# Mesenchymal-to-Endothelial Transition in Kaposi Sarcoma: A Histogenetic Hypothesis Based on a Case Series and Literature Review

CorpusID: 12017528
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0fd3f80343a774bccf523a1a92f43e939764f1c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0fd3f80343a774bccf523a1a92f43e939764f1c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Mesenchymal-to-Endothelial Transition in Kaposi Sarcoma: A Histogenetic Hypothesis Based on a Case Series and Literature Review


Simona Gurzu 
Department of Pathology
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures
Tirgu-MuresRomania

Diana Ciortea 
Department of Dermatology
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures
Tirgu-MuresRomania

Teodora Munteanu 
Department of Pathology
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures
Tirgu-MuresRomania

Iringo Kezdi-Zaharia 
Department of Infectious Diseases
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures
Tirgu-MuresRomania

California Keck School of Medicine
University of Southern
United States of America

Ioan Jung 
Department of Pathology
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures
Tirgu-MuresRomania

Mesenchymal-to-Endothelial Transition in Kaposi Sarcoma: A Histogenetic Hypothesis Based on a Case Series and Literature Review

Objectives:Although several studies have been conducted regarding Kaposi sarcoma (KS), its histogenesis still remains to be elucidated. The aim of our study was to analyze the immunophenotype of Kaposi sarcoma and to present a hypothesis about the histogenesis of this tumor, based on a case series and a review of relevant literature.

## Introduction

Kaposi sarcoma (KS) was first described in 1872 by Moritz Kaposi as an idiopathic hemorrhagic-pigmented sarcoma of the skin (''sarcoma idiopathicum multiplex hemorrhagicum''), which affects elderly male subjects [1]. Although seminal advancements have been made regarding the understanding of the tumor, its histogenesis is still controversial. Some authors still consider that KS is a low-grade vascular tumor associated either with either HIV infection or immunosuppression [2,3]. An important step was performed in the understanding of its etiology, with the evidence of the relation between human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) and KS [4]; HHV-8 can be detected in the patient's blood 5-10 years before occurrence of the clinical symptoms [5].

The immunohistochemical features of KS could also help in the elucidation of its histogenesis. To asses this goal, we analyzed the immunohistochemical expression of c-KIT, CD34, CD31, CD105, smooth muscle actin (SMA), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and COX-2 in KS cells and performed a review of the relevant literature related to these aspects. C-KIT protein is encoded by the C-KIT gene located on chromosome 4q12 and plays an important role in the development of hematopoietic stem cells, mast cells, germ cells, melanocytes, and interstitial cells of Cajal [6]. Regarding the tumor cells, c-KIT (CD117) is positive in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, but overexpression in several mesenchymal tumors including melanoma, angiosarcoma, and KS was also reported [3,6,7].

CD34 is an endothelial marker that marks both normal, preexisting vessels and the neoformed intratumoral angiogenicactivated ones [8,9]. This marker is also present in the thyroid interfollicular cells [10] and can be overexpressed in cancer cells, in tumors such as gastrointestinal stromal tumors, inflammatory fibroid polyp or myofibroblastoma [11,12].

CD105 (endoglin) is a homodimeric transmembrane glycoprotein, a modulator of angiogenesis that marks the angiogenic tumor blood vessels but is not expressed by the normal preexisting mature large vessels [8,9,13]. To our knowledge, only one of the previously reported studies examined the CD105 expression in KS, but the authors declined its positivity in the tumor spindle cells [14].

SMA is a usual marker used for differential diagnosis of several tumors. Beside smooth muscle fibers, it also marks the fibroblasts and myofibroblasts being overexpressed in some mesenchymal tumors such as leiomyoma, leimyosarcoma, myofibroblastoma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors with myogenic differentiation [11,12,15]. A slight expression of SMA was also reported in spindle-shaped KS cells [7,16], but its significance was not elucidated yet.

VEGF is known to be a proangiogenic factor involved in physiological and pathological angiogenesis. Enzymes codified by the PTGS2 gene, the cyclooxygenase isoforms (COX-1 and COX-2 or prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2) regulate the prostaglandin synthesis via arachidonic acid. COX-1 is expressed in most of the normal human tissues in physiological conditions. COX-2 is related to cellular stress response pathways, being inducibly overexpressed in inflammatory processes, but its secretion is also stimulated by oncogenes, cytokines, growth factors, tumor promoters, and hormones, being implicated in cellular proliferation, tumor growth, invasion and hematogenous metastasis [17,18,19]. No data about its expression in KS cells have been published.


## Materials and Methods

The clinicopathological features of KS were analyzed in all consecutive cases diagnosed in a period of eleven years (2000)(2001)(2002)(2003)(2004)(2005)(2006)(2007)(2008)(2009)(2010)(2011). Processing of the cases was approved by the ethical committee of the University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tirgu-Mures, Romania. The patients have submitted their informed consent form for the publication of their case details. Microscopically, KS of the skin was classified into three main types:

N Patch stage -characterized by vascular proliferation, sparse spindle cells, lymphocytes, and rare extravasated erythrocytes N Plaque stage -characterized by association of slit-like spaces with proliferation of spindle cells, in the dermis and irregularly in the hypodermis N Nodular/tumor stage -the dermis was totally replaced by nodular sarcomatous proliferation of spindle cells, which displayed hyaline globules, extravasated erythrocytes, and hemosiderin deposits

The immunohistochemical stains were performed on paraffinembedded tissues, using the UltraVision System (LabVision, Fremont, CA, USA). For each case with a unique lesion a number of three to five slides were evaluated (cases 1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 12, 13, and 14; Table 1). For synchronous tumors, a number of three to five biopsies were performed and analyzed for each of the patients (cases 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, and 15; Table 1). The antibodies CD31 (JC70A clone), CD34 (Qbend/10 clone), and c-KIT (polyclonal rabbit) from Dako (Glostrup, Denmark), diluted at 1:200, 1:100, and 1:500, respectively, were used. SMA (1A4 clone), VEGF-A (clone VG1), and CD105 (SN6H clone) antibodies were diluted at 1:600, 1:25, and 1:50, respectively (LabVision, Fremont, CA, USA). COX-2 (4H12 clone) was diluted at 1:200 (Novocastra, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK). The prediluted monoclonal HHV-8 antibody (clone 13B10) was from MyBioSource (San Diego, CA, USA). The heat-induced antigen retrieval was performed in highretrieval solution (LabVision) for c-KIT and VEGF antibodies. In case of CD31, CD34, HHV-8, CD105, COX-2, and SMA, pepsin-enzymatic retrieval (LabVision) was used. The slides were developed using DAB (diaminobenzidine) solution (Novocastra). Counterstaining was performed using Mayer's hematoxylin (Novocastra).

In case of positivity in more than 40% of spindle-shaped tumor cells, we considered the cases with diffuse positivity. Cases that displayed positivity in 10-40% of tumor cells were considered to have focal positivity; the cut-off value of positivity was 10%. 


## Results


## Clinicopathological features

In a period of eleven years, 15 cases were diagnosed. Twelve male and three female subjects were included in this study. The median age of patients was 54.8619.997 years (20-86 years). One case (case 15, Table 1) was diagnosed in a C3-AIDS-staged female and occurred 7 years after self-cessation of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Another case (case 5) occurred two years after complex radiochemotherapy performed for a metachronous testicular and thyroidian malignant tumors (case 5, Table 1); no significant medical history was reported in the other 13 cases (Table 1) Table 1 shows that the two cases localized in the tonsils (case 11) and the pharynx (case 9) were c-KIT negative. The gastric KS (case 12) presented a focal c-KIT expression in tumor cells, but the endothelial cells were negative. None of these three cases presented skin involvement.

In the twelve KSs of the skin, the c-KIT positivity was correlated to the pathological stage of the tumor. In early stage, c-KIT was either absent (cases 4 and 13) or focally positive in the spindle cells (cases 2 and 15), with negative endothelium. In the plaque stage (cases 7, 8, and 10), c-KIT was focally observed in tumor cells and present or absent in the endothelium. However, in all nodular-type KSs (cases 1, 3, 5, 6, and 14), the tumor cells diffusely expressed c-KIT, and some of the intratumoral vessels were also positive (Figs. 1, and 2).


## N SMA and CD34 expression

Both CD34 and SMA presented either focal or diffuse expression in the tumor cells. The high-power view examination revealed a specific positivity of the large intratumoral vessels. CD34 usually marked the endothelial cells, the external vascular layer, and some of the perivascular cells. At the same time, SMA was negative in the inner endothelium but marked the middle vascular layer and some of the perivascular cells (Fig. 3). The endothelium of the large mature vessels, marked by CD34, was c-KIT negative (Fig. 2).


## N CD105 expression

CD105 marked the vascular endothelium in both small and large intratumoral vessels, in all cases. Regarding the positivity of spindle-shaped tumor cells, no negative cases were identified. The non-skin tumors (cases 9, 11, and 12) presented focal positivity. In the tumor of the skin, CD105 expression was similar to c-Kit one (Table 1), being focally expressed in cases diagnosed in patch or plaque stages; diffuse positivity was displayed by all nodular-type KSs (Figs. 1, and 2).


## N VEGF and COX-2 expression

In all cases, VEGF and COX-2 were focally expressed in both endothelial and spindle-shaped tumor cells. Focally, slit-like leaky spaces with extravasted-erythrocytes but without endothelial cells, marked by VEGF, were observed (Fig. 3). 


## Discussion

Despite the in vivo/in vitro studies and also the complexity of immunohistochemical or molecular examinations, the histogenesis of KS remains controversial. Most authors maintain that KS is a HHV-8-related tumor of endothelial origin that can be treated using antiangiogenic substances [20,21]. In contrast, our immunohistochemical staining results, suggest that KS originates from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSC) derived from pluripotential mesenchymal stem cells of the connective tissue (PMC).  The BM-MSCs were first described in 1976 by Friedenstein et al. as a fibroblast-like cell population of the bone marrow (''marrow stromal cells'') [22], which express CD105, CD90, and CD73 antibodies. They are not hematopoietic cell derivatives because they do not display CD34, c-KIT, CD45, or CD14 [23,24].

On the other hand, PMCs were identified in the connective tissue of the dermis, skeletal muscles, and other organs [10]. They can originate from BM-MSCs [23,24], from fibroblasts reprogrammed into pluripotent cells [25], or from circulating fibrocytes [26,27]. The PMCs express CD105, CD90, CD34 and SMA but are negative for c-KIT and also for CD3, CD4, and CD8 [23,24,[26][27][28][29][30][31]. These cells could be infected by viral vectors and can present genetic abnormalities at the genetic and epigenetic level that can be related with some of the oncogenic pathways [31][32][33][34][35][36]. The genetically modified PMCs secrete cytokines, integrins, and growth factors including VEGF [37] and possess a multilineage capacity. Depending on the induction medium, PMC can be differentiated into mesodermal and neuroectodermal lineage [28][29][30][31]; adipocytes, osteoblasts, chondrocytes, smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, neural-like cells, and endothelial cells can derive from PMCs [10,11,23,29,38]. The mesodermal lineage acquires c-KIT and CD34 positivity [31]. C-KIT positive spindle-shaped cells were also identified in the adult dermis, being in contact with blood capillaries and perifollicular sheaths, which seem to be involved in skin remodeling and regeneration [26]. These cells were presented in literature as dendrocytes [39], dendritic cells [40,41], or telocytes [26], probably variants of PMCs.

The positivity of spindle-shaped KS tumor cells for CD105 and COX-2, first reported in our study, in correlation with CD34, VEGF, SMA, and c-KIT positivity [3,7,41], seems to suggest that KS, similar to other fibroblastic tumors, originates from the PMCs and is related to the VEGF secretion. To sustain the complex and heterogenic origin of KS, other authors revealed an overexpression of the proapoptotic marker bcl-2 that promotes survival and reduces apoptosis in endothelial cells [42]. Positivity for the lymphatic markers D2-40 and Lyve-1was also reported, suggesting a mixed lymphatic and vascular origin [43,44]. However, whether it is about an endothelial-mesenchymal or mesenchymal-endothelial transition is unclear.

On the one hand, the c-KIT endothelial positivity suggests a reversion of the tumor cells to fetal endothelial cell phenotype similar to angiosarcomas [6,11,15] and can sustain the origin of KS in the precursor circulating the pluripotent endothelial cells and also the possible endothelial-mesenchymal transition. At the same time, a literature synthesis performed by Uldrick et al. (2012) shows that in HHV-8-induced KS, the viral gene products, such as viral G protein-coupled receptor (vGPCR), viral interleukin-6, and latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), upregulate VEGF production [20] from the genetically modified PMCs [37,45] but also promote cell proliferation, with vGPCR being sufficient to induce the angiogenic phenotype [42]. Based on these observations and our results, we hypothesis that the spindle-shaped KS cells derive from the genetically modified PMCs. The presence of HHV-8 in both PMCs [20,[32][33][34][35][36] and DNA of KS spindle cells [42] also argues for this origin. VEGF and COX-2 secretion from these cells leads to vascular differentiation, but SMA positivity also suggests a myofibroblastlike differentiation. This hypothesis, synthesized in Fig. 4, advocates rather a mesenchymal-endothelial transition than an endothelial-mesenchymal one. The mesenchymal-endothelial transition is also proven by the lower rate of responders to the antiangiogenic therapy in KS [20] compared with other vascular tumors such as angiosarcoma [46]. In line with our results, some studies revealed that c-KIT was expressed in KS but did not show a correlation with other clinicopathological factors [3,7], and the CD105 positivity in the tumor cells was denied [14]. In our material, both CD105 and c-KIT expression in the spindle-shaped KS cells increased from early-to late-stage KS, proving their role in the evolution of KS. These data are in line with the results of Pyakurel et al. who reported an increasing number of LANA-positive cells from earlyto late-stage KS [44]. A continuous recruitment of tumor precursor cells, probably PMCs, seems to be present during KS evolution, probably one of the reasons why long-term chemotherapy is often required in these patients [20].

This paper primarily aimed to show that KS cannot be considered a pure vascular tumor and seems to originate from the viral modified PMCs. A mesenchymal-endothelial transition and a myofibroblastic-like differentiation seem to be the key events of its origin. This hypothesis could influence the therapeuthical management of KS.


. All 15 patients are still alive without reported recurrences. Immunohistochemical aspects N CD31 and HHV-8 expression The endothelial cells of small and large vessels were marked by CD31 in all the 15 cases without positivity within the spindleshaped tumor cells. Focal immunoexpression for HHV-8 was observed in the tumor cells, in all cases in correlation with high levels of serum HHV-8.

## Figure 1 .
1Immunohistochemical features of a plaque-stage Kaposi sarcoma diagnosed in a 75-year old male that presented a nodule on the sole (case 7). A-Diffuse expression of CD34; B -Endothelial positivity of CD105; C -Focal expression of c-KIT; D -Focal expression of SMA. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071530.g001

## Figure 2 .
2Immunohistochemical features of a nodular-stage Kaposi sarcoma diagnosed in a 65-year old male that presented a nodule on the sole (case 1). A-Diffuse expression of CD34; B -Diffuse expression of CD105 in the endothelial cells and spindle-shaped tumor cells; C -Diffuse expression of c-KIT in the spindle-shaped tumor-cells without endothelial positivity; D -Focal expression of SMA. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071530.g002

## Figure 3 .
3Immunohistochemical particularities of a nodular-stage Kaposi sarcoma diagnosed in a 53-year old male that presented a nodule on the thigh (case 3). A -Diffuse expression of COX-2; B -VEGF is diffusely expressed in the spindle-shaped tumor cells with focally slit-like leaky pseudovascular spaces; C -CD34 marks both endothelial cells (e) and the perivascular tumor cells (p) but the middle vascular layer (m) was negative; D -SMA expression can be seen in the middle vascular layer and the perivascular tumor cells. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071530.g003

## Figure 4 .
4Histogenesis of Kaposi sarcoma: a hypothesis about viral-induced mesenchymal to endothelial transition, based on the immunohistochemical features of the precursor cells and the tumor cells (LANA = latency associated nuclear antigen). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071530.g004

## Table 1 .
1Clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features of patients with Kaposi sarcoma (F = female; M = male; V = vessels; T = tumor cells; 6 referes to focal positivity and + represents diffuse expression).No. of 
case 
Sex 

Age 
(years) Localization 
Macroscopic feature 

Microscopic 
type 
c-KIT 
CD105 SMA VEGF 
COX-2 

V T 
V T 
T 
V T 
V T 

1 
M 
65 
skin -sole 
single nodule 
nodular 
6 + 
+ 
+ 
6 
6 6 6 6 

2 
M 
70 
skin -sole 
multiple plaques 
patch 
2 6 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

3 
M 
53 
skin -thigh 
single nodule 
nodular 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
6 
6 6 6 6 

4 
M 
58 
skin -shin 
ulcerated tumor 
patch 
2 2 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

5 
M 
34 
skin -auricle, forearm, thigh and shin 
nodular protruded tumors nodular 
6 + 
+ 
+ 
6 
6 6 6 6 

6 
M 
30 
skin -multiple nodules on the limbs 
nodular protruded tumors nodular 
6 + 
+ 
+ 
6 
6 6 6 6 

7 
M 
75 
skin -sole 
single nodule 
plaque 
2 6 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

8 
M 
86 
skin -left and right big toes 
ulcerated tumors 
plaque 
6 6 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

9 
M 
42 
pharynx 
infiltrative tumor 
nodular 
2 2 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

10 
M 
76 
skin -shin 
multiple tumors 
plaque 
2 6 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

11 
M 
30 
both tonsils 
infiltrative tumors 
nodular 
2 2 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

12 
M 
48 
stomach 
protruded tumor 
nodular 
2 6 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

13 
F 
70 
skin -shin 
ulcerated tumor 
patch 
2 2 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

14 
F 
65 
skin -shin 
ulcerated tumor 
nodular 
6 + 
+ 
+ 
6 
6 6 6 6 

15 
F 
20 
skin -multiple macules 
macules (flat patches) 
patch 
2 6 + 
6 6 
6 6 6 6 

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071530.t001 

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e71530
AcknowledgmentsThe English-language manuscript was polished by SPI Global Professional Editing Service.
Kaposi M (1872) Idiopatisches multiples Pigmentsarcom der Haut. Arch Dermatol Syph. 3Kaposi M (1872) Idiopatisches multiples Pigmentsarcom der Haut. Arch Dermatol Syph 3: 265-273.

Kaposi's sarcoma -still an enigma. P Babal, J Pec, J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 17Babal P, Pec J (2003) Kaposi's sarcoma -still an enigma. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 17: 377-380.

C-Kit (CD117) expression in classic Kaposi's sarcoma. N O Kandemir, B D Gun, B Bahadir, G Yurdakan, N Ozdemir, Clin Exp Dermatol. 35Kandemir NO, Gun BD, Bahadir B, Yurdakan G, Ozdemir N, et al. (2010) C- Kit (CD117) expression in classic Kaposi's sarcoma. Clin Exp Dermatol 35: 525-30.

Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Y Chang, E Cesarman, M S Pessin, F Lee, J Culpepper, Science. 266Chang Y, Cesarman E, Pessin MS, Lee F, Culpepper J, et al. (1994) Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 266:1865-9.

Seroconversion to antibodies against Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus related latent nuclear antigens before the development of Kaposi's sarcoma. S J Gao, L Kingsley, D R Hoover, T J Spira, C R Rinaldo, N Engl J Med. 335Gao SJ, Kingsley L, Hoover DR Spira TJ, Rinaldo CR, et al. (1996) Seroconversion to antibodies against Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus related latent nuclear antigens before the development of Kaposi's sarcoma. N Engl J Med 335: 233-241.

KIT expression in angiosarcomas and fetal endothelial cells: lack of mutations of exon 11 and exon 17 of C-kit. M Miettinen, M Sarlomo-Rikala, J Lasota, Mod Pathol. 13Miettinen M, Sarlomo-Rikala M, Lasota J (2000) KIT expression in angiosarcomas and fetal endothelial cells: lack of mutations of exon 11 and exon 17 of C-kit. Mod Pathol 13: 536-541.

Clinical, histological and immunohistochemical findings in oral Kaposi's sarcoma in a series of Mexican AIDS patients. Comparative study. V Ramirez-Amador, G Martinez-Marta, I Gonzalez-Ramirez, G Anaya-Saavedra, O P De Almeida, J Oral Pathol Med. 38Ramirez-Amador V, Martinez-Marta G, Gonzalez-Ramirez I, Anaya-Saavedra G, de Almeida OP (2009) Clinical, histological and immunohistochemical findings in oral Kaposi's sarcoma in a series of Mexican AIDS patients. Comparative study. J Oral Pathol Med 38: 328-333.

Both high intratumoral microvessel density and elvated plasma levels of CD105 in colorectal cancer patients correlate with poor prognosis. C Li, R Gardy, B K Seaon, S E Duff, S Abdalla, Br J Cancer. 88Li C, Gardy R, Seaon BK, Duff SE, Abdalla S, et al. (2003) Both high intratumoral microvessel density and elvated plasma levels of CD105 in colorectal cancer patients correlate with poor prognosis. Br J Cancer 88: 1424- 1431.

The differences between the endothelial area marked with CD31 and CD105 in colorectal carcinomas by computer-assisted morphometrical analysis. I Jung, S Gurzu, M Raica, A M Cimpean, Z Szentirmay, Rom J Morphol Embryol. 50Jung I, Gurzu S, Raica M, Cimpean AM, Szentirmay Z (2009) The differences between the endothelial area marked with CD31 and CD105 in colorectal carcinomas by computer-assisted morphometrical analysis. Rom J Morphol Embryol 50: 239-243.

Human reserve pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells are present in the connective tissue of skeletal muscle and dermis derived from fetal, adult, and geriatric donors. H E Young, T A Steele, R A Bray, J Hudson, J A Floyd, Anat Rec. 264Young HE, Steele TA, Bray RA, Hudson J, Floyd JA, et al (2001) Human reserve pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells are present in the connective tissue of skeletal muscle and dermis derived from fetal, adult, and geriatric donors. Anat Rec 264: 51-62.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor in the colon. Case report and hypothesis about its histogenesis. S Gurzu, T Bara, I Jung, 10.1200/JCO.2012.42.8961J Clin Oncol. Gurzu S, Bara T, Jung I (2013) Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor in the colon. Case report and hypothesis about its histogenesis. J Clin Oncol 2013; DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.42.8961.

Male breast cellular myofibroblastoma with a rich reticulinic network -case report. S Gurzu, I Jung, Am J Mens Health. 6Gurzu S, Jung I (2012) Male breast cellular myofibroblastoma with a rich reticulinic network -case report. Am J Mens Health 6: 344-348.

Is it the primetime for endoglin (CD105) in the clinical setting?. M Maio, M Altomonte, E Fonsatti, Cardiovasc Res. 69Maio M, Altomonte M, Fonsatti E (2006) Is it the primetime for endoglin (CD105) in the clinical setting?. Cardiovasc Res 69: 781-783.

Expression of transforming growth factor beta and transforming growth factor beta receptors on AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. I F Ciernik, B H Ciernik, C J Cockerell, J D Minna, A F Gazdar, Clin Cancer Res. 1Ciernik IF, Krayenbühl Ciernik BH, Cockerell CJ, Minna JD, Gazdar AF, et al. (1995) Expression of transforming growth factor beta and transforming growth factor beta receptors on AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res 1: 1119-1124.

Immunohistochemical spectrum of GISTs at different sites and their differential diagnosis with a reference to CD117 (KIT). M Miettinen, L H Sobin, M Sarlomo-Rikala, Mod Pathol. 13Miettinen M, Sobin LH, Sarlomo-Rikala M (2000) Immunohistochemical spectrum of GISTs at different sites and their differential diagnosis with a reference to CD117 (KIT). Mod Pathol 13: 1134-1142.

Expression of the fibroblast/macrophage marker 1B10 by spindle cells in Kaposi's sarcoma lesions and by Kaposi's sarcoma-derived tumor cells. T Simonart, C Degraef, M Heenen, P Hermans, J P Van Vooren, J Cutan Pathol. 29Simonart T, Degraef C, Heenen M, Hermans P, Van Vooren JP et al. (2002) Expression of the fibroblast/macrophage marker 1B10 by spindle cells in Kaposi's sarcoma lesions and by Kaposi's sarcoma-derived tumor cells. J Cutan Pathol 29: 72-78.

COX-2 expression and tumor angiogenesis in colorectal cancer. A W Wu, J Gu, Z F Li, J F Ji, G W Xu, World J Gastroenterol. 10Wu AW, Gu J, Li ZF, Ji JF, Xu GW (2004) COX-2 expression and tumor angiogenesis in colorectal cancer. World J Gastroenterol 10: 2323-2326.

Roles of cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 expression and beta-catenin activation in gastric carcinogenesis in N-methyl-N-nitrosoureatreated K19-C2mE transgenic mice. S Takasu, T Tsukamoto, X Y Cao, T Toyoda, A Hirata, Cancer Sci. 99Takasu S, Tsukamoto T, Cao XY, Toyoda T, Hirata A, et al. (2008) Roles of cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 expression and beta-catenin activation in gastric carcinogenesis in N-methyl-N-nitrosourea- treated K19-C2mE transgenic mice, Cancer Sci 99: 2356-2364

Immunohistochemical assessment of p16, COX-2 and EGFR in HPV-positive cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions. R Balan, N Simion, S E Giusca, A Grigoras, L Gheuca-Solovastru, Rom J Morphol Embryol. 52Balan R, Simion N, Giusca SE, Grigoras A, Gheuca-Solovastru L, et al. (2011) Immunohistochemical assessment of p16, COX-2 and EGFR in HPV-positive cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions. Rom J Morphol Embryol 52: 1187- 1194.

Phase II study of Bevacizumab in patients with HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma receiving antiretroviral therapy. T S Uldrick, K M Wyvill, P Kumar, D O&apos;mahoni, W Bernstein, J Clin Oncol. 30Uldrick TS, Wyvill KM, Kumar P, O'Mahoni D, Bernstein W, et al. (2012) Phase II study of Bevacizumab in patients with HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma receiving antiretroviral therapy. J Clin Oncol 30: 1476-1483.

mTOR Inhibitors Block Kaposi Sarcoma Growth by Inhibiting Essential Autocrine Growth Factors and Tumor Angiogenesis. D Roy, S H Sin, A Lucas, R Venkataramanan, L Wang, Cancer Res. 73Roy D, Sin SH, Lucas A, Venkataramanan R, Wang L, et al. (2013) mTOR Inhibitors Block Kaposi Sarcoma Growth by Inhibiting Essential Autocrine Growth Factors and Tumor Angiogenesis. Cancer Res 73: 2235-2246.

A J Friedenstein, J F Gorskaja, N N Kulagina, Fibroblasts precursors in normal and irradiated mouse hematopoietic organs. 4Friedenstein AJ, Gorskaja JF, Kulagina NN (1976) Fibroblasts precursors in normal and irradiated mouse hematopoietic organs 4: 267-274.

Mesenchymal stem cell: from biology to clinical use. M Krampera, M Franchini, G Pizzolo, G Aprili, Blood Transfus. 5Krampera M, Franchini M, Pizzolo G, Aprili G (2007) Mesenchymal stem cell: from biology to clinical use. Blood Transfus 5: 120-129.

Characteristics and neural-like differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells derived from foetal porcine bone marrow. Y Liu, L Liu, X Ma, Y Yin, B Tang, Z Li, DOI: 10.142/BSR20120023Biosci Rep. Liu Y, Liu L, Ma X, Yin Y, Tang B, Li Z (2013) Characteristics and neural-like differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells derived from foetal porcine bone marrow. Biosci Rep DOI: 10.142/BSR20120023.

Induction of puripotent stem cells from mouse fibroblast cultures. S Yamanka, K Takahashi, Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 51Yamanka S, Takahashi K (2006) Induction of puripotent stem cells from mouse fibroblast cultures. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso 51: 2346-2351.

Telocytes in human skin; are they involved in skin regeneration. L Ceafalan, M Gherghiceanu, L M Popescu, O Simionescu, J Cell Mol Med. 16Ceafalan L, Gherghiceanu M, Popescu LM, Simionescu O (2012) Telocytes in human skin; are they involved in skin regeneration?. J Cell Mol Med 16: 1405- 1420.

Circulating fibrocytes define a new leukocyte subpopulation that mediates tissue repair. R Bucala, L A Spiegel, J Chesney, M Hogan, A Cerami, Mol Med. 1Bucala R, Spiegel LA, Chesney J, Hogan M, Cerami A (2012) Circulating fibrocytes define a new leukocyte subpopulation that mediates tissue repair. Mol Med 1994; 1: 71-81.

Perivascular mesenchymal progenitors in human fetal and adult liver. J C Gerlach, P J Over, M E Turner, R L Thompson, H G Foka, Stem Cells Dev. 21Gerlach JC, Over PJ, Turner ME, Thompson RL, Foka HG, et al. (2012) Perivascular mesenchymal progenitors in human fetal and adult liver. Stem Cells Dev 21:3258-69.

Decidua Parietalis-derived mesenchymal cells reside in a vascular niche within the choridecidua. N M Castrechini, P Murthi, S Qin, G D Kusuma, L Wilton, Reprod Sci. 19Castrechini NM, Murthi P, Qin S, Kusuma GD, Wilton L, et al. (2012) Decidua Parietalis-derived mesenchymal cells reside in a vascular niche within the choridecidua. Reprod Sci 19: 1302-1314.

Stem cells isolated from human stromal limbus possess immunosuppressant properties. Y Garfias, J Nieves-Hernandez, M Garcia-Mejia, C Estrada-Reyes, Jimenez-Martinex Mc, Mol Vis. 18Garfias Y, Nieves-Hernandez J, Garcia-Mejia M, Estrada-Reyes C, Jimenez- Martinex MC (2012) Stem cells isolated from human stromal limbus possess immunosuppressant properties. Mol Vis 18: 2087-2095.

Maintenance and characterization of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells isolated from canine umbilical cord matrix by collagenase digestion. K S Lee, J J Nah, B C Lee, H T Lee, H S Lee, Res Vet Sci Res Vet Sci. 94Lee KS, Nah JJ, Lee BC, Lee HT, Lee HS, et al. (2013) Maintenance and characterization of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells isolated from canine umbilical cord matrix by collagenase digestion. Res Vet Sci Res Vet Sci 94:144-151.

Somatic coding mutations in human induced pluripotent stem cells. A Gore, Z Li, H L Fung, J E Young, S Agarwal, Nature. 471Gore A, Li Z, Fung HL, Young JE, Agarwal S, et al. (2011) Somatic coding mutations in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 471: 63-67.

Copy number variation and selection during reprogramming to pluripotency. S M Hussein, N N Batada, S Vuoristo, R W Ching, R Autio, Nature. 471Hussein SM, Batada NN, Vuoristo S, Ching RW, Autio R, et al. (2011) Copy number variation and selection during reprogramming to pluripotency. Nature 471: 58-62.

Hotspots of aberrant epigenomic reprogramming in human induced pluripotent stem cells. R Lister, M Pelizzola, Y S Kida, R D Hawkins, J R Nery, Nature. 471Lister R, Pelizzola M, Kida YS, Hawkins RD, Nery JR, et al. (2011) Hotspots of aberrant epigenomic reprogramming in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 471: 68-73.

Identification and classification of chromosomal aberrations in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Y Mayshar, U Ben-David, Lavon N Biancotti, J C Yakir, B , Cell Stem Cell. 7Mayshar Y, Ben-David U, Lavon N, Biancotti JC, Yakir B, et al. (2010) Identification and classification of chromosomal aberrations in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 7: 521-531.

Concise review: induced pluripotent stem cellderived mesenchymal stem cells: progress toward safe clinical products. Y Jung, G Bauer, J A Nolta, Stem Cells. 30Jung Y, Bauer G, Nolta JA (2012) Concise review: induced pluripotent stem cell- derived mesenchymal stem cells: progress toward safe clinical products. Stem Cells 30: 42-47.

Effetcs on proliferation and differentiation of multipotent bone marrow stromal cella engineered to express growth factors for combined cell and gene therapy. F Fierro, S Kalomoiris, C Sondergaard, J A Nolta, Stem Cells. 29Fierro F, Kalomoiris S, Sondergaard C, Nolta JA (2011) Effetcs on proliferation and differentiation of multipotent bone marrow stromal cella engineered to express growth factors for combined cell and gene therapy. Stem Cells 29: 1727- 1737.

Human Dermis Harbors Distinct Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Subsets. C Vaculik, C Schuster, W Bauer, N Iram, K Pfisterer, J Invest Dermatol. 132Vaculik C, Schuster C, Bauer W, Iram N, Pfisterer K, et al. (2012) Human Dermis Harbors Distinct Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Subsets. J Invest Dermatol 132: 563-574.

The dermal dendrocyte. J T Headington, Adv Dermatol. 1Headington JT (1986) The dermal dendrocyte. Adv Dermatol 1: 159-171.

Characterization of factor XIIIa positive dermal dendritic cells in normal and inflamed skin. R Cerio, C E Griffiths, K D Cooper, B J Nickoloff, J T Headington, Br J Dermatol. 121Cerio R, Griffiths CE, Cooper KD, Nickoloff BJ, Headington JT (1989) Characterization of factor XIIIa positive dermal dendritic cells in normal and inflamed skin. Br J Dermatol 1989; 121: 421-431.

The human progenitor cell antigen (CD34) is localized on endothelial cells, dermal dendritic cells, and perifollicular cells in formalin-fixed normal skin, and on proliferating endothelial cells and stromal spindle shaped cells in Kaposi's sarcoma. B J Nickoloff, Arch Dermatol. 127Nickoloff BJ (1991) The human progenitor cell antigen (CD34) is localized on endothelial cells, dermal dendritic cells, and perifollicular cells in formalin-fixed normal skin, and on proliferating endothelial cells and stromal spindle shaped cells in Kaposi's sarcoma. Arch Dermatol 127: 523-529.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated Herpessvirus G protein -coupled receptor enhances endothelial cell survival in part by upregulation of bcl-2. E R Abboud, B D Shelby, M Angelova, A B Nelson, M B Ferris, Ochsner J. 13Abboud ER, Shelby BD, Angelova M, Nelson AB, Ferris MB, et al. (2013) Kaposi sarcoma-associated Herpessvirus G protein -coupled receptor enhances endothelial cell survival in part by upregulation of bcl-2. Ochsner J 13: 66-75.

Immunohistochemical identification of lymph vessels with D2-40 in diagnostic pathology. E Kaiserling, Pathologe. 25Kaiserling E (2004) Immunohistochemical identification of lymph vessels with D2-40 in diagnostic pathology. Pathologe 25: 362-364.

Lymphatic and vascular origin of Kaposi's sarcoma spindle cells during tumor development. P Pyakurel, F Pak, A R Mwakigonja, E Kaaya, T Heiden, Int J Cancer. 119Pyakurel P, Pak F, Mwakigonja AR, Kaaya E, Heiden T, et al. (2006) Lymphatic and vascular origin of Kaposi's sarcoma spindle cells during tumor development. Int J Cancer 119:1262-1267.

In vivo biosafety model to assess the risk of adverse events from retroviral and lentoviral vectors. G Bauer, M A Dao, S S Case, T Meyerrose, L Wirthlin, Mol Ther. 16Bauer G, Dao MA, Case SS, Meyerrose T, Wirthlin L, et al. (2008) In vivo biosafety model to assess the risk of adverse events from retroviral and lentoviral vectors. Mol Ther 16: 1308-1315.

An open-label, multicenter, phase II study of bevacizumab for the treatment of angiosarcoma and epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas. M Agulnik, J L Yarber, S H Okuno, M Von Mehren, B D Jovanovic, Ann Oncol. 24Agulnik M, Yarber JL, Okuno SH, von Mehren M, Jovanovic BD, et al. (2013) An open-label, multicenter, phase II study of bevacizumab for the treatment of angiosarcoma and epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas. Ann Oncol 24: 257-263.