# Quality of Lighting in Hospital Environments: A Wide Survey Through in Situ Measurements

CorpusID: 123669687
 
tags: #Engineering, #Environmental_Science, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59976f80ee43a16e7fe1d331980980bc9a1f5447](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59976f80ee43a16e7fe1d331980980bc9a1f5447)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Quality of Lighting in Hospital Environments: A Wide Survey Through in Situ Measurements
2016

Francesco Leccese 
Carlo Montagnani 
Sergio Iaia 
Michele Rocca 
Giacomo Salvadori 
Quality of Lighting in Hospital Environments: A Wide Survey Through in Situ Measurements

Journal of Light & Visual Environment
40201610.2150/jlve.IEIJ150000568The Illuminating Engineering Institute of Japan 52 Research Notehospital lightingvisual work environmentilluminance measurementsluminance mea- surementslighting conditions assessment
In hospital buildings, such as in other large and multi-purpose buildings, a wide variety of work environments can be distinguished, each of which characterized by specific visual tasks. In hospitals the visual tasks are often very demanding and consequently the lighting should be functional to ensure efficiency, safety, hygiene and well-being of medical and auxiliary staff, during the development of their activities. For this type of buildings the activity of in situ measurements is strongly recommended in order to evaluate the quality of lighting and also to perform a lighting risk assessment. In this paper an extensive lighting measurements campaign in a hospital is described. The hospital used as a case study is the Felice Lotti in Pontedera (Pisa district, Tuscany Region, Italy) where illuminance and luminance measurements have been carried out for different environments with different uses typically found in hospitals. The measurement results are described and discussed in detail, with particular reference to the compliance with the requirements imposed by the technical standards.
 Table 1 
Minimum values of average maintained illuminance (E m ) and of average daylight factor (D m ) according to the Circular of the Italian Ministry of Public Works No. 13011 (1974).  The Illuminating Engineering Institute of Japan 56 * * Table 3 List of installed luminaires and lamps, for each of the analyzed rooms. Table 5 Overview of the results of Illuminance measurements in integrated (artificial and day-) lighting conditions. The Illuminating Engineering Institute of Japan 59  
* 1 2 ( ) m N E E E E /N  = + + + m U E E 0 min / =
## Figure 1 Hospital
1Felice Lotti of Pontedera (Pisa district, Tuscany region, Italy). Left: plans of the Hospital with the identification of the analyzed rooms (1-room in the ward of Orthopedics and Traumatology, 2-brief intensive observation room, 3-corridor in the transfusion center, 4-corridor for the connection of pavilions H-F-I, 5-reception center, 6-laboratory for chemical analysis, 7-operating room of ambulatory surgery, 8-endoscopy room). Right: aerial view with the indication of the different pavilions and pictures of some analyzed rooms.

## Figure 2
2Images of the room in the ward of Orthopedics and Traumatology: a) Scenario 1-general lighting, b) Scenario 2-general lighting and indirect lighting from headboard, c) Scenario 3-general lighting, indirect and reading lighting from headboard, d) Scenario 4-daylighting with closed curtains, e) Scenario 5-daylighting with opened curtains, f) plan view of the room with the directions of framing of the pictures.

## Figure 3
3Current stage and design stage for the artificial lighting of the room in the ward of Orthopedics and Traumatology (see Figure 2b, Scenario 2): LED luminaire features (up), simulation results of the current stage (left), simulation results of the designed stage (right). The isolux curves are referred to the floor.

## Table 2
2Examples of lighting requirements for health care premises according to EN 12464-1 9) .

## Table 6
6Room in the ward of Orthopedics and Traumatology: results of illuminance measurements on main working planes for different lighting scenarios.
doi: 10.2150/jlve.IEIJ150000568    The Illuminating Engineering Institute of Japan
Journal ofLight & Visual Environment Vol.40, 2016   doi: 10.2150 The Illuminating Engineering Institute of Japan