# Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio- Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio- Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Basins: A Preliminary Statement Creative Commons License Creative Commons License This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0 License ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL RESOURCES IN THE SAN ANTONIO-GUADALUPE RIVER BASINS: A PRELIMINARY STATEMENT Assembled by Archaeology of the Study Area • A General Overview of Indian Cultures •

CorpusID: 125155462
 
tags: #Mathematics, #Art, #Geography, #History

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4c3d1c6fed955187d2c8ebb68718e1b2340c621](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4c3d1c6fed955187d2c8ebb68718e1b2340c621)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio- Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio- Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Basins: A Preliminary Statement Creative Commons License Creative Commons License This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0 License ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL RESOURCES IN THE SAN ANTONIO-GUADALUPE RIVER BASINS: A PRELIMINARY STATEMENT Assembled by Archaeology of the Study Area • A General Overview of Indian Cultures •


Thomas R Hester 
Center for Archaeological Research


Thomas R Hester 
Center for Archaeological Research


Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio- Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio- Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement Basins: A Preliminary Statement Creative Commons License Creative Commons License This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0 License ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL RESOURCES IN THE SAN ANTONIO-GUADALUPE RIVER BASINS: A PRELIMINARY STATEMENT Assembled by Archaeology of the Study Area • A General Overview of Indian Cultures •
10.21112/ita.1975.1.12Index of Texas Archaeology: Open Access Gray Literature Index of Texas Archaeology: Open Access Gray Literature from the Lone Star State from the Lone Star State Volume 1975 Article 12 1975 Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarworks.sfasu.edu/ita Tell us how this article helped you. Cite this Record Cite this Record Hester, Thomas R. (1975) "Archaeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Basins: A Preliminary Statement," Index of Texas Archaeology: Open Access Gray Literature from the Lone Star State: Vol. 1975 , Article 12. https://doi.org/10.21112/ita.1975.1.12 Available at: This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Center for Regional Heritage Research at SFA ScholarWorks. It has been accepted for inclusion in Index of Texas Archaeology: Open Access Gray Literature from the Lone Star State by an authorized editor of SFA ScholarWorks. For more information, please contact cdsscholarworks@sfasu.edu. This article is available in Index of Texas Archaeology: Open Access Gray Literature from the Lone Star State: Center for Archaeological Research The University of Texas at San Antonio Regional Studies, No. 1 1975 TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Introduction 6 0 G l l l Q 0 0 0 Q O O e $ C t Cl • • • • 1 Bibliography of Archaeology in the Study Area . . . • • 25


ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE STUDY AREA* From the time when public interest was first attracted to the prehistory of the state in the late 19th century, up to the middle of this century, most of the work of finding and recording archaeological sites in this region has been done by amateur archaeologists, with help and guidance from professionals on university and museum staffs. The mid-20th century plan for the Canyon Dam was the forerunner of a growing number of engineering projects which called for large-scale archaeological surveys, and marked the beginning of the era of these surveys in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River basins.

A product of such a survey is a mass of data on a group of sites which will be of primary interest to students and scholars. For many years the results of these surveys, as well as the data recorded by various interested amateur archaeologists around the state, have been filed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, where the University of Texas at Austin operates a central clearing house of files and artifacts, as well as an on-going program of preservation and research. In order to be recorded, a site must be located, examined, plotted on a map, and reported; this is time-consuming and thus a very small percentage of the existing sites in most areas have been documented. The exceptions to this are where intensive professional surveys have been done and published, and where dedicated amateurs have spent a great deal of time in survey efforts carefully recording their findings.


## Chronology

The archaeology of Texas has been tentatively divided into a number of time periods. The earliest, the Palea-Indl.an period (late Pleistocene; 9200 -6000 B.C.), was a time in which there was at least some degree of dependence on large game animals, including mammoth and a now-extinct species of bison. Evidence of this early period consists of various types of distinctive fluted and lanceolate projectile points, usually exhibiting fine workmanship. A small number of these sites has been reported in the areas under discussion.

*Compiled by Anne A. Fox and Thomas R. Hester

Later in time, the people of the Atr..chaic period (6000 B.C. -A.D. 500/1000) hunted modern species of game including deer and rabbit, and gathered edible roots, nuts, and fruits. A multitude of types of projectile points and tools of bone, stone and shell are characteristic of this period. By far, the largest number of sites reported in the study area fall into the Archaic.

By the time of the Neo-AmvU.ean period, (late prehistoric; A.D.

500/1000 -A.D. 1500), a number of innovations were appearing, such 3 as the bow and arrow, pottery, and in some parts of Texas, the beginnings of agriculture. There has been little indication that the prehistoric peoples of the San Antonio and Guadalupe River basins practiced agriculture. However, comparatively few Nee-American period sites have been carefully recorded or excavated.

The H.i..o.toJtJ.c period is marked by the arrival of Europeans and the subsequent impact on the aboriginal inhabitants. Many of the sites of this period are structures built by early settlers. As interest in local history and in historical archaeology is growing, more of these sites are being reported and examined. So far, a moderate number have been recorded in the area under consideration, and many more are undoubtedly present.


## Types of Sites

Until the arrival of the early Spanish and Anglo-American settlers, the inhabitants of the San Antonio and Guadalupe River basins were small groups of semi-nomadic peoples who roamed portions of southern and south-central Texas in search of food, perhaps responding to the availability of game animals and the ripening seasons of the fruits and nuts upon which they depended. By far the majority of sites where the remains of these people can be found are open campsites on the surface or buried in river terraces, in rockshelters rimming the stream valleys, or in shell heaps near the coastal waters. Artifacts found in these sites, along with the ashes and fire-cracked stones from their hearths, are cutting, scraping and chopping tools of chert (flint) and occasional chert projectile points, as well as quantities of chips and flakes which result from their manufacture and repair. Also occasionally present are tools of bone, shell, and stone. Later aboriginal sites contain, in addition, sherds of pottery and, in the historic era, trade items such as glass beads and metal implements.

Associated with campsites in the upper reaches of the San Antonio and Guadalupe River valleys are mounds of fire-cracked limestone, some as large as one acre in size. The origin and use of these "burned rock middens" is still unknown (Hester 1971), although it is possible that they reflect a specialized method of food preparation.

Burials are occasionally found near or in conjunction with habitation sites, or in the sink holes or solution cavities which abound in the upper reaches of the river valleys (Collins 1970). A number of these burial sites have been recorded in the areas under discussion.

Another type of site reported is the quarry and/or workshop, located near a natural source of chert, either a ledge or nodular outcrop in upland areas, or a gravel deposit in the stream bank (see Patterson 1974;Hester, Bass and Kelly 1975). These sites are littered with rejected chunks and large flakes which are derived from quarrying operations, and with the debris which resulted from roughing-out tools and projectile points to be carried back to campsites for finishing.

Sites of 18th century Spanish missions and presidios are also present in the area. Built first of logs and thatch, these establishments gradually constructed stone buildings, often of remarkable sophistication. Many have recently been restored or stabilized; others are crumbling in the brush, known only to landowners, historians, and archaeologists.

Eighteenth century Spanish ranches and early 19th century Anglo-American homes and cemeteries are scattered along the river valleys. Often a home was built over an early prehistoric campsite, showing that man's requirements for a good place to live have not changed greatly over the centuries.


## COUNTY SUMMARIES

BandeJUt County contains the headwaters of the Medina River, a major tributary of the San Antonio River and the source of the Sabinal River, and lies over a portion of the Edwards aquifer. Of eight archaeological sites recorded, all contain burned rock middens, and one includes an open campsite as well. All but one of these sites are located in the upper reaches of creeks which flow into the Medina River. The other site is on the Medina, just west of the town of Bandera. No professional surveys or excavations have been carried out in the county. Judging from sites recorded in adjacent areas, the number of recorded sites is not an accurate reflection of the archaeology of the county. Sites containing burned rock middens, open camp sites, rock shelters and quarry/workshop sites can be predicted to exist throughout the county, concentrated particularly on river terraces along the Medina and up the valleys of its major tributaries. These would range from Paleo-Indian to Neo-American times, as sites containing Nee-American pottery have been described although not formally recorded in the area. In historic times the Bandera Pass is thought to have been the site of an Apache village, and there have been stage stations and military encampments throughout the county, not to mention early settlers' cabins and settlements. A great deal more information is needed on the location and dating of all these types of sites. Virtually nothing is known of the archaeology of the Sabinal River in Bandera County, although the river valley contains a number of important archaeological sites farther south in Uvalde County. Calhoun County is bounded on the southwest by the lower portion of the Guadalupe River, including its confluence with the San Antonio River and the point where the Guadalupe River enters San Antonio Bay. It is bounded on the southeast by Espiritu Santo Bay and contains Lavaca Bay and several smaller bays to the northeast. Fifty archaeological sites have been recorded, and one professional survey has been done (Fritz 1972). The sites are predominantly open campsites of the Archaic and Neo-American time periods, located on shell middens on river terraces or on bluffs overlooking the bays. So far five 19th century towns or homesites have also been recorded.

Archaeological sites on areas bordering the bays are eroding rapidly, and of many large sites originally recorded in the early part of this century, only a trace remains today. However, a great deal of the area farther inland surrounding the tributaries and portions of the main channel of the Guadalupe have never been surveyed. Of particular interest are campsites of the historic Indian tribes and early Spanish sites which are known to exist somewhere in the area and which should be located and recorded. The fact that Calhoun County was a center for coastal shipping throughout the 19th century means that remains of early towns and settlements exist whose location is known but whose remains have never been officially recorded and examined. open campsites, although a variety of other types are present, including burned rock middens, shelters, and burials.* All of these sites date to the Archaic and Neo-American periods. They occur primarily on river terraces overlooking the Guadalupe and its major tributaries, and many have now been inundated by Canyon Reservoir. One 19th century German site has also been recorded. Two professional surveys have been done, one of Canyon Reservoir in 1949 which accounts for the majority of the recorded sites in the county (Stephenson 1949).

In 1963 a survey of Blieders Creek, a small tributary of the Guadalupe, recorded four sites (Shafer n.d.). Several professional excavations have been done in the Canyon Reservoir (Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell 1962).

Judging from the number of archaeological sites recorded within the reservoir areas where a concerted effort has been made, it is reasonable to expect that the Guadalupe River and its tributaries and Cibolo Creek to the south will contain numerous sites, both prehistoric and historic, which are worthy of recording and of further study. The presence of many sink holes, features known to have been used as burial sites, may provide information on prehistoric mortuary practices. Farms and settlements of early 19th century German immigrants are scattered throughout Comal County and deserve further documentation and investigation.  (Fox et a1. 1974) and a survey of a section of the Ecleto

Creek watershed recorded an additional site (Crawford 1971 (Hester and Parker 1970) and the other half,18th century Spanish structures.* Of the latter, four have been the scene of major professional excavations beginning in the 1930's and continuing up to the present day.

Due to the lack of knowledge of the prehistoric sites in the area, a great deal more needs to be done in terms of survey and analysis. The location of the proposed Goliad Dam near the center of the county should provide an excellent opportunity for an intensive site survey. A number of 18th century Spanish trails and ranches are known to have existed within Goliad County. Sites of these and later 19th century settlements are probably located within ~r near the major stream drainages. Gonzal.e.6 County contains a part of the center section of the Guadalupe River and two major tributaries, the San Marcos River and Peach Creek, as well as a section of Sandies Creek to the south. The proposed Gonzales Dam is located on the San Marcos River in the center of the county. One hundred and forty-six archaeological sites have been recorded. A major survey of the proposed Cuero Reservoir accounted for 140 of the total (Fox, et. a.l. 1974). These sites are predominantly prehistoric campsites, of Paleo-Indian to Nee-American *A number of additional archaeological sites have been documented during University of Texas at San Antonio's survey along the Goliad County side of Coleto Creek.

age, located on stream terraces. Twenty-five early 19th century homesites have also been recorded.

The number of sites located by the Cuero Reservoir survey gave an indication of the potential for future archaeological work on the major streams of the county, and probably also on the smaller tributaries. A number of historic sites, including settlements, homesites, reputed Indian camps, early forts (such as Fort Wahl at Gonzales; Orchard ms.) and battle sites are known to exist, but most have not yet been recorded. proportion of historic sites recorded is due to a thorough survey of an extinct rural 19th century community in the north-central part of the county in -72 (Roberson 1972. Judging from the results of this survey, the possibility is strong that other similar unmarked and long-forgotten settlements could exist in many areas of the Hill Country. A survey of the headwaters of the San Marcos River in 1974 recorded 22 prehistoric sites within an area of five square miles (Patterson 1974). Results of these surveys indicate that the archaeological potential of Hays County is extensive and much of it is as yet unknown and unrecorded.  (Crawford 1971).

A great deal more information is needed on the location and identification of archaeological sites in this county. The fact that a survey of a portion of a small tributary creek near Kenedy (Fox 1974) revealed a complete absence of sites on that stream rais.es questions which can be answered only by more extensive surveys. A number of 19th century Spanish trails and ranches and early 19th century Anglo-American settlements are known to have existed in Karnes County. The locations and extent of these remains need to be documented.

Kendai.l County contains a portion of the upper Guadalupe River watershed. Cibolo Creek, which flows southeast to join the San Antonio River. The Blanco River, a tributary of the Guadalupe, originates in the county, and the northern part of the county overlies the Edwards aquifer. A total of 23 archaeological sites have been recorded, of which approximately half are open campsites and the other half, burned rock middens. Two occupations in rockshelters have also been recorded. These sites date from the Archaic to Nee-American periods. Sites are located on terraces overlooking the major streams or in the upper reaches of tributaries. No professional surveys or excavations have been carried out in Kendall County, and a comparatively small percentage of the potential number of sites has been recorded.* The type of site in this area about which the least is known and which holds the greatest promise of recovery of important data is the rockshelter. These features may contain preserved perishable materials and, occasionally, rock art in the form of pictographs on the walls. Because of the geology of the county and its location on the edge of the Edwards Plateau, the potential for finding more shelter sites is great and should be actively pursued. Also of importance in the area are early 19th century historic sites, where German settlers first farmed the river valleys, and the campsites of early historic Indian groups.

KeJVL County contains the headwaters of the Guadalupe River and a number of its more important tributaries, and the majority of the county overlies the Edwards aquifer. A total of 116 archaeological sites are recorded from Kerr County at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, and an additional 165 are recorded at the archaeological laboratory at Southern Methodist University, most dating from the Archaic period. The predominant type is the burned rock midden. Sites are located on or near terraces overlooking the Guadalupe River and its major tributaries. Two major professional surveys have been carried out in the county. In 1970 a survey of the Ingram Reservoir recorded 62 sites in the northwestern part of the county .  extensive surveying and testing was done by the Texas Archeological Society in the Turtle Creek Area, south and west of Kerrville, in which 165 sites were recorded (Skinner 1974). Judging from the large number of sites found wherever intensive survey work has been done, it is apparent that nearly every stream in Kerr County is likely to be dotted with campsites and burned rock middens, of which only a small percentage have been recorded. It is also possible that pictographs may exist within the county, as a number of sites containing them have been reported in surrounding counties (Jackson 1938). The early 19th century German settlers' farms and settlements in the southeastern part of the county have not as yet been properly traced and recorded. Campsites of the historic Apache and Comanche intruders undoubtedly exist, none of which have yet been located.

The only submission to the National Register from Kerr County is historic Camp Verde (41KR111).  (Hall 1974), Major excavations have been done at the Kincaid Shelter on the Sabinal River, (unpublished), at the La Jita site (a burned rock midden complex on the Sabinal River in the northeastern part of the county, Hester 1971), and at sites near the Nueces River southwest of Uvalde (Texas Highway Department, summer and fall, 1975).


## Medlna. County

Judging from the number of active streams in the county and its location on the edge of the Edwards Plateau, a large number of archaeological sites can be predicted to exist where none have yet been recorded. Although Uvalde County is not one of the areas where early settlements may be found (the town of Utopia, founded in the 1850's as Waresville, is an exception), little is known of 17th and 18th century Spanish and Indian groups who lived in or travelled through the region and who may well have left recognizable traces of their activities.

*Excavations at the Landmark Inn were conducted by the Texas Historical Commission in summer, 1975. 


## W-lf..6on County contains a part of the center portion of the San Antonio

River, as well as part of Cibolo and Ecleto Creeks. The site of the proposed Cibolo Dam is within the county. Sixty-one archaeological sites have been recorded, of which 57 are campsites of the Archaic and Nee-American periods, three are 19th century potters' kilns, and one is an 18th century Spanish ranch headquarters. A professional archaeological survey was carried out on the Cibolo Creek in 1967 (Hsu and Ralph 1968).

Outside of the Cibolo Reservoir area, little is known of the prehistory of Wilson County. Judging from data available for surrounding counties, there should be many prehistoric sites on stream terraces of the San Antonio River and its major tributaries. There were a number of 18th century Spanish ranches and trails within the county as well as early Anglo-American settlers' homes, most of which have never been located and recorded.

To date, the only submission to the National Register from the county is historic Rancho de las Cabras (41 WN 30).

*In 1975, the Center for Archaeological Research carried out an archaeological survey of Coleta Creek, and numerous new sites were docu~ented (Fox and Hester, ms. in preparation). "C a.I r-1 C""l :> a.I


## {I)

{I) r::
-l"l 1-l ~ ....... !-I Q) (]) Q) s ,,-... . µ - ::I r-1 .µ .µ "C {I) lt) ro °' Cl) ~ -l"l •r-! "C ~ a.I""" z r-l CD CD •r-l LJ . µ - -1-l 0 ~ p.. i:i 0 -M r-l s:: °' •.-! -l"l ~ .-! 00 !-I {I) 0 0 {I) tll !-I :>-. lH I.I-I > {I) C) C) ..-i Qj .,, .µ ..-i 0 {I) 0 1-1 Qj Cl) a.I .µ (JJ § til a.I Q)
4-1 i::: Q) r:: ..i:::
r-l l::l .µ {I) .µ CD 0) 0 ClJ C) Q) (I) Q) 1-1 0 0 ctl •r-! Cll OJ !-I p.. til p..
..i:::

::I   


## RE Al
""' "~ \ -- 0 _l -- ,. ----\ ~~~---~~ .. - \ ---c ~- 8 MEDINA \ \ ' I \ -~------~R AVIS ~~3 // COMAL 54 ~-------5' -~ ~ ~ / , I , / ---- N ~ 0 30 mi 0 40 km '\ Goliad -~!)am Site / "-"'__J' . / /~ -\ ) VICTORIA ~ 3~//

## I-'

ln As stated in the introductory section 9 part of the study of the San Antonio-Guadalupe, River Basins involved a preliminary assessment of archaeological and historical resources in six proposed reservoir areas: Lockhart, Cloptin Crossing, Goliad, Applewhite, Cuero, and Ingram.

In two instances, the Cuero and Ingram Reservoirs, previous archaeological and historical surveys had been conducted. The results of these surveys are summarized in the following pages. However, within the boundaries of the four other proposed reservoir projects, no organized archaeological or historical investigation had been done. Since our task was to provide a general assessment, no extensive field operations were undertaken. Field teams from the Center paid brief visits to the areas of these four reservoirs, and in all cases, reported the presence of archaeological and historical resources. We have provided here only a brief summary of what has been done--or in most cases, what has not been done--in terms 16 of archaeological-historical inventory in the reservoir areas. We believe that it is essential for an intensive archaeological-historical assessment to be carried out during the planning phases of these reservoir projects.


## I ngfl.am Ru vr..vobr.

An archaeological survey of the area to be affected by the proposed Ingram Reservoir, Kerr County, Texas, was conducted in July and August, 1970 by the Archeological Division of the Texas Historical Survey Connnittee under contractual agreement with the Texas Water Development Board. Summarized here is the report of that survey, authored by Briggs (1971).

The area to be inundated by the proposed reservoir lies within the drainage system of the Upper Guadalupe River Basin on Johnson Creek, an important tributary which joins the Guadalupe River near Ingram, Texas. A literature search was conducted and information gathered on previously recorded sites in the area and its environs. The survey was conducted on foot and by vehicle. Sixty new sites were recorded, as well as three previously known, but undocumented, localities. Any area revealing j_ndication of aboriginal habitation, regardless of its extent, was declared a site and so recorded. Inability to obtain entry permission from some landowners precluded the examination of the entire area.

Three main types of sites were recorded: flint (chert) quarries (4.8%), open campsites strewn with fire-fractured limestone, flakes and artifacts (25.4%), and campsites with burned rock middens (69.8%). The burned rock midden sites consist of flat to slightly conical, circular to oval features, composed of a dense accumulation of burned rock, charcoal-stained, ashy soil, some animal bone remains, artifacts and broken flint, surrounded by scatters of f-'
/,~--t~--., "~( \ £DWARD5 ' \ - -i --1--- \ \ \ MEDINA I I >/"/ ,
'--1 lithic debris. Fifty-five burned rock middens were recorded, in some cases with two or three found at a single site. Many have been raided by relic hunters, others disturbed or destroyed by road construction, building, or plowing. Only eight sites had features which were regarded as relatively intact.

A total of 3,115 lithic specimens, virtually all of chipped stone, was collected from the surface of the 63 recorded sites. Categories include flakes, cores, marginally triw.med flakes (mostly side or end scrapers), various bifaces, and projectile points. 0£ the projectile points 53 specimens are dart points~ of which most are fragmentary, and five specimens are arrow points. These timediagnostic artifacts, range in age from Late Paleo-Indian times (ca. 9000-7000 B.C.), through the Archaic (5000 B.C.-A.D. 500), up to Late Prehistoric (Neo-American; A.D. 500-1500).

Artifacts recovered in 1934 from test excavations at two sites within the reservoir area were found to be of the same types and in about the same percentage, with the addition of two dart points considered to have been prevalent in the Early Archaic period.

Twelve of the 63 sites reported were recommended by Briggs (1971: 68-70) for extensive testing or excavation, all containing Archaic materials. All would be adversely affected by creation of the proposed reservoir.

Cuello Re.6 eJlvoJ.Jr.

Cuero I Reservoir is proposed for the Guadalupe River in south-central Texas. When completed it will inundate approximately 45 stream miles of the river. The dam site will be a short distance upstream from the confluence of the Guadalupe River and Sandies Creek. The purpose of this reservoir will be to regulate the flow for municipal and industrial water supplies, provide for flood control~ and for recreational facilities along the lower Guadalupe River.

The proposed dam will be 6.4 miles (10.3 km) long and will provide a conservation pool, surface level of 41,820 acres (17,074 ha), which will be expanded at flood control capacity to 57,400 acres (23,239 ha).

Because of the great scope of this project and its expected impact upon existing archaeological sites, a comprehensive archaeological survey was conducted during 1972 and 1973 to assess the extent of that threat. This survey was carried out by Daniel E. Fox, Robert J, Y.ialloufs Nancy O'Malley, and William M. Sorrow  under the auspices of the Texas Water Development Board and the Texas Historical Commission.

This survey consisted of an intensive surface inspection and a testing program at such points as time and money permitted. Over 250 man-days were expended in this field examination, which included 20 test excavations.

As a result of the survey, 357 archaeological sites were identified, recorded, and evaluated within the confines and on the periphery of the proposed reservoir.

Though some sites had been disturbed by relic-hunters, many buried sites were well preserved. It was the opinion of the investigators that most sites contained important information concerning the technology, subsistence, and settlement patterns of the prehistoric societies that inhabited this area over a period of approximately 8,000 years.

The survey report indicates that approximately 23 months of salvage archaeology would need to be conducted prior to any action that might destroy these archaeological sites. The cost of these mitigation activities is estimated to be approximately 1.1 million dollars (Fox et al 197L1: 269).
Claptin CJr..0.0-0-lng Reli eJwobt
The Cloptin Crossing Reservoir is a proposed Guadalupe-Blanco River Authority project. It is designed to impound 60,000 ha at top conservation level and 102.8 ha under maximum flood control pool. The flood control pool would extend 17.6 km up the Blanco River from the dam site, which is located in Hays County 1.5 km south of the River Road junction with the North Fork Road in Pioneer Town. Pioneer Town is a resort/amusement area 1.8 km southwest of the River Road junction with Highway 12 in Wimberley.

The area below the dam is a developed tourist-vacation area and some retirement and vacation home development is going on upstream. None of the ranches along the survey area seem to be worked full time, and there are only a few fields still being cultivated.

Brief reconnaissance was conducted in early January, 1975, by Thomas c. Kelly along the north side of the Blanco from the dam to the Pleasant Valley crossing, 12.8 km along the North Fork Road from Pioneer Town. All open roads were driven, five km were walked along the river, and three accessible fields were explored.

Four archaeological sites were found. They are briefly described below:

Site 1 (41 HY 101) Granny Cowan's field north of the River Road is about 20 ha of fallow land with quantities of exposed chert cobbles. The field is on the second terrace above and about 450 m north of the Blanco River. A concentration of worked chert pieces was noted in the northeast quarter and a sample was collected. The artifact inventory consisted of spokeshaves, scrapers, utilized flakes, thick and thin bifaces, cores, an Archaic dart point base, and a burin or possible blade core. Scattered burned limestone and chert was observed along with a few grinding stones and flake debris. The field was too disturbed by repeated plowing for any features to be readily observed.

Site 2 (41 HY 102)

Site 2 consists of two small burned rock middens. One is in the road in front of Granny Cowan's abandoned farm house. A road-grader has cut into it, leaving a. cross section for examination. These are quantities of burned limestone rock, but no flake debris was 20 found in the approximately 10 m diameter midden. The second midden . is located 10 m south of the first and had been freshly trenched by relic collectors. It is 35 cm deep with 10 cm of sterile soil beneath it. The midden is about 10 m in diameter and contains burned, black, greasy limestone. There was a scattering of artifacts in the area, consisting mainly of cores. Undoubtedly other artifacts have washed down into the Blanco River about 150 m south or have been picked up by tourists and collectors.

Site 3 (41 HY 103) The site is a small knapping station on the second terrace above the Blanco River west of Fox Hollow and 100 m west of a new house. The site is a circular area of about 10 m, containing a concentration of knapping debris. Artifacts were: a flake borer, two crude bifaces, an end scraper made on a blade, and two exhausted cores. The site was undisturbed on thin clay soil among oak and cedar.


## Site 4 (41 HY 104)

The site is located on the first terrace on a large bend in the Blanco River 500 m east of a ford. It was the only site with any flake debris along 2.5 km of the river bend. The thin soil over limestone was severly eroded. Artifacts were: a gouge, two cores, a scraper, and a burned biface. This land belongs to Mr. Chester Franklin of Wimberley, who has been a collector for many years and who stated there were no additional sites on his property.

Our survey was of a highly superficial nature and it is entirely possible that important archaeological material is to be found in this area. For this reason it is recommended that, prior to any construction, an intensive survey be made.


## Loc.khall.t Reo eJLvohr..

The proposed dam site is roughly parallel to and 200 m west of Highway 183, beginning 1.8 km north of the Lockhart city limits.

It is approximately 100 m below the confluence of Elm and Plum Creeks.

The land in both creek bottoms is a heavy, black gumbo soil, changing to reddish clay soil as the land rises between and outside the two creeks. A thick cover of grass is found on most of the black soil and repeated floods have heavily silted the bottom areas while eroding the surrounding hills. The higher and lighter soils are heavily covered with large pebbles of Edwards chert, red quartzite, and near hill tops, Uvalde gravels. The entire area was heavily cultivated in the past, but in recent times, grass and weeds have grown up and the land has been converted to cattle pastures.

Reconnaissance was made in early January 1975 by Thomas C. Kelly, aided by C. D. Orchard. All passable roads through the reservoir site were travelled by car and those areas not covered with dense grass were surveyed on foot. Three archaeological sites were round and specimens were collected.

Site 1 (41 CW 11)

The site is located on Elm Creek in a fallow, black gumbo field, 50 m west of the creek. Specimens consisted of lithic material only, and the site was probably a small knapping station. The artifact inventory consisted of heavy cobble cores or choppers, cores from which large flat wide flakes had been removed, small spokeshaves, an unusual plano-convex, biface scraper/knife, an incomplete bifacially-worked stemmed and shouldered dart point modified on its distal end (presumably for use as a scraper), and two other bifaces. All were found in an area of approximately 10 x 15 m and were undoubtedly scattered by repeated plowing.

Site 2 (41 CW 12)

The site is in a fallow field approximately 200 m east of Plum Creek. The reddish clay field is filled with Edwards chert cobbles, and has a very sparse covering of weeds. The artifacts consisted of two heavy crude choppers, a "chisel" or gouge, a small exhausted core, a crude biface, and the distal fragment of a large knife or dart point. All lay in a circular area of about five m in diameter. All were made of Edwards chert except one chopper, fashioned of Uvalde gravel.

An extensive search over the field failed to produce a single flake.

Site 3 (41 CW 13)

The site is an eroding fallow field across the road from the Polonia Cemetery, all that remains of an abandoned Polish village. The field is about 50 ha and is profusely littered with large cobbles of Edwards chert. A random search of the field indicated an area of about two ha in the southwest corner which had a scatter of heavy core/chopper tools. Nine were picked up, eight with the cortex remaining on the butt end. One apparent multipurpose tool made on a large flake was found.

Although the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin has no reported sites from the area, this very brief reconnaissance of the Lockhart Reservoir produced evidence of three. It is reconnnended that an intensive archaeological survey of the projected reservoir basin be conducted.

The dam site and impoundment area of the proposed Applewhite Reservoir are located on the Medina River south of San Antonio. The Walsh Cemetery appears to contain as many as 50 burials and includes a chapel. The roof construction has collapsed and the walls are in poor condition. Each of the four sides has an ornamental iron gate entrance. Mr. Ed Walsh~ the ranch owner~ informed us that the property is still in the hands of the original Spanish grant landowner family and that the majority of the burials in the closed cemetery are those of tenant farmers who formerly worked the land.

Other landowners in the area reported the existence of an old fort on the south bank of the Medina 9 approximately 900 m west of the point where Highway 16 crosses the river. They also informed us of an old cemetery about the same distance east of the Highway 16 crossing and on the south bank of the Medina River.

Several prehistoric occupation zones were found within the floodplain. Near the Monk home, we observed scattered flaking debris and collected a basal fragment of a Mon.t~lt projectile point. This aboriginal occupation is along the south side of Elm Creek about .5 km above its confluence with the Medina.

A few scattered chert flakes were observed but not collected on the southwest headland of the confluence of the two streams. Both the north and south ends of the dam location were surveyed on foot. The south terminus showed no surface indication of occupation. Cultural materials were found at the north terminus, extending along the north bank of the Medina River just outside the nonr~l flood plain.

Twenty-six chert flakes, a possible metate and mano, and the basal fragment of a triangular projectile point were found. This occupation .appears to extend for some distance upstream beyond the survey area. Only 90 to 135 m of river frontage were examined on foot. This area definitely should be examined in later surveys.

Several other crossings of Elm Creek and the Medina were surveyed by auto with limited on-foot checks of the immediate ground on both sides. No further prehistoric occupation was observed. Although the stream banks are fairly steep and abrupt, the terrain is flat to rolling and the elevation is only 150 to 160 m above sea level.

The soil in much of the surveyed area appears to be rich alluvium and there is a possibility that buried occupations would be revealed by excavation.

In summary, our brief inspection of the area indicates the presence of both prehistoric and historic resources within the area of the proposed Applewhite Reservoir. We strongly recommend that an intensive survey and assessment of archaeological resources be conducted during the planning of this project.


## Go.lla.d Ru ell.vobt

The proposed Goliad Reservoir is located on the San Antonio River north of the town of Goliad, and extends as far north as Kenedy in Karnes County. At this point the river runs through a moderately wide valley of alluvial soil, marked by old stream meanders and occasional ox-bow lakes. Alluvial terraces are nearly all under cultivation, with the slopes and upper terraces used for pasture land. '~1erever the land has not been continuously utilized, a thick thorny underbursh quickly moves in, making its further use impossible without radical clearing and brush-removal. Much of the valley is divided into large ranches owned by local families whose history extends back into the 19th century in the area.

As mentioned earlier in this report, comparatively little is known about existing archaeological sites in Goliad and Karnes Counties.

Only one site has previously been recorded within the reservoir. This is an open campsite dating from Archaic to Neo-American times 23 in Karnes County, which would be in the upper reaches of the reservoir. However, area residents have large collections of flint artifacts and tell of picking up numerous projectile points at local sites. No professional surveys have been done in the immediate area, but judging from the report of the Ecleto Creek survey done just north in Karnes County (Crawford 1971), the river valley should contain numerous open campsites and occasional workshop sites, some buried in alluvial terraces,and some on the surface of higher terraces, especially on low knolls near the river, near old river channels, or near the sites of the many never-failing springs which still fed the river in this area as late as the early 19th century, according to local informants. In cultivated areas, the old river channels are difficult to discern but can still be traced by the practiced eye. The sites will range in age from Paleo-Indian to Neo-American and many will include Historic period sites connected with the early 18th century Span:l,.sh missions. The ranch headquarters of Rosario Mission is known to have been somewhere within the area and has not yet been located.

Homes of early settlers and abandoned 19th century town sites are scattered along the valley,

In early January 1975, an archaeological team from the Center for Archaeological Research, consisting of Anne Fox and Jules Jacquier, conducted a reconnaisance of the reservoir area, interviewing local residents and surveying a portion of the river valley to ascertain the general location and make-up of the sites. Several rumored prehistoric sites were noted, and one prehistoric and one historic site were recorded. The prehistoric site (41 GD 11) is an open campsite on a knoll overlooking Collier Lake, a stock tank built in an old ox-bow lake west of the river just north of Goliad. Artifacts collected over a period of time from this site date it from Archaic into Neo-American times, and a few 19th century artifacts present indicate a later occupation in the vicinity as well. 24 The historic site (41 GD 12) is the town of Riverdale, which apparently reached its peak around the turn of the century and gradually declined until its abandonment in the early 19th century. Ruins are still visible within the overgrown river bend, and the iron bridge which was once the center of the small community is still in use today.

In sunnnary, the area to be covered by the Goliad Reservoir involves a large valley which has been intensively utilized by man from Paleo-Indian times to the present day. It is not an exaggeration to predict the presence of several hundred archaeological sites within the reservoir, about which virtually nothing is known at the present time. Intensive survey testing and selective excavation of these sites are urgently recommended as prelude to any future work on the reservoir.  .etJ..n. ofi .the T ex.M M..c.heolog.lc..al. and Pa.leon.tologJ..c..a.t Soc...le.ty 13: 9-15. 1941 


## A GENERAL OVERVIEW OF INDIAN CULTURES*

The Indian occupations of the study area can be divided into two distinct areas: those groups who occupied the central portion of the state, and those occupying the counties which lie along the coastal plain in the area south of a line between Del Rio and Galveston.

The central Texas area was the home, in early historic times, of the Tonkawa Indians (Newcomb 1961). How early they arrived is not known, but it is thought that they may be linked to the late prehistoric sites in the area (Suhm 1958).

The Tonkawa (and their late prehistoric predecessors) were a hunting and gathering society, engaged in some fishing, and possibly, horticulture. The occupation sites were concentrated along the streams and rivers of central Texas. They seem to have often camped on or near the burned rock middens of the earlier Archaic peoples. The Tonkawa manufactured some plain pottery and apparently obtained some in trade from the tribes of eastern Texas.

The Tonkawa, it is believed, probably depended heavily on the bison for food and clothing during the earlier phase of their existence, but, due to encroachment by the Comanche and other plains tribes, were later forced to depend upon smaller game, including deer and small animals such as skunks, rabbits, and rats.

Housing for the Tonkawa was usually a small, squat, crude structure supported by a tripod of branches covered with grass, branches,and brush. In later years cloth and hides sometimes replaced this vegetative cover.

Their main weapon was the bow and arrow, stoned-tipped at first, but with metal points substituted as that material became available from the Europeans. The juice of the mistletoe was used, mistakenly, to poison their arrows, a belief that persisted during their use of the gun when the juice was poured down the gun barrel.

The Tonkawa were joined by the Lipan Apache at about the middle of the 19th century, the latter having been pushed into the area by the aggressive Comanches. There is little or no material evidence remaining of this Apache occupation due largely to the semi-nomadic life-style of these peoples. However, 19th century accounts provide some clues to their mode of life. By the time of their arrival in Central Texas they had become hunters of bison, deer, and antelope, a pursuit in which the horse was employed, as the Lipan Apache were accomplished horsemen. Their primary weapon was the bow and arrow.

The meat diet derived from hunting was supplemented by wild plant food.

The various species of agave were a mainstay of this portion of their diet as well as providing raw materials from which they made various *Compiled by Feris A •. Bass, Jr.

articles of clothing and equipment.

Lipan Apache housing was the more conventional tipi composed of light poles over which bison hides were thrown. Some were large enough to accommodate a dozen people; others were smaller, housing only three or four.

Oppressed by their enemies, the Comanche, the Spaniard, and the Anglo-American settler, the Lipan Apache became the riffraff of the Texas frontier.

By the time the Anglo-American entered Texas, the Comanches were the dominant Indian Group in our area of study, ranging and raiding throughout the state.

As a typical Plains Indian group, the resources provided by buffalo were the mainstays of Comanche material culture. The weapons employed in hunting bison were the bow and arrow and the lance. The hunt was usually a connnunal affair in which an attempt, usually successful, was made to surround a herd causing it to mill about for an easier kill. Occasionally herds were driven off cliffs. Butchering took 44 place after the kill, and the meat was transported back to camp. Longhorn cattle occasionally replaced the buffalo as a meat source.

The Comanche diet also included wild plants and fruits such as plums, grapes, juniper berries, persimmons, fruits of the prickly pears, etc. Pemmican was also made and eaten.

Their housing was the usual Plains-type tipi made of tanned buffalo hides and light poles. These structures usually stood about 14 to 18 feet high.

The Comanche way of life was almost completely centered around warfare and during most of their recorded history, they were engaged in such pursuit. Every male Comanche was a warrior committed to fight as a means of achieving social status. Their warlike nature was a factor in their long resistance, lasting until 1875, to Anglo-American expansion into northern and western Texas.

The major Indian groups in the southern and coastal region of the study area were the Coahuiltecans and Karankawas, the latter being found along the central Texas coast. One of the multitude of Coahuiltecan groups was the Payayas, living in the vicinity of present day San Antonio. Other groups were present in the area between the San Antonio and Guadalupe Rivers.

The early history of the Coahuiltecans is quite obscure and little is known of their origin. But available evidence would indicate that they had existed in the area as a rather static society over a very long period, from at least Archaic times until the beginning of the 19th century.

The culture of the Coahuiltecans was quite primitive, perhaps dictated by the severity of the terrain in which they lived. Their dependence upon plant and animal resources for their support necessitated a seminomadic form of life. Reports from early Spanish explorers indicate that nothing edible was shunned as food -including many items not considered palatable by modern society. Plant foods were probably the principal item in their subsistance regime. The prickly pear ~was an important staple, as were the mesquite bean and the agave.

The principal weapon of the Coahuiltecans was the bow and arrow. The bow was often made from mesquite roots and the arrow from cane with hardwood foreshafts tipped with flint points. Another "weapon" was the curved, wooden "rabbit stick," which was used for digging, grubbing, prying, and throwing. Knives, scrapers, and hammers were made of flint.

The housing of the Coahuiltecan was usually made by bending over saplings on which were placed reed mats and hides forming low, circular huts. The camps of the Coahuiltecan were~ according to the Spaniards, rather filthy, with refuse piled about indiscriminately.

The Karankawa peoples are known from the Central Texas coast, and were probably present in the eastern portions of the study area. How long they and their ancestors had occupied the coastal area is unknown, but it appears that such had been the case since at least Archaic times.

As might be expected, the Karankawa utilized most of the coastal marine resources, both as food items and as a source for raw material for tool manufacture. On the mainland, deer, bison, bear, alligator, and other animals were utilized.

The Karankawa lived a highly mobile maritime existence facilitated by the use of dugout canoes made from hollowed-out tree trunks. Their housing was portable; made of willow poles 18 feet long which were set into the ground in a circle, the upper ends tied together and covered with skins and woven mats. These were usually about 10 feet in diameter. Pottery-making was practiced~ resulting in a distinctive pottery often decorated with asphaltum bands on the exterior and coated with asphaltum on the interior.

Their chief weapon was the bow and arrow, with the arrow points attached with asphaltum. Other weapons used were the lance and clubs.

The Karankawas were often accused of cannibalism, but in fact this was little more than a ritual practice, also followed by many other North American Indian groups.

In the following pages, we have listed selected references dealing with historic Indian peoples in the study area. The bibliographies contained in many of these publications contain further sources relating to the region's Indian cultures.   


## HISTORICAL SUMMARIES OF COUNTIES IN THE STUDY AREA*

In this section we present general historical statements for each of the 17 counties in the study area. Incorporated in these summaries are conunents on historical events, major historical personages, and "Western Frontier" aspects of each county. We are grateful to Cathrine McDowell of the Alamo Library for her assistance in this compilation.


## Bcuidvw.. County

Bandera County was created from a part of Bexar County in 1856 and was named for the Bandera Mountains which are situated in the northern part of the county. The first settlers to locate in the county were shingle makers who used the extensive cypress growth along the Medina River as the source of their raw materials. To man this industry a Polish settlement was formed. There was also a colony of Mormons that had settled here a year or so earlier under the leadership of Elder Lyman Wight.

Bandera County is the locality of one of Texas' most famous battlegrounds. Bandera Pass, a gorge 500 yards long and 125 feet wide, which cuts between the mountains that separate the Guadalupe and Medina Valleys, has been the scene of numerous battles dating almost since the earliest recorded Texas history. In 1720 General Bandera, under orders from the Spanish King, came here to drive out marauding Apaches who were threatening the small Spanish settlement at San Antonio. The battle lasted three days and resulted in the departure of the Apaches from that locality. The pass was also the site of a later battle in 1842 between Texas Rangers and Comanche Indians. This was the first civil settlement in Texas and played a major part in Texas history; here we provide only a brief sunnnary. Established in 1731 when 13 Canary Island families arrived in the area already occupied by the Villa de Bexar and the missions of San Antonio de Valero, San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo, San Juan Capistrano, and Nuestra Senora de la Purisima Concepcion. These "Isleiios" called their little settlement San Fernando.  (1842), and Adams Hill (1861). Skirmishes with Indians were common until the late 1800 1 s.

All types of military establishments have been here, since the first presidial soldier from Spain until today's Army and Air Force.

The many different peoples who settled here have given Bexar County a cosmopolitan heritage that is a blending of Spanish, Indian, Mexican, French, German, American, Irish, Chinese, Negro, and other cultures and customs.


## Cai.dwe.U County

The county was originally part of the DeWitt Colony (1824-1836). It was created from Gonzales in 1848 and named for Matthew Caldwell, signer of the Texas Declaration of Independence, soldier, and Texas Ranger.

A major early event in the area that now comprises Caldwell County was the Battle of Plum Creek (in 1840), between the Comanches and Texans.

During the Civil War seven companies were furnished the Confederate Army by the county. It was during this period that a considerable growth in the cattle industry occurred and in 1868 the first "trail drive" (a herd owned by J. J. Meyers) was sent from the county.

The first railroad was built in the county by the Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad in 1885. Industrialization followed the railroad and in 1893 a cotton oil mill was established, followed by a cotton compress in 1901. In 1922, iron ore was found along with lignite in the Iron Mound district. This was followed by the discovery of oil in the vicinity of Luling. In 1873 the Galveston, Harrisburg, and San Antonio Railroad reached Cuero. This brought about a boom in the development for the community which lasted until 1906 when the railroad was extended to San Antonio.


## Ca.lhoun County

The first county seat was Cameron but was moved to Clinton in 1850, and then across the river to Cuero in 1876. The present day population is a mixture of descendents of DeWitt colonists and Germans who immigrated to Texas. Many residents of Indianola moved inland after the hurricanes of 1875 and 1886, bringing their houses with them which they had dismantled and moved by ox cart and then reassembled at their destination.

DeWitt County was the scene of one of the most bitter and prolonged of early Texas feuds, that between the Suttons and the Taylors, which lasted from 1867 to 1875 and resulted in the deaths of many Suttons, Taylors, and their followers.

Several well-known private schools served this area during, and for some time after, the Civil War.


## Go.ti.ad County

Goliad County is one of the original counties of Texas having been established in 1837 and named for the municipality of Goliad that was already in existence. The area in which this county is situated had long been the scene of Spanish activity in Texas. Cabeza de Vaca is believed to have crossed the county in his travels in 1535. La Salle is believed also to have crossed the county in his explorations in 1685. However, actual settlement did not begin until 1749 when the Spanish moved the presidia and missions of La Bahia, Nuestra Senora del Espiritu Santo de Zuniga and Nuestra Senora de Loreto to the site of Santa Dorotea on the San Antonio River. In 1754 Nuestra Senora del Rosario was established four leagues southwest of La Bahia.

This was one of the three areas of Spanish occupation when the Americans began to enter Texas. One of the first of these entries was the Gutierrez-Magee Expedition which seized the presidia at 55 La Bahia, to be besieged there by the Spanish governor of Texas, Manuel Salcedo, until the latter was forced to withdraw to San Antonio.

In 1821 James Long captured the fort.

Some of the first steps by the Anglo-A.~ericans toward the Texas Revolution were taken here when forces under Ben Milam and George Collinsworth drove the Mexican garrison out of the Presidio. But, the most famous of the military events that occurred at this locality was the defeat and massacre of the Texas Army under the command of James Fannin by General Jose Urrea in 1836.

Following the Goliad massacre the area was deserted until 1840 when Anglo-American colonization was resumed, but on the opposite side of the river from the Spanish town.

Almost adjacent to La Bahia is the site of the birthplace of General Ignacio Zaragosa, the Mexican military leader who defeated the French forces at Puebla, Mexico, in 1862.

Aranama Institute (Presbyterian) and Paine Female Institute (Methodist) were established in the 1850 1 s and were educational centers for the surrounding area for many years. Gonza.tv., Cou.vit.y Part of the colony of Green C. DeWitt, the county was named for Rafael Gonzales, a governor of Coahuila and Texas. It was one of the original counties of the Republic of Texas. 


## Guadalupe County

The county was created in 1846 from Bexar and Gonzales Counties and was named for the Guadalupe River that almost bisects it.

Seguin, an important town in the 1840's, was named for the Seguin family of San futtonio, but was first known as Walnut Springs. Several historic homes and sites are identified by State Historical Markers.

The county was a center of activities of early frontier battalions and Ranger Companies since a major Indian trail from west Texas to the coast passed through it. In 1834 this activity became so intense that settlers were forced to withdraw to Gonzales for protection.

From 1837 to 1839 unclaimed land in the county was granted to veterans of the Texas Revolution and encouraged the rapid settlement of the area during these years. Helena was the center of the "Cart War 11 in 1857 between freighters, and became a hideout for outlaws and rustlers.

Panna Maria (1854) is the oldest Polish settlement in the United States and was the center from which other Polish towns were established. St. Joseph's School (1868)-is considered to be the first Polish private school in the United States and its building now houses an historical society museum.

Two crossings of the San Antonio River, near Hobson and Falls City, were used by Indians on their trails to the coastal areas.

A major uranium discovery in Texas was near Falls City, and a uranium mining-refining plant now is located nearby.

There are several old ranching families in the county, including the Lytles and Toms. German immigration to this part of Texas was very heavy in the 1840's. One of the most noted settlements was New Braunfels in Comal County.

In 1844 Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels brought three shiploads of German immigrants to Texas. On the Texas coast they set up a tent village known as Carlshafen~ but in 1845 most traveled to the site of New Braunfels and laid the foundation for one of the most solid German towns to be established in Texas. They brought with them their Catholic and Lutheran religions and churches were soon built,

Other German iil1111igrants settled in areas such as San Antonio 9 Boerne, Comfort, Yorktown, and Kerrville. Two unique German colonies were set up in Kendall County, Led by a group of German university scholars, the colonies of Bettina and Sisterdale were organized along communal lines. This experiment failed and most of the colonists moved on to other German settlements.

The Reverend Leopold Moczygemba is given credit for the first Polish migration to South Central Texas. In 1841 he was sent to serve the German settlement of New Braunfels. In 1854 he established the colony of Panna Maria which was populated by Polish Catholics. San Antonio, Bandera, Yorktown, and Meyersville we1~e also settled by Polish immigrants.

In the early 1800'sj scores of Anglo-Americans came to Texas seeking Mexican land grants. Green C, DeWitt was significant in obtaining these land grants in our area of interest and responsible for such settlements as Cameron, Clinton, Meyersville, Yorktown, and Seguin. Calhoun County's first Anglo-American colony was Linnville. Established in 1831 it was soon raided by Comanches. The survivors moved to another site and set up the town now known as Port Lavaca. Other sites populated by Anglo-Americans include San Antonio, Goliad, Lockhart, San Marcos, and Kerrville. Methodist, Baptist, Lutheran, Catholic, Presbyterian and Episcopal churches were set up in the late 1800's in many of these settlements.

Other significant ethnic and religious groups also populated this section of Texas. Spanish settlers began moving into Uvalde County in the late 1700's. In 1824 Martin De Leon obtained a land grant *Compiled by Lynn Highley of European man 1 s i'colonization" of this portion of the New World is evident in a strong, indigenous architectural style. Born of necessity, guided by availability of materials and climate, and influenced by their own background, the early pioneers built strong, simple, and above all, functionals shelter for themselves and their families.

The construction techniques range from log cabins to adobe walls, split shake roofs of native cypress, combinations such as timberand-stone and post-and-adobe, usually faced with a local lime plaster for durability.

The first and most pervading European influence came with the Spaniards by way of Mexico in the 18th century. Thick stone and adobe walls, limited openings shuttered against the heat and cold, and secluded patios hidden from the streets were the stylistic labels of the Spanish buildings. More elaborate church architecture carried with it the typical Romanesque influence of Spain in the 12th and 13th Centuries, and the 14th Century Gothic. Moorish overtones, as seen in the charming entrance portal of the small chapel at Espada Mission, south of San Antonio, are reminders of the Moorish occupation of Spain. Influenced by their lives in Spain, the colonizing padres and conquistadors built their churches in faithful detail to extend their architectural style into the new world and particularly Texas.

With the coming of the 19th Century, south central Texas saw an entirely different style of architecture brought in by the arriving immigrants from Germany, Alsace-Lorraine, and Poland. These included steep pitched roofs, native limestone combined with wood posts, and wide porches created by an extension of the simple gable-ended roofs. Wood-work details embellished the exteriors with intricate, perforated scrollery, outlining the porch colunms and extending up the rake of the gable roofs. Finely detailed doors and windows with shutters, extended the display of wood-working craftsmanship.

New Braunfels was one of the centers of German architectural influence which spread into the hill country of the Edwards Plateau.

*Compiled by Harvey P. Smith, Jr, Castroville with its stuccoed inns and stone homes is a concentration of Alsatian influence and atmosphere, resulting from the early settlement along the Medina River of immigrants under the leadership of Henri Castro.

French architectural design influence 9 although much neglected, is still quite evident in the cosmopolitan mixture for which San Antonio is widely famous. The lovely details of the old Ursuline Academy buildings reveal the New Orleans background of these intrepid sisters.

French Mansard roofs, such as on the home formerly located at Elm Street and E. Houston, are seen in the detailing of many fine old structures.

Classic influences were strong in the mid-19th century, particularly in the public buildings in San Antonio. The original Menger Hotel, south of the Alamo on Alamo Plaza, presented a simple classic facade which has since been modified and further embellished. Greek revival, so popular in the east at this time, was reflected in the stately colonade of the City Market building then located on W. Market Street, but now gone.  . (,[c.cLn;t AILc.h.i...tec.,.tUJLa 


## CONCLUDING CO'MMENTS

In this report, we have provided a general inventory of cultural resources in the basins of the San Antonio and Guadalupe Rivers.

In reviewing the region's rich and varied cultural inventory, we have summarized data relative to history~ Indian cultures, archaeology, architecture, and ethnic and religious groups.

We have placed a somewhat greater emphasis in this report on an evaluation of the archaeological resources. It is clear that we 67 know a good deal about the archaeology of some counties, and almost nothing about others. The same can be said about historical resources; records for some counties are lengthy and detailed, while only meager information is available in other counties. In general, we still know far too little about the archaeological-historical remains in this 17-county area. Yet, these resources are being rapidly depleted through urban and industrial expansion, the spread of housing and resort developments, and the depredations of relic collectors and vandals. Numerous historic and prehistoric archaeological sites have been destroyed and their loss is irreplaceable.

To date, only two major reservoirs have been constructed in the study area, In the case of Canyon Reservoir (Comal County), an extensive archaeological survey and salvage program was carried out (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962). On the other hand, Lake Medina (Medina County) was built many years earlier and was developed without benefit of archaeological-historical inspection. Federal and State legislation now acts to ensure that archaeological and historical resources will be evaluated, and the impact of their loss mitigated, prior to dam construction.

In the present report, we have mentioned two planned reservoir areas, Ingram and Cuero, within which archaeological survey has already been conducted. The other four reservoirs (Cloptin Crossing, Applewhite, Goliad, and Lockhart) are still in the planning phases. We strongly suggest that archaeological-historical assessments be done of these areas in the near future, so that the resulting data can be of value in the planning and project evaluation procedures.

## ~
...........

## Figure 1 .
1Reconded AnchaeologlcoJ'... SLte.J:i ln the Study A!Lea. The number of reported sites for each county is indicated (as of January 1975).

## Figure 2 .
2Loc..etti.ovio ot) P11.opo1.ie,d Vam.o and Ret:ie11.vobr.J.i ,{,n :the S:tLtdy All.ea. The approximate dam sites for Ingram, Cloptin Crossing, Lockhart, Cuero, Goliad, and Applewhite are shown.

## Dam\. 0 Figure 3 .Figure 4 .
034-.,,____ -..,..., . ' Sit'l . / ~~r .j::-. AppJtowncite. Loc.cLtiono 06 MctjoJL In.cUcm GJLou.p,6 ,[n. the. Study Ane.a Vt.VUng .the. Six.tee.nth and Se.ve.n.te.e.n.th C e.ntu!Uv.i •

## From
the establishment of the first mission, San Antonio de Valero (1718), until after the Civi1 War, there have been many conflicts among the varying peoples who have lived here: Spanish and Indians, Spanish and Mexicans, Mexicans and Texans? Confederates and Federals. There have been 12 battles in the environs of San Antonio that have left their mark: Rosalie (1813), Alazan (1813), Medina (1813), Concepcion (1835), Grass Fight (1835)~ Battle of Bexar (1835), Alamo (1836), Council House Fight (184.0), Woll Capture of San Antonio (1842), Salado (1842), Dawson Massacre

## ~Figure 5 .
5·"-.... . ..__ ~~Goliad / / . ' \ Pam Site . ___ _,----\~----.Loc.citioYL!:i o-6 Sign.

## TABLE OF CONTENTS
OFPage 

Introduction 6 0 G l l l Q 0 0 0 Q O O e $ C t 

Cl 
• 
• 
• 
• 

1 

Archaeology of the Study Area • 

. . 2 

Bibliography of Archaeology in the Study Area 

. . . • • 25 

A General Overview of Indian Cultures • 

• • • 43 

Historical Summaries of Counties in the Study Area. 

• • 51 

General Comments on Ethnic and Religious Groups of 
the Region • • 
• • • • 

• 60 

Architecture and Styles • 

(II 
• 
,. 
• 
• 

• • 62 

Concluding Comments • 
• • • 6 7 

Bibliography • • • • • 

. . . • • • 68 
INTRODUCTION 

In November, 1974, the Center for Archaeological Research of The 
University of Texas at San Antonio was requested to prepare an 
archaeological-historical resource inventory of the Guadalupe-San 
Antonio River Basins. This work was done under contract with Ecol-
ogy Audits, Inc. of Dallas, Texas. The contract called for the 
inventory to be of a general nature, suitable for use as a base line 
description in planning. The contract stated that the following 
items were to be included in the assessment: 

1) Inventories for the 15 counties within the 
basin: Bandera, Bexar, Caldwell, Calhoun, 
Comal, DeWitt, Goliad, Gonzales, Guadalupe, 
Hays, Karnes, Kendall, Kerr, Victoria, and 
Wilson Counties, as well as two counties, 
Medina and Uvalde, lying outside the study 
area. 

2) Topics including, but not limited to: 

a. Statements about archaeological sites and 
their significance 

b. Indian cultures 

c. Other ethnic cultures 

d. Religious groups 

e. "Western Frontier" 

f. Architecture and styles 

g. Major historical events 

h. Major historical persons 

3) General Assessment of archaeological and his-
torical resources in the following proposed 
reservoirs: 

a. Lockhart Reservoir (Gonzales County) 

b. Cloptin Crossing Reservoir (Hays County) 

c. Goliad Reservoir (Goliad and Karnes 
Counties) 

d. Applewhite Reservoir (DeWitt County) 

e. Cuero Reservoir (DeWitt County) 

f. Ingram Reservoir (Kerr County). 

This report presents the results of the study carried out by the 
Center for Archaeological Research. Active participants in various 
phases of the project included the following Center personnel: 
Feris A. Bass, Jr., Mary Frances Chadderdon, Nancy Y. Clayton, 

Anne A. Fox, E. S. Harris, Cheryl Lynn Highley, Jules Jacquier, 

Thomas C. Kelly, and Harvey P. Smith, Jr. 




BexaJL County encompasses the headwaters of the San Antonio River and Salado, Olmos, and Leon Creeks. Near its southern boundary is the Medina River, an important tributary, and on its northern boundary is Cibolo Creek which joins the San Antonio River farther south in Karnes County. The northern portion of the county overlies the Recharge Area of the Edwards aquifer. Bexar is probably the most-studied county, archaeologically, in south-central Texas. At least seven major surveys and 14 professional excavations have been carried out, contributing to the total of 226 sites presently recorded.* Prehistoric sites are predominantly open campsites on river terraces, with chert workshop/ quarry sites, burned rock middens, and a small number of rockshelters.Caldwell County contains the central section of Plum Creek, a tributary of the San Marcos River which forms the county's southern boundary. The Lockhart dam site is located on Plum Creek within the county. Ten archaeological sites have been recorded in Caldwell *301 sites had been recorded bylate 1975.    County, all open campsites of Archaic times, although one site appears to have also had Paleo-Indian and Nee-American components.Time periods represented range from Paleo-Indian to Nee-American, the 
majority being of the Archaic period. Forty-three historic sites 
have been recorded, including 18th century Spanish missions and related 
structures and 19th century homes, burial grounds, lime kilns, and 
grist mills. 

Despite the number of sites recorded and the archaeological work 
done in Bexar County, it is apparent that there are large sections 
about which very little is known. One such area falls within the 
proposed Applewhite Reservoir on the Medina River, which should con-
tain many important prehistoric sites. Submissions to the National 
Register of Historic Places from Bexar County include: 

Ursuline Academy (41 BX 235) 
The U.S. San Antonio Arsenal 
Hanger Nine 
Spanish Governor's Palace 
Mission Concepcion (41 BX 12) 
Navarro House 
King William Historic District 
Mission San Juan Capistrano (41 BX 5) 
Mission San Francisco de la Espada (41 BX 4) 
First National Bank of San Antonio 
Old Lone Star Brewery 
La Villita Historic District 
Menger Hotel 
Acequia Madre 
Menger Soap Works 
Post Chapel (Gift Chapel) 
Fort Sam Houston 
The Quadrangle (Fort Sam Houston) 
Pershing House (Fort Sam Houston) 
Adrian Edwards Conn House 

No professional archaeological surveys or excavations have been 
done.* 

Considering its geographical location at the edge of the Edwards 
Plateau, the presence of major water sources, and the density of 
sites in neighboring Guadalupe County, it is reasonable to predict 
that prehistoric sites are numerous on terraces near Plum Creek and 
the San Marcos River. Caldwell County was settled in the early 19th 
century, and early settlements and homesites undoubtedly exist which 
have not been recorded. We have been told there are historic 
Indian campsites and battle sites in the area and these should be 
located and recorded. 

One historic landmark, the Enunanuel Episcopal Church, has been 
nominated to the National Register of Historic Places. 




*Subsequent work in Caldwell County has been reported by Thomas R. Hester, Thomas C. Kelly, and Feris A. Bass, Jr., An Initial Archaeological and Historical Assessment of Three Proposed Dam Sites in Gonzales and Kendall Counties, Texas 9 Reg~onai. S.tuclle.6, No. 2, The Ce.nteJL nM. An.clia.eolag~c.al Re.6ea1tc.h, The UniveJcJ.>liy ofi TexM atSa.n    Comal County contains a section of the upper Guadalupe River and is bounded on the south by the upper reaches of Cibolo Creek, a major tributary of the San Antonio River. Fifty-four archaeological sites have been recorded in the county, of which the majority areAntonio, FebnuaJLy, 7975. 
7 




VeW.ltt County contains a section of the central portion of the Guadalupe River as well as Bandies Creek, one of its tributaries. A total of 223 archaeological sites has been recorded, the majority being the result of two professional surveys which included parts of the county. A survey of the proposed Cuero Reservoir recordedSubmissions to the National Register from Comal 
County are: 

First Protestant Church, United Church of Christ 
Lindheimer House 
Step~en Klein House 

212 sites 


From the number of archaeological sites recorded in an intensive survey of one section of the Guadalupe, it may be presumed that a similar situation exists throughout DeWitt County and that only a small percentage of the total existing prehistoric sites have been recorded. There is also the potential for study of settlement patterns in historic times in this county.). Most 
of the sites date from the Archaic period, although one site con-
tained a Paleo-Indian component and a number yielded Nee-American 
artifacts, indication that all prehistoric periods are represented. 
These are open campsites, located on terraces of the major streams 
and their tributaries. A large number of historic sites are also 

*As of late 1975, 89 sites had been documented. See Thomas C. Kelly 
and Thomas R. Hester, Archaeological Investigations at Four Sites 
in the Dry Comal Watershed, Comal County, South Central Texas, 
located in DeWitt County, due to its history as an early Anglo 
colony and the influx of later immigrants who followed the open-
ing of the area to settlement. 

The Cuero I Archaeological District and the DeWitt County Courthouse 
have been nominated to the National Register of Historic Places. 

Go.tla.d County contains a portion of the lower San Antonio River and 

two of its major tributaries. Nine archaeological sites have been 
recorded, about half of which are open campsites of Archaic and Neo-
American age 


Uvcttde Coun;ty contains portions of the Sabinal, Frio, Leona, and Nueces Rivers, and overlies the Recharge Area of the Edwards aquifer. The Sabinal~ Concan,and Montell Dam sites have been proposed for the northern part of the county. Sixty-seven archaeological sites have been recorded~ of which approximately half are open campsites or shelters and the '.remainder, middens, all dating from Paleo-Indian to Neo-American times. One sinkhole burial site and a number of quarry/workshop sites have also been recorded, as well as a 19th century frontier fort. A professional survey in 1973 on the Leona River recorded 11 sitescontains the central portion of the Medina River, a 

major tributary of the San Antonio River, and is bisected by Hondo 
Creek. The northern part of the county overlies the Recharge Area 

*Recent activity by the Center for Archaeological Research in the 
Upper Cibolo Watershed in Kendall County has led to the documentation 
of over 40 additional archaeological sites (Bass and Hester 1975). 
Subsequent studies of sites in this vicinity have yielded abundant 
evidence of early Archaic occupations (Kelly and Hester, ms. in 
preparation). 
of the Edwards aquifer. Eight archaeological sites, dating from 
Paleo-Indian to Neo-American times, have been recorded in the 
northern part of the county, including an open campsite, a burial 
site, burned rock middens, a rockshelter, a quarry site, and a 
19th century historic site. No professional surveys or excavations 
have been done. 

Amateur archaeologists and relic collectors have reported the ex-
istence of numerous prehistoric sites along the Medina River and 
Hondo Creek which have never been properly recorded. Several 19th 
century settlements and numerous historic buildings are known which 
have not been studied or recorded. Campsites of historic Indian 
tribes in the area have not yet been identified and documented. 

Submissions to the National Register include: 

Castroville Historic District 
Landmark Inn Complex* 
Old D'Hanis Historic District 




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF ARCF..AEOLOGY IN THE STUDY AREA* Listed on the following pages are published and unpublished studies resulting from archaeological research in the San Antonio-Guadalupe River Basins area. These references include both prehistoric and historic archaeological investigations. In several instances, unpublished references are listed as being on file at TARL (the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin). We are grateful to the personnel of TARL for their aid in the compilation of this bibliography. In: Notes & News: The Southwest. Ame/Uc.an. Anti.qui:ty 13 Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bui.1.e;tln 06 the El Segundo Mamut Fosil De Santa Isabel Iztapan Mexico, y Artefactos Asociados. In1.itLtu:to Nauona.f. de An.:tJc.opo.f.og.la. e H.l6:toll.)_a_, Mexico D. F. 1955. Mayer-Oakes , William J. Relationship Between Plains Early Hunter and Eastern Archaic. Orchard, C. D. and T. N. Campbell Evidences of Early Man from the Vicinity of San Antonio, Texas. Excavation of a Section of the Acequia Madre in Bexar County, An A1tc..he.olog.lc.al. Tn.ve&.:ti..gcdion 06 Wal . . heJL Ra.nc..h.. Texas Historical Commission, Austin, 1973. Sellards, E. H. EM£.y Man in AmVU.c.a: Texas Press. Austin. A s,tudy -in PnehM.:toJty. An Archaeological Survey of Friedrich Park, Bexar County, Texas. Ce.riteJt 6oJL A,tc..ha.eoR..og.lc..ai. ·Reoe.Mc.h!' The. Un).ve!tf,...Uy ofi Te.xM a..t Sa.n An;tonA..o ~ M.c.ha.e.olog-i..c..ai. SiVl..vey Re.paid, No. 12. 1975. Sorrow,'William M. Archaeological Salvage Excavations at the Alamo (Mission San Antonio De Valero) 1970. Te.xa..o Mc.haeo-log,Lc..a.R.. Sal.vage. Pnojec:t6, Reoe.aJtc..h RepoJr..t 4. 1972. Types of Archaeological Sites in Bexar County, Texas. Wilie Merno.!t.icie. Muo e.wn Bu.Lte;tbi lt. 1935. Survey of Structures No. 38. 'Re6e.aJtc.h Re.poJt..t, La.boJLa.:t.01r..y, Te.x.alJ A and M UnA..vVUi,{;ty 3. 1974. The Corner-tang Flint Artifacts of Texas. UYIA..veJi6..Lty on Tex.a.& Wesolowsky, A. B. and T. S. Ellzey The Human Skeleton from the Cochran Site: 41CW3. The Bu.f.t-Roa!r..Vl New,oleftVl 06 the. Un,lveMUy 06 Tex.cu Anth!r.opo.logka.f. Socle..ty 3 (1) 1968. The. UYIA..veJU:.Uy afi Te.xa.& a:t. San. Antonia Anc.ha.e.alogic.al. Swive.y Re.poJt..t 2. 1974. Briggs, Alton K. Archeological Resources in the Texas Lowlands and Littoral. T e.xcv.i H,i.,o.tafl.lc.al Swive.y Comm.ltte.e. and T e.XL.Ui Wa..te.Jt Ve.velopme.nt Evz.v).Jr..ovlJfle.n:ta.l Pf.a.vining Vi..vioion 06 Te.xa,c, Ge.nelta.f. Land Ofinlc.e.. BuU.etin a 6 .the. T exao Atich.e.olog.f..c.ai.. Suhm, Dee Ann~ Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks An Introductory Handbook to Texas Archeology. Bo.£le:tln ofi .the. Tex.a.ti lVic..heolog..lc.ai.. Saclety 25. 1954. Udden, J. A. The Origin of the Small Sand Mounds of the Gulf Coast Country. Wingate~ R. F. and Thomas Roy Rester Ten Burials from Green Lake. Texas. f.f.afl...lda. An:th!topolog.l6.t Hester, Thomas R., Feris A. Bass, Jr. and Thomas C. Kelly Archaeological Survey of Portions of the Comal River Watershed, Comal County, Texas. The. C ent<!/'l 6M . . Altc.ha.eolog.lc.al Re& e..aJLc.h, The. UnlveM..U:y ot) Texao a..t San. Antonio Aneha.eolog . . foal.. Swwe.yBandera County 

Patterson, J. T. 

Supplementary Notes on the Corner-tang Artifact. The UnA..ve.!L6Lty 

06 Texa!> Bui.1.etin 3734 27-39. 1937. 

Patterson, L. W. 

A Multiple Rock Midden Site. La TiVl/ta. 1 (3): 10-13. 1974. 

Prismatic Blade Distribution in Texas. La T~VUta. 1 (1): 

9-14. 1974. 

Reiter, Paul 

(3): 272-273. 1948. 

Tex.a.& A'1..c.he.o.f.og,foa1. Soue:t.y 25. 1954. 

Bexar County 

Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis 
The Second Mammoth and Associated Artifacts at Santa Isabel 
Iztapan, Mexico. 

Ame/Uc.an An.:Uqui:ty. 22 (1): 12-28. 1956. 

Campbell, T. N, 
Review: E. H. Sellards, Early man in America: A Study in 

Prehistory. Sou:t.hwu:te'1..n H.l6.t.o~c.a1. Qu.0Jde'1..ly (formerly 

The Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Association) 
57 (1): 148-150. 1953. 

Chadderdon, M. F. 
Notes on the Menger Collection, Site 41 BX 272, Bexar County, 

Texas. La T~e.'1..'1..a 2 (1). 1975. 

*Compiled by Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester 
Kelley, J. Charles 
Arrow or Dart Shaft Tool and Problematical Incised Stones 

from Central and Western Texas. El Palacl . . o· 55 (3): 73-85. 

1948. 

Krieger, Alex D. 

Anthropology at University of Texas. Bolet.ln B-i..b.li..og4a61co de 
An.tJr.opologia Ame!U.c.ana. 14: 97-98. 1952. 

In: 
182. 

Notes and News: 
1950. 

Early Man. Ame.JU.can Antiquity 16 (2): 

New World Culture History: Anglo-America. In: A. L. Kroeber 

(editor) An:thJr.opology Today: 238-264. University of Chicago 

Press. Chicago 1953. 

Martin, George C. 

Texas Coastal Pottery. Bulletin 06 :the TexaJ.:i A!tchealogica.£. 
and PCLteon:talog1ca£ Socie:ty 3: 53-56. 1931. 

1 

JoUJtnai. ofi .the WMhJ.ng:ton Academy 06 Sc.len.cu 49 (5): 146-

156. 1959. 

Orchard, C. D. 

Two Etcetera Sites; Paper Presented at Texas Archeological 
Society Annual Meeting, (Manuscript on file at TARL Library). 
1966. 

The Te.xM JaUJtnal. 06 Science 6 (4): 454-465. 1954. 

Southwestern Pottery from Sites in the Vicinity of San Antonio, 

Texas. Tex.tl6 AJz.eheology 4 (2): 7-8. 1959. 

Patterson, L. W. 
Prismatic Blade Distribution in Texas. La T~eJt.Jt.£t 1 (1): 

9-14. 1974. 

A Quarry Site in Medina County, Texas. La T~eJVLa 2 (1). 1975. 

Pearce, J. E. 
Need and Opportunities for Anthropological Research in the 

Southwest. The Sot.Lthwe..bteJtn Pof.);t[ca.£. and Soc.la.£. Science 

Qu.aJLteJU.,y 5 (3): 1-21. 1924. 

Remsburg; George J. (editor) 

In: The Round Table. The Anchaealog~ca.£. Bulletln 2 (4): 

109. 1911. 
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr. 

Review: E. H. Sellards, Early Man in America: A Study in 

Prehistory. AmeJU.ean. Ant.lqul.;ty 19 (2): 180-191. 1953. 

Schuetz, Mardith K. 

Texas and Archeological Investigations at Mission San Jose in 

April 1968. T exa-6 H..U.totU.c.al. Swwe.y Commltte.e., A!r.c.he.olog,f,.c.al. 

Repofl.t 19. 1970. 

29 

The Granberg Site: An Archaic Indian Habitation in Bexar County, 

Texas. W,f;tte MU6e.um S,twii..eo. San Antonio. 1966. 

Historic Background of the Mission San Antonio de Valero. 

Smte. Bu,UcU.n.g Camml6t...Wn 1 Anehe.alag.leaf. PJLogJtam, Re.poJz,,t 1. 
1966. 

The History and Archeology of Mission San Juan Capistrano, 

San Antonio, Texas. S.ta.te. Bu.Jl . . cllng Camrnl6"6.lon, A!tehe.ologlc.a.e. 
P!LogJt .. a.m, Re.poJz,,t 10 and 11. 1968. 

Scurlock, D. and W. R. Hudson, Jr. 

1952. 

Smith, Harvey P.~ Jr. and Kenyon McDonald 

University of 

Tunnell, Curtis 
A Description of Enameled Earthenware from an Archeological 
Excavation at Mission San Antonio De Valero (The Alamo) 1966. 

S.tate. BuJ.-lcUn.g Comm.lot.lon, M.ehe.olog,f,.c.a.f. PJtogM.m. Report 2. 

1966. 

Willey, Gordon R. 

Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Urii»eJl...6..lty afi 

Ch.le.a.go P!r.e6~. Chicago, 1958. 

Woolford, Sam 

Caldwell County 

Baxter, E. P. and H. J. Shafer 
Lower Plum Creek Watershed. Caldwell, Texas. 

Patterson, J. T. 

An Archeological 

Anthfl.o polo g y 

Bulf..etin 3802. 1936. 

Scarborough, Joetta 
Excavation of a Burial at the Cochran Site: 41CW3. The. Buii.-

RoCVLVl~ New.oleftVl ofi ,the. UniveJUJUy ofi Texa.o Anthfl.opo.f.og-i.c.a.l 

SocA..e..ty 3 (1) 1968. 

Walker, Jimmy 

The First Texan. Te.xcv., Pcviade. 16(9): 24-27. 1956. 

Watt, Frank H. 
Lookout Point. Ce.n:tJta.f.. Te.xa.6 A!r..c.hae.ol'..og.lf.d 8: 27-39. 

Calhoun County 

Bass, F. A., Jr. 
Assessment of Archaeological Resources in Portions of the 
Chocolate Creek, Little Chocolate Creek and Lynns Bayou Water-
shed, Victoria and Calhoun Counties, Texas. Cen-teJt fio!r.. 

A'1.c.ha.e.olog-i.c.al Rue.Mc.h, Boa!r..d 1971. 

Comstock, Douglas B., Kerry A. Grombacker 9 and David S. Dibble 
A Study of the Effects of Shell Dredging on the Archeological 

and Historical Resources of San Antonio Bay, Texas. Te.xa.,o 
AJtehe.ologiea.f.. SuJLve.y, Re.6e.Mc.h Repo!Lt 23. 1973. 

Fritz, Gayle 
Pilot Archeological Field Survey of Cox Bay~ Calhoun County, 
Texas. Matagorda Bay -Estuarine Resource Management Study. 

1972. 

Gilmore, Kathleen 
The Keeran Site: The Probable Site of La Salle's Fort St. 

Louis in Texas. Texa.6 H..U:tofl.leal. Commi6f.i . . .fon. 066-i.ee. 06 :the. 

S.:t.a:te. AJtc.he.olog-l6t Re.pow 24. 1973. 
Kennard, Don 

Matagorda Island: A Natural Area Survey (Part II of IV). 

Lyndon B. John6an Sc.hoot at) Public A66cWv.i, The UVLlveJL6Uy 06 

T exao a:t Aw.,.ti.n. 1973. 

Martin, George c. 
Texas Coastal Pottery. and Pale.ontologic.ai.. Socie:t.y 3: 53-56. 1931. 

Poteet, Sybil 
The Occurrence and Distribution of Beveled Knives. Bu.te.e:tLn 

ofi .the Texao M.ehe.olog.lc.a..t a.nd Pal.eon:tolog,i,c..ai.. Socie;t.y 10: 

245-262. 1938. 

Potter, Wendell H. 
Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. 

BuU.etin ofi the. Te.xa.o AJtc.heologlcal. and Paleontologlca.l Soclety. 

2: 41-44. 1930. 

Sc...le.nc.e. 23 (598) 849-851. 1906. 

25 (3): 119-127. 1972. 

Comal County 

Alexander, Herbert 
An Analysis of the Stone Flakes from the Oblate Site, Canyon 
Reservoir. (On file at TARI.). n.d. 

Anonymous (Robert E. Bell) 

News -Meeting of the Texas Archaeological Society. Oklahoma. 
An-th!c.opoiag . . lc.ai.. Socle.:ty Newliie:tt.VL 8 ( 4) : 3-7. 1959. 

Collins, Michael B. 
The Oblate Site, 41CM1, Comal County, TeY...as: 1963 Excavations 
(Unpublished report in 1966) 

RepoJz;t, No. 6. January 5, 1975. 

Jackson, A. T. 

The Fall Creek Sites. Unlvvv.,..U:y 06 Tex.a.ti Pub.U.ca.tlon 3802. 

1938. 
Pendants and Their Uses. Buii.

## .
Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. Bu.ilet.ln a 6 .the.Tex.cu,   M..c.heo.togh~.a.t and Pa1.e.on..tolog.lc..a1. Soc...le..ty. 12: 99-137. 1940. Comal County, South Central Texas. Cen.tefl.. fio4 M..c..haeolog.lc.al. ..c..h, The. UnJ..vvv.,Uy o~ Texal:i a.t San Antonio A4c.hae.olog.lc.a1. Archaeological Investigations at Four Sites in the Dry Comal Watershed Comal County, South Central Texas. Cen.teJI.. fioJt.. Anc.haeoR..og).c..a.f. Ruecvr.c.h, The. Un1.veJrv6,ltif a-Q Tex.a& a..t San An.tanio Afic..ha.e.alag.ical. SWtvey Repoltt, No. 15. 197 5. New, Ina Claire The Race Against Water by University of Texas Archaeologists. Tex.~6 Bi.!Lte:tln 3732. 1937. The Corner-tang Flint Artifacts of Texas. Uni.ve/l...O.lty o~ Te.x.Cl6 Bu-tte:tln 3618. 1936.Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis O. Tunnell 
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Foot-

bridge and Oblate Sites. Te:x.M Me.molt.ia£ MLUie.um Buii..e:tln 5. 
1962. 

Kelleys Charles J. 
Arrow or Dart Shaft Tools and Problematical Incised Stones 
from Central and Western Texas. El Pa.R.ac...la 55 (3): 73-85. 

1948. 

Kelly, Thomas C. and Thomas R. Hester 
Additional Archaeological Survey in the Dry Comal Watershed, 

RUelViSwivey Repoltt» No. 10. 1975. 

The Atc..al'..d.e 48 (1): 12-15. 1959. 

Patterson, J. T. 
Boat-shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest States. Un,lveJUi-lty ofi 

Patterson, L. W. 

Prismatic Blade Distribution in Texas. La TieJUut 1 (1): 9-14. 
1974. 

Shafer, Harry J. 
Archeological Survey of the Blieder's Creek Reservoir. Manu-
script on file: Texas Archeological Survey, Austin, n.d. 

Stephenson, Robert L. 

Archaeological Survey of Canyon Reservoir on the Guadalupe 
River, Comal County, Texas. On file~ Smithsonian Institution~ 
River Basins Survey, Lincoln, Nebraska. 1949. 

A Preliminary Survey of Canyon Reservoir, Comal County, Texas. 

Mimeographed Report of the River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian 
Institutions Austin Off ice. 1951. 



The. KaJc.ank.awa. In.cli..a.no, :the.. Cacv.s:t People.  ofi Te.xcv.s.BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Berlandier, Jean Louis 
1969 

The. Incli..a.r~ 06 Te.xcv.s in 1830. J, Ewers, ed. Smithsonian 

Institution Press. 

Bolton, Herbert Eugene 
1962 

Te.xa.6 hi the. M£dclte. Elgh:te.e.n.th Ce.n:twr..y. Russell and 

Russell, New York. 

Campbell, T. N. 
1975 

The.. Paya.ya I ncii..a.no o 6 Sou.thv1.11 T e.xa.6 • Southern Texas 

Archaeological Association. Special Publication No. 1. 

Day, James M. eX. a£. 

1971 

IncUa.n TPJ..beJ:i ofi Te.x.a.o. Texan Press, Waco. 

Dennis, T. s. and Mrs. T. D. Dennis 

1925 

Ufie 06 F. M. Buc.kelw, The. Tncli..an Cap:Uve.p a.6 Re1..a.:te.d 
by Hiln6elfi. Bandera, Texas. 

Gatschet, A. A. 
1891 

Archeological and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody 
Museum, 1(2). 

Hodge, F. W. (editor) 
1907 
The Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca. In: 

Hoij er, Harry 

Spa.n.i&h ExploJLVUi J..11 .the SouJ:hvr.n Unlte.d Sta.tu, 
1528-1543. New York, 
The Coma.nc.hv.. P Latc.d6 a 6 .the. South Pla.lno. University 

of Oklahoma Press~ Norman. 

Wood~ Alpha Kennedy 
1971 

Te.XM Coao:ta,t Ben.d: Pe.op£.e. a.n.d P.f.a.c.eo. Naylor, 

San Antonio. 

Yoakum 9 Henderson 
1855 

H1..6to~y ofi Te.xa~. Redfield, New York. 



Between 1839 and 1845 residents of the county participated in many fights with Indian marauders and Mexican invaders. The last Indian raid into the county occurred in 1885.Major early families included: Neill, Louis, Smith, West,Rector,  Sowell, Ireland, Hollamon, Nichols, McCulloch, Day, Seguin, Navarro,  Herron, Turner, Dale, Dickinson, Baker, Branch, and Montgomery.    Created in 1848 from Travis County, the county was named for John C. (Jack) Hays, renowned as a leader of the Texas Rangers.In 1755 the San Xavier missions and presidia were moved from their original 1746 location on the San Gabriel River in an unsuccessful attempt to relocate them on the site of present-day San Marcos. In 1808 settlers from Mexico, under the leadership of Felipe Roque de Partilla established the Villa de San Marcos de Neve in the same area, but by 1812 the colony was abandoned. In the early 1830 1 s, the Mexican government granted large tracts of land to Juan Veramendi, T. J. Chambers, and Juan Vicente Campos. These embraced the San Marcos area and from them have come most of the land grants and deeds now in effect.After Texas became part of the United States in 1846, this section of the state began to develop rapidly. Communities sprang up, and churches and schools were established. One group of settlers built their homes along a road west from San Marcos following the foothills of the Balcones Escarpment. This community is still known as Stringtown and some of the original houses are still in use.Among prominent early families were: McGehee, Moon, Merriman, Sessom, Burleson, Pitts, King,Mathews, Kone, Malone, Combs, Kyle, Sowell, Erhard,and Nance.Ko.Jtn.M Count.yThe county was created in 1854 from Bexar and Goliad Counties and was named for Henry W. Karnes. Helena was the first settlement (1852) and county seat. In 1885 the railroad by-passed Helena, and a new town, called Karnes City, was established near the railroad. This became the county seat in 1894.


K e.n.da,U, Ca u.n:ty Created in 1862 from Bexar, Comal, and Blanco Counties, this county was named for George Wilkins Kendall, a founder of the sheep industry in Texas.Boerne (county seat), Comfort and Sisterdale were established in the late 1840's and early 1850's by members of the German colonies who had come into the area during the early 1840's. Many of these did not want to secede from the United States and join the Conf ederacy. A number of these Union sympathizers were killed in the Battle of the Nueces in 1862.Prominent families of the county include: Altgelt, Zink, Degener, Steves, Faltin, Stieler, Ransleben, Schleicher, and Faust.Ke.Jt.Jr. Coun:tyCreated in 1856 from Bexar County, the county was named for James Kerr. The first settlement in the area (1840) was by a group of shingle makers; this later became the town of Kerrville, the county seat.Camp Verde, just inside the line between Bandera and Kerr Counties, was established by the U. S. Army in 1855. In 1856 it became home for the camels the Army brought into Texas through the port of Indianola, Calhoun County. The experiment of using camels as pack animals across the deserts of the southwest was just getting underway when the Civil War erupted and all plans were cancelled.Descendents of many of the early German families who first settled the area still live there. Prominent families include; Schreiner, Real, Stieler, and Reese.This county was created from Bexar County in 1848 and named for the Medina River that angles across the northeastern part.First settlement occurred in 1844 when Henri Castro established the capital of his colony and named it Castroville. The town still shows its Alsatian (French-German) heritage in its architecture and traditions; headstones in the old cemetery on a hill just west of town bear testimony of the origins of those buried there. A few miles north of D'Hanis is the site of Fort Lincoln, established by the U. S. Army in 1849 and named for Captain George Lincoln killed at the battle at Buena Vista during the Mexican War. Among prominent early families are: Pingenot, Tondre, Huth, Haass, Enkin, Rabe, Lesberg, Battot, De Mantel, and Wipff.Created from Bexar County in 1850, the county is named for Captain Juan de Ugalde, leader of Spanish forces in many encounters with Indians.Near present day Montell is the site of Mission Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria de Canon(1762), companion to Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz which is a few miles north in Edwards County near Camp Wood. In this same area was the home of John R. Baylor, famous Texas Ranger captain and Confederate General. Many important outposts and camps for soldiers and Rangers were in the county, including Fort Inge (1849), Camp Sabinal (1856), and Camp Nueces (1862). An important historic community in Utopia, in the northeastern part of the county. Founded as Waresville in 1852, there are many old structures (some with State Historical Markers) and several cemeteries dating from the middle and late 19th century. The Utopia Methodist Church(1890)is still being used and behind it is the grove of pecan trees where· "camp meetings" have been held for over a hundred years.A major character of the Texas frontier of the late 19th century was sometimes-sheriff, sometimes-badman, J. K. "King 11 Fisher of the Uvalde area.Vi..c-toJr1-a CountyThis county was the capital of the colony of Martin De Leon, the only successful Mexican colonizer, and was named for Guadalupe Victoria, first president of the Republic of Mexico. It was one of the original counties of the Republic of Texas.On the west bank of Garcitas Creek in 1685, Rene-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, established Fort St. Louis. The reputed site is on private property. In 1721-22 the Spanish built the Presidio of Loreto on the same site of Fort St. Louis, and the Mission of Nuestra Senor del Espiritu Santo de Zuniga across the Garcitas on the east bank. In 1726 both the presidia and mission were moved to a location on the Guadalupe River now known as Mission Valley near Victoria. Again in 1749, both were moved to sites on the San Antonio River near Goliad. Victoria was headquarters of the Army of the Republic of Texas for some time after San Jacinto, and a Confederate army camp was located just north of the town. Many early settlers are buried in Memorial Park and Evergreen Cemetery in the town of Victoria. Several fine homes of both ante-bellum and Victorian periods are in existence and some are still being used by descendants of original owners. Prominant persons associated with the area are: Martin De Leon, Juan (John) J. Linn, Victor Rose, James A. McFaddin, Al McFaddin, Judge Alexander Phillips, the O'Connor family, the Wilder family, Abel Seymour Cunningham, Captain James B. P. January, and Peter Teal.The county was created from Bexar and Karnes Counties in 1860 and was named for James C. Wilson. Originally, the area contained "ranchos" of Canary Islanders who settled San Antonio in 1731. There is an old cemetery at Floresville of many of these families, including Flores, Barrera, Arocha, and Seguin. On the banks of the San Antonio River near Floresville is the site of old Rancho de las Cabras, a "rancho" of Mission Espada in San Antonio, and now on the National Register of Historic Places.Sutherland Springs, located on the Cibolo Creek, was established by Dr. John Sutherland at the location of mineral springs. It was a popular health spa around the turn of the century. Also located on the Cibolo Creek is "White Halln, built by the Polley family who had come to Texas with Austin's Colony.The Spanish began populating Texas in the early 1700's by establishing missions and presidios to Christianize and educate the Indians. In 1718 the Mission of San Antonio de Valero (later known as the Alamo) was established with the Presidio San Antonio de Bexar. Other missions were built but San Antonio's actual growth began with the establishment of the villa of San Fernando de Bexar. This civil settlement was founded by Canary Islanders on June 21, 1731. In 1749 Mission Nuestra Senor del Espiritu Santo de Zuniga and Presidio Santa Maria del Loreto de la Bahia were established at Goliad. Other missions and presidios were set up in Victoria and Uvalde counties.57 

Medina Coun-ty 

Uvalde County 

Wmon County 

GENERAL COMMENTS ON 
ETHNIC AND RELIGIOUS GROUPS 
OF THE REGION* 

60 




Victorian flamboyancy appears in many fine old structures in the San Antonio area such as Schultze 1 s Store, the Steves Homestead, and several others, particularly in the King William area.Typical examples of these architectural styles are listed by county below:BEXAR COUNTY: 
ALAMO: 
Spanish Mission 
Native Limestone and plaster 
Romanesque details 

SPANISH GOVERNOR'S PALACE: 
Spanish Colonial residence 

SAN JOSE MISSION: 
Spanish, native limestone and plaster 
Romanesque details 

STEVES HOME: 
Victorian 
Stone with wood trim and ornamental iron 

FIRST NATIONAL BANK: 
Native limestone with Moorish architectural 
details 

CALHOUN COUNTY: TOWNSITE OF INDIANOLA: 
19th century seaport 
abandoned 1886 

DEWITT COUNTY: 
COUNTY COURTHOUSE: 
Classic style 

STAGECOACH INN: 
Local indigenous style 



.1-Re..oowwe..o in the. S.tudy Aile.a. 1. San Antonio; 2. Cuero; 3. Goliad; 4. Gonzales; 5. New Braunfels; 6. Karnes City; 7. Victoria; 8. Espiritu Santo Mission; 9! Fort Saint Louis.0\ 

Cl' 



. J W Clark, Jr, Clark, J. W., Jr.

. Martin~ George, C , Martin~ George C.

. W W Newcomb, Jr, Newcomb, W.W., Jr.

Cultural Sink" of Texas. A Reappraisal, The, South- wu.teAn. JoWtn.ai. 06An.ttvr..opo£09y. 122A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. South- wu.teAn. JoWtn.ai. 06 An.ttvr..opo£09y 12 (2): 145-153.

The Indian Tribes of Texas. The Indian Tribes of Texas.

The Indian~ 06 Texa.1.i. University of Texas PressAustinThe Indian~ 06 Texa.1.i. University of Texas Press, Austin.

. J P Nunley, Nunley, J. P. 1971

. M E Opler, Opler, M. E. 1940

Archeological Interpretation and the Particularistic Model: The Coahuiltecan Case. PWl'!.6 An.thflopolog. 16f.,tArcheological Interpretation and the Particularistic Model: The Coahuiltecan Case. PWl'!.6 An.thflopolog,[f.,t 16 (54): 302-310.

. Myths and Legends of the Lipan Apache Indians. Memo,{)u. ofi the Amervlcan. Foifllane Society. 36Myths and Legends of the Lipan Apache Indians. Memo,{)u. ofi the Amervlcan. Foifllane Society. 36: 1-296.

. Frederick Ruecking, Jr , Ruecking, Frederick, Jr. 1953

The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. TexM JoWtn.a1. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. TexM JoWtn.a1.

. Sue.nc.e. 54Sue.nc.e. 5 (4): 470-489.

. Selen.c,e. 63Selen.c,e 6 (3): 330-339.

The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Texa-0 Jawina. l o·6 Sc..lence. 74The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Texa-0 Jawina.l o·6 Sc..lence. 7 (4): 357-388.

. Richard P Schaedel, Schaedel, Richard P.

. The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. .Sou:thwu:t.e.Jt.n. Jau.Jt.nal. ofi An.thllopology. 52The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. .Sou:thwu:t.e.Jt.n. Jau.Jt.nal. ofi An.thllopology 5 (2): 117-137.

. D Scurlock, Scurlock, D. e;t, al, 1974

An Assessment of the Archeological Resources of Padre Island National Seashore, Texas. Texa-0 H-l6:t. ea1. Cammi..-0~,lan, Ofi6iee afi the S;t.al:e Afleheolagi-Ot Speci.a..l Re.pow 11An Assessment of the Archeological Resources of Padre Island National Seashore, Texas. Texa-0 H-l6:t.of/J..ea1. Cammi..-0~,lan, Ofi6iee afi the S;t.al:e Afleheolagi-Ot Speci.a..l Re.pow 11.

. Andree F Sjoberg, Sjoberg, Andree F.

The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. Texa1:i JouJtnal on Se-le.nee. 53The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. Texa1:i JouJtnal on Se-le.nee 5 (3): 280-304.

. Lydia L M Skeels, Skeels, Lydia L. M. 1972

An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians. 2248An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians. Texao H1..6taJt.A..c..a1. Swwey Cammlttee Anc.heo.l!..ogi..c..al Re.pow 22. 48

. Dee Suhm, Ann, Suhm, Dee Ann 1958

. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. B~e.£..etln ofi .the Texao Anc.heo.l!..ogic.al Soc.1.,e.:ty. 29A Review of Central Texas Archeology. B~e.£..etln ofi .the Texao Anc.heo.l!..ogic.al Soc.1.,e.:ty 29: 63-108.

. John R Swanton, Swanton, John R. 1911 1915 1940

Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico. AmeJU.c.an Eth.no logy, Bui.le-Un. 43BUJLea.u afiIndian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico. BUJLea.u afi,AmeJU.c.an Eth.no logy, Bui.le-Un 4 3.

Linguistic Position of the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Ame.tile.an Anth!r..opo.l!..og1..6t. 17Linguistic Position of the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Ame.tile.an Anth!r..opo.l!..og1..6t 17(1): 17-40.

Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. BWL<w.u ofi Ameluc.an. Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. BWL<w.u ofi Ameluc.an.

. ! Ethno, Bulte Ogy, 127Ethno.l!..ogy, Bulte:tln 127.

. Rudolph C Troike, Troike, Rudolph C.

. Coahuiltecan Ethnography. Buf.J!..e.tln on the Texa,o Afl.c..healogic.a£ Sa~Le;t.y. 30Researches in Coahuiltecan Ethnography. Buf.J!..e.tln on the Texa,o Afl.c..healogic.a£ Sa~Le;t.y 30: 301-309;

. Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography. Buf..l!..etin afi .the Texao AJt.c..heo.l!..ogic.al. Soc.1.,e.ty. 321962 Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography. Buf..l!..etin afi .the Texao AJt.c..heo.l!..ogic.al. Soc.1.,e.ty 32: 57-63.

. Ernest Wallace, E A , Hoebel. 1952Wallace, Ernest and E. A. Hoebel 19 52

and settled several Mexican families at a site later known as Victoria. Mexicans also settled in Goliad. San Antonioand settled several Mexican families at a site later known as Victoria. Mexicans also settled in Goliad and San Antonio.

Other ethnic groups included Irish and Scotch-Irish-English settlers moying into Goliad County in the 1830's and Italian immigrants in San Antonio in the late 1800's. Bibliography for Ethnic and Religious Groups Crook. The towns of Castroville and D'Hanis were established by Alsatian families in the 1840's. Most of the families were Catholic. KARNES COUNTY: J. Riely GordonCornelia GOLIAD COUNTY: MISSION LA BAHIA AND PRESIDIO LA BAHIA; Spanish (National Historic Landmark) COUNTY COURTHOUSE: Alfred Giles; J, Riely Gordon, Architect Classic, of limestone COUNTY COURTHOUSE; ESPIRITU SANTO MISSIONRomanesque, with Mansard roofs VICTORIA COUNTY: VICTORIA CITY HALL: Classic Style with Mansard roofs and cupola. Spanish; 1726 OLD DAM and ACEQUIA nearbyThe towns of Castroville and D'Hanis were established by Alsatian families in the 1840's. Most of the families were Catholic. Mormons settled several areas in Texas. In 1854 a Mormon settlement was set up in Bandera. Other ethnic groups included Irish and Scotch- Irish-English settlers moying into Goliad County in the 1830's and Italian immigrants in San Antonio in the late 1800's. Bibliography for Ethnic and Religious Groups Crook, Cornelia GOLIAD COUNTY: MISSION LA BAHIA AND PRESIDIO LA BAHIA: Spanish (National Historic Landmark) COUNTY COURTHOUSE: Alfred Giles, Architect Classic details; native limestone GONZALES COUNTY: COUNTY COURTHOUSE: COMAL COUNTY: KARNES COUNTY: J. Riely Gordon, Architect Romanesque revival COUNTY COURTHOUSE: J, Riely Gordon, Architect Classic, of limestone COUNTY COURTHOUSE: Romanesque, with Mansard roofs VICTORIA COUNTY: VICTORIA CITY HALL: Classic Style with Mansard roofs and cupola ESPIRITU SANTO MISSION: Spanish; 1726 OLD DAM and ACEQUIA nearby

We also provide the following brief list of references dealing with the architecture of the region. Alexander, Drury BWe also provide the following brief list of references dealing with the architecture of the region: Alexander, Drury B.

Texa, Homeo 06 the 19th CentWuJ. Publication No. 1 Texas Architectural Survey. AustinUniversity of Texas PressTexa.o Homeo 06 the 19th CentWuJ. Publication No. 1 Texas Architectural Survey, University of Texas Press, Austin.

American Institute of Architects. San Antonio ChapterAmerican Institute of Architects, San Antonio Chapter 1963

San AntorU.a 1700-1900. H U Uc, San AntonioH..U.,,to!Uc. San AntorU.a 1700-1900. San Antonio.

. Dorothy K Bracken, Maurine W Redway, Bracken, Dorothy K. and Maurine W. Redway 1956

. Ea, Lity Texa, Homeo, Southern Methodist PressDallasEa.lity Texa.o Homeo. Southern Methodist Press, Dallas.

. Briggs, AltonBriggs, Alton 1971

Archeological Resources in the Texas Coastal Lowlands and Littoral. Texa..o HJ.1,~a!Uc.aR.. SWl.vey Comml6J.iian. Austin. Archeological Resources in the Texas Coastal Lowlands and Littoral. Texa..o HJ.1,~a!Uc.aR.. SWl.vey Comml6J.iian. Austin.

. Charles Brooks, M Jr, Brooks, Charles, M. Jr. 1936

J T E.Xa.O Mu, fonl:i. Dealey and Lowe. DallasT e.xa.o MU.J.i,fonl:i. Dealey and Lowe, Dallas.

. William Corner, Corner, William 1890

. ) San Antori, Ve, Bllxcul, Bainbridge, San Corner, Antonio, San Antori)..o Ve. BllXCUl.. Bainbridge and Corner, San Antonio"

Architecture and Culture of Early Texas. Samuel Gideon, UnpublishedGideon, Samuel 1942 Architecture and Culture of Early Texas. Un- published.

. John W Greer, Greer, John W.

A Description of the Features, Straigraphy and Artifacts from Archeological Excavations of the Alamo. State. BuJ.1..cli..ng Comm-l&J. iion Al(.c.h.e.olog.lc.aR.. PJt..oglLam, R.e.poJL:t 3A Description of the Features, Straigraphy and Artifacts from Archeological Excavations of the Alamo. State. BuJ.1..cli..ng Comm-l&J.iion Al(.c.h.e.olog.lc.aR.. PJt..oglLam, R.e.poJL:t 3.

. Judson , Mary Carolyn, Judson, Mary Carolyn 1972

. Alfi4ed G£e, Trinity University PressSan AntonioAlfi4ed G£e.e6. Trinity University Press, San Antonio.

A Hundl(.e.d Ye.a,-to ofi ComfioJL:t. Guido Ransleben, Naylor CoSan AntonioRansleben, Guido 1954 A Hundl(.e.d Ye.a,-to ofi ComfioJL:t. Naylor Co., San Antonio.

. Willard Robinson, Robinson, Willard 1974

ng.6 06 -the. 19.:th Cen:twc.y. PubUc.ation Na. 2. Texas Architectural Survey University of Texas Press. Te.xM Public. Bui-f.cli..AustinTe.xM Public. Bui-f.cli..ng.6 06 -the. 19.:th Cen:twc.y. PubUc.ation Na. 2. Texas Architectural Survey University of Texas Press. Austin.

City of 1973. San Antonio, San Antonio, City of 1973

Mb.i-0,lorui ofi Sa.n. An,ton.fo, A PR.an.. Comprehensive Planning Division. City of San AntonioMb.i-0,lorui ofi Sa.n. An,ton.fo, A PR.an.. Comprehensive Planning Division. City of San Antonio.

N Sa, An, Tonj, Renewal. P'1..ogfe.a.m. San Antonio Historic Survey. Survey and Appendix. City of San AntonioSa.n. An,.tonJ..o Renewal. P'1..ogfe.a.m. San Antonio Historic Survey, Survey and Appendix. City of San Antonio.

. Trent E Sanford, Sanford, Trent E.

. Zora M Talbot, 65Talbot, Zora M. 65

ng:tawn. Stfcj, University of Corpus Christi PressStfcJ...ng:tawn. University of Corpus Christi Press.

. Curtis D Tunnell, W W Newcomb, Jr Lipan, Apache Mission. Bull.e.:ti..n, Te . .xM Mematvi.ai. Mu.ti ewnmn 19Tunnell, Curtis D. and W. w. Newcomb, Jr. A Lipan Apache Mission. Bull.e.:ti..n, Te . .xM Mematvi.ai. Mu.ti ewn, Bull.mn 19.

. Alton K Briggs, Briggs, Alton K. 1971

Archeological Resources in the Texas Lowlands and Littoral. Tex.cu. H.l6.ta!Uc. a1.Archeological Resources in the Texas Lowlands and Littoral. Tex.cu. H.l6.ta!Uc.a1..

Su!lvey, Cammlt:tee and Tex.cu. WateJL Veve.topment BaaAd. SU!Lvey Cammlt:tee and Tex.cu. WateJL Veve.topment BaaAd.

Excavations at the Morhiss Site, Victoria County, by the University of Texas, 1938-40. T N Campbell, Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society. VictoriaPaper presented at theCampbell, T. N. 1962 Excavations at the Morhiss Site, Victoria County, by the University of Texas, 1938-40. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Victoria.

. Michael B Collins, Collins, Michael B. 1970

On the Peopling of Hitzfelder Cave. Alt.c.he.aloglc.ai.. SocJ..e.ty. 41Bulle.tin 06 .the Tex.cuOn the Peopling of Hitzfelder Cave. Bulle.tin 06 .the Tex.cu, Alt.c.he.aloglc.ai.. SocJ..e.ty 41: 301-304.

. Crawford, D Daymond, 68Crawford, Daymond D. 68

An Archeological Reconnaissance of Ecleto Creek Watershed South Central Texas. Te.x.cv., Mc.he.o.loglc.ai.. Salvage. PJtoje.c.:t SuJLvey Repoltt. 8An Archeological Reconnaissance of Ecleto Creek Watershed South Central Texas. Te.x.cv., Mc.he.o.loglc.ai.. Salvage. PJtoje.c.:t SuJLvey Repoltt 8.

. Anne A Fox, Fox, Anne A. 1974

Cen..teJt 601t Altc.haealagic..a.l Rv..ecvr..c.h. The UnlvVl.6li!. An Archaeological Survey of the Nichols Creek Channel Modification. Karnes County, Texast 5An Archaeological Survey of the Nichols Creek Channel Modification, Karnes County, Texas. Cen..teJt 601t Altc.hae- alagic..a.l Rv..ecvr..c.h. The UnlvVl.6li!J ofi Tex.cu, at San. An.tovU.o. AJt..c.haeolagic.ai.. Su.Jtve.y Re.po!c..t 5.

. Daniel E Fox, J Robert, O Mallouf~ Nance, William M Malley, Fox, Daniel E., Robert J. Mallouf~ Nance O'Malley and William M. Sorrow 1974

Pilot Archeological Field Survey of Cox Bay, Calhoun County, Texas. Matagorda Bay -Estuarine Resource Management Study. Gayle Fritz, EnvVionme.n:tal Pla.nnlng Vlv.l6ion ofi T. e.XP.li Ge.ne!LaiLand 0 6 fiic.eFritz, Gayle 1972 Pilot Archeological Field Survey of Cox Bay, Calhoun County, Texas. Matagorda Bay -Estuarine Resource Management Study. EnvVionme.n:tal Pla.nnlng Vlv.l6ion ofi T e.XP.li Ge.ne!Lai.. Land 0 6 fiic.e.

. Grant D Hall, Hall, Grant D.

An Archeological and Historical Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification. Texa6 A~c.heologic.al Swr.vey, Re. Leona River Watershed, J.ieaJLQh Repo!Lt. 37Leona River Watershed, Uvalde County, Texas: An Arche- ological and Historical Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification. Texa6 A~c.heologic.al Swr.vey, Re.J.ieaJLQh Repo!Lt 37.

*Items cited in text. *Items cited in text

. Thomas Rester, Roy, Rester, Thomas Roy 1971

Te,cas. Bulle.tin ofi :the. Te.xa.& Mc.he.-ologic.a.e SocA. Uvalde County42Archeological Investigations at the La Jita SiteArcheological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Te,cas. Bulle.tin ofi :the. Te.xa.& Mc.he.- ologic.a.e SocA,e..ty 42: 51-148.

. Thomas R Hester, A Feris, Jr Bass, Thomas C , Kelly , 69Hester, Thomas R., Feris A. Bass, Jr., and Thomas C, Kelly 69

Archaeological Survey at Portions of the Comal River Watershed. Ce.n.t~t fiotc. Atc.c.ha.e.ologic.ai.Comal County, TexasArchaeological Survey at Portions of the Comal River Watershed, Comal County, Texas. Ce.n.t~t fiotc. Atc.c.ha.e.ologic.ai..

Relie.a!tc.h. The. UnlveJU.liy 06 Te.xa.& a;t Sa.11 Avitonlo, Atc.c.ha.e.-ologic.al. Swwey Re. 6Relie.a!tc.h. The. UnlveJU.liy 06 Te.xa.& a;t Sa.11 Avitonlo, Atc.c.ha.e.- ologic.al. Swwey Re.potL:t 6.

The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulle.tin ofi .the Te.xa.& A!Lc.he.-ologic.al. Soe-le. Thomas Hester, Robert C Roy, Parker, 41Hester, Thomas Roy and Robert c. Parker 1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulle.tin ofi .the Te.xa.& A!Lc.he.- ologic.al. Soe-le..ty 41: 1~24.

. Dick Hsu, Ronald W Ping, Ralph, Hsu, Dick Ping and Ronald W. Ralph 1968

Atc.c.he.olagic.a.£ SWtve.y Re. lp Te.xao S:tclte. Bu.Ltd-lng Commi. 6.ti,lon a.n.d Tex.a& S:tate Wa..:teJL Ve.vela pme.vi.X Bocvui.Wilson County, TexasAn Appraisal of the Archeologica.l Resources of Cibolo ReservoirAn Appraisal of the Archeologica.l Resources of Cibolo Reservoir, Wilson County, Texas. Atc.c.he.olagic.a.£ SWtve.y Re.,poJr..t No. lp Te.xao S:tclte. Bu.Ltd-lng Commi.6.ti,lon a.n.d Tex.a& S:tate Wa..:teJL Ve.vela pme.vi.X Bocvui..

. A T Jackson, Jackson, A. T. 1938

Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. UnlveJi6-lty ofi Te.xa.& PubLlc.a;t. 3809Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. UnlveJi6-lty ofi Te.xa.& PubLlc.a;t,[on 3809.

Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge and Oblate Sites, Te.xcv., Me.mo/Lla. Leroy~ JohnsonJr, Curtis D Dee Ann Suhm, Tunnell, t Mu.6e.um, Bu.Ue..t. n 5 •Johnson, Leroy~ Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell 1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge and Oblate Sites, Te.xcv., Me.mo/Lla.,t Mu.6e.um, Bu.Ue..t,[n 5 •

. W W Newcomb, Jr, Newcomb, W. W., Jr.

Jt6 06 Te.xao. The, Incua, University of Texas PressAustin. Orchard, C. D.The. IncUa.Jt6 06 Te.xao. University of Texas Press, Austin. Orchard, C. D. 1974

. Patience E Patterson, Patterson, Patience E. 1974

An Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification. Te.xao AJc.c.he.olog,f,c.al. Sutc.ve.y. Rue.ci.Jic.h RepoJit. 42Upper San Marcos River, Watershed, Hays County, Texas: An Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for Modifi- cation. Te.xao AJc.c.he.olog,f,c.al. Sutc.ve.y, Rue.ci.Jic.h RepoJit 42.

The Study of Extinct Rural Communities in the United States. A Test of Feasibility. Wayne Roberson, University of Texas at AustinM. A. ThesisRoberson, Wayne 1972 The Study of Extinct Rural Communities in the United States. A Test of Feasibility. M. A. Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Archeological Survey of the Blieder's Creek Reservoir. Manuscript on file: Texas Archeological Survey. Harry J N Shafer, AustinShafer, Harry J. n.d. Archeological Survey of the Blieder's Creek Reservoir. Manuscript on file: Texas Archeological Survey. Austin.

. S A Skinner, Skinner, S. A. 1974

Prehistoric Settlement of A Natural Area. Ph.D. Dissertation. Southern Methodist UniversityPrehistoric Settlement of A Natural Area. Ph.D. Dissertation, Southern Methodist University.

. Robert L Stephenson, Stephenson, Robert L. 1949

Archaeological Survey of Canyon Reservoir on the. Archaeological Survey of Canyon Reservoir on the

. Dee Ann Suhm, Guadalupe River, Texas. On file. River Basins SurveySuhm, Dee Ann Guadalupe River, Comal County, Texas. On file, Smithsonian Institution, River Basins Survey, Lincoln, Nebraska.

. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bail.e.:tln ofi .:the Te.xCUi Alr..c.he.o.f.ogic.at Soue...ty. 29A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bail.e.:tln ofi .:the Te.xCUi Alr..c.he.o.f.ogic.at Soue...ty 29: 63-108.

. D A Suhm, A D Krieger, E B Jelks, Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks 1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bail.e..:tln ofi :the. Texa.6 M.c.heologic.ai. Soue. 25An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bail.e..:tln ofi :the. Texa.6 M.c.heologic.ai. Soue;ty 25.