# BIO-HERBICIDES FOR SUSTAINABLE AND ECO-FRIENDLY WEED CONTROL: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 127986373
 
tags: #Engineering, #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e2e9e511c40eb056ad36dd28e2e14206b586fe4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e2e9e511c40eb056ad36dd28e2e14206b586fe4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

BIO-HERBICIDES FOR SUSTAINABLE AND ECO-FRIENDLY WEED CONTROL: A REVIEW
Published: December 2018

AmrishAgrawalNatish Nusrat 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizer
Govt. of India Sec-20, UdyogViharGurugram-122016HaryanaIndia

Jitendra Kumar 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizer
Govt. of India Sec-20, UdyogViharGurugram-122016HaryanaIndia

Kumar 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizer
Govt. of India Sec-20, UdyogViharGurugram-122016HaryanaIndia

BIO-HERBICIDES FOR SUSTAINABLE AND ECO-FRIENDLY WEED CONTROL: A REVIEW

Int. J. Adv. Res
612Published: December 201810.21474/IJAR01/8173Received: 08 October 2018 Final Accepted: 10 November 2018550 RESEARCH ARTICLE …………………………………………………………………………………………………….... Manuscript Info Abstract ……………………. ……………………………………………………………… Manuscript Historybio-herbicidesmicrobesphysiological activitiesweed control


Weeds are the major cause of crop yield reduction. Synthetic chemical herbicides are very effective in weed control and accomplish the weed reduction up to large extent but, due to resistance development, they become less effective for weed control. There is a need requirement for suitable alternative of chemical herbicides. Bio-herbicides are upcoming products for sustainable weed control. Bioherbicides are the new approach , originated from living organisms or natural metabolites of plant for weed control. Bio-herbicides includes microbes-fungal, bacterial and viral pathogens and plant based products includes plant extract and essential oils. The bio-herbicide inhibit of physiological activities like nutrient uptake, photosynthesis etc and disrupt cellular functions like cell wall and cell membrane, hormone and toxic production etc. Different types of formulation have been developed to enhance the shelf life of different bioherbicides for successful commercialization.

Copy Right, IJAR, 2018,. All rights reserved.


## …………………………………………………………………………………………………….. Introduction:-

With the increase in population agricultural land decreases which may cause food shortage in upcoming years. There is an urgent requirement for high agricultural yield by improved and safe practices . There are many agrochemicals are available against different types of agricultural pest. These agrochemicals are competent to control the various crop pests like insects, fungi, pathogens, weeds etc. Among these pest, weed problem is the major problem and results into 34 % loss in crop yield.

Weeds are the unwanted plant population and compete to the main plant for the resources and major cause of low crop yield. After world war II selective herbicides, MCPA and 2,4-D,introduction considerably reduced the weed losses without harming the main crop ( Mithila et al., 2011).At present , 25 herbicide sites have been discovered but still weed resistance problem have been reported despite of selectivity (Heap, 2015). Ttransgenic crop was adopted worldwide to combat with this resistance problem and replace the former chemical control methods (Green andOwen, 2011Beckie, 2011;). Continuous development of advance control methods are required for for overcoming the problems related to weed control and maintenance of agricultural yields.

Weed control involves integrated weed management practices by which weed losses can effectively reduced. There are various methods of Weed management which involves direct and indirect methods (Chikowo et al. 2009;, Marshall et al., 2003;) .Indirect methods weaken the weed by reducing their ISSN: 2320-5407 Int. J. Adv. Res. 6(12), 550-561 551 vegetative and reproductive growth. Direct methods involves weed control by destroying the weed plant by manual ,mechanical ,biological and chemical methods (Chauvel et al., 2012).These existing weed control methods have some limitations and not competent towards the sustainability of modern agricultural practices. Therefore, new weed control methods are being explored which are environment friendly as well as efficiently control the weed problems.

Bioherbicides: safe approach:-Bio-herbicides are defined as the substance which reduce the weed population by bio-organisms like microbes, pathogens or natural metabolites. It consists of plant based natural products, pathogens, and other microbes used for biological weed control. Bio-herbicides are the new strategy to minimize the shortcomings of the existing conventional herbicides as shown in fig.1.


## Fig.1:-bioherbicides -safe approach

This approach is based on classical and inundative strategy .In classical strategy microorganisms establish, multiply and spread and persist in the ecosystem for the infestation against target weed (Shaw et al., 2009;Dane and Shaw, 1996;TeBeest, 1996). .The main objective of this strategy is to maintain the weed population below the threshold level rather than completely eradication. On the other hand, in inundative control strategy fungal spores or bacterial suspension is applied for destroying weed population this application is not persistent (Auldetal., 2003;Caldwelletal., 2012).


## Classification of Bioherbicides :-

Bioherbicides may be classified on the basis of their source as given below:-  (Arton J. et. al. 1999). Pathogens used as herbicides also known as Mycoherbicides. Mycoherbicides are host specific, non resistant and will reside in soil for longer duration of time .There are 37 mycoherbicides and 8 application techniques of these mycoherbicides are currently available.


## Fungal

Fungal Pathogens as bioherbicides:-Fungi are the most common plant pathogens for weed control. Fungal pathogens are the most promising alternative of synthetic chemical herbicides for weed management systems (Evidente& Motta, 2001;Evidente&Abouzeid 2006). Fungal pathogens weed control is based on their phytotoxic metabolites .These metabolites inhibit the plant pathways and toxic to weed plant cells. Alternaria, Ascochyta, Drechslera, Phoma, Phyllostictica, Pyrenophora.Septoria, Stagonospora, are the most common fingal pathogens for the biocontrol of weeds like Chenopodium album L., Cirsiumarvense L., grass weeds etc. First fungal herbicides are legally market in Canada in 1973.

A fungal pathogen, Phomopsisamaranthicola, potencially used against different species of Amaranthus (Rosskopf et al., 2005).This fungus causes stem and root death of the target weeds.Dactylariahigginsiiis a fungal pathogen isolated from Gainesville and effective against purple nutsedge (Cyperusrotundus). This pathogen causes foliar blight, leaf spots andpremature shedding of leaves results into reduction of nutsedge growth (Kadir andCharudattan, 1999). The Phoma genus species is another potential fungal pathogen for weed control. P. herbarum,isolated from dandelion leaf lesions for dandelions control (Stewart-Wade and Boland, 2005;Neumann and Boland, 1999;).Dicot plant inhibited by P. macrostoma (Smith et al., 2015). Phomachenopodicola, is the another species for the control of Chenopodium album (Cimmino et al., 2013). Two species of Sclerotinia genus are S. minor, S. sclerotiorum have been identified for weed control (Abu- Dieyeh and Watson, 2007).Sclerotinia minor is the most effective bioherbicide against dandelions with turf species in green house conditions. (Watson and Bailey, 2013 .Both S. minor and S. sclerotiorum are phytotoxic agents for creeping thistle (Cirsiumarvense) (Skipp et al., 2013).Main phytotoxicant by these two fungal pathogens is the Oxalic acid. Oxalic acid is the inhibitor of polyphenol oxidase (PPO) inhibitor of plant defensinmolecules (Magro et al., 1984).

In addition to these fungulgenuses, Chondrostereumpurpureum strains have registered by the US and Canada for inhibiting growth of deciduous tree species in coniferous plantations (Bailey, 2014). Pucciniathlaspeos, is another fungus which was registered with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 2002 of trade name Woad Warrior specially for the control of Dyer's woad (Isatistinctoria).( Thomson and Kropp, 2004). Alternariadestruens strain 059 was registered under the product names Smolder WP and Smolder G with EPA for control of Cuscuta spp. (Cook et al., 2009).Phytophthorapalmivora was registered as DeVine, a formulation with the EPAto control Morreniaodorata species in citrus orchards (Ridings, 1986 andKenney, 1986) The literature reference of fungal pathogens are given below:- Viruses as Bioherbicides:-Viruses can also be used as bioherbicides in controlling some weeds but due to some constrains they are not effective as fungal pathogens. Viruses have lots of genetic variability and are not target specific (Kazinczi et al., 2006). Tobacco mosaic tobamovirus (TMV), a most popular virus, this virus has potential to kill the tropical soda apple (Solanumviarum) (Diaz et al., 2014 andFerrell et al., 2008 ).The viral pathogens for weed control are depicted in table no. 2.  fig.3 Grow in liquid cultures formulated as dried formulation  


## ABS J A ETHYLENE


## Fig 4:-mode of action of bioherbicides

Plants asbioherbicides:-Many plants based products are also utilized as potential natural agent for weed control. Plants have secondary metabolites or other photochemical which shows inhibit seed germination and other growth processes.


## Plant extract Essential oils Allelochemicals Fig.5:-classifiacation of plant weed

The Plant products can use as weed controlling agent in three form i.e plant extract, essential oil and allelochemicals. These three plant products have been using as potential bioherbicides from last so many decades. This primary mode of action of plant based products is the inhibition of germination of weeds and reduction of plant growth. Plant extract from any part of the plant have many constituents like extracted peptides, secoundary metabolites -alkaloids ,terpenoids ,tetraterpenoids etc.   


## Steps involved in registration of pathogenic bio-herbicides:-

Step1:-Feild survey for pathogenns

Step 2:-isolation of pathogens

Step 3:-mass production of inoculums

Step 4:-Determination of disease cycle

Step5:-formulation development Step6:-trails in green house for toxicity

Step 8.Registration Step7. Field trials Fig.6:-Registration of bio-herbicides

Bioherbicide registeration is the complex as compare to synthetic herbicides. Screening of microbial pathogens and phytoxins is also vary from chemical herbicides. Potential microbial screening is followed by phytotoxicity 559 studies which involve greenhouse testing and field application and nontoxic to nontarget plants. Research efforts simplified the process by synthesizing microbial phytotoxic compounds in specific enzyme assay (Bo¨ger and Sandmann 1989).This advance approach resulting some improved products that save the time, cost and labour.


## Constraints of Pathogens as Bio-herbicide:-

There are many limitations of using pathogens as bio-herbicide such as environmental ,biological, economic or commercial constraints and technological.


## Limitations Possible Solutions


## Biological limitations

Most desirable factor for weed controlling agent is the host specificity. It has been discovered that many pathogens are capable to control only one weed species. 


## Environmental limitations

The most important environmental factors of foliarly applied bioherbicides are:- Moisture (dew) (Makowski 1993)  Bioherbicide application time  Formulations  UV radiations, Humidity, and rain water (Leathers et al. 1993).  compatibility with synthetic agrochemicals These environment factors are very crucial for pathogens in controlling weeds. These factors plays importance role in pathogenic steps as for example moisture is the important requirement for spore germination ,mycelia growth so,timing of bioherbicide application concide with the required factors for retaintion of water for weed host pathogenecity(Makowski and Mortensen 1990)


## Technological limitations

Major obstacle in mass production of microbes are their stability ,viability and shelf life of the inoculums (Jackson et al. 1996b).

Formulation give the successful techniques for the innovative mode for easy application and enhancement of the stability of microbes for weed control (Boyette et al. 1996). Formulation contain surfactant and other adjuvants for uniform distribution and adhesion on leaf surfaces (Egley and Boyette 1995).


## Commercial/economic limitations

Microbial herbicides are not economically sound because of deficiency of promising techniques of mass production and synthesis for microbial Encouragement of bioherbicide research and development work 560 phytotoxins.


## Formulations of Bio-Herbicide:-

Bioherbicide formulation is the blending of active ingredient and inert materials for effective delivery of herbicide dose to the targeted host weed plant (Rhodes, 1993).Formulated products of bioherbicides are very useful to improve application, survivability, efficacy and maintaining viability during storage and reduce moisture requirement for germination (Green et al., 1998). Liquid formulation:-These are sprayable formulations these formulations include suspension emulsions , emulsions and polymer based products (Womack et al., 1996). In these formulations water is the transporting medium and adjuvants used assist the active ingredient transport in weed plants (Foy, 1989).


## Types of Bioherbicide formulations


## Solid formulation:-

These formulation are applied in soil basically in simple formulations like granular and encapsulated forms (Boyette et al., 1991).Inert material includes grains, clay alginate ,charcoal, polymers etc. These are most suitably used as pre-emergence application and can give longer period of activity as controlled release formulation. Solid formulations have higher shelf life than liquid formulations. Granular formulations can give 75% weed control.

Different types of formulation as bio-hebicides are given in (table.7) Future prospects of bioherbicides:-More work has to be done to improve the most negative aspect of microbial pathogens as bioherbicide is host specificity problem because of narrow host range.

Generation of advance information on allelopathic mechanisms like weed defense and phototoxin production by pathogens.

More attempts are required for covering wide host range via new generation formulations, synergistic combinations and other biotechnological approaches.

Elimination of toxicity problems caused by pathogens like allergic reactions in humans and other animals.


## Conclusion:-

Weed pest is the major factor in crop yield reduction and become the main obstacle in meeting the food requirement of increasing world population.Despite of safe and sustainable approach of bio-herbicides , these are not being utilized in agricultural practices. More research and development is required to enhance the activity of bio-herbicides and make it commercialized. Host specificity is the major problem in bio-herbicides because they are not covered the wider range of weed species in field. Bioherbicides should be used as integrated approach to avoid major problem like resistance as well as host specificity. Bio-herbicides may be the main weed controlling agent for promotion of organic farming. So, different new generation formulation techniques can make the bioherbicide more efficient. Formulation should be developed in combination of different biocontrol agents to cover the wide range of weed species.

## Fig. 3 :
3-Characteristics of bacteria as potential bioherbicides Genetically manipulated:-Many previous investigation have been proved that Pseudomonas fluorescens and Xanthomonascampestris are most popular bacterial species for weed control. RhizobacteriaPseudomonas fluorescens has ability to suppress weed germination of weed plant which include 8 dicot and 21 monocot species(Banowetz et. al., 2008)  . Xanthomonascampestris is the other bacterial species as weed control agent for annual bluegrass (Poaannua) of trade nameCamperico(Tateno, 2000 and Imaizumi et al., 1997 ).

## Fig. 8 :
8Types of Bioherbicides Formulations:-Two approaches of bio-herbicide formulation are liquid formulation and solid formulation (fig.8).


Pathogens as bioherbicides:-There are approximately 200 different plant pathogens have been identified by plant pathologists and weed scientistsViral 
Bacterial 
Allelochemicals 
Plant extracts 
Essential oil 
Pathogens 
Pathogens 
Pathogens 
Fig.2:-classification of bio-herbicides 

Pathogens 
By product of plants 

Bioherbicide 

Environmental 
Friendly 

Non-resistant 

Biodegradable 

Environmental 
friendly 

Sustainable 
Sustainable 

Reduced frequency 
of application 
Good 
bioefficacy 

User 
Friendly 

Bioherbicides 
552 



## Table 1 :
1-Fungal pathogens and targeted weed Bioherbicide agent Fungal pathogen Target weed control ReferencesPhomopsisamaranthicola 
Amaranthusspecies 
Rosskopf et al., 2005 
Dactylariahigginsii 
Cyperusrotundus 
Kadir 
andCharudattan, 
1999 
Phoma genus species 
P. herbarum 
Stewart-Wade and Boland, 
2005,Neumann and Boland, 
1999; 
Phomachenopodicola 
Chenopodium album 
Cirsiumarvense 
Setariaviridis 

Cimmino et al. 2013 

Phomamacrostoma 
Dicot plants 
Bailey et al. 2011 


## Table 2 :
2Many bacterias have been proved as potential biocontrol agent for weeds due to some characteristic features like growth cultures can maintained in liquid,prepared as dry formulation and can genitically modified to improve the bioefficacy . characteristic features shown in-viral pathogens and targeted weed 
S.N 
Viral pathogen 
Weed control 
References 
1. 
Araujia Mosaic Virus 
Moth Plant (AraujiaHortorum) 
Elliott et al., 2009 
2. 
Tobacco Rattle Virus 
Impatiens glandulifera 
Kollmann et al., 2007 

3. 
Tobacco mosaic virus 
Solanumviarum 
Farrel et.al.,2008 
4. 
Óbuda Pepper Virus 
(ObPV) and Pepino 
Mosaic Virus (PepMV) Solanumnigrum 
Kazinczi et al., 2006 


## Table 3 :
3-Different weed controlled by bacterial pathogensBacterial bioherbicide 
Weed control 
References 
Pseudomonas 
fluorescens strain BRG100 

Setariaviridis 
Quail et al., 2002 

Pseudomonas fluorescens 
strain D7 

Bromustectorum 
Kennedy et.al.1991 

Xantonomascompestris 
Poaannua 
Tateno, 2000,Imaizumi et al., 1997 
Streptomyces hygroscopicus General vegetation 
Rupp et al. 1977 
Ralstoniasolanacearum 
Solanumnigrum 
James T. De Valerio et.al.,2011 


## Table 4 :
4-Plant as bio-herbicides Fig.6:-Mode of action of plant products as weed control agentsPlants 
Plant based 
bioherbicides 

Mode of action 
References 

Plant extracts 
Aglaiaodorata 
Leaf extract 
Inhibit growth of weed plant 
Kato-Noguchi et 
al., 
2016 
Usnearoccellina, 
Everniastrumsorocheilum, 
andCladoniaconfusa. 

methanolic extracts 
inhibited root growth and 
germination of red clover 
(Trifoliumpratense) 

Nieves et al. (2011) 

Rice hull 
Hull extracts 
inhibition of germination, seedling 
growth, and weight in 
barnyardgrass 

Ahn et.al. 2000 

Ammivisnaga (L.) Lam. 
Khellin and Visnagin 

Plant extract 
Inhibit seed 
germination,photosynthesis,cellular 
activities. 

Travaini et al. 2016 

lichen Cladoniaverticillaris 
Phenolics extracts 
change the cellular structure of 
leaves and roots of lettuce 
seedlings 

Tigre et.al 2014 

Black walnut (Juglansnigra) 
from walnut 

Plant extracts 
Inhibit growth of horseweed 
(Conyzacanadensis) and hairy 
fleabane (Conyzabonariensis) act 
as a pre-and post-emergent bio-
herbicide 

Shrestha et.al 2009 

Sonchusoleraceus L. 
Plant leaves powder 
Inhibit seed germination, seedling 
growth 

Hassan et al. 2014 

Partheniumhysterophorus 
Crude plant leaves 
extracts 

Inhibit seed germination, growth 
and vigour of whole plant 

Pati and 
Chowdhury 
2015 
Essential oils 
Artemisia absinthium L 
Essential oil 
Inhibit seed germination and 
seedling growth 

Fouad et al. (2015) 

Brassica napus 
Se-seed meals 
Inhibit seed germination and 
seedling emergence 

Banuelos, 2010 

Cymbopogoncitratus 
Essential oil 
Inhibit seed germination and 
growth 

Fouad et al. 2015 

Eucalyptus citriodoraHook 
Essential Oil 
Inhibit plant growth by stopping 
the process of respiration, lessen 
the membrane integrity, premature 
death of plant due to cholorosis and 
necrosis. 

Batish et al. 2007 

Limnanthes alba 
Activated seed meal 
(Isothiocyanate) 

Inhibit seed germination 
Intanon et al. (2014 

Syzygiumaromaticum 
Essential oil 
Inhibit seed germination, seedling 
growth, chlorophyll, respiration 

Ahuja et al. 2015 

Eucalypt (Eucalyptus 
nicholii), Rosemary 
(Rosmarinusofficinalis L.), 
Lawson cypress 
(Chamaecyparislowsoniana) 
and White cedar 
(Thujaoccidentalis) plants 

Essential oil 
Amaranth, Purslane and Knapwee 
germination inhibitors species 

SadrollahRamezani 
et.al 2008 


## Table 5 :
5-Registered pathogens for weed control 
Registered bioherbicides 
Pathogen name 
Targeted Weed 
Devine TM 
Phytophthorapalmivora 
Morreniaodorata 
Collego TM(1982) 
Colletotrichum 
gloeosporiodes 

Aeschynomenvirginica 

Biomal R 
Collectrotrichumgloeosporiodes Malvapusilla 

Wood Warrior R 
Pucciniathlaspeos 
Isatistinctoria 

Mycotech TM 
Chondrosterempurpureum 
PrunosSerotine 
Populous euramericana 

Smoulder R 
Sclerotinia minor 
Dicot weeds 



## Table . 7
.:-Formulations of bio-herbicidesBio-herbicides 
Formulations 
References 
Fusariumoxysporum 
Encapsulated granular formulation 
Elzein et al.;2004 
Fusarium spp. 
Encapsulated granular 
Amsellem et al.;1999 
Fusariumoxysporum 
Gum arabic seed coating 
Elzein et al.;2006 
Myrotheciumverrucaria 
Inverted emulsion formulation 
Yang and Jong ;1995 
Colletotrichumorbicularae Microemulsion 
Klein et al. ;1995 
Collego and BioMal 
Wettable powder 
Boyette et al.;1996 
Alterneriamacrospora 
Granular formulation 
Walker ;1981 
Phomopsissp 
Encapsulation of hyphal fragments 
Chittick et al. ;2003 
AlternariaEichhorneae 
Aqueous Mycelial Inoculum 
Shabana et al. ;1997 
Colletotrichumorbiculare 
water suspension 
Chittick and Auld 
;2001 
Exserohilummonoceras 
Emulsion 
Zhang and Watson 
;1997 

LIQUID FORMULATIONS 
SOLID 
FORMULATION 

INVERT 
EMULSION 
SUSPOEMULSION 
WETTABLE 

POWDER 
GRANULAR 
FORMULATIONN 
561