# (1) Overview Context Spatial coverage

CorpusID: 129685856
 
tags: #Geography, #History

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3193deda2ab873a792f3128299a1257f32c45aa6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3193deda2ab873a792f3128299a1257f32c45aa6)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

(1) Overview Context Spatial coverage


(1) Overview Context Spatial coverage



## Temporal coverage
 AD250-1945 
(2) Methods Steps A custom-build hexacopter UAV was used to collect data, running Ardupilot 3.1 firmware in conjunction with Mission Planner v1.1, the flight was conducted at approximately 35m above ground level at a vertical speed of approximately 2.5m/s. The camera used was a Canon Powershot S110 running CHDK 1.2.0 and a standard intervalometer script. Ground control point (GCP) location was established using a Garmin GLO.

The 3D polygonal mesh was generated using Agisoft Photoscan 1.1.5 software.


## Sampling strategy

GCPs were placed at intervals of approximately 10m. The intervalometer script was set to take a photograph every 5 seconds (the fastest speed mechanically possible when using the camera used).


## Quality control

GCPs were used to support the georeferencing of the photographs. Transparency of data processing methods is facilitated by the inclusion of unprocessed images and lens calibration photographs. The dataset includes the elements required to generate many kinds of derived data. The 3D mesh is intended to act as an example of derived data.


## Constraints

The ground-based GPS unit used is accurate to within 3m (manufacturer's error rate) UAV survey of other portions of the site was prohibited by tree cover to the North and East. These areas were not of primary interest.

The number of photographs taken was ultimately constrained by flight time, limited by the capacity of battery used to power the hexacopter. Due to storage space restrictions an image set in .tif format is not provided. Given that the site is a scheduled ancient monument, it is hoped that the further investigation required to identify such features will soon be undertaken. This data supports the generation of Orthorectified maps, Digital Elevation Models and 3D meshes. A second driver for creating this dataset was the high degree of interest amongst the archaeological community in the potential application of new and affordable UAV technology. It is hoped that this dataset will act as an exemplar for the standardisation of results from similar, low-altitude aerial surveys. This dataset relates to two guides published by Jisc [3] and the Archaeology Data Service [4].


## (3) Dataset description


UAV Aerial Survey -Clifton Camp (ST56557330)Data type primary data, processed data, interpretation of dataFormat names and versions• 'Readme' inventory in .txt format • Camera native image set in .jpeg format (compressed as .zip)Object name 

DATA PAPER 

UAV Survey Data from Clifton Camp (ST56557330), 
Bristol, UK 

Stephen Gray 1 
Creation dates 

01/11/2014 

Dataset Creators 

Stephen Gray 

Language 

Eng 

License 

CC0 

Repository location 

http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1372405 

Publication date 

09/04/2014 

(4) Reuse potential 
Despite its accessible location, little investigation has 
been done on this site. This survey helps further establish 
several non-natural features seen by Russell [1] in archival 
aerial photographs. These features include: 

1. Excavations believed to relate to Brunell's unfinished 
reservoir of 1845 (see area marked as '2' in 'features-
of-interest.tif') 
2. A rectilinear enclosure, believed by Russell to be 
a mediaeval animal enclosure (see area marked 
as '1' in 'features-of-interest.tif' -the much later 
reservoir pipeline can be seen cutting through, 
diagonally). 
3. Several other non-natural features (for example see 
area marked as '3' in 'features-of-interest.tif') are 
suggested both by the results of this survey and by 
Robert's [2] geophysics survey of 2011. 


Post Graduate Researcher, Department of Archaeology & Anthropology, University of Bristol, UK stephen.gray@bristol.ac.uk
AcknowledgementsGail Boyle, Archaeological Curator, Bristol City Museum.
Geophysical Survey at Clifton Camp. A Roberts, ArcheoscanRoberts, A J 2011 Geophysical Survey at Clifton Camp. Archeoscan.

. J Russell, Archaeology of the Parish of Clifton. Bristol & Avon Archaeology. 16Bristol & Avon ArchaeologyRussell, J 2010 Archaeology of the Parish of Clift- on. Bristol & Avon Archaeology, 16. Bristol & Avon Archaeology.

Archaeology use case: 3D surveying with a UAV. Stephen Gray, Gray, Stephen 2014 Archaeology use case: 3D survey- ing with a UAV, http://www.jiscdigitalmedia.ac.uk/ infokit/3d/uav-survey Accessed: 01/12/2014.

UAV Survey: A Guide to Good Practice. Stephen Gray, Gray, Stephen 2014 UAV Survey: A Guide to Good Practice, http://guides.archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/ g2gp/AerialPht_UAV Accessed: 01/12/2014.