# Patient Perceptions and Preferences of Two Etanercept Autoinjectors for Rheumatoid Arthritis: Findings from a Patient Survey in Europe

CorpusID: 1315063
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b966f0ed1321621ad5d856ba526782e0a31b5d2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b966f0ed1321621ad5d856ba526782e0a31b5d2)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Patient Perceptions and Preferences of Two Etanercept Autoinjectors for Rheumatoid Arthritis: Findings from a Patient Survey in Europe


Kunal Thakur Anna 
Biberger Alexandra 
Handrich Mourad 
Farouk Rezk 
Patient Perceptions and Preferences of Two Etanercept Autoinjectors for Rheumatoid Arthritis: Findings from a Patient Survey in Europe
Received: September 19, 2016 / Published online: November 5, 2016ORIGINAL RESEARCH ABSTRACT Introduction: Benepali Ò was the first etanercept (Enbrel Ò ) biosimilar to be approved


## INTRODUCTION

Conventional synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (csDMARDs), such as methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, and sulfasalazine, have long been the mainstay of treatment for RA, and their initiation in the early stages of disease can curb or halt the progressive synovitis and joint destruction, thereby limiting disability [1][2][3]. However, an improved understanding of the pathogenesis of RA over the past decade has led to the development of several biological DMARDs (bDMARDs) that directly target components of the RA inflammatory cascade, and have transformed the management of this disease [3]. The first targeted bDMARD for RA was the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-antagonist, etanercept (Enbrel Ò ), which was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in 1998 [4]. Since then, a number of other bDMARDs have been approved and are now commercially available; many of these treatments are administered by subcutaneous (SC) injection, with a number of presentations and devices currently being available (prefilled syringes, vial and syringe, and autoinjector devices). A number of studies have reported that patients with RA prefer autoinjector devices over conventional methods of treatment administration, with patients citing such factors as these devices being easier to use, more convenient, more acceptable, less painful, and less time-consuming [5][6][7]. Although bDMARDs are effective in reducing RA symptoms, slowing disease progression, and improving physical function and quality of life [3,[8][9][10], they are costly [11]. Consequently, in many countries, not all patients who may be eligible for treatment with biological drugs according to guidelines are prescribed these drugs, with preference generally being given to those with more severe and aggressive disease [12]. Indeed, results from a cross-sectional study estimated that, in total, 320 million people in the European region (approximately 40%) have severely restricted access to bDMARDs in cases of RA, with barriers to access primarily being financial and administrative [11]. However, the patent expiry of some of these bDMARDs has enabled the introduction of therapeutically similar, and more affordable, alternativesknown as biosimilars [13]. 


## Questionnaire Design

The survey was developed in a two-stage process, with the guidance on the interview questions and process taken from a recent survey in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, which investigated patients' perceptions of the importance of different general attributes of autoinjectors [18].

Initially, an English structured quantitative master questionnaire was created, which was then tested and validated in pilot interviews (n = 4) to ensure appropriate content, flow, and clarity of the survey. During these pilot interviews, respondents were asked to provide those autoinjector attributes that they considered to be the most important for inclusion in the main quantitative survey.

These interviews were also used to determine whether respondents fully understood the instructions provided with the questionnaire. 


## RESULTS


## Patient Characteristics

A total of 220 patients from France (n = 30), Germany (n = 65), Italy (n = 67), Spain (n = 12), and the UK (n = 46) participated in this survey.

The lower number from Spain was due to the lower availability of patients with the required experience in using the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector. The majority of patients were female (72%) and aged 51-60 years (36%) ( Table 1). All patients participating in the survey were using the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector.


## Importance of Attributes when Using

an Autoinjector Device for Self-injection

Patients were asked to evaluate the importance of ten attributes, when using an autoinjector device in general for self-injection of their RA medication, on a seven-point scale (1 = not important at all; 7 = extremely important).

Overall, 'easy to operate the self-injection' was ranked as the most important attribute by patients (mean score of 6. 


## Patient Preferences for Autoinjector Based on Attributes Assessed

Patients were asked for their preference of autoinjector based on nine of the ten attributes previously assessed ('button-free device' was not included in this section).

Overall, the attribute of 'easier to operate' was a strong differentiator for the Benepali autoinjector compared to the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector, with 78% of patients reporting that the Benepali autoinjector was 'easier to operate' than the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector (Fig. 2). Furthermore, country-specific data showed that patients from all five EU countries preferred the Benepali autoinjector 'more intuitive to use', 'better visual feedback', 'right weight', 'better size', and 'attractive design' (Fig. 2). The attribute of 'conceals the injection needle better' was rated as being the same for both autoinjectors by 72% of patients.


## Patient Preference for Autoinjector and Attributes that Drive Patient Choice of Autoinjector

Patients were asked their opinion as to which autoinjector they would prefer to use for self-injection of their RA treatment. The majority of patients (n = 163/220 [74%]) reported that they would prefer to use the Benepali autoinjector, with only a small number of patients (n = 28/220 [13%]) reporting a preference for the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector. In addition, 29 patients (13%) stated that they had no preference for either device. A preference for the Benepali autoinjector was also reported across all five EU countries (Fig. 4).

Patients were also asked to select the top three attributes that drove their preference for one autoinjector over the other. Of the 163 patients who preferred the Benepali autoinjector, the reasons most commonly given were 'easy to operate the self-injection' (n = 117), followed by 'button-free autoinjector' (n = 110). Of the 29 patients who preferred the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector, the most common reasons given were 'easy to operate' (n = 26), and 'intuitive/self-explaining usage' (n = 17) (Fig. 5).


## DISCUSSION

Results from this patient survey (n = 220) conducted in five countries in the EU reported that the majority of patients (74%) who were using the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector preferred the Benepali autoinjector to the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector for self-injection of their RA medication. These results were closely aligned with those of the recently reported nurse survey  Country-specific data (n = 149), which was based on the same protocol, and reported that 86% of nurses felt that their patients would prefer the Benepali autoinjector [17]. and 'button-free autoinjector' were reported as key drivers impacting patients' choice of autoinjector. Once again, these results were identical to those reported from the nurse survey, in which these two attributes were also reported as being key drivers impacting nurses' choice of autoinjector [17]. Altogether, the attributes of the Benepali autoinjector that patients most preferred, which were in alignment with results from the nurse survey [17], can be described as those that make the handling process easier for the patient, International GmbH funded the survey. This paper's processing charges were paid by Biogen.

Writing and editorial support was provided by Frances Gambling of inVentiv Health, and was funded by Biogen International GmbH. All 


## Compliance with Ethics

Guidelines. Patients provided written consent before participating in the study.


## Data

Availability. Datasets generated during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 


8), followed by 'easy to grip' (6.5), 'intuitive/self-explaining usage' (6.3), 'visual feedback after treatment has been successfully injected' (6.0), 'concealing the injection needle in the injector body' (5.9), and 'audible feedback after treatment has been successfully injected' (5.8). The attributes of 'button-free device', 'weight of the autoinjector', and 'size of the autoinjector' were considered by patients to be of less importance, with mean scores of 5.3, 5.3, and 5.1, respectively(Fig. 1).

## Fig. 4
4Patient opinions as to which autoinjector they would prefer to use for self-injection

## Fig.
Fig. 3 Patient preferences for autoinjector based on the attribute of 'easier to operate the self-injection': Country-specific data


named authors meet the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria for authorship for this manuscript, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given final approval for the version to be published. All authors had full access to all of the data in this study and take complete responsibility for the integrity of the data and accuracy of the data analysis. Disclosures. Kunal Thakur is an employee of Biogen International GmbH. Alexandra Handrich is an employee of Biogen International GmbH. Mourad Farouk Rezk is an employee of Biogen International GmbH. Anna Biberger is an employee of Kantar Health, the company that designed and analyzed the survey.

## Open
Access. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/4.0/), which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any


was designed to assess patient perceptions and preferences for the Benepali autoinjector compared to the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector.Benepali Ò (manufactured by Biogen, Inc, 

Cambridge, MA, USA) was the first etanercept 

biosimilar to be approved in the European 
Union (EU) in 2016. Benepali, which 

underwent robust preclinical and clinical 
(phase I and phase III) testing in both healthy 

volunteers and patients with RA [14, 15], is 

approved for all the adult indications for 
which 
Enbrel 
is 
approved-namely, 

moderate-to-severe RA, psoriatic arthritis, axial 
spondyloarthritis (ankylosing spondylitis and 

non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis), and 

plaque psoriasis [16]. Both Benepali and Enbrel 
are available as autoinjector devices. In a recent 
European survey conducted in France, 

Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United 

Kingdom (UK), the majority of nurses (86%) 
reported that their patients would prefer the 

Benepali autoinjector compared to the Enbrel 
MYCLIC autoinjector [17]. To determine 

whether patients were in agreement with 

nurses, this survey evaluated patients' 
perceptions and preferences of the Benepali 

autoinjector versus the Enbrel MYCLIC 
autoinjector in the same five European 

countries. 

METHODS 

This survey, which consisted of a 25-min, 
face-to-face, structured, questionnaire-interview, 

The survey was conducted between December 
2015 and April 2016 in France, Germany, Italy, 

Spain, and the UK. The survey, including the 
pilot survey, was conducted by Kantar Health, 

an independent global market research and 

consulting firm, based in Munich, Germany. 
Kantar Health performed the survey in 

accordance with market research guidelines, 
data protection laws, and data privacy 

legislation, ensuring the implementation of an 

effective quality assurance system. Kantar 
Health operates in compliance with ISO 

20252:2012, the International Standard for 
Market, Opinion and Social Research and, as a 

member of numerous market research 

associations, including Arbeitskreis Deutscher 
Markt und Sozialforschungsinstitute e.V. 

(ADM), 
the 
European 
Pharmaceutical 
Marketing Research Association (EphMRA), the 

Council for American Survey Research 
Organizations (CASRO), and the European 

Society for Opinion and Market Research 

(ESOMAR), strictly adheres to the latest 

industry codes of conduct and guidelines in 
market research. 

Patient Population 

Patient recruitment was outsourced by Kantar 

Health 
to 
another 
agency, 
Schmiedl 

Marktforschung GmbH, who enrolled patients 
from a number of sources, including patient 

panels and patient-support groups, as well as 
recommendations from nurses and physicians. 

To be eligible to participate in the survey, 

patients had to have been diagnosed with 
moderate or severe RA by a physician and had 

to be using the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector for 
at least 1 month at the time of recruitment into 

the survey. There were no specific exclusion 

criteria for this survey. Patients provided 
written consent before participating in the 

survey and were compensated for their time 
with an honorarium. 




taking into consideration the information that they had received from the instructional video and device-handling leaflet, their own previous experience of handling the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector and their first experience of handling the Benepali autoinjector. Patients were then asked to select the top three attributes that drove their preference for one autoinjector over the other, based on the attributes assessed in section 1 of the questionnaire. The final section of the questionnaire included questions on patient demographics, including country of origin, gender, and age (see supplementary material for full details on the questionnaire). The analysis population included all patients who completed the survey. During the face-to-face interviews, patient responses were recorded by the interviewer and data input from all interviews was collected by the recruitment agency (Schmiedl Marktforschung GmbH). All analyses were performed by Kantar Health.The final version of the English questionnaire 
was then translated into four languages 

(German, Italian, French, and Spanish). All 

interviews were conducted in the relevant 
local language and were performed by 

experienced interviewers working on behalf of 
the 
recruitment 
agency 
(Schmiedl 

Marktforschung GmbH). Interviewer training 

was conducted by Kantar Health via video 
conference prior to commencement of the 

survey, with scheduled weekly feedback calls 
to check on the progress of the interviews and 

to ensure that they were being performed 

correctly. 
During a 25-min face-to-face interview, each 

patient was asked a series of questions in 
sequence by the interviewer and all responses 

were documented. In addition, patients were 
shown 
an 
instructional 
video 
and 

device-handling leaflet for the Benepali 

autoinjector, received a live demonstration on 
the Benepali training autoinjector, and were 

given access to both the Benepali and Enbrel 
MYCLIC training autoinjectors. 

The questionnaire was broadly divided into 

four sections. In the first section (Q1), patients 
were asked to rate the importance of ten 

attributes, when using an autoinjector device 
in general for self-injection of their RA 

treatment, on a seven-point scale (1 = not 

important at all; 7 = extremely important). 
The following attributes were assessed: (1) size 

of the autoinjector, (2) attractive design of the 
autoinjector, (3) easy to grip the autoinjector, 

(4) easy to operate the self-injection with the 

autoinjector, (5) audible feedback after 
treatment has been successfully injected, (6) 

visual feedback after treatment has been 

successfully injected, (7) concealing the 

injection needle in the injector body, (8) 

intuitive/self-explaining usage, (9) button-free 
autoinjector, and (10) weight of the 

autoinjector. In the second section of the 
questionnaire (Q2-Q11), patients were asked 

for their preference of autoinjector (Benepali, 

Enbrel MYCLIC, or both the same) based on 
nine of the ten attributes assessed in section 1 

(button-free device was excluded from this 
section as this attribute related only to the 

Benepali autoinjector). In the third section of 

the questionnaire (Q12-Q13), patients were 
asked which autoinjector they would prefer to 

use for self-injection of their RA treatment 
(Benepali, Enbrel MYCLIC, or no preference), 

Data Analysis 

Based on the results of previous quantitative 
primary market research surveys, a minimum of 

30 respondents per country is a validated and 

robust sample size and an eligible base for 
significant testing [19]. Statistical significance 

was estimated using Student's t test (Microsoft 
Excel, Ver. 2013, Microsoft Corp. Redmond, 

WA, USA). 



## Table 1
1Demographic and baseline characteristics of patients participating in the survey (n = 220)Characteristic Description 
Number of patients, 
n (%) 

Country 
Germany 
65 (30%) 

France 
30 (14%) 

Italy 
67 (30%) 

UK 
46 (21%) 

Spain 
12 (5%) 

Gender 
Male 
62 (28%) 

Female 
158 (72%) 

Age 
B30 years old 
4 (2%) 

31-40 years old 
27 (12%) 

41-50 years old 
66 (30%) 

51-60 years old 
78 (36%) 

C61 years old 
45 (20%) 



Overall, attributes of 'easy to operate theself-injection', 
'easy 
to 
grip', 
and 
'intuitive/self-explaining 
usage' 
were 

considered by patients as being the most 
important 
attributes 
when 
using 
an 

autoinjector to manage their RA. This was 

consistent with the results from the nurse 

survey, in which these three attributes were 
also considered by nurses as being the most 

important attributes when selecting an 
autoinjector for their patients with RA [17]. In 

line with the nurse survey, patients rated the 

attribute of 'easy to operate the self-injection' as 
a strong differentiator for the Benepali 

autoinjector compared to the Enbrel MYCLIC 
autoinjector in this survey. However, the 

attribute of 'intuitive/self-explaining usage', 

which 
nurses 
reported 
as 
a 
strong 

Fig. 5 Top three attributes driving patient selection 
differentiator for the Benepali autoinjector [17], 

was considered by patients in this survey as 

being a moderate differentiator. Finally, 
attributes of 'easy to operate the self-injection' 




all interviewers across the five EU countries to ensure that all interviews were conducted in an identical manner. Finally, results from this survey are based on patients' perceptions of the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector following usage of at least 1 month at the time of recruitment compared to a demonstration of the Benepali autoinjector only. As such, a further survey is warranted to determine if results of this survey are replicated after exposure to both autoinjectors for the same time period. Despite these limitations, the fact that findings from this patient survey mirrored those of the nurse survey, which was based on the same protocol[17], and demonstrated a large patient preference for the Benepali autoinjector, provides further credence to these results.Althoughthe biosimilars market is relatively new in Europe, a preliminary analysis of pricing behavior indicates that biosimilars in some therapeutic areas are priced below reference biologics, often with discounts of 10-35% [23]. Due to the lower cost of biosimilars versus reference products, there has been considerable interest in determining whether patients who have already been treated on a reference product treatment can be switched to its biosimilar without adverse consequences. To date, a number of switching studies in patients with RA and ankylosing spondylitis have shown that biosimilars can be used in place of reference products while maintaining efficacy and safety [24-27], although, as yet, no independent randomized controlled trials have reported switching from original to biosimilar drugs. The availability of Benepali, the first etanercept biosimilar available in Europe, may help to reduce costs, thereby relieving the burden on healthcare budgets and improving patient access to treatment [13]. Moreover, the fact that patients reported a preference for the Benepali autoinjector over the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector may provide an additional consideration point for clinicians when considering a patient's therapy. In addition, lower costs may also assist in the overall earlier introduction of biological therapy [26, 28], thereby providing a unique opportunity to change the course of RA, after the start of symptoms but before the onset of radiographic damage [29]. Benepali, the first etanercept biosimilar, has now been approved in the EU for the treatment of RA. Results from this patient survey in five EU countries reported that, overall, patients preferred the Benepali autoinjector compared to the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector for the majority of attributes assessed, a finding that was in alignment with results from a recently reported nurse survey [22]. Notably, patients preferred the Benepali autoinjector for attributes of 'easy to operate the self-injection' and 'easy to grip', suggesting that patients found the Benepali autoinjector easier to handle than the Enbrel MYCLIC autoinjector.suggesting that both patients and nurses in 

Europe consider the Benepali autoinjector to be 
easier to handle than the Enbrel MYCLIC 

autoinjector. This is of paramount importance, 
as many patients with RA suffer from 

compromised dexterity, which can affect the 
ability to perform the steps required [20]. 

Adherence to biological therapy is essential 

for 
sustaining 
long-term 
efficacy 
and 
optimizing therapeutic outcomes in patients 

with RA. However, adherence to the therapeutic 
regimen has been reported as low (varying from 

30 to 80%), with the route of administration 

being an important factor in treatment 
adherence [21, 22]. Delivery of Benepali with 

the autoinjector, which appears to be easily 
performed by patients with RA, may increase 

patient 
tolerance 
of 
self-administration, 

possibly improving adherence, which in turn 
could significantly improve the effectiveness of 

drug therapy. 
As with all market research, there are some 

limitations to this survey that need to be 

acknowledged. The survey results are based on 
patient perception of the Benepali autoinjector 

rather than actual clinical experience and do 

not represent a global perspective, as all patients 

came from Europe. In addition, the low patient 

numbers from Spain mean that results cannot 
be extrapolated to Spain. Furthermore, as 

patients volunteered to participate in the 
survey, an inherent self-selection bias may 

have been present, along with interviewer 

bias. However, to minimize selection bias, 
screening criteria were developed and 

rigorously adhered to, ensuring that only 
patients 
representative 
of 
the 
target 

population were recruited into the survey. 

Similarly, 
to 
reduce 
interviewer 
bias, 
comprehensive briefings were conducted with 

CONCLUSIONS 


Rheumatol Ther (2016) 3:245-256
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe authors would like to thank the patients who participated in this survey. Biogen
British Society for Rheumatology, British Health Professionals in Rheumatology Standards, Guidelines and Audit Working Group; British Association of Dermatologists (BAD), et al. BSR/BHPR guideline for disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy in consultation with the British Association of Dermatologists. K Chakravarty, H Mcdonald, T Pullar, Rheumatology (Oxford). 476Chakravarty K, McDonald H, Pullar T, British Society for Rheumatology, British Health Professionals in Rheumatology Standards, Guidelines and Audit Working Group; British Association of Dermatologists (BAD), et al. BSR/BHPR guideline for disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy in consultation with the British Association of Dermatologists. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008;47(6):924-5.

EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis with synthetic and biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2013 update. J S Smolen, R Landewé, F C Breedveld, Ann Rheum Dis. 733Smolen JS, Landewé R, Breedveld FC, et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis with synthetic and biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2013 update. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014;73(3):492-509.

The use of biologics in rheumatoid arthritis: current and emerging paradigms of care. J R Curtis, J A Singh, Clin Ther. 336Curtis JR, Singh JA. The use of biologics in rheumatoid arthritis: current and emerging paradigms of care. Clin Ther. 2011;33(6):679-707.

Enbrel Summary of Product Characteristics. Enbrel Summary of Product Characteristics. http:// www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/ EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/000262/WC50 0027361.pdf. Accessed June 13, 2016.

Clinical assessment of pain, tolerability, and preference of an autoinjection pen versus a prefilled syringe for patient self-administration of the fully human, monoclonal antibody adalimumab: the TOUCH trial. A Kivitz, S Cohen, J E Dowd, Clin Ther. 2810Kivitz A, Cohen S, Dowd JE, et al. Clinical assessment of pain, tolerability, and preference of an autoinjection pen versus a prefilled syringe for patient self-administration of the fully human, monoclonal antibody adalimumab: the TOUCH trial. Clin Ther. 2006;28(10):1619-29.

Subcutaneously administered methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis, by prefilled syringes versus prefilled pens: patient preference and comparison of the self-injection experience. W Demary, H Schwenke, K Rockwitz, Patient Prefer Adherence. 8Demary W, Schwenke H, Rockwitz K, et al. Subcutaneously administered methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis, by prefilled syringes versus prefilled pens: patient preference and comparison of the self-injection experience. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2014;8:1061-71.

Acceptability of switching adalimumab from a prefilled syringe to an autoinjection pen. J Borrás-Blasco, A Gracia-Pérez, J D Rosique-Robles, M D Casterá, F J Abad, Expert Opin Biol Ther. 103Borrás-Blasco J, Gracia-Pérez A, Rosique-Robles JD, Casterá MD, Abad FJ. Acceptability of switching adalimumab from a prefilled syringe to an autoinjection pen. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2010;10(3):301-7.

Improved health-related quality of life with effective disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: evidence from randomized controlled trials. V Strand, J A Singh, Am J Manag Care. 13Strand V, Singh JA. Improved health-related quality of life with effective disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: evidence from randomized controlled trials. Am J Manag Care. 2007;13:S237-51.

New therapies for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. J S Smolen, D Aletaha, M Koeller, M H Weisman, P Emery, Lancet. 370Smolen JS, Aletaha D, Koeller M, Weisman MH, Emery P. New therapies for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet. 2007;370:1861-74.

A network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of biologics for rheumatoid arthritis: a Cochrane overview. J A Singh, R Christensen, G A Wells, CMAJ. 18111Singh JA, Christensen R, Wells GA, et al. A network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of biologics for rheumatoid arthritis: a Cochrane overview. CMAJ. 2009;181(11):787-96.

Working Group 'Equity in access to treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in Europe'. Inequities in access to biologic and synthetic DMARDs across 46 European countries. P Putrik, S Ramiro, T K Kvien, Ann Rheum Dis. 731Putrik P, Ramiro S, Kvien TK, et al. Working Group 'Equity in access to treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in Europe'. Inequities in access to biologic and synthetic DMARDs across 46 European countries. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014;73(1):198-206.

Biosimilars in rheumatology: pharmacological and pharmacoeconomic issues. G Lapadula, G F Ferraccioli, Clin Exp Rheumatol. 304Suppl 73Lapadula G, Ferraccioli GF. Biosimilars in rheumatology: pharmacological and pharmacoeconomic issues. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2012;30(4 Suppl 73):S102-6.

Delivering on the Potential of Biosimilar Medicines. The Role of Functioning Competitive Market. IMS Institute for HealthCare InformaticsIMS Institute for HealthCare Informatics. Delivering on the Potential of Biosimilar Medicines. The Role of Functioning Competitive Market. 2016. http://www.imshealth.com/files/web/ IMSH%20Institute/Healthcare%20Briefs/Documents /IMS_Institute_Biosimilar_Brief_March_2016.pdf. Accessed July 28, 2016.

A randomised Phase l pharmacokinetic study comparing SB4 and etanercept reference product (Enbrel Ò ) in healthy subjects. Y Lee, D Shin, Y Kim, J Kang, A Gauliard, R Fuhr, Br J Pharmacol. 821Lee Y, Shin D, Kim Y, Kang J, Gauliard A, Fuhr R. A randomised Phase l pharmacokinetic study comparing SB4 and etanercept reference product (Enbrel Ò ) in healthy subjects. Br J Pharmacol. 2016;82(1):64-73.

A phase III randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study comparing SB4 with etanercept reference product in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate therapy. P Emery, J Vencovský, A Sylwestrzak, 10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-207588Ann Rheum Dis. Emery P, Vencovský J, Sylwestrzak A, et al. A phase III randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study comparing SB4 with etanercept reference product in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate therapy. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-207588

Benepali Summary of Product characteristics. Benepali Summary of Product characteristics. http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_ library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/00400 7/WC500200378.pdf. Accessed June 13, 2016.

Perceptions and preferences of two etanercept autoinjectors for rheumatoid arthritis: a new European Union-approved etanercept biosimilar (Benepali) versus etanercept (Enbrel)-findings from a nurse survey in. K Thakur, A Biberger, A Handrich, M F Rezk, Europe. Rheumatol Ther. 31Thakur K, Biberger A, Handrich A, Rezk MF. Perceptions and preferences of two etanercept autoinjectors for rheumatoid arthritis: a new European Union-approved etanercept biosimilar (Benepali) versus etanercept (Enbrel)-findings from a nurse survey in Europe. Rheumatol Ther. 2016;3(1):77-89.

Autoinjectors for administration of interferon beta-1b in multiple sclerosis: patient preferences and the ExtaviPro TM 30G and Betacomfort Ò device. K Thakur, L Manuel, M Tomlinson, Prag Obs Res. 4Thakur K, Manuel L, Tomlinson M. Autoinjectors for administration of interferon beta-1b in multiple sclerosis: patient preferences and the ExtaviPro TM 30G and Betacomfort Ò device. Prag Obs Res. 2013;4:19-26.