# A review of uses of satellite imagery in monitoring mangrove forests

CorpusID: 132023404
 
tags: #Geography, #Environmental_Science, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a15dcc1589e6f11a60f78bc42f7200fa1585601d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a15dcc1589e6f11a60f78bc42f7200fa1585601d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review of uses of satellite imagery in monitoring mangrove forests


Rhyma Purnamasayangsukasih 
Faculty of Forestry
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) Serdang
SelangorMalaysia

Department of Forest Management
Faculty of Forestry
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) Serdang
SelangorMalaysia

Ismail Adnan 
Department of Forest Management
Faculty of Forestry
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) Serdang
SelangorMalaysia

Shamsudin I 
A review of uses of satellite imagery in monitoring mangrove forests
10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034
Satellite image could provide much information of earth surfaces in a large scale in a short time, thus saving time. With the evolution and development of sensors providing satellite image, resolution of object captured enhanced with advance image processing techniques. In forestry, satellite image has been widely used for resources management, planning, monitoring, predicting, etc. However, the uses of satellite image are reported to be moderate and sometimes poor for mangrove forests due to homogenous species existed in salty and inundation areas. Many researches had been carried out to improve the uses of satellite imagery of either optical or radar data for mangrove forests. This paper reviews the uses of satellite imagery data in mangrove with the main focus of the literature related to mangroves monitoring.

## Introduction

In 1957, the world witnessed the launch of the first satellite into the orbit of the earth. Subsequently in the early 1960s, satellites associated with other purposes such as weather forecast, communication and commerce were introduced and successful launched. Since the 1970s, data acquired from these satellites have been successfully used for weather prediction, monitoring global environmental conditions, and geographical and geological applications [1]. Data captured from the satellite systems provide information on earth surfaces.

Satellite imageries are beneficial to numerous areas of work such as monitoring work as these imageries cover large areas, virtually any part of the earth, including inaccessible areas which were previously too remote or too dangerous to reach when using conventional aerial photography such as dense forest, peat swamp forest and mangrove forest. Through the usage of satellites, researchers are able to collect data unaffected by local air traffic constraints; they can analyse comparisons of land covers at different times, which is suitable for long-term studies. Research methods based on satellites are time-saving, cost-effective and enhance the possibility of classifying the vegetation through spectral and texture analyses; on the other hand, ground measurement methods are difficult, expensive, time-consuming and labour-intensive [2][3][4][5][6].

Previously, satellite images were expensive and the initial-stage satellite technology was used for military applications such as threat monitoring and assessment; this type of machine was known as reconnaissance satellite, for instance CORONA satellite [7]. The satellite was launched in 1960 and the operation ended in 1972 due to a leakage of confidential images on the internet; these pieces of sensitive information belonging to the United States of America (USA) were related to military security and defence. CORONA was developed primarily for area surveillance covering the regions of the Soviet Union, China and other parts of the world. The first civilian earth satellite, Landsat was launched in 1972. Landsat 1 to Landsat 5 were successfully launched in the absence of competitors until 1986 when the first commercial satellite, SPOT was introduced. Since the launching of commercial satellites, satellite images have gradually become less expensive and the areas of applications increase. Commercial satellites such as Ikonos and QuickBird provide global, accurate and high-resolution images to individuals, organisations and governments. Satellite imaging systems can be classified into radar and optical systems. Radars provide their own energy to illuminate an area of interest and measure the reflected signals while optical systems acquire the reflected electromagnetic waves of the sunlight and/or the infrared radiation emitted by objects on the ground [8]. Optical satellites are more frequently used than radar satellites. Rapid advancement of satellite technology causes wide usages of these data. In mangrove studies, the optical satellite with medium spatial resolution is normally used. Tables 1 and 2 show the common optical and radar satellites used in mangrove researches in the past 3 decades [9][10][11]. Table 3 shows their years of launchings and active applications until the current year. Satellite images are available in different spatial resolutions, from low to high. Satellite images of low-resolution with ground pixels of more than 10 m are useful for applications such as environmental assessment, mapping, forestry management, disaster assessment and urban monitoring. In contrast, images of high-resolution data with ground pixel sizes of less than 5 m provide detailed information of small objects on the earth surface such as buildings, streets, river and trees which are useful for applications such as transportation network mapping, disaster management, urban planning and farming.

Satellite images also can be used to determine the elevation and topographical features of a particular land. Also, it is useful in viewing agricultural fields where farmers are able to monitor the health of their crops. In research, researchers or scientists can study environmental changes to forecast weathers or natural disasters that may happen in the future. Meanwhile, city planners are able to plan developments of new residential areas for communities. In transportation, satellite data can be used for traffic studies and facilitate the planning of new road networks. In disaster management, satellite images can be used to plan evacuation routes during earthquakes or fire events. Lastly, in Forestry, satellite images can provide detailed information about forest status such as species distribution, stand density, forest extend, operational monitoring, and discrimination species at dryland and wetland.   


## Mangrove forest

Mangrove forests flourish in intertidal zones and coastlines between the sea and the land within tropical and subtropical regions of the world (Figure 1), approximately located 30° N and 30° S latitude [12][13]. They grow in harsh environmental conditions with high levels of salinity, high temperature, extreme tides, high rates of sedimentation and muddy anaerobic soils [13][14][15].  Figure 1. The world's mangrove distribution (Source: [13]).

Mangrove forests are among the most productive and biologically important ecosystems as they provide various goods and services to the society as well as benefits to coastal and marine systems; in fact, they are one of the most valuable ecosystems in the world [13] [16][17]. [17] further comment that mangroves constitute less than 0.4% of the world's forests; they provide habitats for thousands of marine life, and serve the local communities with food, medicine, fuel and building materials. They are among the most carbon-rich forests in the tropics and important factors in mitigating the impact of climate change by sequestering carbon dioxide (CO2) (the main greenhouse gas, apart from water vapour) from the atmosphere [18][19]. They also act as a security barrier in protecting the coastal areas from tidal waves, tsunamis and cyclones [15] [20][21][22].

Even though they are important sources of goods and services, FAO (2007) reported that the total global area of mangroves decreases at about 1% per year. Mangrove forests experienced a significant worldwide loss estimated at about 35% to 36% in the period from 1980 to 2005; this rate of decline is faster than that of the tropical rain forest and coral reef [12][16] [23][24]. Natural disasters such as increased sea level, cyclones, storm, lightning strikes, tsunami, and flood cause negative impacts on the growth of mangrove forests; on the other hand, human interferences such as overexploitation, conversion to aquaculture, urbanisation, developments related to agriculture, infrastructure and tourism bring about shrinking area of the mangrove forests [12][16] [20][23] [25][26][27]. [24] predict that the mangrove forest could be 100% vanished if the present rate of loss continues. As a consequence, the important goods and services provided by the ecosystem of mangrove forests will diminish [24].


## Remotely sensed imagery data

Basically, there are two types of remotely sensed satellite images depending on the main source of energy: active and passive [28][29]]. An active system controls its own electromagnetic radiation source, which is known as radar. A passive system uses natural energy from the sun as the source of electromagnetic radiation, which is known as optical system.


## Radar satellite image

A radar imagery system or Radio Detection and Ranging is a method for the detection and ranging of earth surface features. Radar is an active remote sensing system which means that it provides its own source of energy to produce an image; it is commonly referred to as synthetic aperture radar (SAR). Radar carries its own electromagnetic radiation source, which is then directed to the surface and the energy reflected back from the surface is recorded [29]; this is expressed in Figure 2. Some examples of radar satellites are TerraSAR, RazakSat, ENVISAT and RADARSAT. The data are acquired either by day or by night. Due to the specific wavelength of radar, cloud covers can be penetrated without any adverse effect on the imagery. According to [30], radar has special properties that make it a viable alternative and/or partner to the optical remote sensing technique. For instance, microwave energy is capable of penetrating atmospheric conditions that render traditional space borne optical and multispectral systems useless [31]. Therefore, radar has the ability to produce images through rain, fog, hail, smoke, and, most importantly, clouds and it does not depend on daylight [28] [32]. These characteristics hold enormous data collection potential in many countries around the world [32].


## Figure 2.

Principal of radar satellite (modified from [33]).

Advantages of radar satellite [8]:

 all weather capability (small sensitivity of clouds, light rain)  day and night operation (independent of sun illumination)  no effects of atmospheric constituents (multi-temporal analysis)  sensitive to dielectric properties (water content , biomass, ice)  sensitive to surface roughness ( ocean wind speed)  accurate measurements of distance (interferometry)  sensitive to man-made objects  sensitive to target structure (use of polarimetry)  subsurface penetration


## Optical satellite image

Optical imageries are acquired during the daylight since the satellite depends on the reflections of sunlight from objects on the Earth's surface in the absence of cloud cover [28] [33]. Some examples of optical satellite systems include Landsat, SPOT, Ikonos, GeoEye and WorldView. [33] describes an optical satellite as using visible, near infrared and short-wave infrared sensors to form images of the earth's surface by detecting the solar radiation reflected from targets on the ground (Figure 3). With different wavelengths, different materials reflect and absorb them differently. Thus, the targets can be differentiated by their spectral reflectance signatures in the remotely sensed images.  Figure 3. Principal of optical satellite [33].

Advantages of optical satellites [8]:  specific wavelength sensitivity  recent innovations with some satellite systems enable mission operators to more frequently update tasking plans to accommodate cloud-coverage forecasts  manoeuvrable, with varying speed levels to move from one target to another  several images can be collected during the same pass at the same latitude


## The role and needs of satellite imagery data in mangroves monitoring

In the last 3 decades, a significant decline in mangrove forests has become a major environmental issue. The increased awareness of people, particularly environmentalists exerts a pressure on the need for conservation and restoration. As such, retrieving up-to-date information with regard to the extent of damage and condition of mangrove ecosystems is an essential aid to management as well as policyand decision-making processes [9].

Remotely sensed satellite images have been used to characterise mangrove ecosystems for more than two decades; aerial photographs has gradually become obsolete because high resolution images are more advanced, and promise detailed and accurate data [9] [34][35]. The benefits and limitations are listed in Tables 4, 5 and 6. With high resolution images, it is relatively easy to study the costal ecosystems. The embedded detailed information provides a synoptic view, multi-temporal, coverage and multi-spectral ability in the whole range of wavelengths, from visible to microwave. These advantages can effectively act as a tool par excellence in providing advance and reliable information on mangrove extent and status of its growth along the coastal areas [36], which would not be possible by using ground based techniques. The reflectance patterns of vegetation in visible and near infrared (NIR) spectral region give information on the conditions of vegetation covers [36].

In mangrove monitoring, satellite imagery data are able to deliver information such as land cover changes, disaster observation, species distribution, zonation pattern, etc. [37] state, a particular advantage of using optical data that mangroves are relatively distinct from non-mangrove areas, although confusion with adjoining tropical forests often leads to errors in the mapping of mangrove extent. [9] state that the interpretation of radar data over mangrove ecosystems is very complex because in radar data, the backscatter signal of mangrove ecosystems is influenced by the geometric properties of the stand such as canopy closure, canopy geometry, leaf structure, cell structure, stem structure, and the underlying surface component and its roughness: soil mudflats water; it is also affected by dielectric properties, which vary, depending on the soil moisture, plant moisture, and underlying water surfaces. The responses of these different conditions fluctuate, depending on the incidence wavelength, the polarisation of the radar beams, and the incidence angle of the radar waves. Various image processing and analysis techniques have been developed to facilitate remotely sensed imagery interpretation and to extract as much information as possible from the images. Based on a review study by [9], several methods have been employed to classify remotely sensed data on mangroves which are visual interpretation, pixel based classification (supervised and unsupervised), object-based methods, vegetation indices, and leaf area index (LAI). According to [38], visual interpretation highly depends on an interpreter's ability to recognise and analyse several characters of a satellite image, for example shape, size and pattern. Supervised and unsupervised classifications are common pixel based techniques of satellite image processing. In these techniques, spectral properties of every pixel within the area of interest are analysed without taking into account the spatial or contextual information related to the pixel of interest while object-based method is based on information of a group of similar pixels [39]. A vegetation index is a number generated by some combinations of remote sensing bands and may have some relationships to the amount of vegetation in a given image pixel; and normalised difference vegetation index is most widely used to separate vegetation from non-vegetation [9].

In Malaysia, [17] used Landsat images to monitor and analyse the changes over a period of 25 years of mangrove areas in Iskandar Malaysia. Two techniques were applied: the maximum likelihood classification (MLC) was used to compare and support vector machine (SVM). As a result, 6 land use/land cover (LULC) have been classified, which are forest, oil palm, rubber, mangrove, urban, and water bodies for both techniques. The comparisons of accuracies are between 62% (for SVM) and 95% (for MLC) from the years 1989, 2000, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2013 and 2014. Thus, MLC achieved the highest overall classification accuracy compared to with SVM for all the seven years considered.

In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) grow in popularity as a monitoring technique. UAV is an unmanned aerial vehicle or aerial vehicle without a pilot [40]; it is also known as drone. UAVs can fly using a manual remote controller, semi-automatic and automatic or combination of these methods. As an alternative way to acquire images from the space, UAVs can carry many types of sensors such as LiDAR, multispectral camera, or hyper spectral camera to capture images. As for viewing, sensors such as Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) can be applied to view through cloud and Daylight (RGB) Video Sensor to see what is going on at the ground. However, it all depends on the capability of UAV payload. The application of UAVs has widely spread and they are used in vegetation monitoring. For example, in a study conducted by [41], a high altitude long endurance (HALE) UAV, Pathfinder Plus was used to demonstrate this technique in monitoring a coffee plantation in Hawaii. The UAVs also have been applied in wetland observation, such as platform option of free-flying satellite, UAVs and International Space Station (ISS) for remote sensing assessment of the littoral zone; this work was carried out by [42]. He found that UAVs have much greater efficiency since they can be deployed as needed directly to the object areas and avoid poor weather conditions. Next, in a study on hazard detection and analysis at natural wetland of Taijiang National Parks, [43] utilised UAVs to collect ground truth data.  Other Data easy to access or order; best explored data type and , thus, most literature available; long-term monitoring granted Table 5. The benefit and limitation of high resolution of optical imagery data [9] High-resolution imagery Single tree species discrimination usually not possible.

Discrimination level Down to species communities; detailed parameterization Regional differences; classification result depends highly on the ecosystem conditions, such as biodiversity, heterogeneity of forests, adjacent targets


## Methods

Visual interpretation with on screen digitizing, pixel based, object-based, and hybrid-classification approaches.

Skilled analysis needed to exploit the full potential of the data.


## Other

Valuable information source to support field survey and accuracy assessment. Easy to close the scale gap to in situ investigations

In some countries, data of the relevant sensors very difficult to purchase, few studies published based on the data type.  Relatively few studies have been conducted; special software or modules are needed for radar image processing.


## Conclusion and prospective

In short, usages of satellite images for mangrove forests management are crucial in obtaining information. Satellite imagery data offer considerable advantages in mangrove studies and are useful to monitor mangrove ecosystems. Options to use either optical or radar satellite images depend on a study's needs. The output of a satellite imagery analysis can provide accurate information to facilitate conservation planning and policy-making as the technology is currently in an advanced stage. In the future, the quality of images processing can be improved further if radar and optical data are integrated. These images can be utilised to explore and monitor the development of mangrove forests in a more effective manner, as [44] aptly state that radar data complement optical data. 


8th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034

## Table 1 .
1Optical satellite[10].Sensor / System 
Platform 
No. of 
band(s) 

Spectral 
range 

Spatial resolution 

MSS 
Pan. 

High resolution sensor 
MSS (Multi Spectral 
sensor) 

Landsat 1, 2, 3 
4 
B, G, R, NIR 
~ 80 m 

TM (Thematic Mapper) 
Landsat 5 
6 
B, G, R, NIR, 
SWIR 

30 m 

ETM+ 
(Enhanced 
Thematic Mapper Plus) 

Landsat 7 
6 
VNIR, SWIR 
30 m 
15 m 

HVR (High Resolution 
Visibility) 

SPOT (Satellite 
Pour 
I'Observation de 
la Terre) 1, 2, 3 

3 
G, R, NIR 
20 m 
10 m 



## Table 2 .
2Radar satellite[10].Sensor 
Platform 
Band(s) Polarization(s) 

Spatial 
resolution 

SIR-C (Space-borne Imaging 
Radar) 

Space Shuttle 
C, L, X 
HH, HV, VV 
10-200 m 

ERS-1 (European Remote-
Sensing Satellite) 

European Remote-Sensing 
Satellite 
C 
VV 
25-100 m 

JERS-1 
(Japanese 
Earth 
Resource Satellite) 

Japanese Earth Resource 
Satellite 
L 
HH 
25-100 m 

Radarsat-1 
C 
HH 
8-100 m 
Radarsat-2 
C 
HH, HV, VH, 
VV 

3-100 m 

ASAR (Advanced Synthetic 
Aperture Radar) 

ENVISAT 
C 
HH, VH, HV, 
VV 

25-150 m 

PALSAR (Phased Array type 
L-band Synthetic Radar) 

ALOS (Advanced Land 
Observation System) 
L 
HH, HV, VH, 
VV 

10-100 m 

Polarization indicated by transmit and receive polarizations, respectively (H = horizontal polarization; 
V = vertical polarization) 



## Table 3 .
3Year of launch and active application of satellite until current year.Satellite(s) 

Year of 
Launch 

Active 
Application 
Satellite(s) 

Year of 
Launch 

Active 
Application 

SPOT 1 
SPOT 2 
SPOT 3 
SPOT 4 

1986 
1990 
1993 
1998 

Inactive (2002) 
Inactive (2009) 
Inactive (1996) 
Inactive (2013) 

ASTER 
IKONOS 
QuickBird 
RADARSAT-1 SAR 

1999 
1999 
2001 
1995 

Active 
Inactive (2015) 
Active 
Inactive (2013) 

Landsat 1 
Landsat 2 
Landsat 3 
Landsat 5 
Landsat 7 

1972 
1975 
1978 
1984 
1999 

Inactive (1978) 
Inactive (1982) 
Inactive (1983) 
Inactive (2011) 
Active 

ENVISAT ASAR 
ERS-1 SAR 
JERS-1 
AIRSAR 
ALOS PALSAR 

2002 
1991 
1992 
1990 
2006 

Inactive (2012) 
Inactive (2000) 
Inactive (1998) 
Inactive (2004) 
Inactive (2011) 

IRS 1C 
IRS 1D 

1995 
1997 

Inactive (2004) 
Inactive (2006) 




8th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034

## Table 4 .
4The benefit and limitation of medium resolution of optical imagery data[9] 8th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034Medium-resolution 
imagery 

Benefits 
Limitation 

Spectral resolution 
Several multispectral bands, always 
including R, G, B; near-infrared; and 
oftentimes even mid-infrared; and 
thermal bands 

Skilled trained personnel are 
required to best exploit the 
information content of the multiple 
bands (considering transformation, 
etc.) 

Spatial resolution 
Ideal for mapping on a large regional 
scale 

Too coarse for local observation 
requiring 
in-depth 
species 
differentiation and parameterization 

Temporal resolution 
Frequent mapping (e. g., rainy season 
and dry season within 1 year; or 
repeated annual mapping) is possible 

Repetition rate may be too low to 
record impact of extreme events (e. 
g., cyclones, floods, tsunami); 
furthermore, 
very 
weather 
dependent (clouds) = critical in 
subtropical and tropical regions 

Costs 
Depending on sensor, freely available 
(e. g., Landsat), very cost efficient 
(ASTER), or expensive (e. g., 
SPOT); but all are cost efficient 
compared with field surveys and 
airborne campaigns 

Software for image processing need 
(common software, such as erdas, 
ENVI, and ArcGIS, have high 
licene fees), but usually not real 
limitation) 

Long-term monitoring 
Data availability over three decades 
depending on the future duration of 
the systems and subsequent 
comparable sensors 

Purposes 
Inventory and status maps; change 
detection, such as assessment of 
impact damages; assessment of 
forestation and conservation success 

For some species-oriented botany-
focused studies, resolution may 
already be too coarse 

Discrimination level 
Mangrove-non-mangrove, 
density 
variations, 
condition 
status, 
mangrove zonation, in rare cases also 
species discrimination 

High 
regional 
differences; 
classification result depends highly 
on the ecosystem conditions, such 
as biodiversity, heterogeneity of 
forest, adjacent targets; species 
identification is rarely possible 

Methods 
visual interpretation with on screen 
digitizing, pixel-based, object-based, 
and hybrid classification approaches; 
image transformation and analyses 
(PCA, TCT,HIS indices, etc) 

To exploit the full potential of the 
data skilled analysts needed 




Very high costs if repeated monitoring is requested. Also, high costs of object-oriented image processing software Long-term monitoring Theoretically possible, but usually not used because of expense. Sensors, such as Ikonos, QuickBird, etc, available since late 1990s/2000. Depending on the future duration of the systems and subsequent comparable sensors. Only back to the late 1990s.Benefits 
Limitation 

Spectral resolution 
Red-near-infrared 
spectral 
information with red-edge slope; 
usually panchromatic band allowing 
image fusion (pan-sharpening) 

Relatively few spectral bands 

Spatial resolution 
High resolution (0.5-4 m range) for 
mapping on a local scale 

Only small area is covered 

Temporal resolution 
Regular mapping is possible on 
demand 

Weather dependent (clouds); cost 
intensive if repeated monitoring is 
required 

Costs 
Moderate 
costs 
for 
single 
acquisitions (depending on are) 

Purposes 
Discrimination of mangrove species, 
spatial distribution and variability, 
health status, parameterization. 




8th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034

## Table 6 .
6The benefit and limitation of radar imagery data[9] OtherMost promising results when SAR data combined with optical imageryRadar Imagery 
Benefits 
Limitation 

Spectral resolution 
Active microwave radiation; delivers 
alternative information about surface 
structure; various wavelengths and 
polarizations are selectable 

No spectral information 

Spatial resolution 
Varies 
Usually low, except TerraSAR-X 

Temporal resolution 
High; weather independent 
None 

Cost 
Many data types available at low cost 
in the context of science proposal 

Restricted access to data (certain 
number of scene; also some data 
not 
sharable 
with 
certain 
developing countries) 

Long-term monitoring 
Good; long duration systems 
None 

Purposes 
Mangrove extent, condition, canopy 
properties, deforestation, biomass 
estimation 

No information derivable from 
spectra 

Discrimination level 
Age structure, forest parameters, 
biomass estimation 

Vegetation forms without a prior 
knowledge; no separation among 
species 

Methods 
Analyses of the backscatter signal 
using advanced image-processing 
technique; very quantitative physics-
based manner of image analysis 

Extremely skilled analysis with 
experience 
in 
radar 
image 
processing needed 




8th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/01203411 


Detection of Objects from High Resolution Satellite Images. Phd Dissertation. S Kuthadi, 67University of Minnesota: USAKuthadi, S. 2005. Detection of Objects from High Resolution Satellite Images. Phd Dissertation, University of Minnesota: USA. 67 pp.

The cost-effectiveness of remote sensing for tropical coastal resources assessment and management. P J Mumby, E P Green, A J Edwards, C D Clark, Journal of Environment Management. 55Mumby, P.J., green, E.P., Edwards, A.J. and Clark, C.D. 1999. The cost-effectiveness of remote sensing for tropical coastal resources assessment and management. Journal of Environment Management, 55: 157-166.

The use of remote sensing and GIS in the sustainable management of tropical coastal ecosystems. F Dahdouh-Guebas, Environment, Development and Sustainability. 4Dahdouh-Guebas, F. 2002. The use of remote sensing and GIS in the sustainable management of tropical coastal ecosystems. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 4:93-112.

Using high-resolution satellite imagery in a well mapped country. D Holland, P Marshall, Proceeding of ISPRS-EARSel Joint Work on "High Resolution from Space. eeding of ISPRS-EARSel Joint Work on "High Resolution from SpaceHannover, GermanyHolland, D. and Marshall, P. 2003. Using high-resolution satellite imagery in a well mapped country. Proceeding of ISPRS-EARSel Joint Work on "High Resolution from Space", Hannover, Germany, October 2003.

High resolution mapping of tropical mangrove ecosystems using hyperspectral and radar remote sensing. A Held, C Ticehurst, L Lymburner, N Williams, International Journal of Remote Sensing. 2413Held, A., Ticehurst, C., Lymburner, L. and Williams, N. 2003. High resolution mapping of tropical mangrove ecosystems using hyperspectral and radar remote sensing. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 24(13):2739-2759.

Applying remote sensing technique to monitor shifting wetland vegetation: a case study of Danshui river estuary mangrove communities. T M Lee, H C Yeh, Taiwan. Ecological Engineering. 35Lee T.M. and Yeh H.C. 2009. Applying remote sensing technique to monitor shifting wetland vegetation: a case study of Danshui river estuary mangrove communities, Taiwan. Ecological Engineering, 35:487-496.

Earth Satellites and Detection of Air and Ground-based Activities. U Ekblad, Phd Dissertation. Royal Institute of Technology. 193Ekblad, U. Earth Satellites and Detection of Air and Ground-based Activities. Phd Dissertation. Royal Institute of Technology: Stockholm, Sweden. 193 pp.

Exploring the benefits active and passive spaceborne system. S Hennig, 25Hennig, S. 2013. Exploring the benefits active and passive spaceborne system. from http://eijournal.com/print/articles/exploring-the-benefits-of-active-vs-passive-spaceborne- systems. Retrieved 25 January 2016

Remote sensing of mangrove ecosystems: a review. C Kuenzer, A Bluemel, S Gebhardt, T V Quoc, S Dech, Remote Sensing. 3Kuenzer, C., Bluemel, A., Gebhardt, S., Quoc, T.V. and Dech, S. 2011. Remote sensing of mangrove ecosystems: a review. Remote Sensing, 3:878-928.

Satellite remote sensing of mangrove forests: recent, advance and future opportunities. B W Heumann, Progress in Physical Geograpgy. 351Heumann, B.W. 2011. Satellite remote sensing of mangrove forests: recent, advance and future opportunities. Progress in Physical Geograpgy, 35(1):87-108.

Ten years of technology advancement in remote sensing and research in the CRC-AGIP LAB in GGE. Y Zhang, Geomatica. 642Zhang, Y. 2010. Ten years of technology advancement in remote sensing and research in the CRC-AGIP LAB in GGE. Geomatica, 64(2):173-189.

The World's Mangroves 1980-2005. FAO Forestry Paper 153. Fao, 77Rome, ItalyFAO. 2007. The World's Mangroves 1980-2005. FAO Forestry Paper 153. FAO: Rome, Italy. 77 pp.

Status and distribution of mangrove forests of the world using earth observation satellite data. C Giri, E Ochieng, L L Tieszen, Z Zhu, A Singh, T Loveland, J Masek, N Duke, Global Ecology and Biogeography. 20Giri, C., Ochieng, E., Tieszen, L.L., Zhu, Z., Singh, A., Loveland, T., Masek, J. and Duke, N. 2011. Status and distribution of mangrove forests of the world using earth observation satellite data. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 20:154-159.

World Atlas of Mangroves. M Spalding, M Kainuma, L Collin, Earthscan319UKSpalding, M., Kainuma, M. and Collin, L. 2010. World Atlas of Mangroves. Earthscan, UK, 319 pp.

Biology of mangroves and mangroves ecosystem. K Kathiresan, B L Bingham, Advance in Marine Biology. 40Kathiresan, K. and Bingham, B.L. 2001. Biology of mangroves and mangroves ecosystem. Advance in Marine Biology, 40:81-251.

Mangrove forests: One of the world's threatened major tropical environments. I Valiela, J L Bowen, J K York, Bioscience. 51Valiela, I., Bowen, J.L. and York, J.K. 2001. Mangrove forests: One of the world's threatened major tropical environments. Bioscience, 51:807-815.

Satellite images for monitoring mangrove cover changes in a fast growing economic region in southern Peninsular Malaysia. K C Kanniah, A Sheikhi, A P Cracknell, H C Goh, K P Tan, C S Ho, N S Fateen, Remote Sensing. 7Kanniah, K.C., Sheikhi, A., Cracknell, A.P., Goh, H.C., Tan, K.P., Ho, C.S. and Fateen N.S. 2015. Satellite images for monitoring mangrove cover changes in a fast growing economic region in southern Peninsular Malaysia. Remote Sensing, 7:14360-14385.

Mangroves among the most carbon-rich forests in the tropics. D C Donato, J B Kauffman, D Murdiyarso, S Kurnianto, M Stidham, M Kanninen, Nature Geoscience. 4Donato, D.C., Kauffman, J.B., Murdiyarso, D., Kurnianto, S., Stidham, M. and Kanninen, M. 2011. Mangroves among the most carbon-rich forests in the tropics. Nature Geoscience, 4:293- 297.

L-band ALOS PALSAR for biomass estimation of Matang mangroves. O Hamdan, H K Aziz, I Hasmadi, Malaysia. Remote Sensing and Environment. 155Hamdan, O., Aziz, H.K. and Mohd Hasmadi, I. 2014. L-band ALOS PALSAR for biomass estimation of Matang mangroves, Malaysia. Remote Sensing and Environment, 155: 69-78.

Mangrove forest distributions and dynamics (1975-2005) of the tsunami-affected region of Asia. C Giri, Z Zhu, L L Tieszen, A Singh, S Gillette, J A Kelmelis, Journal of Biogeography. 35Giri, C., Zhu, Z., Tieszen, L.L., Singh, A., Gillette, S. and Kelmelis, J.A. 2008. Mangrove forest distributions and dynamics (1975-2005) of the tsunami-affected region of Asia. Journal of Biogeography, 35:519-528.

10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/0120348th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science. 37120348th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034

Managing sustainable mangrove forests in Peninsular Malaysia. J Kamaruzaman, T Dahlan, Journal of Sustainable Development. 11Kamaruzaman, J. and Dahlan, T. 2008. Managing sustainable mangrove forests in Peninsular Malaysia. Journal of Sustainable Development, 1(1):88-96.

United Nations Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre. J., Sullivan, E. & Nakamura, T.128CambridgeThe Importance of Mangroves to People: A Call to Action. Van BochoveUnited Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2014. The Importance of Mangroves to People: A Call to Action. Van Bochove, J., Sullivan, E. & Nakamura, T. (Eds). United Nations Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Cambridge. 128 pp.

Present state and future of the world's mangrove forests. D M Alongi, Environmental Conservation. 293Alongi, D.M., 2002. Present state and future of the world's mangrove forests. Environmental Conservation, 29 (3):331-349.

A world without mangroves?. N C Duke, J O Meynecke, S Dittmann, A M Ellison, K Anger, U Berger, S Cannicci, K Diele, K C Ewel, C D Field, N Koedam, S Y Lee, C Marchand, I Nordhaus, F Dahdouh-Guebas, Science. 3175834Duke, N.C., Meynecke, J.O., Dittmann, S., Ellison, A.M., Anger, K., Berger, U., Cannicci, S., Diele, K., Ewel, K.C., Field, C.D., Koedam, N., Lee, S.Y., Marchand, C., Nordhaus, I. and Dahdouh-Guebas, F. 2007. A world without mangroves? Science, 317(5834): 41-42.

Mapping height and biomass of mangrove forests in Everglades national park with srtm elevation data. M Simard, K Zhang, V H Rivera-Monroy, M S Ross, P L Ruiz, E Castaneda-Moya, R R Twilley, E Rodriguez, Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing. 723Simard, M., Zhang, K., Rivera-Monroy, V.H., Ross, M.S., Ruiz, P.L., Castaneda-Moya, E., Twilley, R.R. and Rodriguez, E. 2006. Mapping height and biomass of mangrove forests in Everglades national park with srtm elevation data. Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing, 72(3):299-311.

Threats to mangroves from climate change and adaptation options: a review. E Gilman, J Ellison, N C Duke, C Field, Aquatic Botany. 892Gilman, E., Ellison, J., Duke, N.C. and Field, C. 2008. Threats to mangroves from climate change and adaptation options: a review. Aquatic Botany, 89(2):237-250.

The loss of species: Mangrove extinction risk and geographic areas of global concern. B A Polidoro, K E Carpenter, L Collins, N C Duke, A M Ellison, J C Ellison, E J Farnsworth, E S Fernando, K Kathiresan, N E Koedam, PLoS ONE. 54Polidoro, B.A., Carpenter, K.E., Collins, L., Duke, N.C., Ellison, A.M., Ellison, J.C., Farnsworth, E.J., Fernando, E.S., Kathiresan, K. and Koedam, N.E. 2010. The loss of species: Mangrove extinction risk and geographic areas of global concern. PLoS ONE, 5(4):1-10.

A review of applications of SAR, optical, altimetry and DEM data for surface water modelling, mapping and parameter data. Z N Musa, I Popescu, A Mynett, Hydrology and Earth System Science. 19Musa, Z.N., Popescu, I. and Mynett, A. 2015. A review of applications of SAR, optical, altimetry and DEM data for surface water modelling, mapping and parameter data. Hydrology and Earth System Science, 19:3755-3769.

Major limitations of satellite images. F A Al-Wassai, N V Kalyankar, Journal of Global research in Computer Science. 45Al-Wassai, F.A. and Kalyankar, N.V. 2013. Major limitations of satellite images. Journal of Global research in Computer Science, 4(5):51-59.

Crop classification from airborne synthetic aperture radar data. G M Foody, International Journal of Remote Sensing. 94Foody, G.M., 1988. Crop classification from airborne synthetic aperture radar data. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 9(4):655-668.

C Elachi, Spaceborne Radar Remote Sensing: Applications and Techniques. New YorkIEEE Press254ppElachi, C. 1988. Spaceborne Radar Remote Sensing: Applications and Techniques.New York: IEEE Press, 254 pp.

Radar and optical data integration for landuse/land-cover Mapping. B N Hack, N D Herold, M A Bechdo, Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing. 666Hack, B.N., Herold, N.D. and Bechdo, M.A. 2000. Radar and optical data integration for land- use/land-cover Mapping. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 66(6):709-716.

Principles of Remote Sensing. C S Liew, Liew, C.S. 2001. Principles of Remote Sensing.

A post-classifier for mangrove mapping using ecological data. C Vaiphasa, A K Skidmore, W F De Boer, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing. 61Vaiphasa, C., Skidmore, A. K., & de Boer, W. F. (2006). A post-classifier for mangrove mapping using ecological data. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing, 61:1-10.

Remote Sensing Techniques for Mangrove Mapping. E P Green, C D Clark, P J Mumby, A J Edwards, A C Ellis, International Journal of Remote Sensing. 195Green, E. P., Clark, C. D., Mumby, P. J., Edwards, A. J., & Ellis, A. C. (1998). Remote Sensing Techniques for Mangrove Mapping. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 19 (5):935-956.

Mapping and monitoring mangrove in the costal districts of Gujerat state using remote sensing and geo-informatics. P Ajay, S Vijay, K Mehmood, K Jaydipsingh, M H Kalubarme, C H Pandya, J Nischal, B Lomesh, Asian Journal of Geoinformatics. 141Ajay, P., Vijay, S., Mehmood, K., Jaydipsingh, K., Kalubarme, M.H., Pandya, C.H., Nischal, J. and Lomesh B. 2014. Mapping and monitoring mangrove in the costal districts of Gujerat state using remote sensing and geo-informatics. Asian Journal of Geoinformatics, 14(1):15-26.

Characterisation and Monitoring of Mangroves Using ALOS PALSAR Data. R M Lucas, P Bunting, D Clewley, C Proisy, K Viergever, I Woodhouse, J Carreiras, A Rosenqvist, A Accad, J Armston, JAXA Earth Observation Research Center. EORCLucas, R.M., Bunting, P., Clewley, D., Proisy, C., Viergever, K., Woodhouse, I., Carreiras, J., Rosenqvist, A., Accad, A. and Armston, J. 2009. Characterisation and Monitoring of Mangroves Using ALOS PALSAR Data. JAXA Earth Observation Research Center (EORC).

H Riebeek, How to Interpret a Satellite Image: Five Tips and Strategies: Feature Articles. Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. Riebeek, H. 2013. How to Interpret a Satellite Image: Five Tips and Strategies: Feature Articles. Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/ColorImage/. Retrieved 31 December 2015.

Object-based classification vs. pixel-based classification: comparitive importance of multi-resolution imagery. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry. R C Weih, N D Riggan, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Weih, R.C. and Riggan, N.D. 2010. Object-based classification vs. pixel-based classification: comparitive importance of multi-resolution imagery. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII-4/C7. Ghent, Belgium.

. H Eisenbeiss, 237UAV Photogrammetry. Phd Dissertation. University of Technology Dresden: GermanyEisenbeiss, H. 2009. UAV Photogrammetry. Phd Dissertation. University of Technology Dresden: Germany. 237 pp.

10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/0120348th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science. 37120348th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034

Imaging from an unmanned aerial vehicle: agricultural surveillance and decision support. S R Herwitz, L F Johnson, S E Dunagan, R G Higgins, D V Sullivan, J Zheng, B M Lobitz, J G Leung, B A Gallmeyer, M Aoyagi, R E Slye, J A Brass, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture. 44Herwitz, S.R., Johnson, L.F., Dunagan, S.E., Higgins, R.G., Sullivan, D.V., Zheng, J., Lobitz, B.M., Leung, J.G., Gallmeyer, B.A., Aoyagi, M., Slye, R.E. and Brass, J.A. 2004. Imaging from an unmanned aerial vehicle: agricultural surveillance and decision support. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 44:49-61.

Platform options of free-flying satellites, UAVs or the international space station for remote sensing assessment of the littoral zone. D L Peterson, J A Brass, W H Smith, G Langford, S Wegener, S Dunagan, P Hammer, K Snook, International Journal of Remote Sensing. 2412Peterson, D.L., Brass, J.A., Smith, W.H., Langford, G., Wegener, S., Dunagan, S., Hammer, P. and Snook, K. 2003. Platform options of free-flying satellites, UAVs or the international space station for remote sensing assessment of the littoral zone. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 24(12): 2785-2804.

Application of multi-scale remote sensing imagery to detection and hazard analysis. C C Liu, Y Y Chen, C W Chen, Natural Hazard. 65Liu, C.C., Chen, Y.Y. and Chen, C.W. 2013. Application of multi-scale remote sensing imagery to detection and hazard analysis. Natural Hazard, 65:2241-2251.

Comparison of different sensors and analysis techniques for tropical mangrove forest mapping. J Aschbacher, P Tiangco, C P Giri, R S Ofren, D R Paudyal, Y K Ang, Proc. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, IGARSS 95, Quantitative Remote Sensing for Science and Applications. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, IGARSS 95, Quantitative Remote Sensing for Science and ApplicationsFirenzeAschbacher, J., Tiangco, P., Giri, C.P., Ofren, R.S., Paudyal, D.R. and Ang,Y.K., 1995. Comparison of different sensors and analysis techniques for tropical mangrove forest mapping. In: editors (Eds.), Proc. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, IGARSS 95, Quantitative Remote Sensing for Science and Applications, Firenze, 10-14 July 1995, 2109-2111 pp.

10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/0120348th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science. 37120348th IGRSM International Conference and Exhibition on Remote Sensing & GIS (IGRSM 2016) IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 37 (2016) 012034 doi:10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012034