# The Prevalence of Self-Reported Diabetes in the Australian National Eye Health Survey

CorpusID: 14200944
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/227c01d50a58fb780c7dc5c0d2fd942f9e16a5c2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/227c01d50a58fb780c7dc5c0d2fd942f9e16a5c2)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Prevalence of Self-Reported Diabetes in the Australian National Eye Health Survey


Stuart Keel 
Centre for Eye Research Australia
Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital
MelbourneAustralia

Joshua Foreman *foreman.j@unimelb.edu.au 
Centre for Eye Research Australia
Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital
MelbourneAustralia

Department of Surgery
Ophthalmology
University of Melbourne
MelbourneAustralia

Jing Xie 
Centre for Eye Research Australia
Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital
MelbourneAustralia

Peter Van Wijngaarden 
Centre for Eye Research Australia
Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital
MelbourneAustralia

Department of Surgery
Ophthalmology
University of Melbourne
MelbourneAustralia

Hugh R Taylor 
School of Population and Global Health
Indigenous Eye Health Unit
Melbourne

The University of Melbourne
MelbourneAustralia

Mohamed Dirani 
Centre for Eye Research Australia
Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital
MelbourneAustralia

The Prevalence of Self-Reported Diabetes in the Australian National Eye Health Survey
10.1371/journal.pone.0169211RESEARCH ARTICLE
ObjectiveTo present the prevalence of self-reported diabetes in Indigenous and non-Indigenous participants in the National Eye Health Survey.Research Design and Methods3098 non-Indigenous Australians aged 50-98 years and 1738 Indigenous Australians aged 40-92 years were examined in 30 randomly selected sites, stratified by remoteness. A history of diabetes was obtained using an interviewer-administered questionnaire.

Introduction from all levels of geographic remoteness, including major city, inner regional, outer regional, remote and very remote areas.

The primary recruitment methodology involved door-to-door household recruitment, however the recruitment of Indigenous Australians included some modifications to be culturally sensitive and to account for the diversity of local conditions. Alternative methods of recruitment included; telephone recruitment from community lists, word of mouth, media and public relations and recruitment from concurrent Aboriginal Health Service clinics. Collaboration with community elders and local health workers at each site facilitated community acceptance of the survey and assisted recruitment. A total of 11,883 residents were contacted across the 30 NEHS sites, of whom 6,760 (56.9%) were eligible to participate in the survey. Of those deemed to be eligible, a total of 5,764 agreed to participate, resulting in a positive response rate of 85.3% (5,764/6,760). Of these, 4,836 residents attended NEHS testing venues and underwent examinations, resulting in an overall clinical examination rate of 71.5% (4,836/ 6,760). The protocol for this study was approved by the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital 


## Interviewer-administered questionnaire

Surveys took place in venues within 6 km of each targeted survey site. Each participant underwent an interviewer-administered questionnaire (S1 File). This questionnaire, developed by the research team, ascertained key socio-demographic data including date of birth, gender, level of education, country of birth, main language spoken at home and Indigenous/non-Indigenous status. Participants who identified as Indigenous were further classified as 1) Aboriginal, 2) Torres Strait Islander or 3) Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander. Using questionnaire data, ethnicity was later categorised according to the Australian Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic Groups (ASCCEG) 2011 for non-Indigenous participants [26]. The component of the questionnaire pertaining to diabetes history asked participants whether they had ever been told by a doctor or nurse that they have diabetes (self-reported diabetes). Interviewers then ascertained the age of diagnosis in those with self-reported diabetes to determine the duration of disease.


## Statistical analysis

Participant demographic characteristics were summarised as the mean and standard deviation (SD) for normally distributed continuous data, or the median and inter-quartile range for skewed distributed data, and counts and percentages for categorical data. Key covariates included age (years), gender, education years, ethnicity, main language spoken at home (English/other), and remoteness. Due to small participant numbers in some of the ethnic group sub-categories, non-Indigenous participants were grouped into Oceanian (Australian Peoples, New Zealand Peoples, Melanesian and Papuan, Micronesian, Polynesian), European and other for analyses. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was used to examine the association between self-reported diabetes and all covariates that were significant in univariate analysis. For the final fitted logistic regression model, we examined model residuals and delta beta values to determine if potential outlying observations influenced analysis results, and we also assessed the degree to which statistical assumptions were violated. Associations were considered statistically significant if p<0.05. All statistical analyses were undertaken using Stata version 14.1 (StataCorp, College Station, TX). Differences between those who self-reported diabetes versus those who did not  [3.72], p = 0.004) than those who did not self-report diabetes ( Table 1). The proportion of participants who were male differed significantly between those who had diabetes and those who did not, with 56.15% of diabetics being male, compared with 44.81% of non-diabetics being male (p<0.001). A smaller proportion of non-Indigenous participants with self-reported diabetes were found to speak English at home compared with their non-diabetic counterparts (88.86% vs. 95.24%, p = <0.001). The prevalence of self-reported diabetes increased with age until it plateaued after the age of 70 years (age 50-59 years, 8.85%; 60-69 years, 14.82%; 70-79 years, 16.14%; >80 years, 17.74%; p = <0.0001).  [3.28], p<0.001) and had a lower proportion of English speakers (self-report diabetes = 93.95% vs. no diabetes = 97.44%, p<0.001) compared to those who did not self-report diabetes. The proportion of Indigenous Australians with diabetes who were male (37.52%) was significantly lower than the proportion who were male in the nondiabetic group (43.15%, p = 0.020). Similarly to non-Indigenous Australians, the prevalence of self-reported diabetes increases markedly with age, plateauing after the age of 70 years (age 40-49 years, 21.78%; 50-59 years, 37.50%; 60-69 years, 53.87%; >70 years, 53.42%; p = <0.0001).


## Results


## Prevalence of self-reported diabetes


## Associations between risk factors and self-reported diabetes

Total population. The univariate and adjusted logistic regression analysis revealed significant associations between self-reported diabetes and several socio-demographic variables in the total population (Table 2). After controlling for covariates, Indigenous status was the greatest risk factor for self-reported diabetes, with an odds ratio of 5.91 (95% CI: 4.86, 7.19). After adjustments, the prevalence of self-reported diabetes increased significantly with age (OR = 1.04 per year, 95% CI: 1.03, 1.05) and English speakers at home (OR = 0.46,95% CI: 0.33, 0.65) were at a lower risk of self-reported diabetes. Due to differences in the age inclusion criteria and sampling methodologies employed between Indigenous and non-Indigenous participants, further logistic regression analysis was stratified by Indigenous status.

Stratified by Indigenous status. In the non-Indigenous population, adjusted analysis revealed that male gender (OR = 1.61, 95% CI: 1.30, 1.98), older age (OR = 1.02 per year, 95% CI: 1.01, 1.03) and lower number of years of education (OR = 0.97 per year, 95% CI: 0.64, 0.99) were risk factors for self-reported diabetes, while English speakers at home (OR = 0.49, 95% CI: 0.32, 0.75) were at lower risk for self-reported diabetes.

For Indigenous Australians, multivariate analysis revealed that older age (OR = 1.05, 95% CI: 1.04, 1.07), female gender (OR = 0.75, 95% CI: 0.60, 0.92) and residing in very remote geographical areas (1.61, 95% CI: 1.03, 2.52) were significant risk factors for self-reported diabetes, while those who spoke English at home (OR = 0.45, p = 0.003) were at lower risk of selfreported diabetes.


## Discussion and Conclusion

This paper presents the prevalence of self-reported diabetes in Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australian participants in a cross-sectional study from 30 randomly selected sites across the nation. The age-adjusted prevalence of self-reported diabetes was almost 4 times higher in Indigenous participants (43.77%) than in their non-Indigenous counterparts (11.49%). There was a clear association between increasing age and increased diabetes prevalence (OR = 1.02 per year of age, and 1.05 per year of age, for non-Indigenous and Indigenous participants, respectively, p< 0.001).

In 2008, it was estimated that the prevalence of diabetes would rise to 11.5% for those aged 45-64 years and 19.8% for those aged 65-85 years by the year 2016 [14,27]. Our findings are closely aligned with these projections. The increasing prevalence of diabetes in Australia has been indicated by the National Health Survey (8.9-10.9%, 55-64 years) [11] and by the Aus-Diab study (9.4%, 40-74 years) [13]. It must be noted that estimates from the AusDiab were obtained using plasma glucose measurements and the diagnosis of diabetes for approximately half of participants was made during the course of the study. Therefore, the use of self-reported diabetes in the present study will have underestimated the true prevalence of disease. The prevalence of self-reported diabetes identified in the present study is consistent with estimates made by statistical modeling [16,5]. Likely risk factors associated with the increase in diabetes prevalence include an ageing population, rising obesity rates and population growth [6]. Of note, our finding that non-English speaking participants were at higher risk of diabetes is consistent with previous Australian reports [28]. Genetics, immigration stressors, socio-economic and cultural factors have been implicated in the higher level of diabetes risk in this Australian sub-group [29]. Our data highlights that more work is required to address the modifiable barriers to the effective and equitable delivery of health services, including; language barriers, literacy rates, effects of stigmatisation and lack of access to culturally specific care [30]. Our findings are consistent with previous epidemiological evidence reporting a significantly higher prevalence of diabetes in Indigenous Australians compared to non-Indigenous Australians, and with an earlier age of onset of the disease [8][9][10]. We found that the prevalence of self-reported diabetes (43.77%) was higher than that identified in the NIEHS in 2008 (37.3%) [10]. Given the similarities in the study methods and examination rates for Indigenous participants (NEHS = 77.6% vs. NIEHS = 78.7%), robust comparisons can be made between the findings of these studies. Accordingly it appears that the prevalence of diabetes in Indigenous Australians is on an upward trajectory. These findings are supported by those of the Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey, that reported an increase in the prevalence of diabetes in similarly aged participants (>55 years) from 32% in 2005 to 39% in 2013 [22,23]. Previous evidence has implicated a greater genetic predisposition [31] and a rising prevalence of key diabetes risk factors, such as obesity [8,23,32], poor nutrition [23,33] and low physical activity levels [23], in the higher prevalence of diabetes in Indigenous Australians. The recent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey (2012-13) highlighted this disparity, reporting that Indigenous Australians displayed 1.5 times higher rates of obesity, were approximately half as likely to meet national physical activity targets and exhibited significantly poorer adherence to recommended fruit and vegetable intake guidelines when compared to non-Indigenous Australians [23]. Efforts to address these issues through the implementation of primary prevention strategies are ongoing [34].

The higher prevalence of diabetes observed in Indigenous Australians living in very remote regions concurs with findings reported by Hoy and co-workers (2007) who found that the prevalence of diabetes in Indigenous persons from three remote communities were 5.4-10fold higher than that of the general population [9]. These findings may be related to multiple barriers that Indigenous Australians face in accessing specialist services in very remote areas, including communication, distance, and cultural factors [28]. This is the first study of its kind to provide population-based national data on the prevalence of self-reported diabetes in both non-Indigenous and Indigenous Australian adults. Key strengths of this study include the high positive response and examination rates and a representative nationwide population sample. The primary limitation of this study was the use of self-report for the ascertainment of diabetes. While we cannot deny the potential influences of self-reporting bias, self-report is a commonly utilised tool for diabetes surveillance [10,12,30,31]. In addition, several studies have reported high sensitivity and specificity for diabetes selfreporting as an indicator of medically diagnosed diabetes [32][33][34]. The absence of glycemic testing in the study protocol is likely to have resulted in an underestimation of the true prevalence of diabetes, as it is estimated that up to 50% of cases are undiagnosed [13].

The prevalence of self-reported diabetes in Australia is high and is increasing. Notably, the age-adjusted prevalence of diabetes in Indigenous Australians in this study was almost 4 times higher than in non-Indigenous Australians. These findings portend major public health and economic challenges for Australia.

Supporting Information S1 File. General questionnaire. (DOCX) Acknowledgments S.K. conducted the literature review and contributed to all aspects of the manuscript. J.F. conducted data collection, and contributed to the introduction and discussion. J.X. conducted statistical analysis and contributed to the methods section. P.v.W. provided expert clinical advice, assisted in the study design, and made contributions to technical aspects of the manuscript. H. R.T. provided expert clinical advice, assisted in the study design, and made contributions to technical aspects of the manuscript. M.D. was the Principal Investigator of the study, and contributed to all aspects of the manuscript, from conception to final proof-reading. The guarantor of this manuscript, Dr. Mohamed Dirani, takes full responsibility for this work, including the study design, access to data, and the decision to submit and publish the manuscript. No authors of this manuscript had any conflicts of interest.

The Centre for Eye Research Australia (CERA) and Vision 2020 Australia wish to recognise the contributions of all the NEHS project steering committee members (Professor Hugh Taylor, Dr Peter van Wijngaarden, Jennifer Gersbeck, Dr Jason Agostino, Anna Morse, Sharon Bentley, Robyn Weinberg, Christine Black, Genevieve Quilty, Louis Young and Rhonda Stilling) and the core CERA research team who assisted with the survey field work (Joshua Foreman, Pei Ying Lee, Rosamond Gilden, Larissa Andersen, Benny Phanthakesone, Celestina Pham, Alison Schokman, Megan Jackson, Hiba Wehbe, John Komser and Cayley Bush). Furthermore, we would like to acknowledge the overwhelming support from all collaborating Indigenous organisations who assisted with the implementation of the survey, and the Indigenous health workers and volunteers in each survey site who contributed to the field work.


## Author Contributions

Conceptualization: MD HRT SK JF PvW.  


Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC-14/1199H) and additional ethical approvals were obtained at the State level from the Aboriginal Health and Medical Research Council of NSW (HREC-1079/15), the Menzies School of Health Research (HREC-2015-2360), the Aboriginal Health Council of Western Australia (HREC-622) and the Aboriginal Health Council of South Australia (HREC-04-15-604) to conduct research within Indigenous communities. Participation was incentivised with a free pair of sunglasses. All participants provided written informed consent.


Data curation: JX SK JF. Formal analysis: JX SK.

## Funding acquisition :
acquisitionMD. Investigation: JF SK MD. Methodology: MD HRT SK PvW JF JX. Project administration: MD SK JF.


77%) than in non-Indigenous participants (p<0.0001). When matched for age, Indigenous Australians were significantly younger at diabetes diagnosis when compared to non-Indigenous Australians (Indigenous mean [SD] age of diabetes onset = 47.41 [12.21] years vs. non-Indigenous = 56.10 [13.81] years, p = <0.001).A total of 4,836 individuals were recruited and examined in the NEHS, including 3,098 
(64.06%) non-Indigenous Australians and 1,738 (35.94%) Indigenous Australians, respec-
tively. Of these, 431 (13.91%, 95% CI: 12.71%-15.18%) non-Indigenous Australians (with 
mean [SD] duration of diabetes = 12.50 [10.0] years) had self-reported diabetes (age-adjusted 
prevalence = 11.49%). In contrast, Indigenous Australians (with mean [SD] duration of dia-
betes = 13.18 [10.86] years) had a crude prevalence of self-reported diabetes nearly three 
times higher (37.11%) than that of their non-Indigenous counterparts (p<0.001). The age-
adjusted prevalence of self-reported diabetes was four times higher in Indigenous partici-
pants (43.


Non-Indigenous participants. Non-Indigenous participants who self-reported diabetes were significantly older (mean [SD] = 68.62 [8.90] years vs. 66.24 [9.77] years, p = <0.001) and had fewer years of educational attainment (mean [SD] = 12.06 [3.78] years vs. 12.61

## Table 1 .
1Comparison of key demographics between participants with self-reported diabetes and those without, stratified by Indigenous status.Statistical significance was set as a p value of <0.05 (two-tailed).doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0169211.t001Self-Reported Diabetes in Australia PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0169211 January 3, 2017 Indigenous participants. As was found in non-Indigenous participants, Indigenous participants who self-reported diabetes were significantly older (mean [SD] = 58.31 [9.58] years vs. 53.09 [9.58] years, p<0.001), had fewer years of educational attainment (mean [SD] = 10.51 [3.31] years vs. 11.26Non-Indigenous 
Indigenous 

No diabetes 
(n = 2667) 

Diabetes 
(n = 431) 

p 
No diabetes 
(n = 1093) 

Diabetes 
(n = 645) 

p 

Age (year) 
66.24 (9.77) 
68.62 (8.90) 
<0.001 
53.07 (9.58) 
58.31 (9.75) 
<0.001 

Education (year) 
12.61 (3.72) 
12.06 (3.78) 
0.004 
11.26 (3.28) 
10.51 (3.31) 
<0.001 

Gender (male) 
1195 (44.81) 
242 (56.15) 
<0.001 
472 (43.18) 
242 (37.52) 
0.020 

English spoken at home 
2540 (95.24) 
383 (88.86) 
<0.001 
1093 (97.44) 
606 (93.95) 
<0.001 

Ethnicity 

Oceanian 
1929 (72.33) 
287 (66.59) 
0.004 

European 
558 (20.92) 
97 (22.51) 

Others 
180 (6.75) 
47 (10.90) 



## Table 2 .
2Univariate and multivariable logistic regression analysis of associations between self-reported diabetes and sociodemographic factors.All study participants (n = 4,836) 
Non-Indigenous (n = 3,098) 
Indigenous (n = 1,738) 

Associated 
factors 

Univariate 
Multivariate 2 
Univariate 
Multivariate 4 
Univariate 
Multivariate 6 

Unadjusted 
OR (95% CI) 

p* Adjusted 
OR 
(95% CI) 

p Unadjusted 
OR (95% CI) 

p Adjusted 
OR 
(95% CI) 

p Unadjusted 
OR (95% CI) 

p Adjusted 
OR 
(95% CI) 

p 

Indigenous 
3.65 (3.17, 
4.20) 

<0.001 5.91 (4.86, 
7.19) 

<0.001 

Age (year) 
1.00 (0.99, 
1.01) 

0.928 1.04 (1.03, 
1.05) 

<0.001 
1.03 (1.02, 
1.03) 

<0.001 1.02 (1.01, 
1.03) 

<0.001 
1.06 (1.04, 
1.07) 

<0.001 1.05 (1.04, 
1.07) 

<0.001 

Gender 
(male) 

1.03 (0.90, 
1.18) 

0.707 1.10 (0.95, 
1.27) 

0.215 
1.58 (1.28, 
1.94) 

<0.001 1.61 (1.30, 
1.98) 

<0.001 
0.79 (0.65, 
0.96) 

0.021 0.75 (0.60, 
0.92) 

0.007 

Education 
(year) 

0.92 (0.90, 
0.94) 1 

<0.001 0.97 (0.95, 
1.00) 

0.017 
0.96 (0.93, 
0.99) 3 

0.007 0.97 (0.64, 
0.99) 

0.021 
0.93 (0.90, 
0.96) 5 

<0.001 0.98 (0.94, 
1.01) 

0.134 

English at 
home 

0.49 (0.37, 
0.64) 

<0.001 0.46 (0.33, 
0.65) 

<0.001 
0.40 (0.28, 
0.57) 

<0.001 0.49 (0.32, 
0.75) 

0.001 
0.41 (0.90, 
0.96) 

<0.001 0.45 (0.26, 
0.76) 

0.003 

Ethnicity 

Oceanian 
1 
1 
1 
1 

European 
0.58 (0.46, 
0.72) 

<0.001 0.97 (0.75, 
1.27) 

0.849 
1.17 (0.91, 
1.50) 

0.220 1.01 (0.77, 
1.31) 

0.968 

Others 
0.84 (0.61, 
1.18) 

0.327 1.42 (0.96, 
2.12) 

0.077 
1.75 (1.24, 
2.48) 

0.001 1.45 (0.95, 
2.20) 

0.083 

Remoteness 

Major City 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

Inner 
Regional 

0.88 (0.72, 
1.06) 

0.171 0.93 (0.76, 
1.15) 

0.507 
1.03 (0.79, 
1.36) 

0.807 1.10 (0.83, 
1.45) 

0.521 
0.81 (0.61, 
1.07) 

0.150 0.80 (0.59, 
1.09) 

0.155 

Outer 
Regional 

1.19 (1.00, 
1.42) 

0.054 1.12 (0.93, 
1.36) 

0.230 
1.06 (0.80, 
1.39) 

0.695 1.05 (0.80, 
1.40) 

0.716 
1.28 (1.00, 
1.64) 

0.053 1.26 (0.97, 
1.63) 

0.083 

Remote 
0.80 (0.63, 
1.01) 

0.062 0.80 (0.62, 
1.03) 

0.080 
0.72 (0.50, 
1.04) 

0.078 0.76 (0.52, 
1.11) 

0.154 
0.95 (0.68, 
1.34) 

0.778 0.86 (0.59, 
1.24) 

0.411 

Very Remote 
1.12 (0.84, 
1.48) 

0.438 1.19 (0.89, 
1.60) 

0.235 
0.89 (0.58, 
1.37) 

0.610 
0.986 
(0.62, 
1.49) 

0.867 
1.78 (1.16, 
2.73) 

0.008 1.61 (1.03, 
2.52) 

0.038 

OR = Odds Ratio 

CI = Confidence Interval 
* Statistical significance was set as a p value of 0.05 (two tailed). 
1 44 participants did not report how many educational years. 

PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0169211 January 3, 2017

The economic costs of type 2 diabetes: a global systematic review. T Seuring, O Archangelidi, M Suhrcke, 10.1007/s40273-015-0268-9Pharmacoeconomics. 3325787932Seuring T, Archangelidi O, Suhrcke M. The economic costs of type 2 diabetes: a global systematic review. Pharmacoeconomics. 2015; 33:811-31. doi: 10.1007/s40273-015-0268-9 PMID: 25787932

pdf: World Health Organisation. WHO. Global report on diabetes. WHO. Global report on diabetes. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/204871/1/9789241565257_ eng.pdf: World Health Organisation; 2016. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

Worldwide trends in diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis of 751 populationbased studies with 4Á4 million participants. Nrf Collaboration, The Lancet. 387Collaboration NRF. Worldwide trends in diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis of 751 population- based studies with 4Á4 million participants. The Lancet. 2016; 387:1513-30.

International Diabetes Federation. IDF. IDF diabetes atlas. 7th edtIDF. IDF diabetes atlas, 7th edt. http://www.diabetesatlas.org: International Diabetes Federation; 2015. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

IDF Diabetes Atlas: Global estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 2011 and 2030. Diabetes research and clinical practice. D Whitling, L Guariguata, C Weil, J Shaw, 10.1016/j.diabres.2011.10.0292207968394Whitling D, Guariguata L, Weil C, Shaw J. IDF Diabetes Atlas: Global estimates of the prevalence of dia- betes for 2011 and 2030. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 2011; 94:311-21. doi: 10.1016/j. diabres.2011.10.029 PMID: 22079683

Projecting the burden of diabetes in Australia-what is the size of the matter?. D J Magliano, A Peeters, T Vos, R Sicree, J Shaw, C Sindall, 10.1111/j.1753-6405.2009.00450.x20078571Aust N Z J Public Health. 336Magliano DJ, Peeters A, Vos T, Sicree R, Shaw J, Sindall C, et al. Projecting the burden of diabetes in Australia-what is the size of the matter? Aust N Z J Public Health. 2009; 33(6):540-3. doi: 10.1111/j. 1753-6405.2009.00450.x PMID: 20078571

Diabetes: The Silent Pandemic and its Impact on Australia. Baker IDI Heart & Diabetes InstituteDiabetes: The Silent Pandemic and its Impact on Australia. https://static.diabetesaustralia.com.au/s/ fileassets/diabetes-australia/e7282521-472b-4313-b18e-be84c3d5d907.pdf: Baker IDI Heart & Diabe- tes Institute, 2012. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

Diabetes incidence in an Australian aboriginal population. An 8-year follow-up study. M Daniel, K Rowley, R Mcdermott, A Mylvaganam, K O&apos;dea, Diabetes Care. 22Daniel M, Rowley K, McDermott R, Mylvaganam A, O'Dea K. Diabetes incidence in an Australian aboriginal population. An 8-year follow-up study. Diabetes Care. 2002; 22:1993-8.

Quantifying the excess risk for proteinuria, hypertension and diabetes in Australian Aborigines: comparison of profiles in three remote communities in the Northern Territory with those in the AusDiab study. W Hoy, S Kondalsamy-Chennakesavan, Z Wang, Aust NZ J Public Health. 31Hoy W, Kondalsamy-Chennakesavan S, Wang Z. Quantifying the excess risk for proteinuria, hyperten- sion and diabetes in Australian Aborigines: comparison of profiles in three remote communities in the Northern Territory with those in the AusDiab study. Aust NZ J Public Health. 2007; 31:177-83.

Prevalence of self-reported diabetes and diabetic retinopathy in Indigenous Australians: the National Indigenous Eye Health Survey. J Xie, A Arnold, J Keeffe, N Goujon, R Dunn, S Fox, 10.1111/j.1442-9071.2011.02502.xClinical and Experimental Ophthalmology. 39Xie J, Arnold A, Keeffe J, Goujon N, Dunn R, Fox S, et al. Prevalence of self-reported diabetes and dia- betic retinopathy in Indigenous Australians: the National Indigenous Eye Health Survey. Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology. 2011; 39:487-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-9071.2011.02502.x PMID: 21819502

001~2014-15~Main%20Features~Diabetes%20mellitus~12: Australian Bureau of Statistics. ABS. National Health Survey: first resultsABS. National Health Survey: first results, 2014-15 http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/ by%20Subject/4364.0.55.001~2014-15~Main%20Features~Diabetes%20mellitus~12: Australian Bureau of Statistics; 2015. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

1989-90 National Health Survey: prevalence of self-reported diabetes in Australia. T Welborn, M Knuiman, H Bartholomew, D Whittall, MJA. 163Welborn T, Knuiman M, Bartholomew H, Whittall D. 1989-90 National Health Survey: prevalence of self-reported diabetes in Australia. MJA. 1995; 163(129-133).

The rising prevalence of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance. D Dunstan, P Zimmet, T Welborn, M Courten, A Cameron, R Sicree, 11978676Diabetes Care. 25Dunstan D, Zimmet P, Welborn T, Courten M, Cameron A, Sicree R, et al. The rising prevalence of dia- betes and impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes Care. 2002; 25:829-34. PMID: 11978676

Lifetime risk and projected population prevalence of diabetes. D J Magliano, J E Shaw, S M Shortreed, W J Nusselder, D Liew, E L Barr, 10.1007/s00125-008-1150-5Diabetologia. 5112Magliano DJ, Shaw JE, Shortreed SM, Nusselder WJ, Liew D, Barr EL, et al. Lifetime risk and projected population prevalence of diabetes. Diabetologia. 2008; 51(12):2179-86. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008- 1150-5 PMID: 18810385

The Australian diabetes, obesity and lifestyle study. Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute. S Tanamas, D Magliano, B Lynch, P Sethi, L Willenberg, K Polkinghorne, Tanamas S, Magliano D, Lynch B, Sethi P, Willenberg L, Polkinghorne K, et al. The Australian diabetes, obesity and lifestyle study. Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute. 2013:59-65.

Projecting the burden of diabetes in Australia-what is the size of the matter?. D Magliano, A Peeters, T Vos, R Sicree, J Shaw, C Sindall, ANZJPH. 33Magliano D, Peeters A, Vos T, Sicree R, Shaw J, Sindall C, et al. Projecting the burden of diabetes in Australia-what is the size of the matter? ANZJPH. 2009; 33:540-3.

The Australian Diabetes, Obesity and Lifestyle Study. S Tanamas, D J Magliano, B Lynch, P Sethi, L Willenberg, K R Polkinghorne, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Insitute. MelbourneTanamas S, Magliano DJ, Lynch B, Sethi P, Willenberg L, Polkinghorne KR, et al. AusDiab 2012. The Australian Diabetes, Obesity and Lifestyle Study. Melbourne: Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Insitute, 2012.

Diabetes and impairedglucose tolerance in Aboriginal Australians: prevalence and risk. Diabetes research and clinical practice. M Daniel, K Rowley, M Mcdermott, K O&apos;dea, 1200772757Daniel M, Rowley K, McDermott M, O'Dea K. Diabetes and impairedglucose tolerance in Aboriginal Australians: prevalence and risk. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 2002; 57:23-33. PMID: 12007727

Obesity, diabetes and associated risk factors among Torres Strait Islander people. D Leonard, R Mcdermott, K Odea, Aust NZ J Public Health. 26Leonard D, McDermott R, Odea K. Obesity, diabetes and associated risk factors among Torres Strait Islander people. Aust NZ J Public Health. 2002; 26:144-9.

Self-reported diabetes and health behaviours in remote Indigenous communities in Norther Queensland. B Mcculloch, R Mcdermott, G Miller, D Leonard, M Elwell, R Muller, Australia. Diabetes Care. McCulloch B, McDermott R, Miller G, Leonard D, Elwell M, Muller R. Self-reported diabetes and health behaviours in remote Indigenous communities in Norther Queensland, Australia. Diabetes Care. 2003; 26397-403.

Increase in prevalence of obesity and diabetes and decrease in plasma cholesterol in a central Australian aboriginal community. R Mcdermott, K Rowley, A Lee, S Knight, K O&apos;dea, 10901770MJA. 172McDermott R, Rowley K, Lee A, Knight S, O'Dea K. Increase in prevalence of obesity and diabetes and decrease in plasma cholesterol in a central Australian aboriginal community. MJA. 2000; 172:480-4. PMID: 10901770

. Australian Bureau of Statistics. ABS. National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health surveyABS. National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health survey. http://www.ausstats.abs.gov.au/ Ausstats/subscriber.nsf/0/B1BCF4E6DD320A0BCA25714C001822BC/$File/47150_2004-05.pdf: Aus- tralian Bureau of Statistics; 2006. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

Ausrtralian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey. Lookup/CD58150AC0A36286CA257C2F0014591C?opendocument: Australian Bureau of Statistics. cited 2016 15th of AugustABS. Ausrtralian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey: 2012-13 http://www.abs.gov.au/ ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/CD58150AC0A36286CA257C2F0014591C?opendocument: Australian Bureau of Statistics; 2014 [cited 2016 15th of August].

Prevalence of self-reported diabetes and diabetic retinopathy in indigenous Australians: the National Indigenous Eye Health Survey. J Xie, A L Arnold, J Keeffe, N Goujon, R A Dunn, S Fox, 10.1111/j.1442-9071.2011.02502.xClin Experiment Ophthalmol. 396Xie J, Arnold AL, Keeffe J, Goujon N, Dunn RA, Fox S, et al. Prevalence of self-reported diabetes and diabetic retinopathy in indigenous Australians: the National Indigenous Eye Health Survey. Clin Experi- ment Ophthalmol. 2011; 39(6):487-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-9071.2011.02502.x PMID: 21819502

Australian Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic Groups. AUSSTATS: Australian Bureau of Statistics. ABS. Australian Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic Groups http://www.abs.gov.au/ AUSSTATS: Australian Bureau of Statistics; 2011.

Information statement: screening for diabetic retinopathy. Aaoo, American Academy of Ophthalmology. Ophthalmology AAoAAOO. Information statement: screening for diabetic retinopathy. In: Ophthalmology AAo, editor. http:// one.aao.org/clinical-statement/screening-diabetic-retinopathy: American Academy of Ophthalmology; 2014. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

Diabetes in Indigenous Australians: possible ways forward. K O&apos;dea, K Rowley, D Brown, 17516893MJA. 186O'Dea K, Rowley K, Brown D. Diabetes in Indigenous Australians: possible ways forward. MJA. 2007; 186:494-5. PMID: 17516893

The roadmap to close the gap for vision. H Taylor, A Boudville, M Anjou, Mcniel , Australian Government Report. 2013Taylor H, Boudville A, Anjou M, McNiel. The roadmap to close the gap for vision. Australian Government Report. 2013:1-24.

A national diabetes strategy and action plan. D Australia, Diabetes Australia. Australia D. A national diabetes strategy and action plan. https://static.diabetesaustralia.com.au/s/ fileassets/diabetes-australia/e549bdb8-0f80-46f8-b827-35cb4f1b6cd2.pdf: Diabetes Australia; 2013. (accessed on the 30th of July 2016)

Prevalence, and associated risk factors, of self-reported diabetes mellitus in a sample of adult urban population in Greece: MEDI-CAL Exit Poll Research in Salamis (MEDICAL EXPRESS. A Gikas, A Sotiropoulos, D Panagiotakos, T Peppas, E Skliros, S Pappas, BMC Public Health. 4Gikas A, Sotiropoulos A, Panagiotakos D, Peppas T, Skliros E, Pappas S. Prevalence, and associated risk factors, of self-reported diabetes mellitus in a sample of adult urban population in Greece: MEDI- CAL Exit Poll Research in Salamis (MEDICAL EXPRESS 2002). BMC Public Health. 2004; 4:1-9.

Prevalence of obesity. diabetes, and obesity-related health risk factors. A Mokdad, E Ford, B Bowman, W Dietz, F Vinicor, V Bales, 12503980JAMA. 289Mokdad A, Ford E, Bowman B, Dietz W, Vinicor F, Bales V, et al. Prevalence of obesity. diabetes, and obesity-related health risk factors. JAMA. 2003; 289:76-9. PMID: 12503980

Evaluating the quality of self-reports of hypertension and diabetes. N Goldman, I Lin, M Weinstein, Y Lin, 12654409Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 56Goldman N, Lin I, Weinstein M, Lin Y. Evaluating the quality of self-reports of hypertension and diabe- tes. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 2003; 56:148-54. PMID: 12654409

Accuracy of self-reported diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia in the Spanish population. DINO study findings. J Huerta, M Tormo, J Egea-Caparros, J Ortola-Devesa, C Navarro, 19232187Rev Esp Cardiol. 62Huerta J, Tormo M, Egea-Caparros J, Ortola-Devesa J, Navarro C. Accuracy of self-reported diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia in the Spanish population. DINO study findings. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2009; 62:143-52. PMID: 19232187

Agreement between self-report questionnaires and medical record data was substantial for diabetes, hypertensions, myocardial infarction and stroke but not for heart failure. Y Okura, L Urban, D Mahoney, S Jacobsen, R Rodeheffer, 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.04.00515528061Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 57Okura Y, Urban L, Mahoney D, Jacobsen S, Rodeheffer R. Agreement between self-report question- naires and medical record data was substantial for diabetes, hypertensions, myocardial infarction and stroke but not for heart failure. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 2004; 57:1096-103. doi: 10.1016/j. jclinepi.2004.04.005 PMID: 15528061