# Obstetric care after radical abdominal trachelectomy in a patient with stage IB1 cervical cancer: A case report and a review of medical literature

CorpusID: 144129
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/51702e3ea9ebcc9cb8295a2c2fdff62bb2d8a74d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/51702e3ea9ebcc9cb8295a2c2fdff62bb2d8a74d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Obstetric care after radical abdominal trachelectomy in a patient with stage IB1 cervical cancer: A case report and a review of medical literature


Yong Kuei Lim 
Department of Gynaecological Oncology
KK Women's and Children's Hospital
100 Bukit Timah Road229899Singapore, Singapore

Min Lek 
Duke-National University of Singapore Medical School
8 College Road169857Singapore, Singapore

Seow Heong Yeo 
Department of Maternal-Foetal Medicine
KK Women's and Children's Hospital
100 Bukit Timah Road229899Singapore, Singapore

Obstetric care after radical abdominal trachelectomy in a patient with stage IB1 cervical cancer: A case report and a review of medical literature
10.1016/j.gore.2016.07.005Case report


## Introduction

The standard recommendation for the treatment of patients with early stage cervical cancer (stage IA2 -IB1) is radical hysterectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy (Farthing, 2006;Kay et al., 2006). However, for patients who are keen in preserving fertility, radical trachelectomy has emerged to be an appropriate and effective method of managing early stage cervical cancer without compromising oncological outcomes (Knight et al., 2010;Park et al., 2014). Abdominal Radical Trachelectomy (ART) has emerged as an alternative to Vaginal Radical Trachelectomy as a fertility sparing procedure in young women diagnosed with early stage cervical cancer. The oncological and obstetrical outcome from this procedure appears to be promising. We report the obstetric care of a patient who had a successful pregnancy outcome after ART and review the current literature.


## Case Presentation

The patient was a 30 years old nulligravid lady when she was diagnosed with Stage IB1 squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix after a cone biopsy in 2011. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no extra-cervical disease spread and no lymph node enlargement. She was counseled on the options of radical hysterectomy versus a radical trachelectomy and she opted for the fertility sparing option of ART. About 2.8 cm length of the cervix was removed leaving approximately 1 cm of the endocervix behind. Frozen section of the pelvic lymph nodes and the endocervical margins were negative for malignancy. A cervical cerclage using permanent Ethibond suture was inserted at the level of the internal os during surgery. Final histology revealed no pelvic nodal metastases or any residual malignancy in the trachelectomy specimen.

She was well postoperatively and resumed normal menses 2 months later. She attempted to become pregnant a year later and conceived naturally 16 months after surgery in 2013. Unfortunately she had preterm premature rupture of membranes and miscarried at 17 weeks of gestation despite progesterone support. The cervical cerclage was removed during evacuation of uterus, allowing the fetus to be aborted vaginally.

She conceived spontaneously again 6 months later in 2014. She underwent close antenatal surveillance every 2 weeks with ultrasound cervical length measurements from 12 weeks onwards. Oral progestogens (Duphaston 10 mg twice daily) were commenced and weekly intramuscular (IM) progesterone (proluton) was administered from 12 weeks of gestation onwards as progesterone support. Her cervical length measured at 1.6-1.8 cm with no evidence of funneling and a cervical cerclage was attempted at 14 weeks of gestation. However, there were technical difficulties and an occlusion of cervix with interrupted prolene suture was performed. The patient was advised for home rest in the third trimester. At 34 weeks of gestation, prophylactic IM dexamethasone was given with a planned caesarean delivery at 37 weeks. However, at 35 + 5 weeks of gestation, she presented with leaking liquor and the sensation of decreased fetal movement. Vaginal examination confirmed that her membranes were ruptured. She was immediately admitted for emergency caesarean section via transverse lower segment uterine incision and removal of cervical cerclage under spinal anesthesia. A healthy male infant weighing 2090 g was delivered with good Apgar scores. Placenta histology showed acute chorioamnionitis and funisitis. Both mother and baby recovered well and were discharged on the 3rd postoperative day. She was well on follow-up, is disease free and planning for another pregnancy soon.


## Discussion

The optimal obstetric management of patients who have undergone radical abdominal trachelectomies remains a challenge for obstetricians. It requires a multidisciplinary team comprising gynecologic oncologists, maternal fetal specialists, obstetricians and neonatologists. These pregnancies are at high risk of 2nd trimester miscarriage, preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) and preterm birth.

Preterm labor is the most common and important complication of post-radical trachelectomy, with a rate of preterm delivery as high as 25-39% (Jolley and Wing, 2008;Plante, 2008;Cibula et al., 2008;Pareja et al., 2013) and this is likely due to the reduction in mechanical support from a shortened cervix. Preterm delivery following PPROM is also attributable to an ascending infection (Bernardini et al., 2003;Gynecologic Oncology Reports 17 (2016) Shepherd et al., 2006;Shepherd et al., 2001). The routine placement of a cervical cerclage is usually performed during the trachelectomy. However, there is a risk of cervical stenosis and cerclage erosion. In a series of 46 patients, Ma et al. suggest that routine cerclage may not be necessary either before or during pregnancy after vaginal trachelectomy but a larger study is needed to confirm this (Ma et al., 2014). Early Total Cervical Occlusion (ETCO) has been described as another measure for patients with cervical incompetence but is yet to have proven efficacy in patients with trachelectomy (Knight et al., 2010). In our patient, a cervical cerclage was placed during radical abdominal trachelectomy but was subsequently removed when she experienced a second trimester miscarriage. A cervical cerclage was attempted at 13 weeks of gestation in her second pregnancy but converted to a cervical occlusion due to technical difficulty. Regular ultrasound surveillance of the cervical length every 2 weeks is recommended from the 2nd trimester onwards (Knight et al., 2010).

Our patient underwent ultrasound measurement of cervical length every 2 weeks from 12 weeks gestation to monitor for cervical length shortening and funneling for the duration of her pregnancy. Complete bed rest has been suggested as a measure to reduce miscarriage risk or preterm labor especially in women who had bleeding, pain or signs of cervical shortening, though there is no conclusive evidence (Knight et al., 2010). Our patient stopped work and had home rest from the 3rd trimester onwards.

Ascending vaginal infection may cause chorioamnionitis and Plante's review showed that the rate of second trimester miscarriage is around twice that of the general population (8.6% to 4%), most of which were due to infection and PPROM (Plante, 2008;Plante, 2013). The absence of the protective cervical mucus plug may be an attributing factor for ascending infection (Shepherd et al., 2001). It has been recommended to give prophylactic antibiotics at vulnerable times (16 and 24 weeks) to eradicate vaginal flora or perform bimonthly screening from 16 weeks onwards and treated with antibiotics if needed (Shepherd et al., 2001;Shepherd and Milliken, 2008). Furthermore, others have reported the use of daily vaginal povidone-iodine and insertion of ulinastatin vaginal pessary to prevent infection (Ishioka et al., 2007). However, similar to Knight et al., we do not routinely administer prophylactic antibiotics unless there are interventions performed as well as evidence of infection or signs and symptoms of chorioamnionitis (Knight et al., 2010).

Numerous meta-analyses have concluded that progesterone supplementation is protective against recurrent preterm birth (Sanchez-Ramos et al., 2005;Mackenzie et al., 2006;Dodd et al., 2008;Rode et al., 2009;Piso et al., 2014). Summary of multiple randomized studies indicates that in women with a documented history of prior spontaneous preterm birth, weekly intramuscular injections of 17alpha-hydroxy-progesterone caproate prophylaxis (Meis et al., 2003;Johnson et al., 1975) and daily supplementation with progesterone vaginal suppositories (da Fonseca et al., 2003) had a significantly reduced risk of recurrent preterm birth at all gestational ages studied. In women with singleton gestations, no prior preterm birth, and short cervical length b 20 mm at b24 weeks, vaginal progesterone, either 90 mg gel or 200 mg suppository, is associated with a significant reduction in the risk of preterm birth b34 weeks, preterm birth b37 weeks and an increase in pregnancy prolongation in weeks. It also reduces perinatal morbidity and mortality such as infant birthweight b2500 g, need for assisted ventilation, necrotising enterocolitis, neonatal death and admission to neonatal intensive care unit and can be offered in these cases (Hassan et al., 2011;Fonseca et al., 2007). Our patient was prescribed oral progestogens twice daily and weekly proluton from 12 weeks of gestation till 34 weeks as she could not tolerate vaginal pessaries.

Intramuscular corticosteroids are administered when a patient presents with threatened preterm labor. Steroids administration has been shown to prevent respiratory distress syndrome if given N 24 h and b7 days before delivery (Brownfoot et al., 2013). In this patient, intramuscular dexamethasone was prophylactically given at 34 weeks of gestation.

Caesarean section timing is also controversial with some authors suggesting as early as 34 weeks to avoid the risk of uterine contractions (Knight et al., 2010), whereas others suggest that it can be performed at 37 weeks (Ma et al., 2014). Uterine contraction onset in these women could have a serious risk of uterine rupture and haemorrhage (Kay et al., 2006). Some authors have suggested that a classical incision in order to prevent lateral extension into the uterine vessels should be performed. However, this may pose a higher risk of intraoperative bleeding. Comparatively, a transverse incision could also predispose to damage to uterine arteries and postpartum haemorrhage (Ishioka et al., 2007). Some authors have shown that a transverse uterine incision is safe in post trachelectomy patients (Ma et al., 2014;Ishioka et al., 2007). We aimed to have a caesarean section at 37 weeks but she suffered a preterm premature rupture of membranes at 35 + 5 weeks. We performed an emergency caesarean section via a transverse uterine incision without any intra or postoperative complications such as haemorrhage.


## Conclusion

Obstetric management of pregnancy following radical abdominal trachelectomy is challenging and requires a multidisciplinary approach. In summary, several antenatal measures that may improve the obstetric outcome include cervical cerclage placement during trachelectomy or during the 2nd trimester with a consideration for an ETCO if cerclage is not possible; close ultrasound surveillance of the cervical length every 2 weeks from 12 weeks gestation; progesterone support from 12 weeks to reduce risk of preterm labor; consider prophylactic antibiotics at 16 and 24 weeks gestation to reduce the risk of ascending infection; and a reduction of physical activity during pregnancy. Most centres aim for delivery between 34 and 37 weeks of gestation and although the route of delivery is usually via a classical caesarean section, a low transverse uterine incision has also been shown to be safe.


86-88 ⁎ Corresponding author. E-mail address: lekszemin@gmail.com (S.M. Lek). Gynecologic Oncology Reports j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / g y n o rContents lists available at ScienceDirect 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gore.2016.07.005 
2352-5789/© 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 


Conflict of interest statementThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Pregnancy outcomes in patients after radical trachelectomy. M Bernardini, J Barrett, G Seaward, A Covens, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 1895Bernardini, M., Barrett, J., Seaward, G., Covens, A., 2003. Pregnancy outcomes in patients after radical trachelectomy. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 189 (5), 1378-1382.

Different corticosteroids and regimens for accelerating fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. F C Brownfoot, D I Gagliardi, E Bain, P Middleton, C A Crowther, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 86764Brownfoot, F.C., Gagliardi, D.I., Bain, E., Middleton, P., Crowther, C.A., 2013. Different cor- ticosteroids and regimens for accelerating fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 8, CD006764.

Update on abdominal radical trachelectomy. D Cibula, J Slama, D Fischerova, Gynecol. Oncol. 1112SupplCibula, D., Slama, J., Fischerova, D., 2008. Update on abdominal radical trachelectomy. Gynecol. Oncol. 111 (2 Suppl), S111-S115.

Prophylactic administration of progesterone by vaginal suppository to reduce the incidence of spontaneous preterm birth in women at increased risk: a randomized placebo-controlled doubleblind study. E B Da Fonseca, R E Bittar, M H Carvalho, M Zugaib, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 1882da Fonseca, E.B., Bittar, R.E., Carvalho, M.H., Zugaib, M., 2003. Prophylactic administration of progesterone by vaginal suppository to reduce the incidence of spontaneous pre- term birth in women at increased risk: a randomized placebo-controlled double- blind study. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 188 (2), 419-424.

Progesterone for the prevention of preterm birth: a systematic review. J M Dodd, V J Flenady, R Cincotta, C A Crowther, Obstet. Gynecol. 1121Dodd, J.M., Flenady, V.J., Cincotta, R., Crowther, C.A., 2008. Progesterone for the prevention of preterm birth: a systematic review. Obstet. Gynecol. 112 (1), 127-134.

Conserving fertility in the management of gynaecological cancers. A Farthing, BJOG. 1132Farthing, A., 2006. Conserving fertility in the management of gynaecological cancers. BJOG 113 (2), 129-134.

Fetal Medicine Foundation Second Trimester Screening G. Progesterone and the risk of preterm birth among women with a short cervix. E B Fonseca, E Celik, M Parra, M Singh, K H Nicolaides, N. Engl. J. Med. 3575Fonseca, E.B., Celik, E., Parra, M., Singh, M., Nicolaides, K.H., 2007. Fetal Medicine Founda- tion Second Trimester Screening G. Progesterone and the risk of preterm birth among women with a short cervix. N. Engl. J. Med. 357 (5), 462-469.

Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in women with a sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. S S Hassan, R Romero, D Vidyadhari, S Fusey, J K Baxter, M Khandelwal, Obstet. Gynecol. 381Hassan, S.S., Romero, R., Vidyadhari, D., Fusey, S., Baxter, J.K., Khandelwal, M., et al., 2011. Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in women with a sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ultra- sound Obstet. Gynecol. 38 (1), 18-31.

Pregnancy-related complications after vaginal radical trachelectomy for early-stage invasive uterine cervical cancer. S Ishioka, T Endo, T Hayashi, T Baba, K Umemura, T Saito, Int. J. Clin. Oncol. 125Ishioka, S., Endo, T., Hayashi, T., Baba, T., Umemura, K., Saito, T., 2007. Pregnancy-related complications after vaginal radical trachelectomy for early-stage invasive uterine cer- vical cancer. Int. J. Clin. Oncol. 12 (5), 350-355.

Efficacy of 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate in the prevention of premature labor. J W Johnson, K L Austin, G S Jones, G H Davis, T M King, N. Engl. J. Med. 29314Johnson, J.W., Austin, K.L., Jones, G.S., Davis, G.H., King, T.M., 1975. Efficacy of 17alpha-hy- droxyprogesterone caproate in the prevention of premature labor. N. Engl. J. Med. 293 (14), 675-680.

Pregnancy management after cervical surgery. J A Jolley, D A Wing, Curr. Opin. Obstet. Gynecol. 206Jolley, J.A., Wing, D.A., 2008. Pregnancy management after cervical surgery. Curr. Opin. Obstet. Gynecol. 20 (6), 528-533.

Successful pregnancy following radical trachelectomy and in vitro fertilisation with ovum donation. T A Kay, J N Renninson, J H Shepherd, M J Taylor, BJOG. 1138Kay, T.A., Renninson, J.N., Shepherd, J.H., Taylor, M.J., 2006. Successful pregnancy follow- ing radical trachelectomy and in vitro fertilisation with ovum donation. BJOG 113 (8), 965-966.

Obstetric management following fertility-sparing radical vaginal trachelectomy for cervical cancer. L J Knight, N Acheson, T A Kay, J N Renninson, J H Shepherd, M J Taylor, J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 308Knight, L.J., Acheson, N., Kay, T.A., Renninson, J.N., Shepherd, J.H., Taylor, M.J., 2010. Ob- stetric management following fertility-sparing radical vaginal trachelectomy for cer- vical cancer. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 30 (8), 784-789.

Pregnancy outcome and obstetric management after vaginal radical trachelectomy. L K Ma, D Y Cao, J X Yang, J T Liu, K Shen, J H Lang, Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 1820Ma, L.K., Cao, D.Y., Yang, J.X., Liu, J.T., Shen, K., Lang, J.H., 2014. Pregnancy outcome and ob- stetric management after vaginal radical trachelectomy. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 18 (20), 3019-3024.

Progesterone for the prevention of preterm birth among women at increased risk: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. R Mackenzie, M Walker, A Armson, M E Hannah, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 1945Mackenzie, R., Walker, M., Armson, A., Hannah, M.E., 2006. Progesterone for the preven- tion of preterm birth among women at increased risk: a systematic review and meta- analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 194 (5), 1234-1242.

Prevention of recurrent preterm delivery by 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate. P J Meis, M Klebanoff, E Thom, M P Dombrowski, B Sibai, A H Moawad, N. Engl. J. Med. 34824Meis, P.J., Klebanoff, M., Thom, E., Dombrowski, M.P., Sibai, B., Moawad, A.H., et al., 2003. Prevention of recurrent preterm delivery by 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate. N. Engl. J. Med. 348 (24), 2379-2385.

Surgical, oncological, and obstetrical outcomes after abdominal radical trachelectomy -a systematic literature review. R Pareja, G J Rendon, C M Sanz-Lomana, O Monzon, P T Ramirez, Gynecol. Oncol. 1311Pareja, R., Rendon, G.J., Sanz-Lomana, C.M., Monzon, O., Ramirez, P.T., 2013. Surgical, on- cological, and obstetrical outcomes after abdominal radical trachelectomy -a system- atic literature review. Gynecol. Oncol. 131 (1), 77-82.

Long-term outcomes after fertility-sparing laparoscopic radical trachelectomy in young women with early-stage cervical cancer: an Asan Gynecologic Cancer Group (AGCG) study. J Y Park, W D Joo, S J Chang, D Y Kim, J H Kim, Y M Kim, J. Surg. Oncol. 1103Park, J.Y., Joo, W.D., Chang, S.J., Kim, D.Y., Kim, J.H., Kim, Y.M., et al., 2014. Long-term out- comes after fertility-sparing laparoscopic radical trachelectomy in young women with early-stage cervical cancer: an Asan Gynecologic Cancer Group (AGCG) study. J. Surg. Oncol. 110 (3), 252-257.

Antenatal interventions to reduce preterm birth: an overview of cochrane systematic reviews. B Piso, I Zechmeister-Koss, R Winkler, BMC Res. Notes. 7265Piso, B., Zechmeister-Koss, I., Winkler, R., 2014. Antenatal interventions to reduce preterm birth: an overview of cochrane systematic reviews. BMC Res. Notes 7, 265.

Vaginal radical trachelectomy: an update. M Plante, Gynecol. Oncol. 1112SupplPlante, M., 2008. Vaginal radical trachelectomy: an update. Gynecol. Oncol. 111 (2 Suppl), S105-S110.

Evolution in fertility-preserving options for early-stage cervical cancer: radical trachelectomy, simple trachelectomy, neoadjuvant chemotherapy. M Plante, Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer. 236Plante, M., 2013. Evolution in fertility-preserving options for early-stage cervical cancer: radical trachelectomy, simple trachelectomy, neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 23 (6), 982-989.

Systematic review of progesterone for the prevention of preterm birth in singleton pregnancies. L Rode, J Langhoff-Roos, C Andersson, J Dinesen, M S Hammerum, H Mohapeloa, Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 8811Rode, L., Langhoff-Roos, J., Andersson, C., Dinesen, J., Hammerum, M.S., Mohapeloa, H., et al., 2009. Systematic review of progesterone for the prevention of preterm birth in singleton pregnancies. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 88 (11), 1180-1189.

Progestational agents to prevent preterm birth: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. L Sanchez-Ramos, A M Kaunitz, I Delke, Obstet. Gynecol. 1052Sanchez-Ramos, L., Kaunitz, A.M., Delke, I., 2005. Progestational agents to prevent preterm birth: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obstet. Gynecol. 105 (2), 273-279.

Conservative surgery for carcinoma of the cervix. J H Shepherd, D A Milliken, Clin. Oncol. (R. Coll. Radiol.). 206Shepherd, J.H., Milliken, D.A., 2008. Conservative surgery for carcinoma of the cervix. Clin. Oncol. (R. Coll. Radiol.) 20 (6), 395-400.

Radical trachelectomy in early stage carcinoma of the cervix: outcome as judged by recurrence and fertility rates. J H Shepherd, T Mould, D H Oram, BJOG. 1088Shepherd, J.H., Mould, T., Oram, D.H., 2001. Radical trachelectomy in early stage carcino- ma of the cervix: outcome as judged by recurrence and fertility rates. BJOG 108 (8), 882-885.

Radical vaginal trachelectomy as a fertility-sparing procedure in women with early-stage cervical cancer-cumulative pregnancy rate in a series of 123 women. J H Shepherd, C Spencer, J Herod, T E Ind, BJOG. 1136Shepherd, J.H., Spencer, C., Herod, J., Ind, T.E., 2006. Radical vaginal trachelectomy as a fer- tility-sparing procedure in women with early-stage cervical cancer-cumulative preg- nancy rate in a series of 123 women. BJOG 113 (6), 719-724.