# Supporting information Figure 2. Overview TB specific T cell responses in TB patients

CorpusID: 14771027
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c1549c0b5e3a8d385026b1b90370b105faf023c0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c1549c0b5e3a8d385026b1b90370b105faf023c0)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Supporting information Figure 2. Overview TB specific T cell responses in TB patients


Supporting information Figure 2. Overview TB specific T cell responses in TB patients

Percentage of patients with Mtb antigen specific T cell cytokine responses above cut-off (0.01%, unstimulated control subtracted) during treatment. A: ESAT-6/CFP-10 (E6C10) stimulated CD4+ T cells B: Ag85 stimulated CD4+ T cells C: E6C10 stimulated CD8+ T cells D: Ag85 stimulated CD8+ T cells.Figure 3. Comparisons of cytokine responses in pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB during TB therapy. Mtb antigen (E6C10) specific cytokine CD4+ T cell production in pulmonary (white bars) and extrapulmonary TB (hatched bars) patients before and during treatment: Week 0 (PTB; N=12 and EPTB; N=8), week 8 (PTB; N=10 and EPTB; N=8) and week 24 (PTB; N=12 and EPTB; N=8). A. Total IFN-у+, IL-2+ and TNF-α+ CD4+ T cell responses at different time-points. B: Combinations of single-producing, duo-producing, and polyfunctional CD4+ T cells. Plots are shown with median, IQR and minimum/maximum values. P-values were calculated by Mann-Whitney U-test.Figure 1.Supporting informationSupporting informationFlow cytometry gating strategy on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and subpopulations.A: Gating strategy intracellular cytokines. A dead cell discriminator was used to exclude dead cells before gating into CD4 and CD8 (CD3+CD4-) cells. Boolean gating strategy was used to delineate combinations of IL-2, IFN-у, TNF-α -producing T cells. B-E: Gating strategy Tregs. Gates were set around CD4+ and CD8+ (CD3+CD4-) cells and further gated into different Treg subsets (B: % CD25 high CD147 ++ , C: % CD25 high CD127 low , D: % CD161 + of CD25 high CD127 low and E: % CD39 + of CD25 high CD127 low ). Figures show representative flow cytometry profiles in unstimulated and ESAT-6 stimulated samples.