# BMC Public Health The effect of cigarette price increase on the cigarette consumption in Taiwan: evidence from the National Health Interview Surveys on cigarette consumption

CorpusID: 14773769
 
tags: #Medicine, #Economics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c9e8ebbfda5e093428561844bb79a63bc70e5f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c9e8ebbfda5e093428561844bb79a63bc70e5f3)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

BMC Public Health The effect of cigarette price increase on the cigarette consumption in Taiwan: evidence from the National Health Interview Surveys on cigarette consumption


Jie-Min Lee 
Department of Logistics Management
National Kaohsiung Marine University
KaohsiungTaiwan

Tsorng-Chyi Hwang tsorng-chyihwang-tchwang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw 
Department of Applied Economics
National Chung Hsing University
TaichungTaiwan

Chun-Yuan Ye chun-yuanye-iune@webmail.ocit.edu.tw 
Department of International Trade
Chinese Institute of Technology
TaichungOverseasTaiwan

Sheng-Hong Chen sheng-hongchen-d9034004@mail.nchu.edu.tw 
Department of Applied Economics
National Chung Hsing University
TaichungTaiwan

BMC Public Health The effect of cigarette price increase on the cigarette consumption in Taiwan: evidence from the National Health Interview Surveys on cigarette consumption
10.1186/1471-2458-4-61BioMed Central Page 1 of 7 (page number not for citation purposes) Research article * Corresponding author
Background: This study uses cigarette price elasticity to evaluate the effect of a new excise tax increase on cigarette consumption and to investigate responses from various types of smokers.

## Background

One of the problems in controlling tobacco in Taiwan is that cigarette prices are lower in Taiwan than in most countries [1,2]. In India, smokers have to work 77 minutes to afford a pack of cigarettes, in Indonesia 62 mins, in China 56 mins, but in Taiwan they need only work 7 to 10 mins to afford a pack [1]. As long as the domestic cigarette price remains rather low, we probably will not see much of a decrease in the number of smokers.

The smoking population increased to 4.5 million persons (total population 22,520,776) in 2002 [3]. One out of three adults smoked. Currently, due to illnesses and death associated with cigarette smoking, smokers currently account for approximately 20 billion NT dollar of extra medical expense annually and account for a 160 billion NT dollar loss in GDP (Gross Domestic Product) [4]. This economic burden in putting pressure on the government to further increase the existing Health and Welfare Tax on tobacco.

Because high excise taxes on cigarettes have been found able to reduce cigarette consumption [5][6][7][8], such measures are becoming one of the most important means of controlling tobacco [9][10][11]. The new tax scheme enacted on 1 January 2002 in Taiwan resulted in NT $16.8 tax excise. This tax included the existing taxes for NT $11.8 and a NT $5 Health & Welfare Tax for a 20-pack of cigarettes. The government also levies 5% sales taxes. Under that tax scheme, the cigarette tax revenues account for 40% of the retail price, which is about NT $42.2. While 40% sounds high, it is actually lower than the taxes imposed on cigarettes in developed countries that have seen some success at lowering cigarette consumption.

The government should take elasticity of demand into consideration when deciding whether to increase or add an excise tax levy. If there is a price elasticity below 1, a tax increase brings about a decline in consumption and an increase in total tax revenues. Since Hsieh, Hu and Lin (1999) found that figure to be -0.6 in Taiwan, it can be reasonable to assume that a tax increase would be more likely to reduce cigarette consumption more significantly in Taiwan than in other countries with lower price elasticities at least in the short-term and medium term [12]. Higher taxes would also generate higher total tax revenues.

Taiwan's Tobacco and Wine Tax Law is currently under review in the Legislative Yuan of Taiwan. Some legislators are seeking to increase the Tobacco Health and Welfare Tax by NT $3 per pack, raising it from NT $5 to NT $8 per pack. Just as they have done in the past, cigarette sellers will probably shift the tax increase to the consumers letting them be responsible for the increase. The effect of the price increase on demand depends on cigarette price elasticity -the larger the elasticity, the larger the reduction in consumption. Therefore, an estimation of price elasticity for domestic cigarettes could be a very important indicator of the possible effect a "Tobacco Health and Welfare Tax" would have on cigarette consumption and could be used to adjust Tobacco Health and Welfare Tax accordingly.

Price elasticity of cigarette in Taiwan has been mostly estimated using time-series data [12,13], though this method might overlook the impact of smuggled cigarettes on the price elasticity and overestimate the price elasticity. It might be more appropriate and useful to use cross-section data from the Health Interview Survey to estimate the effect of cigarette tax on cigarette consumption and to compare differences in cigarette price elasticity with various smoker characteristics.


## Methods

This study uses data on current smokers from 17 to 69 years of age during years 2000 to 2003. First, the demand function of the current smokers was established. Respondents who answered "everyday" or "some of the days" to the question how often you smoke were classified as "current smokers". Then, we used a random sampling of how they consumed and how much they paid for it between 2000 to 2003 to calculate cigarette price elasticity. We then analyzed differences in cigarette price elasticity in smokers categorized according to gender, age, education, income standard, and how much they smoked.


## Demand function

Cigarette demand function was estimated by OLS and expressed by double logarithm function. The estimated demand function we used was: ln Q ig = α 0 + β 1 ln P ig + γ 2 ln I ig (1) where lnQ ig is i'th current smokers' logarithm representing monthly amount smokers consumed per person in group g. Current smokers were categorized according to age, gender, education, monthly income, and amount smoked. lnP ig is i'th current smokers' logarithm representing cigarette price per pack (NT$) for smoking characteristics group g. lnI ig is i'th current smokers' logarithm representing income per capita (NT$) for various categories of smokers in group g.

The α 0 , β 1 , and γ 2 are parameters to be estimated. In order to measure how price change might affect cigarette consumption, the determination of price elasticity was particularly important. Price elasticity of demand for cigarettes is defined as the percent change in consumption resulting from a price increase. Cigarette price elasticity of demand β 1 and income elasticity of demand γ 2 can be derived from logarithmically differentiation (1) according to price and income.


## Data collection

Using an annual face-to-face survey on cigarette consumption from 2000 to 2003 by Taiwan National Health Research Institutes, we collected data on how many packs current smokers consumed, how much they paid for a pack of cigarettes, how much they earned per month and how much they spent on cigarettes per month. Current smokers were categorized into gender, age, education, income, and amount smoked. Calculations of cigarette price were based on the average retail price of the top 3 most consumed cigarettes, calculations of number of packs smoked per month were done by dividing the monthly cigarette consumption by the average retail price. Calculations of income were based on personal monthly income.

Certain background characteristics are listed in Table 1. More than 90% of the smokers were men; less than 10% women. The numbers of young smokers were rising at the time of the study. Young people between the ages of 17 and 24 years old made up 5.4% of the sample in 2000, while they made up 12.8% in 2003, a 1.4 percent increase. The number of elderly smokers above the age of 55 gradually declined from 15.5% in 2000 to 10.8% in 2003.

People with higher educational backgrounds tended to smoke more. More than 60% of the current smokers had senior or junior high school educations between 2000 and 2002. Second only to smokers with senior high school degrees, the percentage of the smokers with college degree increased by 27.2% in 2003, accounting for almost 40% of all the smokers. Thirty-five to forty percent earned between NT $20,000 to NT $30,000 per month. Those who smoked less than one pack were defined as light smokers; 1~2 packs (2 packs excluded), medium smokers; and 2 packs and above, heavy smokers. The proportion of light smokers had gradually increased from 50% in 2000 to 60% in 2003, and the proportion of heavy smokers gradually decreased from 11.8% in 2000 to 6.5% in 2003, showing an overall tendency toward reducing consumption.


## Results

Cigarette consumption, retail price and personal monthly income were used in equation (1), the OLS method, to calculate cigarette price and income elasticities. The overall cigarette price elasticity was negative, less than one, indicating that cigarette consumption or demand in Taiwan was inelastic during the study period (Table 2). Taken However, the tax has been in force for two years, and a significant reduction in consumption has been shown to date. Cigarette taxes accounted for 40% of the retail price in 2002. Although forty percent sounds high, this proportion is still rather low when, as mentioned earlier, comparing it with the 66% or more of the retail price going for cigarettes prices in high-income countries (with the notable exception of the United States) [9]. Consequently, cigarette prices in Taiwan are well below those of many highincome countries, who have seen significant reductions in cigarette consumption. Those successes certainly impose a pressure on the government to implement another tax increase in the existing Health and Welfare Tax.  might be that the rise of average cigarette price was only NT $7 per pack. We speculate that a possible continuous and substantial rise in cigarette prices in the future might increase the overall price elasticity, which in turn could allow for a more effective use of the tax increases or price increases to control tobacco.

Cigarette price elasticity for the male smokers reached statistically significance (5%), which was higher than the price elasticity of the female smokers, indicating that men were more responsive to price elasticity than the women. The cigarette price elasticity of the male smokers in 2002-2003 was -0.393, which was higher than -0.3107 male smokers in 2000-2001. The income elasticity of male smokers in 2002-2003 was 0.0194, reaching statistical significance (5%). There was no statistical difference found in estimated cigarette price and income elasticity of smokers among the different age sub-groups, though, according to some reports in foreign countries, teenagers are more sensitive changes to cigarette prices than adults [15][16][17].

Education level seemed to make a difference. The price elasticity smokers with junior high school educations was -0.5766 in 2000-2001, which was higher than that of senior high school level smokers, -0.2772. In 2002-2003, the price elasticity of college level smokers was -0.7007, which was higher than that of the smokers of senior high school level, -0.5369. Therefore, between 2000 and 2001, the more educated group had a larger price elasticity, though the less educated group had the higher coefficient in 2002-2003. Our findings cover two time spans and are different from those reported by foreign researchers who have found that consumers at lower education levels respond stronger to the change of cigarette price [18]. In our study, those with no income had the greatest cigarette price elasticity, -0.  


## Conclusions

In this study, we evaluate the effect of a new tax on the consumption of tobacco by calculating the cigarette price elasticities of various kinds of smokers and comparing those values with their reactions to an increase cigarette, and then using knowledge gained from that study, we assess the possible effect of another increase on consumption. We found that the new tax scheme implemented after Taiwan joined the WTO reduced cigarette consumption by 13.27 packs/person (10.5%). We estimated that an additional NT $3 increase in Taiwan's Health and Welfare Tax would reduce cigarette consumption here by 2.47 packs/person (2.2%).

In this study, cigarette price elasticity was less than one, meaning that in addition to reducing cigarette consumption, an additional tax would also generate additional tax revenues. Continuing price increases should reduce cigarette consumption significantly. Provided that the tax increases are proportionately larger than the resulting reduction in cigarette consumption, cigarette tax revenues will increase and can be used to reduce current National Health Insurance deficits and possibly reduce the damage and death caused by smoking related diseases.

Based on estimated cigarette price elasticities for various kinds of current smokers, we found that male smokers without income and light smokers were more sensitive to changes in cigarette prices. Teenagers (17 -24 years old), however, were not found to be significantly influenced by the change in cigarette price, which means it will take more than just tax increases to decrease consumption among our youth. Schools will need to commit to preventive education by inculcating the students with the knowledge of tobacco hazards. Only through early preventive education starting from their childhood can we expect to see significant reduction in cigarette consumption.

Finally, the R-squared statistics of the each empirical estimation was below 0.1 for probably sake of to calculate elasticity and exclude variables like advertisement. Future research should also attempt to include these factors with cigarette demand function.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every scientist can read your work free of charge 


5103 in 2000-2001 and -0.8363 in 2002-2003. Those with no income were more sensitive to the price rise than those with income. Light smokers had the highest cigarette price elasticity, -0.1984 in 2000-2001 and -0.532 in 2002-2003. Heavy smokers had a price elasticity of 0.2573 in 2000-2001, indicating that with the rise of cigarette price, these smokers increased their consumption of tobacco.

## Table 1 :
1Background characteristics of the current smokers inTaiwan, 2000-20032000 
2001 
2002 
2003 



## Table 2 :
2The estimated overall cigarette price and income elasticities of the current smokers, 2000-2003 a2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 

Price elasticity 
-0.3134 
(-2.894)* 
-0.3684 
(-3.482)* 
-0.5274 
(-3.143)* 
-0.3090 
(-1.531) 
Income elasticity 
0.0069 
(0.708) 
0.0042 
(0.504) 
-0.0012 
(-0.125) 
0.0320 
(2.916)* 

a. t ratios are shown in parentheses. 
* p < 0.05. 


## Table 3 :## Background

One of the problems in controlling tobacco in Taiwan is that cigarette prices are lower in Taiwan than in most countries [1,2]. In India, smokers have to work 77 minutes to afford a pack of cigarettes, in Indonesia 62 mins, in China 56 mins, but in Taiwan they need only work 7 to 10 mins to afford a pack [1]. As long as the domestic cigarette price remains rather low, we probably will not see much of a decrease in the number of smokers.

The smoking population increased to 4.5 million persons (total population 22,520,776) in 2002 [3]. One out of three adults smoked. Currently, due to illnesses and death associated with cigarette smoking, smokers currently account for approximately 20 billion NT dollar of extra medical expense annually and account for a 160 billion NT dollar loss in GDP (Gross Domestic Product) [4]. This economic burden in putting pressure on the government to further increase the existing Health and Welfare Tax on tobacco.

Because high excise taxes on cigarettes have been found able to reduce cigarette consumption [5][6][7][8], such measures are becoming one of the most important means of controlling tobacco [9][10][11]. The new tax scheme enacted on 1 January 2002 in Taiwan resulted in NT $16.8 tax excise. This tax included the existing taxes for NT $11.8 and a NT $5 Health & Welfare Tax for a 20-pack of cigarettes. The government also levies 5% sales taxes. Under that tax scheme, the cigarette tax revenues account for 40% of the retail price, which is about NT $42.2. While 40% sounds high, it is actually lower than the taxes imposed on cigarettes in developed countries that have seen some success at lowering cigarette consumption.

The government should take elasticity of demand into consideration when deciding whether to increase or add an excise tax levy. If there is a price elasticity below 1, a tax increase brings about a decline in consumption and an increase in total tax revenues. Since Hsieh, Hu and Lin (1999) found that figure to be -0.6 in Taiwan, it can be reasonable to assume that a tax increase would be more likely to reduce cigarette consumption more significantly in Taiwan than in other countries with lower price elasticities at least in the short-term and medium term [12]. Higher taxes would also generate higher total tax revenues.

Taiwan's Tobacco and Wine Tax Law is currently under review in the Legislative Yuan of Taiwan. Some legislators are seeking to increase the Tobacco Health and Welfare Tax by NT $3 per pack, raising it from NT $5 to NT $8 per pack. Just as they have done in the past, cigarette sellers will probably shift the tax increase to the consumers letting them be responsible for the increase. The effect of the price increase on demand depends on cigarette price elasticity -the larger the elasticity, the larger the reduction in consumption. Therefore, an estimation of price elasticity for domestic cigarettes could be a very important indicator of the possible effect a "Tobacco Health and Welfare Tax" would have on cigarette consumption and could be used to adjust Tobacco Health and Welfare Tax accordingly.

Price elasticity of cigarette in Taiwan has been mostly estimated using time-series data [12,13], though this method might overlook the impact of smuggled cigarettes on the price elasticity and overestimate the price elasticity. It might be more appropriate and useful to use cross-section data from the Health Interview Survey to estimate the effect of cigarette tax on cigarette consumption and to compare differences in cigarette price elasticity with various smoker characteristics.


## Methods

This study uses data on current smokers from 17 to 69 years of age during years 2000 to 2003. First, the demand function of the current smokers was established. Respondents who answered "everyday" or "some of the days" to the question how often you smoke were classified as "current smokers". Then, we used a random sampling of how they consumed and how much they paid for it between 2000 to 2003 to calculate cigarette price elasticity. We then analyzed differences in cigarette price elasticity in smokers categorized according to gender, age, education, income standard, and how much they smoked.


## Demand function

Cigarette demand function was estimated by OLS and expressed by double logarithm function. The estimated demand function we used was: ln Q ig = α 0 + β 1 ln P ig + γ 2 ln I ig (1) where lnQ ig is i'th current smokers' logarithm representing monthly amount smokers consumed per person in group g. Current smokers were categorized according to age, gender, education, monthly income, and amount smoked. lnP ig is i'th current smokers' logarithm representing cigarette price per pack (NT$) for smoking characteristics group g. lnI ig is i'th current smokers' logarithm representing income per capita (NT$) for various categories of smokers in group g.

The α 0 , β 1 , and γ 2 are parameters to be estimated. In order to measure how price change might affect cigarette consumption, the determination of price elasticity was particularly important. Price elasticity of demand for cigarettes is defined as the percent change in consumption resulting from a price increase. Cigarette price elasticity of demand β 1 and income elasticity of demand γ 2 can be derived from logarithmically differentiation (1) according to price and income.


## Data collection

Using an annual face-to-face survey on cigarette consumption from 2000 to 2003 by Taiwan National Health Research Institutes, we collected data on how many packs current smokers consumed, how much they paid for a pack of cigarettes, how much they earned per month and how much they spent on cigarettes per month. Current smokers were categorized into gender, age, education, income, and amount smoked. Calculations of cigarette price were based on the average retail price of the top 3 most consumed cigarettes, calculations of number of packs smoked per month were done by dividing the monthly cigarette consumption by the average retail price. Calculations of income were based on personal monthly income.

Certain background characteristics are listed in Table 1. More than 90% of the smokers were men; less than 10% women. The numbers of young smokers were rising at the time of the study. Young people between the ages of 17 and 24 years old made up 5.4% of the sample in 2000, while they made up 12.8% in 2003, a 1.4 percent increase. The number of elderly smokers above the age of 55 gradually declined from 15.5% in 2000 to 10.8% in 2003.

People with higher educational backgrounds tended to smoke more. More than 60% of the current smokers had senior or junior high school educations between 2000 and 2002. Second only to smokers with senior high school degrees, the percentage of the smokers with college degree increased by 27.2% in 2003, accounting for almost 40% of all the smokers. Thirty-five to forty percent earned between NT $20,000 to NT $30,000 per month. Those who smoked less than one pack were defined as light smokers; 1~2 packs (2 packs excluded), medium smokers; and 2 packs and above, heavy smokers. The proportion of light smokers had gradually increased from 50% in 2000 to 60% in 2003, and the proportion of heavy smokers gradually decreased from 11.8% in 2000 to 6.5% in 2003, showing an overall tendency toward reducing consumption.


## Results

Cigarette consumption, retail price and personal monthly income were used in equation (1), the OLS method, to calculate cigarette price and income elasticities. The overall cigarette price elasticity was negative, less than one, indicating that cigarette consumption or demand in Taiwan was inelastic during the study period (Table 2). Taken However, the tax has been in force for two years, and a significant reduction in consumption has been shown to date. Cigarette taxes accounted for 40% of the retail price in 2002. Although forty percent sounds high, this proportion is still rather low when, as mentioned earlier, comparing it with the 66% or more of the retail price going for cigarettes prices in high-income countries (with the notable exception of the United States) [9]. Consequently, cigarette prices in Taiwan are well below those of many highincome countries, who have seen significant reductions in cigarette consumption. Those successes certainly impose a pressure on the government to implement another tax increase in the existing Health and Welfare Tax.  might be that the rise of average cigarette price was only NT $7 per pack. We speculate that a possible continuous and substantial rise in cigarette prices in the future might increase the overall price elasticity, which in turn could allow for a more effective use of the tax increases or price increases to control tobacco.

Cigarette price elasticity for the male smokers reached statistically significance (5%), which was higher than the price elasticity of the female smokers, indicating that men were more responsive to price elasticity than the women. The cigarette price elasticity of the male smokers in 2002-2003 was -0.393, which was higher than -0.3107 male smokers in 2000-2001. The income elasticity of male smokers in 2002-2003 was 0.0194, reaching statistical significance (5%). There was no statistical difference found in estimated cigarette price and income elasticity of smokers among the different age sub-groups, though, according to some reports in foreign countries, teenagers are more sensitive changes to cigarette prices than adults [15][16][17].

Education level seemed to make a difference. The price elasticity smokers with junior high school educations was -0.5766 in 2000-2001, which was higher than that of senior high school level smokers, -0.2772. In 2002-2003, the price elasticity of college level smokers was -0.7007, which was higher than that of the smokers of senior high school level, -0.5369. Therefore, between 2000 and 2001, the more educated group had a larger price elasticity, though the less educated group had the higher coefficient in 2002-2003. Our findings cover two time spans and are different from those reported by foreign researchers who have found that consumers at lower education levels respond stronger to the change of cigarette price [18]. In our study, those with no income had the greatest cigarette price elasticity, -0.  


## Conclusions

In this study, we evaluate the effect of a new tax on the consumption of tobacco by calculating the cigarette price elasticities of various kinds of smokers and comparing those values with their reactions to an increase cigarette, and then using knowledge gained from that study, we assess the possible effect of another increase on consumption. We found that the new tax scheme implemented after Taiwan joined the WTO reduced cigarette consumption by 13.27 packs/person (10.5%). We estimated that an additional NT $3 increase in Taiwan's Health and Welfare Tax would reduce cigarette consumption here by 2.47 packs/person (2.2%).

In this study, cigarette price elasticity was less than one, meaning that in addition to reducing cigarette consumption, an additional tax would also generate additional tax revenues. Continuing price increases should reduce cigarette consumption significantly. Provided that the tax increases are proportionately larger than the resulting reduction in cigarette consumption, cigarette tax revenues will increase and can be used to reduce current National Health Insurance deficits and possibly reduce the damage and death caused by smoking related diseases.

Based on estimated cigarette price elasticities for various kinds of current smokers, we found that male smokers without income and light smokers were more sensitive to changes in cigarette prices. Teenagers (17 -24 years old), however, were not found to be significantly influenced by the change in cigarette price, which means it will take more than just tax increases to decrease consumption among our youth. Schools will need to commit to preventive education by inculcating the students with the knowledge of tobacco hazards. Only through early preventive education starting from their childhood can we expect to see significant reduction in cigarette consumption.

Finally, the R-squared statistics of the each empirical estimation was below 0.1 for probably sake of to calculate elasticity and exclude variables like advertisement. Future research should also attempt to include these factors with cigarette demand function.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every scientist can read your work free of charge 


5103 in 2000-2001 and -0.8363 in 2002-2003. Those with no income were more sensitive to the price rise than those with income. Light smokers had the highest cigarette price elasticity, -0.1984 in 2000-2001 and -0.532 in 2002-2003. Heavy smokers had a price elasticity of 0.2573 in 2000-2001, indicating that with the rise of cigarette price, these smokers increased their consumption of tobacco.

## Table 1 :
1Background characteristics of the current smokers inTaiwan, 2000-20032000 
2001 
2002 
2003 



## Table 2 :
2The estimated overall cigarette price and income elasticities of the current smokers, 2000-2003 a2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 

Price elasticity 
-0.3134 
(-2.894)* 
-0.3684 
(-3.482)* 
-0.5274 
(-3.143)* 
-0.3090 
(-1.531) 
Income elasticity 
0.0069 
(0.708) 
0.0042 
(0.504) 
-0.0012 
(-0.125) 
0.0320 
(2.916)* 

a. t ratios are shown in parentheses. 
* p < 0.05. 


## Table 3 :
3The estimated cigarette price and income elasticities of different types of current smokersduring 2000-2001 and during 



"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK Your research papers will be: available free of charge to the entire biomedical community peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central yours -you keep the copyright Submit your manuscript here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.aspBioMedcentral 

BMC Public Health 2004, 4:61 
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/4/61 

(page number not for citation purposes)
AcknowledgementsA partly-article of this research was support by extramural grants from Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health in Taiwan (Grant Number: BHP-92-Anti-Tobacco-2H01). This study is based (in part) on data from the Taiwan Interview Survey on Cigarette Consumption (TISCC) Original Database provided by National Health Research Institutes. The interpretation and conclusions contained herein do not represent those of Department of Health and National Health Research Institutes.Competing interestsThe author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsJML performed physical measurements, collected data, and drafted the manuscript. TCH reviewed the manuscript. CYY and SHC carried out the statistical analysis and participated in data collection. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Pre-publication historyThe pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/4/61/prepub
Trends and affordability of cigarette price: ample room for tax increases and related health gains. G E Guindon, S Tobin, D Yach, Tobacco Control. 11Guindon GE, Tobin S, Yach D: Trends and affordability of ciga- rette price: ample room for tax increases and related health gains. Tobacco Control 2002, 11:35-43.

Analysis of cigarette taxation in Taiwan. Y W Tsai, C S Chen, T C Liu, C L Yang, C C Chuang, J I Chen, Wen Chi-Pang. Taiwan: Division of Health Policy Research. TaiwanCollection of Research Papers onTsai YW, Chen CS, Liu TC, Yang CL, Chuang CC, Chen JI: Analysis of cigarette taxation in Taiwan. In In Collection of Research Papers on Tobacco or Health in Taiwan 2002 Edited by: Wen Chi-Pang. Taiwan: Division of Health Policy Research, National Health Research Institutes; 2002:188-211.

Smoking policy at the crossroads: opportunities and challenges. C P Wen, D T Levy, Wen Chi-Pang. Taiwan: Division of Health Policy Research. TaiwanCollection of Research Papers onWen CP, Levy DT: Smoking policy at the crossroads: opportu- nities and challenges. In In Collection of Research Papers on Tobacco or Health in Taiwan 2002 Edited by: Wen Chi-Pang. Taiwan: Division of Health Policy Research, National Health Research Institutes; 2002:4-49.

Research on tobacco litigation in Taiwan. H S Lin, C P Wen, C C Hou, C C Hou, S T Chu, W S Chung, Wen Chi-Pang. Taiwan: Division of Health Policy Research. TaiwanCollection of Research Papers onLin HS, Wen CP, Hou CC, Hou CC, Chu ST, Chung WS: Research on tobacco litigation in Taiwan. In In Collection of Research Papers on Tobacco or Health in Taiwan 2002 Edited by: Wen Chi-Pang. Taiwan: Division of Health Policy Research, National Health Research Institutes; 2002:68-90.

Cigarette taxation and demand: an empirical model. H Y Sung, T W Hu, T E Keeler, Contemporary Economic Policy. 123Sung HY, Hu TW, Keeler TE: Cigarette taxation and demand: an empirical model. Contemporary Economic Policy 1994, 12(3):91-100.

Reducing cigarette consumption in California: tobacco taxes vs. anti-smoking media campaign. T W Hu, H Y Sung, T E Keeler, American Journal of Public Health. 889Hu TW, Sung HY, Keeler TE: Reducing cigarette consumption in California: tobacco taxes vs. anti-smoking media campaign. American Journal of Public Health 1998, 88(9):1218-1222.

Taxation or regulation: looking for a good anti-smoking policy. P Lanoie, P Leclair, Economics letters. 58Lanoie P, Leclair P: Taxation or regulation: looking for a good anti-smoking policy. Economics letters 1998, 58:85-89.

Effects of cigarette tax on cigarette consumption and the Chinese economy. T W Hu, Z Mao, Tobacco Control. 11Hu TW, Mao Z: Effects of cigarette tax on cigarette consump- tion and the Chinese economy. Tobacco Control 2002, 11:105-108.

The taxation of tobacco products. F J Chaloupka, T W Hu, K E Warner, Jacobs Rowena, Yurekli Ayda, Tobacco control in developing countries Edited by: Jha Prabhat. Chaloupka Frank. LondonOxford University PressChaloupka FJ, Hu TW, Warner KE, Jacobs Rowena, Yurekli Ayda: The taxation of tobacco products. In Tobacco control in developing countries Edited by: Jha Prabhat, Chaloupka Frank. London: Oxford University Press; 2000:237-272.

Reviews of evidence regarding interventions to reduce use and exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. D P Hopkins, P A Briss, C J Richard, American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 20Hopkins DP, Briss PA, Richard CJ, et al.: Reviews of evidence regarding interventions to reduce use and exposure to envi- ronmental tobacco smoke. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2001, 20:16-66.

United States Department of Health and Human Services: Reducing tobacco use: a report of the Surgeon General. Office on Smoking and HeathAtlanta, GaUnited States Department of Health and Human Services: Reducing tobacco use: a report of the Surgeon General. 2000. Atlanta, Ga, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Heath Promotion, Office on Smoking and Heath .

The demand for cigarettes in Taiwan: domestic versus imported cigarettes. Contemporary Economic Policy. C R Hsieh, T W Hu, C-Fj Lin, 17Hsieh CR, Hu TW, Lin C-FJ: The demand for cigarettes in Tai- wan: domestic versus imported cigarettes. Contemporary Eco- nomic Policy 1999, 17:223-234.

Cigarette demand, cigarette taxation and anti-smoking: review of empirical literature and the case of Taiwan. M S Shi, C R Hsieh, Journal of Social Sciences and Philosophy. 11Shi MS, Hsieh CR: Cigarette demand, cigarette taxation and anti-smoking: review of empirical literature and the case of Taiwan. Journal of Social Sciences and Philosophy 1999, 11:301-334.

A Study of the Impacts of Trade Liberalization and Tobacco Hazard Control on Cigarettes Demand and Industry Structure in Taiwan Taiwan: Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health. J M Lee, C J Yen, Lee JM, Yen CJ: A Study of the Impacts of Trade Liberalization and Tobacco Hazard Control on Cigarettes Demand and Industry Structure in Taiwan Taiwan: Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health; 2004.

Price, tobacco control policies and smoking among young adults. F J Chaloupka, H Wechsler, Journal of Health Economics. 16Chaloupka FJ, Wechsler H: Price, tobacco control policies and smoking among young adults. Journal of Health Economics 1997, 16:359-373.

The potential for using excise taxes to reduce smoking. E M Lewit, D Coate, Journal of Health Economics. 1Lewit EM, Coate D: The potential for using excise taxes to reduce smoking. Journal of Health Economics 1982, 1:121-45.

The effects of government regulations on teenage smoking. E Lewit, M D Coate, M Grossman, Health Economics. 243Lewit E, Coate MD, Grossman M: The effects of government reg- ulations on teenage smoking. Health Economics 1981, 24(3):545-569.

Rational addictive behavior and cigarette smoking. F J Chaloupka, Journal of Political Economy. 994Chaloupka FJ: Rational addictive behavior and cigarette smoking. Journal of Political Economy 1991, 99(4):722-742.