# A Review of Famciclovir in the Management of Genital Herpes

CorpusID: 15388517
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a59a21029f6cb45eae0fd76589090b4d364fdc3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a59a21029f6cb45eae0fd76589090b4d364fdc3d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review of Famciclovir in the Management of Genital Herpes
Wiley-Liss, IncCopyright Wiley-Liss, Inc1998. 1998. 1998. 1998

S Faro 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center
1653 West Congress Parkway, 720 Pavilion60612-3833Chicago, ChicagoIL, IL

DrSebastian Faro 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center
1653 West Congress Parkway, 720 Pavilion60612-3833Chicago, ChicagoIL, IL

A Review of Famciclovir in the Management of Genital Herpes

Infectious Diseases in Obstetrics and Gynecology
Wiley-Liss, Inc61998. 1998. 1998. 1998Received 12 February 1998 Review Article Accepted 20 March 1998Pa-Grant sponsor: SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals. Correspondence to:genital herpesherpes simplex infectionrecurrent genital herpesantiviral therapy
The frequent occurrence of genital herpes continues to be a serious clinical problem. Although not life threatening, the physical symptoms of the disease, and the ensuing psychosocial complications, can be overwhelming to patients. The life cycle of the herpes simplex virus is complex, comprising multiple stages. Following infection, the virus establishes life-long latency in its host and can reactivate at any time as a recurrent infection. Successful management of genital herpes simplex infections involves patient education and psychological support, as well as antiviral agents. The antiviral agent famciclovir has been shown to shorten the course and decrease the severity of episodes of recurrent genital herpes. In addition, famciclovir has been shown to be effective in suppressing recurrent genital herpes. A review of the clinical experience with famciclovir in the treatment of genital herpes is presented. Infect. ore than 45 million people in the. United States are infected with the herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 2 (HSV-2), the primary causative agent of genital herpes; an additional 500,000 people become infected each year. 1,z The predominance of HSV-2 antibodies among those over 12 years of age is almost 22%. 2 Although HSV type (HSV-1) infection is associated primarily with oral herpes, it is being increasingly linked to genital disease.3The astounding prevalence of this sexually transmitted disease suggests the need for better clinical management of genital herpes, including appropriate treatment with antiviral agents.

The HSV life cycle is complex, consisting of five stages: primary mucocutaneous infection, acute infection of nerve ganglia, establishment of life-long latency, reactivation, and recurrent infection (Figure 1). 4 Exposure to HSV at mucosal surfaces or abraded skin permits entry of the virus into epidermal and dermal cells and the initiation of viral rep-lication, s Following primary infection, which can be symptomatic or asymptomatic, the virus travels to the neuronal nuclei in the dorsal root ganglia, where it remains latent for indefinite periods. 4 The ability to persist in cells indefinitely, escaping elimination by the host's immune mechanisms, is one of the most perplexing aspects of the herpesviruses. 6 Patients with a first episode of genital herpes may have either a true primary infection or an initial genital HSV-2 infection (nonprimary first episode). Symptomatic true primary infections are typically severe and occur in seronegative individuals. Patients with nonprimary, first-episode HSV-2 infection have preexisting HSV tients may also experience the reactivation of a previously asymptomatic genital herpes infection.

Factors responsible for the reactivation of the herpesvirus and the onset of recurrent genital herpes infection are not well understood, although emotional stress, sexual intercourse, menstruation, and pregnancy may play a role. [4][5][6] When reactivation is triggered, the virus is released from infected dorsal root ganglia to reestablish active infection. 7 Recurrences are shorter and less intense than primary infections and are generally more severe in women than in men. 7'8 In addition, while men appear to have a higher rate of symptomatic recurrence, asymptomatic recurrence is more frequent in women, s,9 Women infected with HSV-2 also require careful gynecological management, including frequent Pap tests, for the remainder of their lives because HSV-2 antibodies have been associated with cytological abnormalities of the cervix, z,4,6

Recurrence rates of HSV infections vary among individuals and within the same individual, s Immune competence appears to be crucial in the balance between latency and reactivation of the virus. s '7 In patients with symptomatic, first-episode genital HSV-2, recurrence rates are high: four or more per year in about 89% of patients within one year of a first-episode HSV-2 infection. 8 Although not life threatening in the immunocompetent patient, genital herpes is associated with long-term negative sequelae. Psychological and emotional complications are important aspects of the long-term morbidity of HSV infections. 6 The unpredictability of recurrent episodes and their effect on interpersonal relationships can have a substantial negative impact on a patient's quality of life. Palliative and supportive measures remain the cornerstone of therapy for genital herpes, with psychological support and patient education being key elements of disease management. However, these supportive measures do not treat the infection. 4 In recent years, the development of safe and effective antiviral agents has improved the management of HSV. Although there is no drug that permanently destroys HSV, antiviral agents inhibit the virus by interacting with the viral-coded DNA polymerase, ending subsequent viral replication. 4,7 The challenge of antiviral therapy lies not only in treatment of symptoms during first and recurrent episodes, but also in the long-term suppression of the herpesvirus for patients with frequent recurrences.


## PHARMACOKINETICS OF ANTIVIRAL THERAPIES

Acyclovir (Zovirax(R), Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC) has been the drug of choice for HSV infections for well over a decade. A large number of clinical trials have documented its safety and efficacy in various patient populations. 1 Acyclovir is an acyclic nucleoside analog that inhibits DNA replication. It is activated to its triphosphate form, incorporates into viral DNA, and terminates viral DNA synthesis. Acyclovir triphosphate has limited stability when acyclovir is removed from the culture medium and a short intracellular half-life in vitro (less than one hour). 11 In addition, the bioavailability of acyclovir administered orally is 10% to 20%. le Valacyclovir (Valtrex(R), Glaxo Wellcome, Inc.), the L-valyl ester and prodrug of acyclovir, has more recently been developed for the treatment of acute recurrent genital herpes. It has a bioavailability of 55%; lz however, since valacyclovir is the prodrug, once absorbed it has the same pharmacokinetic  Pharmaceuticals, Philadelphia, PA), the oral form of penciclovir, a guanosine nucleoside analog, has been introduced into clinical use for the management of acute herpes zoster and more recently for the treatment or suppression of recurrent episodes of genital herpes. 13,14 Famciclovir is well absorbed and rapidly converted to penciclovir by a series of metabolic steps in the intestinal wall and liver (Figure 2). [15][16][17] Once penciclovir enters herpesvirusinfected cells, it is rapidly converted to its active metabolite, penciclovir triphosphate, which is, in part, dependent on the viral enzyme thymidine kinase, and stops subsequent replication of the virtls. ll '17-z0 The intracellular half-life of penciclovir triphosphate in vitro is 20 hours in HSV-2-infected cells (Table 1). 11 '16 Little unchanged famciclovir is found in the plasma, and the overall bioavailability of penciclovir from oral famciclovir is approximately 77% 


## CLINICAL EXPERIENCE WITH FAMCICLOVIR Safety

Since its introduction, famciclovir has been prescribed more than 2.7 million times worldwide (Data on file at SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals). In integrated safety evaluations of more than 5,000 patients participating in clinical trials with famciclovir, the most common adverse experiences observed in a similar proportion of patients receiving either famciclovir or placebo were headache (-10%), nausea (-5%), and diarrhea (-3%).26,27 Withdrawal from famciclovir treatment due to an adverse event has occurred in less than 1% of patients. 26,27 In addition, no consistent association has been observed between famciclovir treatment and any abnormal laboratory test. 26,27 Efficacy The efficacy of famciclovir in patients with recurrent genital herpes was evaluated in two doseranging, randomized, double-blind studies. 14,2s In these studies, 1,000 patients received famciclovir in 125-mg, 250-mg, or 500-mg doses or a placebo twice daily for five days beginning within six hours of lesion onset (clinic initiated) or prodromal/other signs or symptoms of an outbreak (patient initiated). The duration of viral shedding, cessation of all symptoms (collectively defined as lesion tenderness, pain, itching, burning, and tingling), and time to lesion healing was significantly improved at each dose of famciclovir, compared with placebo. 14,2s In the clinic-initiated study, the duration of viral shedding was reduced by more than 50% (1.6 days for 125-mg of famciclovir versus 3.4 days for placebo [P 0.0001]). Median time to complete healing was shorter for patients receiving 125-mg doses of famciclovir, compared with placebo-treated patients (P 0.0009). 28 In the patient-initiated study, the duration of viral shedding was reduced by almost two days with famciclovir treatment, from a median of 3.3 days with placebo to a median of 1.7 days with 125 mg of famciclovir. Of the patients who were viral-culture-negative prior to initiation of therapy, 73% of those treated with famciclovir remained culture-negative, compared with 46% of patients receiving placebo. 14 The median time to loss of all symptoms was 3.2 days for patients treated with 125 mg of famciclovir, compared with 3.7 days for placebo-treated patients (P < 0.01 based on a hazard ratio of 1.6). 14 Median time to complete healing was 3.8 days for patients receiving 125 mg of famciclovir, compared with 4.8 days for placebo-treated patients. 14 The efficacy of famciclovir has also been evaluated for the suppression of genital herpes. Women (n 375) with a history of six or more episodes of recurrent genital herpes per year were treated with famciclovir (125 mg, once or twice daily; 250 mg, once or twice daily; or 500 mg, once daily) or placebo for four months, z9 All doses of famciclovir were effective in suppressing HSV recurrences; however, famciclovir in doses of 250 mg, twice daily, was clearly the most effective, z9 In addition, the proportion of patients who remained free of HSV recurrences during the 120-day study increased from 48% in the placebo-treated group to 90% in patients receiving famciclovir in doses of 250 mg, twice daily (P < 0.001).z9

The meta-analysis of two year-long clinical trials, in which 369 patients were enrolled (236 receiving famciclovir, 250 mg, twice daily; 133 receiving placebo), showed that 80% fewer genital herpes outbreaks occurred in famciclovir-treated patients (median number of recurrences was 1) than in placebo-recipients (median number of recurrences was 4.9) (Data on file, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals). These and other studies show that once-daily dosing is less effective at preventing outbreaks than is multidosing, z9- 31 The efficacy of famciclovir for the treatment of first-episode genital herpes was evaluated in three studies, which enrolled a total of 951 patients. In two of these studies, famciclovir, 250 mg, 500 mg, and 750 mg, three times for a day for five days, was compared with acyclovir, 200 mg, five times a day for five days; in the third study, famciclovir, 125 mg, 250 mg, and 500 mg, three times a day for 10 days, was compared with acyclovir, 200 mg, five times a day for 10 days. 3z No significant differences between famciclovir and acyclovir were seen in the times to cessation of viral shedding, complete healing, or loss of all symptoms, suggesting that three times daily dosing of famciclovir is as effective as acyclovir five times daily in treatment of initial episodes of genital herpes.

Famciclovir may also impact HSV latency and/or subsequent reactivation. Preclinical studies have shown that treatment with famciclovir was more effective than valacyclovir in reducing the incidence of clinical manifestations of HSV-1 infections in mice. 33,34 In addition, the famciclovirtreated mice showed markedly reduced evidence of latent virus present in explanted ganglia. 33,4 Based on these results, as well as preliminary clinical data that support these observations, clinical trials have been initiated to further examine the effects of famciclovir on latency/reactivation after administration to patients with first-episode genital herpes. s SUMMARY Genital herpes, caused by HSV infection, is a chronic and often debilitating disease. Life-long persistence of the virus and unpredictability of clinical recurrences cause both physical and psychological sequelae that require long-term management. Educational and psychological support are important aspects in the management of genital herpes. However, advances in antiviral therapy have also played an important role.

Famciclovir represents a new advance in antiviral therapy. Its pharmacokinetic profile exceeds those of both acyclovir and valacyclovir. Studies have shown that treatment with famciclovir reduces viral shedding, provides rapid resolution of lesions, and relieves all symptoms of recurrent genital herpes. 14,es Patients may have fewer psychological problems coping with the disease if the duration of viral shedding and uncomfortable symptoms associated with genital herpes are reduced. Famciclovir has also been shown to be effective in those patients who require long-term suppressive antiviral therapy. Finally, famciclovir is effective in relieving the acute signs and symptoms of first-episode genital herpes, and preclinical evidence suggests it has the potential to be effective in preventing life-long HSV latency or subsequent reactivation following treatment of first episodes.

## Fig. 2 .
2Absorption of famciclovir. After ingestion, famciclovir has good stability in duodenal contents. Enzymes in the intestinal wall begin converting famciclovir to the pharmacologically active penciclovir, with most of the process occurring and completing in the liver. Once conversion is complete, penciclovir is rapidly circulated through the body via the bloodstream.(Figure from Vere Hodge et al., s with permission.)characteristics as acyclovir. Thus, the active form of valacyclovir also has limited stability and a short intracellular half-life in vitro (less than one hour in HSV-2-infected cells).11 Famciclovir (Famvir(R), SmithKline Beecham


-1 antibodies and typically have a milder clinical presentation. Although the diagnosis of HSV infection is usually based on clinical signs and symptoms, most genital HSV infections are not clinically apparent. Patients can have atypical lesions or be asymptomatic. Pa-1. Primary mucocutaneous infection 2. Infection of the ganglia Fig. I. Herpes simplex virus cycle. There are five stages to the herpes simplex virus life cycle. Stage I: Primary mucocutaneous infection of a susceptible individual and onset of primary infection. Stage 2: After viral replication at the site of inoculation, HSV infects the terminal branches of sensory endings to the skin and is transported to the cell body of sensory ganglia. Stage 3: At resolution of primary infection viral replication is shut off and HSV establishes life-long latency. Stage 4: Reactivation from the latent stage is triggered and HSV is released from infected ganglia to reestablish active infection. Stage 5: Recurrent infection ensues.Establishment 

of Latency 

5. Recurrent 

4. Reactivatin 

nfect 



## TABLE I .
IPharmacokinetic overview offamciclovirPenciclovir 

Bioavailability (%) 

77 
Dose proportionality 
Yes 

Plasma half-life (hr) 

2-3 

Rate of phosphorylation 

High 

Intracellular half-life (hr) 

HSV-I infected cells 

10 
HSV-2 infected cells 
20 

Excretion 
Renal 

aOral formulation of famciclovir. 

bin vitro data. 

CMeasured in vitro as the triphosphate metabolites. 

(Table 1).zl The bioavailability of penciclovir is not 
affected by the presence of food. zz,z3 No clinically 

significant alterations in pharmacokinetics of pen-
ciclovir were observed following single versus re-
peat doses of 500 mg of famciclovir or single-dose 
administration of 500 mg of famciclovir after pre-
treatment with multiple doses of drugs known to 
inhibit hepatic oxidative enzymes (cimetidine and 
allopurinol) or to have narrow therapeutic ranges 

(theophylline and digoxin), z4 In addition, no clini-

cally significant pharmacokinetic interactions be-
tween 500-mg, single-dose therapy with famciclo-
vir and 200-mg of zidovudine (Retrovir(R), Glaxo 
Wellcome, Inc.) were found when these agents 
were coadministered to immunocompromised pa-

tients. 2s 



Herpes revisited: still a cause of concern. D N Catotti, P Clarke, K E Catoe, Sex Transm Dis. 20Catotti DN, Clarke P, Catoe KE: Herpes revisited: still a cause of concern. Sex Transm Dis 20:77-80, 1993.

Herpes simplex virus type 2 in the United States. Infectious, D T Fleming, G M Mcquillan, R E Johnson, N Engl J Med. 337INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY 2. Fleming DT, McQuillan GM, Johnson RE, et al.: Her- pes simplex virus type 2 in the United States, 1976 to 1994. N Engl J Med 337:1105-1111, 1997.

Incidence of herpes genitalis in Northern Ireland in 1973-1983 and herpes simplex types and 2 isolated in 1982-4. H A Lavery, J H Connolly, J D Russell, Genitourin Med. 62Lavery HA, Connolly JH, Russell JD: Incidence of her- pes genitalis in Northern Ireland in 1973-1983 and her- pes simplex types and 2 isolated in 1982-4. Genitourin Med 62:24-27, 1986.

Herpes simplex virus infection: biology, treatment, and prevention. S E Straus, J F Rooney, J L Sever, Ann Intern Med. 103Straus SE, Rooney JF, Sever JL, et al.: Herpes simplex virus infection: biology, treatment, and prevention. Ann Intern Med 103:404-419, 1985.

Infections with herpes simplex viruses. L Corey, P G Spear, N Engl J Med. 314Corey L, Spear PG: Infections with herpes simplex vi- ruses. N Engl J Med 314:686-691, 1986.

Herpes simplex virus. H J Landy, J H Grossman, Sex Transm Dis. 16Landy HJ, Grossman JH: Herpes simplex virus. Sex Transm Dis 16:495-515, 1989.

Genital herpes simplex virus infection and treatment. S L Sacks, Clinical Management of Herpes Viruses. Sacks SL, Straus SE, Whitley RJ, Griffith PDAmsterdamlOS PressSacks SL: Genital herpes simplex virus infection and treatment. In: Sacks SL, Straus SE, Whitley RJ, Grif- fith PD (eds): Clinical Management of Herpes Viruses. Amsterdam: lOS Press, pp 55-74, 1995.

Recurrence rates in genital herpes after symptomatic first-episode infection. J Benedetti, L Corey, R Ashley, Benedetti J, Corey L, Ashley R: Recurrence rates in genital herpes after symptomatic first-episode infection.

. Ann Intern Med. 121Ann Intern Med 121:847-854, 1994.

Genital herpes simplex virus infections: clinical manifestations, course, and complications. L Corey, H G Adams, Z A Brown, K K Holmes, Ann Intern Med. 98Corey L, Adams HG, Brown ZA, Holmes KK: Genital herpes simplex virus infections: clinical manifestations, course, and complications. Ann Intern Med 98:958-972, 1983.

Acyclovir: a decade later. R J Whitley, J W Gnann, N Engl J Med. 327Whitley RJ, Gnann JW: Acyclovir: a decade later. N Engl J Med 327:782-789, 1992.

Vere Hodge RA: Mode of antiviral action of penciclovir in MRC-5 cells infected with herpes simplex virus type (HSV-1), HSV-2 and varicella-zoster virus. D L Earnshaw, T H Bacon, S J Darlison, K Edmonds, R M Perkins, Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 36Earnshaw DL, Bacon TH, Darlison SJ, Edmonds K, Perkins RM, Vere Hodge RA: Mode of antiviral action of penciclovir in MRC-5 cells infected with herpes sim- plex virus type (HSV-1), HSV-2 and varicella-zoster virus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 36:2747-2757, 1992.

Pharmacokinetics of the acyclovir pro-drug valacyclovir after escalating single and multiple-dose administration to normal volunteers. S Weller, M R Blum, M Doucette, Clin Pharmacol Ther. 54Weller S, Blum MR, Doucette M, et al.: Pharmacoki- netics of the acyclovir pro-drug valacyclovir after esca- lating single and multiple-dose administration to normal volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther 54:595-605, 1993.

Famciclovir for the treatment of acute herpes zoster: effects on acute disease and postherpetic neuralgia. A 1986 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. S K Tyring, R A Barbarash, M D Nahlik, Ann Intern Med. 123Tyring SK, Barbarash RA, Nahlik MD, et al.: Famciclo- vir for the treatment of acute herpes zoster: effects on acute disease and postherpetic neuralgia. A 1986 ran- domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann In- tern Med 123:89-96, 1995.

S for the Canadian Cooperative Study Group: Patient-initiated, twice-daily oral famciclovir for early recurrent genital herpes: a randomized, double-blind multicenter trial. S L Sacks, F Y Aoki, F Diaz-Mitoma, J Sellors, Shafran , JAMA. 276Sacks SL, Aoki FY, Diaz-Mitoma F, Sellors J, and Sha- fran S for the Canadian Cooperative Study Group: Pa- tient-initiated, twice-daily oral famciclovir for early re- current genital herpes: a randomized, double-blind mul- ticenter trial. JAMA 276:44-49, 1996.

Selection of an oral prodrug. Vere Hodge, R A Sutton, D Boyd, M Harnden, M R Jarvest, R L , BRL. Vere Hodge RA, Sutton D, Boyd M, Harnden MR, Jarvest RL: Selection of an oral prodrug (BRL 42810;

famciclovir) for the antiherpesvirus agent BRL 39123 [9-(4-hydroxy-3-hydroxymethylbut-1-yl)guanine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 33penciclovirfamciclovir) for the antiherpesvirus agent BRL 39123 [9-(4-hydroxy-3-hydroxymethylbut-1-yl)guanine; penci- clovir], Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33:1765-1773, 1989.

Famciclovir and penciclovir. The mode of action of famciclovir including its conversion to penciclovir. Vere Hodge, R A , Antiviral Chem Chemother. 4Vere Hodge RA: Famciclovir and penciclovir. The mode of action of famciclovir including its conversion to penciclovir. Antiviral Chem Chemother 4:67-84, 1993.

Use of isotopically chiral [4'-13C] famciclovir and 13C NMR to identify the chiral monoacylated intermediates in the conversion of famciclovir to penciclovir by human intestinal wall extract. Vere Hodge, R A Darlison, S J Readshaw, S A , Chirality. 5Vere Hodge RA, Darlison SJ, Readshaw SA: Use of iso- topically chiral [4'-13C] famciclovir and 13C NMR to identify the chiral monoacylated intermediates in the conversion of famciclovir to penciclovir by human in- testinal wall extract. Chirality 5:577-582, 1993.

Mode of action of 9-(4-hydroxy-3-hydroxymethylbut-1-yl)guanine (BRL 39123) against herpes simplex virus in MRC-5 cells. Vere Hodge, R A Perkins, R M , Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 33Vere Hodge RA, Perkins RM: Mode of action of 9-(4- hydroxy-3-hydroxymethylbut-1-yl)guanine (BRL 39123) against herpes simplex virus in MRC-5 cells. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33:223-229, 1989.

-hydroxy-3-hydroxy-methylbut-1-yl)guanine (BRL 39123) in cell culture. M R Boyd, T H Bacon, D Sutton, M Cole, Antiherpesvirus activity of 9. 31Boyd MR, Bacon TH, Sutton D, Cole M: Antiherpes- virus activity of 9-(4-hydroxy-3-hydroxy-methylbut-1- yl)guanine (BRL 39123) in cell culture. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 31:1238-1242, 1987.

The mode of action of penciclovir. Vere Hodge, R A Cheng, Y-C , Antiviral Chem Chemother. 41supplVere Hodge RA, Cheng Y-C: The mode of action of penciclovir. Antiviral Chem Chemother 4(suppl 1):13- 24, 1993.

Pharmacokinetics of famciclovir in man. M A Pue, L Z Benet, Antiviral Chem Chemother. 41supplPue MA, Benet LZ: Pharmacokinetics of famciclovir in man. Antiviral Chem Chemother 4(suppl 1):47-55, 1993.

Effect of food on the bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of penciclovir, a novel antiherpes agent, following oral administration of the pro-drug famciclovir. S E Fowles, D M Pierce, W T Prince, J C Thow, Br J Clin Pharmacol. 29abstractFowles SE, Pierce DM, Prince WT, Thow JC: Effect of food on the bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of pen- ciclovir, a novel antiherpes agent, following oral admin- istration of the pro-drug famciclovir. Br J Clin Pharma- col 29:620P-621P, 1990 (abstract).

A further study of the effect of food on the bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of penciclovir after oral administration of famciclovir. S E Fowles, A J Fairless, D M Pierce, W J Prince, Br Clin Pharmacol. 32abstractFowles SE, Fairless AJ, Pierce DM, Prince WJ: A fur- ther study of the effect of food on the bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of penciclovir after oral administration of famciclovir. Br Clin Pharmacol 32:657P, 1991 (ab- stract).

Drug interaction studies and safety of famciclovir in healthy volunteers: a review. S Daniels, J J Schentag, Antiviral Chem Chemother. 41supplDaniels S, Schentag JJ: Drug interaction studies and safety of famciclovir in healthy volunteers: a review. Antiviral Chem Chemother 4(suppl 1):57-64, 1993.

Safe coadministration of famciclovir and zidovudine. F Rousseau, S Scott, S Pratt, Abstracts of the 34th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobiat Agents and Chemotherapy. Orlando, FLRousseau F, Scott S, Pratt S, et al.: Safe coadministra- tion of famciclovir and zidovudine. In: Abstracts of the 34th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobiat Agents and Chemotherapy; October 4-7, 1994; Orlando, FL. Abstract A64.

Safety of famciclovir in patients with herpes zoster and genital herpes. R Saltzman, R Jurewicz, R Boon, Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 38Saltzman R, Jurewicz R, Boon R: Safety of famciclovir in patients with herpes zoster and genital herpes. Anti- microb Agents Chemother 38:2454-2457, 1994.

The clinical safety experience with famciclovir. R Boon, R Saltzman, G F Atkinson, Hepatol. 24282Boon R, Saltzman R, Atkinson GF: The clinical safety experience with famciclovir. Hepatol 24:282A, 1996.

Clinic-initiated treatment of recurrent genital herpes using famciclovir: resuits of a Canadian multicenter study. Presented at the 6th International Congress for Infectious Diseases. S L Sacks, A Martel, F Aoki, Sacks SL, Martel A, Aoki F et al.: Clinic-initiated treat- ment of recurrent genital herpes using famciclovir: re- suits of a Canadian multicenter study. Presented at the 6th International Congress for Infectious Diseases;

Oral famciclovir for suppression of recurrent genital herpes simplex virus infection in women. G Mertz, M O Loveless, M J Levin, Arch Intern Med. 157Mertz G, Loveless MO, Levin MJ, et al.: Oral famciclo- vir for suppression of recurrent genital herpes simplex virus infection in women. Arch Intern Med 157:343- 349, 1997.

Dosage and safety of long-term suppressive acyclovir therapy for recurrent genital herpes. G Mindel, A Faherty, O Carney, Lancet. 8591Mindel G, Faherty A, Carney O, et al.: Dosage and safety of long-term suppressive acyclovir therapy for re- current genital herpes. Lancet 8591:926-928, 1997.

Once-daily valaciclovir for suppression of genital herpes--Results from a large, international, controlled study. Presented at the American Academy of Dermatology. Tyring Sk, Valaciclovir Hsv Study, Group, San Francisco, CATyring SK and the International Valaciclovir HSV Study Group. Once-daily valaciclovir for suppression of genital herpes--Results from a large, international, controlled study. Presented at the American Academy of Derma- tology, San Francisco, CA. 21-26, March 1997.

Treatment of first episode genital herpes with famciclovir. M Loveless, W Harris, S Sacks, Abstracts of the 35th Interscience Conference of Antimicrobial Agents in Chemotherapy. 12San FranciscoLoveless M, Harris W, Sacks S: Treatment of first epi- sode genital herpes with famciclovir. In: Abstracts of the 35th Interscience Conference of Antimicrobial Agents in Chemotherapy; September 17-20, 1995; San Francis- co, CA. Abstract H 12.

The effects of delayed-onset chemotherapy using famciclovir or valaciclovir in a murine immunosuppression model for HSV-1. H J Field, A M Thackray, Antiviral Chem Chemother. 6Field HJ, Thackray AM: The effects of delayed-onset chemotherapy using famciclovir or valaciclovir in a mu- rine immunosuppression model for HSV-1. Antiviral Chem Chemother 6:210-216, 1995.

Differential effects of famciclovir and valaciclovir on the pathogenesis of herpes simplex virus in murine infection model including reactivation from latency. A M Thackray, H J Field, J Infect Dis. 173Thackray AM, Field HJ: Differential effects of famci- clovir and valaciclovir on the pathogenesis of herpes simplex virus in murine infection model including re- activation from latency. J Infect Dis 173:291-299, 1996.

Comparison of famciclovir and acyclovir in first episodes of genital herpes: possible effect on latency. A Ahmed, P D Woolley, European Conference on Herpesviruses. Ahmed A, Woolley PD: Comparison of famciclovir and acyclovir in first episodes of genital herpes: possible ef- fect on latency. European Conference on Herpesvi- ruses; 1996;

. France Paris, Paris, France.

. INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY. 43INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY 43