# Solitary Perihepatic Splenosis Mimicking Liver Lesion A Case Report and Literature Review

CorpusID: 15732936
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8000dad3de33efa1f824c5a3656d7a3294c86a8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8000dad3de33efa1f824c5a3656d7a3294c86a8)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Solitary Perihepatic Splenosis Mimicking Liver Lesion A Case Report and Literature Review


MDChao Wu 
MDBinhao Zhang 
MDLin Chen 
MDBixiang Zhang 
MDXiaoping Chen 
Solitary Perihepatic Splenosis Mimicking Liver Lesion A Case Report and Literature Review
10.1097/MD.0000000000000586
Hepatic splenosis, one type of manifestation of ectopic spleen tissue, is rarely reported. It cannot be distinguished from hepatic malignancies because of lack of significant radiological features. By means of this case report and 31 literature reviews, potential treatment modalities concerning clinical diagnostics, patient's management could be discussed.The report presents the case of a 33-year-old man with a liver lesion. Finally, after a mini-incision laparotomy, the lesion was resected and the diagnosis confirmed it as hepatic splenosis. A literature search for case reports published between January 1, 1900, and August 1, 2014, was performed on PubMed.Approximately 80% (27/34) of patients diagnosed with hepatic splenosis had a history of splenectomy. The mean time interval between splenectomy and hepatic splenosis detection was 25 (1.5-47) years. The median size of reported hepatic splenosis is 30 mm in diameter. Technetium-99m-labeled heat denatured red-blood-cells scintigraphy or superparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging is now considered to be the optimal method of diagnosing splenosis.Hepatic splenosis requires no treatment in most cases. Operation should be performed if it is accompanied by hypersplenism in hematological diseases. When the diagnosis remains unclear, further biopsy or laparoscopy is recommended. If hepatic splenosis is confirmed, careful follow-up is beneficial.(Medicine 94(9):e586)Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, DWI = diffusionweighted imaging, HAV = hepatitis A virus, HBV = hepatitis B virus, HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma, SPIO-MRI = superparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, Tc-99mHDRS = Technetium-99m-labeled heat denatured red-blood-cells scintigraphy.Editor: Ana J. Coito.

## INTRODUCTION

S plenosis is one manifestation of ectopic spleen tissue, which usually occurs after splenic trauma or splenectomy. The pathogenesis is possibly the autotransplantation of spleen fragment. It is mostly found in the peritoneal, pelvic, or thoracic cavity. However, hepatic splenosis, especially solitary perihepatic splenosis mimicking liver lesion, was rarely reported in the literature. With the deficiency of significant features, normal radiological examination cannot distinguish this from hepatic malignancies. Here, we report a patient with hepatic splenosis mimicking liver lesion. Literatures were reviewed and analyzed to provide information for clinicians to distinguish and treat this disease. Ethical approval was neither obliged nor sought because all management strategies and treatment procedures were part of routine health care. However, we have obtained the approval from the patient to report the case.


## CASE PRESENTATION

A 33-year-old man presented to our hospital after detection of a hepatic lesion from a routine examination. He claimed no discomfort. His medical history included an urgent splenectomy due to traumatic rupture of spleen from a traffic accident 12 years ago and hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection in childhood. No family or genetic history was found. There was no positive sign on physical examination except a previous operation scar. Blood routine and liver-renal function laboratory tests remained normal except mild elevated platelet count 372 Â10 9 /L (normal range: 100-300 Â10 9 /L) and total bilirubin 21.5 mmol/L (normal range: 3.4-20.5 mmol/L). The Child-Pugh grade was A (score 5). Besides tumor markers including a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, HAV immunoglobulin M and hepatitis B virus (HBV) deoxyribonucleic acid were unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a 3.5 Â 2.2 cm diameter hypoechoic lesion in the left hepatic lobe near diaphragm ( Figure 1A). Electrocardiogram and chest radiography were normal. Plain computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a homogeneous hypodensity mass relative to the surrounding liver parenchyma, measuring 2.1 Â 3.4 cm in diameter ( Figure 1B). MRI with perfusion-weighted and diffusionweighted imaging confirmed the presence of a solitary 3.5 Â 2.0 cm lesion, which suggests hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), lying in segment II in a subcapsular position according to radiological features ( Figure 2). Biopsy was recommended to the patient for clear diagnosis. However, being afraid of liver malignancy, the patient wanted to confirm the status of the lesion and chose surgery. With sufficient preoperative preparation, the patient underwent an exploratory surgery. Consulting with the previous operational adhesion, we performed the mini-incision laparotomy. Exploration showed that an extrahepatic 4 Â 2 Â 2 cm splenosis between liver segment II and diaphragm, and dent on the surface of liver could be seen. Intraoperative ultrasound was performed and excluded any    other mass on the liver. Then the lesion was rapidly resected with no need of hepatic resection. The histopathological result confirmed the lesion as spleen tissue, with no indication of neoplasia ( Figure 3). After 7 days recovery, the patient was discharged without complications. Follow-up examination including blood routine, liver function, and liver CT scanning at 30 days did not show any abnormality. No adverse or unanticipated event was presented.


## DISCUSSION

Albrecht 1 firstly described this disease in 1896, but till 1939, Buchbinder and Lipkopff 2 introduced the term ''splenosis.'' Splenosis was once considered to be rare because of its asymptomatic clinical features. Recent articles 3,4 show that incidence of splenosis varies from 26% to 67% in patients with traumatic splenic rupture. However, the accurate rate is unknown on account of no epidemiologic survey. Among the patients with splenosis, most have been performed splenectomy due to trauma or hematological diseases. Herein, the authors have searched literatures related to hepatic splenosis. All results can be seen in Table 1   cavity, even in the chest when the diaphragm is damaged simultaneously. 5 Even if the real pathogenesis remains unclear, splenosis is now considered of developing from seeding of splenic fragments into exposed serosal surfaces at the time of splenic trauma or splenectomy. 4 Moreover, another mechanism, especially for intrahepatic splenosis, is hematogenous spread of splenic pulp or erythrocyte progenitor cells and secondary growth in response to tissue hypoxia. 34 In our case, perihepatic splenosis is probably because the space between the diaphragm and liver segment II is near the spleen and can be easily reached by splenic fragments during operation. The limitation of this case is that we did not take splenosis as a possible diagnosis before operation, because of lack of experience. The splenic trauma was supposed to be essential to consider this diagnosis. We reviewed the related literatures to gain more knowledge about this disease. This case report and literature review would be helpful for clinicians to distinguish splenosis and select diagnostic methods and treatment.

Usually, splenosis is asymptomatic. However, some clinical features have been reported, which includes abdominal pain or bowel obstruction associated with compression or sudden torsion of the solid lesion. 3,6 In addition, gastrointestinal bleeding was also reported. In some cases of splenectomy for hematological diseases, it leads to recurrence of hematological manifestations. It is probably because that splenosis overtakes some function of the spleen. Howell-Jolly bodies, which are normally retained by normal spleen, could be seen diminishing or absent on the peripheral blood smears in patients with functioning splenosis. Unfortunately, it is difficult to distinguish hepatic splenosis from liver tumor due to lack of typical radiological features using conventional ultrasound, CT and MRI. Up to now, technetium-99m-labeled heat denatured red-blood-cells scintigraphy (Tc-99mHDRS) is considered to be the optimal method of diagnosing splenosis, but it fails to confirm the accurate anatomical localization. 7 Furthermore, it has also been reported that superparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (SPIO-MRI) is a useful diagnostic tool to distinguish hepatic splenosis from malignant hepatic tumor. Normal reticuloendothelial tissue indicates loss of signal intensity on T2-weighted MRI because natural reticuloendothelial cells phagocytose SPIO particles. 8 Tumor cells usually do not phagocytose particles, which results in a cancer-to-liver intensity difference, but well-differentiated HCCs is an exception. Therefore, biopsy or operation could be avoided with the application of Tc-99mHDRS and SPIO-MRI in most situations. In our case, the young patient still wanted to confirm the diagnosis pathologically after he was informed that the lesion may be benign. In account of possible abdominal adhesion caused by the previous operation, finally, we chose a mini-incision laparotomy.

It is still challenging for clinicians to distinguish splenosis from hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatic adenoma, hemangioma, and focal nodular hyperplasia timely and correctly. A missed diagnosis of hepatic splenosis usually has a negative influence on patient's management. Besides, the most difficult differential diagnosis is of accessory spleen. We searched literatures and listed the main differences between these 2 ectopic spleen tissues in Table 2. The splenosis may have some immunologic value and splenic filtering function, which may be beneficial for organism. Thus, hepatic splenosis requires no treatment in most cases. In addition, splenosis with hematological diseases should be estimated on the basis of current spleen function. Operation should be performed if necessary. When the diagnosis remains unclear, further biopsy or laparoscopy is recommended. If hepatic splenosis is confirmed, careful follow-up is beneficial (Figure 4).

## FIGURE 1 .
1(A) Ultrasonography indicates a 3.5 Â 2.2 cm diameter hypoechoic lesion, which envelope is integrated (white arrow). (B) Plain CT scan demonstrated a homogeneous hypodensity mass relative to the surrounding liver parenchyma, measuring 2.1 Â 3.4 cm in diameter (white arrow). CT ¼ computed tomography.

## FIGURE 2 .
2(A) T1-weighted MR image: the lesion is of low signal intensity (white arrow). (B) T2-weighted MR image: the lesion is of high signal intensity (white arrow). (C) Liver acceleration volume acquisition contrast: the lesion is of slight hypointensity (black arrow). (D) DWI: the lesion is of slight hyperintensity (white arrow). DWI ¼ diffusion-weighted imaging, MR ¼ magnetic resonance.

## FIGURE 3 .
3(A) Pathological result (hematoxylin-eosin staining, original magnification: 10Â). (B) Pathological result (hematoxylin-eosin staining, original magnification: 40Â).


. Approximately 80% (27/34) of patients had a history of splenectomy because of splenic trauma. The mean time interval between splenectomy and hepatic splenosis detection was 25 years, with a range of 1.5 to 47 years. The median size of reported hepatic splenosis is 30 mm in diameter. Splenosis can occur anywhere within abdominal or pelvic

## FIGURE 4 .
4Clinical algorithms for the evaluation of perihepatic splenosis. CT ¼ computed tomography, Tc-99mHDRS ¼ technetium-99mlabeled heat denatured red-blood-cells scintigraphy, MRI ¼ magnetic resonance imaging, SPIO ¼ superparamagnetic iron oxide, US, ultrasonography.

## TABLE 1 .
1Literature Review of Hepatic SplenosisCase 

Age, 
y/Sex 

Reason of 
Splenectomy 

Time 
Interval, y 

Risk of 
Liver Tumor 

Number 

Location 

Size, mm 

Primary Diagnosis 

Confirmed 
Method 

Galloro et al 9 

56/M Trauma 

NM 

Cirrhosis 

1 

NM 

48 

Hepatocarcinoma 

FNA cytology 

Yeh et al 10 

64/M Trauma 

8 

HCV 

1 

S6, extra 

25 

Liver tumor 

Operation 

Abu Hilal et al 11 

60/M Trauma 

46 
HCV, cirrhosis, 
persistent alcoholic 

Multiple S7, extra 

27 
Â 20 

HCC 

Laparoscopy 

Choi et al 4 

32/M Trauma 

26 

HBV 
Multiple S4a and S6, extra 

10-30 

HCC 

Operation 

Inchingolo et al 12 

53/M Trauma 

33 

NASH 

1 
S3, exophytic 

35 
HCC, adenoma, FHN 

Laparoscopy, 
Tc-99mHDRS 

Menth et al 13 

43/M Trauma 

25 
HCV, cirrhosis 

Multiple S2, extra 

4-36 

HCC 

CT-guided biopsy 

Gruen and Gollub 6 

38/F Trauma 

20 
Fatty liver, oral 
contraceptive 

1 
S3 and S4, intra 

39 
FNH, hepatic adenoma 

Operation 

D'Angelica et al 3 

38/F Trauma 

20 
Oral contraceptive, 
alcohol abuse 

1 
Within the umbilical 
fissure,S3 and S4, extra 

25 
FNH, hepatic adenoma 

Operation 

Liu et al 14 

38/M Trauma 

14 

HBV 

1 

S2, extra 

33 
Â 27 
Hepatic malignancy 

Laparoscopy 

Li et al 15 

61/M NM 

NM 
Prostate cancer 

Multiple NM 

NM 

Splenosis 

Needle biopsy 

Kim et al 16 

43/M Trauma 

21 
HBV, cirrhosis 

1 

S6, intra 

30 

HCC 

Operation 

Di Costanzo et al 5 

58/M Trauma 

46 
HBV, cirrhosis 

1 

S2, intra 

48 

HCC 

FNA biopsy, Tc-99mHDRS 

48/F Trauma 

41 
HCV cirrhosis 

1 

S3, extra 

31 

HCC 

US-guided biopsy 

Ferraioli et al 17 

40/M Trauma 

28 

HCV 

1 

S7, intra 

60 
Â 31 

Intrahepatic splenosis 

US-guided biopsy 

Lee et al 18 

43/M Trauma 

20 
HBV carrier 

1 

S6, intra 

35 

HCC 

Operation 

Lu et al 19 

59/M Trauma 

NM 

HBV 

3 
S7, left lateral lobe, intra 

12-22 
Hepatic splenosis 

Gd-DTPA, Tc-99mHDRS 

Foroudi et al 20 

59/F NM 

47 
Breast cancer 
Multiple S6, splenectomy bed 

NM 

Metastasis 

FNA biopsy 
and CT 

Davidson and Reid 21 
54/M Surgical injury 

20 

None 

1 
Left lobe, intra 

20 

NM 

Necropsy 

Grande et al 7 

41/M Trauma 

35 

None 
Multiple S7, intra and extra 

5-45 
Intrahepatic splenosis 

Tc-99mHDRS 

Tsitouridis et al 22 

63/M Trauma 

20 

None 

1 
Left lobe, extra 

80 

Splenosis 

Operation 

64/M Gastric 

leiomyosarcoma 

1.5 

None 

1 

S4, extra 

50 
Peritoneal implantation 

CT-guided biopsy 

Mescoli et al 23 

68/F None 

None 

Cirrhosis 

3 

S3, 5, 7 

62-110 
Hemangioma or FNH 

Biopsy 

54/M Iatrogenic cause 

12 
Esophageal cancer 

1 
Left lobe, intra 

30 
Liver metastasis 

Operation 

Kang et al 8 

54/M Trauma 

15 

None 

2 

S2, intra 

7 
Â 6; 23 

Â 19 
Liver metastasis of 
gastric cancer 

Operation 

Yu et al 24 

54/M Trauma 

20 

None 

1 

S2, intra 

40 

Hepatoma 

Operation 

Yoshimitsu et al 25 
51/F Banti syndrome 

23 

Cirrhosis 

1 

S3, intra 

25 
HCC not excluded 

Operation 

Pekkafali et al 26 

21/M Trauma 

15 

None 

1 
Left lobe, intra 

34 
Â 23 

Intrahepatic splenosis 

Tc-99mHDRS 

De Vuysere et al 27 

50/M Trauma 

34 

None 

3 

S2, intra 

60 

Intrahepatic splenosis 

Open biopsy 

Kondo et al 28 

55/M Trauma 

31 

HCV 

1 

S7, intra 

35 
FNH, hemangioma, HCC US-guided biopsy 

Kashgari et al 29 

52/M Trauma 

30 
HCV, cirrhosis 

1 

S7, intra 

21 
Â 15 

HCC 

US-guided biopsy 

Gamulin et al 30 

49/M Trauma 

37 

None 

1 
Left lobe, extra 

66 
Â 42 

Lymphoma 

Operation 

Nakajima et al 31 

41/M Trauma 

21 

None 

1 

S6, intra 

NM 
Intrahepatic splenosis 

US-guided biopsy 

Zhao and Xu 32 

49/M Trauma 

17 

None 

1 
Posterior right lobe, NM 

50 
Â 30 

Â 30 

Adenoma, FNH, 
hemangioma, 

HCC not excluded 

Operation 

Liu et al 33 

49/F Trauma 

20 

NM 

Multiple S2, S4, NM 

12 
Â 10-50 
Â 50 Metastasis 

Operation 

Extra 
¼ extrahepatic, F 


## TABLE 2 .
2Differential Diagnosis Between Splenosis and Accessory SpleenSplenosis 
Accessory Spleen 

Etiopathogenesis 
Acquired 
Congenital 
Location 
Anywhere, usually in the left upper quadrant abdomen 
Near spleen, in the region of splenopancreatic or 
gastrosplenic ligaments 
Number 
Usually multiple 
Usually solitary 
Size in large 
Usually small 
Uncertain 
Blood supply 
From parasitized surrounding tissue 
Branches of spleen artery 
Hilum exist 
No 
Yes 
Histology 
Trabecular network 
Normal 
Prominent 
Capsular tissue 
No smooth muscle component 
Elastic muscular capsule 

US or CT detect hepatic lesion 
History of splenic trauma 
or splenectomy 

Laboratory tests 
peripheral blood smears 

Tc-99mHDRS or 
SPIO-enhanced MRI 

Confirmed splenosis 
Unconfirmed splenosis 

Follow-up 
Biopsy or laparoscopy 
Spleen function estimate 
operation (if needed) 

Splenosis with previous 
hematological diseases 


| www.md-journal.com Copyright # 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Copyright # 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

A case of very large, throughout the peritoneal accessory spleen (German). H Albrecht, Beitr Path Anat. 20Albrecht H. A case of very large, throughout the peritoneal accessory spleen (German). Beitr Path Anat. 1896;20:513-527.

Splenosis: multiple peritoneal splenic implants following abdominal injury. J Buchbinder, C Lipkoff, Surgery. 6Buchbinder J, Lipkoff C. Splenosis: multiple peritoneal splenic implants following abdominal injury. Surgery. 1939;6:927-934.

Isolated hepatic splenosis: first reported case. M D&apos;angelica, Y Fong, L H Blumgart, HPB Surg. 11D'Angelica M, Fong Y, Blumgart LH. Isolated hepatic splenosis: first reported case. HPB Surg. 1998;11:39-42.

Hepatic splenosis preoperatively diagnosed as hepatocellular carcinoma in a patient with chronic hepatitis B: a case report. G H Choi, M K Ju, J Y Kim, J Korean Med Sci. 23Choi GH, Ju MK, Kim JY, et al. Hepatic splenosis preoperatively diagnosed as hepatocellular carcinoma in a patient with chronic hepatitis B: a case report. J Korean Med Sci. 2008;23:336-341.

Hepatic splenosis misinterpreted as hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients referred for liver transplantation: report of two cases. Di Costanzo, G G Picciotto, F P Marsilia, G M , Liver Transpl. 10Di Costanzo GG, Picciotto FP, Marsilia GM, et al. Hepatic splenosis misinterpreted as hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients referred for liver transplantation: report of two cases. Liver Transpl. 2004;10:706-709.

Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking hepatic adenoma. D R Gruen, M J Gollub, Am J Roentgenol. 168Gruen DR, Gollub MJ. Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking hepatic adenoma. Am J Roentgenol. 1997;168:725-726.

Intrahepatic and widely distributed intraabdominal splenosis: multidetector CT, US and scintigraphic findings. M Grande, M Lapecorella, A A Ianora, Intern Emerg Med. 3Grande M, Lapecorella M, Ianora AA, et al. Intrahepatic and widely distributed intraabdominal splenosis: multidetector CT, US and scintigraphic findings. Intern Emerg Med. 2008;3:265-267.

Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking liver metastasis in a patient with gastric cancer. K C Kang, G S Cho, G A Chung, J Gastric Cancer. 11Kang KC, Cho GS, Chung GA, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking liver metastasis in a patient with gastric cancer. J Gastric Cancer. 2011;11:64-68.

Hepatic splenosis diagnosed by fine-needle cytology. P Galloro, G M Marsilia, O Nappi, Pathologica. 95Galloro P, Marsilia GM, Nappi O. Hepatic splenosis diagnosed by fine-needle cytology. Pathologica. 2003;95:57-59.

Abdominal splenosis mimicking hepatic tumor: a case report. M L Yeh, L Y Wang, C I Huang, Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 24Yeh ML, Wang LY, Huang CI, et al. Abdominal splenosis mimicking hepatic tumor: a case report. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2008;24:602-606.

Hepatic splenosis mimicking HCC in a patient with hepatitis C liver cirrhosis and mildly raised alpha feto protein; the important role of explorative laparoscopy. Abu Hilal, M Harb, A Zeidan, B , World J Surg Oncol. 71Abu Hilal M, Harb A, Zeidan B, et al. Hepatic splenosis mimicking HCC in a patient with hepatitis C liver cirrhosis and mildly raised alpha feto protein; the important role of explorative laparoscopy. World J Surg Oncol. 2009;7:1.

Hepatic splenosis presenting as arterialised liver lesion in a patient with NASH. R Inchingolo, P Peddu, J Karani, Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 17Inchingolo R, Peddu P, Karani J. Hepatic splenosis presenting as arterialised liver lesion in a patient with NASH. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013;17:2853-2856.

Intra-hepatic splenosis as an unexpected cause of a focal liver lesion in a patient with hepatitis C and liver cirrhosis: a case report. M Menth, K Herrmann, A Haug, Cases J. 28335Menth M, Herrmann K, Haug A, et al. Intra-hepatic splenosis as an unexpected cause of a focal liver lesion in a patient with hepatitis C and liver cirrhosis: a case report. Cases J. 2009;2:8335.

Laparoscopic resection of isolated hepatic splenosis mimicking liver tumors: case report with a literature review. K Liu, Y Liang, X Liang, Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 22Liu K, Liang Y, Liang X, et al. Laparoscopic resection of isolated hepatic splenosis mimicking liver tumors: case report with a literature review. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012;22:e307-e311.

Hepatic splenosis diagnosed after inappropriate metastatic evaluation in patient with low-risk prostate cancer. H Li, D Snow-Lisy, E A Klein, Urology. 79Li H, Snow-Lisy D, Klein EA. Hepatic splenosis diagnosed after inappropriate metastatic evaluation in patient with low-risk prostate cancer. Urology. 2012;79:e73-e74.

An interesting hepatic mass: splenosis mimicking a hepatocellular carcinoma (2003:9b). K A Kim, C M Park, C H Kim, Eur Radiol. 13Kim KA, Park CM, Kim CH, et al. An interesting hepatic mass: splenosis mimicking a hepatocellular carcinoma (2003:9b). Eur Radiol. 2003;13:2713-2715.

Contrast-enhanced lowmechanical-index ultrasonography in hepatic splenosis. G Ferraioli, Di Sarno, A Coppola, C , J Ultrasound Med. 25Ferraioli G, Di Sarno A, Coppola C, et al. Contrast-enhanced low- mechanical-index ultrasonography in hepatic splenosis. J Ultrasound Med. 2006;25:133-136.

Hepatic splenosis diagnosed as hepatocellular carcinoma: report of a case. J B Lee, K W Ryu, T J Song, Surg Today. 32Lee JB, Ryu KW, Song TJ, et al. Hepatic splenosis diagnosed as hepatocellular carcinoma: report of a case. Surg Today. 2002;32:180- 182.

Hepatic splenosis diagnosed by spleen scintigraphy. H C Lu, C W Su, C L Lu, Am J Gastroenterol. 103Lu HC, Su CW, Lu CL, et al. Hepatic splenosis diagnosed by spleen scintigraphy. Am J Gastroenterol. 2008;103:1842-1844.

Splenosis mimicking metastases from breast carcinoma. F Foroudi, V Ahern, A Peduto, Clin Oncol. 11Foroudi F, Ahern V, Peduto A. Splenosis mimicking metastases from breast carcinoma. Clin Oncol. 1999;11:190-192.

Intrahepatic splenic tissue. L A Davidson, I N Reid, J Clin Pathol. 50Davidson LA, Reid IN. Intrahepatic splenic tissue. J Clin Pathol. 1997;50:532-533.

CT and MRI of intraperitoneal splenosis. I Tsitouridis, M Michaelides, C Sotiriadis, Diagn Interv Radiol. 16Tsitouridis I, Michaelides M, Sotiriadis C, et al. CT and MRI of intraperitoneal splenosis. Diagn Interv Radiol. 2010;16:145-149.

Hepatic spleen nodules (HSN). C Mescoli, C Castoro, A Sergio, Scand J Gastroenterol. 45Mescoli C, Castoro C, Sergio A, et al. Hepatic spleen nodules (HSN). Scand J Gastroenterol. 2010;45:628-632.

Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking hepatoma. H Yu, L Xia, T Li, BMJ Case Rep. Yu H, Xia L, Li T, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking hepatoma. BMJ Case Rep. 2009;2009:.

Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking a liver tumor. K Yoshimitsu, H Aibe, T Nobe, Abdom Imaging. 18Yoshimitsu K, Aibe H, Nobe T, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking a liver tumor. Abdom Imaging. 1993;18:156-158.

Intrahepatic splenosis: a case report. Z Pekkafali, A F Karsli, E Silit, Eur Radiol. 123supplPekkafali Z, Karsli AF, Silit E, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis: a case report. Eur Radiol. 2002;12 (suppl 3):S62-S65.

Intrahepatic splenosis: imaging features. S De Vuysere, W Van Steenbergen, R Aerts, Abdom Imaging. 25De Vuysere S, Van Steenbergen W, Aerts R, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis: imaging features. Abdom Imaging. 2000;25:187-189.

Intrahepatic splenosis in a patient with chronic hepatitis C. M Kondo, H Okazaki, K Takai, J Gastroenterol. 39Kondo M, Okazaki H, Takai K, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis in a patient with chronic hepatitis C. J Gastroenterol. 2004;39:1013- 1015.

Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking hepatocellular carcinoma in a cirrhotic liver. A A Kashgari, H M Al-Mana, Al-Kadhi Ya, Saudi Med J. 30Kashgari AA, Al-Mana HM, Al-Kadhi YA. Intrahepatic splenosis mimicking hepatocellular carcinoma in a cirrhotic liver. Saudi Med J. 2009;30:429-432.

An unusual, presumably hepatic mass. A Gamulin, J Oberholzer, L Rubbia-Brandt, Lancet. 3602066Gamulin A, Oberholzer J, Rubbia-Brandt L, et al. An unusual, presumably hepatic mass. Lancet. 2002;360:2066.

Intrahepatic splenosis with severe iron deposition presenting with atypical magnetic resonance images. T Nakajima, A Fujiwara, M Yamaguchi, Intern Med. 47Nakajima T, Fujiwara A, Yamaguchi M, et al. Intrahepatic splenosis with severe iron deposition presenting with atypical magnetic resonance images. Intern Med. 2008;47:743-746.

Splenosis simulating an intrahepatic mass. M Zhao, H W Xu, Chin J Traumatol. 7Zhao M, Xu HW. Splenosis simulating an intrahepatic mass. Chin J Traumatol. 2004;7:62-64.

Abdominal multiple splenosis mimicking liver and colon tumors: a case report and review of the literature. Y Liu, Ji B Wang, G , Int J Med Sci. 9Liu Y, Ji B, Wang G, et al. Abdominal multiple splenosis mimicking liver and colon tumors: a case report and review of the literature. Int J Med Sci. 2012;9:174-177.

Portal vein entrance of splenic erythrocytic progenitor cells and local hypoxia of liver, two events cause intrahepatic splenosis. C M Kwok, Y T Chen, H T Lin, Med Hypotheses. 67Kwok CM, Chen YT, Lin HT, et al. Portal vein entrance of splenic erythrocytic progenitor cells and local hypoxia of liver, two events cause intrahepatic splenosis. Med Hypotheses. 2006;67:1330-1332.