# Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review

CorpusID: 17017693
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6413d2e151cb0adadfc19f51caf9ca335df9a69](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6413d2e151cb0adadfc19f51caf9ca335df9a69)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review


Brett F Bechtel 
Timothy C Nunez 
Jennifer A Lyon 
Bryan A Cotton 
Tyler W Barrett 
Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review
R E V I E W
Study objective:The acute management of patients on warfarin with spontaneous or traumatic intracranial hemorrhage continues to be debated in the medical literature. The objective of this paper was to conduct a structured review of the medical literature and summarize the advantages and risks of the available treatment options for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients who present to the emergency department with acute intracranial hemorrhage. Methods: A structured literature search and review of articles relevant to intracranial hemorrhage and warfarin and treatment in the emergency department was performed. Databases for PubMed, CINAHL, and Cochrane EBM Reviews were electronically searched using keywords covering the concepts of anticoagulation drugs, intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), and treatment. The results generated by the search were limited to English-language articles and reviewed for relevance to our topic. The multiple database searches revealed 586 papers for review for possible inclusion. The final consensus of our comprehensive search strategy was a total of 23 original studies for inclusion in our review. Results: Warfarin not only increases the risk of but also the severity of ICH by causing hematoma expansion. Prothrombin complex concentrate is statistically significantly faster at correcting the INR compared to fresh frozen plasma transfusions. Recombinant factor VIIa appears to rapidly reverse warfarin's effect on INR; however, this treatment is not FDA-approved and is associated with a 5% thromboembolic event rate. Slow intravenous dosing of vitamin K is recommended in patients with ICH. The 30-day risk for ischemic stroke after discontinuation of warfarin therapy was 3-5%. The risks of not reversing the anticoagulation in ICH generally outweigh the risk of thrombosis in the acute setting. Conclusions: Increasing numbers of patients are on anticoagulation including warfarin. There is no uniform standard for reversing warfarin in intracranial hemorrhage. Intravenous vitamin K in addition to fresh frozen plasma or prothrombin complex concentrate is recommended be used to reverse warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage. No mortality benefit for one treatment regimen over another has been shown. Emergency physicians should know their hospital's available warfarin reversal options and be comfortable administering these treatments to critically ill patients.

## Introduction

Outpatient prescriptions for warfarin increased 45% to 31 million in the United States during the period of 1998-2004 [1]. Warfarin usage will increase with the rising prevalence of diseases such as atrial fibrillation and the aging of the population [2]. There are more than 1 million emergency department (ED) visits annually for traumatic brain injury (TBI) in the US [3]. The use of warfarin increases a patient's risk for spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage and overall mortality. The incidence of spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) is 7-10 times higher among patients taking warfarin compared to those not on anticoagulation [4]. Patients taking warfarin therapy account for 8-14% of all ICH [4,5], and ICH occurs 8-10 times more frequently in individuals on warfarin [4,6]. The annual risk of ICH in patients treated with warfarin has been estimated to be between 0.3-2.0% [7][8][9][10]. ICH is the most lethal form of CVA with 30-day mortality rates estimated at 30-55% [8,9,11], while those on warfarin have a higher risk of death at 30 days of 43-60% [9,11,12]. Alarmingly, between 50-90% of all ICH occurs while the INR is within the target range [7].

Different therapies such as fresh frozen plasma (FFP), vitamin K, prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC), which contain factors II, VII, IX, and X, and recombinant activated factor VII (rfVIIa) have all been used as ways to treat ICH in this high-risk population, either alone or in combination. Acute interventions that minimize or arrest ongoing bleeding and hematoma size are likely to be critical for improving outcomes [4,13]. This makes the role of the ED physician paramount in diagnosis and management of warfarin-associated ICH in a timely manner.

The objective of this systematic review is to summarize the medical literature regarding the benefits and risks of the available treatment options to reverse warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute ICH.


## Materials and methods


## Study design and data sources

We conducted a comprehensive literature search of the databases MEDLINE ® (via PubMed ® ; 1950-) through 2009 using a combination of Medical Subject Terms (MESH ® ) and keywords covering the concepts of anticoagulation drugs, intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), and treatment. A sample search strategy was "(Anticoagulants [mh] OR Anticoagulants [Pharmacological Action]) AND Intracranial Hemorrhages[mh] AND therapeutics[mh] AND English[la]," which yielded 1,082 citations as of 29 December 2009. We limited the search to study designs that included the following: clinical trial, meta-analysis, and practice guideline, randomized controlled trial. This search resulted in a total of 382 (/29 December 2009) abstracts.

Two independent reviewers (BFB, TCN) examined the abstracts and made separate recommendations for inclusion. A third reviewer (TWB) adjudicated any disagreements between the two primary reviewers. This review yielded 37 articles that were selected for full-text evaluation based on the following inclusion/exclusion criteria:

1. Patient taking an anticoagulant drug, with preference for warfarin 2. Patient diagnosed with intracranial hemorrhage 3. Article contains information on treatment/management of ICH 4. Article contains raw data and was original research study From these, 14 additional articles were hand selected from the papers' references for inclusion. This yielded a total of 51 studies, of which 30 were reviews. The reviews were excluded, resulting in 21 original studies for evaluation.

We additionally searched the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (via OVID ® ) and the Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL ® Via EBSCOhost ® ) for relevant reviews and articles as of December 2009. We identified no relevant reviews in the Cochrane Database. A search of CINAHL-using ((MH "Intracranial Hemorrhage+") or (MH "Cerebral Hemorrhage+")) AND ((MH "Anticoagu-lants+") or (MH "Heparin+") or (MH "Warfarin"))-limited to English language, Clinical Trials, Journal Articles, Practice Guidelines, Research, and Systematic Reviews, retrieved 204 abstracts of which 31 were selected. Three of the 31 were eliminated as duplicates to the PubMed search, yielding 28 that were added to the PubMed results for further examination. Two independent reviewers (BFB, TWB) examined the 28 abstracts and chose two for ultimate inclusion in the paper based on the above inclusion/exclusion criteria. The final consensus of our comprehensive search strategy was a total of 23 original studies for inclusion in our review. Two reviewers assessed the quality of evidence for each of these 23 manuscripts using the GRADE system that classifies studies from high to very low based on study design and internal validity measures [14].


## Results

The available literature consists primarily of small case series and retrospective cohort studies with the majority classified as low, thus limiting the strength of findings [14]. Variation in federal regulatory drug agency approvals also impacts reporting as PCC is approved and considered a standard reversal treatment in most nations [6]. The US Federal Drug Agency, however, has yet to approve a PCC formulation that is sufficient for warfarin reversal, thus leaving thawed plasma as the only available clotting factor option for rapid reversal.

This review focuses on warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage (WAICH) from spontaneous causes; however, the acute management of WAICH appears to include the same treatments regardless of whether the ICH was spontaneous or traumatic. However, the literature on traumatic WAICH is limited because of small sample sizes (Table 1) [15][16][17][18].


## Rationale for rapid correction of anticoagulation in the emergency department

Warfarin not only increases the risk of but also the severity of ICH by causing hematoma expansion [10]. Hematoma progression was found to occur in nearly 40% of ICH patients with ICH in the first few hours following symptom onset [4]. Hematoma enlargement within 6-12 h is commonly seen in patients on warfarin with ICH [19]. As volume and ventricular extension increase, earlier patient deterioration is observed [20]. Goldstein et al. found that for every 30-min delay in FFP administration, the probability of successful INR reversal within 24 h decreases by 20% [21]. Interventions aimed at preventing this growth are paramount as larger hematomas are associated with poorer functional outcomes [13,20].


## Administration of prothrombin complex concentrates versus fresh frozen plasma

Warfarin inhibits the production of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors; therefore, patients with WAICH should have their clotting factors repleted. Treatment options for the repletion of clotting factors include FFP and PCC.

FFP contains all coagulation factors in non-concentrated form. FFP is more universally available at hospitals, especially in the US, compared to PCC. Administration of FFP, a blood product, requires compatibility testing and carries the risk of blood borne infection transmission and transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI). FFP is stored frozen, thus requiring at least 15-20 min to thaw [6]. Large FFP volumes (800 to 3,500 mL) are often needed to treat serious hemorrhages [22]. This large volume may result in acute decompensated heart failure in patients with atrial fibrillation or cardiac valve disease and ventricular dysfunction. Less common adverse events including allergic reactions are also possible with FFP [6].

PCC contains coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X, and proteins C, S, and Z in concentrated form [6]. European and Australian practice protocols recommend the use of PCC in bleeding emergencies [6]. PCC is not widely available in US hospitals, and, while cheaper than rfVIIa, it is more expensive than FFP. PCC risks include potential thrombotic complications and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) [6]. The optimal PCC dosing is calculated according to patient age, body weight, severity of INR prolongation, and desired level of INR correction with typical dosages of 25 to 50 IU/kg [19].

Studies have compared the use of PCC and FFP in patients with WAICH, measuring which treatment corrected the INR faster (  FIXCC, similar to other PCC formulations, contains high concentrations of activated vitamin K-dependent factors (factors II, VII, IX, and X). The study included 13 patients, 8 receiving FFP alone and 5 receiving FFP and FIXCC. All patients received vitamin K 10 mg subcutaneously (SQ). They reported significant differences in time to correction, rate of correction, and volume of FFP required for correction between the FFP group (mean 8.9 h, 2,700 cc) and the FIXCC + FFP group (mean 2.95 h, 399 cc) [22]. Another study retrospectively evaluated ten patients treated with FIXCC + FFP + vitamin K and nine patients treated with FFP + vitamin K alone [26]. FIXCC used along with FFP and vitamin K trends toward faster normalization of INR than with FFP and vitamin K alone.

In conclusion, PCC is statistically significantly faster than FFP at correcting the INR in patients taking warfarin. None of these studies, however, demonstrated a statistically significant clinical outcome difference between those treated with FFP or PCC.

Use of recombinant factor VIIa for warfarin reversal in ICH (Table 3) Recombinant factor VIIa (rfVIIa) is the cloned activated form of endogenous human hemostatic factor VII. Its original use was for hemophiliac patients. rfVIIa is given as an IV bolus over 2-5 min, with its onset of action being almost immediate and clinically apparent hemostasis observed within 10 min [27]. However, it is expensive to use, with a 1.2-mg vial costing approximately USD$1,369 [27]. There is no risk of blood-borne pathogen transmission, but there is a clinically important risk of thrombotic complications. A systematic review of 35 randomized clinical trials reported arterial and venous thromboembolic rates of 5.5% and 5.3%, respectively [28]. The half-life of rfVIIa is short unless the dose is increased to 120 μg/kg. At this dose, rfVIIa was able to correct INR for periods of 24 h without signs of systemic coagulation in one study [27]. Bartal et al. in 2007 did a prospective study on seven patients with WAICH. They all received vitamin K and between 6-12 units of FFP. The INR was still greater than 1.3 in all, and so 40-90 μg/kg IV rfVIIa was given. This rapidly corrected the INR to below 1.3 [15]. Sorensen et al. evaluated six patients who all received vitamin K, and three were transfused FFP. The patients' INRs remained elevated (> 1.5), so each patient was given 10-40 μg/kg rfVIIa in preparation for emergent neurosurgery. All six patients' INRs were ≤ 1.5 within 10 min of rfVIIa administration and underwent neurosurgery [29]. Freeman et al. treated seven patients with 15-90 μg/kg of rfVIIa. All patients but one also received vitamin K and FFP. They found that an rfVIIa IV bolus rapidly lowered the INR to normalized levels [30]. Brody treated 15 patients with vitamin K 10 mg IV or SQ and FFP.  [32].

In conclusion, recombinant factor VIIa appears to rapidly reverse warfarin's effects on INR. This is not an FDA-approved use. This potential rapid reversal benefit must be weighed against the reported 5% risk of a thromboembolic event.

Is vitamin K safe and effective and how should it be given?

Vitamin K is a necessary component within the liver in order to help carboxylate factors II, VII, IX, and X to their active forms. When warfarin is given, it blocks the reductase that converts oxidized vitamin K back to vitamin K for reuse [4]. A vitamin K shortage within the liver creates a coagulation cascade deficit. Vitamin K replacement in patients on warfarin can be administered by oral, SQ, or IV route. Oral and SQ routes have variable times to onset and slower absorption rates. Intravenous dosing is recommended in those patients with ICH. Dosages of 10 mg given by slow IV infusion over 30 min has been recommended [11]. The time to onset is at least 2-6 h and often more than 24 h are needed to achieve effective response [4]. Other factor replacement must be given in the interim as well. The incidence of anaphylactic reaction to IV vitamin K is exceedingly rare with a reported rate of 3 out of 10,000 doses [4]. Many of the reported anaphylaxis episodes occurred with older vitamin K formulations containing polyethoxylated castor oil, while the modern micelle formulation is thought to have a lower risk of anaphylactoid reactivity [33]. A 2001 review of anaphylactoid reactions associated with vitamin K reported 23 (3 fatal) case reports and 132 FDA-reported adverse drug events from IV vitamin K, 32 individuals following intramuscular administration, 13 patients following SQ vitamin K, and 7 individuals following oral vitamin K [34]. In conclusion, 5-10 mg of vitamin K should be given slowly by IV when a patient presents with WAICH.

What is the risk of thrombosis after warfarin reversal?

Patients who take warfarin for atrial fibrillation, pulmonary embolus, deep vein thrombosis, or mechanical heart valves are at risk for thrombotic or embolic risk when their anticoagulation is reversed. Physicians need to consider this risk when deciding to reverse the anticoagulation. Most reviews and studies view it as an acceptable risk for reversal in the setting of warfarin ICH [7]. Phan et al. showed that discontinuation of warfarin therapy for 1 to 2 weeks in patients with a high embolic risk is relatively safe [35]. The risk for ischemic stroke after discontinuation of warfarin therapy within 30 days was 3% for metallic valves, 3% with atrial fibrillation, and 5% in those with recurrent TIA or minor stroke [35]. Once warfarin is restarted, early recurrence of ICH is exceedingly uncommon [35]. In conclusion, treating physicians should correct the INR no matter the reason the patient is on anticoagulation. The risk of not treating the ICH and lowering the INR generally outweighs the risk of thrombosis in the acute setting.


## Does rapid correction of anticoagulation improve patient mortality?

Numerous small studies ( Table 4) have reported that the warfarin reversal agents result in more rapid INR normalization and decreased intracranial hematoma expansion [36][37][38][39][40]. The medical literature's reporting of these reversal agents' impact on patient survival is limited to relatively small, primarily retrospective, studies that have investigated whether treatment with a single agent, combination therapy of FFP, vitamin K, PCC, or no reversal therapy affects patient mortality (  [20]. Either single therapy or combinations of vitamin K, factor IX, FFP, or no therapy was administered. There was no evidence that any treatment strategy was superior to the other [20]. Huttner et al. looked at 55 patients with WAICH and compared vitamin K, PCC, and FFP alone or in some combination. They found the incidence and extent of hematoma growth were significantly lower in the PCC-treated group [42]. If the INR was normalized within 2 h, then the influences of FFP and PCC on hematoma growth were similar [42].

In conclusion, multiple small retrospective studies with many treatment arms did not find any difference in one treatment over another or no treatment at all in correcting the INR of those patients with WAICH [20,21,41,42]. However, these may very well reflect a type II error given their underpowered sample sizes. A large well-designed prospective study is still needed to determine whether rapid correction of anticoagulation is effective at improving patient-oriented outcomes (i.e., 


## Conclusions

Emergency medicine physicians will see increasing numbers of patients on warfarin as the population ages. Physicians must know how to treat patients who present with warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage. PCC appears to normalize the INR faster than FFP. Vitamin K is generally safe and should be administered by slow IV infusion in all patients who present with WAICH. rfVIIa has not yet been approved for use in WAICH, but has shown promising results in fast normalization of INR in a small subset of patients, but at the cost of a 5% thromboembolic event rate. Despite the multiple treatment options to correct anticoagulation, studies have yet to demonstrate improved patient survival with any particular treatment strategy.


## Funding sources

No industry financial support or compensation was received for conducting this study. The study was entirely funded by the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Department of Emergency Medicine Research Division. Dr. Barrett is supported in part by NIH grant K23 HL102069 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.


## Disclosure

Dr. Cotton currently serves as an adjudicator for ongoing research sponsored by CSL Behring (makers of prothrombin complex concentrate).

## Table 2 )
2. Makris et al. found that PCC outperformed FFP at repleting factors II, VII, IX, and X [23]. PCC administration normalized the INR, whereas the INR remained elevated in patients given FFP [23]. Fredriksson et al. retrospectively found that PCC worked significantly faster than FFP. The mean INR decreased from 2.83 to 1.22 within 4.8 h in the ten patients treated with PCC compared with an INR decrease from 2.97 to 1.74 within 7.3 h in those seven patients receiving FFP [24]. These findings, however, are not surprising as FFP lacks concentrated factors and has an INR of 1.3-1.4. Cartmill et al. prospectively studied 12 patients with WAICH. They treated six patients with 50 μg/kg intravenous (IV) PCC and 10 mg IV vitamin K. Six matched patients were treated with 4 units of FFP and 10 mg IV vitamin K. The investigators measured the INR at baseline and 15 min after treatment. The PCC group had significantly faster and complete reversal compared to the

## Table 1
1Studies investigating reversal of warfarin anticoagulation in traumatic intracranial hemorrhage FFP group. The mean post-treatment INRs in the PCC and FFP groups were 1.32 and 2.3, respectively [25]. Boulis et al. performed a randomized control trial comparing treatment with FFP and FFP + factor IX complex concentrate (FIXCC) in patients with acute ICH.Author 
Study type Patient population 
Intervention 
Result 
Grade 
[14] 

Bartal et al. 
2007 

Prospective 
7 patients on warfarin 
with traumatic ICH 

All received vitamin K and 6-12 units of 
FFP. INR was still > 1.3 in all, so 40-90 
μg/kg rfVIIa was given. INR dropped 
below 1.3, and all underwent 
neurosurgery 

rfVIIa lowered the INR into operable 
range in all patients. 

Low 

Baldi et al. 
2006 

Prospective 
232 on warfarin or 
acenocumarol or with INR 
equal or > 2 with 
spontaneous or traumatic 
ICH 

FFP used in 22% of patients, vitamin K in 
41%, PCC in 6% and factor VII 
concentrate in 3%. Many did not receive 
any reversal treatment 

No statistical differences were found in 
the outcomes of patients with or 
without medical therapy 

Low 

Kalina et 
al. 2008 

Prospective 
46 trauma patients on 
warfarin with ICH with 
INR > 1.5 

Institution developed protocol for 
trauma patients with ICH taking warfarin 
with INR > 1.5. Patients given weight-
based dose of PCC (concentrated II, VII, 
IX, X). All given 5 mg vitamin K as well. 
Patients could receive FFP as well in 
protocol group 

Protocol resulted in increased number of 
patients receiving PCC. Protocol patients 
had improved times to INR 
normalization, patients having reversal of 
coagulopathy, and shorter times to 
surgery. No difference in ICU days, 
hospital days, or mortality. 2/48 that got 
PCC had DVT 

Low 

Ivascu et 
al. 2006 

Retrospective 57 patients with 
traumatic WAICH from fall 
or MVC 

Established and implemented protocol 
to treat traumatic WAICH. All 35 protocol 
patients received FFP. Only 14/22 
patients in the pre-protocol group 
received FFP 

Mortality and reversal times of INR were 
similar between the protocol instituted 
group and the pre-protocol group 

Low 

Bechtel et al. International Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011, 4:40 
http://www.intjem.com/content/4/1/40 


## Table 2
2Studies investigating PCC versus FFP for anticoagulation reversal in warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage WAICH including 20 who received rfVIIa. They found no difference in mortality. Seven patients died in each group. Four of the 20 thrombotic complications occurred in the rfVIIa group and in the control group (p > 0.05). Time to normalization of INR was significantly faster (p < 0.001) in the rfVIIa cohort (mean = 4.8 h) versus the standard cohort (mean = 17.5 h)Author 
Study type Patient 
population 

Intervention 
Result 
Grade 
[14] 

Makris et al. 
1997 

Prospective 
16 patients with 
WAICH, along 
with 12 "similar 
subjects" 

Vitamin K 1-5 mg IV given to all patients. 
16 patients got PCC and 12 FFP 

PCC repleted factors II, VII, IX, and X better 
than FFP. In patients given FFP, INR 
remained elevated. 28/29 patients given 
PCC had INR correction 

Moderate 

Fredriksson 
et al. 1992 

Retrospective 17 patients with 
WAICH 

All patients received vitamin K 10-20 mg IV. 
Of the 17 total patients, 10 received PCC 
and 7 received FFP 

PCC significantly decreased the INR from 
2.83 to 1.22 within 4.8 h, compared with a 
decrease in INR from 2.97 to 1.74 within 
7.3 h in the FFP group. Signs and 
symptoms of ICH progressed more in 
those treated with FFP than with PCC 

Low 

Boulis et al. 
1999 

Prospective, 
randomized 
controlled 
trial 

13 patients with 
WAICH 

All patients received vitamin K 10 mg 
subcutaneously. 8 patients received FFP. 5 
patients received weight-based dosing of 
factor IX complex concentrate (FIXCC) in 
addition to FFP 

Significant differences were found in time 
to correction, rate of correction, and 
volume of FFP required for correction 
between the FFP group (8.9, 2,700 mL) and 
the FIXCC + FFP group (2.95, 399 mL) 

Moderate 

Cartmill et al. 
2000 

Prospective 
12 patients with 
spontaneous 
WAICH 

6 patients treated with 50 μg/kg IV PCC 
along with vitamin K 10 mg IV. 6 matched 
patients treated with 4 units of FFP and 
vitamin K 10 mg IV. INR re-checked 15 min 
after treatment 

PCC group had significantly faster and 
complete reversal compared to the FFP 
group. Mean post-treatment INRs were 
1.32 in PCC group and 2.3 in FFP group 

Low 

Siddiq et al. 
2008 

Retrospective 19 patients with 
diagnosis of 
WAICH 

10 patients treated with PCC, vitamin K, 
and FFP, and 9 patients treated with FFP 
and vitamin K 

PCC along with FFP and vitamin K trends 
toward faster normalization of INR than 
with FFP and vitamin K alone 

Low 

Bechtel et al. International Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011, 4:40 
http://www.intjem.com/content/4/1/40 


## Table 3
3Studies investigating recombinant factor VIIa for anticoagulation reversal in intracranial hemorrhageAuthor 
Study type Patient 
population 

Intervention 
Result 
Grade 
[14] 

Bartal et al. 
2007 

Prospective 
7 patients on 
warfarin with 
traumatic ICH 

All received vitamin K and between 6-12 
units of FFP. INR was still > 1.3 in all and so 
40-90 μg/kg rfVIIa was given. INR went 
below 1.3, and all underwent neurosurgery 

The use of rfVIIa lowered the INR into 
operable range in all patients 

Low 

Sorensen et al. 
2003 

Retrospective 6 patients with 
WAICH 

All received vitamin K, three received FFP. 
INR still > 1.5 so 10-40 μg/kg rfVIIa given to 
each patient. All underwent NSGY 

All INRs were equal to or < 1.5 within 10 
min of rfVIIa being given and allowed for 
safe neurosurgical procedure 

Very 
low 

Freeman et al. 
2004 

Retrospective 7 patients with 
symptomatic 
non-traumatic 
WAICH 

Treated with 15-90 μg/kg of rfVIIa. Vitamin 
K given to all patients as well except for 
one who died prior. All patients but one 
also received FFP. Two underwent 
neurosurgical procedures 

IV bolus rfVIIa rapidly lowered the INR to 
normalized levels 

Very 
low 

Brody et al. 
2005 

Retrospective 28 patients with 
WAICH with INR 
> 1.3 

15 patients received 10 mg IV or 
subcutaneously vitamin K and FFP. 12 
patients received vitamin K, FFP, and rfVIIa 
as well 

Median time from presentation to INR < 1.3 
was 8.8 h in the rfVIIa group and 32 h in 
the FFP group. Significantly lower. One 
patient with ESRD developed DIC after 
three doses of rfVIIa. One patient in the FFP 
group developed pulmonary edema 

Low 

Nishijima et al. 
2010 

Retrospective 40 patients with 
traumatic 
WAICH and INR 
1.3 or greater 

20 patients received rfVIIa and 20 did not. 
In both groups some patients received 
pRBCs, FFP, and vitamin K. Patient 
characteristics were similar in both groups 

No difference in mortality. 7 patients died 
in each group. There were 4/20 thrombotic 
complications in the rfVIIa group and 1/20 
in the control. This was not statistically 
significant. Time to INR normalization was 
faster in the rfVIIa cohort mean = 4.8 h 
than in the standard cohort mean = 17.5 h 

Low 

Bechtel et al. International Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011, 4:40 
http://www.intjem.com/content/4/1/40 


## Table 5 )
5received no therapy and were treated with an "expectant attitude." Overall the patients in the study who were not on warfarin had an inpatient mortality of 18% versus 38% of those on warfarin[41]. The authors reported no difference in mortality among patients with WAICH who had been reversed with any combination or had not been reversed at all. This method of retrospectively assessing treatment effect is confounded by a great number of treatment arms and small number of patients.Sjoblom  et al. performed a similar study in 2001, retrospectively reviewing charts of 136 patients with WAICH between 1993-1996, who all received some form of reversal[41-43]. Ber-
waerts et al. studied 68 patients with WAICH and 126 
not on warfarin with ICH between 1993-1999 [41]. The 
treatment of the 68 patients on warfarin consisted of 
the following: 19 received only vitamin K, 11 vitamin K 
and FFP, 5 FFP alone, 3 vitamin K and FFP and factor 
IX, 2 vitamin K and factor IX, 2 factor IX alone, and 26 



## Table 4
4Studies investigating multiple treatment options for anticoagulation reversal in warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage IU did not decrease 50% of the patients below 2.0 INR. 500 IU decreased the INR to < 1.5 in 96% of patients with initial INR < 5.0. All patients treated with 1,000 IU-1,500 IU had INR decrease to < 1.3 PCC dose range 25-50 μg/kg was used in each patient as reversal as well as vitamin K 2-5 mg IV Median INR was 3.98 prior to treatment and 20 min after treatment < 1.9 with almost all < 1.3 Factor IX and factor VII concentrate given to patients INR in the patient with ICH went from 5.9 to post-treatment 1.8 within 15 min Varying doses of FFP and vitamin K were given for reversal The median time for door to INR normalization was 30 h (14 to 49.5), with 4 patients' hematomas enlarging after INR normalization Low Bechtel et al. International Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011, 4:40 http://www.intjem.com/content/4/1/40functional neurologic recovery) and an appropriate utilization of healthcare resources.Author 
Study type Patient population 
Intervention 
Result 
Grade 
[14] 

Rabinstein 
and Wijdicks 
2007 

Retrospective 13 patients with 
spontaneous WAICH 

Vitamin K and FFP in "doses 
deemed appropriate for each case." 
Neurosurgical intervention once 
INR < 1.4 

Median time to reversal 6.5 h (INR < 1.4). 
Recovery in 65% of those patients who fully 
awoke within 36 h after evacuation 

Low 

Yasaka et al. 
2005 

Prospective 
35 patients with 
WAICH 

Varying doses of PCC (200-1,500 
IU) were given to see what the 
optimal dose was for INR 
correction 

200 Low 

Preston 2002 Prospective 
10 patients with 
WAICH 

Low 

Nitu et al. 
1998 

Retrospective 1 patient with WAICH; 
17 patients on 
warfarin with other 
bleeding 

Low 

Lee et al. 
2006 

Retrospective 45 patients with 
WAICH 


Authors' contributions TB and BC conceived the study idea. TB, BB, BC, TN, and JL developed the study design and objectives. JL queried numerous medical literature databases on multiple occasions to retrieve the most current literature on the study topic. BB, TN and JL performed the initial screening of potentially eligible abstracts. TB adjudicated disagreements in potential article eligibility. BB wrote the initial draft of the paper. BB, TN, JL, TN, BC, and TB directly participated in the multiple revisions of the intellectual content of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscriptCompeting interestsThe other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Bleeding complications with warfarin use. D K Wysowski, P Nourjah, L Swartz, Arch Intern Med. 167Wysowski DK, Nourjah P, Swartz L: Bleeding complications with warfarin use. Arch Intern Med 2007, 167:1414-1419.

Prevalence of diagnosed atrial fibrillation in adults: national implications for rhythm management and stroke prevention: the AnTicoagulation and Risk Factors In Atrial Fibrillation (ATRIA) Study. A S Go, E M Hylek, K A Phillips, JAMA. 285Go AS, Hylek EM, Phillips KA, et al: Prevalence of diagnosed atrial fibrillation in adults: national implications for rhythm management and stroke prevention: the AnTicoagulation and Risk Factors In Atrial Fibrillation (ATRIA) Study. JAMA 2001, 285:2370-2375.

Clinical policy: Neuroimaging and decision making in adult mild traumatic brain injury in the acute setting. A S Jagoda, J J Bazarian, J J Bruns, Jr, Ann Emerg Med. 52Jagoda AS, Bazarian JJ, Bruns JJ Jr, et al: Clinical policy: Neuroimaging and decision making in adult mild traumatic brain injury in the acute setting. Ann Emerg Med 2008, 52:714-48.

Intracerebral hemorrhage associated with oral anticoagulant therapy. T Steiner, J Rosand, M Diringer, Stroke. 37Steiner T, Rosand J, Diringer M: Intracerebral hemorrhage associated with oral anticoagulant therapy. Stroke 2006, 37:256-262.

Advances in the care of patients with intracerebral hemorrhage. K M Thompson, S Y Gerlach, K S Jorn, Mayo Clin Proc. 82Thompson KM, Gerlach SY, Jorn KS, et al: Advances in the care of patients with intracerebral hemorrhage. Mayo Clin Proc 2007, 82:987-990.

Warfarin and intracranial haemorrhage. R Appelboam, E O Thomas, Blood Rev. 23Appelboam R, Thomas EO: Warfarin and intracranial haemorrhage. Blood Rev 2009, 23:1-9.

Management of oral anticoagulant-induced intracranial haemorrhage. A C Butler, R C Tait, Blood Rev. 12Butler AC, Tait RC: Management of oral anticoagulant-induced intracranial haemorrhage. Blood Rev 1998, 12:35-44.

Therapeutic management of acute intracerebral haemorrhage. N Asdaghi, D Manawadu, K Butcher, Expert Opin Pharmacother. 8Asdaghi N, Manawadu D, Butcher K: Therapeutic management of acute intracerebral haemorrhage. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2007, 8:3097-3116.

Hemorrhagic Complications of oral anticoagulant therapy. R J Beyth, Clin Geriatr Med. 17Beyth RJ: Hemorrhagic Complications of oral anticoagulant therapy. Clin Geriatr Med 2001, 17:49-56.

Treatment and prevention of primary intracerebral hemorrhage. A Towfighi, S Greenberg, J Rosand, Semin Neurol. 25Towfighi A, Greenberg S, Rosand J: Treatment and prevention of primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Semin Neurol 2005, 25:445-452.

Management of warfarin-related intracerebral hemorrhage. W D Freeman, M I Aguilar, Expert Rev Neurotherapeutics. 8Freeman WD, Aguilar MI: Management of warfarin-related intracerebral hemorrhage. Expert Rev Neurotherapeutics 2008, 8:271-290.

Anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation: selected controversies including optimal anticoagulation intensity, treatment of intracerebral hemorrhage. R G Hart, M I Aguilar, J Thromb Thrombolysis. 25Hart RG, Aguilar MI: Anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation: selected controversies including optimal anticoagulation intensity, treatment of intracerebral hemorrhage. J Thromb Thrombolysis 2008, 25:26-32.

. Jp: Warfarin Hanley, Reversal, J Clin Pathol. 57Hanley JP: Warfarin Reversal. J Clin Pathol 2004, 57:1132-1139.

GRADE guidelines: A new series of articles in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. Guyatt, J Clin Epidemiol. 64Guyatt , et al: GRADE guidelines: A new series of articles in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. J Clin Epidemiol 2011, 64:380-2.

Coagulopathic patients with traumatic intracranial bleeding: defining the role of recombinant factor VIIa. C Bartal, J Freedman, K Bowman, J Trauma. 63Bartal C, Freedman J, Bowman K, et al: Coagulopathic patients with traumatic intracranial bleeding: defining the role of recombinant factor VIIa. J Trauma 2007, 63:725-732.

Intracranial haemorrhage in patients on antithrombotics: clinical presentation and determinants of outcome in a prospective multicentric study in Italian emergency departments. G Baldi, F Altomonte, M Altomonte, Cerebrovasc Dis. 22Baldi G, Altomonte F, Altomonte M, et al: Intracranial haemorrhage in patients on antithrombotics: clinical presentation and determinants of outcome in a prospective multicentric study in Italian emergency departments. Cerebrovasc Dis 2006, 22:286-293.

A protocol for the rapid normalization of inr in trauma patients with intracranial hemorrhage on prescribed warfarin therapy. M Kalina, G Tinkoff, A Gbadebo, Am Surg. 74Kalina M, Tinkoff G, Gbadebo A, et al: A protocol for the rapid normalization of inr in trauma patients with intracranial hemorrhage on prescribed warfarin therapy. Am Surg 2008, 74:858-61.

Treatment of trauma patients with intracranial hemorrhage on preinjury Warfarin. F A Ivascu, R J Janczyk, F S Junn, J Trauma. 61Ivascu FA, Janczyk RJ, Junn FS, et al: Treatment of trauma patients with intracranial hemorrhage on preinjury Warfarin. J Trauma 2006, 61:318-321.

Treatment of warfarin-associated intracerebral hemorrhage: literature review and expert opinion. M I Aguilar, R G Hart, C S Kase, Mayo Clin Proc. 82Aguilar MI, Hart RG, Kase CS, et al: Treatment of warfarin-associated intracerebral hemorrhage: literature review and expert opinion. Mayo Clin Proc 2007, 82:82-92.

Management and prognostic features of intracerebral hemorrhage during anticoagulant therapy (a Swedish multicenter study). L Sjoblom, H G Hardemark, A Lindgren, Stroke. 32Sjoblom L, Hardemark HG, Lindgren A, et al: Management and prognostic features of intracerebral hemorrhage during anticoagulant therapy (a Swedish multicenter study). Stroke 2001, 32:2567-2574.

Timing of fresh frozen plasma administration and rapid correction of coagulopathy in warfarin-related intracerebral hemorrhage. J N Goldstein, S H Thomas, V Frontiero, Stroke. 37Goldstein JN, Thomas SH, Frontiero V, et al: Timing of fresh frozen plasma administration and rapid correction of coagulopathy in warfarin-related intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke 2006, 37:151-155.

Use of factor IX complex in warfarin-related intracranial hemorrhage. N M Boulis, M P Bobek, A Schmaier, Neurosurgery. 45Boulis NM, Bobek MP, Schmaier A, et al: Use of factor IX complex in warfarin-related intracranial hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 1999, 45:1113-1118.

Emergency oral anticoagulant reversal: the relative efficacy of infusions of fresh frozen plasma and clotting factor concentrate on correction of the coagulopathy. M Makris, M Greaves, W S Phillips, Throb Haemostasis. 77Makris M, Greaves M, Phillips WS, et al: Emergency oral anticoagulant reversal: the relative efficacy of infusions of fresh frozen plasma and clotting factor concentrate on correction of the coagulopathy. Throb Haemostasis 1997, 77:477-480.

Emergency reversal of anticoagulation after intracranial hemorrhage. K Fredriksson, B Norrving, L G Stromblad, Stroke. 23Fredriksson K, Norrving B, Stromblad LG: Emergency reversal of anticoagulation after intracranial hemorrhage. Stroke 1992, 23:972-977.

Prothrombin complex concentrate for oral anticoagulant reversal in neurosurgical emergencies. M Cartmill, G Dolan, J L Byrne, Br J Neurosurg. 14Cartmill M, Dolan G, Byrne JL, et al: Prothrombin complex concentrate for oral anticoagulant reversal in neurosurgical emergencies. Br J Neurosurg 2000, 14:458-461.

Effectiveness of factor IX complex concentrate in reversing warfarin associated coagulopathy for intracerebral hemorrhage. F Siddiq, A Jalil, C Mcdaniel, Neurocrit Care. 8Siddiq F, Jalil A, McDaniel C, et al: Effectiveness of factor IX complex concentrate in reversing warfarin associated coagulopathy for intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care 2008, 8:36-41.

The emerging role of recombinant-activated factor VII in neurocritical care. M E Fewel, P Park, Neurocrit Care. 1Fewel ME, Park P: The emerging role of recombinant-activated factor VII in neurocritical care. Neurocrit Care 2004, 1:19-30.

Safety of recombinant activated factor vii in randomized clinical trials. M Levi, J H Levy, H F Andersen, D Truloff, N Engl J Med. 363Levi M, Levy JH, Andersen HF, Truloff D: Safety of recombinant activated factor vii in randomized clinical trials. N Engl J Med 2010, 363:1791-1800.

Reversal of the international normalized ratio with recombinant activated factor VII in central nervous system bleeding during warfarin thromboprophylaxis: clinical and biochemical aspects. B Sorensen, P Johansen, G Nielsen, Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 14Sorensen B, Johansen P, Nielsen G, et al: Reversal of the international normalized ratio with recombinant activated factor VII in central nervous system bleeding during warfarin thromboprophylaxis: clinical and biochemical aspects. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2003, 14:469-477.

Recombinant factor VIIa for rapid reversal of warfarin anticoagulation in acute intracranial hemorrhage. W D Freeman, T G Brott, K M Barrett, Mayo Clin Proc. 79Freeman WD, Brott TG, Barrett KM, et al: Recombinant factor VIIa for rapid reversal of warfarin anticoagulation in acute intracranial hemorrhage. Mayo Clin Proc 2004, 79:1495-1500.

Use of recombinant factor VIIa in patients with warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage. D L Brody, V Aiyagaria, A M Shackleford, Neurocritical Care. 2Brody DL, Aiyagaria V, Shackleford AM, et al: Use of recombinant factor VIIa in patients with warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage. Neurocritical Care 2005, 2:263-267.

The efficacy of factor VIIa in emergency department patients with warfarin use and traumatic intracranial hemorrhage. D K Nishijima, W E Dager, R J Schrot, Acad Emerg Med. 17Nishijima DK, Dager WE, Schrot RJ, et al: The efficacy of factor VIIa in emergency department patients with warfarin use and traumatic intracranial hemorrhage. Acad Emerg Med 2010, 17:244-251.

Warfarin anticoagulation reversal: management of the asymptomatic and bleeding patient. M Makris, J J Van Veen, R Maclean, J Thromb Thrombolysis. 29Makris M, van Veen JJ, Maclean R: Warfarin anticoagulation reversal: management of the asymptomatic and bleeding patient. J Thromb Thrombolysis 2010, 29:171-81.

Anaphylactoid reactions to vitamin K. L D Fiore, M A Scola, C E Cantillon, J Thromb Thrombolysis. 11Fiore LD, Scola MA, Cantillon CE, et al: Anaphylactoid reactions to vitamin K. J Thromb Thrombolysis 2001, 11:175-183.

Safety of discontinuation of anticoagulation in patients with intracranial hemorrhage at high thromboembolic risk. T G Phan, M Koh, E F Wijdicks, Arch Neurol. 57Phan TG, Koh M, Wijdicks EF: Safety of discontinuation of anticoagulation in patients with intracranial hemorrhage at high thromboembolic risk. Arch Neurol 2000, 57:1710-1713.

Determinants of outcome in anticoagulationassociated cerebral hematoma requiring emergency evacuation. A A Rabinstein, E M Wijdicks, Arch Neurology. 64Rabinstein AA, Wijdicks EM: Determinants of outcome in anticoagulation- associated cerebral hematoma requiring emergency evacuation. Arch Neurology 2007, 64:203-206.

Optimal dose of prothrombin complex concentrate for acute reversal of oral anticoagulation. M Yasaka, T Sakata, H Naritomi, Thromb Res. 115Yasaka M, Sakata T, Naritomi H, et al: Optimal dose of prothrombin complex concentrate for acute reversal of oral anticoagulation. Thromb Res 2005, 115:455-459.

Rapid reversal of oral anticoagulation with warfarin by a prothrombin complex concentrate (Beriplex): efficacy and safety in 42 patients. F E Preston, S T Laidlaw, B Sampson, Br J Haematol. 116Preston FE, Laidlaw ST, Sampson B, et al: Rapid reversal of oral anticoagulation with warfarin by a prothrombin complex concentrate (Beriplex): efficacy and safety in 42 patients. Br J Haematol 2002, 116:619-624.

Clinical experiences with the use of clotting factor concentrates in oral anticoagulation reversal. I C Nitu, D J Perry, C A Lee, Clin Lab Haem. 20Nitu IC, Perry DJ, Lee CA: Clinical experiences with the use of clotting factor concentrates in oral anticoagulation reversal. Clin Lab Haem 1998, 20:363-367.

Progression of warfarin-associated intracerebral hemorrhage after INR normalization with FFP. S B Lee, E M Manno, K F Layton, Neurology. 67Lee SB, Manno EM, Layton KF, et al: Progression of warfarin-associated intracerebral hemorrhage after INR normalization with FFP. Neurology 2006, 67:1272-1274.

Course, management and outcome of oral-anticoagulant-related intracranial haemorrhages. J Berwaerts, O J Robb, R S Dykhuizen, Scott Med J. 45Berwaerts J, Robb OJ, Dykhuizen RS, et al: Course, management and outcome of oral-anticoagulant-related intracranial haemorrhages. Scott Med J 2000, 45:105-109.

Hematoma growth and outcome in treated neurocritical care patients with intracerebral hemorrhage related to oral anticoagulant therapy. H B Huttner, P D Schellinger, M Hartmann, Stroke. 37Huttner HB, Schellinger PD, Hartmann M, et al: Hematoma growth and outcome in treated neurocritical care patients with intracerebral hemorrhage related to oral anticoagulant therapy. Stroke 2006, 37:1465-1470.

Correction of INR by prothrombin complex concentrate and vitamin K in patients with warfarin related hemorrhagic complication. M Yasaka, T Sakata, K Minematsu, 10.1186/1865-1380-4-40Thromb Res. 108Yasaka M, Sakata T, Minematsu K, et al: Correction of INR by prothrombin complex concentrate and vitamin K in patients with warfarin related hemorrhagic complication. Thromb Res 2003, 108:25-30. doi:10.1186/1865-1380-4-40

Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review. Bechtel, Convenient online submission 7 Rigorous peer review 7 Immediate publication on acceptance 7 Open access: articles freely available online 7 High visibility within the fi eld 7. 440Cite this article as. Retaining the copyright to your article Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.comCite this article as: Bechtel et al.: Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review. International Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011 4:40. Submit your manuscript to a journal and benefi t from: 7 Convenient online submission 7 Rigorous peer review 7 Immediate publication on acceptance 7 Open access: articles freely available online 7 High visibility within the fi eld 7 Retaining the copyright to your article Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com

. Bechtel, International Journal of Emergency Medicine. 440Bechtel et al. International Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011, 4:40