# Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia: A review

CorpusID: 17201391
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc4d1f20814292b0c3a441d6a2442cd6309eca33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc4d1f20814292b0c3a441d6a2442cd6309eca33)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia: A review
2016 September 22

J World 
Psychiatr 
Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia: A review
632016 September 2210.5498/wjp.v6.i3.372Received: April 28, 2016 Peer-review started: April 28, 2016 First decision: June 16, 2016 Revised: July 26, 2016 Accepted: August 6, 2016 Article in press: August 9, 2016Author contributions: Pontillo M wrote the draft of the manu-script; all authors contributed to the sections of the manuscript, and edited, revised and approved the final version. Conflict-of-interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interests for this article. No financial support. Data sharing statement: Please, note that our article is a secondary study and all the primary data are available to the public in the primary studies cited in the references. Open-Access: This article is an open-access article which was selected by an in-house editor and fully peer-reviewed by external reviewers. It is distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-nc/4.0/ Manuscript source: Invited manuscript Correspondence to: Submit a Manuscript:
AIMTo provide an updated of recent findings about efficacy of cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) in reduction of command hallucinations.METHODSPubMed/MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, PsycINFO, ClinicalTrial.gov searches were performed using the keywords "hallucinations", "behavioural therapy" and " cognitive therapy" in order to identify relevant articles published during the years of 2011 to 2016. No language limits were used. Studies conducted within control group, reviews, editorials, were excluded. Data on efficacy, acceptability and tolerability were extracted by three authors independently. Disagreements were resolved in a consensus meeting or by another reviewer.RESULTSA total of eight articles were eligible for inclusion. Two are randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and six are observational studies. The two RCTs included showed a greater efficacy of CBT compared to standard care on auditory hallucinations (AHs). Nevertheless, they considered different CBT models, particularly Treatment of Resistant Command Hallucinations and Cognitive Therapy for Command Hallucinations. As regards non RCT-studies, all papers included showed reduction on frequency and severity of AHs and distress related to them. However, the lack of content details within non-RCTs studies decreased their comparability. In terms of predictive variables,SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS372September 22, 2016|Volume 6|Issue 3|

## INTRODUCTION

Hallucinations can be defined as sensory experiences in any sensory modality, occurring in the absence of a corresponding external stimulation whilst in a fully conscious state, and resembling veridical perceptions [1][2][3] .

In schizophrenia, hallucinations occur with a high frequency of up to 50%-80% [4] . Among hallucinations, auditory hallucinations (AHs) are considered the highest, with prevalence estimates in schizophrenia ranging between 40% and 80% [5][6][7] . AHs, especially command hallucinations, are also associated with an increased risk of harmful or dangerous actions [8][9][10][11][12][13] . Shawyer et al [8] reported a median 53% prevalence of command hallucinations in adult participants with psychiatric disorders, 48% of these participants said the commands stipulated harmful or dangerous actions, rising to 69% for participants in medium secure unit. However, the link between the presence of command hallucinations and harm to self or others is not straightforward. In the MaCarthur study [14] , no association was reported between the presence of delusions or command hallucinations and violence. Thoughts about violence, however, were a strong predictor of violence 6 mo later [14] . Besides the high prevalence, AHs experienced in psychotic illness contribute significantly to distress and disability [8] . Indeed, several clinical studies show that AHs appraised as malevolent are significantly and positively associated with distress [9][10][11] . These findings were confirmed in a recent systematic review by Mawson et al [12] . Antipsychotic agents are considered to be the first choice for the treatment of psychotic symptoms [15] , but at least one third of patients exhibit persistent psychotic symptoms, despite drug treatment [16] . Treatment of drugresistant patients can be complicated by adverse effects, due to the use of second-line drugs such as Clozapine [17] or combination therapy with multiple antipsychotic agents [18] . Moreover, there are many concerns regarding patients' refusal to adhere with drug regimes [19] and long-term compliance to therapy [20] . Consequently, there is a growing interest on psychological interventions, which are now recognized as important components of a comprehensive therapeutic approach in the treatment of schizophrenia. AHs are some of the most prominent and distressing of the treatment-resistant symptoms, and command hallucinations are the most high risk of these [21] . Command hallucinations represent a special problem for the clinical management of psychosis. Previous research suggests cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) to be a useful treatment for reducing compliance with harmful command hallucinations [8,22] . Specifically, CBT applied to the treatment of command hallucinations does not focus on reducing the experience of voices, but on reducing the perceived power of voices to harm the individual and to motivate compliance [8,22] . Indeed, the main rationale is that by challenging key beliefs about the power of commanding voices, the patients would show a lower level of compliance and appeasement behavior and an increase in resistance to the same voices. In a recent meta-analysis, van der Gaag et al [23] showed that CBT is effective in the treatment of AHs and delusions. Specifically, individually tailored case formulation CBT showed larger effect-size than broad CBT including standard training programs. However, in this study va der Gaag et al [23] have considered both the AHs that delusions. The aim of our review is to provide an updated overview on the efficacy of CBT interventions in AHs. Specifically, we focus on the efficacy of CBT in reducing command hallucinations. The search algorithm resulted in 212 articles, of which 38 referred to potentially eligible studies. Of these, 30 articles were non-empirical studies, reviews and commentaries. We found a total pool of eight studies on CBT for the treatment of AHs.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Two randomized clinical trials (RCTs) [21,24] and six observational studies [25][26][27][28][29][30] fulfilled the inclusion criteria.

In terms of evidence-based medicine, the quality of these studies was moderate. We decided to focus on the past five years (2011-2016) because this is the period in which CBT models specifically targeted on AHs were developed. In fact, for the previous period, van der Gaag et al [23] (2014) had already published a meta-analysis. However, this meta-analysis does not focus specifically on AHs.

In Figure 1 are represented the search strategy with inclusion/exclusion criteria for the papers.


## RESULTS


## RCTs

During the last four years two RCTs have been conducted, proving the efficacy of CBT for the treatment of AHs, both were specifically on Command Hallucinations. Details on the methodologies and results of the studies are shown in Table 1.

Shawyer et al [24] evaluated the efficacy of a cognitive behavioural intervention model called Treatment of Resistant Command Hallucinations (TORCH) compared with befriending, which is a fully manualised control intervention [31] that provides the patients with the same amount of therapist engagement and expectancy as CBT. The treatment program was conducted for 15 weekly sessions lasting approximately 50 min and with a follow up at six months. Despite TORCH participants subjectively reporting greater improvement in command hallucinations compared to Befriending participants, the study found no significant group differences in the primary outcome (e.g., degree of compliance with harmful command hallucinations), nor in the secondary outcomes (e.g., severity illness, global functioning, level of distress related to command hallucinations, quality of life), based on blinded assessment data. Birchwood et al [21] performed a multi-centre RCT of Cognitive Therapy for Command Hallucinations (CTCH) [32] which is a subtype of CBT specifically targeted on AHs, compared to usual treatment, on 197 participants with command hallucinations, to prevent harmful compliance. This RCT was programmed to follow the patients for 19 sessions, delivered steadily over the 9 mo postrandomisation. The results showed a better efficacy of CTCH respect to treatment as usual. Both the studies [21,24] were powered on the compliance behavior to voices. In Shawyer et al [24] the Voices Acceptance and Action Scale (VAAS) [33] was used, while in Birchwood et al [21] the Voice Compliance Scale (VCS) [34] was preferred.

The two RCTs differed in many ways. First of all, Shawyer et al [24] did not find any statistical difference between the treatments considered (TORCH vs befriending). Birchwood et al [21] is a much larger trial which found a significant difference between the treatments considered (CBT vs treatment as usual) and which was based and powered on a previous pilot study [22] . The comparisons used for the two RCTs were different as well. In Shawyer et al [24] the intervention "befriending" was used. It has a similar amount of therapist engagement and expectancy as CBT,  [24,25] 6 observational studies on efficacy of CBT for AHs [26][27][28][29][30][31] 28 full text articles excluded: Reviews editorials or letters; Comments, conference proceedings; Studies conducted without a control group groups on confidence to resist harmful commands at endpoint or follow up. On the other hand in Birchwood et al [21] the CTCH intervention showed to be significantly superior to the usual treatment and the efficacy interpreted as the effect that is common to the 9 and 18 mo follow-up points, was calculated as an odds ratio of with similar drop-out rates [35] . Befriending involves a series of conversations that resemble conversations with a friendly social acquaintance. In Birchwood et al [21] the treatment as usual [15] was used as comparison.

On the one hand, in Shawyer et al [24] no differences were found between or within the TORCH and befriending 0.574 (95%CI: 0.33-0.98, P = 0.042). Both the trials had high quality and a low risk of bias (Table 1).


## Non-RCT clinical studies

We found six non-RCT studies examining the efficacy of CBT for AHs in patients with psychosis. Details on the methodologies and results of the studies are shown in Table 2.

In the latest study, Zanello et al [30] investigated the effectiveness of a group cognitive behavioural therapy for AHs, the Voices Group, in 41 patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorders. The program Voices Group was conducted for seven specific sessions. The results showed a significant reduction in the severity of AHs (P < 0.005) and in total symptoms severity score of BPRS 4.0 [Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale [36] ; without hallucination (P < 0.01)]. This result remained stable after the 6-mo follow-up.

Thomas et al [25] conducted an open label trial on the efficacy of CBT in reducing AHs in 33 subjects with schizophrenia. They also investigated the role of insight, beliefs about the origin of hallucinations, negative symptoms and cognitive disorganization as predictors of the outcome. The study observed post-treatment improvements in hallucination severity when AHs were considered a specific target of psychological treatment.

Only overall negative symptoms showed a significant negative correlation on (rpb = -0.60, P = 0.001) with outcome. This effect appeared to be independent of length of illness, drop-out and number of sessions. Mortan et al [26] evaluated the effectiveness of a group-based CBT program for AHs on 7 inpatients with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders compared to 5 in patients treated with treatment as usual. The CBT treatment program was conducted for 9-10 sessions twice/wk. The results showed a significant reduction (P < 0.005) in the severity and frequency of hallucinations, delusions, negative symptoms, distress and anxiety after group-based CBT. A case study by Hutton and Morrison [27] described the effectiveness of brief CBT (12 wk) in an 18-yearold male with psychotic disorder and AHs who refused antipsychotic medication. By week 12, the frequency and duration of AHs had reduced to zero. Dannahy et al [28] examined the impact of group person-based cognitive therapy (PBCT) for distressing voices in a sample of 62 participants with treatmentresistance and subjectively distressing voices. Participants were divided in nine groups and PBCT was conducted over 8-12 sessions. Results demonstrated significant improvements in the outcomes measure of general wellbeing (P < 0.001), voice-distress (P < 0.001), control (P < 0.01) and dependence upon voice (P < 0.05). Gottlieb et al [29] tested the feasibility and effects of a 10 session web-based CBT for AHs in a sample of 17 individuals with schizophrenia spectrum disorder. Results showed a significant reduction of AHs, including the perception of voices as an outside entity and intensity of negative commentary. Interestingly, participants improved in depression and delusion severity, although these symptoms were not directly targeted in the program.


## DISCUSSION

The present review describes the efficacy of CBT in patients with AHs. In summary, the two RCTs included showed a greater efficacy of CBT compared to standard care on AHs. However, in Shawyer et al [24] , TORCH participants subjectively reporting greater improvement in command hallucinations compared to Befriending but no significant group differences on primary outcome measure that was level of compliance with harmful command hallucination. In Birchwood et al [21] instead, CTCH participants showed an improvement in this measure.

One possible explanation of the discrepancy between the two RCTs in term of efficacy on reducing level of compliance with harmful command hallucinations is that, within the general framework of CBT, different theoretical approach can play a different role on the efficacy of the intervention. Indeed, the two RCTs were built on different theoretical frameworks. The TORCH framework is based on the "acceptance" of voices by "cultivating the capacity to just notice voices and associated thoughts rather than believing and acting on them". The CTCH focuses on targeting individuals' appraisals, behavior and affect, and not necessarily symptoms. It is based on the nature of the relationship with the personified voice. Therefore, if the voice hearer believes the voice to have malevolent intent, and crucially to have the power to deliver the threat, this can motivate compliance or appeasement behavior. In addition, in Shawyer et al [24] the intervention "befriending" was used as the control condition and it has a similar amount of therapist engagement and expectancy as CBT. This is likely to have resulted in smaller between-group effect sizes respect to Birchwood et al [21] . As regards non RCT-studies, all papers included showed reduction on frequency and severity of AHs and distress related to them. However, the lack of content details and on rationales within non-RCTs studies decreases their comparability and therefore the chance to draw final conclusions.

In terms of predictive variables, negative symptoms appeared to be the strongest predictor of the treatment efficacy. It may be that negative symptoms are a barrier to treatment specific to hallucinations, although it would be important to verify this association in other studies. However, based on this finding, it is possible to propose that negative symptoms interfere with engagement in therapy, in rapport with the therapist, and completion to homework. This might lead to modifications of CBT to treatment for the presence of negative symptoms, such as the use of more behavioral methods.

Some limitations and strenghts should be con- Decrease in the hallucinations item score of Bprs (P < 0.05) Decrease in the total symptoms severity score of BPRS (P < 0.01)


## 6-mo

Thomas et al [16]  Hutton et al [18]   sidered in our review. Firstly, the role and the possible interference of antipsychotic medications with psychotherapy should be further assessed in the primary studies. Secondly, there is a discrepancy of study design and outcome measures between studies, which did not allow a quantitative analysis of the results. Thirdly, most studies are only preliminary and underpowered. Among strenghts, we have two RCTs with 241 individuals randomized in total and both of them conclude that CBT may be an alternative for individuals with schizophrenia who experience AHs despite antipsychotic treatment.

Overall, several CBT models were tested in the studies included. Apart TORCH and CTCH, Mindfulness approach, PBCT or web-based CBT were used.

We propose that further RCTs are needed. In particular, based on our findings, future studies should be drawn with reference to validated theoretical framework that predicts individuals' compliance with voices and the associated distress, rather than the presence of psychotic symptoms per se. This validated theoretical framework should also consider the role of negative symptoms in predicting the effectiveness of the intervention on Ahs.

Finally, due to the efficacy and high tolerability and acceptability of RCT-studies, we believe that the treatment with CBT should be integrated into standard care for AHs, taking into account that individuals with AHs and command hallucinations especially, and more in general with psychotic disorders, show often a poor compliance to pharmacological treatments.


## COMMENTS


## Backgrounds

In schizophrenia, auditory hallucinations (AHs) occur with a high frequency ranging between 40% and 80%. AHs, especially command hallucinations, are also associated with an increased risk of harmful or dangerous actions and are some of the most prominent of the pharmacological treatmentresistant symptoms. Consequently, there is a growing interest on psychological interventions. The aim of this review is to provide an updated of recent findings about efficacy of cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) in reduction of command hallucinations.


## Research frontiers

Previous research suggests CBT to be a useful treatment for reducing compliance with harmful command hallucinations. Specifically, CBT applied to the treatment of command hallucinations does not focus on reducing the experience of voices, but on reducing the perceived power of voices to harm the individual and to motivate compliance. Indeed, the main rationale is that by challenging key beliefs about the power of commanding voices, the patients would show a lower level of compliance and appeasement behavior and an increase in resistance to the same voices.


## Innovations and breakthroughs

In literature evidence on efficacy of CBT in reduction of command hallucinations are still few. Only in recent years CBT models specifically targeted on AHs were developed. Studies published in the last five years were critically reviewed by the authors who make a comparison between the current existing CBT models for AHs and data to support each.


## Applications

This review suggests that the treatment with CBT should be integrated into standard care for AHs, taking into account that individuals with AHs and command hallucinations especially show often a poor compliance to pharmacological treatments.


## Terminology

AHs can be defined as sensory experiences in auditory modality, occurring in the absence of a corresponding external stimulation whilst in a fully conscious state, and resembling veridical perceptions. CBT is a psychosocial intervention that is the most widely used evidence-based practice for treating mental disorders. CBT focuses on the development of personal coping strategies that target solving current symptoms and changing unhelpful patterns in cognitions (e.g., thoughts, beliefs, and attitudes), behaviors, and emotional regulation.


## Peer-review

The topic is interesting, informative and useful for a clinician. The paper is clearly written.

## Figure 1
1Flow chart of literature review. AHs: Auditory hallucinations; CBT: Cognitivebehavior therapy; RCT: Randomized clinical trial.


< 0.001. BPRS: Brief psychiatric rating scale; PSYRATS: Psychotic symptom rating scale; PANSS: The positive and negative syndrome scale for schizophrenia; SAI: The Schedule for the Assessment of Insight; SCID-I: Structured Clinical Interview for DSM; SAPS: Scale for the assessment of positive symptoms; SANS: Scale for the assessment of negative symptoms; BDI-II: The Back Depression Inventory II; HDI: Hamilton depression inventory; CAARMS: Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk Mental States; GAF: Global Assessment of functioning; IVI: Interpretation Voices of Inventory; CORE-OM: Clinical outcomes in routine evaluation-outcome measure; VAY: Voice and You; BAVQ-R: The Belief about Voices Questionnaire-Revised; MMSE: Mini Mental State Examination; AHs: Auditory hallucinations.


This is a review of the literature published between 2011 and 2016 on trials using CBT targeted on AHs in schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders. A comprehensive literature search of the PubMed/ MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINHAL), Psyc-INFO, ClinicalTrial.gov databases were conducted. A search algorithm based on a combination of the terms: (hallucinations) AND (behavioral therapy OR cognitive Pontillo M et al . Cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia therapy) was used. Moreover the bibliographies of the most relevant published articles in the field were screened. The last update of the search was on March 2016. Data on efficacy, acceptability and tolerability were extracted by three authors independently (Franco De Crescenzo, Maria Laura Pucciarini, Maria Pontillo). Disagreements were resolved in a consensus meeting or by another reviewer (Marco Armando). No language limits were used.

## Table 1
1Randomized clinical trials of cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinationsRef. 
Sample 
Methods Criteria for diagnosis 
Criteria for outcome 
Focused treatment 
Results 
Follow-up 

Shawyer et 
al [14] 

n = 44 
Mean age: 39 

RCT 
(1) diagnosis of 
schizophrenia or related 
condition based on DSM-
IV criteria 
(2) command 
hallucinations within 
the previous 6 mo 
that caused distress or 
dysfunction despite 
treatment with 
antipsychotic medication 
at therapeutic doses 

Assessor-rated degree of 
compliance with harmful 
command hallucinations 
on a scale of 0-7 
Self-rated confidence to 
resist obeying harmful 
commands and confidence 
in coping with general 
commands on a scale of 
0-100 
PANSS 
Modified GAF 
PSYRATS 
Quality of Life Enjoyment 
and Satisfaction 
Questionnaire 
Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire 
VAAS 
BAVQ-R 
8-item self-report Insight 
Scale 
RSQ 

Randomized to 15 sessions 
of the intervention 
"TORCH" or the control, 
Befriending. A sub-sample 
of 17 participants was 
randomized to a waitlist 
control before being 
allocated to TORCH or 
Befriending 
Pharmacological treatment: 
Chlorpromazine equivalent 
dose (mg) Mean = 742.9 SD 
= 388.7 

Confidence to 
resist harmful 
CHs (P = n.s.) 
Confidence in 
coping with 
CHs (P < 0.01) 
PANSS total (P 
< 0.05) 
Modified GAF 
(P = n.s.) 
Distress 
PSYRATS (P < 
0.01) 
Disruption 
PSYRATS (P < 
0.01) 
Quality of Life ( 
P < 0.05) 
VAAS (P = n.s.) 
BAVQ-R (P = 
n.s.) 

6-mo 

Birchwood 
et al [15] 

n = 197 
Mean age: 37.4 

RCT 
(1) ICD-10 schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective, or mood 
disorders, under care of a 
clinical team 
(2) history of harmful 
command hallucinations 
of at least 6 mo duration 
with recent (< 9 mo) 
history of harm to self, 
others or major social 
transgressions as a result 
of the commands (full 
or partial compliance); 
or harmful command 
hallucinations where the 
individual is distressed 
and appeasing the 
powerful voice 

VCS 
VPD 
Personal knowledge 
questionnaire/omniscience 
scale 
BAVQ-R 
PSYRATS 
Calgary Depression Rating 
Scale for Schizophrenia 
Beck Hopeleness Scale 
Beck Scale for Suicidal 
Ideation 
PANSS 

Randomized to cognitive 
Therapy for command 
Hallucinations + treatment 
as usual or treatment as 
usual alone 
Adherence to cognitive 
therapy was excellent: only 
12 (12%) of 98 participants 
not attending any sessions, 
and 79 (81%) completing 
the therapy (all manualised 
elements) 
Pharmacological treatment: 
Olanzapine equivalents 
dose (mg) 25.79 (SD: 21.73). 

RSQ (P = n.s.) 
VCS 
experimental 
group: 41; 
control group: 
49 
VPD total, 
experimental 
group: 21.31; 
control group: 
23.98 
Personal 
knowledge 
questionnaire 
(P = 0.09) 
BAVQ-R (P = 
n.s.) 
PSYRATS total 
(P = n.s.) 
Calgary 
Depression 
Rating Scale for 
Schizophrenia 
(P = n.s.) 
Beck Scale 
for Suicidal 
Ideation (P = 
n.s.) 
PANSS total (P 
= n.s.) 

18-mo 

AHs: Auditory hallucinations; BAVQ-R: Beliefs about the voices questionnaire-revised; CHs: Command hallucinations; GAF: Global assessment of 
functioning scale; n.s.: Not significant; PANSS: Positive and negative syndrome scale; RCT: Randomized clinical trial; PSYRATS: Psychotic symptom rating 
scale; RSQ: Recovery style questionnaire; VAAS: Voices acceptance and action scale; VCS: Voice compliance scale; VPD: Voice power differential scale. 


## Table 2
2Non randomized clinical trials of cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinationsRef. 
Sample 
Methods 
Criteria for diagnosis Criteria for outcome 
Focused treatment 
Results 
Follow-up 

Zanello et 
al [21] 

n = 41 
age-range: 
18-65 

Naturalistic 
Study 

(1) Diagnosis of 
a schizophrenia 
or schizoaffective 
disorder 
(2) Current AHs in 
the form of voices, 
occurring at least once 
per week 

Reduction of AHs: 
BPRS 
Total symptom 
severity without AHs: 
BPRS 

7 sessions of CBT based 
upon the program "Voice 
Group" of Wikes et al 1999 
Pharmacological treatment: 
New antipsychotic 
Combined antipsychotic 
Anxiolytic, mood 
stabilizer, hypnotic or 
antidepressant medication 
Dosage: Changed when 
clinically required 




Pontillo M et al . Cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophreniaSingle 
case, 
An 
18-year-
old man 

Case report Criteria for 
schizophrenia 
spectrum disorder 
based on DSM-IV 
Symptoms and 
psychosocial 
functioning: GAF; 
BPRS; 
Clinical questionnaire 

Positive Symptoms: 
PSYRATS/CAARMS 
Beliefs about control of 
AHs: 
IVI 

Brief CBT upon the 
mindfulness approach 
Pharmacological treatment: 
None 

Pre-treatment: 
IVI score: 62 
Post treatment: 
IVI score 2 
The frequency and 
duration of AHs had 
reduced to zero 

1, 3, 4, 9 
mo post 
therapy 

Dannahy 
et al [19] 

n = 62 
divided 
in nine 
groups 

Pilot study The individual had 
been experiencing 
treatment-resistant 
and subjectively 
distressing voices for 
at least the preceding 

Primary outcome 
measure: 
Improve general 
psychosocial well-
being (CORE-OM); 
Secondary measures: 

Group person-based 
cognitive 
Therapy (PBCT) conducted 
over 8-12 sessions based 
upon the manual of 
Chadwick et al (2006) 
Pharmacological treatment: 
Standard psychiatric care 

CORE-OM 
Total score: 
Post-group: 1.90 b (0.70) 
VOICE-DISTRESS Total 
score: 

1 mo 

Mean age: 
41.1 
SD: 9.2 

2 yr, with the voice-
distress rated at 3 or 
greater on at least one 
of the two PSYRATS 
voice-distress items 

Reduce distress and 
perceived voice-
control; 
Evaluate the 
relationship with 
voice (VAY) 

Group person-based cognitive 
Therapy (PBCT) conducted over 
8-12 sessions based upon the 
manual of Chadwick et al (2006) 
Pharmacological treatment: 
Standard psychiatric care 

Post-group: 3.57 b 
(0.83) 
VOICE-CONTROL 
total score: 
Post-group: 53.47 b 
(23.59) 
VAY Voice 
Dependence total 
score: 
Post group: 6.76 
(5.69) 
VAY Voice 
Intrusiveness total 
score: 
Post group: 9.03 
(4.32) 
VAY Voice 
Dominance total 
score: 
-Post group: 14.46 
(6.37) 
VAY Hearer distance 
total score: 
Post group: 12.93 
(5.93) 
Gottlieb 
et al [20] 

n = 17 
Mean age: 
40.10 

SD: 13.63 

Pilot study (1) Criteria for 
schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective 
disorder, or psychosis, 
NOS based on DSM-
IV 
(2) At least 
"moderate" level of 
AHs severity over 
the past week (BPRS 
Hallucinations item 4 
or higher); 
(3) Between the ages 
of 18-65; 
(4) No exposure to 
CBTp within the past 
3 yr 
(5) No current 
suicidal ideation or 
hospitalization within 
the past month 
(6) Taking a 
stable dose of 
an antipsychotic 
medication for at least 
one month; 
(7) No active 
substance abuse/ 
dependence 
(8) MMSE score ≥ 24) 

Primary outcomes: 
Reduce the 
frequency, 
intensity, loudness, 
associated distress, 
perceived degree of 
controllability of, and 
interference from 
AHs (PSYRATS) 
Secondary outcomes: 
Evaluate beliefs 
about AHs 
(BAVQ-R); 
Evaluate overall 
psychopathology 
(BPRS), and 
depression (BDI-II) 

Web-based cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for AHs: 
-10 session: 
-psychoeducational video 
tutorials 
-games 
-interactive exercises 
-social network to examine the 
coping strategies of other users. 
Pharmacological treatment: stable 
dose of antipsychotic medication 
for at least one month 


Pontillo M et al . Cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia
Pontillo M et al . Cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia © 2016 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights reserved.
COMMENTS
Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: theory and therapy. A T Beck, N A Rector, 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205]2Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 1Beck AT, Rector NA. Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: theory and therapy. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2005; 1: 577-606 [PMID: 17716100 DOI: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205] 2

Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia and nonschizophrenia populations: a review and integrated model of cognitive mechanisms. F Waters, P Allen, A Aleman, C Fernyhough, T S Woodward, J C Badcock, E Barkus, L Johns, F Varese, M Menon, A Vercammen, F Larøi, 10.1093/schbul/sbs045Schizophr Bull. 38Waters F, Allen P, Aleman A, Fernyhough C, Woodward TS, Badcock JC, Barkus E, Johns L, Varese F, Menon M, Vercammen A, Larøi F. Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia and nonschiz- ophrenia populations: a review and integrated model of cognitive mechanisms. Schizophr Bull 2012; 38: 683-693 [PMID: 22446568 DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbs045]

The characteristic features of auditory verbal hallucinations in clinical and nonclinical groups: state-of-the-art overview and future directions. F Larøi, I E Sommer, J D Blom, C Fernyhough, D H Ffytche, K Hugdahl, L C Johns, S Mccarthy-Jones, A Preti, A Raballo, C W Slotema, M Stephane, F Waters, 10.1093/schbul/sbs061Schizophr Bull. 38Larøi F, Sommer IE, Blom JD, Fernyhough C, Ffytche DH, Hugdahl K, Johns LC, McCarthy-Jones S, Preti A, Raballo A, Slotema CW, Stephane M, Waters F. The characteristic features of auditory verbal hallucinations in clinical and nonclinical groups: state-of-the-art overview and future directions. Schizophr Bull 2012; 38: 724-733 [PMID: 22499783 DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbs061]

Schizophrenia: the characteristic symptoms. N C Andreasen, M Flaum, 10.1093/schbul/17.1.27Schizophr Bull. 17Andreasen NC, Flaum M. Schizophrenia: the characteristic symptoms. Schizophr Bull 1991; 17: 27-49 [PMID: 2047788 DOI: 10.1093/schbul/17.1.27]

The positive triad of schizophrenic symptoms. Its statistical properties and its relationship to 13 traditional diagnostic systems. J Landmark, H Merskey, Z Cernovsky, E Helmes, 10.1192/bjp.156.3.388]6Br J Psychiatry. 156Landmark J, Merskey H, Cernovsky Z, Helmes E. The positive triad of schizophrenic symptoms. Its statistical properties and its relationship to 13 traditional diagnostic systems. Br J Psychiatry 1990; 156: 388-394 [PMID: 2346840 DOI: 10.1192/bjp.156.3.388] 6

Hallucinations: The Science of Idiosyncratic Perception. A Aleman, F Larøi, 10.1037/11751-000American Psychological AssociationWashington, DCAleman A, Larøi F. Hallucinations: The Science of Idiosyncratic Perception. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2008 [DOI: 10.1037/11751-000]

The treatment of hallucinations in schizophrenia spectrum disorders. I E Sommer, C W Slotema, Z J Daskalakis, E M Derks, J D Blom, M Van Der Gaag, 10.1093/schbul/sbs034Schizophr Bull. 38Sommer IE, Slotema CW, Daskalakis ZJ, Derks EM, Blom JD, van der Gaag M. The treatment of hallucinations in schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Schizophr Bull 2012; 38: 704-714 [PMID: 22368234 DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbs034]

Command hallucinations and violence: implications for detention and treatment. F Shawyer, A Mackinnon, J Farhall, 10.1375/pplt.2003.10.1.97]9Psychiatry, Psychol Law. 10Shawyer F, Mackinnon A, Farhall J. Command hallucinations and violence: implications for detention and treatment. Psychiatry, Psychol Law 2003; 10: 97-107 [DOI: 10.1375/pplt.2003.10.1.97] 9

The omnipotence of voices: testing the validity of a cognitive model. M Birchwood, P Chadwick, 10.1017/S0033291797005552Psychol Med. 27Birchwood M, Chadwick P. The omnipotence of voices: testing the validity of a cognitive model. Psychol Med 1997; 27: 1345-1353 [PMID: 9403906 DOI: 10.1017/S0033291797005552]

Interpretations of voices in patients with hallucinations and non-patient controls: a comparison and predictors of distress in patients. A P Morrison, S Nothard, S E Bowe, A Wells, 10.1016/j.brat.2003.08.009Behav Res Ther. 42Morrison AP, Nothard S, Bowe SE, Wells A. Interpretations of voices in patients with hallucinations and non-patient controls: a comparison and predictors of distress in patients. Behav Res Ther 2004; 42: 1315-1323 [PMID: 15381440 DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2003.08.009]

Emotion and psychosis: links between depression, self-esteem, negative schematic beliefs and delusions and hallucinations. B Smith, D G Fowler, D Freeman, P Bebbington, H Bashforth, P Garety, G Dunn, E Kuipers, 10.1016/j.schres.2006.06.018Schizophr Res. 86Smith B, Fowler DG, Freeman D, Bebbington P, Bashforth H, Garety P, Dunn G, Kuipers E. Emotion and psychosis: links between depression, self-esteem, negative schematic beliefs and delusions and hallucinations. Schizophr Res 2006; 86: 181-188 [PMID: 16857346 DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2006.06.018]

Reviewing evidence for the cognitive model of auditory hallucinations: The relationship between cognitive voice appraisals and distress during psychosis. A Mawson, K Cohen, K Berry, 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.11.006Clin Psychol Rev. 30Mawson A, Cohen K, Berry K. Reviewing evidence for the cognitive model of auditory hallucinations: The relationship between cognitive voice appraisals and distress during psychosis. Clin Psychol Rev 2010; 30: 248-258 [PMID: 20071062 DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.11.006]

The relationship between command hallucinations and factors of compliance: a critical review of the literature. A L Barrowcliff, G Haddock, 10.1080/14789940500485078The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology. 17Barrowcliff AL, Haddock G. The relationship between command hallucinations and factors of compliance: a critical review of the literature. The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology 2006; 17: 266-298 [DOI: 10.1080/14789940500485078]

Violence and delusions: data from the MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study. P S Appelbaum, P C Robbins, J Monahan, 10739415Am J Psychiatry. 157Appelbaum PS, Robbins PC, Monahan J. Violence and delusions: data from the MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study. Am J Psychiatry 2000; 157: 566-572 [PMID: 10739415 DOI: 10.1176/ appi.ajp.157.4.566]

National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults: treatment and management. Clinical Guideline. London155National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults: treatment and management. London: Clinical Guideline, 2014: 155

World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) Guidelines for Biological Treatment of Schizophrenia, part 1: update 2012 on the acute treatment of schizophrenia and the management of treatment resistance. A Hasan, P Falkai, T Wobrock, J Lieberman, B Glenthoj, W F Gattaz, F Thibaut, H J Möller, 22834451World J Biol Psychiatry. 13Hasan A, Falkai P, Wobrock T, Lieberman J, Glenthoj B, Gattaz WF, Thibaut F, Möller HJ. World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) Guidelines for Biological Treatment of Schizophrenia, part 1: update 2012 on the acute treatment of schizophrenia and the management of treatment resistance. World J Biol Psychiatry 2012; 13: 318-378 [PMID: 22834451 DOI: 10.3109/ 15622975.2012.696143]

Acceptability, and Tolerability of Antipsychotics in Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia: A Network Meta-analysis. M T Samara, M Dold, M Gianatsi, A Nikolakopoulou, B Helfer, G Salanti, Leucht S Efficacy, 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2955JAMA Psychiatry. 73Samara MT, Dold M, Gianatsi M, Nikolakopoulou A, Helfer B, Salanti G, Leucht S. Efficacy, Acceptability, and Tolerability of Antipsychotics in Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia: A Network Meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 2016; 73: 199-210 [PMID: 26842482 DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2955]

Safety and tolerability of antipsychotic co-treatment in patients with schizophrenia: results from a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. B Galling, A Roldán, L Rietschel, K Hagi, F Walyzada, W Zheng, X L Cao, Y T Xiang, J M Kane, C U Correll, 10.1517/14740338.2016.1165668Expert Opin Drug Saf. 15Galling B, Roldán A, Rietschel L, Hagi K, Walyzada F, Zheng W, Cao XL, Xiang YT, Kane JM, Correll CU. Safety and tolerability of antipsychotic co-treatment in patients with schizophrenia: results from a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2016; 15: 591-612 [PMID: 26967126 DOI: 10.1517/14740338.2016.1165668]

How often do patients with psychosis fail to adhere to treatment programmes? A systematic review. M Nosé, C Barbui, M Tansella, Nosé M, Barbui C, Tansella M. How often do patients with psychosis fail to adhere to treatment programmes? A systematic review.

. 14580069Psychol Med. 33Psychol Med 2003; 33: 1149-1160 [PMID: 14580069 DOI: 10.1017/ S0033291703008328]

Medication adherence in patients with schizophrenia. S V Phan, 27079779Int J Psychiatry Med. 51Phan SV. Medication adherence in patients with schizophrenia. Int J Psychiatry Med 2016; 51: 211-219 [PMID: 27079779 DOI: 10.1177/ 0091217416636601]

Cognitive behaviour therapy to prevent harmful compliance with command hallucinations (COMMAND): a randomised controlled trial. M Birchwood, M Michail, A Meaden, N Tarrier, S Lewis, T Wykes, L Davies, G Dunn, E Peters, 10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70247-0Lancet Psychiatry. 1Birchwood M, Michail M, Meaden A, Tarrier N, Lewis S, Wykes T, Davies L, Dunn G, Peters E. Cognitive behaviour therapy to prevent harmful compliance with command hallucinations (COMMAND): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1: 23-33 [PMID: 26360400 DOI: 10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70247-0]

Cognitive therapy for command hallucinations: randomised controlled trial. P Trower, M Birchwood, A Meaden, S Byrne, A Nelson, K Ross, 10.1192/bjp.184.4.312Br J Psychiatry. 184Trower P, Birchwood M, Meaden A, Byrne S, Nelson A, Ross K. Cognitive therapy for command hallucinations: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 2004; 184: 312-320 [PMID: 15056575 DOI: 10.1192/bjp.184.4.312]

The effects of individually tailored formulation-based cognitive behavioural therapy in auditory hallucinations and delusions: a meta-analysis. M Van Der Gaag, L R Valmaggia, F Smit, 10.1016/j.schres.2014.03.016Schizophr Res. 156van der Gaag M, Valmaggia LR, Smit F. The effects of individually tailored formulation-based cognitive behavioural therapy in auditory hallucinations and delusions: a meta-analysis. Schizophr Res 2014; 156: 30-37 [PMID: 24731619 DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.03.016]

A randomised controlled trial of acceptance-based cognitive behavioural therapy for command hallucinations in psychotic disorders. F Shawyer, J Farhall, A Mackinnon, T Trauer, E Sims, K Ratcliff, C Larner, N Thomas, D Castle, P Mullen, D Copolov, 10.1016/j.brat.2011.11.007Behav Res Ther. 50Shawyer F, Farhall J, Mackinnon A, Trauer T, Sims E, Ratcliff K, Larner C, Thomas N, Castle D, Mullen P, Copolov D. A randomised controlled trial of acceptance-based cognitive behavioural therapy for command hallucinations in psychotic disorders. Behav Res Ther 2012; 50: 110-121 [PMID: 22186135 DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2011.11.007]

Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations: effectiveness and predictors of outcome in a specialist clinic. N Thomas, S Rossell, J Farhall, F Shawyer, D Castle, 21062528Behav Cogn Psychother. 39Thomas N, Rossell S, Farhall J, Shawyer F, Castle D. Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations: effectiveness and predictors of outcome in a specialist clinic. Behav Cogn Psychother 2011; 39: 129-138 [PMID: 21062528 DOI: 10.1017/ S1352465810000548]

. O Mortan, Tekinsav Sütcü, S , German Köse, G , A pilot study on the effectiveness of a group-based cognitive-behavioral therapy program for coping with auditory hallucinationsMortan O, Tekinsav Sütcü S, German Köse G. [A pilot study on the effectiveness of a group-based cognitive-behavioral therapy program for coping with auditory hallucinations].

. 21360353Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 22Turk Psikiyatri Derg 2011; 22: 26-34 [PMID: 21360353]

Brief cognitive behavioural therapy for hallucinations: can it help people who decide not to take antipsychotic medication? A case report. P Hutton, A P Morrison, H Taylor, 21740604Behav Cogn Psychother. 40Hutton P, Morrison AP, Taylor H. Brief cognitive behavioural therapy for hallucinations: can it help people who decide not to take antipsychotic medication? A case report. Behav Cogn Psychother 2012; 40: 111-116 [PMID: 21740604 DOI: 10.1017/ S135246581100035X]

Group person-based cognitive therapy for distressing voices: Pilot data from nine groups. L Dannahy, M Hayward, C Strauss, W Turton, E Harding, P Chadwick, 10.1016/j.jbtep.2010.07.006J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry. 42Dannahy L, Hayward M, Strauss C, Turton W, Harding E, Chadwick P. Group person-based cognitive therapy for distressing voices: Pilot data from nine groups. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 2011; 42: 111-116 [PMID: 20817148 DOI: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2010.07.006]

Webbased cognitive-behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinations in persons with psychosis: a pilot study. J D Gottlieb, K H Romeo, D L Penn, K T Mueser, B P Chiko, 10.1016/j.schres.2013.01.002Schizophr Res. 145Gottlieb JD, Romeo KH, Penn DL, Mueser KT, Chiko BP. Web- based cognitive-behavioral therapy for auditory hallucinations in persons with psychosis: a pilot study. Schizophr Res 2013; 145: 82-87 [PMID: 23410709 DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2013.01.002]

Effectiveness of a brief group cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory verbal hallucinations: a 6-month follow-up study. A Zanello, S Mohr, M C Merlo, P Huguelet, Rey-Bellet , P , 24469527J Nerv Ment Dis. 202Zanello A, Mohr S, Merlo MC, Huguelet P, Rey-Bellet P. Effectiveness of a brief group cognitive behavioral therapy for auditory verbal hallucinations: a 6-month follow-up study. J Nerv Ment Dis 2014; 202: 144-153 [PMID: 24469527 DOI: 10.1097/ NMD.0000000000000084]

. S Bendall, E Killackey, Jackson H , Gleeson J Befriending Manual, Melbourne, ORYGEN Research Centre and Department of Psychology, University of MelbourneBendall S, Killackey E, Jackson H, Gleeson J. Befriending Manual. Melbourne: ORYGEN Research Centre and Department of Psychology, University of Melbourne, 2003

A Casebook of cognitive behaviour therapy for command hallucinations. A social rank theory approach. S Byrne, M Birchwood, P Trower, A Meaden, London & New York: RoutledgeByrne S, Birchwood M, Trower P, Meaden A. A Casebook of cognitive behaviour therapy for command hallucinations. A social rank theory approach. London & New York: Routledge, 2006

The voices acceptance and action scale (VAAS): Pilot data. F Shawyer, K Ratcliff, A Mackinnon, J Farhall, S C Hayes, D Copolov, 17457846J Clin Psychol. 63Shawyer F, Ratcliff K, Mackinnon A, Farhall J, Hayes SC, Copolov D. The voices acceptance and action scale (VAAS): Pilot data. J Clin Psychol 2007; 63: 593-606 [PMID: 17457846 DOI: 10.1002/ jclp.20366]

Acting on command hallucinations: a cognitive approach. A Beck-Sander, M Birchwood, P Chadwick, 10.1111/j.2044-8260.1997.tb01237Br J Clin Psychol. 36Pt 1Beck-Sander A, Birchwood M, Chadwick P. Acting on command hallucinations: a cognitive approach. Br J Clin Psychol 1997; 36 (Pt 1): 139-148 [PMID: 9051285 DOI: 10.1111/j.2044-8260.1997.tb01237. x]

The credibility and acceptability of Befriending as a control therapy in a randomized controlled trial of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for acute first episode psychosis. S Bendall, H J Jackson, E Killackey, K Allot, T Johnson, S Harrigan, 10.1017/S1352465806002815Behav Cogn Psychoth. 34Bendall S, Jackson HJ, Killackey E, Allot K, Johnson T, Harrigan S. The credibility and acceptability of Befriending as a control therapy in a randomized controlled trial of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for acute first episode psychosis. Behav Cogn Psychoth 2006; 34: 277-291 [DOI: 10.1017/S1352465806002815]

Training and quality assurance with the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale: The drift busters. J Ventura, M F Green, A Shaner, R P Liberman, Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 3Ventura J, Green MF, Shaner A, Liberman RP. Training and quality assurance with the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale: The drift busters. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res 1993; 3: 221-244

. P-Reviewer , +1-925-223-8242 Fax: +1-925-223-8243Flyckt L, Kravos M, Mauri MC S-Editor: Ji FF L-Editor: A E-EditorLu YJ Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc 8226 Regency DrivePleasanton, CA 94588, USA TelephoneP-Reviewer: Flyckt L, Kravos M, Mauri MC S-Editor: Ji FF L-Editor: A E-Editor: Lu YJ Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc 8226 Regency Drive, Pleasanton, CA 94588, USA Telephone: +1-925-223-8242 Fax: +1-925-223-8243

bpgoffice@wjgnet.com Help Desk. E-mail: bpgoffice@wjgnet.com Help Desk: http://www.wjgnet.com/esps/helpdesk.aspx http://www.wjgnet.com