# An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology of Ibuprofen

CorpusID: 17917709
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1aee5a82bd3404aa5cbe3784c37a1f09ee79ece6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1aee5a82bd3404aa5cbe3784c37a1f09ee79ece6)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology of Ibuprofen


Rabia Bushra 
Nousheen Aslam 

From Ziauddin College of Pharmacy
Ziauddin University
Kaarchi, SindhPakistan


Ziauddin College of Pharmacy
Ziauddin University
Kaarchi, SindhPakistan

An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology of Ibuprofen
FEC2B47B85EBC6A60F3746E1C982B20410.5001/omj.2010.49Received: 21 Feb 2010 Accepted: 24 Apr 2010


## Introduction

Ibuprof en is (2RS)-1[4-(2-methyl propyl) phenyl] propionic acid (BP.2004).Ibuprofen was the first member of propionic acid derivatives to be introduced in 1969 as a better alternative to Aspirin.Gastric discomfort, nausea and vomiting, though less than aspirin or indomethacin, are still the most common side effects. 1 Ibuprofen is the most commonly used and most frequently prescribed NSAID. 2,3It is a non-selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). 4Although its anti inflammatory properties may be weaker than those of some other NSAIDs, it has a prominent analgesic and antipyretic role.Its effects are due to the inhibitory actions on cyclooxygenases, which are involved in the synthesis of prostaglandins.Prostaglandins have an important role in the production of pain, inflammation and fever. 5


## Clinical Pharmacology of Ibuprofen

Ibuprofen is supplied as tablets with a potency of 200 to 800 mg. 6he usual dose is 400 to 800 mg three times a day. 7It is almost insoluble in water having pKa of 5.3. 8It is well absorbed orally; peak serum concentrations are attained in 1 to 2 hours after oral administration.It is rapidly bio-transformed with a serum half life of 1.8 to 2 hours.The drug is completely eliminated in 24 hours after the last dose and eliminated through metabolism. 9,10The drug is more than 99% protein bound, extensively metabolized in the liver and little is excreted unchanged. 11lthough highly bound to plasma proteins (90-99%), displacement interactions are not clinically significant, hence the dose of oral anti-cogulants and oral hypoglycemic needs not be altered. 1More than 90% of an ingested dose is excreted in the urine as metabolites or their conjugates, the major metabolites are hydroxylated and carboxylated compounds. 12,6stract:

Ibuprofen was the first member of Propionic acid derivatives introduced in 1969.It is a popular domestic and over the counter analgesic and antipyretic for adults and children.Ibuprofen has been rated as the safest conventional NSAID by spontaneous adverse drug reaction reporting systems in the UK.This article summarizes the main pharmacological effects, therapeutical applications and adverse drug reactions, drug-drug interactions and food drug interactions of ibuprofen that have been reported especially during the last 10 years.

Old age has no significant effects on the elimination of ibuprofen. 13enal impairment also has no effect on the kinetics of the drugs, rapid elimination still occur as a consequence of metabolism. 14he administration of ibuprofen tablets either under fasting conditions or immediately before meals yield quiet similar serum concentrations-time profile.When it is administered immediately after a meal, there is a reduction in the rate of absorption but no appreciable decrease in the extent of absorption.


## Therapeutic Applications

A low dose ibuprofen is as effective as aspirin and paracetamol for the indications normally treated with over the counter medications. 168][19] Recemic ibuprofen and S(+) enantiomer are mainly used in the treatment of mild to moderate pain related to dysmenorrhea, headache, migraine, postoperative dental pain, management of spondylitis, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and soft tissue disorder. 20A number of other actions of NSAIDs can also be attributed to the inhibition of prostaglandins (PGs) or thromboxane synthesis, including alteration in platelet function (PGI2 and Thromboxane), prolongation of gestation and labor (PGE2, PGF2A), gastrointestinal mucosal damage (PGI2 and PGE2), fluid and electrolyte imbalance (renal PGs), premature closure of ductus arteriosus ( PGE2) and bronchial asthma (PGs). 21he main therapeutic applications of ibuprofen are as follows:


## Patent Ductus arterosus (PDA)

This is a frequent complication in premature infants.So far, intravenous indomethacin is the standard mode of medical therapy. 22However, because of adverse effects of indomethacin, other PG inhibitors such as ibuprofen have been studied for the closure of ductus arteriosus, and results indicated that ibuprofen is as effective as indomethacin. 23


## Rheumatoid and osteo-arthritis (RA and OA)

Ibuprofen is widely used in the management of numerous inflammatory, musculoskeletal and rheumatic disorders, because they are highly effective having minimal toxicities. 24,25Ibuprofen 2400 mg per day resulted in rapid improvement and complete resolution of gouty arthritis within 72 hours. 26In doses of approximately 2400 mg daily, it is equivalent to 4g of aspirin in terms od anti inflammatory effects. 27Higher doses, 1200 to 1600 mg per day have been compared with a number of NSAIDs and it has been found to be as effective and well tolerated. 28Osteoarthritis is very common and treatment involves NSAIDs, particularly ibuprofen. 29,30For control of joint symptoms, diclofenac, ibuprofen, tolmetin and naproxen are equally effective. 31Roughly 1% of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients receiving NSAIDs are prone to develop major GI bleeds. 32With ibuprofen, gastric toxicity has been observed in 10 -32% of patients. 33


## Cystic fibrosis (CF)

High dose ibuprofen therapy has also been shown to be effective in decreasing inflammation, probably by decreasing polymorphonuclear cell influx into the lungs. 35The risk of developing GI side effects from high dose ibuprofen therapy is low in patients with CF. 36,37


## Orthostatic hypotension

Ibuprofen is useful in the treatment of severe orthostatic hypotension as with other NSAIDs. 38Toxic effects are unlikely at doses below 100 mg/kg but can be life-threatening or severe above 400 mg/kg. 39However, large doses do not indicate that the clinical course is likely to be lethal. 40


## Dental pain

Ibuprofen is one of the most effective and widely used NSAID in treatment of dental pain. 41Dental practitioners have relied on ibuprofen and other NSAIDs to manage acute and chronic orofacial pain. 42A dose of 400 mg of ibuprofen provides effective analgesic for the control of postoperative pain after third molar surgery. 43A liquid gel preparation of ibuprofen 400mg provides faster relief and superior overall efficacy in post surgical dental pain. 27


## Dysmenorrhea, fever and headache

5][46] Dysmenorrhea is the most common menstrual complain. 47Ibuprofen was superior to placebo for pain relief and menstrual fluid PGF2 alpha suppression. 48Cycloxygenase inhibitors reduce the amount of menstrual prostanoids release, with concomitant reduction in uterine hyper contractility. 49Overthe-counter (OTC) ibuprofen preparations are mainly used for acute indications, such as fever or headaches, especially tension type headache. 50,51,52t has been reported that the combined use of paracetamol and ibuprofen reduce fever very rapidly. 53Fever almost invariably accompanies uncomplicated falciparum malaria.In a randomized double-'blind' study, a single dose of ibuprofen was compared with paracetamol for the treatment of fever >38•5 °C due to uncomplicated falciparum malaria.Ibuprofen was significantly more effective than paracetamol in lowering temperatures throughout the first 4-5 hrs after dosing and thus should be considered as an antipyretic agent in the management of uncomplicated falciparum infections, providing there is no contraindication to its use. 54Evers et al. in 2006, conducted a double blind study to investigate the efficacy of zolmitriptan and ibuprofen in the treatment of migraine in children and adolescents.Pain relief rates after two hours were 28% for placebo, 62% for zolmitriptan and 69% for ibuprofen. 55


## Prophylaxis of Alzheimers disease

The administration of NSAIDs, particularly ibuprofen markedly reduced neurodegeneration. 56,57In some studies, ibuprofen An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology... Bushra & Aslam showed superior results compared to placebo in the prophylaxis of Alzheimer's disease, when given in low doses over a long time.Further studies are needed to confirm the results before ibuprofen can be recommended for this indication. 58


## Parkinson's disease (PD)

Inflammation and oxidative stress have been implicated as pathogenic mechanisms in PD. 59 Epidemiologic evidence showed that regular use of NSAIDs, particularly non aspirin COX inhibitors such as ibuprofen lower the risk of PD. 60,61 It induced apoptosis significantly in early and late stages, suggesting that these anti-inflammatory agents might inhibit microbial proliferation. 62


## Breast cancer

Harris et al. in 1999 conducted a study for utilization of NSAIDs in breast cancer.Breast cancer rate was decreased by approximately 50% with regular ibuprofen intake and 40% with regular aspirin intake.Results suggested that specific NSAIDs may be effective chemo preventive agents against breast cancer. 63


## Adverse Reactions

NSAIDs are widely used, frequently taken inappropriately and potentially dangerously. 64Nevertheless, ibuprofen exhibits few adverse effects. 65The major adverse reactions include the affects on the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), the kidney and the coagulation system. 66Based on clinical trial data, serious GIT reactions prompting withdrawal of treatment because of hematemesis, peptic ulcer, 67 and severe gastric pain or vomiting showed an incidence of 1.5% with ibuprofen compared to 1% with placebo and 12.5 % with aspirin. 68Ibuprofen was a potential cause of GI bleeding, 69,70 increasing the risk of gastric ulcers and damage, renal failure, epistaxis, [71][72][73][74] apoptosis, 75 heart failure, hyperkalaemia, 76 confusion and bronchospasm. 77It has been estimated that 1 in 5 chronic users (lasting over a long period of time) of NSAIDs will develop gastric damage which can be silent. 78ther adverse effects of ibuprofen have been reported less frequently.They include thrombocytopenia, rashes, headache, dizziness, blurred vision and in few cases toxic amblyopia, fluid retention and edema.Patients who develop ocular disturbances should discontinue the use of ibuprofen. 34Effects on kidney (as with all NSAIDs) include acute renal failure, interstitial nephritis, and nephritic syndrome, but these very rarely occur. 27


## Drug-Drug Interactions

Ibuprofen has established drug interactions with NSAIDs which are both pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic in origin. 79,80he most potentially serious interactions include the use of NSAIDs with lithium, warfarin, oral hypoglycemics, high dose methotrexate, antihypertensives, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, β-blockers, and diuretics.Anticipation and care full monitoring can often prevent serious events when these drugs are used concomitantly. 813][84][85] The pharmacodynamic interactions of aspirin and ibuprofen may not have a significant impact on patient outcomes. 86Palmer et al. in 2003 suggested that NSAIDs interfere with certain antihypertensive therapies.Ibuprofen caused a significant increase in systolic and diastolic blood pressure compared to placebo. 87A case of life-threatening hypotension due to sinus arrest was described in a patient in whom exerciseinduced hyperkalemia developed during a stable regimen that included verapamil, propranolol, and ibuprofen. 88Similar to other NSAIDs, ibuprofen is likely to decrease the diuretic and anti hypertensive actions of thiazides, furosemide and β-Blockers. 1 Hence the administration of ibuprofen caused a significant decrease in urinary output, inulin clearance, sodium excretion, osmolar clearance, free water clearance and urinary PGE2 clearance. 89any overdose experiences have been reported in medical literature. 90The maximum daily dose for ibuprofen is 3200 mg.Ibuprofen may cause serious toxicity when overdosed, mainly in children on ingestion of 400 mg/kg or more.[97][98][99][100] Desmopressin and NSAIDs should not be used in combination in patients with bleeding disorders. 101Coadministration of thiopurines and various NSAIDs (ketoprofen and ibuprofen) may lead to drug interactions. 102t has been observed that caffeine improves antinociceptive efficacy of some non-steroidal anti inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in several experimental models, however, these effects have been questioned in humans.Caffeine is able to potentiate the antinociceptive effect of ibuprofen.This effect was greater than the maximum produced by morphine in the experimental conditions. 103Caffeine also enhances the effectiveness of most analgesics, including ibuprofen.Comparison of the cumulative response scores revealed a trend toward a greater response to ibuprofen-caffeine treatment of headaches. 104emfibrozil moderately increases the AUC of R-ibuprofen and prolongs its t (1/2), indicating that R-ibuprofen is partially metabolised by Cytochrome P2C8 (CYP2C8).The interconversion of R-to S-ibuprofen can explain the small effect of gemfibrozil on the t (1/2) of S-ibuprofen.However, the gemfibrozil-ibuprofen interaction is of limited clinical significance. 105t. John's wort is a popular herbal supplement that has been involved in various herb-drug interactions.St. John's wort treatment appears to significantly reduce the mean residence time of S-ibuprofen, no ibuprofen dose adjustments appear warranted when the drug is administered orally with St. John's wort, due to the lack of significant changes observed in ibuprofen area under the curve (AUC) and maximum concentration C (max) for either enantiomer. 106he effects of the antifungals voriconazole and fluconazole on the pharmacokinetics of S-(+) -and R-(-)-ibuprofen were studied by Hynninen et al.A reduction of ibuprofen dosage should be considered when ibuprofen is coadministered with voriconazole or fluconazole, especially when the initial ibuprofen dose is high due to the inhibition of the cytochrome P450 2C9-mediated metabolism of S-(+)-ibuprofen. 107he competitive binding characteristics of ibuprofen and naproxen with respect to the binding site on bovine serum albumin (BSA) were studied.Ibuprofen displaced naproxen and vice versa from its high affinity binding site (site II) and the displaced drug rebound to its low affinity binding site (site I) on BSA molecule. 108nandamide, an endocannabinoid, is degraded by the enzyme fatty acid amide hydrolase which can be inhibited by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).The antinociceptive interaction between anandamide and ibuprofen was synergistic.The combination of anandamide with ibuprofen produced synergistic antinociceptive effects involving both cannabinoid CB 1 and CB 2 receptors. 109 study by Kaminski et al. in 1998 showed that all NSAIDs enhanced the protective activity of valproate magnesium against maximal electroshock-induced seizures.Only ibuprofen and piroxicam enhanced the anticonvulsive activity of diphenylhydantoin.Ibuprofen also decreased the effective dose 50 (ED 50 value) of valproate (for the induction of motor impairment).Thus, NSAIDs could enhance the protective activity of antiepileptics.110


## Food-Drug Interaction

The absorption of ibuprofen and oxycodone when given as a combination tablet was affected by the concomitant ingestion of food.Food intake before the administration of a single dose of the combination did not affect ibuprofen absorption but marginally increased the extent, but not the rate, of oxycodone absorption. 111The effect of food on the plasma concentration-time profile of sustained release dosage forms of ibuprofen has been investigated after an overnight fast or along with a heavy vegetarian breakfast.The formulation exhibited multiple peaks on the plasma concentration-time curve.Although food did not affect the bioavailability of ibuprofen, there was a statistically significant increase in the mean concentration.Results indicated that while qualitative changes in the plasma concentration versus time curves are primarily influenced by the nature of the formulation and the type of meal, bioavailability is influenced by the absorption characteristics of the drug as well. 112he Cmax and AUC0-alpha of ibuprofen were significantly increased after a single and multiple doses of Coca-Cola, thereby indicating an increased extent of absorption of ibuprofen.The daily dosage and frequency of ibuprofen must be reduced when administered with Coca-Cola. 113


## Warnings

The use of OTC products containing aspirin, acetaminophens, ibuprofen, naproxen or ketoprofen may increase the risk of hepatotoxicity and gastrointestinal hemorrhage in individuals who consume three or more alcoholic drinks daily. 115amburini et al. have reported an atypical presentation of meningitis due to Neisseria meningitidis in a patient who received large doses of ibuprofen.Anti-inflammatory therapy such as NSAIDs could reduce CSF inflammation and modify the clinical outcome in patients with bacterial meningitis.However, the use of NSAIDs is not recommended in bacterial meningitis due to a lack of studies. 116buprofen may exacerbate severe asthma.With this perception, ibuprofen was administered for postoperative pain management to a 17-year-old boy with allergic rhinitis and previous severe asthma (at a time when well controlled), who then had a severe asthma exacerbation. 117Also, it has been reported that gastrointestinal tract anatomical abnormalities or dysmotility may be contraindications for therapy with high-dose ibuprofen in patients with cystic fibrosis. 36 closer look at the nonprescription analgesics revealed their potential harm when used by solid-organ transplant recipients. 118xcretion into breast milk is thought to be minimal, however it should be used with caution by women who are breast feeding. 34


## Conclusion

Ibuprofen is suitable for self medication with regards to its relatively wide spectrum of indication, good tolerance and safety. 119verall, it has been rated as the safest conventional NSAID by the An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology... Bushra & Aslam

## 15
15



## Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: Structural formula of ibuprofen


## Table 1 :
1
Doses of Ibuprofen in adult & Children(34)
Patients IbuprofenDosesAdultAnalgesia200-400 mg, Every 4-6 hrsAnti-inflammatory300 mg, Every 6-8 hrs or 400-800 mg 3-4 times dailyChildren Anti pyretic5-10 mg/kg. Every 6 hrs (max. 40 mg/kg per day)Anti-inflammatory20-40 mg/kg/day in 3-4 divided dose



114ba et al.in 2003 conducted a study indicating that Tamarindus indica fruit extract significantly increased the bioavailability of Ibuprofen.114

AcknowledgementsThe authors reported no conflict of interest and no funding was received on this work.spontaneous adverse drug reaction reporting system in the United Kingdom.1
Non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs and anti pyretic analgesics. K D Tripathi, Essentials of medical pharmacology. 5 th edn. New DelhiJaypee Brothers2003176

Nitro-argenine methyl ester, a non selective inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase reduces ibuprofen-induced gastric mucosal injury in the rat. P Abrahm, K I Kd, Dig Dis. 5092005

How important is the role of the physician in the correct use of a drug? An observational cohort study in general practice. F Bradbury, Int J Clin Prat. 1442004

Valdecoxib: A review. M L Chavez, C J Dekorte, Clin Ther. 2532003

. A A Wahbi, E Hassan, D Hamdy, E Khamis, M Baray, Pak, Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 184412005

Analgesic antipyretic and anti inflammatory agents and drugs wmplyed in treatment of gout. L K Roberts, J D Morrow, Goodman and Gillman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics. J G Hardman, Limbird , New York, ChicagoMcGraw hill2001711th ed.

Analgesics and the control of pain. J M Ritter, L Lewis, Tgk Mant, A text book of clinical pharmacology. Arnold London1999216

Dissociation constant, solubilities and dissolution rate of some selective non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. C D Herzfeld, R Kummel, Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 951983

Non narcotic analgesics. J M Ross, J Dehoratius, DiPalma JR and DiGregorio GJ editors. New YorkMcGraw hill publishing company1990Basic pharmacology in medicine. 3. rd ed.

The influence of hemodialysis on the pharmacokinetic of ibuprofen and its major metabolites. E J Antal, C E Wright, B L Brown, K S Albert, L C Aman, N W Levin, J Clin Pharmacol. 2631986

Non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs, disease miodifying anti rheumatic drugs, non opioid analgesics, drugs used in gout. B G Katzung, D E Furst, Appliton and. Lang Stamford, Connecticut19981068

Analgesic/anti pyretic treatment: ibuprofen or acetaminophen? An update. G Olive, Therapie. 22006

The pharmacokinetic of ibuprofen in elderly and young subjects. E L Compreton, R C Glass, I D Hird, Boots research reports DT. 840411984

An absorption and disposition of ibuprofen in hemodialysed uremic patients. H O Senekjian, C Lee, T H Kuo, R Krothapalli, Eur J Rheumatism and inflammation. 621983

Physician's desk reference. Published by Medical Economic Company, Inc. at Montvale. 199751 st ed.

Forty years of Ibuprofen use. M Moore, Int J Clin Pract. 1352003

Fourty five years of ibuprofen use. D M Wood, J Monaghal, P Streete, A L Jones, P I Dargan, Critical care. 10442006

Ibuprofen: highly potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis. K Nuzu, Biochim Biophys Acta. 5291978

The pharmacological properties of ibuprofen, an anti inflammatory, analgesic and anti pyretic agent. S S Adams, K F Mccullough, J S Nicholson, Arch Int Pharmacodyn. Ther. 17811969

Biowaiver monographs for immediate release solid oral dosage forms: ibuprofen. H Pottast, J B Dressman, H E Junginger, K K Midha, H Oestr, V P Shah, J Pharm. Sci. 941021222005

Central nervous system. S K Bhattacharya, P Sen, A Ray, Das PK editor. 2682003ElsevierPharmacology

Pharmacokinetics of oral ibuprofen in premature infants. P K Sharma, S K Garg, A Narang, J Clin Pharmacol. 4392003

Alldredge BK and Corelli RL editors. D M Kravs, J T Pharm, M A Koda-Kimble, L V Young, W A Kradjan, B J Guglielmo, Applied therapeutics: the clinical use of drugs. Lipponcott William and Wilkins A Wolters Kluwer company Philadelphia New York20058Neonatal therapy. th ed.

Ibuprofen stereochemistry: double-the-trouble. S C Tan, B K Patel, S H Jakson, C G Swift, A J Hutt, Enantiomer. 43-41999

Arthritic disorders: gout and hyperurecemia. T M Russell, Young Ly ; Koda-Kimble, M A Young, L V Kradjan, W A Guglielmo, B J , Applied therapeutics: the clinical use of drugs. Lipponcott William and Wilkins A Wolters Kluwer company Philadelphia New York20058Alldredge BK and Corelli RL editors. th ed.

Ibuprofen in acute poly articular gout. W A Frank, M M Brown, Arthritis Rheum. Arthritis Rheum. 1922691976

Non-steroidal-anti inflammatory drugs, disease modifying anti rheumatic drugs, non opioid analgesics and drugs used in Gout. W Wagner, P Khanna, D E Furst, Katzung BG editor. Basic and clinical pharmacology. 95852004McGraw hill Booston

Clinical comparison of ibuprofen, fenoprofen, sodium naproxen and tolmetin sodium in rheumatoid arthritis. E P Gall, E M Caperton, J E Mccomb, Journal of rheumatology. 931982

Medical pharmacology: a clinical core text for integrated curriculum with self assessment. P Winstanley, T Walley, 2002Churchill Livingstone, AdinburghDrug for arthritis

Non steroidal anti inflammatory, anti pyretic analgesics. W G Calrk, D C Brater, A R Jhonson, Goth's medical pharmacology. StLouis Baltimore Booston199213Mosby year book

The use of non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs in pediatric rheumatic diseases. P Hollingworth, Br. J Rheumatol. 3211993

NA editors. Davidson's principles and practice of medicine. G Nuki, S H Ralston, R Luqmani, Haslett C, Chilvers ER, Hunter JAA and Boon1999Chirchil Livingstone UK18Diseases of connective tissues, joints and bones. th ed.

Gastrointestinal toxicology: toxicological pathology and sources of intestinal toxicity. W Coussement, Toxicology: principles and applications. Rjm Niesink, J Devries, M A Hollinger, Boca Raton, New YorkCRC Press1996655

Analgesic-anti pyretic and anti inflammatory Agents; Pharmacotherapy of gout. A Burke, E Smyth, G A Fitzgerald, Bruntom LL, Lazo JS and Parker KL2006McGraw HillNew YorkGoodmans and Gilman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics. th ed.

. M W Konston, J E Krenicky, M R Finney, H L Kirchner, K A Hillard, G B Hillard, The journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 3062003

High dose ibuprofen therapy associated with esophageal ulceration after pneumonectomy in a patient with cystic fibrosis: a case report. J Mackey, R D Anbar, BMC Pediatr. 4192004

Use of a rapid HPLC assay for determination of pharmacokinetic parameters of ibuprofen in paients with cystic fibrosis. N Rifai, M Sakamoto, T Law, V Galpchian, N Harris, A A Colin, Clin Chem. 42111996

Renal consequences of non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. E Zawada, Postgrad. Med. 7151982

Non opioid analgesic poisoning. G Volans, V Hartley, S Mccrea, J Monagham, Clinical medicine. 322003Clinical medicine

. An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology... Bushra & Aslam. 

Massive ibuprofen ingestion with survival. S A Seifert, A C Bronstein, T Mcguire, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 3812000

Dissolution of enantiomers of ibuprofen by liquid chromatography: a review. R Bhushan, J Martens, Biomed. Chromatogr. 1261998

Celecoxib and refecoxib. The role of Cox-II inhibitors in dental practice. T A Moore, E V Hersh, J AM Dent Assoc. 13242011

Synergistic interactions between the dual serotonergic, noradrenergic reuptake inhibitor duloxetine and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug ibuprofen in inflammatory pain in rodents. K Jones, R A Seymour, J E Hawkesford, British Journal of Oral and Maxilofacial. 3531997

Non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs for heavy bleeding or apin associated with intra uterinedevice use. D A Grimes, D Hubacher, L M Lopez, K F Schulz, Cochrane database Syst Rev. 1842006

Effects of acupressure and ibuprofen on the severity of primary Dysmenorrhea. Z Pouresmail, R Ibrahimzadeh, J Tradit Chin Med. 2232002

Ibuprofen: a monograph. D G Aycock, Am. Pharm. 3111991NS

Comparison of the efficacy and safety of non prescription doses of naproxen and naproxen sodium with ibuprofen, acetaminophen and placebo in the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea: a pooled analysis of five studies. I Milsom, N Minic, M Y Dawood, M D Akin, J Sapann, N F Niland, R A Squire, Clin. Ther. 2492002

Clinical efficacy and differential inhibition of menstrual fluid priostaglandin F2 alpha in a randomized, double-blind cross over treatment with placebo, acetaminophen and ibuprofen in primary dysmenorrheal. M Y Dawood, F S Khan-Dawood, Am J Obstet Gyaneacol. 1961352007

Primary Dysmenorrhea: advances in pathogenesis and management. M Y Dawood, Obstet Gynecol. 10822006

Pharmacokinetic of ibuprofen in man: a single-dose comparison of two over the counter, 200mg preparations. P Karttunen, V Sanno, P Paronen, P Peura, M Vidgren, Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol. 2861990

The use of ibuprofen plus caffeine to treat tensiontype headache. S Diamond, F G Freitag, Curr. Pain Headache Rep. 552001

Treatment of tension headache. J Schoenen, Rev. Neurol (Paris). 15642000

Randomized controlled trial of combined paracetamol and ibuprofen for fever. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse Md, K Coppens, L P Hunt, P J Chinnick, P Davies, I M Higgimson, J R Banjer, Arch Dis Child. 9152006

Fever in uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria: randomized double-'blind' comparison of ibuprofen and paracetamol treatment. S Krishna, S Pukrittayakamee, W Supanaranond, Ter Kuile, F Ruprah, M Sura, T , Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 8951995

Treatment of childhood migraine attacks with oral zolmitriptan and ibuprofen. S Evers, A Rahmann, C Kraeme, G Kurlemann, O Debus, I W Husstedt, Neurology. 6732006

Chronic glial activation, neurodegeneration and APP immunoreactive deposits following acute administration of double-stranded RNA. L N Melton, A B Keith, S Davis, A E Oakley, J A Edwardson, C M Morris, Glia. 4412003

Ibuprofen protects dopaminergic neurons against glutamate toxicity in vitro. D Casper, U Yaparpalvi, N Rempel, P Werner, Neurosci Lett. 28932000

Novel therapeutic opportunities for Alzheimer's disease: focus on non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. K Townsend, A D Pratic, FASEB J. 19122005

Non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs and risks of Parkinson's disease. T G Ton, S R Heckbert, W T Longstreth, Jr, M A Rossing, W A Kukull, G M Franklin, P D Swanson, T Smith-Weller, H Checkoway, Mov Disord. 2172006

Non steroidal anti inflammatory drug use and risks of Parkinson's disease. H Chen, E Jacobs, M Schwarzschild, M Mccullough, E Calle, M Thun, Ann Neurol. 5862005

Dopaminergic neurotoxicity by 6-OHDA and MPP+: differential requirement for neuronal cycloxygenase activity. E Carrasco, D Casper, P Werner, J. Nuerosci Res. 8112005

Ibuprofen and apigenin induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest inactivated microglia. N S Elsisi, S Darling-Reed, E Y Lee, E T Oriaku, K F Soliman, Neurosci Lett. 37522005

Prospective study of non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs and breast cancer. R E Harris, S Kasbari, W B Farar, Oncol Rep. 611999

Patterns of use and public perception of over the counter pain relivers: focus on non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. C M Wilcox, B Cryer, G Triadafilopoulos, J Rheumatol. 32112005

Time to re-evaluate gut toxicity. D N Bateman, Lancet. 34389051994

Analgesia in PACU: non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. G D Rocca, P Chiarandini, P Pietropaoli, Curr. Drug targets. 672005

Contribution of non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs to death associated with peptic ulcer disease:a prospective toxicological analysis of autopsy blood samples. M Tsokos, A Schmoldt, Arch Pathol gLab Med. 125122001

Therapeutic drugs 2 nd ed. C Dollery, 1999112Churchill Livingstone Edinbugh London

Gastrointestinal toxicity of non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. M. Engl. M M Wolfe, D R Lichenstein, G Signh, J.Med. 3401999

The use of anti inflammatory medications in cystic fibrosis: trends and physician attitudes. C M Oermann, M M Sockrider, M W Konstan, Chest. 11541999

Comparative study of anti inflammatory and ulceragenic activities of different cyclo oxygenase inhibitors. A Gambero, T L Becker, A S Zago, A F De-Oliveir, J Pedrazzoli, Inflammopharmacology. 135-62005

Medications for disorders of the musculoskeletal system. E M Fulcher, C D Soto, R M Fulcher, Principles and applications. A work text for allied health professionals. Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Science Philadelphia. 2003510

Inflammation and cystic fibrosis pulmonary disease. M J Kennedy, Pharmacotherapy. 2152001

Transient renal failure due to simultaneous ibuprofen and aminoglycoside therapy in children with cystic fibrosis. T A Kovesi, R Swartz, N Mcdonalds, N. Engl. J. Med. 33811998

Apoptosis induction in gastric mucous cells in vitro: lesser potency of Helicobacter pylori than E coli lipo polysaccharides, but positive interaction with ibuprofen. E Durkin, A P Moran, P J Hanson, J. Endotoxin Res. 1212006

Acute poisoning due to non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs. Clinical features and management. J A Vale, T J Meredith, Med Toxicol. 111986

Australian medicine hand book. S Rossi, 2004

Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant drugs. H P Rang, M M Dale, J M Ritter, Pharmacology. 51999248Churchil Livingstone Edinburgh Londonth ed.

Non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs; New perspectives on a familiar drug class. G A Pepper, Rheumatology. 3512000

Clinical implications of drug interactions with coxibs. W R Garnett, Pharmacotherapy. 21102001

Osteoarthritis. K E Hansen, Me ; Elliott, J T Dipiro, R L Talbert, G C Yee, G R Matzke, Wells Bg, L M Posey, Editors, Pharmacotherapy; A pathophysiologic approach. New YorkMcGraw Hill20056th ed.

Antiplatelet effect of six non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and their pharmacodynamic interaction with aspirin in healthy volunteers. P A Gladding, Mwi Webster, H B Farrell, Isl Zeng, Park R Ruijne, N , Am J Cardiol. 10172008An Overview of Clinical Pharmacology

Potential for drug drug interaction in patients taking analgesic for mild to moderate pain and low-dose aspirin for cardioprotection. J M Gaziano, C M Gibsom, The Am J Cardiol. 9792006. 2006

Parsing an enigma: pharmacodynamic of aspirin resistance. G A Fitzgerald, Lancet. 3612003

Effect of ibuprofen on cardioprotective effect of aspirin. T M Mcdonal, L Wei, Lancet. 3612003

Aspirin, ibuprofen and mortality after myocardial infraction: reterospective cohort study. J P Curtis, Y Wang, Portnay El Masoudi, F A Havranek, E P Krumhols, H M , BMJ. 3272003

Effects of nabumetone, celecoxib and ibuprofen on blood pressure control in hypertensive patients on angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. R Palmer, R Weiss, R M Zusman, A Haig, S Flavin, B Mcdonald, Am. J. Hypertense. 1622003

Hypotension and sinus arrest with exercise-induced hyperkalaemia and combined verapamil/propranolol therapy.The Am. T H Lee, D R Salomon, C M Rayment, E M Antman, J. Med. 8061986

Effects of mesoprostol on ibuprofen-induced renal dysfunction in patients with decompunsated cirrhosis: results of double-blind placebo-controlled parallel group studies. Z Ackerman, S Cominelli, T B Rynolds, The Journal of Gastrointenterology. 9782002

A prospective, population-based study of acute ibuprofen over dose: complication are rare and routine serum level not warranted. N E Mcelwee, J C Veltri, D C Bradford, Rollins De, Ann. Emerg. Med. 1961990

Ibuprofen overdose. Ah; Hall, Sc; Smolinske, Fl; Conrad, K M Wruk, K W Kulig, T L Dwelle, B H Rumack, Ann Emerg Med. 0196-064415111986

. K E Marciniak, 

Massive ibuprofen overdose requiring extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for cardiovascular support. Ih; Thomas, T V Brogan, J S Roberts, A Czaja, S S Mazor, Pediatr Crit Care Med. 1529-7535822007

A prospective, populationbased study of acute ibuprofen overdose: complications are rare and routine serum levels not warranted. N E Mcelwee, J C Veltri, D C Bradford, D E Rollins, Ann Emerg Med. Jun. 1961990

Acute poisoning due to non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Clinical features and management. J A Vale, T J Meredith, Med Toxicol. 11Jan-Feb 1986

Risk of myocardial infarction in patients taking cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors or conventional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: population based nested case-control analysis. J Hippisley-Cox, Coupl C , BMJ. 330750413662005

NSAIDS and the risk of myocardial infarction: do they help or harm?. D L Bhatt, European heart journal. 27142006

. Ibuprofen Oral, AHFS detailed Monograph

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and acute myocardial infarction. D H Solomon, R J Glynn, R Levin, J Avorn, Arch Intern Med. 16210May 27 2002

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. C Almond, Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide. New York, NYMcGraw-Hill1995

Hyponatremic coma induced by desmopressin and ibuprofen in awomen with von willebrand's disease Hemophilia. E B Garcia, A Ruitenberg, G S Madrestsma, R Q Hintzen, 20039

Inhibition of human thiopurine S-methyltransferase by various nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in vitro: a mechanism for possible drug interactions. K Oselin, K Anier, Drug Metab Dispos. 3592007

Enhancement of antinociception by co-administration of ibuprofen and caffeine in arthritic rats Eur. Jrm López, A M Domínguez-Ramírez, H J Cook, Bravo Díaz-Reval, M I , Déciga-Campos M , López-Muño Fj, J Pharmacology. 5441-32006

Caffeine as an adjuvant to ibuprofen in treating childhood headaches. J M Dooley, K E Gordon, E P Wood, P M Brna, J Macsween, A Fraser, Pediatr Neurol. 3712007

Stereoselective interaction between the CYP2C8 inhibitor gemfibrozil and racemic ibuprofen. A Tornio, M Niemi, P J Neuvonen, J T Backman, Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 6352007

Effects of St. John's wort supplementation on ibuprofen pharmacokinetics. E C Bell, W R Ravis, K B Lloyd, T J Stokes, Ann Pharmacother. 4122007

Effects of the antifungals voriconazole and fluconazole on the pharmacokinetics of s-(+)-and R-(-)-Ibuprofen Antimicrob Agents Chemother. V V Hynninen, K T Olkkola, K Leino, S Lundgren, P J Neuvonen, A Rane, M Valtonen, H Vyyryläinen, K Laine, 200650

Competitive binding of ibuprofen and naproxen to bovine serum albumin: modified form of drugdrug displacement interaction at the binding site. M M Rahman, M H Rahman, N N Rahman, Pak J Pharm Sci. 1812005

Local interactions between anandamide, an endocannabinoid, and ibuprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, in acute and inflammatory pain. J Guindon, A Deléan, P Beaulieu, Pain. 1211-22006

Effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on the anticonvulsive activity of valproate and diphenylhydantoin against maximal electroshock-induced seizures in mice. R Kaminski, M Kozicka, J Parada-Turska, M Dziki, Z Kleinrok, Turski Wa , Czuczwar Sj, Pharmacological Research. 3751998

Pharmacokinetic properties of combination oxycodone plus racemic ibuprofen: two randomized, open-label, crossover studies in healthy adult volunteers. R Kapil, A Nolting, P Roy, W Fiske, I Benedek, W Abramowitz, Clin Ther. 26122004

The effect of food on the bioavailability of ibuprofen and flurbiprofen from sustained release formulations. A Pargal, M G Kelkar, P J Nayak, Biopharm Drug Dispos. 1761996

Influence of acidic beverage (Coca-Cola) on pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen in healthy rabbits. A Kondal, S K Garg, Indian J Exp Biol. 41112003

Effect of Tamarindus indica. L on the bioavailability of ibuprofen in healthy human volunteers. M Garba, I A Yakasai, M T Bakare, H Y Munir, Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2832003

Therapeutic and toxicity potential of over-the-counter agents. R Corelli, Katzung BG editor. Basic and clinical pharmacology. 910682004McGraw Hill Boston

Acute bacterial meningitis in a patient receiving ibuprofen. J Tamburini, D Grimaldi, F Bricaire, P Bossi, J Infect. 5142005

A teenager with severe asthma exacerbation following ibuprofen. G M Palmer, Anaesth Intensive Care. 3322005

Nonprescription analgesics and their use in solid-organ transplantation: a review. S Gabardi, L Luu, Prog Transplant. 1432004

Use of over-the-counter drugs containing ibuprofen in selfmedication. B Maceskova, Cesk Slov. Farm. 5032005