# Efficiency of solar collectors -a review

CorpusID: 188577954
 
tags: #Engineering, #Environmental_Science, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ebea72276d5d670edde93b642c2b4b28a4869e7a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ebea72276d5d670edde93b642c2b4b28a4869e7a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Efficiency of solar collectors -a review


A G Lupu 
Automotive and Mechanical Engineering Department
Gheorghe Asachi" Technical University of Iasi
IasiRomania

V M Homutescu 
Automotive and Mechanical Engineering Department
Gheorghe Asachi" Technical University of Iasi
IasiRomania

D T Balanescu 
Automotive and Mechanical Engineering Department
Gheorghe Asachi" Technical University of Iasi
IasiRomania

A Popescu 
Automotive and Mechanical Engineering Department
Gheorghe Asachi" Technical University of Iasi
IasiRomania

Efficiency of solar collectors -a review
10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/0820151 Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd 1234567890''"" The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015
The progress of solar energy conversion technologies during the last few decades triggered the development of various types of collectors, thermal, photovoltaic (PV), or hybrid. In this paper, authors present the basic elements of thermal (energy and exergy) analysis solar collectors and their efficiency. The review of thermal analyses covers basic types of collectors and is extended to some constructive variations, e.g. with supplemental thermal elements (TEG). Thermal radiation proves to be the most important energy loss factor, due to the large temperature difference between the collector surface and the sky. To determine the total efficiency of solar collector operation, as a more complex analysis method of solar collector systems is proposed, to include economic, environmental and life-cycle analysis elements.

## Introduction

Search for clean and cheap energy sources generated, especially in recent decades, an expansion of the scientific research on solar energy conversion technologies.

Solar thermal panels were continuously developed to improve the conversion efficiency, domestic applications using flat panel collectors (FPC) to evacuated tube (ETC), or with heat pipes (HP-ETC). For industrial systems, the concentrated solar power (CSP) plants were designed to follow the Sun's passage on sky, the tracking devices being classified by the number of axes. The linear focus (one-axis movement) devices include Linear Fresnel Reflectors (LFR) and parabolic trough collectors (PTC), while the focal point (two-axes movement) devices include Heliostat Field Concentrator (HFC) as well as Parabolic Dish Reflector (PDR), figure 1.

Solar photovoltaic panels include multiple photovoltaic (PV) cells to directly convert solar energy into electricity. Initially, PV cells were too expensive to use on industrial scale, but recent materials and manufacturing technologies made possible to mass produce PV cells at lower costs and improved conversion efficiency.

Once the necessity for cleaner energy resources amplified, scientists intensified their research to enhance the conversion of solar energy into electricity. Studies published in the literature during the last 3-4 decades demonstrate the strong dependence of PV cell performances to maintaining lower cell operation temperature, [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15], figure 2.

The recent years witnessed huge advances in developing hybrid solar panels, photovoltaic thermal ones, i.e. PVT panels/collectors. First concepts published in the late '70s, early '80s on PVT systems, analysed solar FPC in combination with PV cells. Later, when PV cells manufacturing price became realistic, the research concentrated on combining PVs with thermal management solutions, to improve efficiency of energy conversion from solar to electricity: air and/or water cooling, micro-scale heat exchangers, thermo-electric generators (TEG), or other renewable energy systems, [16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25].   [11].

Commercially available solar panels may reach a conversion efficiency of 40-60% to thermal and 15-20% to electrical energy. The PVT collectors embed cooling systems for PV panels with various designs for the fluid flow passages: tubes, channels (rectangular, square box, corrugated), spiral, flat plate or encapsulated heat pipes. The cooling agents are fluids with regular or cooling characteristics (air, water, glycol or fluids with nanoparticles), flowing in one-, two-or multiple passes, in glazed or unglazed collector configurations. Thus, the total conversion efficiencies (thermal and electrical) may increase to 43 -87%, [26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44].

Besides concept presentations and experimental performance analyses, many studies [45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52][53][54][55][56][57][58] on PVT collectors included mathematical models, numerical simulations or analysis on electrical, thermal and overall system efficiency. When PVT performances where compared with separate thermal and PV systems, the energy and exergy analyses observed higher values for energy conversion efficiency. 


## 1234567890''""

The 


## Thermodynamic 2-E analysis

From thermodynamic point of view, the 2-E (i.e. Energy -Exergy) analysis is based on first law and second law. For a closed systems that undergoes a steady-state process between two states 1 and 2, the laws are mathematically expressed as, [59][60][61][62][63][64] 
δ δ Q W E E Q W E E         (1) 2 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 δ δ 0 gen Q Q S S S S S T T         .
(2)

The exergy concept represents a combination of the first and second law of thermodynamics and is used to improve the analysis, design and performance of thermal systems. It is defined as maximum amount of useful work that can be obtained during a process where a flow of mass or energy comes to equilibrium with the reference environment. In general, the exergy balance is defined as:
, in net out,net loss Ex Ex Ex    (3)
For a thermal machine that produces work, the losses due to internal irreversibilities are 0 lost gen
W T S  (4)
where T0 is the reference temperature at which exergy (available energy) content is zero (dead state). The efficiency of a process is defined as a measure of the real process deviation from a reversible, ideal one. It is also known as exergy efficiency or second law efficiency:
η1 lost II max max W W WW    (5)
whereas the first law efficiency, merely a metric criterion, is defined based on efficiency of the ideal Carnot cycle
η η 1 η η L I II II Carnot H H T W T Q        .(6)
An exergy efficiency analysis takes into account the exergetic input, output and losses and exergy efficiency becomes ,, η1 out,net
loss ex in net in net Ex Ex Ex Ex      .(7)

## The 2-E analysis of solar collectors

The following review attempts a logical presentation of these 2-E analysis concepts, applied to solar thermal collectors, PV panels, hybrid PV/T collectors and PVT-TEG hybrid systems.

The incident solar radiation, G, has three components [65]: beam, diffuse, and ground-reflected. Although each component should be treated separately, the incident solar radiation may be considered affected by an effective transmittance-absorptance product, ()eff , (or optical efficiency, o , [66]).


### Solar thermal collectors

Out of the vast diversity of types of thermal collectors, this paper presents the analysis of simple FPC, with the intent to clarify the method and its use. This may be extended on other types of panels, with pipes or serpentines, ETC, HP-ETC, etc.


## 1234567890''""

The For uniform collector plate temperature, the useful heat rate absorbed by the fluid is, [64][65][66][67][68]:
  , u p fl out fl,in Q mC T T  .(8)
In most practical applications, the collector plate temperature is not uniform, and the heat removal factor is often used instead.
    ατ u R c L fl,in a eff Q F A G U T T      (9)
where the overall heat loss coefficient, UL , is used to account for heat transfer losses from collector to atmosphere, both by convection and radiation:
  loss L c c a Q U A T T (10)
and heat removal factor is defined as:
1 exp p Lc R L c p mC F U A F U A mC            (11)
where F' is the collector efficiency factor.

Energy efficiency of solar thermal collector is:
η u en c Q GA  .(12)
The exergy balance on a FPC may be expressed as:
0 in st out loss des Ex Ex Ex Ex Ex      .(13)
The inlet exergy rate, in Ex , accounts for two components: the inlet exergy with fluid flow, [59,69] , ,, (14) and the inlet exergy absorbed from solar radiation, [69] 4 , 41 η1 33
ln ρ fl in in in fl p fl in a a a T mP Ex mC T T T T        aa in S o c SS TT Ex GA TT                    .(15)
To define the exergy rate of incident solar radiation, several factors have to be taken into account, [70,71]. First, black-body radiation and diluted black body radiation, more precisely the difference between the two, i.e. the entropy transported by the two kinds of radiation. Second, the apparent Sun temperature is considered as ¾ of the blackbody temperature of the Sun, 5770 K.

The stored exergy rate is zero at steady-state:
0 st Ex  .(16)
The outlet exergy rate accounts for the outlet exergy with fluid flow:  (14), where Pin and Pout are pressure difference between fluid and environment at the collector inlet and outlet, respectively.
,

## 1234567890''""

The The heat losses exergy rate accounts for the heat leakage rate from collector plate to environment, defined as:
  1 a loss L c c a c T Ex U A T T T        .(18)
The destroyed exergy rate includes three terms related to -the temperature difference between the collector plate surface and the Sun , 11 η 
s des T o c a cS Ex GA T TT       (19)

### Solar photovoltaic panels

The photovoltaic cell represents a non-linear system characterized by the (I-V) current-voltage, and (P-V) power-voltage curves, [19,50,72,73], with equivalent electrical circuit described in figure 3. 


## 1234567890''""

The Depending on the ideality factor, a, the (I-V) curve is mathematically described as:
exp 1 ss L D sh L o sh V IR V IR I I I I I I I aR                .(24)
The characteristic points of the electrical circuit, as presented in figure 3, are: -the short circuit current values: 
I I V V  .
The reference conditions (standard rated conditions, SRC) are temperature of 25°C and radiation intensity of 1000 W/m 2 .

The overall heat loss coefficient from a PV panel includes both losses by convection and radiation:
L cv rad U h h  .(25)
The convective heat transfer coefficient is estimated using empirical correlation, as suggested in [50,52], depending of the wind speed, Vw:
2.8 3 cv w hV .(26)
In order to obtain a radiation heat transfer coefficient of a similar form to the convective one, it may be derived from the net radiative heat exchange between the PV cell and environment:
   22 rad cell sky cell sky cell h T T T T    (27)
where the effective sky temperature is approximated by empirical correlations, suggested in [50,52]: 

Maximum value for the energy efficiency of a PV cell is defined as: , η oc sc en max cell
VI GA  .(30)
The fill factor, FF, represents measure of the "square area" under the (I-V) curve, of how "square" or "rounded" is the curve. Mathematically, it is defined as:
mp mp oc sc VI FF VI  .(31)
The maximum theoretical value for the FF is determined by differentiating the power from a solar cell with respect to voltage and finding where this is equal to zero. The empirical formula is:
  ln 0.72 1 oc oc oc VV FF V    .(32)
Therefore, the energy efficiency of a PV cell is actually identical to electrical efficiency, which may be expressed in terms of maximum power point values or in terms of circuit characteristics, as: 


## 1234567890''""

The The exergy analysis for the PV panel involves similar terms as the exergy balance in equation (13). The inlet exergy rate absorbed from solar radiation, equation (15), and heat loss exergy rate, equation (18) are identical, observing that Ac is now the area of the PV cell, instead of the collector area.

The exergy destruction terms are caused by -the optical losses: 
Ex I V I V  .(37)
Exergy efficiency of the PV cell is:
  , , η in S loss des ex in S Ex Ex Ex Ex    .(38)

### Solar photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) panels

There are various combinations of constructive solutions and working fluid for a PVT panel. This review covers the case of PV panel physically bonded to the FPC, using water as a working fluid. The 2-E analysis represents a combination of previous equations, considering APVT as area of the absorber. Combining equations (8) and (9), the rate of useful thermal energy for the PVT panel is:
      , ατ u p fl out fl,in R PVT L fl,in a eff Q mC T T F A G U T T        (39)
with the removal factor defined as 1 exp
p L PVT R L PVT p mC F U A F U A mC            .(40)
The thermal efficiency of the PVT panel may be re-written as:
    η ατ L fl,in a u th R eff PVT U T T Q F GA G         .(41)
For the PVT panel, the thermal efficiency is coupled with electrical efficiency. Here, the electrical power consumed by the water circulation pump has to be considered in the analysis.
ρη p p mP E   .(42)
8


## 1234567890''""

The The electrical efficiency of a PVT panel becomes:
η mp mp p el PVT V I E GA   .(43)
Exergy efficiency of a PVT panel in calculated in terms of net output exergy rate that accounts for both thermal and electrical energy rates.

For a PVT panel, the net input exergy rate is: 

An empirical correlation is proposed [27] to compute the electrical power from a PV module: 

The rate of exergy losses for a PVT panel are determined as a sum of internal and external ones. 
         .(49)
The rate of exergy losses due to optical losses   
                       .(50)
The heat loss rate from the PVT to the ambient:
  loss L PVT c a Q U A T T (51)
and then the exergy loss rate due to this heat loss from the PVT to the ambient becomes:   
                                 (53)T T T Ex GA Q Q V I T T T                             (54)I V I V E    .(56)
Substituting the exergy destruction terms from equations (53) 
T Q E T T GA T TT GA TT                              .(57)

### Thermo-Electric Generators (TEG) and PVT-TEG integration

The thermo-electric (TE) modules are composed of n-and p-type materials, connected electrically in series and thermally in parallel, the whole ensemble being sandwiched between two ceramic substrates that act as external electrical insulators. The TE may operate two ways, as generators, TEG (Seebeck effect), when while being subjected to a temperature difference they generate electrical current, or as coolers, TEC (Peltier effect), when under the influence of electrical current supplied to the circuit, heat may be absorbed or rejected, figure 4 [74]. TEs are attached to the back side of the PV panel to form a PV-TE or a PVT-TE hybrid module. The TE modules reduce and/or control the operating temperature of PVs, converting waste thermal energy from PV directly into electric power. Thus, the efficiency of PVT collectors increases twofold, by decreasing the operating temperature and increasing electrical output, [56,75].   
T ZT T T ZT T    (58)
where the figure of merit of the TE module, Z , depends on characteristics of material, i.e. Seebeck coefficient,  , thermal conductivity, k , and thermal resistance, R:
2 α Z kR  .(59)
Conversion efficiency of a TEG is defined as the fraction of the heat absorbed at the hot side of the device that is converted into electricity:
η TEG h c TEG hh P Q Q QQ  (60)
and it yields:
  2 1 α η 4 TEG c fl TT kR  .(61)
Total electrical power generation for solar radiation on the PV/TEG:
η PV TEG PV TEG PV PP GA    .(62)
Total PVT-TEG efficiency includes both electrical efficiency (from PV and TEG) and thermal efficiency of the PVT panel:
η η η η PVT TEG el TEG th     .(63)

## Conclusions

The recent decades witnessed huge developments in solar energy conversion technologies that shifted from mainly solar-thermal to the solar-electrical. This was powered by the decrease of PV cells production costs, along with the increase in their efficiency. The conversion efficiency of industrial-scale manufactured PV cells is still below 20% and their performance is greatly affected by the operational temperature. Thermal management of the PV panels induced the development of hybrid PV/T solar collectors, to address the low total energy conversion efficiency. Despite technological difficulties and supplemental electricity consumption for pumps, the hybrid PVT were further developed and improved into HP-PVT or PVT-TEG systems.

The 2-E (energy-exergy) analysis reviewed in this paper presents the basic elements for the solar thermal collectors (FPC), PV panels, hybrid PVT and PVT-TEG systems.

The extensive literature review demonstrates the keen interest for this scientific area, both energy and exergy analyses are proving to be an effective tool to study PVT systems effectiveness, showing a conversion efficiency higher than for PV systems. 


## References

## Figure 1 .
1CSP devices, classified per number of tracking axes (column) and mobility (line).

## Figure 2 .
2The (I-V) and (P-V) curves for various operational temperature,

## Figure 3 .
3Equivalent electrical circuit and characteristic curves for a PV cell.6 


electrical exergy rate represents the electrical power supplied by PV module diminished by electrical power consumed by the pump

## Figure 4 .
4Thermo-Electric generation (TEG) vs. cooling (TEC),[74].

## [ 1 ]
1O'Leary M J and Clements L D 1980 Thermal-electric performance analysis for actively cooled concentrating photovoltaic systems Sol Energy 25 pp 401-6 [2] Evans D L 1981 Simplified method for predicting photovoltaic array output Sol Energy 27 pp 555-60


8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015


8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015


8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015


Defining the exergy efficiency of the solar collector as:-the pressure drop within the fluid channel 

 
 

, 

, 
,, 

ln 

ρ 

fl 
out 
a 
a 
des 
P 
fl 
out 
fl 
in 

T 
T 
T 
mP 
Ex 
TT 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(20) 

-the temperature difference between collector plate surface and the fluid 

 
 

,, 
, 
, 
, 

ln 

f 

fl 
out 
fl 
in 
fl 
out 
des 
T 
p 
a 
fl 
in 
c 

TT 
T 
Ex 
mC 
T 
TT 

 

  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 

(21) 

,, 

, 

η 

out 
fl 
in 
fl 
ex 
in 
S 

Ex 
Ex 

Ex 

 
 
(22) 

yields: 

, 
,, 
, 

ln 
ρ 
η 

1 

fl 
out 
p 
fl 
out 
fl 
in 
a 
fl 
in 

ex 
a 
c 
S 

T 
P 
m 
C 
T 
T 
T 
T 

T 
GA 
T 

    
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

. 



8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015


8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015


The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015-heat transfer at finite temperature difference between the panel and working fluid:9 

1234567890''"" 

  

, 
, 

ατ 
1 
1 
1 

PVT fl 

a 
a 
a 
des T 
PVT 
loss 
u 
oc sc 
eff 
c 
c 
fl out 




The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015Efficiency of a TEG is defined[76][77][78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85] as:, 
, 

, 

1 
η 
1 

TEG 
TEG 
TEG c 
TEG h 

TEG h 


AcknowledgmentsThis work was partly supported by the project POSCCE-A2-O2.2.1-2009-4-ENERED, ID nr. 911, cofinanced by the European Social Fund within the Sectoral Operational Program "Increase of Economic Competitiveness".
10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 44482015The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015

Cooling of solar cells in: Cells and optics for photovoltaic concentration. G Sala, Bristol: Adam HilgerSala G 1989 Cooling of solar cells in: Cells and optics for photovoltaic concentration (Bristol: Adam Hilger)

. A De Vos, H Pauwels, On the thermodynamic limit of photovoltaic energy conversion Appl Phys. 25de Vos A and Pauwels H 1981 On the thermodynamic limit of photovoltaic energy conversion Appl Phys 25 pp 118-25

. A De Vos, Endoreversible thermodynamics of solar energy conversion. University Pressde Vos A 1992 Endoreversible thermodynamics of solar energy conversion (Oxford: University Press)

Temperature dependence of photovoltaic cells, modules, and systems Proceedings of 25 th IEEE PVSC Conference Washington DC. K Emery, J Burdick, Y Caiyem, D Dunlavy, H Field, B Kroposki, T Moriarty, Emery K, Burdick J, Caiyem Y, Dunlavy D, Field H, Kroposki B and Moriarty T 1996 Temperature dependence of photovoltaic cells, modules, and systems Proceedings of 25 th IEEE PVSC Conference Washington DC 1996 pp 1275-8

Temperature dependence of performance of crystalline silicon modules. E E Dyk, B J Scott, E Meyer, Leitch A W R, S Afr J Sci. 96Dyk E E, Scott B J, Meyer E L and Leitch A W R 2000 Temperature dependence of performance of crystalline silicon modules S Afr J Sci 96 pp 198-200

The effect of temperature on the power drop in crystalline silicon solar cells. E Radziemska, Renew Energy. 28Radziemska E 2003 The effect of temperature on the power drop in crystalline silicon solar cells Renew Energy 28 pp 1-12

Review of the maximum power point tracking algorithms for stand-alone photovoltaic systems. V Salas, E Olias, A Barrado, Lazaro A , Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells. 90Salas V, Olias E, Barrado A and Lazaro A 2006 Review of the maximum power point tracking algorithms for stand-alone photovoltaic systems Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 90 pp 1555-78

Modelling and simulation of photovoltaic cells Acta Technica Napocensis. D Petreus, C Farcas, I Ciocan, Electronics and Communications. 49Petreus D, Farcas C and Ciocan I 2008 Modelling and simulation of photovoltaic cells Acta Technica Napocensis, Electronics and Communications 49 pp 42-7

A cell-to-module-to-array detailed model for photovoltaic panels. H Tian, F Mancilla-David, K Ellis, E Muljadi, P Jenkins, Sol Energy. 86Tian H, Mancilla-David F, Ellis K, Muljadi E and Jenkins P 2012 A cell-to-module-to-array detailed model for photovoltaic panels Sol Energy 86 pp 2695-2706

. Abdel-Basit W , Abdel-Maksood A Soliman, F , Mathematical Model for Photovoltaic Cells Leonardo J Sci. 12Abdel-Basit W, Abdel-Maksood A and Soliman F 2013 Mathematical Model for Photovoltaic Cells Leonardo J Sci 12 pp 13-28

The impact of the environmental condition on the performance of the photovoltaic cell. E Al-Showany, American Journal of Energy Engineering. 41Al-Showany E 2016 The impact of the environmental condition on the performance of the photovoltaic cell American Journal of Energy Engineering 4(1) pp 1-7

Modeling and simulation of temperature effect in polycrystalline silicon PV cells. M Marcu, T Niculescu, R Slusariuc, F Popescu, IOP Conf Ser: Mater Sci Eng. 13312005Marcu M, Niculescu T, Slusariuc R and Popescu F 2016 Modeling and simulation of temperature effect in polycrystalline silicon PV cells IOP Conf Ser: Mater Sci Eng 133 012005

A status review of photovoltaic power conversion equipment reliability, safety and quality assurance protocols. P Hacke, S Lokanath, P Williams, A Vasan, P Sochor, G S Tamizhmani, H Shinohara, S Kurtz, Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 82Hacke P, Lokanath S, Williams P, Vasan A, Sochor P, TamizhMani G S, Shinohara H and Kurtz S 2018 A status review of photovoltaic power conversion equipment reliability, safety and quality assurance protocols Renew Sustain Energy Rev 82 pp 1097-112

Performance analysis of combined heating and photovoltaic power systems for residences Energy Convers Manag. M Wolf, 16Wolf M 1976 Performance analysis of combined heating and photovoltaic power systems for residences Energy Convers Manag 16 pp 79-90

Combined photovoltaic and thermal hybrid collector systems Proc of 13th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists. E KernJr, M C Russell, Washington DC USAKern Jr E C and Russell M C 1978 Combined photovoltaic and thermal hybrid collector systems Proc of 13th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Washington DC USA pp 1153-7

Combined photovoltaic and thermal hybrid collector. A Suzuki, S Kitamura, J Appl Phys. 19Suzuki A and Kitamura S 1980 Combined photovoltaic and thermal hybrid collector J Appl Phys 19 pp 79-83

Design considerations for flat plate photovoltaic/thermal collectors Sol Energy. P Cox Iii C H And Raghuraman, 35Cox III C H and Raghuraman P 1985 Design considerations for flat plate photovoltaic/thermal collectors Sol Energy 35 pp 227-41

Analytical performance evaluation of combined photovoltaic-thermal concentrator receiver systems with linear absorbers Energy Convers Manag. S N Sharma, S Mathur, 27Sharma S N, Mathur S S and Kandpal T C 1987 Analytical performance evaluation of combined photovoltaic-thermal concentrator receiver systems with linear absorbers Energy Convers Manag 27 pp 361-5

Study of a photovoltaic thermal system thermosyphonic solar water heater combined with solar cells Energy Convers Manag. R K Agarwal, H P Garg, 35Agarwal R K and Garg H P 1994 Study of a photovoltaic thermal system thermosyphonic solar water heater combined with solar cells Energy Convers Manag 35 pp 605-20

. O Tudose-Sandu-Ville, Jacq Effect Influence on Thermomechanical Contact Fatigue Applied Mechanics and Materials. 658Tudose-Sandu-Ville O F 2014 Jacq Effect Influence on Thermomechanical Contact Fatigue Applied Mechanics and Materials 658 pp 377-80

Flat plate solar photovoltaic-thermal (PV/T) systems: a reference guide. J Michael, S Iniyan, R Goic, Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 51Michael J, Iniyan S and Goic R 2015 Flat plate solar photovoltaic-thermal (PV/T) systems: a reference guide Renew Sustain Energy Rev 51 pp 62-88

O Tudose-Sandu-Ville, Study on the deterioration origin of thermomechanical contact fatigue IOP Conf Ser: Mater Sci Eng. 14712007Tudose-Sandu-Ville O F 2016 Study on the deterioration origin of thermomechanical contact fatigue IOP Conf Ser: Mater Sci Eng 147 012007

Experimental investigation of a novel LCPV/T system with microchannel heat pipe array Renew Energy 115 pp 773-82 12 1234567890. H Chen, H Zhang, M Li, H Liu, J Huang, 10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 44482015Chen H, Zhang H, Li M, Liu H and Huang J 2018 Experimental investigation of a novel LCPV/T system with microchannel heat pipe array Renew Energy 115 pp 773-82 12 1234567890''"" The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015

Hybrid PV/T solar systems for domestic hot water and electricity production Energy Convers Manag. S A Kalogirou, Y Tripanagnostopoulos, 47Kalogirou S A, Tripanagnostopoulos Y 2006 Hybrid PV/T solar systems for domestic hot water and electricity production Energy Convers Manag 47 pp 3368-82

Performance evaluation of solar PV/T system: an experimental validation Sol Energy. A Tiwari, M S Sodha, 80Tiwari A and Sodha M S 2006 Performance evaluation of solar PV/T system: an experimental validation Sol Energy 80 pp 751-9

Air-cooled PV/T solar collectors with low cost performance improvements Sol Energy. J K Tonui, Y Tripanagnostopoulos, 81Tonui J K and Tripanagnostopoulos Y 2007 Air-cooled PV/T solar collectors with low cost performance improvements Sol Energy 81 pp 498-511

Thermal modeling of a combined system of photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) solar water heater. S Dubey, G N Tiwari, Sol Energy. 82Dubey S and Tiwari G N 2008 Thermal modeling of a combined system of photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) solar water heater Sol Energy 82 pp 602-12

Performance improvement of PV/T solar collectors with natural air flow operation. J K Tonui, Y Tripanagnostopoulos, Sol Energy. 82Tonui J K and Tripanagnostopoulos Y 2008 Performance improvement of PV/T solar collectors with natural air flow operation Sol Energy 82 pp 1-12

. T Chow, A review on photovoltaic/thermal hybrid solar technology Appl Energy. 87Chow T T 2010 A review on photovoltaic/thermal hybrid solar technology Appl Energy 87 pp 365-79

Detailed analysis of the energy yield of systems with covered sheet-and-tube. R Santbergen, C C M Rindt, H Zondag, R J Van Zolingen, Ch, PVT collectors Sol Energy. 84Santbergen R, Rindt C C M, Zondag H A and van Zolingen R J Ch 2010 Detailed analysis of the energy yield of systems with covered sheet-and-tube PVT collectors Sol Energy 84 pp 867-78

Improvement of PV module optical properties for PV-thermal hybrid collector application. P Dupeyrat, C Menezo, H Wirth, M Rommel, Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells. 95Dupeyrat P, Menezo C, Wirth H and Rommel M 2011 Improvement of PV module optical properties for PV-thermal hybrid collector application Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 95 pp 2028-36

Efficient single glazed flat plate photovoltaic-thermal hybrid collector for domestic hot water system. P Dupeyrat, C Menezo, M Rommel, H M Henning, Sol Energy. 85Dupeyrat P, Menezo C, Rommel M and Henning H M 2011 Efficient single glazed flat plate photovoltaic-thermal hybrid collector for domestic hot water system Sol Energy 85 pp 1457- 68

Advances in liquid based photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) collectors Renew Sustain Energy Rev. R Daghigh, M Ruslan, K Sopian, 15Daghigh R, Ruslan M H and Sopian K 2011 Advances in liquid based photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) collectors Renew Sustain Energy Rev 15 pp 4156-70

. M Rosa-Clot, P Rosa-Clot, Tina G M , TESPI: thermal electric solar panel integration Sol Energy. 85Rosa-Clot M, Rosa-Clot P and Tina G M 2011 TESPI: thermal electric solar panel integration Sol Energy 85 pp 2433-42

Hybrid Solar: A Review on Photovoltaic and Thermal Power Integration Int J Photoenergy. T T Chow, G Tiwari, C Menezo, Chow T T, Tiwari G N and Menezo C 2012 Hybrid Solar: A Review on Photovoltaic and Thermal Power Integration Int J Photoenergy 2012 307287 pp 1-17

Advancement in solar photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) hybrid collector technology Renew Sustain Energy Rev. V V Tyagi, S Kaushik, S K Tyagi, 16Tyagi V V, Kaushik S C and Tyagi S K 2012 Advancement in solar photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) hybrid collector technology Renew Sustain Energy Rev 16 pp 1383-98

Review of R&D progress and practical application of the solar photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) technologies. X Zhang, X Zhao, S Smith, J Xu, X Yu, Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 16Zhang X, Zhao X, Smith S, Xu J and Yu X 2012 Review of R&D progress and practical application of the solar photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) technologies Renew Sustain Energy Rev 16 pp 599-617

Performance analysis of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collectors Energy Convers Manag. A Fudholi, K Sopian, M H Yazdi, M H Ruslan, Ibrahim A Kazem, H A , 78Fudholi A, Sopian K, Yazdi M H, Ruslan M H, Ibrahim A and Kazem H A 2014 Performance analysis of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collectors Energy Convers Manag 78 pp 641- 51

J-H Kim, S-H Park, J-G Kang, J T Kim, Experimental performance of heating system with building-integrated PVT (BIPVT) collector Energy Procedia. 48Kim J-H, Park S-H, Kang J-G and Kim J T 2014 Experimental performance of heating system with building-integrated PVT (BIPVT) collector Energy Procedia 48 pp 1374-84

The role of climatic-design-operational parameters on combined PV/T collector performance: A critical review. A M Elbreki, M A Alghoul, Al-Shamani A N Ammara, A A Yegani, B Aboghrara, A M Rusaln, M Sopian, K , Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 57Elbreki A M, Alghoul M A, Al-Shamani A N, Ammara A A, Yegani B, Aboghrara A M, Rusaln M H and Sopian K 2016 The role of climatic-design-operational parameters on combined PV/T collector performance: A critical review Renew Sustain Energy Rev 57 pp 602-47

Environmental impact assessments of hybrid photovoltaic-thermal (PV/T) systems -A review Renew Sustain Energy Rev. C Good, 55Good C 2016 Environmental impact assessments of hybrid photovoltaic-thermal (PV/T) systems -A review Renew Sustain Energy Rev 55 pp 234-9

Review on recent approaches for hybrid PV/T solar technology. A H Besheer, M Smyth, A Zacharopoulos, J Mondol, A Pugsley, Int J Energy Res. 40Besheer A H, Smyth M, Zacharopoulos A, Mondol J and Pugsley A 2016 Review on recent approaches for hybrid PV/T solar technology Int J Energy Res 40 pp 2038-53

Annual exergy evaluation on photovoltaic-thermal hybrid collector. T Fujisawa, Tani T , Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells. 47Fujisawa T and Tani T 1997 Annual exergy evaluation on photovoltaic-thermal hybrid collector Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 47 pp 135-48

M Bosanac, B Sorensen, I Katic, H Sorensen, B J Nielsen, Photovoltaic/Thermal solar collectors and their potential in Denmark. CopenhagenEsbensen Consulting EngineersBosanac M, Sorensen B, Katic I, Sorensen H and Nielsen B J 2003 Photovoltaic/Thermal solar collectors and their potential in Denmark (Copenhagen: Esbensen Consulting Engineers)

Determination of the optimal operation mode of a flat solar collector by exergetic analysis and numerical simulation Energy 30 pp 731-47 1234567890. I Luminosu, Fara L , 10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 44482015Luminosu I and Fara L 2005 Determination of the optimal operation mode of a flat solar collector by exergetic analysis and numerical simulation Energy 30 pp 731-47 1234567890''"" The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015

. A S Joshi, Dincer I Reddy, B V , Thermodynamic assessment of photovoltaic systems Sol Energy. 83Joshi A S, Dincer I and Reddy B V 2009 Thermodynamic assessment of photovoltaic systems Sol Energy 83 pp 1139-49

Energy and exergy analysis of photovoltaic-thermal collector with and without glass cover. T T Chow, Pei G Fong, K F Lin, Z Chan, A , Ji J , Appl Energy. 86Chow T T, Pei G, Fong K F, Lin Z, Chan A L S and Ji J 2009 Energy and exergy analysis of photovoltaic-thermal collector with and without glass cover Appl Energy 86 pp 310-6

. F Sarhaddi, S Farahat, Ajam , H Behzadmehr, A , doi101155/2009/313561Sarhaddi F, Farahat S, Ajam H and Behzadmehr A 2009 Exergetic optimization of a solar photovoltaic array Journal of Thermodynamics doi101155/2009/313561

Exergy analysis of integrated photovoltaic thermal solar water heater under constant flow rate and constant collection temperature modes. A Tiwari, S Dubey, G S Sandhu, M Sodha, S I Anwar, Appl Energy. 86Tiwari A, Dubey S, Sandhu G S, Sodha M S and Anwar S I 2009 Exergy analysis of integrated photovoltaic thermal solar water heater under constant flow rate and constant collection temperature modes Appl Energy 86 pp 2592-7

Exergetic performance evaluation of a solar photovoltaic (PV) array Aust. F Sarhaddi, S Farahat, Ajam , H Behzadmehr, A , J. Basic & Appl. Sci. 4Sarhaddi F, Farahat S, Ajam H and Behzadmehr A 2010 Exergetic performance evaluation of a solar photovoltaic (PV) array Aust. J. Basic & Appl. Sci 4 pp 502-19

Exergy efficiency of a solar photovoltaic array based on exergy destructions. F Sarhaddi, S Farahat, Ajam , H Behzadmehr, A , Proc Inst Mech Eng A: J Power and Energy. 224Sarhaddi F, Farahat S, Ajam H and Behzadmehr A 2010 Exergy efficiency of a solar photovoltaic array based on exergy destructions Proc Inst Mech Eng A: J Power and Energy 224 pp 813-25

. F Sarhaddi, S Farahat, H Ajam, A Behzadmehr, Mahdavi Adeli, M , Appl Energy. 87Sarhaddi F, Farahat S, Ajam H, Behzadmehr A and Mahdavi Adeli M 2010 An improved thermal and electrical model for a solar photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) air collector Appl Energy 87 pp 2328-39

Exergetic optimization of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) air collector. F Sarhaddi, S Farahat, Ajam , H Behzadmehr, A , Int J Energy Res. 35Sarhaddi F, Farahat S, Ajam H and Behzadmehr A 2011 Exergetic optimization of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) air collector Int J Energy Res 35 pp 813-27

Energy-exergy analysis and economic investigation of cogeneration and trigeneration ORC-VCC hybrid system utilizing biomass fuel and solar power Energy Convers Manag. K Karellas, K Braimakis, 107Karellas K and Braimakis K 2016 Energy-exergy analysis and economic investigation of cogeneration and trigeneration ORC-VCC hybrid system utilizing biomass fuel and solar power Energy Convers Manag 107 pp 103-13

A review on exergy analysis of solar electricity production. F Bayrak, N Abu-Hamdeh, K Alnefaie, H F Öztop, Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 74Bayrak F, Abu-Hamdeh N, Alnefaie K A and Öztop H F 2017 A review on exergy analysis of solar electricity production Renew Sustain Energy Rev 74 pp 755-70

A detailed thermal-electrical model of three photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) hybrid air collectors and photovoltaic (PV) module: Comparative study under Algiers climatic conditions Energy Convers Manag. M El Amine Slimani, M Amirat, I Kurucz, S Bahria, A Hamidat, W B Chaouch, 133El Amine Slimani M, Amirat M, Kurucz I, Bahria S, Hamidat A and Chaouch W B 2017 A detailed thermal-electrical model of three photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) hybrid air collectors and photovoltaic (PV) module: Comparative study under Algiers climatic conditions Energy Convers Manag 133 pp 458-76

Second law analysis and synthesis of solar collector systems. A A Bejan, D Kearney, F F Kreith, J Sol Energy Eng Trans-ASME. 103Bejan A A, Kearney D W and Kreith F F 1981 Second law analysis and synthesis of solar collector systems J Sol Energy Eng Trans-ASME 103 pp 23-8

M J Moran, H N Shapiro, Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics 5 th Ed. Hoboken, NJJohn Wiley & SonsMoran M J and Shapiro H N 2006 Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics 5 th Ed (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons)

Influence of working fluid properties on internal irreversibility of power systems. G Dumitrascu, A Popescu, IMECE2010 40467Proc ASME. Dumitrascu G and Popescu A 2010 Influence of working fluid properties on internal irreversibility of power systems, Proc ASME IMECE2010 40467

Solar energy engineering: processes and systems 2 nd Ed. S Kalogirou, Academic Press Elsevier ScienceAmsterdamKalogirou S A 2013 Solar energy engineering: processes and systems 2 nd Ed (Amsterdam: Academic Press Elsevier Science)

Exergy and thermoeconomic optimization of a water-cooled glazed hybrid photovoltaic/thermal (PVT) collector Sol Energy. G Evola, L Marletta, 107Evola G, Marletta L 2014 Exergy and thermoeconomic optimization of a water-cooled glazed hybrid photovoltaic/thermal (PVT) collector Sol Energy 107 pp 12-25

Exergy analysis of solar thermal collectors and processes. S A Kalogirou, S Karellas, K Braimakis, C Stanciu, V Badescu, Prog Energy Combust Sci. 56Kalogirou S A, Karellas S, Braimakis K, Stanciu C and Badescu V 2016 Exergy analysis of solar thermal collectors and processes Prog Energy Combust Sci 56 pp 106-37

J A Duffie, W A Beckman, Solar engineering of thermal processes 4 th Ed. Hoboken, NJJohn Wiley & SonsDuffie J A and Beckman W A 2013 Solar engineering of thermal processes 4 th Ed (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons)

Exergetic optimization of flat plate solar collectors Renew Energy. S Farahat, F Sarhaddi, H Ajam, 34Farahat S, Sarhaddi F and Ajam H 2009 Exergetic optimization of flat plate solar collectors Renew Energy 34 pp 1169-74

Exergy analysis of a flat plate solar collector. S Chamoli, J Energy South Afr. 24Chamoli S 2013 Exergy analysis of a flat plate solar collector J Energy South Afr 24 pp 8-13

Energetic and exergetic evaluation of flat plate solar collectors Renew Energy. F Jafarkazemi, E Ahmadifard, 56Jafarkazemi F and Ahmadifard E 2013 Energetic and exergetic evaluation of flat plate solar collectors Renew Energy 56 pp 55-63

A Bejan, Advanced engineering thermodynamics. New YorkWiley InterscienceBejan A A 1988 Advanced engineering thermodynamics (New York: Wiley Interscience)

. R Petela, Exergy of heat radiation J Heat Trans -Trans-ASME. 68Petela R 1964 Exergy of heat radiation J Heat Trans -Trans-ASME 68 pp 187-92

How much exergy one can obtain from incident solar radiation?. C Zamfirescu, I Dincer, 10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 10582015Zamfirescu C and Dincer I 2009 How much exergy one can obtain from incident solar radiation? J Appl Phys 105 044911 1234567890''"" The 8th International Conference on Advanced Concepts in Mechanical Engineering IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 444 (2018) 082015 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/444/8/082015

Solar energy: renewable energy and the environment. R Foster, M Ghassemi, A Cota, CRC PressBoca RatonFoster R, Ghassemi M and Cota A 2010 Solar energy: renewable energy and the environment, (Boca Raton: CRC Press)

Global advancement of cooling technologies for PV systems. M Hasanuzzaman, A B M A Malek, M M Islam, A Pandey, N A Rahim, A review Sol Energy. 137Hasanuzzaman M, Malek A B M A, Islam M M, Pandey A K and Rahim N A 2016 Global advancement of cooling technologies for PV systems: A review Sol Energy 137 pp 25-45

. B Owens-Baird, Heinrich S Kovnir, K , http:/onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119951438.eibc2497/abstractThermoelectric Materials Encycl Inorg Bioinorg Chem. Owens-Baird B, Heinrich S and Kovnir K 2017 Thermoelectric Materials Encycl Inorg Bioinorg Chem doi:10.1002/9781119951438.eibc2497 pp 1-35

Self-sustained, independent trifold solar energy conversion system for isolated locations in hot climate areas. A Popescu, C E Panaite, A G Lupu, M V Atanasiu, C Vlachokostas, A Michailidou, Applied Mechanics and Materials. 659Popescu A, Panaite C E, Lupu A G, Atanasiu M V, Vlachokostas C and Michailidou A 2014 Self-sustained, independent trifold solar energy conversion system for isolated locations in hot climate areas Applied Mechanics and Materials 659 pp 421-424

Development and applications of solar-based thermoelectric technologies. H Xi, L Luo, G Fraisse, Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 115Xi H, Luo L, Fraisse G 2007 Development and applications of solar-based thermoelectric technologies Renew Sustain Energy Rev 11(5) pp 923-36

Experimental investigation of exergy efficiency of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collector based on exergy losses. J Yazdanpanahi, F Sarhaddi, M M Adeli, Sol Energy. 118Yazdanpanahi J, Sarhaddi F and Adeli M M 2015 Experimental investigation of exergy efficiency of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collector based on exergy losses Sol Energy 118 pp 197-208

High-efficiency photovoltaic technology including thermoelectric generation. M Fisac, F Villasevil, A M Lopez, J Power Sources. 252Fisac M, Villasevil F X and Lopez A M 2014 High-efficiency photovoltaic technology including thermoelectric generation J Power Sources 252 pp 264-69

The performance of a combined solar photovoltaic (PV) and thermoelectric generator (TEG) system Sol Energy. R Bjørk, K K Nielsen, 120Bjørk R and Nielsen K K 2015 The performance of a combined solar photovoltaic (PV) and thermoelectric generator (TEG) system Sol Energy 120 pp 187-94

Experimental analysis and performance evaluation of a tandem photovoltaic-thermoelectric hybrid system Energy Convers Manag. D Kossyvakis, G Voutsinas, E Hristoforou, 117Kossyvakis D, Voutsinas G and Hristoforou E 2016 Experimental analysis and performance evaluation of a tandem photovoltaic-thermoelectric hybrid system Energy Convers Manag 117 pp 490-500

Conceptual development of a novel photovoltaic-thermoelectric system and preliminary economic analysis Energy Convers Manag. G Li, X Zhao, Ji J , 126Li G, Zhao X and Ji J 2016 Conceptual development of a novel photovoltaic-thermoelectric system and preliminary economic analysis Energy Convers Manag 126 pp 935-43

Coupled thermal model of photovoltaicthermoelectric hybrid panel for sample cities in. A Rezania, D Sera, L A Rosendahl, Europe Renew Energy. 99Rezania A, Sera D and Rosendahl L A 2016 Coupled thermal model of photovoltaic- thermoelectric hybrid panel for sample cities in Europe Renew Energy 99 pp 127-35

C Babu, P Ponnambalam, The role of thermoelectric generators in the hybrid PV/T systems: A review Energy Convers Manag. 151Babu C and Ponnambalam P 2017 The role of thermoelectric generators in the hybrid PV/T systems: A review Energy Convers Manag 151 pp 368-85

Futuristic approach for thermal management in solar PV/thermal systems with possible applications Energy Convers Manag. A Chauhan, V Tyagi, S Anand, 163Chauhan A, Tyagi V V and Anand S 2018 Futuristic approach for thermal management in solar PV/thermal systems with possible applications Energy Convers Manag 163 pp 314-54

Energy economic analysis of photovoltaic-thermal-thermoelectric (PVT-TE) air collectors. N S Nazri, A Fudholi, B Bakhtyar, C H Yen, Ibrahim A Ruslan, M H , Mat S Sopian, Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 92Nazri N S, Fudholi A, Bakhtyar B, Yen C H, Ibrahim A, Ruslan M H, Mat S and Sopian K 2018 Energy economic analysis of photovoltaic-thermal-thermoelectric (PVT-TE) air collectors Renew Sustain Energy Rev 92 pp 187-97