# Visual assessment of movement quality in the single leg squat test: a review and meta-analysis of inter-rater and intrarater reliability

CorpusID: 195769225
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e91ae3ee75a151aab2917e969142bde5bc5aec33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e91ae3ee75a151aab2917e969142bde5bc5aec33)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Visual assessment of movement quality in the single leg squat test: a review and meta-analysis of inter-rater and intrarater reliability
2019

John Ressman john.ressman@ki.se 
Division of Physiotherapy
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society
Karolinska Institutet
StockholmSweden

Wilhelmus Johannes 
Andreas Grooten 
Division of Physiotherapy
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society
Karolinska Institutet
StockholmSweden

Functional Area Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy
Allied Health Professionals Function
Karolinska University Hospital
Stockholm

Eva Rasmussen Barr 
Division of Physiotherapy
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society
Karolinska Institutet
StockholmSweden

John Ressman 
Visual assessment of movement quality in the single leg squat test: a review and meta-analysis of inter-rater and intrarater reliability

BMJ Open Sp Ex Med
5541201910.1136/bmjsem-2019-000541Accepted 26 May 20191 Open access Review To cite: Ressman J, Grooten WJA, Rasmussen Barr E. Visual assessment of movement quality in the single leg squat test: a review and meta-analysis of inter-rater and intrarater reliability. BMJ Open Sport & Exercise Medicine 2019;5:e000541. ► Additional material is published online only. To view please visit the journal online (http:// dx. Sweden Correspondence to
Single leg squat (SLS) is a common tool used in clinical examination to set and evaluate rehabilitation goals, but also to assess lower extremity function in active people. Objectives To conduct a review and meta-analysis on the inter-rater and intrarater reliability of the SLS, including the lateral step-down (LSD) and forward step-down (FSD) tests.Design Review with meta-analysis.

Eligibility criteria Studies were eligible for inclusion if they were methodological studies which assessed the inter-rater and/or intrarater reliability of the SLS, FSD and LSD through observation of movement quality.

results Thirty-one studies were included. The reliability varied largely between studies (inter-rater: kappa/ intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) = 0.00-0.95; intrarater: kappa/ICC = 0.13-1.00), but most of the studies reached 'moderate' measures of agreement. The pooled results of ICC/kappa showed a 'moderate' agreement for inter-rater reliability, 0.58 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.65), and a 'substantial' agreement for intrarater reliability, 0.68 (95% CI 0.60 to 0.74). Subgroup analyses showed a higher pooled agreement for inter-rater reliability of ≤3-point rating scales while no difference was found for different numbers of segmental assessments.


## Conclusion

Our findings indicate that the SLS test including the FSD and LSD tests can be suitable for clinical use regardless of number of observed segments and particularly with a ≤3-point rating scale. Since most of the included studies were affected with some form of methodological bias, our findings must be interpreted with caution. PROSPERO registration number CRD42018077822.


## InTrODuCTIOn

Visual assessment of movement is commonly used in sports medicine and aims to recognise quality of movement for identifying athletes predisposed to future injury. [1][2][3][4] For the lower extremity, a series of postural malalignments during single-limb weight bearing or landing have been characterised by excessive pelvic drop, femoral internal rotation, knee valgus, tibia internal rotation and foot pronation. [5][6][7] These malalignments are reportedly associated with overuse syndromes such as patellofemoral pain syndrome, 8 iliotibial pain syndrome, 9 femuro-acetabular impingement, 10 tibial stress fractures 11 and injuries such as anterior cruciate ligament injuries. 12 The single leg squat (SLS) is used to assess movement quality in the lower limb performed by squatting from a single-leg stance while the quality of the movement is observed and assessed. The SLS is described in the literature in various ways, including single-limb mini squat, 13 unilateral squat, 14 one legged squat, 15 single legged squat, 16 single leg mini squat 17 and single leg small knee bend. 18 Thus, a variety of protocols for summary box What is already known? ► The single leg squat (SLS) test is an observational test for movement quality which has a widespread clinical use in assessing the lower limb. ► Visual assessment of the knee in relation to the foot is valid and reliable for use in research and clinical settings for an asymptomatic adult population. ► Due to few studies and inconsistent findings, the reliability of the SLS that assess other segments than the knee is not yet established.

What are the new findings?

► The SLS shows a moderate reliability across all types of SLS tests and is proposed as feasible and reliable in a clinical setting. ► Assessment scales with a ≤3-point rating scale shows a higher pooled agreement for inter-rater reliability compared with ≥4-point rating scales. ► The reliability is not affected by the number of observed body segments. ► Visual assessment of more than two body segments might give the clinician more information which is relevant and helpful in targeted rehabilitation.

Open access assessing and performing the SLS are presented, 13 14 19-22 making it difficult to define a uniform test as 'the SLS test'. Some authors propose a simple segmental approach as they assess only the relation between the foot and the knee, 13 while others propose a multisegmental approach, assessing the whole kinetic chain from the foot to the trunk. 19 In addition, assessment criteria vary, 14 22 as does performance in terms of squatting depth, arm position, support and position of the non-weight-bearing leg (ie, front, middle and back). 13 22-27 Similar to the SLS are the forward step-down (FSD) and lateral step-down (LSD) tests. These tests differ from the SLS by being performed standing on a 15-25 cm high box. Even if studies have shown kinematic and kinetic differences between various SLS 28 and in addition between SLS and FSD, 29 the movement patterns during the descendent phase are the same; flexion at the knee, hip and trunk, pelvic tilt, hip adduction and knee internal rotation and abduction. 28 29 The common denominators for these test are that they visually assess balance, stability, knee control, overall motor control, coordinated movement quality and dynamic alignment throughout the body. That is to say, the same construct with regard of lower extremity coordination patterns of the foot, knee, hip and pelvic. Based on this similarity in construct, the FSD and LSD will be included and analysed in this meta-analysis together with the SLS. Previous literature reviews on the measurement properties of clinical tests to assess movement quality have focused on weight-bearing activities in general (eg, drop jump, tuck jump, lunge and SLS) 30 31 and showed poor to very good inter-rater and intrarater reliability. For clinical and research purposes, it is important that a test is reliable. Reliability in general is affected by factors such as the complexity of the rating scale (dichotomised or multiple-rating, number of segments assessed), the definitions of the rating criteria, the velocity of the tests and the examiner's training and clinical experience. 31 32 Besides the large between-subject variation due to biomechanical differences between individuals, an important aspect of reliability measures of these tests is the within-subject variation. Although 3D [33][34][35][36][37] and 2D studies 27 38-40 report joint kinematics with fair to good agreement over time, the SLS, FSD and LSD joint kinematics have not yet been adequately assessed for within-subject reliability using visual assessment. 31 To our knowledge, no review and meta-analysis have previously summarised the reliability of the SLS and included the FSD and LSD. Thus, the aim of this study was to perform a review and meta-analysis on the inter-rater and intrarater reliability of visual assessment of the SLS, including the FSD and LSD.


## METhODs

The review and meta-analysis were performed according to preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses guidelines. 41 42 Literature search and study selection We conducted a systematic literature search in the CINAHL, Cochrane Library, Embase, Medline (OVID) and Web of Science databases. We used the search concepts: SLS, reproducibility of results and observer variation. The MeSH terms identified for searching Medline (OVID) were adapted in accordance with corresponding vocabularies in CINAHL and Embase. Each search concept was also complemented with relevant freetext terms and the terms were, if appropriate, truncated and/or combined with proximity operators. No language restriction was applied. Databases were searched from inception. The complete search strategies are available in online supplementary material A. The searches were performed up until 29 November 2018.


## Eligibility criteria

Studies were eligible for inclusion if they were methodological studies which assessed the inter-rater and/or intrarater reliability of the SLS, FSD and LSD through observation of movement quality. No limitations were placed on participants' age, activity level or incidence of musculoskeletal disorder. Studies of inter-rater and intrarater reliability were excluded which conducted only kinematic and kinetic studies. Furthermore, studies were excluded in which the assessment was performed quantitatively through photographs where angles and degrees were calculated.

Quality assessment and risk of bias Two authors (JR and ERB) independently assessed the studies meeting the inclusion criteria for methodological quality any disagreement was resolved by consensus discussion and with the participation of an arbitrary third researcher if required (WJAG). We used the Quality Appraisal of Reliability Studies Checklist (QAREL) 43 to assess methodological quality. QAREL is an reliable instrument specially designed to assess the quality of studies of diagnostic reliability. 44 QAREL consists of 11 items covering seven principles: sampling bias and the representativeness of subjects and raters, raters' blinding; order of raters or subject's examination; suitability of time interval among repeated measurements; application and interpretation of test and statistical analysis. Each item should be considered individually and can be answered 'yes', 'no', 'unclear' or 'not applicable'. 43 Data extraction and synthesis Two researchers (JR and ERB), independently and blinded to each other, screened the titles, abstracts and full papers against the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Any disagreements were resolved by consensus discussion with the third researcher if required (WJAG). The information extracted was summarised in tables, including study name, number of participants, age/ gender, activity level, musculoskeletal disorders, number of examiners and their level of experience, method/test, assessment criteria and outcome/statistics. Predefined cut-off p oints for interpretation and categorisation of results were used. For the kappa coefficient, first order of agreement coefficient (AC1) and intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC), the Landis and Koch 45 classification for agreement was used; κ/ICC/AC1:<0.00 = poor; κ/ ICC/AC1: 0.00-0.20 = slight; κ/ICC/AC1: 0.21-0.40 = fair; κ/ICC/AC1: 0.41-0.60 = moderate; κ/ICC/AC1: 0.61-0.80 = substantial and κ/ICC/AC1: 0.81-1.0 = almost perfect.

We pooled data and conducted two separate meta-analyses for inter-rater and intrarater reliability across all studies. Reliability estimates (ICC, kappa and AC1) and sample size values were extracted from each study and transformed to Fisher's z scale. [46][47][48][49] Transformation to Fisher's z is used in correlational meta-analyses to account for the non-normal distribution in these types of statistics. [46][47][48][49] A random-effect model was used due to expected heterogeneity between studies, the between-studies and total between-subgroup effect size heterogeneity was conducted following the transformation to Fisher's z using the Q test and the result was expressed as I 2 statistics. To aid in the interpretation of the results, Fisher's z values were then converted back to reliability estimate values after completing the meta-analyses. The effect size was expressed as the pooled agreement of ICC, kappa and AC1 with 95% CI and for all outcome measures, the critical value to reject H 0 was set to 0.05. All statistical analyses were completed using comprehensive meta-analysis V.3. 50 For the meta-analyses, three choices were made. First, when more than one reliability data were presented for the same rating, a mean value was calculated for multiple examiners (where the experienced examiners were chosen), dominant/non-dominant leg, rating of different segments (ie, hip and knee) and for school children in third and seventh grades. 30 Second, in two of the included studies, 14 23 different assessment methods for the same test were presented and in these cases, the method most conform with the other included methods was chosen. Third, to include reliability data mostly with the same measurement units; plain kappa was chosen before weighted kappa, prevalence-adjusted bias-adjusted kappa, generalised kappa and weighted generalised kappa.

We conducted subgroup analyses to study differences in reliability due to different approaches in the assessment criteria; (1) on the number of segments rated unisegmental/bisegmental approach containing one or two segments versus a multisegmental approach containing ≥3 segments (2) the rater's rating scale (≤3-point vs ≥4-point rating scales).

As a final step, we conducted four sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of our results. 1. To investigate the importance of study quality, we conducted an analysis in which studies assessed with 'no' according to QAREL were removed. 2. To investigate if exclusion of assessment methods not considered conform to other included assessment methods changes our results, those methods were included in the meta-analysis. 14 24 were considered as an FSD, thus being described as such, even if they were presented as SLS by the authors. 4. To confirm that our findings were not driven by any single study, a leave-one-out sensitivity analysis was also performed by removing one study at a time, iteratively.


## rEsuLTs study selection

The literature search elicited 5230 references of which 2367 were duplicates and another 2800 were excluded after screening titles and abstracts (figure 1). In total, 68 studies were reviewed in full text after further citation tracking of the references lists of included studies. We included 31 studies in the review, while 37 studies were excluded for one of the following reasons: kinematic/ kinetic studies (n=9), quantitative measures of SLS (n=5), no methodological studies (n=4), not evaluating a test similar to SLS (n=17) or composite results of more than one test (n=2). Fifteen of the included studies investigated inter-rater and intrarater reliability, 14  which evaluates the statistical analysis of reliability and one study 56 did not fulfil item 8 concerning the order in which raters' or subjects are examined. All studies were assessed with one or more 'uncertain' concerning examiner blinding.


## study characteristics

The specific study characteristics are presented in online supplementary materials B and C.


## Subjects

Altogether, the 31 studies included 1136 subjects (454 female, 360 males and 322 of unknown gender) with an age range from 9 to 89 years; 65% of the subjects were healthy and active or were athletes between 18 and 37 years old. Five studies investigated symptomatic subjects with hip osteoarthrosis, 51 patellofemoral pain syndrome, 26 anterior cruciate ligament injury, 62 knee osteoarthritis 58 63 and three studies investigated healthy children aged from 9 to 16 years. 17 18 55 Examiners

The examiners in the studies comprised 272 certified physiotherapists with different clinical experiences; 45 physiotherapy students or non-clinician physiotherapists;

Open access  


## Assessment criteria

In seven studies, the visual assessment was scored by a 2-point rating scale (dichotomous), 13    segments, 18 19 52 57 five observed two segments 13 16 27 53 55 and one study observed only one segment. 59 
Ageberg et al 13 Y Y Y NA U U U NA Y Y Y Barker-Davis et al 56 Y Y Y U U NA U N Y Y Y Chmielewski et al 14 Y Y U U NA U U Y Y Y Y Cornell et al 66 Y Y NA U NA U U U Y Y N Crossley et al 19 Y Y U U Y U U Y Y Y N Di Mattia et al 20 Y Y U NA U U U NA Y Y N Edmondston et al 59 Y Y U NA U U U Y Y Y N Friedrich et al 61 Y Y Y NA NA NA Y U U Y Y Frohm et al 15 Y Y Y NA NA Y U NA Y Y Y Gianola et al 57 Y Y Y U U NA U U Y Y Y Harris-Hayes et al 16 Y Y Y U Y U U Y Y Y Y Herman et al 21 Y Y U NA Y U U NA Y Y Y Junge et al 17 Y Y U NA NA U U NA Y Y Y Kaukinen et al 58 Y Y Y Y NA Y U Y Y Y Y Kennedy et al 23 Y Y U U NA U U U Y Y Y Lenzlinger-Asprion et al 51 Y Y Y U NA Y Y Y Y Y Y McKeown et al 24 Y Y U U NA U U NA Y Y N Nae et al 30 Y Y Y NA NA U U U Y Y Y Park et al 25 Y Y Y NA NA U U Y Y Y Y Piva et al 26 Y Y Y NA NA U U Y U Y Y Poulsen et al 52 Y Y Y Y U U U U Y Y Y Rabin et al 64 Y Y Y NA NA U U NA Y Y Y Rabin et al 65 Y Y Y NA NA U U NA Y Y Y Räisänen et al 53 Y Y U Y U U U Y Y Y N Stensrud et al 27 Y Y NA U U U U U U Y Y Teyhen et al 60 Y Y Y NA NA U U Y Y Y Y Van Mastrigt et al 63 Y Y Y NA U Y U Y Y U Y Weeks et al 22 Y Y Y Y Y Y U Y Y Y N Weir et al 54 Y Y U U NA U U Y Y Y Y Whatman et al 18 Y Y U U Y U U Y Y Y Y Örtqvist et al 55 Y Y Y U NA U U Y U Y Y *

## synthesis of results

The ICC, AC1 and kappa values of the included studies are shown in online supplementary material C.


## Inter-rater reliability

In total, 29 studies reported on inter-rater reliability and varied between 'slight' and 'almost perfect' (κ=0.00-0.95/ICC=0.39-0.71) (online supplementary material C). Twenty-two of these presented inter-rater agreement varying between 'moderate' and 'almost perfect' (κ and The test for heterogeneity was significant (Q=86.20, df=30, p<0.001) and the I 2 statistics reported that 65% of the variability was attributed to heterogeneity.


## Intrarater reliability

Seventeen of the included studies investigated intrarater reliability and varied between 'slight' and 'almost perfect' (κ=0.13-1.00/ICC=0.49-0.81) (online supplementary material C). Twelve studies presented intrarater agreement varying between 'moderate' and 'almost perfect' (κ and ICC ≥ 0.41). 16 


## Sensitivity analyses

Seven studies 19 20 22 24 53 59 66 did not fulfil QAREL item 11 and one study 56 did not fulfil item 8. Sensitivity analysis on the importance of study quality showed that the pooled agreement for inter-rater reliability slightly increased to 0.60 (95% CI 0.51 to 0.67), while the intrarater reliability decreased to 0.62 (95% CI 0.53 to 0.71) when those eight studies were eliminated from the meta-analyses. Three assessment methods in two studies 14 23 were initially excluded from the meta-analyses in order to achieve conformity. Sensitivity analyses on including these three assessment methods showed a slightly overall decreased pooled agreement of 0.56 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.63) for inter-rater reliability and 0.65 (95% CI 0.57 to 0.72) for intrarater reliability.

Six of the included studies 14 26 54 60 64 65 presented LSD tests and four studies 19 21 24 25 FSD tests. The sensitivity analyses showed that the pooled agreement for interrater reliability slightly decreased to 0.55 (95% CI 0.45 to 0.63) and for intrarater reliability slightly increased to 0.69 (95% CI 0.60 to 0.76) when all FSD and LSD tests were excluded from the meta-analyses. The same small changes of the pooled results were seen when only the LSD tests were excluded; inter-rater reliability of 0.57 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.65) and intrarater reliability of 0.69 (95% CI 0.61 to 0.76). When the FSD tests were excluded, an inter-rater reliability of 0.56 (95% CI 0.48 to 0.64) and an intrarater reliability of 0.67 (95% CI 0.59 to 0.74) were seen. The leave-one-out sensitivity analysis indicated that the pooled agreement remained 'moderate' for interrater reliability and 'substantial' for intrarater reliability despite removing any single study from the analysis.


## DIsCussIOn

We conducted a review and meta-analyses of the interrater and intrarater reliability for the visual assessment of the SLS, including the LSD and FSD. For both the inter-rater and intrarater reliability, most studies found a 'moderate' to 'almost perfect' agreement. The meta-analyses showed a pooled agreement for inter-rater reliability of 0.58 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.65), indicating a 'moderate' agreement while the intrarater reliability was somewhat higher 0.68 (95% CI 0.60 to 0.74), indicating a 'substantial' agreement. Sensitivity analyses did not change the pooled results. Subgroup analyses showed no differences regarding unisegmental/bisegmental versus a multisegmental approach for both inter-rater and intrarater reliability, while the inter-rater reliability of a≤3-point rating scale was significantly greater than the ≥4-point rating scale. There were, however, no difference detected concerning intrarater reliability.

Previous literature reviews have focused on weightbearing activities in general (ie, drop jump, tuck jump, lunge and SLS), 30 31 the validity/kinematics of such tests 67 or modifiable factors associated with knee abduction during weight-bearing activities. 68 Nae et al 30 concluded that visual assessment of the knee in relation to the foot is valid and reliable for use in research and clinical settings for an asymptomatic adult population. In concordance with this, Whatman et al 31 showed acceptable reliability for various SLS across a range of ages, using a dichotomous rating of the knee in relation to the foot. Further, Nae et al 30 and Whatman et al 31 concluded that clearly described assessment criteria, a dichotomous rating scale and a visual assessment on video increased the reliability. This is echoed by our findings, which in addition to previous reviews 30 31 included 15 additional studies. 21-24 51 53 56-58 61-66 Yet, none of the additional studies focused solely on the relation between the knee and foot, as most of them used a multisegmental approach. 21-24 51 56-58 61-66 Nae et al 30 stated in their review that the reliability of tests that assess other segments than the knee is not yet established, due to few studies and inconsistent findings. 30 The present review, however, shows that SLS tests using Open access either an unisegmental/bisegmental or multisegmental approach exhibit an acceptable inter-rater and intrarater reliability and that most of the included studies which used a multisegmental approach exhibited an inter-rater reliability ranging from 'moderate' to 'almost perfect' (κ/ICC >0.41). This was also supported by the subgroup analysis which showed no differences between the unisegmental/bisegmental and multisegmental ratings. Moreover, Whatman et al 31 found that assessment using more complex ratings, such as 3-point and 4-point rating scales or rating multiple segments, has acceptable reliability in some studies but are generally not considered reliable enough. Whatman et al 31 in addition proposed that more complex methods warrant further investigation as they may provide clinicians with information that could be relevant to clinical decision making. However, our subgroup analyses show that 2-point or 3-point rating scales versus ≥4-point rating scale seem to be superior. Hence, our results show that observer rating regardless of number of assessed segments, and furthermore ratings on a ≥3-point rating scale show an acceptable agreement. This indicate that such tests may be of clinical use.

Different cut-off scores for ICC and kappa values exist in the literature; for example, Streiner et al 69 recommend a kappa value of 0.60-0.75 for tests to be considered reliable. Our findings from the meta-analyses showed that the intrarater reliability across all studies and those studies with ≤3-point rating scales exceeded 0.60, but the pooled agreement coefficient for the inter-rater reliability was just below 0.60. On the other hand, previous studies on reliability suggest that a lower cut-off score (κ>0.40) might be considered sufficient for a test to be used in clinical work. [70][71][72][73] We consider this reasonable, as examiners will have different experiences and act in different settings and those being assessed will vary. Hence, we believe that we can conclude that these tests are reliable enough to be of use in clinical practice.

The methodological quality of the included studies may be questioned, as all studies were assessed as 'uncertain' for one or more items, indicating an information gap due to insufficient information provided in the study. In most cases, items assessed as 'uncertain' were related to examiner blinding. When assessing the risk of bias, it cannot be assumed that the examiners were blinded if this is not clearly stated. Future research studies should therefore ensure that examiners are blinded and clearly state this in the methodological section. In addition, seven 19 20 22 24 53 59 66 studies did not fulfil QAREL item 11 and one study did not fulfil item 8. 56 Regardless, the sensitivity analysis of methodological study quality showed that the pooled agreement stayed above 'moderate' when those seven studies were where eliminated from the meta-analyses.

Our meta-analyses found a moderate heterogeneity 74 between included studies (I 2 =53%-65%) suggesting a great variability across all included studies which also has been reported in previous reviews. 30 31 Included studies varied in performance and assessment protocols, study populations and examiners' experiences, suggesting need for further standardisation of testing.

A strength of the present study is its extensive literature search and robustness of the employed methodology. Another strength is the performance of pooled analyses, including subgroup analyses, summarising more than 30 studies on SLS tests similar in performance. To merge various tests in one review may be considered advantageous as it presents the opportunity to compare multiple results from different studies. On the other hand, one could argue that the SLS, FSD and LSD differ and therefore cannot be compared due to the variation in their biomechanical effects in kinematic and kinetic demands. 28 29 Nevertheless, a sensitivity analysis excluding all FSD and LSD tests in our meta-analysis showed only a slight change in the pooled agreement which confirms the robustness of our results and indicates that the visual assessment of a SLS, regardless of stepping-down from a box or performing a SLS standing on the floor shows moderate to substantial reliability. A limitation of the present review is its decreased generalisability to populations other than healthy/active people aged 18 to 37 years, even though the present review includes five studies involving symptomatic subjects, 26 51 58 62 63 three studies involving healthy children aged nine to 16 years 1718 55 and three studies involving older people aged between 55 and 89 years. 51 58 63 Further, different correlation statistics were merged, thus many of the studies included used different kappa statistics and ICC models, or did not report the ICC model used, which could have had implications for the pooled agreement estimates. For the meta-analyses, some choices were needed to be made if more than one reliability measure was presented for the same rating, when different assessment methods were presented in the same study and concerning the choice of the kappa statistics. However, we considered this necessary for the data processing and this methodology has previously been reported. 30 Finally, there is always a risk that a study has been missed out due to poor indexing of studies.


## COnCLusIOn

Our results indicate that the SLS test including the FSD and LSD tests are feasible and reliable, regardless of whether a unisegmental/bisegmental or a multisegmental approach is used. Our findings show a 'moderate' reliability in assessment of the SLS, indicating that the test is suitable for use in clinical work regardless of number of observed segments and particularly with a ≤3-point rating scale. Since most of the included studies are affected with some methodological bias, our findings must be interpreted with caution. Future studies using more robust methodological standardisation of the test performance are warranted.

## Figure 1
1Flow chart of inclusion process. eight athletic trainers; six strength and conditioning coaches; eight physicians; four orthopaedic surgeons and eight examiners of unknown profession.


18 23 55 56 59 66 five studies used a mixed 2-point and 3-point rating scale, 25 26 60 64 65 nine studies used a 3-point rating scale 16 19 21 24 27 51 53 57 58 and another nine used a 4-point rating scale, 14 15 17 20 52 54 61-63 one study used a 10-point rating scale. 22 Most of the studies used a multisegmental approach (≥3 observed segments); 21 studies observed four segments or more, 14 15 17 20-26 51 54 56 58 60-66 four studies observed three Open access

## Figure 2
2Forest plot and the pooled agreement coefficient of studies on the agreement coefficient (ICC, kappa and AC1) for inter-rater reliability of the single-leg squat in a random effect model. ICC≥ 0.41). 13 15-19 21 22 24-26 51 52 54-56 58-60 62 64 65 The pooled agreement for ICC, kappa and AC1 was 0.58 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.65), indicating a 'moderate' agreement (figure 2).

## Figure 3
3Forest plot and the pooled agreement coefficient of studies on the agreement coefficient (ICC, kappa nd AC1) for intrarater reliability of the single-leg squat in a random effect model.


23 3. To investigate if exclusion of all FSD and LSD tests changed our pooled results, we performed meta-analyses excluding these tests. The tests described in Crossley et al19 and McKeown et al


16 18 19 22-24 51-58   14 investigated inter-rater reliability13 15 17 20 21 2526 59-65   and two investigated intrarater reliability.27 66    risk of bias within studies 
The methodological quality of the included studies, 
assessed with QAREL, is presented in table 1. Seven 
studies were assessed as not fulfilling item 11 19 20 22 24 53 59 66 


## Table 1
1Methodological quality and risk of bias of included studies assessed with the Quality Appraisal of Reliability Studies*Study 

Item 
1 

Item 
2 

Item 
3 

Item 
4 

Item 
5 

Item 
6 

Item 
7 

Item 
8 

Item 
9 

Item 
10 

Item 
11 




Assesses study quality based on 11 items. Items: 1. Was the test evaluated in a sample of subjects who were representative of those to whom the authors intended the results to be applied? 2. Was the test performed by raters who were representative of those to whom the authors intended the results to be applied? 3. Were raters blinded to the findings of other raters during the study? 4. Were raters blinded to their own prior findings of the test under evaluation? 5. Were raters blinded to the results of the accepted reference standard or the disease status for the target disorder (or variable) being evaluated? 6. Were raters blinded to clinical information that was not intended to be provided as part of the testing procedure or study design? 7. Were raters blinded to additional cues that were not part of the test? 8.Was the order 
of examination varied? 9. Was the stability (or theoretical stability) of the variable being measured taken into account when determining 
the suitability of the time-interval among repeated measures? 10. Was the test applied correctly and interpreted appropriately? 11. Were 
appropriate statistical measures of agreement used? 
N, no; NA, not applicable; U, unclear; Y, yes (marked in bold). 


Ressman J, et al. BMJ Open Sp Ex Med 2019;5:e000541. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2019-000541Open access
Ressman J, et al. BMJ Open Sp Ex Med 2019;5:e000541. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2019-000541
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Magdalena Svanberg and Gun Brit Knutssön, librarians at Karolinska Institutet University Library, for their help with the development of the search strategies and database search.
Pre-participation screening: the use of fundamental movements as an assessment of function -part. G Cook, L Burton, B Hoogenboom, Cook G, Burton L, Hoogenboom B. Pre-participation screening: the use of fundamental movements as an assessment of function -part

. N Am J Sports Phys Ther. 1N Am J Sports Phys Ther 2006;1:62-72.

Pre-participation screening: the use of fundamental movements as an assessment of function -part 2. G Cook, L Burton, B Hoogenboom, N Am J Sports Phys Ther. 1Cook G, Burton L, Hoogenboom B. Pre-participation screening: the use of fundamental movements as an assessment of function -part 2. N Am J Sports Phys Ther 2006;1:132-9.

Risk factors, testing and preventative strategies for non-contact injuries in professional football: current perceptions and practices of 44 teams from various premier leagues. A Mccall, C Carling, M Nedelec, 10.1136/bjsports-2014-093439Br J Sports Med. 48McCall A, Carling C, Nedelec M, et al. Risk factors, testing and preventative strategies for non-contact injuries in professional football: current perceptions and practices of 44 teams from various premier leagues. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1352-7.

Reliability and association with injury of movement screens: a critical review. R Mccunn, Aus Der Fünten, K Fullagar, Hhk , 10.1007/s40279-015-0453-1Sports Med. 46McCunn R, Aus der Fünten K, Fullagar HHK, et al. Reliability and association with injury of movement screens: a critical review. Sports Med 2016;46:763-81.

Biomechanical measures of neuromuscular control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament injury risk in female athletes: a prospective study. T E Hewett, G D Myer, K R Ford, 10.1177/0363546504269591Am J Sports Med. 33Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromuscular control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament injury risk in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:492-501.

Relationships between knee valgus, hip-muscle strength, and hip-muscle recruitment during a single-limb step-down. J H Hollman, B E Ginos, J Kozuchowski, 10.1123/jsr.18.1.104J Sport Rehabil. 18Hollman JH, Ginos BE, Kozuchowski J, et al. Relationships between knee valgus, hip-muscle strength, and hip-muscle recruitment during a single-limb step-down. J Sport Rehabil 2009;18:104-17.

The influence of altered lower-extremity kinematics on patellofemoral joint dysfunction: a theoretical perspective. C M Powers, 10.2519/jospt.2003.33.11.639J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 33Powers CM. The influence of altered lower-extremity kinematics on patellofemoral joint dysfunction: a theoretical perspective. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2003;33:639-46.

Knee valgus angle during single leg squat and landing in patellofemoral pain patients and controls. L Herrington, 10.1016/j.knee.2013.11.011The Knee. 21Herrington L. Knee valgus angle during single leg squat and landing in patellofemoral pain patients and controls. The Knee 2014;21:514-7.

Biomechanical risk factors associated with iliotibial band syndrome in runners: a systematic review. J Aderem, Q A Louw, 10.1186/s12891-015-0808-7BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 16Aderem J, Louw QA. Biomechanical risk factors associated with iliotibial band syndrome in runners: a systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2015;16.

Movement patterns during a small knee bend test in Academy footballers with femoroacetabular impingement (FAI). N Botha, M Warner, M Gimpel, Health Sciences Working Papers. 1Botha N, Warner M, Gimpel M, et al. Movement patterns during a small knee bend test in Academy footballers with femoroacetabular impingement (FAI). Health Sciences Working Papers 2014;1:1-24.

Distinct hip and rearfoot kinematics in female runners with a history of tibial stress fracture. C E Milner, J Hamill, I S Davis, 10.2519/jospt.2010.3024J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 40Milner CE, Hamill J, Davis IS. Distinct hip and rearfoot kinematics in female runners with a history of tibial stress fracture. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2010;40:59-66.

Mechanisms, prediction, and prevention of ACL injuries: cut risk with three sharpened and validated tools. T E Hewett, G D Myer, K R Ford, 10.1002/jor.23414J Orthop Res. 34Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Mechanisms, prediction, and prevention of ACL injuries: cut risk with three sharpened and validated tools. J Orthop Res 2016;34:1843-55.

Validity and inter-rater reliability of medio-lateral knee motion observed during a single-limb mini squat. E Ageberg, K L Bennell, M A Hunt, 10.1186/1471-2474-11-265BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 11Ageberg E, Bennell KL, Hunt MA, et al. Validity and inter-rater reliability of medio-lateral knee motion observed during a single-limb mini squat. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2010;11.

Investigation of clinician agreement in evaluating movement quality during unilateral lower extremity functional tasks: a comparison of 2 rating methods. T L Chmielewski, M J Hodges, M Horodyski, 10.2519/jospt.2007.2457J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 37Chmielewski TL, Hodges MJ, Horodyski M, et al. Investigation of clinician agreement in evaluating movement quality during unilateral lower extremity functional tasks: a comparison of 2 rating methods. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2007;37:122-9.

A nine-test screening battery for athletes: a reliability study. A Frohm, A Heijne, J Kowalski, 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2010.01267.xScand J Med Sci Sports. 22Frohm A, Heijne A, Kowalski J, et al. A nine-test screening battery for athletes: a reliability study. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2012;22:306-15.

Classification of lower extremity movement patterns based on visual assessment: reliability and correlation with 2-Dimensional video analysis. M Harris-Hayes, K Steger-May, C Koh, 10.4085/1062-6050-49.2.21Journal of Athletic Training. 49Harris-Hayes M, Steger-May K, Koh C, et al. Classification of lower extremity movement patterns based on visual assessment: reliability and correlation with 2-Dimensional video analysis. Journal of Athletic Training 2014;49:304-10.

Single leg mini squat: an intertester reproducibility study of children in the age of 9-10 and 12-14 years presented by various methods of kappa calculation. T Junge, S Balsnes, L Runge, 10.1186/1471-2474-13-203BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 13Junge T, Balsnes S, Runge L, et al. Single leg mini squat: an inter- tester reproducibility study of children in the age of 9-10 and 12-14 years presented by various methods of kappa calculation. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2012;13.

The reliability and validity of physiotherapist visual rating of dynamic pelvis and knee alignment in young athletes. C Whatman, P Hume, W Hing, 10.1016/j.ptsp.2012.07.001Physical Therapy in Sport. 14Whatman C, Hume P, Hing W. The reliability and validity of physiotherapist visual rating of dynamic pelvis and knee alignment in young athletes. Physical Therapy in Sport 2013;14:168-74.

Performance on the single-leg squat task indicates hip abductor muscle function. K M Crossley, W-J Zhang, A G Schache, 10.1177/0363546510395456Am J Sports Med. 39Crossley KM, Zhang W-J, Schache AG, et al. Performance on the single-leg squat task indicates hip abductor muscle function. Am J Sports Med 2011;39:866-73.

What are the validity of the Single-Leg-Squat test and its relationship to Hip-Abduction strength?. M A Dimattia, A L Livengood, T L Uhl, 10.1123/jsr.14.2.108J Sport Rehabil. 14DiMattia MA, Livengood AL, Uhl TL, et al. What are the validity of the Single-Leg-Squat test and its relationship to Hip-Abduction strength? J Sport Rehabil 2005;14:108-23.

Agreement of an evaluation of the Forward-Step-Down test by a broad cohort of clinicians with that of an expert panel. G Herman, O Nakdimon, P Levinger, 10.1123/jsr.2014-0319J Sport Rehabil. 25Herman G, Nakdimon O, Levinger P, et al. Agreement of an evaluation of the Forward-Step-Down test by a broad cohort of clinicians with that of an expert panel. J Sport Rehabil 2016;25:227-32.

Kinematic predictors of single-leg squat performance: a comparison of experienced physiotherapists and student physiotherapists. B K Weeks, C P Carty, S A Horan, 10.1186/1471-2474-13-207BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 13Weeks BK, Carty CP, Horan SA. Kinematic predictors of single-leg squat performance: a comparison of experienced physiotherapists and student physiotherapists. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2012;13.

Intrarater and interrater reliability of the single-leg squat test. M D Kennedy, L Burrows, E Parent, 10.1123/att.15.6.32Athletic Therapy Today. 15Kennedy MD, Burrows L, Parent E. Intrarater and interrater reliability of the single-leg squat test. Athletic Therapy Today 2010;15:32-6.

Athletic ability assessment: a movement assessment protocol for athletes. I Mckeown, K Taylor-Mckeown, C Woods, Int J Sports Phys Ther. 9McKeown I, Taylor-McKeown K, Woods C, et al. Athletic ability assessment: a movement assessment protocol for athletes. Int J Sports Phys Ther 2014;9.

Musculoskeletal predictors of movement quality for the forward step-down test in asymptomatic women. K-M Park, H-S Cynn, S-D Choung, 10.2519/jospt.2013.4073J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 43Park K-M, Cynn H-S, Choung S-D. Musculoskeletal predictors of movement quality for the forward step-down test in asymptomatic women. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2013;43:504-10.

Reliability of measures of impairments associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome. S R Piva, K Fitzgerald, J J Irrgang, 10.1186/1471-2474-7-33BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 7Piva SR, Fitzgerald K, Irrgang JJ, et al. Reliability of measures of impairments associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2006;7.

Correlation between two-dimensional video analysis and subjective assessment in evaluating knee control among elite female team handball players. S Stensrud, G Myklebust, E Kristianslund, 10.1136/bjsm.2010.078287Br J Sports Med. 45Stensrud S, Myklebust G, Kristianslund E, et al. Correlation between two-dimensional video analysis and subjective assessment in evaluating knee control among elite female team handball players. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:589-95.

Not all single leg SQUATS are equal: a biomechanical comparison of three variations. A Khuu, E Foch, C L Lewis, Int J Sports Phys Ther. 11Khuu A, Foch E, Lewis CL. Not all single leg SQUATS are equal: a biomechanical comparison of three variations. Int J Sports Phys Ther 2016;11:201-11.

Differences in lower extremity and trunk kinematics between single leg squat and step down tasks. C L Lewis, E Foch, M M Luko, 10.1371/journal.pone.0126258Plos One. 10126258Lewis CL, Foch E, Luko MM, et al. Differences in lower extremity and trunk kinematics between single leg squat and step down tasks. Plos One 2015;10:e0126258.

Measurement properties of visual rating of postural orientation errors of the lower extremity -A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Nae, M W Creaby, A Cronström, 10.1016/j.ptsp.2017.04.003Phys Ther Sport. 27Nae J, Creaby MW, Cronström A, et al. Measurement properties of visual rating of postural orientation errors of the lower extremity -A systematic review and meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport 2017;27:52-64.

The reliability and validity of visual rating of dynamic alignment during lower extremity functional screening tests: a review of the literature. C Whatman, P Hume, W Hing, 10.1179/1743288X15Y.0000000006Phys Ther Rev. 20Whatman C, Hume P, Hing W. The reliability and validity of visual rating of dynamic alignment during lower extremity functional screening tests: a review of the literature. Phys Ther Rev 2015;20:210-24.

What can professionals qualitatively analyze?. D Knudson, 10.1080/07303084.2000.10605997J Phys Educ Recreat Dance. 71Knudson D. What can professionals qualitatively analyze? J Phys Educ Recreat Dance 2000;71:19-23.

The reliability of biomechanical variables collected during single leg squat and landing tasks. F Alenezi, L Herrington, P Jones, 10.1016/j.jelekin.2014.07.007J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 24Alenezi F, Herrington L, Jones P, et al. The reliability of biomechanical variables collected during single leg squat and landing tasks. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2014;24:718-21.

Patterns of dynamic malalignment, muscle activation, joint motion, and patellofemoral-pain syndrome. J E Earl, J Hertel, C R Denegar, 10.1123/jsr.14.3.216J Sport Rehabil. 14Earl JE, Hertel J, Denegar CR. Patterns of dynamic malalignment, muscle activation, joint motion, and patellofemoral-pain syndrome. J Sport Rehabil 2005;14:216-33.

Differences in lower extremity kinematics between a bilateral drop-vertical jump and a single-leg step-down. J E Earl, S K Monteiro, K R Snyder, 10.2519/jospt.2007.2202J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 37Earl JE, Monteiro SK, Snyder KR. Differences in lower extremity kinematics between a bilateral drop-vertical jump and a single-leg step-down. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2007;37:245-52.

Kinematics during lower extremity functional screening tests--are they reliable and related to jogging?. C Whatman, W Hing, P Hume, 10.1016/j.ptsp.2010.10.006Phys Ther Sport. 12Whatman C, Hing W, Hume P. Kinematics during lower extremity functional screening tests--are they reliable and related to jogging? Phys Ther Sport 2011;12:22-9.

Kinematics during lower extremity functional screening tests in young athletes -are they reliable and valid?. C Whatman, P Hume, W Hing, 10.1016/j.ptsp.2012.06.001Phys Ther Sport. 14Whatman C, Hume P, Hing W. Kinematics during lower extremity functional screening tests in young athletes -are they reliable and valid? Phys Ther Sport 2013;14:87-93.

Femoral medial deviation angle during a one-leg squat test in individuals with patellofemoral pain syndrome. P Levinger, W Gilleard, C Coleman, 10.1016/j.ptsp.2007.03.003Phys Ther Sport. 8Levinger P, Gilleard W, Coleman C. Femoral medial deviation angle during a one-leg squat test in individuals with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Phys Ther Sport 2007;8:163-8.

Reliability of 2-Dimensional video assessment of frontal-plane dynamic knee valgus during common athletic screening tasks. A Munro, L Herrington, Carolan M , 10.1123/jsr.21.1.7J Sport Rehabil. 21Munro A, Herrington L, Carolan M. Reliability of 2-Dimensional video assessment of frontal-plane dynamic knee valgus during common athletic screening tasks. J Sport Rehabil 2012;21:7-11.

Core strength and lower extremity alignment during single leg squats. J D Willson, M L Ireland, I Davis, 10.1249/01.mss.0000218140.05074.faMed Sci Sports Exerc. 38Willson JD, Ireland ML, Davis I. Core strength and lower extremity alignment during single leg squats. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2006;38:945-52.

The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and elaboration. A Liberati, D G Altman, J Tetzlaff, 10.1136/bmj.b2700BMJ. 3392700Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and elaboration. BMJ 2009;339:b2700.

Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. D Moher, A Liberati, J Tetzlaff, 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097PLoS Med. 61000097Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, et al. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med 2009;6:e1000097.

The development of a quality appraisal tool for studies of diagnostic reliability (QAREL). N P Lucas, P Macaskill, L Irwig, 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.10.002J Clin Epidemiol. 63Lucas NP, Macaskill P, Irwig L, et al. The development of a quality appraisal tool for studies of diagnostic reliability (QAREL). J Clin Epidemiol 2010;63:854-61.

The reliability of a quality appraisal tool for studies of diagnostic reliability (QAREL). N Lucas, P Macaskill, L Irwig, 10.1186/1471-2288-13-111BMC Med Res Methodol. 13Lucas N, Macaskill P, Irwig L, et al. The reliability of a quality appraisal tool for studies of diagnostic reliability (QAREL). BMC Med Res Methodol 2013;13.

The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. J R Landis, G G Koch, 10.2307/2529310Biometrics. 33Landis JR, Koch GG. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 1977;33:159-74.

Introduction to Meta-Analysis. M Borenstein, L V Hedges, Jpt Higgins, WileyBorenstein M, Hedges LV, Higgins JPT, et al. Introduction to Meta- Analysis. Wiley, 2011.

Psychometric inferences from a meta-analysis of reliability and internal consistency coefficients. J Botella, M Suero, H Gambara, 10.1037/a0019626Psychol Methods. 15Botella J, Suero M, Gambara H. Psychometric inferences from a meta-analysis of reliability and internal consistency coefficients. Psychol Methods 2010;15:386-97.

The interrater and intrarater reliability of the functional movement screen: a systematic review with meta-analysis. J W Cuchna, M C Hoch, J M Hoch, 10.1016/j.ptsp.2015.12.002Phys Ther Sport. 19Cuchna JW, Hoch MC, Hoch JM. The interrater and intrarater reliability of the functional movement screen: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport 2016;19:57-65.

The reliability of the functional independence Measure: a quantitative review. K J Ottenbacher, Y Hsu, C V Granger, 10.1016/S0003-9993(96)90184-7Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 77Ottenbacher KJ, Hsu Y, Granger CV, et al. The reliability of the functional independence Measure: a quantitative review. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1996;77:1226-32.

Ca ; M Pierce, L V Hedges, J P T Higgins, H Rothstein, Software Review: Borenstein. Version 2.2.027) [Computer softwarePierce CA. Software Review: Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J. P. T., & Rothstein, H. R 2006. Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Version 2.2.027) [Computer software].

. Englewood, NJ: Biostat. In. 11Englewood, NJ: Biostat. In. Vol 11. Los Angeles, CA2008:188-191.

Intertester and intratester reliability of movement control tests on the hip for patients with hip osteoarthritis. R Lenzlinger-Asprion, N Keller, A Meichtry, 10.1186/s12891-017-1388-5BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 18Lenzlinger-Asprion R, Keller N, Meichtry A, et al. Intertester and intratester reliability of movement control tests on the hip for patients with hip osteoarthritis. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2017;18.

Concurrent validity and reliability of clinical evaluation of the single leg squat. D R Poulsen, C R James, 10.3109/09593985.2011.552539Physiother Theory Pract. 27Poulsen DR, James CR. Concurrent validity and reliability of clinical evaluation of the single leg squat. Physiother Theory Pract 2011;27:586-94.

Single-Leg squat as a tool to evaluate young athletes' frontal plane knee control. A Räisänen, K Pasanen, T Krosshaug, 10.1097/JSM.0000000000000288Clin J Sport Med. 26Räisänen A, Pasanen K, Krosshaug T, et al. Single-Leg squat as a tool to evaluate young athletes' frontal plane knee control. Clin J Sport Med 2016;26:478-82.

Core stability: inter-and intraobserver reliability of 6 clinical tests. A Weir, J Darby, H Inklaar, 10.1097/JSM.0b013e3181cae924Clin J Sport Med. 20Weir A, Darby J, Inklaar H, et al. Core stability: inter-and intraobserver reliability of 6 clinical tests. Clin J Sport Med 2010;20:34-8.

Reliability and reference values of two clinical measurements of dynamic and static knee position in healthy children. M Örtqvist, E B Moström, E M Roos, 10.1007/s00167-011-1542-9Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 19Örtqvist M, Moström EB, Roos EM, et al. Reliability and reference values of two clinical measurements of dynamic and static knee position in healthy children. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2011;19:2060-6.

Single leg squat ratings by clinicians are reliable and predict excessive hip internal rotation moment. R M Barker-Davies, A Roberts, A N Bennett, 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2018.02.016Gait Posture. 61Barker-Davies RM, Roberts A, Bennett AN, et al. Single leg squat ratings by clinicians are reliable and predict excessive hip internal rotation moment. Gait Posture 2018;61:453-8.

Single leg squat performance in physically and non-physically active individuals: a cross-sectional study. S Gianola, G Castellini, E Stucovitz, 10.1186/s12891-017-1660-8BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 18Gianola S, Castellini G, Stucovitz E, et al. Single leg squat performance in physically and non-physically active individuals: a cross-sectional study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2017;18.

Intertester and intratester reliability of a movement control test battery for patients with knee osteoarthritis and controls. P T Kaukinen, J P Arokoski, E O Huber, J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 17Kaukinen PT, Arokoski JP, Huber EO, et al. Intertester and intratester reliability of a movement control test battery for patients with knee osteoarthritis and controls. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2017;17:197-208.

Symmetry of trunk and femoro-pelvic movement responses to single leg loading tests in asymptomatic females. S Edmondston, Y Leo, B Trant, 10.1016/j.math.2012.10.010Man Ther. 18Edmondston S, Leo Y, Trant B, et al. Symmetry of trunk and femoro-pelvic movement responses to single leg loading tests in asymptomatic females. Man Ther 2013;18:231-6.

Reliability of lower quarter physical performance measures in healthy service members. D S Teyhen, S W Shaffer, C L Lorenson, US Army Med Dep J. Teyhen DS, Shaffer SW, Lorenson CL, et al. Reliability of lower quarter physical performance measures in healthy service members. US Army Med Dep J 2011:37-49.

Reliability and practicality of the core score: four dynamic core stability tests performed in a physician office setting. J Friedrich, R Brakke, V Akuthota, 10.1097/JSM.0000000000000366Clin J Sport Med. 27Friedrich J, Brakke R, Akuthota V, et al. Reliability and practicality of the core score: four dynamic core stability tests performed in a physician office setting. Clin J Sport Med 2017;27:409-14.

Measurement properties of a test battery to assess postural orientation during functional tasks in patients undergoing anterior cruciate ligament injury rehabilitation. J Nae, M W Creaby, G Nilsson, 10.2519/jospt.2017.7270J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 47Nae J, Creaby MW, Nilsson G, et al. Measurement properties of a test battery to assess postural orientation during functional tasks in patients undergoing anterior cruciate ligament injury rehabilitation. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2017;47:863-73.

Inter-rater reliability of movement quality during single limb mini-squat test in adults with knee osteoarthritis. Mastrigt Nvan, J E Naili, E W Broström, Gait Posture. 57Mastrigt Nvan, Naili JE, Broström EW, et al. Inter-rater reliability of movement quality during single limb mini-squat test in adults with knee osteoarthritis. Gait Posture 2017;57:301-2.

Measures of range of motion and strength among healthy women with differing quality of lower extremity movement during the lateral step-down test. A Rabin, Z Kozol, 10.2519/jospt.2010.3424J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 40Rabin A, Kozol Z. Measures of range of motion and strength among healthy women with differing quality of lower extremity movement during the lateral step-down test. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2010;40:792-800.

Factors associated with visually assessed quality of movement during a lateral step-down test among individuals with patellofemoral pain. A Rabin, Z Kozol, U Moran, 10.2519/jospt.2014.5507J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 44Rabin A, Kozol Z, Moran U, et al. Factors associated with visually assessed quality of movement during a lateral step-down test among individuals with patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2014;44:937-46.

INTRA-RATER test-retest reliability and response stability of the FUSIONETICS™ movement efficiency test. D J Cornell, K T Ebersole, 10.26603/ijspt20180618Int J Sports Phys Ther. 13Cornell DJ, Ebersole KT. INTRA-RATER test-retest reliability and response stability of the FUSIONETICS™ movement efficiency test. Int J Sports Phys Ther 2018;13:618-32.

Observer rating versus threedimensional motion analysis of lower extremity kinematics during functional screening tests: a systematic review. L Maclachlan, S G White, D Reid, Int J Sports Phys Ther. 10Maclachlan L, White SG, Reid D. Observer rating versus three- dimensional motion analysis of lower extremity kinematics during functional screening tests: a systematic review. Int J Sports Phys Ther 2015;10:482-92.

Modifiable factors associated with knee abduction during weight-bearing activities: a systematic review and meta-analysis. A Cronström, M W Creaby, J Nae, 10.1007/s40279-016-0519-8Sports Med. 46Cronström A, Creaby MW, Nae J, et al. Modifiable factors associated with knee abduction during weight-bearing activities: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 2016;46:1647-62.

Health measurement scales : a practical guide to their development and use. D L Streiner, G R Norman, J Cairney, Oxford University PressOxfordStreiner DL, Norman GR, Cairney J. Health measurement scales : a practical guide to their development and use. Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2015.

Interexaminer reliability in physical examination of the cervical spine. A Fjellner, C Bexander, R Faleij, 10.1016/S0161-4754(99)70002-3J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 22Fjellner A, Bexander C, Faleij R, et al. Interexaminer reliability in physical examination of the cervical spine. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 1999;22:511-6.

Intra-and inter-rater reliability of movement and palpation tests in patients with neck pain: a systematic review. A Jonsson, E Rasmussen-Barr, 10.1080/09593985.2017.1390806Physiother Theory Pract. 34Jonsson A, Rasmussen-Barr E. Intra-and inter-rater reliability of movement and palpation tests in patients with neck pain: a systematic review. Physiother Theory Pract 2018;34:165-80.

The interexaminer reproducibility of physical examination of the cervical spine. J J Pool, J L Hoving, H C De Vet, 10.1016/j.jmpt.2003.12.002J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 27Pool JJ, Hoving JL, de Vet HC, et al. The interexaminer reproducibility of physical examination of the cervical spine. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 2004;27:84-90.

Manual examination of the spine: a systematic critical literature review of reproducibility. M J Stochkendahl, H W Christensen, J Hartvigsen, 10.1016/j.jmpt.2006.06.011J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 29Stochkendahl MJ, Christensen HW, Hartvigsen J, et al. Manual examination of the spine: a systematic critical literature review of reproducibility. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 2006;29:475-85.

Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. Jpt Higgins, S G Thompson, J J Deeks, 10.1136/bmj.327.7414.557BMJ. 327Higgins JPT, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ. Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ 2003;327:557-60.