# BOOK REVIEWS Cancer Surveys-Experimental approach to drug targeting

CorpusID: 19631666
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6325a220c990e507f4c03237e38f7a7a9ace412d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6325a220c990e507f4c03237e38f7a7a9ace412d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

BOOK REVIEWS Cancer Surveys-Experimental approach to drug targeting
Oxford University PressCopyright Oxford University Press1983

BOOK REVIEWS Cancer Surveys-Experimental approach to drug targeting

Br. J. Cancer
Oxford University Press4819821983


This, the third in the Cancer Surveys series, maintains the high standard set by the previous issues. This book covers Experimental Approaches to Drug Targeting in a manner suitable both for those already involved in cancer chemotherapy and attempts to direct anti-cancer agents to the tumour site, and those with little prior knowledge but who wish to learn more about the field. It consists of an authoritative introduction by the Editors and ten review chapters by different groups actively involved in drug targeting, followed by a brief concluding commentary by Prof. G. Westbury. Most of the chapters are concerned with the use of monoclonal antibodies for targeting cytotoxic agents, which is quite reasonable considering the enormous interest that monoclonal antibodies have generated in this regard in recent times. The cytotoxic agents discussed are in most cases toxins of plant orgin (or their A chain sub-units) which are candidates as anti-tumour agents if they can be adequately directed, although some authors (notably R. Arnon and M. Sela) also point out the potential of antibodies for targeting conventional cytotoxic drugs. Perhaps the most important point about this book is that as well as outlining the potential for success and various ways of exploiting tumour-directed agents, it emphasizes the pitfalls and problems which could occur in theory and occur in practice. As a result we are given an optimistic, but realistic, overview of current progress and future prospects. The rapid publishing time of the Cancer Surveys series has ensured that the references and factual information are up to date. In summary the book can be recommended to those interested in drug-targeting or cancer chemotherapy in general, and it offers excellent value for money. It also serves to whet the appetite for subsequent issues of Cancer Surveys on other topics. This book is exceptional on several counts. First the breadth of coverage of what will continue to be for many years a burgeoning field; second, the high quality of virtually all the contributions and third, the editing, particularly in respect of individual chapter cross-referencing, the judiciousness of including a separate section on 'Practical Aspects', two detailed appendices with references on the monoclonal antibodies discussed in the fulsome text and an extensive bibliography-so often missing from texts of lesser quality. The book is concerned with applications of monoclonal antibodies in clinical medicine as a whole and there are excellent chapters on their impact in the fields of Haematology (delineation of platelet function, characterisation of blood group antigens), Microbiology (characterisation of influenzal and Epstein-Barr virus antigens; uses in Bacteriology and Parasitology, particularly Malaria), and Neurology (differentiation antigens of the CNS; antibodies to neurotransmitters). Oncologists-experimental and clinical-are also well served, not only in the section specifically concerned with their discipline, but in others also, such as in the Genetics section in which McMichael discusses new approaches to the study of the structure, genetics and function of HLA antigens and Goodfellow and Solomon, monoclonal antibodies and human gene mapping by somatic cell genetics. This desirable overspill also extends to descriptions of monoclonal antibodies in the drug field and to immunohistological applications which, appearing under "Practical Aspects", is not only well-illustrated but also, as one might have anticipated, contains much good advice on technical matters.

The "Cancer" section is subdivided into 3 chapters. In the first E.S. Lennox discusses the characterisation of human tumour antigens and emphasises among other points, the inherent difficulties in defining "tumour-specific" antigens.

Nevertheless, the ability of tumours to make products inappropriate to their normal state of differentiation or to magnify by clonal amplification, the expression of differentiation A'> The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1983


M.J. Embleton CRC Laboratories, University Park, Nottingham. Monoclonal Antibodies in Clinical Medicine. A. MCMICHAEL & J. FABRE (Editors), Academic Press Inc. (London) Ltd. 663 pp, 1982, £34.00. ISBN 0 12 485580 6.