# The Influence of Cooperative Intergerative Reading and Composition (CIRC) and Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review (SQ3R) on Ability Reading Comprehension of Elementary School

CorpusID: 199168147
 
tags: #Psychology, #Education

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c16c8f72eb98893fb9cdf523826c49f07a2ec2c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c16c8f72eb98893fb9cdf523826c49f07a2ec2c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Influence of Cooperative Intergerative Reading and Composition (CIRC) and Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review (SQ3R) on Ability Reading Comprehension of Elementary School
2019

Sedyo Pamungkas 
Program Studi Pendidikan Dasar
Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta
Program Pascasarjana

Suhardi 
Program Studi Pendidikan Dasar
Universitas Negeri Yogyakarta
Program Pascasarjana

The Influence of Cooperative Intergerative Reading and Composition (CIRC) and Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review (SQ3R) on Ability Reading Comprehension of Elementary School
201910.18502/kss.v3i17.4682Conference PaperCooperative integrated learning and composition (CIRC)Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review (SQ3R)Experiment techniquereading comprehension
The objective of this study is to examine the theory of Cooperative integrated learning and composition (CIRC) and Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review (SQ3R). This study used eksperiment technique.The study design Nonequivalent Control Group's pretestposttest Design with two experimental groups and a control group. The population of this study is the fourth grade of Muhammadiyah Gunungpring elemnatary school. Determination of subjects in this study using Simple Random Sampling technique with the subject of research is the fourth grader of Muhammadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan. Technique of collecting data using test. Validity test in this research using grain analysis technique. Measurement of the reliability of research instruments in the form of multiple choice to measure the comprehension of reading comprehension with the cronbach's alpha formula. Based on the results of the research, the following results are obtained: (1) Is there is a significant difference of influence between Cooperative Integrated Reading and Composition (CIRC) method and control class; (2) Is There is a difference of influence between Survey Question Read Recite Review (SQ3R) learning and Context class in learning comprehension reading skill (3) There is influence of using CIRC and SQ3R method to reading comprehension skill

ICMEd experiences with litreature". Through the statement, reading activity is a very important thing to get knowledge in the lesson because by reading the students will understand the meaning of a reading he read. Marsha (2015: 4) "Good readers are strategic readers who think about what they read, develop specific reading strategies and skills, and learn to apply these strategies and skills as a way to get meaning from a variety of text type. Reading requires insight, because it involves not only rote or reading the letters contained in the reading, but involving the role of visual, thinking, psycholinguistic and metacognitive activity. In the words of Van Dijk and Kintsch 1983; Kintsch, 199 (in Pilve Kängsepp, 2011: 381) "In the theory of text comprehension the process of reading is as conceived as the construction of semantic representations of the text (text-base model) and also as creating of more personal mental representations integrated with the reader's prior knowl-edge (situation model) ",it is revealed that reading is an attempt to interpret the intent of the author or text reading, which is associated with previous student knowledge, so it is need basic knowledge to be able to know the purpose of the author. As an activity of thinking process, reading performs activities to know the word, literal, interpretation, critical reading and understanding. In the implementation of learning comprehension reading, usually teachers use traditional learning methods.

Teachers only give assignments to students to read the text. Prior to the event, teachers talked about information that was deemed important regarding what students should do. In fact there are still many teachers who use these traditional methods to teach students in reading comprehension. The same problem also occurs in the fourth grade Muhmmadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan which still uses conventional method where the learning process is still much centered on the teacher so that the students become visible passive. Based on the observation and interview with fourth grade teacher of SD Muhammadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan, showed that the ability of fourth grade students in reading, especially reading comprehension is still lacking.


### The structure

Related problems to face the students to be able and understand the text of book, then the teacher must be good at solving problems faced. To solve the problems faced, teachers can apply the method of learning. One method that can be used to improve students' ability to read comprehension effectively is using SQ3R method.

According to Dalman (2013: 189) SQ3R technique is one of the very effective reading techniques to understand the contents of reading. Therefore, this technique is very well used for reading comprehension. The SQ3R method is usually used to obtain ICMEd detailed and thorough information from a reading. SQ3R method consists of five steps in the application include: survey (check), question (ask), read (read), recite (understand), review (repeat). Tarigan in (Halimah 2015: 204). SQ3R is an excellent method of reading for the purpose of understanding intensive and rational reading. This reading method is good for study purposes. The method of reading for this study was recommended by a professor of psychology from Ohio State University, Francis P. Robinson, in 1941.

SQ3R method is one of the methods of reading which is increasingly known and widely used. Reading activities using the SQ3R method include five steps: 1. survey (preliminary review); 2.question (ask), 3.read (read), 4.recite (recall), and 5.review (repeat).

The SQ3R method has advantages over other methods, is the level of understanding that readers gain can be more profound because students are reading actively. Then the reading process that students do more effectively and efficiently. In addition to the SQ3R method can affect students' reading comprehension, there is a cooperative method that can be used that is COOPERATIVE INTEGRATED READING COMPOSITION (CIRC) method, is one kind of cooperative method specially used by a teacher to assist students in understanding a reading. The main objective of the CIRC is to use cooperative teams to help students improve their comprehensible reading abilities (Slavin, 2008: 203).

The CIRC method consists of three essential elements: basic related activities, direct reading comprehension lessons, and integrated writing (Slavin, 2008: 204). In the CIRC method, students work together in heterogeneous groups to search for mian idea, main thoughts, character figures and matters relating to text readings. So this method is considered appropriate to be used to improve reading comprehension skills in fourth grade students of Muhammadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan. [1] Many students have not been able to understand the context of their reading, [2] Ability to read students' understanding is not maximized, [3] Teachers have not tried to encourage students to read using Cooperative Intergroup Reading and Composition (CIRC) and Survey Question Read Review and Recite (SQ3R) methods to eliminate saturation in students in reading comprehension learning. ICMEd 


#### References citations


## Literature Review

The result that done by Gede Yogi Karmawan, Ni Nyoman Garminah, & I Kadek Suartama,this study showed that the application of SQ3R learning method can increase the activeness and ability for students' reading in SDN 1 kampung Baru, IV class of second semester academic year 2015/2016. It can be seen from the incresing activeness and ability of students in reading from cycle 1 until cycle 11. In cycle 1 percentage of students' activeness in learning was about 67,30% which is categorized as sufficient and the precentage of of students' activeness in learning in cycle 2 was about 81,04% which is categorized as good. Meanwhile the percentage of students' reading ability in cycle 1 was about 66,09% which is catagorized as sufficient and the percentage of students'reading ability in cycle 11 was about 80% which is catagorized as good. Based on previous studies, this study can be used as reference for this research to examine the effect of CIRC, SQ3R and convention methods on students' skills that differ in reading comprehension. This research was conducted on the fourth grade students of SD Muhammadiyah Gunungpring, this is done because there is no research about the use of CIRC and SQ3R methods on reading comprehension skills that are done in the elementary school.


### Reading comprehension

From a cognitive or psycholinguistic perspective, understanding is seen as a process of constructing meaning in transacting with the text (Smith 2004: 66). This is in line with the statement from Richard & Theodore (1999: 91) learning to read is to use the environment for language development so as to recapture a more comfortable and enjoyable student experience and accompany it during language learning, Reading is an active activity undertaken by students. In addition, the same thing reading is also improving other language skills such as writing, because by reading students have the skills to organize words or sentence well, Succesfull comprhenders construct models that incorpotate elaborated text based information with their available proof knowledge (Woolley, Gary, 2010: 108) This proves that the satisfaction of one's students' reading ability must be possessed through the explanation of the objectives, it can be concluded that the reader will gain the ability to comprehend a text reading through discriminating aspect to be gained is the ability to comprehend reading and writing, ideas reading, able to understand the intent or message reading as well as able to read at a glance related reading reading text well. 


### Survey, question, review, read, recite (SQ3R)

Reading a texts then it takes a connection to help students in reading comprehension, "..the advantage of building a connection is the students will can be thought of what he has read (Randi stone 2009: 44) therefore to build the conncetiom, one of them is SQ3R.

The SQ3R method is a method of reading activity involving colonizing, asking, reading, recounting and reviewing "Orlando 2015: 65". This method is one of the recommended ways to use in understanding. The five stages of SQ3R consist of general understanding (survey); ask questions (question); read (read); recount the key points of information (recite) and present, conclusion (review). SQ3R helps students who have poor reading skills and will help students to enhance students' reading skills, this is in line with the statement "SQ3R is an effective reading strategy; it remains the most popular method among teachers "SQ3R provides useful examples for poor readers to improve, and gives meaning and purpose to reading" (Al-Ghazo, 2015: 95). Seeing the superior method of SQ3R is in every step students are able to train themselves to think more quickly and precisely so that students mamaou menappatkan information efficiently in addition to the SQ3R method can improve students' reading comprehension skills on various teaching materials.


### Cooperative intergerated reading composition (CIRC)

Reading comprehension is a complex process, in which the process involves the student's own experience associated with reading text. A reading method that can be used effectively in the learning process, which is a universal feature of a reading teaching is the use of a reading group consisting of students, the Cooperative Intergrated Reading and Composition (CIRC) method in accordance with the opinion of the CIRC method is a medium to help students solve common problems, especially reading.

This reading consists of many things, such as difficulties in recognizing the main idea, supporting ideas, supporting details, vocabulary meanings, explicit and implicit ideas, The main purpose of the CIRC merode is to use teams cooperatively to help students learn the ability to understand a widely applicable reading. If interpreted then CIRC method is a method of reading comprehension that is done with the cooperation of individual in each group, which is to help the students more know and understand what ICMEd they read. Learning CIRC has special features in the process, the following are presented several characteristics of CIRC, namely: (1) the existence of a group formation; (2) there is the responsibility of each individual group; (3) the absence of a specific task; (4) each member in one group has equal opportunity to be able; (5) required a dirid adaptation of each member of the group. Implementation of the CIRC method is expected to assist students in improving reading comprehension skills, which can be done in various ways including summarizing, explaining, answering questions and predicting abilities. After students complete the problems faced then the students must be able to convey what has been foreseen. The teacher in this CIRC learning method acts as a facilitator


## Material & Methodology


### Data

This analysis aims to answer the problems that exist in the research, the analysis used is descriptive and inferential analysis. Statistic descriptive is used to describe the results of research in terms of mean (averagee) reading comprehension skills from data obtained.

Before entering the hypothesis test should be tested assumption of prerequisite that is: test of normality and homogeneity, In this study the normality test used is Kolmogorov -Smirnov with the help of SPSS 20 Software.The variance homogeneity test was conducted to find out whether the samples in the study came from the same variance or not. In this case the test is done with software SPPS 24' With the significance level of research of 5% (0.05). Hypothesis test in this research use independent t test and anava test using spss 24 software. This test is done to test whether or not there is improvement of reading skill of students before and after being given treatment, that is learning using CIRC and SQ3R method, then anova test is done because there are two independent variables to test its influence.


### Method

This research is a quantitative experimental research that is quasi experiment (quasi experiment). In this study there are three classes studied, two classes of experimental groups and one control class. With the subject of this research is the fourth grader students of SD Muhammadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan and the object of this research is reading comprehension skills. This study design uses Nonequivalent Control Group pretest-posttest Design with two experimental groups and a control group. The first ICMEd experimental group used the SQ3R method and the second experimental group using the CIRC method. The control group used the conventional method. 


## Results and Discussion


### Result

Statistic description is used to describe the results of research in the form of mean (mean), the highest score and the lowest score.   variables that will be tested its influence. 


## ICMEd


### Discussion

The result of independent analysis of t test pretest and postes reading skill of students in class using CIRC learning model. 


## Conclusion

A conclusion should give a summary of:

1. There is a significant difference between SQ3R method and conventional method to reading comprehension skill of fourth grade of Muhammmadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan elementary school.

2. There is a significant difference of influence between CIRC and conventional method on reading comprehension skill of fourth grade of Muhammmadiyah

Gunungpring Muntilan elementary school.

3. There are significant differences in the effect of CIRC and SQ3R codes on comprehension reading skills. So to know the most influential class is seen from the result of posttest score in each class, where the mean postes score of reading comprehension of the students of SQ3R group is bigger than the CIRC group, while the CIRC group is bigger than the control group.

## ICMEd



etc. (Wahyuniengsih 2017: 236). The cooperative model has one specific method for improving understanding in reading which is the Cooperative Integrated Reading and Composition (CIRC) model. CIRC is a cooperative teaching of both reading and writing.

## Table 1 :
1Nonequivalent Control Group pretest-postest Design.Class 
Pretest 
Treatment 
Postest 

G1 
O1 
X1 
O2 

G2 
O3 
X2 
O4 

G3 
O5 
-
O6 

Where: 

G1: experimental group I 

G2: Experiment Group II 

G3: control group 

X1: by treatment of SQ3R approach 

X2: with treatment of CIRC approach 

-: with the treatment of conventional approach 

O1: pretest for experimental group I 

O2: posttest for experiment group I 

O3: pretest for experimental group II 

O4: posttest for experiment group II 

O5: pret for control group 

O6: posttest for the control group 

The population in this research is all of fourth grade students in Muhammadiyah 

Gunungpring elemnatary school, which amount to 121 students, then the sample of this 

research is taken by simple random sampling technique. The variables in this study 

are SQ3R, CIRC as the independent variable and the nuance of reading the students' 

understanding as the dependent variable. Research technique used is using instrument 

is a test. The analysis used two methods: descriptive analysis and inferential analysis. the 

results of descriptive analysis using average nilia and postes reading comprehension 

skills, whereas inferesnial analysis is t indpenencent test and annvaone way test. 



## Table 2
2Information 
Pretest 
Postest 

Control 
SQ3R 
CIRC 
Control 
SQ3R 
CIRC 

Mean 
56,32 
57,14 
56,98 
65,67 
75,55 
73,96 

Lowest score 
47,62 
47,62 
47,62 
47,62 
61,9 
57,14 

Highest score 
66,67 
66,67 
66,9 
66,67 
95,24 
95,24 

Student number 
30 
31 
30 
30 
30 
28 

It is known that the average value of pretest in the control group as for the group of 

experiment are CIRC and SQ3R class is not significant, so it can be said that reading 

skill of student's student is same. Meanwhile, the mean value of control group, CIRC 

and SQ3R have significant differences, especially for the control class. This is because 

there are different treatments given to the experimental group using CIRC, and the 

SQ3R experimental group. While the treatment control group given according to what 

is taught by the teacher, namely conventional methods. 

Normality test is used to determine whether the data of each variable is normally 

distributed or not. Normality test is done by using SPSS program 24 for windows 

kolmogrov smirov method. Testing criteria is if the significance value> 0,05 then Ho 

accepted and vice versa if the significance value <0.05 then Ho rejected. The table will 

present a summary of Normality test results in the experimental group and the control 

group. 



## Table 3 :
3Normality test.No 
Class 
Information 
Significance 
Keputusan 

1 
Control 
Pretest 
0,119 
Normal 

Postest 
0,200 
Normal 

2 
Eksperimen SQ3R 
Pretest 
0,100 
Normal 

Postest 
0,200 
Normal 

3 
Eksperimen CIRC 
Pretest 
0,121 
Normal 

Postest 
0,200 
Normal 

The table shows that the index obtained from normality test of the pretest control 

data is 0.95 > 0.05 (α: 5%). Normality test of the pretest SQ3R data is 0.100 > 0.05 (α: 

5%). Normality test of the pretest CIRC data is 0.121 > 0.05 (α: 5%). Normality test of the 

posttest control data is 0.119 > 0.05 (α: 5%). Normality test of the posttest SQ3R data is 

0.200 > 0.05 (α: 5%). While the test for normality of the posttest CIRC data is 0.200 > 

0.05 (α: 5%). The whole calculation produces have index (P) > 0.05 (α: 5%), it can be 

stated that the data used in this study were normally distributed. 


## Table 5 :
5Independent t test.Based on the results of the independent t-test is shows the significant value of 0.002, while for SQ3R class for significance value 0.00. It is means the significance value <0,05 thus it can be concluded that there is a significant influence of SQ3R and CIRC method on reading skill. Test anava done because in this research there are two independentNo 
Group 
Sig 

1 
CIRC 
0,02 

2 
SQ3R 
0,00 



## Table 6 :
6ANOVA TEST. Based on the calculation of statistical test annava that significant result is 0.001. Its means there is a significant increase in students' reading comprehension skills using the CIRC and SQ3R methods on reading skills of grade 4 of Muhammadiyah Gunungpring Muntilan elementary school.Sum of 
Squares 

Df 
Mean 
Square 

F 
Sig. 

Between Groups 
63.845 
2 
31.922 
7.764 
.001 

Within Groups 
337.167 
82 
4.112 

Total 
401.012 
84 




Significant levels of test results were obtained 0.000 or <0.05. Thus the results of t-test show CIRC model significantly influence the students' reading comprehension skills. This is in line with the observations made by Mahdu Gupta and Jyoti Ahuja (2014) which states that cooperative learning type CIRC produces better scores in reading stories than those with control groups using conventional learning.Based on the results of independent t-test test showed that significant value in the SQ3Rclass of 0.000. This means the significance value <0.05. Thus it can be concluded that there is a significant influence SQ3R method of reading skills understanding. This is supported by the results of the mean score of the experimental group postes (SQ3R) and the control group. In the control class group the average score of postes was 65.67 while in the experimental class SQ3R got the average postes value of 75.55.The next hypothesis is to find out the difference of influence of CIRC, SQ3R, and conventional method of reading comprehension skill by using anova test, which based on the result of annova test shows that significant is 0.001 or <0,05. Based on the calculation of statistical test annova that significant of 0.001, it's means that there is a significant increase in students' reading comprehension using the CIRC and SQ3R methods, where the CIRC postes value is 73.96 while the postes value of the SQ3R class is 75.55. Where the two classes have higher score than the value of post-class test control, which is 65.67. Thus can be concluded that there is a significant effect of reading comprehension skills of students by using SQ3R, and CIRC.ICMEd 



Penerapan Metode Pembelajaran Metode SQ3R untuk Meningkatkan Keaktifan dan Kerampilan Membaca Siswa Kelas IV. Gede, Garminah, Suartama, Gede,Garminah, & Suartama., "Penerapan Metode Pembelajaran Metode SQ3R untuk Meningkatkan Keaktifan dan Kerampilan Membaca Siswa Kelas IV

. S D Icmed, Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha. 41ICMEd SD".Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha. Vol. 4 No 1.(2016)

The Effect of cooperative intergrated readign and composition technique on students' reading descriptive text achivement. Zainnudin, Canadian Center of Scince. 8Zainnudin., "The Effect of cooperative intergrated readign and composition technique on students' reading descriptive text achivement", Canadian Center of Scince, Vol 8, 11-21 (2015).

Component of Chinese Reading Comprehension Placement test for Singapore primary school students. T Chung, In thr proceedings of International Journal of Social science and Humanity. 26Chung, T, "Component of Chinese Reading Comprehension Placement test for Singapore primary school students," In thr proceedings of International Journal of Social science and Humanity,vol. 2 no.6 (2012)

The Effect of SQ3R and Semantic Mapping Strategies on Reading Comprehension Learning among Jordanian University Students. A Al-Ghazo, In the procedings of International Journal of English and Education. 492Al-Ghazo, A, "The Effect of SQ3R and Semantic Mapping Strategies on Reading Comprehension Learning among Jordanian University Students," In the procedings of International Journal of English and Education.Vol 4,p.92.(2015)

Effective teaching for improving reading comprehension in K-3 students. Marsha L Roit Ed, Houghton Mifllin CompanyBostonMarsha L. Roit Ed., "Effective teaching for improving reading comprehension in K-3 students. Boston: Houghton Mifllin Company,2015.

Teori Pengkajian Fiksi. Burhan Nurgiyantoro, Gadjah Mada University PressNurgiyantoro, Burhan., "Teori Pengkajian Fiksi,".Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press, 2010. 1983.

Training Student to use a modified version of SQ3R. V P Orlando, An instrcutional strategy. Coloardo: Routledge. Orlando, V. P., "Training Student to use a modified version of SQ3R" An instrcutional strategy. Coloardo: Routledge,2010.

Psikologi Pendidikan: Teori dan Praktik. R E Slavin, Jakarta: pt Indeks. Slavin, R. E." Psikologi Pendidikan: Teori dan Praktik". Jakarta: pt Indeks,2008

Membaca sebagai suatu ketrampilan berbahasa. H G Tarigan, AngkasaBandungTarigan,H. G." Membaca sebagai suatu ketrampilan berbahasa". Bandung: Angkasa,2008.

Language art: content and teaching strategies 3rd edidtion. G E Tompkins, K Hoskisson, Englewood,NJ:A Simo n & Schuster CompanyTompkins,G.E. & Hoskisson,K. "Language art: content and teaching strategies 3rd edidtion."Englewood,NJ:A Simo n & Schuster Company.1995

Strategies of dis-course comprehension. T A Van Dijk, W Kintsch, DOI10.18502/kss.v3i17.4682Page556Academic PressNewYorkVan Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W.,Strategies of dis-course comprehension.NewYork: Academic Press, DOI 10.18502/kss.v3i17.4682 Page 556