# Analysis of Microsurgical Outcomes in Resident-led Reconstruction: A Review of 163 Consecutive Cases

CorpusID: 203383418
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/507af537982bbf32e732cabf56485a2fe4311763](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/507af537982bbf32e732cabf56485a2fe4311763)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Analysis of Microsurgical Outcomes in Resident-led Reconstruction: A Review of 163 Consecutive Cases


MDMin-Jeong Cho 
BAJustin Davis 
MDAndrew Zhang 

MedStar Georgetown
University of Texas South-western Medical Center
DallasTX


Univer-sity Hospital
WashingtonDC

Analysis of Microsurgical Outcomes in Resident-led Reconstruction: A Review of 163 Consecutive Cases
10.1093/neuros/nyy303.11780 PRS Global Open • 2019 the loss of projection or topography seen with traditional ap-proaches to nipple reconstruction.
PURPOSE:With the advances in microsurgery, the published success rate of microsurgical reconstruction by experienced microsurgeon is >95%. However, it is unknown whether the training residents can produce similar results. At our county hospital, although under direct supervision, residents perform and lead all aspects of microsurgical reconstruction, from raising the flap to performing microanastomoses, with only as needed faculty assistance. In this study, we retrospectively reviewed the outcomes of 163 consecutive microsurgical cases to determine the efficacy and safety of resident-led reconstructions at the county hospital.METHODS:We performed a retrospective review of patients who underwent microsurgical reconstruction at the county hospital from 2016 to 2018. Demographic, surgical procedure, flap data, resident levels, and complication data were collected.

## RESULTS:

Of the 163 flaps performed, the most commonly performed reconstruction was breast (63.8%), followed by lower extremity (11.7%), upper extremity (6.7%), head and neck (6.1%), and genital (1.2%). The median procedure time was 540 minutes (240-990), and anastomoses time for each flap was 57 minutes . The venous anastomoses were performed by PGY3 (1.6%), PGY4 (37.1%), PGY5 (3.2%), and PGY6 (58%), whereas the arterial anastomoses were performed by PGY4 (18%), PGY5 (3.3%), and PGY6 (78.7%). The average number of anastomosis attempts was 1.3 with a range of 1-3. The total flap success rate was 96.3% with a take back rate of 4.3%.


## CONCLUSION:

In conclusion, our analysis shows that resident-led reconstruction can achieve similar microsurgical success as the published rates. We believe that resident-led microsurgical reconstruction can be safely performed with as needed faculty assistance in high-risk and complicated cases while allowing resident education and maturation of technical and decisionmaking skills. OBJECTIVES: Stump neuromas are a debilitating consequence of amputation. Although nerve surgery including targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR) may offer lasting improvement, 1 many now advocate for TMR at the time of index amputation to avoid symptomatic neuroma formation. It is as of yet unknown which nerves are responsible for the majority of painful lower extremity neuromas and how TMR outcomes compare to other surgical techniques for neuroma management.


## Symptomatic Neuromas in Lower


## METHODS AND MATERIALS:

A retrospective chart review was performed for 32 lower extremity amputees (33 total limbs) who underwent surgery for symptomatic neuromas. Patients were stratified by amputation level and surgical technique for neuroma management. Pre-and postoperative Visual Analog Scale pain scores and phantom limb pain (PLP) were also gathered. Outcomes of interest included which nerves were involved in neuroma formation and changes in pain. The relative frequency of each specific nerve involvement in painful neuroma formation was calculated as were relative changes in pain.


## RESULTS:

Thirty-three limbs underwent surgery for painful neuromas. A total of 78 painful neuromas were identified with 67% of patients presenting with multiple neuromas at their initial surgery. In patients with confirmed neuromas in their AKA stump, 80% had a single neuroma of the sciatic nerve. Among below knee amputation (BKA) limbs, the superficial peroneal nerve was affected in 76%, medial or lateral sural in 59%, saphenous in 48%, and deep peroneal in 41%. Symptomatic neuroma formation of the tibial nerve was particularly rare, affecting only 1 BKA patient. Overall, 83% of all neuromas were managed by neuroma excision with implantation into muscle and 10% by excision with TMR. Traction neurectomy, centro-central coaptation, nerve capping, and excision with allograft repair combined for the remaining 7%. Average percent improvement in pain at 30-day follow-up was 67% for the TMR cohort versus 45% for others. PLP improved or resolved in 75% of TMR patients (versus 43% for other techniques) and no TMR patients experienced worsened PLP (versus 43% of other techniques).


## PSTM 2019 Abstract Supplement


## Reconstructive Abstracts

CONCLUSIONS: In this retrospective study, the majority of patients undergoing surgery for lower extremity neuroma pain had multiple painful neuromas. The majority of AKA patients presented with sciatic neuromas. In BKA patients, neuromas were most often seen in the superficial peroneal, saphenous, deep peroneal, and sural nerves, whereas symptomatic tibial neuromas were quite rare. Additionally, patients undergoing neuroma excision with TMR nerve transfer saw larger improvements at 1-month postoperative and final follow-up compared to those treated by other techniques. Overall, these findings support the case for using TMR to treat symptomatic amputation stump neuromas and prophylactically address nerves most commonly associated with painful neuromas at the time of primary amputation. 


## REFERENCES


## When the Mesh Goes Away: An Assessment of Clinical Outcomes and Quality of Life Following Poly-4-Hydroxybutyrate Mesh Reinforcement for Complex Ventral Hernia Repair


## Presenter: Charles A. Messa, IV, BS


## Co-Authors: Geoffrey Kozak, MD; Robyn B. Broach, PhD; John P. Fischer, MD, MPH


## Affiliation: University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA


## INTRODUCTION:

Although mesh reinforcement has improved clinical outcomes in ventral hernia repair (VHR), notable disadvantages have arisen with both synthetic and biologic meshes such as increased infection rates and increased cost, respectively, with variable recurrence rates. Long-term resorbable mesh presents an encouraging option for complex VHR, designed to leverage the benefits and improve the deficiencies of synthetic and biologic mesh. This study aims to assess the clinical outcomes and quality of life (QoL) of patients undergoing poly-4-hydroxybutyrate (P4HB) mesh reinforcement for complex VHR.


## METHODS:

A retrospective review was conducted of all consecutive VHR with P4HB mesh reinforcement from October 2015 to January 2018 by a single surgeon. Patient demographics, operative outcomes, and QoL were evaluated. Pre and postoperative QoL was assessed using the HerQLes questionnaire. Descriptive statistics and linear regression analyses were performed.


## RESULTS:

Seventy patients (n = 70) undergoing VHR with P4HB mesh were included. Average age and body mass index were 59.4 years (23.2-81.4) and 33 kg/m 2 , respectively. High-risk comorbidities included diabetes mellitus (23%), obesity (59%), hypertension (59%), and history of smoking (50%). Ninety-five percent of patients underwent >1 previous abdominal surgery, in which 36% (n = 25) presented with a recurrent hernia. Average defect size was 323 cm 2 (25-972 cm 2 ), where cases were primarily clean (64%) or clean-contaminated (26%), and modified Ventral Hernia Working Group class II (n = 35; 50%) or III (n = 25; 36%). P4HB was primarily placed in the retromuscular plane (80%), followed by an onlay (20%) and fixated with either suture (n = 51; 73%) or fibrin glue (n = 19; 27%). Over a mean follow-up of 24 months (range, 12.2-41 months), the hernia recurrence rate was 4% (n = 4). Hernia recurrence occurred an average of 285 days (range, 209-368 days) post-P4HB repair. Average length of stay was 5 days (0-38). Postoperative complications consisted of superficial delayed wound healing (n = 12; 19%), seroma (n = 6; 9%), and cellulitis (n = 4; 6%). Of the 22 surgical site occurrences, only 5 (7%) required surgical intervention. Multivariate analysis identified a significant trend for surgical site occurrences in nonclean cases (P = 0.023). There were no instances of mesh infection or explantation. Comparisons in pre-and postoperative QoL (n = 59; 84%) identified a significant improvement in overall QoL (P = 0.001) and at each follow-up window (P < 0.005). No significant differences were identified in postoperative QoL, regardless of complication or hernia recurrence.

CONCLUSIONS: P4HB reinforcement for complex VHR is associated with favorable long-term clinical outcomes, acceptable complication rates, including hernia recurrence, and a significant improvement in QoL. This study further supports the benefits of biosynthetic mesh to serve as a viable construct for VHR in a complex patient population.


Extremity Amputees: Implications for Preemptive-targeted Muscle ReinnervationPresenter: Manas Nigam, MD 

Co-Authors: Alex Webb, BS; Patrick 
Harbour, MD; Chris Devulapalli, MD; 
Grant Kleiber, MD 

Affiliation: MedStar Georgetown Univer-
sity Hospital, Washington, DC