# Immunogenicity of Biosimilars for Rheumatic Diseases, Plaque Psoriasis, and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Review from Clinical Trials and Regulatory Documents

CorpusID: 207937800
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b757f8dda959ef7c0898fcff6431dfae8964ccee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b757f8dda959ef7c0898fcff6431dfae8964ccee)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Immunogenicity of Biosimilars for Rheumatic Diseases, Plaque Psoriasis, and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Review from Clinical Trials and Regulatory Documents
BioDrugs, 2019

Vibeke Strand 
Electronic Supplementary Material


Joao Gonçalves 
Electronic Supplementary Material


Timothy P Hickling 
Electronic Supplementary Material


Heather E Jones 
Electronic Supplementary Material


Lisa Marshall 
Electronic Supplementary Material


John D Isaacs 
Electronic Supplementary Material


Immunogenicity of Biosimilars for Rheumatic Diseases, Plaque Psoriasis, and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Review from Clinical Trials and Regulatory Documents
BioDrugs, 2019


Bridging ECL assay (screening, followed by confirmatory assay), including acid dissociation steps (acid dissociation inferred based on EGALITY trial [56])

Competitive ligand-binding assay n/a n/a LBEC0101

LG Chem

LG-ECCL003 (NCT01725620) [27] Affinity capture elution assay, with acid dissociation step n/a Before the first dose and at 36 [37] n/a n/a n/a n/a LBEC0101

LG Chem

LG-ECCL002 (NCT02357069) [38] ECL, using biotinylated ETN-RP and SULFO-TAG labelled ETN-RP  6.6% (9/136) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 

## Table 1 .
1Characteristics of ADAb and nAb assaysBiosimilar / 
Manufacturer 

Study 
ADAb Assay 
nAb Assay 
Immunogenicity 
blood sample 
collection 

Differentiation between 
IgG subtypes? 

Reference product: Adalimumab 
Healthy volunteers 
Cyltezo 
(BI 695501) 

Boehringer 
Ingelheim 

VOLTAIRE-PK 
(NCT02045979) 
[19] 

Homogeneous ECL bridging 
assay (single assay, 3-tiered 
approach) with acid 
dissociation step 

Inhibition of an in vitro 
functional activity in a cell-
based format (TNFα-dependent 
ADCC) 

Baseline (predose) and 
Days 1-9, 14, 21, 28, 
35, 44, 56, and 71 

n/a 

Imraldi 
(SB5) 

Samsung Bioepis 

SB5-G11-NHV 
(NCT02144714) 
[20] 

ECL bridging assay (biotin 
and ruthenium), two-tiered 
approach 

Competitive ligand-binding 
assay 

Days 1 (predose), 15 
(Week 2), and 71 
(Week 10) 

n/a 

Solymbic 
(ABP 501, 
adalimumab-atto) 

Amgen 

EudraCT 2012-
000785-37 [21] 

ECL bridging assay that 
detects all antibody classes 
[93] 

A cell-based assay using TNFα-
induced phosphorylation of 
NFκB 

Days 1 (predose), 16, 
29, and 63 (Weeks 2, 
4, and 9) 

No 

Both ADAb and nAb 
assays were expected to 
detect all antibody classes 
that inhibit biologic 
activity of the drug, 
including monovalent 
IgG4 
Hulio (FKB327) 

Fujifilm Kyowa 
Kirin Biologics, 
Mylan 

FKB327-001, 
EudraCT 2012-
005140-23 [22, 33] 

ECL assay 
(insufficient drug tolerance 
limit; many inconclusive 
samples) 

ECL competitive assay 
(insufficient drug tolerance limit; 
many inconclusive samples) 

Baseline and Days 15 
(Week 2), 29 (Week 
4), and 64 (Week 9) 

n/a 

Hyrimoz 
(GP2017, 
adalimumab-adaz) 

Hexal/Sandoz 

GP17-101 
(EudraCT 2012-
004205-27), GP17-
104 (EudraCT 
2015-000579-28) 
[23] 

multi-tiered ECL bridging 
assay 

Competitive ligand-binding 
assay 

Days 1-10, 16, 23, 30, 
44, 58, and 72 

n/a 



## Table 2 .
2Incidence of ADAb and nAb and the Effects of ADAb Formation on PK, PD, Efficacy, and SafetyWeek 12: 16.1% (10/62)Biosimilar / 

Manufacturer 

Participants cDMAR 
D or 
Previous 
Therapy 

Trial Registration 
and Design 

Patients with ADAbs 
(% of total patients per 
treatment group, [n1/N]x100) 

Patients with nAbs 
(% of ADAb-positive patients 
per treatment group, 
[n2/n1]x100) 

PK by ADAb 
Status 

Effect of 
ADAbs on PD, 
efficacy, and 
safety 
parameters 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 

Reference product: Adalimumab 
Healthy 
volunteers 
Cyltezo 
(BI 695501) 

Boehriner 
Ingelheim 

Healthy 
volunteers 

n/a 
VOLTAIRE-PK 
(NCT02045979) 
[19] 
N=327 

Single-dose, 
randomized (1:1:1) 
trial of BI 695501, 
US-ADL, and EU-
ADL with 10-week 
follow-up 

Baseline 
ADA-EU: 
3.7% (4/108) 

ADA-US: 
2.8% (3/108) 

Week 4 
ADA-EU: 
37.4% 
(40/107) 

ADA-US: 
56.1% 
(60/107) 

Week 10 
ADA-EU: 
84.3% 
(91/108) 

ADA-US: 
88.0% 
(95/108) 

denominator 
N calculated 

Baseline 
3.7% (4/108) 

Week 4 
46.7% (50/107) 

Week 10 
92.5% (99/107) 

denominator N 
calculated based 
on n and % 
values 

Baseline 
ADA-EU: 
50.0% (2/4) 

ADA-US: 
33.3% (1/3) 

Week 4 
ADA-EU: 
22.5% (9/40) 

ADA-US: 
31.7% (19/60) 

Week 10 
ADA-EU: 
69.2% (63/91) 

ADA-US: 
72.6% (69/95) 

Baseline 
75.0% (3/4) 

Week 4 
24.0% (12/50) 

Week 10 
64.6% (64/99) 

A decrease in 
AUC0-inf, pred 
was observed 
for patients 
with high titer 
values for 
ADAbs 

n/a 
(healthy 
volunteers) 




Weeks 1-24 (1 st course): 11.1% (2/18) Patients with ADAbs (% of total patients per treatment group, [n1/N]x100) Patients with nAbs (% of ADAb-positive patients per treatment group, [n2/n1]x100) Patients with ADAbs (% of total patients per treatment group, [n1/N]x100) Patients with nAbs (% of ADAb-positive patients per treatment group, [n2/n1]x100) Patients with ADAbs (% of total patients per treatment group, [n1/N]x100) Patients with nAbs (% of ADAb-positive patients per treatment group, [n2/n1]x100) Patients with ADAbs (% of total patients per treatment group, [n1/N]x100) Patients with nAbs (% of ADAb-positive patients per treatment group, [n2/n1]x100) Drug tolerance level of the ADA assay was close to the mean trough concentrations at Weeks 4 and 8. Therefore, an observed difference in between-group concentrations at Weeks 4 and 8 may have caused a bias in the ADAb results. b ADAb/Nab prevalence higher than that of historic controls probably due to a higher-sensitivity assays. c ADAb Occurrence in patients who were ADA-negative during weeks 1-54. d For patients with CD, there was a significant difference in the occurrence of ADAbs at Baseline (P<0.001), Week 14 (P<0.001), Week 30 (P=0.03), and Week 54 (P=0.03) e For patients with UC, there was a significant difference in the occurrence of ADAbs at Baseline (P<0.001)Reference product: Rituximab 
Rheumatic 
diseases 
Truxima 
(CT-P10) 

Celltrion 

RA, poor 
response to 
TNFi 

MTX 
CT-P10 1.1 
(NCT01534884) 
[49, 82] 
N=154 

Randomized (2:1) 
double-blind 
treatment with CT-
P10 or RTX 
(course 1: i.v. 
infusions at weeks 
0 and 2); based on 

Weeks 1-24 
(1 st course): 
17.6% (9/51) 

Weeks 25-48 
(2 nd course): 
21.7% (5/23) 

Weeks 1-24 
(1 st course): 
17.6% (18/102) 

Weeks 25-48 
(2 nd course): 
20.0% (12/60) 

Weeks 1-24 
(1 st course): 
11.1% (1/9) 

Weeks 25-48 
(2 nd course): 
20.0% (1/5) 

Weeks 25-48 
(2 nd course): 
8.3% (1/12) 

ADAb-
positive 
patients had a 
20-30% lower 
AUC0-last and 
12-21% lower 
Cmax (mg/L) 
than ADAb-
negative 
patients 

ADAb-positive 
vs ADAb-
negative: 

Week 24 
ACR20 
RTX: 62.5% vs 
75.0% 
CT-P10: 61.1% 
vs 67.5% 

Biosimilar / 

Manufacturer 

Participants cDMAR 
D or 
Previous 
Therapy 

Trial Registration 
and Design 

PK by ADAb 
Status 

Effect of 
ADAbs on PD, 
efficacy, and 
safety 
parameters 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 

disease activity, 
patients could 
receive a course 2, 
between weeks 24 
and 48, with a max. 
follow-up until 
Week 72 
Truxima 
(CT-P10) 

Celltrion 

RA, poor 
response to 
TNFi 

MTX 
Extension study 
CT-P10 1.3 
(NCT01873443) 
[48] 
N=87 

Patients from trial 
CT-P10 1.1 who 
had responded to 
treatment, but 
whose disease 
activity or B 
cell/IgM levels 
then worsened 
received 1 or 2 
courses of CT-P10, 
with a follow-up of 
up to 56 weeks; 
ADAbs and nAbs 
were assessed at 
Week 24 (post-
course 1 only) 

n/a 
Week 24: 
CT-P10/ 
CT-P10 
13.2% (5/38) 

RTX/ 
CT-P10 
15.0% (3/20) 

n/a 
Week 24: 
CT-P10/ 
CT-P10 
20.0% (1/5) 

RTX/ 
CT-P10 
0 

n/a 
n/a 

Biosimilar / 

Manufacturer 

Participants cDMAR 
D or 
Previous 
Therapy 

Trial Registration 
and Design 

PK by ADAb 
Status 

Effect of 
ADAbs on PD, 
efficacy, and 
safety 
parameters 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 

Truxima 
(CT-P10) 

Celltrion 

RA, poor 
response to 
TNFi 

MTX 
CT-P10 3.2 
(NCT02149121) 
[47, 68] 
N=372 

Part 1 -PK 
evaluation 
(n=189): 
randomized (1:1:1) 
to US-RTX, EU-
RTX, and CT-P10) 
Part 2 -efficacy, 
safety, PD, 
immunogenicity 
(n=372): 183 
newly randomized 
patients (1:1 to CT-
P10 and US-RTX) 
plus all patients 
from Part 1 for 24 
weeks 

Extension period 
(n=295): patients 
initially 
randomized to 
receive CT-P10 
continued with 
their treatment; 
those randomized 
to EU-RTX were 
switched to CT-
P10 and those 
PK by ADAb 
Status 

Effect of 
ADAbs on PD, 
efficacy, and 
safety 
parameters 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 

RTX or switch to 
GP2013 (follow-up 
24 weeks) 
PF-05280586 

Pfizer 

RA, poor 
response to 
TNFi 

MTX 
REFLECTIONS 
B328-01 
(NCT01526057) 
[52] 
N=220 

Randomized 
(1:1:1) for DB 
treatment with 
RTX-EU, RTX-
US, and PF-
05280586 at days 1 
and 15 (follow-up 
24 weeks) 

Week 24: 
RTX-EU: 
13.5% 
(10/74) 

RTX-US: 
12.3% 
(9/73) 

Week 24: 
9.6% 
(7/73) 

Week 24: 
RTX-EU 
0 

RTX-US 
0 

Week 24: 
0 

ADAb-
positive 
patients had 
lower AUC0-∞ 
and higher 
clearance rate 
than ADAb-
negative 
patients 

No 

PF-05280586 

Pfizer 

RA, poor 
response to 
TNFi 

MTX 
REFLECTIONS 
B328-04 
(NCT01643928) 
[53] 
N=185 

Extension of 
REFLECTIONS 
B238-01 

All patients were 
offered 3 courses 
of treatment, each 
course divided into 
2 infusions 2 weeks 

Courses 1-3: 
13.3% 

n/N data are 
not available 

Courses 1-3: 
10.0% 

n/N data are not 
available 

Courses 1-3: 
0 

Courses 1-3: 
0 

ADAb-
positive 
patients had 
slightly lower 
drug 
concentrations, 
but data should 
be interpreted 
with caution 
due to a small 
number of 
patients with 
ADAbs 

n/a 

Biosimilar / 

Manufacturer 

Participants cDMAR 
D or 
Previous 
Therapy 

Trial Registration 
and Design 

PK by ADAb 
Status 

Effect of 
ADAbs on PD, 
efficacy, and 
safety 
parameters 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 
Reference 
product 

Biosimilar 

apart and separated 
from the next 
course by 24 ± 8 
weeks 

Course 1: Patients 
initially 
randomized to PF-
05280586 
remained on that 
treatment; those 
randomized to 
RTX-EU or RTX-
US were re-
randomized (1:1) 
to continue 
treatment or 
receive PF-
05280586 

Courses 2-3: All 
patients who 
continued 
treatment after 
Course 1 received 
PF-05280586 

a 
Baseline:9.5% (20/211)
REFERENCES (greyed out items pertain to manuscript text. but not supplementary tablesREFERENCES (greyed out items pertain to manuscript text, but not supplementary tables)

The role of biosimilars in the treatment of rheumatic diseases. T Dörner, V Strand, G Castaneda-Hernandez, G Ferraccioli, J D Isaacs, T K Kvien, Ann Rheum Dis. 723Dörner T, Strand V, Castaneda-Hernandez G, Ferraccioli G, Isaacs JD, Kvien TK, et al. The role of biosimilars in the treatment of rheumatic diseases. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Mar;72(3):322-8.

The changing landscape of biosimilars in rheumatology. T Dörner, V Strand, P Cornes, J Goncalves, L Gulacsi, J Kay, Ann Rheum Dis. 756Dörner T, Strand V, Cornes P, Goncalves J, Gulacsi L, Kay J, et al. The changing landscape of biosimilars in rheumatology. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Jun;75(6):974-82.

Biologic therapies in rheumatology: lessons learned, future directions. V Strand, R Kimberly, J D Isaacs, Nat Rev Drug Discov. Strand V, Kimberly R, Isaacs JD. Biologic therapies in rheumatology: lessons learned, future directions. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2007

Network meta-analyses of systemic treatments for psoriasis: a critical appraisal. A G Ellis, C Flohr, A M Drucker, Original Articles. Ellis AG, Flohr C, Drucker AM. Network meta-analyses of systemic treatments for psoriasis: a critical appraisal: Original Articles:

Quantitative evaluation of biologic therapy options for psoriasis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Z K Jabbar-Lopez, Zzn Yiu, V Ward, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 1372Br J Dermatol.Jabbar-Lopez ZK, Yiu ZZN, Ward V et al. Quantitative evaluation of biologic therapy options for psoriasis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. J Invest Dermatol 2017; 137:1646-54. Sbidian E, Chaimani A, Garcia-Doval I et al. Systemic pharmacological treatments for chronic plaque psoriasis: a network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 12:CD011535. Br J Dermatol. 2019 Feb;180(2):282-8.

Role of biologics and biosimilars in inflammatory bowel disease: current trends and future perspectives. P Rawla, T Sunkara, J P Raj, J Inflamm Res. 11Rawla P, Sunkara T, Raj JP. Role of biologics and biosimilars in inflammatory bowel disease: current trends and future perspectives. J Inflamm Res. 2018;11:215-26.

American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis. J A Singh, K G Saag, S L Bridges, Jr Akl, E A Bannuru, R R Sullivan, M C , Arthritis Care Res. 681Singh JA, Saag KG, Bridges SL, Jr., Akl EA, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC, et al. 2015 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2016 Jan;68(1):1-25.

EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis with synthetic and biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2016 update. J S Smolen, R Landewe, J Bijlsma, G Burmester, K Chatzidionysiou, M Dougados, Ann Rheum Dis. 766Smolen JS, Landewe R, Bijlsma J, Burmester G, Chatzidionysiou K, Dougados M, et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis with synthetic and biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2016 update. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Jun;76(6):960- 77.

Guideline on similar biological medicinal products containing biotechnology-derived proteins as active substance: non-clinical and clinical issues. Guidelines on Evaluation of Similar Biotherapeutic Products (SBPs). Scientific Considerations in Demonstrating Biosimilarity to a Reference Product. Guidance for Industry. cited; Available fromGuidelines on Evaluation of Similar Biotherapeutic Products (SBPs). 2009 [cited; Available from: http://www.who.int/biologicals/areas/biological_therapeutics/BIOTHERAPEUTICS_FOR_WEB_22APRIL2010.pdf 9. Guideline on similar biological medicinal products containing biotechnology-derived proteins as active substance: non-clinical and clinical issues (EMEA/CHMP/BMWP/42832/2005 Rev1). 2014 [cited; Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2015/01/WC500180219.pdf 10. Scientific Considerations in Demonstrating Biosimilarity to a Reference Product. Guidance for Industry. 2015 [cited; Available from: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM291128.pdf 11.

Immunogenicity of biological therapeutics: from assay to patient. C Krieckaert, T Rispens, G Wolbink, Curr Opin Rheumatol. Krieckaert C, Rispens T, Wolbink G. Immunogenicity of biological therapeutics: from assay to patient. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012

Immunogenicity Testing of Therapeutic Protein Products -Developing and Validating Assays for Anti-Drug Antibody Detection. Guideline on Immunogenicity assessment of therapeutic proteinsGuideline on Immunogenicity assessment of therapeutic proteins (EMEA/CHMP/BMWP/14327/2006 Rev 1). 2017 [cited; Available from: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2017/06/WC500228861.pdf 13. Immunogenicity Testing of Therapeutic Protein Products -Developing and Validating Assays for Anti-Drug Antibody Detection.

Guidance for Industry. cited; Available fromGuidance for Industry. 2019 [cited; Available from: https://www.fda.gov/media/119788/download

Assessment and reporting of the clinical immunogenicity of therapeutic proteins and peptides-harmonized terminology and tactical recommendations. G Shankar, S Arkin, L Cocea, V Devanarayan, S Kirshner, A Kromminga, AAPS J. 164Shankar G, Arkin S, Cocea L, Devanarayan V, Kirshner S, Kromminga A, et al. Assessment and reporting of the clinical immunogenicity of therapeutic proteins and peptides-harmonized terminology and tactical recommendations. AAPS J. 2014 Jul;16(4):658-73.

Assessing the Immunogenicity of Biopharmaceuticals. C Pineda, Castaneda Hernandez, G Jacobs, I A Alvarez, D F Carini, C , BioDrugs. 303Pineda C, Castaneda Hernandez G, Jacobs IA, Alvarez DF, Carini C. Assessing the Immunogenicity of Biopharmaceuticals. BioDrugs. 2016 Jun;30(3):195-206.

Immunoassay methods used in clinical studies for the detection of anti-drug antibodies to adalimumab and infliximab. B Gorovits, D J Baltrukonis, I Bhattacharya, M A Birchler, D Finco, D Sikkema, Clin Exp Immunol. 1923Gorovits B, Baltrukonis DJ, Bhattacharya I, Birchler MA, Finco D, Sikkema D, et al. Immunoassay methods used in clinical studies for the detection of anti-drug antibodies to adalimumab and infliximab. Clin Exp Immunol. 2018 Jun;192(3):348-65.

Evaluating and Reporting the Immunogenicity Impacts for Biological Products--a Clinical Pharmacology Perspective. Y M Wang, J Wang, Y Y Hon, L Zhou, L Fang, H Y Ahn, AAPS J. 182Wang YM, Wang J, Hon YY, Zhou L, Fang L, Ahn HY. Evaluating and Reporting the Immunogenicity Impacts for Biological Products- -a Clinical Pharmacology Perspective. AAPS J. 2016 Mar;18(2):395-403.

B Rup, M Pallardy, D Sikkema, T Albert, M Allez, P Broet, Standardizing terms, definitions and concepts for describing and interpreting unwanted immunogenicity of biopharmaceuticals: recommendations of the Innovative Medicines Initiative ABIRISK consortium. Rup B, Pallardy M, Sikkema D, Albert T, Allez M, Broet P, et al. Standardizing terms, definitions and concepts for describing and interpreting unwanted immunogenicity of biopharmaceuticals: recommendations of the Innovative Medicines Initiative ABIRISK consortium.

. Clin Exp Immunol. 1813Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Sep;181(3):385-400.

safety and immunogenicity of BI 695501, an adalimumab biosimilar candidate, compared with the reference biologic in a randomized, double-blind, active comparator phase I clinical study (VOLTAIRE(R)-PK) in healthy subjects. C Wynne, M Altendorfer, I Sonderegger, L Gheyle, R Ellis-Pegler, S Buschke, Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2512Wynne C, Altendorfer M, Sonderegger I, Gheyle L, Ellis-Pegler R, Buschke S, et al. Bioequivalence, safety and immunogenicity of BI 695501, an adalimumab biosimilar candidate, compared with the reference biologic in a randomized, double-blind, active comparator phase I clinical study (VOLTAIRE(R)-PK) in healthy subjects. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2016 Dec;25(12):1361-70.

A randomized phase I comparative pharmacokinetic study comparing SB5 with reference adalimumab in healthy volunteers. D Shin, Y Lee, H Kim, T Kornicke, R Fuhr, J Clin Pharm Ther. 426Shin D, Lee Y, Kim H, Kornicke T, Fuhr R. A randomized phase I comparative pharmacokinetic study comparing SB5 with reference adalimumab in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2017 Dec;42(6):672-8.

A randomised, single-blind, single-dose, three-arm, parallel-group study in healthy subjects to demonstrate pharmacokinetic equivalence of ABP 501 and adalimumab. P Kaur, V Chow, N Zhang, M Moxness, A Kaliyaperumal, R Markus, Ann Rheum Dis. 763Kaur P, Chow V, Zhang N, Moxness M, Kaliyaperumal A, Markus R. A randomised, single-blind, single-dose, three-arm, parallel-group study in healthy subjects to demonstrate pharmacokinetic equivalence of ABP 501 and adalimumab. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Mar;76(3):526-33.

Pharmacokinetics, safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of FKB327, a new biosimilar medicine of adalimumab/Humira, in healthy subjects. A Puri, A Niewiarowski, Y Arai, H Nomura, M Baird, I Dalrymple, Br J Clin Pharmacol. 837Assessment Report: Hyrimoz (Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/004320/0000). cited; Available fromPuri A, Niewiarowski A, Arai Y, Nomura H, Baird M, Dalrymple I, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of FKB327, a new biosimilar medicine of adalimumab/Humira, in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2017 Jul;83(7):1405-15. 23. Assessment Report: Hyrimoz (Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/004320/0000). 2018 [cited; Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/documents/assessment-report/hyrimoz-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf 24.

Comparison of the pharmacokinetics, safety, and immunogenicity of MSB11022, a biosimilar of adalimumab, with Humira((R)) in healthy subjects. E Hyland, T Mant, P Vlachos, N Attkins, M Ullmann, S Roy, Br J Clin Pharmacol. 824Hyland E, Mant T, Vlachos P, Attkins N, Ullmann M, Roy S, et al. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics, safety, and immunogenicity of MSB11022, a biosimilar of adalimumab, with Humira((R)) in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Oct;82(4):983-93.

A randomized phase l pharmacokinetic study comparing SB4 and etanercept reference product (Enbrel(R)) in healthy subjects. Y J Lee, D Shin, Y Kim, J Kang, A Gauliard, R Fuhr, Assessment Report: Erelzi. 821Br J Clin Pharmacol.. cited; Available fromLee YJ, Shin D, Kim Y, Kang J, Gauliard A, Fuhr R. A randomized phase l pharmacokinetic study comparing SB4 and etanercept reference product (Enbrel(R)) in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Jul;82(1):64-73. 26. Assessment Report: Erelzi (EMA/CHMP/302222/2017). 2017 [cited; Available from:

H Lee, H Chung, S Lee, H Lee, S M Yang, S H Yoon, A Proposed Etanercept Biosimilar: Pharmacokinetics, Immunogenicity, and Tolerability Profiles Compared with a Reference Biologic Product in Healthy Male Subjects. Lee H, Chung H, Lee S, Lee H, Yang SM, Yoon SH, et al. LBEC0101, A Proposed Etanercept Biosimilar: Pharmacokinetics, Immunogenicity, and Tolerability Profiles Compared with a Reference Biologic Product in Healthy Male Subjects. BioDrugs. 2017

Phase I Pharmacokinetic Study Comparing SB2 and Infliximab Reference Product (Remicade((R))) in Healthy Subjects. D Shin, Y Kim, Y S Kim, T Kornicke, R Fuhr, Randomized, BioDrugs. 296Shin D, Kim Y, Kim YS, Kornicke T, Fuhr R. A Randomized, Phase I Pharmacokinetic Study Comparing SB2 and Infliximab Reference Product (Remicade((R))) in Healthy Subjects. BioDrugs. 2015 Dec;29(6):381-8.

Comparison of the pharmacokinetics and safety of three formulations of infliximab (CT-P13, EUapproved reference infliximab and the US-licensed reference infliximab) in healthy subjects: a randomized, double-blind, three-arm, parallelgroup, single-dose, Phase I study. W Park, S J Lee, J Yun, D H Yoo, Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 111SupplPark W, Lee SJ, Yun J, Yoo DH. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics and safety of three formulations of infliximab (CT-P13, EU- approved reference infliximab and the US-licensed reference infliximab) in healthy subjects: a randomized, double-blind, three-arm, parallel- group, single-dose, Phase I study. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2015;11 Suppl 1:S25-31.

Similar efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of adalimumab biosimilar BI 695501 and Humira reference product in patients with moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis: results from the phase III randomised VOLTAIRE-RA equivalence study. S B Cohen, A Alonso-Ruiz, P A Klimiuk, E C Lee, N Peter, I Sonderegger, Ann Rheum Dis. 776Cohen SB, Alonso-Ruiz A, Klimiuk PA, Lee EC, Peter N, Sonderegger I, et al. Similar efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of adalimumab biosimilar BI 695501 and Humira reference product in patients with moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis: results from the phase III randomised VOLTAIRE-RA equivalence study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Jun;77(6):914-21.

Phase III Randomized Study of SB5, an Adalimumab Biosimilar, Versus Reference Adalimumab in Patients With Moderate-to-Severe Rheumatoid Arthritis. M E Weinblatt, A Baranauskaite, J Niebrzydowski, E Dokoupilova, A Zielinska, J Jaworski, Arthritis Rheumatol. 701Weinblatt ME, Baranauskaite A, Niebrzydowski J, Dokoupilova E, Zielinska A, Jaworski J, et al. Phase III Randomized Study of SB5, an Adalimumab Biosimilar, Versus Reference Adalimumab in Patients With Moderate-to-Severe Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018 Jan;70(1):40-8.

Efficacy and safety of the biosimilar ABP 501 compared with adalimumab in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised, double-blind, phase III equivalence study. S Cohen, M C Genovese, E Choy, F Perez-Ruiz, A Matsumoto, K Pavelka, /004429/0000Assessment Report. 7610Ann Rheum Dis.. cited; Available fromCohen S, Genovese MC, Choy E, Perez-Ruiz F, Matsumoto A, Pavelka K, et al. Efficacy and safety of the biosimilar ABP 501 compared with adalimumab in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised, double-blind, phase III equivalence study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Oct;76(10):1679-87. 33. Assessment Report: Hulio (EMEA/H/C/004429/0000). 2018 [cited; Available from:

A comparative clinical study of PF-06410293, a candidate adalimumab biosimilar, and adalimumab reference product (Humira(R)) in the treatment of active rheumatoid arthritis. R M Fleischmann, R Alten, M Pileckyte, K Lobello, S Y Hua, C Cronenberger, Arthritis Res Ther. 201178Fleischmann RM, Alten R, Pileckyte M, Lobello K, Hua SY, Cronenberger C, et al. A comparative clinical study of PF-06410293, a candidate adalimumab biosimilar, and adalimumab reference product (Humira(R)) in the treatment of active rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther. 2018 Aug 15;20(1):178.

A prospective, randomized, double-blind, multicentre, parallelgroup, active controlled study to compare efficacy and safety of biosimilar adalimumab (Exemptia; ZRC-3197) and adalimumab (Humira) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. R H Jani, R Gupta, G Bhatia, G Rathi, Ashok Kumar, P Sharma, R , Int J Rheum Dis. 1911Jani RH, Gupta R, Bhatia G, Rathi G, Ashok Kumar P, Sharma R, et al. A prospective, randomized, double-blind, multicentre, parallel- group, active controlled study to compare efficacy and safety of biosimilar adalimumab (Exemptia; ZRC-3197) and adalimumab (Humira) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Int J Rheum Dis. 2016 Nov;19(11):1157-68.

A phase III randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study comparing SB4 with etanercept reference product in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate therapy. P Emery, J Vencovsky, A Sylwestrzak, P Leszczynski, W Porawska, A Baranauskaite, Emery P, Vencovsky J, Sylwestrzak A, Leszczynski P, Porawska W, Baranauskaite A, et al. A phase III randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study comparing SB4 with etanercept reference product in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate therapy.

. Ann Rheum Dis. 761Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Jan;76(1):51-7.

J O&apos;dell, T Takeuchi, Y Tanaka, I Louw, T Tiabut, M Kai, Double-Blind Study Comparing Chs-0214 with. O'Dell J, Takeuchi T, Tanaka Y, Louw I, Tiabut T, Kai M, et al. OP0226 Randomized, Double-Blind Study Comparing Chs-0214 with

Etanercept in Patients with Active Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) despite Methotrexate (MTX) Therapy. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. 75SupplEtanercept in Patients with Active Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) despite Methotrexate (MTX) Therapy. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. 2016;75(Suppl 2):143.1-.

Phase III, multicentre, double-blind, randomised, parallel-group study to evaluate the similarities between LBEC0101 and etanercept reference product in terms of efficacy and safety in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis inadequately responding to methotrexate. H Matsuno, M Tomomitsu, A Hagino, S Shin, J Lee, Y W Song, Ann Rheum Dis. 774Matsuno H, Tomomitsu M, Hagino A, Shin S, Lee J, Song YW. Phase III, multicentre, double-blind, randomised, parallel-group study to evaluate the similarities between LBEC0101 and etanercept reference product in terms of efficacy and safety in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis inadequately responding to methotrexate. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Apr;77(4):488-94.

A randomised, double-blind, phase III study comparing SB2, an infliximab biosimilar, to the infliximab reference product Remicade in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate therapy. J Y Choe, N Prodanovic, J Niebrzydowski, I Staykov, E Dokoupilova, A Baranauskaite, Ann Rheum Dis. 761Choe JY, Prodanovic N, Niebrzydowski J, Staykov I, Dokoupilova E, Baranauskaite A, et al. A randomised, double-blind, phase III study comparing SB2, an infliximab biosimilar, to the infliximab reference product Remicade in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis despite methotrexate therapy. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Jan;76(1):58-64.

A randomised, double-blind, multicentre, parallel-group, prospective study comparing the pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of CT-P13 and innovator infliximab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: the PLANETAS study. W Park, P Hrycaj, S Jeka, V Kovalenko, G Lysenko, P Miranda, Ann Rheum Dis. 7210Park W, Hrycaj P, Jeka S, Kovalenko V, Lysenko G, Miranda P, et al. A randomised, double-blind, multicentre, parallel-group, prospective study comparing the pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of CT-P13 and innovator infliximab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: the PLANETAS study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Oct;72(10):1605-12.

Efficacy and safety of switching from reference infliximab to CT-P13 compared with maintenance of CT-P13 in ankylosing spondylitis: 102-week data from the PLANETAS extension study. W Park, D H Yoo, P Miranda, M Brzosko, P Wiland, S Gutierrez-Urena, Ann Rheum Dis. 762Park W, Yoo DH, Miranda P, Brzosko M, Wiland P, Gutierrez-Urena S, et al. Efficacy and safety of switching from reference infliximab to CT-P13 compared with maintenance of CT-P13 in ankylosing spondylitis: 102-week data from the PLANETAS extension study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Feb;76(2):346-54.

Evaluation of the pharmacokinetic equivalence and 54-week efficacy and safety of CT-P13 and innovator infliximab in Japanese patients with rheumatoid arthritis. T Takeuchi, H Yamanaka, Y Tanaka, T Sakurai, K Saito, H Ohtsubo, Mod Rheumatol. 256Takeuchi T, Yamanaka H, Tanaka Y, Sakurai T, Saito K, Ohtsubo H, et al. Evaluation of the pharmacokinetic equivalence and 54-week efficacy and safety of CT-P13 and innovator infliximab in Japanese patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Mod Rheumatol. 2015;25(6):817-24.

Subjective Complaints as the Main Reason for Biosimilar Discontinuation After Open-Label Transition From Reference Infliximab to Biosimilar Infliximab. L Tweehuysen, Bjf Van Den Bemt, I L Van Ingen, Ajl De Jong, W H Van Der Laan, Fhj Van Den Hoogen, Arthritis Rheumatol. 701Tweehuysen L, van den Bemt BJF, van Ingen IL, de Jong AJL, van der Laan WH, van den Hoogen FHJ, et al. Subjective Complaints as the Main Reason for Biosimilar Discontinuation After Open-Label Transition From Reference Infliximab to Biosimilar Infliximab. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018 Jan;70(1):60-8.

A randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study to demonstrate equivalence in efficacy and safety of CT-P13 compared with innovator infliximab when coadministered with methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis: the PLANETRA study. D H Yoo, P Hrycaj, P Miranda, E Ramiterre, M Piotrowski, S Shevchuk, Ann Rheum Dis. 7210Yoo DH, Hrycaj P, Miranda P, Ramiterre E, Piotrowski M, Shevchuk S, et al. A randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study to demonstrate equivalence in efficacy and safety of CT-P13 compared with innovator infliximab when coadministered with methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis: the PLANETRA study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Oct;72(10):1613-20.

Efficacy and safety of CT-P13 (biosimilar infliximab) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: comparison between switching from reference infliximab to CT-P13 and continuing CT-P13 in the PLANETRA extension study. D H Yoo, N Prodanovic, J Jaworski, P Miranda, E Ramiterre, A Lanzon, Ann Rheum Dis. 762Yoo DH, Prodanovic N, Jaworski J, Miranda P, Ramiterre E, Lanzon A, et al. Efficacy and safety of CT-P13 (biosimilar infliximab) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: comparison between switching from reference infliximab to CT-P13 and continuing CT-P13 in the PLANETRA extension study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Feb;76(2):355-63.

S B Cohen, R Alten, H Kameda, M I Rehman, K Schumacher, S Schmitt, Double-Blind Study Comparing PF. Cohen SB, Alten R, Kameda H, Rehman MI, Schumacher K, Schmitt S, et al. A Randomized, Double-Blind Study Comparing PF-

Both in Combination with MTX, As Treatment for Patients with Moderate to Severe Active RA Who Have Had an Inadequate Response to MTX Therapy. / Gp1111, Infliximab Biosimilar, /GP1111, a Potential Infliximab Biosimilar, and Infliximab, Both in Combination with MTX, As Treatment for Patients with Moderate to Severe Active RA Who Have Had an Inadequate Response to MTX Therapy

. Arthritis Rheumatol. 6910supplArthritis Rheumatol. 2017;69 (suppl 10).

Comparison of biosimilar CT-P10 and innovator rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized controlled Phase 3 trial. W Park, L Bozic-Majstorovic, D Milakovic, Berrocal Kasay, A El-Khouri, E C Irazoque-Palazuelos, F , MAbs. Park W, Bozic-Majstorovic L, Milakovic D, Berrocal Kasay A, El-Khouri EC, Irazoque-Palazuelos F, et al. Comparison of biosimilar CT-P10 and innovator rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized controlled Phase 3 trial. MAbs. 2018

Efficacy and Safety of Switching from Innovator Rituximab to Biosimilar CT-P10 Compared with Continued Treatment with CT-P10: Results of a 56-Week Open-Label Study in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis. W Park, C H Suh, S C Shim, Ffc Molina, S Jeka, F G Medina-Rodriguez, BioDrugs. 314Park W, Suh CH, Shim SC, Molina FFC, Jeka S, Medina-Rodriguez FG, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Switching from Innovator Rituximab to Biosimilar CT-P10 Compared with Continued Treatment with CT-P10: Results of a 56-Week Open-Label Study in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis. BioDrugs. 2017 Aug;31(4):369-77.

A multicentre randomised controlled trial to compare the pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety of CT-P10 and innovator rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. D H Yoo, C H Suh, S C Shim, S Jeka, F F Cons-Molina, P Hrycaj, Ann Rheum Dis. 763Yoo DH, Suh CH, Shim SC, Jeka S, Cons-Molina FF, Hrycaj P, et al. A multicentre randomised controlled trial to compare the pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety of CT-P10 and innovator rituximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Mar;76(3):566-70.

A randomised, double-blind trial to demonstrate bioequivalence of GP2013 and reference rituximab combined with methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. J S Smolen, S B Cohen, H P Tony, M Scheinberg, A Kivitz, A Balanescu, Ann Rheum Dis. 769Smolen JS, Cohen SB, Tony HP, Scheinberg M, Kivitz A, Balanescu A, et al. A randomised, double-blind trial to demonstrate bioequivalence of GP2013 and reference rituximab combined with methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Sep;76(9):1598-602.

. H P Tony, K Kruger, S B Cohen, H Schulze-Koops, A J Kivitz, S Jeka, Safety and Immunogenicity of RituximabBrief ReportTony HP, Kruger K, Cohen SB, Schulze-Koops H, Kivitz AJ, Jeka S, et al. Brief Report: Safety and Immunogenicity of Rituximab

After Switch From Reference Rituximab in Patients With Active Rheumatoid Arthritis. G P Biosimilar, Arthritis Care Res. 2019Biosimilar GP 2013 After Switch From Reference Rituximab in Patients With Active Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2019

A phase I pharmacokinetics trial comparing PF-05280586 (a potential biosimilar) and rituximab in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. S Cohen, P Emery, M Greenwald, D Yin, J C Becker, L A Melia, Br J Clin Pharmacol. 821Cohen S, Emery P, Greenwald M, Yin D, Becker JC, Melia LA, et al. A phase I pharmacokinetics trial comparing PF-05280586 (a potential biosimilar) and rituximab in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Jul;82(1):129-38.

Extension Study of PF-05280586, a Potential Rituximab Biosimilar, Versus Rituximab in Subjects With Active Rheumatoid Arthritis. S B Cohen, R Burgos-Vargas, P Emery, Jin B Cronenberger, C Vazquez-Abad, M D , Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 7011Cohen SB, Burgos-Vargas R, Emery P, Jin B, Cronenberger C, Vazquez-Abad MD. Extension Study of PF-05280586, a Potential Rituximab Biosimilar, Versus Rituximab in Subjects With Active Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2018 Nov;70(11):1598- 606.

Clinical similarity of biosimilar ABP 501 to adalimumab in the treatment of patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis: A randomized, double-blind, multicenter, phase III study. K Papp, H Bachelez, A Costanzo, P Foley, M Gooderham, P Kaur, J Am Acad Dermatol. 766Papp K, Bachelez H, Costanzo A, Foley P, Gooderham M, Kaur P, et al. Clinical similarity of biosimilar ABP 501 to adalimumab in the treatment of patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis: A randomized, double-blind, multicenter, phase III study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017 Jun;76(6):1093-102.

Phase III randomized study of the proposed adalimumab biosimilar GP2017 in psoriasis: impact of multiple switches. A Blauvelt, J P Lacour, J F Fowler, Jr Weinberg, J M Gospodinov, D Schuck, E , Br J Dermatol. 1793Blauvelt A, Lacour JP, Fowler JF, Jr., Weinberg JM, Gospodinov D, Schuck E, et al. Phase III randomized study of the proposed adalimumab biosimilar GP2017 in psoriasis: impact of multiple switches. Br J Dermatol. 2018 Sep;179(3):623-31.

The EGALITY study: a confirmatory, randomized, doubleblind study comparing the efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of GP2015, a proposed etanercept biosimilar, vs. the originator product in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic plaque-type psoriasis. Cem Griffiths, D Thaci, S Gerdes, P Arenberger, G Pulka, K Kingo, Br J Dermatol. 1764Griffiths CEM, Thaci D, Gerdes S, Arenberger P, Pulka G, Kingo K, et al. The EGALITY study: a confirmatory, randomized, double- blind study comparing the efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of GP2015, a proposed etanercept biosimilar, vs. the originator product in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic plaque-type psoriasis. Br J Dermatol. 2017 Apr;176(4):928-38.

Cross-immunogenicity: antibodies to infliximab in Remicadetreated patients with IBD similarly recognise the biosimilar Remsima. S Ben-Horin, M Yavzori, I Benhar, E Fudim, O Picard, B Ungar, Gut. 657Ben-Horin S, Yavzori M, Benhar I, Fudim E, Picard O, Ungar B, et al. Cross-immunogenicity: antibodies to infliximab in Remicade- treated patients with IBD similarly recognise the biosimilar Remsima. Gut. 2016 Jul;65(7):1132-8.

Switching from Remicade(R) to Remsima(R) is well Tolerated and Feasible: A Prospective, Open-label Study. L C Buer, B A Moum, M Cvancarova, D J Warren, A W Medhus, M L Hoivik, J Crohns Colitis. 113Buer LC, Moum BA, Cvancarova M, Warren DJ, Medhus AW, Hoivik ML. Switching from Remicade(R) to Remsima(R) is well Tolerated and Feasible: A Prospective, Open-label Study. J Crohns Colitis. 2017 Mar 1;11(3):297-304.

K Farkas, M Rutka, A Balint, F Nagy, R Bor, A Milassin, Efficacy of the new infliximab biosimilar CT-P13 induction therapy in. Farkas K, Rutka M, Balint A, Nagy F, Bor R, Milassin A, et al. Efficacy of the new infliximab biosimilar CT-P13 induction therapy in

Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis -experiences from a single center. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 159Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis -experiences from a single center. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015;15(9):1257-62.

K Farkas, M Rutka, P A Golovics, Z Vegh, B D Lovasz, T Nyari, Efficacy of Infliximab Biosimilar CT-P13 Induction Therapy on. Farkas K, Rutka M, Golovics PA, Vegh Z, Lovasz BD, Nyari T, et al. Efficacy of Infliximab Biosimilar CT-P13 Induction Therapy on

Mucosal Healing in Ulcerative Colitis. J Crohns Colitis. 1011Mucosal Healing in Ulcerative Colitis. J Crohns Colitis. 2016 Nov;10(11):1273-8.

. K B Gecse, B D Lovasz, K Farkas, J Banai, L Bene, B Gasztonyi, Efficacy and Safety of the Biosimilar Infliximab CT. 13Gecse KB, Lovasz BD, Farkas K, Banai J, Bene L, Gasztonyi B, et al. Efficacy and Safety of the Biosimilar Infliximab CT-P13

Treatment in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: A Prospective, Multicentre, Nationwide Cohort. J Crohns Colitis. 102Treatment in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: A Prospective, Multicentre, Nationwide Cohort. J Crohns Colitis. 2016 Feb;10(2):133-40.

Biosimilar infliximab (CT-P13) in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: A Norwegian observational study. J Jahnsen, T E Detlie, S Vatn, P Ricanek, Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 91SupplJahnsen J, Detlie TE, Vatn S, Ricanek P. Biosimilar infliximab (CT-P13) in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: A Norwegian observational study. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;9 Suppl 1:45-52.

Switching from originator infliximab to biosimilar CT-P13 compared with maintained treatment with originator infliximab (NOR-SWITCH): a 52-week, randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority trial. K K Jørgensen, I C Olsen, G L Goll, M Lorentzen, N Bolstad, E A Haavardsholm, Lancet. 389Jørgensen KK, Olsen IC, Goll GL, Lorentzen M, Bolstad N, Haavardsholm EA, et al. Switching from originator infliximab to biosimilar CT-P13 compared with maintained treatment with originator infliximab (NOR-SWITCH): a 52-week, randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority trial. Lancet. 2017 Jun 10;389(10086):2304-16.

Infliximab Biosimilar (Remsima) in Therapy of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases Patients: Experience from One Tertiary Inflammatory Bowel Diseases Centre. M Kolar, D Duricova, M Bortlik, V Hruba, N Machkova, K Mitrova, Dig Dis. 351-2Kolar M, Duricova D, Bortlik M, Hruba V, Machkova N, Mitrova K, et al. Infliximab Biosimilar (Remsima) in Therapy of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases Patients: Experience from One Tertiary Inflammatory Bowel Diseases Centre. Dig Dis. 2017;35(1-2):91-100.

Biosimilar Infliximab in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Outcomes of a Managed Switching Programme. V Razanskaite, M Bettey, L Downey, J Wright, J Callaghan, M Rush, J Crohns Colitis. 116Razanskaite V, Bettey M, Downey L, Wright J, Callaghan J, Rush M, et al. Biosimilar Infliximab in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Outcomes of a Managed Switching Programme. J Crohns Colitis. 2017 Jun 1;11(6):690-6.

Clinical Outcomes Following a Switch from. L J Smits, L A Derikx, D J De Jong, R S Boshuizen, A A Van Esch, J P Drenth, Smits LJ, Derikx LA, de Jong DJ, Boshuizen RS, van Esch AA, Drenth JP, et al. Clinical Outcomes Following a Switch from

Remicade(R) to the Biosimilar CT-P13 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients: A Prospective Observational Cohort Study. J Crohns Colitis. 1011Remicade(R) to the Biosimilar CT-P13 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients: A Prospective Observational Cohort Study. J Crohns Colitis. 2016 Nov;10(11):1287-93.

CTP-10 -A Proposed Biosimilar to Rituxan(R) -FDA Advisory Committee Meeting Briefing Document. Ct-P13, Briefing Document for the Arthritis Advisory Committee. cited; Available fromCT-P13 (infliximab biosimilar). Briefing Document for the Arthritis Advisory Committee. 2016 [cited; Available from: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/advisorycommittees/committeesmeetingmaterials/drugs/arthritisadvisorycommittee/ucm484860.pdf 68. CTP-10 -A Proposed Biosimilar to Rituxan(R) -FDA Advisory Committee Meeting Briefing Document. 2018 [cited; Available from: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/OncologicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM622647. pdf 69.

Clinical similarity of the biosimilar ABP 501 compared with adalimumab after single transition: long-term results from a randomized controlled, double-blind, 52-week, phase III trial in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis. K Papp, H Bachelez, A Costanzo, P Foley, M Gooderham, P Kaur, Br J Dermatol. 1776Papp K, Bachelez H, Costanzo A, Foley P, Gooderham M, Kaur P, et al. Clinical similarity of the biosimilar ABP 501 compared with adalimumab after single transition: long-term results from a randomized controlled, double-blind, 52-week, phase III trial in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis. Br J Dermatol. 2017 Dec;177(6):1562-74.

Switching From Reference Adalimumab to SB5 (Adalimumab Biosimilar) in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis: Fifty-Two-Week Phase III Randomized Study Results. M E Weinblatt, A Baranauskaite, E Dokoupilova, A Zielinska, J Jaworski, A Racewicz, Arthritis Rheumatol. 706Weinblatt ME, Baranauskaite A, Dokoupilova E, Zielinska A, Jaworski J, Racewicz A, et al. Switching From Reference Adalimumab to SB5 (Adalimumab Biosimilar) in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis: Fifty-Two-Week Phase III Randomized Study Results. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018 Jun;70(6):832-40.

Long-term Efficacy, Safety, and Immunogenicity of Biosimilar Infliximab After One Year in a Prospective Nationwide Cohort. L Gonczi, K B Gecse, Z Vegh, Z Kurti, M Rutka, K Farkas, Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2311Gonczi L, Gecse KB, Vegh Z, Kurti Z, Rutka M, Farkas K, et al. Long-term Efficacy, Safety, and Immunogenicity of Biosimilar Infliximab After One Year in a Prospective Nationwide Cohort. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2017 Nov;23(11):1908-15.

Prediction of Short-and Medium-term Efficacy of Biosimilar Infliximab Therapy. Do Trough Levels and Antidrug Antibody Levels or Clinical And Biochemical Markers Play the More Important Role?. L Gonczi, Z Vegh, P A Golovics, M Rutka, K B Gecse, R Bor, J Crohns Colitis. 116Gonczi L, Vegh Z, Golovics PA, Rutka M, Gecse KB, Bor R, et al. Prediction of Short-and Medium-term Efficacy of Biosimilar Infliximab Therapy. Do Trough Levels and Antidrug Antibody Levels or Clinical And Biochemical Markers Play the More Important Role? J Crohns Colitis. 2017 Jun 1;11(6):697-705.

Switching from originator to biosimilar infliximab -real world data of a prospective 18 months follow-up of a single-centre IBD population. M L Høivik, Lct Buer, M Cvancarova, D J Warren, N Bolstad, B A Moum, Scand J Gastroenterol. 536Høivik ML, Buer LCT, Cvancarova M, Warren DJ, Bolstad N, Moum BA, et al. Switching from originator to biosimilar infliximab -real world data of a prospective 18 months follow-up of a single-centre IBD population. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2018 Jun;53(6):692-9.

Comparable long-term efficacy, as assessed by patientreported outcomes, safety and pharmacokinetics, of CT-P13 and reference infliximab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: 54-week results from the randomized, parallel-group PLANETAS study. W Park, D H Yoo, J Jaworski, J Brzezicki, A Gnylorybov, V Kadinov, Arthritis Res Ther. 1825Park W, Yoo DH, Jaworski J, Brzezicki J, Gnylorybov A, Kadinov V, et al. Comparable long-term efficacy, as assessed by patient- reported outcomes, safety and pharmacokinetics, of CT-P13 and reference infliximab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: 54-week results from the randomized, parallel-group PLANETAS study. Arthritis Res Ther. 2016 Jan 20;18:25.

Ljt Smits, A Grelack, L Derikx, D J De Jong, Aaj Van Esch, R S Boshuizen, Term Clinical Outcomes After Switching from. Smits LJT, Grelack A, Derikx L, de Jong DJ, van Esch AAJ, Boshuizen RS, et al. Long-Term Clinical Outcomes After Switching from

R)) to Biosimilar CT-P13 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Remicade, Dig Dis Sci. 6211Remicade((R)) to Biosimilar CT-P13 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Dig Dis Sci. 2017 Nov;62(11):3117-22.

Drug Survival and Immunogenicity After Switching From Remicade to Biosimilar CT-P13 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients: Two-year Follow-up of a Prospective Observational Cohort Study. Ljt Smits, Aaj Van Esch, L Derikx, R Boshuizen, D J De Jong, Jph Drenth, Inflamm Bowel Dis. 251Smits LJT, van Esch AAJ, Derikx L, Boshuizen R, de Jong DJ, Drenth JPH, et al. Drug Survival and Immunogenicity After Switching From Remicade to Biosimilar CT-P13 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients: Two-year Follow-up of a Prospective Observational Cohort Study. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2019 Jan 1;25(1):172-9.

Comparing biosimilar SB2 with reference infliximab after 54 weeks of a double-blind trial: clinical, structural and safety results. J S Smolen, J Y Choe, N Prodanovic, J Niebrzydowski, I Staykov, E Dokoupilova, Rheumatology. 5610Smolen JS, Choe JY, Prodanovic N, Niebrzydowski J, Staykov I, Dokoupilova E, et al. Comparing biosimilar SB2 with reference infliximab after 54 weeks of a double-blind trial: clinical, structural and safety results. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 Oct 1;56(10):1771-9.

Safety, immunogenicity and efficacy after switching from reference infliximab to biosimilar SB2 compared with continuing reference infliximab and SB2 in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: results of a randomised, double-blind, phase III transition study. J S Smolen, J Y Choe, N Prodanovic, J Niebrzydowski, I Staykov, E Dokoupilova, Ann Rheum Dis. 772Smolen JS, Choe JY, Prodanovic N, Niebrzydowski J, Staykov I, Dokoupilova E, et al. Safety, immunogenicity and efficacy after switching from reference infliximab to biosimilar SB2 compared with continuing reference infliximab and SB2 in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: results of a randomised, double-blind, phase III transition study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Feb;77(2):234-40.

52-week results of the phase 3 randomized study comparing SB4 with reference etanercept in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. P Emery, J Vencovsky, A Sylwestrzak, P Leszczynski, W Porawska, A Baranauskaite, Rheumatology. 5612Emery P, Vencovsky J, Sylwestrzak A, Leszczynski P, Porawska W, Baranauskaite A, et al. 52-week results of the phase 3 randomized study comparing SB4 with reference etanercept in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 Dec 1;56(12):2093- 101.

Long-term efficacy and safety in patients with rheumatoid arthritis continuing on SB4 or switching from reference etanercept to SB4. P Emery, J Vencovsky, A Sylwestrzak, P Leszczynski, W Porawska, B Stasiuk, Ann Rheum Dis. Emery P, Vencovsky J, Sylwestrzak A, Leszczynski P, Porawska W, Stasiuk B, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety in patients with rheumatoid arthritis continuing on SB4 or switching from reference etanercept to SB4. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Aug 9.

Multiple switches between GP2015, an etanercept biosimilar, with originator product do not impact efficacy, safety and immunogenicity in patients with chronic plaque-type psoriasis: 30-week results from the phase 3, confirmatory EGALITY study. S Gerdes, D Thaçi, Cem Griffiths, P Arenberger, J Poetzl, G Wuerth, J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 323Gerdes S, Thaçi D, Griffiths CEM, Arenberger P, Poetzl J, Wuerth G, et al. Multiple switches between GP2015, an etanercept biosimilar, with originator product do not impact efficacy, safety and immunogenicity in patients with chronic plaque-type psoriasis: 30-week results from the phase 3, confirmatory EGALITY study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018 Mar;32(3):420-7.

D H Yoo, C H Suh, S C Shim, S Jeka, Ffc Molina, P Hrycaj, Safety and Pharmacokinetics of Up to Two Courses of the. Yoo DH, Suh CH, Shim SC, Jeka S, Molina FFC, Hrycaj P, et al. Efficacy, Safety and Pharmacokinetics of Up to Two Courses of the

Rituximab Biosimilar CT-P10 Versus Innovator Rituximab in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis: Results up to Week 72 of a Phase I Randomized Controlled Trial. BioDrugs. 314Rituximab Biosimilar CT-P10 Versus Innovator Rituximab in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis: Results up to Week 72 of a Phase I Randomized Controlled Trial. BioDrugs. 2017 Aug;31(4):357-67.

Comparison of injection-site reactions between the etanercept biosimilar SB4 and the reference etanercept in patients with rheumatoid arthritis from a phase III study. G Girolomoni, S R Feldman, P Emery, J Ghil, J W Keum, S Y Cheong, Br J Dermatol. 1783Girolomoni G, Feldman SR, Emery P, Ghil J, Keum JW, Cheong SY, et al. Comparison of injection-site reactions between the etanercept biosimilar SB4 and the reference etanercept in patients with rheumatoid arthritis from a phase III study. Br J Dermatol. 2018 Mar;178(3):e215- e6.

Evaluation of the Cross-reactivity of Antidrug Antibodies to CT-P13 and Infliximab Reference Product (Remicade): An Analysis Using Immunoassays Tagged with Both Agents. W Reinisch, J Jahnsen, S Schreiber, S Danese, J Panes, A Balsa, BioDrugs. Reinisch W, Jahnsen J, Schreiber S, Danese S, Panes J, Balsa A, et al. Evaluation of the Cross-reactivity of Antidrug Antibodies to CT- P13 and Infliximab Reference Product (Remicade): An Analysis Using Immunoassays Tagged with Both Agents. BioDrugs. 2017

Antibodies to infliximab in. M B Ruiz-Arguello, A Maguregui, Ruiz Del Agua, A Pascual-Salcedo, D Martinez-Feito, A Jurado, T , Ruiz-Arguello MB, Maguregui A, Ruiz Del Agua A, Pascual-Salcedo D, Martinez-Feito A, Jurado T, et al. Antibodies to infliximab in

Remicade-treated rheumatic patients show identical reactivity towards biosimilars. Ann Rheum Dis. 759Remicade-treated rheumatic patients show identical reactivity towards biosimilars. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Sep;75(9):1693-6.

Antigenic response to CT-P13 and infliximab originator in inflammatory bowel disease patients shows similar epitope recognition. J Goncalves, M Santos, R Acurcio, I Iria, L Gouveia, Matos Brito, P , Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 485Goncalves J, Santos M, Acurcio R, Iria I, Gouveia L, Matos Brito P, et al. Antigenic response to CT-P13 and infliximab originator in inflammatory bowel disease patients shows similar epitope recognition. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Sep;48(5):507-22.

Safety, efficacy and immunogenicity of switching from innovator to biosimilar infliximab in patients with spondyloarthritis: a 6-month real-life observational study. M Benucci, F L Gobbi, F Bandinelli, A Damiani, M Infantino, V Grossi, Immunol Res. 651Benucci M, Gobbi FL, Bandinelli F, Damiani A, Infantino M, Grossi V, et al. Safety, efficacy and immunogenicity of switching from innovator to biosimilar infliximab in patients with spondyloarthritis: a 6-month real-life observational study. Immunol Res. 2017 Feb;65(1):419- 22.

Immunogenicity of Biologics in Chronic Inflammatory Diseases: A Systematic Review. V Strand, A Balsa, J Al-Saleh, L Barile-Fabris, T Horiuchi, T Takeuchi, BioDrugs. 314Strand V, Balsa A, Al-Saleh J, Barile-Fabris L, Horiuchi T, Takeuchi T, et al. Immunogenicity of Biologics in Chronic Inflammatory Diseases: A Systematic Review. BioDrugs. 2017 Aug;31(4):299-316.

Efficacy and Safety Outcomes for Originator TNF Inhibitors and Biosimilars in Rheumatoid Arthritis and Psoriasis Trials: A Systematic Literature Review. R J Moots, C Curiale, D Petersel, C Rolland, H Jones, E Mysler, BioDrugs. 323Moots RJ, Curiale C, Petersel D, Rolland C, Jones H, Mysler E. Efficacy and Safety Outcomes for Originator TNF Inhibitors and Biosimilars in Rheumatoid Arthritis and Psoriasis Trials: A Systematic Literature Review. BioDrugs. 2018 Jun;32(3):193-9.

Comparison of immunogenicity test methods used in clinical studies of infliximab and its biosimilar (CT-P13). J S Kim, S H Kim, B Kwon, S Hong, Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 111SupplKim JS, Kim SH, Kwon B, Hong S. Comparison of immunogenicity test methods used in clinical studies of infliximab and its biosimilar (CT-P13). Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2015;11 Suppl 1:S33-41.

The Immunogenicity of Branded and Biosimilar Infliximab in Rheumatoid Arthritis According to Th9-Related Responses. R Talotta, A Berzi, A Doria, A Batticciotto, M C Ditto, F Atzeni, Int J Mol Sci. 1810Talotta R, Berzi A, Doria A, Batticciotto A, Ditto MC, Atzeni F, et al. The Immunogenicity of Branded and Biosimilar Infliximab in Rheumatoid Arthritis According to Th9-Related Responses. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Oct 12;18(10).

Statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. K F Schulz, D G Altman, D Moher, C Group, Consort, BMC Med. 818Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, Group C. CONSORT 2010 Statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. BMC Med. 2010 Mar 24;8:18.