# Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary disease in an immunocompetent host: A case report and literature review

CorpusID: 207959342
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/acaf552e745802d86c2359c8fab6ccf917f43a91](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/acaf552e745802d86c2359c8fab6ccf917f43a91)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary disease in an immunocompetent host: A case report and literature review


Masahiro Shirata 
Respiratory Disease Center
Tazuke Kofukai Medical Research Institute
Kitano Hospital
2-4-20 Ohgimachi, Kita-ku530-8480OsakaJapan

Aki Tamaru 
Division of Microbiology, Bacteriology Section
Osaka Institute of Public Health
1-3-69 Nakamichi, Higashinari-ku537-0025OsakaJapan

Satoshi Marumo 
Respiratory Disease Center
Tazuke Kofukai Medical Research Institute
Kitano Hospital
2-4-20 Ohgimachi, Kita-ku530-8480OsakaJapan

Motonari Fukui 
Respiratory Disease Center
Tazuke Kofukai Medical Research Institute
Kitano Hospital
2-4-20 Ohgimachi, Kita-ku530-8480OsakaJapan

Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary disease in an immunocompetent host: A case report and literature review
10.1016/j.idcr.2019.e00648Article history: Received 15 June 2019 Received in revised form 24 September 2019 Accepted 24 September 2019Case report A R T I C L E I N F OMycobacterium triplex Pulmonary diseases DNA sequencing
A B S T R A C TMycobacterium triplex (M. triplex) is a bacterial species that can cause severe pulmonary diseases. Despite its clinical importance, only a few cases of M. triplex infection have been reported. Here, we present a rare case of pulmonary disease due to M. triplex in an immunocompetent patient who showed abnormal findings on chest X-ray and computed tomography scans. In this patient, the bacterium was identified by DNA sequencing analysis of the 16S rRNA and hsp65 genes. The patient was successfully treated with the appropriate antimicrobial agents. To put this case into the context of the current literature, we also reviewed other case reports of M. triplex infection.

## Introduction

Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) are ubiquitous organisms commonly isolated from environmental sources, whose pathogenicity may vary according to the host's immune status [1]. NTM are most commonly associated with pulmonary infections. There has been an increase in the incidence of pulmonary infections caused by NTM in recent years, and this is an emerging public health concern [2].

Mycobacterium triplex (M. triplex) represents a unique species of NTM first described in 1996 [3]. This new species, a slow-growing, non-pigmented mycobacterium (Runyon group III), was named after its triple-peak cluster pattern of mycolic acid obtained on high-performance liquid chromatography. The cell morphology is short rods to coccoid, usually smooth and non-photochromogenic. M. triplex strain grows well at 37 C and forms mucoid opaque colonies, which are cream to buff in color [3,4]. M. triplex phylogenetically resembles M. florentinum, M. lentiflavum, M. simiae, and M. sherrisii, and is most closely related to M. genavense [5]. M. triplex is classified as a SAV organism based on its association with M. simiae and M. avium. SAV organisms are widely present in the marine environment and are thought to be one of the main pathogens of fish and other marine organisms. M. triplex can cause opportunistic infections in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent humans exposed to environmental sources and may be fatal if the infection is disseminated. Despite its clinical importance, there are few reported cases of M. triplex infection because this species of mycobacterium cannot be identified by clinical methods. Here, we present a case of an immunocompetent patient with pulmonary infection due to M. triplex, which we identified by DNA sequencing analysis of 16S rRNA and hsp65. In addition, we review other reported cases of M. triplex infection.


## Case report

A 78-year-old HIV-negative Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for left upper meibomian gland resection of a sebaceous gland carcinoma in December 2012. He was referred to our respiratory center because of abnormal findings on chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans. He had no subjective respiratory complaints. He had no past history of smoking or alcohol abuse, but had a past medical history of pulmonary tuberculosis at the age of 15 years. In 2008, some NTM were cultured from his sputum at another hospital, but the strain was not identified.

On the first visit to our center, physical examination revealed piping sounds in the right lung field. Laboratory tests showed a slightly elevated inflammatory response. A chest X-ray image showed a reticular shadow in the right upper lung field and pleural calcification of the left lung along with volume reduction (Fig. 1). A chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan revealed moderately thickened bronchial walls in the upper right bronchus, In September 2013, 9 months after the initiation of macrolide administration, his chest CT scan revealed deterioration of centrilobular micronodules and infiltration in the right lobe. He had a positive culture for AFB on an expectorated sputum sample. This isolate demonstrated slow-growing, non-pigmented, creamy and smooth colonies, consistent with the characteristics of Runyon III organisms. However, the strain could not be identified by both polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method to detect M. tuberculosis and DNA-DNA hybridization method (DDH Mycobacteria, Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) which is commonly used to identify 17 clinically isolated species of NTM in Japan. We also performed antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the isolates. We used BrothMIC NTM 1 for the broth microdilution method (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Ltd.) to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). MICs of antibiotics for this strain were 0.06 mg/ml (CLR), 0.12 mg/ml (rifampicin), 0.03 mg/ml [rifabutin (RFB)], 0.25 mg/ml (streptomycin), 0.5 mg/ ml (amikacin), 1 mg/ml [levofloxacin (LVX)], 4 mg/ml [ethambutol (EMB)], and 8 mg/ml [ethionamide (ETO)]. In March 2014, an expectorated sputum smear for the AFB was positive, and the patient received a higher dose of CLR (600 mg per day) and rifampicin (RIF, 300 mg per day). Ethambutol (EMB) was not administered because of his glaucoma. Eventually, the pulmonary shadow partially reduced, but expectorated sputum smear and culture for the AFB remained positive.

We amplified and sequenced the 16S rRNA gene to identify the species of this NTM isolate. Next, we searched for homology between this sequence and various mycobacteria with the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST 1 ). Our results identified 2 species of NTM (M. triplex and M. florentinum) as superior candidates; however, they had the exact similarity score (Fig. 2). Therefore, we sequenced the hsp65 gene of the NTM isolate (Fig. 3), which resulted in a similarity score of 686 for M. triplex and 652 for M. florentinum. We finally identified this bacterium as M. triplex.

The HRCT findings of this patient were consistent with those of pulmonary NTM disease, and NTM strains were detected in 3 serial expectorated sputum samples during the clinical course. There were no other microorganisms that could cause respiratory infections detected. DNA sequencing analysis identified at least one of these NTM strains as M. triplex. In general clinical practice, it is extremely rare that NTM which cannot be identified with DDH are detected [6]. Therefore, it was reasonable to consider this patient had respiratory infection caused by M. triplex. In December 2014, levofloxacin (LVX, 250 mg per day) was started. Eventually, the pulmonary shadow reduced further, and the sputum AFB culture became negative. Fig. 4 shows the clinical course of the present case including expectorated sputum smear and culture, identification results of bacterial species, chest CT images, and treatment details.


## Discussion

We described the case of an immunocompetent 78-year-old HIV-negative Japanese man with pulmonary M. triplex infection. Although he had several expectorated sputum smears and cultures positive for AFB, we could not identify the species by a DNA-DNA hybridization method. Further gene sequencing analysis of 16S rRNA and hsp65 identified the bacterium as M. triplex. The patient began antimycobacterial therapy with CLR, RIF, and LVX. Eventually, he showed a sputum smear and culture negative for AFB, and the abnormal shadow on his chest CT scan gradually reduced.

Over 150 species of NTM have been identified to date. In Japan, we usually identify clinical isolates of M. avium and M. intracellulare using PCR, and we use the DNA-DNA hybridization    peregrinum. Disadvantages of this method include the inability to distinguish between 2 genetically close species and the possible misidentification of a species that cannot be identified as another species [8].

Recently, information on the whole-genome sequence of a variety of bacteria has become available, and we can distinguish between closely related species through the identification of specific, preserved DNA sequences. DNA sequencing of housekeeping genes, such as 16S rRNA, rpoB, recA, and hsp65, is used for microbial analyses [9]. Housekeeping gene sequencing analysis can identify more than 110 species of mycobacterium with a high degree of accuracy by combining multiple analyses of gene sequences. In the present case, we could not identify M. triplex by the DDH method. However, DNA sequencing analysis of the housekeeping genes, 16S rRNA and hsp65, resulted in the correct diagnosis and enabled the administration of a successful medication regimen. Table 1 summarizes the main clinical features of the current patient and the 11 previously published cases of M. triplex infection. Most M. triplex infections have been reported from the United States or Europe. Of these, 4 cases involved immunocompromised hosts, whereas 7 cases were found in immunocompetent patients.

Although extrapulmonary lesions are often observed in immunocompromised hosts, only the lungs and lymph nodes are involved in immunocompetent hosts. Clinical and radiographic features of M. triplex pulmonary infection resemble those of tuberculosis and other NTM. The primary symptoms are cough, hemoptysis, and fatigue. Radiographic studies most often note pulmonary nodules, followed by lung infiltrates, multifocal bronchiectasis, and cavitation. All reported cases were definitively identified by analysis of housekeeping gene sequencing. Antimicrobial susceptibility of M. triplex is similar to that of M. avium complex. Most M. triplex cases are susceptible to CLR and RIF and resistant to isoniazid. Most patients with M. triplex infection received 2-4 antimicrobial agents: EMB, RIF, CLR, and ciprofloxacin [10]. Of the 11 cases, 8 showed improvement after antimicrobial treatment. However, it should be noted that drug susceptibility testing of NTM isolates is difficult to interpret because there are some discrepancies between in vitro and in vivo clinical outcomes [2]. This finding is particularly true for NTM species that are rarely identified in clinical practice.

We reported a case of M. triplex pulmonary disease in a 78-yearold immunocompetent male. The patient received successful treatment with the appropriate antimicrobial agents after definitive diagnosis by housekeeping gene analysis. However, little remains known and further investigations are necessary to better describe M. triplex infection.


## Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.


## Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.


## Author contribution

MS was involved in data collection, analysis, interpretation and manuscript writing. AT was involved in data collection, analysis and interpretation. SM and MF were involved in data analysis and interpretation. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript. 


## Ethics approval and consent for publication

All authors meet the ICMJE authorship criteria. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.


## Declaration of Competing Interest

All authors have no conflicts of interest directly relevant to the content of this article.


Abbreviations: AFB, acid-fast bacilli; HRCT, high resolution computed tomography; M. triplex, Mycobacterium triplex; MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration; NTM, nontuberculous mycobacteria. * Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: mshirata@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp (M. Shirata), tamaru@iph.osaka.jp (A. Tamaru), s-marumo@kitano-hp.or.jp (S. Marumo), mfukui@kitano-hp.or.jp (M. Fukui). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idcr.2019.e00648 2214-2509/© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4in the upper right lobe, infiltration in the right middle lobe, and pleural calcification of the left lung along with volume reduction(Fig. 1). Sputum smears and cultures for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were negative, but we suspected a chronic respiratory tract infection and started the administration of a low dose of clarithromycin (CLR, 200 mg per day).

## Fig. 1 .
1Chest image of the case patient. (A) Chest X-ray image shows a reticular shadow in the right upper lung field (arrowhead) and pleural calcification of the left lobe, along with volume reduction. (B, C) Chest high-resolution CT (HRCT) showed centrilobular micronodules in the right upper lobe and pleural calcification of the left lung, along with volume reduction.

## Fig. 3 .
3Partial alignment of hsp65 sequences. Partial alignment of hsp65 sequences of Mycobacterium triplex (M. triplex), M. florentinum, and M. lentiflavum. Dots indicate nucleotide identity and dashes indicate deletions. Reference sequence accession numbers are as follows: M. triplex: AFP-000NM44; M. florentinum: DSM44852; and M. lentiflavum: FJ06136. The similarity scores are: 686 (M. triplex), 654 (M. florentinum), and 652 (M. lentiflavum).

## Fig. 2 .
2Partial alignment of 16S rRNA sequences. Partial alignment of 16S rRNA sequences of Mycobacterium triplex (M. triplex), M. florentinum, M. stomatepiae, and M. montefiorense. Dots indicate nucleotide identity and dashes indicate deletions. Reference sequence accession numbers are as follows: M. triplex: AJ276890; M. florentinum: NR042223; M. stomatepiae: HM022202; and M. montefiorense: NR028808. The similarity scores are: 1543 (M. triplex), 1543 (M. florentinum), 1531 (M. stomatepiae), and 1526 (M. montefiorense).

## Fig. 4 .
4Timing of diagnostic tests and clinical course of the case patient. AFB: Acid-fast bacilli, CLR: Clarithromycin, DDH: DNA-DNA hybridization, LVX: Levofloxacin, RIF: Rifampicin. Low-dose clarithromycin (CLR) monotherapy was started in December 2012. An expectorated sputum culture for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) became positive in September 2013, but the species could not be identified by DNA-DNA hybridization (DDH) method. In March 2014, CLR dose was increased and rifampicin (RIF) was added because sputum smear for the AFB also became positive and pulmonary shadow gradually worsened. However, the positive results persisted in both smear and culture for AFB, the species of which DDH method still failed to identify. DNA sequencing analysis could identify one of these strains as M. triplex. After the initiation of levofloxacin (LVX) in December 2014, both smear and culture for AFB became negative and chest CT images showed reduction of pulmonary shadow gradually.method for other NTM. The latter method can also distinguish NTM from M. tuberculosis. This method involves a DNA-DNA hybridization between parts of the DNA sequence from a standard strain stabilized on microplates and those of the isolated strain[7]. DNA-DNA hybridization enables the quantitative evaluation of the similarity between both DNA strands by reheating the generated hybrid and measuring the temperature at which the molecules separate to form single-stranded DNA. This method is simple and rapid; however, it can only identify17 species of NTM: M. avium, M. intracellulare, M. kansasii, M. gordonae, M. chelonae, M. abscessus, M. scrofulaceum, M. fortuitum, M. marinum, M. simiae, M. szulgai, M. gastri, M. xenopi, M. nonchromogenicum, M. terrae, M. triviale, and M.

## Table 1
1Summary of Mycobacterium triplex (M. triplex) infection cases and patients' main clinical features. AMK: Amikacin, CIP: Ciprofloxacin, CLR: Clarithromycin, CNS: Central nervous system, EMB: Ethambutol, ETO: Ethionamide, HIV: human immunodeficiency virus, INH: Isoniazid, LVX: Levofloxacin, NR: Not reported, OFX: Ofloxacin, PZA: Pyrazinamide, RFB: Rifabutin, RIF: Rifampicin.Case 
Nation 
Age 
(years) 
/Sex 

Host immunity 
Site of lesion 
Antimicrobial agents 
Response 
Reference 

1 
Italy 
40/M 
Compromised (HIV infection) 
Spleen Lymph node, 
Bone marrow 

CLR + ETO 
Slowly 
worsened 

[11] 

2 
USA 
4/F 
Competent 
Cervical lymph node 
CLR + EMB + RFB 
Healed 
[12] 
3 
USA 
13/F 
Compromised (immunosuppressive agents after 
liver transplantation) 

Pericardial effusion 
Ascites 

No antibiotics (drainage) 
Healed 
[13] 

4 
Finland 
67/M 
Competent 
Lung 
CLR + EMB + RIF + CIP 
Healed 
[10] 
5 
Northern 
Ireland 

47/F 
Competent 
Lung 
NR 
NR 
[14] 

6 
France 
41/M 
Compromised (HIV infection) 
Lung, CNS, Ascites 
CLR + EMB + RIF + INH + PZA Death 
[15] 
7 
Italy 
54/F 
Competent 
Lung 
CLR + EMB + LVX 
Slightly 
improved 

[16] 

8 
USA 
30/M 
Competent 
Lung 
No therapy 
NR 
[17] 
9 
USA 
82/M 
Competent 
Lung 
CLR + EMB + RIF + CIP 
Slowly 
improved 

[18] 

10 
Italy 
4/M 
Competent 
Cervical lymph node 
No antibiotics (surgical 
excision) 

Healed 
[19] 

11 
Brazil 
51/F 
Compromised (HIV infection) 
Lung 
CLR + EMB + AMK + OFX 
Healed 
[20] 
12 (Our 
case) 

Japan 
78/M 
Competent 
Lung 
CLR + RIF + LVX 
Slowly 
improved 


M. Shirata et al. / IDCases 18 (2019) e00648
AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for English language editing.
Falkinham [36_TD$DIFF]3rd JO. Health impacts of environmental mycobacteria. T P Primm, C A Lucero, Clin Microbiol Rev. 17Primm TP, Lucero CA, Falkinham [36_TD$DIFF]3rd JO. Health impacts of environmental mycobacteria. Clin Microbiol Rev 2004;17:98-106.

An official ATS/IDSA statement: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial diseases. D E Griffith, T Aksamit, B A Brown-Elliott, A Catanzaro, C Daley, F Gordin, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 175Griffith DE, Aksamit T, Brown-Elliott BA, Catanzaro A, Daley C, Gordin F, et al. An official ATS/IDSA statement: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007;175:367-416.

Characterization of an SAV organism and proposal of Mycobacterium triplex sp. M M Floyd, L S Guthertiz, V A Silcox, P S Duffey, Y Jang, E P Desmond, J Clin Microbiol. 34Floyd MM, Guthertiz LS, Silcox VA, Duffey PS, Jang Y, Desmond EP, et al. Characterization of an SAV organism and proposal of Mycobacterium triplex sp. nov. J Clin Microbiol 1996;34:2963-7.

Characterization of Mycobacterium montefiorense sp. nov., a novel pathogenic Mycobacterium from moray eels that is related to Mycobacterium triplex. M H Levi, J Bartell, L Gandolfo, S C Smole, S F Costa, L M Weiss, J Clin Microbiol. 41Levi MH, Bartell J, Gandolfo L, Smole SC, Costa SF, Weiss LM, et al. Characterization of Mycobacterium montefiorense sp. nov., a novel pathogenic Mycobacterium from moray eels that is related to Mycobacterium triplex. J Clin Microbiol 2003;41:2147-52.

Mycobacterium sherrisii sp. nov., a slow-growing non-chromogenic species. J Van Ingen, E Tortoli, R Selvarangan, M B Coyle, J A Crump, A B Morrissey, Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 61van Ingen J, Tortoli E, Selvarangan R, Coyle MB, Crump JA, Morrissey AB, et al. Mycobacterium sherrisii sp. nov., a slow-growing non-chromogenic species. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2011;61:1293-8.

Identification of 23 mycobacterial species by Invader assay with targeting 16S rRNA gene and ITS-1 region-comparison with DDH method in clinical isolates. M Nagano, S Ichimura, N Ito, T Tomii, Y Kazumi, K Takei, Kekkaku. 837Nagano M, Ichimura S, Ito N, Tomii T, Kazumi Y, Takei K, et al. Identification of 23 mycobacterial species by Invader assay with targeting 16S rRNA gene and ITS-1 region-comparison with DDH method in clinical isolates. Kekkaku 2008;83(7):487-96.

Application of DNA-DNA hybridization DDH mycobacteria 'Kyokuto' to species-identification of mycobacteria grown in Middlebrook 7H9 broth. Y Wada, H Saitoh, I Nakasone, N Yamane, JARMAM. 11Wada Y, Saitoh H, Nakasone I, Yamane N. Application of DNA-DNA hybridization DDH mycobacteria 'Kyokuto' to species-identification of mycobacteria grown in Middlebrook 7H9 broth. JARMAM 2000;11:47-50.

Mycobacterium shinshuense isolated from cutaneous ulcer lesion of right lower extremity in a 37-year-old woman. Y Kazumi, K Ohtomo, M Takahashi, S Mitarai, I Sugawara, J Izumi, Kekkaku. 79Kazumi Y, Ohtomo K, Takahashi M, Mitarai S, Sugawara I, Izumi J, et al. Mycobacterium shinshuense isolated from cutaneous ulcer lesion of right lower extremity in a 37-year-old woman. Kekkaku 2004;79:437-41.

Mycobacteriosis and tuberculosis: laboratory diagnosis. D Azadi, T Motallebirad, K Ghaffari, H Shojaei, Open Microbiol J. 12Azadi D, Motallebirad T, Ghaffari K, Shojaei H. Mycobacteriosis and tuberculosis: laboratory diagnosis. Open Microbiol J 2018;12:41-58.

Pulmonary infection caused by an unusual, slowly growing nontuberculous mycobacterium. S Suomalainen, P Koukila-Kähkölä, E Brander, M L Katila, A Piilonen, L Paulin, J Clin Microbiol. 39Suomalainen S, Koukila-Kähkölä P, Brander E, Katila ML, Piilonen A, Paulin L, et al. Pulmonary infection caused by an unusual, slowly growing nontuberculous mycobacterium. J Clin Microbiol 2001;39:2668-71.

Brief report: disseminated mycobacteriosis caused by drug-resistant Mycobacterium triplex in a human immunodeficiency virus-infected patient during highly active antiretroviral therapy. A Cingolani, M Sanguinetti, A Antinori, L M Larocca, F Ardito, B Posteraro, Clin Infect Dis. 31Cingolani A, Sanguinetti M, Antinori A, Larocca LM, Ardito F, Posteraro B, et al. Brief report: disseminated mycobacteriosis caused by drug-resistant Mycobacterium triplex in a human immunodeficiency virus-infected patient during highly active antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:177-9.

Novel mycobacterium related to Mycobacterium triplex as a cause of cervical lymphadenitis. R Hazra, M M Floyd, A Sloutsky, R N Husson, J Clin Microbiol. 39Hazra R, Floyd MM, Sloutsky A, Husson RN. Novel mycobacterium related to Mycobacterium triplex as a cause of cervical lymphadenitis. J Clin Microbiol 2001;39:1227-30.

Mycobacterium triplex infection in a liver transplant patient. E Hoff, M Sholtis, G Procop, C Sabella, J Goldfarb, R Wyllie, J Clin Microbiol. 39Hoff E, Sholtis M, Procop G, Sabella C, Goldfarb J, Wyllie R, et al. Mycobacterium triplex infection in a liver transplant patient. J Clin Microbiol 2001;39:2033-4.

Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary infection in an immunocompetent patient. R Mcmullan, J Xu, M Kelly, T Stanley, J E Moore, B C Millar, J Infect. 44McMullan R, Xu J, Kelly M, Stanley T, Moore JE, Millar BC, et al. Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary infection in an immunocompetent patient. J Infect 2002;44:263-4.

Disseminated infection with a mycobacterium related to Mycobacterium triplex with central nervous system involvement associated with AIDS. V Zeller, A L Nardi, C Truffot-Pernot, W Sougakoff, B Stankoff, C Katlama, J Clin Microbiol. 41Zeller V, Nardi AL, Truffot-Pernot C, Sougakoff W, Stankoff B, Katlama C, et al. Disseminated infection with a mycobacterium related to Mycobacterium triplex with central nervous system involvement associated with AIDS. J Clin Microbiol 2003;41:2785-7.

Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary disease in immunocompetent host. C Piersimoni, P Zitti, G Mazzarelli, A Mariottini, D Nista, D Zallocco, Emerg Infect Dis. 10Piersimoni C, Zitti P, Mazzarelli G, Mariottini A, Nista D, Zallocco D, et al. Mycobacterium triplex pulmonary disease in immunocompetent host. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:1859-62.

Initial case report of Mycobacterium triplex isolated from a patient with coal workers' pneumoconiosis. M G Benninghoff, W U Todd, M Tucakovic, Chest. 132Benninghoff MG, Todd WU, Tucakovic M. Initial case report of Mycobacterium triplex isolated from a patient with coal workers' pneumoconiosis. Chest 2007;132:676a-7.

Mycobacterium triplex lung disease in an immunocompetent host. M Song, M A Javed, J Espiritu, Chest. 13660Song M, Javed MA, Espiritu J. Mycobacterium triplex lung disease in an immunocompetent host. Chest 2009;136:60S.

Cervical lymphadenitis by Mycobacterium triplex in an immunocompetent child: case report and review. G Caruso, R Angotti, F Molinaro, E Benicchi, E Cerchia, M Messina, Indian J Microbiol. 53Caruso G, Angotti R, Molinaro F, Benicchi E, Cerchia E, Messina M. Cervical lymphadenitis by Mycobacterium triplex in an immunocompetent child: case report and review. Indian J Microbiol 2013;53:241-4.

First detection of Mycobacterium triplex in Latin America. C E Campos, C F Dias, G Unis, P C De Souza Caldas, P Redner, L D De Carvalho, Int J Mycobacteriol. 5Campos CE, Dias CF, Unis G, de Souza Caldas PC, Redner P, de Carvalho LD, et al. First detection of Mycobacterium triplex in Latin America. Int J Mycobacteriol 2016;5:89-91.