# A literature review on reducing carbon emission from supply chain system: drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices

CorpusID: 212801017
 
tags: #Business, #Environmental_Science, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/918addf36bdea6a2c1b2dd293d02a8223c98b69e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/918addf36bdea6a2c1b2dd293d02a8223c98b69e)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A literature review on reducing carbon emission from supply chain system: drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices


M F Ibrahim 
Department of Logistics Engineering
Universitas Internasional Semen Indonesia
GresikIndonesia

M M Putri 
Department of Logistics Engineering
Universitas Internasional Semen Indonesia
GresikIndonesia

D M Utama 
Department of Industrial Engineering
Universitas Muhammadiyah Malang
MalangIndonesia

A literature review on reducing carbon emission from supply chain system: drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices
10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd ICET4SD IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 IOP Publishing 1
This study aims to review the literature in reducing carbon emission from supply chain system for the past few years and presenting drivers, barrier, performance indicator, and practice. The issue of reducing carbon emission become frequently discussed since unplanned and irresponsible actions by industries are potential threats to sustainability. Companies are now trying to minimize environmental impacts by integrating environmental concerns into their supply chain operations. In the aim of reducing carbon emissions, the industry is faced with different drivers, barriers, and performance indicator. With a variety of problems faced, the practices taken to reduce carbon emissions are very diverse. Thirty papers were collected from previous studies and linked to discussion points. The result showed that good coordination with various media in the supply chain system would be able to achieve common goals in reducing gas emissions.

## Introduction

Supply chain management is strategically positioned for sustainability, performance, and organizational sustainability [1]. Furthermore, the supply chain is an essential branch of operations management, and it has an essential impact on the environment, including emissions, pollutions, and the health hazard of the community. However, unconsciously, inefficient supply chain management activities from upstream to downstream can cause excessive carbon gas emissions.

The increase of global warming and changing biodiversity has brought the world's sustainability towards immediate danger. People from different areas, including researchers, academicians, practitioners, and scientists got all together to suggest ways to maintain the environmental sustainability.

According to King and Lenox [2] claimed that unplanned and irresponsible actions by industries are potential threats to sustainability. Companies are now trying to minimize environmental impacts by integrating environmental concerns into their supply chain operations. According to Sarkis and Dou [3], the integration of supply chain elements with corporate environmental management that referred to as "Green Supply Chain." In today's globalized supply chains, environmental issues are of critical importance. During the past decade, carbon emissions and pollution associated with economic development have caused severe issues such as the greenhouse effect, abnormal climate, and environmental degradation [4]. Based on this background, the handling of gas emission in the company must be better and carefully planned. Many previous studies have tried to find strategies and scenarios in minimizing gas emissions.

This paper presents a review of reducing carbon emission problem, which classifies the study in terms of driver, barrier, and performance indicator. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2, is for presenting the literature review. Section 3 is for drivers and barriers and performance indicators in Section 4. Section 5 is for presenting the practice. Section 6, which is, for the conclusion.


## Literature Review

Tapia Granados and Spash [5] suggest that annual costs in emissions are highly correlated with economic growth. In California, the cap-and-trade scheme has been implemented since 2013, and it did not have a significant impact because the energy supply was minimal. When making decisions about cap-and-trade allowance allocations or carbon tax designs, policymakers should consider that industries may be concentrated and thus already limit output below socially optimal levels [6]. Carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology investment is an effective method of reducing carbon emissions however carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology investment is an effective method of reducing carbon emissions Bai, et al. [7].

Waltho, et al. [8] and Elhedhli and Merrick [9] try to build network design with the aim to reduce carbon emission. Four policies are recommended by Waltho, et al. [8] that successfully reduce emissions effectively without increasing high costs, i.e. carbon offset, carbon cap, carbon tax, and capand-trade. Cap-and-trade is the most preferred policy because it has high flexibility. Peng,et al. [10] utilize structural decomposition analysis and structural path decomposition analysis method to identify air pollution emission. Adjusting the energy consumption structure as soon as make some guiding consumption will reduce emissions gradually.

According to Valadkhani, et al. [11], the country's economic conditions are an essential part of the transition to renewable energy. They study energy consumption portfolio by utilizing data from 79 countries from 1965 to 2017 and investigate the contribution of consumption of primary energy (i.e., coal, gas, oil) to changes in CO2 emission per capita. The result of the study suggests that only highincome countries are eligible to switch to renewable energy. On the other hand, in low-income countries, natural gas remains a potential solution.

Du, et al. [12] utilize a system dynamic method to investigates carbon reduction technology policies to the level of economic growth. According to the study, emissions could be reduced by promoting the development of carbon reduction technology. One of the policies that can be implemented is promoting the use of renewable energy in related industries so that it can reduce carbon emissions. Recovery supply chain model with consideration of safety stock and carbon emission has been developed by Darom, et al. [13]. In this model, safety stock is used as an essential mitigation strategy in overcoming supply disruptions, and the cost of carbon emissions is also considered for its relationship with the environment.

Tseng and Hung [14] developed a strategic decision-making model considering social costs and operational cost costs incurred due to carbon dioxide emissions during the process in the supply chain system. Evaluation is carried out through several different scenarios with case studies on industrial apparels. The results of the study suggested that the government make strict regulations on companies to bear the social costs of carbon emissions produced. This needs to be done because, from the experimental results, it can be concluded that the higher the level of social costs can reduce carbon emissions effectively.

According to Wang, et al. [15], the retailer can achieve the goal of jointly reducing carbon emission with the manufacturer. In their study, numerical experiment and analysis successfully were done to get the optimal cost-sharing rate and the optimal premium rate of the wholesale price. Incentive ICET4SD IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034 3 mechanism policy from the government to work collaboratively among supply chain member to reduce carbon emission has been investigated by Ding, et al. [4]. The results show that collaboration between supply chain members plays a crucial role in improving their environmental performance. Ji, et al. [16] has been compared two emission reduction strategies, i.e., production strategy and joint emission reduction strategy, the result is joined emission reduction strategy is more profitable for manufacturer and retailer.

In recent years, the business and scientists communities have a significant interest to discuss the danger of gas emissions that always increases [17]. According to Chen, et al. [17], the main goal of emission reduction will not succeed if companies often choose actions to reduce emissions without coordination with other business partners. This kind of event results in an increase in emissions for other partners which will not cause emissions reductions in the supply chain system Daryanto [24], [25] in their research they found that integration in the supply chain system can be an essential way to reduce total costs and carbon emissions. Contracts are needed that are designed in such a way as to create the coordination of the entire supply chain system to make perfect coordination between players in the supply chain [26]. Coordination between players in the supply chain system has succeeded in creating optimal costs, especially in transportation costs and carbon emissions [27]. Improving performance and obtaining the benefits of an overall supply chain system will be achieved if the supply chain can be appropriately coordinated [28].

According to Zissis, et al. [19], just the right environmentally friendly policies can save the total cost of the supply chain system. They suggest a quantity discount mechanism to coordinate players along the supply chain. Daryanto, et al. [18] develop three-echelon supply chain models to determines the optimal number and size of the delivery. Delivery starts from supplier to third-party logistic (3PL) and from 3PL to buyers to reduce carbon emissions. Zhou and Ye [26] analyzed shared emission reduction strategies and contract design in multiple channel supply chains under a low carbon environment. Cooperative advertising contract and emission reduction cost-sharing contract successfully to make more supply chain improvements.

Utilizing quantity discount contracts as a medium of coordination between players in the supply chain system has been done by Peng, et al. [20]. The result show, that quantity discount contracts, and revenue sharing contract can coordinate the low-carbon supply chain perfectly with some several combinations.

According to Dash Wu, et al. [29], the win-win solution achieved when manufacturer invests more in reducing emissions. They design a contract to coordinate the supply chain under optimal order quantity, the optimal wholesale price of the manufacturer, and optimal carbon emission level to be the focus for exploration.

Bai, et al. [21] analyze coordination effect on emission reduction, revenue-and investment-sharing (RIS) contract successfully coordinating the supply chain system perfectly. RIS can make supplier and manufacturer gain more profit and not negatively affected by carbon cap. In other studies Liu [22] and Xu, et al. [30] also succeeded in creating a low-carbon supply chain through revenue sharing contract.

Cost-sharing and wholesale price contract is some contract that can coordinate supply chain Xu, et al. [23]. They focus on the problem of coordinating supply chain systems under cap-and-trade regulation. With proper coordination, carbon emissions can be reduced without affecting the profit of each player in the supply chain system. One example, although the retailer shares the manufacturer's total cost, the manufacturer may increase the wholesale price, which indicates that the manufacturer can charge a high price for the low-carbon product.

Ding, et al. [24] developed an optimal pricing strategy model for environmentally friendly supply chain system. In this supply chain model, government and manufacturing have mutually integrated with strong coordination relationships. The results of this study suggest that the performance of an environmentally friendly supply chain system can be improved by the existence of good cooperation between manufacturers and suppliers, regardless of the role of the government.  5 Zhang, et al. [31], has investigated the issue of pricing and coordination of players in the green supply chain system. System performance in cooperative games is better than non-cooperative games.

Deteriorating item in inventory management is the challenging issues [28]. Research conducted by [28] proposes a revised revenue-sharing (RRS) contract to coordinate the decentralized system. They constructed two models with multivariate decisions for both decentralized and centralized systems. Then proposed the use of the RS contract and RRS contract to coordinate the system. The result show RSS contract successfully coordinates the supply chain system perfectly and give a higher profit than RS contract.

Yang, et al. [32] has analyzed two competitive supply chains under the cap and trade scheme. The win-win solution between manufacturers and retailers could be achieved effectively with profitsharing contracts provided by retailers, while also benefiting the environment with a higher level of emission reduction. Members in the supply chain system could accept the cap and trade mechanism only if consumers had strong low carbon preferences Ji, et al. [16].

According to studies by Zhou, et al. [33] Co-op advertising and emission reduction cost-sharing contracts can achieve channel coordination and achieve win-win situations under certain conditions. On another research by Aljazzar, et al. [34], delay in payment has successfully improved the economic performance of the supply chain system and environmental performance.


## Source of Drivers and Barriers to Reducing Carbon Emission from Supply Chain System

To reduce carbon emission from a supply chain system, there are various drivers and barriers in the process of implementation. Drivers in this study are factors that can encourage companies to reduce carbon emissions, for example, the target of company image or competitive pressure. While the barrier is factors that inhibit some process from reducing carbon emission. According to Tseng, et al. [35], drivers on reducing carbon emission can be classified into internal and external sources.


## A. Internal Source of Drivers on Reducing Carbon Emission

The drivers come from internal organizational, for example, company green image, the requirement of ISO 14000, internal environmental awareness, resource efficiency by way of reducing waste.


## B. External Source of Drivers on Reducing Carbon Emission

The drivers come from external organizational, for example, a regulator from government, a regulator from an environmental group, awareness-raising of business partners, competitive pressure because of competitors, requirements of business partners.

On the other hand, barriers to reducing carbon emission are also classified into internal and external sources.


## A. Internal Source of Barriers to Reducing Carbon Emission

The barriers come from internal organizational, for example, lack of environmental knowledge, lack of environmental awareness, new system switching cost, environmentally friendly design costs, financial problem, lack of top management involvement, lack of collaboration between departments, afraid of failure, lack and high cost of eco-technology.


## B. External Source of Barriers to Reducing Carbon Emission

The barriers come from external organizational, for example, lack of government support, lack of ecofriendly training, no eco-friendly appreciation from partners or government, lack of awareness between partners, market uncertainty, lack of commitment between partners, lack of support from related parties.


## Practice

In the literature, this review found a variety of practices that had been submitted by previous researchers. Various policies from the government have a good impact on reducing gas emissions. These policies include renewables energy, carbon-pricing, low carbon development, and incentive mechanism policy. To produce the best output, these policies must be supported by all stakeholders. According to Tapia Granados and Spash [5], policies that have been made will run smoothly if balanced with the availability of renewable material and energy supply. Thus, the policy to reduce gas emissions will not succeed if it is not balanced with the supply of renewable energy. Renewables energy policies were only eligible for high-income countries [11]. Supporting technology is very important for the success of policy [12].

Green supply chains will be challenging to achieve in the decentralized supply chain. According to Chen, et al. [17], the use of penalties in the decentralization supply chain is quite influential on lowcarbon policies. Coordination can be the best way to achieve common goals in a supply chain system. In the literature review, several media in the coordinated contract were found for coordinating the supply chain and achieve the goal of reducing gas emissions. The coordination media include quantity discount, energy consumption structure, optimal safety stock, optimal order quantity, optimal wholesale price, optimal carbon emission level, revenue-and-investment sharing, pricing, delay in payment, production strategy, deliveries, deliveries size, and profit-sharing.

Zissis, et al. [19] and Peng, et al. [20] use quantity discount as a medium in coordinating the supply chain to reduce carbon emission. Energy consumption structure successfully used by Peng, et al.

[10]. Darom, et al. [13] succeeded in using safety stock with consideration of emissions. According to past research optimal order quantity [29], optimal wholesale price [29]; [23], optimal carbon emission level [29] under a coordinated supply chain can reduce carbon emission effectively. In another side, revenue sharing is used by [22] [30] [28] and investment sharing used by [21] to coordinate the supply chain to reduce carbon emission. Other than that, Liu [22], Ding, et al. [24], and Zhang, et al. [31] utilize a pricing strategy to coordinated supply chain and reduce carbon emission. Moreover, coordination has also been carried out with other media, among others delay in payment [34], production strategy [16], deliveries [18], deliveries size [18], and profit sharing [32].

Based on the practices that have been carried out in previous studies, it can be concluded that coordinated supply chains can reduce gas emissions more effectively. Through proper coordination with any media, the common goal of becoming a green supply chain will be easier to achieve.


## Conclusion

Reduce carbon emission has recently become a company goal. The emergence of concern about carbon emissions can come from internal and external companies. Many companies are directly aware of the awareness of reducing carbon emissions. However, it is not uncommon for companies that actually do not have awareness but must do so because of government policies related to carbon emissions. In this paper, 30 papers relating to the practice of reducing carbon emissions were reviewed. The author tries to explore drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices in reducing carbon emissions from each paper.

Some papers suggest that drivers of reducing gas emissions originate from the company's internal awareness. On the other hand, some papers also say that consciousness occurs due to coercion or the terms requested by external parties. Regarding performance indicators, most papers use economic value as a performance indicator

Most of the papers suggest that coordination must be done with various media. With proper coordination in the supply chain system, a common goal will be achieved in reducing gas emissions. For future research work, it is essential to combine approaches that can more effectively and efficiently coordinate every player in the supply chain system to reducing carbon emission. As we know, based on this literature review coordination is very important in achieving the common goal of reducing carbon emissions.

This review concludes that there is a relationship between approaches in the aim of reducing carbon emissions related to drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices.

## 4 Table 1 .
41ICET4SDIOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 Paper Classification According to Source of Drivers, Barriers and Performance IndicatorIOP Publishing 
doi:10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034 

No. 
Authors 

Drivers 
Source 

Barriers 
Source 

Performance 
Indicator 
Practices 
IN EX IN EX EC EN OP 

1. 
Tapia Granados and Spash 
(2019) 
X 
X 
X 
Policies (must be balanced with renewable material and 
energy supply) 

2. 
Valadkhani, Nguyen, and 
Bowden (2019) 
X 
X 
X 
Renewables energy policies (only eligible to high-income 
countries) 

3. 
Di Filippo, Karpman, and 
DeShazo (2019) 
X 
X 
X 
Carbon-pricing policies (limit output and optimal level) 

4. 
Du et al. (2019) 
X 
X 
X 
Low carbon development policy (technology need) 

5. 
Chen, Benjaafar, and Elomri 
(2019) 
X 
X 
X 
Penalties in the decentralized supply chain (buyer-vendor 
supply chain framework) 

6. 
Daryanto, Wee, and Astanti 
(2019) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Optimizes the number of deliveries and delivery size 
(SCM contract) 

7. 
Bai, Gong, Jin, and Xu 
(2019) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology 
investment 

8. 
Liu (2019) 
X 
X 
X 
Revenue sharing contract, pricing, and targeted 
advertisement policy 

9. 
Zissis, Saharidis, Aktas, and 
Ioannou (2018) 
X 
X 
X 
Supply chain coordination with quantity discount 

10. 
J. Peng, Zhang, Xie, and Liu 
(2018) 
X 
X 
X 
Coordinate the relationship between household 
consumption by adjusting energy consumption structure 

11. 

Darom, Hishamuddin, 
Ramli, and Mat Nopiah 
(2018) 

X 
X 
a recovery model with safety stock as the mitigation 
strategy to respond to environmental issues 

12. 
Zhou and Ye (2018) 
X 
X 
X 
Shared emission reduction strategies and contract design 
under a low-carbon environment 

13. 
H. Peng, Pang, and Cong 
(2018) 
X 
X 
X 
quantity discount contracts as a medium of coordination 
between players in the supply chain system 

14. 

Dash Wu, Yang, and Olson 
(2018) 
X 
X 
X 

contract to coordinate supply chain under optimal order 
quantity, the optimal wholesale price of the manufacturer, 
and optimal carbon emission level 

15. 
Bai, Xu, and Zhang (2018) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
coordination with emission reduction, revenue-and 
investment-sharing (RIS) contract 

16. 
L. Xu, Wang, and Zhao 
(2018) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Revenue sharing contract 

17. 
Aljazzar, Gurtu, and Jaber 
(2018) 
X 
X 
X 
Delay in payment to improve economic performance 

18. 
X. Xu, He, Xu, and Zhang 
(2017) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Coordinate by Wholesale price and cost-sharing contract 

19. 
Ji, Zhang, and Yang (2017) 
X 
X 
X 
Production strategy and join emission reduction strategy 

20. 
Yang, Zhang, and Ji (2017) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Profit-sharing contracts 

21. 
Bai, Xu, Xu, and Wang 
(2016) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Revised revenue sharing contract 

22. 
Wang, Zhao, and He (2016) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Retailer and manufacturer join carbon reduction contract 

23. 
Ding, Zhao, An, and Tang 
(2016) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Incentive mechanism policy 

24. 
Zhou, Bao, Chen, and Xu 
(2016) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
co-op advertising contract and the co-op advertising & 
emission reduction cost-sharing contracts 

25. 
Sarkar, Ganguly, Sarkar, and 
Pareek (2016) 
X 
X 
X 
Coordination between players 

26. 
Ding, Zhao, An, Xu, and Liu 
(2015) 
X 
X 
X 
Coordination with optimal pricing strategies 

27. 
Tseng and Hung (2014) 
X 
X 
X 
Government regulation, level of social costs effectively 
reduce carbon emissions 

28. 
Zhang, Wang, and Ren 
(2014) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Pricing and coordination strategy 

29. 
Liu, Kasturiratne, and 
Moizer (2012) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Multi-dimensional integration strategy 

30. 
Elhedhli and Merrick (2012) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Network design 

ICET4SD 
IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 

IOP Publishing 
doi:10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034 




ICET4SD IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/0120347 


AcknowledgementThis research is supported and financed by the Ministry of Research, Technology, and Higher Education of the Republic of Indonesia under the PDP scheme.
Key themes and research opportunities in sustainable supply chain management -identification and evaluation. H Reefke, D Sundaram, 2017/01/01/ 2017Omega. 66H. Reefke and D. Sundaram, "Key themes and research opportunities in sustainable supply chain management -identification and evaluation," Omega, vol. 66, pp. 195-211, 2017/01/01/ 2017.

Industry Self-Regulation without Sanctions: The Chemical Industry's Responsible Care Program. A A King, M J Lenox, The Academy of Management Journal. 434A. A. King and M. J. Lenox, "Industry Self-Regulation without Sanctions: The Chemical Industry's Responsible Care Program," The Academy of Management Journal, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 698-716, 2000.

Green Supply Chain Management: A Concise Introduction. J Sarkis, Y Dou, Taylor & FrancisJ. Sarkis and Y. Dou, Green Supply Chain Management: A Concise Introduction. Taylor & Francis, 2017.

Collaborative mechanism of a sustainable supply chain with environmental constraints and carbon caps. H Ding, Q Zhao, Z An, O Tang, 2016/11/01/ 2016International Journal of Production Economics. 181H. Ding, Q. Zhao, Z. An, and O. Tang, "Collaborative mechanism of a sustainable supply chain with environmental constraints and carbon caps," International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 181, pp. 191-207, 2016/11/01/ 2016.

Policies to reduce CO2 emissions: Fallacies and evidence from the United States and California. J A Tapia Granados, C L Spash, 2019/04/01/ 2019Environmental Science & Policy. 94J. A. Tapia Granados and C. L. Spash, "Policies to reduce CO2 emissions: Fallacies and evidence from the United States and California," Environmental Science & Policy, vol. 94, pp. 262-266, 2019/04/01/ 2019.

The impacts of policies to reduce CO2 emissions within the concrete supply chain. J Di Filippo, J Karpman, J R Deshazo, 2019/08/01/ 2019Cement and Concrete Composites. 101J. Di Filippo, J. Karpman, and J. R. DeShazo, "The impacts of policies to reduce CO2 emissions within the concrete supply chain," Cement and Concrete Composites, vol. 101, pp. 67-82, 2019/08/01/ 2019.

Effects of carbon emission reduction on supply chain coordination with vendor-managed deteriorating product inventory. Q Bai, Y Gong, M Jin, X Xu, 2019/02/01/ 2019International Journal of Production Economics. 208Q. Bai, Y. Gong, M. Jin, and X. Xu, "Effects of carbon emission reduction on supply chain coordination with vendor-managed deteriorating product inventory," International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 208, pp. 83-99, 2019/02/01/ 2019.

Green supply chain network design: A review focused on policy adoption and emission quantification. C Waltho, S Elhedhli, F Gzara, 2019/02/01/ 2019International Journal of Production Economics. 208C. Waltho, S. Elhedhli, and F. Gzara, "Green supply chain network design: A review focused on policy adoption and emission quantification," International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 208, pp. 305-318, 2019/02/01/ 2019.

Green supply chain network design to reduce carbon emissions. S Elhedhli, R Merrick, 2012/07/01/ 2012Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment. 175S. Elhedhli and R. Merrick, "Green supply chain network design to reduce carbon emissions," Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 370-379, 2012/07/01/ 2012.

10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. IOP Publishing72212034IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034

Analysis of driving factors on China's air pollution emissions from the view of critical supply chains. J Peng, Y Zhang, R Xie, Y Liu, 2018/12/01Journal of Cleaner Production. 203J. Peng, Y. Zhang, R. Xie, and Y. Liu, "Analysis of driving factors on China's air pollution emissions from the view of critical supply chains," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 203, pp. 197-209, 2018/12/01/ 2018.

Pathways to reduce CO2 emissions as countries proceed through stages of economic development. A Valadkhani, J Nguyen, M Bowden, 2019/06/01/ 2019Energy Policy. 129A. Valadkhani, J. Nguyen, and M. Bowden, "Pathways to reduce CO2 emissions as countries proceed through stages of economic development," Energy Policy, vol. 129, pp. 268-278, 2019/06/01/ 2019.

Dynamics and scenarios of carbon emissions in China's construction industry. Q Du, L Shao, J Zhou, N Huang, T Bao, C Hao, 2019/04/30/ 2019Sustainable Cities and Society. Q. Du, L. Shao, J. Zhou, N. Huang, T. Bao, and C. Hao, "Dynamics and scenarios of carbon emissions in China's construction industry," Sustainable Cities and Society, 2019/04/30/ 2019.

An inventory model of supply chain disruption recovery with safety stock and carbon emission consideration. N A Darom, H Hishamuddin, R Ramli, Z Mat Nopiah, 2018/10/01Journal of Cleaner Production. 197N. A. Darom, H. Hishamuddin, R. Ramli, and Z. Mat Nopiah, "An inventory model of supply chain disruption recovery with safety stock and carbon emission consideration," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 197, pp. 1011-1021, 2018/10/01/ 2018.

A strategic decision-making model considering the social costs of carbon dioxide emissions for sustainable supply chain management. S.-C Tseng, S.-W Hung, 2014/01/15/ 2014Journal of Environmental Management. 133S.-C. Tseng and S.-W. Hung, "A strategic decision-making model considering the social costs of carbon dioxide emissions for sustainable supply chain management," Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 133, pp. 315-322, 2014/01/15/ 2014.

Contracting emission reduction for supply chains considering market low-carbon preference. Q Wang, D Zhao, L He, 2016/05/01/ 2016Journal of Cleaner Production. 120Q. Wang, D. Zhao, and L. He, "Contracting emission reduction for supply chains considering market low-carbon preference," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 120, pp. 72-84, 2016/05/01/ 2016.

Carbon emission reduction decisions in the retail-/dual-channel supply chain with consumers' preference. J Ji, Z Zhang, L Yang, 2017/01/10/ 2017Journal of Cleaner Production. 141J. Ji, Z. Zhang, and L. Yang, "Carbon emission reduction decisions in the retail-/dual-channel supply chain with consumers' preference," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 141, pp. 852- 867, 2017/01/10/ 2017.

On the effectiveness of emission penalties in decentralized supply chains. X Chen, S Benjaafar, A Elomri, 2019/05/01/ 2019European Journal of Operational Research. 2743X. Chen, S. Benjaafar, and A. Elomri, "On the effectiveness of emission penalties in decentralized supply chains," European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 274, no. 3, pp. 1155-1167, 2019/05/01/ 2019.

Three-echelon supply chain model considering carbon emission and item deterioration. Y Daryanto, H M Wee, R D Astanti, 2019/02/01/ 2019Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. 122Y. Daryanto, H. M. Wee, and R. D. Astanti, "Three-echelon supply chain model considering carbon emission and item deterioration," Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, vol. 122, pp. 368-383, 2019/02/01/ 2019.

Emission reduction via supply chain coordination. D Zissis, G K D Saharidis, E Aktas, G Ioannou, /07/01Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment. 62D. Zissis, G. K. D. Saharidis, E. Aktas, and G. Ioannou, "Emission reduction via supply chain coordination," Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 62, pp. 36- 46, 2018/07/01/ 2018.

Coordination contracts for a supply chain with yield uncertainty and low-carbon preference. H Peng, T Pang, J Cong, Journal of Cleaner Production. 205H. Peng, T. Pang, and J. Cong, "Coordination contracts for a supply chain with yield uncertainty and low-carbon preference," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 205, pp. 291- 302, 2018/12/20/ 2018.

Emission reduction decision and coordination of a make-toorder supply chain with two products under cap-and-trade regulation. Q Bai, J Xu, Y Zhang, 2018/05/01Computers & Industrial Engineering. 119Q. Bai, J. Xu, and Y. Zhang, "Emission reduction decision and coordination of a make-to- order supply chain with two products under cap-and-trade regulation," Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 119, pp. 131-145, 2018/05/01/ 2018.

Pricing policies and coordination of low-carbon supply chain considering targeted advertisement and carbon emission reduction costs in the big data environment. P Liu, 2019/02/10/ 2019Journal of Cleaner Production. 210P. Liu, "Pricing policies and coordination of low-carbon supply chain considering targeted advertisement and carbon emission reduction costs in the big data environment," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 210, pp. 343-357, 2019/02/10/ 2019.

Supply chain coordination with green technology under cap-and-trade regulation. X Xu, P He, H Xu, Q Zhang, 2017/01/01/ 2017International Journal of Production Economics. 183X. Xu, P. He, H. Xu, and Q. Zhang, "Supply chain coordination with green technology under cap-and-trade regulation," International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 183, pp. 433- 442, 2017/01/01/ 2017.

Pricing strategy of environmental sustainable supply chain with internalizing externalities. H Ding, Q Zhao, Z An, J Xu, Q Liu, 2015/12/01/ 2015International Journal of Production Economics. 170H. Ding, Q. Zhao, Z. An, J. Xu, and Q. Liu, "Pricing strategy of environmental sustainable supply chain with internalizing externalities," International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 170, pp. 563-575, 2015/12/01/ 2015.

A hub-and-spoke model for multi-dimensional integration of green marketing and sustainable supply chain management. S Liu, D Kasturiratne, J Moizer, 2012/05/01/ 2012Industrial Marketing Management. 414S. Liu, D. Kasturiratne, and J. Moizer, "A hub-and-spoke model for multi-dimensional integration of green marketing and sustainable supply chain management," Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 581-588, 2012/05/01/ 2012.

Differential game model of joint emission reduction strategies and contract design in a dual-channel supply chain. Y Zhou, X Ye, 2018/07/20Journal of Cleaner Production. 190Y. Zhou and X. Ye, "Differential game model of joint emission reduction strategies and contract design in a dual-channel supply chain," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 190, pp. 592-607, 2018/07/20/ 2018.

10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. IOP Publishing72212034IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 722 (2020) 012034 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012034

Effect of variable transportation and carbon emission in a three-echelon supply chain model. B Sarkar, B Ganguly, M Sarkar, S Pareek, 2016/07/01/ 2016Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. 91B. Sarkar, B. Ganguly, M. Sarkar, and S. Pareek, "Effect of variable transportation and carbon emission in a three-echelon supply chain model," Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, vol. 91, pp. 112-128, 2016/07/01/ 2016.

Coordinating a supply chain for deteriorating items with multi-factor-dependent demand over a finite planning horizon. Q Bai, X Xu, J Xu, D Wang, 2016/11/01/ 2016Applied Mathematical Modelling. 4021Q. Bai, X. Xu, J. Xu, and D. Wang, "Coordinating a supply chain for deteriorating items with multi-factor-dependent demand over a finite planning horizon," Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 40, no. 21, pp. 9342-9361, 2016/11/01/ 2016.

Green supply chain management under capital constraint. D Wu, L Yang, D L Olson, International Journal of Production Economics. D. Dash Wu, L. Yang, and D. L. Olson, "Green supply chain management under capital constraint," International Journal of Production Economics, 2018/09/17/ 2018.

Decision and coordination in the dual-channel supply chain considering cap-and-trade regulation. L Xu, C Wang, J Zhao, 2018/10/01Journal of Cleaner Production. 197L. Xu, C. Wang, and J. Zhao, "Decision and coordination in the dual-channel supply chain considering cap-and-trade regulation," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 197, pp. 551-561, 2018/10/01/ 2018.

Research on pricing and coordination strategy of green supply chain under hybrid production mode. C.-T Zhang, H.-X Wang, M.-L Ren, 06/01/ 2014Computers & Industrial Engineering. 72C.-T. Zhang, H.-X. Wang, and M.-L. Ren, "Research on pricing and coordination strategy of green supply chain under hybrid production mode," Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 72, pp. 24-31, 2014/06/01/ 2014.

Pricing and carbon emission reduction decisions in supply chains with vertical and horizontal cooperation. L Yang, Q Zhang, J Ji, 2017/09/01/ 2017International Journal of Production Economics. 191L. Yang, Q. Zhang, and J. Ji, "Pricing and carbon emission reduction decisions in supply chains with vertical and horizontal cooperation," International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 191, pp. 286-297, 2017/09/01/ 2017.

Co-op advertising and emission reduction cost sharing contracts and coordination in low-carbon supply chain based on fairness concerns. Y Zhou, M Bao, X Chen, X Xu, Journal of Cleaner Production. 133Y. Zhou, M. Bao, X. Chen, and X. Xu, "Co-op advertising and emission reduction cost sharing contracts and coordination in low-carbon supply chain based on fairness concerns," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 133, pp. 402-413, 2016/10/01/ 2016.

Delay-in-payments -A strategy to reduce carbon emissions from supply chains. S M Aljazzar, A Gurtu, M Y Jaber, 2018/01/01Journal of Cleaner Production. 170S. M. Aljazzar, A. Gurtu, and M. Y. Jaber, "Delay-in-payments -A strategy to reduce carbon emissions from supply chains," Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 170, pp. 636-644, 2018/01/01/ 2018.

A literature review on green supply chain management: Trends and future challenges. M.-L Tseng, M S Islam, N Karia, F A Fauzi, S Afrin, 2019/02/01/ 2019Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 141M.-L. Tseng, M. S. Islam, N. Karia, F. A. Fauzi, and S. Afrin, "A literature review on green supply chain management: Trends and future challenges," Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 141, pp. 145-162, 2019/02/01/ 2019.

Drivers of green supply chain initiatives and performance: Evidence from the electrical and electronics industries in Taiwan. Y.-C Huang, C.-H Huang, M.-L Yang, 2017/10/02International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management. 479Y.-C. Huang, C.-H. Huang, and M.-L. Yang, "Drivers of green supply chain initiatives and performance: Evidence from the electrical and electronics industries in Taiwan," International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 796-819, 2017/10/02 2017.