# Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food: A Review

CorpusID: 213274842
 
tags: #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences, #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ad1d7ca504d2bd266c568f593d337d2410852af](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ad1d7ca504d2bd266c568f593d337d2410852af)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food: A Review


L Khoshbouy Lahidjani 
H Ahari dr.h.ahari@gmail.com 
Correspondence H Ahari
Department of Food Science and Technology, Science and Research Branch
Islamic Azad University
TehranIran

A Sharifan 

Department of Food Science and Technology, Science and Research Branch
Islamic Azad University
TehranIran

Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food: A Review

Iranian Journal of Aquatic Animal Health
51Received: January 2019 Accepted: April 201926High energy methodsLow-energy methodsNanoemulsionAntimicrobial properties
Nanotechnology is an innovative approach that its application has inspiring prospective for controlling and preventing diseases, extending shelf-life of food stuff, and other uses in biology, chemistry or industries.Nanoemulsions are products of a branch of nanotechnology comprising submicron emulsion that also refer to nanoemulsion (r < 100 nm) of which high energy as one of the nanoemulsion production method, includes rotary-stator mixers, high pressure homogenizer, microfluidization, ultrasound and membrane emulsion. Another one, low energy method is classified into isothermal and thermal. Isothermal method is, spontaneous emulsification, solvent displacement, and emulsion phase inversion. Also, from among the thermal methods it can be referred to the most important one of them which is the phase inversion temperature. ). In the following, the technics for recognition and diagnosis of nanoemulsion structures are discussed and these technics are generally divided into separation, physical properties determination, and imaging technics.

## Introduction

Nanotechnology is an innovative approach that its application has inspiring prospective for controlling and preventing diseases, extending shelf-life of food stuff, and other uses in biology, chemistry, biochemistry where this property is mostly contributed to atomic scale in the size range of 100 nm or smaller matters (Wang, 


### Water Phase

Water phase is one of the irreplaceable ingredients in the production of nanoemulsion.

It can be explained that the proportion of water to oil phase is an important factor in the  


## Methods of nanoemulsion production


### High Energy Methods


#### Rotor-stator mixers

This method is widely used in a range of industries such as food, medicine, and cosmetics and is a standard method, which used for producing mid to high viscosity emulsions. On 


#### High Pressure Valve Homogenization

This method is one of the very common methods in the industry, which is often used to minimize emulsion droplets using rotor mixer.

Generally, this method entails two stages. In the first stage, the surface to volume ratio of the 


### Low Energy Methods

In these methods, nanoemulsion is produced 


#### Thermal Methods

In these methods, changes in temperature are needed for producing nanoemulsion.


##### Phase Inversion Temperature (PIT)


## Method

In this method, basically, in order to produce 


## Antimicrobial activity of nanoemulsion on fish and other animals

Herbal or other chemical-loaded Nanoemulsion comprises many applied profits for increasing food safety specifically while it would be incorporating with omega-3 oils into foods (Walker, Decker & McClements 2015). 


. The convergence of nanotechnology,in accordance with its many capabilities, and food science has led to more than 200 large worldwide companies investing in new products in the field of nanotechnology. Based on the tremendous potential for nanotechnology applications in the food industry, it is expected L Khoshbouy et al., Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on which the drug is injected in the interior period of the system protected from the exterior media. Nanoemulsions encompass a liquid stage, emulsifying compound and a combination of several oils (e.g. corn oil, mineral oil and olive oil) (Ferreira-Nunes, Gratieri, Gelfuso, & Cunha-Filho 2018). Nano-emulsions are also utilized for micro capsulation of bioactive compounds. Since bioactive compounds undergo undesirable changes in their properties after entering the body and going through digestion phases, as a result of change of the temperature, humidity, and pH, until the time they reach their target area in the body, they are stored in capsules smaller than 100 nanometers (Ahari 2017). As bioactive compounds contain aldehyde, ketone, ester bonds in their structure, they are great prone to oxidative decay, while micro capsulation prevents light and oxidative particular food safety branch to extend use of it (Sajjadi 2006). In the present article, we review the methods of nanoemulsion production generally categorized as two groups of high-energy and low-energy production methods. The low-energy technique was studied against a high-energy technique (microfluidization). Minor droplets (d< 160 nm) can be formed by both methods, but less surfactant was required for the high-energy technique than the others (Ostertag, Weiss & McClements 2012). In general, four components: (a) oil stage (b) water stage (c) surfactant and (d) energy needed to generate nanoemulsion (Figure 1).

## Figure 1 .
1component in the generation of nanoemulsion


of nanoemulsions is generally done through two methods, high energy and low energy. In the former, some factors for creating high mechanical energy are used to form particles in nano scale size such as temperature, time, and properties of ingredients. In the latter, L Khoshbouy et al., Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food 31 low energy is used for forming nanoemulsion particles and the desirability of the size of particles (Ostertag et al., 2012), which are formed depends on the physical and chemical properties of surfactant and co-surfactant as well as the oil droplets, which were involved in the formation of nanoemulsion. Also,


the top part of this device, the rotor or the twisting part is placed(Wooster, Andrews & Sanguansri 2017), which is jointed on an axis so that the part is protruded out of stator plate and liquid enters the rotor through the axis. Rotor accelerates the liquid flow first in a tangent form and then, it is conducted towards stator plate, which has a blade.Then, it is fed through the slot from plate to the stator (Scholz & Keck 2015). Some studies show harsh hydrodynamic tensions either in form of speed gradient or high chaos existed in the inner and the end part of the outer slot (van der Schaaf & Karbstein 2018). Hydrodynamic harshness and following that, the final particles size depends on the spin speed of the rotor in the industry. The passage flow is very slow and this is due to the fact that each drop of liquid must turn into a significant number of stable drops in nano-scale sizes (Håkansson & Rayner 2018).

## ((
A mixture of chitosan biopolymer, nanoclay and Rosemary essential oil was modified as an applicable bionanocomposite coverage. Its capability to enhance the shelf life of fresh fillet fish, Hypophthalmichthys molitrix kept in Bazargani-Gilani 2018). Coconut covering fluid smoke nanoemulsion had qualifications of particle size 13.43 nm, which are a potential antibacterial for fresh fish. Application of 5% fluid smoke of Coconut nano-scale partcles, prolonged the fish freshness up to 24 h at 24 O C. This nanoemulsion retarded the bacterial growth as bacteriostat. The greatest antibacterial feature was implemented against coliforms (Saloko, Darmadji, Setiaji & Pranoto 2014). Antibacterial effects of essential oil of rosemary, Laurel and thyme nanoemulsions on the specifications of trout were studied at 2 O C. The freshness of trout fillets was continued more than two week. The application of nanoemulsions based on herbal extracts decreased the quantities of the biochemical factors and bacterial growth (Ozogul, Yuvka, Ucar, Durmus, Kösker, Öz, & Ozogul 2017). Against to ordinary emulsions veneer, citrus essential oil-loaded nanoemulsions coating was impressive effect on prohibition the bacterial growth and alteration in the biochemical factors of the silvery pomfret within refrigerating storage. The results showed prolonging the shelf life of the fillets about 2 weeks. These findings supposed that nanoemulsion veneer could be an applicable conservation compound for marine fishes (Wu, Wang, Hu, Chen, Liu & Ye 2016). The adding of jujube gum enhanced the conservative effect of nanoemulsions so that the film layer comprising 3.5% nanoemulsion and 12% jujube gum showed the optimum feature to stabilizing the specifications of caviar fish fillet for 2 weeks at cold storage. An remarkable growth in the amount of chemical and bacterial attributes was recorded by increasing of days, whereas the values of pH, and sensory factors of the fillet quality decreased (p < 0.05) (Gharibzahedi & Mohammadnabi 2017). Antimicrobial properties of betel leaf essence nano-emulsion. Betel essence, as the scatter phase, distilled water as the continuous phase, and twin 20 nonionic surfactant as the emulsifier were used in nano-emulsion production through high energy ultrasound method which was formulated in six different volume ratios of oil to surfactant (al. (2018) explored the antimicrobial properties of Citral oil essence nano-emulsion. This nano-emulsion was composed of Citral essence, doubled distilled water, a combination of surfactants (Span 85 and Brij 97), and a co-L Khoshbouy et al., Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterococcus faecalis bacteria. however, the antimicrobial results of nano-emulsion on Listeria monocytogenes and S. aureus were different from the rest of species as they had a wider inhibitory area in comparison with the other bacteria (Lu, Huang, Wang, Yeh, Tsai, Huang & Li 2018). Noori, Zeynali, and Almasi (2018) studied the antimicrobial properties of ginger essence emulsion and nanoemulsion and sodium caseinate edible coating on fillet chicken breast. This nanoemulsion was prepared using Tween 80 nonionic surfactant, ginger essence and double distilled water in two stages. In the first stage, the conventional emulsion was prepared by gradual and constant addition of the essence and Tween 80 into water while shaking (3000 rpm) and then, the resulting emulsion was transformed into nanoemulsion using the ultrasound method. Polydispersity index (PDI) decreased after preparation of the nanoemulsion (from 0.584 to 0.222). The highest intensity peak of nano-emulsion in 57 nanometer area showed that the majority of drops turned into very small particles after applying the ultrasound energy. Bacterial growth inhibition test was performed using Agar well diffusion and on two pathogenic species, L. Monocytogenes and S. Typhimurium. The treatment of coating with 3 percent antibiotic, Gentamicin had the highest growth inhibition in each of the microbial species and the sample with edible coating along with emulsion and nano-emulsion with two different percentages (3 and 6 percent) had the smallest growth inhibition. When the edible coating is utilized with the 3% of emulsion, the growth inhibition in L. Monocytogenes and S. Typhimurium is 10.33 and 8.66 mm, respectively. When the 6 percent emulsion was utilized, antimicrobial properties in L. Monocytogenes significantly increased (p<0.05); while there was not much change in S. Typhimurium (p>0.05). The treatment containing edible coating along with nanoemulsion in both of the microbial species had a significantly larger inhibition growth in comparison to ordinary emulsion (p<0.05). (Noori et al., 2018). Li, Chang, Saenger, and Deering (2017) studied the antimicrobial properties of Thymol oil essence nanoemulsion through Spontaneous emulsification. The oil phase contained Thymol essence solved in ethanol (as a co-solvent) and the water phase contained one of the sodium lauryl sulfate surfactants (anion), polysorbate 20 (nonionic), triton X-100 (nonionic), or Brij 85 (nonionic) solved in water. Three different volume ratios (essence: surfactant) were considered for each surfactant type (1:2, 1:5, 1:10) and using diffused light spectroscope, it was found that the polysorbate 20 and sodium lauryl sulfate (regardless of volume ratio) with the particle diameter of 200 nanometers is the most effective surfactant for the formation of particles in nano scale. Negative Zeta potential in sodium lauryl sulfate which is a ionic surfactant was expected, but it was unexpected of the nonionic surfactants. This might be due to the existence of hydroxyl ion on the drop surfaces or impurity in the reagents. Nanoemulsions stability was measured by measuring the Z-average, diameter and PDI after being exposed to heat and physical tensions and the size of particles containing polysurbate 20 and sodium lauryl sulfate did not change as a result of being centrifuged and facing cold and heat, but the samples containing other surfactants accompanying with an increase in size after being exposed to tension the samples with diameters more than 1000 nanometer was formed. Antimicrobial tests of thymol emulsion were first evaluated against E. coli, E. faecalis, and Candida albicans species in plankton state. The highest antimicrobial property concerning the samples, had surfactants of polysorbate 20 and sodium lauryl sulfate (with the lowest concentration). Emulsions were most effective on E. coli and had the least effect on E. faecalis. The contradiction which existed between the surfactant and essence was totally transparent in the sample containing Triton-X 100 in 1:2 and 1:5 mass ratios due to the lack of antimicrobial property. Generally, formulation without surfactant had the highest inhibition. (Li et al.LAE) which is a cation surfactant solved in water with antimicrobial property and Tween 80 nonionic surfactant. Cinnamon oil with 1% wt in water phase which contained Tween which Tween 20 was used, became opaque before and after heating. Contrarily, samples in which Tween 80 were used, transparent both before and after heating. In samples with Tween 80 (except for the samples with 0.05 %wt. of Lauric arginate) stability and no sediment was observed. In the samples with the least concentration of Lauric arginate, an increase in the hydrodynamic diameter was seen and in all of the samples, the hydrodynamic diameter decreased after 30 days of storage. However, this decrease was not statistically significant (p>0.05). There was no significant difference in the PDI of particles before and after one month storage (p>0.05). MIC index for E. coli and S. enteritidis along with the nanoemulsion was shown 1 ppm greater than the amount in Lauric anginate while 2 ppm greater in the nano-emulsion for L. monocytogenes, than that of in Lauric Arginate. In general, MBC was more than MIC and no growth inhibition was observed for Tween 80 up to 60.00ppm. MIC (400 ppm) and MBC (600 ppm) in cinnamon essential oil was the same for all bacteria. The presence of Lauric arginate with cinnamon essential oil against Gram negative bacteria, showed a decrease of CFU of bacteria as first and was along with an increase ultimately. In positive Gram bacteria, the only significant growth inhibition was occurred in the Lauric arginate and cinnamon essential oil combination. The greatest microbicideal affect occurred against L.monocytogenes in the media 24 h. Lauric arginate alone had the least antimicrobial effect on E. Coli (3.5 log CFU mL -1 ) after 24 h. For L. monocytogenes, no difference was observed between the effectiveness of the treatments (except lauric arginate alone) at 24, but after 48 h, in the treatment containing nanoemulsion, a 3 log CFU ml -1 of L. monocytogenes was observed but in that of Lauric arginate, the least effect was observed. Based on the results of this research, using Lauric arginate along with Tween 80 led into an increase in nanoemulsion stability without any side effect on its antimicrobial properties (Hilbig et al., 2016). Other researchers (Liang, Xu, Shoemaker, Li, Zhong & Huang 2012) tried to produce peppermint oil (PO) nanoemulsion using homogenizer with high pressure to study its physical and antimicrobial properties. Water phase was achieved by combining pure gum powder in double distilled water in 21%wt. This study showed that the particles average diameter significantly decreases by increasing the homogenizer pressure from 50 this proportion. It was observed no changes in PDI, unless oil phase proportion exceeded 4:3. They ultimately concluded that if the proportion of oil phase to starch to be 3:3, the average diameter of particles would be smaller, and the distribution of particles would be narrower. The bacterial death time assay was accomplished in order to compare inhibition growth in emulsion without essential oil, pure essential oil, and essential oil nanoemulsion treatments. It was concluded that the emulsion without essential oil would not have any growth inhibition; while by adding peppermint essential oil, whether in pure form or as nano-emulsion, a great growth inhibition was observed for both species of bacteria. In L. monocytogenes during the first 8 hours, 10 1 CFU ml -1 bacteria were eradicated, but bacteria cells grew very fast after that time. This arising trend was slower in the nanoemulsion than in pure essential oil, so that after 36 hours, L. monocytogenes levels in essential oil and nano-emulsion were 10 7 and 10 4 CFU mL -1 , respectively. Regarding S. aureus, , only 10 1 CFU mL -Liang et al., 2012). Conclusion Generally, there exists a tendency in the industries toward using natural materials with functions like artificial materials. The recent researches show the numerous advantages of nanoemulsions in providing bioactive and antimicrobial natural materials. The function of these materials are due to their small size and their high surface to volume ratio which cause more interaction of antimicrobial nanoemulsion with microbial cells or in nanoemulsions which contain bioactive materials, they increase the biological access and digestion ability of these emulsions. Despite all these advantages, there exists a need to more researches in this regard in order to make practical and industrial nanoparticles in particular, nanoemulsions. As an instance, in order for using nanoemulsions of oils, there should be further researches on their relationship with macromolecules, carbohydrates, or fibers so that these products can supply the consumers and producers with valid data. on the shelf life of fresh silver carp. International Journal of Food Science & Technology 49(3), 811-818. Ahari H. (2017) The Use of Innovative Nano emulsions and Nano-Silver Composites Packaging for anti-bacterial properties: An article review. Iranian Journal of Aquatic Animal Health 3(1), 61-73. Anton N. & Vandamme T. F. International journal of pharmaceutics 377(1-2), 142-147. Bali V., Ali M. & Ali J. (2010) Study of surfactant combinations and development of a novel nanoemulsion for minimising variations in bioavailability of ezetimibe. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 76(2), 410-420. Barani S., Ahari H. & Bazgir S. (2018) Increasing the shelf life of pikeperch (Sander lucioperca) fillets affected by low-density polyethylene/Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites experimentally produced by sol-gel and melt-L Khoshbouy et al., Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food 39 mixing methods. International Journal of Food Properties 21(1), 1923-1936. Bazarani-Gilani B. (2018) Activating sodium alginate-based edible coating using a dietary supplement for increasing the shelf life of rainbow trout fillet during refrigerated storage (4±1° C). Journal of Food Safety 38(1), e12395. Bilbao-Sáinz C., Avena-Bustillos R. J., Wood D. F., Williams T. G. & McHugh T. H. (2010) Nanoemulsions prepared by a low-energy emulsification method applied to edible films. Journal of agricultural and food chemistry 58(22), 11932-11938. Cardoso-Ugarte G. A., López-Malo A. & Jiménez-Munguía M. T. (2016) Application of nanoemulsion technology for encapsulation and release of lipophilic bioactive compounds in food. In Emulsions (pp. 227-255): Elsevier. Donsì F., Sessa, M. & Ferrari G. (2011) Effect of emulsifier type and disruption chamber geometry on the fabrication of food nanoemulsions by high pressure homogenization. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 51(22), 7606-7618. Ferreira-Nunes R., Gratieri T., Gelfuso G. M. & Cunha-Filho M. (2018) Mixture design applied in compatibility studies of catechin and lipid compounds. Journal of pharmaceutical and biomedical analysis 149, 612-617. Ganachaud F. & Katz J. L. (2005) Nanoparticles and nanocapsules created using the Ouzo effect: spontaneous emulsification as an alternative to ultrasonic and high-shear devices. ChemPhysChem 6(2), Journal of Food Engineering 114(2), 158-163. Li J., Chang J. W., Saenger M. & Deering A. (2017) Thymol nanoemulsions formed via spontaneous emulsification: Physical and antimicrobial properties. Food chemistry 232, 191-197. Li M., Ma Y. & Cui J. (2014) Whey-proteinstabilized nanoemulsions as a potential delivery system for water-insoluble curcumin. LWT-Food science and technology 59(1), 49-58. Liang R., Xu, S., Shoemaker C. F., Li, Y., Zhong F. & Huang Q. (2012) Physical and antimicrobial properties of peppermint oil nanoemulsions. Journal of agricultural and food chemistry 60(30), 7548-7555. Lu W. C., Huang D. W., Wang C. C., Yeh C. H., Tsai J. C., Huang Y. T. & Li P. H. (2018) Preparation, characterization, and antimicrobial activity of nanoemulsions incorporating citral essential oil. Journal of food and drug analysis 26(1), 82-89. Formulation. In S. M. Jafari & D. J. McClements (Eds.), Nanoemulsions (pp. Critical reviews in food science and nutrition, 51(4), 285-330. Noori S., Zeynali F. & Almasi H. (2018) Antimicrobial and antioxidant efficiency of nanoemulsion-based edible coating containing ginger (Zingiber officinale) essential oil and its effect on safety and quality attributes of chicken breast fillets. Food Control 84, by emulsion phase inversion. Journal of colloid and interface science 388(1), 95-102. Ozogul Y., Yuvka İ., Ucar Y., Durmus M., Kösker A. R., Öz M. & Ozogul F. (2017) Evaluation of effects of nanoemulsion based on herb essential oils (rosemary, laurel, thyme and sage) on sensory, chemical and microbiological quality of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) fillets during ice storage. LWT, 75, 677-684. Qian C. & McClements D. J. (2011) Formation of nanoemulsions stabilized by model foodgrade emulsifiers using high-pressure homogenization: factors affecting particle size. Food Hydrocolloids 25(5), 1000-1008. Rao J. & McClements D. J. (2010) Stabilization of phase inversion temperature nanoemulsions by surfactant displacement. Journal of agricultural and food chemistry, 58(11) betel leaf (Piper betle L.) essential oil based nanoemulsion and its in vitro antibacterial efficacy against selected food pathogens. Food chemistry 185, 254-260. Saifullah M., Ahsan A. & Shishir M. R. I. (2016) 12 -Production, stability and application of micro-and nanoemulsion in food production and the food processing industry A2 -Grumezescu, Alexandru Mihai. In Emulsions (pp. 405-442): Academic Press. Sajjadi S. (2006) Nanoemulsion formation by phase inversion emulsification: on the nature of inversion. Langmuir 22(13), 5597-5603. Saloko S., Darmadji P., Setiaji B. & Pranoto Y. (2014) Antioxidative and antimicrobial activities of liquid smoke nanocapsules using chitosan and maltodextrin and its application on tuna fish preservation. Food bioscience 7, 71-79. Salvia-Trujillo L., Soliva-Fortuny R., Rojas-Graü M. A., McClements D. J. & Martín-Belloso O. (2017) Edible nanoemulsions as carriers of active ingredients: A review. Annual review of food science and technology 8, 439-466.


For the instance, Milk is an instance of oil in water emulsion and water in oil is the reverse of oil in water emulsion (Li, Ma & Cui 2014).Butter and margarine are of this emulsion type.Iranian Journal of Aquatic Animal Health 

28 

Dispersion-base Nanoemulsion 

Based on their dispersion issue, emulsions are 

divided into two groups: Oil in water (O/W) and 

water in oil (W/O). In the former state, oil drops 

are dispersed in the water phase; at low 

temperature, the surfactant monolayer has a great 

positive impulsive curving fabrication of oil-

swollen aggregated amphipathic solution phases 

(or O/W nanoemulsions) which may co-occur 

with an additional oil phase. At high 

temperatures, the impulsive curving turns into 

negative and water swollen reverse aggregated 

amphipathics (or W/O microemulsions) co-occur 

with additional water phase (Solans, Izquierdo, 

Nolla, Azemar & Garcia-Celma 2005). 

Emulsions are also classified based on their 

layers. In multi-layer or double-layer emulsion, 

the drops of a dispersed liquid (which can be an 

emulsion, a micro-emulsion and a liposome), is 

dispersed once more in another liquid (which 

can be either water or oil), and in this way, a 

double-layer emulsion is formed. The double-

layer emulsion is in two forms of water in oil in 

water (W/O/W) and oil in water in oil (O/W/O). 

In a study multiple W/O/W nanoemulsions 

were improved to fabricate skin use of medicine 

Aciclovir to fight against virus. To produce 

such this drugs, the phase inversion temperature 

(PIT) method was used to finalize the designs 

with no requirement to high pressure to be in 

(Schwarz, Klang, Karall, Mahrhauser, Resch & 

Valenta 2012). 

The structure of these double-layer 

emulsions entails an emulsifier layer, too. 

(Saifullah, Ahsan & Shishir 2016). 

Ordinary emulsions 

The ordinary emulsion with a high light 

dispersion which is known as macro-emulsion, 

includes drops with an average diameter of 100 

micrometers to 100 nanometers has unstable 

thermodynamic properties, and opaque in 

appearance. Nano-emulsions can be considered 

as ordinary emulsions which have very small 

particles with the average diameter of 20 to 100 

nanometers. Their relatively small size in 

comparison with light wavelength makes the 

emulsion clear or a little opaque (d<λ), in other 

words, they scatter the light less and their small 

particle size makes them show a high resistance 

to collection and gravity separation; however, 

this system is still thermodynamically unstable. 

Micro-emulsion is thermodynamically stable 

and the average diameter of its particles ranges 

from 5 to 50 nanometers. As these particles are 

much smaller than light wavelength (d<λ), this 

emulsion is transparent and light dispersion is 

very little in it (McClements 2010). Due to the 

excellent characteristics that nano-emulsions 

have in comparison with ordinary emulsions, 

such as high stability, increase in surface 

tension in oil and water, high biological access, 

informality and safety, they have many 

applications in food industry including 

packaging (Hossaini, Asadnezhad, Ahari, 

Anvar, Abdi, Toumari & Dastmalchi 2014), 

processing, protecting and release of bioactive 

lipophilic materials (vitamins, pesticides, 

antimicrobial compounds, and antioxidants) 

L Khoshbouy et al., Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food 

29 

(Shahbazzadeh, Ahari, Rahimi, Dastmalchi, 

Soltani, Fotovat, Rahmannya & Khorasani 

2009). 

1. Nano-emulsions Ingredients 

1.1. Oil Phase 

Oil phase is composed of bioactive compounds 

such as fish oil, essential oils, oil flavors, and 

vitamins which are solved in carrier oil. 

Generally, different kinds of oil are 

accompanying 
with 
production 
of 

nanoemulsions, including (mono-di-tri) acyl 

glycerol, free fatty acid, essential oils, organic 

oils, as well as waxes among which 

triglycerides have great usages due to their low 

cost, nontoxicity, and abundance of their raw 

sources (soy, sunflower, corn, and canola oil). 

Considering the complex structure of oils, their 

polarity and viscosity features are often varied 

and this can affect the formation and stability of 

nanoemulsions. For example, vegetable oils 

usually have low polarity but their viscosity is 

relatively high. Thus, they were not used in the 

production of nanoemulsions using Phase 

Inversion Temperature (PIT) and homogenizer 

with high pressure (Jin, Xu, Liang, Li, Liu & Li 

2016). 




particles increases because of the decrease in their size and in the second stage, they become stabilized with the absorption of emulsifier in the interface. Samples in nanometer size can be produced with this device (Donsì, Sessa & Ferrari 2011; Lee & Norton 2013). The preemulsified liquid is by pump force and through valves with 10-100 micrometer slots under high pressure being commonly around 50 to 200 MPa. As the liquid enters the valve, it increases and reaches around 100 m s -1 , which high local speed causes local pressure decrease to under evaporation point that in turn causes bubble gaps. These bubbles move downward through valve where they face a high local pressure and burst. This burst sends strong waves. When the current is passing through the narrow slot, it is linear and transient, but when it exits the narrow slot and reaches the large chamber, it makes the current a strong and turbulent jet. This phenomenon leads to the breakage of the drops and decrease of their size. A homogenizer with high pressure is very helpful, but it requires high pressure in order to form nanoemulsion particles (Yu, Cha, Wu, Xu, Qin, Li & Du This method is similar to homogenizer, with high pressure method as a driving force guiding the relatively large particle emulsion into a channel with a narrow flow which is often called reaction room. as soon as the current enters the channel, it is accelerated and instead of being turned into a turbulent current at the end of the channel, it is conducted to form circular currents, which congregate and cause impact zone to be formed at the end of the narrow channel (Mahdi Jafari, He & Bhandari 2006). This convergence of current with high entrance pressure, leads into the formation of nanoemulsion particles (Villalobos-Castillejos, Granillo-Guerrero, Leyva-Daniel, Alamilla-Beltrán, Gutiérrez-López, Monroy-Villagrana & Jafari 2018).2.1.4. UltrasonicationIn high pressure homogenizer, microfluidizer, and rotor-stator methods, the emulsion accelerating force, which is essential for nanoemulsion, is made with rotor blades, but inultrasonication, breaking macroemulsion is done with ultrasound waves. In doing so, waves are in 20 to 100 KHz range and these ultrasound waves cause cavitation and fragmentizes the particles. These vibrations are amplified, made efficient and transferred into a probe. Then, cavitation bubbles are made and move due to pressure fluctuations. When these bubbles reach each other, they have a great shear force which breaks the particles into nanoemulsion particles (Abbas, Hayat, Karangwa, Bashari & Zhang 2013). Ultrasonication devices are in two forms of Batch and Continuous. The Piezoelectric probes in batch devices are used by being placed into a chamber or reactor, while in continuous systems, this is employed by passing the current from one or more piezotransmitter (s) (McClements, 2015).2018). 

2.1.3. Microfluidization 



based on phase transfer as either the temperature is constant and materials change, or materials are constant and temperature changes. In other terms, low-energy methods are of two types: thermal and isothermal. In the latter, we need changes in structure for producing small droplets; in the former, we need changes in temperature in order to make the drops(Komaiko & McClements, 2016;    Ostertag et al., 2012).2.2.1. Isothermal Methods2.2.1.1. Spontaneous Emulsification (SE)This method is based on a number of physicochemical mechanisms; that is, as two liquids which are insoluble in each other while to be in touch. They make an emulsion without any external help (either in thermal or mechanical forms). In this method, oil phase is titrated in a container of water phase which caninitially be buffer solution. In this case, if 

structure, temperature and mixer speed are 

appropriate, particles of less than one hundred 

nanometers size are formed (Ganachaud & 

Katz, 2005). oil phase needs to be homogenized 

in a way that it is mixed with oil phase and 

hydrophilic surfactant and then oil phase is 

titrated in the liquid phase (Schuh, Bruxel, & 

Teixeira 2014). 

2.2.1.2. Emulsion Phase Inversion (EPI) 
This method entails adding water phase to oil 

phase while stirring. Oil phase usually contains 

oil and surfactant. The mechanism in this 

method is the reverse of SE method as water 

phase is first titrated in oil phase and water in oil 

emulsion is made. By adding more water, the 

liquid transparent phase which is formed is 

thickened and makes the stirring bar change 

from continuous to rotational. Formation of 

liquid transparent phase is a middle stage of 

nanoemulsion production which results in the 

production of a bi-continuous micro-emulsion. 

(Bilbao-Sáinz, 
Avena-Bustillos, 
Wood, 

Williams, & McHugh, 2010). In general, the 

critical amount of water in this method depends 

on the stirring pace, speed of water addition, and 

surfactant thickness. Then, water phase is titrated 

in it with a controlled speed. Extra stirring can 

also happen for ensuring the breakage and 

homogenization. As EPI is an isothermal 

method, keeping temperature constant has an 

important impact on the long-term storage of 

nano-emulsion in this method. This method is 

also called phase inversion composition (PIC) in 

some sources (Ostertag et al., 2012). 


Conflict of interestsThe authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
. H Ahari, M Hedayati, B Akbari-Adergani, Ahari H., Hedayati M., Akbari-Adergani B.,

. S Kakoolaki, H Hosseini, A Anvar, Kakoolaki S., Hosseini H. & Anvar A. (2017) http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/p ii/S0141813016320839.

General Principles of Nanoemulsion Formation by High-Energy Mechanical Methods. A Håkansson, M Rayner, Nanoemulsions. ElsevierHåkansson A. & Rayner M. (2018) General Principles of Nanoemulsion Formation by High-Energy Mechanical Methods. In Nanoemulsions (pp. 103-139): Elsevier.

. J Hilbig, Q Ma, P M Davidson, J Weiss, Hilbig J., Ma, Q., Davidson P. M., Weiss J. &

Physical and antimicrobial properties of cinnamon bark oil conanoemulsified by lauric arginate and Tween 80. Q Zhong, International journal of food microbiology. 233Zhong Q. (2016) Physical and antimicrobial properties of cinnamon bark oil co- nanoemulsified by lauric arginate and Tween 80. International journal of food microbiology 233, 52-59.

Survey of Increasing the Shelf-Life of Dry Salami by Nano Packagings. S E Hossaini, Z Asadnezhad, H Ahari, S A A Anvar, F Abdi, I Toumari, F Dastmalchi, Iranian Journal of Public Health. 432160Hossaini S. E., Asadnezhad Z., Ahari H., Anvar S. A. A., Abdi F., Toumari I. & Dastmalchi F. (2014) Survey of Increasing the Shelf-Life of Dry Salami by Nano Packagings. Iranian Journal of Public Health 43(2), 160.

Nanoemulsions for food: properties, production, characterization, and applications. Jin W Xu, W Liang, H Li, Y Liu, S Li, B , Emulsions. ElsevierJin W., Xu W., Liang H., Li Y., Liu S. & Li B. (2016) Nanoemulsions for food: properties, production, characterization, and applications. In Emulsions (pp. 1-36): Elsevier.

Formation of food-grade nanoemulsions using low-energy preparation methods: A. J S Komaiko, D J Mcclements, Komaiko J. S. & McClements D. J. (2016) Formation of food-grade nanoemulsions using low-energy preparation methods: A

. R S Schuh, F Bruxel, H F Teixeira, Schuh R. S., Bruxel F. & Teixeira H. F. (2014)

. J C Schwarz, V Klang, S Karall, D Mahrhauser, G P Resch, C Valenta, Schwarz J. C., Klang V., Karall S., Mahrhauser D., Resch G. P. & Valenta C. (2012) Optimisation

. D Shahbazzadeh, H Ahari, N M Rahimi, Shahbazzadeh D., Ahari H., Rahimi N. M.,

. F Dastmalchi, M Soltani, M Fotovat, J Rahmannya, N Khorasani, TheDastmalchi F., Soltani M., Fotovat M., Rahmannya J. & Khorasani N. (2009) The

. C Solans, P Izquierdo, J Nolla, N Azemar, Solans C., Izquierdo P., Nolla J., Azemar N. &

. M J Garcia-Celma, Nano-emulsions. Garcia-Celma M. J. (2005) Nano-emulsions.

. F Villalobos-Castillejos, V Granillo-Guerrero, Villalobos-Castillejos F., Granillo-Guerrero V.

. G Leyva-Daniel, D E Alamilla-Beltrán, L Gutiérrez-López, G F Monroy-Villagrana, A , G., Leyva-Daniel D. E., Alamilla-Beltrán L., Gutiérrez-López G. F., Monroy-Villagrana A.

Fabrication of Nanoemulsions by Microfluidization. &amp; Jafari, S M , Nanoemulsions. Elsevier& Jafari S. M. (2018) Fabrication of Nanoemulsions by Microfluidization. In Nanoemulsions (pp. 207-232): Elsevier.

. R M Walker, E A Decker, D Mcclements, Walker R. M., Decker E. A. & McClements D.

Physical and oxidative stability of fish. J , J. (2015) Physical and oxidative stability of fish

. S Wang, R Su, S Nie, M Sun, J Zhang, D Wu, N Moustaid-Moussa, Wang S., Su R., Nie S., Sun M., Zhang J., Wu, D. & Moustaid-Moussa N. (2014) Application

T J Wooster, H F Andrews, P Sanguansri, Google Patents. Wooster T. J., Andrews H. F. & Sanguansri P. (2017) Nanoemulsions. In: Google Patents.

Edible coating from citrus essential oilloaded nanoemulsions: physicochemical characterization and preservation performance. C Wu, L Wang, Y Hu, S Chen, D Liu, X Ye, Wu, C., Wang, L., Hu, Y., Chen, S., Liu, D. & Ye, X. (2016). Edible coating from citrus essential oil- loaded nanoemulsions: physicochemical characterization and preservation performance.

. RSC Advances. 625RSC Advances 6(25), 20892-20900.

. C Yu, Y Cha, F Wu, X Xu, Y Qin, X Li, Yu C., Cha Y., Wu F., Xu X., Qin Y., Li X. &

. M Du, Du M. (201853(5), 1157-1165.

Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food 43. L Khoshbouy, L Khoshbouy et al., Enhancement of food safety using nanoemulsion with emphasize on fish food 43

. Y Yuan, Y Gao, J Zhao, L Mao, Research International. 411Yuan Y., Gao Y., Zhao J. & Mao L. (2008) Research International 41(1), 61-68.