# Citation COMPLEXITY FACTORS IN MEGA PROJECTS: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 214230892
 
tags: #Engineering, #Sociology, #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fa9f7aaae31bd04512d29cbf7cc7b243aa71dad](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fa9f7aaae31bd04512d29cbf7cc7b243aa71dad)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Citation COMPLEXITY FACTORS IN MEGA PROJECTS: A LITERATURE REVIEW


Mohammad, Tabassi, AA, Kamal, EM, Bryde, DJMohseni 
Michaelides 
Mohammad Mohseni 
Amin Akhavan 
ErnawatiTabassi 
Mustafa Kamal 
David James Bryde 
Citation COMPLEXITY FACTORS IN MEGA PROJECTS: A LITERATURE REVIEW

European Proceedings of Multidisciplinary Sciences
2610.15405/epms.2019.12.6any article(s) in LJMU Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or any commercial gain. The version presented here may differ from the published version or from the version of the record. Please see the repository URL above for details on accessing the published version and note that access may require a subscription. For more information please contact researchonline@ljmu.ac.uk (please note it is advisable to refer to the publisher's version if you intend to cite from this work) Mohseni, Mohammad, Tabassi, AA, Kamal, EM, Bryde, DJ and Michaelides, R (2019) Complexity Factors In Mega Projects: A Literature Review. LJMU Research Online The European Proceedings of Multidisciplinary Sciences EpMS This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0 Unported License, permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. https://doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6 ICRP 2019
Complexity Factors In Mega Projects: A Literature Review http://researchonline.ljmu.ac.uk/id/eprint/12095/ Article LJMU has developed LJMU Research Online for users to access the research output of the University more effectively.

## Introduction

Most developing countries are now experiencing mega projects that refers to many industrialized societies in particular industries such as oil and gas, construction, and infrastructure ( Figure 1). Bent Flyvbjerg is one of the researchers in the field of mega projects. In 2017 he published a book titled "Managing Mega Projects at Oxford University London": He defined mega projects as excessively complicated and those that great extend hugely. Mega projects are different from the ordinary projects in the view of investment, cost, process executive and time (Flyvbjerg, 2017). More importantly, mega projects have a direct impact on the community of a country (people and government), economic, level of science and technology as well as the culture (Pitsis, Clegg, Freeder, Sankaran, & Burdon, 2018).

Numerous researchers have claimed that the cost of a mega project that can to be more than multimillion or 1 billion $ is reasonable to assume the cost issue can be accompanied by complexity (Flyvbjerg, 2014;Hu, Chan, Le, & Jin, 2015). Uncertainty in management has critical influence on project failure, which is an important cause that leads to complexity in mega projects as well. Obviously, mega projects mostly face to the unpredictable challenges associated with cost and time, owing to on the project size and scope (Eriksson, Larsson, & Pesämaa, 2017). Notwithstanding, a contractual context in mega projects is associated with native disputes and a large number of claims in significant magnitude.

Relating complexities in mega projects with organizational behavior, stakeholders and lack of a clear strategic organizational governance policy, in addition to unfamiliarity with local regulations, are mostly caused challenges in team management and execution failures (Mikkelsen, 2018).

Evaluation factors of complexity in design and construction are one of the most important qualifying determinants. These are factors including coordination, innovation, technology, cost, stakeholder, resources, and alike. Executive uncertainty with insufficient integration among the fragmented subprojects creates huge complexity due to the large scale of operations. Coordination within each subproject is not an easy task either.

Most complexities in the view of the importance of mega projects, raise from lack of monitoring and control over sub-projects activities, and lack of knowledge management in relationship with subprojects and Parent Company. According to the points mentioned above, complexities in mega projects are beyond most controversy surrounds of structural complexity and uncertainty (Bakhshi, Ireland, & Gorod, 2016). https://doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6 Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under 


### Complexities in mega projects

The theory of complexity practically used to define something with diverse parts where those departments relevant to each other in several methods (Bakhshi et al., 2016). Complexity is the reaction of an organization or information of a system that components interact in multiple ways, whereas there is no reasonable instruction to face with conflict the various possible action and reaction (Adeleke et al. 2018). An additional to elaborate on this issue, the given definition of complexity can be expanded to any system. Knew to complexities require to the importance of the subject, such as complexity of the project or complexity of construction. In addition, to better identify project complexity after literature review of various publications, the definitions of the project complexity shown in Figure 02 Obviously that many reasons alternating about complexities in mega projects including, a disordered environment, weak technology, and innumerable possible interactions are certainly identifiable. Mega projects are complex and yet the definition does not consider all possible dimension of complexity because complexity is a reaction and change in the system that be transformed into various forms. Unexpectedly, in ordinary projects faced with specified complexity but in mega projects have unfixed boundaries, which create more elements that are complex, including uncertainty, ambiguity, and interdependency. 


### Attributes of complexity

In recent years, researchers have focused on the identification of complexity attributes more than any other issues in the field of mega project complexity (Dao, Kermanshachi, Shane, Anderson, & Hare, 2016). The Forda Institute first used the concept of stakeholders in 1963; they used this concept for all groups and individuals who were involved in the project and affected the project output (Freeman, 1994).

Based on the literature on Mega projects, they involve different stakeholders with different approaches and personalities, as well as the level of expectation and benefits in the project. The complexity and instability of these projects require them to have a systematic approach and appropriate project management skills to meet the needs and benefits of the various stakeholders, which is called the complexity of stakeholders (Abdou, Yong, & Othman, 2016), and achieve the highest project output value. Environmental complexities related to the situation in which the project implemented. Issues such as nature, market, political factors, and environmental laws (Lu, Luo, Wang, Le, & Shi, 2015;Zhai, Xin, & Cheng, 2009) According to previous literature on the complexity of the environment, the primary components of the environment from suppliers, customers, competitors, technology, and socio-cultural factors are the factors that increase the complexity of the environment. Implementation of a project by an organization inducts project forces, organizational structure, and various rules, which results in the complexity of project as a sign of organizational complexity (Lu et al., 2015). Sophisticated megaprojects frequently have specific organizational structures, with varying levels of authority requiring horizontal and vertical alignment (Greiman, 2013). According to recent research, there are many specified definitions of the complexity of project management and its types. However, project analysis and complexity considered in terms of management understanding.

The Federal Bureau of transportation defined Mega projects with more than $ 1 billion in compared to other projects, but this does not only depend on features, sizes, and locations and the geographic location of the project (Sato & Milton, 2014). Mega projects define broad projects that consist of several teams that quickly, intentionally and deeply in perspective, the need for coordination, capital and government power (Greiman, 2013). In general, Mega-projects have complex financing schemes that include loan, impartiality, grants, stocks, notes and support from non-profit organizations and several supporters from both communal and particular sectors. Mega-projects have a lot of employees over their lives, as well as a joint impact and space constraints on tasks (Lu et al., 2015;Zhai et al., 2009). These projects are faced with multiple and multifaceted tasks in a variety of areas, which will not only include engineering, technology, finance, or organizational management, but will include factors such as environmental protection, social stability and energy storage (Rolstadås & Schiefloe, 2017). These tasks are inseparable from each other and have hidden or obvious relationship. Changing each of the tasks will alter the other tasks. Each of the tasks is in non-linear interaction with another, which increases the complexity of the project (Lu et al., 2015). 59 For efficacious mega project, success is not only an important and effective operation for a team, but also a success for the national community as well as the state (Dunovic, Mladen, & Skreb, 2014).

Mega projects are managed under conditions such as high ambiguity, uncertainty, complexity, budget and time in the form of very complex implementation, paradoxes, uncertainties as well as impacts and uncertainties (Dunovic et al., 2014; van Marrewijk, Clegg, Pitsis, & Veenswijk, 2008). The complexity of a project with a series of uncertainties and ambiguities is one of the inherent features of Mega-project (Dunovic et al., 2014).


## Problem Statement

There is a need to study complexity as a separate factor influencing mega projects. This includes defining mega project complexity, studying the individual and most important facets of complexity, and identifying the factors of mega project complexity on different aspects of mega projects such as cost, schedule, quality, and project performance. Aspects of complexity known to be constantly changing variables such as project type, project size, project scope, project team experience, interfaces within a project, logistics, market conditions, political and social issues, and permitting and approvals. Better understanding factors of mega project complexity and creating a complexity management strategy will influence how efficiently and economically projects planned, executed, and managed. Project managers need to investigate the complexities that arise in a Mega-project to increase their success in such projects.

Each Mega-project has a specific framework for identifying complexity. Scholars believe that with a proactive complexity management plan, a mega project may face less frequent severe complexities.


## Research Questions

According to the literature review and recent studies on the complexities of mega projects, the research questions have been raised to direct research to the focused purpose.

 What is complexity in projects?

 How will project complexity be characterized?  How will the definition of mega projects and their complexity be measured?

 Which factors have more influence on the complexity of mega projects?


## Purpose of the Study

The overall purpose of this research to address research questions is to provide a model for describing complexity based on literature review and then measuring them. The purpose of this process is to determine the complexity of mega projects, identify the complexity factors in mega projects, and then classify them by percentage of impact.


## Research Methods

The methodology in this research based on literature review of publications that used to study systematic literature to find a theoretical framework of the complexity in mega projects. The systematic https: //doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6 Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference eISSN: 2421-826X 60 review is a matter of considerable public attempts to collect all experimental evidence that fits prespecified competency criteria in order (Tranfield et al., 2003). For systematic search, all studies should be identified, using research questions that include the keywords: complexity, mega project, complexity factors, project management. In addition, most valid keywords have been considered in previous studies.

To achieve valid results, both automatic and manual search options used for each bibliographic database. Four stages considered for the research process. The first stage was the selection of related publications on the subject, which included complexity, management, mega projects. In the second step, the publication should be from 2012 to May 2019, focusing on one or more engineering, management, science, and technology sectors of the building, and these publications should have full text available.

In the next stage, the attention based on these publications, which should include the thesis of the  


## Findings

In recent years, complexity factors of the project are gathered and used in numerous scientific and practical research. However, there is no such criterion, and as a result, the complexities of mega projects are very vague and varied. In general, these complexities depend on the operational and situational conditions of the mega project. Nevertheless, many factors in different groups affected on complexity in mega project. In other words, complexity factors in mega projects are very numerous (Dao et al., 2016).

To help further research and understanding about the complexity of mega projects, it is important that these factors define a specific framework. After analysing and scrutinising literature, the distinction between their views is inevitable. Although many of the important features of considering the complexity of mega projects considered in different perspectives, at the end the dominant elements have been categorized in three groups to classify complexity dimension in mega projects. In our view, the distinction


## Step 1 • Keyword searched in the databases

Step 2


## • Full text and English publication articles and thesis

Step 3


## • Review journals and top authors

Step 4 • Project complexity selected  Overall, it is true to say that there are several factors that influence complexities in mega projects (Abdou et al., 2016). To recapitulate, there are diversity factors complexity that depended of specified in mega project and could change the degree of complexity. It is difficult to reach consensus about this issue as a framework of factors complexities in mega projects. Nevertheless, with regard to the previous sections in this research and also used the last outcome during 7 years in terms of the complexity of mega projects, the following tables shows complexity in three dimensions (Environmental, Technological, Organizational). As shown in the tables, the researchers identified more than 75 various complexity factors for mega project in three broad areas (Table 1, 2, 3). Table 1 shows the number of complexity factors in the environmental dimension. The statistics are divided into 21 factors based on referred published papers. Considering the analysis, variety of stakeholder interests, number of stakeholders and relationships between them, changing policy and regulatory, supply chain management are highest referred among 21 items in this dimension. It is clear that the most important cause in environmental complexity external factors. Many external stakeholders participate in mega projects, including but not limited to investors, contractors, governments and suppliers, which will cause social conflicts as a cause of complexity to be occurred. https://doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6 Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under  Local community and authorities and customers 13


### Environment complexity

Tertiary environment 5

Agreed market and pricing 11

Geological/hydrological conditions 7 


### Technological complexity


## No. referred Researchers

Ambiguity in the domain the dynamics of work activities 5 (Bakhshi et al., 2016;Bjorvatn & Wald 2018;Bosch-Rekveldt et al., 2018;Callegari et al., 2018;Dao et al. 2016;Eriksson et al. 2017;Forozandeh et al., 2018;Habibi, Barzinpour, & Sadjadi, 2018;Hartono 2018;He et al., 2015;Invernizzi, Locatelli, Gronqvis, & Brookes, 2019;Abdou et al., 2016;Kuhn et al., 2018;Lehtinen, Peltokorpi, & Artto, 2019;Lessard et al., 2014;Makui et al., 2018;Maylor & Turner, 2017;Mikkelsen, 2018;Mirza & Ehsan, 2017;Mok et al., 2015;Mozaffari et al., 2012;Nguyen et al., 2015;Pitsis et al., 2018;Qazi et al., 2016;Qiu et al., 2019;Rolstadås & Schiefloe 2017;Senescu et al., 2013;Shahhossein et al., 2017;Sheffield et al., 2012;Sridarran et al., 2017;van der Maat 2018;Zeng et al. 2019;Zhu & Mostafavi, 2017;Zhu et al., 2018) Number 


### Organisational complexity

The third dimension is called organizational complexity, which involves aspects such as project staff, project goals, project team size, project budget, planning, contract terms, organizational structure and various teams. Each of the 33 cases that listed in Table 3 is highly influencing the complexity of mega projects. The results of the analysis show that among the items that identified from extent literature, the most pronounce factors are related to size of the project budget, subcontractors, contractors, contract terms and planning. 


## Conclusion

In sum, with the views and comments stated in this paper, complexity issues in mega projects have been reviewed in order to identify the differences and patterns in this subject. On the whole, this review paper collects information on the variability of mega project complexity and the concept of complexity and its features with the use of literary review and analyse. For better expression, in the context of environmental complexity, the study observed political, economic impact as well as supply chain management as the most stimulators for complexities in mega projects. High ranked parameters that influencing technological complexity could be included the number and diversity of technology, high variety of tasks and lack of experience with technology. The most outstanding factors to the complexity of organization in mega projects are relevant to contractors and contract terms, size of the project budget and planning. The collection of this framework could be contributing to the complexity of mega projects in the structuring of the type of dialogue and decision making by senior project managers and project stakeholders. Moreover, this level of analysis is a broad topic for further research in the future, therefore, further investigation could determine the percentage of the impact of each of the complexity factors in mega projects.

## Figure 01 .
01Various types of mega projects considered by publication in the literature review


, this type of complexity can be the bed of the impact of the complexity of stakeholders, those that vary according to their environmental conditions, their interests, and their needs. In addition, some studies have shown that complexity of the environment is one of the most important complications of projects (Bosch-Rekveldt, Jongkind, Mooi, Bakker, & Verbraeck, 2011).


books related to the main subject and all articles from the journals in relation to project management, including the International Project Management Journals, International Management Organization, the magazines for managing building projects and the environmental project and executive management. At last, attempts made to categorize all articles in the highest harmony with the complexity of the project.Endnote 9 software used to collect and manage the articles. Total of over One Hundred and Fifty articles have been reviewed on this subject(Figure 3).

## Figure 03 .
03Four stages of the study selection process


mega project could be analysed by the geographic location and brigade of mega project in terms of operation (Figure 1), the new systems used in mega project and organizational structure in mega project. In recent descriptors, each complexity of mega project comprises of independent sectors and different structures that while are relevant to the same mega project and connected to the other sectors and organizations of mega project. The ranking of complexity factors from the in-depth literature review between 2012-2019 are shown in Figure 4.

## Figure 04 .
04Ranking Complexity Factors based on in depth literature review between 2012-2019


https://doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6   Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference eISSN: 2421-826X

## Table 01 .
01Factors of environmental complexityresponsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference 
eISSN: 2421-826X 



## Table 2
2shows 19 items related to technological complexity in mega projects. These factors usually 

characterize by high technological complexity, such as diversity of technology, innovate technologies of 

design, dependencies between tasks, breadth of scope and technical risks. The most highest reported 

complexities in this dimension are related to number and diversity of technology, lack of experience with 

technology, high variety of tasks and use of very difficult technologies. 




Production technology, 12 Number of interdependencies within and without, 14 Breadth of scope, 18 Number of specialist disciplines involved, 7 Variety of technologies employed, 12and diversity of technology 
23 
Use of very difficult technologies 
19 
Dependencies between tasks 
17 
Uncertainties in scope 
16 
Involvement of different technical disciplines, 
8 
Dynamic complexity of a project is affected by internal factors 
(e.g., human behaviors, material flow, and changes in 
requirement and scope) 

15 

Dynamic complexity of a project is affected by external factors 
(e.g., social, political and economic issues and weather 
conditions) 

11 

Lack of experience with technology, 
22 
High variety of tasks, 
20 
Dependencies between tasks, 
13 
Technical risks, 
11 
Strict quality requirements, 
8 
Interrelations between technological processes, 
10 
Structure, 

## Table 03 .
03Factors of organisational complexity Work experience of members of the organization, 14 al., 2016; Qiu et al., 2019; Rolstadås & Schiefloe 2017; Senescu et al., 2013; Shahhossein et al., 2017; Sheffield et al., 2012; Shi et al. 2018; Silva, Akchurin, & Bebbington, 2018; Sridarran et al., 2017; Turner Number of contract/work packages, 13Factors 

AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to acknowledge European Commission for providing the Grant Agreement
Project Complexity Influence on Project management performance -The Malaysian perspective. S M Abdou, K Yong, M Othman, MATEC Web of Conferences. 66Abdou, S. M., Yong, K., & Othman, M. (2016), 'Project Complexity Influence on Project management performance -The Malaysian perspective', MATEC Web of Conferences, 66.

The Influence of Organizational External Factors on Construction Risk Management among Nigerian Construction Companies. Safety and Health Work. A Q Adeleke, A Y Bahaudin, A M Kamarudden, J A Bamgbade, M G Salimon, M W A Khan, S Y …&amp; Sorooshian, 10.1016/j.shaw.2017.05.0049Adeleke, A. Q., Bahaudin, A. Y., Kamarudden, A. M., Bamgbade, J. A., Salimon, M. G., Khan, M. W. A.,…& Sorooshian, S. Y. (2018). The Influence of Organizational External Factors on Construction Risk Management among Nigerian Construction Companies. Safety and Health Work, 9(1), 115-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shaw.2017.05.004

Clarifying the project complexity construct: Past, present and future. J Bakhshi, V Ireland, A Gorod, International Journal of Project Management. 347Bakhshi, J., Ireland, V., & Gorod, A. (2016). Clarifying the project complexity construct: Past, present and future. International Journal of Project Management, 34(7), 1199-213.

Project complexity and team-level absorptive capacity as drivers of project management performance. T Bjorvatn, A Wald, International Journal of Project Management. 366Bjorvatn, T., & Wald, A. (2018). Project complexity and team-level absorptive capacity as drivers of project management performance. International Journal of Project Management, 36(6), 876-88.

Comparing Project Complexity across Different Industry Sectors. M Bosch-Rekveldt, H Bakker, M Hertogh, Complexity. Bosch-Rekveldt, M., Bakker, H., & Hertogh, M. (2018). Comparing Project Complexity across Different Industry Sectors. Complexity,1-15.

Grasping project complexity in large engineering projects: The TOE. M Bosch-Rekveldt, Y Jongkind, H Mooi, H Bakker, A Verbraeck, Int. J. Proj. Manag. 296Bosch-Rekveldt, M., Jongkind, Y., Mooi, H., Bakker, H., & Verbraeck, A., 2011. Grasping project complexity in large engineering projects: The TOE. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 29(6), 728-739.

Cost overruns and delays in energy megaprojects: How big is big enough?. C Callegari, A Szklo, R Schaeffer, Energy Policy. 114Callegari, C., Szklo, A., & Schaeffer, R. (2018), 'Cost overruns and delays in energy megaprojects: How big is big enough?', Energy Policy, 114, 211-20.

Identifying and Measuring Project Complexity. B Dao, S Kermanshachi, J Shane, S Anderson, E Hare, 10.1016/j.proeng.2016.04.024Procedia Engineering. edia Engineering145Dao, B., Kermanshachi, S., Shane, J., Anderson, S., & Hare, E. (2016). Identifying and Measuring Project Complexity. Procedia Engineering, 145, 476-82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2016.04.024

Towards a New Model of Complexity -The Case of Large Infrastructure Projects. I B Dunović, R Mladen, K A Škreb, 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.03.082Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences. 119Dunović, I. B., Mladen, R., & Škreb, K. A. (2014). Towards a New Model of Complexity -The Case of Large Infrastructure Projects. Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences, 119, 730-738. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.03.082

Managing complex projects in the infrastructure sector -A structural equation model for flexibility-focused project management. P E Eriksson, J Larsson, O Pesämaa, International Journal of Project Management. 358Eriksson, P. E., Larsson, J., & Pesämaa, O. (2017). Managing complex projects in the infrastructure sector -A structural equation model for flexibility-focused project management. International Journal of Project Management, 35(8), 1512-1523.

What you Should Know about Megaprojects and Why: An Overview. B Flyvbjerg, Project Management Journal. 452Flyvbjerg, B. (2014). What you Should Know about Megaprojects and Why: An Overview, Project Management Journal, 45(2), 6-19.

The Oxford handbook of megaproject management. Flyvbjerg, Oxford University PressFlyvbjerg (2017). The Oxford handbook of megaproject management, ed. 1 (Oxford University Press).

The Politics of Stakeholder Theory: Some Future Directions. R E Freeman, Business Ethics Quarterly. 44Freeman, R. E. (1994). The Politics of Stakeholder Theory: Some Future Directions. Business Ethics Quarterly, 4(4), 409-421.

A model for network design of supply chain management in research projects. M Forozandeh, T Ebrahim, A Makui, 10.5267/j.uscm.2017.12.004Uncertain Supply Chain Management. 64Forozandeh, M., Ebrahim, T., & Makui, A. (2018). A model for network design of supply chain management in research projects. Uncertain Supply Chain Management, 6(4), 407-422. https://doi.org/10.5267/j.uscm.2017.12.004

Project management lessons learned on the Big Dig, America's biggest mega project, by a core member responsible for its daily operations. V A Greiman, PMI25Greiman, V. A. (2013). Project management lessons learned on the Big Dig, America's biggest mega project, by a core member responsible for its daily operations (PMI) 25.

Resource-constrained project scheduling problem: review of past and recent developments. F Habibi, F Barzinpour, S J Sadjadi, 10.5267/j.jpm.2018.1.005Journal of Project Management. Habibi, F., Barzinpour, F., & Sadjadi, S. J. (2018). Resource-constrained project scheduling problem: review of past and recent developments. Journal of Project Management, 55-88. https://doi.org/10.5267/j.jpm.2018.1.005

From project risk to complexity analysis: a systematic classification. B Hartono, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. 113Hartono, B. (2018). From project risk to complexity analysis: a systematic classification. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 11(3), 734-60.

Measuring the complexity of mega construction projects in China-A fuzzy analytic network process analysis. Q He, L Luo, Y Hu, A P C Chan, 10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.07.009International Journal of Project Management. 333He, Q., Luo, L., Hu, Y., & Chan, A. P. C. (2015). Measuring the complexity of mega construction projects in China-A fuzzy analytic network process analysis. International Journal of Project Management, 33(3), 549-563. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.07.009

From Construction Megaproject Management to Complex Project Management: Bibliographic Analysis. Y Hu, A P C Chan, Y Le, R Jin, 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000254Journal of Management in Engineering. 431Hu, Y., Chan, A. P. C., Le, Y., & Jin, R. (2015). From Construction Megaproject Management to Complex Project Management: Bibliographic Analysis. Journal of Management in Engineering, 31 (4). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000254

Applying value management when it seems that there is no value to be managed: the case of nuclear decommissioning. D C Invernizzi, G Locatelli, M Gronqvist, N J Brookes, International Journal of Project Management. 375Invernizzi, D. C., Locatelli, G., Gronqvist, M., & Brookes, N. J. (2019). Applying value management when it seems that there is no value to be managed: the case of nuclear decommissioning. International Journal of Project Management, 37(5), 668-683.

Process complexity as a future challenge -a quality management perspective. M Kuhn, F Schaefer, H Otten, The TQM Journal. 306Kuhn, M., Schaefer, F., & Otten, H. (2018). Process complexity as a future challenge -a quality management perspective. The TQM Journal, 30(6), 701-716.

. 10.15405/epms.2019.12.6https://doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6

Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference eISSN. Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference eISSN: 2421-826X

Megaprojects as organizational platforms and technology platforms for value creation. J Lehtinen, A Peltokorpi, K Artto, International Journal of Project Management. 371Lehtinen, J., Peltokorpi, A., & Artto, K. (2019). Megaprojects as organizational platforms and technology platforms for value creation. International Journal of Project Management, 37(1), 43-58.

House of Project Complexity-understanding complexity in large infrastructure projects. D Lessard, V Sakhrani, R Miller, Engineering Project Organization Journal. 44Lessard, D., Sakhrani, V., & Miller, R. (2014). House of Project Complexity-understanding complexity in large infrastructure projects. Engineering Project Organization Journal, 4(4), 170-192.

A model for simulating schedule risks in prefabrication housing production: A case study of six-day cycle assembly activities in Hong Kong. C Z Li, X Xu, G Q Shen, C Fan, X Li, J Hong, 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.02.308Journal of Cleaner Production. 185Li, C. Z., Xu, X., Shen, G. Q., Fan, C., Li, X., & Hong, J. (2018). A model for simulating schedule risks in prefabrication housing production: A case study of six-day cycle assembly activities in Hong Kong. Journal of Cleaner Production, 185, 366-381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.02.308

Measurement model of project complexity for largescale projects from task and organization perspective. Y Lu, L Luo, H Wang, Y Le, Q Shi, 10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.12.005International Journal of Project Management. 333Lu, Y., Luo, L., Wang, H., Le, Y., & Shi, Q. (2015). Measurement model of project complexity for large- scale projects from task and organization perspective. International Journal of Project Management, 33(3), 610-622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.12.005

A structural equation modeling approach to examine the relationship between complexity factors of a project and the merits of project manager. A Makui, P M Zadeh, M Bagherpour, M Jabbarzadeh, Journal of Project Management. 31Makui, A., Zadeh, P. M., Bagherpour, M., & Jabbarzadeh, M. (2018). A structural equation modeling approach to examine the relationship between complexity factors of a project and the merits of project manager. Journal of Project Management, 3(1), 1-12.

. 10.5267/j.jpm.2017.12.001https://doi.org/10.5267/j.jpm.2017.12.001

Understand, reduce, respond: project complexity management theory and practice. H Maylor, N Turner, International Journal of Operations & Production Management. 378Maylor, H., & Turner, N. (2017). Understand, reduce, respond: project complexity management theory and practice. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 37(8), 1076-1093.

Projects, success and complexity. IPMA: Projects, management and success: do we need a new understanding?. M F Mikkelsen, Mikkelsen, M. F. (2018). Projects, success and complexity. IPMA: Projects, management and success: do we need a new understanding?

Quantification of Project Execution Complexity and its Effect on Performance of Infrastructure Development Projects. E Mirza, N Ehsan, Engineering Management Journal. 292Mirza, E., & Ehsan, N. (2017). Quantification of Project Execution Complexity and its Effect on Performance of Infrastructure Development Projects. Engineering Management Journal, 29(2), 108-123.

Stakeholder management studies in mega construction projects: A review and future directions. K Y Mok, G Q Shen, J Yang, International Journal of Project Management. 332Mok, K. Y., Shen, G. Q., & Yang, J. (2015). Stakeholder management studies in mega construction projects: A review and future directions. International Journal of Project Management, 33(2), 446-457.

Identifying the most critical project complexity factors using Delphi method: the Iranian construction industry. M M Mozaffari, S Fazli, A Sedaghat-Seresht, Management Science Letters. 28Mozaffari, M. M., Fazli, S., & Sedaghat-Seresht, A. (2012). Identifying the most critical project complexity factors using Delphi method: the Iranian construction industry. Management Science Letters, 2(8), 2945-2952.

Managing the unexpected in megaprojects: riding the waves of resilience. A G M Nachbagauer, I Boeck, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. Nachbagauer, A. G. M., & Schirl-Boeck, I. (2019). Managing the unexpected in megaprojects: riding the waves of resilience. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business.

Quantifying the complexity of transportation projects using the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process. A T Nguyen, L D Nguyen, L Le-Hoai, C N Dang, 10.1016/j.ijproman.2015.02.007International Journal of Project Management. 336Nguyen, A. T., Nguyen, L. D., Le-Hoai, L., & Dang, C. N. (2015). Quantifying the complexity of transportation projects using the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process. International Journal of Project Management, 33(6), 1364-76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2015.02.007

Megaprojects redefinedcomplexity vs cost and social imperatives. A Pitsis, S Clegg, D Freeder, S Sankaran, S Burdon, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. 111Pitsis, A., Clegg, S., Freeder, D., Sankaran, S., & Burdon, S. (2018). Megaprojects redefined - complexity vs cost and social imperatives. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 11(1), 7-34.

Project Complexity and Risk Management (ProCRiM): Towards modelling project complexity driven risk paths in construction projects. A Qazi, J Quigley, A Dickson, K Kirytopoulos, International Journal of Project Management. 347Qazi, A., Quigley, J., Dickson, A., & Kirytopoulos, K. (2016). Project Complexity and Risk Management (ProCRiM): Towards modelling project complexity driven risk paths in construction projects. International Journal of Project Management, 34(7), 1183-1198.

. 10.1016/j.ijproman.2016.05.008https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2016.05.008

Governance of institutional complexity in megaproject organizations. Y Qiu, H Chen, Z Sheng, S Cheng, International Journal of Project Management. 373Qiu, Y., Chen, H., Sheng, Z., & Cheng, S. (2019). Governance of institutional complexity in megaproject organizations. International Journal of Project Management, 37(3), 425-43.

. 10.1016/j.ijproman.2019.02.001https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2019.02.001

Modelling project complexity. A Rolstadås, P M Schiefloe, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. 102Rolstadås, A., & Schiefloe, P. M. (2017). Modelling project complexity. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 10(2), 295-314.

When do megaprojects start and finish? Redefining project lead time for megaproject success. E Y Sato, F C G Milton, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. 74Sato, E. Y., & Milton, F. C. G. (2014). When do megaprojects start and finish? Redefining project lead time for megaproject success. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 7(4), 624- 637.

Relationships between Project Complexity and Communication. R R Senescu, G Aranda-Mena, J R Haymaker, Journal of Management in Engineering. 292Senescu, R. R., Aranda-Mena, G., & Haymaker, J. R. (2013). Relationships between Project Complexity and Communication. Journal of Management in Engineering, 29(2), 183-197.

The Root Causes of Construction Project Failure. V Shahhossein, M R Afshar, O Amiri, Scientia Iranica. 251Shahhossein, V., Afshar, M. R., & Amiri, O. (2017). The Root Causes of Construction Project Failure. Scientia Iranica, 25(1), 93-108.

Systems thinking: taming complexity in project management. J Sheffield, S Sankaran, T Haslett, On the Horizon. 202Sheffield, J., Sankaran, S., & Haslett, T. (2012). Systems thinking: taming complexity in project management. On the Horizon, 20(2), 126-36.

. 10.15405/epms.2019.12.6https://doi.org/10.15405/epms.2019.12.6

Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference eISSN. Corresponding Author: Mohammad Mohseni Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the conference eISSN: 2421-826X

Policy Effects of Resistance against Mega-Projects in Latin America: An Introduction', European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies | Revista Europea de Estudios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe. E Silva, M Akchurin, A J Bebbington, 0Silva, E., Akchurin, M., & Bebbington, A. J. (2018), 'Policy Effects of Resistance against Mega-Projects in Latin America: An Introduction', European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies | Revista Europea de Estudios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe, 0 (106).

Improving the cost estimates of complex projects in the project-based industries. P Sridarran, K Keraminiyage, L Herszon, Built Environment Project and Asset Management. 72Sridarran, P., Keraminiyage, K., & Herszon, L. (2017). Improving the cost estimates of complex projects in the project-based industries. Built Environment Project and Asset Management, 7(2), 173-84.

On the success of megaprojects. J R Turner, Y Xue, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. 113Turner, J. R., & Xue, Y. (2018). On the success of megaprojects. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business. 11(3), 783-805.

A framework for understanding managerial responses to supply chain complexity. N Turner, J Aitken, C Bozarth, International Journal of Operations & Production Management. 386Conflict Management and Peace ScienceSimplified complexity: Analytical strategies for conflict event researchTurner, N., Aitken, J., & Bozarth, C. (2018). A framework for understanding managerial responses to supply chain complexity. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38(6), 1433-1466. van der Maat, E. (2018). Simplified complexity: Analytical strategies for conflict event research. Conflict Management and Peace Science.

Managing public-private megaprojects: Paradoxes, complexity, and project design. A Marrewijk, S R Clegg, T R Pitsis, M Veenswijk, International Journal of Project Management. 266Marrewijk, A., Clegg, S. R., Pitsis, T. R., Veenswijk, M. (2008). Managing public-private megaprojects: Paradoxes, complexity, and project design. International Journal of Project Management, 26(6), 591-600.

Incentive Mechanisms for Supplier Development in Mega Construction Projects. W Zeng, H Wang, H Li, H Zhou, P Wu, Y Le, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. 662Zeng, W., Wang, H., Li, H., Zhou, H., Wu, P., & Le, Y. (2018). Incentive Mechanisms for Supplier Development in Mega Construction Projects. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 66(2), 252-265.

Understanding the value of project management from a stakeholder's perspective: Case study of mega-project management. L Zhai, Y Xin, C Cheng, Project Management Journal. 401Zhai, L., Xin, Y., & Cheng, C. (2009). Understanding the value of project management from a stakeholder's perspective: Case study of mega-project management. Project Management Journal, 40(1), 99-109.

Complexity Analysis of Prefabrication Contractors' Dynamic Price Competition in Mega Projects with Different Competition Strategies. J Zhu, Q Shi, P Wu, Z Sheng, X Wang, 10.1155/2018/5928235Complexity. Zhu, J., Shi, Q., Wu, P., Sheng, Z., & Wang, X. (2018). Complexity Analysis of Prefabrication Contractors' Dynamic Price Competition in Mega Projects with Different Competition Strategies. Complexity, 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5928235

Discovering complexity and emergent properties in project systems: A new approach to understanding project performance. J Zhu, A Mostafavi, International Journal of Project Management. 351Zhu, J., & Mostafavi, A. (2017). Discovering complexity and emergent properties in project systems: A new approach to understanding project performance. International Journal of Project Management, 35(1), 1-12.