# Medicine 193 RECENT ADVANCES IN MEDICAL SCIENCE. MEDICINE. UNDER THE CHARGE OP gives a review of the enteric cases treated in the first Australian General Hospital 14

CorpusID: 215488214
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3853bb447fef59aa017e60ba950974cf834a5828](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3853bb447fef59aa017e60ba950974cf834a5828)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Medicine 193 RECENT ADVANCES IN MEDICAL SCIENCE. MEDICINE. UNDER THE CHARGE OP gives a review of the enteric cases treated in the first Australian General Hospital 14
6th May 1916

M.DW T Ritchie 
Treatment of Cardiac Irregularity


M.DEdwin Matthew 
Treatment of Cardiac Irregularity


M.DJ D Comrie 
Treatment of Cardiac Irregularity


M.D.A Goodall 
Treatment of Cardiac Irregularity


Medicine 193 RECENT ADVANCES IN MEDICAL SCIENCE. MEDICINE. UNDER THE CHARGE OP gives a review of the enteric cases treated in the first Australian General Hospital 14

Report on the Enteric Cases at Heliopolis. Summons (Med. Journ, of Australia
6th May 1916
Ryser (Correspondenz-Blatt fur schweizer Aerzte, Nos. 24, 25, and 26, June 1916) contributes a clinical study of the phenomena attending irregular activity of the heart in the various forms of t is con ltion.His most interesting deductions are in the matteis of prognosis an treatment.

Recent Advances in Medical Science at Heliopolis. Few soldiers will have sustained any permanent damage from this infection, and out of 800 cases treated in that hospital there were only 5 deaths. But although the paratyphoid fever was of little harmfulness to the individual it was a great burden to the army and to the medical units. The European and Egyptian predominating organism appeared to be bacillus paratyphosus B, while in the Gallipoli infection the predominating organism was bacillus paratyphosus A. It is suggested that as bacillus paratyphosus A is the common organism in India it may have been brought to Gallipoli by the Indian troops. The writer considers that the value of prophylactic inoculation has been fully upheld, and that the troops having now been inoculated against paratyphoid infections, and carriers having been discovered and isolated there will probably be far fewer cases in future.

Perforating Carcinoma of (Esophagus.

In about 50 per cent, of cases of carcinoma in this region there is perforation into the mediastinum, pleura, bronchi or blood-vessels causing death, but Guttmann and Held (Med. Record, 10th June 1916) record a case in which the symptoms of a broncho-oesophageal fistula due to a carcinoma persisted for four months before a fatal result supervened. There was no vomiting, foetor, dysphagia, or similar symptoms up to within a short period before death, but there were cough, spit, etc., which were afterwards found to be due to a bronchiectasis which clinically had simulated tuberculosis. Coughing and choking supervened whenever the patient attempted to drink, and the dribbling of food down through the fistula into the bronchi could be quite well seen by the fluoroscope during life.

MyoPx\thy and Internal Secretions.

M'Couch and Ludlum give a review of what is known as to the relations subsisting between myopathy and other muscular disturbances on the one hand, and disorders of the internal secretions on the other hand (ibicl.). They find that myotonia congenita and myasthenia gravis are frequently associated with muscular dystrophy, and that myotonia congenita has occurred in connection with muscular dystrophy and may be identical with one form of it. There is some evidence suggesting that thyroparathyroid deficiency may bear a causal relationship to myotonia, while myasthenia is frequently associated with hyperthyroidism, hypoadrenalism, and probably with hyperactivity of the thymus. Myopathy has been found in association with many disorders of internal secretion, perhaps most frequently with hypopituitarism. The writers report a case which presented the fully developed characters of both dystrophia adiposo-genitalis and the facio-scapulohumeral type of progressive muscular dystrophy. Whether the glandular disorders bear a causal relationship to myopathy or are secondary to it, or whether both are due to a common cause, is uncertain, but the writers conclude that the combination is too frequent to be a mere coincidence.


## Control of the Pneumothorax Treatment of Pulmonary

Tuberculosis.

This treatment has fallen into desuetude largely because of the difficulty of controlling and observing the effect of air introduced into the pleural cavity. Hirsch (ibid.) describes how the injection of air should not only be controlled at the time, but should also be carefully and persistently followed up either by repeated radiography or by frequent examination of the lung by means of the fluorescent screen. As regards the subsequent study for the determination of the amount of collapse, restitution, etc., the X-ray examination gives the following data : The decree of pneumothorax and its distribution, the condition ?f the lung as to collapse, mobility, etc.; the condition of the pleuial cavity as to the presence of eff usion; the displacement, if an^, of the heart and other mediastinal contents; the position and movement of the diaphragm ; the occurrence of subcutaneous emphysema, the extent to which absorption has taken place, a moderate amount of gas, say 600 c.c., being all absorbed in two weeks; and finally the progiess of the disease.
 With regard to the occasional and isolated extrasystoles which are shown by numerous hearts, sometimes wit t e con sciousness of the subject, sometimes without it, he consi ers^ eseaie of a completely harmless nature. For instance, he consi eio t at t ese occasional extrasystoles in an organically and otherwise functiona y sound heart are no disqualification whatever for military service. As regards treatment of this condition he sets in the first place o importance strychnine, which has also the recommendation o en 'e bach. The dose he gives is 2 mgrs. daily over 20 days. Its eftect is usually shown quickly, and lasts for a prolonged period. In t ose ca_es Which' do not respond to strychnine he recommends small doses of digitalis, which diminish the excitability of the heart muscle. He recommends 0-05 to 0-1 grm. of digitalis leaf. Physostigmin he also recommends in minute subcutaneous doses, and in occasional cases quinine may be tried, with advantage. Heart-block is of course a much more serious condition, particularly when it is due to an organic cause, which then probably affects wide areas of the heart as well as the conducting bundle ? digitalis has in these cases a positively hurtful action, but atropin, which increases the conductive power, maybe beneficial. Auricular flutter accompanied by perpetual arrhythmia is, on the contrary, a condition in which digitalis must be pushed to an extreme, even to the extent of bringing on sickness and great slowing of the heart. Report on the Enteric Cases at Heliopolis.