# Evidence of unexplained discrepancies between planned and conducted statistical 1 analyses: a review of randomized trials 2 3

CorpusID: 216366717
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/567b69ca5900648dc2d49a928bef6f5067152513](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/567b69ca5900648dc2d49a928bef6f5067152513)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Evidence of unexplained discrepancies between planned and conducted statistical 1 analyses: a review of randomized trials 2 3


Suzie Cro s.cro@imperial.ac.uk.78 
Gordon Forbes 
Nicholas A Johnson 
Brennan C Kahan 

School of Public 9 Health
Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics
Suzie Cro, Research Fellow (Statistician), Imperial Clinical Trials Unit
Imperial College London
10 11 Gordon Forbes, Kings 12 College London, 13 14 Nicholas A Johnson, StatisticianW12 7RHLondon, London, LondonUK, UK., UK


School of Public Health
Imperial Clinical Trials Unit
15 Imperial College LondonLondonUK

Evidence of unexplained discrepancies between planned and conducted statistical 1 analyses: a review of randomized trials 2 3
10.1101/2020.02.20.200256841 4 5 *Correspondence to: Suzie Cro, Imperial Clinical Trials Unit, Imperial College London, 1 st 6 Floor, Stadium House, 16 17 Brennan C Kahan, Senior Research Fellow, MRC Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, UK. 18 19 20 21 Short title: Discrepancies between planned and conducted trial analyses 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a perpetuity. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025684 doi: medRxiv preprint NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice. 2
29Background: Choosing or altering the planned statistical analysis approach after 30 examination of trial data (often referred to as 'p-hacking') can bias results of randomized 31 trials. However, the extent of this issue in practice is currently unclear. We conducted a 32 review of published randomized trials to evaluate how often a pre-specified analysis 33 approach is publicly available, and how often the planned analysis is changed. 34 35 Methods: A review of randomised trials published between January and April 2018 in six 36 leading general medical journals. For each trial we established whether a pre-specified 37 analysis approach was publicly available in a protocol or statistical analysis plan, and 38 compared this to the trial publication. 39 40 Results: Overall, 89 of 101 eligible trials (88%) had a publicly available pre-specified 41 analysis approach. Only 22/89 trials (25%) had no unexplained discrepancies between the 42pre-specified and conducted analysis. Fifty-four trials (61%) had one or more unexplained 43 discrepancies, and in 13 trials (15%) it was impossible to ascertain whether any unexplained 44 discrepancies occurred due to incomplete reporting of the statistical methods. Unexplained 45 discrepancies were most common for the analysis model (n=31, 35%) and analysis 46 population (n=28, 31%), followed by the use of covariates (n=23, 26%) and the approach for 47 handling missing data (n=16, 18%). Many protocols or statistical analysis plans were dated 48 after the trial had begun, so earlier discrepancies may have been missed. 49 50 Conclusions: Unexplained discrepancies in the statistical methods of randomized trials are 51 common. Increased transparency is required for proper evaluation of results. 52 53 Medicine (NEJM); and PLOS Medicine. We searched for articles in PubMed with a 89 publication type of "randomized controlled trial" or categorised with the MeSH term "random 90 allocation," or including the keyword "random*" in the title or abstract, restricted to the 91 aforementioned included journals and publication period. The full search strategy is shown in 92 Appendix 1 in Additional File 1 and was conducted July 2018. 93 94 Eligibility 95 96Articles were eligible for inclusion if they reported results from a phase 2-4 randomized trial 97 in humans. Exclusion criteria were pilot or feasibility study, phase 1 trial, non-randomized 98 study, secondary analysis of previously published trial, cost-effectiveness as the primary 99 outcome, more than one trial reported in the article, results of an interim analysis, or if the 100 protocol or SAP was not in English. 101One author screened the title and abstract of each paper for eligibility. The full texts of these 102 articles were then assessed independently by two reviewers to confirm eligibility. For all 103 eligible studies, one author searched the main text, supplementary material, and references 104 to identify whether a protocol and/or SAP was available. 105

3 Background 56


## 57

The results of a clinical trial depend upon the statistical methods used for analysis. For 58

Data was extracted onto a pre-piloted standardised data extraction form by two reviewers 109

independently. Disagreements were resolved by discussion, or by a third reviewer where 110 disagreement could not be resolved. Where the trial publication referred to supplementary 111 material, a SAP or protocol, the extractor referred to these documents. 112


## 113

We extracted data related to the primary analysis of the primary outcome from the trial 114 publication. A single primary outcome was identified as follows; (a) if one outcome was listed 115 as the primary we used this; (b) if no outcomes or multiple outcomes were listed as being 116 primary we used the outcome that the sample size calculation was based on; and (c) if no 117 sample size calculation was performed or sample size was calculated for multiple primary 118 outcomes, we used the first clinical outcome listed in the objectives/outcomes section. We 119 identified the primary analysis as follows; (a) if a single analysis strategy was used, or 120 multiple strategies were used with one being identified as primary, we used this; (b) if 121 multiple strategies were used without one being identified as primary, we used the first one 122 presented in the results section. 123


## 124

For each article, we extracted general trial characteristics, whether protocols or SAPs were 125 available, including the dates of these documents and, if available, the blinding status of trial 126 statisticians. For articles with a protocol or SAP, we compared the method of analysis in the 127 trial publication against the method specified in the earliest available protocol or SAP which 128 included some information on the analysis of the primary outcome (referred to as the original 129 analysis plan). We assessed the following four analysis elements: (i) analysis population (the 130 set of participants included in the analysis, and which treatment group they were analysed 131 in); (ii) the statistical analysis model; (iii) use of baseline covariates in the analysis; and (iv) 132 the method for handling missing data. We chose these elements as they are specified in the 133 SPIRIT guidelines, and have been used in previous reviews (5,25). is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ;https://doi.org/10.1101https://doi.org/10. /2020 We evaluated two types of discrepancies for each analysis element. The first, termed a 136 'change', occurred when the analysis element in the trial publication was different to that 137 specified in the original analysis plan. The following examples would constitute changes: (a) 138

if an intention-to-treat analysis population was originally specified, but a per-protocol analysis 139 was used; (b) if the functional form of the statistical analysis model was changed, such as 140 from a mixed-effects regression model to generalized estimating equations (GEE); (c) if the 141 original analysis plan specified the analysis would not adjust for baseline covariates but the 142 trial publication adjusted for one or more patient characteristic; or (d) if a complete case 143 analysis was originally specified, but multiple imputation was used. 144


## 145

The second discrepancy, termed an 'addition', occurred when the original analysis plan gave 146 the investigators flexibility to subjectively choose the final analysis method after seeing trial 147

data. This could occur if the original analysis plan (i) contained insufficient information about 148 the proposed analysis; or (ii) allowed the investigators to subjectively choose between 149 multiple different potential analyses. The following examples would constitute additions: if 150 the original analysis plan stated that (a) both a per-protocol and intention-to-treat analysis 151 population would be used, without specifying which was the primary analysis (as 152 investigators could then decide during final analysis which was the primary, based on which 153

gave the most favourable result); (b) either parametric or non-parametric methods would be 154 used depending on distributional assumptions, but did not define an objective criteria for 155 assessing distributional assumptions (as the investigators could then present whichever 156 method gave the most favourable result); (c) the analysis would adjust for important baseline 157

covariates, but did not define how these covariates would be chosen (as investigators could is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 We classified each discrepancy as being 'explained' or 'unexplained'. Discrepancies were 164 classified as explained if they had been specified in a subsequent version of the protocol or 165 SAP (with or without a justification or rationale for the discrepancy), or if the trial publication 166 explained that an alteration to the pre-specified analysis approach had been made. 167

Otherwise discrepancies were classified as unexplained. The main outcome measures were (i) the number of trials with a publicly available pre-172 specified analysis approach for the primary outcome (i.e. whether an original analysis plan 173 was available in a protocol or a SAP); (ii) the number of trials with no unexplained 174 discrepancies from the publicly available pre-specified analysis approach; and (iii) the total 175 number of analysis elements for each trial with an unexplained discrepancy. Outcomes were summarised descriptively using frequencies and percentages. We 185 performed two pre-specified subgroup analyses, where we summarised outcomes 186 separately according to trial funding status, and type of intervention. One post-hoc subgroup 187 analysis was performed according to availability of a SAP. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 All statistical analyses were performed using Stata version 15 (28).  Table  198 1. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 Protocols were available for 90 trials (89%) (48 published, 70 as supplementary material with 205 publication, 5 on a website). SAPs were available for 46 trials (46%) (3 published, 43 as 206 supplementary material with publication, 2 on a website). Of 90 trials with an available 207 protocol, the earliest version available was dated before recruitment began for 45 (50%) 208 trials, 19 (21%) were dated during recruitment, 8 (9%) were dated after recruitment ended, 209 and 18 (20%) did not have a date. Of 46 trial with an available SAP, the earliest version of 210 the SAP was dated before recruitment began for 9 (20%) trials, 13 (28%) were dated during 211 recruitment, 13 (28%) were dated after recruitment ended, and 11 (24%) did not have a 212 date. 213


## 214

Overall, only 11 trials (11%) stated in the trial publication, protocol, or SAP that the 215 statistician was blinded until the SAP was signed off and 10 (10%) stated the statistician was 216 blinded until the database was locked. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 Of the 89 trials with an available pre-specified analysis approach, only 22 (25%) did not have 231 any unexplained discrepancies (no discrepancies n=5, explained discrepancies only n=17). 232

A further 54 trials (61%) had one or more unexplained discrepancies (see Fig 2). In 13 trials 233 (15%) it was unclear whether an unexplained discrepancy occurred due to poor reporting of 234 statistical methods (unclear whether discrepancy occurred n=11, unclear whether 235 discrepancy explained n=2). 236 237 Most trials had one (n=25, 28%) or two (n=16, 18%) unexplained discrepancies. Only 11 238 (12%) had three and 2 (2%) had four unexplained discrepancies. Unexplained discrepancies 239

were most common for the statistical analysis model (n=31, 35%) and analysis population 240 (n=28, 31%), followed by the use of covariates (n=23, 26%) and handling of missing data 241 (n=16, 18%). Table 2 provides a description of the unexplained discrepancies. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020  is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 the statistician was blinded until the SAP was signed off, and 4 (14%) until the database was 257 locked. 258 259 260


## Subgroup analyses 261

A total of 43/61 (66%) trials that were not for profit only had at least one unexplained 262 discrepancy, compared to 11/28 (45%) trials that were for profit only. Fewer trials with a SAP 263 available had unexplained discrepancies than trials without an available SAP, though this 264 In our review of 101 trials published in high impact general medical journals, we found that 274 most had a pre-specified analysis approach for the primary outcome available in either a 275 protocol or SAP. This is essential to allow transparent assessment of whether inappropriate 276 changes were made to the statistical methods. However, most pre-specified statistical 277 analysis approaches were available in a document that was dated after the trial had begun, 278 or had no date available. It is therefore possible that the analysis approach in these 279 documents may have already been changed from the pre-trial version. 280 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a perpetuity.

is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 Only 25% of trials did not have any unexplained discrepancies between the trial publication 282 and the pre-specified analysis approach, and only 6% had no discrepancies at all. Most trials 283 had at least one unexplained discrepancy (61%), with 32% of trials having two or more. In 284 15% of trials it was impossible to assess whether there were unexplained discrepancies due 285 to poor reporting of the statistical methods used. Of note, 33% of trials had one or more 286 explained discrepancies; however, less than a quarter of these trials reported that the 287 statistician was blinded to treatment allocation until the analysis plan was finalised or the 288 database was locked. These alterations may therefore have been made based on unblinded 289 trial data, despite being explained. It was also surprising that only two trials explained a 290 discrepancy in the trial publication, despite requirements by the CONSORT (29)  found similar rates of availability. However, the rates of discrepancies we found were 296 generally lower than those previously reported (8,10,20,21). For example, Chan et al 297 compared publications to protocols for 70 trials that received ethical approval by the 298 scientific-ethics committees for Copenhagen and Frederiksberg, Denmark in 1994-5 (21). 299

Overall, 44% of trials had unexplained discrepancies in the analysis population, 60% in the 300 analysis model, 82% in the use of covariates, and 80% for handling of missing data. There 301 are several potential explanations for these differences. The introduction of the SPIRIT 302 guidelines in 2013 (25, 26) may have led to better reporting of statistical methods in trial 303 protocols. We also accessed statistical analysis plans in almost half of trials, which 304 increased the number of explained discrepancies. Finally, we evaluated a different 305 population of trials; most of the high impact general medical journals in our review required 306 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a perpetuity.

is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ;https://doi.org/10.1101https://doi.org/10. /2020 submission of the trial protocol alongside the article, and may have been less likely to accept 307 trials with extreme discrepancies. 308


## 309

The key issues we identified in this study were: (i) low availability of pre-trial protocols and Our study had some limitations. We only included articles from six high impact medical 326 journals; it is likely that trials published in other journals may have lower availability of 327 protocols and SAPs, and higher rates of unexplained discrepancies. Comparisons were 328 based on the first available protocol or SAP, however many were dated after the trial had 329 begun, so there may have been discrepancies before this that we missed. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 Conclusions 333

In conclusion, unexplained discrepancies in the statistical methods of randomized trials are 334 is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ;https://doi.org/10.1101https://doi.org/10. /2020  is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ;https://doi.org/10.1101https://doi.org/10. /2020 Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors 378 379 . CC-BY 4.0 International license It is made available under a perpetuity.

is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ;https://doi.org/10.1101https://doi.org/10. /2020  is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020  is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020  is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in (which was not certified by peer review) preprint

The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10. 1101/2020 


158 choose during final analysis the set of covariates which gave the most favourable result); or 159 (d) multiple imputation would be used, but did not define what the method of imputation 160 would be, or what variables would be included in the imputation model (as this would allow 161 the investigators to run several different imputation models during final analysis and present 162 only the most favourable).


were, for each analysis element described earlier, (i) the number of 178 trials with at least one unexplained discrepancy (either change or addition); (ii) the number of 179 trials with at least one unexplained change; and (iii) the number of trials with at least one 180


results and characteristics of included studies 195 196 Our search identified 197 articles, of which 101 were eligible (see Fig 1 and for a list of 197 eligible trials Appendix 2 in Additional File 1). General trial characteristics are shown in


Fig 1: Flow chart of article selection 203

## 217 218
217Availability of pre-specified analysis approach 219 220Overall, 89 of 101 trials (88%) had a publicly available pre-specified analysis approach for 221 the primary outcome. Eleven trials did not have an available protocol or SAP, and one trial 222 had a protocol with no information on the analysis and no SAP. The document containing the 223 original analysis plan (83 in a protocol, 6 in a SAP) was dated before the start of recruitment 224 for 41 of 89 (46%) trials, during recruitment in 19 (21%) trials (median 19 months post-225 recruitment beginning, IQR 9 to 46), and after the end of recruitment in 8 (9%) trials (median 226 7 months post-recruitment completion, IQR 4 to 13). In 21 trials (24%) no date was available. 227228Comparison of pre-specified and conducted statistical analysis approach 229

## Fig 2 -
2Number of trials with unexplained discrepancies (Total N=89) * Of the n=22 trials 245 with none; no discrepancies (n=5), explained discrepancies only (n=17). ** Unclear if 246 discrepancy occurred (n=11), unclear if discrepancy explained (n=2). One trial had both a 247 change and an addition for the analysis model. trials (33%) had at least one explained discrepancy. Most discrepancies were 254 explained in a later version of the protocol or SAP; only 2 trials explained a discrepancy in 255 the trial publication. Of the 29 trials with an explained discrepancy, only 6 (21%) stated that 256


figure was still high (SAP available 22/46 [48%] with ≥1 unexplained discrepancy vs. no SAP 265 32/43 [74%]). Trials with a SAP still had a relatively high number of additions to the analysis 266 method, indicating that methods were not being adequately pre-specified within these SAPs 267 (range 7-15% across analysis elements). See Additional File 1


are broadly consistent with previous reviews. Spence et al (30) evaluated the 294 availability of protocols and SAPs for trials published in high impact medical journals, and 295


310 analysis plans; (ii) poor pre-specification of statistical methods within protocols and analysis 311 plans; (iii) frequent unexplained discrepancies in the final trial publication; (iv) poor reporting 312 of the blinding status of statisticians in relation to modifications of analysis methods or 313 access to trial data; and (v) poor descriptions of the actual analysis methods used in the final 314 publication. Increased adherence to guidelines such as SPIRIT, CONSORT, and the 315 guidelines for Statistical Analysis Plans (6, 26, 27) would help, though alternative 316 approaches to increase transparency around the statistical methods are also required. Two 317 simple proposals that would greatly improve the situation are (a) journals could require 318 authors to submit the first and last version of their protocol and SAP alongside the results 319 article, and publish these as supplementary material; this would allow transparent evaluation 320 of modifications to the analysis approach and be more effective than relying on authors to 321 publish these documents; and (b) journals could require that authors include the statistical 322 code used to perform their analysis alongside the article as supplementary content to allow a 323 complete and transparent comparison of the planned methods vs the final methods (31). 324 325


1.doc -Supplementary materialcontains additional methods and results. 470 Additional File 2.doc -Protocol and data extraction formcontains protocol and data 471 extraction form used for this study.


common. Increased transparency around the statistical methods used in randomized trials is 335No ethical approval or consent was required for this review of previously published trials. 352required for proper evaluation of trial results. 
336 

337 

338 

List of abbreviations 
339 

340 

CONSORT 
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials 
341 

GEE 
Generalized Estimating Equations 
342 

IQR 
Interquartile Range 
343 

SAP 
Statistical Analysis Plan 
344 

SPIRIT 
Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials 
345 

346 

347 

348 

Declarations 
349 

350 

Ethical approval and consent to participate 
351 

353 

Consent for publication 
354 

. 
CC-BY 4.0 International license 
It is made available under a 

perpetuity. 




The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the 358No specific funding was obtained for this research. Brennan Kahan is grateful for support 365 from the UK Medical Research Council, grant MC_UU_12023/21. 366The corresponding author affirms that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no 369 others meeting the criteria have been omitted. SC and BK had access to all the data in the 370 study and take full responsibility for the work and the conduct of the study and controlled the 371Not applicable 
355 

356 

Availability of data and materials 
357 

corresponding author on reasonable request. 
359 

360 

Competing Interests 
361 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
362 

363 

Funding 
364 

367 

Author contributions 
368 

decision to publish. 
372 

Study concept: BK 
373 

Study design: BK, SC and GF 
374 

Acquisition and interpretation of data: All authors. 
375 

Statistical analysis: SC 
376 

Drafting of the manuscript: SC and BK 
377 

. 
CC-BY 4.0 International license 
It is made available under a 

perpetuity. 



## Table 1 -
1Characteristics of eligible trials (N=101) 489Characteristic 



The copyright holder for this this version posted February 23, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101org/10. /2020 Crossover trial (n, %) 
3 (3%) 

Non-inferiority trial (n, %) 
20 (20%) 

No. of treatment arms (n, %) 

Two 
85 (84%) 

Three or more 
16 (16%) 

Sample size 

Median, IQR 
758 (306, 2129) 

Min, Max 
(36, 415357) 

490 

491 

492 

493 

494 

495 

496 

497 

498 

499 

500 

501 

502 

503 

504 

. 
CC-BY 4.0 International license 
It is made available under a 

perpetuity. 



## Table 2 -
2Description of unexplained discrepancies (N=89) 506Allowed analyst to subjectively choose analysis population based onUnexplained changes 



; https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 Covariates 

Not mentioned in Original Analysis Plan 
2 (2%) 

Incomplete detail given in Original Analysis Plan 
2 (2%) 

Allowed analyst to subjectively choose covariates based on trial 

dataset 

3 (3%) 

Missing data 

Not mentioned in Original Analysis Plan 
9 (10%) 

Incomplete detail given in Original Analysis Plan 
3 (3%) 

Allowed analyst to subjectively choose missing data approach based 

on trial dataset 

1 (1%) 

507 

508 

509 

. 
CC-BY 4.0 International license 
It is made available under a 

perpetuity. 


https://doi.org/10.1101https://doi.org/10. /2020 
Acknowledgements 380Brennan Kahan is grateful for support from the UK Medical Research Council, grant 381 MC_UU_12023/21. 382
The impact of analytic method on interpretation of 386 outcomes in longitudinal clinical trials. A Prakash, R C Risser, C H Mallinckrodt, International journal of clinical practice. 628Prakash A, Risser RC, Mallinckrodt CH. The impact of analytic method on interpretation of 386 outcomes in longitudinal clinical trials. International journal of clinical practice. 2008;62(8):1147-58. 387 2.

Practices and impact of primary outcome adjustment in 388 randomized controlled trials: meta-epidemiologic study. N Saquib, J Saquib, Jpa Ioannidis, BMJ : British Medical Journal. 3894313Saquib N, Saquib J, Ioannidis JPA. Practices and impact of primary outcome adjustment in 388 randomized controlled trials: meta-epidemiologic study. BMJ : British Medical Journal. 389 2013;347:f4313.

Discordance between reported intention-to-treat and per protocol 391 analyses. N Porta, C Bonet, E Cobo, J Clin Epidemiol. 607Porta N, Bonet C, Cobo E. Discordance between reported intention-to-treat and per protocol 391 analyses. J Clin Epidemiol. 2007;60(7):663-9.

Evidence b(i)ased medicine--selective 393 reporting from studies sponsored by pharmaceutical industry: review of studies in new drug 394 applications. H Melander, J Ahlqvist-Rastad, G Meijer, B Beermann, Bmj. 3267400Melander H, Ahlqvist-Rastad J, Meijer G, Beermann B. Evidence b(i)ased medicine--selective 393 reporting from studies sponsored by pharmaceutical industry: review of studies in new drug 394 applications. Bmj. 2003;326(7400):1171-3.

Pre-specification of statistical analysis 396 approaches in published clinical trial protocols was inadequate. L Greenberg, V Jairath, R Pearse, B C Kahan, Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 397Greenberg L, Jairath V, Pearse R, Kahan BC. Pre-specification of statistical analysis 396 approaches in published clinical trial protocols was inadequate. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 397 2018;101:53-60.

Guidelines for the Content 399 of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials. C Gamble, A Krishan, D Stocken, S Lewis, E Juszczak, C Dore, Jama. 31823Gamble C, Krishan A, Stocken D, Lewis S, Juszczak E, Dore C, et al. Guidelines for the Content 399 of Statistical Analysis Plans in Clinical Trials. Jama. 2017;318(23):2337-43.

Many scenarios exist for selective inclusion and reporting of 401 results in randomized trials and systematic reviews. M J Page, J E Mckenzie, A Forbes, Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 665Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Forbes A. Many scenarios exist for selective inclusion and reporting of 401 results in randomized trials and systematic reviews. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 2013;66(5):524- 402 37.

A systematic review of 404 comparisons between protocols or registrations and full reports in primary biomedical research. 405 BMC medical research methodology. G Li, Lpf Abbade, I Nwosu, Y Jin, A Leenus, M Maaz, 189Li G, Abbade LPF, Nwosu I, Jin Y, Leenus A, Maaz M, et al. A systematic review of 404 comparisons between protocols or registrations and full reports in primary biomedical research. 405 BMC medical research methodology. 2018;18(1):9-.

Empirical evidence for 407 selective reporting of outcomes in randomized trials: comparison of protocols to published articles. A W Chan, A Hrobjartsson, M T Haahr, P C Gotzsche, D G Altman, Chan AW, Hrobjartsson A, Haahr MT, Gotzsche PC, Altman DG. Empirical evidence for 407 selective reporting of outcomes in randomized trials: comparison of protocols to published articles.

. Jama. 29120Jama. 2004;291(20):2457-65.

Comparison of 410 protocols and registry entries to published reports for randomised controlled trials. K Dwan, D G Altman, L Cresswell, M Blundell, C L Gamble, P R Williamson, Cochrane 411 Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011(1)Dwan K, Altman DG, Cresswell L, Blundell M, Gamble CL, Williamson PR. Comparison of 410 protocols and registry entries to published reports for randomised controlled trials. Cochrane 411 Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011(1).

Identifying outcome reporting bias in randomised trials on PubMed: 413 review of publications and survey of authors. A W Chan, D G Altman, Bmj. 330749412Chan AW, Altman DG. Identifying outcome reporting bias in randomised trials on PubMed: 413 review of publications and survey of authors. Bmj. 2005;330(7494):753. 414 12.

Systematic review of the 415 empirical evidence of study publication bias and outcome reporting bias. K Dwan, D G Altman, J A Arnaiz, J Bloom, A W Chan, E Cronin, PloS one. 38Dwan K, Altman DG, Arnaiz JA, Bloom J, Chan AW, Cronin E, et al. Systematic review of the 415 empirical evidence of study publication bias and outcome reporting bias. PloS one. 2008;3(8):e3081. 416 13.

Investigation of within-study selective reporting in clinical 417 research: follow-up of applications submitted to a local research ethics committee. S Hahn, P R Williamson, J L Hutton, 814Journal of 418 evaluation in clinical practiceHahn S, Williamson PR, Hutton JL. Investigation of within-study selective reporting in clinical 417 research: follow-up of applications submitted to a local research ethics committee. Journal of 418 evaluation in clinical practice. 2002;8(3):353-9. 419 14.

. S Ramagopalan, A P Skingsley, L Handunnetthi, M Klingel, D Magnus, J Pakpoor, Ramagopalan S, Skingsley AP, Handunnetthi L, Klingel M, Magnus D, Pakpoor J, et al.

Prevalence of primary outcome changes in clinical trials registered on ClinicalTrials.gov: a cross-421 sectional study. 377Prevalence of primary outcome changes in clinical trials registered on ClinicalTrials.gov: a cross- 421 sectional study. F1000Research. 2014;3:77.

Reporting Bias in Drug Trials Submitted to the Food and Drug 423 Administration: Review of Publication and Presentation. K Rising, P Bacchetti, L Bero, PLOS Medicine. 511Rising K, Bacchetti P, Bero L. Reporting Bias in Drug Trials Submitted to the Food and Drug 423 Administration: Review of Publication and Presentation. PLOS Medicine. 2008;5(11):e217. 424 16.

Outcome Reporting in Industry-Sponsored Trials 425 of Gabapentin for Off-Label Use. S S Vedula, L Bero, R W Scherer, K Dickersin, New England Journal of Medicine. 3612017Vedula SS, Bero L, Scherer RW, Dickersin K. Outcome Reporting in Industry-Sponsored Trials 425 of Gabapentin for Off-Label Use. New England Journal of Medicine. 2009;361(20):1963-71. 426 17.

Outcome selection bias in meta-analysis. 427 Statistical methods in medical research. P R Williamson, C Gamble, D G Altman, J L Hutton, 1418Williamson PR, Gamble C, Altman DG, Hutton JL. Outcome selection bias in meta-analysis. 427 Statistical methods in medical research. 2005;14(5):515-24. 428 18.

COMPare: a prospective 429 cohort study correcting and monitoring 58 misreported trials in real time. B Goldacre, H Drysdale, A Dale, I Milosevic, E Slade, P Hartley, Trials. 20119Goldacre B, Drysdale H, Dale A, Milosevic I, Slade E, Hartley P, et al. COMPare: a prospective 429 cohort study correcting and monitoring 58 misreported trials in real time. Trials. 2019;20(1):118. 430 19.

. T Chen, C Li, R Qin, Y Wang, D Yu, J Dodd, 431Chen T, Li C, Qin R, Wang Y, Yu D, Dodd J, et al. Comparison of Clinical Trial Changes in 431

Primary Outcome and Reported Intervention Effect Size Between Trial Registration and Publication. JAMA Network Open. 27197242Primary Outcome and Reported Intervention Effect Size Between Trial Registration and Publication. 432 JAMA Network Open. 2019;2(7):e197242-e.

. K Dwan, D G Altman, M Clarke, C Gamble, Jpt Higgins, Jac Sterne, 434Dwan K, Altman DG, Clarke M, Gamble C, Higgins JPT, Sterne JAC, et al. Evidence for the 434

Selective Reporting of Analyses and Discrepancies in Clinical Trials: A Systematic Review of Cohort 435 Studies of Clinical Trials. PLOS Medicine. 116Selective Reporting of Analyses and Discrepancies in Clinical Trials: A Systematic Review of Cohort 435 Studies of Clinical Trials. PLOS Medicine. 2014;11(6):e1001666. 436 21.

Discrepancies in sample 437 size calculations and data analyses reported in randomised trials: comparison of publications with 438 protocols. A-W Chan, A Hróbjartsson, K J Jørgensen, P C Gøtzsche, D G Altman, J H Powers, C A Dixon, M J Goldberger, 1355-. 441 23New England Journal of Medicine. 3374445New England Journal of Medicine.. International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals forChan A-W, Hróbjartsson A, Jørgensen KJ, Gøtzsche PC, Altman DG. Discrepancies in sample 437 size calculations and data analyses reported in randomised trials: comparison of publications with 438 protocols. BMJ. 2008;337:a2299. 439 22. Editorial Review of Protocols for Clinical Trials. New England Journal of Medicine. 440 1990;323(19):1355-. 441 23. Powers JH, Dixon CA, Goldberger MJ. Voriconazole versus Liposomal Amphotericin B in 442 Patients with Neutropenia and Persistent Fever. New England Journal of Medicine. 2002;346(4):289- 443 90. 444 24. International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for 445

ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Statistical Principles for. Human Use, Clinical Trials E9. 44725European Medicines AgencyHuman Use. ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials E9.: London, 446 England: European Medicines Agency; 1998. 447 25.

448 statement: defining standard protocol items for clinical trials. A W Chan, J M Tetzlaff, D G Altman, A Laupacis, P C Gotzsche, K Krleza-Jeric, Ann Intern Med. 158326Chan AW, Tetzlaff JM, Altman DG, Laupacis A, Gotzsche PC, Krleza-Jeric K, et al. SPIRIT 2013 448 statement: defining standard protocol items for clinical trials. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(3):200-7. 449 26.

450 explanation and elaboration: guidance for protocols of clinical trials. A-W Chan, J M Tetzlaff, P C Gøtzsche, D G Altman, H Mann, J A Berlin, BMJ : British Medical Journal. 45127Chan A-W, Tetzlaff JM, Gøtzsche PC, Altman DG, Mann H, Berlin JA, et al. SPIRIT 2013 450 explanation and elaboration: guidance for protocols of clinical trials. BMJ : British Medical Journal. 451 2013;346:e7586. 452 27.

Explanation and Elaboration: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. D Moher, S Hopewell, K F Schulz, V Montori, P C Gøtzsche, P J Devereaux, BMJ. 45328Moher D, Hopewell S, Schulz KF, Montori V, Gøtzsche PC, Devereaux PJ, et al. CONSORT 453 2010 Explanation and Elaboration: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. 454 BMJ. 2010;340:c869. 455 28.

StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 15. College Station, TX: Stata Corp LLC. 45629StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 15. College Station, TX: Stata Corp LLC. 456 2017. 457 29.

The revised 458 CONSORT statement for reporting randomized trials: explanation and elaboration. D G Altman, K F Schulz, D Moher, M Egger, F Davidoff, D Elbourne, Ann Intern Med. 4598Altman DG, Schulz KF, Moher D, Egger M, Davidoff F, Elbourne D, et al. The revised 458 CONSORT statement for reporting randomized trials: explanation and elaboration. Ann Intern Med. 459 2001;134(8):663-94.

Availability of study protocols for 461 randomized trials published in high-impact medical journals: A cross-sectional analysis. O M Spence, K Hong, Onwuchekwa Uba, R Doshi, P , 1740774519868310Clinical 462 Trials.0(0Spence OM, Hong K, Onwuchekwa Uba R, Doshi P. Availability of study protocols for 461 randomized trials published in high-impact medical journals: A cross-sectional analysis. Clinical 462 Trials.0(0):1740774519868310.

Why researchers should share their analytic code. B Goldacre, C E Morton, N J Devito, BMJ. 4646365Goldacre B, Morton CE, DeVito NJ. Why researchers should share their analytic code. BMJ. 464 2019;367:l6365.