# Overview of Flow Improvers for Crude Oil Production in China

CorpusID: 216526164
 
tags: #Engineering, #Environmental_Science, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/237c37b0fa97a8d1394c0fe45b44300be9246bd4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/237c37b0fa97a8d1394c0fe45b44300be9246bd4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Overview of Flow Improvers for Crude Oil Production in China


Fusheng Zhang 
Key Laboratory of Oilfield Chemistry
CNPC (Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development, PetroChina)
100083BeijingChina

Dalong Shan 
Daqing Oilfield Kaipu Chemical Limited Company
163114DaqingChina

Guoliang Liu 
Key Laboratory of Oilfield Chemistry
CNPC (Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development, PetroChina)
100083BeijingChina

Xuening Li 
Jianghe Sun 
Key Laboratory of Oilfield Chemistry
CNPC (Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development, PetroChina)
100083BeijingChina

School of Energy Resources
China University of Geosciences (Beijing)
100083BeijingChina

Overview of Flow Improvers for Crude Oil Production in China
10.1088/1755-1315/453/1/012037Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd GMEE2019 IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 453 (2020) 012037 IOP Publishing 1 *Corresponding authorHeavy oilWaxy crudeFlow improverFormation driveWellbore liftingPipeline transportation
The production of crude oil has three stages: formation drive, wellbore lifting, and pipeline transportation. This paper summarizes the application effects of flow improvers within several long-distance pipelines in China. The effects of oil-and water-soluble viscosity reducers on lower-and higher-viscosity heavy oils, respectively, and their effects in the wellbore-lifting process are outlined. Further, the technical difficulties and potential solutions associated with driving heavy oil are discussed. This paper has reference value for researchers conducting studies on flow improvers.

## Introduction

Crude oil can be classified according to viscosity as conventional oil, heavy oil, extra heavy oil, or bitumen [1] . Conventional crude oil extracted in China typically has a high wax content [2] , high pour point, high viscosity, and poor flow. Because of their high resin and asphaltene contents, heavy oil, extra heavy oil, and bitumen generally have relatively higher viscosities and poorer flows. Heating is commonly used to improve the flow of heavy oil while ensuring safe production. However, flow improvers have the potential to greatly improve the flow of crude oil and could be far more energy efficient and economic. In recent years, significant progress has been made in the research of flow improvers [3][4][5][6] . Based on this research, a series of flow improvers have been developed and proved suitable for the pipeline transportation and wellbore lifting of crude oil. The flow of conventional crude oil in reservoir conditions is generally sufficient and poses few problems to recovery via water flooding. The flows of heavy oil, extra heavy oil, and bitumen are comparatively poorer, and therefore thermal technology is utilized to drive the flows of these oils. Although water flooding is used to drive normal heavy oil, the associated recovery is only 5%-25% due to the higher viscosity. Although great progress has been made in the research of improving the recovery of heavy oil by water flooding, the work is still in the initial stage, some small-scale field tests have not achieved the expected results, and the main EOR technologies for heavy oil by water flooding has not been developed. Therefore, research into reducing the viscosity of normal heavy oil is vital to improve its recovery via water flooding. 


## Application of Flow Improvers in Crude Oil Pipelines

A combination of heating and flow improvers is commonly used to enhance the flow of conventional crude oil through pipelines, whereas heating alone is commonly used for heavy oil, extra heavy oil, and bitumen.


### Composition of Crude Oil Transported via Various Pipelines in China

Onshore pipelines comprise over 80% of the total transportation for crude oil in China, with a total length of over 23,400 km [7] . However, the high wax, resin, and asphaltene contents of crude oil create significant challenges for its transportation via various major pipelines ( 


### Application Results of Flow Improvers in Crude Oil Pipelines

Based on studies of the mechanisms underlying pour-point depression [8][9][10][11][12] , flow improvers have been developed and utilized to successfully adapt crude oil for transportation via various pipelines, including Luning, Zhongluo, and Pulin (Table 2). Pour point [13] was determined according to Chinese Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry standard SY/T0541-2009. Viscosity [14] was determined according to Chinese Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry standard SY/T0520-2008.  Table 2 shows that the addition of flow improvers produced superior pour-point depressions and reductions in viscosity, with treatments of 15-20 mg/kg reducing pour points by 9-1 ℃ and viscosities by 26%-6%. The application of flow improvers in these pipelines has resulted in substantial reductions in fuel and transportation costs in addition to significant economic and social benefits. Further, the operational safety and adaptability of pipeline transportation has been improved. 


## Application of Viscosity Reducers in Wellbore Lifting of Heavy Oil

Oil-and water-based viscosity reducers have been developed specifically for the characteristics of heavy oil extracted in China and based on studies of viscosity-reduction mechanisms [15] . Subsequently, these viscosity reducers have been utilized in the wellbore lifting of heavy oil [16] .


### Application of Oil-based Viscosity Reducers in Wellbore Lifting

Oil-based viscosity reducers are composed of macromolecule polymers containing strong polar groups that form hydrogen bonds with resin and asphaltene molecules and thereby reduce the viscosity of heavy oil. Therefore, oil-based viscosity reducers are suitable for the production of heavy oils with lower water contents and viscosities. The data presented in Table 3 show that the viscosities of various lower-viscosity heavy oils were significantly reduced by the addition of oil-based viscosity reducers. Dosages of 200-500 mg/kg produced viscosity reductions of 60%-86% in the lower-viscosity heavy oils that were tested. In Jidong oilfield, the early stages of oil production conformed to expectations, and considerable production improvements were achieved with the utilization of oil-based viscosity reducers, as the results in Table 4 indicate. After the utilization of oil-based viscosity reducers in Jidong oilfield, Production efficiency, time of continuous production and production increased.


### Application of Water-based Viscosity Reducers in Wellbore Lifting

Water-based viscosity reducers are composed of surfactants and stabilizers that convert an oil-water system into an O/W emulsion and can therefore reduce the viscosity of a heavy oil by over 90%. In the wellbore-lifting process, a viscosity reducer can be used either alone via injection into the bottom-hole or in combination with steam stimulation. The data presented in Table 5 illustrate the application effects of water-based viscosity reducers on various heavy oils.  Further, a water-based viscosity reducer was utilized in several oil wells in the Xinglongtai oil production plant in Liaohe, and the results are presented in Table 6. Water recovery, production time and oil production of the Xinglongtai increased significantly. According to statistical data provided by the oil production plant, the cumulative increment reached 30,690 tons and the return on investment was as high as 23:1.


## Viscosity Reducer for Heavy Oil Formation Drive

For conventional crude oils with low in-situ viscosities, water flooding is the primary recovery method. For heavy oils with higher viscosities, thermal recovery methods are utilized, including steam stimulation, steam flooding, in-situ combustion, and steam-assisted gravity drainage. For heavy oils with lower viscosities, water flooding is used. Heavy oils that can be recovered by water flooding account for 30.1% of the total reserves and 18% of the total production. However, due to the thickness of heavy oil and the heterogeneity of typical heavy oil reservoirs, water flooding yields only 5%-25% of the final oil recovery.

To improve the oil recovery factors of water flooding in heavy oil reservoirs, most research has focused on alkaline, polymer, surfactant, and combination flooding. Promising theoretical research conducted in this area includes proposals for technologies that have been subsequently field-tested [17][18][19][20][21] . For example, a small-scale field test of a viscosity reducer was implemented in the No. 3 oil production plant in the Dagang oilfield in China. However, the small molecules that comprise the viscosity reducer were unable to form stable O/W emulsions under a low in-situ shear rate, and therefore incremental oil production was negligible. Studies show that the key to improving water drive recovery factors in heavy oil reservoirs is to increase the swept volume. Although reducing the viscosity of heavy oil and increasing the viscosity of the displacement phase are effective ways to increase the swept volume, no research has been conducted on water-flooding enhanced oil recovery (EOR) technologies that could achieve this under low shear stress conditions. A macromolecular viscosity reducer created according to a theoretical molecular design could assist in reducing heavy oil viscosity while increasing displacement phase viscosity, and such synergism could greatly improve the recovery factors of water flooding in heavy oil reservoirs. Therefore, with their promising range of applications, macromolecular viscosity reducers are among the key technologies to augment water flooding in the near future, and are of great significance to the development of water-flooding EOR technologies for heavy oil.


## Conclusions and Proposals

Flow improvers are effective in reducing the pour points and viscosities of waxy crude oils, and have been utilized in the Luning, Zhongluo, and Pulin pipelines (among others) to improve operational safety and adaptability. Oil-based viscosity reducers are effective on lower-viscosity heavy oils, whereas water-based viscosity reducers are effective on higher-viscosity heavy oils. Both oil-and water-based viscosity reducers have been utilized effectively in wellbore lifting. However, to enhance formation drive, further research needs to be conducted on viscosity reducers, including viscosity-reducing mechanisms, evaluation systems, and the design of molecular structures.


GMEE2019 IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 453 (2020) 012037 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1755-1315/453/1/0120372 



## Table 1 )
1. Table1. Parameters of various pipelines in China and the compositions of the transported crude oil.Pipeline name 
Pipeline length 
/km 

Design throughput 
/10 4 ton.y -1 

Wax 
/% 

Resin-asphaltene 
/% 
Luning pipeline 
652.6 
2000 
21.1 
22.7 
Zhongluo pipeline 
290.1 
500 
24.8 
6.9 
Pulin pipeline 
241.9 
350 
21.8 
8.2 
Weijing pipeline 
226.4 
350 
30.6 
10.0 
Donghuang pipeline 
251.1 
1000 
18.3 
21.6 
Donglin pipeline 
171.3 
1000 
19.3 
20.7 
Mahuining pipeline 
270.0 
470 
17.6 
20.1 
Huage pipeline 
438.8 
300 
20.6 
10.7 
Kushan pipeline 
476.0 
1000 
8.8 
6.5 
Dongxin pipeline 
93.0 
540 
18.9 
20.6 
Hongjing pipeline 
210.1 
350 
15.8 
13.3 



## Table 2 .
2Effects of flow improvers on crude oil transported via various pipelines in China.Source of crude oil 
Dosage 
/mg.kg -1 

Pour point /℃ 
Pour point 
reduction 
/℃ 

Viscosity /mPa.s 
Viscosity 
reduction 
/% 

Before 
treatment 

After 
treatment 

Before 
treatment 

After 
treatment 
Luning pipeline 
50 
25 
7 
18 
965(30℃) 320(30℃) 
67 
Zhongluo pipeline 
40 
33 
12 
21 
1122(30℃) 75(30℃) 
93 
Pulin pipeline 
40 
33 
13 
19 
763(30℃) 
35(30℃) 
95 
Weijing pipeline 
60 
36 
24 
12 
1650(30℃) 102(30℃) 
94 
Donghuang pipeline 
40 
17 
5 
12 
416(30℃) 306(30℃) 
26 
Donglin pipeline 
50 
23 
5 
18 
528(30℃) 307(30℃) 
42 
Mahuining pipeline 
120 
18 
-1 
19 
1686(10℃) 75(10℃) 
96 
Huage pipeline 
110 
33 
16 
17 
2175(20℃) 226(20℃) 
90 
Kushan pipeline 
20 
1 
-8 
9 
313(5℃) 
22(5℃) 
93 
Dongxin pipeline 
15 
28 
10 
18 
2218(20℃) 457(20℃) 
79 
Hongjing pipeline 
50 
35 
21 
14 
236 (35℃) 56 (35℃) 
76 




GMEE2019 IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 453 (2020) 012037 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1755-1315/453/1/0120373 



## Table 3 .
3Effects of oil-soluble viscosity reducers on various heavy oils.Source of crude oil 
Dosage 
/mg.kg -1 

Viscosity (40℃) /mPa.s 
Viscosity reduction 
/% 
Before treatment 
After treatment 

Jidong 
oilfield 

111-6 
500 
4600 
810 
82 
111-9 
500 
1600 
358 
77 
109-6 
500 
910 
360 
60 
Huabei oilfield 
200 
1513 
376 
75 
Jilin oilfield 
450 
2520 
360 
86 
Kelamayi oilfield 
450 
2300 
510 
78 



## Table 4 .
4Application results of oil-based viscosity reducers in Jidong oilfield.Well 
number 

Production efficiency /% 
Time of continuous production /d 
Production /ton.d -1 

Before 
treatment 

After 
treatment 
Increment 
Before 
treatment 

After 
treatment 
Increment 
Before 
treatment 

After 
treatment 
Increment 

104-5 
45 
95 
50 
95 
221 
126 
3.9 
4.2 
0.3 
109-6 
46 
95 
49 
81 
121 
40 
5.7 
8.1 
2.4 
111-6 
93 
98 
5 
108 
135 
27 
8.1 
8.9 
0.8 
111-9 
90 
98 
8 
44 
156 
112 
8.4 
8.9 
0.5 




GMEE2019IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 453 (2020) 012037IOP Publishing 
doi:10.1088/1755-1315/453/1/012037 

4 



## Table 5 .
5Effects of water-based viscosity reducers on various heavy oils.Source of crude oil 
Dosage 
/mg.kg -1 

Oil:water 
/w:w 

Viscosity /mPa.s 
Viscosity 
reduction 
/% 

Before 
treatment 

After 
treatment 
Shengli oilfield 
150 
6:4 
48600 (60℃) 
147 (60℃) 
99 
Jidong oilfield 
150 
6:4 
22750 (40℃) 
156 (40℃) 
99 
Xinjiang oilfield 
200 
6:4 
11090 (30℃) 
136 (30℃) 
98 

Liaohe oilfield 
150 
6:4 
68500 (50℃) 
159 (50℃) 
99 
200 
7:3 
68500 (50℃) 
165 (50℃) 
99 



## Table 6 .
6Applicationresults of a water-based viscosity reducer 
for the Xinglongtai of the Liaohe oilfield. 

Well 
number 

Steam 
cycle 
/round 

Water 
recovery 
/% 

Increment of 
water ecovery 
/% 

Oil 
production 
/ton 

Increment of 
oil production 
/ton 

Production 
time 
/d 

Increment of 
production time 
/d 

3547 
3 
47.7 
7.5 
2685 
1280 
165.2 
47.3 
4 
55.2 
3965 
212.5 

37431 
2 
58.5 
37.5 
2077 
279 
171.7 
19.8 
3 
96.0 
2356 
191.5 

37436 
3 
41.2 
27.4 
1716 
184 
209.1 
9.6 
4 
68.6 
1900 
218.7 

3126 
4 
27.1 
58.2 
1927 
1173 
131.7 
64.9 
5 
85.3 
3100 
196.6 

Wa 38 
4 
35.7 
20.5 
568 
798 
58.5 
77.4 
5 
56.2 
1366 
135.9 




GMEE2019 IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 453 (2020) 012037 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1755-1315/453/1/0120375 


Acknowledgements
. P Li, S Zhang, Y He, Oil & Gas Storage and Transportation. 91Li P, Zhang S, and He Y, 1990. Oil & Gas Storage and Transportation, 9(1):74-77.

. Wang B Dong, L , International Meeting on Petroleum Engineering, SPE 29954Wang B and Dong L, 1995. International Meeting on Petroleum Engineering, SPE 29954.

. N Ahmed, A Nassar, R Nasser, Petroleum Science and Technology. 326Ahmed N, Nassar A, Nasser R, et al., 2014. Petroleum Science and Technology, 32(6):680-687.

Petroleum Science and Technology. T Du, S Wang, H Liu, 30Du T, Wang S, and Liu H, 2012. Petroleum Science and Technology, 30(2):212-221.

. T Khidr, Petroleum Science and Technology. 291Khidr T T, 2011. Petroleum Science and Technology, 29(1):19-28.

. C Zhang, C Gao, F Gao, Petroleum Science. 111Zhang C, Gao C, Gao F, et al., 2014. Petroleum Science, 11(1)1:155-160.

J Zhang, Modern Occupational Safety. 7Zhang J, 2016. Modern Occupational Safety, 7:72-74.

. J Li, F Zhang, Y Zhang, Oilfield Chemistry. 61Li J, Zhang F, and Zhang Y, 1989. Oilfield Chemistry, 6(1):50-57.

Xi'an: Xi'an Shiyou University. J Li, Li J, 2010. Xi'an: Xi'an Shiyou University.

Beijing: China University of Petroleum. J Wang, Wang J, 2013. Beijing: China University of Petroleum.

. F Zhang, B Wang, H Xie, Oilfield Chemistry. 164Zhang F, Wang B, Xie H, et al., 1999. Oilfield Chemistry, 16(4):368-371.

F Zhang, B Wang, H Xie, Speciality Petrochemicals. 4Zhang F, Wang B, Xie H, et al., 1999. Speciality Petrochemicals, 4:6-8.

SY/T0541-2009. Chinese Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry standard. SY/T0541-2009. Chinese Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry standard.

SY/T0520-2008. Chinese Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry standard. SY/T0520-2008. Chinese Petroleum and Natural Gas Industry standard.

. F Zhang, B Wang, Oilfield Chemistry. 124Zhang F and Wang B, 1995. Oilfield Chemistry, 12(4):347-352.

. F Zhang, H Xie, Dong L , Speciality Petrochemicals. 6Zhang F, Xie H, and Dong L, 1999. Speciality Petrochemicals, 6:28-30.

Complex Hydrocarbon Reservoirs. J Chen, 7Chen J, 2013. Complex Hydrocarbon Reservoirs, 7(1):38-40, 57.

Natural Gas and Oil. H Liao, S Tang, 36Liao H and Tang S, 2018. Natural Gas and Oil, 36(2):64-67, 95.

. C Qu, Qingdao, China University of Petroleum (East ChinaQu C, 2013. Qingdao: China University of Petroleum (East China).

Fault-Block Oil & Gas Field. M Tang, H Pei, G Zhang, 19Tang M, Pei H, Zhang G, et al., 2012. Fault-Block Oil & Gas Field, 19(1):44-48.

. F Zhou, Petrochemical Industry Application. 361Zhou F, 2017. Petrochemical Industry Application, 36(1):78-83.