# Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY A Survey Paper on Crater Detection

CorpusID: 21693591
 
tags: #Geology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd0a572a7168f1cc356856bb14ba6b894b8de46d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd0a572a7168f1cc356856bb14ba6b894b8de46d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY A Survey Paper on Crater Detection
Index Copernicus ValueCopyright Index Copernicus Value2013. 2014. December 2015

Jyoti Patil 
M.E (Computer)
Department of Computer Engineering
Jayawantrao Sawant College of Engineering
PuneIndia

Savitribai Phule Pune University
411028PuneMaharashtraIndia

DrNarasimha Srinivas 
Kini 
Department of Computer Engineering
Jayawantrao Sawant College of Engineering
PuneIndia

Savitribai Phule Pune University
411007PuneMaharashtraIndia

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY A Survey Paper on Crater Detection

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR) ISSN
OnlineIndex Copernicus Value42013. 2014. December 2015www.ijsr.netCraters DetectionGist featuresRandom forestHough transformHaar Like Elements
Craters are the most plenteous landform on the planet surface, which could give key intimations to planetary science.Because of varieties in the landscape, brightening, and scale, it is trying to distinguish Craters through remote detecting pictures and it requires an effective crater feature extraction method. In this paper, we address this issue utilizing Gist features, which can give exceedingly compelling depictions on crater's nearby edges and worldwide structure. The proposed crater's discovery technique contains three key steps. To begin with, we separate all candidate craters on a planet picture utilizing edge based technique and Hough transform. Second, Gist elements are created from chose preparing tests. Third, Craters discovery is led utilizing Gist features vectors with random forest classification. Contrasted with pixel based also, Haar-like components, our strategy indicates more exact craters acknowledgment, and accomplishes fulfilled results in the analyses directed on the Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC) database.

## Introduction

Impact Craters are among the most studied features on Mars. They are structures formed by collisions of meteoroids with the Martian surface. Their importance stems from the wealth of information that detailed analysis of their distributions and morphology can bring forth. For example, statistics of crater sizes forms the basis for geological stratigraphy of Mars. In addition, knowledge of crater morphologies enables studies of a number of outstanding issues in Martian geomorphology, such as: the nature of degradation processes, regional variations in geologic material, and distribution of subsurface volatiles. Thus, surveying Martian craters is an important task in planetary research. What's more, Crater are perfect route historic points, which are utilized for exact movement estimation for landing control arrangement of planetary tests, for example, landscape relative route. Consequently, checking and measuring the craters on the planet of solar framework is an imperative work for planet science. Be that as it may, with vast volumes of picture information gained by tests of Moon, Mars, and different planets, manual pit recognition, index, and investigation have turned into a testing and tedious undertaking [2]. Along these lines, we require effective and dependable programmed crater discovery strategies.

Numbers of crater detection algorithms (CDAs) have been proposed over the last few decades to address the challenges involved [3].Today, as in the past, efficient crater detection in planetary images remains as a daunting task due to the following challenges. Challenge 1: Lack of distinguishing features. Craters, as a landform formation , lack strong common features distinguishing them from other landform formations. Their sizes differ by orders of magnitude. Their rims have often been eroded since their formation millions of years ago, resulting in shapes that depart significantly from circles. They frequently overlap, complicating the task of their separation from background. Challenge 2: Heterogeneous morphology in images. Planetary surfaces are not homogeneous where non uniform surface morphology frequently exhibits. Furthermore, planetary images may be taken at different lighting conditions, at different resolutions, and their quality varies so that even morphologically identical craters may have different appearances in different images. Challenge 3: Huge amount of sub kilometer craters in high-resolution planetary images. The size distribution of craters follows power-law; large craters that can be easily identified manually are rare and small sub kilometer craters are abundant.

Highlight extraction for crater picture representations is a key procedure, and it is firmly identified with crater recognition results. Great components ought to give crucial portrayal of the subject, catch the discriminative data, and offer a decent execution in pit identification classifier [6]. For crater pictures, an proficient element extraction strategy ought to be powerful in diverse scales, brightening points, and landscapes. Numerous components have been created, for example, standardized pixel-based elements [1], Haar-like elements [7], [8], and other neighborhood descriptors [9], [10]. For pixel-based element, all the first pixels are standardized to dispense with the impact of splendor and differentiation on unique crater pictures by a complexity standardization method. At that point, we acquire the pixelbased component by changing over the standardized dark picture lattice into one-dimensional vector. Pixel-based components keep the first picture data, however they can be delicate to area, landscapes condition, and some other components which influence the picture nature of the planetary surface [11]. For Haar-like components, almost 14 000 elements are acquired by testing every picture hinder with an arrangement of ternary veils, took after by an element determination technique [12]. They are normal to speak to the inborn components to particular the holes and non craters [13]. In this manner, we adjust the Gist components to recognize craters on Martian remote detecting pictures in this paper. The Gist was at first proposed by Potter and Levy [14], which goes for encoding of the worldwide design of an article and overlooking the points of interest. It is an arrangement of components acquired from Gabor wavelet 


## Related Work

J. R. Kim, J. P. Muller, and S. V. [3] propose that mechanized crater recognition calculation is exhibited which endeavors picture information. The calculation is quickly portrayed also, its application showed on an assortment of distinctive A. Oliva and A. Torralba, [15] propose a computational model of the acknowledgment of genuine scenes that sidesteps the division and the handling of individual items or locales. The methodology depends on a low dimensional representation of the scene, that they term the Spatial Envelope. They propose an arrangement of perceptual measurements (expectation, openness, harshness, development, toughness) that speak to the prevailing spatial structure of a scene. At that point, they demonstrate that these measurements may be dependably assessed utilizing phantom and coarsely restricted data. The model produces a multidimensional space in which scenes sharing enrollment in semantic classifications (e.g., avenues, roadways, and coasts) are anticipated shut together. The execution of the spatial envelope model demonstrates that particular data about article shape or character is not a necessity for scene arrangement and that displaying a comprehensive representation of the scene illuminates about its likely semantic classification.

A. Quattoni and A. Torralba [16], Indoor scene acknowledgment is a testing open issue in abnormal state vision. Most scene acknowledgment models that function admirably for open air scenes perform ineffectively in the indoor space. The fundamental trouble is that while some indoor scenes (e.g. hallways) can be very much described by worldwide spatial properties, others (e.g., book shops) are better portrayed by the articles they contain. All the for the most part, to address the indoor scenes acknowledgment issue they require a model that can misuse neighborhood and worldwide discriminative data. In this paper they propose a model based model that can effectively consolidate both wellsprings of data. To test our methodology they made a dataset of 67 indoor scenes classes (the biggest accessible) covering a extensive variety of areas. The outcomes demonstrate that their methodology can fundamentally beat a best in class classifier for the errand.

C. Siagian and L. Itti [17], depict and approve a basic context based scene acknowledgment calculation for versatile mechanical autonomy applications. The framework can separate open air scenes from different locales on a school grounds utilizing a multi scale set of ahead of schedule visual components, which catch the "significance" of the scene into a low-dimensional mark vector. Unmistakable from past methodologies, the calculation shows the favorable position of being organically conceivable and of having low computational many-sided quality, sharing its low-level elements with a model for visual consideration that may work simultaneously on a robot. They analyze characterization precision utilizing scenes taped at three open air locales on grounds (13,965 to 34,711 edges for every site). Isolating every site into nine fragments, they acquire portion grouping rates somewhere around 84.21% and 88.62%. Joining scenes from all locales (75,073 edges altogether) yields 86.45% right characterization, exhibiting speculation and versatility of the methodology.

L. Bandeira, J. Saraiva, and P. Pina [19] presents an approach to recognize impact craters on the surface of Mars based on the analysis of a probability volume created by template matching.

S. Grigorescu, N. Petkov, and P. Kruizinga, [20] propose that surface elements that depend on the nearby power range acquired by a bank of Gabor channels are looked at. The components vary in the kind of nonlinear post-handling which is connected to the nearby power range. The accompanying elements are considered: Gabor vitality, complex minutes, and grinding cell administrator highlights. The ability of the comparing administrators to deliver particular element vector bunches for distinctive surfaces is analyzed utilizing two routines: the Fisher measure and the grouping result correlation. Both strategies give steady results. The grinding cell administrator gives the best separation and division results. The composition recognition capacities of the administrators what's more, their strength to non texture components is additionally looked at. The grinding cell administrator is the one and only that specifically reacts just to surface and does not give false reaction to non texture highlights for example, item shapes.

B. D. Bue and T. F. Stepinski, [22] present a novel methodology to crater discovery that uses advanced geology information rather than pictures. Craters are portrayed by topographic ebb and flow. Thresholding maps of shape changes topographic information into a parallel picture, from which craters are recognized utilizing a mix of division and discovery calculations. They apply their strategy in fact  Does not uses bottomup salient cues to produce a useful topographical map for navigation requesting test site and contrast the outcomes with the current inventory of physically recognized cavities. Their calculation finds numerous little craters not recorded in the manual inventory; however it neglects to distinguish intensely debased craters. A definite quality evaluation of the calculation is introduced. The geography based crater recognition calculation offers a generally basic and prepared to-utilize device for ID and portrayal of crisp effect crater with a sufficient execution for the quick application to Martian geomorphology.


## Conclusion

In this paper we conclude that there are many methods for crater detection. There are some manual methods for crater detection but these methods took more time for detection of crater. Also, there are different types of methods for crater detection which are based on automatic crater detection. So these methods are easy & less time consuming methods for crater detection than manually identifying crater. 


12, December 2015 www.ijsr.net Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY


12, December 2015 www.ijsr.net


unique little preparing set, without extra human marking exertion, to identify cavities from an expansive volume of pictures. They propose two methodologies to enhance location precision by coordinating characterization with investigation on unlabeled specimens. The Majority Vote Strategy is utilized to consequently acquire class marks by abusing unlabeled specimens from test pictures. In the same time, the Active Stability Strategy is utilized to acquire a fitting class dissemination in the built preparing set by identifying temperamental classes. By utilizing those two procedures, they effectively select test examples from test pictures into a current little introductory preparing set while re-taking in the classifier in the mean time. The proposed calculation is observationally assessed on an expansive testing Martian picture, displaying a vigorously cratered Martian landscape described by heterogeneous surface morphology. The exploratory results exhibit that the proposed approach accomplishes a higher exactness than other existing ways to deal with a vast degree. D. Lowe[10] introduces a strategy for removing unmistakable invariant elements from pictures that can be utilized to perform solid coordinating between distinctive perspectives of an item or scene. The elements are invariant to picture scale and turn, and are appeared to give hearty coordinating over a considerable scope of relative mutilation, change in 3D perspective, expansion of commotion, and change in light. The elements are exceedingly unmistakable, as in a solitary element can be effectively coordinated with high likelihood against a vast database of components from numerous pictures. This paper likewise depicts a way to deal with utilizing these components for article acknowledgment.Martian geomorphologic regions and sensors 
(Viking Orbiter Camera, Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC), Mars 
Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), and High Resolution 
Stereo Camera (HRSC)).They indicate appraisal results 
through both an inter comparison of mechanized cavity areas 
with those from the physically inferred Mars Crater 
Consortium (MCC) inventory also, the physically inferred 
holes. The identification calculation achieves a precision of 
70 to 90 percent and a quality component of 60 to 80 percent 
relying upon target sensor sort and geomorphology. They 
additionally introduce hole location results got from HRSC 
pictures locally available the ESA Mars Express on a 
correlation between physically decided Size-Frequency 
Distributions (SFDs) and those inferred completely naturally. 
The methodology portrayed seems to offer incredible 
potential for ordered examination, geometric and land 
examination and for different purposes of additional physical 
planetary surface mapping. 

S. Liu, W. Ding, and T. F. Stepinski [8] consolidate dynamic 
learning with semi-regulated figuring out how to manufacture 
a new semi supervised dynamic class determination 
framework for crater location from high determination 
panchromatic planetary pictures. They propose the Semi-
regulated Active Class Selection Algorithm to iteratively 
enhance a The acknowledgment continues by coordinating individual 
components to a database of components from known articles 
utilizing a quick closest neighbor calculation, trailed by a 
Hough Transform to distinguish bunches having a place with 
a solitary article, lastly performing check through slightest 
squares answer for predictable stance parameters. This way 
to deal with acknowledgment can heartily recognize objects 
among mess and impediment while accomplishing close 
ongoing execution. 

R. Honda, Y. Iijima, and O. Konishi [11] study that a crater 
detection system for a large-scale image database is 
proposed. The original images are grouped according to 
spatial frequency patterns and both optimized parameter sets 
and noise reduction techniques used to identify candidate 
craters. False candidates are excluded using a self-organizing 
map (SOM) approach. The results show that despite the fact 
that a accurate classification is achievable using the proposed 
technique, future improvements in detection process of the 
system are needed. 

S. Liu and. Ding, [12] proposes three procedures to enhance 
identification exactness by incorporating characterization 
with investigation on unlabeled specimens. The Majority 
Vote Strategy is utilized to consequently get class marks by 
misusing unlabelled examples. The De-Mixed Procedure is 
utilized on example separating to acquire dependable 
specimens. The Active Strength Strategy is utilized to acquire 
a suitable class circulation in the developed detecting so as to 
prepare set insecure classes. By utilizing those three systems, 
they effectively select test cases from test pictures into a 
current little introductory preparing set while revamping the 
classifier meanwhile. Their proposed calculations are 
observationally assessed on a vast high determination 
Martian picture, showing a vigorously cratered Martian 
territory described by heterogeneous surface morphology. 
The exploratory results show that the proposed methodology 
accomplishes a higher exactness than other existing ways to 
deal with a vast degree. 

W. Ding and T. F. Stepinski [13] show an incorporated 
structure on auto detection of sub kilometer craters with 
boosting and exchange learning. The structure contains three 
key segments. To begin with, they use numerical morphology 
to proficiently recognize crater's applicants, the areas of a 
picture that can conceivably contain cavities. Just those 
districts possessing generally little partitions of the unique 
picture are the subjects of further preparing. Second, they 
concentrate and select picture composition highlights, in 
blend with regulated boosting outfit learning calculations, to 
ISSN (Online): 2319-7064 
Index Copernicus Value (2013): 6.14 | Impact Factor (2014): 5.611 

Volume 4 Issue 12, December 2015 
www.ijsr.net 

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 

precisely characterize crater's competitors into craters and 
non craters. Third, they coordinate move learning into 
boosting, to upgrade location execution in the locales where 
surface morphology contrasts from what is described by the 
preparation set. Their structure is assessed on an extensive 
test picture of 37, 500 × 56, 250 m2 on Mars, which shows a 
vigorously cratered Martian landscape described by non 
uniform surface morphology. Experimental studies illustrate 
that the proposed crater discovery structure can accomplish a 
F1 score above 0.85, a critical change over the other crater 
discovery calculations. 



## Table 1 :
1Survey Table Results through both an inter comparison of automated crater locations with those from the manually-derived Mars Crater Consortium (MCC) catalogue and the manually-derived craters. Good classification accuracy High computational cost Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Key points D. LoweExtracting distinctive invariant features from images that can be used to perform reliable matching between different views of an object or scene.The advantage of being biologically plausible and of having low computational complexity, sharing its lowlevel features with a model for visual attention that may operate concurrently on a robotPaper Name 
Author Name 
Proposed Work 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Automated Crater 
Detection, A New Tool 
for Mars Cartography 
and Chronology 

J. R. Kim, J. P. 
Muller, and S. 
V 

more efficient feature 
extraction and the ability to 
identify larger 
numbers of features 

A much higher 
computational cost 

Sub kilometer Crater 
Discovery with 
Boosting and Transfer 
Learning 
Systems 

W. Ding and T. 
F. Stepinski 

An integrated framework on auto 
detection of sub kilometer craters with 
boosting and transfer learning 

great potential to produce 
surveys of small craters over 
entire surfaces of planets 

decreases and/or 
disappears when 
classifying crater 
candidates that are 
less similar to those in 
the training set 
Modeling the Shape of 
the Scene: A Holistic 
Representation of the 
Spatial Envelope 

A. Oliva and A. 
Torralba 

Computational model of the 
recognition of real world scenes that 
bypasses the segmentation and the 
processing of individual objects or 
regions 

possibility to generate a 
meaningful description of the 
space 

Primarily for man-
made vs. natural 
differences 

Rapid Biologically-
Inspired Scene 
Classification Using 
Features Shared with 
Visual Attention 

C. Siagian and 
L. Itti 

simple context based scene 
recognition algorithm for mobile 
robotics applications 


Paper ID: NOV151811

Learning to detect small impact craters. P G Wetzler, R Honda, Proc. 7th IEEE Workshops Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV/MOTION). 7th IEEE Workshops Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV/MOTION)P. G. Wetzler and R. Honda, "Learning to detect small impact craters," in Proc. 7th IEEE Workshops Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV/MOTION), 2005,pp. 178-184.

A novel method of crater detection on digital elevation models. J Yin, Y Xu, H Li, Proc. IEEE Conf. 33rd Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp.(IGARSS). IEEE Conf. 33rd Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp.(IGARSS)Melbourne, V.I.C., AustraliaJ. Yin, Y. Xu, and H. Li, "A novel method of crater detection on digital elevation models," in Proc. IEEE Conf. 33rd Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp.(IGARSS), Melbourne, V.I.C., Australia, 2013, pp. 4150-4153.

Automated crater detection, a new tool for mars cartography and chronology. J R Kim, J P Muller, S V Gasselt, Photogramm. Eng.Remote Sens. 7110J. R. Kim, J. P. Muller, and S. V. Gasselt, "Automated crater detection, a new tool for mars cartography and chronology," Photogramm. Eng.Remote Sens., vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 1205-1217, Oct. 2005.

Detection of sub-kilometer craters in high resolution planetary images using shape and texture features. L Bandeira, W Ding, T F Stepinski, Adv. Space Res. 491L. Bandeira, W. Ding, and T. F. Stepinski, "Detection of sub-kilometer craters in high resolution planetary images using shape and texture features," Adv. Space Res., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 64-74, Jan. 2012.

Crater detection based on local nonnegative matrix factorization. H Li, J Yin, Proc. IEEE Conf. IEEE Conf33H. Li and J. Yin, "Crater detection based on local non- negative matrix factorization," in Proc. IEEE Conf. 33rd

Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp. (IGARSS), QC, Canada. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp. (IGARSS), QC, Canada, 2014, pp. 3050-3053.

Biologically inspired model for crater detection. Y Mu, W Ding, D Tao, T F Stepinski, Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. Int. Joint Conf. Neural NetwSan Jose, CA,USAY.Mu,W. Ding, D. Tao, and T. F. Stepinski, "Biologically inspired model for crater detection," in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., San Jose, CA,USA, 2011, pp. 2487-2494.

Crater detection by a boosting approach. R Martins, P Pina, J S Marques, M Silveira, IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 61R. Martins, P. Pina, J. S. Marques, and M. Silveira, "Crater detection by a boosting approach," IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 6, no. 1,pp. 127-131, Jan. 2009.

Semi-supervised based active class selection for automatic identification of sub-kilometer craters. S Liu, W Ding, T F Stepinski, 7th Int.Symp. Dubrovnik, CroatiaS. Liu, W. Ding, and T. F. Stepinski, "Semi-supervised based active class selection for automatic identification of sub-kilometer craters," in 7th Int.Symp. Image Signal Process. Anal., Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2011, pp. 615-620.

Crater detection algorithm with part PHOG features for safe landing. A Liu, W Pan, Proc. Int. Conf. Syst. Informat. Int. Conf. Syst. InformatYantai, ChinaA. Liu and W. Pan, "Crater detection algorithm with part PHOG features for safe landing," in Proc. Int. Conf. Syst. Informat., Yantai, China, 2012,pp. 103-106.

Distinctive image features from scaleinvariant key points. D Lowe, Int.J. Comput. Vis. 602D. Lowe, "Distinctive image features from scale- invariant key points," Int.J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91-10, Nov. 2004.

Mining of topographic feature from heterogeneous imagery and its application to lunar craters. R Honda, Y Iijima, O Konishi, Prog.Discovery Sci. 2281R. Honda, Y. Iijima, and O. Konishi, "Mining of topographic feature from heterogeneous imagery and its application to lunar craters," Prog.Discovery Sci., vol. 2281, pp. 395-407, 2002

Adaptive selective learning for automatic identification of sub-kilometer craters. S Liu, Ding, Neurocomputing. 92S. Liu and. Ding, "Adaptive selective learning for automatic identification of sub-kilometer craters," Neurocomputing, vol. 92, pp. 78-87, Sep.2012.

Sub-kilometer crater discovery with boosting and transfer learning. W Ding, T F Stepinski, ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 2W. Ding and T. F. Stepinski, "Sub-kilometer crater discovery with boosting and transfer learning," ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 2,pp. 1-22, Jul. 2011.

Recognition memory for a rapid sequence of pictures. M C Potter, E I Levy, J. Exp. Psychol. 811M. C. Potter and E. I. Levy, "Recognition memory for a rapid sequence of pictures," J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 10-15, Jul. 1969.

Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope. A Oliva, A Torralba, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 423A. Oliva and A. Torralba, "Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope," Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 42, no. 3,pp. 145-175, May 2001.

Recognition indoor scenes. A Quattoni, A Torralba, Proc. IEEEConf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR). IEEEConf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR)Miami, FL, USAA. Quattoni and A. Torralba, "Recognition indoor scenes," in Proc. IEEEConf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR), Miami, FL, USA, 2009, pp.413-420.

Rapid biologically-inspired scene classification using features shared with visual attention. C Siagian, L Itti, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.Mach. Intell. 29C. Siagian and L. Itti, "Rapid biologically-inspired scene classification using features shared with visual attention," IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.Mach. Intell., vol. 29, pp. 300-312, Feb. 2007.

Method for crater detection from Martian digital topography data using gradient value/orientation, morphometry,vote analysis, slip tuning, and calibration. G Salamuniccar, S Loncaric, IEEE Trans.Geosci. Remote Sens. 485G. Salamuniccar and S. Loncaric, "Method for crater detection from Martian digital topography data using gradient value/orientation, morphometry,vote analysis, slip tuning, and calibration," IEEE Trans.Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 2317-2329, May 2010.

Impact crater recognition on Mars based on a probability volume created by template matching. L Bandeira, J Saraiva, P Pina, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 4512L. Bandeira, J. Saraiva, and P. Pina, "Impact crater recognition on Mars based on a probability volume created by template matching,"IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 4008-4015,Dec. 2007.

Comparison of texture features based on Gabor filters. S Grigorescu, N Petkov, P Kruizinga, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 1110S. Grigorescu, N. Petkov, and P. Kruizinga, "Comparison of texture features based on Gabor filters," IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 11, no. 10,pp. 1160- 1167, Oct. 2002.

Building the gist of a scene: The role of global image feature in recognition. A Oliva, A Torralba, Prog. Brain Res. Vis. Percept. 155A. Oliva and A. Torralba, "Building the gist of a scene: The role of global image feature in recognition," Prog. Brain Res. Vis. Percept., vol. 155,pp. 23-36, 2006.

Machine detection of Martian impact craters from digital topography data. B D Bue, T F Stepinski, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 451B. D. Bue and T. F. Stepinski, "Machine detection of Martian impact craters from digital topography data," IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,vol. 45, no. 1, Jan. 2007.

Automatic extraction of ellipsoidal features for planetary image registration. G Troglio, J L Moigne, IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 91G. Troglio and J. L.Moigne, "Automatic extraction of ellipsoidal features for planetary image registration," IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 9,no. 1, Jan. 2012.

Random forests. L Breiman, Mach. Learn. J. 451L. Breiman, "Random forests," Mach. Learn. J., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5-32,Oct. 2001.

Keypoint recognition using randomized trees. V Lepetit, P Fua, IEEE Pattern Recogn. Mach. Intell. 289V. Lepetit and P. Fua, "Keypoint recognition using randomized trees,"IEEE Pattern Recogn. Mach. Intell., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1465-1479, Sep.2006.