# Evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling for higher postharvest quality: literature review and interdisciplinary perspective

CorpusID: 219097605
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48bc95507790e590cebd89cb13043bd8fc81b3e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48bc95507790e590cebd89cb13043bd8fc81b3e4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling for higher postharvest quality: literature review and interdisciplinary perspective


Guanbang Wang 
Department of Energy and Resources Engineering
College of Engineering
Peking University and Beijing Engineering Research Center of City Heat
BeijingChina

Xinrong Zhang xrzhang@pku.edu.cn 
Department of Energy and Resources Engineering
College of Engineering
Peking University and Beijing Engineering Research Center of City Heat
BeijingChina

Evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling for higher postharvest quality: literature review and interdisciplinary perspective
10.1093/fqsafe/fyaa012Received 16 September 2019; Revised 15 February 2020; Editorial decision 17 March 2020.59 Review Correspondence to: Xin-Rong Zhang,precoolingpostharvest qualityevaluationoptimizationinterdiscipline
Precooling is of significant importance for postharvest fruits and vegetables to control the quality degradation and prolong the shelf-life. Current precooling methods include room cooling, forcedair cooling, hydrocooling, vacuum cooling, contact or package icing, and cryogenic cooling, all of which have their advantages and disadvantages. The first two methods with the cooling medium of air are extensively used because of the wide applicable range of fruits and vegetables. Numerous studies have been devoted to cope with the drawbacks of these two air-based precooling methods with various evaluation criteria and optimization methods. A systematic literature review on these studies is firstly conducted with respect to experimental and numerical investigations respectively for the two methods. The main contributions from the previous studies are also summarized respectively with the research objectives and performance metrics. The literature review indicates that the current performance evaluation is limited to apparent parameters and the optimal design is only proposed based on the performance evaluation and comparison. Furthermore, with inspiration from the research in other domains, a scheme of advanced evaluation and optimization for air-based precooling methods is proposed with thermodynamic evaluation metrics and constructal optimization methods from the interdisciplinary perspective.

## Introduction

Shelf-life is the main concern to maintain high postharvest quality involved with attributes such as colour, flavour, moisture, hardness, visible decay, nutrient content, and microbiological enumeration. Temperature control is of great importance to achieve higher postharvest quality and longer shelf-life. The food supply chain for long-distance transport from farmers to consumers without temperature control usually results in much food wastage (FAO, 2013). Consequently, the cold chain logistics becomes more and more common for food security and quality preservation with the emphasis on temperature management (Hsiao and Huang, 2016;Mercier et al., 2017). It was estimated that the cold chain market would be valued at USD 293.27 billion by 2023 driven by the growing international trade of perishable food products, while the segment of fruits and vegetables was predicted to be at the fastest growth rate from 2018 to 2023 (MarketsandMarkets, 2018). In particular, as firstly introduced in 1904, precooling is the first stage of cold chain logistics for postharvest fruits and vegetables (Ryall and Pentzer, 1982).

Precooling is defined as a postharvest procedure to rapidly remove the field heat and reduce the product temperature with the ultimate motivation of prolonging the shelf-life (Brosnan and Sun, 2001). The postharvest horticultural products are still alive with diverse ongoing physiological activities and biochemical reactions leading to quality deterioration (Prasanna et al., 2007;Vandendriessche et al., 2013). Precooling will retard such biological processes by controlling the temperature at a lower level with the removal of field heat resulting in promoted postharvest quality and longer shelf-life (Manganaris et al., 2007;Pelletier et al., 2011;Souza et al., 2011;Rab et al., 2013;Han et al., 2017b). In the past years, different precooling methods were developed using various cooling mediums such as water, ice, dry ice, liquid nitrogen, and cold air.

Hydrocooling is a common precooling method to achieve heat exchange between the products and chilled water by flood, spray, or immersion operations. This method minimizes the moisture loss (Wills and Golding, 2016) while achieving a moderate cooling rate (Sargent et al., 1988), but decay and microbial contamination may affect the product quality under wet conditions (Vigneault et al., 2000;Macarisin et al., 2017). de Oliveira Alves Sena et al. (2019) investigated the effects of hydrocooling temperature on the quality of cashew apples, while Zainal et al. (2019) studied the effects of hydrocooling time on the physico-chemical attributes of the rockmelon. It was indicated that the products applicable to hydrocooling must be water tolerant.

Vacuum cooling is based on the removal of latent heat of water evaporation from the products under much lower pressure than the atmospheric pressure. Vacuum cooling becomes popular because of the rapid and uniform cooling (Sun and Zheng, 2006) as well as high energy efficiency (Thompson and Chen, 1988). Whereas, the removal of water during vacuum cooling leads to the restrictions of applicability to different kinds of postharvest products (Brosnan and Sun, 2001). On the one hand, vacuum cooling is more suitable for leafy vegetables with a much larger surface area for water evaporation when compared with non-leafy vegetables and fruits. On the other hand, vacuum cooling also results in certain weight loss which was undesirable for postharvest products. Zhu et al. (2019) reviewed the potential of process design and parameters to promote the vacuum cooling performances and found out the feasibility gap between the laboratory experiments and industrial applications.

Contact or package icing is conducted with crushed ice or ice slurry inside or on top of the containers or packages. The melting of ice into water results in steady transport conditions with low temperature and high relative humidity which reduce the weight loss (Gillies and Toivonen, 1995), but the problems with wet conditions still exist (Wills and Golding, 2016). Moreover, additional weight to the products as well as the expensive water-proof packages leads to inefficiency in terms of energy and cost (Thompson et al., 2008). Alternatively, in spite of high operation cost, dry ice or liquid nitrogen can be used for cryogenic cooling by conveying the products through the cooling tunnel (Senthilkumar et al., 2015). Due to the possible chilling damage and high operational cost, such precooling methods are mainly employed for the fish industry .

Air-based methods are old and traditional for the precooling of fruits and vegetables in comparison with the aforementioned precooling methods. The products within packages and containers for room cooling are simply placed inside a cold room where the circulated air from the fan coils cools down the products by flowing around them. Room cooling enables consequent in-situ storage and thus lower loss and cost caused by less handling, but the cooling time tends to be longer in comparison with other precooling methods (Kader and Rolle, 2004). In order to improve the cooling rate, forced-air cooling is developed to force air to flow through the containers and packages with a higher velocity at the product surface by differential pressure. However, the high-power fans used to generate desirable pressure difference lead to high energy consumption in particular for the extremely rapid cooling (Baird et al., 1988;Thompson and Chen, 1988).

Numerous studies have been devoted to cope with the drawbacks of the air-based precooling methods with various evaluation criteria and optimization methods. Therefore, a review on these studies is necessary to give insights into the optimal design of air-based precooling processes with enhanced performances. Furthermore, novel methods for evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling processes are also proposed from the interdisciplinary perspective with inspiration from the research in other domains. The new evaluation parameters in terms of thermodynamics give insight into the mechanisms behind the evolution of postharvest quality. The new constructal optimization method will result in higher postharvest quality.


## Current Evaluation and Optimization Methods of Air-Based Precooling

The research on air-based precooling methods including room cooling and forced-air cooling extends from the last century to recent years with experimental and numerical studies.


## Room cooling

Early experimental observations for room cooling indicated a lower cooling rate than 0.5°C/h (Gibbon, 1972), which hardly met the IIR recommendations for the precooling operation within 24 h (IIR, 1967). Nonetheless, the higher cooling rate can be obtained with well-ventilated packages or containers. For example, 8 h of room cooling for carnations was performed with open boxes (Reid et al., 1983). Furthermore, proper packaging was also investigated for table grapes that were only suitable for air-based precooling (Nelson, 1978).

In addition to the above experimental studies on optimal packaging design, Geyer et al. (2018) developed a new sensor for omnidirectional measurement of air velocity in the space between postharvest products and further measured the air velocity inside the bins and gaps between bins for room cooling of apples (Praeger et al., 2020). Duret et al. (2014) conducted a more comprehensive experimental research on the characteristics of airflow and heat and mass transfer during room cooling by measuring the temperature, velocity, humidity, and heat transfer coefficient. Based on such experimental measurements, Laguerre et al. (2015) subsequently proposed a simplified model to quickly predict the heat and mass transfer involved with the room cooling process by solving the linear system of equations. Thanh et al. (2008) also developed a mechanistic model based on the experimental data to achieve the real-time monitoring and control of the temperature distribution inside a cold room contained with boxes of potatoes.

In recent years, the numerical modelling approach was also used to evaluate and optimize the room cooling process. Chourasia and Goswami (2007) numerically analysed the effects of the product and operating parameters on the cooling time and moisture loss during the cooling of stacks of bagged potatoes in the cold store. They concluded that the product temperature and moisture loss decreased with higher bulk medium porosity and product diameter while increased with the respiration heat and higher air temperature. The humidification system with high pressure fogging of the cold room was numerically studied by the modelling approach of combined discrete element and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and the effects of operating parameters were analysed to optimize the performances of the humidification system (Delele et al., 2009). Ambaw et al. (2013) provided a comprehensive review on the CFD models used to investigate the postharvest handling of horticultural products including room cooling processes. They suggested new strategies using multiscale models to cope with complicated physical phenomena involved in product geometry, turbulence, and porous media. In another review of modelling of postharvest storage, Grubben and Keesman (2015) divided the modelling structures into data-based models, lumped parameter models, and distributed parameter models for postharvest storage of potatoes and respectively reviewed the specific models in the scope of different modelling structures. In order to achieve more accurate simulation with less computation time, different turbulence and product models were compared for the numerical study on the airflow and heat transfer involved with room cooling of apples . It was indicated from the comparison that shear stress transport (SST) k-ω turbulence model and solid bulk model of the products were respectively more appropriate considering the accuracy of Nusselt number and cooling time. For the room cooling and forced-air cooling of fresh cauliflowers, Le Bideau et al. (2018) combined the one-dimensional numerical model with the in-situ experiments to predict the temperature history and mass loss. The heat transfer mechanisms combined with convection, evaporation, and radiation were investigated.

Numerical methods were also used to evaluate potential optimization strategies. The novel staggered placement of the product boxes for room cooling of oranges was compared with the traditional arrangement of in-line arrays in terms of different cooling performances through numerical simulation (Sajadiye and Zolfaghari, 2017). The reduction of cooling time and the promotion of the surface heat transfer coefficient were obtained with the staggered arrangement. Ghiloufi and Khir (2019) also proposed new air deflectors to optimize the distribution of airflow from the fan outlets of the cooling unit. The use of these air deflectors resulted in enhanced heat transfer between the cold air and products and consequently reduced cooling time during room cooling of dates. In fact, air distribution systems such as supply/return diffusers and fabric ducts in the chilled food processing facilities were numerically and experimentally proved to be able to achieve more uniform distributions of air velocity and temperature, which consequently could be the optimization strategies of airflow organization for room cooling (Parpas et al., 2017(Parpas et al., , 2018.

In general, as given in Table 1, the research on room cooling was initially focussed on experiments and turned to numerical simulation in recent years. Most of these studies are mainly for evaluation of apparent performances, while optimizations from experience are achieved in some of them.


## Forced-air cooling

In spite of 4-10 times higher cooling rate compared with room cooling (Ryall and Pentzer, 1982), the effectiveness of forced-air cooling is also affected by a series of factors related to the products, packaging design, and operating conditions (Hass et al., 1976). The effect of the ventilation rate was firstly investigated by experiments. It was reported that 30%-40% reduction of seven-eighths cooling time was achieved with double airflow rate (Emond et al., 1996), while three to six times decrease of cooling time could be obtained with the increase of air velocity from 0.2 to 3.65 m/s (Lambrinos et al., 1997). Albayati et al. (2007) further pointed out that higher air velocity resulted in reduced energy consumption because of shorter cooling time.

Optimal process design for forced-air cooling was still required due to higher energy consumption in comparison with other precooling methods (Thompson et al., 2010). Mukama et al. (2017) studied the energy consumption of forced-air cooling by experiments with pomegranate fruit and found out the significant effects of airflow resistance inside the packages. In fact, the airflow characteristics in terms of the pressure drop within the packaging system for forced-air cooling of table grapes were investigated in earlier research (Ngcobo et al., 2012). The cooling rate and weight loss in addition to the airflow with different packaging designs for table grapes were further studied and the trade-off between the cooling rate and weight loss had to be reached when choosing the packages (Ngcobo et al., 2013). Ferrua and Singh (2011) proposed a new multi-scale packaging system ranging from clamshells and trays to overall airflow pattern across the pallets for forced-air cooling of strawberries with higher uniformity and energy efficiency. Additionally, more performance parameters were evaluated on the scale of the entire forced-air cooler. Olatunji et al. (2017) proposed the overall heterogeneity index to quantify and visualize the non-uniform distribution of temperature during forced-air cooling of kiwifruit. Mukama et al. (2019) investigated the dynamics of quality loss for forcedair cooling of pomegranate fruit. They obtained the spatiotemporal profile of quality loss and analysed the effects of relative humidity, packages, and stack orientation. In addition to lab-scale research, experiments in commercial forced-air coolers were recently conducted. Defraeye et al. (2016) conducted ambient loading experiments with citrus using three airflow strategies within refrigerated containers. The integral performance evaluation involved with the quantification and spatial distribution of cooling rate, shelf-life, and other quality attributes. Wu et al. (2018b) investigated the influences of packages for three kinds of citrus fruits on the cooling rate and heterogeneity and identified the decreasing cooling rate and increasing cooling heterogeneity caused by fruit wrapping. Mercier et al. (2019) studied the non-uniform distribution of temperature and cooling time for strawberries and achieved temperature prediction using limited sensors by the correlation between the cooling times on the outside and inside of the tunnel. Moreover, in the case of the difficulties for practical forced-air cooling experiments, produce simulators could be used to replace the real products with design guidelines in accordance with the geometry parameters, thermophysical properties, and other constraints (Redding et al., 2016).

Mathematical and CFD models for forced-air cooling processes were also developed for performance evaluation and optimization (Dehghannya et al., 2010;Zhao et al., 2016). The forced-air cooling of kiwifruit with palletized packages was numerically simulated with explicit geometry models of the packaging system in order to achieve an accurate prediction of the temperature history (O'Sullivan et al., 2016). Han et al. (2018) conducted similar numerical simulations for apple pallets and integrally evaluated the cooling rate and uniformity, moisture loss, and energy consumption. Wu and Defraeye (2018) numerically investigated the heterogeneities of airflow and cooling rate within an entire pallet of citrus fruit during forced-air cooling as one of the scenarios in the whole cold chain and further predicted the quality evolution by combining with kinetic rate law models. In addition, Wu et al. (2019) further studied the influences of the design and placement of the package on these heterogeneous performances. The packaging design was also the main concern for other numerical research. Delele et al. (2013a) developed a threedimensional CFD model with explicit geometry of oranges within ventilated cartons to simulate the airflow and heat transfer characteristics on the scale of the overall forced-air cooler. Getahun et al. (2017a) developed a CFD model for cooling of palletized apple inside a fully loaded refrigerated shipping container with the simplification by porous medium approach and validated the numerical model by experimental measurements. The same authors further compared the airflow and heat transfer characteristics affected by different packages and airflow resistance (Getahun et al., 2017b). The cooling rate and uniformity of stacked pomegranates with two different package designs were compared by numerical and experimental studies and the increase of cooling time could be caused by the plastic liner . The cooling conditions and packaging design were optimized to achieve reduced cooling time and improved cooling uniformity by rearrangement of airflow according to the numerical simulation with a three-dimensional CFD model of palletized kiwifruit (O'Sullivan et al., 2017). Similarly, the CFD models of stacked citrus fruit were developed to compare the effects of different containers (Defraeye et al., 2013) and cooling conditions (Defraeye et al., 2014) on the cooling performances in terms of the cooling rate, convective heat transfer coefficient, and energy consumption. Gruyters et al. (2019) numerically compared the cooling rate, temperature uniformity, energy consumption, and quality loss for forced-air cooling of apples contained in corrugated boxes and reusable plastic crates and suggested the use of reusable plastic crates for energy-efficient processes.

There was also other research focussed on the numerical simulation on the individual package scale. A two-dimensional mathematical model of the cross-section of a single package with spherical produce inside was solved by direct numerical simulation for forced-air cooling operation and the effects of vent configurations on the cooling rate and uniformity were analysed (Dehghannya et al., 2011(Dehghannya et al., , 2012. Delele et al. (2013b) numerically studied the effects of packaging design in terms of vent area, shape, number, and position on the individual carton scale for forced-air cooling of oranges using an explicit geometry model. Han et al. (2015) developed a CFD model of an individual slotted box with explicit geometry of apples inside to study the airflow and heat transfer therein. A similar modelling approach was also used to evaluate the new packaging design for strawberries with improved airflow pattern (Nalbandi et al., 2016). Defraeye et al. (2015) conducted a comprehensive review on different evaluation metrics of packaging performances and further proposed the trend of integral evaluation for future optimization. Han et al. (2017a) integrally evaluated the packaging design for forced-air cooling of apples in terms of energy consumption, chilling injury, and mass loss based on the simulation results obtained from their previous numerical model. Berry et al. (2016Berry et al. ( , 2017 also conducted a multi-parameter evaluation of carton design for apples considering both the cooling and mechanical performances. Wu et al. (2018a) evaluated the spatial distribution of cooling time and estimated the quality loss for forced-air cooling of a single package of orange fruit using the CFD model combined with the kinetic quality model. Wang et al. (2019) established a numerical model of forced-air cooling for strawberries in the packaging system of the clamshell and box to study the effects of the vent design on the Histories of temperature and humidity, fields of air velocity, temperature, and humidity, tracks of droplets cooling time and cooling uniformity and further propose the optimal design guidelines. Similarly,  recently numerically investigated the effects of opening ratio of the packaging system on the cooling time, cooling uniformity, and energy consumption during forced-air cooling of apples and further established a fitting function of energy consumption in terms of opening ratio and air velocity for fruits with different diameters. Forced-air cooling seemed a more popular topic especially in these years when compared with room cooling indicated by numerous studies shown in Table 2. Both experimental and numerical investigations were extensively conducted with regard to different kinds of products. Moreover, the packaging design was the main research focus because of the significant effects on the apparent performances. In addition, most of the optimization was mainly performed with regard to the packaging design, which was also a posteriori based on performance evaluation and comparison.


## Advanced Evaluation and Optimization With Interdisciplinary Methods

Air-based precooling involves complex mechanisms of airflow and heat transfer with respect to the products and facilities. The performances of such airflow and heat transfer directly affect the postharvest quality. As given in the previous section, current evaluation and optimization methods for air-based precooling are based on simple flow and heat transfer characteristics such as velocity, temperature, heat transfer coefficient, and so on. However, recent development regarding evaluation and optimization of flow and heat transfer indeed provides more advanced methods which are promising for future applications for air-based precooling.

Some of the thermodynamic parameters as the evaluation metrics have been already used in the food industry. The system performance of vacuum cooling for mushroom was evaluated by exergy analysis of experimental results and the system efficiency was respectively assessed in terms of energy and exergy (Ozturk and Hepbasli, 2017). Zisopoulos et al. (2017) conducted a review to investigate the use of exergy indicators in the food industry. The statistical results from their review indicated that exergy indicators were more popular for analyses of the energy-intensive drying technologies and processes. Özilgen (2018) summarized the values of the specific cumulative energy and exergy for various kinds of foods in order to facilitate such thermodynamic analysis of food processing processes. Wang and Zhang (2020) recently conducted a comprehensive thermodynamic analysis in terms of energy, entropy, exergy, and entransy for multi-scale precooling processes for apples and proposed a new air-based precooling method based on the trade-off between room cooling and forced-air cooling.

In addition to the overall evaluation of the processes and systems, the thermodynamic parameters can also be used as the objective functions for the optimization of flow and heat transfer. The minimization of entropy generation was first proposed as the optimization criterion for performance enhancement of heat transfer processes and thermodynamic systems (Bejan, 2013). As derived from the entropy generation, minimal exergy destruction was also used for the enhancement of convective heat transfer (Wang et al., 2015;Liu et al., 2018). The extremum principle of entransy dissipation was another widely used optimization method for conductive, convective, and radiative heat transfer processes (Chen et al., 2013) and was further found out to be more appropriate for convective heat transfer optimization (Chen et al., 2019). Therefore, thermodynamic parameters are suitable for evaluation and further optimization of flow and heat transfer characteristics for air-based precooling processes, which will have a great influence on the postharvest quality. Such interaction among different evaluation parameters is shown in Figure 1.

With inspiration from the natural evolution laws, the constructal theory is widely used to predict the optimal design of various processes and systems, a majority of which is involved with flow and heat and mass transfer (Bejan and Lorente, 2008). The applicability of the constructal design to the problems of forced convective flow within channels for cooling of volumes with heat generation results in the possible use for optimization of airflow strategy for air-based precooling (Feijó et al., 2018). The objectives of constructal optimization can be case-sensitive, e.g. including minimization of the temperature difference (Bejan, 1997), flow resistance (Bejan and Errera, 2000), and entropy generation (Ghodoossi, 2004). Chen et al. (2018) recently combined the entransy dissipation extreme principle with the constructal theory to deal with a series of optimization problems and they achieved the improvement of global transfer performance with the optimized devices.

A similar problem of airflow maldistribution to the air-based precooling method also exists for thermal management in data centre and different strategies have been proposed to promote the uniformity of airflow and cooling (Chu and Wang, 2019). The aforementioned advanced evaluation and optimization methods have been already used for the design of data centre cooling strategies. Qian et al. (2015) conducted a thermodynamic analysis of airflow in data centre in terms of exergy and entransy based on the heat transfer network model and concluded that entransy analysis was more applicable for such research. Xie et al. (2019) also proposed new exergetic evaluation parameters on different levels to identify the inefficient parts of the cooling system based on the experiment and simulation. Tian et al. (2019) developed a new mathematical model to implement the entransy theory to the multi-scale thermal management in data centre and provide optimization measures for practical operations. Zhang et al. (2019) further employed the constructal design of the airflow strategies to improve the cooling uniformity and extended the modular design to the whole large-scale data centre.

As indicated from the above research, the scheme of advanced evaluation and optimization for air-based precooling methods is shown in Figure 2. The original design can be evaluated by thermodynamic metrics according to experimentally measured data or numerical simulation results. The constructal design is conducted based on the simplified geometry of the original design. Afterwards, the reconstruction of the geometry in consideration of the operating conditions results in the modified design. The thermodynamic performance of the modified design is then assessed by CFD simulation and compared with that of the original design. Further adjustments in consideration of the performance comparison and practical operation are then performed and result in the optimal design. Such an optimal design can be in different configurations that have to be compared in terms of thermodynamic performance by CFD simulation. Finally, the most appropriate optimization strategy is selected based on the performance comparison and experimental verification.


## Conclusions

A systematic literature review on the studies related to air-based precooling methods, i.e. room cooling and forced-air cooling, is firstly conducted with respect to experimental and numerical investigations, respectively. The performance evaluation parameters and optimization methods to promote postharvest quality are specifically pointed out. Afterwards, from the interdisciplinary perspective, thermodynamic  (Emond et al., 1996) Experiment Effects of airflow rate and packages Cooling time (Thompson et al., 2010) Experiment Data collection Energy consumption, energy coefficient (Ferrua and Singh, 2011) Experiment Package optimization Temperature history, cooling time, energy consumption (Nalbandi et al., 2016) CFD model Optimization of airflow system Fields of air velocity and temperature, temperature history (Mercier et al., 2019) Experiment Correlation for temperature prediction Temperature history, cooling time  CFD model Effects and optimization of packages Fields of air velocity and temperature, temperature history, cooling time, cooling uniformity coefficient Kiwifruit (Lambrinos et al., 1997 metrics and constructal theory are respectively introduced for advanced evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling methods for higher postharvest quality. The main concluding remarks are as follows:

(1) The research on room cooling was initially focussed on experiments and turned to numerical simulation in recent years. In comparison with room cooling, there was more research by either experimental or numerical methods on forced-air cooling with a wider range of products, and the packaging design was the main research focus. (2) Current performance evaluation of air-based precooling methods is limited to apparent parameters such as air velocity, temperature, cooling time, quality attributes, and their statistical characteristics and derivations. The optimization method is a posteriori based on performance evaluation and comparison. (3) Advanced evaluation and optimization methods should be considered from the interdisciplinary perspective. The thermodynamic evaluation metrics and constructal optimization method are widely used in various domains including data centre cooling. This results in a possible application to solve the similar problem of airflow maldistribution for air-based precooling methods.  (Wu et al., 2018a) CFD model Process evaluation Temperature history, cooling time, convective heat transfer coefficient, quality loss (Wu et al., 2018b) Experiment Effects of packages and fruit sizes Temperature history, cooling time (Wu et al., 2019;Wu and Defraeye, 2018) CFD model Process evaluation and effects of packages Air velocity, temperature history, cooling time, quality loss Pomegranate  Experiment Effects of packages Airflow resistance, cooling time, energy consumption, energy coefficient  CFD model Effects of packages Temperature history, cooling time, heat transfer coefficient, fields of air velocity, pressure, and temperature (Mukama et al., 2019) Experiment Dynamics of quality loss Weight loss, cooling time, quality loss Cauliflower (Le Bideau et al., 2018) One-dimensional numerical model and experiment

Process evaluation and mechanism clarification  Evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling for higher postharvest quality, 2020, Vol. 4, No. 2 

## Table 1 .
1Overview of research related to room cooling.Produce 
Reference 
Research method 
Research objectives 
Performance metrics 

Vegetables 
(Gibbon, 1972) 
Experiment 
Data collection 
Temperature history, cooling rate 
Grape 
(Nelson, 1978) 
Experiment 
Process optimization 
Temperature history, cooling time, 
quality loss 
Carnation 
(Reid et al., 1983) 
Experiment 
Process optimization 
Cooling time, vase-life 
Potato 
(Chourasia and 
Goswami, 2007) 

CFD model 
Effects of product and operating 
parameters 

Airflow pattern, temperature history, 
moisture loss, cooling time 
(Thanh et al., 2008) 
Experiment-based 
theoretical model 

Monitoring and control of 
temperature distribution 

Temperature history, temperature field 

Apple 
(Duret et al., 2014) 
Experiment 
Experimental characterization 
Air velocity, convective heat transfer 
coefficient, temperature history, cool-
ing time, weight loss 
(Laguerre et al., 2015) 
Experiment-based 
theoretical model 

Fast performance prediction 
Temperature history, weight loss 

(Hoang et al., 2015) 
CFD model 
Comparison of numerical models 
Temperature history, cooling time, 
fields of air velocity, pressure, and 
temperature 
(Geyer et al., 2018; 
Praeger et al., 2020) 

Experiment 
Experimental characterization 
Air velocity 

(Wang and Zhang, 
2020) 

Experiment 
Process evaluation and optimization 
Temperature history, cooling time, en-
ergy flow, entropy generation, exergy 
destruction, entransy dissipation 
Orange 
(Sajadiye and 
Zolfaghari, 2017) 

CFD model 
Optimization of placement pattern 
for pallets 

Air velocity, surface heat transfer co-
efficient, temperature history, cooling 
time, temperature heterogeneity 
Cauliflower 
(Le Bideau et al., 2018) 
One-dimensional 
numerical model 
and experiment 

Process evaluation and mechanism 
clarification 

Temperature history, mass loss, air 
velocity 

Dates 
(Ghiloufi and Khir, 
2019) 

CFD model 
Optimization of airflow distribution 
Fields of air velocity and temperature 

Spherical 
produce 

(Delele et al., 2009) 
CFD model 
Effects and optimization of operating 
parameters for the humidification 
system 



## Table 2 .
2Overview of research related to forced-air cooling.Produce 
Reference 
Research method 
Research objectives 
Performance metrics 

Straw-
berry 




Han et al., 2017a) CFD model Process evaluation Temperature history, cooling time, convective heat transfer coefficient, fields of air velocity and temperature, energy consumption, mass loss, quality loss ) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity and packages 
Temperature history, cooling time 
(O'Sullivan et al., 2016) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Temperature history, cooling time, fields of 
air velocity and temperature 
(O'Sullivan et al., 2017) 
CFD model 
Optimization of cooling conditions and 
packages 

Temperature history, cooling time, fields 
of air velocity and temperature, energy 
consumption 
(Olatunji et al., 2017) 
Experiment 
New heterogeneity index 
Overall heterogeneity index 
Apple 
(Albayati et al., 2007) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity 
Temperature history, convective heat 
transfer coefficient, Nusselt number 
(Han et al., 2015) 
CFD model 
Package optimization 
Fields of air velocity and temperature, 
temperature history, cooling time, cooling 
heterogeneity 
(Berry et al., 2016) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Cooling time, convective heat transfer 
coefficient, energy consumption 
(CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Compression strength, cooling time, con-
vective heat transfer coefficient, energy 
consumption, 
(Getahun et al., 2017a) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Temperature history, cooling time, fields of 
air velocity and temperature 
(Getahun et al., 2017b) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Airflow resistance, air velocity, 
temperature history, temperature field 
(Han et al., 2018) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Temperature history, cooling time, fields 
of air velocity and temperature, mass loss, 
quality loss, energy consumption 
(Gruyters et al., 2019) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Cooling time, fields of air velocity and 
temperature, energy consumption, quality 
loss 
(Wang et al., 2020) 
CFD model 
Effects of air velocity and packages 
Cooling time, air velocity field, cooling 
inhomogeneity, energy consumption 
(Wang and Zhang, 2020) 
Experiment 
Process evaluation and optimization 
Temperature history, cooling time, energy 
flow, entropy generation, exergy 
destruction, entransy dissipation 
Papaya 
(Albayati et al., 2007) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity 
Temperature history, convective heat 
transfer coefficient, Nusselt number 
Grape 
(Albayati et al., 2007) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity 
Temperature history, convective heat 
transfer coefficient, Nusselt number 
(Thompson et al., 2010) 
Experiment 
Data collection 
Energy consumption, energy coefficient 
(Ngcobo et al., 2012) 
Experiment 
Effects of packages 
Airflow resistance 
(Ngcobo et al., 2013) 
Experiment 
Effects of packages 
Airflow resistance, temperature history, 
cooling time, quality loss 
Citrus 
(Delele et al., 2013a) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Fields of air velocity, pressure, and 
temperature, temperature history 
(Delele et al., 2013b) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Fields of air velocity, pressure, and 
temperature, temperature history 
(Defraeye et al., 2013) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Temperature history, cooling time, 
convective heat transfer coefficient 
(Defraeye et al., 2014) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages and cooling 
conditions 

Temperature history, cooling time, 
convective heat transfer coefficient, energy 
consumption 



FLOW AND HEAT TRANSFER PARAMETERS THERMODYNAMIC PARAMETERS QUALITY PARAMETERS Energy consumption, entropy generation, exergy destruction, entransy dissipation ... Velocity, temperature, pressure drop, heat transfer coefficient ... Weight loss, quality loss, shelf-life ...Figure 1. Interaction among different evaluation parameters.Figure 2. Scheme of advanced evaluation and optimization for air-based precooling methods.Evaluating 
& 
optimizing 

affecting 

CFD 
simulation 

Simplified geometry model CONSTRUCTAL 
DESIGN 

ORIGINAL 
DESIGN 

OPTIMAL 
DESIGN 

Experimental 
measurement 

Performance 
comparison 

Simulated 
geometry model 

Practical 
consideration 

CFD simulation 

CFD simulation 

Thermodynamic 
evaluation 

MODIFIED 
DESIGN 

Constructal theory 

OPTIMIZATION 
STRATEGY 

Thermodynamic 
evaluation 

Experimental 
verification 
Performance 
comparison 

Produce 
Reference 
Research method 
Research objectives 
Performance metrics 

(Defraeye et al., 2016) 
Experiment 
Effects of airflow strategies 
Temperature history, cooling time, mass 
loss, quality loss 



Temperature history, mass loss, air velocitySpherical 
produce 

(Dehghannya et al., 2011) CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Temperature field, cooling heterogeneity, 
temperature history 
(Dehghannya et al., 2012) CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Temperature field, cooling heterogeneity, 
temperature history, cooling time 



## Table 2 .## Introduction

Shelf-life is the main concern to maintain high postharvest quality involved with attributes such as colour, flavour, moisture, hardness, visible decay, nutrient content, and microbiological enumeration. Temperature control is of great importance to achieve higher postharvest quality and longer shelf-life. The food supply chain for long-distance transport from farmers to consumers without temperature control usually results in much food wastage (FAO, 2013). Consequently, the cold chain logistics becomes more and more common for food security and quality preservation with the emphasis on temperature management (Hsiao and Huang, 2016;Mercier et al., 2017). It was estimated that the cold chain market would be valued at USD 293.27 billion by 2023 driven by the growing international trade of perishable food products, while the segment of fruits and vegetables was predicted to be at the fastest growth rate from 2018 to 2023 (MarketsandMarkets, 2018). In particular, as firstly introduced in 1904, precooling is the first stage of cold chain logistics for postharvest fruits and vegetables (Ryall and Pentzer, 1982).

Precooling is defined as a postharvest procedure to rapidly remove the field heat and reduce the product temperature with the ultimate motivation of prolonging the shelf-life (Brosnan and Sun, 2001). The postharvest horticultural products are still alive with diverse ongoing physiological activities and biochemical reactions leading to quality deterioration (Prasanna et al., 2007;Vandendriessche et al., 2013). Precooling will retard such biological processes by controlling the temperature at a lower level with the removal of field heat resulting in promoted postharvest quality and longer shelf-life (Manganaris et al., 2007;Pelletier et al., 2011;Souza et al., 2011;Rab et al., 2013;Han et al., 2017b). In the past years, different precooling methods were developed using various cooling mediums such as water, ice, dry ice, liquid nitrogen, and cold air.

Hydrocooling is a common precooling method to achieve heat exchange between the products and chilled water by flood, spray, or immersion operations. This method minimizes the moisture loss (Wills and Golding, 2016) while achieving a moderate cooling rate (Sargent et al., 1988), but decay and microbial contamination may affect the product quality under wet conditions (Vigneault et al., 2000;Macarisin et al., 2017). de Oliveira Alves Sena et al. (2019) investigated the effects of hydrocooling temperature on the quality of cashew apples, while Zainal et al. (2019) studied the effects of hydrocooling time on the physico-chemical attributes of the rockmelon. It was indicated that the products applicable to hydrocooling must be water tolerant.

Vacuum cooling is based on the removal of latent heat of water evaporation from the products under much lower pressure than the atmospheric pressure. Vacuum cooling becomes popular because of the rapid and uniform cooling (Sun and Zheng, 2006) as well as high energy efficiency (Thompson and Chen, 1988). Whereas, the removal of water during vacuum cooling leads to the restrictions of applicability to different kinds of postharvest products (Brosnan and Sun, 2001). On the one hand, vacuum cooling is more suitable for leafy vegetables with a much larger surface area for water evaporation when compared with non-leafy vegetables and fruits. On the other hand, vacuum cooling also results in certain weight loss which was undesirable for postharvest products. Zhu et al. (2019) reviewed the potential of process design and parameters to promote the vacuum cooling performances and found out the feasibility gap between the laboratory experiments and industrial applications.

Contact or package icing is conducted with crushed ice or ice slurry inside or on top of the containers or packages. The melting of ice into water results in steady transport conditions with low temperature and high relative humidity which reduce the weight loss (Gillies and Toivonen, 1995), but the problems with wet conditions still exist (Wills and Golding, 2016). Moreover, additional weight to the products as well as the expensive water-proof packages leads to inefficiency in terms of energy and cost (Thompson et al., 2008). Alternatively, in spite of high operation cost, dry ice or liquid nitrogen can be used for cryogenic cooling by conveying the products through the cooling tunnel (Senthilkumar et al., 2015). Due to the possible chilling damage and high operational cost, such precooling methods are mainly employed for the fish industry .

Air-based methods are old and traditional for the precooling of fruits and vegetables in comparison with the aforementioned precooling methods. The products within packages and containers for room cooling are simply placed inside a cold room where the circulated air from the fan coils cools down the products by flowing around them. Room cooling enables consequent in-situ storage and thus lower loss and cost caused by less handling, but the cooling time tends to be longer in comparison with other precooling methods (Kader and Rolle, 2004). In order to improve the cooling rate, forced-air cooling is developed to force air to flow through the containers and packages with a higher velocity at the product surface by differential pressure. However, the high-power fans used to generate desirable pressure difference lead to high energy consumption in particular for the extremely rapid cooling (Baird et al., 1988;Thompson and Chen, 1988).

Numerous studies have been devoted to cope with the drawbacks of the air-based precooling methods with various evaluation criteria and optimization methods. Therefore, a review on these studies is necessary to give insights into the optimal design of air-based precooling processes with enhanced performances. Furthermore, novel methods for evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling processes are also proposed from the interdisciplinary perspective with inspiration from the research in other domains. The new evaluation parameters in terms of thermodynamics give insight into the mechanisms behind the evolution of postharvest quality. The new constructal optimization method will result in higher postharvest quality.


## Current Evaluation and Optimization Methods of Air-Based Precooling

The research on air-based precooling methods including room cooling and forced-air cooling extends from the last century to recent years with experimental and numerical studies.


## Room cooling

Early experimental observations for room cooling indicated a lower cooling rate than 0.5°C/h (Gibbon, 1972), which hardly met the IIR recommendations for the precooling operation within 24 h (IIR, 1967). Nonetheless, the higher cooling rate can be obtained with well-ventilated packages or containers. For example, 8 h of room cooling for carnations was performed with open boxes (Reid et al., 1983). Furthermore, proper packaging was also investigated for table grapes that were only suitable for air-based precooling (Nelson, 1978).

In addition to the above experimental studies on optimal packaging design, Geyer et al. (2018) developed a new sensor for omnidirectional measurement of air velocity in the space between postharvest products and further measured the air velocity inside the bins and gaps between bins for room cooling of apples (Praeger et al., 2020). Duret et al. (2014) conducted a more comprehensive experimental research on the characteristics of airflow and heat and mass transfer during room cooling by measuring the temperature, velocity, humidity, and heat transfer coefficient. Based on such experimental measurements, Laguerre et al. (2015) subsequently proposed a simplified model to quickly predict the heat and mass transfer involved with the room cooling process by solving the linear system of equations. Thanh et al. (2008) also developed a mechanistic model based on the experimental data to achieve the real-time monitoring and control of the temperature distribution inside a cold room contained with boxes of potatoes.

In recent years, the numerical modelling approach was also used to evaluate and optimize the room cooling process. Chourasia and Goswami (2007) numerically analysed the effects of the product and operating parameters on the cooling time and moisture loss during the cooling of stacks of bagged potatoes in the cold store. They concluded that the product temperature and moisture loss decreased with higher bulk medium porosity and product diameter while increased with the respiration heat and higher air temperature. The humidification system with high pressure fogging of the cold room was numerically studied by the modelling approach of combined discrete element and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and the effects of operating parameters were analysed to optimize the performances of the humidification system (Delele et al., 2009). Ambaw et al. (2013) provided a comprehensive review on the CFD models used to investigate the postharvest handling of horticultural products including room cooling processes. They suggested new strategies using multiscale models to cope with complicated physical phenomena involved in product geometry, turbulence, and porous media. In another review of modelling of postharvest storage, Grubben and Keesman (2015) divided the modelling structures into data-based models, lumped parameter models, and distributed parameter models for postharvest storage of potatoes and respectively reviewed the specific models in the scope of different modelling structures. In order to achieve more accurate simulation with less computation time, different turbulence and product models were compared for the numerical study on the airflow and heat transfer involved with room cooling of apples . It was indicated from the comparison that shear stress transport (SST) k-ω turbulence model and solid bulk model of the products were respectively more appropriate considering the accuracy of Nusselt number and cooling time. For the room cooling and forced-air cooling of fresh cauliflowers, Le Bideau et al. (2018) combined the one-dimensional numerical model with the in-situ experiments to predict the temperature history and mass loss. The heat transfer mechanisms combined with convection, evaporation, and radiation were investigated.

Numerical methods were also used to evaluate potential optimization strategies. The novel staggered placement of the product boxes for room cooling of oranges was compared with the traditional arrangement of in-line arrays in terms of different cooling performances through numerical simulation (Sajadiye and Zolfaghari, 2017). The reduction of cooling time and the promotion of the surface heat transfer coefficient were obtained with the staggered arrangement. Ghiloufi and Khir (2019) also proposed new air deflectors to optimize the distribution of airflow from the fan outlets of the cooling unit. The use of these air deflectors resulted in enhanced heat transfer between the cold air and products and consequently reduced cooling time during room cooling of dates. In fact, air distribution systems such as supply/return diffusers and fabric ducts in the chilled food processing facilities were numerically and experimentally proved to be able to achieve more uniform distributions of air velocity and temperature, which consequently could be the optimization strategies of airflow organization for room cooling (Parpas et al., 2017(Parpas et al., , 2018.

In general, as given in Table 1, the research on room cooling was initially focussed on experiments and turned to numerical simulation in recent years. Most of these studies are mainly for evaluation of apparent performances, while optimizations from experience are achieved in some of them.


## Forced-air cooling

In spite of 4-10 times higher cooling rate compared with room cooling (Ryall and Pentzer, 1982), the effectiveness of forced-air cooling is also affected by a series of factors related to the products, packaging design, and operating conditions (Hass et al., 1976). The effect of the ventilation rate was firstly investigated by experiments. It was reported that 30%-40% reduction of seven-eighths cooling time was achieved with double airflow rate (Emond et al., 1996), while three to six times decrease of cooling time could be obtained with the increase of air velocity from 0.2 to 3.65 m/s (Lambrinos et al., 1997). Albayati et al. (2007) further pointed out that higher air velocity resulted in reduced energy consumption because of shorter cooling time.

Optimal process design for forced-air cooling was still required due to higher energy consumption in comparison with other precooling methods (Thompson et al., 2010). Mukama et al. (2017) studied the energy consumption of forced-air cooling by experiments with pomegranate fruit and found out the significant effects of airflow resistance inside the packages. In fact, the airflow characteristics in terms of the pressure drop within the packaging system for forced-air cooling of table grapes were investigated in earlier research (Ngcobo et al., 2012). The cooling rate and weight loss in addition to the airflow with different packaging designs for table grapes were further studied and the trade-off between the cooling rate and weight loss had to be reached when choosing the packages (Ngcobo et al., 2013). Ferrua and Singh (2011) proposed a new multi-scale packaging system ranging from clamshells and trays to overall airflow pattern across the pallets for forced-air cooling of strawberries with higher uniformity and energy efficiency. Additionally, more performance parameters were evaluated on the scale of the entire forced-air cooler. Olatunji et al. (2017) proposed the overall heterogeneity index to quantify and visualize the non-uniform distribution of temperature during forced-air cooling of kiwifruit. Mukama et al. (2019) investigated the dynamics of quality loss for forcedair cooling of pomegranate fruit. They obtained the spatiotemporal profile of quality loss and analysed the effects of relative humidity, packages, and stack orientation. In addition to lab-scale research, experiments in commercial forced-air coolers were recently conducted. Defraeye et al. (2016) conducted ambient loading experiments with citrus using three airflow strategies within refrigerated containers. The integral performance evaluation involved with the quantification and spatial distribution of cooling rate, shelf-life, and other quality attributes. Wu et al. (2018b) investigated the influences of packages for three kinds of citrus fruits on the cooling rate and heterogeneity and identified the decreasing cooling rate and increasing cooling heterogeneity caused by fruit wrapping. Mercier et al. (2019) studied the non-uniform distribution of temperature and cooling time for strawberries and achieved temperature prediction using limited sensors by the correlation between the cooling times on the outside and inside of the tunnel. Moreover, in the case of the difficulties for practical forced-air cooling experiments, produce simulators could be used to replace the real products with design guidelines in accordance with the geometry parameters, thermophysical properties, and other constraints (Redding et al., 2016).

Mathematical and CFD models for forced-air cooling processes were also developed for performance evaluation and optimization (Dehghannya et al., 2010;Zhao et al., 2016). The forced-air cooling of kiwifruit with palletized packages was numerically simulated with explicit geometry models of the packaging system in order to achieve an accurate prediction of the temperature history (O'Sullivan et al., 2016). Han et al. (2018) conducted similar numerical simulations for apple pallets and integrally evaluated the cooling rate and uniformity, moisture loss, and energy consumption. Wu and Defraeye (2018) numerically investigated the heterogeneities of airflow and cooling rate within an entire pallet of citrus fruit during forced-air cooling as one of the scenarios in the whole cold chain and further predicted the quality evolution by combining with kinetic rate law models. In addition, Wu et al. (2019) further studied the influences of the design and placement of the package on these heterogeneous performances. The packaging design was also the main concern for other numerical research. Delele et al. (2013a) developed a threedimensional CFD model with explicit geometry of oranges within ventilated cartons to simulate the airflow and heat transfer characteristics on the scale of the overall forced-air cooler. Getahun et al. (2017a) developed a CFD model for cooling of palletized apple inside a fully loaded refrigerated shipping container with the simplification by porous medium approach and validated the numerical model by experimental measurements. The same authors further compared the airflow and heat transfer characteristics affected by different packages and airflow resistance (Getahun et al., 2017b). The cooling rate and uniformity of stacked pomegranates with two different package designs were compared by numerical and experimental studies and the increase of cooling time could be caused by the plastic liner . The cooling conditions and packaging design were optimized to achieve reduced cooling time and improved cooling uniformity by rearrangement of airflow according to the numerical simulation with a three-dimensional CFD model of palletized kiwifruit (O'Sullivan et al., 2017). Similarly, the CFD models of stacked citrus fruit were developed to compare the effects of different containers (Defraeye et al., 2013) and cooling conditions (Defraeye et al., 2014) on the cooling performances in terms of the cooling rate, convective heat transfer coefficient, and energy consumption. Gruyters et al. (2019) numerically compared the cooling rate, temperature uniformity, energy consumption, and quality loss for forced-air cooling of apples contained in corrugated boxes and reusable plastic crates and suggested the use of reusable plastic crates for energy-efficient processes.

There was also other research focussed on the numerical simulation on the individual package scale. A two-dimensional mathematical model of the cross-section of a single package with spherical produce inside was solved by direct numerical simulation for forced-air cooling operation and the effects of vent configurations on the cooling rate and uniformity were analysed (Dehghannya et al., 2011(Dehghannya et al., , 2012. Delele et al. (2013b) numerically studied the effects of packaging design in terms of vent area, shape, number, and position on the individual carton scale for forced-air cooling of oranges using an explicit geometry model. Han et al. (2015) developed a CFD model of an individual slotted box with explicit geometry of apples inside to study the airflow and heat transfer therein. A similar modelling approach was also used to evaluate the new packaging design for strawberries with improved airflow pattern (Nalbandi et al., 2016). Defraeye et al. (2015) conducted a comprehensive review on different evaluation metrics of packaging performances and further proposed the trend of integral evaluation for future optimization. Han et al. (2017a) integrally evaluated the packaging design for forced-air cooling of apples in terms of energy consumption, chilling injury, and mass loss based on the simulation results obtained from their previous numerical model. Berry et al. (2016Berry et al. ( , 2017 also conducted a multi-parameter evaluation of carton design for apples considering both the cooling and mechanical performances. Wu et al. (2018a) evaluated the spatial distribution of cooling time and estimated the quality loss for forced-air cooling of a single package of orange fruit using the CFD model combined with the kinetic quality model. Wang et al. (2019) established a numerical model of forced-air cooling for strawberries in the packaging system of the clamshell and box to study the effects of the vent design on the Histories of temperature and humidity, fields of air velocity, temperature, and humidity, tracks of droplets cooling time and cooling uniformity and further propose the optimal design guidelines. Similarly,  recently numerically investigated the effects of opening ratio of the packaging system on the cooling time, cooling uniformity, and energy consumption during forced-air cooling of apples and further established a fitting function of energy consumption in terms of opening ratio and air velocity for fruits with different diameters. Forced-air cooling seemed a more popular topic especially in these years when compared with room cooling indicated by numerous studies shown in Table 2. Both experimental and numerical investigations were extensively conducted with regard to different kinds of products. Moreover, the packaging design was the main research focus because of the significant effects on the apparent performances. In addition, most of the optimization was mainly performed with regard to the packaging design, which was also a posteriori based on performance evaluation and comparison.


## Advanced Evaluation and Optimization With Interdisciplinary Methods

Air-based precooling involves complex mechanisms of airflow and heat transfer with respect to the products and facilities. The performances of such airflow and heat transfer directly affect the postharvest quality. As given in the previous section, current evaluation and optimization methods for air-based precooling are based on simple flow and heat transfer characteristics such as velocity, temperature, heat transfer coefficient, and so on. However, recent development regarding evaluation and optimization of flow and heat transfer indeed provides more advanced methods which are promising for future applications for air-based precooling.

Some of the thermodynamic parameters as the evaluation metrics have been already used in the food industry. The system performance of vacuum cooling for mushroom was evaluated by exergy analysis of experimental results and the system efficiency was respectively assessed in terms of energy and exergy (Ozturk and Hepbasli, 2017). Zisopoulos et al. (2017) conducted a review to investigate the use of exergy indicators in the food industry. The statistical results from their review indicated that exergy indicators were more popular for analyses of the energy-intensive drying technologies and processes. Özilgen (2018) summarized the values of the specific cumulative energy and exergy for various kinds of foods in order to facilitate such thermodynamic analysis of food processing processes. Wang and Zhang (2020) recently conducted a comprehensive thermodynamic analysis in terms of energy, entropy, exergy, and entransy for multi-scale precooling processes for apples and proposed a new air-based precooling method based on the trade-off between room cooling and forced-air cooling.

In addition to the overall evaluation of the processes and systems, the thermodynamic parameters can also be used as the objective functions for the optimization of flow and heat transfer. The minimization of entropy generation was first proposed as the optimization criterion for performance enhancement of heat transfer processes and thermodynamic systems (Bejan, 2013). As derived from the entropy generation, minimal exergy destruction was also used for the enhancement of convective heat transfer (Wang et al., 2015;Liu et al., 2018). The extremum principle of entransy dissipation was another widely used optimization method for conductive, convective, and radiative heat transfer processes (Chen et al., 2013) and was further found out to be more appropriate for convective heat transfer optimization (Chen et al., 2019). Therefore, thermodynamic parameters are suitable for evaluation and further optimization of flow and heat transfer characteristics for air-based precooling processes, which will have a great influence on the postharvest quality. Such interaction among different evaluation parameters is shown in Figure 1.

With inspiration from the natural evolution laws, the constructal theory is widely used to predict the optimal design of various processes and systems, a majority of which is involved with flow and heat and mass transfer (Bejan and Lorente, 2008). The applicability of the constructal design to the problems of forced convective flow within channels for cooling of volumes with heat generation results in the possible use for optimization of airflow strategy for air-based precooling (Feijó et al., 2018). The objectives of constructal optimization can be case-sensitive, e.g. including minimization of the temperature difference (Bejan, 1997), flow resistance (Bejan and Errera, 2000), and entropy generation (Ghodoossi, 2004). Chen et al. (2018) recently combined the entransy dissipation extreme principle with the constructal theory to deal with a series of optimization problems and they achieved the improvement of global transfer performance with the optimized devices.

A similar problem of airflow maldistribution to the air-based precooling method also exists for thermal management in data centre and different strategies have been proposed to promote the uniformity of airflow and cooling (Chu and Wang, 2019). The aforementioned advanced evaluation and optimization methods have been already used for the design of data centre cooling strategies. Qian et al. (2015) conducted a thermodynamic analysis of airflow in data centre in terms of exergy and entransy based on the heat transfer network model and concluded that entransy analysis was more applicable for such research. Xie et al. (2019) also proposed new exergetic evaluation parameters on different levels to identify the inefficient parts of the cooling system based on the experiment and simulation. Tian et al. (2019) developed a new mathematical model to implement the entransy theory to the multi-scale thermal management in data centre and provide optimization measures for practical operations. Zhang et al. (2019) further employed the constructal design of the airflow strategies to improve the cooling uniformity and extended the modular design to the whole large-scale data centre.

As indicated from the above research, the scheme of advanced evaluation and optimization for air-based precooling methods is shown in Figure 2. The original design can be evaluated by thermodynamic metrics according to experimentally measured data or numerical simulation results. The constructal design is conducted based on the simplified geometry of the original design. Afterwards, the reconstruction of the geometry in consideration of the operating conditions results in the modified design. The thermodynamic performance of the modified design is then assessed by CFD simulation and compared with that of the original design. Further adjustments in consideration of the performance comparison and practical operation are then performed and result in the optimal design. Such an optimal design can be in different configurations that have to be compared in terms of thermodynamic performance by CFD simulation. Finally, the most appropriate optimization strategy is selected based on the performance comparison and experimental verification.


## Conclusions

A systematic literature review on the studies related to air-based precooling methods, i.e. room cooling and forced-air cooling, is firstly conducted with respect to experimental and numerical investigations, respectively. The performance evaluation parameters and optimization methods to promote postharvest quality are specifically pointed out. Afterwards, from the interdisciplinary perspective, thermodynamic  (Emond et al., 1996) Experiment Effects of airflow rate and packages Cooling time (Thompson et al., 2010) Experiment Data collection Energy consumption, energy coefficient (Ferrua and Singh, 2011) Experiment Package optimization Temperature history, cooling time, energy consumption (Nalbandi et al., 2016) CFD model Optimization of airflow system Fields of air velocity and temperature, temperature history (Mercier et al., 2019) Experiment Correlation for temperature prediction Temperature history, cooling time  CFD model Effects and optimization of packages Fields of air velocity and temperature, temperature history, cooling time, cooling uniformity coefficient Kiwifruit (Lambrinos et al., 1997 metrics and constructal theory are respectively introduced for advanced evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling methods for higher postharvest quality. The main concluding remarks are as follows:

(1) The research on room cooling was initially focussed on experiments and turned to numerical simulation in recent years. In comparison with room cooling, there was more research by either experimental or numerical methods on forced-air cooling with a wider range of products, and the packaging design was the main research focus. (2) Current performance evaluation of air-based precooling methods is limited to apparent parameters such as air velocity, temperature, cooling time, quality attributes, and their statistical characteristics and derivations. The optimization method is a posteriori based on performance evaluation and comparison. (3) Advanced evaluation and optimization methods should be considered from the interdisciplinary perspective. The thermodynamic evaluation metrics and constructal optimization method are widely used in various domains including data centre cooling. This results in a possible application to solve the similar problem of airflow maldistribution for air-based precooling methods.  (Wu et al., 2018a) CFD model Process evaluation Temperature history, cooling time, convective heat transfer coefficient, quality loss (Wu et al., 2018b) Experiment Effects of packages and fruit sizes Temperature history, cooling time (Wu et al., 2019;Wu and Defraeye, 2018) CFD model Process evaluation and effects of packages Air velocity, temperature history, cooling time, quality loss Pomegranate  Experiment Effects of packages Airflow resistance, cooling time, energy consumption, energy coefficient  CFD model Effects of packages Temperature history, cooling time, heat transfer coefficient, fields of air velocity, pressure, and temperature (Mukama et al., 2019) Experiment Dynamics of quality loss Weight loss, cooling time, quality loss Cauliflower (Le Bideau et al., 2018) One-dimensional numerical model and experiment

Process evaluation and mechanism clarification  Evaluation and optimization of air-based precooling for higher postharvest quality, 2020, Vol. 4, No. 2 

## Table 1 .
1Overview of research related to room cooling.Produce 
Reference 
Research method 
Research objectives 
Performance metrics 

Vegetables 
(Gibbon, 1972) 
Experiment 
Data collection 
Temperature history, cooling rate 
Grape 
(Nelson, 1978) 
Experiment 
Process optimization 
Temperature history, cooling time, 
quality loss 
Carnation 
(Reid et al., 1983) 
Experiment 
Process optimization 
Cooling time, vase-life 
Potato 
(Chourasia and 
Goswami, 2007) 

CFD model 
Effects of product and operating 
parameters 

Airflow pattern, temperature history, 
moisture loss, cooling time 
(Thanh et al., 2008) 
Experiment-based 
theoretical model 

Monitoring and control of 
temperature distribution 

Temperature history, temperature field 

Apple 
(Duret et al., 2014) 
Experiment 
Experimental characterization 
Air velocity, convective heat transfer 
coefficient, temperature history, cool-
ing time, weight loss 
(Laguerre et al., 2015) 
Experiment-based 
theoretical model 

Fast performance prediction 
Temperature history, weight loss 

(Hoang et al., 2015) 
CFD model 
Comparison of numerical models 
Temperature history, cooling time, 
fields of air velocity, pressure, and 
temperature 
(Geyer et al., 2018; 
Praeger et al., 2020) 

Experiment 
Experimental characterization 
Air velocity 

(Wang and Zhang, 
2020) 

Experiment 
Process evaluation and optimization 
Temperature history, cooling time, en-
ergy flow, entropy generation, exergy 
destruction, entransy dissipation 
Orange 
(Sajadiye and 
Zolfaghari, 2017) 

CFD model 
Optimization of placement pattern 
for pallets 

Air velocity, surface heat transfer co-
efficient, temperature history, cooling 
time, temperature heterogeneity 
Cauliflower 
(Le Bideau et al., 2018) 
One-dimensional 
numerical model 
and experiment 

Process evaluation and mechanism 
clarification 

Temperature history, mass loss, air 
velocity 

Dates 
(Ghiloufi and Khir, 
2019) 

CFD model 
Optimization of airflow distribution 
Fields of air velocity and temperature 

Spherical 
produce 

(Delele et al., 2009) 
CFD model 
Effects and optimization of operating 
parameters for the humidification 
system 



## Table 2 .
2Overview of research related to forced-air cooling.Produce 
Reference 
Research method 
Research objectives 
Performance metrics 

Straw-
berry 




Han et al., 2017a) CFD model Process evaluation Temperature history, cooling time, convective heat transfer coefficient, fields of air velocity and temperature, energy consumption, mass loss, quality loss ) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity and packages 
Temperature history, cooling time 
(O'Sullivan et al., 2016) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Temperature history, cooling time, fields of 
air velocity and temperature 
(O'Sullivan et al., 2017) 
CFD model 
Optimization of cooling conditions and 
packages 

Temperature history, cooling time, fields 
of air velocity and temperature, energy 
consumption 
(Olatunji et al., 2017) 
Experiment 
New heterogeneity index 
Overall heterogeneity index 
Apple 
(Albayati et al., 2007) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity 
Temperature history, convective heat 
transfer coefficient, Nusselt number 
(Han et al., 2015) 
CFD model 
Package optimization 
Fields of air velocity and temperature, 
temperature history, cooling time, cooling 
heterogeneity 
(Berry et al., 2016) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Cooling time, convective heat transfer 
coefficient, energy consumption 
(CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Compression strength, cooling time, con-
vective heat transfer coefficient, energy 
consumption, 
(Getahun et al., 2017a) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Temperature history, cooling time, fields of 
air velocity and temperature 
(Getahun et al., 2017b) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Airflow resistance, air velocity, 
temperature history, temperature field 
(Han et al., 2018) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Temperature history, cooling time, fields 
of air velocity and temperature, mass loss, 
quality loss, energy consumption 
(Gruyters et al., 2019) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Cooling time, fields of air velocity and 
temperature, energy consumption, quality 
loss 
(Wang et al., 2020) 
CFD model 
Effects of air velocity and packages 
Cooling time, air velocity field, cooling 
inhomogeneity, energy consumption 
(Wang and Zhang, 2020) 
Experiment 
Process evaluation and optimization 
Temperature history, cooling time, energy 
flow, entropy generation, exergy 
destruction, entransy dissipation 
Papaya 
(Albayati et al., 2007) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity 
Temperature history, convective heat 
transfer coefficient, Nusselt number 
Grape 
(Albayati et al., 2007) 
Experiment 
Effects of air velocity 
Temperature history, convective heat 
transfer coefficient, Nusselt number 
(Thompson et al., 2010) 
Experiment 
Data collection 
Energy consumption, energy coefficient 
(Ngcobo et al., 2012) 
Experiment 
Effects of packages 
Airflow resistance 
(Ngcobo et al., 2013) 
Experiment 
Effects of packages 
Airflow resistance, temperature history, 
cooling time, quality loss 
Citrus 
(Delele et al., 2013a) 
CFD model 
Process evaluation 
Fields of air velocity, pressure, and 
temperature, temperature history 
(Delele et al., 2013b) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Fields of air velocity, pressure, and 
temperature, temperature history 
(Defraeye et al., 2013) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Temperature history, cooling time, 
convective heat transfer coefficient 
(Defraeye et al., 2014) 
CFD model 
Effects of packages and cooling 
conditions 

Temperature history, cooling time, 
convective heat transfer coefficient, energy 
consumption 



FLOW AND HEAT TRANSFER PARAMETERS THERMODYNAMIC PARAMETERS QUALITY PARAMETERS Energy consumption, entropy generation, exergy destruction, entransy dissipation ... Velocity, temperature, pressure drop, heat transfer coefficient ... Weight loss, quality loss, shelf-life ...Figure 1. Interaction among different evaluation parameters.Figure 2. Scheme of advanced evaluation and optimization for air-based precooling methods.Evaluating 
& 
optimizing 

affecting 

CFD 
simulation 

Simplified geometry model CONSTRUCTAL 
DESIGN 

ORIGINAL 
DESIGN 

OPTIMAL 
DESIGN 

Experimental 
measurement 

Performance 
comparison 

Simulated 
geometry model 

Practical 
consideration 

CFD simulation 

CFD simulation 

Thermodynamic 
evaluation 

MODIFIED 
DESIGN 

Constructal theory 

OPTIMIZATION 
STRATEGY 

Thermodynamic 
evaluation 

Experimental 
verification 
Performance 
comparison 

Produce 
Reference 
Research method 
Research objectives 
Performance metrics 

(Defraeye et al., 2016) 
Experiment 
Effects of airflow strategies 
Temperature history, cooling time, mass 
loss, quality loss 



Temperature history, mass loss, air velocitySpherical 
produce 

(Dehghannya et al., 2011) CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Temperature field, cooling heterogeneity, 
temperature history 
(Dehghannya et al., 2012) CFD model 
Effects of packages 
Temperature field, cooling heterogeneity, 
temperature history, cooling time 



## Table 2 .
2Continued
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fqs/article/4/2/59/5822988 by guest on 21 August 2022
AcknowledgementsThe support of the National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFD0400106) and the support from Beijing Engineering Research Center of City Heat are gratefully acknowledged.Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
Forced air precooling studies of perishable food products. O A Z Albayati, R Kumar, G Chauhan, 10.2202/1556-3758.1119International Journal of Food Engineering. 3Albayati, O. A. Z., Kumar, R., Chauhan, G. (2007). Forced air precooling studies of perishable food products. International Journal of Food Engin- eering, 3: Article 8. doi:10.2202/1556-3758.1119.

The use of CFD to characterize and design postharvest storage facilities: past, present and future. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture. A Ambaw, 93Ambaw, A. et al. (2013). The use of CFD to characterize and design post- harvest storage facilities: past, present and future. Computers and Elec- tronics in Agriculture, 93: 184-194.

Analysis of the effects of package design on the rate and uniformity of cooling of stacked pomegranates: numerical and experimental studies. A Ambaw, M Mukama, U L Opara, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture. 136Ambaw, A., Mukama, M., Opara, U. L. (2017). Analysis of the effects of package design on the rate and uniformity of cooling of stacked pom- egranates: numerical and experimental studies. Computers and Elec- tronics in Agriculture, 136: 13-24.

Design criteria for efficient and cost effective forced air cooling systems for fruits and vegetables. C D Baird, J J Gaffney, M T Talbot, ASHRAE Transactions. 94Baird, C. D., Gaffney, J. J., Talbot, M. T. (1988). Design criteria for efficient and cost effective forced air cooling systems for fruits and vegetables. ASHRAE Transactions, 94: 1434-1454.

Constructal-theory network of conducting paths for cooling a heat generating volume. A Bejan, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 40Bejan, A. (1997). Constructal-theory network of conducting paths for cooling a heat generating volume. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 40: 799-816.

Entropy Generation Minimization: The Method of Thermodynamic Optimization of Finite-Size Systems and Finite-Time Processes. A Bejan, CRC PressBoca Raton, FLBejan, A. (2013). Entropy Generation Minimization: The Method of Thermo- dynamic Optimization of Finite-Size Systems and Finite-Time Processes. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Convective trees of fluid channels for volumetric cooling. A Bejan, M R Errera, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 43Bejan, A., Errera, M. R. (2000). Convective trees of fluid channels for volu- metric cooling. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 43: 3105-3118.

Design with Constructal Theory. A Bejan, S Lorente, John Wiley & Sons, IncHoboken, NJBejan, A., Lorente, S. (2008). Design with Constructal Theory. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ.

Multiparameter analysis of cooling efficiency of ventilated fruit cartons using CFD: impact of vent hole design and internal packaging. T M Berry, T Defraeye, B M Nicolaї, U L Opara, Food and Bioprocess Technology. 9Berry, T. M., Defraeye, T., Nicolaї, B. M., Opara, U. L. (2016). Multiparameter analysis of cooling efficiency of ventilated fruit cartons using CFD: impact of vent hole design and internal packaging. Food and Bioprocess Tech- nology, 9: 1481-1493.

The role of horticultural carton vent hole design on cooling efficiency and compression strength: a multi-parameter approach. T M Berry, T S Fadiji, T Defraeye, U L Opara, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 124Berry, T. M., Fadiji, T. S., Defraeye, T., Opara, U.L. (2017). The role of horti- cultural carton vent hole design on cooling efficiency and compression strength: a multi-parameter approach. Postharvest Biology and Tech- nology, 124: 62-74.

Precooling techniques and applications for horticultural products-a review. T Brosnan, D.-W Sun, International Journal of Refrigeration. 24Brosnan, T., Sun, D.-W. (2001). Precooling techniques and applications for horticultural products-a review. International Journal of Refrigeration, 24: 154-170.

Entransy theory for the optimization of heat transfer-a review and update. Q Chen, X.-G Liang, Z.-Y Guo, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 63Chen, Q., Liang, X.-G., Guo, Z.-Y. (2013). Entransy theory for the optimiza- tion of heat transfer-a review and update. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 63: 65-81.

Constructal optimizations for heat and mass transfers based on the entransy dissipation extremum principle, performed at the. L G Chen, Q H Xiao, H J Feng, 2074Naval University of Engineering: a review. EntropyChen, L. G., Xiao, Q. H., Feng, H. J. (2018). Constructal optimizations for heat and mass transfers based on the entransy dissipation extremum principle, performed at the Naval University of Engineering: a review. Entropy, 20: 74.

Entropy and entransy in convective heat transfer optimization: a review and perspective. X Chen, T Zhao, M.-Q Zhang, Q Chen, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 137Chen, X., Zhao, T., Zhang, M.-Q., Chen, Q. (2019). Entropy and entransy in convective heat transfer optimization: a review and perspective. Inter- national Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 137: 1191-1220.

CFD simulation of effects of operating parameters and product on heat transfer and moisture loss in the stack of bagged potatoes. M K Chourasia, T K Goswami, Journal of Food Engineering. 80Chourasia, M. K., Goswami, T. K. (2007). CFD simulation of effects of operating parameters and product on heat transfer and moisture loss in the stack of bagged potatoes. Journal of Food Engineering, 80: 947-960.

A review on airflow management in data centers. W.-X Chu, C.-C Wang, Applied Energy. 240Chu, W.-X., Wang, C.-C. (2019). A review on airflow management in data centers. Applied Energy, 240: 84-119.

Forced-convective cooling of citrus fruit: package design. T Defraeye, Journal of Food Engineering. 118Defraeye, T. et al. (2013). Forced-convective cooling of citrus fruit: package design. Journal of Food Engineering, 118: 8-18.

Forced-convective cooling of citrus fruit: cooling conditions and energy consumption in relation to package design. T Defraeye, Journal of Food Engineering. 121Defraeye, T. et al. (2014). Forced-convective cooling of citrus fruit: cooling conditions and energy consumption in relation to package design. Journal of Food Engineering, 121: 118-127.

Towards integrated performance evaluation of future packaging for fresh produce in the cold chain. T Defraeye, Trends in Food Science & Technology. 44Defraeye, T. et al. (2015). Towards integrated performance evaluation of fu- ture packaging for fresh produce in the cold chain. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 44: 201-225.

Integral performance evaluation of the fresh-produce cold chain: a case study for ambient loading of citrus in refrigerated containers. T Defraeye, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 112Defraeye, T. et al. (2016). Integral performance evaluation of the fresh-produce cold chain: a case study for ambient loading of citrus in refrigerated con- tainers. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 112: 1-13.

Mathematical modeling procedures for airflow, heat and mass transfer during forced convection cooling of produce: a review. J Dehghannya, M Ngadi, C Vigneault, Food Engineering Reviews. 2Dehghannya, J., Ngadi, M., Vigneault, C. (2010). Mathematical modeling procedures for airflow, heat and mass transfer during forced convection cooling of produce: a review. Food Engineering Reviews, 2: 227-243.

Mathematical modeling of airflow and heat transfer during forced convection cooling of produce considering various package vent areas. J Dehghannya, M Ngadi, C Vigneault, Food Control. 22Dehghannya, J., Ngadi, M., Vigneault, C. (2011). Mathematical modeling of airflow and heat transfer during forced convection cooling of produce considering various package vent areas. Food Control, 22: 1393-1399.

Transport phenomena modelling during produce cooling for optimal package design: thermal sensitivity analysis. J Dehghannya, M Ngadi, C Vigneault, Biosystems Engineering. 111Dehghannya, J., Ngadi, M., Vigneault, C. (2012). Transport phenomena mod- elling during produce cooling for optimal package design: thermal sensi- tivity analysis. Biosystems Engineering, 111: 315-324.

Studying airflow and heat transfer characteristics of a horticultural produce packaging system using a 3-D CFD model. Part I: model development and validation. M A Delele, M E K Ngcobo, S T Getahun, L Chen, J Mellmann, U L Opara, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 86Delele, M. A., Ngcobo, M. E. K., Getahun, S. T., Chen, L., Mellmann, J., Opara, U. L. (2013a). Studying airflow and heat transfer characteristics of a horticultural produce packaging system using a 3-D CFD model. Part I: model development and validation. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 86: 536-545.

Studying airflow and heat transfer characteristics of a horticultural produce packaging system using a 3-D CFD model. Part II: effect of package design. M A Delele, M E K Ngcobo, S T Getahun, L Chen, J Mellmann, U L Opara, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 86Delele, M. A., Ngcobo, M. E. K., Getahun, S. T., Chen, L., Mellmann, J., Opara, U. L. (2013b). Studying airflow and heat transfer characteristics of a horticultural produce packaging system using a 3-D CFD model. Part II: effect of package design. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 86: 546-555.

Optimization of the humidification of cold stores by pressurized water atomizers based on a multiscale CFD model. M A Delele, A Schenk, E Tijskens, H Ramon, B M Nicolaie, P Verboven, Journal of Food Engineering. 91Delele, M. A., Schenk, A., Tijskens, E., Ramon, H., Nicolaie, B. M., Verboven, P. (2009). Optimization of the humidification of cold stores by pressurized water atomizers based on a multiscale CFD model. Journal of Food Engineering, 91: 228-239.

Postharvest quality of cashew apple after hydrocooling and cold room. De Oliveira Alves, E Sena, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 155de Oliveira Alves Sena, E. et al. (2019). Postharvest quality of cashew apple after hydrocooling and cold room. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 155: 65-71.

Experimental characterization of airflow, heat and mass transfer in a cold room filled with food products. S Duret, H.-M Hoang, D Flick, O Laguerre, International Journal of Refrigeration. 46Duret, S., Hoang, H.-M., Flick, D., Laguerre, O. (2014). Experimental charac- terization of airflow, heat and mass transfer in a cold room filled with food products. International Journal of Refrigeration, 46: 17-25.

Study of parameters affecting cooling rate and temperature distribution in forced-air precooling of strawberry. J P Emond, F Mercier, S O Sadfa, M Bourré, A Gakwaya, Transactions of the ASAE. 39Emond, J. P., Mercier, F., Sadfa, S. O., Bourré, M., Gakwaya, A. (1996). Study of parameters affecting cooling rate and temperature distribution in forced-air precooling of strawberry. Transactions of the ASAE, 39: 2185-2191.

Food wastage footprint: impacts on natural resources: summary report. Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations. Fao, FAO. (2013). Food wastage footprint: impacts on natural resources: summary report. Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations. http://www. fao.org/3/i3347e/i3347e.pdf. Accessed 16 February 2020.

Constructal design of forced convective flows in channels with two alternated rectangular heated bodies. B C Feijó, G Lorenzini, L A Isoldi, L A O Rocha, J N V Goulart, E D Santos, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 125Feijó, B. C., Lorenzini, G., Isoldi, L. A., Rocha, L. A. O., Goulart, J. N. V., dos Santos, E.D. (2018). Constructal design of forced convective flows in channels with two alternated rectangular heated bodies. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 125: 710-721.

Improved airflow method and packaging system for forced-air cooling of strawberries. M J Ferrua, R P Singh, International Journal of Refrigeration. 34Ferrua, M. J., Singh, R. P. (2011). Improved airflow method and packaging system for forced-air cooling of strawberries. International Journal of Re- frigeration, 34: 1162-1173.

Analysis of airflow and heat transfer inside fruit packed refrigerated shipping container: Part I-Model development and validation. S Getahun, A Ambaw, M Delele, C J Meyer, U L Opara, Journal of Food Engineering. 203Getahun, S., Ambaw, A., Delele, M., Meyer, C. J., Opara, U. L. (2017a). Ana- lysis of airflow and heat transfer inside fruit packed refrigerated shipping container: Part I-Model development and validation. Journal of Food Engineering, 203: 58-68.

Analysis of airflow and heat transfer inside fruit packed refrigerated shipping container: Part II-Evaluation of apple packaging design and vertical flow resistance. S Getahun, A Ambaw, M Delele, C J Meyer, U L Opara, Journal of Food Engineering. 203Getahun, S., Ambaw, A., Delele, M., Meyer, C. J., Opara, U. L. (2017b). Ana- lysis of airflow and heat transfer inside fruit packed refrigerated shipping container: Part II-Evaluation of apple packaging design and vertical flow resistance. Journal of Food Engineering, 203: 83-94.

Measuring device for air speed in macroporous media and its application inside apple storage bins. M Geyer, Sensors. 18576Geyer, M. et al. (2018). Measuring device for air speed in macroporous media and its application inside apple storage bins. Sensors, 18: 576.

CFD modeling and optimization of pre-cooling conditions in a cold room located in the South of Tunisia and filled with dates. Z Ghiloufi, T Khir, Journal of Food Science and Technology. 56Ghiloufi, Z., Khir, T. (2019). CFD modeling and optimization of pre-cooling conditions in a cold room located in the South of Tunisia and filled with dates. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 56: 3668-3676.

Entropy generation rate in uniform heat generating area cooled by conducting paths: criterion for rating the performance of constructal designs. L Ghodoossi, Energy Conversion and Management. 45Ghodoossi, L. (2004). Entropy generation rate in uniform heat generating area cooled by conducting paths: criterion for rating the performance of constructal designs. Energy Conversion and Management, 45: 2951-2969.

Some observations of temperatures and cooling rates of vegetables in commercial cold stores. J M Gibbon, Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research. 17Gibbon, J. M. (1972). Some observations of temperatures and cooling rates of vegetables in commercial cold stores. Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research, 17: 332-337.

Cooling method influences the postharvest quality of broccoli. S L Gillies, P M A Toivonen, HortScience. 30Gillies, S. L., Toivonen, P. M. A. (1995). Cooling method influences the postharvest quality of broccoli. HortScience, 30: 313-315.

Modelling ventilated bulk storage of agromaterials: a review. N L M Grubben, K J Keesman, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture. 114Grubben, N. L. M., Keesman, K. J. (2015). Modelling ventilated bulk storage of agromaterials: a review. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 114: 285-295.

Reusable boxes for a beneficial apple cold chain: a precooling analysis. W Gruyters, International Journal of Refrigeration. 106Gruyters, W. et al. (2019). Reusable boxes for a beneficial apple cold chain: a precooling analysis. International Journal of Refrigeration, 106: 338-349.

Precooling and ozone treatments affects postharvest quality of black mulberry (Morus nigra) fruits. Q Han, H Gao, H Chen, X Fang, W Wu, Food Chemistry. 221Han, Q., Gao, H., Chen, H., Fang, X., Wu, W. (2017b). Precooling and ozone treatments affects postharvest quality of black mulberry (Morus nigra) fruits. Food Chemistry, 221: 1947-1953.

Mathematical modelling of cooling efficiency of ventilated packaging: integral performance evaluation. J.-W Han, J.-P Qian, C.-J Zhao, X.-T Yang, B.-L Fan, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 111Han, J.-W., Qian, J.-P., Zhao, C.-J., Yang, X.-T., Fan, B.-L. (2017a). Math- ematical modelling of cooling efficiency of ventilated packaging: integral performance evaluation. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 111: 386-397.

Numerical modeling of forced-air cooling of palletized apple: integral evaluation of cooling efficiency. J.-W Han, C.-J Zhao, J.-P Qian, L Ruiz-Garcia, X Zhang, International Journal of Refrigeration. 89Han, J.-W., Zhao, C.-J., Qian, J.-P., Ruiz-Garcia, L., Zhang, X. (2018). Numer- ical modeling of forced-air cooling of palletized apple: integral evaluation of cooling efficiency. International Journal of Refrigeration, 89: 131-141.

Computational modeling of airflow and heat transfer in a vented box during cooling: optimal package design. J.-W Han, C.-J Zhao, X.-T Yang, J.-P Qian, B.-L Fan, Applied Thermal Engineering. 91Han, J.-W., Zhao, C.-J., Yang, X.-T., Qian, J.-P., Fan, B.-L. (2015). Compu- tational modeling of airflow and heat transfer in a vented box during cooling: optimal package design. Applied Thermal Engineering, 91: 883- 893.

Factors affecting resistance to airflow through packed fresh fruit. E Hass, G Felsenstein, A Shitzer, G Manor, ASHRAE Transactions. 82Hass, E., Felsenstein, G., Shitzer, A., Manor, G. (1976). Factors affecting re- sistance to airflow through packed fresh fruit. ASHRAE Transactions, 82: 548-554.

Preliminary study of airflow and heat transfer in a cold room filled with apple pallets: comparison between two modelling approaches and experimental results. H.-M Hoang, S Duret, D Flick, O Laguerre, Applied Thermal Engineering. 76Hoang, H.-M., Duret, S., Flick, D., Laguerre, O. (2015). Preliminary study of airflow and heat transfer in a cold room filled with apple pallets: com- parison between two modelling approaches and experimental results. Ap- plied Thermal Engineering, 76: 367-381.

Time-temperature transparency in the cold chain. H.-I Hsiao, K.-L Huang, Food Control. 64Hsiao, H.-I., Huang, K.-L. (2016). Time-temperature transparency in the cold chain. Food Control, 64: 181-188.

Recommended Conditions for Cold Storage of Perishable Produce. Paris: International Institute of Refrigeration. Iir, IIR. (1967). Recommended Conditions for Cold Storage of Perishable Produce. Paris: International Institute of Refrigeration.

The role of post-harvest management in assuring the quality and safety of horticultural produce. A A Kader, R S Rolle, FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin. 152Kader, A. A., Rolle, R. S. (2004). The role of post-harvest management in as- suring the quality and safety of horticultural produce. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin 152. https://ucanr.edu/datastoreFiles/234-2089.pdf. Ac- cessed 16 February 2020.

Simplified heat transfer modeling in a cold room filled with food products. O Laguerre, S Duret, H Hoang, L Guillier, D Flick, Journal of Food Engineering. 149Laguerre, O., Duret, S., Hoang, H., Guillier, L., Flick, D. (2015). Simplified heat transfer modeling in a cold room filled with food products. Journal of Food Engineering, 149: 78-86.

Air precooling and hydrocooling of Hayward kiwifruit. G Lambrinos, H Assimaki, H Manolopoulou, Acta Horticulturae. 444Lambrinos, G., Assimaki, H., Manolopoulou, H. (1997). Air precooling and hydrocooling of Hayward kiwifruit. Acta Horticulturae, 444: 561-566.

Experimental and numerical studies for the air cooling of fresh cauliflowers. Le Bideau, P Noel, H Yassine, H Glouannec, P , Applied Thermal Engineering. 137Le Bideau, P., Noel, H., Yassine, H., Glouannec, P. (2018). Experimental and numerical studies for the air cooling of fresh cauliflowers. Applied Thermal Engineering, 137: 238-247.

Exergy destruction minimization: a principle to convective heat transfer enhancement. W Liu, P Liu, J B Wang, N B Zheng, Z C Liu, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 122Liu, W., Liu, P., Wang, J.B., Zheng, N.B., Liu, Z.C. (2018). Exergy destruction minimization: a principle to convective heat transfer enhancement. Inter- national Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 122: 11-21.

Internalization of Listeria monocytogenes in cantaloupes during dump tank washing and hydrocooling. D Macarisin, International Journal of Food Microbiology. 257Macarisin, D. et al. (2017). Internalization of Listeria monocytogenes in can- taloupes during dump tank washing and hydrocooling. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 257: 165-175.

The effect of hydrocooling on ripening related quality attributes and cell wall physicochemical properties of sweet cherry fruit. G A Manganaris, I F Ilias, M Vasilakakis, I Mignani, Prunus avium L.). International Journal of Refrigeration. 30Manganaris, G. A., Ilias, I. F., Vasilakakis, M., Mignani, I. (2007). The ef- fect of hydrocooling on ripening related quality attributes and cell wall physicochemical properties of sweet cherry fruit (Prunus avium L.). Inter- national Journal of Refrigeration, 30: 1386-1392.

Cold chain market by type (refrigerated storage & transport), temperature type (chilled and frozen), application (dairy & frozen desserts; meat, fish, and seafood; fruits & vegetables; bakery & confectionery), and region -global forecast to 2023. Marketsandmarkets, MarketsandMarkets Research Pvt. Ltd. MarketsandMarkets. (2018). Cold chain market by type (refrigerated storage & transport), temperature type (chilled and frozen), application (dairy & frozen desserts; meat, fish, and seafood; fruits & vegetables; bakery & confectionery), and region -global forecast to 2023. MarketsandMarkets Research Pvt. Ltd. https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market- Reports/cold-chains-frozen-food-market-811.html. Accessed 16 Feb- ruary 2020.

Commercial forced-air precooling of strawberries: a temperature distribution and correlation study. S Mercier, J K Brecht, I Uysal, Journal of Food Engineering. 242Mercier, S., Brecht, J. K., Uysal, I. (2019). Commercial forced-air precooling of strawberries: a temperature distribution and correlation study. Journal of Food Engineering, 242: 47-54.

Time-temperature management along the food cold chain: a review of recent developments. S Mercier, S Villeneuve, M Mondor, I Uysal, Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. 16Mercier, S., Villeneuve, S., Mondor, M., Uysal, I. (2017). Time-tempera- ture management along the food cold chain: a review of recent devel- opments. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 16: 647-667.

Energy usage of forced air precooling of pomegranate fruit inside ventilated cartons. M Mukama, A Ambaw, T M Berry, U L Opara, Journal of Food Engineering. 215Mukama, M., Ambaw, A., Berry, T. M., Opara, U. L. (2017). Energy usage of forced air precooling of pomegranate fruit inside ventilated cartons. Journal of Food Engineering, 215: 126-133.

Analysing the dynamics of quality loss during precooling and ambient storage of pomegranate fruit. M Mukama, A Ambaw, T M Berry, U L Opara, Journal of Food Engineering. 245Mukama, M., Ambaw, A., Berry, T. M., Opara, U. L. (2019). Analysing the dynamics of quality loss during precooling and ambient storage of pom- egranate fruit. Journal of Food Engineering, 245: 166-173.

H Nalbandi, S Seiiedlou, H R Ghasemzadeh, F Rangbar, Innovative parallel airflow system for forced-air cooling of strawberries. Food and Bioproducts Processing. 100Nalbandi, H., Seiiedlou, S., Ghasemzadeh, H. R., Rangbar, F. (2016). Innova- tive parallel airflow system for forced-air cooling of strawberries. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 100: 440-449.

Pre-cooling-its significance to the market quality of table grapes. K E Nelson, International Journal of Refrigeration. 1Nelson, K. E. (1978). Pre-cooling-its significance to the market quality of table grapes. International Journal of Refrigeration, 1: 207-215.

Performance of multi-packaging for table grapes based on airflow, cooling rates and fruit quality. M E K Ngcobo, M A Delele, U L Opara, C J Meyer, Journal of Food Engineering. 116Ngcobo, M. E. K., Delele, M. A., Opara, U. L., Meyer, C. J. (2013). Perform- ance of multi-packaging for table grapes based on airflow, cooling rates and fruit quality. Journal of Food Engineering, 116: 613-621.

Resistance to airflow and cooling patterns through multi-scale packaging of table grapes. M E K Ngcobo, M A Delele, U L Opara, C J Zietsman, C J Meyer, International Journal of Refrigeration. 35Ngcobo, M. E. K., Delele, M. A., Opara, U. L., Zietsman, C. J., Meyer, C. J. (2012). Resistance to airflow and cooling patterns through multi-scale packaging of table grapes. International Journal of Refrigeration, 35: 445-452.

Quantifying and visualising variation in batch operations: a new heterogeneity index. J R Olatunji, R J Love, Y M Shim, M J Ferrua, A R East, Journal of Food Engineering. 196Olatunji, J. R., Love, R. J., Shim, Y. M., Ferrua, M. J., East, A. R. (2017). Quantifying and visualising variation in batch operations: a new hetero- geneity index. Journal of Food Engineering, 196: 81-93.

Modelling the forced-air cooling mechanisms and performance of polylined horticultural produce. J O&apos;sullivan, M J Ferrua, R Love, P Verboven, B Nicolaï, A East, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 120O'Sullivan, J., Ferrua, M. J., Love, R., Verboven, P., Nicolaï, B., East, A. (2016). Modelling the forced-air cooling mechanisms and performance of polylined horticultural produce. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 120: 23-35.

Forced-air cooling of polylined horticultural produce: optimal cooling conditions and package design. J L O&apos;sullivan, M J Ferrua, R Love, P Verboven, B Nicolaï, A East, Postharvest Biology and Technology. 126O'Sullivan, J. L., Ferrua, M. J., Love, R., Verboven, P., Nicolaï, B., East, A. (2017). Forced-air cooling of polylined horticultural produce: optimal cooling conditions and package design. Postharvest Biology and Tech- nology, 126: 67-75.

Nutrition and production related energies and exergies of foods. M Özilgen, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews. 96Özilgen, M. (2018). Nutrition and production related energies and exergies of foods. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 96: 275-295.

Experimental performance assessment of a vacuum cooling system through exergy analysis method. H M Ozturk, A Hepbasli, Journal of Cleaner Production. 161Ozturk, H. M., Hepbasli, A. (2017). Experimental performance assessment of a vacuum cooling system through exergy analysis method. Journal of Cleaner Production, 161: 781-791.

Experimental investigation and modelling of thermal environment control of air distribution systems for chilled food manufacturing facilities. D Parpas, C Amaris, S A Tassou, Applied Thermal Engineering. 127Parpas, D., Amaris, C., Tassou, S. A. (2017). Experimental investigation and modelling of thermal environment control of air distribution systems for chilled food manufacturing facilities. Applied Thermal Engineering, 127: 1326-1339.

Investigation into air distribution systems and thermal environment control in chilled food processing facilities. D Parpas, C Amaris, S A Tassou, International Journal of Refrigeration. 87Parpas, D., Amaris, C., Tassou, S. A. (2018). Investigation into air distribution systems and thermal environment control in chilled food processing facil- ities. International Journal of Refrigeration, 87: 47-64.

Quality of strawberries shipped by truck from California to Florida as influenced by postharvest temperature management practices. W Pelletier, J K Brecht, M C D N Nunes, J.-P Emond, Horttechnology. 21Pelletier, W., Brecht, J. K., Nunes, M. C. D. N., Emond, J.-P. (2011). Quality of strawberries shipped by truck from California to Florida as influenced by postharvest temperature management practices. Horttechnology, 21: 482-493.

Airflow distribution in an apple storage room. U Praeger, Journal of Food Engineering. 269109746Praeger, U. et al. (2020). Airflow distribution in an apple storage room. Journal of Food Engineering, 269: 109746.

Fruit ripening phenomena-an overview. V Prasanna, T N Prabha, R N Tharanathan, Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 47Prasanna, V., Prabha, T. N., Tharanathan, R. N. (2007). Fruit ripening phe- nomena-an overview. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 47: 1-19.

Entransy and exergy analyses of airflow organization in data centers. X Qian, Z Li, Z Li, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 81Qian, X., Li, Z., Li, Z. (2015). Entransy and exergy analyses of airflow organ- ization in data centers. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 81: 252-259.

Harvest stages and pre-cooling influence the quality and storage life of tomato fruit. A Rab, H Rehman, I Haq, M Sajid, K Nawab, K Ali, Journal of Animal and Plant Sciences. 23Rab, A., Rehman, H., Haq, I., Sajid, M., Nawab, K., Ali, K. (2013). Harvest stages and pre-cooling influence the quality and storage life of tomato fruit. Journal of Animal and Plant Sciences, 23: 1347-1352.

A review of the use and design of produce simulators for horticultural forced-air cooling studies. G P Redding, A Yang, Y M Shim, J Olatunji, A East, Journal of Food Engineering. 190Redding, G. P., Yang, A., Shim, Y. M., Olatunji, J., East, A. (2016). A review of the use and design of produce simulators for horticultural forced-air cooling studies. Journal of Food Engineering, 190: 80-93.

Postharvest handling of carnations. M S Reid, A M Kofranek, S T Besemer, Acta Horticulturae. 141Reid, M. S., Kofranek, A. M., Besemer, S. T. (1983). Postharvest handling of carnations. Acta Horticulturae, 141: 235-238.

Handling, Transportation and Storage of Fruits and Vegetables. A L Ryall, W T Pentzer, AVI Publishing Co., Inc2Westport, CTFruits and Tree NutsRyall, A. L., Pentzer, W. T. (1982). Handling, Transportation and Storage of Fruits and Vegetables. Volume 2. Fruits and Tree Nuts. AVI Publishing Co., Inc., Westport, CT.

Simulation of in-line versus staggered arrays of vented pallet boxes for assessing cooling performance of orange in cool storage. S M Sajadiye, M Zolfaghari, Applied Thermal Engineering. 115Sajadiye, S. M., Zolfaghari, M. (2017). Simulation of in-line versus staggered arrays of vented pallet boxes for assessing cooling performance of orange in cool storage. Applied Thermal Engineering, 115: 337-349.

Evaluating precooling methods for vegetable packinghouse operations. S Sargent, M Talbot, J Brecht, Proceedings of the Florida State Horticultural Society. the Florida State Horticultural Society101Sargent, S., Talbot, M., Brecht, J. (1988). Evaluating precooling methods for vegetable packinghouse operations. Proceedings of the Florida State Horticultural Society, 101: 175-182.

Advances in precooling techniques and their implications in horticulture sector: a review. S Senthilkumar, R M Vijayakumar, S Kumar, International Journal of Environmental & Agriculture Research. 1Senthilkumar, S., Vijayakumar, R. M., Kumar, S. (2015). Advances in precooling techniques and their implications in horticulture sector: a re- view. International Journal of Environmental & Agriculture Research, 1: 24-30.

Changes in enzymatic activity, accumulation of proteins and softening of persimmon (Diospyros kaki Thunb.) flesh as a function of pre-cooling acclimatization. E L D Souza, Scientia Horticulturae. 127Souza, E. L. D. et al. (2011). Changes in enzymatic activity, accumulation of proteins and softening of persimmon (Diospyros kaki Thunb.) flesh as a function of pre-cooling acclimatization. Scientia Horticulturae, 127: 242-248.

Vacuum cooling technology for the agri-food industry: past, present and future. D.-W Sun, L Zheng, Journal of Food Engineering. 77Sun, D.-W., Zheng, L. (2006). Vacuum cooling technology for the agri-food industry: past, present and future. Journal of Food Engineering, 77: 203-214.

Data-based mechanistic modelling of three-dimensional temperature distribution in ventilated rooms filled with biological material. V T Thanh, E Vranken, D Berckmans, Journal of Food Engineering. 86Thanh, V. T., Vranken, E., Berckmans, D. (2008). Data-based mechanistic modelling of three-dimensional temperature distribution in ventilated rooms filled with biological material. Journal of Food Engineering, 86: 422-432.

Comparative energy use of vacuum, hydro, and forced air coolers for fruits and vegetables. J F Thompson, Y L Chen, ASHRAE Transactions. 94Thompson, J. F., Chen, Y. L. (1988). Comparative energy use of vacuum, hydro, and forced air coolers for fruits and vegetables. ASHRAE Trans- actions, 94: 1427-1432.

Energy use of commercial forcedair coolers for fruit. J Thompson, D Mejia, R Singh, Applied Engineering in Agriculture. 26Thompson, J., Mejia, D., Singh, R. (2010). Energy use of commercial forced- air coolers for fruit. Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 26: 919-924.

Commercial Cooling of Fruits, Vegetables, and Flowers. J F Thompson, F G Mitchell, T R Rumsay, UCANR PublicationsDavisThompson, J. F., Mitchell, F. G., Rumsay, T. R. (2008). Commercial Cooling of Fruits, Vegetables, and Flowers. Davis: UCANR Publications.

A new mathematical model for multi-scale thermal management of data centers using entransy theory. H Tian, H Liang, Z Li, Building Simulation. 12Tian, H., Liang, H., Li, Z. (2019). A new mathematical model for multi-scale thermal management of data centers using entransy theory. Building Simu- lation, 12: 323-336.

Effect of ripening and inter-cultivar differences on strawberry quality. T Vandendriessche, LWT -Food Science and Technology. 52Vandendriessche, T. et al. (2013). Effect of ripening and inter-cultivar differ- ences on strawberry quality. LWT -Food Science and Technology, 52: 62-70.

Postharvest decay risk associated with hydrocooling tomatoes. C Vigneault, J A Bartz, S A Sargent, Plant Disease. 84Vigneault, C., Bartz, J. A., Sargent, S. A. (2000). Postharvest decay risk associ- ated with hydrocooling tomatoes. Plant Disease, 84: 1314-1318.

The optimal design and energy consumption analysis of forced air pre-cooling packaging system. D Wang, Y Lai, B Jia, R Chen, X Hui, Applied Thermal Engineering. 165114592Wang, D., Lai, Y., Jia, B., Chen, R., Hui, X. (2020). The optimal design and energy consumption analysis of forced air pre-cooling packaging system. Applied Thermal Engineering, 165: 114592.

Numerical and experimental investigation on forced-air cooling of commercial packaged strawberries. D Wang, Y Lai, H Zhao, B Jia, Q Wang, X Yang, International Journal of Food Engineering. 15Wang, D., Lai, Y., Zhao, H., Jia, B., Wang, Q., Yang, X. (2019). Numerical and experimental investigation on forced-air cooling of commercial packaged strawberries. International Journal of Food Engineering, 15: 20180384.

The application of exergy destruction minimization in convective heat transfer optimization. J Wang, W Liu, Z Liu, Applied Thermal Engineering. 88Wang, J., Liu, W., Liu, Z. (2015). The application of exergy destruction mini- mization in convective heat transfer optimization. Applied Thermal En- gineering, 88: 384-390.

Experimental performance comparison and trade-off among air-based precooling methods for postharvest apples by comprehensive multiscale thermodynamic analyses. G.-B Wang, X.-R Zhang, International Journal of Energy Research. 44Wang, G.-B., Zhang, X.-R. (2020). Experimental performance comparison and trade-off among air-based precooling methods for postharvest ap- ples by comprehensive multiscale thermodynamic analyses. International Journal of Energy Research, 44: 1546-1566.

Postharvest: An Introduction to the Physiology and Handling of Fruit and Vegetables. R Wills, J Golding, UNSW PressSydney, AustraliaWills, R., Golding, J. (2016). Postharvest: An Introduction to the Physiology and Handling of Fruit and Vegetables. UNSW Press, Sydney, Australia.

Identifying heterogeneities in cooling and quality evolution for a pallet of packed fresh fruit by using virtual cold chains. W Wu, T Defraeye, Applied Thermal Engineering. 133Wu, W., Defraeye, T. (2018). Identifying heterogeneities in cooling and quality evolution for a pallet of packed fresh fruit by using virtual cold chains. Applied Thermal Engineering, 133: 407-417.

Virtual cold chain method to model the postharvest temperature history and quality evolution of fresh fruit-a case study for citrus fruit packed in a single carton. W Wu, P Cronjé, B Nicolai, P Verboven, U Linus Opara, T Defraeye, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture. 144Wu, W., Cronjé, P., Nicolai, B., Verboven, P., Linus Opara, U., Defraeye, T. (2018a). Virtual cold chain method to model the postharvest temperature his- tory and quality evolution of fresh fruit-a case study for citrus fruit packed in a single carton. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 144: 199-208.

Unveiling how ventilated packaging design and cold chain scenarios affect the cooling kinetics and fruit quality for each single citrus fruit in an entire pallet. Food Packaging and Shelf Life. W Wu, P Cronjé, P Verboven, T Defraeye, 21100369Wu, W., Cronjé, P., Verboven, P., Defraeye, T. (2019). Unveiling how ventilated packaging design and cold chain scenarios affect the cooling kinetics and fruit quality for each single citrus fruit in an entire pallet. Food Packaging and Shelf Life, 21: 100369.

Full-scale experiments in forced-air precoolers for citrus fruit: impact of packaging design and fruit size on cooling rate and heterogeneity. W Wu, P Häller, P Cronjé, T Defraeye, Biosystems Engineering. 169Wu, W., Häller, P., Cronjé, P., Defraeye, T. (2018b). Full-scale experiments in forced-air precoolers for citrus fruit: impact of packaging design and fruit size on cooling rate and heterogeneity. Biosystems Engineering, 169: 115-125.

Evaluation metrics of thermal management in data centers based on exergy analysis. M Xie, J Wang, J Liu, Applied Thermal Engineering. 147Xie, M., Wang, J., Liu, J. (2019). Evaluation metrics of thermal management in data centers based on exergy analysis. Applied Thermal Engineering, 147: 1083-1095.

Physico-chemical and microstructural characteristics during postharvest storage of hydrocooled rockmelon (Cucumis melo L. B Zainal, P Ding, I S Ismail, N Saari, reticulatus cv. Glamour). Postharvest Biology and Technology. 152Zainal, B., Ding, P., Ismail, I. S., Saari, N. (2019). Physico-chemical and microstructural characteristics during postharvest storage of hydrocooled rockmelon (Cucumis melo L. reticulatus cv. Glamour). Postharvest Biology and Technology, 152: 89-99.

Airflow uniformity optimization for modular data center based on the constructal T-shaped underfloor air ducts. Y Zhang, K Zhang, J Liu, R Kosonen, X Yuan, Applied Thermal Engineering. 155Zhang, Y., Zhang, K., Liu, J., Kosonen, R., Yuan, X. (2019). Airflow uniformity optimization for modular data center based on the constructal T-shaped underfloor air ducts. Applied Thermal Engineering, 155: 489-500.

Principles and recent applications of novel non-thermal processing technologies for the fish industry-a review. Y M Zhao, M De Alba, D W Sun, B Tiwari, Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 59Zhao, Y. M., de Alba, M., Sun, D. W., Tiwari, B. (2019). Principles and re- cent applications of novel non-thermal processing technologies for the fish industry-a review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 59: 728-742.

Effects of operation processes and conditions on enhancing performances of vacuum cooling of foods: a review. Z Zhu, Y Geng, D.-W Sun, Trends in Food Science & Technology. 85Zhu, Z., Geng, Y., Sun, D.-W. (2019). Effects of operation processes and con- ditions on enhancing performances of vacuum cooling of foods: a review. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 85: 67-77.

A review of computational fluid dynamics for forced-air cooling process. C.-J Zhao, J.-W Han, X.-T Yang, J.-P Qian, B.-L Fan, Applied Energy. 168Zhao, C.-J., Han, J.-W., Yang, X.-T., Qian, J.-P., Fan, B.-L. (2016). A review of computational fluid dynamics for forced-air cooling process. Applied Energy, 168: 314-331.

The use of exergetic indicators in the food industry-a review. F K Zisopoulos, F J Rossier-Miranda, A J Van Der Goot, R M Boom, Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 57Zisopoulos, F. K., Rossier-Miranda, F. J., van der Goot, A. J., Boom, R. M. (2017). The use of exergetic indicators in the food industry-a review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 57: 197-211.