# The Role of Camel Milk and Milk Products, in Household Diet and Therapeutic Advancement: A Review

CorpusID: 219332555
 
tags: #Medicine, #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fcb4f3c2d48a43fadbfdfe3328ba323481ab534](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fcb4f3c2d48a43fadbfdfe3328ba323481ab534)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Role of Camel Milk and Milk Products, in Household Diet and Therapeutic Advancement: A Review
2020. 2020

Roba Jiso Wako 
Department of Animal Science
College of Agricultural Sciences
Arba Minch University
Arba MinchEthiopia

Guyo Demise 
Department of Animal Science
College of Agricultural Sciences
Arba Minch University
Arba MinchEthiopia

Ano 
Department of Animal Science
College of Agricultural Sciences
Arba Minch University
Arba MinchEthiopia

Asrat Guja 
Department of Animal Science
College of Agricultural Sciences
Arba Minch University
Arba MinchEthiopia

Amejo 
Department of Animal Science
College of Agricultural Sciences
Arba Minch University
Arba MinchEthiopia

The Role of Camel Milk and Milk Products, in Household Diet and Therapeutic Advancement: A Review

American Journal of Biomedical and Life Sciences
832020. 2020Received: May 7, 2020; Accepted: May 25, 2020; Published: June 4, 2020Review Article Email address: * Corresponding author To cite this article: Roba Jiso Wako, Guyo Demise Ano, Asrat Guja Amejo. The Role of Camel Milk and Milk Products, in Household Diet and Therapeutic Advancement: A Review.Camel MilkCamelus DromedariesMedicinal ValueFood DietLivelihoods
This was a comprehensive review of camel (Camelus dromedaries) milk and the contribution of its products for the household and medicinal values. The aim was to make meta-analysis about the potentials of camel milk products; for better understanding of the role of camel milk and milk products, in household diet and therapeutic advancements. The review was summarized that the milk compositions of dairy animals have been widely studied throughout the world and thousands of references are available especially about milk consumed by humans. The cow milk, which represents 85% of the milk consumed in the world and to a lesser extent, goat and sheep milk. The studies on other dairy animals, for instance, camel is rather scarce, despite their nutritional value and contribution to food security in arid regions. Camel milk is a good source of protein and referred to as whole food. It has enough nutrients to sustain life and is often given to babies suffering from malnutrition for poor pastoralists and other human-related disease treatments. The camel milk is considered as the Insulin' of the future: which the milk has a high concentration of insulin that has positive effects on the immunity, the diabetics in different countries highly depend on the camel milk. Therefore, further study would be required on the natural dynamics, substance, and antimicrobial action of camel milk and the concerned stakeholders should give attention to improve the camel milk utilization by developing a long-term strategy.

## Introduction

Camel (Camelus dromedaries) milk and its products may be one of the economical ways to improve the social life of camel owners [1]. It has been contributing to the household food diet, medicinal values, income and poverty relief, and national economy through export [2]. The number of pastoralist households has been considering camels as an essential means of production, and at the same time, an important property of social exchange through connections of likely social network expansion [3]. The camel is one of the most ignored domestic animals in developing countries in which this statement is comparable to the Ethiopian context [4,2]. As a result, camel and camel milk had been a victim of neglect by policymakers, research, and development under the livestock subsector in most countries [2]. Camel milk is leading food, especially for those who live in arid zones and it produced in large amounts than other domestic livestock's in the areas [5]. Hence, it is a vital part of a diet for households and its contribution to a healthy nutritional status especially during the drought and lack of pasture in the dry seasons [2].

In Sub-Saharan Africa, the camels (Camelus dromedaries) assume a fundamental job in the way of life of numerous networks inferable from their adjustment to the hostile climatic conditions by giving milk, meat, and transportation [6].

In most camel rearing cultures, the milk is mainly consumed in its raw state without being subjected to any sort of processing or treatment [7]. However, recently, various traditional fermented camel milk products are produced in different parts of the world by camel herders which supported with advanced technologies [8].

In global perspectives, camel milk and milk products have always been highly valued playing an important role in the diet of the population in the rural areas [7].

Nowadays, the scholars become in agreement that camel milk has traditionally been used for medicinal values and recent scientific studies are confirmed that it is a rich source of bioactive, antimicrobial, and antioxidant substances [6,9].


### Milk Production Potential of Camel (Camelus Dromedaries)

Camel milk is turning into a gradually interesting product with regards to the world, for its great nutritious properties as well as for tasteful products [7]. The milk production in annual has been increasing throughout the world, in particular of camel milk is estimated to be 2.9 million tons [10]. In sub-Saharan countries, camel rising sub-division has been adding to the family food, income and destitution alleviation, and national economy through price. East African countries like Somalia are a top producer of camel milk with 1.1 million tones pursued by Kenya, Mali, Sudan, Ethiopia, and some Middle East countries are also producing a sufficient amount [11]. However, the variables that may influence and decide the convergence of minerals in the milk is accounted for as the wellbeing related components in the milk are firmly dependent on creature species and nourishing, the season of the test range, ecological conditions and feed producing process [12,13].


### Composition and Property of Camel Milk

The most important component in camel milk is water content. Varieties for this value depend generally on the management and condition (season, temperature, and feed supply) [14]. The milk composed in averages totals solid, protein, fat, ash, lactose, and acidity are 13.62%, 4.35%, 4.59%, 0.84, 3.79% and 0.19, respectively [15]. Although different research findings indicated that Camel milk is closer to human milk than any other milk. It is rich in healthy vitamins and minerals, especially B vitamins, vitamin C, and iron [16,17,9].


### Proximate Comparisons of Camel Milk with Other Species

Camel milk is unlike other ruminants milk, with low cholesterol, low sugar, high minerals, (sodium, potassium, iron, zinc, and magnesium), high vitamin C, low protein, and a large concentration of insulin [18]. Furthermore, the milk composition of the dromedary camel is great from a dietary perspective. Different authors are argued that composition of camel milk varies due to difference of geographical origin and year of publication of the published data's but other factors such as the physiological stage, feeding conditions, seasonal or physiological variations, genetic or health status of the camel have also paramount importance [19]. The most minimal substance of fat was recorded in the fifth month of lactation, which compared with the lactation top [20]. According to [21], It is likewise found that the normal fat% and SNF% between two age bunch are 3.35±0.07 and 4.37±0.70, 8.34±0.24 and 9.17±0.49, individually and the distinctions were found exceptionally critical. Camel milk is made out of lactose, fat, and protein is generally a similar extent as cow milk [6].


### Health Benefits and Curative Properties of Camel Milk

Camel milk likewise has vital curative properties as it contains a high degree of antibacterial substances and a higher immune defense mechanism in correlation with cow milk [14]. It contains approximately 52 units of insulin in each liter of camel milk, making it a great treatment option for Type 1 or Type 2 diabetics as well as Gestational Diabetes [16]. The number of scholars has been argued that one of the unique characteristics of camel milk such as its therapeutic potential and absence β-LG has made it a focus area of research in the fields of health science and nutrition as an antimicrobial, anti-diabetic and antihypertensive supplement [6].

Camel milk is enriched with various protective proteins like lysozyme, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, NAGase, PGRP, IgG, and IgA which exert antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal and anti-parasitic activity, immunological properties, growth promotion activity and anti-tumor activity [22,23,18]. Of course, scholars are argued that much research still needs to be done on the healing effects of the milk. Therefore, the health benefits of camel milk, 'Insulin' of the future: camel milk has a high concentration of insulin that has a positive effect on immunity.


### Probiotic Property and Nutritive Value

Camel milk is a significant segment of the human diet routine in numerous parts of the world [14]. Whereas the commitments rendered by dromedary camels are milk production and transportation [24]. However, the contribution of camel milk to family unit nourishment admission is critical during the dry season [16]. The camel milk is a profoundly nutritious item giving a perfect situation to the development of various and complex microbial populations. These bacterial populaces are principally gathered into two significant classifications: (i) advantageous and innovatively pertinent microscopic organisms and (ii) pathogenic and waste microorganisms. Nowadays, a couple of studies depend on the way of life subordinate methodologies have been led on the recognizable proof of the bacterial populaces of camel milk [15,25].


### The Role Camel Milk for Domestic Food Diet

Camel milk is an imperative part of food consumption routine for families in a domain that might be correct named as unfavorable as far as temperature, and its contribution to a solid healthful status, particularly during the dry spell where others domestic dairy animals ceased production and absence of field, is without a reservation [2]. The extent of families  [15,26]. The camel milk is directly consumed about 60.9% while remained is used for selling and calve feeding.

Source: [27]. 


## Conclusion

Camel milk is a good source of protein that is a whole food. The milk has a significant contribution to the household in the market costs brought as well as, nutritional diet and medicinal values. It has enough nutrients to sustain life and is often given to babies suffering from malnutrition for poor pastoralists, but the production could affect by topographical areas, encouraging conditions, breeds, and phase of lactation which every influenced variety in the composition of camel milk. The fresh and fermented camel milk was accounted for specific potential therapeutic properties than any other domestic dairy animals. The camel milk is considered as the Insulin' of the future: for the milk has a high concentration of insulin that has a positive effect on the immunity, the diabetics in different countries highly depend on the camel milk to control their Diabetes.


## Recommendations

Therefore, the gradually comprehensive research could be done to affirm the instrument of potential curative properties of camel milk particularly in the country like Ethiopia where the Orthodox Christianity has negative perception that camel for Muslim community. Further study would be additionally required on the naturally dynamic constituents and their antimicrobial action to improve the camel milk utilization by developing a long-term strategy.

## Figure 1 .
1Milk Production, Consumption, and Sale of domestic livestock species.


Roba Jiso Wako et al.: The Role of Camel Milk and Milk Products, in Household Diet andTherapeutic Advancement: A Review 

who used different home commodities has fluctuated. For 
instance, while sugar, oil, and cow milk are devoured by 
nearly the whole pastoralist communities, the degree of 
utilization is 30.2%, 32.2% and 30.7% for the cow, goat and 
camel meat, individually 
AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to thank the Department of Animal Science for technical support.
Evaluation of camel milk for selected processing-related parameters and comparisons with cow and buffalo milk. international journal of Health. P Shyam, Sagar, M Bhavbhuti, K N Mehta, V B Wadhwani, K D Darji, Aparnathi, Animal Science and Food Safety. 31Shyam P. Sagar, Bhavbhuti M. Mehta, K. N. Wadhwani, V. B. Darji, K. D. Aparnathi. (2016). Evaluation of camel milk for selected processing-related parameters and comparisons with cow and buffalo milk. international journal of Health, Animal Science and Food Safety, 3 (1): 27-37.

Production and marketing of camel milk in Eastern Ethiopia. Bedilu Demissie, H Hussien, Adem Komicha, Kedir, African Journal of Marketing Management. 97Bedilu Demissie, Hussien H. Komicha, and Adem Kedir. (2017). Production and marketing of camel milk in Eastern Ethiopia. African Journal of Marketing Management, 9 (7): 98-106.

How the Est African Pastoral Nomads, Especially the Rendille, respond to the Encroaching market economy. S Sato, African study Monograph. 18Sato, S. (1997). How the Est African Pastoral Nomads, Especially the Rendille, respond to the Encroaching market economy. African study Monograph, 18 (3, 4): 121-135.

. Ibrahim A Ishag, Ibrahim A. Ishag;

Impact of Management System on Milk Performance and Lactation Curve of Camel in Sudan. M Enaam, Mohamed O Yousif, Eisa, Scientia Agriculturae. 202Enaam M. Yousif and Mohamed O. Eisa. (2017). Impact of Management System on Milk Performance and Lactation Curve of Camel in Sudan. Scientia Agriculturae, 20 (2): 56-61.

Physicochemical and microbiological quality of one-humped camel (Camelus dromedarius) milk: A Review. Mulugojjam Adugna, Aleme Asresie, Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare. 423Mulugojjam Adugna and Aleme Asresie. (2014). Physicochemical and microbiological quality of one-humped camel (Camelus dromedarius) milk: A Review. Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 4 (23): 119-124.

Processing Challenges and Opportunities of Camel Dairy Products. T Berhe, E S , 10.1155/2017/9061757International Journal of food science and Technology. Berhe T, E. S. (2017). Processing Challenges and Opportunities of Camel Dairy Products. International Journal of food science and Technology, https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/9061757.

Brezovecki Andreja, Mateja Cagalj, Natasa Zrinka Filipovic Dermit, Mikule, Darija Bendelja Lijoljic and Neven Antumax. 65Camel milk and Milk products. MijekarstvoBrezovecki Andreja, Mateja Cagalj, Zrinka Filipovic Dermit, Natasa Mikule, Darija Bendelja Lijoljic and Neven Antumax (2015). Camel milk and Milk products. Mijekarstvo, Vol. 65 (2): 81-90.

Distribution, characteristic features of camel populations (Camelus dromedarius) and the unseen treasures of rock-shelters in relation to camel domestication in Ethiopia. . T Yosef, Mohammed Y K U Mengistu, Solomon A Kefelegn, . K , Tadelle D , Livestock Production and Animal Breeding. 3Global Journal of Animal ScienceYosef. T, Mohammed Y. K, Mengistu. U, Solomon. A, Kefelegn. K, and Tadelle. D. (2015). Distribution, characteristic features of camel populations (Camelus dromedarius) and the unseen treasures of rock-shelters in relation to camel domestication in Ethiopia. Global Journal of Animal Science, Livestock Production and Animal Breeding, 3: 145-155.

Composition and Properties of Camel Milk. Open access peer-reviewed chapter. 10.5772/intechopen.82592Rita Rahmeh, Husam Alomirah, Abrar Akbar and Jiwan Sidhu.Rita Rahmeh, Husam Alomirah, Abrar Akbar and Jiwan Sidhu. (2019). Composition and Properties of Camel Milk. Open access peer-reviewed chapter, retrieve on January 03, 2020. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82592.

The future of food and agriculture-trends and challenges. Rome: FAOFAO. (2017). The future of food and agriculture-trends and challenges. Rome: FAO.

Camel Milk: An Important Natural Adjuvant. S Raghvendar, M Gorakh, K Devendra, N V Patil, K M L Pathak, DOI10.1007/s40003-017-0284-4Agric Res. 64Raghvendar S., Gorakh M., Devendra K., Patil N. V. and Pathak K. M. L. (2017). Camel Milk: An Important Natural Adjuvant. Agric Res, 6 (4): 327-2340. DOI 10.1007/s40003-017-0284-4.

Minor and trace Element contents f two typical Italian Sheep dairy products. E Coni, B Bocca, S Caroli, Journal of Dairy and reproduction. 66Coni, E, B. Bocca, and S. Caroli. (1999). Minor and trace Element contents f two typical Italian Sheep dairy products. Journal of Dairy and reproduction, 66: 589-598.

The Study of Camel Herd Composition and Milk Yield in Central Libya. A O Idris, Amna Alhelo, H A Elbukhary, I A Ishag, M O Eisa, 3rd International Scientific Conference of Camel Research and Production (ISCCRP). pIdris, A. O., Amna Alhelo, ElBukhary, H. A. Ishag, I. A. and Eisa, M. O. (2017). The Study of Camel Herd Composition and Milk Yield in Central Libya. 3rd International Scientific Conference of Camel Research and Production (ISCCRP), (p.

. Khartoum-Sudan, the University of Khartoum, Faculty of Animal productionKhartoum-Sudan: the University of Khartoum, Faculty of Animal production.

Review on Production, Quality, and Use of Camel Milk in Ethiopia. K Sisay F And Awoke, DOI10.4172/2332-2608.1000145Journal of Fisheries and Livestock Production. 3145Sisay F and Awoke K. (2015). Review on Production, Quality, and Use of Camel Milk in Ethiopia. Journal of Fisheries and Livestock Production, 3: 145: DOI 10.4172/2332-2608.1000145.

Role of camel milk in pastoral livelihoods in Kenya: contribution to household diet and income. Elhad Yazan Ahmed, M Dickson, Nyariki, V Oliver, Wasonga, 8.DOI10.1186/s13570-015-0028-7Pastoralism: Research, Policy and Practice. 5Elhad Yazan Ahmed, Dickson M Nyariki and Oliver V Wasonga. (2015). Role of camel milk in pastoral livelihoods in Kenya: contribution to household diet and income. Pastoralism: Research, Policy and Practice, 5: 8. DOI 10.1186/s13570-015-0028-7.

review on the medicinal properties of Camel milk. A R Mullaicharam, World Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 23Mullaicharam. A. R. (2014). review on the medicinal properties of Camel milk. World Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2 (3): 237-242.

Composition and characteristics of Chinese Bacterian Camel. Dian B Z , Yuan W N , Small Ruminant Research. 127ELSEVIERDian. B. Z, Yan. H. B, and Yuan. W. N. (2015). Composition and characteristics of Chinese Bacterian Camel. ELSEVIER: Small Ruminant Research, 127: 58-67.

Composition and medicinal properties of camel milk: A Review. A Kumar, Rakesh Yadav, Lakshmi Kumar, Jitendra Priyadarshini, Singh, Asian Journal of Dairy & Food Research. 342Kumar A. Yadav, Rakesh Kumar, Lakshmi Priyadarshini, and Jitendra Singh. (2015). Composition and medicinal properties of camel milk: A Review. Asian Journal of Dairy & Food Research, 34 (2): 83-91.

Some parameters to process camel milk into cheese. Konuspayeva Gaukhar, Benedicte Camier, Frederic Gaucheron, Bernard Faye, Emir. J. Food Agric. 26Konuspayeva Gaukhar, Benedicte Camier, Frederic Gaucheron and Bernard Faye. (2014). Some parameters to process camel milk into cheese. Emir. J. Food Agric., 26: 280-284.

Phenotypic Classification of Saudi Arbian camel (Camelus dromedarius) by their body measurements. Bernard Abdallah, H R Faye, Emirates Journal of Food and Agriculture. 243Abdallah and Bernard Faye H. R.. (2012). Phenotypic Classification of Saudi Arbian camel (Camelus dromedarius) by their body measurements. Emirates Journal of Food and Agriculture 24 (3): 272-280.

Productive and reproductive performances of camel (Camelus dromedarius) in Bangladesh. M A Fazal, M M R Howlader, M A Zaman, 10.4172/2574-2868.100005Vet. Med. Surg. 11Journal of veterinary medicineFazal, M. A., Howlader, M. M. R. and Zaman, M. A., 2017. Productive and reproductive performances of camel (Camelus dromedarius) in Bangladesh. Journal of veterinary medicine. Vet. Med. Surg., 1: 1. doi: 10.4172/2574-2868.100005.

Biochemical Effects of Fermented Camel Milk on Diarrhea in Rats. E Mona, O Ragia, A Abeer, T Mosa, New York Science Journal. 53Mona, E., Ragia, O., Abeer, A. and Mosa, T. (2010). Biochemical Effects of Fermented Camel Milk on Diarrhea in Rats. New York Science Journal, 3 (5).

Health benefits and curative properties of camel milk. Z Syed, Escalating Research. 34Syed, Z. (2014). Health benefits and curative properties of camel milk. Escalating Research, 3 (4): 24-25.

Analysis on the contribution of and constraints to camel production in Shinie and Jijiga zones, Eastern Ethiopia. Seifu Eyassu, Journal of Agriculture and Environment for International Development. 1033Seifu Eyassu. (2009). Analysis on the contribution of and constraints to camel production in Shinie and Jijiga zones, Eastern Ethiopia. Journal of Agriculture and Environment for International Development, 103 (3): 213-224.

Composition and microbial quality of raw camel milk produced in Morocco. Bouchta Maha Alaoui Ismaili, Mohamed Saidi, Zahar, Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences. 18Abed Hamamab and Raghia EzzaierMaha Alaoui Ismaili, Bouchta Saidi, Mohamed Zahar, Abed Hamamab and Raghia Ezzaier. (2019). Composition and microbial quality of raw camel milk produced in Morocco. Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences, 18: 17- 21.

Contribution of camel breeding to the household economy in southeast Tunisia. Jaouad N M Tardif, Khorchani , Faye B , Tunisia: Forage resources and ecosystem services provided by Mountain Mediterranean grasslands and rangelands. 2014 -Forage resources and ecosystemTardif. N, Jaouad. M, Khorchani. T and Faye. B. (2017). Contribution of camel breeding to the household economy in southeast Tunisia. Options Méditerranéennes, A, no. 109, 2014 -Forage resources and ecosystem (pp. 745-749). Tunisia: Forage resources and ecosystem services provided by Mountain Mediterranean grasslands and rangelands.

The contribution of milk to the pastoalist Economy in the Ethiopian Somali Regional State: Feed the Future -Research Award. J Kedir, Jigjiga: Ethiopia: United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Agriculture Knowledge, Learning, Documentation and Policy. AKLDPKedir. J. (2016). The contribution of milk to the pastoalist Economy in the Ethiopian Somali Regional State: Feed the Future -Research Award. Jigjiga: Ethiopia: United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Agriculture Knowledge, Learning, Documentation and Policy (AKLDP).