# A literature review on leadership qualities among Project Managers of building refurbishment Una revisión bibliográfica sobre las cualidades de liderazgo entre los Gerentes de Proyectos de rehabilitación de edificios

CorpusID: 219651077
 
tags: #Engineering, #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d92f8cda3de551e8a2e608c07e384ce8b446bc65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d92f8cda3de551e8a2e608c07e384ce8b446bc65)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A literature review on leadership qualities among Project Managers of building refurbishment Una revisión bibliográfica sobre las cualidades de liderazgo entre los Gerentes de Proyectos de rehabilitación de edificios


G Garcés gegarces@ubiobio.cl 
ENGLISH VERSION
Revista Ingeniería de Construcción Vol 35 Nº1 Abril de 2020 www.ricuc.cl
Revista Ingeniería de Construcción RIC Vol
35 Nº1 2020 www.ricuc.cl

Universidad del Bío-Bío -Concepción
CHILE

Universidad del Bío-Bío -Concepción
CHILE

A literature review on leadership qualities among Project Managers of building refurbishment Una revisión bibliográfica sobre las cualidades de liderazgo entre los Gerentes de Proyectos de rehabilitación de edificios
45 Fecha de Recepción: 09/07/2019 Fecha de Aceptación: 15/11/2019 PAG 45-59 1 Corresponding author:Project Managerrehabilitation of buildingsuncertaintyproject performanceleadership
This research provides a review of potential leadership qualities among building refurbishment project managers. The scope of work in rehabilitation projects is very different from that of new buildings projects. The key features associated with remodeling projects are unique, risky, highly complex and intrinsically full of uncertainties that are constant throughout the life cycle of the project. In addition, these projects have always been identified with the poor performance of the project that covers aspects of time, cost and quality. The objective of this study is to identify potential leadership qualities among managers of buildings refurbishment projects. In addition, the relationships between the factors of uncertainty and the performance of refurbishment projects will also be determined according to leadership qualities. To achieve this goal, a comprehensive bibliographic search was carried out, wherefrom this review, a research model was proposed. This model serves as a basis for broader research on leadership qualities among project managers to better manage uncertainties in refurbishment projects.ResumenEsta investigación proporciona una revisión de las cualidades potenciales de liderazgo entre los gerentes de proyectos de remodelación de edificios. El alcance del trabajo en los proyectos de rehabilitación es muy diferente al de los proyectos de nuevos edificios. Las características clave asociadas con los proyectos de remodelación son únicos, arriesgados, altamente complejos e intrínsecamente llenos de incertidumbres que son constantes a lo largo del ciclo de vida del proyecto. Además, estos proyectos siempre se han identificado con un desempeño deficiente del proyecto que abarca aspectos de tiempo, costo y calidad. Este estudio tiene como objetivo identificar las cualidades potenciales de liderazgo entre los gerentes de proyectos de rehabilitación de edificios. Además, también se determinarán las relaciones entre los factores de incertidumbre y el desempeño de los proyectos de rehabilitación según las cualidades de liderazgo. Para lograr este objetivo, se realizó una búsqueda bibliográfica exhaustiva, en donde a partir de esta revisión, se propuso un modelo de investigación. Este modelo sirve como base para una investigación más amplia sobre las cualidades de liderazgo entre los gerentes de proyectos para manejar mejor las incertidumbres en los proyectos de rehabilitación.

## Introducción

Many industry sectors such as information technology, management consulting and construction, are increasingly being project-based, of which construction is probably the largest and most complex sector (Sydow et al., 2004); (Cheng et al., 2005); (Whitley, 2006). The importance of project managers has been widely recognized in project-based industry sectors, especially in construction (Cheng et al., 2005); (Turner and Müller, 2005); (Papke-Shields et al., 2010). As a result, a great deal of research efforts has been made to investigate project managers. Existing studies on project managers are divided into five categories: (1) studies on the competencies/skills of project managers such as (Crawford, 2000) and (Cheng et al., 2005); (2) studies on the selection of project managers such as (Ahsan et al., 2013) and (Mohammadi et al., 2014); (3) studies on the leadership of project managers such as (Turner and Müller, 2005), (Bossink, 2004) and (Yacob et al., 2017); (4) studies on the personality and emotional intelligence (EI) of project managers such as (Dolfi and Andrews, 2007) and (Zhang and Fan, 2013); and (5) studies on the role of project managers such as (Ammeter and Dukerich, 2002) and (Sommerville et al., 2010). These studies contribute to an updated understanding of the existing knowledge of project managers, as well as to more developed project management.

It is important to mention that the environment around an organization puts constant pressure on a leader to further develop his or her skills in dealing with uncertain situations. Self-awareness and maturity within oneself are required from the leader, skills that are very visible in both success and failure (Nilsson, 2001) page 14;(Das, 2019). In the rapidly changing environment we live in today, the world outside the company is a very important factor that decides how leadership can and should be carried out. It is the individual ability to accept the change that comes from the outside, as well as the ability within the organization given to the leader who decides the possible outcome of his or her actions. That is to say, without the freedom of action within an organization, the ability of the leader to accept change will not matter (Nilsson, 2001). page 15.

In this sense, leading an organization is an act of balance between pursuing the intentions and objectives of the organization and caring for the best interests of the employees. Quite often, the objectives of the organization include a change in the way things are done in a company, which in turn affects the employees who have to make a change in habits. For this reason, it is in the role of the leader to be able to manage the crisis in a human way, involving self-knowledge and knowledge of human reactions (Nilsson, 2001), p. 30. According to (Hersey, 1984), there are two behaviors of the leader: 1) task-management oriented; 2) relationship-management oriented. A taskmanagement oriented leader focuses primarily on explaining how, where and when tasks should be completed, whereas a relationship-management oriented leader focuses on building strong relationships and trust between the manager and subordinates so that less instruction is needed to perform the tasks (Hersey and Blanchard, 1972), pages 82-83;(Grimard, 2019); (Hassan et al., 2019); (Imron et al., 2019). In general, Project Managers use combinations of these two leadership styles depending on the situation. An effective or ineffective leadership style is a question of how well the leadership style fits the given situation. However, it is not enough to consider only the situation and leadership style when measuring how effective a leadership style is, it is also necessary to consider the organizational environment in which the leadership works.

Building refurbishment works use valuable and functional elements to extend the use of aging building stock (Ekanayake et al., 2018). Such works can be classified as repair, refurbishment, restoration, upgrade, and expansion (Ali and Rahmat, 2009); (Yacob et al., 2018). Refurbishment works begin for several reasons, such as physical deterioration, differences in functionality over time, the dynamics of economic activities, innovation, technological changes, legal problems, aesthetics and land constraints in urban areas, etc. (Ali et al., 2008); (Rahmat et al., 2012). In countries like the UK and Germany, building refurbishment work is one of the most important sectors in the construction industry, contributing to about half of total construction production (Ali et al., 2008). In addition, (Villa et al., 2013) mentioned that the existing refurbishment works have become the priority of the European Union to reach its ambitious goal of being carbon-free by 2050.

According to the literature, the management of building refurbishment works is demanding, risky, inherently full of uncertainties, highly complex and involves many unforeseen elements (Ali, 2014); (Yacob et al., 2017); (Baudrit et al., 2019); (Kimiagari and Keivanpour, 2019); (Kim et al., 2020). In addition, uncertainties in refurbishment projects are constant throughout the life cycle of the project and are often listed as a reason for poor performance and efficiency (Ali and Rahmat, 2009), being one of the causes of the increase in costs and estimated time, due to the uncertainties in the design process, the recovery of design information and design changes are unpredictable during the construction phase. In this regard, extensive research has been conducted on building refurbishment projects to manage the factors that contribute to uncertainties. However, it takes time for these research findings to be adopted into practice, due to the existing technical and non-technical barriers (qualitative results) (Sunikka-Blank et al., 2012); (Yacob et al., 2017). Not surprisingly, most of the studies focused on technical issues, as opposed to issues related to the leadership characteristics of project managers (Duit and Galaz, 2008); (Yacob et al., 2017);(González et al., 2018); (Rybakova et al., 2020).

Apart from that, (Rahmat and Adnan, 2012) and (Noori et al., 2016) stated that building refurbishment or rehabilitation projects were one of the riskiest; inherently, due to complex and uncertain factors. (Egbu et al., 1996) mentioned that managing renovation projects means managing an uncertain project as the situation could change dramatically. This was also cited by many construction management writers, such as (Egbu, 1999) and (McKim et al., 2000), who reiterated that the uncertainty and complexity of rehabilitation projects were the main reasons for low efficiency. An investigation conducted by (Jens, 2013) stated that moving from an environment of stability to one of complexity and constant change required new skills and leadership qualities. Supported by (Jaeger and Adair, 2010), successful management is said to be based primarily on the commitment of project managers to construction projects; where leaders, followers and organizational factors strongly influence the behavior of people and the environment at work, so that it could increase or decrease the efficiency of a project (Okakpu et al., 2018). Under this assumption, there is a relationship between leadership qualities, uncertainty and efficiency in building rehabilitation projects. (Berg and Karlsen, 2013) observed that project managers faced many leadership challenges and problems, for example, on issues related to leadership style, stress, uncertainty, motivation, learning, and teamwork spirit. Also, in the work environment, leaders are under constant pressure to further develop their skills to manage uncertain situations and improve overall project performance. This has resulted in a high turnover of project managers in many organizations (Powell, 1995); (Harrison et al., 1997); (Harzing, 2001). Therefore, this research intends to contribute towards a more integral vision-through a literature review-of the leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers, as an element of human impact for the management of uncertainties and performance in building refurbishment projects.


## Theoretical Framework

The role of project managers has been studied by several researchers and professionals with different approaches. For example, (Ireland, 1992) examined the role of project managers in ensuring customer satisfaction. (Ammeter and Dukerich, 2002) addressed the role of project managers in the formation of the project team. (Liebowitz and Megbolugbe, 2003) analyzed the role of project managers in the implementation of knowledge management. In addition, (Blindenbach-Driessen and Ende, 2006) recognized project managers who excel in innovation management in project-based companies. (Crawford and Nahmias, 2010) emphasized the role of project managers in change management. Although (Davis and Pharro 2003) identify relationship management as the next generation of project management, where few studies to date have systematically investigated the role of project managers in project-based relationship management, (Bourne and Walker, 2008) and (Veal, 2011) described project-based relationship management as the way a project manager and his or her team build and maintain relationships with the right stakeholders at the right time.

In recent years, there has been growing research evidence on the characteristics of a project manager and how he or she influences his/her relationships with the working team. For example, (Walker and Hampson, 2003) and (Davis and Walker, 2009) illustrated relationship-based acquisition strategies for construction projects. (Pryke and Smyth, 2006) provided a relationship approach for managing complex construction projects, delivering a construction project through the development of social relationship capital. (Yeung et al., 2009) created an efficiency index for relationship-based construction project management. (Davis and Love, 2011) presented a structured way of developing relationships to add value to construction projects. (Meng, 2012) showed the significant effect of relationship management on project performance in construction. (Jelodar et al., 2016) proposed a quality relationship framework in the management of construction projects. All these investigations make a joint effort to detail the importance of relationship management that the project manager should have in a refurbishment project.

For this reason, the competencies and skills among project managers have attracted the greatest attention in research. For example, (Crawford, 2000) (Bredillet et al., 2015) provided definition and evaluation approaches to see "what is a competent project manager?" from the Aristotelian perspective and they believed that the project manager should be "wise" and act "correctly" or perform a "good" action to become competent. In addition, (Cheng et al., 2005) presented a model in the United Kingdom, based on competencies for the performance of project managers to answer "what makes a good project manager?", in which twelve competencies are goal-orientation, initiative, search for information, focus on customer needs, impact and influence, management and leadership skills, teamwork and cooperation, team leadership, analytical thinking, conceptual thinking, self-control and flexibility. (Ahadzie et al., 2008) developed competency-based measures for the performance of construction project managers in developing countries, covering four task skills (cognitive ability, work knowledge, expertise and experience) and two contextual skills (work dedication and interpersonal facilitation). Therefore, choosing the right project manager is a challenge for any project-based organization (Ahsan et al., 2013); (Sloof and von Siemens, 2019); (Klijn et al., 2020).

Apart from that, a competency development framework can be used to assess past performance and predict the future performance of project managers. For example, (Hadad et al., 2013) and (Zavadskas et al., 2008) took into account competencies and performance when selecting project managers. (Ahsan et al., 2013) identified communication, technical skills, stakeholder management, cost management, time management, educational background, planning, leadership, team building and professional qualifications as the top ten criteria for the selection of the project manager. According to (Mohammadi et al., 2014) and (Gotsis and Grimani, 2016), decision-making for the selection of the project manager always involves complexity and uncertainty. For this reason, establishing appropriate and systematic criteria is crucial to the successful selection of the project manager, which must reflect the needs and expectations of the project customer.

Moving from a stable to a complex and constantly changing environment unavoidably requires new skills and leadership characteristics (Powell, 1995); (Kramer et al., 2019); (Moldoveanu and Narayandas, 2019); (Tsai et al., 2019); Cleveland and Cleveland, 2020), where the presence of different uncertainties requires specific leadership qualities among project managers to manage them (Gregersen et al., 1998); (Hodgson and White, 2003). Leadership qualities have thus been an important factor for refurbishment project managers and therefore they became a key component of successful project performance. In addition, improving team member morale and performance begins with the leader, as exemplified by the department leader or manager (Mitchell et al., 2015). Similarly, (Jaeger and Adair, 2010) found out that successful management of construction projects depended mainly on the level of commitment of the project managers. In this research, new directions are proposed for future research, which consists of considering the leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers as a human impact element for the management of uncertainties in building refurbishment projects. The rest of this article is organized as follows: (a) methodology; (b) discussions, proposing a research model; and (c) conclusions, with suggestions for future research. (Lowe and Gardner, 2000) reviewed 10 years of research articles between 1990 and 1999. A total of 188 articles on "quarterly leadership" were analyzed, and it was found that 64% of the studied research used a method based on data collection questionnaires. Also, (Toor and Ofori, 2008) recognized that quantitative research methods are characterized by the assumption that human behavior can be explained by social facts. Consequently, it was applied as evidence for the research methodology adopted in this study.See (Figure 1).  (Cooper, 2015) In addition, the statistics mediation model should be adapted to identify and explain the relationship between an independent variable (VI) and a dependent variable (VD) by including a third hypothetical variable, known as the mediating variable (VM). (Cooper, 2015) emphasizes that a mediator explains how or why an independent variable relates to a dependent variable and mediation is exemplified by the question "how did it work?" or how does it relate? The approach involves the chain of causal events. Also, a critical discussion should be provided, related to quality, reliability and validity which in turn have become the model for data collection, measurement and analysis. Therefore, it was found that the quantitative research method is suitable for future research.


## Methodology

In the case of this research, the literature review considered scientific articles within the last 15 years. One validation criterion of the proposal is that in addition to being mentioned in a report or technical document, it must have related academic articles, and of relevance according to bibliometric criteria. The keywords used in the English search with the greatest impact were: Project Manager, rehabilitation, uncertainty, performance, leadership, building, and construction. The literature review provided an updated understanding of existing knowledge about project managers see (Table 1).

In this study, the initial stage was to review the leadership characteristics of building refurbishment project managers. Scientific papers were reviewed to identify relationships between uncertainty factors in the construction of refurbishment projects and project performance. In addition, the main reasons for the uncertainty of rehabilitation projects were identified (Table 2), and the main reasons for the performance of building restoration projects (Table 3), where the main literature references on the leadership characteristics expected from building restoration project managers were also identified ( Table 4). The remaining articles provided supporting information for this study. Therefore, after an analysis based on the literature review, the relationships identified allowed proposing a research model that supports the desirable leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers.


## Uncertainties in refurbishment projects

A large number of researchers agree that, compared to new construction projects, the scope of work for  (Quah, 1992); (Egbu, 1999); (Rahmat and Ali, 2010); (Saurin et al., 2013). Rehabilitation works tend to have a higher unit cost than new works. Project complexity can be measured in terms of site access, design building capacity, design coordination, site conditions and quality management (Walker, 1994); (Chan and Tam, 2000). In this context, uncertainties can mean differences in the amount of information available to implement a specific task (Rahmat and Ali, 2010). In addition, uncertainty is also related to the "lack of certainty" and "ambiguity" that points to a deficiency in data, elements, working resources and assumptions (Saurin et al., 2013); (Biswas and Zaman, 2019). Apart from that, (Egbu et al., 1998) reported that management of refurbishment projects includes the management of project risks and uncertainty factors where the condition may change dramatically. Therefore, this requires a lot of knowledge and information to improve the overall performance of a project (in addition, risk assessment involves investigating known probability, while uncertainty refers to events where it is not possible to quantify the probability or likelihood of occurrence) (Ekung and Onwusonye, 2015); . Consequently, the slight modification of the management process to carry out successful refurbishment works is not enough. In addition, it can be observed that uncertainties in refurbishment projects are persistent throughout the life cycle of the project (Ali and Rahmat, 2009). These can become more complex and uncertain when refurbishment works include structural modifications, which are more dangerous and involve more difficult operations (Ali, 2010). In addition, uncertainty factors could be managed and minimized through good relationships between all project participants, especially with local authorities (Reyers and Mansfield, 2001); (Miller and Hobbs, 2007). Other issues related to refurbishment projects include lack of information on operating facilities, limited space for reconstruction projects, maintenance of safety and health, and involvement of many stakeholders, such as building owners (McKim et al., 2000).


## In addition, planning refurbishment works can be demanding and requires more flexibility. This occurs when frequent requests for design changes by the customers and unfinished designs (due to problems only revealed during the construction stage) have contributed to variations in the scope of work and the time exceeded.

In this sense, (Yacob et al., 2017) 


## established that the human attributes and leadership characteristics of project managers have a significant relationship with the uncertainties in refurbishment projects (Table 2). However, the existing literature has limited information on this subject. Consequently, it is appropriate and important to develop an alternative solution to manage the uncertainties in restoration projects through the specific leadership characteristics of project managers.


## Dimensions Authors

1. Design process Experience, knowledge, meeting multidisciplinary requirements and involving many participants. Stone, 1976;Baldwin et al., 1999;Ali et al., 2009.


## Planning and control process Integration of all parties, workflow and work coordination, a large number of subcontractors and fragmentation problems.

Den; Laufer et al., 1996;Hartog et al., 2007;Rahmat and Ali, 2010;Christiansen, 2012;Shah, 2012;Strachan, 2013;Yacob et al., 2017.


## Refurbishment works on occupied buildings

Interferes with the normal use of occupants, disruption of the workflow, difficulty in determining the needs of residents and unpredictable situations. Daoud, 1997;Egbu et al., 1998;Quah, 1998;Mitropoulos and Howell, 2002;Noori et al., 2016;Yacob et al., 2017.


## Acquisition methods The type of acquisition influences the level of uncertainty, the management of the contract by specialized contractors and the inadequacy of the specifications.

Abdul Rashid et al., 2006;Ali and Au-Yong, 2013;Yacob et al., 2017.


## Legal requirements

Affected by the complexity of the law, changes and updates affect approval, inconsistencies in design requirements and required expertise. Keeping and Shiers, 1996;Holm, 2000;Hardie et al., 2007.  
Ingeniería de Construcción RIC Vol 35 Nº1

## Performance of refurbishment projects

One of the reasons for the uncertainty in refurbishment or rehabilitation projects has been the poor performance (Yacob et al., 2017). This is because the refurbishment implies a new design, structural modifications, high contents of service works, as well as energy efficiency and sustainability problems (Masrom et al., 2017); (Amiri and Nasiri, 2018); (Baumhof et al., 2018). These types of projects can be sensitive, dangerous and require the implementation of additional safety precautions (Egbu et al., 1998); (Yacob et al., 2017).

Specifically, refurbishment works require greater involvement of all stakeholders in the decision-making process to reduce fragmentation in the design and construction stages. However, this has not been implemented as more than half of the projects have exceeded the budget and time objectives (Rahmat and Ali, 2010); (Yacob et al., 2017). Also, (Thomas et al., 2002) and (Josephson and Lindstrom, 2007) agreed that the performance of a project could be measured using numerous parameters related to cost, time and quality aspects. Specifically, the parameters that affect the performance of refurbishment projects include time variations, cost variations, percentage of variations in work, an average of complaints received an average of non-compliance reported (Egbu, 1999); (Tang and Ng, 2014); (Mokhtar, 2015). An important contribution of this current study relates to the collection of well-established performance dimensions identified in previous research (Table 3), as well as to test the relationships between refurbishment project performance and uncertainty factors using leadership characteristics of project managers as the mediating variable.


## Table 3. Performance in building refurbishment projects


## Dimensions Authors


## Cost variations Cash flow, change in order and missing items in the Quantity Invoices

The cost is often higher than specified in the original contract due to the lack of design and specification details, and the absence of quantity invoices during the tendering Thomas et al., 2002;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009;Masrom et al., 2017 


## Time variations Payment and communication problems with customers and consultants.

Failure to pay for variations in the work by the customer results in unhealthy cash flow management by contractors, causing variation over time, and the contractor will suffer a monthly loss of revenue. Dissanayaka and Kumaraswamy, 1999;Thomas et al., 2002;Chan and Chan, 2004;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009.


## Variation work Decision-making by customers and consultants. The absence of quantity invoices during the tendering process can lead to great variations in the works.

Ballard and Howell 1994; Thomas et al., 2002;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009.


## Number of customer and occupant satisfaction complaints The effectiveness of the refurbishment process depends largely on the quality of communications between the parties involved which can reduce failure. The poor quality of the executed work can lead to complaints from the customer. Attention should focus on occupant satisfaction and socio-cultural

problems that may arise during the refurbishment or restoration of the building. Thomas et al., 2002;Dainty et al., 2003;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009;Tang and Ng, 2014;Noori et al., 2016.


## Number of non-compliance reports

Quality of work, communication skills and customer satisfaction. Poor planning and control will delay refurbishment projects. Specifically, an incorrect workflow causes the contractor to incur higher costs, poor quality of work, increases in work rates and additional costs, as well as noncompliance reports. Thomas et al., 2002;Tam et al., 2006;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009;Maciel et al., 2016 


## Expected leadership characteristics of project managers to direct the performance of the building refurbishment Project

According to (Bassioni et al., 2004), leadership is the combination of the strong characteristics of a person, and the vision and mission of an organization to achieve specific goals. Apart from that, the role of refurbishment project managers refers to the application of skills and knowledge throughout the life cycle of the project (Egbu et al., 1998). In addition, there are some overlaps in management levels that are associated with planning, conflict and crisis management, the well-being of occupants, the ability to integrate multidisciplinary teams, and the decisionmaking process (Noori et al., 2016). However, these tasks are totally different, reflecting the uncertain nature and higher complexity levels, compared to the management of the construction of new buildings (Yacob et al., 2017).

Based on previous studies, such as those by (Cohen and March, 1974), leadership is the art of influencing others to reach their highest level of performance and efficiency, to accomplish any task. (Murphy, 1997) emphasized the importance of selecting the right people to achieve organizational success. Also, in the fast-paced and globally competitive market, leaders must adopt a new global mindset. On the one hand, researchers as (Yang et al., 2011) agreed that project implementation requires construction leaders who can play a key role in ensuring that the process starts smoothly so that it contributes positively to the performance of the project. On the other hand, (Yacob et al., 2017) concluded that to manage the various uncertainties, specific leadership characteristics are needed among project managers. Apart from that, (Montequin et al., 2015) stated that uncertain situations could seriously expose the quality of leadership.

In this regard, (Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014) state that during the execution of the project the quality of leadership would affect the performance of the project. Successful management of construction projects is based primarily on the level of engagement shown by the project manager (Jaeger and Adair ,2010). In addition, when the vision and behavior of team members are improved, project managers feel more committed to their team and would be more cooperative (Den Hartog, 2007); (Martinuzzi, 2009). Also, the power of influence is an important criterion, necessary to achieve specific objectives and extract maximum performance from team members (Cohen and March, 1974). Therefore, a project manager plays an important role in the success of the project. (Montequin et al., 2015) emphasized that the most efficient project managers shared common characteristics such as extroversion, rational judgment and structured behavior. Apart from that, (Hanna et al., 2016) stated that issues related to human elements, especially those related to project managers, were the key to solving productivity problems. (Hanna et al., 2016) recommended that project managers should focus on developing their cognitive skills, management skills, experience and understanding throughout the life cycle of the project.

The above said, being a successful leader means being adaptable, flexible and capable of leading change, as well as getting the best out of others. Constant change requires improvements in leadership characteristics, such as building extensive technical and political networks, collaboration and engagement with staff members and stakeholders, and acquisition of the social intelligence and conceptual skills to achieve results (Hodge and Greve, 2012); (Muldoon, 2018). The leadership qualities of project managers can help form a high-performance culture and set the training bar for team members (Yacob et al., 2018). The research of (Egbu, 1999) on skills, knowledge and competencies for the management of building refurbishment works was based on the feedback provided by the project managers. The organizations identified challenges and opportunities where the survival of the project depended on the necessary skills, knowledge and competencies of their employees (Hersey and Blanchard, 1972), p 50; (Setiawan et al., 2019), as well as innovative processes, products, services, technologies and markets.

Similarly, a project manager must meet specific characteristics to be able to manage a team effectively, for example, technical knowledge, punctuality, attitude, effective communication, dedication, participation, and to be able to bravely face challenges (Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014). It is important to mention that, there is no unique form of leadership that is suitable for all the circumstances of the project. However, to face problems, solid leadership characteristics are required, such as communication skills, team building, decision making, sense of responsibility, vision, planning and strategy, relationship management skills, empowerment, ethics, influence and integrity (Yang et al., 2011). Thus, through the literature search, 14 desirable leadership characteristics were identified for building refurbishment project managers associated with uncertainty and project performance factors see (Table 4).


## Revista Ingeniería de Construcción RIC

Vol 35 Nº1 2020 www.ricuc.cl ENGLISH VERSION................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Oke et al., 2009;Yacob et al., 2017 3. Inspirational Having the right vision provides a platform for empowering others, giving the social structure needed to achieve the vision. Levine et al., 2010;Yang et al., 2011;Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014;Yacob et al., 2017 4 Levine et al., 2010;Shadraconis, 2013;Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014;Yacob et al., 2017 


## Transparency

Keeping up with uncertainty is as much about planning for failure as it is about hoping for the best. Experts in managing uncertainties do not hesitate to admit that they could be wrong, and that frees them to make detailed, rational and transparent contingency plans before acting. This also involves disclosing bad news and offering positive and critical feedback to reinforce the best behaviors. Bradberry and Greaves, 2006;D'Amato and Roome, 2009;Yacob et al., 2017 11. Not just looking out for own interests Valuing the interests of stakeholders, rather than using people for individual gains.


## Crane and Matten, 2004


## Long-term orientation

Focused on long-term goals, and not pressured with different and competitive goals. Hind et al., 2009;Yacob et al., 2017 


## Integrity Demonstrate honesty and other moral values in both personal and professional

life, which stakeholders see as a positive role model. Hind et al., 2009;Montequin et al., 2015;Yacob et al., 2017 14. Optimism It allows project managers to overcome the obstacles associated with the working environment.

Davis and Cable, 2006;Dolfi and Andrews, 2007;Meng and Boyd, 2017 


## Discussions

According to the literature, a combination of specific characteristics would enable project managers to be more effective leaders, allowing them to attract others through focused engagement, unite their team to achieve the performance of the project, and inspire the team members by making them feel valued. In addition, most influential leaders could motivate their team through joint identification with the collective goal and vision. The expected leadership characteristics of building refurbishment project managers were identified according to the nature of refurbishment projects, which includes the relationship between the performance of the project and uncertainties. Therefore, leadership characteristics are considered key dimensions that affect the process of managing uncertainties in refurbishment projects. In addition, it was observed that the leadership characteristics of refurbishment project managers, as an element of human impact, were rarely examined in previous studies by other researchers. Consequently, a knowledge gap was identified. Finally, based on the literature findings, a research model is proposed see (Figure 2). Therefore, this current study expands the scope of the existing literature on the relationship between project performance and uncertainties, covering aspects of time, cost and quality with leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers as a mediating variable. It is also expected that this research will have provided insights into the management of uncertainty factors through leadership qualities among project managers and by providing a basis for future research.


## Conclusions

In times of uncertainty, when the level of maturity and confidence of an employee has declined, the leader must recognize his or her personality characteristics that are important to the employee. By doing this, the leader has a better chance of helping the employee to increase his or her level of maturity. When the degree of maturity returns to normal, the previous internal organizational stability is restored. This model would help a project manager to get an overview of the leadership situation in times of uncertainty, being useful when reviewing the leadership characteristics to better adapt it in times of uncertainty.

This research has provided an overview focused on the relationships between uncertainty factors and project performance, with leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers as a roadmap. Fourteen leadership characteristics associated with uncertainty and project performance factors were identified. In addition, a knowledge gap was revealed, so it was observed that only a few studies have been conducted on leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers, specifically on the management of uncertainty factors. However, further empirical research is recommended to justify and validate the aforementioned findings. 

## Figure 1 .
1Conceptual framework of the effects of uncertainty factors on the performance of renovation projects in relation to the leadership qualities of project managers. Source: Adaptation of the Statistics Mediation Model of


2020 www.ricuc.cl ENGLISH VERSION..................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Revista Ingeniería de Construcción Vol 35 Nº1 Abril de 2020 www.ricuc.cl 51

## Figure 2 .
2Proposed research model. Source: adapted from(Bradberry and Greaves, 2006);(Yacob et al., 2018) 


created a profile of competent project managers. (Clarke, 2010) grouped 24 competency elements within the Project Manager Competency Development Framework according to the Project Management Institute into four competency measures: communication, teamwork, attentiveness and conflict management.

## Table 2 .
2Uncertainties in building refurbishment projectsRevista 

## . . 53 Table 4 .## Introducción

Many industry sectors such as information technology, management consulting and construction, are increasingly being project-based, of which construction is probably the largest and most complex sector (Sydow et al., 2004); (Cheng et al., 2005); (Whitley, 2006). The importance of project managers has been widely recognized in project-based industry sectors, especially in construction (Cheng et al., 2005); (Turner and Müller, 2005); (Papke-Shields et al., 2010). As a result, a great deal of research efforts has been made to investigate project managers. Existing studies on project managers are divided into five categories: (1) studies on the competencies/skills of project managers such as (Crawford, 2000) and (Cheng et al., 2005); (2) studies on the selection of project managers such as (Ahsan et al., 2013) and (Mohammadi et al., 2014); (3) studies on the leadership of project managers such as (Turner and Müller, 2005), (Bossink, 2004) and (Yacob et al., 2017); (4) studies on the personality and emotional intelligence (EI) of project managers such as (Dolfi and Andrews, 2007) and (Zhang and Fan, 2013); and (5) studies on the role of project managers such as (Ammeter and Dukerich, 2002) and (Sommerville et al., 2010). These studies contribute to an updated understanding of the existing knowledge of project managers, as well as to more developed project management.

It is important to mention that the environment around an organization puts constant pressure on a leader to further develop his or her skills in dealing with uncertain situations. Self-awareness and maturity within oneself are required from the leader, skills that are very visible in both success and failure (Nilsson, 2001) page 14;(Das, 2019). In the rapidly changing environment we live in today, the world outside the company is a very important factor that decides how leadership can and should be carried out. It is the individual ability to accept the change that comes from the outside, as well as the ability within the organization given to the leader who decides the possible outcome of his or her actions. That is to say, without the freedom of action within an organization, the ability of the leader to accept change will not matter (Nilsson, 2001). page 15.

In this sense, leading an organization is an act of balance between pursuing the intentions and objectives of the organization and caring for the best interests of the employees. Quite often, the objectives of the organization include a change in the way things are done in a company, which in turn affects the employees who have to make a change in habits. For this reason, it is in the role of the leader to be able to manage the crisis in a human way, involving self-knowledge and knowledge of human reactions (Nilsson, 2001), p. 30. According to (Hersey, 1984), there are two behaviors of the leader: 1) task-management oriented; 2) relationship-management oriented. A taskmanagement oriented leader focuses primarily on explaining how, where and when tasks should be completed, whereas a relationship-management oriented leader focuses on building strong relationships and trust between the manager and subordinates so that less instruction is needed to perform the tasks (Hersey and Blanchard, 1972), pages 82-83;(Grimard, 2019); (Hassan et al., 2019); (Imron et al., 2019). In general, Project Managers use combinations of these two leadership styles depending on the situation. An effective or ineffective leadership style is a question of how well the leadership style fits the given situation. However, it is not enough to consider only the situation and leadership style when measuring how effective a leadership style is, it is also necessary to consider the organizational environment in which the leadership works.

Building refurbishment works use valuable and functional elements to extend the use of aging building stock (Ekanayake et al., 2018). Such works can be classified as repair, refurbishment, restoration, upgrade, and expansion (Ali and Rahmat, 2009); (Yacob et al., 2018). Refurbishment works begin for several reasons, such as physical deterioration, differences in functionality over time, the dynamics of economic activities, innovation, technological changes, legal problems, aesthetics and land constraints in urban areas, etc. (Ali et al., 2008); (Rahmat et al., 2012). In countries like the UK and Germany, building refurbishment work is one of the most important sectors in the construction industry, contributing to about half of total construction production (Ali et al., 2008). In addition, (Villa et al., 2013) mentioned that the existing refurbishment works have become the priority of the European Union to reach its ambitious goal of being carbon-free by 2050.

According to the literature, the management of building refurbishment works is demanding, risky, inherently full of uncertainties, highly complex and involves many unforeseen elements (Ali, 2014); (Yacob et al., 2017); (Baudrit et al., 2019); (Kimiagari and Keivanpour, 2019); (Kim et al., 2020). In addition, uncertainties in refurbishment projects are constant throughout the life cycle of the project and are often listed as a reason for poor performance and efficiency (Ali and Rahmat, 2009), being one of the causes of the increase in costs and estimated time, due to the uncertainties in the design process, the recovery of design information and design changes are unpredictable during the construction phase. In this regard, extensive research has been conducted on building refurbishment projects to manage the factors that contribute to uncertainties. However, it takes time for these research findings to be adopted into practice, due to the existing technical and non-technical barriers (qualitative results) (Sunikka-Blank et al., 2012); (Yacob et al., 2017). Not surprisingly, most of the studies focused on technical issues, as opposed to issues related to the leadership characteristics of project managers (Duit and Galaz, 2008); (Yacob et al., 2017);(González et al., 2018); (Rybakova et al., 2020).

Apart from that, (Rahmat and Adnan, 2012) and (Noori et al., 2016) stated that building refurbishment or rehabilitation projects were one of the riskiest; inherently, due to complex and uncertain factors. (Egbu et al., 1996) mentioned that managing renovation projects means managing an uncertain project as the situation could change dramatically. This was also cited by many construction management writers, such as (Egbu, 1999) and (McKim et al., 2000), who reiterated that the uncertainty and complexity of rehabilitation projects were the main reasons for low efficiency. An investigation conducted by (Jens, 2013) stated that moving from an environment of stability to one of complexity and constant change required new skills and leadership qualities. Supported by (Jaeger and Adair, 2010), successful management is said to be based primarily on the commitment of project managers to construction projects; where leaders, followers and organizational factors strongly influence the behavior of people and the environment at work, so that it could increase or decrease the efficiency of a project (Okakpu et al., 2018). Under this assumption, there is a relationship between leadership qualities, uncertainty and efficiency in building rehabilitation projects. (Berg and Karlsen, 2013) observed that project managers faced many leadership challenges and problems, for example, on issues related to leadership style, stress, uncertainty, motivation, learning, and teamwork spirit. Also, in the work environment, leaders are under constant pressure to further develop their skills to manage uncertain situations and improve overall project performance. This has resulted in a high turnover of project managers in many organizations (Powell, 1995); (Harrison et al., 1997); (Harzing, 2001). Therefore, this research intends to contribute towards a more integral vision-through a literature review-of the leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers, as an element of human impact for the management of uncertainties and performance in building refurbishment projects.


## Theoretical Framework

The role of project managers has been studied by several researchers and professionals with different approaches. For example, (Ireland, 1992) examined the role of project managers in ensuring customer satisfaction. (Ammeter and Dukerich, 2002) addressed the role of project managers in the formation of the project team. (Liebowitz and Megbolugbe, 2003) analyzed the role of project managers in the implementation of knowledge management. In addition, (Blindenbach-Driessen and Ende, 2006) recognized project managers who excel in innovation management in project-based companies. (Crawford and Nahmias, 2010) emphasized the role of project managers in change management. Although (Davis and Pharro 2003) identify relationship management as the next generation of project management, where few studies to date have systematically investigated the role of project managers in project-based relationship management, (Bourne and Walker, 2008) and (Veal, 2011) described project-based relationship management as the way a project manager and his or her team build and maintain relationships with the right stakeholders at the right time.

In recent years, there has been growing research evidence on the characteristics of a project manager and how he or she influences his/her relationships with the working team. For example, (Walker and Hampson, 2003) and (Davis and Walker, 2009) illustrated relationship-based acquisition strategies for construction projects. (Pryke and Smyth, 2006) provided a relationship approach for managing complex construction projects, delivering a construction project through the development of social relationship capital. (Yeung et al., 2009) created an efficiency index for relationship-based construction project management. (Davis and Love, 2011) presented a structured way of developing relationships to add value to construction projects. (Meng, 2012) showed the significant effect of relationship management on project performance in construction. (Jelodar et al., 2016) proposed a quality relationship framework in the management of construction projects. All these investigations make a joint effort to detail the importance of relationship management that the project manager should have in a refurbishment project.

For this reason, the competencies and skills among project managers have attracted the greatest attention in research. For example, (Crawford, 2000) (Bredillet et al., 2015) provided definition and evaluation approaches to see "what is a competent project manager?" from the Aristotelian perspective and they believed that the project manager should be "wise" and act "correctly" or perform a "good" action to become competent. In addition, (Cheng et al., 2005) presented a model in the United Kingdom, based on competencies for the performance of project managers to answer "what makes a good project manager?", in which twelve competencies are goal-orientation, initiative, search for information, focus on customer needs, impact and influence, management and leadership skills, teamwork and cooperation, team leadership, analytical thinking, conceptual thinking, self-control and flexibility. (Ahadzie et al., 2008) developed competency-based measures for the performance of construction project managers in developing countries, covering four task skills (cognitive ability, work knowledge, expertise and experience) and two contextual skills (work dedication and interpersonal facilitation). Therefore, choosing the right project manager is a challenge for any project-based organization (Ahsan et al., 2013); (Sloof and von Siemens, 2019); (Klijn et al., 2020).

Apart from that, a competency development framework can be used to assess past performance and predict the future performance of project managers. For example, (Hadad et al., 2013) and (Zavadskas et al., 2008) took into account competencies and performance when selecting project managers. (Ahsan et al., 2013) identified communication, technical skills, stakeholder management, cost management, time management, educational background, planning, leadership, team building and professional qualifications as the top ten criteria for the selection of the project manager. According to (Mohammadi et al., 2014) and (Gotsis and Grimani, 2016), decision-making for the selection of the project manager always involves complexity and uncertainty. For this reason, establishing appropriate and systematic criteria is crucial to the successful selection of the project manager, which must reflect the needs and expectations of the project customer.

Moving from a stable to a complex and constantly changing environment unavoidably requires new skills and leadership characteristics (Powell, 1995); (Kramer et al., 2019); (Moldoveanu and Narayandas, 2019); (Tsai et al., 2019); Cleveland and Cleveland, 2020), where the presence of different uncertainties requires specific leadership qualities among project managers to manage them (Gregersen et al., 1998); (Hodgson and White, 2003). Leadership qualities have thus been an important factor for refurbishment project managers and therefore they became a key component of successful project performance. In addition, improving team member morale and performance begins with the leader, as exemplified by the department leader or manager (Mitchell et al., 2015). Similarly, (Jaeger and Adair, 2010) found out that successful management of construction projects depended mainly on the level of commitment of the project managers. In this research, new directions are proposed for future research, which consists of considering the leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers as a human impact element for the management of uncertainties in building refurbishment projects. The rest of this article is organized as follows: (a) methodology; (b) discussions, proposing a research model; and (c) conclusions, with suggestions for future research. (Lowe and Gardner, 2000) reviewed 10 years of research articles between 1990 and 1999. A total of 188 articles on "quarterly leadership" were analyzed, and it was found that 64% of the studied research used a method based on data collection questionnaires. Also, (Toor and Ofori, 2008) recognized that quantitative research methods are characterized by the assumption that human behavior can be explained by social facts. Consequently, it was applied as evidence for the research methodology adopted in this study.See (Figure 1).  (Cooper, 2015) In addition, the statistics mediation model should be adapted to identify and explain the relationship between an independent variable (VI) and a dependent variable (VD) by including a third hypothetical variable, known as the mediating variable (VM). (Cooper, 2015) emphasizes that a mediator explains how or why an independent variable relates to a dependent variable and mediation is exemplified by the question "how did it work?" or how does it relate? The approach involves the chain of causal events. Also, a critical discussion should be provided, related to quality, reliability and validity which in turn have become the model for data collection, measurement and analysis. Therefore, it was found that the quantitative research method is suitable for future research.


## Methodology

In the case of this research, the literature review considered scientific articles within the last 15 years. One validation criterion of the proposal is that in addition to being mentioned in a report or technical document, it must have related academic articles, and of relevance according to bibliometric criteria. The keywords used in the English search with the greatest impact were: Project Manager, rehabilitation, uncertainty, performance, leadership, building, and construction. The literature review provided an updated understanding of existing knowledge about project managers see (Table 1).

In this study, the initial stage was to review the leadership characteristics of building refurbishment project managers. Scientific papers were reviewed to identify relationships between uncertainty factors in the construction of refurbishment projects and project performance. In addition, the main reasons for the uncertainty of rehabilitation projects were identified (Table 2), and the main reasons for the performance of building restoration projects (Table 3), where the main literature references on the leadership characteristics expected from building restoration project managers were also identified ( Table 4). The remaining articles provided supporting information for this study. Therefore, after an analysis based on the literature review, the relationships identified allowed proposing a research model that supports the desirable leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers.


## Uncertainties in refurbishment projects

A large number of researchers agree that, compared to new construction projects, the scope of work for  (Quah, 1992); (Egbu, 1999); (Rahmat and Ali, 2010); (Saurin et al., 2013). Rehabilitation works tend to have a higher unit cost than new works. Project complexity can be measured in terms of site access, design building capacity, design coordination, site conditions and quality management (Walker, 1994); (Chan and Tam, 2000). In this context, uncertainties can mean differences in the amount of information available to implement a specific task (Rahmat and Ali, 2010). In addition, uncertainty is also related to the "lack of certainty" and "ambiguity" that points to a deficiency in data, elements, working resources and assumptions (Saurin et al., 2013); (Biswas and Zaman, 2019). Apart from that, (Egbu et al., 1998) reported that management of refurbishment projects includes the management of project risks and uncertainty factors where the condition may change dramatically. Therefore, this requires a lot of knowledge and information to improve the overall performance of a project (in addition, risk assessment involves investigating known probability, while uncertainty refers to events where it is not possible to quantify the probability or likelihood of occurrence) (Ekung and Onwusonye, 2015); . Consequently, the slight modification of the management process to carry out successful refurbishment works is not enough. In addition, it can be observed that uncertainties in refurbishment projects are persistent throughout the life cycle of the project (Ali and Rahmat, 2009). These can become more complex and uncertain when refurbishment works include structural modifications, which are more dangerous and involve more difficult operations (Ali, 2010). In addition, uncertainty factors could be managed and minimized through good relationships between all project participants, especially with local authorities (Reyers and Mansfield, 2001); (Miller and Hobbs, 2007). Other issues related to refurbishment projects include lack of information on operating facilities, limited space for reconstruction projects, maintenance of safety and health, and involvement of many stakeholders, such as building owners (McKim et al., 2000).


## In addition, planning refurbishment works can be demanding and requires more flexibility. This occurs when frequent requests for design changes by the customers and unfinished designs (due to problems only revealed during the construction stage) have contributed to variations in the scope of work and the time exceeded.

In this sense, (Yacob et al., 2017) 


## established that the human attributes and leadership characteristics of project managers have a significant relationship with the uncertainties in refurbishment projects (Table 2). However, the existing literature has limited information on this subject. Consequently, it is appropriate and important to develop an alternative solution to manage the uncertainties in restoration projects through the specific leadership characteristics of project managers.


## Dimensions Authors

1. Design process Experience, knowledge, meeting multidisciplinary requirements and involving many participants. Stone, 1976;Baldwin et al., 1999;Ali et al., 2009.


## Planning and control process Integration of all parties, workflow and work coordination, a large number of subcontractors and fragmentation problems.

Den; Laufer et al., 1996;Hartog et al., 2007;Rahmat and Ali, 2010;Christiansen, 2012;Shah, 2012;Strachan, 2013;Yacob et al., 2017.


## Refurbishment works on occupied buildings

Interferes with the normal use of occupants, disruption of the workflow, difficulty in determining the needs of residents and unpredictable situations. Daoud, 1997;Egbu et al., 1998;Quah, 1998;Mitropoulos and Howell, 2002;Noori et al., 2016;Yacob et al., 2017.


## Acquisition methods The type of acquisition influences the level of uncertainty, the management of the contract by specialized contractors and the inadequacy of the specifications.

Abdul Rashid et al., 2006;Ali and Au-Yong, 2013;Yacob et al., 2017.


## Legal requirements

Affected by the complexity of the law, changes and updates affect approval, inconsistencies in design requirements and required expertise. Keeping and Shiers, 1996;Holm, 2000;Hardie et al., 2007.  
Ingeniería de Construcción RIC Vol 35 Nº1

## Performance of refurbishment projects

One of the reasons for the uncertainty in refurbishment or rehabilitation projects has been the poor performance (Yacob et al., 2017). This is because the refurbishment implies a new design, structural modifications, high contents of service works, as well as energy efficiency and sustainability problems (Masrom et al., 2017); (Amiri and Nasiri, 2018); (Baumhof et al., 2018). These types of projects can be sensitive, dangerous and require the implementation of additional safety precautions (Egbu et al., 1998); (Yacob et al., 2017).

Specifically, refurbishment works require greater involvement of all stakeholders in the decision-making process to reduce fragmentation in the design and construction stages. However, this has not been implemented as more than half of the projects have exceeded the budget and time objectives (Rahmat and Ali, 2010); (Yacob et al., 2017). Also, (Thomas et al., 2002) and (Josephson and Lindstrom, 2007) agreed that the performance of a project could be measured using numerous parameters related to cost, time and quality aspects. Specifically, the parameters that affect the performance of refurbishment projects include time variations, cost variations, percentage of variations in work, an average of complaints received an average of non-compliance reported (Egbu, 1999); (Tang and Ng, 2014); (Mokhtar, 2015). An important contribution of this current study relates to the collection of well-established performance dimensions identified in previous research (Table 3), as well as to test the relationships between refurbishment project performance and uncertainty factors using leadership characteristics of project managers as the mediating variable.


## Table 3. Performance in building refurbishment projects


## Dimensions Authors


## Cost variations Cash flow, change in order and missing items in the Quantity Invoices

The cost is often higher than specified in the original contract due to the lack of design and specification details, and the absence of quantity invoices during the tendering Thomas et al., 2002;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009;Masrom et al., 2017 


## Time variations Payment and communication problems with customers and consultants.

Failure to pay for variations in the work by the customer results in unhealthy cash flow management by contractors, causing variation over time, and the contractor will suffer a monthly loss of revenue. Dissanayaka and Kumaraswamy, 1999;Thomas et al., 2002;Chan and Chan, 2004;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009.


## Variation work Decision-making by customers and consultants. The absence of quantity invoices during the tendering process can lead to great variations in the works.

Ballard and Howell 1994; Thomas et al., 2002;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009.


## Number of customer and occupant satisfaction complaints The effectiveness of the refurbishment process depends largely on the quality of communications between the parties involved which can reduce failure. The poor quality of the executed work can lead to complaints from the customer. Attention should focus on occupant satisfaction and socio-cultural

problems that may arise during the refurbishment or restoration of the building. Thomas et al., 2002;Dainty et al., 2003;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009;Tang and Ng, 2014;Noori et al., 2016.


## Number of non-compliance reports

Quality of work, communication skills and customer satisfaction. Poor planning and control will delay refurbishment projects. Specifically, an incorrect workflow causes the contractor to incur higher costs, poor quality of work, increases in work rates and additional costs, as well as noncompliance reports. Thomas et al., 2002;Tam et al., 2006;Josephsonm and Lindstrom, 2007;Thylin and Andersson, 2009;Maciel et al., 2016 


## Expected leadership characteristics of project managers to direct the performance of the building refurbishment Project

According to (Bassioni et al., 2004), leadership is the combination of the strong characteristics of a person, and the vision and mission of an organization to achieve specific goals. Apart from that, the role of refurbishment project managers refers to the application of skills and knowledge throughout the life cycle of the project (Egbu et al., 1998). In addition, there are some overlaps in management levels that are associated with planning, conflict and crisis management, the well-being of occupants, the ability to integrate multidisciplinary teams, and the decisionmaking process (Noori et al., 2016). However, these tasks are totally different, reflecting the uncertain nature and higher complexity levels, compared to the management of the construction of new buildings (Yacob et al., 2017).

Based on previous studies, such as those by (Cohen and March, 1974), leadership is the art of influencing others to reach their highest level of performance and efficiency, to accomplish any task. (Murphy, 1997) emphasized the importance of selecting the right people to achieve organizational success. Also, in the fast-paced and globally competitive market, leaders must adopt a new global mindset. On the one hand, researchers as (Yang et al., 2011) agreed that project implementation requires construction leaders who can play a key role in ensuring that the process starts smoothly so that it contributes positively to the performance of the project. On the other hand, (Yacob et al., 2017) concluded that to manage the various uncertainties, specific leadership characteristics are needed among project managers. Apart from that, (Montequin et al., 2015) stated that uncertain situations could seriously expose the quality of leadership.

In this regard, (Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014) state that during the execution of the project the quality of leadership would affect the performance of the project. Successful management of construction projects is based primarily on the level of engagement shown by the project manager (Jaeger and Adair ,2010). In addition, when the vision and behavior of team members are improved, project managers feel more committed to their team and would be more cooperative (Den Hartog, 2007); (Martinuzzi, 2009). Also, the power of influence is an important criterion, necessary to achieve specific objectives and extract maximum performance from team members (Cohen and March, 1974). Therefore, a project manager plays an important role in the success of the project. (Montequin et al., 2015) emphasized that the most efficient project managers shared common characteristics such as extroversion, rational judgment and structured behavior. Apart from that, (Hanna et al., 2016) stated that issues related to human elements, especially those related to project managers, were the key to solving productivity problems. (Hanna et al., 2016) recommended that project managers should focus on developing their cognitive skills, management skills, experience and understanding throughout the life cycle of the project.

The above said, being a successful leader means being adaptable, flexible and capable of leading change, as well as getting the best out of others. Constant change requires improvements in leadership characteristics, such as building extensive technical and political networks, collaboration and engagement with staff members and stakeholders, and acquisition of the social intelligence and conceptual skills to achieve results (Hodge and Greve, 2012); (Muldoon, 2018). The leadership qualities of project managers can help form a high-performance culture and set the training bar for team members (Yacob et al., 2018). The research of (Egbu, 1999) on skills, knowledge and competencies for the management of building refurbishment works was based on the feedback provided by the project managers. The organizations identified challenges and opportunities where the survival of the project depended on the necessary skills, knowledge and competencies of their employees (Hersey and Blanchard, 1972), p 50; (Setiawan et al., 2019), as well as innovative processes, products, services, technologies and markets.

Similarly, a project manager must meet specific characteristics to be able to manage a team effectively, for example, technical knowledge, punctuality, attitude, effective communication, dedication, participation, and to be able to bravely face challenges (Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014). It is important to mention that, there is no unique form of leadership that is suitable for all the circumstances of the project. However, to face problems, solid leadership characteristics are required, such as communication skills, team building, decision making, sense of responsibility, vision, planning and strategy, relationship management skills, empowerment, ethics, influence and integrity (Yang et al., 2011). Thus, through the literature search, 14 desirable leadership characteristics were identified for building refurbishment project managers associated with uncertainty and project performance factors see (Table 4).


## Revista Ingeniería de Construcción RIC

Vol 35 Nº1 2020 www.ricuc.cl ENGLISH VERSION................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Oke et al., 2009;Yacob et al., 2017 3. Inspirational Having the right vision provides a platform for empowering others, giving the social structure needed to achieve the vision. Levine et al., 2010;Yang et al., 2011;Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014;Yacob et al., 2017 4 Levine et al., 2010;Shadraconis, 2013;Udhayakumar and Karthikeyan, 2014;Yacob et al., 2017 


## Transparency

Keeping up with uncertainty is as much about planning for failure as it is about hoping for the best. Experts in managing uncertainties do not hesitate to admit that they could be wrong, and that frees them to make detailed, rational and transparent contingency plans before acting. This also involves disclosing bad news and offering positive and critical feedback to reinforce the best behaviors. Bradberry and Greaves, 2006;D'Amato and Roome, 2009;Yacob et al., 2017 11. Not just looking out for own interests Valuing the interests of stakeholders, rather than using people for individual gains.


## Crane and Matten, 2004


## Long-term orientation

Focused on long-term goals, and not pressured with different and competitive goals. Hind et al., 2009;Yacob et al., 2017 


## Integrity Demonstrate honesty and other moral values in both personal and professional

life, which stakeholders see as a positive role model. Hind et al., 2009;Montequin et al., 2015;Yacob et al., 2017 14. Optimism It allows project managers to overcome the obstacles associated with the working environment.

Davis and Cable, 2006;Dolfi and Andrews, 2007;Meng and Boyd, 2017 


## Discussions

According to the literature, a combination of specific characteristics would enable project managers to be more effective leaders, allowing them to attract others through focused engagement, unite their team to achieve the performance of the project, and inspire the team members by making them feel valued. In addition, most influential leaders could motivate their team through joint identification with the collective goal and vision. The expected leadership characteristics of building refurbishment project managers were identified according to the nature of refurbishment projects, which includes the relationship between the performance of the project and uncertainties. Therefore, leadership characteristics are considered key dimensions that affect the process of managing uncertainties in refurbishment projects. In addition, it was observed that the leadership characteristics of refurbishment project managers, as an element of human impact, were rarely examined in previous studies by other researchers. Consequently, a knowledge gap was identified. Finally, based on the literature findings, a research model is proposed see (Figure 2). Therefore, this current study expands the scope of the existing literature on the relationship between project performance and uncertainties, covering aspects of time, cost and quality with leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers as a mediating variable. It is also expected that this research will have provided insights into the management of uncertainty factors through leadership qualities among project managers and by providing a basis for future research.


## Conclusions

In times of uncertainty, when the level of maturity and confidence of an employee has declined, the leader must recognize his or her personality characteristics that are important to the employee. By doing this, the leader has a better chance of helping the employee to increase his or her level of maturity. When the degree of maturity returns to normal, the previous internal organizational stability is restored. This model would help a project manager to get an overview of the leadership situation in times of uncertainty, being useful when reviewing the leadership characteristics to better adapt it in times of uncertainty.

This research has provided an overview focused on the relationships between uncertainty factors and project performance, with leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers as a roadmap. Fourteen leadership characteristics associated with uncertainty and project performance factors were identified. In addition, a knowledge gap was revealed, so it was observed that only a few studies have been conducted on leadership characteristics among building refurbishment project managers, specifically on the management of uncertainty factors. However, further empirical research is recommended to justify and validate the aforementioned findings. 

## Figure 1 .
1Conceptual framework of the effects of uncertainty factors on the performance of renovation projects in relation to the leadership qualities of project managers. Source: Adaptation of the Statistics Mediation Model of


2020 www.ricuc.cl ENGLISH VERSION..................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... Revista Ingeniería de Construcción Vol 35 Nº1 Abril de 2020 www.ricuc.cl 51

## Figure 2 .
2Proposed research model. Source: adapted from(Bradberry and Greaves, 2006);(Yacob et al., 2018) 


created a profile of competent project managers. (Clarke, 2010) grouped 24 competency elements within the Project Manager Competency Development Framework according to the Project Management Institute into four competency measures: communication, teamwork, attentiveness and conflict management.

## Table 2 .
2Uncertainties in building refurbishment projectsRevista 

## . . 53 Table 4 .
.534Revista Ingeniería de Construcción Vol 35 Nº1 Abril de 2020 www.ricuc.cl Desirable leadership characteristics for building refurbishment project managers The power to project personality, including social and verbal skills, and body language Thylin and Andersson, 2009; Yacob et al., 2017 2. Motivational Motivate and inspire the working team, setting realistic expectations and demonstrating engagement to a shared visionDimensions 
Authors 
1. Empathy 



. Emotional Intelligence In the face of uncertainty, humans overreact. However, successful people can reverse this mechanism and change their thinking in a rational direction. This requires emotional intelligence. In an uncertain world with limited resources, perseverance and flexibility have become critical skills. To persevere is to believe in the chosen direction and to overcome difficulties and setbacks while moving towards established objectives and goals. Yacob et al., 2017 6. Focus People who are better at making decisions, when faced with uncertainty, do not waste time. Confidence and modesty Believing in personal ability and effective leadership goes hand in hand. Confident leaders are self-confident in their judgments and abilities. None of the aforementioned dimensions can be achieved without effective communication and listening skills. Effective communication involves the ability to engage in transparent, open and frequent dialogue with staff members and stakeholders. Intellectual Intellectual stimulation is the ability of a leader to help the team to discover new ways of performing tasks.Bradberry and Greaves, 

2006; Yacob et al., 2017 

5. Perseverance and flexibility 
Hodgson and White, 

2003; Schwegler, 2006; 
Udhayakumar & 
Karthikeyan, 2014; 
Hodgson and White 
2003; Bradberry and 

Greaves 2006; Yacob et 
al., 2017 
7. Smith and Imbrie, 2004; 
Meng and Boyd, 2017; 

Yacob et al., 2017; 
8. Effective communication 
Mazur and Pisarski, 

2015; Sun et al., 2015; 

Nasaruddin and 

Rahman, 2016; Yacob et 
al., 2017 

9. 


Revista Ingeniería de Construcción Vol 35 Nº1 Abril de 2020 www.ricuc.cl54 


Revista Ingeniería de Construcción Vol 35 Nº1 Abril de 2020 www.ricuc.cl

Social integration in post conflict Somalia: implications for a situational leadership style framework. A Hassan, Z M Zain, M N I Ajis, Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies. 3. Hersey, P.7Warner BooksThe situational leaderHassan, A.; Zain, Z. M. y Ajis, M. N. I. (2019). Social integration in post conflict Somalia: implications for a situational leadership style framework. Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies, 7, 3. Hersey, P. (1984). The situational leader. New York, USA: Warner Books.

Management of Organizational Behavior: Utilizing human resources. P Hersey, K Blanchard, Prentice-Hall, IncEnglewood Cliffs, New JerseySecond EditionHersey, P. y Blanchard, K. (1972). Management of Organizational Behavior: Utilizing human resources (Second Edition). Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Developing leaders for sustainable business. P Hind, A Wilson, G Lenssen, Doi:10.1108/14720700910936029Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society. 91Hind, P.; Wilson, A. y Lenssen, G. (2009). Developing leaders for sustainable business. Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society, 9(1), 7-20. Doi: 10.1108/14720700910936029

Public-private partnerships: an international performance review. G A Hodge, C Greve, Doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2007.00736.xPublic Administration Review. 673Hodge, G. A. y Greve, C. (2007). Public-private partnerships: an international performance review. Public Administration Review, 67(3), 545- 558. Doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6210.2007.00736.x

Facing the unknown: What are leaders for if not to manage uncertainty. P Hodgson, R White, Ivey Business Journal Online. 672Hodgson, P. y White, R. (2003). Facing the unknown: What are leaders for if not to manage uncertainty?. Ivey Business Journal Online, 67(2).

Service management in housing refurbishment: a theoretical approach. M G Holm, Doi:10.1080/014461900407338Construction Management and Economics. 185Holm, M. G. (2000). Service management in housing refurbishment: a theoretical approach. Construction Management and Economics, 18(5), 525-533. Doi: 10.1080/014461900407338

Implementation of Situational Leadership in Educational Organizations. A Imron, R Satria, I Puspitaningtyas, the 4th International Conference on Education and Management (COEMA 2019). Atlantis PressImron, A.; Satria, R. y Puspitaningtyas, I. (2019, December). Implementation of Situational Leadership in Educational Organizations. In the 4th International Conference on Education and Management (COEMA 2019). Atlantis Press.

Customer satisfaction: the project manager's role. L R Ireland, Doi:10.1016/0263-7863(92)90065-HInternational Journal of Project Management. 102Ireland, L. R. (1992). Customer satisfaction: the project manager's role. International Journal of Project Management, 10(2), 123-127. Doi: 10.1016/0263-7863(92)90065-H

Human factors simulation in construction management education. M Jaeger, D Adair, Doi:10.1080/03043797.2010.483607European Journal of Engineering Education. 353Jaeger, M. y Adair, D. (2010). Human factors simulation in construction management education. European Journal of Engineering Education, 35(3), 299-309. Doi: 10.1080/03043797.2010.483607

A conceptualisation of relationship quality in construction procurement. M B Jelodar, T W Yiu, S Wilkinson, Doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2016.03.005International Journal of Project Management. 346Jelodar, M. B.; Yiu, T. W. y Wilkinson, S. (2016). A conceptualisation of relationship quality in construction procurement. International Journal of Project Management, 34(6), 997-1011. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2016.03.005

Uncertainty + Complexity = Today's Reality for Leaders in International Public Organisations. Management Centre Europe. Jens , Jens (2013). Uncertainty + Complexity = Today's Reality for Leaders in International Public Organisations. Management Centre Europe. Retrieved from https://cdn.mce.eu/eu/uploads/2016/05/Professional-and-Personal-Leadership-Skills-for-IPO-Leaders-2.pdf

Measuring performance in construction projects. P E Josephson, J Lindstrom, Proceeding of the CIB World Building Conference on Construction for Development. eeding of the CIB World Building Conference on Construction for DevelopmentCape Town, South AfricaJosephson, P. E. y Lindstrom, J. (2007, May). Measuring performance in construction projects. In Proceeding of the CIB World Building Conference on Construction for Development, Cape Town, South Africa (pp. 14-18).

The "green" refurbishment of commercial property. M Keeping, D Shiers, Doi:10.1108/02632779610112481Facilities. 143/4Keeping, M. y Shiers, D. (1996). The "green" refurbishment of commercial property. Facilities, 14(3/4), 15-19. Doi: 10.1108/02632779610112481

Dynamic production scheduling model under due date uncertainty in precast concrete construction. T Kim, Y W Kim, H Cho, 120527.Doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120527Journal of Cleaner Production. Kim, T.; Kim, Y. W. y Cho, H. (2020). Dynamic production scheduling model under due date uncertainty in precast concrete construction. Journal of Cleaner Production, 120527. Doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120527

An interactive risk visualisation tool for large-scale and complex engineering and construction projects under uncertainty and interdependence. S Kimiagari, S Keivanpour, Doi:10.1080/00207543.2018.1503426International Journal of Production Research. 5721Kimiagari, S. y Keivanpour, S. (2019). An interactive risk visualisation tool for large-scale and complex engineering and construction projects under uncertainty and interdependence. International Journal of Production Research, 57(21), 6827-6855. Doi: 10.1080/00207543.2018.1503426

How do network characteristics influence network managers' choice of strategies. E H Klijn, I Van Meerkerk, J Edelenbos, Doi:10.1080/09540962.2019.1665828Public Money & Management. 40Klijn, E. H.; van Meerkerk, I. y Edelenbos, J. (2020). How do network characteristics influence network managers' choice of strategies?. Public Money & Management, 40(2), 149-159. Doi: 10.1080/09540962.2019.1665828

Evolving leadership: New clues and cues toward environment and context. M Kramer, L Page, G Klemic, Doi:10.1002/jls.21618Journal of Leadership Studies. 124Kramer, M.; Page, L. y Klemic, G. (2019). Evolving leadership: New clues and cues toward environment and context. Journal of Leadership Studies, 12(4), 82-85. Doi: 10.1002/jls.21618

Simultaneous management: the key to excellence in capital projects. A Laufer, G R Denker, A J Shenhar, Doi:10.1016/0263-7863(95)00091-7International Journal of Project Management. 144Laufer, A.; Denker, G. R. y Shenhar, A. J. (1996). Simultaneous management: the key to excellence in capital projects. International Journal of Project Management, 14(4), 189-199. Doi: 10.1016/0263-7863(95)00091-7

Measuring transformational and charismatic leadership: Why isn't charisma measured. K J Levine, R A Muenchen, A M Brooks, Doi:10.1080/03637751.2010.499368Communication Monographs. 774Levine, K. J.; Muenchen, R. A. y Brooks, A. M. (2010). Measuring transformational and charismatic leadership: Why isn't charisma measured?. Communication Monographs, 77(4), 576-591. Doi: 10.1080/03637751.2010.499368

A set of frameworks to aid the project manager in conceptualizing and implementing knowledge management initiatives. J Liebowitz, I Megbolugbe, Doi:10.1016/S0263-7863(02)00093-5international Journal of project management. 213Liebowitz, J. y Megbolugbe, I. (2003). A set of frameworks to aid the project manager in conceptualizing and implementing knowledge management initiatives. international Journal of project management, 21(3), 189-198. Doi: 10.1016/S0263-7863(02)00093-5

Ten years of the leadership quarterly: Contributions and challenges for the future. K B Lowe, W L Gardner, The leadership Quarterly. 114Lowe, K. B. y Gardner, W. L. (2000). Ten years of the leadership quarterly: Contributions and challenges for the future. The leadership Quarterly, 11(4), 459-514.

Management system proposal for planning and controlling construction waste. T Maciel, M Stumpf, A Kern, Doi:10.4067/S0718-50732016000200004Revista Ingeniería de Construcción. 312116Maciel, T.; Stumpf, M. y Kern, A. (2016). Management system proposal for planning and controlling construction waste. Revista Ingeniería de Construcción, 31(2), 116. Doi: 10.4067/S0718-50732016000200004

The leader as a mensch: Become the kind of person others want to follow. B Martinuzzi, Six Seconds Emotional Intelligence PressUSAMartinuzzi, B. (2009). The leader as a mensch: Become the kind of person others want to follow. USA: Six Seconds Emotional Intelligence Press.

A preliminary exploration of the barriers of sustainable refurbishment for commercial building projects in Malaysia. M A N Masrom, M H I A Rahim, S C Ann, S Mohamed, K C Goh, Procedia Eng. 180Masrom, M. A. N.; Rahim, M. H. I. A.; Ann, S. C.; Mohamed, S. & Goh, K. C. (2017). A preliminary exploration of the barriers of sustainable refurbishment for commercial building projects in Malaysia. Procedia Eng, 180, 1363-1371.

Major project managers' internal and external stakeholder relationships: The development and validation of measurement scales. A K Mazur, A Pisarski, Doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2015.07.008International Journal of Project Management. 338Mazur, A. K. y Pisarski, A. (2015). Major project managers' internal and external stakeholder relationships: The development and validation of measurement scales. International Journal of Project Management, 33(8), 1680-1691. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2015.07.008

Project performance control in reconstruction projects. R Mckim, T Hegazy, M Attalla, Doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(2000)126:2(137Journal of Construction Engineering and Management. 1262McKim, R.; Hegazy, T. & Attalla, M. (2000). Project performance control in reconstruction projects. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 126(2), 137-141. Doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(2000)126:2(137)

The effect of relationship management on project performance in construction. X Meng, Doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2011.04.002International Journal of Project Management. 302Meng, X. (2012). The effect of relationship management on project performance in construction. International Journal of Project Management, 30(2), 188-198. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2011.04.002

The role of the project manager in relationship management. X Meng, P Boyd, Doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.03.001International Journal of Project Management. 355Meng, X. & Boyd, P. (2017). The role of the project manager in relationship management. International Journal of Project Management, 35(5), 717-728. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.03.001

Habitat restoration-Do we know what we're doing. J R Miller, R J Hobbs, 382-390.Doi:10.1111/j.1526-100X.2007.00234.xRestoration Ecology. 15Miller, J. R. & Hobbs, R. J. (2007). Habitat restoration-Do we know what we're doing?. Restoration Ecology, 15(3), 382-390. Doi: 10.1111/j.1526-100X.2007.00234.x

Managing inclusiveness and diversity in teams: How leader inclusiveness affects performance through status and team identity. R Mitchell, B Boyle, V Parker, M Giles, V Chiang, P Joyce, Doi:10.1002/hrm.21658Human Resource Management. 542Mitchell, R.; Boyle, B.; Parker, V.; Giles, M.; Chiang, V. & Joyce, P. (2015). Managing inclusiveness and diversity in teams: How leader inclusiveness affects performance through status and team identity. Human Resource Management, 54(2), 217-239. Doi: 10.1002/hrm.21658

Renovation projects: Design process problems and improvement mechanisms. P Mitropoulos, G A Howell, 179-185.Doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0742-597X(2002)18:4(179Journal of Management in Engineering. 184Mitropoulos, P. & Howell, G. A. (2002). Renovation projects: Design process problems and improvement mechanisms. Journal of Management in Engineering, 18(4), 179-185. Doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0742-597X(2002)18:4(179)

A hybrid quality function deployment and cybernetic analytic network process model for project manager selection. F Mohammadi, M K Sadi, F Nateghi, A Abdullah, M Skitmore, Doi:10.3846/13923730.2014.945952Journal of Civil Engineering and Management. 206Mohammadi, F.; Sadi, M. K.; Nateghi, F.; Abdullah, A. & Skitmore, M. (2014). A hybrid quality function deployment and cybernetic analytic network process model for project manager selection. Journal of Civil Engineering and Management, 20(6), 795-809. Doi: 10.3846/13923730.2014.945952

Identifying Activities That Contribute to The Generation of Refurbishment Waste At. S N Mokhtar, Mokhtar, S. N. (2015, April). Identifying Activities That Contribute to The Generation of Refurbishment Waste At.

The future of leadership development. M Moldoveanu, D Narayandas, Harvard Business Review. 972Moldoveanu, M. & Narayandas, D. (2019). The future of leadership development. Harvard Business Review, 97(2), 40-48.

Managerial style profiles of successful project managers: a survey. V R Montequin, A G Nieto, F Ortega, J Villanueva, Doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.463Procedia Computer Science. 64Montequin, V. R.; Nieto, A. G.; Ortega, F. & Villanueva, J. (2015). Managerial style profiles of successful project managers: a survey. Procedia Computer Science, 64, 55-62. Doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.463

The architecture of global governance: an introduction to the study of international organizations. J P MuldoonJr, RoutledgeNew York, USAMuldoon Jr, J. P. (2018). The architecture of global governance: an introduction to the study of international organizations. New York, USA: Routledge.

Leadership IQ: A personal development process based on a scientific study of a new generation of leaders. E C Murphy, WileyNew Jersey, USAMurphy, E. C. (1997). Leadership IQ: A personal development process based on a scientific study of a new generation of leaders. New Jersey, USA: Wiley.

Leadership quality for Malaysia Construction leader to steer a success construction project. N A N Nasaruddin, I A Rahman, 10.1051/matecconf/20164704006MATEC Web of Conferences. 474006Nasaruddin, N. A. N. & Rahman, I. A. (2016). Leadership quality for Malaysia Construction leader to steer a success construction project. In MATEC Web of Conferences (Vol. 47, p. 04006). EDP Sciences. Doi: 10.1051/matecconf/20164704006

Conflict, complexity, and uncertainty in building refurbishment projects. I ; A Nilsson, M Saruwono, H Adnan, I Rahmat, Doi:10.1007/978-981-10-0155-0_24Ledarskap i kris, kaos och omställning. Uppsala, Sweden; SingaporeSpringerActa Universitatis Upsaliensis NooriNilsson, I. (2001). Ledarskap i kris, kaos och omställning. Uppsala, Sweden: Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis Noori, A.; Saruwono, M.; Adnan, H. & Rahmat, I. (2016). Conflict, complexity, and uncertainty in building refurbishment projects. In InCIEC 2015 (pp. 251-258). Springer, Singapore. Doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-0155-0_24

A proposed framework to investigate effective BIM adoption for refurbishment of building projects. A Okakpu, A Ghaffarianhoseini, J Tookey, J Haar, A Ghaffarianhoseini, A Rehman, Doi:10.1080/00038628.2018.1522585Architectural Science Review. 6Okakpu, A.; GhaffarianHoseini, A.; Tookey, J.; Haar, J.; Ghaffarianhoseini, A. & Rehman, A. (2018). A proposed framework to investigate effective BIM adoption for refurbishment of building projects. Architectural Science Review, 61(6), 467-479. Doi: 10.1080/00038628.2018.1522585

The influence of leadership on innovation processes and activities. A Oke, N Munshi, F O Walumbwa, Organizational Dynamics. 381Oke, A.; Munshi, N. & Walumbwa, F. O. (2009). The influence of leadership on innovation processes and activities. Organizational Dynamics, 38(1), 64-72.

Knowledge based decision support system for the selection and appointment of sub-contractors for building refurbishment contracts (Doctoral dissertation). M I Okoroh, Loughborough, UK.Loughborough UniversityOkoroh, M. I. (1992). Knowledge based decision support system for the selection and appointment of sub-contractors for building refurbishment contracts (Doctoral dissertation). Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK. Retrieved from https://hdl.handle.net/2134/7173

Do project managers practice what they preach, and does it matter to project success?. K E Papke-Shields, C Beise, J Quan, Doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2009.11.002International Journal of Project Management. 287Papke-Shields, K. E.; Beise, C. & Quan, J. (2010). Do project managers practice what they preach, and does it matter to project success?. International Journal of Project Management, 28(7), 650-662. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2009.11.002

Total quality management as competitive advantage: a review and empirical study. T C Powell, Doi:10.1002/smj.4250160105Strategic Management Journal. 161Powell, T. C. (1995). Total quality management as competitive advantage: a review and empirical study. Strategic Management Journal, 16(1), 15-37. Doi: 10.1002/smj.4250160105

The Management of Complex Projects: A Relationship Approach. S Pryke, H Smyth, Blackwell ScienceOxford, UKPryke, S.; Smyth, H. (2006). The Management of Complex Projects: A Relationship Approach. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science.

An evaluation of the risks in estimating and tendering for refurbishment work (Doctoral dissertation). L K Quah, Edinburgh, UKHeriot-Watt UniversityQuah, L. K. (1988). An evaluation of the risks in estimating and tendering for refurbishment work (Doctoral dissertation). Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK.

Comparative variability in tender bids for refurbishment and new build work. L K Quah, Doi:10.1080/01446199200000022Construction management and Economics. 103Quah, L. K. (1992). Comparative variability in tender bids for refurbishment and new build work. Construction management and Economics, 10(3), 263-269. Doi: 10.1080/01446199200000022

Planning for Refurbishment Projects: the Effects of Organizational Complexity and Integration of Projetc Performance. I Rahmat, M Shabri Abd, H Adnan, ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences. 75Rahmat, I.; Shabri Abd, M. & Adnan, H. (2012). Planning for Refurbishment Projects: the Effects of Organizational Complexity and Integration of Projetc Performance. ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 7(5), 554-560.

The involvement of the key participants in the production of project plans and the planning performance of refurbishment projects. I Rahmat, A S Ali, Doi:10.1057/jba.2009.34Journal of Building Appraisal. 53Rahmat, I. & Ali, A. S. (2010). The involvement of the key participants in the production of project plans and the planning performance of refurbishment projects. Journal of Building Appraisal, 5(3), 273-288. Doi: 10.1057/jba.2009.34

The assessment of risk in conservation refurbishment projects. J Reyers, J Mansfield, Doi:10.1108/02630800110412480Structural Survey. 195Reyers, J. & Mansfield, J. (2001). The assessment of risk in conservation refurbishment projects. Structural Survey, 19(5), 238-244. Doi: 10.1108/02630800110412480

Advancing Leadership Careers with Leadership Competences. A Rybakova, M Vinogradova, V Sizikova, Doi:10.2991/assehr.k.191221.1815th International Conference on Social, Economic, and Academic Leadership (ICSEALV 2019). Atlantis PressRybakova, A.; Vinogradova, M. & Sizikova, V. (2020, January). Advancing Leadership Careers with Leadership Competences. In 5th International Conference on Social, Economic, and Academic Leadership (ICSEALV 2019) (pp. 74-79). Atlantis Press. Doi: 10.2991/assehr.k.191221.181

Guidelines for the management of complex socio-technical systems: an exploratory study of a refurbishment project. 21st Annual Summit of the International Group for Lean Construction. T A Saurin, J Rooke, L Koskela, S Kemmer, 1Saurin, T. A.; Rooke, J.; Koskela, L. & Kemmer, S. (2013). Guidelines for the management of complex socio-technical systems: an exploratory study of a refurbishment project. 21st Annual Summit of the International Group for Lean Construction, 1, 13-22.

Entrepreneurial governance and the urban restructuring of a Slovakian town. B Schwegler, The Urban Mosaic of Post-Socialist Europe. Physica-Verlag HDSchwegler, B. (2006). Entrepreneurial governance and the urban restructuring of a Slovakian town. In The Urban Mosaic of Post-Socialist Europe (pp. 295-318). Physica-Verlag HD.

The Study of Situational Leadership Style on an Indonesian Construction Company. T H Setiawan, A Firdaus, A D Putra, Malaysian Journal of Civil Engineering. 131Setiawan, T. H.; Firdaus, A. & Putra, A. D. (2019). The Study of Situational Leadership Style on an Indonesian Construction Company. Malaysian Journal of Civil Engineering, 31(1).

Organizational Leadership in Times of Uncertainty: Is Transformational Leadership the Answer. S Shadraconis, 228LUX: A Journal of Transdisciplinary Writing and Research from Claremont Graduate UniversityShadraconis, S. (2013). Organizational Leadership in Times of Uncertainty: Is Transformational Leadership the Answer?. LUX: A Journal of Transdisciplinary Writing and Research from Claremont Graduate University, 2(1), 28.

Sustainable refurbishment. S Shah, Wiley-BlackwellSussex, UKShah, S. (2012). Sustainable refurbishment. Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.

Effective leadership and the allocation and exercise of power in organizations. R Sloof, F A Siemens, Doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.12.001The Leadership Quarterly. Sloof, R. & von Siemens, F. A. (2019). Effective leadership and the allocation and exercise of power in organizations. The Leadership Quarterly. Doi: 10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.12.001

Teamwork and project management. K A Smith, P K Imbrie, McGraw-Hill's BEST SeriesNew York, USASmith, K. A., & Imbrie, P. K. (2004). Teamwork and project management. New York, USA: McGraw-Hill's BEST Series.

The role of the project manager: all things to all people. J Sommerville, N Craig, J Hendry, Doi:10.1108/02630801011044235Structural Survey. 28Sommerville, J.; Craig, N. & Hendry, J. (2010). The role of the project manager: all things to all people?. Structural Survey, 28(2), 132-141. Doi: 10.1108/02630801011044235

Building economy. P A Stone, Pergamon PressOxford, UKStone, P. A. (1976). Building economy. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.

Energy-led, non-domestic building refurbishment: Decision support for a whole-building approach to improvement of operational performance. M E Strachan, Doctoral dissertationStrachan, M. E. (2013). Energy-led, non-domestic building refurbishment: Decision support for a whole-building approach to improvement of operational performance (Doctoral dissertation).

. Heriot-Watt University, U K Edinburgh, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK. Retrieved from https://www.ros.hw.ac.uk/handle/10399/2724

Communication behaviors to implement innovations: How do AEC teams communicate in IPD projects. W Sun, S Mollaoglu, V Miller, B Manata, Doi:10.1002/pmj.21478Project Management Journal. 461Sun, W.; Mollaoglu, S.; Miller, V. & Manata, B. (2015). Communication behaviors to implement innovations: How do AEC teams communicate in IPD projects?. Project Management Journal, 46(1), 84-96. Doi: 10.1002/pmj.21478

Improving energy efficiency of social housing areas: A case study of a retrofit achieving an "A" energy performance rating in the UK. M Sunikka-Blank, J Chen, J Britnell, D Dantsiou, Doi:10.1080/09654313.2011.638494European Planning Studies. 201Sunikka-Blank, M.; Chen, J.; Britnell, J. & Dantsiou, D. (2012). Improving energy efficiency of social housing areas: A case study of a retrofit achieving an "A" energy performance rating in the UK. European Planning Studies, 20(1), 131-145. Doi: 10.1080/09654313.2011.638494

Project-based organizations, embeddedness and repositories of knowledge: Editorial. Organization Studies. J Sydow, L Lindkvist, R Defillippi, Doi:10.1177/017084060404816225Sydow, J.; Lindkvist, L. & DeFillippi, R. (2004). Project-based organizations, embeddedness and repositories of knowledge: Editorial. Organization Studies, 25(9), 1475-1489. Doi: 10.1177/0170840604048162

Environmental performance measurement indicators in construction. V W Tam, C M Tam, S X Zeng, K K Chan, Doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2005.01.009Building and Environment. 412Tam, V. W.; Tam, C. M.; Zeng, S. X. & Chan, K. K. (2006). Environmental performance measurement indicators in construction. Building and Environment, 41(2), 164-173. Doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2005.01.009

Sustainable building development in China-A system thinking study. Z Tang, S T Ng, Procedia Engineering. 85Tang, Z. & Ng, S. T. (2014). Sustainable building development in China-A system thinking study. Procedia Engineering, 85, 493-500.

Measuring the impact of the delivery system on project performance: design-build and design-bid-build (NIST GCR 02-840). S R Thomas, C L Macken, T H Chung, I Kim, Construction Industry InstituteAustinThomas, S. R.; Macken, C. L.; Chung, T. H. & Kim, I. (2002). Measuring the impact of the delivery system on project performance: design-build and design-bid-build (NIST GCR 02-840). Austin: Construction Industry Institute.

Leadership in situations of uncertainty: a guideline for the leader. Uppsala universitet, Department of Business Studies. K Thylin, M Andersson, SwedenThylin, K. & Andersson, M. (2009). Leadership in situations of uncertainty: a guideline for the leader. Uppsala universitet, Department of Business Studies, Sweden.

Grounded theory as an appropriate methodology for leadership research in construction. S Toor, G Ofori, Y S Tsai, O Poquet, D Gašević, S Dawson, A Pardo, Doi:10.1111/bjet.12846CIB International Conference on Building Education and Research. Sri Lanka50Complexity leadership in learning analytics: Drivers, challenges and opportunitiesToor, S. & Ofori, G. (2008). Grounded theory as an appropriate methodology for leadership research in construction. In CIB International Conference on Building Education and Research, pp. 1816-1831. Sri Lanka. Retrieved from http://usir.salford.ac.uk/id/eprint/9822/ Tsai, Y. S.; Poquet, O.; Gašević, D.; Dawson, S. & Pardo, A. (2019). Complexity leadership in learning analytics: Drivers, challenges and opportunities. British Journal of Educational Technology, 50(6), 2839-2854. Doi: 10.1111/bjet.12846

The project manager's leadership style as a success factor on projects: A literature review. J R Turner, R Müller, Doi:10.1177/875697280503600206Project Management Journal. 362Turner, J. R. & Müller, R. (2005). The project manager's leadership style as a success factor on projects: A literature review. Project Management Journal, 36(2), 49-61. Doi: 10.1177/875697280503600206

Expected leadership qualities for a project manager to manage construction projects. R Udhayakumar, P Karthikeyan, Internacional Journal of Innovative Research and Development. 3Udhayakumar, R. & Karthikeyan, P. (2014). Expected leadership qualities for a project manager to manage construction projects. Internacional Journal of Innovative Research and Development, 3, 57-61.

. R Veal, Newton Square, USAProject Relationship Management. Project Management InstituteVeal, R. (2011). Project Relationship Management. Project Management Institute, Newton Square, USA.

Innovative design tools for sustainable refurbishment of large building complexes. N Villa, C F Bonacina, M Grecchi, G Iannaccone, L Malighetti, E Pizzi, M Ruta, Central Europe towards Sustainable Building Prague 2013 (CESB13) ProceedingsVilla, N.; Bonacina, C. F.; Grecchi, M.; Iannaccone, G.; Malighetti, L.; Pizzi, E. & Ruta, M. (2013). Innovative design tools for sustainable refurbishment of large building complexes. Central Europe towards Sustainable Building Prague 2013 (CESB13) Proceedings.

Investigation into factors that determine building construction time performance. D H T Walker, Procurement Strategies: A Relationship-based Approach. Hampson, K.urement Strategies: A Relationship-based ApproachMelbourne, Australia. Walker, D; Oxford, UKBlackwell ScienceRoyal Melbourne Institute of TechnologyPh.D. thesisWalker, D. H. T. (1994). Investigation into factors that determine building construction time performance (Ph.D. thesis). Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne, Australia. Walker, D.; Hampson, K. (2003). Procurement Strategies: A Relationship-based Approach. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science.

Project-based firms: new organizational form or variations on a theme. R Whitley, Doi:10.1093/icc/dtj003Industrial and Corporate Change. 15Whitley, R. (2006). Project-based firms: new organizational form or variations on a theme?. Industrial and Corporate Change, 15(1), 77-99. Doi: 10.1093/icc/dtj003

Effects of uncertainty factors and refurbishment projects performance in relation to leadership quality of project managers. R Yacob, I Rahmat, M Saruwono, Z Ismail, Journal of Building Performance. 81Yacob, R.; Rahmat, I.; Saruwono, M. & Ismail, Z. (2017). Effects of uncertainty factors and refurbishment projects performance in relation to leadership quality of project managers. Journal of Building Performance, 8(1), 69-79.

A Review of Leadership Qualities among Building Refurbishment Project Managers. R Yacob, M Saruwono, Z Ismail, International Journal of Engineering & Technology. 7(4.22Yacob, R.; Saruwono, M. & Ismail, Z. (2018). A Review of Leadership Qualities among Building Refurbishment Project Managers. International Journal of Engineering & Technology, 7(4.22), 126-131.

The association among project manager's leadership style, teamwork and project success. L R Yang, C F Huang, K S Wu, Doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2010.03.006International journal of Project Management. 293Yang, L. R.; Huang, C. F. & Wu, K. S. (2011). The association among project manager's leadership style, teamwork and project success. International journal of Project Management, 29(3), 258-267. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2010.03.006

Developing a performance index for relationship-based construction projects in Australia: Delphi study. J F Yeung, A P Chan, D W Chan, Doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0742-597X(2009)25:2(59Journal of Management in Engineering. 252Yeung, J. F.; Chan, A. P. & Chan, D. W. (2009). Developing a performance index for relationship-based construction projects in Australia: Delphi study. Journal of Management in Engineering, 25(2), 59-68. Doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0742-597X(2009)25:2(59)

Managing refurbishment works in the construction and shipping industries. B A Young, V B Torrance, C O Egbu, London, UKUniversity College London, Faculty of the Built EnvironmentYoung, B. A., Torrance, V. B., & Egbu, C. O. (1996). Managing refurbishment works in the construction and shipping industries. University College London, Faculty of the Built Environment, London, UK.

Multicriteria selection of project managers by applying grey criteria. Technological and Economic Development of Economy. E K Zavadskas, Z Turskis, J Tamošaitiené, V Marina, Doi:10.3846/1392-8619.2008.14.462-47714Zavadskas, E. K.; Turskis, Z.; Tamošaitiené, J. & Marina, V. (2008). Multicriteria selection of project managers by applying grey criteria. Technological and Economic Development of Economy, 14(4), 462-477. Doi: 10.3846/1392-8619.2008.14.462-477

Improving performance of construction projects: A project manager's emotional intelligence approach. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management. L Zhang, W Fan, Doi:10.1108/0969998131130304420Zhang, L. & Fan, W. (2013). Improving performance of construction projects: A project manager's emotional intelligence approach. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 20(2), 195-207. Doi: 10.1108/09699981311303044

Construction-project risk assessment by a new decision model based on De-Novo multi-approaches analysis and hesitant fuzzy sets under uncertainty. S Zolfaghari, S M Mousavi, Doi:10.1108/09699981311303044Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems. 351Zolfaghari, S. & Mousavi, S. M. (2018). Construction-project risk assessment by a new decision model based on De-Novo multi-approaches analysis and hesitant fuzzy sets under uncertainty. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, 35(1), 639-649.Doi: 10.1108/09699981311303044

Construction-project risk assessment by a new decision model based on De-Novo multi-approaches analysis and hesitant fuzzy sets under uncertainty. S Zolfaghari, S M Mousavi, Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems. 351Zolfaghari, S. & Mousavi, S. M. (2018). Construction-project risk assessment by a new decision model based on De-Novo multi-approaches analysis and hesitant fuzzy sets under uncertainty. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, 35(1), 639-649.