# High resolution tomography for galaxy spectroscopic surveys with Angular Redshift Fluctuations

CorpusID: 220845900
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44e0fa36dda62a1ef32f2a982cb1dee0e251a8f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44e0fa36dda62a1ef32f2a982cb1dee0e251a8f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

High resolution tomography for galaxy spectroscopic surveys with Angular Redshift Fluctuations
July 30, 2020 July 30, 2020

L Legrand louis.legrand@ias.u-psud.fr 
Université Paris-Saclay
CNRS
Institut d'astrophysique spatiale
91405OrsayFrance

C Hernández-Monteagudo 
Centro de Estudios de Física del Cosmos de Aragón (CEFCA)
Unidad Asociada al CSIC, Plaza San Juan, 1, planta 2, E-44001TeruelSpain

M Douspis 
Université Paris-Saclay
CNRS
Institut d'astrophysique spatiale
91405OrsayFrance

N Aghanim 
Université Paris-Saclay
CNRS
Institut d'astrophysique spatiale
91405OrsayFrance

Raúl E Angulo 
Donostia International Physics Centre (DIPC)
Paseo Manuel de Lardizabal 4, E20018Donostia-San SebastianSpain

IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science
E-48013BilbaoSpain

High resolution tomography for galaxy spectroscopic surveys with Angular Redshift Fluctuations
July 30, 2020 July 30, 2020Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. main c ESO 2020Cosmology: large-scale structure of Universe -observations -cosmological parameters -dark energy
In the context of next generation spectroscopic galaxy surveys, new observables of the distribution of matter are currently being developed. Among these we investigate the angular redshift fluctuations (ARF), which probe the information contained in the projected redshift distribution of galaxies. Relying on the Fisher formalism, we show how ARF will provide complementary cosmological information compared to traditional angular galaxy clustering. We test both the standard ΛCDM model and the wCDM extension. We find that the cosmological and galaxy bias parameters express different degeneracies when inferred from ARF or from angular galaxy clustering. As such, combining both observables breaks these degeneracies and greatly decreases the marginalised uncertainties, by a factor of at least two on most parameters for the ΛCDM and wCDM model. We find that the ARF combined with angular galaxy clustering are a great probe of dark energy by increasing the figure of merit of the w 0 -w a parameter set by a factor of more than 10 compared to angular galaxy clustering alone. Finally we compare ARF to the CMB lensing constraints on the galaxy bias parameters. We show that a joint analysis of ARF and angular galaxy clustering improves constraints by ∼ 40% on galaxy bias compared to a joint analysis of angular galaxy clustering and CMB lensing.

## Introduction

In the coming years, large scale optical and infra-red (IR) surveys will map with unprecedented accuracy our Universe from the present epoch up to when it was roughly one tenth of its current age. A significant part of these surveys will be spectroscopic, e.g., DESI (DESI Collaboration et al. 2016), 4MOST (de Jong & 4MOST Consortium 2015), WEAVE (Bonifacio et al. 2016), or NISP aboard Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011) and will provide us with spectra for large samples of sources. Such spectra will not only enable deep insight on the physics of those objects, but will also yield accurate estimates of their redshift and thus of their distance to the observer. From the cosmological point of view, this will enable a precise (statistical) characterization of the (apparent) spatial distribution of those luminous tracers (via two-or three-point statistics), and this itself should shed precious light on open topics such as, e.g., the nature of dark energy, the possible interplay of dark energy and dark matter, the mass hierarchy of neutrinos, or possible deviations of gravity from General Relativity, to quote a few.

At the same time, a different family of surveys will scan the sky at greater depths with of optical filters, and with exquisite image quality. These photometric experiments build high quality, very large catalogues of sources, with however relatively rough redshift estimations given their moderate number of filters/colours. While mining the faint Universe, this type of surveys will be particularly sensitive, from a cosmological perspective, to the angular clustering of luminous matter, the cosmolog-ical aspects of gravitational lensing throughout cosmic epochs, the satellite population in halos, and the formation and evolution of the population of galaxy clusters. In this context, the Dark Energy Survey (DES, Abbott et al. 2018) is currently providing state-of-the-art cosmological constraints in the late universe, and these should be further complemented by the Vera Rubin Observatory (LSST, Ivezić et al. 2019), which, at the same time, will also explore the variability of the night sky in a regime of depth and time domain that so far remains practically unexplored.

An intermediate third class of experiments also exists. These are the spectro-photometric surveys that conduct standard photometry in a relatively large set (from ∼ 10 up to ∼ 60) of narrow-band optical filters. This strategy combines the indiscriminate character of the photometric surveys with high precision redshift estimates (∆z/(1 + z) ∼ 10 −3 -10 −2 ) for a large fraction (> 20-30 %) of the detected sources. Given its multi-color character, these surveys are able to provide pseudo-spectrum / photo-spectrum in each pixel of the surveyed area. The pioneer example of COMBO-17 has been or is being followed by other efforts such as COSMOS (Scoville et al. 2007), ALHAMBRA (Moles et al. 2008), SHARDS (Pérez-González et al. 2013), PAU (Martí et al. 2014), J-PAS (Benitez et al. 2014), SPHEREx (Doré et al. 2014), and J-PLUS (Cenarro et al. 2019).

In this work, we forecast the power of cosmological analyses in spectroscopic and spectro-photometric surveys. In this type of surveys, it is customary to convert redshift estimates into radial distances under the assumption of a given fiducial cosmological model. Angular and redshift coordinates are thus converted Article number, page 1 of 14 arXiv:2007.14412v1 [astro-ph.CO] 28 Jul 2020 A&A proofs: manuscript no. main into the three-dimensional space, where standard 3D clustering analysis techniques are applied.

In our case however, we choose to follow a different strategy. We focus on a new cosmological observable, namely the angular redshift fluctuations (ARF, Hernández-Monteagudo et al. 2019, hereafter HMCMA). Being a 2D observable, the ARF field can easily be cross-correlated with other 2D observables, such as the 2D galaxy density filed and the CMB lensing fiels. ARF present other interesting features, such as being correlated to the cosmic, radial, peculiar velocity fields (HMCMA, Chaves-Montero et al. 2019), or being particularly insensitive to additive systematics that remain constant under the redshift shell subject to analysis.

In this paper we apply the Fisher formalism on the angular galaxy clustering, the ARF and the CMB lensing convergence observables, and explore their sensitivity to cosmology in two different observational set ups, mimicking those expected for the DESI and Euclid surveys. We consider the CMB lensing convergence field among our observables, since it constitutes an intrinsically different probe whose dependence on the parameters defining the galaxy sample is different from that of angular galaxy clustering and ARF. Our scope is to assess if the ARF field can provide complementary information on the galaxy density field and on the CMB lensing field.

The paper is organized as follows. We introduce the spectroscopic galaxy surveys and CMB experiments that we use in our analysis in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we present the angular galaxy clustering, the ARF, and the CMB lensing convergence field. In Sect. 4, we compute the foreseen signal to noise ratios of these combination of probes, while also introducing the covariance among those observables. In Sect. 5, we present the predicted constraints on cosmological parameters in the fiducial ΛCDM scenario. Finally we discuss our findings in Sect. 6 and conclude in Sect. 7.

Throughout this paper, we use the Planck 2018 cosmology as our fiducial cosmology. We take the values given in Table  2, in the column 6 (best-fit with BAO), of Planck Collaboration et al. (2018a). We use the following naming conventions: observable refers to a spherical 2D field built on measured quantities, such as counts, redshifts, or deflection angles, while probe refers to the combination of one or two observables into a summary statistics. In practice, our probes will be the two-point angular power spectra C . The redshift due to the Hubble expansion is denoted by z, while z obs is the measured redshift (which includes redshift distortions induced by radial peculiar velocities);Ω m,0 is the density of matter at z = 0 in units of the critical density and H 0 is the Hubble constant; r(z) = dz c / H(z) is the line of sight comoving distance, and dV Ω = dV/dΩ = r 2 dr = r 2 (z) c/H(z) dz is the comoving volume element per solid angle, with dΩ a differential solid angle element. Vectors are in bold font and a hat denotes a unit vector.


## Surveys

Among the wealth of current and upcoming experiments, we choose two representative cases for spectroscopic large scale structures (LSS) surveys, namely the DESI and the Euclid experiments. We detail their specifications in Table 1.

On the CMB side, we consider first a Planck-like experiment, currently the state-of-the-art data base in terms of multifrequency, full sky CMB data (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018a). In order to observe the future sensitivity reachable on the smallest angular scales via ground CMB experiments, we also consider the Simons Observatory (The Simons Observatory Collab-oration et al. 2019) and the CMB-Stage 4 (Abazajian et al. 2019). Both shall cover thousands of square degrees of the southern sky (> 40% of the sky) with extremely high sensitivity (≤ 2 µK arcmin) and fine angular resolution (at the arcmin level)


### The DESI experiment

DESI is a ground-based survey that will cover 14, 000 deg 2 on the sky and will measure the redshift of about 30 million galaxies using optical fibers spectroscopy (DESI Collaboration et al. 2016). It will target four different classes of galaxies. In this paper, we compute forecasts for the emission line galaxies (ELG) sample which is the largest sample of the survey. It ranges from z = 0.6 up to z = 1.6. The expected galaxy distributionn g (z) (see Fig. 1a) and the galaxy bias b(z) are calibrated based on the DEEP2 survey (Newman et al. 2013). The (linear) bias of the spatial distribution of this galaxy population with respect to dark matter is a redshift dependent quantity approximated by
b g (z) = 0.84/D(z) ,(1)
with D(z) denoting the growth factor of linear matter density perturbations.

The DESI experiment successfuly achieved the comissioning phase in the first halo of 2020 and should start observing the sky in the second half of 2020 for a five year period. The DESI collaboration plans to release annual datasets.


### The Euclid spectroscopic survey

The Euclid satellite will observe about 15 000 deg 2 of the extragalactic sky (Laureijs et al. 2011). The NISP instruments will provide slitless spectroscopy, allowing for precise redshift determinations for about 1950 gal deg −2 . The spectroscopic survey will target H α emission-line galaxies in the redshift range 0.9 < z < 1.8. We assume the model 3 from Pozzetti et al. (2016) for the expected number density of galaxiesn g (z) (see Fig. 1b). For the expected galaxy linear bias, we fit a linearly redshift dependent bias on the values of the Table 3  (2)

The Euclid satellite will be launched in 2022 and will be operated for six years. The data will be released in three batches: 2, 4 and 7 years after the launch.


### Tomography

As already mentioned above, our forecasts are based on a tomographic approach where the entire redshift range covered by a galaxy survey is sliced into different redshift bins. Centred at each of these redshift bins, we consider Gaussian redshift shells of a given width σ z centered on redshifts z i .
W i (z) = exp − (z − z i ) 2 2σ 2 z .(3)
Provided that a Gaussian shell will be diluting information on radial scales shorter than the Gaussian width, our choice for σ z is a compromise between maximizing the amount of radial scales under study, and minimizing the impact of non-linear, radial scales in the analysis (Asorey et al. 2012;Di Dio et al. 2014).

In HMCMA, we found that, at z 1, down to σ z = 0.01 the impact of radial non-linearities was either negligible or easily  tractable with a Gaussian kernel describing thermal, stochastic, radial motions. We thus adopt σ z = 0.01 for our forecasts. As shown in Asorey et al. (2012), the angular galaxy clustering analysis can recover the same amount of information as the 3D analysis when the bin size is comparable to the maximum scale probed by the 3D analysis. This gives σ z c/H(z) 2π/k max , so in our case, for z = 1 and k max = 0.2 h Mpc −1 (see Sect. 3), we get σ z 0.01, corresponding to our choice of bin size.

For the two galaxy survey under consideration we take the same number of 20 redshift bins, and since the overlap between consecutive bins is not zero, we account for all cross-correlations between shells in the covariance matrix. In this way, redundant information between different shells is fully accounted for. The redshift bins sample the range from z = 0.65 to z = 1.65 for DESI, and from z = 0.9 to z = 1.8 for Euclid. These redshift bins are displayed in Figs. 1a and 1b, together with the expected number density of tracers for each survey.


### The Planck experiment

The Planck satellite was launched in 2009 and scanned the full sky until 2013 in CMB frequencies. The satellite hosted two instruments, the HFI operating in six frequency bands between 100 GHz and 857 GHz, and the LFI instrument operating in three band between 30 GHz and 77 GHz. The CMB maps were produced by combining these frequencies to remove the contribution from the galaxy and other foregrounds sources. The final maps have noise of 27 µK arcmin, and an the effective beam with full width at half maximum of 7 arcmin. The final data release of Planck was published in Planck Collaboration et al. (2018a).

The CMB lensing field has been estimated with a minimum variance quadratic estimator, combining temperature and polarization data. It is to date the most precise map of the integral of the density of matter on the full extra galactic sky, covering ∼ 70 % of the sky, which allowed to get an estimate of the lensing-potential power spectrum over lensing multipoles 8 ≤ L ≤ 400 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018b).


### The Simons Observatory

The Simons Observatory consists of four different telescopes placed in the Atacama Desert in Chile, with the goal of providing an exquisite mapping of the CMB intensity and polarization anisotropies from a few degrees down to arcminutes scales. Three of the telescopes have 0.5 m of aperture, and with an angular resolution close to half a degree, will map 10 % of the sky targeting the moderate to large angular scales. Their primary goal is to measure large-scale polarisation from the background of primordial gravitational waves.

Alongside these small telescopes, one 6 m diameter telescope will observe at 27, 39, 93, 145, 225, and 280 GHz, with an angular resolution close to the arcminute, appropriate to obtain a high resolution map of the lensing potential of the CMB. It is Article number, page 3 of 14 A&A proofs: manuscript no. main expected to reach a sensitivity level of 6 µK arcmin on 40 % of the sky.


### CMB Stage 4

The CMB Stage 4 (CMB-S4) experiment will be the successor of the Simons Observatory, which will combine resources with the successor of the South Pole telescope and the BICEP/Keck collaborations. Its main scope is to measure the imprint of primordial gravitational waves on the CMB polarization anisotropy, but it will also perform a wide survey with a high resolution which will allow to probe the secondary anisotropies with unprecedented accuracy. Its deep and wide survey will cover ∼ 60% of the extra-galactic sky and will be conducted over seven years using two 6 m telescopes located in Chile, each equipped with 121, 760 detectors distributed over eight frequency bands from 30 GHz to 270 GHz. These observations will provide CMB temperature and polarization maps with a resolution of ≤ 1.5 arcmin and with a noise level of 1 µK arcmin. This very-high sensitivity at small scales both in temperature and polarization, on a large fraction of the sky, will allow to get an accurate estimation of the CMB lensing potential.


## Observables

In this paper, we consider three different observables, namely the angular galaxy clustering, the corresponding ARF, and the CMB lensing convergence field. In order to compute the forecasts, we shall restrict to the linear scales, where the cosmological linear theory of perturbations apply. In practice, we ignored all scales above k max = 0.2 h Mpc −1 at all redshifts. This is a conservative approach, as one could consider a scale cutoff which evolves with redshift as in Di Dio et al. (2014). We shall also assume that our observables are Gaussian distributed, and that the information content is completely captured by the two-point momenta, in particular the angular power spectrum, either auto or cross, depending on whether we combine different observables or not.

In what follows, we describe our model of the observables, so that expressions for their angular power spectrum can be derived thereafter.


### Galaxy Angular Density Fluctuations

The 3D field of the number density of galaxies is noted as n g (z,n), wheren denotes a direction on the sky. The average number density of galaxies at a redshift z is defined byn g (z) = n g (z,n) n . The 3D field of galaxy density contrast is then given by
δ 3D g (z,n) = n g (z,n) −n g (z) n g (z) .(4)
We assume that the galaxy density contrast traces the dark matter density contrast δ 3D m via a scale-independent bias: δ 3D g (z,n) = b g (z) δ 3D m (z,n). This bias depends on the properties of the galaxies used as a tracer for each survey, and are given in Eqs. 1 and 2.

In our analysis, we model the observed redshift of galaxies z obs as a 3D field. It is defined as the sum of the redshift induced by the Hubble flow, and the redshift due to the peculiar velocity of galaxies:
z obs (z,n) = z + (1 + z) v(z,n) ·n c ,(5)
where v is the peculiar velocity field of galaxies. We neglect other sources of redshift distortions which are significantly smaller than those considered here (HMCMA). The angular galaxy clustering field is then modelled by an integral along the line of sight in which, at every redshift z, only galaxies within the selection function W(z obs ; z i ) are included:
δ i g (n) = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) b g (z) δ 3D m (z,n) W i [z obs (z,n)] ,(6)
where
N i g = ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) W i (z)
is the average number of galaxies per solid angle, under the i-th selection function W i centred on redshift z i , and in practice can be computed from an angular average over the survey's footprint.

We next expand the selection function, retaining only linear terms in density and velocity fluctuations, finding:
δ i g (n) 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) W i (z) × b g (z) δ 3D m (z,n) + (1 + z) d ln W i dz v(z,n) ·n c ,(7)
with the derivative d ln
W i /dz = −(z − z i )/σ 2 z .

### Angular redshift fluctuations

The ARF field represents the spatial variations of the average redshift of galaxies on the sky. The average redshift of galaxies is given bȳ
z = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ω z obs (z,n) n g (z,n) W i [z obs (z,n)] n = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ω zn g (z) W i (z) .(8)
We thus define the ARF field as follows,
δ i z (n) = 1 N i g ∞ z=0
dV Ω (z obs (z,n) −z)n g (z)
× 1 + b g (z) δ 3D m (z,n) W i [z obs (z,n )] ,(9)
where we again refer to a redshift bin centred upon z i . Expanding the Gaussian selection function at first order and retaining only linear terms in density and velocity, we find:
δ i z (n) 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) W i (z) (z −z) b g (z) δ 3D m (z,n) + (1 + z) v(z,n) ·n c 1 + (z −z) d ln W i dz .(10)
Note that given the small widths adopted (σ z = 0.01), it is safe to assume that the bias b(z) remains constant within the redshift bin.


### CMB lensing

The image of the primary CMB, emitted at the moment of recombination at z 1100, is distorted by the gravitational lensing arising as a consequence of the (slightly inhomogeneous) mass distribution between us and the surface of last scattering.

This modify the initial anisotropy pattern and creates statistical anisotropy (see Lewis & Challinor 2006, for a review). Assuming that the primordial CMB is Gaussian and statistically isotropic, we can reconstruct the lensing potential φ with the so called quadratic estimator (Hu & Okamoto 2002;Okamoto & Hu 2003). The lensing potential is linked to the convergence field κ CMB by
κ CMB = − 1 2 ∆φ .(11)
This convergence field is directly proportional to the surface mass density along the line of sight. The CMB lensing is as such an unbiased estimation of the distribution of mass. However it is an integrated estimation, whereas galaxy surveys can enable tomographic analyses thanks to redshift measurements. The CMB lensing has been characterized by the Planck CMB survey (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018b), and by the ACTPol (Sherwin et al. 2017), SPT-SZ (Omori et al. 2017) and SPTpol (Wu et al. 2019) collaborations. Next generation CMB surveys such as Simons Observatory or CMB-S4 will increase the signal to noise ratios at all by almost one and two orders of magnitude respectively. These new experiments will make the CMB lensing as a sensitive probe of the dark matter distribution, and via cross-correlation studies it will be crucial to constrain the growth rate of structure, the neutrino masses, or the level of primordial non-Gaussianities during the inflationary epoch.


### Angular power spectra

Our statistical tool to test cosmological models are the angular two-point power spectra C performed over the three fields defined in Sects. 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. Assuming that the galaxy bias and the growth factors are scale independent, one can show that our (cross and auto) angular power spectra can be expressed as the convolution of two kernels ∆ A (k) and ∆ B (k), corresponding for the fields A and B (see, e.g. Huterer et al. 2001):
C A,B = 2 π dk k 2 P(k) ∆ A (k) ∆ B (k),(12)
where P(k) is the linear 3D matter power spectrum at z = 0, function of the wave number k.

To obtain the theoretical prediction of our angular power spectra, we start from the 2D fields defined in Eqs. 7 and 10. The velocity field is related to the matter density contrast field via the linearized continuity equation ∂ δ 3D m /∂t + ∇v/a = 0, with a(z) the cosmological scale factor, a = 1/(1 + z). We introduce the linear growth rate
f = d ln D d ln a = −(1 + z) 1 D(z) dD dz .(13)
We assume f (z) = Ω m (z) γ , with γ = 0.55 (Lahav et al. 1991;Linder 2005). The growth factor D(z) is computed by integrating the growth rate f (z). One can show that the angular galaxy clustering kernel is the sum of two terms, one arising from the density of galaxies and the other from the peculiar line of sight velocities, ∆ g = ∆ g | δ + ∆ g | v (see e.g. Padmanabhan et al. 2007): 
∆ g,i | δ (k) = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) W i (z) b g (z) D(z) j (k r(z)) ,(14)∆ g,i | v (k) = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) H(z) f (z) D(z) dW i dz j (k r(z)) k ,(15)(C v, v + 2C δ, v )/C

## Fig. 2:

Top panel: Power spectra of for angular galaxy clustering (δ g , in blue) and ARF (δ z , in red), for a Gaussian redshift bin taken in a DESI-like survey. The bin is centered on z i = 0.75 and has a standard deviation of σ z = 0.01. The dashed line show the term coming from the density kernel C δ ,δ ; the dotted line show the part coming from the velocity kernel C v ,v and the dot-dashed line show the cross term C δ ,v . The total C power spectra (plain lines) correspond to the sum C = C δ ,δ + 2 C δ ,v + C v ,v . Bottom panel: Ratio of the velocity dependence in the power spectrum (C v ,v +2 C δ ,v ) over the complete power spectrum, for the angular galaxy clustering (blue line) and for the ARF (red line). This figure shows that ARF are more sensitive to the peculiar velocity of galaxies than angular galaxy clustering, for the same redshift shell.

where j (x) is the spherical Bessel function of order and j (x) is its derivative j (x) ≡ d j /dx.

One can thus write the power spectrum as the sum of the contributions from the density and from the velocity kernels
C = C δ ,δ + 2 C δ ,v + C v ,v .
The ARF kernel can also be separated into two kernels:
∆ z, i | δ (k) = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) W i (z) b g (z) D(z) (z −z) j (k r(z)) ,(16)∆ z, i | v (k) = 1 N i g ∞ z=0 dV Ωng (z) H(z) f (z) D(z) W i (z) × 1 + (z −z) d ln W i dz j (k r(z)) k .(17)
The kernel function of the CMB lensing convergence field is given by:
∆ κ (k) = 3Ω m,0 2 H 0 c 2 r * r=0 dr r a(r) r * − r r * D(z(r)) j (k r),(18)
where r * the comoving distance from the observer to the last scattering surface, and a is the cosmological scale factor. The top panel of Fig. 2 shows the angular power spectra of the angular galaxy clustering and ARF, for a Gaussian selection function of width σ z = 0.01 centered on z i = 0.75 in a DESIlike survey. We show in the same figure the terms arising from the density fluctuation kernel and the peculiar velocity kernel (c.f. Eqs. 14 to 17). We can see that the peculiar velocity term is relatively more important (compared to the total power spectrum) in the ARF power spectrum than in the angular galaxy clustering power spectrum. To better illustrate this fact, we show in the bottom panel Fig. 2 the ratio of the velocity part of the power spectrum (which is the sum C v ,v + 2 C δ ,v ) over the total power spectrum for both angular galaxy clustering and ARF. For both fields, the peculiar velocity contribution dominates at low , while it vanishes to zero for > 300. At = 10, the velocitydependent part in the power spectrum represents around 67 % of the total contribution for C z, z , while it represents only 58 % of C g, g . The difference between the two is even more visible at = 60, where the velocity contribution represents 55 % of C z, z and only 35 % of C g, g .

This difference is caused by the intrinsic different nature of the angular galaxy clustering and ARF transfer functions: angular galaxy clustering is sensitive to the average of density and velocity under the Gaussian shell, whereas ARF is sensitive to radial derivatives of those fields. For narrow shells, this makes both fields practically uncorrelated (HMCMA), and given the ratio comparison showed in Fig. 2, one would expect ARF to be more sensitive than angular galaxy clustering to cosmological parameters impacting peculiar velocities.


## Signal to noise forecasts

We forecast the expected signal to noise ratio (SNR) for different combinations of observables. Our data vector D( ) contains the auto-and cross-power spectra between the different observables and between the redshift bins. In order to compare several combinations of probes, we define the following data vectors:
D g ( ) = C g i , g j l ,(19)D z ( ) = C z i , z j l , D g, z ( ) = C g i , g j l , C g i , z j l , C z i , z j l , D g, κ CMB ( ) = C g i , g j l , C g i , κ CMB l , C κ CMB , κ CMB l , D g, z, κ CMB ( ) = C g i , g j l , C g i , z j l , C g i , κ CMB l , C z i , z j l , C z i , κ CMB l , C κ CMB , κ CMB l ,(20)
where i and j are indexes running over the redshift bins. We perform a tomographic analysis with 20 redshift bins, thus the data vectors containing only the auto-spectra of angular galaxy clustering and ARF ( D g and D z ) contain 210 C each. The data vector containing the cross-correlation D g, z has 820 C and the longest data vector D g, z, κ CMB contains 861 C . In Fig. 3, we display the correlation matrix for the D g, z, κ CMB ( = 10) data vector. We clearly see that, in the same redshift bin, angular galaxy clustering and ARF are practically un-correlated (diagonal terms of the top left and lower right blocks close to zero), but that there is some degree of anticorrelation in neighbouring redshift bins. We can also observe that the CMB lensing field is almost uncorrelated with the ARF.

We assume that there is no correlation between different multipoles and that the covariance between the probes is totally captured by a Gaussian covariance. This assumption is exact on large (linear) scales and if the survey covers the full sky. On real pixel corresponds to C A,B / C A,A C B,B . All the data vectors considered in Eqs. 19 to 20 are a subset of this matrix. We see that there is no correlation between δ g and δ z inside the same redshift bin (diagonals of the upper left and lower right blocks), and that there are opposite and positive correlation for neighboring bins. 
SNR(D g )=554 SNR(D z )=545 SNR(D g, z )=778 SNR(D g, z, κCMB )=786
Fig. 4: Signal to noise ratios of angular galaxy clustering (D g ) in blue, ARF (D z ) in orange and the combinations D g, z in green and D g, z, κ CMB in red. We use 20 tomographic Gaussian bins of width σ z = 0.01 in a Euclid-like survey, in combination with a CMB-S4 survey. The total signal to noise ratios for the range of multipoles = 10 to = 300 are shown in the text box on the bottom right.

data, the footprint of the survey and the presence of masked area will create correlations between multipoles. See e.g. Krause & Eifler (2017) or Lacasa (2018) for the inclusion the higher-order (non-Gaussian) terms in the covariance matrix. In this work we neglect these effects.

The SNR of our data vectors as a function of , taking into account all redshift bins and the correlations between them, are given by
SNR ( D( )) = D( ) t Cov −1 D( ) ,(21)
and the total SNR are
SNR ( D) = max = min [SNR (D( ))] 2 .(22)
Assuming that there is no correlation between different multipoles, we define our Gaussian covariance matrix between our data vectors as in Hu & Jain (2004) Cov
C A,B , C C,D = 1 (2 + 1) ∆ f sky × C A,C + δ K A,C N A C B,D + δ K B,D N B + C A,D + δ K A,D N A C B,C + δ K B,C N B ,(23)
with A, B, C, D are the observables g i , z j , κ CMB , ∆ is the width of the multipole bin, δ K x,y is the Kronecker delta, N are the probe specific noise power spectra and f sky is the sky fraction of the survey considered.

For the sake of simplicity, when combining galaxy surveys with CMB lensing, we always assume a full overlap of the two. As such, the sky fraction f sky is always taken to be the one of either DESI or Euclid. Even if not accurate, this provides a rough estimate of the available constraining power that the combination of galaxy surveys with CMB lensing will be able to achieve.

We assume that the noise of the angular galaxy clustering and that of the ARF are the shot noise arising from the discrete nature of galaxy surveys. We model it by replacing the power spectrum of dark matter by a Poissonian term, P shot (k, z) = 1/n g (z), into Eq. 12. From this, we can derive the following expressions for the shot noise
N g i , g j = δ K i, j N i gal ,(24)N z i , z j = δ K i, j N i gal 2 dV Ωng (z) W(z i , z) (z −z i ) 2 ,(25)N g i , z j = δ i j N i gal 2 dV Ωng (z) W(z i , z) (z −z i ) = 0 .(26)
We can see here that the shot noise cancels out when computing the cross correlation between the angular galaxy density and the ARF fields. The noise of the CMB lensing field reconstructed from Planck is taken from Planck Collaboration et al. (2018b). For the forecasted Simons Observatory CMB lensing noise, we take the publicly available noise curves provided by The Simons Observatory Collaboration et al. (2019) 1 . In practice, we use the noise curves obtained with the internal linear combination (ILC) component separation method, assuming the baseline analysis for a sky fraction of f sky = 0.4. For CMB-S4, the lensing noise curve is taken as the minimum variance N0 bias, which is computed using the code quicklens 2 . We assume that CMB-S4 will have a beam size (full width at half maximum) of 1 arcmin, a temperature noise of ∆T = 1 µK arcmin and a polarization noise of ∆P = √ 2 µK arcmin (Abazajian et al. 2019). For both Simons Observatory and CMB-S4, = 40 is the minimum multipole which will be accessible. We assume that these measurements will be combined with the Planck lensing signal for lower multipoles. As a result, we use the lensing noise of Planck for mutipoles below = 40 when forecasting constraints with the Simons Observatory and CMB-S4.

We use the linear matter power spectrum P(k) computed with the CLASS software (Blas et al. 2011). In order to focus on the linear regime we restrict our analysis to a maximum multipole of max = 300. Assuming the Limber approximation k = ( +1/2)/χ(z), this max corresponds to k = 0.18 h Mpc −1 at a redshift of z = 0.65. Given that we will sample higher redshifts, we will probe larger scales (k lower than 0.18 h Mpc −1 ). We hence expect little impact from non-linear physics in our observables (these are expected to become relevant on k < 0.2 h Mpc −1 at z = 0, and yet shorter at higher redshifts). Again this is a conservative approach as one could consider a multipole cuttoff evolving with redshift as in Di Dio et al. (2014). We stress that, in our computations, we do not use the Limber approximation but the full computation of spherical Bessel functions.

Our minimum multipole is chosen to be min = 10. To reduce numerical noise and to speed up Fisher matrix computations, we perform a linear binning of the multipoles. In each multipole bin [ i , i+1 [, the binned C is the average of the C 's that fall in the bin, and the binned multipole is taken has = ( i + i+1 )/2. We choose a bin size of ∆ = 3, which is applied on the full range. We check that this binning does not impact the constraints from the Fisher matrix by comparing with the case where we do not perform any binning of the multipoles.

We show in Fig. 4 the SNR for a Euclid-like survey combined with a CMB-S4 survey, for four combination of probes: D g , D z , D g, z and D g, z, κ CMB following the redshift binning shown in Fig. 1b. The total signal to noise for this four data vectors is respectively 544, 545, 778 and 786. This shows that the tomographic analysis of angular galaxy clustering and ARF have a similarly high SNR. Moreover, the combined analysis D g, z brings more information than measuring the angular galaxy clustering alone D g , as the SNR is increased by 40%.


## Fisher forecasts

We use the Fisher formalism to compute a priori how well our data vectors defined in Sect. 4 will constrain cosmological parameters in the context of future surveys. As we assumed that there is no correlation between different multipoles, the Fisher matrix can be summed over the multipoles and is given by
F i, j = max min ∂D( ) ∂λ i Cov −1 ∂D( ) ∂λ j ,(27)
with D one of the data vectors defined in Eqs. 19 to 20, {λ i } i is the set of free parameters of our model, and Cov the covariance matrix given in Eq. 23. The derivatives ∂D( )/∂λ i are computed as the two-point variation with a 1% step around the fiducial value. We have checked that our derivatives are numerically stable when changing the step size.  We see that for most parameters (except σ 8 ) confidence intervals shrink by ∼ 50% when using D z instead of D g . When using the combination D g, z , 1σ intervals are shrinked by at least 60% for all parameters.

We compute forecasts for two cosmological models. The first one assumes the standard ΛCDM model, and the parameters we vary are Ω m , Ω baryon , σ 8 , n s , h, . The fiducial values of these parameters are given by Planck Collaboration et al. (2018a). The second model assumes an evolving dark energy equation of state, with the so-called CPL parametrization (Chevallier & Polarski 2001;Linder 2003): w(z) = w 0 + w a z/(1 + z). Our second set of free parameters is then Ω m , Ω baryon , σ 8 , n s , h, w 0 , w a . In both cases, we assume a flat universe (Ω k = 0) with massless neutrinos ( m ν = 0). We show in Tab. 2 the fiducial values of the free parameters.

We also consider a bias parameter assumed constant within each redshift bin, thus adding one free parameter for each redshift shell, over which we marginalise in the Fisher analysis. The fiducial values of the galaxy bias depend on the survey considered and are given in Eqs. 1 and 2. We take the value at z i , the center of the Gaussian shell for each bin.


### Results for the ΛCDM model

The results for the ΛCDM model are summarized in Fig. 5, where we show the ratio of the 1σ marginalised uncertainties when including ARF compared to using only angular galaxy clustering, for a DESI-like and a Euclid-like surveys. Fig. 6 Fig. 6 for a Euclid-like survey. Fig. 7 show the 1σ uncertainty ellipses for the ΛCDM parameters and three out of the 20 galaxy bias parameters for a DESIlike survey and a Euclid-like survey respectively. Error ellipses for D g , D z , and D g, z are given by blue, orange, and green curves, respectively, while marginalised 1σ uncertainties for each pa-rameter are quoted, for these three sets of observables, above the panels containing the one dimensional probability density distributions (PDFs).

For both types of LSS surveys, we can see in Fig. 5 that ARF ( D z ) are significantly more sensitive than angular galaxy clustering ( D g ), reducing by a factor two the marginalised uncertainties of all cosmological parameters but σ 8 , to which both observables are similarly sensitive. For the combined analysis D g, z , marginalised uncertainties are reduced by more than 60 % for all parameters (including σ 8 ), compared to the angular galaxy clustering probe alone D g . We find that using ARF in combination with angular galaxy clustering provides almost the same improvement on the constraints on cosmological parameter for both surveys, although the improvement is on average slightly better for our Euclid-like survey.

We see in Figs. 6 and 7 that while the degeneracy direction between different cosmological parameter pairs seems very similar for both angular galaxy clustering and ARF, this is again different for σ 8 . For D z this parameter seems rather independent from other cosmological parameters, while its degeneracy with bias parameters is slightly tilted with respect to that of D g . As a consequence the joint D g, z ellipses show little degeneracy with other parameters, including bias. We also find that the marginalised constraints from both experiments are very close, although the Euclid-like experiment provides slightly more sensitive forecasts.


## Fig.A.1 in Appendix shows the correlation matrix between our free parameters (including galaxy bias parameters) and illustrates the opposite degeneracies that both σ8 and bias parameters have with the other parameters when comparing ARF and angular galaxy clustering.

Even for those parameters for which both angular galaxy clustering and ARF show a similar direction of degeneracy, the combination of the two observables yields significantly reduced error ellipses. This is mostly due to the lack of correlation between the ARF and angular galaxy clustering for narrow widths used in this work (σ z ≤ 0.01), as noted in HMCMA and shown here in Fig. 3.


### Extension to CPL Dark Energy parametrization

We repeat the analysis detailed above including two new parameters describing the equation of state of dark energy following the CPL parametrization: w 0 and w a . We show in Fig. 8 the improvement on the marginalised uncertainties of the ARF with respect to angular galaxy clustering alone. We see that D z improves the constraints by 20 % to 50 % on this set of free wCDM parameters, for both surveys. The combined analysis D g, z reduces the uncertainties by at least 50 % and up to 80 % for Ω m , σ 8 , w 0 and w a .

The error ellipses are given in Appendix in Fig. B.1 for the DESI-like and Euclid-like experiments, displaying a pattern similar to what was found for ΛCDM, together with the correlation matrices (Fig. B.2) In our idealized case, the combination of ARF with angular galaxy clustering greatly improves the sensitivity of these surveys to dark energy. As shown in Fig. 9, the figure of merit of w 0 -w rma increases by more than a factor of 10 when ARF are combined to angular galaxy clustering. It increases from 17 to 189 for our DESI-like survey and from 19 to 345 for our Euclidlike survey. 68% confidence relative to reference Fig. 8: Ratios of the 1σ marginalised uncertainties relative to the 1σ marginalised uncertainty for D g . We assume wCDM model and marginalise on 20 galaxy bias parameters (one for each redshift bin). Orange lines show the ratio for D z and green lines show the ratio for D g, z . Solid lines are for a DESI-like survey while dashed lines are for a Euclid-like survey. We see that D z improves constraints by up to 50 % compared to D g and the combined analysis D g, z improves constraints by up to 80 %.
D g , DESI D g , Euclid D z , DESI D z , Euclid D g, z , DESI D g, z , Euclid

### Combining with CMB lensing

We show in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 the improvements on the constraints of the ΛCDM and wCDM parameters for a Euclid-like survey, when combined with CMB lensing from Planck, Simons Observatory and CMB-S4, marginalised over the galaxy bias parameters. We see that including CMB lensing from Planck improves the constraints by maximum of 10 % in both cosmologies. The improvement is more significant when combining with Simons Observatory or CMB-S4. For the Simons Observatory and CMB-S4, in the ΛCDM model, marginalised uncertainties on Ω m and σ 8 are decreased by up to 30 %. Other parameters are improved by 5 % to 10 % . For the wCDM model, the improvement is of ∼ 15 % for most parameters, with the most significant for Ω m and w a , with uncertainties decreased by up to 30 %. We see that the combination with CMB lensing help decreasing uncertainties on the wCDM cosmology. Since the CMB lensing is an unbiased probe of the distribution of matter, one of the main interests of combining it with galaxy surveys is to produce tight constraints on the galaxy bias parameter. We show in Fig. 12 the 1σ marginalised uncertainties on the galaxy bias parameters for each of the 20 redshift bins in a Euclid-like survey combined with CMB-S4 lensing, for the ΛCDM model. We compare the constraints obtained for angular galaxy clustering alone (D g ), with the ones obtained when combined with CMB lensing (D g, κ CMB ), with ARF (D g, z ), and the full combination (D g, z, κ CMB ).

We see that the combination of angular galaxy clustering with ARF provides better constraints on the galaxy bias than the combination with CMB lensing. For instance, at a redshift of 1.06, the marginalised uncertainties for the galaxy bias parameter b 3 is of 0.025 for the angular galaxy clustering, it decreases to 0.020 when combined with CMB lensing, and down to 0.013 when combined with ARF. The combination of the three results in marginalised uncertainties of 0.08. We can see that the CMB lensing improves constraints by ∼ 20 % only, while ARF im-  proves constraints by ∼ 50 % (a factor 2 improvement). We argue that this is due to the importance of the velocity term in the ARF kernel (see Fig 2), which does not depend on galaxy bias as it is sensitive to the full matter distribution.  Fig. 12: Marginalised 1σ confidence values for the galaxy bias parameters, with a Euclid-like survey alone (plain lines) or in combination with CMB-S4 lensing survey (dashed lines). We marginalised on the 5 free parameters of the ΛCDM model. We show constraints with angular galaxy clustering (blue and brown lines) and in combination with ARF (green and red lines). The mean redshift of each shell is shown at the top. We see that the ARF combined with angular galaxy clustering D g, z provides better constraints on galaxy bias than the combination of angular galaxy clustering with CMB lensing D g, κ CMB .
Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 w 0 w a 0.

## Discussion

One could argue several reasons why angular observables might be preferred over standard 3D ones. Probably the main one is the lack of assumption of any fiducial cosmological model to analyse the data. This means that angular observables may be directly compared with theoretical predictions without any intermediate data manipulations that hinge on an assumption whose implications in the analysis may not always be clear. Moreover, this type of angular analysis are conducted tomographically in moderately narrow redshift shells, thus avoiding the assumption that the universe remains effectively frozen in relatively long time spans, as it may occur in 3D clustering analysis where an effective redshift must be defined for the entire volume under analysis (see, e.g., Cuesta et al. 2016). Asorey et al. (2012) andDi Dio et al. (2014) have shown that when using a large number of narrow redshift slices, a 2D clustering analysis can produce the same constraints on cosmological parameters than a 3D clustering analysis, provided that the width of the redshift slices is comparable to the minimum scale probed in the 3D analysis. By including the redshift information in a 2D field, the ARF observable keeps some information about the distribution of galaxies along the line of sight, which normally disappear when projecting the 3D galaxy density field on a 2D observable. As we have shown, ARF are improving the usual 2D galaxy clustering analysis. Another major interest of using angular observables is that they can easily be cross-correlated with other 2D observables. Indeed the combination of 3D probes with 2D probes is not straightforward, especially when one has to properly take into account the covariances between them (see e.g. Passaglia et al. 2017;Camera et al. 2018). In this work we used the CMB lensing field and its cross-correlation with our tomographic analysis of angular galaxy clustering and ARF. We have shown that this cross-correlations improve the constraints, especially on the galaxy bias. Chaves-Montero et al. (2019) have shown that the cross-correlation of the ARF field with the CMB temperature field can detect the kinematic Sunyaev-Zel'dovich (kSZ) effect at the 10σ level.

The point of this paper is not a detailed comparison between 2D and 3D clustering analysis, but rather an exploration of the added value of including ARF in cosmological studies of the large scale structures, on top of the traditional angular galaxy clustering. By its intrinsic different sensitivity to the cosmic density and velocity fields under the redshift shells, the ARF change the degeneracies between cosmological parameters, especially with respect to σ 8 and the galaxy bias, compared to the angular galaxy clustering. This is due, as claimed in HMCMA, to the fact that angular galaxy clustering is sensitive to the first moment (the average) of matter density and velocity under the redshift shells, whereas ARF are sensitive to the second moment (the variance) of matter density and velocity along the line of sight, inside these redshift shells. Moreover, we have shown that the ARF and the angular galaxy clustering inside the same tomographic redshift bin are almost uncorrelated. Due to this absence of correlation, by combining both we are able to break degeneracies and give tighter constraints on all the cosmological parameters we have considered.

The results we obtained in our work can be considered as an optimistic setting for both galaxy and CMB surveys. We restricted our analysis to the linear regime and we did not include any systematic effects which could impact our results and worsen the constraints. It was found in Hernández-Monteagudo et al. (2020) that the impact of non-linear physics is more severe in angular galaxy clustering than in ARF. They found that a linear bias was sufficient to describe the ARF on scales larger than 60 h −1 Mpc, while it was not the case for angular galaxy clustering. Indeed, ARF are built upon the average observed redshift along the line of sight in a redshift selection function. This is intrinsically different to counting the number of galaxies in a given region in the universe, and consequently systematics and non-linearities are affecting differently each observable. In future works we plan to address systematics and non-linearities, aiming to model more realistic settings. We expect that the impact of both systematics and non-linearities will depend on the survey and on the targeted galaxy sample, as ongoing work on existing galaxy surveys is indicating.

We do not provide a detailed comparison with the forecasted constraints of the Euclid survey published in Euclid Collaboration et al. (2019). Indeed our analysis consider a simplistic, linear model of the galaxy clustering. In this context, our findings indicate that ARF brings significant cosmological information on top of the traditional angular galaxy clustering. At best, our results with the angular galaxy clustering probe ( D g ) could be compared with the linear setting shown in the Table 9 of Euclid Collaboration et al. (2019) (first line). In that case, their probe is the 3D linear galaxy power spectrum, with a cutoff value at k max = 0.25 h Mpc −1 , in four different redshift bins. Their Fisher analysis account for more parameters describing the anisotropies in the power spectrum and the shot noise residuals. This 3D probe is intrinsically different to the (2D) angular power spectrum tomography used in our work, in 20 Gaussian bins, for which we limit to k max = 0.20 h Mpc −1 . Our forecasts with D g for the errors on some parameters are tighter than theirs (by a factor of ∼ 2 for σ 8 ), while for others we find the opposite situation (e.g., the reduced Hubble parameter h, whose uncertainty in Euclid Collaboration et al. 2019 is roughly one third of ours).


## Conclusion

We showed that the ARF are a promising cosmological observable for next generation spectroscopic surveys. We found that for our choice of binning, the tomographic analysis of ARF retrieves more information than the tomographic analysis of the angular galaxy clustering. We showed that the joint analysis of both fields helps in breaking degeneracies between cosmological parameters, due to their lack of correlation and their different sensitivities to cosmology. The improvement appears to be particularly significant for the wCDM model. We have shown that the figure of merit for the w 0 -w a parameters was increased by a factor of more than ten when combining angular galaxy clustering with ARF.

Finally, we have seen that combining angular galaxy clustering with ARF provides tighter constraints on the galaxy bias parameters compared to the combination of angular galaxy clustering with CMB lensing. This shows that ARF are a very powerful probe of the distribution of matter, as it allows to break the degeneracy between σ 8 and the galaxy bias. For future galaxy surveys, errors on the cosmological figure of merit will be dominated by systematic uncertainties and non-linearities, and ARF might provide a novel, complementary view on those issues.

In our analysis we did not consider massive neutrinos. As the growth rate is particularly sensitive to them, we expect ARF to be a powerful tool to constrain the mass of neutrinos. We defer this detailed analysis to an upcoming work.

Simultaneously from the LSS and CMB fronts, the coincidence in the acquisition of data sets of tremendous quality and huge size should enable the combination of standard analyses with new, alternative ones like the one introduced in this paper. The combination of techniques and observables should work jointly in the efforts of identifying and mitigating systematics, and pushing our knowledge of cosmological physics to its limits.

We show the ellipses obtained with our Fisher analysis for the wCDM model in Fig. B.1, for a DESI-like and a Euclid-like suvey. For many parameter pairs, the degeneracy direction (or ellipse orientation) for angular galaxy clustering and ARF are similar, although the resulting error ellipse in the joint D g, z probe shrink very significantly in all cases. As a result, foreseen uncertainties in the parameters are divided by a factor of at least two for all parameters.

We show in Fig. B.2 the correlation matrices for the wCDM model. It turns out that for D z the new parameters w 0 , w a , together with σ 8 , constitute an almost separate (or largely un-correlated) box with respect to all other parameters (see Fig. B.2b). This does not seem to be the situation for angular galaxy clustering D g (Fig. B.2a), although this character remains (to great extent) for the joint observable set (D g, z , Fig. B.2c).  00 -0.97 0.68 -0.56 -0.55 -0.54 -0.53 -0.52 -0.52 -0.51 -0.51 -0.50 -0.51 -0.50 -0.50 -0.49 -0.50 -0.49 -0.49 -0.54 -0.46 -0.49 - 00 -0.98 -0.97 -0.97 -0.97 -0.97 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.96 -0.95 -0.95 -0.97 -0.95 -0.95 -     . We find that D z show different correlations compared to D g . The combination of both greatly helps in breaking degeneracies as we can see in panel (c).
Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 b 0 b 1 b 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 b 6 b 7 b 8 b 9 b 10 b 11 b 12 b 13 b 14 b 15 b 16 b 17 b 18 b 19 Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 b 0 b 1 b 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 b 6 b 7 b 8 b 9 b 10 b 11 b 12 b 13 b 14 b 15 b 16 b 17 b 18 b 19 1.(a) D g Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 b 0 b 1 b 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 b 6 b 7 b 8 b 9 b 10 b 11 b 12 b 13 b 14 b 15 b 16 b 17 b 18 b 19 Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 b 0 b 1 b 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 b 6 b 7 b 8 b 9 b 10 b 11 b 12 b 13 b 14 b 15 b 16 b 17 b 18 b 19 1.(b) D z Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 b 0 b 1 b 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 b 6 b 7 b 8 b 9 b 10 b 11 b 12 b 13 b 14 b 15 b 16 b 17 b 18 b 19 Ω b Ω m n s h σ 8 b 0 b 1 b 2 b 3 b 4 b 5 b 6 b 7 b 8 b 9 b 10 b 11 b 12 b 13 b 14 b 15 b 16 b 17 b 18 b 19 1.

of Euclid Collaboration et al. (2019), yielding b g (z) = 0.79 + 0.68 z .

## Fig. 1 :
1Galaxy density distribution as a function of redshift for the emission line galaxies (ELG) of DESI (left panel), and the Euclid spectroscopic sample (right panel). The filled coloured lines show the Gaussian bins used in our analysis, colour coded as a funciton of bin index. The orange line shows the CMB lensing efficiency kernel (with arbitrarily normalization).

## Fig. 3 :
3Correlation matrix between our observables, for the 20 redshift bins in a Euclid-like survey, at = 10. This matrix corresponds to the D g, z, κ CMB ( = 10) data vector. The value in each

## Fig. 6 :
6Foreseen constraints (1σ contours) for a set of five ΛCDM parameters, plus three galaxy bias parameters (out of a total of 20) for a DESI-like survey. We assume 20 tomographic Gaussian bins of size σ z = 0.01. The blue line are the constraints for angular galaxy clustering alone D g , the orange line are for the ARF alone D z , and the green line is a joint analysis of both fields D g, z . The figures above the 1-D PDFs give the marginalised 1σ uncertainty of the parameter for each data vector. We show here only 3 galaxy bias parameters even if we marginalised upon the 20 bias parameters.

## Fig. 7 :
7Same as

## Fig. 9 :
9Marginalised constraints (1σ contours) on the dark energy equation of state parameters for the DESI-like (solid lines) and for the Euclid-like (dashed lines) surveys, assuming 20 tomographic Gaussian bins of size σ z = 0.01. The blue lines are the constraints for angular galaxy clustering alone, the orange lines are for ARF alone, and the green lines are a joint analysis of both fields, D g, z . These contours are marginalised over the set of cosmological parameters as before, and over the galaxy bias in the 20 redshift bins. We display the figure of merit (FoM) of this pair of parameters in the upper right box for each combination of observables and for each survey.

## FigFig. B. 2 :
2between parameters of the ΛCDM model, for a DESI like survey. The top panel is for the angular galaxy clustering alone, the central panel is for ARF alone, and the bottom panel is when combining both observables. We see that the angular galaxy clustering and ARF have opposite correlation coefficients between cosmological paameters and the galaxy bias. The combination of both helps greatly in breaking degeneracies with the galaxy bias. . B.1: Foreseen constraints (1σ contours) in the CPL cosmological extension wCDM for a DESI-like survey (top) and a Euclid-like survey (bottom), assuming 20 tomographic Gaussian bins of size σ z = 0.01. The blue line are the constraints for angular galaxy clustering alone (D g ), the orange line are for the ARF alone ( D z ), and the green line is a joint analysis of both fields (D g, z ). These contours are marginalised over the galaxy bias in the 20 redshift bins. The numbers above the parameter PDFs give the marginalised 1σ uncertainty of each parameter for each data-vector. Correlation between parameters of the wCDM model, marginalised over the galaxy bias for a DESI-like survey. The top panel is for the angular galaxy clustering (D g ), the central panel refers to ARF alone (D z ), and the bottom panel is when combining both observables (D g, z )

## Table 2 :
2Fiducial values of the free parameter of our fiducial cosmological model. We first consider only parameters in the standard ΛCDM model, and later we include the w 0 , w a parameters from the CPL parametrization of Dark Energy.Fig. 5: Ratio of 1σ confidence interval relative to the 1σ value from angular galaxy clustering (D g ) for ΛCDM parameters. Constraints are marginalised over the 20 galaxy bias parameters. Plain lines are for a DESI-like survey while dashed lines are for a Euclid-like survey. Blue line shows D g (our reference here), orange lines show D z and green lines show D g, z .Ω b 
Ω m 
n s 
h 
σ 8 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

1.2 

68% confidence relative to reference 

D g , DESI 
D g , Euclid 

D z , DESI 
D z , Euclid 

D g, z , DESI 
D g, z , Euclid 




00 -0.13 -0.98 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.22 -0.35 0.01 -0.14 -0.97 0.96 1.00 0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.22 -0.36 0.02 -0.14 -0.97 0.96 0.97 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.23 -0.37 0.02 -0.15 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.23 -0.36 0.02 -0.15 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.24 -0.37 0.03 -0.16 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.23 -0.36 0.03 -0.16 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.23 -0.36 0.03 -0.16 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.24 -0.37 0.04 -0.16 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.95 0.95 -0.22 -0.35 0.02 -0.15 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.22 -0.36 0.03 -0.15 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.22 -0.35 0.02 -0.15 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.21 -0.35 0.02 -0.14 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95 -0.21 -0.34 0.01 -0.14 -0.97 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.95
δg,0 δg,1 δg,2 δg,3 δg,4 δg,5 δg,6 δg,7 δg,8 δg,9 δg,10 δg,11 δg,12 δg,13 δg,14 δg,15 δg,16 δg,17 δg,18 δg,19 δz,0 δz,1 δz,2 δz,3 δz,4 δz,5 δz,6 δz,7 δz,8 δz,9 δz,10 δz,11 δz,12 δz,13 δz,14 δz,15 δz,16 δz,17 δz,18 δz,19 κCMB δg,0 δg,1 δg,2 δg,3 δg,4 δg,5 δg,6 δg,7 δg,8 δg,9 δg,10 δg,11 δg,12 δg,13 δg,14 δg,15 δg,16 δg,17 δg,18 δg,19 δz,0 δz,1 δz,2 δz,3 δz,4 δz,5 δz,6 δz,7 δz,8 δz,9 δz,10 δz,11 δz,12 δz,13 δz,14 δz,15 δz,16 δz,17 δz,18 δz,19 κCMB
Article number, page 6 of 14 L. Legrand et al.: High resolution tomography for galaxy spectroscopic surveys with Angular Redshift Fluctuations
We use the version 3.1.0 of the noise curves available on https: //github.com/simonsobs/so_noise_models
https://github.com/dhanson/quicklens Article number, page 7 of 14 A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
A&A proofs: manuscript no. mainAppendix A: Correlation matricesThe correlation matrices inFig. A.1provide an alternative view of our results. It shows the correlation matrices for the 5 ΛCDM parameters and the 20 galaxy bias parameters for a DESI-like survey. We see the opposite correlation of the cosmological parameters Ω b , Ω m , n s and h with σ 8 for angular galaxy clustering and ARF. This opposite correlation is mirrored in the correlations of those three cosmological parameters with galaxy bias parameters. This is expected as σ 8 and bias are tightly correlated. The different nature of the correlation of σ 8 and bias with the other cosmological parameters for angular galaxy clustering and ARF is critical for (partially) breaking degeneracies when combining angular galaxy clustering with ARF.Appendix B: Results for wCDM model
. K Abazajian, G Addison, P Adshead, arXiv:1907.04473arXiv e-printsAbazajian, K., Addison, G., Adshead, P., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1907.04473

. T M C Abbott, F B Abdalla, A Alarcon, Phys. Rev. D. 9843526Abbott, T. M. C., Abdalla, F. B., Alarcon, A., et al. 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 043526

. J Asorey, M Crocce, E Gaztañaga, A Lewis, MNRAS. 4271891Asorey, J., Crocce, M., Gaztañaga, E., & Lewis, A. 2012, MNRAS, 427, 1891

. N Benitez, R Dupke, M Moles, arXiv:1403.5237arXiv e-printsBenitez, N., Dupke, R., Moles, M., et al. 2014, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1403.5237

. D Blas, J Lesgourgues, T Tram, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 34Blas, D., Lesgourgues, J., & Tram, T. 2011, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2011, 034

P Bonifacio, G Dalton, S Trager, Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics. C. Reylé, J. Richard, L. Cambrésy, M. Deleuil, E. Pécontal, L. Tresse, & I. Vauglinthe Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and AstrophysicsBonifacio, P., Dalton, G., Trager, S., et al. 2016, in SF2A-2016: Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics, ed. C. Reylé, J. Richard, L. Cambrésy, M. Deleuil, E. Pécontal, L. Tresse, & I. Vauglin, 267-270

. S Camera, J Fonseca, R Maartens, M Santos, MNRAS. 4811251Camera, S., Fonseca, J., Maartens, R., & Santos, M. G. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 1251

. A J Cenarro, M Moles, D Cristóbal-Hornillos, A&A. 622176Cenarro, A. J., Moles, M., Cristóbal-Hornillos, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A176

. J Chaves-Montero, C Hernández-Monteagudo, R E Angulo, J D Emberson, arXiv:1911.10690arXiv e-printsChaves-Montero, J., Hernández-Monteagudo, C., Angulo, R. E., & Emberson, J. D. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1911.10690

. M Chevallier, D Polarski, International Journal of Modern Physics D. 10213Chevallier, M. & Polarski, D. 2001, International Journal of Modern Physics D, 10, 213

. A J Cuesta, M Vargas-Magaña, F Beutler, MNRAS. 4571770Cuesta, A. J., Vargas-Magaña, M., Beutler, F., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 457, 1770

. R S De Jong, Consortium, IAU General Assembly. 292255843de Jong, R. S. & 4MOST Consortium. 2015, in IAU General Assembly, Vol. 29, 2255843

. A Aghamousa, DESI CollaborationJ Aguilar, DESI CollaborationarXiv:1611.00036arXiv e-printsDESI Collaboration, Aghamousa, A., Aguilar, J., et al. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1611.00036

. E Di Dio, F Montanari, R Durrer, J Lesgourgues, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 42Di Dio, E., Montanari, F., Durrer, R., & Lesgourgues, J. 2014, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2014, 042

. O Doré, J Bock, M Ashby, arXiv:1412.4872arXiv e-printsDoré, O., Bock, J., Ashby, M., et al. 2014, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1412.4872

. A Blanchard, Euclid CollaborationS Camera, Euclid CollaborationarXiv:1910.09273arXiv e-printsEuclid Collaboration, Blanchard, A., Camera, S., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1910.09273

. C Hernández-Monteagudo, J Chaves-Montero, R E Angulo, arXiv:1911.12056arXiv e-printsHernández-Monteagudo, C., Chaves-Montero, J., & Angulo, R. E. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1911.12056

. C Hernández-Monteagudo, J Chaves-Montero, R E Angulo, G Ariccò, arXiv:2005.06568arXiv e-printsHernández-Monteagudo, C., Chaves-Montero, J., Angulo, R. E., & Ariccò, G. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2005.06568

. W Hu, B Jain, Phys. Rev. D. 7043009Hu, W. & Jain, B. 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 70, 043009

. W Hu, T Okamoto, ApJ. 574566Hu, W. & Okamoto, T. 2002, ApJ, 574, 566

. D Huterer, L Knox, R C Nichol, ApJ. 555547Huterer, D., Knox, L., & Nichol, R. C. 2001, ApJ, 555, 547

. Ž Ivezić, S M Kahn, J A Tyson, ApJ. 873111Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873, 111

. E Krause, T Eifler, MNRAS. 4702100Krause, E. & Eifler, T. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 2100

. F Lacasa, A&A. 6151Lacasa, F. 2018, A&A, 615, A1

. O Lahav, P B Lilje, J R Primack, M J Rees, MNRAS. 251128Lahav, O., Lilje, P. B., Primack, J. R., & Rees, M. J. 1991, MNRAS, 251, 128

. R Laureijs, J Amiaux, S Arduini, arXiv:1110.3193arXiv e-printsLaureijs, R., Amiaux, J., Arduini, S., et al. 2011, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1110.3193

. A Lewis, A Challinor, Phys. Rep. 4291Lewis, A. & Challinor, A. 2006, Phys. Rep., 429, 1

. E V Linder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 9091301Linder, E. V. 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett., 90, 091301

. E V Linder, Phys. Rev. D. 7243529Linder, E. V. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 72, 043529

. P Martí, R Miquel, F J Castander, MNRAS. 44292Martí, P., Miquel, R., Castander, F. J., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 92

. M Moles, N Benítez, J A L Aguerri, AJ. 1361325Moles, M., Benítez, N., Aguerri, J. A. L., et al. 2008, AJ, 136, 1325

. J A Newman, M C Cooper, M Davis, ApJS. 2085Newman, J. A., Cooper, M. C., Davis, M., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 5

. T Okamoto, W Hu, Phys. Rev. D. 6783002Okamoto, T. & Hu, W. 2003, Phys. Rev. D, 67, 083002

. Y Omori, R Chown, G Simard, ApJ. 849124Omori, Y., Chown, R., Simard, G., et al. 2017, ApJ, 849, 124

. N Padmanabhan, D J Schlegel, U Seljak, MNRAS. 378852Padmanabhan, N., Schlegel, D. J., Seljak, U., et al. 2007, MNRAS, 378, 852

. S Passaglia, A Manzotti, S Dodelson, Phys. Rev. D. 95123508Passaglia, S., Manzotti, A., & Dodelson, S. 2017, Phys. Rev. D, 95, 123508

. P G Pérez-González, A Cava, G Barro, ApJ. 76246Pérez-González, P. G., Cava, A., Barro, G., et al. 2013, ApJ, 762, 46

. N Aghanim, Planck CollaborationY Akrami, Planck CollaborationarXiv:1807.06209arXiv e-printsPlanck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al. 2018a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1807.06209

. N Aghanim, Planck CollaborationY Akrami, Planck CollaborationarXiv:1807.06210arXiv e-printsPlanck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al. 2018b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1807.06210

. L Pozzetti, C M Hirata, J E Geach, A&A. 5903Pozzetti, L., Hirata, C. M., Geach, J. E., et al. 2016, A&A, 590, A3

. N Scoville, H Aussel, A Benson, ApJS. 172150Scoville, N., Aussel, H., Benson, A., et al. 2007, ApJS, 172, 150

. B D Sherwin, A Van Engelen, N Sehgal, Phys. Rev. D. 95123529Sherwin, B. D., van Engelen, A., Sehgal, N., et al. 2017, Phys. Rev. D, 95, 123529

The Simons Observatory Collaboration. P Ade, J Aguirre, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 256The Simons Observatory Collaboration, Ade, P., Aguirre, J., et al. 2019, J. Cos- mology Astropart. Phys., 2, 056

. W L K Wu, L M Mocanu, P A R Ade, ApJ. 88470Wu, W. L. K., Mocanu, L. M., Ade, P. A. R., et al. 2019, ApJ, 884, 70