# REVIEW DECONTAMINATION OF AFLATOXINS WITH A FOCUS ON AFLATOXIN B1 BY PROBIOTIC BACTERIA AND YEASTS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 222121380
 
tags: #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ac946935578a2c26ee8d01f366ba218a6569c3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ac946935578a2c26ee8d01f366ba218a6569c3d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

REVIEW DECONTAMINATION OF AFLATOXINS WITH A FOCUS ON AFLATOXIN B1 BY PROBIOTIC BACTERIA AND YEASTS: A REVIEW


Kianoush Khosravi_Darani 
Research Department of Food Technology
Faculty of Food and Nutrition Sciences
National Nutrition and food Technology Research Institute
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences
P.O. Box19395-4741TehranIran

Alaleh Zoghi 
Department of Food Sciences and Technology
Faculty of Nutrition Sciences and Food Technology
National Nutrition and Food Technology Research Institute
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science
P. O. Box: 193954741TehranIran

Shima Jazayeri 
Department of Nutrition
School of Public Health
University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran, Iran

Adriano Gomes Da Cruz 
Instituto Federal de Educação
Ciência

ProfKianoush Khosravi-Darani 

Departamento de Alimentos, Maracanã
Tecnologia do Rio de Janeiro (IFRJ)
20270-021Rio de JaneiroBrazil

REVIEW DECONTAMINATION OF AFLATOXINS WITH A FOCUS ON AFLATOXIN B1 BY PROBIOTIC BACTERIA AND YEASTS: A REVIEW
DetoxificationProbioticAdsoptionAflatoxinStability
Food and feed contamination by aflatoxins represents a great challenge for human and animal health. Aflatoxins detoxification using probiotic bacteria and yeasts has been introduced as an inexpensive and promising method. This article is organized with an overview of the potential application of probiotic bacteria and yeasts to eliminate, inactivate or reduce the bioavailability of aflatoxins, especially aflatoxin B1, in vitro and in vivo. Also, a fast glance to beneficial health effects and preservative properties of probiotics followed by the mechanism of binding of aflatoxins by probiotics, influence of different probiotic pretreatments, and the stability of aflatoxin-probiotic complexes are mentioned.

## INTRODUCTION

Contamination of food and feed by mycotoxins is a severe problem in all countries; hence, decontamination of mycotoxins from food and feed is essential. The food and agriculture organization evaluates that approximately 25% of global food and feed are contaminated with mycotoxins (Zoghi et al., 2017). Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites of mycelia or filamentous fungi associated to the Penicillium, Aspergillus (A.), and Fusarium genera. Production of mycotoxins may happen during the process of production, harvesting, storage or processing, under suitable temperature (between 24 and 37 °C) and humidity (above 13%) conditions (Massoud et al., 2018;Perczak et al., 2018). Several pre-and postharvest methods in order to decrease mycotoxins level in raw materials have been suggested; but, while mycotoxins levels have attained to contamination limited level in a product, it is difficult to eliminate the total toxin amount. Directly or indirectly exposure to mycotoxins may cause teratogenic, mutagenic, estrogenic, haemorrhagic, carcinogenic, immunotoxic, nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic, neurotoxic and immunosuppressive impacts on the health of animals and humans (Haskard et al., 2000;Zoghi et al., 2019). Aflatoxins are a group of the most repeatedly found mycotoxins in a variety of foods and feeds commodities causing economic losses in industry, veterinary care costs enhancement, and livestock production decline. These toxins are secondary metabolite products of some Aspergillus species, especially A. flavus, A. parasiticus and A. nomius. Several factors affect the production of this toxin including water activity, temperature, available nutrients, competitive growth of other microorganisms, and pH-value (Ghofrani Tabari et al., 2018). Various agricultural products may be contaminated by aflatoxins such as cereal grains especially rice, corn, maize, wheat, soya, rye, oats, barley, sorghum, nuts (almonds, peanuts, Pistachio, chestnuts, pumpkin seeds, etc.) and oily seeds such as cottonseed (Fochesato et al., 2018). Aflatoxins can enter the human body directly or indirectly by consuming contaminated products or derived foods, such as dairy products and meats from contaminated livestock, respectively. Exposure to aflatoxins leads to severe effects on human and animal health including chronic intoxications and liver and kidney cancers (Karazhiyan et al., 2016). Once aflatoxins are ingested by animals, they get adsorbed rapidly in the gastro intestinal tract (GIT), because they have low molecular weight, and then appear in blood and milk quickly after 15 minutes and 12 hours of post-feeding, respectively (Martins et al., 2001). 18 types of aflatoxins are identified through toxicological studies, but the major aflatoxins are aflatoxins B1 (AFB1), B2 (AFB2), G1 (AFG1) and G2 (AFG2). These names are related to their fluorescence under UV light (blue (B) or green (G)) and comparative chromatographic migration patterns through thin layer chromatography (TLC) (Lizárraga-Paulín et al., 2011;Rahnama Vosough et al., 2013). A. flavus usually produces the B group of aflatoxins, while A. parasiticus produces both B and G groups of aflatoxins through several biochemical processes. Among four mentioned aflatoxins, AFB1 is considered as the most common and dangerous one and exposure to AFB1 leads to both acute and chronic hepatocellular injury (Jakhar and Sadana, 2004). Aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) and aflatoxin M2 (AFM2) are metabolic derivates of AFB1 and AFB2, respectively (Lizárraga-Paulín et al., 2011). When feed containing AFB1 is ingested by livestock, it can be bio-transformed into AFM1 (4-hydroxy-AFB1) in the liver and excreted in milk, tissues, and urine of animals (Iha et al., 2013;Karazhiyan et al., 2016). AFM1 is resistant to all stages of dairy processing including pasteurization or sterilization (Prandini et al., 2009;Assaf et al., 2018). Approximately 0.3 to 6.2% of ingested AFB1 by livestock appears as AFM1 in milk. Diet type, amount of milk production, breed, health, and rate of digestion can affect the change rate of AFB1 to AFM1. A linear relationship between the AFM1 concentration in milk and AFB1 in contaminated feed is reported by Adibpour et al. (2016). The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) categorized AFB1 and AFM1 as group 1 that leads to human cancer (IARC, 2016). However AFM1 is about ten times less toxigenic, mutagenic and genotoxic than AFB1, its carcinogenic effects have been demonstrated in several species (Elsanhoty et al., 2014). AFM1 is cytotoxic and can also cause DNA damage, gene mutation, chromosomal anomalies and cell transformation in mammalians cells. The Food and Drug Administration (2005) recommended that the maximum acceptable level of AFM1 in milk is 0.5 μg/kg, and the European Commission (2006) settled this limit to 0.05 μg/kg. Various strategies have been applied to remove aflatoxins from contaminated food and feed. Elimination of aflatoxins with chemical (addition of chlorinating, oxidizing or hydrolytic agents) and physical (UV light, heat, or ionizing radiation) approaches has some disadvantages, such as possible losses in nutritional value of treated commodities, insufficiency of toxin elimination, and requirement of expensive equipment (Zoghi et al., 2014). In addition, one of the most effective adsorbents for AFB1 is clay soil-based adsorbent. The layer structure of this type of adsorbents swells when it is placed in a liquid medium and it can adsorb AFB1 on its layers and prevent adsorption of AFB1 by cells in the GIT (Hadiani et al., 2018a). Nevertheless, this group of adsorbents is of low efficiency in adsorbing AFB1. Therefore, according to the researches, bioremoval method is an interesting alternative for inexpensive control or reducing of aflatoxins in foodstuffs without losses of nutritional quality or toxic compounds generation. Probiotics are the best candidate for aflatoxins detoxification due to their GRAS (Generally recognized as safe) status. Recently, several approaches to the removal of aflatoxins using probiotics are demonstrated. This article reviews the potential applications of probiotics in aflatoxin detoxification and the mechanism of aflatoxin binding by probiotics and the aflatoxin-probiotic complex stability are discussed.


## PROBIOTICS AS AFLATOXIN BINDERS

Probiotics are described by FAO (2016) as 'viable microorganisms that, while ingested in sufficient amounts, exert health benefits on the host'. The main benefits for health include: lactose intolerance reduction, gut mucosal immunity support, a possible hypocholesterolemic effect, preventing the diarrheas or respiratory infections, colon cancer or inflammatory bowel disease inhibition, Helicobacter pylori or intestinal pathogens prevention, and antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic activities (Sanders et al., 2014;Yu, Chang and Lee, 2015). Recently, the use of microorganisms, especially probiotics, has been studied for their potential to aflatoxins elimination with an indirect health effect on the host (Bovo et al., 2012). Several probiotic strains have been investigated for their ability to bind aflatoxins (El-Nezami et al., 1998;Bueno et al., 2006;El Khoury et al., 2011;El-Nezami et al., 2002). Lactobacillus (L.) and Bifidobacterium (B.) species are the most known commonly probiotic bacteria, as well as the yeast Saccharomyces (S.) cerevisiae and Bacillus species and some strains of Escherichia (E.) coli. A functional classification of nontoxigenic, nonpathogenic, and fermentative probiotic bacteria are Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) witch are mainly related to the human gastrointestinal tract and widely used in food industry (Zoghi et al., 2017). LAB are Gram-positive, organotrophic, nonsporulating, fermentative rods or cocci, air and acid tolerant, which produce mostly lactic acid as the end-product of carbohydrate fermentation. All of them are anaerobic, but some of them can tolerate low levels of oxygen. Enterococcus, Lactococcus, Pediococcus, Oenococcus, Leuconostoc, Streptococcus, and Lactobacillus species are industrially important genera. The genus Bifidobacteria is also used as LAB, however they are phylogenetically unrelated and have unique sugar fermentation pathways. LAB are widely used in the world food production, vegetables, meat, and fermented dairy products. LAB play a significant role in improving the flavour, texture, and shelf-life of food products (Perczak et al., 2018). It is demonstrated that living and dead probiotics are able to decontaminate aflatoxins by attaching the toxin to their cell wall components. This phenomenon can be described as adsorption by components of the cell wall rather than by metabolism or covalent binding (Santos et al., 2006). 


## Inhibition of aflatoxin biosynthesis by LAB

A few authors also reported the antifungal properties of LAB. The main LAB recognized for this ability belong to Lactococcus and Lactobacillus (L.) genera. In contrast, it is reported that some LAB strains such as L. lactis can motivate aflatoxin accumulation. Coallier-Ascah and Idziak (1985) demonstrated a significant inhibition of aflatoxin accumulation by LAB and reported that this inhibition was not related to a pH decrease or a hydrogen peroxide production but rather to producing a heat stable and low molecular weight metabolite by LAB at the beginning of its growth phase. Gourama and Bullerman (1997) also reported that prevention of aflatoxin synthesis by Lactobacillus strain was due to specific bacterial metabolites. Several effective parameters related to antifungal properties of LAB have been investigated including growth medium, temperature, incubation time, pH, and nutritional factors. It was revealed that temperature and period of incubation were significantly affecting the amounts of antifungal metabolite production (Dalié et al., 2010). Gonzalez Pereyra et al. (2018) found that six Bacillus sp. strains were capable of decrease aflatoxigenic A. parasiticus growth rate significantly and could also decrease AFB1 concentration.


## FACTORS AFFECTING AFLATOXIN BIOREMOVAL BY PROBIOTICS

Several criteria affect the aflatoxins removal using probiotics such as probiotic strain concentration and specificity, toxin concentration, pH, and incubation time.


## Effect of probiotic strain specificity and concentration

In addition to bacterial strain specificity, the bacterial concentration can also affect the aflatoxin removal. Detoxification of aflatoxins by viable or nonviable probiotic cells is strain dependent (Topcu et al., 2010). In some studies, LAB were considered to be inappropriate binders of AFB1. This may be due to the specific LAB strains used in those studies (Shetty and Jespersen, 2006). Similarly, Peltonen et al. (2001) assayed 20 LAB strains and reported that the differences in AFB1 binding were because of different bacterial strain specificity. So, differences between aflatoxin ability of strains of LAB indicate that binding ability is highly strain dependent. El-Nezami et al. (1998) showed that L. rhamnosus strains GG and LC 705 can significantly remove AFB1 in comparison to other strains of LAB and the removal process was bacterial concentration dependent. 


## Toxin concentration effect


## Effect of pH-value

Some investigation showed that binding process is not pH dependent exclusively. According to Zinedine et al. (2005) all the assayed Lactobacillus spp. removed AFB1 from 5% to 40% when pH increased from 3 to 5.5. Also, Pranoto et al. (2007) demonstrated that amount of bound AFB1 by LAB was higher at low pH (< 5) in compare with pH 6 and 7. In another study, Rayes (2013) stated that at pH 8.5 the highest decrease percentage of AFB1 by a pool of LAB occurred, while at pH 4.5 the lowest removal observed. On the other hand, the highest and lowest AFB1 removal was at pH 4.5 and 8.5, respectively, when the pool was included a S. cerevisiae strain. Hernandez-Mendoza et al.

(2009) investigated the binding of L. reuteri and L. casei with AFB1 at different pH (6, 7.2, and 8) and incubation time (4 and 12 h). They showed that the highest AFB1-binding capacity was at pH 7.2. Furthermore, Topcu et al. (2010) found that the binding of AFB1 by Enterococcus faecium was a pH and incubation time dependent process. In contrast, Bovo et al. (2014) showed no significant differences in the AFB1 reduction between L. rhamnosus strains conditions (spray, in solution or freeze-dried) at pH 3 and 6. So, it can be concluded that the pH dependence of AFB1 binding vary between bacterial strains. In addition, binding of AFB1 in a study, was not affected by pH, but binding of AFB2 considerably influenced by pH. It indicates that different metabolites of the same mycotoxin may show significant differences depend on binding mechanisms. reported that Enterococcus faecium M74 and EF031 strains at 1 h removed almost 65% of the total AFB1 removed during the whole incubation period (48 h). Bovo et al. (2012) stated that some probiotic strains bound AFM1 from skimmed milk in 15 min within a range from 13.51 to 37.75%. In another study, it was reported that the percentage of AFB1 removal was not significantly different between the 0 h and 72 h incubation period . In addition, El-Nezami et al. (1998) showed that the AFB1 removal was fast and no significant different was observed between different incubation times. Motawee and El-Ghany (2011) noted that the percentage of AFM1 and AFB1 reduction after 5 h by eight dairy strains of LAB in yoghurt was not considerably less than the whole of storage time. These results suggest that the binding of AFB1 by probiotics is a rapid process and the removal does not increase with the incubation time, considerably.


## Effect of incubation time


## BINDING OF AFLATOXINS BY LAB

Specific strains of LAB are generally the most known probiotics for reducing aflatoxins. It has been reported that different strains of LAB have different effect on AFB1 removal in vitro. This removal is due to binding of bacterial cell wall to the aflatoxin, not bacterial metabolism. It was described that in vitro binding of AFB1 by LAB is a fast (less than 1 min), strain specific, and reversible process (Bueno et (2013) reported that L. plantarum was more efficient than L. lactis in removing AFB1 from liquid culture (46% and 27%, respectively), but when the two strains were combined, AFB1 removal reached 81%. Corassin et al. (2013) also revealed that a combination of LAB (L. rhamnosus, L. delbrueckii, and B. lactis) and S. cerevisiae could reduce AFM1 from UHT skim milk, completely. In contrast, El-Khoury et al. (2011) stated that L. bulgaricus, Streptococcus thermophilus and a mixture of these two bacterium reduced AFM1 content of milk to 58.5, 37.7 and 46.7%, respectively. It can be concluded that combination of specific probiotic strains may lead to a more aflatoxin removal efficiency than a single one, but may reduce their toxin removal capacity. Some authors have reported a mathematical model to illustrate the in vitro AFB1 binding to the LAB cell wall. A theoretical model has been suggested by Bueno et al. (2006). This model takes two possible processes into investigation: adsorption (binding) and desorption (release) of AFB1 to and from the binding site on the LAB surface. This model shows that AFB1 binds to a number of sites in LAB and allows us to evaluate the number of AFB1 binding sites and the efficacy of cells to reduce AFB1 from a liquid medium. So, this model demonstrates that the different abilities of probiotic strains to bind AFB1 are directly link to the number of binding sites of each probiotic.


## BINDING OF AFLATOXINS BY YEASTS

Data found in the literature indicate that in addition to LAB, other organisms such as S. cerevisiae have the potential to bind aflatoxins. Yeast cells can bind to different molecules such as toxins as complexes on their cell wall surfaces (Baptista et al., 2004). Corassin et al. (2013) evaluated the AFM1 binding ability of L. rhamnosus, L. delbrueckii spp. bulgaricus, and B. lactis in combination with heat-treated S. cerevisiae. This mixture could bind with 100% of AFM1. In a study, S. cerevisiae and Candida krusei were tested for AFB1 binding and they could bind more than 60% (w/w) of the added mycotoxins in PBS. They emphasized the AFB1 binding was highly strain specific (Shetty and Jespersen, 2006). In another research, when dried yeast and yeast cell wall (include mannan-oligosaccharides) with AFB1 were added to rat-ration feed, a significant decrease in the toxicity was observed (Baptista et al., 2004).


## MECHANISM OF AFLATOXIN BINDING BY PROBIOTICS

Several researchers studied the mechanism of binding of aflatoxins to probiotics. A review by Shetty and Jespersen (2006) stated that aflatoxin removal by probiotics is due to adhesion to cell wall components, because nonviable and viable probiotics are able to remove aflatoxins in vitro with similar efficiency. Possible binding sites include carbohydrates, proteins or a combination of both. It has been shown that two main components responsible for the binding of AFB1 by L. rhamnosus GG are cell wall polysaccharide and peptidoglycan. In addition, since LAB strain treatment with lipases did not lead to a significant increase in AFB1 binding, it was supposed that no fatty acids were involved in this adsorption (Lahtinen et al., 2004). Similarly, other authors have suggested that the peptidoglycan of LAB is the most likely site of aflatoxins binding (Haskard et al., 2000; Niderkorn et al., 2009). Yiannikouris et al. (2006) found that a cell wall component of many microorganisms named beta-d-glucans, played a key in the binding of aflatoxins. Recently, it was reported that the binding characteristics of a probiotic strain are possibly depend on the exopolysaccharides produced by the probiotics (Taheur et al., 2017). Also, Haskard et al. (2001) indicated superior involvement of hydrophobic interactions and main role of teichoic acids in aflatoxin binding mechanism. Similarly, Hernandez-Mendoza et al. (2009) showed that teichoic acids as well as peptidoglycans were important parts of the cell wall which could bind aflatoxin. Another report indicated the main role of teichoic acids in aflatoxin binding by probiotics. Teichoic acids may contribute mainly to hydrophobicity of wall contributed by anionic carbohydrates (Gratz et al., 2004). It can be concluded that binding of probiotics to aflatoxins is a function of fibril network of teichoic acids, peptidoglycans, and polysaccharides. Another mechanistic study conducted by Fochesato et al. (2018), which demonstrated that polysaccharides of L. rhamnosus attached aflatoxins. These polysaccharides are in three principal forms: peptidoglycan, cell wall polysaccharide, and teichoic or lipoteichoic acids. The environmental conditions such as pH-value or enzymes would be affecting the three-dimensional structure of the cell wall and the binding sites for aflatoxins. Therefore, it can be concluded that aflatoxin removal is due to the physical binding rather than metabolism, because peptidogylcan is one of the three principal carbohydrate forms of bacterial cell wall. When acid or heat treatments were used for LAB, it has been demonstrated that LAB ability to remove AFB1 increased. Also, inserting some basic compounds such as NaOH, Na2CO3, and isopropanol had negative influence on this binding (El-Nezami et al., 1998). Haskard et al. (2000) investigated the mechanism of binding of L. rhamnosus to aflatoxins. They used pronase E and periodate treatments (using periodate causes oxidation of cis OH groups to aldehydes and carbon acid groups) on viable, heat and acid-inactivated probiotic strains and suggested that binding was due to carbohydrate and protein components in cell wall, because a considerable decrease in AFB1 binding was observed. Heat and acid treatments cause protein denaturation and lead to the exposure of more hydrophobic surfaces. They also reported that AFB1 binding reduction by urea-treated LAB indicated the key role of hydrophobic interactions in binding. On the other hand, treatments with metal ions such as Na + and Ca 2+ showed that electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding played only minor role in AFB1 binding by LAB, because this process was not affected by mono and divalent ions or by changes in pH (2.5-8.5). Heterogeneous bacteria of LAB, posses a typical gram positive cell wall containing the peptidoglycan matrices, organic acids (teichoic and lipoteichoic acid), proteinacious surface (S) layer and neutral polysaccharides. These components play various functions including adhesion to macromolecules such as toxins (Perczak et al., 2018). Cell wall polysaccharides are produced by LAB with large variation between different strains (Zoghi et al., 2014). The peptidoglycan consists of polymerized disaccharide N-acetyl-glucosamine-beta (1-4)-N-acetyl muramic acid chains cross-linked by pentapeptide bridges. Disaccharide units of peptidoglycan have three different amendments, including acetyl groups of both N-acetyl-glucosamine and N-acetyl-muramic acid. Some LAB strains such as Enterococcus faecium, Pediococcus pentosaceus, L. plantarum, and L. casei have a diverging amino acid sequence of pentapeptide bridge where c-terminal d-alanine is replaced by d-lactate (Grohs et al., 2004). Teichoic acids are anionic polymers which bind to the peptidoglycan layer via a linkage unit and contribute more than 50% (w/w) of total weight of cell wall. The structure of the linkage unit is glycerol-phospho-N-acetyl mannosaminyl-beta (1-4)-glucosamine. Two types of teichoic acids which are detected from LAB, including poly glycerol phosphate and poly ribitol phosphate teichoic acids. Lipoteichoic acids are structurally similar to teichoic acids but they attach to the plasma membrane instead of peptidoglycan by a glycolipid anchor. The most frequently identified lipoteichoic acid in LAB is the poly glycerol phosphate lipoteichoic acid, which is almost similar to the structure of poly glycerol phosphate teichoic acid (Ambrosini et al., 1996). Some LAB strains such as Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, Sterptococcus, Bifidobacterium and Propionibacterium produce exopolysaccharides containing glucose, rhamnose, galactose, mannose, Nacetylgalactosamine, and N-acetylglucosamine (Grohs et al., 2004). Many LAB from the genus Lactobacillus are able to produce S-layer proteins. The size of these proteins is 25-50 kDa with calculated pI's ranging from 9.35 to 10.88, and they are highly basic. LAB which cannot produce S-layer proteins have a negative surface charge at neutral pH. Also, it has been reported that the surface charge of S-layer producing Lactobacillus are negative. This phenomenon may be due to the involvement of positively charged areas of S-layer proteins in their adhesion to peptidoglycan (Zoghi et al., 2014).


## LAB cell wall


## S. cereviciae cell wall

Except LAB, S. cereviciae is reported to the most used yeast as a probiotic strain in order to aflatoxins removal. S. cerevisiae cell wall represents about 30% (w/w) of total weight of the cell and made up of a network of back bone of β-1,3 glucan with β-1,6 glucan side chains, which is covalently linked to glycosylated mannoproteins. The cell wall mannoprotein includes a very heterogeneous class of glycoproteins. Carbohydrate fraction represents as much as 90% (w/w) of mannoproteins and oligosaccharide of mannan constitutes approximately 50% w/w of the total carbohydrates (Hadiani et al., 2018b). The core contains mannoproteins and branched mannose side chains as well as short and rigid rods like clusters of oligomannosyl chains extend out. Phosphodiester bridges in mannosyl side chains contribute negative charges on the cell surface. In addition, the cell wall of S. cereviciae is a highly dynamic structure which quickly replies to changes in the environmental stresses (Zoghi et al., 2014). Based on chemical combination and physical nature of cell wall of S. cerevisiae, it can be concluded that cell surface presents limitless sites on it in order to physical adsorption of aflatoxins. According to certain research, it is confirmed that mannan components of the cell wall play a main role in aflatoxin binding by S. cerevisiae (Shetty and Jespersen, 2006). The proteins and glucans provide accessible adsorption sites with ability to adsorb aflatoxins through various mechanisms such as hydrogen bonds and ionic or hydrophobic reactions. Heat treatment of S. cerevisiae increases permeability of the outer layer of cell wall, due to dissolution of cell-surface mannan and development of adsorption regions (Shetty et al., 2007). Haskard et al. (2001) revealed that using heat treatment for L. rhamnosus GG and LC 705 strains led to significant increase in AFB1 removal from contaminated defined medium and the stability of LAB-AFB1 complex. Similarly, Elsanhoty et al. (2014) found that heat treatment of L. rhamnosus can significantly enhance its binding to AFM1 in yoghurt. Reported literature indicates that heat treatment of LAB exhibit higher removal capacity, because of changes on the cell surface (Perczak et al., 2018). Other researchers showed that heat treated yeast reduce aflatoxins more than viable cells. Heating is responsible for protein denaturation or the formation of Maillard reaction products in the cell wall (Shetty et al., 2007; Rahaie et al., 2010). Several researchers showed that the acid treatment of yeast or LAB caused the highest adsorption of aflatoxin compared with viable and heattreated probiotic (Haskard et al., 2001; Rahaie et al., 2010; Hegazy et al., 2011). El-Nezami et al. (1998) reported that the binding ability of LAB increased by acid pretreatment. They also stated that acid treatment might break amine linkage in peptides and proteins, producing peptides and amino acids. Moreover, accessible aflatoxin binding sites increase and allow the aflatoxins to bind to the cell wall or its associated components (El-Nezami et al., 2002). According to Haskard et al. (2001) acid treatment may affect cell wall components such as peptidoglycan and polysaccharide by releasing monomers and further fragmentation into aldehydes after the glycosidic linkages break down. The acidic conditions could make AFB1 to be easily and repidly bound by constituents of cytoplasmic membrane (Bejaoui et al., 2004). Furthermore, Haskard et al. (2000) noted that hydrophobic interactions were expected in acid-treated LAB; because the protein denaturation may exhibit more hydrophobic binding areas to aflatoxins. In another study, significant increase in the ability of L. rhamnosus GG to bind AFB1 was observed after treatment with sodium dodecyl sulphate, whereas, treatment with urea showed no effect. One of the probable reasons could be the denaturation of protein by sodium dodecyl sulphate and cell wall isolation consist of peptidoglycan. The exposure of L. rhamnosus GG to divalent cations such as Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ or chelators such as EDTA and ethylene glycol tetra-acetic acid, as well as sonication and enzymatic treatments include different specific proteases, did not affect the binding of AFB1 may be due to the release of molecules bound to the surface of the bacteria (Lahtinen et al.,  2004). In fact, probiotic pretreatments which lead to protein denaturation, release of some components, and increase of pore size, probably act on the charge distribution change and hydrophobic nature of the bacterial surface and therefore enhance the efficiency of probiotics as adsorbent of aflatoxin (Karazhiyan et al., 2016; Ahlberg et al., 2015).


## EFFECT OF DIFFERENT PROBIOTIC PRETREATMENTS ON AFLATOXIN BINDING


## PROBIOTIC-AFLATOXIN COMPLEX STABILITY

Several researchers have reported the partial reversibility of the process of probiotics binding by probiotics (Peltonen et al., 2001; Hernandez-Mendoza et al., 2009); Haskard et al. (2001) studied the stability of 12 LAB-AFB1 complexes in both viable and nonviable forms (heat and acid treated LAB) after five washing steps with water. They exhibited that up to 71% of the total AFB1 remained bound and binding of aflatoxins to cell surface is significantly strong. In their investigation, viable cells of L. rhamnosus strains LGG and LC105 retained 38 and 50% (w/w) of the bound AFB1, respectively. Whereas, non-viable (acid and heat treated) cells retained the highest amount of AFB1 (66-71% (w/w)). Also, they revealed that autoclaving and sonication treated probiotic bacteria did not release any detectable AFB1. The authors concluded that the binding was reversible, but the stability of the complexes depended on strain, treatment and environmental conditions. Hernandez-Mendoza et al. (2009) reported that about 60-70% of AFB1 remained bound to the probiotic cells after washing by PBS; so, AFB1 attached to the bacteria by almost weak and partially reversible bound. Pizzolitto et al. (2012) stated that after five washings with PBS, different LAB cells retained AFB1 bound close to 50%, and the washing time (1-60 min) did not affect the release percentages. Among a panel of native LAB isolated from Iranian sourdough and dairy products, L. casei was reported to have the strongest binding of aflatoxin compared to other L. plantarum and L. fermentum strains (Fazeli et al., 2009). According to the findings obtained from the washing of AFB1-Enterococcus faecium complex, the binding of AFB1 to bacterial cell surface was a reversible process and the stability of the complexes was strain specific (Topcu et al., 2010). Similarly, it was noted that after washing the AFB1-Lactobacillus complexes, variable amounts of AFB1 were released back into the solution (Peltonen et al., 2001). Also, the stability of AFB1-Enterococcus faecium strains (MF4 and GJ40) complexes was found to be high after three washes with PBS (Fernandez Juri et al., 2014). In addition, a stable AFM1-LAB (L. rhamnosus and L. plantarum) complex was showed by Elsanhoty et al. (2014). Moreover, Bevilacqua et al. (2014) described the proportionality of the amount of aflatoxin released into the medium by the number of treatments performed. According to the above discussion, it is clear that any in vitro results must be supported by in vivo experiments, because aflatoxins may be released by the continual washing of the bacterial surface in the GIT and negative health implications may be observed. Thus, several studies have attempted to evaluate the stability of the aflatoxin-probiotic complexes in the GIT conditions. It is revealed that defined LAB that show significant adhesion to intestinal cells lose this property when they bind to aflatoxins. Therefore, in the gastrointestinal tract, the bacteriaaflatoxin complex is rapidly excreted (Gratz et al., 2004).


## IN VIVO STUDIES

Many recent studies revealed that AFB1 intake can change the morphological and immune function of the intestinal mucosa due to decreasing the percentage of T-cell subsets and the expression level of cytokine mRNA in the small intestine. The mechanism of intestinal tissue poisoning of the host by AFB1 includes the prevention of oxygen production and inhibition of the free radicals of oxygen (Jiang et al., 2015). Intestinal cells can absorb aflatoxins at high rates (>80%), regardless of the species (Grenier and Applegate, 2013;Wan et al., 2016). Some experimental evidences reported that probiotics could bind aflatoxins within the lumen, so, reducing the negative impacts of aflatoxins and improving gut and liver health (Niderkorn et  showed that L. reuteri and L. casei were able to considerably reduce malondialdehyde concentration in the kidney and liver. As aflatoxin toxicity is mainly related to the liver, using probiotics could improve the histological picture and architecture of the liver and serum biochemical parameters. Besides in vitro studies, the AFB1 binding ability of probiotics was evaluated ex vivo in the intestinal lumen of chicken using the chicken duodenum loop technique (El-Nezami et al., 2000). The authors stated that L. rhamnosus GG, L. rhamnosus LC705, and Propionibacterium freudenreichii removed 54, 44, and 36% of the AFB1, respectively from the soluble fraction of the luminal fluid within 1 min. It can be concluded from these findings that AFB1 binding by LAB appears in physiological conditions in animals, which may represents a way to reduce AFB1 bioavailability in the organism. El Nezami et al. (2006) continued their research in Egypt and investigated the effect of a combination of L. rhamnosus LC705 and Propionibacterium freudenreichii on AFB1 levels in human feces samples from 20 healthy volunteers. The mentioned probiotic strains were administered two times per day (at a dosage of 2-5×10 10 CFU/day) for five weeks by volunteers and the control group received a placebo. The marker for biologically effective dose of AFB1 was the adduct AFB1-N7-guanine. High level of this adduct in the urinary excretion is associated to a high risk of liver cancer (Vinderola and Ritieni, 2015). The fecal samples were positive for AFB1 with a range from 1.8 to 6 μg AFB1/kg feces for 11 volunteers. A significant reduction in urinary excretion of AFB1-N7-guanine and fecal aflatoxin levels was observed for volunteers after receiving the probiotic mixture compared to volunteers receiving a placebo. Kankaanpaa et al. (2000) showed that aflatoxin binding by L. rhamnosus LGG and LC105 considerably reduced adhesion properties of the probiotic strains and facilitates excretion of immobilized AFB1. Similarly, Gratz et al. (2004) reported that pre-exposure of L. rhamnosus GG to AFB1 decreases its binding with intestinal mucus and leads to faster removal. Also, it was shown that addition of S. cerevisiae to the animal diet reduced aflatoxin toxicities; thus, possible stability of the yeast-afllatoxin complex was indicated through the GIT (Shetty and Jespersen, 2006;Armando et al., 2012). Similar results reported by Gratz et al. (2006) who found that L. rhamnosus GG was able to modulate AFB1 uptake in rats, increased fecal AFB1 excretion in rats and reduced liver injury. As demonstrated, L. casei Shirota can decrease AFB1 absorption in the GIT even after a long period of toxin exposure (Hernandez-Mendoza et al., 2010). Nikbakht Nasrabadi et al. (2013) also found that L. casei Shirota could reduce the blood serum level of AFB1 in rats and improved the adverse effect of AFB1 on rats' body weight and plasma biochemical parameters. This result is consistent with Hernandez-Mendoza et al. (2009) who stated that L. reuteri was able to bind to AFB1 in all intestinal sections under normal conditions of the GIT. On the other hand, another study revealed that the probiotic mixture could only retard the AFB1 absorption in duodenal loops and considerably decrease the AFB1 adsorption in the intestinal mucus (Gratz et al., 2005). Fochesato et al. (2018) reported that dynamics of AFB1 adsorption and desorption by L. rhamnosus RC007 were strongly affected by the salivary environment. The knowledge of the adsorption dynamics of AFB1 with a probiotic strain will allow predicting its behavior at each stage of the GIT.


## CONCLUSION

Aflatoxins frequently contaminate the food and feed at various levels. So, for the food industry, it has always been an uphill task to control the aflatoxins level in the products. It is suggested that probiotic strains with high aflatoxin binding abilities can be used in food industries as additives in small quantities without compromising the characteristics of the final product and thus can avoid accumulation of this toxic compound and decrease its toxic effects. Many studies have demonstrated varying efficiency of some selected probiotics in removing aflatoxins. Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate several kinds of probiotics applied for decontamination of food and feed from AFB1 and AFM1, respectively.  


Capability of nonviable probiotics in aflatoxins decontamination is an important point of view because the viability of probiotics decreases under low pH condition through passing the stomach (Topcu et al., 2010; Hamidi et al., 2013). El-Nezami et al. (1998) reported that five strains of Lactobacillus and one Propionibacterium were significantly effective in aflatoxin removal from aqueous solution in comparison to E. coli. In another study, Peltonen et al. (2001) stated that significant differences in the binding abilities of different amounts of AFB1 were due to different bacterial cell wall structures.


Several researchers such as El-Nezami et al. (1998), Elsanhoty et al. (2014) and Peltonen et al. (2001) reported that the amounts of aflatoxin removed by viable and nonviable bacteria depend on initial toxin concentrations. In addition, Pizzolitto et al. (2012) demonstrated that the removal of AFB1 depended on the LAB strain; because some of LAB strains were more efficient at a low toxin concentration (L. rhamnosus at 50 ppb) and other applied LAB were more efficient at high AFB1 concentration (L. acidophilus at 100 ppb and L. casei at 500 ppb). According to Shetty et al. (2007) the absolute amount of the AFB1 removal increased steadily with increasing concentration of AFB1; therefore, the initial AFB1 concentration had a considerable impact on the binding capacity. In contrast, Rahayu et al. (2007) stated that AFB1 concentration enhancement did not affect the percentage of AFB1 binding; but, it influenced the binding speed. Also, Lee et al. (2003) reported AFB1 binding as a linear process and dependent on the toxin concentration at low level of AFB1, and a plateau process at higher toxin concentrations.


Peltonen et al. (2001) stated that the AFB1 binding by L. amylovorus CSCC 5197 was a fast process and increased from 52% (0 h) to 73.2% (72 h). Similarly, Topcu et al. (2010)


al., 2006; Kankaanpaa et al., 2000). El Nezami et al. (1998) assayed the capacity of L. rhamnosus GG, L. rhamnosus LC705, L. acidophilus, L. gasseri, L. casei Shirota, and Propionibacterium freudenreichii ssp. shermanii JS to bind AFB1 in a liquid medium and stated that L. rhamnosus strains GG and LC705 removed 80% of the toxin. They emphasized that the viability of cells was not a perquisite for this binding capacity. Then, Haskard et al. (2001) tested 12 viable and non-viable LAB strains and found that L. rhamnosus was the best strain to remove AFB1. The authors demonstrated that some surface components of the LAB were involved in binding. Also, Peltonen et al. (2001) investigated the binding of AFB1 by 12 Lactobacillus, five Bifidobacterium and three Lactococcus strains and revealed that two strains of L. amylovorus and L. rhamnosus removed more than 50% of initial AFB1 concentration. In addition, Motameny et al. (2012) studied the AFB1 removal from a gastrointestinal model by L. rhamnosus, L. plantarum, and L. acidophilus and found that all strains were able to AFB1 detoxification and L. plantarum was the most successful (28 %). Elsanhoty et al. (2014) reported that L. rhamnosus was the most effective in the binding of AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, and AFG2 from liquid medium in compared with L. acidophilus, L. sanfranciscensis, and B. angulatum and LAB-aflatoxin complex was stable. On the other hand, Sarimehmetoglu and Küplülü (2004) compared the ability of Streptococcus thermophilus ST-36 and L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus CH-2 to AFM1 removal from phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and milk. Elgerbi et al. (2006) found that the percentage of AFM1 binding by Lactobacillus spp., Lactococcus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp. ranged from 4.5-73.1% after 96 hr. Sezer et al.


Some authors suggested that the significant differences among aflatoxin binding ability of LAB depends on different cell wall structures (El-Nezami et al., 1998; Peltonen et al., 2001; Zinedine et al., 2005; Hernandez-Mendoza et al., 2009; Lahtinen et al., 2004; Pierides et al., 2000). Cell wall structure of LAB is reviewed widely by several researchers (Chapot-Chartier and Kulakauskas, 2014; Elsanhoty et al., 2016; Zoghi et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Zoghi et al., 2019; Nazareth et al., 2020).


al., 2009; Gratz et al., 2010). A few investigations by Slizewska et al. (2010), Hathout et al. (2011), Nikbakht Nasrabadi et al. (2013), and Yadav et al. (2013) indicated the ability of probiotics to decrease genotoxicity impacts and protect animals against oxidative stresses. Hathout et al. (2011)

## Table 1
1Several kinds of probiotics applied for decontamination of aflatoxin B1 Lactobacillus sp. Legend: L. is abbreviation of Lactobacillus; S. is abbreviation of Saccharomyces; B. is abbreviation of BifidobacteriumReference 
Explanation 
AFB1 
removal 
% 

Initial AFB1 
Concentration 

Probiotic 
Condition 

Probiotic 
concentration 
(CFU/mL) 

Medium 
kind 

Strain 
Probiotic species 

Smiley & 
Draughon, 
2000 

At 30 °C for 
24 h 

74.5 
55 

34.5 

80.5 

2 ppm 

Viable 
Heat-
treated 
Proteinase-
treated 
DNase-
treated 

aqueous 
solution 

NRRL B-
184 

Flavobacterium 
aurantiacum 

El-Nezami 
et al., 1998 

0-72 h 
incubation 
period at 37 
°C. 
Toxin 
concentration 
and 
temperature 
dependent 
process 

55-67 
33-58 
48-68 
75-82 
75-82 

5,10,50 
mg/mL 
Viable 
Heat-
treated 

Liquid 
media 

ATCC 
4356 
YIT 9018 
ATCC 
33323 
GG 

LC-705 

L. acidophilus 
L. casei Shirota 
L. gasseri 
L. rhamnosus 
L. rhamnosus 

Ghofrani 
Tabari et 
al., 2018 

44.45 
73.35 

73.03 

2 ppm 
Viable 
Acid-
treated 
Cell wall 

2×10 8 
aqueous 
solution 

S. cerevisiae 

Ghofrani 
Tabari et 
al., 2018 

46.46 
75.52 

75.28 

2 ppm 
Viable 
Acid-
treated 
Cell wall 

1×10 9 
aqueous 
solution 

GG 
L. rhamnosus 

Topcu et 
al., 2010 

48 h 
incubation 
period 
pH 7 

23.4 -
37.5 
19.3-
30.5 

5 mg/L 
Viable 
non-viable 

1×10 10 
aqueous 
solution 

EF031 

M74 

Enterococcus 
faecium 

Fernandez 
Juri et al., 
2014 

48 h 
incubation 
period 
pH 7 

24-27 
17-24 

50 ppb 
100 ppb 

Viable 
heat-killed 
cells 

1×10 8 
aqueous 
solution 

GJ40 
Enterococcus 
faecium 

Fernandez 
Juri et al., 
2014 

48 h 
incubation 
period 
pH 7 

36-42 
27-32 

50 ppb 
100 ppb 

Viable 
heat-killed 
cells 

1×10 8 
aqueous 
solution 

MF4 
Enterococcus 
faecium 

Damayanti 
et al., 2017 

48 h 
incubation 
period 

69.11 
73.75 

5 mg/L 
Viable 
nonviable 

1×10 10 
aqueous 
solution 

G7 
PDS3 

Fochesato 
et al., 2018 

Under GIT 
conditions 

82.39 
93.89 ng/g 
viable 
1×10 8 
Simulated 
GIT 

RC007 
L. rhamnosus 

Rahnama 
Vosough et 
al., 2013 

slow process 
24 h 
incubation 
period 

44-49 
5 µg/L 
10 µg/L 
20 µg/L 

Viable 
heat killed 
acid killed 

1×10 9 
cottonseed 
GG 
L. rhamnosus 

Shahin, 
2007 

Strong 
stability of 
complex 

86.1 
100 

2 μg/L 
Dead cells 
(by 
boiling) 

10 7 -10 8 
phosphate 
buffer 
solution 

Lactococcus lactis 
Sterptococcus 
thermophilus 
Shahin, 
2007 

Strong 
stability 

54.35 
81 

2 μg/L 
viable 
10 7 -10 8 
phosphate 
buffer 
solution 

Lactococcus lactis 
Sterptococcus 
thermophilus 
Taheur et 
al., 2017 

80-100 
1 μg/mL 
viable 
8.4 × 10 7 
milk 
KFLM3 
L. kefiri 



## Table 2
2Several kinds of probiotics applied for detoxification of aflatoxin M1 OLUWAFEMI, F., KUMAR, M., BANDYOPADHYAY, R., OGUNBANWO, T., AYANWANDE, K.B. 2010. Bio-detoxification of aflatoxinReferences 

Explanatio 
n 

AFM1 
remova 
l % 

Initial AFM1 
Concentratio 
n 

Probiotic 
Condition 

Probiotic 
concentratio 
n 
(CFU/mL) 

Mediu 
m kind 

Strain 
probiotic 

Adibpour et al., 
2016 

in the 
presence and 
absence of 
yoghurt 
starter 

90 
0.1, 0.5, 0.75 
μg/L 

viable 
1×10 8 
yoghurt 
LA-5 
L. 
acidophilus 

Assaf et al., 
2018 

18 h 
incubation 
period at 37 
°C Partial 
reversible 

63 
50, 100 μg/L 
Viable and 
heat 
treated 

5×10 8 -10 10 
liquid 
media 

GG 
L. rhamnosus 

Karazhiyan et 
al., 2016 

different 
storage 
times (1, 7, 

74.2-
76.4 

100, 500 and 
750 pg/ mL 

viable, 
acid-, heat-
and 

2.1×10 9 
yoghurt 
S. cerevisiae 

Acknowledgment: Declared none.Aflatoxin removal mainly relies on aflatoxin binding to probiotic cell walls rather than bacterial metabolism. This removal was described as a reversible phenomenon, probiotic strain-and dose-dependent, and did not affect the viability of probiotics. Binding is related to some protein and carbohydrate components in the cell wall of probiotics. The stability and strength of binding of probiotics to aflatoxins is also a key consideration for evaluation of probiotic strains ability to decline aflatoxins. The binding stability depends on the environmental conditions (such as pH), probiotic strain, amino acid composition of peptidoglycan structure, formation medium conditions and the treatment used to investigate stability. According to previous studies, aflatoxin binding could be permanent if the probiotic strains are dead, whereas the living probiotics may release some of the aflatoxin content with time. As reported, treated probiotic cells with physical and chemical treatments (high temperature, adding metal ions or acids, alkaline and enzymatic treatments) seems to increase their aflatoxin binding efficiency due to the impact of hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. This is quite related to the probiotic cell wall components, mainly peptidoglycans and exopolysaccharides. Even though probiotic effect can be varied between species and strains of probiotics, the most efficient probiotic strains could be applied as biological detoxifying agents in various kinds of food and livestock feed frequently contaminated by aflatoxins in order to increase food safety. As reported by several researches, under appropriate in vitro conditions, L. rhamnosus and L. bulgaricus have high potential for removal of AFB1 and AFM1, respectively. In vivo studies are all in agreement that aflatoxin binding by probiotics is in fact better at lower pH, therefore, the probiotics have the ability to bind with aflatoxins in the small intestine and subsequently preventing toxicity of aflatoxin. Despite the promising research findings, future studies should also focus on the potential release of aflatoxins (from probiotics) after ingestion and the dose of toxicity of the bound aflatoxin compared to its unbound form. Until now, all the studies have been conducted bench scale and there are not any applicable industrial reports for probiotics application in detoxification of aflatoxins from foods. So, further research on the pilot and industrial scale of such process is required. Also, future study on screening of new probiotic strains, combination of different probiotic strains, improvement of culture conditions, genetic engineering, and modeling of bioprocess would be required in this field of research.
Effect of storage time and concentration of aflatoxin M1 on toxin binding capacity of L. acidophilus in fermented milk product. N Adibpour, S Soleimanian-Zad, M Sarabi-Jamab, F Tajalli, Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology. 18ADIBPOUR, N., SOLEIMANIAN-ZAD, S., SARABI-JAMAB, M., TAJALLI, F. 2016. Effect of storage time and concentration of aflatoxin M1 on toxin binding capacity of L. acidophilus in fermented milk product. Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology, 18, 1209-1220.

Potential of lactic acid bacteria in aflatoxin risk mitigation. S H Ahlberg, V Joutsjoki, H J Korhonena, 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2015.04.042International Journal of Food Microbiology. 207AHLBERG, S.H., JOUTSJOKI, V., KORHONENA, H.J. 2015. Potential of lactic acid bacteria in aflatoxin risk mitigation. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 207, 87-102. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2015.04.042

Chemical composition of the cell wall of lactic acid bacteria and related species. V M Ambrosini, S Gonzalez, G Perdigon, De Ruiz, A P Holdago, G Oliver, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin. 4411AMBROSINI, V.M., GONZALEZ, S., PERDIGON, G., DE RUIZ HOLDAGO, A.P., OLIVER, G. 1996. Chemical composition of the cell wall of lactic acid bacteria and related species. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 44 (11), 2263-2267.

Adsorption of ochratoxin A and zearalenone by potential probiotic Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains and its relation with cell wall thickness. M Armando, R Pizzolitto, C Dogi, A Cristofolini, C Merkis, V Poloni, J C Assaf, A Atoui, A El Khoury, A Chokr, N Louka, 10.1016/j.bjm.2017.05.003Brazilian Journal of Microbiology. 113Journal of Applied MicrobiologyARMANDO, M., PIZZOLITTO, R., DOGI, C., CRISTOFOLINI, A., MERKIS, C., POLONI, V. 2012. Adsorption of ochratoxin A and zearalenone by potential probiotic Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains and its relation with cell wall thickness. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 113, 256-264. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.05331.x ASSAF, J.C., ATOUI, A., EL KHOURY, A., CHOKR, A., LOUKA, N. 2018. A comparative study of procedures for binding of aflatoxin M1 to Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology, 49, 120-127. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bjm.2017.05.003

The capacity of mannooligosaccharides thermolysed yeast and active yeast to attenuate aflatoxicosis. A S Baptista, J Horii, M A Calori-Domingues, E M Da Gloria, J M Salgado, M R Vizioli, World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology. 205BAPTISTA, A.S., HORII, J., CALORI-DOMINGUES, M.A., DA GLORIA, E.M., SALGADO, J.M., VIZIOLI, M.R. 2004. The capacity of mannooligosaccharides thermolysed yeast and active yeast to attenuate aflatoxicosis. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 20(5), 475-481.

Potential preventive role of lactic acid bacteria against aflatoxin M1 immunotoxicity and genotoxicity in mice. H Bejaoui, F Mathieu, P Taillandier, A Lebrihi, J B Ben Salah-Abbe`s, S Abbe`s, R Jebali, Z Haous, R Oueslati, 10.3109/1547691X.2014.904025Journal of Applied Microbiology. 975Journal of ImmunotoxicologyBEJAOUI, H., MATHIEU, F., TAILLANDIER, P., LEBRIHI, A. 2004. Ochratoxin A removal in synthetic and natural grape juices by selected oenological Saccharomyces strains. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 97(5), 1038-1044. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2004.02385.x BEN SALAH-ABBE`S, J.B., ABBE`S, S., JEBALI, R., HAOUS, Z., OUESLATI, R. 2015. Potential preventive role of lactic acid bacteria against aflatoxin M1 immunotoxicity and genotoxicity in mice. Journal of Immunotoxicology, 12(2), 107-114. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/1547691X.2014.904025

Ochratoxin A released back into the medium by Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a function of the strain, washing medium and fermentative conditions. A Bevilacqua, L Petruzzi, M R Corbo, A Baiano, C Garofalo, M Sinigaglia, 10.1002/jsfa.6683Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 94BEVILACQUA, A., PETRUZZI, L., CORBO, M.R., BAIANO, A., GAROFALO, C., SINIGAGLIA, M. 2014. Ochratoxin A released back into the medium by Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a function of the strain, washing medium and fermentative conditions. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 94, 3291-3295. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.6683

Efficiency of lactic acid bacteria strains for decontamination of aflatoxin M1 in phosphate buffer saline solution and in skim milk. F Bovo, C H Corassin, R E Rosim, C A F Oliveira, Food and Bioprocess Technology. 51BOVO, F., CORASSIN, C.H., ROSIM, R.E., OLIVEIRA, C.A.F. 2012. Efficiency of lactic acid bacteria strains for decontamination of aflatoxin M1 in phosphate buffer saline solution and in skim milk. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 5(1), 1-5.

The ability of Lactobacillus rhamnosus in solution, spray-dried or lyophilized to bind aflatoxin B1. F Bovo, L T Franco, R Rosim, E Favaro, C S Trindade, C A Fernandes De Oliveira, 10.5539/jfr.v3n2p35Journal of Food Researches. 3BOVO, F., FRANCO, L.T., ROSIM, R., FAVARO, E., TRINDADE, C.S., FERNANDES DE OLIVEIRA, C.A. 2014. The ability of Lactobacillus rhamnosus in solution, spray-dried or lyophilized to bind aflatoxin B1. Journal of Food Researches, 3, 35-41. http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/jfr.v3n2p35

Physical adsorption of Aflatoxin B1 by lactic acid bacteria and Saccharomyces cerevisiae: A theoretical model. D J Bueno, C H Casale, R P Pizzolitto, M A Salano, G Olivier, Journal of Food Protection. 709BUENO, D.J., CASALE, C.H., PIZZOLITTO, R.P., SALANO, M.A., OLIVIER, G. 2006. Physical adsorption of Aflatoxin B1 by lactic acid bacteria and Saccharomyces cerevisiae: A theoretical model. Journal of Food Protection, 70(9), 2148-2154.

Cell wall structure and function in lactic acid bacteria. M Chapot-Chartier, S Kulakauskas, 10.1186/1475-2859-13-S1-S9Microbial Cell Factories. 13CHAPOT-CHARTIER, M., KULAKAUSKAS, S. 2014. Cell wall structure and function in lactic acid bacteria. Microbial Cell Factories, 13, S9. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-13-S1-S9

Interaction between Streptococcus lactis and Aspergillus flavus on production of aflatoxin. J Coallier-Ascah, E S Idziak, Applied Environmental Microbiology. 491COALLIER-ASCAH, J., IDZIAK, E.S. 1985. Interaction between Streptococcus lactis and Aspergillus flavus on production of aflatoxin. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 49(1), 163-167.

Efficiency of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and lactic acid bacteria strains to bind aflatoxin M-1 in UHT skim milk. C H Corassin, F Bovo, R E Rosim, C A F Oliveira, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.09.033Food Control. 31CORASSIN, C.H., BOVO, F., ROSIM, R.E., OLIVEIRA, C.A.F. 2013. Efficiency of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and lactic acid bacteria strains to bind aflatoxin M-1 in UHT skim milk. Food Control, 31, 80-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.09.033

Lactic acid bacteria -Potential for control of mould growth and mycotoxins: A review. D K D Dalié, A M Deschamps, F Richard-Forget, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2009.07.011Food Control. 21DALIÉ, D.K.D., DESCHAMPS, A.M., RICHARD-FORGET, F. 2010. Lactic acid bacteria -Potential for control of mould growth and mycotoxins: A review. Food Control, 21, 370-380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2009.07.011

Characterization of lactic acid bacteria as poultry probiotic candidates with aflatoxin B1 binding activities. E Damayanti, L Istiqomah, J E Saragih, T Purwoko, E Sardjono, Environmental Earth Sciences. 101DAMAYANTI, E., ISTIQOMAH, L., SARAGIH, J.E., PURWOKO, T., SARDJONO, E. 2017. Characterization of lactic acid bacteria as poultry probiotic candidates with aflatoxin B1 binding activities. Environmental Earth Sciences, 101, 1-8.

Analysis of aflatoxin M1 in milk and yogurt and AFM1 reduction by lactic acid bacteria used in Lebanese industry. A El Khoury, A Atoui, J Yaghi, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2011.04.001Food Control. 22EL KHOURY, A., ATOUI, A., YAGHI, J. 2011. Analysis of aflatoxin M1 in milk and yogurt and AFM1 reduction by lactic acid bacteria used in Lebanese industry. Food Control, 22, 1695-1699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2011.04.001

Effects of lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria on levels of aflatoxin M1 in milk and phosphate buffer. A M Elgerbi, K E Aidoo, A A G Candlish, A G Williams, Milchwissenschaft. 2ELGERBI, A.M., AIDOO, K.E., CANDLISH, A.A.G., WILLIAMS, A.G. 2006. Effects of lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria on levels of aflatoxin M1 in milk and phosphate buffer. Milchwissenschaft, 61(2), 197-199.

Probiotic supplementation reduces a biomarker for increased risk of liver cancer in young men from Southern China. H S El-Nezami, N N Polychronaki, J Ma, H Zhu, W Ling, E K Salminen, 10.1093/ajcn/83.5.1199American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 83EL-NEZAMI, H.S., POLYCHRONAKI, N.N., MA, J., ZHU, H., LING, W., SALMINEN, E.K. 2006. Probiotic supplementation reduces a biomarker for increased risk of liver cancer in young men from Southern China. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 83, 1199-1203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/83.5.1199

Ability of dairy strains of lactic acid bacteria to bind a common food carcinogen, aflatoxin B1. H El-Nezami, P Kankaanpaa, S Salminen, J Ahokas, Food and Chemical Toxicology. 36EL-NEZAMI, H., KANKAANPAA, P., SALMINEN, S., AHOKAS, J. 1998. Ability of dairy strains of lactic acid bacteria to bind a common food carcinogen, aflatoxin B1. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 36, 321-326.

Ability of Lactobacillus and Propionibacterium strains to remove aflatoxin B1, from the chicken duodenum. H El-Nezami, H Mykkanen, P Kankaanpaa, S Salminen, J Ahokas, Journal of Food Protection. 63EL-NEZAMI, H., MYKKANEN, H., KANKAANPAA, P., SALMINEN, S., AHOKAS, J. 2000. Ability of Lactobacillus and Propionibacterium strains to remove aflatoxin B1, from the chicken duodenum. Journal of Food Protection, 63, 549-552.

Binding rather than metabolism may explain the interaction of two food-grade Lactobacillus strains with zearalenone and its derivative alpha-zearalenol. H El-Nezami, N Polychronaki, S Salminen, H Mykkanen, 10.1128/aem.68.7.3545-3549.2002Applied Environmental Microbiology. 687EL-NEZAMI, H., POLYCHRONAKI, N., SALMINEN, S., MYKKANEN, H. 2002. Binding rather than metabolism may explain the interaction of two food-grade Lactobacillus strains with zearalenone and its derivative alpha-zearalenol. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 68(7), 3545-3549. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.68.7.3545-3549.2002

Application of lactic acid bacteria in removing heavy metals and aflatoxin B1 from contaminated water. R M Elsanhoty, I A Al-Turki, M F Ramadan, 10.2166/wst.2016.255Water Science and Technology. 743ELSANHOTY, R.M., AL-TURKI, I.A., RAMADAN, M.F. 2016. Application of lactic acid bacteria in removing heavy metals and aflatoxin B1 from contaminated water. Water Science and Technology, 74 (3), 625-638. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2016.255

Detoxification of aflatoxin M1 in yoghurt using probiotics and lactic acid bacteria. R M Elsanhoty, S A Salam, M F Ramadan, F H Badr, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.03.002Food Control. 43ELSANHOTY, R.M., SALAM, S.A., RAMADAN, M.F., BADR, F.H. 2014. Detoxification of aflatoxin M1 in yoghurt using probiotics and lactic acid bacteria. Food Control, 43, 129-134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.03.002

Setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs. European Commission, Official Journal of the European Union. 364Commission Regulation (EC) No.1881/EUROPEAN COMMISSION. 2006. Commission Regulation (EC) No.1881/2006 of 19 December. Setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs. Official Journal of the European Union, 364, 5-24.

Aflatoxin B1 binding capacity of autochthonous strains of lactic acid bacteria. M R Fazeli, M Hajimohammadali, A Moshkani, N Samadi, H Jamalifar, M R Khoshayand, Journal of Food Protection. 72FAZELI, M.R., HAJIMOHAMMADALI, M., MOSHKANI, A., SAMADI, N., JAMALIFAR, H., KHOSHAYAND, M.R. 2009. Aflatoxin B1 binding capacity of autochthonous strains of lactic acid bacteria. Journal of Food Protection, 72, 189-192.

In vitro aflatoxin B1 binding capacity by two Enterococcus faecium strains isolated from healthy dog faeces. M G Fernandez Juri, A M Dalcero, C E Magnoli, A S Fochesato, D Cuello, V Poloni, M A Galvagno, C A Dogi, L R Cavaglieri, 10.1111/jam.12726Journal of Applied Microbiology. 118Aflatoxin B1FERNANDEZ JURI, M.G., DALCERO, A.M., MAGNOLI, C.E. 2014. In vitro aflatoxin B1 binding capacity by two Enterococcus faecium strains isolated from healthy dog faeces. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 118, 574-582. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jam.12726 FOCHESATO, A.S., CUELLO, D., POLONI, V., GALVAGNO, M.A., DOGI, C.A., CAVAGLIERI, L.R. 2018. Aflatoxin B1

Yadav By, S Bajagai Athol, V Klieve Peter, J Wayne, L , 10.1111/jam.14101adsorption/desorption dynamics in the presence of Lactobacillus rhamnosus RC007 in a gastrointestinal tract-simulated model. 126179FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA). 2005. Compliance ProgramGuidance Manual. Accessed 31.03.16adsorption/desorption dynamics in the presence of Lactobacillus rhamnosus RC007 in a gastrointestinal tract-simulated model. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 126, 223-229. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jam.14101 FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO). 2016. Probiotics in animal nutrition -production, impact and regulation by YADAV, S., BAJAGAI ATHOL, V., KLIEVE PETER, J., WAYNE, L. p. 179. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA). 2005. Compliance ProgramGuidance Manual. Accessed 31.03.16.

In Vitro binding potentials of Bentonite, yeast cell wall and lactic acid bacteria for aflatoxin B1 and Ochratoxin A. D Ghofrani Tabari, H Kermanshahi, A Golian, R Majidzadeh Heravi, 10.29252/arakmu.12.2.7Iranian Journal of Toxicology. 122GHOFRANI TABARI, D., KERMANSHAHI, H., GOLIAN, A., MAJIDZADEH HERAVI, R. 2018. In Vitro binding potentials of Bentonite, yeast cell wall and lactic acid bacteria for aflatoxin B1 and Ochratoxin A. Iranian Journal of Toxicology, 12(2), 7-13. http://dx.doi.org/10.29252/arakmu.12.2.7

Antifungal and aflatoxin-reducing activity of extracellular compounds produced by soil Bacillus spp. with potential application in agriculture. M L Gonzalez Pereyra, M P Martinez, L R Cavaglieri, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2017.10.020Food Control. 85GONZALEZ PEREYRA, M.L., MARTINEZ, M.P., CAVAGLIERI, L.R. 2018. Antifungal and aflatoxin-reducing activity of extracellular compounds produced by soil Bacillus spp. with potential application in agriculture. Food Control, 85, 392-399. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2017.10.020

Anti-aflatoxigenic activity of Lactobacillus casei pseudoplantarum. H Gourama, L B Bullerman, International Journal of Food Microbiology. 342GOURAMA, H., BULLERMAN, L.B. 1997. Anti-aflatoxigenic activity of Lactobacillus casei pseudoplantarum. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 34(2), 131-143.

Probiotics and gut health: a special focus on liver diseases. S W Gratz, H Mykkanen, H S El-Nezami, 10.3748/wjg.v16.i4.403World Journal of Gastroenterology. 16GRATZ, S.W., MYKKANEN, H., EL-NEZAMI, H.S. 2010. Probiotics and gut health: a special focus on liver diseases. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 16, 403-409. http://dx.doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v16.i4.403

Aflatoxin B1 binding by a mixture of Lactobacillus and Propionibacterium: In vitro versus ex vivo. S Gratz, H Mykkänen, H Elnezami, Journal of Food Protection. 68GRATZ, S., MYKKÄNEN, H., ELNEZAMI, H. 2005. Aflatoxin B1 binding by a mixture of Lactobacillus and Propionibacterium: In vitro versus ex vivo. Journal of Food Protection, 68, 2470-2474.

Intestinal mucus alters the ability of probiotic bacteria to bind aflatoxin B1 in vitro. S Gratz, H Mykkänen, A C Ouwehand, R Juvonen, S Salminen, H El-Nezami, 10.1128/AEM.70.10.6306-6308Applied Environmental Microbiology. 70GRATZ, S., MYKKÄNEN, H., OUWEHAND, A.C., JUVONEN, R., SALMINEN, S., EL-NEZAMI, H. 2004. Intestinal mucus alters the ability of probiotic bacteria to bind aflatoxin B1 in vitro. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 70, 6306-6308. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.70.10.6306-6308

Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG modulates intestinal absorption, fecal excretion, and toxicity of aflatoxin B1 in rats. S Gratz, M Täubel, R O Juvonen, M Viluksela, P C Turner, H Mykkänen, 10.1128/AEM.01348-06Applied Environmental Microbiology. 7211GRATZ, S., TÄUBEL, M., JUVONEN, R.O., VILUKSELA, M., TURNER, P.C., MYKKÄNEN, H. 2006. Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG modulates intestinal absorption, fecal excretion, and toxicity of aflatoxin B1 in rats. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 72 (11), 7398- 7400. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01348-06

Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG reduces aflatoxin B1 transport, metabolism, and toxicity in Caco-2 cells. S Gratz, Q K Wu, H El-Nezami, R O Juvonen, H Mykkanen, P C Turner, 10.1128/AEM.02944-06Applied Environmental Microbiology. 7312GRATZ, S., WU, Q.K., EL-NEZAMI, H., JUVONEN, R.O., MYKKANEN, H., TURNER, P.C. 2007. Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG reduces aflatoxin B1 transport, metabolism, and toxicity in Caco-2 cells. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 73(12), 3958-3964. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02944-06

Modulation of intestinal functions following mycotoxin ingestion: meta-analysis of published experiments in animals. B Grenier, T J Applegate, 10.3390/toxins5020396Toxins. 5GRENIER, B., APPLEGATE, T.J. 2013. Modulation of intestinal functions following mycotoxin ingestion: meta-analysis of published experiments in animals. Toxins, 5, 396-430. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/toxins5020396

Assessing the Effectiveness of Sport Sponsorships: An Empirical Examination. R Grohs, S Vsetecka, U Wagner, 10.1007/BF03396689Schmalenbach Business Reviews. 56GROHS, R., VSETECKA, S., WAGNER, U. 2004. Assessing the Effectiveness of Sport Sponsorships: An Empirical Examination. Schmalenbach Business Reviews, 56, 119-138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF03396689

Assessment of Mercury biosorption by Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Response surface methodology for optimization of low Hg (II) concentrations. M R Hadiani, K Khosravi-Darani, N Rahimifard, H Younesi, 10.1016/j.jece.2018.07.034Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 64HADIANI, M.R., KHOSRAVI-DARANI, K., RAHIMIFARD, N., YOUNESI, H. 2018a. Assessment of Mercury biosorption by Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Response surface methodology for optimization of low Hg (II) concentrations. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 6(4), 4980-4987. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2018.07.034

Biosorption of low concentration levels of Lead (II) and Cadmium (II) from aqueous solution by Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Response surface methodology. M R Hadiani, K Khosravi-Darani, N Rahimifard, H Younesi, 10.1016/j.bcab.2018.05.001Biocatalysis and Agricultural Biotechnology. 15HADIANI, M.R., KHOSRAVI-DARANI, K., RAHIMIFARD, N., YOUNESI, H. 2018b. Biosorption of low concentration levels of Lead (II) and Cadmium (II) from aqueous solution by Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Response surface methodology. Biocatalysis and Agricultural Biotechnology, 15, 25-34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcab.2018.05.001

Combining strains of lactic acid bacteria may reduce their toxin and heavy metal removal efficiency from aqueous solution. T Halttunen, M C Collado, H El-Nezami, J Meriluato, S Salminen, A Hamidi, R Mirnejad, E Yahaghi, V Behnod, A Mirhosseini, S Amani, 10.1111/j.1472-765X.2007.02276.xAsian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine. 46Letters in Applied MicrobiologyHALTTUNEN, T., COLLADO, M.C., EL-NEZAMI, H., MERILUATO, J., SALMINEN, S. 2008. Combining strains of lactic acid bacteria may reduce their toxin and heavy metal removal efficiency from aqueous solution. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 46, 160-165. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1472-765X.2007.02276.x HAMIDI, A., MIRNEJAD, R., YAHAGHI, E., BEHNOD, V., MIRHOSSEINI, A., AMANI, S. 2013. The aflatoxin B1 isolating potential of two lactic acid bacteria. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine, 3, 732-736. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60147-1

Surface binding of aflatoxin B1 by lactic acid bacteria. C A Haskard, H S El-Nezami, P E Kankaanpää, S Salminen, J T Ahokas, 10.1128/AEM.67.7.3086-3091.2001Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 67HASKARD, C.A., EL-NEZAMI, H.S., KANKAANPÄÄ, P.E., SALMINEN, S., AHOKAS, J.T. 2001. Surface binding of aflatoxin B1 by lactic acid bacteria. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 67, 3086-3091. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.67.7.3086-3091.2001

Factors affecting the sequestration of aflatoxin by Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG. C Haskard, C Binnion, J Ahokas, Chemico-Biological Interactions. 128HASKARD, C., BINNION, C., AHOKAS, J. 2000. Factors affecting the sequestration of aflatoxin by Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG. Chemico-Biological Interactions, 128, 39-49.

Ability of Lactobacillus casei and Lactobacillus reuteri to protect against oxidative stress in rats fed aflatoxins-contaminated diet. A S Hathout, S R Mohamed, A A El-Nekeety, N S Hassan, S E Aly, M A Abdel-Wahhab, 10.1016/j.toxicon.2011.05.015Toxicon. 58HATHOUT, A.S., MOHAMED, S.R., EL-NEKEETY, A.A., HASSAN, N.S., ALY, S.E., ABDEL-WAHHAB, M.A. 2011. Ability of Lactobacillus casei and Lactobacillus reuteri to protect against oxidative stress in rats fed aflatoxins-contaminated diet. Toxicon, 58, 179-186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2011.05.015

Aflatoxins binding by Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. boulardii in functional cereal based icecream. E M Hegazy, Z I Sadek, K El-Shafei, A B El-Khalek, Life Sciences Journal. 84HEGAZY, E.M., SADEK, Z.I., EL-SHAFEI, K., ABD EL-KHALEK, A.B. 2011. Aflatoxins binding by Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. boulardii in functional cereal based icecream. Life Sciences Journal, 8(4), 75-81.

Screening of Lactobacillus casei strains for their ability to bind aflatoxin B1. A Hernandez-Mendoza, H S Garcia, J L Steele, Food and Chemical Toxicology. 476HERNANDEZ-MENDOZA, A., GARCIA, H.S., STEELE, J.L. 2009. Screening of Lactobacillus casei strains for their ability to bind aflatoxin B1. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 47(6), 1064-1068.

In vivo assessment of the potential protective effect of Lactobacillus casei Shirota against aflatoxin B 1. Dairy Science and Technology. A Hernandez-Mendoza, D Guzman-De-Peña, B Vallejo-Córdoba, H S Garcia, 10.1051/dst/201003090HERNANDEZ-MENDOZA, A., GUZMAN-DE-PEÑA, D., VALLEJO-CÓRDOBA, B., GARCIA, H.S. 2010. In vivo assessment of the potential protective effect of Lactobacillus casei Shirota against aflatoxin B 1. Dairy Science and Technology, 90, 729-740. http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/dst/2010030

Effect of certain factors on surface binding of aflatoxin B1 by some probiotic strains. A H Hussien, Journal of Radiation Research and Applied Sciences. 12HUSSIEN, A.H. 2008. Effect of certain factors on surface binding of aflatoxin B1 by some probiotic strains. Journal of Radiation Research and Applied Sciences, 1(2), 245-250.

Aflatoxin M1 in milk and distribution and stability of aflatoxin M1 during production and storage of yoghurt and cheese. M H Iha, C B Barbosa, I A Okada, M W Trucksess, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.05.058INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC). 2016. Agents Classified by the IARC Monographs. 29IHA, M.H., BARBOSA, C.B., OKADA, I.A., TRUCKSESS, M.W. 2013. Aflatoxin M1 in milk and distribution and stability of aflatoxin M1 during production and storage of yoghurt and cheese. Food Control, 29(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.05.058 INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC). 2016. Agents Classified by the IARC Monographs. vol. 1-116 Available from:. http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/ Classification/ latest_classif. Php.

Sequential pathology of experimental aflatoxicosis in quail and the effect of selenium supplementation in modifying the disease process. K K Jakhar, J R Sadana, Mycopathology. 157JAKHAR, K.K., SADANA, J.R. 2004. Sequential pathology of experimental aflatoxicosis in quail and the effect of selenium supplementation in modifying the disease process. Mycopathology, 157, 99-109.

Effects of aflatoxin B1 on T-cell subsets and mRNA expression of cytokines in the intestine of broilers. M Jiang, X Peng, J Fang, H Cui, Z Yu, Z Chen, 10.3390/ijms16046945International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 16JIANG, M., PENG, X., FANG, J., CUI, H., YU, Z., CHEN, Z. 2015. Effects of aflatoxin B1 on T-cell subsets and mRNA expression of cytokines in the intestine of broilers. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 16, 6945-6959. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijms16046945

Binding of aflatoxin B1 alters the adhesion properties of Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG in a Caco-2 model. P Kankaanpaa, E Tuomola, H S El-Nezami, J Ahokas, S J Salmanien, Journal of Food Protection. 633KANKAANPAA, P., TUOMOLA, E., EL-NEZAMI, H.S., AHOKAS, J., SALMANIEN, S.J. 2000. Binding of aflatoxin B1 alters the adhesion properties of Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG in a Caco-2 model. Journal of Food Protection, 63(3), 412-414.

Ability of different treatments of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to surface bind aflatoxin M1 in yoghurt. H Karazhiyan, M Mehraban Sangatash, R Karazhyan, A Mehrzad, E Haghighi, Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology. 18KARAZHIYAN, H., MEHRABAN SANGATASH, M., KARAZHYAN, R., MEHRZAD, A., HAGHIGHI, E. 2016. Ability of different treatments of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to surface bind aflatoxin M1 in yoghurt. Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology, 18, 1489- 1498.

An in vitro investigation of aflatoxin B1 biological control by Lactobacillus plantarum. A Khanafari, H Soudi, M Miraboulfathi, R K Osboo, Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences. 10KHANAFARI, A., SOUDI, H., MIRABOULFATHI, M., OSBOO, R.K. 2007. An in vitro investigation of aflatoxin B1 biological control by Lactobacillus plantarum. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences, 10, 2553-2556.

Binding of aflatoxin B1 to cell wall components of Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG. S J Lahtinen, C A Haskard, A C Ouwehand, S Salminen, J Ahokas, Food Additives and Contaminants. 21LAHTINEN, S.J., HASKARD, C.A., OUWEHAND, A.C., SALMINEN, S., AHOKAS, J. 2004. Binding of aflatoxin B1 to cell wall components of Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG. Food Additives and Contaminants, 21, 158-164.

. 10.1080/02652030310001639521http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02652030310001639521

Kinetics of adsorption and desorption of aflatoxin B1 by viable and nonviable bacteria. Y Lee, H El-Nezami, C Haskard, S Gratz, K Puong, S Salminen, Journal of Food protection. 66LEE, Y., EL-NEZAMI, H., HASKARD, C., GRATZ, S., PUONG, K., SALMINEN, S. 2003. Kinetics of adsorption and desorption of aflatoxin B1 by viable and nonviable bacteria. Journal of Food protection, 66, 426-430.

Aflatoxins and their impact on human and animal health: an emerging problem. E G Lizárraga-Paulín, E Moreno-Martínez, S P Miranda-Castro, Aflatoxins -Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. R. G. Guevara-GonzalezRijeka, CroatiaLIZÁRRAGA-PAULÍN, E.G., MORENO-MARTÍNEZ, E., MIRANDA-CASTRO, S.P. 2011. Aflatoxins and their impact on human and animal health: an emerging problem. In: Aflatoxins -Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (edited by R. G. Guevara-Gonzalez). p. 255-282. Rijeka, Croatia.

Detoxification of aflatoxin B1 by lactic acid bacteria and hydrated sodium calcium aluminosilicate in broiler chickens. N Liu, J Wang, Q Deng, K Gu, J Wang, 10.1016/j.livsci.2017.12.005Livestock Science. 208LIU, N., WANG, J., DENG, Q., GU, K., WANG, J. 2018. Detoxification of aflatoxin B1 by lactic acid bacteria and hydrated sodium calcium aluminosilicate in broiler chickens. Livestock Science, 208, 28-32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.livsci.2017.12.005

Aflatoxins in spices marketed in Portugal. M L Martins, H M Martins, F Bernardo, 10.1080/02652030120041Food Additives and Contaminants. 18MARTINS, M.L., MARTINS, H.M., BERNARDO, F. 2001. Aflatoxins in spices marketed in Portugal. Food Additives and Contaminants, 18, 315-319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02652030120041

Ochratoxin A: From safety aspects to prevention and remediation strategies. R Massoud, A Cruz, K Khosravi-Darani, 10.2174/1573401313666170517165500Current Nutrition and Food Science. 141MASSOUD, R., CRUZ, A., KHOSRAVI-DARANI, K. 2018. Ochratoxin A: From safety aspects to prevention and remediation strategies. Current Nutrition and Food Science, 14(1), 11-16. http://dx.doi.org/10.2174/1573401313666170517165500

Effect of some acid treated bacteria on reduction of impure aflatoxin B1 in ruminant gastrointestinal model. R Motameny, A A Sadeghi, M Dehghan-Banadaky, M Chamani, M Abolhassani, Journal of American Sciences. 7MOTAMENY, R., SADEGHI, A.A., DEHGHAN-BANADAKY, M., CHAMANI, M., ABOLHASSANI, M. 2012. Effect of some acid treated bacteria on reduction of impure aflatoxin B1 in ruminant gastrointestinal model. Journal of American Sciences, 7, 213-217.

Effect of some lactic acid bacteria strains on aflatoxins reduction in some dairy foods. Development of Higher Specific Education Programs in Egypt and the Arab World in the Light of Knowledge Era Requirements. The 6th Arab and 3 rd International Annual Scientific Conference. M M Motawee, M A El-Ghany, Egypt, T M Nazareth, C Luz, R Torrijos, J M Quiles, F B Luciano, J Mañes, G Meca, 10.3390/toxins12010021Toxins. 12Potential application of lactic acid bacteria to reduce Aflatoxin B1 and Fumonisin B1 occurrence on corn kernels and corn earsMOTAWEE, M.M., ABD EL-GHANY, M.A. 2011. Effect of some lactic acid bacteria strains on aflatoxins reduction in some dairy foods. Development of Higher Specific Education Programs in Egypt and the Arab World in the Light of Knowledge Era Requirements. The 6th Arab and 3 rd International Annual Scientific Conference, Egypt. NAZARETH, T.M., LUZ, C., TORRIJOS, R., QUILES, J.M., LUCIANO, F.B., MAÑES, J., MECA, G. 2020. Potential application of lactic acid bacteria to reduce Aflatoxin B1 and Fumonisin B1 occurrence on corn kernels and corn ears. Toxins, 12, 21. https://doi.org/10.3390/toxins12010021

Cell wall component and mycotoxin moieties involved in the binding of fumonisin B1 and B2 by lactic acid bacteria. V Niderkorn, D P Morgavi, B Aboab, M Lemaire, H ; E Boudra, R Jamaluddin, M S Abdul Mutalib, H Khaza&apos;ai, S Khalesi, S Mohd Redzwan, 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.04065.xJournal of Applied Microbiology. 1063NIDERKORN, V., MORGAVI, D.P., ABOAB, B., LEMAIRE, M., BOUDRA, H. 2009. Cell wall component and mycotoxin moieties involved in the binding of fumonisin B1 and B2 by lactic acid bacteria. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 106(3), 977-985. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.04065.x NIKBAKHT NASRABADI, E., JAMALUDDIN, R., ABDUL MUTALIB, M.S., KHAZA'AI, H., KHALESI, S., MOHD REDZWAN, S.

Reduction of aflatoxin level in aflatoxin-induced rats by the activity of probiotic Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota. 10.1111/jam.12148Journal of Applied Microbiology. 114Reduction of aflatoxin level in aflatoxin-induced rats by the activity of probiotic Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 114, 1507-1515. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jam.12148

Removal of aflatoxins by viable and heat-killed Lactobacillus species isolated from fermented maize. F Oluwafemi, F A Da-Silva, Journal of Applied Biosciences. 16OLUWAFEMI, F., DA-SILVA, F.A. 2009. Removal of aflatoxins by viable and heat-killed Lactobacillus species isolated from fermented maize. Journal of Applied Biosciences, 16, 871-876. 115-122.

. 10.3109/15569543.2010.512556https://doi.org/10.3109/15569543.2010.512556

Binding of aflatoxin B1 by probiotic bacteria. K D Peltonen, H S El-Nezami, S J Salminen, J T Ahokas, 10.1002/1097-0010(200010)80:13%3c1942::AID-JSFA741%3e3.0.CO;2-7Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 80PELTONEN, K.D., EL-NEZAMI, H.S., SALMINEN, S.J., AHOKAS, J.T. 2000. Binding of aflatoxin B1 by probiotic bacteria. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 80, 1942-1945. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0010(200010)80

Aflatoxin B1 binding by dairy strains of lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria. K Peltonen, H El-Nezami, C Haskard, J Ahokas, S Salminen, 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(01)74660-7Journal of Dairy Sciences. 84PELTONEN, K., EL-NEZAMI, H., HASKARD, C., AHOKAS, J., SALMINEN, S. 2001. Aflatoxin B1 binding by dairy strains of lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria. Journal of Dairy Sciences, 84, 2152-2156. http://dx.doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(01)74660-7

The efficiency of lactic acid bacteria against pathogenic fungi and mycotoxins. A Perczak, P Goliński, M Bryła, A Waśkiewicz, 10.2478/aiht-2018-69-3051Arch Industrial Hygiene Toxicology. 69PERCZAK, A., GOLIŃSKI, P., BRYŁA, M., WAŚKIEWICZ, A. 2018. The efficiency of lactic acid bacteria against pathogenic fungi and mycotoxins. Arch Industrial Hygiene Toxicology, 69, 32-45. https://doi.org/10.2478/aiht-2018-69-3051

Ability of dairy strains of lactic acid bacteria to bind aflatoxin M1 in a food model. M Pierides, H El-Nezami, K Peltonen, S Salminen, J Ahokas, Journal of Food Protection. 63PIERIDES, M., EL-NEZAMI, H., PELTONEN, K., SALMINEN, S., AHOKAS, J. 2000. Ability of dairy strains of lactic acid bacteria to bind aflatoxin M1 in a food model. Journal of Food Protection, 63, 645-650.

Analysis of fumonisin B1 removal by microorganisms in co-occurrence with aflatoxin B1 and the nature of the binding process. R P Pizzolitto, M A Salvano, M Dalcero, 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2012.03.024International Journal of Food Microbiology. 1563PIZZOLITTO, R.P., SALVANO, M.A., DALCERO, M. 2012. Analysis of fumonisin B1 removal by microorganisms in co-occurrence with aflatoxin B1 and the nature of the binding process. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 156(3), 214-221. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2012.03.024

On the occurrence of aflatoxin M1 in milk and dairy products. A Prandini, G Tansini, S Sigolo, L Filippi, M Laporta, G Piva, 10.1016/j.fct.2007.10.005Food and Chemical Toxicology. 47PRANDINI, A., TANSINI, G., SIGOLO, S., FILIPPI, L., LAPORTA, M., PIVA, G. 2009. On the occurrence of aflatoxin M1 in milk and dairy products. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 47, 984-991. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2007.10.005

Y Pranoto, H Amanah, T Utami, E Rahayu, Study on factors affectin aflatoxin B1 binding by Lactobacillus acidophilus SNP-2. Internatinal Agriculture Engineering Conference. Bangkok: ThailandPRANOTO, Y., AMANAH, H., UTAMI, T., RAHAYU, E. 2007. Study on factors affectin aflatoxin B1 binding by Lactobacillus acidophilus SNP-2. Internatinal Agriculture Engineering Conference, Bangkok: Thailand.

The ability of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae strain in aflatoxin reduction in pistachio nuts. S Rahaie, S H Razavi, Z Jomeh, Iranian Journal of Food Science and Technology. 71RAHAIE, S., RAZAVI, S.H., EMAM JOMEH, Z. 2010. The ability of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae strain in aflatoxin reduction in pistachio nuts. Iranian Journal of Food Science and Technology, 7(1), 81-88.

E S Rahayu, H Z Amanah, R Utami, T Utami, Study on binding of AFB1 by Lactobacillus acidophilus SNP-2. Asian Conference of Lactic Acid Bacteria. ShianghaiChinaRAHAYU, E.S., AMANAH, H.Z., UTAMI, R., UTAMI, T. 2007. Study on binding of AFB1 by Lactobacillus acidophilus SNP-2. Asian Conference of Lactic Acid Bacteria, Shianghai: China.

Assessing the ability of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG to bind aflatoxin B1 from contaminated cottonseed. Rahnama, P Vosough, A Mohamadi Sani, M Mehraban Sangatash, R Karazhyan, Biotechnology An Indian Journal. 71RAHNAMA VOSOUGH, P., MOHAMADI SANI, A., MEHRABAN SANGATASH, M., KARAZHYAN, R. 2013. Assessing the ability of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG to bind aflatoxin B1 from contaminated cottonseed. Biotechnology An Indian Journal, 7(1), 28-33.

Removal of aflatoxin B1 from experimentally contaminated whole milk using a pool of probiotic strains of lactic acid bacteria and baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Aah Rayes, New York Science Journal. 6RAYES AAH. Removal of aflatoxin B1 from experimentally contaminated whole milk using a pool of probiotic strains of lactic acid bacteria and baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. New York Science Journal, 6, 84-90.

Probiotics and prebiotics: prospects for public health and nutritional recommendations. M E Sanders, I Lenoir-Wijnkoop, S Salminen, D J Merenstein, G R Gibson, B W Petschow, 10.1111/nyas.12377Annals New York Academy Sciences. SANDERS, M.E., LENOIR-WIJNKOOP, I., SALMINEN, S., MERENSTEIN, D.J., GIBSON, G.R., PETSCHOW, B.W. 2014. Probiotics and prebiotics: prospects for public health and nutritional recommendations. Annals New York Academy Sciences, 1309, 19-29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12377

-6)-b-D-glucan as cell wall receptor for Pichia membranifaciens killer toxin. A Santos, D Marquina, J A Leal, J M Peinado, 10.1128/aem.66.5.1809-1813.2000Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 661SANTOS, A., MARQUINA, D., LEAL, J.A., PEINADO, J.M. 2006. (1-6)-b-D-glucan as cell wall receptor for Pichia membranifaciens killer toxin. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 1809-1813. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/aem.66.5.1809-1813.2000

Binding ability of aflatoxin M1 to yoghurt bacteria. B Sarimehmetoglu, Ö Küplülü, Ankara University Veteriner Faculties Dergisi. 513SARIMEHMETOGLU, B., KÜPLÜLÜ, Ö. 2004. Binding ability of aflatoxin M1 to yoghurt bacteria. Ankara University Veteriner Faculties Dergisi, 51(3), 195-198.

Assessment of probiotic strains ability to reduce the bioaccessibility of aflatoxin M1 in artificially contaminated milk using an in vitro digestive model. J C Serrano-Niño, A Cavazos-Garduño, A Hernandez-Mendoza, B Applegate, M G Ferruzzi, M F Martin-González, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.09.023Food Control. 311SERRANO-NIÑO, J.C., CAVAZOS-GARDUÑO, A., HERNANDEZ-MENDOZA, A., APPLEGATE, B., FERRUZZI, M.G., SAN MARTIN-GONZÁLEZ, M.F. 2013. Assessment of probiotic strains ability to reduce the bioaccessibility of aflatoxin M1 in artificially contaminated milk using an in vitro digestive model. Food Control, 31(1), 202-207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.09.023

Detoxification of aflatoxin B1 by bacteriocins and bacteriocinogenic lactic acid bacteria. C Sezer, A Güven, N Bilge Oral, L Vatansever, Turkish Journal of Veterinary and Animal Sciences. 37SEZER, C., GÜVEN, A., BILGE ORAL, N., VATANSEVER, L. 2013. Detoxification of aflatoxin B1 by bacteriocins and bacteriocinogenic lactic acid bacteria. Turkish Journal of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, 37, 594-601.

Removal of aflatoxin B1 from contaminated liquid media by dairy lactic acid bacteria. A A M Shahin, International Journal of Agriculture and Biology. 91SHAHIN, A.A.M. 2007. Removal of aflatoxin B1 from contaminated liquid media by dairy lactic acid bacteria. International Journal of Agriculture and Biology, 9(1), 71-75.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae and lactic acid bacteria as potential mycotoxin decontaminating agents. P H Shetty, L Jespersen, 10.1016/j.tifs.2005.10.004Food Science and Technology. 17SHETTY, P.H., JESPERSEN, L. 2006. Saccharomyces cerevisiae and lactic acid bacteria as potential mycotoxin decontaminating agents. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 17(1), 48-55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2005.10.004

Surface binding of aflatoxin B1 by Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with potential decontaminating abilities in indigenous fermented foods. P H Shetty, B Hald, L Jespersen, 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2006.07.013International Journal of Food Microbiology. 1131SHETTY, P.H., HALD, B., JESPERSEN, L. 2007. Surface binding of aflatoxin B1 by Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with potential decontaminating abilities in indigenous fermented foods. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 113(1), 41-46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2006.07.013

Probiotic preparation reduces the faecal water genotoxicity in chickens fed with aflatoxin B1 contaminated fodder. K Slizewska, A Nowak, Z Libudzisz, J Blasiak, 10.1016/j.rvsc.2010.04.004Research in Veterinary Science. 893SLIZEWSKA, K., NOWAK, A., LIBUDZISZ, Z., BLASIAK, J. 2010. Probiotic preparation reduces the faecal water genotoxicity in chickens fed with aflatoxin B1 contaminated fodder. Research in Veterinary Science, 89(3), 391-395. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rvsc.2010.04.004

Preliminary evidence that degradation of aflatoxin B1 by Flavobacterium aurantiacum is enzymatic. R Smiley, F Draughon, Journal of Food Protection. 63SMILEY, R., DRAUGHON, F. 2000. Preliminary evidence that degradation of aflatoxin B1 by Flavobacterium aurantiacum is enzymatic. Journal of Food Protection, 63, 415-418.

Adsorption of aflatoxin B1, zearalenone and ochratoxin A by microorganisms isolated from Kefir grains. F B Taheur, K Fedhila, K Chaieb, B Kouidhi, A Bakhrouf, L Abrunhosa, 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.03.021International Journal of Food Microbiology. 251TAHEUR, F.B., FEDHILA, K., CHAIEB, K., KOUIDHI, B., BAKHROUF, A,. ABRUNHOSA, L. 2017. Adsorption of aflatoxin B1, zearalenone and ochratoxin A by microorganisms isolated from Kefir grains. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 251, 1-7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.03.021

Detoxification of aflatoxin B1 and patulin by Entrococcus faecium strains. A Topcu, T Bulat, R Wishah, I H Boyaci, 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.03.006International Journal of Food Microbiology. 139TOPCU, A., BULAT, T., WISHAH, R., BOYACI, I.H. 2010. Detoxification of aflatoxin B1 and patulin by Entrococcus faecium strains. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 139, 202-205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.03.006

Role of probiotics against mycotoxins and their deleterious effects. G Vinderola, A Ritieni, 10.5539/jfr.v4n1p10Journal of Food Research. 4VINDEROLA, G., RITIENI, A. 2015. Role of probiotics against mycotoxins and their deleterious effects. Journal of Food Research, 4, 10- 21. http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/jfr.v4n1p10

Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG modulates intestinal mucosal barrier and inflammation in mice following combined dietary exposure to deoxynivalenol and zearalenone. M L Wan, P C Turner, K J Allen, H El-Nezami, 10.1016/j.jff.2016.01.014Journal of Functional Foods. 22WAN, M.L., TURNER, P.C., ALLEN, K.J., EL-NEZAMI, H. 2016. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG modulates intestinal mucosal barrier and inflammation in mice following combined dietary exposure to deoxynivalenol and zearalenone. Journal of Functional Foods, 22, 34-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2016.01.014

Role of surface layer collagen binding protein from indigenous Lactobacillus plantarum 91 in adhesion and its anti-adhesion potential against gut pathogen. A K Yadav, A Tyagi, J K Kaushik, A C Saklani, S Grover, V K Batish, 10.1016/j.micres.2013.05.003Microbiological Research. 168YADAV, A.K., TYAGI, A., KAUSHIK, J.K., SAKLANI, A.C., GROVER, S., BATISH, V.K. 2013. Role of surface layer collagen binding protein from indigenous Lactobacillus plantarum 91 in adhesion and its anti-adhesion potential against gut pathogen. Microbiological Research, 168, 639-645. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2013.05.003

Chemical and conformational study of the interactions involved in mycotoxin complexation with beta-d-glucans. A Yiannikouris, G André, L Poughon, 10.1021/bm050968tBiomacromolecular Journal. 74YIANNIKOURIS, A., ANDRÉ, G., POUGHON, L. 2006. Chemical and conformational study of the interactions involved in mycotoxin complexation with beta-d-glucans. Biomacromolecular Journal, 7(4), 1147-1155. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm050968t

Effects of the probiotics supplementation in diet on intestinal microflora ecosystem in broilers. B Yu, C H Chang, T T Lee, 10.12720/joaat.2.2.138-142Journal of Advanced Agricultural Technologies. 2YU, B., CHANG, C.H., LEE, T.T. 2015. Effects of the probiotics supplementation in diet on intestinal microflora ecosystem in broilers. Journal of Advanced Agricultural Technologies, 2, 138-142. http://dx.doi.org/10.12720/joaat.2.2.138-142

Lactobacillus plantarum BS22 promotes gut microbial homeostasis in broiler chickens exposed to aflatoxin B1. Y Zeng, D Zeng, Y Zhang, X Q Ni, J Wang, P Jian, 10.1111/jpn.12766Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition. 102ZENG, Y., ZENG, D., ZHANG, Y., NI, X.Q., WANG, J., JIAN, P. 2018. Lactobacillus plantarum BS22 promotes gut microbial homeostasis in broiler chickens exposed to aflatoxin B1. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition, 102, 449-459. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jpn.12766

In vitro reduction of aflatoxin B1 by strains of lactic acid bacteria isolated from Moroccan sourdough bread. A Zinedine, M Faid, M Benlemlih, International Journal of Agriculture and Biology. 7ZINEDINE, A., FAID, M., BENLEMLIH, M. 2005. In vitro reduction of aflatoxin B1 by strains of lactic acid bacteria isolated from Moroccan sourdough bread. International Journal of Agriculture and Biology, 7, 67-70.

Surface binding of toxins and heavy metals by probiotics. A Zoghi, K Khosravi-Darani, S Sohrabvandi, Mini Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry. 14ZOGHI, A., KHOSRAVI-DARANI, K., SOHRABVANDI, S. 2014. Surface binding of toxins and heavy metals by probiotics. Mini Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry, 14, 84-98.

Patulin removal from synbiotic apple juice using Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8014. A Zoghi, K Khosravi-Darni, S Sohrabvandi, 10.1111/jam.14172Journal of Applied Microbiology. 126ZOGHI, A., KHOSRAVI-DARNI, K., SOHRABVANDI, S. 2019. Patulin removal from synbiotic apple juice using Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8014. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 126, 1149-1160. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jam.14172

Effect of probiotics on patulin removal from synbiotic apple juice. A Zoghi, K Khosravi-Darani, S Sohrabvandi, H Attar, S A Alavi, 10.1002/jsfa.8082Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 978ZOGHI, A., KHOSRAVI-DARANI, K., SOHRABVANDI, S., ATTAR, H., ALAVI, S. A. 2017. Effect of probiotics on patulin removal from synbiotic apple juice. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 97(8), 2601-2609. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.8082