# Stroke Epidemiology in South, East, and South-East Asia: A Review

CorpusID: 22221174
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df96d57ec7ef966b52e5f6bd356d5e4cdd53052e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df96d57ec7ef966b52e5f6bd356d5e4cdd53052e)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Stroke Epidemiology in South, East, and South-East Asia: A Review
2017

Narayanaswamy Venketasubramanian 
Raffles Neuroscience Centre
Raffles Hospital
SingaporeSingapore

Byung Woo Yoon 
Department of Neurology
Seoul National University Hospital
SeoulKorea

Jeyaraj Pandian 
Department of Neurology
Christian Medical College
LudhianaIndia

Jose C Navarro 
Neuroscience Institute
St. Luke's Medical Center
Jose R. Reyes Medical Center
188770Manila, SingaporePhilippines, Singapore

Stroke Epidemiology in South, East, and South-East Asia: A Review

Journal of Stroke
193201710.5853/jos.2017.00234Received: January 30, 2017 Revised: September 7, 2017 Accepted: September 14, 2017Review Correspondence: Narayanaswamy Venketasubramanian Raffles Neuroscience Centre, Raffles Hospital, 585 North Bridge Road, The authors have no financial conflicts of interestCerebrovascular disordersStrokeEpidemiologyRisk factorsAsia
Asia, which holds 60% of the world's population, comprises some developing countries which are in economic transition. This paper reviews the epidemiology of stroke in South, East and South-East Asia. Data on the epidemiology of stroke in South, East, and South-East Asia were derived from the Global Burden of Disease study (mortality, disability-adjusted life-years [DALYs] lost because of stroke), World Health Organization (vascular risk factors in the community), and publications in PubMed (incidence, prevalence, subtypes, vascular risk factors among hospitalized stroke patients). Age-and sex-standardized mortality is the lowest in Japan, and highest in Mongolia. Communitybased incidence data of only a few countries are available, with the lowest rates being observed in Malaysia, and the highest in Japan and Taiwan. The availability of prevalence data is higher than incidence data, but different study methods were used for case-finding, with different age bands. For DALYs, Japan has the lowest rates, and Mongolia the highest. For community, a high prevalence of hypertension is seen in Mongolia and Pakistan; diabetes mellitus in Papua New Guinea, Pakistan, and Mongolia; hypercholesterolemia in Japan, Singapore, and Brunei; inactivity in Malaysia; obesity in Brunei, Papua New Guinea, and Mongolia; tobacco smoking in Indonesia. Hypertension is the most frequent risk factor, followed by diabetes mellitus and smoking. Ischemic stroke occurs more frequently than hemorrhagic stroke, and subarachnoid hemorrhages are uncommon. There are variations in the stroke epidemiology between countries in South, East, and South-East Asia. Further research on stroke burden is required.

## Introduction

Stroke is a major cause of death and disability in many countries. It was reported that, in 2013, globally, there were nearly 25.7 million stroke survivors, 6.5 million deaths due to stroke, 113 million disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) lost because of stroke, and 10.3 million new cases of strokes. 1 A majority of the stroke burden was observed in developing countries, accounting for 75.2% of all stroke-related deaths and 81.0% of the associated DALYs lost.

Stroke is an especially serious problem in Asia, which has more than 60% of the world's population, and many of its countries are "developing" economies. Stroke mortality is higher in Asia than in Western Europe, the Americas or Australasia, except in the case of some countries such as Japan. 2 The epidemiology of stroke in East Asia and South Asia has been previously reviewed. 3,4 A recent review of stroke in 12 Asian countries included 3 of the 11 countries in South-East Asia, 5 whose people largely have South and East Asian origins-however, data on the remaining South-East Asian countries were not presented.

This study was conducted to review the recent epidemiology of stroke in South, East, and South-East Asia, including mortality, incidence, prevalence, DALYs lost, stroke subtypes and risk factors, based on data from the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) study, World Health Organization (WHO), and recent major publications from Asian countries. A greater understanding of the stroke burden in this part of the world could assist in the appreciation of the magnitude of stroke and its diversity, and help in healthcare planning and resource allocation.


## Methods

A search was conducted of all the publications in the PubMed database, from the time of entry into the database to November 1, 2015. The search terms used were "stroke" with the operator "and", along with any ("or") of the following terms: "burden", "epidemiology", "mortality", "incidence", "prevalence", "subtype", and "risk factors". The operator "and" was then used with the name of each country in South, East, and South-East Asia. Data from Middle-Eastern countries were excluded, as the people from those countries are ethnically different from those in the other parts of Asia. The abstracts were reviewed for relevance, and data on stroke epidemiology were extracted. Where possible, the original papers were also obtained and reviewed. The most recent studies or review papers from each country, were preferred over older publications. Data on incidence and prevalence were obtained from community-based studies with wide age ranges and no upper limit. Data on the stroke subtypes and vascular risk factors among stroke patients were preferably from multi-center hospital collaborations with high brain scan rates. There was no exclusion based on language. Data on stroke mortality and morbidity were obtained from the GBD study, and vascular risk factors in the community were obtained from the WHO database. All the data search was conducted by a single author (NV). The data were then tabulated, stratified according to geographical regions.


## Results and discussion


## Mortality

As per the GBD study, the age-and sex-standardized mortality in Asia has a wide range (Table 1). 2 The lowest rates are observed in Japan (43.4/1,000,000 person-years and Singapore (47.9/100,000 person-years), followed by Bangladesh, Papua New Guinea, and Bhutan. The highest rates are observed in Mongolia (222.6/100,000 person-years) and Indonesia (193.3/100,000 person-years), followed by Myanmar and North Korea. All three regions show a range of mortality values, although, in general, they are lower in South Asia and high-income countries in East Asia. These varying rates may reflect the differences in stroke incidence, disease severity, and quality of healthcare. Competing causes of death such as coronary artery disease may provide a falsely low mortality value attributable to stroke.


## Incidence

Stroke incidence data are available for most countries in East Asia, but only for some in the other regions (Table 1). [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15] The lowest rate is observed in Malaysia (67/100,000 person-years). The highest rates are in Japan (422/100,000 person-years among men and 212/100,000 person-years among women) and Taiwan (330/100,000 person-years). However, the results are not strictly comparable, as the methods used were variable and the studies were performed at different time points. However, the observed variations may reflect differences in the risk-factor prevalence, screening/detection method and level of control.


## Prevalence

Data on stroke prevalence are more readily-available than those on incidence; especially so in East Asia (Table 1). [6][7][8][9]12,[15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23] Comparisons of the studies are difficult to perform as differing study methods were used for case-finding, and differing age bands were investigated. These studies were also conducted at different time points. As prevalence reflects the balance between incidence and mortality, a low prevalence may be due to low incidence or high mortality or both; conversely, a high prevalence may be due to high incidence or low mortality or both. Competing illnesses such as coronary artery disease may reduce the number of stroke survivors and provide a falsely low stroke prevalence value. Prevalence still, however, reflects the status of disease in the community that healthcare services for chronic diseases need to actively deal with.


## Stroke burden

Arguably, the best measure of stroke burden is the number of DALYs lost because of stroke. Based on data from the GBD study, there was a wide range of age-and sex-standardized stroke DALYs lost in Asia, in 2010 (Table 1). 2 The lowest rates are in Japan (706.6 /100,000 people) and Singapore (804.2/100,000 people), with low rates also observed in Bangladesh and Bhutan. The highest rates are in Mongolia (4,409.8/100,000 people) and Indonesia (3,382.2/100,000 people), with high rates also observed in Myanmar, Lao PDR, North Korea, and Cambodia. As in the case of mortality, a range of the rates of DALYs lost are observed in all three regions, but the DALYs lost tend to be lower in high-income countries in East and South-East Asia. The DALYs lost reflect the net effects of mortality, incidence, and disability among prevalent cases, and the latter possibly indicates the effects of stroke severity and rehabilitative services.


## Vascular factors

Increasing age, sex (male), and genetics are non-modifiable risk factors for stroke. The modifiable stroke risk factors are shown in Table 2, based on data from the WHO. 6,24 These were derived from community-based cross-sectional surveys. Similar criteria were used for diagnosis, which makes the studies comparable.

Hypertension remains the most common medical risk factor for stroke, whereas current smoking and inactivity are the most predominant among lifestyle-related risk factors. In most countries, high or low frequencies of occurrence are observed consistently across all risk factors for that country, compared to other countries. There is a range of frequencies within each region. A high prevalence of hypertension is seen in Mongolia and Pakistan (low in Korea and Singapore); diabetes mellitus in Papua New Guinea, Pakistan, and Mongolia (low in Vietnam, Timor Leste, and DPR Korea); hypercholesterolemia in Japan, Singapore and Brunei (low in Nepal, Timor Leste, and DPR Korea); inactivity in Malaysia (low in Nepal and Lao PDR); obesity in Brunei, Papua New Guinea, and Mongolia (low in Timor Leste, Cambodia, and Bangladesh); tobacco smoking in Indonesia (low in India). In general, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and tobacco smoking tend to be more prevalent among men, whereas hypercholesterolemia, inactivity and obesity tend to be more prevalent among women. Data on the vascular risk factors among stroke patients are available for a number of countries (Table 3). These are derived from hospital-based stroke registries. 6,12,[25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36] They are not strictly comparable as varying definitions were used, and studies were performed at differing time points, but there is still some consistency in the findings. Hypertension is the most common risk factor, with diabetes mellitus and smoking following closely. A significant proportion of stroke patients have had previous cerebrovascular events and coronary artery disease.

Possessing knowledge on the risk factors in each population can inform policy makers and healthcare planners on which factors should be targeted and what appropriate preventive measures should be taken.


## Stroke subtypes

Information on stroke subtypes is also available in most coun- 


## Geographical variations within countries

Variations in stroke epidemiology have been found within many countries. Studies in China have shown that the stroke incidence is higher in the northern regions compared to the south, 9 with double the incidence along the stroke belt. 41 In India, on the contrary, the incidence is higher in rural areas. 7 In Thailand, the stroke prevalence is highest in the cities, and then, in a decreasing fashion, in the central, south, north, and northeast regions of the country. 23 Similarly, stroke prevalence was found to be higher in cities and urban areas than in rural regions, in Indonesia. 20 These differences have been attributed to the differences in the risk factors between various regions in the same country. However, there is no difference in the age-standardized stroke mortality between the metropolitan cities of Korea and the other regions in the country. 12


## Comparative epidemiology

Heart disease and stroke are competing causes of mortality. Generally, stroke-associated mortality, as a percent of total mortality, is lower than ischemic heart disease-related mortality, in most parts of the world. 42 This has been attributed to the higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus and higher mean serum cholesterol levels among those with ischemic heart disease, 


## South-East Asia

Brunei Myanmar than stroke patients. However, in some countries, the converse is true, wherein the stroke-related mortality exceeds the mortality caused by ischemic heart disease (in China by 11.9%, Korea by 9.9%, Mongolia by 8.0%, Thailand by 6.6%, etc.). Yet, the stroke mortality in Asia is higher than in North America or Europe. 43 Likewise, globally, the disease burden-as measured by the DALYs lost-associated with stroke is lower than that associated with ischemic heart disease. 42 However, in terms of mortality, the stroke burden exceeds the ischemic heart disease burden in the same countries in which an excess stroke mortality is observed-China, Mongolia, and Thailand.
- - - - - - - - Cambodia - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - Papua New Guinea - - - - - - - - Philippines - - - - - - - -
As in much of the world, ischemic stroke occurs more frequently than hemorrhagic stroke (Table 4). However, the 15-40% incidence of stroke due to hemorrhage, in Asia, is much higher than the 15% observed in most developed countries in North America and Western Europe. The incidence of hemorrhagic stroke is highest in East Asia, notably in China, compared to North America and Western Europe. 44


## Trends

Globally, between 1990 and 2013, there was a rise in the number of deaths, survivors, and events associated with stroke. However, the significant increase in the associated deaths and DALYs lost were not significantly different between developing and developed countries. 1 Stroke-related mortality has been decreasing in East-Asian countries such as Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and the urbanized areas of China. 43 This may be due to the better risk factor control and stroke care in these countries. However, the age-standard-  ized stroke incidence, in general, has remained relatively constant. The GDB study showed a reduction in age-standardized stroke incidence in Japan, Singapore, and Korea, between 1990 and 2010; 2 in fact, the substantial decline in the age-adjusted stroke incidence in Japan began in the 1960s, due to a decrease in severe hypertension and current smoking. 45 Impressive falls in the DALYs lost were observed in Japan, Singapore, Korea, and Taiwan (Table 5). 2 The decrease in high mortality, incidence and morbidity, observed predominantly in high-income countries, reflects the significant impact of the economic status of a country on health. This pattern of high incidence and falling mortality is likely to raise the prevalence of stroke in those countries. This problem may be compounded by the presence of fewer caregivers, as these countries also have low birth rates.

In South-Asian counties such as India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, and in developing countries in South-East Asia, such as Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, and Malaysia, with the better control of infectious diseases, life expectancy will be prolonged. With the economic transition of these countries, towards achieving "developed country" status, risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, obesity, and cigarette smoking will become more prevalent, raising the incidence of stroke. However, due to insufficient healthcare facilities in these developing countries, the mortality will be high, and the number of disabled survivors will also rise.


## Limitations and strengths

Our study has several limitations. The data from the WHO, though comprehensive and available for almost all countries, are based on routinely available data in those countries. There may be variations in the comprehensiveness of the data collection and data reporting, accuracy of the cause of death, and extent of disability. Prevalence and incidence studies, though community-based, were performed at different time points, involved varying ages (especially prevalence studies), used differing methods to screen and assess cases, and thus are not directly comparable. The data were not granular enough to allow for a systematic review. Data were unavailable for a number of countries. Hospital-based studies are prone to selection bias, with a significant flaw in their representativeness; they were performed at different time points; they used varying definitions for the risk factors; and few had 100% brain scan rates. Nation-wide data with good representativeness would be preferred-at present, such data are only available from the country-wide hospital-based registry in China. 29 However, our paper has several strengths. It includes up-todate reliable data from the excellently-performed GBD study and WHO, as well as large, recently-conducted studies from most Asian countries. Data on South-East Asia are available, alongside data on South and East Asia. The paper summarizes and compares, in an easily readable manner, key epidemiological data on stroke that could be helpful to clinicians, researchers and healthcare planners.


## Conclusions

Stroke is a major healthcare problem in South, East, and South-East Asia. With a majority of the world's population living in the developing countries of these regions, the the global burden of stroke will have the largest contribution from Asia. In these countries, there are disparities in the healthcare provisions, and this will continue to pose a challenge to disease control. Governments and healthcare workers need to work together, with an informed public, to stem this growing epidemic. As life expectancy increases, with the aging of Asian populations and reduction in mortality due to infectious diseases, and the rise in the prevalence of vascular risk factors among economies in transition, the stroke burden in Asia will surely rise.


number; IS, ischemic stroke; ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage; TIA, transient ischemic attack; CVT, cerebral venous thrombosis; UNC, unclassified.

## Table 1 .
1Mortality, incidence, prevalence, and DALYs lost because of stroke DALYs, disability adjusted life-years; IS, ischemic stroke; F, female; M, male.Country 

Age-sex standardized 
mortality /100,000 
person-years (2010) 2 

Incidence /100,000 
person-years 
Prevalence /1,000 
Age-sex standardized DALYs 
lost /100,000 people (2010) 2 

South Asia 

Bangladesh 
54.8 
-
9.4 (>30 years) 16 
888.1 

Bhutan 
58.3 
-
-
990.8 

India 
82.4 
119-145 7 
0.84-4.24 7 
1,420.3 

Nepal 
73.5 
-
-
1,284.0 

Pakistan 
83.3 
250 8 
191 (>35 years) 8 
1,467.2 

Sri Lanka 
65.4 
-
0.1 (>18 years) 17 
1,073.6 

East Asia 

China 
126.9 
116-219 9 
2.6-7.2 9 
2,101.5 

DPR Korea 
149.6 
-
-
2,698.8 

Japan 
43.4 
422 (M), 212 (F) 10 
27.0 (>65 years) 18 
706.6 

Mongolia 
222.6 
326 (IS) 11 
71.3 (>55 years) 19 
4,409.8 

Korea 
77.4 
216 12 
15.9 12 
1,117.8 

Taiwan 
56.8 
330 6 
19.3 6 
992.1 

South-East Asia 

Brunei 
68.6 
-
-
1,103.2 

Cambodia 
137.8 
-
-
2,627.9 

Indonesia 
193.3 
-
0.02-8.0 20 
3,382.2 

Lao PDR 
141.3 
-
-
2,727.9 

Malaysia 
84.3 
67 13 
-
1,480.4 

Myanmar 
165.4 
-
-
2,971.3 

Papua New Guinea 
56.04 
-
-
1,353.1 

Philippines 
109.6 
-
9.0 21 
2,171.9 

Singapore 
47.9 
180 14 
36.5 (>50 years) 22 
804.2 

Thailand 
62.8 
-
18.8 (>45 years) 23 
1,108.1 

Timor Leste 
117.3 
-
-
2,236.3 

Vietnam 
124.5 
250 15 
6.1 15 
1,955.0 



## Table 2 .
2Vascular risk factors in the communityCountry 

Hypertension 
(SBP>140 mmHg 
and DBP>90 mmHg) 
(2015) 
18+ years (%) 

Diabetes mellitus 
(FBS>7.0 mmol/L or 
on medication) 
(2014) 18+ years (%) 

Hypercholesterolemia 
(TC>6.2 mmol/L) 
(2008) 25+ years (%) 

Insufficient physical 
activity (2010) 
18+ years (%) 

Obesity (BMI>30) 
(2014) 18+ years (%) 

Smoking (2015) 
>15 years (%) 

M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 

South Asia 

Bangladesh 
24.5 
24.9 
10.3 
9.3 
4.4 
5.5 
10.2 
43.4 
1.8 
4.9 
39.8 
0.7 

Bhutan 
28.5 
27.6 
11.9 
11.5 
6.0 
6.3 
5.7 
11.8 
4.2 
8.2 
-
-

India 
26.6 
24.7 
9.1 
8.3 
4.5 
6.0 
10.8 
16.1 
2.3 
5.1 
20.4 
1.9 

Nepal 
29.7 
29.5 
11.2 
9.5 
3.7 
4.9 
4.5 
3.7 
2.2 
5.3 
37.1 
11.1 

Pakistan 
31.5 
29.5 
12.6 
12.1 
5.7 
6.6 
20.2 
31.7 
4.1 
8.2 
41.9 
3.0 

Sri Lanka 
23.0 
21.6 
7.0 
7.7 
6.6 
9.5 
17.3 
30.3 
3.3 
9.1 
28.4 
0.4 

East Asia 

China 
21.5 
16.8 
9.9 
7.6 
5.9 
8.4 
22.5 
25.6 
7.4 
8.2 
47.6 
1.8 

DPR Korea 
29.3 
27.6 
5.8 
5.9 
4.2 
6.1 
-
-
2.0 
3.7 
-
-

Japan 
22.5 
12.6 
8.4 
5.0 
15.7 
15.8 
31.1 
36.5 
3.7 
3.0 
33.7 
10.6 

Mongolia 
32.3 
25.6 
12.2 
11.2 
7.5 
8.3 
19.6 
23.2 
14.0 
18.4 
47.7 
5.3 

Korea 
13.8 
8.2 
9.3 
6.7 
8.6 
10.2 
28.9 
37.9 
4.6 
6.0 
49.8 
4.2 

Taiwan 6 
-
-
11.6 
8.0 
-
-
-
-
19.2 
13.4 
35.0 
4.1 

South-East Asia 

Brunei 
22.0 
15.8 
9.2 
9.7 
15.7 
18.1 
-
-
15.3 
18.5 
29.3 
3.1 

Cambodia 
26.3 
25.5 
7.4 
6.9 
4.6 
6.6 
9.7 
10.9 
1.6 
4.2 
44.1 
2.8 

Indonesia 
24.3 
23.1 
7.4 
8.0 
6.4 
8.9 
25.5 
22.0 
3.5 
8.1 
76.2 
3.6 

Lao PDR 
24.5 
24.9 
7.7 
7.6 
5.4 
7.8 
4.7 
16.0 
2.0 
4.8 
56.6 
9.1 

Malaysia 
25.3 
20.8 
11.4 
10.7 
13.3 
17.4 
46.7 
58.0 
11.4 
15.9 
43.0 
1.4 

Myanmar 
24.9 
24.2 
6.9 
7.9 
5.1 
7.5 
8.3 
11.6 
2.0 
5.5 
31.6 
6.4 

Papua New Guinea 
25.1 
25.8 
15.4 
14.3 
7.6 
9.7 
11.8 
17.5 
14.5 
23.6 
-
-

Philippines 
24.1 
21.0 
7.1 
7.3 
8.2 
12.5 
13.1 
18.6 
4.1 
17.0 
43.0 
8.5 

Singapore 
17.8 
11.3 
9.4 
6.5 
15.2 
19.4 
30.9 
35.3 
6.2 
7.1 
28.0 
5.0 

Thailand 
24.2 
20.3 
8.3 
8.8 
14.4 
16.7 
12.9 
16.7 
5.9 
11.4 
41.4 
2.3 

Timor Leste 
26.9 
28.1 
5.6 
5.5 
4.2 
6.3 
-
-
1.0 
2.9 
-
-

Vietnam 
25.0 
21.6 
5.5 
5.1 
6.8 
9.4 
22.1 
25.8 
8.6 
19.3 
47.1 
1.3 

SBP, systolic blood pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; FBS, fasting blood sugar; TC, total cholesterol; BMI, body mass index; M, male; F, female. 



## Table 3 .
3Vascular risk factors among stroke patients, from hospital-based registriesCountry 
Year 
HT (%) 
DM (%) 
HL (%) 
AF (%) 
pS, TIA (%) 
CAD (%) 
SM (%) 

South Asia 

Bangladesh 25 
2014 
57.6 
23.0 
5.3 
-
-
17.1 
44.6 

Bhutan 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

India 7 
2013 
85.0 
50.0 
26.0 
-
-
-
26.8 

Nepal 26 
2011 
61.2 
9.3 
7.5 
23.0 
-
-
59.4 

Pakistan 27 
2008 
50.0 
18.0 
-
-
17.0 
19.0 
17.0 

Sri Lanka 28 
2015 
58.9 
42.4 
40.2 
6.5 
32.3 
-
29.7 

East Asia 

China 29 
2011 
63.2 
17.7 
9.7 
5.5 
30.9 
11.8 
38.9 

DPR Korea 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Japan 30 
2010 
74.4 
22.4 
35.7 
-
14.7 
-
19.7 

Mongolia 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Korea 12 
2013 
63.5 
30.1 
19.3 
19.4 
19.7 
-
38.0 

Taiwan 6 
2014 
79.7 
43.8 
45.4 
14.7 
31.8 
12.3 
39.8 




HT, hypertension; DM, diabetes mellitus; HL, hyperlipidemia; AF, atrial fibrillation; pS, previous stroke; TIA, transient ischemic attack; CAD, coronary artery disease; SM, smoking.Singapore 33 
2008 
67.8 
39.7 
6.3 
10.0 
22.3 
20.2 
22.3 

Thailand 23 
2014 
53.0 
26.0 
30.0 
10.0 

Timor Leste 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Vietnam 34 
2012 
96.4 
16.8 
22.6 
5.8 
13.7 
-
35.9 



## Table 4 .
4Stroke subtypes from hospital-based registriesCountry 
Year 
N 
IS (%) 
ICH (%) 
SAH (%) 
TIA (%) 
CVT (%) 
UNC (%) 

South Asia 

Bangladesh 25 
2014 
8,400 
72.0 
28.0 
-
-
-
0.0 

Bhutan 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

India 35 
2005 
801 
49.8 
49.1 
4.8 
-
-
2.4 

Nepal 26 
2011 
160 
63.0 
29.0 
8.0 
-
-
0.0 

Pakistan 27 
2006 
796 
69.0 
31.0 
-
-
-
0.0 

Sri Lanka 36 
2001 
103 
74.7 
19.1 
6.2 
-
-
0.0 

East Asia 

China 29 
2011 
21,902 
66.3 
23.4 
3.4 
6.2 
-
0.7 

DPR Korea 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Japan 37 
2013 
47,782 
75.4 
17.8 
6.8 
-
-
0.0 

Mongolia 38 
2009 
3,938 
55.3 
40.7 
4.0 
-
-
0.0 

Korea 12 
2013 
119,901 
76.1 
23.9 
-
-
-
0.0 

Taiwan 6 
2014 
30,599 
74 
16.1 
2.8 
6.7 
0.2 
0.2 

South-East Asia 



## Table 5 .
5Age and sex-standardized disability-adjusted life years lost, 1990-2010Country 


. V L Feigin, R V Krishnamurthi, P Parmar, B Norrving, G A Mensah, D A Bennett, et al; GBD 2013 Writing Group; GBD 2013Feigin VL, Krishnamurthi RV, Parmar P, Norrving B, Mensah GA, Bennett DA, et al; GBD 2013 Writing Group; GBD 2013

Update on the Global Burden of Ischemic and Hemorrhagic Stroke in 1990-2013: the GBD 2013 study. Stroke Panel Experts Group. 45NeuroepidemiologyStroke Panel Experts Group. Update on the Global Burden of Ischemic and Hemorrhagic Stroke in 1990-2013: the GBD 2013 study. Neuroepidemiology 2015;45:161-176.

Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study 2010 (GBD 2010) and the GBD Stroke Experts Group. Global and regional burden of stroke during 1990-2010: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study. V L Feigin, M H Forouzanfar, R Krishnamurthi, G A Mensah, M Connor, D A Bennett, Lancet. 383Feigin VL, Forouzanfar MH, Krishnamurthi R, Mensah GA, Connor M, Bennett DA, et al; Global Burden of Diseases, In- juries, and Risk Factors Study 2010 (GBD 2010) and the GBD Stroke Experts Group. Global and regional burden of stroke during 1990-2010: findings from the Global Burden of Dis- ease Study 2010. Lancet 2014;383:245-254.

The epidemiology of stroke in the East Asian region: a literature-based review. T A Burke, R N Venketasubramanian, Int J Stroke. 1Burke TA, Venketasubramanian RN. The epidemiology of stroke in the East Asian region: a literature-based review. Int J Stroke 2006;1:208-215.

Stroke in South Asian countries. M Wasay, I A Khatri, S Kaul, Nat Rev Neurol. 10Wasay M, Khatri IA, Kaul S. Stroke in South Asian countries. Nat Rev Neurol 2014;10:135-143.

Stroke in Asia: geographical variations and temporal trends. M M Mehndiratta, M Khan, P Mehndiratta, M Wasay, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 85Mehndiratta MM, Khan M, Mehndiratta P, Wasay M. Stroke in Asia: geographical variations and temporal trends. J Neu- rol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2014;85:1308-1312.

Stroke: morbidity, risk factors, and care in Taiwan. F I Hsieh, H Y Chiou, J Stroke. 16Hsieh FI, Chiou HY. Stroke: morbidity, risk factors, and care in Taiwan. J Stroke 2014;16:59-64.

Stroke epidemiology and stroke care services in India. J D Pandian, P Sudhan, J Stroke. 15Pandian JD, Sudhan P. Stroke epidemiology and stroke care services in India. J Stroke 2013;15:128-134.

Growing burden of stroke in Pakistan: a review of progress and limitations. M Hashmi, M Khan, M Wasay, Int J Stroke. 8Hashmi M, Khan M, Wasay M. Growing burden of stroke in Pakistan: a review of progress and limitations. Int J Stroke 2013;8:575-581.

Epidemiological factors of stroke: a survey of the current status in China. H Sun, X Zou, L Liu, J Stroke. 15Sun H, Zou X, Liu L. Epidemiological factors of stroke: a sur- vey of the current status in China. J Stroke 2013;15:109-114.

Secular trends in cardiovascular disease and its risk factors in Japanese: half-century data from the Hisayama study. J Hata, T Ninomiya, Y Hirakawa, M Nagata, N Mukai, S Gotoh, Circulation. 128Hata J, Ninomiya T, Hirakawa Y, Nagata M, Mukai N, Gotoh S, et al. Secular trends in cardiovascular disease and its risk factors in Japanese: half-century data from the Hisayama study (1961-2009). Circulation 2013;128:1198-1205.

Smoking, heart rate, and ischemic stroke: a population-based prospective cohort study among Inner Mongolians in China. T Xu, X Bu, H Li, M Zhang, A Wang, W Tong, Stroke. 44Xu T, Bu X, Li H, Zhang M, Wang A, Tong W, et al. Smoking, heart rate, and ischemic stroke: a population-based prospec- tive cohort study among Inner Mongolians in China. Stroke 2013;44:2457-2461.

Stroke statistics in Korea: part I. Epidemiology and risk factors: a report from the Korean stroke society and clinical research center for stroke. K S Hong, O Y Bang, D W Kang, K H Yu, H J Bae, J S Lee, J Stroke. 15Hong KS, Bang OY, Kang DW, Yu KH, Bae HJ, Lee JS, et al. Stroke statistics in Korea: part I. Epidemiology and risk fac- tors: a report from the Korean stroke society and clinical re- search center for stroke. J Stroke 2013;15:2-20.

Stroke incidence in the South West District of the Penang Island, Malaysia: PEARLs: Penang Acute Stroke Research Longitudinal Study. M Neelamegam, I Looi, W K Cheah, P Narayanan, A M Hamid, L M Ong, Prev Med. 57SupplNeelamegam M, Looi I, Cheah WK, Narayanan P, Hamid AM, Ong LM. Stroke incidence in the South West District of the Penang Island, Malaysia: PEARLs: Penang Acute Stroke Re- search Longitudinal Study. Prev Med 2013;57 Suppl:S77-S79.

Incidence of ischaemic heart disease and stroke in Chinese, Malays and Indians in Singapore: Singapore cardiovascular cohort study. D M Heng, J Lee, S K Chew, B Y Tan, K Hughes, K S Chia, Ann Acad Med. 29Heng DM, Lee J, Chew SK, Tan BY, Hughes K, Chia KS. Inci- dence of ischaemic heart disease and stroke in Chinese, Ma- lays and Indians in Singapore: Singapore cardiovascular co- hort study. Ann Acad Med Singapore 2000;29:231-236.

Strokes in South Vietnam: an epidemiologic study. V T Lê, T L Lê, T H Nguyên, H H Nguyên, T X Dào, V T Nguyên, Rev Neurol (Paris). 155Lê VT, Lê TL, Nguyên TH, Nguyên HH, Dào TX, Nguyên VT, et al. Strokes in South Vietnam: an epidemiologic study. Rev Neurol (Paris) 1999;155:137-140.

Prevalence of stroke in a rural population of Bangladesh. M M Zaman, S R Choudhury, J Ahmed, Akram Hussain, S M , Mahbubus Sobhan, S M Turin, T C , Glob Heart. 10Zaman MM, Choudhury SR, Ahmed J, Akram Hussain SM, Mahbubus Sobhan SM, Turin TC. Prevalence of stroke in a ru- ral population of Bangladesh. Glob Heart 2015;10:333-334.

. Venketasubramanian, South, East, and South-East AsiaVenketasubramanian, et al. Stroke in South, East, and South-East Asia

Prevalence of stroke and its risk factors in urban Sri Lanka: population-based study. T Chang, S Gajasinghe, C Arambepola, Stroke. 46Chang T, Gajasinghe S, Arambepola C. Prevalence of stroke and its risk factors in urban Sri Lanka: population-based study. Stroke 2015;46:2965-2968.

Prevalence and causes of functional disability in an elderly general population of Japanese: the Hisayama study. D Yoshida, T Ninomiya, Y Doi, J Hata, M Fukuhara, F Ikeda, J Epidemiol. 22Yoshida D, Ninomiya T, Doi Y, Hata J, Fukuhara M, Ikeda F, et al. Prevalence and causes of functional disability in an elderly general population of Japanese: the Hisayama study. J Epide- miol 2012;22:222-229.

An epidemiological study of stroke and its sub-types in the over 55 Mongolian and Han populations in a pastoral area of inner Mongolia. Huriletemuer, C Zhang, S Zhao, D Wang, Z Wang, M Jiang, Int J Stroke. 6468Huriletemuer, Zhang C, Zhao S, Wang D, Wang Z, Jiang M, et al. An epidemiological study of stroke and its sub-types in the over 55 Mongolian and Han populations in a pastoral area of inner Mongolia. Int J Stroke 2011;6:468.

Burden of stroke in Indonesia. Y Kusuma, N Venketasubramanian, L S Kiemas, J Misbach, Int J Stroke. 4Kusuma Y, Venketasubramanian N, Kiemas LS, Misbach J. Burden of stroke in Indonesia. Int J Stroke 2009;4:379-380.

The real stroke burden in the Philippines. J C Navarro, J K Lokin, N Venketasubramanian, Int J Stroke. 9Navarro JC, Baroque AC 2nd, Lokin JK, Venketasubramanian N. The real stroke burden in the Philippines. Int J Stroke 2014;9:640-641.

Prevalence of stroke among Chinese, Malay, and Indian Singaporeans: a community-based tri-racial cross-sectional survey. N Venketasubramanian, L C Tan, S Sahadevan, J J Chin, E S Krishnamoorthy, C Y Hong, Stroke. 36Venketasubramanian N, Tan LC, Sahadevan S, Chin JJ, Krish- namoorthy ES, Hong CY, et al. Prevalence of stroke among Chinese, Malay, and Indian Singaporeans: a community-based tri-racial cross-sectional survey. Stroke 2005;36:551-556.

Stroke epidemiology in Thailand. N C Suwanwela, J Stroke. 16Suwanwela NC. Stroke epidemiology in Thailand. J Stroke 2014;16:1-7.

Stroke in Bangladeshi patients and risk factor. Q D Mohammad, M Habib, B A Mondal, R N Chowdhury, M H Hasan, M A Hoque, Mymensingh Med J. 23Mohammad QD, Habib M, Mondal BA, Chowdhury RN, Hasan MH, Hoque MA, et al. Stroke in Bangladeshi patients and risk factor. Mymensingh Med J 2014;23:520-529.

A study of risk factors of stroke in patients admitted in Manipal Teaching Hospital, Pokhara. A Maskey, M Parajuli, S C Kohli, Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 9Maskey A, Parajuli M, Kohli SC. A study of risk factors of stroke in patients admitted in Manipal Teaching Hospital, Pokhara. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ) 2011;9:244-247.

The burden of stroke in Pakistan. B A Khealani, M Wasay, Int J Stroke. 3Khealani BA, Wasay M. The burden of stroke in Pakistan. Int J Stroke 2008;3:293-296.

Comparison of risk factors, severity and outcome between lacunar and non-lacunar stroke in a tertiary care center in Sri Lanka: a descriptive study. N D Perera, K M Bandara, I R Ranasinghe, S B Gunatilake, Ceylon Med J. 60Perera ND, Bandara KM, Ranasinghe IR, Gunatilake SB. Com- parison of risk factors, severity and outcome between lacu- nar and non-lacunar stroke in a tertiary care center in Sri Lanka: a descriptive study. Ceylon Med J 2015;60:103-106.

China National Stroke Registry Investigators. The China National Stroke Registry for patients with acute cerebrovascular events: design, rationale, and baseline patient characteristics. Y Wang, L Cui, Ji X Dong, Q Zeng, J Wang, Y , Int J Stroke. 6Wang Y, Cui L, Ji X, Dong Q, Zeng J, Wang Y, et al; China Na- tional Stroke Registry Investigators. The China National Stroke Registry for patients with acute cerebrovascular events: design, rationale, and baseline patient characteristics. Int J Stroke 2011;6:355-361.

Risk factor profiles of stroke, myocardial infarction, and atrial fibrillation: a Japanese Multicenter Cooperative Registry. S Uchiyama, Y Shibata, T Hirabayashi, B Mihara, N Hamashige, K Kitagawa, J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 19Uchiyama S, Shibata Y, Hirabayashi T, Mihara B, Hamashige N, Kitagawa K, et al; J-TRACE Investigators. Risk factor pro- files of stroke, myocardial infarction, and atrial fibrillation: a Japanese Multicenter Cooperative Registry. J Stroke Cerebro- vasc Dis 2010;19:190-197.

Stroke in Indonesia: a first large prospective hospital-based study of acute stroke in 28 hospitals in Indonesia. J Misbach, W Ali, J Clin Neurosci. 8Misbach J, Ali W. Stroke in Indonesia: a first large prospec- tive hospital-based study of acute stroke in 28 hospitals in Indonesia. J Clin Neurosci 2001;8:245-249.

National Stroke Registry (NSR): Terengganu and Seberang Jaya experience. S N Nazifah, I K Azmi, B B Hamidon, I Looi, A A Zariah, M R Hanip, Med J Malaysia. 67Nazifah SN, Azmi IK, Hamidon BB, Looi I, Zariah AA, Hanip MR. National Stroke Registry (NSR): Terengganu and Se- berang Jaya experience. Med J Malaysia 2012;67:302-304.

Burden of stroke in Singapore. N Venketasubramanian, C L Chen, Int J Stroke. 3Venketasubramanian N, Chen CL. Burden of stroke in Singa- pore. Int J Stroke 2008;3:51-54.

A prospective cohort study of stroke characteristics, care, and mortality in a hospital stroke registry in Vietnam. D L Tirschwell, T G Ton, K A Ly, Q Van Ngo, T T Vo, C H Pham, BMC Neurol. 12150Tirschwell DL, Ton TG, Ly KA, Van Ngo Q, Vo TT, Pham CH, et al. A prospective cohort study of stroke characteristics, care, and mortality in a hospital stroke registry in Vietnam. BMC Neurol 2012;12:150.

Analysis of a hospital-based stroke registry in a neurological centre in Kolkata. T K Banerjee, D Choudhury, A Das, A Sekhar, D Roy, S Sen, J Indian Med Assoc. 103Banerjee TK, Choudhury D, Das A, Sekhar A, Roy D, Sen S. Analysis of a hospital-based stroke registry in a neurological centre in Kolkata. J Indian Med Assoc 2005;103:665-668.

Stroke subtypes in Sri Lanka--a hospital based study. S B Gunatilake, B A Jayasekera, A P Premawardene, Ceylon Med J. 46Gunatilake SB, Jayasekera BA, Premawardene AP. Stroke sub- types in Sri Lanka--a hospital based study. Ceylon Med J 2001;46:19-20.

Epidemiology and registry studies of stroke in Japan. K Toyoda, J Stroke. 15Toyoda K. Epidemiology and registry studies of stroke in Ja- pan. J Stroke 2013;15:21-26.

Relationship between admission pulse pressure and clinical outcome during hospitalization among acute stroke patients. Z Ju, H Zhang, W Tong, T Xu, Y Zhang, N Wang, Acta Neurol Belg. 109Ju Z, Zhang H, Tong W, Xu T, Zhang Y, Wang N, et al. Rela- tionship between admission pulse pressure and clinical out- come during hospitalization among acute stroke patients. Acta Neurol Belg 2009;109:18-23.

Burden of stroke in Brunei Darussalam. S H Nainar, N Venketasubramanian, Int J Stroke. 4Nainar SH, Venketasubramanian N. Burden of stroke in Bru- nei Darussalam. Int J Stroke 2009;4:395-397.

Sources and reasons for delays in the care of acute stroke patients. R F Yu, San Jose, M C Manzanilla, B M Oris, M Y Gan, R , J Neurol Sci. 199Yu RF, San Jose MC, Manzanilla BM, Oris MY, Gan R. Sources and reasons for delays in the care of acute stroke patients. J Neurol Sci 2002;199:49-54.

Is there a stroke belt in China and why?. G Xu, M Ma, X Liu, G J Hankey, Stroke. 44Xu G, Ma M, Liu X, Hankey GJ. Is there a stroke belt in China and why? Stroke 2013;44:1775-1783.

Global variation in the relative burden of stroke and ischemic heart disease. A S Kim, S C Johnston, Circulation. 124Kim AS, Johnston SC. Global variation in the relative burden of stroke and ischemic heart disease. Circulation 2011;124:314- 323.

Stroke in Asia: a global disaster. J S Kim, Int J Stroke. 9Kim JS. Stroke in Asia: a global disaster. Int J Stroke 2014;9:856- 857.

Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors 2010 Study Stroke Expert Group. The global burden of hemorrhagic stroke: a summary of findings from the GBD 2010 study. R V Krishnamurthi, A E Moran, M H Forouzanfar, D A Bennett, G A Mensah, C M Lawes, Glob Heart. 9Krishnamurthi RV, Moran AE, Forouzanfar MH, Bennett DA, Mensah GA, Lawes CM, et al; Global Burden of Diseases, In- juries, and Risk Factors 2010 Study Stroke Expert Group. The global burden of hemorrhagic stroke: a summary of findings from the GBD 2010 study. Glob Heart 2014;9:101-106.

Trends in the incidence, mortality, and survival rate of cardiovascular disease in a Japanese community: the Hisayama study. M Kubo, Y Kiyohara, I Kato, Y Tanizaki, H Arima, K Tanaka, Stroke. 34Kubo M, Kiyohara Y, Kato I, Tanizaki Y, Arima H, Tanaka K, et al. Trends in the incidence, mortality, and survival rate of cardiovascular disease in a Japanese community: the Hisaya- ma study. Stroke 2003;34:2349-2354.