# Chest Infections SESSION TITLE: Chest Infections Posters SESSION TYPE: Original Investigation Posters COVID-19 ANXIETY AND STRESS SURVEY (CASS) IN HIGH SCHOOL AND COLLEGE STUDENTS DUE TO CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019

CorpusID: 222278076
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/841b57498a8a5ffa3998bbc0a1aafe0af702ea96](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/841b57498a8a5ffa3998bbc0a1aafe0af702ea96)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Chest Infections SESSION TITLE: Chest Infections Posters SESSION TYPE: Original Investigation Posters COVID-19 ANXIETY AND STRESS SURVEY (CASS) IN HIGH SCHOOL AND COLLEGE STUDENTS DUE TO CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019
October 18-21, 2020

Presented 
On 
Chest Infections SESSION TITLE: Chest Infections Posters SESSION TYPE: Original Investigation Posters COVID-19 ANXIETY AND STRESS SURVEY (CASS) IN HIGH SCHOOL AND COLLEGE STUDENTS DUE TO CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019
October 18-21, 202010.1016/j.chest.2020.08.312Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre -including this research content -immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.


## METHODS:

We created a covid19 anxiety and stress survey (CASS) by combining 2 abbreviated instrumentsthe Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-4) and the Patient Health Questionnaire for Depression and Anxiety (PHQ-4). We distributed the CASS survery in electronic format during the month of March/April at the peak of the covid19 pandemic, both directly, as well as through use of social media to students in HS and UG. We also collected limited information about grade level, age, gender, ethnicity and location.

RESULTS: A total of 116 (72Male; 44 Female) students completed the questionnaire -Grade distribution was15 HS (Gr 9,10), 41 HS (Gr 11,12), 41 UG (Yr 1,2), & 19 UG (Yr 3,4). 56 (48.2%) had an elevated perceived stress level (PSS-4 of >8). 66 of students (56.9%) screened positive for a mood disorder depression/anxiety based on PSQ4 of >4. When we examined the subscales we found 43(37%) had anxiety (PSQ-2 for anxiety of >3) and 36 (31%) had depression (PSQ-2 for depression >3). Both HS and UG had similar levels of stress, but both overall PSQ4 as well as subscales for anxiety and depression was significantly more prevalent in college than in high school students (Mean total PSQ4 scores was 5.4 +/-4 for UG vs 3.9 +/-3.3 HS respectively) Strong gender influence in both PSS and PSQ was seenmean PSS for girls and boys was 8.7 +/-2.6 vs 7.2 +/-2.8; p <0.05 and PSQ4 was 6.1 +/-3.2 vs 4.2 +/-3.8 respectively) There was a strong correlation between PSS and PSQ scores (r ¼ 0.68) CONCLUSIONS: The Covid19 pandemic has resulted in an extremely high level of stress and mental health morbidity in both high school and especially college students. There is a high prevalence of depression and anxiety in students, and this is more pronounced in girls.

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Specific screening measures and interventions to improve mental health of students especially in college is urgently warranted with a particular focus on women, due to the covid19 pandemic. 


## DISCLOSURES


: No relevant relationships by Akshar Aiyer, source¼Web Response No relevant relationships by Yashdeep Gill, source¼Web Response No relevant relationships by Iqbal Ratnani, source¼Web Response No relevant relationships by Shaleen Sunesara, source¼Web Response No relevant relationships by Salim Surani, source¼Web Response DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2020.08.312 Copyright ª 2020 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 314A [ 1 5 8 # 4 S C H E S T O C T O B E R 2 0 2 0 ] CHEST INFECTIONS