# Normal alkaline phosphatase levels are dependent on race/ethnicity: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data

CorpusID: 222840202
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ef528d6b8cc995ff1da88af0252ee5983056ed2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ef528d6b8cc995ff1da88af0252ee5983056ed2)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Normal alkaline phosphatase levels are dependent on race/ethnicity: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data
2020

Humberto C Gonzalez 
BostonMAUSA

Zaid Imam 
BostonMAUSA

Robert Wong 
BostonMAUSA

Jia Li 
BostonMAUSA

Mei Lu 
BostonMAUSA

Sheri Trudeau 
BostonMAUSA

Stuart C Gordon 
BostonMAUSA

Mohammad Imam 
BostonMAUSA

Robert G Gish rgish@robertgish.com 
BostonMAUSA

DrRobert G Gish 
BostonMAUSA

Normal alkaline phosphatase levels are dependent on race/ethnicity: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data

BMJ Open Gastro
7502202010.1136/bmjgast-2020-000502Received 27 July 2020 Revised 3 September 2020 Accepted 17 September 20201 To cite: Gonzalez HC, Imam Z, Wong R, et al. Normal alkaline phosphatase levels are dependent on race/ ethnicity: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data. BMJ Open Gastro Preliminary results for this analysis were presented as a poster at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) 2019, For numbered affiliations see end of article. Correspondence to
Objective The range of normal serum alkaline phosphatase is not well defined. We used data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey from 2009 to 2016 to generate normal ranges for a racially diverse sample of healthy adults. Methods Respondents 18 years or older were included. Conditions known to elevate alkaline phosphatase were cause for exclusion. Alkaline phosphatase was measured using a colorimetric method based on standardised National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey protocols. Because alkaline phosphatase values were not normally distributed, log transformation was used. We calculated upper limits of normal (97.5 percentile), stratified by sex and race/ethnicity, and 90% CIs for the upper limits of normal. Results 1199 respondents (673 female, 526 male) had body mass index from 18.5 to less than 25. Upper limits of normal were highest among Hispanics (123.2 IU/L (90% CI 110.2 to 136.7) for females; 123.8 IU/L (90% CI 112.0 to 135.1) for males), followed by African Americans (109.9 IU/L (90% CI 97.3 to 122.4) for females; 116.3 IU/L (90% CI 105.0 to 126.1) for males) and whites (97.1 IU/L (90% CI 91.0 to 103.4) for females; 109.6 IU/L (90% CI 102.1 to 116.3) for males). Asian American/Pacific Islander respondents had the lowest results: 93.8 IU/L (90% CI 88.2 to 99.5) for females and 95.3 IU/L (90% CI 88.1 to 102.1) for males. Conclusions The upper limit of normal alkaline phosphatase varies by race/ethnicity in a large US sample with body mass index of 18.5<25.

## INTRODUCTION

Circulating alkaline phosphatase (ALP) primarily originates from the liver and bones and is routinely used as a as a marker of hepatic/biliary injury. Values exceeding the upper limit of normal (ULN) often prompt further clinical follow-up, including measurement of gamma-glutamyl transferase and fractionation of ALP to determine the origin of this elevation-thus the establishment of appropriate cutoffs has clinical implications. Standard procedures for the establishment of reference ranges for laboratory assays were published by the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry in 2011; 1 however, there is considerable variation in results for ALP across various laboratories, and there is not universal acceptance of a single ULN. Moreover, published reference intervals have been derived from racially and ethnically homogeneous samples, such as Northern European 2 or, more recently, Han Chinese, 3 which may not be generalisable to the multiracial population of the USA. We used demographic and laboratory data from the annual National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 4 collected from 2009 to 2016 to evaluate normal ranges of ALP among a large, racially diverse sample of healthy adults in the USA.


## METHODS

Deidentified NHANES data are made available for public use; respondents 18 years or older were included. Respondents were


## Summary box

What is already known about this subject? ► The normal alkaline phosphatase levels were established many years ago, and they have not been validated in an ethnically diverse population.

What are the new findings?

► Alkaline phosphatase levels are lower than previously described and vary according to sex and race/ ethnicity. This may set a new 'healthy' if confirmed.

How might it impact on clinical practice in the foreseeable future?

► The knowledge of healthy levels of alkaline phosphatase can assist in early identification of disease process such as primary biliary cholangitis and assist in appropriate medication adjustments, prognosis and overall patient care.

Open access excluded if they had evidence of any of the conditions known to elevate ALP or if there was missing data regarding those conditions, including pregnancy; infection with hepatitis B or C or HIV; significant alcohol intake (>21 standard drinks/week in males and >14 standard drinks/week in females); metabolic syndrome (as a surrogate for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease) or chronic kidney disease/end stage renal disease (creatinine >1.5 mg/dL or dialysis). Variables of interest included age, sex, self-reported race/ethnicity (Asian American/ Pacific Islander (AAPI), Black/African American (AA), white and Hispanic ethnicity (of any race)), body mass index (BMI; categorised as <18.5, 18.5<25, 25<30, 30<35, 35<40 and ≥40). NHANES uses standardised specimen collection, handling and analysis procedures. 5 During the study period, all specimens were analysed using the UniCel DxC800 Synchron Clinical System (Beckman Coulter); this system uses a colorimetric kinetic rate method using a 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol buffer to measure ALP activity in serum. 6 Reported reference ranges for this analyzer are 32-91 IU/L. 7 Analysis was confined to respondents with BMI 18.5<25. Box-Cox transformation was considered given ALP was not normally distributed. 8 We performed multivariable regression to test the effects of sex and race/ethnicity on the transformed ALP values, including consideration of sex-by-race interactions and variables or variable interaction, which were retained in the model if p<0.05. Hoffmann's method using a Q-Q (quantile-quantile) plot of transformed ALP was used to estimate the ULN, defined as the 97.5th percentile for each stratified covariate retained in the multivariable model. 9 10 One thousand simulations were conducted to generate 90% CIs for the ULN; groups were considered to be significantly different from one another if CIs did not overlap.


## RESULTS

A total of 3053 respondents were included, 1199 (673 female, 526 male) of whom had BMI 18.5<25. Table 1 displays the distribution of respondents by race/ ethnicity. Because ALP values were not normally distributed (figure 1), log transformation was used. Age was not associated with ALP and was not included in further analysis. Sex and race/ethnicity were significantly associated with ALP (p<0.0001) and retained the model. Figure 2   Open access compared with other race/ethnic groups; ULNs for female AAPIs and whites were also lower than for other groups, but there was some overlap in CIs. Hispanics of both sexes had the highest ULNs; this difference was significant in females compared with AAPIs and whites. Our study has some limitations. Although use of NHANES data permits access to a large, geographically and racially diverse sample, detailed health information beyond that collected for the survey is not available. Specifically, we lack data regarding conditions whose prevalence may vary by race/ethnicity and that may affect ALP (eg, hyperparathyroidism 11 or thyroid disorders 12 ). Likewise, data regarding individual ALP isoenzymes that estimate the proportion of ALP originating from different tissue sources was not available. A prospective study design that accounts for these limitations may be necessary to confirm that our results were not confounded by these variables. In addition, exploratory analyses did not suggest any consistent relationship between ALP and BMI category by race/ethnicity or sex (data not shown). As a result, our sample was also limited to respondents with BMI 18.5>25 in an effort to generate 'normal' values among a healthy sample of individuals.

We note with interest that all 97.5th percentile values in our sample exceeded the reference range reported in the manual for the analyzer used (91 IU/L). Because the demographic characteristics of the sample used to develop these ranges were not available, we are unable to speculate as to possible reasons for this discrepancy. Variation in laboratory analyzer output ranges has impeded the development of a widely accepted standard reference range for ALP; as a result, manufacturers recommend calibration of analyzer equipment at each site. Our findings underscore the importance of selecting an appropriate patient pool for this calibration, in order to generate normal ranges that reflect the sex and racial profile of the patients at each health system. Failure to reference appropriate normal values can impact care.

In particular, normal ALP (and multiples of the ULN) are frequently used in the diagnosis and evaluation of treatment efficacy for primary biliary cholangitis (PBC). White women are most commonly affected by PBC, and as a result, much of the literature reflects laboratory parameters derived from this cohort. Our data suggest that these values may not appropriately represent normal ranges in male patients and those from other racial groups, potentially impacting their care. Future prospective studies in large, racially diverse samples are needed to confirm our results. Correction notice The article has been corrected since it was published. The article title has been updated and middle initials for authors, Humberto C Gonzalez, Stuart C Gordon, Robert G Gish have been added.

## Figure 1
1Distribution of alkaline phosphatase values in the analytic sample of respondents with BMI 18.5<25. Mean ALP was 60.2 IU/L; median was 57 IU/L; Q1 was 47 IU/L; Q3 was 69 IU/L. Skewness was 1.87. Kurtosis was 10.69. AA, African American; AAPI, Asian American/Pacific Islander; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; BMI, body mass index; Hisp, Hispanic includes any race; LCL, lower confidence limit; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; UCL, upper confidence limit; ULN, upper limit of normal.


displays the 97.5 percentile (ULN) for ALP with 90% CIs for each value, stratified by race/ethnicity and sex. ALP values were highest among Hispanics (123.2 IU/L (90% CI 110.2 to 136.7) for females and 123.8 IU/L (90% CI 112.0 to 135.1) for males), followed by AAs (109.9 IU/L (90% CI 97.3 to 122.4) for females and 116.3 IU/L (90% CI 105.0 to 126.1) for males) and whites (97.1 IU/L (90% CI 91.0 to 103.4) for females and 109.6 IU/L (90% CI 102.1 to 116.3) for males). AAPI respondents had the lowest results (93.8 IU/L (90% CI 88.2 to 99.5) for females and 95.3 IU/L (90% CI 88.1 to 102.1) for males). Notably, the ULN for AAPI male respondents was significantly lower than for all other race/ethnic groups, while the ULN for Hispanic female respondents was significantly higher than for AAPI and white females. DISCUSSION Using a large, racially diverse sample of healthy NHANES respondents, we found that the 97.5th percentile levels of ALP varied significantly by sex and race/ethnicity. Male AAPIs had a significantly lower ULN (95.3 IU/L) Table 1 Distribution of sample by race/ethnicityRace/Ethnicity 
N 
Per cent 

Hispanic (of any race) 
204 
17.01 
White 
453 
37.78 

Black/African American 
209 
17.43 
Asian American/Pacific Islander 
333 
27.77 


Acknowledgements We thank Kelly Schrank, MA, ELS, of Bookworm Editing Services LLC for her editorial services in preparing the manuscript for publication. Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.ContributorsCompeting interests None declared.Patient consent for publication Not required.Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.Data availability statement No data are available. This research study was conducted retrospectively from deidentified National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data, which is made available for public use.Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// creativecommons. org/ licenses/ by-nc/ 4. 0/.ORCID iDsHumberto C Gonzalez http:// orcid. org/ 0000-0003-3351-1846 Robert G Gish http:// orcid. org/ 0000-0001-6306-3189
IFCC primary reference procedures for the measurement of catalytic activity concentrations of enzymes at 37 °C. Part 9: reference procedure for the measurement of catalytic concentration of alkaline phosphatase International Federation of clinical chemistry and laboratory medicine (IFCC) scientific division, Committee on reference systems of enzymes (C-RSE) (1)). G Schumann, R Klauke, F Canalias, 10.1515/CCLM.2011.621Clin Chem Lab Med. 49Schumann G, Klauke R, Canalias F, et al. IFCC primary reference procedures for the measurement of catalytic activity concentrations of enzymes at 37 °C. Part 9: reference procedure for the measurement of catalytic concentration of alkaline phosphatase International Federation of clinical chemistry and laboratory medicine (IFCC) scientific division, Committee on reference systems of enzymes (C-RSE) (1)). Clin Chem Lab Med 2011;49:1439-46.

Figure 2 97.5th percentile values (IU/L) for alkaline phosphatase derived from adult respondents to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey with body mass index 18.5<25. ALP, alkaline phosphatase; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Figure 2 97.5th percentile values (IU/L) for alkaline phosphatase derived from adult respondents to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey with body mass index 18.5<25. ALP, alkaline phosphatase; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.

Reference intervals for eight enzymes in blood of adult females and males measured in accordance with the International Federation of clinical chemistry reference system at 37 degrees C: part of the Nordic reference interval project. J H Strømme, P Rustad, H Steensland, 10.1080/00365510410002742Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 64Strømme JH, Rustad P, Steensland H, et al. Reference intervals for eight enzymes in blood of adult females and males measured in accordance with the International Federation of clinical chemistry reference system at 37 degrees C: part of the Nordic reference interval project. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 2004;64:371-84.

Development of reference intervals for serum alkaline phosphatase among adults in southern China traced to the new IFCC reference measurement procedure. L Han, J Wang, Q Zhang, 10.1515/cclm-2015-0732Clin Chem Lab Med. 54Han L, Wang J, Zhang Q, et al. Development of reference intervals for serum alkaline phosphatase among adults in southern China traced to the new IFCC reference measurement procedure. Clin Chem Lab Med 2016;54:659-65.

National health and nutrition examination survey. National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). National health and nutrition examination survey. Available: https:// wwwn. cdc. gov/ nchs/ nhanes/ Default. aspx [Accessed 1 May 2020].

National health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) MEC laboratory procedures manual. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention31Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) MEC laboratory procedures manual, 2016. Available: https:// wwwn. cdc. gov/ nchs/ data/ nhanes/ 2015-2016/ manuals/ 2016_ MEC_ Laboratory_ Procedures_ Manual. pdf [Accessed 31 Aug 2020].

National health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) laboratory procedure manual analyte: alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention31Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) laboratory procedure manual analyte: alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 2016. Available: https:// wwwn. cdc. gov/ nchs/ data/ nhanes/ 2015-2016/ labmethods/ BIOPRO_ I_ MET_ ALP_ DXC800and660i. pdf [Accessed 31 Aug 2020].

Beckman Coulter, Systems, Chemistry Information Sheet -Alkaline Phosphatase. Beckman Coulter. SYNCHRON Systems: Chemistry Information Sheet -Alkaline Phosphatase, 2015. Available: https://www. beckmancoulter. com/ wsrportal/ techdocs? docname=/ cis/ A18450/%%/ EN_ ALP. pdf [Accessed 1 May 2020].

An analysis of transformations. Gep Box, D R Cox, 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1964.tb00553.xJournal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B. 26Box GEP, Cox DR. An analysis of transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B 1964;26:211-43.

Statistics in the practice of medicine. R G Hoffmann, 10.1001/jama.1963.03060110068020JAMA. 185Hoffmann RG. Statistics in the practice of medicine. JAMA 1963;185:864-73.

An introduction to reference intervals (1)-some theoretical considerations. C Higgins, 10.1097/POC.0b013e318246a59cPoint Care. 11Higgins C. An introduction to reference intervals (1)-some theoretical considerations. Point Care 2012;11:2-5.

Changes in bone mass and serum markers of bone metabolism after parathyroidectomy. K Thorsen, A O Kristoffersson, R P Lorentzon, 10.1016/S0039-6060(97)90328-7Surgery. 122Thorsen K, Kristoffersson AO, Lorentzon RP. Changes in bone mass and serum markers of bone metabolism after parathyroidectomy. Surgery 1997;122:882-7.

Hepatic manifestations of systemic disorders. S C Gordon, H C Gonzalez, Schiff's Diseases of the Liver. Schiff ER, Maddrey WC, Reddy RJohn Wiley & Sons Ltd12th ed.Gordon SC, Gonzalez HC. Hepatic manifestations of systemic disorders. In: Schiff ER, Maddrey WC, Reddy R, eds. Schiff's Diseases of the Liver. 12th ed.. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2017: 218-43.