# Knowledge Attitude and Practice of Ergonomics and Musculoskeletal Disorders as an Occupational Hazard among Periodontists in India -A Questionnaire Based Survey

CorpusID: 225199434
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/611e767c54b5a6ef9b03be910144b1c1fab92821](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/611e767c54b5a6ef9b03be910144b1c1fab92821)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Knowledge Attitude and Practice of Ergonomics and Musculoskeletal Disorders as an Occupational Hazard among Periodontists in India -A Questionnaire Based Survey


Gaurav N Ketkar 
Department of Periodontics
Saveetha Dental College and Hospital
Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences
ChennaiIndia

Sankari Malaiappan sankari@saveetha.com 
Department of Periodontics
Saveetha Dental College and Hospital
Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences
ChennaiIndia

Knowledge Attitude and Practice of Ergonomics and Musculoskeletal Disorders as an Occupational Hazard among Periodontists in India -A Questionnaire Based Survey
10.9734/JPRI/2020/v32i2030739Received 29 May 2020 Accepted 05 August 2020 Published 28 August 2020_____________________________________________________________________________________________________ *Corresponding author: Journal of Pharmaceutical Research International 32(20): 162-183, 2020; Article no.JPRI.59658 ISSN: 2456-9119 (Past name: British Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, Past ISSN: 2231-2919, NLM ID: 101631759) Authors' contributions This work was carried out in collaboration between both authors. Author Gaurav Ketkar designed the study, performed the statistical analysis, wrote the protocol and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. Author Sankari M. managed the analyses and the literature searches of the study. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. Article Information Editor(s): (1) Dr. Khadiga Ahmed Ismail Eltris, Ain Shams University, Egypt. Reviewers: (1) Mohammad Gudarzi, University of Pittsburgh, USA. (2) Bahram Kouhnavard, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Iran. Complete Peer review History: http://www.sdiarticle4.com/review-history/59658Ergonomicsmusculoskeletal disordersoccupational hazardsperiodontist
Ergonomics can be defined as a discipline that studies workers and their relationship to their occupational environment. To prevent musculoskeletal disorders which can develop over time and can lead to long-term disability proper ergonomic design is necessary. Periodontal work covers most of the areas in the oral cavity including distal aspects of posterior teeth which are difficult to approach. Hence preventing work related strain was of greater significance in ensuring long term successful practice as a periodontists. The purpose of this survey was to assess the knowledge attitude and practice of ergonomics and musculoskeletal disorders as an occupational hazard in periodontists in India .A survey was conducted among 150 periodontists in India in which 120 periodontists responded. The survey was distributed through questionnaire printouts and electronic media. The data was collected, analysed and interpreted. The results suggested that 85% of the periodontists had adequate knowledge and attitude towards ergonomics, however the practical Ketkar and Malaiappan; JPRI, 32(20): 162-183, 2020; Article no.JPRI.59658    163 application was not as satisfactory. This survey concludes that the knowledge and attitude of periodontists in India regarding ergonomics and musculoskeletal disorders as an occupational hazard is good overall, but the practice is needs some improvement.Original Research Article

## INTRODUCTION

Dentistry is an occupation that requires good mental and physical health of the operator. A fit dentist is one of the most important factors in a successful dental practice also long term well being of the operator [1,2]. Ergonomics is not just a way of avoiding musculoskeletal issues that might occur due to improper practice it is the practice that ensures high productivity and success rate along with avoidance of illness and increased satisfaction amongst the practitioners as well as the workers. A study by Gorter et al in 2000 showed that out of every ten dentists, one dentist shows poor general health and three dentists show poor physical health [1] Such poor health can disrupt or impair a practice and overall health of the dentist. Although, according to a study done by Kupcinskas & Petrauskas et al in 2003, 88% of dentists report good or excellent health,Yet there is evidence that shows that dentists still do suffer from work related physical illnesses [3][4][5].

Dental practice may result in physical injuries such as pain and dysfunction, muscular imbalance, neuromuscular inhibition [6][7][8]. A combination of multiple risk factors seem to be the cause rather than a single risk factor. Prolonged static posture, repetitive movements, genetic predisposition, mental stress, mechanical stress, extrinsic stress, physical conditioning, age, non work activities, awkward positions, poor posture, poor postural muscle strength, poor flexibility, infrequent breaks, inappropriate selection and use of dental stools and magnification aids, vibration and cold temperature etc. can all be involved [9] . The musculoskeletal health of dental professionals has been studied worldwide. A study by Branson et al in 1998 indicates that 81% of dental operators experience pain in their back, neck and shoulder or arm [1] A study was done by Murphy DC et al 1997 to evaluate the common reasons of the dental practitioners to retire early out of which 29.5% of the dental practitioners had to retire early because of the musculoskeletal disorders.

The results clearly show the importance of the ergonomic perspective of the of the dental practice, hence this study carries immense importance to find out about the awareness of the dental practitioners specially periodontists about the knowledge about the subject.

Periodontists particularly work in all parts of the oral cavity. The work field also includes working in minute furcation areas of the teeth were approach and instrumentation is difficult and time consuming. Their specialty requires repetitive precise movements of long duration and the use of vibrating and ultrasonic instruments. Also periodontics is one of the the speciality that makes the use of indirect vision. All these factors are responsible for the poor posture of periodontists while working. Hence special attention should be made to make sure that this speciality has sufficient knowledge about how musculoskeletal disorders as an occupational hazard can be prevented [6,10].

Dental ergonomics is the adaptation of the working environment and methods to the dentist and his team, with respect to the physical and psychological capacity, for a healthy, safe and comfortable functioning in their professional activity. It takes into account the worker's capabilities and limitations to ensure that tasks, equipment, information and the environment suit each worker. It is the efficiency of persons in their working environment 3.The purpose of this survey was to assess the knowledge and attitude of periodontists towards ergonomics and musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and the efforts they make in their practise to reduce the risk of such an occupational hazard [5].

Previously we have done studies in the field of periodontics related to regeneration, effectiveness of mouthwash, PRF ect. and now we have planned to do a KAP study about awareness of ergonomics and musculoskeletal disorders as an occupational hazard for the periodontists working in India [11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25].


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

A total of 150 periodontists in India were included in the survey in which 117 practitioners responded. A structured closed questionnaire consisting of questions (Table 1) based on knowledge, attitude and clinical practice were distributed among the periodontists through means of communication such as questionnaire forms, electronic media and other means of communication such as personal emails etc. The questionnaire held a total of 20 questions of which 3 were knowledge based, 7 questions to check the attitude of the practitioners and 9 questions based on the clinical practice followed by them. The questionnaires were distributed randomly to periodontists in India. The survey data was then collected together and analysed.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Hand & wrist problems and back problems are most commonly faced issues by all the dental practitioners which include tendinitis , trigger finger , carpel tunnel syndrome , Guyon's syndrome , upper and lower back pain , hence proper implementation of ergonomic principles is of utmost importance in ensuring a long, productive, healthy, and pain free career. Periodontics is a high risk profession for musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) as it requires high visual demands which result in the adoption of fixed postures. In this survey, periodontists were asked about the occurrence of pain due to MSDs and ergonomics. The investigation showed the frequency of pain among 29.3% occurring very frequently and 66.4% occurring occasionally (Fig. 5) .54.6% of them did not take any measures to reduce the occurrence of pain (Fig. 5). 54.3% periodontists are aware of the different stretching exercises that can be performed to relieve the physical stress (Fig. 5). Almost 64.4% of the periodontists are aware of safe neck tilting limits but only 36.9% frequently follow it while working (Fig. 5). Statistics show that the maximum number of periodontists complain of pain in the back and shoulder followed by the neck (Fig. 5). It also shows that only 35.7% of the periodontists stop working for a while when the pain or discomfort arises (Fig. 5). This indicates that although the knowledge of periodontists about this subject is good, their practice and attitude towards it is not satisfactory. This may be due to negligence towards personal health while working. Measures must be taken to educate dentists about the magnitude of the situation as the MSD's have a long term effect on an individual's life and methods to reduce the occurrence of such illnesses.    (Table no. 


## 2).Where x axis represents the number of working hours and y axis represents the count in each group

While the direct etiology of the development of MSDs is difficult to discern, we know that the practice of dentistry is associated with difficulties in visualization of the working area, and specific clinical tasks that demand concentration and precision [3] This may result in decreased range of motion, function and elasticity of tissue strength as a result of degenerative arthritic changes in the spine related to repetitive microtrauma [26]. MSDs consist of injuries that mainly affect soft tissues like muscles, tendons, ligaments, joints, cartilage and nervous system. These conditions are also known as cumulative trauma disorders, repeated trauma, repetitive stress injuries, and occupational overexertion syndrome. Lower back and neck injuries occur due to prolonged and static postures [27]. Repetition and force more commonly are related to hand and arm conditions. The risk for trapezius pain may be increased by holding the arm elevated for long periods while holding the mirror. Historic trends to improve efficiency such as increased number of patient visits can also increase MSD risk. In addition, there may also be their factors such as body height, dominating arm and availability of specific chairs, high visual demands, workplace organization, and lack of recovery time, prolonged working hours which add to the risk of developing MSD's.

Neck and lower back were the common sites for MSDs as periodontists do large of their work with their head bent forward and rotated and with their arms, especially the right one, held out from the body [6]. This working posture leads to a considerable load on different structures in the neck, back and shoulders.


## Fig. 2. Bar chart representing distribution of individuals working with assistants ( four handed dentistry ) amongst the 3 groups namely full time practitioner ( blue colour bar ) , part time practitioners ( green colour bar ) and full time academicians ( yellow colour bar)


## Based on the results in the chart we can see that most of the full time practitioners practice four handed dentistry whereas the number of part time practitioners working with assistants is fairly lower. It can be attributed to the simple fact of longer working hours of full time practitioners. Correlation calculated using chi-square test in SPSS

ver. 20 (Table no.  Dentistry as a profession has showed a marked rise in females in the last 10 years this is a concern because , According to a survey done by Lindfors et al, Thiele et al and Lundstorm et al; [2] females dentists are more prone to MSDs than males [28] This makes it all the more necessary to improve ergonomics and reduce the risk of occupational hazards [6,29,30].


## 3) .Where x axis represents the incidence of individuals working with an assistant and y axis represents the count in each group


## Fig. 3. Bar chart representing distribution of incidence of experiencing pain post procedure amongst the 3 groups namely full time practitioner (blue colour bar), part time practitioners (green colour bar) and full time academicians (yellow colour bar)

Based on the results of this bar chart we can see that incidence of experiencing pain by full time practitioners post procedures is higher than that of part time practitioners followed by academicians. It can be attributed to the simple fact that working are much more in case of a full time practitioner. Correlation calculated using chi-square test in SPSS ver. 20 (Table no. 4) .Where x axis represents the incidence of pain in back ,neck ,shoulder or hand and y axis represents the count in each group 


## Fig. 4. Bar chart representing distribution of incidence of pain and numbness in fingers during or post procedures amongst the 3 groups namely full time practitioner ( blue colour bar ) , part time practitioners ( green colour bar ) and full time academicians (yellow colour bar)

Correlation calculated using chi-square test in SPSS ver. 20 (Table no. 5) . Where x axis represents the incidence of pain or numbness in fingers and y axis represents the count in each group While MSDs are multifactorial in nature, so too should be the approach to correcting or preventing them. The increased use of magnification systems have been associated with decreased neck and low back pain, as they allow operators to maintain healthier postures. Placing the feet flat on the floor and adjusting the seat height up until thighs gently slope downward while the feet remain flat on floor helps maintain the low back curve and enables one to position their knees under the patient. Static positions lead to more fatigue. Literature supports the idea that workers should vary their work positions as often as possible to shift the workload from one group of muscles to another [31,32]. Alternating between standing and sitting can also help relieve stress build up. Positioning the patient too high causes the shoulders to elevate and necessitates bringing the arms closer to the torso, leading to prolonged static muscular tension in the neck and shoulders. The working area must be positioned at the elbow level in order to maintain the shoulders and arms in a relaxed state [33]. Studies performed by Fish et al and Murphy et al suggest that taking micro breaks while working improve efficiency during dental procedures [34] Other methods of improving ergonomics and reducing MSDs include indirect mirror viewing, observing recommended practices for nutrition and regular exercise , proper lighting The physical inactivity among dentists seems to put them at risk for the occurrence of MSDs. This is a major reason leading for loss of work efficiency as well as early ill health retirement among dentists [34].

Apart from this, there are a number of stretching exercises that can be performed to relieve the strain on the muscles while working [2]. finger Stretch, hip stretch, spinal twist, back stretch etc. A number of chair side stretches have also been recommended by several authors that can be followed comfortably on the dental chair [3,34].

A few researchers have also recommended the use of ergonomically designed instruments to reduce the load on the muscles. This survey shows that only 31.9% of the periodontists frequently consider ergonomic principles and designs of the work related materials and tools before purchasing the equipment. The instruments with larger diameter handles and lighter weight are recommended as they decrease finger and wrist MSDs [35][36][37].

Four Handed dentistry has been suggested to be an ergonomic concept and has reduced the occurrence of musculoskeletal disorders in dentists It has been reviewed that by appointing a dental assistant to help you carry out dental procedures, the clinician twists his body less often in search of instruments or materials thus reducing lower back pain [4] Although it could not cease the pain, literature drops a hint that the painful sites were changed. In this survey we realise that only 54.3% of the periodontists make use of a dental assistant while working. It must be kept in mind that a well-trained dental assistant reduces the physical burden on the clinician thus improving his efficiency.

Different ergonomic assessment tools have also been developed to evaluate inappropriate positions in dentistry. RULA, which stands for Rapid Upper Limb Assessment, is a survey method for individual workers in dentistry. RULA ensues to assess the seriousness of the state of affairs. It indicates the level of intervention required to reduce the risk of injury due to physical loading on the operator. Higher the RULA score, higher the level of intervention required [38]. Teaching that inculcating ergonomic habits into young dentists is one of the best ways to avoid occupational musculoskeletal disorders in dentistry. Some of the methods that can be used include promoting training on both ergonomics and stress reduction in dental schools as a prevention strategy. Separate course on ergonomics in the dentistry curriculum and periodical evaluating the ergonomics practices of students is also a very efficient way of dealing with this; formulating global guidelines for developing ergonomic dental equipment; prevent manufacturing and sale of non-ergonomic dental equipment; periodical screening of dental professionals for MSD related symptoms to diagnose them early and so that effective treatment can be provided; promoting world-wide research on this subject, etc [2,[39][40][41][42]. These results are the unfortunate consequence of training programs placing emphasis on what is done as opposed to how it is accomplished.

To ensure a ergonomically safe practice one has to stress on following things so as to avoid the ill effect 1. Lighting and magnification 2. Gloves -wearing proper size gloves. 3. Supervised exercise -evidence says poor medical and physical condition may increase the risk of musculoskeletal disorders hence special care should be taken when performing regular exercises it should be done under professional supervision. 4. Proper temperature -there are no specificnorms as per how much the hand or finger temperature should be while working although research says that 25°c is ideal hand temperature to ensure better grip strength and dexterity. 5. Posture 6. Patient positioning 7. Smart patient appointment management 8. Ergonomically designed instruments 9. Four hand dentistry


## CONCLUSION

Maintaining the correct posture at all times results in less stress on the joints and muscles while working which increases the efficiency of the work also improves quality of life. Based on the results of this survey it can be concluded that the knowledge of periodontists in India towards ergonomics and musculoskeletal disorders is quite good as most of the knowledge based questions were answered with appropriate responses but their attitude and practice is not as satisfactory as expected. The reasons might be variable hence more stress on working with a proper posture has to be given during dental graduate and post graduate teaching programs so doctors inculcate these habits since the beginning. More care must be taken in implementing this knowledge into practice to prevent occupational hazards that might ruin one's career. Periodic reminders for breaks and stretching exercises can be set in the clinics also dental assistants can be trained to practice a four handed dentistry which will improve the work efficiency multiple folds with least strain on the body.


## CONSENT

As per international standard or university standard, respondents' written consent has been collected and preserved by the author(s).


## ETHICAL APPROVAL

As per international standard or university standard written ethical approval has been collected and preserved by the author(s).


How often do you experience pain in back, neck, shoulder or hands post procedure?

## Fig. 1 .
1Bar chart representing distribution of working hours amongst the 3 groups namely full time practitioner (blue colour bar) , part time practitioners (green colour bar) and full time academicians (yellow colour bar) According to the results of this chart we can see that most of the full time and part time practitioners practice 20-40 hours in a week. Correlation calculated using chi-square test in SPSS ver. 20

## Fig. 5. 1 Fig. 5. 2 Fig. 5. 3 Fig. 5. 4 Fig. 5. 5 Fig. 5. 6 Fig. 5. 7 Fig. 5. 8 Fig. 5. 9 Fig. 5. 10 Fig. 5. 11 Fig. 5. 12 Fig. 5. 13 Fig. 5. 14 Fig. 5. 15 Fig. 5. 16 Fig. 5. 17 Fig. 5. 18 Fig. 5. 19 Fig. 5. 20 Fig. 5. 21 Fig. 5 .
1234567891011121314151617181920215Shows results according to individual questions.

## Table 2 .
2Showing cross tabulated data of working hours and the type of the practice that individual followsType of participant * number of clinical hours 
Count 
Number of clinical hours 
Total 
less than 20 
hours 

20-40 
hours 

40-60 
hours 

more than 
60 hours 
Type of 
participant 

Full time Practitioner 
14 
23 
15 
7 
59 
Part time Practitioner 
12 
22 
5 
1 
40 
Full time Academician 
10 
4 
3 
0 
17 
Total 
36 
49 
23 
8 
116 


## Table 3 .
3Showing cross tabulation between incidence of working with an assistant and the type of practice followed by the individualWorking with and assistant * Type of participant cross tabulation 
Count 
Type of Participant 
Total 
Full time 
Practitioner 

Part time 
Practitioner 

Full time 
Academician 
Working with and 
assisstant 

Yes 
40 
13 
10 
63 
No 
7 
16 
3 
26 
Sometimes 
12 
11 
4 
27 
Total 
59 
40 
17 
116 



## Table 4 .
4Showing cross tabulation between incidence of pain while working and the type of practice followed by the individualPain While Working * Type of Participant Cross Tabulation 
Count 
Type of Participant 
Total 
Full time 
Practitioner 

Part time 
Practitioner 

Full time 
Academician 
Pain While 
Working 

Sometimes 35 
29 
13 
77 
Always 
22 
9 
3 
34 
Never 
2 
2 
1 
5 
Total 
59 
40 
17 
116 

The number of patients treated per day is a 
significant predictor for the incidence of MSDs. A 
study done by Forouzan Rafie et al in 2004, 
stated that MSDs were positively associated with 

work hours. Prolonged static contractions lead 
to accumulation of lactic acid, that lead to 
reduction of oxygen levels causing fatigue and 
pain [2]. 


## Table 5 .
5Showing cross tabulation between incidence of numbness in fingers and the type of 
practice followed by the individual 

Numbness In Fingers * Type of Participant Cross Tabulation 
Count 
Type of Participant 
Total 
Full time 
Practitioner 

Part time 
Practitioner 

Full time 
Academician 
Numbness in Fingers Yes 
28 
6 
5 
39 
No 
23 
27 
10 
60 
Maybe 8 
7 
2 
17 
Total 
59 
40 
17 
116 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTThe authors thank the Director of academics, Saveetha dental college for his encouragement towards research and also we thank the Chancellor of the university and Dean of the dental college for their valuable support.COMPETING INTERESTSAuthors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Ergonomics in general dental practice. People's. P A Sarkar, A L Shigli, J Sci Res. 5Sarkar PA, Shigli AL. Ergonomics in general dental practice. People's J Sci Res. 2012;5:56-60.

Prevalence of upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders in dentists: symptoms and risk factors. F Rafie, Zamani Jam, A Shahravan, A , J Environ Public Health. 517346Rafie F, Zamani Jam A, Shahravan A, et al. Prevalence of upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders in dentists: symptoms and risk factors. J Environ Public Health. 2015;517346.

Preventing musculoskeletal disorders in clinical dentistry: Strategies to address the mechanisms leading to musculoskeletal disorders. B Valachi, K Valachi, J Am Dent Assoc. 134Valachi B, Valachi K. Preventing musculoskeletal disorders in clinical dentistry: Strategies to address the mechanisms leading to musculoskeletal disorders. J Am Dent Assoc 2003;134: 1604-1612.

Musculoskeletal disorders among dentists and variation in dental work. L Finsen, H Christensen, M Bakke, Appl Ergon. 29Finsen L, Christensen H, Bakke M. Musculoskeletal disorders among dentists and variation in dental work. Appl Ergon 1998;29:119-125.

. G Gupta, M Bhat, A Gupta, Ergonomics in Dentistry. International Journal of Clinical Pediatric Dentistry. 7Gupta G, Bhat M, Gupta A, et al. Ergonomics in Dentistry. International Journal of Clinical Pediatric Dentistry 2014; 7:30-34.

Ergonomics and upper extremity Musculoskeletal Disorders. Physical and Biological Hazards of the Workplace. T R Hales, Hales TR. Ergonomics and upper extremity Musculoskeletal Disorders. Physical and Biological Hazards of the Workplace. 2016; 13-32.

. >10.1002/(sici)1097-027429DOI: 3.0.co;2-e. 6<609::aid-ajim5>3.0.co;2-eDOI: 3.0.co;2-e">10.1002/(sici)1097-0274 (199606)29:6<609::aid-ajim5>3.0.co;2-e

Medical management of Work-related musculoskeletal disorders. P Bertsche, T Hales, Occupational Ergonomics. Bertsche P, Hales T. Medical management of Work-related musculoskeletal disorders. Occupational Ergonomics. 2003;27-21.

Periodontal resident selfassessment of ergonomics before and after videotaped surgeries. C Marantz, Marantz C. Periodontal resident self- assessment of ergonomics before and after videotaped surgeries;

The nature of work-related neck and upper limb musculoskeletal disorders. P W Buckle, Jason Devereux, J , Applied Ergonomics. 33Buckle PW, Jason Devereux J. The nature of work-related neck and upper limb musculoskeletal disorders. Applied Ergonomics. 2002;33:207-217.

Ashok Vardhan N. Syzygium cumini extract induced reactive oxygen species-mediated apoptosis in human oral squamous carcinoma cells. D Ezhilarasan, V S Apoorva, J Oral Pathol Med. 48Ezhilarasan D, Apoorva VS, Ashok Vardhan N. Syzygium cumini extract induced reactive oxygen species-mediated apoptosis in human oral squamous carcinoma cells. J Oral Pathol Med. 2019; 48:115-121.

Comparative evaluation of bone formation between PRF and Blood clot alone as the sole sinus-filling material in maxillary sinus augmentation with the implant as a tent pole: A randomized splitmouth study. G Kaarthikeyan, N D Jayakumar, D Sivakumar, J Long Term Eff Med Implants. 29Kaarthikeyan G, Jayakumar ND, Sivakumar D. Comparative evaluation of bone formation between PRF and Blood clot alone as the sole sinus-filling material in maxillary sinus augmentation with the implant as a tent pole: A randomized split- mouth study. J Long Term Eff Med Implants. 2019;29:105-111.

Nanomaterials for the management of periodontal diseases. R Arjunkumar, Chaughule RS (ed) dental applications of nanotechnology. ChamSpringer International PublishingArjunkumar R. Nanomaterials for the management of periodontal diseases. In: Chaughule RS (ed) dental applications of nanotechnology. Cham: Springer International Publishing. 2018;203-215.

Additive effect of plasma rich in growth factors with guided tissue regeneration in treatment of intrabony defects in patients with chronic periodontitis: A split-mouth randomized controlled clinical trial. S Ravi, S Malaiappan, S Varghese, J Periodontol. 88Ravi S, Malaiappan S, Varghese S, et al. Additive effect of plasma rich in growth factors with guided tissue regeneration in treatment of intrabony defects in patients with chronic periodontitis: A split-mouth randomized controlled clinical trial. J Periodontol. 2017;88:839-845.

Comparative evaluation of demineralized bone matrix and type II collagen membrane versus eggshell powder as a graft material and membrane in rat model. A Kavarthapu, S Malaiappan, Indian J Dent Res. 30Kavarthapu A, Malaiappan S. Comparative evaluation of demineralized bone matrix and type II collagen membrane versus eggshell powder as a graft material and membrane in rat model. Indian J Dent Res. 2019;30:877-880.

Association of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism (rs10735810) and chronic periodontitis. K Murthykumar, R Arjunkumar, V P Jayaseelan, J Investig Clin Dent. 1012440Murthykumar K, Arjunkumar R, Jayaseelan VP. Association of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism (rs10735810) and chronic periodontitis. J Investig Clin Dent. 2019;10: 12440.

Esthetic lip repositioning: A cosmetic approach for correction of gummy smile -A case series. A Ramesh, R Vellayappan, S Ravi, J Indian Soc Periodontol. 23Ramesh A, Vellayappan R, Ravi S, et al. Esthetic lip repositioning: A cosmetic approach for correction of gummy smile -A case series. J Indian Soc Periodontol. 2019;23:290-294.

Comparative estimation of sulfiredoxin levels between chronic periodontitis and healthy patients -A case-control study. A Ramesh, S Varghese, N D Jayakumar, J Periodontol. 89Ramesh A, Varghese S, Jayakumar ND, et al. Comparative estimation of sulfiredoxin levels between chronic periodontitis and healthy patients -A case-control study. J Periodontol. 2018;89:1241-1248.

Assessing the variation in course and position of inferior alveolar nerve among south Indian population: A cone beam computed tomographic study. A Kavarthapu, M Thamaraiselvan, Indian J Dent Res. 29Kavarthapu A, Thamaraiselvan M. Assessing the variation in course and position of inferior alveolar nerve among south Indian population: A cone beam computed tomographic study. Indian J Dent Res 2018;29:405-409.

Comprehensive rehabilitation using dental implants in generalized aggressive periodontitis. A Ramesh, S Ravi, G Kaarthikeyan, J Indian Soc Periodontol. 21Ramesh A, Ravi S, Kaarthikeyan G. Comprehensive rehabilitation using dental implants in generalized aggressive periodontitis. J Indian Soc Periodontol 2017;21:160-163.

Comparative Evaluation of the Efficacy of and supraperiosteal injections in the extraction of maxillary teeth: A randomized controlled clinical trial. M Jain, N Nazar, J Contemp Dent Pract. 19Jain M, Nazar N. Comparative Evaluation of the Efficacy of and supraperiosteal injections in the extraction of maxillary teeth: A randomized controlled clinical trial. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2018;19:1117- 1121.

In silico validation of the non-antibiotic drugs acetaminophen and ibuprofen as antibacterial agents against red complex pathogens. J Vijayashree Priyadharsini, J Periodontol. 90Vijayashree Priyadharsini J. In silico validation of the non-antibiotic drugs acetaminophen and ibuprofen as antibacterial agents against red complex pathogens. J Periodontol. 2019;90:1441- 1448.

Comparison of effect of hiora mouthwash versus chlorhexidine mouthwash in gingivitis patients: a clinical trial. J Ramamurthy, V Mg, Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical Research. 1184Ramamurthy J, Mg V. Comparison of effect of hiora mouthwash versus chlorhexidine mouthwash in gingivitis patients: a clinical trial. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical Research. 2018;11:84.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and periodontitis -unwinding their linking mechanisms. A Ramesh, S S Varghese, N D Jayakumar, Journal of Oral Biosciences. 58Ramesh A, Varghese SS, Jayakumar ND, et al. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and periodontitis -unwinding their linking mechanisms. Journal of Oral Biosciences. 2016;58:23-26.

Herbs as an antioxidant arsenal for periodontal diseases. A Ramesh, S S Varghese, J N Doraiswamy, J Intercult Ethnopharmacol. 5Ramesh A, Varghese SS, Doraiswamy JN, et al. Herbs as an antioxidant arsenal for periodontal diseases. J Intercult Ethnopharmacol. 2016;5:92-96.

Injury prevention for the practice of dentistry. A J Yoser, R S Mito, J Calif Dent Assoc. 30Yoser AJ, Mito RS. Injury prevention for the practice of dentistry. J Calif Dent Assoc. 2002;30:170-176.

Practice Dentistry Pain-free: Evidence-based Strategies to Prevent Pain and Extend Your Career. B Valachi, Posturedontics PressValachi B. Practice Dentistry Pain-free: Evidence-based Strategies to Prevent Pain and Extend Your Career. Posturedontics Press. 2008. Available:https://play.google.com/store/boo ks/details?id=o3tCPQAACAAJ

Work characteristics and upper extremity disorders in female dental health workers. P Lindfors, U Von Thiele, U Lundberg, J Occup Health. 48Lindfors P, von Thiele U, Lundberg U. Work characteristics and upper extremity disorders in female dental health workers. J Occup Health. 2006;48:192-197.

Psychological medicine, pain, and musculoskeletal disorder S. Rheumatic Disease Clinics of North America. H Merskey, 22Merskey H. Psychological medicine, pain, and musculoskeletal disorder S. Rheumatic Disease Clinics of North America. 1996;22:623-638.

Musculoskeletal Disorders in the Workplace: Principles and Practice. Mosby Elsevier. M Nordin, M H Pope, G Andersson, Nordin M, Pope MH, Andersson G. Musculoskeletal Disorders in the Workplace: Principles and Practice. Mosby Elsevier; 2007. Available:https://play.google.com/store/boo ks/details?id=hYpsAAAAMAAJ

342 Prevention of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (msds) in upper extremities. Musculoskeletal Disorders. Epub ahead of print. K Reinhold, M Kozorez, V Pille, 10.1136/oemed-2018-icohabstracts.-757Reinhold K, Kozorez M, Pille V, et al. 342 Prevention of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (msds) in upper extremities. Musculoskeletal Disorders. Epub ahead of print; 2018. DOI: 10.1136/oemed-2018-icohabstracts.- 757

Preventing work-related msds in dental hygienists. ergonomics and the management of musculoskeletal disorders. M Sanders, Sanders M. Preventing work-related msds in dental hygienists. ergonomics and the management of musculoskeletal disorders. 2004;448-473.

Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and dental practice Part 2. Risk factors for dentistry, magnitude of the problem, prevention, and dental ergonomics. N Yamalik, International Dental Journal. 57Yamalik N. Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and dental practice Part 2. Risk factors for dentistry, magnitude of the problem, prevention, and dental ergonomics. International Dental Journal. 2007;57:45-54.

Exercise prescriptions to prevent musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. D K Kumar, N Rathan, S Mohan, J Clin Diagn Res. 8Kumar DK, Rathan N, Mohan S, et al. Exercise prescriptions to prevent musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014;8:13-6.

Four-Handed Dentistry In Clinical Practice. Mosby Company. J E Chasteen, Chasteen JE. Four-Handed Dentistry In Clinical Practice. Mosby Company; 1978. Availablehttps://play.google.com/store/boo ks/details?id=jy1qAAAAMAAJ

Musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. D R Fish, D M Morris-Allen, N Y State Dent J. 64Fish DR, Morris-Allen DM. Musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. N Y State Dent J. 1998;64:44-48.

Physiotherapy Handbooks: 1. Exercises for the face, neck and upper limbs; 2. Exercises for the upper and lower trunk; 3. Exercises for the lower limb. J Davidson, Physiotherapy. 82642Davidson J. Physiotherapy Handbooks: 1. Exercises for the face, neck and upper limbs; 2. Exercises for the upper and lower trunk; 3. Exercises for the lower limb. Physiotherapy. 1996;82:642.

Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders and posture analysis using RULA method in Shiraz general dentists in 2010. E Soleimani, H Daneshmandi, A Mohamadbeigi, Journal of Islamic Dental Association of Iran. 25Soleimani E, Daneshmandi H, Mohamadbeigi A, et al. Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders and posture analysis using RULA method in Shiraz general dentists in 2010. Journal of Islamic Dental Association of Iran. 2013;25:35-40.

Dental ergonomics to combat musculoskeletal disorders: A review. A Gupta, A V Ankola, M Hebbal, Int J Occup Saf Ergon. 19Gupta A, Ankola AV, Hebbal M. Dental ergonomics to combat musculoskeletal disorders: A review. Int J Occup Saf Ergon. 2013;19:561-571.

Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. E C Alexopoulos, I-C Stathi, F Charizani, BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 516Alexopoulos EC, Stathi I-C, Charizani F. Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2004; 5:16.

Effect of magnification loupes on dental hygiene student posture. J P Maillet, A M Millar, J M Burke, J Dent Educ. 72Maillet JP, Millar AM, Burke JM, et al. Effect of magnification loupes on dental hygiene student posture. J Dent Educ 2008;72:33-44.

Musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. H Dehgan-Shahreza, M Talebzadeh, Occup HygDehgan-Shahreza H, Talebzadeh M. Musculoskeletal disorders in dentists. Occup Hyg; 2012. Available:http://ijoh.tums.ac.ir/index.php/ijo h/article/view/46