# National survey of invasive procedural training for nephrology fellows and residents in France: from bedside mentoring to simulation-based teaching Comité scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT

CorpusID: 225223238
 
tags: #Medicine, #Education

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4c40f60993b4da91beb84c10916effab0898f94](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4c40f60993b4da91beb84c10916effab0898f94)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

National survey of invasive procedural training for nephrology fellows and residents in France: from bedside mentoring to simulation-based teaching Comité scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT


Mickaë L Bobot mickael.bobot@ap-hm.fr 
Service de Né phrologie et Transplantation Ré nale
Hô pital de la Conception
AP-HM
INRAE 1260C2VN, 1263INSERM

Aix-Marseille Université
MarseilleFrance

Comité Scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues
ParisFrance

Valentin Maisons 
Comité Scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues
ParisFrance

Service de Né phrologie et Immunologie clinique
CHRU Tours
ToursFrance

Sophie Chopinet 
Service de Chirurgie Digestive
Hô pital de la Timone
AP-HM
Aix-Marseille Université
MarseilleFrance

Cô Me Bureau 
Comité Scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues
ParisFrance

Service de Pneumologie
Hô pital de la Pitié -Salpê triè re
Mé decine Intensive et Ré animation

APHP
ParisFrance

Yosu Luque 
Comité Scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues
ParisFrance

Service des Urgences Né phrologies et Transplantation Ré nale
UMR_S115
Hô pital Tenon
APHP
Sorbonne Université
ParisInsermFrance

National survey of invasive procedural training for nephrology fellows and residents in France: from bedside mentoring to simulation-based teaching Comité scientifique du Club des Jeunes Né phrologues GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
10.1093/ckj/sfaa111Received: 25.4.2020; Editorial decision: 27.4.2020L E T T E R T O T H E E D I T O R Correspondence to: Mickaë l Bobot;


Training in nephrology requires both medical skills and the mastering of technical invasive procedures such as central venous catheter (CVC) placement and percutaneous kidney biopsy (KB). The French Nephrology Residency Teaching Program, published in 2020, encourages the development of simulation-based learning techniques [1,2]. However, only a small minority of universities currently offer these training methods.

We surveyed nephrology residents, fellows and young nephrologists aged 43 years about their perceptions of KB and CVC placement teaching (Supplementary data, File S1). The survey was promoted on the Club des Jeunes Né phrologues (French Young Nephrologists Association) website, by e-mail and through social networks.

We received 164 responses: 95 (57.9%) from nephrology residents (about one-third of the French total), 33 (20.1%) from fellows and 36 (22.0%) from young attending physicians, from all 13 French regions.

The majority of the participants (75.9%) considered teaching of CVC placement to have been sufficient during their residency and they feel confident using this technique (82.3%). However, 84.1% of the responders have experienced stress while carrying out the procedure. CVC placement is mainly ultrasound guided (65.9%). Of the participants, 53.0% considered that the successful placement between 5 and 10 CVC was necessary to be fully confident with the technique. The simulation-based teaching is considered very useful for 62.6% and mandatory for 19.6% of the participants. The most suitable simulation model for CVC placement was the mannequin for 77.0% participants (Figure 1).

The answers were very different concerning the training for KB. Only 34.4% of the participants considered the teaching of KB to have been sufficient during their residency, with just 44.2% of them currently feeling confident with this procedure, with residents being the least confident (33.7%, P ¼ 0.005). The vast majority (84%) have experienced stress during a KB. A total of 50.3% considered that performing >10 KB was necessary to be confident with the procedure. More than 80% of the participants considered a simulation-based teaching for KB to be very useful (53.4%) or mandatory (28.8%). The most suitable simulation model for KB was the mannequin for 72.8% of respondents, the cadaveric model for 23.5% and the animal model for 3.7% ( Figure 1).

All the participants would like to use simulation models for both CVC placement and KB if available.

Concerning CVC placement, the contribution of simulation training on mannequins has been widely demonstrated in recent years in intensive care. It allows an increase in the technical performance of the trainees and faster empowerment [3][4][5]. Compared with standard training, mannequin training has been shown to improve accuracy of the procedure, with a decrease in the number of catheter complications [4] such as catheter-related sepsis [6].

KB has a risk of post-procedural haemorrhage, which necessitates implementation of special precautions. In reality, therefore, residents have very little opportunity for training during their internship. Performing KB also requires experience in ultrasound techniques for guiding the puncture.

The contribution of simulation to the teaching of KB has been little documented in the literature. Some articles have shown that participants in simulation teaching using a porcine KB model introduced into a turkey carcass [7,8] performed better in KB procedures compared with those who received 'conventional' teaching, with a reduction of post-procedure bleeding. In nephrology, teaching by in vivo simulation in pigs and in silico on mannequins is feasible, but poorly evaluated [9,10].

Young nephrologists are open-minded about simulationbased teaching, which has shown interesting pedagogical results in other fields [3][4][5][6]. New simulation models using mannequins are now emerging [10] ( Figure 1E) and could improve technical teaching in nephrology.

In our opinion, simulation-based teaching should be extended to all nephrology residents and fellows, for better training of invasive procedures, to reduce stress and to improve patient safety.
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe thank all those who participated in this survey. We thank Felicity Kay for the English editing.SUPPLEMENTARY DATASupplementary data are available at ckj online.CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTNone declared. The results presented in this article have not been published previously in whole or part, except in abstract form.
Amending of the 3rd cycle of medical studies in France: what the nephrologists stand for. C Lohé Ac, V Maisons, C Bureau, Lohé ac C, Maisons V, Bureau C et al. [Amending of the 3rd cy- cle of medical studies in France: what the nephrologists stand for].

. Nephrol Ther. 16Nephrol Ther 2020; 16: 50-58

aux connaissances, aux compé tences et aux maquettes de formation des diplô mes d'é tudes spé cialisé es et fixant la liste de ces diplô mes et des options et formations spé cialisé es transversales du troisiè me cycle des é tudes de mé decine NOR: ESRS2001981A. JORF n 0066 du 17 mars 2020 texte n 23 Arrê té du 13 fé vrier 2020 modifiant l'arrê té du 21 avril 2017 relatif. JORF n 0066 du 17 mars 2020 texte n 23 Arrê té du 13 fé vrier 2020 modifiant l'arrê té du 21 avril 2017 relatif aux connaiss- ances, aux compé tences et aux maquettes de formation des diplô mes d'é tudes spé cialisé es et fixant la liste de ces dip- lô mes et des options et formations spé cialisé es transver- sales du troisiè me cycle des é tudes de mé decine NOR: ESRS2001981A. 66AD. https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/ arrete/2020/2/13/ESRS2001981A/jo/texte

Development and evaluation of a simulation-based curriculum for ultrasoundguided central venous catheterization. R Mcgraw, T Chaplin, C Mckaigney, Can J Emerg Med. 18McGraw R, Chaplin T, McKaigney C et al. Development and evaluation of a simulation-based curriculum for ultrasound- guided central venous catheterization. Can J Emerg Med 2016; 18: 405-413

Simulation-based mastery learning reduces complications during central venous catheter insertion in a medical intensive care unit. J H Barsuk, W C Mcgaghie, E R Cohen, Crit Care Med. 37Barsuk JH, McGaghie WC, Cohen ER et al. Simulation-based mastery learning reduces complications during central ve- nous catheter insertion in a medical intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 2697-2701

Achieving optimal clinical outcomes in ultrasound-guided central venous catheterizations of the internal jugular vein after a simulation-based training program for novice learners. J Koh, Y Xu, L Yeo, Simul Healthc. 9Koh J, Xu Y, Yeo L et al. Achieving optimal clinical out- comes in ultrasound-guided central venous catheteriza- tions of the internal jugular vein after a simulation-based training program for novice learners. Simul Healthc 2014; 9: 161-166

Use of simulationbased education to reduce catheter-related bloodstream infections. J H Barsuk, E R Cohen, J Feinglass, Arch Intern Med. 169Barsuk JH, Cohen ER, Feinglass J et al. Use of simulation- based education to reduce catheter-related bloodstream infections. Arch Intern Med 2009; 169: 1420-1423

Simulation of real-time ultrasoundguided renal biopsy. M Mrug, J J Bissler, Kidney Int. 78Mrug M, Bissler JJ. Simulation of real-time ultrasound- guided renal biopsy. Kidney Int 2010; 78: 705-707

Impact of ultrasoundguided kidney biopsy simulation on trainee confidence and biopsy outcomes. D Dawoud, W Lyndon, S Mrug, Am J Nephrol. 36Dawoud D, Lyndon W, Mrug S et al. Impact of ultrasound- guided kidney biopsy simulation on trainee confidence and biopsy outcomes. Am J Nephrol 2012; 36: 570-574

Teaching innovations in ultrasound-guided renal biopsy. M Rivera Gorrín, Correa Gorospe, C Burguera, V , Nefrología. 36Rivera Gorrín M, Correa Gorospe C, Burguera V et al. Teaching innovations in ultrasound-guided renal biopsy. Nefrología 2016; 36: 1-4

An integrated pathology and ultrasonography-based simulation for training in performing kidney biopsy. S G Sharma, J M Arthur, S M Bonsib, Clin Nephrol. 89Sharma SG, Arthur JM, Bonsib SM et al. An integrated pathology and ultrasonography-based simulation for training in performing kidney biopsy. Clin Nephrol 2018; 89: 214-221

FIGURE 1: Feelings of young nephrologists about CVC placement and KB. Results of the French survey of (A) current confidence, (B) stress, (C) current training, (D) simulation-based teaching and (E) simulation-based teaching of KB on mannequin. 447FIGURE 1: Feelings of young nephrologists about CVC placement and KB. Results of the French survey of (A) current confidence, (B) stress, (C) current training, (D) simu- lation-based teaching and (E) simulation-based teaching of KB on mannequin. Feelings of young nephrologists about invasive procedural training | 447