# THE FEATURES OF FEMALE ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT IN KAZAKHSTAN: AN ANALYTICAL SURVEY

CorpusID: 225822975
 
tags: #Sociology, #Economics, #Business, #Political_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/104f9f0932a846c241d4762189eb6974f1bceafa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/104f9f0932a846c241d4762189eb6974f1bceafa)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

THE FEATURES OF FEMALE ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT IN KAZAKHSTAN: AN ANALYTICAL SURVEY
2020

Polish Journal 
I Management Studies Onyusheva 
N Meyer 
THE FEATURES OF FEMALE ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT IN KAZAKHSTAN: AN ANALYTICAL SURVEY
211202010.17512/pjms.2020.21.1.20Article history: Received November 22, 2019; Revised February 12, 2020; Accepted March 16, 2020265Female entrepreneurshipbusinesswomenfeaturesdevelopmentbarriersKazakhstan
The given article is devoted to the contemporary concepts of female entrepreneurship and its features, particularly the case of Kazakhstan as the leading developing country of Central Asia. The importance of female entrepreneurship development has been highlighted as a key economic factor forming the innovation potential of the modern economy resulting in stable economic growth within a country. The research methodology of this paper is based on conducting a historical retrospective, comparative analysis of existing patterns of macroeconomic development, political and social issues in the context of the female entrepreneurship formation and development. It also implemented problematic analyses, systematic vision, causes and consequences analysis and expert assessment, interviewing and broad online survey. The methodology of the research is based on both primary and secondary data collected and processed. Taking into account the specifics and key problems female entrepreneurs face, possible solutions and recommendations on how to improve the current social and economic situation to unleash the female entrepreneurship potential of Kazakhstan are proposed.

## Introduction

In modern society, female entrepreneurship has a special and pertinent role. A much smaller part of the social group of entrepreneurs are women, but the scale of their participation in business has been growing in recent times (Meyer, 2018). In nowadays society, the 'female entrepreneur' is the bearer of new thinking, philosophy, lifestyle, value attitudes and morality. Arguably the most significant factor for developing a country's economy is the development of entrepreneurship. Moreover, entrepreneurship is an initial factor for an innovative type of economic growth, which is based on an entrepreneurial initiative in the field of scientific, technical, organisational and economic activity. Contributing to the growth of public welfare, creating conditions for the realisation of economic interests, entrepreneurship in order to determine the prospects for further successful development of a country's economy.


## Literature Review

In recent times the concept of entrepreneurship and further its focus on gender aspects has been changing. Therefore, in the frame of this study, it is considered to explore, in detail, the features of entrepreneurship from a retrospective point of view. The term 'entrepreneur' was used as early as the Middle Ages in the thirteenth century in France. It stems from the French verb 'entreprendre' literally meaning 'mediator' which is translated as 'to do something' or 'to undertake'. Initially, the term was used in a different meaning to denote an actor with reference to warlike action or in particular, a person in charge of large-scale construction projects such as cathedrals, bearing no risks but simply carrying the task forward until resources were exhausted (Carlen, 2016). By the sixteenth century, the term 'entrepreneur' had emerged to refer to someone who undertakes a business venture. During that time, the first mention of business as a concept in the framework of feudalistic times was noticed (Hayek, 1931). Scientific research of the entrepreneurship concept belongs to the seventeenth century and associated with the economist Richard Cantillon (1680Cantillon ( -1734. He is considered the founder of entrepreneurship theory, as in 1725-1730 he was the first one who associated an entrepreneur with 'risk-bearing' business activity, yet Cantillon clearly distinguished between entrepreneurs who provided capital versus those who relied on their own labour and resources. According to Cantillon, an entrepreneur is 'a person who entered into a contractual relationship with the government for the performance of a service or the supply of goods; the price at which the contract was valued was fixed and the entrepreneur bore the risks of profit and loss from the barging' and 'the bearing of risk engaging in business without an assurance of the profits that would be derived is the distinguishing feature of an entrepreneur' (Cantillon, 1755(Cantillon, [1959). Besides Cantillon, a great contribution in entrepreneurship theory formation was also made by Jean Baptiste Say, Francois Quesnay, John Stuart Mill, Alfred Marshall, Joseph Schumpeter, and others (Heer, 1928;Bula, 2012). Later, in the twentieth century, the work from Schumpeter defined the importance of the 'innovation' factor in entrepreneurship and related it with national economic development and growth (Schumpeter, 1981). Moreover, a significant contribution to the development of the entrepreneurship theory has been made by scientists such as Thomas, Znaniecki and Burgess (Znaniecki, 1934). The Polish sociologist, Peter Sztompka, strongly believed that the development of society and the economy is due to the following factors: the constant human desire for innovation; the ability to accumulate knowledge and transfer them to a new generation through education and culture (Sztompka, 2005). According Sztompka (2005) trust becomes a prerequisite for development due to the growing uncertainty of people in the future. Uncertainty is associated with an increase in the complexity and opacity of modern societies. The researcher concludes that trust performs a positive function, mobilizes human actions, encourages creative, innovative, entrepreneurial activity towards other people, reduces uncertainty and risk associated with human actions. Further, the research concerning the gender aspect of entrepreneurship and female entrepreneurship appeared much later, mostly in the ninetieths (Meyer, 2018). Here, it should be mentioned that till the 1990s, mainstream academic journals and leading newspapers in the US perceived women-owned firms as only small lifestyle businesses or sole proprietorship firms (Pines et al., 2010;Aaltio et al., 2016). The male-centred business model was considered as the natural model of doing business. However, research on women entrepreneurs 'reveals that entrepreneurship is a gendered phenomenon and entrepreneurial activities can be rooted in families (De Bruin, 2007;Meyer, 2019). Emerging literature suggests that women can play a significant role in the larger entrepreneurship phenomenon and economic development (Okafor et al., 2010;Sospeter et al, 2014). As a result, there is an insistent need to investigate various dimensions of women entrepreneurship. The existing theoretical concepts need to be expanded to better explain the uniqueness of women entrepreneurship as a subject of research inquiry. Among other interesting researches of the gender, entrepreneurship are works of Brush, de Bruin, and Welter (Brush et al., 2009) who developed the 3Ms institutional theory, according to which the launch and development of an enterprise require three important factors: 'market', 'money', and 'management'. They proposed a new gender mainstreaming system. To these existing three ones, they added two more factors, emphasizing the domestic and family context of women entrepreneurs through the "motherhood" factor, and also took into account the meso-and macro-environment: society's expectations and cultural norms (macro), and also intermediate structures and institutions (meso). The inclusion of the "motherhood" factor indicates that the home and family context affects the woman more than the man, which reinforces the importance of addressing issues of gender discrimination in doing business: ownership, access to resources, and the possibility of realizing one's potential. Meyer (2018) found that some factors are influenced if female entrepreneurs have children thus placing added pressure on them. The factors of the "macro-environment" and "meso-medium" reflect the influence of society's expectations and cultural norms on women's entrepreneurship. At the same time, the macro-environment includes national policies, strategies, cultural, legal and economic impacts, while the mesentery reflects the influence of regional entrepreneurship support policies, development institutions, business associations, professional networks, services and initiatives (Brush et al., 2009;Onyusheva et al., 2018). A number of other international researches have been devoted to the study of features of female entrepreneurship, covering different aspects (Verheul et al., 2006;Andriuta et al., 2013;Galonska, 2015;Yadav & Unni, 2016;Yordanova & Tarrazon, 2016). The ratio of research in this area, taking into account Kazakhstan specifics, is still extremely low. This underlines the relevance and significance of the research, as well as the necessity of further research with a focus on the search for new approaches, methods, and mechanisms to ensure gender equality in the field of entrepreneurship and the development of female entrepreneurs.


## The research goal, objectives and methodology

The given research is aimed at the features of female entrepreneurship development, taking into consideration the case of Kazakhstan as the leading developing country of Central Asia. The main goal of the research is to study the concept of female entrepreneurship development, its features, problems, and development barriers and finding out the ways and directions of improving the current state of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan with further managerial recommendations provided. The research methodology of this paper is based on conducting a historical retrospective, comparative analysis of existing patterns of macroeconomic development, political and social issues in the context of female entrepreneurship development. It also implemented a SWOT-matrix, problematic analyses, systematic vision, causes, and consequences analysis and expert assessment. The methodology of the research is based on both primary and secondary data collected and processed by the authors in detail. The research has been based on the analysis of the most famous and significant international and domestic scientific and academic sources devoted to the formation and development of female entrepreneurship, as well as on the analysis of the annual state statistical reports. The paper adds value in that it is contemporary, using primary research conducted amongst Kazakhstan female entrepreneurs through segmented survey data (almost a thousand questionnaire sample completed by female Kazakhstan citizens-entrepreneurs between 18-64 years, who are directly involved in female business development in the country) during August 2018 -June 2019.


## The research results

The first part of the results comprised that of a historical retrospective, comparative analysis of existing patterns of macroeconomic development, political and social issues in the context of female entrepreneurship development. According to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitoring in 2017, 11.3% of Kazakhstan women aged 18-64 years were nascent or new entrepreneurs. This rate is also referred to as Total Early-Stage Entrepreneurial activity or TEA (GEM Consortium, 2017).  When registering small and medium-sized businesses, most women prefer to be individual entrepreneurs, rather than legal entities as limited liability or joint-stock companies. The number of individual proprietorship entities registered, where women are headed, by the end of January 2019 increased to 581 200 (3.6% p/y). This increased their share of the total number of individual entrepreneurs from 47% to 47.2%. The existing ones are 485 200, which is 10.7% more than 2018. The share of active entrepreneurs with female leaders also increased -from 46.5% to 46.8% (Enterprise Surveys, 2017;DAMU, 2014DAMU, -2018. The main reason for the higher representation of women in SMEs and lower in large-scaled business lies in the industries or 'specialisation' of female business in the country. In countries with a more developed tradition of female entrepreneurship, numerous studies have documented and confirmed the presence of so-called 'traditionally female industries' (Zhussupova et al., 2018;Meyer, 2018). In Kazakhstan, there is a concentration of women in areas such as healthcare and social services (83%), education (77%), hospitality businesses (75%) and financial sector (66%). Men are more predominant in construction (81%), agriculture, hunting and forestry (77%), fishing and fish farming (74%), mining (75%), energy (72%), transport and communications (67%), manufacturing industry (64%) and public administration (60%) (DAMU, 2018;Enterprise Surveys, 2017). The uneven distribution of women and men is also observed in positions of job hierarchy. This phenomenon is demonstrated by the fact that men account for 76% of senior leaders in local government bodies. While the proportion of women in central and local governments is more than 54%, their share among the political composition does not exceed 9% in local and 11% in central bodies (DAMU, 2018). Moreover, from August 2018 -June 2019, a survey conducted to disclose the features of female entrepreneurship in the Republic of Kazakhstan was conducted through both face-to-face and online interviewing (Seilbekova & Nurbekova, 2017;Semenova, 2010;Yordanova & Tarrazon, 2010;Yadav & Unni, 2016;Sztompka, 2005). The survey revealed that the majority of entrepreneurs (63.5%) identify their enterprises as single-industry, with 29.4% of respondents indicating that they were active in two fields and only 7.1% in three areas of activity. The group of industries most actively mastered by women includes retail trade, public catering, science, culture, and health care. The female entrepreneurs noted that among the main reasons for the priority of the service and trade sectors in Kazakhstan is due to previous experience of women; that statistically, women are less interested in technical education that reflects on the ratio creating construction, transport and logistics and industrial production businesses; financial loans, in particular, in "non-traditional" female industries are difficult to obtain and preferences are based on some character features, imitation of "home cosiness" in colleagues' relations at work. From a Western perspective, research is often reduced to a statement regarding growth in the number of female enterprises while their size remains small in terms of turnover and number of employees (OECD, 2016;European Union, 2018). According to the research data, this trend exists in Kazakhstani as well. In 2017, among all small businesses headed by women, the share of enterprises with up to 20 employees was 75.4%, 21 to 100 employees amounted to 18.4% and more than 100 employees a mere 6.2% (Enterprise Surveys, 2017). Analysing the results of the survey and annual reports of the DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund for 2014-2018, several features of the size of female owned enterprises were found. These include that female entrepreneurship is mostly concentrated in industries with where a small number of workers are needed; female entrepreneurs are more oriented with time management than with income growth; an attempt to find the balance between work and home is a "constraint" in business scale extension and small scale business are defined by young women headed the business (DAMU, 2014(DAMU, -2018. Women entrepreneurs could be divided broadly into three groups. The first group brings together businesswomen 'by vocation' (39.2%). The motivation for their choice is an inner desire to become an entrepreneur, thus having an interest in this type of activity. They came into the business of free will and with serious intentions. The second type of are those entering business 'occasionally' (46.2%). They made their decision spontaneously, under the influence of unexpected Vol. random circumstances. Finally, the third type are the 'unwilling' who have been forced based on some conditions they did not voluntarily decide on (14.6%). They were forced by various unfavourable circumstances to start a business. The motivation for their choice is unemployment or the threat of unemployment, lack of income, non-payment of wages, as well as outside pressure (see Figure 2). In this case, attention should also be paid to the social expectations of women going into business. The expectations related to self-actualisation are: the desire for independence and independence in work (65.2%), the desire to more fully reveal their professional abilities and capabilities (19.2%) and to try out new business (15.6%). The social expectations associated with starting a business were fully met by the time of the survey for every second woman, for every third woman -only partially, and a very small proportion of those who did not achieve their goals at all. Concerning the degree of readiness for a new social role, features of female entrepreneurs are rather similar to the features described by Seilbekova and Nurbekova (2017), and Semenova (2010). It was found that every second woman noted high readiness for starting a business. Before starting their entrepreneurial activity, more than half (69.5%) were ordinary specialists with higher or secondary specialised education, and only over a third (32.6%) held senior positions (director, head, manager, chief specialist, etc.). Nowadays, women in business are rather skilful at risk and have sufficient abilities to gain success (see Figure 3). Success in business for Kazakhstani women entrepreneurs are determined by the following aspects: socio-psychological features (52.3%), status features (36.5%) and the socio-economic situation in the country (11.2%). The social and psychological, 'human' qualities, such as contact, sociability, perseverance in achieving a goal, intelligence, receptivity to innovation and diplomacy are the main determinants of entrepreneurial women. Female entrepreneurs have some weaknesses compared to males, among them: vocational education -for example, "the authority of a professional confirmed by years of previous work", lack of family affairs, suitable age, and well-established connections in the business world (Kalenova et al., 2017;Meyer, 2018).


## Figure 4 represents the barriers faced by female entrepreneurs in Kazakhstan.

According to the respondents, specific barriers to the development of female entrepreneurship include: lack of necessary business experience (32.4%); lack of time as female entrepreneurs are many times forced to combine the management of her enterprise with the functions of raising children and running a household (22.3%); obtaining funds, unequal access to credit and financial resources (14.6%); low status of women in society, politics, culture and the associated limited opportunities (17.1%) and gender stereotypes in the society (13.6%).


## Figure 4: Female entrepreneurship hindering aspects in Kazakhstan Source: Compiled by authors on the base of Survey, Kazakhstan, 2019

Considering life values of Kazakhstan businesswomen (see Figure 5), it is dominated by two main aspects: motherhood and self-realisation. Life success (29.7%) and the well-being of children (28.3%) are the key values in their lives. The opportunity to work with full dedication, to reveal their abilities (23.5%) occupies the same high positions. Among the most least mentioned values were confidence in the future (10.5%) and the ability to travel (6.9%). The second part of the analysis involves that of a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis as resented in Table 1.  Source: Hashemi, 2011;Vaněk et al., 2016;Ács, 2017;Enterprise Surveys, 2017;European Union, 2018;DAMU, 2014DAMU, -2018 In order to improve the level of female development in Kazakhstan, policies need to focus on building more on the strengths and making sure that opportunities can be accessed by more female entrepreneurs. Furthermore, a focus must be placed on weaknesses and extra support through entrepreneurial training, research and development should be given by government and private institutions. Threats also need to be closely monitored, although threats are more difficult to manage, being aware of the possible threats and sharing awareness in the country may improve the situation. Focusing on improving the general SWOT aspects will ultimately lead to a more enabling business environment for entrepreneurs to grow in (Meyer et al., 2016;Sytnyk et al., 2019). Based on the survey and SWOT analyses of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan, three main groups of barriers preventing the development of female entrepreneurship has been identified. They are: Economic Barriers which include unclear and frequently changing legal provisions regarding the opening and development of a business; excessively high taxes; insufficient start-up capital and difficulty in accessing financial resources; low demand as a result of high unemployment and low economic growth rates; competition from large domestic or foreign companies; limited access to foreign markets due to non-compliance with standards established by more developed countries; high costs required to promote the business in these markets; unfavourable government policy in relation to business development and lack of government support. Educational barriers: limited access to consulting services of centres for those who want to open their own business or promote it; limited access to knowledge and information; the high cost of professional training provided in the market (only a few countries are developing programmes to refinance the cost of participation in training for entrepreneurs); limited opportunities in continuous learning. Cultural barriers: incomplete acceptance by the company of private economic activity; insufficiently respectful attitude to entrepreneurs; lack of traditions regarding training people in entrepreneurial activity; concerns about future changes; gender discrimination in business. Cultural barriers become even more severe for women from the moment they decide to start their own business . The reason is the fact that entrepreneurship has always been associated with men, especially in Central Asia. These three aspects were also identified as barriers by Meyer (2018). The last aspect pertaining to this study included the identification of new directions and managerial recommendations for further development of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan. In accordance with the SWOT analysis results (Table 1) and barriers ( Figure 4) identified in this study, a SWOT matrix for female entrepreneurship development in Kazakhstan with strategic directions is proposed (see Table 2): Source: Compiled by authors on the base of SWOT-analysis conducted; Hashemi, 2011;Vaněk et al., 2016;Ács, 2017;Enterprise Surveys, 2017;European Union, 2018;DAMU, 2014DAMU, -2018 To realise the opportunities provided, it is proposed to make maximum use of the existing strengths of female entrepreneurship (SO1). To overcome the existing weaknesses of female entrepreneurship, it is proposed to use the capabilities of the external environment (WO1, WO2). To minimize the consequences of impending threats and to avoid them, it is proposed to use the strengths of female entrepreneurship (ST1, ST2). To prevent impending threats, it is proposed to get rid of the weaknesses of female entrepreneurship and minimize their influence (WT1) (Hashemi, 2011). Based on the framework of the implementation focussing on priority strategic actions for the development of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan, the followings are proposed: 1. Export support for women entrepreneurs. To ensure females gain access to new markets, in particular abroad, active support for the female business community abroad and such national development institutions as Export Credit Insurance Corporation JSC is necessary. The KazExportGarant, JSC National Management Holding KazAgro JSC, 'Kazakhstan Institute for the Development of Industry' and others should be focussed on. This could be possible through the creation of an electronic information and communication resource with a description of all the opportunities for Kazakhstan entrepreneurs to enter the foreign market (DAMU, 2018). 2. Development of the high-tech sector of women's business. This is impossible without increasing the participation of women in the primary and secondary sectors of the economy. One of the ways to achieve this goal may be to increase women's access to technical, vocational and higher education in specialties in the field of information and communication technologies, engineering, manufacturing and construction industries, where there is more than a double-gender gap, which is possible when using the quota mechanism for distribution of educational grants. The quota mechanism can also be used in the implementation of government programmes. 3. Development of a system of social support for motherhood. An increase in the number of kindergartens, the development of elective circles (extensions) in primary and secondary schools, the creation of children's rooms or playgrounds in business centres and other similar measures will contribute to the emergence of new women's enterprises and the growth of existing ones. 4. The development of business education among women, especially young women. This can be long-term entrepreneurship courses, the universal inclusion in the compulsory school curriculum of the 'Entrepreneurship' course, entrepreneurship education at the university level (for example, opening a specialty of the same name by industry). For beginner entrepreneurs, it will be useful to take courses to increase financial (basics of accounting, investment design, business planning, etc.), legal (Entrepreneurial code, Labour code, Tax code, etc.), computer (business on the Internet, social networks, etc.) literacy (Sytnyk et al., 2019). 5. Development of infrastructure to support female entrepreneurship. It is necessary to ensure women's access not only to the 'rigid' infrastructure of entrepreneurship but also to the 'soft' aspect (network communities, the use of crowdsourcing, crowdfunding). Also among the new forms of infrastructure are innovative camps, general fab laboratories, co-working centres, which can be provided by public and private entities. 6. Development of a system of indicators for monitoring and development of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan. The main limitation of this study was the lack of a system of gender-specific indicators on the issue of entrepreneurship development (for example, data about large-scaled business, output, including data by sex and age, regional, industry, as well as by socially vulnerable segments of the population: orphans, former prisoners, housewives, youth, retirees, people with disabilities, etc.). To quantify and monitor female entrepreneurship in the Kazakhstan, a new system of indicators is needed, based on a comparison of indicators characterizing its entry and exit, as well as its internal structure. Some of the indicators could be borrowed from the gender methodological system of the European Union (European Union, 2018).


## Conclusion

As a result of the research of female entrepreneurship, the features, main barriers and directions of improving the development, considering the case of Kazakhstan, we can conclude the following. First, female entrepreneurship is a significant factor in the evolution of the domestic Kazakhstan economy. It contributes to its stabilization and dynamic economic growth. Secondly, a female entrepreneur is a special social type of women, carriers of liberal values, with an increased need for self-realisation, creative dedication, and innovators in nature. As a rule, this type of woman is in demand not only in business but also in other areas of work, in enterprises with a wide variety of organisational and legal forms. The intrinsic qualities of a businesswoman are not dominant and widespread among modern women, especially those who have been repressed for one reason or another from the sphere of production. However, over time, the social qualities necessary for the entrepreneurial activity will become more and more apparent in the new generations of women entering life in market conditions. Indeed, it is not by chance, for example, in the USA every second small enterprise, and in Germanyevery third is headed by a female. Thirdly, the scale of development of women's business in Kazakhstan, as statistics shows, still lags behind the corresponding indicators of highly developed countries. Despite the fact that this phenomenon is a characteristic of most countries with economies in transition, in Kazakhstan it is further enhanced under the influence of numerous specific factors and features. The research indicates the presence of scientific interest in the participation of women in the business sector. This contributed to the creation of a certain theoretical and practical base of research. However, there are issues that remain a constant subject of discussion, in particular, the definition of female entrepreneurship, the definition of guidelines for its analysis and evaluation. A significant number of scientific developments on female entrepreneurship are reduced to a description of the results of sociological studies. At the same time, studies that address theoretical and methodological issues, as well as the statistical measurement of female entrepreneurship, algorithms and methods for analysing it and evaluating its effectiveness, adapting the experience of developed countries in the development of female entrepreneurship to the conditions of developing countries, are still poorly developed, especially in domestic science. Although many studies conducted a constructive study of certain aspects of female entrepreneurship, a holistic and systematic review of female entrepreneurship has not been conducted. To date, the degree of research in this area, taking into account Kazakhstan specifics, is extremely low. Therefore, the topic needs further study, and, above all, with a focus on the search for new approaches, methods, and mechanisms to ensure gender equality in the field of entrepreneurship and the development of women's entrepreneurship in the republic. According to a McKinsey Global Institute report, the implementation of a scenario in which women's economic participation will be on a par with men could lead to an increase in annual global GDP of $ 28 trillion (26%) by 2025 (European Union, 2018). It turns out, due to the low participation of women in business, the economy of Kazakhstan is losing millions of dollars. By the given research has been focused on understanding the features of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan, and reasons for the lack of growth of female business in the country and offer recommendations for its development.

To conclude, in this article, the concept of female entrepreneurship development, its features, problematic zones, and barries by considering the case of Kazakhstan was investigated. Finding out new ways and directions of improving the current state of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan with the further managerial recommendations provided is imperative. Main managerial recommendations include provising export support for women entrepreneurs; development of a hightech sector for female entrepreneurs; development of a system of social support for motherhood; the development of business education among women, especially young women; development of infrastructure to support female entrepreneurship and development of a system of indicators for monitoring and development of female entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan. It has been considered the theoretical background of the female entrepreneurship concept, its formation, and 


From 2010 to 2016 the percentage of women-led enterprises in Kazakhstan increased from 26.1% to 27.4%. However, the representation of women in large-scaled business is still rather low. In 2016, women headed only 15.3% of large Vol.21 No.1 POLISH JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES Onyusheva I., Meyer N. enterprises, 27.4% of small and 30.8% of medium-sized enterprises in Kazakhstan (Enterprise Surveys, 2017). According to the official data of the Ministry of National Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan for the year 2017/2018, the number of small and medium-sized enterprises headed by women, amounted to 648 100, or 42.1% of the total number of registered small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) (National Statistical Review, 2018). The information concerning the number of SMEs registered in Kazakhstan headed by women for 2011-2018 is presented inFigure 1.

## Figure 1 :
1Number of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs) registered in KZ headed by women, 2011-2018Source: National StatisticalReview, 2018; DAMU (2014 DAMU ( -2018; Enterprise Surveys, 2017.

## Figure 3 :Figure 3 :
33Motivation Aspects defining business success Source: Enterprise Surveys, 2019

## Figure 5 :
5Life values of female entrepreneurs in Kazakhstan Source: Compiled by authors on the base of Survey, Kazakhstan, 2019


1: SWOT-Analysis of Female Entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES S1. New generation (new wave) of womenentrepreneurs; S2. A rather high level of female participation in business (number of enterprises, employment, contribution to GDP); S3. The presence of women's business associations; S4. The inclusion of women from socially vulnerable sectors in entrepreneurial activity W1. Representation of women entrepreneurs by micro and small business; W2. Specialization of female business in the tertiary sectors of the economy; W3. The "double" burden of women entrepreneurs (doing business, housekeeping); W4. Limited statistics on women's entrepreneurship OPPORTUNITIES THREATS O1. Political will for the development of women's entrepreneurship; O2. The presence of unemployed women among the working population and the possibility of their involvement in productive activities; O3. The presence of industrial and innovative infrastructure; O4. International Integration (EAEU, New Silk Road: One Belt, One Road) T1. Gender discrimination; T2. A new wave of global economic crisis; T3 Low culture of entrepreneurship and lack of innovative culture; T4. Weak development level and inefficiency of female entrepreneurship support infrastructure

## Table


## Table 2 :
2SWOT-Matrix of Female Entrepreneurship Development in KazakhstanSO1 Strategy: 
 Export support for women 
entrepreneurs. 

WO1 Strategy: 
 Development of a high-tech sector of 
female business. 
WО2 Strategy: 

CECHY ROZWOJU PRZEDSIĘBIORCZOŚCI KOBIET W KAZACHSTANIE: ANALITYCZNA ANKIETAStreszczenie: Niniejszy artykuł poświęcony jest współczesnym koncepcjom przedsiębiorczości kobiet i ich cechom, w szczególności przypadkowi Kazachstanu jako wiodącego rozwijającego się kraju Azji Środkowej. Znaczenie rozwoju przedsiębiorczości kobiet zostało podkreślone jako kluczowy czynnik ekonomiczny kształtujący potencjał innowacyjny nowoczesnej gospodarki, powodujący stabilny wzrost gospodarczy w kraju. Metodologia badań tego artykułu opiera się na przeprowadzeniu historycznej retrospektywnej analizy porównawczej istniejących wzorców rozwoju makroekonomicznego, zagadnień politycznych i społecznych w kontekście kształtowania i rozwoju przedsiębiorczości kobiet. Wdrożono także analizy problematyczne, systematyczne widzenie, analizę przyczyn i konsekwencji oraz ocenę ekspertów, wywiady i szeroką ankietę internetową. Metodologia badań opiera się zarówno na pierwotnych, jak i wtórnych danych zebranych i przetworzonych. Biorąc pod uwagę specyfikę i kluczowe problemy, przed którymi stają kobiety-przedsiębiorcy, proponuje się możliwe rozwiązania i zalecenia dotyczące poprawy obecnej sytuacji społeczno-ekonomicznej w celu uwolnienia potencjału przedsiębiorczości kobiet w Kazachstanie.Słowa kluczowe: przedsiębiorczość kobiet, kobiety biznesu, cechy, rozwój, bariery, Kazachstan.
Making sense of women entrepreneurship research: a qualitative meta-analytical review. I Aaltio, Q Wang, 61st ICSB 2016 World Conference. New York, USAAaltio, I., Wang, Q. (2016). Making sense of women entrepreneurship research: a qualitative meta-analytical review. In: 61st ICSB 2016 World Conference, New York, USA, 15-18 June 2016: Proceedings, 1-19.

The Global Entrepreneurship Index. Z J Ács, L Szerb, A Lloyd, The Global Entrepreneurship and Development Institute. Washington, D.CÁcs, Z.J., Szerb, L., Lloyd, A. (2017). The Global Entrepreneurship Index 2018. Washington, D.C.: The Global Entrepreneurship and Development Institute, 72-88.

Female entrepreneurship patterns: A theoretical comparative study. X Andriuta, J Kartašova, Verslo Sistemos ir Ekonomika Business Systems and Economics. 32Andriuta, X., Kartašova, J. (2013). Female entrepreneurship patterns: A theoretical comparative study. Verslo Sistemos ir Ekonomika Business Systems and Economics, 3(2), 187-195.

A gender aware framework for women's entrepreneurship. C G Brush, A Bruin, F Welter, International Journal of Gender and Entrepreneurship. 11Brush, C.G., Bruin, A., Welter, F. (2009). A gender aware framework for women's entrepreneurship. International Journal of Gender and Entrepreneurship, 1 (1), 8-24.

Evolution and theories of entrepreneurship: a critical review on the Kenyan perspective. H O Bula, International Journal of Business and Commerce. 111Bula, H.O. (2012). Evolution and theories of entrepreneurship: a critical review on the Kenyan perspective. International Journal of Business and Commerce, 1(11), 81-96.

Essai sur la nature du commerce in général (Essay on the Nature of Trade in General) London: Frank Cass and Co. R Cantillon, 1959Cantillon, R. (1755 [1959]). Essai sur la nature du commerce in général (Essay on the Nature of Trade in General) London: Frank Cass and Co., Ltd. Translated and republished in 1959.

A Brief History of Entrepreneurship. The Pioneers, Profiteers, and Racketeers Who Shaped Our World. J Carlen, 256.zf DAMU.Columbia University PressAnnual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund. Accessed on: 01.10.Carlen, J. (2016). A Brief History of Entrepreneurship. The Pioneers, Profiteers, and Racketeers Who Shaped Our World, Columbia University Press, 256.zf DAMU. (2014). Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund, 2014, Available at: https://damu.kz/upload/iblock/d2b/GodovoyOtchetFondDamuZa2014 God.pdf, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund. on: 01.10DAMUDAMU. (2015). Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund, 2015, Available at: https://damu.kz/upload/iblock/0b0/GodovoyOtchetAOFondRazvitiya Predprinimatelst vaDamu_Za2015God.pdf, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund. on: 01.10DAMUDAMU. (2016). Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund, 2016, Available at: https://damu.kz/upload/iblock/3aa/DAMU_AR_2016_RU_0911_ spread.pdf, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund. on: 01.10DAMUDAMU. (2017). Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund, 2017, Available at: https://damu.kz/upload/iblock/3aa/DAMU_AR_2017_RU_0911_ spread.pdf, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

. on: 01.10Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund. DAMU.DAMU. (2018). Annual Report of DAMU Entrepreneurship Development Fund -, 2018, Available at: https://damu.kz/upload/iblock/3aa/DAMU_AR_2018_RU_0911_ spread.pdf, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

Advancing a framework for coherent research on women's entrepreneurship. A De Bruin, C G Brush, F Welter, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 313De Bruin, A., Brush, C.G., Welter F. (2007). Advancing a framework for coherent research on women's entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31(3), 323-339.

Enterprise Surveys. on: 01.10Enterprise Surveys. (2017). Kazakhstan 2017, Available at: http://www.enterprisesurveys. org/data/exploreeconomies/2017/kazakhstan#2, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

Gender Research of the European Union on. European Union. 211Central AsiaEuropean Union. (2018). Gender Research of the European Union on Central Asia, 2018, Vol.21 No.1

. Polish Journal, I Management Studies Onyusheva, N Meyer, on: 01.10POLISH JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES Onyusheva I., Meyer N. Available at: https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/kz_report_executive_ summary_ru.pdf, Accessed on: 01.10.2019.

Female entrepreneurs and their use of business models: thesis. Aarhus: Aarhus university, 65. GEM Consortium. T Galonska, Country profiles: Kazakhstan. Galonska, T. (2015). Female entrepreneurs and their use of business models: thesis. Aarhus: Aarhus university, 65. GEM Consortium. (2017). Country profiles: Kazakhstan https://www.gemconsortium.org/economy-profiles/kazakhstan Accessed on: 2 March 2020

Women's empowerment in Indian agriculture: does market orientation of farming systems matter? Food Sec. S Gupta, Р L Pingali, P Pinstrup-Andersen, 9Gupta, S., Pingali, Р. L., Pinstrup-Andersen P. (2017). Women's empowerment in Indian agriculture: does market orientation of farming systems matter? Food Sec., 9, 1447- 1463.

Formulating and choosing strategies using SWOT analysis and QSPM matrix: a case study of Hamadan glass company. N F Hashemi, M M Mazdeh, A Razeghi, A Rahimian, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Computers & Industrial Engineering. the 41st International Conference on Computers & Industrial EngineeringLos AngelesHashemi, N.F., Mazdeh, M.M., Razeghi, A., Rahimian, A. (2011). Formulating and choosing strategies using SWOT analysis and QSPM matrix: a case study of Hamadan glass company. Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Computers & Industrial Engineering, Los Angeles, 366-371.

Richard Cantillon. F A Hayek, Journal of Libertarian Studies. 72Hayek, F.A. (1931). Richard Cantillon, Journal of Libertarian Studies, 7(2).

Social Aspects of the Business Cycle. By Dorothy Swaine Thomas. C Heer, Alfred A. Knopf7New YorkHeer, C. (1928). Social Aspects of the Business Cycle. By Dorothy Swaine Thomas. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 7(2), 322-324.

The Contemporary State of Eco-Economy of Kazakhstan: Problems and Solutions. S Kalenova, I Onyusheva, G Yerubayeva, International Journal of Ecological Economics and Statistics. 382Kalenova, S., Onyusheva, I., Yerubayeva, G. (2017). The Contemporary State of Eco- Economy of Kazakhstan: Problems and Solutions. International Journal of Ecological Economics and Statistics, 38(2), 114-123.

South African female entrepreneurs' intention to remain in business. N Meyer, Vanderbijlpark: North-West UniversityDoctoral thesisMeyer N. (2018). South African female entrepreneurs' intention to remain in business, Vanderbijlpark: North-West University (Doctoral thesis).

Local government's role in the creation of an enabling developmental environment. D F Meyer, Administratio Publica22Meyer, D.F. (2014). Local government's role in the creation of an enabling developmental environment. Administratio Publica, 22 (1), 24-46.

Perceptions of business owners on service delivery and the creation of an enabling environment. D F Meyer, N Meyer, J R Neethling, Administratio Publica24Meyer, D.F., Meyer, N., Neethling, J.R. (2016). Perceptions of business owners on service delivery and the creation of an enabling environment. Administratio Publica, 24(3), 52- 73.

South African female entrepreneurs' business styles and its influence on various entrepreneurial factors. N Meyer, Forum Scientiae Oeconomia. 72Meyer, N. (2019). South African female entrepreneurs' business styles and its influence on various entrepreneurial factors. Forum Scientiae Oeconomia, 7(2):25-35.

Women and Men of Kazakhstan. National Statistical Review. 86Statistical ReviewNational Statistical Review, (2018). Women and Men of Kazakhstan 2013-2017: Statistical Review, 2018, Astana, 86.

Gender equality in the «Three Es» in the Asia/Pacific Region. on: 25.08OECDOECD, (2016a). Gender equality in the «Three Es» in the Asia/Pacific Region. Available at:http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/download/8114171ec005.pdf?expires= 1464400445&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=AA2CD88D76694B1591FAF 95AA8C10D24. Accessed on: 25.08.2019.

Women's Entrepreneurship: Issues and Policies. Oecd, OECDParisOECD. (2016b). Women's Entrepreneurship: Issues and Policies, 2016, Paris: OECD, 72- 74.

Entrepreneurial motivations as determinants of women entrepreneurship challenges. Petroleum-Gas University of Ploiesti bulletin. C Okafor, R Amalu, Economic Sciences Series. 622Okafor, C., Amalu, R. (2010). Entrepreneurial motivations as determinants of women entrepreneurship challenges. Petroleum-Gas University of Ploiesti bulletin. Economic Sciences Series, 62 (2), 67-77.

ASEAN: Problems of Regional Integration. I Onyusheva, L Thammashote, S Kot, Espacios Journal. 3936Onyusheva, I., Thammashote, L., Kot, S. (2018). ASEAN: Problems of Regional Integration. Espacios Journal, 39(36), 2-6.

Gender differences in entrepreneurship: Equality, diversity and inclusion in times of global crisis. Equality, Diversity and Inclusion. A M Pines, M Lerner, D Schwartz, An International Journal. 292Pines, A.M., Lerner, M., Schwartz D. (2010). Gender differences in entrepreneurship: Equality, diversity and inclusion in times of global crisis. Equality, Diversity and Inclusion: An International Journal, 29 (2), 186-198.

History of Economic Analysis. J A Schumpeter, POLISH JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES Onyusheva I. Schumpeter, J.A. (1981). History of Economic Analysis. New York. POLISH JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES Onyusheva I., Meyer N.

Theoretical Backgrounds and Features of Women Entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan. S Seilbekova, Z Nurbekova, Central Asian Economic Review. 451Seilbekova, S., Nurbekova, Z. (2017). Theoretical Backgrounds and Features of Women Entrepreneurship in Kazakhstan, Central Asian Economic Review, 4(51), 34-42.

Gender Asymmetry of Russian Entrepreneurship. Y Semenova, 10News of Saratov UniversitySemenova, Y. (2010). Gender Asymmetry of Russian Entrepreneurship. News of Saratov University, 10 (4), 6-8.

Review of theory and practice literature on women entrepreneurship in the Tanzanian construction industry: establishing the missing link. N G Sospeter, P D Rwelamila, M Nchimbi, M Masoud, Journal of Construction in Developing Countries. 192Sospeter, N.G., Rwelamila, P.D., Nchimbi, M., Masoud, M. (2014). Review of theory and practice literature on women entrepreneurship in the Tanzanian construction industry: establishing the missing link. Journal of Construction in Developing Countries, 19(2), 75-85.

. P Sztompka, Sociology of Social Changes. Sztompka, P. (2005). Sociology of Social Changes, Moscow, 252-288.

The Managerial Issues of State Budgets Execution: The Case of Ukraine and Kazakhstan. N Sytnyk, I Onyusheva, Y Holynskyy, Polish Journal of Management Studies. 191Sytnyk, N., Onyusheva, I., Holynskyy, Y. (2019). The Managerial Issues of State Budgets Execution: The Case of Ukraine and Kazakhstan. Polish Journal of Management Studies, 19(1), 445-463.

Evaluation methods of SWOT analysis. М Vaněk, М Mikoláš, K Žváková, GeoScience Engineering. 2Vaněk, М., Mikoláš, М., Žváková, K. (2016). Evaluation methods of SWOT analysis. GeoScience Engineering, 2, 23-31.

Explaining female and male entrepreneurship at the country level. I Verheul, A Van Stel, R Thurik, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development. 18Verheul, I., van Stel, A., Thurik, R., (2006). Explaining female and male entrepreneurship at the country level. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 18, 151-183.

Women entrepreneurship: research review and future directions. V Yadav, J Unni, Journal of Global Entrepreneurship Research. 612Yadav, V., Unni, J. (2016). Women entrepreneurship: research review and future directions. Journal of Global Entrepreneurship Research, 6(12), 1-18.

Gender differences in entrepreneurial intentions: evidence from Bulgaria. D Yordanova, M Tarrazon, Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship. 153Yordanova, D., Tarrazon, M. (2010). Gender differences in entrepreneurial intentions: evidence from Bulgaria. Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 15 (3), 245-261.

Corporate governance and firm value of Kazakhstani companies in the conditions of economic instability. Z Zhussupova, I Onyusheva, M El-Hodiri, Polish Journal of Management Studies. 172Zhussupova, Z., Onyusheva, I., El-Hodiri, M. (2018). Corporate governance and firm value of Kazakhstani companies in the conditions of economic instability. Polish Journal of Management Studies, 17(2), 235-245.

The Method of Sociology. F Znaniecki, New YorkZnaniecki, F. (1934). The Method of Sociology, New York.