# A review of phosphorus homeostasis and the impact of different types and amounts of dietary phosphate on metabolism and renal health in cats

CorpusID: 226276380
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de5a21d7f56e51ab2408917bab820641dde987b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de5a21d7f56e51ab2408917bab820641dde987b4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review of phosphorus homeostasis and the impact of different types and amounts of dietary phosphate on metabolism and renal health in cats


Dottie Laflamme 
Scientific Communications Consultant
FloydVirginia

Robert Backus 
Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Missouri
ColumbiaMissouri

| Scott Brown 
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
AthensGeorgia

| Richard Butterwick 
Waltham Petcare Science Institute
LeicestershireUnited Kingdom

Gail Czarnecki-Maulden 
Nestlé Purina Research
St LouisMissouri

Jonathan Elliott 
Royal Veterinary College
University of London
LondonUnited Kingdom

Andrea Fascetti 
Department of Molecular Biosciences
University of California
DavisCalifornia

David Polzin 
Veterinary Clinical Sciences Department
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
473 Grandmas Place, NE, Floyd24091St PaulMinnesota, VA

A review of phosphorus homeostasis and the impact of different types and amounts of dietary phosphate on metabolism and renal health in cats
10.1111/jvim.15961R E V I E W Correspondence Dottie Laflamme, Scientific Communications Consultant, Funding information Nestle Purina PetCare; Waltham Centre for Pet NutritionK E Y W O R D S calciumhomeostasiskidneymagnesiumnutritionphosphorustoxicity
Elevated concentrations of serum phosphate are linked with progression and increased case fatality rate in animals and humans with chronic kidney disease. Elevated concentrations of serum phosphate can be a risk factor for development of renal and cardiovascular diseases or osteoporosis in previously healthy people. In rodents, an excess intake of dietary phosphorus combined with an inverse dietary calcium : phosphorus ratio (<1 : 1) contributes to renal calcification. Renal injury also has occured in cats fed experimental diets supplemented with highly soluble phosphate salts, especially in diets with inverse calcium : phosphorus ratios. However, not all phosphorus sources contribute similarly to this effect. This review, which focuses on cats, summarizes the published evidence regarding phosphorus metabolism and homeostasis, including the relative impact of different dietary phosphorus sources, and their impact on the kidneys. No data currently shows that commercial cat foods induce renal injury. However, some diets contain high amounts of phosphorus relative to recommendations and some have inverse Ca : P ratios and so could increase the risk for development of kidney disease. While limiting the use of highly soluble phosphates appears to be important, there are insufficient data to support a specific upper limit for phosphate intake. This review also proposes areas where additional research is needed in order to strengthen conclusions and recommendations regarding dietary phosphorus for cats.

systems; and is a constituent of nucleic acids. [1][2][3][4] Most nonskeletal P in the body is intracellular. The body controls extracellular P concentrations primarily by regulation of urinary excretion but also by intestinal absorption and deposition into and release from bound sources in bone and other tissues.

Although P is essential, excess can be detrimental. Elevated concentrations of blood phosphate or maladaptive activation of hormonal systems involved in regulating phosphate could have direct toxic effects on the kidneys and cardiovascular system. 5,6 Reducing serum phosphate concentration (sPi) in subjects with chronic kidney disease (CKD) delays progression and death. [7][8][9][10][11][12] Evidence in humans suggests that elevated sPi (in the high normal range or highest quartile in population studies) can be a risk factor for development of renal disease, cardiovascular disease, or osteoporosis, and is associated with increased mortality. [13][14][15][16] Although there are discrepancies between dietary P and sPi, dietary factors do contribute to sPi, as detailed below. Human diets considered to increase risk for elevated sPi are those high in added phosphates (Pi) and low in calcium (Ca), resulting in inverse Ca : P ratios (phosphorus greater than calcium) which is itself a risk factor for renal injury. 17,18 In cats, under some circumstances, intake of highly soluble Pi salts can induce damage to otherwise healthy kidneys. 19,20 The detrimental effects of the Pi salts are not limited to clearly excessive dietary P nor inverse dietary Ca : P ratios. In some cases, the effects occur during feeding of diets containing total P concentrations not in excess of that found in some commercial diets, although the sources and proportions of added Pi in the experimental diets differ from those in commercial diets.

This review summarizes the published evidence regarding P metabolism and homeostasis, including how these factors affect the kidneys. This review further notes the limitations and gaps in the existing evidence, and proposes areas where additional research is needed in order to strengthen conclusions and recommendations regarding dietary P for cats.


# | PHOSPHORUS DIGESTION, METABOLISM, AND HOMEOSTASIS IN MAMMALS

Dietary P is absorbed in the small intestine via 2 general mechanisms: sodium-dependent active absorption (primary route), and concentration dependent paracellular diffusion (secondary route) in humans and rodents.

Active absorption of P is up-or down-regulated depending on the animal's needs and various regulating factors, while paracellular diffusion is more dependent on the total amount consumed. [21][22][23] Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 1-25-dihydroxy vitamin D3 (1,25D3), fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), thyroid hormone, glucocorticoids, estrogens and metabolic acidosis are just some of the endogenous metabolic factors that can modify intestinal P uptake either directly or indirectly. 2,[23][24][25] In addition, P absorption in most species is dependent on the intestinal pH, P needs of the animal, source of P, and interactions with other dietary factors such as dietary Ca, magnesium (Mg), and phytates. 2,21,[24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31] Metabolic acidosis upregulates sodium-dependent P uptake in the intestines of mice while simultaneously increasing urinary excretion of phosphate (Pi). 2 Dietary Ca and Ca : P ratio exert an influence over P availability, with intestinal absorption of P inversely affected by dietary Ca and Ca : P ratio, thus increasing when Ca : P is low. This has been demonstrated in dogs and cats, as well as other animals. 21,32 Likewise, dietary Mg affects intestinal uptake of both Ca and P in both rats and cats, with higher Mg decreasing uptake of Ca and P. 26,31,33,34 Increased dietary protein appeared to enhance renal Pi excretion and decrease Pi retention in both adult and growing cats, so P requirements might be dependent on dietary protein content. 28,35,36 This effect could be an artifact of protein's effect on pH. Since Pi is a critical component of urinary titratable acids used to remove excess acid from the body in a buffered form (dihydrogen phosphate), an acidic pH can increase urinary Pi (uPi) excretion. This has been confirmed in cats in 1 study designed to evaluate dietary base excess on urine pH. 37 In that study, there was a significant, negative correlation between urinary pH and uPi. Similarly, in cats given phosphoric acid to increase urinary acidification, average 24-hour Pi excretion was significantly higher than in cats with less acidic urine despite identical dietary P concentrations. 38 Thus, as urine becomes less acidic, uPi decreases which could increase positive P balance and increase sPi.

Dietary P can be intrinsic to ingredients, such as meats, bone meals, and grains, or be added as inorganic sources such as mined phosphate rock, phosphoric acid, or various phosphate salts. (Table 1).

Phosphorus from animal sources is primarily present as calcium phosphates (such as hydroxyapatite) and phosphate esters. The apparent digestibility of P ranges between 0% and 80% depending on source and other dietary variables. Grain and oilseed based P is poorly digested because it is primarily present as phytate, with digestibility between 0% and 40%. 16,22,39 Supplemental inorganic Pi, such as those in phosphate-containing food additives, have an intestinal uptake of 80% or greater. 16,39 One study comparing cats fed P coming primarily from poultry, meat, fish meals with added inorganic Pi (mono-and dibasic sodium phosphates) confirmed greater intestinal uptake of the P from sodium phosphates, with about 40% absorption compared to about 20% absorption for the diet containing primarily animal sources of P. 27 Concurrent with this were increases in sPi and uPi in cats fed the more digestible sodium phosphate containing diet. 27  both dogs and cats, as in other species, Ca : P ratio affects P digestion : higher ratios are associated with lower digestibility. Adult cats fed diets with Ca : P ratios of 1 : 1 have apparent digestibility of P averages about 50%, while increasing Ca to a ratio of 2 : 1 or 4 : 1 reduces apparent absorption. 40 The reverse also holds true, with P digestibility increased when the Ca : P ratio is less than 1 : 1. 30 Evidence in people has been accumulating that elevations in sPi can be a risk factor for development of renal disease, cardiovascular disease and increased mortality even in patients with apparently normal kidney function. [14][15][16][17] These epidemiological studies evaluated sPi rather than intake, and the association between dietary P and sPi is weak at best. 58,75,76 Discrepancies between dietary P and sPi in healthy subjects are due to several factors including normal diurnal variation in sPi and efficient excretion of excess P such that fasting sPi does not change with alterations in P intake. 15 another study in dialysis patients reports a strong association between dietary P and mortality rate. 16 In the NHANES III study, analysis of data from the subset of subjects that were healthy at the start of the study demonstrated a positive association between diet P and mortality among individuals consuming more than 1400 mg per day. 79 However, in that same study, diets with the lowest P concentrations (energy basis) were also associated with greater all-cause mortality. 79 A study in human patients with or without diabetes mellitus documented an increased risk for development of CKD in those diabetic patients consuming the highest P diets, but no impact was observed in the nondiabetic subjects. 80 A small study in pet dogs and cats suggests a positive correlation between high P intake (assessed through dietary questionnaire) and CKD in cats, but not in dogs. 81 Median P intake at the time of diagnosis was 239% of the recommended allowance in cats with CKD and 147% of the recommended allowance in the controls. Home-made diets were the most commonly fed diet type in this study, and the P sources and Ca : P ratio were not reported. In a different study of aged cats (10 years of age or older) without clinical evidence of CKD, a higher P diet (2.6 g/Mcal) had no impact on development of azotemic CKD compared with those fed a lower P diet (1.6 g/Mcal) over an 18-month period. 77 It should be noted that in this study the overall prevalence of azotemic-CKD was less than expected, so the study might have been underpowered to detect an effect from P intake.

High Pi concentrations alter vascular and endothelial function and alter the nitric oxide pathway in in vitro studies. 82,83 It is hypothesized that these changes can contribute to increased proteinuria, which might contribute to further renal injury. 16 In human patients with and without CKD, there is a significant association between sPi or uPi excretion and proteinuria. 16 The endothelial effects have been confirmed with in vivo studies in humans and rats. [82][83][84][85] For example, healthy men fed 1200 mg P (vs 400 mg P) show 2-hours postprandial elevations in sPi and compromised vascular function measured as flow-mediated dilation of the brachial artery. However, the Ca : P ratio in this treatment group was 0.167 : 1. 82 The lower the dietary Ca : P ratio, the higher the apparent likelihood of adverse effects related to any given dietary P intake. 58 Lack of control of the Ca : P ratio is a common confounding issue in studies investigating the effects of high P intake. 15,16,70,79,[82][83][84] 


# | EVIDENCE FOR PHOSPHORUS' ROLE IN RENAL HEALTH IN CATS

Although there is currently no evidence that P in commercial cat foods induces renal disease in healthy cats, high "ash" content in food might be a risk factor for developing CKD. 86 Ash refers to all the minerals in food, and this includes P but is not specifically correlated to it. In that study, higher intakes of dietary fiber, magnesium and sodium all were associated with reduced risk for CKD. Each of these nutrients can impact dietary P availability. Another small study suggests that increased P and protein intakes might be associated with CKD in cats. 81 Studies in healthy cats show an impact of dietary P, or inverse Ca : P ratios, on markers of kidney function. 19,20,87,88  phosphates. 20 The amount of phosphorus from highly soluble monosodium phosphate was approximately 0.4 g/Mcal ME or 0.17% of diet DM, in a diet with a Ca : P ratio of approximately 0.4 : 1.

A third study compared a diet supplemented with sodium dihydrogen phosphate (SDHP: NaH 2 PO 4 , also referred to as monosodium phosphate) to deliver 4.78 g P/Mcal ME (1.93% diet DM) with a Ca : P ratio of 0.6 to a control diet providing 1.23 g P/Mcal ME (0.52% diet DM) and Ca : P at 1.1. 19 Within 4 weeks after starting on this HP-NaP diet, cats developed changes consistent with renal injury: increased plasma creatinine and urea nitrogen; increased urinary microalbuminuria; decreased GFR; and ultrasound echogenicity changes consistent with altered renal morphology.

GFR also decreased in the control group, but to a lesser extent than the HP-NaP group. A final study evaluated a more moderate diet providing 3.6 g P/Mcal ME (1.5% diet DM), including approximately 1.5 g P (0.6% diet DM) from SDHP, and a Ca : P ratio of 0.9. 19 Urinary albumin excretion was significantly increased in the higher P cats by week 4 and remained elevated throughout the study. Three cats (12.5%) fed this diet developed biochemical evidence of kidney disease and 36% of the cats showed evidence of altered renal morphology. In addition, 15 cats (60%) fed this diet developed renal stones, compared with 6 cats (27%) fed the control diet. 19 Thus, multiple studies show adverse renal effects in cats fed diets containing highly soluble inorganic Pi especially, but not exclusively, in diets with a Ca : P ratio less than 1 : 1-findings consistent with those reported in other species. A key question not addressed in these studies is the applicability of these findings to other P sources.

The studies above did not compare the effects of different P sources on renal biomarkers, however other research evaluated different P sources on other physiologically important parameters. One study compared a mix of dietary P sources (poultry, meat, fish meals, and calcium phosphate) with supplemental inorganic P from mono-and di-basic sodium phosphates, and confirmed significantly greater uptake, along with increases in sPi and uPi in cats fed the more digestible inorganic P. 27 Two studies in cats compared diets providing P only from rice and beef (total P approximately 0.54%-0.64% DM) with high P diets providing additional P from either monosodium phosphate (HP-NaP: total P, 1.7% DM) or monocalcium phosphate (HP-CaP: total P, 1.5% DM). 88 Monosodium phosphate is a water soluble P source whereas monocalcium phosphate is poorly water soluble. 89  have not yet been evaluated in this manner. While limiting the use of highly soluble phosphates, such as sodium-or potassium-phosphates, appears to be important, there are insufficient data to support a specific upper limit for inorganic or soluble phosphates at this time.

Among the additional research needed are studies to identify sensitive markers of renal injury; to identify risk, if any, from current commercial products; and to generate more information about the kinetics, impact of different phosphorus sources, and the physiological adaptations to long term feeding of highly bioavailable phosphates. 


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


## OFF-LABEL ANTIMICROBIAL DECLARATION

Authors declare no off-label use of antimicrobials.


## INSTITUTIONAL ANIMAL CARE AND USE COMMITTEE (IACUC) OR OTHER APPROVAL DECLARATION

Authors declare no IACUC or other approval was needed.


## HUMAN ETHICS APPROVAL DECLARATION

Authors declare human ethics approval was not needed for this study. 


https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9992-8148


Although supplemental inorganic P sources are generally more bioavailable than those intrinsic to food ingredients, they are not uniform is this respect. In PO 4 ) significantly increased sPi and PTH compared to similar amounts of P from poultry meal (Herbst S, Dobenecker B. Effects of phosphorus addition from organic and inorganic sources on kinetics of selected blood parameters in dogs. Proc Eur Soc Vet Clin Nutr 2018, Munich, Germany. Abstract) while another study showed that the effects of calcium diphosphate (Ca[H 2 PO 4 ] 2 ) were intermediate between phosphorus from poultry meal and monosodium phosphate (Siedler S, Dobenecker B. Effect of different P sources in high phosphorus diets with balanced Ca/P ratio on serum PTH, phosphorus and calcium levels as well as apparent digestibility of these minerals in dogs. Proc Eur Soc Vet Clin Nutr 2015, Toulouse, France. Abstract).Meta-analysis of digestion trials in dogs and cats estimated the average true digestibility of P to be 17% in dogs and 31% in cats.32 In T A B L E 1 Names and chemical formulas for phosphate saltsdogs, monosodium phosphate (NaH 2 PO 4 ) and monopotassium phosphate 

(KH 2 Chemical formula a 

Common name a 

Alternate names a 

Used in research cited in this document 

Used in cat foods 
(type) b 

NaH 
2 PO 

2 

Sodium hypophosphite 

Multiple 

Sodium phosphate 
Used as generic term for mono-, di-, and tri-sodium 
phosphates 

Wet 

NaH 
2 PO 

4 

Monosodium phosphate 
Sodium Dihydrogen phosphate, SDHP; Sodium 
phosphate monobasic, sodium dihydrogen 
orthophosphate 

Dobenecker 2017-cats; Dobenecker 2018-cats; 
Alexander 2018-cats; Matsuzaki 1999-rats; Finco 
1999-cats 

Dry, wet 

Na 
2 HPO 

4 

Disodium phosphate 
Disodium hydrogen phosphate, sodium phosphate dibasic 

Coltherd 2018-cats; Finco 1999-cats 

Dry, wet 

Na 
3 PO 

4 

Trisodium phosphate 
Sodium orthophosphate, tribasic sodium phosphate; 
trisodium orthophosphate, TSP 

Wet 

Na 
5 P 
3 O 

10 

Sodium tripolyphosphate c 

Pentasodium triphosphate, STPP 

Coltherd 2018-cats; Matsuzaki 1999-rats 

Dry, wet 

Na 
4 P 
2 O 

7 

Tetrasodium 
pyrophosphate 
TSPP, Sodium pyrophosphate 

Dry, wet 

(NaPO 
3 ) 

6 

Sodium 
hexametaphosphate 
Sodium polymetaphosphate 

Dry, wet 

H 
3 PO 

4 

Phosphoric acid d 

Orthophosphoric acid 

Dry, wet 

CaH 
4 (PO 

4 ) 
2 ; OR 
Ca(H₂PO₄)₂ 

Monocalcium phosphate 
Calcium biphosphate, Calcium monobasic phosphate, 
Calcium dihydrogen phosphate 

Dobenecker 2017-cats; Dobenecker 2018-cats 

Dry, wet 

Ca 
3 (PO 

4 ) 

2 

Calcium phosphate 
Tricalcium orthophosphate, penta-Calcium hydroxide 
triphosphate, Calcium phosphate tribasic 

Dry, wet 

CaHPO 

4 

Dicalcium phosphate c,d 
Calcium hydrogen phosphate, calcium phosphate dibasic 

Cockell 2002 and 2004-rats; PaBlack 2016-cats; 

Dry, wet 

Ca 
3 (PO 

4 ) 

2 

Tricalcium phosphate c 

Calcium phosphate 

Dry, wet 

Ca 
10 (PO 

4 ) 
6 (OH) 

2 

Calcium apatite 

Hydroxyapatite 

Ca 
4 Na(PO 

4 ) 

3 

Defluorinated phosphate 
Defluorinated feed phosphate 

Dry, wet 

KH 
2 PO 

4 

Monopotassium 
phosphate 
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate 

Cockell 2002 and 2004-rats; Tani 2007-rats; Matsuzaki 
1999-rats 

Dry, wet 

K 
2 HPO 

4 

Dipotassium phosphate 
Potassium phosphate dibasic 

K 
3 PO 

4 

Tripotassium phosphate 
Potassium phosphate, potassium phosphate tribasic 

K 
5 P 
3 O 

10 

Potassium 
tripolyphosphate 
Pentapotassium triphosphate, potassium triphosphate 

Matsuzaki 1999-rats 

K 
4 P 
2 O 

7 

Potassium pyrophosphate 
Potassium diphosphate, tetrapotassium diphosphate; 
tetrapotassium pyrophosphate 

a 

Primary resource for chemical names and formulas: Pub Chem: US National Library of Medicine. 

b 

US Cat foods, based on ingredient information listed on Chewy.com, accessed February 2019, and Mintel's Global New Products Database (gnpd.com) accessed February 2020. 

c 

Among most common phosphate additives used in wet cat foods in USA (gnpd.com). 

d 

Among most common phosphate additives used in dry cat foods in USA (gnpd.com). 



In healthy subjects, nearly 100% of sPi is filtered via the renal glomerulus and 80% to 90% is typically reabsorbed via sodium-mediated facilitated cotransporters in the renal tubules.16 That portion not reabsorbed is excreted in the urine. Total renal phosphorus excretion is balanced to phosphorus intake under the control of PTH, 1,25D3, and FGF23 (and its cofactor α-klotho) so as to maintain sPi within a fairly stable range.4,44 In cats, for example, acute responses to high intake of readily available inorganic phosphate appear to involve rapid secretion of PTH, resulting in increased uPi.45 Adaptation to longer term feeding of cats with diets high in readily available phosphate results in increases in both FGF23 and PTH, both increasing uPi.19 In a healthy adult animal at steady state (not pregnant or lactating), the total urinary Pi is thought to approximate the amount absorbed in the intestines, 46,47 although exceptions to this have been noted.47,48 In particular, with inadequate intake of P or low absorption of P from the intestine, uPi is low and may serve as an indicator of altered P regulation.44,49 In the face of kidney disease, however, urinary excretion of P is compromised.50 The amount of phosphorus entering renal tubules is dependent on glomerular filtration, as there are no other mechanisms by which additional Pi can be added to the filtrate. Thus, for a given sPi, the amount of Pi entering the tubules is dependent on glomerular filtration rate (GFR). As GFR decreases in the face of CKD, the amount of filtrate decreases. Likewise, for a given GFR, the sPi affects the amount of Pi entering the tubules. Thus, as sPi increases, the amount of Pi entering the tubules increases despite the reduced GFR. Once in the renal tubules, reabsorption or excretion is controlled by PTH, 1,25D3, and FGF23, as noted above. However, these also are impacted by CKD. Both FGF23 and PTH are increased in CKD which result in reduced renal tubular reabsorption of Pi and greater urinary Pi excretion, reduced activation of 1,25D3 and reduced intestinal P absorption, 51 maintaining stable sPi despite reduced GFR. As CKD progresses, however, there is a reduction in kidney-derived α-klotho, an essential cofactor for FGF23.25,52 In the absence of α-klotho, FGF23 is nonfunctional, thereby limiting the kidney's ability to regulate Pi reabsorption despite increased concentrations of FGF23. As the ability to regulate Pi homeostasis continues to decline with advancing CKD, sPi increases until a new equilibrium is reached but at a greater sPi. The increase in PTH, FGF23 and sPi that occur in CKD all are associated with ongoing renal damage and increased mortality rates.53-55 3 | PHOSPHORUS DYSREGULATION AND IMPACT ON RENAL HEALTH Hyperphosphatemia contributes to ongoing damage in the face of existing kidney disease, and dietary P restriction can help reduce this vations in sPi, PTH and FGF23 are risk or prognostic factors for allcause mortality and progression of CKD. 55,62-65 Serum Pi is positively correlated with severity of interstitial fibrosis in cats with CKD. 66However, it is not known if these substances actually contribute to renal injury, or are simply markers of ongoing renal injury.16 ,32 The 

average true digestibility of dietary P was summarized as: 49% when 

the Ca : P was less than 1 : 1; 27% when the Ca : P ratio fell between 

1 : 1 and 2 : 1; and approximately 0% when Ca : P was greater than 

2 : 1. 32 It is not known how much of this effect is strictly the Ca : P 

ratio or if differences in P sources or other dietary variables affect the 

apparent digestibility of P. 

Dietary Mg is another macromineral that interacts with Ca and 

P. In cats, as dietary Mg (added as MgCO 3 ) increases, intestinal 

absorption of dietary P and urinary excretion of Pi are both reduced in 

a linear manner. 31 In addition to impact on Pi homeostasis, low serum 

Mg is correlated with CKD, cardiovascular disease and all-cause mor-

tality. 6,41,42 Mg can reduce vascular mineralization in the face of 

hyperphosphatemia, reduce sPi, and reduce FGF23 which indepen-

dently contribute to death in CKD. 6,41-43 

ongoing damage. 8,16,56-58 In humans, hyperphosphatemia secondary 

to CKD is linked with disease progression, increased vascular damage 

and cardiovascular morbidity and death. 16,23,58 In mice with CKD fed 

high P diets (ie, 0.9% P vs 0.5% P; Ca : P 0.66 : 1 vs 1.2 : 1), high P 

intake results in vascular calcification which can aggravate CKD or 

contribute to cardiovascular disease. 59,60 Elevations in serum PTH and 

FGF23, which are stimulated in healthy subjects by increased P intake 

and which are increased in patients with established CKD, are associ-

ated with increased risk of CKD progression 6,61 Likewise, in cats, ele-

Female rats are predisposed to development of nephrocalcinosis, 

or calcification of kidney tissue especially at the corticomedullary 

junctions. This form of kidney disease is responsive to dietary P and 

to the dietary Ca : P ratio. 18,67-70 An inverse Ca : P ratio (Ca less than 

P) appears to be the primary risk factor although absolute amounts of 

Ca and P also influence nephrocalcinosis. 18,68 For example, when 

female rats were fed a diet that contained approximately 5 g Ca and 

6 g P/kg dry diet and had a molar Ca : P ratio of about 0.66 : 1, kidney 

tissue accumulated 171 ± 130 μmol calcium/g dry tissue weight. In 

the same study, female rats fed diets modified with considerably more 

Ca and P but molar Ca : P ratios of 1.1-1.2 : 1 showed significantly less 

calcification. The highest Ca diet, containing 20 g Ca and 13 g P/kg 

dry diet, with a molar Ca : P ratio of 1.2 : 1, resulted in only 

39 ± 31 μmol calcium/g dry tissue weight despite containing 4× more 

Ca and 2× more P than the diet with the inverse Ca : P ratio. 68 

In dogs with induced CKD, restriction of dietary P reduces the 

associated morbidity and improves survival. 56,71,72 In cats with induced 

renal failure, restriction of dietary P from 1.56% of diet dry matter 

(DM) to 0.42% results in less renal mineralization, fibrosis and inflam-

matory cell infiltration. 7 Cats on the lower P intake also have lower 

serum Pi and PTH concentrations compared to those fed the high P 

diet. It is important to note that the high P diet used a highly soluble 

inorganic P salt mixture (Na 3 PO 4 ) for a large portion of the P (about 

73% of total P, or 1.1% diet DM added Pi) and also had an inverse Ca : P 

ratio, both of which can alter bioavailability and renal effects of P. 7 

While no studies have evaluated P restriction alone in cats with 
naturally occurring CKD, several do show clinical benefits in cats with 

CKD fed "renal diets" (restricted in phosphorus, protein, and sodium, 

plus alkalinizing buffers and often with other changes compared to 

maintenance diets) or those treated with phosphate binders. 9,10,73,74 




footnote relative to P, stating "High intake of inorganic phosphorus compounds (such as NaH2 PO 4 ) may affect indicators of renal health in cats (Alexander et al 2018, Dobenecker et al 2018 a, b). Moreresearch is needed to clarify potential risk."92 United States pet food regulations require all ingredients, including specific sources of P, to be listed individually in descending order by weight but this is not required for European pet foods. Furthermore, neither US nor European regulations require that total amounts of P or Ca be listed on commercial pet food labels. Many cat foods in the United Kingdom are not in compliance with published nutritional guidelines, and more relevant to the topic of this paper, about 10% have inverse Ca : P ratios (below 1 : 1).93 Likewise, among 82 cat foods sold in the United States, approximately 16% had an inverse Ca : P ratio.94 Given that the combination of low Ca : P ratios coupled with use of some highly soluble Pi salts are associated with markers of renal injury, it is important to address this potential danger. Although much remains to be studied, currently available data suggests the need to maintain dietary Ca : P at or above 1 : 1, while also avoiding excess inorganic Pi salts. However, specific guidelines regarding inorganic Pi salts require additional data as different inorganic Pi show differences in bioavailability and may differently impact renal health.27,45,88 6 | WHAT CONCLUSIONS CAN AND CANNOT BE DRAWN BASED ON CURRENTLY AVAILABLE EVIDENCE? Based on currently available evidence, it is clear that excess phosphorus, especially when provided as highly soluble inorganic phosphate salts, can be damaging to kidneys. This effect appears to be more pronounced in foods with an inverse Ca : P ratio. What is not known is the impact of various phosphate salts which vary in digestibility and physiological effects. Safe upper limits have not been established for the various Pi salts. Adverse effects can occur with high Pi diets in relatively short term studies, but might lower amounts be detrimental over longer periods or do physiological adaptations occur to protect against these effects and, if so, do individuals vary in their ability to adapt? Other dietary factors, such as the presence of phytates, fibers, other minerals, differences in base excess and differences in the base diet matrix, also may alter the impact of dietary P. No data currently shows that commercial diets induce renal injury. However, some commercial diets contain high amounts of phosphorus relative to recommendations and some have inverse Ca : P ratios, so could increase the risk for development of CKD.It is clear that more research is needed. Until more evidence is available, the authors recommend avoiding diets with a Ca : P less than 1 : 1. Postprandial increases in serum Pi and PTH can occur when highly soluble sodium phosphates are added to diets in amounts equal to or greater than 0.5gP/Mcal, despite a Ca : P ratio above 1 : 1. However, similar results do not occur with other inorganic phosphates, such as calcium phosphates, and many inorganic phosphate sourcesThe 

Ca : P ratio was held constant for all diets at about 1.3 : 1. Each diet was 

fed for 29 days. Urine volume doubled in cats fed HP-NaP diet (which was 

high in sodium as well as P). Despite this increase in volume, uPi concentra-

tion increased. Glucosuria occurred in 54% of cats fed this diet but did not 

occur with the HP-CaP diet. The authors concluded the differences in 

phosphaturic effects were due to the high solubility of monosodium 

phosphate. 88 

A different study design was used in series of acute kinetic trials in 

cats fed diets with 2 different inorganic sodium phosphate sources, SDHP 

and sodium tripolyphosphate (Na 5 P 3 O 10 ). 45 Each randomized, cross-over 

trial measured relevant blood parameters (plasma Pi, PTH and FGF-23 

concentrations, and whole blood ionized Ca) over a 6-hour postprandial 

period with no dietary adaptation period. The trials indicate a dose-

dependent and threshold effect from the supplemental sodium phos-

phates on plasma Pi: at 0.5 g P/Mcal (0.64 g kg diet DM) or greater added 

inorganic Pi, plasma Pi and PTH increases and blood iCa decreases, 

whereas with lesser additions or with increased food-source P, no 

increases in plasma Pi or PTH occurs during the 6-hour postprandial 

period. Furthermore, the Ca : P ratio of the diet affects the response to 

dietary sodium phosphates, with a prolonged elevation in plasma Pi in 

cats fed diets with Ca : P less than 1 : 1. 45 Given that prolonged eleva-

tions in blood Pi are associated with renal injury and increased all-cause 

mortality, at least in humans, this can have clinical importance. 14 

5 | PHOSPHORUS IN COMMERCIAL CAT 
FOODS 

Phosphorus sources have many uses in pet food in addition to their 

contribution to nutritional adequacy. Some of these functional uses 

include: control of urine pH for prevention of stone formation (ie, 

phosphoric acid); reduced accumulation of dental tartar (ie, sodium 

hexametaphosphate); and, processing aids to ensure optimal cooking 

and texture (ie, sodium phosphates). Among commercial cat foods in 

the United States, the most commonly added phosphorus sources for 

wet foods include tricalcium phosphate, dicalcium phosphate, and 

sodium tripolyphosphate, while phosphoric acid and dicalcium phos-

phate are the most commonly added sources of phosphate in dry cat 

foods (Table 1). 

United States pet food regulations address both nutrient content 

of foods and ingredients used. Table 2 lists the recommendations for 

Ca and P levels as cited by the NRC (National Research Council), 

AAFCO (Association of American Feed Control Officials), and FEDIAF 

(Fédération européenne de l'industrie des aliments pour animaux 

familiers-The European Pet Food Industry Federation). 90-92 None of 

these organizations currently list a maximum or safe upper limit for 

phosphorus for cat foods although FEDIAF does list a maximum for 

the Ca : P ratio of 2 : 1, and both FEDIAF and AAFCO provide maxi-

mum limits for phosphorus for dog foods. In 2019, FEDIAF added a 

T A B L E 2 Calcium and phosphorus 
recommendations for cats 

Calcium (minimum) 
Phosphorus (minimum) 

g/Mcal 
g/100 g DM 
g/Mcal 
g/100 g DM 
Ca : P ratio 

FEDIAF 

Growth and reproduction 
2.5 
1.0 
2.1 
0.84 
1 : 1 to 1.5 : 1 

Adults, 100 kcal/kg 0.67 
1.48 
0.59 
1.25 
0.50 
1 : 1 to 2 : 1 

Adults, 75 kcal/kg 0.67 
1.97 
0.79 
1.67 
0.67 
1 : 1 to 2 : 1 

AAFCO 

Growth and reproduction 
2.5 
1.0 
2.0 
0.8 
NR b 

Adults 
1.5 
0.6 
1.25 
0.5 
NR b 

NRC (RA) a 

Growth and reproduction 
2.7 
1.9 
NR b 

Adults 
0.72 
0.64 
NR b 

a 

RA, recommended allowance. 
b NR, no recommendation. 



Funding provided by Nestle Purina PetCare and Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition. The authors thank the sponsors, the Purina Institute and the Waltham Petcare Science Institute, for supporting this endeavor. CONFLICT OF INTEREST DECLARATION Expenses related to the development of the manuscript (travel, meeting and honoraria) were offset by the sponsors, the Purina Institute and the Waltham Petcare Science Institute. Laflamme is a consultant for Purina. Backus receives support for his nutrition program from a Purina endowment, has consulted for both sponsors, and has received other support for his nutrition program from both sponsors and Hill's Pet Care. Butterwick and Czarnecki-Maulden are employed by the sponsors. Elliott has served as a consultant for Waltham and has received research funding from Royal Canin. Fascetti serves on an advisory council and is a frequent speaker for the Purina Institute, and has received support for her nutrition program from both sponsors and Hill's Pet Care.

Prevention and control of phosphate retention/hyperphosphatemia in CDK-MBD: what is normal, when to start, and how to treat. Kjm M, E A Gonzalez, Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 6KJM M, Gonzalez EA. Prevention and control of phosphate retention/hyper- phosphatemia in CDK-MBD: what is normal, when to start, and how to treat. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:440-446.

Metabolic acidosis stimulates Na + -dependent phosphate absorption and expression of the Na + -Pi cotransporter NaPi-IIb in small intestine. A Stauber, T Radanovic, G Stange, H Murer, C A Wagner, J Biber, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 288Regulation of intestinal phosphate transport IIStauber A, Radanovic T, Stange G, Murer H, Wagner CA, Biber J. Reg- ulation of intestinal phosphate transport II. Metabolic acidosis stimu- lates Na + -dependent phosphate absorption and expression of the Na + -Pi cotransporter NaPi-IIb in small intestine. Am J Physiol Gas- trointest Liver Physiol. 2005;288:G501-G506.

Phosphate homeostasis and its role in bone health. M G Penido, Alon Us, Pediatr Nephrol. 27Penido MG, Alon US. Phosphate homeostasis and its role in bone health. Pediatr Nephrol. 2012;27:2039-2048.

Renal control of calcium, phosphate, and magnesium homeostasis. J Blaine, M Chonchol, M Levi, Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 10Blaine J, Chonchol M, Levi M. Renal control of calcium, phosphate, and magnesium homeostasis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;10:1257- 1272.

Regulation and effects fo FGF23 in chronic kidney disease. J Musgrove, M Wolf, 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021119-034650Annu Rev Physiol. 82Musgrove J, Wolf M. Regulation and effects fo FGF23 in chronic kid- ney disease. Annu Rev Physiol. 2019;82:365-390. https://doi.org/10. 1146/annurev-physiol-021119-034650.

FGF23 and phosphate-cardiovascular toxins in CKD. I Vogt, M Leifheit-Hestler, 10.3390/toxins11110647Toxins (Basel). 11Vogt I, Leifheit-Hestler M. FGF23 and phosphate-cardiovascular toxins in CKD. Toxins (Basel). 2019;11:E647. https://doi.org/10. 3390/toxins11110647.

Effect of dietary phosphorus restriction on the kidneys of cats with reduced renal mass. L A Ross, D R Finco, W A Crowell, Am J Vet Res. 43Ross LA, Finco DR, Crowell WA. Effect of dietary phosphorus restric- tion on the kidneys of cats with reduced renal mass. Am J Vet Res. 1982;43:1023-1026.

Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal function and deterioration. A C Alfrey, Am J Clin Nutr. 47Alfrey AC. Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal function and deterioration. Am J Clin Nutr. 1988;47:153-156.

Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in the cat. P J Barber, J M Rawlings, P J Markwell, J Elliott, J Small Anim Pract. 40Barber PJ, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, Elliott J. Effect of dietary phos- phate restriction on renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in the cat. J Small Anim Pract. 1999;40:62-70.

Survival of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure: effect of dietary management. J Elliott, J M Rawlings, P J Markwell, P J Barber, J Small Anim Pract. 41Elliott J, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, Barber PJ. Survival of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure: effect of dietary manage- ment. J Small Anim Pract. 2000;41:235-242.

Treatment of hyperphosphatemia in patients with chronic kidney disease on maintenance hemodialysis. C R Nolan, W Y Qunibi, Kidney Int Suppl. 95Nolan CR, Qunibi WY. Treatment of hyperphosphatemia in patients with chronic kidney disease on maintenance hemodialysis. Kidney Int Suppl. 2005;95:S13-S20.

Strategies for phosphate control in patients with CKD. F C Baretto, D V Barreto, Z A Massy, T B Brueke, Kidney Int Rep. 4Baretto FC, Barreto DV, Massy ZA, Brueke TB. Strategies for phos- phate control in patients with CKD. Kidney Int Rep. 2019;4:1043- 1056.

Public health impact of dietary phosphorus excess on bone and cardiovascular health in the general population. M S Calvo, J Uribarri, Am J Clin Nutr. 98Calvo MS, Uribarri J. Public health impact of dietary phosphorus excess on bone and cardiovascular health in the general population. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;98:6-15.

Phosphorus and risk of renal failure in subjects with normal renal function. J J Sim, S K Bhandari, N Smith, Am J Med. 126Sim JJ, Bhandari SK, Smith N, et al. Phosphorus and risk of renal fail- ure in subjects with normal renal function. Am J Med. 2013;126: 311-318.

Dietary phosphorus excess: a risk factor in chronic bone, kidney, and cardiovascular disease. J Uribarri, M S Calvo, Adv Nutr. 4Uribarri J, Calvo MS. Dietary phosphorus excess: a risk factor in chronic bone, kidney, and cardiovascular disease. Adv Nutr. 2013;4: 542-544.

Dietary phosphorus intake and the kidney. A R Chang, C Anderson, Annu Rev Nutr. 37Chang AR, Anderson C. Dietary phosphorus intake and the kidney. Annu Rev Nutr. 2017;37:321-346.

Assessing the health impact of phosphorus in the food supply: issues and considerations. M S Calvo, A J Moshfegh, K L Tucker, Adv Nutr. 5Calvo MS, Moshfegh AJ, Tucker KL. Assessing the health impact of phosphorus in the food supply: issues and considerations. Adv Nutr. 2014;5:104-113.

AIN-93 purified diets for laboratory rodents: final report of the American Institute of Nutrition ad hoc writing committee on the reformulation of the AIN-76A rodent diet. P G Reeves, F H Nielsen, G C FaheyJr, J Nutr. 123Reeves PG, Nielsen FH, Fahey GC Jr. AIN-93 purified diets for labora- tory rodents: final report of the American Institute of Nutrition ad hoc writing committee on the reformulation of the AIN-76A rodent diet. J Nutr. 1993;123:1939-1951.

Effects of the long-term feeding of diets enriched with inorganic phosphorus on the adult feline kidney and phosphorus metabolism. J Alexander, J Stockman, J Atwal, 10.1017/S0007114518002751Br J Nutr. 121Alexander J, Stockman J, Atwal J, et al. Effects of the long-term feeding of diets enriched with inorganic phosphorus on the adult feline kidney and phosphorus metabolism. Br J Nutr. 2018;121:1-21. https://doi. org/10.1017/S0007114518002751.

Effect of a high phosphorus diet on indicators of renal health in cats. B Dobenecker, A Webel, S Reese, E Kienzle, J Fel Med Surg. 20Dobenecker B, Webel A, Reese S, Kienzle E. Effect of a high phos- phorus diet on indicators of renal health in cats. J Fel Med Surg. 2018; 20:339-343.

Dietary calcium and phosphorus ratio regulates bone mineralization and turnover in vitamin D receptor knockout mice by affecting intestinal calcium and phosphorus absorption. R Masuyama, Y Nakaya, S Katsumata, J Bone Miner Res. 18Masuyama R, Nakaya Y, Katsumata S, et al. Dietary calcium and phos- phorus ratio regulates bone mineralization and turnover in vitamin D receptor knockout mice by affecting intestinal calcium and phospho- rus absorption. J Bone Miner Res. 2003;18:1217-1226.

Sodium-dependent phosphate uptake in the jejunum is post-transcriptionally regulated in pigs fed a low-phosphorus diet and is independent of dietary calcium concentration. K L Saddoris, J C Fleet, J S Radcliffe, J Nutr. 140Saddoris KL, Fleet JC, Radcliffe JS. Sodium-dependent phosphate uptake in the jejunum is post-transcriptionally regulated in pigs fed a low-phosphorus diet and is independent of dietary calcium concen- tration. J Nutr. 2010;140:731-736.

Intestinal phosphate transport. Y Sabbagh, H Giral, Y Caldas, M Levi, S C Schiavi, Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 18Sabbagh Y, Giral H, Caldas Y, Levi M, Schiavi SC. Intestinal phosphate transport. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2011;18:85-90.

Role of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 on intestinal phosphate absorption in rats with a normal vitamin D supply. R Rizzoli, H Fleisch, J P Bonjour, J Clin Invest. 60Rizzoli R, Fleisch H, Bonjour JP. Role of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 on intestinal phosphate absorption in rats with a normal vitamin D sup- ply. J Clin Invest. 1977;60:639-647.

Regulation of serum phosphate. E Lederer, J Physiol. 59218Lederer E. Regulation of serum phosphate. J Physiol. 2014;592(18): 3985-3995.

Animal Nutrition. L A Maynard, J K Loosli, H F Hintz, R G Warner, McGraw-Hill Book Company1979New York7th edMaynard LA, Loosli JK, Hintz HF, Warner RG. Animal Nutrition. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company; 1979:220-240.

Influence of dietary source of phosphorus on fecal and urinary excretion of phosphorus and other minerals by male cats. D R Finco, J A Barsanti, S A Brown, Am J Vet Res. 50Finco DR, Barsanti JA, Brown SA. Influence of dietary source of phos- phorus on fecal and urinary excretion of phosphorus and other min- erals by male cats. Am J Vet Res. 1989;50:263-266.

Effects of a high-protein diet on mineral metabolism and struvite activity product in clinically normal cats. M Funaba, M Hashimoto, C Yamanaka, Am J Vet Res. 57Funaba M, Hashimoto M, Yamanaka C, et al. Effects of a high-protein diet on mineral metabolism and struvite activity product in clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res. 1996;57:1726-1732.

Effect of various chloride salts on the utilization of phosphorus, calcium and magnesium. S M Kaup, J L Greger, J Nutr Biochem. 1Kaup SM, Greger JL. Effect of various chloride salts on the utilization of phosphorus, calcium and magnesium. J Nutr Biochem. 1990;1: 542-548.

Increasing calcium intakes lower urinary concentrations of phosphorus and magnesium in adult ovariectomized cats. Fjh Pastoor, Atvt Klooster, Jnjj Mathot, A C Beynen, J Nutr. 124Pastoor FJH, Klooster ATVT, Mathot JNJJ, Beynen AC. Increasing cal- cium intakes lower urinary concentrations of phosphorus and magne- sium in adult ovariectomized cats. J Nutr. 1994;124:299-304.

Effect of dietary magnesium level on urinary and faecal excretion of calcium, magnesium and phosphorus in adult, ovariectomized cats. Fjh Pastoor, Atvt Klooster, R Opitz, A C Beynen, Br J Nutr. 74Pastoor FJH, Klooster ATVT, Opitz R, Beynen AC. Effect of dietary magnesium level on urinary and faecal excretion of calcium, magne- sium and phosphorus in adult, ovariectomized cats. Br J Nutr. 1995; 74:77-84.

Demonstration of uniformity of calcium absorption in adult dogs and cats. J K Mack, L G Alexander, P J Morris, B Dobenecker, E Kienzle, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 99Mack JK, Alexander LG, Morris PJ, Dobenecker B, Kienzle E. Demon- stration of uniformity of calcium absorption in adult dogs and cats. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 2015;99:801-809.

The effect of variations in the proportions of calcium, magnesium and phosphorus contained in the diet. J R Haag, L S Palmer, J Biol Chem. 76Haag JR, Palmer LS. The effect of variations in the proportions of cal- cium, magnesium and phosphorus contained in the diet. J Biol Chem. 1928;76:367-389.

Kidney function in rats with corticomedullary nephrocalcinosis: effects of altered dietary calcium and magnesium. Akj Al-Modhefer, J C Atherton, H O Garland, J Physiol. 380Al-Modhefer AKJ, Atherton JC, Garland HO, et al. Kidney function in rats with corticomedullary nephrocalcinosis: effects of altered dietary calcium and magnesium. J Physiol. 1986;380:405-414.

Dietary protein levels affect water intake and urinary excretion of magnesium and phosphorus in laboratory cats. M Hashimoto, M Funaba, M Abe, S Ohshima, Exp Anim. 44Hashimoto M, Funaba M, Abe M, Ohshima S. Dietary protein levels affect water intake and urinary excretion of magnesium and phospho- rus in laboratory cats. Exp Anim. 1995;44:29-35.

Effect of chronic high protein intake on magnesium, calcium and phosphorus balance in growing cats. M Hashimoto, M Funaba, M Abe, S Ohshima, Exp Anim. 45Hashimoto M, Funaba M, Abe M, Ohshima S. Effect of chronic high protein intake on magnesium, calcium and phosphorus balance in growing cats. Exp Anim. 1996;45:63-70.

Influence of the feed base excess on urine parameters in cats. E Wagner, C Keusch, C Iben, J Anim Phys Anim Nutr. 90Wagner E, Keusch C, Iben C. Influence of the feed base excess on urine parameters in cats. J Anim Phys Anim Nutr. 2006;90:19-24.

Effect of dietary phosphoric acid supplementation on acid-base balance and mineral and bone metabolism in adult cats. M J Fettman, J M Coble, S W Hammar, Am J Vet Res. 53Fettman MJ, Coble JM, Hammar SW, et al. Effect of dietary phospho- ric acid supplementation on acid-base balance and mineral and bone metabolism in adult cats. Am J Vet Res. 1992;53:2125-2135.

Management of natural and added dietary phosphorus burden in kidney disease. A Cupisti, K Kalantar-Zadeh, Sem Nephrol. 33Cupisti A, Kalantar-Zadeh K. Management of natural and added die- tary phosphorus burden in kidney disease. Sem Nephrol. 2013;33: 180-190.

Investigations on phosphorus requirements of adult cats. E Kienzle, C Thielen, C Pessinger, J Nutr. 128Kienzle E, Thielen C, Pessinger C. Investigations on phosphorus requirements of adult cats. J Nutr. 1998;128:2598-2600S.

Prognostic importance of plasma total magnesium in a cohort of cats with azotemic chronic kidney disease. Dhn Van Den Broek, Y M Chang, J Elliott, R E Jepson, J Vet Intern Med. 32van den Broek DHN, Chang YM, Elliott J, Jepson RE. Prognostic importance of plasma total magnesium in a cohort of cats with azotemic chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med. 2018;32:1359- 1371.

Magnesium: a magic bullet for cardiovascular disease in chronic kidney disease?. Nhj Leenders, M G Vervloet, 10.3390/nu11020455Nutrients. 11455Leenders NHJ, Vervloet MG. Magnesium: a magic bullet for cardio- vascular disease in chronic kidney disease? Nutrients. 2019;11:455. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu11020455.

A magnesium based phosphate binder reduces vascular calcification without affecting bone in chronic renal failure rats. E Neven, T M Deschutter, G Dams, PLoS One. 9107067Neven E, DeSchutter TM, Dams G, et al. A magnesium based phos- phate binder reduces vascular calcification without affecting bone in chronic renal failure rats. PLoS One. 2014;9:e107067.

Phosphatonins" and the regulation of phosphorus homeostasis. T J Berndt, S Schiavi, R Kumar, Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 289Berndt TJ, Schiavi S, Kumar R. "Phosphatonins" and the regulation of phosphorus homeostasis. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005;289:F1170- F1182.

Not all forms of dietary phosphorus are equal: an evaluation of postprandial phosphorus concentrations in the plasma of the cat. J C Coltherd, R Staunton, A Colyer, 10.1017/S0007114518003379Br J Nutr. 121Coltherd JC, Staunton R, Colyer A, et al. Not all forms of dietary phos- phorus are equal: an evaluation of postprandial phosphorus concen- trations in the plasma of the cat. Br J Nutr. 2019;121:270-284. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114518003379.

Experimental and regional variations in Na+−dependent and Na+−independent phosphate transport along the rat small intestine and colon. J Marks, G J Lee, S P Nadaraja, E S Debnam, R J Unwin, 10.14814/phy2.12281Physiol Rep. 3Marks J, Lee GJ, Nadaraja SP, Debnam ES, Unwin RJ. Experimental and regional variations in Na+−dependent and Na+−independent phosphate transport along the rat small intestine and colon. Phy- siol Rep. 2015;3:e12281. https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.12281.

Twenty-four-hour urine phosphorus as a biomarker of dietary phosphorus intake and absorption in CKD. E R Stremke, L D Mccabe, G P Mccabe, Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 13Stremke ER, McCabe LD, McCabe GP, et al. Twenty-four-hour urine phosphorus as a biomarker of dietary phosphorus intake and absorp- tion in CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018;13:1002-1012.

Examining the proportion of dietary phosphorus from plants, animals and food additives excreted in urine. D E St-Jules, R Jagannathan, L Gutekunst, K Kalantar-Zadeh, M A Sevick, 10.1053/j.jrn.2016.09.003J Ren Nutr. 27St-Jules DE, Jagannathan R, Gutekunst L, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Sevick MA. Examining the proportion of dietary phosphorus from plants, animals and food additives excreted in urine. J Ren Nutr. 2017;27:78-83. https://doi. org/10.1053/j.jrn.2016.09.003.

Effects of low phosphorus supply on the availability of calcium and phosphorus, and musculoskeletal development of growing dogs of 2 different breeds. B Kiefer-Hecker, E Kienzle, B Dobenecker, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 102Kiefer-Hecker B, Kienzle E, Dobenecker B. Effects of low phosphorus supply on the availability of calcium and phosphorus, and musculo- skeletal development of growing dogs of 2 different breeds. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2018;102:789-798.

Assessment of acid-base status of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure. J Elliott, H M Syme, E Reubens, P J Markwell, J Small Anim Pract. 44Elliott J, Syme HM, Reubens E, Markwell PJ. Assessment of acid-base status of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure. J Small Anim Pract. 2003;44:65-70.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 and disordered vitamin D metabolism in chronic kidney disease: updating the "trade off" hypothesis. O M Gutierrez, Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 5Gutierrez OM. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and disordered vitamin D metabolism in chronic kidney disease: updating the "trade off" hypoth- esis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1710-1716.

Dysregulation of phosphate metabolism and conditions associated with phosphate toxicity. R B Brown, M S Razzaque, 10.1038/bonekey.2015.74BoneKey Rep. 705Brown RB, Razzaque MS. Dysregulation of phosphate metabolism and conditions associated with phosphate toxicity. BoneKey Rep. 2015;705:1-7. https://doi.org/10.1038/bonekey.2015.74.

Parathyroid klotho and FGFreceptor 1 expression decline with renal function in hyperparathyroid patients with chronic kidney disease and kidney transplant recipients. T Krajisnik, H Olauson, Mai Mirza, Kidney Int. 78Krajisnik T, Olauson H, Mirza MAI, et al. Parathyroid klotho and FGF- receptor 1 expression decline with renal function in hyperparathyroid patients with chronic kidney disease and kidney transplant recipients. Kidney Int. 2010;78:1024-1032.

Depressed expression of klotho and FGF receptor 1 in hyperplastic parathyroid glands from uremic patients. H Komaba, S Goto, H Fujii, Kidney Int. 77834ErratumKomaba H, Goto S, Fujii H, et al. Depressed expression of klotho and FGF receptor 1 in hyperplastic parathyroid glands from uremic patients. Kidney Int. 2010;77:232-238. Erratum 2010;77:834.

Relationship between plasma fibroblast growth factor-23 concentration and survival time in cats with chronic kidney disease. R F Geddes, J Elliott, H M Syme, 10.1111/jvim.13625J Vet Intern Med. 29Geddes RF, Elliott J, Syme HM. Relationship between plasma fibro- blast growth factor-23 concentration and survival time in cats with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med. 2015;29:1494-1501. https:// doi.org/10.1111/jvim.13625.

On the prevention of secondary hyperparathyroidism in experimental chronic renal disease using "proportional reduction" of dietary phosphorus intake. E Slatopolsky, S Caglar, L Gradowska, J Canterbury, E Reiss, N S Bricker, Kidney Int. 2Slatopolsky E, Caglar S, Gradowska L, Canterbury J, Reiss E, Bricker NS. On the prevention of secondary hyperparathyroidism in experimental chronic renal disease using "proportional reduction" of dietary phosphorus intake. Kidney Int. 1972;2:147-151.

Phosphate depletion arrests progression of chronic renal failure independent of protein intake. D Lumlertgul, T J Burke, D M Gillum, Kidney Int. 29Lumlertgul D, Burke TJ, Gillum DM, et al. Phosphate depletion arrests progression of chronic renal failure independent of protein intake. Kidney Int. 1986;29:658-666.

Dietary phosphorus and kidney disease. J Uribarri, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1301Uribarri J. Dietary phosphorus and kidney disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013;1301:11-19.

Phosphate feeding induces arterial medial calcification in uremic mice: role of serum phosphorus, FGF-23 and osteopontin. M M El-Abbadi, A S Pai, E M Leaf, Kidney Int. 75El-Abbadi MM, Pai AS, Leaf EM, et al. Phosphate feeding induces arterial medial calcification in uremic mice: role of serum phosphorus, FGF-23 and osteopontin. Kidney Int. 2009;75:1297-1307.

High phosphate feeding promotes mineral and bone abnormalities in mice with chronic kidney disease. W L Lau, M Linnes, E Y Chu, Nephrol Dial Transplant. 28Lau WL, Linnes M, Chu EY, et al. High phosphate feeding promotes mineral and bone abnormalities in mice with chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:62-69.

Forging forward with 10 burning questions on FGF23 in kidney disease. M Wolf, 10.1681/ASN.2009121293J Am Soc Nephrol. 21Wolf M. Forging forward with 10 burning questions on FGF23 in kid- ney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;21:1427-1435. https://doi.org/ 10.1681/ASN.2009121293.

BENRIC (benazepril in renal insufficiency in cats) study group: prognostic factors in cats with chronic kidney disease. J N King, S Tasker, D A Gunn-Moore, G Strehlau, J Vet Intern Med. 21King JN, Tasker S, Gunn-Moore DA, Strehlau G. BENRIC (benazepril in renal insufficiency in cats) study group: prognostic factors in cats with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med. 2007;21:906-916.

Clinicopathological variables predicting progression of azotemia in cats with chronic kidney disease. S Chakrabarti, H M Syme, J Elliott, J Vet Intern Med. 26Chakrabarti S, Syme HM, Elliott J. Clinicopathological variables predicting progression of azotemia in cats with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med. 2012;26:275-281.

Parathyroid hormone concentration in geriatric cats with various degrees of renal function. N C Finch, H M Syme, J Elliott, J Am Vet Med Assoc. 241Finch NC, Syme HM, Elliott J. Parathyroid hormone concentration in geriatric cats with various degrees of renal function. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2012;241:1326-1335.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) concentration in cats with early nonazotemic chronic kidney disease (CKD) and in healthy geriatric cats. N C Finch, R F Gesses, H M Syme, J Elliott, J Vet Intern Med. 27Finch NC, Gesses RF, Syme HM, Elliott J. Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) concentration in cats with early nonazotemic chronic kidney disease (CKD) and in healthy geriatric cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27:227-233.

Histomorphometry of feline chronic kidney disease and correlation with markers of renal dysfunction. S Chakrabarti, H M Syme, C A Brown, J Elliott, Vet Pathol. 50Chakrabarti S, Syme HM, Brown CA, Elliott J. Histomorphometry of feline chronic kidney disease and correlation with markers of renal dysfunction. Vet Pathol. 2013;50:147-155.

Different dietary calcium levels required to prevent nephrocalcinosis in male and female rats. B G Shah, B Belonje, Nutr Res. 11Shah BG, Belonje B. Different dietary calcium levels required to pre- vent nephrocalcinosis in male and female rats. Nutr Res. 1991;11: 385-390.

The concentrations and ratio of dietary calcium and phosphorus influence development of nephrocalcinosis in female rats. K A Cockell, L &apos;abbe, M R Belonje, B , J Nutr. 132Cockell KA, L'Abbe MR, Belonje B. The concentrations and ratio of die- tary calcium and phosphorus influence development of nephrocalcinosis in female rats. J Nutr. 2002;132:252-256.

Nephrocalcinosis caused by dietary calcium: phosphorus imbalance in female rats develops rapidly and is irreversible. K A Cockell, B Belonje, J Nutr. 134Cockell KA, Belonje B. Nephrocalcinosis caused by dietary calcium: phosphorus imbalance in female rats develops rapidly and is irrevers- ible. J Nutr. 2004;134:637-640.

Highphosphorus diet induces osteopontin expression of renal tubules in rats. H Matsuzaki, S Katsumata, M Uehara, K Suzuki, M Miwa, J Clin Biochem Nutr. 41Matsuzaki H, Katsumata S, Uehara M, Suzuki K, Miwa M. High- phosphorus diet induces osteopontin expression of renal tubules in rats. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2007;41:179-183.

Beneficial effects of dietary mineral restriction in dogs with marked reduction of functional renal mass. S A Brown, W A Crowell, J A Barsanti, J V White, D R Finco, J Am Soc Nephrol. 1Brown SA, Crowell WA, Barsanti JA, White JV, Finco DR. Beneficial effects of dietary mineral restriction in dogs with marked reduction of functional renal mass. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1991;1:1169-1179.

Effects of dietary phosphorus and protein in dogs with chronic renal failure. D R Finco, S A Brown, W A Crowell, R J Duncan, J A Barsanti, S E Bennett, Am J Vet Res. 53Finco DR, Brown SA, Crowell WA, Duncan RJ, Barsanti JA, Bennett SE. Effects of dietary phosphorus and protein in dogs with chronic renal failure. Am J Vet Res. 1992;53:2264-2271.

Dietary management of naturally occurring chronic renal failure in cats. J G Harte, P J Markwell, R M Moraillon, J Nutr. 124Harte JG, Markwell PJ, Moraillon RM, et al. Dietary management of naturally occurring chronic renal failure in cats. J Nutr. 1994;124:260- 2662S.

Clinical evaluation of dietary modification for treatment of spontaneous chronic kidney disease in cats. S J Ross, C A Osborne, C A Kirk, S R Lowry, L A Koehler, D J Polzin, J Am Vet Med Assoc. 229Ross SJ, Osborne CA, Kirk CA, Lowry SR, Koehler LA, Polzin DJ. Clini- cal evaluation of dietary modification for treatment of spontaneous chronic kidney disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2006;229: 949-957.

Dietary intake of calcium and phosphorus and serum concentration in relation to the risk of coronary artery calcification in asymptomatic adults. S M Kwak, J S Kim, Y Choi, Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 34Kwak SM, Kim JS, Choi Y, et al. Dietary intake of calcium and phos- phorus and serum concentration in relation to the risk of coronary artery calcification in asymptomatic adults. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34:1763-1769.

Consequenses of a high phosphorus intake on mineral metabolism and bone remodeling in dependence of calcium intake in healthy subjects-a randomized placebo-controleed human intervention study. U Trautvetter, G Jahreis, M Kiehntopf, M Glei, 10.1186/s12937-016-0125-5Nutr J. 15Trautvetter U, Jahreis G, Kiehntopf M, Glei M. Consequenses of a high phosphorus intake on mineral metabolism and bone remodeling in dependence of calcium intake in healthy subjects-a randomized placebo-controleed human intervention study. Nutr J. 2016;15:7. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12937-016-0125-5.

The effect of moderate dietary protein and phosphate restriction on calciumphosphate homeostasis in healthy older cats. R F Geddes, V Biourge, Y Chang, H M Syme, J Elliott, J Vet Intern Med. 30Geddes RF, Biourge V, Chang Y, Syme HM, Elliott J. The effect of moderate dietary protein and phosphate restriction on calcium- phosphate homeostasis in healthy older cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2016; 30:1690-1702.

Dietary phosphorus, serum phosphorus and cardiovascular disease. M C Menon, J H Ix, 10.1111/nyas.12283Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1301Menon MC, Ix JH. Dietary phosphorus, serum phosphorus and car- diovascular disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2017;1301:21-26. https://doi. org/10.1111/nyas.12283.

High dietary phosphorus intake is associated with all-cause mortality: results from NHANES III. A R Chang, M Lazo, L J Appel, O M Gutiérrez, M E Grams, Am J Clin Nutr. 99Chang AR, Lazo M, Appel LJ, Gutiérrez OM, Grams ME. High dietary phosphorus intake is associated with all-cause mortality: results from NHANES III. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99:320-327.

High dietary phosphorus density is a risk factor for incident chronic kidney disease development in diabetic subjects: a community-based prospective cohort study. C Y Yoon, J T Park, J H Jhee, Am J Clin Nutr. 106Yoon CY, Park JT, Jhee JH, et al. High dietary phosphorus density is a risk factor for incident chronic kidney disease development in diabetic subjects: a community-based prospective cohort study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017;106:311-321.

Observation about phosphorus and protein supply in cats and dogs prior to the diagnosis of chronic kidney disease. L F Boswald, E Kienzle, B Dobenecker, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 1021supplBoswald LF, Kienzle E, Dobenecker B. Observation about phospho- rus and protein supply in cats and dogs prior to the diagnosis of chronic kidney disease. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 2018;102(suppl 1): 31-36.

Dietary phosphorus acutely impairs endothelial function. E Shuto, Y Taketani, R Tanaka, J Am Soc Nephrol. 20Shuto E, Taketani Y, Tanaka R, et al. Dietary phosphorus acutely impairs endothelial function. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20:1504-1512.

Deleterious effects of phosphate on vascular and endothelial function via disruption to the nitric acid pathway. K K Stevens, L Denby, R K Patel, Nephrol Dial Transplant. 32Stevens KK, Denby L, Patel RK, et al. Deleterious effects of phos- phate on vascular and endothelial function via disruption to the nitric acid pathway. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2017;32:1617-1627.

Effects of phosphate on vascular function under normal conditions and influence of uraemic state. I Six, J Maizel, F C Barreto, Cardiovasc Res. 96Six I, Maizel J, Barreto FC, et al. Effects of phosphate on vascular function under normal conditions and influence of uraemic state. Cardiovasc Res. 2012;96:130-139.

Dietary phosphate restriction ameliorates endothelial dysfunction in adenine-induced kidney disease rats. T V Van, E Wateri, Y Taketani, J Clin Biochem Nutr. 51Van TV, Wateri E, Taketani Y, et al. Dietary phosphate restriction ameliorates endothelial dysfunction in adenine-induced kidney dis- ease rats. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2012;51:27-32.

Diet and lifestyle variables as risk factors for chronic renal failure in pet cats. K L Hughes, M R Slater, S Geller, W J Burkholder, C Fitzgerald, Prev Vet Med. 55Hughes KL, Slater MR, Geller S, Burkholder WJ, Fitzgerald C. Diet and lifestyle variables as risk factors for chronic renal failure in pet cats. Prev Vet Med. 2002;55:1-15.

Increasing phosphorus intake reduces urinary concentrations of magnesium and calcium in adult ovariectomized cats fed purified diets. Fjh Pastoor, Atvt Klooster, Jnjj Mathot, A C Beynen, J Nutr. 125Pastoor FJH, Klooster ATVT, Mathot JNJJ, Beynen AC. Increasing phosphorus intake reduces urinary concentrations of magnesium and calcium in adult ovariectomized cats fed purified diets. J Nutr. 1995; 125:1334-1341.

Renal phosphorus excretion in adult healthy cats after the intake of high phosphorus diets with either calcium monophosphate or sodium monophosphate. B Dobenecker, P Hertel-Bohnke, A Webel, E Kienzle, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 102Dobenecker B, Hertel-Bohnke P, Webel A, Kienzle E. Renal phospho- rus excretion in adult healthy cats after the intake of high phosphorus diets with either calcium monophosphate or sodium monophosphate. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 2018;102:1759-1765.

A pilot study on in vitro solubility of phosphorus from mineral sources, feed ingredients and compound feed for pigs, poultry, dogs and cats. A Lineva, R Kirchner, E Kienzle, J Kamphues, B Dobenecker, 10.1111/jpn.12986J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 103Lineva A, Kirchner R, Kienzle E, Kamphues J, Dobenecker B. A pilot study on in vitro solubility of phosphorus from mineral sources, feed ingredients and compound feed for pigs, poultry, dogs and cats. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr. 2018;103:1-7. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpn. 12986.

National Research Council: Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and Cats. D C Beitz, J E Bauer, K C Behnke, The National Academies PressWashington, DCBeitz DC, Bauer JE, Behnke KC, et al. National Research Council: Nutri- ent Requirements of Dogs and Cats. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2006.

. Association of American Feed Control Officials. Official Publication. Champaign, IL: Association of American Feed Control Officials, Inc. Association of American Feed Control Officials. Official Publication. Champaign, IL: Association of American Feed Control Officials, Inc; 2014 http://aafco.org/publications/PublicationListing.aspx.

Fédération européenne de l'industrie des aliments pour animaux familiers (The European Pet Food Industry Federation). Nutritional Guidelines for Complete and Complementary Pet Food for Cats and Dogs. Bruxelles: The European Pet Food Industry Federation. Fédération européenne de l'industrie des aliments pour animaux familiers (The European Pet Food Industry Federation). Nutritional Guidelines for Complete and Complementary Pet Food for Cats and Dogs. Bruxelles: The European Pet Food Industry Federation; 2017.

Mineral analysis of complete dog and cats foods in the UKand compliance with European guidelines. M Davies, R Alborough, L Jones, C Davis, C Williams, D S Gardner, 10.1038/s41598-017-17159-7Sci Rep. 717107Davies M, Alborough R, Jones L, Davis C, Williams C, Gardner DS. Mineral analysis of complete dog and cats foods in the UKand compli- ance with European guidelines. Sci Rep. 2017;7:17107. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41598-017-17159-7.

Evaluation of phosphorus, calcium, and magnesium content in commercially available foods formulated for healthy cats. S C Summers, J Stockman, J Larsen, 10.1111/jvim.15689J Vet Intern Med. 34Summers SC, Stockman J, Larsen J, et al. Evaluation of phosphorus, calcium, and magnesium content in commercially available foods for- mulated for healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2019;34:266-273. https:// doi.org/10.1111/jvim.15689.

A review of phosphorus homeostasis and the impact of different types and amounts of dietary phosphate on metabolism and renal health in cats. D Laflamme, R Backus, S Brown, 10.1111/jvim.15961J Vet Intern Med. 34How to cite this article: Laflamme D, Backus R, Brown S, et al. A review of phosphorus homeostasis and the impact of different types and amounts of dietary phosphate on metabolism and renal health in cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34: 2187-2196. https://doi.org/10.1111/jvim.15961