# Compression stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome: Literature overview and presentation of the CELEST trial

CorpusID: 227179781
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f5a0caaf00d4b3bd395700d3f0143626448c04e8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f5a0caaf00d4b3bd395700d3f0143626448c04e8)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Compression stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome: Literature overview and presentation of the CELEST trial
2020

MDJean-Philippe Galanaud jean-philippe.galanaud@sunnybrook.ca 
Department of Vascular Medicine
Montpellier University Hospital
MontpellierFrance

Department of Medicine
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre and University of Toronto
TorontoONCanada

Céline Genty-Vermorel Msc 
Department of Public Health
University Grenoble Alpes
CNRS
Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital
TIMC-IMAG
F38000GrenobleFrance

| Carole 
Rolland Msc 
Department of Public Health
University Grenoble Alpes
CNRS
Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital
TIMC-IMAG
F38000GrenobleFrance

MScAlexa Comte 
Department of Public Health
University Grenoble Alpes
CNRS
Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital
TIMC-IMAG
F38000GrenobleFrance

MDPierre Ouvry 
Vascular Medicine Physician
St Aubin sur Scie
France

MScIsabelle Bertaina 
Division of General Internal Medicine
Department of Medicine
Laboratoires Innothera
Correspondence Jean-Philippe Galanaud
ArcueilFrance

University of Toronto
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
2075 Bayview AvenueM4N 3M5TorontoOntarioCanada

MD| François Verrière 
Division of General Internal Medicine
Department of Medicine
Laboratoires Innothera
Correspondence Jean-Philippe Galanaud
ArcueilFrance

University of Toronto
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
2075 Bayview AvenueM4N 3M5TorontoOntarioCanada

MDJean-Luc Bosson 
Department of Public Health
University Grenoble Alpes
CNRS
Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital
TIMC-IMAG
F38000GrenobleFrance

Compression stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome: Literature overview and presentation of the CELEST trial

Res Pract Thromb Haemost
4202010.1002/rth2.12445Received: 8 July 2020 | Revised: 31 August 2020 | Accepted: 14 September 2020| 1239 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/rth2 R E V I E W A R T I C L E Funding information Laboratoires Innothera funded the CELEST trial and supplied the trial ECS. Handling Editor: Cihan Ay.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.AbstractPostthrombotic syndrome (PTS) is a burdensome and costly complication of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) that develops in 20%-40% of patients within 2 years after proximal DVT. In the absence of effective curative treatment, management of PTS relies on its prevention after DVT. The effectiveness of elastic compression stockings (ECS) to prevent PTS is uncertain. We present an overview of published studies assessing the efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS and present the protocol for the CELEST clinical trial. While previous open-label randomized trials have reported a 50% risk reduction in PTS in patients treated with >30 mm Hg ankle pressure ECS, a large double-blind trial reported no effect of ECS. We discuss the main potential limitations of these trials, including a placebo effect and suboptimal compliance to ECS. We present the protocol of the CELEST double-blind randomized trial comparing 2 years of high strength (ankle pressure 35 mm Hg) versus lower strength (ankle pressure 25 mm Hg) ECS in the prevention of PTS after a first acute symptomatic, unilateral, proximal DVT. The use of lower-strength ECS than that used in previous studies should favor compliance. CELEST may provide important evidence about the efficacy of ECS in the prevention of PTS after DVT. The results will be interpreted in the light of results from recent clinical trials assessing ECS for PTS prevention that reported that the duration of ECS use should be tailored to the individual, if ECS are efficacious in the prevention of PTS.

## Essentials

• Efficacy of elastic compression stockings (ECS) in the prevention of postthrombotic syndrome (PTS) after deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is uncertain.

• Discrepancy between randomized controlled trials (RCTs) may be explained by the placebo effect and/or suboptimal compliance.

• Lower-strength ECS should improve compliance, but their efficacy has not been established.

• The CELEST double-blind RCT will compare high-versus lower-strength ECS to prevent PTS after a first DVT.


# | INTRODUCTION

Postthrombotic syndrome (PTS) refers to chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) manifestations following deep vein thrombosis (DVT). 1 It is an important long-term adverse outcome of venous thromboembolism (VTE), in addition to VTE recurrence and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. 2 PTS develops in 20%-40% of patients after proximal DVT. 3 Although it is not lethal, it can have serious medical, social, and economic consequences. 4 In the absence of effective treatment for established PTS, management of PTS is challenging and is mainly focused on prevention. 5,6 Before 2014, the mainstay of prevention included the use of elastic compression stockings (ECS) for 2 years, with optimal anticoagulant treatment to prevent DVT. [7][8][9][10] This was mainly based on the results of two small open-label randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that showed a significant 50% risk reduction in PTS in patients treated with >30 mm Hg ankle pressure ECS versus no ECS after an acute proximal DVT. 11,12 The results of a large randomized RCT, the SOX (Compression Stockings to Prevent the Post-Thrombotic Syndrome) trial, did not provide evidence of efficacy of this simple, harmless treatment versus placebo ECS. 13 There are several potential explanations as to why rigorously conducted trials report opposite results, and ECS efficacy is now debated. 14 This lack of agreement on the efficacy of ECS among experts led to several guidelines no longer recommending ECS for the prevention of PTS, leaving physicians "empty handed." 6,[15][16][17][18][19][20][21] In this article, we present an overview of the published clinical trials that have assessed the efficacy of ECS in the prevention of PTS after an acute DVT and examine their limitations. We will then present the protocol of the CELEST trial (Compression Elastique Evaluation du Syndrome post Thrombotique), a multicenter double-blind RCT comparing high-strength (ankle pressure 35 mm Hg) versus lower-strength (ankle pressure 25 mm Hg) ECS to prevent PTS after proximal DVT.


# | OVERVIEW OF PUBLISHED CLINICAL TRIALS ON ECS TO PREVENT PTS

We (JPG and JLB) made a PubMed and clinical trials.gov search on May 25, 2020, using the terms postthrombotic syndrome, postphlebitic syndrome, and compression to identify RCTs and meta-analyses published after SOX publication in 2014 that have assessed the efficacy of ECS (vs placebo or no ECS) to prevent PTS after an acute DVT. We identified four RCTs. [11][12][13]22 Their design and main results are presented in Table 1. Two studies reported that ECS were effective 11,12 and two did not. 13,22 Eight meta-analyses have been published since the publication of SOX study in 2014. [23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30] Three of these meta-analyses concluded that ECS might/could be efficacious with an approximate 30% risk reduction of PTS, 23,24,29 three concluded that ECS might/could not be efficacious, 27,28,30 and the remaining ones reported no conclusion because they felt that the trials were too heterogeneous and sampling bias was too high. 25,26 All meta-analyses agreed on the need for additional studies. This underlines the high level of uncertainty surrounding the question of ECS efficacy and raises a first question: Why would ECS be effective in preventing PTS?


# | PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL RATIONALE SUPPORTING THE USE OF ECS FOR PTS PREVENTION

ECS have been shown indisputably to prevent edema, heal and prevent venous ulcers, and provide symptom relief in individuals with venous and lymphatic disorders. 31 The mechanism of action of ECS is straightforward: stockings oppose gravitational forces and decrease ambulatory venous pressure, thereby reducing the volume in veins and tissues. 32 This then reduces edema, restores microcirculation, and improves calf muscle pump efficiency. 5 The pathophysiological rationale supporting the efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS is less clear-cut. Several studies have shown that patients with DVT or superficial venous thrombosis who wore ECS had better or faster recanalization rates than those who did not. 14,33-35 Furthermore, ECS were found to reduce markers of inflammation in patients with venous ulcers, 36 and in mouse models, stasis is associated with increased inflammation and impaired thrombus resolution. 37 


## | Placebo effect

The placebo effect can be defined as improvement or change in subjective discomfort or illness resulting from an intervention with no physical effect. 38 The mechanisms of the placebo effect are not well understood but are thought to be related to the power of the brain to affect bodily sensations and functions. This effect is particularly likely to occur in diseases with subjective symptoms such as PTS, although it has also been reported in severe diseases with objective measurements, such as angina pectoris. 38,39 The interaction between the caregiver and the patient can strongly enhance the placebo effect. 40 A potential placebo effect has been suggested to explain the 50% risk reduction in PTS in the ECS groups in openlabel RCTs. 11,12,25 One study reported higher efficacy of ECS on symptoms rather than on objective signs of PTS. 12 However, two RCTs reported that the beneficial effect of ECS was present in subgroups of patients with severe PTS, where a placebo effect is less likely. 11,12 Only a well-designed double-blind RCT that minimizes this bias could provide definitive evidence of the efficacy or inefficacy of ECS. 


## | Suboptimal compliance


## | Timing of ECS use

In the SOX trial protocol, ECS should have been used within 2 weeks of the DVT diagnosis. It has been suggested that the 


## | Other potential limitations

The other following limitations have been reported:

• A possible therapeutic effect of placebo stockings in SOX   


# | THE CELEST TRIAL


## | Objectives of the study

The primary objective of the study is to assess if 25 mm Hg ECS are noninferior to 35 mm Hg ECS for the prevention of PTS in patients after a first proximal DVT. We expect that the potential lower efficacy of 25 mm Hg ECS in compliant patients will be balanced by a lower compliance rate to 35 mm Hg ECS, leading to an overall similar efficacy.

The secondary objectives were to assess: 14. To perform subgroup analyses of primary and secondary objectives according to sex and age, and analysis of primary objective, using the Ginsberg criteria for the diagnosis of PTS. 63  performed at each follow-up visit are summarized in Figure 1 and 


## | Description of the study procedures


## | Assessment of outcomes


### | Primary outcome

The primary outcome, cumulative incidence of PTS at 2 years, was measured using the Villalta scale and PTS was considered as present if the score was ≥5 in the leg ipsilateral to the initial DVT, at a sin- with instructions on how to fill it in, was sent to the patient. 66 For all patients with a Villalta score ≥5, the investigator assessed if there was a possible differential diagnosis besides CVI or PTS that could explain the Villalta score.


### | Secondary outcomes

• Severity of PTS assessed using the Villalta score 65 was considered as mild, moderate, or severe if the score was 5-9, 10-14, and ≥ 15, respectively, or if a venous ulcer was present. PTS was also assessed with the Ginsberg method. 63 • Compliance to ECS was considered as optimal if patients (i) self-reported use of the allocated study ECS ≥80% of the overall time (based on the patient's diary, compliance was assessed weekly for 3 months and then monthly till the end of follow-up) and (ii) had a modified GIRERD score of 0-2. 67 The GIRERD score is a validated French tool to assess self-reported compliance and is derived from MORISKY score. 68 For this study, we removed a question corresponding to treatment renewal from the original GIRERD score; as in CELEST, patients automatically received their ECS at home. In subgroup analyses, compliance was defined as null, weak, reasonable (corresponding to the expected TA B L E 2 CELEST: procedures undertaken at in-person and phone follow-up visits To be completed whenever a major or a clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding is suspected Termination form To be completed whenever a patient is terminated from the study Withdrawal form To be completed whenever a patient withdraws from the study


## Death

To be completed whenever a patient dies compliance in routine clinical practice 51 ) or good if self-reported use of ECS was 0%-19%, 20%-49%, 50%-79%, and ≥80% of time, respectively.

• QOL was assessed using validated general (EUROQUOL EQ5D-3L) 69 and chronic venous specific (CIVIQ ) 70 


## | Sample size calculation


## | Statistical analysis

Data will be analyzed once, at the end of follow-up, except for data on patients' self-reported pain and edema discomfort, which will be assessed at 3 months. Intention-to-treat analyses, which include all randomized patients after exclusion of any that were ineligible, will be used for all outcomes. To test the hypothesis of superiority of 35 versus 25 mm Hg in the prevention of PTS, per-protocol analyses will be done among compliant patients without major protocol deviation using two different definitions of compliance (optimal and reasonable as defined in Assessment of Outcomes section).

Descriptive statistics for baseline variables will be done to describe the baseline status of the treatment groups. Losses to follow-up, withdrawals, and deaths will be censored at last date of follow-up.

The primary outcome is the cumulative rate of PTS at 2 years at the 1-or 2-year follow-up visit. We will calculate the 90% confidence interval for the difference in the rates of PTS between the 25 versus 35 mm Hg groups. Noninferiority will be concluded if the upper limit of this confidence interval is <12.5%. We will also do two one-sided test with calculation of the P value associated with a one-tailed null hypothesis H0: difference ≥ 12.5%. 76 We will then test the superiority of the 25 mm Hg ECS compared with the 35 mm Hg ECS, as per the protocol amendment.

For the primary outcome, there will be two separate analyses:

one based on all available data, and one in which missing data will be replaced by self-reported Villalta score, if available, or by a multivariable model including known risk factors for PTS. To compare the rates of PTS between groups (overall rate and among compliant patients), chi-square or Fisher exact tests will be used.

For qualitative secondary outcomes (rates of patients compliant to ECS, with edema, with PTS according to the Ginsberg method, with trophic changes, with deep or superficial reflux or with residual obstruction on US), we will use chi-square or Fisher exact tests, as appropriate.

For quantitative secondary outcomes, we will assess evolution over time (M3-M12-M24) of results for the CIVIQ20 and EUROQOL questionnaires, as well as for pain and edema in both groups using mixed-design models with presentation of P value associated with the time*treatment interaction.

Student t tests or Mann-Whitney tests will be used to compare leg volume, Villalta score (continuous), and US data at 24 months.

Kaplan-Meier analyses will be used to calculate the cumulative incidence of PTS. To assess prognostic factors for PTS, we will use Cox models and include variables mentioned in the Assessment of Outcomes section, with anticoagulant treatment entered as a time-dependent variable. Based on the number of reported events, we will also calculate the cumulative rates of death, VTE recurrence, and major bleeding.

Other analyses not scheduled in the protocol may be decided by scientific committee.

Analyzes will be done with STATA 15.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA). For all analyses, a two-sided P value of ≤ 0.05 will be considered significant.


## | Data management

Data will be entered online at trial sites using standardized case report forms and a customized web-based data entry tool. Data quality will be ensured via the use of validation checks at the time of data entry. Data will be reviewed and cleaned by the database coordinator on an ongoing basis by initiating and following up on queries to the sites. Data management will be overseen by the trial coordinating center. At the end of the trial, all data will be completely monitored.


## | Ethical considerations

The CELEST trial protocol was approved by the South East II Ethics Committee (Lyon, France) in November 2011 (Number 2011-032) and registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01578122).

Written informed consent was obtained from all participating patients. CELEST is a double-blind RCT, and as both study ECS are tighter than placebo ECS or even thromboembolic deterrent stockings, there is less chance that patients will guess which ECS they were allocated. All ECS were specifically manufactured by Innothera (Arcueil, Ile-de-France) for the purpose of the study and were fully anonymized (no distinctive sign such as a label or a seam). Furthermore, to confirm the quality of masking, patients will be asked to state at the end of the study which treatment they thought they had been assigned to receive: 25 mm Hg ECS, 35 mm Hg ECS, or uncertain.


# | DISCUSSION

Regarding compliance, the following actions were taken to optimize it: (i) large choice of ECS models in terms of length, color, open-or closed-toe that could be changed at any time;

(ii) regular and frequent patient education and coaching actions during the course of the study. Finally, to improve compliance reporting, we will not only use prospectively maintained diaries (current gold standard), 51 but we will also use a stricter definition of compliance to limit the risk of patient overestimation by adding the GIRERD scale to the classical ECS compliance self-reported assessment. 67 The expected results from the CELEST trial could be interpreted as follow:

• If the 25 mm Hg ECS are found to be noninferior to the 35 


# | CONCLUSION

The efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS is uncertain and ECS are no longer recommended in some international guidelines. The heterogeneous trial results could be due to a placebo effect or suboptimal compliance. The ongoing double-blind CELEST RCT that compares high-versus lower-strength ECS was designed to improve compliance to ECS and should contribute to improve our knowledge on the efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS. The results from CELEST will be interpreted in the light of other recently published RCTs that assessed the efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

English-language editing was provided by Margaret Haugh, PhD, MediCom Consult, France, funded by Laboratoires Innothera. 


## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS


## Conception


To confirm the safety of this routine clinical practice, TIMC (University Grenoble Alpes AND CNRS) and Laboratoires Innothera(sponsor) decided to conduct a clinical trial comparing the efficacy of high-strength (ankle pressure 35 mm Hg) versus lower-strength (ankle pressure 25 mm Hg) ECS in the prevention of PTS. The trial was endorsed by the French Society of Vascular Medicine. The CELEST trial started enrolling patients in June 2012. Patients were recruited over 61 months, and follow-up ended in June 2019. Final audit of data is expected was completed in October 2020, and statistical analysis is expected to be started in November 2020.


study is being conducted in 46 French private practice offices and hospital-based vascular medicine wards. The clinical trial coordinating center is located in Grenoble (TIMC-IMAG), and the principal investigator is Dr Jean-Luc Bosson. The study inclusion and exclusion criteria are summarized in Figure 1. Briefly, adult patients with a first, acute, symptomatic, objectively confirmed, ipsilateral proximal DVT (calf trifurcation or above) were eligible. At baseline inclusion visit, patients' demographics, past medical history, risk factors for VTE, usual medications, and current DVT management were collected. Patients had a full clinical examination, including bilateral CEAP, Villalta score, edema, ankle brachial indexes, Godet's sign, and ankle perimeter assessments and measurements for ECS sizing (on DVT-affected leg). A bilateral whole leg ultrasound (US) was also done. Patients were instructed on how to put on the ECS and were given a diary to record compliance, symptoms, and any adverse events or treatment modifications. This diary also contained educational materials and was replaced at 3 months, 6 months, and then every 6 months. Patients were asked to wear ECS from when they woke up until they went to bed for 2 years. Patients were randomized online using Clininfo software (Lyon, France) (random block size, stratified by center, age, and sex) to receive either 25 mm Hg custom-fitted ECS (ACTYS 25 (Innothera, Arcueil, France) in women, LEGGER 25 (Innothera, Arcueil, France) classic in men) or 35 mm Hg custom-fitted ECS (ACTYS 35 in women, LEGGER 35 in men). Two pairs of trial custom-fitted ECS were sent to the patient by mail via the trial coordinating center within 10 days of randomization. ECS were changed every 3 months and more frequently if required. Patient could choose between knee-length or thigh-length ECS, based on the CANANO trial results that showed similar efficacy for both, as well as the color and open-or closed-toe models. 64 Donning devices were provided if needed. At the baseline visit, patients were given commercialized ECS stockings (VARISMA Comfort Coton model (innothera, Arcueil, France), 20-36 mm Hg [different type and strength from trial ECS]) to be worn until they had received the trial ECS. Three face-to-face follow-up visits were scheduled at 3 months (±15 days), 1 year (±1 month), and 2 years (±1 month), in the afternoon. Patients were instructed not to wear and not to bring their ECS on the day of the follow-up visit. In addition, patients were F I G U R E 1 CELEST study flow diagram. ABI, ankle brachial index; CEAP, Clinical Etiological Anatomical Pathophysiological classification; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; ECS, elastic compression stockings; F/U, follow-up; IVC, inferior vena cava; PE, pulmonary embolism; PTS, postthrombotic syndrome; QOL, quality of life; SAE, serious adverse event; US, ultrasound


gle assessment, either at the 1-or 2-year follow-up visit. 6,65 Physical signs were assessed by investigators with the aid of a full-color visual guide, and symptoms were rated by the patients. All investigators received individual training on PTS assessment before the beginning of the trial. If a patient could not attend the 2-year follow-up visit, a French version of the self-reported Villalta questionnaire,


Abbreviations: ABI, ankle brachial index; AC, anticoagulant treatment; CEAP, Clinical Etiological Anatomical Pathophysiology classification; CRF, case report form; F/U: follow-up; PTS, postthrombotic syndrome; QOL, quality of life; SAE, serious adverse event; VAS: visual analog scale; VTE, venous thromboembolism (deep vein thrombosis and/or pulmonary embolism). a Phone call follow-up simultaneous to the visit in person (±15 d).


by the patient weekly for 3 months and then monthly until the end of follow-up. Edema was also assessed by the investigator at inclusion and each follow-up visit (Godet's sign and ankle perimeter). The presence of CVI was assessed by the investigator with the CEAP classification. 71 • The following parameters were assessed to identify predictors of PTS: patients' characteristics (eg, age, sex, obesity), DVT extent, clot resolution on US (between baseline and 3 months), unprovoked character of DVT, time between onset of DVT symptoms and beginning of treatment, pain intensity at baseline (pain item of the Villalta score assessed in the leg ipsilateral to DVT), pain and edema during follow-up, and contralateral Villalta score at baseline. • Serious adverse events including death, major bleeding, and VTE recurrence (as defined by the ISTH standards) 72,73 as well as all other adverse events were recorded. • The thrombus burden was assessed using the LET US classification 74,75 and reflux in the common femoral, femoral, popliteal, fibular, and anterior and posterior tibial veins as well as the great saphenous veins was measured. Reflux was considered as being present if it is >1.0 seconds in deep veins and >0.5 seconds in superficial veins.


and design of the manuscript: JPG and JLB; funding: IB, and FV; data acquisition and analysis: all authors; drafting of the article: JPG; critical revision for important intellectual content:all authors; final approval of the manuscript: all authors.


By reducing inflammation, prompting thrombus resolution, ECS may prevent vein wall fibrosis and preserve venous valves. Thus, theoretically, ECS could target the three main pathophysiological mechanisms of PTS: inflammation, venous obstruction, and venous reflux. However, it is important to remember the potential presence of important limitations (see below) in each of the published RCTs when considering the debate about the efficacy of ECS. TA B L E 1 Characteristics of RCTs comparing ECS versus no ECS or placebo ECS to prevent PTS after acute DVTBrandjes, 1997 11 
Prandoni, 2004 12 
Kahn, 2014 13 
Javaraj, 2015 22 

Number of participants 
194 
180 
803 
69 

Design 
Open label 
Open label 
Placebo controlled 
Open label 

Country, centers 
Netherlands, 2 centers 
Italy, 1 center 
Canada, United States, 24 
centers 

United States , 2 centers 

Trial arms 
40 mm Hg ECS 
No ECS 

30-40 mm Hg ECS 
No ECS 

30-40 mm Hg ECS 
Placebo ECS (<5 mm Hg) 

30-40 mm Hg 
No ECS 

Inclusion criteria 
Venogram-proven first 
unilateral proximal DVT 

US-proven first ipsilateral 
unilateral symptomatic 
proximal DVT 

US-proven first 
symptomatic proximal 
DVT < 14 d 

US-proven first proximal 
DVT 

Main exclusion criteria 
-CVI 
-Use of ECS at 
randomization 

Leg ulcer, extensive 
varicosities excluded 
Exclusion criterion 

Leg ulcer, signs of CVI 
excluded 
-

NA 
NA 

CEAP 4-6 excluded 
Exclusion criterion 

PTS assessment 
Modified Villalta scale 
on 2 consecutive 
assessments ≥ 3 mo 
apart, ≥6 mo after DVT 
dg 

Villalta scale: 
VS ≥ 5 on 2 consecutive 
assessments starting 
3 mo after DVT dg 

Ginsberg method 
Villalta scale (VS ≥ 5 once) 
starting ≥ 6 mo after DVT 
dg 

Villalta scale 
VCSS 

ECS type 
Made-to-measure 
knee-length 

Ready-made knee-length 
Ready-made knee-length 
Ready-made 
knee-length 

Time between DVT dg and 
ECS use 

2-3 wk 
1 wk (at hospital 
discharge) 

1 wk, (2 wk max) 
48 h 

ECS supply 
2 ECS, replaced/6 mo 
2 ECS, replaced/6 mo 
2 ECS, replaced/6 mo 
3 pairs ECS/4 mo 

Assessment compliance 
Self-reported, interview at 
each FU visit 

Self-reported (notebook), 
at each FU visit 

Self-reported, at each FU 
visit 

Self-reported, interviews 
at least every month 

Duration ECS use 
At least 2 y 
2 y 
2 y 
2 y 

FU visit 
Every 3 mo for 2 y, then 
every 6 mo for up to 5 y 

At 3 mo, then every 6 mo 
At 1 month, then every 
6 mo 

At 1 and 3 mo, then 
every 6 mo 

Median follow-up 
76 mo 
49 mo (at least 3 y) 
24 mo 
12 mo 

Mean age 
60 
62 
55 y 
48 y 

Males 
56% 
43% 
60% 
51% 

AC treatment 
At least 3 mo 
No FU data 

At least 3 mo 
Median, 6 mo both groups 

… 
Median, 6 mo in both 
groups 

Must receive some AC 
No FU data 

Death 
18% (n = 35, 19 and 16) 
10.6% (n = 19, 7 and 12) 
9.0% (72, 36, and 36) 
Not reported 

Loss to FU 
3.6% (n = 7, 4, and 2) 
1.7% (n = 3, 1, and 2) 
5.5% (n = 44, 23, and 21) 
54% (n = 37, 19, and 13), 
including death 

Withdraw from study 
Included in loss to FU 
6.7% (n = 6, ECS group) 
8.7% (n = 70, 33, and 37) 

PTS (ECS vs placebo/no 
ECS) 
Overall 
Severe PTS 

6-y cum inc: 
31.3% (n = 40) vs 70.4% 
(n = 69), P < .001 
11.5% (n = 11) vs. 23.5% 
(n = 23), P < .001 

At most 5-y cum inc: 
25.7% (n = 23) vs 49.1% 
(n = 44), P < .01 
3.5% (n = 3) vs 11.7% 
(n = 1), P = .01 

2-y cum inc: 
G:14.2% (n = 44) vs 12.7% 
(n = 37), NS 
VS: 52.6% (n = 176) vs. 
52.3% (n = 168), NS 
VS: 7.5% (n = 27) vs 5.8% 
(n = 20), NS 

2-y cum inc: 
No numeric data 
provided. 
NS difference if PTS 
assessed ≥ 6-mo DVT 
Dg 

QOL 
Not assessed 
Not assessed 
SF-36, VEINES-QOL 
No difference between 
groups 

Not assessed 

Reported compliance with 
ECS at 2 y 

93% >80% of time 
76% always 

87% >80% of time 
93% if FU achieved 

56% >3 d a wk 
60% 

VTE recurrence 
14.6% (n = 14) vs 13.3% 
(n = 13), NS 

13.3% (n = 12) vs 14.4% 
(n = 13), NS 

8.1% (n = 33) vs 9.6% 
(n = 38), NS 

No data 

(Continues) 
4 | POTENTIAL LIMITATIONS OF 
PUBLISHED RCTS ASSESSING THE EFFICACY 
OF ECS IN THE PREVENTION OF PTS AFTER 
ACUTE DVT 

Three important limitations that could explain why some RCTs failed 

to demonstrate the efficacy of ECS or why others may have errone-

ously reported efficacy have been identified. 




Unquestionably, compliance is the Achilles heel of ECS therapy, and in routine clinical practice, compliance with ECS appears to be similar to that reported in the SOX trial[45][46][47] rather than that reported in the positive open-label trials.11,12 One reason that could explain the differences in compliance rates between the SOX trial and the open-label trials could beIt has been suggested that the negative results in the SOX trial 

can be explained by a lower rate of compliance to ECS use than in 

other trials. In the SOX trial only 55.6% of patients reported using 

stockings >3 days per week at the end of follow-up compared with 

76% of patients who reported wearing ECS all the time and 86.6% 

of patients reported wearing ECS >80% of time in the open-label 

trials. 11-13 However, as 52% of patients developed PTS, as assessed 

by the Villalta score in the SOX trial, a substantial underlying effect 

should have been detected, if the 50% hazard reduction reported for 

compliant patients in the open-label studies were present, despite 

the low compliance. 28 Furthermore, the SOX trial reported that fre-

quent ECS use did not improve the results. 

In line with previous studies, the main reason for noncompliance 

reported by the patients in the SOX trial was difficulty putting the 

stockings on. 41-43 Similarly, in the IDEAL-DVT (Individually Tailored 

Elastic Compression Therapy After Deep Venous Thrombosis in 

Relation to the Incidence of Post Thrombotic Syndrome) trial, the 

second most important determinant of good compliance, after PTS 

risk reduction, was the ability to put the ECS on independently. 44 

that, in routine clinical practice in Canada, where the trial was 

performed, physicians rarely prescribe ECS after DVT. 48,49 This 

is in contrast to practice in most European countries (including 

those where the positive open-label trials were conducted) and 

endorsement of ECS use by physicians has been shown to increase 

ECS compliance compared with providing minimal explanation to 

patients. 44,48,50 Another reason could be that differences in inves-

tigators' and patients' reporting practices may have accounted for 

some of the differences. A recent literature review showed that 

compliance reporting is usually poor in studies, particularly when 

there is no standardized tools collecting data. 51 Future RCTs as-

sessing the efficacy of ECS should encourage compliance with 

ECS, via promoting physicians' endorsement of ECS use, schedul-

ing regular phone contact with the patient to reinforce compliance 

and improve reporting by the use of prospectively maintained di-

aries, which are the current "gold standard" for ECS compliance 

assessment. 51 However, beyond these measures, use of lighter 

ECS is probably one of the best and easiest ways to improve ECS 

compliance. 52 




Itching rash: 2% each group No data Abbreviations: AC, anticoagulant; cum inc, cumulative incidence; CVI, chronic venous insufficiency; dg, diagnosis; DVT: deep vein thrombosis; ECS: elastic compression stockings; FU: follow-up; NA, not applicable; NS, not statistically significant difference; PTS, postthrombotic syndrome; US, ultrasound; VCSS, Venous Clinical Severity Score; VEINES-QOL, Venous Insufficiency Epidemiological and Economic Study-Quality of Life; VS, Villalta score; VTE, venous thromboembolism.absence of compression at the very acute phase of DVT may have played a role in final outcome.28,53 Lower rates of PTS have been reported in some studies when compression is used earlier.14,33,34,54 However, from a practical point of view, ECS were not applied earlier in the open-label trials that reported positive results for ECS (2 weeks and 1 week, respectively) compared with in the SOX trial (1 week on average). Without questioning the potential benefits of applying compression early, this is unlikely to explain the differences between the results from open-label trials and the SOX trial.55 Brandjes, 1997 11 
Prandoni, 2004 12 
Kahn, 2014 13 
Javaraj, 2015 22 

Side effects of ECS 
No data 
Itching, redness, 
discomfort: 6% (n = 5) 
ECS group 

TA B L E 1 (Continued) 



• Differences in the characteristics of patients' and of their DVTs between trials• Differences in anticoagulant treatments between trialsThus, it is unclear if the use of ECS prevents PTS in patients after acute DVT. Well-designed, randomized, double-blind trials, with good compliance to ECS, are needed to provide definitive evidence of efficacy, or lack of efficacy of ECS.29,30,56,57 Use of lighter strength of compression than previously used (>30 mm Hg), cautious patient education, and regular monitoring of ECS compliance should favor compliance in the long-term.


The CELEST trial is a French, multicenter, double-blind, RCT assessing the efficacy of 2 years of high-strength (ankle pressure 35 mm Hg) versus lower-strength (ankle pressure 25 mm Hg) ECS to prevent PTS after a first proximal DVT. When the protocol was finalized in 2012, the SOX trial had not been published 13 and at that time the use of 30-40 mm Hg ECS was considered as a simple and effective measure to prevent PTS.7,9,10 However, in routine clinical practice, lighter strengths of ECS were often prescribed.48,49,58,59 In a survey conducted in France in 2009 among 761 vascular medicine physicians, 96% stated that they systematically prescribed ECS after DVT.58 In contrast with guidelines, two-thirds stated that they prescribed lighter ECS than the recommended ones (30-40 mm Hg), mainly to favor compliance.10 At pressures as low as 20-30 mm Hg, ECS have been shown to improve calf muscle efficiency and to relieve symptoms, reduce edema, and prevent and heal trophic disorders.32,60,61 Nevertheless, it was unknown if this lower pressure could also be efficacious in PTS prevention.


PTS in patients with proximal DVT after excluding patients who have a differential diagnosis that could explain a Villalta score ≥ 5 (sensitivity analysis). Indeed, signs and symptoms of PTS/CVI are nonspecific and unlikely to be improved by ECS.62 3. If 35 mm Hg ECS are superior to 25 mm Hg ECS to prevent PTS in the subgroup of patients compliant with ECS. If ECS are ef-1. If 25 mm Hg ECS are superior to 35 mm Hg for the pre-

vention of PTS. This could be achieved if the efficacy of 

25 mm Hg ECS are similar to that of 35 mm Hg ECS and 

if compliance is higher for the 25 mm Hg ECS. 

2. If 25 mm Hg ECS are noninferior to 35 mm Hg ECS to prevent 

ficacious in the prevention of PTS, a dose-response relationship 

may exist, and higher pressure applied could be expected to re-

sult in a greater therapeutic effect. 32 

4. If the compliance to 25 mm Hg ECS is superior to that for 

35 mm Hg ECS at 2 years of follow-up. 

5. If the quality of life (QOL) is superior and ECS constraints are 

inferior in the 25 mm Hg ECS group to those in the 35 mm Hg 

ECS group. As 25 mm Hg ECS are easier to put on, this should 

reduce wearing constraints and improve venous QOL. 

6. If 25 mm Hg ECS and 35 mm Hg ECS have similar efficacy in 

reducing the patient's self-reported pain and edema discomfort 

up to 3 months after DVT. 

7. If the evolution of general QOL scores are similar in the 

25 mm Hg ECS and 35 mm Hg ECS groups. 

8. If 25 mm Hg ECS and 35 mm Hg ECS have similar efficacy in the 

prevention of patient's self-reported pain and edema discomfort 

at 12 and 24 months. 

9. If 25 mm Hg ECS and 35 mm Hg ECS have similar efficacy in 

the prevention of venous trophic disorders (Clinical Etiological 

Anatomical Pathophysiological classification [CEAP], C4-C6). 

10. If 25 mm Hg ECS and 35 mm Hg ECS have similar efficacy in 

the prevention of ultrasonographic postthrombotic sequelae at 

3-month, 1-year, and 2-year follow-up. 

11. To assess predictors of PTS. 

12. To assess predictors of compliance to ECS use. 
13. To describe rates of VTE recurrence, any-cause death, fatal pul-

monary embolism, venous ulcers, and any possible side effect 

of study treatment (eg, peripheral arterial disease decompensa-

tion, rashes). 




pliance, how to use ECS, and to check if they needed new ECS or needed to change the size. The data collected and examinationsPatients with acute (<8 days) first, symptomatic ipsilateral, proximal DVT +/-PE 

Ineligible if 
Ineligible if 

20-36 mmHg (Varisma Comfort coton ® ) 

3 Months 
F/U Visit 2 (± 15 days): Clinic visit 
Pain, edema, QOL, compliance, US, SAE 

1 year 
F/U Visit (± 1 month): Clinic visit 
PTS, pain, edema, compliance, QOL, US, SAE 

20-30 mmHg ECS 
ACTYS 25 ® or LEGGER 25 ® 
2 years 

30-36 mmHg ECS 
ACTYS35® or LEGGER 35® 
2 years 

Primary outcome: Cumulative incidence of PTS at 2 years 
Secondary outcomes: PTS severity, Pain, Edema, QOL, Compliance, Predictors of PTS & compliance, SAEs 

2 years End of Follow-up 
F/U Visit 3 (± 1 month): Clinic visit 
PTS, pain, edema, compliance, QOL, US, SAE 

Eligible and 
Consenting 
patients 

R 

Age < 18 years 
Contralateral acute proximal DVT (bilateral proximal DVT) 
Expected duration of anticoagulant treatment <3 moths 
Any invasive early thrombus removal technique 
IVC filter 
Phlegmasia cerulae 
Septic thrombosis 
Ipsilateral trophic disorder (CEAP>3) 
Lymphedema requiring ECS use 
Chronic edema of non-venous origin 
Diabetic microangiopathy 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• Severe peripheral artery disease with ABI<0.6 
Intolerance to ECS 
Heart failure: acute or on long-term (>3 months) diuretics 
Oozing dermatosis 
Pregnant women 
Life expectancy ≤2 years, unalbe to attend 2 years of folloe-up 
Mental disorder, cognitive impairment 
Unable or unwilling to provide free informed consent 
Participation in another clinical trial (<1 month) 
Not affiliated to French national health care system 
contacted by phone at 15 days (±2 days), 6 months (±15 days), 

and 18 months (±15 days) to provide individual coaching on com-



## Table 2 .
2


The efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS after DVT is uncertain and debated, with conflicting conclusions from published meta-analyses. Guidelines, even sometimes those issued in the same country, have heterogeneous recommendations. For example, in France, where the CELEST trial is conducted, one guideline recommends ECS for the prevention of PTS after DVT, and another one does not.18,21 Differences in results for ECS efficacy for PTS prevention between studies may be due to a placebo effect or suboptimal compliance.The CELEST study may provide important evidence for the efficacy of ECS to prevent PTS. The study was designed to minimize the main potential limitations of previously published studies, that is, open-label design (placebo effect) and compliance to ECS.


mm Hg ECS, then they could be used to prevent PTS if one believes, despite SOX trial negative results, that ECS are useful to prevent PTS. 13 • If the 25 mm Hg ECS are not noninferior to the 35 mm Hg ECS and the 35 mm Hg ECS are found to be superior, this will challenge SOX trial results as it will suggest that ECS are efficacious in the prevention of PTS and that the highest strength provides a better outcome via a dose-effect mechanism.• If the 25 mm Hg ECS are more efficacious than the 35 mm Hg ECS and are associated with better compliance, this will suggest that ECS are efficacious for the prevention of PTS and the lack of efficacy reported in the SOX trial could be due to suboptimal compliance.The CELEST results will also be interpreted in light of new results from the OCTAVIA (Optical Coherence Tomography Assessment of Gender Diversity in Primary Angioplasty), CANANO, and IDEAL-DVT trials64,77,78 that suggest that use of below-knee ECS should be favored because they are associated with fewer side effects than thigh-length ECS and that patients could stop wearing ECS as early as 6 months after their acute DVT if they have two consecutive Villalta scores that are <5.
RELATIONSHIP DISCLOSUREJPG received a travel grant from Innothera to present the study. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENTJPG takes responsibility for the content of this manuscript.
Prevention and management of the post thrombotic syndrome. S R Makedonov, J P Kahn, Galanaud, J Clin Med. 94923Makedonov SR, Kahn JP. Galanaud, Prevention and management of the post thrombotic syndrome. J Clin Med. 2020;9(4):923.

Epidemiology of the post-thrombotic syndrome. J P Galanaud, M Monreal, S R Kahn, Thromb Res. 164Galanaud JP, Monreal M, Kahn SR. Epidemiology of the post-throm- botic syndrome. Thromb Res. 2018;164:100-9.

Post-thrombotic syndrome: prevalence, prognostication and need for progress. P Prandoni, S R Kahn, Br J Haematol. 145Prandoni P, Kahn SR. Post-thrombotic syndrome: prevalence, prognostication and need for progress. Br J Haematol. 2009;145: 286-95.

How I treat the postthrombotic syndrome. A Rabinovich, S R Kahn, Blood. 131Rabinovich A, Kahn SR. How I treat the postthrombotic syndrome. Blood. 2018;131:2215-22.

Prevention and treatment of the post-thrombotic syndrome. Ten Cate-Hoek, A J , Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2Ten Cate-Hoek AJ. Prevention and treatment of the post-throm- botic syndrome. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2018;2:209-19.

The postthrombotic syndrome: evidence-based prevention, diagnosis, and treatment strategies: a scientific statement from the. S R Kahn, A J Comerota, M Cushman, N S Evans, J S Ginsberg, N A Goldenberg, American Heart Association. Circulation. 130Kahn SR, Comerota AJ, Cushman M, Evans NS, Ginsberg JS, Goldenberg NA, et al. The postthrombotic syndrome: evi- dence-based prevention, diagnosis, and treatment strategies: a sci- entific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;130:1636-61.

Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis. C Kearon, E A Akl, A J Comerota, P Prandoni, H Bounameaux, S Z Goldhaber, Chest. 141American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines9th edKearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, Prandoni P, Bounameaux H, Goldhaber SZ, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141:e419S-e496S.

The history and historical treatments of deep vein thrombosis. J P Galanaud, J P Laroche, M Righini, J Thromb Haemost. 11Galanaud JP, Laroche JP, Righini M. The history and histori- cal treatments of deep vein thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11:402-11.

Quality standard for diagnosis and management of venous thromboembolic diseases. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Clinical Guideline, DOI. Clinical guideline [CG144Clinical Guideline, Quality standard for diagnosis and management of venous thromboembolic diseases. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, DOI (2012) Clinical guideline [CG144].

Guidelines for good clinical practice: prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism in medical patients. P Mismetti, J M Baud, F Becker, F Belmahdi, P Blanchard, J Constans, J Mal Vasc. 35Mismetti P, Baud JM, Becker F, Belmahdi F, Blanchard P, Constans J, et al. Guidelines for good clinical practice: prevention and treat- ment of venous thromboembolism in medical patients. J Mal Vasc. 2010;35:127-36.

Randomised trial of effect of compression stockings in patients with symptomatic proximal-vein thrombosis. D P Brandjes, H R Buller, H Heijboer, M V Huisman, M De Rijk, H Jagt, Lancet. 349Brandjes DP, Buller HR, Heijboer H, Huisman MV, de Rijk M, Jagt H, et al. Randomised trial of effect of compression stockings in patients with symptomatic proximal-vein thrombosis. Lancet. 1997;349:759-62.

Below-knee elastic compression stockings to prevent the post-thrombotic syndrome: a randomized, controlled trial. P Prandoni, A W Lensing, M H Prins, M Frulla, A Marchiori, E Bernardi, Ann Intern Med. 141Prandoni P, Lensing AW, Prins MH, Frulla M, Marchiori A, Bernardi E, et al. Below-knee elastic compression stockings to prevent the post-thrombotic syndrome: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2004;141:249-56.

Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. S R Kahn, S Shapiro, P S Wells, M A Rodger, M J Kovacs, D R Anderson, Lancet. 383Kahn SR, Shapiro S, Wells PS, Rodger MA, Kovacs MJ, Anderson DR, et al. Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;383:880-8.

Reduced incidence of vein occlusion and postthrombotic syndrome after immediate compression for deep vein thrombosis. E E Amin, I M Bistervels, K Meijer, L W Tick, S Middeldorp, G Mostard, Blood. 132Amin EE, Bistervels IM, Meijer K, Tick LW, Middeldorp S, Mostard G, et al. Reduced incidence of vein occlusion and postthrombotic syndrome after immediate compression for deep vein thrombosis. Blood. 2018;132:2298-304.

Antithrombotic Therapy for VTE Disease: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report. C Kearon, E A Akl, J Ornelas, A Blaivas, D Jimenez, H Bounameaux, Chest. 149Kearon C, Akl EA, Ornelas J, Blaivas A, Jimenez D, Bounameaux H, et al. Antithrombotic Therapy for VTE Disease: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report. Chest. 2016;149:315-52.

Elastic compression stockings-is there any benefit?. A J Ten Cate-Hoek, Lancet. 383ten Cate-Hoek AJ. Elastic compression stockings-is there any ben- efit? Lancet. 2014;383:851-3.

Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing NICE guideline. NICE guidelineNG158], DOI (2020NICE guideline, Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, man- agement and thrombophilia testing NICE guideline [NG158], DOI (2020) https://www.nice.org.uk/guida nce/ng158

Recommendations for best practice in the management of venous thromboembolic disease in adults. Long version. O Sanchez, Y Benhamou, L Bertoletti, J Constans, F Couturaud, A Delluc, 10.1016/j.rmr.2019.01.003Rev Mal Respir. 362Sanchez O, Benhamou Y, Bertoletti L, Constans J, Couturaud F, Delluc A, et al. Recommendations for best practice in the manage- ment of venous thromboembolic disease in adults. Long version. Rev Mal Respir. 2019;36(2):249-283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. rmr.2019.01.003

Indications for medical compression stockings in venous and lymphatic disorders: an evidence-based consensus statement. E Rabe, H Partsch, J Hafner, C Lattimer, G Mosti, M Neumann, Phlebology. 33Rabe E, Partsch H, Hafner J, Lattimer C, Mosti G, Neumann M, et al. Indications for medical compression stockings in venous and lymphatic disorders: an evidence-based consensus statement. Phlebology. 2018;33:163-84.

Refining diagnosis and management of chronic venous disease: outcomes of a modified Delphi consensus process. T L Aloi, G Camporese, M Izzo, D Kontothanassis, A Santoliquido, Eur J Intern Med. 65Aloi TL, Camporese G, Izzo M, Kontothanassis D, Santoliquido A. Refining diagnosis and management of chronic venous disease: out- comes of a modified Delphi consensus process. Eur J Intern Med. 2019;65:78-85.

Unresolved questions on venous thromboembolic disease. Consensus statement of the French Society for Vascular Medicine (SFMV). A Quéré, M Elias, M Maufus, M A Elias, J P Sevestre, J L Galanaud, J Med Vasc. 44Quéré A, Elias M, Maufus M, Elias MA, Sevestre JP, Galanaud JL, et al. Unresolved questions on venous thromboembolic disease. Consensus statement of the French Society for Vascular Medicine (SFMV). J Med Vasc. 2019;44:e1-e47.

Impact of graduated compression stockings on the prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome -results of a randomized controlled trial. M Jayaraj, Meissner, Phlebology. 30Jayaraj M. Meissner, Impact of graduated compression stockings on the prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome -results of a random- ized controlled trial. Phlebology. 2015;30:541-8.

Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome in adults, a Bayesian meta-analysis. M L Avila, M Montoya, C Lumia, A Marson, L R Brandao, G Tomlinson, Thromb Res. 182Avila ML, Montoya M, Lumia C, Marson A, Brandao LR, Tomlinson G. Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome in adults, a Bayesian meta-analysis. Thromb Res. 2019;182:20-6.

Compression therapy in the prevention of postthrombotic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. H T Tie, M Z Luo, M J Luo, K Li, Q Li, Q C Wu, Medicine (Baltimore). 941318Tie HT, Luo MZ, Luo MJ, Li K, Li Q, Wu QC. Compression therapy in the prevention of postthrombotic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94:e1318.

Systematic review and meta-analysis of utility of graduated compression stockings in prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome. A L Skervin, A Thapar, A J Franchini, P Prandoni, J Shalhoub, A H Davies, Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 51Skervin AL, Thapar A, Franchini AJ, Prandoni P, Shalhoub J, Davies AH. Systematic review and meta-analysis of utility of graduated compression stockings in prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;51:838-45.

Efficacy of compression stockings in preventing post-thrombotic syndrome in patients with deep venous thrombosis: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J M Burgstaller, J Steurer, U Held, B Amann-Vesti, Vasa. 45Burgstaller JM, Steurer J, Held U, Amann-Vesti B. Efficacy of com- pression stockings in preventing post-thrombotic syndrome in patients with deep venous thrombosis: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Vasa. 2016;45:141-7.

compression stockings for prevention of postthrombotic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Y W Jin, H Ye, F Y Li, X Z Xiong, N S Cheng, Vasc Endovascular Surg. 50Jin YW, Ye H, Li FY, Xiong XZ, Cheng NS. compression stockings for prevention of postthrombotic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2016;50:328-34.

Compression stockings for preventing the postthrombotic syndrome in patients with deep vein thrombosis. C F Berntsen, A Kristiansen, E A Akl, P M Sandset, E M Jacobsen, G Guyatt, Am J Med. 1294e20Berntsen CF, Kristiansen A, Akl EA, Sandset PM, Jacobsen EM, Guyatt G, et al. Compression stockings for preventing the post- thrombotic syndrome in patients with deep vein thrombosis. Am J Med. 2016;129(4):447.e1-447.e20.

Compression therapy for prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome. D Appelen, E Van Loo, M H Prins, M H Neumann, D N Kolbach, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 004174Appelen D, van Loo E, Prins MH, Neumann MH, Kolbach DN. Compression therapy for prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;CD004174.

Effect of compression stockings on post thrombotic syndrome in patients with deep vein thrombosis: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. R Subbiah, V Aggarwal, H Zhao, R Kolluri, S Chatterjee, R Bashir, Lancet Haematol. 3Subbiah R, Aggarwal V, Zhao H, Kolluri R, Chatterjee S, Bashir R. Effect of compression stockings on post thrombotic syndrome in patients with deep vein thrombosis: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet Haematol. 2016;3:e293-e300.

Chronic venous insufficiency. R T Eberhardt, J D Raffetto, Circulation. 130Eberhardt RT, Raffetto JD. Chronic venous insufficiency. Circulation. 2014;130:333-46.

Haemodynamic performance of low strength below knee graduated elastic compression stockings in health, venous disease, and lymphoedema. C R Lattimer, E Kalodiki, M Azzam, G Geroulakos, Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 52Lattimer CR, Kalodiki E, Azzam M, Geroulakos G. Haemodynamic performance of low strength below knee graduated elastic com- pression stockings in health, venous disease, and lymphoedema. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;52:105-12.

Efficacy of elastic compression stockings used early or after resolution of the edema on recanalization after deep venous thrombosis: the COM.PRE Trial. G Arpaia, C Cimminiello, O Mastrogiacomo, E De Gaudenzi, Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 18Arpaia G, Cimminiello C, Mastrogiacomo O, de Gaudenzi E. Efficacy of elastic compression stockings used early or after resolution of the edema on recanalization after deep venous thrombosis: the COM.PRE Trial. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2007;18:131-7.

Leg compression and ambulation is better than bed rest for the treatment of acute deep venous thrombosis. W Blattler, H Partsch, Int Angiol. 22Blattler W, Partsch H. Leg compression and ambulation is better than bed rest for the treatment of acute deep venous thrombosis. Int Angiol. 2003;22:393-400.

Therapeutic effect of compression stockings versus no compression on isolated superficial vein thrombosis of the legs: a randomized clinical trial. K Boehler, H Kittler, S Stolkovich, S Tzaneva, Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 48Boehler K, Kittler H, Stolkovich S, Tzaneva S. Therapeutic effect of compression stockings versus no compression on isolated super- ficial vein thrombosis of the legs: a randomized clinical trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014;48:465-71.

A reduction in serum cytokine levels parallels healing of venous ulcers in patients undergoing compression therapy. M A Murphy, W P Joyce, C Condron, D Bouchier-Hayes, Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 23Murphy MA, Joyce WP, Condron C, Bouchier-Hayes D. A reduction in serum cytokine levels parallels healing of venous ulcers in pa- tients undergoing compression therapy. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2002;23:349-52.

Incomplete resolution of deep vein thrombosis under reduced flow conditions. B C Cooley, C Y Chen, R Hess, G Schmeling, Thromb Res. 131Cooley BC, Chen CY, Hess R, Schmeling G. Incomplete resolution of deep vein thrombosis under reduced flow conditions. Thromb Res. 2013;131:55-8.

The placebo effect: the good, the bad, and the ugly. M E Tavel, Am J Med. 127Tavel ME. The placebo effect: the good, the bad, and the ugly. Am J Med. 2014;127:484-8.

Comparison of internal mammary artery ligation and sham operation for angina pectoris. E G Dimond, C F Kittle, J E Crockett, Am J Cardiol. 5Dimond EG, Kittle CF, Crockett JE. Comparison of internal mam- mary artery ligation and sham operation for angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 1960;5:483-6.

Components of placebo effect: randomised controlled trial in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. T J Kaptchuk, J M Kelley, L A Conboy, R B Davis, C E Kerr, E E Jacobson, BMJ. 336Kaptchuk TJ, Kelley JM, Conboy LA, Davis RB, Kerr CE, Jacobson EE, et al. Components of placebo effect: randomised con- trolled trial in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. BMJ. 2008;336:999-1003.

Current prescribing patterns of elastic compression stockings post-deep venous thrombosis. G Roche-Nagle, F Ward, M Barry, Phlebology. 25Roche-Nagle G, Ward F, Barry M. Current prescribing patterns of elastic compression stockings post-deep venous thrombosis. Phlebology. 2010;25:72-8.

Post-thrombotic syndrome patient education based on the health belief model: self-reported intention to comply with recommendations. C Carolyn, J Wound Ostomy Continence Nurs. 38Carolyn C. Post-thrombotic syndrome patient education based on the health belief model: self-reported intention to comply with recommendations. J Wound Ostomy Continence Nurs. 2011;38:648-54.

Patient-reported reasons for and predictors of noncompliance with compression stockings in a randomized trial of stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome. A J Dawson, A Akaberi, J P Galanaud, D R Morrison, S R Kahn, Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 4Dawson AJ, Akaberi A, Galanaud JP, Morrison DR, Kahn SR. Patient-reported reasons for and predictors of noncompliance with compression stockings in a randomized trial of stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2020;4:269-77.

Eliciting patients' preferences for elastic compression stocking therapy after deep vein thrombosis: potential for improving compliance. A C Bouman, Ten Cate-Hoek, A J Dirksen, C D Joore, M A , J Thromb Haemost. 14Bouman AC, Ten Cate-Hoek AJ, Dirksen CD, Joore MA. Eliciting patients' preferences for elastic compression stocking therapy after deep vein thrombosis: potential for improving compliance. J Thromb Haemost. 2016;14:510-7.

Does prescription of medical compression prevent development of post-thrombotic syndrome after proximal deep venous thrombosis?. M Perrin, B Eklof, Phlebology. 31Perrin M, Eklof B. Does prescription of medical compression pre- vent development of post-thrombotic syndrome after proximal deep venous thrombosis? Phlebology. 2016;31:160-9.

Use of compression stockings in chronic venous disease: patient compliance and efficacy. S Raju, K Hollis, P Neglen, Ann Vasc Surg. 21Raju S, Hollis K, Neglen P. Use of compression stockings in chronic venous disease: patient compliance and efficacy. Ann Vasc Surg. 2007;21:790-5.

Incidence, risk factors and skin manifestations of post-thrombotic syndrome: a four-year follow-up of patients included in the EDITH study. C Delluc, L Gouedard, De Saint Martin, C Garcia, A M Roguedas, L Bressollette, L , Rev Med Interne. 31Delluc C, Gouedard L, De Saint Martin C, Garcia AM, Roguedas L, Bressollette L, et al. Incidence, risk factors and skin manifestations of post-thrombotic syndrome: a four-year follow-up of patients in- cluded in the EDITH study. Rev Med Interne. 2010;31:729-34.

Rates of elastic compression stockings prescription following the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis among Canadian emergency physicians and trainees. A Kayssi, J Petrosoniak, N Levenstadt, S Eisenberg, G Jenkins, Roche-Nagle, CJEM. 17Kayssi A, Petrosoniak J, Levenstadt N, Eisenberg S, Jenkins G. Roche-Nagle, Rates of elastic compression stockings prescription following the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis among Canadian emergency physicians and trainees. CJEM. 2015;17:248-52.

Use of elastic compression stockings after deep venous thrombosis: a comparison of practices and perceptions of thrombosis physicians and patients. S R Kahn, E Elman, M A Rodger, P S Wells, J Thromb Haemost. 1Kahn SR, Elman E, Rodger MA, Wells PS. Use of elastic compression stockings after deep venous thrombosis: a comparison of practices and perceptions of thrombosis physicians and patients. J Thromb Haemost. 2003;1:500-6.

Prospective randomized controlled study of patient compliance in using a compression stocking: Importance of recommendations of the practitioner as a factor for better compliance. J F Uhl, J P Benigni, M Chahim, D Frederic, Phlebology. 33Uhl JF, Benigni JP, Chahim M, Frederic D. Prospective random- ized controlled study of patient compliance in using a compression stocking: Importance of recommendations of the practitioner as a factor for better compliance. Phlebology. 2018;33:36-43.

A summation analysis of compliance and complications of compression hosiery for patients with chronic venous disease or post-thrombotic syndrome. Hkn Kankam, C S Lim, F Fiorentino, A H Davies, M S Gohel, Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 55Kankam HKN, Lim CS, Fiorentino F, Davies AH, Gohel MS. A sum- mation analysis of compliance and complications of compression hosiery for patients with chronic venous disease or post-throm- botic syndrome. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2018;55:406-16.

Adherence to and efficacy of different compression methods for treating chronic venous insufficiency in the elderly. K Suehiro, N Morikage, O Yamashita, T Harada, K Ueda, M Samura, Phlebology. 31Suehiro K, Morikage N, Yamashita O, Harada T, Ueda K, Samura M, et al. Adherence to and efficacy of different compression methods for treating chronic venous insufficiency in the elderly. Phlebology. 2016;31:723-8.

Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome. N Labropoulos, A P Gasparis, J A Caprini, H Partsch, Lancet. 384Labropoulos N, Gasparis AP, Caprini JA, Partsch H. Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome. Lancet. 2014;384:129-30.

Multilayer compression bandaging in the acute phase of deep-vein thrombosis has no effect on the development of the post-thrombotic syndrome. E M Roumen-Klappe, M Heijer, J Van Rossum, H Wollersheim, C Van Der Vleuten, T Thien, J Thromb Thrombolysis. 27Roumen-Klappe EM, den Heijer M, van Rossum J, Wollersheim H, van der Vleuten C, Thien T, et al. Multilayer compression ban- daging in the acute phase of deep-vein thrombosis has no effect on the development of the post-thrombotic syndrome. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2009;27:400-5.

Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome -Authors' reply. S R Kahn, S Shapiro, J S Ginsberg, Lancet. 384Kahn SR, Shapiro S, Ginsberg JS. Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome -Authors' reply. Lancet. 2014;384:130-1.

Stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome-where are we now?. D Keeling, Lancet Haematol. 5Keeling D. Stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome-where are we now? Lancet Haematol. 2018;5:e4-e5.

Elastic compression stockings: the jury is still out. T W Wakefield, A T Obi, P K Henke, Lancet Haematol. 3Wakefield TW, Obi AT, Henke PK. Elastic compression stockings: the jury is still out. Lancet Haematol. 2016;3:e262-e263.

Compression therapy and deep-vein thrombosis: a clinical practice survey. P Ouvry, A C Arnoult, C Genty, J P Galanaud, J L Bosson, J Mal Vasc. 37Ouvry P, Arnoult AC, Genty C, Galanaud JP, Bosson JL. Compression therapy and deep-vein thrombosis: a clinical practice survey. J Mal Vasc. 2012;37:140-5.

Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome: a role for anticoagulation clinics?. A K Wittkowsky, E A Nutescu, E B Devine, J Thromb Thrombolysis. 26Wittkowsky AK, Nutescu EA, Devine EB. Compression stockings to prevent post-thrombotic syndrome: a role for anticoagulation clin- ics? J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2008;26:248-50.

Dogmas and controversies in compression therapy: report of an International Compression Club (ICC) meeting, Brussels. M Flour, M Clark, H Partsch, G Mosti, J F Uhl, M Chauveau, Int Wound J. 10Flour M, Clark M, Partsch H, Mosti G, Uhl JF, Chauveau M, et al. Dogmas and controversies in compression therapy: report of an International Compression Club (ICC) meeting, Brussels. Int Wound J. 2011;10(2013):516-26.

High compression pressure over the calf is more effective than graduated compression in enhancing venous pump function. G Mosti, H Partsch, Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 44Mosti G, Partsch H. High compression pressure over the calf is more effective than graduated compression in enhancing venous pump function. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012;44:332-6.

Comparison of the Villalta post-thrombotic syndrome score in the ipsilateral vs. contralateral leg after a first unprovoked deep vein thrombosis. J P Galanaud, C A Holcroft, M A Rodger, M J Kovacs, M T Betancourt, P S Wells, J Thromb Haemost. 10Galanaud JP, Holcroft CA, Rodger MA, Kovacs MJ, Betancourt MT, Wells PS, et al. Comparison of the Villalta post-thrombotic syndrome score in the ipsilateral vs. contralateral leg after a first unprovoked deep vein thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost. 2012;10:1036-42.

Prevention and treatment of postphlebitic syndrome: results of a 3-part study. J S Ginsberg, J Hirsh, J Julian, M Vander Laandevries, D Magier, B Mackinnon, Arch Intern Med. 161Ginsberg JS, Hirsh J, Julian J, Vander LaandeVries M, Magier D, MacKinnon B, et al. Prevention and treatment of postphlebitic syn- drome: results of a 3-part study. Arch Intern Med. 2001;161:2105-9.

Thigh-length versus below-knee compression elastic stockings for prevention of the postthrombotic syndrome in patients with proximal-venous thrombosis: a randomized trial. P Prandoni, F Noventa, R Quintavalla, C Bova, B Cosmi, S Siragusa, Blood. 119Prandoni P, Noventa F, Quintavalla R, Bova C, Cosmi B, Siragusa S, et al. Thigh-length versus below-knee compression elastic stockings for prevention of the postthrombotic syndrome in pa- tients with proximal-venous thrombosis: a randomized trial. Blood. 2012;119:1561-5.

Definition of post-thrombotic syndrome of the leg for use in clinical investigations: a recommendation for standardization. S R Kahn, H Partsch, S Vedantham, P Prandoni, C Kearon, J Thromb Haemost. 7Kahn SR, Partsch H, Vedantham S, Prandoni P, Kearon C. Definition of post-thrombotic syndrome of the leg for use in clinical investiga- tions: a recommendation for standardization. J Thromb Haemost. 2009;7:879-83.

Development and validation of a tool for patient reporting of symptoms and signs of the post-thrombotic syndrome. K K Utne, W Ghanima, S Foyn, S Kahn, P M Sandset, H S Wik, Thromb Haemost. 115Utne KK, Ghanima W, Foyn S, Kahn S, Sandset PM, Wik HS. Development and validation of a tool for patient reporting of symp- toms and signs of the post-thrombotic syndrome. Thromb Haemost. 2016;115:361-7.

Assessment of antihypertensive compliance using a self-administered questionnaire: development and use in a hypertension clinic. X Girerd, O Hanon, K Anagnostopoulos, C Ciupek, J J Mourad, S Consoli, Presse Med. 30Girerd X, Hanon O, Anagnostopoulos K, Ciupek C, Mourad JJ, Consoli S. Assessment of antihypertensive compliance using a self-administered questionnaire: development and use in a hyper- tension clinic. Presse Med. 2001;30:1044-8.

Concurrent and predictive validity of a self-reported measure of medication adherence. D E Morisky, L W Green, D M Levine, Med Care. 24Morisky DE, Green LW, Levine DM. Concurrent and predictive validity of a self-reported measure of medication adherence. Med Care. 1986;24:67-74.

EQ-5D: a measure of health status from the EuroQol Group. R Rabin, F De Charro, Ann Med. 33Rabin R, de Charro F. EQ-5D: a measure of health status from the EuroQol Group. Ann Med. 2001;33:337-43.

Construction and validation of a quality of life questionnaire in Chronic Lower Limb Venous Insufficiency (CIVIQ). R Launois, J Reboul-Marty, B Henry, Qual Life Res. 5Launois R, Reboul-Marty J, Henry B. Construction and validation of a quality of life questionnaire in Chronic Lower Limb Venous Insufficiency (CIVIQ). Qual Life Res. 1996;5:539-54.

Revision of the CEAP classification for chronic venous disorders: consensus statement. R B Eklof, J J Rutherford, P H Bergan, P Carpentier, R L Gloviczki, M H Kistner, J Vasc Surg. 40Eklof RB, Rutherford JJ, Bergan PH, Carpentier P, Gloviczki RL, Kistner MH, et al. Wakefield, Revision of the CEAP classification for chronic venous disorders: consensus statement. J Vasc Surg. 2004;40:1248-52.

The diagnosis of symptomatic recurrent pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis: guidance from the SSC of the ISTH. W Ageno, A Squizzato, P S Wells, H R Buller, G Johnson, J Thromb Haemost. 11Ageno W, Squizzato A, Wells PS, Buller HR, Johnson G. The diag- nosis of symptomatic recurrent pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis: guidance from the SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11:1597-602.

Subcommittee on Control of Anticoagulation. Definition of clinically relevant non-major bleeding in studies of anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation and venous thromboembolic disease in non-surgical patients: communication from the SSC of the ISTH. S Kaatz, D Ahmad, A C Spyropoulos, S Schulman, J Thromb Haemost. 13Kaatz S, Ahmad D, Spyropoulos AC, Schulman S, Subcommittee on Control of Anticoagulation. Definition of clinically relevant non-major bleeding in studies of anticoagulants in atrial fibrilla- tion and venous thromboembolic disease in non-surgical patients: communication from the SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost. 2015;13:2119-26.

Diameters of acute proximal and distal deep venous thrombosis of the lower limbs. J L Bosson, M Riachi, O Pichot, E Michoud, P H Carpentier, A Franco, Int Angiol. 17Bosson JL, Riachi M, Pichot O, Michoud E, Carpentier PH, Franco A. Diameters of acute proximal and distal deep venous thrombosis of the lower limbs. Int Angiol. 1998;17:260-7.

Validation of the LET classification. R H Strijkers, C W Arnoldussen, C H Wittens, Phlebology. 30Strijkers RH, Arnoldussen CW, Wittens CH. Validation of the LET classification. Phlebology. 2015;30:14-9.

A comparison of the two one-sided tests procedure and the power approach for assessing the equivalence of average bioavailability. D J Schuirmann, J Pharmacokinet Biopharm. 15Schuirmann DJ. A comparison of the two one-sided tests procedure and the power approach for assessing the equivalence of average bioavailability. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm. 1987;15:657-80.

One versus two years of elastic compression stockings for prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome (OCTAVIA study): randomised controlled trial. G C Mol, M A Van De Ree, F A Klok, M J Tegelberg, F B Sanders, S Koppen, BMJ. 3532691Mol GC, van de Ree MA, Klok FA, Tegelberg MJ, Sanders FB, Koppen S, et al. One versus two years of elastic compression stock- ings for prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome (OCTAVIA study): randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2016;353:i2691.

Individualised versus standard duration of elastic compression therapy for prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome (IDEAL DVT): a multicentre, randomised, single-blind, allocation-concealed, non-inferiority trial. Ten Cate-Hoek, A J Amin, E E Bouman, A C Meijer, K Tick, L W Middeldorp, S , Lancet Haematol. 5Ten Cate-Hoek AJ, Amin EE, Bouman AC, Meijer K, Tick LW, Middeldorp S, et al. Individualised versus standard duration of elastic compression therapy for prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome (IDEAL DVT): a multicentre, randomised, single-blind, allocation-concealed, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Haematol. 2018;5:e25-e33.

How to cite this article. Galanaud J-P, Genty-Vermorel CHow to cite this article: Galanaud J-P, Genty-Vermorel C,

Compression stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome: Literature overview and presentation of the CELEST trial. C Rolland, 10.1002/rth2.12445Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 4Rolland C, et al. Compression stockings to prevent postthrombotic syndrome: Literature overview and presentation of the CELEST trial. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2020;4:1239-1250. https://doi.org/10.1002/rth2.12445