# Related content THE TRANSITING EXOPLANET SURVEY SATELLITE: SIMULATIONS OF PLANET DETECTIONS AND ASTROPHYSICAL FALSE POSITIVES

CorpusID: 227148941
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/297631573a0e378c887430569615c7276ad73898](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/297631573a0e378c887430569615c7276ad73898)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Related content THE TRANSITING EXOPLANET SURVEY SATELLITE: SIMULATIONS OF PLANET DETECTIONS AND ASTROPHYSICAL FALSE POSITIVES


Peter W Sullivan 
Joshua N Winn 
Zachory K Berta-Thompson 
Natalie M Batalha 
William J Borucki 
Stephen T Bryson 
Related content THE TRANSITING EXOPLANET SURVEY SATELLITE: SIMULATIONS OF PLANET DETECTIONS AND ASTROPHYSICAL FALSE POSITIVES

Journal of Physics: Conference Series
10.1088/1742-6596/271/1/012084PLATO : PLAnetary Transits and Oscillations of stars To cite this article: Claude Catala et al 2011 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 271 012084 View the article online for updates and enhancements. -KEPLER'S FIRST ROCKY PLANET: KEPLER-10b


to understand how planetary systems, including our own, are formed and evolve, and also as a first and necessary step to understand whether life can exist elsewhere in the Universe, and locate potential sites for life. Since the discovery of the first exoplanet in 1995, this field has seen a remarkable development, with about 400 exoplanets known as of the end of October, 2009. Most of these objects are giant planets in close-in orbits, but continuous progress in the precision of radial velocity observations is now enabling the detection of "Super-earths", with masses just a few times that of the earth.

The field of exoplanet search has been recently boosted by the launch of the CoRoT satellite in Dec. 06 [1], followed by that of Kepler in March 09 [2]. The discovery of CoRoT-7b, the very first small telluric, rocky planet with measured radius and mass, and therefore with a known density, has opened up a new era, in which the CoRoT extended mission and Kepler will now play a major role.

Both CoRoT and Kepler target faint stars, up to m V = 15 and beyond, which makes their ground-based follow-up difficult, in particular in radial velocity monitoring. As a consequence, ground confirmation and mass measurements are restricted to the largest of the CoRoT and Kepler planets, which severely impacts the scientific return of these missions. While we can today with CoRoT, and soon Kepler, detect the passage of a planet the size of our own world, it is impossible to confirm the presence of any such object found by either spacecraft. Moreover, even in cases where radial velocities can be measured to the required precision to confirm the planetary nature of the detected event and measure the planet-to-star mass ratio, our knowledge of the faint host stars is still too poor to allow us to derive estimates of the planet radii, masses and ages to a sufficient accuracy to significantly constrain their structure and state of evolution.

The goal of PLATO is to alleviate these difficulties by focusing on bright stars, 3 to 4 magnitudes brighter than CoRoT and Kepler, and also by including in its target list a large sample of very bright (m V ≤ 8) and nearby stars. This will bring three decisive advantages: (i) the groundbased follow-up observations will be highly facilitated, and the required precision will be reached to confirm small, terrestrial planets in the habitable zone and to measure their masses; (ii) the host stars of the detected planets will be studied in detail, in particular via seismic analysis using the PLATO data themselves; seismic analysis, i.e. the measurement of stellar oscillations, will be used to probe the internal structure of these stars, and determine their radii, masses, and age in a precise and reliable way; (iii) the detection of exoplanets orbiting very bright and nearby stars will provide the best targets for subsequent detailed follow-up observations, both from space (e.g. JWST) and from the ground (e.g. E-ELT), including in particular spectroscopy of their surfaces and atmospheres, in the search for bio-markers.

The main goal of PLATO is to detect and characterize a significant number of exoplanets through their transits in front of their host stars, and provide measurements of their radii and masses, hence of their mean densities. It will also provide estimates of the ages of the detected exoplanetary systems. The PLATO strategy to reach this objective relies on the detection and measurement of photometric transits, which can be used to derive the ratio R p /R * of the planet radius to that of its host star. Follow-up observations from the ground will be used to measure the mass ratio M p /M * (actually the mass function). The planet radius and mass can be determined if the radius and mass of its host star are known.

The precision on planet parameters that is needed for constraining its internal composition is of the order of 10% for the mass and 5% for the radius (see Fig. 1). Failure to reach this level of precision results in a degeneracy of planet interior models. Unfortunately, the currently achieved precision is much worse, mainly due to uncertainties on host star parameters. It is clear from Fig. 1 that seismically determined masses and radii of host stars, such as provided by PLATO are required to derive useful constraints on planetary interiors. An example of the spectacular improvement in our estimates of planet parameters when seismic analysis of the host star is performed was recently given by [3] who analyzed Kepler asteroseismic data of HAT-7a, a cool dwarf which is harbouring a giant planet. In addition, seismic analysis of the planet host stars will allow us to determine the ages of exoplanetary systems, and therefore to place exoplanets in an evolutionary context. Figure 1. Comparison of planet mass and radius with model predictions. Current precision on planet mass and radius are not decisive for constraining the internal composition of planets, while measurements with PLATO will represent a qualitative jump, and provide stringent constraints on the models


## Observation strategy

The main PLATO science product will be a very large sample of ultra-high precision stellar light curves in the visible, obtained on very long time intervals (up to 3 years) with very high duty cycle (≥95%). The requirement is to obtain a photometric precision better than 2.7 × 10 −5 in 1 hr for more than 20,000 cool dwarfs/subgiants brighter than m V ≈11. This photometric precision corresponds to about 1 ppm in one month, and is sufficient to detect and measure solar-like oscillations in these stars, detect the transit of planets with the size of the Earth in their photometric lightcurves, and measure the transit characteristics with high precision.

PLATO will also monitor more then 1,000 cool dwarfs brighter than m V ≈8 for 2 to 3 years. In addition to this main sample, PLATO will obtain lightcurves with a precision better than 8 × 10 −5 in 1 hr for 250,000 stars down to m V ≈13. Finally, the PLATO star sample will also include about 10,000 M dwarfs down to m V ≈16, observed with a photometric noise level lower than 8 × 10 −4 in 1 hr, enabling the detection of transits from small terrestrial planets.

In order to reach these goals, PLATO will observe two successive very wide fields, for 2 to 3 years. These two long monitoring sequences will be followed by a one-or two-year step&stare phase, during which a number of fields will be monitored for several months each. This step&stare phase will bring flexibility to the mission, allowing for instance to survey a very large fraction of the whole sky (up to 50%), as well as to re-visit particularly interesting targets identified during the long monitoring phases.

The spacecraft is intended to be launched in 2018 on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket for injection into an orbit around the L2 Lagrangian point for a nominal lifetime of 6 years, with a possible extension of 2 years, which is compatible with the observation strategy outlined above. 3. Payload PLATO is presently under study, with the payload being designed by the PLATO Mission Consortium, while the spacecraft is subject to two parallel industrial studies. The payload concept provides at the same time a very wide field-of-view, and a large overall collecting area. Wide fields-of-view are required to obtain large samples of bright stars, while large collecting areas are necessary to reach the desired photometric precision.

The PLATO payload includes a set of 34 identical fully 6-lens refractive cameras, with 120mm pupil and field-of-view of about 37 • . Each camera has its own CCD-based focal plane, with four 4,510 2 × 18µm pixel CCDs. Two out of 34 cameras are devoted to very bright stars with m V between 4 and 8, and have their CCDs operated in frame transfer mode at a cadence of 2.5 sec (fast cameras), while the remaining 32 cameras observe stars fainter than m V =8, with their CCDs working in full frame mode at a cadence of 25 sec (normal cameras). The total dynamical range is 4 ≤ m V ≤ 16. The two fast cameras will observe through broad band filters.

The light and centroid curves from each camera are computed on board, then transmitted to the ground, where they are co-added to reach the desired precision.

The 32 normal cameras are grouped in 4 sections of 8 cameras, each section having its line of sight offset from the next one by 35% of the field-of-view. This overlapping line-of-sight arrangement is depicted in Fig. 2 and results in an overall instrument field-of-view of about 50 • diameter, or about 2,200 deg 2 , each star being observed either by 8, 16, 24, or 32 telescopes, with an effective collecting area of 0.09, 0.18, 0.27 or 0.36 m 2 , depending on its position in the field. The surveyed area after two long pointings will thus be 4,400 deg 2 , while it will go up to 22,000 deg 2 (i.e. 50% of the whole sky) when a two-year step&stare phase is added during which 4 fields per year are monitored for 3 months each. (star positions and magnitudes, zodiacal light, etc) and of the instrument (optical PSF, detector characteristics, etc). Fig. 3 presents these results for the region of the field observed by all 32 normal cameras, and shows that photon noise level is approached closely at magnitudes brighter than m V =11, and that non photonic noise remains well below photon noise at least down to m V =12. A level of noise of 2.7 × 10 −5 in 1 hr is reached down to m V =10.3, while a noise of 8 × 10 −5 in 1 hr is obtained around m V =12.3. At fainter magnitudes, the noise becomes significantly higher than pure photon noise, due to the contribution of contaminating sources, but remains below 8×10 −4 in 1 hr down to m V =15.5. Fig. 3 also shows the results expected from the two fast cameras.  Table 1 shows the expected numbers of dwarfs/subgiants later than F5, observable with PLATO and Kepler at various levels of noise, and down to various magnitudes. The three PLATO concepts are considered in this table, concept C corresponding to the PPLC design presented here. The gain compared to Kepler is clearly shown in this table, indicating in particular that PLATO will observe as many stars down to 8th magnitude as Kepler down to 11th.

The comparison with Kepler is further illustrated by Fig. 4, showing the expected total number of detectable planets as a function of mass and orbital semi-major axis, for both missions. The numbers indicated are those of the expected detectable planets by both missions, while the sizes of the coloured regions show the respective discovery potential of both missions (blue: PLATO and green: Kepler). There is no underlying planet formation model, instead we simply assume that each star has one (and one only) planet in the parameter range considered. The planet is considered detectable if it can be seen in transit by the satellite AND confirmed by follow-up radial velocity measurements with a reasonable amount of telescope time.

These results take into account all sources of noise for the radial velocity follow-up (oscillation, granulation, activity level), limiting the required observing time to reasonable values. Future developments in our understanding of the interplay between activity level and induced radialvelocity jitter might help correct for the spurious effect and further improve our characterization ability. As can be seen in Fig. 4, we expect a vastly increased number of planet detections with PLATO , in particular in the lower mass range, where Kepler is not expected to produce confirmable planets. The main reason is related to the much larger field of view of PLATO , and consequently the brightness of the candidates. The main conclusion is that, although Kepler will bring considerable progress, it is unlikely that it can detect unambiguously small planets in far-away orbits, mainly due to the faintness and the limited number of its targets. Only PLATO with its extended surveyed area and its main focus on bright cool dwarfs, will allow us to reach real earth analogue systems and extend the search for exoplanets to small terrestrial planets in the habitable zone of their stars.  


## Conclusion

PLATO will represent a real breakthrough in our study of exoplanetary systems, in particular by providing a full census of exoplanets in the solar neighbourhood, down to low-mass, earth-size planets in the habitable zone. Thanks to its capacity to determine in detail all characteristics of the planet host stars, using seismic analysis based on PLATO data themselves, it will allow us to measure the radii, masses and ages of the planets to unprecedented accuracies, and will also identify suitable targets for future more direct characterization facilities. PLATO will reach these ambitious goals by focusing its observations on a large sample of bright stars.

## Figure 2 .
2The PLATO payload concept. Left: global view; Right: overlapping line-of-sight concept; numbers of cameras monitoring the various parts of the field are indicated4. PerformancesA full end-to-end simulator was used to estimate the expected level of noise of the instrument. It takes into account all sources of noise, including photon noise, confusion by neighbouring sources, readout noise, satellite jitter, etc, by including all characteristics of the observed field

## Figure 3 .
3Expected noise level for PLATO instrument. Dashed line: photon noise only. Full line: all sources of noise included. Top: for all 32 normal cameras; Bottom: for the two fast cameras

## Figure 4 .
4Estimated total numbers of detected transiting planets, which can be confirmed by ground-based radial velocity observations, for PLATO (in the PPLC concept) and Kepler. Left: for all stars; right: for stars with mV ≤11 only (see text for details).


Table 1. Numbers of targets from PLATO and Kepler, at various photometric noise levels and various magnitude limits. All star numbers refer to cool dwarfs and subgiants only. Numbers for PLATO correspond to the two long monitoring phases (2 to 3 years) only.GONG-SoHO 24: A new era of seismology of the sun and solar-like stars 
IOP Publishing 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 271 (2011) 012084 
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/271/1/012084 
PLATO 

Kepler 
surveyed area 
4496 deg 2 
100 deg 2 
noise level 
# cool dwarfs mag range # cool dwarfs mag 
(ppm in 1hr) 
& subgiants 
& subgiants 
27 
22,000 
8.7 -10.2 
1,300 
11.2 
80 
345,000 
11.0 -12.2 
25,000 
13.6 
magnitude 
# stars 
# stars 
6 
90 
0 
8 
1,326 
30 
9 
4,500 
100 
10 
16,600 
370 
11 
58,000 
1,300 



The CoRoT Mission, Pre-Launch Status. A Baglin, M. Fridlund, A. Baglin, J. Lochard, L. ConroyBaglin, A., et al. 2006, The CoRoT Mission, Pre-Launch Status, ESA SP-1306, Eds. M. Fridlund, A. Baglin, J. Lochard, L. Conroy, p. 11-538

The Kepler Mission: Finding the Sizes, Orbits and Frequencies of Earth-size and Larger Extrasolar Planets. W J Borucki, ASP CS. 294427Borucki, W.J., et al. 2003, The Kepler Mission: Finding the Sizes, Orbits and Frequencies of Earth-size and Larger Extrasolar Planets, ASP CS-294, p. 427

. J Christensen-Dalsgaard, H Kjeldsen, T M Brown, R L Gilliland, T Arentoft, S Frandsen, P.-O Quirion, W J Borucki, D Koch, J M Jenkins, ApJ. 713164Christensen-Dalsgaard, J.; Kjeldsen, H.; Brown, T. M.; Gilliland, R. L.; Arentoft, T.; Frandsen, S.; Quirion, P.-O.; Borucki, W. J.; Koch, D.; Jenkins, J. M., 2010, ApJ 713, L164

A new era of seismology of the sun and solar-like stars. 10.1088/1742-6596/271/1/012084IOP Publishing Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2412084GONG-SoHOGONG-SoHO 24: A new era of seismology of the sun and solar-like stars IOP Publishing Journal of Physics: Conference Series 271 (2011) 012084 doi:10.1088/1742-6596/271/1/012084