# An Abstracted Survey on 6G: Drivers, Requirements, Efforts, and Enablers

CorpusID: 230438676
 
tags: #Engineering, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72727147fee796b481eee705087e3250696d9905](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72727147fee796b481eee705087e3250696d9905)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

An Abstracted Survey on 6G: Drivers, Requirements, Efforts, and Enablers


Bin Han 
Wei Jiang 
German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)


Mohammad Asif Habibi 
Hans D Schotten 
German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)



Technische Universität Kaiserslautern


An Abstracted Survey on 6G: Drivers, Requirements, Efforts, and Enablers
Index Terms-B5G6Gwirelesscommunication networks
As of today, 5G mobile systems have been already widely rolled out, it is the right time for academia and industry to explore the next generation mobile communication system beyond 5G. To this end, this paper provides an abstracted survey for the 6G mobile system. We shed light on the key driving factors for 6G through predicting the growth trend of mobile traffic and mobile service subscriptions until the year of 2030, envisioning the potential use cases and applications, as well as deriving the potential use scenarios. Then, a number of key performance indicators to support the 6G use cases are identified and their target values are estimated in a quantitatively manner, which is compared with those of 5G clearly in a visualized way. An investigation of the efforts spent on 6G research in different countries and institutions until now is summarized, and a potential roadmap in terms of the definition, specification, standardization, and spectrum regulation is given. Finally, an introduction to potential key 6G technologies is provided. The principle, technical advantages, challenges, and open research issues for each identified technology are discussed.

## I. INTRODUCTION

The year of 2019 opens a new era of the 5G mobile communications. As we are writing the paper, a list of countries such as South Korea, United States, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and Spain have launched commercial 5G services for the general public, while this list grows quickly and is envisioned to become much longer in the near future. As a revolutionary technology, 5G will penetrate into all aspects of society, generating tremendous economic and societal benefits. From the perspective of technology research, however, it is already the time to start considering what the future beyond-5G (B5G) or 6G mobile networks should be, in order to satisfy the demand on communications and networking in 2030.

Since 2018, several pioneering projects have been launched aiming at the next generation of mobile networks. The International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) Focus Group Technologies for Network 2030 (FG NET-2030) was established in July 2018, intending to study the capabilities of networks for the year 2030 and beyond, when it is expected to support novel forward-looking scenarios. The European Commission initiated to sponsor beyond-5G research activities, such as its recent Horizon 2020 call -5G Long Term Evolution -where a number of pioneer projects will be kicked off at the early beginning of 2020. In Finland, the University of Oulu began ground-breaking 6G research as part of Academy of Finland's flagship program, 6G-Enabled Wireless Smart Society and Ecosystem (6Genesis). Besides, other counties such as the United States, China, Japan, and South Korea already formally started the research and development of key 6G technologies or at least announced their ambition to support the 6G works.

During the same time, there has also been a significant literature conducted for 6G, as listed in Tab. I. Some of these works focus on the description of use cases or applications, some list a number of potential key technologies but only in rough introduction, while some others are providing detailed technological description to very specific categories of technologies. To the best of our knowledge, yet there is no comprehensive survey that can provide a complete view to link the aforementioned related works into an organic structure. To fill this gap, in this article we attempt to provide a complete and through view of the state-of-the-art advances in the development and research of 6G by providing vision, use cases, use scenarios, requirements, efforts, roadmap, as well as a introduction to the promising key technologies.

The rest of this article is organized as follows: Sec. II discusses the key driving factors for the necessity of developing 6G, including the prediction of the explosive growth of mobile traffic and mobile users by 2030, the envision and use cases and application scenarios. Sec. III analyzes the requirements for the 6G systems by quantitatively depicting a number of key performance indicators. The efforts of research, regulatory, and standardization of the main players in the mobile communication industry are summarized and the potential timelines and roadmap for development and standardization are estimated in Sec. V. Sec. IV provides a brief survey of a dozen of key technologies that are identified as the key enablers for 6G. Finally, Sec. VI concludes this article.


## II. DRIVERS

As of today, the commercial deployment of 5G mobile networks has been rolled out for around one year across the world, and the network scale in some countries is already very large. Following the historical tradition in the mobile industry, i.e., a new generation every ten years, it is the right time to discuss the successor of 5G in the research and standardization community. The key driving forces for the development of a next-generation system are not only from the exponential growth of mobile traffic and connectivity demand, but also from new disruptive services and applications on the horizon.


## A. Explosive Mobile Traffic

We are in an unprecedented era where a massive number of smart products, services, and applications emerge and evolve [2] April 2019 ML Review the state-of-the-art advances in machine learning and quantum computing, and propose a quantum computingassisted ML framework for 6G networks. [3] June 2019 Terahertz Describe the technical challenges and potentials for wireless communications and sensing above 100GHz, and presents discoveries, approaches, and recent results that will aid in the development and implementation of the 6G networks.

[4] July 2019 Vision Outline a number of key technological challenges and the potential solutions associated with 6G.

[5] Aug. 2019 AI Discuss potential technologies for 6G to enable ubiquitous AI applications and AI-enabled approaches for the design and optimization of 6G.

[6] Sept. 2019 Photonics, holography, AI Proposes two candidate system architectures for 6G and identifies several 6G technologies including photonics-defined radio, holography, and AI.

[7] Sept. 2019 Survey A survey aiming to identify requirements, network architecture, key technologies, and new applications.

[8] Sept. 2019 Technological enablers

Five technology enablers for 6G, including pervasive AI at network edge, 3D coverage consisting of terrestrial networks, aerial platforms, and satellite constellation, a new physical layer incorporating sub-Thz and VLC, distributed security mechanisms, and a new architecture.

[9] Dec. 2019 Green 6G A survey on new architectural changes associated with 6G networks and potential technologies, such as ubiquitous 3D coverage, pervasive AI, terahertz, visible light communication, and blockchain.

[10] Dec. 2019 AI A special issue provides a comprehensive and highly coherent treatment on all the technology aspects related to ML for wireless communications and networks such as multi-path fading channel, channel coding, and physical-layer design.

[11] Jan. 2020 Vision Argue that 6G should be human-centric, and therefore security, secrecy, and privacy are key features. To support this vision, a systematic framework, required technologies, and challenges are outlined.

[12]

Feb. 2020 Vehicular, ML A survey on various machine learning technologies that are promising for communication, networking, and security aspects of vehicular networks, and a envision of the ways toward an intelligent 6G vehicular network, including intelligent radio, network intelligentization, and self-learning.

[13] Mar. 2020 Use cases Foresee several possible use cases and presents technologies that are considered as the enablers for these 6G use cases. [14] Mar. 2020 Survey New themes including new human-machine interface, ubiquitous computing, multi-sensory data fusion, and precise sensing and actuation, major technology transformations such as new spectrum, new architecture, and new security are presented, and the potential of AI is emphasized.

[15] April 2020 Survey A comprehensive discussion of 6G based on the review of 5G developments, covering visions, requirements, technology trends, and challenges, aiming at clarifying the ways to tackle the challenges of coverage, capacity, data rate, and mobility of 6G communication systems. [16] May 2020 Survey A vision on 6G in terms of applications, technological trends, service classes, and requirements, and an identification on enabling technologies and open research problems.

[17] June 2020 ML Discuss possible challenges and potential research directions of advancing machine learning technologies into the future 6G network in terms of communication, networking, and computing perspective.

[18] June 2020 AI Outline the core concepts of explainable AI for 6G, including public and legal motivations, definitions, trade-off between explainability and performance, and explainable methods, and propose an explainable AI framework for future wireless systems.

quickly, imposing a huge demand on mobile traffic. It can be foreseen that the 5G system designed before 2020 cannot well satisfy such a demand in 2030 and beyond. Due to the proliferation of rich-video applications, enhanced screen resolution, Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communications, mobile cloud services, etc., the global mobile traffic will continuously increase in an explosive manner, up to 5016 EB per month in the year of 2030 compared with 62 EB per month in 2020, according to the estimation of ITU-R made in 2015 [19]. A report by Ericsson [20] revealed that the global mobile traffic had reached around 33 EB per month by the end of 2019, which partially proves the correctness of ITU-R's estimation. The number of smartphones and tablets will further increase, while other devices such as wearable electronics will grow in a faster pace, amounting to a total of 17.1 billion mobile subscriptions in 2030. In addition to the human-centric communications, the M2M terminals will experience a more-rapid growth and will become saturated no earlier than 2030. It is envisioned that the number of M2M subscriptions will reach 97 billion, as shown in Fig.1, around 14 times over that of 2020. The traffic from mobile video services already dominated, account for two-thirds of all mobile traffic. However, the usage of video services keeps growing, such as the boom of Tik-Tok recently, and the resolution of video continuously improves. In some developed countries, strong traffic growth before 2025 is driven by rich-video services and long-term growth wave will continue due to the penetration of Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) applications. The average data consumption for every mobile user per month, as illustrated in Fig.1, will increase from around 5 GB in 2020 to over 250 GB in 2030.


## B. Use cases

With the advent and evolution of cutting-edge fields, such as displaying, robotics, edge computing, AI, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), and space technology, in combination with the mobile system, many unprecedented use cases can be fostered. Here, we envision several cases with high potential, as summarized in Tab. II.


## C. Use scenarios

In the 5G systems, three usage scenarios have been firstly defined by ITU-R recommendation M.2083 in 2015 [21]. More specifically: the enhanced Mobile Broad-band (eMBB)  addresses the human-centric applications for a high-data-rate access to mobile services, multi-media content and data; the Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications (URLLC) focuses on enabling mission-critical connectivity for new applications with stringent requirements on reliability, latency, and availability; while the massive Machine-Type Communications (mMTC) aims at support to dense connectivity with a very large number of connected devices that are low-cost, lowpower consumption but typically transmitting a low volume of delay-tolerate data [22].

Being customized for highly specialized applications, all 5G use scenarios achieve extreme performance in some aspect by sacrificing in others, and cannot fully satisfy the requirements of envisioned 6G use cases. For instance, an user wearing a lightweight VR glass playing interactive immersive games requires not only ultra-high data throughput but also very low latency connectivity. Autonomous vehicles on the road or flying drones demand both high data rate and highreliability low-latency connectivity. Through extending the scope of current 5G use scenarios, as shown in Fig.2, we envision four extra scenarios to cover their overlapping areas. To accommodate the increasing capacity requirement from commercial passenger planes, helicopters, ships, high-speed trains and the demand of connectivity in remote areas, a ubiquitous coverage of MBB service for the whole planet is expected in 6G, which we named ubiquitous Mobile Broad-Band (uMBB) as an use scenario for 6G. Another key aspect of uMBB is the capacity improvement for hot spots so as to support the proliferation of new services, e.g., VR with a data rate of up to 1 Gbps/user. Ultra-reliable Low-latency Broadband Communication (ULBC) supports the services with lowlatency high-reliability connectivity and high data throughput, such as moving robots and Automatic Guided Vehicle (AGV) in industrial sites. The scenarios of massive Ultra-reliable Low-latency Communication (mULC) combines the features of mMTC and URLLC, facilitating the deployment of massive sensors and actuators in verticals.


## III. KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATOR REQUIREMENTS

To satisfy the technical requirements of use scenarios and applications in 2030 and beyond, the 6G system will provide more system capacity and network performance. Most of the key performance indicators (KPIs) applied for quantitatively or qualitatively evaluating 5G networks are also valid for 6G networks while some new KPIs must be considered for the new features. We briefly summarize our overview to the KPI comparison between 5G and 6G in Fig. 3 and Tab. III.


## IV. ROADMAP AND EFFORTS

Although a discussion is ongoing within the wireless community about whether counting should be stop at 5, several pioneering works on the next-generation wireless networks have been initiated, as summarized in Fig. 4.


## V. TECHNOLOGICAL ENABLERS

To pave the road towards the expected extreme performance, so as to realize the envisioned use cases and use scenarios, a diverse set of technologies are expected to play their roles in the future evolution of mobile networks. We can generally categorize them into the following groups: New Spectrum 


## VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we provided an abstracted outlook at the drivers, requirements, efforts, and enablers for the nextgeneration mobile system beyond 5G. The prediction of the trends, the envision of the future societal and technological evaluation, and the identification of key research directions might be rough, partial and even somehow inaccurate with the limitation of the knowledge of the authors and the information we can collect up to now.  Large-scale LEO satellite ubiquitous coverage, resistance to natural disasters, integration with terrestrial networks, launching cost constellation lower channel loss and cost than GEO [48], [49] HAP large coverage, unobstructed, flexible deployment; channel modelling [50], deployment, path planning, operalower cost, easier access to infrastructure and better tional altitude, interference, energy limit, reliability [51] UAV channel than satellite, new use scenarios [52], [50] security, real-time demand [53] Paradigm AI Deep learning automatic featuring [54], prediction [55] computational complexity [56] Federated learning protection to data privacy communication overheads, heterogeneity [57] Transfer learning quick model adaptation and optimization at local unification, gain measuring, dataset dissimilarity AI as a service low latency AI service for end-user at terminals new distributed AI techniques, new APIs Block-chain immutability, decentralization, transparency, security majority vulnerability, double-spending, transaction and privacy [58] privacy leakage, scalability, quantum computing [59] Digital twin improved quality of products, services, processes, scalability, self-management, lack of models and devices, etc. in Industry 4.0 and IoT methodologies, security and privacy [60], [61], [62] Edge intelligence resolves MEC issue caused by service requirement customized AI algorithms, resource management diversity among a massive number of users and task scheduling [63] resolves timeliness and resilience problems due to CoCoCo convergence the coupling between communication, computation, in-loop co-design methodologies & frameworks and control systems [64], [65] 

## Fig. 1 .Fig. 2 .
12The estimated global mobile subscriptions and traffic from 2020 to 2030. Source: ITU-R Report M.2370-0[19]. The envisioned use scenarios for 6G systems.

## TABLE I A
ISUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS IN THE FIELD OF 6G NETWORKSRef. 
Time 
Topics 
Contributions 

[1] 
Sept. 2018 
Vision 
Review the key services and innovations from 1G to 5G, and provide a vision for 6G. 



## TABLE II SOME
II6G USE CASES WITH HIGH POTENTIALUse Case 
Typical Applications 
Key Requirements 

Extended reality (ER) 
immersive gaming, remote surgery, remote industrial control 
high data rate ( 1.6 Gbps/device), low latency, high reliability 
Holographic telepresence 
online education, collaborative working, deep-immersive gaming 
ultra high data rate (terabits per second) 
Multi-sense experience 
remote surgery, tactile Internet, remote controlling and reparing 
stringently low latency 
Tactile Internet for Industry 4.0 
industrial automation, smart energy consumption 
1 ms E2E latency 
Intell. transport & logistics 
Automated road speed enforcement, real-time parking management 
stringently high reliability and low latency 
Ubiquitous global roaming 
World-wide roaming services for UE, portable devices, industrial apps. 
low-cost fully global coverage 
Pervasive intelligence 
computer vision, SLAM, speech recognition, NLP, motion control 
high decision accuracy and transparency, complex data privacy 



## TABLE III COMPARISON
IIIBETWEEN 5G AND 6G ON SOME KPI REQUIREMENTS Fig. 3. The envisioned KPI requirements for 6G in comparison with 5G. consisting of mmWave, Terahertz communications, Visible Light Communications, Optical Wireless Communications, and the mechanisms of dynamic spectrum management and sharing, New Networking covering NFV and SDN, RAN slicing, Open and Smart RAN (O-RAN), and Security, New Air Interface that including massive MIMO, Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces, Coordinated Multi-Point, Cell-Free massive MIMO, and new waveform modulation techniques, New Architecture providing 3D coverage by means of integrating large-scale satellite constellation, High-Altitude Platform, and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle with traditional terrestrial networks, and New Paradigm empowered by Artificial Intelligence, blockchain, Digital Twin, and Communication-Computing-Control (Co-CoCo) convergence. A brief but systematic summary to them is given in Tab. IV.KPI 
5G Requirement 
6G Requirement 

Peak data rate 
20/10 Gbps (DL/UL) 
1 Tbps 

User-experienced data rate 
100/50 Mbps 
1 Gbps 
(DL/UL, dense urban) 

Latency 

UP: 4/1 ms (eMBB/URLLC) 
UP: 10 µs to 100 µs 
CP: 10 ms (eMBB/URLLC) 
CP: remarkably improved 
E2E: not defined 
E2E: considered 
Mobility 
up to 500 km/h (high-speed trains) 
up to 1000 km/h (airlines) 
Connection density 
10 6 per km 2 (with relaxed QoS) 
10 7 per km 2 
Network energy efficiency 
not defined 
10 -100 times better than that of 5G 
Peak spectral efficiency 
30/15 bps/Hz (DL/UL) 
90/45 bps/Hz (DL/UL) 
Area traffic capacity 
10 Mbps/m 2 
1 Gbps/m 2 (e.g. indoor hot spots) 
Reliability 
99.999% (URLLC: 32 bytes within 1 ms, urban macro) 
99.99999% 
Signal bandwidth 
100 MHz 
1 GHz 
Positioning accuracy 
10 m 
cm level 
Timeliness 
undefined 
considered 

Peak Rate 
(Tbps) 

User-experience 
Rate (Gbps) 

Air-Interface 
Latency (ms) 

Reliability 

Mobility (km/h) 

Position 
Accuracy (m) 

Connectivity 
Density (/km 2 ) 

Area Traffic 
Capacity 
(Gbps/m 2 ) 

1 

0.02 

10 7 

10 

6 

1 

0.1 

1 
0.1 

1000 

500 

99.99999% 

99.999% 

1 

0.01 

1 




Fig. 4. The roadmap for main 6G research and developments.ITU-R 

3GPP 

R15 
R17 
R16 

5G+ Evolution 

6G Study 
Specification 

Deployment 

WRC-27 Allocate 6G spectrum 
WRC-23 Discuss 6G spectrum 
WRC-19 5G spectrum allocation 

Vision 
Requirements 
Evaluation 

IMT-2030 

EU 

FP8: Horizon 2020 

ICT-20 call 
ICT-52 call 

FP9: Horizon Europe 

Japan 1 st 6G Panel 

5G-PPP 
PPP Smart Network & Services 

South Korea 6G plan 

Finland 6G flagship 

South 6G trial 

US open Thz 

Countries 



## TABLE IV CATEGORIZED
IVKEY ENABLERS WITH ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES resource efficiency, security arch. framework supporting multi-use-case verticals [36] O-RAN efficiency, intelligence, flexibility, dynamic lack of tech. convergence & standardization efforts Security service-based E2E security AI & ML deployment Air interface high capacity, statistical multiplexing gain extremely-large aperture, channel prediction [37], [38], Massive MIMO high spec. efficiency, low expenditure, [39], intell. envir. aware adaptation, holographic mMIMO, low energy consumption 6D positioning, large-scale MIMO radar [40], [41] IRS, aka. RIS/SRE high MIMO gain, low imp. cost, low power [42], [43] rely on 3 rd party assessments, business framework CoMP BS-level spatial diversity, "cell-free" potential clustering, sync., channel est., backhaul[44] New Intell. OFDMA online MIMO precoding & resource mapping waveform design [45], out-of-band radiation [46] modulation NOMA high power & spec. efficiencies specific D2D interface [47] for cooperative decodingCategory 
Enabler 
Advantages 
Challenges 

Spectrum 

mmWave 
high bandwidth, narrow beams, high integration 
severe attenuation & blockage, low range 
THz 
level [7], [23], [24] 
OWC 
almost unlimited bandwidth, license-free, low cost, 
frail MIMO gain, HW implementation, noise, loss, 
(incl. VLC) 
security, health-friendly 
nonlinearity, dispersion, pointing errors [25], [26] 
DSM 
coexistence of licensed/unlicensed users 
all-spec. sensing, data processing&mngmt [27], [28] 

Networking 

service heterogeneity, SDN controller placement, auto 
NFV & SDN 
high flexibility, low operational cost [29] 
network management [30] and orchestration [31], E2E 
QoS control[32], [33], [34], [35] 
RAN Slicing 
flexibility, Architecture 



6G vision and requirements: Is there any need for beyond 5G?. K David, H Berndt, IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 133K. David and H. Berndt, "6G vision and requirements: Is there any need for beyond 5G?" IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 72-80, Sep. 2018.

Quantum machine learning for 6G communication networks: State-of-the-art and vision for the future. S J Nawaz, IEEE Access. 7S. J. Nawaz et al., "Quantum machine learning for 6G communication networks: State-of-the-art and vision for the future," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 46 317-46 350, Apr. 2019.

Wireless communications and applications above 100 GHz: Opportunities and challenges for 6G and beyond. T S Rappaport, IEEE Access. 7T. S. Rappaport et al., "Wireless communications and applications above 100 GHz: Opportunities and challenges for 6G and beyond," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 78 729-78 757, Jun. 2019.

6G wireless communications: Vision and potential techniques. P Yang, IEEE Network. 334P. Yang et al., "6G wireless communications: Vision and potential techniques," IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 70-75, Jul. 2019.

The roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks. K B Letaief, IEEE Commun. Mag. 578K. B. Letaief et al., "The roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84-90, Aug. 2019.

6G technologies: Key drivers, core requirements, system architectures, and enabling technologies. B Zong, IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 143B. Zong et al., "6G technologies: Key drivers, core requirements, system architectures, and enabling technologies," IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 18-27, Sep. 2019.

6G wireless networks: Vision, requirements, architecture, and key technologies. Z Zhang, Y Xiao, Z Ma, M Xiao, Z Ding, X Lei, G K Karagiannidis, P Fan, IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine. 143Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Karagiannidis, and P. Fan, "6G wireless networks: Vision, requirements, architecture, and key technologies," IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 28-41, 2019.

6G: The next frontier: From holographic messaging to artificial intelligence using subterahertz and visible light communication. E C Strinati, IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 143E. C. Strinati et al., "6G: The next frontier: From holographic messaging to artificial intelligence using subterahertz and visible light communica- tion," IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 42-50, Sep. 2019.

A survey on green 6G network: Architecture and technologies. T Huang, IEEE Access. 7T. Huang et al., "A survey on green 6G network: Architecture and technologies," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 175 758-175 768, Dec. 2019.

Computational radio intelligence: One key for 6G wireless. W Jiang, F.-L Luo, ZTE Commun. 174W. Jiang and F.-L. Luo, "Computational radio intelligence: One key for 6G wireless," ZTE Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1-3, Dec. 2019.

What should 6G be?. S Dang, Nat. Electron. 3S. Dang et al., "What should 6G be?" Nat. Electron., vol. 3, p. 20-29, Jan. 2020.

Future intelligent and secure vehicular network toward 6G: Machine-learning approaches. F Tang, Proc. IEEE. IEEE108F. Tang et al., "Future intelligent and secure vehicular network toward 6G: Machine-learning approaches," Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 292-307, Feb. 2020.

Toward 6G networks: Use cases and technologies. M Giordani, IEEE Commun. Mag. 583M. Giordani et al., "Toward 6G networks: Use cases and technologies," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 55-61, Mar. 2020.

Communications in the 6G era. H Viswanathan, P E Mogensen, IEEE Access. 8H. Viswanathan and P. E. Mogensen, "Communications in the 6G era," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 57 063-57 074, Mar. 2020.

Vision, requirements, and technology trend of 6G: How to tackle the challenges of system coverage, capacity, user data-rate and movement speed. S Chen, IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag. 272S. Chen et al., "Vision, requirements, and technology trend of 6G: How to tackle the challenges of system coverage, capacity, user data-rate and movement speed," IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 218-228, Apr. 2020.

A vision of 6G wireless systems: Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems. W Saad, IEEE Network. 343W. Saad et al., "A vision of 6G wireless systems: Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems," IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134-142, May 2020.

Ten challenges in advancing machine learning technologies toward 6G. N Kato, IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag. 273N. Kato et al., "Ten challenges in advancing machine learning tech- nologies toward 6G," IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 96-103, Jun. 2020. 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030

. China, Kick, China 6G Kick-off

Explainable artificial intelligence for 6G: Improving trust between human and machine. W Guo, IEEE Commun. Mag. 586W. Guo, "Explainable artificial intelligence for 6G: Improving trust between human and machine," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 39-45, Jun. 2020.

IMT traffic estimates for the years 2020 to 2030, ITU-R Std. M.2370-0. IMT traffic estimates for the years 2020 to 2030, ITU-R Std. M.2370-0, Jul. 2015.

Mobile data traffic outlook. Report"Mobile data traffic outlook," Report, Ericsson, Jun. 2020.

IMT vision-Framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2020 and beyond, ITU-R Std. M.2083-0. IMT vision-Framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2020 and beyond, ITU-R Std. M.2083-0, Sep. 2015.

A comprehensive survey of ran architectures toward 5g mobile communication system. M A Habibi, M Nasimi, B Han, H D Schotten, IEEE Access. 7M. A. Habibi, M. Nasimi, B. Han, and H. D. Schotten, "A comprehensive survey of ran architectures toward 5g mobile communication system," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 70 371-70 421, 2019.

Millimeter wave communication: A comprehensive survey. X Wang, L Kong, F Kong, F Qiu, M Xia, S Arnon, G Chen, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials. 203X. Wang, L. Kong, F. Kong, F. Qiu, M. Xia, S. Arnon, and G. Chen, "Millimeter wave communication: A comprehensive survey," IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1616-1653, 2018.

A survey on terahertz communications. Z Chen, X Ma, B Zhang, Y Zhang, Z Niu, N Kuang, W Chen, L Li, S Li, China Communications. 162Z. Chen, X. Ma, B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Niu, N. Kuang, W. Chen, L. Li, and S. Li, "A survey on terahertz communications," China Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1-35, 2019.

Visible light communication, networking, and sensing: A survey, potential and challenges. P H Pathak, X Feng, P Hu, P Mohapatra, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials. 174P. H. Pathak, X. Feng, P. Hu, and P. Mohapatra, "Visible light commu- nication, networking, and sensing: A survey, potential and challenges," IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2047-2077, 2015.

Wireless infrared communications. J M Kahn, J R Barry, Proceedings of the IEEE. 852J. M. Kahn and J. R. Barry, "Wireless infrared communications," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 265-298, Feb. 1997.

6g and beyond: The future of wireless communications systems. I F Akyildiz, A Kak, S Nie, IEEE Access. 830I. F. Akyildiz, A. Kak, and S. Nie, "6g and beyond: The future of wireless communications systems," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 133 995- 134 030, 2020.

Beyond 5G: Big data processing for better spectrum utilization. A Kliks, L Kulacz, P Kryszkiewicz, H Bogucka, M Dryjanski, M Isaksson, G P Koudouridis, P Tengkvist, IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine. 153A. Kliks, L. Kulacz, P. Kryszkiewicz, H. Bogucka, M. Dryjanski, M. Isaksson, G. P. Koudouridis, and P. Tengkvist, "Beyond 5G: Big data processing for better spectrum utilization," IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 40-50, 2020.

Autonomic network management for software-define and virtualized 5G systems. W Jiang, M Strufe, H Schotten, Proc. European Wireless. European WirelessDresden, GermanyW. Jiang, M. Strufe, and H. Schotten, "Autonomic network management for software-define and virtualized 5G systems," in Proc. European Wireless, Dresden, Germany, May 2017.

Experimental results for artificial intelligence-based self-organized 5G networks. W Jiang, M Strufe, H D Schotten, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC). IEEE Int. Symp. on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC)Montreal, QC, CanadaW. Jiang, M. Strufe, and H. D. Schotten, "Experimental results for artificial intelligence-based self-organized 5G networks," in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Montreal, QC, Canada, Oct. 2017.

Intelligent network management for 5G systems: The SELFNET approach. W Jiang, M Strufe, H Schotten, Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. on Net. and Commun. (EUCNC). IEEE Eur. Conf. on Net. and Commun. (EUCNC)Oulu, FinlandW. Jiang, M. Strufe, and H. Schotten, "Intelligent network management for 5G systems: The SELFNET approach," in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. on Net. and Commun. (EUCNC), Oulu, Finland, Jun. 2017, pp. 109-113.

On using SDN in 5G: The controller placement problem. A Ksentini, M Bagaa, T Taleb, 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). A. Ksentini, M. Bagaa, and T. Taleb, "On using SDN in 5G: The controller placement problem," in 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2016, pp. 1-6.

Joint fronthaul optimization and SDN controller placement in dynamic 5G networks. V.-M Alevizaki, M Anastasopoulos, A Tzanakaki, D Simeonidou, Modeling, A. Tzanakaki, M. Varvarigos, R. Muñoz, R. Nejabati, N. Yoshikane, M. Anastasopoulos, and J. Marquez-BarjaSpringer International PublishingV.-M. Alevizaki, M. Anastasopoulos, A. Tzanakaki, and D. Simeonidou, "Joint fronthaul optimization and SDN controller placement in dynamic 5G networks," in Optical Network Design and Modeling, A. Tzanakaki, M. Varvarigos, R. Muñoz, R. Nejabati, N. Yoshikane, M. Anasta- sopoulos, and J. Marquez-Barja, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 181-192.

Topology discovery in software defined networks: Threats, taxonomy, and state-of-the-art. S Khan, A Gani, A W Wahab, M Guizani, M K Khan, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials. 191S. Khan, A. Gani, A. W. Abdul Wahab, M. Guizani, and M. K. Khan, "Topology discovery in software defined networks: Threats, taxonomy, and state-of-the-art," IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 303-324, 2017.

Toward a scalable, robust, and QoSaware virtual-link provisioning in SDN-based ISP networks. S Tomovic, I Radusinovic, IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management. 163S. Tomovic and I. Radusinovic, "Toward a scalable, robust, and QoS- aware virtual-link provisioning in SDN-based ISP networks," IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1032-1045, 2019.

How should network slice instances be provided to multiple use cases of a single vertical industry?. M A Habibi, B Han, F Z Yousaf, H D Schotten, IEEE Communications Standards Magazine. 43M. A. Habibi, B. Han, F. Z. Yousaf, and H. D. Schotten, "How should network slice instances be provided to multiple use cases of a single vertical industry?" IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 53-61, 2020.

Multi-antenna fading channel prediction empowered by artificial intelligence. W Jiang, H D Schotten, Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC). IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC)Chicago, USAW. Jiang and H. D. Schotten, "Multi-antenna fading channel prediction empowered by artificial intelligence," in Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC), Chicago, USA, Aug. 2018.

Recurrent neural network-based frequencydomain channel prediction for wideband communications. W Jiang, H Schotten, Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC). IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC)Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaW. Jiang and H. Schotten, "Recurrent neural network-based frequency- domain channel prediction for wideband communications," in Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Apr. 2019.

Recurrent neural networks with long short-term memory for fading channel prediction. W Jiang, H D Schotten, Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC). IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC)Antwerp, BelgiumW. Jiang and H. D. Schotten, "Recurrent neural networks with long short-term memory for fading channel prediction," in Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC), Antwerp, Belgium, May 2020.

Holographic mimo surfaces for 6g wireless networks: Opportunities, challenges, and trends. C Huang, S Hu, G C Alexandropoulos, A Zappone, C Yuen, R Zhang, M Di Renzo, M Debbah, IEEE Wireless CommunicationsC. Huang, S. Hu, G. C. Alexandropoulos, A. Zappone, C. Yuen, R. Zhang, M. Di Renzo, and M. Debbah, "Holographic mimo surfaces for 6g wireless networks: Opportunities, challenges, and trends," IEEE Wireless Communications, pp. 1-8, 2020.

Massive mimo is a reality-what is next?: Five promising research directions for antenna arrays. E Björnson, L Sanguinetti, H Wymeersch, J Hoydis, T L Marzetta, ScienceDirect: Digital Signal Processing. 94E. Björnson, L. Sanguinetti, H. Wymeersch, J. Hoydis, and T. L. Marzetta, "Massive mimo is a reality-what is next?: Five promising research directions for antenna arrays," ScienceDirect: Digital Signal Processing, vol. 94, pp. 3-20, 2019.

Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces for wireless communications: Principles, challenges, and opportunities. M A Mossallamy, H Zhang, L Song, K G Seddik, Z Han, G Y Li, IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking. M. A. El Mossallamy, H. Zhang, L. Song, K. G. Seddik, Z. Han, and G. Y. Li, "Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces for wireless communica- tions: Principles, challenges, and opportunities," IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, pp. 1-1, 2020.

Smart radio environments empowered by reconfigurable intelligent surfaces: How it works, state of research, and road ahead. M D Renzo, A Zappone, M Debbah, M Alouini, C Yuen, J D Rosny, S Tretyakov, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. M. D. Renzo, A. Zappone, M. Debbah, M. Alouini, C. Yuen, J. D. Rosny, and S. Tretyakov, "Smart radio environments empowered by reconfigurable intelligent surfaces: How it works, state of research, and road ahead," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, pp. 1-1, 2020.

Kpi/kqi-driven coordinated multipoint in 5g: Measurements, field trials, and technical solutions. G Song, W Wang, D Chen, T Jiang, IEEE Wireless Communications. 255G. Song, W. Wang, D. Chen, and T. Jiang, "Kpi/kqi-driven coordinated multipoint in 5g: Measurements, field trials, and technical solutions," IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 23-29, 2018.

From OFDM to FBMC: Principles and Comparisons. W Jiang, T Kaiser, Signal Processing for 5G: Algorithms and Implementations. F. L. Luo and C. ZhangJohn Wiley&Sons and IEEE Pressch. 3W. Jiang and T. Kaiser, "From OFDM to FBMC: Principles and Com- parisons," in Signal Processing for 5G: Algorithms and Implementations, F. L. Luo and C. Zhang, Eds. United Kindom: John Wiley&Sons and IEEE Press, 2016, ch. 3.

Suppressing the out-of-band power radiation in multi-carrier systems: A comparative study. W Jiang, M Schellmann, Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. (Globecom). IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. (Globecom)Anaheim, USAW. Jiang and M. Schellmann, "Suppressing the out-of-band power radiation in multi-carrier systems: A comparative study," in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. (Globecom), Anaheim, USA, Dec. 2012, pp. 1477-1482.

Device-to-device based cooperative relaying for 5G network: A comparative review. W Jiang, ZTE Commun. 15S1W. Jiang, "Device-to-device based cooperative relaying for 5G network: A comparative review," ZTE Commun., vol. 15, no. S1, pp. 60-66, Jun. 2017.

LEO satellite constellation for internet of things. Z Qu, IEEE Access. 5Z. Qu et al., "LEO satellite constellation for internet of things," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18 391-18 401, Sep. 2017.

Satellite-based internet: A tutorial. Y Hu, V O K Li, 39Y. Hu and V. O. K. Li, "Satellite-based internet: A tutorial," vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 154-162, Mar. 2001.

Opportunistic relaying over aerial-to-terrestrial and device-to-device radio channels. W Jiang, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun. (ICC). IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun. (ICC)Sydney, AustraliaW. Jiang et al., "Opportunistic relaying over aerial-to-terrestrial and device-to-device radio channels," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun. (ICC), Sydney, Australia, Jul. 2014, pp. 206-211.

Achieving high reliability in aerial-terrestrial networks: Opportunistic space-time coding. Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. on Net. and Commun. (EUCNC). IEEE Eur. Conf. on Net. and Commun. (EUCNC)Bologne, Italy--, "Achieving high reliability in aerial-terrestrial networks: Oppor- tunistic space-time coding," in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. on Net. and Commun. (EUCNC), Bologne, Italy, Jun. 2014.

The role of high-altitude platforms (HAPs) in the global wireless connectivity. A Mohammed, Proceedings of IEEE. IEEE99A. Mohammed et al., "The role of high-altitude platforms (HAPs) in the global wireless connectivity," Proceedings of IEEE, vol. 99, no. 11, pp. 1939-1953, Nov. 2011.

Uav communications for 5g and beyond: Recent advances and future trends. B Li, Z Fei, Y Zhang, IEEE Internet of Things Journal. 62B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, "Uav communications for 5g and beyond: Recent advances and future trends," IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241-2263, 2019.

Deep learning for fading channel prediction. W Jiang, H Schotten, IEEE Open J. of the Commun. Society. 1W. Jiang and H. Schotten, "Deep learning for fading channel prediction," IEEE Open J. of the Commun. Society, vol. 1, pp. 320-332, Mar. 2020.

A deep learning method to predict fading channel in multi-antenna systems. W Jiang, H D Schotten, Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC). IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC)Antwerp, BelgiumW. Jiang and H. D. Schotten, "A deep learning method to predict fading channel in multi-antenna systems," in Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf. (VTC), Antwerp, Belgium, May 2020.

Neural network-based fading channel prediction: A comprehensive overview. IEEE Access. 7--, "Neural network-based fading channel prediction: A comprehen- sive overview," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 118 112-118 124, Aug. 2019.

Federated learning: Challenges, methods, and future directions. T Li, A K Sahu, A Talwalkar, V Smith, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 373T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, "Federated learning: Challenges, methods, and future directions," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50-60, 2020.

Blockchain for internet of things: A survey. H.-N Dai, IEEE Internet of Things Journal. 65H.-N. Dai et al., "Blockchain for internet of things: A survey," IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076-8094, Oct. 2019.

Privacy-aware blockchain innovation for 6g: Challenges and opportunities. T Nguyen, N Tran, L Loven, J Partala, M Kechadi, S Pirttikangas, in 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMITT. Nguyen, N. Tran, L. Loven, J. Partala, M. Kechadi, and S. Pirt- tikangas, "Privacy-aware blockchain innovation for 6g: Challenges and opportunities," in 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT), 2020, pp. 1-5.

Digital twin in the iot context: A survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models. R Minerva, G M Lee, N Crespi, Proceedings of the IEEE. 10810R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, "Digital twin in the iot context: A survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785-1824, 2020.

Digital twin in industry 4.0: Technologies, applications and challenges. F Pires, A Cachada, J Barbosa, A P Moreira, P Leitão, 2019 IEEE 17th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN). 1F. Pires, A. Cachada, J. Barbosa, A. P. Moreira, and P. Leitão, "Digital twin in industry 4.0: Technologies, applications and challenges," in 2019 IEEE 17th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), vol. 1, 2019, pp. 721-726.

A survey on digital twin: Definitions, characteristics, applications, and design implications. B R Barricelli, E Casiraghi, D Fogli, IEEE Access. 7B. R. Barricelli, E. Casiraghi, and D. Fogli, "A survey on digital twin: Definitions, characteristics, applications, and design implications," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 167 653-167 671, 2019.

Edge intelligence: Challenges and opportunities. H Hu, C Jiang, 2020 International Conference on Computer, Information and Telecommunication Systems (CITS). H. Hu and C. Jiang, "Edge intelligence: Challenges and opportuni- ties," in 2020 International Conference on Computer, Information and Telecommunication Systems (CITS), 2020, pp. 1-5.

Robustness analysis of networked control systems with aging status. B Han, S Yuan, Z Jiang, Y Zhu, H D Schotten, IEEE INFOCOM 2020 -IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS). B. Han, S. Yuan, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhu, and H. D. Schotten, "Robustness analysis of networked control systems with aging status," in IEEE INFOCOM 2020 -IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 1360-1361.

Ai-assisted low information latency wireless networking. Z Jiang, S Fu, S Zhou, Z Niu, S Zhang, S Xu, IEEE Wireless Communications. 271Z. Jiang, S. Fu, S. Zhou, Z. Niu, S. Zhang, and S. Xu, "Ai-assisted low information latency wireless networking," IEEE Wireless Communica- tions, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 108-115, 2020.