# Actuator Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Motion Control: A Survey

CorpusID: 232352659
 
tags: #Engineering, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7af1582d9cfb2dad61c6889d5bfb8f0e6c49ac07](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7af1582d9cfb2dad61c6889d5bfb8f0e6c49ac07)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Actuator Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Motion Control: A Survey


Torben Stolte 
Actuator Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Motion Control: A Survey
TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. AA, NO. B, MONTH YEAR 1
The advent of automated vehicles operating at SAE levels 4 and 5 poses high fault tolerance demands for all functions contributing to the driving task. At the actuator level, fault-tolerant vehicle motion control, which exploits functional redundancies among the actuators, is one means to achieve the required degree of fault tolerance. Therefore, we give a comprehensive overview of the state of the art in actuator fault-tolerant vehicle motion control with a focus on drive, brake, and steering degradations, as well as tire blowouts. This review shows that actuator fault-tolerant vehicle motion is a widely studied field; yet, the presented approaches differ with respect to many aspects. To provide a starting point for future research, we survey the employed actuator topologies, the tolerated degradations, the presented control approaches, as well as the experiments conducted for validation. Overall, and despite the large number of different approaches, the covered literature reveals the potential of increasing fault tolerance by fault-tolerant vehicle motion control. Thus, besides developing novel approaches or demonstrating real-time applicability, future research should aim at investigating limitations and enabling comparison of fault-tolerant motion control approaches in order to allow for a thorough safety argumentation.This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.

## I. Introduction

F AULT-tolerant vehicle systems, which have been the subject of intensive research for more than two decades, continue to gain importance with the advent of automated driving technology. While the required safety level for the operation of automated vehicles according to SAE levels 4 and 5 [2] is yet to be defined, it is indisputable that automated vehicles demand a high degree of fault tolerance throughout the automated driving system. On the part of vehicle actuators, redundant implementations are one way to compensate for the missing human fallback layer in SAE levels 4 and 5. However, redundancy is usually accompanied by increased costs caused by, i. a., additional weight and installation space complexity. These drawbacks become even more important for novel overactuated topologies proposed in several automated vehicle prototypes, for instance those featuring wheel-individual drive, brake, and steering actuators.

Manuscript received AAAAAA BB, CCCC; revised DDDDDD EE, FFFF. This research is accomplished within the project "UNICARagil" (FKZ 16EMO0285) [1]. We acknowledge the financial support for the project by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany (BMBF). 1 The author is with the Institute of Control Engineering at Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany.

stolte@ifr.ing.tu-bs.de Also in modern series production vehicles, there is a trend towards over-actuation in order to improve the vehicles' handling, ride comfort, and safety. For instance, electronic stability control leverages wheel-individual brakes, and premium class vehicles feature chassis control systems that use torque vectoring and by-wire rear-axle steering.

The over-actuation offers additional opportunities for realizing fault-tolerant automated vehicles. Since drive, brake, and steering actuators generally impact both, the longitudinal and lateral vehicle motion, the resulting functional redundancies could be exploited either for avoiding physical redundancy at the actuator level or as a secondary fallback layer if the currently accepted single fault assumption for vehicle systems [3] does not hold true for automated vehicles.

In either case, the impact of the degraded actuators must be handled by fault-tolerant system layers superimposed on the actuator layer in order to obtain safe vehicle behavior. In particular, vehicle motion control must be able to account for possible actuator degradations in order to be able to stabilize the vehicle on its given trajectory by using the remaining fully functional actuators 2 . Hence, we aim at giving a comprehensive overview of the current state of the art of actuator fault-tolerant vehicle motion control in this survey.

A few earlier literature reviews are available [5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12], however, they cover only parts of the existing publications that address fault-tolerant motion control in the presence of actuator degradations. Cross-domain overviews are given by Zhang and Jiang [5] as well as Johansen and Fossen [6]. In their 2008 study, Zhang and Jiang present a comprehensive review of reconfigurable control systems and include selected publications from the automotive domain. Johansen and Fossen, in their overview from 2013, highlight the potential of control allocation towards fault tolerance, yet they give only one reference for a fault-tolerant control approach in the automotive domain.

Focusing on the automotive domain, Wanner et al. [7] review fault-tolerant vehicle design in general in their 2012 study. With respect to fault-tolerant control in the presence of actuator degradations, the authors present general considerations as well as requirements and introduce a few selected publications on the topic. Vivas-López et al. [8] as well as Shyrokau [9] survey approaches towards global chassis control in their studies from 2013 and 2014, respectively. Yet, the authors give only a few selected examples of fault-tolerant control approaches addressing 2 Following a hierarchical approach towards automated vehicle systems, e. g., as presented by Matthaei and Maurer [4], higher layers such as trajectory planning and decision making must adapt to the degradation as well.

actuator faults. The same applies to the more recent works of Kissai et al. [10], Huang et al. [11], and Shet et al. [12], which are from 2017, 2019, and 2020, respectively. As Vivas-López et al. and  This survey is meant to serve as a starting point for future research in the field of fault-tolerant vehicle motion control. Hence, after refining the focus in Section II, the subsequent sections are structured by the different ways in which researchers and practitioners can approach fault-tolerant vehicle motion control. On the one hand, they can look for approaches to handle selected actuator degradations; therefore, Section III provides an overview of the different degradation types addressed in the literature. On the other hand, researchers and practitioners can search for faulttolerant vehicle motion control approaches for a given set of drive, brake, and steering actuators. Actuator topologies are hence reviewed in Section IV. To compare novel control approaches to the state of the art, Section V considers the different control targets, the employed control techniques, and the related control structures. Last but not least, Section VI gives an overview of the experiments that are used to evaluate fault-tolerant vehicle motion control approaches.


## II. Focus of the survey

Within in the field of automated driving, we concentrate on road vehicles. Fault-tolerant control approaches for offroad vehicles, e. g., [13,14], omnidirectional robots [15][16][17][18], as well as other mobile robots [19][20][21] are not further discussed as their specific application domain poses different requirements from a safety perspective compared to road vehicles. The same applies to fault-tolerant motion control of special purpose vehicles and vehicles with more than four wheels, for instance [22][23][24][25][26][27][28].

Specifically, we focus on drive, brake, and steering actuators as these are present in every road vehicle. Moreover, tires are arguably the most critical mechanical components with regard to motion safety as they transfer all forces generated by actuators. Transfer characteristics as well as vehicle dynamics change significantly after tire blowouts and therefore impact vehicle motion critically. Thus, we include publications that target vehicle motion control after tire blowouts. In contrast, active suspension systems as optional components are not further considered 3 . As a consequence, we purely highlight planar vehicle motion 3 Fault-tolerant control approaches for active suspension systems are presented, e. g., in [114,118,121,. aspects, although vertical motion is partially considered in the covered literature, too. All publications surveyed in Sections III-VI introduce approaches to exploit the over-actuation of a vehicle. Therefore, publications showing fault tolerance at the actuator level are not considered. Moreover, we focus on publications that outline the specific control approach for reaching fault tolerance. Publications that only show results are neglected, e. g., [237][238][239][240][241][242][243][244]. The same applies to publications that only state that an approach is potentially fault-tolerant without demonstrating the implementation or presenting experimental results.

Some publications that appear relevant based on their titles and abstracts unfortunately cannot be included in this survey because they are only available to us in Chinese [245][246][247][248][249][250][251][252][253][254][255][256][257][258], Japanese [259], or not at all [260][261][262][263][264] 4 .

Within this focus, a total of 172 publications forms the core of this survey. Hence, without claiming to be exhaustive, the survey provides a representative picture of the current state of the art in fault-tolerant vehicle motion control research. An overview of the contained publications is presented in Table I, which summarizes employed actuator topology, covered degradations, control approaches, as well as conducted experiments for each publication.

The literature covered in this survey indicates that actuator fault-tolerant vehicle motion control has been the subject of research for roughly a quarter of a century as illustrated in Fig. 1. After the potential of fault-tolerant vehicle motion control had already been recognized earlier (1989 at the latest, cf. [267]), there were a few publications in the mid-1990s. However, it was not until the beginning of the 21st century that fault-tolerant motion control came more into the attention of researchers, with research intensifying significantly over the past decade.


## III. Degradations

For implementing fault-tolerant control systems, an understanding of how components degrade due to internal faults is key. Hence, in this section, we highlight and unify the different ways of how researchers model degradations. Based on the unified understanding, we distinguish nine degradation categories, each posing comparable requirements on fault-tolerant vehicle motion control approaches.

The ways researchers model degradations can be described by means of the general fault-tolerant control problem without feed-through, which also neglects disturbances and uncertainties:
x(t) = f f (x(t), u f (t)) , y(t) = g (x(t)) ,
where x ∈ R n denotes the system state vector and y the measurement output. f f describes the system dynamic potentially subject to faults. Here, the system dynamic f f changes in the presence of tire blowouts, which form the first category and are considered in 23 publications .

The remaining categories comprise actuator degradations and can be explained by means of the potentially degraded
system input u f (t) ∈ R m with u f = (u f,1 , . . . u f,m ) ,
where m equals the number of control inputs. With u f (t), two ways of describing actuator degradations can be distinguished. On the one hand, researchers take a setbased perspective, which concentrates on the usable range of u f . For the fault-free case, the usable range of control inputs is u ≤ u f ≤ū, where u andū are the minimum and the maximum value of the control inputs. In case of faults, the usable range for one or multiple u i ∈ u, with i indicating the i-th actuator, deteriorates such that
u f,i (t) ∈ [u f,i ,ū f,i ] ⊂ [u i ,ū i ],
where u i andū i denote the physical actuator limitations. Consequently, actuators are assumed to degrade by providing a reduced range. For the singleton u f,i =ū f,i follows u f,i (t) = const., which is a frequently encountered degradation in literature; in particular u f,i (t) = 0 is often considered.

On the other hand, several researchers model actuator degradations by defining the system input u f (t) as
u f (t) = (t)u(t) + u + (t),
where u(t) is the intended input, (t) = diag{ i } a diagonal matrix with i ∈ [0, 1] denoting a time-varying effectiveness factor, and u + (t) a time-varying additive fault. Common degradations from this perspective are a stuck-at fault ( i (t) = 0, u +,i (t) = const.) and especially a loss-ofeffectiveness fault ( i (t) ∈ (0, 1], u +,i (t) = 0). Other degradations can be summarized as time-varying control inputs and can be expressed by means of u +,i (t), too. 
u f,i (t) ∈ [u f,i ,ū f,i ] ⊂ [u i ,ū i ].
It is quite obvious that both ways of describing degradations can be merged to a great extent: Both ways can easily model constant control inputs or stuck-at degradations. A reduced control input range can be related to the loss-ofeffectiveness fault. The same applies to a constant offset if one explicitly considers physical actuator limitations that bound the actuator usage, which also results in a reduced control input range. Only time-varying control inputs are specific to the modeling of faults using loss-of-effectiveness and additive faults.

Based on these general considerations, we categorize the degradations tolerated by the control algorithms found in the covered literature. We summarize degradations of drive and brake actuators as both impact the wheel rotation and create four categories: 1) Zero torque, 2) Reduced torque range, 3) Unintended torque, and 4) Spinning or locking wheel. In the third category, constant non-zero torques as well as time-varying torques are subsumed that are counteracting the intended vehicle motion. The fourth category addresses the special yet -in terms of vehicle dynamics -interesting case of unintended drive or brake torques that exceed the tire force limits such that the wheel starts spinning or locks when braking.

Also four steering degradation categories can be distinguished in literature: 5) Reduced steering angle range, 6) Reduced steering rate, 7) Unintended steering angle, and 8) Zero steering torque. The seventh category summarizes unintended steering angles, which can be either constant or time-varying. After a degradation according to the last category, the wheel's motion around its z-axis is purely determined through the forces at the tire road contact patch, attenuated by friction and other effects in the steering system. Fig. 2 depicts the number of publications that address each of the nine categories. With respect to brake and drive degradations, most publications -namely 66 -consider zero torque [29, 45, 48-50, 54, 55, 57, 58, 65, 66, 68, 70, 74, 76-80, 83-86, 88-93, 95, 97, 98, 101-110, 116, 122, 126, 128, 133-137, 141-143, 145, 147, 150, 155, 159-163, 167, 175, 177] followed by a reduced torque range with 54 publications [30-33, 38, 40, 43, 45, 51, 52, 64, 66-68, 74, 82, 94, 109, 114, 115, 117, 120, 121, 123, 124, 126, 127, 129-131, 138-142, 144-146, 149, 150, 152, 159, 162, 163, 165-168, 170, 172-176]. 15 publications assume a constant torque [39,42,67,69,70,119,126,127,142,144,146,150,156,157,176], whereas only six consider locking or spinning wheels [58, 103-105, 126, 158]. Last but not least, a sole publication addresses malfunctioning anti-lock and anti-spin control systems [126], which is not displayed in Table I.  


## Author(s) (Year) Source

Drive Brake Steering  TU  T0  L|S  TR  SR  SD  SU  S0  BO  Target  Technique   Type  DLC TU  T0  L|S  TR  SR  SD  SU  S0  BO  Target  Technique   Type  DLC  AW-I FA Path LQR MiL&ViL Patwardhan (1994) [190] FA AW/FA/RA Path FF&LQR MiL&ViL Patwardhan et al. (1996) [191] FA Overall, researchers expect that there are more or less defined ways of how actuators degrade. That is, they implicitly assume certain actuator-internal mechanisms that lead to the defined behavior, e. g., a drive motor that is torque-free after a fault. In contrast to this general black box assumption, a few publications take into account the internal dynamics of an actuator and model the temporal behavior of the actuator during a degradation. For instance, Nguyen et al. [109] and Chen et al. [178] propose approaches to handle drive degradations caused by bearing faults deteriorating the available drive torque IV. Actuator topologies The effects of degradations as well as the potential to overcome these effects are strongly linked to the available actuator topology. While compiling this survey it turned out that actuator implementations are not always designated clearly and unambiguously. For instance, the term "front steering" could refer to either one steering actuator that steers both wheels or to one steering actuator per wheel resulting in wheel-individual steering. Therefore, we distinguish between front-axle, rear-axle, and all-wheel topologies where all-wheel refers to separate front and rearaxle actuators. It is stated explicitly if wheels of an axle can be controlled individually, otherwise both wheels are affected by the same actuator. The abbreviation scheme used in Table I as well as in Fig. 3 is influenced by the work of Jonasson et al. [268].

Altogether, the available literature presents fault-tolerant control schemes for a wide range of different actuator topologies, which appear with different frequency as can be taken from Fig. 3. Concentrating on single actuator types, it can be observed that the most common brake and steering implementations reflect the state of the art in series production vehicles: 50 publications involve wheelindividual all-wheel braking and 76 front-axle steering. For steering implementations, all-wheel steering (28 publications) and wheel-individual all-wheel steering (22) are quite frequently encountered as well. In contrast, drive implementations found in literature are more projecting into future, for wheel-individual all-wheel drive is by far the most widespread variant (107 publications). This implementation is frequently motivated by the potential for wheel hub or close-to-wheel motors in electric vehicles  as well as the ease of implementation in simulation and control design. The joint consideration of drive, brake, and steering implementations reveals that the most widely used actuator topology consists of wheel-individual all-wheel drive and front-axle steering [41, 42, 45, 50-52, 59-63, 67, 68, 75, 87, 96-98, 100, 101, 116, 120, 132, 135, 146, 148-154, 158, 159, 172-176, 187, 199]. Publications focusing on fault-tolerant control for wheel-individual all-wheel drive only [30-32, 38, 43, 49, 80, 84, 88, 93, 94, 109, 113, 128, 138-142, 144, 155, 160, 161] are considered second most in literature followed by wheel-individual all-wheel brake together with front-axle steering [41, 42, 45, 50-52, 59-63, 67, 68, 75, 87, 96-98, 100, 101, 116, 120, 132, 135, 146, 148-154, 158, 159, 172-176, 187, 199].
AW-I | -| FA AW-I | -| - - | AW-I | FA AW-I | -| AW AW-I | -| AW-I - | AW-I | - AW-I | AW-I | AW-I - | -| FA - | -| AW RA-I | -| FA AW-I | AW-I | - - | AW-I | AW AW-I | AW-I | AW AW-I | -| FA-I AW | -| - RA | AW | - RA-I | -| - - | RA-I | FA FA | -| AW FA | -| FA FA | -| RA FA-I | -| FA RA-I | AW-I | - FA+RA-I| -| AW - | AW-I |
In general, Fig. 3 reveals that most publications involve topologies that consist of two actuator types, namely steering actuators combined with either drive [29, 33, 36, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47, 50-52, 56-63, 67, 68, 75, 82, 83, 85-87, 89-91, 96-98, 100, 101, 110, 116, 118, 120, 127, 129-132, 135, 146, 148-154, 158, 159, 162, 163, 165-170, 172-177, 187, 190, 199] or brake actuators [35,46,48,54,55,71,73,76,78,79,81,95,108,111,114,115,117,121,164,171,182,189,193,[195][196][197].

Exceptions from this scheme are a few publications featuring topologies with all three types of actuators or only a single actuator type. Topologies featuring three actuator types are the most over-actuated topologies, i. e. combining wheel-individual all-wheel drive and wheelindividual all-wheel brakes with either wheel-individual all-wheel steering [69, 70, 103-105, 126, 136, 137, 145] or all-wheel steering [77,112].

Topologies with a sole actuator type are found using drive, brake, or steering in the reviewed literature. There are two drive-only topologies, which feature either an allwheel drive topology [106,107] or the wheel-individual all-wheel drive topology mentioned above. A brake-only topology using wheel-individual brakes at all wheels is encountered as well [64,72,92,122,143,147,178,185,188,200]. For these topologies, steering angles act as system parameters or as disturbance if a steering actuators are mentioned but not actively used, cf. Table I. Moreover, two different steering-only implementations are found which consist either of all-wheel steering [34,37,53,99,125,181] or front-axle steering [180,183,184,186,191,192,194,198]. Obviously, the approaches using solely front-axle steering are used for compensating effects of tire blowouts. For the steering-only approaches, vehicle speed serves as system parameter.

Last but not least, we would like to note that some dissertations show integrated vehicle motion control approaches applicable to different actuator topologies, which also investigate the approaches' potential for fault tolerance [58,77,112,192]. For these publications, Table I as well as Fig. 3 take into account those topologies that are explicitly investigated by the authors with regard to faulty actuators.


## V. Control approaches

In addition to the diversity of actuator topologies and permissible actuator degradations, a plethora of faulttolerant vehicle motion control approaches exists in the covered literature. In order to give an overview, we examine the approaches from three perspectives in the following subsections. In Subsection V-A, as a first perspective, we present the different control targets that researchers aim to achieve with their approaches. To attain the control targets, researchers use a variety of control techniques, which are summarized as a second perspective in Subsection V-B. The presented control approaches often combine different control techniques. Therefore, as a third perspective, we give an overview of the resulting control structures in Subsection V-C. Additionally, Subsection V-D highlights approaches that use brake or drive actuators to steer.


## A. Control targets

Overall, we distinguish five different control targets. An overview of the number of available publications for the different control targets is given in Fig. 4 publications addressing tire degradations). 58, 64, 69, 70, 74, 75, 77-79, 82-86, 88, 90-92, 94, 97, 101, 103-105, 109, 118, 127-131, 135-142, 144-146, 150-152, 156-158, 169, 170, 173, 175, 177], while only one publication targets the control of vehicle dynamics in presence of tire blowouts [200]. These publications are frequently motivated by human-driven cars where reference values for the vehicle dynamics are generated via the driver inputs on the steering wheel as well as the brake and the accelerator pedals.

Lateral vehicle dynamics -i. e., yaw and lateral motionare the second most encountered control target in the surveyed literature. They are considered in 48 publications addressing actuator degradations [34, 38, 46, 49, 57, 59, 61, 62, 65-68, 71, 72, 76, 80, 81, 87, 89, 93, 95, 96, 99, 100, 108, 111-116, 119-122, 132-134, 147-149, 155, 159-161, 164, 165, 171] and six addressing tire blowouts [178,183,[185][186][187][188]. In contrast, the reviewed approaches seldom target pure longitudinal dynamics [45,106,107,123,124,143].

The remaining publications consider the vehicle motion in relation to an external reference. Among these, path tracking is the biggest group, to which publications considering tire blowouts contribute a significant number with 16 publications [179-182, 184, 189-199]. Still, those considering actuator degradations form the majority in this group (27 publications) [29, 35, 37, 40-42, 44, 47, 52, 53, 56, 60, 63, 73, 98, 110, 125, 153, 154, 162, 163, 166-168, 172, 174, 176]. Publications that target yaw angle [102,117] control and pose tracking [126] are comparably rare.


## B. Control techniques

To reach the control targets, researchers use various control techniques, often in combination. We categorize the techniques as displayed in Fig. 5, which reveals that different techniques are encountered with varying frequency. Of course, the techniques' implementations differ in the publications, even within one category, which are influenced i. a. on the actuator topology, tolerated degradations, control target, and control structure.

Classic feedback control techniques are widely used. Among these, P, PI, PID, or PD controllers (summarized under PID in Fig. 5) 2  2  4  6  1  3  3  2  2  3  4  3  2   42  39  34  20  21  16  16  16  12  10  9 145, 149, 150, 152, 155-159, 171, 173, 181, 183, 186, 195]. To explicitly address actuator limitations, linear quadratic regulators are also frequently used [38,47,57,59,112,113,162,163,169,175,185,189,190]. In comparison, standard state feedback control is encountered less often [35, 46, 60-62, 73, 144, 151, 154, 170, 187, 197, 199].

Moreover, advanced feedback control techniques are employed regularly. Here, sliding mode control is most widespread [30, 31, 33, 41, 42, 44, 47-49, 51, 61-64, 66, 74, 85, 86, 94-96, 117, 119, 122-124, 127, 132, 135-138, 141, 142, 147, 164, 172-174, 188, 200]. Further regularly used are Lyapunov theory-based techniques [39,40,52,53,67,68,76,100,114,115,121,133,134,146,148,153,179,182,193], H ∞ control [39,40,52,53,67,68,76,100,114,115,121,133,134,146,148,153,179,182,193] as well as model-predictive control [44,78,83,90,91,126,165,176,177,180,194,198,199]. H ∞ control techniques are sometimes enhanced with other norm-optimal techniques, e. g., the L 2 -norm is used for disturbance rejection in [146,179]. A few publications also use fuzzy control [120,160,161,178,186], flatness-based [56,58,77,79], as well as model-free adaptive control techniques [82,97,98].

The remaining techniques can be summarized as nonfeedback control techniques. Here, control allocation is the most often used control technique in order to distribute control inputs to the four wheels; sometimes employed as sole control technique, yet in most cases in hierarchical control structures as control layer underlying a feedback control technique. 44 publications solve the optimization problem underlying the control allocation online [31, 33, 35, 36, 43, 45, 49, 52, 54, 64, 70, 76, 78, 79, 83, 88, 90-92, 94, 96, 111, 118, 128, 133-138, 140, 141, 145, 147, 149, 155-157, 159, 173, 176, 177, 182, 200] and 22 analytically [38, 41, 42, 48, 58, 59, 66, 73, 77, 103-105, 127, 129-131, 152, 156-158, 164, 199]. Among the latter, solutions based on pseudo-inverses are frequently encountered [38, 48, 73, 77, 103-105, 127, 156-158, 164, 199]. Additionally, researchers use simpler control allocation techniques, which are subsumed as direct control allocation in Table I and Fig. 5. These techniques allocate forces either evenly among the wheels [32,65,68,69,93,122,160,161] or proportionally to the tire normal force distribution [29,50,55,81,84,116,119,143]. In case of tire blowouts, also uneven distributions are presented in order to account for the specific effects [187,188]. Commonly, all direct control allocation techniques cannot directly take into account physical tire limits. Thus, sometimes rule-based redistribution is proposed if maximum tire forces are exceeded.

Other non-feedback control techniques are feed forward control and rule-based reconfiguration. Feed forward control comprise techniques that reduce control efforts of a parallel feedback controller in closed loop applications or control the desired vehicle motion in open-loop manner [35, 38, 49, 65, 71-73, 75, 81, 93, 103-105, 109, 139, 150-154, 190-192, 195-197]. In a broader sense, many of the control approaches can be described as rule-based since controller reconfiguration necessary for fault tolerance normally follows a certain set of rules. However, we summarize those approaches as rule-based where discrete and simple reconfiguration takes place [43,65,80,88,89,102,106,107,110,147,160,161,185,200], e. g., in a four-wheel individual drive application, disabling the non-faulty drive of an axle when the axle's other drive motor stops providing torque to a wheel.


## C. Control structures

As stated, different control techniques are often combined to reach the control targets. The resulting control structures are either parallel or hierarchical, sometimes a combination of both. Hierarchical control structures with usually two control layers are found in 73 publications [29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 38, 41-44, 47-50, 52, 58, 59, 64, 66, 68-70, 73, 76-79, 81, 83, 90, 91, 93, 94, 96, 103-105, 119, 122, 127, 129-131, 133-138, 140, 141, 145, 147, 149, 152, 155-161, 164, 173, 176, 177, 182, 185, 187, 188, 190, 199, 200]. 35 publications feature parallel control structures [31, 35, 38, 49, 60-62, 65, 71-73, 75, 80, 88, 103-105, 109, 110, 139, 150-154, 160-163, 173, 181, 195-197, 199]. Here, either multiple controlled variables are addressed by distinct control laws or a single controlled variable is addressed by a combination of different control techniques. The remaining portion of the examined publications uses a sole control technique [30, 33, 34, 37, 39, 40, 45, 46, 51, 53-57, 63, 67, 74, 82, 84-87, 89, 92, 95, 97-102, 106-108, 111-118, 120, 121, 123-126, 128, 132, 142-144, 146, 148, 165-172, 174, 175, 178-180, 183, 184, 186, 189, 191-194, 198].

It is worth mentioning that some publications also present the control techniques used at the actuator level. As we focus purely on vehicle motion control (cf. Section II), these are neglected in the statements of this subsection and in the overviews of Table I. The same applies to fault estimation techniques, which are included in some publications. Last but not least, we would like to highlight that a few publications feature alternative control techniques on selected control layers [33,65,102,147,156,157,200].


## D. Steering redundancy through drive or brake actuation at front axle

In presence of degradations, the majority of control approaches controls the vehicle motion directly by means of the remaining healthy actuators. However, indirect approaches can be found too, primarily regarding degradations of front-axle steering whose actuator has stopped providing steering torque. Then, these approaches control the steering angle by either wheel-individual front-axle drives [44, 59-63, 75, 87, 100, 113, 132, 148] or brakes [46,71,72,171] in order to gain the desired vehicle motion. The drive or brake actuation causes a moment around the tires' vertical axis, which is used to induce the desired steering motion -given that certain prerequisites with regard to suspension kinematics such as a positive mechanical trail are fulfilled. These approaches are referred to as drive or brake assisted steering as well as steer-by-drive or steer-bybrake.

Of course, using wheel torques as backup steering mechanism influences the overall vehicle dynamics as these are strongly coupled with the dynamics of the steering system. Consequently, Zhang et al. [171] investigate possible consequences of their steer-by-brake approach on longitudinal dynamics while Kirli et al. [75] focus on demonstrating limitations for a steer-by-drive approach.


## VI. Experiments

For demonstrating the suitability of fault-tolerant control approaches, experimental validation is key. Just as with the perspectives presented in the previous sections, the experimental setups used for validation differ considerably in the covered literature and make comparisons between approaches difficult, even when similar topologies and degradations are used.


## A. Type of experiments

A first distinguishing point is the type of experiments. Researchers use model-in-the-loop experiments in the vast majority of publications [29-44, 46-73, 75-78, 80-86, 88-90, 92-115, 118-141, 143, 145-157, 159-175, 177, 179-181, 183-190, 193-200]. Rare exceptions are publications showing hardware-in-the-loop [74,117,176,182] or even vehicle-inthe-loop experiments [45,79,87,91,116,142,144,158,178,191,192].

For model-in-the-loop experiments, commercial simulation environments are quite frequently employed. Among these, CarSim is most often used [30-32, 38-42, 44, 49-51, 56, 57, 60-64, 66-68, 74, 78, 80, 92-94, 97, 98, 100, 108, 109, 122, 132, 135-141, 143, 145-149, 155, 159, 164, 165, 170-176, 181, 184-187, 200], followed by veDYNA [150-154, 180, 182, 193-198], CarMaker [73,117,179], ADAMS [52,53], Cruise [43], Dyna4 [119], and AMESim [76]. Altogether, the vehicle models' parametrizations are selected more or less individually in each publication and also depend strongly on the actuator topology as well as on the considered degradations.


## B. Reference trajectories

In particular, the experiments differ in terms of the chosen reference trajectories, which are the second distinguishing point. Although often oriented towards standard vehicle testing maneuvers, the references are specific for each publication and vary widely in speed, yaw rate, lateral, as well as longitudinal acceleration. As a result, they pose different challenges for vehicle motion control, especially in the presence of degradations.

Based on the standard vehicle testing maneuvers, we divide the reference trajectories into five categories to give an overview. Reference trajectories oriented to lane change maneuvers are often used, either in terms of single lane changes [30, 31, 35, 41, 42, 51, 57, 59-61, 63, 67, 68, 77, 85, 86, 94, 96, 100, 110, 111, 120, 127, 129-131, 138-141, 146, 150-155, 170, 173, 174, 181] or double lane changes [38, 44, 49, 51, 53, 62, 74-76, 78, 79, 85-87, 99, 109, 112, 114-116, 126, 132, 136, 137, 146-148, 150-152, 159, 164, 165, 175, 176]. Moreover, reference trajectories that are curved in only one direction are found regularly [29, 33, 36, 37, 41, 42, 44, 57, 60, 62, 63, 65, 68-72, 80, 81, 83, 85, 86, 90, 92, 96, 105, 106, 119, 122, 125, 127, 132, 138-142, 144, 146, 148, 150-152, 154, 156, 157, 160, 161, 171, 176, 177, 180, 183, 185, 187, 189], for instance J-turns or circular drives, which cannot be sharply distinguished in the literature. Usually simpler to handle from a vehicle dynamics point of view, trajectories going straight are employed in [31, 32, 37, 39, 40, 48, 49, 54, 55, 64, 66, 69, 80, 83, 84, 88, 89, 92-95, 97, 98, 102-104, 106, 107, 110, 117-119, 122-125, 128, 135-137, 139, 141-143, 145, 149, 150, 153, 155, 158, 162, 163, 166-168, 170, 172-174, 177, 178, 180, 182-188, 193-198, 200]. Other trajectories are of arbitrary shape [34, 40, 43, 45-47, 50, 52, 56, 58, 73, 82, 91, 101, 108, 113, 133, 134, 155, 159, 169, 171, 179, 190-192, 195, 199]. Please note that the maneuvers overall are not sharply distinguishable, e. g., we categorize curved reference trajectories with large curvatures as straight since they evoke negligible lateral acceleration and yaw motion.


## VII. Conclusion and outlook

Motivated by the need for a high degree of fault tolerance in SAE level 4+ automated vehicles, we survey fault-tolerant vehicle motion control approaches targeting drive, brake, steering, and tire degradations in this paper. Altogether, we are surprised by the plethora of available publications, which comes along with a huge variety of different control approaches.

Basically, the literature reveals that different actuator degradations can be handled in vehicles with varying actuator topologies even in dynamic driving situations. This implies a high potential for exploiting functional redundancies as part of safety concepts for future series production vehicles. However, further research is required to support the mandatory thorough safety argumentation.

First, advanced real world testing would increase the validity when arguing real-time capability and suitability since the majority of publications uses simulation experiments.

Furthermore, explicitly highlighting the limits of an approach would contribute to the state of the art. While good case experiments basically show that an approach is working, investigating the limits would allow a statement under which conditions a fault-tolerant control approach fails. This would enable a comparison of the functional range that an approach can ensure with the functional range required by a specific application. For example, we introduce a first concept to investigate systematically whether fault-tolerant vehicle motion control is suitable under normal driving conditions for a given automated vehicle application in [269].

Investigating the functional limits could be one approach that would allow for a comparison of different fault-tolerant control approaches. However, a comparison based on the current state of the art, in general, is hardly possible due to the manifold of varying conditions used in the reviewed literature. Hence, a general framework to test different approaches under otherwise identical conditions (i. e., standardized vehicles as well as reference trajectories) would be of high value for researchers and practitioners. In this context, an approach for comparing trajectory tracking controllers for automated vehicles is presented by Calzolari et al. [270], though not considering actuator faults. The authors also introduce a scoring mechanism, which is based on the deviation from a reference trajectory and allows an easy comparison of different control approaches. Such an approach could be extended for comparing different fault-tolerant vehicle motion controllers.

## Fig. 1 .
1Overview of the publication years of the literature covered in the core of this survey. ( publications addressing actuator degradations; publications addressing tire degradations).


Still, time-varying degradations are rarely encountered in the literature covered in this survey. For additive faults u + (t) = 0, physical actuator limitations are mostly not taken into account explicitly. Limitations are implicitly addressed in the provided experimental examples by choosing fault values that result in an actuator usage that lies in a physically realistic range yielding


topologies: AW: All-wheel; FA: Front axle; RA: Rear axle; -I: Wheel-individual; (·): Not actively used. Degradations: Dr.: Drive; Br.: Brake; Steer.: Steering; T.: Tire. TU: Unintended wheel torque; T0: Zero wheel torque; L|S: Locking or spinning wheel; TR: Reduced wheel torque range; SR: Reduced steering angle range; SD: Reduced steering dynamics; SU: Unintended steering angle; S0: Zero steering torque; BO: Tire blowout. Control targets: LaD: Lateral dynamics; LoD: Longitudinal dynamics; Path: Path tracking; Pose: Temporal sequence of poses; VeD: Vehicle dynamcis; YA: Yaw angle. Control techniques: ACA: Analytical control allocation; D: Differential; DCA: Direct control allocation; FB: Flatness-based; FF: Feed forward; I: Integral; LQR: Linear-quadratic regulator; LT: Lyapunov theory-based; MFA: Model-free adaptive control; MPC: Model-predictive control; OCA: Optimal control allocation; P: Proportional; RB: Rule-based reconfiguration; SF: State feedback control; SM: Sliding mode. &: Hierarchical control structure; +: Parallel control structure; /: Alternative control techniques. Experiments: HiL: Hardware in the Loop; MiL: Model in the Loop; ViL: Vehicle in the Loop; Reference: DLC: Double lane change; SLC: Single lane change; Crv.: Curved; Str.: Straight; Oth.: Other.


et al. (2017) [39] RA-I (FA) VeD H∞ MiL Chen et al. (2018) [40] RA-I (FA) Path H∞ MiL Chen et al. (2019) [41] AW-I FA Path SM&ACA MiL Chen et al. (2019) [42] AW-I FA Path SM&ACA MiL Chen et al. (2020) [43] AW-I (FA) VeD RB&OCA MiL Chen et al. (2020) [44] FA-I FA Path MPC&SM MiL Chu et al. (2012) [45] AW-I FA LoD OCA ViL Dominguez-Garcia et al. et al. (2020) [49] AW-I (FA) LaD (FF+SM)&OCA MiL Gáspár et al. (2015) [50] AW-I FA VeD LT&DCA MiL Guo and Chen (2019) [51] AW-I FA VeD SM MiL Guo et al. (2020) [52] AW-I FA Path H∞&OCA MiL&ViL Guo et al. (2020) [53] AW Path H∞ MiL Hac et al. et al. (2015) [59] AW-I FA LaD LQR&ACA MiL Hu et al. (2016) [60] AW-I FA Path SF+LT MiL Hu et al. (2017) [61] AW-I FA LaD SF+LT+SM MiL Hu et al. (2018) [62] AW-I FA LaD SF+LT+SM MiL Hu et al. (2019) [63] AW-I FA Path SM MiL in Park et al. et al. (2015) [67] AW-I FA LaD H∞ MiL Jing et al. (2018) [68] AWet al. (2021) [87] AW-I FA LaD PID ViL Liu et al. (2012) [88] AW-I VeD RB+OCA MiL Liu et al. (2012) [89] AW-I AW LaD RB MiL Liu et al.


et al. (2014) [95] (AW-I) AW-I AW LaD SM MiL Lu et al. (2016) [96] AW-I FA LaD SM&OCA MiL Luo et al. (2016) [97] AW-I FA VeD MFA MiL&ViL Luo et al. (2019) [98] AW-I FA Path MFA MiL Marino et al. (2007) [99] AW LaD PI MiL Mi et al. (2015)[100] AW-I FA LaD H∞ MiL Mihály et al. Poussot-Vassal et al. (2008)[115] RA-I FA LaD H∞ MiL Ramanathan Venkita et al. (2020)[116] AW-I FA LaD DCA ViL Raveendran et al. et al. (2018)[120] AW-I FA LaD Fuzzy MiL Sename et al. (2013)[121] AW-I FA LaD H∞ MiL Sho et al. et al. (2011)[125] AW Path LT MiL Stolte et al. (2018)[126] AW-I AW-I AW-I Pose MPC MiL Subroto et al. (2020)[127] AW-I AW VeD SM&ACA MiL&HiL Sun et al. (2014)[128] AW-I (FA) VeD OCA MiL&ViL Temiz et al. (2018)[129] AW-I AW VeD PI&ACA MiL Temiz et al. (2019)[130] AW-I AW VeD PI&ACA MiL Temiz et al. (2020)[131] AW-I AW-I VeD PI&ACA MiL Tian et al. (2018)[132] AW-I FA LaD SM MiL Wada et al. (2012)[133] RA-I FA LaD H∞&OCA MiL Wada et al. (2013)[134] RAet al. (2014)[144] AW-I (FA) VeD SF ViL Wang et al. (2014)[145] AW-I AW-I AW-I VeD PI&OCA MiL Wang et al. (2014)[146] AW-I FA VeD H∞ MiL Wang et al. (2014)[147] AW-I (FA) LaD (SM&OCA)/RB MiL&HiL Wang et al. (2016)[148] AW-I FA LaD H∞ MiL Wang et al. (2016)[149] AW-I FA LaD PI&OCA MiL Wang et al. (2018)[150] AW-I FA VeD FF+PI MiL Wang et al. (2018)[151] AW-I FA VeD FF+SF MiL Wang et al. (2019)[152] AW-I FA VeD (FF+P)&ACA MiL Wang et al. (2020)[153] AW-I FA Path FF+H∞ MiL Wang et al. topologies: AW: All-wheel; FA: Front axle; RA: Rear axle; -I: Wheel-individual; (·): Not actively used. Degradations: Dr.: Drive; Br.: Brake; Steer.: Steering; T.: Tire. TU: Unintended wheel torque; T0: Zero wheel torque; L|S: Locking or spinning wheel; TR: Reduced wheel torque range; SR: Reduced steering angle range; SD: Reduced steering dynamics; SU: Unintended steering angle; S0: Zero steering torque; BO: Tire blowout. Control targets: LaD: Lateral dynamics; LoD: Longitudinal dynamics; Path: Path tracking; Pose: Temporal sequence of poses; VeD: Vehicle dynamcis; YA: Yaw angle. Control techniques: ACA: Analytical control allocation; D: Differential; DCA: Direct control allocation; FF: Feed forward; I: Integral; LQR: Linear-quadratic regulator; LT: Lyapunov theory-based; MPC: Model-predictive control; OCA: Optimal control allocation; P: Proportional; RB: Rule-based reconfiguration; SF: State feedback control; SM: Sliding mode. &: Hierarchical control structure; +: Parallel control structure; /: Alternative control techniques. Experiments: HiL: Hardware in the Loop; MiL: Model in the Loop; ViL: Vehicle in the Loop; Reference: DLC: Double lane change; SLC: Single lane change; Crv.: Curved; Str.: Straight; Oth.


et al. (2016)[159] AW-I FA LaD P&OCA MiL&ViL Xin et al. (2014)[160] AW-I (FA) LaD Fuzzy&(RB+DCA) MiL Xin et al. (2016)[161] AW-I (FA) LaD Fuzzy&(RB+DCA) MiL Yang et al. (2008)[162] AW-I AW Path LQR+LT MiL Yang et al. (2010)[163] AWet al. (2018)[172] AW-I FA Path SM MiL Zhang et al. (2018)[173] AW-I FA VeD (SM+PI)&OCA MiL&ViL Zhang et al. (2019)[174] AW-I FA Path SM MiL Zhang et al. et al. (2020)[179] RA-I FA Path H∞ MiL Guo et al. (2012)[180] FA Path MPC MiL Haddad et al. et al. (2019)[186] FA LaD Fuzzy PID MiL Meng et al. (2019)[187] AW-I FA LaD SF&DCA MiL Mo et al. (2013)[188] AW-I (FA) LaD SM&DCA MiL Patwardhan et al. (1994)[189] 

## Fig. 2 .
2Number of contributions investigating fault tolerance approaches targeting the nine different degradation categories used in this survey. range. Other examples are Ringdorfer [119] and Jonasson and Wallmark [70] who consider the speed-dependent drag torque of synchronous motors caused by an electrical fault of the inverter bridge as a time-varying wheel torque offset in their control schemes.

## Fig. 3 .
3Overview of actuator topologies that are actively involved in the fault-tolerant control schemes covered in this survey, either as degraded actuator or as actuator to compensate for the degradation (Steer.: Steering; publications addressing actuator degradations; publications addressing tire degradations; AW: All-wheel; FA: Front axle; RA: Rear axle; -I: Wheel-individual).

## Fig. 4 .
4. With 66 publications, the control of vehicle dynamics (comprising longitudinal as well as lateral vehilce motion) is the most common control target in the body of literature considered in this survey. These are primarily publications addressing actuator degradations [Number of papers per different control target ( publications addressing actuator degradations;

## Fig. 5 .
5Number of papers per different control techniques ( publications addressing actuator degradations; publications addressing tire degradations; OCA: Optimal control allocation; SM: Sliding mode; PID: Proportional, integral, derivative or alike; FF: Feed forward; ACA: Analytical control allocation; H∞: H∞ control; LT: Lyapunov theory-based; DCA: Direct control allocation; RB: Rulebased reconfiguration; LQR: Linear quadratic regulator; MPC: Model predictive control; SF: State feedback control; Fuzzy: Fuzzy control; FB: Flatness-based; MFA: Model-free adaptive control).


Shyrokau, Kissai et al. present a survey on integrated vehicle motion control. Again, only one approach is mentioned that targets actuator fault-tolerant vehicle motion control. The work of Huang et al. focuses on steerby-wire systems. While giving an extensive overview of steering-internal fault-tolerant control, it mentions only a few publications that present approaches to overcome steering degradations by means of other healthy actuators. Finally, also the recent survey of Shet et al. contains only a small selection of publications outlining fault-tolerant vehicle motion control approaches.

## TABLE


## TABLE I (
Icontinued, continues on next page) Overview of fault-tolerant control approaches targeting steering, drive, brake, and tire degradations Actuator topology Dr.&Br. Steer. T. Actuator topologies: AW: All-wheel; FA: Front axle; RA: Rear axle; -I: Wheel-individual; (·): Not actively used. Degradations: Dr.: Drive; Br.: Brake; Steer.: Steering; T.: Tire. TU: Unintended wheel torque; T0: Zero wheel torque; L|S: Locking or spinning wheel; TR: Reduced wheel torque range; SR: Reduced steering angle range; SD: Reduced steering dynamics; SU: Unintended steering angle; S0: Zero steering torque; BO: Tire blowout. Control targets: LaD: Lateral dynamics; LoD: Longitudinal dynamics; Path: Path tracking; Pose: Temporal sequence of poses; VeD: Vehicle dynamcis; YA: Yaw angle. Control techniques: ACA: Analytical control allocation; D: Differential; DCA: Direct control allocation; FF: Feed forward; I: Integral; LQR: Linear-quadratic regulator; LT: Lyapunov theory-based; MFA: Model-free adaptive control; MPC: Modelpredictive control; OCA: Optimal control allocation; P: Proportional; RB: Rule-based reconfiguration; SF: State feedback control; SM: Sliding mode. &: Hierarchical control structure; +: Parallel control structure; /: Alternative control techniques. Experiments: HiL: Hardware in the Loop; MiL: Model in the Loop; ViL: Vehicle in the Loop; Reference: DLC: Double lane change; SLC: Single lane change; Crv.: Curved; Str.: Straight; Oth.: Other.Degradation 

Control 

Reference 

Experiment 

Author(s) (Year) 
Source 

Drive Brake Steering 
TU 
T0 
L|S 
TR 
SR 
SD 
SU 
S0 
BO 
Target 
Technique 

Type 
DLC 
SLC 
Crv. 
Str. 
Oth. 


For[251] and[259], there are similar publications of the same authors in English, which are part of this survey, see[45] and[65], respectively. For[260], which is cited in[265], very similar content is found in[70] according to the authors[266]. For[261], i. a., mentioned in[160,161], a paper with similar title is available[106].[262] is cited in[98].
AcknowledgmentThe author would like to thank Dr. Marcus Grobe, Dr. Sonja Luther, Christina Harms, Marcus Nolte, Liren Wu, and Prof. Markus Maurer for their support.
UNICARagil -Disruptive Modular Architectures for Agile, Automated Vehicle Concepts. T Woopen, 10.18154/RWTH-2018-229909doi: 10.18154/ RWTH-2018-22990927th Aachen Colloq. Aachen, GermanyT. Woopen et al., "UNICARagil -Disruptive Modular Architectures for Agile, Automated Vehicle Concepts," in 27th Aachen Colloq., Aachen, Germany, 2018. doi: 10.18154/ RWTH-2018-229909.

Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles, SAE Int. StandardTaxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles, SAE Int. Standard J3016 201806.

Fault-tolerant driveby-wire systems. R Isermann, R Schwarz, S Stölzl, 10.1109/MCS.2002.1035218IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 225R. Isermann, R. Schwarz, and S. Stölzl, "Fault-tolerant drive- by-wire systems," IEEE Control Syst. Mag., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 64-81, 2002. doi: 10.1109/MCS.2002.1035218.

Autonomous driving -a topdown-approach. R Matthaei, M Maurer, 10.1515/auto-2014-1136Automatisierungstechnik. 633R. Matthaei and M. Maurer, "Autonomous driving -a top- down-approach," Automatisierungstechnik, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 155-167, 2015. doi: 10.1515/auto-2014-1136.

Bibliographical review on reconfigurable fault-tolerant control systems. Y Zhang, J Jiang, 10.1016/j.arcontrol.2008.03.008Annu. Rev. Control. 322Y. Zhang and J. Jiang, "Bibliographical review on reconfig- urable fault-tolerant control systems," Annu. Rev. Control, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 229-252, 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.arcontrol. 2008.03.008.

Control Allocation -A Survey. T A Johansen, T I Fossen, Automatica. 495T. A. Johansen and T. I. Fossen, "Control Allocation -A Survey," Automatica, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1087-1103, 2013.

Survey on Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Design. D Wanner, A Trigell, L Drugge, J Jerrelind, 10.3390/wevj5020598World Electric Veh. J. 52D. Wanner, A. Trigell, L. Drugge, and J. Jerrelind, "Survey on Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Design," World Electric Veh. J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 598-609, 2012. doi: 10.3390/wevj5020598.

Review on Global Chassis Control. C A Vivas-López, D Hernández-Alcantara, J C Tudón-Martínez, R Morales-Menendez, 10.3182/20130204-3-FR-2033.000405th IFAC Symp. Syst. Struct. and Control, ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Grenoble, FranceIFAC46C. A. Vivas-López, D. Hernández-Alcantara, J. C. Tudón- Martínez, and R. Morales-Menendez, "Review on Global Chassis Control," in 5th IFAC Symp. Syst. Struct. and Control, ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 46, no. 2, Grenoble, France: IFAC, 2013, pp. 875-880. doi: 10.3182/20130204-3- FR-2033.00040.

Coordinated control of multi-actuated electric vehicle. B Shyrokau, 10.32657/10356/61979Dissertation, Nanyang Technological Univ., SingaporeB. Shyrokau, "Coordinated control of multi-actuated electric vehicle," Dissertation, Nanyang Technological Univ., Singa- pore, 2014. doi: 10.32657/10356/61979.

Review of integrated vehicle dynamics control architectures. M Kissai, B Monsuez, A Tapus, 10.1109/ECMR.2017.8098687Conf. Mobile Robots (ECMR). Paris, FranceIEEEM. Kissai, B. Monsuez, and A. Tapus, "Review of integrated vehicle dynamics control architectures," in 2017 Eur. Conf. Mobile Robots (ECMR), Paris, France: IEEE, pp. 1-8. doi: 10.1109/ECMR.2017.8098687.

Fault tolerant steer-by-wire systems: An overview. C Huang, F Naghdy, H Du, H Huang, 10.1016/j.arcontrol.2019.04.001Annu. Rev. Control. 47C. Huang, F. Naghdy, H. Du, and H. Huang, "Fault tolerant steer-by-wire systems: An overview," Annu. Rev. Control, vol. 47, pp. 98-111, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.arcontrol.2019.04. 001.

Fault Tolerant Control System for Autonomous Vehicle: A Survey. R M Shet, N C Iyer, Y Jeppu, 10.5373/JARDCS/V12SP8/20202585J. Adv. Res. Dynamical and Control Syst. 12R. M. Shet, N. C. Iyer, and Y. Jeppu, "Fault Tolerant Control System for Autonomous Vehicle: A Survey," J. Adv. Res. Dynamical and Control Syst., vol. 12, pp. 813-830, SP8 2020. doi: 10.5373/JARDCS/V12SP8/20202585.

Fault-Tolerant Behavior-Based Motion Control for Offroad Navigation. M Proetzsch, T Luksch, K Berns, 10.1109/ROBOT.2005.1570845Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. and Automat. 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. and AutomatBarcelona, SpainIEEEM. Proetzsch, T. Luksch, and K. Berns, "Fault-Tolerant Behavior-Based Motion Control for Offroad Navigation," in Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. and Automat., Barcelona, Spain: IEEE, pp. 4697-4702. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2005. 1570845.

Fault Diagnosis and Fault-Tolerant Control of an Electric Vehicle Overactuated [sic]. M A Djeziri, R Merzouki, B O Bouamama, M Ouladsine, 10.1109/TVT.2012.2231950IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 623M. A. Djeziri, R. Merzouki, B. O. Bouamama, and M. Ouladsine, "Fault Diagnosis and Fault-Tolerant Control of an Electric Vehicle Overactuated [sic]," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 986-994, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVT. 2012.2231950.

A Fault-Hiding Approach for the Switching Quasi-LPV Fault-Tolerant Control of a Four-Wheeled Omnidirectional Mobile Robot. D Rotondo, V Puig, F Nejjari, J Romera, 10.1109/TIE.2014.2367002IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 626D. Rotondo, V. Puig, F. Nejjari, and J. Romera, "A Fault- Hiding Approach for the Switching Quasi-LPV Fault-Tolerant Control of a Four-Wheeled Omnidirectional Mobile Robot," IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3932-3944, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2014.2367002.

Integration of Fault Diagnosis and Fault-Tolerant Control for Health Monitoring of a Class of MIMO Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles. R Loureiro, S Benmoussa, Y Touati, R Merzouki, B O Bouamama, 10.1109/TVT.2013.2274289doi: 10 . 1109 / TVT . 2013 . 2274289IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 631R. Loureiro, S. Benmoussa, Y. Touati, R. Merzouki, and B. O. Bouamama, "Integration of Fault Diagnosis and Fault- Tolerant Control for Health Monitoring of a Class of MIMO Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 30-39, 2014. doi: 10 . 1109 / TVT . 2013 . 2274289.

Fuzzy Behavior-based Control of Three Wheeled Omnidirectional Mobile Robot. N Hacene, B Mendil, 10.1007/s11633-018-1135-xInt. J. Automat. and Comput. 162N. Hacene and B. Mendil, "Fuzzy Behavior-based Control of Three Wheeled Omnidirectional Mobile Robot," Int. J. Automat. and Comput., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 163-185, 2019. doi: 10.1007/s11633-018-1135-x.

Uncertain Bicausal Bond Graph and Adaptive Fuzzy PID Controller for Fault-Tolerant Control. Y Lounici, Y Touati, S Adjerid, B O Bouamama, D Benazzouz, 2020Y. Lounici, Y. Touati, S. Adjerid, B. O. Bouamama, and D. Benazzouz, "Uncertain Bicausal Bond Graph and Adaptive Fuzzy PID Controller for Fault-Tolerant Control," in 2020

10.1109/ICEE49691.2020.9249839Int. Conf. Elect. Eng. (ICEE). Istanbul, TurkeyIEEEInt. Conf. Elect. Eng. (ICEE), Istanbul, Turkey: IEEE. doi: 10.1109/ICEE49691.2020.9249839.

Adaptive fault-tolerant control of mobile robots with actuator faults and unknown parameters. X.-Z Jin, Y.-X Zhao, H Wang, Z Zhao, X.-P Dong, 10.1049/iet-cta.2018.5492IET Control Theory Appl. 1311X.-Z. Jin, Y.-X. Zhao, H. Wang, Z. Zhao, and X.-P. Dong, "Adaptive fault-tolerant control of mobile robots with actuator faults and unknown parameters," IET Control Theory Appl., vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 1665-1672, 2019. doi: 10.1049/iet-cta. 2018.5492.

Fault-Tolerant Dynamic Control of a Four-Wheel Redundantly-Actuated Mobile Robot. X Zhang, Y Xie, L Jiang, G Li, J Meng, Y Huang, 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2949746doi: 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2019 . 2949746IEEE Access. 7X. Zhang, Y. Xie, L. Jiang, G. Li, J. Meng, and Y. Huang, "Fault-Tolerant Dynamic Control of a Four-Wheel Redundantly-Actuated Mobile Robot," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 157 909-157 921, 2019. doi: 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2019 . 2949746.

Autonomic architecture for fault handling in mobile robots. M Doran, R Sterritt, G Wilkie, 10.1007/s11334-020-00361-8Innov. Syst. and Softw. Eng. M. Doran, R. Sterritt, and G. Wilkie, "Autonomic architec- ture for fault handling in mobile robots," Innov. Syst. and Softw. Eng., 2020. doi: 10.1007/s11334-020-00361-8.

Design and validation of a reconfiguration strategy for a redundantly actuated intelligent autonomous vehicle. T K Bera, R Merzouki, B O Bouamama, A K Samantaray, 10.1177/0959651812447486doi: 10 . 1177 / 0959651812447486Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part I: J. Syst. and Control Eng. 2268T. K. Bera, R. Merzouki, B. O. Bouamama, and A. K. Samantaray, "Design and validation of a reconfiguration strategy for a redundantly actuated intelligent autonomous vehicle," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part I: J. Syst. and Control Eng., vol. 226, no. 8, pp. 1060-1076, 2012. doi: 10 . 1177 / 0959651812447486.

Fault-tolerant driving control of a steer-by-wire system for six-wheel-drivingsix-wheel-steering vehicles. J Nah, W Kim, K Yi, D Lee, J Lee, 10.1177/0954407012457507Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. 2274J. Nah, W. Kim, K. Yi, D. Lee, and J. Lee, "Fault-tolerant driving control of a steer-by-wire system for six-wheel-driving- six-wheel-steering vehicles," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., vol. 227, no. 4, pp. 506-520, 2013. doi: 10.1177/0954407012457507.

Optimized torque allocation strategy on multi-wheel vehicles. H Liang, Y Ma, J Zhi, Y Li, Y Peng, 2017H. Liang, Y. Ma, J. Zhi, Y. Li, and Y. Peng, "Optimized torque allocation strategy on multi-wheel vehicles," in 2017

10.1109/ICMIC.2017.83215679th Int. Conf. Model., Identification and Control (ICMIC). Kunming, ChinaIEEE9th Int. Conf. Model., Identification and Control (ICMIC), Kunming, China: IEEE, pp. 815-820. doi: 10.1109/ICMIC. 2017.8321567.

Analysis of Potential in Asymmetric Braking for Autonomous Applications. P Volz, Gothenburg, SwedenChalmers Univ. Technol.Master's ThesisP. Volz, "Analysis of Potential in Asymmetric Braking for Autonomous Applications," Master's Thesis, Chalmers Univ. Technol., Gothenburg, Sweden, 2018.

Hierarchical Control Coordination Strategy of Six Wheeled Independent Drive (6WID) Skid Steering Vehicle. R Prasad, Y Ma, Adv. Automot. Control. R. Prasad and Y. Ma, "Hierarchical Control Coordination Strategy of Six Wheeled Independent Drive (6WID) Skid Steering Vehicle," in Adv. Automot. Control 2019, Orléans, France.

Research on Brake Failure Control of Heavy Commercial Vehicles Based on Turning Conditions. Y Lu, F Wang, G Zhang, 10.1109/CVCI51460.2020.93386012020 4th CAA Int. Conf. Veh. Control and Intell. (CVCI). Hangzhou, ChinaIEEEY. Lu, F. Wang, and G. Zhang, "Research on Brake Failure Control of Heavy Commercial Vehicles Based on Turning Conditions," in 2020 4th CAA Int. Conf. Veh. Control and Intell. (CVCI), Hangzhou, China: IEEE, pp. 395-400. doi: 10.1109/CVCI51460.2020.9338601.

Trajectory control for tire burst vehicle using the standalone and roll interconnected active suspensions with safety-comfort control strategy. P Sathishkumar, R Wang, L Yang, J Thiyagarajan, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.106776Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. 1422020P. Sathishkumar, R. Wang, L. Yang, and J. Thiyagarajan, "Trajectory control for tire burst vehicle using the standalone and roll interconnected active suspensions with safety-comfort control strategy," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 142, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.106776.

Multi Actuation Scheme for Path-Following Control of Autonomous Vehicles. J Ahmadi, 10.1007/978-3-030-48989-2_32ser. Mechanisms and Mach. Sci. Adv. Service and Ind. Robot., S. Zeghloul, M. A. Laribi, and J. S. Sandoval Arevalo84Springer Int. PublishingChasseneuil du PoitouJ. Ahmadi et al., "Multi Actuation Scheme for Path-Following Control of Autonomous Vehicles," in Adv. Service and Ind. Robot., S. Zeghloul, M. A. Laribi, and J. S. Sandoval Arevalo, Eds., ser. Mechanisms and Mach. Sci. Vol. 84, Chasseneuil du Poitou, France: Springer Int. Publishing, 2020, pp. 294-301. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-48989-2 32.

A modified integral sliding mode control to lateral stabilisation of 4-wheel independent drive electric vehicles. H Alipour, M B Bannae Sharifian, M Sabahi, 10.1080/00423114.2014.951661doi: 10 . 1080 / 00423114.2014.951661Veh. Syst. Dyn. 5212H. Alipour, M. B. Bannae Sharifian, and M. Sabahi, "A modified integral sliding mode control to lateral stabilisation of 4-wheel independent drive electric vehicles," Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 1584-1606, 2014. doi: 10 . 1080 / 00423114.2014.951661.

Fault-tolerant control using sliding mode techniques applied to multi-motor electric vehicle. S Almeida, R E Araújo, 10.1109/IECON.2013.669969639th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON). Vienna, AustriaIEEES. Almeida and R. E. Araújo, "Fault-tolerant control using sliding mode techniques applied to multi-motor electric vehicle," in 39th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON), Vienna, Austria: IEEE, 2013, pp. 3530-3535. doi: 10.1109/IECON.2013.6699696.

Fault-Tolerant Distributed and Switchable PI Slip Control Architecture in Four In-Wheel Motor Drive Electric Vehicles. G Amato, R Marino, 10.1109/MED48518.2020.91830672020 28th Mediterranean Conf. Control and Automat. (MED). Saint-Raphaël, FranceIEEEG. Amato and R. Marino, "Fault-Tolerant Distributed and Switchable PI Slip Control Architecture in Four In-Wheel Motor Drive Electric Vehicles," in 2020 28th Mediterranean Conf. Control and Automat. (MED), Saint-Raphaël, France: IEEE, pp. 7-12. doi: 10.1109/MED48518.2020.9183067.

Fault Tolerant Control Design for All Wheels Independent Drive and Steering Electric Vehicle with Singular Effective Drive Wheel. C Bian, G Yin, M Hu, N Zhang, N Chen, 10.1109/VPPC.2016.77916882016 IEEE Veh. Power and Propulsion Conf. (VPPC). Hangzhou, ChinaIEEEC. Bian, G. Yin, M. Hu, N. Zhang, and N. Chen, "Fault Tolerant Control Design for All Wheels Independent Drive and Steering Electric Vehicle with Singular Effective Drive Wheel," in 2016 IEEE Veh. Power and Propulsion Conf. (VPPC), Hangzhou, China: IEEE. doi: 10.1109/VPPC.2016. 7791688.

Actuator Faulttolerant control for vehicle dynamics. J Bosche, A E Hajjaji, A Rabhi, 10.3182/20090630-4-ES-2003.00182doi: 10.3182/ 20090630-4-ES-2003.001827th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. Tech. Processes (SAFE-PROCESS), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Barcelona, SpainIFAC42J. Bosche, A. E. Hajjaji, and A. Rabhi, "Actuator Fault- tolerant control for vehicle dynamics," in 7th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. Tech. Processes (SAFE- PROCESS), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 42, no. 8, Barcelona, Spain: IFAC, 2009, pp. 1103-1108. doi: 10.3182/ 20090630-4-ES-2003.00182.

Emergency Autonomous Vehicle Guidance Under Steering Loss. M Boudali, R Orjuela, M Basset, R Attia, 10.1109/IVS.2018.85005392018 IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (IV). Changshu, ChinaIEEEM. Boudali, R. Orjuela, M. Basset, and R. Attia, "Emergency Autonomous Vehicle Guidance Under Steering Loss," in 2018 IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (IV), Changshu, China: IEEE, pp. 2078-2083. doi: 10.1109/IVS.2018.8500539.

Integrierte Fahrwerkregelung mit minimierter Kraftschlussausnutzung auf der Basis dynamischer Inversion (Global Chassis Control Based on Inverse Vehicle Dynamics Models Providing Minimized Utilisation of the Tyre Force Potential). T Bünte, J Andreasson, AUTOREG 2006 -3. VDI/VDE-Fachtagung Steuerung und Regelung von Fahrzeugen und Motoren, ser. VDI-Berichte. Wiesloch, GermanyVDI Verlag1931in GermanT. Bünte and J. Andreasson, "Integrierte Fahrwerkregelung mit minimierter Kraftschlussausnutzung auf der Basis dy- namischer Inversion (Global Chassis Control Based on Inverse Vehicle Dynamics Models Providing Minimized Utilisation of the Tyre Force Potential)," (in German), in AUTOREG 2006 -3. VDI/VDE-Fachtagung Steuerung und Regelung von Fahrzeugen und Motoren, ser. VDI-Berichte, vol. 1931, Wiesloch, Germany: VDI Verlag, pp. 163-173.

Fault-tolerant tracking control of FW-steering autonomous vehicles. H.-N Chen, Y.-D Song, D.-Y. Li, 2011H.-N. Chen, Y.-D. Song, and D.-Y. Li, "Fault-tolerant track- ing control of FW-steering autonomous vehicles," in 2011

Chin, 10.1109/CCDC.2011.5968152Control and Decis. Conf. (CCDC). Mianyang, ChinaIEEEChin. Control and Decis. Conf. (CCDC), Mianyang, China: IEEE, pp. 92-97. doi: 10.1109/CCDC.2011.5968152.

Active Fault Tolerant Torque Distribution Control of Electric Vehicle with Four Directdriven Wheel Motors. B.-C Chen, Y.-C Yu, Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'14). 12th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'14)Tokyo, JapanJSAEB.-C. Chen and Y.-C. Yu, "Active Fault Tolerant Torque Distribution Control of Electric Vehicle with Four Direct- driven Wheel Motors," in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'14), Tokyo, Japan: JSAE, 2014, pp. 785-790.

Robust vehicle longitudinal motion control subject to in-wheel-motor driving torque variations. Y Chen, H Yu, R Graaf, X Wang, J Wang, 10.23919/ACC.2017.7963619doi: 10. 23919/ACC.2017.7963619Proc. 2017 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 2017 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)Seattle, WA, USAIEEEY. Chen, H. Yu, R. Graaf, X. Wang, and J. Wang, "Robust vehicle longitudinal motion control subject to in-wheel-motor driving torque variations," in Proc. 2017 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), Seattle, WA, USA: IEEE, pp. 4316-4321. doi: 10. 23919/ACC.2017.7963619.

Driver-Assistance Lateral Motion Control for In-Wheel-Motor-Driven Electric Ground Vehicles Subject to Small Torque Variation. Y Chen, C Stout, A Joshi, M L Kuang, J Wang, 10.1109/TVT.2018.2817514IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 678Y. Chen, C. Stout, A. Joshi, M. L. Kuang, and J. Wang, "Driver-Assistance Lateral Motion Control for In-Wheel- Motor-Driven Electric Ground Vehicles Subject to Small Torque Variation," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 6838-6850, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2018.2817514.

Passive fault-tolerant path following control of autonomous distributed drive electric vehicle considering steering system fault. T Chen, L Chen, X Xu, Y Cai, H Jiang, X Sun, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2019.01.019Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. 123T. Chen, L. Chen, X. Xu, Y. Cai, H. Jiang, and X. Sun, "Passive fault-tolerant path following control of autonomous distributed drive electric vehicle considering steering system fault," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 123, pp. 298-315, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2019.01.019.

Passive actuator-fault-tolerant path following control of autonomous ground electric vehicle with in-wheel motors. 10.1016/j.advengsoft.2019.05.003doi: 10.1016/j. advengsoft.2019.05.003Adv. Eng. Softw. 134--, "Passive actuator-fault-tolerant path following control of autonomous ground electric vehicle with in-wheel motors," Adv. Eng. Softw., vol. 134, pp. 22-30, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j. advengsoft.2019.05.003.

Dynamic energy-efficient torque allocation algorithm for in-wheel motor-driven vehicle. H Chen, P Du, Y Wang, D Jin, X Lian, 10.1177/0954407019899205Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. 2347H. Chen, P. Du, Y. Wang, D. Jin, and X. Lian, "Dynamic energy-efficient torque allocation algorithm for in-wheel motor-driven vehicle," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., vol. 234, no. 7, pp. 1815-1825, 2020. doi: 10.1177/0954407019899205.

Trajectory tracking control of steer-by-wire autonomous ground vehicle considering the complete failure of vehicle steering motor. T Chen, Y Cai, L Chen, X Xu, X Sun, 10.1016/j.simpat.2020.102235doi: 10 . 1016/j.simpat.2020.102235Simul. Model. Pract. and Theory. 1092020T. Chen, Y. Cai, L. Chen, X. Xu, and X. Sun, "Trajectory tracking control of steer-by-wire autonomous ground vehicle considering the complete failure of vehicle steering motor," Simul. Model. Pract. and Theory, vol. 109, 2020. doi: 10 . 1016/j.simpat.2020.102235.

Traction Fault Accommodation System for Four Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicle. W Chu, Y Luo, Y Dai, K Li, Proc. 26th Electric Veh. Symp. 26th Electric Veh. SympLos Angeles, CA, USAW. Chu, Y. Luo, Y. Dai, and K. Li, "Traction Fault Accommo- dation System for Four Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicle," in Proc. 26th Electric Veh. Symp., Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2012.

A backup system for automotive steer-by-wire, actuated by selective braking. A Dominguez-Garcia, J Kassakian, J Schindall, 10.1109/PESC.2004.13557742004 IEEE 35th Annu. Power Electron. Specialists Conf. (PESC). Aachen, GermanyIEEEA. Dominguez-Garcia, J. Kassakian, and J. Schindall, "A backup system for automotive steer-by-wire, actuated by selective braking," in 2004 IEEE 35th Annu. Power Electron. Specialists Conf. (PESC), Aachen, Germany: IEEE, pp. 383- 388. doi: 10.1109/PESC.2004.1355774.

Fault Tolerant Control on an Electric Vehicle. P E Dumont, A Aïtouche, R Merzouki, M Bayart, 10.1109/ICIT.2006.372706IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Technol. IEEEP. E. Dumont, A. Aïtouche, R. Merzouki, and M. Bayart, "Fault Tolerant Control on an Electric Vehicle," in 2006 IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Technol., Mumbai, India: IEEE, pp. 2450-2455. doi: 10.1109/ICIT.2006.372706.

A Control Allocation Algorithm for Improving the Fail-Safe Performance of an Electric Vehicle Brake System. C Feng, N Ding, Y He, G Xu, F Gao, 10.4271/2013-01-0187SAE Int. J. Passenger Cars -Electron. and Elect. Syst. 61C. Feng, N. Ding, Y. He, G. Xu, and F. Gao, "A Control Allocation Algorithm for Improving the Fail-Safe Performance of an Electric Vehicle Brake System," SAE Int. J. Passenger Cars -Electron. and Elect. Syst., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 134-143, 2013. doi: 10.4271/2013-01-0187.

Fault Tolerance Control of Four In-wheel Motors Driven Vehicles Based on Limping Dynamic Performance. X Fu, Y Yuan, D Liu, Q Zhang, J Pei, 10.1109/ICEDME50972.2020.000872020 3rd Int. Conf. Electron Device and Mech. Eng. (ICEDME). Suzhou, ChinaIEEEX. Fu, Y. Yuan, D. Liu, Q. Zhang, and J. Pei, "Fault Tolerance Control of Four In-wheel Motors Driven Vehicles Based on Limping Dynamic Performance," in 2020 3rd Int. Conf. Electron Device and Mech. Eng. (ICEDME), Suzhou, China: IEEE, pp. 352-359. doi: 10.1109/ICEDME50972.2020.00087.

Robust Reconfgurable Control for In-wheel Electric Vehicles. P Gáspár, J Bokor, A Mihály, Z Szabó, T Fülep, F Szauter, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.5019th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine. Paris, FranceIFAC48P. Gáspár, J. Bokor, A. Mihály, Z. Szabó, T. Fülep, and F. Szauter, "Robust Reconfgurable Control for In-wheel Electric Vehicles," in 9th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 21, Paris, France: IFAC, 2015, pp. 36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.501.

Robust adaptive fault tolerant control of four wheel independently actuated Electric vehicles. B Guo, Y Chen, 10.1109/TII.2018.2889292IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 165B. Guo and Y. Chen, "Robust adaptive fault tolerant control of four wheel independently actuated Electric vehicles," IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2882-2894, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TII.2018.2889292.

Robust lateral control of autonomous four-wheel independent drive electric vehicles considering the roll effects and actuator faults. J Guo, J Wang, Y Luo, K Li, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.106773doi: 10.1016/ j.ymssp.2020.106773Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. 1432020J. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Luo, and K. Li, "Robust lateral control of autonomous four-wheel independent drive electric vehicles considering the roll effects and actuator faults," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 143, p. 106 773, 2020. doi: 10.1016/ j.ymssp.2020.106773.

Robust H∞ Fault-Tolerant Lateral Control of Four-Wheel-Steering Autonomous Vehicles. J Guo, Y Luo, K Li, 10.1007/s12239-020-0094-8Int. J. Automot. Technol. 214J. Guo, Y. Luo, and K. Li, "Robust H∞ Fault-Tolerant Lat- eral Control of Four-Wheel-Steering Autonomous Vehicles," Int. J. Automot. Technol., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 993-1000, 2020. doi: 10.1007/s12239-020-0094-8.

Unified Control of Brake-and Steer-by-Wire Systems Using Optimal Control Allocation Methods. A Hac, D Doman, M Oppenheimer, 10.4271/2006-01-0924Proc. 2006 SAE World Congr., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. 2006 SAE World Congr., ser. SAE Tech. PapersDetroit, MI, USASAE IntA. Hac, D. Doman, and M. Oppenheimer, "Unified Control of Brake-and Steer-by-Wire Systems Using Optimal Control Allocation Methods," in Proc. 2006 SAE World Congr., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2006-01-0924.

Control of Brake-and Steer-by-Wire Systems During Brake Actuator Failure. A Hac, 10.4271/2006-01-0923Proc. 2006 SAE World Congr. & Exhib. 2006 SAE World Congr. & ExhibDetroit, MI, USASAE IntA. Hac, "Control of Brake-and Steer-by-Wire Systems During Brake Actuator Failure," in Proc. 2006 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2006-01- 0923.

Hierarchical diagnosis for an overactuated autonomous vehicle. A Haddad, A Aïtouche, V Cocquempot, 2013A. Haddad, A. Aïtouche, and V. Cocquempot, "Hierarchical diagnosis for an overactuated autonomous vehicle," in 2013

10.1109/SysTol.2013.6693956Conf. Control and Fault-Tolerant Syst. (SysTol). Nice, FranceIEEEConf. Control and Fault-Tolerant Syst. (SysTol), Nice, France: IEEE, pp. 613-618. doi: 10.1109/SysTol.2013.6693956.

Fault tolerant design for X-by-wire vehicle. T Hiraoka, S Eto, O Nishihara, H Kumamoto, Proc. SICE. SICET. Hiraoka, S. Eto, O. Nishihara, and H. Kumamoto, "Fault tolerant design for X-by-wire vehicle," in Proc. SICE 2004

. Annu. Conf. 3IEEEAnnu. Conf., vol. 3, Sapporo, Japan: IEEE, pp. 1940-1945.

Fahrdynamikregelung für fehlertolerante X-By-Wire-Antriebstopologien. J Hoedt, Darmstadt, GermanyDissertation, Tech. Univ. Darmstadtin GermanJ. Hoedt, "Fahrdynamikregelung für fehlertolerante X-By- Wire-Antriebstopologien," (in German), Dissertation, Tech. Univ. Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, 2013.

Fault-Tolerant Control of FWIA Electric Ground Vehicles with Differential Drive Assisted Steering. C Hu, H Jing, R Wang, F Yan, C Li, N Chen, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.6869th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine. Paris, FranceIFAC48C. Hu, H. Jing, R. Wang, F. Yan, C. Li, and N. Chen, "Fault- Tolerant Control of FWIA Electric Ground Vehicles with Differential Drive Assisted Steering," in 9th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 1, Paris, France: IFAC, 2015, pp. 1180-1185. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.686.

Robust Composite Nonlinear Feedback Path-Following Control for Independently Actuated Autonomous Vehicles With Differential Steering. C Hu, R Wang, F Yan, H R Karimi, 10.1109/TTE.2016.2538183IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrific. 23C. Hu, R. Wang, F. Yan, and H. R. Karimi, "Robust Composite Nonlinear Feedback Path-Following Control for Independently Actuated Autonomous Vehicles With Differen- tial Steering," IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrific., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 312-321, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TTE.2016.2538183.

Integral sliding mode yaw control for in-wheel-motor driven and differentially steered electric vehicles with mismatched disturbances. C Hu, R Wang, F Yan, P Chen, 10.23919/ACC.2017.7963190Proc. 2017 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 2017 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)Seattle, WA, USAIEEEC. Hu, R. Wang, F. Yan, and P. Chen, "Integral sliding mode yaw control for in-wheel-motor driven and differentially steered electric vehicles with mismatched disturbances," in Proc. 2017 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), Seattle, WA, USA: IEEE, pp. 1654-1659. doi: 10.23919/ACC.2017.7963190.

Differential Steering Based Yaw Stabilization Using ISMC for Independently Actuated Electric Vehicles. C Hu, R Wang, F Yan, Y Huang, H Wang, C Wei, 10.1109/TITS.2017.2750063IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 192C. Hu, R. Wang, F. Yan, Y. Huang, H. Wang, and C. Wei, "Differential Steering Based Yaw Stabilization Using ISMC for Independently Actuated Electric Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 627-638, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2017.2750063.

Lane keeping of autonomous vehicles based on differential steering with adaptive multivariable supertwisting control. C Hu, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.09.011Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. 125C. Hu et al., "Lane keeping of autonomous vehicles based on differential steering with adaptive multivariable super- twisting control," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 125, pp. 330-346, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.09.011.

Design of fail-safe controller for brake-by-wire systems using optimal braking force distribution. J Park, K Jeon, S Choi, 10.1109/EVS.2013.6914797doi: 10. 1109/EVS.2013.69147972013 World Electric Veh. Symp. and Exhib. (EVS27). Barcelona, SpainIEEEJ. in Park, K. Jeon, and S. Choi, "Design of fail-safe controller for brake-by-wire systems using optimal braking force distribution," in 2013 World Electric Veh. Symp. and Exhib. (EVS27), Barcelona, Spain: IEEE, pp. 1-7. doi: 10. 1109/EVS.2013.6914797.

Design of Fault Tolerant Control System for Electric Vehicles with Steer-by-Wire and In-Wheel Motors. A Ito, Y Hayakawa, 10.3182/20130904-4-JP-2042.000217th IFAC Symp. Adv. Automot. Control (AAC), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Tokyo, JapanIFAC46A. Ito and Y. Hayakawa, "Design of Fault Tolerant Control System for Electric Vehicles with Steer-by-Wire and In-Wheel Motors," in 7th IFAC Symp. Adv. Automot. Control (AAC), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 46, no. 21, Tokyo, Japan: IFAC, 2013, pp. 556-561. doi: 10.3182/20130904-4-JP-2042.00021.

Brake Safety Evaluation Index and Fail-Safe Control Strategy of Brake-by-Wire Systems for Straight Braking Stability Improvement. K Jeon, Dissertation, Seoul Nat. Univ. K. Jeon, "Brake Safety Evaluation Index and Fail-Safe Control Strategy of Brake-by-Wire Systems for Straight Braking Stability Improvement," Dissertation, Seoul Nat. Univ., Seoul, South Korea, 2013.

Fault-Tolerant Control of Four-Wheel Independently Actuated Electric Vehicles with Active Steering Systems. H Jing, R Wang, M Chadli, C Hu, F Yan, C Li, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.6849th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine. Paris, FranceIFAC48H. Jing, R. Wang, M. Chadli, C. Hu, F. Yan, and C. Li, "Fault- Tolerant Control of Four-Wheel Independently Actuated Electric Vehicles with Active Steering Systems," in 9th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC- PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 21, Paris, France: IFAC, 2015, pp. 1165-1172. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.684.

Robust H∞ dynamic output-feedback control for four-wheel independently actuated electric ground vehicles through integrated AFS/DYC. H Jing, R Wang, J Wang, N Chen, 10.1016/j.jfranklin.2017.10.031J. Franklin Inst. 35518H. Jing, R. Wang, J. Wang, and N. Chen, "Robust H∞ dynamic output-feedback control for four-wheel indepen- dently actuated electric ground vehicles through integrated AFS/DYC," J. Franklin Inst., vol. 355, no. 18, pp. 9321-9350, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.jfranklin.2017.10.031.

Stability of an Electric Vehicle with Permanent-Magnet In-Wheel Motors during Electrical Faults. M Jonasson, O Wallmark, 10.3390/wevj1010100World Electric Veh. Assoc. J. 1M. Jonasson and O. Wallmark, "Stability of an Electric Vehicle with Permanent-Magnet In-Wheel Motors during Electrical Faults," World Electric Veh. Assoc. J., vol. 1, pp. 100-107, 2007. doi: 10.3390/wevj1010100.

Control of electric vehicles with autonomous corner modules: Implementation aspects and fault handling. 10.1504/IJVSMT.2008.023839Int. J. Veh. Syst. Model. and Testing. 33--, "Control of electric vehicles with autonomous corner modules: Implementation aspects and fault handling," Int. J. Veh. Syst. Model. and Testing, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 213-228, 2008. doi: 10.1504/IJVSMT.2008.023839.

Steering redundancy for selfdriving vehicles using differential braking. M Jonasson, M Thor, Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'16. J. Edelmann, M. Plöchl, and P. E. Pfeffer13th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'16Munich, Germany; London, United KingdomTaylor & Francis GroupM. Jonasson and M. Thor, "Steering redundancy for self- driving vehicles using differential braking," in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'16), J. Edelmann, M. Plöchl, and P. E. Pfeffer, Eds., Munich, Germany: Taylor & Francis Group, London, United Kingdom, 2016, pp. 23-28.

Steering redundancy for self-driving vehicles using differential braking. 10.1080/00423114.2017.1356929Veh. Syst. Dyn. 565[72] --, "Steering redundancy for self-driving vehicles using differential braking," Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 791- 809, 2017. doi: 10.1080/00423114.2017.1356929.

An Emergency Hierarchical Guidance Control Strategy for Autonomous Vehicles. F Khelladi, M Boudali, R Orjuela, M Cassaro, M Basset, C Roos, 10.1109/TITS.2020.3043485doi: 10 . 1109 / TITS . 2020 . 3043485IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. F. Khelladi, M. Boudali, R. Orjuela, M. Cassaro, M. Basset, and C. Roos, "An Emergency Hierarchical Guidance Control Strategy for Autonomous Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 1-12, 2020. doi: 10 . 1109 / TITS . 2020 . 3043485.

Fault-tolerant braking control with integerated EMBs and regenerative in-wheel motors. S Kim, K Huh, 10.1007/s12239-016-0090-1Int. J. Automot. Technol. 175S. Kim and K. Huh, "Fault-tolerant braking control with integerated EMBs and regenerative in-wheel motors," Int. J. Automot. Technol., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 923-936, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s12239-016-0090-1.

Limitations of Torque Vectoring As a Backup Safety Strategy for Steerby-Wire Vehicles due to Vehicle Stability Control. A Kirli, C E Okwudire, A G Ulsoy, 10.1115/DSCC2017-5190Proc. ASME 2017 Dynamic Syst. and Control Conf. ASME 2017 Dynamic Syst. and Control ConfTysons, VA, USAASME1A. Kirli, C. E. Okwudire, and A. G. Ulsoy, "Limitations of Torque Vectoring As a Backup Safety Strategy for Steer- by-Wire Vehicles due to Vehicle Stability Control," in Proc. ASME 2017 Dynamic Syst. and Control Conf., vol. 1, Tysons, VA, USA: ASME, V001T45A008. doi: 10.1115/DSCC2017- 5190.

Complementary Chassis Systems for Ground Vehicles Safety. M Kissai, X Mouton, B Monsuez, D Martinez, A Tapus, 10.1109/CCTA.2018.85116222018 IEEE Conf. Copenhagen, DenmarkIEEEM. Kissai, X. Mouton, B. Monsuez, D. Martinez, and A. Tapus, "Complementary Chassis Systems for Ground Vehicles Safety," in 2018 IEEE Conf. Control Technol. and Appl. (CCTA), Copenhagen, Denmark: IEEE, pp. 179-186. doi: 10.1109/CCTA.2018.8511622.

Optimal Control Allocation for Road Vehicle Dynamics Using Wheel Steer Angles, Brake/drive Torques, Wheel Loads, and Camber Angles. C Knobel, Dissertation, Tech. Univ. München. 115ppC. Knobel, "Optimal Control Allocation for Road Vehicle Dynamics Using Wheel Steer Angles, Brake/drive Torques, Wheel Loads, and Camber Angles," Dissertation, Tech. Univ. München, Munich, Germany, 2009, 115 pp.

Development and Evaluation of Integraterd Chassis Control Systems. Y Kou, Dissertation, Univ. Michigan. Y. Kou, "Development and Evaluation of Integraterd Chassis Control Systems," Dissertation, Univ. Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 2010.

Control Allocation for Road Vehicles -a system-independent approach for integrated vehicle dynamics control. J Krüger, A Pruckner, C Knobel, 19th Aachen Colloq. Aachen, GermanyJ. Krüger, A. Pruckner, and C. Knobel, "Control Allocation for Road Vehicles -a system-independent approach for integrated vehicle dynamics control," in 19th Aachen Colloq., Aachen, Germany, 2010.

Fault-Tolerant Stability Control for Independent Four-Wheel Drive Electric Vehicle Under Actuator Fault Conditions. K Lee, M Lee, 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2994530IEEE Access. 8K. Lee and M. Lee, "Fault-Tolerant Stability Control for In- dependent Four-Wheel Drive Electric Vehicle Under Actuator Fault Conditions," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 91 368-91 378, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2994530.

Study on fail-safe strategy of electric power steering system. L Li, B Liu, G Zhao, H Sun, 10.1109/ICMA.2009.5246451Proc. Int. Conf. Mechatronics and Automat. Int. Conf. Mechatronics and AutomatChangchun, ChinaIEEEL. Li, B. Liu, G. Zhao, and H. Sun, "Study on fail-safe strategy of electric power steering system," in Proc. Int. Conf. Mechatronics and Automat., Changchun, China: IEEE, 2009, pp. 4775-4779. doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2009.5246451.

Model-Independent Adaptive Fault-Tolerant Output Tracking Control of 4WS4WD Road Vehicles. D.-Y Li, Y.-D Song, D Huang, H.-N Chen, 10.1109/TITS.2012.2211016IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 141D.-Y. Li, Y.-D. Song, D. Huang, and H.-N. Chen, "Model- Independent Adaptive Fault-Tolerant Output Tracking Con- trol of 4WS4WD Road Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 169-179, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TITS. 2012.2211016.

Fault-Tolerant Control for 4WID/4WIS Electric Vehicles. C Li, G Chen, C Zong, presented at the SAEC. Li, G. Chen, and C. Zong, "Fault-Tolerant Control for 4WID/4WIS Electric Vehicles," presented at the SAE 2014

Int, Powertrain, 10.4271/2014-01-2589Fuels & Lubricants Meeting. Birmingham, United KingdomInt. Powertrain, Fuels & Lubricants Meeting, Birmingham, United Kingdom: SAE Int., 2014, pp. 2014-01-2589. doi: 10.4271/2014-01-2589.

A Study on Force Distribution Control for the Electric Vehicle with Four Inwheel motors. Y Li, J Zhang, K Guo, D Wu, presented at the SAE 2014 Commercial VehY. Li, J. Zhang, K. Guo, and D. Wu, "A Study on Force Distribution Control for the Electric Vehicle with Four In- wheel motors," presented at the SAE 2014 Commercial Veh.

. Eng, Congr, Rosemont, Il, Usa: Sae, Int, 10.4271/2014-01-2379doi: 10. 4271/2014-01-2379Eng. Congr. Rosemont, IL, USA: SAE Int., 2014. doi: 10. 4271/2014-01-2379.

Fault-tolerant control of electric vehicles with in-wheel motors using actuator-grouping sliding mode controllers. B Li, H Du, W Li, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.11.020Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. B. Li, H. Du, and W. Li, "Fault-tolerant control of electric vehicles with in-wheel motors using actuator-grouping sliding mode controllers," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 72-73, pp. 462-485, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.11.020.

State Estimation and Dynamic Control Allocation for Over-actuated Electric Vehicles with In-wheel Motors. B Li, Dissertation, Univ. Wollongong. B. Li, "State Estimation and Dynamic Control Allocation for Over-actuated Electric Vehicles with In-wheel Motors," Dissertation, Univ. Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia, 2016.

Experimental Study of Electric Vehicle Yaw Rate Tracking Control Based on Differential Steering. C Li, Y.-F Xie, G Wang, S.-Q Liu, B Kuang, H Jing, 10.1155/2021/6668091J. Adv. Transp. K. Wang20212021C. Li, Y.-F. Xie, G. Wang, S.-Q. Liu, B. Kuang, and H. Jing, "Experimental Study of Electric Vehicle Yaw Rate Tracking Control Based on Differential Steering," J. Adv. Transp., vol. 2021, K. Wang, Ed., 2021. doi: 10.1155/2021/6668091.

Study on the Fault Tolerance Control Strategy of the Distributed Driving Electric Vehicle Running in Straight Line with Failure Motor(s). X Liu, H He, R Xiong, Q Tong, 10.2991/emeit.2012.362doi: 10. 2991/emeit.2012.362Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Electron. and. 2nd Int. Conf. Electron. andShenyang, ChinaAtlantis PressX. Liu, H. He, R. Xiong, and Q. Tong, "Study on the Fault Tolerance Control Strategy of the Distributed Driving Electric Vehicle Running in Straight Line with Failure Motor(s)," in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Electron. and Mech. Eng. and Inf. Technol. (2012), Shenyang, China: Atlantis Press. doi: 10. 2991/emeit.2012.362.

Study on the Torque Allocation Strategy of the Distributed Driving Electric Vehicles Running in Straight Line with a Single Failure Motor. X Liu, H He, X Wang, R Xiong, 10.1109/ICCECT.2012.39Int. Conf. Control Eng. and Commun. Technol. IEEEX. Liu, H. He, X. Wang, and R. Xiong, "Study on the Torque Allocation Strategy of the Distributed Driving Electric Vehi- cles Running in Straight Line with a Single Failure Motor," in 2012 Int. Conf. Control Eng. and Commun. Technol., Shenyang, China: IEEE, pp. 378-381. doi: 10.1109/ICCECT. 2012.39.

Passive Fault-Tolerant Performance of 4WID/4WIS Electric Vehicles Based on MPC and Control Allocation. C Liu, C Zong, L He, J Liu, C Li, 10.4271/2013-24-014511th Int. Conf. Engines & Veh. Capri, ItalySAE IntC. Liu, C. Zong, L. He, J. Liu, and C. Li, "Passive Fault- Tolerant Performance of 4WID/4WIS Electric Vehicles Based on MPC and Control Allocation," in 11th Int. Conf. Engines & Veh., Capri, Italy: SAE Int., 2013, pp. 2013-24-0145. doi: 10.4271/2013-24-0145.

Fault tolerant control for 4WID/4WIS electric vehicles: Theory and its applications. J Liu, C Zong, G Chen, C Liu, G Li, 10.2495/ACAR140041doi: 10 . 2495 / ACAR140041Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Control, Automat. and Robot., Hong Kong. Int. Conf. Adv. Control, Automat. and Robot., Hong KongJ. Liu, C. Zong, G. Chen, C. Liu, and G. Li, "Fault tolerant control for 4WID/4WIS electric vehicles: Theory and its applications," in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Control, Automat. and Robot., Hong Kong, 2015, pp. 28-35. doi: 10 . 2495 / ACAR140041.

Fault-Tolerant Control of Brake-by-Wire Systems Based on Control Allocation. H Liu, W Deng, R He, J Wu, B Zhu, 10.4271/2016-01-0132Proc. 2016 SAE World Congr. and Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. 2016 SAE World Congr. and Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. PapersDetroit, MI, USASAE IntH. Liu, W. Deng, R. He, J. Wu, and B. Zhu, "Fault- Tolerant Control of Brake-by-Wire Systems Based on Control Allocation," in Proc. 2016 SAE World Congr. and Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2016-01-0132.

Drive system failure control for distributed drive electric vehicles. T Liu, Y Tang, J Wang, Y Li, N Yang, Y Liu, 10.1088/1757-899X/231/1/012149IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. and Eng. 231012149T. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Wang, Y. Li, N. Yang, and Y. Liu, "Drive system failure control for distributed drive electric vehicles," IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. and Eng., vol. 231, no. 012149, 2017. doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/231/1/012149.

Fault Tolerant Control Allocation Based on Adaptive Sliding Mode Control for Distributed-Driven Electric Vehicle. G Liu, S Wang, D Zhang, Y Shen, Z Yao, Proc. nullG. Liu, S. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Shen, and Z. Yao, "Fault Tolerant Control Allocation Based on Adaptive Sliding Mode Control for Distributed-Driven Electric Vehicle," in Proc.

. 10.1007/978-981-32-9050-1_29Lecture Notes Elect. Eng. Chin. Intell. Automat. Conf., Z. Deng, Ed., ser586Springer SingapChin. Intell. Automat. Conf., Z. Deng, Ed., ser. Lecture Notes Elect. Eng. Vol. 586, Jiangsu, China: Springer Singap., 2020, pp. 251-261. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9050-1 29.

Steering-based faulttolerant control for the braking failures of an independent driving electric vehicle. S.-B Lu, C W Lim, Y.-B He, 10.1177/0954407014527740Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. 2289S.-B. Lu, C. W. Lim, and Y.-B. He, "Steering-based fault- tolerant control for the braking failures of an independent driving electric vehicle," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., vol. 228, no. 9, pp. 1017-1033, 2014. doi: 10.1177/0954407014527740.

Fault Tolerant Control for Four-Wheel Independent Drive EV with steering failure. S.-B Lu, Y Zhang, J Shi, 10.1109/ChiCC.2016.7554775Control Conf. (CCC). Chengdu, ChinaIEEE35th ChinS.-B. Lu, Y. Zhang, and J. Shi, "Fault Tolerant Control for Four-Wheel Independent Drive EV with steering failure," in 2016 35th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), Chengdu, China: IEEE, pp. 8868-8873. doi: 10.1109/ChiCC.2016.7554775.

Model-independent self-tuning fault-tolerant control method for 4WID EV. Y Luo, J Luo, Z Qin, 10.1007/s12239-016-0106-xdoi: 10.1007/ s12239-016-0106-xInt. J. Automot. Technol. 176Y. Luo, J. Luo, and Z. Qin, "Model-independent self-tuning fault-tolerant control method for 4WID EV," Int. J. Automot. Technol., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1091-1100, 2016. doi: 10.1007/ s12239-016-0106-x.

Active Fault-Tolerant Control Based on Multiple Input Multiple Output-Model Free Adaptive Control for Four Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicle Drive System. Y Luo, Y Hu, F Jiang, R Chen, Y Wang, 10.3390/app9020276Appl. Sci. 9276Y. Luo, Y. Hu, F. Jiang, R. Chen, and Y. Wang, "Active Fault- Tolerant Control Based on Multiple Input Multiple Output- Model Free Adaptive Control for Four Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicle Drive System," Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 276, 2019. doi: 10.3390/app9020276.

Nonlinear PI front and rear steering control in four wheel steering vehicles. R Marino, S Scalzi, F Cinili, VehR. Marino, S. Scalzi, and F. Cinili, "Nonlinear PI front and rear steering control in four wheel steering vehicles," Veh.

. Syst, Dyn, 10.1080/00423110701214450doi: 10.1080/ 0042311070121445045Syst. Dyn., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 1149-1168, 2007. doi: 10.1080/ 00423110701214450.

Robust H∞ output-feedback yaw control for in-wheel-motor driven electric vehicles with differential steering. T Mi, C Li, C Hu, J Wang, N Chen, R Wang, Proc. 54th. 54thT. Mi, C. Li, C. Hu, J. Wang, N. Chen, and R. Wang, "Robust H∞ output-feedback yaw control for in-wheel-motor driven electric vehicles with differential steering," in Proc. 54th

10.1109/CDC.2015.7402426Conf. Decis. and Control (CDC). Osaka, JapanIEEEConf. Decis. and Control (CDC), Osaka, Japan: IEEE, 2015, pp. 1521-1526. doi: 10.1109/CDC.2015.7402426.

Multiple Fault-Tolerant In-Wheel Vehicle Control Based on High-level Control Reconfiguration. A Mihály, P Gáspár, B Németh, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.142820th IFAC World. Congr., Denis Dochain, Didier Henrion, and Dimitri Peaucelle, Eds., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLineToulouse, France50A. Mihály, P. Gáspár, and B. Németh, "Multiple Fault- Tolerant In-Wheel Vehicle Control Based on High-level Control Reconfiguration," in 20th IFAC World Congr., De- nis Dochain, Didier Henrion, and Dimitri Peaucelle, Eds., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 50, no. 1, Toulouse, France: IFAC, 2017, pp. 8606-8611. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08. 1428.

Driving stability for electric vehicle with independently driven two wheels in case of inverter failure. H Miyazaki, T Ohmae, 10.1109/EPE.2005.219433Eur. Conf. Power Electron. and Appl. IEEEH. Miyazaki and T. Ohmae, "Driving stability for electric vehicle with independently driven two wheels in case of inverter failure," in 2005 Eur. Conf. Power Electron. and Appl., Dresden, Germany: IEEE. doi: 10.1109/EPE.2005. 219433.

Robust cascade control for the horizontal motion of a vehicle with single-wheel actuators. J.-E Moseberg, G Roppenecker, 10.1080/00423114.2015.1081954Veh. Syst. Dyn. 5312J.-E. Moseberg and G. Roppenecker, "Robust cascade control for the horizontal motion of a vehicle with single-wheel actuators," Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 1742-1758, 2015. doi: 10.1080/00423114.2015.1081954.

AUTOREG 2015 -7. VDI/VDE-Fachtagung Steuerung und Regelung von Fahrzeugen und Motoren, Auf dem Weg zum automatisierten Fahren, ser. VDI-Berichte. Baden-Baden, GermanyVDI Verlag2233Eine kaskadierte Regelung der horizontalen Fahrzeugbewegung mit Einzelradaktorik--, "Eine kaskadierte Regelung der horizontalen Fahrzeug- bewegung mit Einzelradaktorik," (in German), in AUTOREG 2015 -7. VDI/VDE-Fachtagung Steuerung und Regelung von Fahrzeugen und Motoren, Auf dem Weg zum automatisierten Fahren, ser. VDI-Berichte, vol. 2233, Baden-Baden, Germany: VDI Verlag, pp. 67-78.

Regelung der Horizontalbewegung eines uberaktuierten Fahrzeugs unter Berücksichtigung von Realisierungsanforderungen. J.-E Moseberg, Erlangen, GermanyUniv. Erlangen-Nürnbergin German), DissertationJ.-E. Moseberg, "Regelung der Horizontalbewegung eines uberaktuierten Fahrzeugs unter Berücksichtigung von Real- isierungsanforderungen," (in German), Dissertation, Univ. Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2016.

Failsafe Control Methods for EVs with the Failsafe Structure Driven by Front and Rear Wheels Independently. N Mutoh, Y Tomita, World Electric Veh. Assoc. J. 1N. Mutoh and Y. Tomita, "Failsafe Control Methods for EVs with the Failsafe Structure Driven by Front and Rear Wheels Independently," World Electric Veh. Assoc. J., vol. 1, pp. 271-278, 2007.

Front-and-Rear-Wheel-Independent-Drive-Type Electric Vehicle (FRID EV) with Compatible Driving Performance and Safety. N Mutoh, Symp. Ser. World Electric Veh. J. 3Eur. Assoc. for ElectromobilityN. Mutoh, "Front-and-Rear-Wheel-Independent-Drive-Type Electric Vehicle (FRID EV) with Compatible Driving Per- formance and Safety," presented at the EVS24 Int. Battery, Hybrid and Fuel Cell Electric Veh. Symp. Ser. World Electric Veh. J. Vol. 3, Stavanger, Norway: Eur. Assoc. for Electro- mobility (AVERE), 2009, pp. 17-26.

Fault-tolerant control design for trajectory tracking in driver assistance systems. B Németh, P Gáspár, J Bokor, O Sename, L Dugard, 10.3182/20120829-3-MX-2028.001028th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection Supervision and Saf. Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Mexico City, MexicoIFAC45B. Németh, P. Gáspár, J. Bokor, O. Sename, and L. Dugard, "Fault-tolerant control design for trajectory tracking in driver assistance systems," in 8th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection Supervision and Saf. Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 45, no. 20, Mexico City, Mexico: IFAC, 2012, pp. 186-191. doi: 10.3182/20120829-3-MX- 2028.00102.

Active fault tolerant torque distribution control of 4 in-wheel motors electric vehicles based on Kalman filter approach. T.-H Nguyen, B.-C Chen, D Yin, P.-S Huynh, 2017T.-H. Nguyen, B.-C. Chen, D. Yin, and P.-S. Huynh, "Active fault tolerant torque distribution control of 4 in-wheel motors electric vehicles based on Kalman filter approach," in 2017

Int, Conf, 10.1109/ICSSE.2017.8030897doi: 10 . 1109 / ICSSE . 2017 . 8030897Syst. Sci. and Eng. (ICSSE). Ho Chi Minh City, VietnamIEEEInt. Conf. Syst. Sci. and Eng. (ICSSE), Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam: IEEE, pp. 360-364. doi: 10 . 1109 / ICSSE . 2017 . 8030897.

Reconfiguration of Directional Handling of an Autonomous Vehicle. P M Pathak, R Merzouki, A K Samantaray, B Ould-Bouamama, 10.1109/ICIINFS.2008.4798408doi: 10. 1109/ICIINFS.2008.47984082008 IEEE Region 10 and 3rd Int. Conf. Ind. and Inf. Syst. Kharagpur, IndiaIEEEP. M. Pathak, R. Merzouki, A. K. Samantaray, and B. Ould- Bouamama, "Reconfiguration of Directional Handling of an Autonomous Vehicle," in 2008 IEEE Region 10 and 3rd Int. Conf. Ind. and Inf. Syst., Kharagpur, India: IEEE. doi: 10. 1109/ICIINFS.2008.4798408.

Control of a ground vehicle using quadratic programming based control allocation techniques. J H Plumlee, D M Bevly, A S Hodel, 10.23919/ACC.2004.1384055Proc. 2004 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 2004 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)Boston, MA, USAIEEE5J. H. Plumlee, D. M. Bevly, and A. S. Hodel, "Control of a ground vehicle using quadratic programming based control allocation techniques," in Proc. 2004 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), vol. 5, Boston, MA, USA: IEEE, pp. 4704-4709. doi: 10.23919/ACC.2004.1384055.

Multi-input ground vehicle control using quadratic programming based control allocation techniques. J H Plumlee, Auburn, AL, USAAuburn Univ.Master's ThesisJ. H. Plumlee, "Multi-input ground vehicle control using quadratic programming based control allocation techniques," Master's Thesis, Auburn Univ., Auburn, AL, USA, 2004.

Torque vectoring as redundant steering for automated driving or steer-by-wire. K Polmans, S Stracke, 10.1007/978-3-658-05978-1_13doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-658-05978-1 135th Int. Munich Chassis Symp. P. E. PfefferWiesbadenSpringer Fachmedien WiesbadenK. Polmans and S. Stracke, "Torque vectoring as redundant steering for automated driving or steer-by-wire," in 5th Int. Munich Chassis Symp. 2014, P. E. Pfeffer, Ed., Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp. 163-177. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-658-05978-1 13.

Robust LPV multivariable Automotive Global Chassis Control. C Poussot, Dissertation, Grenoble Institut Polytechnique. C. Poussot-Vassal, "Robust LPV multivariable Automotive Global Chassis Control," Dissertation, Grenoble Institut Polytechnique, Grenoble, France, 2008.

A LPV/H∞ Global Chassis Controller for handling improvements involving braking and steering systems. C Poussot-Vassal, O Sename, L Dugard, 10.1109/CDC.2008.4738784Proc. 47th IEEE Conf. Decis. and Control. 47th IEEE Conf. Decis. and ControlCancun, MexicoIEEEC. Poussot-Vassal, O. Sename, and L. Dugard, "A LPV/H∞ Global Chassis Controller for handling improvements in- volving braking and steering systems," in Proc. 47th IEEE Conf. Decis. and Control, Cancun, Mexico: IEEE, 2008, pp. 5366-5371. doi: 10.1109/CDC.2008.4738784.

A Fault Tolerant Lateral Control Strategy for an Autonomous Four Wheel Driven Electric Vehicle. S Ramanathan Venkita, B Boulkroune, A Mishra, E Van Nunen, 10.1109/IV47402.2020.93047042020 IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (IV). Las Vegas, NV, USAIEEES. Ramanathan Venkita, B. Boulkroune, A. Mishra, and E. Van Nunen, "A Fault Tolerant Lateral Control Strategy for an Autonomous Four Wheel Driven Electric Vehicle," in 2020 IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (IV), Las Vegas, NV, USA: IEEE, pp. 1221-1226. doi: 10.1109/IV47402.2020.9304704.

Brake Fault Identification and Fault-Tolerant Directional Stability Control of Heavy Road Vehicles. R Raveendran, K B Devika, S C Subramanian, 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3024251doi: 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2020.3024251IEEE Access. 8R. Raveendran, K. B. Devika, and S. C. Subramanian, "Brake Fault Identification and Fault-Tolerant Directional Stability Control of Heavy Road Vehicles," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 169 229-169 246, 2020. doi: 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2020.3024251.

An Advanced Electric Vehicle for Development and Test of New Vehicle-Dynamics Control Strategies. P Reinold, V Nachtigal, A Trächtler, 6th IFAC Symp. AdvP. Reinold, V. Nachtigal, and A. Trächtler, "An Advanced Electric Vehicle for Development and Test of New Vehicle- Dynamics Control Strategies," in 6th IFAC Symp. Adv.

Automot, 10.3182/20100712-3-DE-2013.00172doi: 10. 3182/20100712-3-DE-2013.00172Control (AAC), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Munich, GermanyIFAC43Automot. Control (AAC), ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 43, no. 7, Munich, Germany: IFAC, 2010, pp. 152-161. doi: 10. 3182/20100712-3-DE-2013.00172.

Integrated Vehicle Dynamics Controller for Electric Traction Drives and Mechatronic Drivetrain Components. M Ringdorfer, Dissertation, Tech. Univ. Graz. M. Ringdorfer, "Integrated Vehicle Dynamics Controller for Electric Traction Drives and Mechatronic Drivetrain Components," Dissertation, Tech. Univ. Graz, Graz, Austria, 2013.

State Estimation and Dissipative-Based Control Design for Vehicle Lateral Dynamics With Probabilistic Faults. R Sakthivel, S Mohanapriya, C K Ahn, P Selvaraj, IEEER. Sakthivel, S. Mohanapriya, C. K. Ahn, and P. Selvaraj, "State Estimation and Dissipative-Based Control Design for Vehicle Lateral Dynamics With Probabilistic Faults," IEEE

. 10.1109/TIE.2018.2793253Trans. Ind. Electron. 659Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 7193-7201, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2018.2793253.

LPV methods for fault-tolerant vehicle dynamic control. O Sename, J.-C Tudon-Martinez, S Fergani, 2013O. Sename, J.-C. Tudon-Martinez, and S. Fergani, "LPV methods for fault-tolerant vehicle dynamic control," in 2013

10.1109/SysTol.2013.6693821Conf. Control and Fault-Tolerant Syst. (SysTol). Nice, FranceIEEEConf. Control and Fault-Tolerant Syst. (SysTol), Nice, France: IEEE, pp. 116-130. doi: 10.1109/SysTol.2013.6693821.

Development of a Fail-Safe Control Strategy for Electro-Mechanical Brake System. M Sho, K Park, M Park, M Kim, 10.4271/2013-01-0055doi: 10. 4271/2013-01-005517th Asia-Pacific Automot. Eng. Conf., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. Bangkok, ThailandSAE IntM. Sho, K. Park, M. Park, and M. Kim, "Development of a Fail-Safe Control Strategy for Electro-Mechanical Brake System," in 17th Asia-Pacific Automot. Eng. Conf., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Bangkok, Thailand: SAE Int., 2013. doi: 10. 4271/2013-01-0055.

Fault Tolerant Control and Classification for Longitudinal Vehicle Control. B Song, J K Hedrick, A Howell, 10.1115/1.1592188J. Dynamic Syst., Meas., and Control. 1253B. Song, J. K. Hedrick, and A. Howell, "Fault Tolerant Control and Classification for Longitudinal Vehicle Control," J. Dynamic Syst., Meas., and Control, vol. 125, no. 3, pp. 320-329, 2003. doi: 10.1115/1.1592188.

Fault tolerant nonlinear control with applications to an automated transit bus. B Song, J K Hedrick, 10.1080/00423110412331282922doi: 10 . 1080 / 00423110412331282922Veh. Syst. Dyn. 435B. Song and J. K. Hedrick, "Fault tolerant nonlinear control with applications to an automated transit bus," Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 331-350, 2005. doi: 10 . 1080 / 00423110412331282922.

Virtual-Point-Based Fault-Tolerant Lateral and Longitudinal Control of 4W-Steering Vehicles. Y.-D Song, H.-N Chen, D.-Y. Li, 10.1109/TITS.2011.2158646IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 124Y.-D. Song, H.-N. Chen, and D.-Y. Li, "Virtual-Point-Based Fault-Tolerant Lateral and Longitudinal Control of 4W- Steering Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1343-1351, 2011. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2011.2158646.

Investigating Functional Redundancies in the Context of Vehicle Automation -A Trajectory Tracking Perspective. T Stolte, T Liao, M Nee, M Nolte, M Maurer, 10.1109/ITSC.2018.8569243IEEE 21st Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC). Maui, HI, USAIEEET. Stolte, T. Liao, M. Nee, M. Nolte, and M. Maurer, "Investigating Functional Redundancies in the Context of Vehicle Automation -A Trajectory Tracking Perspective," in IEEE 21st Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Maui, HI, USA: IEEE, 2018, pp. 2398-2405. doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2018. 8569243.

Four-Wheel Independent Drive Electric Vehicle Stability Control using Novel Adaptive Sliding Mode Control. R K Subroto, C Z Wang, K L Lian, 10.1109/TIA.2020.2977598IEEE Trans. Industry Appl. 565R. K. Subroto, C. Z. Wang, and K. L. Lian, "Four-Wheel Independent Drive Electric Vehicle Stability Control using Novel Adaptive Sliding Mode Control," IEEE Trans. Industry Appl., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 5995-6006, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TIA. 2020.2977598.

Motor fault tolerant control strategy for distributed driving electric vehicle. X Sun, H He, X Liu, 10.1109/ITEC-AP.2014.69411212014 IEEE Conf. and Expo Transp. Electrific. Asia-Pacific (ITEC Asia-Pacific). Beijing, ChinaIEEEX. Sun, H. He, and X. Liu, "Motor fault tolerant control strategy for distributed driving electric vehicle," in 2014 IEEE Conf. and Expo Transp. Electrific. Asia-Pacific (ITEC Asia- Pacific), Beijing, China: IEEE. doi: 10.1109/ITEC-AP.2014. 6941121.

A Fault Tolerant Vehicle Stability Control Using Adaptive Control Allocation. O Temiz, M Cakmakci, Y Yildiz, 10.1115/DSCC2018-8976Proc. ASME 2018 Dynamic Syst. and Control Conf. ASME 2018 Dynamic Syst. and Control ConfAtlanta, Georgia, USAASME1O. Temiz, M. Cakmakci, and Y. Yildiz, "A Fault Tolerant Vehicle Stability Control Using Adaptive Control Allocation," in Proc. ASME 2018 Dynamic Syst. and Control Conf., vol. 1, Atlanta, Georgia, USA: ASME. doi: 10.1115/DSCC2018- 8976.

Adaptive Control Allocation with Communication Delay for In-Wheel Propulsion Electric Vehicles. 10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.12.1518th IFAC Workshop Distrib. Estimation and Control. Netw. Syst. (NECSYS), D. F. Gayme, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLineChicago, IL, USAIFAC52--, "Adaptive Control Allocation with Communication Delay for In-Wheel Propulsion Electric Vehicles," in 8th IFAC Workshop Distrib. Estimation and Control Netw. Syst. (NECSYS), D. F. Gayme, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 20, Chicago, IL, USA: IFAC, 2019, pp. 157-162. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.12.151.

A Fault-Tolerant Integrated Vehicle Stability Control Using Adaptive Control Allocation. arXiv:2008.056972020--, "A Fault-Tolerant Integrated Vehicle Stability Control Using Adaptive Control Allocation," 2020. arXiv: 2008.05697.

Differential Steering Control of Four-Wheel Independent-Drive Electric Vehicles. J Tian, J Tong, S Luo, Energies. 112892J. Tian, J. Tong, and S. Luo, "Differential Steering Control of Four-Wheel Independent-Drive Electric Vehicles," Energies, vol. 11, no. 2892, 2018.

Reconfigurable faulttolerant control of a vehicle with a steer-by-wire system. N Wada, K Fujii, M Saeki, Int. Conf. Adv. Mechatronic Syst. IEEEN. Wada, K. Fujii, and M. Saeki, "Reconfigurable fault- tolerant control of a vehicle with a steer-by-wire system," in 2012 Int. Conf. Adv. Mechatronic Syst., Tokyo, Japan: IEEE, pp. 701-706.

Reconfigurable faulttolerant controller synthesis for a steer-by-wire vehicle using independently driven wheels. N Wada, K Fujii, M Saeki, 10.1080/00423114.2013.806671Veh. Syst. Dyn. 519N. Wada, K. Fujii, and M. Saeki, "Reconfigurable fault- tolerant controller synthesis for a steer-by-wire vehicle using independently driven wheels," Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1438-1465, 2013. doi: 10.1080/00423114.2013.806671.

Multi-Objective Optimal Based Fault Tolerant Control Allocation for Over-Actuated Electric Vehicles. Z Wan, S Lu, 10.23919/CCC50068.2020.9188990Proc. 39th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC). 39th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC)Shenyang, ChinaIEEEZ. Wan and S. Lu, "Multi-Objective Optimal Based Fault Tolerant Control Allocation for Over-Actuated Electric Vehi- cles," in Proc. 39th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), Shenyang, China: IEEE, 2020, pp. 4646-4651. doi: 10.23919/CCC50068. 2020.9188990.

Coordinated and Reconfigurable Vehicle Dynamics Control. J Wang, Dissertation, Univ. Texas. J. Wang, "Coordinated and Reconfigurable Vehicle Dynamics Control," Dissertation, Univ. Texas, Austin, TX, USA, 2007.

Coordinated and Reconfigurable Vehicle Dynamics Control. J Wang, R G Longoria, 10.1109/TCST.2008.2002264IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 173J. Wang and R. G. Longoria, "Coordinated and Reconfig- urable Vehicle Dynamics Control," IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 723-732, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TCST. 2008.2002264.

Fault-Tolerant Control of Electric Ground Vehicles With Independently-Actuated Wheels. R Wang, J Wang, 10.1115/DSCC2010-4255doi: 10.1115/ DSCC2010-4255Proc. ASME 2010 Dynamic Syst. and Control Conf. ASME 2010 Dynamic Syst. and Control ConfCambridge, MA, USAASME1R. Wang and J. Wang, "Fault-Tolerant Control of Electric Ground Vehicles With Independently-Actuated Wheels," in Proc. ASME 2010 Dynamic Syst. and Control Conf., vol. 1, Cambridge, MA, USA: ASME, pp. 515-522. doi: 10.1115/ DSCC2010-4255.

Fault-Tolerant Control With Active Fault Diagnosis for Four-Wheel Independently Driven Electric Ground Vehicles. 10.1109/TVT.2011.2172822IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 609--, "Fault-Tolerant Control With Active Fault Diagnosis for Four-Wheel Independently Driven Electric Ground Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 4276-4287, 2011. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2011.2172822.

Fault-tolerant control with active fault diagnosis for four-wheel independently-driven electric ground vehicles. 10.1109/ACC.2011.5991311Proc. 2011 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 2011 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)San Francisco, CA, USAIEEE--, "Fault-tolerant control with active fault diagnosis for four-wheel independently-driven electric ground vehicles," in Proc. 2011 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), San Francisco, CA, USA: IEEE, pp. 3954-3959. doi: 10.1109/ACC.2011.5991311.

Fault-Tolerant Control for Electric Ground Vehicles With Independently-Actuated In-Wheel Motors. 10.1115/1.4005050J. Dynamic Syst., Meas., and Control. 1342--, "Fault-Tolerant Control for Electric Ground Vehicles With Independently-Actuated In-Wheel Motors," J. Dynamic Syst., Meas., and Control, vol. 134, no. 2, pp. 021014-1- 021014-10, 2012. doi: 10.1115/1.4005050.

Passive Actuator Fault-Tolerant Control for a Class of Overactuated Nonlinear Systems and Applications to Electric Vehicles. 10.1109/TVT.2012.2232687IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 623--, "Passive Actuator Fault-Tolerant Control for a Class of Overactuated Nonlinear Systems and Applications to Electric Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 972- 985, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2012.2232687.

Prototype of Distributed Electro-Hydraulic Braking System and its Fail-Safe Control Strategy. Z Wang, L Yu, Y Wang, C You, L Ma, J Song, in 31st Annu. SAEZ. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Wang, C. You, L. Ma, and J. Song, "Prototype of Distributed Electro-Hydraulic Braking System and its Fail-Safe Control Strategy," in 31st Annu. SAE 2013

. Brake Colloq, Exhib, Tech, 10.4271/2013-01-2066Papers. SAE IntBrake Colloq. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Ponte Vedra, FL, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2013-01-2066.

Linear parameter-varyingbased fault-tolerant controller design for a class of overactuated non-linear systems with applications to electric vehicles. R Wang, H Zhang, J Wang, 10.1049/iet-cta.2013.0505IET Control Theory Appl. 89R. Wang, H. Zhang, and J. Wang, "Linear parameter-varying- based fault-tolerant controller design for a class of over- actuated non-linear systems with applications to electric vehicles," IET Control Theory Appl., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 705-717, 2014. doi: 10.1049/iet-cta.2013.0505.

Allocation-Based Fault Tolerant Control for Electric Vehicles with Xby-Wire. Y Wang, W Deng, J Wu, B Zhu, S Zhang, 10.4271/2014-01-0866SAE Int. J. Passenger Cars -Electron. and Elect. Syst. 71Y. Wang, W. Deng, J. Wu, B. Zhu, and S. Zhang, "Allocation- Based Fault Tolerant Control for Electric Vehicles with X- by-Wire," SAE Int. J. Passenger Cars -Electron. and Elect. Syst., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 256-263, 2014. doi: 10.4271/2014-01- 0866.

Linear Parameter-Varying Controller Design for Four-Wheel Independently Actuated Electric Ground Vehicles With Active Steering Systems. R Wang, H Zhang, J Wang, 10.1109/TCST.2013.2278237IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 224R. Wang, H. Zhang, and J. Wang, "Linear Parameter- Varying Controller Design for Four-Wheel Independently Actuated Electric Ground Vehicles With Active Steering Systems," IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1281-1296, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TCST.2013.2278237.

Fail-safe control allocation for a distributed brake-by-wire system considering the driver's behaviour. Z Wang, L Yu, C You, Y Wang, J Song, 10.1177/0954407014534225Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. 22813Z. Wang, L. Yu, C. You, Y. Wang, and J. Song, "Fail-safe control allocation for a distributed brake-by-wire system considering the driver's behaviour," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., vol. 228, no. 13, pp. 1547-1567, 2014. doi: 10.1177/0954407014534225.

Robust H∞ output-feedback yaw control for in-wheel motor driven electric vehicles with differential steering. R Wang, H Jing, C Hu, M Chadli, F Yan, 10.1016/j.neucom.2015.08.015Neurocomputing. 1733R. Wang, H. Jing, C. Hu, M. Chadli, and F. Yan, "Robust H∞ output-feedback yaw control for in-wheel motor driven electric vehicles with differential steering," Neurocomputing, vol. 173, no. 3, pp. 676-684, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2015.08.015.

Combined Fault-Tolerant Control with Optimal Control Allocation for Four-Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicles. Y Wang, G Liu, D Zhang, H Zhou, H Ye, X Chen, 10.1109/VPPC.2016.77916282016 IEEE Veh. Power and Propulsion Conf. (VPPC). Hangzhou, ChinaIEEEY. Wang, G. Liu, D. Zhang, H. Zhou, H. Ye, and X. Chen, "Combined Fault-Tolerant Control with Optimal Control Allocation for Four-Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicles," in 2016 IEEE Veh. Power and Propulsion Conf. (VPPC), Hangzhou, China: IEEE. doi: 10.1109/VPPC.2016. 7791628.

Fault-Tolerant Control of Electric Ground Vehicles Using a Triple-Step Nonlinear Approach. Y Wang, S Yu, J Yuan, H Chen, 10.1109/TMECH.2018.2837128IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics. 234Y. Wang, S. Yu, J. Yuan, and H. Chen, "Fault-Tolerant Control of Electric Ground Vehicles Using a Triple-Step Nonlinear Approach," IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1775-1786, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TMECH. 2018.2837128.

Fault-tolerant control for in-wheel-motor-driven electric ground vehicles in discrete time. Y Wang, C Zong, K Li, H Chen, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.11.030Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. 121Y. Wang, C. Zong, K. Li, and H. Chen, "Fault-tolerant control for in-wheel-motor-driven electric ground vehicles in discrete time," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 121, pp. 441-454, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.11.030.

Integrated Design of Control Allocation and Triple-Step Control for Over-Actuated Electric Ground Vehicles with Actuator Faults. Y Wang, J Gao, K Li, H Chen, 10.1016/j.jfranklin.2019.07.035doi: 10.1016/j. jfranklin.2019.07.035J. Franklin Inst. 3576Y. Wang, J. Gao, K. Li, and H. Chen, "Integrated Design of Control Allocation and Triple-Step Control for Over-Actuated Electric Ground Vehicles with Actuator Faults," J. Franklin Inst., vol. 357, no. 6, pp. 3150-3167, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j. jfranklin.2019.07.035.

Faulttolerant path-tracking control of autonomous electric ground vehicles with lateral prescribed performance. Y Wang, L Yin, N Xu, N Bian, H Chen, 10.1177/0142331219895343Trans. Inst. Meas. and Control. 429Y. Wang, L. Yin, N. Xu, N. Bian, and H. Chen, "Fault- tolerant path-tracking control of autonomous electric ground vehicles with lateral prescribed performance," Trans. Inst. Meas. and Control, vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 1740-1751, 2020. doi: 10.1177/0142331219895343.

Fault-tolerant path-following control for in-wheel-motor-driven autonomous ground vehicles with differential steering. Y Wang, C Zong, H Guo, H Chen, 10.1002/asjc.1976Asian J. Control. 223Y. Wang, C. Zong, H. Guo, and H. Chen, "Fault-tolerant path-following control for in-wheel-motor-driven autonomous ground vehicles with differential steering," Asian J. Control, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1230-1240, 2020. doi: 10.1002/asjc.1976.

Application of PID Algorithm in Drive Fault-Tolerant Control of Four-Wheel Drive Electric Vehicle. J Wang, Int. J. Mechatronics and Appl. Mech. 18J. Wang, "Application of PID Algorithm in Drive Fault- Tolerant Control of Four-Wheel Drive Electric Vehicle," Int. J. Mechatronics and Appl. Mech., vol. 1, no. 8, pp. 235-242, 2020.

Fault-Tolerant Control of Electric Vehicles with In-Wheel Motors through Tyre-Force Allocation. D Wanner, J Edrén, M Jonasson, O Wallmark, L Drugge, A S Trigell, Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'12). 11th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'12)Seoul, South KoreaJSAED. Wanner, J. Edrén, M. Jonasson, O. Wallmark, L. Drugge, and A. S. Trigell, "Fault-Tolerant Control of Electric Vehicles with In-Wheel Motors through Tyre-Force Allocation," in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC'12), Seoul, South Korea: JSAE, 2012.

Control allocation strategies for an electric vehicle with a wheel hub motor failure. D Wanner, O Wallmark, M Jonasson, L Drugge, A S Trigell, 10.1504/IJVSMT.2015.070164doi: 10.1504/ IJVSMT.2015.070164Int. J. Veh. Syst. Model. and Testing. 103D. Wanner, O. Wallmark, M. Jonasson, L. Drugge, and A. S. Trigell, "Control allocation strategies for an electric vehicle with a wheel hub motor failure," Int. J. Veh. Syst. Model. and Testing, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 263-287, 2015. doi: 10.1504/ IJVSMT.2015.070164.

Experimental implementation of a fault handling strategy for electric vehicles with individual-wheel drives. D Wanner, M Nybacka, O Wallmark, L Drugge, A Stensson Trigell, Proc. 24th Symp. Int. Assoc. for Veh. Syst. Dyn. (IAVSD). 24th Symp. Int. Assoc. for Veh. Syst. Dyn. (IAVSD)Graz, AustriaCRC PressD. Wanner, M. Nybacka, O. Wallmark, L. Drugge, and A. Stensson Trigell, "Experimental implementation of a fault handling strategy for electric vehicles with individual-wheel drives," in Proc. 24th Symp. Int. Assoc. for Veh. Syst. Dyn. (IAVSD), Graz, Austria: CRC Press, 2015, pp. 147-152.

Integrated torque vectoring and power management framework for electric vehicles. A Wong, D Kasinathan, A Khajepour, S.-K Chen, B Litkouhi, 10.1016/j.conengprac.2015.12.012Control Eng. Pract. 48A. Wong, D. Kasinathan, A. Khajepour, S.-K. Chen, and B. Litkouhi, "Integrated torque vectoring and power manage- ment framework for electric vehicles," Control Eng. Pract., vol. 48, pp. 22-36, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.conengprac.2015.12. 012.

Control strategies for four in-wheel driven electric vehicles when motor drive systems fail. X Xin, H Zheng, H Xu, G Qin, 10.1109/ACC.2014.6859424Proc. 2014 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 2014 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)Portland, OR, USAIEEEX. Xin, H. Zheng, H. Xu, and G. Qin, "Control strategies for four in-wheel driven electric vehicles when motor drive systems fail," in Proc. 2014 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), Portland, OR, USA: IEEE, pp. 885-890. doi: 10.1109/ACC. 2014.6859424.

Control strategy for four-wheel independent drive electric vehicles under failure of motor drive systems. X Xin, H Zheng, H Xu, G Qin, 10.1177/0142331215572040Trans. Inst. Meas. and Control. 382X. Xin, H. Zheng, H. Xu, and G. Qin, "Control strategy for four-wheel independent drive electric vehicles under failure of motor drive systems," Trans. Inst. Meas. and Control, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 129-140, 2016. doi: 10.1177/0142331215572040.

Hybrid fault tolerant tracking control design for electric vehicles. H Yang, V Cocquempot, B Jiang, 16H. Yang, V. Cocquempot, and B. Jiang, "Hybrid fault tolerant tracking control design for electric vehicles," in 16th

Mediterranean Conf, 10.1109/MED.2008.4602014Control and Automat. Ajaccio, FranceIEEEMediterranean Conf. Control and Automat., Ajaccio, France: IEEE, 2008, pp. 1210-1215. doi: 10.1109/MED.2008.4602014.

Optimal Fault-Tolerant Path-Tracking Control for 4WS4WD Electric Vehicles. 10.1109/TITS.2009.2033374IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 111--, "Optimal Fault-Tolerant Path-Tracking Control for 4WS4WD Electric Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 237-243, 2010. doi: 10.1109/TITS. 2009.2033374.

Fault-Tolerant Yaw Moment Control with Steer-and Brake-by-Wire Devices. S Yim, 10.1007/s12239-014-0048-0Int. J. Automot. Technol. 153S. Yim, "Fault-Tolerant Yaw Moment Control with Steer-and Brake-by-Wire Devices," Int. J. Automot. Technol., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 463-468, 2014. doi: 10.1007/s12239-014-0048-0.

Yaw stability of four-wheel-drive electric vehicle based on multimodel predictive control. G Yin, Q Chen, Q Ahmed, X Jin, C Bian, 10.1109/ChiCC.2015.7260938doi: 10 . 1109/ChiCC.2015.7260938Control Conf. (CCC). Hangzhou, ChinaIEEE34th ChinG. Yin, Q. Chen, Q. Ahmed, X. Jin, and C. Bian, "Yaw stability of four-wheel-drive electric vehicle based on multi- model predictive control," in 2015 34th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), Hangzhou, China: IEEE, pp. 8159-8164. doi: 10 . 1109/ChiCC.2015.7260938.

Fault Tolerant Control for an Electric 4WD Vehicle's Path Tracking with Active Fault Diagnosis. X Zhang, V Cocquempot, 10.3182/20140824-6-ZA-1003.0189319th IFAC World Congr., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Cape Town, South AfricaIFAC47X. Zhang and V. Cocquempot, "Fault Tolerant Control for an Electric 4WD Vehicle's Path Tracking with Active Fault Diagnosis," in 19th IFAC World Congr., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 47, no. 3, Cape Town, South Africa: IFAC, 2014, pp. 6728-6734. doi: 10.3182/20140824-6-ZA-1003.01893.

Fault tolerant control scheme based on active fault diagnosis for the path tracking control of a 4WD electric vehicle. X Zhang, V Cocquempot, 10.1109/ISIC.2014.69676472014 IEEE Int. Symp. Intell. Control (ISIC). Juan Les Pins, FranceIEEEX. Zhang and V. Cocquempot, "Fault tolerant control scheme based on active fault diagnosis for the path tracking control of a 4WD electric vehicle," in 2014 IEEE Int. Symp. Intell. Control (ISIC), Juan Les Pins, France: IEEE, pp. 2189-2195. doi: 10.1109/ISIC.2014.6967647.

Fault-tolerant control scheme based on reference adjustments for a 4WD electric vehicle with actuator faults and constraints. X Zhang, V Cocquempot, A Aïtouche, 10.1109/MED.2015.71587532015 23rd Mediterranean Conf. Control and Automat. (MED). Torremolinos, SpainIEEEX. Zhang, V. Cocquempot, and A. Aïtouche, "Fault-tolerant control scheme based on reference adjustments for a 4WD electric vehicle with actuator faults and constraints," in 2015 23rd Mediterranean Conf. Control and Automat. (MED), Torremolinos, Spain: IEEE, pp. 218-223. doi: 10.1109/MED. 2015.7158753.

Optimal Torque Distribution for the Stability Improvement of a Four-Wheel Distributed-Driven Electric Vehicle Using Coordinated Control. X Zhang, K Wei, X Yuan, Y Tang, 10.1115/1.4033004J. Comput. and Nonlinear Dyn. 115X. Zhang, K. Wei, X. Yuan, and Y. Tang, "Optimal Torque Distribution for the Stability Improvement of a Four-Wheel Distributed-Driven Electric Vehicle Using Coordinated Con- trol," J. Comput. and Nonlinear Dyn., vol. 11, no. 5, p. 051 017, 2016. doi: 10.1115/1.4033004.

Active Fault-Tolerant Control for Electric Vehicles With Independently Driven Rear In-Wheel Motors Against Certain Actuator Faults. G Zhang, H Zhang, X Huang, J Wang, H Yu, R Graaf, 10.1109/TCST.2015.2501354IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 245G. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Huang, J. Wang, H. Yu, and R. Graaf, "Active Fault-Tolerant Control for Electric Vehicles With Independently Driven Rear In-Wheel Motors Against Certain Actuator Faults," IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1557-1572, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TCST.2015.2501354.

Reduction of Steering Effort in the Event of EPAS Failure using Differential Braking Assisted Steering. D Zhang, B Lin, A Kirli, C Okwudire, 10.4271/2017-01-1489SAE Int. J. Transp. Saf. 52D. Zhang, B. Lin, A. Kirli, and C. Okwudire, "Reduction of Steering Effort in the Event of EPAS Failure using Differential Braking Assisted Steering," SAE Int. J. Transp. Saf., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 227-233, 2017. doi: 10.4271/2017-01-1489.

Fault-tolerant Control for Distributed-drive Electric Vehicles Considering Individual Driver Steering Characteristics. H Zhang, W Zhao, J Wang, 10.1109/IECON.2018.859162544th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON). Washington, DC, USAIEEEH. Zhang, W. Zhao, and J. Wang, "Fault-tolerant Control for Distributed-drive Electric Vehicles Considering Individual Driver Steering Characteristics," in 44th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON), Washington, DC, USA: IEEE, 2018, pp. 2056-2061. doi: 10.1109/IECON.2018.8591625.

Adaptive Sliding Mode Fault-Tolerant Coordination Control for Four-Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicles. D Zhang, G Liu, H Zhou, W Zhao, 10.1109/TIE.2018.2798571doi: 10.1109/ TIE.2018.2798571IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 6511D. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Zhou, and W. Zhao, "Adaptive Sliding Mode Fault-Tolerant Coordination Control for Four-Wheel Independently Driven Electric Vehicles," IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 9090-9100, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ TIE.2018.2798571.

Fault-Tolerant Control for Electric Vehicles With Independently Driven in-Wheel Motors Considering Individual Driver Steering Characteristics. H Zhang, W Zhao, J Wang, 10.1109/TVT.2019.2904698IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 685H. Zhang, W. Zhao, and J. Wang, "Fault-Tolerant Control for Electric Vehicles With Independently Driven in-Wheel Mo- tors Considering Individual Driver Steering Characteristics," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 4527-4536, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2019.2904698.

Fault-tolerant control based on 2D game for independent driving electric vehicle suffering actuator failures. B Zhang, S Lu, L Zhao, K Xiao, 10.1177/0954407020928827Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. B. Zhang, S. Lu, L. Zhao, and K. Xiao, "Fault-tolerant control based on 2D game for independent driving electric vehicle suffering actuator failures," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., 2020. doi: 10.1177/0954407020928827.

Fault-tolerant control for four-wheel independent actuated electric vehicle using feedback linearization and cooperative game theory. B Zhang, S Lu, 10.1016/j.conengprac.2020.104510Control Eng. Pract. 1012020B. Zhang and S. Lu, "Fault-tolerant control for four-wheel independent actuated electric vehicle using feedback lineariza- tion and cooperative game theory," Control Eng. Pract., vol. 101, p. 104 510, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.conengprac.2020. 104510.

Fault Tolerant Control Against Actuator Failures of 4WID/4WIS Electric Vehicles. C Zong, C Liu, H Zheng, J Liu, 10.4271/2013-01-0405Proc. 2013 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. 2013 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. PapersDetroit, MI, USASAE IntC. Zong, C. Liu, H. Zheng, and J. Liu, "Fault Tolerant Control Against Actuator Failures of 4WID/4WIS Electric Vehicles," in Proc. 2013 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2013-01- 0405.

Stability Control of Vehicle Emergency Braking with Tire Blowout. Q Chen, Y Liu, X Li, 10.1155/2014/436175Int. J. Veh. Technol. 2014Q. Chen, Y. Liu, and X. Li, "Stability Control of Vehicle Emergency Braking with Tire Blowout," Int. J. Veh. Technol., vol. 2014, 2014. doi: 10.1155/2014/436175.

LPV control for autonomous vehicles using a machine learning-based tire pressure estimation. D Fényes, T Hegedűs, B Németh, P Gáspár, D Koenig, O Sename, 10.1109/MED48518.2020.9183106doi: 10 . 1109 / MED48518.2020.91831062020 28th Mediterranean Conf. Control and Automat. (MED). Saint-Raphaël, FranceIEEED. Fényes, T. Hegedűs, B. Németh, P. Gáspár, D. Koenig, and O. Sename, "LPV control for autonomous vehicles using a machine learning-based tire pressure estimation," in 2020 28th Mediterranean Conf. Control and Automat. (MED), Saint-Raphaël, France: IEEE, pp. 212-217. doi: 10 . 1109 / MED48518.2020.9183106.

Stability control of vehicle with tire blowout using differential flatness based MPC method. H Guo, F Wang, H Chen, D Guo, 10.1109/WCICA.2012.6358216Proc. 10th World Congr. Intell. Control and Automat. 10th World Congr. Intell. Control and AutomatBeijing, ChinaIEEEH. Guo, F. Wang, H. Chen, and D. Guo, "Stability control of vehicle with tire blowout using differential flatness based MPC method," in Proc. 10th World Congr. Intell. Control and Automat., Beijing, China: IEEE, 2012, pp. 2066-2071. doi: 10.1109/WCICA.2012.6358216.

Fault Tolerant Control for Autonomous Vehicle by Generating References for Rear Wheels Steering. A Haddad, A Aïtouche, V Cocquempot, 10.3182/20120912-3-BG-2031.00069doi: 10 . 3182 / 20120912 -3 -BG - 2031.0006913th IFAC Symp. Control Transp. Syst., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Sofia, BulgariaIFAC45A. Haddad, A. Aïtouche, and V. Cocquempot, "Fault Tolerant Control for Autonomous Vehicle by Generating References for Rear Wheels Steering," in 13th IFAC Symp. Control Transp. Syst., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 45, no. 24, Sofia, Bulgaria: IFAC, 2012, pp. 328-333. doi: 10 . 3182 / 20120912 -3 -BG - 2031.00069.

Gain-scheduling robust control for a tire-blow-out road vehicle. H Jing, Z Liu, 10.1177/0954407017743411Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. 2332H. Jing and Z. Liu, "Gain-scheduling robust control for a tire-blow-out road vehicle," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., vol. 233, no. 2, pp. 344-362, 2019. doi: 10.1177/0954407017743411.

A Control Algorithm for Electric Power Steering of Tire Blowout Vehicle to Reduce the Impact Torque on Steering Wheel. S Li, C Zong, G Chen, L He, 10.4271/2013-01-1239Proc. 2013 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. 2013 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. PapersDetroit, MI, USASAE IntS. Li, C. Zong, G. Chen, and L. He, "A Control Algorithm for Electric Power Steering of Tire Blowout Vehicle to Reduce the Impact Torque on Steering Wheel," in Proc. 2013 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2013-01-1239.

Shared Steering Control of Tire Blowout for Ground Vehicles. A Li, Y Chen, W.-C Lin, X Du, Proc. nullA. Li, Y. Chen, W.-C. Lin, and X. Du, "Shared Steering Control of Tire Blowout for Ground Vehicles," in Proc.

Amer, 10.23919/ACC45564.2020.9147390Control Conf. (ACC). Denver, CO, USAIEEEAmer. Control Conf. (ACC), Denver, CO, USA: IEEE, pp. 4862-4867. doi: 10.23919/ACC45564.2020.9147390.

Development of Active Control Strategy for Flat Tire Vehicles. H Liu, W Deng, C Zong, J Wu, 10.4271/2014-01-0859Proc. SAE 2014 World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. SAE 2014 World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. PapersDetroit, MI, USASAE IntH. Liu, W. Deng, C. Zong, and J. Wu, "Development of Active Control Strategy for Flat Tire Vehicles," in Proc. SAE 2014 World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2014-01-0859.

Active rectifying control of vehicle with tire blowout based on adaptive fuzzy proportional-integral-derivative control. S Lu, 10.1177/1687814019835108Adv. Mech. Eng. 113S. Lu et al., "Active rectifying control of vehicle with tire blowout based on adaptive fuzzy propor- tional-integral-derivative control," Adv. Mech. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, 2019. doi: 10.1177/1687814019835108.

Finite-time stability control of an electric vehicle under tyre blowout. Q Meng, C Qian, Z.-Y. Sun, 10.1177/0142331218780967Trans. Inst. Meas. and Control. 415Q. Meng, C. Qian, and Z.-Y. Sun, "Finite-time stability control of an electric vehicle under tyre blowout," Trans. Inst. Meas. and Control, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1395-1404, 2019. doi: 10.1177/0142331218780967.

Design and simulation of the sliding mode controller for the vehicle blowout process control. T Mo, X Zhang, K Fan, W Mo, Y Qiu, 10.1504/IJVS.2013.056967Int. J. Veh. Saf. 64333T. Mo, X. Zhang, K. Fan, W. Mo, and Y. Qiu, "Design and simulation of the sliding mode controller for the vehicle blow- out process control," Int. J. Veh. Saf., vol. 6, no. 4, p. 333, 2013. doi: 10.1504/IJVS.2013.056967.

Theory and experiments of tire blow-out effects and hazard reduction control for automated vehicle lateral control system. S Patwardhan, M Tomizuka, W.-B Zhang, P Devlin, 10.1109/ACC.1994.752248doi: 10.1109/ ACC.1994.752248Proc. 1994 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 1994 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)Baltimore, MD, USAIEEE2S. Patwardhan, M. Tomizuka, W.-B. Zhang, and P. Devlin, "Theory and experiments of tire blow-out effects and haz- ard reduction control for automated vehicle lateral control system," in Proc. 1994 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), vol. 2, Baltimore, MD, USA: IEEE, pp. 1207-1209. doi: 10.1109/ ACC.1994.752248.

Fault Detection and Tolerant Control for Lateral Guidance of Vehicles in Automated Highways. S N Patwardhan, Dissertation, Univ. California. S. N. Patwardhan, "Fault Detection and Tolerant Control for Lateral Guidance of Vehicles in Automated Highways," Dissertation, Univ. California, Berkeley, CA, USA, 1994.

Experimental Results of Tire Burst Controller for AHS. S Patwardhan, H.-S Tan, M Tomizuka, 10.1016/S1474-6670(17)58961-2doi: 10. 1016/S1474-667013th Triennial World Congr., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. San Francisco, CA, USAIFAC29S. Patwardhan, H.-S. Tan, and M. Tomizuka, "Experimental Results of Tire Burst Controller for AHS," in 13th Triennial World Congr., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 29, no. 1, San Francisco, CA, USA: IFAC, 1996, pp. 7885-7890. doi: 10. 1016/S1474-6670(17)58961-2.

Experimental results of a tire-burst controller for AHS. S Patwardhan, H.-S Tan, M Tomizuka, 10.1016/S0967-0661(97)10017-Xdoi: 10 . 1016 / S0967 - 0661Control Eng. Pract. 51110017S. Patwardhan, H.-S. Tan, and M. Tomizuka, "Experimental results of a tire-burst controller for AHS," Control Eng. Pract., vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1615-1622, 1997. doi: 10 . 1016 / S0967 - 0661(97)10017-X.

Constrained H∞ control for road vehicles after a tire blow-out. F Wang, H Chen, H Guo, D Cao, 10.1016/j.mechatronics.2014.12.007Mechatronics. 30F. Wang, H. Chen, H. Guo, and D. Cao, "Constrained H∞ control for road vehicles after a tire blow-out," Mechatronics, vol. 30, pp. 371-382, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.mechatronics.2014. 12.007.

Nonlinear model predictive control of blowout tire vehicles and its map-based implementation. F Wang, H Guo, H Chen, 10.1109/ChiCC.2015.7260263doi: 10 . 1109 / ChiCC . 2015 . 72602632015 34th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC). Hangzhou, ChinaIEEEF. Wang, H. Guo, and H. Chen, "Nonlinear model predictive control of blowout tire vehicles and its map-based implemen- tation," in 2015 34th Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), Hangzhou, China: IEEE, pp. 4043-4048. doi: 10 . 1109 / ChiCC . 2015 . 7260263.

Nonlinear Coordinated Motion Control of Road Vehicles After a Tire Blowout. F Wang, H Chen, D Cao, 10.1109/TCST.2015.2472982IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 243F. Wang, H. Chen, and D. Cao, "Nonlinear Coordinated Motion Control of Road Vehicles After a Tire Blowout," IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 956-970, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TCST.2015.2472982.

Triple-step nonlinear control design for road vehicles after a tire blow-out on the highway. F Wang, N Hao, L Song, H Chen, 10.1109/WCICA.2016.75786072016 12th World Congr. Intell. Control and Automat. (WCICA). Guilin, ChinaIEEEF. Wang, N. Hao, L. Song, and H. Chen, "Triple-step nonlinear control design for road vehicles after a tire blow-out on the highway," in 2016 12th World Congr. Intell. Control and Automat. (WCICA), Guilin, China: IEEE, pp. 1414-1419. doi: 10.1109/WCICA.2016.7578607.

A novel integrated approach for path following and directional stability control of road vehicles after a tire blow-out. F Wang, H Chen, K Guo, D Cao, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2017.02.016Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. 93F. Wang, H. Chen, K. Guo, and D. Cao, "A novel integrated approach for path following and directional stability control of road vehicles after a tire blow-out," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 93, pp. 431-444, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp. 2017.02.016.

Predictive safety control for road vehicles after a tire blowout. F Wang, H Chen, L Guo, Y Hu, 10.1007/s11432-017-9330-6Sci. China Inf. Sci. 617F. Wang, H. Chen, L. Guo, and Y. Hu, "Predictive safety control for road vehicles after a tire blowout," Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 61, no. 7, p. 70 209, 2018. doi: 10.1007/s11432-017- 9330-6.

RMPC-Based Directional Stability Control for Electric Vehicles Subject to Tire Blowout on Curved Expressway. L Yang, M Yue, J Wang, W Hou, 10.1115/1.4042029J. Dynamic Syst., Meas., and Control. 1414L. Yang, M. Yue, J. Wang, and W. Hou, "RMPC-Based Directional Stability Control for Electric Vehicles Subject to Tire Blowout on Curved Expressway," J. Dynamic Syst., Meas., and Control, vol. 141, no. 4, pp. 041009-1-041009-9, 2019. doi: 10.1115/1.4042029.

Stability Control for Tire Blowout Vehicle Based on Brake by Wire System Considering Driver Operation. L Yu, Z Wang, N Pan, L Zhang, J Song, Proc. ASME. ASMEL. Yu, Z. Wang, N. Pan, L. Zhang, and J. Song, "Stability Control for Tire Blowout Vehicle Based on Brake by Wire System Considering Driver Operation," in Proc. ASME 2014

. 10.1115/DETC2014-35564Int. Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. & Comput. and Inf. Eng. Conf. 3ASMEInt. Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. & Comput. and Inf. Eng. Conf., vol. 3, Buffalo, NY, USA: ASME. doi: 10.1115/DETC2014- 35564.

Dynamic Event-Triggered Fault-Tolerant Control of Vehicle Active Suspension Systems. I Ahmad, X Ge, Q.-L Han, Z Cao, 10.1109/IECON43393.2020.9254609doi: 10. 1109/IECON43393.2020.925460946th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON). SingaporeIEEEI. Ahmad, X. Ge, Q.-L. Han, and Z. Cao, "Dynamic Event- Triggered Fault-Tolerant Control of Vehicle Active Suspension Systems," in 46th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON), Singapore: IEEE, 2020, pp. 4889-4894. doi: 10. 1109/IECON43393.2020.9254609.

Control and Sensor Fault Tolerance of Vehicle Active Suspension. A Chamseddine, H Noura, 10.1109/TCST.2007.908191doi: 10.1109/ TCST.2007.908191IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 163A. Chamseddine and H. Noura, "Control and Sensor Fault Tolerance of Vehicle Active Suspension," IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 416-433, 2008. doi: 10.1109/ TCST.2007.908191.

Coordination strategy between AFS and ASB with fault-tolerant mechanism for ground vehicle. P Dawei, Y Mingshuai, L Yulong, L Yahui, 10.1177/0954407019896141Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. P. Dawei, Y. Mingshuai, L. Yulong, and L. Yahui, "Coordi- nation strategy between AFS and ASB with fault-tolerant mechanism for ground vehicle," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., 2020. doi: 10.1177/0954407019896141.

Coordination strategy between AFS and ASB with fault-tolerant mechanism for ground vehicle. 10.1177/0954407019896141Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. 2354--, "Coordination strategy between AFS and ASB with fault-tolerant mechanism for ground vehicle," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., vol. 235, no. 4, pp. 1128-1148, 2021. doi: 10.1177/0954407019896141.

Fault Detection and Fault Tolerant Control of Vehicle Semi-Active Suspension System with Magneto-rheological Damper. X Du, G Han, M Yu, Y Peng, X Xu, J Fu, 10.1088/1361-665X/abbff8Smart Mater. and Struct. X. Du, G. Han, M. Yu, Y. Peng, X. Xu, and J. Fu, "Fault Detection and Fault Tolerant Control of Vehicle Semi- Active Suspension System with Magneto-rheological Damper," Smart Mater. and Struct., 2020. doi: 10.1088/1361-665X/ abbff8.

A LPV/H∞ fault tolerant control of vehicle roll dynamics under semi-active damper malfunction. S Fergani, O Sename, L Dugard, 10.1109/ACC.2014.6859081doi: 10. 1109/ACC.2014.6859081Proc. 2014 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC). 2014 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC)Portland, OR, USAIEEES. Fergani, O. Sename, and L. Dugard, "A LPV/H∞ fault tolerant control of vehicle roll dynamics under semi-active damper malfunction," in Proc. 2014 Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), Portland, OR, USA: IEEE, pp. 4482-4487. doi: 10. 1109/ACC.2014.6859081.

A Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Control Design. P Gáspár, Z Szabó, J Bokor, 10.3182/20080706-5-KR-1001.0144417th IFAC World Congr., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes. Seoul, South KoreaIFAC41P. Gáspár, Z. Szabó, and J. Bokor, "A Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Control Design," in 17th IFAC World Congr., ser. IFAC Proc. Volumes, vol. 41, no. 2, Seoul, South Korea: IFAC, 2008, pp. 8540-8545. doi: 10.3182/20080706-5-KR-1001.01444.

Model-Based Control Design of Integrated Vehicle Systems. P Gáspár, 10.1007/978-3-642-03737-5_8Towards Intell. Eng. and Inf. Technol. Ser. Stud. Comput. Intell. I. J. Rudas. J. Fodor, and J. Kacprzyk243SpringerP. Gáspár, "Model-Based Control Design of Integrated Vehicle Systems," in Towards Intell. Eng. and Inf. Tech- nol. Ser. Stud. Comput. Intell. I. J. Rudas, J. Fodor, and J. Kacprzyk, Eds., vol. 243, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 103-119. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-03737-5 8.

LPV design of faulttolerant control for road vehicles. P Gáspár, Z Szabó, J Bokor, 10.1109/SYSTOL.2010.56760602010 Conf. Control and Fault-Tolerant Syst. (SysTol). Nice, FranceIEEEP. Gáspár, Z. Szabó, and J. Bokor, "LPV design of fault- tolerant control for road vehicles," in 2010 Conf. Control and Fault-Tolerant Syst. (SysTol), Nice, France: IEEE, pp. 807- 812. doi: 10.1109/SYSTOL.2010.5676060.

LPV Design of Fault-tolerant Control for Road Vehicles. 10.2478/v10006-012-0013-xInt. J. Appl. Math. and Comput. Sci. 221--, "LPV Design of Fault-tolerant Control for Road Vehi- cles," Int. J. Appl. Math. and Comput. Sci., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 173-182, 2012. doi: 10.2478/v10006-012-0013-x.

Robust Output-Feedback Based Fault-Tolerant Control of Active Suspension with Finite-Frequency Constraint. H Jing, R Wang, H R Karimi, M Chadli, C Hu, F Yan, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.6859th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS). D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLineParis, FranceIFAC48H. Jing, R. Wang, H. R. Karimi, M. Chadli, C. Hu, and F. Yan, "Robust Output-Feedback Based Fault-Tolerant Control of Active Suspension with Finite-Frequency Constraint," in 9th IFAC Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision and Saf. for Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), D. Maquin, Ed., ser. IFAC- PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 21, Paris, France: IFAC, 2015, pp. 1173-1179. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.685.

Faulttolerant control of active suspensions in in-wheel motor driven electric vehicles. H Jing, R Wang, C Li, J Wang, N Chen, 10.1504/IJVD.2015.071067Int. J. Veh. Des. 6822H. Jing, R. Wang, C. Li, J. Wang, and N. Chen, "Fault- tolerant control of active suspensions in in-wheel motor driven electric vehicles," Int. J. Veh. Des., vol. 68, p. 22, 1/2/3 2015. doi: 10.1504/IJVD.2015.071067.

Fault-tolerant H∞ control for active suspension vehicle systems with actuator faults. H Li, H Gao, H Liu, M Liu, 10.1177/0959651811418401doi: 10 . 1177 / 0959651811418401Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part I: J. Syst. and Control Eng. 2263H. Li, H. Gao, H. Liu, and M. Liu, "Fault-tolerant H∞ control for active suspension vehicle systems with actuator faults," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part I: J. Syst. and Control Eng., vol. 226, no. 3, pp. 348-363, 2011. doi: 10 . 1177 / 0959651811418401.

Reliable Fuzzy Control for Active Suspension Systems With Actuator Delay and Fault. H Li, H Liu, H Gao, P Shi, 10.1109/TFUZZ.2011.2174244IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 202H. Li, H. Liu, H. Gao, and P. Shi, "Reliable Fuzzy Control for Active Suspension Systems With Actuator Delay and Fault," IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 342-357, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TFUZZ.2011.2174244.

A Switching Control Approach for Uncertain Vehicle Suspension Systems with Actuator Failure. Q Li, Y Pan, H Liang, 10.1007/s40815-020-00961-3Int. J. Fuzzy Syst. Q. Li, Y. Pan, and H. Liang, "A Switching Control Approach for Uncertain Vehicle Suspension Systems with Actuator Failure," Int. J. Fuzzy Syst., 2021. doi: 10.1007/s40815-020- 00961-3.

Fault-tolerant Controller Design for Active Suspension System with Proportional Differential Sliding Mode Observer. B Lin, X Su, 10.1007/s12555-018-0630-8Int. J. Control, Automat. and Syst. 177B. Lin and X. Su, "Fault-tolerant Controller Design for Active Suspension System with Proportional Differential Sliding Mode Observer," Int. J. Control, Automat. and Syst., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1751-1761, 2019. doi: 10.1007/s12555-018-0630-8.

Adaptive Fault Tolerant Control of a Half-Car Active Suspension Systems Subject to Random Actuator Failures. B Liu, M Saif, H Fan, 10.1109/TMECH.2016.2587159IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics. 216B. Liu, M. Saif, and H. Fan, "Adaptive Fault Tolerant Control of a Half-Car Active Suspension Systems Subject to Ran- dom Actuator Failures," IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 2847-2857, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TMECH. 2016.2587159.

Actuator Failure Compensation-Based Adaptive Control of Active Suspension Systems With Prescribed Performance. Y Liu, Q Zeng, S Tong, C L P Chen, L Liu, 10.1109/TIE.2019.2937037IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 678Y. Liu, Q. Zeng, S. Tong, C. L. P. Chen, and L. Liu, "Actuator Failure Compensation-Based Adaptive Control of Active Suspension Systems With Prescribed Performance," IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 7044-7053, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2019.2937037.

Adaptive PID-Sliding-Mode Fault-Tolerant Control Approach for Vehicle Suspension Systems Subject to Actuator Faults. M Moradi, A Fekih, 10.1109/TVT.2013.2282956IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 633M. Moradi and A. Fekih, "Adaptive PID-Sliding-Mode Fault- Tolerant Control Approach for Vehicle Suspension Systems Subject to Actuator Faults," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 1041-1054, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2013. 2282956.

A Stability Guaranteed Robust Fault Tolerant Control Design for Vehicle Suspension Systems Subject to Actuator Faults and Disturbances. 10.1109/TCST.2014.2357341IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 233--, "A Stability Guaranteed Robust Fault Tolerant Control Design for Vehicle Suspension Systems Subject to Actuator Faults and Disturbances," IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Tech- nol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1164-1171, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TCST. 2014.2357341.

LPV-MPC Fault Tolerant Control of Automotive Suspension Dampers. M Morato, O Sename, L Dugard, 2nd IFAC Workshop Linear Parameter Varying Syst. M. Menezes Morato, O. Sename, and L. Dugard, "LPV-MPC Fault Tolerant Control of Automotive Suspension Dampers," in 2nd IFAC Workshop Linear Parameter Varying Syst.

. ( Lpvs), A Bazanella, Ed Ser, Ifac-Papersonline, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.11.172Brazil: IFAC. 5126(LPVS), A. Sanfelice Bazanella, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 26, Florianópolis, Brazil: IFAC, 2018, pp. 31-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.11.172.

Development of a simple ER damper model for fault-tolerant control design. M Morato, T.-P Pham, O Sename, L Dugard, 10.1007/s40430-020-02585-yJ. Brazilian Soc. Mech. Sci. and Eng. 42102020M. Menezes Morato, T.-P. Pham, O. Sename, and L. Dugard, "Development of a simple ER damper model for fault-tolerant control design," J. Brazilian Soc. Mech. Sci. and Eng., vol. 42, no. 10, p. 502, 2020. doi: 10.1007/s40430-020-02585-y.

Adaptive Fault-Tolerant Compensation Control and Its Application to Nonlinear Suspension Systems. H Pan, H Li, W Sun, Z Wang, 10.1109/TSMC.2017.2785796doi: 10. 1109/TSMC.2017.2785796IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, and Cybern.: Syst. 505H. Pan, H. Li, W. Sun, and Z. Wang, "Adaptive Fault- Tolerant Compensation Control and Its Application to Non- linear Suspension Systems," IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, and Cybern.: Syst., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1766-1776, 2020. doi: 10. 1109/TSMC.2017.2785796.

Fault Tolerance in an Active Suspension System with a Linear Permanent Magnet Actuator for Automotive Applications. D Papagiannis, E Tsioumas, N Jabbour, M Koseoglou, C Mademlis, 10.1109/WEMDCD.2019.88877662019 IEEE Workshop Elect. Mach. Des., Control and Diagnosis (WEMDCD). Athens, GreeceIEEE1D. Papagiannis, E. Tsioumas, N. Jabbour, M. Koseoglou, and C. Mademlis, "Fault Tolerance in an Active Suspension System with a Linear Permanent Magnet Actuator for Automotive Applications," in 2019 IEEE Workshop Elect. Mach. Des., Control and Diagnosis (WEMDCD), vol. 1, Athens, Greece: IEEE, pp. 203-208. doi: 10.1109/WEMDCD. 2019.8887766.

Fault-Tolerant Controller and Failure Analysis of Automotive Electromagnetic Suspension Systems. D V Retianza, J Duivenbode, H Huisman, E A Lomonova, 10.1109/EVER.2019.8813514doi: 10.1109/ EVER.2019.88135142019 14th Int. Conf. Ecological Veh. and Renewable Energies (EVER). Monte-Carlo, MonacoIEEED. V. Retianza, J. v Duivenbode, H. Huisman, and E. A. Lomonova, "Fault-Tolerant Controller and Failure Analysis of Automotive Electromagnetic Suspension Systems," in 2019 14th Int. Conf. Ecological Veh. and Renewable Energies (EVER), Monte-Carlo, Monaco: IEEE, pp. 1-9. doi: 10.1109/ EVER.2019.8813514.

Higher order sliding mode control for active suspension systems subject to actuator faults and disturbances. J Sun, J Cong, L Gu, M Dong, 10.1177/1464419318762887Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part K: J. Multi-body Dyn. 2332J. Sun, J. Cong, L. Gu, and M. Dong, "Higher order sliding mode control for active suspension systems subject to actuator faults and disturbances," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part K: J. Multi-body Dyn., vol. 233, no. 2, pp. 280-298, 2018. doi: 10.1177/1464419318762887.

Actuator faultbased integrated control for vehicle chassis system. J Sun, J Cong, W Zhao, Y Zhang, 10.1177/0020294020977574Meas. and Control. 2020J. Sun, J. Cong, W. Zhao, and Y. Zhang, "Actuator fault- based integrated control for vehicle chassis system," Meas. and Control, 2020. doi: 10.1177/0020294020977574.

Fault tolerant control with additive compensation for faults in an automotive damper. J R Tudón-Martínez, 10.1109/ICNSC.2013.6548842doi: 10.1109/ ICNSC.2013.65488422013 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Netw., Sens., And Control (ICNSC). Evry, FranceIEEEJ. R. Tudón-Martínez et al., "Fault tolerant control with additive compensation for faults in an automotive damper," in 2013 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Netw., Sens., And Control (ICNSC), Evry, France: IEEE, pp. 810-814. doi: 10.1109/ ICNSC.2013.6548842.

Robust fault-tolerant H∞ control of active suspension systems with finite-frequency constraint. R Wang, H Jing, H R Karimi, N Chen, 10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.01.015Mech. Syst. and Signal Process. R. Wang, H. Jing, H. R. Karimi, and N. Chen, "Robust fault-tolerant H∞ control of active suspension systems with finite-frequency constraint," Mech. Syst. and Signal Process., vol. 62-63, pp. 341-355, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.01. 015.

Event-triggered control for active vehicle suspension systems with networkinduced delays. G Wang, M Chadli, H Chen, Z Zhou, 10.1016/j.jfranklin.2018.10.012J. Franklin Inst. 3561G. Wang, M. Chadli, H. Chen, and Z. Zhou, "Event-triggered control for active vehicle suspension systems with network- induced delays," J. Franklin Inst., vol. 356, no. 1, pp. 147-172, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.jfranklin.2018.10.012.

Active fault tolerance control for active suspension with control input time-delay and actuator gain variation fault. H Wang, 10.1504/IJHVS.2020.111260Int. J. Heavy Veh. Syst. 275703H. Wang, "Active fault tolerance control for active suspension with control input time-delay and actuator gain variation fault," Int. J. Heavy Veh. Syst., vol. 27, no. 5, p. 703, 2020. doi: 10.1504/IJHVS.2020.111260.

Fault-tolerant prescribed performance control of active suspension based on approximation-free method. Y Wu, B Li, H Du, N Zhang, B Zhang, 10.1080/00423114.2020.1866767Veh. Syst. Dyn. Y. Wu, B. Li, H. Du, N. Zhang, and B. Zhang, "Fault-tolerant prescribed performance control of active suspension based on approximation-free method," Veh. Syst. Dyn., 2021. doi: 10.1080/00423114.2020.1866767.

Nonfragile fault-tolerant control of suspension systems subject to input quantization and actuator fault. J Xiong, X.-H Chang, J H Park, Z.-M Li, 10.1002/rnc.5135Int. J. Robust and Nonlinear Control. 3016J. Xiong, X.-H. Chang, J. H. Park, and Z.-M. Li, "Nonfrag- ile fault-tolerant control of suspension systems subject to input quantization and actuator fault," Int. J. Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 30, no. 16, pp. 6720-6743, 2020. doi: 10.1002/rnc.5135.

Reliable control for a class of nonlinear time-delay systems against actuator faults with application to suspension control. X Yu, H Pan, W Sun, H Gao, 10.1109/TMECH.2019.2948477doi: 10. 1109/TMECH.2019.2948477IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics. 246X. Yu, H. Pan, W. Sun, and H. Gao, "Reliable control for a class of nonlinear time-delay systems against actuator faults with application to suspension control," IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 2498-2507, 2019. doi: 10. 1109/TMECH.2019.2948477.

Semi-active control of air suspension with auxiliary chamber subject to parameter uncertainties and time-delay. Z Zhang, J Wang, W Wu, C Huang, 10.1002/rnc.5169Int. J. Robust and Nonlinear Control. Z. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Wu, and C. Huang, "Semi-active control of air suspension with auxiliary chamber subject to parameter uncertainties and time-delay," Int. J. Robust and Nonlinear Control, pp. 1-20, 2020. doi: 10.1002/rnc.5169.

Adaptive NN control based on Butterworth low-pass filter for quarter active suspension systems with actuator failure. X Zhang, L Liu, Y.-J Liu, 10.3934/math.2021046AIMS Math. 61X. Zhang, L. Liu, and Y.-J. Liu, "Adaptive NN control based on Butterworth low-pass filter for quarter active suspension systems with actuator failure," AIMS Math., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 754-771, 2021. doi: 10.3934/math.2021046.

Fault-tolerant architecture of yaw moment management with steer-by-wire, active braking and drivingtorque distribution integrated control. R Hayama, M Higashi, S Kawahara, S Nakano, H Kumamoto, 10.4271/2008-01-0110Proc. 2008 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers. 2008 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. PapersDetroit, MI, USASAE IntR. Hayama, M. Higashi, S. Kawahara, S. Nakano, and H. Kumamoto, "Fault-tolerant architecture of yaw moment management with steer-by-wire, active braking and driving- torque distribution integrated control," in Proc. 2008 SAE World Congr. & Exhib., ser. SAE Tech. Papers, Detroit, MI, USA: SAE Int. doi: 10.4271/2008-01-0110.

Fault-tolerant automobile steering based on diversity of steer-by-wire, braking and acceleration. 10.1016/j.ress.2009.07.003Rel. Eng. & Syst. Saf. 951--, "Fault-tolerant automobile steering based on diversity of steer-by-wire, braking and acceleration," Rel. Eng. & Syst. Saf., vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 10-17, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.ress.2009. 07.003.

Zuverlässigkeitsorientierte Mehrzieloptimierung zur Aktorrekonfiguration eines X-by-wire-Fahrzeugs. C Sondermann-Wölke, W Sextro, P Reinold, A Trächtler, 25. Fachtagung Tech. Zuverlässigkeit -Entwicklung und Betrieb zuverlässiger Produkte, ser. VDI-Berichte. Leonberg, GermanyVDI Verlag2146in GermanC. Sondermann-Wölke, W. Sextro, P. Reinold, and A. Trächtler, "Zuverlässigkeitsorientierte Mehrzieloptimierung zur Aktorrekonfiguration eines X-by-wire-Fahrzeugs," (in German), in 25. Fachtagung Tech. Zuverlässigkeit -Entwick- lung und Betrieb zuverlässiger Produkte, ser. VDI-Berichte, vol. 2146, Leonberg, Germany: VDI Verlag, 2011, pp. 291-304.

Automated driving, technical approach with motion control architecture. T Raste, S Lüke, A Eckert, 10.1515/auto-2014-1148Automatisierungstechnik. 633T. Raste, S. Lüke, and A. Eckert, "Automated driving, technical approach with motion control architecture," Au- tomatisierungstechnik, vol. 63, no. 3, 2015. doi: 10.1515/auto- 2014-1148.

Potential of wheel-individual brake interventions as a backup for steering system failures during automated driving. A Gauger, A Kern, J Feinauer, S Kanngießer, R Greul, 10.1007/978-3-658-14219-3_337th Int. Munich Chassis Symp. P. E. Pfeffer. Wiesbaden, GermanySpringer Fachmedien WiesbadenA. Gauger, A. Kern, J. Feinauer, S. Kanngießer, and R. Greul, "Potential of wheel-individual brake interventions as a backup for steering system failures during automated driving," in 7th Int. Munich Chassis Symp. P. E. Pfeffer, Ed., Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp. 485-503. doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-14219-3 33.

Potential and Control Strategies of a Wheel-Individual Steer-by-Wire System Relating to a Steering Actuator Malfunction. T Sandmann, L Eckstein, 26th Aachen Colloq. Aachen, GermanyT. Sandmann and L. Eckstein, "Potential and Control Strate- gies of a Wheel-Individual Steer-by-Wire System Relating to a Steering Actuator Malfunction," in 26th Aachen Colloq., Aachen, Germany, 2017, pp. 1-11.

Automated hazard escaping trajectory planning/tracking control framework for vehicles subject to tire blowout on expressway. M Yue, L Yang, H Zhang, G Xu, 10.1007/s11071-019-05171-7Nonlinear Dyn. M. Yue, L. Yang, H. Zhang, and G. Xu, "Automated hazard escaping trajectory planning/tracking control framework for vehicles subject to tire blowout on expressway," Nonlinear Dyn., 2019. doi: 10.1007/s11071-019-05171-7.

Driving Fault-Tolerant Control Strategy of Four-Wheel Drive Electric Vehicle. J Wang, Int. J. Mechatronics and Appl. Mech. 81J. Wang, "Driving Fault-Tolerant Control Strategy of Four- Wheel Drive Electric Vehicle," Int. J. Mechatronics and Appl. Mech., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 221-227, 2020.

Study on motor fault tolerance control strategy of distributed driving electric vehicle. X Liu, H He, X Wang, J.-K Peng, Comput. Simul. 3011X.-l. Liu, H.-w. He, X.-m. Wang, and J.-k. Peng, "Study on motor fault tolerance control strategy of distributed driving electric vehicle," Comput. Simul., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 152-155, 2013.

Analysis and Control of Vehicle Movement with Blown-out Tire. K Guo, J Huang, X Song, 10.19562/j.chinasae.qcgc.2007.12.005Automot. Eng. 2912K. Guo, J. Huang, and X. Song, "Analysis and Control of Vehicle Movement with Blown-out Tire," Automot. Eng., vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1041-1045, 2007. doi: 10.19562/j.chinasae. qcgc.2007.12.005.

Study on Vehicle Dynamic Response to Tire Blow-out Based on CarSim and UniTire. Y Wang, Jilin, ChinaJilin Univ.Master ThesisY.-l. Wang, "Study on Vehicle Dynamic Response to Tire Blow-out Based on CarSim and UniTire," Master Thesis, Jilin Univ., Jilin, China, 2007.

Vehicle Stability Control Method after Tire Blow-out. J Huang, K Guo, X Song, W Liu, China Mech. Eng. 2016J. Huang, K. Guo, X. Song, and W. Liu, "Vehicle Stability Control Method after Tire Blow-out," China Mech. Eng., vol. 20, no. 16, pp. 2006-2010, 2009.

A study on driving force distribution of four-wheel-independent drive electric vehicle based on control allocation. B Wang, Y Luo, J Fan, K Li, 10.19562/j.chinasae.qcgc.2010.02.008Automot. Eng. 322B. Wang, Y. Luo, J. Fan, and K. Li, "A study on driving force distribution of four-wheel-independent drive electric vehicle based on control allocation," Automot. Eng., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 128-132, 2010. doi: 10.19562/j.chinasae.qcgc.2010.02.008.

Flat Tire Vehicle Trajectory Control. D.-P Guo, Jilin, ChinaJilin Univ.Master ThesisD.-P. Guo, "Flat Tire Vehicle Trajectory Control," Master Thesis, Jilin Univ., Jilin, China, 2011.

Rule-based Traction System Failure Control of Distributed Electric Drive Vehicle. W Chu, Y Luo, Y Han, K Li, 10.3901/JME.2012.10.090doi: 10.3901/ JME.2012.10.090J. Mech. Eng. 4810W. Chu, Y. Luo, Y. Han, and K. Li, "Rule-based Traction System Failure Control of Distributed Electric Drive Vehicle," J. Mech. Eng., vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 90-95, 2012. doi: 10.3901/ JME.2012.10.090.

Trajectory tracking and stability control for vehicle after tire blow-out. F Wang, B.-N Liu, H Guo, H Chen, Electric Mach. and Control. 1711F. Wang, B.-N. Liu, H. Guo, and H. Chen, "Trajectory tracking and stability control for vehicle after tire blow-out," Electric Mach. and Control, vol. 17, no. 11, 2013.

Research on electric drive system failure control of four in-wheel drive electric vehicle. H Zheng, Univ. Electron. Sci. and Technol. China. Master ThesisH. Zheng, "Research on electric drive system failure control of four in-wheel drive electric vehicle," Master Thesis, Univ. Electron. Sci. and Technol. China, Chengdu, China, 2013.

Tire Blow-out Modelling and Active Braking Control Algorithm of Vehicle. H Zheng, C Zong, H.-Z Liu, China J. Highway and Transp. 254H.-y. Zheng, C.-f. Zong, and H.-Z. Liu, "Tire Blow-out Modelling and Active Braking Control Algorithm of Vehicle," China J. Highway and Transp., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 147-158, 2012.

Compensation torque algorithm for electric power steering system of puncture cars. H Zheng, H.-Z Liu, C.-F Zong, 10.13229/j.cnki.jdxbgxb2012.03.035J. Jilin Univ. (Eng. and Technol42H.-y. Zheng, H.-Z. Liu, and C.-f. Zong, "Compensation torque algorithm for electric power steering system of puncture cars," J. Jilin Univ. (Eng. and Technol. Ed.), vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 521- 526, 2012. doi: 10.13229/j.cnki.jdxbgxb2012.03.035.

Trajectory control of vehicles during a tyre blowout: A simulation study. Y Liu, S Yu, F Wang, H Chen, H.-Y Guo, 10.1109/CCDC.2015.7162531Control and Decis. Conf. (CCDC). Qingdao, ChinaIEEEY. Liu, S.-y. Yu, F. Wang, H. Chen, and H.-y. Guo, "Trajec- tory control of vehicles during a tyre blowout: A simulation study," in 2015 Chin. Control and Decis. Conf. (CCDC), Qingdao, China: IEEE, pp. 3512-3517. doi: 10.1109/CCDC. 2015.7162531.

Simulation of Trajectory Control of Vehicles During a Tire Blowout. S Yu, Y Liu, F Wang, H Chen, H Guo, 10.11936/bjutxb2015110016J. Beijing Univ. Technol. 428S. Yu, Y. Liu, F. Wang, H. Chen, and H. Guo, "Simulation of Trajectory Control of Vehicles During a Tire Blowout," J. Beijing Univ. Technol., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1225-1232, 2016. doi: 10.11936/bjutxb2015110016.

Dynamics and Active Safety Control of The Tire Blowout Vehicle. Y Tao, Nanchang, ChinaJiangxi UnivTech-nologyY. Tao, "Dynamics and Active Safety Control of The Tire Blowout Vehicle," Master Thesis, Jiangxi Univ. Tech-nology, Nanchang, China, 2018.

Design of Fault Tolerant Control System for Steer-by-Wire Depending on Drive System. A Ito, Y Hayakawa, 10.9746/sicetr.48.872Trans. Soc. Instrum. and Control Eng. 4812A. Ito and Y. Hayakawa, "Design of Fault Tolerant Control System for Steer-by-Wire Depending on Drive System," Trans. Soc. Instrum. and Control Eng., vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 872-881, 2012. doi: 10.9746/sicetr.48.872.

Vehicles with autonomous corner modules: Control and fault handling aspects. O Wallmark, M Jonasson, Proc. Program Rev. Meeting -MIT Industry Consortium Adv. Program Rev. Meeting -MIT Industry Consortium AdvO. Wallmark and M. Jonasson, "Vehicles with autonomous corner modules: Control and fault handling aspects," in Proc. Program Rev. Meeting -MIT Industry Consortium Adv.

. Automot. Elect./Electron. Compon. and Syst. Automot. Elect./Electron. Compon. and Syst., Seattle, WA, USA, 2007.

Failsafe control methods for EVs with the structure driven by front and rear wheels independently. N Mutoh, Y Tomita, Proc. 22nd Int. Battery, Hybrid Fuel Cell Electric Veh. Symp. and Expo (EVS-22). 22nd Int. Battery, Hybrid Fuel Cell Electric Veh. Symp. and Expo (EVS-22)Yokohama, JapanN. Mutoh and Y. Tomita, "Failsafe control methods for EVs with the structure driven by front and rear wheels independently," in Proc. 22nd Int. Battery, Hybrid Fuel Cell Electric Veh. Symp. and Expo (EVS-22), Yokohama, Japan, 2006.

Development of fail-safe technologies of ultra high performance EV "KAZ. K Kawakami, S Matsugaura, M Onishi, H Shimizu, Proc. 18th Int. Electric Veh. Symp. (EVS-18). 18th Int. Electric Veh. Symp. (EVS-18)Berlin, GermanyK. Kawakami, S. Matsugaura, M. Onishi, and H. Shimizu, "Development of fail-safe technologies of ultra high perfor- mance EV "KAZ"," in Proc. 18th Int. Electric Veh. Symp. (EVS-18), Berlin, Germany, 2001.

Optimal control allocation for trajectory and stability control of electric vehicle with in-wheel motors after a tire blowout. B Li, Thesis Collection Proc. 19th Asia Pacific Automot. Eng. Conf. and SAE-China Congr. Shanghai, China; SingapSpringerSAE of ChinaB. Li, "Optimal control allocation for trajectory and stability control of electric vehicle with in-wheel motors after a tire blowout," in Thesis Collection Proc. 19th Asia Pacific Automot. Eng. Conf. and SAE-China Congr. 2017, SAE of China, Ed., Shanghai, China: Springer, Singap.

Fault-tolerant control approach based on constraint control allocation for 4WIS/4WID vehicles. Y Liu, C Zong, D Zhang, H Zheng, X Han, M Sun, 10.1177/0954407020982838doi: 10.1177/ 0954407020982838Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng. Y. Liu, C. Zong, D. Zhang, H. Zheng, X. Han, and M. Sun, "Fault-tolerant control approach based on constraint control allocation for 4WIS/4WID vehicles," Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D: J. Automob. Eng., 2021. doi: 10.1177/ 0954407020982838.

Exploiting individual wheel actuators to enhance vehicle dynamics and safety in electric vehicles. M Jonasson, Dissertation, KTH Roy. Inst. Technol. M. Jonasson, "Exploiting individual wheel actuators to enhance vehicle dynamics and safety in electric vehicles," Dissertation, KTH Roy. Inst. Technol., Stockholm, Sweden, 2009.

Your publication 'Vehicles with autonomous corner modules: Control and fault handling aspects. O Wallmark, T Stolte, E-mail communicationO. Wallmark and T. Stolte, "Your publication 'Vehicles with autonomous corner modules: Control and fault handling aspects'," E-mail communication, 2019.

Integrated vehicle control. R D Fruechte, A M Karmel, J H Rillings, N A Schilke, N M Boustany, B S Repa, 10.1109/VETEC.1989.40176IEEE 39th Veh. San Francisco, CA, USAIEEE2R. D. Fruechte, A. M. Karmel, J. H. Rillings, N. A. Schilke, N. M. Boustany, and B. S. Repa, "Integrated vehicle control," in IEEE 39th Veh. Technol. Conf., vol. 2, San Francisco, CA, USA: IEEE, 1989, pp. 868-877. doi: 10.1109/VETEC.1989. 40176.

Global force potential of over-actuated vehicles. M Jonasson, J Andreasson, B Jacobson, A S Trigell, 10.1080/00423110903243232doi: 10 . 1080 / 00423110903243232Veh. Syst. Dyn. 489M. Jonasson, J. Andreasson, B. Jacobson, and A. S. Trigell, "Global force potential of over-actuated vehicles," Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 983-998, 2010. doi: 10 . 1080 / 00423110903243232.

Reference Trajectories for Investigating Fault-Tolerant Trajectory Tracking Control Algorithms for Automated Vehicles. T Stolte, L Qiu, M Maurer, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.09.0079th IFAC Symp. AAC), D. Nelson-Gruel, Ed., ser. IFAC-PapersOnLineOrléans, FranceIFAC52T. Stolte, L. Qiu, and M. Maurer, "Reference Trajectories for Investigating Fault-Tolerant Trajectory Tracking Control Algorithms for Automated Vehicles," in 9th IFAC Symp. Adv. Automot. Control (AAC), D. Nelson-Gruel, Ed., ser. IFAC- PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 5, Orléans, France: IFAC, 2019, pp. 40-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.09.007.

Comparison of Trajectory Tracking Controllers for Autonomous Vehicles. D Calzolari, B Schürmann, M Althoff, 10.1109/ITSC.2017.8317800IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC). Yokohama, JapanIEEED. Calzolari, B. Schürmann, and M. Althoff, "Comparison of Trajectory Tracking Controllers for Autonomous Vehicles," in IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Yokohama, Japan: IEEE, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2017.8317800.