# Medical student experiences of applying into emergency medicine during the COVID-19 pandemic: A multi-institutional survey of emergency medicine-bound medical students

CorpusID: 232479170
 
tags: #Medicine, #Education

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66199932ac7c5c773d605bc0979d0568d40534d2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66199932ac7c5c773d605bc0979d0568d40534d2)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Medical student experiences of applying into emergency medicine during the COVID-19 pandemic: A multi-institutional survey of emergency medicine-bound medical students
2021

MDJoshua Jauregui joshjaur@uw.edu 
MDRoss Kessler 
MDNicholas Villalón 
Department of Emergency Medicine
Oregon Health & Science University
PortlandOregonUSA

MDJoseph House 
Department of Emergency Medicine
University of Michigan
Ann ArborMichiganUSA

MDMichael Cole 
Department of Emergency Medicine
University of Michigan
Ann ArborMichiganUSA

MDNicholas Kman 
Department of Emergency Medicine
OSU Wexner Medical Center
ColumbusOhioUSA

Department of Emergency Medicine
Correspondence Joshua Jauregui
University of Washington
325 9th Avenue Box 35970298104SeattleMD, WAUSA

MD, MPHJamie Shandro 
Nicole Deiorio 

Department of Emergency Medicine
University of Washington
Seattle, WashingtonUSA

Medical student experiences of applying into emergency medicine during the COVID-19 pandemic: A multi-institutional survey of emergency medicine-bound medical students

AEM Educ Train
5105872021Received: 1 October 2020 | Revised: 11 January 2021 | Accepted: 2 February 2021| 1 of 6 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/aet2 O R I G I N A L C O N T R I B U T I O N Medicine Supervising Editor:
Background:The COVID-19 pandemic added new and great uncertainty to the typical approach to applying into emergency medicine (EM) for medical students. There are little data on students' lived experience of applying during this time period. We performed a multi-institutional survey of EM-bound students' experiences with preparing to apply into EM during the pandemic.Methods: This was a cross-sectional survey design study of fourth-year students preparing to apply into EM during the 2020-2021 academic year. All self-identified EM-bound students at four participating institutions were recruited by email in June 2020 to participate in a 13-item, 5-point Likert-scale survey. Univariate descriptive statistics, response rate, and nonresponse bias were calculated.Results: Sixty-seven of 125 eligible students responded for an overall response rate of 53.6%. Nonresponse bias for specific survey items ranged from 0.01 to 0.12. Students rated the importance of securing an EM rotation at their home institution the highest of any item (mean ± SD = 4.81 ± 0.68). Students indicated higher satisfaction with advice from their department of EM (mean ± SD = 4.28 ± 0.75) than from their school of medicine (mean ± SD = 3.52 ± 0.89). Students indicated higher confidence in their home EM rotations' ability to assure adequate personal protective equipment (PPE; mean ± SD = 3.91 ± 0.83) than an away rotation (mean ± SD = 2.82, 1.09). Students reported feeling between moderately and quite stressed about applying into EM thisyear (mean ± SD = 3.49 ± 1.01), but reported the financial stress the lowest of any item (mean ± SD = 1.46 ± 0.84). Students rated it highly important that away rotations prioritize students from institutions without an EM residency (mean ± SD = 4.51 ± 0.93).Conclusion:Medical students applying into EM during the COVID-19 pandemic felt confident in their EM advisors' recommendations and their home institution's PPE provision. Students with EM residency programs at their schools recognized the importance of away rotations being prioritized for students from schools without EM residency programs. Strong EM advising is important to students. S U PP O RTI N G I N FO R M ATI O N Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section. How to cite this article: Jauregui J, Kessler R, Villalón N, et al. Medical student experiences of applying into emergency medicine during the COVID-19 pandemic: A multiinstitutional survey of emergency medicine-bound medical students. AEM Education and Training. 2021;5:e10587. https://

## BACKG ROU N D

The COVID-19 pandemic added new and great uncertainty to the seemingly ordered and typical approach to applying into emergency medicine (EM) for medical students. 1 One of the most significant disruptions from the pandemic was a sudden lack of access to away rotations for medical students applying into EM. Traditionally, performance on an away EM rotation has been very highly valued by EM residency program directors when evaluating an EM applicant's portfolio. 2 On May 11, 2020, the Coalition for Physician Accountability, a group of national medical education organizations, recommended that away rotations be discouraged for the 2020-2021 academic year except in specific circumstances. 3 In addition, the CORD Advising Students Committee in Emergency Medicine published a consensus statement encouraging students to go on fewer, if any, away rotations. 4 Because of the disruption to the clinical learning environment and the ability to travel to away rotations, many institutions, including all four of our institutions, canceled away rotations for their students. 5 Other than anecdotal reports, there are little data on students' experiences with preparing to apply into EM given changes due to the COVID-19 pandemic or how our advising interventions in response to the pandemic were impacting them. As such, we performed a multi-institutional survey of EMbound students' experiences with preparing to apply into EM during the pandemic.


## ME THODS


## Study design and population

This was a cross-sectional survey design study. We considered all medical students self-reporting to their respective institutions as applying into EM from a purposeful sample of four institutions as eligible to participate in the survey. The University of Michigan We recruited participants by email. The initial survey invitation was sent out on June 1, 2020, with two reminders sent at 1-week intervals each. Data collection was completed by the end of June 2020. All participation was voluntary and there was no compensation for taking the survey. All responses were anonymized. The human subjects division at all four institutions deemed the study to be exempt from institutional review board review.


## Survey content and protocol

We developed an original 13-item survey instrument guided by Messick's validity framework. 6 The content validity for the survey instrument was based on the CORD student advising guide and the timely Council of Residency Directors in EM (CORD) Advising Students Committee in EM (ASC-EM) consensus statement. 2,4,7 All the authors are EM clerkship directors and iteratively contributed to the development of the survey. We intentionally avoided including more demographic questions in the survey to maintain strict anonymity of all participants. We performed cognitive, "thinkaloud" interviews with two senior medical students who had recently matched in EM and two rising fourth-year medical students pursuing non-EM specialties for response process validity evidence and for clarity. We incorporated all feedback into the final instrument, which we determined via consensus of all authors (see Data Supplement S1, available as supporting information in the online version of this paper, which is available at http://onlin elibr ary.wiley. com/doi/10.1002/aet2.10587/ full). We rated each item on a 1-to 5-point Likert scale ranging from "not at all" to "extremely," with response anchors intentionally worded to emphasize the construct being measured rather than simple agreement. 8


## Data collection and analysis

We collected and managed the study data using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at the University of Washington. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, Web-based software platform designed to support data capture for research studies, providing 1) an intuitive interface for validated data capture, 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures, 3) automated export procedures for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages, and 4) procedures for data integration and interoperability with external sources.

We conducted data analysis using Microsoft Excel 2018 (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA) with which we calculated univariate descriptive statistics including the mean and standard deviation (SD) of each item, a response rate according to the AAPOR definition of response rate 5 (RR5) and the nonresponse bias for each item to estimate the difference between those who responded and those who did not, using wave analysis. [9][10][11][12] 


## RE SULTS

We electronically delivered the survey via email to 125 medical students applying into EM at our four institutions. Of those, 67
K E Y W O R D S
away rotations, elective rotations, student advising and development, undergraduate medical education students responded to the survey for an overall response rate of 53.6%. Response rates for each participating institution ranged from 38.1% to 70% (Table 1).

The descriptive statistics and nonresponse bias for 11 of the 13 survey items are displayed in Table 2. The nonresponse bias was minimal, ranging from 0.01 to 0.12 on the 5-point scale. The other two items inquired about whether students perceived that they were still permitted to do away rotations. Of all respondents, only one student reported that their institution was allowing them to do away rotations despite their institution's policy against it. The same student also reported that they were "not at all confident" that they would secure an away rotation despite their perceptions they were allowed to do so.

Emergency medicine-bound medical students rated the importance of securing an EM rotation at their home institution prior to submitting residency applications this year the highest (mean ± SD = 4.81 ± 0.68). Students also indicated that they were more satisfied with the advice from their department of EM (mean ± SD = 4.28 ± 0.75) than from their respective schools of medicine (mean ± SD = 3.52 ± 0.89). Not surprisingly, students reported feeling between moderately and quite stressed about applying into EM this

year (mean ± SD = 3.49 ± 1.01) and at least moderately concerned that they needed to do an away rotation at a particular institution to get an interview there (mean ± SD = 3.27 ± 1.14). However, they also reported that the rationale for not permitting away rotations was quite clear to them (mean ± SD = 4.34 ± 0.90) and that they were moderately to quite confident in their advisors plan to support them through the process of applying this year (mean ± SD = 3.68 ± 0.98).

Students rated the financial stress they were experiencing the lowest 


## TA B L E 2

Descriptive statistics of students' survey responses (1-5 scale from "not at all satisfied" to "extremely satisfied") of any item (mean ± SD = 1.46 ± 0.84). In addition, they indicated that they were much more confident in their home EM rotations' ability to assure them adequate personal protective equipment (PPE; mean ± SD = 3.91 ± 0.83) than an away EM rotations' ability to do so (mean ± SD = 2.82 ± 1.09). It was highly important to students that away rotations prioritize spots for students at institutions without an EM residency program (mean ± SD = 4.51 ± 0.93).


## DISCUSS ION

These results illustrate the stressors that medical students experienced while preparing to apply in EM during the COVID-19 pandemic and illuminate areas where we can focus our support for students in response. They underscore the importance of effective advising that has been previously demonstrated in the literature and add to the paucity of data we have on students' experience with advising. 13 Students identified that their EM departmental advising inspired more confidence than the general career advising from their medical schools. These results highlight the importance of having engaged and involved specialty-specific advising, in addition to the more generalized residency application advising from a school of medicine.

Although students applying in all specialties faced similar challenges with lack of away rotations and upended schedules, our EM-bound students placed a higher value on the career advising from EM faculty than the generalized school of medicine advising. These findings may have implications for medical students at institutions without an EM residency program to provide directed career advising, where students may face even more challenges than usual during a time when specialty-specific career advising and support is viewed as critical by EM-bound students. Furthermore, students from an institution without an EM residency program are much more likely to be from historically excluded in medicine backgrounds. 14 The different advising and EM experiential opportunities that students have access to at these institutions may further exacerbate existing inequities in our field.

Our results also highlight that students feel between moderately and quite stressed, but not extremely so. We imagine that the clear EM national consensus guidelines and collaborative leadership from EM specialty societies also contributed to a sense of security and community in the EM applicant group. 15 It would be interesting to compare our results to students applying into other specialties, particularly those that did not release clear national guidelines to guide and support programs and applicants during this time (Figures 1 and 2).

Students expressed confidence in their advisors' plans and in the clarity from their advisors for the rationale of not permitting away

rotations this year. Supporting this, they strongly understood the importance of rotating at their home institution in EM prior to applying to residency. Students recognize that an away rotation is important to getting an interview and nonetheless still agree with the rationale of the no-away-rotation policy. To us, this demonstrates that our EM-bound students understand the seriousness of the pandemic and importance of shared sacrifice. It also reinforces the importance of strong and timely leadership through consensus guidelines.

Predictably, and positively, students expressed very low financial stress from away rotations this year-further supporting the fact that they understand the policies and rationale for no away rotations. The low financial stress is of benefit during a time of great stress and it will likely also be an unintended benefit of having remote interviewing for residency this year. Given the welldocumented financial burden of applying to residency, it would be wise to consider ways that we can maintain some of the decreased financial stress of applying that has resulted from this year's upheaval. 16 In addition, further research evaluating the effectiveness of virtual interviewing in light of the financial burden of traveling to traditional in-person interviews would also help us better understand ways we may be able to address financial inequalities in applying into EM.

Additionally, students were more confident that their home EM rotation would be able to provide them adequate PPE than an away EM rotation (Figures 3 and 4). Students seem to be more appre- should certainly expand to a wide range of institutions to include the important perspectives of a broader range of medical students.

Furthermore, while the nonresponse bias was minimal and the response rate was adequate, our results may not be fully representative of all the students we recruited. We also recruited students who self-identified as pursuing EM as a career in June 2020, which may have changed over time, and a small percentage of responses may no longer be from students still applying into EM. the importance of strong emergency medicine advising to students.


## CON CLUS IONS


## CO N FLI C T O F I NTE R E S T

The authors have no potential conflicts to disclose.


## AUTH O R CO NTR I B UTI O N S

Joshua Jauregui, Ross Kessler, and Jamie Shandro contributed to the study concept and design, the acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of the data, drafting of the manuscript, and critical revi- 

## (
Michigan), OSU Wexner Medical Center (OSU), Oregon Health & Science University (OSHU), and the University of Washington (UW) all participated in the study. We surveyed students in June 2020, in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic and social distancing measures and at a time of national uncertainty about the future of medical students being permitted in the clinical environment.


TA B L E 1 Participant response rate by institution Michigan, University of Michigan; OHSU, Oregon Health & Sciences University; OSU, Ohio State University; UW, University of Washington. How satisfied are you with the advising communication from your department of EM?How confident are you that your advisors' plan to support you in your application process will help mitigate the lack of an away rotation given the COVID-19 pandemic?School 
Recruited 
Responded 

Response 
rate (%) 

Michigan 
28 
11 
39.3 

OHSU 
20 
14 
70 

OSU 
21 
8 
38.1 

UW 
56 
33 
58.9 

Survey item 
Mean 
SD 

Nonresponse 
bias 

4.28 
0.75 
0.12 

How satisfied are you with the advising 
communication from your school of medicine? 

3.52 
0.89 
0.01 

How stressed do you feel about applying in EM 
this year? 

3.49 
1.01 
0.01 

How important is it to you to secure an EM 
rotation spot at your home institution prior 
to submitting your residency applications this 
year? 

4.81 
0.68 
0.08 

3.68 
0.90 
0.02 

How clear is the rationale from your department 
of EM for their policy on away rotations this 
year? 

4.34 
0.90 
0.03 

How much financial stress are you experiencing 
regarding away rotations this year? 

1.46 
0.84 
0.06 

How confident are you that your home EM 
rotation will be able to assure you adequate 
PPE? 

3.91 
0.83 
0.05 

How confident are you that any away EM rotation 
will be able to assure you adequate PPE? 

2.82 
1.09 
0.06 

How important do you think it is that programs 
that offer away rotations prioritize spots for 
students who attend institutions without an 
EM residency program? 

4.51 
0.93 
0.02 

How important do you think it is to do an away 
rotation at an institution you are interested in 
in order to get an interview at that institution? 

3.27 
1.14 
0.05 

Abbreviation: PPE, personal protective equipment. 




2021 academic year. These four institutions also have departments of EM with established EM residency programs, which may make it difficult to generalize the results to all, especially to students at schools without EM residency programs. Future work in this areahensive about the safety of away rotations and more comfortable 

with the safety of their home institution. It is not surprising to be 

more comfortable with what is familiar. However, it also illustrates 

F I G U R E 1 Student responses to the survey item, "How satisfied 
are you with the advising communication from your department 
of EM?" Extremely satisfied (31, 46.3%), quite satisfied (24, 
35.8%), moderately satisfied (12, 17.9%), slightly satisfied (0, 
0.0%), not at all satisfied (0, 0.0%) 

0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 

Extremely SaƟsfied 

Quite SaƟsfied 

Moderately SaƟsfied 

Slightly SaƟsfied 

Not At All SaƟsfied 

F I G U R E 2 Student responses to the survey item, "How satisfied 
are you with the advising communication from your school of 
medicine?" Extremely satisfied (7, 10.4%), quite satisfied (31, 
46.3%), moderately satisfied (20, 29.9%), slightly satisfied (8, 
11.9%), not at all satisfied (1, 1.5%) 

0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 

Extremely SaƟsfied 

Quite SaƟsfied 

Moderately SaƟsfied 

Slightly SaƟsfied 

Not At All SaƟsfied 
the challenges of variance among local and regional specific policies 

when students are expected to move between different hospital 

systems nationally. 

Finally, students reported that it was highly important that 

away rotations prioritize spots for students without home EM 

residency programs. This highlights a sense of shared commu-

nity and generosity among EM-bound students, who recognize 

that the limited available away rotations should go to students 

most in need of a core EM rotation. It is clear that students have 

strong confidence in their EM advisors, even in a time of great 

uncertainty, and it follows that our EM educational community 

has an opportunity to evaluate all medical students' access to 

EM-specific advising including the need to prioritize away rota-

tions for those students at institutions without EM residency pro-

grams. Given that there are over 80 medical schools without EM 

residency programs, we would suggest implementing practical, 

nationally collaborative processes such as creating more formal 

partnerships between schools without an EM residency program 

and other geographically proximate institutions with EM resi-

dency programs. Other ideas include increasing virtual advising, 

either from these formal partnerships or through professional 

society-sponsored national advising teams. 17 

LI M ITATI O N S 

This study is limited by the nature of it being a convenience sam-

ple of medical students from four institutions rather than a sample 

of the entire population of students applying into EM in the 2020-




This multi-institutional study of fourth-year medical students applying into emergency medicine during the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates that the communication and rationale for no away rotations this year was clear and that students felt confident in their EM advisors' recommendations and their home institution's ability to provide them adequate personal protective equipment. Students with emergency medicine residency programs at their schools recognized the importance of away rotations being prioritized for students from schools without EM residency programs. During a time of uncertainty, clear and consensus-based advising likely made this experience less stressful for students. Most importantly, it reinforces


sion of the manuscript for important intellectual content. NicholasVillalón, Joseph House, Michael Cole, and Nicholas Kman contributed to the study concept and design, acquisition of data, and drafting of the manuscript.Jamie Shandrohttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6507-5108R E FE R E N C E S1. Shamapant N. COVID-19: a medical student's perspective. AEM Educ Train. 2020;4:181-182. F I G U R E 3 Student responses to the survey item, "How confident are you that your home EM rotation will be able to assure you adequate PPE?" Extremely confident (14, 20.Not At All Confident F I G U R E 4 Student responses to the survey item, "How confident are you that any away EM rotation will be able to assure you adequate PPE?" Extremely confident (4, 6.1%), quite confident (12, 18.2%), moderately confident (28, 42.4%), slightly confident (12, 18.2%), not at all confident (10, 15.2%)O RCI D 

Joshua Jauregui 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4741-0296 

9%), quite 
confident (38, 56.7%), moderately confident (11, 16.4%), slightly 
confident (3, 4.5%), not at all confident (1, 1.5%) 

0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

Extremely Confident 

Quite Confident 

Moderately Confident 

Slightly Confident 

0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 

Extremely Confident 

Quite Confident 

Moderately Confident 

Slightly Confident 

Not At All Confident 


20 19-studentadvisingguide-final-web-version.pdf (emra.org). Jarou ZEMRA and CORD Student Advising GuideJarou Z, editor. EMRA and CORD Student Advising Guide. 2019. 20 19-studentadvisingguide-final-web-version.pdf (emra.org). Accessed September 26, 2020.

AAMC Guidance on Medical Students' Participation in Direct Patient Contact Activities. 2020. Microsoft Word -August 14 2020 Guidance on medical students on clinical rotations FINAL (aamc. org). Accessed. AAMC Guidance on Medical Students' Participation in Direct Patient Contact Activities. 2020. Microsoft Word -August 14 2020 Guidance on medical students on clinical rotations FINAL (aamc. org). Accessed September 26, 2020.

Consensus Statement Regarding SLOEs and Away Rotations for the CORD Advising Students Committee in Emergency Medicine (ASC-EM). 2020. Consensus Statement Regarding SLOEs and Away Rotations for the CORD Advising Students Committee in Emergency Medicine (ASC-EM). 2020. https://corde mblog.com/2020/03/13/conse nsus- state ment-ascem/. Accessed September 26, 2020.

Advising medical students during COVID-19: the case for a single emergency medicine rotation for all. J Shandro, R Kessler, C Schrepel, J Jauregui, AEM Educ Train. 43Shandro J, Kessler R, Schrepel C, Jauregui J. Advising medical stu- dents during COVID-19: the case for a single emergency medicine rotation for all. AEM Educ Train. 2020;4(3):318-320.

Validity: on meaningful interpretation of assessment data. S M Downing, Med Educ. 379Downing SM. Validity: on meaningful interpretation of assessment data. Med Educ. 2003;37(9):830-837.

Addressing challenges in obtaining emergency medicine away rotations and standardized letters of evaluation due to COVID-19 pandemic. L Katirji, L Smith, A Pelletier-Bui, West J Emerg Med. 213Katirji L, Smith L, Pelletier-Bui A, et al. Addressing challenges in ob- taining emergency medicine away rotations and standardized let- ters of evaluation due to COVID-19 pandemic. West J Emerg Med. 2020;21(3):538-541.

Developing questionnaires for educational research. AMEE Guide No. 87. A R ArtinoJr, La Rochelle, J S Dezee, K J Gehlbach, H , Med Teach. 366Artino AR Jr, La Rochelle JS, Dezee KJ, Gehlbach H. Developing questionnaires for educational research. AMEE Guide No. 87. Med Teach. 2014;36(6):463-474.

Surveys of health professions trainees: prevalence, response rates, and predictive factors to guide researchers. A W Phillips, B T Friedman, A Utrankar, A Q Ta, S T Reddy, S J Durning, Acad Med. 922Phillips AW, Friedman BT, Utrankar A, Ta AQ, Reddy ST, Durning SJ. Surveys of health professions trainees: prevalence, response rates, and predictive factors to guide researchers. Acad Med. 2017;92(2):222-228.

Definitions: Final Dispositions of Case Codes and Outcome Rates for Surveys. AAPOR.org. American Association for Public Opinion Research. Aapor, Standard, Standard Definitions (aapor.orgAAPOR. Standard Definitions: Final Dispositions of Case Codes and Outcome Rates for Surveys. AAPOR.org. American Association for Public Opinion Research. 2011. Standard Definitions (aapor.org).

. Accessed, Accessed September 26, 2020.

Improving response rates and evaluating nonresponse bias in surveys: AMEE Guide No. 102. A W Phillips, S Reddy, S J Durning, Med Teach. 383Phillips AW, Reddy S, Durning SJ. Improving response rates and evaluating nonresponse bias in surveys: AMEE Guide No. 102. Med Teach. 2016;38(3):217-228.

Techniques for improving survey response rates in medical education. C Brown, W Watson, Med Teach. 386634Brown C, Watson W. Techniques for improving survey response rates in medical education. Med Teach. 2016;38(6):634.

Mentoring during medical school and match outcome among emergency medicine residents. E Dehon, M H Cruse, B Dawson, Jackson-Williams , L , West J Emerg Med. 166Dehon E, Cruse MH, Dawson B, Jackson-Williams L. Mentoring during medical school and match outcome among emergency med- icine residents. West J Emerg Med. 2015;16(6):927-930.

Diversity matters. I M Brown, Emerg Med News. 421Brown IM, Diversity matters. Emerg Med News. 2020;42:1

Consensus Statement on the 2020-2-21 Residency Application Process for US Medical Students Planning Careers in Emergency Medicine in the Main Residency Match. 2020. 2020 Res App Consensus Statement (cordem.org). Consensus Statement on the 2020-2-21 Residency Application Process for US Medical Students Planning Careers in Emergency Medicine in the Main Residency Match. 2020. 2020 Res App Consensus Statement (cordem.org). Accessed September 26, 2020.

Time to reevaluate the away rotation: improving return on investment for students and schools. M Griffith, S C Demasi, A J Mcgrath, J N Love, J Moll, S A Santen, Acad Med. 944Griffith M, DeMasi SC, McGrath AJ, Love JN, Moll J, Santen SA. Time to reevaluate the away rotation: improving return on invest- ment for students and schools. Acad Med. 2019;94(4):496-500.

COVID-19: a driver for disruptive innovation of the emergency medicine residency application process. A Pelletier-Bui, D Franzen, L Smith, West J Emerg Med. 215Pelletier-Bui A, Franzen D, Smith L, et al. COVID-19: a driver for disruptive innovation of the emergency medicine residency appli- cation process. West J Emerg Med. 2020;21(5):1105-1113.