# Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders: A Literature Review Male sexual health and dysfunction Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders

CorpusID: 233190941
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c2d159c992045300e3969a45294b2676474ebcfc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c2d159c992045300e3969a45294b2676474ebcfc)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders: A Literature Review Male sexual health and dysfunction Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders
2022 Jan 40

Enis Rauf Coskuner enisraufcoskuner@hotmail.com 
Department of Urology
Department of Urology, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of Medicine
Acibadem Bakirkoy Hospital
Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of Medicine
Halit Ziya Usakligil Cad No:134140Bakirkoy, Istanbul, IstanbulTurkey., Turkey

Burak Ozkan 
Department of Urology
Department of Urology, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of Medicine
Acibadem Bakirkoy Hospital
Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of Medicine
Halit Ziya Usakligil Cad No:134140Bakirkoy, Istanbul, IstanbulTurkey., Turkey

Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders: A Literature Review Male sexual health and dysfunction Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders

World J Mens Health
12022 Jan 4010.5534/wjmh.200184Received: Nov 5, 2020 Revised: Feb 6, 2021 Accepted: Feb 9, 2021Correspondence to: Enis Rauf Coskuner Review ArticleDiabetes mellitusHyperthyroidismMetabolic syndromePremature ejaculationVitamin D
Premature ejaculation (PE) is the most common male sexual dysfunction, with 30% of men experiencing PE worldwide. According to the generally accepted classification, there are two types of PE: lifetime PE and acquired PE. Various biological and psychological causes are known to be involved in the etiology of PE. However, due to the incomplete definition and etiopathogenesis of PE, there is no effective treatment. Although clinical and animal studies indicate that hormones play a role in controlling the ejaculation process, the precise endocrine mechanisms are unclear. In addition, little is known about the role of endocrine disorders in PE etiology. However, there is evidence that diabetes mellitus (DM), obesity, metabolic syndrome (MetS), thyroid gland disorders, pituitary gland disorders, and vitamin D deficiency affect the prevalence of PE. Moreover, it has been reported that the prevalence of PE decreases with treatment of these endocrine disorders. In this review, the relationship between PE and DM, MetS, obesity, vitamin D deficiency, and thyroid and pituitary gland disorders is summarized. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## INTRODUCTION

Premature ejaculation (PE) is a phenomenon that occurs when a man's ejaculation occurs earlier than he or his partner intended during sexual activity. PE affects about 30% of men worldwide, but some reviews have stated that this number could be as high as 75% [1]. For this reason, PE is accepted as the most common sexual disorder in men [2]. In some cases, PE is not a cause for concern. However, it can cause significant distress and can have negative consequences between partners [3].

Because PE is subjective, it is difficult to conclusively define. However, many authors and several scientific societies have provided different definitions of PE, as they classify PE according to different situations, such as pathogenesis and time of onset [4]. While Masters and Johnson defined PE as a condition in which "the man cannot adequately control ejaculation to satisfy his female partner for more than 50% of sexual intercourse, provided that he is not anorgasmic," Strassberg et al [5] defines PE as "the state of the man ejaculating in 2 minutes or less in at least 50% of his attempts to have sexual intercourse because he has little control over ejaculation". The American Urological Association describes PE as "ejaculation that occurs before or after sexual intercourse, that occurs earlier than desired, www.wjmh.org and causes distress to one or both partners" [6]. The American Psychiatric Association defines PE as "recurrent or persistent ejaculation before or shortly after sexual intercourse and with minimal sexual stimulation despite the person's unwillingness" [7]. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines PE as "the occurrence of ejaculation before or shortly after the onset of sexual intercourse, or the inability to delay ejaculation (DE) enough to enjoy lovemaking, which is manifested by ejaculation that occurs in the absence of sufficient erection during sexual intercourse: [7]. However, these definitions have been criticized for being conceptual and ambiguous, rather than evidence-based [8]. The International Society for Sexual Medicine (ISSM) has made recommendations to develop a precise scientific definition of PE. According to these recommendations, lifetime PE (LPE) or primary PE was defined as "ejaculation that always or almost always occurs before vaginal penetration or within about 1 minute of the first sexual experience." Acquired PE (APE) or secondary PE has been defined as "a clinically significant and disturbing reduction in ejaculation time, and an inability to DE, usually in about 3 minutes or less" [9].

Schapiro [10] was the first to describe primary PE (PPE or lifelong PE), which affects men without erectile or desire difficulties and who have never achieved ejaculation control, and secondary PE (SPE or APE), which affects older men and is associated with erection difficulties. Cooper [11] defined three types of PE: PPE (Type 1), which occurs in adolescence and is characterized by normal erection and anxiety neurosis; acute onset PE (Type 2), which is associated with generalized anxiety and often with erectile failure; and insidious onset PE (Type 3), which is associated with low libido and erectile insufficiency. Anxiety was less prominent and often reactive to the development of Type 3 PE. Godpodinoff [12] described two main types of PE: (1) PPE that is present from the first sexual experience, and (2) SPE that develops over the years, after an initial satisfactory sexual performance. Godpodinoff stated that PPE is relatively homogeneous, while SPE can be divided into two subtypes, as those developing with organic and psychopathological elements. When PPE is classified in this way, appropriate treatment plans can be formulated. The simplest way to classify PE is to establish whether the symptoms occurred when the man first became sexually active (PPE) or after normal ejaculation control (SPE). Waldinger and Schweitzer [13] suggested that there is a third subtype of PE, called subjective PE, in which there are men who complain of PE but have normal ejaculation time.


## ETIOLOGY OF PREMATURE EJACULATION

Although PE is considered the most common sexual dysfunction (SD) in men, its etiology remains unclear. However, psychogenic and biogenic factors have traditionally been held responsible for the etiology of PE [14]. Psychogenic factors include depression, anxiety, stress, guilt, unrealistic expectations about sexual performance, history of sexual repression, lack of trust/poor body image in general, sexual abuse, relationship problems, and early experience [1]. While PE was previously considered to be only a psychological problem, subsequent studies showed that PE may be affected by various somatic, genetic and/or neurobiological disorders [15]. Some genetic studies have shown that polymorphisms in serotonin transporters are associated with PE [16,17]. In addition, PE is associated with various factors such as chronic prostatitis, erectile dysfunction (ED), metabolic syndrome (MetS), and thyroid dysfunction [18][19][20][21][22]. Because PE has been shown to be affected by so many factors, it is difficult to fully understand and classify PE.

While it is known that the male reproductive system is largely hormonally regulated, the involvement of the endocrine system in the intravaginal ejaculatory delay time (IELT) and ejaculation process is not yet fully understood [23]. Studies have shown that pituitary (oxytocin and prolactin [PRL]), adrenal, thyroidal, and gonadal hormones can control ejaculation at various levels, and that ejaculation problems are experienced in endocrine disorders [7,[24][25][26]. Therefore, PE may be a result of endocrine diseases. Based on a comprehensive review of the literature, this review will discuss the relationship between endocrine diseases and PE.


## TESTOSTERONE AND PREMATURE EJACULATION

Hormones play a central role in ejaculation control, and therefore, any pathology in hormone levels may directly or indirectly affect ejaculation control. Testosterone is one of the most important hormones involved in ejaculation control. However, there are conflicting data regarding the relationship between testosterone levels and PE. In one of the first studies on this subject, Cohen [27] reported that PE patients had low serum testosterone levels. More recently, Tahtali [28] reported that men with SPE have lower testosterone levels than healthy controls. In contrast, Corona et al [29] reported that PE patients between the ages of 25 and 39 had high total testosterone (TT) and free testosterone (FT) levels. Further, that study reported that men with LPE between the ages of 25 and 39 have higher FT levels than men with APE. In a later publication, Corona et al [30] reported that higher testosterone levels were associated with PE, and lower testosterone levels were associated with DE. Similarly, Mohseni et al [31] found that serum FT and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) levels were higher in PE patients compared to controls, but there were no significant differences in serum TT and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels between PE patients and controls.

Canat et al [32] reported no significant difference in serum TT, FT, and FSH levels between PE patients and controls. In accordance with that study, Abu El-Hamd and Farah [33] reported no difference in serum TT, FT, FSH, LH, and PRL levels between PE patients and controls. Another study also reported no difference between PE patients and controls with regards to TT levels [34]. Based on a comprehensive review of the aforementioned studies, it is clear that there are conflicting results regarding the relationship between testosterone and PE. Therefore, we believe that more comprehensive studies are needed to better elucidate the relationship between testosterone and PE.


## DIABETES MELLITUS

As a result of the short and long-term effects caused by hyperglycemia, many medical, psychological, and SD complications can develop in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) [35]. These complications can be prevented or delayed with effective treatment and blood sugar control. SD in men is one of the lesser-known complications of DM. SD in diabetic men may present as ED, ejaculation problems, and libido disorders. All three of these types of SD can significantly affect the quality of life of diabetic patients [36]. It has been reported that the prevalence of SD is gradually increasing in diabetic patients [37]. However, the prevalence of PE has not been fully determined, due to the lack of a clear evidence-based definition of PE [7]. Studies investigating the relationship between PE and DM have been conducted separately on type 1 DM (T1DM), type 2 DM (T2DM), and preDM (Table 1).

In the study by El Sakka [38] including 676 male T2DM patients, the prevalence of PE was 32.4% in patients younger than 50 years old and 67.6% in patients over 50 years old. That study reported that patients who had diabetes for more than 10 years were 2.7 times more likely to have PE than men who had diabetes less than 5 years (p<0.05). In addition, the authors observed that diabetic patients with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) >7% were 10 times more likely to have PE than patients with HbA1c <7%. As a result of their study, El-Sakka concluded that long diabetes duration, the presence of cardiovascular disease, poor glycemic control, and the presence of ED are associated with an increased risk of PE in diabetic men [38]. In another study including 300 diabetic men, Owiredu et al [36] reported a prevalence of PE of 56.6%. In addition, testosterone levels were negatively correlated with fasting blood glucose (FBS), HbA1c, short IELT, weight, and waist circumference (WC). Majzoub et al [39] reported that of 488 patients with T2DM, 115 (23.6%) had ED and 294 (60.2%) had PE. The authors of that study observed that patients with T2DM had a significantly higher prevalence of PE and ED than the control group (p<0.001). In addition, the authors found that all PE types were higher in patients with T2DM, and that mean IELT was significantly lower in patients with T2DM (3.6±2.7) than controls (4.3±2.8) (p=0.014) [39]. In a study conducted to evaluate the prevalence of PE in Italy, 569 of 2,658 men with PE had LPE, 1,855 had APE, and 234 were not identified. In that same study, it was determined that diabetes treatment led to a decrease in PE prevalence [40]. Differences in PE rates in patients with T2DM may be due to variations in the studied populations or to the way PE was defined in each study [39]. The link between PE and T2DM is still unclear. However, psychogenic factors and organic causes, especially diabetic autonomic neuropathy, play a role in the proportionality of the incidence of PE with the duration and severity of DM [41].

To our knowledge, only one study has investigated the relationship between T1DM and PE. Results of that study showed that the prevalence of PE in young patients with T1DM was not different from that of agematched controls [42]. However, it has been reported www.wjmh.org that the premature ejaculation diagnostic tool (PEDT) score is strongly associated with low blood glucose indexes (LBGI). This suggests that glycemic control, especially hypoglycemia, plays a role in the ejaculatory process. The relationship between hypoglycemia and PE may be related to inhibition of serotoninergic neuronal activity or activation of the adrenergic system [43,44].

After some studies showed a possible biological link between glycemic metabolism and ejaculation control, more studies were conducted with the goal of evaluating the prevalence of PE among men with preDM. Corona et al [45] defined PE as ejaculation within 1 minute after vaginal penetration, and evaluated some biochemical parameters associated with PE. However, despite detecting lower FBS in patients with PE compared to controls, they did not determine any relationship between the two. Conversely, in a recent case-control study involving 100 men with APE, the mean FBS of APE patients was higher than that of controls, but FBS did not correlate with PEDT score in multivariate analysis [46]. Further, the relationship between PE and MetS was investigated in a cohort of 300 men with various urological disorders [21]. Among the healthy controls without MetS in that study, there was a significantly higher proportion of men with PE (33.3%) with an FBS level greater than 110 mg/dL than men without PE (5.5%).

Although the causal relationship between PE and DM has been investigated, there remains a lack of understanding regarding the etiology of PE, and there is no defined relationship due to the multi-systemic and polyetiological nature of DM. Possible causal relationships between PE and DM include neurological, neurotransmitter-induced, and psychological dysfunctions [47]. Diabetic neuropathy is a well-known microvascular complication of DM that can affect neural control of ejaculation through sensory, focal/multifocal, and autonomic neuropathies [48]. It has been reported that there is a disruption in nitric oxide (NO) metabolism in DM as a result of insulin resistance [49]. NO is a key regulatory molecule with metabolic, vascular, and cellular effects [50]. NO has been shown to alleviate PE in an experimental animal study [51]. Hyposensitivity of the serotonin neurotransmitter receptor 5-HT2C has also been reported in the etiopathogenesis of PE [52]. Recent experimental animal studies have shown that  [53]. 5-HT2C receptor agonists have been reported to improve glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in obese and diabetic mice [53]. It has been reported that DM patients with PE have lower levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and PRL, which are also responsible for PE etiology, than healthy controls [54].


## 5-HT2C receptors play a role in glucose homeostasis


## OBESITY AND METABOLIC SYNDROME

Risk factors for obesity include lack of physical activity, aging, and benign prostatic hypertrophy [55,56]. A recent study reported that MetS, particularly central obesity, plays a role in male SD [55]. Further studies revealed that MetS is an independent risk factor for ED [57]. MetS may affect ejaculatory dysfunctions, particularly the onset of PE, as it not only induces ED, but also alters serotonergic function and affects psychological changes, such as depression [58,59]. The results of some studies investigating the relationship between MetS and PE are presented in Table 2.

Gao et al [60] reported that men with complaints of APE have higher body mass index (BMI) than those that do not. Further, Bolat et al [46] revealed that the prevalence of MetS in patients with PE (51%) was significantly higher than in controls (24%). In addition, it has been shown that men with complaints of PE have higher WC and serum triglyceride (TG) levels than controls. Men with WC >102 cm and serum TG levels ≥150 mg/dL had lower IELT scores and a higher prevalence of PE [46]. Jeh et al [61] reported that pa-  [64] reported that PE patients were leaner than healthy controls, and that the number of PE patients decreased as BMI increased. Amato et al [65] developed a new sex-specific metabolic index, the visceral adiposity index (VAI), which is calculated from WC, BMI, TG, and high-density lipoprotein values. In their study using VAI, Cakir et al [66] reported that the prevalence of obesity in the PE group was lower than that of the control group. The authors of that study also suggested that VAI is a useful index for assessing and calculating the risk of PE, and the relationship between adiposity and PE may be due to the increase in peripheral aromatization of androgens. The difference in the prevalence of PE in patients with MetS in the last two studies [64,66] may be due to regional and cultural differences. The differing prevalence of PE in patients with MetS may be due to the use of different definitions of PE, variations in the number of patients in each study, and the large inconsistency in the prevalence of hyperglycemia in these studies. In a recent study, Lu et al [67] investigated the relationship between MetS and APE in 500 men with APE and 500 men without APE. They observed that neck circumference, WC, visceral fat ratio, fat mass, FBS, and high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels in the APE group were significantly higher than those of the control group. They also found that the APE population had a higher prevalence of MetS (35.6% controls vs. 49.4% MetS, p=0.000) and that both the prevalence and severity of PE increased significantly as the number of MetS components increased. In their multivariate analysis, Lu et al [67] reported that both MetS and hs-CRP are independent risk factors for APE. The underlying mechanism in the causality relationship between MetS and PE has not been fully elucidated. However, evidence has shown that there is a bidirectional relationship between depression, one of the known causes of PE, and MetS [58,59]. Rosmond et al [68] reported that abnormal production of the serotonergic receptor 5-HT2A gene, which is the primary organic cause of PE, can lead to obesity. Obesity is known to be associated with chronic low-grade inflammation [69]. Prostatic infections have been reported to be associated with the prevalence of PE [70], and treatment of prostatitis improves IELT scores [71]. Therefore, it is possible that MetS-induced tissue inflammation, such as prostatitis, may contribute to PE.


## THYROID DISORDERS

The thyroid is a hormonally active gland that is part of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis and secretes thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), which act on metabolism. Receptors that mediate the activity of thyroid hormones are found in almost all cells in the body. Indeed, hyperthyroidism, which is an excess of thyroid hormones, causes a hypermetabolic state characterized by tachycardia, tremors, anxiety, diarrhea, and sympathetic overactivity resulting in weight loss. Conversely, in hypothyroidism, there is a slowdown in physical and mental activity resulting in fatigue, decreased cardiac output, constipation, and weight gain. Although both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism affect almost all systems in the organism, the effects of these hormones on sexual function have been elucidated in less detail. The long-held false belief that the genital organs do not respond to thyroid hormone is responsible for this. However, studies have identified the presence of thyroid hormone receptors in both male and female genitalia, including the testis, corpora cavernosa, ovary, and vagina [72]. Therefore, it has been revealed that thyroid hormones can also be effective in the functioning of the genital organs, and studies on thyroid hormones and sexual activity have been accelerated. The results of some studies investigating the relationship between thyroid disorders and PE are presented in Table 3.

Two to four months after treatment of hypothyroidism and normalization of thyroid hormone levels, one study showed that there is a reduction in the proportion of hypothyroidic men with ED (64.3% during treatment to 21.4% after treatment, p<0.05), hypoactive sexual dysfunction (HSD) (64.3% during treatment to 35.7% after treatment, p<0.05), and DE (64% during treatment to 28.6% after treatment, p<0.05). However, this study included only 14 patients, which is an important limitation [73].

Numerous studies have identified a link between hyperthyroidism and ejaculatory dysfunction. In the study of Carani et al [73], PE was detected in half of the patients with hyperthyroidism. After the treat-ment of hyperthyroidism, with normalization of thyroid hormone levels for 2 to 4 months, the prevalence of PE decreased from 50% to 15%, which is similar to the levels in the general population (14%). In their study including 755 men, Corona et al [74] observed that the prevalence of PE was significantly higher in patients with TSH less than 0.2 mU/L compared to the rest of the study group (57.1% vs. 26.5%). Interestingly, Corona et al [74] found that patients with TSH less than 0.2 mU/L that also had ED had higher rates of PE. Thus, they suggested that hyperthyroidism is associated with PE independently of ED. Cihan et al [75] examined the prevalence of PE in hyperthyroidic men from a different perspective. In their single-center prospective observational study, they detected PE in 72% of 49 men with untreated hyperthyroidism, and observed a direct correlation between IELT and TSH levels (r=0.37, p=0.04). After patients were treated med- The prevalence of PE decreased from 50% to 15% after 2-4 months of treatment.

Waldinger et al [78] 2005 IELT ≤1 minute Hyperthyroidism -There is no relationship between LPE and hypo-or hyperthyroidism. Cihan et al [75] 2009 DMS-IV Hyperthyroidism 72% Correlation between IELT and TSH levels. Increase the IELT and decrease in the incidence of PE to 25% after treatment. Cihan et al [76] 2009 Animal study Hyperthyroidism -Hyperthyroid rat ejaculation time is shorter than control and returns to normal after treatment. Corona et al [30] 2011 PE was defined as ejaculation within 1 minute of vaginal intromission (as reported by the patient).


## Hyperthyroidism


## 42.4%

TSH level affected the ejaculation time independent of age, testosterone, or prolactin level, and the increase in TSH caused an increase in IELT levels.

Oztürk et al [77] 2012 Unspecified Hyperthyroidism -Hyperprolactinemia was detected in 19 participants (17.8%) and TSH was below normal in 9 patients (8.4%) in the PE group. Mean serum prolactin and free T4 concentrations were found to be significantly higher in the PE group. Canat et al [32] 2017 PEDT Hyperthyroidism -TSH levels lower in PE men. ically or surgically, the IELT increased from 75.8 to 123 seconds (p=0.004) and there was a decrease in the incidence of PE (to 25%.) In addition, Cihan et al [75] found significant increases in sexual desire, orgasmic function, erectile function, and general satisfaction domain scores in patients who were treated either medially or surgically (p=0.04, p=0.04, p=0.03, p=0.03, respectively). Cihan et al [76] then used a rat model to further investigate the relationship between hyperthyroidism and PE. That study utilized the ejaculation model, in which seminal vesicle pressure and bulbospongiosus muscle contraction was evaluated in response to parachloroamphetamine. The ejaculation delay time after para-chloroamphetamine injection was significantly shorted in the hyperthyroid rat group compared to the recovered, sham operated, and control groups (202 vs. 480, 465, 444 seconds, respectively, p<0.001 for all). The ejaculation delay time of the hyperthyroid rats treated with para-chloramphetamine was similar to that of the controls. According to these results, hyperthyroidism can cause PE, and PE can be reversed by treating the hyperthyroidism. Oztürk et al [77] conducted a case-control study involving 107 men with PE and 94 healthy controls. They found that free T4 levels were significantly increased in the PE group compared to controls. In a retrospective analysis of 2,652 patients, the prevalence of PE in patients with overt hyperthyroidism was found to be 42.4%. This ratio was significantly higher than the general male cohort of the clinic (hazard ratio=2.98, p<0.05). In that study, it was observed that TSH level affected the ejaculation time independent of age, testosterone, or PRL level (r=0.047, p=0.019). Moreover, that study reported that an increase in TSH level caused an increase in IELT levels [30]. In another case-control study by Canat et al [32] involving 63 men with PE and 39 controls, TSH levels were reported to be significantly lower in men with PE (p=0.017), but there were no significant changes in free T3 or free T4 levels (p>0.05). In addition, in a study involving 620 men with LPE, no relationship was observed between PE and hypo-and hyperthyroidism [78]. For this reason, it is suggested that hyperthyroidism can only increase the risk of developing APE. When the results of all of these studies are evaluated together, it can be concluded that there is a relationship between PE and thyroid disease. However, since thyroid disorders are not the only cause of PE, these studies report variable results [79].


## PITUITARY GLAND DISORDERS

Testosterone production is driven by the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. Hypothalamic gonadotropin releasing hormone stimulates the secretion of LH and FSH from the pituitary gland. LH regulates testosterone secretion by Leydig cells while FSH supports spermatogenesis. Testosterone deficiency can be asymptomatic or cause SD such as decreased libido and ED. Hypogonadism is a clinical condition that causes low serum testosterone levels due to dysfunction of the HPG axis. The relationship of testosterone levels to PE has been discussed before. Although the relationship between hypogonadism and PE has not been fully elucidated, it has been suggested that patients with PE are associated with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) [27]. Whether or not there are symptoms of hypothalamic or pituitary disease, hypogonadism is common in sexually mature men. The results of some studies investigating the relationship between pituitary disease and PE are presented in Table 4.

Cohen [27] reported a relationship between PE and idiopathic HH in men with SD. Laumann et al [80] reported that the prevalence of PE in men with HH is 21%. They also suggested that it is possible that a large number of men suffer from hormonal inadequacy. Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is the most common sex chromosomal disorder causing male hypogonadism and infertility [81,82]. Corona et al [83] reported that patients with KS also have severe ED, HSD, PE, and DE. Other recent studies have shown that KS patients have significantly lower libido and PE rates compared to controls [84]. However, another study reported that there was no significant difference between KS patients and controls in terms of the incidence of PE (11.3% vs. 8.3%, respectively) and DE (6.4% vs. 5.0%, respectively) [85].

In a study investigating the relationship between PRL levels and SD, it was observed that 2,265 (89.5%) of the SD patients had ED, 929 (36.7%) had HSD, 658 (26.0%) had PE, and 165 (6.5%) had DE. Of the patients with PE, 241 (36.6%) were APE and 417 (63.4%) were LPE. The authors detected hyperprolactinemia (PRL >720 mU/L or 35 ng/mL) in 1.4% (n=35) of the SD patients. However, they reported that hyperprolactinemia, especially in patients with PRL levels in the lowest quartile, exhibited a higher prevalence of MetS, arteriogenic ED, PE, and anxiety [86]. Similarly, Oztürk et al [77] reported that mean serum PRL levels were significantly higher in PE patients than in healthy controls. In addition, that same study reported that 19 of the PE patients (17.8%) had hyperprolactinemia and hypotestosteronemia. In their study including 1,249 patients with SD, El-Sakka et al [87] reported a significant relationship between hyperprolactinemia and PE. In contrast, Canat et al [32] reported that patients with PE had lower PRL than healthy controls. However, other published studies have shown that the serum PRL levels of PE patients were not different from controls [31,33].


## VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY

Vitamin D is a steroid hormone produced in the skin that is converted to vitamin D3 through exposure to sunlight [88]. Studies suggest that vitamin D deficiency is associated with endocrinological disorders, autoimmune diseases, infectious diseases, and neurocognitive disorders (other than those in the musculoskeletal system) [89]. Other studies have investigated the relationship between vitamin D and PE, and the results of those studies are presented in Table 5. Mirzahosseini et al [90] reported that the administration of 2.5 mg of vitamin D3 during the critical hormonal imprint period (neonatal period) completely prevented ejaculation in male rats due to the overlap of sex steroid receptors.

Abd El Aal et al [91] investigated vitamin D deficiency in a sample of 40 men with LPE and 40 healthy controls. They detected vitamin D deficiency in 16 (20%) of the participants, all of whom had LPE. In addition, vitamin D was observed to be significantly lower in the group with LPE compared to controls (35.75 vs. 58.92 ng/mL, p<0.001, respectively). That study found a correlation between vitamin D levels and IELT (r 2 =0.349; p<0.001) and PEDT (r 2 =0.425; p<0.001). ROC analysis revealed that the best cut-off value of vitamin D to detect patients with LPE was 50.65 ng/mL (85% sensitivity and specificity). In logistic regression analysis, vitamin D was determined to be an important risk factor for LPE (p<0.001). Canat et al [92] investigated the relationship between vitamin D levels and APE, and determined the vitamin D level in the APE group as 12.0±4.5 ng/mL and in the control group as 18.2±7.4 ng/mL. They suggested that serum vitamin D levels should be investigated in the etiology of APE, although the sensitivity and specificity are relatively low in the relationship between vitamin D deficiency and APE (60.9% and 83.5%, respectively). Different mechanisms have been proposed that may reveal the causal relationship between PE and vitamin D deficiency. Animal studies have revealed an association between anxiety, a cause of PE [93], and vitamin D deficiency [94,95]. Vitamin D stimulates the production of NO and NO synthase, which are important effectors of the sympathetic nervous system, which can affect ejaculation [96]. High levels of vitamin D activating enzymes and vitamin D receptors have been reported in the hypothalamus and substantia nigra [97]. Moreover, vitamin D has been reported to control serotonin synthesis [96]. Since vitamin D binds to androgen receptors when it rises above normal values [98], many studies have found a relationship between serum androgen and vitamin D levels [99,100].


## CONCLUSIONS

Most studies to date have focused on the psychogenic factors of PE. However, after recent studies have reported that PE can be caused by organic reasons, research has turned to this area. Endocrine disorders are one of the most important organic causes of PE. Recently, both clinical and experimental animal studies have shown that especially DM, obesity, MetS, hyperthyroidism, and vitamin D deficiency are associ-ated with PE. Moreover, treatment of these endocrine disorders leads to a decrease in the prevalence of PE. Therefore, when treating patients with SD, physicians should also consider endocrine disorders. However, it should be noted that the relationship between endocrine disorders and SD has not been fully elucidated. Larger studies are needed in order to demonstrate the relationship between hormonal irregularity and PE. Mirzahosseini et al [90] 1996 Animal study Vitamin D excess -Administration of 2.5 mg of vitamin D3 during the critical hormonal imprint period (neonatal period) completely prevented male rat ejaculation. Abd El Aal et al [91] 2018 ISSM Vitamin D deficiency -Vitamin D is lower in the group with LPE, there is a correlation between vitamin D levels and IELT and PEDT, vitamin D is an important risk factor for LPE. Canat et al [92] 2019 Second Ad Hoc ISSM Committee and PEDT Vitamin D deficiency -There was no significant relationship between vitamin D deficiency and APE.

PE: premature ejaculation, ISSM: International Society for Sexual Medicine, LPE: lifetime pemature ejaculation, IELT: intravaginal ejaculatory delay time, PEDT: premature ejaculation diagnostic tool, APE: acquired pemature ejaculation, -: not available.


PE: premature ejaculation, TSH: thyroid stimulating hormone, ED: erectile dysfunction, DMS-IV: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV, IELT: intravaginal ejaculatory delay time, LPE: lifetime pemature ejaculation, PEDT: premature ejaculation diagnostic tool, -: not available. www.wjmh.org

## Table 1 .
1Studies investigating the relationship between T1DM, T2DM, PreDM, and PE in men Long diabetes duration, poor glycemic control, and the presence of ED increased risk of PE PE: premature ejaculation, T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus, ED: erectile dysfunction, PreDM: prediabetes mellitus, FBS: fasting blood sugar, DMS-IV: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV, GRISS: Golombok Rust Inventory of Sexual Satisfaction, HbA1c: glycated hemoglobin, IELT: intravaginal ejaculatory delay time, WC: waist circumference, T1DM: type 1 diabetes mellitus, PEDT: premature ejaculation diagnostic tool, LBGI: low blood glucose indexes, AIPE: Arabic Index for Premature Ejaculation, LPE: lifetime pemature ejaculation, APE: acquired premature ejaculation, -: not available.Study 
Year 
Definition of PE 
Disorder 
PE prevalence 
Results 

El-Sakka [38] 
2003 The persistent or recur-
rent inability to volun-
tarily delay ejaculation 
either upon or shortly 
after penetration or 
with minimal sexual 
stimulation. 

T2DM 
50 years old ↓ 32.4% 
50 years old ↑ 67.6% 

Corona et al [45] 
2004 PE was defined as ejacula-
tion within 1 minute of 
vaginal intromission (as 
reported by the patient) 

PreDM, 
T2DM 

28.4% 
There was no relationship between PE and FBS. 

Basile Fasolo et al [40] 2005 DMS-IV 
T2DM 
21.2% 
Decreased PE in those treated for T2DM 
Owiredu et al [36] 
2011 GRISS 
T2DM 
56.6% 
Testosterone levels were negatively correlated 
with FBS, HbA1C, short IELT, weight, and WC. 
Bellastella et al [42] 
2015 PEDT 
T1DM 
24% 
PE prevalence in T1DM same as control. PEDT 
score was strongly associated with LBGI 
Majzoub et al [39] 
2016 AIPE 
T2DM 
60.2% 
LPE and APE were higher, and mean IELT was low-
er, in patients with T2DM compared to controls. 
Salama et al [21] 
2017 PEDT 
PreDM 
35.2% 
Higher PEDT, higher FBS 
Bolat et al [46] 
2017 PEDT 
PreDM 
-
PEDT score higher, IELT score lower in PE 



## Table 2 .
2Studies investigating the relationship between MetS and PE in menStudy 
Year 
Definition of PE 
Definition 
of MetS 

PE 
prevalence 
Results 

Corona et al [63] 2006 PE was defined as ejacula-
tion within 1 minute of 
vaginal intromission (as 
reported by the patient). 

NCEP-ATP-III 
22.7% 
MetS is associated with a higher prevalence of hypogo-
nadism in patients with SD. 

Gökçe and 
Ekmekcioglu 
[64] 

2010 PE was defined as ejacula-
tion in <1 minute during 
more than half of the 
sexual attempts. 

Unspecified 
-
The prevalence of obesity in the PE group is lower than 
the control group. 

Lotti et al [62] 
2013 PEDT 
IDF & AHA/ 
NHLBI 

22.2% with MetS 
14.4% without MetS 

MetS is associated with hypogonadism, poor sperm 
morphology, ED, somatization, depression. 
Gao et al [60] 
2013 According to the out-
comes of question-
naires, men who were 
not satisfied with their 
time to ejaculation were 
accepted as having the 
complaint of PE. 

WHO 
25.80% 
Higher age, BMI score, smoking rate, a lower frequency 
of sexual intercourse, IELT, and exercise rate in PE. 

Salama et al [21] 2017 PEDT 
NCEP-ATP-III 
35.2% 
WC and FBS were significantly associated with the pres-
ence of PE. 
Bolat et al [46] 
2017 PEDT 
NCEP-ATP-III 
51% 
Men with WC >102 cm and serum TG levels ≥150 mg/ 
dL had lower IELT scores and higher PE prevalence. 
Cakir et al [66] 
2018 PEDT 
Unspecified 
-
Men with PE had lower BMI, TG levels, WC, and HDL-C 
levels. 
Jeh et al [61] 
2019 ISSM 
NCEP-ATP-III 
7.2% 
Men with MetS had a 2.2-fold higher risk of APE. 
Lu et al [67] 
2020 PEDT 
NCEP-ATP-III 
-
WC, visceral fat ratio, fat mass, FBS, and hs-CRP levels 
in the APE group were significantly higher than in the 
control group. 

MetS: metabolic syndrome, PE: premature ejaculation, NCEP-ATP-III: National Cholesterol Education Program-Adult Treatment Panel III, SD: sexual 
dysfunction, PEDT: premature ejaculation diagnostic tool, IDF & AHA/NHLBI: International Diabetes Federation and the American Heart Associa-
tion/National Heart, Lung, and Blood, ED: erectile dysfunction, WHO: World Health Organization, BMI: body mass index, IELT: intravaginal ejacu-
latory delay time, WC: waist circumference, FBS: fasting blood sugar, TG: triglyceride, HDL-C: higher high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, ISSM: 
International Society for Sexual Medicine, APE: acquired pemature ejaculation, hs-CRP: high sensitivity C-reactive protein, -: not available. 


## Table 3 .
3Studies investigating the relationship between thyroid disorders and PE in menStudy 
Year 
Definition of PE 
Disorder 
PE prevalence 
Results 

Corona et al [45] 
2004 PE was defined as 
ejaculation within 
1 minute of vaginal 
intromission (as 
reported by the 
patient). 

Hyperthyroidism TSH ↓ 0.2 mU/L 
57.1% 
TSH ↑ 0.2 mU/L 
26.5% 

TSH <0.2 mU/L and ED had higher rates of PE. Hyper-
thyroidism is associated with PE independent of 
ED. 

Carani et al [73] 
2005 DMS-IV 
Hypothyroidism, 
hyperthyroidism 

Hypothyroidism 
7.1% 
Hyperthyroidism 
50% 



## Table 4 .
4Studies investigating the relationship between pituitary gland disorders and PE in men There is a significantly lower libido and PE in KS. Ferlin et al[85] 2018 PEDT KS 11.3% KS subjects had significantly fewer areas of sexual desire, sexual intercourse satisfaction, overall satisfaction, and erectile function, compared to controls. There was no difference in the incidence of PE and DE between KS patients and controls.PE: premature ejaculation, DMS: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, LH: luteinizing hormone, FSH: follicle stimulating hormone, ED: erectile dysfunction, KS: Klinefelter syndrome, HSD: hypoactive sexual dysfunction, DE: delayed ejaculation, AIPE: Arabic Index for Premature Ejaculation, PEDT: premature ejaculation diagnostic tool, KS: klinefelter syndrome, -: not available.Study 
Year Definition of PE 
Disorder 
PE 
prevalence 
Results 

Cohen [27] 
1997 DMS-III-R 
Hypogonadism 
-
Plasma testosterone, free testosterone, LH, and FSH 
levels were decreased in PE. 
Laumann et al [80] 
1999 DMS-IV 
Hypogonadism 
21% 
Large number of men suffering from hormonal inad-
equacy. 
Corona et al [86] 
2009 PE was defined 
as ejaculation 
within 1 min-
ute of vaginal 
intromission (as 
reported by the 
patient). 

Hypoprolactinemia 
26% 
Hyperprolactinemic patients exhibited a higher preva-
lence of MetS, arteriogenic ED, PE, and anxiety. 

Corona et al [83] 
2010 PE was defined 
as ejaculation 
within 1 min-
ute of vaginal 
intromission (as 
reported by the 
patient). 

KS 
9.5% 
Patients with KS have severe ED, HSD, PE, and DE. 

El Bardisi et al [84] 
2017 AIPE 
KS 
22.6% 


## Table 5 .
5Studies investigating the relationship between vitamin D and PE in menStudy 
Year Definition of PE 
Disorder 
PE 
prevalence 
Results 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe would like to acknowledge the www.makaletercume.com for their outstanding scientific proofreading and editing services that was provided for this manuscript. There are no conflicts of interest in connection with this paper and the study was not use any sources of financial assistance.Conflict of InterestThe authors have nothing to disclose.Author Contribution
Premature ejaculation: an update on definition and pathophysiology. M A El-Hamd, R Saleh, A Majzoub, Asian J Androl. 21El-Hamd MA, Saleh R, Majzoub A. Premature ejaculation: an update on definition and pathophysiology. Asian J Androl 2019;21:425-32.

Prevalence and risk factors of sexual dysfunction in men and women. R C Rosen, Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2Rosen RC. Prevalence and risk factors of sexual dysfunction in men and women. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2000;2:189-95.

Premature ejaculation. M Crowdis, S Nazir, Treasure IslandCrowdis M, Nazir S. Premature ejaculation. Treasure Island;

. Statpearls, StatPearls; 2020.

Standard operating procedures in the disorders of orgasm and ejaculation. C G Mcmahon, E Jannini, M Waldinger, D Rowland, J Sex Med. 10McMahon CG, Jannini E, Waldinger M, Rowland D. Standard operating procedures in the disorders of orgasm and ejacula- tion. J Sex Med 2013;10:204-29.

The role of anxiety in premature ejaculation: a psychophysiological model. D S Strassberg, J M Mahoney, M Schaugaard, V E Hale, Arch Sex Behav. 19Strassberg DS, Mahoney JM, Schaugaard M, Hale VE. The role of anxiety in premature ejaculation: a psychophysiologi- cal model. Arch Sex Behav 1990;19:251-7.

AUA Erectile Dysfunction Guideline Update Panel. AUA guideline on the pharmacologic management of premature ejaculation. D K Montague, J Jarow, G A Broderick, R R Dmochowski, J P Heaton, T F Lue, J Urol. 172Montague DK, Jarow J, Broderick GA, Dmochowski RR, Heaton JP, Lue TF, et al.; AUA Erectile Dysfunction Guideline Update Panel. AUA guideline on the pharmacologic manage- ment of premature ejaculation. J Urol 2004;172:290-4.

International Society for Sexual Medicine. International Society for Sexual Medicine's guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of premature ejaculation. S E Althof, C H Abdo, J Dean, G Hackett, M Mccabe, C G Mc-Mahon, J Sex Med. 7Althof SE, Abdo CH, Dean J, Hackett G, McCabe M, Mc- Mahon CG, et al.; International Society for Sexual Medicine. International Society for Sexual Medicine's guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of premature ejaculation. J Sex Med 2010;7:2947-69.

An evidence-based definition of lifelong premature ejaculation: report of the International Society for Sexual Medicine (ISSM) ad hoc committee for the definition of premature ejaculation. C G Mcmahon, S E Althof, M D Waldinger, H Porst, J Dean, I D Sharlip, J Sex Med. 5McMahon CG, Althof SE, Waldinger MD, Porst H, Dean J, Sharlip ID, et al. An evidence-based definition of lifelong premature ejaculation: report of the International Society for Sexual Medicine (ISSM) ad hoc committee for the definition of premature ejaculation. J Sex Med 2008;5:1590-606.

An evidence-based unified definition of lifelong and acquired premature ejaculation: report of the second International Society for Sexual Medicine Ad Hoc Committee for the Definition of Premature Ejaculation. E C Serefoglu, C G Mcmahon, M D Waldinger, S E Althof, A Shindel, G Adaikan, J Sex Med. 11Serefoglu EC, McMahon CG, Waldinger MD, Althof SE, Shindel A, Adaikan G, et al. An evidence-based unified defi- nition of lifelong and acquired premature ejaculation: report of the second International Society for Sexual Medicine Ad Hoc Committee for the Definition of Premature Ejaculation. J Sex Med 2014;11:1423-41.

Premature ejaculation: a review of 1130 cases. B Schapiro, J Urol. 50Schapiro B. Premature ejaculation: a review of 1130 cases. J Urol 1943;50:374-9.

Clinical and therapeutic studies in premature ejaculation. A J Cooper, Compr Psychiatry. 10Cooper AJ. Clinical and therapeutic studies in premature ejaculation. Compr Psychiatry 1969;10:285-95.

Premature ejaculation: clinical subgroups and etiology. M L Godpodinoff, J Sex Marital Ther. 15Godpodinoff ML. Premature ejaculation: clinical subgroups and etiology. J Sex Marital Ther 1989;15:130-4.

Changing paradigms from a historical DSM-III and DSM-IV view toward an evidencebased definition of premature ejaculation. Part I--validity of DSM-IV-TR. M D Waldinger, D H Schweitzer, J Sex Med. 3Waldinger MD, Schweitzer DH. Changing paradigms from a historical DSM-III and DSM-IV view toward an evidence- based definition of premature ejaculation. Part I--validity of DSM-IV-TR. J Sex Med 2006;3:682-92.

Recent advances in the classification, neurobiology and treatment of premature ejaculation. M D Waldinger, Adv Psychosom Med. 29Waldinger MD. Recent advances in the classification, neuro- biology and treatment of premature ejaculation. Adv Psycho- som Med 2008;29:50-69.

Advances in understanding and treating premature ejaculation. T R Saitz, E C Serefoglu, Nat Rev Urol. 12Saitz TR, Serefoglu EC. Advances in understanding and treat- ing premature ejaculation. Nat Rev Urol 2015;12:629-40.

A reassessment of the possible effects of the serotonin transporter gene linked polymorphism 5-HTTLPR on premature ejaculation. P Jern, E Eriksson, L Westberg, Arch Sex Behav. 42Jern P, Eriksson E, Westberg L. A reassessment of the possible effects of the serotonin transporter gene linked polymor- phism 5-HTTLPR on premature ejaculation. Arch Sex Behav 2013;42:45-9.

Retraction statement: analysis of association between the 5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms in the serotonin-transporter gene and clinical response to a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (sertraline) in patients with premature ejaculation. M R Safarinejad, BJU Int. 1159Safarinejad MR. Retraction statement: analysis of association between the 5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms in the serotonin-transporter gene and clinical response to a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (sertraline) in patients with pre- mature ejaculation. BJU Int 2015;115:E9.

Erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation: interrelationships and psychosexual factors. S Brody, P Weiss, J Sex Med. 12Brody S, Weiss P. Erectile dysfunction and premature ejacula- tion: interrelationships and psychosexual factors. J Sex Med 2015;12:398-404.

Relationship between premature ejaculation and chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome. J H Lee, S W Lee, J Sex Med. 12Lee JH, Lee SW. Relationship between premature ejaculation and chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome. J Sex Med 2015;12:697-704.

Anxiety and depression among Greek men with primary erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation. I Mourikis, M Antoniou, E Matsouka, E Vousoura, C Tzavara, C Ekizoglou, Mourikis I, Antoniou M, Matsouka E, Vousoura E, Tzavara C, Ekizoglou C, et al. Anxiety and depression among Greek men with primary erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation.

. Ann Gen Psychiatry. 1434Ann Gen Psychiatry 2015;14:34.

Increased prevalence of premature ejaculation in men with metabolic syndrome. N Salama, A Eid, A Swedan, A Hatem, Salama N, Eid A, Swedan A, Hatem A. Increased prevalence of premature ejaculation in men with metabolic syndrome.

. Aging Male. 20Aging Male 2017;20:89-95.

Hormonal correlations of premature ejaculation. A Sansone, F Romanelli, E A Jannini, A Lenzi, Endocrine. 49Sansone A, Romanelli F, Jannini EA, Lenzi A. Hormonal cor- relations of premature ejaculation. Endocrine 2015;49:333-8.

The hormonal control of ejaculation. G Corona, E A Jannini, L Vignozzi, G Rastrelli, M Maggi, Nat Rev Urol. 9Corona G, Jannini EA, Vignozzi L, Rastrelli G, Maggi M. The hormonal control of ejaculation. Nat Rev Urol 2012;9:508-19.

Editorial comment on: Dapoxetine for the treatment of premature ejaculation: results from a randomized, double-blind. E A Jannini, 22Jannini EA. Editorial comment on: Dapoxetine for the treat- ment of premature ejaculation: results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial in 22 countries.

. Eur Urol. 55Eur Urol 2009;55:967-8.

Epidemiology of premature ejaculation. E A Jannini, A Lenzi, Jannini EA, Lenzi A. Epidemiology of premature ejaculation.

. Curr Opin Urol. 15Curr Opin Urol 2005;15:399-403.

Disorders of orgasm and ejaculation in men. D Rowland, C G Mcmahon, C Abdo, J Chen, E Jannini, M D Waldinger, J Sex Med. 74Pt 2Rowland D, McMahon CG, Abdo C, Chen J, Jannini E, Waldinger MD, et al. Disorders of orgasm and ejaculation in men. J Sex Med 2010;7(4 Pt 2):1668-86.

The association of premature ejaculation and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. P G Cohen, J Sex Marital Ther. 23Cohen PG. The association of premature ejaculation and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. J Sex Marital Ther 1997;23:208-11.

Is testosterone replacement an effective treatment of secondary premature ejaculation?. İ N Tahtali, Andrologia. 5213452Tahtali İN. Is testosterone replacement an effective treat- ment of secondary premature ejaculation? Andrologia 2020;52:e13452.

Different testosterone levels are associated with ejaculatory dysfunction. G Corona, E A Jannini, E Mannucci, A D Fisher, F Lotti, L Petrone, J Sex Med. 5Corona G, Jannini EA, Mannucci E, Fisher AD, Lotti F, Petrone L, et al. Different testosterone levels are associated with ejaculatory dysfunction. J Sex Med 2008;5:1991-8.

Premature and delayed ejaculation: two ends of a single continuum influenced by hormonal milieu. G Corona, E A Jannini, F Lotti, V Boddi, De Vita, G Forti, G , Int J Androl. 34Corona G, Jannini EA, Lotti F, Boddi V, De Vita G, Forti G, et al. Premature and delayed ejaculation: two ends of a single continuum influenced by hormonal milieu. Int J Androl 2011;34:41-8.

Serum Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders www.wjmh.org testosterone and gonadotropins levels in patients with premature ejaculation: a comparison with normal men. M G Mohseni, S R Hosseini, F Alizadeh, N Rangzan, Adv Biomed Res. 36Mohseni MG, Hosseini SR, Alizadeh F, Rangzan N. Serum Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders www.wjmh.org testosterone and gonadotropins levels in patients with prema- ture ejaculation: a comparison with normal men. Adv Biomed Res 2014;3:6.

Assessment of hormonal activity in patients with premature ejaculation. L Canat, A Erbin, M Canat, M Dinek, T Caskurlu, Canat L, Erbin A, Canat M, Dinek M, Caskurlu T. Assessment of hormonal activity in patients with premature ejaculation.

. Int Braz J Urol. 43Int Braz J Urol 2017;43:311-6.

Possible role of serum testosterone, gonadotropins and prolactin in patients with premature ejaculation. Abu El-Hamd, M Farah, A , Andrologia. 5012808Abu El-Hamd M, Farah A. Possible role of serum testoster- one, gonadotropins and prolactin in patients with premature ejaculation. Andrologia 2018;50:e12808.

The relationship between anogenital distance and lifelong premature ejaculation. T Toprak, A Şahin, K Akgul, M A Kutluhan, M A Ramazanoglu, M Yilmaz, Andrology. 8Toprak T, Şahin A, Akgul K, Kutluhan MA, Ramazanoglu MA, Yilmaz M, et al. The relationship between anogenital distance and lifelong premature ejaculation. Andrology 2020;8:353-7.

Effects of diabetes mellitus on neuropsychological functioning: a lifespan perspective. C M Ryan, Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 2Ryan CM. Effects of diabetes mellitus on neuropsychological functioning: a lifespan perspective. Semin Clin Neuropsy- chiatry 1997;2:4-14.

Determinants of sexual dysfunction among clinically diagnosed diabetic patients. W K Owiredu, N Amidu, H Alidu, C Sarpong, C K Gyasi-Sarpong, Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 970Owiredu WK, Amidu N, Alidu H, Sarpong C, Gyasi-Sarpong CK. Determinants of sexual dysfunction among clinically di- agnosed diabetic patients. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2011;9:70.

Epidemiology of erectile dysfunction in four countries: cross-national study of the prevalence and correlates of erectile dysfunction. A Nicolosi, E D MoreiraJr, M Shirai, M I Bin Mohd Tambi, D B Glasser, Urology. 61Nicolosi A, Moreira ED Jr, Shirai M, Bin Mohd Tambi MI, Glasser DB. Epidemiology of erectile dysfunction in four countries: cross-national study of the prevalence and corre- lates of erectile dysfunction. Urology 2003;61:201-6.

Premature ejaculation in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. A I El-Sakka, Int J Androl. 26El-Sakka AI. Premature ejaculation in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Int J Androl 2003;26:329-34.

Premature ejaculation in type II diabetes mellitus patients: association with glycemic control. A Majzoub, M Arafa, S Al-Said, Z Dabbous, S Aboulsoud, K Khalafalla, Transl Androl Urol. 5Majzoub A, Arafa M, Al-Said S, Dabbous Z, Aboulsoud S, Khalafalla K, et al. Premature ejaculation in type II diabetes mellitus patients: association with glycemic control. Transl Androl Urol 2016;5:248-54.

Premature ejaculation: prevalence and associated conditions in a sample of 12,558 men attending the andrology prevention week 2001--a study of the Italian Society of Andrology (SIA). C Basile Fasolo, V Mirone, V Gentile, F Parazzini, E Ricci, J Sex Med. 2Andrology Prevention Week centers; Italian Society of Andrology (SIA)Basile Fasolo C, Mirone V, Gentile V, Parazzini F, Ricci E; An- drology Prevention Week centers; Italian Society of Androl- ogy (SIA). Premature ejaculation: prevalence and associated conditions in a sample of 12,558 men attending the andrology prevention week 2001--a study of the Italian Society of An- drology (SIA). J Sex Med 2005;2:376-82.

Diabetic autonomic neuropathy. A I Vinik, R Freeman, T Erbas, Semin Neurol. 23Vinik AI, Freeman R, Erbas T. Diabetic autonomic neuropa- thy. Semin Neurol 2003;23:365-72.

Premature ejaculation is associated with glycemic control in Type 1 diabetes. G Bellastella, M I Maiorino, L Olita, Della Volpe, E Giugliano, D Esposito, K , J Sex Med. 12Bellastella G, Maiorino MI, Olita L, Della Volpe E, Giugliano D, Esposito K. Premature ejaculation is associated with glyce- mic control in Type 1 diabetes. J Sex Med 2015;12:93-9.

Peripheral arterial tonometry to measure the effects of vardenafil on sympathetic tone in men with lifelong premature ejaculation. D Francomano, L M Donini, A Lenzi, A Aversa, Francomano D, Donini LM, Lenzi A, Aversa A. Peripheral arterial tonometry to measure the effects of vardenafil on sympathetic tone in men with lifelong premature ejaculation.

. Int J Endocrinol. 394934Int J Endocrinol 2013;2013:394934.

Insulininduced hypoglycemia decreases single-unit activity of serotonergic medullary raphe neurons in freely moving cats: relationship to sympathetic and motor output. F J Martín-Cora, C A Fornal, C W Metzler, B L Jacobs, Eur J Neurosci. 16Martín-Cora FJ, Fornal CA, Metzler CW, Jacobs BL. Insulin- induced hypoglycemia decreases single-unit activity of se- rotonergic medullary raphe neurons in freely moving cats: relationship to sympathetic and motor output. Eur J Neurosci 2002;16:722-34.

Psycho-biological correlates of rapid ejaculation in patients attending an andrologic unit for sexual dysfunctions. G Corona, L Petrone, E Mannucci, E A Jannini, R Mansani, A Magini, Eur Urol. 46Corona G, Petrone L, Mannucci E, Jannini EA, Mansani R, Magini A, et al. Psycho-biological correlates of rapid ejacula- tion in patients attending an andrologic unit for sexual dys- functions. Eur Urol 2004;46:615-22.

The relationship between acquired premature ejaculation and metabolic syndrome: a prospective, comparative study. D Bolat, G U Kocabas, B Gunlusoy, O Aydogdu, M E Aydin, Int J Impot Res. 29Bolat D, Kocabas GU, Gunlusoy B, Aydogdu O, Aydin ME. The relationship between acquired premature ejaculation and metabolic syndrome: a prospective, comparative study. Int J Impot Res 2017;29:105-9.

A pivotal role of lumbar spinothalamic cells in the regulation of ejaculation via intraspinal connections. M D Staudt, W A Truitt, K E Mckenna, C V De Oliveira, M N Lehman, L M Coolen, J Sex Med. 9Staudt MD, Truitt WA, McKenna KE, de Oliveira CV, Lehman MN, Coolen LM. A pivotal role of lumbar spinothalamic cells in the regulation of ejaculation via intraspinal connections. J Sex Med 2012;9:2256-65.

Diabetic neuropathies: a statement by the American Diabetes Association. A J Boulton, A I Vinik, J C Arezzo, V Bril, E L Feldman, R Freeman, Diabetes Care. 28American Diabetes AssociationBoulton AJ, Vinik AI, Arezzo JC, Bril V, Feldman EL, Free- man R, et al.; American Diabetes Association. Diabetic neu- ropathies: a statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2005;28:956-62.

Workshop: endothelial cell dysfunction leading to diabetic nephropathy: focus on nitric oxide. M S Goligorsky, J Chen, S Brodsky, Hypertension. 372Pt 2Goligorsky MS, Chen J, Brodsky S. Workshop: endothelial cell dysfunction leading to diabetic nephropathy: focus on nitric oxide. Hypertension 2001;37(2 Pt 2):744-8.

The L-arginine-nitric oxide pathway. S Moncada, A Higgs, N Engl J Med. 329Moncada S, Higgs A. The L-arginine-nitric oxide pathway. N Engl J Med 1993;329:2002-12.

The roles of nitric oxide in sexual function of male rats. E M Hull, L A Lumley, L Matuszewich, J Dominguez, J Moses, D S Lorrain, Neuropharmacology. 33Hull EM, Lumley LA, Matuszewich L, Dominguez J, Moses J, Lorrain DS. The roles of nitric oxide in sexual function of male rats. Neuropharmacology 1994;33:1499-504.

The neurobiological approach to premature ejaculation. M D Waldinger, J Urol. 168Waldinger MD. The neurobiological approach to premature ejaculation. J Urol 2002;168:2359-67.

Serotonin 2C receptor agonists improve type 2 diabetes via melanocortin-4 receptor signaling pathways. L Zhou, G M Sutton, J J Rochford, R K Semple, D D Lam, L J Oksanen, Cell Metab. 6Zhou L, Sutton GM, Rochford JJ, Semple RK, Lam DD, Ok- sanen LJ, et al. Serotonin 2C receptor agonists improve type 2 diabetes via melanocortin-4 receptor signaling pathways. Cell Metab 2007;6:398-405.

Longer trinucleotide repeats of androgen receptor are associated with higher testosterone and low oxytocin levels in diabetic premature ejaculatory dysfunction patients. H L Khan, S Bhatti, S Abbas, Y L Khan, Rmm Gonzalez, M Aslamkhan, Basic Clin Androl. 283Khan HL, Bhatti S, Abbas S, Khan YL, Gonzalez RMM, Aslamkhan M, et al. Longer trinucleotide repeats of andro- gen receptor are associated with higher testosterone and low oxytocin levels in diabetic premature ejaculatory dysfunction patients. Basic Clin Androl 2018;28:3.

Urological aspects of the metabolic syndrome. J Hammarsten, R Peeker, Nat Rev Urol. 8Hammarsten J, Peeker R. Urological aspects of the metabolic syndrome. Nat Rev Urol 2011;8:483-94.

Central obesity as measured by waist circumference is predictive of severity of lower urinary tract symptoms. R K Lee, D Chung, B Chughtai, A E Te, S A Kaplan, BJU Int. 110Lee RK, Chung D, Chughtai B, Te AE, Kaplan SA. Central obesity as measured by waist circumference is predic- tive of severity of lower urinary tract symptoms. BJU Int 2012;110:540-5.

Is the metabolic syndrome an independent risk factor for erectile dysfunction?. S Heidler, C Temml, C Broessner, K Mock, M Rauchenwald, S Madersbacher, J Urol. 177Heidler S, Temml C, Broessner C, Mock K, Rauchenwald M, Madersbacher S, et al. Is the metabolic syndrome an indepen- dent risk factor for erectile dysfunction? J Urol 2007;177:651- 4.

bolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. A Pan, N Keum, O I Okereke, Q Sun, M Kivimaki, R R Rubin, 10.5534/wjmh.200184Diabetes Care. 35Bidirectional association between depressionPan A, Keum N, Okereke OI, Sun Q, Kivimaki M, Rubin RR, et al. Bidirectional association between depression and meta- https://doi.org/10.5534/wjmh.200184 bolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Diabetes Care 2012;35:1171-80.

Associations between anxiety, depression, and the metabolic syndrome. M R Skilton, P Moulin, J L Terra, F Bonnet, Biol Psychiatry. 62Skilton MR, Moulin P, Terra JL, Bonnet F. Associations be- tween anxiety, depression, and the metabolic syndrome. Biol Psychiatry 2007;62:1251-7.

Prevalence and factors associated with the complaint of premature ejaculation and the four premature ejaculation syndromes: a large observational study in China. J Gao, X Zhang, P Su, J Liu, L Xia, J Yang, J Sex Med. 10Gao J, Zhang X, Su P, Liu J, Xia L, Yang J, et al. Prevalence and factors associated with the complaint of premature ejacula- tion and the four premature ejaculation syndromes: a large observational study in China. J Sex Med 2013;10:1874-81.

Metabolic syndrome is an independent risk factor for acquired premature ejaculation. S U Jeh, S Yoon, J H Choi, J Do, D H Seo, S W Lee, World J Mens Health. 37Jeh SU, Yoon S, Choi JH, Do J, Seo DH, Lee SW, et al. Meta- bolic syndrome is an independent risk factor for acquired premature ejaculation. World J Mens Health 2019;37:226-33.

ultrasound and psychobiological parameters correlate with metabolic syndrome in male members of infertile couples. F Lotti, G Corona, Degli Innocenti, S Filimberti, E Scognamiglio, V Vignozzi, L , Andrology. 1Lotti F, Corona G, Degli Innocenti S, Filimberti E, Scognami- glio V, Vignozzi L, et al. Seminal, ultrasound and psychobio- logical parameters correlate with metabolic syndrome in male members of infertile couples. Andrology 2013;1:229-39.

Psychobiologic correlates of the metabolic syndrome and associated sexual dysfunction. G Corona, E Mannucci, C Schulman, L Petrone, R Mansani, A Cilotti, Eur Urol. 50discussion 604Corona G, Mannucci E, Schulman C, Petrone L, Mansani R, Cilotti A, et al. Psychobiologic correlates of the meta- bolic syndrome and associated sexual dysfunction. Eur Urol 2006;50:595-604; discussion 604.

Insight on pathogenesis of lifelong premature ejaculation: inverse relationship between lifelong premature ejaculation and obesity. A Gökçe, O Ekmekcioglu, Int J Impot Res. 22Gökçe A, Ekmekcioglu O. Insight on pathogenesis of life- long premature ejaculation: inverse relationship between lifelong premature ejaculation and obesity. Int J Impot Res 2010;22:251-4.

Visceral adiposity index: a reliable indicator of visceral fat function associated with cardiometabolic risk. M C Amato, C Giordano, M Galia, A Criscimanna, S Vitabile, M Midiri, Diabetes Care. 33AlkaMeSy Study GroupAmato MC, Giordano C, Galia M, Criscimanna A, Vitabile S, Midiri M, et al.; AlkaMeSy Study Group. Visceral adiposity index: a reliable indicator of visceral fat function associated with cardiometabolic risk. Diabetes Care 2010;33:920-2.

Visceral adiposity index is associated with premature ejaculation inversely: a cross-sectional study. S S Cakir, L Ozcan, H Besiroglu, M Dursun, E C Polat, A Otunctemur, Aging Male. 21Cakir SS, Ozcan L, Besiroglu H, Dursun M, Polat EC, Otunc- temur A, et al. Visceral adiposity index is associated with pre- mature ejaculation inversely: a cross-sectional study. Aging Male 2018;21:206-10.

The association between acquired premature ejaculation and metabolic syndrome in young Chinese men. Y Lu, Z Liang, J Tian, Z Li, Y Song, X Wang, Andrologia. 5213787Lu Y, Liang Z, Tian J, Li Z, Song Y, Wang X, et al. The as- sociation between acquired premature ejaculation and metabolic syndrome in young Chinese men. Andrologia 2020;52:e13787.

Increased abdominal obesity in subjects with a mutation in the 5-HT(2A) receptor gene promoter. R Rosmond, C Bouchard, P Björntorp, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 967Rosmond R, Bouchard C, Björntorp P. Increased abdominal obesity in subjects with a mutation in the 5-HT(2A) receptor gene promoter. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002;967:571-5.

Obesity, inflammation, and insulin resistance. S E Shoelson, L Herrero, A Naaz, Gastroenterology. 132Shoelson SE, Herrero L, Naaz A. Obesity, inflammation, and insulin resistance. Gastroenterology 2007;132:2169-80.

Prevalence of premature ejaculation in Turkish men with chronic pelvic pain syndrome. M Gonen, M Kalkan, A Cenker, H Ozkardes, J Androl. 26Gonen M, Kalkan M, Cenker A, Ozkardes H. Prevalence of premature ejaculation in Turkish men with chronic pelvic pain syndrome. J Androl 2005;26:601-3.

Antibiotic treatment can delay ejaculation in patients with premature ejaculation and chronic bacterial prostatitis. A El-Nashaar, R Shamloul, J Sex Med. 4El-Nashaar A, Shamloul R. Antibiotic treatment can delay ejaculation in patients with premature ejaculation and chron- ic bacterial prostatitis. J Sex Med 2007;4:491-6.

Thyroid hormone receptors and ligands, tissue distribution and sexual behavior. E Carosa, A Lenzi, E A Jannini, Mol Cell Endocrinol. 467Carosa E, Lenzi A, Jannini EA. Thyroid hormone receptors and ligands, tissue distribution and sexual behavior. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2018;467:49-59.

Multicenter study on the prevalence of sexual symptoms in male hypo-and hyperthyroid patients. C Carani, A M Isidori, A Granata, E Carosa, M Maggi, A Lenzi, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 90Carani C, Isidori AM, Granata A, Carosa E, Maggi M, Lenzi A, et al. Multicenter study on the prevalence of sexual symptoms in male hypo-and hyperthyroid patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:6472-9.

Psychobiological correlates of delayed ejaculation in male patients with sexual dysfunctions. G Corona, E Mannucci, L Petrone, A D Fisher, G Balercia, De Scisciolo, G , J Androl. 27Corona G, Mannucci E, Petrone L, Fisher AD, Balercia G, De Scisciolo G, et al. Psychobiological correlates of delayed ejac- ulation in male patients with sexual dysfunctions. J Androl 2006;27:453-8.

The relationship between premature ejaculation and hyperthyroidism. A Cihan, O Demir, T Demir, G Aslan, A Comlekci, A Esen, J Urol. 181Cihan A, Demir O, Demir T, Aslan G, Comlekci A, Esen A. The relationship between premature ejaculation and hyper- thyroidism. J Urol 2009;181:1273-80.

An experimental approach to the interrelationship between hyperthyroidism and ejaculation latency time in male rats. A Cihan, N Murat, O Demir, G Aslan, T Demir, S Gidener, J Urol. 181Cihan A, Murat N, Demir O, Aslan G, Demir T, Gidener S, et al. An experimental approach to the interrelationship be- tween hyperthyroidism and ejaculation latency time in male rats. J Urol 2009;181:907-12.

Hormonal evaluation in premature ejaculation. M İ Oztürk, O Koca, M Tüken, M O Keleş, A Ilktaç, M I Karaman, Urol Int. 88Oztürk Mİ, Koca O, Tüken M, Keleş MO, Ilktaç A, Karaman MI. Hormonal evaluation in premature ejaculation. Urol Int 2012;88:454-8.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone assessments in a Dutch cohort of 620 men with lifelong premature ejaculation without erectile dysfunction. M D Waldinger, A H Zwinderman, B Olivier, D H Schweitzer, J Sex Med. 2Waldinger MD, Zwinderman AH, Olivier B, Schweitzer DH. Thyroid-stimulating hormone assessments in a Dutch cohort of 620 men with lifelong premature ejaculation without erec- tile dysfunction. J Sex Med 2005;2:865-70.

Effect of thyroid hormone derangements on sexual function in men and women. J N Bates, T P Kohn, A W Pastuszak, Sex Med Rev. 8Bates JN, Kohn TP, Pastuszak AW. Effect of thyroid hormone derangements on sexual function in men and women. Sex Med Rev 2020;8:217-30.

Sexual dysfunction in the United States: prevalence and predictors. E O Laumann, A Paik, R C Rosen, JAMA. 281Laumann EO, Paik A, Rosen RC. Sexual dysfunction in the United States: prevalence and predictors. JAMA 1999;281:537-44.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS): genetics, clinical phenotype and hypogonadism. M Bonomi, V Rochira, D Pasquali, G Balercia, E A Jannini, A Ferlin, Klinefelter ItaliaN Group (KING)Bonomi M, Rochira V, Pasquali D, Balercia G, Jannini EA, Ferlin A; Klinefelter ItaliaN Group (KING). Klinefelter syn- drome (KS): genetics, clinical phenotype and hypogonadism.

. J Endocrinol Invest. 40J Endocrinol Invest 2017;40:123-34.

Klinefelter's syndrome. F Lanfranco, A Kamischke, M Zitzmann, E Nieschlag, Lancet. 364Lanfranco F, Kamischke A, Zitzmann M, Nieschlag E. Kline- felter's syndrome. Lancet 2004;364:273-83.

Sexual dysfunction in subjects with Klinefelter's syndrome. G Corona, L Petrone, F Paggi, F Lotti, V Boddi, A Fisher, Corona G, Petrone L, Paggi F, Lotti F, Boddi V, Fisher A, et al. Sexual dysfunction in subjects with Klinefelter's syndrome.

. Int J Androl. 33Int J Androl 2010;33:574-80.

Sexual dysfunction in Klinefelter's syndrome patients. H El Bardisi, A Majzoub, Al Said, S Alnawasra, H Dabbous, Z Arafa, M , Andrologia. 4912670El Bardisi H, Majzoub A, Al Said S, Alnawasra H, Dabbous Z, Arafa M. Sexual dysfunction in Klinefelter's syndrome pa- tients. Andrologia 2017;49:e12670.

Endocrine and psychological aspects of sexual dysfunction in Klinefelter patients. A Ferlin, R Selice, S Angelini, Di Grazia, M Caretta, N Cavalieri, F , Andrology. 6Ferlin A, Selice R, Angelini S, Di Grazia M, Caretta N, Cava- lieri F, et al. Endocrine and psychological aspects of sexual dysfunction in Klinefelter patients. Andrology 2018;6:414-9.

Hypoprolactinemia: a new clinical syndrome in patients with sexual dysfunction. G Corona, E Mannucci, E A Jannini, Lotti F , Ricca V Monami, M , J Sex Med. 6Corona G, Mannucci E, Jannini EA, Lotti F, Ricca V, Monami M, et al. Hypoprolactinemia: a new clinical syndrome in pa- tients with sexual dysfunction. J Sex Med 2009;6:1457-66.

Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders www. Rauf Enis, Burak Coskuner, Ozkan, wjmh.orgEnis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders www.wjmh.org

Pattern of endocrinal changes in patients with sexual dysfunction. A I El-Sakka, H M Hassoba, H M Sayed, K A Tayeb, J Sex Med. 2El-Sakka AI, Hassoba HM, Sayed HM, Tayeb KA. Pattern of endocrinal changes in patients with sexual dysfunction. J Sex Med 2005;2:551-8.

Resurrection of vitamin D deficiency and rickets. M F Holick, J Clin Invest. 116Holick MF. Resurrection of vitamin D deficiency and rickets. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2062-72.

Vitamin D for health: a global perspective. A Hossein-Nezhad, M F Holick, Mayo Clin Proc. 88Hossein-nezhad A, Holick MF. Vitamin D for health: a global perspective. Mayo Clin Proc 2013;88:720-55.

Changes in sexual behavior of adult male and female rats neonatally treated with vitamin D3. S Mirzahosseini, C Karabélyos, O Dobozy, G Csaba, Hum Exp Toxicol. 15Mirzahosseini S, Karabélyos C, Dobozy O, Csaba G. Changes in sexual behavior of adult male and female rats neonatally treated with vitamin D3. Hum Exp Toxicol 1996;15:573-6.

Serum vitamin D level may be a novel potential risk factor for premature ejaculation: a comparative study. Abd El Aal, A M , Gamalel Din, S F Rashed, L A Tawfik, Aerb Elsheemy, M S , Abd El Aal AM, GamalEl Din SF, Rashed LA, Tawfik AERB, ElSheemy MS. Serum vitamin D level may be a novel poten- tial risk factor for premature ejaculation: a comparative study.

. Int Urol Nephrol. 50Int Urol Nephrol 2018;50:1975-80.

Low serum vitamin D is associated with an increased likelihood of acquired premature ejaculation. L Canat, R B Degirmentepe, H A Atalay, S S Çakir, I Alkan, M G Çulha, Int Braz J Urol. 45Canat L, Degirmentepe RB, Atalay HA, Çakir SS, Alkan I, Çulha MG, et al. Low serum vitamin D is associated with an increased likelihood of acquired premature ejaculation. Int Braz J Urol 2019;45:621-8.

Cognitive and partner-related factors in rapid ejaculation: differences between dysfunctional and functional men. U Hartmann, M Schedlowski, T H Krüger, World J Urol. 23Hartmann U, Schedlowski M, Krüger TH. Cognitive and partner-related factors in rapid ejaculation: differences between dysfunctional and functional men. World J Urol 2005;23:93-101.

Adult vitamin D deficiency leads to behavioural and brain neurochemical alterations in C57BL/6J and BALB/ c mice. N J Groves, J P Kesby, D W Eyles, J J Mcgrath, A Mackay-Sim, T H Burne, Behav Brain Res. 241Groves NJ, Kesby JP, Eyles DW, McGrath JJ, Mackay-Sim A, Burne TH. Adult vitamin D deficiency leads to behavioural and brain neurochemical alterations in C57BL/6J and BALB/ c mice. Behav Brain Res 2013;241:120-31.

Dietary vitamin D deficiency in rats from middle to old age leads to elevated tyrosine nitration and proteomics changes in levels of key proteins in brain: implications for low vitamin D-dependent age-related cognitive decline. Jtr Keeney, S Förster, R Sultana, L D Brewer, C S Latimer, J Cai, Free Radic Biol Med. 65Keeney JTR, Förster S, Sultana R, Brewer LD, Latimer CS, Cai J, et al. Dietary vitamin D deficiency in rats from middle to old age leads to elevated tyrosine nitration and proteomics changes in levels of key proteins in brain: implications for low vitamin D-dependent age-related cognitive decline. Free Radic Biol Med 2013;65:324-34.

Vitamin D hormone regulates serotonin synthesis. Part 1: relevance for autism. R P Patrick, B N Ames, FASEB J. 28Patrick RP, Ames BN. Vitamin D hormone regulates se- rotonin synthesis. Part 1: relevance for autism. FASEB J 2014;28:2398-413.

Distribution of the vitamin D receptor and 1 alpha-hydroxylase in human brain. D W Eyles, S Smith, R Kinobe, M Hewison, J J Mcgrath, J Chem Neuroanat. 29Eyles DW, Smith S, Kinobe R, Hewison M, McGrath JJ. Dis- tribution of the vitamin D receptor and 1 alpha-hydroxylase in human brain. J Chem Neuroanat 2005;29:21-30.

Dysregulation of the vitamin D nuclear receptor may contribute to the higher prevalence of some autoimmune diseases in women. A D Proal, P J Albert, T G Marshall, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1173Proal AD, Albert PJ, Marshall TG. Dysregulation of the vita- min D nuclear receptor may contribute to the higher preva- lence of some autoimmune diseases in women. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009;1173:252-9.

Association between plasma 25-OH vitamin D and testosterone levels in men. K Nimptsch, E A Platz, W C Willett, E Giovannucci, Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 77Nimptsch K, Platz EA, Willett WC, Giovannucci E. Associa- tion between plasma 25-OH vitamin D and testosterone lev- els in men. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2012;77:106-12.

Association of vitamin D status with serum androgen levels in men. E Wehr, S Pilz, B O Boehm, W März, B Obermayer-Pietsch, Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 73Wehr E, Pilz S, Boehm BO, März W, Obermayer-Pietsch B. Association of vitamin D status with serum androgen levels in men. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2010;73:243-8.