# A Review on Pongamia pinnata (L.): Traditional Uses, Phytochemistry and Pharmacological Properties Introduction

CorpusID: 233266597
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Chemistry, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/add872d5bde7dd82af18104d7119e7a0d36e940a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/add872d5bde7dd82af18104d7119e7a0d36e940a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review on Pongamia pinnata (L.): Traditional Uses, Phytochemistry and Pharmacological Properties Introduction
2021. 2021

Akshay G Fugare 
Department of Pharmacology
Rajgad Dnyanpeeth's College of Pharmacy
M Pharm
Bhor-412206 Dist-PuneM.SIndia

Rajkumar V Shete 
Department of Pharmacology
Rajgad Dnyanpeeth's College of Pharmacy
Akshay G. Fugare, M Pharm. Student
Department of Pharmacology
Rajgad Dnyanpeeth's College of Pharmacy
Bhor-, Bhor412206, 412206Dist-Pune, Dist-PuneIndia

Vishal S Adak 
Krishna Murthy 
G 
A Review on Pongamia pinnata (L.): Traditional Uses, Phytochemistry and Pharmacological Properties Introduction

Journal of Drug Delivery and Therapeutics
111-s2021. 202110.22270/jddt.v11i1-s.4522Received 27 Nov 2020; Review Completed 13 Jan 2021 Accepted 19 Jan 2021;[207] CODEN (USA): JDDTAO2021 at http://jddtonline.info Journal of Drug Delivery and Therapeutics Review Article (M.S) India. 3 Assistant Professor, Department of Pharmacology, Rajgad Dnyanpeeth's College of Pharmacy, Bhor-412206 Dist-Pune, (M.S) India. 4 Associate Professor, Department of Pharmacognosy, Rajgad Dnyanpeeth's College of Pharmacy, Bhor-412206 Dist-Pune, (M.S) India. Article Info: _____________________________________________ Article History: _____________________________________________ Cite this article as: Fugare AG, Shete RV, Adak VS, Krishna Murthy G, A Review on Pongamia pinnata (L.): Traditional *Address for Correspondence:FabaceaePongamia pinnataPhytochemistryPharmacological properties
______________________________________________________________________________________________________Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre is one of many plants with different medicinal properties where all its components have been used in the treatment and prevention of many forms of ailments in many countries as traditional medicine. The plant extract shows antidiarrhoeal, anti-fungal, anti-plasmodial, anti-ulcer, anti-inflammatory, anti-nociceptive, anti-hyperglycaemic, anti-hyperammonic, anti-lipoxidative, anti-oxidant and analgesic activities. For gums, teeth and ulcers, roots are used for cleaning. For bleeding piles, bark is used internally. Traditionally, different parts of the P. pinnata plant are said to be used to treat bronchitis, whooping cough, rheumatism, diarrhea, dyspepsia, flatulence, gonorrhea and leprosy, to name a few. Oil is a source of biodiesel, an alternative, sustainable, nutritious and non-pollutant. The present Knowledge of traditional uses, phytochemistry and pharmacological activities according to parts of the Pongamia pinnata plant is discussed in this study.

## Introduction:

Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre belongs to the Fabaceae family, a medium-sized perennial tree commonly known in Hindi as Karanja and in English as Indian beech. In India, Australia Bangladesh, and China, it is widely distributed. Pongamia pinnata has been documented in a number of traditional medicinal systems for the cure of various human diseases and foods. It includes alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, hormones, glycosides, karangin, glabrin, kanugin, and fixed oils, as well as other phytoconstituents. Historically, P. pinnata has been used as a folk medicinal plant, mostly in the Indian medicine systems of Ayurveda and Siddha. The antiinflammatory, anti-nonciceptive, antioxidant, anti-diarrhoeal, anti-fungal, anti-plasmodial, anti-ulcer, anti-hyperglycaemic, anti-lipoxidative, anti-hyperammonic and analgesic functions are available in plant extracts. The tree is known for its multipurpose advantages and as a potential biodiesel source. On average, the seeds are stated to contain around 28-34% oil with a high percentage of polyunsaturated fatty acids. 1 Bark: -The inside is thin gray to grayish brown and yellow.   
 Karangin  Kaempferol  Kanugin  Kankone  Alkaloids dimethoxy-kanugin  Glabrin  Gamatay  Glabrosaphonin  Tannin  β-sitosterol  Saponin  Quercetin  Pongapin  Pinnatin  Pongamol  Neoglabrin c) Contents of seed oil:  Karanjin (S18H22O4)  Pongamol  Glabrachalcone  Kanjone  Pongapin d) Content of bark  Resin  Contains a bitter alkaloid  Sugar  Mucilage
From the stem bark of P. pinnata two new compound Anti-diabetic activity: Oral administration of ethanolic extract of P. pinnata flowers (300 mg/kg bw) showed substantial anti-hyperglycemic effects, which significantly decreased blood glucose levels to a degree close to that of the reference drug glibenclamide (600 μg/kg bw) in diabetic alloxane-induced rats . The aqueous extract of the flower also displayed strong antihyperglycemic activity and raised the level of plasma insulin significantly. In alloxan-induced diabetic rats, the extract also regulated the actions of glucose-6-phosphatase and hexokinase. 12  Antibacterial Activity: Pongamia pinnata leaf chloroform extract demonstrated higher antibacterial action against E-coli, Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, while acetone extract was more active than normal against E-coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Gentamycin). Compared to the standard, the petroleum ether extract didn't demonstrate significant antibacterial activity. 13  Antidiarrhoeal Activity: The antimicrobial effect of the crude decoction of dried Pongamia pinnata leaves was assessed to determine this behavior. Enterococcus (cholera toxin, Escherichia coli labile toxin, stable toxin) and enteropathogenic E-coli adherence and invasion of enteroinvasive E-coli and Shigella flex epithelial cells were also evaluated for their effects on development and action. This research shows that Pongamia pinnata decoction had selective antidiarrhoeal action against cholera and enteroinvasive bacteria that triggered the episode of bloody diarrhoea. 14  Antiprotozoal activity: The plant had been documented against Plasmodium falciparum for its anti-plasmodial activity. 15  Anti-Ulcer activity: The methanol root extract of P. pinnata has been reported to provide substantial defense against aspirin-induced mucosal damage and has a potential to minimize acetic acid-induced ulcers after 10 days of treatment. With the cessation of mucosal defense factors such as mucin secretion, mucosal cell glycoproteins, life span of mucosal cells, cell proliferation and lipid peroxidation prevention, the extract showed ulcer protective effects. 16  Anti-hyperglycemic & anti-lipid peroxidative activity: Orally administration of ethanolic extract of P. pinnata flowers has been reported to show important antihyperglycemic and anti-lipid peroxidative effects and improvement of the antioxidant protection system in diabetic rats induced by alloxan. Oral administration of the extract of the flower (300mg/kg bw) exhibited antihyperglycemic action which considerably reduce the blood glucose concentration in a similar extent to that of the reference drug glibenclamide (600mg/kg bw) in alloxan -induced diabetic rats. The findings indicated that treatment with Pongamia pinnata extract could be used in diabetic patients as a safe alternative to anti-hyperglycaemic medications. 17 Conclusion:

The present review shows that the significance of Pongamia pinnata (karanja) as an essential medicinal plant was defined by the plant parts for its pharmacological properties and its indications. In several countries, particularly in India, Pongamia pinnata (Karanja) has been extensively used as a traditional medicine. In the traditional systems of medicines, such as Ayurveda and Unani, the Pongamia pinnata plant is used for anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective, antiplaysmodial, anti-nociceptive, anti-diarrhoeal, anti-ulcer, anti-hyperglycaemic, anti-hyperammonic and antioxidant, antibacterial, antiviral, anticonvulsant activity.

## *
Address for Correspondence: Akshay G. Fugare, M Pharm. Student, Department of Pharmacology, Rajgad Dnyanpeeth's College of Pharmacy, Bhor-412206 Dist-Pune, India.

## Figure 1 :
1Pongamia pinnata: A) The whole plant B) Leaves C) Fruits D) Seeds.

##  3 - 7  8 
378methoxy-(3,4-dihydro 3-hydroxy-4-acetoxy)-2,2dimethylpyrano-(7,8:5,6)-flavone  3-methoxy-(3,4-dihydro 4-hydroxy-3-acetoxy)-2,2dimethylpyrano-(7,8:5,6)-flavone Anti-inflammatory activity: In acute, subacute and chronic inflammation models, the authors demonstrated the anti-inflammatory efficacy of 70% ethanolic extract of P. pinnata leaves in rats. These findings indicate that the extract of Pongamia pinnata leaves has substantial anti-inflammatory activity without ulcerative activity, indicating its potential as an anti-inflammatory agent for use in the treatment of various inflammatory diseases.6 Cardioprotective activity: The authors investigated the cardioprotective activity of P. pinnata in diabetic rats with streptozotocin-nicotinamide. The authors researched the effect of Pongamia pinnata stem bark petroleum ether extract on cardiomyopathy in diabetic rats.Antinociceptive and Antipyretic Activity: Pongamia pinnata leaves have antinociceptive and antipyretic behaviors. In this study, the authors tested the antinociceptive efficacy of the 70% ethanolic extract of P. pinnata leaves in various pain models in rats and mice. Furthermore, in Brewer's yeast-induced pyrexia in rats, Pongamia pinnata leaves extract was also evaluated for its antipyretic effect. The findings showed that the extract of Pongamia pinnata leaves has marked antinociceptive and antipyretic activity. Wound healing, Antimicrobial, Antioxidant Activity: In wistar rats, the authors assessed the wound healing, antioxidant ability and anti-microbial of Pongamia Pinnata. Increased wound contraction and tensile strength, increased hydroxyproline and hexosamine content, antioxidant action and moderate antimicrobial activity are shown in methanol extracts of P. pinnata leaf to promote early wound healing demonstrated by P. pinnata. 9Anticonvulsant activity: The authors tested the anticonvulsant efficacy in laboratory animals of the petroleum ether extract of P. Pinnata stem bark and its fractions. P. pinnata stem bark-petroleum ether extract has been tested against convulsions caused in mice by pentylenetetrazol (PTZ), picrotoxin (PTX), maximal electroshock (MES), strychnine (STY) and isoniazid (INH). The outcome showed that P. pinnata stem barkpetroleum ether extract had a strong anticonvulsant effect. 10  Antiviral activity: Antiviral activity was demonstrated by the crude aqueous seed extract. It complete inhibited the growth of type 1(HSV-1) and (HSV-2) herpes simplex virus at 1 and 20 mg/ml (w/v) concentrations, respectively, and showed complete absence of cytopathic influence. The crude extract of dried leaves showed no action against the rota virus. The safety effect of Karanja seed extract 24 was demonstrated by acute and chronic toxicological studies in Swiss albino rats. The antiviral activity of bis (2-methylheptyl) phthalate secluded from P.pinnata leaves against White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) of Penaeus monodon Fabricius was evaluated. 11 


Pongamia pinnata is sometimes referred to by different synonyms, such as,2,3 

Synonyms: 1,4 

 

Millettia pinnata (L.) Panigrahi 
 
Derris indica (Lam.) 
 
Pongamia glabra Vent. 
 
Pongamia pinnata Merr. 
 
Bennett Millettia novo-guineensis Kane. & Hat 

Taxonomical Classification of Pongamia 
pinnata (L.) 2 

Kingdom -Plantae 
Subkingdom -Tracheobionta 
Super division -Spermatophyta 
Division -Magnoliophyta 
Class -Magnoliopsida 
Subclass -Rosidae 
Order -Fabales 
Family -Fabaceae 
Genus -Pongamia 
Species -Pinnata 

Botanical description 1 

Pongamia pinnata is a fast-growing tree that ranges 40 feet 
in height & spreads, creating a wide-ranging, spreading 
canopy that casts moderate shade, according to Allen and 
ISSN: 2250-1177 
[208] 
CODEN (USA): JDDTAO 

Allen (1981). All of this plant's evocative botanical characters 
are listed and its vernacular names and synonyms are given 
in Table 1. 

Plant type: -

A tree of medium height, evergreen, annual and deciduous. 

Height: Thirty-five to fourty feet 
Texture: Medium 
Growth rate: Fast 
Chromosome number: 22 

Growing requirements: -

Light requirement: tree raises in full sun. 

Soil tolerances: clay, loam, sandy, slightly alkaline, acidic, 
well-drained. 

Drought tolerance: high Vaporizer 

Salt tolerance: moderate 

Winter interest: no special winter 

Root: -Taproot is thick and long, lateral roots are numerous 
and well developed. 

Leaf: -Odd pinnate compound, alternate, 2 to 4 inches, 
evergreen, hairless. 

Flower: -Lavender, violet, white, 2-4 together, pea-shaped, 
short-stalked, 15-18mm long. 

Pods: -Smooth, brown, thick-walled, rough, indehiscent, 1-2 
grainy, 3-6cm long and 2-3cm tall. 

Seed: -Ovoid or elliptical, compressed, been-like, 10-15 mm 
long, dark brown, oily. 



## Table 1 :
1Vernacular names of Pongamia pinnata (L.) 
Pierre. 

Languages 
Vernacular Name 
Hindi, Marathi and 
Guajarati 

Karanj, Karanja 

Sanskrit 
Ghrtakarauja, Karanjaka, Naktahva, 
Naktamala 
English 
Indian beech 
Telgu 
Pungu, Gaanuga 
Tamil 
Ponga, Pongam 
Malayalam 
Pungu, punnu 
Oriya 
Koranjo 
Punjabi 
Sukhehein, Karanj, Paphri 
Assam 
Karchuw 
Bengali 
Dahara Karanja, Karanja, Natakaranja 
Kannada 
Honge, Hulagilu 



## , 18 
18Neuroprotective Activity: The current study showed a neuroprotective impact of P. pinnata stem bark ethanol extract on monosodium glutamate-induced neurotoxicity in rats. Neurotoxicity was caused by intraperitoneal route injection of 2 g/kg body weight per day for 7 days of monosodium glutamate. P. pinnata stem bark ethanol extract (200 and 400 mg/kg) was orally administered after 1 h of The study indicates that stem bark of Pongamia plant ethanolic extract has important neuroprotective activity in albino rats.19  Anti-Lice activity: In discovering novel anti lice agent for medicinal plants, the growing trend of pediculoicidal drug resistance to the terms head louse laid the found attraction for research. Different extracts of P. Pinnata leaves in the sample Checked against head louse pediculus humanus capitis. The outcome indicated that P. E. Extract demonstrated mild pediculocidal effects with anti and methanol extract.20,21 ISSN: 2250-1177 
[211] 
CODEN (USA): JDDTAO 

monosodium glutamate therapy. As the normal drug 
for comparison, dextromethorphan (30 mg/kg, p.o.) 
was used. 

Phytochemistry and Pharmacological Evaluation of Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre. A Satish, Bhalerao, S Amit, Sharma, Ethnopharmacology, International Journal of Current Research in Biosciences and Plant Biology. 13Satish A. Bhalerao, Amit S. Sharma. Ethnopharmacology, Phytochemistry and Pharmacological Evaluation of Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre. International Journal of Current Research in Biosciences and Plant Biology.2014; 1(3):50-60.

Phytochemical and Pharmacological studies on Pongamia pinnata. Seerapu Jayasree Battu Ganga Rao, Devarakonda Reddy, Battu Ramadevi, Heera, Indian Journal of Research. 72Battu Ganga Rao, Seerapu Jayasree Reddy, Devarakonda Ramadevi, Battu Heera, Phytochemical and Pharmacological studies on Pongamia pinnata. Indian Journal of Research.2018; 7(2):489-492.

A review of the chemistry and biological activity of Pongamia pinnata. B Meera, S Kumar, S B Kalidhar, J. Med. Aromatic. Plant Sci. 25Meera B., Kumar S., Kalidhar S.B., 2003. A review of the chemistry and biological activity of Pongamia pinnata. J. Med. Aromatic. Plant Sci. 2003; 25:441-65.

A phyto pharmacological review on a versatile medicinal plant: Pongamia pinnata (L.) pierre. P Sowjanya, Srinivasa Babu, P Lakshmi, D N Navyasri, N Harshini, Y Vyshnavi, J Prasanth, M , Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. 74Sowjanya P, Srinivasa Babu P, Lakshmi DN, Navyasri N, Harshini Y, Vyshnavi J, Prasanth M, A phyto pharmacological review on a versatile medicinal plant: Pongamia pinnata (L.) pierre. Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry.2018; 7(4):459-463.

Acritical review on Karanja (pongamia pinnata) & its medicinal properties. A Bholane, V V Hiremath, Journal of Ayurveda and integrated medical sciences. 52Bholane A, Hiremath VV, Acritical review on Karanja (pongamia pinnata) & its medicinal properties. Journal of Ayurveda and integrated medical sciences.2020; 5(2):194-202.

Evaluation of anti-inflammatory activity of Pongamia pinnata leaves in rats. K Srinivasan, S Muruganandan, J Lal, S Chandra, S K Tandan, Ravi Prakash, V , Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 78Srinivasan K, Muruganandan S, Lal J, Chandra S, Tandan SK, Ravi Prakash V. Evaluation of anti-inflammatory activity of Pongamia pinnata leaves in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology.2001; 78:151-157.

Cardioprotective Activity of Pongamia pinnata in Streptozotocin-Nicotinamide Induced Diabetic Rats. S L Badole, S M Chaudhari, G B Jangam, A D Kandhare, S L Bodhankar, BioMed Research International. Badole SL, Chaudhari SM, Jangam GB, Kandhare AD, Bodhankar SL. Cardioprotective Activity of Pongamia pinnata in Streptozotocin-Nicotinamide Induced Diabetic Rats. BioMed Research International. 2015; 1-8.

Antinociceptive and Antipyretic Activities of Pongamia pinnata Leaves. K Srinivasan, S Muruganandan, J Lal, S Chandra, S K Tandan, Ravi Prakash, V Kumar, D , Phytotherapy Research. 17Srinivasan K, Muruganandan S, Lal J, Chandra S, Tandan SK, Ravi Prakash V, Kumar D. Antinociceptive and Antipyretic Activities of Pongamia pinnata Leaves. Phytotherapy Research.2003; 17:259-264.

Evaluation of wound healing, anti-microbial and antioxidant potential of Pongamia pinnata in wistar rats. D Dwivedi, M Dwivedi, S Malviya, V Singh, Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine. 7Dwivedi D, Dwivedi M, Malviya S, Singh V. Evaluation of wound healing, anti-microbial and antioxidant potential of Pongamia pinnata in wistar rats. Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine.2016; 7(2017):79-85.

Anticonvulsant activity of stem bark of Pongamia pinnata. A S Ramdhave, S L Badole, S L Bodhankar, Biomedicine & Aging Pathology. 1Ramdhave AS, Badole SL, Bodhankar SL. Anticonvulsant activity of stem bark of Pongamia pinnata. Biomedicine & Aging Pathology. 2011; 1: 147-157.

Antiviral activity of bis(2-methylheptyl) phthalate isolated from Pongamia pinnata leaves against White Spot Syndrome Virus of Penaeus monodon Fabricius. P Rameshthangam, P Ramasamy, Virus Research. 126P. Rameshthangam, P. Ramasamy. Antiviral activity of bis(2- methylheptyl) phthalate isolated from Pongamia pinnata leaves against White Spot Syndrome Virus of Penaeus monodon Fabricius. Virus Research.2007; 126:38-44.

Effect of Pongamia pinnata flowers on blood glucose and oxidative stress in alloxan induced diabetic rats. R Punitha, K Vasudevan, S Manoharan, Indian Journal of Pharmacology. 38Punitha, R., Vasudevan, K., Manoharan, S. Effect of Pongamia pinnata flowers on blood glucose and oxidative stress in alloxan induced diabetic rats. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 2006; 38:62-63.

Medicinal uses, phytochemistry and pharmacology of Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre: A review. L M R Muqarrabun, N Ahmat, S A S Ruzaina, N H Ismail, I Sahidin, Journal of Ethnopharmacology. L.M.R. Al Muqarrabun, N. Ahmat, S.A.S. Ruzaina, N.H. Ismail, I. Sahidin, Medicinal uses, phytochemistry and pharmacology of Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre: A review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology.2013; 395-420.

Studies on Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre leaves: understanding the mechanism(s) of action in infectious diarrhea. S Brijesh, P G Daswani, P Tetali, S R Rojatkar, N H Anita, T J Birdi, Journal of Zhejiang University SCIENCE B. 7Brijesh S, Daswani PG, Tetali P, Rojatkar SR, Anita NH, Birdi TJ. Studies on Pongamia pinnata (L.) Pierre leaves: understanding the mechanism(s) of action in infectious diarrhea. Journal of Zhejiang University SCIENCE B. 2006; 7:665-74.

In vitro screening of Indian medicinal plants for antiplasmodial activity. H T Simonsen, J B Nordskjold, U W Smitt, U Nyman, P Palpu, P Joshi, Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 74Simonsen HT, Nordskjold JB, Smitt UW, Nyman U, Palpu P, Joshi P et al. In vitro screening of Indian medicinal plants for antiplasmodial activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2001; 74:195-204

Evaluation of Pongamia pinnata root extract on gastric ulcers and mucosal offensive and defensive factors in rats. T Prabha, M Dora, S Priyambada, Indian Journal Experimental Biology. 41Prabha T, Dora M, Priyambada S. Evaluation of Pongamia pinnata root extract on gastric ulcers and mucosal offensive and defensive factors in rats. Indian Journal Experimental Biology. 2003; 41:304-10.

Antihyperglycaemic and antilipidperoxidative effects of Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Pierrre flowers in alloxan-induced diabetic. R Punitha, S Manoharan, J Ethon Pharmacol. 105Punitha R, Manoharan S. Antihyperglycaemic and antilipidperoxidative effects of Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Pierrre flowers in alloxan-induced diabetic. J Ethon Pharmacol. 2006; 105:39-46.

Indian medicinal Plants I. K R Kirtikar, B D Basu, 830Allahabad, IndiaLalit Mohan BasuKirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal Plants I. Lalit Mohan Basu, Allahabad, India, 1993, 830.

Neuroprotective Activity of Pongamia pinnata in Monosodium Glutamate-induced Neurotoxicity in Rats. H M Viswanatha Swamy, N L Patel, P V Gadad, C Koti, H M Patel, C Thippeswamy, V Manjula, Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 756Viswanatha swamy HM, Patel NL, Gadad PV, Koti C, Patel HM, Thippeswamy C, . Manjula V, Neuroprotective Activity of Pongamia pinnata in Monosodium Glutamate-induced Neurotoxicity in Rats. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2013; 75(6):657-663.

Prevention and treatment of head lice in Children. K Y Mumcuoglu, Prediatr Drugs. 1Mumcuoglu KY. Prevention and treatment of head lice in Children. Prediatr Drugs. 1999; 1:211-218.

Insecticidal activity of plant essential oil against Pediculus humanus Capitis (Anoplura: Ped. Y C Yang, H S Lee, J M Clark, Y J Ahn, Yang YC, Lee HS, Clark JM, Ahn YJ. Insecticidal activity of plant essential oil against Pediculus humanus Capitis (Anoplura: Ped;

. Culidae, J Med Entomol. 41Culidae). J Med Entomol. 2004; 41: 699-704.

Chemistry of Pongamol. Part I. The Indian Academy of Sciences. S Rangaswami, T R Seshadri, IndiaRangaswami, S., Seshadri, T.R., 1942. Chemistry of Pongamol. Part I. The Indian Academy of Sciences, India, pp. 417-423.

A note on Glabrin, a new component of the seeds of Pongamia glabra. N V S Rao, J V Rao, The Indian Academy and Sciences. Rao, N.V.S., Rao, J.V., 1941. A note on Glabrin, a new component of the seeds of Pongamia glabra. The Indian Academy and Sciences, India, pp. 123-125.

The Wealth of India. A Krishnamurthi, VIII. Publication and Information Directorate CSIRNew Delhi, IndiaKrishnamurthi A. 1969. The Wealth of India, vol. VIII. Publication and Information Directorate CSIR, New Delhi, India.

Chemical composition of karanja (Pongamia glabra Vent) (P.Pinnata) kernel and cake as animal feed. R Natanam, R Kadirvel, D Chandrasekaran, Indian J. Anim. Nutr. 6Natanam R, Kadirvel, R, Chandrasekaran D.,Chemical composition of karanja (Pongamia glabra Vent) (P.Pinnata) kernel and cake as animal feed. Indian J. Anim. Nutr.1989; 6:270-273.

Indian medicinal Plants I. K R Kirtikar, B D Basu, 830Allahabad, IndiaLalit Mohan BasuKirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal Plants I. Lalit Mohan Basu, Allahabad, India, 1993, 830.