# The Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 233711811
 
tags: #Engineering, #Environmental_Science, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b757b3a91db928d6aea99325b515a2b0284a7005](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b757b3a91db928d6aea99325b515a2b0284a7005)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Systems: A Systematic Literature Review
Published: 12 March 2021

Adel Mottahedi 
Faculty of Mining, Petroleum and Geophysics Engineering
Shahrood University of Technology
3619995161ShahroodIran

Farhang Sereshki 
Faculty of Mining, Petroleum and Geophysics Engineering
Shahrood University of Technology
3619995161ShahroodIran

Mohammad Ataei 
Faculty of Mining, Petroleum and Geophysics Engineering
Shahrood University of Technology
3619995161ShahroodIran

Ali Nouri Qarahasanlou 
Faculty of Technical and Engineering
Imam Khomeini International University
3414896818QazvinIran

Abbas Barabadi 
Department of Technology and Safety
UiT
Arctic University of Norway
6050TromsøNorway

The Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

Energies 2021
14Published: 12 March 202110.3390/en14061571Received: 18 February 2021 Accepted: 8 March 2021energies Review 1571. https://doi.org/10.3390/ en14061571 Academic Editor: Dalia Štreimikienė
Citation: Mottahedi, A.; Sereshki, F.; Ataei, M.; Nouri Qarahasanlou, A.; Barabadi, A. The Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Systems: A Systematic Literature Review.

## Introduction

Modern societies excessively depend on highly interconnected technological systems such as water supply, electric power supply, telecommunication, and transportation networks that provide vital services. Such a system is known as a critical infrastructure system to ineffective pre-and post-disruption planning. A well-established systematic literature review can provide a deep understanding regarding the concept of resilience, its limitation, and its applications. The systematic literature review provides a systematic approach using a search protocol that is not a part of a traditional literature review. Thus, in this approach, selecting the studies is not by a chance and it increases the accuracy and credibility of the obtained results [26]. Therefore, this paper implements a systematic literature review to explore how resilience is defined in the discipline of technological CISs, what types of CISs' resilience have been used, what types of concepts affect CISs' resilience, and which approaches have been used for resilience analysis of CISs.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the systematic literature review technique and its phases are described. Section 3 shows the application of the systematic review of CISs' resilience. Section 4 illustrates the discussion about the results of the systematic review. Finally, Section 5 concludes our findings.


## Systematic Literature Review

Typically, researchers turn to the literature review of a particular subject to answer the questions that arise in their minds. In such cases, the researcher searches for relevant articles and studies only according to his previous idea of the subject. This search then continues until reaching the desired publications and selecting the appropriate ones and ends by summarizing the obtained results. This type of literature review is called a nonsystematic (narrative/traditional) literature review approach. Such review is frequently limited to literature either already known to the researcher or is found by doing a quick search [26]. This approach is not clear about the methods used for finding and selecting studies [27].

Moreover, it is not repeatable, which makes them challenging to follow by other researchers. However, according to a series of exact and pre-arranged stages, a systematic literature review (SLR) approach was developed to perform all the steps mentioned. SLR was firstly proposed by Kitchenham [28]. It is a means of recognizing, assessing, and explaining all accessible literature related to a specific research question. This technique requires considerably more effort. However, due to the well-defined methodology, the likelihood of biased results is lower than with the traditional method.

The application of SLR has spread from medicine and health care into other fields. Recently, its application in some engineering fields, specifically software engineering, transportation systems, manufacturing, etc., has increased [29][30][31][32][33][34]. Later on, Kitchenham and Charters [35] modified this technique and provided a guideline to facilitate its application. Based on the new procedure, SLR can be summarized in three phases: (i) planning, (ii) conducting, and (iii) reporting the review. Figure 1 shows the SLR phases. As this figure illustrates in the first steps, it is necessary to identify the need for SLR. For example, if someone needs to identify the knowledge gaps in a specific field, then SLR is a justified approach.

Then, based on the study aim, research questions must be defined clearly and properly. Later on, the whole review methodology will be carried to answer these questions. The related search terms (keywords) should be specified based on defined research questions to have an effective SLR. Therefore, these keywords will be used to find scientific publications in the defined databases (search sources). Digital databases like ScienceDirect and Springer-Link are some of these search resources [35,36]. To facilitate the review process, some screening criteria need to be defined as inclusion and exclusion criteria. For example, the year of publication or excluding the book chapters from the collected studies can be an exclusion criterion. Finally, a data extraction strategy must be established for data collection [35,36]. The data extraction strategy determines how the relevant data items needed from each study will be collected. To collect the needed data items, a data extraction form should be designed. This form is used to collect data (e.g., full reference, research topic, definitions, applied methods, publication data, etc.) which are necessary to answer the defined research questions. If the data need manipulation or assumptions and inferences to be made, the procedure should state a suitable validation process [35]. In phase 2, the review is conducted. Based on the defined keywords in the defined scientific database, the possible documentation and studies are identified in this phase. After that, using the inclusion and exclusion criteria, the relevant documentation will be selected. These remaining studies are named primary studies. Later, the required data should be extracted from the primary studies using the data extraction strategy. Finally, these data should be synthesized to answer the research questions [35,36]. Finally, at the end of the review process, the previous phases' obtained results should be documented.


## SLR on Technological CISs' Resilience

In this study, the developed approach in Figure 1 was used for SLR on CISs' resilience. As was explained above, the need for SLR should be justified. Since our communities highly rely on interdependent CISs such as electric power supply systems, natural gas processing plants, communication networks, transportation networks, and water distribution networks, it is crucial to assess the resilience of such CISs against various disruptive events. However, for efficient application of the concept of resilience, this concept should first be understood properly. Without this awareness, managers would not be able to minimize the total service loss (e.g., energy supply cut) and enable expeditious recovery of the CISs. Thus, it is necessary to systematically review the available resilience-related research studies that can increase our awareness and knowledge about the concept of resilience, its assessment approaches, and those factors that influence the CISs' resilience. Moreover, for years, as mentioned in the introduction, planners' and managers' main goal was to design a CIS that can resist various disruptions. However, based on the abovementioned experiences, this goal is still unattainable, and attention has recently shifted to the concept of resilience. To have an effective shift to resilient CISs, our awareness and knowledge about its concepts and current practices and research should be increased. However, it should be emphasized that knowledge and practice of resilience should be inline with the risk management process.

After this step, the research question (RQ) needs to be developed. This stage is the most significant part of the review process. Based on this paper's purposes, the first author developed the research questions and then discussed them with all authors to confirm. The defined research questions are as follows:

• RQ 1 :Is resilience an emerging topic in the discipline of technological CISs?

To answer RQ 1 , it would be useful to examine the research output per year. Based on the amount of published resilience-related studies per year, we can determine how the importance of resilience is changing with time. Sometimes a research area may lose its appeal over time or can no longer conduct further research.

• RQ 2 : How is the term "resilience" defined in the discipline of technological CISs?

Without a comprehensive definition of the concept of resilience, its application will be challenging. Therefore, RQ 2 is defined to understand the current definition of the concept of resilience in technological CISs' discipline using the literature review.
• RQ 3 :
For what type of technological CISs has the concept of resilience been used?

This question identifies the most dominant CISs in which the concept of resilience has been applied. The identified studies should be classified based on their type of CIS for answering this question.

• RQ 4 :What types of terms define/determine the resilience of technological CISs?

Resilience is a macro-concept; thus, to use it correctly, it is essential to identify and understand all terms (e.g., reliability and redundancy) that determine it. Without this understanding, it will be complicated to apply the concept of resilience in the CISs. Moreover, exchanging the knowledge and best practices between different operators and users will be almost impossible. Therefore, by reviewing the definitions and approaches for interpreting and analyzing technological CISs' resilience, the associated terms will be identified.


## •

RQ 5 : What types of approaches have been used for technological CISs' resilience analysis?

Many approaches can be used for CISs' resilience analysis. Hence, a literature review should be conducted to identify and classify all of these methods based on their essence


### Developing a Review Protocol

In this stage, the search terms, search resources, and primary studies selection criteria have been identified as follows:


#### Identify the Search Terms

Based on the addressed research questions, "system resilience", "resilience analysis", "resilience metric", "resilience assessment", "resilience definition", and "resilience concept" are considered as search terms. Figure 2 shows the ultimate search string that was applied in this SLR. This string uses Boolean operators (AND, OR). 


#### Identify the Search Resources

Here, well-known digital resources were considered as search resources. They include ScienceDirect, Springer-Link, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, SAGE Journals, MDPI, and Wiley Online Library. Moreover, other databases such as Web of Science and Google Scholar can be used for the search process.


#### Identify the Selection Criteria

A large volume of studies can be collected by using search string and research resources. The defined inclusion and exclusion criteria decide which studies need to be processed further. The considered inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed as follows: 
•

## Results and Discussion

The search was conducted on 2 October 2020 using search sources and the search string. Accordingly, 1454 resilience-related studies were found. Figure 3 shows the search process, from which 182 primary studies remained for final review. Furthermore, according to the references in these included studies and complementing studies of relevance known by the authors, an additional 10 published studies were added. In total, 192 primary studies were hence included in the review process. As Figure 4 illustrates, in the boundary of the inclusive and inclusive criteria, selected primary studies were 13% of all resilience-related studies. In the search process, around 51% of studies were irrelevant research studies, which were not linked to the CIS. Furthermore, 9% of the studies were related to nontechnological domains such as social and ecological domains. In such domains, researchers occasionally used the term "system" for social or ecological entities. This caused these types of research studies to emerge from the initial search process.

Identified primary studies have been studied to recognize which resource these studies belong to. As Figure 5 shows, most of the primary studies were published in ScienceDirect. The selected primary studies are presented in Appendix A.


### Is Resilience an Emerging Topic in the Discipline of Technological CISs?

The number of published papers and their trends can reveal how the importance of the concept of resilience varies with time in the discipline of technological CISs. Accordingly, all of the 158 primary studies were classified based on their publication date. The results are illustrated in Figure 6. According to this figure, the concept of resilience was first presented to the technological CISs' discipline in 2003 by Bruneau et al. [12]. As can be seen, after 2003, this concept has gradually found its place among the technological CISs' managers and researchers. Since the concept of resilience has a high impact on technological CISs' safety and productivity, research is expected to continue to grow in future years.

As shown, since 2011, the volume of publications in this area has been increased significantly. The 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan, we believe, could be one of the specific drivers for such rapid growth in the resilience-related researches volume of technological CISs. Furthermore, terrorist or cyber-attack increment (e.g., the Ukraine power grid cyber-attack that affects 225,000 people in 2015) led to the recognition of the necessity to address the increasing threat that these attacks can pose on our societies' CISs, especially those that supply vital needs like energy. This issue has been led to commence large-scale research projects (e.g., starting of European IMPROVER project in 2015) and establish many CIS's resilience research centers worldwide (e.g., the establishment of the US Critical Infrastructure Resilience Institute (CIRI) in 2016). Such activities have motivated researchers and led to the growth of publication volume about the CISs' resilience since 2015.    The application of the concept of resilience is new in the discipline of technological CISs. Moreover, the complexities of these CISs and disruptive events are increasing day by day. Hence, many research gaps need to be addressed to make the best use of the concept of resilience. This indicates that the concept of resilience is an emerging and important topic.


### In What Type of Technological CISs Has the Concept of Resilience Been Used?

The case studies used in all primary studies were analyzed to identify the application areas of the concept of resilience in technological CISs. The results are illustrated in Figure 7. According to the results, among the surveyed studies, energy systems (e.g., [37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52][53][54][55]), transportation networks (e.g., [56][57][58][59][60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67][68][69]), and water supply networks (e.g., [70][71][72][73][74][75][76][77][78]) have the highest frequency as case studies, among other fields. Meanwhile, health care infrastructures [79,80], industrial processes [81][82][83], supply chain [84], mining sector [85,86], construction [87][88][89], and telecommunication (e.g., IT networks [90]) are other cases in which resilience concepts have been used.

Energy systems are designed to supply the required energies of the public and industries. They can be divided into three main categories: electric power supply system (electric grid), gas distribution system, and heating grids. As shown in Figure 8, the electric grid is the dominant area in energy systems' resilience-related studies. The electric grid can be categorized as electric power generation, transmission, and distribution systems. Figure 9 shows the share of these categories in the review studies. As can be seen, 45% of the primary studies in the field of electric grid cover all the components of this grid. Moreover, electric power transmission systems have received more attention compared to the other components of the electric grid.   For the electric grid classification, the frequency of research conducted in various transportation modes (i.e., airway, railway, roadway, and waterway transportation networks) is categorized in Figure 10. As shown, the roadway transportation networks (e.g., traffic networks, road network, highways, and bridges), waterway transportation networks (e.g., ports and inland waterways), airway transportation networks (e.g., airports and aviation navigation systems), and railway transportation networks (e.g., subways, railway stations) have received more attention, respectively. Moreover, 23% of primary studies have worked on the transportation networks' resilience, generally without focusing on a specific transportation mode. According to the studies conducted in the water supply network field, six studies have worked on water distribution systems' resilience. In contrast, the rest of the studies have focused on the entire water supply network (i.e., purification, storage, pumping, and water distribution systems). As shown in Figure 7, the resilience of energy systems has attracted enormous notice., because these systems supply the vital needs of today's societies and their proper functioning is essential in many respects, such as national security, health, and social welfare. Most of the energy systems are network-oriented, and their disruption can lead to cascading failure in other systems. For example, disruption of an electric power supply system can lead to loss of not just electricity, but also water and communication in affected areas [2]. As a real example, in 2011, the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan damaged much of the energy systems, leaving 4.4 million households without electricity and 1.5 million consumers without access to safe drinking water. Moreover, about 10 days after the event, there were still 2.43 million households without electricity and 1.04 million consumers without water [91]. Moreover, the reduction of CO 2 and sustainable development have recently increased the importance of the energy systems transition from traditional systems (e.g., fossil-fuel-based systems) to systems based on renewable energies (e.g., wind turbines) [37,[92][93][94]. Therefore, researchers have paid more attention to energy systems' resilience, especially in countries prone to natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes, ice storms, and earthquakes) or sabotage. However, as shown, some technological CISs have not received a lot of attention. For instance, the health care infrastructures of many countries were seriously affected by COVID-19 in 2020. The pressures of this pandemic have exceeded the capacity of health care in many countries. To manage such pressure, attempts need to be made to address our communities' health care infrastructures' resilience in various respects such as medical devices, organizational, and human resources. Failure of health care CISs in the early stage of any disruptive event, can trigger panic in the community and lead to functionality loss in other CISs in the community.

Furthermore, telecommunication systems, supply chains, and industrial processes are also fields that their resilience needs to study. The proper functioning of these CISs is essential in many respects, such as national security, health, and social welfare. Therefore, the severe consequences of the disruption of such CISs should lead researchers to pay more attention to their resilience, especially in countries prone to natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes, ice storms, and earthquakes) or terrorist attacks.


### How Is the Term "Resilience" Defined in the Discipline of Technological CISs?

Based on the collected literature, there is a wide range of resilience definitions. In this section, the presented definitions of resilience in the discipline of technological CISs are described.

Bruneau et al. [12] asserted that a resilient system "reduced failure probabilities, reduced consequences from failures, in terms of lives lost, damage, and negative economic and social consequences, and reduced time to recovery". Youn et al. [95] proposed a definition for the engineering system's resilience: "The conceptual definition of engineering resilience is the degree of a passive survival rate plus a proactive survival rate". Liu et al. [96] described resilience as the "system ability to prepare and respond quickly and reduce its losses". Barker et al. [97], Shafieezadeh and Ivey Burden [98], and Kong and Simonovic [99] defined resilience as the "proportion of affected performance of the system after disruption to the normal performance of the system without disruption". Teodorescu [100] defined resilience as the "ability of a system to recover its normal performance level". He believed resilience is a function of the recovery process duration and the system performance level after the recovery process. According to Nan et al. [101], resilience is the "system's ability to withstand a change or a disruptive event by reducing the initial negative impacts, by adapting itself to them and by recovering from them". Jin and Gu [102] defined resilience as the "system's ability to resist potentially high impact disruption events, and it is characterized by the ability of the system to mitigate or absorb the impact of disruption and quick recover to normal conditions". Hosseini and Barker [17] described resilience as the "ability of a system to adjust its functionality in the presence of disturbances, external threats, and unpredicted changes, and to withstand internal and external disruptive events without letting the system become discontinuous by performing system functionalities". Nan and Sansavini [103] defined resilience as the "system's ability to resist the effects of a disruptive force and to reduce performance deviations". According to Zhao et al. [104], resilience is the "system's ability to recover to the desired level from disruption event within an acceptable time, which is measured by the total satisfaction level under the interactions of resilience capacities, dispatch strategies, and disruption events". Yoon et al. [8] defined resilience as the "ability of a system to maintain its required functionality by resisting and recovering from disruptive events". Lu [105] defined resilience as the "system's ability to recover rapidly from the worst performance under disruption to its original state". According to Karangelos et al. [46], resilience of a power system can be defined as the "system's ability to withstand a much wider range of atypical, yet not entirely unlikely, operating conditions characterized by the simultaneous failure of several system components, or at least to deteriorate moderately and promptly recover". Furthermore, in Zhang et al. [54], a resilient power system is defined as a "system that could anticipate possible disruptions, adopt effective actions to reduce the losses of system components and load before and during disruption, and recover power supply quickly". Faber et al. [106] defined resilience as "an aggregate characterization of systems encompassing their ability to maintain their main modes and levels of services, and on their own to develop and mobilize resources to adapt to and sustain disturbances over time". Wang et al. [39] defined resilience as the "ability to resist all kinds of hazards, withstand the consequences of initial incident, and quickly restore back to normal operation". Rehak et al. [107] defined CIS's resilience as a "quality that reduces vulnerability, minimizes the consequences of threats, accelerates response and recovery, and facilitates adaptation to a disruptive event". Cutini and Pezzcia [108] defined urban networks' resilience as the "capacity of an urban grid to maintain the operation of urban functional assets by redistributing movement after a physical perturbation". Mostafavi [59] defined CIS's resilience as the "ability of an infrastructure asset to maintain its performance to serve the required functions before, during, and after the occurrence of a natural hazard". Some studies described resilience as the "system's joint ability to resist (prevent and withstand) any possible hazards, absorb the initial damage, and recover to normal operation" [109][110][111][112]. The US National Academies of Science (NAS) defined system's resilience as the "system's ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover from, and successfully adapt to disruptive events" [77,113,114]. According to the US Presidential Policy Directive (PPD), resilience can be defined as the "system's ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptive events" [88,115]. The American Society of Mechanical Engineer (ASME) defined resilience as the "system's ability to sustain external and internal disruptions without discontinuity of performing the system function or, if the function is disconnected, to fully recover the functions rapidly" [75,116]. The US National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC) described resilience as the "system's ability to anticipate, absorb, adapt to, and rapidly recover from a potentially disruptive event" [15,117,118]. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) defined resilience as the "ability of the system, community or society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, accommodate, adapt to, transform and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through the preservation and restoration of its essential basic structures and functions" [60,117,119,120]. As said, European project IMPROVER also proposed a definition of resilience. Based on this definition, resilience is "the ability of a CIS exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, accommodate to and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, for the preservation and restoration of essential services" [121]. The CIGRE C4.47 Power System Resilience Working Group defines power system resilience as the "ability to limit the extent, severity, and duration of system degradation following an extreme event" [2]. The UK Energy Research Center defined the resilience of energy system as the "capacity of an energy system to tolerate disturbance and to continue to deliver affordable energy services to consumers. A resilient energy system can speedily recover from shocks and can provide alternative means of satisfying energy service needs in the event of changed external circumstances" [122].

The variation of definitions presented in the discipline of technological CISs' resilience suggests that there is still no agreement between researchers about the definition of resilience. Here are some highlights regarding the available definitions of resilience:


## •

The majority of the definitions emphasized the CIS's ability to recover to the normal operation state from a disruptive event. Therefore, recoverability can be considered a critical part of the technological CISs' resilience.  [59], Faber et al. [106], UNISDR, and IM-PROVER's definitions, a resilient CIS preserves its needed functionality after a disruptive event. This means the CIS's performance level should not be less than a certain value after the disruption.


## •

Hosseini and Barker [17] and ASME's definitions show that a resilient CIS should not let its functionality become discontinuous.


## •

The CIS's ability to anticipate the disruptive event is only considered explicitly in Bruneau et al. [12], Zhang et al. [54], and NIAC's definitions.


## •

None of the definitions considers the positive influence of the CIS's learning capacity on its resilience. Learning from previous experiences would be helpful in the upcoming disruptive events.

Based on the reviewed definitions of resilience, a resilient technological CIS possess the following five abilities:


## •

The ability to imagine what to expect; •

The ability to protect and resist a disruptive event; •

The ability to absorb the adverse effects of a disruptive event; • Adaptability to the new conditions and changes of disruptive events; •

The ability to recover the CIS's normal performance level after a disruptive event.

Some pre-disruption (preparedness) and post-disruption (recovery) activities need to be established to achieve these abilities. Pre-disruption activities target the CIS's ability to protect, resist, absorb, adapt, and recover, and post-disruption activities target the CIS's ability to adapt and recover [7,117,120,[123][124][125][126]. According to Faturechi et al. [123], investment costs on the CIS's preparedness are mandatory, whether a disruption occurs or not.


### What Types of Terms Define/Determine the Resilience of Technological CISs?

According to the reviewed studies, 20 terms were identified as contributing factors to CISs' resilience. The types and percentages of application of the identified terms are shown in Figure 11. As can be seen, robustness is the most frequent term among the reviewed primary studies. The definitions of the identified terms are described in the following.

Robustness: Robustness is the ability of a CIS to resist a certain disruption level and absorb its primary effects without significantly reducing performance. A CIS with high robustness maintains its central function in a disruptive event [3,12,80,123,127,128]. Robustness is measured by the CIS's amount of residual performance after a disruption [75,115]. Furthermore, survivability, resistant ability, and stability have a similar definition to robustness [75,126,129,130].

Recoverability: Recoverability is defined as the CIS's ability to recover its capacity and performance promptly under certain conditions and using available resources [117,129,131]. In some studies, such as Barker et al. [97], recoverability is defined as the CIS's ability to recover its performance quickly. In this definition, the importance of the resources required to perform the recovery actions is not considered.

Rapidity: The rate at which a CIS can recover a satisfactory performance level is called rapidity [3,115,132,133]. Rapidity refers to the CIS's performance curve slope during the recovery process and is often known as the recovery rate [80,134,135]. Absorptive Capacity: The absorptive capacity is the degree that the CIS can absorb the negative impact of the disruptive event automatically. This capacity is considered an intrinsic CIS's characteristic to minimize the disruptive event's adverse effects. For example, for those CISs (e.g., electric power supply systems) that have been located in areas with a harsh environment, it is very hard to repair the disrupted components in severe storms. Therefore, they should be capable of absorbing various component failures [46]. Absorptive capacity includes a set of proactive actions (e.g., by safer design) that should be considered in the CIS's preparedness phase [136][137][138][139]. Robustness is commonly used to quantify the adsorptive CIS capacity [101].

Adaptive Capacity: The degree to which the CIS can arrange itself and use temporary and often non-standard actions to prevent CIS downtime during and after the disruption is called adaptive capacity. This capacity can prevent sudden collapses in the CIS's performance level [17,128,136,137,140]. However, as mentioned, these actions have a temporary nature, and for the CIS's performance recovery, permanent actions should be taken as soon as possible.

Restorative Capacity: This capacity is the degree to which the CIS can effectively restore its damaged performance and is typically affected by available budget and resources (e.g., materials, human, etc.) [17,139,141]. Therefore, this capacity is affected by the CIS's supportability. Restorative capacity provides permanent solutions to damages caused by the disruption. Therefore, the cost of restorative capacity is much more than an adaptive capacity [136]. Rapidity is commonly used to quantify the CIS's restorative capacity [142].

Vulnerability: This denotes the degree of the CIS's sensitivity to disruption [140]. Vulnerability is an inherent feature of the CIS, even before any disruptive event. Paying attention to the CIS's vulnerability would help identify the weak points of the CIS. These are pos-sible points that would cause the most damage during disruption [97,129,136,140,143,144]. During the disruptions, more vulnerable CISs will experience more severe failure [144]. Although there is no consensus about the relationship between vulnerability and resilience, it seems that higher vulnerability of the CIS leads to lower resiliency and vice versa [9,107].

Early warning and predictability: This refers to the early detection of disruptions in the CIS and directly influences the CISs' recovery [81,117]. In some reviewed studies, the Prognosis and Health Management (PHM) system is used as a useful tool for prediction and then early warning. The PHM system assesses the CIS's current state by monitoring facilities, anticipates potential defects by analyzing the monitoring data, and assists in the proper management of technological CISs throughout their life cycle [8,95,117].

Early warning and predictability will provide timely information to implement efficient response measures against disruptive events. Therefore, it can positively affect the dedicated costs and time for the CISs' recovery process. It should be noted that the positive outcome of early warning is obtained by the adequate and appropriate decision-making of the CIS's management. Thus, inadequate or improper decisions may make the situation even worse. However, based on the reviewed studies, predictability and early warning as well as the role of management decision making has been less considered in the available literature. Since, in resilient CISs, early warning enables managers to get timely information about the proximity and development of disruption, more attempts need to be made in this part.

Flexibility: The CIS's ability to reacts to disruption and adjust its internal mechanism with the help of adaptive capacity, without the consideration of any prior responses, is called flexibility [83,123,145,146].

Redundancy: This refers to the degree to which components, CISs, and other units exist that are interchangeable and can meet functional needs in the presence of disruption [3,12,57,108,140,147,148]. According to Kong and Simonovic [99], redundancy creates alternative functions for the CIS's operation, and its goal is to achieve a robust CIS. Thus, it increases the absorptive capacity of the CIS [80,103,149].

Reliability: The CIS's ability to implement the needed performance under certain conditions and over some time without loss of performance is called reliability [8,75,131,133,143]. When the CIS is in a normal state (before a disruptive event), reliability provides its essential function [143]. The aim of absorptive, adaptive, and restorative capacities is to enhance the CIS's reliability degradation due to disruptive events [8,17,95,136,137]. Mathias et al. [150] noted that reliability focuses on avoiding disruptions, while resilience also counts the CIS's recovery. Therefore, reliability and recoverability are complement and greatly related to the CISs' resilience [131].

Resourcefulness: Resourcefulness is the capacity of using and mobilizing the required resources (e.g., money, information, technology, laborers, spare parts, etc.) to identify and solve problems in a prioritized manner [3,12,80,115,140,149]. The goal of resourcefulness is to enhance the CIS's rapidity. Hence, it also increases the restorative CIS capacity [149,151].

Maintainability: The term maintainability is a measure of how easily the CIS is repaired to a specified condition [117,136]. Most studies have used recovery speed or recovery time to quantify CIS maintainability [45,76,78,85,100,102,[152][153][154]. Therefore, if the time required to recover the CIS is short, it indicates proper CIS maintainability. The aim of absorptive, adaptive, and restorative capacities is to increase the ease of CIS recovery by reducing the CIS's damages caused by disruption [8,17,95,136,137].

Supportability: This ability refers to the intrinsic features of the CIS that facilitate efficient and effective support of the CIS throughout its life cycle [17,136]. According to the resourcefulness definition, this term affects the CIS's supportability.

Availability: Generally, the availability of CIS is defined as the CIS uptime ratio to the total CIS uptime and downtime. Thus, the CIS's availability refers to the portion of time that the CIS can be used [97].

Learning Capacity: This capacity is the degree to which the CIS can learn from the occurred disruption to prevent similar future events [136,150,155]. The obtained knowledge from past events can be incorporated for future iterations [150]. Few researchers have used this term. Therefore, this issue requires further research to clarify the effect of learning capacity on CIS.

Organizational Resilience: The owner's organization's resilience plays a significant role in CISs' resilience. Incorporating resilience aids CISs in coping with crises and recovering from disruptive events, which is impossible without an organizational foundation that can cope with and respond to disruption [107,156]. Organizational resilience includes all actors involved in CIS management, such as managers, personnel, and operators. The final purpose of organizational resilience is to enhance organizational performance in the face of irregular conditions and to create a problem-solving mentality at the organizational level [157]. Rehak et al. [107] tried to determine organizational resilience using internal processes of an organization, including risk management, innovation processes, and education/development processes. Based on Rehak et al. [107], the internal processes' levels of an organization, which provide the proper conditions for CIS to adapt to disruptions, can determine organizational resilience. However, based on the results, resilience analysts have paid less attention to this critical term because there is no easy way to analyze and assess organizational resilience. Thus, the main issue that should be addressed is to present a comprehensive explanation of organizational resilience. This will increase our understanding of this term and encourage other researchers to conduct research in this area.

According to the reviewed studies, society's role in the CISs' resilience is not well studied. As Qin and Faber [55] noted, "The major benefit associated with the concept of resilience as compared to traditional probabilistic reliability and risk modeling of systems is that resilience modeling accounts for the interrelations between the performances of the natural systems and the social systems and their internal organization". Therefore, the overall resilience of any CIS will be affected by the resilience of the three mentioned actors, i.e., engineered system (technological resilience), owner organization (organizational resilience), and society (social resilience).

The role of the reviewed terms in a resilient technological CIS is summarized in Figure 12. CIS normal operation starts at t 0 . During the pre-disruption period (t 1 − t 0 ), the performance level of the CIS is controlled by its reliability, and the potential defects are anticipated by analyzing the monitoring facilities' data. While the disruption begins at t 1 , the CIS applies its absorptive capacity (e.g., using redundant systems) and resists the disruption's adverse impacts. However, during damage propagation (t 2 − t 1 ), the CIS's adaptive capacity incorporates its absorptive capacity. Thus, CIS shows flexibility as well as robustness. As shown, the level of disrupted performance refers to the CIS vulnerability, and the remaining level of performance refers to the CIS robustness.

After disruption ends at t 2 , recovery actions should be taken. However, sometimes, due to delayed decisions, lack of readiness of the infrastructure owner organization, unavailability of required resources, etc., the CIS stays in the disrupted state for a while, i.e., (t 3 -t 2 ). Therefore, the CIS's proper restorative capacity and an adequate level of organizational resilience can reduce this period. Finally, at t 4 , recovery actions are completed, and a new cycle of the CIS's function starts. The CIS's performance level in the recovered status may be different from its primary performance level. This level can be equal to, lesser than, or even above the primary level. The recoverability of CIS depends on its supportability and maintainability. It should be noted that supporting CIS and learning from experiences should be activated throughout the CIS life cycle. 


### What Types of Approaches Have Been Used for Technological CISs' Resilience Analysis?

Despite years of studies on technological CISs' resilience, researchers in this discipline still do not agree on a specific resilience analysis approach. To date, various approaches have been proposed for resilience analysis. The proposed approaches have their interpretation of the CISs' resilience. Some consider either preparedness or recovery activities, and some consider both of them. Based on the reviewed studies, technological CISs' resilience analysis approaches can be classified into four main groups: empirical, qualitative, indexbased, and simulation approaches. Figure 13 illustrates the distribution of primary studies in these groups. As can be seen, simulation approaches were predominantly applied among the reviewed primary studies. Simulation Approaches: These approaches examine how the CIS structure affects its resilience. The behavior of the CIS should be observed in these approaches, and its properties must be modeled or simulated [6,157]. Simulation approaches are mostly used in CISs such as energy systems (e.g., electric grids), transportation networks, and water supply networks [17,75,131,137,158,159]. These approaches commonly apply Bayesian networks (BNs) [17,116,[135][136][137]160], Monte Carlo simulation [161,162], fuzzy models [72,163], and optimization algorithms [65,164]. BNs are mostly used to deal with uncertainties and partial data and information [135,137]. However, they are limited to systems with static nature. For instance, Kammouh et al. [135] used a dynamic BN to consider the dynamic nature of a transportation system by adding the dimension of time. In simulation approaches, optimization algorithms are usually used to optimize the resilience of engineering systems.

Simulation approaches are complex, costly, and time-consuming approaches and need a high level of expertise as well as extensive technical, operational, organizational data and information. Hence, their application is limited to organizations with these capabilities.

Empirical Approaches: In empirical approaches, the CIS's resilience is analyzed using the CIS's failure and recovery curves, which are usually determined by analyzing historical data of the CIS (e.g., time to failure and time to repair data) [157]. In these approaches, apart from the CIS's structure, the CIS's performance levels before and after the disruption are compared to each other. Empirical approaches are either deterministic [12,15,85,132,[165][166][167][168] or probabilistic [89,95,100,115,117,126]. Deterministic approaches do no use any probabilistic parameters in the resilience analysis process and cannot model the uncertainties that exist in the inputs of the metric [12,85,[165][166][167]. In probabilistic approaches, using the available data and statistical methods, the CIS's recovery and failure distribution function, etc., can be obtained [89,100,115,126]. However, empirical approaches, specifically those that are deterministic, include many hypotheses that limit these approaches. For example, some assume the CIS's performance is at the ideal level (i.e., 100%) and that recovery actions start right after the disruption [12,85,166]. These hypotheses and limitations restrict their application. Although both deterministic and probabilistic metrics use some terms to model a system's behavior (e.g., redundancy, robustness, etc.), they are limited in incorporating all necessary terms. Hence, they have limitations in modeling the system's behavior. Furthermore, empirical approaches highly rely on the available historical data, and in the absence of the required data, their application ischallenging for resilience analysts.

Index-based Approaches: In these approaches, the raw data needed for the CIS's resilience analysis are usually collected by measuring the indicators that express the CIS's resilience concept. The resilience index, which is also the CIS's resilience score, can be determined by aggregating the obtained information from indicators (usually using the weighted average method). The index-based approaches are often implemented semiquantitatively [79,157,169,170]. This approach makes it possible to use various influencing factors and indicators in the resilience analysis process. Furthermore, it would help recognize the weak and strong points of CIS resilience [171].

Qualitative Approaches: These approaches try to evaluate the CIS's resilience without any numerical descriptions and present a conceptual insight [172]. This conceptual insight of resilience is usually established using a graph. This kind of graph represents the relationship between the CIS's resilience and resilience contributing factors. In the qualitative approaches, some steps can be designed to evaluate the CIS's resilience qualitatively [6]. Since engineers prefer to use numeric tools, this approach has been rarely used in the field of technological CIS.


## Conclusions

Today's society has become complex. The majority of people have access to several services such as electricity, heat, health care, clean water, transportation, and communication worldwide. These vital services are provided by technological CISs. Disruption of CISs may affect the entire community. For example, an electric power outage may cause water and communication network failure, restrict health care services usage, and disrupt the heating and transportation systems. Therefore, our welfare highly depends on the normal and continuous performance of such CISs. The current practice for CISs management is based on risk management. This approach has its limitation when it comes to rare and extreme events as well as unforeseen hazards. Moreover, it is not a very effective approach for managing pre-and post-disruption activities. Although there is an attempt to use the concept of resilience to improve the performance of the critical infrastructures, there is still a long way to go. Specifically, we should determine how the available practice can benefit from resilience assessment and how they can provide information for the resilience management process. Therefore, in the present paper, to learn more about the concept, areas of application, and analysis approaches of the technological CISs' resilience, available resilience-related literature was reviewed using the SLR technique. Based on the results, 1454 potential resilience-related studies were identified using search terms and resources. Using the inclusive and exclusive criteria, 192 primary studies were selected to conduct the review process. The results of the systematic review are summarized as follows:

•

The concept of resilience has gradually found a place among researchers in the discipline of technological CISs since 2003. In the last decades, the publications' number of resilience-related studies has grown significantly. Based on the result, the concept of resilience is an up-to-date, attractive, and important research area in the discipline of technological CISs.


## •

Among the reviewed primary studies, energy systems, transportation networks, and water supply networks are mostly used as case studies. • A resilient technological CIS should have the ability to imagine what to expect, the ability to protect and resist a disruptive event, the ability to absorb the adverse effects of a disruption, the ability to adapt to new conditions and changes caused by disruption, and the ability to recover the CIS's normal performance level after a disruption. Building these abilities in a CIS is necessary to perform two types of preparedness and recovery activities.


## •

In this paper, 20 terms were identified as contributing factors to CISs' resilience, which depends on preparedness and recovery activities. As shown, robustness is the most frequent term among the reviewed primary studies. However, none of the evaluated terms can guarantee the resilience of the CISs alone. Therefore, technological CISs' management must develop sets of these terms to build a resilient CIS.


## •

Few researchers have tried to use the organizational resilience concept in technological CIS resilience analysis. However, there are still some gaps in our comprehension of this concept. Moreover, there is no consensus on how to assess it. Therefore, this issue will be an interesting research topic for researchers who are working on technological CIS resilience. • Resilience analysis approaches of technological CISs can be classified into four main groups: empirical, simulation, index-based, and qualitative approaches. Simulation approaches were dominantly applied to resilience analysis. Simulation approaches are case-study-based. Empirical approaches, specifically those that are deterministic, include many hypotheses that limit the use of these approaches. The index-based approaches are often implemented semi-quantitatively. Qualitative approaches propose a qualitative representation of the resilience of the CIS.


## •

To apply the concept of resilience more effectively, the main effort should be performed on understanding and establishing the concept of resilience appropriate to the discipline of technological CISs. There is still some vagueness about its definition and analysis approaches. Therefore, first, the main researches must be performed in these areas.


## •

In the reviewed studies, we noticed that the role of societies on the CISs' resilience was not considered. CISs have consisted of engineered systems and also owner organizations of them. Moreover, societies are the customers of these CISs' services. Therefore, the overall Resilience of any CIS will be affected by the resilience of the three mentioned actors. Therefore, the role of social and organizational resilience on overall CIS resilience needs more research.

• In modern communities, critical infrastructures are highly interconnected, and an electric power outage may cause water and communication network failure, restrict health care services usage, and disrupt heating and transportation systems. Therefore, the interdependency of critical infrastructures needs to be focused on more future research.


## •

Since black swan events have extremely low occurrence probability as well as severe consequences, the black swan modeling of critical infrastructures needs some more research. • Continuity management is an important subject that should be developed for critical infrastructures. It is more than a response to disruption and commences with the policies and procedures developed, tested, and adopted when a disruption happens.


## •

According to the reviewed papers, predictability and early warning as well as the role of management decision-making has been less considered in the available literature.

Since in a resilient CISs early warning enables managers to get timely information about the proximity and development of disruption, more attempts need to be made about this. 


## Conflicts of Interest:

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Appendix A    [195] Hsieh and Feng The resilience of transportation systems [196] Baroud and Barker Resilience of networks [133] Moslehi and Reddy Resilience assessment [197] Ramirez-Marquez et al.

Resilience of networks [198] Cai et al.  The resilience of infrastructure systems [99] Maheshwari and Ramakumar

The resilience of energy systems [41] Hosseini and Ivanov

The resilience of supply networks [209] Gautam et al.  

## Figure 1 .
1Systematic literature review technique phases[35].

## Figure 2 .
2The final search string for conducting the searching process.

## Figure 3 .
3Search process results.

## Figure 4 .
4The details of the obtained studies.

## Figure 5 .
5Percentages of primary studies in each resource.

## Figure 6 .
6Published researches per year until 2 October 2020.

## Figure 7 .
7No. and types of case studies among the reviewed primary studies.

## Figure 8 .
8No. and types of case studies that are used in the field of energy systems' resilience.

## Figure 9 .
9Percentages and types of case studies used in the field of electric grid resilience.

## Figure 10 .
10Percentages and types of case studies used in the field of transportation network system resilience.

## Figure 11 .
11Percentages and types of identified terms that are used in the discipline of technological critical infrastructure systems' (CISs') resilience.

## Figure 12 .
12The role of the reviewed terms in a resilient technological CIS.

## Figure 13 .
13Percentages and types of resilience analysis approach that are used in the reviewed primary studies.

## Author
Contributions: Conceptualization, A.B., F.S., and M.A.; Methodology, A.M., and A.B.; Investigation, A.M., and A.N.Q.; Formal Analysis, A.M. Writing -Original Draft, A.M., and A.N.Q.; Writing -Review & Editing, A.B., F.S., M.A., and A.N.Q.; Visualization, A.M.; Supervision, F.S., M.A., A.N.Q., and A.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: Data sharing not applicable.


Included studies should be written in English •Included studies should be published as a research paper. Hence, unpublished studies, discussion papers, encyclopedia, book chapters, workshops, news articles, prefaces, tutorials, presentations, and keynotes should be excluded. Review papers should be excluded. The SLR is an analysis of all primary studies that exist on a specific topic. Preliminary studies should include only original research papers.• 
• 
Irrelevant research should be excluded by checking the title, keyword, abstract, and 
conclusion. 
• 
Duplicated publications in different journals that introduce the same results should be 
excluded, and the complete version should be included in the review process. 
• 
Those studies that have applied resilience to non-technological CISs should be excluded. 

3.1.4. Data Collection 

To collect the needed data items for addressing the defined research questions, a data 
extraction form was used. The data extraction form's items are listed as follows: 

• 
Research topic; 
• 
Publication date; 
• 
Full reference; 
• 
Presented definitions for the technological CISs' resilience; 
• 
Type and explanation of the concepts determine the resilience of technological CISs; 
• 
Application field of the concept of resilience; 
• 
Type and description of the approach used for technological CISs' resilience analysis. 



## Table A1 .
A1Selected primary studies.Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 
Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 

Bruneau et al. 
Quantifying urban 
infrastructure resilience 
[12] 
Cimellaro et al. 
Quantifying system 
resilience 
[80] 

Yazdani et al. 
The resilience of water 
distribution systems 
[70] 
Zobel 
Quantifying system 
resilience 
[166] 

Enjalbert et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[63] 
Youn et al. 
Engineered systems 
resilience assessment 
[95] 

Cox et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[145] 
Croope and 
McNeil 

The resilience of critical 
infrastructure systems 
[173] 

Dinh et al. 
The resilience of 
industrial processes 
[83] 
Henry and 
Ramirez-Marquez 
Resilience assessment 
[174] 

Shirali et al. 
Resilience assessment 
[175] 
Afgan and 
Veziroglu 

The resilience of the energy 
system 
[40] 

Muller 
The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[163] 
Ouyang et al. 
The resilience of urban 
infrastructure systems 
[109] 

Tokgoz and 
Gheorghe 

Quantifying system 
resilience 
[89] 
Trucco et al. 
The resilience of transport 
systems 
[176] 

Liu et al. 
The resilience of water 
systems 
[96] 
Barker et al. 
The resilience of networks 
[97] 

Francis and Bekera 
Quantifying 
infrastructure resilience 
[15] 
Jin et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[61] 


## Table A1 .
A1Cont.Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 
Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 

Zobel and Khansa 
Characterizing disaster 
resilience 
[132] 
Baroud et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[143] 

Shafieezadeh and 
Ivey Burden 

The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[98] 
Pant et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[177] 

Ouyang and 
Dueñas-Osorio 

The resilience of power 
systems 
[110] 
Omer et al. 
The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[156] 

Ayyub 
Systems resilience 
assessment 
[115] 
Behzadian et al. 
The resilience of the urban 
water system 
[74] 

Baroud et al. 
Resilience of networks 
[129] 
Faturechi et al. 
Quantifying urban 
infrastructure resilience 
[123] 

Sharifi and 
Yamagata 

The resilience of urban 
infrastructure 
[172] 
Ouyang and Wang Resilience of infrastructures 
[112] 

Testa et al. 
The resilience of coastal 
transportation 
[178] 
Zhang et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[179] 

Labaka et al. 
The resilience of nuclear 
plant 
[147] 
Sikula et al. 
Proposing a conceptual 
model for resilience 
[180] 

D'Lima and 
Medda 

The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[127] 
Rød et al. 
The resilience of Arctic 
infrastructure 
[117] 

Teodorescu 
Resilience concept 
evaluation 
[100] 
Jin and Gu 
The resilience of the 
engineered system 
[102] 

Fang et al. 
The resilience of 
electrical infrastructures 
[52] 
Nan et al. 
Quantifying system 
resilience 
[101] 

Diao et al. 
The resilience of the 
water system 
[78] 
Nogal et al. 
The resilience of traffic 
networks 
[65] 

Hosseini and 
Barker 

The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[17] 
Huang and Zhang 
Resilience analysis of tunnel 
lining 
[64] 

Rinaudo et al. 
Underground space 
resilience 
[181] 
Espinoza et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[182] 

Gama 
Dessavre et al. 

Complex system 
resilience analysis 
[183] 
Adjetey-
Bahun et al. 

The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[148] 

Filippone et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[184] 
MacKenzie and 
Zobel 

The resilience of power 
systems 
[164] 

Hu and 
Mahadevan 

Engineered systems 
resilience assessment 
[144] 
Feofilovs. and 
Romagnoli 

The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[185] 

Yodo and Wang 
Engineered systems 
resilience assessment 
[186] 
Kim et al. 
The resilience of the power 
system 
[152] 

Nan and Sansavini 
Resilience of 
infrastructures 
[103] 
Mebarki 
Resilience theory and 
metrics 
[187] 

Yoon et al. 
Resilience assessment 
[8] 
Panteli et al. 
Power systems resilience 
assessment 
[188] 

Zhao et al. 
Modeling resilience of 
infrastructures 
[104] 
Faber et al. 
Resilience characteristics 
[106] 

Zhu et al. 
Assessment of 
infrastructure resilience 
[140] 
Herrera et al. 
The resilience of the 
transportation system 
[189] 

Klise et al. 
The resilience of the 
water supply system 
[77] 
Tran et al. 
Quantifying system 
resilience 
[190] 

Malandri et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[153] 
Ouyang and Fang 
Optimizing critical 
infrastructure resilience 
[111] 


## Table A1 .
A1Cont.Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 
Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 

Chen et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[191] 
Fotouhi et al. 
The resilience of urban 
traffic-electric power 
[124] 

Mebarki 
The resilience of 
industrial tanks 
[192] 
Yodo and Wang 
The resilience of engineered 
systems 
[193] 

Pursiainen et al. 
Quantifying critical 
infrastructure resilience 
[194] 
Meng et al. 
Resilience of networks 
[134] 

Liu et al. 
Resilience strategy for 
cloud data 
[118] 
Gong and You 
Resilience assessment 
[4] 

Haque et al. 
Cyber resilience 
framework 
[113] 
Buchanan et al. 
The resilience of engineered 
systems 


## Table A1 .
A1Cont.Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 
Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 

Specking et al. 
Engineered systems 
resilience assessment 
[208] 
Abimbola and 
Khan 

The resilience of 
engineering systems 
[128] 

Xu et al. 
Critical infrastructure 
resilience 
[91] 
Najarian and Lim 
Engineered systems 
resilience assessment 
[126] 

Goldbeck et al. 
The resilience of urban 
infrastructures 
[7] 
Kong and 
Simonovic 




CharaniShandiz et al.The resilience of 
distribution systems 
[210] 
X. Liu et al. 
Resilience assessment of 
power system 
[49] 

Sabouhi et al. 
Resilience assessment of 
electric power 
[44] 
Yarveisy et al. 
Resilience assessment 
[138] 

Zhou et al. 
The resilience of thermal 
power generation 
[159] 
Younesi et al. 
Resilience assessment of 
power system 
[211] 

Kandaperumal 
and Srivastava 

The resilience of the 
electric distribution 
systems 

[51] 
Najarian and Lim 
Optimizing 
infrastructure resilience 
[212] 

Z. Chen et al. 
Resilience analysis of the 
system of systems 
[213] 
Li et al. 
Resilience analysis of a 
road network 
[161] 

Cheng et al. 
Quantitative assessment 
of resilience 
[214] 
Ottenburger et al. 
Resilience assessment of 
power system 
[215] 

W. Liu et al. 
The resilience of the 
urban water system 
[71] 
Ahmadian et al. 
Network resilience 
[216] 

C. Chen et al. 
Urban Resilience 
[130] 
Koc et al. 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[66] 

Izadi et al. 
The resilience of water 
systems 
[76] 
Rød 
Critical infrastructure 
resilience 
[157] 

Heydari et al. 
The resilience of 
longwall machinery 
[85] 
Barabadi et al. 
The resilience of health 
infrastructure systems 
[79] 

The resilience of energy 
systems 
[48] 
Petersen et al. 
The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[121] 

Guo et al. 
Resilience assessment of 
safety system 
[170] 
Tepes and 
Neumann 

The resilience of water 
supply systems 
[72] 

Eljaoued et al. 
The resilience of 
socio-technical systems 
[217] 
Yang et al. 
The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[120] 

Komljenovic et al. 
Resilience in managing 
mine tailing ponds 
[86] 
Zinetullina et al. 
The resilience of a 
separator system 
[139] 

Toroghi and 
Thomas 

The resilience of power 
systems 
[218] 
Kammouh et al. 
The resilience of 
engineering systems 
[135] 

Bao et al. 
The resilience of energy 
systems 
[50] 
Das 
The resilience of 
transportation systems 
[69] 

Zhou and Chen 
The resilience of an 
airport 
[167] 
Tong et al. 
The resilience of 
infrastructures 
[160] 

Assad et al. 
The resilience of water 
distribution network 
[75] 
Ciapessoni et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[47] 

Rehak et al. 
The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[107] 
Karangelos et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[46] 

Khaghani and 
Jazizadeh 

The resilience of the 
transportation system 
[57] 
Papic et al. 
The resilience of 
transmission grids 
[2] 


## Table A1 .
A1Cont.Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 
Author (s) 
Research Topic 
Ref. 

Cutini and Pezzica 
The resilience of street 
networks 
[108] 
Ibrahim and 
Alkhraibat 
Resilience of microgrids 
[45] 

Afrin and Yodo 
The resilience of the 
transportation system 
[56] 
Kong et al. 
Resilience of 
infrastructures 
[151] 

Wang et al. 
The resilience of air 
traffic network 
[9] 
Mostafavi 

The resilience of 
highway transportation 
system 

[59] 

Santos et al. 
The resilience of the 
transportation system 
[219] 
Han and Zhang 
The resilience of 
highway networks 
[220] 

Mathias et al. 

The resilience of electric 
power generation 
system 

[150] 
Tang et al. 
The resilience of traffic 
network 
[221] 

Kong et al. 
The resilience of critical 
infrastructures 
[222] 
Kumar et al. 

The resilience of electric 
power generation 
system 

[37] 

Murdock et al. 
Resilience of 
transportation system 
[146] 
Brugnetti et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[122] 

Li et al. 
The resilience of supply 
chains 
[84] 
J. Wang et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[39] 

Chalishazar et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[223] 
Qin and Faber 
The resilience of wind 
turbines 
[55] 

Engler et al. 
The resilience of 
navigation systems 
[60] 
Wyss et al. 
The resilience of energy 
systems' transition 
[93] 

Afrin and Yodo 
Resilience of networks 
[131] 
Zhang et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[54] 

Hollins et al. 
Resilience of dams 
[87] 
Binder et al. 
The resilience of energy 
systems' transition 
[92] 

Pilpola et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[94] 
Zhang et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[53] 

Lau et al. 
The resilience of power 
systems 
[42] 
Bragatto et al. 
The resilience of electric 
power distribution grids 
[38] 

Energies 2021,14, 1571   

On the Identification and Designation of European Critical Infrastructures and the Assessment of the Need to Improve Their Protection. Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December. Brussels, BelgiumThe Council of the European Union. The Council of the European UnionThe Council of the European Union. On the Identification and Designation of European Critical Infrastructures and the Assessment of the Need to Improve Their Protection. In Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008; The Council of the European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2008.

A Risk-Based Approach to Assess the Operational Resilience of Transmission Grids. M Papic, S Ekisheva, E Cotilla-Sanchez, 10.3390/app10144761Appl. Sci. 104761Papic, M.; Ekisheva, S.; Cotilla-Sanchez, E. A Risk-Based Approach to Assess the Operational Resilience of Transmission Grids. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4761. [CrossRef]

Building Resilience of Critical Infrastructure: A Case of Impacts of Cyclones on the Power Sector in Odisha. S K Mohanty, R Chatterjee, R Shaw, 10.3390/cli8060073873Mohanty, S.K.; Chatterjee, R.; Shaw, R. Building Resilience of Critical Infrastructure: A Case of Impacts of Cyclones on the Power Sector in Odisha. Climate 2020, 8, 73. [CrossRef]

Resilient Design and Operations of Process Systems: Nonlinear Adaptive Robust Optimization Model and Algorithm for Resilience Analysis and Enhancement. J Gong, F You, 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2017.11.002Comput. Chem. Eng. 116Gong, J.; You, F. Resilient Design and Operations of Process Systems: Nonlinear Adaptive Robust Optimization Model and Algorithm for Resilience Analysis and Enhancement. Comput. Chem. Eng. 2018, 116, 231-252. [CrossRef]

Changing the Resilience Paradigm. I Linkov, T Bridges, F Creutzig, J Decker, C Fox-Lent, W Kröger, J H Lambert, A Levermann, B Montreuil, J Nathwani, 10.1038/nclimate2227Nat. Clim. Chang. 4Linkov, I.; Bridges, T.; Creutzig, F.; Decker, J.; Fox-Lent, C.; Kröger, W.; Lambert, J.H.; Levermann, A.; Montreuil, B.; Nathwani, J.; et al. Changing the Resilience Paradigm. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2014, 4, 407-409. [CrossRef]

A Review of Definitions and Measures of System Resilience. S Hosseini, K Barker, J E Ramirez-Marquez, 10.1016/j.ress.2015.08.006Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 145Hosseini, S.; Barker, K.; Ramirez-Marquez, J.E. A Review of Definitions and Measures of System Resilience. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2016, 145, 47-61. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment for Interdependent Urban Infrastructure Systems Using Dynamic Network Flow Models. N Goldbeck, P Angeloudis, W Y Ochieng, 10.1016/j.ress.2019.03.007Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 188Goldbeck, N.; Angeloudis, P.; Ochieng, W.Y. Resilience Assessment for Interdependent Urban Infrastructure Systems Using Dynamic Network Flow Models. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2019, 188, 62-79. [CrossRef]

A Newly Formulated Resilience Measure That Considers False Alarms. J T Yoon, B D Youn, M Yoo, Y Kim, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.06.013Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 167Yoon, J.T.; Youn, B.D.; Yoo, M.; Kim, Y. A Newly Formulated Resilience Measure That Considers False Alarms. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2017, 167, 417-427. [CrossRef]

Vulnerability and Resilience Analysis of the Air Traffic Control Sector Network in China. X Wang, S Miao, J Tang, 10.3390/su120937492020Wang, X.; Miao, S.; Tang, J. Vulnerability and Resilience Analysis of the Air Traffic Control Sector Network in China. Sustainability 2020, 12, 3749. [CrossRef]

Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems. C S Holling, 10.1146/annurev.es.04.110173.000245Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 4Holling, C.S. Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 1973, 4, 1-23. [CrossRef]

Analyses of Transient Characteristics of a Nutrient Cycling Model. M A Harwell, W P Cropper, H L Ragsdale, 10.1016/0304-3800(81)90027-2Ecol. Model. 12Harwell, M.A.; Cropper, W.P.; Ragsdale, H.L. Analyses of Transient Characteristics of a Nutrient Cycling Model. Ecol. Model. 1981, 12, 105-131. [CrossRef]

A Framework to Qantitatively Assess and Enhance the Science the Seismic Resilience of Communities. M Bruneau, S E Chang, R T Eguchi, G C Lee, T D O&apos;rourke, A Reinhorn, M Shinozuka, K Tierney, W Wallace, D Winterfeldt, 10.1193/1.1623497Earthq. Spectra. 19Bruneau, M.; Chang, S.E.; Eguchi, R.T.; Lee, G.C.; O'Rourke, T.D.; Reinhorn, A.; Shinozuka, M.; Tierney, K.; Wallace, W.; Winterfeldt, D. A Framework to Qantitatively Assess and Enhance the Science the Seismic Resilience of Communities. Earthq. Spectra 2003, 19, 733-752. [CrossRef]

Economic Resilience to Natural and Man-Made Disasters: Multidisciplinary Origins and Contextual Dimensions. Environ. Hazards. A Rose, 10.1016/j.envhaz.2007.10.0017Rose, A. Economic Resilience to Natural and Man-Made Disasters: Multidisciplinary Origins and Contextual Dimensions. Environ. Hazards 2007, 7, 383-398. [CrossRef]

Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History and Context. In Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning. T Taşan-Kok, D Stead, P Lu, Taşan-Kok, T.; Stead, D.; Lu, P. Conceptual Overview of Resilience: History and Context. In Resilience Thinking in Urban Planning;

. A Eraydin, T Taşan-Kok, Eds, 978-94-007-5476-8GeoJournal Library. 106SpringerEraydin, A., Taşan-Kok, T., Eds.; GeoJournal Library; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2013; Volume 106, pp. 39-51. ISBN 978-94-007-5476-8.

A Metric and Frameworks for Resilience Analysis of Engineered and Infrastructure Systems. R Francis, B Bekera, 10.1016/j.ress.2013.07.004Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 121Francis, R.; Bekera, B. A Metric and Frameworks for Resilience Analysis of Engineered and Infrastructure Systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2014, 121, 90-103. [CrossRef]

Static and Dynamic Metrics of Economic Resilience for Interdependent Infrastructure and Industry Sectors. R Pant, K Barker, C W Zobel, 10.1016/j.ress.2013.09.007Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 125Pant, R.; Barker, K.; Zobel, C.W. Static and Dynamic Metrics of Economic Resilience for Interdependent Infrastructure and Industry Sectors. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2014, 125, 92-102. [CrossRef]

Modeling Infrastructure Resilience Using Bayesian Networks: A Case Study of Inland Waterway Ports. S Hosseini, K Barker, 10.1016/j.cie.2016.01.007Comput. Ind. Eng. 93Hosseini, S.; Barker, K. Modeling Infrastructure Resilience Using Bayesian Networks: A Case Study of Inland Waterway Ports. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2016, 93, 252-266. [CrossRef]

Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. 978-0-309-26150-0National Academies (U.S.) (Ed.National Academies PressWashington, DC, USANational Academies (U.S.) (Ed.) Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2012; ISBN 978-0-309-26150-0.

Integrated Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Planning: Towards Organizational Resilience. N Sahebjamnia, S A Torabi, S A Mansouri, 10.1016/j.ejor.2014.09.055Eur. J. Oper. Res. 242Sahebjamnia, N.; Torabi, S.A.; Mansouri, S.A. Integrated Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Planning: Towards Organizational Resilience. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2015, 242, 261-273. [CrossRef]

Sustainability and Community Resilience: The Holy Grail of Hazards Planning? Environ. G A Tobin, 10.3763/ehaz.1999.01031Tobin, G.A. Sustainability and Community Resilience: The Holy Grail of Hazards Planning? Environ. Hazards 1999, 1, 13-25. [CrossRef]

Community Resilience to Volcanic Hazard Consequences. D Paton, M Millar, D Johnston, 10.1023/A:1011882106373Nat. Hazards. 24Paton, D.; Millar, M.; Johnston, D. Community Resilience to Volcanic Hazard Consequences. Nat. Hazards 2001, 24, 157-169. [CrossRef]

Vulnerability and Mental Health. P Haddadi, M A Besharat, Resilience, 10.1016/j.sbspro.2010.07.157Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 5Haddadi, P.; Besharat, M.A. Resilience, Vulnerability and Mental Health. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 2010, 5, 639-642. [CrossRef]

Ordinary Magic: Resilience Processes in Development. A S Masten, 10.1037/0003-066X.56.3.227Am. Psychol. 56Masten, A.S. Ordinary Magic: Resilience Processes in Development. Am. Psychol. 2001, 56, 227-238. [CrossRef]

New Indices for Quantifying the Resistance and Resilience of Soil Biota to Exogenous Disturbances. K H Orwin, D A Wardle, 10.1016/j.soilbio.2004.04.036Soil Biol. Biochem. 36Orwin, K.H.; Wardle, D.A. New Indices for Quantifying the Resistance and Resilience of Soil Biota to Exogenous Disturbances. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2004, 36, 1907-1912. [CrossRef]

Resilience in Ecology: Abstraction, Distraction, or Where the Action Is?. R J Standish, R J Hobbs, M M Mayfield, B T Bestelmeyer, K N Suding, L L Battaglia, V Eviner, C V Hawkes, V M Temperton, V A Cramer, 10.1016/j.biocon.2014.06.008Biol. Conserv. 177Standish, R.J.; Hobbs, R.J.; Mayfield, M.M.; Bestelmeyer, B.T.; Suding, K.N.; Battaglia, L.L.; Eviner, V.; Hawkes, C.V.; Temperton, V.M.; Cramer, V.A.; et al. Resilience in Ecology: Abstraction, Distraction, or Where the Action Is? Biol. Conserv. 2014, 177, 43-51. [CrossRef]

The Benefits and Challenges of Using Systematic Reviews in International Development Research. R Mallett, J Hagen-Zanker, R Slater, M Duvendack, 10.1080/19439342.2012.711342J. Dev. Eff. 4Mallett, R.; Hagen-Zanker, J.; Slater, R.; Duvendack, M. The Benefits and Challenges of Using Systematic Reviews in International Development Research. J. Dev. Eff. 2012, 4, 445-455. [CrossRef]

Bias within Systematic and Non-Systematic Literature Reviews: The Case of the Balanced Scorecard. S Jansen, Enschede, The NetherlandsUniversity of TwenteMaster's ThesisJansen, S. Bias within Systematic and Non-Systematic Literature Reviews: The Case of the Balanced Scorecard. Master's Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2017.

Procedures for Performing Systematic Reviews. B Kitchenham, 33Newcastle, UKSoftware Engineering Group, Keele UniversityKitchenham, B. Procedures for Performing Systematic Reviews; Software Engineering Group, Keele University: Newcastle, UK, 2004; p. 33.

Knowledge in Engineering Design: A Systematic Literature Review On Artifacts and It Systems. M Preidel, W M Wang, K Exner, R Stark, Proceedings of the DESIGN 2018 15th International Design Conference. the DESIGN 2018 15th International Design ConferenceDubrovnik, CroatiaPreidel, M.; Wang, W.M.; Exner, K.; Stark, R. Knowledge in Engineering Design: A Systematic Literature Review On Artifacts and It Systems. In Proceedings of the DESIGN 2018 15th International Design Conference, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 21-24 May 2018; pp. 881-892.

Air Source Heat Pumps Field Studies: A Systematic Literature Review. P Carroll, M Chesser, P Lyons, 10.1016/j.rser.2020.110275Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 134Carroll, P.; Chesser, M.; Lyons, P. Air Source Heat Pumps Field Studies: A Systematic Literature Review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020, 134, 110275. [CrossRef]

Empirical Software Product Line Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review. A E Chacón-Luna, A M Gutiérrez, J A Galindo, D Benavides, 10.1016/j.infsof.2020.106389Inf. Softw. Technol. 128Chacón-Luna, A.E.; Gutiérrez, A.M.; Galindo, J.A.; Benavides, D. Empirical Software Product Line Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review. Inf. Softw. Technol. 2020, 128, 106389. [CrossRef]

. T Paschou, M Rapaccini, F Adrodegari, N Saccani, 10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.02.012Digital Servitization in Manufacturing: A Systematic Literature Review and Research Agenda. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2020Paschou, T.; Rapaccini, M.; Adrodegari, F.; Saccani, N. Digital Servitization in Manufacturing: A Systematic Literature Review and Research Agenda. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2020, 89, 278-292. [CrossRef]

Transportation Systems in the Arctic: A Systematic Literature Review Using Textometry. A Lavissière, R Sohier, M C Lavissière, 10.1016/j.tra.2020.09.003Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 141Lavissière, A.; Sohier, R.; Lavissière, M.C. Transportation Systems in the Arctic: A Systematic Literature Review Using Textometry. Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2020, 141, 130-146. [CrossRef]

. P B Silva, M Andrade, S Ferreira, 10.1016/j.jtte.2020.07.004Machine Learning Applied to Road Safety Modeling: A Systematic Literature Review. J. Traffic Transp. Eng. 7Silva, P.B.; Andrade, M.; Ferreira, S. Machine Learning Applied to Road Safety Modeling: A Systematic Literature Review. J. Traffic Transp. Eng. 2020, 7, 775-790. [CrossRef]

Guidelines for Performing Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering. B Kitchenham, S Charters, Kitchenham, B.; Charters, S. Guidelines for Performing Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering;

. B Kitchenham, O Brereton, D Budgen, M Turner, Bailey, 10.1016/j.infsof.2008.09.009J. Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering -A Systematic Literature Review. Inf. Softw. Technol. 51Kitchenham, B.; Brereton, O.; Budgen, D.; Turner, M.; Bailey, J. Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering -A Systematic Literature Review. Inf. Softw. Technol. 2009, 51, 7-15. [CrossRef]

A Novel Islanding Detection Technique for a Resilient Photovoltaic-Based Distributed Power Generation System Using a Tunable-Q Wavelet Transform and an Artificial Neural Network. S A Kumar, M S P Subathra, N M Kumar, M Malvoni, N J Sairamya, S T George, E S Suviseshamuthu, S S Chopra, 10.3390/en13164238Energies 2020, 13, 4238. [CrossRefKumar, S.A.; Subathra, M.S.P.; Kumar, N.M.; Malvoni, M.; Sairamya, N.J.; George, S.T.; Suviseshamuthu, E.S.; Chopra, S.S. A Novel Islanding Detection Technique for a Resilient Photovoltaic-Based Distributed Power Generation System Using a Tunable-Q Wavelet Transform and an Artificial Neural Network. Energies 2020, 13, 4238. [CrossRef]

Assessment and Possible Solution to Increase Resilience: Flooding Threats in Terni Distribution Grid. T Bragatto, M Cresta, F Cortesi, F Gatta, A Geri, M Maccioni, M Paulucci, 10.3390/en1204074412Bragatto, T.; Cresta, M.; Cortesi, F.; Gatta, F.; Geri, A.; Maccioni, M.; Paulucci, M. Assessment and Possible Solution to Increase Resilience: Flooding Threats in Terni Distribution Grid. Energies 2019, 12, 744. [CrossRef]

Resilience-Oriented Optimal Operation Strategy of Active Distribution Network. J Wang, X Zheng, N Tai, W Wei, L Li, 10.3390/en1217338012Wang, J.; Zheng, X.; Tai, N.; Wei, W.; Li, L. Resilience-Oriented Optimal Operation Strategy of Active Distribution Network. Energies 2019, 12, 3380. [CrossRef]

Sustainable Resilience of Hydrogen Energy System. N Afgan, A Veziroglu, 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.04.201Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 37Afgan, N.; Veziroglu, A. Sustainable Resilience of Hydrogen Energy System. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2012, 37, 5461-5467. [CrossRef]

An Approach for Resilience Assessment of SIRES. Z Maheshwari, R Ramakumar, Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Kansas Power and Energy Conference (KPEC). the 2020 IEEE Kansas Power and Energy Conference (KPEC)Manhattan, KS, USAMaheshwari, Z.; Ramakumar, R. An Approach for Resilience Assessment of SIRES. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Kansas Power and Energy Conference (KPEC), Manhattan, KS, USA, 13-14 July 2020; pp. 1-6.

Efficient Economic and Resilience-Based Optimization for Disaster Recovery Management of. E Lau, K Chai, Y Chen, J Loo, 10.3390/en11123418Critical Infrastructures. 11Lau, E.; Chai, K.; Chen, Y.; Loo, J. Efficient Economic and Resilience-Based Optimization for Disaster Recovery Management of Critical Infrastructures. Energies 2018, 11, 3418. [CrossRef]

Conceptual Design of Cogeneration Plants under a Resilient Design Perspective: Resilience Metrics and Case Study. J A Matelli, K Goebel, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.02.081Appl. Energy. 215Matelli, J.A.; Goebel, K. Conceptual Design of Cogeneration Plants under a Resilient Design Perspective: Resilience Metrics and Case Study. Appl. Energy 2018, 215, 736-750. [CrossRef]

Electrical Power System Resilience Assessment: A Comprehensive Approach. H Sabouhi, A Doroudi, M Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M Bashiri, 10.1109/JSYST.2019.2934421IEEE Syst. J. 14Sabouhi, H.; Doroudi, A.; Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M.; Bashiri, M. Electrical Power System Resilience Assessment: A Comprehensive Approach. IEEE Syst. J. 2020, 14, 2643-2652. [CrossRef]

. M Ibrahim, A Alkhraibat, 10.3390/app10051824Resiliency Assessment of Microgrid Systems. Appl. Sci. 2020Ibrahim, M.; Alkhraibat, A. Resiliency Assessment of Microgrid Systems. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 1824. [CrossRef]

Probabilistic Resilience Analysis of the Icelandic Power System under Extreme Weather. E Karangelos, S Perkin, L Wehenkel, 10.3390/app10155089Appl. Sci. 10Karangelos, E.; Perkin, S.; Wehenkel, L. Probabilistic Resilience Analysis of the Icelandic Power System under Extreme Weather. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 5089. [CrossRef]

Quantification of the Benefits for Power System of Resilience Boosting Measures. E Ciapessoni, D Cirio, A Pitto, M Sforna, 10.3390/app10165402Appl. Sci. 10Ciapessoni, E.; Cirio, D.; Pitto, A.; Sforna, M. Quantification of the Benefits for Power System of Resilience Boosting Measures. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 5402. [CrossRef]

Resilience Framework and Metrics for Energy Master Planning of Communities. Charani Shandiz, S Foliente, G Rismanchi, B Wachtel, A Jeffers, R F , 10.1016/j.energy.2020.117856Energy 2020, 203, 117856. [CrossRefCharani Shandiz, S.; Foliente, G.; Rismanchi, B.; Wachtel, A.; Jeffers, R.F. Resilience Framework and Metrics for Energy Master Planning of Communities. Energy 2020, 203, 117856. [CrossRef]

A Resilience Assessment Approach for Power System from Perspectives of System and Component Levels. X Liu, K Hou, H Jia, J Zhao, L Mili, Y Mu, J Rim, Y Lei, 10.1016/j.ijepes.2020.105837Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 118Liu, X.; Hou, K.; Jia, H.; Zhao, J.; Mili, L.; Mu, Y.; Rim, J.; Lei, Y. A Resilience Assessment Approach for Power System from Perspectives of System and Component Levels. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 2020, 118, 105837. [CrossRef]

Modeling and Evaluating Nodal Resilience of Multi-Energy Systems under Windstorms. M Bao, Y Ding, M Sang, D Li, C Shao, J Yan, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115136Appl. Energy. 270Bao, M.; Ding, Y.; Sang, M.; Li, D.; Shao, C.; Yan, J. Modeling and Evaluating Nodal Resilience of Multi-Energy Systems under Windstorms. Appl. Energy 2020, 270, 115136. [CrossRef]

Resilience of the Electric Distribution Systems: Concepts, Classification, Assessment, Challenges, and Research Needs. G Kandaperumal, A K Srivastava, 10.1049/iet-stg.2019.0176IET Smart. 2020Kandaperumal, G.; Srivastava, A.K. Resilience of the Electric Distribution Systems: Concepts, Classification, Assessment, Challenges, and Research Needs. IET Smart Grid 2020, 3, 133-143. [CrossRef]

Optimization of Cascade-Resilient Electrical Infrastructures and Its Validation by Power Flow Modeling: Optimization and Validation of Cascade-Resilient Electrical Infrastructures. Y Fang, N Pedroni, E Zio, 10.1111/risa.12396Risk Anal. 35PubMedFang, Y.; Pedroni, N.; Zio, E. Optimization of Cascade-Resilient Electrical Infrastructures and Its Validation by Power Flow Modeling: Optimization and Validation of Cascade-Resilient Electrical Infrastructures. Risk Anal. 2015, 35, 594-607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Collaborative Optimization of Post-Disaster Damage Repair and Power System Operation. H Zhang, G Li, H Yuan, 10.3390/en1110261111Zhang, H.; Li, G.; Yuan, H. Collaborative Optimization of Post-Disaster Damage Repair and Power System Operation. Energies 2018, 11, 2611. [CrossRef]

Quantitative Resilience Assessment under a Tri-Stage Framework for Power Systems. H Zhang, H Yuan, G Li, Y Lin, 10.3390/en1106142711Zhang, H.; Yuan, H.; Li, G.; Lin, Y. Quantitative Resilience Assessment under a Tri-Stage Framework for Power Systems. Energies 2018, 11, 1427. [CrossRef]

Resilience Informed Integrity Management of Wind Turbine Parks. J Qin, M H Faber, 10.3390/en12142729122729Qin, J.; Faber, M.H. Resilience Informed Integrity Management of Wind Turbine Parks. Energies 2019, 12, 2729. [CrossRef]

A Survey of Road Traffic Congestion Measures towards a Sustainable and Resilient Transportation System. T Afrin, N Yodo, 10.3390/su121146602020Afrin, T.; Yodo, N. A Survey of Road Traffic Congestion Measures towards a Sustainable and Resilient Transportation System. Sustainability 2020, 12, 4660. [CrossRef]

A Multi-Dimensional Approach for Resilience-Based Performance Assessment in Urban Transportation. F Khaghani, F Jazizadeh, Md-Resilience, 10.3390/su1212487920204879Khaghani, F.; Jazizadeh, F. MD-Resilience: A Multi-Dimensional Approach for Resilience-Based Performance Assessment in Urban Transportation. Sustainability 2020, 12, 4879. [CrossRef]

A Method to Measure The Resilience of Algorithm for Operation Management. B Han, C L Liu, W J Zhang, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.07.77449IFAC-PapersOnLineHan, B.; Liu, C.L.; Zhang, W.J. A Method to Measure The Resilience of Algorithm for Operation Management. IFAC-PapersOnLine 2016, 49, 1442-1447. [CrossRef]

A System-of-Systems Approach for Integrated Resilience Assessment in Highway Transportation Infrastructure Investment. A Mostafavi, 10.3390/infrastructures2040022222Mostafavi, A. A System-of-Systems Approach for Integrated Resilience Assessment in Highway Transportation Infrastructure Investment. Infrastructures 2017, 2, 22. [CrossRef]

Situation Assessment-An Essential Functionality for Resilient Navigation Systems. E Engler, M Baldauf, P Banyś, F Heymann, M Gucma, F Torres, 10.3390/jmse80100178Engler, E.; Baldauf, M.; Banyś, P.; Heymann, F.; Gucma, M.; Sill Torres, F. Situation Assessment-An Essential Functionality for Resilient Navigation Systems. JMSE 2019, 8, 17. [CrossRef]

Enhancing Metro Network Resilience via Localized Integration with Bus Services. J G Jin, L C Tang, L Sun, D.-H Lee, 10.1016/j.tre.2014.01.002Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 63Jin, J.G.; Tang, L.C.; Sun, L.; Lee, D.-H. Enhancing Metro Network Resilience via Localized Integration with Bus Services. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2014, 63, 17-30. [CrossRef]

Framework for Improving the Resilience and Recovery of Transportation Networks under Geohazard Risks. N Y Aydin, H S Duzgun, H R Heinimann, F Wenzel, K R Gnyawali, 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2018.07.022Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 31Aydin, N.Y.; Duzgun, H.S.; Heinimann, H.R.; Wenzel, F.; Gnyawali, K.R. Framework for Improving the Resilience and Recovery of Transportation Networks under Geohazard Risks. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 2018, 31, 832-843. [CrossRef]

Assessment of Transportation System Resilience. E Enjalbert, F Vanderhaegen, M Pichon, K A Ouedraogo, P Millot, In Human Modelling in Assisted Transportation. Enjalbert, E.; Vanderhaegen, F.; Pichon, M.; Ouedraogo, K.A.; Millot, P. Assessment of Transportation System Resilience. In Human Modelling in Assisted Transportation;

. P Cacciabue, M Hjälmdahl, A Luedtke, C Riccioli, 978-88-470-1820-4SpringerMilan, ItalyCacciabue, P., Hjälmdahl, M., Luedtke, A., Riccioli, C., Eds.; Springer: Milan, Italy, 2011; pp. 335-341. ISBN 978-88-470-1820-4.

Resilience Analysis of Shield Tunnel Lining under Extreme Surcharge: Characterization and Field Application. H Huang, D Zhang, 10.1016/j.tust.2015.10.044Tunnell. Undergr. Space Technol. 51Huang, H.; Zhang, D. Resilience Analysis of Shield Tunnel Lining under Extreme Surcharge: Characterization and Field Application. Tunnell. Undergr. Space Technol. 2016, 51, 301-312. [CrossRef]

Martinez-Pastor, B. Resilience of Traffic Networks: From Perturbation to Recovery via a Dynamic Restricted Equilibrium Model. M Nogal, A O&apos;connor, B Caulfield, 10.1016/j.ress.2016.07.020Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 156Nogal, M.; O'Connor, A.; Caulfield, B.; Martinez-Pastor, B. Resilience of Traffic Networks: From Perturbation to Recovery via a Dynamic Restricted Equilibrium Model. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2016, 156, 84-96. [CrossRef]

CRAFT: Comprehensive Resilience Assessment Framework for Transportation Systems in Urban Areas. E Koc, B Cetiner, A Rose, L Soibelman, E Taciroglu, D Wei, 10.1016/j.aei.2020.101159Adv. Eng. Inform. 46Koc, E.; Cetiner, B.; Rose, A.; Soibelman, L.; Taciroglu, E.; Wei, D. CRAFT: Comprehensive Resilience Assessment Framework for Transportation Systems in Urban Areas. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2020, 46, 101159. [CrossRef]

Assessing Urban Transportation Systems Resilience: A Proposal of Indicators. C M Leobons, V B Gouvêa Campos, R A Mello Bandeira, De, 10.1016/j.trpro.2018.12.199Transp. Res. Procedia. 37Leobons, C.M.; Gouvêa Campos, V.B.; Mello Bandeira, R.A. de Assessing Urban Transportation Systems Resilience: A Proposal of Indicators. Transp. Res. Procedia 2019, 37, 322-329. [CrossRef]

From Metaphor to Practice: Operationalizing the Analysis of Resilience Using System Dynamics Modelling: Operationalizing the Analysis of Resilience Using System Dynamics Modelling. H Herrera, 10.1002/sres.2468Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 34Herrera, H. From Metaphor to Practice: Operationalizing the Analysis of Resilience Using System Dynamics Modelling: Operationalizing the Analysis of Resilience Using System Dynamics Modelling. Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 2017, 34, 444-462. [CrossRef]

Approach for Measuring Transportation Network Resiliency: A Case Study on Dhaka. R Das, 10.1016/j.cstp.2020.04.001Bangladesh. Case Stud. Transp. Policy. 8Das, R. Approach for Measuring Transportation Network Resiliency: A Case Study on Dhaka, Bangladesh. Case Stud. Transp. Policy 2020, 8, 586-592. [CrossRef]

Resilience Enhancing Expansion Strategies for Water Distribution Systems: A Network Theory Approach. A Yazdani, R A Otoo, P Jeffrey, 10.1016/j.envsoft.2011.07.016Environ. Model. Softw. 26Yazdani, A.; Otoo, R.A.; Jeffrey, P. Resilience Enhancing Expansion Strategies for Water Distribution Systems: A Network Theory Approach. Environ. Model. Softw. 2011, 26, 1574-1582. [CrossRef]

Lifecycle Operational Resilience Assessment of Urban Water Distribution Networks. W Liu, Z Song, M Ouyang, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.106859Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Liu, W.; Song, Z.; Ouyang, M. Lifecycle Operational Resilience Assessment of Urban Water Distribution Networks. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 198, 106859. [CrossRef]

Multiple Perspectives of Resilience: A Holistic Approach to Resilience Assessment Using Cognitive Maps in Practitioner Engagement. A Tepes, M B Neumann, 10.1016/j.watres.2020.115780Water Res. 178Tepes, A.; Neumann, M.B. Multiple Perspectives of Resilience: A Holistic Approach to Resilience Assessment Using Cognitive Maps in Practitioner Engagement. Water Res. 2020, 178, 115780. [CrossRef]

Water Distribution Networks Resilience Analysis: A Comparison between Graph Theory-Based Approaches and Global Resilience Analysis. A Pagano, C Sweetapple, R Farmani, R Giordano, D Butler, 10.1007/s11269-019-02276-xWater Resour Manag. 33Pagano, A.; Sweetapple, C.; Farmani, R.; Giordano, R.; Butler, D. Water Distribution Networks Resilience Analysis: A Comparison between Graph Theory-Based Approaches and Global Resilience Analysis. Water Resour Manag. 2019, 33, 2925-2940. [CrossRef]

Resilience-Based Performance Assessment of Water-Recycling Schemes in Urban Water Systems. K Behzadian, Z Kapelan, M S Morley, 10.1016/j.proeng.2014.11.499Procedia Eng. edia Eng89Behzadian, K.; Kapelan, Z.; Morley, M.S. Resilience-Based Performance Assessment of Water-Recycling Schemes in Urban Water Systems. Procedia Eng. 2014, 89, 719-726. [CrossRef]

A New Metric for Assessing Resilience of Water Distribution Networks. A Assad, O Moselhi, T Zayed, 10.3390/w1108170111Assad, A.; Moselhi, O.; Zayed, T. A New Metric for Assessing Resilience of Water Distribution Networks. Water 2019, 11, 1701. [CrossRef]

Asset-Based Assessment of Resiliency in Water Distribution Networks. A Izadi, F Yazdandoost, R Ranjbar, 10.1007/s11269-020-02508-5Water Resour Manag. 34Izadi, A.; Yazdandoost, F.; Ranjbar, R. Asset-Based Assessment of Resiliency in Water Distribution Networks. Water Resour Manag. 2020, 34, 1407-1422. [CrossRef]

A Software Framework for Assessing the Resilience of Drinking Water Systems to Disasters with an Example Earthquake Case Study. K A Klise, M Bynum, D Moriarty, R Murray, 10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.06.022Environ. Model. Softw. 95Klise, K.A.; Bynum, M.; Moriarty, D.; Murray, R. A Software Framework for Assessing the Resilience of Drinking Water Systems to Disasters with an Example Earthquake Case Study. Environ. Model. Softw. 2017, 95, 420-431. [CrossRef]

Global Resilience Analysis of Water Distribution Systems. K Diao, C Sweetapple, R Farmani, G Fu, S Ward, D Butler, 10.1016/j.watres.2016.10.011Water Res. 106Diao, K.; Sweetapple, C.; Farmani, R.; Fu, G.; Ward, S.; Butler, D. Global Resilience Analysis of Water Distribution Systems. Water Res. 2016, 106, 383-393. [CrossRef]

A Holistic View of Health Infrastructure Resilience Before and After COVID-19. A Barabadi, M H Ghiasi, A Nouri Qarahasanlou, A Mottahedi, 10.22038/abjs.2020.47817.2360ABJS 2020, 8. [CrossRefBarabadi, A.; Ghiasi, M.H.; Nouri Qarahasanlou, A.; Mottahedi, A. A Holistic View of Health Infrastructure Resilience Before and After COVID-19. ABJS 2020, 8. [CrossRef]

Framework for Analytical Quantification of Disaster Resilience. G P Cimellaro, A M Reinhorn, M Bruneau, 10.1016/j.engstruct.2010.08.008Eng. Struct. 32Cimellaro, G.P.; Reinhorn, A.M.; Bruneau, M. Framework for Analytical Quantification of Disaster Resilience. Eng. Struct. 2010, 32, 3639-3649. [CrossRef]

Process Resilience Analysis Framework (PRAF): A Systems Approach for Improved Risk and Safety Management. P Jain, H J Pasman, S Waldram, E N Pistikopoulos, M S Mannan, 10.1016/j.jlp.2017.08.006J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 53Jain, P.; Pasman, H.J.; Waldram, S.; Pistikopoulos, E.N.; Mannan, M.S. Process Resilience Analysis Framework (PRAF): A Systems Approach for Improved Risk and Safety Management. J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 2018, 53, 61-73. [CrossRef]

Process Resilience Analysis Based Data-Driven Maintenance Optimization: Application to Cooling Tower Operations. P Jain, E N Pistikopoulos, M S Mannan, 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2018.10.019Comput. Chem. Eng. 121Jain, P.; Pistikopoulos, E.N.; Mannan, M.S. Process Resilience Analysis Based Data-Driven Maintenance Optimization: Application to Cooling Tower Operations. Comput. Chem. Eng. 2019, 121, 27-45. [CrossRef]

Engineering of Industrial Processes: Principles and Contributing Factors. L T T Dinh, H Pasman, X Gao, M S Mannan, Resilience, 10.1016/j.jlp.2011.09.003J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 25Dinh, L.T.T.; Pasman, H.; Gao, X.; Mannan, M.S. Resilience Engineering of Industrial Processes: Principles and Contributing Factors. J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 2012, 25, 233-241. [CrossRef]

A New Resilience Measure for Supply Chain Networks. R Li, Q Dong, C Jin, R Kang, 10.3390/su90101449144Li, R.; Dong, Q.; Jin, C.; Kang, R. A New Resilience Measure for Supply Chain Networks. Sustainability 2017, 9, 144. [CrossRef]

Resilience Measurement of Longwall Machinery. S Heydari, S H Hoseini, B Ghodrati, U Kumar, 10.17794/rgn.2020.3.42020Heydari, S.; Hoseini, S.H.; Ghodrati, B.; Kumar, U. Resilience Measurement of Longwall Machinery. MGPB 2020, 35, 39-44. [CrossRef]

A Resilience-Based Approach in Managing the Closure and Abandonment of Large Mine Tailing Ponds. D Komljenovic, L Stojanovic, V Malbasic, A Lukic, 10.1016/j.ijmst.2020.05.007Int. J. Min. Sci. Technol. 30Komljenovic, D.; Stojanovic, L.; Malbasic, V.; Lukic, A. A Resilience-Based Approach in Managing the Closure and Abandonment of Large Mine Tailing Ponds. Int. J. Min. Sci. Technol. 2020, 30, 737-746. [CrossRef]

Risk and Resilience at the. L Hollins, D Eisenberg, T Seager, 10.3390/infrastructures3040049Oroville Dam. 349Hollins, L.; Eisenberg, D.; Seager, T. Risk and Resilience at the Oroville Dam. Infrastructures 2018, 3, 49. [CrossRef]

A Resilience Model for Engineered Slopes Subject to Anchor Corrosion. X.-Y Li, Z.-B Fan, T Lu, T Xiao, L.-M Zhang, 10.1007/s12205-018-1041-3KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 22Li, X.-Y.; Fan, Z.-B.; Lu, T.; Xiao, T.; Zhang, L.-M. A Resilience Model for Engineered Slopes Subject to Anchor Corrosion. KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 2018, 22, 887-895. [CrossRef]

Resilience Quantification and Its Application to a Residential Building Subject to Hurricane Winds. B E Tokgoz, A V Gheorghe, 10.1007/s13753-013-0012-zInt. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 4Tokgoz, B.E.; Gheorghe, A.V. Resilience Quantification and Its Application to a Residential Building Subject to Hurricane Winds. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 2013, 4, 105-114. [CrossRef]

Simulation Based Assessment of Resilience of Two Large-Scale Socio-Technical IT Networks. F Landegren, M Höst, P Möller, 10.1016/j.ijcip.2018.08.003Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 23Landegren, F.; Höst, M.; Möller, P. Simulation Based Assessment of Resilience of Two Large-Scale Socio-Technical IT Networks. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2018, 23, 112-125. [CrossRef]

Improving Repair Sequence Scheduling Methods for Postdisaster Critical Infrastructure Systems. M Xu, M Ouyang, Z Mao, X Xu, 10.1111/mice.12435Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 34Xu, M.; Ouyang, M.; Mao, Z.; Xu, X. Improving Repair Sequence Scheduling Methods for Postdisaster Critical Infrastructure Systems. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 2019, 34, 506-522. [CrossRef]

An Indicator-Based Approach for Analyzing the Resilience of Transitions for Energy Regions. Part I: Theoretical and Conceptual Considerations. C Binder, S Mühlemeier, R Wyss, 10.3390/en1001003610Binder, C.; Mühlemeier, S.; Wyss, R. An Indicator-Based Approach for Analyzing the Resilience of Transitions for Energy Regions. Part I: Theoretical and Conceptual Considerations. Energies 2017, 10, 36. [CrossRef]

An Indicator-Based Approach for Analysing the Resilience of Transitions for Energy Regions. Part II: Empirical Application to the Case of Weiz-Gleisdorf. R Wyss, S Mühlemeier, C Binder, 10.3390/en11092263Austria. 11Wyss, R.; Mühlemeier, S.; Binder, C. An Indicator-Based Approach for Analysing the Resilience of Transitions for Energy Regions. Part II: Empirical Application to the Case of Weiz-Gleisdorf, Austria. Energies 2018, 11, 2263. [CrossRef]

Analyzing National and Local Pathways to Carbon-Neutrality from Technology, Emissions, and Resilience Perspectives-Case of Finland. S Pilpola, V Arabzadeh, J Mikkola, P Lund, 10.3390/en1205094912949Pilpola, S.; Arabzadeh, V.; Mikkola, J.; Lund, P. Analyzing National and Local Pathways to Carbon-Neutrality from Technology, Emissions, and Resilience Perspectives-Case of Finland. Energies 2019, 12, 949. [CrossRef]

Resilience-Driven System Design of Complex Engineered Systems. B D Youn, C Hu, P F Wang, 10.1115/1.4004981J. Mech. Des. 133Youn, B.D.; Hu, C.; Wang, P.F. Resilience-Driven System Design of Complex Engineered Systems. J. Mech. Des. 2011, 133, 1-15. [CrossRef]

Modeling and Simulation on a Resilient Water Supply System Under Disruptions. X Liu, J Liu, S Zhao, L C Tang, Proceedings of the Institute of Industrial Engineers Asian Conference. the Institute of Industrial Engineers Asian ConferenceLiu, X.; Liu, J.; Zhao, S.; Tang, L.C. Modeling and Simulation on a Resilient Water Supply System Under Disruptions. In Proceedings of the Institute of Industrial Engineers Asian Conference 2013;

. Y.-K Lin, Y.-C Tsao, S.-W Lin, 978-981-4451-97-0SpringerSingapore; SingaporeLin, Y.-K., Tsao, Y.-C., Lin, S.-W., Eds.; Springer Singapore: Singapore, 2013; pp. 1385-1393. ISBN 978-981-4451-97-0.

Resilience-Based Network Component Importance Measures. K Barker, J E Ramirez-Marquez, C M Rocco, 10.1016/j.ress.2013.03.012Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 117Barker, K.; Ramirez-Marquez, J.E.; Rocco, C.M. Resilience-Based Network Component Importance Measures. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2013, 117, 89-97. [CrossRef]

Scenario-Based Resilience Assessment Framework for Critical Infrastructure Systems: Case Study for Seismic Resilience of Seaports. A Shafieezadeh, L Ivey Burden, 10.1016/j.ress.2014.07.021Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 132Shafieezadeh, A.; Ivey Burden, L. Scenario-Based Resilience Assessment Framework for Critical Infrastructure Systems: Case Study for Seismic Resilience of Seaports. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2014, 132, 207-219. [CrossRef]

Probabilistic Multiple Hazard Resilience Model of an Interdependent Infrastructure System. J Kong, S P Simonovic, 10.1111/risa.13305Risk Anal. 39Kong, J.; Simonovic, S.P. Probabilistic Multiple Hazard Resilience Model of an Interdependent Infrastructure System. Risk Anal. 2019, 39, 1843-1863. [CrossRef]

Defining Resilience Using Probabilistic Event Trees. H.-N L Teodorescu, 10.1007/s10669-015-9550-935Environ. Syst. Decis.Teodorescu, H.-N.L. Defining Resilience Using Probabilistic Event Trees. Environ. Syst. Decis. 2015, 35, 279-290. [CrossRef]

Building an Integrated Metric for Quantifying the Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems. C Nan, G Sansavini, W Kröger, C G Panayiotou, G Ellinas, E Kyriakides, Critical Information Infrastructures Security. Cham, SwitzerlandSpringer International Publishing8985ISBN 978-3-319-31663-5Nan, C.; Sansavini, G.; Kröger, W. Building an Integrated Metric for Quantifying the Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems. In Critical Information Infrastructures Security; Panayiotou, C.G., Ellinas, G., Kyriakides, E., Polycarpou, M.M., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland; Volume 8985, pp. 159-171. 2016; ISBN 978-3-319-31663-5.

Option-Based Design for Resilient Manufacturing Systems. X Jin, X Gu, 10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.07.80949IFAC-PapersOnLineJin, X.; Gu, X. Option-Based Design for Resilient Manufacturing Systems. IFAC-PapersOnLine 2016, 49, 1602-1607. [CrossRef]

A Quantitative Method for Assessing Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructures. C Nan, G Sansavini, 10.1016/j.ress.2016.08.013Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 157Nan, C.; Sansavini, G. A Quantitative Method for Assessing Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructures. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2017, 157, 35-53. [CrossRef]

Hybrid Hidden Markov Models for Resilience Metrics in a Dynamic Infrastructure System. S Zhao, X Liu, Y Zhuo, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.02.009Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 164Zhao, S.; Liu, X.; Zhuo, Y. Hybrid Hidden Markov Models for Resilience Metrics in a Dynamic Infrastructure System. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2017, 164, 84-97. [CrossRef]

Modeling Network Resilience of Rail Transit under Operational Incidents. Q.-C Lu, 10.1016/j.tra.2018.08.015Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 117Lu, Q.-C. Modeling Network Resilience of Rail Transit under Operational Incidents. Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2018, 117, 227-237. [CrossRef]

On the Probabilistic Characterization of Robustness and Resilience. Procedia Eng. M H Faber, J Qin, S Miraglia, S Thöns, 10.1016/j.proeng.2017.07.151198Faber, M.H.; Qin, J.; Miraglia, S.; Thöns, S. On the Probabilistic Characterization of Robustness and Resilience. Procedia Eng. 2017, 198, 1070-1083. [CrossRef]

Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Elements and Its Main Factors. D Rehak, P Senovsky, S Slivkova, 10.3390/systems6020021Systems. 6Rehak, D.; Senovsky, P.; Slivkova, S. Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Elements and Its Main Factors. Systems 2018, 6, 21. [CrossRef]

Street Network Resilience Put to the Test: The Dramatic Crash of Genoa and Bologna Bridges. V Cutini, C Pezzica, 10.3390/su12114706Sustainability 2020, 12, 4706. [CrossRefCutini, V.; Pezzica, C. Street Network Resilience Put to the Test: The Dramatic Crash of Genoa and Bologna Bridges. Sustainability 2020, 12, 4706. [CrossRef]

A Three-Stage Resilience Analysis Framework for Urban Infrastructure Systems. M Ouyang, L Dueñas-Osorio, X Min, 10.1016/j.strusafe.2011.12.004Struct. Saf. Ouyang, M.; Dueñas-Osorio, L.; Min, X. A Three-Stage Resilience Analysis Framework for Urban Infrastructure Systems. Struct. Saf. 2012, 36-37, 23-31. [CrossRef]

Multi-Dimensional Hurricane Resilience Assessment of Electric Power Systems. M Ouyang, L Dueñas-Osorio, 10.1016/j.strusafe.2014.01.001Struct. Saf. 48Ouyang, M.; Dueñas-Osorio, L. Multi-Dimensional Hurricane Resilience Assessment of Electric Power Systems. Struct. Saf. 2014, 48, 15-24. [CrossRef]

A Mathematical Framework to Optimize Critical Infrastructure Resilience against Intentional Attacks. M Ouyang, Y Fang, 10.1111/mice.12252Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 2017Ouyang, M.; Fang, Y. A Mathematical Framework to Optimize Critical Infrastructure Resilience against Intentional Attacks. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 2017, 1-21. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems: With a Focus on Joint Restoration Modeling and Analysis. M Ouyang, Z Wang, 10.1016/j.ress.2015.03.011Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 141Ouyang, M.; Wang, Z. Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems: With a Focus on Joint Restoration Modeling and Analysis. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2015, 141, 74-82. [CrossRef]

Cyber Resilience Framework for Industrial Control Systems: Concepts, Metrics, and Insights. M A Haque, G K De Teyou, S Shetty, B Krishnappa, Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI)Miami, FL, USA, 9Haque, M.A.; De Teyou, G.K.; Shetty, S.; Krishnappa, B. Cyber Resilience Framework for Industrial Control Systems: Concepts, Metrics, and Insights. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), Miami, FL, USA, 9-11 November 2018; pp. 25-30.

A Boolean Networks Approach to Modeling and Resilience Analysis of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures: A Boolean Networks Approach to Critical Infrastructure Modeling. L Galbusera, G Giannopoulos, S Argyroudis, K Kakderi, 10.1111/mice.12371Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 33Galbusera, L.; Giannopoulos, G.; Argyroudis, S.; Kakderi, K. A Boolean Networks Approach to Modeling and Resilience Analysis of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures: A Boolean Networks Approach to Critical Infrastructure Modeling. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 2018, 33, 1041-1055. [CrossRef]

Systems Resilience for Multihazard Environments: Definition, Metrics, and Valuation for Decision Making. B M Ayyub, 10.1111/risa.12093Risk Anal. 34PubMedAyyub, B.M. Systems Resilience for Multihazard Environments: Definition, Metrics, and Valuation for Decision Making. Risk Anal 2014, 34, 340-355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Availability-Based Engineering Resilience Metric and Its Corresponding Evaluation Methodology. B Cai, M Xie, Y Liu, Y Liu, Q Feng, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.12.021Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 172Cai, B.; Xie, M.; Liu, Y.; Liu, Y.; Feng, Q. Availability-Based Engineering Resilience Metric and Its Corresponding Evaluation Methodology. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018, 172, 216-224. [CrossRef]

Characteristics of Arctic Infrastructure Resilience: Application of Expert Judgement. B Rød, A Barabadi, O Gudmestad, International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers. Rød, B.; Barabadi, A.; Gudmestad, O. Characteristics of Arctic Infrastructure Resilience: Application of Expert Judgement; International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers: Rhodes, Greece, 2016.

Service Oriented Resilience Strategy for Cloud Data Center. Y Liu, X Li, L Xiao, Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C). the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C)Lisbon, PortugalLiu, Y.; Li, X.; Xiao, L. Service Oriented Resilience Strategy for Cloud Data Center. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C), Lisbon, Portugal, 16-20 July 2018; pp. 269-274.

Integration of Stress Testing with Graph Theory to Assess the Resilience of Urban Road Networks under Seismic Hazards. N Y Aydin, H S Duzgun, F Wenzel, H R Heinimann, 10.1007/s11069-017-3112-zNat. 91Aydin, N.Y.; Duzgun, H.S.; Wenzel, F.; Heinimann, H.R. Integration of Stress Testing with Graph Theory to Assess the Resilience of Urban Road Networks under Seismic Hazards. Nat. Hazards 2018, 91, 37-68. [CrossRef]

Physics-Based Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Civil Infrastructure Systems with Condition-Varying Components: A Case with Stormwater Drainage System and Road Transport System. Y Yang, S T Ng, S Zhou, F J Xu, H Li, 10.1016/j.scs.2019.101886Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020, 54, 101886. [CrossRefYang, Y.; Ng, S.T.; Zhou, S.; Xu, F.J.; Li, H. Physics-Based Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Civil Infrastructure Systems with Condition-Varying Components: A Case with Stormwater Drainage System and Road Transport System. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020, 54, 101886. [CrossRef]

Resilience for Whom? The General Public's Tolerance Levels as CI Resilience Criteria. L Petersen, E Lundin, L Fallou, J Sjöström, D Lange, R Teixeira, A Bonavita, 10.1016/j.ijcip.2020.100340Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2020, 28, 100340. [CrossRefPetersen, L.; Lundin, E.; Fallou, L.; Sjöström, J.; Lange, D.; Teixeira, R.; Bonavita, A. Resilience for Whom? The General Public's Tolerance Levels as CI Resilience Criteria. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2020, 28, 100340. [CrossRef]

Enabling Methodologies for Predictive Power System Resilience Analysis in the Presence of Extreme Wind Gusts. E Brugnetti, G Coletta, F De Caro, A Vaccaro, D Villacci, 10.3390/en1313350113Brugnetti, E.; Coletta, G.; De Caro, F.; Vaccaro, A.; Villacci, D. Enabling Methodologies for Predictive Power System Resilience Analysis in the Presence of Extreme Wind Gusts. Energies 2020, 13, 3501. [CrossRef]

Miller-Hooks, E. Evaluating and Optimizing Resilience of Airport Pavement Networks. R Faturechi, E Levenberg, Comput. Oper. Res. 43Faturechi, R.; Levenberg, E.; Miller-Hooks, E. Evaluating and Optimizing Resilience of Airport Pavement Networks. Comput. Oper. Res. 2014, 43, 335-348.

Quantifying the Resilience of an Urban Traffic-Electric Power Coupled System. H Fotouhi, S Moryadee, E Miller-Hooks, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.01.026Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 163Fotouhi, H.; Moryadee, S.; Miller-Hooks, E. Quantifying the Resilience of an Urban Traffic-Electric Power Coupled System. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2017, 163, 79-94. [CrossRef]

Post-Disaster Infrastructure Recovery: Prediction of Recovery Rate Using Historical Data. A Barabadi, Y Z Ayele, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.08.018Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 169Barabadi, A.; Ayele, Y.Z. Post-Disaster Infrastructure Recovery: Prediction of Recovery Rate Using Historical Data. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018, 169, 209-223. [CrossRef]

Design and Assessment Methodology for System Resilience Metrics. M Najarian, G J Lim, 10.1111/risa.13274Risk Anal. 39Najarian, M.; Lim, G.J. Design and Assessment Methodology for System Resilience Metrics. Risk Anal. 2019, 39, 1885-1898. [CrossRef]

A New Measure of Resilience: An Application to the London Underground. M D&apos;lima, F Medda, 10.1016/j.tra.2015.05.017Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 81D'Lima, M.; Medda, F. A New Measure of Resilience: An Application to the London Underground. Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2015, 81, 35-46. [CrossRef]

Resilience Modeling of Engineering Systems Using Dynamic Object-Oriented Bayesian Network Approach. M Abimbola, F Khan, 10.1016/j.cie.2019.02.022Comput. Ind. Eng. 130Abimbola, M.; Khan, F. Resilience Modeling of Engineering Systems Using Dynamic Object-Oriented Bayesian Network Approach. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2019, 130, 108-118. [CrossRef]

Stochastic Measures of Network Resilience: Applications to Waterway Commodity Flows: Stochastic Measures of Network Resilience. H Baroud, J E Ramirez-Marquez, K Barker, C M Rocco, 10.1111/risa.12175Risk Anal. 34PubMedBaroud, H.; Ramirez-Marquez, J.E.; Barker, K.; Rocco, C.M. Stochastic Measures of Network Resilience: Applications to Waterway Commodity Flows: Stochastic Measures of Network Resilience. Risk Anal. 2014, 34, 1317-1335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

A New Model for Describing the Urban Resilience Considering Adaptability, Resistance and Recovery. C Chen, L Xu, D Zhao, T Xu, P Lei, 10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104756Saf. Sci. 2020Chen, C.; Xu, L.; Zhao, D.; Xu, T.; Lei, P. A New Model for Describing the Urban Resilience Considering Adaptability, Resistance and Recovery. Saf. Sci. 2020, 128, 104756. [CrossRef]

Resilience-Based Recovery Assessments of Networked Infrastructure Systems under Localized Attacks. Infrastructures 2019, 4, 11. T Afrin, N Yodo, 10.3390/infrastructures4010011Afrin, T.; Yodo, N. Resilience-Based Recovery Assessments of Networked Infrastructure Systems under Localized Attacks. Infrastructures 2019, 4, 11. [CrossRef]

Characterizing Multi-Event Disaster Resilience. C W Zobel, L Khansa, 10.1016/j.cor.2011.09.024Comput. Oper. Res. 42Zobel, C.W.; Khansa, L. Characterizing Multi-Event Disaster Resilience. Comput. Oper. Res. 2014, 42, 83-94. [CrossRef]

A Bayesian Kernel Approach to Modeling Resilience-Based Network Component Importance. H Baroud, K Barker, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.09.022Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 170Baroud, H.; Barker, K. A Bayesian Kernel Approach to Modeling Resilience-Based Network Component Importance. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018, 170, 10-19. [CrossRef]

Topological Attributes of Network Resilience: A Study in Water Distribution Systems. F Meng, G Fu, R Farmani, C Sweetapple, D Butler, 10.1016/j.watres.2018.06.048Water Res. 143Meng, F.; Fu, G.; Farmani, R.; Sweetapple, C.; Butler, D. Topological Attributes of Network Resilience: A Study in Water Distribution Systems. Water Res. 2018, 143, 376-386. [CrossRef]

Probabilistic Framework to Evaluate the Resilience of Engineering Systems Using Bayesian and Dynamic Bayesian Networks. O Kammouh, P Gardoni, G P Cimellaro, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.106813Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Kammouh, O.; Gardoni, P.; Cimellaro, G.P. Probabilistic Framework to Evaluate the Resilience of Engineering Systems Using Bayesian and Dynamic Bayesian Networks. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 198, 106813. [CrossRef]

Analysis of a Remote Offshore Oil and Gas Facility for a Potential Hydrocarbon Release. A Sarwar, F Khan, M Abimbola, L James, 10.1111/risa.12974Risk Anal. 38PubMedSarwar, A.; Khan, F.; Abimbola, M.; James, L. Resilience Analysis of a Remote Offshore Oil and Gas Facility for a Potential Hydrocarbon Release. Risk Anal. 2018, 38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

A Bayesian Network Based Approach for Modeling and Assessing Resilience: A Case Study of a Full Service Deep Water Port. N U I Hossain, F Nur, S Hosseini, R Jaradat, M Marufuzzaman, S M Puryear, 10.1016/j.ress.2019.04.037Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 189Hossain, N.U.I.; Nur, F.; Hosseini, S.; Jaradat, R.; Marufuzzaman, M.; Puryear, S.M. A Bayesian Network Based Approach for Modeling and Assessing Resilience: A Case Study of a Full Service Deep Water Port. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2019, 189, 378-396. [CrossRef]

A Simple yet Robust Resilience Assessment Metrics. R Yarveisy, C Gao, F Khan, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.106810Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Yarveisy, R.; Gao, C.; Khan, F. A Simple yet Robust Resilience Assessment Metrics. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 197, 106810. [CrossRef]

Dynamic Resilience Assessment for Process Units Operating in Arctic Environments. A Zinetullina, M Yang, N Khakzad, B Golman, 10.1007/s42797-019-00008-3Saf. Extreme Environ. 2020Zinetullina, A.; Yang, M.; Khakzad, N.; Golman, B. Dynamic Resilience Assessment for Process Units Operating in Arctic Environments. Saf. Extreme Environ. 2020, 2, 113-125. [CrossRef]

Assessment of Infrastructure Resilience in the 2015 Gorkha. J Zhu, B Manandhar, J Truong, N E Ganapati, N Pradhananga, R A Davidson, A Mostafavi, 10.1193/121116eqs231m33NepalZhu, J.; Manandhar, B.; Truong, J.; Ganapati, N.E.; Pradhananga, N.; Davidson, R.A.; Mostafavi, A. Assessment of Infrastructure Resilience in the 2015 Gorkha, Nepal, Earthquake. Earthq. Spectra 2017, 33, 147-165. [CrossRef]

A Framework for Modeling and Assessing System Resilience Using a Bayesian Network: A Case Study of an Interdependent Electrical Infrastructure System. N U I Hossain, R Jaradat, S Hosseini, M Marufuzzaman, R K Buchanan, 10.1016/j.ijcip.2019.02.002Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 25Hossain, N.U.I.; Jaradat, R.; Hosseini, S.; Marufuzzaman, M.; Buchanan, R.K. A Framework for Modeling and Assessing System Resilience Using a Bayesian Network: A Case Study of an Interdependent Electrical Infrastructure System. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2019, 25, 62-83. [CrossRef]

Decision Making under Uncertainty for Design of Resilient Engineered Systems. C A Mackenzie, C Hu, 10.1016/j.ress.2018.05.020Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. MacKenzie, C.A.; Hu, C. Decision Making under Uncertainty for Design of Resilient Engineered Systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018. [CrossRef]

Importance Measures for Inland Waterway Network Resilience. H Baroud, K Barker, J E Ramirez-Marquez, S C M Rocco, 10.1016/j.tre.2013.11.010Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 62Baroud, H.; Barker, K.; Ramirez-Marquez, J.E.; Rocco, S.C.M. Importance Measures for Inland Waterway Network Resilience. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2014, 62, 55-67. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment Based on Time-Dependent System Reliability Analysis. Z Hu, S Mahadevan, 10.1115/1.4034109J. Mech. Des. 138Hu, Z.; Mahadevan, S. Resilience Assessment Based on Time-Dependent System Reliability Analysis. J. Mech. Des. 2016, 138. [CrossRef]

Transportation Security and the Role of Resilience: A Foundation for Operational Metrics. A Cox, F Prager, A Rose, 10.1016/j.tranpol.2010.09.004Transp. Policy. 18Cox, A.; Prager, F.; Rose, A. Transportation Security and the Role of Resilience: A Foundation for Operational Metrics. Transp. Policy 2011, 18, 307-317. [CrossRef]

Assessment of Critical Infrastructure Resilience to Flooding Using a. H Murdock, K De Bruijn, B Gersonius, 10.3390/su10103470Response Curve Approach. 10Murdock, H.; de Bruijn, K.; Gersonius, B. Assessment of Critical Infrastructure Resilience to Flooding Using a Response Curve Approach. Sustainability 2018, 10, 3470. [CrossRef]

Resilience Framework for Critical Infrastructures: An Empirical Study in a Nuclear Plant. L Labaka, J Hernantes, J M Sarriegi, 10.1016/j.ress.2015.03.009Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 141Labaka, L.; Hernantes, J.; Sarriegi, J.M. Resilience Framework for Critical Infrastructures: An Empirical Study in a Nuclear Plant. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2015, 141, 92-105. [CrossRef]

A Model to Quantify the Resilience of Mass Railway Transportation Systems. K Adjetey-Bahun, B Birregah, E Châtelet, J.-L Planchet, 10.1016/j.ress.2016.03.015Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 153Adjetey-Bahun, K.; Birregah, B.; Châtelet, E.; Planchet, J.-L. A Model to Quantify the Resilience of Mass Railway Transportation Systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2016, 153, 1-14. [CrossRef]

Metrics and Quantitative Framework for Assessing Microgrid Resilience against Windstorms. M H Amirioun, F Aminifar, H Lesani, M Shahidehpour, 10.1016/j.ijepes.2018.07.025Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 104Amirioun, M.H.; Aminifar, F.; Lesani, H.; Shahidehpour, M. Metrics and Quantitative Framework for Assessing Microgrid Resilience against Windstorms. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 2019, 104, 716-723. [CrossRef]

An Integrated Dynamical Modeling Perspective for Infrastructure Resilience. J.-D Mathias, S Clark, N Onat, T Seager, 10.3390/infrastructures30200113Mathias, J.-D.; Clark, S.; Onat, N.; Seager, T. An Integrated Dynamical Modeling Perspective for Infrastructure Resilience. Infrastructures 2018, 3, 11. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems: A Case Study Based on Different Response Strategies. J Kong, S P Simonovic, C Zhang, 10.3390/su1123655211Kong, J.; Simonovic, S.P.; Zhang, C. Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems: A Case Study Based on Different Response Strategies. Sustainability 2019, 11, 6552. [CrossRef]

Network Topology and Resilience Analysis of South Korean Power Grid. D H Kim, D A Eisenberg, Y H Chun, J Park, 10.1016/j.physa.2016.08.002Phys. A Stat. Mech. Appl. 465Kim, D.H.; Eisenberg, D.A.; Chun, Y.H.; Park, J. Network Topology and Resilience Analysis of South Korean Power Grid. Phys. A Stat. Mech. Appl. 2017, 465, 13-24. [CrossRef]

Airport Ground Access Reliability and Resilience of Transit Networks: A Case Study. C Malandri, L Mantecchini, M N Postorino, 10.1016/j.trpro.2017.12.022Transp. Res. Procedia. 27Malandri, C.; Mantecchini, L.; Postorino, M.N. Airport Ground Access Reliability and Resilience of Transit Networks: A Case Study. Transp. Res. Procedia 2017, 27, 1129-1136. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment of Self-Healing Distribution Systems Under Extreme Weather Event. S Ma, N Carrington, A Arif, Z Wang, Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM). the 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM)Atlanta, GA, USAMa, S.; Carrington, N.; Arif, A.; Wang, Z. Resilience Assessment of Self-Healing Distribution Systems Under Extreme Weather Event. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), Atlanta, GA, USA, 4-8 August 2019; pp. 1-5.

A Resilience Perspective on Water Transport Systems: The Case of Eastern Star. Y Wang, E Zio, X Wei, D Zhang, B Wu, 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2018.10.019Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 33Wang, Y.; Zio, E.; Wei, X.; Zhang, D.; Wu, B. A Resilience Perspective on Water Transport Systems: The Case of Eastern Star. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 2019, 33, 343-354. [CrossRef]

Resilience Analysis of Soft Infrastructure Systems. M Omer, A Mostashari, U Lindemann, 10.1016/j.procs.2014.03.104Procedia Comput. Sci. 28Omer, M.; Mostashari, A.; Lindemann, U. Resilience Analysis of Soft Infrastructure Systems. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2014, 28, 873-882. [CrossRef]

Operationalising Critical Infrastructure Resilience, From Assessment to Management. B Rød, Tromsø, NorwayUiT The Arctic University of NorwayPh.D. ThesisRød, B. Operationalising Critical Infrastructure Resilience, From Assessment to Management. Ph.D. Thesis, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2020.

Identifying Resilient-Important Elements in Interdependent Critical Infrastructures by Sensitivity Analysis. X Liu, E Ferrario, E Zio, 10.1016/j.ress.2019.04.017Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Liu, X.; Ferrario, E.; Zio, E. Identifying Resilient-Important Elements in Interdependent Critical Infrastructures by Sensitivity Analysis. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2019. [CrossRef]

Quantifying the System-Level Resilience of Thermal Power Generation to Extreme Temperatures and Water Scarcity. Y Zhou, M Panteli, B Wang, P Mancarella, 10.1109/JSYST.2019.2938332IEEE Syst. J. 14Zhou, Y.; Panteli, M.; Wang, B.; Mancarella, P. Quantifying the System-Level Resilience of Thermal Power Generation to Extreme Temperatures and Water Scarcity. IEEE Syst. J. 2020, 14, 749-759. [CrossRef]

A Dynamic Bayesian Network-Based Approach to Resilience Assessment of Engineered Systems. Q Tong, M Yang, A Zinetullina, 10.1016/j.jlp.2020.10415265J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 2020Tong, Q.; Yang, M.; Zinetullina, A. A Dynamic Bayesian Network-Based Approach to Resilience Assessment of Engineered Systems. J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 2020, 65, 104152. [CrossRef]

Time-Dependent Resilience Analysis of a Road Network in an Extreme Environment. C Li, Q Fang, L Ding, Y K Cho, K Chen, 10.1016/j.trd.2020.102395Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 85Li, C.; Fang, Q.; Ding, L.; Cho, Y.K.; Chen, K. Time-Dependent Resilience Analysis of a Road Network in an Extreme Environment. Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 2020, 85, 102395. [CrossRef]

Resilience-Based Network Design under Uncertainty. X Zhang, S Mahadevan, S Sankararaman, K Goebel, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.09.009Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 169Zhang, X.; Mahadevan, S.; Sankararaman, S.; Goebel, K. Resilience-Based Network Design under Uncertainty. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018, 169, 364-379. [CrossRef]

Fuzzy Architecture Assessment for Critical Infrastructure Resilience. G Muller, 10.1016/j.procs.2012.09.086Procedia Comput. Sci. 12Muller, G. Fuzzy Architecture Assessment for Critical Infrastructure Resilience. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2012, 12, 367-372. [CrossRef]

Allocating Resources to Enhance Resilience, with Application to Superstorm Sandy and an Electric Utility: Allocating Resources to Enhance Resilience. C A Mackenzie, C W Zobel, 10.1111/risa.12479Risk Anal. 36MacKenzie, C.A.; Zobel, C.W. Allocating Resources to Enhance Resilience, with Application to Superstorm Sandy and an Electric Utility: Allocating Resources to Enhance Resilience. Risk Anal. 2016, 36, 847-862. [CrossRef]

Evaluation of Transportation System Resilience in the Presence of Connected and Automated Vehicles. S Ahmed, K Dey, R Fries, 10.1177/0361198119848702Transp. Res. Rec. Ahmed, S.; Dey, K.; Fries, R. Evaluation of Transportation System Resilience in the Presence of Connected and Automated Vehicles. Transp. Res. Rec. 2019, 2673, 562-574. [CrossRef]

Representing Perceived Tradeoffs in Defining Disaster Resilience. C W Zobel, 10.1016/j.dss.2010.10.001Decis. Support Syst. 50Zobel, C.W. Representing Perceived Tradeoffs in Defining Disaster Resilience. Decis. Support Syst. 2011, 50, 394-403. [CrossRef]

Measuring the Performance of Airport Resilience to Severe Weather Events. L Zhou, Z Chen, 10.1016/j.trd.2020.102362Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 83Zhou, L.; Chen, Z. Measuring the Performance of Airport Resilience to Severe Weather Events. Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 2020, 83, 102362. [CrossRef]

Seismic Resilience of a Hospital System. G P Cimellaro, A Reinhorn, M Bruneau, 10.1080/15732470802663847Struct. Infrastruct. Eng. 6Cimellaro, G.P.; Reinhorn, A.; Bruneau, M. Seismic Resilience of a Hospital System. Struct. Infrastruct. Eng. 2010, 6, 127-177. [CrossRef]

Complex Approach to Assessing Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Elements. D Rehak, P Senovsky, M Hromada, T Lovecek, 10.1016/j.ijcip.2019.03.003Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 25Rehak, D.; Senovsky, P.; Hromada, M.; Lovecek, T. Complex Approach to Assessing Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Elements. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2019, 25, 125-138. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment of Safety System at Subway Construction Sites Applying Analytic Network Process and Extension Cloud Models. Q Guo, S Amin, Q Hao, O Haas, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.106956Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Guo, Q.; Amin, S.; Hao, Q.; Haas, O. Resilience Assessment of Safety System at Subway Construction Sites Applying Analytic Network Process and Extension Cloud Models. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 201, 106956. [CrossRef]

. K Storesund, K N Reitan, J Sjöström, B Rød, F Guay, R Almeida, M Theocharidou, Novel Methodologies for Analysing Critical Infrastructure Resilience. Storesund, K.; Reitan, K.N.; Sjöström, J.; Rød, B.; Guay, F.; Almeida, R.; Theocharidou, M. Novel Methodologies for Analysing Critical Infrastructure Resilience;

. Taylor &amp; Francis Group, Abingdon, UKTaylor & Francis Group: Abingdon, UK, 2018.

A Conceptual Framework for Assessment of Urban Energy Resilience. A Sharifi, Y Yamagata, 10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.586Energy Procedia. 75Sharifi, A.; Yamagata, Y. A Conceptual Framework for Assessment of Urban Energy Resilience. Energy Procedia 2015, 75, 2904-2909. [CrossRef]

Improving Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Systems Postdisaster: Recovery and Mitigation. S V Croope, S Mcneil, 10.3141/2234-01Transp. Res. Rec. 2234Croope, S.V.; McNeil, S. Improving Resilience of Critical Infrastructure Systems Postdisaster: Recovery and Mitigation. Transp. Res. Rec. 2011, 2234, 3-13. [CrossRef]

Generic Metrics and Quantitative Approaches for System Resilience as a Function of Time. D Henry, J Ramirez-Marquez, 10.1016/j.ress.2011.09.002Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 99Henry, D.; Emmanuel Ramirez-Marquez, J. Generic Metrics and Quantitative Approaches for System Resilience as a Function of Time. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2012, 99, 114-122. [CrossRef]

Challenges in Building Resilience Engineering (RE) and Adaptive Capacity: A Field Study in a Chemical Plant. G H A Shirali, M Motamedzade, I Mohammadfam, V Ebrahimipour, A Moghimbeigi, 10.1016/j.psep.2011.08.003Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 90Shirali, G.H.A.; Motamedzade, M.; Mohammadfam, I.; Ebrahimipour, V.; Moghimbeigi, A. Challenges in Building Resilience Engineering (RE) and Adaptive Capacity: A Field Study in a Chemical Plant. Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2012, 90, 83-90. [CrossRef]

Resilience of Transport Systems under Disaster: Simulation-Based Analysis of 2011 Tsunami in Japan. P Trucco, N Minato, N Careri, Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management. the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering ManagementBangkok, ThailandTrucco, P.; Minato, N.; Careri, N. Resilience of Transport Systems under Disaster: Simulation-Based Analysis of 2011 Tsunami in Japan. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, Bangkok, Thailand, 10-13 December 2013; pp. 487-491.

Stochastic Measures of Resilience and Their Application to Container Terminals. R Pant, K Barker, J E Ramirez-Marquez, C M Rocco, 10.1016/j.cie.2014.01.017Comput. Ind. Eng. 70Pant, R.; Barker, K.; Ramirez-Marquez, J.E.; Rocco, C.M. Stochastic Measures of Resilience and Their Application to Container Terminals. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2014, 70, 183-194. [CrossRef]

Resilience of Coastal Transportation Networks Faced with Extreme Climatic Events. A C Testa, M N Furtado, A Alipour, 10.3141/2532-04Transp. Res. Rec. Testa, A.C.; Furtado, M.N.; Alipour, A. Resilience of Coastal Transportation Networks Faced with Extreme Climatic Events. Transp. Res. Rec. 2015, 2532, 29-36. [CrossRef]

Assessing the Role of Network Topology in Transportation Network Resilience. X Zhang, E Miller-Hooks, K Denny, 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2015.05.006J. Transp. Geogr. 46Zhang, X.; Miller-Hooks, E.; Denny, K. Assessing the Role of Network Topology in Transportation Network Resilience. J. Transp. Geogr. 2015, 46, 35-45. [CrossRef]

Risk Management Is Not Enough: A Conceptual Model for Resilience and Adaptation-Based Vulnerability Assessments. N R Sikula, J W Mancillas, I Linkov, J A Mcdonagh, 10.1007/s10669-015-9552-7Environ. Syst. Decis. 35Sikula, N.R.; Mancillas, J.W.; Linkov, I.; McDonagh, J.A. Risk Management Is Not Enough: A Conceptual Model for Resilience and Adaptation-Based Vulnerability Assessments. Environ. Syst. Decis. 2015, 35, 219-228. [CrossRef]

Improving Tunnel Resilience against Fires: A New Methodology Based on Temperature Monitoring. P Rinaudo, I Paya-Zaforteza, P A Calderón, 10.1016/j.tust.2015.11.021Tunn. Undergr. Space Technol. 52Rinaudo, P.; Paya-Zaforteza, I.; Calderón, P.A. Improving Tunnel Resilience against Fires: A New Methodology Based on Temperature Monitoring. Tunn. Undergr. Space Technol. 2016, 52, 71-84. [CrossRef]

Multi-Phase Assessment and Adaptation of Power Systems Resilience to Natural Hazards. S Espinoza, M Panteli, P Mancarella, H Rudnick, 10.1016/j.epsr.2016.03.019Electr. Power Syst. Res. 136Espinoza, S.; Panteli, M.; Mancarella, P.; Rudnick, H. Multi-Phase Assessment and Adaptation of Power Systems Resilience to Natural Hazards. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2016, 136, 352-361. [CrossRef]

Multidimensional Approach to Complex System Resilience Analysis. D Gama Dessavre, J E Ramirez-Marquez, K Barker, 10.1016/j.ress.2015.12.009Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 149Gama Dessavre, D.; Ramirez-Marquez, J.E.; Barker, K. Multidimensional Approach to Complex System Resilience Analysis. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2016, 149, 34-43. [CrossRef]

Resilience Management Problem in ATM Systems as a Shortest Path Problem. E Filippone, F Gargiulo, A Errico, V Di Vito, D Pascarella, 10.1016/j.jairtraman.2016.03.014J. Air Transp. Manag. 56Filippone, E.; Gargiulo, F.; Errico, A.; Di Vito, V.; Pascarella, D. Resilience Management Problem in ATM Systems as a Shortest Path Problem. J. Air Transp. Manag. 2016, 56, 57-65. [CrossRef]

Resilience of Critical Infrastructures: Probabilistic Case Study of a District Heating Pipeline Network in Municipality of Latvia. M Feofilovs, F Romagnoli, 10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.007Energy Procedia. 128Feofilovs, M.; Romagnoli, F. Resilience of Critical Infrastructures: Probabilistic Case Study of a District Heating Pipeline Network in Municipality of Latvia. Energy Procedia 2017, 128, 17-23. [CrossRef]

Resilience Modeling and Quantification for Engineered Systems Using Bayesian Networks. N Yodo, P Wang, 10.1115/1.4032399J. Mech. Des. 138Yodo, N.; Wang, P. Resilience Modeling and Quantification for Engineered Systems Using Bayesian Networks. J. Mech. Des. 2016, 138, 1-13. [CrossRef]

Resilience: Theory and Metrics -A Metal Structure as Demonstrator. A Mebarki, 10.1016/j.engstruct.2017.02.026138Eng. Struct. 2017Mebarki, A. Resilience: Theory and Metrics -A Metal Structure as Demonstrator. Eng. Struct. 2017, 138, 425-433. [CrossRef]

Power Systems Resilience Assessment: Hardening and Smart Operational Enhancement Strategies. M Panteli, D N Trakas, P Mancarella, N D Hatziargyriou, 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2691357Proc. IEEE 2017. IEEE 2017105Panteli, M.; Trakas, D.N.; Mancarella, P.; Hatziargyriou, N.D. Power Systems Resilience Assessment: Hardening and Smart Operational Enhancement Strategies. Proc. IEEE 2017, 105, 1202-1213. [CrossRef]

Risk and Resilience Analysis for Highway Assets. E K Herrera, A Flannery, M Krimmer, 10.3141/2604-01Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board. 2017Herrera, E.K.; Flannery, A.; Krimmer, M. Risk and Resilience Analysis for Highway Assets. Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board 2017, 1-8. [CrossRef]

A Framework for the Quantitative Assessment of Performance-Based System Resilience. H T Tran, M Balchanos, J C Domerçant, D N Mavris, 10.1016/j.ress.2016.10.014Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 158Tran, H.T.; Balchanos, M.; Domerçant, J.C.; Mavris, D.N. A Framework for the Quantitative Assessment of Performance-Based System Resilience. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2017, 158, 73-84. [CrossRef]

Developing a Model for Measuring the Resilience of a Port-Hinterland Container Transportation Network. H Chen, K Cullinane, N Liu, 10.1016/j.tre.2016.10.008Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 97Chen, H.; Cullinane, K.; Liu, N. Developing a Model for Measuring the Resilience of a Port-Hinterland Container Transportation Network. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2017, 97, 282-301. [CrossRef]

Safety of Atmospheric Industrial Tanks: Fragility, Resilience and Recovery Functions. A Mebarki, 10.1016/j.jlp.2017.06.00749J. Loss Prev. Process IndMebarki, A. Safety of Atmospheric Industrial Tanks: Fragility, Resilience and Recovery Functions. J. Loss Prev. Process Ind. 2017, 49, 590-602. [CrossRef]

A Control-Guided Failure Restoration Framework for the Design of Resilient Engineering Systems. N Yodo, P Wang, 10.1016/j.ress.2018.05.018Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 178Yodo, N.; Wang, P. A Control-Guided Failure Restoration Framework for the Design of Resilient Engineering Systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018, 178, 179-190. [CrossRef]

Critical Infrastructure Resilience Index. C Pursiainen, B Rød, G Baker, D Honfi, D Lange, Proceedings of the 26th European Safety and Reliability Conference. the 26th European Safety and Reliability ConferenceGlasgow, UK; Glasgow, ScotlandCRC PressPursiainen, C.; Rød, B.; Baker, G.; Honfi, D.; Lange, D. Critical Infrastructure Resilience Index. In Proceedings of the 26th European Safety and Reliability Conference, Glasgow, UK, 26 September 2016; CRC Press: Glasgow, Scotland, 2017; pp. 2183-2190.

Sitterle, V. Resilience in Engineered Resilient Systems. R Buchanan, S Goerger, C Rinaudo, G Parnell, A Ross, 10.1177/1548512918777901J. Def. Model. Simul. Appl. Methodol. Technol. Buchanan, R.; Goerger, S.; Rinaudo, C.; Parnell, G.; Ross, A.; Sitterle, V. Resilience in Engineered Resilient Systems. J. Def. Model. Simul. Appl. Methodol. Technol. 2018, 1-12. [CrossRef]

The Highway Resilience and Vulnerability in Taiwan. C.-H Hsieh, C.-M Feng, 10.1016/j.tranpol.2018.08.010Transp. Policy. Hsieh, C.-H.; Feng, C.-M. The Highway Resilience and Vulnerability in Taiwan. Transp. Policy 2018. [CrossRef]

Sustainability of Integrated Energy Systems: A Performance-Based Resilience Assessment Methodology. S Moslehi, T A Reddy, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.06.075Appl. Energy. 228Moslehi, S.; Reddy, T.A. Sustainability of Integrated Energy Systems: A Performance-Based Resilience Assessment Methodology. Appl. Energy 2018, 228, 487-498. [CrossRef]

Quantifying the Resilience of Community Structures in Networks. J E Ramirez-Marquez, C M Rocco, K Barker, J Moronta, 10.1016/j.ress.2017.09.019Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 169Ramirez-Marquez, J.E.; Rocco, C.M.; Barker, K.; Moronta, J. Quantifying the Resilience of Community Structures in Networks. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2018, 169, 466-474. [CrossRef]

Risk-Based Resilience Assessment Model Focusing on Urban Infrastructure System Restoration. C S Ongkowijoyo, H Doloi, 10.1016/j.proeng.2018.01.144Procedia Eng. 212Ongkowijoyo, C.S.; Doloi, H. Risk-Based Resilience Assessment Model Focusing on Urban Infrastructure System Restoration. Procedia Eng. 2018, 212, 1115-1122. [CrossRef]

Assessment of the Impact of Interdependencies on the Resilience of Networked Critical Infrastructure Systems. Q Mao, N Li, 10.1007/s11069-018-3302-3Nat. 93Mao, Q.; Li, N. Assessment of the Impact of Interdependencies on the Resilience of Networked Critical Infrastructure Systems. Nat. Hazards 2018, 93, 315-337. [CrossRef]

A Power-Flow Emulator Approach for Resilience Assessment of Repairable Power Grids Subject to Weather-Induced Failures and Data Deficiency. R Rocchetta, E Zio, E Patelli, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.10.126Appl. Energy. 210Rocchetta, R.; Zio, E.; Patelli, E. A Power-Flow Emulator Approach for Resilience Assessment of Repairable Power Grids Subject to Weather-Induced Failures and Data Deficiency. Appl. Energy 2018, 210, 339-350. [CrossRef]

Sequential Hazards Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure System: A Case Study of Greater Toronto Area Energy Infrastructure System. J Kong, S P Simonovic, C Zhang, 10.1111/risa.13222Risk Anal. 39PubMedKong, J.; Simonovic, S.P.; Zhang, C. Sequential Hazards Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure System: A Case Study of Greater Toronto Area Energy Infrastructure System. Risk Anal. 2019, 39, 1141-1168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The Impact-Increment State Enumeration Method Based Component Level Resilience Indices of Transmission System. X Liu, K Hou, H Jia, Y Mu, S Ma, F Wang, Y Lei, 10.1016/j.egypro.2019.01.825Energy Procedia. 158Liu, X.; Hou, K.; Jia, H.; Mu, Y.; Ma, S.; Wang, F.; Lei, Y. The Impact-Increment State Enumeration Method Based Component Level Resilience Indices of Transmission System. Energy Procedia 2019, 158, 4099-4103. [CrossRef]

Enhancing Resilience of Interdependent Traffic-Electric Power System. Q Zou, S Chen, 10.1016/j.ress.2019.106557Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Zou, Q.; Chen, S. Enhancing Resilience of Interdependent Traffic-Electric Power System. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2019, 191, 106557. [CrossRef]

Measuring the Resilience of an Airport Network. Y Wang, J Zhan, X Xu, L Li, P Chen, M Hansen, 10.1016/j.cja.2019.08.023Chin. J. Aeronaut. 32Wang, Y.; Zhan, J.; Xu, X.; Li, L.; Chen, P.; Hansen, M. Measuring the Resilience of an Airport Network. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 2019, 32, 2694-2705. [CrossRef]

Modeling the Recovery Process: A Key Dimension of Resilience. B Cassottana, L Shen, L C Tang, 10.1016/j.ress.2019.106528Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Cassottana, B.; Shen, L.; Tang, L.C. Modeling the Recovery Process: A Key Dimension of Resilience. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2019, 190, 106528. [CrossRef]

Resilient Operational Strategies for Power Systems Considering the Interactions with Natural Gas Systems. A R Sayed, C Wang, T Bi, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.053Appl. Energy. 241Sayed, A.R.; Wang, C.; Bi, T. Resilient Operational Strategies for Power Systems Considering the Interactions with Natural Gas Systems. Appl. Energy 2019, 241, 548-566. [CrossRef]

Assessing Engineering Resilience for Systems with Multiple Performance Measures. E Specking, B Cottam, G Parnell, E Pohl, M Cilli, R Buchanan, Z Wade, C Small, 10.1111/risa.13395Risk Anal. 39Specking, E.; Cottam, B.; Parnell, G.; Pohl, E.; Cilli, M.; Buchanan, R.; Wade, Z.; Small, C. Assessing Engineering Resilience for Systems with Multiple Performance Measures. Risk Anal. 2019, 39, 1899-1912. [CrossRef]

A New Resilience Measure for Supply Networks with the Ripple Effect Considerations: A Bayesian Network Approach. S Hosseini, D Ivanov, 10.1007/s10479-019-03350-8Ann. Oper. Res. Hosseini, S.; Ivanov, D. A New Resilience Measure for Supply Networks with the Ripple Effect Considerations: A Bayesian Network Approach. Ann. Oper. Res. 2019. [CrossRef]

Resilience Assessment of Distribution Systems Integrated with Distributed Energy Resources. P Gautam, P Piya, R Karki, 10.1109/TSTE.2020.2994174IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy. 2020Gautam, P.; Piya, P.; Karki, R. Resilience Assessment of Distribution Systems Integrated with Distributed Energy Resources. IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy 2020, 338-348. [CrossRef]

Assessing the Resilience of Multi Microgrid Based Widespread Power Systems against Natural Disasters Using Monte Carlo Simulation. A Younesi, H Shayeghi, A Safari, P Siano, 10.1016/j.energy.2020.118220Younesi, A.; Shayeghi, H.; Safari, A.; Siano, P. Assessing the Resilience of Multi Microgrid Based Widespread Power Systems against Natural Disasters Using Monte Carlo Simulation. Energy 2020, 207, 118220. [CrossRef]

Optimizing Infrastructure Resilience under Budgetary Constraint. M Najarian, G J Lim, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.106801Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Najarian, M.; Lim, G.J. Optimizing Infrastructure Resilience under Budgetary Constraint. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 198, 106801. [CrossRef]

Performance-Threshold-Based Resilience Analysis of System of Systems by Considering Dynamic Reconfiguration. Z Chen, T Zhao, J Jiao, J Chu, 10.1177/0954405420937528Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B J. Eng. Manufact. 2020Chen, Z.; Zhao, T.; Jiao, J.; Chu, J. Performance-Threshold-Based Resilience Analysis of System of Systems by Considering Dynamic Reconfiguration. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B J. Eng. Manufact. 2020, 1-11. [CrossRef]

Improved Integrated Metric for Quantitative Assessment of Resilience. C Cheng, G Bai, Y.-A Zhang, J Tao, 10.1177/1687814020906065Adv. Mech. Eng. 12Cheng, C.; Bai, G.; Zhang, Y.-A.; Tao, J. Improved Integrated Metric for Quantitative Assessment of Resilience. Adv. Mech. Eng. 2020, 12, 1-14. [CrossRef]

A Novel Optimization Method for Urban Resilient and Fair Power Distribution Preventing Critical Network States. S S Ottenburger, H K Çakmak, W Jakob, A Blattmann, D Trybushnyi, W Raskob, U Kühnapfel, V Hagenmeyer, 10.1016/j.ijcip.2020.100354Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2020, 29, 100354. [CrossRefOttenburger, S.S.; Çakmak, H.K.; Jakob, W.; Blattmann, A.; Trybushnyi, D.; Raskob, W.; Kühnapfel, U.; Hagenmeyer, V. A Novel Optimization Method for Urban Resilient and Fair Power Distribution Preventing Critical Network States. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2020, 29, 100354. [CrossRef]

A Quantitative Approach for Assessment and Improvement of Network Resilience. N Ahmadian, G J Lim, J Cho, S Bora, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.106977Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Ahmadian, N.; Lim, G.J.; Cho, J.; Bora, S. A Quantitative Approach for Assessment and Improvement of Network Resilience. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 200, 106977. [CrossRef]

A Qualitative-Quantitative Resilience Assessment Approach for Socio-Technical Systems. W Eljaoued, N B Yahia, N B Ben Saoud, 10.1016/j.procs.2020.09.305Procedia Comput. Sci. 176Eljaoued, W.; Yahia, N.B.; Ben Saoud, N.B. A Qualitative-Quantitative Resilience Assessment Approach for Socio-Technical Systems. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2020, 176, 2625-2634. [CrossRef]

A Framework for the Resilience Analysis of Electric Infrastructure Systems Including Temporary Generation Systems. S S H Toroghi, V M Thomas, 10.1016/j.ress.2020.107013Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. Toroghi, S.S.H.; Thomas, V.M. A Framework for the Resilience Analysis of Electric Infrastructure Systems Including Temporary Generation Systems. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2020, 202, 107013. [CrossRef]

Resilience and Vulnerability of Public Transportation Fare Systems: The Case of the City of Rio De Janeiro. T Santos, M A Silva, V A Fernandes, G Marsden, 10.3390/su12020647Brazil. Sustainability. 12Santos, T.; Silva, M.A.; Fernandes, V.A.; Marsden, G. Resilience and Vulnerability of Public Transportation Fare Systems: The Case of the City of Rio De Janeiro, Brazil. Sustainability 2020, 12, 647. [CrossRef]

Evaluation of Spatial Resilience of Highway Networks in Response to Adverse Weather Conditions. F Han, S Zhang, 10.3390/ijgi90804802020480Han, F.; Zhang, S. Evaluation of Spatial Resilience of Highway Networks in Response to Adverse Weather Conditions. IJGI 2020, 9, 480. [CrossRef]

Exploring Resilient Observability in Traffic-Monitoring Sensor Networks: A Study of Spatial-Temporal Vehicle Patterns. J Tang, L Wan, T Nochta, J Schooling, T Yang, 10.3390/ijgi90402472020247Tang, J.; Wan, L.; Nochta, T.; Schooling, J.; Yang, T. Exploring Resilient Observability in Traffic-Monitoring Sensor Networks: A Study of Spatial-Temporal Vehicle Patterns. IJGI 2020, 9, 247. [CrossRef]

A Two-Stage Restoration Resource Allocation Model for Enhancing the Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems. J Kong, C Zhang, S P Simonovic, 10.3390/su1119514311Kong, J.; Zhang, C.; Simonovic, S.P. A Two-Stage Restoration Resource Allocation Model for Enhancing the Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems. Sustainability 2019, 11, 5143. [CrossRef]

Connecting Risk and Resilience for a Power System Using the Portland Hills Fault Case Study. V H Chalishazar, T K A Brekken, D Johnson, K Yu, J Newell, K Chin, R Weik, E Dierickx, M Craven, M Sauter, 10.3390/pr8101200Processes 2020, 8, 1200. [CrossRefChalishazar, V.H.; Brekken, T.K.A.; Johnson, D.; Yu, K.; Newell, J.; Chin, K.; Weik, R.; Dierickx, E.; Craven, M.; Sauter, M.; et al. Connecting Risk and Resilience for a Power System Using the Portland Hills Fault Case Study. Processes 2020, 8, 1200. [CrossRef]