# Gingival enlargements: A review

CorpusID: 233701199
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb66aa4c6b73589fdd3aeb70686591c1f71166b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb66aa4c6b73589fdd3aeb70686591c1f71166b7)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Gingival enlargements: A review
2021

Anuja Namala 
Intern Student, Oral Medicine & Radiology, AJ Institute of Dental Sciences
575004Kuntikana, MangaloreKarnatakaIndia

Dyamavva Halerolli 
Intern Student, Oral Medicine & Radiology, AJ Institute of Dental Sciences
575004Kuntikana, MangaloreKarnatakaIndia

Preethi A Poonja 
Assistant Professor, Oral Medicine & Radiology, AJ Institute of Dental Sciences
575004Kuntikana, MangaloreKarnatakaIndia

Prasanna Kumar Rao 
Professor, Oral Medicine & Radiology, AJ Institute of Dental Sciences
575004Kuntikana, MangaloreKarnatakaIndia

Raghavendra Kini 
Professor and Head, Oral Medicine & Radiology, AJ Institute of Dental Sciences
Karna-taka575004, 575004Kuntikana, Mangalore, Kuntikana, MangaloreKarnatakaIndia, India


Anuja N
Poonja PAHalerolli D, Rao PK, Kini

Gingival enlargements: A review

J Dent Probl Solut
812021Received: 10 February, 2021 Accepted: 20 March, 2021029 Citation: https://doi.org/10.17352/jdps DOI: 2394-8418 ISSN: C L I N I C A L G R O U P Case Report *Corresponding author: Dr. Prasanna Kumar Rao, Professor, Oral Medicine & Radiology, AJ Institute of Dental Sciences,GeneralizedPapillaryGingival over growth https://wwwpeertechzpublicationscom
Alteration in size of gingiva is one of the clinical features of periodontal disease. Increase in size of gingiva, which is termed as gingival enlargement or gingival over growth is a common clinical sign of gingival disease and a matter of great clinical concern. Increase in size alters the physiologic contour of gingiva, creates areas of plaque accumulation, intereferes with regular oral hygiene procedures and creates aesthetic problems. In severe cases, it interefere with mastication and phonation. Enlargement may involve one or more components of gingiva. Depending on the involvement of components of gingiva and distribution, gingival enlargement can be Localized, genaralized, marginal, papillary, diffuse and discrete. Depending on etiology and pathogenesis, it can be classifi ed as infl ammatory enlargement, fi brotic enlargement, combined enlargement, enlargement associated with systemic conditions, neoplastic enlargement and false enlargements.

## Introducion

Infl ammatory gingival enlargement is most common type of over growth, which manifest because of increase in volume of gingival tissue in response to local microbial irritation.

Infl amatory enlargement may be acute or chronic. Fibrotic gingival enlargement or non-infl ammatory fi brous gingival over growth is belived to be the result of genetic predispostion or adverse effect of drug . Large number of drugs and genetic disorders are associated with occurance of gingival over growth in susceptible individuals. They may be [1],

• Drug induced gingival enlargement • Idiopathic gingival enlargement


## Drug induced gingival enlargement

The drugs that are reported to be associated with gingival over growth are anti-convulsants, immune suppresents and calcium channel blockers (Table 1). Despite their pharmacological diversity all these drugs have similar mechanism of action at cellular level. They are known to inhibit intracellular calcium ion induced infl ux. Therefore the clinical features of gingival over growth (Figure 1), by these agents and even the histologic appearance are reported to have common characteristics such as increase in extra cellular ground substance, number of fi broblast and acanthosis of epithelium.

understood; however, blood and cellular immunity response seems to be infl uenced by selective and reversible inhibition of T helper cells. There is disagreement between severity of gingival enelrgement in blood and saliva. Some studies have reported that development of gingival enlargement requires a threshold of drug concentration In blood plasma, while its severity is not associated with the dose. The dosage 500mg is considred as threshold [3].


## Calcium channel blockers

Calium channel blockers induces direct dilation of coronary arteries and arterioles, improving the oxygen supply to the heart muscles. It is used in the treatment of acute and chronic coronary insuffi ciency. Gingival over growth occurs in 20% of cases. The stratifi ed squamous epithelium covering the gingival is thick and has a keratinized layer . The rete pegs are extremely long sometimes called "test pegs" with considerable confl uence seen [4].

Calcium channel blockers affect the Ca metabolism by reducing the intra cellular Ca fl ow and limiting the production of active collagenase. Gingival enlargement occurs by taking 30-100mg Nefedipine per day [4].


## Idiopathic gingival enlargement

It is also termed as gingivostomatitis, elephantiasis, fi rm and leathery with pebbled surface. Teeth are completely covered. In severe cases jaw appears distorted due bulbous enlargement [5].


## Pregnancy induced gingival enlergement

The prevalence of pregnancy gingivitis changes from 35-100%. The gingiva shows increased level of infl ammation often characterized by edema, colour and contour change and propensity to bleed on gentle stimulation ( Figure 2). The marginal gingival tends to be more prominent than facial and lingual surfaces. And infl ammatory reaction to the local irritants that occurs after 3 rd month of pregnancy is called pregnancy tumour. This lesion appears as discrete, mushroom, fl attened spherical masses, that protrude from gingival margin, more frequently interproximal space and are attached by sessile or pedanculated base [6].


## Puberty induced gingival enlargement

It is infl ammatory type of gingival enlargement which occurs in both male and females in pubertal age groups. it involves mainly marginal and interdental gingiva ( Figure   3). It is characterised by prominent bulbous interproximal papilla. After puberty the enlargement undergoes spontaneous reduction but does not disappear until local irritants are removed [7]. Some studies have found that pre threshold serum phenytoin was directly aenlargement, while no association was found post threshold phenytoin and gingival enlergment. Girgis et al found a direct relationship between gingival enlargement in 50% of patients, while no relationship and even an inverse relationship was found in rest 50% [2].

Studies have demonstrated that oral hygiene procedures may limit the severity of the lesion but are unable alone to lead to the reversal of the condition [2].


## Immunosuppresants

Cyclosporine is apotent immunosuppressive agent used to prevent organ transplant rejection and to treat several disease of autoimmune origin.Clinically it is similar to that induced by dilantin. Mechanism of action of cyclosporine is not fully 


## Conclusion

Gingival enlargement has varied presentations, hence diagnosis of these entities become challenging for the clinician.

Detailed investigation is necessary. So prompt diagnosis and removal of the etiologic factors is the main treatment objectives.


idiopathic fi bromatosis, hereditary gingival hyperplasia and congenitally familial fi bromatosis. It is a proliferative fi brous lesion that causes aesthetic and functional problems. Both genetically and pharmacologically induced forms of gingival enlargement exists. Clinically it is seen on attached gingiva, gingival margina and interdental papilla. It appears as pink,

## Figure 1 :
1Generalized enlargement of marginal gingiva, attached gingiva and interdental papillae. Anticonvulsants These are the drugs which are used to control epileptic seizures. Clinically it may manifest as generalized hyperplasia in mouth, but it is most severe in maxillary and mandibular anterior region. The 1 st change noted is a painless bead like enlargement of gingiva, starting with one or two interdental papillae. The surface of gingival shows an increase in stippling and fi nally a caulifl ower, warty or pebbled surface. Hyperplasia may develop massively covering a considerable portion of the crown. They may interfere with occlusion, increase plaque accumulation, resulting in secondary infl ammatory process [2]. Laborotary studies on phenytoin induced enlargement have observed fi broblast like cell proliferation, proliferation of epithelium, increased synthesis of Glycosoaminoglycans sulfate and reduced degeneration of collagen.phenytoin induced reduction of folic acid leads degerative chanes in epithelium exacerbated in presence of infl ammatory factors. The increased synthesis of testosterone metabolite by fi broblast can causes gingival enlargement [2].

## Table 1 :
1List of Drugs causes Gingival Enlargement.Category 
Generic Name 
Trade Name 

Anti-convulsants 

• Phenytoin 
• Valproic acid 
• Carbamazepine 
• Vigabatrin 

• Dilantin 
• Depakene 
• Tegretol 
• sabril 

Calcium channel 
blockers 

• Amlodipine 
• Diltiazem 
• Felodipine 
• Isradipine 
• Nicardipine 
• Nifedipine 
• Nisoldipine 
• Verapamil 

• Norvasc 
• Cardizem 
• Plendil 
• Dyanacirc 
• Cardene 
• Nifedical 
• Sular 
• calan 

Immunosuppresants 

• Cyclosporine A 
• Tacrolimus 
• Mycophenolate mophetil 
• serolimus 

• Neoral 
• Prograf 
• Cellcept 
• Rapamunel 



Citation: Anuja N, Halerolli D, Poonja PA, Rao PK, Kini R (2021) Gingival enlargements: A review. J Dent Probl Solut 8(1): 029-031. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.17352/2394-8418.000100 Treatment for drug induced hyperplasia includes substitution with another drug. Sodium valproate has been used as alternative to dilantin sodium in management of epilepsy.Anti -hypertensives other than calcium channel blockers may be considered for replacement of Nifedipine. Tacrolimus has been used successfully as calcium channel blocker. Most of the gingival enlargement during pregnancy can be prevented by removal of local irritants and institution of fastidious oral hygiene. Hyperplasia at puberty can be managed by removal of lesions along with elimination of irritating factors[8].Management 


https://www.peertechzpublications.com/journals/journal-of-dental-problems-and-solutions

Gingival enlargements: Differential diagnosis and review of literature. A A Agrawal, World J Clin Cases. 3Agrawal AA (2015) Gingival enlargements: Differential diagnosis and review of literature. World J Clin Cases 3: 779-788. Link: https://bit.ly/39325W9

Drug-induced gingival overgrowth: The nemesis of gingiva unraveled. V Bharti, C Bansal, J Indian Soc Periodontol. 17Bharti V, Bansal C (2013) Drug-induced gingival overgrowth: The nemesis of gingiva unraveled. J Indian Soc Periodontol 17: 182-187. Link: http://bit.ly/3ra4QLy

Gingival enlargement among renal transplant recipients in the era of new-generation immunosuppressants. K V Greenberg, G C Armitage, C H Shiboski, J Periodontol. 79Greenberg KV, Armitage GC, Shiboski CH (2008) Gingival enlargement among renal transplant recipients in the era of new-generation immunosuppressants. J Periodontol 79: 453-460. Link: http://bit.ly/3sbgMho

Calcium channel blocker induced gingival enlargement following implant placement in a fi bula free fl ap reconstruction of the mandible: a case report. H Quach, A Ray-Chaudhuri, Int J Implant Dent. 647Quach H, Ray-Chaudhuri A (2020) Calcium channel blocker induced gingival enlargement following implant placement in a fi bula free fl ap reconstruction of the mandible: a case report. Int J Implant Dent 6: 47. Link: http://bit.ly/3c61HIo

Long standing Idiopathic gingival hyperplasia of oral cavity with invasion of maxillary sinus: A rare case report. K Shah, K Khan, P K Pandilwar, Ksa Unnikrishnan, M Sanap, Int J Surg Case Rep. 77Shah K, Khan K, Pandilwar PK, Unnikrishnan KSA, Sanap M, et al. (2020) Long standing Idiopathic gingival hyperplasia of oral cavity with invasion of maxillary sinus: A rare case report Int J Surg Case Rep 77: 62-66. Link: http://bit.ly/3vMxHcl

A classical case of pregnancy induced gingival enlargement: A case Report. S S Chauhan, A Pandey, A Raj, A Raj, Journal of Evolution of Medical and Dental Sciences. 3Chauhan SS, Pandey A, Raj A, Raj A (2014) A classical case of pregnancy induced gingival enlargement: A case Report. Journal of Evolution of Medical and Dental Sciences 3: 11104-11108. Link: https://bit.ly/3c4pMiR

Puberty Induced Gingival Enlargement. T Siddharth, Biomed J Sci Tech Res. 1Siddharth T (2017) Puberty Induced Gingival Enlargement. Biomed J Sci Tech Res 1. Link: https://bit.ly/3vL67MJ

Management of drug-induced gingival enlargement. B A Taylor, Aust Prescr. 26Taylor BA (2003) Management of drug-induced gingival enlargement. Aust Prescr 26: 11-13. Link: https://bit.ly/3cPaAp2