# Genetics and voice production in childhood and adolescence e a review

CorpusID: 233886872
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/640b1a37c8b3b9cf4c7d2a13080e19d783831d04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/640b1a37c8b3b9cf4c7d2a13080e19d783831d04)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Genetics and voice production in childhood and adolescence e a review
Available online 19 February 2021

Mette Pedersen 
Medical Centre
Østergade 18, 11100CopenhagenDenmark

Anders Overgård Jønsson 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
University of Copenhagen
Blegdamsvej 3B2200CopenhagenDenmark

Christian F Larsen 
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 32000FrederiksbergDenmark

Genetics and voice production in childhood and adolescence e a review
Available online 19 February 202110.1016/j.ijpam.2021.02.005Article history: Received 5 October 2020 Accepted 14 February 2021a r t i c l e i n f o of King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre (General Organization), Saudi Arabia. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Voice production Development Adolescence Genetics Childhood Puberty
a b s t r a c tAdolescence is a challenging time of change in voicing, normally and in pathology. An increased focus on voice production in relation to genetics can expand our knowledge of the onset of puberty and voice change. Our aim with this review was to connect research of genetics to voice production in adolescence. We need further understanding of the developmental background of voice in childhood and adolescence, because many genetic multi handicaps include voice production. Genetic development related to voice production was the focus in a search made by the Royal English Society of Medicine, with only a few results. We supplemented with references to genetic studies of adults and animals as well as adjacent areas of voice production. The genetic development of voice production is steered from the hypothalamus probably related to growth hormone. The genetic voice production in adults form the basis for understanding development. Some research results were found related to the pubertal steps. The findings are important in the future, using advanced voice analysis and artificial intelligence methods in patients with Multi handicaps.

## Introduction

Adolescence is a challenging time when voices change normally and pathologically . Knowledge of hormonal changes based on genetic stimulation should be updated. Therefore, we present the results in an overview of the voice production in relation to genetics.

Also, measurements of acoustics of voice production is getting broader for bigger amounts of data, e.g. the technical methods for measuring voice production include highspeed films combined with analysis programs like Glottal Analysis Tools (GAT). Convolution networks analysis of highspeed films with 4000 pictures per second is used in the clinical setting as well as optical coherence tomography [1e5]. These methods with high amounts of input information should be related to better and more exact methods of genetic measurements in childhood and during puberty, to help many multi handicapped with a better communication possibility [6]. Many other aspects could be referred to.

The aim of the overview is to discuss the possibility for a relation between measurement of exact voice production and development at the level of genetics. Studies of voice production have earlier been made, defining prepubertal, pubertal, and post pubertal voices but without genetic aspects [7].

Voice measurements should be an integrated part in the research of developmental pathology e.g. genetic malformations including cochlear implants, from where much understanding can be gained [8]. It should supplement the very arbitrary definition of self-evaluated pubertal voice break used in many connections [9].


## Methods

The search for voice production and genetics development made by the library of the English Royal Society of Medicine (RSM) at the end only included a few hand searched papers for the last 10 years; only a few of them were related to childhood and puberty. English language or foreign language article with an English abstract, human studies, and conference abstracts in Embase and Medline were searched. Since the amount of papers that included voice production studies, was rather small, we included our own intensive search of other papers, often based on reference lists, and in studies of other subjects -that could be relevant for understanding genetics in childhood and puberty also without voice measurements.


## Results


### Basic results of genetic studies

The brain development of voice production related areas in childhood and puberty is genetically structured. At the beginning the activation of the hypothalamic hypophysis gonad axis is a result of a complex network of genes, neurotransmitters, and neuronal interactions in the hypothalamus. It all begins from the nasal placode wherefrom GnRH (gonadotropin releasing hormone) neurons migrate to hypothalamus [10,11]. Fig. 1 shows the central activation of GnRH neurons by leptin, considered necessary for normal pubertal development. The nasal placode, and development of GnRH neurons have been considered a causal mechanism as stimulating factors on KNDy neurons (Kisspeptin, neurokinin B, dynorphins). The genes involved are included in the figure. The neuropeptide alfa-MSH plays a key role in energy homeostasis by mediating the action of leptin and may have a central role to the metabolic control of puberty. From the hypothalamus, at the medio basal area, the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the pituitary gland is stimulated, also by the GnRH-PG (Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone-Prostaglandin), the reaction depending on the GnRH-R e (Receptors). Follicle stimulating and luteinizing hormones stimulate the ovaries in girls, and in boys the production of Leydig-cells' production of testosterone, stimulating puberty. In girls the Anti-Müller hormone (AMH) for egg reserve and inhibin level of hindering FSH production in the pituitary are regulated in balance with E2 (estradiol), stimulating puberty. Extrinsic factors (EDC) and body mass index (BMI) have an impact on the development [6].

An overview of genetic voice disorders was made in Phoniatrics 1 [6]. The main reason for this work was that it is now understood that genetic pathology of human development mostly involves voice production. The importance was underlined by Sataloff [12].

There is a genetic mix of research in the field, genetic factors influence vocal quality development but only narratively described in the literature [12]. Genetic correlations indicated shared etiologies in both sexes between puberty timing, body mass, and voice. Renes et al. [13] describe the dependency of growth hormone on normal functions of growth receptor hormones based on a gene on chromosome [5]. Gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) is active in many connections as described by Forni et al. [14] The importance of understanding the relation between GnRH and among others fibroblast growth factor was described by Cho [11].

Lardone et al. [15] commented that voice break is a landmark of advanced male puberty in genome wide association studies and have revealed that pubertal timing is a highly polygenetic trait. They refer that although voice breaks are easily recorded in large cohorts, it holds quite low precision as a marker of puberty, 29 significant and independent single nucleotide polymorphisms were extracted associated with age at voice break. In contrast godanarche and pubarche are earlier and clinically well-defined measures of puberty onset.

The articulatory loop refers to the phonological loop with direct cortical control of the vocal fold musculature and the consolidation of an auditory-articulatory circuit, encompassing auditory areas in the temporoparietal junction and prefrontal and motor areas in the frontal lope, the connection between the anatomical and genetical understanding is still to be developed [16]. The definition of puberty stages 1e5 is referring to Marshall and Tanner [17,18]. In a large survey of puberty by Sultan et al., [10] voice production is not discussed at all. The author states that puberty cannot be perceived as a solitary event, they discuss the basic genetic changes. It is clear that genetic timing and e.g. age of menarche are relevant, Sultan et al. [10] underline that the onset of puberty is determined by genetic heritability and neuroendocrine factors (modulated by general health, nutritional adequacy, exercise and environmental chemicals). The understanding of voice production is also related to research on transgenders; Styne [19] has an overview of adolescence with the aspect of transgenders without commenting voice development. The forms of nuclei in arcuate-and antero-ventralperi-ventricular nuclei account for the differential behavior of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis.


### Basic voice production measures

There was a change of understanding of the human voice with the vowel research made by Peterson and Barney [20]. Much has happened since. Fant [21], in his book of acoustic theory of voice production and Carlson and Fant [22,23], discussed the isolated vowels. Formants and resonance are discussed [24,25]. Henick and Sataloff [12] refer that the mutational voice is between 12 and 14 years of age and that the vocal folds in males at 16 years of age are 18e24 mm long with a fundamental (Fo) of 130 Hz. In girls, 16 years of age the vocal folds are 15e20 mm long and fundamental frequency (Fo) is 220e225. At 6e12 years the vocal folds have two layers, at 16 years the vocal folds have three layers, which is documented with optical coherence tomography [26].

Puberty stages 1e5 of average development [17,18] is not the same as the beginning of the various parts of puberty: adrenarche (of production DHEAS and androstenedione in the adrenals), thelarche (breast development), menarche (beginning of menstruation), pubarche (pubic hair development), godanarche (secondary sex characteristics). These to some extend genetically defined beginnings have till now not been related specifically to voice parameters. Table 1 and Table 2 show the puberty related voice parameters, related to hormonal development divided in prepubertal e pubertal and post pubertal parts based on age [7], the pubertal stages can be extrapolated [17,18]. Fundamental frequency during reading of a standard text and the lowest tone as well as voice range during speaking are of interest in both genders. Androgens, testosterone, and serum hormone binding globulin (SHBG) are of special interest. Estrogens E1 and E2 should be noted. Change in DHEAS marks adrenarche.

The sex hormone receptors in vocal folds have been focused upon by Nacci et al. [27] but were seldom found. The authors speculate that the changes of voice according to gender throughout life might be linked with a different expression of some genetic growth factor in the laryngeal tissue and that this expression might in turn be influenced by hormonal variation.


### Some specific results in animals

There is a mix of genetic research in the field: animal studies, new-born studies, pubertal pathology studies, among others. Genetic factors influence vocal quality development but only narratively described in the literature although speech and language development is described [12,28]. The development of GnRH is important for the functional reproductive systems in vertebrates including PAX6, SOX2 and FOXG1. Kotler J and Haig [29] focus on anthropology in the difference between vertebrates. Based on studies in primates, Aboitiz [16] propose a continuous evolution for the auditory vocal apparatus. It is a problem that a lot of research on genetics and hormones is on primates/non-humans, which means that even if some results are common e when it comes to human voice, they can probably not be used.


### Specific results in humans

Day F et al. [30] recognizes the biological genetic mechanisms and timing of puberty as important. In the recent large-scale genome wide female developmental study, 389 statistically independent signals were found distributed across all 23 chromosome pairs. According to Hollis et al. [31], in a male study, 76 independent genetic signals for male puberty was described. The authors found that genetically the voice break in boys was related to menarche in girls. Day et al. [32] also found 2 genes reportedly disrupted in rare disorders of puberty: LEPR and KAL1. A cluster of imprinted genes on human chromosomes 15 and 14, genetic variants in DLK1 are associated with menarche timing in girls and voice break in boys and pathology thereof.

The genetic and epigenetic approach to puberty is probably important for future aspects as examples in twins have shown for specific hormonal disorders e.g. SOX3 [33,34]. Schriberg et al. [35] have updated overview of percentages of neurodevelopmental disorders of speech/motor-speech.

Interesting is a study from Sato et al. [36] showing that the vocal fold mucosa, unphonetic, without voice, two cerebral palsy children (7 and 12 years old) did not have a vocal ligament, lamina propria appeared as a uniform structure, vocal fold stellate cells synthesized fewer extracellular matrix substances such as fibrous protein and glycosaminoglycan.

Aguiar-Oliveira et al. [37] present a study on humans with IGHG gene-type 18 owing to a mutation of GnRHr with severe reduction of growth hormone which resulted in voices that were highpitched. Valenca [38] and their group also found in untreated isolated growth deficiencies that most voices had higher formant frequencies than normal, with a prepubertal acoustical structure. De Andrade [39] and their group showed that voice problems in patients with growth deficiency could be improved with the voice therapy of semi occluded vocal tract training.


## Discussion

Some interesting results were found. In the pediatric literature, voice break is the parameter used for the change of voice production in puberty [9]. The pubertal genetic development itself seems to be rather well understood (Fig. 1) That might be the reason for the difficulties of comparing genetics to the pediatric developmentsince there are several voice production parameters to take into account: a part from a god measurement of fundamental frequency that includes registration in reading or counting, also measuring of the lowest tone and widening of the fundamental frequency range during reading e at best in semitones with geometric averaging of Hz (Tables 1 and 2). Other parameters include changes in formant structures [8,24,25].

From a genetic point of view e the aim should include the pathological genes involved in the specific Multi handicap syndromes first e and with GAT measures on highspeed films and AI of neural networks, to combine many measurements of each syndrome to find a pattern of genetic pathology related to voice production. These aspects seem to be necessary in society at the time where some genetic treatment aspects of multi handicap syndromes are under way.


## Conclusion

An online search was made in Medline and Embase and a hand search of the Royal Medical Society, UK with modest results. Many indirect relevant studies of voice production development and genetics especially in adolescence were found in reference lists. It was shown how development of voice production is connected to genetic development. This is of main value for understanding pathology. New areas of voice production diagnostics are of importance. The genetic development of voice production is regulated from the hypothalamus probably related to growth hormone. Especially in pathology, genetic multi handicaps clients might get better help when combined genetic and voice production measures are used. 


## Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.


## Ethical Statement

Hereby, I Mette Pedersen consciously assure that for the manuscript Genetics and voice production in childhood and adolescencee a review the following is fulfilled:

1) This material is the authors' own original work, which has not been previously published elsewhere.

2) The paper is not currently being considered for publication elsewhere. Results are presented as geometrical averages. Groups: pre-pubertal (8.7e12.9 years), pubertal (13.0e15.9 years), post-pubertal (16.0e19.5). The annual change in %. Cm 2 conversion factor: 1 cm 2 ¼ 32 semitones x dB(a). Semitone range is measured from the lowest frequency to the highest frequency in number of semitones. Results are presented as geometrical averages. Groups: pre-pubertal (8.7e12.9 years), pubertal (13.0e15.9 years), post-pubertal (16.0e19.8). The relative standard deviation range: 11%e140%. Significance of the differences between the groups: ** ¼ p < 0.01; * ¼ p < 0.05. Cm 2 conversion factor: 1 cm 2 ¼ 32 semitones x dB(a). Semitone range is measured from the lowest frequency to the highest frequency in number of semitones.

3) The paper reflects the authors' own research and analysis in a truthful and complete manner. 4) The paper properly credits the meaningful contributions of coauthors and co-researchers. 5) The results are appropriately placed in the context of prior and existing research. 6) All sources used are properly disclosed (correct citation). Literally copying of text must be indicated as such by using quotation marks and giving proper reference. 7) All authors have been personally and actively involved in substantial work leading to the paper, and will take public responsibility for its content.

I agree with the above statements and declare that this submission follows the policies as outlined in the Guide for Authors and in the Ethical Statement.


## Declaration of competing interest

The material is not published previously and will not be submitted for publication elsewhere.

No conflict of interest relevant to this article were reported.

## Fig. 1 .
1Presents an overview of the genes involved in puberty regulation with hypothalamus in the center. The development starts from the nasal placode in the fetus with development and integration of GnRH neurons (gonadotropin releasing hormone expressing neurons).


MP. Data curation: MP, AOJ. Formal analysis: MP, AOJ. Funding acquisition: MP. Methodology: MP, AOJ Visualization: MP, CL, AOJ. Writing e original draft: MP. Writing review & editing: MP, CL, AOJ.

## Table 1
1Hormonal, pubertal, and vocal parameters for boys.Age 
Years 
8.7e12.9 y 
13.0e15.9 y 
16.0e19.5 y 
Annual change (%) 

No of boys 
19 
15 
14 
Serum testosterone 
n mol/l 
0,54 
10,5 
18,9 
68 
Dihydrotestosterone 
n mol/l 
0,18 
1,21 
1,57 
37 
Free testosterone 
n mol/l 
0,007 
0,14 
0,33 
77 
Sexual hormone binding globulin 
n mol/l 
134 
66 
45 
À16 
Delta 4 androstenedione 
n mol/l 
0,54 
1,17 
2,5 
24 
Dehydro epi androsterone sulfate 
n mol/l 
1400 
4100 
5900 
25 
Testis volume 
ml 
2,3 
13 
20 
36 
Fundamental frequency 
Hz 
237 
184 
125 
À11 
Semitones in continuous speech 
Semitones 
3,7 
4,8 
5 
3,9 
Phonetogram area 
cm 2 
19 
28 
34 
9,2 
Lowest biological tone 
Hz 
158 
104 
72 
À12 



## Table 2
2Hormonal, pubertal, and vocal parameters for girls.Age 
Years 
8.7e12.9 y 
13.0e15.9 y 
16.0e19.8 y 
Significance 

Total number 
18 
12 
11 
Oesterone (E1) 
p mol/l 
57 
104 
123 
** 
Oestradiol (E2) 
p mol/l 
73 
135 
108 
Total testosterone 
n mol/l 
0,5 
0,76 
0,94 
Free testosterone 
n mol/l 
0,006 
0037 
0,009 
Oesterone sulfate (E1SO4) 
p mol/l 
732 
1924 
2342 
** 
DHEAS 
n mol/l 
3210 
3700 
7200 
** 
Androstendione 
n mol/l 
1,44 
3,28 
3,43 
* 
Sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) 
n mol/l 
153 
130 
123 
Menarche 
þ4 
þ9 
þ11 
Pubic hair stage 
1e4 
2 e5 
4 e6 
Mamma development stage 
1e4 
2 e5 
5 
Fundamental frequency in continuous speech 
Hz 
256 
248 
241 
Semi tones in continuous speech 
Semitones 
3,7 
4,2 
5,2 
** 
Semi tones in singing 
Semitones 
23 
30 
38 
Phonetogram area 
cm 2 
17,3 
21,8 
28,3 
** 
Phonetogram lowest tone 
Hz 
166 
156 
145 
* 
Phonetogram middle tone 
Hz 
429 
409 
413 
Phonetogram highest tone 
Hz 
1136 
1105 
1263 


AcknowledgementsThanks to the librarian at Royal Society of Medicine for facilitating our literature search.
Fully automatic segmentation of glottis and vocal folds in endoscopic laryngeal high-speed videos using a deep Convolutional LSTM Network. M K Fehling, F Grosch, M E Schuster, B Schick, J Lohscheller, PloS One. 152Fehling MK, Grosch F, Schuster ME, Schick B, Lohscheller J. Fully automatic segmentation of glottis and vocal folds in endoscopic laryngeal high-speed videos using a deep Convolutional LSTM Network. PloS One 2020;15(2):1e29.

Intersegmenter variability in high-speed laryngoscopy-based glottal area waveform measures. Y Maryn, M Verguts, H Demarsin, J Van Dinther, P Gomez, P Schlegel, Laryngoscope. Maryn Y, Verguts M, Demarsin H, van Dinther J, Gomez P, Schlegel P, et al. Intersegmenter variability in high-speed laryngoscopy-based glottal area waveform measures. Laryngoscope 2019;1e8.

Which mathematical and physiological formulas are describing voice pathology: an overview. M Pedersen, A Jønsson, 10.4172/2329-9126.1000253J Gen Pract. 43Pedersen M, Jønsson A. Which mathematical and physiological formulas are describing voice pathology: an overview. J Gen Pract 2016;4(3). https:// doi.org/10.4172/2329-9126.1000253.

Auswirkungen von Phonationsverdickungen bei professionellen S€ angerinnen. M Echternach, F Burk, F Rose, C T Herbst, M Burdumy, M D€ Ollinger, HNO. 664Echternach M, Burk F, Rose F, Herbst CT, Burdumy M, D€ ollinger M, et al. Auswirkungen von Phonationsverdickungen bei professionellen S€ angerinnen. HNO 2018 Apr 1;66(4):308e20.

Optical coherence tomography in the laryngeal arytenoid mucosa for documentation of pharmacological treatments and genetic aspects: a protocol. M Pedersen, A Agersted, B Akram, S Mahmood, A Jønsson, S Mahmood, 10.3402/acmo.v4.32246Adv Cell Mol Otolaryngol. 4132246Pedersen M, Agersted A, Akram B, Mahmood S, Jønsson A, Mahmood S. Optical coherence tomography in the laryngeal arytenoid mucosa for documentation of pharmacological treatments and genetic aspects: a protocol. Adv Cell Mol Otolaryngol 2016;4(1):32246. https://doi.org/10.3402/acmo.v4.32246.

M Pedersen, A Zehnhoff-Dinnesen, Mahmood S In, 10.1007/2F978-3-662-46780-0225Phoniatrics I. am Zehnhoff-Dinnesen A, Wiskirska-Woznica B, Neumann K, Nawka TBerlin HeidelbergSpringerPedersen M, am Zehnhoff-Dinnesen A, Mahmood S. In: am Zehnhoff- Dinnesen A, Wiskirska-Woznica B, Neumann K, Nawka T, editors. Phoniatrics I. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2020. p. 225e30. https://doi.org/10.1007/2F978- 3-662-46780-0225.

Normal development of voice in children. M Pedersen, internetPedersen M. Normal development of voice in children [internet].

. 10.1007/2F978-3-540-69359-8SpringerBerlin HeidelbergSpringer Berlin Heidelberg; 2008. https://doi.org/10.1007/2F978-3-540-69359-8.

Neural representation of consonantevowel transition in individuals with cochlear hearing loss and auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder. P Kumar, H K Sanju, N K Singh, 10.1007/s00405-020-06017-4Eur Arch Oto-Rhino-Laryngol. 27710Kumar P, Sanju HK, Singh NK. Neural representation of consonantevowel transition in individuals with cochlear hearing loss and auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder. Eur Arch Oto-Rhino-Laryngol 2020;277(10):2739e44. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-020-06017-4.

Voice break in boys temporal relations with other pubertal milestones and likely causal effects of BMI. A S Busch, B Hollis, F R Day, K Sørensen, L Aksglaede, Jrb Perry, 10.1093/2Fhumrep/2Fdez118Hum Reprod. 348Busch AS, Hollis B, Day FR, Sørensen K, Aksglaede L, Perry JRB, et al. Voice break in boys temporal relations with other pubertal milestones and likely causal effects of BMI. Hum Reprod 2019 Jul;34(8):1514e22. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/2Fhumrep/2Fdez118.

Disorders of puberty. C Sultan, L Gaspari, L Maimoun, N Kalfa, F Paris, 62e89.Availablefrom:10.1016/2Fj.bpobgyn.2017.11.004Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 48InternetSultan C, Gaspari L, Maimoun L, Kalfa N, Paris F. Disorders of puberty [Internet] Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2018 Apr;48:62e89. Available from: 10.1016/2Fj.bpobgyn.2017.11.004.

Nasal placode development, {GnRH} neuronal migration and Kallmann syndrome. H-J Cho, Y Shan, N C Whittington, S Wray, 10.3389/2Ffcell.2019.00121Front Cell Dev Biol. Cho H-J, Shan Y, Whittington NC, Wray S. Nasal placode development, {GnRH} neuronal migration and Kallmann syndrome. Front Cell Dev Biol 2019 Jul:7. https://doi.org/10.3389/2Ffcell.2019.00121.

. R T Sataloff, Sataloff RTPlural PublishingSan Diego, CA, USASataloff RT. In: Sataloff RT, editor. Voice science. second ed. San Diego, CA, USA: Plural Publishing; 2017.

Current insights into the role of the growth hormone-insulinlike growth factor system in short children born small for gestational age. J S Renes, J Van Doorn, Ascs Hokken-Koelega, J S Renes, J Vañdoorn, Ascs Hokken-Koelega, Renes JS, Van Doorn J, Hokken-Koelega ASCS, Renes JS, vañDoorn J, Hokken- Koelega ASCS. Current insights into the role of the growth hormone-insulin- like growth factor system in short children born small for gestational age.

. 10.1159/2F000502739Horm Res Paediatr. 921cited 2020 Jul 3Horm Res Paediatr 2019;92(1):15e27. https://doi.org/10.1159/2F000502739 [cited 2020 Jul 3].

Neural crest and ectodermal cells intermix in the nasal placode to give rise to {GnRH}-1. P E Forni, C Taylor-Burds, V S Melvin, T Williams, S Wray, Forni PE, Taylor-Burds C, Melvin VS, Williams T, Wray S. Neural crest and ectodermal cells intermix in the nasal placode to give rise to {GnRH}-1

neurons, sensory neurons, and olfactory ensheathing cells. 10.1523/2Fjneurosci.6087-10.2011J Neurosci. 3118neurons, sensory neurons, and olfactory ensheathing cells. J Neurosci 2011 May;31(18):6915e27. https://doi.org/10.1523/2Fjneurosci.6087-10.2011. sc3.

A polygenic risk score suggests shared genetic architecture of voice break with early markers of pubertal onset in boys. M C Lardone, A S Busch, J L Santos, P Miranda, S Eyheramendy, A Pereira, 10.1210/2Fclinem/2Fdgaa003J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1053Lardone MC, Busch AS, Santos JL, Miranda P, Eyheramendy S, Pereira A, et al. A polygenic risk score suggests shared genetic architecture of voice break with early markers of pubertal onset in boys. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020 Jan;105(3):e349e57. https://doi.org/10.1210/2Fclinem/2Fdgaa003.

Palgrave Macmillan {UK}. F Aboitiz, 10.1057/2F978-1-137-54060-7In: A brain for speechAboitiz F. In: A brain for speech. Palgrave Macmillan {UK}; 2017. https:// doi.org/10.1057/2F978-1-137-54060-7.

Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls. W A Marshall, J M Tanner, 10.1136/2Fadc.44.235.291Arch Dis Child. 44235Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls. Arch Dis Child 1969 Jun;44(235):291e303. https://doi.org/10.1136/ 2Fadc.44.235.291.

Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys. W A Marshall, J M Tanner, 10.1136/2Fadc.45.239.13Arch Dis Child. 45239Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys. Arch Dis Child 1970 Feb;45(239):13e23. https://doi.org/10.1136/ 2Fadc.45.239.13.

In: Pubertal suppression in transgender youth. D M Styne, Puberty, internetStyne DM. Puberty. In: Pubertal suppression in transgender youth [internet].

. 10.1016/2Fb978-0-323-56963-7.00003-xElsevierElsevier; 2019. p. 13e24. https://doi.org/10.1016/2Fb978-0-323-56963- 7.00003-x.

99.8 percent accuracy achieved on Peterson and Barney (1952) acoustic measurements. M A Stokes, 10.1121/1.4899482J Acoust Soc Am. 13642083Stokes MA. 99.8 percent accuracy achieved on Peterson and Barney (1952) acoustic measurements. J Acoust Soc Am 2014 Oct 1;136(4):2083. https:// doi.org/10.1121/1.4899482.

Acoustic theory of speech production. G Fant, internetFant G. Acoustic theory of speech production [internet].

. {de} {gruyter}, 10.1515/2F9783110873429{DE} {GRUYTER}. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1515/2F9783110873429; 1970.

Two-formant models, pitch and vowel perception. R Carlson, G Fant, Granstr€, 10.1016/2Fb978-0-12-248550-3.50008-8ElsevierIn: Auditory analysis and perception of speech. internetCarlson R, Fant G, Granstr€ om B. Two-formant models, pitch and vowel perception. In: Auditory analysis and perception of speech [internet]. Elsevier; 1975. p. 55e82. https://doi.org/10.1016/2Fb978-0-12-248550-3.50008-8.

Some studies concerning perception of isolated vowels. R Carlson, B Granstrom, G Fant, Stl-Qpsr. 112e3Carlson R, Granstrom B, Fant G. Some studies concerning perception of iso- lated vowels. Stl-Qpsr. 1970;11(2e3):19e35.

Effect of formant frequency spacing on perceived gender in pre-pubertal Children's voices. V Cartei, D Reby, 10.1371/2Fjournal.pone.0081022PLOS ONE. Cartei V, Reby D. Effect of formant frequency spacing on perceived gender in pre-pubertal Children's voices. In: Nusbaum H, editorvol. 8. PLOS ONE; 2013 Dec. https://doi.org/10.1371/2Fjournal.pone.0081022.

Vocal tract resonances in speech, singing, and playing musical instruments. J Wolfe, M Garnier, J Smith, 10.2976/2F1.2998482{HFSP} J. 31Wolfe J, Garnier M, Smith J. Vocal tract resonances in speech, singing, and playing musical instruments. {HFSP} J 2009 Feb;3(1):6e23. https://doi.org/ 10.2976/2F1.2998482.

Using attenuation coefficients from optical coherence tomography as markers of vocal fold maturation. J A Garcia, F Benboujja, K Beaudette, R Guo, C Boudoux, C J Hartnick, Laryngoscope. 1266Garcia JA, Benboujja F, Beaudette K, Guo R, Boudoux C, Hartnick CJ. Using attenuation coefficients from optical coherence tomography as markers of vocal fold maturation. Laryngoscope 2016;126(6):E218e23.

Sex hormone receptors in vocal fold tissue: a theory about the influence of sex hormones in the larynx. A Nacci, B Fattori, F Basolo, M E Filice, K Jeso, De, L Giovannini, 10.1159/2F000316136Folia Phoniatr Logop. 632Nacci A, Fattori B, Basolo F, Filice ME, Jeso K De, Giovannini L, et al. Sex hor- mone receptors in vocal fold tissue: a theory about the influence of sex hormones in the larynx. Folia Phoniatr Logop 2011;63(2):77e82. https:// doi.org/10.1159/2F000316136.

A molecular genetic perspective on speech and language. S E Fisher, 10.1016/2Fb978-0-12-407794-2.00002-xNeurobiology of language. ElsevierinternetFisher SE. A molecular genetic perspective on speech and language. In: Neurobiology of language [internet]. Elsevier; 2015. p. 13e24. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/2Fb978-0-12-407794-2.00002-x.

The tempo of human childhood: a maternal foot on the accelerator, a paternal foot on the brake. J Kotler, D Haig, 10.1002/2Fevan.21579Evol Anthropol Issues News. 2722020citedKotler J, Haig D. The tempo of human childhood: a maternal foot on the accelerator, a paternal foot on the brake. Evol Anthropol Issues News Rev 2018 Mar 1;27(2):80e91. https://doi.org/10.1002/2Fevan.21579 [cited 2020

Genetic regulation of puberty timing in humans. F R Day, Jrb Perry, K K Ong, Neuroendocrinology. 1024Day FR, Perry JRB, Ong KK. Genetic regulation of puberty timing in humans. Neuroendocrinology 2015;102(4):247e55.

Genomic analysis of male puberty timing highlights shared genetic basis with hair colour and lifespan. B Hollis, F R Day, A S Busch, D J Thompson, Alg Soares, Prhj Timmers, 10.1038/2Fs41467-020-14451-5Nat Commun. 1111536cited 2020 Jul 3Hollis B, Day FR, Busch AS, Thompson DJ, Soares ALG, Timmers PRHJ, et al. Genomic analysis of male puberty timing highlights shared genetic basis with hair colour and lifespan. Nat Commun 2020;11(1):1536. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/2Fs41467-020-14451-5. Mar [cited 2020 Jul 3].

Shared genetic aetiology of puberty timing between sexes and with healthrelated outcomes. F R Day, B Bulik-Sullivan, D A Hinds, H K Finucane, J M Murabito, J Y Tung, 10.1038/2Fncomms9842Nat Commun. 61Day FR, Bulik-Sullivan B, Hinds DA, Finucane HK, Murabito JM, Tung JY, et al. Shared genetic aetiology of puberty timing between sexes and with health- related outcomes. Nat Commun 2015 Nov;6(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/ 2Fncomms9842.

Birth weight discordance, {DNA} methylation, and cortical morphology of adolescent monozygotic twins. K F Casey, M L Levesque, M Szyf, E Ismaylova, M-P Verner, M Suderman, 10.1002/2Fhbm.23503Hum Brain Mapp. 384Casey KF, Levesque ML, Szyf M, Ismaylova E, Verner M-P, Suderman M, et al. Birth weight discordance, {DNA} methylation, and cortical morphology of adolescent monozygotic twins. Hum Brain Mapp 2016 Dec;38(4):2037e50. https://doi.org/10.1002/2Fhbm.23503.

Over-and underdosage of {SOX}3 is associated with infundibular hypoplasia and hypopituitarism. K S Woods, M Cundall, J Turton, K Rizotti, A Mehta, R Palmer, 10.1086/2F430134Am J Hum Genet. 765Woods KS, Cundall M, Turton J, Rizotti K, Mehta A, Palmer R, et al. Over-and underdosage of {SOX}3 is associated with infundibular hypoplasia and hy- popituitarism. Am J Hum Genet 2005 May;76(5):833e49. https://doi.org/ 10.1086/2F430134.

Estimates of the prevalence of speech and motor speech disorders in persons with complex neurodevelopmental disorders. L D Shriberg, E A Strand, K J Jakielski, H L Mabie, 10.1080/2F02699206.2019.1595732Clin Linguist Phon. 338Shriberg LD, Strand EA, Jakielski KJ, Mabie HL. Estimates of the prevalence of speech and motor speech disorders in persons with complex neuro- developmental disorders. Clin Linguist Phon 2019 Jun;33(8):707e36. https:// doi.org/10.1080/2F02699206.2019.1595732.

Histopathologic investigations of the unphonated human child vocal fold mucosa. K Sato, H Umeno, T Nakashima, S Nonaka, Y Harabuchi, 10.1016/2Fj.jvoice.2010.10.006J Voice. 261Sato K, Umeno H, Nakashima T, Nonaka S, Harabuchi Y. Histopathologic in- vestigations of the unphonated human child vocal fold mucosa. J Voice 2012 Jan;26(1):37e43. https://doi.org/10.1016/2Fj.jvoice.2010.10.006.

Growth hormone deficiency: health and longevity. M H Aguiar-Oliveira, A Bartke, 10.1210/2Fer.2018-00216Endocr Rev. 402Aguiar-Oliveira MH, Bartke A. Growth hormone deficiency: health and longevity. Endocr Rev 2018 Dec;40(2):575e601. https://doi.org/10.1210/ 2Fer.2018-00216.

Voice formants in individuals with congenital, isolated, lifetime growth hormone deficiency. Eho Valença, R Salvatori, Aho Souza, L A Oliveira-Neto, Aha Oliveira, Mir Gonçalves, 10.1016/2Fj.jvoice.2015.03.015J Voice. 303Valença EHO, Salvatori R, Souza AHO, Oliveira-Neto LA, Oliveira AHA, Gonçalves MIR, et al. Voice formants in individuals with congenital, isolated, lifetime growth hormone deficiency. J Voice 2016 May;30(3):281e6. https:// doi.org/10.1016/2Fj.jvoice.2015.03.015.

Effects of therapy with semi-occluded vocal tract and choir training on voice in adult individuals with congenital, isolated, untreated growth hormone deficiency. Bmr De Andrade, Eho Valença, R Salvatori, Aho Souza, L A Oliveira-Neto, Aha Oliveira, 10.1016/2Fj.jvoice.2018.02.018808.e1e5J Voice. 335de Andrade BMR, Valença EHO, Salvatori R, Souza AHO, Oliveira-Neto LA, Oliveira AHA, et al. Effects of therapy with semi-occluded vocal tract and choir training on voice in adult individuals with congenital, isolated, untreated growth hormone deficiency. J Voice 2019 Sep;33(5):808.e1e5. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/2Fj.jvoice.2018.02.018.