# PAIN MANAGEMENT WITH PENTHROX INHALER IN PREHOSPITAL CARE:LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 234029162
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6387b1d7dbfc0b7a5eee7b2eb35475eb1224932f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6387b1d7dbfc0b7a5eee7b2eb35475eb1224932f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

PAIN MANAGEMENT WITH PENTHROX INHALER IN PREHOSPITAL CARE:LITERATURE REVIEW


Sobur Setiaman 
Yuly Peristiowati 
Agusta Dian Ellina 
PAIN MANAGEMENT WITH PENTHROX INHALER IN PREHOSPITAL CARE:LITERATURE REVIEW
10.21474/IJAR01/12374Received: 25 November 2020 Final Accepted: 28 December 2020 Published: January 2021Int. J. Adv. Res. 9(01), 941-949 941 RESEARCH ARTICLE Master Nursing Program, Nursing School, Institute Health Sciences of Strada Indonesia, Jl. Manila, No. 37, Kediri, Jawa Timur, Indonesia. …………………………………………………………………………………………………….... Manuscript Info Abstract ……………………. ……………………………………………………………… Manuscript HistoryPain ReliefPenthrox InhalerTrauma PainPre-Hospital


## ISSN: 2320-5407

Int. J. Adv. Res. 9(01), 941-949 942 Severe pain not addressed immediately can induce stress, increased the concentration of catecholamine, vasoconstriction, impaired tissue perfusion, tissue of oxygen pressure, hyperglycemia, lipolysis, protein catabolism, disrupted in the wound healing process, risk of wound infection, disturbance in the immune system, disruption of sodium and potassium activities in cells, decrease in cytotoxic T lymphocyte and reduced phagocytes activities (Kotfis et al., 2017).

Penthrox inhaler containing Methoxyflurane which serves asa non-narcotic analgesic effect and can easily be given through inhalation, single-use inhalermaygivenimmedeatlyin pre-hospital services by ambulance officers for relief a severe of trauma painand has been of use for more than 40 years in cases of pain management in Australia and New Zealand (Porter et al., 2018).

Since 1915the Authorities in the UK, allowed to use the methoxyflurane in ambulance services in handling cases of moderate to severe pain in cases of trauma or injury (Forrest et al., 2019), and Methoxyflurane is wide used in other mainland of Europe .

Methoxyflurane is a type of fluorinated hydrocarbon anesthetic, first produced by the company Abbott Laboratories under the trade name Penthrane in the early 1960s, Since 1970 the company About Laboratories developed Methoxyflurane in the form of a single-use inhaler package, and it can be used independently by patients for pain relief,especially in cases of minor and obstetric surgery (Porter et al., 2018).

Low-dose methoxyflurane has been approved by the authorities in Canada, for use in cases of severe acute pain associated with trauma an also for carrying out medical procedures in conscious patients (Campbell et al., 2020).

Methoxyfluraneis a nonnarcoticanelgesic drug, common used for relief severe pain due to injury of musculoskeletal trauma (Kenworthy et al., 2018).Penthorx inhaler is easy to use for handling pain cases in the Ambulance Helicopter service and very helpful in the process of handling pain quickly. Patients will get maximal 2 times 3 ml of Methoxyflurane can be done by the patient himself under medical supervision (Marinangeli et al., 2018).

Picture 1shows the Penthrox Inhaler. Penthrox inhaler contains 3 ml Methoxyflurane substances, which is inserted into the cavity of the inhaler tube, and then rotated around before inhaled through the mouth by the patient (Crankshaw, 2015).


## Picture 1:-Penthrox Inhaler Unit.

Picture 2describes how the Penthrox Inhaler works, where after the Penthrox drug is put into the suction tube, the air that is sucked in from the outside will push the penthrox substance into the respiratory tract, the respiratory tract then absorbs the Methoxyflurane quickly. 


## Inclusion Critera

The article inclusion criteria were: (1) Participants were adult cases with pain in trauma at the pre-hospital service, (2) The intervention used was Penthrox inhalation, (3) the results of the study showed the effect of reducing pain in trauma cases.


## Exclusion criteria

The articles exclusion criteria are as follows: articles that are less than 5 years, Non-English articles, non-human activity, duplicate articles, non-relevant articles, and articles that don't answer research questions.  


## Result and Disccusion: -Pain management with Penthrox Inhaler

A common problem in pain management in the emergency department and pre-hospital is the difficulty in injecting patients, especially in intravenous administration or patients who do not want to take oral medications because of nausea and vomiting. Failure to put the infusion in the ambulance can affect the delay in handling trauma pain, as well as the limited authority of ambulance officers to administer pain medication injections, penthrox inhaler is the choice of ambulance officers in handling trauma pain (Dißmann et al., 2018).Penthroxinhaleris an anesthetic drug as a trademark of Methoxyflurane, which has been used for more than 40 years in Australia in the management of traumatic pain, both in the pre-hospital and in the emergency department (Porter et al., 2018). Methoxyflurane is a fluorinated hydrocarbon anesthetic, where Penthtrox inhaler contains 3 ml per unit package or in terms of the low dose drug Methoxyflurane that can be used up to 6 ml in the treatment of trauma pain, when inhaled for 25-30 minutes, can provide analgesic effect (Porter et al., 2018). Penthrox inhaler is an alternative treatment for trauma pain and in minor surgical procedures or other medical procedures for both adults and children to treat pain due to the procedure (Porter et al., 2018).


## 947


## Benefit of PenthroxInhaler

The administration of Low Dose Methoxyflurane in cases of trauma pain showed a very significant effect, seen from the length of pain relief (mean 38.1 minutes with SD 34.7 minutes) compared to other analgesic drugs (mean 29.9 minutes with a SD 35.5 minute) (Xia et al., 2019).Giving Low Dose Methoxyflurane was given faster to the patient (mean 21.7 minutes with a SD 24.2 minutes) compared to other drugs (mean 39.2 with SD 43 minutes) (Xia et al., 2019).Traumatic pain was measured using the VAS (Visual analogue Scale) model, figure 4 is a form of VAS that is often used in the emergency department to measure the quality of pain levels (Karcioglu et al., 2018). With the provision of LDM, the pain reduction was with a VAS value, which stated very satisfying by 42.8% and satisfying 67.3%, while the VAS level with the administration of morphine injection showed very satisfying by 18.1% and a satisfactory level of 22. 8% (Voza et al., 2020).


## Gambar 3:-Visual Analogue Scale.


## Side effect of Penthrox Inhaler

The side effects of using gas drugs are generally seen, whether it causes neprotoxicity and the level of tolerability by the patient himself. Neprotoxicity occurs, depending on how long the drug is given and at what dose. The safe dose for using Pentrox inhaler is 3 ml, and can be repeated for 0.3 hours, the results show that the fluoride level in the serum is 4.7 micro mol/l, while the blood level is between 0.006-0.026 micro mol/l (Porter et al., 2018). The maximum point for safe use of Penthrox inhaler is a maximum of 2 hours (serum level 50 micro mol/l), if given between 2.5 -3 hours will cause sub-clinical symptoms of toxicity, and toxic levels occur when given more than 5 hours (serum level 90 micro mol/l) (Porter et al., 2018).The level of tolerability of drug use can be expressed by patients in the form of side effects. Side effects occurred when 3 ml of Penthrox inhaler was given with oxygen saturation less than 90%, some patients complained of mild headache and mild somnolence. Some patients complain of the smell of rotten fruit (Porter et al., 2018). 18.1% complained of nausea, euphoria, lightheadedness, hallucinations, dry throat, and paresthesia on the lips. Complaints in children after being given Penthrox inhaler, 25.7% experienced drowsiness and 6.7% experienced mild hallucinations (Porter et al., 2018).It can be concluded that giving Methoxyflurane to patients, must ensure the oxygen saturation level is above 90%, the maximum dose is 6 ml, can be given for 2 hours to reduce side effects.


## Penthrox Inhaler Exposure Level to the Ambulance Staff

Every use of a drug in the form of gas, can undeniably give negative exposure to the officer who gave it. The results of observations of giving Penthrox inhaler in 8 hours in a room without cold air conditioning showed that methoxyflurane gas exposure was 0.23 PPM while in a closed room, exposure to Methoxyflurane gas showed 1.5 PPM, the median of 0.017 (0.008-0.736) PPM, the maximum exposure limit the Methoxyflurane gas is 15 PPM. It can be concluded that giving Methoxyflurane during working hours,specifically 8 hours a day, is safe for use by ambulance officers in the handling of cases of trauma pain (Frangos et al., 2020).


## 948


## Conclusion:-

Common problems and difficulties in pain management in the emergency department and pre-hospital can be resolved easily and quickly by administering Penthrox inhalers compared to giving the patient injection, especially during intravenous administration or when the patient does not want to take oral medication. Penthrox inhaler when inhaled for 25-30 minutes, can provide an analgesic effect on traumatic pain, and provide a fast pain management effect and a longer analgesic effect compared to other methods of pain relief.Penthrox inhaler which contains a dose of 3 ml per package, is safe to use and can be administered by ambulance officers. Before administering the use of Penthrox inhaler, the oxygen saturation of the patients must be above 90% to reduce any possible side effects. The maximum dose of Penthrox inhaler for cases of trauma pain is 6 ml given for 2 hours. Penthrox inhaler does not expose the ambulance officers to lethal levels of exposure limit for Methoxyflurane gas when administering for 8 working hours to the patient.


## Suggestion:-

It is recommended that the authorities, namely the Ministry of Health and the Food and Drug Supervisory Agency, to conduct a clinical study of the use of Pentrox inhalers for patients of Asian ethnicity, especially Indonesians and give special permission to ambulance officers (paramedics or ambulance nurses) to use Pentrox inhalers in handling trauma pain cases, without a doctor's prescription.


The results of observations on 138 cases of trauma pain given by Penthrox inhaler, showed that the concentration of Penthrox exposure to officers was a median value of 8 hours: 0.017 (0.008, 0.736) ppm, the maximum LDM exposure level was 15 ppm / 8 hours. 95% CI: −10.49, −0.59mm; p = 0.029). Patients said -Excellent‖ or -Very good‖ to doctors more with LDM (42.8% to 7.3%) than those with morphine inj (18.1% to 22.8%). Non-serious side effects of using LDM were 20.4%, whereas with morphine inj 4.8%.Evaluation Quality of Article research 
Tabel 1:-Result of Literature Reviews. 
No Author 
Name Journal 
Vol, No, Year 

Title 
Metode 
Result 

1 
Patrick D. 
Dißmann, 
Maxime 
Maignan, 
Paul D. Cloves, 
Blanca 
Gutierrez 
Parres, 
Sara Dickerson, 
Alice Eberhardt. 

Pain Ther 
(2018) 7:179-
192 
doi.org/10.100 
7/s40122-018-
0101-1 

A Review of 
the Burden 
of Trauma 
Pain 
in 
EmergencyS 
ettings 
in 
Europe 

A 
literature 
review of pain 
management in 
prehospital and 
ED in Europe. 

ER: Mild to moderate pain, treated 
with Paracetamol and / or NSAIDs, 
N2O 
inhalation, 
Metamizole 
(dipyrone) 
inj, 
codeine 
and 
tramadol. Severe pain is treated 
with Fentanyl inj, oxycodone inj or 
Ketamine inj. 
Ambulance paramedics: only use 
LDM in pain management, and are 
not allowed to use injectable drugs. 
Failure to assess pain acuity leads to 
delays in pain management. 

2 
John Frangos, 
Anissa 
Belbachir, 
Sandrine 
Dautheville, 
Christiane Jung, 
Key Herklotz, 
Freya Amon, 
Sara Dickerson, 
BerangereChom 
ier. 

BMJ Open 
(2020);10:e03 
4647. 
doi:10.1136/ 
bmjopen-
2019-034647 

Non-
intervention 
al 
study 
evaluating 
exposure to 
inhaled, 
low-dose 
ethoxyfluran 
e 
experienced 
by hospital 
emergency 
department 
personnel in 
France 

Non-
Interventional 
Study. 
Evaluation 
of 
exposure 
to 
inhalation 
of 
LDM by a nurse-
supervised 
patient in the 
French 
emergency 
department for 
the next 2 weeks 
and 3 weeks. 

3 
Keith M Porter, 
Anthony D 
Dayan, 
Sara Dickerson, 
Paul M 
Middleton 

Open Access 
Emergency 
Medicine 
(2019) 
Https://www.d 
ovepress.com 
165.215.209.1 
5 
25-May-2019 

The role of 
inhaled 
methoxyflur 
ane in acute 
painmanage 
ment 

Literaturreviuw 
Methoxyflurane in cases of trauma 
and other medical measures, is very 
effective in reducing pain levels, 
good tolerance, is widely used as an 
analgesia. 
Low-dose methoxyflurane has good 
safety, minimal side effects, does 
not interfere with vital signs and 
level 
of 
consciousness. 
No 
nephrotoxicitas were found. 

No Author 
Name Journal Title 
Metode 
Result 
946 

Vol, No, Year 
4 
Andrew D Xia, 
Sara L 
Dickerson, 
Andrew 
Watson, 
Mika Nokela, 
Sam Colman, 
AgotaSzende 

Open Access 
Emergency 
Medicine 
(2019):11 
229-240 

Evaluation 
of pain relief 
treatment 
and 
timelines 
inemergency 
care in six 
European 
countries 
and 
Australia 

Observational of 
the 
medical 
records 
of 
patients 
who 
entered the ER 
with cases of 
musculoskeletal 
trauma 
and 
administered 
analgesics with 
LDM. 

Looking at the 
speed 
of 
Paramedics 
compared to ER 
officers in pain 
management. 

Pain management in Europe was 
longer than that in Australia (mean 
[SD] 38.1 [34.7] vs 29.9 [35.5] 
mins; P = 0.0017). 
Australia 
was 
faster 
in 
administering LDM compared to 
other analgesic drugs in the 
management of pain cases than 
European countries: (propensity 
score matched [n = 85] per group: 
21.7 [24.2] vs 39.1 [43.0] mins; P = 
0.0013). 
Paramedics decided to administer 
LDM more quickly than hospital 
emergency staff (15.7 [14.7] vs 49.1 
[38.4] mins). 

5 
Antonio Voza, 
GermanaRuggia 
no, 
Sossio Serra, 
Giuseppe 
Carpinteri, 
GianfilippoGan 
gitano, 
Fabio 
Intelligente, 
Elisabetta 
Bonafede, 
Antonella 
Sblendido, 
Alberto Farina, 
Amedeo Soldi, 
Andrea Fabbri 

Inhaled 
Methoxyflur 
ane versus 
Intravenous 
Morphine 
for Severe 
Trauma 
Pain in the 
Emergency 
Setting: 
Subgroup 
Analysis of 
MEDITA, a 
Multicenter, 
Randomized, 
Controlled, 
Open-Label 
Trial 

Investigate the 
efficiency 
and 
safety of using 
LDM compared 
to 
injecting 
morphine 
in 
severe cases of 
trauma pain. 

Pain decreased 10 minutes after 
LDM administration compared with 
morphine inj (adjusted mean 
treatment difference: −5.54mm; 


P129: A phase IV real world study on the use of low dose methoxyflurane (PENTHROXTM) for the treatment of moderate to severe trauma pain in the Canadian emergency department (ADVANCE-ED): an interim report on secondary outcomes. S Campbell, E Simard, A Arcand, L Blagrove, P Piraino, S &amp;dhani, 10.1017/cem.2020.333Cjem. 22S1Campbell, S., Simard, E., Arcand, A., Blagrove, L., Piraino, P., &Dhani, S. (2020). P129: A phase IV real world study on the use of low dose methoxyflurane (PENTHROXTM) for the treatment of moderate to severe trauma pain in the Canadian emergency department (ADVANCE-ED): an interim report on secondary outcomes. Cjem, 22(S1), S111-S111. https://doi.org/10.1017/cem.2020.333

Stability of methoxyflurane loaded Penthrox Inhaler. D P Crankshaw, 10.1002/j.2055-2335.2009.tb00473.xJournal of Pharmacy Practice and Research. 394Crankshaw, D. P. (2015). Stability of methoxyflurane loaded Penthrox Inhaler. Journal of Pharmacy Practice and Research, 39(4), 274-276. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2055-2335.2009.tb00473.x

A Review of the Burden of Trauma Pain in Emergency Settings in. P D Dißmann, M Maignan, P D Cloves, B Gutierrez Parres, S Dickerson, A Eberhardt, 10.1007/s40122-018-0101-1Europe. Pain and Therapy. 72Dißmann, P. D., Maignan, M., Cloves, P. D., Gutierrez Parres, B., Dickerson, S., & Eberhardt, A. (2018). A Review of the Burden of Trauma Pain in Emergency Settings in Europe. Pain and Therapy, 7(2), 179-192. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40122-018-0101-1

Methoxyflurane Versus Standard of Care for Acute Trauma-Related Pain in the Emergency Setting: Protocol for a Randomised, Controlled Study in Italy (MEDITA). A Fabbri, G Carpinteri, G Ruggiano, E Bonafede, A Sblendido, A Farina, A Soldi, I Bartoli, F Bermano, M Chiesa, D Mura, M Oppes, P Masciari, D Torti, V Iorno, A Voza, P Paolini, S Serra, G Gangitano, R &amp;francesconi, 10.1007/s12325-018-0830-xAdvances in Therapy. 361Fabbri, A., Carpinteri, G., Ruggiano, G., Bonafede, E., Sblendido, A., Farina, A., Soldi, A., Bartoli, I., Bermano, F., Chiesa, M., Mura, D., Oppes, M., Masciari, P., Torti, D., Iorno, V., Voza, A., Paolini, P., Serra, S., Gangitano, G., &Francesconi, R. (2019). Methoxyflurane Versus Standard of Care for Acute Trauma-Related Pain in the Emergency Setting: Protocol for a Randomised, Controlled Study in Italy (MEDITA). Advances in Therapy, 36(1), 244-256. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-018-0830-x

Methoxyflurane (Penthrox® )-a case series of use in the prehospital setting. M Forrest, K Porter, J Van Der Velde, 10.12968/jpar.2019.11.2.54Journal of Paramedic Practice. 112Forrest, M., Porter, K., & van der Velde, J. (2019). Methoxyflurane (Penthrox® )-a case series of use in the prehospital setting. Journal of Paramedic Practice, 11(2), 54-60. https://doi.org/10.12968/jpar.2019.11.2.54

Non-interventional study evaluating exposure to inhaled, low-dose methoxyflurane experienced by hospital emergency department personnel in France. J Frangos, A Belbachir, S Dautheville, C Jung, K Herklotz, F Amon, S Dickerson, B &amp;chomier, 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-034647BMJ Open. 102Frangos, J., Belbachir, A., Dautheville, S., Jung, C., Herklotz, K., Amon, F., Dickerson, S., &Chomier, B. (2020). Non-interventional study evaluating exposure to inhaled, low-dose methoxyflurane experienced by hospital emergency department personnel in France. BMJ Open, 10(2), 1-7. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen- 2019-034647

A systematic review of the pain scales in adults: Which to use?. O Karcioglu, H Topacoglu, O Dikme, O &amp;dikme, 10.1016/j.ajem.2018.01.008The American Journal of Emergency Medicine. 36In American Journal of Emergency MedicineKarcioglu, O., Topacoglu, H., Dikme, O., &Dikme, O. (2018). A systematic review of the pain scales in adults: Which to use? In American Journal of Emergency Medicine (Vol. 36, Issue 4, pp. 707-714). The American Journal of Emergency Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2018.01.008

Psy43 -Budget Impact Analysis of Methoxyflurane (Penthrox®) for Emergency Relief of Moderate-To-Severe Trauma Pain in the Swedish Setting. J Kenworthy, S Langham, A Wright, W Dunlop, 10.1016/j.jval.2018.09.2620Value in Health. 21Kenworthy, J., Langham, S., Wright, A., & Dunlop, W. (2018). Psy43 -Budget Impact Analysis of Methoxyflurane (Penthrox®) for Emergency Relief of Moderate-To-Severe Trauma Pain in the Swedish Setting. Value in Health, 21, S443. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2018.09.2620

Methods of pain assessment in adult intensive care unit patients-Polish version of the CPOT (Critical Care Pain Observation Tool) and BPS (Behavioral Pain Scale). K Kotfis, M Zegan-Baraska, L Szydlowski, M Ukowski, E W Ely, 10.5603/AIT.2017.0010Anaesthesiology Intensive Therapy. 491Kotfis, K., Zegan-Baraska, M., SzydLowski, L., Ukowski, M., & Ely, E. W. (2017). Methods of pain assessment in adult intensive care unit patients-Polish version of the CPOT (Critical Care Pain Observation Tool) and BPS (Behavioral Pain Scale). Anaesthesiology Intensive Therapy, 49(1), 66-72. https://doi.org/10.5603/AIT.2017.0010

Comparison of inhalational methoxyflurane (Penthrox®) and intramuscular tramadol for prehospital analgesia. K J Lim, Z X Koh, Y Y Ng, S Fook-Chong, A F W H Ho, N E Doctor, N A Z M Said, M E H Ong, 10.11622/smedj.2020035Singapore Med J. 20201Lim, K. J., Koh, Z. X., Ng, Y. Y., Fook-Chong, S., Ho, A. F. W. H., Doctor, N. E., Said, N. A. Z. M., & Ong, M. E. H. (2020). Comparison of inhalational methoxyflurane (Penthrox®) and intramuscular tramadol for prehospital analgesia. Singapore Med J 2020, 1-17, 51(1), 1-1. https://doi.org/10.11622/smedj.2020035

Prospective, Multicentre Trial of Methoxyflurane for Acute Trauma-Related Pain in Helicopter Emergency Medical Systems and Hostile 949. F Marinangeli, G Reggiardo, A Sblendido, A Soldi, A Farina, Marinangeli, F., Reggiardo, G., Sblendido, A., Soldi, A., & Farina, A. (2018). Prospective, Multicentre Trial of Methoxyflurane for Acute Trauma-Related Pain in Helicopter Emergency Medical Systems and Hostile 949

. 10.1007/s12325-018-0816-8Environments: METEORA Protocol. Advances in Therapy. 3511Environments: METEORA Protocol. Advances in Therapy, 35(11), 2081-2092. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325- 018-0816-8

Comparison of Visual Analog Pain Score Reported to Physician vs Nurse. K D Martin, J P Van Buren, J Wake, L Dawson, Foot and Ankle International. 393Martin, K. D., Van Buren, J. P., Wake, J., & Dawson, L. (2018). Comparison of Visual Analog Pain Score Reported to Physician vs Nurse. Foot and Ankle International, 39(3), 300-303.

. 10.1177/1071100717740584https://doi.org/10.1177/1071100717740584

Analgesic Efficacy, Practicality and Safety of Inhaled Methoxyflurane Versus Standard Analgesic Treatment for Acute Trauma Pain in the Emergency Setting: A Randomised, Open-Label, Active-Controlled, Multicentre Trial in Italy (MEDITA). S Mercadante, A Voza, S Serra, G Ruggiano, G Carpinteri, G Gangitano, F Intelligente, E Bonafede, A Sblendido, A Farina, A Soldi, A &amp;fabbri, 10.1007/s12325-019-01055-9Advances in Therapy. 3611Mercadante, S., Voza, A., Serra, S., Ruggiano, G., Carpinteri, G., Gangitano, G., Intelligente, F., Bonafede, E., Sblendido, A., Farina, A., Soldi, A., &Fabbri, A. (2019). Analgesic Efficacy, Practicality and Safety of Inhaled Methoxyflurane Versus Standard Analgesic Treatment for Acute Trauma Pain in the Emergency Setting: A Randomised, Open-Label, Active-Controlled, Multicentre Trial in Italy (MEDITA). Advances in Therapy, 36(11), 3030-3046. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-019-01055-9

The role of inhaled methoxyflurane in acute pain management. K M Porter, A D Dayan, S Dickerson, P M Middleton, Open Access Emergency Medicine. 10Porter, K. M., Dayan, A. D., Dickerson, S., & Middleton, P. M. (2018). The role of inhaled methoxyflurane in acute pain management. Open Access Emergency Medicine, 10, 149-164.

. 10.2147/OAEM.S181222https://doi.org/10.2147/OAEM.S181222

Reviewing the literature. Evid Based Nurs. J Smith, H Noble, Number 1 |. 191Smith, J., & Noble, H. (2016). Reviewing the literature. Evid Based Nurs January 2016 | Volume 19 | Number 1 |, 19(1), 66-75.

Inhaled methoxyflurane versus intravenous morphine for severe trauma pain in the emergency setting: Subgroup analysis of MEDITA, a multicenter, randomized, controlled, open-label trial. A Voza, G Ruggiano, S Serra, G Carpinteri, G Gangitano, F Intelligente, E Bonafede, A Sblendido, A Farina, A Soldi, A &amp;fabbri, 10.2147/JPR.S240911Journal of Pain Research. 13Voza, A., Ruggiano, G., Serra, S., Carpinteri, G., Gangitano, G., Intelligente, F., Bonafede, E., Sblendido, A., Farina, A., Soldi, A., &Fabbri, A. (2020). Inhaled methoxyflurane versus intravenous morphine for severe trauma pain in the emergency setting: Subgroup analysis of MEDITA, a multicenter, randomized, controlled, open-label trial. Journal of Pain Research, 13, 491-502. https://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S240911

Evaluation of pain relief treatment and timelines inemergency care in six european countries and Australia. A D Xia, S L Dickerson, A Watson, M Nokela, S Colman, A &amp;szende, 10.2147/OAEM.S214396Open Access Emergency Medicine. 11Xia, A. D., Dickerson, S. L., Watson, A., Nokela, M., Colman, S., &Szende, A. (2019). Evaluation of pain relief treatment and timelines inemergency care in six european countries and Australia. Open Access Emergency Medicine, 11, 229-240. https://doi.org/10.2147/OAEM.S214396.