# Applications of MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) in photocatalysis: a review

CorpusID: 234171137
 
tags: #Chemistry, #Materials_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/41f191c3a037831d4677d9dabb1b014186516436](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/41f191c3a037831d4677d9dabb1b014186516436)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Applications of MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) in photocatalysis: a review


Xing Li 
Yang Bai 
Xian Shi 
Na Su 
Gongzhe Nie 
Rumeng Zhang 
Hongbo Nie 
Liqun Ye 
Applications of MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) in photocatalysis: a review
10.1039/d0ma00938e
MXenes are two-dimensional nanomaterials, which can be constructed from different elements. The rich interlayer groups, surface groups, and the flexible layer spacing of MXenes make them ideal catalysts. Among these, Ti 3 C 2 T x has gained particular attention as a photocatalyst for photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reactions (CO 2 RR), hydrogen evolution reactions (HER), and photocatalytic degradation reactions. The structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x , hydrophilic surface functional groups, and the Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption lead to the excellent photocatalytic HER performance of this material. Numerous surface defects on Ti 3 C 2 T x also provide plentiful CO 2 adsorption sites for CO 2 RR. It is the structure of two-dimensional nanomaterials and their high-speed electron transport channels that enable their excellent catalytic oxidation activity. However, at present, there are still challenges that limit their further application, the most significant of which is the material stability. In order to overcome this, the synthetic routes to prepare these photocatalysts need to be adapted. Fig. 24 Trapping experiment for the photocatalytic degradation of TC over GTOCN3 (a); ESR spectra of CNTOC3 for (b) DMPO-O 2 À , (c) TEMPO-h + , (d) DMPO-OH in the dark and under visible light irradiation, I-T curves under visible light irradiation (e) and the EIS response (f) of the samples. 105 1590 | Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570À1594

# Introduction

Photocatalysis is an environment-friendly technology developed in the 20th century. When light is absorbed by some special semiconductors, namely ''photocatalysts'', electrons (e À ) originally in the valence band (VB) are excited to the conduction band (CB) and holes (h + ) are formed in the initial position. Free electrons with strong reducibility can reduce the valence state of some elements in compounds (such as carbon in CO 2 and nitrogen in N 2 ) when regular methods are not useful or cost too much. Thus far, photocatalysis has shown its huge application prospects in clean energy, environmental remediation, and many other fields; currently, researchers are heading towards new photocatalyst development and reaction mechanisms. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), CO 2 reduction reaction (CO 2 RR), and photocatalytic degradation reaction represent the three main aspects of photocatalysis.

Photocatalytic nanomaterials have an extensive number of potential applications. When their particle size is below a certain value, the Fermi level of the electronic energy levels morphs from continuous to discrete levels and the energy gap grows wider. These semiconductors are, therefore, more susceptible to photon excitation, which improves their photocatalytic activity. 1 Nanomaterials can be divided into four categories, according to the dimensions of their structural scale: (1) zero-dimensional materials, e.g., groups of nanostructure clusters; (2) onedimensional nanomaterials, e.g., fibrous nanotubes, nanowires, nanoribbons, or other related structures; (3) two-dimensional nanomaterials, e.g., layered nanomaterials, quantum wells, superlattices, and other structures; (4) three-dimensional nanomaterials, e.g., composite structures consisting of one or more zero-dimensional, one-dimensional, or two-dimensional nanomaterials. The first three are collectively known as low Vannami materials. In low Vannami materials, two-dimensional nanomaterials show significant changes in the surface, electron energy levels, state density, and other aspects compared with three-dimensional materials. This due to the fact that their thickness is greatly reduced compared to other two-dimensional materials; thus, these possess unique optical and electronic characteristics, which make them a hot topic in catalysis. 2,3 MXenes are two-dimensional nanomaterials and have a general material formula of M n+1 X n T x . In this formula, M represents nitrogen or carbon, X is generally a transition metal element, and T represents the functional groups. MXenes typically consist of transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbides that are several Cite this: Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570 a State Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation, School of atomic layers thick. It was first reported in 2011 4 that MXene materials have comparable conductivity towards transition metal carbides due to the presence of hydroxy groups or terminal oxygen species on their surfaces. The most important feature of this range of materials is that, unlike conventional battery materials, they provide more channels for ions to move through, thus dramatically increasing their speed.

Ti 3 C 2 T x was the first discovered MXene material and is also the most widely used MXene material in the field of photocatalysis. [5][6][7] It was first obtained by etching the Al layer of Ti 3 AlC 2 with hydrofluoric acid. In this paper, the application of Ti 3 C 2 T x as a photocatalyst and approaches to improve its catalytic performance are summarized.

2 MXene 2.1 From MAX to MXene. MXenes are a type of twodimensional nanomaterials with covalent bonds formed between the early transition elements and nitrogen or carbon elements. This furnishes an intramolecular skeleton in which the layers are connected by hydrogen bonds. Since the first Mxene, Ti 3 C 2 T x , was discovered in 2011, more than 20 kinds of MXene materials including M 2 X, M 3 X 2 , and M 4 X 3 have been successively prepared. 7,8 Due to their unique structure and properties, MXenes have been widely favored for use in battery applications.

The preparation of MXenes can be divided into two approaches, namely, bottom-up and top-down. Presently, the top-down etching method is commonly employed. This is due to the MAX phase 9,10 (commonly, M means early transition metal elements such as Ti and Nb; A represents the Al or Si layer; X represents C or N elements) as M is mainly composed of metallic bonds between the atoms, which are connected to A. The chemical properties are largely dictated by A. By using certain concentrations of hydrofluoric acid or LiF/HCl 11 to etch the MAX phase of Ti 3 AlC 2 , ternary carbides within the titanium carbon layers become closer to each other. In this process, the Al layer is etched away gradually, resulting in a greater carbontitanium interlayer spacing in the Ti 3 C 2 T x product. In order to obtain Ti 3 AlC 2 with a graphene-like structure consisting of only a few or single layers, mechanical or chemical intercalation dissection is required. However, when chemical intercalation is used for stripping, some organic molecules may occupy the active sites exposed on the surface, which is unfavorable for photocatalytic reactions.

Etching is a slow process, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In this process, Al layers are gradually peeled off, while the Ti-C skeleton layers are not damaged because of their strong ionic bonding. 12 Free groups such as -OH and some H 2 O molecules enter into the framework of Ti-C and become inter-connected by hydrogen bonds, which expands the layer spacing of Ti 3 C 2 T x . This permits ions with a large radius to enter the layer spacing, 13 providing an operating space for the ion intercalation method to peel-off few layers of Ti 3 C 2 T x . The number of -OH groups and H 2 O molecules within the interlayer space accounts for the large electrical capacity of Ti 3 C 2 T x .

Ti 3 C 2 T x obtained by direct etching with hydrofluoric acid possesses a different morphology to Ti 3 C 2 T x obtained by etching with LiF/HCl. Furthermore, NMR spectroscopy revealed a greater number of -OH and -F functional groups on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 T x etched by hydrofluoric acid, while LiF/HCl etching furnished a material with predominantly -O functional groups.

2.2 Structure and properties of Ti 3 C 2 T x 2.2.1 Structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x . As shown in Fig. 2(a), the structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x is comprised of three parts: the intralayer skeleton region, the interlayer region, and the surface terminating groups. In the intramolecular skeleton region, Ti atoms and C atoms are stacked alternately to form ionic bonds, and the skeleton of the entire main structure is formed on this basis. In the interlayer region, it was found through neutron diffraction that the interaction between the layers is established through hydrogen bonding between either O or F atoms on the surface and van der Waals forces between these atoms. The strength of interlayer hydrogen bonding depends not only on the orientation of -OH relative to the entire sheet but also on the number and distribution of the -OH groups. When there is water between the layers, it can also participate in hydrogen bonding. In addition, a large number of terminal groups are randomly distributed on the surface of the Ti 3 C 2 T x main structure. These surface groups are directly bonded to the exposed surface and Ti 3 C 2 T x is obtained by top-down etching, which mainly includes surface groups such as -O, -OH, and -F. After a period of placement, the -F groups can be replaced by -O groups. The surface groups have a great influence on the properties of the Ti 3 C 2 T x formed, which can be analyzed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (TEM), 14,15 neutron scattering, 16 and NMR techniques. 17,18 These experiments confirm that the surface functional groups of Ti 3 C 2 T x are randomly distributed with -O, -OH, and -F all directly bonded to the surface of the exposed MXene plane. Furthermore, there are no adjacent -OH functional groups found between the layers. The presence of cations between the layers causes the MXene lamellae to slide easily relative to each other, changing their rheological properties and resulting in their clay-like properties.

2.2.2 Properties of Ti 3 C 2 T x . The structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x determines the electric storage performance. As Ti 3 C 2 T x has a wide spacing between the layers, the ions can travel through the layers at a high speed, whilst the hydroxyl or terminal oxygen groups on the surface furnish a material with excellent conductivity. Both factors are important for the use of these MXene materials in batteries. [20][21][22][23][24][25] Various surface groups (such as -O, -F, and -OH) have supplied abundant anchored sites for the base photocatalyst to form efficient heterojunction structures, which are ideal for photocatalytic activities. 26 There is also a large number of exposed metal sites on the surface, which can be used as active sites for reactions.

The surface chemical state of MXene materials has a large influence on the regulation of its physical properties. When -F on the surface is replaced by an -O group, the electrochemical performance is improved. For example, when Ti 3 C 2 T x is treated with a KOH and CH 3 OOK solution, the -O groups on the surface increase, along with the electric capacity. Under an atmosphere of N 2 , Ar, or other inert gases, the number of -F groups on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 T x is reduced, after which the electrical capacity is greatly increased.

Ti 3 C 2 T x shows an excellent absorption of light between 300 nm and 500 nm. 27 Recently, researchers have even found that the absorption can be broadened to the near-infrared (NIR) region. According to a further study, this may be related to its surface plasmon resonance (SPR), and the thinner the material, the stronger the SPR. 28 Such a peculiarity makes Ti 3 C 2 T x an ideal photothermal co-catalyst.

2.2.3 Instability of Ti 3 C 2 T x . MXenes typically have poor stability. Ti 3 C 2 T x is rapidly oxidized when heated under CO 2 , air, and other environments, and when the surface groups are all -O, Ti 3 C 2 O 2 exhibits metallic properties. 29,30 Ti 3 C 2 T x is also slowly oxidized when exposed to air under atmospheric conditions. After oxidation, Ti 3 C 2 T x is called oxidized MXene (denoted as MO).     When Ti 3 C 2 T x is oxidized, it is only the Ti atoms that are oxidized into the corresponding oxide (TiO 2 ), while the C atoms remain unchanged. In other words, MO comprises a sandwich structure of layered carbon layers and titanium oxide. 31 Fig. 3 shows the structural evolution of Ti 3 C 2 T x oxidation to MXene (MO). As can be seen from Fig. 3, MO maintains a layered structure, whilst the TiO 2 nanoparticles formed by oxidation are coated within the carbon layer structure. Due to the photoresponse capacity of TiO 2 , this resulting structure is photocatalytically active. An example of this is MO/g-C 3 N 4 , which can photocatalytically split water with a relatively high efficiency. 32 The crystal structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x contains Ti defects, which appear to contribute significantly to the instability of this material. 14,33 High angle annular dark field (HAADF)-STEM imaging is an important tool in 2D materials' characterization and is used to unambiguously resolve the crystal structure and defect configurations. 34,35 As shown in Fig. 4, widespread Ti defects were directly detected through the HAADF-STEM imaging of the single-layer Ti 3 C 2 T x flakes. Single-layered Ti 3 C 2 T x obtained by HF etching was observed through HAADF-STEM images in Fig. 4(a)-(c). Fig. 4(d) was obtained by calculating tens of such images, and it reveals that the relationship between HF concentration and defect formation. It was found that vacancy clusters are rarely observed after etching with 2.7 wt% HF concentration but are relatively common after etching with 7 wt% HF. 33 Generally speaking, the average concentration of V Ti (Ti vacancies) is positively related to that of HF.


## Application in photocatalysis

Due to the excellent structural properties of Ti 3 C 2 T x , there are many cases in which Ti 3 C 2 T x is used as a co-catalyst in photocatalytic systems or is directly involved in photocatalytic reaction systems. This paper summarizes the application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in the field of photocatalysis from three aspects: photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions (HER), photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reactions (CO 2 RR), and photocatalytic degradation reactions.


## Application in HER

Ti 3 C 2 T x is the most widely used photocatalytic agent in hydrogen evolution reactions [36][37][38][39]. Ti 3 C 2 T x has the following advantages that make it ideal for use in photolysis: (a) hydrophilic surface functional groups are conducive for the adsorption of water molecules and promote the reaction; and (b) the Gibbs free energy of Ti 3 C 2 T x adsorption on hydrogen approaches zero infinitely, which is conducive for the reduction of H + .

There are three important steps in the HER process, which are: 30,40,41 (a) initial h + + e À formation; (b) generation of H* (the intermediate adsorption state); and (c) formation of the 1/2 H 2 product. The adsorption state of H* in process (b) directly affects the final hydrogen evolution efficiency and is an extremely important factor, which can be represented by the Gibbs adsorption free energy |DG H* |. Through simulation calculations, it was found that when all the Ti 3 C 2 T x surface groups are -F, DG H* = À0.927 eV, and the adsorption is too strong. When all the surface groups are -O, |DG H* | is 0.003 eV, which is even better than the commonly used catalyst Pt (DG H* E À 0.090 eV). 42,43 Therefore, Ti 3 C 2 T x is a good HER co-catalyst. Examples of Ti 3 C 2 T x used for photolysis in recent years are summarized below (Table 1).

Ti 3 C 2 T x plays a significant role in HER, whether as a co-catalyst or as a part of the overall catalyst, as it greatly improves the performance of the base catalyst. As shown in Table 1, the presence of Ti 3 C 2 T x increases the yield of H 2 compared to solely the base catalyst by more than 2 times. The quantum efficiency is also significantly improved to 40.1%, whilst the maximum value of hydrogen production is 14.34 mmol g À1 h À1 .

Monolayer Ti 3 C 2 T x or quantum dot Ti 3 C 2 T x displays better activity in HER. However, the use of monolayer Ti 3 C 2 T x as a photocatalyst has several disadvantages: (a) the preparation of monolayer Ti 3 C 2 T x is complex; (b) the structural stability is low and the catalyst is easily oxidized in water; (c) manipulation of the mono-layer or few-layer structures is not easy to carry out. Few-layer structures are presently prepared by electrostatic selfassembly or by in situ growth. The stability of the composite catalyst obtained by in situ growth is significantly greater than that obtained by electrostatic self-assembly.

Due to the surface hydrophilic groups, 70 suitable Gibbs adsorption free energies |DG H* |, and excellent electron transfer efficiency, Ti 3 C 2 T x not only plays an important role in the threestep process of HER but can participate in electron hole separation.

Xiao et al. successfully synthesized the Schottky junction of 1D CdS nanorod/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene nanosheet in 2019. 52 As shown in Fig. 5, Xiao et al. anchored Cd 2+ using the deficiency of Ti on the Ti 3 C 2 surface and the electrostatic interaction of free Cd 2+ to prepare the 1D CdS nanorods. The composite material demonstrated excellent hydrogen production performance (2407 mmol h À1 g catalyst À1 ), producing 6.68 times as much H 2 as pure CdS (Fig. 6).

Theoretically, the surface negative value (zeta potential value: B18 mV) of Ti 3 C 2 T x is sufficient to adsorb positively charged Cd 2+ . Ti 3 C 2 T x treated with DMSO forms a low-layered structure, on which Cd 2+ can be anchored and one-dimensional CdS nanorods can be grown. As shown in Fig. 5, due to the constraint effect of Ti 3 C 2 T x , the length of 1D CdS nanorods in the 1D CdS nanorods/2D Ti 3 C 2 T x heterojunctions is smaller than that of the 1D CdS nanorods alone.

CdS equipped with Ti 3 C 2 T x displays excellent electrochemical properties. As shown in Fig. 7, the photocurrent of 1D CdS nanorods/2D Ti 3 C 2 T x was significantly better than that of onedimensional CdS nanorods and the optical resistance was significantly lower than that of one-dimensional CdS nanorods. ESR tests show that the hydroxyl radical and superoxide radical signals of 1D CdS nanorods/2D Ti 3 C 2 T x were significantly enhanced after the addition of Ti 3 C 2 T x . In conclusion, under the same illumination conditions, 1D CdS nanorods/2D Ti 3 C 2 T x generate more photogenic carriers. These produce oxygen-containing  groups with oxidizing reductivity, which can participate in photocatalytic hydrogenation reactions. 1D CdS nanorods/2D Ti 3 C 2 T x typically exhibit better visible light response, electron hole separation efficiency, and more effective carrier transport efficiency after the formation of multi-dimensional heterojunctions. This accounts for their excellent photocatalytic hydrogen evolution capability.

Using Ti 3 C 2 T x as the co-catalyst, Wang et al. synthesized a TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x complex photocatalyst, 45 which was 4 times more efficient than pure phase TiO 2 in photohydrolyzing aquatic hydrogen. This is attributed to the Schottky barrier formed between TiO 2 and Ti 3 C 2 T x , which effectively improves the separation efficiency of the electron holes. As shown in Scheme 1, excited electrons can be wired to Ti 3 C 2 T x from the conduction band of TiO 2 owing to the close contact between Ti 3 C 2 T x and TiO 2 ; thus, negative charge is accumulated in Ti 3 C 2 T x and a depletion layer formed at the metal-semiconductor interface, which is the Schottky barrier. 45 In this work, Wang et al. treated Ti 3 C 2 T x with DMSO to form low-layer structures. Amorphous TiO 2 was formed from TiCl 4 hydrolysis and then on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 T x , amorphous TiO 2 was coated. After hydrothermal treatment, anatase TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x material was formed, as shown in Fig. 8. Amorphous TiO 2 is micro-spherical and is coated on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 T x , displaying a low-layered structure (Fig. 8). After water heat treatment, the whole structure forms into a brittle cake structure (Fig. 9).

The TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x material displays excellent photocatalytic hydrogen evolution capability with good cycling stability. The hydrogen production efficiency of TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x -5% is about 4 times as high as Fig. 9 (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen production rates and (b) recycling studies over the TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x (5 wt%) sample. 45 Fig. 10 (a) PL spectra and (b) DRS spectra of TiO 2 , TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x (5 wt%), TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x (10 wt%), and TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x (50 wt%). 45 that of pure phase TiO 2 , reaching 17.8 mmol h À1 g catalyst


## À1

. The hydrogen production efficiency of the 10% and 50% samples decreased slightly, which may be related to light energy absorption, as shown in Fig. 10(a). With the increase in Ti 3 C 2 T x addition, the light absorption capacity of the samples in the 250-380 nm region is gradually decreased. This significant improvement in the hydrogen production efficiency is closely related to the smooth carriage of Ti 3 C 2 T x . As shown in Fig. 10(b), after the formation of the Schottky barrier, the carrier separation efficiency is improved, thus improving its photocatalytic capacity.

Thus, in conclusion, after loading with Ti 3 C 2 T x , H 2 production increased at least twice. Such an amazing promotion is mainly related with 3 aspects of Ti 3 C 2 T x : (a) it supplies a high throughput channel as a co-catalyst for the excited electrons while the holes cannot pass the boundaries; (b) its hydrophilcity; and (c) the Gibbs free energy of Ti 3 C 2 T x adsorption on hydrogen approaches zero infinitely.


## Application in CO 2 RR

The photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction (CO 2 RR) consists of five steps: 71-74 light absorption, charge separation, CO 2 adsorption, surface redox reaction, and product desorption. As shown in Fig. 11, when the CB of the photocatalyst is greater than the redox potential of CO 2 , and charge separation occurs whilst the electrons and holes recombine. Several complex factors dictate which of these two competing processes predominantly occurs. After the adsorption of CO 2 and the migration of photogenerated electrons and holes from the inside of the crystal structure to the surface, the redox reaction is carried out on the surface of the catalyst. The product then de-attaches, which completes the entire photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction.

Ti 3 C 2 T x is also widely used in the photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction. However, due to its own carbon source and instability, further research is needed to understand the mechanism of photocatalytic CO 2 reduction of Ti 3 C 2 T x .

In 2017, Zhang et al. summarized the CO 2 reduction capacity of three MXene materials with surface groups, which terminate with -O through theoretical calculations. 75 Among the three materials, Ti 2 CO 2 , V 2 CO 2 , and Ti 3 C 2 O 2 , Ti 2 CO 2 showed the best photocatalytic CO 2 reduction capacity. Of the two reduction paths [76][77][78] shown in Fig. 12, the pathway of ''CO 2 -HCOO-HCOOH'' has a favorable energy barrier of about 0.53 eV.

Through DFT calculations, it was revealed that in the first step reaction of CO 2 adsorption in CO 2 RR, the O atom of the CO 2 molecule occupies an O defect position on the MXene. This mode in adsorption requires the lowest energy. The adsorption energies of the three materials were Ti 3 C 2 O 2 (À0.73 eV), Ti 2 CO 2 (À0.67 eV), and V 2 CO 2 (À0.35 eV). Ti 2 CO 2 has a lower adsorption energy compared to V 2 CO 2 as the Ti atoms are more likely to lose electrons than the V atoms.

If the reaction proceeds via pathway 1 (Fig. 11), one of the oxygen atoms of the CO 2 molecule is captured by the oxygen defect. This results in the breaking of the C-O bond, while CO is produced. In this step, Ti 3 C 2 O 2 would lower the energy barrier of the C-O bond to about 0.86 eV. Pathway 2 (Fig. 11) has an energy barrier greater than 1 eV. In this pathway, the CO 2 molecules are captured by an oxygen defect on the surface of MXene and are hydrogenated to form COOH. This is further hydrogenated and converted into the products CO and H 2 O. CO, which is produced, can further react to form HCOOH, HCOH, CH 2 OH, CH 4 , and other products.

Studies into the application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in CO 2 RR is summarized in Table 2.

In 2018, Cao et al. prepared a 2D/2D heterogeneous junction of Ti 3 C 2 T x /Bi 2 WO 6 and the composite showed excellent photocatalytic CO 2 reduction performance. 82 As shown in Fig. 13,  multi-layer structure Ti 3 C 2 T x was tested with DMSO. After the formation of low-layer structure Ti 3 C 2 T x , the oxygen-rich surface was negatively charged, which permitted Bi 3+ to be adsorbed from hydrolyzed Bi(NO 3 ) 35 5H 2 O. 84 After the addition of a tungsten source, a 2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 T x /Bi 2 WO 6 heterojunction was formed. The concurrent addition of CTAB furthermore ensures the ultrathin structure of both Bi 2 WO 6 85 and Ti 3 C 2 T x . 86 The successful preparation of heterojunctions greatly enhances the ability of Bi 2 WO 6 to reduce CO 2 . The CH 4 production of the sample TB2 reached 1.78 mmol h À1 g À1 , while the yield of CH 3 OH reached 0.44 mmol h À1 g À1 . The isotopic spectra of Fig. 14(b) and (c) indicates that the produced CH 4 and CH 3 OH are formed from the photocatalytic reduction of CO 2 . As shown in Fig. 15(a), Ti 3 C 2 T x exhibits excellent light absorption performance between 200-800 nm. The light absorption capacity of Bi 2 WO 6 was also significantly improved by carrying Ti 3 C 2 T x . To be noted, as shown in Fig. 14(b), the fluorescence lifetime decreased after loading with Ti 3 C 2 T x . This is because TC supplies a more efficient non-radiative decay pathway. In electrochemical tests, the photocurrent photoelectric impedance spectrum further revealed that the carriage of Ti 3 C 2 T x greatly promoted the carrier strength of Bi 2 WO 6 . This further confirmed the successful construction of the Ti 3 C 2 T x /Bi 2 WO 6 heterojunction.

Yang et al. prepared 2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene/g-C 3 N 4 heterojunctions in 2020. 79 As shown in Fig. 16(g), Ti 3 AlC 2 was successfully etched to form Ti 3 C 2 , as indicated by the XRD patterns. 87,88 2D g-C 3 N 4 was found to grow on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 under an atmosphere of N 2 . The formed 2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene/g-C 3 N 4 demonstrated excellent photocatalytic CO 2 reduction capability. As shown in Fig. 17, the photocatalytic performance of pure phase g-C 3 N 4 for the production of CO and CH 4 is only 0.62 mmol h À1 g À1 and 0.021 mmol h À1 g À1 , respectively, in contrast to Ti 3 C 2 , wherein the production of CO and CH 4 is 5.19 mmol h À1 g À1 , 0.044 mmol h À1 g À1 , respectively. The isotopic experiments confirm that the product is produced by the photocatalytic reduction of CO 2 .

The tests of PL and TRPL showed that the composite rate of electron holes 45,89 decreased significantly after carrying Ti 3 C 2 . As shown in Fig. 18(b), the fitted pure phase C 3 N 4 had a lifetime of only 4.14 ns, while 10TC had a lifetime of 4.51 ns, which represents a significant increase in the lifetime of the carriers. This is closely related to the smooth carrying of Ti 3 C 2 . An excellent ''storage capacitor'' is produced when Ti 3 C 2 forms a heterojunction with g-C 3 N 4 . When the electrons are transmitted to the semiconductor surface, they transfer to Ti 3 C 2 quickly while the holes cannot. This greatly reduces the electron hole composite and improves the photocatalytic performance of the material. On the other hand, abundant defects on the Ti 3 C 2 surface provide excellent sites for CO 2 adsorption.

In conclusion, the application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in CO 2 RR is relatively less than that of photocatalytic water splitting. This is because of its instability and its own carbon resources, which can cause interferences during the photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction. As shown in Table 2, among limited reports, Ti 3 C 2 T x with both single-layered structures and multi-layered structures shows an obvious production promotion. It is to be noted that there are no new products (such as C 2 products, formaldehyde, and methyl ether) after loading with Ti 3 C 2 T x compared to the base photocatalyst. This phenomenon confirms that Ti 3 C 2 T x cannot change the energy barrier of the base photocatalyst for CO 2 reduction. Thus, in general, the obvious promotion during CO 2 RR may be related to the two features of Ti 3 C 2 T x : (a) abundant surface vacancies for CO 2 adsorption and (b) promoting the separation of carriers.


## Applications in degradation

The main principle of photocatalytic degradation by photocatalytic semiconductor materials is that light stimulates the generation of oxidizing holes. [90][91][92][93] These can oxidize dissolved oxygen into efficient oxygen-active species such as superoxide radicals ( O 2 À ), singlet oxygen ( O), and hydroxyl radicals ( OH). These species can directly oxidize the substrate. [94][95][96] Ti 3 C 2 has a wealth of surface groups and active sites, which are conducive for the adsorption of substrates. Accordingly, Ti 3 C 2 has been of particular interest as a photoactive degradation catalyst. A summary of the previous studies investigating the application of Ti 3 C 2 in photocatalytic degradation reactions is shown in Table 3. In 2018, Cai et al. produced a Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 composite photocatalyst, which possessed excellent photocatalytic degradation performance. 87 As shown in Fig. 19, after DMSO and sonication treatment, Ti 3 C 2 with a low-layer structure was formed. After the addition of silver nitrate, Ag + was adsorbed due to the negative charge on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 . Ag 3 PO 4 nanoparticles were grown in situ, forming a heterojunction between the Ag 3 PO 4 nanoparticles and the Ti 3 C 2 nanosheets.

As shown in Fig. 20, the heterojunction of the Ag 3 PO 4 nanoparticles/Ti 3 C 2 nanosheets shows a photocatalytic degradation stage rate K of 0.094, 0.005, 0.32, and 0.0042 min À1 for methyl orange (MO), 2,4-dinitrophenol (2,4-DNP), tetracycline (TC-H), thiamphenicol (TPL), and chloramphenicol (CPL), respectively. According to EPR analysis, the hydroxyl radical ( OH) plays an important role in the oxidation system, as shown in Fig. 20(f). This may be related to abundant Ti defects on the Ti 3 C 2 surface. Ti sites exposed on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 have strong redox reactivity, which promotes multiple electron reduction reactions (O 2 -H 2 O 2 -OH).

As shown in Fig. 21, PL, TRPL, and the electrochemical characterization spectra indicate that the carrier separation efficiency of the material is significantly improved after carrying Ti 3 C 2 . This may be attributed to (i) the abundant surface hydrophilic functional groups of the Ti 3 C 2 construct, which have strong interfacial contact with Ag 3 PO 4 , facilitating the separation of carriers; (ii) the strong redox reactivity of the surface Ti sites, which promote multiple electron reduction reactions to induce more OH production; and (iii) a Schottky junction formed at the Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 interface enabling efficient transfer electrons to the Ti 3 C 2 surface. This inhibits the photocossion of Ag 3 PO 4 caused by photogeneration electrons.

Under high temperature conditions, Ti in the Ti 3 C 2 skeleton layer is oxidized into TiO 2 , while C still exists in the form of a graphene-like layer. Therefore, under high temperature conditions, Ti 3 C 2 can be converted into amorphous TiO 2 anchored within the graphene-like layer. In 2020, Wu et al. took advantage of this material, which displayed excellent photocatalytic degradation performance. 105 As shown in Fig. 22(e) and (f), high temperature treated Ti 3 C 2 still retains its morphology and a 3D block-shaped morphology is formed after carrying g-C 3 N 4 (Fig. 23).

Graphene layers anchored to TiO 2 /g-C 3 N 4 show first-order kinetic constants for the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB), tetracycline (TC), ciprofloxacin (CIP), and bisphenol A (BPA) of 0.0559, 0.0244, 0.0168, and 0.0194 min À1 , respectively. According to the EPR test results (Fig. 24(a)-(d)), the oxygen active species that play a role in the oxidation process mainly include O 2 À and OH. Furthermore, signals corresponding to the holes (h + ) were also detected. The contribution to the degradation of these test molecules appears to be in the order of O 2 À 4 h + 4 OH. Fig. 17 Photocatalytic CO 2 reduction performance of the as-prepared samples (a); cycling tests over the 10TC sample (b); GC-MS analysis of the products from the photoreduction of CO 2 over 10TC using labelled 12 CO 2 and 13 CO 2 as the carbon sources (c and d). 79 High-temperature treated Ti 3 C 2 has a greatly enhanced light absorption capacity, whilst the carrier separation efficiency and transmission efficiency are also improved. The improvement of the photocurrent (Fig. 24(e) and (f)) also verified that the graphene layers anchoring TiO 2 lead to the formation of a heterogeneous junction. This is due to the change in the electric field between g-C 3 N 4 .

In conclusion, as a co-catalyst, the application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in photocatalytic degradation is mainly due to its three characteristics: (a) in a liquid-solid phase reaction, its hydrophilicity makes it easy for the adsorption or contact between the pollutants and photocatalysts; (b) high throughput electron transfer makes it easier to generate concentrated holes (h + ); and (c) Ti sites exposed on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 have strong redox reactivity, which promotes multiple electron reduction reactions, such as the reaction of activating molecular oxygen (O 2 -H 2 O 2 -OH).


## Challenges

The application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in photocatalysis is worthy of further investigation, despite the many problems that need to be solved. The main issue lies in the instability of the composite material, resulting in unstable photocatalytic performance. This contributes to the difficulty in determining the photocatalytic process mechanisms of Ti 3 C 2 T x -based photocatalysts. Many of the existing solutions use either few-or single-layer structured materials. However, the preparation process of these is complex. Despite this, Ti 3 C 2 T x has an excellent optical response ability and displays broad catalytic activity.


## Summary and outlook


## Summary

In recent years, Ti 3 C 2 T x has attracted wide interest as a photocatalytic material due to its rich surface space and surface defects, hydrophilic properties, large interlayer spacing, and excellent microwave absorbing properties. Ti 3 C 2 T x -based photocatalysts are widely used in hydrogen evolution reactions (HER), CO 2 reduction reactions (CO 2 RR), photocatalytic degradation reactions, and show excellent catalytic performance. The application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in photocatalysis still warrants further investigation.

The further application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in photocatalysis depends on the development of the material itself. Methods to improve the stability of the Ti 3 C 2 T x structure need to be explored, starting from synthetic methods. In addition, the rich groups on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 T x and its hydrophilicity should be further explored, particularly in photocatalytic liquid phase reactions.


## Outlook


### Mechanism.

During the photocatalytic reaction, especially the reaction including liquid phase, the mechanism  needs to be explored. As is known to all, the structure of pure Ti 3 C 2 T x is not stable in both air and water. In air, the freshetched surface groups (such as -OH and -F) can be replaced by oxygen termination after being exposed to air for a period of time; in water, Ti 3 C 2 T x can even be oxidized after being replaced for 21 days in room temperature. 108 Thus, it needs to be explored more whether the structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x is changed during the photocatalytic reaction and if it does, how it changes. During photocatalytic CO 2 RR, although both monolayerstructured and multilayer-structured Ti 3 C 2 T x exhibit high performance, isotope detection shows that some carbon resources come from CO 2 molecular; thus, there are still some ambiguities and other possibilities. For example, the valence state of ''C'' in Ti 3 C 2 T x is mostly ''À4'', which makes it possible for CO 2 to react with Ti 3 C 2 T x in order to form the CO as product; this pathway involves redox reaction rather than catalysis.

This, in all, the mechanism needs to be explored more, both during the photocatalytic reaction and the oxidation of Ti 3 C 2 T x itself. 


### Development direction.

The application of Ti 3 C 2 T x in photocatalysis is meaningful not just because it obviously promotes the reaction but also due to its applications in other new two-dimensional materials. For further applications, the following directions are necessary: to explore new methods of preparation to get structurally-stable Ti 3 C 2 T x ; to explore easier  methods of preparation to get monolayered Ti 3 C 2 T x ; to explore more effective combination between Ti 3 C 2 T x and the base photocatalyst; to explore methods of regulating the surface groups and interlayer groups; to explore other application in the MXene family; to explore the mechanism.

Ti 3 C 2 T x is the earliest material in the MXene family; thus, the improvement of its application in photocatalysis represents a great significance for the application of the whole family.


## Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare. 


## Materials Advances Review

Open Access Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.


## View Article Online

## Fig. 1
1The process of etching Ti 3 AlC 2 to yield Ti 3 C 2 .

## Fig. 3
3Oxidation process of Ti 3 C 2 T x .

## Fig. 4
4HAADF-STEM images from single-layer Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene flakes prepared using etchants with different HF concentrations: (a) 2.7 wt% HF, (b) 5.3 wt% HF, and (c) 7 wt% HF. Single V Ti vacancies are indicated by the red circles, while vacancy clusters V C Ti are shown by the blue circles. (d) Scatter plot of the defect concentration from the images acquired from samples produced using different HF concentrations. The red line shows the error plot with the average and standard deviation for different HF concentrations.33 

## Fig. 2
2Schematic diagram showing the crystal structure of Ti 3 C 2 (a)19 and its monolayer with (b) top and (c) side view. The large blue balls represent Ti atoms and the small brown balls represent C atoms. The highlighted unit cell indicates the high symmetry A, B, and C adatom sites.20 

## Fig. 5
5TEM images of (a-c) CdS, (d-f) exfoliated Ti 3 C 2 MXene nanosheets, (g-i) the composite CM-20, (j) the corresponding elemental mapping results of CM-20, and (k) the oxidation process of Ti 3 C 2 T x .52 

## Fig. 6
6(a and b) Photocatalytic H 2 evolution performance of different samples, (c) the recycled photocatalytic H 2 evolution experiments of CM-20, (d) AQY values and the wavelength dependence of photocatalytic H 2 evolution in the composite CM-20. 52 Fig. 7 (a) Photocurrent density curves and (b) EIS Nyquist plots of CdS and CM-20. 52 1576 | Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570À1594 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Materials Advances Review Open Access Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Scheme 1
1Formation of Schottky barrier at the MXene/TiO 2 interface.45 

## Fig. 8 2 ,
82SEM images of (a) TiO 2 (50 wt%), (d) Ti 3 C 2 T x , (b) TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x (5 wt%), and (c) TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 T x . 45 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Mater. Adv., 2021, 1570À1594 Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Fig. 11
11CO 2 RR process. 1578 | Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570À1594 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Materials Advances Review Open Access Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Fig. 12
12Two pathways in CO 2 RR.

## Fig. 13 2 ,
132(a-c) Typical FESEM, AFM images, and height cutaway view of Bi 2 WO 6 , (d-f) Ti 3 C 2 nanosheets, (g-i) TB2 (Ti 3 C 2 T x /Bi 2 WO 6 ), and (j) schematic illustration of the synthetic process. 82Fig. 14 (a) Photocatalytic activity of TB0 to TB5; (b) GC-MS spectra over TB2 after irradiation for several hours with different carbon sources; (c) GC-MS analysis of the reaction products with 12 C and 13 C as carbon sources. 82Fig. 15 (a) UV-Vis DRS of all the as-prepared samples; (b) TRPL spectra of TB0 and TB2; (c) EIS plots and (d) transient photocurrent of the prepared samples. 82 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Mater. Adv., 2021, 1570À1594 Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Fig. 16
16FESEM images of UCN (a) and 10TC (b) samples, AFM images and the corresponding height profiles of UCN (c and e), 10TC (d and f) samples, and (g) schematic illustration for the fabrication process. 79 Materials Advances Review Open Access Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Fig. 18
18PL spectra, EIS, and TPR plots of UCN, Ti 3 C 2 , and 10TC samples (a, c, and d); TR-PL spectra of UCN and 10TC (b). 79 1584 | Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570À1594 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Materials Advances Review Open Access Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Fig. 19 2 ,
192TEM images of (a) bulk Ti 3 C 2 , (b) single Ti 3 C 2 sheet, (c) Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 composite. (d) EDX spectra of the Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 composite and (e) the schematic representation of single 2D Ti 3 C 2 sheets and Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 synthesis. 87 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Mater. Adv., 2021, 1570À1594 Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.

## Fig. 20
20Photocatalytic degradation of various pollutants by the as-prepared catalysts. (a) CPL, (b) TPL, and (c) TC-H degradation efficiency in the presence of the as-prepared catalysts under visible light irradiation (l 4 420 nm). HPLC chromatogram of (d) CPL and (e) TPL under different degradation times using the as-prepared catalysts. (f) UV-vis absorption spectra of TC-H under different degradation times using different catalysts. 87

## Fig. 21
21UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (a), PL spectra (b), time-resolved PL decay spectra (c), EIS Nyquist plots (d), transient photocurrent responses (e) of the as-prepared catalysts, and DMPO spin-trapping ESR spectra for DMPO-OH in the Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 system in the presence or absence of HA.87 


Science and Technology in the University of Henan Province (19IRTSTHN025), PetroChina Innovation Foundation (No. 2018D-5007-0604), and Sichuan Science and Technology Program (No. 2020JDJQ0057).

## Table 1
1Comparison of photocatalysts including Ti3 C 

2 T 
x in HER 

Name 

H 
2 production 
(mmol h À1 

g 

catalyst 
À1 

) 

AQY (%) 
Activity improvement 
factor 
Sacrificial reagent Preparation methods 

Monolayer or 
multilayer 
Light source 

Morphology 

Year Ref. 

CdS/Ti 
3 C 

2 T 

x 

14 342 
40.1% (420 nm) 135.59 times 

Lactic acid 
(17.6%) 

One-step 
hydrothermal method 

Ti 
3 C 

2 T 
x NPs 300 W Xe lamp 

(l 4 
420 nm) 

Cauliflower-
structure by 
self-assembly of 

many NPs 

2017 30 

2D-Layered Carbon/TiO 

2 480.8 

1.98% (400 nm) 

TEOA (10%) 

Ti 
3 C 

2 T 
x oxidation 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
400 nm) 

Nanosheets 

2017 44 

Ti 
3 C 

2 T 
x /rutile TiO 

2 

17.8 

0.3% 

Approximately 4 times 
Methanol (25%) Hydrothermal method Monolayer 

200 W Hg lamp 
(l 4 
400 nm) 
2D sheetswith TiO 

2 

attached on the 
surfaces and 
between the sheets 

2016 45 

Ti 
3 C 
2 /Pt/g-C 

3 N 

4 

5000 
3.1% (420 nm) 15 times than pristine 

g-C 
3 N 

4 

TEOA (10%) 

Hydrothermal and 
photodeposition 

method 

Monolayer 
300 W Xe lamp Nanosheets with 

porous 
nanoparticles 

2018 46 

Sulfur-doped Carbon/ 

TiO 

2 

333 

7.36% 

Methanol (10%) Ti 

3 C 

2 T 
x oxidation 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
400 nm) 

Nanosheets 

2018 47 

Ti 
3 C 

2 T 
x /TiO 

2 

nanoflowers 

783.11 
5.86 (350 nm) 6 times 

Methanol (20%) Hydrothermal and 

calcination 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp Nanoflowers 

2018 48 

Zn 
2 In 

2 S 
5 /Ti 

3 C 

2 T 

x 

2596.76 
8.96% (420 nm) 1.97 times 

0.25 M Na 

2 SO 

3 / 

0.35 M Na 

2 S/ 

H 
2 PtCl 

6 

Hydrothermal 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
420 nm) 

Flower-like 
microspheres 

2018 49 

d-Ti 
3 C 
2 /TiO 

2 /g-C 

3 N 

4 

1620 
4.16% (420 nm) 12.15 times than pure 

g-C 
3 N 

4 

TEOA (10%) 

Calcination 

Monolayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
420 nm) 

2D-2D 
heterostructure 

2018 50 

ZnS/Ti 
3 C 

2 

502.6 

4 times 
Lactic acid (20%) Hydrothermal 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp Sphere-like 

structure 

2019 51 

1D CdS nanorod/2D 
Ti 
3 C 
2 MXene nanosheet 

2407 
35.6% (429 nm) 6.68 times 

Lactic acid (10%) Electrostatic 

self-assembly 

Monolayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
420 nm) 
1D/2D nanosheets 2019 52 

TiO 
2 nanofibers/MXene 
Ti 
3 C 

2 

6979 

3.8 times than TiO 

2 

nanofibers 
Methanol (10%) Electrostatic 

self-assembly 
technique 

Monolayer 
300 W Xe lamp Nanofibers/ 

nanosheets 

2019 53 

TiO 
2 nanoparticale/ 
monolayer Ti 

3 C 

2 

2650 
15.8% (305 nm) 2.88 times than TiO 

2 

nanoparticles/multilayer 

Ti 
3 C 

2 

Methanol (25%) Electrostatic 

self-assembly 
technique 

Monolayer 
200 W Hg lamp 
(285-325 nm) 

Nanosheets 

2019 54 

MoS 
2 /Ti 

3 C 

2 

6144.7 

2.33 times 
Methanol (30%) Hydrothermal 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
400 nm) 

Spheres-like 
structure 

2019 55 

Ti 
3 C 
2 MXene/O-doped g-

C 
3 N 

4 

25124 

17.59% 
(405 nm) 
1.8 times than O-doped 
g-C 
3 N 

4 

TEOA 

Electrostatic 
self-assembly 
technique 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp 2D nanosheets 

structure 

2019 56 

CdLa 
2 S 
4 /Ti 

3 C 

2 

11182.4 

15.60% 
(420 nm) 

13.4 times 

0.25 M Na 

2 SO 

3 

and 
0.35 M Na 

2 S 

Hydrothermal 

Monolayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
420 nm) 

Particle-like 

2019 57 

Ti 
3 C 
2 MXene quantum 
dots/g-C 
3 N 

4 

5111.8 

3.654% 

25.97 times 

TEOA (15%) 

Deposition 

Ti 
3 C 
2 MXene 
quantum dots 
300 W Xe lamp Nanosheets 

2019 58 

Mo 
x S@TiO 

2 @Ti 

3 C 

2 

10505.8 

7.535% 
5.99 times than 
Mo 
2 S@TiO 

2 @Ti 

3 C 

2 

TEOA 
In situ growth and 
hydrothermal 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp Nanosheets 

2019 59 

Ti 
3 C 
2 /porous MOFs 
(UiO-66-NH 
2 ) 

204 

Approximately 8 times 

0.1 M Na 

2 S and 

0.1 M Na 

2 SO 

3 

Hydrothermal 

Monolayer 
350 W Xe lamp 3D structure 

2019 60 

C-TiO 
2 /g-C 

3 N 

4 

1409 

8 times than C-TiO 

2 

TEOA (10%) 

Calcination 

Multilayer 
300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
420 nm) 
Smooth sheet-like 
structure 


## Table 2
2Comparison of photocatalysts including Ti 3 C 2 T x in CO 2 RRPhotocatalyst 

Products and yield 
(mmol g À1 h À1 ) 

Activity 
improvement 
factor 

Reaction 
conditions 
Light source 

Preparation 
method 
Morphology 

Monolayer 
or Multilayer Year Ref. 

2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 
MXene/g-C 3 N 4 
nanosheet 

CO (5.19) 
8.37 (CO) 
20 mg 
300 W Xe 
lamp 
(l 4 420 nm) 

Calcination 
under N 2 
atmosphere 

2D/2D 
nanosheets 

Monolayer 
2020 79 
CH 4 (0.044) 
2.09 (CH 4 ) 
catalyst gas-solid 

Alklinized Ti 3 C 2 / 
decorating g-C 3 N 4 

CO (11.21 mmol g À1 ) 5.96 (CO) 
40 mg catalyst 
gas-solid 

300 W Xe 
lamp 
(l 4 420 nm) 

Alkali etching 3D 
Multilayer 
2019 80 

CH 4 (0.044 mmol g À1 ) 5.6 (CH 4 ) 
TiO 2 /Ti 3 C 2 
CO 
-
50 mg 
300 W Xe 
lamp 

Calcination Nanoparticles Multilayer 
2018 81 
CH 4 (0.22) 
catalyst liquid-
solid 
2D/2D ultrathin 
Ti 3 C 2 /Bi 2 WO 6 

CO 
4.34 (CH 4 ) 
100 mg 
Xe lamp 
Hydrothermal Flat shape 2D 
structure 

Monolayer 
2018 82 
CH 4 (1.78) 
6.28 (CH 3 OH) 
catalyst liquid-
solid 
CH 3 OH (0.44) 
2D/2D/0D TiO 2 / 
C 3 N 4 /Ti 3 C 2 

CO (4.39) 
1.39 (CO) 
(than TiO 2 /C 3 N 4 ) 

30 mg catalyst 
liquid-solid 

300 W Xe 
lamp 

Electrostatic 
self-assembly 

2D/2D 
structure 

Ti 3 C 2 quan-
tum dots 

2020 83 

CH 4 (1.20) 


## Table 3
3Application of Ti 1586 | Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570À1594 2021 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Open Access Article. Published on 28 January 2021. Downloaded on 6/23/2023 5:21:05 AM. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence.3 C 

2 T 
x in photocatalytic degradation reactions 

Photocatalyst 

Substrate of degradation 

Removal rate (%)/rate 
constants (min À1 

) 
Reaction conditions 

Light 
source 

Oxygenic 
species 

Morphology 

Monolayer 

or multilayer Year 

Ref. 

Ag 
3 PO 

4 /Ti 

3 C 

2 

Methyl orange (MO) 

(rate constants) 0.094 
(MO) 

20 mg catalyst + 50 
mL 20 mg L À1 

sub-

strate, 30 min dark 
adsorption 

300 W Xe 
lamp (l 4 
420 nm) 

h + 
(main) 2D Ti 

3 C 
2 /Ag 

3 PO 
4 particles Monolayer 2018 

87 

2,4-Dinitrophenol (2,4-DNP) 

2,4-DNP (0.005) 

OH 

Tetracycline hydrochloride 

(TC-H) 

TC-H (0.32) 

Thiamphenicol (TPL) 

TPL (0.0042) 

Chloramphenicol (CPL) 

CPL (0.025) 

Ti 
3 C 
2 /SrTiO 
3 composites 

UO 

2 
2+ 

(Removal rate) 
20 mg catalyst + 60 
mL 50 ppm sub-
strate, 8 hours dark 
adsorption 

300 W Xe 
lamp (l = 
320-
2500 nm) 

OH 

2D Ti 

3 C 
2 /SrTiO 
3 particles Multilayer 

2019 

97 

77% in 180 min 

Ti 
3 C 
2 -OH/Bi 

2 WO 
6 composites Rhodamine B (Rate constants) 0.0596 10 mg catalyst + 50 mL 2 

Â 10 À5 

mol L À1 
substrate, 30 min dark 

adsorption 

300 W Xe lamp (l = 
400-2500 nm) 

h + 
Porous spherical structure 

Ti 
3 C 
2 -OH 2019 98 

MoS 
2 @Ti 

3 C 
2 Nanohybrid 

Liquid paraf-

fin (LP) 
(Rate constants) 0.0476 A certain amount of sample + 
2.0 g of deionized water and 
1.0 g of LP + 10 mL dichlor-
omethane as the sacrifice 
reagent, 30 min dark adsorption 

1000 W high-
pressure mercury 

lamp 

MoS 
2 nanosheets/Ti 

3 C 
2 sheets 

Multilayer 2019 99 

0D/2D Bi 
3 TaO 

7 /Ti 

3 C 

2 

Methylene blue 

(Rate constants) 
0.032 
50 mg catalyst + 100 
mL 10 mg L À1 

300 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
420 nm) 

OH 

Bi 
3 TaO 
7 nanoparticles/Ti 

3 C 

2 

nanosheets 

Multilayer 
2020 100 

Substrate, 60 min 

dark adsorption 

2D/2D Ti 

3 C 
2 /Porous g-C 

3 N 

4 

Phenol 

(Rate constants) 
0.022 
20 mg catalyst + 50 
mL 10 mg L À1 

500 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
400 nm) 

2D/2D Ti 

3 C 
2 /PCN nanocomposite Multilayer 

with ultra-
sonication 
2020 101 

Substrate, 30 min 

dark adsorption 

CdS@Ti 
3 C 
2 @TiO 

2 

Sulfachloropyridazine 

(SCP) 

(Removal rate) SCP 
(about 95% in 60 
min) 
50 mg catalyst + 200 
mL 20 mg L À1 

Light intensity 
300 mW cm À2 

(l 

= 400-1050 nm) 

O 

2 

À 

CdS nanoparticles/Ti 

3 C 
2 @TiO 

2 

bulk 

Bulk 
Ti 
3 C 
2 @TiO 

2 

2019 102 

Methylene blue (MB) MB (about 80% in 

60 min) 

Rhodamine B (RhB) 
RhB (about 99% in 
60 min) 

substrate, 30 min 

dark adsorption 

Phenol 

Phenol (about 50% 

in 60 min) 

(111) TiO 

2-x /Ti 

3 C 

2 

Mmethylene blue (MB) (Removal rate) MB 
(75% in 150 min) 
10 mg catalyst + 200 
mL 20 mg L À1 

500 W Xe lamp 
(l 4 
400 nm) 

OH (main) TiO 
2 nanoparticles/Ti 

3 C 

2 

nanosheets 

Multilayer 
2017 103 

(001) TiO 

2 /Ti 

3 C 

2 

Methyl orange (MO) 

(Rate constants) 
0.018 
10 mg catalyst + 200 
mL 20 mg L À1 

sub-

strate, 60 min dark 
adsorption 
300 W Xe lamp 

OH (main) TiO 
2 square nanosheets/Ti 

3 C 

2 

nanosheets 

Multilayer 
2016 104 

AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51702270 and 51872147), the 111 Project (D20015), the Program for Innovative Research Team of105
Size effect in thermoelectric materials. J Mao, Z Liu, Z Ren, npj Quantum Mater. 1116028J. Mao, Z. Liu and Z. Ren, Size effect in thermoelectric materials, npj Quantum Mater., 2016, 1(1), 16028.

Solution-phase synthesis of metal and/or semiconductor homojunction/heterojunction nanomaterials. X Feng, G Hu, J Hu, Nanoscale. 35X. Feng, G. Hu and J. Hu, Solution-phase synthesis of metal and/or semiconductor homojunction/heterojunction nanomaterials, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(5), 2099-2117.

Recent progress in 2D group-VA semiconductors: from theory to experiment. S Zhang, S Guo, Z Chen, Y Wang, H Gao, J Gomez-Herrero, P Ares, F Zamora, Z Zhu, H Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev. 473S. Zhang, S. Guo, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Gao, J. Gomez- Herrero, P. Ares, F. Zamora, Z. Zhu and H. Zeng, Recent progress in 2D group-VA semiconductors: from theory to experiment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(3), 982-1021.

Twodimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti 3 AlC 2. M Naguib, M Kurtoglu, V Presser, J Lu, J Niu, M Heon, L Hultman, Y Gogotsi, M W Barsoum, Adv. Mater. 37M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two- dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti 3 AlC 2 , Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(37), 4248-4253.

MXene: an emerging two-dimensional material for future energy conversion and storage applications. N K Chaudhari, H Jin, B Kim, D Baek, S H Joo, K Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A. 547N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim, D. San Baek, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, MXene: an emerging two-dimensional material for future energy conversion and storage applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(47), 24564-24579.

Adsorptive environmental applications of MXene nanomaterials: a review. Y Zhang, L Wang, N Zhang, Z Zhou, RSC Adv. 836Y. Zhang, L. Wang, N. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Adsorptive environmental applications of MXene nanomaterials: a review, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(36), 19895-19905.

Twodimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical applications. K Huang, Z Li, J Lin, G Han, P Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev. 14K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Two- dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(14), 5109-5124.

2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage. B Anasori, M R Lukatskaya, Y Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2216098B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(2), 16098.

Ti 3 AlC 2 , a candidate structural material for innovative nuclear energy system: the microstructure phase transformation and defect evolution induced by energetic heavy-ion irradiation. T Deng, J Sun, P Tai, Y Wang, L Zhang, H Chang, Z Wang, L Niu, Y Sheng, D Xue, Q Huang, Y Zhou, P Song, J Li, Acta Mater. 189T. Deng, J. Sun, P. Tai, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Chang, Z. Wang, L. Niu, Y. Sheng, D. Xue, Q. Huang, Y. Zhou, P. Song and J. Li, Ti 3 AlC 2 , a candidate structural material for innovative nuclear energy system: the microstructure phase transformation and defect evolution induced by energetic heavy-ion irradiation, Acta Mater., 2020, 189, 188-203.

Transparent conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide epitaxial thin films. J Halim, M R Lukatskaya, K M Cook, J Lu, C R Smith, L A Naslund, S J May, L Hultman, Y Gogotsi, P Eklund, M W Barsoum, Chem. Mater. 267J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L. A. Naslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Transparent conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide epitaxial thin films, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26(7), 2374-2381.

One-step synthesis for cations intercalation of two-dimensional carbide crystal Ti 3 C 2 MXene. A Hu, J Yu, H Zhao, H Zhang, W Li, Appl. Surf. Sci. 144538A. Hu, J. Yu, H. Zhao, H. Zhang and W. Li, One-step synthesis for cations intercalation of two-dimensional carbide crystal Ti 3 C 2 MXene, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 505, 144538.

Conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide 'clay' with high volumetric capacitance. M Ghidiu, M R Lukatskaya, M Q Zhao, Y Gogotsi, M W Barsoum, Nature. 5167529M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide 'clay' with high volumetric capacitance, Nature, 2014, 516(7529), 78-81.

Cation intercalation and high volumetric capacitance of two-dimensional titanium carbide. M R Lukatskaya, O Mashtalir, C E Ren, Y Dall&apos;agnese, P Rozier, P L Taberna, M Naguib, P Simon, M W Barsoum, Y Gogotsi, Science. 6153M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Cation intercalation and high volumetric capacitance of two-dimensional titanium carbide, Science, 2013, 341(6153), 1502-1505.

Atomically resolved structural and chemical investigation of single MXene sheets. L H Karlsson, J Birch, J Halim, M W Barsoum, P O Persson, Nano Lett. 8L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Persson, Atomically resolved structural and chemical investigation of single MXene sheets, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(8), 4955-4960.

Site-projected electronic structure of twodimensional Ti 3 C 2 MXene: the role of the surface functionalization groups. D Magne, V Mauchamp, S Celerier, P Chartier, T Cabioc&apos;h, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 1845D. Magne, V. Mauchamp, S. Celerier, P. Chartier and T. Cabioc'h, Site-projected electronic structure of two- dimensional Ti 3 C 2 MXene: the role of the surface functio- nalization groups, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(45), 30946-30953.

Resolving the structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x MXenes through multilevel structural modeling of the atomic pair distribution function. H W Wang, M Naguib, K Page, D J Wesolowski, Y Gogotsi, Chem. Mater. 281H. W. Wang, M. Naguib, K. Page, D. J. Wesolowski and Y. Gogotsi, Resolving the structure of Ti 3 C 2 T x MXenes through multilevel structural modeling of the atomic pair distribution function, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(1), 349-359.

Direct measurement of surface termination groups and their connectivity in the 2D MXene V 2 CT x using NMR spectroscopy. K J Harris, M Bugnet, M Naguib, M W Barsoum, G R Goward, J. Phys. Chem. C. 11924K. J. Harris, M. Bugnet, M. Naguib, M. W. Barsoum and G. R. Goward, Direct measurement of surface termination groups and their connectivity in the 2D MXene V 2 CT x using NMR spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(24), 13713-13720.

NMR reveals the surface functionalisation of Ti 3 C 2 MXene. M A Hope, A C Forse, K J Griffith, M R Lukatskaya, M Ghidiu, Y Gogotsi, C P Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 187M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, NMR reveals the surface functionalisation of Ti 3 C 2 MXene, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(7), 5099-5102.

Photoluminescent Ti 3 C 2 MXene quantum dots for multicolor cellular imaging. Q Xue, H Zhang, M Zhu, Z Pei, H Li, Z Wang, Y Huang, Y Huang, Q Deng, J Zhou, S Du, Q Huang, C Zhi, Adv. Mater. 151604847Q. Xue, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, S. Du, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, Photoluminescent Ti 3 C 2 MXene quantum dots for multi- color cellular imaging, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(15), 1604847.

Ti 3 C 2 MXene as a high capacity electrode material for metal (Li, Na, K, Ca) ion batteries. D Er, J Li, M Naguib, Y Gogotsi, V B Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 614D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, Ti 3 C 2 MXene as a high capacity electrode material for metal (Li, Na, K, Ca) ion batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(14), 11173-11179.

Are MXenes promising anode materials for Li ion batteries? Computational studies on electronic properties and Li storage capability of Ti 3 C 2 and Ti 3 C 2 X 2 (X = F, OH) monolayer. Q Tang, Z Zhou, P Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 13440Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, Are MXenes promising anode materials for Li ion batteries? Computational stu- dies on electronic properties and Li storage capability of Ti 3 C 2 and Ti 3 C 2 X 2 (X = F, OH) monolayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(40), 16909-16916.

MXene: a new family of promising hydrogen storage medium. Q Hu, D Sun, Q Wu, H Wang, L Wang, B Liu, A Zhou, J He, J. Phys. Chem. A. 11751Q. Hu, D. Sun, Q. Wu, H. Wang, L. Wang, B. Liu, A. Zhou and J. He, MXene: a new family of promising hydrogen storage medium, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117(51), 14253-14260.

Prediction and characterization of MXene nanosheet anodes for non-lithium-ion batteries. Y Xie, Y Dall&apos;agnese, M Naguib, Y Gogotsi, M W Barsoum, H L L Zhuang, P R C Kent, ACS Nano. 89Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, Prediction and characteri- zation of MXene nanosheet anodes for non-lithium-ion batteries, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(9), 9606-9615.

Ion intercalation into twodimensional transition-metal carbides: global screening for new high-capacity battery materials. C Eames, M S Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 46C. Eames and M. S. Islam, Ion intercalation into two- dimensional transition-metal carbides: global screening for new high-capacity battery materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(46), 16270-16276.

Ultra-high electrochemical catalytic activity of MXenes. H Pan, Sci. Rep. H. Pan, Ultra-high electrochemical catalytic activity of MXenes, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32531.

Flexible MXene/Carbon nanotube composite paper with high volumetric capacitance. M Q Zhao, C E Ren, Z Ling, M R Lukatskaya, C F Zhang, K L Van Aken, M W Barsoum, Y Gogotsi, Adv. Mater. 272M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. F. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible MXene/Carbon nanotube composite paper with high volumetric capacitance, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(2), 339-345.

MXene: a promising photocatalyst for water splitting. Z Guo, J Zhou, L Zhu, Z Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A. 429Z. Guo, J. Zhou, L. Zhu and Z. Sun, MXene: a promising photocatalyst for water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(29), 11446-11452.

Flexible MXene/Carbon nanotube composite paper with high volumetric capacitance. M Q Zhao, C E Ren, Z Ling, M R Lukatskaya, C F Zhang, K L Van Aken, M W Barsoum, Y Gogotsi, Adv. Mater. 272M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. F. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible MXene/Carbon nanotube composite paper with high volumetric capacitance, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(2), 339-345.

A new family of promising catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction. G Gao, A P O&apos;mullane, A Du, Mxenes, ACS Catal. 71G. Gao, A. P. O'Mullane and A. Du, 2D MXenes: A new family of promising catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, ACS Catal., 2016, 7(1), 494-500.

Ti 3 C 2 MXene co-catalyst on metal sulfide photo-absorbers for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen production. J Ran, G Gao, F.-T Li, T.-Y Ma, A Du, S.-Z Qiao, Nat. Commun. 8113907J. Ran, G. Gao, F.-T. Li, T.-Y. Ma, A. Du and S.-Z. Qiao, Ti 3 C 2 MXene co-catalyst on metal sulfide photo-absorbers for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen produc- tion, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 13907.

Onestep synthesis of nanocrystalline transition metal oxides on thin sheets of disordered graphitic carbon by oxidation of MXenes. M Naguib, O Mashtalir, M R Lukatskaya, B Dyatkin, C Zhang, V Presser, Y Gogotsi, M W Barsoum, Chem. Commun. 56M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dyatkin, C. Zhang, V. Presser, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, One- step synthesis of nanocrystalline transition metal oxides on thin sheets of disordered graphitic carbon by oxidation of MXenes, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(56), 7420-7423.

Ti 3 C 2 MXene-derived carbon-doped TiO 2 coupled with g-C 3 N 4 as the visible-light photocatalysts for photocatalytic H 2 generation. X Han, L An, Y Hu, Y Li, C Hou, H Wang, Q Zhang, Appl. Catal., B. 118539X. Han, L. An, Y. Hu, Y. Li, C. Hou, H. Wang and Q. Zhang, Ti 3 C 2 MXene-derived carbon-doped TiO 2 coupled with g- C 3 N 4 as the visible-light photocatalysts for photocatalytic H 2 generation, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118539.

Atomic defects in monolayer titanium carbide (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) MXene. X Sang, Y Xie, M W Lin, M Alhabeb, K L Van Aken, Y Gogotsi, P R C Kent, K Xiao, R R Unocic, ACS Nano. 1010X. Sang, Y. Xie, M. W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. C. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, Atomic defects in monolayer titanium carbide (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) MXene, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(10), 9193-9200.

Intrinsic structural defects in monolayer molybdenum disulfide. W Zhou, X Zou, S Najmaei, Z Liu, Y Shi, J Kong, J Lou, P M Ajayan, B I Yakobson, J C Idrobo, Nano Lett. 6W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J. C. Idrobo, Intrinsic structural defects in monolayer molybdenum disulfide, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(6), 2615-2622.

Free-standing graphene at atomic resolution. M H Gass, U Bangert, A L Bleloch, P Wang, R R Nair, A K Geim, Nat. Nanotechnol. 311M. H. Gass, U. Bangert, A. L. Bleloch, P. Wang, R. R. Nair and A. K. Geim, Free-standing graphene at atomic resolu- tion, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3(11), 676-681.

Photocatalytic Water Splitting: Quantitative Approaches toward Photocatalyst by Design. K Takanabe, ACS Catal. 711K. Takanabe, Photocatalytic Water Splitting: Quantitative Approaches toward Photocatalyst by Design, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(11), 8006-8022.

Earthabundant cocatalysts for semiconductor-based photocatalytic water splitting. J Ran, J Zhang, J Yu, M Jaroniec, S Z Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev. 22J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Earth- abundant cocatalysts for semiconductor-based photocata- lytic water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(22), 7787-7812.

Particulate photocatalysts for overall water splitting. S S Chen, T Takata, K Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater. 21017050S. S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Particulate photo- catalysts for overall water splitting, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(10), 17050.

Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting. A Kudo, Y Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev. 381A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materi- als for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(1), 253-278.

Design of electrocatalysts for oxygen-and hydrogen-involving energy conversion reactions. Y Jiao, Y Zheng, M Jaroniec, S Z Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev. 8Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Design of electrocatalysts for oxygen-and hydrogen-involving energy conversion reactions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(8), 2060-2086.

Towards the computational design of solid catalysts. J K Norskov, T Bligaard, J Rossmeisl, C H Christensen, Nat. Chem. 11J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Towards the computational design of solid catalysts, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1(1), 37-46.

Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution. J K Nørskov, T Bligaard, A Logadottir, J R Kitchin, J G Chen, S Pandelov, U Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc. 152323J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(3), J23.

Biomimetic hydrogen evolution: MoS 2 nanoparticles as catalyst for hydrogen evolution. H Berit, G H Poul, B Jacob, P J Kristina, H N Jane, H Sebastina, C Lb, K N Jens, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127H. Berit, G. H. Poul, B. Jacob, P. J. Kristina, H. N. Jane, H. Sebastina, C. lb and K. N. Jens, Biomimetic hydrogen evolution: MoS 2 nanoparticles as catalyst for hydrogen evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 15(127), 5308-5309.

2D-layered Carbon/TiO 2 hybrids derived from Ti 3 C 2 MXenes for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation. W Yuan, L Cheng, Y Zhang, H Wu, S Lv, L Chai, X Guo, L Zheng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces. 1700577W. Yuan, L. Cheng, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, S. Lv, L. Chai, X. Guo and L. Zheng, 2D-layered Carbon/TiO 2 hybrids derived from Ti 3 C 2 MXenes for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4(20), 1700577.

Titania composites with 2D transition metal carbides as photocatalysts for hydrogen production under visible-light irradiation. H Wang, R Peng, Z D Hood, M Naguib, S P Adhikari, Z Wu, ChemSusChem. 912H. Wang, R. Peng, Z. D. Hood, M. Naguib, S. P. Adhikari and Z. Wu, Titania composites with 2D transition metal carbides as photocatalysts for hydrogen production under visible-light irradiation, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(12), 1490-1497.

The synergetic effects of Ti 3 C 2 MXene and Pt as co-catalysts for highly efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution over g-C 3 N 4 . Phys. Chem.y. X An, W Wang, J Wang, H Duan, J Shi, X Yu, Chem. Phys. 16X. An, W. Wang, J. Wang, H. Duan, J. Shi and X. Yu, The synergetic effects of Ti 3 C 2 MXene and Pt as co-catalysts for highly efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution over g-C 3 N 4 . Phys. Chem.y, Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(16), 11405-11411.

Laminated hybrid junction of sulfurdoped TiO 2 and a carbon substrate derived from Ti 3 C 2 MXenes: toward highly visible light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. W Yuan, L Cheng, Y An, S Lv, H Wu, X Fan, Y Zhang, X Guo, J Tang, Adv. Sci. 561700870W. Yuan, L. Cheng, Y. An, S. Lv, H. Wu, X. Fan, Y. Zhang, X. Guo and J. Tang, Laminated hybrid junction of sulfur- doped TiO 2 and a carbon substrate derived from Ti 3 C 2 MXenes: toward highly visible light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5(6), 1700870.

Ti 3 C 2 MXenederived Ti 3 C 2 /TiO 2 nanoflowers for noble-metal-free photocatalytic overall water splitting. Y Li, X Deng, J Tian, Z Liang, H Cui, Appl, Mater. Today. 13Y. Li, X. Deng, J. Tian, Z. Liang and H. Cui, Ti 3 C 2 MXene- derived Ti 3 C 2 /TiO 2 nanoflowers for noble-metal-free photocatalytic overall water splitting. Appl, Mater. Today, 2018, 13, 217-227.

Electrical promotion of spatially photoinduced charge separation via interfacialbuilt-in quasi-alloying effect in hierarchical Zn 2 In 2 S 5 / Ti 3 C 2 (O, OH) x hybrids toward efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and environmental remediation. H Wang, Y Sun, Y Wu, W Tu, S Wu, X Yuan, G Zeng, Z J Xu, S Li, J W Chew, Appl. Catal., B. 245H. Wang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, W. Tu, S. Wu, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, Z. J. Xu, S. Li and J. W. Chew, Electrical promotion of spatially photoinduced charge separation via interfacial- built-in quasi-alloying effect in hierarchical Zn 2 In 2 S 5 / Ti 3 C 2 (O, OH) x hybrids toward efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and environmental remediation, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 290-301.

Heterostructured d-Ti 3 C 2 /TiO 2 /g-C 3 N 4 nanocomposites with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen production activity. M Zhang, J Qin, S Rajendran, X Zhang, R Liu, ChemSusChem. 1124M. Zhang, J. Qin, S. Rajendran, X. Zhang and R. Liu, Heterostructured d-Ti 3 C 2 /TiO 2 /g-C 3 N 4 nanocomposites with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen pro- duction activity, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11(24), 4226-4236.

In situ decoration of ZnS nanoparticles with Ti 3 C 2 MXene nanosheets for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. L Tie, S Yang, C Yu, H Chen, Y Liu, S Dong, J Sun, J Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 545L. Tie, S. Yang, C. Yu, H. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Dong, J. Sun and J. Sun, In situ decoration of ZnS nanoparticles with Ti 3 C 2 MXene nanosheets for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 545, 63-70.

In situ fabrication of 1D CdS nanorod/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene nanosheet Schottky heterojunction toward enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. R Xiao, C Zhao, Z Zou, Z Chen, L Tian, H Xu, H Tang, Q Liu, Z Lin, X Yang, Appl. Catal., B. 118382R. Xiao, C. Zhao, Z. Zou, Z. Chen, L. Tian, H. Xu, H. Tang, Q. Liu, Z. Lin and X. Yang, In situ fabrication of 1D CdS nanorod/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene nanosheet Schottky heterojunc- tion toward enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118382.

Fabrication of TiO 2 nanofibers/MXene Ti 3 C 2 nanocomposites for photocatalytic H 2 evolution by electrostatic self-assembly. Y Zhuang, Y Liu, X Meng, Appl. Surf. Sci. 143647Y. Zhuang, Y. Liu and X. Meng, Fabrication of TiO 2 nanofibers/MXene Ti 3 C 2 nanocomposites for photocatalytic H 2 evolution by electrostatic self-assembly, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 143647.

Monolayer Ti 3 C 2 T x as an effective co-catalyst for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production over TiO 2. T Su, Z D Hood, M Naguib, L Bai, S Luo, C M Rouleau, I N Ivanov, H Ji, Z Qin, Z Wu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 27T. Su, Z. D. Hood, M. Naguib, L. Bai, S. Luo, C. M. Rouleau, I. N. Ivanov, H. Ji, Z. Qin and Z. Wu, Monolayer Ti 3 C 2 T x as an effective co-catalyst for enhanced photocatalytic hydro- gen production over TiO 2 , ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(7), 4640-4651.

MoS 2 /Ti 3 C 2 heterostructure for efficient visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen generation. J Zhang, C Xing, F Shi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 4511J. Zhang, C. Xing and F. Shi, MoS 2 /Ti 3 C 2 heterostructure for efficient visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen genera- tion, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(11), 6291-6301.

Construction of Ti 3 C 2 MXene/O-doped g-C 3 N 4 2D-2D Schottkyjunction for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. P Lin, J Shen, X Yu, Q Liu, D Li, H Tang, Ceram. Int. 18P. Lin, J. Shen, X. Yu, Q. Liu, D. Li and H. Tang, Construc- tion of Ti 3 C 2 MXene/O-doped g-C 3 N 4 2D-2D Schottky- junction for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(18), 24656-24663.

Boosting the photocatalytic activity of CdLa 2 S 4 for hydrogen production using Ti 3 C 2 MXene as a co-catalyst. L Cheng, Q Chen, J Li, H Liu, Appl. Catal., B. L. Cheng, Q. Chen, J. Li and H. Liu, Boosting the photo- catalytic activity of CdLa 2 S 4 for hydrogen production using Ti 3 C 2 MXene as a co-catalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118379.

Boosting the photocatalytic ability of g-C 3 N 4 for hydrogen production by Ti 3 C 2 MXene quantum dots. Y Li, L Ding, Y Guo, Z Liang, H Cui, J Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 1144Y. Li, L. Ding, Y. Guo, Z. Liang, H. Cui and J. Tian, Boosting the photocatalytic ability of g-C 3 N 4 for hydrogen produc- tion by Ti 3 C 2 MXene quantum dots, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(44), 41440-41447.

Synergetic effect of defects rich MoS 2 and Ti 3 C 2 MXene as cocatalysts for enhanced photocatalytic H 2 production activity of TiO 2. Y Li, L Ding, Z Liang, Y Xue, H Cui, J Tian, Chem. Eng. J. 123178Y. Li, L. Ding, Z. Liang, Y. Xue, H. Cui and J. Tian, Synergetic effect of defects rich MoS 2 and Ti 3 C 2 MXene as cocatalysts for enhanced photocatalytic H 2 production activity of TiO 2 , Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123178.

Ti 3 C 2 nanosheets modified Zr-MOFs with Schottky junction for boosting photocatalytic HER performance. P Tian, X He, L Zhao, W Li, W Fang, H Chen, F Zhang, Z Huang, H Wang, Sol. Energy. 188P. Tian, X. He, L. Zhao, W. Li, W. Fang, H. Chen, F. Zhang, Z. Huang and H. Wang, Ti 3 C 2 nanosheets modified Zr-MOFs with Schottky junction for boosting photocatalytic HER performance, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 750-759.

Construction of CdS@Ti 3 C 2 @CoO hierarchical tandem p-n heterojunction for boosting photocatalytic hydrogen production in pure water. Z Ai, K Zhang, B Chang, Y Shao, L Zhang, Y Wu, X Hao, Chem. Eng. J. 123130Z. Ai, K. Zhang, B. Chang, Y. Shao, L. Zhang, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Construction of CdS@Ti 3 C 2 @CoO hierarchical tandem p-n heterojunction for boosting photocatalytic hydrogen production in pure water, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123130.

Conductive Ti 3 C 2 and MOF-derived CoS x boosting the photocatalytic hydrogen production activity of TiO 2. J.-H Zhao, L.-W Liu, K Li, T Li, F.-T Liu, CrystEngComm. 2114J.-H. Zhao, L.-W. Liu, K. Li, T. Li and F.-T. Liu, Conductive Ti 3 C 2 and MOF-derived CoS x boosting the photocatalytic hydrogen production activity of TiO 2 , CrystEngComm, 2019, 21(14), 2416-2421.

Effective orientation control of photogenerated carrier separation via rational design of a Ti 3 C 2 (TiO 2 )@CdS/MoS 2 photocatalytic system. Z Ai, Y Shao, B Chang, B Huang, Y Wu, X Hao, Appl. Catal., B. 242Z. Ai, Y. Shao, B. Chang, B. Huang, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Effective orientation control of photogenerated carrier separation via rational design of a Ti 3 C 2 (TiO 2 )@CdS/MoS 2 photocatalytic system, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 202-208.

2D/2D/2D heterojunction of Ti 3 C 2 MXene/ MoS 2 nanosheets/TiO 2 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets toward enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production activity. Y Li, Z Yin, G Ji, Z Liang, Y Xue, Y Guo, J Tian, X Wang, H Cui, Appl. Catal., B. 246Y. Li, Z. Yin, G. Ji, Z. Liang, Y. Xue, Y. Guo, J. Tian, X. Wang and H. Cui, 2D/2D/2D heterojunction of Ti 3 C 2 MXene/ MoS 2 nanosheets/TiO 2 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets toward enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen produc- tion activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 12-20.

In situ fabrication of 2D/3D g-C 3 N 4 /Ti 3 C 2 (MXene) heterojunction for efficient visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. J Li, L Zhao, S Wang, J Li, G Wang, J Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci. 145922J. Li, L. Zhao, S. Wang, J. Li, G. Wang and J. Wang, In situ fabrication of 2D/3D g-C 3 N 4 /Ti 3 C 2 (MXene) heterojunction for efficient visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen evolu- tion, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 145922.

Au/MoS 2 /Ti 3 C 2 composite catalyst for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. J Zhang, M Liu, Y Wang, F Shi, CrystEngComm. 2221J. Zhang, M. Liu, Y. Wang and F. Shi, Au/MoS 2 /Ti 3 C 2 composite catalyst for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22(21), 3683-3691.

2D/2D heterojunction of Ti 3 C 2 /g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. T Su, Z D Hood, M Naguib, L Bai, S Luo, C M Rouleau, I N Ivanov, H Ji, Z Qin, Z Wu, Nanoscale. 1117T. Su, Z. D. Hood, M. Naguib, L. Bai, S. Luo, C. M. Rouleau, I. N. Ivanov, H. Ji, Z. Qin and Z. Wu, 2D/2D heterojunction of Ti 3 C 2 /g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(17), 8138-8149.

Facile preparation of selfassembled MXene@Au@CdS nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production activity. J Yin, F Zhan, T Jiao, W Wang, G Zhang, J Jiao, G Jiang, Q Zhang, J Gu, Q Peng, Sci. China Mater. 202011J. Yin, F. Zhan, T. Jiao, W. Wang, G. Zhang, J. Jiao, G. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Gu and Q. Peng, Facile preparation of self- assembled MXene@Au@CdS nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production activity, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63(11), 2228-2238.

Construction of BPQDs/ Ti 3 C 2 @TiO 2 composites with favorable charge transfer channels for enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation. Z Yao, H Sun, H Sui, X Liu, Nanomater. 103452Z. Yao, H. Sun, H. Sui and X. Liu, Construction of BPQDs/ Ti 3 C 2 @TiO 2 composites with favorable charge transfer channels for enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation, Nanomater., 2020, 10(3), 452.

Hydrophobic, flexible, and lightweight MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic-interference shielding. J Liu, H.-B Zhang, R Sun, Y Liu, Z Liu, A Zhou, Z.-Z Yu, Adv. Mater. 381702367J. Liu, H.-B. Zhang, R. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, A. Zhou and Z.-Z. Yu, Hydrophobic, flexible, and lightweight MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic-interference shielding, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(38), 1702367.

Two-dimensional nanomaterials for photocatalytic CO 2 reduction to solar fuels. Y Chen, G Jia, Y Hu, G Fan, Y H Tsang, Z Li, Z Zou, Sustainable Energy Fuels. 19Y. Chen, G. Jia, Y. Hu, G. Fan, Y. H. Tsang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Two-dimensional nanomaterials for photocatalytic CO 2 reduction to solar fuels, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1(9), 1875-1898.

Product selectivity of photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reactions. J Fu, K Jiang, X Qiu, J Yu, M Liu, Mater. Today32J. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Qiu, J. Yu and M. Liu, Product selectivity of photocatalytic CO 2 reduction reactions, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 222-243.

Recent advances in heterogeneous photocatalytic CO 2 conversion to solar fuels. K Li, B Peng, T Peng, ACS Catal. 611K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, Recent advances in hetero- geneous photocatalytic CO 2 conversion to solar fuels, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(11), 7485-7527.

Lightdriven heterogeneous reduction of carbon dioxide: photocatalysts and photoelectrodes. J L White, M F Baruch, J E Iii, Y Hu, I C Fortmeyer, J E Park, T Zhang, K Liao, J Gu, Y Yan, T W Shaw, E Abelev, A B Bocarsly, Chem. Rev. 11523J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander Iii, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Light- driven heterogeneous reduction of carbon dioxide: photo- catalysts and photoelectrodes, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(23), 12888-12935.

Ti 2 CO 2 MXene: a highly active and selective photocatalyst for CO 2 reduction. X Zhang, Z Zhang, J Li, X Zhao, D Wu, Z Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A. 525X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Li, X. Zhao, D. Wu and Z. Zhou, Ti 2 CO 2 MXene: a highly active and selective photocatalyst for CO 2 reduction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(25), 12899-12903.

Computational screening of dopants for photocatalytic two-electron reduction of CO 2 on anatase (101) surfaces. H He, P Zapol, L A Curtiss, Energy Environ. Sci. 53H. He, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, Computational screening of dopants for photocatalytic two-electron reduction of CO 2 on anatase (101) surfaces, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(3), 6196-6205.

Theoretical study on the mechanism of photoreduction of CO 2 to CH 4 on the anatase TiO 2 (101) surface. Y Ji, Y Luo, ACS Catal. 63Y. Ji and Y. Luo, Theoretical study on the mechanism of photoreduction of CO 2 to CH 4 on the anatase TiO 2 (101) surface, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(3), 2018-2025.

New mechanism for photocatalytic reduction of CO 2 on the anatase TiO 2 (101) surface: the essential role of oxygen vacancy. Y Ji, Y Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 49Y. Ji and Y. Luo, New mechanism for photocatalytic reduction of CO 2 on the anatase TiO 2 (101) surface: the essential role of oxygen vacancy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(49), 15896-15902.

2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene/g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets heterojunction for high efficient CO 2 reduction photocatalyst: Dual effects of urea. C Yang, Q Tan, Q Li, J Zhou, J Fan, B Li, J Sun, K Lv, Appl. Catal., B. 118738C. Yang, Q. Tan, Q. Li, J. Zhou, J. Fan, B. Li, J. Sun and K. Lv, 2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 MXene/g-C 3 N 4 nanosheets heterojunc- tion for high efficient CO 2 reduction photocatalyst: Dual effects of urea, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118738.

Decorating g-C 3 N 4 with alkalinized Ti 3 C 2 MXene for promoted photocatalytic CO 2 reduction performance. Q Tang, Z Sun, S Deng, H Wang, Z Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 564Q. Tang, Z. Sun, S. Deng, H. Wang and Z. Wu, Decorating g-C 3 N 4 with alkalinized Ti 3 C 2 MXene for promoted photo- catalytic CO 2 reduction performance, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 406-417.

TiO 2 /MXene Ti 3 C 2 composite with excellent photocatalytic CO 2 reduction activity. J Low, L Zhang, T Tong, B Shen, J Yu, J. Catal. 361J. Low, L. Zhang, T. Tong, B. Shen and J. Yu, TiO 2 /MXene Ti 3 C 2 composite with excellent photocatalytic CO 2 reduction activity, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 255-266.

2D/2D heterojunction of ultrathin MXene/Bi 2 WO 6 nanosheets for improved photocatalytic CO 2 reduction. S Cao, B Shen, T Tong, J Fu, J Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 211800136S. Cao, B. Shen, T. Tong, J. Fu and J. Yu, 2D/2D hetero- junction of ultrathin MXene/Bi 2 WO 6 nanosheets for improved photocatalytic CO 2 reduction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(21), 1800136.

2D/ 2D/0D TiO 2 /C 3 N 4 /Ti 3 C 2 MXene composite S-scheme photocatalyst with enhanced CO 2 reduction activity. F He, B Zhu, B Cheng, J Yu, W Ho, W Macyk, Appl. Catal., B. 119006F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, 2D/ 2D/0D TiO 2 /C 3 N 4 /Ti 3 C 2 MXene composite S-scheme photo- catalyst with enhanced CO 2 reduction activity, Appl. Catal., B., 2020, 272, 119006.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of select multi-layered transition metal carbides (MXenes). J Halim, K M Cook, M Naguib, P Eklund, Y Gogotsi, J Rosen, M W Barsoum, Appl. Surf. Sci. 362J. Halim, K. M. Cook, M. Naguib, P. Eklund, Y. Gogotsi, J. Rosen and M. W. Barsoum, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of select multi-layered transition metal car- bides (MXenes), Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 362, 406-417.

Single unit cell bismuth tungstate layers realizing robust solar CO 2 reduction to methanol. L Liang, F Lei, S Gao, Y Sun, X Jiao, J Wu, S Qamar, Y Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 5447L. Liang, F. Lei, S. Gao, Y. Sun, X. Jiao, J. Wu, S. Qamar and Y. Xie, Single unit cell bismuth tungstate layers realizing robust solar CO 2 reduction to methanol, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(47), 13971-13974.

Twodimensional ultrathin MXene ceramic nanosheets for photothermal conversion. H Lin, X Wang, L Yu, Y Chen, J Shi, Nano Lett. 171H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Two- dimensional ultrathin MXene ceramic nanosheets for photothermal conversion, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(1), 384-391.

Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 MXene interface materials as a Schottky catalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activities and anti-photocorrosion performance. T Cai, L Wang, Y Liu, S Zhang, W Dong, H Chen, X Yi, J Yuan, X Xia, C Liu, S Luo, Appl. Catal., B. 239T. Cai, L. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Dong, H. Chen, X. Yi, J. Yuan, X. Xia, C. Liu and S. Luo, Ag 3 PO 4 /Ti 3 C 2 MXene interface materials as a Schottky catalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activities and anti-photocorrosion perfor- mance, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 545-554.

Fabrication of layered Ti 3 C 2 with an accordion-like structure as a potential cathode material for high performance lithium-sulfur batteries. X Zhao, M Liu, Y Chen, B Hou, N Zhang, B Chen, N Yang, K Chen, J Li, L An, J. Mater. Chem. A. 315X. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Hou, N. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Yang, K. Chen, J. Li and L. An, Fabrication of layered Ti 3 C 2 with an accordion-like structure as a potential cathode material for high performance lithium-sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(15), 7870-7876.

Highly Efficient Photo-Reduction of p-nitrophenol by protonated graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets. J Qian, A Yuan, C Yao, J Liu, B Li, F Xi, X Dong, ChemCatChem. 1020J. Qian, A. Yuan, C. Yao, J. Liu, B. Li, F. Xi and X. Dong, Highly Efficient Photo-Reduction of p-nitrophenol by pro- tonated graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10(20), 4747-4754.

Environmental Applications of semiconductor photocatalysis. M R Hoffmann, S T Martin, W Choi, Chem. Rev. 951M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin and W. Choi, Environmental Applications of semiconductor photocatalysis, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95(1), 69-96.

Recent developments in heterogeneous photocatalytic water treatment using visible light-responsive photocatalysts: a review. S Dong, J Feng, M Fan, Y Pi, L Hu, X Han, M Liu, J Sun, J Sun, RSC Adv. 519S. Dong, J. Feng, M. Fan, Y. Pi, L. Hu, X. Han, M. Liu, J. Sun and J. Sun, Recent developments in heterogeneous photo- catalytic water treatment using visible light-responsive photocatalysts: a review, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(19), 14610-14630.

Direct growth of TiO 2 nanosheet arrays on carbon fibers for highly efficient photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange. W Guo, F Zhang, C Lin, Z L Wang, Adv. Mater. 35W. Guo, F. Zhang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Direct growth of TiO 2 nanosheet arrays on carbon fibers for highly efficient photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(35), 4761-4764.

Synthesis of bismuth vanadate nanoplates with exposed {001} facets and enhanced visible-light photocatalytic properties. G Xi, J Ye, Chem. Commun. 11G. Xi and J. Ye, Synthesis of bismuth vanadate nanoplates with exposed {001} facets and enhanced visible-light photocatalytic properties, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46(11), 1893-1895.

Oxygen vacancies of the TiO 2 nano-based composite photocatalysts in visible light responsive photocatalysis. B B Adormaa, W K Darkwah, Y Ao, RSC Adv. 858B. B. Adormaa, W. K. Darkwah and Y. Ao, Oxygen vacancies of the TiO 2 nano-based composite photocatalysts in visible light responsive photocatalysis, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(58), 33551-33563.

Overview on oxidation mechanisms of organic compounds by TiO 2 in heterogeneous photocatalysis. V Augugliaro, M Bellardita, V Loddo, G Palmisano, L Palmisano, S , J. Photochem. Photobiol., C. 133V. Augugliaro, M. Bellardita, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano and S. Yurdakal, Overview on oxidation mechanisms of organic compounds by TiO 2 in hetero- geneous photocatalysis, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13(3), 224-245.

Generation and Detection of Reactive Oxygen Species in Photocatalysis. Y Nosaka, A Y Nosaka, Chem. Rev. 17Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Generation and Detection of Reactive Oxygen Species in Photocatalysis, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(17), 11302-11336.

3 C 2 , and SrTiO 3 composites for photocatalytic reduction and removal of uranium(VI). H Deng, Z Li, L Wang, L Yuan, J Lan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. Z.-y. Chang, Z.-f. Chai, W.-q. Shi and Nanolayered Ti24H. Deng, Z.-j. Li, L. Wang, L.-y. Yuan, J.-h. Lan, Z.-y. Chang, Z.-f. Chai, W.-q. Shi and Nanolayered Ti 3 C 2 , and SrTiO 3 composites for photocatalytic reduction and removal of uranium(VI), ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(4), 2283-2294.

Enhanced photocatalytic activity and mechanism of Ti 3 C 2 -OH/Bi 2 WO 6 : Yb 3+ ,Tm 3+ towards degradation of RhB under visible and near infrared light irradiation. H Fang, Y Pan, M Yin, C Pan, Mater. Res. Bull. 110618H. Fang, Y. Pan, M. Yin and C. Pan, Enhanced photocatalytic activity and mechanism of Ti 3 C 2 -OH/Bi 2 WO 6 : Yb 3+ ,Tm 3+ towards degradation of RhB under visible and near infrared light irradiation, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 121, 110618.

Friction-induced enhancements for photocatalytic degradation of MoS 2 @Ti 3 C 2 nanohybrid. S Jiao, L Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 5839S. Jiao and L. Liu, Friction-induced enhancements for photocatalytic degradation of MoS 2 @Ti 3 C 2 nanohybrid, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58(39), 18141-18148.

Bi 3 TaO 7 /Ti 3 C 2 heterojunctions for enhanced photocatalytic removal of water-borne contaminants. K Li, X Lu, Y Zhang, K Liu, Y Huang, H Liu, Environ. Res. 109409K. Li, X. Lu, Y. Zhang, K. Liu, Y. Huang and H. Liu, Bi 3 TaO 7 /Ti 3 C 2 heterojunctions for enhanced photocatalytic removal of water-borne contaminants, Environ. Res., 2020, 185, 109409.

Efficient day-night photocatalysis performance of 2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 /Porous g-C 3 N 4 nanolayers composite and its application in the degradation of organic pollutants. N Liu, N Lu, H Yu, S Chen, X Quan, Chemosphere. 125760N. Liu, N. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, Efficient day-night photocatalysis performance of 2D/2D Ti 3 C 2 /Porous g-C 3 N 4 nanolayers composite and its application in the degradation of organic pollutants, Chemosphere, 2020, 246, 125760.

MXene as a non-metal charge mediator in 2D layered CdS@Ti 3 C 2 @TiO 2 composites with superior Z-scheme visible light-driven photocatalytic activity. Q Liu, X Tan, S Wang, F Ma, H Znad, Z Shen, L Liu, S Liu, Environ. Sci. Nano. 610Q. Liu, X. Tan, S. Wang, F. Ma, H. Znad, Z. Shen, L. Liu and S. Liu, MXene as a non-metal charge mediator in 2D layered CdS@Ti 3 C 2 @TiO 2 composites with superior Z-scheme visible light-driven photocatalytic activity, Environ. Sci. Nano, 2019, 6(10), 3158-3169.

TiO2 Àx /Ti3C2: Synergy of active facets, interfacial charge transfer and Ti3+ doping for enhance photocatalytic activity. C Peng, H Wang, H Yu, F Peng, Mater. Res. Bull. 89111C. Peng, H. Wang, H. Yu and F. Peng, (111) TiO2 Àx /Ti3C2: Synergy of active facets, interfacial charge transfer and Ti3+ doping for enhance photocatalytic activity, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 89, 16-25.

Hybrids of two-dimensional Ti 3 C 2 and TiO 2 exposing {001} facets toward enhanced photocatalytic activity. C Peng, X Yang, Y Li, H Yu, H Wang, F Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 89C. Peng, X. Yang, Y. Li, H. Yu, H. Wang and F. Peng, Hybrids of two-dimensional Ti 3 C 2 and TiO 2 exposing {001} facets toward enhanced photocatalytic activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(9), 6051-6060.

MXene Ti 3 C 2 derived Z-scheme photocatalyst of graphene layers anchored TiO 2 /g-C 3 N 4 for visible light photocatalytic degradation of refractory organic pollutants. Z Wu, Y Liang, X Yuan, D Zou, J Fang, L Jiang, J Zhang, H Yang, Z Xiao, Chem. Eng. J. 124921Z. Wu, Y. Liang, X. Yuan, D. Zou, J. Fang, L. Jiang, J. Zhang, H. Yang and Z. Xiao, MXene Ti 3 C 2 derived Z-scheme photocatalyst of graphene layers anchored TiO 2 /g-C 3 N 4 for visible light photocatalytic degradation of refractory organic pollutants, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124921.

2D/2D Heterojunction of R-scheme Ti 3 C 2 MXene/MoS 2 nanosheets for enhanced photocatalytic performance. Z Yao, H Sun, H Sui, X Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2020178Z. Yao, H. Sun, H. Sui and X. Liu, 2D/2D Heterojunction of R-scheme Ti 3 C 2 MXene/MoS 2 nanosheets for enhanced photocatalytic performance, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15(1), 78.

Preparation of magnetic a-Fe 2 O 3 /ZnFe 2 O 4 @Ti 3 C 2 MXene with excellent photocatalytic performance. H Zhang, M Li, C Zhu, Q Tang, P Kang, J Cao, Ceram. Int. 20201H. Zhang, M. Li, C. Zhu, Q. Tang, P. Kang and J. Cao, Preparation of magnetic a-Fe 2 O 3 /ZnFe 2 O 4 @Ti 3 C 2 MXene with excellent photocatalytic performance, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46(1), 81-88.

Antioxidants unlock shelf-stable Ti 3 C 2 T (MXene) nanosheet dispersions, Matter. X Zhao, A Vashisth, E Prehn, W Sun, S A Shah, T Habib, Y Chen, Z Tan, J L Lutkenhaus, M Radovic, M J Green, 1X. Zhao, A. Vashisth, E. Prehn, W. Sun, S. A. Shah, T. Habib, Y. Chen, Z. Tan, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, Antioxidants unlock shelf-stable Ti 3 C 2 T (MXene) nanosheet dispersions, Matter, 2019, 1(2), 513-526.