# Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review Volume 7 Issue 2 -2020 Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review 64

CorpusID: 234714655
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7da396122d1a3a12841fea30da5d2a719dc2e006](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7da396122d1a3a12841fea30da5d2a719dc2e006)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review Volume 7 Issue 2 -2020 Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review 64
2020. 2020. 2020. 2020. 2020. 2020

Shraboni Ghosal 
Nutrition Consultant
UK

Arnab Ghosal 
B.Sc. Biology
Staffordshire University
UK

Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review Volume 7 Issue 2 -2020 Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review 64

J Diab Metab Disorder Control
722020. 2020. 2020. 2020. 2020. 202010.15406/jdmdc.2020.07.00202Received: June 10, 2020 | Published: June 29, 2020Submit Manuscript | Correspondence: Shraboni Ghosal, Nutrition Consultant, Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, UK, Email Review Article Copyright: Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. and obesity for better patient care, prevention or management and treatment, are desirable. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review.Abbreviations: DM, diabetes mellitusWHO, World health organizationT1DM, type 1 diabetes mellitusT2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitusPWD, patients with diabetesIR, insulin resistanceOA, osteoarthritisRA, rheumatoid arthritisCF, charcot footAC, adhesive capsulitis, LJM, limited joint mobilityFMS, fibromyalgia syndromeDC, Dupuytren contractureTF, trigger fingerCTS, carpal tunnel syndromeORs, odds ratiosCOA, charcot osteoarthropathyHR, hazard ratioFMS, fibromyalgia syndromeDISH, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosisFS, frozen shoulderRR, relative riskAGEs, advanced glycation end productsRAGE, receptor for advanced glycation end productsTNF, tumor necrosis factorIL, interleukinQoL, quality of life Keywords: diabetes mellitus, hyperglycaemia, osteoarthritis, fibromyalgia, carpal tunnel syndrome, musculoskeletal disorder Journal of Diabetes, Metabolic Disorders & Control
Diabetes mellitus comprises of metabolic diseases that are characterized by elevated levels of blood glucose or hyperglycaemia, which is a result of insulin deficiency, insulin resistance or both. Marked hyperglycaemia causes an increase in morbidity and mortality that are related to macrovascular and microvascular complications. Musculoskeletal disorders seem to occur often in patients who have diabetes. Musculoskeletal pain is a usual occurrence in patients who have diabetes compared to the general population. The aim of this review was to explore and musculoskeletal disorders in diabetes. Diabetes causes significant morbidity and mortality and has been found to have an association with musculoskeletal disorders. A number of studies have found that diabetes has an association with musculoskeletal disorders such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis, fibromyalgia and carpal tunnel syndrome however the reasons underlying them are unclear. This review looks at the effects of diabetes on musculoskeletal disorders and the mechanisms through which diabetes contributes to them, so as to have a better understanding of the impact they may have in patients with diabetes. Further studies are necessary to understand how diabetes correlates with connective tissue metabolism, cytokines and obesity, for better patient care, treatment and prevention.

## Introduction

Diabetes mellitus (DM) comprises of metabolic disorders that are chronic and characterized by hyperglycaemia, which is a result of insulin deficiency, insulin resistance or both. 1 Marked hyperglycaemia causes increased morbidity and mortality, which are mostly associated with macrovascular and microvascular complications. 2 The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that globally about 422 million people currently have diabetes. 3 The number of adults with diabetes globally has been estimated to increase to 592 million by 2035. 4 In the United States (US), diabetes affects about 10% of the general population. 5 In 2009 2.6 million people were diagnosed with diabetes in the UK. 6 Diabetes can be grouped into two main categories. The autoimmune destruction of beta-cells of the pancreas causes Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), which starts in the young. 7 The most common form is Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) that is characterized by insulin resistance (IR) and comprises about 90-95% of patients with diabetes (PWD). 6 Evidence suggests that a number of musculoskeletal disorders are linked with diabetes, which may cause significant pain and disability. [8][9][10] While musculoskeletal disorders in PWD have been reported in previous studies, [11][12][13] the causes underlying them are unclear. This review discusses some of the musculoskeletal disorders associated with diabetes.


## Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders

Musculoskeletal disorders are common and the prevalence is raised in PWD. 14 About 20-33% of people globally and about one in two adults were found to have a musculoskeletal disorder in the US. 15 Worldwide, in 2017, musculoskeletal disorders were about 16% of global disabilities. 16 The common musculoskeletal disorders include osteoarthritis (OA), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Charcot's foot (CF), adhesive capsulitis (AC), osteoporosis, limited joint mobility (LJM), fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS), Dupuytren's contracture (DC), trigger finger (TF) and carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). 17 Musculoskeletal pain and loss of function can be caused due to restricted movement, flexibility and abilities. 18 In PWD, musculoskeletal pain may have negative consequences, which includes inadequate glycaemic control and a reduction in being physically active. 19 


## Diabetes and musculoskeletal pain

In PWD, several musculoskeletal disorders have been related, that have an impact on all age groups. There is evidence that musculoskeletal pain is a frequent problem in PWD. 20 In the UK, about 9.3 million working days are lost as a result of pain in the back, hips or knees. 21 Diabetes has been found to have significant associations with back/lower back pain, pain in the limbs, OA, osteoporosis, RA and shoulder/neck pain, with odds ratios (ORs) ranging between 1.2 to 1.6 (p<0.01). 22 In a previous study on 950 patients with T2DM, musculoskeletal pain was 1.7 to 2.1 times as frequent (p<0.001) to age and gender matched controls and the pain was more frequent in females (p<0.001). 20 Another study found that there was a significant rise in the pain intensity (p<0.001) of PWD with knee OA and raised synovitis scores were found (p=0.024) compared to patients without diabetes. 23


## Diabetic neuropathy

Diabetic neuropathy has been found to affect over 90% of PWD 24 and is a common complication of both T1DM and T2DM. It has been observed in those who have had the disease for 10 years or longer. One of the main symptoms of diabetic neuropathy is pain. 22 Peripheral neuropathy, retinopathy, autonomic neuropathy or renal failure may be due to the long-term complications of diabetes. 2 Limited joint mobility (LJM) has been found to be more prevalent in patients with diabetic neuropathy. The blood vessels may be affected by autonomic neuropathy, which leads to increased blood flow and cause inflammation and damage to the bones. Autonomic neuropathy has been found in patients with Adhesive capsulitis (AC) often compared to other PWD, which could be an underlying mechanism. 25 Sharp pains, numbness, cramps, burning, tingling or sensory loss have been observed in peripheral neuropathy, 26 which may increase the risk of some forms of OA in PWD. 1


## Charcot osteoarthropathy

Charcot osteoarthropathy (COA) or neuropathic arthropathy is also known as Charcot's Joint, and is a result of diabetic peripheral neuropathy. 27 In PWD, it causes damage and deformities of joints along with symptoms such as tingling, numbness or sensory loss. 27 COA is a progressive and degenerative disease and pain/discomfort may be observed in the acute stages. Joints such as the knees, ankles and feet, which are the weight-bearing joints, are mostly affected 28 and people of both genders are equally affected. The incidence of arthropathy was found to be about 10% in the foot and ankle, with an increase in prevalence of 1/680 in PWD, which increased with the duration of diabetes. 18,29 COA is mostly found in people above 50 years 18 and has been found in 0.1-5% of PWD. It is caused due to a lowering of the afferent neural impulses, which leads to abnormal vasomotor regulation. 30 T2DM was found in about two-thirds of people with COA. 30,31 Osteoarthritis Osteoarthritis (OA) is caused due to degradation of the cartilage in one or more joints, which make them stiff and painful. 1,32 OA affects around 8 million people in the UK 32 and is the most common form of arthritis. 22,33 OA commonly affects the knees, hips and joints in the hands and musculoskeletal pain may arise in PWD. 1 The prevalence of OA amongst PWD was 29.5±1.2% and diabetes amongst patients with OA was 14.4±0.1%. 34 In PWD, the overall risk of OA as reported in a systematic review was 1.46 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.08, 1.96; p=0.01) and diabetes in patients with OA was 1.41 (CI 1.21, 1.65; p<0.001). 34 T2DM has been significantly associated with OA (OR 1·21, 95% CI 1·02, 1·41). 35 A cohort study showed that in men with T2DM and knee OA, joint space narrowing was significantly higher than controls. 36 These results were supported by a few animal studies, which also found a negative effect of diabetes on OA. 37 In contrast, no association was found between OA and T2DM in those who had knee or hip joint replacement (OR 1.0, 95% CI 0.5, 1.9). 38 The researchers concluded that diabetes could be a risk factor for hip and knee OA. 38 Studies have suggested that T2DM may have a pathogenic effect on OA through major pathways involving inflammation and oxidative stress, caused by persistent hyperglycemia and IR. 39


## Rheumatoid arthritis

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, inflammatory and autoimmune disease. 32,40 It affects the synovial membranes of joints and may lead to joint deformities. 41 Peripheral and symmetric polyarthritis observed in RA 41 are likely to cause destruction of cartilage by the immune system. 42 Inflammation, pain, and decreased function of the affected joints are the common symptoms of RA. 43 RA has an estimated global prevalence of 0.24% and females are twice as likely to have RA as males. 44 Approximately 400,000 people are affected by RA in the UK. 32,42 An increased prevalence of diabetes has been observed in patients with RA. 45,46 Diabetes was associated with 55% elevated odds of having RA in a Danish study. 22 In contrast, some studies have found no evidence that RA occurs often in PWD. 47,48 Some studies have shown that T2DM increases the risk for developing RA and conversely, having RA increases the risk for developing T2DM. Patients with RA may be at an increased risk for IR and T2DM. 49 However, others have suggested that people with T1DM are likely to have a higher chance of developing RA, 42 as they share some common genetic characteristics such as the chromosomes HLA-DR9, 4q27, PTPN22 and the regions IDDM8 and IDDM5. 50


## Gout

Gout is an inflammatory arthritis and commonly affects adult males. 18 The collection of monosodium urate crystals leads to inflamed and painful joints along with acute inflammatory attacks. 32 Gout had an association with an increased risk of diabetes (hazard ratio [HR] 1.45, 95% CI 1.37, 1.54) and the risk of incident diabetes was more in females (HR 1.77, 95% CI 1.51, 2.09) than males (HR 1.41, 95% CI 1.33, 1.50). 51 The incidence rates of diabetes were 9.5 in males and 10.1 in females per 1000 person-years in people with gout in a population-based study and 7.2 in males and 5.6 in females per 1000 person-years in controls. 52 A recent prospective study in the UK found that diabetes was related to a lower risk of incident gout 53 whereas a Chinese study found no significant relationship. 54 Some studies have found that people with gout are significantly more likely to develop T2DM than controls. 55 The prevalence of gout in T2DM patients was 22%. 56 In gout, serum uric acid levels have been related with the risk of developing diabetes. 57 Diabetes was strongly related with serum urate concentrations, abdominal obesity and gout, 18 while others found gout related with diabetes when hyperlipidaemia and obesity were present. 47


## Diabetic muscle infarction

Diabetic Muscle Infarction is an uncommon complication of longstanding diabetes. 58,59 with established vasculopathy. The symptoms include sudden pain and inflammation in the lower limbs and it mostly affects the adductor muscles, quadriceps femoris and calf muscles. 18 Out of 114 PWD, it was found to be more common in females (61.53%), 59.1% had T1DM and 23.8% had T2DM. 59 The underlying factors such as vascular endothelial damage and diffuse diabetic microangiopathy may cause diabetic muscle infarction. 60


## Diabetic amyotrophy

Diabetic Amyotrophy (Diabetic Cachexia) is a disabling and different form of diabetic neuropathy, 61 with an estimated incidence of about 1% amongst PWD. 62 The symptoms commonly include loss of tendon reflexes, pain, muscle wasting and weakness. 18 Diabetic amyotrophy has been found to often occur in older males with T2DM and is linked with weight loss. 62 The underlying factors may be due to a combination of metabolic imbalances, autoimmunity, microvascular inadequacy and oxidative stress. 18


## Fibromyalgia syndrome

Fibromyalgia or Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is a chronic condition that affects about 2-4% of adult females. 63 The symptoms consist of extensive musculoskeletal pain, stiffness and tenderness along with functional and cognitive impairments, headaches and tiredness. 64 Diabetes may have a role in the development of FMS as it was found to be more common in FMS patients than controls. 64 Peripheral neuropathy has been linked with FMS as it was found in 61.9% of T2DM patients with FMS compared to only 2.5% of T2DM patients without FMS. 64 Other than endocrine and neurological factors, research indicates that environmental and genetic factors may also play a role in the development of FMS. 64


## Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis

Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH), Forestier disease or ankylosing hyperostosis mostly affects the neck or spine. 65 In DISH, the tendons and ligaments harden along with the formation of new bones. Stiffness or a decrease in movement has been observed in PWD. 65 DISH commonly occurs in PWD (13-49%) compared to controls (1.6-13%), 18 and another study reported that it was present in 25% amongst 428 PWD. 7 DISH is mostly found in T2DM compared to T1DM and mainly occurs in the elderly. 7,66 DISH affects more males than females and in those with dyslipidaemia, hyperuricaemia or obesity. 66


## Dupuytren's contracture

Dupuytren's contracture (DC) is a disorder that causes hardening, thickening, tethering and contraction of the fingers, with limited joint movements. 67 It is associated with peripheral neuropathy and diabetes was found to be a significant risk factor (mainly T1DM) for DC. 68 DC occurs more in PWD than in the general population 69,70 and has been reported in 16-42% of PWD. 7,70 A systematic review found an association between DC and diabetes (OR 3.06, 95% CI, 2.69, 3.48). 71 DC is common in patients who have long-standing diabetes and may increase with age and the duration of diabetes. 72 A study reported that the prevalence increased in both T1DM and T2DM compared to controls (35.0 and 30.0% versus 6.7 and 10.0%), both p<0.01 and had a correlation with age (p<0.05). 73


## Adhesive capsulitis

Frozen shoulder (FS) or adhesive capsulitis (AC), is a disabling and common musculoskeletal disorder. The symptoms include restricted and painful shoulder movements, mainly with abduction and external rotation that causes acute pain, tightening and stiffness in PWD. 22 The prevalence of AC was estimated to be 11-30% in PWD and 2-10% in controls. 74 Another study reported that the estimated prevalence was 10-20% in T1DM, 7-32% in T2DM and 0-10% in controls. 75 In AC, a lower BMD was found in T1DM, whereas patients with T2DM and hyper insulinaemia were found to have a normal/high BMD. 65 In T1DM, AC was found to be related with age and duration of diabetes whereas in T2DM, it was related only with age. 75


## Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is a disorder that causes bone damage and deterioration, making them prone to fracture. 26 Osteoporosis affects around 3 million people in the UK. 76 Diabetes has been associated with an increased risk of fracture. Studies suggest that and diabetes could be a risk factor for fracture. 26 Osteoporosis can cause musculoskeletal pain and bone loss is greater in patients with inadequately controlled diabetes than those with good control. 77 T1DM and T2DM have different effects on BMD but share common pathways, which cause bones to become fragile. 26 In the Nurses' Health Study, 1,398 females had a hip fracture during 2.22 million person-years of follow-up and in T1DM, the risk of hip fracture was found to be six-fold higher than those without diabetes. 77 The age-adjusted relative risk (RR) of hip fracture in T1DM was 7.1 (95% CI 4.4, 11.4) and 1.7 (CI 1.4, 2.0) in T2DM compared with females without diabetes. 77 Researchers have suggested that people with T1DM may have an increased risk of osteoporosis because they tend to have a lower BMD. 76


## Diabetic cheiroarthropathy

Diabetic cheiroarthopathy, Diabetic Hand Syndrome or Limited joint mobility (LJM) is a disabling condition that may occur due to vascular insufficiency. 64 In LJM, limitations occur in joint movements due to contractures and skin of the hands become thick, tight and waxy, with deformities and pain in the joints. 78 The prevalence of LJM was found to vary from about 8 to 58% in T1DM, 25 to 76% in T2DM and 1 to 20% in controls. 65 LJM is associated with age and duration of diabetes. 71 Researchers have suggested that the differences in the prevalence estimates in LJM may be due to differences in glycaemic control. 79 The prevalence of LJM in T1DM was found to be related to age (p<0.05) and with duration of diabetes 73 and some studies have suggested that genetic factors could have a role in the development of LJM. 65 A study showed that the prevalence of LJM was 8% in T1DM, 9% in their siblings without diabetes and 2% in controls who were not siblings. 80 In contrast, another study found that genetic factors did not have a role in LJM in patients with T1DM and their first-degree relatives. 81


## Carpal tunnel syndrome

Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a neuropathic disorder, which may occur due to diabetic neuropathy and/or compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel. 7 CTS causes pain, tingling and numbness in the hands. The prevalence of CTS in adults ranges from about 2.7% to 5.8% 82 while the incidence is about 125 per 100,000 person-years. 61 CTS is more common in females 82 with an incidence of 8% compared to 0.6% in males. 18 Diabetes is commonly associated with CTS and studies have found about 11% in T1DM, 12% in T2DM and 8% in controls. 7 CTS is associated with age and the duration of diabetes. A meta-analysis suggested that both T1DM and T2DM are risk factors for CTS 83 A study found that the prevalence increased in both T1DM and T2DM compared to controls (26.7 and 15.0% versus 3.3 and 5%, p<0.01 and non-significant). 73


## Flexor tenosynovitis

Flexor tenosynovitis is also known as stenosing tenosynovitis or trigger finger. 84 It is caused due to fibrous proliferation in the tendon sheath, which leads to limited movement around the fingers and hands 84 In PWD, the incidence of flexor tenosynovitis ranges from 10 to 20% 84 and is linked with age and the duration of diabetes. A study observed an increased incidence in those with impaired glucose tolerance. 85 In both T1DM and T2DM, the prevalence increased compared to controls (23.3 and 16.7% versus 0.0 and 3.3%), p<0.01 and p<0.05 73 and in T2DM, the prevalence also increased with age (p<0.05). 73


## Causes of musculoskeletal disorders and pain in diabetes

The prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders of all types was 58.15% (95% CI 41.4, 73.9), as reported in a systematic review. 86 PWD commonly have an increased risk of having musculoskeletal pain, 22 which may be related to neuropathy, connective tissue disorders, 64 osteoporosis, reduced insulin-like growth factor 1, vasculopathy, obesity, sedentary lifestyle or due to these factors combined. 87  is associated with microvascular complications of diabetes in patients with T1DM. 81,88,89 In people with T2DM, musculoskeletal pain is especially common. 87 A population-based retrospective cohort study demonstrated a significantly higher 10-year cumulative incidence of musculoskeletal pain in T2DM in both genders and in all age groups compared to controls (p<0.05). 87 The relative risk (RR) for all age groups and genders was >1 and was increased in females compared to males. 87 Similarly, a previous study also found musculoskeletal pain in patients with T2DM, which was 1.7-2.1 times more than controls. 20 Researchers have suggested that pain can also be due to osteoporosis, which has also been associated with T2DM. 90 An earlier study had also reported that pain in the arms, hands, knees and/or hips and lowback pain had a significant relation with BMI (p<0.005). 20 Impaired QoL, a sedentary lifestyle and reduced physical function (p<0.05) were related with low back pain, which was found less in males compared to females (p<0.001). 20


## Hyperglycaemia

Several studies have suggested that hyperglycaemia may play a vital role in musculoskeletal disorders and pain. 24 Diabetes causes a disturbance in insulin metabolism that leads to hyperglycaemia, which commonly leads to other complications. 91 Impaired insulin action on target tissues can be a result of faults in insulin secretion and/or decreased tissue responses to insulin, which may cause abnormalities in carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism. 2 Hyperglycemia may induce chronic inflammation that can lead to systemic changes in body organs. 92 Studies have reported association of diabetes and hyperglycaemia with OA. 93,94 OA was found to have correlations with inadequate glycaemic control and longer duration of diabetes. [11][12][13] Moderate hyperglycaemia has been linked with higher uric acid levels in individuals with gout. 95 Chronic hyperglycaemia may also cause impaired growth and susceptibility to certain infections, such as feet and hand infections, in PWD. 2


## Advanced glycation end-stage products

Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are harmful compounds and can be produced as a result of hyperglycaemia that can affect cartilage and bone health. 65 A combination of protein or fat with glucose may lead to the formation of AGEs, which are linked with diabetic microvascular complications. 96 AGEs can collect in the joints and surrounding areas, and cause increase the fragility of bones, cartilage stiffness and cause pain. 97 They can alter the structure of proteins and may damage the intracellular and extracellular structural proteins, such as collagen. AGEs may also act through specific receptors. Studies have reported that they can alter cellular functions by attaching to RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products) and produce cellular signalling outcomes such as activation of some signalling mechanisms that may cause cell stress, cellular dysfunction and damage. 65


## Inflammation

Inflammation of a low-grade has been found that exists in diabetes 98 and also in OA. 99 Inflammatory arthritis such as RA and psoriatric arthritis have both been linked with diabetes. 100 In PWD, inflammatory markers are also found, that are also high in people who have inflammatory arthritis. 100 Diabetes may trigger inflammation which causes progressive joint damage, stiffness and pain, such as in RA. A study reported that diabetes was associated with 55% elevated odds of having RA however, in this study RA was reported by 15.1% and 7.6% of the participants with and without diabetes. 101 In RA, inflammation of joints and other tissues have been associated with nociceptive pain. 102 Inflammation in RA can cause damage to the joints and more inflammation as in RA can increase IR and promote T2DM. Studies have suggested that inflammation may increase the risks of T2DM and OA and may also be a result of dyslipidaemia and visceral obesity. 97,103 Connective tissue Diabetes has major effects on connective tissues, which significantly impacts tendons, ligaments, bones and cartilage. 104 An increased prevalence of connective tissue and musculoskeletal disorders has been observed in PWD. 1 The alterations observed in connective tissue in PWD have suggested that various factors can lead to musculoskeletal pain. 1 The cartilage extracellular matrix can alter due to metabolic abnormalities linked with diabetes. 37 The periarticular and skeletal systems may also get altered due to diabetes. 64 Abnormal deposition of collagen in the periarticular connective tissues can alter the extracellular matrix and cause damage. 10,105 Some studies in animal models of diabetes have shown a decrease in collagen production 58 and increased catabolism of proteoglycans, 106 which supports these findings. Faults related to disturbed glucose metabolism, such as increased non-enzymatic glycosylation of collagen, 107,108 crosslinking of collagen and resistance to enzymatic degradation, increased hydration of collagen 109 and changed collagen synthesis, may contribute to some musculoskeletal disorders and pain in PWD. 65


## Inflammatory cytokines

Certain pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-α], interleukin-6 [IL-6] and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) have been found to be involved in musculoskeletal pain. TNF-α, a pleiotropic cytokine, is known to facilitate pathological conditions such as inflammation, arthritis, IR, immunomodulation, autoimmune diseases and apoptosis. 18 Bone resorption and osteoclastogenesis are increased by TNF-α when the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) is present. 18 Inflammatory response is increased by IL-6, which activates the immune system. A number of studies have shown that some immunoregulatory components such as IL-6 and TNF-α are linked in musculoskeletal disorders such as RA, IR and T2DM. 110,111 They play an important role through intracellular pathways of signal transduction for producing cytokines, some enzymes and other inflammatory compounds. 112 The intracellular pathways get activated and causes inflammation and catabolism to increase in joint tissues, 113,114 which causes a loss of metabolic homeostasis. 112 A study reported higher synovitis scores (p=0.024) and a significant increase in the levels of IL-6 (p=0.003) in the synovial fluid of knee joints of PWD, in comparison with patients without diabetes. 115


## Obesity

In recent years, diabetes and obesity have increased at an alarming rate globally. 7 The risk of T2DM as well as forms of arthritis such as OA, gout and RA may be increased due to obesity. 32 Musculoskeletal pain had an association with raised BMI, decreased quality of life (QoL), lower physical function and being physically active, in a previous study on 940 patients with T2DM. 20 Associations between OA and T2DM have also been found which were linked with the underlying risk factors of obesity and age. 99 In OA, damage to the joints may be due to excess pressure on the joints caused by obesity and joint injury. 29 A higher incidence of RA found in a study was likely to be driven by obesity, comorbidities and lifestyle factors. 116 Dyslipidemia, hyperuricaemia, obesity and increased levels of serum insulin were found to be increased in patients with DISH compared to controls. 18 An increased production of TNF-alpha, IL-6, leptin and resistin has been found in obesity, which may contribute to IR. 117 Conversely, there is a decrease in the plasma levels and expression of the insulin-sensitizing effector, adiponectin, in obesity. 117


## Discussion

This review looked at how diabetes affects musculoskeletal disorders, for a better understanding of the impact it can have on PWD. Musculoskeletal disorders are common in T1DM and T2DM and several studies have reported that PWD have an elevated risk of having musculoskeletal pain. 118 Diabetes has also been associated with elevated odds of OA, RA and osteoporosis. 22 A cross-sectional study reported that long duration of diabetes and dyslipidaemia were associated with raised prevalence of hand abnormalities (p=0.017; p=0.019). 8 Moreover, an increase was observed in the prevalence of soft tissue hand lesions in both T1DM and T2DM, compared to controls. 73 Researchers have suggested that disorders such as AC may have other complications of diabetes such as LJM, than controls. Changes in connective tissue could be the underlying mechanism that causes disorders such as LJM, DC and AC. 65 Insufficient control of diabetes can damage nerves, muscles and bones and cause musculoskeletal pain over time. 119 In PWD, musculoskeletal pain can occur due to a number of reasons, such as vasculopathy, connective tissue disorders, neuropathy or a combination of them. Neuropathy may be the underlying cause of the increased incidence of musculoskeletal disorders with associated pain in PWD. 65 The harmful effects of hyperglycaemia can cause diabetic neuropathy. 120 Neuropathic joints are complications of diabetes and are commonly found mainly in the foot and ankle of PWD. 121 A number of studies have found that RA has an association with neuropathic pain. [122][123][124] The pain may also be a consequence of the complications of diabetic polyneuropathy. 22 Neuropathic pain can increase due to central sensitization. 43 Although a study found a significant increase in the prevalence of musculoskeletal pain in patients with T2DM, only a weak correlation was found between the intensity of pain and peripheral inflammation. 29 Studies have shown that hyperglycaemia can cause cell damage and induce inflammation by various mechanisms. A loss of BMD in PWD may be due to an increase in bone resorption and decrease in bone formation when diabetes is not controlled effectively. 125 Chronic inflammation due to diabetes has been found to lead to RA. An increased risk for diabetes associated with RA was found in a population-based study 126 and another study showed that RA increased the risk for diabetes by about 50%. 51 Pain is frequently considered a marker of inflammation and in patients with RA it may be caused due to joint inflammation or secondary OA. 127 Low-grade inflammation has been found to be associated with diabetes 98 and OA. 99 However, other than inflammation, some studies emphasize that the association between diabetes and OA could be due to AGEs and oxidative stress. 92,127 The accumulation of AGEs may cause musculoskeletal pain in PWD in joints and their surrounding tissues. 117 Hyperglycaemia may also raise the levels of plasma insulin significantly. High levels of insulin or insulin-like growth factors (IGF-1, IGF-2) due to hyperglycaemia, can promote new bone growth or calcification of bones, especially in obese patients with T2DM, which may explain a normal/high BMD found in T2DM patients with hyperinsulinaemia. 65 High levels of insulin and IGF-1 can lead to calcification and ossification of ligaments and areas that are exposed to mechanical stress. 128 Mechanical stress can cause oxidative damage, as indicated in previous studies. 129 Some studies have found that hyperglycaemia can lead to joint inflammation and cartilage degradation not only through AGEs and oxidative stress, but also inflammatory mediators. 127 A significant synovitis observed in OA may have been due to the increased levels of inflammatory cytokines, prostaglandins and adipokines found in diabetic tissues. 37 There is evidence that there are links between inflammations, TNF-α, IL-6 and RANKL, which regulates osteoclastogenesis. 19 TNFα stimulates resorption, inhibits the synthesis of proteoglycan in cartilage and inhibits the synthesis of proteoglycans and type II collagen by chondrocytes. 130,131 This may lead to the death of chondrocytes and prevent cartilage regeneration. Increased concentrations of IL-6 (p=0.003) found in the synovial fluid of PWD and knee OA was likely to have been the reason for a significant increase in the intensity of pain. 115 In another study, increased hand pain in erosive OA along with worsening of pain was probably due to diabetes and/or synovitis. 23 In contrast, a Finnish self-reported study did not find diabetes to be associated with pain intensity in older males or females. 132 However, they did not measure cytokine levels, and this was a cross-sectional study, a cause-effect relationship cannot be assumed. Moreover, selfreported data may have certain inaccuracies and additionally, the study population was only from one area and therefore the results may not be generalizable to a larger population. Chronic hyperglycaemia may also cause susceptibility to certain infections in PWD, which may be caused due to arterial disease, diabetic neuropathy or obesity. 1,2 Other than associations with inadequate glycaemic control, raised BMI, age and duration of diabetes, musculoskeletal conditions and pain in diabetes have been found to be associated with reductions in QoL, physical function and being physically active. 20 Pain in the hands, arms, knees, hips and low-back pain have been associated with BMI (p<0.005). 20 Studies have confirmed that in RA, diabetes occurred more often with increasing BMI and age. 119


## Future implications

Future studies are needed to clarify the links between body composition, TNF-α, inflammation, musculoskeletal pain and IR. Studies have indicated that an optimal glycaemic control, control of inflammation and insulin sensitivity may decrease the risk of developing diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders associated with diabetes. Moreover, blockade of TNF-α may improve IR and lipid profiles and additionally, cytokines could be important targets for therapies. An improved understanding of the abnormalities of connective tissue metabolism in diabetes is needed. The underlying mechanisms that underlie diabetic neuropathic pain can lead to new or improved therapies to optimize pain control and may lead to significant improvements in clinical care of PWD.


## Conclusion

In conclusion, musculoskeletal disorders and pain are common in PWD. Diabetes is associated with musculoskeletal disorders like OA, RA, and osteoporosis and fibromyalgia syndrome along with pain. Insufficient glycaemic control can lead to worsening of these disorders in PWD, which clearly needs attention in clinical practice. This review suggests having an increased focus on musculoskeletal disorders in PWD in clinical practice. Early management of musculoskeletal problems in PWD and maintaining good glycaemic control can prevent or improve musculoskeletal disorders, pain, morbidity, mortality and improve QoL. Future studies to understand how diabetes relates with connective tissue metabolism, cytokines


Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. J Diab Metab Disorder Control. 2020;7(2):63-71. DOI: 10.15406/jdmdc.2020.07.00202
AcknowledgmentsNone.Conflicts of interestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.FundingNone.Copyright:Copyright:Copyright:
Association of hand or knee osteoarthritis with diabetes mellitus in a population of hispanics from Puerto Rico. M Nieves-Plaza, L E Castro-Santana, Y M Font, J Clin Rheumatol. 191Nieves-Plaza M, Castro-Santana LE, Font YM, et al. Association of hand or knee osteoarthritis with diabetes mellitus in a population of hispanics from Puerto Rico. J Clin Rheumatol. 2013;19(1):1-6.

Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes care. 361American Diabetes AssociationADA). SupplAmerican Diabetes Association (ADA). Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes care. 2013;36(Suppl 1):S67-S74.

. World Health Organization. Diabetes. World Health Organization. Diabetes. 2020.

Global estimates of diabetes prevalence for 2013 and projections for 2035. L Guariguata, D R Whiting, I Hambleton, Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1032Guariguata L, Whiting DR, Hambleton I, et al. Global estimates of diabetes prevalence for 2013 and projections for 2035. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014;103(2):137-149.

Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. National diabetes statistics report: estimates of diabetes and its burden in the United States. Atlanta, GAUS Department of Health and Human ServicesCenters for Disease Control & Prevention. National diabetes statistics report: estimates of diabetes and its burden in the United States, 2014. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services. 2014.

Diabetes in the UK 2010. Key statistics on diabetes. Diabetes in the UK 2010. Key statistics on diabetes.

Impact of obesity and diabetes on arthritis: an update. Health (Irvine Calif). R Pandey, N Kumar, S Paroha, 5Pandey R, Kumar N, Paroha S, et al. Impact of obesity and diabetes on arthritis: an update. Health (Irvine Calif). 2013;5(1):143-156.

Musculoskeletal disorders in patients with diabetes mellitus: a cross-sectional study. A Majjad, Y Errahali, H Toufik, Int J Rheumatol. 3839872Majjad A, Errahali Y, Toufik H, et al. Musculoskeletal disorders in patients with diabetes mellitus: a cross-sectional study. Int J Rheumatol. 2018:3839872.

Musculoskeletal manifestations of diabetes mellitus. M Merashli, T A Chowdhury, Asm Jawad, QJM: An International Journal of Medicine. 10811Merashli M, Chowdhury TA, Jawad ASM. Musculoskeletal manifestations of diabetes mellitus. QJM: An International Journal of Medicine. 2015;108(11):853-857.

Musculoskeletal impairments are often unrecognized and underappreciated complications from diabetes. M J Mueller, Phys Thert. Mueller MJ. Musculoskeletal impairments are often unrecognized and underappreciated complications from diabetes. Phys Thert. 2016;

Rheumatic disorders in diabetes mellitus. J Swierkot, K Guszecka-Marczyńska, D Sowińsk, Pol Merkur Lekarski. 19114Swierkot J, Guszecka-Marczyńska K, Sowińsk D, et al. Rheumatic disorders in diabetes mellitus. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2005;19(114):843- 847.

Rheumatological manifestations in diabetes mellitus. Del Rosso, A Cerinic, M M , De Giorgio, F , Curr Diabetes Rev. 24Del Rosso A, Cerinic MM, De Giorgio F, et al. Rheumatological manifestations in diabetes mellitus. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2006;2(4):455- 466.

Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a pilot study. I Douloumpakas, A Pyrpasopoulou, A Triantafyllou, Hippokratia. 114Douloumpakas I, Pyrpasopoulou A, Triantafyllou A, et al. Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a pilot study. Hippokratia. 2007;11(4):216-218.

Lifetime risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. L Murphy, T A Schwartz, C G Helmick, Arthritis Rheum. 599Murphy L, Schwartz TA, Helmick CG, et al. Lifetime risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2008;59(9):1207-1213.

The impact of musculoskeletal disorders on Americans-opportunities for action. Bone and Joint Initiative USA. The impact of musculoskeletal disorders on Americans-opportunities for action. Bone and Joint Initiative USA. 2016.

Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. S L James, D Abate, K H Abate, Lancet. 392James SL, Abate D, Abate KH, et al. Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet. 2018;392(10159):1789-1858.

Rheumatic manifestations of diabetes mellitus. J C Crispin, J Alcocer-Varela, Am J Med. 1149Crispin JC, Alcocer-Varela J. Rheumatic manifestations of diabetes mellitus. Am J Med. 2003;114(9):753-757.

Musculoskeletal problems in diabetes mellitus. T Sözen, N Ç Başaran, M Tınazlı, Eur J Rheumatol. 54Sözen T, Başaran NÇ, Tınazlı M, et al. Musculoskeletal problems in diabetes mellitus. Eur J Rheumatol. 2018;5(4):258-265.

Facilitators, barriers and expectations in the self-management of type 2 diabetes--a qualitative study from Portugal. L Laranjo, A L Neves, A Costa, Eur J Gen Pract. 212Laranjo L, Neves AL, Costa A, et al. Facilitators, barriers and expectations in the self-management of type 2 diabetes--a qualitative study from Portugal. Eur J Gen Pract. 2015;21(2):103-110.

Musculoskeletal pain in patients with type 2 diabetes. S Molsted, J Tribler, O Snorgaard, Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 962Molsted S, Tribler J, Snorgaard O. Musculoskeletal pain in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012;96(2):135-140.

The National Institute for Health & Care Excellence (NICE). The Joint pain advisor approach for knee and hip Pain. The National Institute for Health & Care Excellence (NICE). The Joint pain advisor approach for knee and hip Pain. 2017.

Diabetes is associated with musculoskeletal pain, osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, and rheumatoid arthritis. T Rehling, A D Bjørkman, M B Andersen, Journal of Diabetes Research. 6324348Rehling T, Bjørkman AD, Andersen MB, et al. Diabetes is associated with musculoskeletal pain, osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of Diabetes Research. 2019:6324348.

Veterans with diabetes receive arthroplasty more frequently and at a younger age. K B King, T W Findley, A E Williams, Clin Orthop Relat Res. 471King KB, Findley TW, Williams AE, et al. Veterans with diabetes receive arthroplasty more frequently and at a younger age. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2013;471:3049-3054.

Diabetic neuropathic pain: physiopathology and treatment. A K Schreiber, C F Nones, R C Reis, World J Diabetes. 63Schreiber AK, Nones CF, Reis RC, et al. Diabetic neuropathic pain: physiopathology and treatment. World J Diabetes. 2015;6(3):432-444.

Shoulder capsulitis in type I and II diabetic patients: association with diabetic complications and related diseases. P E Arkkila, I M Kantola, J S Viikari, Ann Rheum Dis. 5512Arkkila PE, Kantola IM, Viikari JS, et al. Shoulder capsulitis in type I and II diabetic patients: association with diabetic complications and related diseases. Ann Rheum Dis. 1996;55(12):907-914.

. Diabetes.co.uk. Diabetes.co.uk. 2019.

. Diabetes.co.uk. Diabetes.co.uk. 2019.

Diabetic charcot's arthropathy of the wrist. case report and literature review. O Bayne, E J Lu, Clin Orthop Relat Res. 357Bayne O, Lu EJ. Diabetic charcot's arthropathy of the wrist. case report and literature review. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1998;357:122-126.

Charcot's foot: newest findings on its pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. L Molines, P Darmon, D Raccah, Diabetes Metab. 364Molines L, Darmon P, Raccah D. Charcot's foot: newest findings on its pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. Diabetes Metab. 2010;36(4):251-255.

The charcot foot. A Hartemann-Heurtier, Ha Van, G Grimaldi, A , Lancet. 360Hartemann-Heurtier A, Ha Van G, Grimaldi A. The charcot foot. Lancet. 2002;360:1776-1779.

Musculoskeletal problems of neurogenic origin. C Collange, M A Burde, Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 142Collange C, Burde MA. Musculoskeletal problems of neurogenic origin. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2000;14(2):325-343.

. Diabetes.co.uk. Diabetes.co.uk. 2019.

Beta-catenin, cartilage, and osteoarthritis. Q Wu, M Zhu, R N Rosier, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 11921Wu Q, Zhu M, Rosier RN, et al. Beta-catenin, cartilage, and osteoarthritis. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1192(1):344-350.

Association between diabetes mellitus and osteoarthritis: systematic literature review and meta-analysis. K Louati, C Vidal, F Berenbaum, RMD Open. 1177Louati K, Vidal C, Berenbaum F, et al. Association between diabetes mellitus and osteoarthritis: systematic literature review and meta-analysis. RMD Open. 2015;1(1):e000077.

Type 2 diabetes and osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. M F Williams, D A London, E M Husni, J Diabetes Complications. 305Williams MF, London DA, Husni EM, et al. Type 2 diabetes and osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes Complications. 2016;30(5):944-950.

Diabetes is a risk factor for knee osteoarthritis progression. F Eymard, C Parsons, M H Edwards, Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 236Eymard F, Parsons C, Edwards MH, et al. Diabetes is a risk factor for knee osteoarthritis progression. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2015;23(6):851-859.

The adverse effects of diabetes on osteoarthritis: update on clinical evidence and molecular mechanisms. K B King, A K Rosenthal, Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 236King KB, Rosenthal AK. The adverse effects of diabetes on osteoarthritis: update on clinical evidence and molecular mechanisms. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2015;23(6):841-850.

Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) and patterns of osteoarthritis. the ulm osteoarthritis study. T Sturmer, H Brenner, R E Brenner, Scand J Rheumatol. 303Sturmer T, Brenner H, Brenner RE, et al. Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) and patterns of osteoarthritis. the ulm osteoarthritis study. Scand J Rheumatol. 2001;30(3):169-171.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus and osteoarthritis. N Veronese, C Cooper, J Y Reginster, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 491Veronese N, Cooper C, Reginster JY, et al. Type 2 diabetes mellitus and osteoarthritis. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2019;49(1):9-19.

Evolving concepts of rheumatoid arthritis. G S Firestein, Nature. 4236937Firestein GS. Evolving concepts of rheumatoid arthritis. Nature. 2003;423(6937):356-361.

The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. I B Mcinnes, G Schett, N Engl J Med. 36523McInnes IB, Schett G. The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(23):2205-2219.

. Diabetes.co.uk. Diabetes.co.uk. 2019.

Use of the painDETECT tool in rheumatoid arthritis suggests neuropathic and sensitization components in pain reporting. S Ahmed, T Magan, M Vargas, J Pain Res. 7Ahmed S, Magan T, Vargas M, et al. Use of the painDETECT tool in rheumatoid arthritis suggests neuropathic and sensitization components in pain reporting. J Pain Res. 2014;7:579-588.

The global burden of rheumatoid arthritis: estimates from the global burden of disease 2010 study. M Cross, E Smith, D Hoy, Ann Rheum Dis. 737Cross M, Smith E, Hoy D, et al. The global burden of rheumatoid arthritis: estimates from the global burden of disease 2010 study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014;73(7):1316-1322.

Cardiovascular disease and risk factors in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis. C Han, D W Robinson, M V Hackett, J Rheumatol. 3311Han C, Robinson DW, Hackett MV. Cardiovascular disease and risk factors in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis. J Rheumatol. 2006;33(11):2167-2172.

High incidence of cardiovascular events in a rheumatoid arthritis cohort not explained by traditional cardiac risk factors. I D Rincon, K Williams, M P Stern, Arthritis Rheumatol. 4412Rincon ID, Williams K, Stern MP, et al. High incidence of cardiovascular events in a rheumatoid arthritis cohort not explained by traditional cardiac risk factors. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2001;44(12):2737-2745.

Rheumatic syndromes in endocrine disease. J H Bland, J W Frymoyer, A H Newberg, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 91Bland JH, Frymoyer JW, Newberg AH, et al. Rheumatic syndromes in endocrine disease. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1979;9(1):23-65.

Hand symptoms associated with diabetes mellitus. An investigation of 765 patients based on a questionnaire. G Sturfelt, E Leden, O Nived, Acta Med Scand. 2101-2Sturfelt G, Leden E, Nived O. Hand symptoms associated with diabetes mellitus. An investigation of 765 patients based on a questionnaire. Acta Med Scand. 1981;210(1-2):35-38.

Risk of diabetes among patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis. D H Solomon, T J Love, C Canning, Ann Rheumatol Dis. 6912Solomon DH, Love TJ, Canning C, et al. Risk of diabetes among patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis. Ann Rheumatol Dis. 2010;69(12):2114-2117.

Familial aggregation of rheumatoid arthritis and co-aggregation of autoimmune diseases in affected families: a nationwide population-based study. C F Kuo, M J Grainge, A M Valdes, Rheumatology (Oxford). 566Kuo CF, Grainge MJ, Valdes AM, et al. Familial aggregation of rheumatoid arthritis and co-aggregation of autoimmune diseases in affected families: a nationwide population-based study. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017;56(6):928-933.

Risk of incident diabetes in patients with gout: a cohort study. S C Kim, J Liu, D H Solomon, Arthritis Rheumatol. 671Kim SC, Liu J, Solomon DH. Risk of incident diabetes in patients with gout: a cohort study. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015;67(1):273-280.

Independent impact of gout on the risk of diabetes mellitus among women and men: a population-based, BMImatched cohort study. Y H Rho, N Lu, C E Peloquin, Ann Rheum Dis. 751Rho YH, Lu N, Peloquin CE, et al. Independent impact of gout on the risk of diabetes mellitus among women and men: a population-based, BMI- matched cohort study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016;75(1):91-95.

Impact of diabetes against the future risk of developing gout. G Rodríguez, L C Soriano, H K Choi, Ann Rheum Dis. 6912Rodríguez G, Soriano LC, Choi HK. Impact of diabetes against the future risk of developing gout. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69(12):2090-2094.

Gender-specific risk factors for incident gout: a prospective cohort study. J H Chen, W T Yeh, S Y Chuang, Clin Rheumatol. 312Chen JH, Yeh WT, Chuang SY, et al. Gender-specific risk factors for incident gout: a prospective cohort study. Clin Rheumatol. 2012;31(2):239-245.

. Diabetes.co.uk. Diabetes.co.uk. 2019.

High prevalence of gout in patients with type 2 diabetes: male sex, renal impairment, and diuretic use are major risk factors. R Suppiah, A Dissanayake, N Dalbeth, N Z Med J. 121Suppiah R, Dissanayake A, Dalbeth N. High prevalence of gout in patients with type 2 diabetes: male sex, renal impairment, and diuretic use are major risk factors. N Z Med J. 2008;121(1283):43-50.

Association between serum uric acid and development of type 2 diabetes. S Kodama, K Saito, Y Yachi, Diabetes Care. 329Kodama S, Saito K, Yachi Y, et al. Association between serum uric acid and development of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(9):1737- 1742.

Correction of altered collagen metabolism in diabetic animals with insulin therapy. G E Umpierrez, T Zlatev, R G Spanheimer, Matrix. 94Umpierrez GE, Zlatev T, Spanheimer RG. Correction of altered collagen metabolism in diabetic animals with insulin therapy. Matrix. 1989;9(4):336-342.

Diabetic muscle infarction: an underdiagnosed complication of long-standing diabetes. A J Trujillo-Santos, Diabetes Care. 261Trujillo-Santos AJ. Diabetic muscle infarction: an underdiagnosed complication of long-standing diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(1):211- 215.

Diabetic muscle infarction. J A Morcuende, M B Dobbs, H Crawford, Iowa Orthop J. 20Morcuende JA. Dobbs MB, Crawford H, et al. Diabetic muscle infarction. Iowa Orthop J. 2000;20:65-74.

Musculoskeletal manifestations of diabetes mellitus. L L Smith, S P Burnet, J D Mcneil, Br J Sports Med. 371Smith LL. Burnet SP, McNeil JD. Musculoskeletal manifestations of diabetes mellitus. Br J Sports Med. 2003;37(1):30-35.

An unusual presentation of diabetic amyotrophy: myoclonus. S A Zaidi, S K Chhetri, G Lekwuwa, BMJ Case Rep. 2012008245Zaidi SA, Chhetri SK, Lekwuwa G, et al. An unusual presentation of diabetic amyotrophy: myoclonus. BMJ Case Rep. 2013:bcr2012008245.

Understanding fibromyalgia and its resultant disability. I Grodman, D Buskila, Y Arnson, IMAJ. 1312Grodman I, Buskila D, Arnson Y, et al. Understanding fibromyalgia and its resultant disability. IMAJ. 2011;13(12):769-772.

Cross-sectional analysis of the associations between fibromyalgia and diabetes mellitus. A Lichtenstein, S Tiosano, D Comaneshter, Reumatologia. 565Lichtenstein A, Tiosano S, Comaneshter D, et al. Cross-sectional analysis of the associations between fibromyalgia and diabetes mellitus. Reumatologia. 2018;56(5):275-278.

Musculoskeletal disorders in diabetes mellitus: an update. P E Arkkila, J F Gautier, Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 176Arkkila PE. Gautier JF. Musculoskeletal disorders in diabetes mellitus: an update. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2003;17(6):945-970.

Metabolic syndrome in diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. A controlled study. G Vezyroglou, A Mitropoulos, C A Antoniadis, J Rheumatol. 234Vezyroglou G, Mitropoulos A, Antoniadis CA. Metabolic syndrome in diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. A controlled study. J Rheumatol. 1996;23(4):672-676.

Dupuytren's disease: where do we stand?. R Grazina, S Teixeira, R Ramos, EFORT Open Rev. 42Grazina R, Teixeira S, Ramos R, et al. Dupuytren's disease: where do we stand? EFORT Open Rev. 2019;4(2):63-69.

Dupuytren's disease risk factors. J M Geoghegan, J Forbes, D I Clark, J Hand Surg Br. 295Geoghegan JM, Forbes J, Clark DI, et al. Dupuytren's disease risk factors. J Hand Surg Br. 2004;29(5):423-426.

Dupuytren's contracture and diabetes mellitus. P Fossati, M Romon, P Vennin, Ann Chir Main. 14Fossati P, Romon M, Vennin P. Dupuytren's contracture and diabetes mellitus. Ann Chir Main. 1982;1(4):351-354.

Dupuytren's contracture as a concomitant disease in diabetes mellitus. F Stradner, A Ulreich, K P Pfeiffer, Wien Med Wochenschr. 1374Stradner F, Ulreich A, Pfeiffer KP. Dupuytren's contracture as a concomitant disease in diabetes mellitus. Wien Med Wochenschr. 1987;137(4):89-92.

A systematic review and meta-analysis on the strength and consistency of the associations between dupuytren disease and diabetes mellitus, liver disease, and epilepsy. D C Broekstra, H Groen, S Molenkamp, Plast Reconstr Surg. 1413Broekstra DC, Groen H, Molenkamp S, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis on the strength and consistency of the associations between dupuytren disease and diabetes mellitus, liver disease, and epilepsy. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2018;141(3):367e-379e.

Hand abnormalities are associated with the complications of diabetes in type 2 diabetes. A M Jennings, P C Milner, J D Ward, Diabet Med. 61Jennings AM, Milner PC, Ward JD. Hand abnormalities are associated with the complications of diabetes in type 2 diabetes. Diabet Med. 1989;6(1):43-47.

Increased prevalence of soft tissue hand lesions in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: various entities and associated significance. Renard E Jacques, D Chammas, M , Diabete Metab. 206Renard E, Jacques D, Chammas M, et al. Increased prevalence of soft tissue hand lesions in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: various entities and associated significance. Diabete Metab. 1994;20(6):513-521.

Shoulder adhesive capsulitis and shoulder range of motion in type II diabetes mellitus: association with diabetic complications. N Balci, M K Balci, S Tuzuner, J Diabetes Complications. 133Balci N, Balci MK, Tuzuner S. Shoulder adhesive capsulitis and shoulder range of motion in type II diabetes mellitus: association with diabetic complications. J Diabetes Complications. 1999;13(3):135-140.

Calcific shoulder periarthritis (tendinitis) in adult onset diabetes mellitus: a controlled study. M E Mavrikakis, S Drimis, D A Kontoyannis, Ann Rheum Dis. 483Mavrikakis ME, Drimis S, Kontoyannis DA, et al. Calcific shoulder periarthritis (tendinitis) in adult onset diabetes mellitus: a controlled study. Ann Rheum Dis. 1989;48(3):211-214.

Diabetes mellitus and bone health: epidemiology, etiology and implications for fracture risk stratification. R J Valderrábano, M I Linares, Clin Diabetes Endocrinol. 49Valderrábano RJ, Linares MI. Diabetes mellitus and bone health: epidemiology, etiology and implications for fracture risk stratification. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018;4:9.

Prospective study of diabetes and risk of hip fracture: the nurses' health study. M Janghorbani, D Feskanich, W C Willett, F Hu, Diabetes Care. 297Janghorbani M, Feskanich D, Willett WC, Hu F. Prospective study of diabetes and risk of hip fracture: the nurses' health study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(7):1573-1578.

Limited joint mobility syndrome in diabetes mellitus: a mini review. E G Gerrits, G W Landman, L Nijenhuis-Rosien, World J Diabetes. 69Gerrits EG, Landman GW, Nijenhuis-Rosien L, et al. Limited joint mobility syndrome in diabetes mellitus: a mini review. World J Diabetes. 2015;6(9):1108-1112.

Connective tissue abnormalities in diabetes mellitus. A J Crisp, J G Heathcote, J R Coll Physicians Lond. 182Crisp AJ, Heathcote JG. Connective tissue abnormalities in diabetes mellitus. J R Coll Physicians Lond. 1984;18(2):132-141.

Joint contractures in patients with juvenile diabetes and their siblings. H S Traisman, E S Traisman, T J Marr, Diabetes Care. 16Traisman HS, Traisman ES, Marr TJ, et al. Joint contractures in patients with juvenile diabetes and their siblings. Diabetes Care. 1978;1(6):360- 361.

Copyright: ©2020 Ghosal et al. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. A L Rosenbloom, J H Silverstein, D C Lezotte, 10.15406/jdmdc.2020.07.00202J Diab Metab Disorder Control. 3054N Engl J Med.Rosenbloom AL, Silverstein JH, Lezotte DC, et al. Limited joint mobility in childhood diabetes indicates increased risk for microvascular disease. N Engl J Med. 1981;305(4):191-194. Copyright: ©2020 Ghosal et al. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. J Diab Metab Disorder Control. 2020;7(2):63-71. DOI: 10.15406/jdmdc.2020.07.00202

On the severity of carpal tunnel syndrome: diabetes or metabolic syndrome. Gül Yurdakul, F Bodur, H , Öztop Çakmak, Ö , J Clin Neurol. 113Gül Yurdakul F, Bodur H, Öztop Çakmak Ö, et al. On the severity of carpal tunnel syndrome: diabetes or metabolic syndrome. J Clin Neurol. 2015;11(3):234-240.

Diabetes as a risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. M H Pourmemari, R Shiri, Diabet Med. 331Pourmemari MH, Shiri R. Diabetes as a risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabet Med. 2016;33(1):10-16.

G Ray, M A Tall, Tenosynovitis, StatPearls [Internet. Treasure Island (FLStatPearls PublishingRay G, Tall MA. Tenosynovitis. [Updated 2019 Jun 17]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan.

Rheumatic hand symptoms as a clue to undiagnosed diabetes mellitus. I Leden, B Svensson, G Sturfelt, https:/www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.3109/03009748009098142Scand J Rheumatol. 92Leden I, Svensson B, Sturfelt G, et al. Rheumatic hand symptoms as a clue to undiagnosed diabetes mellitus. Scand J Rheumatol. 1980;9(2):127- 128.

Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. B Kaka, S S Maharaj, F Fatoye, Kaka B, Maharaj SS, Fatoye F. Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil. 322J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil. 2019;32(2):223-235.

Musculoskeletal pain in people with and without type 2 diabetes in Taiwan: a population-based, retrospective cohort study. L W Pai, C T Hung, S F Li, BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders. 161364Pai LW, Hung CT, Li SF, et al. Musculoskeletal pain in people with and without type 2 diabetes in Taiwan: a population-based, retrospective cohort study. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders. 2015;16(1):364.

Limited joint mobility in type 1 diabetic patients. Associations with microangiopathy and subclinical macroangiopathy are different in men and women. D Frost, W Beischer, Diabetes Care. 241Frost D, Beischer W. Limited joint mobility in type 1 diabetic patients. Associations with microangiopathy and subclinical macroangiopathy are different in men and women. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(1):95-99.

Limited joint mobility in type 1 diabetic patients: correlation to other diabetic complications. P E Arkkila, I M Kantola, J S Viikari, J Intern Med. 2362Arkkila PE, Kantola IM, Viikari JS. Limited joint mobility in type 1 diabetic patients: correlation to other diabetic complications. J Intern Med. 1994;236(2):215-223.

Vitamin D deficiency: effects on oxidative stress, epigenetics, gene regulation, and aging. S J Wimalawansa, Biology. 8230Wimalawansa SJ. Vitamin D deficiency: effects on oxidative stress, epigenetics, gene regulation, and aging. Biology. 2019;8(2):30.

The Association of diabetes with knee pain severity and distribution in people with knee osteoarthritis using data from the osteoarthritis initiative. A M Alenazi, M M Alshehri, S Alothman, Scientific report. 1013985Alenazi AM, Alshehri MM, Alothman S, et al. The Association of diabetes with knee pain severity and distribution in people with knee osteoarthritis using data from the osteoarthritis initiative. Scientific report. 2020;10(1):3985.

Experimental diabetes modulates collagen remodelling of joints in rats. S A Atayde, N H Yoshinari, D P Nascimento, Histol Histopathol. 2711Atayde SA, Yoshinari NH, Nascimento DP, et al. Experimental diabetes modulates collagen remodelling of joints in rats. Histol Histopathol. 2012;27(11):1471-1479.

Sex dimorphism in the association of cardiometabolic characteristics and osteophytesdefined radiographic knee osteoarthritis among obese and non-obese adults: NHANES III. C A Karvonen-Gutierrez, M R Sowers, S G Heeringa, Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 207Karvonen-Gutierrez CA, Sowers MR, Heeringa SG. Sex dimorphism in the association of cardiometabolic characteristics and osteophytes- defined radiographic knee osteoarthritis among obese and non-obese adults: NHANES III. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2012;20(7):614-621.

Vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 as a predictor of severe osteoarthritis of the hip and knee joints. G Schett, S Kiechl, E Bonora, Arthritis Rheum. 608Schett G, Kiechl S, Bonora E et al. Vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 as a predictor of severe osteoarthritis of the hip and knee joints. Arthritis Rheum. 2009;60(8):2381-2389.

Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in individuals with hyperuricemia. H K Choi, E S Ford, Am J Med. 1205Choi HK, Ford ES. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in individuals with hyperuricemia. Am J Med. 2007;120(5):442-447.

Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of diabetic complication. M Brownlee, Nature. 4146865Brownlee M. Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of diabetic complication. Nature. 2001;414(6865):813-882.

Metabolic stress-induced joint inflammation and osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. A Courties, O Gualillo, F Berenbaum, 23Courties A, Gualillo O, Berenbaum F, et al. Metabolic stress-induced joint inflammation and osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2015;23(11):1955-1965.

Inflammatory markers and risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. X Wang, W Bao, J Liu, Diabetes Care. 361Wang X, Bao W, Liu J, et al. Inflammatory markers and risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(1):166-175.

Links between osteoarthritis and diabetes: implications for management from a physical activity perspective. S R Piva, A M Susko, S S Khoja, Clin Geriatr Med. 311Piva SR, Susko AM, Khoja SS, et al. Links between osteoarthritis and diabetes: implications for management from a physical activity perspective. Clin Geriatr Med. 2015;31(1):67-87,viii.

Diabetes incidence in psoriatic arthritis, psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis: a UK population-based cohort study. M Dubreuil, Y H Rho, A Man, Rheumatology (Oxford). 532Dubreuil M, Rho YH, Man A, et al. Diabetes incidence in psoriatic arthritis, psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis: a UK population-based cohort study. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014;53(2):346-352.

Rheumatoid arthritis is getting less frequent-results of a nationwide population-based cohort study. A Abhishek, M Doherty, C F Kuo, Rheumatology (Oxford). 565Abhishek A, Doherty M, Kuo CF, et al. Rheumatoid arthritis is getting less frequent-results of a nationwide population-based cohort study. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017;56(5):736-744.

Nociceptive neurons detect cytokines in arthritis. H G Schaible, Arthritis Res Ther. 165470Schaible HG. Nociceptive neurons detect cytokines in arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014;16(5):470.

Obesity, metabolic syndrome, and musculoskeletal disease: common inflammatory pathways suggest a central role for loss of muscle integrity. K H Collins, W Herzog, G Z Macdonald, Front Physiol. 9112Collins KH, Herzog W, MacDonald GZ, et al. Obesity, metabolic syndrome, and musculoskeletal disease: common inflammatory pathways suggest a central role for loss of muscle integrity. Front Physiol. 2018;9:112.

Diabetes and rheumatic diseases. T W Burner, A K Rosenthal, Curr Opin Rheumatol. 211Burner TW, Rosenthal AK. Diabetes and rheumatic diseases. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2009;21(1):50-54.

Advanced glycation end products stimulate osteoblast apoptosis via the MAP kinase and cytosolic apoptotic pathways. M Alikhani, Z Alikhani, C Boyd, Bone. 402Alikhani M, Alikhani Z, Boyd C, et al. Advanced glycation end products stimulate osteoblast apoptosis via the MAP kinase and cytosolic apoptotic pathways. Bone. 2007;40(2):345-353.

Enzyme studies in the articular cartilage of diabetic rats and of rats bearing transplanted pancreatic islets. R Silberberg, G E Hirshberg, P Lesker, Diabetes. 268Silberberg R, Hirshberg GE, Lesker P. Enzyme studies in the articular cartilage of diabetic rats and of rats bearing transplanted pancreatic islets. Diabetes. 1977;26(8):732-735.

Glycation of skin collagen in type I diabetes mellitus: correlation with long-term complications. V Vishwanath, K E Frank, C A Elments, Diabetes. 358Vishwanath V, Frank KE, Elments CA, et al. Glycation of skin collagen in type I diabetes mellitus: correlation with long-term complications. Diabetes. 1986;35(8):916-921.

Increased non-enzymatic glycosylation and reduced solubility of skin collagen in insulin-dependent diabetic patients. P I Salmela, A Oikarainen, H Pirttiaho, Diabetes Res. 113Salmela PI, Oikarainen A, Pirttiaho H, et al. Increased non-enzymatic glycosylation and reduced solubility of skin collagen in insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Diabetes Res. 1989;11(3):115-120.

Contractures in diabetes mellitus: the syndrome of limited joint mobility. A Kapoor, W L SibbittJr, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 183Kapoor A, Sibbitt WL Jr. Contractures in diabetes mellitus: the syndrome of limited joint mobility. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1980;18(3):168-180.

The role of TNF-alpha in chronic inflammatory conditions, intermediary metabolism, and cardiovascular risk. C Popa, M G Netea, P L Van Riel, J Lipid Res. 484Popa C, Netea MG, van Riel PL, et al. The role of TNF-alpha in chronic inflammatory conditions, intermediary metabolism, and cardiovascular risk. J Lipid Res. 2007;48(4):751-762.

Tumour necrosis factors receptor associated signalling molecules and their role in activation of apoptosis. Bb ; Aggarwal, Nf-Kappab Jnk, Aggarwal BB. Tumour necrosis factors receptor associated signalling molecules and their role in activation of apoptosis, JNK and NF-kappaB.

. Ann Rheum Dis. 591SupplAnn Rheum Dis. 2000;59(Suppl 1):i6-i16.

The role of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. P Wojdasiewicz, Ł A Poniatowski, D Szukiewicz, Mediators Inflamm. 561459Wojdasiewicz P, Poniatowski ŁA, Szukiewicz D. The role of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;561459.

NF-κB as a potential therapeutic target in osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. J A Roman-Blas, S A Jimenez, Osteoarthritis and Cartilage. 149Roman-Blas JA, Jimenez SA. NF-κB as a potential therapeutic target in osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage. 2006;14(9):839-848.

NF-KaapaB signaling: multiple angles to target OA. K B Marcu, M Otero, E Olivotto, Current Drug Targets. 115Marcu KB, Otero M, Olivotto E, et al. NF-KaapaB signaling: multiple angles to target OA. Current Drug Targets. 2010;11(5):599-613.

Pain sensation in human osteoarthritic knee joints is strongly enhanced by diabetes mellitus. A Eitner, J Pester, F Vogel, Pain. 1589Eitner A, Pester J, Vogel F, et al. Pain sensation in human osteoarthritic knee joints is strongly enhanced by diabetes mellitus. Pain. 2017;158(9):1743- 1753.

Obesity in rheumatoid arthritis. A Stavropoulos-Kalinoglou, G S Metsios, Y Koutedakis, Rheumatology (Oxford). 503Stavropoulos-Kalinoglou A, Metsios GS, Koutedakis Y, et al. Obesity in rheumatoid arthritis, Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011;50(3):450-462.

Recent advances in the relationship between obesity, inflammation, and insulin resistance. J P Bastard, M Maachi, C Lagathu, Eur Cytokine Netw. 171Bastard JP, Maachi M, Lagathu C, et al. Recent advances in the relationship between obesity, inflammation, and insulin resistance. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2006;17(1):4-12.

Association of pain with HbA1c in a predominantly black population of community-dwelling adults with diabetes: a cross-sectional analysis. M S Herbert, A L Varley, S J Andreae, Diabet Med. 3012Herbert MS, Varley AL, Andreae SJ, et al. Association of pain with HbA1c in a predominantly black population of community-dwelling adults with diabetes: a cross-sectional analysis. Diabet Med. 2013;30(12):1466-1471.

High prevalence of diabetes in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: results from a questionnaire survey linked to claims data. K Albrecht, A L Ramos, F Hoffmann, Rheumatology (Oxford). 572Albrecht K, Ramos AL, Hoffmann F, et al. High prevalence of diabetes in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: results from a questionnaire survey linked to claims data. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018;57(2):329-336.

Copyright: ©2020 Ghosal et al. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. D Lebiedz-Odrobina, J Kay, 10.15406/jdmdc.2020.07.00202J Diab Metab Disorder Control. 364Rheum Dis Clin North Am.Lebiedz-Odrobina D, Kay J. Rheumatic manifestations of diabetes mellitus. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2010;36(4):681-699. Copyright: ©2020 Ghosal et al. Citation: Ghosal S, Ghosal A. Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review. J Diab Metab Disorder Control. 2020;7(2):63-71. DOI: 10.15406/jdmdc.2020.07.00202

The musculoskeletal effects of diabetes mellitus. L H Wyatt, R J Ferrance, J Can Chiropr Assoc. 501Wyatt LH, Ferrance RJ. The musculoskeletal effects of diabetes mellitus. J Can Chiropr Assoc. 2006;50(1):43-50.

Impact of different levels of disease activity in painful profile and quality of life in people with rheumatoid. Smd Mendes, Bll Queiroz, L V Santana, Braz J Med Human Health. 21Mendes SMD, Queiroz BLL, Santana LV, et al. Impact of different levels of disease activity in painful profile and quality of life in people with rheumatoid. Braz J Med Human Health. 2014;2(1):17-25.

Mechanisms, impact and management of pain in rheumatoid arthritis. D A Walsh, D F Mcwilliams, Nat Rev Rheumatol. 1010Walsh DA, McWilliams DF. Mechanisms, impact and management of pain in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2014;10(10):581-592.

Neuropathic-like pain features and cross-sectional associations in rheumatoid arthritis. S M Koop, P M Klooster, H E Vonkeman, Arthritis Res Ther. 171237Koop SM, ten Klooster PM, Vonkeman HE, et al. Neuropathic-like pain features and cross-sectional associations in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015;17(1):237.

Dupuytren's contracture in pensioners at the royal hospital Chelsea. J Carson, C Clarke, J R Coll Physicians Lond. 271Carson J, Clarke C. Dupuytren's contracture in pensioners at the royal hospital Chelsea. J R Coll Physicians Lond. 1993;27(1):25-27.

Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome is increased in rheumatoid arthritis and is associated with coronary atherosclerosis. C P Chung, A Oeser, J F Solus, Atherosclerosis. 1962Chung CP, Oeser A, Solus JF. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome is increased in rheumatoid arthritis and is associated with coronary atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis. 2008;196(2):756-763.

Diabetes-induced osteoarthritis: from a new paradigm to a new phenotype. F Berenbaum, Ann Rheum Dis. 708Berenbaum F. Diabetes-induced osteoarthritis: from a new paradigm to a new phenotype. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011;70(8):1354-1356.

Growth promoting peptides in osteoarthritis and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis--insulin, insulinlike growth factor-I, growth hormone. C W Denko, B Boja, R W Moskowitz, J Rheumatol. 219Denko CW, Boja B, Moskowitz RW. Growth promoting peptides in osteoarthritis and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis--insulin, insulin- like growth factor-I, growth hormone. J Rheumatol. 1994;21(9):1725- 1730.

Cyclic stretch induced oxidative stress by mitochondrial and NADPH oxidase in retinal pigment epithelial cells. X Liang, Z Wang, M Gao, https:/bmcophthalmol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12886-019-1087-0BMC Ophthalmol. 1979Liang X, Wang Z, Gao M, et al. Cyclic stretch induced oxidative stress by mitochondrial and NADPH oxidase in retinal pigment epithelial cells. BMC Ophthalmol. 2019;19:79.

Tumour necrosis factor α stimulates resorption and inhibits synthesis of proteoglycan in cartilage. J Saklatvala, Nature. 3226079Saklatvala J. Tumour necrosis factor α stimulates resorption and inhibits synthesis of proteoglycan in cartilage. Nature. 1986;322(6079)547-549.

TNFalpha suppresses link protein and type II collagen expression in chondrocytes: role of MEK1/2 and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. C A Séguin, S M Bernier, J Cell Physiol. 1973Séguin CA, Bernier, SM. TNFalpha suppresses link protein and type II collagen expression in chondrocytes: role of MEK1/2 and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. J Cell Physiol. 2003;197(3):356-369.

Frequent pain in older people with and without diabetes-finnish community based study. M Karjalainen, J Saltevo, M Tiihonen, BMC Geriatr. 18173Karjalainen M, Saltevo J, Tiihonen M, et al. Frequent pain in older people with and without diabetes-finnish community based study. BMC Geriatr. 2018;18(1):73.