# Extramedullary myeloid sarcoma mimicking tuberculosis of spine: A case report and literature review

CorpusID: 234855245
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a8cbde53b72f9ccb20f4501c0d13f33c7490cd0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a8cbde53b72f9ccb20f4501c0d13f33c7490cd0)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Extramedullary myeloid sarcoma mimicking tuberculosis of spine: A case report and literature review


Prasad Patgaonkar 
Department of Spine Surgery
Indore Spine Centre
IndoreMadhya Pradesh

Vaibhav Goyal 
Department of Spine Surgery
Indore Spine Centre
IndoreMadhya Pradesh

Nandan Marathe nandanmarathe88@gmail.com 
Department of Spine Services
Indian Spinal Injuries Centre
New DelhiIndia

Extramedullary myeloid sarcoma mimicking tuberculosis of spine: A case report and literature review

Surgical Neurology International • 2021 •
1217810.25259/SNI_855_2020is is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-Share Alike 4.0 License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as the author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
Background:A definitive diagnosis of spinal tuberculosis (TB) remains challenging. e "gold standard" is to obtain histopathological confirmation of the lesion. is analysis highlights how to avoid missing the diagnosis of an extramedullary myeloid sarcoma (EMS) versus TB.Case Description: A 25-year-old male presented with paraparesis. Although this was first attributed to TB spondylodiscitis, a PET-CT and reevaluation of the biopsy specimen both confirmed the diagnosis of an EMS.Conclusion: Nontubercular spinal disease should be suspected when a patient deteriorates despite the institution of antitubercular therapy for a reasonable duration. Further, microbiological and/or pathological confirmation is warranted to direct appropriate treatment and differentiate spinal TB from other entities as, in this case, an EMS.

## INTRODUCTION

Extramedullary myeloid sarcoma (EMS) may involve any organ or tissue. Skin, bone, and lymph nodes are most frequently affected, with vertebral involvement being extremely rare. Here, we present a 25-year-old male who was originally diagnosed and treated for tuberculosis (TB) of spine, where the ultimate correct diagnosis was EMS.


## CASE REPORT

A 25-year-old male originally presented with mid-back pain of 2 months duration. After a T8 thoracic CT-guided biopsy, he was diagnosed/treated for TB spondylitis with bed rest and appropriate antibiotic therapy. However, 1 month following his initial presentation, he developed worsening of his mid-back pain (VAS score 8), chest pain, shortness of breath, and a progressive lower extremity paraparesis (3/5 proximal and 4/5 distal).


## X-ray and MR studies

e chest X-ray showed a pleural effusion, while the thoracic spine X-ray demonstrated T8 vertebral collapse. Further, the thoracic spine MRI showed a posterior epidural collection extending from T7 to T9 resulting in cord compression. Of interest, lumbar X-rays and lumbar MR scan both demonstrated an additional although smaller, asymptomatic L3 vertebral body lesion [ Figures 1 and 2].

Surgery e patient's progressive myelopathy prompted a T8, T9 laminectomy that included a culture/biopsy of the lesion, epidural debridement, and T6-T10 pedicle screw fixation [ Figure 3]. Notably, at the T8 level, there was a nonpurulent, soft, grayish-white material found in the center of the T8 vertebral body that appeared more consistent with tumor than tubercular infection.


## Pathology/culture

e pathology showed only inflammatory granulation tissue, and the staining for all organisms, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB), was negative [ Figure 4].


## Postoperative course

Postoperatively, the patient's back pain (VAS score 2) improved, and he showed significant neurological recovery (e.g., 4/5 function proximally, 5/5 distally). However, within 3 days, he developed an increased left-sided pleural effusion (1700 cc). Tissue culture and MTB DNA reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction of the fluid were negative. Four weeks postoperatively, when he returned with dyspnea and cough, the PET-CT scan revealed a metabolically active osteolytic lesion predominantly involving the T8 vertebral body, with extension into the T7, T9, and T11 vertebral bodies, involving the left 7 th rib, as well as multiple other sites [ Figure 5a].

Biopsy of the left 7 th rib and immunohistochemistry studies confirmed that the lesion was an EMS [ Figure 5b]. At that   


## DISCUSSION


## Frequency and differential diagnosis for EMS

EMS (also known as myeloid sarcoma MS, granulocytic sarcoma, or myeloblastoma) is rare. Patients ages can range from 1 to 81. EMS commonly affects skin, bone, and lymph nodes, but rarely presents in the spine. [2,3] Misdiagnosis is often seen in EMS with differential diagnoses including lymphoma, undifferentiated malignancies, extramedullary hematopoiesis, and inflammatory pathologies (i.e., TB that is more common and endemic in India) [ Table 1]. [4,6,8] Diagnostic studies for EMS EMS can present as single or multifocal lesions; 2-8% of these patients will have acute myeloid leukemia (AML). CT and MRI studies help differentiate EMS from hemorrhage or abscesses. Stölzel et al. emphasized that fluorodeoxyglucose PET-CT also  additionally helped document extramedullary AML. [7] ere are also multiple treatment regimens for MS with or without AML, including conventional AML chemotherapy. [1,5] CONCLUSION EMSs of the spine are rare. ey must be biopsy confirmed to differentiate them from TB spondylodiscitis (i.e., in endemic areas) and other lesions.


## Declaration of patient consent

e authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent.


## Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.


## Conflicts of interest

ere are no conflicts of interest. 

## Figure 2 :
2Preoperative MRI sagittal and axial T1-and T2-weighted images showing collapsed D8 vertebral body with surrounding free fluid extending posteriorly from D7 to D9 vertebra and causing significant compression of spinal cord with a lesion in L3 vertebral body causing dural sac indentation.

## Figure 1 :
1Preoperative X-ray whole spine anteroposterior and lateral view showing osteolytic lesions in D8 and L3 vertebral bodies with erosion and collapse of D8 vertebra.

## Figure 4 :
4Histopathological examination report showing inflammatory granulation tissue.

## Figure 3 :
3Postoperative X-ray postdecompression X-ray spine anteroposterior and lateral views showing pedicle screws inserted from D6 to D10 and L2-L4 vertebral levels sparing involved D8 vertebra.

## Figure 5 :
5(a) PET-CT scan showed metabolically active osteolytic lesion predominantly in D8 vertebra and in multiple regions such as D7, D9, D11 vertebral bodies, left 7 th rib, sternum, and right iliac bone along with bilateral pleural effusions, mediastinal, and left supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and soft-tissue lesions in the left orbit and left temporal region of brain. (b) Surgical site biopsy and its paraffin block with further biopsy from the left 7 th rib and immunohistochemistry studies confirmed it to be extramedullary myeloid sarcoma. a b

## Table 1 :
1Review of literature of extramedullary sarcoma involving spine.S. No. Author/ 
year 

#Patients 
Location of tumor 

Treatment 
laminectomy chemo-RT 

Outcome 

1. 
Landis 
et al., 2003 

1 patient 
oracic (T8-T9) 

Laminectomy T8, T9 and excisional 
biopsy of tumor followed by chemo 

6 months postcompletion of chemo, he 
remains in remission 
2. 
Kalayci 
et al., 2006 

1 patient 
oracic (T3-T5) 

Laminectomy T3 to T5 and excisional 
biopsy of tumor followed by chemo 
and RT 

8 months postoperatively, no recurrence and 
patient is walking with a cane 

3. 
Seok et al., 
2010 

32 patients 
Lumbosacral and 
thoracic 

Laminectomy and excisional biopsy 
in four patients 
Chemo and RT in all 

In 21 patients followed 1 year postoperatively, 
9 had complete reduction, and 12 had partial 
reduction in tumor volume 
4. 
Gupta 
et al., 2014 

1 patient 
Cervicothoracic (C5-T1) 

Laminectomy C5 to T1 with tumor 
debulking 

Patient died 4 days postoperatively due to 
respiratory failure 
5. 
Krishnan 
et al., 2015 

1 patient 
oracic (T7) 

Laminectomy T6 to T8 and excisional 
biopsy followed by chemo and RT 

2 years postoperatively, patient had no back 
pain or any residual deficits 
6. 
Alaya 
et al., 2017 

1 patient 
oracic (T4-T7) 

Laminectomy T4 to T7 and excisional 
biopsy followed by chemo 

7 years postoperatively, there are tumor 
remission and residual circumduction present 

RT: Radiation therapy, Chemo: Chemotherapy 

point, the patient was referred for chemotherapy (e.g., 
cytarabine + daunorubicin). Now 1 year following the 
completion of chemotherapy, he remains asymptomatic, and 
the EMS has not yet recurred. 



erapeutic advances in acute myeloid leukemia. A Burnett, M Wetzler, B Löwenberg, J Clin Oncol. 29Burnett A, Wetzler M, Löwenberg B. erapeutic advances in acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:487-94.

Extramedullary sites of leukemia relapse after transplant. I Cunningham, Leuk Lymphoma. 47Cunningham I. Extramedullary sites of leukemia relapse after transplant. Leuk Lymphoma 2006;47:1754-67.

Prognostic factors of treatment outcomes in patients with granulocytic sarcoma. T Y Lan, D T Lin, H F Tien, R S Yang, C Y Chen, K Wu, Acta Haematol. 122Lan TY, Lin DT, Tien HF, Yang RS, Chen CY, Wu K. Prognostic factors of treatment outcomes in patients with granulocytic sarcoma. Acta Haematol 2009;122:238-46.

Granulocytic sarcoma of the spine. H Mostafavi, P J Lennarson, V C Traynelis, Neurosurgery. 46discussion 83-4Mostafavi H, Lennarson PJ, Traynelis VC. Granulocytic sarcoma of the spine. Neurosurgery 2000;46:78-83; discussion 83-4.

Induction and postremission strategies in acute myeloid leukemia: What is new?. Y Ofran, J M Rowe, Curr Opin Hematol. 18Ofran Y, Rowe JM. Induction and postremission strategies in acute myeloid leukemia: What is new? Curr Opin Hematol 2011;18:83-8.

Granulocytic sarcoma of the spine: MRI and clinical review. J H Seok, J Park, S K Kim, J E Choi, C C Kim, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 194Seok JH, Park J, Kim SK, Choi JE, Kim CC. Granulocytic sarcoma of the spine: MRI and clinical review. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2010;194:485-9.

¹⁸F-FDG-PET/CT for detection of extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia. F Stölzel, C Röllig, J Radke, B Mohr, U Platzbecker, M Bornhäuser, T Paulus, Haematologica. 96Stölzel F, Röllig C, Radke J, Mohr B, Platzbecker U, Bornhäuser M, Paulus T, et al. ¹⁸F-FDG-PET/CT for detection of extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia. Haematologica. 2011;96:1552-6.

Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of granulocytic sarcoma: A clinicopathologic study of 27 cases. Y K Suh, H J Shin, Cancer. 90Suh YK, Shin HJ. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of granulocytic sarcoma: A clinicopathologic study of 27 cases. Cancer 2000;90:364-72.

Extramedullary myeloid sarcoma mimicking tuberculosis of spine: A case report and literature review. P Patgaonkar, V Goyal, N Marathe, Surg Neurol Int. 12178How to cite this article: Patgaonkar P, Goyal V, Marathe N. Extramedullary myeloid sarcoma mimicking tuberculosis of spine: A case report and literature review. Surg Neurol Int 2021;12:178.