# The Weak Ring of the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Elderly (A Literature Review)

CorpusID: 235251864
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ebce142cde0fcd5473fd62ef5ee66c6d7719c8b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ebce142cde0fcd5473fd62ef5ee66c6d7719c8b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Weak Ring of the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Elderly (A Literature Review)
2021

Ömer Şevgin 
Üsküdar University
Turkey

Hasan Kerem 
Associate professor
Bahçeşehir University
Turkey

Alptekin 
Kübra Şevgin 
Health Sciences University
Turkey

The Weak Ring of the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Elderly (A Literature Review)

Journal of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology • Page
72111202110.23937/2469-5858/1510111Accepted: April 19, 2021: Published: April 21, 2021Citation: Şevgin O, Alptekin HK, Şevgin K (2021) The Weak Ring of the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Elderly (A Literature Review). J Geriatr Med Gerontol 7:111. OriginAl Article Check for updates
Introduction:The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the social life, mental health and physical performance of the elderly and to compile studies on this subject.

## Introduction

A new SARS-CoV-2 infection has been identified as the cause of a series of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, China. It spread rapidly and caused an epidemic throughout China, and then followed by increases in cases in other countries around the world. In February 2020, the World Health Organization named this viral infection as COVID-19 disease, which stands for 2019 Coronavirus disease [1]. Among symptomatic COVID-19 patients, cough, myalgia, and headache are the most frequently reported symptoms. Other features such as diarrhea, sore throat, and smell or taste abnormalities have been noted as other symptoms that may be seen in patients. In infection that turns into pneumonia, findings such as fever, cough, shortness of breath and ground glass appearance on radiological imaging are the most common serious findings [2]. Although some clinical symptoms, especially smell or taste disturbances, distinguish COVID-19 from other viral respiratory infections, there are no specific symptoms or signs that can reliably differentiate COVID-19 [3]. However, the development of dyspnea about a week after onset symptoms may suggest COVID-19. Among those with risk factors for severe disease symptoms; advanced age and some underlying medical comorbidities can be listed. Specific demographic features and laboratory abnormalities have also been associated with this serious disease. Several estimation methods have been proposed to identify patients with a higher likelihood of developing severe disease based on epidemiological, clinical and laboratory characteristics; however, studies evaluating these methods have not hospitalization rate of 101 affected facility residents was reported as 55% and mortality rates as 34%. An underlying chronic secondary disease was found in 94% of the patients who died [16]. In the analysis of approximately 300,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 reported in the United States, the mortality rate was 12 times higher among patients with reported comorbidities [17]. Various complications such as acute respiratory distress syndrome, the most important complication in patients with severe disease caused by COVID-19, arrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, thromboembolic complications including acute stroke, encephalopathy and persistent fever have been identified in the literature. In addition, secondary infections and long-term permanent damage are among the expected complications of COVID-19. Infection is the primary cause of death in one third of individuals aged 65 and over. Infection also has a pronounced effect on morbidity in older adults; exacerbates the underlying diseases and causes functional regression. Multiple biological and social factors reveal that the elderly is more susceptible to infection. The COVID-19 pandemic had a serious impact on the elderly as an infection, and nearly 80% of all deaths were seen in the elderly aged 65 and over. In our study, we focused on the secondary health problems caused by the pandemic on the elderly for one year, such as physical activity, depression, loneliness, and social problems. And we made an analysis by examining the research studies on these topics in the literature.


## Method

The PRISMA flow chart illustrating the selection process for all included and excluded studies were given in Figure 1. Total of 561 studies were examined detected by database scan. 60 out of 463 studies were examined according to the research criteria and common results from these studies were given. The review was performed in accordance with Preferred Recording Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) Statements [18]. Studies that did not directly or indirectly address the elderly population were excluded. Publications with the language of publication in English were examined and publications in other languages were not included in the study.


## Literature search

A literature review of studies examining older adults and COVID-19 issues was conducted. PubMed and Web of Science were selected from databases indexing world health sciences research studies. The search period was planned to cover the years 15  been clinically confirmed [4]. Individuals of all ages can become infected with SARS-CoV-2, but adults of middle age and older are the most affected. The elderly is more likely to have the disease and the symptoms [5,6]. Older age is also associated with increased mortality. According to the China Center for Disease Control and Prevention, it has been reported that the mortality rate of all cases is 2.3%, while the mortality rate between the ages of 70 and 79 is 8%, and those aged 80 and over are 15% [7]. In an analysis conducted in the United Kingdom, the risk of death of individuals aged 80 and over was found to be 20 times higher than the death risk of individuals aged 50 to 59 [8]. In the United States, 67% of 2449 patients diagnosed with COVID-19 between February 12 and March 16 in 2020 were older than 45. Similar to the findings in China, the death rate was the highest among older people, with 80% of deaths occurring among older people. In a research conducted; individuals aged 18 to 34 years were reported to account for only 5% of adults hospitalized for COVID-19, with a death rate of 2.7%. Morbid obesity, hypertension and male gender were reported to be highly associated with these deaths [9,10]. In the elderly, due to age-related physiological changes, the immune system weakens and insufficient response occurs.

Increased risk of invasion by pathogenic organisms is observed due to changes in the barriers formed by the skin, lungs and gastrointestinal system. The risk of intracellular pathogen detection increases due to the loss of the proliferative capacity of immune cells and the reduced production of specific cytokines such as interleukin 2. After infection, cells in the elderly have impaired defense system against fungal and viral pathogens due to impaired signal transduction after cytokine binding. They give reduced antibody response to vaccines associated with decreases in CD8 and CD4 cell populations and changes in B cell biology. Accordingly, the infection causes antibody responses associated with impaired immunoglobulin production and reduction in B cells [11][12][13]. Older adults with chronic diseases such as diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or heart failure are more immune compromised, resulting in greater susceptibility to common infections and poorer vaccine responses. The risk of infection in elderly patients generally increases in other social areas such as social settings, crowded places, day care centers and elderly nursing homes [14,15]. Comorbidities associated with severe disease can be listed as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension, chronic lung disease, cancer (especially hematological malignancies, lung cancer and metastases), chronic kidney disease, obesity, and smoking.

Among patients with advanced age and these medical comorbidities, COVID-19 infection is severe. For example, in the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak that occurred in several long-term care facilities in Washington State, the  According to the literature, the results of the studies evaluating the negative effects of COVID-19 on the elderly in many aspects are shown in Figure 2. In the study with lowest participant (n: 93) the mean age is 73 and the outcome of the study is interpretation of increased loneliness, sleep problems and psychological problems in the elderly [42]. At the same time, in the study with highest participant (n: 6186) the participants mean age is 36 including the elderly population and the outcome of the study is increased loneliness [43,44]. The highest mean age (82) of the participants is seen in study of face-to-face survey in Norway [45].


## Discussion

COVID-19 infection has affected all of humanity as well as the elderly. Due to the fragile nature of the elderly and secondary reasons, this impact was felt more severely. The reasons for these are; their health conditions such as having chronic diseases, fragile structure of the body and weak immune system. In addition to physical effects, it also has social and psychological effects. In this study, we presented a one-year up-to-date summary of studies conducted in various countries in the literature that examined the elderly directly or indirectly.

In most countries, due to restrictions, elderly people have been forced to either forced or voluntary isolation at home. This not only caused social and psychological


## Results

According to PRISMA guideline; 60 studies were examined and 8 of them was given as an example in Table  1 Table 1. elderly to pain and created a weakness in their struggle [51]. It was obligatory for patients who needed physiotherapy to direct their treatment to home-based applications, but their treatment was interrupted during the restriction period. In a study conducted in patients with Parkinson's, it was found that depressive thoughts of patients who could not receive physical therapy increased and their treatment was disrupted during the pandemic [55].


## COVID 19 pandemic and Restrictions Before COVID 19 Results


## INCREASED

Corona-phobia and sleep problems are closely related. Another negative effect seen during the pandemic is sleep. According to an online survey with 700 people; it has been observed that people staying at home have increased sleep problems compared to working people. However; it should be considered that there is limitation for the online survey studies because their use is not easy for elderly and only ones having confidence with the digital can access to the survey which may affect the outcome of the studies. Also, it was found that Corona-phobia values were higher in those staying at home. There are other studies pointing out that the sleep problem increased during the pandemic period [42,56]. Physical activity is defined as any movement that is performed using skeletal muscles in daily life and requires energy expenditure. Exercise (Regular Physical Activity) is regular, planned and repetitive physical activities aimed at maintaining or improving physical fitness. Regular physical activity has positive effects on the function of many systems and organs. It has been shown that regular exercise increases the life expectancy and quality of life even in people who did not do regular physical activity until old age. Physical activity levels in the pandemic have decreased significantly due to staying at home and this will cause an increase in the risk of many secondary diseases [41,57,43]. Poor food intake and food insecurity caused mental health to be affected in the elderly and caused the development of depression [47]. These effects can be considered as lifestyle changes. This lifestyle change has been extremely devastating for the elderly, who we describe as the oldest link in the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, values such as increased insulin level and body mass index ratios and cholesterol were affected by this lifestyle change [58]. On the other hand, there is also factors that can exacerbate the negative consequences of pandemic such including their living conditions. In the studies; it could be interesting to know if there are differences between elderly people living alone or with their wife/husband in terms of COVID-19 effects, or between elderly leaving in city or in countryside which may affect the negative effect of COVID-19 on the elderly. However, there is only one study that takes into account the living conditions of the elderly including education, civil status, having children and residential community site. As a result of these effects, it is expected that the elderly feelings of satisfaction with life decrease [46]. problems, but also caused a change in their physical capacities. According to the literature; the results of the studies evaluating the negative effects of COVID-19 on the elderly in many aspects are shown in Figure 2. These negative effects of COVID-19 on the elderly are decreased physical condition, life quality, physical activity level, access to physiotherapy and safe food, life satisfaction and vitamin D production. Also, there is increased risk of falling, depression syndromes, body pain, sleep problems, corona-phobia and secondary disease risk for the elderly as negative results of pandemic ( Figure 2).

The elderly, who have to change their normal lifestyle in an abnormal way, are also exposed to the adverse effects of the pandemic. Emphasizing that falls may become a new epidemic, scientists emphasized that the physical condition of the elderly decreases with the duration of staying at home and this trigger falls. It was emphasized that the elderly should be directed to resistive exercise and physical activities at home in order to maintain physical condition [46][47][48][49][50]. Increasing depression symptoms has been the main subject of many studies in the literature. The increase in depressive thoughts, which we think is related with physical inactivity, affects the mental health of the elderly [40]. Quality of life is an issue that needs to be handled as a whole. The decrease in physical condition and mental health deterioration naturally caused a decrease in the quality of life in the elderly [41,42]. Loneliness or being alone is a feeling of being cut off from the world along with a feeling of emptiness. Loneliness is an emotion that goes further than a lack of friends or a desire to be with others. People who are lonely may feel disconnected from society and have difficulty in meaningful communication with other people. Another feeling created by the pandemic is the feeling of loneliness in the elderly. Social injustice and inequality arise as a big problem during the pandemic as everywhere. Difficulties in accessing hygiene products, difficulties in food supply and financial inequality have revealed the distance between the elderly and other adults [51]. The tendency towards telephone-health applications has increased more in this period and it has been an opportunity for people to explain their health problems without leaving home and to get solutions for this with this method. Tele or mobile health has an important place in patient follow-up for healthcare professionals [42,52,53].

The sun is the biggest source of vitamin D and an indispensable natural source for the elderly. The elderly, who had to stay at home due to restrictions, could not benefit from this natural resource sufficiently. In a study, attention was drawn to the vitamin D deficiency during the pandemic period [54]. The impairment of dealing with chronic or acute pain is also vital for the elderly. Not being able to go to the hospital, insufficient medical support, financial problems, mental fears and depressive thoughts have changed the approach of the In order to protect the elderly and reduce the transmission in the pandemic, restrictions and protection measures have been taken in many countries. The difficulties experienced by elderly individuals in trying to cope with the coronavirus and getting used to the new normal after a conventional order have been investigated in many different areas. The most important thing we can do for the elderly is to empathize and manage this process in cooperation by helping these weak links of the pandemic. Complying with hygiene rules and avoiding crowded environments is the biggest responsibility of individuals. At the same time, it is the biggest responsibility of young adults to be with the elderly with social and psychological support and to encourage them to physical activity.


## Financial Support

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-forprofit sectors.

## Figure 1 :
1Flow chart illustrating the selection process for all included and excluded studies.


. Most of the studies have been conducted in the form of an online questionnaire due to COVID-19 measures. There are also studies conducted through telephone surveys and social media. The participant profiles of the studies consist of older people or all adults. Participant numbers vary between 93 and 6186. Scales and questionnaires used in studies are; Depression Rating Scale (DRS), Delirium Clinical Assessment Protocol (CAP), Aggressive Behavior Scale (ABS), Activities of Daily Living Hierarchy (ADL Hierarchy), Cognitive Performance Scale (CPS), Revised Index of Social Engagement (RISE), International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ-SF) Short form, Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI, World Health Organization Quality of Life Scale (WHOQOL-BREF), UCLA Loneliness Scale (UCLA), Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), Mini mental test (MMT) , Functional Independence Measure (FAST), Rating of Perceived Capacity scale (RPC) , Life Satisfaction Questionnaire-11 (LISAT-11), Lawton Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale (IADL), Geriatric Depression Scale (M-GDS), Dietary History Questionnaire (DHQ United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Household Food Security Survey, General Health Questionnaire-12 (GHQ-12) [19-41] as shown in

## Figure 2 :
2Effects of COVID 19 on the elderly.


March 2020 and 15 February 2021. As a search strategy in databases; [«COVID» [Mesh] OR COVID19 OR « COVID-19 »] AND [older OR elderly OR aging OR «Aged» [Mesh AND «physiotherapy»]] and [covid AND aged AND physiotherapy] were used. Participants in the trials were elderly patients (age ≥ 65 years) with COVID-19.

## Table 1 :
1Sample studies related to COVID-19 and the elderly.Country 
Participant Age 
N 
Method 
Scale 
Result 
Reference 

Canada 
Elderly 
Mean: 81 
765 
Face to face 
evaluation 

DRS, CAP, 
ABS, ADL 
Hierarchy, 
CPS, RISE 

Increased mental 
health problems 

[40] 

Turkey 
20-75 years 
old 

20-39: 61% 

40-59: 34% 

60-75: 4% 

2659 
Online survey 

(Google forms) 

IPAQ-SF, BAI, 
BDI, WHOQL-
BREF 

Reduced physical 
activity 

[41] 

Spain 
Elderly 
Mean: 73 
93 
Telephone 
survey 

Questionnaire 
prepared 
specifically for 
the study 

Increased loneliness, 
sleep problems 
and psychological 
problems 

[42] 

Brazil 
Adults 
(age>18) 

18-35: 52% 

≥ 36: 47% 

937 
Online survey 

(Social media) 

BDI, BAI 
Increased depressive 
symptoms 

[43] 

USA 
Adults 
(age>18) 

Mean: 36 
6186 
Online survey 
UCLA, PHQ-9 Increased loneliness [44] 

Norway 
Elderly and 
Caregivers 

Mean: 82 
438 
Face-to-face 
survey 

MMT, FAST 
Increased need for 
technological support 

[45] 

Sweden 
Adults 
< 35: 15% 

35-69: 81% 

> 70: 4% 

1318 
Online survey 
(REDCap) 

IPAQ-
SF, RPC, 
LİSAT-11 

Reduced physical 
activity 

[46] 

Malaysia 
Adults (age 
> 52) 

Mean: 71 
535 
Telephone 
survey 

IADL, M-GDS, 
USDA, GHQ-
12 

Increased safe 
nutrition and 
malnutrition problems 

[47] 

N: The number of participants. 


Şevgin et al. J Geriatr Med Gerontol 2021, 7:111 • Page 3 of 7 •
Şevgin et al. J Geriatr Med Gerontol 2021, 7:111 • Page 4 of 7 •
Şevgin et al. J Geriatr Med Gerontol 2021, 7:111 • Page 6 of 7 •
Şevgin et al. J Geriatr Med Gerontol 2021, 7:111 • Page 7 of 7 •
AcknowledgementsThe figure of this review was created with Biorender. com
Clinical Outcomes in Young US Adults Hospitalized With COVID-19. J W Cunningham, M Vaduganathan, B L Claggett, K S Jering, A S Bhatt, JAMA Intern Med. 181Cunningham JW, Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, Jering KS, Bhatt AS, et al. (2020) Clinical Outcomes in Young US Adults Hospitalized With COVID-19. JAMA Intern Med. 181: 379-381.

Host resistance and immune responses in advanced age. S C Castle, K Uyemura, T Fulop, T Makinodan, Clin Geriatr Med. 23Castle SC, Uyemura K, Fulop T, Makinodan T (2007) Host resistance and immune responses in advanced age. Clin Geriatr Med 23: 463-479.

The aging of the immune system. D Weiskopf, B Weinberger, B Grubeck-Loebenstein, Transpl Int. 22Weiskopf D, Weinberger B, Grubeck-Loebenstein B (2009) The aging of the immune system. Transpl Int 22: 1041-50.

Age-associated decrease in TLR function in primary human dendritic cells predicts influenza vaccine response. A Panda, F Qian, S Mohanty, D Van Duin, F K Newman, J Immunol. 184Panda A, Qian F, Mohanty S, van Duin D, Newman FK, et al. (2010) Age-associated decrease in TLR function in primary human dendritic cells predicts influenza vaccine re- sponse. J Immunol 184: 2518-2527.

Association of smoking and cumulative pack-year exposure with COVID-19 outcomes in the cleveland clinic COVID-19 registry. K E Lowe, J Zein, U Hatipoglu, A Attaway, JAMA Intern Med. Lowe KE, Zein J, Hatipoglu U, Attaway A (2021) Associa- tion of smoking and cumulative pack-year exposure with COVID-19 outcomes in the cleveland clinic COVID-19 reg- istry. JAMA Intern Med e208360.

Patients with cancer appear more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2: A multicenter study during the COVID-19 outbreak. M Dai, D Liu, M Liu, F Zhou, G Li, Cancer Discov. 10Dai M, Liu D, Liu M, Zhou F, Li G, et al. (2020) Patients with cancer appear more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2: A multi- center study during the COVID-19 outbreak. Cancer Discov 10: 783-791.

Public health-seattle and king county, evergreen health, and CDC COVID-19 investigation team. Epidemiology of Covid-19 in a long-term care facility in king county. T M Mcmichael, D W Currie, S Clark, S Pogosjans, M Kay, N Engl J Med. 382McMichael TM, Currie DW, Clark S, Pogosjans S, Kay M, et al. (2020) Public health-seattle and king county, evergreen health, and CDC COVID-19 investigation team. Epidemiol- ogy of Covid-19 in a long-term care facility in king county, Washington. N Engl J Med. 382: 2005-2011.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 Case Surveillance -United States. E K Stokes, L D Zambrano, K N Anderson, E P Marder, K M Raz, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 69Stokes EK, Zambrano LD, Anderson KN, Marder EP, Raz KM, et al. (2020) Coronavirus Disease 2019 Case Surveil- lance -United States, January 22-May 30, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69: 759-765.

The PRISMA statement for reporting systematicreviewsand meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: Explanation and elaboration. Alessandro Liberati, Jennifer Douglas G Altman, Cynthia Tetzlaff, Mulrow, Peter C Gøtzsche, BMJ. 3392700Alessandro Liberati, Douglas G Altman, Jennifer Tetzlaff, Cynthia Mulrow, Peter C Gøtzsche, et al. (2009) The PRISMA statement for reporting systematicreviewsand meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interven- tions: Explanation and elaboration. BMJ 339: b2700.

Measuring depression in nursing home residents with the MDS and GDS: an observational psychometric study. M Koehler, T Rabinowitz, J Hirdes, M Stones, G I Carpenter, BMC Geriatr. 51Koehler M, Rabinowitz T, Hirdes J, Stones M, Carpenter GI, et al.(2005) Measuring depression in nursing home resi- dents with the MDS and GDS: an observational psychomet- ric study. BMC Geriatr 5:1.

Adverse Events in Home Care: Identifying and Responding with interRAI Scales and Clinical Assessment Protocols. C J Sinn, Rsd Betini, J Wright, L Eckler, B W Chang, Can J Aging. 37Sinn CJ, Betini RSD, Wright J, Eckler L, Chang BW, et al. (2018) Adverse Events in Home Care: Identifying and Responding with interRAI Scales and Clinical Assessment Protocols. Can J Aging 37: 60-69.

The aggressive behavior scale: A new scale to measure aggression based on the minimum data set. C M Perlman, J Hirdes, J Am Geriatr Soc. 56Perlman CM, Hirdes J (2008) The aggressive behavior scale: A new scale to measure aggression based on the minimum data set. J Am Geriatr Soc 56: 2298-2303.

The MDS-CHESS scale: A new measure to predict mortality in institutionalized older people. J P Hirdes, D H Frijters, G F Teare, J Am Geriatr Soc. 51Hirdes JP, Frijters DH, Teare GF (2003) The MDS-CHESS scale: A new measure to predict mortality in institutional- ized older people. J Am Geriatr Soc 51: 96-100.

MDS Cognitive Performance Scale. J N Morris, B E Fries, D R Mehr, C Hawes, C Phillips, J Gerontol. 49Morris JN, Fries BE, Mehr DR, Hawes C, Phillips C, et al. (1994) MDS Cognitive Performance Scale. J Gerontol 49: M174-M182.

A revised Index for Social Engagement for long-term care. D L Gerritsen, N Steverink, D H Frijters, J P Hirdes, M E Ooms, J Gerontol Nurs. 34Gerritsen DL, Steverink N, Frijters DH, Hirdes JP, Ooms ME, et al. (2008) A revised Index for Social Engagement for long-term care. J Gerontol Nurs 34: 40-48.

International physical activity questionnaire: 12-country reliability and validity. C L Craig, A L Marshall, M Sjöström, A E Bauman, M L Booth, Med Sci Sports Exerc. 35Craig CL, Marshall AL, Sjöström M, Bauman AE, Booth ML, et al.(2003) International physical activity questionnaire: 12-country reliability and validity. Med Sci Sports Exerc 35: 1381-95.

An inventory for measuring depression. A T Beck, C H Wart, M Mendelson, J Mock, J Erbaugh, Arch Gen Psychiatry. 4Beck AT, Wart CH, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J (1961) An inventory for measuring depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 4: 561-57.

World Health Organization (2020) Director-General's remarks at the media briefing on 2019-nCoV. World Health Organization (2020) Director-General's re- marks at the media briefing on 2019-nCoV.

Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan. C Huang, Y Wang, X Li, L Ren, J Zhao, China. Lancet. 395Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, et al. (2020) Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 395: 497-506.

Cochrane COVID-19 diagnostic test accuracy group. Signs and symptoms to determine if a patient presenting in primary care or hospital out patient settings has COVID-19 disease. T Struyf, J J Deeks, J Dinnes, Y Takwoingi, C Davenport, https:/www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD013665/fullCochrane Database Syst Rev. 713665Struyf T, Deeks JJ, Dinnes J, Takwoingi Y, Davenport C, et al. (2020) Cochrane COVID-19 diagnostic test accura- cy group. Signs and symptoms to determine if a patient presenting in primary care or hospital out patient settings has COVID-19 disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7: CD013665.

Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19 infection: Systematic review and critical appraisal. L Wynants, B Van Calster, G S Collins, R D Riley, G Heinze, BMJ. 3691328Wynants L, Van Calster B, Collins GS, Riley RD, Heinze G, et al. (2020) Prediction models for diagnosis and prog- nosis of covid-19 infection: Systematic review and critical appraisal. BMJ 369: m1328.

Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: A descriptive study. N Chen, M Zhou, X Dong, J Qu, F Gong, Lancet. 395Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, et al. (2020) Ep- idemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: A de- scriptive study. Lancet 395: 507-513.

Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. D Wang, B Hu, C Hu, F Zhu, X Liu, JAMA. 323Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, et al. (2020) Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 323: 1061-1069.

Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: Summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the chinese center for disease control and prevention. Z Wu, J M Mc Googan, JAMA. 323Wu Z, Mc Googan JM (2020) Characteristics of and import- ant lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: Summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the chinese center for disease control and prevention. JAMA 323: 1239-1242.

Factors associated with COVID-19-related death using open SAFELY. E J Williamson, A J Walker, K Bhaskaran, S Bacon, C Bates, Nature. 584Williamson EJ, Walker AJ, Bhaskaran K, Bacon S, Bates C, et al. (2020). Factors associated with COVID-19-related death using open SAFELY. Nature 584: 430-436.

Telehealth home support during COVID-19 confinement for community-dwelling older adults with mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia: survey study. J M Goodman-Casanova, E Dura-Perez, J Guzman-Parra, A Cuesta-Vargas, F Mayoral-Cleries, CDC COVID-19 Response Team (2020) Severe outcomes among patients with Coronavirus Disease. 6919434J Med Internet ResCDC COVID-19 Response Team (2020) Severe outcomes among patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) -United States, February 12-March 16, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 69: 343-346. 45. Goodman-Casanova JM, Dura-Perez E, Guzman-Parra J, Cuesta-Vargas A, Mayoral-Cleries F (2020) Telehealth home support during COVID-19 confinement for commu- nity-dwelling older adults with mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia: survey study. J Med Internet Res 22: e19434.

Loneliness during the first half-year of COVID-19. Wds Killgore, S A Cloonan, E C Taylor, D A Lucas, N S Dailey, Killgore WDS, Cloonan SA, Taylor EC, Lucas DA, Dailey NS (2020) Loneliness during the first half-year of COVID-19

. Lockdowns, Psychiatry Res. 294113551Lockdowns. Psychiatry Res 294:113551.

The social threats of COVID-19 for people with chronic pain. K Karos, J L Mcparland, S Bunzli, H Devan, A Hirsh, Pain. 161Karos K, McParland JL, Bunzli S, Devan H, Hirsh A, et al. (2020) The social threats of COVID-19 for people with chronic pain. Pain 161: 2229-2235.

Telehealth for musculoskeletal physiotherapy. M A Cottrell, T G Russell, Musculoskelet Sci Pract. 48102193Cottrell MA, Russell TG (2020) Telehealth for musculoskel- etal physiotherapy. Musculoskelet Sci Pract 48: 102193.

Alcacer-Pitarch B (2021) Implementation of podiatry telephone appointments for people with rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases. J L Palmer, H J Siddle, A C Redmond, https:/jfootankleres.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13047-020-00441-9J Foot Ankle Res. 144Palmer JL, Siddle HJ, Redmond AC, Alcacer-Pitarch B (2021) Implementation of podiatry telephone appointments for people with rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases. J Foot Ankle Res 14: 4.

Lockdown during COVID-19 and the increase of frailty in people with neurological conditions. Phs Pelicioni, J S Schulz-Moore, L Hale, C G Canning, S R Lord, Front Neurol. 11604299Pelicioni PHS, Schulz-Moore JS, Hale L, Canning CG, Lord SR (2020) Lockdown during COVID-19 and the increase of frailty in people with neurological conditions. Front Neurol 11: 604299.

Physical activity changes and correlate effects in patients with Parkinson's disease during COVID-19 lockdown. T Schirinzi, Di Lazzaro, G Salimei, C Cerroni, R Liguori, C , Mov Disord Clin Pract. 7Schirinzi T, Di Lazzaro G, Salimei C, Cerroni R, Liguori C, et al.(2020) Physical activity changes and correlate effects in patients with Parkinson's disease during COVID-19 lock- down. Mov Disord Clin Pract 7: 797-802.

2020) Coronaphobia, musculoskeletal pain, and sleep quality in stay-at home and continued-working persons during the 3-month Covid-19 pandemic lockdown in Turkey. S Toprakcelenay, Y Karaaslan, O Mete, Ozer Kaya, D , Chronobiol Int. 37ToprakCelenay S, Karaaslan Y, Mete O, Ozer Kaya D (2020) Coronaphobia, musculoskeletal pain, and sleep quality in stay-at home and continued-working persons during the 3-month Covid-19 pandemic lockdown in Tur- key. Chronobiol Int 37: 1778-1785.

Associations of moderate to vigorous physical activity and sedentary behavior with depressive and anxiety symptoms in self-isolating people during the COVID-19 pandemic: A cross-sectional survey in Brazil. F B Schuch, R A Bulzing, J Meyer, D Vancampfort, J Firth, Psychiatry Res. 292113339Schuch FB, Bulzing RA, Meyer J, Vancampfort D, Firth J, et al. (2020) Associations of moderate to vigorous physical activity and sedentary behavior with depressive and anxi- ety symptoms in self-isolating people during the COVID-19 pandemic: A cross-sectional survey in Brazil. Psychiatry Res 292: 113339.

COVID-19 lockdown may increase cardiovascular disease risk factors. D G Muhammad, I A Abubakar, https:/tehj.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s43044-020-00127-4Egypt Heart J. 732Muhammad DG, Abubakar IA (2021) COVID-19 lockdown may increase cardiovascular disease risk factors. Egypt Heart J 73: 2.

The impact of poor nutrient intakes and food insecurity on the psychological distress among community-dwelling middle-aged and older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. N F Malek Rivan, H M Yahya, S Shahar, Ajit Singh, D K Ibrahim, N , Nutrients. 13353Malek Rivan NF, Yahya HM, Shahar S, Ajit Singh DK, Ibra- him N, et al. (2021) The impact of poor nutrient intakes and food insecurity on the psychological distress among com- munity-dwelling middle-aged and older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nutrients 13: 353.

Metabolic Impacts of confinement during the COVID-19 pandemic due to modified diet and physical activity habits. M Martinez-Ferran, F De La Guía-Galipienso, F Sanchis-Gomar, H Pareja-Galeano, Nutrients. 121549Martinez-Ferran M, de la Guía-Galipienso F, Sanchis-Go- mar F, Pareja-Galeano H (2020) Metabolic Impacts of con- finement during the COVID-19 pandemic due to modified diet and physical activity habits. Nutrients 12: 1549.

Ekvall Hansson E (2021) Self-Perceived changes in physical activity and the relation to life satisfaction and rated physical capacity in Swedish adults during the COVID-19 Pandemic-A cross sectional study. F Eek, C Larsson, A Wisén, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 18671Eek F, Larsson C, Wisén A, Ekvall Hansson E (2021) Self-Perceived changes in physical activity and the relation to life satisfaction and rated physical capacity in Swedish adults during the COVID-19 Pandemic-A cross sectional study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 18: 671.

Access to and interest in assistive technology for home-dwelling people with dementia during the COVID-19 pandemic (PAN.DEM). M H Gedde, B S Husebo, A Erdal, N G Puaschitz, M Vislapuu, Int Rev Psychiatry. Gedde MH, Husebo BS, Erdal A, Puaschitz NG, Vislapuu M, et al.(2021) Access to and interest in assistive technol- ogy for home-dwelling people with dementia during the COVID-19 pandemic (PAN.DEM). Int Rev Psychiatry 1-8.

An inventory for measuring clinical anxiety: Psychometric properties. A T Beck, N Epstein, G Brown, R A Steer, J Consult Clin Psychol. 56Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, Steer RA (1988) An invento- ry for measuring clinical anxiety: Psychometric properties. J Consult Clin Psychol 56: 893-897.

The world health organization quality of life assessment (WHOQOL): development and general psychometric properties. The Whoqol Group, Soc Sci Med. 46The Whoqol Group (1998) The world health organization quality of life assessment (WHOQOL): development and general psychometric properties. Soc Sci Med 46: 1569- 1585.

UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity, and factor structure. D W Russell, https:/www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s15327752jpa6601_2J Pers Assess. 66Russell DW (1996) UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity, and factor structure. J Pers Assess 66: 20-40.

The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. K Kroenke, R L Spitzer, J B Williams, J Gen Intern Med. 16Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB (2001) The PHQ-9: Va- lidity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med 16: 606-613.

Mini-mental state. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. M F Folstein, S E Folstein, P R Mchugh, J Psychiatr Res. 12Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR (1975) Mini-mental state. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 12: 189-198.

Functional assessment staging (FAST). B Reisberg, Psychopharmacol Bull. 24Reisberg B (1988) Functional assessment staging (FAST). Psychopharmacol Bull 24: 653-659.

A novel rating scale to predict maximal exercise capacity. A G Wisén, R G Farazdaghi, B Wohlfart, https:/link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00421-002-0636-yEur J Appl Physiol. 87Wisén AG, Farazdaghi RG, Wohlfart B (2002) A novel rat- ing scale to predict maximal exercise capacity. Eur J Appl Physiol 87: 350-357.

Life satisfaction in 18-to 64-year-old Swedes: In relation to gender, age, partner and immigrant status. A R Fugl-Meyer, R Melin, K S Fugl-Meyer, https:/www.medicaljournals.se/jrm/content/abstract/10.1080/165019702760279242J Rehabil Med. 34Fugl-Meyer AR, Melin R, Fugl-Meyer KS (2002) Life satis- faction in 18-to 64-year-old Swedes: In relation to gender, age, partner and immigrant status. J Rehabil Med 34: 239- 246.

The Lawton instrumental activities of daily living scale. C Graf, Am J Nurs. 108Graf C (2008) The Lawton instrumental activities of daily living scale. Am J Nurs 108: 52-62.

Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). J A Yesavage, J I Sheikh, https:/www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1300/J018v05n01_09?journalCode=wcli20#:~:text=Thedatacitedshowthat,moderatedementiaandphysicalillness.Clin Gerontol. 9Yesavage JA, Sheikh JI (1986) 9/Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Clin Gerontol 5:165-173.

Validation of a dietary history questionnaire against a 7-D weighed record for estimating nutrient intake among rural elderly malays. S Shahar, J Earland, S Abdulrahman, Malays J Nutr. 6Shahar S, Earland J, Abdulrahman S (2000) Validation of a dietary history questionnaire against a 7-D weighed record for estimating nutrient intake among rural elderly malays. Malays J Nutr 6: 33-44.

United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service (2012) US Household Food Security Survey Module: Six-item Short Form Economic Research Service. USDAUnited States Department of Agriculture Economic Re- search Service (2012) US Household Food Security Survey Module: Six-item Short Form Economic Research Service, USDA.

The 12-Item General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12): Reliability, external validity and factor structure in the Spanish population. P Sánchez-López Mdel, V Dresch, Psicothema. 20Sánchez-López Mdel P, Dresch V (2008) The 12-Item Gen- eral Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12): Reliability, external validity and factor structure in the Spanish population. Psi- cothema 20: 839-843.

COVID-19 pandemic is an urgent time for older people to practice resistance exercise at home. Clf Machado, R S Pinto, C M Brusco, E L Cadore, R Radaelli, Exp Gerontol. 141111101Machado CLF, Pinto RS, Brusco CM, Cadore EL, Radaelli R (2020) COVID-19 pandemic is an urgent time for older people to practice resistance exercise at home. Exp Geron- tol 141:111101.

Falls in older adults: The new pandemic in the post COVID-19 era?. M Á De La Cámara, A Jiménez-Fuente, A I Pardos, Med Hypotheses. 145110321De La Cámara MÁ, Jiménez-Fuente A, Pardos AI (2020) Falls in older adults: The new pandemic in the post COVID-19 era? Med Hypotheses 145: 110321.

Confinement time due to the COVID-19 disease: An opportunity to promote and engage people in regular physical exercise?. M Á De La Cámara, A Jiménez-Fuente, A I Pardos-Sevilla, 10.1002/tsm2.170Transl Sports Med. de la Cámara MÁ, Jiménez-Fuente A, Pardos-Sevilla AI (2020) Confinement time due to the COVID-19 disease: An opportunity to promote and engage people in regular physi- cal exercise? Transl Sports Med 10.1002/tsm2.170.

Evaluating the Effect of COVID-19 Pandemic Lockdown on Long-Term Care Residents' Mental Health: A Data-Driven Approach in New Brunswick. C Mcarthur, M Saari, G A Heckman, N Wellens, J Weir, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 22McArthur C, Saari M, Heckman GA, Wellens N, Weir J, et al. (2021) Evaluating the Effect of COVID-19 Pandemic Lockdown on Long-Term Care Residents' Mental Health: A Data-Driven Approach in New Brunswick. J Am Med Dir Assoc 22: 187-192.

The role of physical activity on mental health and quality of life during COVID-19 outbreak: A cross-sectional study. F Ozdemir, N Cansel, F Kizilay, E Guldogan, I Ucuz, Eur J Integr Med. 40101248Ozdemir F, Cansel N, Kizilay F, Guldogan E, Ucuz I, et al. (2020) The role of physical activity on mental health and quality of life during COVID-19 outbreak: A cross-sectional study. Eur J Integr Med 40: 101248.