# Prevalence of glucose dysregulation (GD) in patients with β-thalassemias in different countries: A preliminary ICET- A survey

CorpusID: 235709221
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4016949cbaf4303bb429c1cd083c1a1a6b8d5eb0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4016949cbaf4303bb429c1cd083c1a1a6b8d5eb0)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Prevalence of glucose dysregulation (GD) in patients with β-thalassemias in different countries: A preliminary ICET- A survey
2021

Vincenzo De Sanctis 
Coordinator of ICET-A Network (International Network of Clinicians for Endocrinopathies in Thalassemia and Adolescence Medicine) and Pediatric and Adolescent Outpatient Clinic
Quisisana Hospital
FerraraItaly

Ashraf Soliman 
Department of Pediatrics
Division of Endocrinology
Department of Pediatrics
Division of Endocrinol-ogy
Hamad General Hospital
DohaQatar

Alexandria University Children's Hospital
AlexandriaEgypt

Ploutarchos Tzoulis 
Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology
Whittington Hospital
University College London
LondonUK

Shahina Daar 
Department of Haematology
College of Medicine and Health Sciences
Sultan Qaboos University
Sultanate of Oman

Antonis Kat-Tamis 
Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology
First Depart-ment of Pediatrics
Thalassemia Unit
University of Athens, "Agia Sofia" Children's Hospital
AthensGreece

Polyxeni Delaporta 
Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology
First Depart-ment of Pediatrics
Thalassemia Unit
University of Athens, "Agia Sofia" Children's Hospital
AthensGreece

Mohamed A Yassin 
National Center for Cancer Care and Research
Medical Oncology Hematology Section HMC
DohaQatar

Mehran Karimi 
Hematology Research Center
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

Duran Canatan 
Medical Director of Antalya Genetic Diseases Center
AntalyaTurkey

Soad Al Jaouni 
Department of Hematology Faculty of Medicine
Head Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology
King Abdulaziz University
King-dom of Saudi ArabiaJeddah

Maria Concetta Galati 
Department of Pediatric Haematoncology
Thalassaemia and Prenatal Diagnosis Regional Center
Pug-liese-Ciaccio Hospital
CatanzaroItaly

Giuseppe Raiola 
Department of Paediatrics
Pugliese-Ciaccio Hospital
CatanzaroItaly

Umberto I° Hospital
SiracusaItaly

Giuseppe Messina 
Saveria Campisi 
Forough Saki 
Shiraz Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center
ShirazIran

Dulani Kottahachchi 
Thalassaemia Care Unit, Colombo North Teaching Hospital, Sri Lanka; 16 Varna Expert Center for Coagulopathies and Rare Anemias; 17 Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University Hospital "Tzaritza Giovanna -ISUL"
SofiaBulgaria

Valeria Kaleva 
Kristina Petrova 
Atanas Banchev 
Christos Kattamis 
First Department of Paediatrics
National Kapodistrian University of Athens
Greece

; 12 
Uosd Microcitemie 
Ospedale Grande 
&quot; Metropolitano 
Reggio Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli 
Italy ; Calabria 
Uosd Thalassemia 
Prevalence of glucose dysregulation (GD) in patients with β-thalassemias in different countries: A preliminary ICET- A survey

Acta Biomed
922021240202110.23750/abm.v92i3.11733L e t t e r t o E d i t o r To the Editor,


## L e t t e r t o E d i t o r

To the Editor,

The prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) in β-thalassemia varies from 9.7% to 29% and the overall prevalence of impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) is 17.2% and 12.4% respectively in transfusion dependent thalassemia (TDT) patients (1). The highest prevalence of IFG and IGT has been observed in countries of the Middle East (27.8%) and the Mediterranean coast (15.1%) (2). Therefore, early detection of glucose dysregulation (GD) plays an important prevention role and is an area of considerable research interest for patients with thalassemias.

The current international guidelines recommend annual screening for GD in all patients with transfu-sion-dependent (TDT) from the age of ten years (2). Annual screening becomes even more important in the light of evidence showing that intensive chelation regimen (monotherapy or combined) in the early stages of glucose abnormalities can improve insulin secretion and normalise glucose metabolism (3). Similar GD recommendations are not available for patients with non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia (NTDT) (4).

The International Network on Endocrine Complications in Thalassaemia (ICET-A) aims to encourage research in the field of growth disorders and endocrine complications in thalassaemia (5), and works to attract the interest of young physicians to the world of thalassemia.

In December 2020, the ICET-A promoted a preliminary multi-country survey with the aim of assess-ing the prevalence of GD in patients with TDT and NTDT followed in 14 centers of the ICET-A Network. TDT refers to the patients who require regular blood transfusions for survival since early life, while NTDT refers mainly to patients who do not need regular transfusions, though they may require occasional transfusions in certain circumstances, such as surgery, pregnancy or infection (6).

An ad hoc questionnaire was prepared and distributed by email to participating centers. As defined by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) criteria, a fasting plasma glucose between 100 and 125 mg/dl (5.6 -6.9 mmol/L) is termed IFG, while the WHO proposes a cut-off value of 110 mg/dl (6.1 mmol/L) plasma glucose for IFG. Because the new WHO and ADA classification are based on the pathogenesis of the disease and not on its treatment, and thalassemia-related diabetes (TRD) is a distinct clinical entity caused either by insulin insufficiency and variable insulin resistance, we decided to use the old terminology: Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and Non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) for the data presentation of patients.

The results of the survey of the overall prevalence of GD in patients with TDT are summarized in table 1.

The most prevalent GD were IFG (10.4%) and IDDM (8.6%). The prevalence of GDs among NTDT patients was lower compared to TDT patients and was documented at a more advanced age.

A number of important observations emerged from this retrospective survey:1) the high prevalence of GD in TDT patients suggest a revaluation of general management of these patients especially in regard to intensive chelation therapy as well as lifestyle modifications is extremely important; 2) GD in NTDT patients is less common than in TDT patients (12.1 % vs. 31.0 %) and is usually documented later in life; and 3) a number of TDT patients with DM retained a residual capacity to secrete insulin, at least in the earlier stages of their disease, responding to oral antidiabetic agents (6.1%).

In conclusion, in the last four decades, there has been a rapid increase in the survival of thalassemia patients due to an improvement in diagnosis and treat-  Many unresolved issues in the relation to this very peculiar form of TRD still persist, such as: advantages and limitations of imaging, biomarkers for detecting high-risk patients, outcome of GD, long-term benefits of oral antidiabetic agents and assessment of microvascular complications (retinopathy, nephropathy) and neuropathy. These may be clarified by new studies over the next few years.


## Conflicts of interest:

Each author declares that he or she has no commercial associations (e.g. consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, patent/licensing arrangement etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article.  

## 1 .
1Types and prevalence of glucose dysregulation (GD) in patients with β-thalassemias (TDT and NTDT) in different countries. 29.2%) ment. With the increased lifespan, the comorbidities associated with the disease have begun to appear. Among them, GD is the most frequent and, potentially, the most severe, aggravating the patients' quality of life and prognosis.


= TDT: transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia; NDTT: non-transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia; M: Males; F: Females; ADA: American Diabetes Association; WHO: World Health Organization; ISPAD: International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes; FPG: Fasting plasma glucose; IGT: Impaired glucose tolerance; IDDM; Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus; NIDDM: Non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus; GD: Glucose dysregulation, NA: Not available; NR: Not reported.

## Table


Early detection of glucose dysregulation (GD) in patients with β-thalassemia major: Review of current diagnostic criteria and the ICET-A survey. De Sanctis, V Soliman, A Tzoulis, P , Curr Trends Endocrinol. 11De Sanctis V, Soliman A,Tzoulis P, et al. Early detection of glucose dysregulation (GD) in patients with β-thalassemia major: Review of current diagnostic criteria and the ICET-A survey. Curr Trends Endocrinol. 2021;11:1-11.

Elevated Prevalence of Abnormal Glucose Metabolism and Other Endocrine Disorders in Patients with β-Thalassemia Major: A. L N He, W Chen, Y Yang, Meta-Analysis. Biomed Res Int. 6573497He LN, Chen W, Yang Y, et al. Elevated Prevalence of Ab- normal Glucose Metabolism and Other Endocrine Disorders in Patients with β-Thalassemia Major: A Meta-Analysis. Bi- omed Res Int 2019;2019:6573497.

Effect of enhanced iron chelation therapy on glucose metabolism in patients with b-thalassaemia major. K Farmaki, N Angelopoulos, G Anagnostopoulos, Br J Hematol. 134Farmaki K, Angelopoulos N, Anagnostopoulos G, et al. Ef- fect of enhanced iron chelation therapy on glucose metabo- lism in patients with b-thalassaemia major. Br J Hematol. 2006;134:438-444.

Guidelines for diagnosis and management of Beta-thalassemia intermedia. M Karimi, N Cohan, De Sanctis, V Mallat, N S Taher, A , Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 31Karimi M, Cohan N, De Sanctis V, Mallat NS, Taher A. Guidelines for diagnosis and management of Beta-thalas- semia intermedia. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2014;31:583-96.

ICET-A an Opportunity for Improving Thalassemia Management. De Sanctis, V Soliman, A T , J Blood Disord. 1De Sanctis V, Soliman AT. ICET-A an Opportunity for Im- proving Thalassemia Management. J Blood Disord. 2014;1: 1-2.

Review of disease-related complications and management in adult patients with thalassemia: A multi-center study in Thailand. S Chuncharunee, N Teawtrakul, N Siritanaratkul, N Chueamuangphan, Correspondence Vincenzo De Sanctis, MD Coordinator of the International Network of Clinicians for Endocrinopathies in Thalassemia and Adolescence Medicine (ICET-A) Via Paolo V. 1425Chuncharunee S, Teawtrakul N, Siritanaratkul N, Chueamuangphan N. Review of disease-related complica- tions and management in adult patients with thalassemia: A multi-center study in Thailand. PLoS One 2019;14:e0214148 Received: 1 May 2020 -Accepted: 6 May 2021 Correspondence Vincenzo De Sanctis, MD Coordinator of the International Network of Clinicians for Endocrinopathies in Thalassemia and Adolescence Medicine (ICET-A) Via Paolo V, 25

. Italy Ferrara, Tel, +39 0532 770243 E-mail: vdesanctis@libero.itFerrara, Italy Tel: +39 0532 770243 E-mail: vdesanctis@libero.it