# Review Article Monitoring and Mapping of Insecticide Resistance in Medically Important Mos- quitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in Iran (2000-2020): A Review

CorpusID: 235998113
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37ee1b652a15d1a2383a44c0c31614b81761d213](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37ee1b652a15d1a2383a44c0c31614b81761d213)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Review Article Monitoring and Mapping of Insecticide Resistance in Medically Important Mos- quitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in Iran (2000-2020): A Review
Published Online: March 31, 2021

Yaser Salim Abadi 
Department of Health Services and Health Promotion
School of Health
Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences
RafsanjanIran

Alireza Sanei-Dehkordi 
Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control
Faculty of Health
Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences
Bandar AbbasIran

Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center
Hormozgan Health Institute
Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences
Bandar AbbasIran

Azim Paksa 
Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control
School of Public Health
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences
ShirazIran

; Mohammad 
Amin Gorouhi 
Department of Vector Biology and Control
School of Public Health
Kerman University of Medical Sciences
KermanIran

; 
Hassan Vatandoost hvatandoost1@yahoo.com 
Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control
School of Public Health
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Department of Chemical Pollutants and Pesticides
Institute for Environmental Research
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Review Article Monitoring and Mapping of Insecticide Resistance in Medically Important Mos- quitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in Iran (2000-2020): A Review
Published Online: March 31, 2021(Received 24 Nov 2020; accepted 30 Mar 2021)J Arthropod-Borne Dis, March 2021, 15(1): 21-40 Y Salim Abadi et al.: Monitoring and … 21 *Corresponding author: Prof Hassan Vatandoost,
Background: Mosquitos due to their role in the transmission of different pathogens to humans are considered as an important group in the phylum Arthropoda. According to the WHO and FAO guideline different groups of insecticide applied for controlling pests in both the agricultural and public health sectors. Methods: All the data published about resistant status of the mosquitoes Anopheles, Culex, Aedes and Culiseta species were searched on PubMed, Elsevier, Web of Science, Magiran and google scholar. The objectives of this study was to review the trend of resistance to insecticides during 2000-2020 in medically important mosquitoes in Iran. The criteria for resistant are followed according to WHO guideline. Results: The Results showed that there are widespread, multiple resistances in the country to different organochlorine, organophosphates, carbamate and pyrethroids insecticides in the mosquitoes. Conclusion: The effect of pesticide residues on the environment could be a cause for selection pressure on mosquitos and lead to insecticides resistance to them. Insecticides resistance is main challenge of the vector control program. Also result will provide a guideline for control of the mosquito-borne diseases in the country as well as the world.

## Introduction

Malaria is one of the most important parasitic diseases transmitted by the genus Anopheles to human (1)(2)(3). In Iran malaria has been present for a long time ago (4,5) and mainly mentioned as a big public health challenge in Sistan and Baluchistan, Hormozgan and Ker-man Provinces in the south-eastern part of Iran also featured as refractory malaria (6). The favorable results obtained in reducing of malaria transmissions by application of DDT for controlling of mosquito in a hyperendemic area in Iran for the first time in 1947 and then spraying with DDT in combination with other vectors control interventions continued in the most malaria-endemic areas of the country until 1956, finally for first time in 1957 resistance to DDT was recorded in Anopheles stephensi as vector of malaria in Iran (4,5). In Iran there are some species of malaria vectors ( Fig. 1) including: An. stephensi, An. dthali, An. culicifacies s.l., An. fluviatilis s.l., An. superpictus s.l., An. sacharovi, An. maculipennis s.l. (3,5). Culex pipiens pipiens and Culex. quinquefasciatus as complex members of Cx. pipiens are competent vectors for some filarial and arboviral disease and also Dirofilaria immitis moreover West Nile and Sindbis viruses have been detected from mentioned species in Iran (1,(7)(8)(9). Culex pipiens habitat mainly is sewage system and there are different reagents and also residues of insecticides belong to several group of pesticides which have been previously used in agriculture and public health sectors (9,10). For the first time resistance to insecticides was shown in 1975 in Cx. pipiens pipiens about DDT in the northern part of Iran (9,11). Fig. 2 shows the distribution of Cx. pipiens and Cx. quinquefasciatus in Iran. After 20 years later from the first report of resistance to DDT in An. stephensi, this report was the second alarm related to resistance in medically important mosquitos in Iran. The presence of West Nile virus also has been reported in Aedes caspius or Ochlerotatus caspius from Iranian wetlands during recent years (12). Even though to date there is no report about the detection of pathogens among Culiseta longiareolata in Iran but, Ae. caspius (13) and Cs. longiaerolata (14) currently showed their resistance to DDT. Figs. 3 and 4 shows the distribution of Ae. caspius and Cs. longiareolata in Iran. Continuation of the previous report related to the appearance of insecticide resistance about DDT in An. stephensi and Cx. pipiens as vectors of important diseases in Iran. According to the latest studies only during 2012 to 2014 approximately 14,000 tons of pesticides consist of herbicides, insecticides, acaricides, and fungicides were used for agricultural pests (15). Due to the effect of pesticide residues on the environment it could be a cause for selection pressure on mosquitos which their breeding places are water and finally lead to their resistance to different group of insecticides indirectly (9,10,16). In the public health sector also different groups of insecticide applied for controlling Anopheles mosquitoes in malarious areas of Iran such as DDT and Dieldrin belong to organochlorine compounds, Malathion and Pirimiphos-methyl (organophosphates), Propoxur (carbamates), Deltamethrin and Lamdacyhalothrin belong to pyrethroids compounds (4,5). Previously for testing the insecticide susceptibility level among adult of mosquitos all bioassay studies have been performed referring to the test procedures of World Health Organization (WHO) recommended for insecticide resistance monitoring in mosquitos that suggested for each concentrations, six replicate samples of 20-25 adult female mosquitoes per tube (2 replicates as control) shroud be expose for one hour at diagnostic dose of each insecticide and the number of mortality determined 24 hours after recovery period, finally the mortality results divided in three categories include: 98-100% mortality indicates susceptibility, 80-97% mortality considered as tolerance and also requires confirmation of resistance with other methods and if mortality was less than 80% in tested samples, mosquitos considered as resistant to insecticide (17). Previous guideline was revised recently and considering the current WHO categories for susceptibility level, the following criteria have been used for interpretation of results related to mortality rate: higher than 98% was considered as susceptible, mortality between 90% to 97% considered as resistance candidate and more investigation is needed for the confirmation of resistance and finally mortality less than 90% demonstrated resistance (18). Here there are examples regarding resistance to DDT lonely in medically important mosquitos and its trend from the beginning of the resistance to insec-23 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online:  ticides. In the present paper, we aimed to review the trend of resistance to insecticides during 2000-2020 in medically important mosquitoes and also the distribution of resistant specimen plotted using Arc-GIS10.2 software (Redlands, CA) In Iran.


## Materials and Methods

All the data published about resistant status of mosquitoes Anopheles, Culex, Aedes and Culiseta species were searched during 2000-2020 on PubMed, Elsevier, Web of Science, Magiran and google scholar.


## Results


## Review of resistance to insecticides in Anopheles mosquitoes as malaria vectors

According to recent studies, seven species of Anopheles mosquitoes ( Fig. 1) introduced as malaria vectors in Iran including: An. stephensi, An. culicifacies s.l., An. fluviatilis s.l., An. superpictus s.l., An. dthali, An. sacharovi and An. maculipennis s.l. while An. pulcherrimus is considered as a suspect vector moreover five of these vectors can be found in the southeast of the country, where the majority of malaria cases is reported also An. stephensi considered to be the main malaria vector in the same area (3,19). The resistant status of Anopheles mosquitos to organochlorine com-pounds in Iran (Table 1 and Figs. 5-7) indicated that approximately all malaria vectors in Iran were resistant to the DDT and Dieldrin which have been used previously for control of mosquitoes (6,13,(20)(21)(22)(23)(24)(25)(26)(27)(28)(29)(30)(31)(32)(33)(34)(35)(36)(37). After the first report about resistance to DDT in An. ste-phensi in 1957 other malaria vectors gradually, showed their resistance to organochlorine compounds in Iran up to now. But about An. sacharovi and An. maculipennis s.l. as main malaria vectors in the northern part of the country, all studies which have been performed on the susceptibility level of these species to organochlorine compounds showed tolerance to dieldrin (21,23,30,33). Similar to this finding about Dieldrin, tolerance to DDT in An. dthali in south eastern part of Iran also has been shown (13). Although in some districts in southern parts of the country in Jiroft District in Kerman Province An. stephensi was tolerant to DDT and dieldrin (27). Moreover, in Bashagard District in Hormozgan Province tolerant to dieldrin in An. stephensi as well as tolerant to DDT in An. culicifacies s.l. also have been shown (28,29).

The susceptibility level of Anopheles mosquitos about pyrethroids compounds ( Table 2 and Fig. 6) showed that, to date among malaria vectors in Iran, just in An. stephensi resistant to Cyfluthrin, and Lmbdacyhalothrin has been shown in Chabahar District in southeastern part of the country (31,34,35). Although tolerant to others pyrethroids insecticides such as deltamethrin, permethrin and etofenprox also have been reported in An. stephensi in this area (31,34). Tolerant to deltamethrin also shown in An. stephensi, An. culicifacies s.l. and An. dthali in Bashagard District and An. stephensi in Jask District in Hormozgan Province (28,35) and also in An. culicifacies s.l. in Chabahar District in Sistan and Baluchistan Province (36). Similar to mentioned finding about tolerant to pyrethroids insecticides in Anopheles mosquitos, tolerant to deltamethrin and permethrin also has been shown in An. maculipennis in the northern part of Iran (33).

The susceptibility level of Anopheles mosquitos to organophosphates compounds (Table  3 and Fig. 7) indicated that An. maculipennis s.l. in West Azarbaijan Province in the Northwestern part of the country has become resistant to Malathion (33) but about other Anopheles mosquitos tolerant to Malathion in southern part also in An. dthali in Hormozgan Province (28) and also in An. stephensi and An. culicifacies s.l. in Sistan and Baluchistan Province were shown (13).

The status of Anopheles mosquito resistant to carbamates compound's ( around the country resistance to carbamates insecticides such as propoxur and bendiocarb is shown in An. maculipennis s.l. in Northwestern part and resistance to bendiocarb in An. stephensi is in the southern part of the country (33,37). Although in An. stephensi, An. culicifacies s.l. and An. dthali tolerant to propoxur in some parts of the country has been reported (13,22,28). By reviewing the resistance status of Anopheles mosquitos during 2000 to 2020 it is concluded that approximately all Anopheles mosquitos found resistance to organochlorine insecticides in Iran and although about other classes of insecticides there are a few reports for resistance about some malaria vectors to one or more insecticides, but considering the modification of the guideline for susceptibility test in mosquitos From 2013 which demonstrated resistance in mosquitos with mortality less than 90%, susceptible species in previous studies can be categories as resistant to insecticides (36).


## Review of resistance to insecticides in Culex mosquitos

The susceptibility level of Culex mosquitos against organochlorine compounds in Iran (Table 5 and Figs. 8-10) revealed that Cx. pipiens, Cx. quinquefasciatus and Cx. theileri in most area of the country showed their highly level of insecticide resistance to DDT and deildrin (9,13,14,16,38,39,41,42). Although, Cx. quinquefasciatus in a study in Southeast area showed its 90% mortality rate to DDT and according to the WHO considered as tolerant or candidate for resistance (40), similar Anopheles species, resistance to DDT in Culex mosquitos around the country have been developed during recent years after the first report for resistance to DDT in the northern part of Iran about Cx. pipiens pipiens in 1975 (9,11).

The status of Culex mosquitoes resistant to pyrethroids compound's (Table 6 and Figs. [8][9][10] showed that they are almost resistant to most insecticides belong to pyrethroids (9,13,14,39,(41)(42)(43). For example, in the north of Iran, Cx. pipiens in Sari District was highly resistance to all tested pyrethroids insecticides including Cyfluthrin, Lambda-cyhalothrin, Deltamethrin, Etofenprox and Permethrin (41).

Resistance to organophosphates compounds in Culex mosquitos (Table 7 and Figs. 8,9) indicated that members of Cx. pipiens complex were found resistant to Malathion and Fenitrothion (40,41) although in Ahar District in East Azarbaijan tolerance to malathion in Cx. pipiens and Cx. theileri have been reported (14).

The susceptibility level of Culex mosquitos to carbamates compounds (Table 8 and Figs. 8-10) revealed that Cx. quinquefasciatus, Cx. theileri and Cx. pipiens were found to be resistant to all tested insecticides belong to carbamates compounds (14,16,40,41).

Comparing the resistance status of Culex mosquitos with Anopheles mosquitos during the past 20 years ago revealed that Culex species almost were found resistant to most insecticides belong to pyrethroids and also about other classes of insecticides the number of species which showed resistance to insecticides are more than Anopheles mosquitos.


## Review of resistance to insecticides in Aedes caspius

The resistance status of Ae. caspius to different groups of insecticides in Iran (Table 9 and Fig. 11) showed that Ae. caspius is resistant to DDT, Bendiocarb, Malathion, Permethrin and Lambdacyhalothrin (13,44). Actually this species was found to be resistant to all classes of insecticides although in some part this species was susceptible to deltame-thrin (44).


## Review of resistance to insecticides in Culiseta longiareolata

The susceptibility level of Cs. longiareolata to different groups of insecticides (Table  10 and Fig. 12) indicated that this species similar Ae. caspius was resistant to all classes of insecticides (14,45). There are a few studies about the susceptibility level of Cs. longiareolata and Ae. caspius in Iran, but both of them were found to be resistant to all groups of in-25 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online:  secticides. In the following resistance to insecticides in medically important mosquitos in Iran resistance to insecticides in mentioned species also can be considered as a problem in the vector control program.                 


## Discussion

The trend of insecticides resistance in medially important mosquitos in Iran revealed that among specimens of Anopheles mosquitoes as malaria vectors, approximately all of them have been found resistant to one or more insecticides and also most malaria vectors are resistant to the organochlorine compounds in Iran. It cannot conclude certainly that all the malaria vectors are resistant to insecticide because there are no definite report about resistance to insecticides in An. fluviatilis s.l. and An. dthali although there are some reports about tolerant in An. dthali to some insecticides. In Iran, An. stephensi as the main malaria vector has been found resistant to most classes of insecticides during recent years and this resistance may be caused by others intervention for controlling of malaria vectors such as Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) and Insec-ticide Treated Nets (ITNs) or usage of insecticide in the agriculture sector (34). Resistance to all classes of insecticides also reported in other countries in An. stephensi for example in Afghanistan, An. stephensi has been found resistant to DDT, malathion, bendiocarb, deltamethrin, and permethrin and in Ethiopia, it was highly resistant to deltamethrin, permethrin pirimiphos-methyl, malathion, DDT, propoxur, and bendiocarb (46,47). Similar finding of Anopheles mosquitos, Culex specimens also were resistant to several insecticides belong to each class moreover Cx. pipiens in the north of Iran, in Mazandaran Province was high resistance to all tested insecticides of all major classes (41) around the world some studies also reported a high level of resistance in members of Cx. pipiens complex to many groups of insecticides (48)(49)(50). Based on the literature, there were no reports available on monitoring the susceptibility level of Ae. caspius and Cs. longiaerolata to insecticides which recommended by WHO around the world. Recent studies about baseline susceptibility of mentioned species in Iran revealed that both of these mentioned species were found to be resistant to all classes of insecticides in the study areas of Ae. caspius and Cs. longiaerolata (13,14,44,45). During recent years the development of resistance to insecticides in mosquitos as vectors of important diseases in Iran were increased. So that almost all medially important mosquitos were found to be resistant to all different classes of insecticides. The use of alternative insecticide which is made from natural products and some biological agents can be appropriates method for vectors control programs (45,51,52). Secondary metabolites of plants such as essential oils are candidates for the discovery of new compounds against vector mosquitoes. Insecticide-based plants have the advantage of exhibiting novel modes of action against mosquito vectors that could lessen the risk of resistance (45,(52)(53)(54)(55)(56)(57)(58)(59)(60)(61). Moreover, for controlling of mosquito populations, Wolbachia as an intracellular organism that infect different groups of arthropods, also introduced as a bioagent due to its environmentally friendly feature (62,63).


## Conclusion

Relevant studies about resistance to insecticides during the quarter of a century about medially important mosquitos in Iran indi-cated that the development of resistance to all classes of insecticides in mosquitos is happening gradually, so alternative and efficient intervention methods should be used to preventing the development of resistance to in-secticides in mosquitos.

## Fig. 1 .
1Distribution of malaria vectors in Iran 26 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

## Fig. 3 .
3Distribution of Aedes caspius in Iran

## Fig. 4 .
4Distribution of Culiseta longiareolata in Iran

## Fig. 6 .Fig. 7 .
67Distribution of Anopheles stephensi with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020) Distribution of Anopheles maculipennis with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020) 31 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

## Fig. 8 . 2021 Fig. 9 .
820219Distribution of Culex quinquefasciatus with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020) 32 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, Distribution of Culex pipiens with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020) 33 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

## Fig. 10 .
10Distribution of Culex theileri with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020) Fig. 11. Distribution of Aedes caspius with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020) http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

## Fig. 12 .
12Distribution of Culiseta longiaerolata with resistance to different insecticides in Iran (2000-2020)


35 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

## Table 4 and
4Figs. 6, 7) indicated that among all malaria vectors 24 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

## Table 1 .
1List of Anopheles mosquitos resistant to organochlorine compounds in Iran using the WHO insecticide sus-ceptibility tests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location 
(Province-District) 

References 

An. pulcherrimus 
Dieldrin 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Ghasreghand 
20 
An. sacharovi 
DDT 
West Azerbaijan-Poldasht 
21 
An. stephensi 
DDT 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Iranshahr 
22 
An. Sacharovi 
DDT 
East Azerbaijan-Kalibar 
23,30 
An. stephensi 
DDT, Dieldrin 
Kerman-Kahnooj 
24 
An. stephensi 
DDT 
Hormozgan-Siahoo, Geno and Bandar Abbas 
Hormozgan-Bandar Abbas 

25 

An. stephensi 
DDT, Dieldrin 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Iranshahr 
Fars-Kazeroon 

26 

An. maculipennis s.l. DDT, Dieldrin 
Gilan-Astara 
6 
An. stephensi 
DDT 
Hormozgan-Bashagard 
28,29 
An. stephensi 
DDT 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Chabahar 
13, 31, 34, 37 
An. superpictus s.l. 
DDT 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Sarbaz 
32 
An. stephensi 
DDT 
Hormozgan-Jask 
35 
An. culicifacies s.l. 
DDT, Dieldrin 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Chabahar 
36 



## Table 2 .
2List of Anopheles mosquitos resistant to pyrethroids compounds in Iran using WHO insecticide susceptibilitytests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location 
(Province-District) 

References 

An. stephensi cyfluthrin, lmbda-cyhalothrin Sistan and Baluchistan-Chabahar 
31, 34 
An.stephensi 
lmbdacyhalothrin 
Hormozgan-Jask 
35 



## Table 3 .
3List of Anopheles mosquitos resistant to organophosphates compound's in Iran using WHO insecticide sus-ceptibility tests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides Location (Province-District) References 
An. maculipennis s.l. 
Malathion 
West Azerbaijan 
33 



## Table 4 .
4List of Anopheles mosquitos resistant to Carbamates compound's in Iran using WHO insecticide susceptibil-ity tests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location (Province-District) 
References 
An. maculipennis s.l. 
Propoxur and Bendiocarb 
West Azerbaijan 
33 
An. stephensi 
Bendiocarb 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Chabahar 
37 



## Table 5 .
5List of Culex mosquitos resistant to organochlorine compounds in Iran using WHO insecticide susceptibilitytests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location (Province-District) 
References 
Cx .theileri, Cx. pipiens 
DDT 
Tehran-Tehran 
38 
Cx. quinquefasciatus 
DDT 
Tehran-Varamin 
16 
Cx. pipiens 
DDT 
Sistan and Baluchistan-Chabahar 
13 
Cx. theileri and Cx. pipiens 
DDT 
East Azarbaijan -Ahar 
14 
Cx. pipiens 
DDT 
West Azerbaijan -Urmia 
39 
Cx. pipiens 
DDT 
Tehran-Tehran 
9 
Cx. pipiens 
DDT, Dieldrin 
Mazandaran-Sari 
41 
Cx. quinquefasciatus 
DDT 
Hormozgan-Suru 
42 



## Table 6 .
6List of Culex mosquitos resistant to pyrethroids compound's in Iran using WHO insecticide susceptibilitytests (2000-2020) 



## Table 7 .
7List of Culex mosquitos resistant to organophosphates compound's in Iran using WHO insecticide suscepti-bility tests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location (Province-District) References 
Cx. quinquefasciatus 
Malathion 
Kerman-Rafsanjan 
40 
Cx. pipiens 
Malathion, Fenitrothion 
Mazandaran-Sari 
41 



## Table 8 .
8List of Culex mosquitos resistant to carbamates compounds in Iran using WHO insecticide tests Species 
Insecticides Location (Province-District) References 
Cx. theileri and Cx. pipiens 
Propoxur 
East Azarbaijan-Ahar 
14 
Cx. quinquefasciatus 
Bendiocarb 
Tehran-Varamin 
16 
Cx. quinquefasciatus 
Bendiocarb 
Kerman-Rafsanjan 
40 
Cx. pipiens 
Bendiocarb 
Mazandaran-Sari 
41 



## Table 9 .
9Resistance status of Aedes caspius to different groups of insecticides in Iran using WHO insecticide suscepti-bility tests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location (Province-District) 
References 

Ae. caspius 

DDT 

Sistan and Baluchistan-Chabahar 
Hormozgan-Siahoo 

13 
44 

Malathion 
Bendiocarb 
Permethrin, lambdacyhalothrin 

Hormozgan-Siahoo 
44 



## Table 10 .
10Resistance status of Culiseta longiareolata to different groups of insecticides in Iran using WHO insecticidesusceptibility tests (2000-2020) 

Species 
Insecticides 
Location (Province-District) References 

Cs. longiaerolata 

DDT 

Propoxur 

Lambdacyhalothrine 
Deltamethrin 
Fenitrothion 

East Azarbaijan-Ahar 

East Azarbaijan-Marand 
East Azarbaijan-Ahar 

East Azarbaijan-Marand 
East Azarbaijan-Ahar 
East Azarbaijan-Marand 

14 

45 
14 

45 
14 
45 


J Arthropod-Borne Dis, March 2021, 15(1): 21-40 Y Salim Abadi et al.: Monitoring and …
J Arthropod-Borne Dis, March 2021, 15(1): 21-40 Y Salim Abadi et al.: Monitoring and Mapping of …
AcknowledgementsThis research is partially supported by Ministry of Health and Medical Education under NIMAD code numbers of 963262, 983984 and 995633. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
G Mullen, L ; Durden, D Edward, Walter, Mosquitoes (Culicidae) Woodbridge A. Foster and. BurlingtonElsevier2Medical and Veterinary EntomologyMullen G, Durden L (2009) Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 2 ed edition, Mos- quitoes (Culicidae) Woodbridge A. Fos- ter and Edward D Walter. Vol. 2. Else- vier, Burlington.

. M W Service, Medical Entomology for Students. 3Cambridge. University PressService MW (2003) Medical Entomology for Students. Vol. 3. United Kingdom: Cambridge. University Press, Cambridge.

Malaria situation in Iran. H Vatandoost, A Raeisi, A Saghafipour, F Nikpour, J Nejati, Malar J. 181200Vatandoost H, Raeisi A, Saghafipour A, Nikpour F, Nejati J (2019) Malaria situ- ation in Iran: 2002-2017. Malar J. 18 (1): 200.

Malaria past and present situation in Iran. G H Edrissian, Iran J Parasitol. 11Edrissian GH (2006) Malaria past and pre- sent situation in Iran. Iran J Parasitol. 1 (1): 1-14.

A review of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors of Iran. Yousef Mogaddam, M Motevalli-Haghi, F Fazeli-Dinan, M Hosseini-Vasoukolaei, N Enayati, A A , J Mazandaran Univ Med Sci. 25134Yousef Mogaddam M, Motevalli-Haghi F, Fazeli-Dinan M, Hosseini-Vasoukolaei N, Enayati AA (2016) A review of in- secticide resistance in malaria vectors of Iran. J Mazandaran Univ Med Sci. 25 (134): 394-411.

Responsiveness of Anopheles maculipennis to different imagicides during resurgent malaria. H Vatandoost, A H Zahirnia, Asian Pacific J Trop Med. 3Vatandoost H, Zahirnia AH (2010) Respon- siveness of Anopheles maculipennis to dif- ferent imagicides during resurgent malar- ia. Asian Pacific J Trop Med. 3: 360-363.

Serological survey on viral antibodies in Iran. K Naficy, S Saidi, Trop Geogr Med. 222Naficy K, Saidi S (1970) Serological survey on viral antibodies in Iran. Trop Geogr Med. 22(2): 183-188.

Distribution and ecology of mosquitoes in a focus of dirofilariasis in northwestern Iran, with the first finding of filarial larvae in naturally infected local mosquitoes. S Azari-Hamidian, M R Yaghoobi-Ershadi, E Javadian, M R Abai, I Mobedi, Y M Linton, R E Harbach, Med Vet Entomol. 232Azari-Hamidian S, Yaghoobi-Ershadi MR, Javadian E, Abai MR, Mobedi I, Linton YM, Harbach RE (2009) Distribution and ecology of mosquitoes in a focus of dirofilariasis in northwestern Iran, with the first finding of filarial larvae in nat- urally infected local mosquitoes. Med Vet Entomol. 23(2): 111-121.

High insecticides resistance in Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae) from Tehran, capital of Iran. Y Salim-Abadi, M A Oshaghi, A A Enayati, M R Abai, H Vatandoost, M R Eshraghian, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 104Salim-Abadi Y, Oshaghi MA, Enayati AA, Abai MR, Vatandoost H, Eshraghian MR (2016) High insecticides resistance in Cu- lex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae) from Teh- ran, capital of Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 10(4): 483-492.

First report of biochemical mechanisms of insecticide resistance in the field population of Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae) from Sari, Mazandaran, north of Iran. S H Nikookar, M Fazeli-Dinan, S P Ziapour, F Ghorbani, Y Salim-Abadi, H Vatandoost, A A Enayati, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 134Nikookar SH, Fazeli-Dinan M, Ziapour SP, Ghorbani F, Salim-Abadi Y, Vatandoost H, Enayati AA (2019) First report of bi- ochemical mechanisms of insecticide re- sistance in the field population of Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae) from Sari, Ma- zandaran, north of Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 13(4): 378-390.

Resistance of Cx. pipiens pipiens to DDT in northern Iran. M D Lotfi, A V Manouchehri, H Yazdanpanah, Bull Soc Pathol Exot Filiales. 681Lotfi MD, Manouchehri AV, Yazdanpanah H (1975) Resistance of Cx. pipiens pipiens to DDT in northern Iran, 1973. Bull Soc Pathol Exot Filiales. 68(1): 91-93.

West Nile Virus in mosquitoes of Iranian wetlands. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. M Bagheri, O Terenius, M A Oshaghi, M Motazakker, S Asgari, F Dabiri, H Vatandoost, Mohammadi Bavani, M Chavshin, A R , 15Bagheri M, Terenius O, Oshaghi MA, Mota- zakker M, Asgari S, Dabiri F, Vatandoost H, Mohammadi Bavani M, Chavshin AR (2015) West Nile Virus in mosquitoes of Iranian wetlands. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 15(12): 750-754.

Susceptibility of Culicidae mosquitoes to some insecticides recommended by WHO in a malaria endemic area of southeastern Iran. M Fathian, H Vatandoost, S H Moosa-Kazemi, A Raeisi, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 91Fathian M, Vatandoost H, Moosa-Kazemi SH, Raeisi A (2015) Susceptibility of Cu- licidae mosquitoes to some insecticides recommended by WHO in a malaria en- demic area of southeastern Iran. J Ar- thropod Borne Dis. 9(1): 22-34.

Assessing the susceptibility status of mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in a dirofilariasis focus, northwestern Iran. A Ataie, S H Moosa-Kazemi, H Vatandoost, M R Yaghoobi-Ershadi, H Bakhshi, M Anjomruz, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 91Ataie A, Moosa-Kazemi SH, Vatandoost H, Yaghoobi-Ershadi MR, Bakhshi H, Anjomruz M (2015) Assessing the sus- ceptibility status of mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in a dirofilariasis focus, north- western Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 9 (1): 7-21.

An assessment of agricultural pesticide use in Iran. Z Morteza, S B Mousavi, M A Baghestani, A Aitio, Morteza Z, Mousavi SB, Baghestani MA, Aitio A (2017) An assessment of agri- cultural pesticide use in Iran, 2012-2014.

. J Environ Health Sci Eng. 151J Environ Health Sci Eng. 15(1): 1-8.

Enhanced tolerance of house mosquito to different insecticides due to agricultural and household pesticides in sewage system of Tehran. H Vatandoost, L Ezeddinloo, A H Mahvi, M R Abai, E B Kia, I Mobedi, Iran. Iran J Environ Health Sci Eng. 11Vatandoost H, Ezeddinloo L, Mahvi AH, Abai MR,Kia EB, Mobedi I (2004) En- hanced tolerance of house mosquito to different insecticides due to agricultural and household pesticides in sewage sys- tem of Tehran, Iran. Iran J Environ Health Sci Eng. 1(1): 42-45.

Test procedures for insecticide resistance monitoring in malaria vectors, bio-efficacy and persistence of insecticides on treated surfaces: report of the WHO informal consultation. World Health Organization (WHO46GenevaWorld Health Organization (WHO) (1998) Test procedures for insecticide resistance monitoring in malaria vectors, bio-effi- cacy and persistence of insecticides on treated surfaces: report of the WHO in- formal consultation, Geneva, 28-30 Sep- tember 1998. p. 46.

World Health Organization (WHO) (2016) Test procedures for insecticide resistance monitoring in malaria vector mosquitoes. 2 nd edition. 56World Health Organization (WHO) (2016) Test procedures for insecticide resistance monitoring in malaria vector mosquitoes. 2 nd edition. p. 56.

Biochemical basis of cyfluthrin and DDT resistance in Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae) in malarious area of Iran. M A Gorouhi, M A Oshaghi, H Vatandoost, A A Enayati, A Raeisi, M R Abai, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 123Gorouhi MA, Oshaghi MA, Vatandoost H, Enayati AA, Raeisi A, Abai MR (2018) Biochemical basis of cyfluthrin and DDT resistance in Anopheles stephensi (Dip- tera: Culicidae) in malarious area of Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 12 (3): 310-320.

Insecticide resistance/ susceptibility monitoring in Anopheles pulcherrimus (Diptera: Culicidae) in Ghasreghand District, Sistan and Baluchistan Province, Iran. A Zahirnia, H Vatandoost, M Nateghpour, E Djavadian, Iran J Public Health. 311-2Zahirnia A, Vatandoost H, Nateghpour M, Djavadian E (2002) Insecticide resistance/ susceptibility monitoring in Anopheles pulcherrimus (Diptera: Culicidae) in Ghasreghand District, Sistan and Balu- chistan Province, Iran. Iran J Public Health. 31(1-2): 11-14.

Monitoring of insecticide resistance in Anopheles sacharovi (Favre, 1903) in borderline of Iran, Armenia, Naxcivan and Turkey. S S Lak, H Vatandoost, M Entezarmahdi, H Ashraf, M Abai, M Nazari, Iran J Public Health. 313-4Lak SS, Vatandoost H, Entezarmahdi M, Ashraf H, Abai M, Nazari M (2002) Monitoring of insecticide resistance in Anopheles sacharovi (Favre, 1903) in bor- derline of Iran, Armenia, Naxcivan and Turkey, 2001. Iran J Public Health. 31 (3-4): 96-99.

Susceptibility and irritability levels of main malaria vectors to synthetic pyrethroids in the endemic areas of Iran. N Borhani, H Vatandoost, Acta Med Iran. 424Borhani N, Vatandoost H (2004) Suscep- tibility and irritability levels of main ma- laria vectors to synthetic pyrethroids in the endemic areas of Iran. Acta Med Iran. 42(4): 240-247.

. H Vatandoost, Abdoljabari Boonab, Vatandoost H, Abdoljabari Boonab R, Abai 37 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

Entomological survey in Kalibar, a resurgent malaria focus in East-Azerbaijan. Oshaghi Mr, Ma, Iran. Pak J Biol Sci. 810MR, Oshaghi MA (2005) Entomological survey in Kalibar, a resurgent malaria focus in East-Azerbaijan, Iran. Pak J Bi- ol Sci. 8(10): 1466-1471.

Monitoring of insecticides resistance in main malaria vectors in a malarious area of Kahnooj District, Kerman Province, southeastern Iran. H Vatandoost, M Mashayekhi, M R Abai, M Aflatoonian, A A Hanafi-Bojd, I Sharifi, J Vector Borne Dis. 423Vatandoost H, Mashayekhi M, Abai MR, Aflatoonian M, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Shar- ifi I (2005) Monitoring of insecticides re- sistance in main malaria vectors in a ma- larious area of Kahnooj District, Kerman Province, southeastern Iran. J Vector Borne Dis. 42(3): 100-108.

Bionomics of Anopheles stephensi Liston in the malarious area of Hormozgan Province, Southern Iran. H Vatandoost, M A Oshaghi, M R Abai, M Shahi, F Yaaghoobi, M Baghaii, A A Hanafi-Bojd, G Zamani, H Townson, Acta Trop. 972Vatandoost H, Oshaghi MA, Abai MR, Shahi M, Yaaghoobi F, Baghaii M, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Zamani G, Townson H (2006) Bionomics of Anopheles stephensi Liston in the malarious area of Hormozgan Province, Southern Iran, 2002. Acta Trop. 97(2): 196-203.

Comparative efficacy of different imagicides against different strains of Anopheles stephensi in the malaroius areas of Iran. B Davari, H Vatandoost, H Ladonni, M Shaeghi, M A Oshaghi, H R Basseri, A A Enayati, Y Rassi, M R Abai, A A Hanafi-Bojd, K Akbarzadeh, Pakistan J Biol Sci. 95Davari B, Vatandoost H, Ladonni H, Shaeghi M, Oshaghi MA, Basseri HR, Enayati AA, Rassi Y, Abai MR, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Akbarzadeh K (2006) Comparative effi- cacy of different imagicides against dif- ferent strains of Anopheles stephensi in the malaroius areas of Iran, 2004-2005. Pakistan J Biol Sci. 9(5): 885-892.

Comparative performance of imagicides on Anopheles stephensi, main malaria vector in a malarious area, southern Iran. M R Abai, A Mehravaran, H Vatandoost, M A Oshaghi, E Javadian, M Mashayekhi, A Mosleminia, N Piyazak, H Edallat, F Mohtarami, H Jabbari, F Rafi, J Vector Borne Dis. 454Abai MR, Mehravaran A, Vatandoost H, Oshaghi MA, Javadian E, Mashayekhi M, Mosleminia A, Piyazak N, Edallat H, Mohtarami F, Jabbari H, Rafi F (2008) Comparative performance of imagicides on Anopheles stephensi, main malaria vec- tor in a malarious area, southern Iran. J Vector Borne Dis. 45(4): 307-312.

Entomological and epidemiological attributes for malaria transmission and implementation of vector control in southern Iran. A A Hanafi-Bojd, H Vatandoost, M A Oshaghi, A A Haghdoost, M Shahi, M M Sedaghat, F Abedi, M Yeryan, A Pakari, Acta Trop. 1212Hanafi-Bojd AA, Vatandoost H, Oshaghi MA, Haghdoost AA, Shahi M, Sedaghat MM, Abedi F, Yeryan M, Pakari A (2012) Entomological and epidemiological attrib- utes for malaria transmission and imple- mentation of vector control in southern Iran. Acta Trop. 121(2): 85-92.

Vector ecology and susceptibility in a malaria endemic focus in southern Islamic Republic of Iran. M Soleimani-Ahmadi, H Vatandoost, M Shayeghi, A Raeisi, F Abedi, M R Eshraghian, A Madani, R Safari, M Shahi, A Mojahedi, F Poorahmad-Garbandi, East Mediterr Health J. 18Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Vatandoost H, Shayeghi M, Raeisi A, Abedi F, Eshraghi- an MR, Madani A, Safari R, Shahi M, Mojahedi A, Poorahmad-Garbandi F (2012) Vector ecology and susceptibility in a malaria endemic focus in southern Islamic Republic of Iran. East Mediterr Health J. 18: 1034-1041.

Irritability of malaria vector, Anopheles sacharovi to different insecticides in a malaria-prone area. H Vatandoost, M R Abai, Asian Pac J Trop Med. 52Vatandoost H, Abai MR (2012) Irritabil- ity of malaria vector, Anopheles sacha- rovi to different insecticides in a malar- ia-prone area. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 5 (2): 113-116.

Indication of pyrethroid resistance in the main malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi from Iran. H Vatandoost, A A Hanafi-Bojd, Asian Pac J Trop Med. 59Vatandoost H, Hanafi-Bojd AA (2012) Indication of pyrethroid resistance in the main malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi from Iran. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 5(9): 722-726.

Some ecological attributes of malarial vector Anopheles superpictus Grassi in endemic foci in Southeastern Iran. J Nejati, H Vatandoost, M A Oshaghi, M Salehi, E Mozafari, S H Moosa-Kazemi, Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 312Nejati J, Vatandoost H, Oshaghi MA, Salehi M, Mozafari E, Moosa-Kazemi SH (2013) Some ecological attributes of malarial vec- tor Anopheles superpictus Grassi in en- demic foci in Southeastern Iran. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 3(12): 1003-1008.

Susceptibility of Anopheles maculipennis to different classes of insecticides in West Azarbaijan Province, Northwestern Iran. A R Chavshin, F Dabiri, H Vatandoost, M M Mohammadi-Bavani, Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 55Chavshin AR, Dabiri F, Vatandoost H, Mo- hammadi-Bavani MM (2015) Susceptibil- ity of Anopheles maculipennis to differ- ent classes of insecticides in West Azarbai- jan Province, Northwestern Iran. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 5(5): 403-406.

Current susceptibility status of Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae) to different imagicides in a malarious area, southeastern of Iran. M A Gorouhi, H Vatandoost, M A Oshaghi, A Raeisi, A A Enayati, H Mirhendi, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 104Gorouhi MA, Vatandoost H, Oshaghi MA, Raeisi A, Enayati AA, Mirhendi H (2016) Current susceptibility status of Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae) to different imagicides in a malarious area, southeast- ern of Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 10 (4): 493-500.

Insecticide susceptibility of Anopheles stephensi to DDT and current insecticides in an elimination area in Iran. M Zare, M Soleimani-Ahmadi, S H Davoodi, A Sanei-Dehkordi, Parasit Vectors. 91Zare M, Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Davoodi SH, Sanei-Dehkordi A (2016) Insecticide susceptibility of Anopheles stephensi to DDT and current insecticides in an elim- ination area in Iran. Parasit Vectors. 9 (1): 571-575.

Ecology, monitoring and mapping of insecticide resistance of malaria vector, Anopheles culicifacies (Diptera: Culicidae) to different imagicides in Iran. H Vatandoost, A A Hanafi-Bojd, A Raeisi, M R Abai, F Nikpour, Asian Pac J Trop Dis. 71Vatandoost H, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Raeisi A, Abai MR, Nikpour F (2017) Ecology, monitoring and mapping of insecticide re- sistance of malaria vector, Anopheles cu- licifacies (Diptera: Culicidae) to different imagicides in Iran. Asian Pac J Trop Dis. 7(1): 53-56.

Comparison of CDC bottle bioassay with WHO standard method for assessment susceptibility level of malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi to three imagicides. H Vatandoost, M R Abai, M Akbari, A Raeisi, H Yousefi, S Sheikhi, A Bagheri, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 131Vatandoost H, Abai MR, Akbari M, Rae- isi A, Yousefi H, Sheikhi S, Bagheri A (2019) Comparison of CDC bottle bio- assay with WHO standard method for as- sessment susceptibility level of malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi to three ima- gicides. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 13 (1): 17-26.

A survey of the susceptibility level of Culex theileri and Cx. pipiens to DDT, Dieldrin, Propoxur and Malathion in the southern area of Tehran. M Nazari, B Janbakhsh, J Uromia Univ Med Sci. 111Nazari M, Janbakhsh B (2000) A survey of the susceptibility level of Culex theil- eri and Cx. pipiens to DDT, Dieldrin, Propoxur and Malathion in the southern area of Tehran. J Uromia Univ Med Sci. 11(1): 13-19.

Susceptibility status of Culex pipiens against deltamethrin and DDT. N Naseri-Karimi, H Vatandoost, M Bagheri, A R Chavshin, Asian Pac J Trop Dis. 51SupplNaseri-Karimi N, Vatandoost H, Bagheri M, Chavshin AR (2015) Susceptibility sta- tus of Culex pipiens against deltamethrin and DDT, Urmia County, West Azerbaijan Province, northwestern Iran. Asian Pac J Trop Dis. 5(Suppl 1): S77-S79.

Baseline susceptibility of filarial vector Culex quinquefasciatus (Diptera: Culicidae) to five insecticides with different modes of action in southeast of Iran. Y Salim-Abadi, M Asadpour, I Sharifi, A Sanei-Dehkordi, M A Gorouhi, A Paksa, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 114Salim-Abadi Y, Asadpour M, Sharifi I, Sanei-Dehkordi A, Gorouhi MA, Paksa A (2017) Baseline susceptibility of filarial vector Culex quinquefasciatus (Diptera: Culicidae) to five insecticides with dif- ferent modes of action in southeast of Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 11(4): 453- 462.

High resistance of vector of West Nile Virus, Culex pipiens Linnaeus (Diptera: Culicidae) to different insecticides recommended by WHO in northern Iran. F Ghorbani, H Vatandoost, A A Hanafi-Bojd, M R Abai, H Nikoobar, A A Enayati, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 121Ghorbani F, Vatandoost H, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Abai MR, Nikoobar H, Enayati AA (2018) High resistance of vector of West Nile Virus, Culex pipiens Linnaeus (Dip- tera: Culicidae) to different insecticides recommended by WHO in northern Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 12(1): 24-30.

Assessment the changing trend of susceptibility to two insecticides mmong field-population Culex quinquefasciatus compared with the same population undergoing to multiple colonization. A Shemshadian, M R Abai, H Vatandoost, N Dinparast-Djadid, M A Oshaghi, A Mojahedi, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 142Shemshadian A, Abai MR, Vatandoost H, Dinparast-Djadid N, Oshaghi MA, Mo- jahedi A (2020) Assessment the changing trend of susceptibility to two insecticides mmong field-population Culex quinque- fasciatus compared with the same popula- tion undergoing to multiple colonization. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 14(2): 185-192.

Target site insensitivity detection in deltamethrin resistant Culex pipiens complex in Iran. R Zeidabadinezhad, H Vatandoost, M R Abai, N Dinparast-Djadid, A Raz, M M Sedaghat, M A Oshaghi, A Raeisi, N Adibi, Iran J Public Health. 486Zeidabadinezhad R, Vatandoost H, Abai MR, Dinparast-Djadid N, Raz A, Seda- ghat MM, Oshaghi MA, Raeisi A, Adibi N (2019) Target site insensitivity detec- tion in deltamethrin resistant Culex pipiens complex in Iran. Iran J Public Health. 48 (6): 1091-1098.

Evaluation of susceptibility of Aedes caspius (Diptera: Culicidae) to insecticides in a potent arboviralprone area, southern Iran. S Hassandoust, S H Moosa-Kazemi, H Vatandoost, M M Sedaghat, K Akbarzadeh, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 142Hassandoust S, Moosa-Kazemi SH, Vatan- doost H, Sedaghat MM, Akbarzadeh K (2020) Evaluation of susceptibility of Ae- des caspius (Diptera: Culicidae) to insec- ticides in a potent arboviralprone area, southern Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 14 (2): 214-227.

Baseline Susceptibility of Culiseta longiareolata (Diptera: Culicidae) to Different Imagicides, in Eastern Azerbaijan. T Hazratian, A Paksa, M M Sedaghat, H Vatandoost, S H Moosa-Kazemi, A Sanei-Dehkordi, Y Salim-Abadi, M Pirmohammadi, S Yousefi, M Amin, M A Oshaghi, Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 134Hazratian T, Paksa A, Sedaghat MM, Vatan- doost H, Moosa-Kazemi SH, Sanei- Dehkordi A, Salim-Abadi Y, Pirmoham- madi M, Yousefi S, Amin M, Oshaghi MA (2019) Baseline Susceptibility of Culiseta longiareolata (Diptera: Cu- licidae) to Different Imagicides, in East- ern Azerbaijan, Iran. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 13 (4): 407-415.

Status of insecticide resistance and its biochemical and molecular mechanisms in Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae) from Afghanistan. N H Safi, A A Ahmadi, S Nahzat, S Warusavithana, N Safi, R Valadan, A Shemshadian, M Sharifi, A Enayati, J Hemingway, Malar J. 181249Safi NH, Ahmadi AA, Nahzat S, Warusa- vithana S, Safi N, Valadan R, Shemshad- ian A, Sharifi M, Enayati A, Hemingway J (2019) Status of insecticide resistance and its biochemical and molecular mech- anisms in Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae) from Afghanistan. Malar J. 18(1): 249.

Insecticide resistance in Anopheles stephensi in Somali Region, eastern Ethiopia. S Yared, A Gebressielasie, L Damodaran, V Bonnell, K Lopez, D Janies, T E Carter, Malar J. 19Yared S, Gebressielasie A, Damodaran L, Bonnell V, Lopez K, Janies D, Carter TE (2020) Insecticide resistance in Anoph- eles stephensi in Somali Region, eastern Ethiopia. Malar J. 19: 1-7.

Resistance to Organophosphorus and Pyrethroid Insecticides in Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae) from Tunisia. I I Ben Cheikh, Ben Ali-Haouas, Z Marquine, M Pasteur, N , J Med Entomol. 353Ben Cheikh II, Ben Ali-Haouas Z, Mar- quine M, Pasteur N (1998) Resistance to Organophosphorus and Pyrethroid In- secticides in Culex pipiens (Diptera: Cu- licidae) from Tunisia. J Med Entomol. 35(3): 251-260.

V Corbel, N &apos;guessan, R Brengues, C Chandre, F Djogbenou, L Martin, T Akogbéto, M Hougard, J M Rowland, M , Multiple insecticide resistance mechanisms. 39Published OnlineCorbel V, N'Guessan R, Brengues C, Chan- dre F, Djogbenou L, Martin T, Akogbéto M, Hougard JM, Rowland M (2007) Mul- tiple insecticide resistance mechanisms 39 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021

Anopheles gambiae and Culex quinquefasciatus from. Benin, West Africa101in Anopheles gambiae and Culex quin- quefasciatus from Benin, West Africa. Acta Trop. 101: 207-216.

The mechanisms of organophosphate and carbamate resistance in Culex quinquefasciatus (Diptera: Culicidae) from Cuba. J A Bisset, M M Rodriguez, C Diaz, E Ortiz, M C Marquetti, J Hemingway, Bull Entomol Res. 803Bisset JA, Rodriguez MM, Diaz C, Ortiz E, Marquetti MC, Hemingway J (1990) The mechanisms of organophosphate and carbamate resistance in Culex quinque- fasciatus (Diptera: Culicidae) from Cu- ba. Bull Entomol Res. 80(3): 245-250.

Evaluation of biological control agents for mosquitoes control in artificial breeding places. Y Salim Abadi, H Vatandoost, Y Rassi, M R Abai, A R Sanei-Dehkordi, A Paksa, Asian Pac J Trop Med. 34Salim Abadi Y, Vatandoost H, Rassi Y, Abai MR, Sanei-Dehkordi AR, Paksa A (2010) Evaluation of biological control agents for mosquitoes control in artificial breeding places. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 3(4): 276-277.

Efficacy of extractions of Iranian native plants against main malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi in Iran for making appropriate formulation for disease control. H Vatandoost, F Nikpour, A A Hanafi-Bojd, M R Abai, M Khanavi, A Hajiiakhondi, A Raesi, J Nejati, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 134Vatandoost H, Nikpour F, Hanafi-Bojd AA, Abai MR, Khanavi M, Hajiiakhon- di A, Raesi A, Nejati J (2019) Efficacy of extractions of Iranian native plants against main malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi in Iran for making appropriate formulation for disease control. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 13(4): 344-352.

Plant essential oils for pest and disease management. M B Isman, Crop Prot. 198-10Isman MB (2004) Plant essential oils for pest and disease management. Crop Prot. 19(8-10): 603-608.

Chemical composition and larvicidal activity of essential oil of Cupressus arizonica E.L. Greene against malaria vector Anopheles stephensi Liston (Diptera: Culicidae). M M Sedaghat, A R Sanei-Dehkordi, M Khanavi, M R Abai, F Mohtarami, H Vatandoost, Pharmacognsy Res. 32Sedaghat MM, Sanei-Dehkordi AR, Kha- navi M, Abai MR, Mohtarami F, Vatan- doost H (2011) Chemical composition and larvicidal activity of essential oil of Cu- pressus arizonica E.L. Greene against ma- laria vector Anopheles stephensi Liston (Diptera: Culicidae). Pharmacognsy Res. 3(2): 135-139.

Larvicidal activity of essential oils of apiaceae plants against malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi. M M Sedaghat, A R Sanei-Dehkordi, M Abai, M Khanavi, F Mohtarami, Y S Abadi, F Rafi, H Vatandoost, Iran J Arthropod Borne Dis. 52Sedaghat MM, Sanei-Dehkordi AR, Abai M, Khanavi M, Mohtarami F, Abadi YS, Rafi F, Vatandoost H (2011) Larvicidal activity of essential oils of apiaceae plants against malaria vector, Anopheles ste- phensi. Iran J Arthropod Borne Dis. 5 (2): 51-59.

Identification of chemical constituents and larvicidal activity of Kelussia odoratissima Mozaffarian essential oil against two mosquito vectors Anopheles stephensi and Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae). H Vatandoost, A Sanei-Dehkordi, S Sadeghi, B Davari, F Karimian, M Abai, Exp Parasitol. 1324Vatandoost H, Sanei-Dehkordi A, Sadeghi S, Davari B, Karimian F, Abai M (2012) Identification of chemical constituents and larvicidal activity of Kelussia odoratis- sima Mozaffarian essential oil against two mosquito vectors Anopheles stephensi and Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae). Exp Parasitol. 132(4): 470-474.

Chemical composition and mosquito larvicidal properties of essential oil from leaves of an Iranian indigenous plant Zhumeria majdae. A Sanei-Dehkordi, M Soleimani-Ahmadi, K Akbarzadeh, Salim Abadi, Y Paksa, A Gorouhi, M A , J Essent Oil Bear Pl. 196Sanei-Dehkordi A, Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Akbarzadeh K, Salim Abadi Y, Paksa A, Gorouhi MA (2016) Chemical compo- sition and mosquito larvicidal properties of essential oil from leaves of an Iranian indigenous plant Zhumeria majdae. J Es- sent Oil Bear Pl. 19(6): 1454-1461.

Phytochemical properties and insecticidal potential of volatile oils from Tanacetum persicum and Achillea kellalensis against two medically important mosquitoes. M Soleimani-Ahmadi, A R Sanei-Dehkordi, H Turki, A Madani, Y S Abadi, A Paksa, J Essent Oil Bear Pl. 205Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Sanei-Dehkordi AR, Turki H, Madani A, Abadi YS, Paksa A (2017) Phytochemical properties and in- secticidal potential of volatile oils from Tanacetum persicum and Achillea kella- lensis against two medically important mosquitoes. J Essent Oil Bear Pl. 20(5): 1254-1265.

Phytochemical profile and mosquito larvicidal activity of the essential oil from aerial parts of Satureja bachtiarica Bunge against malaria and lymphatic filariasis vectors. M Soleimani-Ahmadi, S M Abtahi, A Madani, A Paksa, Y S Abadi, M A Gorouhi, J Essent Oil Bear Pl. 202Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Abtahi SM, Mada- ni A, Paksa A, Abadi YS, Gorouhi MA (2017) Phytochemical profile and mos- quito larvicidal activity of the essential oil from aerial parts of Satureja bacht- iarica Bunge against malaria and lym- phatic filariasis vectors. J Essent Oil Bear Pl. 20 (2): 328-336.

Larvicidial effects of essential oil and methanol extract of Achillea wilhelmsii C. Koch (Asteraceae) against Anopheles stephensi Liston (Diptera: Culicidae), a malaria vector. M Soleimani-Ahmadi, M A Gorouhi, Mohammadi Azani, S Salim-Abadi, Y Paksa, A Rashid, G , J Kerman Univ of Med Sci. 241Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Gorouhi MA, Mo- hammadi Azani S, Salim-Abadi Y, Paksa A, Rashid G (2017) Larvicidial effects of essential oil and methanol extract of Achillea wilhelmsii C. Koch (Asteraceae) against Anopheles stephensi Liston (Dip- tera: Culicidae), a malaria vector. J Ker- man Univ of Med Sci. 24(1): 58-67.

Wild chive oil is an extremely effective larvicide against malaria mosquito vector Anopheles stephensi. A Sanei-Dehkordi, M Soleimani-Ahmadi, Y Salim-Abadi, A Paksa, Asian Pac J Trop Med. 124Sanei-Dehkordi A, Soleimani-Ahmadi M, Salim-Abadi Y, Paksa A (2019) Wild chive oil is an extremely effective larvi- cide against malaria mosquito vector Anopheles stephensi. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 12(4): 170-174.

Wolbachia Endobacteria in natural populations of Culex pipiens of Iran and its phylogenetic congruence. M Karami, S H Moosa-Kazemi, M A Oshaghi, H Vatandoost, M M Sedaghat, R Rajabnia, M Hosseini, N Maleki-Ravasan, Y Yahyapour, Ferdosi-Shahandashti, J Arthropod Borne Dis. 403Karami M, Moosa-Kazemi SH, Oshaghi MA, Vatandoost H, Sedaghat MM, Ra- jabnia R, Hosseini M, Maleki-Ravasan N, Yahyapour Y, Ferdosi-Shahandashti E 40 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online: March 31, 2021 (2016) Wolbachia Endobacteria in nat- ural populations of Culex pipiens of Iran and its phylogenetic congruence. J Ar- thropod Borne Dis. 10(3): 347-363.

A Review: Wolbachia-based population replacement for mosquito control shares common points with genetically modified control Approaches. P S Yen, A B Failloux, Pathogens. 95404Yen PS, Failloux AB (2020) A Review: Wolbachia-based population replacement for mosquito control shares common points with genetically modified control Approaches. Pathogens. 9(5): 404.