# The use of positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance imaging in dementia: A literature review

CorpusID: 236235923
 
tags: #Medicine, #Materials_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f8a794afdac743569ba1b1378da6ddcb1ed34b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f8a794afdac743569ba1b1378da6ddcb1ed34b3)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The use of positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance imaging in dementia: A literature review


Nicole Lorking 
School of Medicine
University of Aberdeen
Scotland, UK

Alison D Murray 
School of Medicine
University of Aberdeen
Scotland, UK

John T O&apos;brien john.obrien@medschl.cam.ac.uk 
Department of Psychiatry
Department of Psychiatry
University of Cambridge
CambridgeUK

School of Clinical Medicine
University of Cambridge
Level E4 Cambridge Biomedical CampusBox 189CB2 0SPCambridgeUK

John T O&apos;brien 
The use of positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance imaging in dementia: A literature review
10.1002/gps.5586Received: 15 February 2021 -Revised: 22 April 2021 -Accepted: 17 May 2021R E V I E W A R T I C L E Correspondence
Objectives: Positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance imaging (PET/MRI) is an emerging hybrid imaging system in clinical nuclear medicine. Research demonstrates a comparative utility to current unimodal and hybrid methods, including PET-computed tomography (PET/CT), in several medical subspecialities such as neuroimaging. The aim of this review is to critically evaluate the literature from 2016 to 2021 using PET/MRI for the investigation of patients with mild cognitive impairment or dementia, and discuss the evidence base for widening its application into clinical practice. Methods: A comprehensive literature search using the PubMed database was conducted to retrieve studies using PET/MRI in relation to the topics of mild cognitive impairment, dementia, or Alzheimer's disease between January 2016 and January 2021. This search strategy enabled studies on all dementia types to be included in the analysis. Studies were required to have a minimum of 10 human subjects and incorporate simultaneous PET/MRI.Results:A total of 116 papers were retrieved, with 39 papers included in the final selection. These were broadly categorised into reviews (12), technical/methodological papers (11) and new data studies (16). For the current review, discussion focused on findings from the new data studies.Conclusions: PET/MRI offers additional insight into the underlying anatomical, metabolic and functional changes associated with dementia when compared with unimodal methods and PET/CT, particularly relating to brain regions including the hippocampus and default mode network. Furthermore, the improved diagnostic utility of PET/MRI, as reported by radiologists, offers improved classification of dementia patients, with important implications for clinical management.

recently in the literature, initially assessing feasibility. 5,6 Multiple considerations are needed when combining the two methods, such as the effect on electron flow in PET as a result of both static and gradient magnetic fields, as well as the disruption to the uniformity of the magnetic field resulting from PET components being placed in the MRI scanner bore. 7,8 Methods developed to overcome such technical issues are highlighted by the presence of three whole-body PET/MRI systems utilising different approaches created by GE Health Care, Philips Healthcare, and Siemens. 9 Despite the significant economic and technical barriers, the motivation to advance the use of PET/MRI within routine clinical practice stems from the superior structural information provided by MRI compared to CT, as well as the technical advantages of improved coregistration, and service benefits associated with reducing scanning time. Using radiotracers, PET relies on the production of gamma rays from positron decay to provide functional information based on blood flow, glucose or oxygen consumption, protein synthesis, or neuroreceptor uptake. 10 Whilst PET has high specificity, anatomical information varies according to tracer used. MRI utilises a magnetic field and radiofrequency pulse to influence the axial spin of hydrogen protons, abundant in water and fat, with the energy emitted during proton relaxation used to produce highly sensitive structural images. 11 Compared to PET/CT, the soft tissue contrast, multiplanar capability, and reduced radiation dose offered by PET/MRI makes it an increasingly attractive tool, particularly within neuroimaging.


## | PET/MRI in neuroimaging

Whilst used clinically in cardiology, 12 orthopaedics 13 and oncology, [14][15][16][17] the first human research PET/MRI images were of the brain. 6 PET imaging in the examination of neurotransmitter activity, neuroinflammation and haemodynamic compromise in ischaemic stroke is well-established. [18][19][20][21][22] Conversely, MRI is the gold standard in the assessment of brain tumours, 23 as well as in the detection of white matter (WM) damage in multiple sclerosis. [24][25][26] Combined, the advantages of PET/MRI in neurological investigation are increasingly documented, including the increased sensitivity of 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/MRI in differentiating posttherapy tumour recurrence from fibrosis, in addition to an improved accuracy in targeting radiotherapy volumes, and overall superior image quality and artefact reduction. [27][28][29] Additionally, studies investigating epileptic seizure focus have shown PET/MRI to be a valid alternative to PET/CT in paediatric populations, particularly due to the reduced radiation exposure. 30 


## | PET/MRI in people with dementia

Patients undergoing cognitive assessment often require routine MRI and PET imaging. MRI techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and functional MRI (fMRI) assist in examining functional connectivity networks implicated in dementia, such as the default mode network (DMN) composed of regions including the medial prefrontal cortex, angular gyrus and posterior cingulate cortex. 31,32 Conversely, PET has been used in differentiating clinical subtypes of dementia based on patterns of brain metabolism. 33 Recent amyloid PET radiotracers such as [ 11 C]-Pittsburgh compound-B (PIB) and fluorinated tracers which have now become licensed for clinical use provide additional information on β-amyloid plaque pathology associated with dementias such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), improving understanding of disease prevention and progression. 34 Integration of these methods to assist diagnosis and treatment of dementia is subsequently of great interest to clinicians, with the added benefit of single session multimodal image acquisition being an important consideration for patients who are often elderly or frail. 35 Currently, PET/MRI use in dementia is predominantly research-based,   with the Dementias Platform UK establishing an innovative dementia   imaging network linking PET/MRI scanners at seven UK universities, with an aim to support large scale research and clinical trials. 36 The purpose of this review is to critically examine the most recent literature published between 2016 and 2021 on the use of PET/MRI in dementia, evaluating how it compares to unimodal approaches, and discuss the evidence base for widening its application into clinical practice.


## | The current review


# | METHODS


## | Literature search

A literature search on the use of PET-MRI in dementia was performed in the PubMed database. The MeSH terms used to search the database were ("PET-MR" OR "PET-MRI") AND ("Dementia" OR "Mild cognitive impairment" OR "Alzheimer"). The search was undertaken on 15th January 2021 and included all papers published from 1st January 2016 until then. The search was designed to ensure that relevant papers on all dementias would be captured, as well as papers which used the term AD (rather than Alzheimer's dementia) and studies of those with mild cognitive impairment.


## | Study selection

The inclusion criteria used to screen for eligibility required papers to have been published in the last 5 years, in English, with a minimum of 10 human subjects. Additionally, only papers employing simultaneous PET/MRI imaging relating to the topic of dementia or mild cognitive impairment were selected. Papers comparing the utility of different PET radiotracers, using PET or MRI imaging separately, reports of animal studies, or papers relating to other neurological or neurodegenerative diseases were excluded from selection. Using these criteria, two researchers separately reviewed the titles and abstracts for relevance to agree a final list for inclusion.


# | RESULTS

The results of the literature search are illustrated in Figure 1. Of the 116 studies identified using the search, 39 papers were included in the final selection, and they can be broadly categorised into 1) review F I G U R E 1 Flow chart demonstrating selection process of retrieved articles from literature search 


## | Hippocampal studies

MRI evidence of medial temporal lobe atrophy, involving structures such as the hippocampus, entorhinal, and perirhinal cortices is welldocumented in dementia. 53,54 Hippocampal regions including the cornu ammonis, and dentate gyrus are often smaller in AD/MCI patients, 55 an important biomarker for predicting AD onset. 56 were grouped together to increase statistical power, which may influence the applicability of these findings to patients at varying disease stages. Despite this, the authors noted an improved spatial alignment between PET and MRI images due to intrinsic scanner coregistration, reducing issues such as misalignment and spatial intensity distortion associated with coregistering unimodal images. 60 Kang et al. 39 similarly used automated brain segmentation software and [ 11 C]PiB PET/MRI to demonstrate the predictive ability of hippocampal regional volume on the presence of Aβ, an important predictor of dementia development. 61 These findings support the association between early memory deficits and hippocampal atrophy, 55 and further demonstrate the relationship between these structural changes and developing Aβ pathology in MCI. Although MRI is widely used to assess structural abnormalities associated with neurodegeneration, 55  Researchers also reported a significant negative correlation between 18 F-FDG hypometabolism and decreased left cornu ammonis/dentate gyrus-superior medial frontal gyrus connectivity in AD patients, a finding corresponding to previous fMRI studies showing that increased activity in cornu ammonis/dentate gyrus is associated with reduced cognitive function, 63 and can be therapeutically targeted. 64 The relationship between hippocampal functional connectivity and metabolism demonstrated by PET/fMRI in this study improves on previous findings using unimodal techniques, and allows for a more comprehensive understanding of underlying neurodegenerative processes occurring at the subregional hippocampal level.


## | Functional connectivity studies

The default mode network is a tightly connected functional brain network important in memory function, studied previously using predominantly fMRI. 31 reported by both Ding et al. 50 and Scherr et al. 52 Moreover, withinsubject PET/fMRI correlations showed a 17% reduction in AD/MCI patients compared to controls. These findings support prior unimodal studies [65][66][67] and go further to provide evidence for the theory that glucose-mediated CBF regulation and glucose/oxygen coupling deteriorates with AD disease progression. 68 Limitations of this study include the finding that DMN hypometabolism in AD/MCI patients was more extensive than patterns of hypoconnectivity. 18 FDG metabolism reflects resting-state glucose mobilisation and is largely unaffected by physiological artefacts, 69 whereas the blood-oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal is a haemodynamic measure of oxygen consumption, and can be influenced by altered physiological conditions. 70 These differences could therefore bias the combined used of PET/fMRI metrics when interpreting underlying DMN changes in AD/MCI. However, Göttler et al. 47 found that whilst overlapping changes in BOLD signal, 18 FDG uptake, and CBF were found in the DMN of AD patients, reductions in BOLD signal were correlated with reduced CBF independently from 18 FDG-PET hypometabolism. This suggests that altered BOLD signals found in AD/MCI patients can reflect impairments in haemodynamic processes separately from changes in neuronal activity.

Regional reductions in CBF for AD patients was also found by Okazawa 41 and Riederer. 45 Altogether, the use of both fMRI BOLD signal and 18 FDG-PET data in these studies allows for a unique insight into simultaneous neurodegenerative processes underlying AD in a way that cannot be achieved using unimodal imaging methods.

PET/MRI has also been used to investigate WM tracts forming the basis of functional brain networks such as the DMN, as WM damage is consistently observed in AD postmortem studies. 71 There is also increasing evidence that neurodegeneration spreads via brain networks. 72 


## | Diagnostic utility

An important consideration for the clinical applicability of PET/MRI in dementia is the perception of clinical utility. Compared to other cerebral disorders (e.g., tumours, stroke), dementia and associated pathology is underemphasised in radiology teaching, with few radiological reports suggesting dementia diagnoses despite identification of characteristic atrophy patterns. 74 In practice, MRI and PET images are often interpreted by different subspecialist radiologists, with integration of these separate findings often left to the referring clinician. 75 Mukku et al. 43 examined the diagnostic utility of 18 FDG-PET/MRI in dementia diagnoses, finding that biomarkers of hypometabolism and structural atrophy showed 90.5% concordance with clinical diagnoses, and further assisted with diagnostic subtyping.

Although offering limited benefit in two patients, the authors note that PET/MRI reduced the need for sedation in distressed cognitively-impaired patients due to its relative simplicity and reduced scanning time. Tahmasian et al. 49 reported a similar benefit of multimodal imaging for differentiating dementia subtypes. Using 18 FDG-PET/MRI, they found classification accuracies to be between 77.5% and 97.5% for subtypes including bvFTD, SD, and PNFA, findings that were significantly superior to unimodal approaches.

Further support is provided by Schutz et al. 48 


# | CONCLUSION


Nuclear medicine today includes hybrid imaging modalities such as combined positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT), improving on previously used PET-only cameras. The increased diagnostic accuracy of PET/CT, in addition to the reduction in emission scan time resulting from both lutetium-based PET scintillators, and CT-based attenuation correction 1 resulted in an economically viable product for widespread clinical use. Prior to the commercialisation of PET/CT, the concept of combining PET with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was already being tested, 2-4 with the first human application of PET/MRI only appearing relatively


demonstrate reduced18 F-FDG-uptake in PET studies.58 Limited studies have investigated hippocampal structural and metabolic changes using PET/MRI. Carlson et al.40 employed 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI and automated hippocampal subfield-segmentation in AD/ MCI patients, finding significantly lower dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis volumes, and reduced dentate gyrus FDG-SUVr compared to controls. Whole hippocampal SUVr values were not significantly different between groups. These findings support previous studies using unimodal PET and MRI, implicating the early involvement of cornu ammonis and dentate gyrus in neurodegenerative processes. However, Carlson et al. further demonstrated that at a single timepoint, in the same individuals, hippocampal atrophy is more pronounced than hypometabolism, as structural differences between hippocampal regions, and between groups, were significantly more varied than SUVr values. Such findings are difficult to extrapolate from unimodal imaging studies, and may provide further insight into useful biomarkers of early disease onset. However, hippocampal volumes are shown to be influenced by early life factors, potentially affecting individual baseline values. 59 Additionally, AD/MCI patients


the additional screening for Aβ load using[ 11 C]    PiB has important clinical implications for PET/MRI, as earlier detection of such biomarkers improves opportunities for active intervention. However, this study also assessed the utility of a newly approved segmentation software, with more studies applying this specific package to PET/MRI needed to substantiate their findings.Additionally, risk factors such as cardiovascular disease, which have the potential to confound brain volume assessment, were notaccounted for in patient selection or statistical analyses. Despite these limitations, Kang et al. demonstrate the utility of PET/MRI in predicting early Aβ pathology using multimodal parameters in a single imaging session. A further study by Yan et al. 51 used PET/fMRI to investigate the relationship between hippocampal structure and metabolism, and resulting effects on functional connectivity in AD/MCI patients. Results showed a significant reduction in both 18 F-FDG-SUVr and functional connectivity in most hippocampal subregions in AD patients, and significantly reduced connectivity between the hippocampus and frontal regions including the superior medial frontal gyrus and precuneus, supporting previous fMRI and PET studies. 62


,32 Employing 18 F-FDG-PET/fMRI, Marchitelli et al. 46 investigated the relationship between glucose metabolism and neuronal activity in patients with AD/MCI, and examined withinsubject correlations between 18 FDG-PET and fMRI metrics measuring local connectivity and spatiotemporal patterns. Both 18 FDG-PET and fMRI metrics independently differentiated AD/MCI patients from healthy controls, with posterior DMN regions exhibiting the greatest changes. Similar findings using PET/MRI are LORKING ET AL.


review examined studies published in the last 5 years on the use of PET/MRI in dementia in order to identify the advantages and possible disadvantages of this hybrid method for clinical application. Overall, new data studies investigating the role of the hippocampus matching, and arguably surpassing current methods used in dementia care, although further studies providing direct comparisons with PET/CT are critical. In conclusion, whilst PET/MRI currently exists as a predominantly research-based tool in dementia, the current review demonstrates that not only does PET/MRI offer comparative feasibility to unimodal methods and PET/CT, it could improve diagnostic classification of dementia patients, with important implications for clinical management.


LORKING ET AL.T A B L E 1 Summary of all the new data studies (n = 16) included in literature review Tract based spatial statistics showed an overall increase in diffusion restriction from Aþ− to Ai, but a decrease in diffusion restriction from Aþi to Aþ+. Overall, found changes in opposing directionality between Aþ levels and diffusion metrics, most notable in the genu of the corpus callosum and fornix. Suggests that different mechanisms affect WM microstructure during different stages of AD PLoS ONE To assess the clinical value of hybrid PET/MRI in memory clinic patients, and compare the diagnostic yield of an abbreviated hybrid PET/MRI No CBF reductions were found between the MCI and control groups. A reduction in FDG uptake and grey matter volume was found in numerous brain areas when comparing AD and MCI patients, AD and controls, and MCI and controls. Overall pulsed ASL PET/MRI showed overlapping regional and quantitative measures of hypoperfusion and hypometabolism DMN, default mode network; FDG/gICA-DR, group independent component analysis and dual regression; MPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; NDH, network degeneration hypothesis; PNFA, progressive non-fluent aphasia; QSM, quantitative susceptibility mapping; ReHo, regional homogeneity; SD, semantic dementia; SUVR, standardised uptake value; WM, white matter.Full text unavailable, findings presented in abstract used for current review.presented in the abstract being used to inform the current review. A summary of the aims and main findings of the new data papers is shown inTable 1.Author 
Year Journal 

Aims 

Patients/control 

subjects 

PET/MRI 

Main findings 

a 

Franceschi 

et al. 37 
2021 American Journal of 

Roentgenology 
Evaluate the prevalence of crossed 
cerebellar diaschisis (CCD) in 
patients undergoing 18 

F-FDG 

PET/MRI for suspected 
neurodegenerative disease 

75 patients 

Integrated 3-T PET/MRI 
system using 18 

F-

FDG radiotracer 
Results showed that 7.5% of patients had decreased FDG 
activity in cerebellar hemispheres contralateral to cortical 
hypometabolism, consistent with CDD. Six of these 

patients showed characteristic imaging findings of 
frontotemporal dementia, one had Alzheimer's dementia, 

and three showed corticobasal degeneration. Investigation 
of cerebellar metabolism could assist evaluation of 
patients with cognitive impairment 

Tiepolt 
et al. 38 
2020 European Journal of 

Radiology 
Examine whether Aβ-positive (AD) 
and Aβ-negative (non-AD) 
patients differ in their regional 
magnetic susceptibility, and if 

there is correlation with Aβ-load 
or mini mental state 
examination scores 

11 healthy controls, 16 
AD, 10 non-AD 
patients 

Simultaneous PET/MR 
scanner (Biograph 
mMR; Siemens 
Healthineers) using 

[ 11 

C]PiB 
Compared with controls, AD patients showed higher QSM 
values in the putamen (0.049 

± 0.033 vs. 0.002 

± 0.031; 

p 
= 0.006). Non-AD patients showed lower QSM values in 
the caudate nucleus (0.003 

± 0.027 vs. 0.051 

± 0.039; 

p 
= 0.006). No significant correlation was found between 
MMSE scores and QSM values, (ρ 

= −0.340, p 

= 0.053, 

although Aβ-load and putaminal QSM values were 
significantly correlated (ρ 

= −0.574, p 
= 0.020). QSM MRI 

enables detection of iron pathologies associated with 
neurodegeneration, with implications for use as a 

diagnostic biomarker 

Kang et al. 39 
2020 Neuropsychiatric Disease 
and Treatment 
Assess the predictive ability of 
regional volume data provided 

by automated brain 
segmentation software for 

cerebral amyloid positivity in 
amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) 

58 patients with Aβ 
deposition and 72 
without 

11 

C-PiB, 3.0T Biograph 
mMR (PET-MR) 
scanner (Siemens) 
Hippocampal volume percentage of intracranial volume, 
normative percentiles of hippocampal volume and grey 

matter volume were significantly associated with Aβ 
positivity (all p 
< 0.001). Hippocampal volumes provided 

by automated segmentation software could be useful in 
clinical practice for screening Aβ positivity in patients with 
MCI 

Carlson 
et al. 40 
2020 Scientific Reports 

Investigate alterations in volume 

and metabolism using 
hippocampal subfield analysis 

and simultaneous PET/MRI on 
patients with MCI, AD, and 
healthy subjects 
29 AD/MCI, 17 controls FDG-PET scan on a 3T 

PET-MR (SIGNA; GE 
Healthcare) 
MCI and AD combined group showed significantly lower left 
and right whole hippocampal volumes compared to 
controls (p 
= 0.002), more specifically subfield volumes of 

the dentate gyrus (DG) and cornu ammonis were 
significantly smaller than controls (p 

= 0.003; p 

= 0.001, 

respectively). FDG SUVr values for the whole 
hippocampus were not significantly different between 

MCI/AD and controls (p 
= 0.166), although a significantly 

lower SUVr was found in DG for combined MCI/AD 
compared to controls (p 
= 0.009).Subfield analysis of 

hippocampus demonstrates structural and metabolic 

changes in MCI/AD 

1504 -

LORKING ET AL. 

T A B L E 1 (Continued) 

Author 
Year Journal 

Aims 

Patients/control 

subjects 

PET/MRI 

Main findings 

Okazawa 

et al. 41 
2020 European Journal of 
Nuclear Medicine and 
Molecular Imaging 
Assessing PET/MRI data 
simultaneously obtained from 

patients with early stage of 
Alzheimer's disease to observe 

changes in brain function, 
pathophysiology and 

morphology 

58 patients with early 
dementia or MCI, 16 
controls 

[ 11 
C]PiB PET/MRI (Signa 
PET/MR; GE 
Healthcare) 

[ 11 
C]PiB SUVr values for all regions in eAD were significantly 
greater than controls (p 
≤ 0.00001). Average cortical SUVr 

values were also significantly different between groups, 
particularly in the posterior cingulate cortex (AD vs. CTL: 

2.1 
± 0.4 vs. 1.1 
± 0.2 for both sides, p 

< 0.00001). A 

significant correlation was found between visual scores for 

tracer deposition and MMSE scores (r 

= 0.71, p 
< 0.0005), 

but not between SUVr and MMSE (r 

= 0.30, p 

> 0.05). 

Regional CBF values for AD group were significantly lower 

in the bilateral parietal and right temporal lobes (p 

< 0.05). 

MRI-CBF showed greater regional values compared to 
PET-CBF, although significant differences in the posterior 
cingulate cortex were only demonstrated by MRI-CBF 
comparisons. [ 11 
C]PiB-PET/MRI provides multiple 

parameters to investigate pathological changes in AD 

Dong et al. 42 
2020 Neurobiology of Ageing 
To use DKI metrics and AWF to 
identify WM tracts affected by 

AD pathology, and to assess the 
relationship between Aβ 
deposition and WM changes in 
MCI/AD and healthy controls 

21 mild cognitive 
impairment or early 

AD patients, 23 
healthy controls 
3-T integrated PET-MRI 
system (Siemens 
Biograph mMR, 
VB20) using 18 

F-

Florbetapir 
radiotracer 
Out of 44 subjects, 13 were classified as Aþ−, 22 as Aþi, and 9 
as Aþ+. No significant differences were found in WM 
lesion load between groups (p 

= 0.84 for Abi/ 

Ab 
+ comparison, p 
= 0.80 for Aþ−/Aþi comparison, 

p 
= 0.56 for Aþ−/Aþ+ comparison). Mukku 
et al. 43 
2019 Asian Journal of 

Psychiatry 

Examine utility of 18 

F-FDG-PET/ 

MRI brain as an investigational 
tool in diagnosis and subtyping 
of dementia 

5 MCI, 16 dementia 

Siemens Biograph 
Simultaneous PET/ 

MRI scanner 
(Erlangen, Germany) 

with 18 

F-FDG 
radiotracer 
Clinical diagnoses of MCI and dementia were established 
using mental state examination and associated structural 
MRI brain features. Based on patterns of hypometabolism, 
the dementia group had 7 patients with a pattern of 
bvFTD, 4 with AD, 1 with SD, 1 with posterior cortical 
atrophy, mixed AD 
+ DLBD in 1, and no specific pattern in 

2 patients. In the MCI group, patterns indicative of AD, 
semantic FTD, and mixed AD 
+ FTD were found, with 2 

patients showing patterns of bvFTD. 18 

F-FDG-PET/MRI 

can be used as a noninvasive emerging tool to help in 
dementia diagnosis and subtyping in India 

(Continues) 

LORKING ET AL. 

-1505 

T A B L E 1 (Continued) 

Author 
Year Journal 

Aims 

Patients/control 

subjects 

PET/MRI 

Main findings 

Kaltoft 
et al. 44 
2019 protocol with that of separate 

PET and standard CT 

78 patients with 
suspected dementia 
Siemens Biograph mMR 
3T PET/MRI system 
(Siemens Healthcare) 
MRI identified significantly more infarcts when compared to 
CT (p 
< 0.001). From 78 patients, 17% were classified 
partially different on PET/MRI vs. PET/CT. Additional 
findings on MRI included white matter lesions (n 

= 3) and 

atrophy (n 
= 2). There was also a significant increase in 

reader diagnostic confidence from PET/CT to PET/MRI 

(p 
≤ 0.001). Total change of interpretation of PET/MRI 
compared to PET/CT influenced patient diagnosis and 
management in 22% patients (see Appendix 1) 

Riederer 
et al. 45 
2018 Radiology 

Compare regional and quantitative 
measures of integrated PET/MRI 
hypoperfusion and 
hypometabolism in AD/MCI 
20 patients with MCI, 11 
healthy controls, 45 
consecutive patients 

with AD 

18 F 
-FDG PET/MRI 
A reduction in CBF between patients with AD and MCI was 
found in multiple regions including the superior and 
inferior parietal cortex (p 

= 0.023, p 
= 0.019, respectively). 

Marchitelli 

et al. 46 
2018 Neuroimage 

Investigate the relationships 
between glucose consumption 

and intrinsic functional activity 
in healthy individuals and 
patients with mild AD 

17 AD, 6 MCI, 23 HC 

Biograph mMR MR-PET 
integrated system 
(Siemens Healthcare) 
Results showed that FDG/gICA-DR correlations, used to 
identify common spatiotemporal patterns, allowed 
identification of MCI/AD patients at around 89%, with 

highest overlap in the DMN. In addition, FDG/ReHo, a 
measure of local functional connectivity, showed an 18.1% 
reduction in MCI/AD patients. Several clusters of brain 

areas showing reduced glucose consumption and 
functional connectivity were found, with the precuneus 

being consistently involved across all variables. Overall a 
predominant posterior cortical involvement typical of 

MCI/AD was found when integrating FDG-PET and fMRI 

Göttler 
et al. 47 
2018 Journal of Cerebral Blood 
Flow and Metabolism 
Investigate the hypothesis that 
impairments in vascular-
haemodynamic processes 

underlie impairments in BOLD-

FC for the pDMN in AD, 
independently from aberrant 

neuronal activity 
32 patients, 22 controls Integrated 3T Siemens 

mMR Biograph 
scanner (Siemens 
Healthcare) 
Patients had lower BOLD-FC in the precuneus/posterior 
cingulate cortex and inferior parietal lobe of the DMN 

(p 
< 0.05). A reduction in CBF and FDG uptake was also 
found in the medial and lateral parietal areas of the DMN 
for patients. No correlation was found between CBF and 
FDG uptake in the DMN (patients: r 

= 0.132, p 

= 0.236; 

controls: r 
= 0.121, p 
= 0.296), indicating that they are 

separate variables. In addition, BOLD-FC was positively 
associated with mean CBF independently of glucose 
metabolism in the DMN of patients (p 

= 0.050), suggesting 

that an impairment in vascular haemodynamic processes 
contribute to impaired BOLD-FC in AD, separately to 
reduced neuronal activity 

1506 -

LORKING ET AL. 

T A B L E 1 (Continued) 

Author 
Year Journal 

Aims 

Patients/control 

subjects 

PET/MRI 

Main findings 

Schütz 
et al. 48 
2016 European Journal of 
Nuclear Medicine and 
Molecular Imaging 
Investigate for the feasibility of 
combined amyloid-beta PET/ 

MRI to provide data on amyloid 
beta load and medial temporal 
lobe atrophy, biomarkers of AD, 
in a single imaging session 

51 patients with MCI, 28 
patients with possible 
ADD, 16 patients 
with probable ADD 
and 5 patients with 
the clinical diagnosis 
of frontotemporal 
lobe degeneration 
(FTLD) 

3-Tesla Biograph mMR 
(Siemens Healthcare). 

In 37 cases, [ 11 

C] 

Pittsburgh compound 

B ([ 11 
C]PIB) was 
employed as amyloid 

PET tracer, and in 63 
cases, [ 18 

F] 
florbetaben 
For all cases, SUVr were significantly higher in those visually 
assessed as amyloid beta positive compared to negative 

(1.61 
± 0.32 vs. 1.07 
± 0.12). 57 of the 97 subjects (59%) 

were evaluated as showing pathological medial temporal 
lobe atrophy; 26 (53%) MCI subjects, 19 (70%) patients 
with possible ADD, 11 (69%) patients with probable ADD, 
and 1 patient with FTLD. The influence of PET/MRI on the 
diagnosis of patients was noted in 82% of referrers. PET/ 

MRI is a feasible method for providing information on 
biomarkers used in clinical diagnoses of MCI, AD and ADD 

Tahmasian 

et al. 49 
2016 Journal of Nuclear 

Medicine 
Examine whether multimodal 
neuroimaging guided by the 

NDH can separate individual 
patients with different 
neurodegenerative syndromes 

40 patients with 
dementia due to 
different 
neurodegenerative 

syndromes (20 AD, 

11 bvFTD, 4 SD, 5 
PNFA 
Hybrid PET/MR scanner 
with 18 

F-FDG 
Results showed that classification accuracies based on DC 
(degree centrality), MET (glucose metabolism as) VBM 
(voxel-based morphometry) were 77.5% for AD, 82.5% for 

bvFTD, 97.5% for SD, and 87.5% for PNFA. Voxel wise 
multimodal classification results were also found to be 
superior to unimodal approaches in separating individual 
patients 

Ding et al. 50 
2020 Proceedings of the Annual 

International 
Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology 
Society 
Explore the relevance between 
voxel-based glucose metabolism 

and functional connectivity in 
Chinese CD people. Explore 
biomarkers of CD subjects by 
analysing the relevance between 

PET and fMRI 

21 healthy control 
subjects and 15 CD 

(AD 
+ MCI) 

3.0 T TOF PET/MR 
(SIGNA PET/MR; GE 
Healthcare) 
Results showed SUVRs in CD group were significantly lower 
than HC group in the DMN (p 

< 0.01). Functional 

connectivity indexes also showed a downward trend, but 

no significant differences were found between the two 
groups. Brain regions differing in glucose metabolism and 
functional connectivity between CD and controls were 

mainly in the inferior and medial temporal lobes, angular 
cortex and inferior parietal lobe. DMN can be considered 

as an important biomarker of CD subjects in the relevance 
analysis between glucose metabolism and intrinsic 
functional connectivity 

Yan et al. 51 
2020 European Journal of 
Nuclear Medicine and 
Molecular Imaging 

Investigate hippocampal 
neurodegeneration and its 

associated functions in MCI and 

AD patients using simultaneous 
PET/MRI 

38 MCI, 22 AD 
participants, 42 

controls 

PET/MRI (Signa PET/ 
MRI; GE Healthcare) 
using 18 

F-FDG 

radiotracer 
Patient groups had significantly decreased 18 

F-FDG PET 

metabolism compared to controls, in regions including the 

left and right hippocampus, bilateral CA1 (cornu 
ammonis), bilateral CA2/3 DG (dentate gyrus), and 
bilateral subiculum (p 
≤ 0.001). Regarding functional 

connectivity, AD patients showed significantly reduced 
connectivity compared to MCI patients in numerous 
hippocampal regions, with similar findings between AD 

patients and controls. A linear correlation was found 
between the left CA2/3DG volume and FDG SUVR in AD 
patients (p 
< 0.001). No other correlations were found 

between functional connectivity and metabolism in other 
hippocampal subregions (p 

> 0.05) 

(Continues) 

LORKING ET AL. 

-1507 

T A B L E 1 (Continued) 

Author 
Year Journal 

Aims 

Patients/control 

subjects 

PET/MRI 

Main findings 

Scherr 
et al. 52 
2018 Human Brain Mapping 

Applied metabolic connectivity 
mapping to the DMN to examine 
effective connectivity (EC) in 
patients with early AD 

35 patients with early 
AD, including 
patients with mild 
cognitive impairment 

(MCI; n 
= 15) or mild 
dementia (n 
= 20) 

both due to AD, 18 
matched controls 

Integrated Siemens 
Biograph mMR 
scanner (Siemens) 
For the combined group of patients with AD-MCI and AD-
dementia, there was a significant decrease of FDG activity 

in all parietal regions and in the hippocampus (p 

< 0.05), 

but not in the prefrontal cortex (p 

= 0.09). Regarding 

functional connectivity, pathways between the medial 
prefrontal and all parietal regions were reduced in 
patients with early AD (p 
< 0.05). Additional reductions in 

connectivity were found between parietal regions in 

patients with AD-dementia. Reduced patterns of EC were 
found among DMN regions in patients with early AD, 
including MPFC into hippocampus (p 

= 9 � 

10 −4 
), MPFC 

and left parietal cortex (p 
= 0.003), and left to right 

parietal cortex (p 

= 3 � 

10 −4 
). Specific disruptions in EC 

were identified in patients with AD 

Abbreviations: 18 
F-FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose; [ 11 
C]PiB, Pittsburgh compound B; Aβ, amyloid-beta; AD, Alzheimer's disease; ADD: Alzheimer's disease dementia; ASL, arterial spin labelling; AWF, axonal 

water fraction; BOLD-FC, blood oxygen level dependent-functional connectivity; bvFTD, behavioural variant fronto-temporal dementia; CBF, cerebral blood flow; CD, cognitive dysfunction; DKI, diffusion 
kurtosis imaging; a 

1508 -

LORKING ET AL. 

articles, 2) technical or methodological papers and 3) new data pa-

pers on patients with MCI or dementia. Full text analysis was not 

possible for one paper due to restricted access, with the findings 

4 | DISCUSSION 

A third of papers retrieved were review articles, highlighting an 

increased awareness of PET/MRI and its potential applications for 

dementia. Technical papers focused predominantly on attenuation 

correction, with results largely demonstrating the comparative effi-

cacy of MRI-based techniques with CT-AC. Whilst these papers 

address important challenges faced when commercialising PET/MRI, 

for the purposes of this review, discussion will focus on the new data 

studies retrieved to assess the utility of PET/MRI as a clinical tool in 

dementia. 




DTI, an MRI method based on the measurement of water molecule diffusion in different tissues, has demonstrated WM changes in AD patients.73 Dong et al. 42  used amyloid tracer18 F-Florbetapir and PET/DTI-MRI to examine the relationship between WM changes and Aβ deposition in AD/MCI patients, demonstrating WM changes in tracts such as the anterior corona radiata and genu of the corpus callosum. The benefits of integrating MRI techniques with PET amyloid tracers is further highlighted by Tiepolt 38 who combined [ 11 C]PiB-PET with quantitative susceptibility mapping, an MRI technique measuring the magnetic susceptibility of brain regions as a consequence of iron deposition. Findings suggested a relationship between Aβ load and putaminal iron deposition in AD patients. Although this requires further investigation, additional discoveries of such biomarkers is possible if PET/MRI were more widely available. Moving beyond the cerebrum, Franceschi et al. 37 used 18 FDG-PET/MRI to examine neurodegeneration within the corticopontinecerebellar pathway. Results showed decreased 18 FDG activity in the contralateral cerebellar hemisphere to supratentorial hypometabolism, providing support for the presence of crossed cerebellar diaschisis in dementia, a common finding in neurological disease, and further demonstrated this to be more common in FTD compared to other dementias. Although further research is needed to clarify the relationship between PET and MRI metrics when examining functional connectivity in dementia, the overall benefit shown by these studies of simultaneous image acquisition at a single point in time and physiological state is important for advancing understanding of disease stage and pathology, with subsequent implications for earlier clinical intervention.


who employed both [ 11 C]PIB and 18 F-florbetaben amyloid PET tracers, finding that PET/MRI assisted diagnostic categorisation in 67% of patients independent of MTL atrophy and amyloid load biomarkers. Furthermore, 82% of referrers noted the significant influence PET/MRI had on final diagnoses. This positive reception was also reported by Kaltoft et al.44 who found that radiologist confidence ratings for the diagnostic classification of memory clinic patients were significantly greater for PET/MRI images compared to PET/CT. Additionally, PET/ MRI identified significantly more vascular pathologies, which altered diagnoses in 17% of patients. Furthermore, reclassification of patients using PET/MRI had a major clinical impact on management in 22% of patients. This is the only study directly comparing the two hybrid techniques within this review, a comparison that is desperately needed to better assess the extent to which PET/MRI can aid clinical practice.
-LORKING ET AL.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSSUPPORTING INFORMATIONAdditional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article. -1513
Positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance imaging: technical review. R F Muzic, F P Difilippo, Semin Roentgenol. 493Muzic RF, DiFilippo FP. Positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance imaging: technical review. Semin Roentgenol. 2014;49(3): 242-254.

PET and NMR dual acquisition (PANDA): applications to isolated, perfused rat hearts. P B Garlick, P K Marsden, A C Cave, NMR Biomed. 10Garlick PB, Marsden PK, Cave AC, et al. PET and NMR dual acqui- sition (PANDA): applications to isolated, perfused rat hearts. NMR Biomed. 1997;10:138-142.

Simultaneous acquisition of PET images and NMR spectra in a high field magnet. P K Marsden, Y Shao, S R Cherry, J Nucl Med. 38161Marsden PK, Shao Y, Cherry SR, et al. Simultaneous acquisition of PET images and NMR spectra in a high field magnet. J Nucl Med. 1997;38:161.

Simultaneous PET and MR imaging. Y Shao, S R Cherry, K Farahani, Phys Med Biol. 42Shao Y, Cherry SR, Farahani K, et al. Simultaneous PET and MR imaging. Phys Med Biol. 1997;42:1965-1970.

Feasibility of simultaneous PET/MR imaging in the head and upper neck area. A Boss, L Stegger, S Bisdas, Eur Radiol. 21Boss A, Stegger L, Bisdas S, et al. Feasibility of simultaneous PET/MR imaging in the head and upper neck area. Eur Radiol. 2011;21: 1439-1446.

Simultaneous MR/PET imaging of the human brain: feasibility study. H P Schlemmer, B J Pichler, M Schmand, Radiology. 248Schlemmer HP, Pichler BJ, Schmand M, et al. Simultaneous MR/PET imaging of the human brain: feasibility study. Radiology. 2008;248: 1028-1035.

Sensitivity and power deposition in a high-field imaging experiment. D I Hoult, D Phil, J Magn Reson Imaging. 12Hoult DI, Phil D. Sensitivity and power deposition in a high-field imaging experiment. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2000;12:46-67.

PET/MRI: a frontier in era of complementary hybrid imaging. S Musafargani, K K Ghosh, S Mishra, P Mahalakshmi, P Padmanabhan, B Gulyás, Eur J Hybrid Imaging. 2112Musafargani S, Ghosh KK, Mishra S, Mahalakshmi P, Padmanabhan P, Gulyás B. PET/MRI: a frontier in era of complementary hybrid imaging. Eur J Hybrid Imaging. 2018;2(1):12.

Competitive advantage of PET/ MRI. C Haigh, J Dunkerley, M Rogers, Eur J Radiol. 831Haigh C, Dunkerley J, Rogers M. Competitive advantage of PET/ MRI. Eur J Radiol. 2014;83(1):66-89.

Positron emission tomography. J Hubert, J L Descotes, P Olivier, Prog Urol. 135Hubert J, Descotes JL, Olivier P. Positron emission tomography. Prog Urol, 2003;13(5):807-812.

Magnetic resonance imaging. Z P Liang, E M Haacke, Biomedical Imaging V-Proceedings of the 5th IEEE EMBS International Summer School on Biomedical Imaging. 324Liang ZP, Haacke EM. Magnetic resonance imaging. Biomedical Im- aging V-Proceedings of the 5th IEEE EMBS International Summer School on Biomedical Imaging, SSBI. 2002. p. 324.

Hybrid PET/MR imaging of the heart: potential, initial experiences, and future prospects. C Rischpler, S G Nekolla, I Dregely, J Nucl Med. 54Rischpler C, Nekolla SG, Dregely I, et al. Hybrid PET/MR imaging of the heart: potential, initial experiences, and future prospects. J Nucl Med. 2013;54:402-415.

Evaluation of musculoskeletal disorders with PET, PET/CT, and PET/MRI. K Chen, J Blebera, J D Laredo, PET Clin. 3Chen K, Blebera J, Laredo JD, et al. Evaluation of musculoskeletal disorders with PET, PET/CT, and PET/MRI. PET Clin. 2008;3: 451-465.

Correlation of simultaneously acquired diffusion-weighted imaging and 2-deoxy-[ 18 F]fluoro-2-Dglucose positron emission tomography of pulmonary lesions in a dedicated whole-body magnetic resonance/positron emission tomography system. H Schmidt, C Brendle, C Schrami, Invest Radiol. 48Schmidt H, Brendle C, Schrami C, et al. Correlation of simultaneously acquired diffusion-weighted imaging and 2-deoxy-[ 18 F]fluoro-2-D- glucose positron emission tomography of pulmonary lesions in a dedicated whole-body magnetic resonance/positron emission to- mography system. Invest Radiol. 2013;48:247-255.

. S A Shamim, D A Torigian, R Kumar, Pet, Pet Pet/Ct, Mri, assessment of breast cancer. PET Clin. 3Shamim SA, Torigian DA, Kumar R. PET, PET/CT, and PET/MRI assessment of breast cancer. PET Clin. 2008; 3:381-393.

Simultaneous 18 F choline positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance imaging of the prostate: initial results. A Wetter, C Lipponer, F Nensa, Invest Radiol. 48Wetter A, Lipponer C, Nensa F, et al. Simultaneous 18 F choline positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance imaging of the prostate: initial results. Invest Radiol. 2013;48:256-262.

Diffusion-weighted MRI of lymphoma: prognostic utility and implications for PET/MRI?. S Punwani, S A Taylor, Z Z Saad, Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 40Punwani S, Taylor SA, Saad ZZ, et al. Diffusion-weighted MRI of lymphoma: prognostic utility and implications for PET/MRI? Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2013;40:373-385.

18 F]FDOPA uptake in the raphe nuclei complex reflects serotonin transporter availability. A combined [ 18 F]FDOPA and [ 11 C]DASB PET study in Parkinson's disease. N Pavese, B S Simpson, V Metta, Neuroimage. 59Pavese N, Simpson BS, Metta V, et al. [ 18 F]FDOPA uptake in the raphe nuclei complex reflects serotonin transporter availability. A combined [ 18 F]FDOPA and [ 11 C]DASB PET study in Parkinson's disease. Neuroimage. 2012;59:1080-1084.

Fatigue in Parkinson's disease is linked to striatal and limbic serotonergic dysfunction. N Pavese, V Metta, S K Bose, Brain. 133Pavese N, Metta V, Bose SK, et al. Fatigue in Parkinson's disease is linked to striatal and limbic serotonergic dysfunction. Brain, 2010;133:3434-3443.

Molecular imaging as a guide for the treatment of central nervous system disorders. E Kim, O D Howes, S Kapur, Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 15Kim E, Howes OD, Kapur S. Molecular imaging as a guide for the treatment of central nervous system disorders. Dialogues Clin Neu- rosci. 2013;15:315-328.

Recent imaging advances in neurology. L Rocchi, F Niccolini, M Politis, J Neurol. 262Rocchi L, Niccolini F, Politis M, et al. Recent imaging advances in neurology. J Neurol. 2015;262:2182-2194.

Ischemic penumbra: evidence from functional imaging in man. W D Heiss, J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 20Heiss WD. Ischemic penumbra: evidence from functional imaging in man. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2000;20:1276-1293.

Magnetic resonance as a cancer imaging biomarker. A G Sorensen, J Clin Oncol. 24Sorensen AG. Magnetic resonance as a cancer imaging biomarker. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3274-3281.

Evaluation of the degradation of the selected projectile, commissural and association white matter tracts within normal appearing white matter in patients with multiple sclerosis using diffusion tensor MR imaging-a preliminary study. A Banaszek, J Bladowska, A Pokryszko-Dragan, Pol J Radiol. 80Banaszek A, Bladowska J, Pokryszko-Dragan A, et al. Evaluation of the degradation of the selected projectile, commissural and associ- ation white matter tracts within normal appearing white matter in patients with multiple sclerosis using diffusion tensor MR imaging-a preliminary study. Pol J Radiol, 2015;80:457-463.

Changes and variability of proton density and T1 relaxation times in early multiple sclerosis: MRI markers of neuronal damage in the cerebral cortex. R M Gracien, S C Reitz, S M Hof, Eur Radiol. 268Gracien RM, Reitz SC, Hof SM, et al. Changes and variability of proton density and T1 relaxation times in early multiple sclerosis: MRI markers of neuronal damage in the cerebral cortex. Eur Radiol, 2015;26(8):2578-2586.

Multiple sclerosis: improved identification of disease-relevant changes in gray and white matter by using susceptibility-based MR imaging. D A Rudko, I Solovey, J S Gati, Radiology. 272Rudko DA, Solovey I, Gati JS, et al. Multiple sclerosis: improved identification of disease-relevant changes in gray and white matter by using susceptibility-based MR imaging. Radiology. 2014;272: 851-864.

Role of FDG-PET/MRI, FDG-PET/ CT, and dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion MRI in differentiating radiation necrosis from tumor recurrence in glioblastomas. M Hojjati, C Badve, V Garg, J Neuroimaging. 281Hojjati M, Badve C, Garg V, et al. Role of FDG-PET/MRI, FDG-PET/ CT, and dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion MRI in differen- tiating radiation necrosis from tumor recurrence in glioblastomas. J Neuroimaging. 2018;28(1):118-125.

Comparison of 68 Ga-DOTATOC-PET/CT and PET/MRI hybrid systems in patients LORKING ET AL. A Afshar-Oromieh, M B Wolf, C Kratochwil, 1511Afshar-Oromieh A, Wolf MB, Kratochwil C, et al. Comparison of 68 Ga-DOTATOC-PET/CT and PET/MRI hybrid systems in patients LORKING ET AL. -1511

with cranial meningioma: initial results. Neuro Oncol. 172with cranial meningioma: initial results. Neuro Oncol. 2015;17(2): 312-319.

Simultaneous 68 Ga-DOTATOC-PET/MRI for IMRT treatment planning for meningioma: first experience. D Thorwarth, G Henke, A C Müller, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 811Thorwarth D, Henke G, Müller AC, et al. Simultaneous 68 Ga- DOTATOC-PET/MRI for IMRT treatment planning for meningioma: first experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(1):277-283.

Comparison of the diagnostic accuracy of PET/MRI to PET/CT-acquired FDG brain exams for seizure focus detection: a prospective study. M J Paldino, Yang E Jones, J Y , Pediatr Radiol. 47Paldino MJ, Yang E, Jones JY, et al. Comparison of the diagnostic accuracy of PET/MRI to PET/CT-acquired FDG brain exams for seizure focus detection: a prospective study. Pediatr Radiol. 2017;47:1500-1507.

The brain's default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. R L Buckner, J R Andrews-Hanna, D L Schacter, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1124Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL. The brain's default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1124:1-38

Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. M D Greicius, G Srivastava, A L Reiss, V Menon, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 101Greicius MD, Srivastava G, Reiss AL, Menon V. Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:4637-4642.

Brain FDG PET and the diagnosis of dementia. Vkn Shivamurthy, A K Tahari, C Marcus, R M Subramaniam, Am J Roentgenol. 204Shivamurthy VKN, Tahari AK, Marcus C, Subramaniam RM. Brain FDG PET and the diagnosis of dementia. Am J Roentgenol. 2015;204: W76-W85.

The who, when, why, and how of PET amyloid imaging in management of Alzheimer's disease-review of literature and interesting images. S Suppiah, M A Didier, S Vinjamuri, Diagnostics. 9265Suppiah S, Didier MA, Vinjamuri, S. The who, when, why, and how of PET amyloid imaging in management of Alzheimer's disease-review of literature and interesting images. Diagnostics, 2019;9(2):65.

PET/MRI for neurological applications. C Catana, A Drzezga, W Heiss, B Rosen, J Nucl Med. 5312Catana C, Drzezga A, Heiss W, Rosen B. PET/MRI for neurological applications. J Nucl Med. 2012; 53(12):1916-1925.

. Dementias Platform, U K , Dementias Platform UK. https://www.dementiasplatform.uk/for- researchers/dementia-research-resources/dementia-research- resources). Accessed January 19, 2021.

FDG PET/MRI for visual detection of crossed cerebellar diaschisis in patients with dementia. A M Franceschi, M A Clifton, K Naser-Tavakolian, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2161Franceschi AM, Clifton MA, Naser-Tavakolian K, et al. FDG PET/MRI for visual detection of crossed cerebellar diaschisis in patients with dementia. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2021;216(1):165-171.

Quantitative susceptibility mapping in β-amyloid PET-stratified patients with dementia and healthy controls-a hybrid PET/MRI study. S Tiepolt, M Rullmann, T H Jochimsen, Eur J Radiol. 131109243Tiepolt, S, Rullmann, M, Jochimsen, TH, et al. Quantitative suscep- tibility mapping in β-amyloid PET-stratified patients with dementia and healthy controls-a hybrid PET/MRI study. Eur J Radiol. 2020;131:109243.

Prediction of amyloid positivity in mild cognitive impairment using fully automated brain segmentation software. K M Kang, C H Sohn, M S Byun, Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 16Kang KM, Sohn CH, Byun MS, et al. Prediction of amyloid positivity in mild cognitive impairment using fully automated brain segmen- tation software. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2020;16:1745-1754.

Simultaneous FDG-PET/ MRI detects hippocampal subfield metabolic differences in AD. M L Carlson, P S Digiacomo, A P Fan, /MCI. Sci Rep. 10112064Carlson ML, DiGiacomo PS, Fan AP, et al. Simultaneous FDG-PET/ MRI detects hippocampal subfield metabolic differences in AD/MCI. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):12064.

Multimodal analysis using [ 11 C] PiB-PET/MRI for functional evaluation of patients with Alzheimer's disease. H Okazawa, M Ikawa, M Jung, EJNMMI Res. 10130Okazawa H, Ikawa M, Jung M, et al. Multimodal analysis using [ 11 C] PiB-PET/MRI for functional evaluation of patients with Alzheimer's disease. EJNMMI Res. 2020;10(1):30.

Diffusion MRI biomarkers of white matter microstructure vary nonmonotonically with increasing cerebral amyloid deposition. J W Dong, I O Jelescu, B Ades-Aron, Neurobiol Aging. 89Dong JW, Jelescu IO, Ades-Aron B, et al. Diffusion MRI biomarkers of white matter microstructure vary nonmonotonically with increasing cerebral amyloid deposition. Neurobiol Aging. 2020;89:118-128.

Clinical utility of 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI brain in dementia: preliminary experience from a geriatric clinic in South India. Ssr Mukku, P T Sivakumar, C Nagaraj, S Mangalore, V Harbishettar, M Varghese, Asian J Psychiatr. 44Mukku SSR, Sivakumar PT, Nagaraj C, Mangalore S, Harbishettar V, Varghese M. Clinical utility of 18 F-FDG-PET/MRI brain in dementia: preliminary experience from a geriatric clinic in South India. Asian J Psychiatr. 2019;44:99-105.

Hybrid FDG PET/MRI vs. FDG PET and CT in patients with suspected dementia-a comparison of diagnostic yield and propagated influence on clinical diagnosis and patient management. N S Kaltoft, L Marner, V A Larsen, S G Hasselbalch, I Law, O M Henriksen, PLoS ONE. 145216409Kaltoft NS, Marner L, Larsen VA, Hasselbalch SG, Law I, Henriksen OM. Hybrid FDG PET/MRI vs. FDG PET and CT in patients with suspected dementia-a comparison of diagnostic yield and propa- gated influence on clinical diagnosis and patient management. PLoS ONE, 2019;14(5):e0216409.

Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment: integrated pulsed arterial spin-labeling MRI and 18 F-FDG PET. I Riederer, K P Bohn, C Preibisch, Radiology. 2881Riederer I, Bohn KP, Preibisch C, et al. Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment: integrated pulsed arterial spin-labeling MRI and 18 F-FDG PET. Radiology. 2018;288(1):198-206.

Simultaneous restingstate FDG-PET/fMRI in Alzheimer disease: relationship between glucose metabolism and intrinsic activity. R Marchitelli, M Aiello, A Cachia, Neuroimage. 176Marchitelli R, Aiello M, Cachia A, et al. Simultaneous resting- state FDG-PET/fMRI in Alzheimer disease: relationship between glucose metabolism and intrinsic activity. Neuroimage. 2018;176: 246-258.

Reduced blood oxygenation level dependent connectivity is related to hypoperfusion in Alzheimer's disease. J Göttler, C Preibisch, I Riederer, J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 397Göttler J, Preibisch C, Riederer I, et al. Reduced blood oxygenation level dependent connectivity is related to hypoperfusion in Alz- heimer's disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2019;39(7):1314-1325.

Feasibility and acceptance of simultaneous amyloid PET/MRI. L Schütz, D Lobsien, D Fritzsch, Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 4312Schütz L, Lobsien D, Fritzsch D, et al. Feasibility and acceptance of simultaneous amyloid PET/MRI. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2016;43(12):2236-2243.

Based on the network degeneration hypothesis: separating individual patients with different neurodegenerative syndromes in a preliminary hybrid PET/MR study. M Tahmasian, J Shao, C Meng, J Nucl Med. 573Tahmasian M, Shao J, Meng C, et al. Based on the network degen- eration hypothesis: separating individual patients with different neurodegenerative syndromes in a preliminary hybrid PET/MR study. J Nucl Med. 2016;57(3):410-415.

Exploring the relevance between brain glucose metabolism and functional connectivity in Chinese cognitive dysfunctions' subjects using integrated resting-state PET/MRI images. C Ding, Y Han, J Jiang, Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society. the Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology SocietyDing C, Han Y, Jiang J. Exploring the relevance between brain glucose metabolism and functional connectivity in Chinese cogni- tive dysfunctions' subjects using integrated resting-state PET/MRI images. In: Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC);

Multiparametric imaging hippocampal neurodegeneration and functional connectivity with simultaneous PET/MRI in Alzheimer's disease. S Yan, C Zheng, B Cui, Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 4710Yan S, Zheng C, Cui B, et al. Multiparametric imaging hippocampal neurodegeneration and functional connectivity with simultaneous PET/MRI in Alzheimer's disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2020;47(10):2440-2452.

Effective connectivity in the default mode network is distinctively disrupted in Alzheimer's disease-a simultaneous resting-state FDG-PET/fMRI study. M Scherr, L Utz, M Tahmasian, Hum Brain Mapp. 2019Scherr M, Utz L, Tahmasian M, et al. Effective connectivity in the default mode network is distinctively disrupted in Alzheimer's disease-a simultaneous resting-state FDG-PET/fMRI study. Hum Brain Mapp. 2019:1-10.

Neuropathological staging of Alzheimer-related changes. H Braak, E Braak, Acta Neuropathol. 82Braak H, Braak E. Neuropathological staging of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 1991;82:239-259.

The clinical use of structural MRI in Alzheimer disease. G B Frisoni, N C Fox, C R JackJr, P Scheltens, P M Thompson, Nat Rev Neurol. 667Frisoni GB, Fox NC, Jack CR Jr., Scheltens P, Thompson PM. The clinical use of structural MRI in Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010;6:67.

Differences in the pattern of hippocampal neuronal loss in normal ageing and Alzheimer's disease. M J West, P D Coleman, D G Flood, J C Troncoso, Lancet. 344West MJ, Coleman PD, Flood DG, Troncoso JC. Differences in the pattern of hippocampal neuronal loss in normal ageing and Alz- heimer's disease. Lancet. 1994;344:769-772.

Preclinical detection of Alzheimer's disease: hippocampal shape and volume predict dementia onset in the elderly. J G Csernansky, L Wang, J Swank, Neuroimage. 25Csernansky JG, Wang L, Swank J, et al. Preclinical detection of Alzheimer's disease: hippocampal shape and volume predict de- mentia onset in the elderly. Neuroimage. 2005;25:783-792.

Hippocampal hypometabolism predicts cognitive decline from normal aging. L Mosconi, S D Santi, J Li, Neurobiol Aging. 29Mosconi L, Santi SD, Li J, et al. Hippocampal hypometabolism pre- dicts cognitive decline from normal aging. Neurobiol Aging. 2008;29:676-692.

An evaluation of the benefits of simultaneous acquisition on PET/MR coregistration in head/neck imaging. S Monti, C Cavaliere, M Covello, E Nicolai, M Salvatore, M Aiello, J Healthc Eng. 2634389Monti S, Cavaliere C, Covello M, Nicolai E, Salvatore M, Aiello M. An evaluation of the benefits of simultaneous acquisition on PET/MR co- registration in head/neck imaging. J Healthc Eng. 2017;2017:2634389.

Childhood socioeconomic status and adult brain size: childhood socioeconomic status influences adult hippocampal size. R T Staff, A D Murray, T S Ahearn, N Mustafa, H C Fox, L J Whalley, Ann Neurol. 715Staff RT, Murray AD, Ahearn TS, Mustafa N, Fox HC, Whalley LJ. Childhood socioeconomic status and adult brain size: childhood so- cioeconomic status influences adult hippocampal size. Ann Neurol. 2012;71(5):653-660.

Brain beta-amyloid measures and magnetic resonance imaging atrophy both predict time-toprogression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease. C R Jack, H J Wiste, P Vemuri, Brain. 13311Jack CR, Wiste HJ, Vemuri P, et al. Brain beta-amyloid measures and magnetic resonance imaging atrophy both predict time-to- progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's dis- ease. Brain. 2010;133(11):3336-3348.

Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI. L Wang, Y Zang, Y He, Neuroimage. 31Wang L, Zang Y, He Y, et al. Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI. Neuroimage 2006;31:496-504.

Glucose hypometabolism in hippocampal subdivisions in Alzheimer's disease: a pilot study using high-resolution 18 F-FDG PET and 7.0-T MRI. E J Choi, Y D Son, Y Noh, H Lee, Y B Kim, K H Park, J Clin Neurol. 142Choi EJ, Son YD, Noh Y, Lee H, Kim YB, Park KH. Glucose hypo- metabolism in hippocampal subdivisions in Alzheimer's disease: a pilot study using high-resolution 18 F-FDG PET and 7.0-T MRI. J Clin Neurol 2018;14(2):158-164.

High-resolution structural and functional MRI of hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment. M A Yassa, S M Stark, A Bakker, M S Albert, M Gallagher, C E Stark, Neuroimage. 51Yassa MA, Stark SM, Bakker A, Albert MS, Gallagher M, Stark CE. High-resolution structural and functional MRI of hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impair- ment. Neuroimage. 2010;51:1242-1252.

Reduction of hippocampal hyperactivity improves cognition in amnestic mild cognitive impairment. A Bakker, G L Krauss, M S Albert, Neuron. 74Bakker A, Krauss GL, Albert MS, et al. Reduction of hippocampal hyperactivity improves cognition in amnestic mild cognitive impair- ment. Neuron. 2012;74:467-474.

Resting-state network dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. A Badhwar, A Tam, C Dansereau, P Orban, F Hoffstaedter, P Bellec, Alzheimers Dement. 8Badhwar A, Tam A, Dansereau C, Orban P, Hoffstaedter F, Bellec P. Resting-state network dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease: a sys- tematic review and meta-analysis. Alzheimers Dement. 2017;8: 73-85.

Diminished posterior precuneus connectivity with the default mode network differentiates normal aging from Alzheimer's disease. B L Klaassens, Jma Van Gerven, J Van Der Grond, F De Vos, C Moller, S Rombouts, Front Aging Neurosci. 997Klaassens BL, van Gerven JMA, van der Grond J, de Vos F, Moller C, Rombouts S. Diminished posterior precuneus connectivity with the default mode network differentiates normal aging from Alzheimer's disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017;9:97.

Metabolic reduction in the posterior cingulate cortex in very early Alzheimer's disease. S Minoshima, B Giordani, S Berent, K A Frey, N L Foster, D E Kuhl, Ann Neurol. 421Minoshima S, Giordani B, Berent S, Frey KA, Foster NL, Kuhl DE. Metabolic reduction in the posterior cingulate cortex in very early Alzheimer's disease. Ann Neurol. 1997;42(1):85-94.

Sugar for the brain: the role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain function. P Mergenthaler, U Lindauer, G A Dienel, A Meisel, Trends Neurosci. 3610Mergenthaler P, Lindauer U, Dienel GA, Meisel A. Sugar for the brain: the role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain function. Trends Neurosci 2013;36(10):587-597.

Nonoxidative glucose consumption during focal physiologic neural activity. P T Fox, M E Raichle, M A Mintun, C Dence, Cell Biol. 1022076Fox PT, Raichle ME, Mintun MA, Dence C. Nonoxidative glucose consumption during focal physiologic neural activity. Cell Biol 1986;102:2076.

Regional impairment of intrinsic functional connectivity strength in patients with chronic primary insomnia. S Huang, F Zhou, J Jiang, Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 13Huang S, Zhou F, Jiang J, et al. Regional impairment of intrinsic functional connectivity strength in patients with chronic primary insomnia. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2017;13:1449-1462.

A white matter disorder in dementia of the Alzheimer type: a pathoanatomical study. A Brun, E Englund, Ann Neurol. 19Brun A, Englund E. A white matter disorder in dementia of the Alz- heimer type: a pathoanatomical study. Ann Neurol. 1986;19:253-262.

Patient-tailored, connectivitybased forecasts of spreading brain atrophy. J A Brown, J Deng, J Neuhaus, Neuron. 1045Brown JA, Deng J, Neuhaus J, et al. Patient-tailored, connectivity- based forecasts of spreading brain atrophy, Neuron. 2019;104(5): 856-868.

White matter damage in Alzheimer disease and its relationship to gray matter atrophy. F Agosta, M Pievani, S Sala, Radiology. 258Agosta F, Pievani M, Sala S, et al. White matter damage in Alzheimer disease and its relationship to gray matter atrophy. Radiology. 2011;258:853-863.

Clinical use of integrated positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance imaging for dementia patients. T M Shepherd, G K Nayak, Top Magn Reson Imaging. 286Shepherd TM, Nayak GK. Clinical use of integrated positron emis- sion tomography-magnetic resonance imaging for dementia patients. Top Magn Reson Imaging. 2019;28(6):299-310.

Characterizing radiology reports in patients with frontotemporal dementia. J Suarez, M C Tartaglia, P Vitali, Neurology. 73Suarez J, Tartaglia MC, Vitali P, et al. Characterizing radiology re- ports in patients with frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. 2009;73: 1073-1074.