# A REVIEW OF EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE IN AFRICA

CorpusID: 237347168
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences, #Economics, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2e96d6de6269bbbf4b5a0b5974a1d5f551cf810](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2e96d6de6269bbbf4b5a0b5974a1d5f551cf810)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A REVIEW OF EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE IN AFRICA


Samuel Asante Gyamerah 
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology
KumasiGhana

Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Statistical Analysis -Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST-LISA)
KumasiGhana

Dennis Ikpe 
Department of Probability and Statistics
Michigan State University
MichiganUSA

Africa Institute for Mathematical Sciences
South Africa

A REVIEW OF EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE IN AFRICA
Correspondence:


Africa and Asia. Despite their enormous contribution to food production, their reliance on traditional methods, which increasingly become obsolete stifles productivity in the agriculture sector (Mwangi & Kariuki, 2015). Nevertheless, commercialization and general transformation of the sector in Africa has been significant over the past decade despite less notice (Jayne & Ameyaw, 2016). Studies (Chauvin, Mulangu & Porto, 2012;Salami, Kamara & Brixiova, 2010;Fuglie & Rada, 2013) blame the slow transformation of the sector according to Tongwane & Moeletsi (2018) several factors including but not limited to low technology adoption; challenges related to market access; less skilled labor and poor soil fertility. (Generally, productivity is in a steady increase as medium-sized to large-sized farms begin to increase in rural areas. Unfortunately, this is threatened by several factors including declining soil fertility, increasing cost of arable land, and the impacts of climate variability and change (Jayne & Ameyaw, 2016).

The vulnerability of the continent's slowly transitioning agricultural system (Chauvin, Mulangu & Porto, 2012) to projected impacts of climate change and variability is indubitable as the system relies on climaterainfall, light, temperature, humidity other climatic variables (Molua, 2002) for food production. Further, the agriculture system is increasingly becoming sensitive to adverse impacts of climate change and variability due to lack of modern technologies and low adoption climate-smart agricultural methods. These dynamics opens up the very backbone of every African economy, and mainstay to many vulnerable rural populations to dire consequences of projected climate impacts.

Currently, agriculture in Africa contributes only a tenth to global Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from agriculture (Tongwane & Moeletsi, 2018). Despite its relatively low contribution to GHG, a conundrum of "climate justice", adverse impacts of climate change disproportionately threaten Africa's agriculture, the continent's main economic sector. Rapidly changing rainfall patterns resulting in high unpredictability, is one of the major threats to agricultural systems in the continent. Famers lack the requisite technology, infrastructure, and knowledge and skills among others to effectively cope or adapt to drastic short-term changes in weather patterns known as "climate variability", and seasonal variations which are increasingly becoming observational. Aside from their low adaptive capacity, other vulnerabilities such as the characteristic rain-fed agriculture dominance in SSA (Kotir, 2011) and many other African countries exposes them more to climate risk. Climate variability potentially induces extreme conditions such as water stress and erosion among others which threaten plant growth and health, consequently dwarfing crop production. According to Müller, Cramer, Hare & Lotze-Campen (2011), the IPCC Synthesis Report (SYR) and the Summary for Policy Makers of the Working Group II Report indicated that climate change and variability could result in close to 50% decline in rain-fed agricultural crop production by 2020. This underscores the need for African countries aggressively pursue swifts to irrigation and climate-smart agriculture systems in order to sustain the sector and prevent knock-on effects food security, livelihoods, economic growth and development.

Aside from the effects from the increasingly variable and unpredictable climate on agriculture, the impacts of long-term climate events are enormous. Extreme climate change-induced phenomena such as increased intensity and frequency of drought and floods, and ENSO (El-Nino) which usually occur as a result of longterm changes pose severe challenges to agriculture in Africa. According to Sylla, Nikiema, Gibba, Kebe & Klutse (2016), the current GHG emission scenarios would result in "shorter rainy seasons, generalized torrid, arid and semi-arid conditions, longer dry spells and more intense extreme precipitations" in most West African countries. Climate change increases not only the vulnerability of the agriculture system in Africa drought and floods but also their impacts. These events, caused by extreme changes in temperature and rainfall are already observational many regions of the African continent (Ngaina & Mutai, 2013;Otto et al., 2015;Kadomura, 2005). Crop, fisheries and animal production are among the major components of agriculture in Africa that are highly sensitive, and have suffered (Blanc, 2012;Brida, Owiyo & Sokona, 2013;Zougmoré et al., 2016) from the impacts of these events, especially, drought and floods.

Further, according to Boko et al. (2007) the overall revenue Africa makes from crop production is projected to decline by up to 90% by 2100 due to climate change (Williams & Kniveton, 2011). This would be enhanced in part by substantial reduction in the length of cropping seasons and unpredictability of initiation of wet periods (Williams & Kniveton, 2011). Drastic seasonal shifts of this nature would drive declines in crop production as a result of potential end of rainfall season when crops are yet to mature or torrential rainfalls during periods of crop harvest or less requirement for excess moisture. Whiles improved seeds with the capacity to adapt to such changes and precision agriculture are touted around the world, most African countries unfortunately lags behind in the adoption of biotechnology and advanced engineering among other critical technologies (Muzari, Gatsi & Muvhunzi, 2012). Also, a majority of farmers in the continent are less skilled, and mainly rely on traditional farming methods and implements. Moreover, the impacts abrupt seasonal changes are not limited to reduction in crop production, animal or livestock production could equally be hampered as adverse climate change impacts could affect incidence of disease and natural resources on which livestock depend on (Baumgard et al., 2012). Also, the fisheries sector is not immune as upwelling regimes among other important phenomena could be significantly altered by such climate change induced variations (Bakun etal., 2015). Access to credit remains challenging to these vulnerable famers as investment in the sector fails to meeting growing demand for expansion. These factors together complicate the adaptive capacity of farmers, especially, small-holder farmers who constitute a significant proportion, against increasing uncertainties related to season and climate variables. Finally, the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), African economies relies on climate-sensitive sectors, especially agriculture, fisheries and forestry climate change which could suffer multiplied impacts of existing stressors and emerging adverse conditions hence the need for integration of adaptation planning in decision-making (Carabine, Lemma & Dupar, (2014). This would not only be instrumental in building resilience but also contribute significantly to the reduction in hunger and poverty; and accelerating growth and development all of which are pivotal to the global agenda for sustainable development-Sustainable Development Goals.
 
Agricultural transformation in Africa? Assessing the evidence in Ethiopia. F N Bachewe, G Berhane, B Minten, A S Taffesse, World Development. 105Bachewe, F. N., Berhane, G., Minten, B., & Taffesse, A. S. (2018). Agricultural transformation in Africa? Assessing the evidence in Ethiopia. World Development, 105, 286-298.

Anticipated effects of climate change on coastal upwelling ecosystems. A Bakun, B A Black, S J Bograd, M Garcia-Reyes, A J Miller, R R Rykaczewski, W J Sydeman, Current Climate Change Reports. 12Bakun, A., Black, B. A., Bograd, S. J., Garcia-Reyes, M., Miller, A. J., Rykaczewski, R. R., & Sydeman, W. J. (2015). Anticipated effects of climate change on coastal upwelling ecosystems. Current Climate Change Reports, 1(2), 85-93.

Impact of climate change on livestock production. L H Baumgard, R P Rhoads, M L Rhoads, N K Gabler, J W Ross, A F Keating, . . Sejian, V , The impact of climate change on crop yields in Sub-Saharan Africa. BerlinHeidelberg. Blanc, ÉEnvironmental stress and amelioration in livestock productionBaumgard, L. H., Rhoads, R. P., Rhoads, M. L., Gabler, N. K., Ross, J. W., Keating, A. F., ... & Sejian, V. (2012). Impact of climate change on livestock production. In Environmental stress and amelioration in livestock production (pp. 413-468). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. Blanc, É. (2012). The impact of climate change on crop yields in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Climate change: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of working group II to the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. M Boko, I Niang, A Nyong, C Vogel, A Githeko, M Medany, B Osman-Elasha, R Tabo, P Yanda, Africa. Parry M, Canziani O, Palutikof J, van der Linden P, Hanson CCambridge University PressBoko M, Niang I, Nyong A, Vogel C, Githeko A, Medany M, Osman-Elasha B, Tabo R, Yanda P (2007) Africa. In: Parry M, Canziani O, Palutikof J, van der Linden P, Hanson C (eds) Climate change: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of working group II to the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 433-467

Loss and damage from the double blow of flood and drought in Mozambique. A B Brida, T Owiyo, Y Sokona, International Journal of Global Warming. 54Brida, A. B., Owiyo, T., & Sokona, Y. (2013). Loss and damage from the double blow of flood and drought in Mozambique. International Journal of Global Warming, 5(4), 514-531.

The IPCC's fifth assessment report: What's in it for Africa. E Carabine, A Lemma, M Dupar, Climate & Development Knowledge Network (CDKN. Carabine, E., Lemma, A., & Dupar, M. (2014). The IPCC's fifth assessment report: What's in it for Africa. Climate & Development Knowledge Network (CDKN), 1-33.

Food production and consumption trends in sub-Saharan Africa: Prospects for the transformation of the agricultural sector. N D Chauvin, F Mulangu, G Porto, UNDP Regional Bureau for Africa. Chauvin, N. D., Mulangu, F., & Porto, G. (2012). Food production and consumption trends in sub- Saharan Africa: Prospects for the transformation of the agricultural sector. UNDP Regional Bureau for Africa: New York, NY, USA.

Increasing resilience and reducing vulnerability in sub-Saharan African agriculture: Strategies for risk coping and management. C A Chuku, C Okoye, African Journal of Agricultural Research. 411Chuku, C. A., & Okoye, C. (2009). Increasing resilience and reducing vulnerability in sub-Saharan African agriculture: Strategies for risk coping and management. African Journal of Agricultural Research, 4(11), 1524-1535.

Resources, policies, and agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa. K Fuglie, N Rada, USDA-ERS Economic Research Report. 145Fuglie, K., & Rada, N. (2013). Resources, policies, and agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa. USDA-ERS Economic Research Report, (145).

Hedging Crop Yields Against Weather Uncertainties-A Weather Derivative Perspective. S A Gyamerah, P Ngare, D Ikpe, Mathematical and Computational Applications. 24371Gyamerah, S. A., Ngare, P., & Ikpe, D. (2019). Hedging Crop Yields Against Weather Uncertainties-A Weather Derivative Perspective. Mathematical and Computational Applications, 24(3), 71.

Africa's emerging agricultural transformation: Evidence, opportunities and challenges. T S Jayne, S Ameyaw, Africa Agriculture Status Report: Progress towards agriculture transformation in Sub-Saharan Africa. Jayne, T. S., & Ameyaw, S. (2016). Africa's emerging agricultural transformation: Evidence, opportunities and challenges. Africa Agriculture Status Report: Progress towards agriculture transformation in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2-20.

Climate anomalies and extreme events in Africa in 2003, including heavy rains and floods that occurred during northern hemisphere summer. H Kadomura, Kadomura, H. (2005). Climate anomalies and extreme events in Africa in 2003, including heavy rains and floods that occurred during northern hemisphere summer. Correspondence: saasgyam@gmail.com

Climate change and variability in Sub-Saharan Africa: a review of current and future trends and impacts on agriculture and food security. J H Kotir, Environment, Development and Sustainability. 133Kotir, J. H. (2011). Climate change and variability in Sub-Saharan Africa: a review of current and future trends and impacts on agriculture and food security. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 13(3), 587-605.

Climate variability, vulnerability and effectiveness of farm-level adaptation options: the challenges and implications for food security in Southwestern Cameroon. E L Molua, Environment and Development Economics. Molua, E. L. (2002). Climate variability, vulnerability and effectiveness of farm-level adaptation options: the challenges and implications for food security in Southwestern Cameroon. Environment and Development Economics, 529-545.

Climate change risks for African agriculture. C Müller, W Cramer, W L Hare, H Lotze-Campen, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 10811Müller, C., Cramer, W., Hare, W. L., & Lotze-Campen, H. (2011). Climate change risks for African agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(11), 4313-4315.

The impacts of technology adoption on smallholder agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa: A review. W Muzari, W Gatsi, S Muvhunzi, Journal of Sustainable Development. 5869Muzari, W., Gatsi, W., & Muvhunzi, S. (2012). The impacts of technology adoption on smallholder agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa: A review. Journal of Sustainable Development, 5(8), 69.

Factors determining adoption of new agricultural technology by smallholder farmers in developing countries. M Mwangi, S Kariuki, Journal of Economics and sustainable development. 65Mwangi, M., & Kariuki, S. (2015). Factors determining adoption of new agricultural technology by smallholder farmers in developing countries. Journal of Economics and sustainable development, 6(5).

Observational evidence of climate change on extreme events over East Africa. J Ngaina, B Mutai, Global Meteorology. 21Ngaina, J., & Mutai, B. (2013). Observational evidence of climate change on extreme events over East Africa. Global Meteorology, 2(1), e2-e2.

Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa: Prospects and Challenges for the Next Decade. Oecd-Fao, OECD-FAO. (2016). Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa: Prospects and Challenges for the Next Decade.

Foreign aid, resources and export diversification in Africa: A new test of existing theories. P N Osakwe, Osakwe, P. N. (2007). Foreign aid, resources and export diversification in Africa: A new test of existing theories.

Attribution of extreme weather events in Africa: a preliminary exploration of the science and policy implications. F E Otto, E Boyd, R G Jones, R J Cornforth, R James, H R Parker, M R Allen, Climatic Change. 1324Otto, F. E., Boyd, E., Jones, R. G., Cornforth, R. J., James, R., Parker, H. R., & Allen, M. R. (2015). Attribution of extreme weather events in Africa: a preliminary exploration of the science and policy implications. Climatic Change, 132(4), 531-543.

A Salami, A B Kamara, Z Brixiova, Smallholder agriculture in East Africa: Trends, constraints and opportunities. TunisAfrican Development BankSalami, A., Kamara, A. B., & Brixiova, Z. (2010). Smallholder agriculture in East Africa: Trends, constraints and opportunities. Tunis: African Development Bank.

Rural food security, subsistence agriculture, and seasonality. K T Sibhatu, M Qaim, PloS one. 1210186406Sibhatu, K. T., & Qaim, M. (2017). Rural food security, subsistence agriculture, and seasonality. PloS one, 12(10), e0186406.

Climate change over West Africa: Recent trends and future projections. M B Sylla, P M Nikiema, P Gibba, I Kebe, N A B Klutse, Adaptation to climate change and variability in rural West Africa. ChamSpringerSylla, M. B., Nikiema, P. M., Gibba, P., Kebe, I., & Klutse, N. A. B. (2016). Climate change over West Africa: Recent trends and future projections. In Adaptation to climate change and variability in rural West Africa (pp. 25-40). Springer, Cham.

A review of greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture sector in Africa. M I Tongwane, M E Moeletsi, Agricultural systems. 166Tongwane, M. I., & Moeletsi, M. E. (2018). A review of greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture sector in Africa. Agricultural systems, 166, 124-134.

African climate and climate change: physical, social and political perspectives. C J Williams, Kniveton, D. R.Springer Science & Business Media43Williams, C. J., & Kniveton, D. R. (Eds.). (2011). African climate and climate change: physical, social and political perspectives (Vol. 43). Springer Science & Business Media.

. R Zougmoré, S Partey, M Ouédraogo, B Omitoyin, T Thomas, A Ayantunde, Zougmoré, R., Partey, S., Ouédraogo, M., Omitoyin, B., Thomas, T., Ayantunde, A., ...

Toward climate-smart agriculture in West Africa: a review of climate change impacts, adaptation strategies and policy developments for the livestock, fishery and crop production sectors. A Jalloh, Agriculture & Food Security. 5126& Jalloh, A. (2016). Toward climate-smart agriculture in West Africa: a review of climate change impacts, adaptation strategies and policy developments for the livestock, fishery and crop production sectors. Agriculture & Food Security, 5(1), 26.