# Intermittent Preventive Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy Coverage Estimates from Population-based Surveys: Reliability of Women's Recall Among Women with ANC Cards

CorpusID: 237555024
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9bf0d94fd0aef066da2a6a5f66837d7a650802e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9bf0d94fd0aef066da2a6a5f66837d7a650802e6)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Intermittent Preventive Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy Coverage Estimates from Population-based Surveys: Reliability of Women's Recall Among Women with ANC Cards


Natasha Hansen 
President's Malaria Initiative
District of Columbia
U.S. Agency for International Development
Washington

Susan Youll syoull@usaid.gov 
President's Malaria Initiative
District of Columbia
U.S. Agency for International Development
Washington

Lia Florey 
President's Malaria Initiative
District of Columbia
U.S. Agency for International Development
Washington

Cameron Taylor 
U.S. Agency for International Development
The Demographic and Health Surveys Program
ICF
1300 Pennsylvania Avenue20004Rockville, WashingtonMaryland, DC

Intermittent Preventive Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy Coverage Estimates from Population-based Surveys: Reliability of Women's Recall Among Women with ANC Cards

Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg
105210.4269/ajtmh.20-1296Ã Address correspondence to Susan Youll, President's Malaria Initiative, 472
Large household surveys performed to estimate coverage rates for various health interventions, including intermittent preventive treatment, depend on recall. Many studies question the validity of recalled data. Regarding vaccine coverage rates, it is standard practice to validate responses using medical history cards. To validate the coverage rates of intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy reported by large household surveys, recalled coverage rates were compared with antenatal care card data in Benin, Ghana, Malawi, and Tanzania. The results indicated that recall was comparable to the coverage rates provided indicated by the antenatal care cards. These findings suggest that intermittent preventive treatment coverage rates reported by large household surveys performed using recalled data are valid.Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Malaria Indicator Surveys (MIS) are large, nationally representative household surveys conducted every 3 to 5 years. 1 These surveys rely on the participants' ability to accurately recall receiving health services, including insecticide-treated net (ITN) use, intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy (IPTp), and the vaccination history of children. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends IPTp with sulphadoxinepyrimethamine for pregnant women residing in most sub-Saharan African countries to protect them from malaria during pregnancy. 2 IPTp is administered monthly during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy during routine antenatal care (ANC) visits; at least three doses of IPTp are recommended during pregnancy. 2 Key indicators for assessing optimal IPTp coverage are the percentage of women receiving at least one dose (IPTp11) and the percentage of women receiving at least three doses (IPTp31).IPTp coverage is a self-reported indicator in national household surveys; therefore, many of the studies of IPTp uptake cite recall bias as a potential limitation.[3][4][5]The risk of recall bias may lead to inaccurate estimates of coverage. To eliminate recall bias for vaccination coverage rates, it is standard practice in DHS surveys to verify a parent's recall of their children's vaccination history using the children's medical card. 6 However, this practice is not standardly used to assess interventions that protect pregnant women from malaria. Recall bias is a real concern for IPTp estimates because the data used to calculate IPTp coverage come from questions asked of women who experienced a live birth within the 2 years before completing the survey. This means it could have been as long as 2.5 years since some women received IPTp during the second trimester. Respondents' health records, such as an antenatal care (ANC) card kept by women during their pregnancies, may be used as a second verification source to increase confidence in self-reported statistics; this practice is similar to the process used for self-reported immunization data in household surveys. 7 This analysis assessed the validity of self-reported IPTp coverage in nationally representative household surveys by comparing interviewee responses based on recall with the interviewee's written ANC card record. Several questions and a process of cross-referencing ANC cards were added to the 2017 Malawi MIS, the 2017-2018 Benin DHS, the 2011-2012 Tanzania HIV and Malaria Indicator Survey (THMIS), and the 2014 Ghana DHS. 1 Surveyors recorded the results of each woman's recall and what was recorded on her ANC card using the survey questionnaire tool.We compared the self-reported results to the ANC card data by testing specificity, sensitivity, kappa statistics, and area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve for each of these surveys assuming the IPTp frequency reported on the ANC card was the gold standard. The sensitivity represents the likelihood of a woman correctly reporting that she received IPTp during her most recent pregnancy. The specificity represents the likelihood of a woman correctly reporting that she did not receive IPTp. The kappa test was used to assess the overall agreement between the recall and the ANC card data. These statistics were calculated separately for each incidence of IPTp (one dose, IPTp1; two doses, IPTp2; and three or more doses, IPTp31). For the purpose of this analysis, only women who had experienced live birth within the past 2 years before the survey, attended an ANC appointment at least once, received at least one dose of IPTp, and had an ANC card that was observed by the surveyor were included. Of the eligible women participating in the Benin survey, 69.2% presented an ANC card (N 5 1,847); 46.8% (N 5 873) participating in the Ghana DHS, 69.9% (N 5 658) participating in the Malawi survey, and 47.3% (N 5 997) participating in the Tanzania survey presented an ANC card.Table 1shows the IPTp coverage according to background and sociodemographic characteristics of the women.In the Benin 2017-2018 MIS and the Ghana 2014 DHS, the proportion of women with IPTp31 was higher among the more educated and wealthier women. The proportion of women with IPTp31 was also higher among women in urban settings than among those in rural settings who participated in the Ghana 2014 DHS. The proportions of women with IPTp31 appeared to be more equitable among women who participated in the Malawi 2017 MIS and the Tanzania 2011-2012 MIS.

Abstract. Large household surveys performed to estimate coverage rates for various health interventions, including intermittent preventive treatment, depend on recall. Many studies question the validity of recalled data. Regarding vaccine coverage rates, it is standard practice to validate responses using medical history cards. To validate the coverage rates of intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy reported by large household surveys, recalled coverage rates were compared with antenatal care card data in Benin, Ghana, Malawi, and Tanzania. The results indicated that recall was comparable to the coverage rates provided indicated by the antenatal care cards. These findings suggest that intermittent preventive treatment coverage rates reported by large household surveys performed using recalled data are valid.

Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Malaria Indicator Surveys (MIS) are large, nationally representative household surveys conducted every 3 to 5 years. 1 These surveys rely on the participants' ability to accurately recall receiving health services, including insecticide-treated net (ITN) use, intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy (IPTp), and the vaccination history of children. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends IPTp with sulphadoxinepyrimethamine for pregnant women residing in most sub-Saharan African countries to protect them from malaria during pregnancy. 2 IPTp is administered monthly during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy during routine antenatal care (ANC) visits; at least three doses of IPTp are recommended during pregnancy. 2 Key indicators for assessing optimal IPTp coverage are the percentage of women receiving at least one dose (IPTp11) and the percentage of women receiving at least three doses (IPTp31).

IPTp coverage is a self-reported indicator in national household surveys; therefore, many of the studies of IPTp uptake cite recall bias as a potential limitation. [3][4][5] The risk of recall bias may lead to inaccurate estimates of coverage. To eliminate recall bias for vaccination coverage rates, it is standard practice in DHS surveys to verify a parent's recall of their children's vaccination history using the children's medical card. 6 However, this practice is not standardly used to assess interventions that protect pregnant women from malaria. Recall bias is a real concern for IPTp estimates because the data used to calculate IPTp coverage come from questions asked of women who experienced a live birth within the 2 years before completing the survey. This means it could have been as long as 2.5 years since some women received IPTp during the second trimester. Respondents' health records, such as an antenatal care (ANC) card kept by women during their pregnancies, may be used as a second verification source to increase confidence in self-reported statistics; this practice is similar to the process used for self-reported immunization data in household surveys. 7 This analysis assessed the validity of self-reported IPTp coverage in nationally representative household surveys by comparing interviewee responses based on recall with the interviewee's written ANC card record. Several questions and a process of cross-referencing ANC cards were added to the 2017 Malawi MIS, the 2017-2018 Benin DHS, the 2011-2012 Tanzania HIV and Malaria Indicator Survey (THMIS), and the 2014 Ghana DHS. 1 Surveyors recorded the results of each woman's recall and what was recorded on her ANC card using the survey questionnaire tool.

We compared the self-reported results to the ANC card data by testing specificity, sensitivity, kappa statistics, and area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve for each of these surveys assuming the IPTp frequency reported on the ANC card was the gold standard. The sensitivity represents the likelihood of a woman correctly reporting that she received IPTp during her most recent pregnancy. The specificity represents the likelihood of a woman correctly reporting that she did not receive IPTp. The kappa test was used to assess the overall agreement between the recall and the ANC card data. These statistics were calculated separately for each incidence of IPTp (one dose, IPTp1; two doses, IPTp2; and three or more doses, IPTp31). For the purpose of this analysis, only women who had experienced live birth within the past 2 years before the survey, attended an ANC appointment at least once, received at least one dose of IPTp, and had an ANC card that was observed by the surveyor were included. Of the eligible women participating in the Benin survey, 69.2% presented an ANC card (N 5 1,847); 46.8% (N 5 873) participating in the Ghana DHS, 69.9% (N 5 658) participating in the Malawi survey, and 47.3% (N 5 997) participating in the Tanzania survey presented an ANC card. Table 1 shows the IPTp coverage according to background and sociodemographic characteristics of the women.

In the Benin 2017-2018 MIS and the Ghana 2014 DHS, the proportion of women with IPTp31 was higher among the more educated and wealthier women. The proportion of women with IPTp31 was also higher among women in urban settings than among those in rural settings who participated in the Ghana 2014 DHS. The proportions of women with IPTp31 appeared to be more equitable among women who participated in the Malawi 2017 MIS and the Tanzania 2011-2012 MIS. For the women who participated in the Malawi 2017 MIS, IPTp31 coverage was higher among women who presented an ANC card compared with women who did not present an ANC card (49% versus 36%); however, IPTp1 coverage was lower among women who presented an ANC card (15% versus 22%). For the women who participated in the Tanzania 2011-2012 THMIS, IPTp31 coverage was lower among women who presented an ANC card (4% versus 9%). For the women who participated in the Ghana and Benin surveys, no significant difference was apparent in IPTp coverage based on the ANC card availability.

The proportions of women who received IPTp1, IPTp2, and IPTp31 according to self-report, ANC card data, both selfreport and ANC card data, and the survey are shown in Table  2; however, these data are restricted to the subpopulation who presented ANC cards at the time of the interview. The IPTp31 coverage was highest for women who participated in the Ghana and Malawi surveys and ranged from 47% to 55% and from 45% to 49%, respectively, depending on method of reporting information. The proportion of women with IPTp31 in Benin ranged from 23% to 28%. However, the IPTp31 coverage was lowest in Tanzania (range, 2-5%).

To test the validity of women's recall of IPTp doses received, we calculated the sensitivity and specificity of IPTp1, IPTp2, and IPTp31 by comparing self-report with ANC card data. Additionally, we calculated a kappa statistic to test the agreement between the two measures and the AUC of the ROC curve to test the individual validity of the self-report measure compared with that of the ANC card data (Table 3).

Across surveys, the sensitivity of women's ability to correctly report IPTp coverage ranged from 79% to 92% for IPTp1, from 79% to 96% for IPTp2, and from 73% to 100% for IPTp31. The proportion of women who correctly reported that they did not receive IPTp (specificity) ranged from 88% to 99.6% for IPTp1, from 87% to 96% for IPTp2, and from 83% to 98% for IPTp31. The agreement between self-reported IPTp coverage and coverage indicated on ANC cards, as measured by kappa scores, ranged from 0.69 to 0.85 for IPTp1, from 0.64 to 0.92 for IPTp2, and from 0.52 to 0.94 for IPTp31. Although interpreting kappa scores can be somewhat problematic, the scores found during this analysis represent a moderate to high level of agreement on most scales. 8,9 The AUC of the ROC curve values were . 0.8 for all reported IPTp measurements from all surveys and . 0.9 for the majority, indicating an excellent to outstanding level of individual validity for the selfreported coverage estimates. 10,11 This analysis demonstrates that self-reported recall of IPTp is an adequate method of reporting IPTp with sulphadoxinepyrimethamine doses received by women who had experienced a live birth within the 2 years before the survey using the standard protocols for household surveys such as the DHS and MIS. The analysis suggests that additional validation through external sources, such as ANC cards and a review of medical records, is not necessary. It has been found that using local context (i.e., a local word for iron folate) or a visual aid (photograph of a drug) can improve recall. 12,13 For example, because of the potentially long period of recall (up to 2.5 years), the accuracy of IPTp recall may be improved by providing visuals of sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine tablets during household survey interviews to help women recall the number of IPTp doses they received.

This study only includes data from four countries; therefore, the results presented here may not be representative of all countries implementing IPTp with different rates of coverage. Another limitation of this study was that the dataset was restricted to include only women who were able to present their ANC card to the interviewer; therefore, only 47% of the women in Ghana and Tanzania, 69% in Benin, and 70% in Malawi were eligible for this study. This group of women may be different than the group women who were unable or unwilling to present their ANC card at the time of the survey. Additional studies that use health facility records of IPTp administration to verify self-reported data could be considered to address this bias. Furthermore, the surveys used for this study covered a wide date range and a wide range of IPTp coverage. The Tanzania survey was conducted in 2011 to 2012, but the others were conducted more recently. The IPTp31 coverage indicated by this early Tanzania survey was low; therefore, these data could have affected the sensitivity and agreement statistics. Finally, the potential for interviewer bias should be considered because it is possible that during the interviews, surveyors reconciled self-reported responses based on the data observed on the ANC card.

Despite these limitations, after validation using the ANC card data as the gold standard, the results of this study demonstrate that the self-reported IPTp coverage estimates indicated by these national household surveys are accurate. The results of this study support the validity of recall of IPTp indicated by large household surveys, thus suggesting that national malaria control programs can reliably assess their IPTp intervention coverage and make programmatic decisions based on survey data. Additionally, this analysis demonstrates that including additional questions and ANC card data  

## TABLE 1
1Self-reported IPTp coverage by background characteristics and by survey1 dose of SP 
2 doses of SP 
31 doses of SP 

% (CI) 
P value 
% (CI) 
P value 
% (CI) 
P value 
n 

Benin DHS 2017-2018 
Residence 
0.071 
0.727 
0.114 
Urban 
28.6 (25.3-32.2) 
41.9 (38.7-45.1) 
29.5 (26.4-32.9) 
1,108 
Rural 
32.9 (30.0-35.9) 
41.1 (38.2-44.1) 
26 (23.3-28.9) 
1,562 
Mother's education 
0.001 
0.003 
, 0.0001 
No education 
34.3 (31.5-37.2) 
43.3 (40.4-46.3) 
22.3 (20.0-24.9) 
15,33 
Primary 
28.2 (24.1-32.7) 
43.0 (38.8-47.7) 
28.7 (25.1-32.7) 
561 
Secondary or more 
25.3 (21.6-29.5) 
34.7 (30.7-39.0) 
39.9 (35.7-44.3) 
576 
Wealth quintiles 
, 0.0001 
0.124 
, 0.0001 
Lowest 
37.7 (32.2-43.4) 
45.7 (40.4-51.0) 
16.6 (13.0-21.0) 
387 
Second 
35.8 (31.6-40.4) 
44.8 (40.2-49.5) 
19.3 (15.9-23.3) 
524 
Middle 
32.5 (27.9-37.4) 
39.4 (35.0-43.9) 
28.1 (24.1-32.5) 
580 
Fourth 
30.6 (26.5-35) 
38.9 (34.5-43.4) 
30.6 (26.5-35.0) 
602 
Highest 
21.5 (18.0-25.5) 
40.2 (36.1-44.4) 
38.3 (33.9-42.8) 
577 
Age, years 
0.545 
0.838 
0.301 
15-19 
33.7 (26.6-41.5) 
40.5 (33.0-48.5) 
25.8 (19.6-33.2) 
192 
20-29 
30.2 (27.6-33) 
41.0 (38.3-43.8) 
28.7 (26.1-31.5) 
1,486 
30-49 
31.9 (28.7-35.3) 
42.2 (38.9-45.6) 
25.9 (23.1-29.0) 
991 
Time since delivery 
0.054 
0.94 
0.066 
0-12 months postpartum 
29.6 (27.0-32.4) 
41.5 (38.8-44.2) 
28.9 (26.3-31.6) 
1,586 
13-24 months postpartum 
33.3 (30.2-36.4) 
41.3 (38.2-44.6) 
25.4 (22.6-28.5) 
1,085 
ANC card presented 
0.321 
0.925 
0.367 
No 
29.6 (26.3-33.1) 
41.6 (37.7-45.5) 
28.8 (25.4-32.5) 
823 
Yes 1 
31.8 (29.1-34.6) 
41.3 (38.8-43.9) 
26.9 (24.5-29.5) 
1,847 
Total 
31.1 (28.9-33.4) 
41.4 (39.3-43.6) 
27.5 (25.4-29.6) 
2,670 
Ghana DHS 2014 
Residence 
0.65 
0.041 
0.049 
Urban 
17.6 (14.0-21.8) 
31.8 (27.9-35.9) 
50.7 (45.4-56.0) 
836 
Rural 
18.7 (15.9-21.9) 
37.8 (33.8-42.0) 
43.4 (38.7-48.3) 
1,033 
Mother's education 
0.773 
0.086 
0.043 
No education 
19.2 (15.5-23.5) 
36.5 (32.2-41.1) 
44.2 (38.8-49.8) 
472 
Primary 
18.7 (14.7-23.4) 
39.9 (33.7-46.4) 
41.5 (35.3-47.9) 
352 
Secondary or more 
17.6 (14.4-21.3) 
32.9 (29.1-36.9) 
49.5 (44.9-54.2) 
1,043 
Wealth quintiles 
0.007 
0.071 
0.016 
Lowest 
17.3 (13.1-22.5) 
36.0 (31.0-41.2) 
46.8 (39.9-53.8) 
406 
Second 
15.1 (11.3-19.8) 
41.7 (34.0-49.8) 
43.2 (35.6-51.2) 
396 
Middle 
24.6 (19.2-31.1) 
35.1 (28.9-41.7) 
42.5 (34.5-50.8) 
369 
Fourth 
21.6 (16.4-27.9) 
35.1 (28.9-41.7) 
43.4 (26.5-50.4) 
258 
Highest 
12.3 (8.3-17.9) 
28.9 (23.4-35.1) 
58.7 (52.2-65.0) 
339 
Age, years 
0.147 
0.115 
0.709 
15-19 
20.4 (12.8-30.9) 
29.2 (18.4-43.0) 
50.4 (35.4-65.3) 
120 
20-29 
20.3 (16.6-24.6) 
32.6 (28.9-36.4) 
47.1 (42.9-51.4) 
877 
30-49 
15.7 (13.0-19.0) 
38.5 (34.0-43.2) 
45.7 (41.7-49.8) 
871 
Time since delivery 
0.049 
0.437 
0.014 
0-12 months postpartum 
20.3 (17.4-23.5) 
36.1 (32.0-40.3) 
43.7 (39.4-48.1) 
1,007 
13-24 months postpartum 
15.8 (12.6-19.6) 
34.0 (30.4-37.8) 
50.2 (45.5-54.9) 
860 
ANC card presented 
0.552 
0.474 
0.782 
No 
17.5 (14.4-21.1) 
36.2 (32.5-40.1) 
46.3 (41.9-50.7) 
994 
Yes 1 
19.0 (15.7-22.8) 
33.9 (29.3-38.9) 
47.1 (42.1-52.2) 
873 
Total 
18.2 (15.9-20.7) 
35.1 (32.2-38.2) 
46.7 (43.0-50.4) 
1,867 
Malawi MIS 2017 
Residence 
0.947 
0.232 
0.262 
Urban 
16.9 (13.1-21.7) 
42.3 (36.0-48.8) 
40.8 (34.1-47.8) 
144 
Rural 
16.8 (13.3-20.9) 
37.7 (33.7-41.8) 
45.6 (40.9-50.3) 
797 
Mother's education 
0.541 
0.711 
0.913 
No education 
20.5 (12.5-31.9) 
36.5 (28.6-45.2) 
43.0 (31.2-55.5) 
141 
Primary 
16.5 (12.7-21.1) 
38.1 (33.8-42.7) 
45.4 (40.5-50.4) 
630 
Secondary or more 
14.8 (10.4-20.5) 
40.8 (34.3-47.7) 
44.4 (35.4-52.8) 
170 
Wealth quintiles 
0.582 
0.453 
0.199 
Lowest 
19.4 (12.0-29.7) 
39.4 (30.1-49.6) 
41.2 (32.3-50.6) 
242 
Second 
18 (11.3-27.6) 
32.7 (24.5-42.1) 
49.2 (39.4-59.2) 
198 
Middle 
12.4 (7.6-19.5) 
35.2 (26.8-44.6) 
52.5 (43.3-61.4) 
179 
Fourth 
18.3 (12.1-26.8) 
43.2 (34.2-52.7) 
38.4 (29.3-48.4) 
165 
Highest 
14.6 (10.5-19.8) 
42.4 (35.4-49.7) 
43.1 (36.2-50.2) 
158 
Age, years 
0.05 
0.143 
0.186 
15-19 
24.7 (17.0-34.4) 
31.1 (24.4-41) 
43.2 (34.1-52.7) 
160 
20-29 
14.3 (10.8-18.6) 
37.8 (33.0-42.8) 
48.0 (42.7-53.5) 
515 
30-49 
16.9 (11.9-23.5) 
43.3 (36.2-50.6) 
39.8 (32.8-47.3) 
265 

(continued) 

TREATMENT OF MALARIA IN PREGNANCY: RELIABILITY OF RECALL 


## TABLE 1 Continued
1sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine; THMIS 5 Tanzania HIV and Malaria Indicator Survey.1 dose of SP 
2 doses of SP 
31 doses of SP 

% (CI) 
P value 
% (CI) 
P value 
% (CI) 
P value 
n 

Time since delivery 
0.428 
0.512 
0.971 
0-12 months postpartum 
18.0 (13.9-23.0) 
37.2 (32.4-2.3) 
44.8 (39.7-50.0) 
509 
13-24 months postpartum 
15.4 (11.3-20.6) 
39.7 (34.4-45.3) 
44.9 (39.5-50.4) 
432 
ANC card presented 
0.043 
0.182 
0.002 
No 
22.1 (16.5-28.8) 
42.3 (36.0-48.8) 
35.7 (29.5-42.4) 
283 
Yes 1 
14.5 (10.9-19.0) 
36.7 (32.3-41.4) 
48.8 (43.8-53.8) 
658 
Total 
16.8 (13.8-20.3) 
38.4 (34.8-42.0) 
44.8 (40.7-49.0) 
941 
Tanzania THMIS 2011-2012 
Residence 
0.842 
0.81 
0.291 
Urban 
46.9 (41.0-52.9) 
47.8 (41.5-54.1) 
5.3 (3.5-8.1) 
469 
Rural 
46.2 (42.6-49.7) 
46.9 (43.6-50.3) 
6.9 (5.5-8.7) 
1,637 
Mother's education 
0.206 
0.496 
0.325 
No education 
45.5 (39.0-52.0) 
49.1 (42.9-55.3) 
5.5 (3.1-9.7) 
385 
Primary 
47.7 (44.2-51.1) 
46.0 (42.5-49.6) 
6.3 (5.0-7.9) 
1,450 
Secondary or more 
40.5 (33.4-48.1) 
49.9 (42.8-57.1) 
9.5 (5.2-16.8) 
272 
Wealth quintiles 
0.541 
0.816 
0.835 
Lowest 
48.3 (41.5-55.1) 
45.7 (40.0-51.5) 
6.1 (3.5-10.2) 
398 
Second 
48.5 (42.6-54.5) 
45.2 (38.8-51.8) 
6.2 (4.0-9.7) 
452 
Middle 
44.6 (38.7-50.6) 
48.0 (42.1-54.1) 
7.4 (4.8-11.3) 
379 
Fourth 
47.8 (42.1-53.4) 
46.7 (41.0-52.5) 
5.5 (2.5-8.7) 
451 
Highest 
42.2 (35.3-49.5) 
50.0 (42.7-57.3) 
7.8 (4.8-12.5) 
426 
Age, years 
0.577 
0.781 
0.538 
15-19 
49.8 (40.6-59.1) 
46.0 (36.8-55.5) 
4.2 (2.0-8.6) 
200 
20-29 
46.8 (43.1-50.7) 
46.3 (42.8-49.9) 
6.8 (5.1-9.1) 
1,073 
30-49 
44.8 (40.1-49.7) 
48.4 (43.4-53.4) 
6.8 (4.7-9.8) 
833 
Time since delivery 
0.037 
0.01 
0.531 
0-12 months postpartum 
49.4 (45.2-53.7) 
43.6 (39.8-47.4) 
7.0 (5.3-9.2) 
1,098 
13-24 months postpartum 
42.9 (38.6-47.4) 
50.9 (46.7-55.2) 
6.1 (4.6-8.2) 
1,009 
ANC card presented 
0.904 
0.163 
0.001 
No 
46.1 (41.9-50.4) 
44.9 (40.7-49.2) 
9.0 (7.0-11.4) 
1,110 
Yes 1 
46.5 (42.1-51.0) 
49.6 (45.1-54) 
3.9 (2.6-5.9) 
997 
Total 
46.3 (43.3-49.4) 
47.1 (44.2-50.0) 
6.6 (5.4-8.0) 
2,106 

ANC 5 antenatal care; CI 5 confidence interval; DHS 5 Demographic and Health Survey; IPTp 5 intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy; MIS 5 Malaria Indicator Survey; 
SP 5 

## TABLE 2
2IPTp rates reported by women who presented ANC cards 1 ANC 5 antenatal care; CI 5 confidence interval; DHS 5 Demographic and Health Survey; IPTp 5 intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy; MIS 5 Malaria Indicator Survey; THMIS 5 Tanzania HIV and Malaria Indicator Survey.% (CI) 
Total 

Benin DHS 2017-2018 
Percentage who received 
IPTp1 during ANC 

Self-report 
31.8 (29.1-34.6) 1,847 
ANC card 
31.2 (28.5-34.1) 
Either source 35.6 (32.8-38.5) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp2 during ANC 

Self-report 
41.3 (38.8-43.9) 
ANC card 
39.9 (37.4-42.4) 
Either source 44.6 (42.1-47.2) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp31 during ANC 

Self-report 
26.9 (24.5-29.5) 
ANC card 
23.2 (20.9-25.7) 
Either source 27.6 (25.2-30.2) 
Ghana DHS 2014 
Percentage who received 
IPTp1 during ANC 

Self-report 
19 (15.7-22.8) 
873 
ANC card 
15.5 (12.6-18.9) 
Either source 21.1 (17.7-25) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp2 during ANC 

Self-report 
33.9 (29.2-38.9) 
ANC card 
30.8 (27-34.8) 
Either source 39.9 (35.2-44.8) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp31 during ANC 

Self-report 
47.1 (42.1-52.2) 
ANC card 
47.5 (43.1-51.9) 
Either source 54.7 (49.9-59.4) 
Malawi MIS 2017 
Percentage who received 
IPTp1 during ANC 

Self-report 
14.5 (10.9-19) 
658 
ANC card 
19.1 (15.6-23.3) 
Either source 19.6 (16-23.7) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp2 during ANC 

Self-report 
36.7 (32.3-41.4) 
ANC card 
35.6 (31-40.5) 
Either source 38.7 (34.1-43.5) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp31 during ANC 

Self-report 
48.8 (43.8-53.8) 
ANC card 
44.5 (39.8-49.2) 
Either source 48.8 (43.8-53.8) 
Tanzania THMIS 2011-2012 
Percentage who received 
IPTp1 during ANC 

Self-report 
46.5 (42.1-51) 
997 
ANC card 
43.7 (39.6-47.8) 
Either source 50.6 (46.2-55) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp2 during ANC 

Self-report 
49.6 (45.1-54) 
ANC card 
47.4 (43.3-51.5) 
Either source 54.1 (49.7-58.4) 
Percentage who received 
IPTp31 during ANC 

Self-report 
3.9 (2.6-5.9) 
ANC card 
2.1 (1.2-3.4) 
Either source 4.8 (3.2-7.1) 



## TABLE 3
3Sensitivity, specificity, and agreement of IPTp coverage comparing self-report with ANC card records among women who presented an ANC card ANC 5 antenatal care; CI 5 confidence interval; DHS 5 Demographic and Health Survey; IPTp 5 intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy; MIS 5 Malaria Indicator Survey; ROC 5 receiveroperating characteristic; THMIS 5 Tanzania HIV and Malaria Indicator Survey.Sensitivity 
Specificity 
ROC curve area 
% (CI) 
% (CI) 
% (CI) 
Kappa statistic 

Benin DHS 2017-2018 
Recall of IPTp1 
88.4 (85.4-91) 
94 (92.6-95.3) 
0.912 (0.9-0.93) 
0.8162 
Recall of IPTp2 
91.7 (89.4-93.6) 
92.3 (90.5-93.8) 
0.92 (0.91-0.93) 
0.8377 
Recall of IPTp3 
97.2 (95.1-98.5) 
94.4 (93-95.5) 
0.958 (0.95-0.97) 
0.8655 
Ghana DHS 2014 
Recall of IPTp1 
82.5 (75.3-88.4) 
92.4 (90.2-94.2) 
0.874 (0.84-0.91) 
0.6887 
Recall of IPTp2 
79.3 (74-84) 
86.6 (83.6-89.2) 
0.83 (0.8-0.86) 
0.6431 
Recall of IPTp3 
84 (80.1-87.5) 
86.4 (82.9-89.3) 
0.852 (0.83-0.88) 
0.7039 
Malawi MIS 2017 
Recall of IPTp1 
79.1 (70-86.6) 
99.6 (98.6-100) 
0.894 (0.85-0.93) 
0.8526 
Recall of IPTp2 
95.6 (92-97.9) 
96.4 (94-98) 
0.96 (0.94-0.98) 
0.9164 
Recall of IPTp3 
100 (98.7-100) 
94.3 (91.2-96.5) 
0.971 (0.96-0.98) 
0.938 
Tanzania THMIS 2011-2012 
Recall of IPTp1 
91.6 (88.8-94) 
87.5 (84.5-90.1) 
0.896 (0.88-0.91) 
0.7871 
Recall of IPTp2 
91.2 (88.3-93.6) 
88.4 (85.4-90.9) 
0.898 (0.88-0,92) 
0.7928 
Recall of IPTp3 
72.7 (49.8-89.3) 
97.8 (96.7-98.6) 
0.853 (0.76-0.95) 
0.5203 


This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
may not be necessary and is not likely to significantly change IPTp coverage estimates. may not be necessary and is not likely to signifi- cantly change IPTp coverage estimates.

mails: natasha.hansen16@gmail.com, syoull@usaid.gov, and lflorey@usaid.gov. Cameron Taylor, The Demographic and Health Surveys Program. Susan Authors&apos; Addresses: Natasha Hansen, Lia Youll, Florey, U.S; Washington, DC, E-; ICF, Rockville, MD, E-mailAgency for International DevelopmentAuthors' addresses: Natasha Hansen, Susan Youll, and Lia Florey, President's Malaria Initiative, U.S. Agency for International Develop- ment, Washington, DC, E-mails: natasha.hansen16@gmail.com, syoull@usaid.gov, and lflorey@usaid.gov. Cameron Taylor, The Demographic and Health Surveys Program, ICF, Rockville, MD, E-mail: cameron.taylor@icf.com. REFERENCES

Demographic in Health Surveys Program. Available at: www. dhsprogram.comDemographic in Health Surveys Program. Available at: www. dhsprogram.com. Accessed December 12, 2019.

Malaria in Pregnant Women. Available at: who. int/malaria/areas/high_risk_groups/pregnancy/en. WHO, 2017. Malaria in Pregnant Women. Available at: who. int/malaria/areas/high_risk_groups/pregnancy/en. Accessed December 12, 2019.

Predictors for uptake of intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy (IPTp) in Tanzania. S Kibusi, E Kimunai, C Hines, BMC Public Health. 7540Kibusi S, Kimunai E, Hines C, 2015. Predictors for uptake of inter- mittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy (IPTp) in Tanzania. BMC Public Health 7: 540.

Low uptake of intermittent preventive treatment in Ghana: an examination of health system bottlenecks. E Odjidja, Health Syst Policy Res. 458Odjidja E, 2017. Low uptake of intermittent preventive treatment in Ghana: an examination of health system bottlenecks. Health Syst Policy Res 4: 58.

Factors associated with uptake of optimal doses of intermittent preventive treatment for malaria among pregnant women in Uganda: analysis of data from the Uganda Demographic and Health Survey. D Okethwangu, Malar J. 18250Okethwangu D et al., 2019. Factors associated with uptake of optimal doses of intermittent preventive treatment for malaria among pregnant women in Uganda: analysis of data from the Uganda Demographic and Health Survey, 2016. Malar J 18: 250.

Validity of vaccination cards and parental recall to estimate vaccination coverage: a systematic review of the literature. M Miles, Vaccine. 31Miles M et al., 2013. Validity of vaccination cards and parental recall to estimate vaccination coverage: a systematic review of the literature. Vaccine 31: 1560-1568.

Guide to DHS Statistics. T Croft, Rockville, MDCroft T et al., 2018. Guide to DHS Statistics. Rockville, MD: ICF. Available at: www.dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/DHSG1/Guide_ to_DHS_Statistics_DHS-7_v2.pdf. Accessed December 12, 2019.

The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. K Landis, Biometrics. 33Landis K, 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for cat- egorical data. Biometrics 33: 159-174.

J L Fleiss, Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions. New York, NYJohn WileySecond edFleiss JL, 1981. Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, Second ed. New York, NY: John Wiley.

Applied Logistic Regression. H D Lemeshow, John Wiley and SonsNew York, NYSecond edLemeshow HD, 2000. Applied Logistic Regression, Second ed. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons.

Validation studies for population-based intervention coverage indicators: design, analysis and, interpretation. M Munos, J Glob Health. 820804Munos M et al., 2018. Validation studies for population-based intervention coverage indicators: design, analysis and, interpre- tation. J Glob Health 8: 020804.

Underreporting and missed opportunities for uptake of intermittent preventative treatment of malaria in pregnancy in Mali. E Hurley, PLoS One. 58Hurley E et al., 2016. Underreporting and missed opportunities for uptake of intermittent preventative treatment of malaria in pregnancy in Mali. PLoS One 5: 8.

Measuring malaria diagnosis and treatment coverage in population-based surveys: a recall validation study in Mali among caregivers of febrile children under 5 years. R Ashton, Malar J. 183Ashton R et al., 2019. Measuring malaria diagnosis and treatment coverage in population-based surveys: a recall validation study in Mali among caregivers of febrile children under 5 years. Malar J 18: 3.