# a section of the journal Frontiers in Neurology A Review of Resting-State electroencephalography Analysis in Disorders of Consciousness

CorpusID: 23752730
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/218ace79f1bbf52e15f76cc6114be2167df3274d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/218ace79f1bbf52e15f76cc6114be2167df3274d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

a section of the journal Frontiers in Neurology A Review of Resting-State electroencephalography Analysis in Disorders of Consciousness
September 2017

Olivia Gosseries 
Quentin Noirhomme 
Damian Cruse 
Xiaoli Li xiaoli@bnu.edu.cn 
Yang Bai 
Institute of Electrical Engineering
Yanshan University
QinhuangdaoChina

Xiaoyu Xia 
Department of Neurosurgery
PLA Army General Hospital
BeijingChina

Xiaoli Li 
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning
Beijing Normal University
BeijingChina


University of Liège
Belgium


Maastricht University
Netherlands


University of Western Ontario
Canada

a section of the journal Frontiers in Neurology A Review of Resting-State electroencephalography Analysis in Disorders of Consciousness

Citation ; : Bai Y, Xia X and Li X (2017) A Review of Resting-State Electroencephalography Analysis in Disorders of Consciousness

Article 471. Front. Neurol
8471September 201710.3389/fneur.2017.00471Specialty section: This article was submitted to Applied Neuroimaging, Received: 25 June 2017 Accepted: 25 August 20171 Mini Review Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org Edited by: Reviewed by: *Correspondence:electroencephalographydisorder of consciousnessvegetative stateminimally conscious stateunresponsive wakefulness syndrome
Recently, neuroimaging technologies have been developed as important methods for assessing the brain condition of patients with disorders of consciousness (DOC). Among these technologies, resting-state electroencephalography (EEG) recording and analysis has been widely applied by clinicians due to its relatively low cost and convenience. EEG reflects the electrical activity of the underlying neurons, and it contains information regarding neuronal population oscillations, the information flow pathway, and neural activity networks. Some features derived from EEG signal processing methods have been proposed to describe the electrical features of the brain with DOC. The computation of these features is challenging for clinicians working to comprehend the corresponding physiological meanings and then to put them into clinical applications. This paper reviews studies that analyze spontaneous EEG of DOC, with the purpose of diagnosis, prognosis, and evaluation of brain interventions. It is expected that this review will promote our understanding of the EEG characteristics in DOC.

Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 471 following severe brain injuries (2,18). The active paradigms, such as motor imagery, require the active participation of patients. This poses several problems when working with DOC patients, such as their impaired cognitive function, fluctuations of arousal levels, fatigue, and subclinical seizure activity. EEG recordings taken in a resting state denote spontaneous neural activity, which is relevant to the fundamental brain state (3,19). Therefore, appropriate features derived from resting-sate EEG may be helpful in monitoring the brain condition of DOC and contribute to decision-making related to these patients' care. In this paper, we present a review of studies on resting-state EEG in DOC and attempt to improve our knowledge of EEG features in the diagnosis, prognosis, and evaluation of brain interventions in cases of DOC.


## THe eeG AnALYSiS FOR DiAGnOSiS

Since MCS patients are considered to benefit relatively easily from some specific treatments, compared to VS (11,20), the ability to differentiate an MCS from a VS would offer great value in making decisions about treatment. In clinical practice, many standardized behavioral scales are used in the assessment of consciousness of brain-injured patients, such as the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (21) and the Coma Recovery Scale-Revised (CRS-R) (22). Among them, the GCS is widely used in the early hours of a patient's admission, and the CRS-R is used throughout the recovery (1). However, a high ratio of misdiagnoses can be caused by clinicians' subjective judgments, motor function injuries, and patients' fluctuating levels of awareness (10,16,23). Therefore, one of the primary applications of EEG studies in DOC patients is auxiliary diagnosis. Table 1 summarizes the studies we reviewed in this paper. Spectrum powers have demonstrated the ability to discriminate between MCS and VS. VS patients have shown increased delta power but decreased alpha power, compared to those with MCS (35,44). In comparison with healthy subjects, VS patients have shown higher delta and theta frequency powers, and both MCS and VS patients have shown decreased alpha power (39). Moreover, the ratios between higher frequencies (alpha + beta) and lower frequencies (delta + theta) have shown a positive correlation with patients' CRS-R scores (24,39) and a correlation with regional glucose metabolism in MCS (n = 4) (24). Considering the spatial distribution, cortical EEG sources showed that the MCS and VS have significant variations of delta in the frontal region, theta in the frontal and parietal regions, alpha and beta in the central region, and gamma in the parietal region (43).

Spectral entropy analysis has found that the MCS has higher entropy value than the VS (18,31), and the entropy values were correlated with CRS-R (31). The spectral entropy of the MCS changes over time, and periodicities closely resemble being awake in healthy subjects (44). Therefore, the spectral entropy value and its periodic characteristic have been suggested as potential indices for differentiating the MCS from VS. Some other spectrum-derived indices have been introduced in DOC research, such as BIS. BIS was demonstrated to discriminate between an unconscious state and a conscious one (with a value of 50) in one study (25). It could effectively distinguish the VS from the MCS (26). Entropy theory has also been applied in the time domain of EEG. Approximate entropy (28)(29)(30), Lempel-Ziv complexity (30), permutation entropy (18), and Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity (18) indices have been proposed to investigate the association of EEG complexity with the consciousness levels of DOC patients. Generally, the VS had lower EEG complexity than the MCS, and the control had the highest (30). Among the indices, Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity and permutation entropy have been indicated as capable of discriminating the MCS from the VS (18,45).

Functional connectivity is a crucial method for examining consciousness (40,67). Among the connectivity methods, coherence was the earliest connectivity measurement used in DOC research (62). The results of one study showed that the frontal regions and their connections with the left temporal and parietooccipital areas could differentiate the MCS and severe neurocognitive disorders, and this difference was consistent with the results of a Granger causality (27). Similarly, a study of coherence performed by Leon-Carrion et al. showed significant differences in full bandwidth (delta, theta, alpha, and beta) in MCS patients with severe neurocognitive disorders (34). However, the coherence methodology has inherent defects that prevent it from being considered as an ideal method for describing global networks (68,69). Lehembre et al. compared three connectivity methods (coherence, the imaginary part of coherence, and the phase lag index) and found that significantly lower connectivity of the VS than the MCS could be detected by the imaginary part of coherence and the phase lag index, but failed with coherence (35). Another study addressed 44 indices and proved that partial coherence, directed transfer function, and generalized partial directed coherence were methods with above-chance accuracy for the distinction of an MCS from a VS (with accuracy levels of 0.88, 0.80, and 0.78, respectively) (40).

Furthermore, some other connectivity approaches have been employed, such as weighted symbolic mutual information (wSMI), cross-approximate entropy (32), debiased weighted phase lag index (dwPLI) (46), symbolic transfer entropy, and multivariate Granger causality (41). Among them, wSMI has demonstrated a dissociation with consciousness levels in DOC patients (36), and it was significantly lower in VS in theta and alpha bands (18). Similarly, connectivity and network parameters measured by dwPLI in delta and alpha bands also provided valuable approaches to discriminate different consciousness levels in DOC patients (46).

New approaches using non-strict resting-state EEG might provide new perspectives for finding physiological features that may contribute to diagnoses. Standard EEG patterns in DOC patients showed a difference between the MCS and VS in sleeping states (33). The occurrence of EEG patterns, including sleep spindles, slow wave activity, and the variability of brain rhythms (theta, alpha, and beta), were demonstrated to have significant correlations with the patients' behavioral diagnoses (37). Bonfiglio et al. proposed that the detection of blink-rated oscillations contributed to the differential diagnoses between the MCS and VS (38,42). Blink-related delta oscillations linked with awareness of the surrounding environment, which was a criterion for assessing consciousness. The detection of blink-related activity differs from the classical resting-state measurement. However, although it included an event input, the resting-state blinking used in the studies was also a type of spontaneous activity which differed from external stimulus used in ERP.


## THe eeG AnALYSiS FOR PROGnOSiS

The prognosis for survival and recovery of DOC is still difficult under present clinical conditions (70,71). Generally, the outcomes at 3 and 6 months following the first assessment were selected to observe the predictive performance of the measures. After 3 months of observation, the spectrum power of EEG recordings showed potentially positive performance in predicting the outcomes of a persistent VS (a patient stays in a VS over 1 month after brain injury) (47). Measured by the level of the cognitive functioning scale (LCF), 12 of 50 patients recovered (from LCF I-II to LCF V-VIII). All the patients stayed in a chronic DOC state at the first evaluation. Compared to healthy subjects, the power of alpha in the occipital region showed progressive decay from healthy subjects to recovered patients and then to non-recovered patients. Therefore, the alpha oscillation was implied as a predictor of the possibility of consciousness recovery (47).

Studies using 6 months of observation have shown an association of non-linear analysis indices with the follow-up recovery. Lempel-Ziv complexity, ApEn, and cross-approximate entropy have been suggested as being capable of predicting outcomes of DOC patients (10 of 37 recovered, with Glasgow Outcome Scale scores decreasing to 3). The first evaluation was conducted on patients who stayed in a chronic DOC state after the onset of brain injury for less than 6 months; the patients with increasing indices under painful stimuli had a higher probability of recovery (30). Coincidentally, another study also found that the highest ApEn might correspond to partial or full consciousness improvement at 6 months after the first assessment (29). The prognostic value of resting-state EEG in predicting survival or non-survival 6 months after brain injury was also proven by EEG oscillatory microstate analyses (48). The first EEG recording of the patients was obtained between 14 days and 3 months after acute brain events. The diversity and variability of EEG oscillations and the probability of the appearance of delta, theta (slow and fast), and alpha oscillations were shown to be potential prognostic features in predicting the outcomes of DOC at the group level. In a recent study, 39 of 61 patients had positive outcomes (assessed by Glasgow Outcome Scale-Extended) at 1 year following the first assessment (46). EEG analysis of the patients found that the connectivity and brain network parameters in delta band had a clear relationship with their outcomes. Meanwhile, EEG sleep patterns were also demonstrated valuable predictors of patients' clinical outcomes (49,50,52). Especially, the density of sleep spindles provided significantly predictive and valuable information about the clinical outcomes of DOC patients.


## THe eeG AnALYSiS FOR THe evALUATiOn OF bRAin inTeRvenTiOn

Due to a variety of etiological, brain injury, and cortical conditions, DOC patients have shown various responses to treatment  therapies (20,72). A precise evaluation of the cerebral responses in the treatment would be helpful for understanding the mechanism of the intervention and facilitate the creation of individual therapeutic strategies. In practice, behavioral changes induced by treatment might be long-lasting accumulated effects that could not be observed immediately. Recently, indices based on EEG analyses were applied to monitor the instantaneous cerebral responses in pharmacological and non-pharmacological brain interventions (16). Spectrum power, connectivity of coherence, and phase synchronization have been used to assess the cerebral changes of patients in pharmacological treatment (53,55). For MCS patients who respond to midazolam, spectrum power changes and connectivity changes were found after taking the medication (55). While under zolpidem treatment, all patients showed a distinct low-frequency oscillatory peak at approximately 6-10 Hz over the fronto-central regions (53). Resting-state EEG in nonpharmacological interventions have been investigated in DOC treatment, such as spinal cord stimulation (61), repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) (54,57,60), sensory stimuli (56), transcranial alternating current stimulation (58), and oscillatory transcranial direct current stimulation (59). The fronto-parietal networks of the MCS in the theta and gamma bands have been demonstrated as being responsive to transcranial current stimulation, with little reactivity found in the VS (58,59). This modulation of a consciousness-related network may suggest more benefits to the MCS than the VS from transcranial current stimulation, and the differential cortical responses between the MCS and VS might provide a stimulus-response approach for diagnoses. Similarly, the different EEG responses between the MCS and VS have also been demonstrated in rTMS, proven by spectrum power (54), complex network parameters (60), and slow wave activity in sleeping (57). In addition, we have attempted to use resting-state EEG as an assistive method for parameter selection in spinal cord stimulations of patients with DOC (61).


## SUMMARY AnD COnCLUSiOn

The characteristics that have been applied in DOC-related studies could be generally classified into five categories: the spectrum, entropy, connectivity, the network, and the sleeping pattern. We summarize the primary features that are frequently used in DOC studies (Figure 1). We found that spectrum power, coherence, and entropy were the most frequently used features in differentiating consciousness levels, predicting follow-up outcome or measuring patients' cortical response to brain intervention. Comparisons of various methods with multiple indices were performed in two studies (18,40). Indices derived from spectrum, non-linear analysis, information theory, and functional connectivity were investigated. A discrimination performance of the measures supports power spectrum and functional connectivity as having the best performance in separating the VS from the MCS and healthy subjects (18). In addition, permutation entropy in the theta frequency also has relatively higher classification accuracy in distinguishing the MCS and VS. Spectral power measures the strength of neuronal oscillations, which depend on the spontaneously activity of underlying oscillators (neurons) (73). Spectral power at some specific frequency can reveal relationships between the activity of groups of neurons and consciousness levels (24,39). Reviewing the studies, increases of low power (delta and theta), and decreases of high power (alpha) were common spectrum characteristics of patients with DOC. In comparing the MCS and VS, the latter has increased delta and decreased alpha power than the former. Therefore, a power ratio index may be first considered to help us qualitatively assess the consciousness state of patients. In predicting the follow-up outcomes, alpha power should always receive attention. In addition, theta and alpha bands are also critical frequency bands in assessing cortical responses to brain interventions.

Since the neuronal oscillations and synchronization are two essential features of the conscious brain (74), synchronization should be a critical feature in understanding the consciousness of patients with DOC. Synchronization analysis could reveal direct structural connections or indirect information flows, and it could concurrently provide temporal causality and spatial links (2,75). Non-directed (coherence, the phase locking index, partial directed coherence, the imaginary part of coherence, the dwPLI, cross-approximate entropy, and wSMI) and directed (transfer entropy, symbolic transfer entropy, mutual information, and Granger causality) connectivity measurements were used to reveal the "disconnection" characteristics of patients with DOC (32,64). Among the measurements, coherence is the most commonly used method. In addition, disconnection between the frontal and other regions, especially the fronto-parietal, was shown to be a significant biomarker, whether assessing the consciousness level or evaluating the brain response to intervention. However, when taking the synchronization feature into actual clinical operation, the reference location, artifact robustness, volume conduction, interesting regions, and cautious physiological explanations should be taken into account.

Similar to EEG complexity in a sleep or anesthesia state (76)(77)(78), the complexity measures in DOC were based on the hypothesis that neural activities would be suppressed in a brain of a low consciousness level, and thus fewer components would be included in the EEG signals. EEG complexity, whether measured in the time domain (such as approximate entropy, Lempel-Ziv complexity, Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity, and permutation entropy) or the frequency domain (BIS and spectral entropy), provided relatively effective and readily comprehensible indices (range of 0-1 or 0-100, with higher value corresponding to higher consciousness level) to describe brain electrical activities under different consciousness states. Therefore, complexity characteristics may have potential value in quantitatively describing the consciousness level of patients with DOC and finally are implanted into monitors for daily caring.


## AUTHOR COnTRibUTiOnS

YB and XX reviewed the articles and written the manuscript. XL guided the whole work. 

## FiGURe 1 |
1The primary features in resting-state electroencephalography studies of disorders of consciousness.

## FUnDinG


## TAbLe 1 |
1Summary of studies using resting-state EEG for diagnosis, prognosis, and evaluation of intervention and basic researches.Best cross-validated single measure: MCS vs. VS (AUC = 71 ± 4) Whole set of measures: MCS vs. VS (AUC = 78 ± 4)The most discriminative measure was wSMI, which separated VS from MCS Short-and long-range coherence had a diagnostic value in the prognosis of recovery from VS Greater low-frequency power, less high-frequency power, and reduced coherence were over the more damaged right hemisphereObjectives Literatures 
Methods 
Subjects 
Accuracy/sensitivity/specificity (%) 
Main results 

Diagnosis 
Coleman et al. (24) 
Spectrum power ratio 
MCS 4, VS 6 
-/-/-
VS showed significantly higher EEG power ratio than MCS 

Schnakers et al. (25) 
BIS 
VS 32, Coma 11 
-/75/75 
BIS could differentiate unconscious from conscious 

Schnakers et al. (26) 
EMCS 13, MCS 30, 
VS 13, Coma 16 

-/-/-

Pollonini et al. (27) 
Coherence, Granger causality 
MCS 7, SND 9 
100/-/-
Number of connections within and between brain regions 
could differentiate MCS from SND 

Sara and Pistoia (28) 
ApEn 
VS 10, control 10 
-/-/-
ApEn was lower in VS than in controls 

Sarà et al. (29) 
VS 38, control 40 
-/100/97.5 

Wu et al. (30) 
Lempel-Ziv complexity, ApEn, cross-
approximate entropy 

MCS 16, VS 21, control 30 
-/-/-
VS had lowest non-linear indices than MCS and control had 
highest indices 

Gosseries et al. (31) 
State entropy, response entropy 
MCS 26, VS 24, Coma 6 
-/89/90 
EEG entropy of MCS was higher than VS 

Wu et al. (32) 
Cross-approximate entropy 
MCS 20, VS 30, control 30 
-/-/-
Interconnection of local and distant cortical networks in MCS 
was superior to that of VS 

Landsness et al. (33) 
Slow wave activity 
MCS 6, VS 5 
-/-/-
MCS showed an alternating sleep pattern; 
VS preserved behavioral sleep but no sleep EEG patterns; 

Leon-Carrion et al. (34) Coherence, Granger causality 
MCS 7, SND 9 
-/-/-
MCS showed frontal cortex disconnection from other cortical 
regions 

Significant difference in full bandwidth coherence between 
SND and MCS 

Lehembre et al. (35) 
Spectrum power, coherence, imaginary 
part of coherence, phase lag index 

MCS 18, VS 10, 
Acute/subacute 15 

-/-/-
VS showed increased delta, decreased alpha power, and 
lower connectivity than MCS 

King et al. (36) 
wSMI 
MCS 68, VS 75, CS 24, 
control 14 

-/-/-
wSMI increases as a function separate VS from MCS 

Malinowska et al. (37) Matching pursuit decomposition, Slow 
wave activity, K-complexes 

LIS 1, MCS 20, VS 11 
87/-/-
Sleep EEG patterns correlated with patients' diagnosis 

Bonfiglio et al. (38) 
Blink-related delta oscillations 
MCS 5, VS 4, control 12 
-/-/-
Patients showed abnormal blink-related delta oscillations 

Lechinger et al. (39) 
Spectrum power 
MCS 9, VS 8, control 14 
-/-/-
Ratios between frequencies (above 8 Hz) and (below 8 Hz) 
correlated with CRS-R 

Höller et al. (40) 
A total of 44 indices 
MCS 22, VS 27, control 23 Partial coherence: MCS vs. VS (88), control 
vs. MCS (96), control vs. VS (98) 

Connectivity was crucial for determining the level of 
consciousness 

Transfer function: MCS vs. VS (80), control 
vs. MCS (87), control vs. VS (84) 

Partial coherence: MCS vs. VS (78), control 
vs. MCS (93), control vs. VS (96) 

Sitt et al. (18) 
Spectrum power, spectral entropy, 
Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity, phase 
locking index, wSMI, permutation entropy 

MCS 68, VS 75, CS 24, 
control 14 

Marinazzo et al. (41) 
Multivariate Granger causality, transfer 
entropy 

MCS 10, EMCS 5, VS11, 
control 10 

-/-/-
In VS, the central, temporal, and occipital electrodes showed 
asymmetry between incoming and outgoing information 

Bonfiglio et al. (42) 
Blink-related synchronization/ 
desynchronization 

MCS 4, VS 5, control 12 
-/-/-
Blink-related synchronization/desynchronization could 
differentiate MCS from VS 



Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 471
ReFeRenCeS
Disorders of consciousness: coma, vegetative and minimally conscious states. O Gosseries, A Vanhaudenhuyse, M-A Bruno, A Demertzi, C Schnakers, M M Boly, States of Consciousness. Cvetkovic D., Cosic I.BerlinSpringerGosseries O, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Bruno M-A, Demertzi A, Schnakers C, Boly MM, et al. Disorders of consciousness: coma, vegetative and minimally conscious states. In: Cvetkovic D., Cosic I., editors. States of Consciousness. Berlin: Springer (2011). p. 29-55.

Measuring consciousness in severely damaged brains. O Gosseries, H Di, S Laureys, M Boly, 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062012-170339Annu Rev Neurosci. 37Gosseries O, Di H, Laureys S, Boly M. Measuring consciousness in severely damaged brains. Annu Rev Neurosci (2014) 37:457-78. doi:10.1146/annurev- neuro-062012-170339

Disorders of consciousness after acquired brain injury: the state of the science. J T Giacino, J J Fins, S Laureys, N D Schiff, 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.279Nat Rev Neurol. 102Giacino JT, Fins JJ, Laureys S, Schiff ND. Disorders of consciousness after acquired brain injury: the state of the science. Nat Rev Neurol (2014) 10(2): 99-114. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2013.279

Persistent vegetative state after brain damage. A syndrome in search of a name. B Jennett, F Plum, 10.1016/S0140-6736(72)90242-5doi:10.1016/ S0140-6736(72Lancet. 17753Jennett B, Plum F. Persistent vegetative state after brain damage. A syn- drome in search of a name. Lancet (1972) 1(7753):734-7. doi:10.1016/ S0140-6736(72)90242-5

Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: a new name for the vegetative state or apallic syndrome. S Laureys, G G Celesia, F Cohadon, J Lavrijsen, J Leon-Carrion, W G Sannita, 10.1186/1741-7015-8-68BMC Med. 868Laureys S, Celesia GG, Cohadon F, Lavrijsen J, Leon-Carrion J, Sannita WG, et al. Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: a new name for the vegetative state or apallic syndrome. BMC Med (2010) 8:68. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-68

Brain function in coma, vegetative state, and related disorders. S Laureys, A M Owen, N D Schiff, 10.1016/S1474-4422(04)00852-XLancet Neurol. 39852Laureys S, Owen AM, Schiff ND. Brain function in coma, vegetative state, and related disorders. Lancet Neurol (2004) 3(9):537-46. doi:10.1016/S1474- 4422(04)00852-X

The changing spectrum of coma. S Laureys, M Boly, 10.1038/ncpneuro0887Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 410Laureys S, Boly M. The changing spectrum of coma. Nat Clin Pract Neurol (2008) 4(10):544-6. doi:10.1038/ncpneuro0887

The minimally conscious state: definition and diagnostic criteria. J T Giacino, S Ashwal, N Childs, R Cranford, B Jennett, D I Katz, 10.1212/WNL.58.3.349Neurology. 583Giacino JT, Ashwal S, Childs N, Cranford R, Jennett B, Katz DI, et al. The minimally conscious state: definition and diagnostic criteria. Neurology (2002) 58(3):349-53. doi:10.1212/WNL.58.3.349

Neuroimaging in disorders of consciousness: contributions to diagnosis and prognosis. D Cruse, M M Monti, A M Owen, 10.2217/fnl.10.87Future Neurol. 62Cruse D, Monti MM, Owen AM. Neuroimaging in disorders of consciousness: contributions to diagnosis and prognosis. Future Neurol (2011) 6(2):291-9. doi:10.2217/fnl.10.87

Our rapidly changing understanding of acute and chronic disorders of consciousness: challenges for neurologists. I S Gantner, O Bodart, S Laureys, A Demertzi, 10.2217/fnl.12.77Future Neurol. 81Gantner IS, Bodart O, Laureys S, Demertzi A. Our rapidly changing under- standing of acute and chronic disorders of consciousness: challenges for neurologists. Future Neurol (2013) 8(1):43-54. doi:10.2217/fnl.12.77

tDCS in patients with disorders of consciousness: sham-controlled randomized double-blind study. A Thibaut, M A Bruno, D Ledoux, A Demertzi, S Laureys, 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000260Neurology. 8213Thibaut A, Bruno MA, Ledoux D, Demertzi A, Laureys S. tDCS in patients with disorders of consciousness: sham-controlled randomized double-blind study. Neurology (2014) 82(13):1112-8. doi:10.1212/WNL. 0000000000000260

Detecting awareness after severe brain injury. D Fernandez-Espejo, A M Owen, 10.1038/nrn3608Nat Rev Neurosci. 1411Fernandez-Espejo D, Owen AM. Detecting awareness after severe brain injury. Nat Rev Neurosci (2013) 14(11):801-9. doi:10.1038/nrn3608

Bedside detection of awareness in the vegetative state: a cohort study. D Cruse, S Chennu, C Chatelle, T A Bekinschtein, D Fernandez-Espejo, J D Pickard, 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61224-5Lancet. 3789809Cruse D, Chennu S, Chatelle C, Bekinschtein TA, Fernandez-Espejo D, Pickard JD, et al. Bedside detection of awareness in the vegetative state: a cohort study. Lancet (2011) 378(9809):2088-94. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61224-5

Detecting awareness in the vegetative state: electroencephalographic evidence Frontiers in Neurology | www. D Cruse, S Chennu, D Fernandez-Espejo, W L Payne, G B Young, A M Owen, 10.1371/journal.pone.0049933PLoS One. 81149933Article 471 for attempted movements to commandCruse D, Chennu S, Fernandez-Espejo D, Payne WL, Young GB, Owen AM. Detecting awareness in the vegetative state: electroencephalographic evidence Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 471 for attempted movements to command. PLoS One (2012) 7(11):e49933. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0049933

The reliability of the N400 in single subjects: implications for patients with disorders of consciousness. D Cruse, S Beukema, S Chennu, J G Malins, A M Owen, K Mcrae, 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.05.001Neuroimage Clin. 4Cruse D, Beukema S, Chennu S, Malins JG, Owen AM, McRae K. The reliability of the N400 in single subjects: implications for patients with disorders of con- sciousness. Neuroimage Clin (2014) 4:788-99. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.05.001

The role of neuroimaging techniques in establishing diagnosis, prognosis and therapy in disorders of consciousness. O Gosseries, F Pistoia, V Charland-Verville, A Carolei, S Sacco, S Laureys, 10.2174/1874440001610010052Open Neuroimag J. 10Gosseries O, Pistoia F, Charland-Verville V, Carolei A, Sacco S, Laureys S. The role of neuroimaging techniques in establishing diagnosis, prognosis and therapy in disorders of consciousness. Open Neuroimag J (2016) 10:52-68. doi:10.2174/1874440001610010052

Brain Function and Responsiveness in Disorders of Consciousness. M M Monti, W G Sannita, Springer International PublishingSwitzerlandMonti MM, Sannita WG. Brain Function and Responsiveness in Disorders of Consciousness. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing (2016).

Large scale screening of neural signatures of consciousness in patients in a vegetative or minimally conscious state. J D Sitt, J R King, El Karoui, I Rohaut, B Faugeras, F Gramfort, A , 10.1093/brain/awu141doi:10.1093/ brain/awu141Brain. Pt 8Sitt JD, King JR, El Karoui I, Rohaut B, Faugeras F, Gramfort A, et al. Large scale screening of neural signatures of consciousness in patients in a vegetative or minimally conscious state. Brain (2014) 137(Pt 8):2258-70. doi:10.1093/ brain/awu141

Disturbed fluctuations of resting state EEG synchronization in Alzheimer's disease. C Stam, T Montez, B Jones, S Rombouts, Y Van Der Made, Y Pijnenburg, 10.1016/j.clinph.2004.09.022doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2004.09.022Neurophysiol Clin. 1163Stam C, Montez T, Jones B, Rombouts S, Van Der Made Y, Pijnenburg Y, et al. Disturbed fluctuations of resting state EEG synchronization in Alzheimer's disease. Neurophysiol Clin (2005) 116(3):708-15. doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2004.09.022

Disorders of consciousness and electrophysiological treatment strategies: a review of the literature and new perspectives. A Guerra, E M Costantini, S Maatta, D Ponzo, F Ferreri, 10.2174/13816128113196660648Curr Pharm Des. 2026Guerra A, Costantini EM, Maatta S, Ponzo D, Ferreri F. Disorders of con- sciousness and electrophysiological treatment strategies: a review of the literature and new perspectives. Curr Pharm Des (2014) 20(26):4248-67. doi: 10.2174/13816128113196660648

Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness. A practical scale. G Teasdale, B Jennett, 10.1016/S0140-6736(74)91639-0Lancet. 27872Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired conscious- ness. A practical scale. Lancet (1974) 2(7872):81-4. doi:10.1016/S0140- 6736(74)91639-0

The JFK Coma Recovery Scale-revised: measurement characteristics and diagnostic utility. J T Giacino, K Kalmar, J Whyte, 10.1016/j.apmr.2004.02.033Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 8512Giacino JT, Kalmar K, Whyte J. The JFK Coma Recovery Scale-revised: measurement characteristics and diagnostic utility. Arch Phys Med Rehabil (2004) 85(12):2020-9. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2004.02.033

Diagnostic accuracy of the vegetative and minimally conscious state: clinical consensus versus standardized neurobehavioral assessment. C Schnakers, A Vanhaudenhuyse, J Giacino, M Ventura, M Boly, S Majerus, 10.1186/1471-2377-9-35BMC Neurol. 935Schnakers C, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Giacino J, Ventura M, Boly M, Majerus S, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the vegetative and minimally conscious state: clinical consensus versus standardized neurobehavioral assessment. BMC Neurol (2009) 9:35. doi:10.1186/1471-2377-9-35

Neurometabolic coupling in the vegetative and minimally conscious states: preliminary findings. M R Coleman, D K Menon, T D Fryer, J D Pickard, 10.1136/jnnp.2004.045930J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 763Coleman MR, Menon DK, Fryer TD, Pickard JD. Neurometabolic coupling in the vegetative and minimally conscious states: preliminary findings. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2005) 76(3):432-4. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2004.045930

Bispectral analysis of electroencephalogram signals during recovery from coma: preliminary findings. C Schnakers, S Majerus, S Laureys, 10.1080/09602010443000524Neuropsychol Rehabil. 153-4Schnakers C, Majerus S, Laureys S. Bispectral analysis of electroencephalo- gram signals during recovery from coma: preliminary findings. Neuropsychol Rehabil (2005) 15(3-4):381-8. doi:10.1080/09602010443000524

Diagnostic and prognostic use of bispectral index in coma, vegetative state and related disorders. C Schnakers, D Ledoux, S Majerus, P Damas, F Damas, B Lambermont, doi:10.1080/ 02699050802530565Brain Inj. 2212Schnakers C, Ledoux D, Majerus S, Damas P, Damas F, Lambermont B, et al. Diagnostic and prognostic use of bispectral index in coma, vegetative state and related disorders. Brain Inj (2008) 22(12):926-31. doi:10.1080/ 02699050802530565

Information communication networks in severe traumatic brain injury. L Pollonini, S Pophale, N Situ, M H Wu, R E Frye, J Leon-Carrion, 10.1007/s10548-010-0139-9Brain Topogr. 232Pollonini L, Pophale S, Situ N, Wu MH, Frye RE, Leon-Carrion J, et al. Information communication networks in severe traumatic brain injury. Brain Topogr (2010) 23(2):221-6. doi:10.1007/s10548-010-0139-9

Complexity loss in physiological time series of patients in a vegetative state. M Sara, F Pistoia, Nonlinear Dynamics Psychol Life Sci. 141Sara M, Pistoia F. Complexity loss in physiological time series of patients in a vegetative state. Nonlinear Dynamics Psychol Life Sci (2010) 14(1):1-13.

Functional isolation within the cerebral cortex in the vegetative state: a nonlinear method to predict clinical outcomes. M Sarà, F Pistoia, P Pasqualetti, F Sebastiano, P Onorati, P M Rossini, 10.1177/1545968310378508Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 251Sarà M, Pistoia F, Pasqualetti P, Sebastiano F, Onorati P, Rossini PM. Functional isolation within the cerebral cortex in the vegetative state: a nonlinear method to predict clinical outcomes. Neurorehabil Neural Repair (2011) 25(1):35-42. doi:10.1177/1545968310378508

Application of nonlinear dynamics analysis in assessing unconsciousness: a preliminary study. D Y Wu, G Cai, Y Yuan, L Liu, G Q Li, W Q Song, 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.05.036Clin Neurophysiol. 1223Wu DY, Cai G, Yuan Y, Liu L, Li GQ, Song WQ, et al. Application of nonlinear dynamics analysis in assessing unconsciousness: a preliminary study. Clin Neurophysiol (2011) 122(3):490-8. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2010.05.036

Automated EEG entropy measurements in coma, vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome and minimally conscious state. O Gosseries, C Schnakers, D Ledoux, A Vanhaudenhuyse, M A Bruno, A Demertzi, Funct Neurol. 261Gosseries O, Schnakers C, Ledoux D, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Bruno MA, Demertzi A, et al. Automated EEG entropy measurements in coma, vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome and minimally conscious state. Funct Neurol (2011) 26(1):25-30.

Measuring interconnection of the residual cortical functional islands in persistent vegetative state and minimal conscious state with EEG nonlinear analysis. D Y Wu, G Cai, R D Zorowitz, Y Yuan, J Wang, W Q Song, 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.03.018Clin Neurophysiol. 12210Wu DY, Cai G, Zorowitz RD, Yuan Y, Wang J, Song WQ. Measuring intercon- nection of the residual cortical functional islands in persistent vegetative state and minimal conscious state with EEG nonlinear analysis. Clin Neurophysiol (2011) 122(10):1956-66. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2011.03.018

Electrophysiological correlates of behavioural changes in vigilance in vegetative state and minimally conscious state. E Landsness, M A Bruno, Q Noirhomme, B Riedner, O Gosseries, C Schnakers, 10.1093/brain/awr152Brain. Pt 8Landsness E, Bruno MA, Noirhomme Q, Riedner B, Gosseries O, Schnakers C, et al. Electrophysiological correlates of behavioural changes in vigilance in vegetative state and minimally conscious state. Brain (2011) 134(Pt 8): 2222-32. doi:10.1093/brain/awr152

Synchronization between the anterior and posterior cortex determines consciousness level in patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI). J Leon-Carrion, Leon-Dominguez , U Pollonini, L Wu, M-H Frye, R E Dominguez-Morales, M R , 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.055doi:10.1016/j. brainres.2012.03.055Brain Res. 1476Leon-Carrion J, Leon-Dominguez U, Pollonini L, Wu M-H, Frye RE, Dominguez-Morales MR, et al. Synchronization between the anterior and posterior cortex determines consciousness level in patients with trau- matic brain injury (TBI). Brain Res (2012) 1476:22-30. doi:10.1016/j. brainres.2012.03.055

Resting-state EEG study of comatose patients: a connectivity and frequency analysis to find differences between vegetative and minimally conscious states. R Lehembre, B Marie-Aurelie, A Vanhaudenhuyse, C Chatelle, V Cologan, Y Leclercq, Funct Neurol. 271Lehembre R, Marie-Aurelie B, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Chatelle C, Cologan V, Leclercq Y, et al. Resting-state EEG study of comatose patients: a connectivity and frequency analysis to find differences between vegetative and minimally conscious states. Funct Neurol (2012) 27(1):41-7.

Information sharing in the brain indexes consciousness in noncommunicative patients. J R King, J D Sitt, F Faugeras, B Rohaut, El Karoui, I Cohen, L , 10.1016/j.cub.2013.07.075Curr Biol. 23King JR, Sitt JD, Faugeras F, Rohaut B, El Karoui I, Cohen L, et al. Information sharing in the brain indexes consciousness in noncommunicative patients. Curr Biol (2013) 23(19):1914-9. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.07.075

Electroencephalographic profiles for differentiation of disorders of consciousness. U Malinowska, C Chatelle, M-A Bruno, Q Noirhomme, S Laureys, P J Durka, 10.1186/1475-925X-12-109Biomed Eng Online. 121109Malinowska U, Chatelle C, Bruno M-A, Noirhomme Q, Laureys S, Durka PJ. Electroencephalographic profiles for differentiation of disorders of conscious- ness. Biomed Eng Online (2013) 12(1):109. doi:10.1186/1475-925X-12-109

Cortical source of blink-related delta oscillations and their correlation with levels of consciousness. L Bonfiglio, U Olcese, B Rossi, A Frisoli, P Arrighi, G Greco, 10.1002/hbm.22056Hum Brain Mapp. 349Bonfiglio L, Olcese U, Rossi B, Frisoli A, Arrighi P, Greco G, et al. Cortical source of blink-related delta oscillations and their correlation with levels of consciousness. Hum Brain Mapp (2013) 34(9):2178-89. doi:10.1002/hbm. 22056

CRS-R score in disorders of consciousness is strongly related to spectral EEG at rest. J Lechinger, K Bothe, G Pichler, G Michitsch, J Donis, W Klimesch, 10.1007/s00415-013-6982-3J Neurol. 2609Lechinger J, Bothe K, Pichler G, Michitsch G, Donis J, Klimesch W, et al. CRS-R score in disorders of consciousness is strongly related to spectral EEG at rest. J Neurol (2013) 260(9):2348-56. doi:10.1007/s00415-013-6982-3

Connectivity biomarkers can differentiate patients with different levels of consciousness. Y Höller, A Thomschewski, J Bergmann, M Kronbichler, J S Crone, E V Schmid, 10.1016/j.clinph.2013.12.095doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2013.12.095Clin Neurophysiol. 1258Höller Y, Thomschewski A, Bergmann J, Kronbichler M, Crone JS, Schmid EV, et al. Connectivity biomarkers can differentiate patients with different levels of consciousness. Clin Neurophysiol (2014) 125(8):1545-55. doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2013.12.095

Directed information transfer in scalp electroencephalographic recordings: insights on disorders of consciousness. D Marinazzo, O Gosseries, M Boly, D Ledoux, M Rosanova, M Massimini, 10.1177/1550059413510703Clin EEG Neurosci. 451Marinazzo D, Gosseries O, Boly M, Ledoux D, Rosanova M, Massimini M, et al. Directed information transfer in scalp electroencephalographic recordings: insights on disorders of consciousness. Clin EEG Neurosci (2014) 45(1):33-9. doi:10.1177/1550059413510703

Spectral parameters modulation and source localization of blink-related alpha and low-beta oscillations differentiate minimally conscious state from vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome. L Bonfiglio, A Piarulli, U Olcese, P Andre, P Arrighi, A Frisoli, 10.1371/journal.pone.0093252PLoS One. 9393252Bonfiglio L, Piarulli A, Olcese U, Andre P, Arrighi P, Frisoli A, et al. Spectral parameters modulation and source localization of blink-related alpha and low-beta oscillations differentiate minimally conscious state from vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome. PLoS One (2014) 9(3):e93252. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0093252

Towards a method to differentiate chronic disorder of consciousness patients' awareness: the low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography analysis. A Naro, P Bramanti, A Leo, A Cacciola, A Bramanti, A Manuli, 10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.016J Neurol Sci. 368Naro A, Bramanti P, Leo A, Cacciola A, Bramanti A, Manuli A, et al. Towards a method to differentiate chronic disorder of consciousness patients' awareness: the low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography analysis. J Neurol Sci (2016) 368:178-83. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2016.07.016

EEG ultradian rhythmicity differences in disorders of consciousness during wakefulness. A Piarulli, M Bergamasco, A Thibaut, V Cologan, O Gosseries, S Laureys, 10.1007/s00415-016-8196-yJ Neurol. 2639Piarulli A, Bergamasco M, Thibaut A, Cologan V, Gosseries O, Laureys S. EEG ultradian rhythmicity differences in disorders of consciousness during wakefulness. J Neurol (2016) 263(9):1746-60. doi:10.1007/s00415-016-8196-y

EEG entropy measures indicate decrease of cortical information processing in disorders of consciousness. A Thul, J Lechinger, J Donis, G Michitsch, G Pichler, E F Kochs, 10.1016/j.clinph.2015.07.039Neurophysiol Clin. 1272Thul A, Lechinger J, Donis J, Michitsch G, Pichler G, Kochs EF, et al. EEG entropy measures indicate decrease of cortical information processing in disorders of consciousness. Neurophysiol Clin (2016) 127(2):1419-27. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2015.07.039

Brain networks predict metabolism, diagnosis and prognosis at the bedside in disorders of consciousness. S Chennu, J Annen, S Wannez, A Thibaut, C Chatelle, H Cassol, 10.1093/brain/awx163Brain. 1408Chennu S, Annen J, Wannez S, Thibaut A, Chatelle C, Cassol H, et al. Brain networks predict metabolism, diagnosis and prognosis at the bedside in disorders of consciousness. Brain (2017) 140(8):2120-32. doi:10.1093/brain/ awx163

Cortical sources of resting-state alpha rhythms are abnormal in persistent vegetative state patients. C Babiloni, M Sara, F Vecchio, F Pistoia, F Sebastiano, P Onorati, 10.1016/j.clinph.2009.02.157Clin Neurophysiol. 1204Babiloni C, Sara M, Vecchio F, Pistoia F, Sebastiano F, Onorati P, et al. Cortical sources of resting-state alpha rhythms are abnormal in persistent vegetative state patients. Clin Neurophysiol (2009) 120(4):719-29. doi:10.1016/j.clinph. 2009.02.157

Life or death: prognostic value of a resting EEG with regards to survival in patients in vegetative and minimally conscious states. A A Fingelkurts, A A Fingelkurts, S Bagnato, C Boccagni, G Galardi, 10.1371/journal.pone.0025967PLoS One. 61025967Fingelkurts AA, Fingelkurts AA, Bagnato S, Boccagni C, Galardi G. Life or death: prognostic value of a resting EEG with regards to survival in patients in vegetative and minimally conscious states. PLoS One (2011) 6(10):e25967. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025967

Sleep in the unresponsive wakefulness syndrome and minimally conscious state. V Cologan, X Drouot, S Parapatics, A Delorme, G Gruber, G Moonen, 10.1089/neu.2012.2654J Neurotrauma. 305Cologan V, Drouot X, Parapatics S, Delorme A, Gruber G, Moonen G, et al. Sleep in the unresponsive wakefulness syndrome and minimally conscious state. J Neurotrauma (2013) 30(5):339-46. doi:10.1089/neu.2012.2654

The prognostic value of sleep patterns in disorders of consciousness in the sub-acute phase. D Arnaldi, M Terzaghi, R Cremascoli, De Carli, F Maggioni, G Pistarini, C , doi:10.1016/ j.clinph.2015.10.042Clin Neurophysiol. 1272Arnaldi D, Terzaghi M, Cremascoli R, De Carli F, Maggioni G, Pistarini C, et al. The prognostic value of sleep patterns in disorders of consciousness in the sub-acute phase. Clin Neurophysiol (2016) 127(2):1445-51. doi:10.1016/ j.clinph.2015.10.042

Coherence in resting-state EEG as a predictor for the recovery from unresponsive wakefulness syndrome. B Schorr, W Schlee, M Arndt, A Bender, 10.1007/s00415-016-8084-5J Neurol. 2635Schorr B, Schlee W, Arndt M, Bender A. Coherence in resting-state EEG as a predictor for the recovery from unresponsive wakefulness syndrome. J Neurol (2016) 263(5):937-53. doi:10.1007/s00415-016-8084-5

Night and day variations of sleep in patients with disorders of consciousness. M Wislowska, R D Giudice, J Lechinger, T Wielek, D P Heib, A Pitiot, 10.1038/s41598-017-00323-47266Sci RepWislowska M, Giudice RD, Lechinger J, Wielek T, Heib DP, Pitiot A, et al. Night and day variations of sleep in patients with disorders of consciousness. Sci Rep (2017) 7(1):266. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-00323-4

Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org. 8471Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 471

Common resting brain dynamics indicate a possible mechanism underlying zolpidem response in severe brain injury. S T Williams, M M Conte, A M Goldfine, Q Noirhomme, O Gosseries, M Thonnard, 10.7554/eLife.01157Elife. 21157Williams ST, Conte MM, Goldfine AM, Noirhomme Q, Gosseries O, Thonnard M, et al. Common resting brain dynamics indicate a possible mechanism underlying zolpidem response in severe brain injury. Elife (2013) 2:e01157. doi:10.7554/eLife.01157

Effect of high-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on brain excitability in severely brain-injured patients in minimally conscious or vegetative state. P Manganotti, E Formaggio, S F Storti, A Fiaschi, L Battistin, P Tonin, 10.1016/j.brs.2013.06.006doi:10.1016/j. brs.2013.06.006Brain Stimul. 66Manganotti P, Formaggio E, Storti SF, Fiaschi A, Battistin L, Tonin P, et al. Effect of high-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on brain excitability in severely brain-injured patients in minimally con- scious or vegetative state. Brain Stimul (2013) 6(6):913-21. doi:10.1016/j. brs.2013.06.006

A case of post-traumatic minimally conscious state reversed by midazolam: clinical aspects and neurophysiological correlates. M C Carboncini, A Piarulli, A Virgillito, P Arrighi, P Andre, F Tomaiuolo, 10.3233/RNN-140426Restor Neurol Neurosci. 326Carboncini MC, Piarulli A, Virgillito A, Arrighi P, Andre P, Tomaiuolo F, et al. A case of post-traumatic minimally conscious state reversed by midazolam: clinical aspects and neurophysiological correlates. Restor Neurol Neurosci (2014) 32(6):767-87. doi:10.3233/RNN-140426

Coherence and consciousness: study of fronto-parietal gamma synchrony in patients with disorders of consciousness. M Cavinato, C Genna, P Manganotti, E Formaggio, S F Storti, S Campostrini, 10.1007/s10548-014-0383-5Brain Topogr. 284Cavinato M, Genna C, Manganotti P, Formaggio E, Storti SF, Campostrini S, et al. Coherence and consciousness: study of fronto-parietal gamma synchrony in patients with disorders of consciousness. Brain Topogr (2015) 28(4):570-9. doi:10.1007/s10548-014-0383-5

Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation induced slow wave activity modification: a possible role in disorder of consciousness differential diagnosis. L R Pisani, A Naro, A Leo, I Arico, F Pisani, R Silvestri, 10.1016/j.concog.2015.09.012Conscious Cogn. 38Pisani LR, Naro A, Leo A, Arico I, Pisani F, Silvestri R, et al. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation induced slow wave activity modification: a possible role in disorder of consciousness differential diagnosis? Conscious Cogn (2015) 38:1-8. doi:10.1016/j.concog.2015.09.012

Transcranial alternating current stimulation in patients with chronic disorder of consciousness: a possible way to cut the diagnostic Gordian knot. A Naro, P Bramanti, A Leo, M Russo, R S Calabrò, 10.1007/s10548-016-0489-zBrain Topogr. 294Naro A, Bramanti P, Leo A, Russo M, Calabrò RS. Transcranial alternating cur- rent stimulation in patients with chronic disorder of consciousness: a possible way to cut the diagnostic Gordian knot? Brain Topogr (2016) 29(4):623-44. doi:10.1007/s10548-016-0489-z

Cortical connectivity modulation induced by cerebellar oscillatory transcranial direct current stimulation in patients with chronic disorders of consciousness: a marker of covert cognition. A Naro, M Russo, A Leo, A Cannavò, A Manuli, A Bramanti, 10.1016/j.clinph.2015.12.010Neurophysiol Clin. 1273Naro A, Russo M, Leo A, Cannavò A, Manuli A, Bramanti A, et al. Cortical connectivity modulation induced by cerebellar oscillatory transcranial direct current stimulation in patients with chronic disorders of consciousness: a marker of covert cognition? Neurophysiol Clin (2016) 127(3):1845-54. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2015.12.010

How far can we go in chronic disorders of consciousness differential diagnosis? The use of neuromodulation in detecting internal and external awareness. A Naro, A Leo, A Manuli, A Cannavò, A Bramanti, P Bramanti, 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.02.053Neuroscience. 349Naro A, Leo A, Manuli A, Cannavò A, Bramanti A, Bramanti P, et al. How far can we go in chronic disorders of consciousness differential diagnosis? The use of neuromodulation in detecting internal and external awareness. Neuroscience (2017) 349:165-73. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.02.053

Spinal cord stimulation modulates frontal delta and gamma in patients of minimally consciousness state. Y Bai, X Xia, X Li, Y Wang, Y Yang, Y Liu, 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.01.036Neuroscience. 346Bai Y, Xia X, Li X, Wang Y, Yang Y, Liu Y, et al. Spinal cord stimulation modulates frontal delta and gamma in patients of minimally conscious- ness state. Neuroscience (2017) 346:247-54. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience. 2017.01.036

Power spectra and coherence in the EEG of a vegetative patient with severe asymmetric brain damage. M P Davey, J D Victor, N D Schiff, 10.1016/S1388-2457(00)00435-1Clin Neurophysiol. 11111Davey MP, Victor JD, Schiff ND. Power spectra and coherence in the EEG of a vegetative patient with severe asymmetric brain damage. Clin Neurophysiol (2000) 111(11):1949-54. doi:10.1016/S1388-2457(00)00435-1

Resting state eyes-closed cortical rhythms in patients with locked-in-syndrome: an EEG study. C Babiloni, F Pistoia, M Sara, F Vecchio, P Buffo, M Conson, 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.04.027doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2010.04.027Clin Neurophysiol. 11Babiloni C, Pistoia F, Sara M, Vecchio F, Buffo P, Conson M, et al. Resting state eyes-closed cortical rhythms in patients with locked-in-syndrome: an EEG study. Clin Neurophysiol (2010) 121(11):1816-24. doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2010.04.027

Altered resting state effective connectivity in long-standing vegetative state patients: an EEG study. G Varotto, P Fazio, Rossi Sebastiano, D Duran, D , D &apos;incerti, L Parati, E , 10.1016/j.clinph.2013.06.016doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2013.06.016Clin Neurophysiol. 1251Varotto G, Fazio P, Rossi Sebastiano D, Duran D, D'Incerti L, Parati E, et al. Altered resting state effective connectivity in long-standing vegetative state patients: an EEG study. Clin Neurophysiol (2014) 125(1):63-8. doi:10.1016/j. clinph.2013.06.016

Preservation of electroencephalographic organization in patients with impaired consciousness and imaging-based evidence of command-following. P B Forgacs, M M Conte, E A Fridman, H U Voss, J D Victor, N D Schiff, 10.1002/ana.24283Ann Neurol. 766Forgacs PB, Conte MM, Fridman EA, Voss HU, Victor JD, Schiff ND. Preser- vation of electroencephalographic organization in patients with impaired consciousness and imaging-based evidence of command-following. Ann Neurol (2014) 76(6):869-79. doi:10.1002/ana.24283

Night sleep in patients with vegetative state. Y G Pavlov, S Gais, F Muller, M Schonauer, B Schapers, J Born, 10.1111/jsr.12524doi:10.1111/ jsr.12524J Sleep Res. 7266Pavlov YG, Gais S, Muller F, Schonauer M, Schapers B, Born J, et al. Night sleep in patients with vegetative state. J Sleep Res (2017) 7:266. doi:10.1111/ jsr.12524

Unresponsiveness ≠ unconsciousness. R D Sanders, G Tononi, S Laureys, J W Sleigh, 10.1097/ALN.0b013e318249d0a7J Am Soc Anesthesiol. 1164Sanders RD, Tononi G, Laureys S, Sleigh JW. Unresponsiveness ≠ uncon- sciousness. J Am Soc Anesthesiol (2012) 116(4):946-59. doi:10.1097/ALN. 0b013e318249d0a7

Common reference coherence data are confounded by power and phase effects. G Fein, J Raz, F F Brown, E L Merrin, 10.1016/0013-4694(88)90171-XElectroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 696Fein G, Raz J, Brown FF, Merrin EL. Common reference coherence data are confounded by power and phase effects. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol (1988) 69(6):581-4. doi:10.1016/0013-4694(88)90171-X

Spatial filtering and neocortical dynamics: estimates of EEG coherence. R Srinivasan, P L Nunez, R B Silberstein, 10.1109/10.686789IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 457Srinivasan R, Nunez PL, Silberstein RB. Spatial filtering and neocortical dynamics: estimates of EEG coherence. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng (1998) 45(7):814-26. doi:10.1109/10.686789

Diagnostic and prognostic guidelines for the vegwive and minimally conscious states. J T Giacino, K Kalmar, 10.1080/09602010443000498Neuropsychol Rehabil. 153-4Giacino JT, Kalmar K. Diagnostic and prognostic guidelines for the vegwive and minimally conscious states. Neuropsychol Rehabil (2005) 15(3-4):166-74. doi:10.1080/09602010443000498

Prognostic value of standard EEG in traumatic and non-traumatic disorders of consciousness following coma. S Bagnato, C Boccagni, C Prestandrea, A Sant&apos; Angelo, A Castiglione, G Galardi, 10.1016/j.clinph.2009.11.008Neurophysiol Clin. 1213Bagnato S, Boccagni C, Prestandrea C, Sant' Angelo A, Castiglione A, Galardi G. Prognostic value of standard EEG in traumatic and non-traumatic disorders of consciousness following coma. Neurophysiol Clin (2010) 121(3):274-80. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2009.11.008

Vegetative state and minimally conscious state: a review of the therapeutic interventions. M Georgiopoulos, P Katsakiori, Z Kefalopoulou, J Ellul, E Chroni, C Constantoyannis, 10.1159/000314354Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 884Georgiopoulos M, Katsakiori P, Kefalopoulou Z, Ellul J, Chroni E, Constantoyannis C. Vegetative state and minimally conscious state: a review of the therapeutic interventions. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg (2010) 88(4): 199-207. doi:10.1159/000314354

Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks. G Buzsaki, A Draguhn, 10.1126/science.1099745Science. 3045679Buzsaki G, Draguhn A. Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks. Science (2004) 304(5679):1926-9. doi:10.1126/science.1099745

Synchronous neural oscillations and cognitive processes. L M Ward, 10.1016/j.tics.2003.10.012Trends Cogn Sci. 712Ward LM. Synchronous neural oscillations and cognitive processes. Trends Cogn Sci (2003) 7(12):553-9. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2003.10.012

Brain connectivity in disorders of consciousness. M Boly, M Massimini, M I Garrido, O Gosseries, Q Noirhomme, S Laureys, 10.1089/brain.2011.0049Brain Connect. 21Boly M, Massimini M, Garrido MI, Gosseries O, Noirhomme Q, Laureys S, et al. Brain connectivity in disorders of consciousness. Brain Connect (2012) 2(1):1-10. doi:10.1089/brain.2011.0049

Non-linear analysis of EEG signals at various sleep stages. R Acharya, O Faust, N Kannathal, T Chua, S Laxminarayan, 10.1016/j.cmpb.2005.06.011Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 801Acharya R, Faust O, Kannathal N, Chua T, Laxminarayan S. Non-linear anal- ysis of EEG signals at various sleep stages. Comput Methods Programs Biomed (2005) 80(1):37-45. doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2005.06.011

Using permutation entropy to measure the electroencephalographic effects of sevoflurane. X Li, S Cui, L J Voss, 10.1097/ALN.0b013e318182a91bAnesthesiology. 1093Li X, Cui S, Voss LJ. Using permutation entropy to measure the electroen- cephalographic effects of sevoflurane. Anesthesiology (2008) 109(3):448-56. doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e318182a91b

Multiscale permutation entropy analysis of EEG recordings during sevoflurane anesthesia. D Li, X Li, Z Liang, L J Voss, J W Sleigh, 10.1088/1741-2560/7/4/046010J Neural Eng. 7446010Li D, Li X, Liang Z, Voss LJ, Sleigh JW. Multiscale permutation entropy analysis of EEG recordings during sevoflurane anesthesia. J Neural Eng (2010) 7(4):046010. doi:10.1088/1741-2560/7/4/046010