# SCIENTIA PSYCHIATRICA An Overlap between Depression and Anxiety-A Literature Review

CorpusID: 238804662
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e7081024372a48ebab7147e0a81c6f954a194c4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e7081024372a48ebab7147e0a81c6f954a194c4a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

SCIENTIA PSYCHIATRICA An Overlap between Depression and Anxiety-A Literature Review


Patricia Wulandari dr.patricia.wulandari@gmail.com 
Cattleya Mental Health Center
PalembangIndonesia

Patricia Wulanda 
Cattleya Mental Health Center
PalembangIndonesia

SCIENTIA PSYCHIATRICA An Overlap between Depression and Anxiety-A Literature Review
10.32539/bsm.v2i3.38A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Depression Anxiety Comorbid Psychiatric Disorder Berkson 's Paradox ⁎ Correspo ndi ng author: All authors have reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.
A B S T R A C TMost studies show a high overlap between depression and anxiety syndromes. Relevant data come from representative studies. In clinical settings, the relative proportion of comorbid cases is even higher than that found in representative population surveys. Individuals with two concomitant disorders, suffering from a high overall burden, are more likely to seek treatment than individuals wi th only one disorder (Berkson's paradox). Both depression and anxiety syndromes also co-occur with other psychiatric conditions such as substance abuse or personality disorders.

## Introduction

Comorbidity between depression and anxiety is quite common in everyday clinical practice. Similar clinical symptoms ranging from sleep disturbances and mood disorders cause these two disorders considered as one disease. The elevated risk of second disorder symptoms can be understood from a network perspective in psychopathology, where causal interactions between symptoms are theorized to promote the development of psychopathology, including comorbidities 1,2 . Central to the networking perspective is the proposition that psychiatric disorders arise because of symptoms that trigger other symptoms over time, such as when, for example, feelings of lethargy make it challenging to be active during the day, which in turn results in increased sadness and restlessness because a person is not accomplishing what he wants to do. Hypothetically, the more strongly the depressive symptoms of the examples above trigger one another over time (i.e., the higher the tissue density), the more difficult it may be to interfere with activation, which may eventually lead to depressive disorders. 3 This perspective also offers several potential explanations for comorbidities. 2 


## Depression and Panic Disorder


## Depression and other anxiety disorders

In patients with major depression, comorbidity with simple phobia was found in 24.3%, with social phobia in 27.1%, post-traumatic stress disorder in 19.5%, and obsessive-compulsive disorder in 5.4 to 10.9%.

Conversely, patients with these disorders have a higher than expected rate for major depression. Of all anxiety disorders, generalized anxiety disorder shows the highest comorbidity with major depression. It can be assumed that the same comorbidity models apply for these anxiety disorders as for panic disorder. 7


## Is there a general neurotic syndrome?

It has been discussed that anxiety disorders (and probably "neurotic depression") are not diagnosed entities but are just different manifestations of a "general neurotic syndrome" because there is such a high overlap between these disorders. Moreover, no biological markers have been found that can differentiate between these disorders, and antidepressants seem to be effective in all of these conditions. However, it still seems to make sense to demarcate different diagnostic entities.8,9 Reasons for this include: in most comorbid cases; one disorder can be identified in the foreground; some features, such as symptomatology and age of onset, seem to differ quite substantially between these disorders; and there is some evidence for specificity in genetic transmission.


## Comorbidity of anxiety disorders

Although comorbidity rates are very high ( 


## Conclusion

Anxiety disorders and depression are among the most prevalent psychiatric disorders. They are associated with a considerable degree of impairment, high healthcare utilization, and an enormous economic burden for society. Epidemiological studies may help in planning treatment and prevention programs, and they also may help us better understand the etiology of these disorders. Future large epidemiological initiatives to investigate the prevalence of depression and anxiety among different cultures are currently ongoing.


Of all anxiety disorders, panic disorder has beenFrom the available epidemiological, family, and neurobiological studies, it is difficult to decide which model is most appropriate to explain the high frequency of comorbidity of panic disorder and major depression.investigated most 
thoroughly 
concerning 
its 

association with depression. Frequently, both panic 

disorder and depression co-occur. Consistently, high 

estimates of the lifetime prevalence of major depression 

in panic disorder between 22.5 and 68.2 have been 

reported. 4 Point prevalence rates vary between 30 and 

38%. Conversely, high lifetime rates of panic disorder 

among subjects with bipolar disorder or unipolar 

depression have been found. They vary from 10-59%. 5 

eISSN (Online): 2715-9736 

Scientia Psychiatrica 

Journal Homepage: www.scientia psychia trica .com 
From different depression types, a lifetime prevalence 

rate of panic disorder of 20.8% was observed among 

subjects with bipolar disorder, compared to 10.0% 

among subjects with unipolar depression and 0.8% 

among reference subjects. 6 Subjects with panic and 

depression usually have worse symptoms than those 

with only one disorder. The disorders begin earlier in 

life when they are comorbid than when they occur 

singly. 

Models explaining co-occurrence of panic disorder 

and depression include the hypotheses that the co-

occurrence of panic attacks and major depression; as 

a results from a common underlying pathogenic 

process; a third disorder separate from panic disorder 

and depression; a coincidence of two common 

psychiatric disorders by chance; maybe explained in 

some cases by secondary depression due to 

demoralization by panic attacks; In other cases may be 

explained by significant depression with secondary 

anxiety symptoms. 7,8 



## Table 1 ),
1These considerations may explain why psychiatrists or unique anxiety disorders units mostly see patients with panic disorder, although specific and social phobia are more frequent according to epidemiological studies. Perhaps because they are overrepresented in representative epidemiological studies, GAD patients were also underrepresented in the clinical setting. The high healthcare utilization of panic patients also explains why more clinical studies have been conducted with panic disorder than with any other anxiety disorder, due to the easy access to high patient numbers needed for scientific studies.most patients still do not have another anxiety 

disorder, underlining the fact that anxiety disorders 

should not be easily lumped together. 10 



Comorbidity between depression and anxiety: assessing the role of bridge mental states in dynamic psychological networks. R N Groen, O Ryan, Jtw Wigman, H Riese, Bwjh Penninx, BMC Med. 18308Groen RN, Ryan O, Wigman JTW, Riese H, Penninx BWJH, et al. Comorbidity between depression and anxiety: assessing the role of bridge mental states in dynamic psychological networks. BMC Med. 2020; 18 (308): 20-5.

Advice for clinicians on how to treat comorbid anxiety and depression. J Spijker, A Muntingh, N Batelaan, JAMA Psychiatry. 776Spijker J, Muntingh A, Batelaan N. Advice for clinicians on how to treat comorbid anxiety and depression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2020; 77 (6): 645-6.

Comorbid generalized anxiety disorder and its association with quality of life in patients with major depressive disorder. Y Zhou, Z Cao, M Yang, X Xi, Y Guo, Sci Rep. 740511Zhou Y, Cao Z, Yang M, Xi X, Guo Y, et al. Comorbid generalized anxiety disorder and its association with quality of life in patients with major depressive disorder. Sci Rep. 2017; 7:40511.

Comorbid anxiety and depression: Prevalence and associated factors among pregnant women in Arba Minch zuria district. A Bante, A Mersha, Z Zerdo, B Wassihun, T Yeheyis, PLos One. 248331Bante A, Mersha A, Zerdo Z, Wassihun B, Yeheyis T. Comorbid anxiety and depression: Prevalence and associated factors among pregnant women in Arba Minch zuria district, Gamo zone, southern Ethiopia. PLos One. 2021; 0248331.

Anxiety and depression symptom comorbidity and the risk of heat disease: a prospective communitybased cohort study. S S Deschenes, R J Burns, N Schmitz, Psychosom Med. Deschenes SS, Burns RJ, Schmitz N. Anxiety and depression symptom comorbidity and the risk of heat disease: a prospective community- based cohort study. Psychosom Med. 2020;

The prevalence of panic disorder and its related factor in hospitalized chest pain and normal angiography. J Shakeri, F Tatari, S Golshani, V Farnia, M Alikhani, J Edu Health Promot. 861Shakeri J, Tatari F, Golshani S, Farnia V, Alikhani M, et al. The prevalence of panic disorder and its related factor in hospitalized chest pain and normal angiography. J Edu Health Promot. 2019; 8:61.

Anxiety and depression. G Maina, M Mauri, A Rossi, J Psychopath. 22Maina G, Mauri M, Rossi A. Anxiety and depression. J Psychopath. 2016; 22:236-50.

The critical relationship between anxiety and depression. N M Kalin, Am J Psy. 1775Kalin NM. The critical relationship between anxiety and depression. Am J Psy. 2020; 177(5): 365-7.

The neurobiology of panic: a chronic stress disorder. Chronic stress. A W Goddard, 1Goddard AW. The neurobiology of panic: a chronic stress disorder. Chronic stress. 2017;1.

Clinical implications of agoraphobia in patients with panic disorder. J Shin, D H Park, S H Ryu, J H Ha, S M Kim, Medicine. 993021414Shin J, Park DH, Ryu SH, Ha JH, Kim SM, eta al. Clinical implications of agoraphobia in patients with panic disorder. Medicine. 2020; 99 (30): e21414.