# Digital accessibility: A systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 238904884
 
tags: #Education, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78b972659134f7037fdfc00f348006a7c13dac36](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78b972659134f7037fdfc00f348006a7c13dac36)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Digital accessibility: A systematic Literature Review


Fatima Ezzahra Chadli fatimaezzahra.chadli@uit.ac.ma 
Engineering Sciences Laboratory
National School of Applied Sciences
Ibn Tofail University
KenitraMorocco

Driss Gretete 
Engineering Sciences Laboratory
National School of Applied Sciences
Ibn Tofail University
KenitraMorocco

Aniss Moumen 
Engineering Sciences Laboratory
National School of Applied Sciences
Ibn Tofail University
KenitraMorocco

Digital accessibility: A systematic Literature Review
10.1051/shsconf/202111906005* Corresponding author:
Today digital content has soared since the covid19 pandemic, no physical interaction, only digital operations, even in the education system and training. Learning moved towards the virtual classroom, and elearning is now widely adopted. This transformation was a challenge for most people, especially people with disabilities. Although, despite the type of disability, digital content and services should be accessible, which means it includes considerations like compatibility with assistive technologies, using enough contrast for visually impaired users, providing understandable content, etc. Many studies have shown decades before covid19 the importance of digital accessibility, including guidelines, implementation and evaluation, design and methods. This systematic literature review of 204 studies exposes the different topics related to digital accessibility in previous studies.

# Introduction

"The power of the web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless of disability is an essential aspect", this is a famous quote by Tim Berners-Lee, director and inventor of the World Wide Web [1]. As defined by World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) [2] and Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) [3], Digital accessibility means that people with disabilities should be able to access, navigate, perceive, and interact with content [4]. However, people with disabilities (PWD) still face many challenges and difficulties with digital content.

COVID19 might be an evident example that emphasizes those serious barriers that disabled people face every day. Digital content has soared since the COVID19 pandemic, with no physical interaction, only digital operations. This transformation and quick switch to fully digital services was a challenge for most people, especially people with disabilities who are less comfortable than others using certain technologies [5].

Disability involves one or more impairments, including visual, physical, mental, cognitive, hearing or speech impairment. International guidelines include norms and standards to cover different impairments. Most of the policies use the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) [6], proposed by W3C via the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) [3]. This article covers five sections; besides a general introduction, we overview the WCAG standards, describe our systematic literature review SLR and expose its main results. The last section presents discussions and conclusions.


# Overview of WCAG


## WCAG History

WCAG are standards and norms that explain how to make accessible content for people with disabilities [6].

The first version WCAG1.0 [7], was published in 1999 and was focused on HTML. It was followed in 2008 by WCAG2.0 [8]; this second version was focused on new digital assets besides HTML as texted documents and more technologies not covered by WCAG1.0 and integrated four principles. In 2018 a new version, WCAG2. 1 [9], was published and added many criteria and was approved as an ISO standard.

The new latest version, WCAG2.2 [10], is set to publish in 2021. WCAG works with a backwards-compatible principle, meaning that content that meets the new version should meet the previous one [6].


## Four principles of accessibility (POUR)

WCAG guidelines focus on four principles of accessibility; perceivable, operable, understandable and robust (POUR) [11]: -Perceivability: The user must perceive content and components, providing text alternatives for non-text content and audio description or media alternative for time-based media [12].

-Operability: the user must interact easily with the content, all functionalities must be accessible via keyboard, providing enough time to read and use the information [13].

-Understandability: The user must understand information and operation as clear and familiar word, indication about the language, the meaning of the provided abbreviation, and more other criteria [14].

-Robustness: compatibility with various user agents, browsers, devices and assistive technologies [15].


# SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW


## Methodology

Our methodology is based on a systematic literature review (SLR) to identify prior research and studies relative to digital accessibility for all disabilities without specifying any limitation or criteria for impairment. To conduct our SLR, we followed the steps below [16]: 1. We determined the keywords for research: Digital Accessibility, Web Accessibility, people with disabilities, impairment, universal design, WCAG. We combined operators "AND", "OR" with keywords and adapted search strings to each scientific database: Springer Link, Web of Science, Scopus, Science Direct, Cairn, IMIST and Google Scholar.

2. We selected results based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, and we removed duplicate studies. 3. We selected results (204 articles) finally and analyzed them using NVIVO software. The following figure illustrates the different steps:  Table 1 below summarizes the types and frequency of references used in our selection. Journal articles represent 86.8% of selected references, followed by conference papers with 6,4% and books with 4.9%, chapters represent only 2% of our selection.  We identified five periods ( The bar graph shows that the highest frequency is between 2015 and 2019, which could be interpreted by adopting the first sub-version of WCAG2 in 2018, namely WCAG 2.1. The period between 2020 and 2024 ranked second with 61 references due to the context of covid19.


## Meta-analysis


### Reference Analysis

For the distribution of included references by language, we note that 183 references corresponding to 89, 7 % is in English and 21 references corresponding to 10, 3% is in French. 


### Word analysis

Word analysis or word cloud shows a visual representation of the most words used in our references. The size of each word depends on its frequency. The most used words include accessibility, disabilities, web and Learning; we can also notice that visual impairment is the most used type of disability within the selection; we note that we included all types of disabilities without limitation or specification of impairment. 


# RESULTS


## Disability in Morocco

In 2014, a national survey was conducted in Morocco, including a sample of 47275 participants representing 16044 households from urban and rural areas; according to this survey disability, the prevalence rate is 6.8%, about 2.264.672. One family out of four has at least one person with a disability. As shown in Table 4 below; People with one disability represent 4,45%, people with two disabilities represent 1,6%, and people with three disabilities or more represent 0,75% [17]. As shown in Table 5 below, the prevalence varies according to the type and level of disability: As reported in the survey, visual and mobility impairment is the most common within Moroccan disabilities.


## Digital accessibility in Morocco: government initiatives

Morocco has engaged in a digital strategy in 2013, called digital Morocco 2013, for public administration modernization. Among its notable results is the common charter for governmental websites [18]; this document makes 18 pages including norms and standards to respect governmental websites, as the minimum sections to include in a website, structure and components of the website, and the language used and accessibility recommendations. The accessibility part of the charter is not obligatory; it is recommended to implement by departments. Table 6 below provides a synthesis of those recommendations: We notice that the charter not fully covers all the aspects, standards and norms of accessibility; it integrates just a few recommendations and issues about web accessibility.


## Digital accessibility: Moroccan studies

Concerning research studies, we notice that Moroccan researchers have conducted few works in digital accessibility that we divided into two categories; topics related to egovernment and others related to education:  Accessibility and e-government : The authors [19] conducted research based on the evaluation of three Moroccan egovernment websites accessibility using AccessiWeb methodology created by the BrailleNet Association to detect accessibility problems and check the conformity with the Accessibility Initiative Guidelines WCAG. The authors established an evaluation grid with thirteen thematics: images, frames, colours, multimedia, tables, links, scripts, mandatory elements, the structure of information, presentation of information, forms, web pages consultation and navigation. Tests used automatic tools, and for the three evaluated websites, the minimum level A of accessibility is not respected. There are various measures [19] to take for each principle of accessibility, as shown in Table 7 below:  Accessibility and education:

The authors [20] focused on m-learning or mobile Learning for students with disabilities; they exposed the problems faced by this particular category of students with assistive technology AT due to many factors such as affordability and availability. The authors used quantitative and qualitative methods to compare seven AT devices and seven alternative open-source medical apps for students with hearing impairment, visual impairment, autism and speech articulation disorder. The study findings have thus proved that open source applications are efficient alternatives to monofunctional AT devices in formal and informal learning environments.

The authors [21] discussed the importance of mobile Learning in university for people with disabilities, especially motor disabilities. The authors used quantitative and qualitative methodology; data collection concerns a sample of the population that represents 40 students with disabilities in Med V University Rabat. The study findings have revealed that mobile technologies can foster student engagement and participation and increase their interactions.


## Digital Accessibility: International studies

Digital Accessibility is a vast field; some authors have followed a targeted approach to study and research specific components instead of looking for digital accessibility in all its aspects. We identified 19 studies in our SLR that targeted specific components in digital accessibility; below; we summarize the results with the relevant studies:

 Studies on search engine component The authors [22,23] focused on the search engine as an essential component for searching information and proposed in their studies interactive tools to improve the interactive experience with the search engine. The authors [23] described a prototype search engine that provides a re-ranked set of search results.


##  Studies on Chabot component

The authors [24][25][26] highlighted the importance of chat applications and conversational agents to enhance the learning experience for students with disabilities. The authors [24] Have compared the three most-used non-commercial learning content management system CMS, namely Moodle, Edmodo, and Instructure. The authors have provided recommendations to improve and build inclusive chat applications; the study showed that Moodle includes features that avoid accessibility barriers. The authors [25] Focused on educational chatbots for Facebook Messenger to support Learning and examined their quality based on language, subject and development platform and presented a list of the top ten educational chatbots. Liu Qingtang & al [26] proposed an agent-based conceptual architecture to develop a domain-specific Chabot for mobile Learning, as shown in figure 4 below:  [26].

The 19 studies with components studies, target population and authors are summarized in Table 8 below: 


# DISCUSSION AND CONLUCSION

Several limitations bounded the present review; we extracted references from different scientific databases; however, we faced technical problems with Scopus during our collection, which impacted the distribution of the score compared to the other scientific databases. An additional weakness related to our review is that Moroccan studies are hard to capture because they are scattered across various sources. This systematic literature review identified 204 studies and aimed to explore and provide an overview of a state-of-the-art about digital accessibility with a particular focus on Moroccan studies. On the international scale, we notice that investigations could be divided into two groups. Some researchers carried out digital accessibility in all aspects, and others focused on specific elements and components about accessibility. They even focused on a particular type of disability or impairment. On the national scale, we detected a lack of descriptive and experimental research about digital accessibility in Morocco; only a few studies have been conducted compared to other countries. Thus further studies should be undertaken about digital accessibility involving people with disabilities.

## Fig. 1 .
1Systematic Literature Review methodology

## Fig. 2 .
2[2000][2001][2002][2003][2004],[2005][2006][2007][2008][2009], [2010-2014], [2015-2019], [2020-2024]) with a span of 4 years to simplify analysis for included references, as shown in Figure 2 below: Frequency and period of publication.

## Fig. 3 .
3Word analysis.

## Fig. 4 .
4Conceptual architecture of domain-specific Chabot proposed by Liu Qingtang & al

## Table 1 .
1Types of references and frequency.Types of references 
Frequency 
Per cent 

Article 
177 
86,8 

Book 
10 
4,9 

Chapter 
4 
2,0 

Conference Paper 
13 
6,4 

Total 
204 
100,0 


## Table 2 .
2Distribution summary of a scientific databaseScientific Database 
Per cent 

Springer Link 
55,88 

ScienceDirect 
12,25 

Google Scholar 
11,27 

Web of Science 
8,82 

CAIRN 
6,37 

Scopus 
3,92 

IMIST 
1,47 



## Table 3 .
3Frequency of references by languageLanguage 
Frequency 
Per cent 

English 
183 
89,7 

French 
21 
10,3 

Total 
204 
100,0 



## Table 4 .
4Prevalence by number of disabilities according to the national survey [17]Number of disabilities 
Person 
Per cent 

One disability 
1.482.028 
4,45 
Two disabilities 
532.864 
1,6 
Three or more disabilities 
249.780 
0,75 
Total 
2.264.672 
6.8 



## Table 5 .
5Prevalence by type and level of disabilities according to the national survey [17]Type of disability 

Mild to 
moderate 

Very Severe Mild to very 
severe 
Vision 
3,47% 
0,10% 
3,56% 
hearing 
0,91% 
0,09% 
0,99% 
Mobility 
3,07% 
0,27% 
3,34% 
Memory 
0,65% 
0,10% 
0,75% 
Personal care 
0,66% 
0,21% 
0,87% 
Communication 
0,53% 
0,16% 
0,69% 



## Table 6 .
6Accessibility recommendation in the charter for governmental websitesComponent 
Recommendation 

Graphic elements 
Each graphic element must have a textual alternative 

Displays 
The weight of the web pages must be about 300ko per page to allow 
rapid display and ensure a quality user experience 

Readability 
The user should be able to resize the text 

Responsive design 
Websites should be adapted to mobile navigation, especially for the 
home page, links for Administrative Procedure and services 


## Table 7 .
7Measures recommended by I. Bousarhane and N. Daoudi[19] to meet the four principles of accessibility for the three evaluated websites: Indicate Language changes in the source code.-Append the labels associated with form fields with their fields, -Indicate mandatory fields -Display suggestions for the input control that facilitate the correction of errors.Robustness-Provide for each framework used a relevant title.-Provide equivalent alternatives.-Make all media compatible with assistive technologies.-Define the type of each document so that assistive technologies could render hidden texts.-Provide an appropriate title for each form button.Principle 
Recommendation 
Perceivability 
-Provide text equivalents for non-textual items, 
-Increase the contrast ratio, make time-based media identifiable 
-Provide summaries and titles for tables. 
-Make all links explicit 
-Indicate changes of reading direction in the source code 
-Organize the content by the use of titles. 
-Use CSS, associate form fields with relevant labels 
-Offer accessible versions to documents for download and make 
it possible for users to control flashing contents 

Operability 

-Make the control of time-based media and no time-based media 
possible by the keyboard, 
-Give pertinent titles for 
links and web pages, 
-Make explicit links that open in a new window, 
-Add links that help bypass the blocks of content and the groups 
of links, provide information about the documents for download, 
-Ensure that navigation does not contain keyboard traps and that 
the sitemap page shows the general architecture of the website. 
Readability 
-Integrate explicit buttons to initiate context changes. 
-


## Table 8 .
8Studies with specific componentsAuthors 
Population Methodology 
Specific component 
Aqle & al (2020) [22] 
visually 
impaired 
people VIP 

Quantitative & 
Qualitative 
search engine 

Arrue Myriam & al.(2008) 
[23] 
PWD 

Quantitative & 
Prototype 
search engine 

Sitbon Laurianne & al (2010) 
[27] 

dyslexia 
impairment 

Experiment 
recherche 
documentaire 
Liu Qingtang & al (2020) [26] 

PWD 

Quantitative 

Chatbot 

Calvo Rocío & al (2017) [24] 
PWD 
Descriptive 
Chatbot 

Smutny Pavel & al (2020) 
[25] 

Students 
with 
disabilities 

Descriptive 
Chatbot 

Lister Kate & al (2020) [28] 
PWD 
Review 
Chatbot 

Lidio Antonelli 
Humberto & al (2015) [29] 
PWD 
Case study 
web menus 

Estrada-Martínez Francisco J. 
& al (2020) [30] 
PWD 

Systematic 
Literature 
Review 

semantic web 

Harper Simon & al (2007) 
[31] 
VIP 
Descriptive 
XHTML document 

9 

SHS Web of Conferences 119, 06005 (2021) 
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202111906005 
QQR'21 


SHS Web of Conferences 119, 06005 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202111906005 QQR'21
SHS Web of Conferences 119, 06005 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202111906005

World Wide Web Consortium Launches International Program Office for Web Accessibility Initiative. Government, Industry, Research and Disability Organizations Join Forces to Promote Accessibility of the Web. T. Berners Lee, T. Berners Lee. 1997. World Wide Web Consortium Launches International Program Office for Web Accessibility Initiative. Government, Industry, Research and Disability Organizations Join Forces to Promote Accessibility of the Web. https://www.w3.org/Press/IPOannounce ( accessed 24 June 2021)

World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Available atWorld Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Available at: http://www. w3.org/

World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) Available at. World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) Available at: https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/#world-wide-web-consortium-w3c-web-accessibility- initiative-wai

. Introduction to Web Accessibility. Available. Introduction to Web Accessibility. Available at: https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/accessibility-intro/

Accessibility Easterseals Study on the Impact of COVID-19 on People with Disabilities Executive Summary & Key Findings. Accessibility Easterseals Study on the Impact of COVID-19 on People with Disabilities Executive Summary & Key Findings: May 2021.

. Accessibility Guidelines, Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) Overview https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/

Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1. Available at. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0. Available atWeb Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0. Available at : https://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/ 8. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0. Available at: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 9. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1. Available at: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/

Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.2. Working Draft Available at. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.2. Working Draft Available at: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22/

. Accessibility Principles. Available at. Accessibility Principles. Available at: https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/accessibility-principles/

« Séminaire sur la méthodologie de recherche & guide des bonnes pratiques et techniques en communication, redaction et publication scientifique. A Moumen, A. Moumen, « Séminaire sur la méthodologie de recherche & guide des bonnes pratiques et techniques en communication, redaction et publication scientifique ».(2018)

I Bousarhane, N Daoudi, pp65-79-pp65-79.The Accessibility of Moroccan Public Websites: Evaluation of Three E-Government Websites. 12I. Bousarhane, and N. Daoudi, « The Accessibility of Moroccan Public Websites: Evaluation of Three E-Government Websites ». Electronic Journal of E-Government 12 (1): pp65-79-pp65-79. (2014)

« Mobile Learning as Alternative to Assistive Technology Devices for Special Needs Students. J Ismaili, E Ouazzani Ibrahimi, 10.1007/s10639-015-9462-922J. Ismaili, E. Ouazzani Ibrahimi. « Mobile Learning as Alternative to Assistive Technology Devices for Special Needs Students ». Education and Information Technologies 22 (3): 883-99 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-015-9462-9.

S Boumaghzel, M I Hafidi Alaoui, La technologie éducative et handicap dans l'enseignement supérieur au Maroc» « Cas de l'université Med V ». Massalek Atarbya Wa Atakwine. 21S. Boumaghzel, et M. I. Hafidi Alaoui,« La technologie éducative et handicap dans l'enseignement supérieur au Maroc» « Cas de l'université Med V ». Massalek Atarbya Wa Atakwine volume 2 N1 (2019)

. 10.48403/IMIST.PRSM/massalek-v2i1.199231https://doi.org/10.48403/IMIST.PRSM/massalek-v2i1.19923 (accessed 01 February 2021).

« Can Search Result Summaries Enhance the Web Search Efficiency and Experiences of the Visually Impaired Users? » Universal Access in the Information Society. A Aqle, D Al-Thani, A Jaoua, 10.1007/s10209-020-00777-wA. Aqle, D. Al-Thani, and A. Jaoua, « Can Search Result Summaries Enhance the Web Search Efficiency and Experiences of the Visually Impaired Users? » Universal Access in the Information Society, November, 1-22. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-020-00777-w.

« Web Accessibility Awareness in Search Engine Results. M Arrue, M Vigo, J , 10.1007/s10209-007-0106-8Universal Access in the Information Society. 71M. Arrue, M. Vigo, and J. Abascal, « Web Accessibility Awareness in Search Engine Results ». Universal Access in the Information Society 7 (1): 103-16 (2008) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-007-0106-8.

C Rocío, A Iglesias, L Castaño, Evaluation of Accessibility Barriers and Learning Features in M-Learning Chat Applications for Users with Disabilities. 16C. Rocío, A. Iglesias and L. Castaño, « Evaluation of Accessibility Barriers and Learning Features in M-Learning Chat Applications for Users with Disabilities ». Universal Access in the Information Society 16 (3): 593-607 (2017).

. 10.1007/s10209-016-0484-xhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-016-0484-x.

« Chatbots for Learning: A Review of Educational Chatbots for the Facebook Messenger. P Smutny, P Schreiberova, 10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103862Computers & Education. 151103862juilletP. Smutny, and P. Schreiberova, « Chatbots for Learning: A Review of Educational Chatbots for the Facebook Messenger ». Computers & Education 151 (juillet): 103862. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103862.

Design and Evaluation of a Domain-Specific Chatbot for Mobile Learning. Q Liu, J Huang, L Wu, K Zhu, S Ba, « Cbet, 10.1007/s10209-019-00666-xUniversal Access in the Information Society. 193Q. Liu, J. Huang, L. Wu, K. Zhu, and S. Ba, « CBET: Design and Evaluation of a Domain-Specific Chatbot for Mobile Learning ». Universal Access in the Information Society 19 (3): 655-73 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-019-00666-x.

«Vers une recherche d'information adaptée aux utilisateurs dyslexiques. L Sitbon, P Bellot, P Blache, 13L. Sitbon, P. Bellot, P. Blache. «Vers une recherche d'information adaptée aux utilisateurs dyslexiques ». Document numerique Vol. 13 (1): 161-85. (2010)

K Lister, T Coughlan, F Iniesto, N Freear, P Devine, 10.1145/3371300.3383343W4A '20: Proceedings of the 17th International Web for All Conference. Accessible Conversational User Interfaces: Considerations for DesignK. Lister, T. Coughlan, F. Iniesto, N. Freear, et P. Devine. « Accessible Conversational User Interfaces: Considerations for Design » In W4A '20: Proceedings of the 17th International Web for All Conference, article no. 5, 1-11. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1145/3371300.3383343.

H Antonelli, E Adriano, N Da Silva, 10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.253et R. Pontin M. Fortes. « A Model-Driven Development for Creating Accessible Web Menus ». DSAI Procedia Computer Science. 67H. Lidio Antonelli, E. Adriano N. da Silva, et R. Pontin M. Fortes. « A Model-Driven Development for Creating Accessible Web Menus ». DSAI Procedia Computer Science 67:95-104. (2015) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.253.

. J Francisco, José R Estrada-Martínez, S Hilera, J Otón, Aguado-Delgado, Francisco J. Estrada-Martínez, José R. Hilera, S. Otón, et J. Aguado-Delgado..

. Web « Semantic, 10.1007/s10209-020-00759-yTechnologies Applied to Software Accessibility Evaluation: A Systematic Literature Review ». Universal Access in the Information Society, octobre. « Semantic Web Technologies Applied to Software Accessibility Evaluation: A Systematic Literature Review ». Universal Access in the Information Society, octobre, 1-25. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-020-00759-y.

. S Harper, Y Yesilada, 10.1016/j.websem.2007.05.001Web Authoring for Accessibility (WAfA) ». Journal of Web Semantics. 53S. Harper, Y. Yesilada. « Web Authoring for Accessibility (WAfA) ». Journal of Web Semantics 5 (3): 175-79. (2007) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2007.05.001.

« Web-Based Platform for a Customizable and Synchronized Presentation of Subtitles in Single-and Multi-Screen Scenarios. M Montagud, F Boronat, J Pastor, D Marfil, 10.1007/s11042-020-08955-xMultimedia Tools and Applications. 7929M. Montagud, F. Boronat, J. Pastor, D. Marfil. « Web-Based Platform for a Customizable and Synchronized Presentation of Subtitles in Single-and Multi-Screen Scenarios ». Multimedia Tools and Applications 79 (29): 21889-923. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-020-08955-x.

. D Giakoumis, K Votis, D Tzovaras, 10.1007/s11761-013-0135-5« Introducing Web Service Accessibility Assessment Techniques through a Unified Quality of Service Context ». Service Oriented Computing and Applications. 82D. Giakoumis, K. Votis, et D. Tzovaras, « Introducing Web Service Accessibility Assessment Techniques through a Unified Quality of Service Context ». Service Oriented Computing and Applications 8 (2): 159-74. (2014) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11761-013-0135-5.

« Challenges and Opportunities to Improve the Accessibility of YouTube for People with Visual Impairments as Content Creators ». Universal Access in the Information Society. W Seo, H Jung, W. Seo, H. Jung, « Challenges and Opportunities to Improve the Accessibility of YouTube for People with Visual Impairments as Content Creators ». Universal Access in the Information Society (2021).

. 10.1007/s10209-020-00787-8https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-020-00787-8.

M Shoaib, I Hussain, H T Mirza, 10.1007/s10209-019-00696-5Automatic Switching between Speech and Non-Speech: Adaptive Auditory Feedback in Desktop Assistance for the Visually Impaired. 19M. Shoaib, I. Hussain, H T. Mirza, « Automatic Switching between Speech and Non- Speech: Adaptive Auditory Feedback in Desktop Assistance for the Visually Impaired ». Universal Access in the Information Society 19 (4): 813-23. (2019) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-019-00696-5.

A Tool for Embedding Audio Descriptions to Enhance Video Accessibility for Persons with Visual Impairments. M Pantula, K S Kuppusamy, Audiva, 10.1007/s11042-019-7363-4Multimedia Tools and Applications. 7814M. Pantula, et K. S. Kuppusamy, « AuDIVA: A Tool for Embedding Audio Descriptions to Enhance Video Accessibility for Persons with Visual Impairments ». Multimedia Tools and Applications 78 (14): 20005-18. (2019) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-019-7363-4.

Approach Design of an Accessible Media Player. M González, L Moreno, P Martínez, 10.1007/s10209-013-0342-zUniversal Access in the Information Society. 141M. González, L. Moreno, et P. Martínez, « Approach Design of an Accessible Media Player ». Universal Access in the Information Society 14 (1): 45-55. (2015) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-013-0342-z.

Chris J Hughes, M Montagud, 10.1007/s11042-020-10088-0Accessibility in 360° Video Players ». Multimedia Tools and Applications. Chris J. Hughes, et M. Montagud, « Accessibility in 360° Video Players ». Multimedia Tools and Applications, October, 1-28. (2020) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-020-10088-0.

« Attuning Speech-Enabled Interfaces to User and Context for Inclusive Design: Technology, Methodology and Practice ». Universal Access in the. M A Neerincx, A H M. Cremers, J M Kessens, D A Van Leeuwen, K P Truong, 10.1007/s10209-008-0136-xInformation Society. 82M A. Neerincx, A H M. Cremers, J M. Kessens, D A. van Leeuwen, et K P. Truong. « Attuning Speech-Enabled Interfaces to User and Context for Inclusive Design: Technology, Methodology and Practice ». Universal Access in the Information Society 8 (2): 109-22. (2009) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-008-0136-x.