# Progress in Emerging Contaminants Removal by Adsorption/Membrane Filtration-Based Technologies: A Review

CorpusID: 238995840
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Chemistry

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Progress in Emerging Contaminants Removal by Adsorption/Membrane Filtration-Based Technologies: A Review
2021

Rosmaya Dewi 
Faculty of Integrated Technologies
Universiti

Norazanita Shamsuddin 
Faculty of Integrated Technologies
Universiti

Muhammad S Abu Bakar 
Faculty of Integrated Technologies
Universiti

Jose H Santos 
Faculty of Science
Indonesian Journal of Science & Technology
Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam

Muhammad Roil Bilad 
Faculty of Integrated Technologies
Universiti

Hoon Lee 
Lim 
Faculty of Science
Indonesian Journal of Science & Technology
Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam

Brunei Darussalam 
Brunei Darussalam 
Sekolah Tinggi 
Ilmu Kesehatan Bakti 
Tunas Husda 
Indonesia 
Progress in Emerging Contaminants Removal by Adsorption/Membrane Filtration-Based Technologies: A Review

Indonesian Journal of Science & Technology
632021Article History: Received 05 Aug 2021 Revised 20 Sep 2021 Accepted 26 Sep 2021577 A B S T R A C T S A R T I C L E I N F O ____________________Keyword: AdsorptionEmerging contaminantsHybrid systemMembrane filtration
This paper discussed the removal and the remediation of emerging contaminants (ECs) in water using adsorption and membrane filtration as a single and hybrid system. The classifications, sources, effects, detection techniques, and available technologies for ECs removal were discussed. Next, an overview of both adsorption and membrane filtration processes in terms of materials, separation mechanisms, factors affecting their performances, and their applications for ECs removals was provided. It was followed by a comprehensive review of the combination of the membrane and the adsorption processes with other physical, chemical, or biological treatments. Finally, progress in research on a hybrid system between membrane filtration and adsorption was discussed. The combination included adsorption as the pre-treatment, integrated adsorption/membrane filtration system, or adsorption as the post-treatment. Generally, the hybrid systems showed improved performance than a single system. Nonetheless, further studies are recommended for applications of those systems on a wide range of ECs removals and the scale-up issue.

## INTRODUCTION

Water bodies have been polluted not only by conventional pollutants but also by emerging contaminants (ECs). With advances in detection techniques, ECs have been found in the water even at low concentrations (ng/L to mg/L, or lower). The presence of ECs is not regulated yet; hence they are not appropriately monitored. Compounds belonging to ECs are extensive in numbers. The numbers are also developing with the discovery of new compounds. ECs are classified into pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PCPs). Their presence in water bodies is getting more attention from scientists, government agencies, and society. They negatively impact ecology and have drawbacks on human health and aquatic organisms (Rasheed et al., 2019).

Based on the SCOPUS database using keywords of "emerging contaminant," 6326 publications on ECs from 2011 until 2020. The number of publications increased annually. Most of them were published by institutions based in the United States and China, as shown in Figure 1.

Production, usage, and application of chemicals and pharmaceuticals are usually associated with long-term environmental pollution and health problems (Kümmerer, 2011). When consumed, they can accumulate in humans, invertebrates, and other living organisms and persist in the food chain (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017). Some examples of major human/environmental health concerns of ECs include hormone activities, skin, brain, nervous system disruption, cancer, ecological toxicity, persistency, and accumulation (Smital, 2008).

The emergence of new contaminants has been reported globally. In European surface waters, pharmaceuticals were frequently detected in ppb level, in which there were 12 high-risk and 17 medium-risk compounds (Zhou et al., 2019b). In East and Southeast Asian countries, antibiotics were found in surface water (at concentrations of <1 ng/Lµg/L with median values of 10 -100 ng/L). Yet, the lack of antibiotics monitoring in surface waters makes it difficult to know their distribution (Anh et al., 2020). In the Central Mexican Pacific, pharmaceuticals classified as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have also been detected. They included diclofenac, naproxen, ketorolac, and ibuprofen. Moreover, these compounds were also detected in muscle tissues of 14 fish species, which could end up in bioaccumulation in the environment and organisms (Arguello-Pérez et al., 2019). In another study, the presence of ECs in water bodies was found in Coruña, Galicia (NW Spain). From 53 target compounds, 19 compounds at concentrations of > 0.1 µg/L were detected in wastewater. The traditional wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) could not remove these chemicals efficiently (Rodil et al., 2012). The compounds with the highest concentration were ibuprofen, salicylic acid, and UV filter benzophenone. Some compounds (i.e., ibuprofen, tri (2chloroethyl) phosphate, diphenyl phosphate, benzophenone-4, 2-phenyl benzimidazole-5sulphonic acid, tri (chloropropyl) phosphate, atenolol, diethylhexyl phosphate, tri-n-butyl phosphate, and diclofenac) were also present at concentrations of 20-200 ng/L. In many countries in Asia, North America, and Europe, several categories of ECs (i.e., anticonvulsants/antidepressants, antibiotics, antifungal/antimicrobial agents, steroid hormones, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, beta-adrenoaceptor, blocking agents, X-ray contrast media, UV filters, stimulants, anti-itching drugs, insect lipid regulating drugs, repellents, plasticizers, artificial sweeteners) have also been detected in WWTPs . Conventional treatment technologies such as activated sludge, coagulation, sedimentation, flocculation could not thoroughly remove ECs (e.g., antibiotics, xray contrast media, beta-blockers, anticonvulsants) (Rasheed et al., 2019;Tran et al., 2018). Therefore, advanced technologies (e.g., membrane filtration, oxidation, adsorption) either as standalone or in combination have been assessed (Patel et al., 2019;Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017). Adsorption has been widely used to remove hazardous inorganic and organic materials (Ahmed et al., 2015). It is simple, costeffective, and offers high removal efficiencies (Gopal et al., 2014). In adsorption, adsorbent and adsorbate (contaminant) interact either physically or chemically. Other essential aspects of adsorption include adsorbent type, modeling, mode of operation, and regeneration (Dotto & McKay, 2020).

Membrane filtration is attractive for ECs removal. It offers high removal capability, low energy requirement, ease of scale-up, rapid kinetics, and a small carbon footprint. However, it still imposes several challenges such as membrane fouling, limited lifespan, insufficient rejection, chemical resistance, additional treatment of concentrates, and lack of tools for modeling and simulations (Van der Bruggen et al., 2008).

The hybrid system comprising membrane filtration and adsorption is thus of interest which combines the advantage of both processes. Moreover, a hybrid system can be applied to overcome the shortcomings of each technology (Dhangar & Kumar, 2020). Both adsorption and membrane filtration can be combined with other treatments (i.e., physical, biological, or chemical) to improve their performances.

This review reported a systematic analysis of membrane filtration and adsorption-based technologies for ECs removals. In addition, this review discusses ECs classification, sources, effects, analysis, and general information about available technologies for ECs removals.


## EMERGING CONTAMINANTS (ECs)

The advances in analytical techniques using gas chromatography or liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS/LC-MS) allow the detection of polar compounds such as pharmaceuticals, metabolites, and transformation products at low concentrations that could not be analyzed beforehand. These groups of compounds are called ECs. ECs are found in the environment at very low concentrations (in µg/L or lower). Hence, they are often also called organic micro-pollutants (Kümmerer, 2011). Henceforth, the term EC is used in this review.


### Classification of Emerging Contaminants

There is no comprehensive definition and a complete list of compounds classified as ECs (Kümmerer, 2011). Each study categorized ECs into different classes. For instance, ECs were ranked into algal toxins, biocide and their transformation products, bioterrorism and sabotage agents, industrial chemicals, PCPs, and pharmaceuticals. Another report categorized ECs into pesticides, pharmaceuticals, PCPs, food additives, x-ray contrasting agents, steroids and surfactants, flame retardants, industrial compounds, and veterinary medicines (Qureshi et al., 2020).

In general, the term ECs refers to three main categories. The first category consisted of substances that have recently entered the environment, such as industrial additives. The second category included substances that may have been in the environment for a long time but have recently detected and attracted much attention, such as pharmaceuticals. The third category was a group of substances that have been known, but their potential adverse effects on the environment and organisms have only recently been realized. The ECs categories that have attracted more attention and always existed in the ECs categorization in various studies are pharmaceuticals and PCPs.

The compounds classified into pharmaceuticals and PCPs have different physical and chemical properties. Pharmaceuticals and PCPs are manufactured to improve animals/humans' health and enhance human life quality. Pharmaceuticals include antibiotics, steroids, diuretics, nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs, stimulant drugs, analgesics, antimicrobials, betablockers, antiseptics, hormones, lipid regulators, illicit drugs (e.g., amphetamines, cocaine). In contrast, PCPs include cosmetics, sunscreen agents, fragrances, domestic insect repellents, personal hygiene products, food supplements, and their metabolites, as well as transformation products. Some lotions and shampoos can contain up to 10-20 compounds (i.e., dyes, surfactants, preservatives, and others). Most of the PCPs are rinsed and drained into the sewage (Kümmerer, 2011).


### Sources of Emerging Contaminants

The primary sources of ECs are wastewater, sewage sludge, municipal solid waste, households, livestock and poultry, hospital and industrial effluents, and urban runoff (Sophia & Lima, 2018). The paths of ECs reaching the water bodies are illustrated in Figure 2.

Most ECs were originated from industries, hospitals, households, animal husbandries, and urban runoff and flowed into WWTPs. Physical and chemical processes in WWTPs produce a sludge containing heavy metal concentrates and organic compounds. For example, Southeast Spain (Almeri'a) municipal WWTP had sludge that contained ECs. The analysis showed that there were 62 types of ECs detected (Klamerth et al., 2013).

Pharmaceuticals and PCPs also entered the environment through drug residues excretion from the human body that later flowed into sewerage; externally used drugs or PCPs; or expired/unused pharmaceuticals/PCPs disposed of in the trash. Moreover, ineffective treatment in WWTPs also led to ECs discharge into rivers and ecosystems. 


### Adverse effect of emerging contaminants

A summary of potential human health risks, bioaccumulation, toxic effects, and regulatory status of some ECs frequently found in the environment is shown in Table  1. ECs have shown either substantial, probable, or limited evidence on human/environmental health problems. Pharmaceuticals have shown strong evidence of congenital disabilities, developmental delays, hormone activity, and endocrine system (including liver). While, they have probable and limited evidence on the accumulation in wildlife and/or people, cancer, respiratory system, skin, reproduction and fertility, wildlife and environmental toxicity, brain, and nervous system. The toxicities of pharmaceutical products toward plants and alga are shown in Table 2.

Sulfachlorpyridazine, oxytetracycline, and diclofenac are toxic to duckweed/plant with EC50 of 2.33 mg/L, 4.92 mg/L, and 7.5 mg/L, respectively. While tiludronate, propranolol and metoprolol are toxic to algae with EC50 of 13.3, 5.8, and 7.3 mg/L, respectively.

ECs have shown potential adverse effects and need to be analyzed further. Some significant concerns of ECs on human's health include glucose metabolism, infertility, abortion, cholesterol, weight, fetal growth, allergy, cancer, uric acid, semen quality, acute effects (Lei et al., 2015), nervous system syndrome, memory disruption, anemia, hypertension, carcinogenic, nondegradable, toxic in nature, oxidative stress, cardiovascular disorder, reproductive disorder, reduce IQs, and apoptosis (Rasheed et al., 2019). The toxicity effect of ECs (i.e., furosemide and tramadol) was detected on Prague's surface water and WWTP to Artemia salina. They had a lethal concentration (LC50) of 225.01 mg/L and 14,000 mg/L for furosemide and tramadol, respectively (Diaz-Sosa et al., 2020)    The presence of ketorolac, ibuprofen, estradiol, diclofenac, and pentachlorophenol ranged under toxic concentrations in the coastal zone of Mexico. It was found from an ecotoxicological analysis. These ECs can contaminate surface water and soil and later cause endocrine changes in organisms living in this ecosystem (Arguello-Pérez et al., 2019). Endocrine disruption chemicals interfere endocrine system by mimicking, disrupting, and blocking the hormone's function (Bolong et al., 2009).


### Emerging Contaminants Analysis

The data on the ECs presence in water bodies are still scarce and limited. It is partly due to the unavailability of instruments for analysis. Hence, improvement of ECs analysis methods is significant in ECs' detection. Generally, ECs analysis can be classified based on the targeted compound, nontargeted compound, and unknown compound. The LC-MS/MS is commonly used to analyze ECs . Nonetheless, research is still needed, especially for detecting non-target/unknown ECs. New methods are required to allow a more efficient, low-cost, and time-saving analysis (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017). Figure 3 shows targeted compounds and non-targeted compounds analysis using LC-MS. The LC-QTOF-MS/MS method showed high-confidence results. In the targeted compound analysis, the high sensitivity of TOF-MS offered intelligent screening and quantitative analysis. In the study of nontargeted compounds, the data were obtained through processing data based on some parameters (i.e., full scan mode mass accuracy; MS/MS library data of spectral purity score grade; structure description and mass error of fragment ion). Although the commercial MS/MS library can accurately and simultaneously confirm the non-target compounds, it is recommended to use the library that contains 20,000-30,000 compounds to achieve higher accuracy (Bueno et al., 2012). A pharmaceutical product is the standard category of ECs. The general steps for analyzing the ECs include sample collection, filtration, extraction, derivatization (if necessary), and LC-MS or GC-MS analysis (Fatta et al., 2007).  ECs treatment technologies typically consist of physical, biological, and chemical treatments (Figure 4). Physical treatment does not employ a biological or chemical agent and does not change the biochemical properties of the ECs. Biological treatment is a process that involves living organisms or enzymatic degradation. Lastly, chemical treatment is a process that involves chemical reactions (Ahmed et al., 2021).

Some effective treatments for ECs removal are biological treatment, membrane filtration, adsorption, and advanced oxidation processes. The biological treatment is the most widely used because of its availability, low cost, and environmentally friendly. However, it was reported to be less effective due to its poor biodegradability. In chemical treatment, ECs are converted into more stable or into compounds that are biodegradable through mineralization or conversion into inorganics (e.g., H2O, CO2, and N2). It is the most effective in eliminating various ECs, although posing some drawbacks. In several studies, physical treatment has also been shown effective in pharmaceutical removals (Dhangar & Kumar, 2020).

Recently, technologies for ECs removal have been developed (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017). Each technology offered different performances for a specific type of ECs. For instance, phosphorized carbonaceous adsorbent showed good performance for some ECs, with a removal efficiency of about 99%. Continuous ultrafiltration (UF) showed removals of less than 30%. Activated sludge and constructed wetland showed removal efficiencies of 10-95% for 14 types of ECs. Sono-fenton+photocatalysts showed different diethyl phthalate and dimethyl phthalate removal efficiencies of 35 and 47%, respectively. 


## ADSORPTION

Adsorption is a surface phenomenon in which the solute (adsorbate) and the porous surface (adsorbent) interact through a particular mechanism (Rashed, 2013). Adsorption is one of the promising methods for ECs removal due to its simple operation, low cost, and high efficiency (Sophia & Lima, 2018). Several advantages of adsorption include (Rasheed et al., 2019): high selectivity, high efficiency, facile processing, no harsh chemicals used, high productivity, cost-effective, easy post-treatment, and less disruptive.

Like other methods, adsorption also faces some challenges. They include the cost aspect of the entire adsorption process; only a few studies available on the fixed-bed system typically used in the industry; the ability to regenerate and reuse adsorbents in an environmentally friendly manner; the need to develop isotherm models for multicomponent systems; and the application of adsorption methods in actual cases (Dotto & McKay, 2020).

The main stages in the adsorption studies for ECs removal are shown in Figure 5. The first stage involves choosing raw material for the adsorbent. It can come from various sources such as natural, synthetic, waste, etc. The second stage is the development of adsorbent material through physical or chemical processes, such as changing the particle size, acidification, structure modification, etc. The third stage is the adsorbent characterization that reveals the physical and chemical characteristics of the adsorbents. The fourth stage is the selection of ECs types and concentrations due to the wide range of ECs. The fifth stage is sorption studies, which include optimizing parameters that affect adsorbent performance and investigating the adsorption equilibrium and the adsorption kinetic. The final stage is desorption and regeneration studies, where the effectiveness of adsorbent is investigated when used many times. 


### Adsorbent Materials

The adsorbent's selection, characterization, and development are essential aspects in ECs removal via the adsorption process. Some critical criteria are cost and adsorbent availability, chemical stability, good physicochemical and textural characteristics, fast kinetic rate, mechanical stability, ability to regenerate or reuse, and high adsorption capacity (Dotto & McKay, 2020).

Adsorbents are generally classified into five categories : natural, biomass, industrial waste, agriculture waste, and synthetic adsorbents. Low-cost adsorbents include the ones prepared from readily available materials (e.g., peat, natural zeolite, chitin/ chitosan, clay, coal, wood, etc.), industrial wastes (e.g., saw dust, sunflower stalk, nuts and fruits peels, straw, corncob waste, etc.), and agriculture wastes (e.g., palm oil ash, fly ash, blast furnace, red mud, shale oil ash, bagasse, and bagasse pith, bagasse fly ash, etc.).

An adsorbent is characterized in terms of absorption capacity, porosity, and pore structure. Natural adsorbents (e.g., clay, zeolite, charcoal) are cheap and abundant and can be modified to increase their adsorption capacity (Rashed, 2013). Agriculture wastes-based adsorbents have a porous structure and desirable functional groups (e.g., hydroxyl, carboxyl). They are also low-cost and renewable resources. Modification of agriculture waste-based adsorbents resulted in enhanced performance . Industrial wastes such as fly ash, red mud, waste slurry are also potential adsorbents. The adsorption capacity of industrial waste adsorbents depends on adsorbent characteristics, adsorbate concentration, and adsorbent modification (Ahmaruzzaman, 2011).

Biosorbents can be classified as living (e.g., bacteria, algae, fungi, yeast) or non-living organic materials (e.g., wastes of agricultural and food industries) (Shamim, 2018). Biosorption is a physical or a chemical process (i.e., adsorption, electrostatic interactions, micro-deposition, chelation, ion exchange) that occurs in the cell wall before the adsorbate is assimilated. It has high selectivity and efficiency, as well as low cost.

Another category is synthetic adsorbents, such as nano adsorbents. It has a high surface area and consists of several categories based on their roles in the adsorption process related to surface properties and their functionalities. They are nanoparticles, silicon nanomaterials, nanofibers, xerogels and aerogels, polymer-based nanomaterials, nano clays, and carbonaceous nanomaterials (Khajeh et al., 2013).


### Adsorption Mechanism

Adsorbent and adsorbate interact in two ways: chemi-and physisorption. In the former, the adsorbate forms a monolayer. The adsorbate interacts with the external surface of the adsorbent, enters the internal pores through pore diffusion, and interacts with the active sites (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). The adsorbent and the adsorbate form a new electronic configuration through electron sharing or electron transfer, and chemical interaction occurs. In the latter, adsorbent and adsorbate interact through the Van der Waals force in solid-liquid or solid-gas systems (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). Electrostatic forces or Van der Waals forces occur without the transfer or sharing of electrons. The adsorbate retains its identity, although a surface force field may deform it.

The illustration of the adsorption process is shown in Figure 6. The process is related to pore surface areas, active sites, chemisorption, and/or physisorption. Cheng et al. (2021) explained that modified biochar could adsorb some ECs with different mechanisms: hydrophobic interaction (for tylosin), ion exchange (for tetracycline and endocrine-disrupting chemicals), electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, and functional groups (for tetracycline and endocrine-disrupting chemicals), and π-π DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045 bond interaction (for ciprofloxacin, tetracycline, sulfate, and endocrinedisrupting chemicals).

The adsorption equilibrium state is reached when there is minimum solute adsorption from the bulk to the adsorbent. The adsorption amount (qe, mmol/g) under equilibrium is given in Equation
[1]. qe = V (Co−Ce) M (1)
where V is the volume of the solution (L); M is the adsorbent mass (g); Co, Ce are adsorbate concentrations in the initial and equilibrium condition, respectively (Rashed, 2013).

The adsorption isotherm is a function of the equilibrium concentration of the solution at a constant temperature. It is defined as the percentage of adsorbate per unit weight of adsorbent. Usually, the adsorption isotherm is given in the Langmuir or Freundlich model (Román et al., 2020) (2) qe = KfCe 1/n (3) where KI (L/mg) is the Langmuir constant; Q0 (mg/g) is the monolayer maximum adsorption capacity; qe (mg/g) is the measured adsorption at Ce; Kf (mg/g)(L/mg) 1/n is the Freundlich constant representing the adsorption capacity, and n is the constant depicting the adsorption intensity.

Adsorption kinetic shows the retention rate or solute release from solution to adsorbent's surface at certain conditions (i.e., the dose of adsorbent, pH, temperature, and flow rate). Examples of adsorption kinetics are pseudo-first-order, intra-particle diffusion, pseudo-second-order, and Elovich models. 


### Factors Affecting Adsorption

Internal and external factors influence the adsorption process. The internal factors include structure features (e.g., molecular weight, functional groups, morphology, pore size, surface area, etc.). The external factors include adsorbent dosage, adsorbate concentration, contact time, pH, temperature, and competitiveness.

Those factors need to be optimized to achieve desirable performances. A high concentration of adsorbate leads to lower adsorption efficiency. High temperature is preferred for endothermic reactions. Contact time relates to the saturation of all adsorbent active sites. The presence of competitive ions can also compete on the active site of the adsorbent. An adsorbent's chemical properties (e.g., functional group, ionization, steric effect) also influence the adsorption capacity (Román et al., 2020). Pore size and surface area affect the number of available active sites on the adsorbent surface. There is also a relationship between pore size and surface area, in which smaller pore size results in higher surface area.


### Adsorption for Emerging Contaminants Removal

Adsorption is a promising method for ECs removal. Research has shown the application of various types of adsorbents (e.g., nanoadsorbent, biochar, activated carbon, composite adsorbent) for ECs removals. The adsorbent surface can be modified chemically or thermally to convert it from a functional material to a multifunctional nano-adsorbent and increase its capacity to absorb ECs (Sophia & Lima, 2018).

Agricultural wastes have a prospect to be applied as an adsorbent. As such, it simultaneously reduces environmental waste and converts waste into functional and valuable materials. Physical and chemical modifications have been proved to improve their adsorption performances . After being modified to increase their porosity and surface area, most of the agricultural and industrial wastes were used as adsorbents. These modifications included nano-structuring, carbonization, activation, milling, sieving, derivatization, and grafting techniques (Mo et al., 2018).

The summary of reports on ECs removals using adsorbent is shown in Table 3. The performance of agricultural and industrial waste-based adsorbents for ECs removals depends on the type of ECs, modification of adsorbent material, and several external factors. Peñafiel et al., (2019) investigated ciprofloxacin removal by corn cob and rice husk-based adsorbent. The removals obtained by the corn cob was 56.3%, and rice husk was 59.7%. The optimum doses were 2 g/L for the corn cob and 6 g/L for the rice husk-based adsorbent. The performance was strongly influenced by pH with an optimum value of 6, and the mechanism was well described by the Freundlich isotherm and pseudo-second-order kinetic models. Oyehan et al., (2020) investigated phenol removal by a mesoporous fly ash-based adsorbent. It was coated by an ultrathin film of polydiallydimethyl ammonium chloride. The highest removal was about 95%. The mechanism was fitted by Freundlich, Langmuir and Temkin isotherm models with physisorption mechanism.

Biomass-based adsorbents (i.e., living or dead microorganisms and their components) can be utilized for the biosorption of ECs. However, the commercialization of this group of adsorbents is still limited. Various physical and chemical modifications led to higher costs and created new environmental problems (Fomina & Gadd, 2014). Bankole et al., (2020) investigated Ibuprofen, diclofenac, celecoxib removals using two wood-rot fungi: Laetiporus sulphurous and Ganoderma applanatum. The combination of Laetiporus sulphurous and Ganoderma applanatum biomassed showed better performance than the standalone.    luchuensis and Trametes versicolor were >99.9, >98, and 100%, respectively. Each fungal strain required different pHs and incubation periods for achieving a good biosorption process.

Nano-adsorbent could remove ECs even at low concentrations (μg/L) under optimum temperature and pH. Moreover, the nanoadsorbent dose was low, and the time required for ECs removal was short (1-15 minutes). However, the application of nanoadsorbent is still limited. Therefore, further studies are still required to enhance the adsorption capacity, security level of materials, and application in various conditions (Basheer, 2018). Nguyen et al. (2020) investigated lindane (pesticide) removal by using modified nanomaterial of aluminum hydroxide as adsorbent. The removal efficiency was 93.68% by applying an adsorbent dosage of 25 mg/L, adsorption time of 60 min, ionic strength of 10 Mm NaCl, and pH six.


## MEMBRANE FILTRATION

Membrane-based processes have long been used in water and wastewater to remove microorganisms, organic materials, including emerging contaminants and other particles (Gómez-Espinosa & Arizmendi-Cotero, 2019). The membrane material can separate those constituents under specific driving forces. Various pressure-driven membrane processes (i.e., nanofiltration (NF), UF, reverse osmosis (RO)), and osmotically driven forward osmosis (FO) have been studied for ECs removal. The removal efficiency followed the order of the typical pore sizes being the highest for the one with the smallest one: RO≥FO> NF> UF.

Retention of ECs by the membrane is affected by the size/ steric exclusion, hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions (adsorption), electrostatic forces, or a combination thereof. Polar ECs have less retention than less polar ones. UF is less effective for ECs removals but can act as a pre-treatment before FO, NF, or RO. Further studies are needed to study the transfer mechanism and evaluate the effects of draw solution type, concentration, permeation rate, and foulant accumulation .


### Materials

Most of the commercial membranes were prepared from synthetic polymers. The materials often used for UF and MF are polysulfone, polyvinylidene fluoride, polyacrylonitrile, and polypropylene, including recently inorganic/ ceramic, which has been of great interest. The most common material for RO membrane is polyamide, while the materials for NF membrane are polysulfone, polyimide, and ceramic. The application of membrane technology for ECs removals is challenged by various limitations on membrane physicochemical characteristics and other factors that influence the separation process. Some membrane materials such as polymers, inorganic membranes, and others need further tests (Kárászová et al., 2020).

Membranes can have a porous or dense structure. The separation of ECs using membranes is related to the solubility and diffusivity of ECs and the applied pressure (Gómez-Espinosa & Arizmendi-Cotero, 2019). Detailed classification of membrane materials can be found elsewhere (Pendergast & Hoek, 2011).

Generally, different membrane materials (e.g., polyamide, ceramic, cellulose triacetate) are pretty similar in the rejection of ECs, only differ in some ways. In RO membrane prepared from cellulose triacetate had a less significant effect on the DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045 electrostatic interaction than polyamide. The rejection of positively charged ECs is lower than negatively charged ECs when separated using ceramic membranes. In polyamide NF/RO membrane, the effect of positive/negative charge on ECs was not observed.


### Separation Process

In membrane-based separation, membrane material acts as a physical barrier for pollutants/contaminants in the feed. The retention of contaminants is highly affected by the relative size of the pores to the contaminants. A membrane process requires a driving force (e.g., electrical force, concentration difference, pressure) to allow separation of a particular substance, as schematically illustrated in Figure 7. Membrane with tiny pores requires high transmembrane pressure to separate specific components from the feed and vice versa (Madhura et al., 2018).

The transport through the membrane pores is influenced by the material, physicochemical characteristics, and membrane morphology. In general, the ECsmembrane interaction mechanism consists of size exclusion, electrostatic and/or hydrophobic interactions. The size exclusion mechanism occurs through sieving, where large ECs molecules are retained while smaller ECs molecules pass through the membrane pores. The relative sizes of the ECs and the free volume of the active membrane layer is a factor that determines the efficiency of the separation.

Electrostatic interaction is related to electrostatic attraction or repulsion between the ECs and the membrane material. If the membrane surface is negatively charged, then ECs with negative charged ECs will be rejected, and vice versa. Moreover, neutral ECs are not affected by electrostatic interactions.


## Hydrophobic interactions between hydrophobic

ECs and hydrophobic membranes can also affect the separation process. Hydrophobic ECs do not fully dissolve but suspend in with water. When presented in the feed, they could be absorbed into the hydrophobic membrane material and concentrated on its surface. The use of membranes (especially MF and UF) for ECs removals can be done in a combined process (Gómez-Espinosa & Arizmendi-Cotero, 2019). UF is effective for pathogen removal, and MF is effective for particulates removal. RO and NF operate at higher transmembrane pressure and can remove contaminants up to 0.0001 μm and 0.001 μm, respectively. The RO and NF processes can remove a wide range of contaminants and requiring more pre-treatments. NF and RO effectively remove ECs such as pesticides, pharmaceutical products, endocrines, algal toxins, and other similar substances.

Tables 4 and 5 compare NF and RO membranes and their performance for ECs removal. In ECs removals, RO has higher removal efficiency than NF. Generally, NF and RO membranes are different in some parameters, including adequate pore size, energy consumption, micropollutant removal, membrane availability, etc.


### Factor Affecting Performance

The main parameter to judge membrane performance is permeability that is affected by membrane pore size, surface chemistry, morphology, porosity, thickness, etc. The increase in membrane thickness causes a decrease in permeation flux because of longer flow path across the membrane matric (Kárászová et al., 2020). Membrane permeability is also influenced by hydrophilic/ hydrophobic characteristics and morphology of membrane surface. Higher porosity leads to lower intrinsic membrane resistance (Shamsuddin et al., 2016).  Transport through a membrane is affected by both the feed solution characteristics and the membrane properties (Hammami et al., 2017). In NF, ECs rejection is influenced by several factors. They are EC properties (i.e., molecular size, charge, hydrophobicity, polarity, diffusivity, solubility), membrane properties (i.e., surface charge, hydrophobicity, permeability, pore size), and membrane operating conditions (i.e., rejections/recovery, transmembrane pressure, flux, water feed quality) (Bolong et al., 2009). The efficiency of ECs removal is influenced by both the physicochemical characteristics of ECs and the membrane properties.

Membrane properties affect the interaction of the feed constituents and the membrane surface. Membranes can attract or repel water (i.e., hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces). The nature of the feed solution can also affect the membrane fouling propensity. The increased foulant material concentration in the feed lowers the permeability. The permeation rate is proportional to the trans-membrane pressure, in which higher pressure leads to higher fluid force.  


### Membrane Fouling

One of the main challenges of membranebased filtration is membrane fouling (Van der Bruggen et al., 2008). It is caused by substance deposition on the membrane surface and/or in the membrane pores (Madhura et al., 2018). It lowers the membrane flux and could alter the membrane surface hydrophobicity through the formation of the cake layer, the surface charge, traces contaminant adsorption, and the overall surface roughness (Kárászová et al., 2020). Membrane fouling is affected by the foulant material characteristics, such as the functional groups, overall structure, size, etc. It dictates its physical/chemical interaction with the membrane material. (Shamsuddin et al., 2016).

Based on the nature of the foulant materials, foulant materials can be classified into living cells (biological), organics, particulates, and inorganics (Bokhary et al., 2018). Several parameters also influence membrane fouling, namely membrane properties, feed characteristics, and operational parameters. These parameters must be considered when designing a membrane process (Bokhary et al., 2018).

There are several mechanisms of membrane fouling: adsorption, pore blocking, cake layer, and gel-layer formation. Some of them mostly co-occur. In the adsorption mechanism, the membrane and the foulant material interact, forming particles monolayer on the surface of the membrane. The layer causes additional hydraulic resistance and eventually lowers the hydraulic throughput. In the poreblocking mechanism, the foulant blocks the membrane pores either wholly or partially, depending on the particle's relative size to the membrane pore size. In the cake layer fouling, particle deposition causes additional hydraulic resistance on the surface of the membrane. The firmly attached cake forms gel-layer on the membrane surface (Madhura et al., 2018).

Several methods can be implemented to reduce the severity of membrane fouling as summarized in Figure 8, namely pretreatment of the feed, membrane modification, operation conditions, and cleanings (physical or chemical methods). 


### Application of Membrane Filtration for Emerging Contaminants Removal

Membrane-based processes (such as MF, UF, membrane bioreactor) have been proposed as the technologies ECs removals (Couto et al., 2018). They have proven to offer good permeation and do not impose toxicity (i.e., excess chemicals) to the environment. Reports on membrane application for ECs removal showed that good selectivity could be achieved by implementing dense membrane (NF, RO, FO). Denser membrane (i.e., RO) had better selectivity in retaining ECs than more open pore membrane (i.e., NF). The mass transport through a dense membrane generally obeys the solution diffusion model. Porous membranes offer higher permeation but lower EC rejection (Kárászová et al., 2020). Table 6 summarizes the applications of various types of membrane processes for ECs removals. The application of membrane filtration for the separation or concentration of pharmaceuticals has been extensively investigated. Most of the studies employed commercial membranes (especially polyamide) with an NF process. RO membranes have an efficiency of ≥ 80% removals for most pharmaceuticals. For the UF membrane, the results varied widely (Shojaee Nasirabadi et al., 2016).    Ferreiro et al. (2020) studied ECs removals in WWTP using the biological treatment, followed by UF as the tertiary treatment. The removals of 39 types of ECs using UF were ≤ 30%, except for amitriptyline (63.0%). UF showed good performance in other studies on phenol, atenolol, ciprofloxacin, amoxiline, and sulfamethoxazole removals (Bhattacharya et al., 2019(Bhattacharya et al., , 2020Ali et al., 2021;Shakak et al., 2020 


## HYBRID SYSTEMS

Various treatment technologies (i.e., biological, physical, chemical treatments) have been investigated for ECs removal and showed good performance. However, hybrid systems have been developed due to challenges and limitations of each technology (e.g., contaminant sludge disposal, high retention time, high cost, limited removals of a wide range of ECs) (Dhangar & Kumar, 2020). Recently, studies of various hybrid systems for ECs removal have increased significantly (Ahmed et al., 2017). One of the hybrid systems is adsorption/membrane filtration-based technologies. This hybrid system has some advantages: rapid kinetic, low pressure-drop, better separation efficiency, easier control and handling, lower discharge volume, higher reusability, lower fouling rate (in some cases), and low-energy footprint, lower process cost, and potential use as biosorbents. In this section, an overview of the hybrid system involving adsorption or/and membrane is provided.


### Adsorption-Based Hybrid Systems

Adsorption can be combined with biological treatments (e.g., activated sludge, MBR), chemical treatments (e.g., photo Fenton oxidation, ozonation), and other physical treatments (e.g., membrane filtration). Table 7 shows a summary of various adsorption-based hybrid systems for ECs removal.

Tagliavini & Schäfer, (2018) evaluated polymer-based activated carbon adsorption+UF/NF for steroid removals. They compared adsorption+UF and adsorption+NF. The result showed that the role of adsorption in the adsoprtion+NF hybrid system was not significant. Nonetheless, the adsorption+UF hybrid system showed more potential due to its higher permeability and good performance, with a removal efficiency of > 90%. Granzoto et al., (2021) investigated ECs removals (i.e., phosphate, tri-n-butyl phosphate, tris (chloropropyl), triphenyl phosphate) by using a hybrid system. It combined adsorption (granulated activated carbon (GAC)) and ozonation (O3)/ UV-H2O2. They evaluated different configurations, namely UV/H2O2+GAC+UV/H2O2; O3+GAC+O3;

UV/H2O2+GAC+O3; O3+GAC+UV/H2O2. The performance of the O3+GAC+O3 configuration showed a good result and was found to be cost-effective. This configuration could remove the ECs almost entirely with the removals from various units as follow: the first O3 treatment (15%), GAC treatment (80%), and last O3 treatment (100%). Dwivedi et al., (2018) assessed a hybrid system combining Fenton and GAC to treat carbamazepine in raw wastewater. The process was optimized by Response Surface Methodology tools and found the optimum condition of Fenton pretreatment with the concentration of H2O2 (8.5 g/L) and pH (3.5). The maximum removal was 99.51 ±0.02%. This result was higher than the standalone Fenton treatment (with the removal of merely 49.39%).

Ferrer-Polonio et al., (2020) assessed a hybrid system consisting of adsorption (activated carbon) and biological (activated sludge) treatments. The targeted ECs were caffeine, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen. The adsorption process was effective for acetaminophen removal but not for caffeine and ibuprofen.   (Guillossou et al., 2020) Based on results summarized in Table 7, an adsorption-based hybrid system offered better performances than single systems. The combination between adsorption and biological/physical/chemical treatments shows higher removal efficiencies than a single system. The range of removal efficiency is quite diverse depending on the type of ECs and the treatment processes.


### Membrane Filtration-Based Hybrid System

The applications of membrane filtrationbased hybrid systems for ECs removal are shown in Table 8. Pathak et al., (2018) assessed a combination of osmotic membrane bioreactor (OMBR) with MF to remove atenolol, caffeine, and atrazine. MF was required to solve the salt accumulation problems due to rejection by the FO, acting as the purging system. The process worked under oxic-anoxic conditions, and the performance was quite diverse for each targeted ECs. The highest removal was obtained for caffeine (94-100%), followed by atenolol (89-96%) and atrazine (16-40%). Atrazine removal was related to redox and microbial condition on the system. Martínez et al., (2013) removed ECs (i.e., nicotine, hydrochlorothiazide 4-acetamido antipyrine, sulfamethoxazole, ranitidine hydrochloride, nicotine) by a combination of photocatalytic oxidation and membrane filtration. The photocatalytic oxidation process was facilitated by the TiO2 photocatalysis and Fe2O3/SBA-15 in H2O2 photo-Fenton. The membrane types were RO and NF. NF membrane showed a better choice for the hybrid system than the RO due to its lower energy footprint and higher flux while still offering good EC rejection. TiO2 photocatalysis and Fe2O3/SBA-15 with H2O2 photo-Fenton showed ECs removal of 80-100%. Among all targeted ECs, nicotine has the lowest removal efficiency. However, Fe2O3/SBA-15 in H2O2 photo-Fenton showed better performance on nicotine removal than the TiO2 photocatalysis system. Chen et al., (2019) assessed the hybrid process between UF and magnetic ion exchange resin (MIEX) for carbamazepine removal. This hybrid system exploited the UF advantage of turbidity treatment and MIEX advantage in EC removal. MIEX was used as pre-treatment. The system could reduce the secondary contaminant of resin and increase the membrane lifespan.

The removal efficiencies of this system were 25-79%, depending on the water turbidity. Data in Table 8 suggest that membrane filtration-based hybrid systems offered a wide range of ECs removals. Some of them can achieve complete removal, while only achieved as low as 16%.


### Membrane Filtration / Adsorption Hybrid Process

Membrane filtration and adsorption can be combined in many configurations. They include adsorption pre-treatment, integrated adsorption/ membrane systems (IAMPs), and adsorption post-treatment. The integrated adsorption/ membrane process can be done through (1) a low-pressure membrane combined with adsorption, (2) membrane adsorption bioreactor, and (3) membrane adsorption. Several studies assessed the performance of those configurations for ECs removal. Wang et al., (2020) conducted the experiments on a hybrid system of NF/UF+adsorption, in which PAC was used for the pre-treatment to ease the membrane fouling. The result showed that PAC pretreatment could reduce membrane fouling caused by organic foulant in UF and NF membranes. Huang et al., (2019) investigated a combination between activated carbon adsorption and NF to remove octyl phenol, diclofenac, and caffeine by involving coagulation as the pre-treatment. They compared the performances between adsorption+NF and NF+ adsorption configurations. The result shows the hybrid system performance is better than the single systems. The adsorption+NF had better performance than the NF+adsorption configuration with removals of targeted ECs of ≥ 95%.

Ivancev-tumbas & Hobby (2010) assessed the adsorption+UF system for carbamazepine and p-nitrophenol removals by employing the integrated configuration. They compared three types of adsorbents with different properties. The found the best adsorbent was the one with the smallest particle size. The removal efficiency was influenced by the density and the particle size of the adsorbent. The presence of coagulant improved the removal efficiency of the treatment system. The maximum removals of carbamazepine and pnitrophenol were 40.0 and 30.7%, respectively.


### Application of Hybrid System Combining Membrane Filtration and Adsorption for Emerging Contaminants Removal

The application of the hybrid system for ECs removal has great attention because it combines the advantages of each technology. There are several configurations of hybrid adsorption-membrane filtration (AD+M), as summarized in Table 9. Most of ECs treated by AD+M hybrid system were pharmaceuticals. The common adsorbent and membrane processes were activated carbon and UF, respectively. Generally, the processes were applied with pressure and stirring under various adsorbent loadings.

The removal efficiencies were quite diverse, depending on ECs, adsorbent characteristics, membrane properties, operating conditions, and the process configurations. Sharma et al., (2017) investigated M+AD for antibiotic removals. The hybrid system used the adsorption pre-treatment followed by the membrane filtration. The adsorbent was synthesized through co-precipitation resulting in modified layered adsorbent material. The membrane material was a lowcost MF ceramic with an average pore size of 1 µm and a porosity of 47%. The result showed that the optimum conditions were pH (7), ECs concentration (of 10 mg/L), and adsorbent dosage (1 g/L). This system could achieve the removal efficiency of 98.7% for norfloxacin and 94.6% for ofloxacin. PH conditions highly influenced the performance. Sheng et al., (2016) compared adsorption and coagulation as the pre-treatment of UF. It was used to remove 16 ECs, namely bezafibrate, acetaminophen, gemfibrozil, sulfamethazine, triclosan, naproxen, acetaminophen, sulfamethoxazole, cotinine, caffeine, diclofenac, ibuprofen, metoprolol, sulfadimethoxine, trimethoprim, and carbamazepine. These ECs were collected from many WWTPs in the USA. The adsorbent was the PAC, and the coagulant was poly-aluminum chloride. The result showed that the hybrid systems (adsorption+UF and coagulation+UF) had better performances than the single systems (adsorption, coagulation, or UF only). Adsorption has better performance than coagulation pre-treatment. The average removal efficiencies of coagulation, UF, adsorption, coagulation+UF, and adsorption+UF systems were 7, 29, 50, 33, and 90.3%, respectively. These results showed that the hybrid system combining adsorption and UF, in which adsorption acted as the pre-treatment, had an excellent prospect for ECs removal.  

investigated a combination of submerged membrane filtration-adsorption (M+AD) for removals of 19 ECs. They were naproxen, triclosan, paracetamol, amitriptyline, clozapine, caffeine, verapamil, DEET, gemfibrozil, sulfamethoxazole, atenolol, ketoprofen, simazine, trimethoprim, fluoxetine, primidone, triclocarban, carbamazepine, and diclofenac. These ECs were obtained from RO concentrate of water reclamation plant in Australia. The membrane-type was hydrophilic polyacrylonitrile MF. The adsorbent was GAC with a size of 300-600 μm. Most ECs were removed with a removal efficiency of 80% on day 1, except for sulfamethoxazole and DEET. The excellent performance was attributed to the electrostatic interaction between hydrophobic or neutral/positive charge ECs with the negative charge of GAC.

Generally, a combination between adsorption and membrane filtration shows high removal efficiency. However, some investigations still showed unsatisfied removal efficiencies of <50%. Further studies are still required to unravel the ECs removal mechanism and the most ideal process layout, including strategies for scale-up.


## CONCLUSION

ECs need to be removed due to their potential adverse effects on the environment, human health, and other organisms. There are several available treatment technologies for ECs removal classified into physical, biological, and chemical treatments. Adsorption and membrane filtration are physical treatments that can be used for ECs removal as a single/ standalone or in hybrid systems. As a single system, adsorption or membrane filtration had shown diverse removal efficiencies. Adsorption or membrane filtration can also be combined with various other technologies. Hybrid systems are of great interest due to their potential to overcome the shortcomings of standalone technology. The combinations between adsorption and membrane filtration have been done in three configurations: adsorption as the pretreatment, integrated adsorption/membrane filtration, and adsorption as the post-treatment. Most of the hybrid systems offered better performance than the standalone systems due to the synergistic effects. However, further investigations are needed to assess the large-scale application and remove a wide range of ECs.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank for the financial support of Universiti Brunei Darussalam Graduate Scholarship (UGS).


## AUTHORS' NOTE

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this article. The authors confirmed that the paper was free of plagiarism.

## Figure 1 .
1(A) The number of publications in SCOPUS by year (A) and by country (B) obtained using "emerging contaminant" as a keyword (Source: SCOPUS, search on 19 th August 2021).

## 8045 Figure 2 .
80452DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-Sources and pathways of emerging contaminants.

## Figure 3 .
3Targeted and non-targeted compound analysis(Bueno et al., 2012).

## Figure 4 .
4Available technologies for ECs removals(Dhangar & Kumar, 2020). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

## Figure 5 .
5Adsorbent selection protocol for pharmaceutical product removals (Patel et al., 2019). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

## Figure 6 .
6Adsorption pathway.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

## 8045 Figure 7 .
80457DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-Schematic diagram of membrane separation process(Madhura et al., 2018).

## 8045 Figure 8 .
80458DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-Strategies for membrane fouling control(Bokhary et al., 2018).


DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045


. Further research and regulation of ECs and their detrimental effects are needed to protect human health and ecology. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

## Table 1 .
1The priority of major human/environmental health issues of the most prominent categories of ECs(Smital, 2008). Weight of evidence:+++ strong, ++ probable, + limited. Oslo and Paris Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR)Health concern 

Chemical family 

Nonculturable 
biological 
pathogens 

Bisphenol 

& 

BADGE 
Perfluoro-chemicals 

(PFCs) 
Perchlorate 
Pharmaceuticals 
Nanomaterials 

Fragrances 

(nitro-

and 

polycyclic 
musks) Polychlorinated 
naphthalenes 
(PCNs) 
Phthalates 
Triclosan 
Polybrominated 

diphenyl 

esthers 

(PBDEs) 

A 

Brominate 

dioxins 

and 

furans 

Alkyl 

phenols 

Persistent accumulates in wildlife and/or people 
++ 
++ 
+ 
++ 
++ 
++ 
++ 
++ 
+++ 
+ 
+ 
Birth defects and developmental delays 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
++ 
+ 
Cancer 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Respiratory system 
+++ 
+ 
++ 
+++ 
+ 
Hematologic (blood) system 
+ 
Immune system (including sensitization 
and allergies) 

+ 
++ 
+++ 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+ 
+ 

Skin 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+ 
+ 
Reproduction and fertility 
++ 
+++ 
++ 
+++ 
+ 
+++ 
+ 
+++ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Hormone activity 
+++ +++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+ 
Endocrine system (including liver) 
+ 
+++ +++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Wildlife and environmental toxicity 
++ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Kidney and renal system 
+ 
+++ 
Brain and nervous system 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
USA, Canada, EU list of priority compound 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
OSPAR list 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Note: 

## Table 2 .
2Pharmaceutical product toxicity toward plant and alga(Basheer, 2018).Pharmaceutical group 
Substance 
Organism affected 
Long-Term Exposure (mg/L) 
Duckweed/ Plant 
Alga EC 10 
EC50 
Anti-bacterial (sulfonamide) 
Sulfamethoxazole 
√ 
0.011 
Sulfamethazine 
√ 
>1.00 
Sulfachlorpyridazine 
√ 
2.33 
Sulfadimethoxine 
√ 
>0.04 
4 
Nicotine metabolite 
Cotinine 
√ 
> 1.00 
Anti-protozoal 
Metronidazole 
√ 
2.03 
Oestrogen 
Ethinylestradiol 
√ 
0.054 
Anti-bacterial (tetracycline) 
Tetracycline 
√ 
0.23 
Oxytetracycline 
√ 
0.788 
√ 
4.92 
Chlortetracycline 
√ 
0.036 
Doxycycline 
√ 
0.055 
Anti-bacterial (macrolide antibiotic) 
Erythromycin 
√ 
>1.00 
Lincomycin 
√ 
>1.00 
Roxithromycin 
√ 
>1.00 
Tylosin 
√ 
>1.00 
Fluvoxetine 
Sertraline 
√ 
>1.00 
Anti-diabetic (biguanide) 
Metformin 
√ 
>320 
√ 
110 
Antihyperlipoproteinemic 
Clofibric acid 
√ 
5.40 
√ 
115 
√ 
12.5 
Anti-hyperlipidemic 
Atorvastatin 
√ 
0.085 
Anti-hypertensive 
Captropril 
√ 
168 
√ 
25 
Bone resorption Inhibitor 
Tiludronate 
√ 
13.3 


## Table 2 (
2Continue). Pharmaceutical product toxicity toward plant and alga(Basheer, 2018).Pharmaceutical group 
Substance 
Organism affected 
Long-Term Exposure (mg/L) 
Duckweed/ Plant 
Alga EC 10 
EC50 
√ 
36.6 
Non-steroid antiInflammatory drug 
Naproxen 
√ 
>320.0 
√ 
24.2 
Ibuprofen 
√ 
>1.0 
√ 
22.0 
Acetaminophen 
(paracetamol) 

√ 
>1.0 

√ 
72.0 
Diclofenac 
√ 
7.5 
√ 
315.0 
β-adrenergic receptor blocker 
Propranolol 
√ 
5.8 
√ 
114.0 
Metoprolol 
√ 
7.3 
√ 
>320.0 
Anti-bacterial 
Trimethoprim 
√ 
>1.0 
Cephalexin 
√ 
>1.0 
Ciprofloxacin 
√ 
0.106 
Norfloxacin 
√ 
0.206 
Anti-bacterial (aminogycoside) 
Neomycin 
√ 
>1.0 
Streptomycin 
√ 
>1.0 
Anti-epileptic 
Carbamazepine 
√ 
74.0 
√ 
>1.0 
√ 
25.5 



, as shown in Equations [2] and [3], respectively. Q0 x Ce x Kl 1+(Ce x Kl)qe = 



## Table 3 .
3Emerging contaminants removal using adsorbents.Category of 
adsorbent 
Type of adsorbent 
EC adsorbate 
Adsorption Capacity 
Adsorption isotherm 
model 
Reference 

Natural 
adsorbent 

Granulated cork 
Diclofenac, phenol, 2,4-
dichlorophenol, methyl 
paraben, 
pentachlorophenol 
carbamazepine, 
ketoprofen, triclosan,2-
nitrophenol and 2-
chlorophenol, naproxen 

2-chlorophenol (45%), 2,4-
dichlorophenol (75%), 
methyl paraben (50%), 2-
nitrophenol (55%), phenol 
(20%), pentachlorophenol 
(100%), naproxen 
(2%),triclosan 
(100%).sodium diclofenac 
(100%), ketoprofen (57%), 
carbamazepine(50%). 

Freundlich and 
Langmuir 

(Mallek et al., 2018) 

Activated carbons 
obtained from peat 

poly(acrylic acid) 
265mg/g 
-

magnetic poly(N-
isopropylacrylamide)/c 
hitosan hydrogel 

hydrophilic 
sulfamethoxazole 
(SMZ) and hydrophobic 
bisphenol A (BPA). 

SMZ = 33.95 mg/g 
BPA = 747.53 mg/g 

Freundlich (for SMZ) 
Freundlich and Slips 
(for BPA) 

(Wiśniewska & Nowicki, 2020) 

Thermally modified 
bentonite clay 

Ciprofloxacin 
114.4 mg/g 
Langmuir 

Zeolite 
Phenol 
23.3, 24.9, 23.8, 34.5, mg/g 
at 55, 35, 45, and 25 o C, 
respectively 

Freundlich 
(Zhou et al., 2019a) 

Agriculture 
waste 

Grapefruit peel based 
biochar 

Tetracyclin 
37.92 mg/g 
Langmuir 
(Antonelli et al., 2020) 

Hydrochar-derived 
magnetic carbon 
composite from 
sawdust 

Roxarsone 
588.2 mg/g 
Langmuir 

Corn cob 
Ciprofloxacin 
56.3% 
Freundlich 
(Yousef et al., 2011) 
Rice husk 
Ciprofloxacin 
59.7% 
Freundlich 


## Table 3 (
3Continue). Emerging contaminants removal using adsorbents.Category of 
adsorbent 
Type of adsorbent 
EC adsorbate 
Adsorption Capacity 
Adsorption isotherm 
model 
Reference 

Activated carbons from 
peach stones 

Carbamazepine, 
diclofenac, caffeine 

caffeine (260 mg/g), 
carbamazepine (335 
mg/g). Diclofenac 
adsorption capacity is 
lower than caffein 

Sips 
(Yu et al., 2020a) 

Modification and 
magnetization of rice 
straw derived biochar 

tetracycline 
98.33 mg/g 
Langmuir, Freundlich, 
Temkin 

Waste tea residue 
Hydralazine 
hydrochloride 
pharmaceutical 
pollutant 

131.63 mg/g 
Langmuir and 
Freundlich 

(Qureshi et al., 2020) 

Pistachio shell coated 
with ZnO nanoparticles 

tetracycline 
95.06 mg/g 
Freundlich 

Industrial 
waste 

Mesoporous fly ash 
phenol 
~95% 
Freundlich, Langmuir 
and Temkin 
Biochar derived from 
hydrothermal 
carbonization of 
sugarcane bagasse 

sulfamethoxazole 
400 mg/g 
Freundlich 
(Peñafiel et al., 2019) 

Bagasse fly ash 
2-picoline 
98% 
Langmuir and 
Redlich-Peterson 
Activated carbon from 
effluent beverage 
industry treatment 
plant sludge 

ibuprofen, ketoprofen, 
and paracetamol 

ibuprofen (105 mg/g), 
paracetamol (57 mg/g ), 
and ketoprofen,(145 mg/g) 

Sips 
(Torrellas et al., 2015) 


## Table 3 (
3Continue). Emerging contaminants removal using adsorbents.Category of 
adsorbent 
Type of adsorbent 
EC adsorbate 
Adsorption Capacity 
Adsorption isotherm 
model 
Reference 

Chars from reprocessed 
wet olive mill waste 
pitted, olive tree 
pruning, olive stone. 

Diclofenac, ibuprofen, 
triclosan. 

Diclofenac (64%), 
ibuprofen (43%), triclosan 
(98%). 

Freundlich 

Novel modified red 
mud with polypyrrole 

Phosphorus (P) and 
diclofenac (DCF) 

DCF/P (115.7 mg/g), DCF 
(195 mg/g). 

Freundlich 
(Dai et al., 2020) 

Biomass 
adsorbent 

Unburned materials 
obtained by 
combustion in a conical 
spouted bed of four 
types of vegetable 
biomasses of forestry 
residues, grass, and 
food industry. 

amoxicillin 
1:33,107 mg/g 
Langmuir 

Wood-rot fungi; 
Laetiporus sulphureus 
(LS, Ganoderma 
applanatum (GA). 

Ibuprofen, diclofenac, 
celecoxib 

ibuprofen (95%), 
diclofenac (96%), celecoxib 
(98,96%) 

Langmuir and Temkin 
(Patil et al., 2019) 

Yeast, Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, 

Phenol 
27 mg/g 
Langmuir 

Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa 
immobilizedFe3O4-
multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes 
bioadsorbent 

2,4,6-trinitrophenol 
100 mg/g 
Langmuir 
(Mohammed & Kareem, 2019) 

Fungal Strains from 
Municipal Wastewater 

diclofenac 
>98% 
-


## Table 3 (
3Continue). Emerging contaminants removal using adsorbents. and Trametes versicolor. The diclofenac removals by Aspergillus luchuensis, A.Category of 
adsorbent 
Type of adsorbent 
EC adsorbate 
Adsorption Capacity 
Adsorption isotherm 
model 
Reference 

Nano-
adsorbent 

composite iron nano 
adsorbent. 

Ibuprofen 
= 92% 
Freundlich, 
Langmuir,Dubinin-
Radushkevich. Temkin 
and 

(Oyehan et al., 2020) 

Carbon nanotubes 
impregnated with 
metallic nanoparticles. 

Glyphosate-based 
herbicides 

43.66 mg/g 
Sips 

Surface modification of 
aluminum hydroxide 
Nanoparticles 

emerging pesticide 
lindane 

93.68% 
A two-step adsorption 
model 

(Prasannamedha et al., 2021) 

Magnetic 
graphene/chitosan 
nanocomposite 

2-naphthol 
169.49 mg g−1 
Freundlich 

Polypyrrole-
functionalized magnetic 
Bi2MoO6 
nanocomposites 

ketoprofen and 
indomethacin 

ketoprofen (87.03%) and 
indomethacin (86.24%) 

Langmuir 
(Lataye et al., 2008) 

magnetic silica-based 
nanoadsorbents 

Carbamazepine, 
ibuprofen, diclofenac, 

Diclofenac (83.0%) 
ibuprofen (63.5%), 
carbamazepine (< 3%). 

Freundlich model 


## Table 4 .
4A general comparison between NF vs. RO(Yangali-Quintanilla et al., 2011).Condition 
NF 
RO 
Effective pore size (range) 
1-2 nm 
< 1 nm 
Energy consumption 
Low to moderate 
High 
Removal of salts 
Moderate 
High 
Post-treatment for the addition of 
salts (ions) 

Not necessary 
Necessary 

Removal of contaminants 
(micropollutants) 

Low to high, depending on "tight" or 
"loose" membrane and type of 
contaminant 

Low to high, 
depending on the type 
of contaminant 
Membrane availability 
Low to moderate 
Plentiful 
Types of membranes by 
manufacturer 

Few 
Many 




DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX 
p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045 



## Table 5 .
5Removal efficiencies of specific ECs by NF and RO membranes.Type 
Chemical 
NF Removal (%) RO Removal (%) 
Pharmaceuticals 
Analgesic 
Ibuprofen 
98 
>98 
Naproxen 
23 
>95 
Antibiotic 
Trimethoprim 
22 
90 
Muscle 
relaxant 

Diazepam 
55 
>95 

Steroid 
17β-estradiol 
(estrogen) 

20 
90 

Testosterone 
(androgen) 

60 
95 

Personal Care Products 
Antimicrobial 
Triclosan 
45 
>96 
Insecticide 
DEET 
75 
>90 
Surfactant 
Nonylphenol 
>99 
>99 



## Table 6 .
6Application of membrane technology for emerging contaminant removals.Process 
Membrane 
material 
ECs 
Removal 
efficiency 
References 

UF 
Polyether sulfone 
(PES) 

39 high-occurrence CEC < 30% except for 
amitriptyline 
(63%). 

(Ferreiro et 
al., 2020) 

Polyelectrolyte 
multilayer 
(PEM) 
nanofiltration 
(NF) 

Poly(sodium 
styrene sulfonate) + 
poly(diallyl 
dimethylammonium 
chloride) 

Tetracycline, amoxicillin 
trihydrate, 
perfluorooctanesulfonic 
acid, perfluorooctanoic 
acid, and 
hydrochloride. 

90% 
(Wang et al., 
2021) 

MBR-RO 
RO: aromatic 
polyamide. 

20 types of 
pharmaceuticals 

> 99% 
(Dolar et al., 
2012) 
MBR: flat sheet 
membranes 
(Kubota, porous size 
of 0.4 µm). 
UF 
Poly (vinylidene 
fluoride) (PVDF)-
ZnO/Ag2CO3/Ag2O 
nanocomposite 
membrane 

Ibuprofen 
5.27% 
(Rosman et 
al., 2020) 

MF-FOMBR 
FO: CTA-ES 
20 antibiotics 
58.9-100% 
(Qiu et al., 
2021) 
MF: Polyvinylidene 
fluoride 
UF 
UF: CuO/TiO2 
ceramic 

Ciprofloxacin 
99.5% 
(Bhattacharya 
et al., 2019) 
NF 
NF: 270 and NF 90 
(Filmtec-
Minneapolis, MN). 
Thin-film (skin) of 
polyamide over a 
layer of polysulfone 
on a polyester 
support layer. 

Norfloxacin 
87-99.5% 
(De Souza et 
al., 2018) 

NF 
Chitosan-modified 
acrylic 
nanofiltration 
membrane 

Diphenhydramine and 
mebeverine 

diphenhydramine 
(97%) and 
mebeverine 
(∼98%) 

(Kamrani et 
al., 2018) 

NF 
Polyamide Thin-Film 
Composite 

Caffeine, theobromine, 
theophylline, 
amoxicillin, and 
penicillin G 

amoxicillin (89%), 
caffeine (20%), 
theobromine 
(18%), penicillin 
G (70 %), 
theophylline (7%) 

(Egea-
Corbacho et 
al., 2019) 


## Table 6
6(Continue). Application of membrane technology for emerging contaminant 
removals. 

Process 
Membrane material 
ECs 
Removal 
efficiency 
References 

NF 
Two thin film composite 
NF membranes: NF-200 
and NF-90 (Dow-
Filmtec), made of 
polyamide 

18 ECs 
ionic 
contaminants 
(97%), neutral 
contaminants 
(82%) 

(Yangali-
Quintanilla et 
al., 2011) 

RO 
BW30-2540 made from 
polyamide thin-film 
composite 

Caffeine, theobromine, 
theophylline, 
amoxicillin, and 
penicillin G 

100% 
(Lopera et al., 
2019) 

RO 
RE2521-SHF made from 
polyamide thin-film 
composite 

Ciprofloxacin 
> 90% 
(Alonso et al., 
2018) 

RO 
ESPA2, ESPAB, andLFC3 
made from polyamide 
thin-film composite 

N-
nitrosodimethylamine 

80% 
(Fujioka et 
al., 2020) 

FO 
Polyamide thin film 
composite and 
polysulfone (PS) 

24 ECs 
> 93 % 
(Salamanca et 
al., 2021) 

FO 
thin film composite 
membrane with 
aquaporin proteins 
embedded in a 
polyamide active layer 
supported by a porous 
polysulfone support 
layer 

21 ECs 
> 80% 
(Li et al., 
2021) 

FO 
thin-film composite 
membrane with 
aquaporin protein 
embedded in the poly-
amide layer 

N-
nitrosodimethylamine 
(NDMA) and 
haloacetonitriles 
(HANs) 

NDMA (31%), 
HANs (48-76%) 

(Xu et al., 
2018) 

FOMBR 
cellulose triacetate 
Ibuprofen 
96.32% 
(Yao et al., 
2021) 
FO 
commercial cellulose 
triacetate (CTA) based 
membranes and thin-
film composite (TFC) 
polyamide-based 
membranes 

Carbamazepine, 
diclofenac, ibuprofen 
and naproxen 

naproxen (93%), 
(Jin et al., 
2012) 
Diclofenac (99%), 
ibuprofen (93%), 
carbamazepine 
(95%). 



## Table 7 .
7Application of adsorption-based hybrid systems for ECs removal.Hybrid system 
ECs 
Removal efficiency 
Reference 

polymer-based activated 
carbon adsorptionwith 
UF/NF 

Estradiol (E2) 
> 90%. 

(Tagliavini & 
Schäfer, 
2018) 

Ozone+ Granulated 
activated carbon (GAC) 

Deuterated surrogate 
standard tris (phenyl) 
phosphate-D15 
(TPHP-D15), Tri-n-
butyl phosphate 
(TNBP), tris 
(chloropropyl) 
phosphate (TCIPP). 
triphenyl phosphate 
(TPHP) 

100% 
(Granzoto et 
al., 2021) 

Fenton pretreatment + 
granulated activated 
carbon (GAC) 

Carbamazepine (CBZ) 
99.51 ±0.02%. 

(Dwivedi et 
al., 2018) 

Electrochemical+ 
Adsorption (granular 
activated carbon (GAC)) 

Iopromide (IPM), 
carbamazepine (CBZ), 
diatrizoate (DTR), 
DEET 

DEET (40-57%), iopromide 
(22-46%), carbamazepine 
(15-34%) and diatrizoate 
(4-30%) 

(Norra & 
Radjenovic, 
2021) 

sequencing batch reactor 
(SBR) + powdered 
composite adsorbent (CA) 

Atenolol (ATN), 
ciprofloxacin (CIP) 
and diazepam (DIA) 

DIA (95.5%), CIP (94.0%), 
ATN (90.2%) 

(Mojiri et al., 
2020) 

adsorption/photo Fenton 
oxidation+ Microbial Fuel 
Cell 

Fumaric acid, succinic 
acid 

40.8 % 
(Civan et al., 
2021) 

active carbon felt (ACF)+ 
electro-Fenton (EF) 

Tetracycline 
> 90% 
(Zhang et al., 
2018) 
Ozonation + activated 
carbon adsorption 

28 ECs 
80% 


## Table 8 .
8Application of membrane filtration-based hybrid system for ECs removal. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045Hybrid system 
ECs 
Removal efficiency 
Reference 
Osmotic membrane bioreactor + 
microfiltration 

Caffein, atenolol, and 
atrazine 

Atenolol (89-96%), 
Caffeine (94-100%), 
Atrazine (16-40%) 

(Pathak et al., 
2018) 

Nanofiltration + TiO2 and 
Fe2O3/SBA-15 photo-Fenton 

Sulfamethoxazole, 
diclofenac, 
hydrochlorothiazide 4-
acetamidoantipyrine, 
nicotine, ranitinide 
hydrochloride 

80-100% 
(Martínez et al., 
2013) 

magnetic ion exchange resin + UF 
carbamazepine (CBZ) 
35-79% 
(Chen et al., 
2019) 
Catalytic ozonation + membrane 
filtration (catalytic ceramic 
membranes, CCMs) 

clofibricacid(CA), 
bisphenolA(BPA), 
benzotriazole(BTZ) 

38% 
(Lee et al., 2019) 

metal-organic frameworks + UF 
Ibuprofen, 17α-ethinyl 
estradiol 

53.2% 
(Kim et al., 
2020) 
advanced oxidation processes + UF 
oxytetracycline 
49%. 
(Espíndola et al., 
2019) 


## Table 9 .
9Application of hybrid system combining membrane filtration and adsorption for ECs removal. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045ECs 
Adsorbent 
Membrane 

Operating 
condition 
of 
adsorbent 

Operating 
condition 
of the 
membrane 

Removal 
efficiency 
References 

Ofloxacin (OFL), 
norfloxacin (NOR) 

Ni-Al 
layered 
double 
hydroxide 
(LDH) 

MF (ceramic 
membrane) 

Adsorbent 
dose = 0.1 g 
antibiotic 
concentrati 
on 10 mg/L 

Pressure = 
34.47-
172.36 kPa. 

NOR 
(98.7%), 
OFL 
(94.6%) 

(Sharma et 
al., 2017) 

Octylphenol, 
caffeine, diclofenac, 

Activated 
carbon F400 

NF-270 
Adsorbent 
dose = 10 
mg/L 

transmemb 
rane 
pressure= 
100 psi; 
cross flow 
velocity= 
0.27 mg/s. 

> 95% 
(Huang et 
al., 2019a) 

Ibuprofen (IBP), 
carbamazepine 
(CBM), 17 α-ethinyl 
estradiol (EE2) 

Activated 
biochar 

A commercial 
flat sheet 
polyamide UF 
membrane 

Adsorbent 
dose = 10 
mg/L 
initial 
concentrati 
on of ECs= 
10 Μm. 

stirring 
speed (300 
rpm), trans 
membrane 
pressure 
(520 kPa (75 
psi) 

45.2% 
(Kim et al., 
2019) 

Bezafibrate, 
Gemfibrozil, 
Sulfamethazine, 
Naproxen, 
Sulfamethoxazolem, 
Caffeine, Diclofenac, 
Ibuprofen, 
Metoprolol, 
Sulfadimethoxine, 
Sulfathiazole, 
Triclosan, 
Trimethoprim, 
Acetaminophen, 
Carbamazepine, 
Cotinine, 

Powdered 
activated 
carbon 

UF membrane 
with MWCO 
100 kDa 

Adsorbent 
dosage = 
100 ppm. 
Configurati 
on: 
adsorption 
pre-
treatment 

Pressure = 
6.9×103 kPa 
(1000 Psi). 
maximum 
flow rate is 
22.7 L/min 

90.3% 
(Sheng et 
al., 2016) 

Sulphametoxazol, 
Carbamazepine, 
Diclofenac, Diuron, 
Erythromycin 

Powdered 
activated 
carbon 

UF with tight 
poly-ether 
sulfone 

Adsorbent 
dose = 20 
mg/l 

Feed pump 
pressure 
regulates 
permeate 
low 

> 81±13% (Echevarría 
et al., 2020) 

Phenol 
Cross-linked 
macronet 
polymer 
adsorbents 

UF: AZW-1 
model (GE) 

Adsorbent 
dose = 1, 2, 
3, and 4 g/L 

The flow 
rate = 4 
L/min 

90% 
(İpek et al., 
2012) 


## Table 9 (
9Continue). Application of hybrid system combining membrane filtration and adsorption for ECs removal. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045ECs 
Adsorbent 
Membrane 

Operating 
condition 
of 
adsorbent 

Operating 
condition 
of the 
membrane 

Removal 
efficiency 
References 

Octyl-phenol, diclofenac, 
caffeine 

Activated 
carbon 

NF-270 
Adsorbent 
dosage = 10 
mg/L 

Trans 
membrane 
pressure 
(100 psi); 
crossflow 
velocity 
(0.27m/s) 

>95% 
(Huang et 
al., 2019) 

Carbamazepine, p-
nitrophenol 

Powdered 
activated 
carbon 

UF membrane 
(non-ionic 
hydrophilic 
membrane) 

Adsorbent 
dosage for 
p-
nitrophenol 
removal= 5 
or 10 mg/L 
Adsorbent 
dosage for 
carbamaze 
pine 
removal is 
0.3 mg/L 

Flux = 20 
L/m2/h 
Pressure = 
10 bar 

Carbama-
zepine 
(40%) and 
p-
nitrophen 
ol (30.7%) 

(Ivancev-
tumbas & 
Hobby, 
2010) 

Phenol 
Hypercrossli 
nked 
macronet 
polymer 
(Purolite 
MN 202 and 
MN 200) 

UF 
Adsorbent 
dosage for 
purolite 
MN 202 
and MN 
200 is 0.2 
g/50mL 
solution 
and 0.1 
g/50 ml 
solution, 
respectively 
. 
Stirring = 
250 rpm 

Air flow rate 
= 4 L/min 

90% 
(İpek et al., 
2012) 

Naproxen, triclosan, 
paracetamol, amitriptyline, 
clozapine, caffeine, 
verapamil, DEET, 
gemfibrozil, 
sulfamethoxazole, 
atenolol, ketoprofen, 
simazine, trimethoprim, 
fluoxetine, primidone, 
triclocarban, 
carbamazepine, diclofenac 

granular 
activated 
carbon 

MF 
Adsorbent 
dosage = 10 
mg/L with 
replacemen 
t of 
10%/day 

Flux: 10 
L/m2 

80% 
(Shanmuga 
nathan et 
al., 2017) 

| Indonesian Journal of Science & Technology, Volume 6 Issue 3, December 2021 Hal 577-618 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

2527-8045DOI. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

New trends in the analytical determination of emerging contaminants and their transformation products in environmental waters. A Agüera, M J Bueno, A R Fernández-Alba, Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 206Agüera, A., Martínez Bueno, M. J., and Fernández-Alba, A. R. (2013). New trends in the analytical determination of emerging contaminants and their transformation products in environmental waters. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 20(6), 3496- 3515.

Industrial wastes as low-cost potential adsorbents for the treatment of wastewater laden with heavy metals. M Ahmaruzzaman, Advances in Colloid and Interface Science. 1661-2Ahmaruzzaman, M. (2011). Industrial wastes as low-cost potential adsorbents for the treatment of wastewater laden with heavy metals. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 166(1-2), 36-59.

Adsorptive removal of antibiotics from water and wastewater: Progress and challenges. M B Ahmed, J L Zhou, H H Ngo, W Guo, Science of the Total Environment. 532Ahmed, M. B., Zhou, J. L., Ngo, H. H., and Guo, W. (2015). Adsorptive removal of antibiotics from water and wastewater: Progress and challenges. Science of the Total Environment, 532, 112-126.

Progress in the biological and chemical treatment technologies for emerging contaminant removal from wastewater: A critical review. M B Ahmed, J L Zhou, H H Ngo, W Guo, N S Thomaidis, J Xu, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 323Ahmed, M. B., Zhou, J. L., Ngo, H. H., Guo, W., Thomaidis, N. S., and Xu, J. (2017). Progress in the biological and chemical treatment technologies for emerging contaminant removal from wastewater: A critical review. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 323, 274-298.

Recent developments in physical, biological, chemical, and hybrid treatment techniques for removing emerging contaminants from wastewater. S F Ahmed, M Mofijur, S Nuzhat, A T Chowdhury, N Rafa, M A Uddin, A Inayat, T M I Mahlia, H C Ong, W Y Chia, P L Show, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 416125912Ahmed, S. F., Mofijur, M., Nuzhat, S., Chowdhury, A. T., Rafa, N., Uddin, M. A., Inayat, A., Mahlia, T. M. I., Ong, H. C., Chia, W. Y., and Show, P. L. (2021). Recent developments in physical, biological, chemical, and hybrid treatment techniques for removing emerging contaminants from wastewater. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 416(March), 125912.

Enhanced removal of aqueous phenol with polyimide ultrafiltration membranes embedded with deep eutectic solvent-coated nanosilica. J K Ali, C M Chabib, M Abi Jaoude, E Alhseinat, S Teotia, S Patole, D H Anjum, I Qattan, Chemical Engineering Journal. 408128017Ali, J. K., Chabib, C. M., Abi Jaoude, M., Alhseinat, E., Teotia, S., Patole, S., Anjum, D.H. and Qattan, I. (2021). Enhanced removal of aqueous phenol with polyimide ultrafiltration membranes embedded with deep eutectic solvent-coated nanosilica. Chemical Engineering Journal, 408, 128017.

Removal of ciprofloxacin from seawater by reverse osmosis. J J S Alonso, N El Kori, N Melián-Martel, Del Río-Gamero, B , Journal of Environmental Management. 217Alonso, J. J. S., El Kori, N., Melián-Martel, N., and Del Río-Gamero, B. (2018). Removal of ciprofloxacin from seawater by reverse osmosis. Journal of Environmental Management, 217, 337-345.

Antibiotics in surface water of East and Southeast Asian countries: A focused review on contamination status, pollution sources, potential risks, and future perspectives. H Q Anh, T P Q Le, N Da Le, X X Lu, T T Duong, J Garnier, E Rochelle-Newall, S Zhang, N.-H Oh, C Oeurng, C Ekkawatpanit, T D Nguyen, Q T Nguyen, T D Nguyen, T N Nguyen, T L Tran, T Kunisue, R Tanoue, S Takahashi, T A H Nguyen, Science of The Total Environment. 764142865Anh, H. Q., Le, T. P. Q., Da Le, N., Lu, X. X., Duong, T. T., Garnier, J., Rochelle-Newall, E., Zhang, S., Oh, N.-H., Oeurng, C., Ekkawatpanit, C., Nguyen, T. D., Nguyen, Q. T., Nguyen, T. D., Nguyen, T. N., Tran, T. L., Kunisue, T., Tanoue, R., Takahashi, S., and Nguyen, T. A. H. (2020). Antibiotics in surface water of East and Southeast Asian countries: A focused review on contamination status, pollution sources, potential risks, and future perspectives. Science of The Total Environment, 764, 142865.

Adsorption of ciprofloxacin onto thermally modified bentonite clay: Experimental design, characterization, and adsorbent regeneration. R Antonelli, G R P Malpass, M G C Da Silva, M G A Vieira, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 86104553Antonelli, R., Malpass, G. R. P., Da Silva, M. G. C., and Vieira, M. G. A. (2020). Adsorption of ciprofloxacin onto thermally modified bentonite clay: Experimental design, characterization, and adsorbent regeneration. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 8(6), 104553.

Ecotoxicological analysis of emerging contaminants from wastewater discharges in the coastal zone of cihuatlán. M Á Arguello-Pérez, J A Mendoza-Pérez, A Tintos-Gómez, E Ramírez-Ayala, E Godínez-Domínguez, F D A Silva-Bátiz, 2527-8045Water1386Jalisco, MexicoArguello-Pérez, M. Á., Mendoza-Pérez, J. A., Tintos-Gómez, A., Ramírez-Ayala, E., Godínez- Domínguez, E., and Silva-Bátiz, F. D. A. (2019). Ecotoxicological analysis of emerging contaminants from wastewater discharges in the coastal zone of cihuatlán (Jalisco, Mexico). Water, 11(7), 1386. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

Novel cobiomass degradation of NSAIDs by two wood rot fungi, Ganoderma applanatum and Laetiporus sulphureus: Ligninolytic enzymes induction, isotherm and kinetic studies. P O Bankole, A A Adekunle, B H Jeon, S P Govindwar, Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety. 203110997Bankole, P. O., Adekunle, A. A., Jeon, B. H., and Govindwar, S. P. (2020). Novel cobiomass degradation of NSAIDs by two wood rot fungi, Ganoderma applanatum and Laetiporus sulphureus: Ligninolytic enzymes induction, isotherm and kinetic studies. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 203(May), 110997.

New generation nano-adsorbents for the removal of emerging contaminants in water. A A Basheer, Journal of Molecular Liquids. 261Basheer, A. A. (2018). New generation nano-adsorbents for the removal of emerging contaminants in water. Journal of Molecular Liquids, 261, 583-593.

Application of green synthesized ZnO nanoparticle coated ceramic ultrafiltration membrane for remediation of pharmaceutical components from synthetic water: Reusability assay of treated water on seed germination. P Bhattacharya, D Mukherjee, N Deb, S Swarnakar, S Banerjee, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 83103803Bhattacharya, P., Mukherjee, D., Deb, N., Swarnakar, S., and Banerjee, S. (2020). Application of green synthesized ZnO nanoparticle coated ceramic ultrafiltration membrane for remediation of pharmaceutical components from synthetic water: Reusability assay of treated water on seed germination. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 8(3), 103803.

Development and performance evaluation of a novel CuO/TiO 2 ceramic ultrafiltration membrane for ciprofloxacin removal. P Bhattacharya, D Mukherjee, S Dey, S Ghosh, S Banerjee, Materials Chemistry and Physics. 229Bhattacharya, P., Mukherjee, D., Dey, S., Ghosh, S., and Banerjee, S. (2019). Development and performance evaluation of a novel CuO/TiO 2 ceramic ultrafiltration membrane for ciprofloxacin removal. Materials Chemistry and Physics, 229(February), 106-116.

Membrane fouling prevention and control strategies in pulp and paper industry applications: A review. A Bokhary, A Tikka, M Leitch, B Liao, Journal of Membrane Science and Research. 44Bokhary, A., Tikka, A., Leitch, M., and Liao, B. (2018). Membrane fouling prevention and control strategies in pulp and paper industry applications: A review. Journal of Membrane Science and Research, 4(4), 181-197.

A review of the effects of emerging contaminants in wastewater and options for their removal. N Bolong, A F Ismail, M R Salim, T Matsuura, Desalination. 2391-3Bolong, N., Ismail, A. F., Salim, M. R., and Matsuura, T. (2009). A review of the effects of emerging contaminants in wastewater and options for their removal. Desalination, 239(1-3), 229-246.

Simultaneous measurement in mass and mass/mass mode for accurate qualitative and quantitative screening analysis of pharmaceuticals in river water. M M Bueno, M M Ulaszewska, M J Gomez, M D Hernando, A R Fernández-Alba, Journal of Chromatography A. 1256Bueno, M. M., Ulaszewska, M. M., Gomez, M. J., Hernando, M. D., and Fernández-Alba, A. R. (2012). Simultaneous measurement in mass and mass/mass mode for accurate qualitative and quantitative screening analysis of pharmaceuticals in river water. Journal of Chromatography A, 1256, 80-88.

Effect of turbidity on micropollutant removal and membrane fouling by MIEX/ultrafiltration hybrid process. Y Chen, W Xu, H Zhu, D Wei, F He, D Wang, B Du, Wei , Q , Chemosphere. 216Chen, Y., Xu, W., Zhu, H., Wei, D., He, F., Wang, D., Du, B., and Wei, Q. (2019). Effect of turbidity on micropollutant removal and membrane fouling by MIEX/ultrafiltration hybrid process. Chemosphere, 216, 488-498.

Adsorption of emerging contaminants from water and wastewater by modified biochar: A review. N Cheng, B Wang, P Wu, X Lee, Y Xing, M Chen, B Gao, Environmental Pollution. 273116448Cheng, N., Wang, B., Wu, P., Lee, X., Xing, Y., Chen, M., and Gao, B. (2021). Adsorption of emerging contaminants from water and wastewater by modified biochar: A review. Environmental Pollution, 273(January), 116448.

Experimental assessment of a hybrid process including adsorption/photo Fenton oxidation and Microbial Fuel Cell for the removal of dicarboxylic acids from aqueous solution. G Civan, B Palas, G Ersöz, S Atalay, I Bavasso, Di Palma, L , Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry. 407Civan, G., Palas, B., Ersöz, G., Atalay, S., Bavasso, I., and Di Palma, L. (2021). Experimental assessment of a hybrid process including adsorption/photo Fenton oxidation and Microbial Fuel Cell for the removal of dicarboxylic acids from aqueous solution. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, 407(October), 1-8.

A critical review on membrane separation processes applied to remove pharmaceutically active compounds from water and wastewater. C F Couto, L C Lange, M C S Amaral, Journal of Water Process Engineering. 26Couto, C. F., Lange, L. C., and Amaral, M. C. S. (2018). A critical review on membrane separation processes applied to remove pharmaceutically active compounds from water and wastewater. Journal of Water Process Engineering, 26, 156-175.

Effects of modification and magnetization of rice straw derived biochar on adsorption of tetracycline from water. J Dai, X Meng, Y Zhang, Y Huang, Bioresource Technology. 123455Dai, J., Meng, X., Zhang, Y., and Huang, Y. (2020). Effects of modification and magnetization of rice straw derived biochar on adsorption of tetracycline from water. Bioresource Technology, 311(December), 123455.

Y Dai, Q Sun, W Wang, L Lu, M Liu, J Li, S Yang, Y Sun, K Zhang, J Xu, W Zheng, Z Hu, Y Yang, Y Gao, Y Chen, X Zhang, F Gao, Y Zhang, 2527-8045Utilizations of DOI. Dai, Y., Sun, Q., Wang, W., Lu, L., Liu, M., Li, J., Yang, S., Sun, Y., Zhang, K., Xu, J., Zheng, W., Hu, Z., Yang, Y., Gao, Y., Chen, Y., Zhang, X., Gao, F., and Zhang, Y. (2018). Utilizations of DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

agricultural waste as adsorbent for the removal of contaminants: A review. Chemosphere. 211agricultural waste as adsorbent for the removal of contaminants: A review. Chemosphere, 211, 235-253.

Isolation of fungal strains from municipal wastewater for the removal of pharmaceutical substances. B Dalecka, C Oskarsson, T Juhna, Kuttava Rajarao, G , Water. 122524Dalecka, B., Oskarsson, C., Juhna, T., and Kuttava Rajarao, G. (2020). Isolation of fungal strains from municipal wastewater for the removal of pharmaceutical substances. Water, 12(2), 524.

Nanofiltration for the removal of norfloxacin from pharmaceutical effluent. De Souza, D I Dottein, E M Giacobbo, A Siqueira Rodrigues, M A De Pinho, M N Bernardes, A M , Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 65De Souza, D. I., Dottein, E. M., Giacobbo, A., Siqueira Rodrigues, M. A., De Pinho, M. N., and Bernardes, A. M. (2018). Nanofiltration for the removal of norfloxacin from pharmaceutical effluent. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 6(5), 6147- 6153.

Tricks and tracks in removal of emerging contaminants from the wastewater through hybrid treatment systems: A review. K Dhangar, M Kumar, Science of the Total Environment. 738336140320Dhangar, K., and Kumar, M. (2020). Tricks and tracks in removal of emerging contaminants from the wastewater through hybrid treatment systems: A review. Science of the Total Environment, 738(336), 140320.

Monitoring and ecotoxicity assessment of emerging contaminants in wastewater discharge in the City of. V R Diaz-Sosa, M Tapia-Salazar, J Wanner, D L Cardenas-Chavez, Water121079Prague (Czech RepublicDiaz-Sosa, V. R., Tapia-Salazar, M., Wanner, J., and Cardenas-Chavez, D. L. (2020). Monitoring and ecotoxicity assessment of emerging contaminants in wastewater discharge in the City of Prague (Czech Republic). Water, 12(4), 1079.

Removal of emerging contaminants from municipal wastewater with an integrated membrane system, MBR-RO. D Dolar, M Gros, S Rodriguez-Mozaz, J Moreno, J Comas, I Rodriguez-Roda, D Barceló, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 239Dolar, D., Gros, M., Rodriguez-Mozaz, S., Moreno, J., Comas, J., Rodriguez-Roda, I., and Barceló, D. (2012). Removal of emerging contaminants from municipal wastewater with an integrated membrane system, MBR-RO. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 239, 64-69.

Current scenario and challenges in adsorption for water treatment. G L Dotto, G Mckay, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 84103988Dotto, G. L., and McKay, G. (2020). Current scenario and challenges in adsorption for water treatment. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 8(4), 103988.

Evaluation and optimization of Fenton pretreatment integrated with granulated activated carbon (GAC) filtration for carbamazepine removal from complex wastewater of pharmaceutical industry. K Dwivedi, A Morone, T Chakrabarti, R A Pandey, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 63Dwivedi, K., Morone, A., Chakrabarti, T., and Pandey, R. A. (2018). Evaluation and optimization of Fenton pretreatment integrated with granulated activated carbon (GAC) filtration for carbamazepine removal from complex wastewater of pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 6(3), 3681-3689.

Hybrid sorption and pressuredriven membrane technologies for organic micropollutants removal in advanced water reclamation: A techno-economic assessment. C Echevarría, C Valderrama, J L Cortina, I Martín, M Arnaldos, X Bernat, A De La Cal, M R Boleda, A Vega, A Teuler, E Castellví, Journal of Cleaner Production. 273123108Echevarría, C., Valderrama, C., Cortina, J. L., Martín, I., Arnaldos, M., Bernat, X., De la Cal, A., Boleda, M. R., Vega, A., Teuler, A., and Castellví, E. (2020). Hybrid sorption and pressure- driven membrane technologies for organic micropollutants removal in advanced water reclamation: A techno-economic assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 273, 123108.

Removal of emerging contaminants from wastewater using nanofiltration for its subsequent reuse: Full-scale pilot plant. A Egea-Corbacho, S Gutiérrez Ruiz, Quiroga Alonso, J M , Journal of Cleaner Production. 214Egea-Corbacho, A., Gutiérrez Ruiz, S., and Quiroga Alonso, J. M. (2019). Removal of emerging contaminants from wastewater using nanofiltration for its subsequent reuse: Full-scale pilot plant. Journal of Cleaner Production, 214, 514-523.

Performance of hybrid systems coupling advanced oxidation processes and ultrafiltration for oxytetracycline removal. J C Espíndola, K Szymański, R O Cristóvão, A Mendes, V J Vilar, S Mozia, Catalysis Today. 328Espíndola, J. C., Szymański, K., Cristóvão, R. O., Mendes, A., Vilar, V. J., and Mozia, S. (2019). Performance of hybrid systems coupling advanced oxidation processes and ultrafiltration for oxytetracycline removal. Catalysis Today, 328, 274-280.

Analytical methods for tracing pharmaceutical residues in water and wastewater. D Fatta, A Achilleos, A Nikolaou, S Meriç, TrAC -Trends in Analytical Chemistry. 266Fatta, D., Achilleos, A., Nikolaou, A., and Meriç, S. (2007). Analytical methods for tracing pharmaceutical residues in water and wastewater. TrAC -Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 26(6), 515-533.

Contaminants of emerging concern removal in an effluent of wastewater DOI. C Ferreiro, I Gómez-Motos, J I Lombraña, A De Luis, N Villota, O Ros, N Etxebarria, 2527-8045Ferreiro, C., Gómez-Motos, I., Lombraña, J. I., de Luis, A., Villota, N., Ros, O., and Etxebarria, N. (2020). Contaminants of emerging concern removal in an effluent of wastewater DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

treatment plant under biological and continuous mode ultrafiltration treatment. Sustainability. 122725treatment plant under biological and continuous mode ultrafiltration treatment. Sustainability, 12(2), 725.

Removal of pharmaceutical compounds commonly-found in wastewater through a hybrid biological and adsorption process. E Ferrer-Polonio, J Fernández-Navarro, M I Iborra-Clar, M I Alcaina-Miranda, J A Mendoza-Roca, Journal of Environmental Management. 263110368Ferrer-Polonio, E., Fernández-Navarro, J., Iborra-Clar, M. I., Alcaina-Miranda, M. I., and Mendoza-Roca, J. A. (2020). Removal of pharmaceutical compounds commonly-found in wastewater through a hybrid biological and adsorption process. Journal of Environmental Management, 263, 110368.

Biosorption: Current perspectives on concept, definition and application. M Fomina, G M Gadd, Bioresource Technology. 160Fomina, M., and Gadd, G. M. (2014). Biosorption: Current perspectives on concept, definition and application. Bioresource Technology, 160(November), 3-14.

Impact of heat modification conditions on the removal of N-nitrosodimethylamine by polyamide reverse osmosis membranes. T Fujioka, M Osako, K Oda, T Shintani, H Kodamatani, Separation and Purification Technology. 247116921Fujioka, T., Osako, M., Oda, K., Shintani, T., and Kodamatani, H. (2020). Impact of heat modification conditions on the removal of N-nitrosodimethylamine by polyamide reverse osmosis membranes. Separation and Purification Technology, 247(February), 116921.

Role of Membrane on Emerging Contaminant Removal. Handbook of Environmental Chemistry. R M Gómez-Espinosa, D Arizmendi-Cotero, 66Gómez-Espinosa, R. M., and Arizmendi-Cotero, D. (2019). Role of Membrane on Emerging Contaminant Removal. Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, 66, 157-174.

Adsorption studies of a direct dye using polyaniline coated activated carbon prepared from Prosopis juliflora. N Gopal, M Asaithambi, P Sivakumar, V Sivakumar, Journal of Water Process Engineering. 2Gopal, N., Asaithambi, M., Sivakumar, P., and Sivakumar, V. (2014). Adsorption studies of a direct dye using polyaniline coated activated carbon prepared from Prosopis juliflora. Journal of Water Process Engineering, 2, 87-95.

Integration of ozone, UV/H2O2 and GAC in a multi-barrier treatment for secondary effluent polishing: Reuse parameters and micropollutants removal. M R Granzoto, I Seabra, J A Malvestiti, J Cristale, R F Dantas, Science of the Total Environment. 759143498Granzoto, M. R., Seabra, I., Malvestiti, J. A., Cristale, J., and Dantas, R. F. (2021). Integration of ozone, UV/H2O2 and GAC in a multi-barrier treatment for secondary effluent polishing: Reuse parameters and micropollutants removal. Science of the Total Environment, 759, 143498.

Benefits of ozonation before activated carbon adsorption for the removal of organic micropollutants from wastewater effluents. R Guillossou, J Le Roux, S Brosillon, R Mailler, E Vulliet, C Morlay, F Nauleau, V Rocher, J Gaspéri, Chemosphere. 125530Guillossou, R., Le Roux, J., Brosillon, S., Mailler, R., Vulliet, E., Morlay, C., Nauleau, F., Rocher, V., and Gaspéri, J. (2020). Benefits of ozonation before activated carbon adsorption for the removal of organic micropollutants from wastewater effluents. Chemosphere, 245, 125530.

Performances of Continuous Adsorption-Ultrafiltration Hybrid Process for AO7 Dye Removal from Aqueous Solution and Real Textile Wastewater Treatment. A Hammami, C Charcosset, Ben Amar, R R , Journal of Membrane Science and Technology. 01Hammami, A., Charcosset, C., and Ben Amar, R. R. (2017). Performances of Continuous Adsorption-Ultrafiltration Hybrid Process for AO7 Dye Removal from Aqueous Solution and Real Textile Wastewater Treatment. Journal of Membrane Science and Technology, 07(01), 1-8.

Performance evaluation of integrated adsorption-nanofiltration system for emerging compounds removal: exemplified by caffeine, diclofenac and octylphenol. Z Huang, B Gong, C P Huang, S Y Pan, P Wu, Z Dang, P C Chiang, Journal of Environmental Management. 231Huang, Z., Gong, B., Huang, C. P., Pan, S. Y., Wu, P., Dang, Z., and Chiang, P. C. (2019). Performance evaluation of integrated adsorption-nanofiltration system for emerging compounds removal: exemplified by caffeine, diclofenac and octylphenol. Journal of Environmental Management, 231, 121-128.

Performance evaluation of integrated adsorption-nano fi ltration system for emerging compounds removal : Exempli fi ed by ca ff eine , diclofenac and octylphenol. Z Huang, B Gong, C Huang, S Pan, P Wu, Z Dang, 231Huang, Z., Gong, B., Huang, C., Pan, S., Wu, P., and Dang, Z. (2019a). Performance evaluation of integrated adsorption-nano fi ltration system for emerging compounds removal : Exempli fi ed by ca ff eine , diclofenac and octylphenol. 231(October 2018), 121-128.

Application of adsorptionultrafiltration hybrid method for removal of phenol from water by hypercrosslinked polymer adsorbents. İ Y İpek, N Kabay, M Yüksel, D Yapıcı, Yüksel , Ü , Desalination. 306İpek, İ. Y., Kabay, N., Yüksel, M., Yapıcı, D., and Yüksel, Ü. (2012). Application of adsorption- ultrafiltration hybrid method for removal of phenol from water by hypercrosslinked polymer adsorbents. Desalination, 306, 24-28.

Removal of organic xenobiotics by combined out/in ultrafiltration and powdered activated carbon adsorption. I Ivancev-Tumbas, R Hobby, Desalination. 2551-3Ivancev-Tumbas, I., and Hobby, R. (2010). Removal of organic xenobiotics by combined out/in ultrafiltration and powdered activated carbon adsorption. Desalination, 255(1-3), 124- 128.

2527-8045DOI. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

Rejection of pharmaceuticals by forward osmosis membranes. X Jin, J Shan, C Wang, J Wei, C Y Tang, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 227Jin, X., Shan, J., Wang, C., Wei, J., and Tang, C. Y. (2012). Rejection of pharmaceuticals by forward osmosis membranes. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 227, 55-61.

Chitosan-modified acrylic nanofiltration membrane for efficient removal of pharmaceutical compounds. M Kamrani, A Akbari, A Yunessnia Lehi, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 61Kamrani, M., Akbari, A., and Yunessnia lehi, A. (2018). Chitosan-modified acrylic nanofiltration membrane for efficient removal of pharmaceutical compounds. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 6(1), 583-587.

Membrane removal of emerging contaminants from water: Which kind of membranes should we use. M Kárászová, M Bourassi, J Gaálová, Membranes. 1011Kárászová, M., Bourassi, M., and Gaálová, J. (2020). Membrane removal of emerging contaminants from water: Which kind of membranes should we use?. Membranes, 10(11), 1-23.

Nanoadsorbents: Classification, preparation, and applications (with emphasis on aqueous media). M Khajeh, S Laurent, K Dastafkan, Chemical Reviews. 11310Khajeh, M., Laurent, S., and Dastafkan, K. (2013). Nanoadsorbents: Classification, preparation, and applications (with emphasis on aqueous media). Chemical Reviews, 113(10), 7728- 7768.

Removal of heavy metals and pollutants by membrane adsorption techniques. K C Khulbe, T Matsuura, Applied Water Science. 81Khulbe, K. C., and Matsuura, T. (2018). Removal of heavy metals and pollutants by membrane adsorption techniques. Applied Water Science, 8(1), 1-30.

Removal of contaminants of emerging concern by membranes in water and wastewater: A review. S Kim, K H Chu, Y A J Al-Hamadani, C M Park, M Jang, D H Kim, M Yu, J Heo, Y Yoon, Chemical Engineering Journal. 335Kim, S., Chu, K. H., Al-Hamadani, Y. A. J., Park, C. M., Jang, M., Kim, D. H., Yu, M., Heo, J., and Yoon, Y. (2018). Removal of contaminants of emerging concern by membranes in water and wastewater: A review. Chemical Engineering Journal, 335(November 2017), 896- 914.

A metal organic framework-ultrafiltration hybrid system for removing selected pharmaceuticals and natural organic matter. S Kim, J C Muñoz-Senmache, B M Jun, C M Park, A Jang, M Yu, A J Hernández-Maldonado, Y Yoon, Chemical Engineering Journal. 382122920Kim, S., Muñoz-Senmache, J. C., Jun, B. M., Park, C. M., Jang, A., Yu, M., Hernández- Maldonado, A. J., and Yoon, Y. (2020). A metal organic framework-ultrafiltration hybrid system for removing selected pharmaceuticals and natural organic matter. Chemical Engineering Journal, 382(July 2019), 122920.

Removal of selected pharmaceuticals in an ultrafiltration-activated biochar hybrid system. S Kim, C M Park, A Jang, M Jang, A J Hernández-Maldonado, M Yu, J Heo, Y Yoon, Journal of Membrane Science. 570Kim, S., Park, C. M., Jang, A., Jang, M., Hernández-Maldonado, A. J., Yu, M., Heo, J., and Yoon, Y. (2019). Removal of selected pharmaceuticals in an ultrafiltration-activated biochar hybrid system. Journal of Membrane Science, 570, 77-84.

Photo-Fenton and modified photo-Fenton at neutral pH for the treatment of emerging contaminants in wastewater treatment plant effluents: A comparison. N Klamerth, S Malato, A Agüera, A Fernández-Alba, Water Research. 472Klamerth, N., Malato, S., Agüera, A., and Fernández-Alba, A. (2013). Photo-Fenton and modified photo-Fenton at neutral pH for the treatment of emerging contaminants in wastewater treatment plant effluents: A comparison. Water Research, 47(2), 833-840.

Emerging Contaminants. K Kümmerer, Treatise on Water Science. 3Kümmerer, K. (2011). Emerging Contaminants. Treatise on Water Science, 3, 69-87.

Adsorption of 2-picoline onto bagasse fly ash from aqueous solution. D H Lataye, I M Mishra, I D Mall, Chemical Engineering Journal. 1381-3Lataye, D. H., Mishra, I. M., and Mall, I. D. (2008). Adsorption of 2-picoline onto bagasse fly ash from aqueous solution. Chemical Engineering Journal, 138(1-3), 35-46.

Hybrid catalytic ozonation-membrane filtration process with CeOx and MnOx impregnated catalytic ceramic membranes for micropollutants degradation. W J Lee, Y Bao, X Hu, T T Lim, Chemical Engineering Journal. 378121670Lee, W. J., Bao, Y., Hu, X., and Lim, T. T. (2019). Hybrid catalytic ozonation-membrane filtration process with CeOx and MnOx impregnated catalytic ceramic membranes for micropollutants degradation. Chemical Engineering Journal, 378(May), 121670.

Overview of emerging contaminants and associated human health effects. M Lei, L Zhang, J Lei, L Zong, J Li, Z Wu, Wang , Z , BioMed Research International. Lei, M., Zhang, L., Lei, J., Zong, L., Li, J., Wu, Z., and Wang, Z. (2015). Overview of emerging contaminants and associated human health effects. BioMed Research International, 2015, 1-12.

Laboratory and pilot evaluation of aquaporin-based forward osmosis membranes for rejection of micropollutants. R Li, S Braekevelt, J L N De Carfort, S Hussain, U E Bollmann, K Bester, 2527-8045Water Research. 194116924Li, R., Braekevelt, S., De Carfort, J. L. N., Hussain, S., Bollmann, U. E., and Bester, K. (2021). Laboratory and pilot evaluation of aquaporin-based forward osmosis membranes for rejection of micropollutants. Water Research, 194, 116924. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

Removal of emerging contaminants from wastewater using reverse osmosis for its subsequent reuse: pilot plant. A E C Lopera, S G Ruiz, Alonso , J M Q , Journal of Water Process Engineering. 29100800Lopera, A. E. C., Ruiz, S. G., and Alonso, J. M. Q. (2019). Removal of emerging contaminants from wastewater using reverse osmosis for its subsequent reuse: pilot plant. Journal of Water Process Engineering, 29, 100800.

Membrane technology for water purification. L Madhura, S Kanchi, M I Sabela, S Singh, K Bisetty, Inamuddin , Environmental Chemistry Letters. 162Madhura, L., Kanchi, S., Sabela, M. I., Singh, S., Bisetty, K., and Inamuddin. (2018). Membrane technology for water purification. Environmental Chemistry Letters, 16(2), 343-365.

Granulated cork as biosorbent for the removal of phenol derivatives and emerging contaminants. M Mallek, M Chtourou, M Portillo, H Monclús, K Walha, A Salah, V Salvadó, Journal of Environmental Management. 223Mallek, M., Chtourou, M., Portillo, M., Monclús, H., Walha, K., Salah, A. ben, and Salvadó, V. (2018). Granulated cork as biosorbent for the removal of phenol derivatives and emerging contaminants. Journal of Environmental Management, 223(June), 576-585.

Coupling membrane separation and photocatalytic oxidation processes for the degradation of pharmaceutical pollutants. F Martínez, M J López-Muñoz, J Aguado, J A Melero, J Arsuaga, A Sotto, R Molina, Y Segura, M I Pariente, A Revilla, L Cerro, G Carenas, Water Research. 4715Martínez, F., López-Muñoz, M. J., Aguado, J., Melero, J. A., Arsuaga, J., Sotto, A., Molina, R., Segura, Y., Pariente, M. I., Revilla, A., Cerro, L., and Carenas, G. (2013). Coupling membrane separation and photocatalytic oxidation processes for the degradation of pharmaceutical pollutants. Water Research, 47(15), 5647-5658.

A review on agroindustrial waste (AIW) derived adsorbents for water and wastewater treatment. J Mo, Q Yang, N Zhang, W Zhang, Y Zheng, Z Zhang, Journal of Environmental Management. 227Mo, J., Yang, Q., Zhang, N., Zhang, W., Zheng, Y., and Zhang, Z. (2018). A review on agro- industrial waste (AIW) derived adsorbents for water and wastewater treatment. Journal of Environmental Management, 227(April), 395-405.

Adsorption of tetracycline fom wastewater by using Pistachio shell coated with ZnO nanoparticles: Equilibrium, kinetic and isotherm studies. A A Mohammed, Kareem , S L , Alexandria Engineering Journal. 583Mohammed, A. A., and Kareem, S. L. (2019). Adsorption of tetracycline fom wastewater by using Pistachio shell coated with ZnO nanoparticles: Equilibrium, kinetic and isotherm studies. Alexandria Engineering Journal, 58(3), 917-928.

Removal performance and optimisation of pharmaceutical micropollutants from synthetic domestic wastewater by hybrid treatment. A Mojiri, J Zhou, M Vakili, H Van Le, Journal of Contaminant Hydrology. 235103736Mojiri, A., Zhou, J., Vakili, M., and Van Le, H. (2020). Removal performance and optimisation of pharmaceutical micropollutants from synthetic domestic wastewater by hybrid treatment. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 235(October), 103736.

Removal of lindane from aqueous solution using aluminum hydroxide nanoparticles with surface modification by anionic surfactant. T H Nguyen, T T L Nguyen, T D Pham, T S Le, Polymers. 124960Nguyen, T. H., Nguyen, T. T. L., Pham, T. D., and Le, T. S. (2020). Removal of lindane from aqueous solution using aluminum hydroxide nanoparticles with surface modification by anionic surfactant. Polymers, 12(4), 960.

Removal of persistent organic contaminants from wastewater using a hybrid electrochemical-granular activated carbon (GAC) system. G F Norra, J Radjenovic, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 415125557Norra, G. F., and Radjenovic, J. (2021). Removal of persistent organic contaminants from wastewater using a hybrid electrochemical-granular activated carbon (GAC) system. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 415, 125557.

The capacity of mesoporous fly ash grafted with ultrathin film of polydiallyldimethyl ammonium for enhanced removal of phenol from aqueous solutions. T A Oyehan, F A Olabemiwo, B S Tawabini, T A Saleh, Journal of Cleaner Production. 263121280Oyehan, T. A., Olabemiwo, F. A., Tawabini, B. S., and Saleh, T. A. (2020). The capacity of mesoporous fly ash grafted with ultrathin film of polydiallyldimethyl ammonium for enhanced removal of phenol from aqueous solutions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 263, 121280.

Pharmaceuticals of emerging concern in aquatic systems: Chemistry, occurrence, effects, and removal methods. M Patel, R Kumar, K Kishor, T Mlsna, C U Pittman, Mohan , D , Chemical Reviews. 1196Patel, M., Kumar, R., Kishor, K., Mlsna, T., Pittman, C. U., and Mohan, D. (2019). Pharmaceuticals of emerging concern in aquatic systems: Chemistry, occurrence, effects, and removal methods. Chemical Reviews, 119(6), 3510-3673.

Assessing the removal of organic micropollutants by a novel baffled osmotic membrane bioreactor-microfiltration hybrid system. N Pathak, S Li, Y Kim, L Chekli, S Phuntsho, A Jang, N Ghaffour, T O Leiknes, Shon , H K , Bioresource Technology. 262Pathak, N., Li, S., Kim, Y., Chekli, L., Phuntsho, S., Jang, A., Ghaffour, N., Leiknes, T. O., and Shon, H. K. (2018). Assessing the removal of organic micropollutants by a novel baffled osmotic membrane bioreactor-microfiltration hybrid system. Bioresource Technology, 262(April), 98-106.

Waste tea residue as a low cost adsorbent for removal of hydralazine hydrochloride pharmaceutical pollutant from aqueous media: An environmental remediation. C S Patil, D B Gunjal, V M Naik, N S Harale, S D Jagadale, A N Kadam, P S Patil, G B Kolekar, A H Gore, Journal of Cleaner Production. 206Patil, C. S., Gunjal, D. B., Naik, V. M., Harale, N. S., Jagadale, S. D., Kadam, A. N., Patil, P. S., Kolekar, G. B., and Gore, A. H. (2019). Waste tea residue as a low cost adsorbent for removal of hydralazine hydrochloride pharmaceutical pollutant from aqueous media: An environmental remediation. Journal of Cleaner Production, 206, 407-418.

2527-8045DOI. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

Organic residues as adsorbent for the removal of ciprofloxacin from aqueous solution. M E Peñafiel, E Vanegas, D Bermejo, J M Matesanz, M P Ormad, Hyperfine Interactions. 2401Peñafiel, M. E., Vanegas, E., Bermejo, D., Matesanz, J. M., and Ormad, M. P. (2019). Organic residues as adsorbent for the removal of ciprofloxacin from aqueous solution. Hyperfine Interactions, 240(1), 1-13.

A review of water treatment membrane nanotechnologies. M M Pendergast, E M V Hoek, Energy and Environmental Science. 46Pendergast, M. M., and Hoek, E. M. V. (2011). A review of water treatment membrane nanotechnologies. Energy and Environmental Science, 4(6), 1946-1971.

Versatile nanoadsorbents based on magnetic mesostructured silica nanoparticles with tailored surface properties for organic pollutants removal. M E Peralta, D O Mártire, M S Moreno, M E Parolo, Carlos , L , Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 91104841Peralta, M. E., Mártire, D. O., Moreno, M. S., Parolo, M. E., and Carlos, L. (2021). Versatile nanoadsorbents based on magnetic mesostructured silica nanoparticles with tailored surface properties for organic pollutants removal. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 9(1), 104841.

Enhanced adsorptive removal of sulfamethoxazole from water using biochar derived from hydrothermal carbonization of sugarcane bagasse. G Prasannamedha, P S Kumar, R Mehala, T J Sharumitha, D Surendhar, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 407124825Prasannamedha, G., Kumar, P. S., Mehala, R., Sharumitha, T. J., and Surendhar, D. (2021). Enhanced adsorptive removal of sulfamethoxazole from water using biochar derived from hydrothermal carbonization of sugarcane bagasse. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 407(November 2020), 124825.

Removal behaviors of antibiotics in a hybrid microfiltration-forward osmotic membrane bioreactor for real municipal wastewater treatment. G Qiu, H Chen, D S S Raghavan, Y P Ting, Chemical Engineering Journal. 129146Qiu, G., Chen, H., Raghavan, D. S. S., and Ting, Y. P. (2021). Removal behaviors of antibiotics in a hybrid microfiltration-forward osmotic membrane bioreactor for real municipal wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering Journal, 417, 129146.

Adsorption of endocrine disrupting compounds and other emerging contaminants using lignocellulosic biomass-derived porous carbons: A review. U A Qureshi, B H Hameed, Ahmed , M J , Journal of Water Process Engineering. 38101380Qureshi, U. A., Hameed, B. H., and Ahmed, M. J. (2020). Adsorption of endocrine disrupting compounds and other emerging contaminants using lignocellulosic biomass-derived porous carbons: A review. Journal of Water Process Engineering, 38(March), 101380.

Adsorption technique for the removal of organic pollutants from water and wastewater. Organic Pollutants-Monitoring. M N Rashed, Risk and Treatment. 7Rashed, M. N. (2013). Adsorption technique for the removal of organic pollutants from water and wastewater. Organic Pollutants-Monitoring, Risk and Treatment, 7, 167-194.

Environmentallyrelated contaminants of high concern: Potential sources and analytical modalities for detection, quantification, and treatment. T Rasheed, M Bilal, F Nabeel, M Adeel, H M N Iqbal, Environment International. 122Rasheed, T., Bilal, M., Nabeel, F., Adeel, M., and Iqbal, H. M. N. (2019). Environmentally- related contaminants of high concern: Potential sources and analytical modalities for detection, quantification, and treatment. Environment International, 122(November 2018), 52-66.

Emerging pollutants in sewage, surface and drinking water in Galicia. R Rodil, J B Quintana, E Concha-Graña, P López-Mahía, S Muniategui-Lorenzo, D Prada-Rodríguez, Chemosphere. 8610NW SpainRodil, R., Quintana, J. B., Concha-Graña, E., López-Mahía, P., Muniategui-Lorenzo, S., and Prada-Rodríguez, D. (2012). Emerging pollutants in sewage, surface and drinking water in Galicia (NW Spain). Chemosphere, 86(10), 1040-1049.

Treatment technologies for emerging contaminants in water: A review. O M Rodriguez-Narvaez, J M Peralta-Hernandez, A Goonetilleke, E R Bandala, Chemical Engineering Journal. 323Rodriguez-Narvaez, O. M., Peralta-Hernandez, J. M., Goonetilleke, A., and Bandala, E. R. (2017). Treatment technologies for emerging contaminants in water: A review. Chemical Engineering Journal, 323, 361-380.

Surface interactions during the removal of emerging contaminants by hydrochar-based adsorbents. S Román, J M V Nabais, B Ledesma, C Laginhas, M M Titirici, Molecules. 259Román, S., Nabais, J. M. V., Ledesma, B., Laginhas, C., and Titirici, M. M. (2020). Surface interactions during the removal of emerging contaminants by hydrochar-based adsorbents. Molecules, 25(9), 1-12.

Ibuprofen removal through photocatalytic filtration using antifouling PVDF-ZnO/Ag2CO3/Ag2O nanocomposite membrane. N Rosman, Norharyati Wan, W Salleh, N Aqilah Mohd Razali, S Z Nurain Ahmad, N Ismail, F Aziz, Z Harun, A Fauzi Ismail, Yusof , N , Materials Today: Proceedings. 42Rosman, N., Norharyati Wan Salleh, W., Aqilah Mohd Razali, N., Nurain Ahmad, S. Z., Hafiza Ismail, N., Aziz, F., Harun, Z., Fauzi Ismail, A., and Yusof, N. (2020). Ibuprofen removal through photocatalytic filtration using antifouling PVDF-ZnO/Ag2CO3/Ag2O nanocomposite membrane. Materials Today: Proceedings, 42, 69-74.

Study of the rejection of contaminants of. M Salamanca, R López-Serna, L Palacio, A Hernández, P Prádanos, M Peña, 2527-8045Salamanca, M., López-Serna, R., Palacio, L., Hernández, A., Prádanos, P., and Peña, M. (2021). Study of the rejection of contaminants of emerging concern by a biomimetic aquaporin DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

hollow fiber forward osmosis membrane. Journal of Water Process Engineering. 40101914hollow fiber forward osmosis membrane. Journal of Water Process Engineering, 40, 101914.

Synthesis and characterization of nanocomposite ultrafiltration membrane (PSF/PVP/SiO2) and performance evaluation for the removal of amoxicillin from aqueous solutions. M Shakak, R Rezaee, A Maleki, A Jafari, M Safari, B Shahmoradi, H Daraei, S M Lee, Environmental Technology and Innovation. 17100529Shakak, M., Rezaee, R., Maleki, A., Jafari, A., Safari, M., Shahmoradi, B., Daraei, H., and Lee, S. M. (2020). Synthesis and characterization of nanocomposite ultrafiltration membrane (PSF/PVP/SiO2) and performance evaluation for the removal of amoxicillin from aqueous solutions. Environmental Technology and Innovation, 17, 100529.

Biosorption of heavy metals. S Shamim, Biosorption. 2Shamim, S. (2018). Biosorption of heavy metals. Biosorption, 2, 21-49.

Membrane-Based Point-Of-Use Water Treatment (PoUWT) System in Emergency Situations. N Shamsuddin, D B Das, V M Starov, Separation and Purification Reviews. 451Shamsuddin, N., Das, D. B., and Starov, V. M. (2016). Membrane-Based Point-Of-Use Water Treatment (PoUWT) System in Emergency Situations. Separation and Purification Reviews, 45(1), 50-67.

Submerged membrane filtration adsorption hybrid system for the removal of organic micropollutants from a water reclamation plant reverse osmosis concentrate. S Shanmuganathan, P Loganathan, C Kazner, M A H Johir, S Vigneswaran, Desalination. 401Shanmuganathan, S., Loganathan, P., Kazner, C., Johir, M. A. H., and Vigneswaran, S. (2017). Submerged membrane filtration adsorption hybrid system for the removal of organic micropollutants from a water reclamation plant reverse osmosis concentrate. Desalination, 401, 134-141.

Integrated adsorption-membrane filtration process for antibiotic removal from aqueous solution. V Sharma, R Vinoth Kumar, K Pakshirajan, G Pugazhenthi, Powder Technology. 321Sharma, V., Vinoth Kumar, R., Pakshirajan, K., and Pugazhenthi, G. (2017). Integrated adsorption-membrane filtration process for antibiotic removal from aqueous solution. Powder Technology, 321, 259-269.

Science of the Total Environment Removal of Trace Pharmaceuticals from Water using coagulation and powdered activated carbon as pretreatment to ultra fi ltration membrane system. C Sheng, A G A Nnanna, Y Liu, J D Vargo, Science of the Total Environment. 550Sheng, C., Nnanna, A. G. A., Liu, Y., and Vargo, J. D. (2016). Science of the Total Environment Removal of Trace Pharmaceuticals from Water using coagulation and powdered activated carbon as pretreatment to ultra fi ltration membrane system. Science of the Total Environment, 550, 1075-1083.

Membrane processes used for removal of pharmaceuticals, hormones, endocrine disruptors and their metabolites from wastewaters: A review. P Shojaee Nasirabadi, E Saljoughi, S M Mousavi, Desalination and Water Treatment. 5751Shojaee Nasirabadi, P., Saljoughi, E., and Mousavi, S. M. (2016). Membrane processes used for removal of pharmaceuticals, hormones, endocrine disruptors and their metabolites from wastewaters: A review. Desalination and Water Treatment, 57(51), 24146-24175.

Water purification by using Adsorbents: A Review. N B Singh, G Nagpal, S Agrawal, Rachna , Environmental Technology and Innovation. 11Singh, N. B., Nagpal, G., Agrawal, S., and Rachna. (2018). Water purification by using Adsorbents: A Review. Environmental Technology and Innovation, 11, 187-240.

Acute and chronic effects of emerging contaminants. Water Pollution. T Smital, 5Smital, T. (2008). Acute and chronic effects of emerging contaminants. Water Pollution, 5(March), 105-142.

Removal of emerging contaminants from the environment by adsorption. Sophia A , C Lima, E C , Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety. 150Sophia A., C., and Lima, E. C. (2018). Removal of emerging contaminants from the environment by adsorption. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 150(June 2017), 1-17.

Improvement of the fabricated and application of aluminosilicate-based microfiltration membrane. J Sun, Z Chen, J Shen, B Wang, S Zhao, W Wang, X Zhu, Z Wang, J Kang, Chemosphere. 129628Sun, J., Chen, Z., Shen, J., Wang, B., Zhao, S., Wang, W., Zhu, X., Wang, Z., and Kang, J. (2021). Improvement of the fabricated and application of aluminosilicate-based microfiltration membrane. Chemosphere, 273, 129628.

Removal of steroid micropollutants by polymer-based spherical activated carbon (PBSAC) assisted membrane filtration. M Tagliavini, A I Schäfer, Journal of Hazardous Materials. 353Tagliavini, M., and Schäfer, A. I. (2018). Removal of steroid micropollutants by polymer-based spherical activated carbon (PBSAC) assisted membrane filtration. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 353(July 2017), 514-521.

Chemical-activated carbons from peach stones for the adsorption of emerging contaminants in aqueous solutions. S Á Torrellas, R García Lovera, N Escalona, C Sepúlveda, J L Sotelo, J García, Chemical Engineering Journal. 279Torrellas, S. Á., García Lovera, R., Escalona, N., Sepúlveda, C., Sotelo, J. L., and García, J. (2015). Chemical-activated carbons from peach stones for the adsorption of emerging contaminants in aqueous solutions. Chemical Engineering Journal, 279, 788-798.

2527-8045DOI. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

Occurrence and fate of emerging contaminants in municipal wastewater treatment plants from different geographical regions-a review. N H Tran, M Reinhard, K Y H Gin, Water Research. 133Tran, N. H., Reinhard, M., and Gin, K. Y. H. (2018). Occurrence and fate of emerging contaminants in municipal wastewater treatment plants from different geographical regions-a review. Water Research, 133, 182-207.

Drawbacks of applying nanofiltration and how to avoid them: A review. B Van Der Bruggen, M Mänttäri, M Nyström, Separation and Purification Technology. 632Van der Bruggen, B., Mänttäri, M., and Nyström, M. (2008). Drawbacks of applying nanofiltration and how to avoid them: A review. Separation and Purification Technology, 63(2), 251-263.

Polypyrrole-functionalized magnetic Bi2MoO6 nanocomposites as a fast, efficient and reusable adsorbent for removal of ketoprofen and indomethacin from aqueous solution. Y Wang, L He, G Dang, H Li, X Li, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. 592Wang, Y., He, L., Dang, G., Li, H., and Li, X. (2021). Polypyrrole-functionalized magnetic Bi2MoO6 nanocomposites as a fast, efficient and reusable adsorbent for removal of ketoprofen and indomethacin from aqueous solution. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 592, 51-65.

Removal of Emerging Wastewater Organic Contaminants by Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Nanofiltration Membranes with Tailored Selectivity. Y Wang, I Zucker, C Boo, M Elimelech, ACS ESandT Engineering. 13Wang, Y., Zucker, I., Boo, C., and Elimelech, M. (2020). Removal of Emerging Wastewater Organic Contaminants by Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Nanofiltration Membranes with Tailored Selectivity. ACS ESandT Engineering, 1(3), 404-414.

Peat-based activated carbons as adsorbents for simultaneous separation of organic molecules from mixed solution of poly(acrylic acid) polymer and sodium dodecyl sulfate surfactant. M Wiśniewska, P Nowicki, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects. 585124179Wiśniewska, M., and Nowicki, P. (2020). Peat-based activated carbons as adsorbents for simultaneous separation of organic molecules from mixed solution of poly(acrylic acid) polymer and sodium dodecyl sulfate surfactant. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 585(August 2019), 124179.

Removal of disinfection byproducts in forward osmosis for wastewater recycling. J Xu, T N Tran, H Lin, N Dai, Journal of Membrane Science. 564Xu, J., Tran, T. N., Lin, H., and Dai, N. (2018). Removal of disinfection byproducts in forward osmosis for wastewater recycling. Journal of Membrane Science, 564(March), 352-360.

Nanofiltration vs. reverse osmosis for the removal of emerging organic contaminants in water reuse. V Yangali-Quintanilla, S K Maeng, T Fujioka, M Kennedy, Z Li, Amy , G , Desalination and Water Treatment. 341-3Yangali-Quintanilla, V., Maeng, S. K., Fujioka, T., Kennedy, M., Li, Z., and Amy, G. (2011). Nanofiltration vs. reverse osmosis for the removal of emerging organic contaminants in water reuse. Desalination and Water Treatment, 34(1-3), 50-56.

Degradation mechanism of Ibuprofen via a forward osmosis membrane bioreactor. M Yao, L Duan, Y Song, S W Hermanowicz, Bioresource Technology. 124448Yao, M., Duan, L., Song, Y., and Hermanowicz, S. W. (2021). Degradation mechanism of Ibuprofen via a forward osmosis membrane bioreactor. Bioresource Technology, 321(November 2020), 124448.

Adsorption characteristics of natural zeolites as solid adsorbents for phenol removal from aqueous solutions: Kinetics, mechanism, and thermodynamics studies. R I Yousef, B El-Eswed, Al-Muhtaseb , A H , Chemical Engineering Journal. 1713Yousef, R. I., El-Eswed, B., and Al-Muhtaseb, A. H. (2011). Adsorption characteristics of natural zeolites as solid adsorbents for phenol removal from aqueous solutions: Kinetics, mechanism, and thermodynamics studies. Chemical Engineering Journal, 171(3), 1143- 1149.

Activation of grapefruit derived biochar by its peel extracts and its performance for tetracycline removal. H Yu, L Gu, L Chen, H Wen, D Zhang, H Tao, Bioresource Technology. 123971Yu, H., Gu, L., Chen, L., Wen, H., Zhang, D., and Tao, H. (2020a). Activation of grapefruit derived biochar by its peel extracts and its performance for tetracycline removal. Bioresource Technology, 316(July), 123971.

Electrospun PAN-based graphene/SnO2 carbon nanofibers as anodic electrocatalysis microfiltration membrane for sulfamethoxazole degradation. S Yu, Y Gao, R Khan, P Liang, X Zhang, X Huang, Journal of Membrane Science. 118368Yu, S., Gao, Y., Khan, R., Liang, P., Zhang, X., and Huang, X. (2020b). Electrospun PAN-based graphene/SnO2 carbon nanofibers as anodic electrocatalysis microfiltration membrane for sulfamethoxazole degradation. Journal of Membrane Science, 614, 118368.

Removal of tetracycline by coupling of flow-through electro-Fenton and in-situ regenerative active carbon felt adsorption. Y Zhang, S Zuo, M Zhou, L Liang, G Ren, Chemical Engineering Journal. 335Zhang, Y., Zuo, S., Zhou, M., Liang, L., and Ren, G. (2018). Removal of tetracycline by coupling of flow-through electro-Fenton and in-situ regenerative active carbon felt adsorption. Chemical Engineering Journal, 335(November 2017), 685-692.

Comparative adsorption of emerging contaminants in water by functional designed magnetic poly. A Zhou, W Chen, L Liao, P Xie, T C Zhang, X Wu, X Feng, 2527-8045Zhou, A., Chen, W., Liao, L., Xie, P., Zhang, T. C., Wu, X., and Feng, X. (2019a). Comparative adsorption of emerging contaminants in water by functional designed magnetic poly(N- DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045

isopropylacrylamide)/chitosan hydrogels. Science of the Total Environment. 671isopropylacrylamide)/chitosan hydrogels. Science of the Total Environment, 671, 377- 387.

Optimization of screening-level risk assessment and priority selection of emerging pollutants -The case of pharmaceuticals in European surface waters. S Zhou, C Di Paolo, X Wu, Y Shao, T B Seiler, H Hollert, Environment International. 128Zhou, S., Di Paolo, C., Wu, X., Shao, Y., Seiler, T. B., and Hollert, H. (2019b). Optimization of screening-level risk assessment and priority selection of emerging pollutants -The case of pharmaceuticals in European surface waters. Environment International, 128(April), 1-10.