# A Review on Multifunctional Excipients with Regulatory Considerations

CorpusID: 238998280
 
tags: #Medicine, #Chemistry

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/91e0d6b10572f049a91b662a84e3b5892c4a106d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/91e0d6b10572f049a91b662a84e3b5892c4a106d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review on Multifunctional Excipients with Regulatory Considerations
2021

Arti Swami arti.swami@mitwpu.edu 
MIT-WPU School of Pharmacy
Sr. No. 124

MIT Campus
Paud Road411038Kothrud, PuneMaharashtraIndia

Prajakta Chavan 
MIT-WPU School of Pharmacy
Sr. No. 124

MIT Campus
Paud Road411038Kothrud, PuneMaharashtraIndia

Shivani Chakankar 
MIT-WPU School of Pharmacy
Sr. No. 124

MIT Campus
Paud Road411038Kothrud, PuneMaharashtraIndia

Amol Tagalpallewar 
MIT-WPU School of Pharmacy
Sr. No. 124

MIT Campus
Paud Road411038Kothrud, PuneMaharashtraIndia

A Review on Multifunctional Excipients with Regulatory Considerations

Journal of Pharmaceutical Research International
3345B202110.9734/JPRI/2021/v33i45B32796Received 28 July 2021 Accepted 02 October 2021_____________________________________________________________________________________________________ *Corresponding author: (Past name: British Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, Past ISSN: 2231-2919, NLM ID: 101631759) Authors' contributions This work was carried out in collaboration among all authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Article Information Editor(s): (1) Dr. Farzaneh Mohamadpour, University of Sistan and Baluchestan, Iran. Reviewers: (1) Ajmer Singh Grewal, Guru Gobind Singh College of Pharmacy, India. (2) S. Vidyadhara, Chebrolu Hanumaiah Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, India. Complete Peer review History: https://www.sdiarticle4.com/review-history/74789Co-processedexcipientregulatoryguidelinestesting
The practice of multifunctional excipients is gaining more and more attention as it simplifies the process of drug formulation by substituting the necessity of using mixture of many excipients. The multifunctional excipients are the class of excipients which includes pre--processed and coprocessed excipients and it provides added functionalities to the formulation. Functionality of an excipient is a useful property which helps in manufacturing and improves quality as well as applicability of the material. Researchers have identified that single component excipients may not always give the required results during development and manufacturing of definite API, hence they are concentrating to develop multifunctional excipients which will have improved quality that will fulfil the requirements of the formulation experts in terms of cost. The cost of new excipient development is very high as it demands toxicity studies, hence the industry is now focusing on coprocessing of approved materials. The demand for directly compressible co-processed excipients has also increased due to the availability of high-speed tableting machines, time saving in Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA), simplified validation and stability of active ingredients. The intention of this review article is to highlight applicability and increasing attention focusing the benefits of co-processed excipients. Their advantages over conventional blend of excipients include development methods, testing and also highlighting their regulatory consideration. Swami et al.; JPRI, 33(45B): 189-201, 2021; Article no.JPRI.74789    190Review Article

## INTRODUCTION

Pharmaceutical drug products/dosage forms are formulated by blending Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) with excipients. API is that which has the therapeutic action and the excipients are those which are referred as pharmacologically inactive ingredients [1]. These excipients are fused with API during development process for various functions so as to formulate a dosage form that is ready for stated use [2,3]. Co-processing of excipients would result in the enhancement and improvement in the characteristics of individual excipients as compared to the physical mixture of multiple excipients. A multifunctional excipient executes multiple functions in a dosage form [4]. The purpose behind selecting a multifunctional excipientis to give synergistic enhancement of desired characteristics and veiling the unpleasant properties of individual excipients [5]. The example of multifunctional excipient is Silicified microcrystalline cellulose which is merging of MCC and colloidal silicon dioxide. This is an example of directly compressible excipients can beneficially affect the properties of drugs [6]. The purpose for using MCC in various solid dosage form is its capability of compression, which is a direct result of its, plastic deformation, extended porous structure and surface roughness [7]. By employing these co-processed excipients, the outcome will be enhanced compressibility, porosity, flow properties, particle size distribution, shape etc. These multifunctional excipients after their evolution have to be examined using different testing techniques. Co-processed excipient is the consolidation of at least two pharmacopeial and/or non-pharmacopeial excipients to genuinely modify their properties [3]. Co-processing is a method of designing that empowers the mixture of at least two excipients to make single compound excipient with better usefulness compared with simple blend of excipients [8].

New blends of prevailing excipients are fascinating options for improving excipient usefulness since all dosage forms contain more than one excipient [9]. None of the single excipient holds all the physicochemical characteristics for the development of a formulation. Subsequently there is need to have excipients having more than one characteristics like enhanced flowability, decreased moisture sensitivity, enhanced compressibility and improved disintegration ability [10].The usefulness of the excipients can be improved by either advancing novel excipient or coprocessing of prevailing excipients. Developments in drug formulations and delivery system led to the development of multifunctional excipients which have added functions apart from their main purpose. Producing the new chemical excipient is inefficient and must have to pass through various regulatory approvals which states about the safety and non-toxicity of the excipient [3].

These multifunctional excipients can be formulated by either pre-processing method or by co-processing method. Out of these two stated methods; co-processing is the widely adapted method of preparation for multifunctional excipients. Some of the methods used for preparing co-processed excipients are spray drying, agglomeration, spheronization by extrusion, melt granulation, co precipitation, roller drying etc. The accessibility of nanotechnology extendschances to elaborate on novel coprocessed excipients [11].

The engineering of pharmaceutical excipients produces excipients that can come up with minimum of two functions to the formulation by using single ingredient that can be made by using novel substance excipients, new evaluation of prevailing materials, or by new mixtures of present materials [12].

Polymers built on natural resources owing to their importance can produce new excipients that have highest potential to perform unequivocal capacities , on account of their Abundance, biodegradability and non-harmful nature [13].


## Types of Excipients

The excipients can be classified in the following types based upon the number and type of components used: 


## General

Flow for Steps in Coprocessing of


## Multifunctional Excipients

Advancement of any multifunctional excipient by co-processing strategy includes steps like, determination of parent excipients according to the method as depicted in Fig. 1. The two or more parent excipients composition is made as per the requirement for production of multifunctional excipients. Further optimization of characteristics for the excipients and finally drying of optimized mixture of excipients is done [3]. 


## Selection of excipients


## Melt Granulation

Melt granulation has been utilized in numerous mechanical applications, including polymer, substance, metal, glass, food processing and fertilizers [18]. Melt granulation method of producing multifunctional excipients includes consolidating, the blending of excipients to be coprocessed along with a meltable binder. The fusion is then heated with constant blending which breaks the mass into agglomerates which is further chilled to room temperature and eventually screened to acquire granules of required size. This technique does not utilize water or some other solvents [3].


## Wet Granulation

Goyanes et al. had utilised the method of wet massing with slight modification for preparation of co-processed excipients [15]. Wet granulation technique can be completed either in fluid bed granulators or high shear blenders. Coprocessing of excipients by wet granulation method involves mixing of the granule blend with a granulating liquid, passing the wet mass through sieve, drying and ultimately screening the dried granules [3]. This is the method mostly used in the pharmaceutical industries. The advantage of wet granulation over direct compression is its cost effectiveness and it is an attractive granulation method [12]. Wet granulation of α-lactose monohydrate is still a common choice for producing pharmaceutical tablets [19].


## Freeze Thawing

This technique involves simultaneous crystallization and agglomeration processes in single step which has been efficaciously used for enhancement of flowability and similarity of excipients [10]. Additionally numerous biotech items are effectively put away in the frozen state [20].


## Extrusion Spheronization

In this method two or more excipients are mixed to create a dry powder blend. This dry powder blend is then mixed with the liquid binder to produce a wet mass. This wet mass is then passed through the spheronizer which produces spheroids of uniform spherical size and shape. Hot melt extrusion method is most widely used among spheronization method. is a heat dependent technique which has gained interest as a novel approach for HME producing polymeric sustained release, immediate or transdermal/transmucosal delivery system. The molten polymer functions as a thermal binder hence no solvent or water is required. The HME process involves higher temperature greater than 80°C. Hence the excipient and the API must be heat labile. Schematic diagram of hot melt extrusion process is as depicted in Fig.2.

Technique is broadly utilized in moving and liquefying of polymer inside a tank by a pivoting screw. The polymer dissolve is further forced through the die which solidifies into various shapes/forms which can then be converted into tablet or granules [10].The advantages of this method is, it is reproducible, less time consuming and also, various shapes are possible, however the costs involved is higher [16]. For example, in Telmisartan antihypertensive drug, by using the hot melt extrusion technique, the properties like solubility, bioavailability, and stability were improved. This was attained by using Telmisartan (TEL) with the formulation of TELloaded pH-modulated solid dispersion [21].


## Spray Drying

The spray drying process is a method in which continuous drying of the processed particles takes place. Spray drying technique involves spraying of the liquid feeds, i.e, solution, suspension, emulsion into hot drying medium which is converted into dried particulate matter like powder, granules or agglomerates depending on physicochemical properties of the feed and design of the dryer [22]. This method mostly involves five steps: concentration, automization, droplet air contact, droplet drying, separation, co-spray drying [16,14].Schematic diagram of spray drier is as depicted in Fig.3. 


## Solvent Evaporation

This process involves microencapsulating the main excipient material by dissolving or dispersing it in the polymer coating solution. Further by agitation process the core material blend is distributed all over the vehicle phase to get the proper size and shape microcapsules. Then heating the above mixture results in evaporation of the solvent. On evaporation of the solvent, the liquid vehicle temperature is decreased to ambient room temperature by continuous agitation process. The core excipient materials can be either water insoluble or watersoluble materials [23]. This process is used in preparation of liquid manufacturing vehicles. The coating excipient is solubilized in a volatile solvent, which is immiscible with the liquid manufacturing vehicles [16].


## Roller Compaction

It is a method of compaction of dry powder into a solid mass in the form of a ribbon. This involves feeding of powder mass into a set of directly opposed, counter rotating rollers. This process does not use any liquid as well as it is carried out at comparatively low temperature. Roller compaction method is more favourable for water or thermosensitive drugs since no use of liquid or drying is required. Flow diagram of roller compaction process is as depicted in Fig.4.


## Co-Grinding and Co-fusion

In this method two or more excipients are ground or fused with each other to prepare a mixture of excipient with improved characteristics.  


## Testing of Co-processed Excipients

Co-processed excipients differ from simple mixture of excipients which contains combination of at least two excipients. Hence, it will be important to establish the techniques for testing and analysis that will permit the composition of co-processed excipient to be estimated in a routine process. Usually, quantitative analysis of individual excipients which are used to prepare a co-processed excipient is the most preferred way of the quality control analysis. But this may not be possible for the combination of excipients when one of the component excipients is polymeric in nature. However, a suitable method must be developed which would estimate the individual components present in the coprocessed excipients in a quantitative manner.

Apart from the quantitative test to be performed for a co-processed excipient, few more tests also need to be considered while analysing it. These additional tests include physical tests such as particle size and distribution, water content, limit tests for individual excipients, residual solvents, elemental impurities and degradants. But still, it is mandatory to develop an analytical technique which will give clear differentiation from coprocessed and simple mixture of excipients. Such a test will be important to ultimately acquire a compendial monograph for the co-processed excipient [26]. For characterization of individual excipients present in co-processed excipients, advanced analytical techniques are used like, scanning electron microscopy, differential scanning calorimetry, FTIR, X ray Diffraction technique. Following are the different analysis methods used for various co-processed excipients:

1. Solubility: Each sample was examined in three-fold and outcomes are revealed as the mean with standard deviation. e.g.Pharmaburst®500, Parteck® ODT, Ludiflash®, Disintequik™ ODTe [23]. 2. Density: The density measurement is critical parameter for the co-processed excipients in the solid powdered form. The density can be estimated by using pycnometer. e.g. Alginic acid and microcrystalline cellulose (Alginate ester) 3. Particle size determination: Determination was performed using threefold and the middle particle diameter was used to indicate the size of particle. Also, particle size can be determined by methods such as Direct microscopy or Optical microscopy, Sieving method, Conductivity or Coulter counter method, Sedimentation method and LASER particle size analysis. e.g.Alginic acid and microcrystalline cellulose (Alginate ester) [13]. 4. Scanning electron microscopy: the particle size distribution of an excipients has a major impact on the characteristics of a formulation, so it becomes very necessary to study the particle morphology. Scanning electron microscopy is used to study particle size, morphology with its chemical composition. The SEM instrument consists of components like the source, electromagnetic lenses, scan coils, electron detector for backscattered electrons, sample compartment, and a computer system for detection. SEM is classified into three types, the conventional SEM, environmental SEM, and the low vacuum SEM.This technique will acquire a mosaic image of the particles which will describe about the particle characteristics of an excipient [27,28]. e.g. Alginic acid and microcrystalline cellulose [25] BARETab® Nutra [28], xylitol-starch [ spectroscopy: FTIR technique is used to study the compatibility of two excipients as well as API and excipients. This method consists of grinding of the sample and triturating with the KBr powder in the ratio of 1:100 and further compressing it into the KBr pellets using a hydraulic press. The formed pellets are thus placed in the sample compartment and scanned from 4000 to 500cm -1 having a 4 cm -1 resolution. The FTIR spectra demonstrates the change in the shape and position of the bands on the spectra due to the presence or absence of different functional groups present [30,31]. e.g. Alginic acid and microcrystalline cellulose [25]. chitincalcium carbonate [30]. 


## Regulatory Considerations

Before getting introduced in the market, every novel excipient needs to go through a few administrative endorsements and toxicological examinations to confirm safety and effectiveness. The FDA necessitates that NDA (new drug applications) and ANDA (abbreviated new drug applications) applicants give data about all constituents of the drugs as well as all excipients used. This information involves data of its composition, analytical techniques used, along with the safety. New excipients must be properly scrutinized for pharmacological action as per the ICH guidelines. These assessments can be performed through toxicological evaluations. By detailed investigations of co-processed excipients, it had observed and proved that the included excipients do not lead to any chemical changes after coprocessing, these co-processed excipients are considered as safe if the parent excipients are like wise Generally Regarded As Safe (GRAS)-certified by regulatory authorities and hence these excipients need not to undergo any further regulatory approval and toxicological evaluations. Guidelines expresses that when any one or both of the excipients used in coprocessing are official in any compendia, then these excipients used will follow all the standards stated in its monograph [31]. But if one of the excipients is non compendial or it is a novel excipient then, it must be regarded as a new chemical entity which will be then subjected for detailed toxicological studies.

For any new excipient or a new combination of co-processed excipient various guidelines need to be referred. These guidelines include  CDSCO guidelines as per D & C Act [32]. For a new co-processed excipient to be approved, it should be contained within approved products regulated by the national regulatory agency (public competent expert in the European Union). There are contrasts in how co-processed excipients are taken care of in the significant areas (Europe, Japan and the United States). Excipient Master File system, is not practised in Europe, hence the full details relating to any excipient are included in the Marketing Application. The application, either for an Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) or


## Marketing

Authorization should be referenced.  As per latest European guidelines, when a novel excipient is used in a drug formulation it must undergo detailed toxicological studies as that of an API [30] The blend of excipients was introduced as a subject to the National Formulary and was allocated an importance based on the usage of the blend in marketed formulation in which the processing has given an increased value to the excipient mixture. In this way, there is a need for an administrative dossier inside the EU region for any novel excipients [24].


## Fig. 5. Various Regulatory agencies and their guidelines for excipients

In Japan, co-processed excipients are mentioned as premixed excipients. Japan has an Excipient Master File framework, and their DMF framework can be utilized for premixed excipients.

The US FDA has a grounded Drug Master File (DMF) framework for excipients. The whole data for excipients can be submitted as a Type IV DMF.

The configuration for such an accommodation ought to follow the rules from the ICH M4Q(R1) guidelines [23].


## Patents on Co-processed Excipients

There are various patents published and granted for no. of co-processed excipients with its method of manufacturing as depicted in Table 2.


## Marketed Co-processed Excipients

With the expanding improvement of new synthetic elements, there is a colossal chance for the development of co-processed excipients. With this ever-increasing demand from manufacturing industries, many co-processed excipients were developed and marketed as depicted in Table 3 [54].


## CONCLUSION

Formulation development mainly depends on the excipient used. Though the excipients are not active ingredients but it assumes fundamental part in design and development of dosage form. From the available dosage forms around 90% are solid dosage form with tablet being one of the main dosage forms. Hence, in development and testing of multifunctional excipient more emphasis has been put on the excipients used in tablet manufacturing. One of the major benefits in developing co-processed multifunctional excipient is that from regulatory perspective this excipient is not ideally considered as a new excipient by virtue of this these excipients don't need extra toxicological investigations. The increasing use of excipients in development of formulation results in more economic expenditure. So, to save time and economy during the stages of Food and Drug; the concept of multifunctional excipient proved to be the most effective and beneficial.


## CONSENT

It is not applicable.


## ETHICAL APPROVAL

It is not applicable.


## DISCLAIMER

The products used for this research are commonly and predominantly use products in our area of research and country. There is absolutely no conflict of interest between the authors and producers of the products because we do not intend to use these products as an avenue for any litigation but for the advancement of knowledge. Also, the research was not funded by the producing company rather it was funded by personal efforts of the authors. 

## Fig. 2 .
2Schematic diagram of hot melt extrusion process [24] Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of spray drier [24]

## Fig. 4 .
4Flow diagram of roller compaction process[24] 


Composition of two or more excipients as per the requirementOptimization of characteristics for the excipients 

Drying of optimised mixtures of excipients 

Fig. 1. Steps in Coprocessing of 
Multifunctional Excipients [3] 

2. METHODS FOR PREPARATION OF 
CO-PROCESSED EXCIPIENTS 

Co-processed excipients can be prepared by 
various methods like melt granulation, solvent 
evaporation, wet granulation, spray drying, 
freeze 
thawing, 
hot 
melt 
extrusion, 
extrusion spheronization etc. as depicted in 
Table 1. 



## Table 1 .
1Co-processing Methods and Outcomes[25] Methods 
Excipients involved in 
coprocessing 

Outcomes 

Melt granulation 
MCC, Crospovidone, 
Good flowability, higher disintegration, 
time, rapid drug release, better hardness 
PEG-4000, dibasic calcium 
phosphate 
Solvent 
evaporation 

Acacia gum, Maize starch 
Improved flow property, better 
disintegration time. 
Spray drying 
MCC, Colloidal silicon dioxide 
Very good flow property, high 
compressibility, decreased disintegration 
time and good binding property, good 
dilution potential (up to 40%) 

Crospovidone, StarCap 1500 
Lactose and MCC 

Wet granulation 
Lactose monohydrate, MCC 
&Corn-starch 

Superb flow property, directly compressible 
excipient and increased compressibility 
Extrusion 
spheronization 

MCC and Eudrajit 
Strong mechanical strength, excellent flow 
property, improved dissolution 
Roller 
compaction 

Polyethylene oxide and HPMC 
K4M 

Improved release retarding property, better 
flowability and compressibility. 
Co-grinding and 
co-fusion 

Tapioca starch & mannitol 
Co-grinding less useful than co-fusion, 
improved flow property, improved packing 
and compaction property 


## Table 2 .
2Patent Review on Co-Processed Excipients[25] Sr. 
No 

Patent No 
Grant year 
Title 

1 
EP 3 682 901 A1 
22.07.2020 BULLETIN 
2020/30 

2020 
Co-processed excipient, obtained by spray-
drying, usable as a pharmaceutical excipient or 
food additive [43]. 
2 
WO 2017/013682 AL 
2017 
A co-processed pharmaceutical excipient [44]. 
3 
WO 2016/046693 AL 
2016 
Process of preparation of co-processed polymer 
and it's pharmaceutical application [45]. 
4 
US 8,932,629 B2 JAN. 
13, 2015 

2015 
Co-processed microcrystalline cellulose and 
sugar alcohol as an excipient for tablet 
formulations [46]. 
5 
WO 2014/165246A1 
2014 
Co-processed tablet excipient composition its 
preparation and use [47]. 
6 
US 2013/0177649 A1 
2013 
Modified protein excipient for delayed-release 
tablet [48]. 
7 
WO 2013/175405 AL 
2013 
High performance excipient comprising co-
processed microcrystalline cellulose and surface-
reacted calcium carbonate [49]. 
8 
US20110076326, 
MARCH 31, 2011 

2011 
Microcrystalline cellulose calcium carbonate [50]. 

9 
WO 2003/051338 
2003 
Microcrystalline cellulose galactomannan gum 
[51]. 
10 
US4744987A 1998 
1998 
Mannitol-sorbitol [52]. 
11 
US5686107A 1997 
1997 
Silicified mcc-a polyol and sugar with or without 
disintegrant [53]. 



## Table 3 .
3Marketed Co-Processed Excipients[16,24] Multifunctional 
excipient 

Trade Name 
Advantages 
Method of 
manufacturing 
Sucrose 3% dextrin 
Dipac 
Directly compressible 
Crystallization 
Microcrystalline 
cellulose, Silicon 
dioxide 

Prosolv 
Improved flow, decreased 
affectability to wet 
granulation, improved 
hardness of tablet, 
decreased friability 

Co-spray dried 

Microcrystalline 
cellulose, Guar gum 

Avicel ce-15 
A reduced amount of 
grittiness, negligible 
chalkiness, more 
palatability 

Spray dried 

Calcium carbonate, 
Sorbitol 

Formaxx 
Better particle size 
distribution 

Co-processed 
(unique process) 
Microcrystalline 
cellulose, Lactose 

Microlela 
Potential for formulating 
elevated dose 
Anhydrous lactose, 
lactitol 

Pharmatose DCL 40 
increased compressibility, 
low lubricant sensitivity 

Spray dried 

MCC, colloidal Silica Prosolv 
better flow properties, 
better hardness, reduced 
friability 

Co-spray dried 

Lactose, 25% 
cellulose 

Cellactose 
Improved compressibility, 
enhanced mouth feel, 
improved tableting at low 
price 

Co-spray dried 




cellulose. Powder Technol. 2021;378:576-84. 9. Chauhan SI, Nathwani SV, Soniwala MM, Chavda JR. Development and Characterization of Multifunctional Directly Compressible Co-processed Excipient by spray Drying Method.AAPS Pharm SciTech. 2017;18(4)1: 293-301. 10. Main. Amol, Bhairav B. A., Saudagar R. B.Co-Processed Excipients for Tabletting Review Article. Res J Pharm Technol. 2017; 10 (7):2427-2432. 11. Luis Eduardo Serrano-Mora, María L. Zambrano-Zaragoza, Néstor Mendoza-Muñoz, Gerardo Leyva-Gómez, Zaida Urbán-Morlán and David Quintanar-Guerrero.Preparation of Co-processed Excipients for Controlled Release of Drugs Assembled with Solid Lipid Nanoparticles and Direct Compression Materials. Molecules,6 April 2021; 26(7): 2093. 12. Eraga S, Damisah C, Uhumwangho M, Iwuagwu M.Development and evaluation of novel ,multifunctional co-processed excipients for direct compression of paracetamol tablets. JSPP. 2014; (1): 25-30 13. Sanchez-Ballester NM, Bataille B, Benabbas R, Alonso B, Soulairol I.Development of alginate esters as novel Pawar SB, Ahirrao SP, Kshirsagar SJ: Review on Novel Pharmaceutical Available:https://patents.google.com/patent /WO2010132431A1/en?oq=WO+2010%2f 132431+A1)+WO+2014%2f165246A1 53. Thulluru A, Madhavi C, Nandini K, Sirisha S, Spandana D.Co-Processed Excipients New Era in Pharmaceuticals. Asian J Res Pharm Sci. 2019;9(1):1-5. 54. Paul J Sheskey, Bruno C Hancock, Gary P Moss, David J Goldfarb,of 
Multiple 
Roller 
Compaction 
of 
Microcrystalline Cellulose for Overcoming 
Re-compression Drawbacks in Tableting 
Processing. Appl Sci. 2020;11:4787 
8. 
Benabbas R, Sanchez-Ballester NM, 
Bataille 
B, 
Sharkawi 
T, 
Soulairol 
I.Development 
and 
Pharmaceutical 
performance of a novel co-processed 
excipient 
of 
alginic 
acid 
and 
microcrystalline multifunctional 
excipients 
for 
Direct 
compression.Carbohydr 
Polym. 2020; 
240:116280 
14. Handbook 
of 
Pharmaceutical 
excipients, 
Published 
by 
Pharma-
ceutical 
Press 
and 
American 
Pharmacists Association, Ninth Edition; 
2020. 

© 2021 Swami et al.; This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
COMPETING INTERESTSAuthors have declared that no competing interests exist.
A review of polymers as multifunctional excipients in drug dosage form technology. B Karolewicz, Saudi Pharm J. 245Karolewicz B. A review of polymers as multifunctional excipients in drug dosage form technology. Saudi Pharm J. 2016;24(5):525-36.

Preparation and optimization of multifunctional directly compressible excipient an integrated approach of principal component analysis and design of experiments. D Mori, P Rathod, R Parmar, K Dudhat, J Chavda, Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 4612Mori D, Rathod P, Parmar R, Dudhat K, Chavda J. Preparation and optimization of multifunctional directly compressible excipient an integrated approach of principal component analysis and design of experiments. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2020;46(12):2010-21.

Development and Evalution of Mouth Dissolving Tablets of Montelukast Sodium Using Coprocessed Exicipients. K Kumar, D Reddy, Y Reddy, J , J.Pharm.Res.Int. 3314K. Sampath Kumar,D. Maheswara Reddy,Y. Dastagiri Reddy,J.Development and Evalution of Mouth Dissolving Tablets of Montelukast Sodium Using Co- processed Exicipients. J.Pharm.Res.Int. 2021;33(14):21-29

Application of an newly developed multifunctional excipients in tablet formulation. A O Onyekweli, O Kunle, E Okoye, Res J Pharm Technol. 610Onyekweli AO, Kunle O, Okoye E.Application of an newly developed multifunctional excipients in tablet formulation. Res J Pharm Technol. 2013; 6:10:19-31.

Formulation and Evalution of Metoprolol Succinate Orodispersible Tablet Using Directly Compressible Excipient of Moringa Gum. P Subhranshu, C S Kumari, G Sireesha, Asian J. Pharm. 141Subhranshu P, Kumari CS, Sireesha G.Formulation and Evalution of Metoprolol Succinate Orodispersible Tablet Using Directly Compressible Excipient of Moringa Gum. Asian J. Pharm, 2020;14 (1):1-8

Physicochemical and Antifungal Properties of Clotrimazole in combination with High Molecular Weight Chitosan as a Multifunctional Excipient. B Grimling, B Karolewicz, U Nawrot, K Włodarczyk, A Górniak, 18591Grimling B, Karolewicz B, Nawrot U, Włodarczyk K, Górniak A.Physicochemical and Antifungal Properties of Clotrimazole in combination with High Molecular Weight Chitosan as a Multifunctional Excipient. Mar Drugs. 2020;18(12):591.

A new Perspective Coprocessed Excipients. Abu Fara, D Rashid, I Al-Hmoud, L Chowdhry, B Badwan, A , Pharm. Resonance. 21Abu Fara D, Rashid I, Al-Hmoud L, Chowdhry B, Badwan A.A new Perspective Coprocessed Excipients. Pharm. Resonance. 2019;.2(1):14-20.

Compaction and tableting properties of composite particles of microcrystalline cellulose and crosprovidone engineered for direct compression. F Haruna, Y E Apeji, C Oparaeche, A R Oyi, M Gamlen, Future J Pharm Sci. 6135Haruna F, Apeji YE, Oparaeche C, Oyi AR, Gamlen M.Compaction and tableting properties of composite particles of microcrystalline cellulose and crosprovidone engineered for direct compression. Future J Pharm Sci. 2020;6(1):35.

Modified Excipients in Novel Drug Delivery Need of the Day. N Kanojia, L Kaur, M Nagpal, R Bala, J Pharm Technol Res Manag. 11Kanojia N, Kaur L, Nagpal M, Bala R.Modified Excipients in Novel Drug Delivery Need of the Day. J Pharm Technol Res Manag, 2013;1(1):81-107.

Evaluation of the mechanical and release properties of lactose and microcrystalline cellulose and their binary mixtures as directly compressible excipients in paracetamol tablets. O D Akin-Ajani, O A Odeku, O Olumakinde-Oni, J Excip Food Chem. 112Akin-Ajani OD, Odeku OA, Olumakinde- Oni O.Evaluation of the mechanical and release properties of lactose and microcrystalline cellulose and their binary mixtures as directly compressible excipients in paracetamol tablets. J Excip Food Chem. 2020;11(2):42-52.

Twin-Screw Melt Granulation for oral Solid Pharmaceutical Products. S P Forster, E Dippold, T Chiang, Pharmaceutics. 135665Forster SP, Dippold E, Chiang T. Twin- Screw Melt Granulation for oral Solid Pharmaceutical Products.Pharmaceutics. 2021;13(5):665.

Development and Evaluation of a Novel,Multifunctional,Co-processed Excipient via Roll Compaction of alpha Lactose Monohydrate and Magnesium Silicate. F Al-Akayleh, Al-Mishlab , M Shubair, M Alkhatib, H Rashid, I Badwan, A , J Excip Food Chem. 4Al-Akayleh F, Al-Mishlab M, Shubair M, Alkhatib H, Rashid I, Badwan A.Development and Evaluation of a Novel,Multifunctional,Co-processed Excipient via Roll Compaction of alpha Lactose Monohydrate and Magnesium Silicate J Excip Food Chem. 2013; 4:27- 37.

Freezing of Biologicals Revisited Scale,Stability,Excipients, and Degradation Stresses. J-R Authelin, M A Rodrigues, S Tchessalov, S K Singh, T Mccoy, S Wang, J Pharm Sci. 1091Authelin J-R, Rodrigues MA, Tchessalov S, Singh SK, McCoy T, Wang S, et al. Freezing of Biologicals Revisited Scale,Stability,Excipients, and Degradation Stresses.J Pharm Sci. 2020;109(1):44-61.

Hot-Melt Extruded Amorphous Solid Dispersion for Solubility,Stability,andBioavailability Enhancement of Telmisartan. B R Giri, J Kwon, A Q Vo, A M Bhagurkar, S Bandari, D W Kim, Pharma Basel Switz. 141Giri BR, Kwon J, Vo AQ, Bhagurkar AM, Bandari S, Kim DW.Hot-Melt Extruded Amorphous Solid Dispersion for Solubility,Stability,andBioavailability Enhancement of Telmisartan. Pharma Basel Switz. 2021;14(1).

A review co-processed excipients. U Desai, R Chavan, P Mhatre, R Chinchole, Int J Pharm Sci Rev Res. 12Desai U, Chavan R, Mhatre P, Chinchole R.A review co-processed excipients. Int J Pharm Sci Rev Res. 2012;12: 93-105.

Formulation and Evaluation of Novel Coprocessed Excipients of Maize Starch and Acacia Gum (StarAc) For Direct Compression Tabletting. A K Olowosulu, Avosuahi Oyi, A B Isah, M A , Int J Pharmaceut Res Innovat. 2Olowosulu AK, Avosuahi Oyi AB, Isah MA. Formulation and Evaluation of Novel Coprocessed Excipients of Maize Starch and Acacia Gum (StarAc) For Direct Compression Tabletting. Int J Pharmaceut Res Innovat. 2011;2:39-45.

A review on development of multifunctional coprocessed excipient. H Patel, M Gohel, J. Crit. Rev. 32Patel H, Gohel M. A review on development of multifunctional co- processed excipient. J. Crit. Rev. 2016; 3(2):7:48-54

A review on functionality assessment of multifunctional excipients. S B Sandhan, D V Derle, Int.J.Pharm.Sci.Res. Sandhan SB, Derle DV. A review on functionality assessment of multifunctional excipients.Int.J.Pharm.Sci.Res.2019; 4078-4089.

. Ipec-Europe-Co, IPEC-Europe-Co-processed-Excipient- Guide 2021 May 24. Avaialble:https://www.complianceonline.co m/resources/downloads/IPEC-Europe-Co- processed-Excipient-Guide.pdf

Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM): A Review. A Abdullah, A Mohammed, Proceedings of 2018 International Conference on Hydraulics and Pneumatics -HERVEX November 7-9. 2018 International Conference on Hydraulics and Pneumatics -HERVEX November 7-9Băile Govora, RomaniaAbdullah A, Mohammed A. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM): A Review. Proceedings of 2018 International Conference on Hydraulics and Pneumatics -HERVEX November 7-9, Băile Govora, Romania;1-9

Development and Pharmaceutical performance of a novel co-procssed excipient of alginic acid and microcrystalline cellulose. R Benabbas, N M Sanchez-Ballester, Aubert A Sharkawi, T Bataille, B Soulairol, I , Polym. 136Benabbas R, Sanchez-Ballester NM, Aubert A, Sharkawi T, Bataille B, Soulairol I.Development and Pharmaceutical performance of a novel co-procssed excipient of alginic acid and microcrystalline cellulose. Polym. 2021; 13(6):988.1-20.

Characterization of Cellulosic Fibers by FTIR spectroscopy for their Further Implementation to Building Materials. V Hospodarova, E Singovszka, N Stevulova, Am J Analyt Chem. 0906Hospodarova V, Singovszka E, Stevulova N.Characterization of Cellulosic Fibers by FTIR spectroscopy for their Further Implementation to Building Materials. Am J Analyt Chem. 2018;09(06):303-10.

Thiolated cyclodextrins Mucoadhesive and permeation enhancing excipients for ocular drug delivery. M H Asim, M Ijaz, A Mahmood, P Knoll, A Jalil, S Arshad, Int J Pharma. 599Asim MH, Ijaz M, Mahmood A, Knoll P, Jalil A, Arshad S, et al.Thiolated cyclodextrins Mucoadhesive and permeation enhancing excipients for ocular drug delivery. Int J Pharma. 2021; 599:120451:1-9

Multifunctional coprocessed excipients for improve tabletting performance. S Saha, A F Shahiwala, Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 62Saha S, Shahiwala AF.Multifunctional coprocessed excipients for improve tabletting performance. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2009;6(2):197-208.

WHO Supplementary guideline for the manufacture of pharmaceutical excipients. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Government of IndiaThe Drugs and Cosmetics Act. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Government of India; 1940. Available:https://cdsco.gov.in/opencms/exp ort/sites/CDSCO_WEB/Pdf- documents/acts_rules/2016DrugsandCos meticsAct1940Rules1945.pdf 33. WHO Supplementary guideline for the manufacture of pharmaceutical excipients. Available:https://www.gmp- compliance.org/files/guidemgr/WHO_TRS_ 885_Annex_5

Guidance for Industry: Nonclinical Studies for the Safety Evaluation of Pharmaceutical Excipients, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), Centre for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council: General Glossary of Terms and AcronymsGuidance for Industry: Nonclinical Studies for the Safety Evaluation of Pharmaceutical Excipients, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), Centre for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), May 2005 35. International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council: General Glossary of Terms and Acronyms 2014. Avaialble:www.ipecamericas.org

Available:www.ipecamericas.org 37. Eudralex Volume 4 guidelines for excipients. The IPEC Excipient Stability Program Guide. The IPEC Excipient Stability Program Guide, 2010. Available:www.ipecamericas.org 37. Eudralex Volume 4 guidelines for excipients. Available:https://ec.europa.eu/health/docu ments/eudralex/vol-4_en

The International Pharmaceutical Excipient Council & The Pharmaceutical Quality Group The Joint Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients. The International Pharmaceutical Excipient Council & The Pharmaceutical Quality Group The Joint Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients 2017. Avaialble:www.ipecamericas.org

EXCiPACT Certification Standards for Pharmaceutical Excipient Suppliers. EXCiPACT Certification Standards for Pharmaceutical Excipient Suppliers, Issue 1, January 2012. Available from: www.excipact.org/.

NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363 -2016 Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for Pharmaceutical Excipients. NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363 -2016 Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for Pharmaceutical Excipients. Available:https://webstore.ansi.org/.../NSF/ preview_NSF+IPEC+ANSI+363-2016

International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: The Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. USP 39-NF34General Chapter <1078> Good Manufacturing Practices for Bulk Pharmaceutical Excipients. Rockville MDQuality -M4Q42R1)USP 39-NF34, General Chapter <1078> Good Manufacturing Practices for Bulk Pharmaceutical Excipients, USP Convention, Inc., Rockville MD, 2014 42. International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: The Common Technical Document for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use: Quality -M4Q(R1);

Quality Overall Summary of Module 2 Module 3: Quality. Current Step 4 Version Dated 12. Quality Overall Summary of Module 2 Module 3: Quality. Current Step 4 Version Dated 12 September 2002. (www.ich.org).

Co-processed excipient, obtained by spray-drying, usable as a pharmaceutical excipient or food additive. Internet. cited 2021 May 9Co-processed excipient, obtained by spray-drying, usable as a pharmaceutical excipient or food additive [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2021 May 9] Available:https://patents.google.com/patent /WO2013175405A1/en

A co-processed pharmaceutical excipient. S V Nathwani, J M Vasoya, R S Nathwani, Internet]. WO2016046693A1; 2016 [cited 2021 May 9Nathwani SV, Vasoya JM, Nathwani RS. A co-processed pharmaceutical excipient [Internet]. WO2016046693A1; 2016 [cited 2021 May 9].

Process of preparation of co-processed polymer and it's pharmaceutical application. H A Pawar, S R Kamat, P D Choudhary, A J Gavasane, P Gide, InternetPawar HA, Kamat SR, Choudhary PD, Gavasane AJ, Gide P. Process of preparation of co-processed polymer and it's pharmaceutical application [Internet].

Co-processed microcrystalline cellulose and sugar alcohol as an excipient for tablet formulations. J-X Li, B Carlin, T Ruszkay, US8932629B2Internet. cited 2021 May 8Li J-X, Carlin B, Ruszkay T: Co-processed microcrystalline cellulose and sugar alcohol as an excipient for tablet formulations [Internet]. US8932629B2, 2015 [cited 2021 May 8].

Gessel AWV. Co-processed tablet excipient composition its preparation and use. InternetAvailable:https://patents.google.com/patent /US8932629B2/en?q=co- processed+excipients&oq=co- processed+excipients 47. Gessel AWV. Co-processed tablet excipient composition its preparation and use [Internet].

High performance excipient comprising co-processed microcrystalline cellulose and surfacereacted calcium carbonate. L D Miguel, S Lander, Miguel LD, Lander S. High performance excipient comprising co-processed microcrystalline cellulose and surface- reacted calcium carbonate

. EP3682901A1. 2021citedEP3682901A1, 2020 [cited 2021

Coprocessed microcrystalline cellulose and calcium carbonate composition and its preparation. D K Mehra, K P West, J D Wiggins, InternetMehra DK, West KP, Wiggins JD: Co- processed microcrystalline cellulose and calcium carbonate composition and its preparation [Internet].

US4744987A. cited 2021 May 15US4744987A, 1988 [cited 2021 May 15].

Chewable pharmaceutical tablets. S Ratnaraj, Wjr Jr, InternetAvailable:https://patents.google.com/patent /US4744987A/en?oq=United+States+pate nt+4744987 50. Ratnaraj S, Jr WJR. Chewable pharmaceutical tablets [Internet].

US5686107A. cited 2021 May 15US5686107A, 1997 [cited 2021 May 15].

Co-processed carbohydrate system as a quick-dissolve matrix for solid dosage forms. G T Norman, K S Nuguru, A F Amin, S Chandar, InternetNorman GT, Nuguru KS, Amin AF, Chandar S: Co-processed carbohydrate system as a quick-dissolve matrix for solid dosage forms [Internet].

. WO2003051338A1. cited 2021 May 15WO2003051338A1, 2003 [cited 2021 May 15].

oq=WO+2003%2f 051338 52. Schaible D, Mejias L. Orally disintegrating excipient. InternetAvailable:https://patents.google.com/patent /WO2003051338A1/en?oq=WO+2003%2f 051338 52. Schaible D, Mejias L. Orally disintegrating excipient [Internet].

. Wo2010132431a1, cited 2021 May 15WO2010132431A1, 2010 [cited 2021 May 15]:1-26.