# Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 239113717
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04858d7cc6b548c20520a1d267ca0146ab51f2d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04858d7cc6b548c20520a1d267ca0146ab51f2d4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review


Kasturi Subramaniam 
School of Medicine (PU-RCSI)
Perdana University-Royal
Ireland

Perdana University
Kaula LumpurMalaysia venkatesh@perdanauniversit

Jeevan Shetty 
School of Medicine (PU-RCSI)
Perdana University-Royal
Ireland

Perdana University
Kaula LumpurMalaysia venkatesh@perdanauniversit

Thirupathi Rao 
School of Medicine (PU-RCSI)
Perdana University-Royal
Ireland

Perdana University
Kaula LumpurMalaysia venkatesh@perdanauniversit

Venkatesh R Naik 
School of Medicine (PU-RCSI)
Perdana University-Royal
Ireland

Perdana University
Kaula LumpurMalaysia venkatesh@perdanauniversit

Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review
10.52629/jamsa.v9i1.199139 Review Article J Asian Med Stud Assoc. 2020; Volume 9 www.jamsa.amsa-international.org College of Surgeon's in Ireland School of Medicine (PU-RCSI) Correspondence to: Venkatesh R Naik Perdana University-Royal College of Surgeon's in


## 141

www.jamsa.amsa-international.org


## Background

The word cancer is derived from the Greek word "Carcinos", which means crab. Hippocrates coined it as the cut surface of cancer looked like a crab with the tumor extensions looking like its numerous legs. Cancer generally affects older people. There are a variety of cancers described, each with its own behavior.

Cancer occurs when the epithelial cells start dividing abnormally in the body and invades the surrounding tissues. It can also spread to the other parts of the body through the blood and lymphatic systems. 1 Age, genetics, and lifestyle are major risk factors in developing cancer. The World Cancer Research Fund states that colorectal cancer is globally ranked third in men and second in women in terms of disease occurrence. 2 With a global mortality rate of 880,792 according to the World Health Organization (WHO) global overview, colorectal cancer has shown to be a significant burden on countries in terms of economy and finance. 3 According to the World Cancer Report 2014, more than 65% of new colorectal cancer cases occurred in countries with high or very high human development index (HDI). Men in Central Europe and the Republic of Korea showed the highest incidence. 4 The Human Development Index (HDI) is a summary measure of average achievement in key dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life, being knowledgeable, and having a decent living standard. 5 Developed countries are countries in the top quartile in the HDI distribution, those in the bottom three quartiles are developing countries. 6 Countries with high GDP are considered developed, and countries with low GDP are considered developing countries. Studies have shown that there was a significant correlation between reduced deaths and the level of Gross Domestic Product Expenditure on Health (GDPEH) of each nation. 7 Developed and Developing countries are terms used to categorize countries based on the infrastructure and facilities and provide for their citizens. According to the United Nations, there is no clear-cut definition. 7 What is accepted and used by the United Nations, World health organization, and other world governing bodies is a classification based on the Human Development Index (HDI). 8 Total health spending is growing faster than GDP, increasing more rapidly in low and middle-income countries (close to 6% on average) than in high-income countries (4%). 8 Inpatient and outpatient curative care and dispense of medicines and medical supplies account for more than 70% of health spending. 8 Total healthcare spending is strongly related to GDP. 8 Countries with more money tend to spend more on health care facilities for their population. 8 Since colorectal cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide, it is essential to have effective screening and management protocols to achieve a better prognosis and to reduce mortality and morbidity. Screening and management are not uniform worldwide, and it is affected by the economy of individual countries. 8 We wanted to look deeper into what might affect the prognosis of colorectal cancer in different countries. In this context, we aimed to explore the prognosis of colorectal cancer in developed and developing countries and look for the factors affecting the prognosis. This, with the hope of helping the countries to acquire and adopt the best practices within the available resources for a better outcome in colorectal cancer survival rate.


## Materials and Methods

A systematic search of the peer-reviewed journals from the databases was carried out to answer the following key research questions:

• What is the prognosis of colorectal cancer in specific developed countries?

• What is the prognosis of colorectal cancer in specific developing countries?

• What are the factors affecting the prognosis of colorectal cancer in the said countries? EBSCOHost, EZproxy, and PubMed databases were used to search for papers. The following search terms '"prognosis of colorectal cancer" OR "survival rate of colorectal cancer" OR "5-year survival of colorectal cancer" OR "factors affecting the prognosis of colorectal cancer" OR "prognostic factor of colorectal cancer" AND "developed countries" OR "developing countries" were used to look for relevant articles. Countries were classified as developed and developing concerning the UN World Economic Situation and Prospects 2014. 9


## Process of selecting relevant studies

All the articles retrieved through search criteria were reviewed for the study scope by closely examining the objectives of the study. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria to the retrieved articles from the database and eliminating papers not meeting the criteria, 8 papers were shortlisted to be included in the study. Figure 1 depicts the process of identifying, screening, and choosing the eligible articles suitable using the PRISMA guidelines.  


## Results

Eight studies, including the OECD, Healthat-a-glance report were selected as they were meeting our inclusion, exclusion criteria and addressed our study objectives. We selected data from 16 countries. Eight countries are developed, and the remaining eight are developing countries. Table 1 shows the list of developed countries selected in this study. Countries namely Australia, Denmark, United Kingdom, Sweden, Poland, Canada, Norway, and the United States are developed countries situated in the West and have a predominantly Caucasian population. These countries belong to the OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) countries with a higher GDP and spend more money on their health care systems. 10 They have a robust health insurance system for their citizens. The health insurance system is mainly from the taxes collected. 10 The 5year survival of patients with colorectal cancer between 2008 to 2013 in these countries ranges from 50% in Poland to 70% in Australia. 10  


## Discussion

The OECD member countries are considered as developed countries. 10 They spent an average of 12.6 % of their GDP (Gross Domestic Product) on health care services. Of this 61% was from the government coffers and the rest was by private spending. 10 The developing countries spent an average of 4 to 5 % of their GDP on health care services of this 20 to 33% is sponsored by the government. 18 From this data, it can be observed that developed countries spent more GDP on health services than developing countries. This, in turn, translates into better health care for their citizens. The health Insurance system is robust in developed nations, but it is more of "Out of Pocket" spending in developing countries. 8 Cost-of-illness (COI) studies provide information on a specific disease's economic burden from a societal, public payer, family, or individual perspective. COI becomes important in countries when there is more "Out of Pocket" spending rather than Health Insurance coverage. COI studies aim to evaluate the diseaserelated health care costs and the overall costs to society, including medical and non-medical expenses. 19 For example, the annual cost of treatment for colorectal cancer was €3165, and the total cost as % of GDP/capita was 16% for colorectal cancer in Hungary, a developing country. 20 We observed a range of prognoses among developed countries; however, the gap was narrower in these countries compared to those in developing countries. This may be mainly due to more standardized screening and treatment practices in developed countries. Among the developed countries, Australia has shown to have the best prognosis. During the 1982-1986 period, the 5-year survival rate of colorectal cancer patients in Australia was 48% for men and 50% for women. 21 Since then, Australia has changed its clinical practice guidelines on colorectal cancer.

According to the Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Prevention, Early Detection, and Management of Colorectal Cancer by the Australian Cancer Council, Australia implemented several practices to increase the detection rate of colorectal cancer. As primary prevention, the guideline recommends giving aspirin 100-300mg/day for a minimum of 2.5 years starting at the ages between 50-70 years. 21 As for high-risk patients such as those with Lynch syndrome, it is recommended to start aspirin therapy from the start of their colonoscopy screening from the age of 25 years. 21  Among the developed countries, in Norway, both colon and rectal cancer incidence has been increasing for many decades, but the rectal cancer rates have leveled off since the 1990s. 23 Of particular note is the increased survival and declining mortality from rectal cancer in both sexes, and the mortality is now nearly half of what it used to be. 23 The most important determinants are probably the national introduction of total mesorectal excision in the early 1990s, increasing specialization treatment, and use of preoperative radiation. 23 Another developed country included in the study is Denmark. It has been recognized for decades that Danish colorectal cancer patients have an inferior prognosis than neighboring countries. 24 Danish government started several national initiatives in the mid-1990s to overcome this poor outcome. Danish government's extensive and profound focus on rectal cancer management by implementing total mesorectal excision (TME) helped decrease the local recurrence rate. 24 Other essential elements the government focused on in the management of rectal cancer, which helped to enhance the survival rate, include efficient T-staging by use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and use of neoadjuvant chemo-radiotherapy. 24 Among the developing countries analyzed, Turkey showed a significantly positive 5year survival rate of 87.5%. 15 In Turkey, colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer following lung cancer and breast cancer. 25 According to the Turkey Cancer Control Programme 2013-2018, there is 1.7 times increase in the risk of developing colorectal cancer in patients with a family history of colorectal cancer in comparison to the general population. 26,24 In patients with a family history of colorectal cancer, screening starts at the age of 40, or 5 years before the age of diagnosis in the said relative, whichever comes first. Screening includes a fecal occult blood test every two years, with colonoscopy is done every ten years. 26 Saudi Arabia, which also falls under the developing countries category, has a relatively low survival rate of 44.6%. 16 It has been reported that colorectal cancer presents at a younger age in Saudis, especially in women. 16 This has a significant implication for decisions about the threshold age for screening. The average survival rate has increased but is still much lower than in developed countries. Compared with developed countries, the lower overall 5-year survival is due to lack of screening, a higher proportion of advanced-stage cancer at presentation, 147 www.jamsa.amsa-international.org lack of specialized care outside the major cities, and a higher percentage of rectal cancer cases. 16 Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in females and the second most common cancer in males in Malaysia, a developing country also included in this study. It is causing a substantial economic burden on the health care sector, which is likely to increase over time, owing to the current colorectal cancer incidence trend. Malaysian government spends an average of between 2.8 to 3.7 % of GDP on the health care of its citizens. 18 With the improving socioeconomic status and an increasingly westernized lifestyle in developing countries in Asia, including Malaysia, it could be expected to be associated with an increased incidence of colorectal cancer. 11 Malaysians have higher spending ability, which enhances the prevalence of obesity, the practice of a westernized diet, and tobacco smoking. All these in combination or independently impact the increased incidence of colorectal cancer and its prognosis. 11,9,13 In Malaysia, about 80% of colorectal cancer cases are diagnosed in people aged more than 50 years; the increase in their population's aging trend can further increase the prevalence. 13 Looking at Ghana with the lowest 5-year survival of 16.0%, followed by the Gaza strip at 50.2%, among the developing countries, the factors affecting their prognosis are inevitable. In Ghana, the lack of modern infrastructures for cancer care and the inaccessibility to curative treatment added with the lack of education and late presentation lead to its bad prognosis. 11 In the Gaza strip, the isolation of their citizens due to the Gaza Strip's closure policy for security reasons is causing the cancer patients who are living there not to get adequate cancer care. On top of that, multiple antineoplastic medications are not allowed to patients due to prohibition. 12 Even though regular prompt screening and reasonable care to the patient available in most developed countries brings a better outcome, but, many other factors play a significant role. Studies have shown that the outcome of CRC is determined by various factors, including the American Joint Committee on Cancer AJCC staging, tumor location, and neoadjuvant/adjuvant chemotherapy. Along with all these factors, socioeconomic status (SES) is also an important prognostic factor of CRC. 27 Studies have shown that married individuals possess a better prognosis for major causes of death than those who are single, separated, widowed, or divorced. These authors also found that insured patients have the best overall survival rate compared to uninsured patients. 27 They concluded that unmarried, Medicaid, lower education level, and Non-Hispanic Black CRC patients are at a greater risk. 27 Thus, the evolution of multiple factors and their impact on colon cancer led to a term Non-Biological Factor (NBF) -staging, which was proposed as an independent prognostic factor in colon cancer. 28  the AJCC TNM staging system is essential for prognostic prediction and clinical guidance of adjuvant chemotherapy in stage II and III colon cancer. 28 In conclusion, colorectal cancer prognosis and survival depend on multiple factors. The spending ability of individual countries plays a crucial impact on mortality and morbidity. A better prognosis can be achieved by implementing total mesorectal excision (TME) and more effective screening strategies. More health care spending and including nonbiological factors like unmarried, health insurance, and lower education level during the staging of the disease will significantly help in predicting a more accurate prognosis. We also recommend the implementation of screening and management strategies used in Australia and Turkey into other countries as the survival rates in both these countries improved after they changed their strategy.

## FullFigure 1
1Searches: PubMed, MEDLINE, EBSCO host Records Identified through database searching. (n= 10,-Text articles excluded, with reasons (n= 62) 1. Insufficient information on colorectal prognosis data 2. Lack of 5-year survival data 3. Study involving very small sample size Studies Included in Qualitative Synthesis (n = 8) PRISMA flow diagram, including database searches, the number of abstracts screened, and the full texts retrieved.


142 Ramaswamy Naik et al: Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review www.jamsa.amsa-international.org


144 Ramaswamy Naik et al: Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review www.jamsa.amsa-international.org

## Table 1 .
1Colorectal cancer prognosis in developed countriesArticle Title 
Country 
The 5-year 
survival rate of 
colorectal 
cancer (%) 

OECD, Health at 
a glance 201510. 

Australia 
70.0 

Denmark 
62.0 



## Table 2
2shows the list of developing 
countries selected in this study. Countries 
like Korea, Ghana, Gaza Strip, Malaysia, 
China, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Taiwan 
were analyzed. There was a variety of 
ethnicity in these countries, including 
Asians and Middle Easterners. The 5-year 
survival of colorectal cancer in these 
countries ranged from a low 16% in Ghana 
to a soaring 87.5% in Turkey. This list of 
countries is scattered worldwide and does 
not have much in common except that 
they fall under developing countries. This is 
based on GDP. Countries with lower GDP 
spent less on health care facilities. 8 "Out of 
pocket spending" is more prevalent in 
these countries, reflecting on the disease 
prognosis 
and 
outcome. 8 

Table 2. Colorectal cancer prognosis in 
developing countries 

Article Title 
Country 
The 5-year 
survival rate of 
colorectal 
cancer (%) 

OECD (2015), 
Health at a 
glance 2015.10 

Korea 
72.0 



A population screening for those 146 Ramaswamy Naik et al: Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review www.jamsa.amsa-international.orgwith 
average 
risk 
includes 
an 
immunochemical fecal occult blood test 
every two years from 50 to 74. 21 To increase 
the detection rate, those with Familial 
Adenomatous 
Polyposis 
start 
their 
screening regime at 10-15 years of age or 
earlier if there are any gastrointestinal 
symptoms. As for Juvenile Polyposis 
Syndrome, colonoscopy begins at 12-15 
years of age, done every 1-3 years. Apart 
from that, intensive follow-up after post-
curative 
surgeries, 
regular 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) Titers, 
and CT-scan are done with the aim of early 
detection of recurrence. 22 




Effect of NBFs on the survival of colon cancer necessitates further clinical attention. Moreover, incorporating NBF-stage into 148 Ramaswamy Naik et al: Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review www.jamsa.amsa-international.org
Ramaswamy Naik et al: Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis BetweenDeveloped and Developing Countries: A Literature Review
AcknowledgmentWe acknowledge Prof.Dr.Vijayalakshmi for proofreading the manuscript and Prof. Dr. Michael Larvin, Dean of PURCSI school of medicine, Perdana University, for providing the opportunity to conduct this study under the PU-RCSI summer research program 2019Conflict of InterestNone
NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms. InternetNCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms [Internet].

Colorectal cancer statistics. InternetColorectal cancer statistics [Internet].

. World Cancer Research Fund. citedWorld Cancer Research Fund. 2018 [cited 2019July11].Available from:https://www.wcrf.org/dietandcancer/ cancer-trends/colorectal-cancer-statistics

Cancer today. InternetCancer today [Internet].

Global Cancer Observatory. CitedGlobal Cancer Observatory. [Cited 2019Sep10]. Available from: http://gco.iarc.fr/today/fact-sheets- cancers.

World cancer report. B W Stewart, C P Wild, Lyon: IARC PressStewart BW, Wild CP. World cancer report, 2014. Lyon: IARC Press; 2014.

Socioeconomic factors and health care system characteristics related to cancer survival in the elderly. A populationbased analysis in 16 European countries (ELDCARE project). A Quaglia, M Vercelli, R Lillini, E Mugno, J W Coebergh, M Quinn, C Martinez-Garcia, R Capocaccia, A; Eldcare Working Micheli, Group, 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2004.12.0011584Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 542Quaglia A, Vercelli M, Lillini R, Mugno E, Coebergh JW, Quinn M, Martinez-Garcia C, Capocaccia R, Micheli A; ELDCARE Working Group. Socioeconomic factors and health care system characteristics related to cancer survival in the elderly. A population- based analysis in 16 European countries (ELDCARE project). Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2005 May;54(2):117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2004.12.001. PMID: 1584

Public Spending on Health: A Closer Look at Global Trends. K Xu, A Soucat, J Kutzin, Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGOGeneva: World Health Organization. 3Xu K, Soucat A & Kutzin J et al. Public Spending on Health: A Closer Look at Global Trends. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 (WHO/HIS/HGF/HFWorkingPaper/18.3). Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.

World Economic Situation and Prospects (WESP). World economic situation and prospectsWorld economic situation and prospects 2014. World Economic Situation and Prospects (WESP). 2014May

Health at a glance 2015: OECD indicators. ParisOECD PublishingOECD (2015), Health at a glance 2015: OECD indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris. www.jamsa.amsa-international.org

Colorectal cancer survival rates in Ghana: A retrospective hospital-based study. F Agyemang-Yeboah, J Yorke, C Obirikorang, Nsenbah Batu, E Acheampong, E , Amankwaa Frimpong, E , 10.1371/journal.pone.0209307PlosOnePLoS ONE. 131213Agyemang-Yeboah F, Yorke J, Obirikorang C, Nsenbah Batu E, Acheampong E, Amankwaa Frimpong E, et al. (2018) Colorectal cancer survival rates in Ghana: A retrospective hospital-based study. PLoS ONE 13(12): e0209307. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.020930 7Plos One. 2018;13(12).

Survival after the diagnosis of breast or colorectal cancer in the GAZA Strip from. C Panato, K Abusamaan, E Bidoli, M Hamdi-Cherif, D Pierannunzio, S Ferretti, BMC Cancer. 181Panato C, Abusamaan K, Bidoli E, Hamdi- Cherif M, Pierannunzio D, Ferretti S, et al. Survival after the diagnosis of breast or colorectal cancer in the GAZA Strip from 2005 to 2014. BMC Cancer. 2018Apr;18(1).

Colorectal cancer in Malaysia: Its burden and implications for a multiethnic country. S K Veettil, K G Lim, N Chaiyakunapruk, S M Ching, Mra Hassan, Asian Journal of Surgery. 406Veettil SK, Lim KG, Chaiyakunapruk N, Ching SM, Hassan MRA. Colorectal cancer in Malaysia: Its burden and implications for a multiethnic country. Asian Journal of Surgery. 2017;40(6):481-9.

Trends in and Predictions of Colorectal Cancer Incidence and Mortality in China From. L Zhang, F Cao, G Zhang, L Shi, S Chen, Z Zhang, Frontiers in Oncology. 9Zhang L, Cao F, Zhang G, Shi L, Chen S, Zhang Z, et al. Trends in and Predictions of Colorectal Cancer Incidence and Mortality in China From 1990 to 2025. Frontiers in Oncology. 2019;9.

Long-Term Outcomes of Colon Cancer Patients Undergoing Standardized Technique Operation With Curative Intent. E Akgun, C Caliskan, T Yoldas, C Karaca, B Karabulut, B Doganavsargil, International Surgery. 100Akgun E, Caliskan C, Yoldas T, Karaca C, Karabulut B, Doganavsargil B, et al. Long- Term Outcomes of Colon Cancer Patients Undergoing Standardized Technique Operation With Curative Intent. International Surgery. 2015;100(11-12):1382- 95.

Colorectal cancer in Saudi Arabia: incidence, survival, demographics and implications for national policies. N Alsanea, A S Abduljabbar, S Alhomoud, L H Ashari, D Hibbert, S Bazarbashi, Annals of Saudi Medicine. 353Alsanea N, Abduljabbar AS, Alhomoud S, Ashari LH, Hibbert D, Bazarbashi S. Colorectal cancer in Saudi Arabia: incidence, survival, demographics and implications for national policies. Annals of Saudi Medicine. 2015;35(3):196-202.

The Risk Factors Affecting Survival in Colorectal Cancer in Taiwan. C-H Lee, S-C Cheng, H-Y Tung, S-C Chang, C-Y Ching, S-F Wu, Iranian journal of public Health. Tehran University of Medical Sciences. Internet. cited 2019Sep9. cited 2021 Jan 5Lee C-H, Cheng S-C, Tung H-Y, Chang S-C, Ching C-Y, Wu S-F. The Risk Factors Affecting Survival in Colorectal Cancer in Taiwan [Internet]. Iranian journal of public Health. Tehran University of Medical Sciences; 2018 [cited 2019Sep9]. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles /PMC5996318/ 18. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XP D.CHEX.GD.ZS?contextual=region&end=20 18&locations=AU&start=2009[cited 2021 Jan 5 ]

Costof-illness studies in nine Central and Eastern European countries. V Brodszky, Z Beretzky, P Baji, F Rencz, M Péntek, A Rotar, K Tachkov, S Mayer, J Simon, M Niewada, R Hren, L Gulácsi, 10.1007/s10198-019-01066-x.Epub31104219Eur J Health Econ. 16544593PMCIDSupplBrodszky V, Beretzky Z, Baji P, Rencz F, Péntek M, Rotar A, Tachkov K, Mayer S, Simon J, Niewada M, Hren R, Gulácsi L. Cost- of-illness studies in nine Central and Eastern European countries. Eur J Health Econ. 2019 Jun;20(Suppl 1):155-172. doi: 10.1007/s10198-019-01066-x. Epub 2019 May 18. PMID: 31104219; PMCID: PMC6544593.

Prognosis, Cost, and Occurrence of Colorectal, Lung, Breast, and Prostate Cancer in Hungary. Value Health Reg Issues. A Inotai, Z Abonyi-Tóth, G Rokszin, Z Vokó, 10.1016/j.vhri.2015.03.020.Epub296981467Inotai A, Abonyi-Tóth Z, Rokszin G, Vokó Z. Prognosis, Cost, and Occurrence of Colorectal, Lung, Breast, and Prostate Cancer in Hungary. Value Health Reg Issues. 2015 Sep;7:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vhri.2015.03.020. Epub 2015 Apr 22. PMID: 29698146.

Colorectal cancer in Australia. Cancer Australia, InternetCancer Australia. Colorectal cancer in Australia [Internet].

Cancer Australia. Edcan, citedEdCaN. Cancer Australia; 2014. [cited 2019Sep9]. Available from: http://edcan.org.au/edcan-learning-

. Clinical Guidelines Wiki, nes:Colorectal_cancer#_ga=2.32799614.1136 664472.1566484688- 1802572781.1566484688citedClinical Guidelines Wiki. [cited 2019Sep9]. Available from: https://wiki.cancer.org.au/australia/Guideli nes:Colorectal_cancer#_ga=2.32799614.1136 664472.1566484688- 1802572781.1566484688

. Cancer in Norway. Internet. Cited 2020 aug25Cancer in Norway 2018[Internet] [Cited 2020 aug25] Available from: https://www.kreftregisteret.no/globalasset s/cancer-in-norway/2018/cin2018.pdf

Kell Østerlind &Ismail Gögenur, Improved survival of colorectal cancer in Denmark during 2001-2012 -The efforts of several national initiatives. H Lene, Anders Iversen, Peter Green, Ingeholm, Acta Oncologica. 55Lene H. Iversen, Anders Green, Peter Ingeholm, Kell Østerlind &Ismail Gögenur, Improved survival of colorectal cancer in Denmark during 2001-2012 -The efforts of several national initiatives. Acta Oncologica ,Volume 55, 2016, Pages 10-23.

Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review www.jamsa.amsa-international.org 25. Cancer today. Global Cancer, Observatory. Ramaswamy Naik, Internet. cited 2019 Oct5Ramaswamy Naik et al: Comparison of Colorectal Cancer Prognosis Between Developed and Developing Countries: A Literature Review www.jamsa.amsa-international.org 25. Cancer today. Global Cancer, Observatory.[Internet]. [cited 2019 Oct5].

. Iccp-Portal, Org, InternetIccp-portal.org. 2019 [Internet]. [cited 5 October 2019].

Impact of socioeconomic status on survival of colorectal cancer patients. Q Zhang, Y Wang, H Hu, 10.18632/oncotarget.20859Oncotarget. 862Zhang Q, Wang Y, Hu H, et al. Impact of socioeconomic status on survival of colorectal cancer patients. Oncotarget. 2017;8(62):106121-106131. Published 2017 Sep 13. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.20859

Real-World Implications of Nonbiological Factors with Staging, Prognosis and Clinical Management in Colon Cancer. Q Liu, D Luo, S Cai, Q Li, X Li, 10.3390/cancers10080263Cancers (Basel). 108263.Liu Q, Luo D, Cai S, Li Q, Li X. Real-World Implications of Nonbiological Factors with Staging, Prognosis and Clinical Management in Colon Cancer. Cancers (Basel). 2018;10(8):263. Published 2018 Aug 8. doi:10.3390/cancers10080263