# Barriers and Facilitators to Accessing Health Care Services among Married Women in Ethiopia: a Multi-level Analysis of the Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey

CorpusID: 240056994
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d5df6a26b72113c0bf850db2cdee8441969c14c4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d5df6a26b72113c0bf850db2cdee8441969c14c4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Barriers and Facilitators to Accessing Health Care Services among Married Women in Ethiopia: a Multi-level Analysis of the Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey
2021. 2021

MPHBetregiorgis Zegeye 
HaSET Maternal and Child Health Research Program
Shewarobit Field OfficeShewarobitEthiopia

M A 
; Nicholas 
DrPH, MScKofi Adjei 
; Bright 
Department of Public Health and Policy
University of Liverpool
LiverpoolUK

MPhilOpoku Ahinkorah 
School of Public Health
Faculty of Health
University of Technology Sydney
UltimoAustralia

MPhil; Edward Kwabena Ameyaw 
School of Public Health
Faculty of Health
University of Technology Sydney
UltimoAustralia

Eugene Budu 
Department of Population and Health
University of Cape Coast
Cape CoastGhana

; Abdul-Aziz 
MPhilSeidu 
Department of Population and Health
University of Cape Coast
Cape CoastGhana

MSc, MHADina Idriss-Wheeler 
Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences
University of Ottawa
OttawaOntarioCanada

PhD, MSc; Sanni Yaya 
Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences
University of Ottawa
OttawaOntarioCanada

School of International Development and Global Studies
University of Ottawa
OttawaOntarioCanada

The George Institute for Global Health
Imperial College London
LondonUK

Barriers and Facilitators to Accessing Health Care Services among Married Women in Ethiopia: a Multi-level Analysis of the Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey

Online) International Journal of Translational Medical Research and Public Health
521842021. 202110.21106/ijtmrph.380183 ORIGINAL ARTICLE | HEALTH CARE ACCESS This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License CC BY 4.0.Health Care AccessFactorsMultilevelEthiopiaDHSGlobal HealthIndividual-and Community-LevelsBarriersFacilitators
Background and Objective: Access to health care services is a major challenge to women and children in many developing countries such as Ethiopia. In this study, we investigated the individual-and communitylevel factors associated with barriers to accessing health care services among married women in Ethiopia.Methods:Data from the 2016 Ethiopia demographic and health survey on 9,824 married women of reproductive age (15-49 years) were analyzed. Multilevel logistic regression models were used to assess individual-and community-level factors associated with barriers to access health care services. Regression analysis results revealed adjusted odds ratios at 95% confidence intervals.Results: Over two-thirds (71.8%) of married women in Ethiopia reported barriers to accessing health care services. Some of the individual-level factors that were associated with lower odds of reporting barriers to access health care services include: having secondary education (aOR=0.49, 95% CI: 0.32-0.77), being in the richest quintile (aOR=0.34, 95% CI: 0.22-0.54), and indicating wife-beating as unjustified (aOR=0.66, 95% CI: 0.55-0.81). Among the community-level factors, high community-level literacy (aOR=0.56, 95% CI: 0.34-0.92) and moderate community socioeconomic status (aOR=0.62, 95% CI: 0.45-0.85) were significantly associated with lower odds of reporting barriers to access health care services.Conclusion and Implications for Translation:The findings revealed high barriers to access health care services, and both individual-and community-level factors were significant contributing predictors. Therefore, it is important to consider multidimensional strategies and interventions to facilitate access to health care services in Ethiopia.

## Introduction


### Background of the Study

Access to health care services is a fundamental human right, and barriers to accessing health services may have a detrimental effect on an individual's physical and mental health, and overall quality of life. 1,2 Delays in receiving quality health care services, unnecessary financial expenditures, preventable hospitalization, and unmet health needs are strongly associated with barriers to access health care services. 1 Regrettably, access to health care services is a common problem in developing countries. 1,3 Globally, approximately 400 million people do not have access to health care services, and about eight million deaths are treatable health problems. 4 Only half of the population in Africa have access to modern health facilities, 5 mainly due to financial burdens and geographic distance. 6 Zegeye et al. (2021) revealed that geographic distance to a health facility, money, and garnering permission from the husband were reasons for the inaccessibility to health services for women in Benin. 7 In Ethiopia, access barriers to health care services are prevalent in rural communities. The implementation of the primary health care (PHC) services through the rapid expansion of health centers and health posts, as well as training and recruiting primary and middle-level health professionals, were some of the attempts made to reduce access barriers. 8 The program significantly improved PHC coverage from 76.9% in 2005 to 90% in 2010. 8 However, regional disparities and socioeconomic inequalities continue to exist in accessing health services, particularly for those living in rural areas. 9 Several factors such as women's empowerment, 10 religion, 11 place of residence, 12,13 region, 14 as well as physician preference and service acceptability by patients 10,15 are known to play a significant role in health service accessibility.

The few studies on health service accessibility in Ethiopia focus on facility and health force distribution, 9 cultural factors and health-seeking behavior, 16 physical accessibility, 17 and descriptive reports. However, no comprehensive study to date exists on the individual-and communitylevel factors associated with health care service accessibility barriers in Ethiopia. In this study, multilevel modeling was applied to investigate the effects of cluster-level (i.e., primary sampling units) variables on individual-level outcomes (i.e., reporting barriers to access health care services by respondent). Multilevel modeling was also used to explore the effects of specific community-level characteristics (residence, region, literacy level in the community, and socioeconomic status of the community) on reported barriers to access health care services, while also adjusting for individual-level factors.


### Objectives of the Study

We used nationally representative data to examine the individual-and community-level factors associated with barriers to access health care services among married women of reproductive age  living in Ethiopia. We hypothesize that both individual-and community-level factors are associated with barriers to access health care services among married women of reproductive age  living in Ethiopia.


## Methods


### Study Variables

Data from the 2016 Ethiopia demographic and health survey (EDHS) were used to conduct this study. Using a two-stage stratified cluster sampling method, the data included men and women in their reproductive age. First, enumeration areas (EAs) were selected using Probability Proportional to Size (PPS). 18 Second, household selection and interviews took place; 16,650 out of 18,008 households were interviewed resulting in the participation of a total of 15,683 women aged 15-49 years. 18 Survey methodology details are in the final report. 18 The final analysis in this study was limited to married women (N=9824).

The outcome variable for this study was barriers to access health care services. In the survey, women were asked the following question with four options to assess factors that prevent women from getting medical advice or treatment as an indication of access to health care services: "When you are sick and want to get medical advice or treatment, is each of the following a big problem or not? (1) Getting permission to go to the doctor? (2) Getting money needed for advice or treatment? (3) The distance to the health facility? (4) Not wanting to go alone?" 18 The outcome variable was coded as "yes" if a woman encountered at least one of the aforementioned problems. Those who did not have any problem were considered not to have barriers in access to health care services and coded as "no." Individual-and community-level factors were considered as independent variables. The individuallevel factors included age (15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49), women's and husband's educational level (no formal education, primary school, secondary school, higher), women's and husband's occupation (not working, professional or technical or managerial, clerical, sales, agriculturalemployee, services, skilled manual, unskilled manual, others), wealth index (poorest, poorer, middle, richer, richest), media exposure (no, yes), religion (Orthodox, Protestant, Muslim, Others), parity (no, 1-2, 3-4, 5+), family size (<5, >=5), sex of household head (male, female), native language (Amarigna, Tigregna, Oromigna, Afarigna, Somaligna, Sidamigna, Agniwakigna, Nuwerigna/Gambeligna, Gumuzigna/ Bangagna, Others), decision making (no, yes) and wife-beating (accept, refuse).

Community-level factors included place of residence (urban, rural), region (Tigray, Afar, Amhara, Oromia, Somali, Benishangul, SNPPR, Gambela, Harari, Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa), literacy level (low, medium, high), and socioeconomic status (low, moderate, high). A given community's participants' wealth, education, and occupation were aggregated to create the community socioeconomic status variable. Principal component analysis was used to estimate women who were poor, uneducated, and unemployed, resulting in a standardized score with a mean (0) and standard deviation (1). These were then categorized into tertile 1 (the lowest scores, least disadvantaged, and highest socioeconomic status), tertile 2, and tertile 3 (highest scores, most disadvantaged, and lowest socioeconomic status). Similarly, for community literacy, respondents who had attended higher than secondary school were assumed to be literate while all other respondents were given a sentence to read, and they were considered literate if they could read all or part of the sentence. 18 Therefore, high literacy included respondents who had higher than secondary education or had no school/primary/secondary education and could read a whole sentence. Medium literacy were respondents who had no school/ primary/secondary education and could read part of the sentence. Low literacy were respondents who had no school/primary/secondary education and could not read at all. These were categorized into appropriate tertiles where tertile 1 (lowest score, least disadvantaged) was high community literacy, tertile two (medium score) was medium community literacy, and tertile 3 (highest score, most disadvantaged) was low community literacy.


### Statistical Analysis

Descriptive statistics were performed to obtain the frequency and percentages of all variables and the prevalence of barriers to health care services. Subsequently, bivariate analysis (chi-square test) was completed to select potential variables for the regression analysis. A p-value less than 0.05 was used as a cut-off point. Using the variance inflation factor (VIF), a multi-collinearity test was performed for all explanatory variables that had a significant association with the outcome variable. The test revealed no evidence of collinearity between explanatory variables (Mean VIF =1.82, Min VIF=1.03, Max VIF=3.59). To account for the DHS's complex sampling design for data collection, the appropriate level-weights in DHS surveys were used at the individual level 1 and cluster (community) level 2.

A multilevel logistic regression model (MLRM), which consisted of fixed and random effects was fitted in the final step. 19 The fixed effects revealed the association between the independent variables and the outcome variable and were reported as adjusted odds ratios (AOR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Measures of variations, known as random effects, were assessed using Intra-Cluster Correlation (ICC). The Likelihood Ratio (LR) tested model adequacy and Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) measured how well the different models fitted the data on the four models.

www.ijtmrph.org

The first model -Model 0 -was the empty model used to check the variance in the outcome variable attributed to the clustering of primary sampling units (PSUs) (Model 0). The second model -Model I -included individual-level factors associated with barriers in accessing health care services. In the third -Model II -community-level factors were fitted. The fourth -Model III -included both the individual-and community-level factors. All analyses were weighted to adjust for the DHS sampling design. The data were analyzed with STATA Version 14.


### Ethical Approval

This study used publicly available secondary data from the DHS Program which ensures standards are followed for the protection of respondents' privacy and confidentiality. Details regarding ethical considerations and the protection and privacy of DHS survey respondents are available at: http://goo. gl/ny8T6X. Table 1 reveals a total of 9,824 married women were included in this study, of whom, 23.5% were in the 25-29-year-old age group. More than threequarters (83.8 %) resided in rural areas and 61.2% had no formal education. Over half (51.6 %) of the participants were unemployed, and more than onefifth (23.5 %) had worked in agriculture. Over threefifth (61.7 %) were not exposed to any form of media (i.e., newspaper, radio, or television). Figure 1 shows the barriers to access health care services in Ethiopia. Approximately 71.9% of married women reported having at least one barrier to accessing health care services and the most stated barrier, as indicated by 56.3% of respondents, was money. Approximately 54.6%, 43.6%, and 34.3% of respondents reported that distance to a health facility, going alone, and receiving permission were barriers to accessing health care services, respectively. Table 1 also outlines the barriers in accessing health care services by sociodemographic characteristics. More than three-quarters (78.2%) of women who had no formal education reported barriers to accessing health care services compared to less than one-third (36.5%) with higher education. Socioeconomic inequalities in access to health care services revealed 86.1% of women in the poorest wealth index reporting barriers.


## Results


### Sociodemographic Characteristics


### Individual-and Community-level Factors Associated with Barriers to Accessing Health Care Services among Married Women in Ethiopia

The random effects of the individual-and community factors associated with barriers to health care services access are presented in Table 2. Model 0 showed significant variation in the odds of reporting barriers in access to health care service across the clusters (σ2=2.24, 1.82-2.74). Approximately 43% of the total variance in barriers to accessing health care services were attributed to betweencluster variations, as shown by the Intra-Cluster Correlation (ICC=0.43). This estimate decreased by 17% in Model I, 6% (ICC=0.20) in Model II, and 1% in Model III (ICC=0. 19). The variations in the odds of facing barriers to health care accessibility were highly attributed to the variances in the clustering at the primary sampling units. Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) values showed a decrement in the individual-and community model, revealing Model III as the best-fitted model. Table 3 outlines the fixed effects models of the individual-and community-level factors associated with barriers to accessing health care services. Controlling for exploratory factors, the results showed that women with secondary education had the lowest odds of reporting health care service access barriers (aOR=0.49, 95% CI: 0.32-0.77) compared to those with no formal education. Women whose occupation was sales (aOR=0.73, 95% CI: 0.56-0.95) were less likely to report barriers compared to respondents who were unemployed.

The likelihood of reporting barriers among women in the richest (aOR=0.34, 95% CI: 0.22-0.54) and richer (aOR=0.46, 95% CI: 0.32-0.65) wealth index was lower compared to women in the poorest wealth index. Additionally, the odds of reporting barriers were lower among Muslim women (aOR=0.67, 95% CI: 0.47-0.96) compared to www.ijtmrph.org      The community-level factors analyzed showed region, community literacy level, and community socioeconomic status were associated with barriers to health care services access; however, place of residence (urban or rural) was not. Women in Amhara region (aOR=0.31, 95% CI: 0.10-0.91) and Harari region (aOR=0.16, 95% CI: 0.05-0.56) were less likely to report barrier access compared to women in Tigray. Women living in communities with medium (aOR=0.64, 95% CI: 0.45-0.92) and high (aOR=0.56, 95% CI: 0.34-0.92) literacy were found to report lower odds of barriers compared to those living in communities with low literacy levels. Similarly, the odds of facing barriers to health care accessibility were lower among communities of high (aOR=0.62, 95% CI: 0.45-0.85) compared to communities of low socioeconomic status.


## Discussion


### Discussion

Using the 2016 EDHS, we investigated the individual-and community-level factors associated with barriers to accessing health care services among married women in Ethiopia. Overall, the findings revealed that 71.8% of married women encountered at least one type of barrier (i.e., money, distance to a health facility, getting permission to go to a health facility, and going alone) to accessing health care services.

Both individual-and community-level factors were found to be linked with health care accessibility 6   Regarding individual-level factors, we observed the likelihood of reporting barriers in access to health care services to be lower among educated women compared to those with no formal education. 7,20 The influence of formal education on quality of life and overall wellbeing has been highlighted in prior studies suggesting that education enhances the freedom and decision capacity of women in matters related to their health and reproductive health services. 21 Education also enhances women's awareness and health-seeking behavior, which is seen as an entry point to using health services. 22 Consistent with previous work, occupation was found to be associated with health care accessibility and service utilization. 23 Employed women, particularly in sales, were less likely to have barriers to accessing health care services than those who were unemployed. 24 Women with higher economic status, which tends to be linked to better financial circumstances, had lower odds of reporting barriers in access to health care services. 25,26 In Ethiopia, of the total health expenditure, 35.8% are outof-pocket expenditures, and the poor may not be able to afford the costs associated with health care services utilization (i.e., transport, wasted working hours for traveling and treatment). 13,26 Religion was linked to barriers in accessing health care services, similar to previous work in Africa. 11 A study in Nigeria revealed that women ignored essential maternal services (i.e., skilled birth attendants), mainly due to the gender of the service provider (i.e., male). 11 Working closely with religious leaders has been suggested as a mechanism to improve health care services and coverage. 7,27 The results also showed that women who refused wife-beating were less likely to have barriers to access health care services than women who accepted the norm of wife-beating. A possible explanation is that women who accept wife-beating have less knowledge about their human and health rights . 28 On the other hand, those who refuse wife-beating are known to have higher levels of self-confidence, positive selfesteem, and capacity to utilize household resources for good health and wellbeing. 29 Similar to previous work, regional variations in barriers to health care accessibility were found. 7,9 In Ethiopia, huge disparities in health care access across regions were found, suggesting the unfair distribution of health care staff as a possible reason. 9 Variations in the accessibility of health care across regions may also be due to differences in the quality of health services, shortage of health professionals in rural areas, and treatment approach by doctors, nurses, or other professionals. 13,15 We observed that community literacy level was associated with health care accessibility. Women living in communities with literacy had lower odds of barriers in access to health care services, 7  higher incomes, and availability of resources. 30 Similarly, women living in communities with better socioeconomic status were less likely to face obstacles in accessing health care services. 7,13 The reason may be that economically disadvantaged women may not have adequate resources to afford health services, especially in rural areas .7,13


### Strengths and Limitations of the study

Our study has both strengths and limitations. One strength is that we assessed the barriers married women face in accessing health care services using nationally representative data. We also included both individual-and community-level factors for a multi-level approach. Nonetheless, there are some limitations of the study. First, a cause-effect relationship could not be established because we used cross-sectional secondary data. Second, other factors such as the perception and attitude of women towards health care accessibility were not covered due to secondary data limitations (i.e., not collected by authors).


## Conclusion and Implications for Translation

This study demonstrated that more than two-thirds of married women in Ethiopia faced at least one form of barrier to accessing health care services. The findings revealed that both individual-and community-level factors such as women's education, women's occupation, economic status, religion, wifebeating attitude, region, and community literacy level, and community socioeconomic status were associated with barriers to health care accessibility.

For sustainable health development, it is important to consider multidimensional strategies and interventions to facilitate access to health care services in Ethiopia. This could be done through education, employment opportunities, and economic strengthening. In addition, equitable distribution of resources across regions and communities are key to improving health care services. ► Married women in Ethiopia reported both individual-and community-level barriers to accessing health care services. ► At the individual level, married women in Ethiopia who are rich, have some formal education, work in sales and do not accept wife-beating as the norm, are less likely to encounter barriers to health care services. ► High and medium community literacy, as well as moderate community socioeconomic status, reduce the chances of barriers to access health care services.


## Compliance with Ethical Standards


## Key Messages

## Figure 1 :
1Barriers in access to health care services among married women in Ethiopia: evidence from 2016 EDHS


Table 1: Barrier in access to health care by sociodemographic characteristics: Evidence from 2016 EDHSVariables 
Number 
(Weighted %) 

Barrier in access to health care 
P-value 

No, 
Number (Weighted %) 

Yes, 
Number (Weighted %) 

Age in years 
P=0.4707 

15-19 
664 (5.75) 
230 (30.37) 
434 (69.63) 

20-24 
1,783 (16.72) 
645 (28.92) 
1,138 (71.08) 

25-29 
2,236 (23.50) 
748 (29.47) 
1,488 (70.53) 

30-34 
1,854 (20.04) 
607 (27.51) 
1,247 (72.49) 

35-39 
1,565 (15.78) 
510 (28.38) 
1,055 (71.62) 

40-44 
1,019 (10.40) 
315 (26.80) 
704 (73.20) 

45-49 
703 (7.81) 
200 (23.84) 
503 (76.16) 

Women's educational level 
P<0.001 

No formal education 
5,693 (61.17) 
1,367 (21.79) 
4,326 (78.21) 

Primary school 
2,700 (28.31) 
1,008 (29.76) 
1,692 (70.24) 

Secondary school 
880 (6.40) 
510 (59.03) 
370 (40.97) 

Higher 
551 (4.12) 
370 (63.50) 
181 (36.50) 

Husband educational level 
P<0.001 

No formal education 
4,524 (46.59) 
1,090 (22.52) 
3,434 (77.48) 

Primary school 
3,054 (36.90) 
956 (25.67) 
2,098 (74.33) 

Secondary school 
1,226 (9.54) 
587 (43.48) 
639 (56.52) 

Higher 
1,020 (6.97) 
622 (57.96) 
398 (42.04) 
(Contd...) 

www.ijtmrph.org 

Variables 
Number 
(Weighted %) 

Barrier in access to health care 
P-value 

No, 
Number (Weighted %) 

Yes, 
Number (Weighted %) 

Women occupation 
P<0.001 

Not working 
5,345 (51.60) 
1,606 (23.71) 
3,739 (76.29) 

Professional or technical or managerial 
270 (2.30) 
168 (55.37) 
102 (44.63) 

Clerical 
88 (0.63) 
69 (80.99) 
19 (19.01) 

Sales 
1,320 (13.21) 
606 (38.17) 
714 (61.83) 

Agricultural employee 
1,916 (23.45) 
445 (25.78) 
1,471 (74.22) 

Services 
219 (2.62) 
96 (22.80) 
123 (77.20) 

Skilled manual 
355 (3.76) 
147 (39.55) 
208 (60.45) 

Unskilled manual 
130 (0.81) 
40 (32.20) 
90 (67.80) 

Others 
181 (1.62) 
78 (43.17) 
103 (56.83) 

Husband occupation 
P<0.001 

Not working 
1,158 (9.07) 
271 (22.22) 
887 (77.78) 

Professional or technical or managerial 
774 (5.22) 
393 (47.87) 
381 (52.13) 

Clerical 
92 (0.62) 
58 (50.13) 
34 (49.87) 

Sales 
782 (6.99) 
388 (39.58) 
394 (60.42) 

Agricultural employee 
4,891 (61.88) 
1,192 (22.60) 
3,699 (77.40) 

Services 
432 (3.10) 
200 (43.67) 
232 (56.33) 

Skilled manual 
888 (6.88) 
469 (45.73) 
419 (54.27) 

Unskilled manual 
366 (3.03) 
126 (27.99) 
240 (72.01) 

Others 
441 (3.21) 
158 (38.21) 
283 (61.79) 

Media exposure 
P<0.001 

No 
5,873 (61.71) 
1,342 (20.76) 
4,531 (79.24) 

Yes 
3,951 (38.29) 
1,913 (40.06) 
2,038 (59.94) 

Wealth quintiles 
P<0.001 

Poorest 
2,907 (19.10) 
497 (13.88) 
2,410 (86.12) 

Poorer 
1,499 (20.29) 
321 (17.27) 
1,178 (82.73) 

Middle 
1,359 (20.12) 
343 (21.08) 
1,016 (78.92) 

Richer 
1,316 (19.56) 
469 (32.15) 
847 (67.85) 

Richest 
2,743 (20.93) 
1,625 (54.77) 
1,118 (45.23) 

Religion 
P<0.001 

Orthodox 
3,535 (40.49) 
1,517 (40.22) 
2,018 (59.78) 

Protestant 
1,784 (22.39) 
456 (21.72) 
1,328 (78.28) 

Muslim 
4,318 (34.63) 
1,250 (19.37) 
3,068 (80.63) 

Others 
187 (2.49) 
32 (11.71) 
155 (88.29) 

Parity 
P<0.001 

No 
985 (8.54) 
442 (39.68) 
543 (60.32) 

1-2 
2,949 (27.72) 
1,204 (34.70) 
1,745 (65.30) 

3-4 
2,343 (24.23) 
764 (27.99) 
1,579 (72.01) 

5+ 
3,547 (39.51) 
845 (21.16) 
2,702 (78.84) 



## Table 1 :
1(Continued) 



## Table 1 :
1(Continued) 



## Table 1 :
1(Continued)    

## Table 2 :
2Random effect and model comparison of individual-and community-level factors associated with barriers to access health care services in Ethiopia PSU = Primary Sampling Unit; ICC = Intra-Cluster Correlation; LR Test = Likelihood Ratio Test; AIC = Akaike's Information CriterionRandom effect result 
Model 0 
Model I 
Model II 
Model III 

PSU variance (95% CI) 
2.24 (1.82-2.74) 
1.14 (0.89-1.47) 
0.89 (0.70-1.14) 
0.92 (0.71-1.19) 

ICC 
0.43 
0.26 
0.20 
0.19 

LR Test 
1905.46 
711.45 
501.08 
422.92 

Wald chi-square and p-value 
reference 
423.99 
471.31 
720.62 

Model fitness 

Log-likelihood 
-4941.0641 
-4623.6947 
-4759.642 
-4555.8912 

AIC 
9886.128 
9341.389 
9553.284 
9235.782 

PSU 
643 
643 
643 
643 

N 
9,824 
9,824 
9,824 
9,824 

Orthodox women. The likelihood of facing barriers 
in accessing health care services among women who 
refused compared to those who accepted wife-
beating was lower (aOR=0.66, 95% CI: 0.55-0.81). 



## Table 3 :
3Multilevel multivariate logistic regression of the individual-and community-level factors associated with barrier in access to health care services among married women in Ethiopia (fixed effects)(Contd...) 


## Table 3 :
3(Continued) 




Model I: model included individual-level factors; Model II: model included community-level factors; Model III (complete model): model included both individual-and communitylevel factorsVariables 
Model I 
Model II 
Model III 

Addis Ababa 
1.16 (0.77-1.75) 
0.89 (0.30-2.60) 

Dire Dawa 
3.54 (2.07-6.08)*** 
2.30 (0.72-7.30) 

Community literacy level 

Low (Reference) 

Medium 
0.57 (0.41-0.80)** 
0.64 (0.45-0.92)* 

High 
0.34 (0.21-0.53)*** 
0.56 (0.34-0.92)* 

Community socioeconomic level 

Low (Reference) 

Moderate 
0.46 (0.34-0.62)*** 
0.62 (0.45-0.85)** 

High 
0.37 (0.24-0.58)*** 
0.70 (0.42-1.17) 



## Table 3 :
3(Continued)   


Conflicts ofInterest: The authors declare no competing interests. Financial Disclosure: Nothing to declare. Funding/Support: There was no funding for this study. Ethics Approval: This study used publicly available secondary data from the DHS Program which ensures standards are followed for the protection of respondents' privacy and confidentiality. Details regarding ethical considerations and the protection and privacy of DHS survey respondents are available at: http://goo.gl/ny8T6X. In summary, the International City Fund Institutional Review Board reviews and approves procedures and questionnaires used in DHS. It must also comply with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services regulations for the protection of human subjections while also requiring in host country IRB approvals. Acknowledgments: The authors thank the MEASURE DHS project for their support and for free access to the original data. Disclaimer: None.
. Harvard Medical School. Preventable deaths from lack of high-quality medical care cost trillions. ScienceDaily. Published online 2018. Accessed June 18, 2021. https:// www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/06/180604160447. htm 5. Clausen LB. Taking on the challenges of health care in Africa. Stanford Graduate School of Business. Graduate School of

Allegheny County Health Department. Health Equity Brief -Access to Health Care in Allegheny County. Allegheny County Health Department. PublishedAllegheny County Health Department. Health Equity Brief -Access to Health Care in Allegheny County. Allegheny County Health Department. Published May 2018.

Is healthcare a human right? yes. Accessed, 10.1016/j.amjms.2017.10.001Schraufnagel AM, Schraufnagel WE, Schraufnagel DE. 354Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www.alleghenycounty. us/uploadedFiles/Allegheny_Home/Health_Department/ Resources/Data_and_Reporting/Chronic_Disease_ Epidemiology/HEB-ACCESS.pdf 2. Schraufnagel AM, Schraufnagel WE, Schraufnagel DE. Is healthcare a human right? yes. Am J Med Sci. 2017;354(5):447-448. doi:10.1016/j.amjms.2017.10.001

Delivering health care to the global poor: solving the accessibility problem. M J Epstein, E G Bing, 10.1162/INOV_a_00073Innov Technol Gov Glob. 62Epstein MJ, Bing EG. Delivering health care to the global poor: solving the accessibility problem. Innov Technol Gov Glob. 2011;6(2):117-141. doi:10.1162/INOV_a_00073

. Stanford Business, PublishedStanford Business. Published June 16, 2015. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/taking- challenges-health-care-africa

Determinants of women access to healthcare services in sub-saharan Africa. A Dominic, A Ogundipe, O Ogundipe, 10.2174/1874944501912010504Open Public Health J. 121Dominic A, Ogundipe A, Ogundipe O. Determinants of women access to healthcare services in sub-saharan Africa [Abstract]. Open Public Health J. 2019;12(1). doi:10.2174/1874944501912010504

Breaking barriers to healthcare access: a multilevel analysis of individual-and community-level factors affecting women's access to healthcare services in Benin. B Zegeye, Z El-Khatib, E K Ameyaw, 10.3390/ijerph18020750Int J Environ Res Public Health. 182Zegeye B, El-Khatib Z, Ameyaw EK, et al. Breaking barriers to healthcare access: a multilevel analysis of individual-and community-level factors affecting women's access to healthcare services in Benin. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18(2). doi:10.3390/ijerph18020750

Ethiopia's health extension program: improving health through community involvement. H Banteyerga, MEDICC Rev. 133Banteyerga H. Ethiopia's health extension program: improving health through community involvement. MEDICC Rev. 2011;13(3):46-49. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www.medigraphic.com/cgi-bin/new/resumenI. cgi?IDARTICULO=63007

Availability and inequality in accessibility of health centre-based primary healthcare in Ethiopia. A Woldemichael, A Takian, A A Sari, A Olyaeemanesh, 10.1371/journal.pone.0213896PLoS One. 143213896Woldemichael A, Takian A, Sari AA, Olyaeemanesh A. Availability and inequality in accessibility of health centre-based primary healthcare in Ethiopia. PLoS One. 2019;14(3):e0213896. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0213896

Empowerment and barriers to health care access among currently married women: secondary data analysis of the 2015-16 Myanmar demographic and health survey. DHS Program. Nmm Htun, Z L Hnin, W Khaing, B L Solanke, O A Oladosu, A Akinlo, S O Olanisebe, 10.11564/29-2-761Afr Popul Stud. 292Religion as a social determinant of maternal health care service utilisation in NigeriaHtun NMM, Hnin ZL, Khaing W. Empowerment and barriers to health care access among currently married women: secondary data analysis of the 2015- 16 Myanmar demographic and health survey. DHS Program. Published June 2019. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication- wp146-working-papers.cfm 11. Solanke BL, Oladosu OA, Akinlo A, Olanisebe SO. Religion as a social determinant of maternal health care service utilisation in Nigeria. Afr Popul Stud. 2015;29(2). doi:10.11564/29-2-761

What are the economic consequences for households of illness and of paying for health care in low-and middle-income country contexts?. D Mcintyre, M Thiede, G Dahlgren, M Whitehead, 10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.07.001Soc Sci Med. 624McIntyre D, Thiede M, Dahlgren G, Whitehead M. What are the economic consequences for households of illness and of paying for health care in low-and middle-income country contexts? Soc Sci Med. 2006;62(4):858-865. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.07.001

Barriers and facilitating factors in access to health services in Greece. World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. C Economou, 174Economou C. Barriers and facilitating factors in access to health services in Greece. World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2015:174. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/ pdf_file/0006/287997/Barriers-and-facilitating-factors-in- access-to-health-services-in-Greece-rev1.pdf 14.

Causes and consequences of regional variations in health care. J Skinner, 10.1016/B978-0-444-53592-4.00002-5Health Economics. Pauly MV, Mcguire TG, Barros PP2ElsevierSkinner J. Causes and consequences of regional variations in health care. In: Pauly MV, Mcguire TG, Barros PP, eds. Handbook of Health Economics. Vol 2. Elsevier; 2011:45-93. doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-53592-4.00002-5

Physician Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care Spending. D Cutler, J Skinner, A D Stern, D Wennberg, 10.3386/w19320National Bureau of Economic Research. Cutler D, Skinner J, Stern AD, Wennberg D. Physician Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care Spending. National Bureau of Economic Research; 2013. doi:10.3386/w19320

Cultural barriers to seeking care in Ethiopia: A review of the literature. A T Reta, A Reta, Ann Glob Health. 811Reta AT, Reta A. Cultural barriers to seeking care in Ethiopia: A review of the literature. Ann Glob Health. 2015;81(1). Accessed June 18, 2021. https://cyberleninka. org/article/n/535661

Barriers in physical access to maternal health services in rural Ethiopia. Y B Okwaraji, E L Webb, K M Edmond, 10.1186/s12913-015-1161-0BMC Health Serv Res. 151493Okwaraji YB, Webb EL, Edmond KM. Barriers in physical access to maternal health services in rural Ethiopia. BMC Health Serv Res. 2015;15(1):493. doi:10.1186/s12913-015- 1161-0

Central Statistical Agency (CSA) [Ethiopia] and ICF. Central Statistical Agency (CSA) [Ethiopia] and ICF. 2016

Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey Key Findings. CSA and ICF. 551Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey Key Findings. CSA and ICF; 2016:551.

Analyzing barriers to accessing health care services in Holeta town, Ethiopia. Prim Health Care Open Access. K Birmeta, B R Sim, D Kim, S Dhakal, Y A Do, E W Nam, 10.4172/2167-1079.10002045Birmeta K, Sim BR, Kim D, Dhakal S, Do YA, Nam EW. Analyzing barriers to accessing health care services in Holeta town, Ethiopia. Prim Health Care Open Access. 2015;05(02). doi:10.4172/2167-1079.1000204

Utilization of maternal health-care services in Peru: the role of women's education. I T Elo, Health Transit Rev. 21Elo IT. Utilization of maternal health-care services in Peru: the role of women's education. Health Transit Rev. 1992;2(1):49-69.

Women's autonomy in health care decision-making in developing countries: a synthesis of the literature. P E Osamor, C Grady, doi:10.2147/ IJWH.S105483Int J Womens Health. 8Osamor PE, Grady C. Women's autonomy in health care decision-making in developing countries: a synthesis of the literature. Int J Womens Health. 2016;8:191-202. doi:10.2147/ IJWH.S105483

Inequities in utilization of reproductive and maternal health services in Ethiopia. F T Bobo, E A Yesuf, M Woldie, 10.1186/s12939-017-0602-2Int J Equity Health. 16Bobo FT, Yesuf EA, Woldie M. Inequities in utilization of reproductive and maternal health services in Ethiopia. Int J Equity Health. 2017;16. doi:10.1186/s12939-017-0602-2

Determinants of the use of maternal health services in rural Bangladesh. N Chakraborty, M A Islam, R I Chowdhury, W Bari, H H Akhter, 10.1093/heapro/dag414Health Promot Int. 184Chakraborty N, Islam MA, Chowdhury RI, Bari W, Akhter HH. Determinants of the use of maternal health services in rural Bangladesh. Health Promot Int. 2003;18(4):327-337. doi:10.1093/heapro/dag414

The impact of type of employment on women's use of prenatal-care services and family planning in urban Cebu, the Philippines. R Miles-Doan, K L Brewster, Stud Fam Plann. 291Miles-Doan R, Brewster KL. The impact of type of employment on women's use of prenatal-care services and family planning in urban Cebu, the Philippines. Stud Fam Plann. 1998;29(1):69-78.

The role of faith leaders in influencing health behaviour: a qualitative exploration on the views of Black African Christians in Leeds. H Zelelew, doi:10.11604/ pamj.2018.30.199.15656Health care financing reform in Ethiopia: improving quality and equity. USAID; 2012:12. Accessed. Heward-Mills NL, Atuhaire C, Spoors C, Pemunta NV, Priebe G, Cumber SN; United Kingdom30199World Health Organization (WHO). Primary Health Care Systems (PRIMASYS): Case Study from Ethiopia. WHO; 2017:36Zelelew H. Health care financing reform in Ethiopia: improving quality and equity. USAID; 2012:12. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www.hfgproject.org/wp-content/ uploads/2015/02/Ethiopia_Health_Care_Reform_ Brief1.pdf 26. World Health Organization (WHO). Primary Health Care Systems (PRIMASYS): Case Study from Ethiopia. WHO; 2017:36. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www-who-int. proxy.bib.uottawa.ca/alliance-hpsr/projects/alliancehpsr_ ethiopiaprimasys.pdf 27. Heward-Mills NL, Atuhaire C, Spoors C, Pemunta NV, Priebe G, Cumber SN. The role of faith leaders in influencing health behaviour: a qualitative exploration on the views of Black African Christians in Leeds, United Kingdom. Pan Afr Med J. 2018;30:199. doi:10.11604/ pamj.2018.30.199.15656

Women's attitude towards wifebeating and its relationship with reproductive healthcare seeking behavior: A countrywide population survey in Bangladesh. M N Khan, M M Islam, doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0198833PLoS One. 136198833Khan MN, Islam MM. Women's attitude towards wife- beating and its relationship with reproductive healthcare seeking behavior: A countrywide population survey in Bangladesh. PLoS One. 2018;13(6):e0198833. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0198833

Maternal behavior and experience, care access, and agency as determinants of child diarrhea in Bolivia. B Caruso, R Stephenson, J S Leon, Rev Panam Salud Publica Pan Am J Public Health. 286Caruso B, Stephenson R, Leon JS. Maternal behavior and experience, care access, and agency as determinants of child diarrhea in Bolivia. Rev Panam Salud Publica Pan Am J Public Health. 2010;28(6):429-439. Accessed June 18, 2021. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3142664

Measuring the Effects of Education on Health and Civic Engagement. L Feinstein, R Sabates, T M Anderson, A Sorhaindo, Cathie Hammond, Proceedings of the Copenhagen Symposium. Desjardins R, Schuller TOECDWhat are the effects of education on healthFeinstein L, Sabates R, Anderson TM, Sorhaindo A, Cathie Hammond. What are the effects of education on health. In: Desjardins R, Schuller T, eds. Measuring the Effects of Education on Health and Civic Engagement. Proceedings of the Copenhagen Symposium. OECD; 2006:171-310.