# Carotid Endarterectomy Requiring Removal of the Superior Horn of Thyroid Cartilage: Case Report and Literature Review

CorpusID: 240558449
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e559c66177fe5d2016da25a985d1364e182c019b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e559c66177fe5d2016da25a985d1364e182c019b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Carotid Endarterectomy Requiring Removal of the Superior Horn of Thyroid Cartilage: Case Report and Literature Review


Takayuki Ishikawa 
Department of Neurosurgery
Ichinomiya Municipal Hospital
IchinomiyaAichiJapan

Kazuho Moribe 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology
Ichinomiya Municipal Hospital
IchinomiyaAichiJapan

Keishi Ito 
Department of Neurosurgery
Ichinomiya Municipal Hospital
IchinomiyaAichiJapan

Ryusuke Kabeya 
Department of Neurosurgery
Ichinomiya Municipal Hospital
IchinomiyaAichiJapan

Carotid Endarterectomy Requiring Removal of the Superior Horn of Thyroid Cartilage: Case Report and Literature Review
10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2020-0364595 Case RepoRtcarotid endarterectomysuperior horn of thyroid cartilagesuperior thyroid cornu syndromehyoid-larynx complex
Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is an established surgical procedure for carotid stenosis. We present the case of a 74-year-old man who underwent CEA for symptomatic internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis. During the operation, we found that the hyoid bone (HB) and the superior horn of the thyroid cartilage covered the carotid sheath, preventing adequate visualization. Since this was anticipated based on preoperative examinations, the superior horn of thyroid cartilage was removed with the help of an otorhinolaryngologist. The HB was preserved because it could be retracted, and thereafter we performed CEA. Although CEA is a common procedure, the HB and thyroid cartilage are rarely involved in the operation. We present a case report including literature review of acute cerebrovascular syndrome (ACVS) due to HB and thyroid cartilage obstruction.

## Introduction

The carotid artery typically runs lateral to the hyoid bone (HB) and thyroid cartilage, and in carotid endarterectomy (CEA), these structures generally do not obstruct the procedure. A few reports have shown resection of the HB during CEA 1) but there are no reports about resection of the superior horn of thyroid cartilage (SHTC) during CEA. In this study, we report a case of CEA requiring resection of the SHTC. The patient provided consent for this case report, and it was exempted from institutional review board approval at our institution.


## Case Presentation

A 74-year-old male who had a previous history of right cerebral cortical infarction was under treatment by neurologists. MRA performed about 3 months prior showed the right carotid artery had severe stenosis, for which we were consulted about surgical treatment. Three-dimensional CTA (3D-CTA) ( Fig. 1) detected highly calcified bilateral carotid arteries, and the right side was especially severe. We found that it would be difficult to perform CEA, because the right internal carotid artery (ICA) was positioned abnormally medial to the external carotid artery (ECA) around a bifurcation. This anomaly is called as lateral ECA, lateral position of ECA, or twisted carotid bifurcation. 2) Furthermore, the right carotid artery extended medial to the right greater horn of HB and the SHTC. Carotid artery stenting (CAS) was also considered, but the calcification was so severe in the entire circumference that CAS would be extremely difficult. We consulted an otorhinolaryngologist and decided to perform CEA with resection of the HB and SHTC.

After skin and platysma incision and retraction of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the greater horn of HB and SHTC was detected easily (Fig. 2). 3D-CTA revealed that these two structures covered the carotid NMC Case Report Journal Vol. 8,2021 artery, but there was no compression or adherence between these bony structures and the carotid artery that would compromise the operation. After dissecting membrane tissue on the inferior side of the greater horn of HB, we identified the lateral thyrohyoid ligament and cut it. Then, we were able to retract the HB medially with light force, but the SHTC could not be retracted. We continued dissection of connective tissue around the SHTC, being careful not to injure the superior laryngeal nerve and artery. These are often positioned between the HB and thyroid cartilage. After exposing where the SHTC covered the carotid artery and obstructed the surgical corridor, we removed about 1.5 cm of the SHTC. We did not cut in the body of thyroid cartilage. Following these procedures, we performed CEA. Because we did not feel difficulty in exposing distal ICA and STA ran laterally, we finished CEA without normalizing the positions of ICA and ECA. After the operation, the patient experienced slight dysphagia and pharyngeal discomfort, but he recovered without additional treatment after 1 week. Postoperative 3D-CTA showed ICA running normalized naturally after surgery (Fig. 1D). He was discharged 8 days after the surgery.


## Discussion

CEA is an established treatment for carotid stenosis. Typically, the HB and SHTC do not obstruct the corridor, because these structures are positioned medial to the carotid sheath. In this case, the greater horn of the HB and SHTC was positioned in front of the carotid sheath. There have been no reports about CEA requiring removal of SHTC obstructing surgical corridor. In a similar situation, O'Connor et al. reported anterior cervical discectomy and fusion requiring SHTC resection. 3) The hyoid-larynx complex has many anatomical variations, and the frequency of permutation has been reported to be relatively high, 4%-30%. 4) The greater horn of HB and SHTC develops from the third and fourth branchial arches, respectively. Morphological abnormalities often occur in both. These anomalies do not always obstruct the surgical corridor, but surgeons operating in the cervical region should be aware of this possibility. Furthermore, care should be taken when creating a 3D-CTA reconstructed image, because cartilage with low intensity visualized using CT can be excluded automatically by the software. NMC Case Report Journal Vol. 8,2021 Hyoid larynx complex anomalies sometimes cause Eagle's syndrome (styloid process), hyoid syndrome 5,6) (HB), and superior thyroid cornu syndrome 7,8) (SHTC). The latter two syndromes occur infrequently, and acute cerebrovascular syndrome (ACVS) due to HB or thyroid cartilage misplacement is extremely rare and relatively unknown to clinicians. Two cases of ACVS resulting from misplacement of SHTC have been reported previously. In the first case, the patient suffered from symptomatic carotid stenosis caused by repetitive mechanical stimulation by the thyroid cartilage and received antiplatelet therapy only. 9) In the other case, the patient suffered from symptomatic severe stenosis of the vertebral artery caused by abnormal positioning of the SHTC, and the SHTC was removed in an operation. 10) We found that 17 ACVS cases due to HB obstruction have been reported previously. Among these reports, we summarized cases in which we identified the running course of the ICA (medial or lateral to ECA) and the positional relationship between HB and ICA 1,[11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22] (Table 1). Among 14 cases, seven cases had twisted carotid bifurcations, and in all the cases the greater horn of HB was located lateral to the ICA. On the contrary, in the cases of ICA running laterally (normal bifurcation), all the greater horn of HB was positioned medial to ICA normally. From this result it seems that this lateral positioning of HB is related to twisted carotid bifurcation, but the cause is unknown. In addition, some of these positional anomalies have been reported to be reversible changes. Some studies have reported that abnormal ICA position became normal (including its relationship with ECA 1,15) or HB 11) ), or conversely, a normal positioning became abnormal 22) naturally during follow-up period. There are other reports in which authors detected these changes by ultrasonography and then established a relationship between ICA and HB affecting swallowing 23) or neck rotation. 24) From these reports, there seem to be cases in which the structures of the HB and carotid bifurcation are more flexible than expected, and cerebral infarction due to mechanical stimulation by the hyoid-larynx complex may potentially be more common. In the present case, we did not detect an indentation of carotid artery by the greater horn of HB or the SHTC  in preoperative study nor in the operation. However, we experienced that twisted carotid bifurcation naturally became normal bifurcation. Repetitive mechanical stimulation following neck rotation could be one of the causes of carotid stenosis. Finally, we discuss the risk of removing HB or SHTC. Considering anatomy, the greater horn of HB and SHTC has attached muscle groups that act during swallowing, and therefore massive resection of these structures may cause dysphagia. Close attention must be focused on the superior thyroid artery and vein, as damage of these structures can lead to immediate or late onset hematoma, 25) and superior laryngeal nerve injury can cause weakness, tightness, and increased effort to speak. 26) In the present case, the patient suffered transient swallowing discomfort after resection of the cartilage. There was no vocal cord paralysis, so we think there was no nerve injury or muscle injury but rather focal swelling around the manipulation site. The six cases in Table 1 received resection of HB and one of them had transient dysphagia. 14) We also included reports from otorhinolaryngology in our investigation, and no other reports showed post operative deficit after removal of the greater horn of HB and SHTC. Hence, we think the greater horn of HB and SHTC can be removed relatively safely.


## Conclusion

We performed the removal of the SHTC during CEA. Clinicians should be aware that hyoid-larynx complex anomalies occur at a relatively high rate, and they may obstruct the surgical corridor and cause several symptoms including ACVS.

## Fig. 1
13D-CT angiography. (A) Preoperative non-enhanced CT: Right ICA was highly calcified (red circle). Hyoid bone (HB) (purple circle) was positioned lateral to ICA. (B) Preoperative 3D-CTA MIP image: ICA ran medial to ECA. HB (purple circle) and superior horn of thyroid cartilage (SHTC) (green circle) positioned lateral to carotid arteries. (C) Preoperative 3D-CTA reconstruction image: ICA (arrow) ran medial to ECA (arrowhead). HB and SHTC covered carotid artery. The length of SHTC was 2.4 cm. (D) Postoperative 3D-CTA reconstruction image: ICA and HB both return to their natural position. SHTC was partially removed and its length was 0.86 cm. ECA: external carotid artery, ICA: internal carotid artery.

## Fig. 2
2Intraoperative view. (A) The view after retracting sternocleidomastoid muscle posteriorly. The blue dotted line shows the line of greater horn of hyoid bone (HB), and the green dotted line shows the superior horn of thyroid cartilage (SHTC). (B) The view after retracting HB and removal SHTC and dissecting connective tissue around carotid sheath. ECA: external carotid artery, ICA: internal carotid artery. (C) Superimposition of the views in (A) and (B). While the images in (A) and (B) were photographed, the camera was not moved, and zoom or focus operations were not performed. HB and thyroid cartilage covered the carotid sheath as preoperative 3D-CTA showed.NMC Case Report Journal Vol.8, 2021    

## Table 1
1Summary of ACVS caused by HB CA: carotid artery, CCA: common carotid artery, CEA: carotid endarterectomy, CI: cerebral infarction, ECA: external carotid artery, F: female, HB: hyoid bone, ICA: internal carotid artery, Lt: left, M: male, N.A.: data were not available, Rt: right, TCB: twisted carotid bifurcation, TIA: transient ischemic attack.Case 
Author, 
references 
Age/sex 
Form of onset 

TCB or 
normal 
at onset 

Side 

HB 
position 
relative to 
ICA 

Natural 
repositioning 
(ICA-ECA/ 
CA-HB) 

Resection of 
HB 

Surgical 
manipulation 
to CA 

Operative 
complication 

1 
Kawahara 
et al. 11) 

79/F 
CI 
TCB 
Rt 
Lateral 
−/+ 
− 
CEA 
-

2 
Kawahara 
et al. 11) 

65/M 
TIA 
TCB 
Rt 
Lateral 
−/+ 
− 
CEA 
-

3 
Liu et al. 12) 
81/M 
CI 
TCB 
Rt 
Lateral 
N.A/-
− 
CEA patch 
-

4 
Martinelli 
et al. 13) 

68/F 
TIA 
TCB 
Rt 
Lateral 
N.A./-
− 
CEA 
-

5 
Kölbel 
et al. 14) 

61/F 
CI 
TCB 
Rt 
Lateral 
N.A./-
+ 
-
Dysphagia 
(3 months) 

6 
Tokunaga 
et al. 1) 

46/F 
CI 
TCB 
Rt 
Lateral 
+/− 
+ 
CEA 
-

7 
Kho et al. 15) 
29/F 
CI 
TCB 
Lt 
Lateral 
+/N.A. 
+ 
-
-

8 
Schneider 
and 
Kortmann 16) 

47/M 
Pseudoaneurysm Normal 
Lt 
Medial 
N.A/N.A. 
+ 
Lesion resection 
+ end to end 
anastomosis of CCA 

-

9 
Hong 
et al. 17) 

56/M 
CI 
Normal 
Rt 
Medial 
−/− 
+ 
-
-

10 
Campos 
et al. 18) 

29/M 
CI 
Normal 
Rt 
Medial 
N.A/N.A. 
+ 
Lesion resection + 
ECA-ICA bypass 

-

11 
Mori et al. 19) 
61/M 
CI 
Normal 
Lt 
Medial 
N.A/N.A. 
− (technical 
difficulty) 

Adhesionectomy + 
patch 

-

12 
Yukawa 
et al. 20) 

36/M 
CI/dissection 
Normal 
Rt 
Medial 
N.A/N.A. 
Medication 
Medication 

13 
Renard and 
Freitag 21) 

83/M 
CI 
Normal 
Lt 
Medial 
N.A/N.A. 
Medication 
Medication 

14 
Renard 
et al. 22) 

30/M 
CI/ICA dissection Normal 
Rt 
Medial 
+/+ 
Observation 
Observation 


Conflicts of Interest DisclosureThe authors do not have any disclosures or conflicts of interest to declare.
Repetitive artery-to-artery embolism caused by dynamic movement of the internal carotid artery and mechanical stimulation by the hyoid bone. K Tokunaga, T Uehara, H Kanamaru, Circulation. 132Tokunaga K, Uehara T, Kanamaru H, et al.: Repetitive artery-to-artery embolism caused by dynamic move- ment of the internal carotid artery and mechanical stimulation by the hyoid bone. Circulation 132: 217-219, 2015

Diagnosis and operative management of carotid endarterectomy in patients with twisted carotid bifurcation. M Uno, K Yagi, H Takai, Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 60Uno M, Yagi K, Takai H, et al.: Diagnosis and operative management of carotid endarterectomy in patients with twisted carotid bifurcation. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 60: 383-389, 2020

Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion requiring resection of the superior horn of thyroid cartilage: case report. K P O&apos;connor, A D Smitherman, A H Palejwala, G A Kremple, M D Martin, J Neurosug Spine. 32O'Connor KP, Smitherman AD, Palejwala AH, Kremple GA, Martin MD: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion requiring resection of the superior horn of thyroid cartilage: case report. J Neurosug Spine 32: 559-561, 2020

Variants of the hyoid-larynx complex, with implications for forensic science and consequence for the diagnosis of Eagle's syndrome. B S De Bakker, H M De Bakker, V Soerdjbalie-Maikoe, F G Dikkers, Sci Rep. 915950de Bakker BS, de Bakker HM, Soerdjbalie-Maikoe V, Dikkers FG: Variants of the hyoid-larynx complex, with implications for forensic science and conse- quence for the diagnosis of Eagle's syndrome. Sci Rep 9: 15950, 2019

Hyoid bone syndrome; a case report. N Katsumi, H Iwatake, H Tomisawa, I Koizuka, I Kato, Pract Oto-Rhino-Laryngol. 932020JapaneseKatsumi N, Iwatake H, Tomisawa H, Koizuka I, Kato I: Hyoid bone syndrome; a case report. Pract Oto-Rhino-Laryngol 93: 223-228, 2020 (Japanese)

Hyoid bone syndrome; a case report. F Satomi, Y Nishimura, H Mori, T Kumoi, Pract Oto-Rhino-Laryngol. 84JapaneseSatomi F, Nishimura Y, Mori H, Kumoi T: Hyoid bone syndrome; a case report. Pract Oto-Rhino- Laryngol 84: 359-362, 1991 (Japanese)

Superior thyroid cornu syndrome: an unusual cause of cervical dysphagia. M Mortensen, C M Ivey, M Iida, P Woo, Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 118Mortensen M, Ivey CM, Iida M, Woo P: Superior thyroid cornu syndrome: an unusual cause of cervical dysphagia. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 118: 833-838, 2009

Extended superior cornu of thyroid cartilage causing dysphagia and throat pain. P Wojtowicz, T Szafarowski, W Kukwa, E Migacz, A Krzeski, J Med Cases. 6Wojtowicz P, Szafarowski T, Kukwa W, Migacz E, Krzeski A: Extended superior cornu of thyroid cartilage causing dysphagia and throat pain. J Med Cases 6: 134-136, 2015

A rare case of symptomatic carotid stenosis caused by mechanical stimulation by thyroid cartilage and frequent swimming. N Kumagai, Y Enomoto, M Miyai, Y Egashira, N Nakayama, T Iwama, J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 28Kumagai N, Enomoto Y, Miyai M, Egashira Y, Nakayama N, Iwama T: A rare case of symptomatic carotid stenosis caused by mechanical stimulation by thyroid cartilage and frequent swimming. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 28: 699-701, 2019

Thyroid cartilage compression causing stroke. W E Karle, M C Buniel, H L Lutsep, B E Hamilton, G M Nesbit, J S Schindler, Laryngoscope. 129Karle WE, Buniel MC, Lutsep HL, Hamilton BE, Nesbit GM, Schindler JS: Thyroid cartilage compres- sion causing stroke. Laryngoscope 129: E445-E448, 2019

Internal carotid artery stenosis associated with hyoid bone: can hyoid bone be a risk factor for acute cerebrovascular syndrome?. I Kawahara, K Ozono, T Fujimoto, M Hirose, No Shinkei Geka. 44JapaneseKawahara I, Ozono K, Fujimoto T, Hirose M: Internal carotid artery stenosis associated with hyoid bone: can hyoid bone be a risk factor for acute cerebrovas- cular syndrome? No Shinkei Geka 44: 835-841, 2016 (Japanese)

Hyoid bone impingement contributing to symptomatic atherosclerosis of the carotid bifurcation. S Liu, N Nezami, A Dardik, N Nassiri, J Vasc Surg Cases Innov Tech. 6Liu S, Nezami N, Dardik A, Nassiri N: Hyoid bone impingement contributing to symptomatic athero- sclerosis of the carotid bifurcation. J Vasc Surg Cases Innov Tech 6: 89-92, 2020

Internal carotid stenosis associated with compression by hyoid bone. O Martinelli, M Fresilli, J Jabbour, Di Girolamo, A Irace, L , Ann Vasc Surg. 58Martinelli O, Fresilli M, Jabbour J, Di Girolamo A, Irace L: Internal carotid stenosis associated with compression by hyoid bone. Ann Vasc Surg 58: 379. e1-379.e3, 2019

Carotid artery entrapment by the hyoid bone. T Kölbel, J Holst, M Lindh, T Mätzsch, J Vasc Surg. 48Kölbel T, Holst J, Lindh M, Mätzsch T: Carotid artery entrapment by the hyoid bone. J Vasc Surg 48: 1022- 1024, 2008

Cerebral embolism and carotid-hyoid impingement syndrome. L K Kho, T R Bates, A Thompson, F Dharsono, D Prentice, J Clin Neurosci. 64Kho LK, Bates TR, Thompson A, Dharsono F, Prentice D: Cerebral embolism and carotid-hyoid impinge- ment syndrome. J Clin Neurosci 64: 27-29, 2019

Pseudoaneurysm of the common carotid artery due to ongoing trauma from the hyoid bone. C G Schneider, H Kortmann, J Vasc Surg. 45Schneider CG, Kortmann H: Pseudoaneurysm of the common carotid artery due to ongoing trauma from the hyoid bone. J Vasc Surg 45: 186-187, 2007

Repetitive internal carotid artery compression of the hyoid: a new mechanism of golfer's stroke?. J M Hong, T J Kim, J S Lee, J S Lee, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 82Hong JM, Kim TJ, Lee JS, Lee JS: Repetitive internal carotid artery compression of the hyoid: a new mech- anism of golfer's stroke? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychia- try 82: 233-234, 2011

Traumatic injury to the internal carotid artery by the hyoid bone: a rare cause of ischemic stroke. Fpf De Campos, M Y Kanegae, V D Aiello, Pjds Neto, T C Gratão, E S Silva, Autops Case Rep. 82018010de Campos FPF, Kanegae MY, Aiello VD, Neto PJDS, Gratão TC, Silva ES: Traumatic injury to the internal carotid artery by the hyoid bone: a rare cause of isch- emic stroke. Autops Case Rep 8: e2018010, 2018

. NMC Case Report Journal. 82021NMC Case Report Journal Vol. 8, 2021

Hyoid bone compression-induced repetitive occlusion and recanalization of the internal carotid artery in a patient with ipsilateral brain and retinal ischemia. M Mori, H Yamamoto, M Koga, Arch Neurol. 68Mori M, Yamamoto H, Koga M, et al.: Hyoid bone compression-induced repetitive occlusion and reca- nalization of the internal carotid artery in a patient with ipsilateral brain and retinal ischemia. Arch Neu- rol 68: 258-259, 2011

Carotid artery dissection associated with an elongated hyoid bone. S Yukawa, S Yamamoto, H Hara, J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 23Yukawa S, Yamamoto S, Hara H: Carotid artery dis- section associated with an elongated hyoid bone. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 23: e411-e412, 2014

Hyoid-related internal carotid artery dissection. D Renard, C Freitag, J Neurol. 259Renard D, Freitag C: Hyoid-related internal carotid ar- tery dissection. J Neurol 259: 2501-2502, 2012

Hyoid bone-related focal carotid vasculopathy. D Renard, M Rougier, I Aichoun, P Labauge, J Neurol. 258Renard D, Rougier M, Aichoun I, Labauge P: Hyoid bone-related focal carotid vasculopathy. J Neurol 258: 1540-1541, 2011

Embolic stroke due to carotidynia potentially associated with moving carotid artery caused by swallowing. Y Yamaguchi, M Hayakawa, N Kinoshita, C Yokota, T Ishihara, K Toyoda, J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 27Yamaguchi Y, Hayakawa M, Kinoshita N, Yokota C, Ishihara T, Toyoda K: Embolic stroke due to carotidy- nia potentially associated with moving carotid artery caused by swallowing. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 27: e54-e57, 2018

Carotid artery entrapment by the hyoid bone-a rare cause of recurrent strokes in a young patient. A Plotkin, M G Bartley, K E Bowser, J A Yi, G A Magee, Ann Vasc Surg. 57Plotkin A, Bartley MG, Bowser KE, Yi JA, Magee GA: Carotid artery entrapment by the hyoid bone-a rare cause of recurrent strokes in a young patient. Ann Vasc Surg 57: 48.e7-48.e11, 2019

Anatomical considerations of the superior thyroid artery: its origins, variations, and position relative to the hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage. S Y Won, Anat Cell Biol. 49Won SY: Anatomical considerations of the superior thyroid artery: its origins, variations, and position relative to the hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage. Anat Cell Biol 49: 138-142, 2016

Injury of the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve in thyroid surgery. A S Potenza, Vjfa Filho, C R Cernea, Gland Surg. 6Potenza AS, Filho VJFA, Cernea CR: Injury of the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve in thyroid surgery. Gland Surg 6: 552-562, 2017