# Smart Lockers Smart Lockers for Personal Storage Smart Lockers for Parcel Management Smart Lockers for Inventory Management / Smart Asset Management Lockers Smart Lockers for Retail Service Advantage Overview 3 Smart Lockers for Personal Storage 5 Smart Lockers for Parcel Management 8 Smart Lockers for Inventory Management / Smart Asset Management Lockers 11 Smart Lockers for Retail 14

CorpusID: 242935479
 
tags: #Engineering, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dacd8404a4106afadfd259bdd2403e29dbebcfd4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dacd8404a4106afadfd259bdd2403e29dbebcfd4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Smart Lockers Smart Lockers for Personal Storage Smart Lockers for Parcel Management Smart Lockers for Inventory Management / Smart Asset Management Lockers Smart Lockers for Retail Service Advantage Overview 3 Smart Lockers for Personal Storage 5 Smart Lockers for Parcel Management 8 Smart Lockers for Inventory Management / Smart Asset Management Lockers 11 Smart Lockers for Retail 14


Smart Lockers Smart Lockers for Personal Storage Smart Lockers for Parcel Management Smart Lockers for Inventory Management / Smart Asset Management Lockers Smart Lockers for Retail Service Advantage Overview 3 Smart Lockers for Personal Storage 5 Smart Lockers for Parcel Management 8 Smart Lockers for Inventory Management / Smart Asset Management Lockers 11 Smart Lockers for Retail 14
Contents


## What is a Smart Locker?

Smart Lockers are an innovative combination of flexible workspace storage and the latest connected technology. They provide advanced storage solutions that offer 24/7 manageable access, end-to-end tracking of usage, new more efficient business processes, automation and full management reporting capabilities.

They have a variety of applications across your business to provide powerful and dynamic storage solutions, which do not compromise on security. With in-built software they automate time-consuming activities and introduce new efficient processes. Smart Lockers will transform the way you manage many aspects of your workplace, from managing incoming mail and parcels to controlling an inventory of valuable devices or equipment.

Smart Lockers also improve accountability, governance and enable connectivity with other smart devices for more flexibility and ease of use by users and facilities management. Much more than just a locker, our Smart Lockers give your business:

• Improved flexibility and usage • Greater security and governance • New processes and efficiency • End-to-end user visibility and management • 24hr access with different security options • Reporting and accountability tracking Overview Why your business needs to think Smart

As businesses continue to work in new, and more agile ways, the needs of employees change too. A mobile workforce and visitors require an office environment that provides secure day storage space for their personal belongings. Similarly, as flexible working increases, this also impacts on mail and parcel volumes coming into the mailroom, placing further pressure on existing business processes. Dealing with accountable mail and parcels requires a chain of custody, so locating employees who work flexible hours and locations can cause backlogs and inefficiencies. Lastly, time spent handling valuable assets and inventory, such as stationery items, IT equipment or PDA's, can be reduced significantly and usage better monitored to reduce misuse and improve departmental cross-charging.


## What makes a Locker Smart?

The technology that makes our Lockers Smart will revolutionise the way you see storage. Our management software enables endto-end custody of mail, full accountability and visibility of ownership, and governance of your inventory. The keyless digital locking technology means that losing keys is no longer an issue, and Smart Lockers also connect easily with your IT network, existing applications and a multitude of devices.


## Where Smart Lockers can help your business

Ricoh Smart Lockers come with four key applications, to suit your business needs and future-proof your office space. Ricoh provide four key types of locker, which are all customisable to suit your office environment.


## Smart Mail and Parcel Lockers

Smart Mail and Parcel Lockers enable today's mailroom to deal with increasing parcel and secure mail volumes easily, providing a new approach to distribution management. Offering end-to-end accountability, Smart Mail and Parcel Lockers increase convenience for your employees, and save on time and the workload of your mailroom staff. This solution enhances security and simplifies productivity chains.


## Smart Locker for Retail

Click & Collect (or Delivery Orders) are used to pass items through a locker via a one-time delivery code and one-time pickup code. In the IT space the locker may be preloaded with replacement items or kits of items, or the delivery may take place after a specific request for equipment is made. Once the equipment is delivered to the locker and the user is approved to collect that item, the pick-up code is sent to the user (via email, text message or similar) who can enter it or scan it on a barcode reader, which in turn opens the relevant door allowing the collection of the appropriate items.


## Smart Day Lockers

With the introduction of agile working and hot-desking, your workforce require personal, and in some cases, team locker space. Smart Day Lockers offer secure temporary storage, whilst at the same time providing greater control of your property portfolio. With Smart Day Lockers employees are able to reserve a locker in advance via their mobile device, or on-demand via a touch screen console. 24/7 keyless access 100% accountability


## Click & Collect


## Streamline management


## Smart Inventory Lockers

Ricoh Smart Inventory Lockers can help with better governance of your business inventory including IT assets, consumables and stationery. By providing visible, self-service secure storage users can select and access stock easily. Smart security allows for easy tracking, reporting and cost centre billing.


## Smart Asset Management Lockers

Smart Asset Management Lockers give you control of hand held devices, tools and calibrated instruments typically found in a warehouse environment. The cloud based system controlling the locker offers secure check-out and check-in, meaning you always know who has used a device, when it was returned and whether it is broken or damaged. 


## Service Advantage


## Smart Day Lockers

Ricoh Smart Day Lockers bring a unique solution to a common workplace problem. With the introduction of agile working and hot-desking, your workforce is increasingly mobile. Yet employees still require personal, and in some cases, team locker space. Managing this day-to-day, whilst auditing usage, dealing with locker hogging and lost keys all adds to the workload of the facilities team and frustrates the workforce.

Smart Day Lockers offer both secure temporary and permanent storage, providing your staff with a safe space for their personal belongings at the workplace, whilst at the same time providing greater control of your property portfolio.

With Smart Day Lockers employees are able to reserve a locker in advance via their mobile device, or on-demand via a touch screen console.


## Benefits & Features

Ricoh Smart Lockers enable multiple storage locations to be managed from a single online portal. With a keyless entry system using only a keypad or ID pass/card, the lockers track who is using what, and for how long. You see at a glance how much of your estate is being used, and by whom, ensuring that all lockers are fully and correctly utilised.


## Key benefits:

• 


## Built to suit your needs

Whether you're a large enterprise, a manufacturing business, a university, hospital or school, our range of locker configurations will help you optimise your property holdings and increase accountability. Our lockers come in a range of styles to suit your needs, whether it's stand-alone or networked and integrated.


## Modular, extendable and customisable

The modular column design of the lockers enables them to flex according to your different layout requirements. The size of the lockers are also customisable, to accommodate different staff needs. With a variety of modern, classic and wooden finishes, expect a solution that seamlessly integrates with your existing workplace. 


## Smart Mail and Parcel Lockers for efficient, accountable mailrooms

Today's mailroom is a busy place. The number of commercial and personal packages being delivered puts ever-increasing pressure on your business. By 2023 the parcels market is expected to reach 2.3 billion items, meaning your business needs to think ahead now.* A mobile workforce means parcel delivery has become a less manageable process. Logging deliveries, tracking the packages and gathering recipient information all falls to the mail management team. So as more items are delivered to the workplace, it becomes even more time-consuming and less efficient for your team to manage.

Our solution enables you to better manage your mailroom. With secure and trackable locker facilities, you can provide tracked storage for mail until the recipient is available. Ricoh Smart Lockers provide a new approach to parcel management.

Rather than hiring more full-time employees, it's worth investing now in the long term process management in your business. This enables your current staff to move away from laborious tasks, and get back to adding more value to your business.


## The solution

With Smart Mail and Parcel Lockers it is possible to dramatically improve package delivery logistics, and provide a means to safeguard packages from end-to-end with MI and reporting. Employees can conveniently pick up packages in their own time, through secure, authenticated access. All package drop offs and pick ups are tracked automatically, ensuring strict chain of custody. Our solution offers a single package delivery solution, that will transform your mailroom. With enhanced security, 100% accountability and less margin for human error, Smart Lockers offer considerable benefits:

• Greater efficiency and governance over your mailroom • Communication with smart devices • Automated tracking -every package drop off and pickup is recorded and integration within existing mail management systems • Security with strict chain-of-custody • Convenient package collection with 24hr employee access • Provides more secure and easy to manage storage


## Agile management

Mailroom and facility managers need an agile, long-term management solution. One which can automate processes and reduce repetitive tasks. A solution that can limit the responsibility placed on employees and maintain a more organised and secure mailroom environment. Smart Lockers offer this, plus provide greater visibility, control and reporting.


## Accountability

Smart Mail and Parcel Lockers offer increased accountability and item control. By offering individual compartment control, and secure, key-free access, Ricoh Smart Lockers dramatically improves package delivery logistics within organisations. This safeguards assets and offers an end-to-end chain of custody, for peace of mind and increased package throughput. Ricoh's Smart Mail and Parcel Locker solution introduces a new and smarter workflow for the mailroom. We also offer a full serviced solution, enabling you to focus on your business growth while Ricoh manage your mailroom for you.

Our Smart Lockers use remote software, so that mailroom staff can now scan, register, track and manage the physical delivery through our automated lockers, reporting on all stages of the process for full accountability. Furthermore, our open API allows you to seamlessly integrate Smart Lockers with your existing mailroom systems. Smart Lockers can distribute inventory at the point when its needed. For you, this means reducing the cost of inefficient storerooms and interrupting other members of staff, yet allowing your employees access to any type of inventory, such as office stationery items, IT peripherals, or even laptops and mobile phones which can be stored securely.

Smart Inventory Lockers combine workspace storage with the latest technology. Enabling key-less, manageable access, with tracking and securing the content, to save you time, losses and space. Smart Lockers improve accountability and governance, providing reporting that shows you who has accessed what and when so you can maintain accurate records and interdepartmental cross-charging.


## The real benefits for your business

Ricoh Smart Inventory Lockers takes inventory governance to a new level. Whatever the inventory, our technology provides managed accessibility and full accountability for all your office supplies.

Manage your inventory more efficiently in your workplace, giving your team 24-hour visibility of stock and access when they need it.


## Smart Asset Management Lockers

Ensuring your business critical assets are visible and easy to access at any time can be a headache. The daily issuing of handheld devices or calibrated instruments to shift workers is time consuming, and not an effective method for tracking individual usage. Ricoh have an innovative new solution.

Smart Asset Management Lockers can distribute assets at the point when they are needed, quickly and efficiently. They enable you to be part of a rapidly emerging trend to use secure, selfservice automated lockers. For your workforce this reduces time spent off-task whilst accessing tools or equipment and for the business it controls costs by minimising losses, damages, delays and the need to manually hand out equipment.

Combining smart storage with the latest technology enables your workforce to access assets via a key-less lock system using either a pin code or ID card. This provides accurate individual usage tracking and security, ensuring against loss and saving time. By incorporating day-to-day accountability and governance our Smart Asset Management Lockers provide detailed reporting so you can optimise the management and maintenance of your assets.


## Improve access and save time


## A new level of control with Smart Inventory Lockers

With Smart Inventory Lockers, you can intelligently track your inventory without the need for RFID tags, or the need to rely on complex and time consuming manual tracking processes. Accountability and control of inventory and assets is maximised, with smart technology recording every item as it is accessed, providing visibility and the ability to manage stock levels. This means your business can have quick, point-of-use access to important supplies and inventory, 24/7.


## Benefits & Features

• Provides an advanced inventory solution for all types of assets (stationery, office equipment, provisions) • Easy access and easy tracking of assets • Protects against misuse • Tracking of use by individual, department, location or work order • Integrates with existing incident / request service management system • Supports a wide range of user ID access -barcode, magnetic stripe, card or keypad entry


## Accountability and flexibility

Our Smart Asset Management Lockers provide individual compartment control for reusable assets, devices, tools and calibrated instruments. This system offers secure check-out and check-in, meaning you always know by whom and when an item was checked out and returned. Alerts can be created to set loan periods, and notifications set up for when items are overdue.

This provides an automated service, that calibrates notifications and time-stamps documentation so you can always work at peak performance. Furthermore, lockers offer a multitude of bespoke configurations so, if you wish, you can specify power sockets in each locker to keep electrical devices fully charged and connected when in store.

Smart Asset Management Lockers enable you to meet your customer and staff needs 24/7, by providing convenient selfserve, automated data exchange and remote dispensing convenience. 


## Benefits & Features


## Click & Collect

Delivery Orders are used to pass items through a locker via a one-time delivery code and one-time pickup code. In the IT space the locker may be preloaded with replacement items or kits of items, or the delivery may take place after a specific request for equipment is made. Once the equipment is delivered to the locker and the user is approved to collect that item, the pick-up code is sent to the user (via email, text message or similar) who can enter it or scan it on a barcode reader, which in turn opens the relevant door allowing the collection of the appropriate items. A full set of RESTful APIs are available to allow the creation and management of delivery orders from external systems. Apex has already used this process to deploy working implementations with ServiceNow. Apex has working implementations deployed with ServiceNow, Remedy and other ITSM applications.

Click & Collect has exposed areas of inefficiencies:

• Process inefficiencies • Long waiting times • Reduced customer experience • Storage space requirements • Taking staff away from the shop floor


## What do customers really want?

• Flexibility -to collect when it's convenient for them • Good customer experience -no queues or waiting times • Good customer service -having staff members to help • Self-serve options -to be able to carry out simple tasks by themselves Lockers gives 24/7 availability. 15 seconds is typical time to collect an order 3+ minutes using a manual approach

In addition to the clear financial benefits, retailers will also see a significant improvement in their day-to-day processes:

• All orders loaded prior to store opening -staff hours better utilised • Staff are able to focus on other revenue generating activities / merchandising / customer service • Click & Collect customer diverted away from queuing at the till point -this allows for faster customer throughput and reduced queues • Suitable for indoor and outdoor use -giving 24/7 availability All brand and/or product names are trademarks of their respective owners. Specifications and external appearance are subject to change without notice. The colour of the actual product may vary from the colour shown in the brochure. The images in this brochure are not real photographs and slight differences in detail might appear. Copyright © 2019 Ricoh Europe PLC. All rights reserved. This brochure, its contents and/or layout may not be modified and/or adapted, copied in part or in whole and/or incorporated into other works without the prior written permission of Ricoh Europe PLC. www.ricoh-europe.com For more information:

service.advantage@ricoh-europe.com


Smart Lockers provide unique locking technology and facilities management, offering greater security for your employees and ease of management for the business. Management of units is centralised at a Locker Bank, which can only be accessed via secure RFID swipe card authentication or a touchscreen interface. This control interfaces with key-free access, touch screen and RF card readers, offering full accountability and security for all users.Oversight of your locker real estate 
• Allocation of individual lockers 
• More efficient utilisation of your space 
• Modular, extendable and customisable 
• Keyless access 
• Online booking facility 
• Increased accountability and reduced hoarding 
• 27/4 access (or whenever building is open) 

Link with smart 
Apps -users can 
reserve storage from 
their smart device 

Secure, keyless 
check in and 
check out 



• Connected -easy to keep devices fully charged • and optimised • Secure Access -controls based on job roles, departments, work orders and designated authority • Versatile configurations -customise height, door and dispensing solution • Product visibility -clear doors and bright interior lighting • Supports wide range of user ID -barcode, magnetic stripe, card or keypad entry • Bespoke configuration -you specify the locker solution you wantGreater visibility and control of your 
valuable assets, 24/7. 

Smart Lockers for Inventory Management Process 

IT or facilities 
management 

Stock locker 
with new 
inventory 

Management information 

Smart Inventory 
Locker 

Add authentication 
with pin or access card 

Automated reports 
on stock levels