# Supplemental Appendix I: Regional Research Needs Assessment Survey Welcome and Introduction

CorpusID: 244908025
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1dd798ad7dd45edf6f35f373d89ab8b868a6fef7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1dd798ad7dd45edf6f35f373d89ab8b868a6fef7)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Supplemental Appendix I: Regional Research Needs Assessment Survey Welcome and Introduction
September 24, 2020.

Supplemental Appendix I: Regional Research Needs Assessment Survey Welcome and Introduction
September 24, 2020.C6E408ABAB929DDEB8A06D06CA1B07D9
The AO Spine Research Commission is conducting a needs assessment survey.Objectives:1) To assess the research capabilities and needs of the AO Spine community within the regions.2) To engage with AO Spine members and develop the strategic plan for how AO Spine can best support and develop research in the regions.The results from this survey will be used to shape the future directions and research strategy for AO Spine research.They may also be disseminated via social media, journals, and other media platforms.



No / Undecided / I am not familiar with AO Global Data) 39.Why would you not be interested in joining an AO Spine-managed registry?Please explain.40.Would you be willing to pay a nominal fee for such a data collection system (i.e. a system which would include seamless integration with all electronic health records, automated data collection processes, user-friendly interfaces, and customizable reporting and analytics for your own use)?If Yes, do you think a mentorship program by AO Spine should consist of in-person mentormentee meetings?(Yes, at least once a year / Yes, more than once a year / No) 68.In your opinion, would it be beneficial for AO to identify, initiate, and grow research at a single or several key centers in your region that will then serve as research mentors for others?(Yes / No) 69.In your opinion, how often should a mentor-mentee meet (in-person or virtually) to discuss research progress?(Once per month / Every 3 months / Twice per year / Once per year) E. Research Grants and Financial Support 70.Have you ever applied for a research grant?
8. Do you have a formal academic appointment with a university? (Yes / No) 9. Approximately, what percentage of your time at work do you devote to research? (0-25% / 26-50% / 51-75% / 76-100%) 10. Surgical case volume of practice (# of spine surgeries per year): (0-100 / 101-200 / 201-300 / 301-400 / 401-499 / 500+) 11. How many years have you been working in spine surgery? (0-5 / 6-10 / 11-15 / 16-19 / 20+) 12. How many years have you been working in research? (0-5 / 6-10 / 11-15 / 16-19 / 20+) 13. Do you hold an undergraduate academic degree in a science (i.e., biology, physics, molecular biology, chemistry, psychology, etc.)? (Yes / No) 14. What is your main research focus? author? (Yes / No) 21. How many research manuscripts have you published in peer-reviewed journals? (Yes / No) 27. If Yes, what are the challenges in performing research at the place where you work? Select all that apply. i. Lack of interest ii. Lack of infrastructure (i.e. clinical research support staff, ethics committee, etc.) iii. Lack of funds iv. Lack of knowledge about designing or conducting research v. Lack of knowledge about statistical analysis vi. Lack of incentive to perform the research study vii. Lack of mentorship viii. Lack of a collection of cases ix. Lack of time to perform research x. Other, please specify 28. Why do you perform research? Rank from most important (1) to least important (10). research activities? (Yes / No) 35. Do you or your research group record your surgical cases, including patient-reported outcomes data, imaging, and clinical assessments for research purposes? (Yes / No) 36. If Yes, how are your records handled? (Own personal or surgical group system / Hospital, university, or department data storage system for research purposes / National registry / Other, please specify) 37. Do you collect/bank blood (serum, plasma) and/or tissue samples for biomarker evaluation? (Yes / No) 38. Would you be interested in joining an international AO Spine-managed registry called AO Global Data (www.aoglobaldata.com)? (Yes / (Yes / No / Undecided) 41. If Yes, how much in US Dollars are you willing to pay per year? ($0-$500 / $500-$1'000 / $1'000-$2'000 / $2'000-$5'000 / $5'000-10'000) C. Research Training and Education 42. Does the institution where you work have a medical residency, postgraduate, or specialization program in research? (Yes / No) 43. Have you received research training in preclinical and/or clinical research? (Yes / No) 44. If Yes, what type of preclinical and/or clinical research training? Please select all that apply. i. Research fellowship (0-3 months) ii. Research fellowship (> 3 months) iii. Master's degree in Public Health, Health Economics, Epidemiology, Health Research, Medical Research, Life Sciences, or a similar field iv. Doctor of Philosophy in Public Health, Health Economics, Epidemiology, Health Research, Medical Research, Life Sciences, or a similar field v. AO PEER course vi. Good Clinical Practice course xiii. Critical appraisal of scientific literature xiv. Ethics xv. Regulatory affairs xvi. Health policy xvii. Intellectual property xviii. Other, please specify 46. If Yes, do you feel you understand the fundamental principles in conducting successful research? (Yes / No) 47. If Yes, as a result of the research training that you have conducted, have you successfully produced a publication? (Yes / No) 48. Why have you not successfully produced a publication? Please explain. 49. Do you feel that you have enough knowledge and interest to teach preclinical and/or clinical research to others? (Yes / No) 50. In your opinion, do you think teaching other clinicians about preclinical and/or clinical research in your region would stimulate research? (Yes / No) an AO PEER faculty) / No) 53. As a course participant, what research topics would you want to learn and study? Select all that apply. i. Basic science study design and methodology ii. Preclinical in vivo (animal) study design and methodology iii. Clinical study design and clinical methodology iv. Research protocol development and writing v. Study management vi. Research team management vii. Data management viii. Statistics ix. Literature search and reviews x. Systematic reviews and Meta-analyses (Spanish / Portuguese / French / German / Dutch / Russian / Mandarin / Japanese / Korean / Tamil / Other, please specify) 56. In your opinion, would your country/region benefit from having research fellowship opportunities in preclinical and/or clinical research? (Yes / No) 57. If Yes, what type of research fellowships? (Clinical research fellowship with AO Innovation Translation Center / Preclinical research fellowship with AO Research Institute / Both) 58. If Yes, would you apply for a research fellowship? (Yes / No) 59. If Yes, what is the desired length of a research fellowship? (0-3 months / 3-6 months / 6-12 months / 12-24 months / > 2 years / Other, please specify) D. Research Mentorship 60. Do you currently have or have you had a research mentor? (Yes / No) 61. If Yes, was this mentor instrumental in motivating you to pursue research? (Yes / No) 62. Are you currently a research mentor? (Yes / No) 63. If Yes, are you mentoring as part of a mentorship program? (Yes / No) 64. If Yes, would you make use of a program or material that support mentors in their mentorship activities (i.e., mentor-the-mentor program)? (Yes / No) 65. In your opinion, would it be beneficial to have an AO Spine research mentorship program in your country/region? (Yes / No) 66. If Yes, would you like to become a research mentor? (Yes / No) iv. Pain v. Biomarker discoveries vi. Guidelines vii. Predictive analytic modeling viii. Imaging studies ix. Other, please specify 81. Comments Thank you 67. iii. Safety Thank you for your participation.(0-5 / 6-10 / 11-15 / 16-19 / 20+) vii. Other, please specify xi. Medical writing / How to publish32. Do you have a PhD/Masters student(s) that assists you with your research activities? xii. Grant writing22. What are your fields of interest for working in research? Select all that apply. (Yes / No) 45. If Yes, what preclinical and/or clinical research topics did you learn and study? Select all that xiii. Critical appraisal of scientific literature(Degeneration / Deformities / Tumor / Trauma / Spinal Cord Injury / Infection / Metabolic apply. xiv. EthicsDisorders / Other, please specify) 33. Do you have residents or spine fellows that are required to do research and assist you with your i. Basic science study design and methodology xv. Regulatory affairsresearch activities? ii. Preclinical in vivo (animal) study design and methodology xvi. Health policy23. What type of research do you perform? Select all that apply. (Yes / No) iii. Clinical study design and methodology xvii. Intellectual property(Clinical / Public health / Basic science / Biomechanics / Other, please specify) iv. Research protocol development and writing xviii. Other, please specify34. Does your work environment support and encourage you in pursuing your research efforts? v. Study management24. How would you characterize the clinical research you perform? (Yes / No) vi. Research team management 54. In your opinion, would it be beneficial for your country/region to have the online AO PEER(Single-site / Multi-site (a study performed at 2 or more sites) / Both) vii. Data management research education material (www.aopeer.org) translated in the local language?viii. Statistics (Yes / No)25. On what geographic scale do you perform your clinical research? Select all that apply. (Local / National / Regional / International) ix. Literature search and reviews B. Research Registry and Data Collection System x. Systematic reviews 55. What language(s) in addition to English would you want the online AO PEER research educationxi. Medical writing / How to publish material to be translated? Select all that apply.26. Are there challenges in performing research at the place where you work? xii. Grant writing
(Preclinical (lab-based/animal) / Clinical / Both of the above / I do not perform research --> jump to F. Future Research Directions) 15.When did you first start conducting preclinical and/or clinical research?(Undergraduate / Graduate degree / Medical School / Residency / Fellowship / Post-training years) 16.How would you evaluate your level of experience in conducting preclinical and/or clinical research, using a scale from 0 to 10? (0 = no experience, 10 = a lot of experience) 17.How would you characterize your research productivity?(Growing / At a steady state / Declining) 18. Have you ever been a co-author on a peer-reviewed manuscript?(Yes / No) 19.Have you published a peer-reviewed manuscript as first author?(Yes / No) 20.Have you published a peer-reviewed manuscript as last i.Personal gratification ii.To advance the field iii.To benefit patients iv.Pressure from institution v. Peer-pressure from spine community vi.To obtain research funding vii.To obtain more fame and glory viii.For promotion ix.To meet and interact with other researchers x.To audit one's clinical practice 29.Using the following scale, how important are the following research activities?-2 (not at all important) ----1 (somewhat important) ---0 (neutral) ---1 (important) ---2 (very important) i.To publish in peer-reviewed journals ii.To have abstracts accepted iii.To present at meetings iv.To be part of research consortia v.To obtain research funding vi.To win research awards 30.Describe your level of motivation to perform research.(Low / Average / High / Very high) 31.Do you have your own Research Coordinator or support staff that assists you with your 51.Would you benefit from having more research education course offerings, such as AO PEER face-to-face courses (www.aopeer.org), in your country/region?(Yes / No, I am not interested / No, but I would participate in AO PEER courses if they were available online / I am not familiar with AO PEER) 52.If Yes, would you participate in such research education courses?(Yes, as a participant / Yes, as faculty (please note that there is a selection process to become

This survey is organized into the following six sections: A. Demographics and Characteristics B. Research Registry and Data Collection System C. Research Training and Education D. Research Mentorship E. Research Grants and Financial Support F. Future Research Directions This survey will take approximately 20-25 minutes to complete.
Male / Female). Gender

Country where you currently practice. List of countries

AO Region where you currently practice. Asia Pacific / Europe and Southern Africa / Middle East and Northern Africa / North America / Latin America

Specialty, Orthopaedics / Neurosurgery / Trauma / Pediatric Surgery / Other. please specify

Practice focus (select all that apply): (Degenerative / Deformities / Tumor / Trauma / Spinal Cord Injury / Other. please specify

Practice type.