# biomolecules A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents

CorpusID: 245213230
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Chemistry, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

biomolecules A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents
Published: 10 December 2021

Alka Rani 
Khem Chand Saini 
Felix Bast 
Sunita Varjani 
Gujarat Pollution Control Board
382010GandhinagarIndia

Sanjeet Mehariya 
Department of Chemistry
Umeå University
90187UmeåSweden

Shashi Kant Bhatia 
Department of Biological Engineering
College of Engineering
Konkuk University
05029SeoulKorea

Neeta Sharma 
Department of Sustainability-CR Trisaia
ENEA, Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development
SS Jonica 106, km 419 + 50075026RotondellaItaly

Christiane Funk 
Department of Chemistry
Umeå University
90187UmeåSweden


Department of Botany
School of Basic and Applied Sciences
Central University of Punjab
151401BathindaIndia

biomolecules A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents
Published: 10 December 202110.3390/biom11121860Received: 17 October 2021 Accepted: 7 December 2021Review 2021, 11, 1860. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/biom11121860 Academic Editor: Marc Maresca
Citation: Rani, A.; Saini, K.C.; Bast, F.; Varjani, S.; Mehariya, S.; Bhatia, S.K.; Sharma, N.; Funk, C. A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents. Biomolecules

## Introduction

For the last few decades, antibiotics have saved millions of lives, but the prevalence of multidrug resistance (MDR) in microbial strains, nullifying the effects of antibiotics is an expected consequence of antibiotic abuse. The emergence and prevalence of antibioticresistant microbial strains remain one of the major health issues of the 21st century, creating pressure on natural microbiota. The ESKAPE pathogens (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species) are one of the greatest challenges faced by medical practices as many of them are multidrug-resistant isolates [1]. The US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) classified the most concerning antimicrobial resistance (AMR) threats, cataloguing carbapenem-resistant P. aeruginosa, Clostridium difficile, and A. baumannii; MDR Neisseria gonorrhoeae and carbapenem-and cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacteriaceae as "urgent" threats [2], requiring urgent measures to deal with the situation. Pendleton et al. [3] provide a contemporary summary and clinically relevant information on the ES-KAPE pathogens. In contrast, a detailed description regarding the antimicrobial resistance mechanisms of ESKAPE pathogens was illustrated by Santajit and Indrawattana [1], and can be used as a tool and applied to emerging MDR pathogens. Mulani et al. [4] highlight the use of therapies, including the combination of antibiotics, bacteriophages, antimicrobial 


## Bacteria

Bacterial antimicrobial compounds have been used traditionally for numerous reasons, including delaying the spoilage of food material or crops by plant pathogens in agriculture, and extending the shelf life of products in the food industry [12]. Compared to terrestrial bacteria, marine bacteria have many unique secondary metabolites due to their more complex and biologically competitive environment and their unique pressure, temperature, salinity, oxygen, light, and pH conditions. These factors make them a rich source Figure 1. Antibiotics reported from different microorganisms with their target sites. Adapted from: [11]. 


## Bacteria

Bacterial antimicrobial compounds have been used traditionally for numerous reasons, including delaying the spoilage of food material or crops by plant pathogens in agriculture, and extending the shelf life of products in the food industry [12]. Compared to terrestrial bacteria, marine bacteria have many unique secondary metabolites due to their more complex and biologically competitive environment and their unique pressure, temperature, salinity, oxygen, light, and pH conditions. These factors make them a rich source of effective antibiotics.

Many researchers have isolated and identified various antimicrobial compounds from marine bacteria against drug-resistant pathogens [13]. Marinomonas mediterranea, a marine bacterium isolated from the Mediterranean Sea at the Murcia coast has antagonistic activity against Pseudomonas sp. and S. aureus resistance to ceftazidime and meticillin antibiotics, respectively [14]. Ayuningrum et al. [15] isolated isatin from the marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas rubra TKJD 22 associated with a marine tunicate, which has antibacterial activity against MDR pathogens including MDR E. coli, B. cereus, Micrococcus luteus, and B. megaterium. Ieodoglucomide and ieodoglycolipid isolated from the ethyl acetate extract of a marine-derived Bacillus licheniformis bears antifungal activity against the plant pathogens Colletotrichum acutatum and Botrytis cinerea, along with the human pathogen Candid albicans [16]. Similarly, janthinopolyenemycin A and B polyketides were isolated from the proteobacterium Janthinobacterium spp., strains ZZ145 and ZZ148, respectively, by Anjum et al. [17], who found that they hinder the growth of C. albicans. Schulze et al. [18] utilized a genome-assisted discovery strategy to isolate three macrolactams, lobosamides A, B, and C from Micromonospora sp. RL09-050-HVF-A. Among them, lobosamides A and B have antagonist activity against the microbial agent of African trypanosomiasis i.e., Trypanosoma brucei, whereas, lobosamide C has no bioactivity. Zhang et al. [19] reported Streptoseomycin, a macrolactone from the Streptomyces seoulensis A01, having specific activity against microaerophilic bacteria Helicobacter pylori. Bacicyclin, a cyclic peptide, was isolated from a Bacillus sp. strain BC028 associated with mussel (Mytilus edulis), it was found that it inhibits the growth of Enterococcus faecalis and S. aureus with minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) values of 8 and 12 µM, respectively. In addition, it is used to design analogs with increased antibiotic efficacy [20].

Bacillus strains from both marine and terrestrial environments are widely known to produce extensive biocontrol metabolites, which include the ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides (bacteriocins) [21], as well as non-ribosomally synthesized peptides (NRPs) and polyketides (PKs) [22].


### Ribosomally Synthesized Antimicrobial Peptides (Bacteriocins) and Bacteriocin-Like Inhibitory Substances (BLIS)

Bacteriocins are antimicrobial ribosomal peptides reported from all major lineages of bacteria and some members of archaea. Gram-negative intestinal bacteria Escherichia coli produces bacteriocidal proteins, colicins, larger than 20 kDa which are antagonistic against zoonotic strains and might establish a defence line against multidrug-resistant strains. [23]. Bacteriocins have attracted increasing attention because of their use as a food preservative and therapeutic antibiotic. Furthermore, they have also received attention because they have a rapid-acting mechanism by forming pores in the membrane of target bacterial cells, even at very low concentrations ( Figure 2). The recently reported bacteriocins along with their characteristics are presented in Table 1.

Hoyt et al. [24] isolated the first marine bacteriocin from Vibrio harveyi after screening 795 strains of Vibrio sp. from Galveston Island (Texas, USA). This laid the foundation for multiple studies focused on the identification and biochemical characterization of new bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds. Genera of marine bacteria producing bacteriocins include Aeromonas, Bacillus, Burkholderia, Lactococcus, Pseudomonas, Photobacterium, Pediococcus, Enterococcus, Stenotrophomonas, Carnobacterium, Pseudoalteromonas, Streptomyces, etc. The major difference between marine and terrestrial bacteriocins is that marine bacteri- forming pore [30,35] IIc N-and C-termini are covalently linked, generating a circular bacteriocin Lactocyclicin Q, Leucocyclicin Q L. gasseri, Enterococcusfaecalis, L. garvieae


## Membrane permeabilization

forming pore [36] Biomolecules 2021, 11, 1860 5 of 28 Disrupt membrane potential, which causes ATP efflux [40] Unfortunately, many factors cause a reduction in BLIS antimicrobial activity affecting the efficacy of bacteriocins. Such factors include the advent of bacteriocin-resistant strains, conditions that are destabilizing its biological activities such as oxidation processes, poor solubility, proteases or inactivation by other additives, and pH or temperature. Therefore, it is necessary to develop an antimicrobial system that minimizes these drawbacks and maximizes bacteriocins' bioprotective potential.

Nisin belongs to type I bacteriocin and is the first antimicrobial peptide from Lactococcus and Streptococcus sp., it has been regarded as GRAS by both the FDA and the WHO [41]. Nisin has been used to inhibit microbial growth in beef, ground beef, sausages, liquid whole eggs, and poultry. It was reported that when nisin was crosslinked to chitosan, minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) decreased from 48 µg/mL to 40 µg/mL for Staphylococcus aureus ATCC6538. The antimicrobial activity of nisin increased after crosslinking with a lesser concentration of chitosan i.e., the ratio of 200:1, thereby allowing better penetration into the lipid membrane [42]. The antibacterial constancy of nisin was successfully enhanced after its conjugation with gellan. Therefore, this conjugate can be an encouraging biomaterial for wound dressings and transplant coatings [43]. A study revealed the proficiency of nisin in combination with polymyxin in combating P. aeruginosa biofilms and reducing the dose of polymyxin required to interrupt P. aeruginosa biofilms [44]. Polymyxin might facilitate the transfer of nisin to its target. Along with nisin's synergistic action with polymyxin and clarithromycin against P. aeruginosa and other non-β-lactam antibiotics against MRSA [45] and strains of vancomycin-resistant enterococci [46] were also reported. Webber et al. [47] embedded 0.89 µg cm −2 of positively charged nisin Z within polyelectrolyte multilayers (PEMs) i.e., nine layers of carrageenan (CAR) and chitosan (CS), forming a 4.5 bilayer film with antimicrobial activity against S. aureus and MRSA. Therefore, the antimicrobial potential of CAR/CS multilayers helps to realize its applicability within food, pharmaceutical, and biomedical industries [47]. Although nisin has a broad range of biomedical applications and is used in food bio preservation, further justification of nisin's practicality and evaluation of its efficacy in biomedical fields will require in vivo and in vitro studies.

The mechanism of action of bacteriocins depends on the bacteriocin receptor molecules used. All bacteriocins from the same class do not follow a similar mode of action. Bacteriocins might utilize the same receptors but their mode of interaction with these receptor molecules and the aftereffect on the target cell could be quite different. For example, as described by Kjos et al. [48], bacteriocins lactococcin A and lactococcin Z share 55.6% similarity in the N-terminal region, both use IIC and IID components of mannose phospho-transferase system (man-PTS) as receptor molecules on target cells. As depicted in Figure 2, lactococcin A results in pore formation and dissipates the cell membrane potential, whereas lactococcin Z kills target cells without following any of these mechanisms. Lozo et al. [49] comprehensively represented the bacteriocins classification-based receptor molecules in target cells according to structural similarity within the same receptor molecule.

require in vivo and in vitro studies.

The mechanism of action of bacteriocins depends on the bacteriocin receptor molecules used. All bacteriocins from the same class do not follow a similar mode of action. Bacteriocins might utilize the same receptors but their mode of interaction with these receptor molecules and the aftereffect on the target cell could be quite different. For example, as described by Kjos et al. [48], bacteriocins lactococcin A and lactococcin Z share 55.6% similarity in the N-terminal region, both use IIC and IID components of mannose phosphotransferase system (man-PTS) as receptor molecules on target cells. As depicted in Figure 2, lactococcin A results in pore formation and dissipates the cell membrane potential, whereas lactococcin Z kills target cells without following any of these mechanisms. Lozo et al. [49] comprehensively represented the bacteriocins classification-based receptor molecules in target cells according to structural similarity within the same receptor molecule.


## Figure 2.

Mode of action of bacteriocins. Inhibition of cell wall synthesis: class II bacteriocins (e.g., lactococcin) cross the cell wall and bind with the pore-forming receptor in the mannose-phosphotransferase (man-PTS), resulting in the pore formation in the cell membrane. Pore formation: class I bacteriocins, (e.g., nisin) can follow both mechanisms. Nisin generated pores in the cell membrane resulting in the efflux of ions (K + and Mg 2+ ), amino acids (glutamic acid, lysin), generating proton motive force dissipation and ultimately causes cell death. Adapted from: [50,51].

Class I bacteriocins are cationic lantibiotics (e.g., nisin) that electrostatically bind with the negatively charged membrane phospholipids II, allowing further interaction of bacte-riocin′s hydrophobic domain with the target cytoplasmic membrane (lipid II), thereby preventing the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan [30,52]. Similarly, class III bacteriocins, enterolysin A with N-terminal endopeptidase domain and a C-terminal substrate Figure 2. Mode of action of bacteriocins. Inhibition of cell wall synthesis: class II bacteriocins (e.g., lactococcin) cross the cell wall and bind with the pore-forming receptor in the mannosephosphotransferase (man-PTS), resulting in the pore formation in the cell membrane. Pore formation: class I bacteriocins, (e.g., nisin) can follow both mechanisms. Nisin generated pores in the cell membrane resulting in the efflux of ions (K + and Mg 2+ ), amino acids (glutamic acid, lysin), generating proton motive force dissipation and ultimately causes cell death. Adapted from: [50,51].

Class I bacteriocins are cationic lantibiotics (e.g., nisin) that electrostatically bind with the negatively charged membrane phospholipids II, allowing further interaction of bacteriocin s hydrophobic domain with the target cytoplasmic membrane (lipid II), thereby preventing the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan [30,52]. Similarly, class III bacteriocins, enterolysin A with N-terminal endopeptidase domain and a C-terminal substrate recognition domain, exhibit antimicrobial activity against streptococci by cleaving the peptidoglycan cross-links between l-alanine and d-glutamic acid of the stem peptide and between l-lysine of the stem peptide and d-aspartic acid of the interpeptide bridge of the target cell [53].


### Non-Ribosomal Synthesized Peptides (NRPs) and Polyketides (PKs)

NRPs and PKs include a range of cyclic, linear, and branched compounds, synthesized by composite enzymes viz. non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS), polyketide synthetases (PKS), and hybrid of NRPS/PKS, respectively [22,54]. Lipopeptides (LPs) are NRPs produced by Bacillales; LPs have significant antimicrobial activity [55]. LAB is considered the primary producer of ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides, as reviewed by Alvarez-Sieiro et al. [53] and Pircalabioru et al. [30]. However, the classification scheme for antimicrobial compounds produced by Bacillus is not explored in comparison to LAB. Caulier et al. [22] reviewed and updated the antimicrobial metabolites classification from the B. subtilis group based on biosynthetic pathway and chemical nature. Zhao et al. [21] acknowledged 31 types of PKs, NRPs, and NRPS/PKS hybrid synthesized antimicrobials using antiSMASH.


### Lipopeptides (LPs)

LPs occur naturally and are of bacterial origin, contain a hydrophobic long alkyl chain that associates with a hydrophilic polypeptide, and they form a cyclic or linear structure.

Traditional LPs including the iturins, surfactins, and fengycins (Table 2) produced from Bacillus species are homologs that differ in length, branching pattern, and saturation of their acyl chain. LPs comprise anionic (e.g., surfactin and daptomycin) or cationic (e.g., colistin and polymixin B) peptide motif, dictating the range of their activity. As demonstrated by Perez et al. [56] Bacillus sp. P5 synthesize LPs iturin A, bacteriocin subtilosin A, and surfactin exhibiting antimicrobial activity against L. monocytogenes and B. cereus, along with the antifungal activity. A study by Kourmentza et al. [57] reported that a mixture of mycosubtilin and mycosubtilin/surfactin LPs inhibit the growth of filamentous fungi Byssochlamys fulva and Paecilomyces variotti, with MICs of 1-16 mg/L and Candida krusei with MIC of 16-64 mg/L. .03 kDa et al. [21] acknowledged 31 types of PKs, NRPs, and NRPS/PKS hybrid synthesized antimicrobials using antiSMASH.


### Lipopeptides (LPs)

LPs occur naturally and are of bacterial origin, contain a hydrophobic long alkyl chain that associates with a hydrophilic polypeptide, and they form a cyclic or linear structure. Traditional LPs including the iturins, surfactins, and fengycins (Table 2) produced from Bacillus species are homologs that differ in length, branching pattern, and saturation of their acyl chain. LPs comprise anionic (e.g., surfactin and daptomycin) or cationic (e.g., colistin and polymixin B) peptide motif, dictating the range of their activity. As demonstrated by Perez et al. [56] Bacillus sp. P5 synthesize LPs iturin A, bacteriocin subtilosin A, and surfactin exhibiting antimicrobial activity against L. monocytogenes and B. cereus, along with the antifungal activity. A study by Kourmentza et al. [57] reported that a mixture of mycosubtilin and mycosubtilin/surfactin LPs inhibit the growth of filamentous fungi Byssochlamys fulva and Paecilomyces variotti, with MICs of 1-16 mg/L and Candida krusei with MIC of 16-64 mg/L. Surfactins, a cyclic heptapeptide that formulates a lactone bridge with β-hydroxy fatty acids, are the most potent biosurfactant. They display an array of activities including hemolytic, antiviral, anti-mycoplasma, and antibacterial [61]. Surfactin WH1 fungin from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens WH1 is an antifungal inhibiting glucan synthase that reduces the synthesis of callose on the fungal cell wall and binds to ATPase on the mitochondrial membrane, ultimately inducing apoptotic markers to stimulate the extracellular apoptotic pathway [62]. Many researchers claim that after inserting into the lipid bilayers, surfactin acts by forming voltage-independent channels in biofilms, distorting the membrane integrity and permeability of ions, i.e., K + and Ca 2+ , causing membrane disruption [63]. Surfactins, a cyclic heptapeptide that formulates a lactone bridge with β-hydroxy fatty acids, are the most potent biosurfactant. They display an array of activities including hemolytic, antiviral, anti-mycoplasma, and antibacterial [61]. Surfactin WH1 fungin from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens WH1 is an antifungal inhibiting glucan synthase that reduces the synthesis of callose on the fungal cell wall and binds to ATPase on the mitochondrial membrane, ultimately inducing apoptotic markers to stimulate the extracellular apoptotic pathway [62]. Many researchers claim that after inserting into the lipid bilayers, surfactin acts by forming voltage-independent channels in biofilms, distorting the membrane integrity and permeability of ions, i.e., K + and Ca 2+ , causing membrane disruption [63].

Iturins are comprised of A, C, D, and E isoforms, bacillomycin D, F and L, and mycosubtilin that inhibit bacterial growth in the same manner as class I and class II bacteri-


## B. subtilis

Act as bioagents showing hypocholesterolemic activities, immunomodulators; antibiotics, antiviral, and antitumor agents; toxins; and enzyme inhibitors [60] Surfactins, a cyclic heptapeptide that formulates a lactone bridge with β-hydroxy fatty acids, are the most potent biosurfactant. They display an array of activities including hemolytic, antiviral, anti-mycoplasma, and antibacterial [61]. Surfactin WH1 fungin from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens WH1 is an antifungal inhibiting glucan synthase that reduces the synthesis of callose on the fungal cell wall and binds to ATPase on the mitochondrial membrane, ultimately inducing apoptotic markers to stimulate the extracellular apoptotic pathway [62]. Many researchers claim that after inserting into the lipid bilayers, surfactin acts by forming voltage-independent channels in biofilms, distorting the membrane integrity and permeability of ions, i.e., K + and Ca 2+ , causing membrane disruption [63].

Iturins are comprised of A, C, D, and E isoforms, bacillomycin D, F and L, and mycosubtilin that inhibit bacterial growth in the same manner as class I and class II bacteriocins [64]. A marine-derived Bacillus velezensis 11-5 produced a cyclic lipopeptide (CLP) iturin A, which is considered an antagonist against Magnaporthe oryzae, a rice pathogen [65]. Fengycin, an anti-fungal lipopeptide, isolated from Bacillus sp. is also called plipastatin. Both iturins and fengycins act as biocontrol agents preventing plant diseases and inhibiting the progression of a wide variety of plant fungal pathogens including Aspergillus flavus, Rhizoctonia solani, Fusarium graminearum, Botritis cinerea, and Penicillium expansum [66]. However, there is no doubt that LPs are a novel class of antibiotics exhibiting a wide range of activities. Therefore, detailed structural and functional knowledge is required to exploit them as potent antimicrobials, feed additives, and drug delivery systems.


## Actinomycetes

Approximately 75% of the known industrial antibiotics and economically important compounds were obtained from the Streptomyces species [67]. Actinomycetes can synthesize antifungal, antiviral, antitumor, anti-inflammatory, antioxidants, immunosuppressive, plant-growth-promoting, and herbicidal compounds [68]. Among actinomycetes, Streptomyces is the most dominant because of a broad range of bioactive metabolites. Genus Streptomyces is classified into the family Streptomycetaceae based on its morphology and cell wall chemotype. Streptomyces spp. have filamentous hyphae, allowing them to efficiently utilize nutrients in the rhizosphere, enabling them to colonize and carry out a complex life cycle. Streptomyces spp. catabolizes complex molecules and substances, such as cellulose, lignocellulose, xylan, lignin, etc. to produce well-known bioactive compounds. The genus Streptomyces alone contributes approximately 7500 of the 10,000 known compounds from actinomycetes, whereas the other genera including Actinomadura, Micromonospora, Nocardia, Saccharopolyspora, Actinoplanes and Streptosporangium contribute approximately 2500 compounds [69]. Marine or terrestrial actinomycetes utilize enzymes polyketide synthases (PKS) or non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) for the synthesis of metabolic bioactive compounds [70].

Pacios et al. [71] reviewed the importance of the Streptomyces genus as a prodigious producer of bioactive metabolites that act as a biological control against phytopathogenic bacteria. Widowati et al. [72] reported a new strain of marine actinomycetes, NPS12745 associated with marine sediment from the coast of San Diego, California, and after using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, NPS12745 was confirmed to be a fruitful strain of genus Marinispora, which produced ample new chlorinated bisindole pyrroles and their derivatives, including chromopyrrolic acid, which was earlier isolated from Chromobacterium violaceum. The first halogenated bisindole derivative was lynamicins A-E, having activity against several Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, i.e., MSSA (methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus), MRSA, S. epidermidis, and Enterococcus faecalis, signifying a possible cure for nosocomial infections [73]. Siddharth and Vittal [69] isolated Streptomyces sp. S2A from the Gulf of Mannar, which have antagonistic activity against bacterial (Micrococcus luteus, S. epidermidis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bacillus cereus, and S. aureus) and fungal (Fusarium moniliforme and Bipolaris maydis) pathogens. A unique prenylated-indole derivative known as 3-acetonylidene-7-prenylindolin-2-one, hybrid isoprenoids, 3-cyanomethyl-6-prenylindole, 7-isoprenylindole-3-carboxylic acid, and 6-isoprenylindole-3-carboxylic acid were extracted from the Streptomyces sp. neau-D50. These antifungal compounds prevent the growth of phytopathogenic fungi Corynespora cassiicola, Phytophthora capsica, Colletotrichum orbiculare, and Fusarium oxysporum [74]. Djinni et al. [75] described Streptomyces sundarbansensis WR1L1S8, an endophyte sequestered from brown algae, yields an innovative anti-MRSA compound, [2-hydroxy-5-((6-hydroxy-4-oxo-4H-pyran-2-yl)methyl)-2-ropylchroman-4-one] beside three already reported polyketides, namely phaeochromycin B, C, and E, which are active against Gram-positive pathogenic MRSA. Sebak et al. [76] isolated Streptomyces sp. MS. 10 from Egyptian soil and reported the presence of saturated fatty acid through 1 H NMR spectroscopy, which bears broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against MRSA. Recently, Qureshi et al. [77] identified compounds, Actinomycin X 2 and D, from Streptomyces smyrnaeus UKAQ_23 collected from the mangrove-sediment, with MIC of 1.56-12.5 µg/mL for non-MRSA and 3.125-12.5 µg/mL for MRSA, respectively.

Yang et al. [78] isolate vinaceuline, a cyclopeptide, activity against bacteria, from the broth culture of endophytic Streptomyces sp. YIM64018 allied with Paraboea sinensis. The same team isolated a new benzamide, 2-amino-3, 4-dihydroxy-5-methoxybenzamide in 2015, from Streptomyces YIM67086 that attacks E. coli and Candida albicans (MICs of 64 and 32 µg/mL, respectively). Ding et al. [79] reported that 7, 3'-di-(c,c dimethylallyloxy)-5hydroxy-40-methoxyflavone, an antifungal compound, from the broth culture of Streptomyces sp. MA-12 obstructs the growth of plant pathogens Penicillium citrinum, Gibberella zeae, and Colletotrichum musae.

Lee et al. [80] isolated 87 actinomycetes species including Streptomyces pluripotens MUSC135T, that inhibit MRSA. This antibacterial metabolite-producing ability was confirmed by PKS (polyketide synthetase) and NRPS (non-ribosomal polyketide synthetase) gene detection process. Streptomyces sp. colonizing on root tissues produce ample antifungal and antibacterial compounds i.e., antimycin A18, phaeochromycin B, C and E, diastaphenazine, 3-acetonylidene-7-prenylindolin-2-one, and staurosporine, some of which are represented in Table 3. Similarly, Jaroszewicz et al. [81] isolated Streptomyces sp. M4_24 and M5_8 strains and identified the presence of dichloranthrabenzoxocinone and 4,10-or 10,12-dichloro-3-O-methylanthrabenzoxocinone, which are putative antimicrobial compounds. A newly discovered lipopeptide NRPS/PKS-derived colibrimycins, from Streptomyces sp. CS147, isolated from Attini ant niche displayed antagonism against virus protease [82]. An endophytic actinomycetes, VITGV01, isolated from a farm tomato plant produced different antibiotics on different media which were active against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria including B. subtilis, S. aureus, E. coli, and Klebsiella pneumoniae [83]. The unique properties of rhizospheric actinomycetes which allow them to produce a diverse range of bioactive metabolites with antagonistic outcomes toward pathogens have led them to be a potent agent ensuring plant health.

Cycloserin, an antibiotic produced by Streptomyces orchidaceus, blocks protein synthesis and is used to treat tuberculosis in conjunction with other drugs [84]. Robertsen and Musiol-Kroll [85] reviewed the actinomycetes-derived polyketide drugs, such as erythromycin A, tetracyclines, rifamycin, tylosin, monensin A, amphotericin B, etc. with antimicrobial activity, including the source of the compounds, their structure, the biosynthetic mechanisms, and mode of action. However, the increasing rate of MDR requires the rediscovery of compounds from potential producers. However, many organisms require special cultivation conditions, therefore, many strategies need to be developed in order to overcome such barriers. Hug et al. [86] described the strategies and innovative methods such as advanced cultivation methods, genomics, metabolomics, and metagenomics-based approaches used to explore the new reservoir of actinomycetes and improve the efficacy of antimicrobial compounds. Hence, it was concluded that Streptomyces spp. can be used as a promising candidate with the potential to be scaled up for industrial production, which could benefit both the agricultural and pharmaceutical industry. Streptomyces sp. neau-D50 Glycine max
3-acetonylidene-7- prenylindolin-2-one, 7-isoprenylindole-3- carboxylic acid
such as advanced cultivation methods, genomics, metabolomics, and metagenomicsbased approaches used to explore the new reservoir of actinomycetes and improve the efficacy of antimicrobial compounds. Hence, it was concluded that Streptomyces spp. can be used as a promising candidate with the potential to be scaled up for industrial production, which could benefit both the agricultural and pharmaceutical industry. Streptomyces sp. YIM67086

Dysophylla stellata 4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzoic acid, p--Antifungal activity [78] Cytotoxic and antifungal activities [74] Streptomyces sp. YIM56209


## Drymaria cordata

Bafilomycin D, B1, B2, C1, C2, C1 amide and C2 amide based approaches used to explore the new reservoir of actinomycetes and improve the efficacy of antimicrobial compounds. Hence, it was concluded that Streptomyces spp. can be used as a promising candidate with the potential to be scaled up for industrial production, which could benefit both the agricultural and pharmaceutical industry. 


## Archaea

Archaeocins, is a proteinaceous antibiotic produced from archaea which mark the chronicled beginning in the series of antimicrobial compounds. The term "archaeocin" was used to differentiate the archaeal peptide and protein-based antibiotics from those produced by bacteria [95]. Only two phylogenetic groups have produced archaeocins (Table 4); one is euryarchaeal producing "halocins", whereas the other group is crenarchaeal genus Sulfolobus producing "sulfolobicin" [96]. Valera et al. [97] reported halocins, the first proteinaceous antimicrobial compound from halophilic members of the archaeal domain. Archaeal protein VLL-28, from Sulfolobus islandicus, is the first archaeal antimicrobial peptide, possessing a broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity [98]. Until recently, very few reports were available on the characterization of antimicrobial compounds from archaea. Besse et al. [99] comprehensively reviewed the archaeocins and sul-Antibacterial, antifungal and anticancer activity [90] Streptomyces sp. YIM66017


## Alpinia oxyphylla

Yangjinhualine A and 2,6-dimethoxy terephthalic acid 


## Archaea

Archaeocins, is a proteinaceous antibiotic produced from archaea which mark the chronicled beginning in the series of antimicrobial compounds. The term "archaeocin" was used to differentiate the archaeal peptide and protein-based antibiotics from those produced by bacteria [95]. Only two phylogenetic groups have produced archaeocins (Table 4); one is euryarchaeal producing "halocins", whereas the other group is crenarchaeal genus Sulfolobus producing "sulfolobicin" [96]. Valera et al. [97] reported halocins, the first proteinaceous antimicrobial compound from halophilic members of the archaeal domain. Archaeal protein VLL-28, from Sulfolobus islandicus, is the first archaeal antimicrobial peptide, possessing a broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity [98]. Until recently, very few reports were available on the characterization of antimicrobial compounds from archaea. Besse et al. [99] comprehensively reviewed the archaeocins and sulfolobicins antimicrobial peptides ribosomally-synthesized by archaea belonging to the order Halobacteriales and Sulfolobales, respectively. However, until recently halocin A4, 


## Archaea

Archaeocins, is a proteinaceous antibiotic produced from archaea which mark the chronicled beginning in the series of antimicrobial compounds. The term "archaeocin" was used to differentiate the archaeal peptide and protein-based antibiotics from those produced by bacteria [95]. Only two phylogenetic groups have produced archaeocins (Table 4); one is euryarchaeal producing "halocins", whereas the other group is crenarchaeal genus Sulfolobus producing "sulfolobicin" [96]. Valera et al. [97] reported halocins, the first proteinaceous antimicrobial compound from halophilic members of the archaeal domain. Archaeal protein VLL-28, from Sulfolobus islandicus, is the first archaeal antimicrobial peptide, possessing a broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity [98]. Until recently, very few reports were available on the characterization of antimicrobial compounds from archaea. Besse et al. [99] comprehensively reviewed the archaeocins and sulfolobicins antimicrobial peptides ribosomally-synthesized by archaea belonging to the order Halobacteriales and Sulfolobales, respectively. However, until recently halocin A4, G1, R1, H1 [ 


## Archaea

Archaeocins, is a proteinaceous antibiotic produced from archaea which mark the chronicled beginning in the series of antimicrobial compounds. The term "archaeocin" was used to differentiate the archaeal peptide and protein-based antibiotics from those produced by bacteria [95]. Only two phylogenetic groups have produced archaeocins (Table 4); one is euryarchaeal producing "halocins", whereas the other group is crenarchaeal genus Sulfolobus producing "sulfolobicin" [96]. Valera et al. [97] reported halocins, the first proteinaceous antimicrobial compound from halophilic members of the archaeal domain. Archaeal protein VLL-28, from Sulfolobus islandicus, is the first archaeal antimicrobial peptide, possessing a broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity [98]. Until recently, very few reports were available on the characterization of antimicrobial compounds from archaea. Besse et al. [99] comprehensively reviewed the archaeocins and sulfolobicins antimicrobial peptides ribosomally-synthesized by archaea belonging to the order Halobacteriales and Sulfolobales, respectively. However, until recently halocin A4, G1, R1, H1 [100]; H2 [37]; H3, H5 [97]; H4 [101]; H6 [102]; C8 [103]; S8 [104]; HalR1 [105]; and Sech7a [106] have been considered up to their molecular level, however, their mode of action is not yet clearly understood [107]. Only some workers reported that halocins kill the indicator organisms by altering the cell permeability at membrane level followed by cell lysis. However, to date, only the mode of action mechanism of halocin H6/H7 produced by Haloferax gibbonsii was characterized. HalH6 specifically inhibits Na + /H + antiporter and proton flux ultimately causing cell lysis and death [108].

H1 and H4 are proteinaceous halocins of roughly 30-40 kDa [109], whereas C8, H6, H7, R1, U1, and S8 are microhalocins which are smaller than 10kDa. Microhalocins are more vigorous than proteinaceous halocins since they are resistant to varying temperature, salinity, exposure to organic solvents, acids, and bases [109]. Halocins have wide-ranging activity against haloarchaea and members of the family Halobacteriaceae [110]. Mainly halocin production is prompted during the progression between exponential and stationary phases, with H1 being an exception, produced during the exponential phase of the growth cycle [111]. Recently, Sahli et al. [112] screened 81 halophilic strains collected from solar salterns of Algeria's northern coast for the production of antimicrobial compounds, through partial 16S rRNA gene sequencing, these strains were recognized to belong to the Haloferax (Hfx) sp. Roscetto et al. [117] reported that VLL-28 damages the cell wall of Candida albicans and C. parapsilosis by binding to their cell surface. Kumar and Tiwari [118] purified halocin HA1 from Haloferax larsenii HA1 and HA3 from H. larsenii HA3; both were halocidal against H. larsenii HA10, instigating cellular distortion, releasing cell contents, and finally causing cell death. Because of these properties, it can be used for the preservation of leather hides and salted foods in the leather and food industries. Ghanmi et al. [114] isolated Halobacterium salinarum ETD5, H. salinarum ETD8, and Haloterrigena thermotolerans SS1R12 of the order Halobacteriales and reported that their antimicrobial activity is due to the production of a halocin, HalS8, a hydrophobic peptide. Quadri et al. [119] isolated archeal strain, Natrinema gari, the common producer of antimicrobial compounds, which after partial purification and characterization resembles the microhalocin HalC8. Besse et al. [115] confirmed that Natrinema sp. synthesizes Halocin C8, a 7.4 kDa peptide involving the genes halC8.

Although many studies characterized the synthesis of halocins, the research concerning their structure and mode of action is still far behind in comparison to the antibiotics produced by other domains. Nowadays, when archaea gain more attention, it becomes necessary to explore their metabolites', biosynthetic pathways, mode of action, etc., using the latest available technology.


## Fungi

In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.


### Endophytic Fungi

Huang et al. [126] discovered ten-membered lactones from endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. YM 311483, with antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, Fusarium, and Botrytis cinere. Endophytic Fusarium sp. from Selaginella pollescens collected from the Guanacaste conservation area of Costa Rica inhibit C. albicans [127]. The number of antimicrobial compounds were reported from the endophytic fungi, some of which are listed in Table 5. produced by other domains. Nowadays, when archaea gain more attention, it becomes necessary to explore their metabolites', biosynthetic pathways, mode of action, etc., using the latest available technology.


## Fungi

In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.


### Endophytic Fungi

Huang et al. [126] discovered ten-membered lactones from endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. YM 311483, with antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, Fusarium, and Botrytis cinere. Endophytic Fusarium sp. from Selaginella pollescens collected from the Guanacaste conservation area of Costa Rica inhibit C. albicans [127]. The number of antimicrobial compounds were reported from the endophytic fungi, some of which are listed in Table  5. produced by other domains. Nowadays, when archaea gain more attention, it becomes necessary to explore their metabolites', biosynthetic pathways, mode of action, etc., using the latest available technology.


## Fungi

In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.


### Endophytic Fungi

Huang et al. [126] discovered ten-membered lactones from endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. YM 311483, with antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, Fusarium, and Botrytis cinere. Endophytic Fusarium sp. from Selaginella pollescens collected from the Guanacaste conservation area of Costa Rica inhibit C. albicans [127]. The number of antimicrobial compounds were reported from the endophytic fungi, some of which are listed in Table  5.  


### Marine-Derived Fungi

In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 


### Marine-Derived Fungi

In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 


### Marine-Derived Fungi

In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 


### Marine-Derived Fungi

In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 


### Marine-Derived Fungi

In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity.   


## Colletotrichum asianum

Marine sponge Callyspongia sp. [154] Peniciadametizine A and Peniciadametizine B derivative of thiolated diketopiperazine was isolated from sponges-associated Penicillium sp. viz. Penicillium adametzioides AS-53 and Penicillium sp. LS54, respectively. Both derivatives inhibit A. brassicae (pathogenic fungus) with a MIC of 4.0 µg/mL and 32.0 µg/mL, respectively [138]. Communol A, G, and F extracted from P. commune 518 displayed antibacterial activities against E. coli with MIC values of 4.1, 23.8, and 6.4µM, respectively, and also against E. aerogenes [136]. Pyrrospirones were produced by marine-derived fungus Penicillium sp. ZZ380, isolated from Pachygrapsus crassipes which is a wild crab found on the seaside rocks of Putuo Mountain (Zhoushan, China). Pyrrospirones C-F, H, and I inhibit MRSA and E. coli having MIC values of 2.0-19.0 µg/mL [155]. Song et al. [156], following the previous lead, separated penicipyrrodiether A from a cultured marine fungal strain Penicillium sp. ZZ380 which inhibits E. coli and S. aureus with MIC of 34.0 and 5.0 µg/mL, respectively. These laboratory studies need to be directed toward developing the efficiency and effectiveness of isolated compounds that could benefit society in the long-term.


### Mushrooms

Mushrooms are colonizing fungi belonging to division Eumycota and subdivision Basidiomycetes, characterized by the formation of basidiospores. Most of these macrofungi are edible, with culinary, nutritional, and medicinal characteristics, but many of them are not palatable or are poisonous [157]. Besides the nutritional and culinary properties, their antimicrobial activities attracted researchers seeking natural solutions to deal with the urgent requirements of food safety. Mushrooms have been publicly consumed for thousands of years due to their medicinal and nutritional properties. Secondary metabolites and extracts from mushrooms have recently attained considerable attention due to their anticancer, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, antidiabetic, and immunomodulatory properties. Approximately 1069 mushroom species have been consumed by people [158]. To date, numerous antimicrobial peptides have been acknowledged from mushrooms. Plectasin (endogenous peptide antibiotics), an antibacterial peptide, was extracted from Pseudoplectania nigrella. Mygind et al. [159] demonstrated the potent activity of recombinant plectasin against some Gram-positive Streptococcus pneumoniae. Wong et al. [160] described an antifungal peptide, cordymin isolated from medicinal mushroom Cordyceps militaris, which repressed mycelial growth of Bipolaris maydis, Mycosphaerella arachidicola, Candida albicans, and Rhizoctonia solani with IC 50 values of 50 µM, 10 µM, 0.75 mM, and 80 µM, respectively. They also reported the remarkable pH stability (pH 6-13), thermostability (100 • C), and metal ion stability (10 mM Mg 2+ and 10 mM Zn 2+ ) of cordymin. An investigation by Gebreyohannes et al. [161] revealed that chloroform, ethanol, and hot water extract of Auricularia and Termitomyces sp. promisingly inhibited E. coli, K. pneumoniae, C. parapsilosis, and S. aureus. Poompouang and Suksomtip, [162] isolated an antifungal compound of 17 kDa from fruiting bodies of edible mushroom, Lentinus squarrosulus, inhibiting Trichophyton mentagrophytes and T. rubrum, a human fungal pathogen. More recently, Irshad et al. [163] comprehensively reviewed the synthesis and mode of action of polysaccharides silver nanoparticles (NPs) from Pleurotus mushroom. They characterized the NPs through ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis), Fourier transformation infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), etc., and disclosed their promising antimicrobial efficiency. However, further studies are required in order to fortify and test these extracts and NPs against human and plant pathogenic microorganisms coupled with the purification and characterization of the compounds from mushrooms.

Hamamoto et al. [164] screened the volatile compound, 3,4-dichloro-4-methoxy benzaldehyde (DCMB) from mycelia of Porostereum spadiceum. It remarkably inhibited the plant-pathogenic bacteria (Clavibacter michiganensis and Ralstonia solanacearum) and inhibited the conidial germination of plant-pathogenic fungi (Alternaria brassicicola and Colletotrichum orbiculare). However, further studies are essential to investigate its effects on plant-pathogens in vivo. Subrata et al. [165] reported that edible wild mushrooms' methanolic extracts exhibited different levels of antimicrobial activities. A recent study by Sevindi [166] analysed the phenolic content of the wild edible mushroom Melanoleuca melaleuca (Pers.) Murrill had antimicrobial activities inhibiting Gram-negative E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Acinetobacter baumannii.


### Filamentous Fungi

Yeasts mainly occur in milk, meat, food, and products such as fruit, yogurt, jams, sausage, and cheeses. Generally, antimicrobial compounds produced from yeasts inhibit the evolution/growth of pathogenic organisms (bacteria or molds) in food products. Some classes of yeasts secrete toxins, thereby naming them killer yeasts. Killer yeasts naturally occur in rotten vegetables and fruits and constrain the growth of other yeast strains and also inhibit microbial growth [167]. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast), unicellular yeast, is the most widely studied microorganisms involved in many biotechnological practices because of its good fermentation capacity [168]. The inhibitory mechanism of S. cerevisiae killer strains was discovered in 1963 by Bevan and co-worker's, and the phenomenon is related to the secretion of a protein toxin, k1, and k28 from the host that kills sensitive target pathogenic cells in a receptor-mediated approach without direct cell-to-cell contact [169]. Other genera producing killer toxins include Cryptococcus, Candida, Kluyveromyces, Williopsis, Pichia, Debaromyces, and Zygosaccharomyces [170]. The anti-bacterial capability of S. cerevisiae is attributed to: Sequential re-pitching of Saccharomyces biomass is a common process during brewing. Therefore, yeast is reused many times before its final dumping [171]. Hence, yeast develops an adaptive response against oxidative stress like that of human cells, leading to the accumulation of vitamins (B6 and B12) and minerals (enzyme co-factors including zinc, manganese, and copper) in the yeast cell. Phenolic compounds are also adsorbed by Saccharomyces from the exterior medium, which increases the phenolic content and antioxidant activity within yeast cells [172]. Efficient means are required to disrupt yeast cell walls and separate the products of interest, which are further used for food applications. However, increasing consumer' fears regarding the toxicity of killer yeast strains present in food and milk products constitutes a direct risk to public health.


## Microalgae

The antimicrobial activity of microalgae is due to the presence of phytochemicals, including indoles, acetogenins, terpenes, fatty acids, phenols, and volatile halogenated hydrocarbons (Table 7) [173]. Moreno et al. [174] reported that Chaetoceros muelleri extracts' antimicrobial activity is due to their lipid configuration, whereas Dunaliella salina's is attributed to the presence of β-cyclocitral, α and β-ionone, phytol, and neophytadiene. In natural environmental conditions, microalgal cells release fatty acids against predators and pathogenic bacteria. It is elucidated that these fatty acids act on bacterial cell membranes causing cell seepage, a decline in nutrient intake, and reduced cellular respiration, ultimately resulting in cell death [175]. Chlorellin, the first antibacterial compound from a microalga Chlorella, is composed of a mixture of fatty acid and was isolated by Pratt et al. [183]. Chlorellin was reported to inhibit the activity of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Arthrospira platensis, commercially known as Spirulina had MICs of 0.20% for L. innocua and P. fluorescens, and an MIC of 0.25% for Serratia, whereas minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) value was 0.30% for all of these species [184]. HPTLC screening and GC-MS analyses were conducted to detect and screen the macroalgae's antimicrobial compounds. Peptides, namely AQ-1756, AQ-1757, and AQ-1766 identified from Tetraselmis suecica exhibited an antibacterial activity resulting in decreasing cell viability (human embryonic kidney cells) (HEK293) up to 75% after 24 h of treatment. AQ-1766 was more active against Gram-positive than Gramnegative bacteria, with MBC values between 40 and 50 µM [185]. Mendiola et al. [186] demonstrated that lipid fractions obtained from Chaetoceros muelleri by the supercritical CO 2 method have antibacterial activity against Staphyloccocus aureus and E. coli. In contrast, extraction via classic methods using hexane, dichloromethane, and methanol solvent did not result in any activity against E. coli. However, these studies were unable to elaborate the mode of action of these antibacterial compounds.

Axenic microalgae co-culture can produce compounds with potent activity against pathogenic bacteria. Kokou et al. [187] reported that axenic cultures of Tetraselmis chui, Chlorella minutissima, Isochrysis sp. and Nannochloropsis sp. inhibit Vibrio harveyi. The potent activity of microalgal compounds against microorganisms requires further development in the search for drugs and food preservatives. Therefore, the exploitation in medicine deserves to be further investigated.


## Discussion and Future Prospects

One of the significant challenges healthcare services face worldwide is the excessive use of antibiotics in medicine and food production, leading to microbiome disruption. With the outburst of antimicrobial resistance strains, there is a continuous decline in the antimicrobial drug pipeline, and it has become necessary to discover and develop new agents/metabolites to tackle antibiotic resistance. Novel compounds that target microbial resistance can be developed to regulate the huge risk posed by multi-drug resistance. However, the production cost needs to be reduced by isolating these compounds from natural sources such as microorganisms and then synthesizing them or modifying derivative compounds. Along with this, further research into their toxicity against human cells, their mode of action, in vivo effects, and their interactions with commonly available antibiotics must be conducted. After the discovery of penicillin, many drug discoveries from microbial sources were reported. In addition, the advancement of techniques such as genetic engineering during the 1970s opened the door to the ignored source, i.e., microbial metabolites [188].

Ample research is being conducted to search for novel antimicrobial agents from biological sources, including bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, yeast, etc. Table 8 depicts selected commercially available antimicrobial products alongside their uses.  [194] LAB producing bacteriocins are a promising candidate for the food industry as they help to extend shelf life and safeguarde consumers' health. Actinomycetes, particularly Streptomyces spp., exhibited effective antagonistic activity and played a significant role in drug discovery and development.

In the ongoing rearch for novel antibiotics, archaeocins have generally been overlooked, and further studies on purifications and characterizations of archaeocins and sulfolobicins are in progress, resulting in the economical production of bioactive compounds for pharmaceutical applications. It is desirable to expand our understanding of the effectiveness and use of other naturally occurring ribosomally-synthesized peptide antimicrobials to understand their implantation and survival strategies, and to quantitatively estimate their efficacy for future applications in the pharmaceutical and health care sectors.

Fungi synthesized small quantities of bioactive compounds in response to explicit environmental conditions which cannot be reproduced easily in the laboratory. Therefore, to develop new antimicrobial drugs from these fungal metabolites, commercial-scale synthesis must be accomplished potentially through strain improvement, optimizing growth conditions, and incorporating techniques, such as metabolomics, genomics, and pathway engineering. Endophytic, filamentous, and marine-derived fungi also offer a suitable substitute against toxic, ineffective, and expensive antimicrobial drugs because they act as a warehouse filled with bioactive compounds with endless potential for biological properties. Antimicrobials, isolated from mushrooms, act as essential substitutes to synthetic drugs and preservatives, whose protection and influence on the health of humans, animals, and food are still uncertain. Although there are many edible mushrooms, the mushroom species identified have antimicrobial properties which are quite small. The current review demonstrates potent bioactive substances with antimicrobial activities from edible mushrooms. Hence, they must not be considered only as a culinary delicacy, but also taken as therapeutic agents. However, methods for isolation, purification, identification, and characterization of antimicrobial compounds from mushrooms need to be developed.

Microalgae are a promising source of high-value products, and large-scale screening programs have been conducted to discover the antimicrobial potential of microalgal extracts against pathogenic and foodborne organisms. However, major antibacterial and antifungal activity reports were predominantly from the Chlorella sp. and Chlamydomonas sp. Many hurdles exist in developing the marine product, including resource supply issues, large-scale production, production cost, and determination of the efficacy target. These obstacles must be bypassed by optimizing mass culturing conditions, utilizing biotechnological techniques, etc. Along with these measures, extensive clinical trials will be needed to determine the in vivo fortune of antimicrobials from microbial extracts on mammalian cells.

Therefore, developing and using robust screening and high-throughput methods will be essential to study their antimicrobial activity, thereby increasing the chances of discovering and identifying new antibiotic molecules. To achieve this goal, the experimental design must include all possible variables, such as recovering both intra-and extracellular extracts produced by microorganisms under variable growth conditions, utilizing potential inducers of antimicrobial activity, and testing these compounds against a more significant number of targets. In recent years, nanoencapsulation has gained much attention. It is a technique used for formulating and stacking a compound in nanosized carriers that can carry and deliver the molecules to the targeted site. Nanoencapsulation allows the conservation and controlled release of bioactive compounds, followed by resistance to pH and temperature variations, lesser product contamination, economic viability, and stability. Chromatographic separation techniques were used recently for purifying antimicrobials, followed by their chemical characterization using spectroscopic techniques, and response surface methodology (RSM) to predict the yield of the crude antimicrobial extract. Detailed functional and structural knowledge would explain antimicrobials' mode of action and performance at cellular and molecular levels. However, for this, a better understanding of the structure, function and, existing mode of action of newly identified antimicrobials is required.


## Conclusions

In conclusion, microorganisms are probable sources of bioactive compounds, and this review has explored of microorganisms' aptitudes to deliver novel bioactive compounds with potential pharmaceutical and nutraceutical applications. Microorganisms have fascinated many researchers due to the ease of growth and understanding of their chemical interactions. The development of new biotechnological tools and techniques contributes to the discovery of next-generation antimicrobial compounds. The application of microorganisms in human foods, animal feeds, agriculture, and an increased market demand motivates the research and development of novel antibiotics and preservatives. Furthermore, the molecular docking and structural analysis approaches can design potent pathogen-specific antimicrobial agents that exhibit lesser toxicity, higher selectivity, and biodegradability. Therefore, exploiting microbial biodiversity and biotechnological potential to discover novel bioactive compounds to treat life-threatening diseases and safeguard human health.  

## Figure 1 .
1Antibiotics reported from different microorganisms with their target sites. Adapted from:[11].


(a) Secretion of inhibitory proteins, (b) Production of extracellular protease, (c) Stimulation of immunoglobulin A, (d) Procurement and eradication of secreted toxins, (e) Killer toxins, sulfur dioxide, etc.

## Author
Contributions: Acquisition of data, analysis and original draft and table preparation, A.R.; formal analysis, reviewing and figure preparation, K.C.S. and S.V.; review and editing, F.B., S.M., S.K.B., N.S. and C.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## Funding:
This research has received funding from the Swedish Research council FORMAS (grant no. 2019-00492). Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

## Table 1 .
1List of recently reported Bacteriocins.Type 
Characteristics 
Example 
Producer 
Mode of Action 
References 

Bacteriocin 
type I 

Lantibiotics, very small (<5 kDa) 
peptides containing lanthionine and 
β-methyllanthionine 

Nisin Z and Q, 
Enterocin W 
Nukacin ISK-1 

Lactococcus 
lactis 

Membrane 
permeabilization 
forming pore 

[33] 

Bacteriocin 
type II 

Small (<10 kDa), non-lanthionine-
containing peptides 

IIa 

heat-stable peptides 
synthesized as a 
precursor and 
processed after two 
glycine residues, 
antilisterial, bear 
consensus sequence 
YGNGV-C at the 
N-terminal 

Enterocin 
NKR-5-3C, 
Enterocin A, 
Leucocin A, 
Munditicin 

Pediococcus 
pentosaceus, 
P. Acidilactici 
and L. sakei 

Membrane 
permeabilization 
forming pore 

[34] 

IIb 

Two-component 
systems: two different 
peptides work 
together and generate 
an active poration 
complex 

Lactococcin Q, 
Enterocin 
NKR-5-3AZ, 
Enterocin X 

L. lactis sub sp. 
cremoris, 
L. plantarum 

Membrane 
permeabilization 


## Table 1 .
1Cont.Type 
Characteristics 
Example 
Producer 
Mode of Action 
References 

IId 

Other class II 
bacteriocins, 
including unmodified, 
sec-dependent 
bacteriocins and 
leaderless, 
non-pediocin-like 
bacteriocins 

Lacticin Q and Z, 
Weissellicin Y and 
M, Leucocin Q and 
N, Bactofencin A, 
LsbB 

L. salivarius, L. 
lactis 
Sub sp. Lactis 

[30,37] 

Bacteriocin 
type III 
Large peptides, sensitive to heat 

L. crispatus, L. 
helveticus, 
E. faecalis 

[38] 

IIIa 
27 kDa, heat-labile 
protein 

Lysostaphin and 
enterolysin A 

S. simulans 
biovar 
Staphylolyti-
cus, 
Enterococcus 
faecalis 

Cell-wall degradation 
[39] 

IIIb 
Helveticin J 
Lactobacillus 
helveticus 



## Table 2 .
2Various types of LPs and their characteristics.Type 
Characteristic 
Features 

Molecular 
Weight 
Chemical Structure 
Producer 
Applicability References 

Surfactin 

Cyclic 
heptapeptide is 
an antibiotic 
with seven 
amino acids i.e., 
Glu-Leu-Leu-
Val-Asp-
LeuLeu 
(ELLVDLL). 
A, B, and C 
types varying 
according to 
their amino 
acid sequences.~1 



## Table 2 .
2Various types of LPs and their characteristics.Type 
Characteristic 
Features 

Molecular 
Weight 
Chemical Structure 
Producer 
Applicability References 

Surfactin 

Cyclic heptapep-
tide is an antibi-
otic with seven 
amino acids i.e., 
Glu-Leu-Leu-
Val-Asp-LeuLeu 
(ELLVDLL). 
A, B, and C types 
varying accord-
ing to their 
amino acid se-
quences. 

~1.03 kDa 

B. subtilis MSH1 
and B. amyloliq-
uefaciens ES-2 

Antimicrobial, an-
tifungal, insecti-
cidal, antimyco-
plasma, hemoly-
sis, and formation 
of ion channels in 
lipid membranes. 

[58] 

B. subtilis 
MSH1 and B. 
amyloliquefa-
ciens 
ES-2 

Antimicrobial, 
antifungal, 
insecticidal, 
antimy-
coplasma, 
hemolysis, 
and 
formation of 
ion channels 
in lipid 
membranes. 

[58] 

Iturin 

Contains two 
major parts: a 
peptide part 
composed of 7 
amino acid 
residues (Asn-
Tyr-Asn-Gln-
Pro-Asn-Ser) 
and 11-12 
carbons 
hydrophobic 
tail. Example 
Iturin A, 
Bacillomycin D, 
Bacillomycin L, 
Mycosubtilin~1 

.04 kDa 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
8 of 29 

Iturin 

Contains two 
major parts: a 
peptide part 
composed of 7 
amino acid resi-
dues (Asn-Tyr-
Asn-Gln-Pro-
Asn-Ser) and 11-
12 carbons hy-
drophobic tail. 
Example Iturin 
A, Bacillomycin 
D, Bacillomycin 
L, Mycosubtilin 

~1.04 kDa 

B. subtilis, B. am-
yloliquefaciens 
B128 and B. amy-
loliquefaciens 
BUZ-14 

Antimicrobial and 
antifungal activi-
ties. Disrupt the 
membrane of 
yeast cells by in-
creasing the elec-
trical conductance 
of bimolecular li-
pid membranes. 

[59] 

Fengycin 

An array of 10 
amino acids with 
a lactone ring 
and a ß-hydroxy 
fatty acid linked 
to the N-termi-
nus of a decapep-
tide. Example 
Plipastatin A and 
B 

1463.7 
g/mol 
B. subtilis 

Act as bioagents 
showing hypo-
cholesterolemic 
activities, im-
muno-modula-
tors; antibiotics, 
antiviral, and an-
titumor agents; 
toxins; and en-
zyme inhibitors 

[60] 



## Table 3 .
3Bioactive compounds from endophytic actinomycetes.Endophytic 
Actinomycetes 
Host 
Bioactive 
Compounds 
Structure 
Bioactivity 
References 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM64018 
Paraboea sinensis 
Vinaceuline 
-
Antibacterial activity 
[87] 



## Table 3 .
3Bioactive compounds from endophytic actinomycetes.Endophytic 
Actinomycetes 
Host 
Bioactive Com-
pounds 
Structure 
Bioactivity 
Reference 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM64018 

Paraboea 
sinensis 
Vinaceuline 
-
Antibacterial activity 
[87] 

Streptomyces sp. 
neau-D50 
Glycine max 

3-acetonylidene-7-
prenylindolin-2-
one, 7-isoprenylin-
dole-3-carboxylic 
acid 

Cytotoxic and antifungal 
activities 
[74] 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM56209 

Drymaria 
cordata 

Bafilomycin D, B1, 
B2, C1, C2, C1 am-
ide and C2 amide 

Antibacterial, antifungal, 
insecticidal, antihelmintic 
and cytotoxic activity 

[88] 

Streptomyces dia-
staticus 
Sub sp. 
ardesiacus 

Artemisia 
annua 
Diastaphenazines 
-
Antibacterial and antifun-
gal activity 
[89] 



## Table 3 .
3Bioactive compounds from endophytic actinomycetes.Endophytic 
Actinomycetes 
Host 
Bioactive Com-
pounds 
Structure 
Bioactivity 
Reference 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM64018 

Paraboea 
sinensis 
Vinaceuline 
-
Antibacterial activity 
[87] 

Streptomyces sp. 
neau-D50 
Glycine max 

3-acetonylidene-7-
prenylindolin-2-
one, 7-isoprenylin-
dole-3-carboxylic 
acid 

Cytotoxic and antifungal 
activities 
[74] 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM56209 

Drymaria 
cordata 

Bafilomycin D, B1, 
B2, C1, C2, C1 am-
ide and C2 amide 

Antibacterial, antifungal, 
insecticidal, antihelmintic 
and cytotoxic activity 

[88] 

Streptomyces dia-
staticus 
Sub sp. 
ardesiacus 

Artemisia 
annua 
Diastaphenazines 
-
Antibacterial and antifun-
gal activity 
[89] 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM67086 

Dysophylla 
stellata 

4-hydroxy-3-meth-
oxybenzoic acid, p-
-
Antifungal activity 
[78] 

Antibacterial, 
antifungal, 
insecticidal, 
antihelmintic and 
cytotoxic activity 

[88] 

Streptomyces 
diastaticus 
Sub sp. 
ardesiacus 

Artemisia 
annua 
Diastaphenazines 
-
Antibacterial and 
antifungal activity 
[89] 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM67086 
Dysophylla stellata 

4-hydroxy-3-
methoxybenzoic acid, 
p-hydroxytruxinic 
acid 

-
Antifungal activity 
[78] 

Microbispora sp. 
LGMB259 

Vochysia 
divergens 

β-carboline or 
1-vinyl-β-carboline-
3-carboxylic 
acid 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
11 of 29 

hydroxytruxinic 
acid 

Microbispora sp. 
LGMB259 

Vochysia 
divergens 

β-carboline or 1-vi-
nyl-β-carboline-3-
carboxylic acid 

Antibacterial, antifungal 
and anticancer activity 
[90] 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM66017 

Alpinia 
oxyphylla 

Yangjinhualine A 
and 2,6-dimethoxy 
terephthalic acid 

Radical scavenging activ-
ity 
[91] 

Streptomyces albi-
doflavus 
07A-01824 

Bruguiera 
gymnorrhiza 
Antimycin A18 
Antifungal activity 
[92] 

Streptomyces sp. 
VITMK1 

mangrove 
soil 
Pyrrolopyrazines 
-
Antimicrobial 
[93] 

Streptomyces sp. 
Diketopiperzines 
-
Anti-H1N1 activity 
[94] 




Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 29hydroxytruxinic 
acid 

Microbispora sp. 
LGMB259 

Vochysia 
divergens 

β-carboline or 1-vi-
nyl-β-carboline-3-
carboxylic acid 

Antibacterial, antifungal 
and anticancer activity 
[90] 

Streptomyces sp. 
YIM66017 

Alpinia 
oxyphylla 

Yangjinhualine A 
and 2,6-dimethoxy 
terephthalic acid 

Radical scavenging activ-
ity 
[91] 

Streptomyces albi-
doflavus 
07A-01824 

Bruguiera 
gymnorrhiza 
Antimycin A18 
Antifungal activity 
[92] 

Streptomyces sp. 
VITMK1 

mangrove 
soil 
Pyrrolopyrazines 
-
Antimicrobial 
[93] 

Streptomyces sp. 
Diketopiperzines 
-
Anti-H1N1 activity 
[94] 




100]; H2 [37]; H3, H5 [97]; H4 [101]; H6 [102]; C8 [103]; S8 [104]; HalR1 [105];Antifungal activity 
[92] 

Streptomyces sp. 
VITMK1 
mangrove soil 
Pyrrolopyrazines 
-
Antimicrobial 
[93] 

Streptomyces sp. 
Diketopiperzines 
-
Anti-H1N1 activity 
[94] 



## Table 4 .
4Archaeocins reported from halobacteria.Halocin 
Producers 
Size 
(kDa) 
Origin 
Active Against 
Mode of Action 
References 

HalH1 
Haloferax mediterranei 
Xia3 
31 
Solar salterns, 
Alicante, Spain 

Members of the 
Halobacteriales 

Alter membrane 
permeability 
[99] 

HalH4 
Hfx. mediterranei R4 
34.9 
Solar salterns, 
Tunisia 

Members of the 
Halobacteriales, 
Strains of Sulfolobus 
sp. 

Alter macromolecular 
synthesis, cell wall 
conformation, and 
Na + /H + antiport 
inhibitor 

[113] 

HalH6 
Hfx. gibbonsii Ma2.39 
32 
Solar salterns, 
Alicante, Spain 

Members of the 
Halobacteriales 

Alter intracellular 
osmotic balance, 
Na + /H + antiport 
inhibitor 

[99] 

HalS8 

Haloarchaeal strain 
S8a, Halobacterium 
salinarum strain ETD5 

3.58 

Great Salt Lake, 
(Utah, United 
States) 

Halobacterium 
salinarum NRC817, 
Hbt. sp. strain GRB 
and Hfx. gibbonsii 

ND 
[104,114] 

HalC8 
Natrinema sp. AS7092 
7.4 

Chaidan Salt 
Lake in Qinghai 
province, China 

ND 
[111,115] 

HalR1 
Hbt. salinarum GN101 
3.8 
Guerrero 
Negro, Mexico 

Members of the 
Halobacteriales, 
Strains of Sulfolobus 
sp., 
Methanosarcina 
thermophile 

ND 
[37,99] 

Sulfolobicins 
Sulfolobus 
Islandicus HEN2/2 

33.9 pro-
protein), 
3.6 
(mature) 

Solfataric fields, 
Iceland 

Strains of Sulfolobus 
sp. 
ND 
[116] 

Note: ND: Note Detected or Not Reported. 



## Table 5 .
5Antimicrobial compounds extracted from endophytic fungi.Compound 
Chemical 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Host 
References 

e 1, 4-
naphthoquinone 
derivatives 

-
Talaromyces sp. 
SK-S009 
Pseudomonas sp. 
Kandelia obovata 
[128] 

Clavatol 



## Table 5 .
5Antimicrobial compounds extracted from endophytic fungi.Compound Chemical Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Host 
Reference 
e 1, 4-naph-
thoquinone 
derivatives 

-
Talaromyces sp. 
SK-S009 
Pseudomonas sp. 
Kandelia obovata 
[128] 

Clavatol 

Aspergillus clava-
tonanicus, 
Aspergillus elegans 
KUFA0015 

Botrytiscinerea, Didymella bryo-
niae, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
cucumerinum, Rhizoctonia 
solani, and Pythium ultimum 

Taxus mairei, 
Monanchora un-
guiculate (Marine 
sponge) 

[129] 

Lactones 
Phomopsis sp. YM 
311483 

A. niger, Botrytis cinere, and 
Fusarium 
Azadirachta indica 
[130] 

Jesterone 
Pestalotiopsis jesteri 

Pythium ultimum, Phytophthora 
citrophthora, Rhizoctonia solani 
and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 

Fragraea bodenii 
[131] 

Aspergillus 
clavatonanicus, 
Aspergillus elegans 
KUFA0015 

Botrytiscinerea, Didymella 
bryoniae, Fusarium oxysporum 
f. sp. cucumerinum, 
Rhizoctonia solani, and 
Pythium ultimum 

Taxus mairei, 
Monanchora 
unguiculate 
(Marine sponge) 

[129] 

Lactones 



## Table 5 .
5Antimicrobial compounds extracted from endophytic fungi.Compound Chemical Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Host 
Reference 
e 1, 4-naph-
thoquinone 
derivatives 

-
Talaromyces sp. 
SK-S009 
Pseudomonas sp. 
Kandelia obovata 
[128] 

Clavatol 

Aspergillus clava-
tonanicus, 
Aspergillus elegans 
KUFA0015 

Botrytiscinerea, Didymella bryo-
niae, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
cucumerinum, Rhizoctonia 
solani, and Pythium ultimum 

Taxus mairei, 
Monanchora un-
guiculate (Marine 
sponge) 

[129] 

Lactones 
Phomopsis sp. YM 
311483 

A. niger, Botrytis cinere, and 
Fusarium 
Azadirachta indica 
[130] 

Jesterone 
Pestalotiopsis jesteri 

Pythium ultimum, Phytophthora 
citrophthora, Rhizoctonia solani 
and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 

Fragraea bodenii 
[131] 

Phomopsis sp. YM 
311483 

A. niger, Botrytis cinere, 
and Fusarium 
Azadirachta indica 
[130] 


## Table 5 .
5Cont.Compound 
Chemical 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Host 
References 

Jesterone 

Clavatol 

Aspergillus clava-
tonanicus, 
Aspergillus elegans 
KUFA0015 

Botrytiscinerea, Didymella bryo-
niae, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
cucumerinum, Rhizoctonia 
solani, and Pythium ultimum 

Taxus mairei, 
Monanchora un-
guiculate (Marine 
sponge) 

[129] 

Lactones 
Phomopsis sp. YM 
311483 

A. niger, Botrytis cinere, and 
Fusarium 
Azadirachta indica 
[130] 

Jesterone 
Pestalotiopsis jesteri 

Pythium ultimum, Phytophthora 
citrophthora, Rhizoctonia solani 
and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 

Fragraea bodenii 
[131] 

Pestalotiopsis jesteri 

Pythium ultimum, 
Phytophthora citrophthora, 
Rhizoctonia solani and 
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 

Fragraea bodenii 
[131] 

Peniciadametizine 
A 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
14 of 29 

Peniciadamet-
izine A 

Penicillium 
adametzioides AS-53, 
Penicillium jan-
thinellum strain 
HDN13-309 

Alternaria brassica 

Sponge collected 
at the Hainan Is-
land of China, 
roots of Sonneratia 
caseolaris 

[132] 



## Table 6 .
6Antimicrobial compounds extracted from marine fungi.Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against Environment Source Reference 

Penicisteroid A 

Penicillium 
chrysogenum 
QEN-24S 

A. niger and Alter-
naria brassicae 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium sp. 
[135] 

Arisugacin K 
P. echinulatum 
E. coli 
Marine alga Chondrus 
ocellatus. 
[136] 

Methyl (Z)-3-(3, 4-
dihydroxy-
phenyl)-2-
Formamidoacry-
late 

P. oxalicum 
EN-
290 

S. aureus 
Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[137] 



## Table 6 .
6Antimicrobial compounds extracted from marine fungi.Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Environment Source 
References 

Penicisteroid A 



## Table 6 .
6Antimicrobial compounds extracted from marine fungi.Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against Environment Source Reference 

Penicisteroid A 

Penicillium 
chrysogenum 
QEN-24S 

A. niger and Alter-
naria brassicae 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium sp. 
[135] 

Arisugacin K 
P. echinulatum 
E. coli 
Marine alga Chondrus 
ocellatus. 
[136] 

Methyl (Z)-3-(3, 4-
dihydroxy-
phenyl)-2-
Formamidoacry-
late 

P. oxalicum 
EN-
290 

S. aureus 
Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[137] 

Penicillium 
chrysogenum 
QEN-24S 

A. niger and 
Alternaria 
brassicae 

Marine algae associated 
Penicillium sp. 
[135] 

Arisugacin K 



## Table 6 .
6Antimicrobial compounds extracted from marine fungi.Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against Environment Source Reference 

Penicisteroid A 

Penicillium 
chrysogenum 
QEN-24S 

A. niger and Alter-
naria brassicae 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium sp. 
[135] 

Arisugacin K 
P. echinulatum 
E. coli 
Marine alga Chondrus 
ocellatus. 
[136] 

Methyl (Z)-3-(3, 4-
dihydroxy-
phenyl)-2-
Formamidoacry-
late 

P. oxalicum 
EN-
290 

S. aureus 
Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[137] 

P. echinulatum 
E. coli 
Marine alga Chondrus 
ocellatus. 
[136] 

Methyl (Z)-3-(3, 
4-
dihydroxyphenyl)-
2-
Formamidoacrylate 



## Table 6 .
6Antimicrobial compounds extracted from marine fungi.Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against Environment Source Reference 

Penicisteroid A 

Penicillium 
chrysogenum 
QEN-24S 

A. niger and Alter-
naria brassicae 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium sp. 
[135] 

Arisugacin K 
P. echinulatum 
E. coli 
Marine alga Chondrus 
ocellatus. 
[136] 

Methyl (Z)-3-(3, 4-
dihydroxy-
phenyl)-2-
Formamidoacry-
late 

P. oxalicum 
EN-
290 

S. aureus 
Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[137] 

P. oxalicum EN-
290 
S. aureus 
Marine algae associated 
Penicillium 
[137] 


## Table 6 .
6Cont.Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Environment Source 
References 

Chermesins A 
and B 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
15 of 29 

Chermesins A 
and B 

P. chermesinum 
EN-480, 

C. albicans, 
E. coli, M. luteus, 
and V. alginolyti-
cus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[138] 

Comazaphilones 
C (C-E) 

P. commune 
QSD-17 
Antibacterial 
Penicillium sp. from 
marine sediments 
[139] 

Penicibilaenes A 
-
P. bilaiae MA-
267 

Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides 

Rhizospheric soil of 
Lumnitzera racemosa 
[140] 

Xylarinonericin D 
and E 

Penicillium sp. 
H1 

Fusarium ox-
ysporum f. sp. Cu-
bense (antifungal) 

Beibu Gulf nearby 
Guangxi 
[136] 

Terretonin G 
Aspergillus sp. 
OPMF00272 

S. aureus 
FDA209P, Bacillus 
subtillis PCI219 
and Micrococus 
luteus 
(ATCC9341) 

Ishigaki island 
[141] 

Schevalone E 
-
A. similanensis 
sp. nov. 
MRSA 

Sponge Rhabdermia 
sp. from the coral reef 
of the Similan Island 

[142] 

Asperitaconic 
acids A-C 
-
A. niger LS11 
S. aureus 
Sponges-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[143] 

Ochramide B 
A. ochraceus 
LCJ11-102 

Enterobacter 
aerogenes 

Marine sponge Di-
chotella gemmacea 
[144] 

Spiculisporic 
acids F and G 
-
A. candidus 
HDf2 

P. solanacearum 
and S. aureus 

Marine animals asso-
ciated Aspergillus sp. 
[145] 

P. chermesinum 
EN-480, 

C. albicans, 
E. coli, M. luteus, 
and V. 
alginolyticus 

Marine algae associated 
Penicillium 
[138] 

Comazaphilones 
C (C-E) 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
15 of 29 

Chermesins A 
and B 

P. chermesinum 
EN-480, 

C. albicans, 
E. coli, M. luteus, 
and V. alginolyti-
cus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[138] 

Comazaphilones 
C (C-E) 

P. commune 
QSD-17 
Antibacterial 
Penicillium sp. from 
marine sediments 
[139] 

Penicibilaenes A 
-
P. bilaiae MA-
267 

Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides 

Rhizospheric soil of 
Lumnitzera racemosa 
[140] 

Xylarinonericin D 
and E 

Penicillium sp. 
H1 

Fusarium ox-
ysporum f. sp. Cu-
bense (antifungal) 

Beibu Gulf nearby 
Guangxi 
[136] 

Terretonin G 
Aspergillus sp. 
OPMF00272 

S. aureus 
FDA209P, Bacillus 
subtillis PCI219 
and Micrococus 
luteus 
(ATCC9341) 

Ishigaki island 
[141] 

Schevalone E 
-
A. similanensis 
sp. nov. 
MRSA 

Sponge Rhabdermia 
sp. from the coral reef 
of the Similan Island 

[142] 

Asperitaconic 
acids A-C 
-
A. niger LS11 
S. aureus 
Sponges-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[143] 

Ochramide B 
A. ochraceus 
LCJ11-102 

Enterobacter 
aerogenes 

Marine sponge Di-
chotella gemmacea 
[144] 

Spiculisporic 
acids F and G 
-
A. candidus 
HDf2 

P. solanacearum 
and S. aureus 

Marine animals asso-
ciated Aspergillus sp. 
[145] 

P. commune 
QSD-17 
Antibacterial 
Penicillium sp. from 
marine sediments 
[139] 

Penicibilaenes A 
-
P. bilaiae MA-267 
Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides 

Rhizospheric soil of 
Lumnitzera racemosa 
[140] 

Xylarinonericin 
D and E 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
15 of 29 

Chermesins A 
and B 

P. chermesinum 
EN-480, 

C. albicans, 
E. coli, M. luteus, 
and V. alginolyti-
cus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[138] 

Comazaphilones 
C (C-E) 

P. commune 
QSD-17 
Antibacterial 
Penicillium sp. from 
marine sediments 
[139] 

Penicibilaenes A 
-
P. bilaiae MA-
267 

Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides 

Rhizospheric soil of 
Lumnitzera racemosa 
[140] 

Xylarinonericin D 
and E 

Penicillium sp. 
H1 

Fusarium ox-
ysporum f. sp. Cu-
bense (antifungal) 

Beibu Gulf nearby 
Guangxi 
[136] 

Terretonin G 
Aspergillus sp. 
OPMF00272 

S. aureus 
FDA209P, Bacillus 
subtillis PCI219 
and Micrococus 
luteus 
(ATCC9341) 

Ishigaki island 
[141] 

Schevalone E 
-
A. similanensis 
sp. nov. 
MRSA 

Sponge Rhabdermia 
sp. from the coral reef 
of the Similan Island 

[142] 

Asperitaconic 
acids A-C 
-
A. niger LS11 
S. aureus 
Sponges-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[143] 

Ochramide B 
A. ochraceus 
LCJ11-102 

Enterobacter 
aerogenes 

Marine sponge Di-
chotella gemmacea 
[144] 

Spiculisporic 
acids F and G 
-
A. candidus 
HDf2 

P. solanacearum 
and S. aureus 

Marine animals asso-
ciated Aspergillus sp. 
[145] 

Penicillium sp. 
H1 

Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. 
Cubense 
(antifungal) 

Beibu Gulf nearby 
Guangxi 
[136] 

Terretonin G 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
15 of 29 

Chermesins A 
and B 

P. chermesinum 
EN-480, 

C. albicans, 
E. coli, M. luteus, 
and V. alginolyti-
cus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[138] 

Comazaphilones 
C (C-E) 

P. commune 
QSD-17 
Antibacterial 
Penicillium sp. from 
marine sediments 
[139] 

Penicibilaenes A 
-
P. bilaiae MA-
267 

Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides 

Rhizospheric soil of 
Lumnitzera racemosa 
[140] 

Xylarinonericin D 
and E 

Penicillium sp. 
H1 

Fusarium ox-
ysporum f. sp. Cu-
bense (antifungal) 

Beibu Gulf nearby 
Guangxi 
[136] 

Terretonin G 
Aspergillus sp. 
OPMF00272 

S. aureus 
FDA209P, Bacillus 
subtillis PCI219 
and Micrococus 
luteus 
(ATCC9341) 

Ishigaki island 
[141] 

Schevalone E 
-
A. similanensis 
sp. nov. 
MRSA 

Sponge Rhabdermia 
sp. from the coral reef 
of the Similan Island 

[142] 

Asperitaconic 
acids A-C 
-
A. niger LS11 
S. aureus 
Sponges-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[143] 

Ochramide B 
A. ochraceus 
LCJ11-102 

Enterobacter 
aerogenes 

Marine sponge Di-
chotella gemmacea 
[144] 

Spiculisporic 
acids F and G 
-
A. candidus 
HDf2 

P. solanacearum 
and S. aureus 

Marine animals asso-
ciated Aspergillus sp. 
[145] 

Aspergillus sp. 
OPMF00272 

S. aureus 
FDA209P, 
Bacillus 
subtillis PCI219 
and Micrococus 
luteus 
(ATCC9341) 

Ishigaki island 
[141] 

Schevalone E 
-
A. similanensis sp. 
nov. 
MRSA 

Sponge Rhabdermia sp. 
from the coral reef of the 
Similan Island 

[142] 

Asperitaconic 
acids A-C 
-
A. niger LS11 
S. aureus 
Sponges-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[143] 

Ochramide B 

Chermesins A 
and B 

P. chermesinum 
EN-480, 

C. albicans, 
E. coli, M. luteus, 
and V. alginolyti-
cus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Penicillium 
[138] 

Comazaphilones 
C (C-E) 

P. commune 
QSD-17 
Antibacterial 
Penicillium sp. from 
marine sediments 
[139] 

Penicibilaenes A 
-
P. bilaiae MA-
267 

Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides 

Rhizospheric soil of 
Lumnitzera racemosa 
[140] 

Xylarinonericin D 
and E 

Penicillium sp. 
H1 

Fusarium ox-
ysporum f. sp. Cu-
bense (antifungal) 

Beibu Gulf nearby 
Guangxi 
[136] 

Terretonin G 
Aspergillus sp. 
OPMF00272 

S. aureus 
FDA209P, Bacillus 
subtillis PCI219 
and Micrococus 
luteus 
(ATCC9341) 

Ishigaki island 
[141] 

Schevalone E 
-
A. similanensis 
sp. nov. 
MRSA 

Sponge Rhabdermia 
sp. from the coral reef 
of the Similan Island 

[142] 

Asperitaconic 
acids A-C 
-
A. niger LS11 
S. aureus 
Sponges-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[143] 

Ochramide B 
A. ochraceus 
LCJ11-102 

Enterobacter 
aerogenes 

Marine sponge Di-
chotella gemmacea 
[144] 

Spiculisporic 
acids F and G 
-
A. candidus 
HDf2 

P. solanacearum 
and S. aureus 

Marine animals asso-
ciated Aspergillus sp. 
[145] 

A. ochraceus 
LCJ11-102 

Enterobacter 
aerogenes 

Marine sponge Dichotella 
gemmacea 
[144] 

Spiculisporic 
acids F and G 
-
A. candidus HDf2 
P. solanacearum 
and S. aureus 

Marine animals associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[145] 

Aspergicin 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
16 of 29 

Aspergicin 

Aspergillus sp. 
FSY-01 and As-
pergillus sp. 
FSW-02 

S. aureus, S. epider-
midis, B. subtilis, B. 
dysenteriae, B. 
proteus and E. coli, 

Mangrove Avicennia 
marina in 
Guangdong. 

[146] 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Aspergillus sp. 
FSY-01 and 
Aspergillus sp. 
FSW-02 

S. aureus, S. 
epidermidis, B. 
subtilis, B. 
dysenteriae, B. 
proteus and E. 
coli, 

Mangrove Avicennia 
marina in Guangdong. 
[146] 


## Table 6 .
6Cont.Peniciadametizine A and Peniciadametizine B derivative of thiolated diketopiperazine was isolated from sponges-associated Penicillium sp. viz. Penicillium adametzioides AS-53 and Penicillium sp. LS54, respectively. Both derivatives inhibit A. brassicae (pathogenic fungus) with a MIC of 4.0 µ g/mL and 32.0 μg/mL, respectively[138]. Communol A, G, Peniciadametizine A and Peniciadametizine B derivative of thiolated diketopiperazine was isolated from sponges-associated Penicillium sp. viz. Penicillium adametzioides AS-53 and Penicillium sp. LS54, respectively. Both derivatives inhibit A. brassicae (pathogenic fungus) with a MIC of 4.0 µ g/mL and 32.0 μg/mL, respectively[138]. Communol A, G, and F extracted from P. commune 518 displayed antibacterial activities against E. coli with MIC values of 4.1, 23.8, and 6.4µ M, respectively, and also against E. aerogenes[136]. Pyr-Compounds 
Structure 
Producer 
Active Against 
Environment Source 
References 

Asperamide 

Aspergicin 

Aspergillus sp. 
FSY-01 and As-
pergillus sp. 
FSW-02 

S. aureus, S. epider-
midis, B. subtilis, B. 
dysenteriae, B. 
proteus and E. coli, 

Mangrove Avicennia 
marina in 
Guangdong. 

[146] 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 
A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodop-
tilometrin-
1-methyl ether 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. cereus 
and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Paecilomyces li-
lacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 
A. tamarii 
M143 
Mycrococcus luteus 
driftwood in Oki-
nawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 
3A00080 

S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 

Aspergicin 

Aspergillus sp. 
FSY-01 and As-
pergillus sp. 
FSW-02 

S. aureus, S. epider-
midis, B. subtilis, B. 
dysenteriae, B. 
proteus and E. coli, 

Mangrove Avicennia 
marina in 
Guangdong. 

[146] 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 
A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodop-
tilometrin-
1-methyl ether 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. cereus 
and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Paecilomyces li-
lacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 
A. tamarii 
M143 
Mycrococcus luteus 
driftwood in Oki-
nawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 
3A00080 

S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodoptilometrin-

1-methyl ether 

Aspergicin 

Aspergillus sp. 
FSY-01 and As-
pergillus sp. 
FSW-02 

S. aureus, S. epider-
midis, B. subtilis, B. 
dysenteriae, B. 
proteus and E. coli, 

Mangrove Avicennia 
marina in 
Guangdong. 

[146] 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 
A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodop-
tilometrin-
1-methyl ether 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. cereus 
and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Paecilomyces li-
lacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 
A. tamarii 
M143 
Mycrococcus luteus 
driftwood in Oki-
nawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 
3A00080 

S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. 
cereus and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Aspergicin 
pergillus sp. 
FSW-02 

dysenteriae, B. 
proteus and E. coli, 

marina in 
Guangdong. 

[146] 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 
A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodop-
tilometrin-
1-methyl ether 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. cereus 
and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Paecilomyces li-
lacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 
A. tamarii 
M143 
Mycrococcus luteus 
driftwood in Oki-
nawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 
3A00080 

S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

Paecilomyces 
lilacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, 
Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 

FSW-02 
proteus and E. coli, 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 
A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodop-
tilometrin-
1-methyl ether 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. cereus 
and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Paecilomyces li-
lacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 
A. tamarii 
M143 
Mycrococcus luteus 
driftwood in Oki-
nawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 
3A00080 

S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

A. tamarii M143 
Mycrococcus 
luteus 
driftwood in Okinawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

Asperamide 
A. niger EN-13 
C. albicans 
Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[147] 

Flavusides A and 
B 
A. flavus 
S. aureus 
and MRSA 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[148] 

Isorhodop-
tilometrin-
1-methyl ether 

A. versicolor 

B. subtilis, B. cereus 
and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[149] 

Asperterrein 

Paecilomyces li-
lacinus EN-531 
and A. terreus 
EN-539 

Alternaria 
brassicae, E. coli, 
Edwardsiella 
tarda, Physalospora 
piricola, and 
S. aureus 

Marine algae associ-
ated Aspergillus sp. 
[150] 

Speradine A 
A. tamarii 
M143 
Mycrococcus luteus 
driftwood in Oki-
nawa 
[136] 

Versiperol A 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 
3A00080 

S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

A. versicolor 
MCCC 3A00080 
S. aureus 
seawater-associated 
Aspergillus sp. 
[151] 

Ergosterdiacids 
A and B 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
17 of 29 

Ergosterdiacids A 
and B 
Aspergillus sp. M. tuberculosis 

Marine sediments 
associated Aspergillus 
sp. 

[152] 

Heptapeptide 
RHM1 
-
Acremonium 
sp. HM1 
S. epidermidis 
Marine sponges-
associated fungi 

Trichoderins A 
Trichoderma sp. 
05FI48 
M. smegmatis 
Marine sponges-
associated fungi 
[153] 

Botryorhodines I 
and J 
-

Setosphaeria sp. 
SCSIO 
41009 

Colletotrichum 
asianum 

Marine sponge 
Callyspongia sp. 
[154] 

A 
B 

Aspergillus sp. 
M. tuberculosis 
Marine sediments 
associated Aspergillus sp. 
[152] 

Heptapeptide 
RHM1 
-
Acremonium sp. 
HM1 
S. epidermidis 
Marine sponges-
associated fungi 

Trichoderins A 

Biomolecules 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
17 of 29 

Ergosterdiacids A 
and B 
Aspergillus sp. M. tuberculosis 

Marine sediments 
associated Aspergillus 
sp. 

[152] 

Heptapeptide 
RHM1 
-
Acremonium 
sp. HM1 
S. epidermidis 
Marine sponges-
associated fungi 

Trichoderins A 
Trichoderma sp. 
05FI48 
M. smegmatis 
Marine sponges-
associated fungi 
[153] 

Botryorhodines I 
and J 
-

Setosphaeria sp. 
SCSIO 
41009 

Colletotrichum 
asianum 

Marine sponge 
Callyspongia sp. 
[154] 

A 
B 

Trichoderma sp. 
05FI48 
M. smegmatis 
Marine sponges-
associated fungi 
[153] 

Botryorhodines I 
and J 
-

Setosphaeria sp. 
SCSIO 
41009 



## Table 7 .
7Selected antimicrobial extracts from microalgae.Microalgae 
Target Microorganism 
Active Extract 
References 

Scenedesmus quadricauda 
S. aureus and P. aeruginosa 
Methanolic extract 
[176] 
Tetraselmis sp. 
E. coli, P. aeruginosa, and S. aureus 
Ethanolic extract 
[177] 

Phaeodactylum tricornutum 
Listonella anguillarum, Lactococcus 
garvieae, Vibrio spp. and MRSA 
Eicosapentaenoic acid 
[175] 

C. vulgaris 
Steinernema feltiae 
Hydrophilic extracts 
[178] 
Skeletonema costatum 
Listeria monocytogenes 
Extra-metabolites 

S. costatum 
Vibrio spp., Pseudomonas sp. and 
Listeria monocytogenes 

Unsaturated, saturated 
long-chain fatty acids 
[179] 

Haematococcus pluvialis 
E. coli, S. aureus, Candida albicans 

Short-chain fatty acids 
(butanoic acid and 
methyl lactate), Astaxanthin 

[180] 

Amphidinium sp. 
A. niger, Trichomonas foetus 
Karatungiols 
[181] 

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii 
A. niger, A. fumigatus, C. albicans, 
S. aureus and E. coli 
Methanolic extracts 
[182] 



## Table 8 .
8List of selected antimicrobial compounds with commercial trade name and uses.Compounds 
Brand Name 
Company Name 
Country 
Uses 
References 

Nisin 
Nisaplin ® 
Danisco 
Denmark 
Used as a food preservative 
[189] 
Nisin 
Novasin ™ 
Danisco 
Denmark 
Used as a food preservative 
[189] 
Nisin 
Delvo ® Nis 
DSM 
Netherlands 
Used as a food preservative 
[190] 
Nisin 
Chrisin ® 
Chris Hansen 
Denmark 
Used as a food preservative 
[190] 

Nisin 
-
Duke Thomson's 
International 
India 
Used as a food preservative 
[191] 

Nisin 
-
Ecobio Biotech Co. 
Ltd. 
China 
Used as a food preservative 
[191] 

Delvocid-
Natamycin 
-
Duke Thomson's 
International 
India 
Used as a food preservative 
[191] 

Natamycin 
Delvocid ™ 
DSM 
Netherlands 
Used as a food preservative 
[191] 
Daptomycin 
Cubicin 
Novartis India Ltd. 
India 
Used to treat bacterial infections 
[192] 
Lipopeptides 
RhizoVital ® 
ABiTEP, GmbH 
Germany 
Biological control in agriculture 
[191] 
Lipopeptides 
Kodiak ™ 
Gustafson Inc. 
USA 
Biological control in agriculture 
[191] 
Lipopeptides 
Taegro ® 
Novozymes 
USA 
Biological control in agriculture 
[191] 
Lipopeptides 
Serenade ® 
AgraQuest Inc. 
USA 
Biological control in agriculture 
[191] 
Lipopeptides 
Botrybel 
Agricaldes 
Spain 
Biological control in agriculture 
[193] 
Spironolactone 
Aldactone ® 
Pfizer Medical 
USA 
To treat various diseases 

Conflicts of Interest:The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in ESKAPE pathogens. S Santajit, N Indrawattana, 10.1155/2016/2475067Biomed Res. Int. PubMedSantajit, S.; Indrawattana, N. Mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in ESKAPE pathogens. Biomed Res. Int. 2016, 2016, 1-8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States. C F D C Prevention, 29Prevention, C.f.D.C.a. Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States. Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/ pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pd (accessed on 29 January 2021).

Clinical relevance of the ESKAPE pathogens. J N Pendleton, S P Gorman, B F Gilmore, 10.1586/eri.13.12Expert. Rev. Anti. Infect. Ther. 11Pendleton, J.N.; Gorman, S.P.; Gilmore, B.F. Clinical relevance of the ESKAPE pathogens. Expert. Rev. Anti. Infect. Ther. 2013, 11, 297-308. [CrossRef]

Emerging strategies to combat ESKAPE pathogens in the era of antimicrobial resistance: A review. M S Mulani, E E Kamble, S N Kumkar, M S Tawre, K R Pardesi, 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00539Front. Microbiol. 10Mulani, M.S.; Kamble, E.E.; Kumkar, S.N.; Tawre, M.S.; Pardesi, K.R. Emerging strategies to combat ESKAPE pathogens in the era of antimicrobial resistance: A review. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 1-24. [CrossRef]

Global trends in antimicrobial use in food animals. T P Van Boeckel, C Brower, M Gilbert, B T Grenfell, S A Levin, T P Robinson, A Teillant, R Laxminarayan, 10.1073/pnas.1503141112Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Natl. Acad. SciUSA112Van Boeckel, T.P.; Brower, C.; Gilbert, M.; Grenfell, B.T.; Levin, S.A.; Robinson, T.P.; Teillant, A.; Laxminarayan, R. Global trends in antimicrobial use in food animals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 5649-5654. [CrossRef]

Microorganisms: A potential source of bioactive molecules for antioxidant applications. A Rani, K C Saini, F Bast, S Mehariya, S K Bhatia, R Lavecchia, A Zuorro, 10.3390/molecules26041142Molecules. 261142PubMedRani, A.; Saini, K.C.; Bast, F.; Mehariya, S.; Bhatia, S.K.; Lavecchia, R.; Zuorro, A. Microorganisms: A potential source of bioactive molecules for antioxidant applications. Molecules 2021, 26, 1142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Natural products as sources of new drugs over the 30 years from 1981 to 2010. D J Newman, G M Cragg, 10.1021/np200906sJ. Nat. Prod. 75Newman, D.J.; Cragg, G.M. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the 30 years from 1981 to 2010. J. Nat. Prod. 2012, 75, 311-335. [CrossRef]

Editorial: Bioactive compounds from microbes. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 392. R Mazzoli, K Riedel, E Pessione, 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00392PubMedMazzoli, R.; Riedel, K.; Pessione, E. Editorial: Bioactive compounds from microbes. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bacterial biofilm and its role in the pathogenesis of disease. L K Vestby, T Grønseth, R Simm, L L Nesse, 10.3390/antibiotics9020059Antibiotics. 202059PubMedVestby, L.K.; Grønseth, T.; Simm, R.; Nesse, L.L. Bacterial biofilm and its role in the pathogenesis of disease. Antibiotics 2020, 9, 59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Infectious keratitis: An update on epidemiology, causative microorganisms, risk factors, and antimicrobial resistance. D S J Ting, C S Ho, R Deshmukh, D G Said, H S Dua, 10.1038/s41433-020-01339-3Eye. 35PubMedTing, D.S.J.; Ho, C.S.; Deshmukh, R.; Said, D.G.; Dua, H.S. Infectious keratitis: An update on epidemiology, causative microorgan- isms, risk factors, and antimicrobial resistance. Eye 2021, 35, 1084-1101. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

State of the Art on the Contribution of Water to Antimicrobial Resistance; Publications Office of the European Union. I Sanseverino, A Navarro Cuenca, R Loos, D Marinov, T Lettieri, 10.2760/82376LuxembourgSanseverino, I.; Navarro Cuenca, A.; Loos, R.; Marinov, D.; Lettieri, T. State of the Art on the Contribution of Water to Antimicrobial Resistance; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2018. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial peptides of the genus Bacillus: A new era for antibiotics. C D Sumi, B W Yang, I.-C Yeo, Y T Hahm, 10.1139/cjm-2014-0613Can. J. Microbiol. 61PubMedSumi, C.D.; Yang, B.W.; Yeo, I.-C.; Hahm, Y.T. Antimicrobial peptides of the genus Bacillus: A new era for antibiotics. Can. J. Microbiol. 2015, 61, 93-103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Statistical research on the bioactivity of new marine natural products discovered during the 28 years from. Y Hu, J Chen, G Hu, J Yu, X Zhu, Y Lin, S Chen, J Yuan, 10.3390/md13010202Mar. Drugs. 13Hu, Y.; Chen, J.; Hu, G.; Yu, J.; Zhu, X.; Lin, Y.; Chen, S.; Yuan, J. Statistical research on the bioactivity of new marine natural products discovered during the 28 years from 1985 to 2012. Mar. Drugs 2015, 13, 202-221. [CrossRef]

Purification and partial characterization of marinocine, a new broad-spectrum antibacterial protein produced by Marinomonas mediterranea. P Lucas-Elio, P Hernandez, A Sanchez-Amat, F Solano, 10.1016/j.bbagen.2004.11.002Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 1721PubMedLucas-Elio, P.; Hernandez, P.; Sanchez-Amat, A.; Solano, F. Purification and partial characterization of marinocine, a new broad-spectrum antibacterial protein produced by Marinomonas mediterranea. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2005, 1721, 193-203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

. D Ayuningrum, Y Liu, Riyanti, Ayuningrum, D.; Liu, Y.; Riyanti;

Tunicate-associated bacteria show a great potential for the discovery of antimicrobial compounds. M T Sibero, R Kristiana, M A Asagabaldan, Z G Wuisan, A Trianto, O K Radjasa, A Sabdono, 10.1371/journal.pone.0213797PLoS ONE. 14Sibero, M.T.; Kristiana, R.; Asagabaldan, M.A.; Wuisan, Z.G.; Trianto, A.; Radjasa, O.K.; Sabdono, A.; et al. Tunicate-associated bacteria show a great potential for the discovery of antimicrobial compounds. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0213797. [CrossRef]

F S Tareq, H S Lee, Y J Lee, J S Lee, H J Shin, 10.1007/s11745-015-4014-zIeodoglucomide C and Ieodoglycolipid, new glycolipids from a marine-derived bacterium Bacillus licheniformis 09IDYM23. Lipids. 50Tareq, F.S.; Lee, H.S.; Lee, Y.J.; Lee, J.S.; Shin, H.J. Ieodoglucomide C and Ieodoglycolipid, new glycolipids from a marine-derived bacterium Bacillus licheniformis 09IDYM23. Lipids 2015, 50, 513-519. [CrossRef]

Novel antifungal janthinopolyenemycins A and B from a co-culture of marine-associated Janthinobacterium spp. ZZ145 and ZZ148. K Anjum, I Sadiq, L Chen, S Kaleem, X.-C Li, Z Zhang, X.-Y Lian, 10.1016/j.tetlet.2018.08.022Tetrahedron Lett. 59Anjum, K.; Sadiq, I.; Chen, L.; Kaleem, S.; Li, X.-C.; Zhang, Z.; Lian, X.-Y. Novel antifungal janthinopolyenemycins A and B from a co-culture of marine-associated Janthinobacterium spp. ZZ145 and ZZ148. Tetrahedron Lett. 2018, 59, 3490-3494. [CrossRef]

Genome-directed lead discovery: Biosynthesis, structure elucidation, and biological evaluation of two families of polyene macrolactams against Trypanosoma brucei. C J Schulze, M S Donia, J L Siqueira-Neto, D Ray, J A Raskatov, R E Green, J H Mckerrow, M A Fischbach, R G Linington, 10.1021/acschembio.5b00308ACS Chem. Biol. 10PubMedSchulze, C.J.; Donia, M.S.; Siqueira-Neto, J.L.; Ray, D.; Raskatov, J.A.; Green, R.E.; McKerrow, J.H.; Fischbach, M.A.; Linington, R.G. Genome-directed lead discovery: Biosynthesis, structure elucidation, and biological evaluation of two families of polyene macrolactams against Trypanosoma brucei. ACS Chem. Biol. 2015, 10, 2373-2381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Discovery, biosynthesis, and heterologous production of streptoseomycin, an anti-microaerophilic bacteria macrodilactone. B Zhang, K B Wang, W Wang, S F Bi, Y N Mei, X Z Deng, R H Jiao, R X Tan, H M Ge, 10.1021/acs.orglett.8b01006Org. Lett. 20Zhang, B.; Wang, K.B.; Wang, W.; Bi, S.F.; Mei, Y.N.; Deng, X.Z.; Jiao, R.H.; Tan, R.X.; Ge, H.M. Discovery, biosynthesis, and heterologous production of streptoseomycin, an anti-microaerophilic bacteria macrodilactone. Org. Lett. 2018, 20, 2967-2971. [CrossRef]

Bacicyclin, a new antibacterial cyclic hexapeptide from Bacillus sp. strain BC028 isolated from Mytilus edulis. J Wiese, U R Abdelmohsen, A Motiei, U H Humeida, J F Imhoff, 10.1016/j.bmcl.2018.01.062Bioorganic. Med. Chem. Lett. 28PubMedWiese, J.; Abdelmohsen, U.R.; Motiei, A.; Humeida, U.H.; Imhoff, J.F. Bacicyclin, a new antibacterial cyclic hexapeptide from Bacillus sp. strain BC028 isolated from Mytilus edulis. Bioorganic. Med. Chem. Lett. 2018, 28, 558-561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Identification and classification of known and putative antimicrobial compounds produced by a wide variety of Bacillales species. X Zhao, O P Kuipers, 10.1186/s12864-016-3224-yBMC Genomics. 17PubMedZhao, X.; Kuipers, O.P. Identification and classification of known and putative antimicrobial compounds produced by a wide variety of Bacillales species. BMC Genomics 2016, 17, 882. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Overview of the antimicrobial compounds produced by members of the Bacillus subtilis group. S Caulier, C Nannan, A Gillis, F Licciardi, C Bragard, J Mahillon, 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00302Front. Microbiol. 10PubMedCaulier, S.; Nannan, C.; Gillis, A.; Licciardi, F.; Bragard, C.; Mahillon, J. Overview of the antimicrobial compounds produced by members of the Bacillus subtilis group. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 302. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

. Praptiwi, Praptiwi;

Assessment of Actinomycetes Isolated from Soils on Simeuleu Island as Antibacterial and Antioxidant. A Fathoni, A L Putri, D Wulansari, A Agusta, Proceedings of the AIP Conference. the AIP ConferenceMalang, IndonesiaFathoni, A.; Putri, A.L.; Wulansari, D.; Agusta, A. Assessment of Actinomycetes Isolated from Soils on Simeuleu Island as Antibacterial and Antioxidant. In Proceedings of the AIP Conference, Malang, Indonesia, 13-14 March 2019; pp. 1-8.

Competitive dominance by a bacteriocin-producing Vibrio harveyi strain. P R Hoyt, R K Sizemore, 10.1128/aem.44.3.653-658.1982Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 44Hoyt, P.R.; Sizemore, R.K. Competitive dominance by a bacteriocin-producing Vibrio harveyi strain. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1982, 44, 653-658. [CrossRef]

Overview of global trends in classification, methods of preparation and application of bacteriocins. M Zimina, O Babich, A Prosekov, S Sukhikh, S Ivanova, M Shevchenko, S Noskova, 10.3390/antibiotics9090553Antibiotics. 2020Zimina, M.; Babich, O.; Prosekov, A.; Sukhikh, S.; Ivanova, S.; Shevchenko, M.; Noskova, S. Overview of global trends in classification, methods of preparation and application of bacteriocins. Antibiotics 2020, 9, 553. [CrossRef]

Nisin preparation: Affirmation of GRAS status as a direct human food ingredient. F Register, Fed. Regist. 53Register, F. Nisin preparation: Affirmation of GRAS status as a direct human food ingredient. Fed. Regist. 1988, 53, 11247-11251.

Characterization and antimicrobial activity of bacteriocin 217 produced by natural isolate Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei BGBUK2-16. J Lozo, M Vukasinovic, I Strahinic, L Topisirovic, 10.4315/0362-028X-67.12.2727J. Food. Prot. 67PubMedLozo, J.; Vukasinovic, M.; Strahinic, I.; Topisirovic, L. Characterization and antimicrobial activity of bacteriocin 217 produced by natural isolate Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei BGBUK2-16. J. Food. Prot. 2004, 67, 2727-2734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Common occurrence of antibacterial agents in human intestinal microbiota. F Drissi, S Buffet, D Raoult, V Merhej, 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00441Front. Microbiol. 6PubMedDrissi, F.; Buffet, S.; Raoult, D.; Merhej, V. Common occurrence of antibacterial agents in human intestinal microbiota. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 1-8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bacteriocinlike inhibitory substances (BLIS) produced by Bacillus cereus: Preliminary characterization and application of partially purified extract containing BLIS for inhibiting Listeria monocytogenes in pineapple pulp. J A Leite, F L Tulini, F B D Reis-Teixeira, L Rabinovitch, J Q Chaves, N G Rosa, H Cabral, E C P De Martinis, 10.1016/j.lwt.2016.04.058LWT Food Sci. Tech. 72Leite, J.A.; Tulini, F.L.; Reis-Teixeira, F.B.d.; Rabinovitch, L.; Chaves, J.Q.; Rosa, N.G.; Cabral, H.; De Martinis, E.C.P. Bacteriocin- like inhibitory substances (BLIS) produced by Bacillus cereus: Preliminary characterization and application of partially purified extract containing BLIS for inhibiting Listeria monocytogenes in pineapple pulp. LWT Food Sci. Tech. 2016, 72, 261-266. [CrossRef]

Bacteriocins in the era of antibiotic resistance: Rising to the challenge. G Gradisteanu Pircalabioru, L I Popa, L Marutescu, I Gheorghe, M Popa, I Czobor Barbu, R Cristescu, M.-C Chifiriuc, 10.3390/pharmaceutics13020196Pharmaceutics. 13Gradisteanu Pircalabioru, G.; Popa, L.I.; Marutescu, L.; Gheorghe, I.; Popa, M.; Czobor Barbu, I.; Cristescu, R.; Chifiriuc, M.-C. Bacteriocins in the era of antibiotic resistance: Rising to the challenge. Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 196. [CrossRef]

In vitro evaluation of potential probiotic strain Lactococcus lactis Gh1 and its bacteriocin-like inhibitory substances for potential use in the food industry. R Jawan, S Abbasiliasi, S Mustafa, M R Kapri, M Halim, A B Ariff, 10.1007/s12602-020-09690-3Probiotics Antimicrob. Proteins. 13Jawan, R.; Abbasiliasi, S.; Mustafa, S.; Kapri, M.R.; Halim, M.; Ariff, A.B. In vitro evaluation of potential probiotic strain Lactococcus lactis Gh1 and its bacteriocin-like inhibitory substances for potential use in the food industry. Probiotics Antimicrob. Proteins 2020, 13, 422-440. [CrossRef]

A newly-isolated Bacillus subtilis BSC35 produces bacteriocin-like inhibitory substance with high potential to control Clostridium perfringens in food. W B Hyun, H S Kang, J W Lee, H B Abraha, K P Kim, 10.1016/j.lwt.2020.110625LWT Food Sci. Tech. 2021, 138, 110625. [CrossRefHyun, W.B.; Kang, H.S.; Lee, J.W.; Abraha, H.B.; Kim, K.P. A newly-isolated Bacillus subtilis BSC35 produces bacteriocin-like inhibitory substance with high potential to control Clostridium perfringens in food. LWT Food Sci. Tech. 2021, 138, 110625. [CrossRef]

Bovicins: The bacteriocins of streptococci and their potential in methane mitigation. A K Garsa, P K Choudhury, A K Puniya, T Dhewa, R K Malik, S K Tomar, 10.1007/s12602-018-9502-zProbiotics Antimicrob. Proteins. 11Garsa, A.K.; Choudhury, P.K.; Puniya, A.K.; Dhewa, T.; Malik, R.K.; Tomar, S.K. Bovicins: The bacteriocins of streptococci and their potential in methane mitigation. Probiotics Antimicrob. Proteins 2019, 11, 1403-1413. [CrossRef]

Bacteriocins, potent antimicrobial peptides and the fight against multi drug resistant species: Resistance is futile? Antibiotics. E Meade, M A Slattery, M Garvey, 10.3390/antibiotics90100329Meade, E.; Slattery, M.A.; Garvey, M. Bacteriocins, potent antimicrobial peptides and the fight against multi drug resistant species: Resistance is futile? Antibiotics 2020, 9, 32. [CrossRef]

Halocins: Protein antibiotics from hypersaline environments. R F Shand, L B Price, E M O&apos;connor, In Microbiology and Biogeochemistry of Hypersaline Environments. Shand, R.F.; Price, L.B.; O'Connor, E.M. Halocins: Protein antibiotics from hypersaline environments. In Microbiology and Biogeochemistry of Hypersaline Environments;

. A Oren, Ed, CRC PressBoca Raton, FL, USAOren, A., Ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1999; pp. 295-306.

Classification of antimicrobial peptides bacteriocins, and the nature of some bacteriocins with potential applications in food safety and bio-pharmaceuticals. O O Ibrahim, EC Microbiol. 15Ibrahim, O.O. Classification of antimicrobial peptides bacteriocins, and the nature of some bacteriocins with potential applications in food safety and bio-pharmaceuticals. EC Microbiol. 2019, 15, 591-608.

Halocins and sulfolobicins: The emerging story of archaeal protein and peptide antibiotics. E O&apos;connor, R Shand, 10.1038/sj/jim/7000190J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 28PubMedO'connor, E.; Shand, R. Halocins and sulfolobicins: The emerging story of archaeal protein and peptide antibiotics. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2002, 28, 23-31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Gut microbiota as a source of novel antimicrobials. E Garcia-Gutierrez, M J Mayer, P D Cotter, A Narbad, 10.1080/19490976.2018.1455790Gut Microbes. 10Garcia-Gutierrez, E.; Mayer, M.J.; Cotter, P.D.; Narbad, A. Gut microbiota as a source of novel antimicrobials. Gut Microbes 2019, 10, 1-21. [CrossRef]

Staphylococcal-produced bacteriocins and antimicrobial peptides: Their potential as alternative treatments for Staphylococcus aureus Infections. L L Newstead, K Varjonen, T Nuttall, G K Paterson, 10.3390/antibiotics9020040Antibiotics. 202040Newstead, L.L.; Varjonen, K.; Nuttall, T.; Paterson, G.K. Staphylococcal-produced bacteriocins and antimicrobial peptides: Their potential as alternative treatments for Staphylococcus aureus Infections. Antibiotics 2020, 9, 40. [CrossRef]

Current applications of bacteriocin. A W Negash, B A Tsehai, 10.1155/2020/4374891Int. J. Microbiol. 4374891Negash, A.W.; Tsehai, B.A. Current applications of bacteriocin. Int. J. Microbiol. 2020, 2020, 4374891. [CrossRef]

Nisin-A lantibiotic with immunomodulatory properties: A review. J Małaczewska, E Kaczorek-Łukowska, 10.1016/j.peptides.2020.170479Peptides. 137170479Małaczewska, J.; Kaczorek-Łukowska, E. Nisin-A lantibiotic with immunomodulatory properties: A review. Peptides 2021, 137, 170479. [CrossRef]

Effect of N-terminal modification on the antimicrobial activity of nisin. X Yu, N Lu, J Wang, Z Chen, C Chen, J Mac Regenstein, P Zhou, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2020.107227Food Control. 114Yu, X.; Lu, N.; Wang, J.; Chen, Z.; Chen, C.; Mac Regenstein, J.; Zhou, P. Effect of N-terminal modification on the antimicrobial activity of nisin. Food Control 2020, 114, 107227. [CrossRef]

Enhanced stability of the bactericidal activity of nisin through conjugation with gellan gum. X Peng, L Zhu, Z Wang, X Zhan, 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.164Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020PubMedPeng, X.; Zhu, L.; Wang, Z.; Zhan, X. Enhanced stability of the bactericidal activity of nisin through conjugation with gellan gum. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 148, 525-532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Synergistic nisin-polymyxin combinations for the control of pseudomonas biofilm formation. D Field, N Seisling, P D Cotter, R P Ross, C Hill, 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01713Front. Microbiol. 7PubMedField, D.; Seisling, N.; Cotter, P.D.; Ross, R.P.; Hill, C. Synergistic nisin-polymyxin combinations for the control of pseudomonas biofilm formation. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1-7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Comparative proteomics of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus subjected to synergistic effects of the lantibiotic nisin and oxacillin. F C B Alves, M Albano, B F M T Andrade, J L Chechi, A F M Pereira, A Furlanetto, V L M Rall, A A H Fernandes, L D Santos, L N Barbosa, 10.1089/mdr.2019.0038Microb. Drug Resist. 26Alves, F.C.B.; Albano, M.; Andrade, B.F.M.T.; Chechi, J.L.; Pereira, A.F.M.; Furlanetto, A.; Rall, V.L.M.; Fernandes, A.A.H.; Dos Santos, L.D.; Barbosa, L.N. Comparative proteomics of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus subjected to synergistic effects of the lantibiotic nisin and oxacillin. Microb. Drug Resist. 2020, 26, 179-189. [CrossRef]

Effect of the lantibiotic nisin on inhibitory and bactericidal activities of antibiotics used against vancomycin-resistant enterococci. S S El-Kazzaz, N T Abou El-Khier, 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.02.031J. Glob. Antimicrob. Resist. 22El-Kazzaz, S.S.; Abou El-Khier, N.T. Effect of the lantibiotic nisin on inhibitory and bactericidal activities of antibiotics used against vancomycin-resistant enterococci. J. Glob. Antimicrob. Resist. 2020, 22, 263-269. [CrossRef]

Incorporation and antimicrobial activity of nisin Z within carrageenan/chitosan multilayers. J L Webber, R Namivandi-Zangeneh, S Drozdek, K A Wilk, C Boyer, E H H Wong, B H Bradshaw-Hajek, M Krasowska, D A Beattie, 10.1038/s41598-020-79702-3Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 1690. [CrossRef. PubMedWebber, J.L.; Namivandi-Zangeneh, R.; Drozdek, S.; Wilk, K.A.; Boyer, C.; Wong, E.H.H.; Bradshaw-Hajek, B.H.; Krasowska, M.; Beattie, D.A. Incorporation and antimicrobial activity of nisin Z within carrageenan/chitosan multilayers. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 1690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

An extracellular loop of the mannose phosphotransferase system component IIC is responsible for specific targeting by class IIa bacteriocins. M Kjos, Z Salehian, I F Nes, D B Diep, 10.1128/JB.00777-10J. Bacteriol. 192Kjos, M.; Salehian, Z.; Nes, I.F.; Diep, D.B. An extracellular loop of the mannose phosphotransferase system component IIC is responsible for specific targeting by class IIa bacteriocins. J. Bacteriol. 2010, 192, 5906-5913. [CrossRef]

Natural bacterial isolates as an inexhaustible source of new bacteriocins. J Lozo, L Topisirovic, M Kojic, 10.1007/s00253-020-11063-3Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 105PubMedLozo, J.; Topisirovic, L.; Kojic, M. Natural bacterial isolates as an inexhaustible source of new bacteriocins. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2021, 105, 477-492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bacteriocins from lactic acid bacteria: A review of biosynthesis, mode of action, fermentative production, uses, and prospects. R H Perez, M T M Perez, F B Elegado, 10.18191/2015-08-2-027Int. J. Phil. Sci. Tech. 8Perez, R.H.; Perez, M.T.M.; Elegado, F.B. Bacteriocins from lactic acid bacteria: A review of biosynthesis, mode of action, fermentative production, uses, and prospects. Int. J. Phil. Sci. Tech. 2015, 8, 61-67. [CrossRef]

Preservation of meat products with bacteriocins produced by lactic acid bacteria isolated from meat. R J Da Costa, F L Voloski, R G Mondadori, E H Duval, Â M Fiorentini, 10.1155/2019/4726510J. Food Qual. Da Costa, R.J.; Voloski, F.L.; Mondadori, R.G.; Duval, E.H.; Fiorentini, Â.M. Preservation of meat products with bacteriocins produced by lactic acid bacteria isolated from meat. J. Food Qual. 2019, 2019, 1-12. [CrossRef]

Thiazostatin A and thiazostatin B, new antioxidants produced by Streptomyces tolurosus. K Shindo, A Takenaka, T Noguchi, Y Hayakawa, H Seto, 10.7164/antibiotics.42.1526J. Antibiot. 42PubMedShindo, K.; Takenaka, A.; Noguchi, T.; Hayakawa, Y.; Seto, H. Thiazostatin A and thiazostatin B, new antioxidants produced by Streptomyces tolurosus. J. Antibiot. 1989, 42, 1526-1529. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria: Extending the family. P Alvarez-Sieiro, M Montalbán-López, D Mu, O P Kuipers, 10.1007/s00253-016-7343-9Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100PubMedAlvarez-Sieiro, P.; Montalbán-López, M.; Mu, D.; Kuipers, O.P. Bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria: Extending the family. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2016, 100, 2939-2951. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Atlas of nonribosomal peptide and polyketide biosynthetic pathways reveals common occurrence of nonmodular enzymes. H Wang, D P Fewer, L Holm, L Rouhiainen, K Sivonen, 10.1073/pnas.1401734111Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Natl. Acad. SciUSA111Wang, H.; Fewer, D.P.; Holm, L.; Rouhiainen, L.; Sivonen, K. Atlas of nonribosomal peptide and polyketide biosynthetic pathways reveals common occurrence of nonmodular enzymes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 9259-9264. [CrossRef]

Genome mining: Prediction of lipopeptides and polyketides from Bacillus and related Firmicutes. G Aleti, A Sessitsch, G Brader, 10.1016/j.csbj.2015.03.003Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 13Aleti, G.; Sessitsch, A.; Brader, G. Genome mining: Prediction of lipopeptides and polyketides from Bacillus and related Firmicutes. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 2015, 13, 192-203. [CrossRef]

Bacillus spp. isolated from puba as a source of biosurfactants and antimicrobial lipopeptides. Front. K J Perez, J D S Viana, F C Lopes, J Q Pereira, D M Santos, J S Oliveira, R V Velho, S M Crispim, J R Nicoli, A Brandelli, 10.3389/fmicb.2017.000618PubMedPerez, K.J.; Viana, J.d.S.; Lopes, F.C.; Pereira, J.Q.; dos Santos, D.M.; Oliveira, J.S.; Velho, R.V.; Crispim, S.M.; Nicoli, J.R.; Brandelli, A.; et al. Bacillus spp. isolated from puba as a source of biosurfactants and antimicrobial lipopeptides. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 61-75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antimicrobial activity of lipopeptide biosurfactants against foodborne pathogen and food spoilage microorganisms and their cytotoxicity. K Kourmentza, X Gromada, N Michael, C Degraeve, G Vanier, R Ravallec, F Coutte, K A Karatzas, P Jauregi, 10.3389/fmicb.2020.561060Front. Microbiol. 11PubMedKourmentza, K.; Gromada, X.; Michael, N.; Degraeve, C.; Vanier, G.; Ravallec, R.; Coutte, F.; Karatzas, K.A.; Jauregi, P. Antimicrobial activity of lipopeptide biosurfactants against foodborne pathogen and food spoilage microorganisms and their cytotoxicity. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 11, 3398-3412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antibacterial activity of surfactin produced by Bacillus subtilis MSH1. M H M Isa, M A Shannaq, -H F Mohamed, N Hassan, A R Al-Shorgani, N K N Hamid, A A , Trans. Sci. Tech. 4Isa, M.H.M.; Shannaq, M.A.-H.F.; Mohamed, N.; Hassan, A.R.; Al-Shorgani, N.K.N.; Hamid, A.A. Antibacterial activity of surfactin produced by Bacillus subtilis MSH1. Trans. Sci. Tech. 2017, 4, 402-407.

The role of iturin A from B. amyloliquefaciens BUZ-14 in the inhibition of the most common postharvest fruit rots. H Calvo, I Mendiara, E Arias, D Blanco, M Venturini, 10.1016/j.fm.2019.01.010Food Microbiol. 82PubMedCalvo, H.; Mendiara, I.; Arias, E.; Blanco, D.; Venturini, M. The role of iturin A from B. amyloliquefaciens BUZ-14 in the inhibition of the most common postharvest fruit rots. Food Microbiol. 2019, 82, 62-69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Selectivity and mechanism of fengycin, an antimicrobial lipopeptide, from molecular dynamics. S Sur, T D Romo, A Grossfield, 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b11889J. Phys. Chem. B. 122Sur, S.; Romo, T.D.; Grossfield, A. Selectivity and mechanism of fengycin, an antimicrobial lipopeptide, from molecular dynamics. J. Phys. Chem. B 2018, 122, 2219-2226. [CrossRef]

Microbial lipopeptides and their medical applications. K Meena, A Sharma, S Kanwar, Ann. Pharmacol. Pharm. Meena, K.; Sharma, A.; Kanwar, S. Microbial lipopeptides and their medical applications. Ann. Pharmacol. Pharm. 2017, 2, 1126.

Lipopeptide induces apoptosis in fungal cells by a mitochondriadependent pathway. G Qi, F Zhu, P Du, X Yang, D Qiu, Z Yu, J Chen, X Zhao, 10.1016/j.peptides.2010.08.003Peptides. 31PubMedQi, G.; Zhu, F.; Du, P.; Yang, X.; Qiu, D.; Yu, Z.; Chen, J.; Zhao, X. Lipopeptide induces apoptosis in fungal cells by a mitochondria- dependent pathway. Peptides 2010, 31, 1978-1986. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Lipopeptide surfactants: Production, recovery and pore forming capacity. M Inès, G Dhouha, 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.07.006Peptides. 71Inès, M.; Dhouha, G. Lipopeptide surfactants: Production, recovery and pore forming capacity. Peptides 2015, 71, 100-112. [CrossRef]

Mode of action of the new antibiotic for Gram-positive pathogens daptomycin: Comparison with cationic antimicrobial peptides and lipopeptides. S K Straus, R E Hancock, 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.02.009Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr. BBA-Biomembr. 1758Straus, S.K.; Hancock, R.E. Mode of action of the new antibiotic for Gram-positive pathogens daptomycin: Comparison with cationic antimicrobial peptides and lipopeptides. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr. BBA-Biomembr. 2006, 1758, 1215-1223. [CrossRef]

Identification and characterization of a cyclic lipopeptide iturin A from a marine-derived Bacillus velezensis 11-5 as a fungicidal agent to Magnaporthe oryzae in rice. Z Ma, S Zhang, K Sun, J Hu, 10.1007/s41348-019-00282-0J. Plant. Dis. Prot. 127Ma, Z.; Zhang, S.; Sun, K.; Hu, J. Identification and characterization of a cyclic lipopeptide iturin A from a marine-derived Bacillus velezensis 11-5 as a fungicidal agent to Magnaporthe oryzae in rice. J. Plant. Dis. Prot. 2020, 127, 15-24. [CrossRef]

Role of lipopeptides produced by Bacillus subtilis GA1 in the reduction of grey mould disease caused by Botrytis cinerea on apple. Y Touré, M Ongena, P Jacques, A Guiro, P Thonart, 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2004.02252.xJ. Appl. Microbiol. 96PubMedTouré, Y.; Ongena, M.; Jacques, P.; Guiro, A.; Thonart, P. Role of lipopeptides produced by Bacillus subtilis GA1 in the reduction of grey mould disease caused by Botrytis cinerea on apple. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2004, 96, 1151-1160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Biologically active secondary metabolites from Actinomycetes. J Solecka, J Zajko, M Postek, A Rajnisz, 10.2478/s11535-012-0036-1Open Life Sci. 7Solecka, J.; Zajko, J.; Postek, M.; Rajnisz, A. Biologically active secondary metabolites from Actinomycetes. Open Life Sci. 2012, 7, 373-390. [CrossRef]

Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of novel actinobacteria strain isolated from Gulf of Khambhat. R N Dholakiya, R Kumar, A Mishra, K H Mody, B Jha, 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02420Gujarat. Front. Microbiol. Dholakiya, R.N.; Kumar, R.; Mishra, A.; Mody, K.H.; Jha, B. Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of novel actinobacteria strain isolated from Gulf of Khambhat, Gujarat. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 2420. [CrossRef]

Evaluation of antimicrobial, enzyme inhibitory, antioxidant and cytotoxic activities of partially purified volatile metabolites of marine Streptomyces sp. S Siddharth, R R Vittal, 10.3390/microorganisms6030072S2A. Microorganisms. 6PubMedSiddharth, S.; Vittal, R.R. Evaluation of antimicrobial, enzyme inhibitory, antioxidant and cytotoxic activities of partially purified volatile metabolites of marine Streptomyces sp. S2A. Microorganisms 2018, 6, 72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Engineering actinomycetes for biosynthesis of macrolactone polyketides. Micro. Cell Fact. D Dhakal, J K Sohng, R P Pandey, 10.1186/s12934-019-1184-z18PubMedDhakal, D.; Sohng, J.K.; Pandey, R.P. Engineering actinomycetes for biosynthesis of macrolactone polyketides. Micro. Cell Fact. 2019, 18, 137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Application of Streptomyces antimicrobial compounds for the control of phytopathogens. S Pacios-Michelena, C N Aguilar González, O B Alvarez-Perez, R Rodriguez-Herrera, M Chávez-González, R Arredondo Valdés, J A Valdés, M Salas, A Ilyina, 10.3389/fsufs.2021.696518Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 5Pacios-Michelena, S.; Aguilar González, C.N.; Alvarez-Perez, O.B.; Rodriguez-Herrera, R.; Chávez-González, M.; Arredondo Valdés, R.; Ascacio Valdés, J.A.; Govea Salas, M.; Ilyina, A. Application of Streptomyces antimicrobial compounds for the control of phytopathogens. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2021, 5, 310-324. [CrossRef]

Antioxidant Activity of Three Microalgae Dunaliella Salina, Tetraselmis chuii and Isochrysis galbana Clone Tahiti. I Widowati, M Zainuri, H P Kusumaningrum, R Susilowati, Y Hardivillier, V Leignel, N Bourgougnon, J L Mouget, Proceedings of the IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science. the IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental ScienceBali, Indonesia; Bristol, UKIOP Publishing12067Widowati, I.; Zainuri, M.; Kusumaningrum, H.P.; Susilowati, R.; Hardivillier, Y.; Leignel, V.; Bourgougnon, N.; Mouget, J.L. Antioxidant Activity of Three Microalgae Dunaliella Salina, Tetraselmis chuii and Isochrysis galbana Clone Tahiti. In Proceedings of the IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, Bali, Indonesia, 19-22 October 2017; IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2017; p. 012067.

Lynamicins a−e, chlorinated bisindole pyrrole antibiotics from a novel marine actinomycete. K A Mcarthur, S S Mitchell, G Tsueng, A Rheingold, D J White, J Grodberg, K S Lam, B C Potts, 10.1021/np800286dJ. Nat. Prod. 71PubMedMcArthur, K.A.; Mitchell, S.S.; Tsueng, G.; Rheingold, A.; White, D.J.; Grodberg, J.; Lam, K.S.; Potts, B.C. Lynamicins a−e, chlorinated bisindole pyrrole antibiotics from a novel marine actinomycete. J. Nat. Prod. 2008, 71, 1732-1737. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

A new prenylated indole derivative from endophytic actinobacteria Streptomyces sp. neau-D50. J Zhang, J.-D Wang, C.-X Liu, J.-H Yuan, X.-J Wang, W.-S Xiang, 10.1080/14786419.2013.871546Nat. Prod. Res. 28PubMedZhang, J.; Wang, J.-D.; Liu, C.-X.; Yuan, J.-H.; Wang, X.-J.; Xiang, W.-S. A new prenylated indole derivative from endophytic actinobacteria Streptomyces sp. neau-D50. Nat. Prod. Res. 2014, 28, 431-437. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Metabolite profile of marine-derived endophytic Streptomyces sundarbansensis WR 1 L 1 S 8 by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and evaluation of culture conditions on antibacterial activity and mycelial growth. I Djinni, A Defant, M Kecha, I Mancini, 10.1111/jam.12360J. Appl. Microbiol. 116Djinni, I.; Defant, A.; Kecha, M.; Mancini, I. Metabolite profile of marine-derived endophytic Streptomyces sundarbansensis WR 1 L 1 S 8 by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and evaluation of culture conditions on antibacterial activity and mycelial growth. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2014, 116, 39-50. [CrossRef]

Isolation and optimized production of putative antimicrobial compounds from Egyptian soil isolate Streptomyces sp. MS. 10. Beni-Suef Univ. M Sebak, A E Saafan, S Abdelghani, W Bakeer, A S Moawad, A O El-Gendy, 10.1186/s43088-021-00099-7J. Basic Appl. Sci. 10Sebak, M.; Saafan, A.E.; Abdelghani, S.; Bakeer, W.; Moawad, A.S.; El-Gendy, A.O. Isolation and optimized production of putative antimicrobial compounds from Egyptian soil isolate Streptomyces sp. MS. 10. Beni-Suef Univ. J. Basic Appl. Sci. 2021, 10, 8. [CrossRef]

Isolation, characterization, anti-MRSA evaluation, and in-silico multi-target anti-microbial validations of actinomycin X2 and actinomycin D produced by novel Streptomyces smyrnaeus UKAQ_23. K A Qureshi, A D Bholay, P K Rai, H A Mohammed, R A Khan, F Azam, M Jaremko, A.-H Emwas, P Stefanowicz, M Waliczek, 10.1038/s41598-021-93285-7Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 14539. [CrossRefQureshi, K.A.; Bholay, A.D.; Rai, P.K.; Mohammed, H.A.; Khan, R.A.; Azam, F.; Jaremko, M.; Emwas, A.-H.; Stefanowicz, P.; Waliczek, M.; et al. Isolation, characterization, anti-MRSA evaluation, and in-silico multi-target anti-microbial validations of actinomycin X2 and actinomycin D produced by novel Streptomyces smyrnaeus UKAQ_23. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 14539. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of a new benzamide from endophytic Streptomyces sp. YIM 67086. X Yang, T Peng, Y Yang, W Li, J Xiong, L Zhao, Z Ding, 10.1080/14786419.2014.945174Natl. Prod. Res. 29Yang, X.; Peng, T.; Yang, Y.; Li, W.; Xiong, J.; Zhao, L.; Ding, Z. Antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of a new benzamide from endophytic Streptomyces sp. YIM 67086. Natl. Prod. Res. 2015, 29, 331-335. [CrossRef]

A new di-O-prenylated flavone from an actinomycete Streptomyces sp. MA-12. W.-J Ding, S.-Q Zhang, J.-H Wang, Y.-X Lin, Q.-X Liang, W.-J Zhao, C.-Y Li, 10.1080/10286020.2012.751979J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 15Ding, W.-J.; Zhang, S.-Q.; Wang, J.-H.; Lin, Y.-X.; Liang, Q.-X.; Zhao, W.-J.; Li, C.-Y. A new di-O-prenylated flavone from an actinomycete Streptomyces sp. MA-12. J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 2013, 15, 209-214. [CrossRef]

Diversity and antimicrobial activities of actinobacteria isolated from tropical mangrove sediments in Malaysia. L.-H Lee, N Zainal, A.-S Azman, S.-K Eng, B.-H Goh, W.-F.; Ab Yin, N.-S Mutalib, K.-G Chan, 10.1155/2014/698178Sci. World J. PubMedLee, L.-H.; Zainal, N.; Azman, A.-S.; Eng, S.-K.; Goh, B.-H.; Yin, W.-F.; Ab Mutalib, N.-S.; Chan, K.-G. Diversity and antimicrobial activities of actinobacteria isolated from tropical mangrove sediments in Malaysia. Sci. World J. 2014, 2014, 1-14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antibacterial, antifungal and anticancer activities of compounds produced by newly isolated Streptomyces strains from the Szczelina Chochołowska cave. W Jaroszewicz, P Bielańska, D Lubomska, K Kosznik-Kwaśnicka, P Golec, Ł Grabowski, E Wieczerzak, W Dróżdż, L Gaffke, K Pierzynowska, 10.3390/antibiotics10101212101212Tatra Mountains, PolandPubMedJaroszewicz, W.; Bielańska, P.; Lubomska, D.; Kosznik-Kwaśnicka, K.; Golec, P.; Grabowski, Ł.; Wieczerzak, E.; Dróżdż, W.; Gaffke, L.; Pierzynowska, K. Antibacterial, antifungal and anticancer activities of compounds produced by newly isolated Streptomyces strains from the Szczelina Chochołowska cave (Tatra Mountains, Poland). Antibiotics 2021, 10, 1212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Colibrimycins, novel halogenated hybrid PKS-NRPS compounds produced by Streptomyces sp. L Prado-Alonso, I Pérez-Victoria, M G Malmierca, I Montero, E Rioja-Blanco, J Martín, F Reyes, C Méndez, J A Salas, C Olano, 10.1128/AEM.01839-21CS147. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. Prado-Alonso, L.; Pérez-Victoria, I.; Malmierca, M.G.; Montero, I.; Rioja-Blanco, E.; Martín, J.; Reyes, F.; Méndez, C.; Salas, J.A.; Olano, C. Colibrimycins, novel halogenated hybrid PKS-NRPS compounds produced by Streptomyces sp. CS147. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2021. [CrossRef]

Extraction and Characterization of Antibiotic Compounds produced by Streptomyces spp. VITGV01 against Selected Human Pathogens. P Veilumuthu, R Siva, J Godwin Christopher, 20Veilumuthu, P.; Siva, R.; Godwin Christopher, J. Extraction and Characterization of Antibiotic Compounds produced by Streptomyces spp. VITGV01 against Selected Human Pathogens. 2021. Available online: https://www.researchsquare.com/ article/rs-321054/v1 (accessed on 20 April 2021).

Anti-inflammatory effect of d-(+)-cycloserine through inhibition of NF-κB and MAPK signaling pathways in LPS-induced RAW 264.7 macrophages. H.-K Kang, C G Hyun, 10.1177/1934578X20920481Nat. Prod. Commun. 15Kang, H.-K.; Hyun, C.G. Anti-inflammatory effect of d-(+)-cycloserine through inhibition of NF-κB and MAPK signaling pathways in LPS-induced RAW 264.7 macrophages. Nat. Prod. Commun. 2020, 15, 1-11. [CrossRef]

Actinomycete-derived polyketides as a source of antibiotics and lead structures for the development of new antimicrobial drugs. H L Robertsen, E M Musiol-Kroll, 10.3390/antibiotics80401578157PubMedRobertsen, H.L.; Musiol-Kroll, E.M. Actinomycete-derived polyketides as a source of antibiotics and lead structures for the development of new antimicrobial drugs. Antibiotics 2019, 8, 157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Concepts and methods to access novel antibiotics from actinomycetes. J J Hug, C D Bader, M Remškar, K Cirnski, R Müller, 10.3390/antibiotics7020044Antibiotics. 744Hug, J.J.; Bader, C.D.; Remškar, M.; Cirnski, K.; Müller, R. Concepts and methods to access novel antibiotics from actinomycetes. Antibiotics 2018, 7, 44. [CrossRef]

A new cyclopeptide from endophytic Streptomyces sp. YIM 64018. X Yang, Y Yang, T Peng, F Yang, H Zhou, L Zhao, L Xu, Z Ding, 10.1177/1934578X1300801225Nat. Prod. Commun. 8Yang, X.; Yang, Y.; Peng, T.; Yang, F.; Zhou, H.; Zhao, L.; Xu, L.; Ding, Z. A new cyclopeptide from endophytic Streptomyces sp. YIM 64018. Nat. Prod. Commun. 2013, 8, 1753-1754. [CrossRef]

Bafilomycins produced by an endophytic actinomycete Streptomyces sp. YIM56209. Z Yu, L.-X Zhao, C.-L Jiang, Y Duan, L Wong, K C Carver, L A Schuler, B Shen, 10.1038/ja.2010.147J. Antibiot. 64Yu, Z.; Zhao, L.-X.; Jiang, C.-L.; Duan, Y.; Wong, L.; Carver, K.C.; Schuler, L.A.; Shen, B. Bafilomycins produced by an endophytic actinomycete Streptomyces sp. YIM56209. J. Antibiot. 2011, 64, 159-162. [CrossRef]

Diastaphenazine, a new dimeric phenazine from an endophytic Streptomyces diastaticus subsp. ardesiacus. Y Li, L Han, H Rong, L Li, L Zhao, L Wu, L Xu, Y Jiang, X Huang, 10.1038/ja.2014.124J. Antibiot. 68PubMedLi, Y.; Han, L.; Rong, H.; Li, L.; Zhao, L.; Wu, L.; Xu, L.; Jiang, Y.; Huang, X. Diastaphenazine, a new dimeric phenazine from an endophytic Streptomyces diastaticus subsp. ardesiacus. J. Antibiot. 2015, 68, 210-212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microbispora sp. LGMB259 endophytic actinomycete isolated from Vochysia divergens (Pantanal, Brazil) producing β-carbolines and indoles with biological activity. D C Savi, K A Shaaban, N Vargas, L V Ponomareva, Y M Possiede, J S Thorson, C Glienke, J Rohr, 10.1007/s00284-014-0724-3Curr. Microbiol. 70Savi, D.C.; Shaaban, K.A.; Vargas, N.; Ponomareva, L.V.; Possiede, Y.M.; Thorson, J.S.; Glienke, C.; Rohr, J. Microbispora sp. LGMB259 endophytic actinomycete isolated from Vochysia divergens (Pantanal, Brazil) producing β-carbolines and indoles with biological activity. Curr. Microbiol. 2015, 70, 345-354. [CrossRef]

Metabolites of Streptomyces sp., an endophytic actinomycete from Alpinia oxyphylla. H Zhou, Y Yang, T Peng, W Li, L Zhao, L Xu, Z Ding, 10.1080/14786419.2013.830219Nat. Prod. Res. 28Zhou, H.; Yang, Y.; Peng, T.; Li, W.; Zhao, L.; Xu, L.; Ding, Z. Metabolites of Streptomyces sp., an endophytic actinomycete from Alpinia oxyphylla. Nat. Prod. Res. 2014, 28, 265-267. [CrossRef]

Antimycin A 18 produced by an endophytic Streptomyces albidoflavus isolated from a mangrove plant. L.-L Yan, N.-N Han, Y.-Q Zhang, L.-Y Yu, J Chen, Y.-Z Wei, Q.-P Li, L Tao, G.-H Zheng, S.-E Yang, 10.1038/ja.2010.21J. Antibiot. 63Yan, L.-L.; Han, N.-N.; Zhang, Y.-Q.; Yu, L.-Y.; Chen, J.; Wei, Y.-Z.; Li, Q.-P.; Tao, L.; Zheng, G.-H.; Yang, S.-E. Antimycin A 18 produced by an endophytic Streptomyces albidoflavus isolated from a mangrove plant. J. Antibiot. 2010, 63, 259-261. [CrossRef]

Antibacterial activity of Streptomyces sp. VITMK1 isolated from mangrove Soil of pichavaram. M Manimaran, J V Gopal, K Kannabiran, 10.1007/s40011-015-0619-5Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Natl. Acad. SciTamil Nadu, India87Manimaran, M.; Gopal, J.V.; Kannabiran, K. Antibacterial activity of Streptomyces sp. VITMK1 isolated from mangrove Soil of pichavaram, Tamil Nadu, India. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA India Sect. B Biol. Sci. 2017, 87, 499-506. [CrossRef]

Diketopiperazine derivatives from the marine-derived actinomycete Streptomyces sp. FXJ7.328. P Wang, L Xi, P Liu, Y Wang, W Wang, Y Huang, W Zhu, 10.3390/md11041035Mar. Drugs. 11Wang, P.; Xi, L.; Liu, P.; Wang, Y.; Wang, W.; Huang, Y.; Zhu, W. Diketopiperazine derivatives from the marine-derived actinomycete Streptomyces sp. FXJ7.328. Mar. Drugs 2013, 11, 1035-1049. [CrossRef]

Synthesis of some novel pyridine compounds containing bis-1, 2, 4-triazole/thiosemicarbazide moiety and investigation of their antioxidant properties, carbonic anhydrase, and acetylcholinesterase enzymes inhibition profiles. N Bulut, U M Kocyigit, I H Gecibesler, T Dastan, H Karci, P Taslimi, S Durna Dastan, I Gulcin, A Cetin, 10.1002/jbt.22006J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 32PubMedBulut, N.; Kocyigit, U.M.; Gecibesler, I.H.; Dastan, T.; Karci, H.; Taslimi, P.; Durna Dastan, S.; Gulcin, I.; Cetin, A. Synthesis of some novel pyridine compounds containing bis-1, 2, 4-triazole/thiosemicarbazide moiety and investigation of their antioxidant properties, carbonic anhydrase, and acetylcholinesterase enzymes inhibition profiles. J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 2018, 32, e22006. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antioxidants and antioxidant methods: An updated overview. İ Gulcin, 10.1007/s00204-020-02689-3Arch. Toxicol. 2020PubMedGulcin,İ. Antioxidants and antioxidant methods: An updated overview. Arch. Toxicol. 2020, 94, 651-715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Halocins: Salt-dependent bacteriocins produced by extremely halophilic rods. F Rodriguez-Valera, G Juez, D Kushner, 10.1139/m82-019Can. J. Microbiol. 28Rodriguez-Valera, F.; Juez, G.; Kushner, D. Halocins: Salt-dependent bacteriocins produced by extremely halophilic rods. Can. J. Microbiol. 1982, 28, 151-154. [CrossRef]

Insights into the anticancer properties of the first antimicrobial peptide from Archaea. R Gaglione, L Pirone, B Farina, S Fusco, G Smaldone, M Aulitto, E Dell&apos;olmo, E Roscetto, A Del Gatto, R Fattorusso, 10.1016/j.bbagen.2017.06.009Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. Gaglione, R.; Pirone, L.; Farina, B.; Fusco, S.; Smaldone, G.; Aulitto, M.; Dell'Olmo, E.; Roscetto, E.; Del Gatto, A.; Fattorusso, R.; et al. Insights into the anticancer properties of the first antimicrobial peptide from Archaea. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2017, 1861, 2155-2164. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial peptides and proteins in the face of extremes: Lessons from archaeocins. A Besse, J Peduzzi, S Rebuffat, A Carré-Mlouka, 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.06.004Biochimie. 118Besse, A.; Peduzzi, J.; Rebuffat, S.; Carré-Mlouka, A. Antimicrobial peptides and proteins in the face of extremes: Lessons from archaeocins. Biochimie 2015, 118, 344-355. [CrossRef]

Amils, R. Purification and biological characterization of halocin H1 from Haloferax mediterranei M2a. G Platas, I Meseguer, 10.1007/s10123-002-0053-4Int. Microbiol. 5Platas, G.; Meseguer, I.; Amils, R. Purification and biological characterization of halocin H1 from Haloferax mediterranei M2a. Int. Microbiol. 2002, 5, 15-19. [CrossRef]

Production and purification of halocin H4. I Meseguer, F Rodriguez-Valera, 10.1111/j.1574-6968.1985.tb00787.xFEMS Microbiol. Lett. 28Meseguer, I.; Rodriguez-Valera, F. Production and purification of halocin H4. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 1985, 28, 177-182. [CrossRef]

. M Torreblanca, I Meseguer, F Rodríguez-Valera, Halocin, 10.1099/00221287-135-10-2655135Torreblanca, M.; Meseguer, I.; Rodríguez-Valera, F. Halocin H6, a bacteriocin from Haloferax gibbonsii. Microbiology 1989, 135, 2655-2661. [CrossRef]

Purification and biological characterization of halocin C8, a novel peptide antibiotic from Halobacterium strain AS7092. Y Li, H Xiang, J Liu, M Zhou, H Tan, 10.1007/s00792-003-0335-6Extremophiles. 7PubMedLi, Y.; Xiang, H.; Liu, J.; Zhou, M.; Tan, H. Purification and biological characterization of halocin C8, a novel peptide antibiotic from Halobacterium strain AS7092. Extremophiles 2003, 7, 401-407. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Halocin S8: A 36-amino-acid microhalocin from the haloarchaeal strain S8a. L B Price, R F Shand, 10.1128/JB.182.17.4951-4958.2000J. Bacteriol. 182Price, L.B.; Shand, R.F. Halocin S8: A 36-amino-acid microhalocin from the haloarchaeal strain S8a. J. Bacteriol. 2000, 182, 4951-4958. [CrossRef]

Genes and genome structures in the archaebacteria. K Ebert, W Goebel, U Rdest, B Surek, 10.1016/S0723-2020(86)80120-5Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 7Ebert, K.; Goebel, W.; Rdest, U.; Surek, B. Genes and genome structures in the archaebacteria. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 1986, 7, 30-35. [CrossRef]

Optimization of the culture conditions for the production of a bacteriocin from halophilic archaeon Sech7a. L Pašić, B H Velikonja, N P Ulrih, 10.1080/10826060802164637Prep. Biochem. Biotechnol. 38PubMedPašić, L.; Velikonja, B.H.; Ulrih, N.P. Optimization of the culture conditions for the production of a bacteriocin from halophilic archaeon Sech7a. Prep. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2008, 38, 229-245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Peptide and protein antibiotics from the domain Archaea: Halocins and sulfolobicins. R F Shand, K J Leyva, Bacteriocins: Ecology and Evolution. Riley, M.A., Chavan, M.A.SpringerShand, R.F.; Leyva, K.J. Peptide and protein antibiotics from the domain Archaea: Halocins and sulfolobicins. In Bacteriocins: Ecology and Evolution; Riley, M.A., Chavan, M.A., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2007; pp. 93-109.

Halocin SH10 production by an extreme haloarchaeon Natrinema sp. BTSH10 isolated from salt pans of South India. P Karthikeyan, S G Bhat, M Chandrasekaran, 10.1016/j.sjbs.2013.02.002Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 20Karthikeyan, P.; Bhat, S.G.; Chandrasekaran, M. Halocin SH10 production by an extreme haloarchaeon Natrinema sp. BTSH10 isolated from salt pans of South India. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 2013, 20, 205-212. [CrossRef]

Lc-ms phytochemical screening, in vitro antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer activity of microalgae Nannochloropsis oculata extract. A F Wali, Y Dhaheri, J Ramakrishna Pillai, A Mushtaq, P G Rao, S A Rabbani, A Firdous, M S Elshikh, D A A Farraj, 10.3390/separations7040054Separations 2020, 7, 54. [CrossRefWali, A.F.; Al Dhaheri, Y.; Ramakrishna Pillai, J.; Mushtaq, A.; Rao, P.G.; Rabbani, S.A.; Firdous, A.; Elshikh, M.S.; Farraj, D.A.A. Lc-ms phytochemical screening, in vitro antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer activity of microalgae Nannochloropsis oculata extract. Separations 2020, 7, 54. [CrossRef]

Streptomyces sp. MUM212 as a source of antioxidants with radical scavenging and metal chelating properties. L T Tan, .-H Chan, K.-G Khan, T M Bukhari, S I Saokaew, S Duangjai, A Pusparajah, P Lee, L.-H Goh, B.-H , 10.3389/fphar.2017.00276Front. Pharmacol. 8Tan, L.T.-H.; Chan, K.-G.; Khan, T.M.; Bukhari, S.I.; Saokaew, S.; Duangjai, A.; Pusparajah, P.; Lee, L.-H.; Goh, B.-H. Streptomyces sp. MUM212 as a source of antioxidants with radical scavenging and metal chelating properties. Front. Pharmacol. 2017, 8, 276-293. [CrossRef]

Antibiotics from Haloarchaea: What can we learn from comparative genomics?. I De Castro, S Mendo, T Caetano, 10.1007/s10126-020-09952-9Mar. Biotechnol. 22de Castro, I.; Mendo, S.; Caetano, T. Antibiotics from Haloarchaea: What can we learn from comparative genomics? Mar. Biotechnol. 2020, 22, 308-316. [CrossRef]

Bioprospecting and characterization of pigmented halophilic archaeal strains from Algerian hypersaline environments with analysis of carotenoids produced by Halorubrum sp. BS2. K Sahli, M A Gomri, J Esclapez, P Gómez-Villegas, O Ghennai, M J Bonete, R León, K Kharroub, 10.1002/jobm.202000083J. Basic Microbiol. 60Sahli, K.; Gomri, M.A.; Esclapez, J.; Gómez-Villegas, P.; Ghennai, O.; Bonete, M.J.; León, R.; Kharroub, K. Bioprospecting and characterization of pigmented halophilic archaeal strains from Algerian hypersaline environments with analysis of carotenoids produced by Halorubrum sp. BS2. J. Basic Microbiol. 2020, 60, 624-638. [CrossRef]

Antagonistic interactions and production of halocin antimicrobial peptides among extremely halophilic prokaryotes isolated from the solar saltern of Sfax. F Ghanmi, A Carré-Mlouka, M Vandervennet, I Boujelben, D Frikha, H Ayadi, J Peduzzi, S Rebuffat, S Maalej, 10.1007/s00792-016-0827-9Extremophiles. 20PubMedGhanmi, F.; Carré-Mlouka, A.; Vandervennet, M.; Boujelben, I.; Frikha, D.; Ayadi, H.; Peduzzi, J.; Rebuffat, S.; Maalej, S. Antagonistic interactions and production of halocin antimicrobial peptides among extremely halophilic prokaryotes isolated from the solar saltern of Sfax, Tunisia. Extremophiles 2016, 20, 363-374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The extremely halophilic archaeon Halobacterium salinarum ETD5 from the solar saltern of Sfax (Tunisia) produces multiple halocins. F Ghanmi, A Carré-Mlouka, Z Zarai, H Mejdoub, J Peduzzi, S Maalej, S Rebuffat, 10.1016/j.resmic.2019.09.003Res. Microbiol. 2020PubMedGhanmi, F.; Carré-Mlouka, A.; Zarai, Z.; Mejdoub, H.; Peduzzi, J.; Maalej, S.; Rebuffat, S. The extremely halophilic archaeon Halobacterium salinarum ETD5 from the solar saltern of Sfax (Tunisia) produces multiple halocins. Res. Microbiol. 2020, 171, 80-90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Halocin C8: An antimicrobial peptide distributed among four halophilic archaeal genera: Natrinema, Haloterrigena, Haloferax, and Halobacterium. A Besse, M Vandervennet, C Goulard, J Peduzzi, S Isaac, S Rebuffat, A Carré-Mlouka, 10.1007/s00792-017-0931-521PubMedBesse, A.; Vandervennet, M.; Goulard, C.; Peduzzi, J.; Isaac, S.; Rebuffat, S.; Carré-Mlouka, A. Halocin C8: An antimicrobial peptide distributed among four halophilic archaeal genera: Natrinema, Haloterrigena, Haloferax, and Halobacterium. Extremophiles 2017, 21, 623-638. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Sulfolobus-A potential key organism in future biotechnology. J Quehenberger, L Shen, S.-V Albers, B Siebers, O Spadiut, 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02474Front. Microbiol. 8Quehenberger, J.; Shen, L.; Albers, S.-V.; Siebers, B.; Spadiut, O. Sulfolobus-A potential key organism in future biotechnology. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 2474-2485. [CrossRef]

Antifungal and anti-biofilm activity of the first cryptic antimicrobial peptide from an archaeal protein against Candida spp. E Roscetto, P Contursi, A Vollaro, S Fusco, E Notomista, M R Catania, 10.1038/s41598-018-35530-0clinical isolates. Sci. Rep. 8PubMedRoscetto, E.; Contursi, P.; Vollaro, A.; Fusco, S.; Notomista, E.; Catania, M.R. Antifungal and anti-biofilm activity of the first cryptic antimicrobial peptide from an archaeal protein against Candida spp. clinical isolates. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 17570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Halocin HA1: An archaeocin produced by the haloarchaeon Haloferax larsenii HA1. V A Kumar, S K Tiwari, 10.1016/j.procbio.2017.06.010Process Biochem. 61Kumar, V.A.; Tiwari, S.K. Halocin HA1: An archaeocin produced by the haloarchaeon Haloferax larsenii HA1. Process Biochem. 2017, 61, 202-208. [CrossRef]

Characterization and antimicrobial potential of extremely halophilic archaea isolated from hypersaline environments of the Algerian Sahara. I Quadri, I I Hassani, S Haridon, M Chalopin, H Hacène, M Jebbar, 10.1016/j.micres.2016.04.003Microbiol. Res. Quadri, I.; Hassani, I.I.; l'Haridon, S.; Chalopin, M.; Hacène, H.; Jebbar, M. Characterization and antimicrobial potential of extremely halophilic archaea isolated from hypersaline environments of the Algerian Sahara. Microbiol. Res. 2016, 186-187, 119-131. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial and antioxidant properties of a bacterial endophyte, Methylobacterium radiotolerans MAMP 4754, isolated from Combretum erythrophyllum seeds. M M Photolo, V Mavumengwana, L Sitole, M G Tlou, 10.1155/2020/9483670Int. J. Microbiol. 9483670PubMedPhotolo, M.M.; Mavumengwana, V.; Sitole, L.; Tlou, M.G. Antimicrobial and antioxidant properties of a bacterial endophyte, Methylobacterium radiotolerans MAMP 4754, isolated from Combretum erythrophyllum seeds. Int. J. Microbiol. 2020, 2020, 9483670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties of probiotic bacterium Lactobacillus mucosae AN1 and Lactobacillus fermentum SNR1 in Wistar Albino rats. R Ayyanna, D Ankaiah, V Arul, 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03063Front. Microbiol. 9Ayyanna, R.; Ankaiah, D.; Arul, V. Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties of probiotic bacterium Lactobacillus mucosae AN1 and Lactobacillus fermentum SNR1 in Wistar Albino rats. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 3063-3075. [CrossRef]

Glucose represses formation of delta-(L-alpha-aminoadipyl)-Lcysteinyl-D-valine and isopenicillin N synthase but not penicillin acyltransferase in Penicillium chrysogenum. G Revilla, F Ramos, M López-Nieto, E Alvarez, J Martin, 10.1128/jb.168.2.947-952.1986J. Bacteriol. 168PubMedRevilla, G.; Ramos, F.; López-Nieto, M.; Alvarez, E.; Martin, J. Glucose represses formation of delta-(L-alpha-aminoadipyl)-L- cysteinyl-D-valine and isopenicillin N synthase but not penicillin acyltransferase in Penicillium chrysogenum. J. Bacteriol. 1986, 168, 947-952. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Carbon catabolite regulation of the conversion of penicillin N into cephalosporin C. D M Zanca, J F Martin, 10.7164/antibiotics.36.700J. Antibiot. 36Zanca, D.M.; Martin, J.F. Carbon catabolite regulation of the conversion of penicillin N into cephalosporin C. J. Antibiot. 1983, 36, 700-708. [CrossRef]

Exploring the ocean for new drug developments: Marine pharmacology. H Malve, 10.4103/0975-7406.171700J. Pharm. Bioallied. Sci. 8PubMedMalve, H. Exploring the ocean for new drug developments: Marine pharmacology. J. Pharm. Bioallied. Sci. 2016, 8, 83. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Biosynthesis of pneumocandin lipopeptides and perspectives for its production and related echinocandins. Y Li, N Lan, L Xu, Q Yue, 10.1007/s00253-018-9382-xAppl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 102Li, Y.; Lan, N.; Xu, L.; Yue, Q. Biosynthesis of pneumocandin lipopeptides and perspectives for its production and related echinocandins. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2018, 102, 9881-9891. [CrossRef]

Chemistry and weak antimicrobial activities of phomopsins produced by mangrove endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. ZSU-H76. Z Huang, X Cai, C Shao, Z She, X Xia, Y Chen, J Yang, S Zhou, Y Lin, 10.1016/j.phytochem.2008.02.002Phytochemistry. 69PubMedHuang, Z.; Cai, X.; Shao, C.; She, Z.; Xia, X.; Chen, Y.; Yang, J.; Zhou, S.; Lin, Y. Chemistry and weak antimicrobial activities of phomopsins produced by mangrove endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. ZSU-H76. Phytochemistry 2008, 69, 1604-1608. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bioprospecting for microbial endophytes and their natural products. Microbiol. G Strobel, B Daisy, 10.1128/MMBR.67.4.491-502.2003Mol. Biol. Rev. 67PubMedStrobel, G.; Daisy, B. Bioprospecting for microbial endophytes and their natural products. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2003, 67, 491-502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Naphthoquinone derivatives with anti-inflammatory activity from mangrove-derived endophytic fungus Talaromyces sp. SK-S009. H Liu, C Yan, C Li, T You, Z She, 10.3390/molecules25030576Molecules. 25Liu, H.; Yan, C.; Li, C.; You, T.; She, Z. Naphthoquinone derivatives with anti-inflammatory activity from mangrove-derived endophytic fungus Talaromyces sp. SK-S009. Molecules 2020, 25, 576. [CrossRef]

Clavatol and patulin formation as the antagonistic principle of Aspergillus clavatonanicus, an endophytic fungus of Taxus mairei. C.-L Zhang, B.-Q Zheng, J.-P Lao, L.-J Mao, S.-Y Chen, C P Kubicek, F.-C Lin, 10.1007/s00253-008-1371-zAppl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 78Zhang, C.-L.; Zheng, B.-Q.; Lao, J.-P.; Mao, L.-J.; Chen, S.-Y.; Kubicek, C.P.; Lin, F.-C. Clavatol and patulin formation as the antagonistic principle of Aspergillus clavatonanicus, an endophytic fungus of Taxus mairei. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2008, 78, 833-840. [CrossRef]

Ten-membered lactones from Phomopsis sp., an endophytic fungus of Azadirachta indica. S.-H Wu, Y.-W Chen, S.-C Shao, L.-D Wang, Z.-Y Li, L.-Y Yang, S.-L Li, R Huang, 10.1021/np070624jJ. Nat. Prod. 71PubMedWu, S.-H.; Chen, Y.-W.; Shao, S.-C.; Wang, L.-D.; Li, Z.-Y.; Yang, L.-Y.; Li, S.-L.; Huang, R. Ten-membered lactones from Phomopsis sp., an endophytic fungus of Azadirachta indica. J. Nat. Prod. 2008, 71, 731-734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Recent advances in inducing endophytic fungal specialized metabolites using small molecule elicitors including epigenetic modifiers. R M K Toghueo, D Sahal, F F Boyom, 10.1016/j.phytochem.2020.112338Phytochemistry. 174PubMedToghueo, R.M.K.; Sahal, D.; Boyom, F.F. Recent advances in inducing endophytic fungal specialized metabolites using small molecule elicitors including epigenetic modifiers. Phytochemistry 2020, 174, 112338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Peniciadametizine a, a dithiodiketopiperazine with a unique spiro (furan-2, 7'-pyrazino (1, 2-b)(1,2) oxazine) skeleton, and a related analogue, peniciadametizine B, from the marine sponge-derived fungus Penicillium adametzioides. Y Liu, A Mándi, X.-M Li, L.-H Meng, T Kurtán, B.-G Wang, 10.3390/md13063640Mar. Drugs. 13PubMedLiu, Y.; Mándi, A.; Li, X.-M.; Meng, L.-H.; Kurtán, T.; Wang, B.-G. Peniciadametizine a, a dithiodiketopiperazine with a unique spiro (furan-2, 7'-pyrazino (1, 2-b)(1,2) oxazine) skeleton, and a related analogue, peniciadametizine B, from the marine sponge-derived fungus Penicillium adametzioides. Mar. Drugs 2015, 13, 3640-3652. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Penicibrocazines A-E, five new sulfide diketopiperazines from the marine-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium brocae. L.-H Meng, P Zhang, X.-M Li, B.-G Wang, 10.3390/md13010276Mar. Drugs. 13Meng, L.-H.; Zhang, P.; Li, X.-M.; Wang, B.-G. Penicibrocazines A-E, five new sulfide diketopiperazines from the marine-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium brocae. Mar. Drugs 2015, 13, 276-287. [CrossRef]

Lindgomycin, an unusual antibiotic polyketide from a marine fungus of the Lindgomycetaceae. B Wu, J Wiese, A Labes, A Kramer, R Schmaljohann, J F Imhoff, 10.3390/md13084617Mar. Drugs. 13PubMedWu, B.; Wiese, J.; Labes, A.; Kramer, A.; Schmaljohann, R.; Imhoff, J.F. Lindgomycin, an unusual antibiotic polyketide from a marine fungus of the Lindgomycetaceae. Mar. Drugs 2015, 13, 4617-4632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Secondary metabolites from a marine-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium chrysogenum QEN-24S. S.-S Gao, X.-M Li, F.-Y Du, C.-S Li, P Proksch, B.-G Wang, 10.3390/md9010059Mar. Drugs. 9Gao, S.-S.; Li, X.-M.; Du, F.-Y.; Li, C.-S.; Proksch, P.; Wang, B.-G. Secondary metabolites from a marine-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium chrysogenum QEN-24S. Mar. Drugs 2011, 9, 59-70. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi. C Wang, S Tang, S Cao, 10.1007/s11101-020-09705-5Phytochem. Rev. 20Wang, C.; Tang, S.; Cao, S. Antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi. Phytochem. Rev. 2020, 20, 1-33. [CrossRef]

A new phenolic enamide and a new meroterpenoid from marine alga-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium oxalicum EN-290. X Li, X.-M Li, P Zhang, B.-G Wang, 10.1080/10286020.2015.1117454J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 17Li, X.; Li, X.-M.; Zhang, P.; Wang, B.-G. A new phenolic enamide and a new meroterpenoid from marine alga-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium oxalicum EN-290. J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 2015, 17, 1204-1212. [CrossRef]

Chermesins A-D: Meroterpenoids with a drimane-type spirosesquiterpene skeleton from the marine algal-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium chermesinum EN-480. H Liu, X.-M Li, Y Liu, P Zhang, J.-N Wang, B.-G Wang, 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.5b00893J. Nat. Prod. 79PubMedLiu, H.; Li, X.-M.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, P.; Wang, J.-N.; Wang, B.-G. Chermesins A-D: Meroterpenoids with a drimane-type spiros- esquiterpene skeleton from the marine algal-derived endophytic fungus Penicillium chermesinum EN-480. J. Nat. Prod. 2016, 79, 806-811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Comazaphilones A-F, azaphilone derivatives from the marine sediment-derived fungus Penicillium commune QSD-17. S.-S Gao, X.-M Li, Y Zhang, C.-S Li, C.-M Cui, B.-G Wang, 10.1021/np100788hJ. Nat. Prod. 74PubMedGao, S.-S.; Li, X.-M.; Zhang, Y.; Li, C.-S.; Cui, C.-M.; Wang, B.-G. Comazaphilones A-F, azaphilone derivatives from the marine sediment-derived fungus Penicillium commune QSD-17. J. Nat. Prod. 2011, 74, 256-261. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Penicibilaenes A and B, sesquiterpenes with a tricyclo (6.3. 1.01, 5) dodecane skeleton from the marine isolate of Penicillium bilaiae MA-267. L.-H Meng, X.-M Li, Y Liu, B.-G Wang, 10.1021/ol503046uOrg. Lett. 16Meng, L.-H.; Li, X.-M.; Liu, Y.; Wang, B.-G. Penicibilaenes A and B, sesquiterpenes with a tricyclo (6.3. 1.01, 5) dodecane skeleton from the marine isolate of Penicillium bilaiae MA-267. Org. Lett. 2014, 16, 6052-6055. [CrossRef]

Terretonin G, a new sesterterpenoid antibiotic from marine-derived Aspergillus sp. OPMF00272. T Fukuda, Y Kurihara, A Kanamoto, H Tomoda, 10.1038/ja.2014.46J. Antibiot. 67PubMedFukuda, T.; Kurihara, Y.; Kanamoto, A.; Tomoda, H. Terretonin G, a new sesterterpenoid antibiotic from marine-derived Aspergillus sp. OPMF00272. J. Antibiot. 2014, 67, 593-595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

New isocoumarin derivatives and meroterpenoids from the marine sponge-associated fungus Aspergillus similanensis sp. nov. KUFA 0013. C Prompanya, T Dethoup, L J Bessa, M M Pinto, L Gales, P M Costa, A Silva, A Kijjoa, 10.3390/md12105160Mar. Drugs. 12Prompanya, C.; Dethoup, T.; Bessa, L.J.; Pinto, M.M.; Gales, L.; Costa, P.M.; Silva, A.; Kijjoa, A. New isocoumarin derivatives and meroterpenoids from the marine sponge-associated fungus Aspergillus similanensis sp. nov. KUFA 0013. Mar. Drugs 2014, 12, 5160-5173. [CrossRef]

Asperitaconic acids A-C, antibacterial itaconic acid derivatives produced by a marinederived fungus of the genus Aspergillus. L Ding, T Li, X Liao, S He, S Xu, 10.1038/s41429-018-0079-2J. Antibiot. 71Ding, L.; Li, T.; Liao, X.; He, S.; Xu, S. Asperitaconic acids A-C, antibacterial itaconic acid derivatives produced by a marine- derived fungus of the genus Aspergillus. J. Antibiot. 2018, 71, 902-904. [CrossRef]

Pyrazinone derivatives from the coral-derived Aspergillus ochraceus LCJ11-102 under high iodide salt. X Peng, Y Wang, T Zhu, W Zhu, 10.1007/s12272-017-0928-8Arch. Pharm. Res. 41Peng, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhu, T.; Zhu, W. Pyrazinone derivatives from the coral-derived Aspergillus ochraceus LCJ11-102 under high iodide salt. Arch. Pharm. Res. 2018, 41, 184-191. [CrossRef]

Spiculisporic acid analogues of the marine-derived fungus, Aspergillus candidus strain HDf2, and their antibacterial activity. R Wang, Z K Guo, X M Li, F X Chen, X F Zhan, M H Shen, 10.1007/s10482-015-0462-yAntonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 108Wang, R.; Guo, Z.K.; Li, X.M.; Chen, F.X.; Zhan, X.F.; Shen, M.H. Spiculisporic acid analogues of the marine-derived fungus, Aspergillus candidus strain HDf2, and their antibacterial activity. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 2015, 108, 215-219. [CrossRef]

Aspergicin, a new antibacterial alkaloid produced by mixed fermentation of two marine-derived mangrove epiphytic fungi. F Zhu, G Chen, X Chen, M Huang, X Wan, 10.1007/s10600-011-0053-8Chem. Nat. Compd. 47Zhu, F.; Chen, G.; Chen, X.; Huang, M.; Wan, X. Aspergicin, a new antibacterial alkaloid produced by mixed fermentation of two marine-derived mangrove epiphytic fungi. Chem. Nat. Compd. 2011, 47, 767-769. [CrossRef]

New sphingolipids with a previously unreported 9-methyl-C 20-sphingosine moiety from a marine algous endophytic fungus Aspergillus niger EN-13. Y Zhang, S Wang, X.-M Li, C.-M Cui, C Feng, B.-G Wang, 10.1007/s11745-007-3079-8Lipids. 42Zhang, Y.; Wang, S.; Li, X.-M.; Cui, C.-M.; Feng, C.; Wang, B.-G. New sphingolipids with a previously unreported 9-methyl-C 20-sphingosine moiety from a marine algous endophytic fungus Aspergillus niger EN-13. Lipids 2007, 42, 759-764. [CrossRef]

Flavusides A and B, antibacterial cerebrosides from the marine-derived fungus Aspergillus flavus. G Yang, L Sandjo, K Yun, A S Leutou, G.-D Kim, H D Choi, J S Kang, J Hong, B W Son, 10.1248/cpb.59.1174Chem. Pharm. Bull. 59PubMedYang, G.; Sandjo, L.; Yun, K.; Leutou, A.S.; Kim, G.-D.; Choi, H.D.; Kang, J.S.; Hong, J.; Son, B.W. Flavusides A and B, antibacterial cerebrosides from the marine-derived fungus Aspergillus flavus. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 2011, 59, 1174-1177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bioactive anthraquinones from endophytic fungus Aspergillus versicolor isolated from red sea algae. U W Hawas, A A El-Beih, A M El-Halawany, 10.1007/s12272-012-1006-xArch. Pharm. Res. 35PubMedHawas, U.W.; El-Beih, A.A.; El-Halawany, A.M. Bioactive anthraquinones from endophytic fungus Aspergillus versicolor isolated from red sea algae. Arch. Pharm. Res. 2012, 35, 1749-1756. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Induced terreins production from marine red algal-derived endophytic fungus Aspergillus terreus EN-539 co-cultured with symbiotic fungus Paecilomyces lilacinus EN-531. H.-L Li, X.-M Li, S.-Q Yang, J Cao, Y.-H Li, B.-G Wang, 10.1038/s41429-019-0242-4J. Antibiot. 73PubMedLi, H.-L.; Li, X.-M.; Yang, S.-Q.; Cao, J.; Li, Y.-H.; Wang, B.-G. Induced terreins production from marine red algal-derived endophytic fungus Aspergillus terreus EN-539 co-cultured with symbiotic fungus Paecilomyces lilacinus EN-531. J. Antibiot. 2020, 73, 108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Absolute configurations of 14, 15-hydroxylated prenylxanthones from a marine-derived Aspergillus sp. fungus by chiroptical methods. A Zhu, M.-Y Yang, Y.-H Zhang, C.-L Shao, C.-Y Wang, L.-D Hu, F Cao, H.-J Zhu, Sci. Rep. 8Zhu, A.; Yang, M.-Y.; Zhang, Y.-H.; Shao, C.-L.; Wang, C.-Y.; Hu, L.-D.; Cao, F.; Zhu, H.-J. Absolute configurations of 14, 15-hydroxylated prenylxanthones from a marine-derived Aspergillus sp. fungus by chiroptical methods. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 1-10.

Two new bioactive steroids from a mangrovederived fungus Aspergillus sp. Z Liu, Z Dong, P Qiu, Q Wang, J Yan, Y Lu, P Wasu, K Hong, Z She, 10.1016/j.steroids.2018.08.009Steroids. 140Liu, Z.; Dong, Z.; Qiu, P.; Wang, Q.; Yan, J.; Lu, Y.; Wasu, P.-a.; Hong, K.; She, Z. Two new bioactive steroids from a mangrove- derived fungus Aspergillus sp. Steroids 2018, 140, 32-38. [CrossRef]

Trichoderins, novel aminolipopeptides from a marine sponge-derived Trichoderma sp., are active against dormant mycobacteria. P Pruksakorn, M Arai, N Kotoku, C Vilchèze, A D Baughn, P Moodley, W R JacobsJr, M Kobayashi, 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.04.100Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 20Pruksakorn, P.; Arai, M.; Kotoku, N.; Vilchèze, C.; Baughn, A.D.; Moodley, P.; Jacobs Jr, W.R.; Kobayashi, M. Trichoderins, novel aminolipopeptides from a marine sponge-derived Trichoderma sp., are active against dormant mycobacteria. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2010, 20, 3658-3663. [CrossRef]

Spiro-phthalides and isocoumarins isolated from the marine-spongederived fungus Setosphaeria sp. SCSIO41009. X Pang, X Lin, J Yang, X Zhou, B Yang, J Wang, Y Liu, 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.8b00345J. Nat. Prod. 81Pang, X.; Lin, X.; Yang, J.; Zhou, X.; Yang, B.; Wang, J.; Liu, Y. Spiro-phthalides and isocoumarins isolated from the marine-sponge- derived fungus Setosphaeria sp. SCSIO41009. J. Nat. Prod. 2018, 81, 1860-1868. [CrossRef]

New bioactive pyrrospirones C− I from a marine-derived fungus Penicillium sp. T Song, M Chen, W Chai, Z Zhang, X.-Y Lian, 10.1016/j.tet.2018.01.015Tetrahedron. 380Song, T.; Chen, M.; Chai, W.; Zhang, Z.; Lian, X.-Y. New bioactive pyrrospirones C− I from a marine-derived fungus Penicillium sp. ZZ380. Tetrahedron 2018, 74, 884-891. [CrossRef]

Bioactive penicipyrrodiether A, an adduct of GKK1032 analogue and phenol A derivative, from a marine-sourced fungus Penicillium sp. ZZ380. T Song, M Chen, Z.-W Ge, W Chai, X.-C Li, Z Zhang, X.-Y Lian, 10.1021/acs.joc.8b02172J. Org. Chem. 83Song, T.; Chen, M.; Ge, Z.-W.; Chai, W.; Li, X.-C.; Zhang, Z.; Lian, X.-Y. Bioactive penicipyrrodiether A, an adduct of GKK1032 analogue and phenol A derivative, from a marine-sourced fungus Penicillium sp. ZZ380. J. Org. Chem. 2018, 83, 13395-13401. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobials from mushrooms for assuring food safety. H.-S Shen, S Shao, J.-C Chen, T Zhou, 10.1111/1541-4337.12255Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 16PubMedShen, H.-S.; Shao, S.; Chen, J.-C.; Zhou, T. Antimicrobials from mushrooms for assuring food safety. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2017, 16, 316-329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Bioactive phytochemical constituents of wild edible mushrooms from Southeast Asia. Z M Thu, K K Myo, H T Aung, M Clericuzio, C Armijos, G Vidari, 10.3390/molecules25081972Molecules. 25Thu, Z.M.; Myo, K.K.; Aung, H.T.; Clericuzio, M.; Armijos, C.; Vidari, G. Bioactive phytochemical constituents of wild edible mushrooms from Southeast Asia. Molecules 2020, 25, 1972. [CrossRef]

Plectasin is a peptide antibiotic with therapeutic potential from a saprophytic fungus. P H Mygind, R L Fischer, K M Schnorr, M T Hansen, C P Sönksen, S Ludvigsen, D Raventós, S Buskov, B Christensen, L De Maria, 10.1038/nature04051Nature. 437PubMedMygind, P.H.; Fischer, R.L.; Schnorr, K.M.; Hansen, M.T.; Sönksen, C.P.; Ludvigsen, S.; Raventós, D.; Buskov, S.; Christensen, B.; De Maria, L.; et al. Plectasin is a peptide antibiotic with therapeutic potential from a saprophytic fungus. Nature 2005, 437, 975-980. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Cordymin, an antifungal peptide from the medicinal fungus Cordyceps militaris. J H Wong, T B Ng, H Wang, S C W Sze, K Y Zhang, Q Li, X Lu, 10.1016/j.phymed.2010.07.010Phytomedicine. 18PubMedWong, J.H.; Ng, T.B.; Wang, H.; Sze, S.C.W.; Zhang, K.Y.; Li, Q.; Lu, X. Cordymin, an antifungal peptide from the medicinal fungus Cordyceps militaris. Phytomedicine 2011, 18, 387-392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Investigation of antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of different extracts of Auricularia and Termitomyces species of mushrooms. G Gebreyohannes, A Nyerere, C Bii, D B Sbhatu, 10.1155/2019/7357048Sci. World J. Gebreyohannes, G.; Nyerere, A.; Bii, C.; Sbhatu, D.B. Investigation of antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of different extracts of Auricularia and Termitomyces species of mushrooms. Sci. World J. 2019, 2019, 1-10. [CrossRef]

Isolation and characterization of an antifungal peptide from fruiting bodies of edible mushroom Lentinus squarrosulus Mont. Malays. S Poompouang, M Suksomtip, 10.21161/mjm.74815J. Microbiol. 12Poompouang, S.; Suksomtip, M. Isolation and characterization of an antifungal peptide from fruiting bodies of edible mushroom Lentinus squarrosulus Mont. Malays. J. Microbiol. 2016, 12, 43-49. [CrossRef]

Comprehensive facts on dynamic antimicrobial properties of polysaccharides and biomolecules-silver nanoparticle conjugate. A Irshad, N Sarwar, H Sadia, K Malik, I Javed, A Irshad, M Afzal, M Abbas, H Rizvi, 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.12.089Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 145Irshad, A.; Sarwar, N.; Sadia, H.; Malik, K.; Javed, I.; Irshad, A.; Afzal, M.; Abbas, M.; Rizvi, H. Comprehensive facts on dynamic antimicrobial properties of polysaccharides and biomolecules-silver nanoparticle conjugate. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 145, 189-196. [CrossRef]

5-dichloro-4-methoxybenzaldehyde, produced by the mushroom Porostereum spadiceum, against plant-pathogenic bacteria and fungi. E Hamamoto, N Kimura, S Nishino, A Ishihara, H Otani, K Osaki-Oka, 10.1111/jam.15020Antimicrobial activity of the volatile compound. 3J. App. Microbiol.Hamamoto, E.; Kimura, N.; Nishino, S.; Ishihara, A.; Otani, H.; Osaki-Oka, K. Antimicrobial activity of the volatile compound 3,5-dichloro-4-methoxybenzaldehyde, produced by the mushroom Porostereum spadiceum, against plant-pathogenic bacteria and fungi. J. App. Microbiol. 2021, 131, 1431-1439. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial activities of basidiocarps of wild edible mushrooms of West Bengal. G Subrata, B Gunjan, P Prakash, S C Mandal, A Krishnendu, India. Int. J. Pharmtech. Res. 4Subrata, G.; Gunjan, B.; Prakash, P.; Mandal, S.C.; Krishnendu, A. Antimicrobial activities of basidiocarps of wild edible mushrooms of West Bengal, India. Int. J. Pharmtech. Res. 2012, 4, 1554-1560.

Phenolic content, antioxidant and antimicrobial potential of Melanoleuca melaleuca edible mushroom. M Sevindi, J. Anim. Plant Sci. 31Sevindi, M. Phenolic content, antioxidant and antimicrobial potential of Melanoleuca melaleuca edible mushroom. J. Anim. Plant Sci. 2021, 31, 824-830.

Butyrate-producing probiotics reduce nonalcoholic fatty liver disease progression in rats: New insight into the probiotics for the gut-liver axis. H Endo, M Niioka, N Kobayashi, M Tanaka, T Watanabe, PLoS ONE. 863388Endo, H.; Niioka, M.; Kobayashi, N.; Tanaka, M.; Watanabe, T. Butyrate-producing probiotics reduce nonalcoholic fatty liver disease progression in rats: New insight into the probiotics for the gut-liver axis. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e63388.

Antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of Saccharomyces cerevisiae IFST062013, a potential probiotic. M Fakruddin, M N Hossain, M M Ahmed, 10.1186/s12906-017-1591-9BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 17Fakruddin, M.; Hossain, M.N.; Ahmed, M.M. Antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of Saccharomyces cerevisiae IFST062013, a potential probiotic. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2017, 17, 64. [CrossRef]

Dissecting toxin immunity in virus-infected killer yeast uncovers an intrinsic strategy of self-protection. F Breinig, T Sendzik, K Eisfeld, M J Schmitt, 10.1073/pnas.0510070103Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Nat. Acad. SciUSA103PubMedBreinig, F.; Sendzik, T.; Eisfeld, K.; Schmitt, M.J. Dissecting toxin immunity in virus-infected killer yeast uncovers an intrinsic strategy of self-protection. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 2006, 103, 3810-3815. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Exoglucanase-encoding genes from three Wickerhamomyces anomalus killer strains isolated from olive brine. S Muccilli, S Wemhoff, C Restuccia, F Meinhardt, 10.1002/yea.2935Yeast. 30PubMedMuccilli, S.; Wemhoff, S.; Restuccia, C.; Meinhardt, F. Exoglucanase-encoding genes from three Wickerhamomyces anomalus killer strains isolated from olive brine. Yeast 2013, 30, 33-43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antioxidant effects of Lactobacillus plantarum via activation of transcription factor Nrf2. D Gao, Z Gao, G Zhu, 10.1039/c3fo30316kFood Funct. 4Gao, D.; Gao, Z.; Zhu, G. Antioxidant effects of Lactobacillus plantarum via activation of transcription factor Nrf2. Food Funct. 2013, 4, 982-989. [CrossRef]

Extracellular polysaccharide from Bacillus sp. strain LBP32 prevents LPS-induced inflammation in RAW 264.7 macrophages by inhibiting NF-κB and MAPKs activation and ROS production. Y Diao, Y Xin, Y Zhou, N Li, X Pan, S Qi, Z Qi, Y Xu, L Luo, H Wan, 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.10.021Int. Immunopharmacol. 18PubMedDiao, Y.; Xin, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Li, N.; Pan, X.; Qi, S.; Qi, Z.; Xu, Y.; Luo, L.; Wan, H. Extracellular polysaccharide from Bacillus sp. strain LBP32 prevents LPS-induced inflammation in RAW 264.7 macrophages by inhibiting NF-κB and MAPKs activation and ROS production. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2014, 18, 12-19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Microalgae with immunomodulatory activities. G Riccio, C Lauritano, 10.3390/md18010002Mar. Drugs. 182Riccio, G.; Lauritano, C. Microalgae with immunomodulatory activities. Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 2. [CrossRef]

Microalgae biomass production for a biorefinery system: Recent advances and the way towards sustainability. L Moreno-Garcia, K Adjallé, S Barnabé, G Raghavan, 10.1016/j.rser.2017.03.024Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 76Moreno-Garcia, L.; Adjallé, K.; Barnabé, S.; Raghavan, G. Microalgae biomass production for a biorefinery system: Recent advances and the way towards sustainability. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 76, 493-506. [CrossRef]

A fatty acid from the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum is antibacterial against diverse bacteria including multi-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). A P Desbois, A Mearns-Spragg, V J Smith, 10.1007/s10126-008-9118-5Mar. Biotechnol. 11PubMedDesbois, A.P.; Mearns-Spragg, A.; Smith, V.J. A fatty acid from the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum is antibacterial against diverse bacteria including multi-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Mar. Biotechnol. 2009, 11, 45-52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Proximate analysis, antibacterial activity, total phenolic content and antioxidant capacity of a green microalga Scenedesmus quadricauda (Turpin) Brébisson. E Arguelles, Asian J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Environ. Sci. 20Arguelles, E. Proximate analysis, antibacterial activity, total phenolic content and antioxidant capacity of a green microalga Scenedesmus quadricauda (Turpin) Brébisson. Asian J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Environ. Sci. 2018, 20, 150-158.

Antioxidant activity of some Moroccan marine microalgae: Pufa profiles, carotenoids and phenolic content. A Maadane, N Merghoub, N E Mernissi, T Ainane, S Amzazi, H El Arroussi, R Benhima, S Amzazi, Y Bakri, I Wahby, 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.06.400J. Biotechnol. 215Maadane, A.; Merghoub, N.; Mernissi, N.E.; Ainane, T.; Amzazi, S.; El Arroussi, H.; Benhima, R.; Amzazi, S.; Bakri, Y.; Wahby, I. Antioxidant activity of some Moroccan marine microalgae: Pufa profiles, carotenoids and phenolic content. J. Biotechnol. 2015, 215, 13-19. [CrossRef]

Biological activity of hydrophilic extract of Chlorella vulgaris grown on post-fermentation leachate from a biogas plant supplied with stillage and maize silage. D Zielinski, J Fraczyk, M Debowski, M Zielinski, Z J Kaminski, D Kregiel, C Jacob, B Kolesinska, 10.3390/molecules25081790Molecules. 25Zielinski, D.; Fraczyk, J.; Debowski, M.; Zielinski, M.; Kaminski, Z.J.; Kregiel, D.; Jacob, C.; Kolesinska, B. Biological activity of hydrophilic extract of Chlorella vulgaris grown on post-fermentation leachate from a biogas plant supplied with stillage and maize silage. Molecules 2020, 25, 1790. [CrossRef]

Evaluation of microalgae and cyanobacteria as potential sources of antimicrobial compounds. F Alsenani, K R Tupally, E T Chua, E Eltanahy, H Alsufyani, H S Parekh, P M Schenk, 10.1016/j.jsps.2020.11.010Saudi Pharm. J. 28PubMedAlsenani, F.; Tupally, K.R.; Chua, E.T.; Eltanahy, E.; Alsufyani, H.; Parekh, H.S.; Schenk, P.M. Evaluation of microalgae and cyanobacteria as potential sources of antimicrobial compounds. Saudi Pharm. J. 2020, 28, 1834-1841. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antimicrobial activity of marine microalgae isolated from Moroccan coastlines. A Maadane, N Merghoub, N E Mernissi, T Ainane, S Amzazi, I W Bakri, 10.15414/jmbfs.2017.6.6.1257-1260J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Food Sci. Maadane, A.; Merghoub, N.; Mernissi, N.E.; Ainane, T.; Amzazi, S.; Bakri, I.W. Antimicrobial activity of marine microalgae isolated from Moroccan coastlines. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Food Sci. 2021, 2021, 1257-1260. [CrossRef]

Karatungiols A and B, two novel antimicrobial polyol compounds, from the symbiotic marine dinoflagellate Amphidinium sp. K Washida, T Koyama, K Yamada, M Kita, D Uemura, 10.1016/j.tetlet.2006.02.045Tetrahedron Lett. 47Washida, K.; Koyama, T.; Yamada, K.; Kita, M.; Uemura, D. Karatungiols A and B, two novel antimicrobial polyol compounds, from the symbiotic marine dinoflagellate Amphidinium sp. Tetrahedron Lett. 2006, 47, 2521-2525. [CrossRef]

The Biofilm Inhibitory Potential of Compound Produced from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Against Pathogenic Microorganisms. H Ghaidaa, H Neihaya, Z M Nada, M Amna, Baghdad Sci. J. 17Ghaidaa, H.; Neihaya, H.; Nada, Z.M.; Amna, M. The Biofilm Inhibitory Potential of Compound Produced from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Against Pathogenic Microorganisms. Baghdad Sci. J. 2020, 17, 34-41.

. R Pratt, T Daniels, J J Eiler, J Gunnison, W Kumler, J F Oneto, L A Strait, H Spoehr, G Hardin, H Milner, Chlorellin, 10.1126/science.99.2574.35199Pratt, R.; Daniels, T.; Eiler, J.J.; Gunnison, J.; Kumler, W.; Oneto, J.F.; Strait, L.A.; Spoehr, H.; Hardin, G.; Milner, H. Chlorellin, an antibacterial substance from Chlorella. Science 1944, 99, 351-352. [CrossRef]

Bacteriostatic or bactericidal? Impedometric measurements to test the antimicrobial activity of Arthrospira platensis extract. E Bancalari, F Martelli, V Bernini, E Neviani, M Gatti, 10.1016/j.foodcont.2020.107380Food Control. 118Bancalari, E.; Martelli, F.; Bernini, V.; Neviani, E.; Gatti, M. Bacteriostatic or bactericidal? Impedometric measurements to test the antimicrobial activity of Arthrospira platensis extract. Food Control 2020, 118, 107380. [CrossRef]

Identification of antimicrobial peptides from the microalgae Tetraselmis suecica (Kylin) Butcher and bactericidal activity improvement. F Guzmán, G Wong, T Román, C Cárdenas, C Alvárez, P Schmitt, F Albericio, V Rojas, 10.3390/md17080453Mar. Drugs. 17Guzmán, F.; Wong, G.; Román, T.; Cárdenas, C.; Alvárez, C.; Schmitt, P.; Albericio, F.; Rojas, V. Identification of antimicrobial peptides from the microalgae Tetraselmis suecica (Kylin) Butcher and bactericidal activity improvement. Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 453. [CrossRef]

Use of supercritical CO 2 to obtain extracts with antimicrobial activity from Chaetoceros muelleri microalga. A correlation with their lipidic content. J A Mendiola, C F Torres, A Toré, P J Martín-Álvarez, S Santoyo, B O Arredondo, F J Señoráns, A Cifuentes, E Ibáñez, 10.1007/s00217-006-0353-6Eur. Food Res. Technol. 224Mendiola, J.A.; Torres, C.F.; Toré, A.; Martín-Álvarez, P.J.; Santoyo, S.; Arredondo, B.O.; Señoráns, F.J.; Cifuentes, A.; Ibáñez, E. Use of supercritical CO 2 to obtain extracts with antimicrobial activity from Chaetoceros muelleri microalga. A correlation with their lipidic content. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2007, 224, 505-510. [CrossRef]

Antibacterial activity in microalgae cultures. F Kokou, P Makridis, M Kentouri, P Divanach, 10.1111/j.1365-2109.2011.02955.xAquac. Res. 43Kokou, F.; Makridis, P.; Kentouri, M.; Divanach, P. Antibacterial activity in microalgae cultures. Aquac. Res. 2012, 43, 1520-1527. [CrossRef]

Marine natural products. J W Blunt, B R Copp, R A Keyzers, M H Munro, M R Prinsep, 10.1039/C4NP00144CNat. Prod. Rep. 32PubMedBlunt, J.W.; Copp, B.R.; Keyzers, R.A.; Munro, M.H.; Prinsep, M.R. Marine natural products. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2015, 32, 116-211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nisin and the Market for Commericial Bacteriocins. E Jones, V Salin, G Williams, Jones, E.; Salin, V.; Williams, G. Nisin and the Market for Commericial Bacteriocins;

. Texas Agribusiness Market Research Center (TAMRC) Consumer and Product Research Report. Texas A&M UniversityTexas Agribusiness Market Research Center (TAMRC) Consumer and Product Research Report No; Texas A&M University: College Station, TX, USA, 2005.

Bacteriocins as a new generation of antimicrobials: Toxicity aspects and regulations. S Soltani, R Hammami, P D Cotter, S Rebuffat, L B Said, H Gaudreau, F Bédard, E Biron, D Drider, I Fliss, 10.1093/femsre/fuaa039FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 45PubMedSoltani, S.; Hammami, R.; Cotter, P.D.; Rebuffat, S.; Said, L.B.; Gaudreau, H.; Bédard, F.; Biron, E.; Drider, D.; Fliss, I. Bacteriocins as a new generation of antimicrobials: Toxicity aspects and regulations. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2021, 45, 1-24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Inhibition of Fusarium virgulifomre by prokaryotes in vitro. L Xing, A Westphal, Subtrop. Plant. Sci. 59Xing, L.; Westphal, A. Inhibition of Fusarium virgulifomre by prokaryotes in vitro. Subtrop. Plant. Sci. 2007, 59, 24-29.

Daptomycin: A review 4 years after first approval. R Sauermann, M Rothenburger, W Graninger, C Joukhadar, 10.1159/000109868Pharmacology. 81Sauermann, R.; Rothenburger, M.; Graninger, W.; Joukhadar, C. Daptomycin: A review 4 years after first approval. Pharmacology 2008, 81, 79-91. [CrossRef]

Antimicrobial activities of lipopeptides and polyketides of Bacillus velezensis for agricultural applications. M Fazle Rabbee, K.-H Baek, 10.3390/molecules25214973Molecules. 25Fazle Rabbee, M.; Baek, K.-H. Antimicrobial activities of lipopeptides and polyketides of Bacillus velezensis for agricultural applications. Molecules 2020, 25, 4973. [CrossRef]

Isolation and identification of novel sulfur-containing metabolites of spironolactone (Aldactone ® ). A Karim, E A Brown, 10.1016/0039-128X(72)90117-1Steroids. 20Karim, A.; Brown, E.A. Isolation and identification of novel sulfur-containing metabolites of spironolactone (Aldactone ® ). Steroids 1972, 20, 41-62. [CrossRef]