# Information Technology and Human Resources Management: An Overview of Developing Countries

CorpusID: 246054558
 
tags: #Economics, #Business, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4b0b4281f5573791a358f47a90d88187c6d1eb7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4b0b4281f5573791a358f47a90d88187c6d1eb7)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Information Technology and Human Resources Management: An Overview of Developing Countries
2021

Mohammad Sirajuddin 
Department of Business Administration CMR College of Engineering & Technology
Medchal RoadKandlakoya, HyderabadTelanganaIndia

P Jagannadharao 
Department of Business Administration CMR College of Engineering & Technology
Medchal RoadKandlakoya, HyderabadTelanganaIndia

Information Technology and Human Resources Management: An Overview of Developing Countries
112202110.29042/2021-11-2-1-5Received: 18 th January 2021, Accepted: 19 th February 2021, Published: 30 th April 2021Information TechnologyInternetHuman Resource ManagementRecruitmentDevelopment
The world has been changed with Information Technology and changed over as a solitary town in view of interchanges and different organizations, Thanks to innovation. Our day to day existence and the manner in which we interconnect with others have been changed by means of Internet, how we study and realize, how we work, and invest our energy. Data Technology assumes an imperative part in all parts of life and causes to bring precision, speed, accessibility and effectiveness in our regular routine. Data innovation, as a bundle of offered program is accessible to people and associations through equipment framework and assumes a crucial part in the development of Human Resources. This paper covers a short presentation of the job of data innovation in human asset the executive's framework particularly in agricultural nations for example India. Today, the decision chiefs and seniors of associations know the force of Internet and automated framework to accomplish the objective of associations. The use of data innovation and Internet not just assists with acquiring the target of the associations, yet to improve the appraisal of work too.

## Introduction

Organizations and associations have observed that the Human Resource is their greatest resource for the further advancement of their associations. The course of advancement and development without individual support isn't anything since person is the worthiest variable and reason for the advancement. The fundamental point of human asset advancement is the presence of test and new data. Moreover, data is a legitimate interaction called data innovation, which can help to make and to foster another potential in human asset the executives framework. One of the crucial elements that influences every day business and laborers advance as per new innovations is data innovation that causes a major insurgency in the present life. Data innovation has gone through continuous improvement. Human Resource Management and Information Technology affect one another; accordingly the human asset specialists ought to comply to embrace the advances that permit the activity of human salvage reengineering, a major change to keep up with and put together a surge of performed errands could be extremely simple through the use of innovation and to have the option to keep an appropriate administration environment for an imaginative, creative and all around oversaw associations. Data and correspondence advancements, an overall term for all innovations partners with the new media (interpersonal interaction destinations), Internet, portable correspondence and PCs, permit associations to oversee better their interior cycles structures, fundamental abilities and proper business sectors all around the world. Data and correspondence advancements are generally utilized in all areas of the economy and have suggestions for practically all organizations overall. The human asset the board framework should zero in on the essential objective, and these essential objectives use data innovation techniques to accomplish the arrangement of Human Resource procedures in the time of innovation.


## Literature Review

Innovation is another peculiarity, particularly in non-industrial nations like India, and it develops quickly.

Innovation is a bunch of strategies, processes, hardware, strategy, devices, apparatus and abilities that offer item or administrations. Innovation is the usage of science to business undertaking, utilizing normal and directional practices and exploration". Data innovation is a bunch of devices that is made to foster data frameworks and the innovation might have a few detriments brought about by the ill-advised use of frameworks, bogus plan, and somewhat planned data frameworks. The abuse by designers, originators and PC architects of these frameworks fundamentally makes issues. Data innovation is a sort of procedure, thought, thought, and instrument of advancement in human domains. Data framework quick turn of events, execution and assurance is perhaps the most vital business assessment in Information Technology and friends are confronting new difficulties in this stage. Data innovation is a lot of social and scholarly frameworks that is called a data development culture. Without promoting a culture of data development; thusly, data innovation is a data situated thought. Data innovation framed by consolidating and interfacing series of graphs and helpful items PCs, supercomputers, links and wires. Data innovation alludes to the data creation and assortment framework utilized by associations. Processing has made it conceivable to get to data from anyplace by making PC programs less expensive, more straightforward and more modest.


## Role of Information Technology in Human Resource Function:

At the new time of data innovation, worked with correspondence and information move is Alvin Toffler's third wave in a worldwide society and financial business sectors face the test of getting a major portion of worldwide advantages. Today, regularly associations utilize the data frameworks and PC advancements to examine all stuff anyplace. Information Technology and the Internet are extremely amazing as far as hierarchical learning, successful correspondence with representatives, great authoritative learning cycle, and accessibility of data anyplace and whenever, in light of the fact that the administrators need it to involve their capacities in their associations, besides to lessen its shortcomings and different perspectives without wasting much time and efforts by them.


## Role of Information Technology in Placement: Another way has been made by the Human

Resource work by Information Technology of moving toward Human Resource applications. This utilization of Information Technology in Human Resource processes incorporates position from far off region (electronic Recruitment), e-learning, and Human Resource self-administration. Virtual Recruitment is an electronic enrollment that incorporates virtual meeting, online mental test, continue search and online work articulation which changed the enlistment interaction and acquired a major effortlessness that region, and has changed the enlistment cycle quicker. These applications additionally eliminated expected boundaries to getting to the pool of chosen people. Before the Internet, Human Resource selection representatives needed to depend on print distributions like as-diary; yet data innovation has made the enrollment cycle more compelling and productive when contrasted with the past manual employing framework.


## Role of Information Technology in Training:

With its new peculiarity, the human asset administrator can prepare new staff in the association all the more productively and their accessibility isn't an issue any longer. They can prepare new staff from a distance with its assistance. Instructors can work straightforwardly with new staff through data innovation and preparing programs for each bend of the globe by means of online courses, studios and educating classes.


## Role of Information Technology in Performance Management:

Human asset directors use data innovation to improve execution and furthermore assess representative by his/her own criticism or input by means of investors to be utilized to serve the association. There are numerous applications, equipment and programming accessible for Human Resource administrators to survey their representatives' presentation and set the exhibition norms. The Human Resource directors look at the genuine presentation of a representative with the standard exhibition and eliminate the distinctions and furthermore give extra preparing to his/her workers. Information Technology assumes an indispensable part to be aware of an association related workers to comprehend their result, to know their abilities and get input of other involved gatherings.


## Role of Information Technology in Human Resource Development: As Information

innovation is caused for a major insurgency in human existence, so Information innovation is likewise fundamental for the advancement of Human Resource in organizations and associations and decides the rule of human asset improvement as indicated by the requirements of the staff and organizations. Data innovation collaborates and adds to human asset improvement by creating human limit and quality on a continuous venture.

In the data innovation process, data are constantly delivered, handled, circulated, and coordinated, so data innovation will be the a superior answer for the issues during representatives preparing and human abilities that are joined and hence create and further develop efficiency. Through data innovation a firm or association can further develop limit fabricating locally and can prepare their staff from abroad also through Information Technology.


## Role of Information Technology in Idea Management Tool: Presently days, Information

innovation assumes an essential part in thought administration by giving data on new raised proposition of progress put together by their staff in an association and the interaction likewise assists with creating groundbreaking thoughts in an association. It can give data on the information and pay of an association and helps in the execution of the new proposition in an association for future use as well. The fundamental objective of online data support in thought age and the board is to turn into the reinforcement of a solid association and give the chance to all staff. It assists staff with introducing their present thoughts and to ponder further enhancements talked about in gatherings and visiting gatherings. Data innovation enjoys many benefits like speed, accessibility, straightforwardness, saving time, cash and all assets, lessening costs and further developing position execution by quick activity and on time quick interchanges.


## Role of Information Technology for Human Resource Information System:

It is a sort of capacity framework to store information and data of an association. The Human Resources Information System is a consolidated information obtaining and capacity framework for investigation and decision making in the field of Human Resource. Innovation generally improves on work of Human Resource. The human asset directors store and recover data, for example, organization records, benefit, misfortune and different information in electronic configuration gives data on representative information, employing process, work qualities, application conditions, determination and staffing, proficient and individual improvement, organization structure, execution assessment, preparing costs, association, individual preparation, and so on Through IT, a director can store in sequence.


## Role of information technology in Human Resource Management System: Use of data

innovation is more required variable in all parts of life. Data innovation carries different upgrades to an association or organization, like expanding incomes, diminishing authoritative costs, expanding efficiency, further developing the dynamic cycle and further developing client care. An association involves all sort of advancements for human asset the executives to enlist and choose an appropriate worker for a meeting, oversee representatives, store their information and investigate it appropriately. There are additionally a few sorts of utilizations, programming and equipment bundles exist for the reason and the association utilizes these bundles as per their requirements. Presently days, numerous associations utilize the Internet to acquire representative applications and to put new workers into the association as per their exhibition and result to an association.


## Role of information technology in developing countries, especially in India:

India is an emerging nation and Information Technology is another peculiarity in the country. The occupants of the nation is likewise new with the utilization of IT in their every day exercises that is the reason use of IT administrations are exceptionally less when contrasted with agricultural nations like USA, Germany and UK.

Interchanges like phones, web-based media administrations through cell phones, portable cash and barely any organizations, lodgings and corner shops, which they offer web based buying administrations. There are not many disadvantages of Information Technology exist, which are acknowledged in the review here in India:

1. Absence of IT writing 2. Absence of laws and strategies, for example, duplicate right 3. Absence of programming engineers 4. Absence of public effort about Information Technology, utilization and its benefits 5. Less comprehension of Information Technology driven candidates and English language proficiency


## Research Methodology

The current work completes a methodical and exploratory examination study to research the job of the Internet and data advancements in human asset the board framework. We have tried to get information on how data innovation impacts Human Resource framework to know the benefits and weaknesses of data innovation for the workers and associations. The work depends on optional information and the auxiliary information source is gathered utilizing distributed articles, diaries, books, the Internet, course materials, and web advances, data and human asset the board, and so forth. We have also explored the job of data advances and effects of Information Technology on representatives, Recruitment and associations.


## Results and Discussion

Data Technology caused a major upheaval on the planet and carried numerous offices to individuals. Data Technology is urgent in our day to day existence that impacts all parts of our life. Information Technology is a key variable that causes speed, accessibility, classification, security and give admittance to data wherever when you really want it. Through data innovation representatives can work at each end of the globe from home. It implies that presence or actual accessibility is not any more required. Moreover, Information Technology is required in all areas and can acquire straightforwardness all organizations.  Speed: information technology reduces wasting of time and a person can find required information very quickly.  Availability: An employee can find data everywhere and there is no need to carry data files.  Backup: Employees can store date in several locations using disks, tap, cloud, etc.  Security: Data could be saved more secure and confidentially. 5. Disadvantage of information technology for employees and organization  The increase in information technologies reduces job opportunities in the organization and a large number of employees are unemployed, because Robots can be used as employees; a single employee can work more using Information Technology compared to many more employees who do not use Information Technology.  If employees are not familiar with information technology, the employee cannot get the desired job in the company. It can be costly to build a new Information Technology system in your organization.  It is risky from a data security point of view.


## Conclusion

From all the above clarifications, data innovation extraordinarily help the inside tasks of an association and can get a major upset situation process in both creating and created nations. Representatives can apply, give test and even can work from a distance at each bend of globe from home that causes enhancements in economy, which is a best an open door for agricultural nations. It can acquire ease neighborhood and far off region applications utilizing PCs, Internet, printers, copiers, scanner, fax machine, robots, phones, and so on it helps the progression of data quickly and effectively. With the assistance of data innovation, the human asset the executives plan grows quicker and work execution becomes viable. Data innovation is an assortment of programming and equipment for workers and associations and assumes an imperative part in the advancement of Human Resource. Through data advances, an individual can impart, apply and give tests worldwide and can work from a distance. Data innovation can increment in Recruitment, chances of more empty situations to work with work valuable open doors for candidates. For non-industrial nations that has low or medium degree of economy, IT is a best instrument to further develop their economy by means of Information Technology, reevaluate their laborers to abroad to have the chances of arrangement, bring in cash and limit fabricating that have an immediate effect of progress in economy.


## Recommendations

Public effort: To impart best practices to government and private area zeroing in on Information Technology. a. Creating Information Technology arrangements: To persuade government Information Technology strategy creators and related associations to have distinctive required Information Technology related polices and methodologies. b. Creating Information Systems and Websites: To inspire both public area and private area to foster devoted applications; people groups will get enrolled on the web and take a time allotment. In outcome, there will be office for clients and occupations for some PC administrators to enlist people groups in rustic regions. c. Organizations Process Outsourcing: To out-source Information Technology specialists abroad that will cause business amazing open doors and further develop our economy. d. To propel others and give ideas to future examination.
 © 2021 The Author (s); Helix E-ISSN: 2319-5592; P-ISSN: 2277-3495

The Role of Information Technology in Planning the Organization Resources E-Journal of Elites, Elite National Foundation of Azerbaijan -E-Sharghi. A Ahmadi, 15Ahmadi, A. (2011). "The Role of Information Technology in Planning the Organization Resources E- Journal of Elites, Elite National Foundation of Azerbaijan -E-Sharghi," pp15.

Development of Human Resources and Administration. A Davoudi, Tadb Journal Tehran. 41Davoudi, A. (1999).Development of Human Resources and Administration. Tadb Journal Tehran, 41.

Virtual HR: The Impact of Information Technology on the Human Resources Professional. S D Gardner, D Lepak, K M Bartol, Journal of Vocational Behavior. 632Gardner, S.D., Lepak, D.P and Bartol, K.M. (2003).Virtual HR: The Impact of Information Technology on the Human Resources Professional, Journal of Vocational Behavior, vol 63(2), pp 159-179.

The role of Information Technology on the Organizational Effectiveness in Mashhad City Hall. M Ghorbani, S Sangani, World Applied Sciences Journal. 139Ghorbani, M., & Sangani, S (2011).The role of Information Technology on the Organizational Effectiveness in Mashhad City Hall. World Applied Sciences Journal, vol 13(9), pp 2095-2107.

Human Resources Information System: Backbone Technology of Contemporary Human Resources. A Hendrickson, Journal of Labor Research. 243Hendrickson, A. R (2003).Human Resources Information System: Backbone Technology of Contemporary Human Resources. Journal of Labor Research, vol 24(3), pp 3781-394.

Information Technology Projected Based Organization and Employee Satisfaction: A Case Study of Iran. A Hajizade Moghadom, S S Vajdi Dastgerdi, Word Applied Science Journal. 1010Hajizade Moghadom, A., & Vajdi Dastgerdi, S.S. (2010). "Information Technology Projected Based Organization and Employee Satisfaction: A Case Study of Iran. Word Applied Science Journal, vol 10(10), pp 1176-1184

Human Resources Management and Information Technology: An Overview of Developing Countrie. Human Resources Management and Information Technology: An Overview of Developing Countrie

Information Technology in Human Resources Management: A Practical Evaluation. M Kaur, L Sindhu, S Sharma, S Narang, S , An International Journal of Advanced Computer Technology. 312Kaur, M., Sindhu, L, S., Sharma, S., Narang, S. (2014). Information Technology in Human Resources Management: A Practical Evaluation An International Journal of Advanced Computer Technology, vol 3(12), pp 1437-1442.

The new competition and human resources: how disadvantaged are low-income LDCs? Paper prepared for a conference on globalization and learning. R Kolinsky, OxfordKolinsky, R. (1998). The new competition and human resources: how disadvantaged are low-income LDCs? Paper prepared for a conference on globalization and learning. Sep,Oxford.

Human resources information system (HRIS) and technology trust. S K Lippert, P M Swiercz, Journal of Information Science. 315Lippert, S.K, and Swiercz, P.M. (2005). "Human resources information system (HRIS) and technology trust" Journal of Information Science, vol 31(5), pp 340-353.

The Effect of Applying Information Technology on Efficiency of Parks and Green Space Organization: A Case Study. F Nejdairani, R Rasouli, M ; F Behravesh, R Rasouli, M Behravesh, Middle -East Journal of Science Research. 102The Effect of Applying Information NejdairaniNejdairani, F., Rasouli, R., & Behravesh, M. (2011).The Effect of Applying Information Nejdairani, F., Rasouli, R., & Behravesh, M. (2011). The Effect of Applying Information Technology on Efficiency of Parks and Green Space Organization: A Case Study. Middle -East Journal of Science Research, vol 10(2), pp 224-232.

Study on the role of technology in human resource management. Selvan, International Journal of Applied Research. 17Selvan, V (2015).Study on the role of technology in human resource management. International Journal of Applied Research, vol 1(7): pp 472-475.