# Bronchoscopy Basics: Current approaches-A literature review OPEN ACCESS

CorpusID: 247099067
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff7b15a9050ee39e179da87d8872afb6849b1dc5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff7b15a9050ee39e179da87d8872afb6849b1dc5)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Bronchoscopy Basics: Current approaches-A literature review OPEN ACCESS
Available Online: 26-02-2022 Published 28-02-2022

Naved Hasan naved911@hotmail.com 
King Abdullah Medical City 
Muzdalifah Road 
MakkahAl Mashaer 
Saudi Arabia 
Naved Hasan 
Bronchoscopy Basics: Current approaches-A literature review OPEN ACCESS
Available Online: 26-02-2022 Published 28-02-2022Received 14-02-2022 Accepted 25-02-2022Review Article Distributed under Creative Commons CC-BY-NC 4.0basic bronchoscopyhigh riskMallampati scoreguidelinesrecommendations
Objective: This review article aims to understand the basic airway anatomy, bronchoscopy in high risk patients, premedication in bronchoscopy and performing the procedure in patients on anticoagulation. Basic bronchoscopy is the procedure done by pulmonologists, intensivists, thoracic surgery, and anesthesiologists. After a literature search from several databases, including PubMed, Google Scholar, Medline, Science Direct, Cochrane Library, Update etc., I found several categories of high-risk patients based on clinical history, Mallampati score, and 3-3-2 Rule. These include patients with pulmonary hypertension, renal failure, COPD, asthma, obesity, patients on anticoagulation. I searched the literature to find multiple expert guidelines and recommendations that suggested minimizing the risk of complications in these high-risk patients, including premedication.

## INTRODUCTION Physical Status Classification

American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has classified the airway risk based on the physical status:


## 3-3-2 Rule

Intubations during bronchoscopy can be difficult as it is likely to be swelling and spasm in the airways. As pulmonologists and intensivists often use fentanyl and midazolam for conscious sedation, no anesthesiologist may be present. The 3-3-2 rule is a simple measurement to assess the likelihood of difficult intubation.

3-A measurement of 3 fingers (7 cm) between upper and lower teeth to assess good mouth opening.

3-A measurement of 3 fingers from chin to the hyoid bone. If > 3 cm, suggests distance to the posterior pharynx, which will allow easy insertion of the laryngoscope.

2-A measurement of 2 fingers from the base of the mandible to the thyroid notch will indicate the relation of the larynx to the base of the tongue.

Few have been done, but it is a quick and simple method to evaluate the patient's airway.


## Bronchoscopy in pulmonary hypertension (PH)

The main issue is that we rarely know the status of pulmonary hypertension in most patients.

The majority of the experts believe that bronchoscopic inspection of the airway is a safe procedure, but TBBx is not.

An ACCP Survey was conducted in a CHEST meeting in 2001 to detect the comfort level of doing bronchoscopy in PH patients. 29% -absolute contraindication, 58%-relative contraindication, 13%no contraindication, 40%-MPAP>40 is a contraindication. (1) It is important to be aware of the potential predisposing conditions related to pulmonary hypertension.

Known autoimmune diseases, OHS/ sleep apnea, chronic pulmonary diseases, even COPD Do 2D Echocardiogram, look for RVSP. If > 40-45 mm Hg, be careful and follow stringent indications. (2) Bronchoscopy can cause bleeding, which may be minor or major. (3,4) Minor bleeding usually stops spontaneously or requires local epinephrine or cold saline.

Major bleeding is one that may require balloon tamponade, embolization, surgical intervention, and blood transfusion.

No significant major bleeding occurs with mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension. There is, however, an increased risk of post-procedure prolonged intubation in these patients. There is no consensus in these patients and data is limited.

If PH is > 40-45, one should be very careful, especially when doing transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLBx).


## Bronchoscopy in Renal Insufficiency

A study done in 2012 showed procedure-related hemorrhage most commonly occurred in patients with renal insufficiency with an unadjusted odds ratio of 2.94, adjusted odds ratio of 2.85, and P < 0.0001. (5) It is recommended that if blood urea nitrogen(BUN) >30 mm/dl or serum creatinine > 2mm/dl, then desmopressin (DDAVP) should be given 30 minutes before the biopsy or needle aspiration.


## Bronchoscopy in COPD

A study was published in 2017, which showed minor and major complications when bronchoscopy was done in COPD patients. (6) Minor complications included transient desaturation, bronchospasm, epistaxis, and transient hypotension.

Major complications included respiratory failure, pneumothorax, and hemoptysis.

The most significant complication was respiratory failure, which was 4 times more common.

No cut-off for FEV1 or amount of inhaled oxygen has been shown in studies regarding when to do or not to do a bronchoscopy. It depends on individual comfort level. However, if a patient is on 6-10 liters of oxygen, one should be very careful and have all the preparations. The presence of anesthesia can also be helpful.

A study published in CHEST showed that premedication with inhaled short-acting beta-agonist is not recommended. (7)


## Bronchoscopy in Bronchial Asthma

Bronchoscopy in severe asthma is usually well tolerated with proper precautions. (8,9,10) Beta 2 agonists are recommended pre-procedure with or without anticholinergics.

No cut-off for FEV1 has been recommended.


## Bronchoscopy in Obesity

A study in 2016 looked at the percentages of complications according to various indices of obesity. (11) Early termination of the procedure is seen more in obese patients than in non-obese, 6.41 vs 2.78

There are a lot of other issues in these patients. A higher Mallampati score in obese patients has a significantly higher percentage of transient oxygen desaturation and bronchospasm.

If these patients have a triple syndrome with obesity, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), and COPD, one should be well prepared and ideally, anesthesia should be available immediately if a need arises to intubate these patients.

Obese patients with OSA have a much higher percentage of termination of procedure as compared to obese patients without OSA. 2.5 vs 15.8, p=0.0002. They also have a higher percentage of pneumothorax 0.4 vs 5.3.

Based on the current literature, the following is recommended:

Pre-procedure assessment of hypercapnia, anticipate the difficult airway, consider CPAP during bronchoscopy, consider anesthesia support, and consider pre-emptive awake intubation.


## Premedication in Bronchoscopy

Routine use of anticholinergics like atropine and glycopyrrolate is not recommended anymore. (12) They may reduce secretions but no reduction in cough, discomfort, desaturation, and procedure time. They have even been shown to be harmful and may contribute to hemodynamic instability.

Topical lidocaine may decrease the cough and the total dose of sedation. Either 1% or 2% should be used. Both have similar efficacy. A 4% concentration is not recommended as it may get absorbed and cause toxicity, including methemoglobinemia. ACCP and Thorax guidelines recommend 7mg/kg body weight to minimize the risk of complications. (13,14,15) Nebulized lidocaine, in addition to topical lidocaine, has no benefit. (16,17,18) Discontinue clopidogrel (Plavix) 5-7 days before the procedure, especially if a transbronchial biopsy is planned.


## Bronchoscopy in Anticoagulated Patients

Aspirin should be continued.

Warfarin should be stopped 5 days prior to the procedure or based on current INR if < 1.5 and resume in 12-24 h.


## LMWH should be held for 24 h (prophylactic for 12 h).

Unfractionated heparin should be held 4-6 h before the procedure.

In DOACs, stop 1-2 days before the procedure. If they have renal insufficiency with GFR < 50, then as a general principle, it should be 2-3 days. If renal failure is end-stage, it may be longer than 3 days.


## CONCLUSION

Basic bronchoscopy is a safe procedure. However, in high-risk patients, several guidelines and recommendations have been proposed to minimize the complications. The majority of the patients are in ASA Class 3 or 4. MPAP > 40 is high-risk for bleeding, especially with TBBx. BUN > 30 mg/dl and creatinine > 2 mg/dl is high risk of bleeding. Consider DDAVP. No benefit of short-acting beta agonist in COPD premedication. Short-acting beta-agonist nebulization can be used in bronchial asthma. In Obese patients with BMI. 30, anesthesia support should be considered especially if they have sleep apnea. Lidocaine dose for bronchoscopy is 7 mg/kg. No benefit to adding nebulization. 


Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease TBBx: Trans-bronchial Biopsy CPAP: Continuous Positive Airway Pressure MPAP: Mean Pulmonary Artery Pressure BUN: Blood Urea Nitrogen GFR: Glomerular Filtration Rate FEV1: Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second DOAC: Direct Acting Oral Anticoagulants Author Contributions: NH; Search the literature, Data collecttion, Data the analysis, manuscript Preperation, Revisions.
Medical Science and Discovery, 2022; 9(2):76-79
Acknowledgments: None
Contraindications and safety of transbronchial lung biopsy via flexible bronchoscopy. A survey of pulmonologists and review of the literature. Respiration. M M Wahidi, A T Rocha, J W Hollingsworth, J A Govert, D Feller-Kopman, A Ernst, 10.1159/0000853701594229872Wahidi MM, Rocha AT, Hollingsworth JW, Govert JA, Feller-Kopman D, Ernst A. Contraindications and safety of transbronchial lung biopsy via flexible bronchoscopy. A survey of pulmonologists and review of the literature. Respiration. 2005 May-Jun;72(3):285-95. doi: 10.1159/000085370. PMID: 15942298.

Safety of Bronchoscopy in Patients with Echocardiographic Evidence of Pulmonary Hypertension. G Diaz-Fuentes, B Bajantri, M Adrish, 10.1159/000448848Respiration. 92Diaz-Fuentes G, Bajantri B, Adrish M: Safety of Bronchoscopy in Patients with Echocardiographic Evidence of Pulmonary Hypertension. Respiration 2016;92:182-187. doi: 10.1159/000448848

Pulmonary Hypertension and Transbronchial Lung Biopsy: Does It Increase the Risk of Hemorrhage? Cureus. B H Lashari, M Asai, W Alswealmeen, C Hodge, C Ripley-Hager, R K Patel, 10.7759/cureus.908432789034PMCID127417037Lashari BH, Asai M, Alswealmeen W, Hodge C, Ripley-Hager C, Patel RK. Pulmonary Hypertension and Transbronchial Lung Biopsy: Does It Increase the Risk of Hemorrhage? Cureus. 2020 Jul 9;12(7):e9084. doi: 10.7759/cureus.9084. PMID: 32789034; PMCID: PMC7417037.

. Medical Science and Discovery. 92Medical Science and Discovery, 2022; 9(2):76-79

Safety of diagnostic bronchoscopy in patients with pulmonary hypertension. E Diaz-Guzman, S Vadi, O A Minai, T R Gildea, A C Mehta, 10.1159/000197465Respiration. 773Diaz-Guzman E, Vadi S, Minai OA, Gildea TR, Mehta AC. Safety of diagnostic bronchoscopy in patients with pulmonary hypertension. Respiration. 2009;77(3):292-7. doi: 10.1159/000197465. Epub 2009

Population-based estimates of transbronchial lung biopsy utilization and complications. Melissa H Turkey, Renda Soylemez Wiener, 10.1016/j.rmed.2012.08.008Respir Med. 10611Melissa H. Turkey, Renda Soylemez Wiener. Population-based estimates of transbronchial lung biopsy utilization and complications. Respir Med. 2012 Nov; 106(11): 1559-1565. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2012.08.008

. Christina R Bellinger, Md*, Bellinger, Christina R. MD*;

. Khan, M D Irtaza, Khan, Irtaza MD †;

Bronchoscopy Safety in Patients With Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Et Chatterjee, 10.1097/LBR.0000000000000333Journal of Bronchology & Interventional Pulmonology. 242Chatterjee, et.al. Bronchoscopy Safety in Patients With Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, Journal of Bronchology & Interventional Pulmonology: April 2017 -Volume 24 -Issue 2 -p 98-103. doi: 10.1097/LBR.0000000000000333

A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of bronchodilators for bronchoscopy in patients with COPD. Chest. D Stolz, V Pollak, P N Chhajed, C Gysin, E Pflimlin, M Tamm, 10.1378/chest.06-230817356091131Stolz D, Pollak V, Chhajed PN, Gysin C, Pflimlin E, Tamm M. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of bronchodilators for bronchoscopy in patients with COPD. Chest. 2007 Mar;131(3):765- 772. doi: 10.1378/chest.06-2308. PMID: 17356091.

Safety of investigative bronchoscopy in the Severe Asthma Research Program. W C Moore, M D Evans, E R Bleecker, 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.02.042J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1282Moore WC, Evans MD, Bleecker ER, et al. Safety of investigative bronchoscopy in the Severe Asthma Research Program. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128(2):328-336.e3. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2011.02.042

Safety of bronchoalveolar lavage and bronchial biopsies in patients with asthma of variable severity. T Van Vyve, P Chanez, J Bousquet, J Y Lacoste, F B Michel, P Godard, 10.1164/ajrccm/146.1.1161626794Am Rev Respir Dis. 1461Van Vyve T, Chanez P, Bousquet J, Lacoste JY, Michel FB, Godard P. Safety of bronchoalveolar lavage and bronchial biopsies in patients with asthma of variable severity. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1992 Jul;146(1):116- 21. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm/146.1.116. PMID: 1626794.

The safety aspects of fiberoptic bronchoscopy, bronchoalveolar lavage, and endobronchial biopsy in asthma. R Djukanović, J W Wilson, C K Lai, S T Holgate, P H Howarth, 10.1164/ajrccm/143.4_Pt_1.7722008989Am Rev Respir Dis. 1434Pt 1Djukanović R, Wilson JW, Lai CK, Holgate ST, Howarth PH. The safety aspects of fiberoptic bronchoscopy, bronchoalveolar lavage, and endobronchial biopsy in asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1991 Apr;143(4 Pt 1):772-7. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm/143.4_Pt_1.772. PMID: 2008989.

Sedation for Bronchoscopy and Complications in Obese Patients. I Khan, A B Chatterjee, C R Bellinger, E Haponik, 10.1159/00044825027595264Respiration. 923EpubKhan I, Chatterjee AB, Bellinger CR, Haponik E. Sedation for Bronchoscopy and Complications in Obese Patients. Respiration. 2016;92(3):158-65. doi: 10.1159/000448250. Epub 2016 Sep 6. PMID: 27595264.

Anticholinergic premedication for flexible bronchoscopy: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of atropine and glycopyrrolate. J A Malik, D Gupta, A N Agarwal, S K Jindal, Chest. Malik JA, Gupta D, Agarwal AN, Jindal SK. Anticholinergic premedication for flexible bronchoscopy: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of atropine and glycopyrrolate. Chest. 2009

. 10.1378/chest.08-2924.Epub19318667136Aug;136(2):347-354. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-2924. Epub 2009 Mar 24. PMID: 19318667.

Topical nasal anesthesia for fibreoptic bronchoscopy: patients' preference for lignocaine gel. A R Webb, M A Woodhead, H R Dalton, J A Grigg, F J Millard, 10.1136/thx.44.8.674Thorax. 448Webb AR, Woodhead MA, Dalton HR, Grigg JA, Millard FJ. Topical nasal anesthesia for fibreoptic bronchoscopy: patients' preference for lignocaine gel. Thorax. 1989;44(8):674-675. doi:10.1136/thx.44.8.674

Topical lidocaine through the bronchoscope reduces cough rate during bronchoscopy. N Antoniades, C Worsnop, Respirology. Antoniades N, Worsnop C. Topical lidocaine through the bronchoscope reduces cough rate during bronchoscopy. Respirology. 2009

. 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2009.01587.x1970306814Aug;14(6):873-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2009.01587.x. PMID: 19703068.

American College of Chest Physicians consensus statement on the use of topical anesthesia, analgesia, and sedation during flexible bronchoscopy in adult patients. M M Wahidi, P Jain, M Jantz, P Lee, G B Mackensen, S Y Barbour, C Lamb, G A Silvestri, 10.1378/chest.10-336122045879Chest. 1405Wahidi MM, Jain P, Jantz M, Lee P, Mackensen GB, Barbour SY, Lamb C, Silvestri GA. American College of Chest Physicians consensus statement on the use of topical anesthesia, analgesia, and sedation during flexible bronchoscopy in adult patients. Chest. 2011 Nov;140(5):1342-1350. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-3361. PMID: 22045879.

Effect of routine clopidogrel use on bleeding complications after transbronchial biopsy in humans. A Ernst, R Eberhardt, M Wahidi, H D Becker, F J Herth, 10.1378/chest.129.3.73416537875Chest. 1293Ernst A, Eberhardt R, Wahidi M, Becker HD, Herth FJ. Effect of routine clopidogrel use on bleeding complications after transbronchial biopsy in humans. Chest. 2006 Mar;129(3):734-7. doi: 10.1378/chest.129.3.734. PMID: 16537875.

Thoracic Society guideline for diagnostic flexible bronchoscopy in adults: accredited by NICE. Du Rand, I A Blaikley, J Booton, R , Thorax. 68Du Rand IA, Blaikley J, Booton R, et al British Thoracic Society guideline for diagnostic flexible bronchoscopy in adults: accredited by NICE Thorax 2013;68:i1-i44.

The Periprocedural Management of Anticoagulation and Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors in Endoscopic Interventions. C M Lange, S Fichtlscherer, W Miesbach, S Zeuzem, J Albert, 10.3238/arztebl.2016.0129Dtsch Arztebl Int. 1138Lange CM, Fichtlscherer S, Miesbach W, Zeuzem S, Albert J. The Periprocedural Management of Anticoagulation and Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors in Endoscopic Interventions. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2016;113(8):129-135. doi:10.3238/arztebl.2016.0129

), (CC BY NC) which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. © Copyright, International Journal of Medical Science and Discovery. The Author(s); This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution LicenseCopyright © 2022 The Author(s); This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), (CC BY NC) which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. International Journal of Medical Science and Discovery.