# SPORTS NUTRITION (L CIALDELLA KAM, SECTION EDITOR) Prevalence of Food Insecurity in the General College Population and Student-Athletes: a Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 247111476
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d79f28c978936a69a8701bd2e836bef54746839](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d79f28c978936a69a8701bd2e836bef54746839)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

SPORTS NUTRITION (L CIALDELLA KAM, SECTION EDITOR) Prevalence of Food Insecurity in the General College Population and Student-Athletes: a Review of the Literature
0123456789

Elizabeth L Abbey 
Melissa Brown 
· Christine Karpinski 
SPORTS NUTRITION (L CIALDELLA KAM, SECTION EDITOR) Prevalence of Food Insecurity in the General College Population and Student-Athletes: a Review of the Literature
13012345678910.1007/s13668-022-00394-4Accepted: 15 January 2022Food insecurity · Food security · College student · Athlete · Hunger · COVID-19
Purpose of Review The purpose of this review is to examine the prevalence of food insecurity (FI) among the general college student population with a focus on student-athletes and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on FI in these groups. Recent Findings FI is estimated to be more prevalent in college students than in the general population, although ranges vary widely. Less is known about FI among college student-athletes. Data on changes in FI prevalence pre-pandemic and during is mixed. Summary Colleges and universities should invest in interventions to address FI on their campuses, and further research on FI among student-athletes and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on FI is needed.Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Introduction

Food insecurity (FI) is the lack of consistent access to safe and healthy food [1]. In 2020, the prevalence of FI among households in the US was estimated to be 10.5%, which was down from 11.1% in 2019 [2]. Comprehensive national data since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic are not yet available, but local data indicate that the prevalence of FI has increased, particularly among the newly food insecure as a result of COVID-19 [3]. Among the US population, pre-COVID-19 rates of FI among college students range from 10 to 75% [4].

While the general college population has been widely studied, less is known about the prevalence of FI among collegiate athletes. One non-peer-reviewed source on this topic is the RealCollege survey of students at 4-year and 2-year institutions in the US conducted by the Hope Center for College, Community, and Justice [5]. The most recent survey in fall 2019 aggregated data for student-athletes for the first time. "Student-athlete" was self-reported as participating in their institution's athletic department. Of the almost 167,000 total students who completed the survey, 1866 were student-athletes at 4-year institutions and 1640 attended 2-year institutions. Prevalence of FI among athletes at 4-year institutions and 2-year institutions was 23% and 39%, respectively. For non-athletes, these rates were 32% and 43%, respectively. This report, as well as the ripple effects from the pandemic, have spurred increased interest on the topic of FI among college students in general and student-athletes specifically. The purpose of this review is to examine the prevalence of FI among the general college student population and student-athletes, also taking into consideration the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on FI in college students.


## This article is part of the Topical Collection on Sports Nutrition


## Search Strategy and Selection Criteria

After conducting preliminary searches to identify key words, a systematic search of PubMed, SportDiscus, and Medline (using EBSCOhost Research Platform) was conducted, and all were screened for original, primary research articles published in the last 5 years since 2016. The search strategy was based on sensitivity and did not include terms related to comparators or outcomes in order to allow for the potential retrieval of a larger number of articles. The following search terms were used to search the databases with filters for human subject research and English language applied without restriction on study design: "food insecurity" and "food security" in combination with "college" or "athlete."

A defined set of eligibility criteria was constructed with the following inclusion criteria: a population of college students in the US, use of a validated tool for food security (FS), results that included a reported overall prevalence of FI, clear methodology that could confirm all inclusion criteria, and the article written in English. Exclusion criteria included not meeting the previous inclusion criteria and/or ambiguous methods that could not confirm all inclusion criteria.

Data were extracted independently by three researchers and included study objective, sample size, and population characteristics (gender, race/ethnicity, 4-year or 2-year institution, non-athlete or athlete status, undergraduate or graduate status, first-generation college student, assessment tool utilized, time frame of assessment, study design, and results and outcomes). The results and outcomes data from each of the studies included an overall % FI, % low and very low FS when available, and factors associated with FI. Full data can be found in Tables 1 and 2.


## Results and Discussion

Searches of the databases resulted in a total of 801 studies. After screening of the titles and abstracts and excluding review articles and duplicates, 62 articles remained. After a more careful screening of the full texts, 16 were excluded for not meeting the inclusion criteria. One additional publication became available during the preparation of this manuscript and was subsequently included in the data and discussion. Therefore, a total of 47 articles that met the inclusion criteria were analyzed and evaluated [6-9, 10 ••, 11-17, 18•, 19, 20•, 21•, 22•, 23-28, 29•, 30-37, 38••, [39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52] (see Table 1).


## Study Characteristics

Of the 47 studies, 44 were cross-sectional research [6-9, 10••, 11, 15-17, 18•, 19, 20•, 21•, 22•, 23-28, 29•, 30-37, 38••, [39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52] and three were cohort design [12,13,44]. Two of the studies were performed at 2-year institutions [25,46] with the other 45 at 4-year institutions [6-9, 10 ••, 11-17, 18•, 19, 20•, 21•, 22•, 23, 24, 26-28, 29•, 30-37, 38••, 45, 47-52]. All but two of the studies were focused on the general college student population (non-athletes) while the other two were focused on student-athletes [10••, 38••]. For the administration of the assessment tools, in 41 studies an online version was utilized [6, 8, 10••, 11-17, 18•, 19, 20•, 21•, 22•, 23-28, 29•, 30-37, 39-45, 49-52], a paper version in two studies [9, 38••], and both in one study [7]. There were three studies where the mode of administration was not stated [46][47][48]. In all but three studies [13,17,25] some version of the USDA Economic Research Service's survey tool was used to assess FS [53]. The USDA has three validated surveys that categorize FS levels: the 18-item Household Food Security Survey Module (HFSSM), the 10-item Adult Food Security Survey Module (AFSSM), and the 6-item AFSSM Short Form. Within the HFSSM, there are specific questions about FS status of children in the household, while these questions are omitted from the other two surveys. In the majority of the assessments, participants were queried about FS in the past 12 months [6-9, 10••, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18•, 19, 20•, 21•, 22•, 23, 24, 26-28, 29•, 30-34, 37, 39-43, 45, 46, 52]. In one, FS status was assessed over the past 9 months [35], and in the remaining studies, FS status was assessed over the past 30 days [11,16,36,[47][48][49][50][51]. No time frame was specified in four studies [13, 25, 38••, 44]. FS status was reported on a continuum from high FS to very low FS. A person is considered to have FI if they have "low" or "very low" FS.


## Food Insecurity Among the General College Student Population

The overall prevalence of FI from all subjects combined in this current review reveals a much higher prevalence of FI in college students at 32.2 ± 12.9% (range 9.9-72.9%) compared to the national household average in the USA in 2019 (10.5%) [2]. The overall prevalence was obtained by the sum of all published prevalences from each of the studies included in the review, divided by the total of studies included in the review, and then multiplied by 100 to yield a percent. Breaking down the results from the current review, the prevalence of FI at 4-year institutions and 2-year institutions was 32.7 ± 12.9% (range 9.9-72.9%) and 37.8 ± 20.1% (23.36-52%), respectively. These are in line with the results from the Hope Center survey (32% from 4-year institutions and 43% from 2-year institutions) [5]. When comparing the results based on the assessment tool, it appears that the 6-item (35.3 ± 11.7%; range 9.9-48.0%), 10-item (30.3 ± 10.1%; range 9.9-48.0%), and 18-item (33.8 ± 18.5%; range 15.0-52.0%) surveys all yielded similar results while 


## Factors Associated with Food Insecurity in College Students


## Demographic, Sociocultural, and Socioeconomic Factors

Several factors that were investigated in the 47 studies were correlated with the level of FS reported. Race and ethnicity are factors that are associated with a higher risk of FI. When analyzing the data from the current review for studies with overrepresentation of Hispanics and Black/African Americans, the combined % FI is 35.0 ± 14.8% (range 14.0-72.9%). The highest prevalence of FI (72.9%) was in the study by Duke et al. performed in a population of students from a historically Black college or university [17]. Only El Zein et al. [18] specifically reported on FI prevalence among international students and noted that it was higher (37.6%) than the entire student population (32.0%) at one university, though this was still significantly lower than the rate for Black students (61.7%) [19].

Other demographic factors identified as being associated with increased FI were the female sex/gender, being a single parent, and having dependent children. In an analysis by the Institute for Women's Policy Research [54], 22% of all undergraduate students are parents. Among students raising children while in college, 70% are mothers, and of these, 62% are single parents. In the US, single mothers with children in the household have the highest rates of FI (27.7%) of any household composition [55]. Considering this data and the fact that a larger proportion of the college student population is female (60%) [2] may provide at least some explanation for the higher rates of FI among college students compared to the general population.

Educationally related factors associated with FI include being a first-generation college student, parental education of high school level or below, and having undergraduate status. First-generation college students are more likely to come from low-income, poor, or working class backgrounds (57%) compared to continuing generation students (12%) [56]. No direct cause is known for why graduate students have lower rates of FI than undergraduate students-are more resources available to graduate students than undergraduates, or are they just more likely to come from more financially stable backgrounds? Socioeconomically, students receiving financial assistance (specifically Pell Grants) had higher rates of FI. Considering access to food, it is not surprising that having a limited meal plan or no meal plan was associated with increased FI. Lack of accessibility to food may also potentially explain why students living off campus and those who do not have access to a car reported increased levels of FI. Finally, food security status may vary for students depending on the time of the semester. The prevalence of FI was higher at the end of the fall and spring semesters compared to the beginning when financial assistance is greater and campus meal plans have not been depleted.


## Food Insecurity and Outcomes

The authors of the reviewed literature identified many relationships between FI and specific outcomes among college students. To begin, the outcome most notably unique among this group compared to the general population is academic performance. Higher rates of FI among college students were consistently associated with lower grade point average. There is evidence that dietary behaviors (e.g., eating breakfast) and quality (e.g., increased fruit and vegetable consumption) are related to better academic outcomes [57]. In this review, FI was related to dietary behaviors and quality such as increased frequency of skipping meals; lower fruit, vegetable, and fiber intake; and increased intake of  added sugars, processed foods, fast food, dairy, and calcium. Conversely lower FI was associated with higher rates of nutrition literacy, which has been shown to predict adherence to healthier dietary patterns [58]. In regard to FI and other health outcomes, college students experiencing FI were more likely to report poor overall health than students not experiencing FI. These health metrics included less frequent medical visits/exams, poor mental health, increased psychological stress, increased depression, poor sleep quality, disordered eating/eating disorders, increased obesity, less physical activity, increased tobacco and marijuana use, and higher rates of binge drinking. College students experiencing FI employed various coping strategies to meet their food needs such as more frequent attendance at events that offered free snacks and meals, increased use of food pantries, greater frequency of skipping meals, decreasing portion sizes, stretching the available food over a longer period of time, and purchasing low-cost, highly processed foods.

While it remains out of the scope of this paper to offer specific solutions to address FI on college campuses, strategies currently being employed include on-campus food pantries and food recovery from campus events directed to students.


## Food Insecurity Among Collegiate Student-Athletes

There are only two published studies in peer-reviewed journals that have assessed the prevalence of FI among collegiate student-athletes [10••, 38••]. The average prevalence of FI for student-athletes (see Table 2) was 12.3 ± 3.4% (range 9.9-14.7%) much lower than the general college student population and more in line with the national average. However, this value is much lower than the results of the Hope Center survey for student-athletes (23% from 4-year institutions and 39% from 2-year institutions) [5]. One explanation for this difference could be that there was a wider variety of schools from across the country in the Hope Center survey compared to the two studies where the samples were from one Division I program and Division III athletes from schools nationwide. Poll et al. studied the relationship between FI and disordered eating in a population of male NCAA Division I student-athletes (mostly football players) at a single institution in the southeastern USA and found a 9.9% prevalence of FI [38••]. They also queried the participants about their FS in high school, and 13.5% reported being FI at that time. Collegiate FI status was significantly associated with preoccupation with food and keeping food or hiding food but not with binge eating. As observed in the general college student population, preoccupation with food was significantly correlated with having experienced FI before coming to college (i.e., in high school). No correlations between FI and race/ethnicity were reported in this study. Brown et al. reported a 14.7% prevalence of FI over the previous 12 months in a nationwide sample of NCAA Division III student-athletes [10••]. The prevalence of FI among subjects who self-identified among the following racial/ethnic groups was 13.3% for white, 18.3% for Hispanic, 31.0% for Black/African American, and 8.5% for Asian. The level of FI was higher for those without a meal plan, those receiving a Pell grant, first-generation college students, and those who have previously experienced FI. Subjects that experienced FI self-reported a negative impact on academic and athletic performance. Contributing factors to FI reported by student-athletes were dining hall hours conflicting with practice times (45.4% of subjects), games during dining hours (22%), and living off-campus with limited money (14.6%).

Since there are so few peer-reviewed, published articles on FI and student-athletes, it is worth discussing a master's thesis [59] and dissertation [60] on the topic that, although not published, have undergone a rigorous review process. In a master's thesis by Anziano [59], 18 NCAA Division II student-athletes were interviewed about their level of FS and 61.6% (n = 11) reported having some level of FI which is much higher than in the published work by Poll et al. [38 ••] and Brown et al. [10••]. It is important to note the small sample size of this qualitative thesis study and consider possible self-selection bias of participants. Contributing factors to FI that were identified by Anziano [59] were limited access to transportation, limited cooking facilities, lack of time to cook or prepare meals, and lack of food options in the dining hall [59]. Outcomes for those experiencing FI were similar to those found in Brown et al. [10••] including self-report of a negative impact on athletic performance. Identified coping strategies were similar to those found in this review mentioned previously.

In a dissertation by Misener [60], 424 Division III student-athletes on 22 teams from a primarily white, liberal arts college in Western Pennsylvania completed a survey to assess the prevalence of FI. Using the 6-item AFSSM Short Form, 129 (29%) were found to experience some level of FI, which was higher than Brown et al. [10••], who also surveyed students at DIII schools. The student-athletes in Misener's research specifically reported cutting the size of their meals or skipping meals because they ran out of money. Twenty-six percent reported eating less than they felt they should have in the last year because they did not have enough money or food. The teams with the highest percentage of FI were women's cross country (80%) and men's field athletes (67%). The reason 23.8% reported not eating a meal i s because they ran out of meal swipes. About one-third (29.7%) reported being unable to afford balanced meals.


## Impact of COVID-19 on Food Insecurity in College Students

The impact of COVID-19 on FS of college students was only evaluated in three studies [13,16,44]. Davitt et al. assessed food security over 30 days during the spring of 2020 and determined that 17.0% of respondents were classified as FI [16]. Soldavani et al. looked at specific changes in FS status and found that 12% had improved status, 68% unchanged, and 20% became worse [44]. In contrast, Christensen et al. reported no differences in prevalence of FI pre-COVID-19 compared to during COVID-19 [13]. In the two longitudinal studies, the sampled populations were predominantly white and female students at single institutions (Soldavani et al. [44] in the southeastern USA and Christensen et al. [13] in the Midwest) prior to the start of the COVID-19 pandemic and the spring of 2020. The timing of the surveys between these two studies may help explain this discrepancy in that Soldavani et al. [44] surveyed students in June and July of 2020, while Christensen et al. [13] surveyed students earlier in April 2020. In addition, different FS assessment tools were used for these studies. Soldavani et al. [44] reported that moving in with family and receiving financial support from family appeared to have a positive impact on students' FS status.


## Limitations

The lack of published peer-reviewed studies on collegiate student-athletes prevents conclusions from being made on this population. Student-athlete resources vary widely across athletic division and location leading to variability in the limited data available. In the general college student studies, the validity of the assessment tools available has been questioned. Ames et al. used the 10-item AFSSM in their assessment of 478 students [7]. They concluded that this survey may lead to inaccurate results in college students due to the questions relating to household FS which may not be appropriate for the specific living situations of the college population. This survey tool was used in 24 of the reviewed studies (66% of total subjects). Self-selection bias could also influence the results as students who are FI may be more likely to participate in a study on this topic. Lastly, our convenience sample was primarily white and female and may not be indicative of other demographics.


## Conclusion

This review of the literature further confirmed that FI exists among the general college student population. It also confirmed that there is a lack of peer-reviewed, published literature that addresses FI and collegiate student-athletes. The information gleaned from studies summarized in this article address not only the potential impact of FI on academic performance in the classroom, but also the potential impact outside the classroom. This can include the impact on athletic performance and health and wellness of student-athletes, even if a lack of scientific evidence is not yet available to support it. We found parallels between the peer-reviewed, published, and unpublished studies on both the general college student population and collegiate student-athletes implying that student-athletes are a small subset of college students that have the same challenges, if not more, around FI. The long-term implications of COVID on the prevalence of FI on college campuses are yet to be explored. Future studies will need to assess the effectiveness of initiatives at decreasing the prevalence of FI on college campuses and factors that may contribute to FI among specific segments of the college population such as student-athletes.


## Compliance with Ethical Standards

Conflict of Interest Elizabeth L. Abbey declares that she has no conflict of interest. Melissa Brown declares that she has no conflict of interest. Christine Karpinski received a grant from Aramark to support her student-athlete nutrition and food insecurity program. This is one of the types of solutions discussed in this article, but this specific program is not included.


## Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent

All reported studies/ experiments with human or animal subjects performed by the authors have been previously published and complied with all applicable ethical standards (including the Helsinki declaration and its amendments, institutional/national research committee standards, and international/ national/institutional guidelines). 

## Table 1
1Summary of research studies on food insecurity in college studentsReference 

Study Objective 

Population 

Assessment 

Results 

Adamovic et al. [6] 
Determine prevalence of FI among 
students, variables associated with 

FI, and possible solutions 

n 
= 339 students (70% female) at a 
large public university in the western 
USA 

Online survey including USDA 6-Item 
AFSSM Short Form (Dec 2016-Feb 
2017), demographic questions, and 
question about possible solutions 
54% FI in the last year (26% low FS; 
28% very low FS) 
Students receiving financial aid that 
required repayment more likely to be 

FI (p < 0.001) 
Proposed solutions included on-and 
off-campus food assistance and 
education initiatives 

Ames et al. [7] 

Evaluate the USDA Adult Food 
Security Survey Module for use with 

US college students 

n 
= 478 students (51.1% Caucasian) at 
a public university in the Southern 
USA 

Online and in-person survey including 
USDA 10-item AFSSM 
21.3% FI in the last year (9.6% low FS; 
11.7% very low FS) 
Authors conclude that the 10-item 
survey, particularly questions on 
household food security, may lead to 
inaccurate results in college students 

Barry et al. [8] 
Relationship between FI and screening 
positive for an eating disorder 

n 
= 804 students (50% female) at 
a large, public university in the 
Midwestern US; oversampling from 
racial/ethnic minorities, 
1st-generation college students, and 

students from low SES households 

Online survey including USDA 
10-item AFSSM and 5-item SCOFF 
questionnaire 
35.1% FI in the last year (16.3% low 
FS; 18.8% very low FS) 
Males (37.5%) had higher prevalence of 
FI than females 
29.0% screened positive for an eating 
disorder 
Positive SCOFF screen associated with 
marginal food security (PR = 1.83; 

p 
= 0.001), low FS (PR = 1.72; p 

= 

0.007), and very low FS (PR = 2.83; 

p 
< 0.0001) 

Becerra et al. [9] 
Assess the role of FI and other social 
determinants on mental health of 

college students 

n 
= 302 undergrad students (63.0% 
female) from a mid-sized, public 
institution in the USA; majority 
Hispanic (67.9%) and 1st-generation 
commuters 
Hard copy survey including USDA 
6-Item AFSSM Short Form, questions 
measuring self-perceived mental 

health status and psychological 
distress (Kessler-6 scale), and other 
demographic questions 

37.5% FI in the last year 
Among FI, higher odds of reported 
psychological distress (OR = 3.645, p 

< 0.05) and average to very poor self-
perceived mental health status (OR = 
2.687, p 
< 0.05) compared to FS 

Brown et al. (in press) [10 •• 
] Prevalence of FI in NCAA D3 athletes n 

= 787 NCAA D3 collegiate athletes 
(64.4% female; 81.5% white) from 
schools across the USA representing 

19 sports 

Online descriptive survey including 

5 questions from the USDA 6-Item 
AFSSM Short Form (Jan-Feb 
2020), 17 questions about FI in the 
context of college athletics, and 
demographic questions 

14.7% were FI in the last year 

FI among self-identified white (13.3%), 
Hispanic (18.3%), Black (31.0%), and 
Asian (8.5%) 

FI for those with/without a meal plan 
(11.5% vs. 29.9%), Pell grant (11.1% 

vs. 26.5%), 1st-generation college 
(11.3% vs. 27.2%), and previous 
experience of FI (11.5% vs. 52.5%) 
Self-reported negative impact of FI on 
academic and athletic performance 


## Table 2
2Food insecurity prevalence levels * One study used both the 18-item HFSSM and 2-item surveysNo. of studies Overall % FI [range] 
% low FS [range] 
% very low FS [range] 

Overall, n = 10,0167 
47 
32.2 ± 12.9 [9.9-72.9] 
17.9 ± 6.0 [7.1-26.6] 
15.8 ± 8.0 [3.4-34.5] 
Four-year institutions, n = 99,784 
45 
32.7 ± 12.9 [9


online survey included a validated measure of FI as well as other measures to determine associations between FI and sleep quality, perceived stress, disordered eating behaviors, and food assistance awareness.21.• Hagedorn RL, McArthur LH, Hood LB, Berner M, Anderson Steeves ET, Connell CL, et al. Expenditure, coping, and academic behaviors among food-insecure college students at 10 higher education institutes in the Appalachian and southeastern regions. Curr Dev Nutr. 2019;3(6):nzz058. This study had a large sample of students from 10 public universities in the USA. A comprehensive online survey included a validated measure of FI as well as other measures to determine associations between FI and finances, academics, coping strategies, and health characteristics. 22.• Hagedorn RL, Olfert MD, MacNell L, Houghtaling B, Hood LB, Savoie Roskos MR, et al. College student sleep quality and mental and physical health are associated with food insecurity in a multi-campus study. Public Health Nutr. 2021;24(13):4305-12. This study had the largest sample of subjects of any reviewed article with participants from 22 universities in the USA. It also had the most extensive online survey of any reviewed research that included a validated measure of FI as well as assessments of sleep quality, mental health, and physical health to determine associations between these metrics and FI. 23. Keogh B, Kushalnagar P, Engelman A. Peer support and food security in deaf college students. J Am Coll Health. 2020;68(1):1-5. 24. Knol LL, Robb CA, McKinley EM, Wood M. Very low food security status is related to lower cooking self-efficacy and less frequent food preparation behaviors among college students. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2019;51(3):357-63. 25. Laska MN, Lenk K, Lust K, McGuire CM, Porta CM, Stebleton M. Sociodemographic and health disparities among students screening positive for food insecurity: findings from a large college health surveillance system. Prev Med Rep. 2021;21:101297. 26. Leung CW, Farooqui S, Wolfson JA, Cohen AJ. Understanding the cumulative burden of basic needs insecurities: associations with health and academic achievement among college students. Am J Health Promot. 2021;35(2):275-8. 27. Leung CW, Wolfson JA, Lahne J, Barry MR, Kasper N, Cohen AJ. Associations between food security status and diet-related outcomes among students at a arge, public Midwestern university. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2019;119(10):1623-31. 28. Marshall TA, Zheng R, Anderson CL, Handoo N, Qian F. Is food insecurity a barrier to dental student success? J Dent Educ. 2021. 29.• Martinez SM, Grandner MA, Nazmi A, Canedo ER, Ritchie LD. Pathways from food insecurity to health outcomes among California university students. Nutrients. 2019;11(6):1419. Martinez et al. reported on the prevalence of FI in a large sample of students (predominantly non-white) from 10 University of California campuses. They also exampled the relationship between FI and health-related habits/outcomes (e.g., sleep, physical activity, fruit and vegetable intake, and BMI). 30. McArthur LH, Ball L, Danek AC, Holbert D. A high prevalence of food insecurity among university students in Appalachia reflects a need for educational interventions and policy advocacy. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2018;50(6):564-72. 31. McArthur LH, Fasczewski KS, Wartinger E, Miller J. Freshmen at a university in Appalachia experience a higher rate of campus than family food insecurity. J Community Health. 2018;43(5):969-76. 32. Mei J, Fulay AP, Wolfson JA, Leung CW. Food insecurity and dietaryintake among college students with unlimited meal plans at a large Midwesternuniversity. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2021.

have been highlighted as: • Of importance •• Of major importance 1. US Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Definition of Food Security. particular interest, published recentlyparticular interest, published recently, have been highlighted as: • Of importance •• Of major importance 1. US Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Definition of Food Security. 2021. https:// www. ers. usda. gov/ top- ics/ food-nutri tion-assis tance/ food-secur ity-in-the-us/ defin itions- of-food-secur ity. aspx. Accessed 10 Nov 2021.

The early food insecurity impacts of COVID-19. Nutrients. M T Niles, F Bertmann, E H Belarmino, T Wentworth, E Biehl, R Neff, 122096Niles MT, Bertmann F, Belarmino EH, Wentworth T, Biehl E, Neff R. The early food insecurity impacts of COVID-19. Nutri- ents. 2020;12(7):2096.

Food insecurity among college students in the United States: a scoping review. C J Nikolaus, R An, B Ellison, S M Nickols-Richardson, Adv Nutr. 112Nikolaus CJ, An R, Ellison B, Nickols-Richardson SM. Food insecurity among college students in the United States: a scoping review. Adv Nutr. 2020;11(2):327-48.

Hungry to win: a first look at food and housing insecurity among student-athletes. S Goldrick-Rab, B Richardson, C Baker-Smith, Goldrick-Rab S, Richardson B, Baker-Smith C. Hungry to win: a first look at food and housing insecurity among student-athletes. 2020. https:// hope4 colle ge. com/ hungry-to-win-a-first-look-at-food-and- housi ng-insec urity-among-stude nt-athle tes/. Accessed 10 Nov 2021.

Food insecurity on a college campus: prevalence determinants and solutions. E Adamovic, P Newton, V House, J Am Coll Health. Adamovic E, Newton P, House V. Food insecurity on a col- lege campus: prevalence determinants and solutions. J Am Coll Health. 2020.

Psychometric validation of the 10-item USDA food security scale for use with college students. A J Ames, T M Barnett, J Appl Meas. 203Ames AJ, Barnett TM. Psychometric validation of the 10-item USDA food security scale for use with college students. J Appl Meas. 2019;20(3):228-42.

Students with food insecurity are more likely to screen positive for an eating disorder at a large public university in the Midwest. M R Barry, K R Sonneville, C W Leung, J Acad Nutr Diet. 1216Barry MR, Sonneville KR, Leung CW. Students with food inse- curity are more likely to screen positive for an eating disorder at a large public university in the Midwest. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2021;121(6):1115-24.

Psychological distress among college students: role of food insecurity and other social determinants of mental health. M B Becerra, B J Becerra, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 17114118Becerra MB, Becerra BJ. Psychological distress among col- lege students: role of food insecurity and other social deter- minants of mental health. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(11):4118.

Brown et al. are the first to assess the prevalence of FI in the NCAA Division III student-athlete population. This is a sample population from 19 different sports at universities across the USA and queried participants about FS. M •• Brown, Abbey E Mckenzie, M Karpinski, C , ID JACH-2020-08-0516.R1Press; Manuscript. Prevalence of food insecurity in NCAA Division III collegiate athletes. J Am Coll Health. in the context of athletics•• Brown M, Abbey E, McKenzie M, Karpinski C. Prevalence of food insecurity in NCAA Division III collegiate athletes. J Am Coll Health. In Press; Manuscript ID JACH-2020-08-0516.R1. Brown et al. are the first to assess the prevalence of FI in the NCAA Division III student-athlete population. This is a sam- ple population from 19 different sports at universities across the USA and queried participants about FS in the context of athletics.

Factors related to the high rates of food insecurity among diverse, urban college freshmen. M Bruening, S Brennhofer, I Van Woerden, M Todd, M Laska, J Acad Nutr Diet. 1169Bruening M, Brennhofer S, van Woerden I, Todd M, Laska M. Factors related to the high rates of food insecurity among diverse, urban college freshmen. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2016;116(9):1450-7.

Hungry to learn: the prevalence and effects of food insecurity on health behaviors and outcomes over time among a diverse sample of university freshmen. M Bruening, I Van Woerden, M Todd, M N Laska, Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 1519Bruening M, van Woerden I, Todd M, Laska MN. Hungry to learn: the prevalence and effects of food insecurity on health behaviors and outcomes over time among a diverse sample of university freshmen. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2018;15(1):9.

Food insecurity associated with elevated eating disorder symptoms, impairment, and eating disorder diagnoses in an American University student sample before and during the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. K A Christensen, K T Forbush, B N Richson, M L Thomeczek, V L Perko, K Bjorlie, Int J Eat Disord. 547Christensen KA, Forbush KT, Richson BN, Thomeczek ML, Perko VL, Bjorlie K, et al. Food insecurity associated with ele- vated eating disorder symptoms, impairment, and eating disorder diagnoses in an American University student sample before and during the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. Int J Eat Dis- ord. 2021;54(7):1213-23.

Food insecurity in baccalaureate nursing students: a cross-sectional survey. M Cockerham, S Camel, L James, D Neill, J Prof Nurs. 372Cockerham M, Camel S, James L, Neill D. Food insecurity in baccalaureate nursing students: a cross-sectional survey. J Prof Nurs. 2021;37(2):249-54.

Food insecurity financial priority and nutrition literacy of university students at a mid-size private university. Cuy Castellanos, D Holcomb, J , J Am Coll Health. 681Cuy Castellanos D, Holcomb J. Food insecurity financial priority and nutrition literacy of university students at a mid-size private university. J Am Coll Health. 2020;68(1):16-20.

Effects of COVID-19 on university student food security. Nutrients. E D Davitt, M M Heer, D M Winham, S T Knoblauch, M C Shelley, 131932Davitt ED, Heer MM, Winham DM, Knoblauch ST, Shelley MC. Effects of COVID-19 on university student food security. Nutri- ents. 2021;13(6):1932.

Prevalence of food insecurity among students attending four historically Black colleges and universities. N N Duke, S D Campbell, D L Sauls, R Stout, M T Story, T Austin, J Am Coll Health. Duke NN, Campbell SD, Sauls DL, Stout R, Story MT, Austin T, et al. Prevalence of food insecurity among students attend- ing four historically Black colleges and universities. J Am Coll Health. 2021.

):nzaa120. This study had a relatively large sample of students from 8 universities in the USA; a majority of subjects were non-Hispanic white. An online survey included a validated measure of FI as well as inperson anthropometric measures to determine associations between FI and body composition. • El Zein, A Colby, S E Zhou, W Shelnutt, K P Greene, G W Horacek, T M , Curr Dev Nutr. 48Food insecurity is associated with increased risk of obesity in US college students• El Zein A, Colby SE, Zhou W, Shelnutt KP, Greene GW, Horacek TM, et al. Food insecurity is associated with increased risk of obesity in US college students. Curr Dev Nutr. 2020;4(8):nzaa120. This study had a relatively large sample of students from 8 universities in the USA; a majority of subjects were non-Hispanic white. An online survey included a validated measure of FI as well as in- person anthropometric measures to determine associations between FI and body composition.

Why are hungry college students not seeking help? Predictors of and barriers to using an on-campus food pantry. A El Zein, A E Mathews, L House, K P Shelnutt, Nutrients. 1091163El Zein A, Mathews AE, House L, Shelnutt KP. Why are hungry college students not seeking help? Predictors of and barriers to using an on-campus food pantry. Nutrients. 2018;10(9):1163.

Prevalence and correlates of food insecurity among U.S. college students: a multi-institutional study. • El Zein, A Shelnutt, K P Colby, S Vilaro, M J Zhou, W Greene, G , BMC Public Health. 191660This study had a relatively large sample of students from 8 universities in the USA, specifically targeting first-year college students. A comprehensive• El Zein A, Shelnutt KP, Colby S, Vilaro MJ, Zhou W, Greene G, et al. Prevalence and correlates of food insecurity among U.S. college students: a multi-institutional study. BMC Public Health. 2019;19(1):660. This study had a relatively large sample of students from 8 universities in the USA, specifi- cally targeting first-year college students. A comprehensive

COVID-19 and college students: food security status before and after the onset of a pandemic. K Mialki, L A House, A E Mathews, K P Shelnutt, Nutrients. 132628Mialki K, House LA, Mathews AE, Shelnutt KP. COVID-19 and college students: food security status before and after the onset of a pandemic. Nutrients. 2021;13(2):628.

Predictors of college-student food security and fruit and vegetable intake differ by housing type. E Mirabitur, K E Peterson, C Rathz, S Matlen, N Kasper, J Am Coll Health. 647Mirabitur E, Peterson KE, Rathz C, Matlen S, Kasper N. Predictors of college-student food security and fruit and vegetable intake differ by housing type. J Am Coll Health. 2016;64(7):555-64.

The prevalence of food security and insecurity among Illinois university students. L M Morris, S Smith, J Davis, D B Null, J Nutr Educ Behav. 486Morris LM, Smith S, Davis J, Null DB. The prevalence of food security and insecurity among Illinois university students. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2016;48(6):376-82.

Prevalence and social determinants of food insecurity among college students during the COVID-19 pandemic. M R Owens, F Brito-Silva, T Kirkland, C E Moore, K E Davis, M A Patterson, Nutrients. 1292515Owens MR, Brito-Silva F, Kirkland T, Moore CE, Davis KE, Patterson MA, et al. Prevalence and social determinants of food insecurity among college students during the COVID-19 pan- demic. Nutrients. 2020;12(9):2515.

Student hunger on campus: food insecurity among college students and implications for academic institutions. D C Payne-Sturges, A Tjaden, K M Caldeira, K B Vincent, A M Arria, Am J Health Promot. 322Payne-Sturges DC, Tjaden A, Caldeira KM, Vincent KB, Arria AM. Student hunger on campus: food insecurity among college students and implications for academic institutions. Am J Health Promot. 2018;32(2):349-54.

This is the first published research on the topic of FI prevalence in any collegiate population in the USA. The researchers used a validated survey and compared FI from high school to college. K L •• Poll, D H Holben, M Valliant, H D Joung, J Am Coll Health. 682Food insecurity is associated with disordered eating behaviors in NCAA division 1 male collegiate athletes•• Poll KL, Holben DH, Valliant M, Joung HD. Food insecurity is associated with disordered eating behaviors in NCAA division 1 male collegiate athletes. J Am Coll Health. 2020;68(2):105-9. This is the first published research on the topic of FI preva- lence in any collegiate population in the USA. The research- ers used a validated survey and compared FI from high school to college.

Food insecurity, psychosocial health and academic performance among college and university students in Georgia USA. I G Raskind, R Haardörfer, C J Berg, Public Health Nutr. 223Raskind IG, Haardörfer R, Berg CJ. Food insecurity, psy- chosocial health and academic performance among college and university students in Georgia USA. Public Health Nutr. 2019;22(3):476-85.

Food insecurity, depression, and race: correlations observed among college students at a university in the Southeastern United States. N Reeder, P Tapanee, A Persell, T Tolar-Peterson, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 17218268Reeder N, Tapanee P, Persell A, Tolar-Peterson T. Food insecu- rity, depression, and race: correlations observed among college students at a university in the Southeastern United States. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(21):8268.

Food insecurity among health sciences graduate students at a large northeastern university. J D Sackey, K Pike, P Rothpletz-Puglia, R Brody, R Touger-Decker, J Nutr Educ Behav. 535Sackey JD, Pike K, Rothpletz-Puglia P, Brody R, Touger- Decker R. Food insecurity among health sciences graduate students at a large northeastern university. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2021;53(5):428-33.

Food insecurity, carotenoid values and coping strategies of students on a mid-sized college campus. E A Smith, C R Story, K C Hobbs, T Bos, G Thareja, 10.47779/ajhs.2020.240Am J Health Stud. 353Smith EA, Story CR, Hobbs KC, Bos T, Thareja G. Food inse- curity, carotenoid values and coping strategies of students on a mid-sized college campus. Am J Health Stud. 2020;35(3):209- 18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 47779/ ajhs. 2020. 240.

The importance of precision: differences in characteristics associated with levels of food security among college students. J Soldavini, M Berner, Public Health Nutr. 239Soldavini J, Berner M. The importance of precision: differences in characteristics associated with levels of food security among college students. Public Health Nutr. 2020;23(9):1473-83.

Characteristics associated with changes in food security status among college students during the COVID-19 pandemic. J Soldavini, H Andrew, M Berner, Transl Behav Med. 112Soldavini J, Andrew H, Berner M. Characteristics associ- ated with changes in food security status among college stu- dents during the COVID-19 pandemic. Transl Behav Med. 2021;11(2):295-304.

Rates of and characteristics associated with food insecurity differ among undergraduate and graduate students at a large public university in the Southeast United States. J Soldavini, M Berner, Da Silva, J , Prev Med Rep. 14100836Soldavini J, Berner M, Da Silva J. Rates of and characteristics associated with food insecurity differ among undergraduate and graduate students at a large public university in the Southeast United States. Prev Med Rep. 2019;14:100836.

Food for thought: food insecurity in women attending community colleges. R Spaid, R Gillett-Karam, Forum Public Policy. Spaid R, Gillett-Karam R. Food for thought: food insecurity in women attending community colleges. Forum Public Policy. 2018.

Depression mediates the relationship between food insecurity and pain interference in college students. M Umeda, S L Ullevig, Chung E Kim, Y Escobedo, T J Zeitz, C J , Int J Environ Res Public Health. 18178Umeda M, Ullevig SL, Chung E, Kim Y, Escobedo TJ, Zeitz CJ. Depression mediates the relationship between food insecu- rity and pain interference in college students. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;18(1):78.

Food insecure college students and objective measurements of their unused meal plans. I Van Woerden, D Hruschka, S Vega-Lόpez, D R Schaefer, M Adams, M Bruening, Nutrients. 114904van Woerden I, Hruschka D, Vega-Lόpez S, Schaefer DR, Adams M, Bruening M. Food insecure college students and objective measurements of their unused meal plans. Nutrients. 2019;11(4):904.

Relationship between diet and mental health in a young adult Appalachian college population. R A Wattick, R L Hagedorn, M D Olfert, Nutrients. 108957Wattick RA, Hagedorn RL, Olfert MD. Relationship between diet and mental health in a young adult Appalachian college population. Nutrients. 2018;10(8):957.

University student food insecurity and academic performance. R R Weaver, N A Vaughn, S P Hendricks, P E Mcpherson-Myers, Q Jia, S L Willis, J Am Coll Health. 687Weaver RR, Vaughn NA, Hendricks SP, McPherson-Myers PE, Jia Q, Willis SL, et al. University student food insecurity and academic performance. J Am Coll Health. 2020;68(7):727-33.

Feeding inequality: food insecurity social status and college student health. D E Willis, Sociol Health Illn. 431Willis DE. Feeding inequality: food insecurity social status and college student health. Sociol Health Illn. 2021;43(1):220-37.

Assessing food insecurity prevalence and associated factors among college students enrolled in a university in the Southeast USA. R Wooten, M Spence, S Colby, S E Anderson, Public Health Nutr. 223Wooten R, Spence M, Colby S, Anderson SE. Assessing food insecurity prevalence and associated factors among college students enrolled in a university in the Southeast USA. Public Health Nutr. 2018;22(3):383-90.

Food Security in the US: Survey Tools. US Department of Agriculture Economic Research ServiceUS Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Food Security in the US: Survey Tools. 2021. https:// www. ers. usda. gov/ topics/ food-nutri tion-assis tance/ food-secur ity-in-the- us/ survey-tools/. Accessed 10 Nov 2021.

Institute for Women's Policy Research. Parents in College by the Numbers. Institute for Women's Policy Research. Parents in College by the Numbers. 2019. https:// iwpr. org/ iwpr-issues/ stude nt-parent-succe ss- initi ative/ paren ts-in-colle ge-by-the-numbe rs/ ERS. Accessed 10 Nov 2021.

Overview: Spring 2021 Enrollment Estimates. National Student Clearinghouse Research CenterNational Student Clearinghouse Research Center. Overview: Spring 2021 Enrollment Estimates. 2021. https:// www. ers. usda. gov/ top- ics/ food-nutri tion-assis tance/ food-secur ity-in-the-us/ key-stati stics- graph ics. aspx. Accessed 10 Nov 2021.

First-generation students' experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic. K Soria, B Horgos, I Chirikov, D Jones-White, Soria K, Horgos B, Chirikov I, Jones-White D. 2020. First-generation students' experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic. https:// docs. google. com/ docum ent/d/ 1bvQc PTRIj czu_ dHWCy w25AP2_ VUcD9 uGJ9q L30Vn rFY/ edit# headi ng=h. nwakn anyns 7x. Accessed 10 Nov 2021.

Associations between dietary intake and academic achievement in college students: a systematic review. T L Burrows, M C Whatnall, A J Patterson, M J Hutchesson, Healthcare. 5460Burrows TL, Whatnall MC, Patterson AJ, Hutchesson MJ. Asso- ciations between dietary intake and academic achievement in college students: a systematic review. Healthcare. 2017;5(4):60.

Nutrition literacy predicts adherence to healthy/unhealthy diet patterns in adults with a nutrition-related chronic condition. M K Taylor, D K Sullivan, E F Ellerbeck, B J Gajewski, H D Gibbs, 10.1017/S1368980019001289Public Health Nutr. 221289Taylor MK, Sullivan DK, Ellerbeck EF, Gajewski BJ, Gibbs HD. Nutrition literacy predicts adherence to healthy/unhealthy diet patterns in adults with a nutrition-related chronic condi- tion. Public Health Nutr. 2019;22(12):2157-69. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S1368 98001 90012 89.

Food insecurity among college athletes at a public university in New England. J Anziano, New HavenSouthern Connecticut State UniversityAnziano J. Food insecurity among college athletes at a public university in New England. New Haven: Southern Connecticut State University; 2020.

Food insecurity and college athletes: a study on food Insecurity/Hunger among division III athletes. P Misener, BinghamtonState University of New YorkMisener P. Food insecurity and college athletes: a study on food Insecurity/Hunger among division III athletes. Binghamton: State University of New York; 2020.