# A review on essential oil analyses and biological activities of the traditionally used medicinal plant Thymus vulgaris L

CorpusID: 247163422
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2fd06520ad88a7061fa59237b0c71bceacd784e1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2fd06520ad88a7061fa59237b0c71bceacd784e1)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review on essential oil analyses and biological activities of the traditionally used medicinal plant Thymus vulgaris L


Mohammad Amzad Hossain 
School of Pharmacy
College of Pharmacy and Nursing
University of Nizwa
Postal Code 616P. O. Box 33NizwaSultanate of Oman

Yahya Bin 
Abdullah Alrashdi 
School of Nursing
College of Pharmacy and Nursing
University of Nizwa
Postal Code 616P. O. Box 33NizwaSultanate of Oman

Salem Said 
Jaroof Al-Touby 
School of Nursing
College of Pharmacy and Nursing
University of Nizwa
Postal Code 616P. O. Box 33NizwaSultanate of Oman

A review on essential oil analyses and biological activities of the traditionally used medicinal plant Thymus vulgaris L

International Journal of Secondary Metabolite
2022110.21448/ijsm.1029080Received: Nov. 27, 2021 Revised: Jan. 19, 2022 Accepted: Feb. 27, 2022Review Article 103Thymus vulgarisMedicinal usesPhytochemicalsPharmacologicalToxicological activitySultanate Oman
Since the old times, seeds producing plants have played a vital role in the progress of human culture to treat diseases. Medicinal plants are used traditionally by the local communities to treat diseases. Recently, a report has shown that more than 250,000 flowering plant species are available globally. Scientists are continuously working on higher plants to help and understand plant poisonousness and to defend humans and animals from natural toxins. A plant`s toxicity and its medical use are dependent on the plant's volatile phytochemicals. Thymus vulgaris L is a common aromatic plant used widely as a folk medicine to treat various diseases by different ethnic communities around the globe including the Sultanate of Oman. Previous studies in Oman showed that the selected plant species contains several groups of phytochemicals such as essential oils and secondary metabolic compounds they can enhance their biological and toxicological activities. Therefore, the aim of the present review is to explore the volatile phytochemicals, biological and toxicological features of Thymus vulgaris grown in Oman. The results can be helpful for discovering new drugs to treat asthma, cough, chronic bronchitis and other infectious diseases. In conclusion, this review provides information on the volatile phytochemicals, pharmacological and toxicological aspects of the selected plant species.ARTICLE HISTORY

## INTRODUCTION

Due to the increasing demands for daily foods that contain bioactive constituents such as volatile oils and secondary metabolic compounds, which may occur as health assistance, nutrition, as well as herbal. Nowadays, medicinal plants are used as sources in most countries of alternative medicines in many countries. Different traditional systems are revived to treat diseases instead of using synthetic drugs (Hossain, 2019). As drug resistance is becoming a global health issue, the main target of scientists is to discover herbal extracts or pure ingredients that may act as microbial, antifungal or anticancer agents. Numerous spices and their extracts are used for food preservation as antimicrobial agents and natural antioxidants. Some of the species are used in natural healing and as appetizers. Now, many local plant species are used by the local ethnic communities as safe medicine to treat aliments (Ait M'barek et al., 2007).

The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that a large percentage of the population in most developing countries depend on plants and herbal medicine for their primary healthcare needs (Aziz & Rehman, 2008). In the process of drug discovery, medicinal plants played a significant part due to the presence of safe bioactive ingredients including essential oils (Hossain, 2019). The ingredients normally present in the plants and their crude extracts are essential oils, saponins and steroids derivatives, phenolics and flavonoids derivatives, lignans and glycosides complexes, terpenes, and alkaloids. Due to their powerful therapeutic and biological properties, all the ingredients have been used for a long time to discover modern pharmaceutical drugs (Wayne et al., 2004;Cronquist, 1988;Cruz et al., 1989). Among the aromatic plants, some plants are economical and have played a crucial part in human illness (Cruz et al., 1989). In addition, a good number of medicinal plants can be used as fuel for the survival of all of living things. All the higher plants contain ingredients with synergistic effects that can neutralize toxicity.


### Synonyms

More than fifteen synonyms of the selected plant species are identified and available globally (Dob et al., 2006). Some significant synonyms are as follows: 


### Plant Description

Thymus vulgaris (T. vulgaris) is one of the tiny plant species with flowers. Several species including T. vulgaris are available in Oman. Locally, the plant species is called "kekik" (Al Hashmi et al., 2013). The species grow up to 40 cm. It has a branch of stems and the stems are woody when the plant is matured . Figure 1 shows different parts of T. vulgaris L. (Hazzit et al., 2009). The leaves of this species is approximately not more than 5 mm and it is covered by white hair. The shape of the leaves is oval or rectangular. The whole aerial parts including leaves are fleshy and they contain maximum essential oils. The species have a strong smell, but the smell may differ due to the chemical ingredients of different types (Houmania et al., 2002). 


### Traditional Use

Traditionally, the selected thyme species have been used widely to treat heart failure, chest infections, and encourage saliva production (Al Hashmi et al., 2013;Hudaib et al., 2002). All parts of this plant are medicinally important and used widely to treat human diseases because of their medicinal values. In addition, several prescription drugs contain ingredients from this plant species. In Oman, local ethnic communities used it as a juice to kill worms Hwang et al., 2004). Leaves paste is taken to release sore throats Hwang et al., 2004). The flowers are edible with an acceptable taste. It also has a powerful capability to kill bacteria, fungi and viruses (Karaman et al., 2001). The dried aerial part of this species is used by the local communities as a tea to treat sore throats. Thyme species have a very rich flora in all over the world including the Sultanate of Oman. Based on the traditional uses of the plant species, scientists and researchers are highly interested in working on the selected plant species for t he isolation of active ingredients and to use them to treat diseases.


### Pharmaceutical Importance of T. vulgaris

Since ancient times, people have been using thyme in alternative traditional systems to treat numerous respiratory diseases, especially chronic cough, bronchitis, and asthma . Based on the active ingredient, the plant species are also used to treat vascular problems, diseases of the urinary tract, teeth pain and indigestion (Hudaib et al., 2002;Karaman et al., 2001). The plant contains the highest percentage of thymol (approximately 60%); thymol has a good ability to increase appetite as well as to kill bacterial infections. Recently, the plant has been used for treating asthma. In the last decades, the authors carried out several studies and concluded that the essential oil and plant crude extracts showed significant biological activities. The plant is also a good source of Fe, Ca, Mg and vitamin K that can increase blood flow (Hudaib et al., 2002;Karaman et al., 2001;Hwang et al., 2004).


### Sample Process and Extraction

Several methods such as steam distillation, solvent extraction, supercritical fluid extraction, and pressurized liquid extraction procedure are extensively used for the extraction of essential oils, and other secondary metabolic constituents Marino et al., 1999;Maryam et al., 2022). All these methods are efficient and can provide a great percentage of bioactive constituents. Mainly two methods, such as simple steam distillation and extraction with the solvent method, are used for the extraction of essential oils (Markovic, 2011). Nowadays, supercritical carbon dioxide and pressurized liquid extraction are relatively recent solventsolvent extraction techniques to minimize the degradation of the active compounds because both processes can function in the absence of light and air (Miura et al., 2002).


### Distribution of The Plant

T. vulgaris is a perennial plant species that belongs to the Lamiaceae family. Globally, its common name is thyme (Al Hashmi et al., 2013). The selected plant species is indigenous to some parts of EU countries, and indigenous in several South Asian and Gulf countries (Farooqi et al., 2005). In addition, this plant is also native to Northern Africa, parts of Africa. Some of the countries such as Egypt, Cameroon, Algeria, Tunisia, Nigeria, South Africa, and Libya have cultivated the plant species due to its and economic medicinal values (Ghasemi, 2009;Giordiani et al., 2008;Giweli et al., 2013;Guillen & Manzanos, 1998).


## BIOCHEMICAL STUDIES

Several secondary bioactive compounds were isolated and identified from the selected plant species described by several authors (Pina-Vaz et al., 2004;Naghdi-Badi, 2004). The types of compounds such as polar and non-polar compounds isolated and identified by chromatographic and spectroscopic methods from this plant species are presented in Table 1. Some of the compounds are used as herbal medicine as well as modern medicine; another group of them are used as food nutrients, natural antioxidants and food preservatives (Naghdi-Badi, 2004). Normally, it is a continuous process to isolate the bioactive compounds from the traditionally used plants that are used by the local communities to treat diseases. Scientists and researchers are working on pure isolated compounds to explore their in-vitro and in-vivo biological and pharmacological activities to enhance formulation of drug for treatments of human diseases (Nickavar et al., 2005;Nikolić et al., 2012). 


### Essential Oil

Based on the essential oil, T. vulgaris plant is used by different ethnic communities to treat asthma, bronchitis and cough. The essential oil was isolated from various parts of the selected plant species by using different methods such as steam distillation method, cohobating method and many others (Nickavar et al., 2005;Nikolić et al., 2012;Markovic, 2011;Ozguven & Tansi, 1998;Akhtar et al., 2012). The percentage of essential oils varies due to the extraction methods, the parts of the plants used and the different environmental conditions. Our previous study showed that the selected species contains more than 80 compounds. However, most of the authors identified more than 70 compounds. The major compounds are presented in Table 2. They are mainly oxygenated monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes. Some of them show significant antimicrobial, cytotoxic and antioxidant activities. Most of the researchers reported that the highest percentage ingredient was thymol approximately (56-60%). 


### Nutritional Value

The selected thyme species showed remarkable health benefits that can be endorsed due to its nutritional value. The main nutrients in this species are namely vitamins, minerals, volatile oils and antioxidants. Most of them have strong disease-preventing activities as well as healthpromoting properties (Naghdi-Badi et al., 2004;Ozguven & Tansi, 1998;Penalver et al., 2005). The selected plant species contain different phytonutrients, natural minerals and vitamins that are energetic for maintaining good health (Ozguven & Tansi, 1998). Thyme is a natural source of vitamins C and A and carbohydrates. In addition, the plant also contains vitamin B-complex and vitamin B6. All these vitamins are essential for maintaining healthy skin and protecting the infectious diseases. The selected plant also contains several minerals such as K, Ca, Mg, Fe, and Se. These minerals are essential to maintain the electrolyte balance in the human body (Penalver et al., 2005).


## PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES

The oil and extracts of the selected species showed significant antiseptic, antibacterial, anticancer, and anti-cough properties that can enhance the healing of different diseases (Kizil & Uyart, 2006).


### Antioxidant Properties

Generally, in-vivo and in vitro methods were used to determine antioxidant properties of various extracts and essential oils from the plant species as described by several authors (Penalver et al., 2005;Pirbalouti et al., 2013;Raal et al., 2004). Our previous experimental results showed that various polarities extracts and essential oils at different concentrations showed significant activity against DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl), superoxide and hydroxyl radical scavenging activity and bestows protection (Pirbalouti et al., 2013;Raal et al., 2004;. Among the existing phytochemicals in this plant, thymol is the main ingredient about 60% and it shows powerful antioxidant activity against superoxide, DPPH radical scavenging and reducing capacity at various concentrations (Penalver et al., 2005;Pirbalouti et al., 2013;Raal et al., 2004). The thymol ingredient also showed modest activity against V79 Chinese hamster lung fibroblast cells (Rasooli & Mirmostafa, 2002). It also showed strong antioxidant activity against lipid system in gamma-ray induced V79 Chinese hamster cells (Raal et al., 2004). The carvacrol is the isomer of thymol that also showed better antioxidant capacity in lipid systems due to its synergetic effect.


### Antimicrobial Activity

A good number of scientists evaluated the antimicrobial activities at various concentrations of essential oils and different polarities crude extracts of thyme plant species against various bacterial and fungi strains (Reis et al., 2004;Rota et al., 2004;Soliman & Badeaa, 2002). They revealed that both the essential oils and crude extracts showed significant activity against the applied bacterial and fungi strains. These significant biological activities of the plant extracts and essential oil are due to the main chemical ingredients. Among the phytochemicals present in the selected plant, two phytochemicals, carvacrol and p-cymene, are significant components that have very weak antibacterial properties due to their synergy effect with carvacrol (Stahl-Biskup, 1991). Some scientists reported previously that polar extracts such as ethanol and aqueous extracts demonstrated high antimicrobial activity against gram-positive bacterial strains (Thompson et al., 2003;. Tsukatani et al. (2012) conducted a comparative study of the antibacterial activity of the essential oils of cultivated T. vulgaris L. and wild thyme species against gram (+ and -) bacterial strains and the results revealed that wild thyme essential oil showed less activity compared the essential oil of the cultivated plant (Tsukatani et al., 2012). Other work by Verma et al. reported that the microbial activity of the essential oil, either it is from the wild or the cultivated thyme species, depends on the phenolic compounds and their derivatives (Verma et al., 2009(Verma et al., & 2011. Furthermore, the antimicrobial activity of essential oils also depends on incubation, synergistic ingredient effects, and the other ingredients.


### Cytotoxic Activity

The preliminary screening of cytotoxic activity of various polarity plant extracts and essential oil of the thyme herb is assessed against the Brine Shrimp Lethally (BSL) and 96-cell wall described by several authors ( (Vichai et al., 2006;Vukovic-Gacic & Simic, 1993;Zaidi & Crow, 2005). The majority of reports showed that both plant extracts and essential oil at different concentrations attribute potential cytotoxic activity against (BSL) and 96-cell walls. However, some of the researchers mentioned that the cytotoxic activity only showed when the concentration of chemical ingredients is high of the extracts and essential oil. They mentioned that low concentration extracts and essential oil of the selected species did not show any activity. In addition, the non-polar extracts showed high activity compared to polar extracts which mean that the toxic compounds are present only in the non-polar extract. Similar results were also obtained by the 96-cell wall method.


## CONCLUSION

T. vulgaris L. is a small plant that has been used as a spice, remedy, drug, and cosmetics. The essential oil of this plant is used in medicine, food, and cosmetics industries as preservative and antioxidant. This current review focuses on the latest status of phytochemicals, pharmacological and toxicological activities reported on T. vulgaris. The selected plant species contains a high amount of phytochemicals named phenolic derivatives and flavonoids; therefore, the plant exhibits antioxidant and antibacterial activity, anticancer and larvicidal effects. Thyme native to Oman can be used as a natural antioxidant in food products, supplements and drugs so that more clinical and pathological studies must be conducted to investigate the unexploited potentials of the T. vulgaris plant grown in Oman before using the plant for treating different diseases.

## Figure 1 .
1Pictures of T. vulgaris


Origanum thymus, Origanum webbianum, Thymus baeticus var. prostrates, Thymus chinensis, Thymus collinus, Thymus ilerdensis, Thymus sublaxus, Thymus vulgaris var. Thymus vulgaris var. latifolius, Thymus vulgaris, Thymus vulgaris subsp. Thymus vulgaris var. palearensis, Thymus vulgaris var. verticillatus, Thymus vulgaris subsp. Thymus webbianus, Thymus webbianus var. prostrate, Thymuswelwitschii subsp. Ilerdensis Thyymus zygis subsp ilerdensis. 1.2. Taxonomic Classification Kingdom Plantae-plantes, Planta, Vegetal, plants; Subkingdom: Viridiplantae-green plants; Infrakingdom: Streptophyta-land plants; Superdivision; Embryophyta; Division: Tracheophyta-vascular plants, tracheophytes; Class: Magnoliopsida; Superorder: Asteranae; Family: Lamiaceae-mints, menthes; Genus: Thymus L; Species: T. vulgaris L.

## Table 1 .
1List of phytochemicals of different leaves extracts of T. vulgaris.Hexane Extract 
Ethyl acetate extract 
Butanol extract 
Linalyl anthranilate 
o-Cymol 
4-Heptanone 
Bicyclo[3.1.0]hexan-2-ol 
Linalyl anthranilate 
n-Butyl ether 
α-Terpineol 
1,5-Octadiene-3,7-diol 
Hexanal 
Thymol 
α-Terpineol 
4-Heptanone 
O-Thymol 
Thymol 
Butanoic acid, butyl ester 
2.Thymol acetate 
o-Thymol 
5-Methyl-3-heptanone 
Bicyclo[7.2.0]undec-4-ene, 4,11,11-
trime 

4-Methoxy-2,3,6-
trimethylphenol 
o-Cymol 

O-methoxy-α,α-dimethylbenzyl 
Spathulenol 
Linalool 
Spathulenol 
Phytol 
4-Terpineol 
α.-farnesene 
Naringenin 
Terpineol 
1-octadecyne 
1-Iodo-2-methylundecane 
Thymol 
n-Hexadecanoic acid 
3,7-Octadiene-2,6-diol 
o-Thymol 
Naringenin 
2,4-Dimethylbenzaldehyde 
Thymol acetate 

Thymol 
Bicyclo[7.2.0]undec-4-ene, 
4,11,11-trime 
o-Thymol 
Aromadendrene 
Spathulenol 
Alpha.-farnesene 
3,7,11,15-Tetramethyl-2-
hexadecen-1-ol 
n-Hexadecanoic acid 



## Table 2 .
2List of phytochemicals in the essential oil of T. vulgaris.Sl. No 
Name of Phytochemicals 
Percentage 

1 
Tetra hydro-3-methylfuran 
12.76 
2 
Cyclohexane 
0.15 
3 
Camphene 
0.13 
4 
α-Pinene 
0.71 
5 
β-Myrcene 
0.32 
6 
Octanol-3 
0.18 
7 
Carene 
0.28 
8 
p-Cymene 
2.27 
9 
o-Cymene 
0.39 
10 
γ-Terpinene 
1.21 
11 
Terpinen-4-ol 
0.35 
12 
α-Terpineol 
0.33 
13 
Thymol 
9.91 
14 
o-Thymol 
41.90 
15 
2-Methyl-5-(1-methylethyl) phenolacetate 
0.58 
16 
Caryophyllene 
1.01 
17 
Humulene 
0.11 
18 
Caryophyllene oxide 
0.61 


AcknowledgmentsThe authors are grateful to the University of Nizwa for providing all kinds of facilities. Special thanks to Mr. Erno Muzamel, Coordinator, Student Support System (SSS), Writing Center (TWC) for his professional assistance to edit the manuscript.Declaration of Conflicting Interests and EthicsThe authors declare no conflict of interest. This research study complies with research and publishing ethics. The scientific and legal responsibility for manuscripts published in IJSM belongs to the authors.Authorship contribution statement
. L Ait M&apos;barek, H Ait Mouse, A Jaâfari, R Aboufatima, A Benharref, M Kamal, J Bénard, N El Abbadi, M Bensalah, A Gamouh, A Chait, A Dalal, A Zyad, Ait M'barek, L., Ait Mouse, H., Jaâfari, A., Aboufatima, R., Benharref, A., Kamal, M., Bénard. J., El Abbadi, N., Bensalah, M., Gamouh, A., Chait, A., Dalal, A., Zyad, A. (2007).

Cytotoxic effect of essential oil of thyme (Thymus broussonettii) on the IGR-OV1 tumor cells resistant to chemotherapy. Brazil. J. Med. Res. 40Cytotoxic effect of essential oil of thyme (Thymus broussonettii) on the IGR-OV1 tumor cells resistant to chemotherapy. Brazil. J. Med. Res., 40, 1537-1544.

Extraction, isolation and structural characterization of two triterpenoid glycosides from the fruits of Ficus bengalensis. M A Akhtar, S R Mir, A S Sadri, M A Hossain, M Ali, Carbohyd. Res. 510108444Akhtar, M.A., Mir, S.R., Sadri, A.S., Hossain, M.A., Ali, M. (2021). Extraction, isolation and structural characterization of two triterpenoid glycosides from the fruits of Ficus bengalensis. Carbohyd. Res., 510, 108444.

Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of different organic crude extracts from the local medicinal plant of Thymus vulgaris L. Asian Pac. Al Hashmi, L S Hossain, M A Weli, M A Al-Riyami, Q Al-Sabahi, J N , J. Trop. Biomed. 31Al Hashmi, L.S., Hossain, M.A., Weli, M.A., Al-Riyami, Q., Al-Sabahi, J.N. (2013). Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of different organic crude extracts from the local medicinal plant of Thymus vulgaris L. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed., 3(1), 69-73.

In vitro evaluation of the total phenolic and flavonoid contents and the antimicrobial and cytotoxic activities of crude fruits extract with different polarities from Ficus sycomorus. S K Al-Matani, R Wahaibi, M A Hossain, Pac. Sci. Rev. A: Nat. Sci. Eng. 17Al-Matani, S.K., Wahaibi, R., Hossain, M.A. (2015). In vitro evaluation of the total phenolic and flavonoid contents and the antimicrobial and cytotoxic activities of crude fruits extract with different polarities from Ficus sycomorus. Pac. Sci. Rev. A: Nat. Sci. Eng., 17, 103- 108.

Total flavonoids content and antimicrobial activity of crude extract from leaves of Ficus sycomorus native to Sultanate of Oman. S K Al-Matani, R Wahaibi, M A Hossain, Karbala Inter. J. Mod. Sci. 1Al-Matani, S.K., Wahaibi, R., Hossain, M.A. (2015). Total flavonoids content and antimicrobial activity of crude extract from leaves of Ficus sycomorus native to Sultanate of Oman. Karbala Inter. J. Mod. Sci., 1, 166-171

Studies on the Chemical Constituents of Thymus serpyllum Turk. S Aziz, H Rehman, J. Chem. 32Aziz, S., Rehman, H. (2008). Studies on the Chemical Constituents of Thymus serpyllum Turk. J. Chem., 32, 605-614.

The Evolution and Classification of Flowering Plants. A Cronquist, The New York Botanical GardenNew York, USACronquist, A. (1988). The Evolution and Classification of Flowering Plants. The New York Botanical Garden, New York, USA.

In vitro antibacterial effect of the essential oil of Thymus longiflorus Boiss Microb. T Cruz, M P Cabo, M M Cabo, J Jiménez, J Cabo, C Ruiz, 60Cruz, T., Cabo, M.P., Cabo, M.M., Jiménez, J., Cabo, J., Ruiz, C. (1989). In vitro antibacterial effect of the essential oil of Thymus longiflorus Boiss Microb., 60. 59-61.

Studies on the essential oil composition and antimicrobial activity of Thymus algeriensis. T Dob, D Dahmane, T Benabdelkader, C Chelghoum, Boiss. et Reut, Inter. J. Aroma. 162Dob, T., Dahmane, D., Benabdelkader, T., Chelghoum C. (2006). Studies on the essential oil composition and antimicrobial activity of Thymus algeriensis Boiss. et Reut, Inter. J. Aroma., 16(2), 95-100.

Cultivation of Spice Crops. A A Farooqi, B S Sreeramu, K N Srinivasappa, Universities PressHyderabadFarooqi, A.A., Sreeramu, B.S., Srinivasappa, K.N. (2005). Cultivation of Spice Crops, Universities Press, Hyderabad.

Medicinal plants used in Chaharmahal and Bakhtyari districts. A P Ghasemi, Iran Herba Pol. 55Ghasemi A.P. (2009). Medicinal plants used in Chaharmahal and Bakhtyari districts. Iran Herba Pol., 55, 69-75.

Compositions and antifungal activities of essential oils of some Algerian aromatic plants. R Giordiani, Y Hadef, J Kaloustina, Fitot. 79Giordiani, R., Hadef, Y., Kaloustina, J. (2008). Compositions and antifungal activities of essential oils of some Algerian aromatic plants. Fitot., 79, 199-203.

Chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of essential oil of Thymus algeriensis wild-growing in Libya. Cent. A A Giweli, A M Džamic, M D Sokovic, M S Ristić, P D Marin, Europ. J. Bot. Giweli, A.A., Džamic, A.M., Sokovic, M.D., Ristić, M.S., Marin, P.D. (2013). Chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of essential oil of Thymus algeriensis wild-growing in Libya. Cent. Europ. J. Bot., 504-511.

Study of composition of different parts of a Spanish Thymus vulgaris L. M D Guillen, M J Manzanos, Plant Food Chem. 3Guillen, M.D., Manzanos, M.J. (1998). Study of composition of different parts of a Spanish Thymus vulgaris L. Plant Food Chem., 3, 373-383.

Study of total phenol, flavonoids contents and phytochemical screening of various leaves crude extracts of locally grown Thymus vulgaris. M A Hossain, K A S Al-Raqmi, Z H Al-Mijizy, A M Weli, Q Al-Riyami, Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed. 39Hossain, M.A., AL-Raqmi, K.A.S., AL-Mijizy, Z.H., Weli, A.M., Al-Riyami, Q. (2013). Study of total phenol, flavonoids contents and phytochemical screening of various leaves crude extracts of locally grown Thymus vulgaris. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed., 3(9), 705-710.

Chemical composition and biological activities of Algerian Thymus oils. M Hazzit, A Baaliouamer, A R Verissimo, M L Faleiro, M G Miguel, Food Chem. 116Hazzit, M., Baaliouamer, A., Verissimo, A.R., Faleiro, M.L., Miguel, M.G. (2009). Chemical composition and biological activities of Algerian Thymus oils. Food Chem., 116, 714-721.

A review on Ficus sycomorus: A potential indigenous medicinal plant in Oman. M A Hossain, J. King Saud Uni. Sci. 31Hossain, M.A. (2019). A review on Ficus sycomorus: A potential indigenous medicinal plant in Oman. J. King Saud Uni. Sci., 31, 961-965.

The essential oil composition of Algerian Zaâtar: Origanum spp. and Thymus spp. Z Houmania, S Azzoudja, G Naxakis, M Skoula, J. Herbs, Spices & Med. Plants. 94Houmania, Z., Azzoudja, S., Naxakis, G., Skoula, M. (2002). The essential oil composition of Algerian Zaâtar: Origanum spp. and Thymus spp. J. Herbs, Spices & Med. Plants, 9(4), 275- 280.

GC/MS evaluation of thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.) oil composition and variations during the vegetative cycle. M Hudaib, E Speroni, A M Di Pietra, V Cavrini, J. Pharma. Biomed. Anal. 294Hudaib, M., Speroni, E., Di Pietra, A.M., Cavrini, V. (2002). GC/MS evaluation of thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.) oil composition and variations during the vegetative cycle. J. Pharma. Biomed. Anal., 29(4), 691-700.

Isopanduratin A from Kaempferia pandurata as an active antibacterial agent against cariogenic Streptoccocus mutans. J K Hwang, J Y Chung, N I Baek, J H Park, Inter. J. Antimicrobiol. Agents. 23Hwang, J.K., Chung, J.Y., Baek, N.I., Park, J.H. (2004). Isopanduratin A from Kaempferia pandurata as an active antibacterial agent against cariogenic Streptoccocus mutans. Inter. J. Antimicrobiol. Agents., 23, 377-378.

Antibacterial and antifungal activity of the essential oils of Thymus revolutus Celak from Turkey. S Karaman, M Digrak, V Ravid, A Iclim, J. Ethnopharma. 762Karaman, S., Digrak, M., Ravid, V., Iclim, A. (2001). Antibacterial and antifungal activity of the essential oils of Thymus revolutus Celak from Turkey. J. Ethnopharma., 76(2), 183-186.

Antimicrobial activities of some Thyme (Thymus, Satureja, Origanum and Thymbra) species against important plant pathogens. S Kizil, F Uyart, Asian J. Chem. 18Kizil, S., Uyart, F. (2006). Antimicrobial activities of some Thyme (Thymus, Satureja, Origanum and Thymbra) species against important plant pathogens. Asian J. Chem., 18, 1455-1461.

Effect of temperature and extraction process on antioxidant activity of various leaves crude extracts of Thymus vulgaris. M A Hossain, Z H Al-Mijizy, K K Al-Rashdi, A M Weli, Q Al-Riyami, J. Coastal Life Med. 12Hossain, M.A., AL-Mijizy, Z.H., Al-Rashdi, K.K., Weli, A.M., Al-Riyami, Q. (2013). Effect of temperature and extraction process on antioxidant activity of various leaves crude extracts of Thymus vulgaris. J. Coastal Life Med., 1(2), 118-122.

Comparison of total phenols, flavonoids and antioxidant activity of various crude extracts of Hyoscyamus gallagheri traditionally used for the treatment of epilepsy. M A Hossain, A M Weli, S H I Ahmed, Clin. Phytosci. 5Hossain, M.A., Weli, A.M., Ahmed, S.H.I. (2019). Comparison of total phenols, flavonoids and antioxidant activity of various crude extracts of Hyoscyamus gallagheri traditionally used for the treatment of epilepsy. Clin. Phytosci., 5, 20-26.

Antimicrobial activity of the essential oils of Thymus vulgaris L. measured using a bioimpedometric method. M Marino, C Bersani, G Comi, J. Food Prot. 62Marino, M., Bersani, C., Comi, G. (1999). Antimicrobial activity of the essential oils of Thymus vulgaris L. measured using a bioimpedometric method. J. Food Prot., 62, 1017-1023.

Market Study Antioxidants Ceresana Research. Essential oils and their safe use. T Markovic, BelgradeInstitute of Medicinal Plant Research editionMarkovic, T. (2011). Market Study Antioxidants Ceresana Research. Essential oils and their safe use. Institute of Medicinal Plant Research edition, Belgrade, pg. 1-289.

Isolation, characterization and prediction of biologically active glycoside compounds quercetin-3-rutinoside from the fruits of Ficus sycomorus. H S S Maryam, S S J Al-Touby, M A Hossain, Carbohyd. Res. 5112022Maryam, H. S. S., Al-Touby, S. S. J., Hossain, M. A. (2022). Isolation, characterization and prediction of biologically active glycoside compounds quercetin-3-rutinoside from the fruits of Ficus sycomorus. Carbohyd. Res., 511, 108483, 2022

Antioxidant activity of chemical components from sage (Salvia officinalis) and thyme (Thymus vulgaris) measured by the oil stability index method. K Miura, H Kikuzaki, N Nakatani, J. Agric. Food Chem. 50Miura, K., Kikuzaki, H., Nakatani, N. (2002). Antioxidant activity of chemical components from sage (Salvia officinalis) and thyme (Thymus vulgaris) measured by the oil stability index method. J. Agric. Food Chem., 50, 1845-1851.

Antifungal activity of Thymus oils and their major compounds. C Pina-Vaz, C Gonçalves, E Rodrigues, S Pinto, C Costa-De-Oliveira, L Tavares, C Salgueiro, M J Cavaleiro, Martinez-De Gonçalves, J Oliveira, J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereo. 18Pina-Vaz, C., Gonçalves, C., Rodrigues, E., Pinto, S., Costa-de-Oliveira, C., Tavares L., Salgueiro, C., Cavaleiro, M.J., Gonçalves, Martinez-de Oliveira, J. (2004). Antifungal activity of Thymus oils and their major compounds. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereo., l18, 73-78.

Effects of spacing and harvesting time on herbage yield and quality/quantity of oil in thyme. H Naghdi-Badi, D Yazdani, S Mohammad Ali, F Nazari, Thymus vulgaris L. Ind. Crops Prod. 19Naghdi-Badi, H., Yazdani, D., Mohammad Ali, S., Nazari, F. (2004). Effects of spacing and harvesting time on herbage yield and quality/quantity of oil in thyme, Thymus vulgaris L. Ind. Crops Prod., 19, 231-236.

Analysis of the essential oils of two Thymus species from Iran. B Nickavar, F Mojab, R Dolatbadi, Food Chem. 90Nickavar, B., Mojab, F., Dolatbadi, R. (2005). Analysis of the essential oils of two Thymus species from Iran. Food Chem., 90, 609-611.

. M Nikolić, J Glamočlija, A Ćirić, T Perić, D Marković, T Stević, M Soković, Nikolić, M., Glamočlija, J., Ćirić, A., Perić, T., Marković, D., Stević, T., Soković, M. (2012).

Antimicrobial activity of ozone gas and colloidal silver against oral microorganismis. Digest J. Nano. Biostruct. 74Antimicrobial activity of ozone gas and colloidal silver against oral microorganismis. Digest J. Nano. Biostruct., 7(4), 1693-1699.

Drug yield and essential oil of Thymus vulgaris L. as in influenced by ecological and ontogenetical variation. M Ozguven, S Tansi, Turk. J. Agri. Forest. 22Ozguven, M., Tansi, S. (1998). Drug yield and essential oil of Thymus vulgaris L. as in influenced by ecological and ontogenetical variation. Turk. J. Agri. Forest., 22, 537-542.

Antimicrobial activity of five essential oils against origin strains of the Enterobacteriaceae family. P Penalver, B Huerta, C Borge, R Astorga, R Romero, A Perea, Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Immunol. Scand. 113Penalver, P., Huerta, B., Borge, C., Astorga, R., Romero, R., Perea, A. (2005). Antimicrobial activity of five essential oils against origin strains of the Enterobacteriaceae family. Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Immunol. Scand., 113, 1-6.

Essential oil and chemical compositions of wild and cultivated Thymus daenensis Celak and Thymus vulgaris L. A G Pirbalouti, M Hashemi, F T Ghahfarokhic, Ind. Crops Prod. 48Pirbalouti A.G., Hashemi, M., Ghahfarokhic, F.T. (2013). Essential oil and chemical compositions of wild and cultivated Thymus daenensis Celak and Thymus vulgaris L. Ind. Crops Prod., 48, 43-48.

Content and composition of the essential oil of Thymus serpyllum L. growing wild in Estonia. A Raal, U Paaver, E Arak, A Orav, 40Raal, A., Paaver, U., Arak, E., Orav, A. (2004). Content and composition of the essential oil of Thymus serpyllum L. growing wild in Estonia. Med., 40, 795-800.

Antibacterial properties of Thymus pubescens and Thymus serpyllum essential oils. I Rasooli, S A Mirmostafa, Fitot. 733Rasooli, I, Mirmostafa, S.A. (2002). Antibacterial properties of Thymus pubescens and Thymus serpyllum essential oils. Fitot., 73(3), 244-250.

Antioxidant properties and phenolic profile of the most widely appreciated cultivated mushrooms: A comparative study between in vivo and in vitro samples. F S Reis, A Martins, L Barros, I C F R Ferreira, Food Chem. Toxicol. 50Reis, F.S., Martins, A., Barros, L., Ferreira, I.C.F.R. (2012). Antioxidant properties and phenolic profile of the most widely appreciated cultivated mushrooms: A comparative study between in vivo and in vitro samples. Food Chem. Toxicol., 50, 1201-1207.

In vitro antimicrobial activity of essential oils from aromatic plants against selected foodborne pathogens. C Rota, J J Carramiñana, J Burillo, A Herrera, J. Food Prot. 67Rota, C., Carramiñana, J.J., Burillo, J., Herrera, A. (2004). In vitro antimicrobial activity of essential oils from aromatic plants against selected foodborne pathogens J. Food Prot., 67. 1252-1256.

Effect of oil extracted from some medicinal plants on different mycotoxigenic fungi. K M Soliman, R I Badeaa, Food Chem. Toxicol. 40Soliman, K.M., Badeaa, R.I. (2002). Effect of oil extracted from some medicinal plants on different mycotoxigenic fungi Food Chem. Toxicol., 40, 1669-1675.

The Chemical Composition of Thymus Oils: A Review of the Literature. E Stahl-Biskup, J. Ess. Oil Res. 32Stahl-Biskup, E. (1991). The Chemical Composition of Thymus Oils: A Review of the Literature. J. Ess. Oil Res., 3(2), 61-82.

Qualitative and quantitative variation in monoterpene co-occurrence and composition in the essential oil of Thymus vulgaris chemotypes. J D Thompson, J C Chalchat, A Michet, Y B Linhart, B Ehlers, J. Chem. Ecol. 294Thompson, J.D., Chalchat, J.C., Michet, A., Linhart, Y.B., Ehlers, B. (2003). Qualitative and quantitative variation in monoterpene co-occurrence and composition in the essential oil of Thymus vulgaris chemotypes. J. Chem. Ecol., 29(4), 859-880.

Comparison of the WST-8 colorimetric method and the CLSI broth microdilution method for susceptibility testing against drug-resistance bacteria. T Tsukatani, M Suenaga, K Shiga, M Noguchi, T Ishiyama, T Ezoe, K Matsumoto, J. Microb. Meth. 903Tsukatani, T., Suenaga, M., Shiga, K., Noguchi, M., Ishiyama, T., Ezoe, T., Matsumoto, K. (2012). Comparison of the WST-8 colorimetric method and the CLSI broth microdilution method for susceptibility testing against drug-resistance bacteria. J. Microb. Meth., 90(3), 160-166.

Essential oil composition of Thymus serpyllum cultivated in the Kumaon region of western Himalaya. R S Verma, L Rahman, C S Chanotiya, R K Verma, A Singh, A Yadav, A Chauhan, A K Yadav, A K Singh, India. Nat. Prod. Comm. 47Verma, R.S., Rahman, L., Chanotiya, C.S., Verma, R.K., Singh, A, Yadav, A., Chauhan, A., Yadav, A.K., Singh, A.K. (2009). Essential oil composition of Thymus serpyllum cultivated in the Kumaon region of western Himalaya, India. Nat. Prod. Comm., 4(7), 987-988.

Seasonal Variation in Essential Oil Content and Composition of Thyme, Thymus serpyllum L. Cultivated in Uttarakh and Hills. R S Verma, R K Verma, A Chauhan, A K Yadav, Indian J. Pharmacol. Sci. 732Verma, R.S., Verma, R.K., Chauhan, A., Yadav, A.K. (2011). Seasonal Variation in Essential Oil Content and Composition of Thyme, Thymus serpyllum L. Cultivated in Uttarakh and Hills. Indian J. Pharmacol. Sci., 73(2), 233-235.

Sulforhodamine B colorimetric assay for cytotoxicity screening. V Vichai, K Kirtikara, Nat. Prot. 1Vichai, V., Kirtikara, K. (2006). Sulforhodamine B colorimetric assay for cytotoxicity screening. Nat. Prot., 1, 1112-1116.

Identification of natural antimutagens with modulating effects on DNA repair. B Vukovic-Gacic, D Simic, WHO Monographs on Selected Medicinal Plants. 611999Basic Life Science.Vukovic-Gacic, B., Simic, D. (1993). Identification of natural antimutagens with modulating effects on DNA repair. Basic Life Science. 61, 269-277. WHO Monographs on Selected Medicinal Plants, Vol. 1 1999 (Geneva)

Chemical Analysis and Antifungal Activity of Thymus striatus. P A Wayne, M Couladis, O Tzakou, S Kujundžic, M Soković, N Mimica-Dukić, Phytoth. Res. 18Wayne, P.A., Couladis, M., Tzakou, O., Kujundžic, S., Soković, M., Mimica-Dukić, N. (2004). Chemical Analysis and Antifungal Activity of Thymus striatus. Phytoth. Res., 18, 40-42.

Biologically active traditional medicinal herbs from Balochistan. M A Zaidi, S A Crow, J. Ethnopharmacol. 96Zaidi, M.A., Crow, S.A. (2005). Biologically active traditional medicinal herbs from Balo- chistan. J. Ethnopharmacol., 96, 331-334.