# Males: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)

CorpusID: 248101140
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ecd39f1a99dc65de02d00c82b14778cdc2950b0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ecd39f1a99dc65de02d00c82b14778cdc2950b0)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Males: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
2003-2010. Nutrients 2022

Giorgio Ivan Russo 
Department of Urology
Union Hospital
Tongji Medical College
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
430074WuhanChina

Department of Urology
Wuhan Red Cross Hospital
430015WuhanChina

People's Hospital of Dongxihu District
430040WuhanChina

Males: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
1413252003-2010. Nutrients 202210.3390/nu14071325Received: 21 January 2022 Accepted: 21 March 2022Academic Editor:
Citation: Wei, C.; Tian, L.; Jia, B.; Wang, M.; Xiong, M.; Hu, B.; Deng, C.; Hou, Y.; Hou, T.; Yang, X.; et al. Association between Serum Triglycerides and Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) among U.S.

## Introduction

In 2020, prostate cancer (PCa) was recorded as the most common cancer diagnosed in men, accounting for 26%, and was the second cause of the estimated death of 34,130 cases in males [1]. Detection of serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentrations plays an essential part in screening prostate cancer at an early age amenable to curative treatment [2]. Widespread use of PSA concentration assays has significantly reduced the overall disease-specific mortality and improved the detection rate of asymptomatic, which highly differentiated prostate cancer [3,4]. Nevertheless, numerous studies have shown that PSA concentrations could be affected by various other factors, which may occur as detection bias in prostate cancer [5][6][7]. Inopportune and unnecessary treatment may take place due to overdiagnosis or missed diagnosis influenced by the various factors [8,9]. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recently updated their recommendation, which changed from a grade D of guidance against PSA as based screening to a grade C of advocating for an individual screening [2,3,10]. Screening for prostate cancer by detecting PSA remains highly controversial because of the limitations of random trials, insufficient clinical evidence, and numerous factors affecting PSA levels [9,11]. Missing PSA data, hard to monitor, and the variety of decisions on patients between different areas may also contribute to practice variations [12].

An increasing number of studies strongly indicate that lipid and glucose metabolism play a critical role in prostate cancer (PCa) development [13]. Some studies have shown that cholesterol plays a possible role in prostate cancer development, aggressiveness, and progression through the effects of inflammation and steroidogenesis [14,15]. Some studies have also reported that higher serum low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) levels correlated with a higher risk of prostate cancer. Meanwhile, higher levels of serum highdensity lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) were corrected with the nonaggressive disease and lower risk of overall prostate cancer [16][17][18]. However, conflicting explanations exist on the function of triglycerides in the process of prostate cancer. Some studies have illustrated that triglycerides promote the malignant progression of prostate cancer [19]. However, some studies have considered triglycerides as a protection factor because of the higher triglyceride detection in a normal population [20,21]. In fact, the association may occur between triglyceride PSA metabolism, which could cause the detection bias in prostate cancer diagnosis. Moreover, we found this phenomenon has not been previously reported.

We hypothesized that serum triglycerides may influence the PSA concentrations among men without diagnosis of prostate cancer in the U.S. population. The presence of possible association could create a detection bias in observational studies of the exposures and prostate cancer. To test the hypothesis, we investigated the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) for secondary data analysis. After controlling a vast array of influencing factors, we attempted to clarify the association between serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations among U.S. men without prostate cancer as well as try to explain the conflicting results


## Materials and Methods


### Data Availability

Since 1960, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) has been designed to estimate the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the United States, which is conducted by the National Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention National Health Statistics Center. Population and methodological details are available at the NHANES website (www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes, accessed on 7 October 2021). The National Center approved NHANES protocols for the Health Statistics research ethics review board.


### Study Population

Four cycles' two-year data of the NHANES survey from 2003 to 2010 were integrated into our study. These data included PSA concentrations, sociodemographic data, laboratory data, medical examination-personal life history, dietary, and comorbidities data for the second analysis. According to the following exclusion criteria, participants were left out of our study as follows: (1) female participants (n = 20,785); (2) aged < 40 years (n = 13,231); (3) participant diagnosed with prostate cancer (n = 314); (4) factors affecting PSA concentrations: diagnosed with prostatitis, stain drug user, received prostate biopsy within one week and had urinary system surgery within one month (n = 76); (5) missing PSA (734); and (6) missing serum triglycerides (n = 3106) [22]. There were 2910 participants out of 41,156 participants who fit into our study after conducting the screening ( Figure 1). Furthermore, our study complied with the Helsinki Declaration of the World Medical Association in the process of study design and conduction. In our study, we used the data analysis based on NHANES.

Furthermore, our study complied with the Helsinki Declaration of the World Medical Association in the process of study design and conduction. In our study, we used the data analysis based on NHANES. In our study, serum triglyceride was the target-independent variable downloaded from the NHANES website. Collaborative Laboratory Services periodically refines these laboratory methods. More detailed information on the test principles and clinical relevance can be found on the NHANES website and articles elsewhere [23,24]. PSA concentration (ng/mL) was set as the dependent variable. Total prostate-specific antigen (PSA) from the participants' serum were recorded by Beckman Access at the Department of Laboratory Medicine Immunology Division, and the Hybritech PSA method was used to record serum total PSA concentration (ng/mL) (https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/2003-2004/labmethods/l11psa_c_met_to-tal_psa.pdf, accessed on 7 October 2021). In this study, we used total serum PSA as the result variable connected to serum triglycerides and we selected the following covariates, based on the previous articles regarding the connection to triglycerides, PSA, or prostate cancer and other covariates [25][26][27][28][29][30]. Covariates contained the sociodemographic data, laboratory data, medical examination-personal life history, dietary, and comorbidities data. Continuous variables included age (year), poverty income ratio (PIR), vitamin D (ng/mL), LDL-cholesterol (mg/dL), HDL-cholesterol (mg/dL), glycohemoglobin (%), C-reactive protein (mg/dL), BMI (kg/m 2 ), alcohol (gm), and triglycerides (mg/dL). Categorical In our study, serum triglyceride was the target-independent variable downloaded from the NHANES website. Collaborative Laboratory Services periodically refines these laboratory methods. More detailed information on the test principles and clinical relevance can be found on the NHANES website and articles elsewhere [23,24]. PSA concentration (ng/mL) was set as the dependent variable. Total prostate-specific antigen (PSA) from the participants' serum were recorded by Beckman Access at the Department of Laboratory Medicine Immunology Division, and the Hybritech PSA method was used to record serum total PSA concentration (ng/mL) (https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/2003--20 04/labmethods/l11psa_c_met_total_psa.pdf, accessed on 7 October 2021). In this study, we used total serum PSA as the result variable connected to serum triglycerides and we selected the following covariates, based on the previous articles regarding the connection to triglycerides, PSA, or prostate cancer and other covariates [25][26][27][28][29][30]. Covariates contained the sociodemographic data, laboratory data, medical examination-personal life history, dietary, and comorbidities data. Continuous variables included age (year), poverty income ratio (PIR), vitamin D (ng/mL), LDL-cholesterol (mg/dL), HDL-cholesterol (mg/dL), glycohemoglobin (%), C-reactive protein (mg/dL), BMI (kg/m 2 ), alcohol (gm), and triglycerides (mg/dL). Categorical variables contained race/ethnicity, education, marital status, physical activity (MET-based rank), smoked at least 100 cigarettes in life, hypertension history, coronary heart disease history, diabetes history, and stroke. More information about the details of variables is available on the NHANES official website.


### Statistical Analysis

Following the criteria of the CDC guidelines, we conducted a statistical analysis between the serum triglycerides and PSA level (https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/ index.htm, accessed on 7 October 2021). Serum triglyceride was expressed as the mean ± standard deviation as normally distributed. PSA concentrations and other continuous variables were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (normal distribution). The categorical variables were expressed in percentage or frequency. Our aim was to research the potential relationship of particular participants between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations. First, we divided the continuous variables of serum triglycerides into four quartile concentrations. The weighted chi-square was used to calculate the categorical variable, and the weighted linear regression model was used to calculate the continuous variable between the quartile arrays which shown in the Table 1. Second, we constructed three weighted univariate and multiple linear regression models including a non-adjusted model, a minimally adjusted model, and a fully adjusted model, which are shown in Table 2 to figure out the linear relationship between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations. Third, subgroup analyses were performed to identify the stratified associations between triglyceride and PSA using stratified multivariate logistic regression. Furthermore, in the model-development phase, we constructed the XGBoost algorithm model to predict the relative importance of selected variables. We performed the XGBoost model to analyze the contribution (gain) of each variable to PSA concentration [31,32]. Finally, the penalty spline method constructed a fully adjusted model with a smooth curve fit to explore the potential linear relationship between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations. In order to prevent the bias caused by missing data, we curated the NHANES database to improve the accuracy of the analysis by using the MICE package to account for missing data [33]. The results showed that the original data represented no significant difference with the complete data. All in all, univariate and multiple analysis results were based on the calculated dataset as well as Rubin's rules. All kinds of statistical analyses of analysis were performed by R software (Version 4.0.2) using the R package (http://www.R-project.org, The R Foundation, accessed on 7 October 2021) [34]. The software EmpowerStats also provided significant help in the process of analysis (http://www.empowerstats.com, X&Y Solutions, Inc., Boston, MA, USA). In our study, a p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.   


## Results


### Baseline Characteristics of Selected Participants Subsection

Weighted distribution of baseline characteristics is shown in Table 1 including sociodemographic data, laboratory data, medical examination-personal life history, dietary, and comorbidities data of chosen participants selected from the NHANES (2013-2010) survey. In this study, the average age of the chosen participants was 59.7 years (±12.7). Then, we divided different serum triglycerides into four quartiles (Q1-Q4). The distribution of poverty to income ratio, marital status, C-reactive protein, coronary heart disease history, diabetes history, and stroke history in Q1-Q4 of serum triglycerides showed no statistical difference with approximate similarities (p values > 0.05). Compared with the different groups in Table 1, the distribution of serum triglycerides showed an age difference, where younger participants had higher serum triglycerides than older ones; had more elevated LDL-C, higher glycohemoglobin, higher body mass index (BMI), more likely to have a lower education level, higher incidence of hypertension, and more likely smoked at least 100 cigarettes in life. On the other hand, participants with more elevated serum triglycerides had lower PSA concentrations, lower vitamin D, lower HDL-C, lower physical activity, and were more likely to drink less alcohol. In our study, non-Hispanic Whites were the main participants.


### The Connection between PSA Concentrations and Serum Triglycerides

The results of the univariate and multivariate analyses by the weighted linear model are shown in Table 2. In the non-adjusted model, which adjusts for none, the PSA concentrations were reduced by 0.0014 (−0.0023, −0.0005) for each additional unit of serum triglyceride with p for a trend less than 0.05. In the minimally adjusted model, which adjusts for race/ethnicity, education level, poverty income ratio, and marital status, the PSA concentrations were reduced by 0.0013 (−0.0022, −0.0004) for each additional unit of serum triglyceride with p for the trend <0.05. The fully adjusted model that adjusts for race/ethnicity, education level, poverty income ratio, marital status, VITD, LDL-C, total cholesterol, C-reactive protein, glycohemoglobin (%), physical activity (MET-based rank) (%), BMI (kg/m 2 ), smoked at least 100 cigarettes in life, drinking alcohol (gm) first day, coronary heart disease, and stroke indicated that the PSA concentrations were reduced by 0.0043 ng/mL for each additional unit of serum triglyceride (mg/dL).


### Stratified Associations between PSA Concentrations and Serum Triglycerides

As shown in Table 3, we conducted stratified analysis by age, race, education, marital status, body mass index (BMI), and ratio of family income to assess the associations between triglycerides and PSA. It is likely that Non-Hispanic Whites, education level higher than high school, married status, and high group of ratios of family income had lower PSA concentrations, with increasing serum triglycerides displaying a significant trend (p for trend = 0.0036; p for trend = 0.0012; p for trend = 0.0004; and p for trend = 0.0002). In addition, we detected a significant difference by p for the interaction analyses. Variables of age and triglycerides may have an interaction effect associated with PSA concentrations (p for interaction < 0.0001).  


### Machine Learning Using the XGBoost Algorithm Model

In the phase of model-development and validation, we used the machine learning of the XGBoost model to determine the relative importance of selected variables associated with the PSA. Variables included triglyceride, age, body mass index (BMI), LDL-cholesterol, total-cholesterol, C-relative protein, glycohemoglobin, vitamin-D, and alcohol. According to the results of each variables' contribution by the XGBoost model, triglyceride, age, body mass index (BMI), LDL-cholesterol, and total-cholesterol were the top five most important variables of the dataset (Figure 2). Triglyceride, as the most relative variable, was included to construct smooth curve models in our study. Note 1: Above adjusts for race/ethnicity, education level, poverty income ratio, marital status, VITD, LDL-C, total cholesterol, C-reactive protein, glycohemoglobin (%), BMI (kg/m 2 ), physical activity (MET-based rank) (%), smoked at least 100 cigarettes in life, drinking alcohol (gm) first day, coronary heart disease, and stroke. Note 2: In each case, the model was not adjusted for the stratification variable itself.


### Machine Learning Using the XGBoost Algorithm Model

In the phase of model-development and validation, we used the machine learning of the XGBoost model to determine the relative importance of selected variables associated with the PSA. Variables included triglyceride, age, body mass index (BMI), LDLcholesterol, total-cholesterol, C-relative protein, glycohemoglobin, vitamin-D, and alcohol. According to the results of each variables' contribution by the XGBoost model, triglyceride, age, body mass index (BMI), LDL-cholesterol, and total-cholesterol were the top five most important variables of the dataset (Figure 2). Triglyceride, as the most relative variable, was included to construct smooth curve models in our study.


## Figure 2.

Relative importance of the selected variables using XGBoost and the corresponding variable importance score. X-axis indicates the importance score, which is the relative number of a variable that is used to distribute the data, Y-axis indicates the selected variable.


### Identification of Sensitivity Analysis

We conducted sensitivity analysis to confirm the accuracy and stability of the results. First, we converted the serum triglyceride as a continuous variable to the categorical variable in the quartile value, and then the p-value was calculated for trend. Surprisingly, the result of the categorical variable was consistent with the effect of the serum triglyceride as a continuous variable. To investigate the possible linear relationship between the serum Figure 2. Relative importance of the selected variables using XGBoost and the corresponding variable importance score. X-axis indicates the importance score, which is the relative number of a variable that is used to distribute the data, Y-axis indicates the selected variable. 


### Identification of Sensitivity Analysis

We conducted sensitivity analysis to confirm the accuracy and stability of the results. First, we converted the serum triglyceride as a continuous variable to the categorical variable in the quartile value, and then the p-value was calculated for trend. Surprisingly, the result of the categorical variable was consistent with the effect of the serum triglyceride as a continuous variable. To investigate the possible linear relationship between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations, we constructed a smooth curve based on the fully adjusted model. The relationship between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations was linear after adjusting for other covariates based on the fully adjusted model strategy (Figure 3). The results showed that if the serum triglyceride with each additional unit was mg/dL, the PSA concentrations were reduced by 0.0043 ng/mL. These results indicated a negative correlation between serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations. triglycerides and PSA concentrations, we constructed a smooth curve based on the fully adjusted model. The relationship between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations was linear after adjusting for other covariates based on the fully adjusted model strategy ( Figure 3). The results showed that if the serum triglyceride with each additional unit was mg/dL, the PSA concentrations were reduced by 0.0043 ng/mL. These results indicated a negative correlation between serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations. 


## Discussion

Our study is one of the most extensive cross-sectional studies to explore the potential association between the serum triglyceride and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) connections and is also the first to investigate this relationship in males without a history of malignant cancer in the United States based on the NHANES database. Up to now, there are 


## Discussion

Our study is one of the most extensive cross-sectional studies to explore the potential association between the serum triglyceride and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) connections and is also the first to investigate this relationship in males without a history of malignant cancer in the United States based on the NHANES database. Up to now, there are no previous epidemiological studies that have reported on the association between triglyceride and PSA levels. Thus, after adjusting for the sociodemographic, laboratory, medical examination-personal life history, dietary, and comorbidities data, the serum triglyceride was negatively correlated with PSA. To avoid PSA detection bias in the process of diagnosis disease related to the prostate, it is necessary to understand that serum lipid may cause individual differences in PSA concentration and triglyceride is one aspect that needs further attention. Our study population was 2910 participants selected from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (2003)(2004)(2005)(2006)(2007)(2008)(2009)(2010)(2011)(2012). Machine learning of the XGBoost model was used to determine the relative importance of selected variables associated with the PSA, and triglyceride was the most relative variable. Our result shows that the PSA concentrations were reduced by 0.0043 ng/mL for each additional unit of serum triglyceride (mg/dL) and the result showed a statistical difference, which means that if 100 (mg/dL) of triglyceride is added, the PSA concentration will reduce by 4.3 ng/mL. Now, more and more of the population have dyslipidemia, which may aggravate PSA detection bias. Triglyceride, as the most relative variable, was included to construct smooth curve models to confirm the robustness of the result.

Previously, some prospective studies have provided evidence showing a potential role for lipid metabolism in PCa development, which suggests that a higher serum total cholesterol may relate to a higher grade or more aggressive prostate cancer [18,[35][36][37][38][39]. The relationship between the triglyceride and the prognostic outcomes of prostate cancer have been seldomly reported and are unclear. One study showed evidence that triglycerides may influence the aggressiveness and severity of prostate cancer [25]. However, one study considered triglycerides as a protective factor because of the higher triglyceride detection in a normal population [20,21]. This result was also reported by a study from a Chinese investigation that revealed the inverse association between serum triglycerides and PSA levels [40]. Research is still needed to assess the relationship between the serum lipids and PSA level as most studies involve the population of relatively low-risk Asian men. Thus, we hypothesized that triglycerides may influence the PSA concentrations and cause detection bias, leading to this conflict in explanation. Additionally, we need to conduct further cohort experiments to understand the function of triglyceride as a protective or dangerous factor in the process of prostate cancer

The possible explanation of the inverse function of triglycerides with the PSA concentrations may be due to the detection bias between the process of prostate cancer, as shown in several recent studies [41][42][43], requires consideration. As we observed, higher concentrations of triglyceride populations are associated with lower PSA (Figure 3), so the possibility of detecting asymptomatic prostate cancer might be lower among high triglycerides. Meanwhile, if prostate cancer is already present, people with higher triglycerides may be more likely to be diagnosed at an advanced stage by PSA testing. Thus, our results considered that detection bias due to negative association between triglycerides and PSA does not explain the inverse association between the serum triglycerides and advanced prostate cancer than previously reported.

Our results support a negative association between triglycerides and PSA that may lead to detection bias, which can have implications for prostate cancer screening. Because triglycerides preferentially decrease PSA concentration in males without prostate cancer, the specificity of the PSA test for prostate cancer screening might be improved in males with high triglycerides. Thus, it is necessary to adjust the PSA threshold for further examination with various triglycerides if triglycerides can decrease PSA production by prostate tumor or change the ability of tumor-derived PSA to enter thee serum. Further studies are needed to explore the mechanism by which triglycerides influence PSA concentration and the influence on prostate cancer screening. Moreover, prospective cohort studies are still needed to confirm the causality, and serum triglyceride is involved in the occurrence and development of PCa, which needs to be verified via in vitro and in vivo experiments.

This study had several advantages compared with previously published articles. First, a large sample with a total of 2910 participants was utilized in our research. Second, machine learning of the XGBoost algorithm model was used to assess each variable's contribution to PSA. Then, we performed a sensitivity analysis that considered and evaluated the impact of other factors, which may influence the result. Finally, a smooth curve was constructed based on the fully adjusted model to investigate the possible linear relationship between the serum triglycerides and PSA concentrations. Nevertheless, our study had some limitations in interpreting the results, which need to be considered. First, in our study, it was hard to distinguish the causality because of the intrinsic limitations of the NHANES database as a cross-sectional survey. Therefore, prospective cohort studies are still needed to confirm the causality. Additionally, we excluded participants diagnosed with prostate cancer, with factors affecting PSA concentrations and missing data. Thus, our results cannot explain the aforementioned populations. Finally, our investigation was based on the NHANES database, which is limited to the American people. Therefore, generalizability is geographically restricted. All of the above points require further evaluation and investigation in the future.


## Conclusions

This nationally representative study showed that serum triglyceride is independently and negatively correlated with PSA among adult American males without a history of tumors. People with higher triglycerides would be more likely to be diagnosed with prostate cancer at an advanced stage in the future. This detection bias is unlikely to explain the inverse association between triglycerides and aggressive prostate cancer.  

## Figure 1 .
1Flowchart in selecting the studying participants.

## Figure 1 .
1Flowchart in selecting the studying participants.


adjusted model adjusts for none. Minimally adjusted model adjusts for race/ethnicity, education level, poverty income ration, and marital status. Fully adjusted model adjusts for race/ethnicity, education level, poverty income ration, marital status, VITD, LDL-C, total cholesterol, C-reactive protein, glycohemoglobin (%), BMI (kg/m 2 ), physical activity (MET-based rank) (%), smoked at least 100 cigarettes in life, drinking alcohol (gm) first day, coronary heart disease, and stroke.

## Nutrients 2022 ,
202214, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 13

## Figure 3 .
3The relationship between serum triglyceride and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) connections.

## Figure 3 .
3The relationship between serum triglyceride and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) connections.

## Author
Contributions: Conceptualization and design, C.W. and L.T.; Acquisition and analysis of the data, C.W., B.H. and B.J.; Interpretation of the data, C.W. and M.W.; Writing-original draft, C.W., M.X. and Z.C.; Writing-review and editing and critical analysis of the results, C.W., T.H., X.Y., Y.H., C.D. and Z.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## Funding:
This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: All data are available at NHANES website https://www.cdc.gov/ nchs/nhanes/index.htm (accessed on 7 October 2021).

## Table 1 .
1Baseline characteristics of the selected participants.Table 1. Cont.Triglycerides (mg/dL) 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
p-Value 

N 
718 
719 
744 
729 
PSA ng/ml 
1.56 ± 2.60 
1.74 ± 3.11 
1.40 ± 1.86 
1.30 ± 1.62 
0.0023 
Sociodemographic variables 
Age, mean ± SD (years) 
56.16 ± 11.94 
55.84 ± 11.31 
56.46 ± 11.36 
54.48 ± 10.70 
0.0041 
Poverty to income ratio, mean ± SD (years) 
3.31 ± 1.57 
3.40 ± 1.55 
3.32 ± 1.56 
3.30 ± 1.61 
0.6691 
Race/ethnicity (%) 
<0.0001 
Mexican American 
3.91 
5.39 
6.57 
8.30 
Other Hispanic 
2.47 
2.69 
3.72 
4.16 
Non-Hispanic White 
76.52 
75.82 
78.13 
75.67 
Non-Hispanic Black 
13.07 
10.12 
5.56 
5.38 
Other race/ethnicity 
4.02 
5.98 
6.02 
6.50 
Education (%) 
0.0335 
Less than high school 
19.27 
16.60 
21.00 
20.20 
High school 
22.65 
23.99 
22.76 
27.83 
More than high school 
58.08 
59.41 
56.24 
51.97 
Marital status (%) 
0.2121 
Married 
71.14 
75.20 
69.96 
73.24 
Single 
24.19 
19.50 
25.35 
21.98 
Living with a partner 
4.67 
5.30 
4.69 
4.77 
Variables of laboratory data 


## Table 2 .
2Univariate and multivariate analyses by the weighted linear model.

## Table 3 .
3Effect size of triglycerides on PSA in the prespecified and exploratory subgroup.Triglycerides (mg/dL) 
N 
β 
95% CI 
p-Value 
p for Interaction 

Stratified by age 
<0.0001 
<60 
1475 
−0.0012 
(−0.0028, 0.0003) 
0.1241 
60-80 
1153 
−0.0038 
(−0.0090, 0.0014) 
0.1557 
>80 
282 
−0.0225 
(−0.0472, 0.0023) 
0.078 
Stratified by race 
0.3315 
Mexican American 
496 
−0.0012 
(−0.0054, 0.0031) 
0.5987 
Other Hispanic 
213 
0.0017 
(−0.0061, 0.0094) 
0.678 
Non-Hispanic White 
1585 
−0.006 
(−0.0100, −0.0020) 
0.0036 
Non-Hispanic Black 
498 
−0.0125 
(−0.0281, 0.0031) 
0.1184 
Other race/ethnicity 
118 
−0.0092 
(−0.0228, 0.0044) 
0.1946 
Stratified by education 
0.1640 
Less than high school 
935 
−0.0082 
(−0.0173, 0.0009) 
0.0791 
High school 
669 
−0.0055 
(−0.0124, 0.0014) 
0.1168 
More than high school 
1306 
−0.0059 
(−0.0094, −0.0024) 
0.0012 
Stratified by marital status 
0.8274 
Married 
1981 
−0.0073 
(−0.0113, −0.0033) 
0.0004 
Single 
789 
−0.0038 
(−0.0123, 0.0047) 
0.3763 
Living with a partner 
136 
−0.0064 
(−0.0126, −0.0001) 
0.0527 


## Table 3 .
3Cont.Triglycerides (mg/dL) 
N 
β 
95% CI 
p-Value 
p for Interaction 

Stratified by BMI 
0.1168 
<25 
710 
−0.0092 
(−0.0184, −0.0000) 
0.0504 
25-28 
718 
−0.0052 
(−0.0172, 0.0068) 
0.3964 
>28 
1424 
−0.0029 
(−0.0056, −0.0003) 
0.0305 
Stratified by ratio of family income 
0.5872 
Low group 
896 
−0.0038 
(−0.0081, 0.0005) 
0.0873 
Median group 
898 
−0.0066 
(−0.0157, 0.0026) 
0.1594 
High group 
906 
−0.0093 
(−0.0142, −0.0044) 
0.0002 

Note 1: Above adjusts for race/ethnicity, education level, poverty income ratio, marital status, VITD, LDL-C, 
total cholesterol, C-reactive protein, glycohemoglobin (%), BMI (kg/m 2 ), physical activity (MET-based rank) (%), 
smoked at least 100 cigarettes in life, drinking alcohol (gm) first day, coronary heart disease, and stroke. Note 2: In 
each case, the model was not adjusted for the stratification variable itself. 


Acknowledgments:The NHANES protocol was approved by the NCHS Research Ethics Review Board and thanks so much for little bear who supported us the most.Conflicts of Interest:The authors declare no conflict of interest.
. R L Siegel, K D Miller, H E Fuchs, A Jemal, 10.3322/caac.21654CA Cancer J. Clin. 71Cancer Statistics. PubMedSiegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Fuchs, H.E.; Jemal, A. Cancer Statistics, 2021. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2021, 71, 7-33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Screening for Prostate Cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. D C Grossman, S J Curry, D K Owens, K Bibbins-Domingo, A B Caughey, K W Davidson, C A Doubeni, M Ebell, J W Epling, Jr, A R Kemper, 10.1001/jama.2018.3710JAMA. 319PubMedGrossman, D.C.; Curry, S.J.; Owens, D.K.; Bibbins-Domingo, K.; Caughey, A.B.; Davidson, K.W.; Doubeni, C.A.; Ebell, M.; Epling, J.W., Jr.; Kemper, A.R.; et al. Screening for Prostate Cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2018, 319, 1901-1913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Prostate Cancer Screening: Time to Question How to Optimize the Ratio of Benefits and Harms. A J Vickers, 10.7326/M17-2012Ann. Intern. Med. 167PubMedVickers, A.J. Prostate Cancer Screening: Time to Question How to Optimize the Ratio of Benefits and Harms. Ann. Intern. Med. 2017, 167, 509-510. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Genome-wide associations for benign prostatic hyperplasia reveal a genetic correlation with serum levels of PSA. J Gudmundsson, J K Sigurdsson, L Stefansdottir, B A Agnarsson, H J Isaksson, O A Stefansson, S A Gudjonsson, D F Gudbjartsson, G Masson, M L Frigge, 10.1038/s41467-018-06920-9Nat. Commun. 94568Gudmundsson, J.; Sigurdsson, J.K.; Stefansdottir, L.; Agnarsson, B.A.; Isaksson, H.J.; Stefansson, O.A.; Gudjonsson, S.A.; Gudbjartsson, D.F.; Masson, G.; Frigge, M.L.; et al. Genome-wide associations for benign prostatic hyperplasia reveal a genetic correlation with serum levels of PSA. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 4568. [CrossRef]

Associations of demographic and lifestyle characteristics with prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentration and rate of PSA increase. A R Kristal, C Chi, C M Tangen, P J Goodman, R Etzioni, I M Thompson, 10.1002/cncr.21603Cancer. 106Kristal, A.R.; Chi, C.; Tangen, C.M.; Goodman, P.J.; Etzioni, R.; Thompson, I.M. Associations of demographic and lifestyle characteristics with prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentration and rate of PSA increase. Cancer 2006, 106, 320-328. [CrossRef] Nutrients 2022, 14, 1325 11 of 12

Do antibiotics decrease prostate-specific antigen levels and reduce the need for prostate biopsy in type IV prostatitis? A systematic literature review. K T Buddingh, M G F Maatje, H Putter, R F Kropman, R C M Pelger, 10.5489/cuaj.4515E25-E30Can. Urol. Assoc. J. 12PubMedBuddingh, K.T.; Maatje, M.G.F.; Putter, H.; Kropman, R.F.; Pelger, R.C.M. Do antibiotics decrease prostate-specific antigen levels and reduce the need for prostate biopsy in type IV prostatitis? A systematic literature review. Can. Urol. Assoc. J. 2018, 12, E25-E30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Optimal Starting Age and Baseline Level for Repeat Tests: Economic Concerns of PSA Screening for Chinese Men-10-Year Experience of a Single Center. Y Liu, G Xiao, J W Zhou, J K Yang, L Lu, J Bian, L Zhong, Q Z Wei, Q Z Zhou, K Y Xue, 10.1159/000503733Urol. Int. 104Liu, Y.; Xiao, G.; Zhou, J.W.; Yang, J.K.; Lu, L.; Bian, J.; Zhong, L.; Wei, Q.Z.; Zhou, Q.Z.; Xue, K.Y.; et al. Optimal Starting Age and Baseline Level for Repeat Tests: Economic Concerns of PSA Screening for Chinese Men-10-Year Experience of a Single Center. Urol. Int. 2020, 104, 230-238. [CrossRef]

Smarter screening for prostate cancer. G H Tan, G Nason, K Ajib, D T S Woon, J Herrera-Caceres, O Alhunaidi, N Perlis, 10.1007/s00345-019-02719-5World J. Urol. 37Tan, G.H.; Nason, G.; Ajib, K.; Woon, D.T.S.; Herrera-Caceres, J.; Alhunaidi, O.; Perlis, N. Smarter screening for prostate cancer. World J. Urol. 2019, 37, 991-999. [CrossRef]

National evidence on the use of shared decision making in prostate-specific antigen screening. P K Han, S Kobrin, N Breen, D A Joseph, J Li, D L Frosch, C N Klabunde, 10.1370/afm.1539Ann. Fam. Med. 11Han, P.K.; Kobrin, S.; Breen, N.; Joseph, D.A.; Li, J.; Frosch, D.L.; Klabunde, C.N. National evidence on the use of shared decision making in prostate-specific antigen screening. Ann. Fam. Med. 2013, 11, 306-314. [CrossRef]

Prostate-Specific Antigen-Based Screening for Prostate Cancer: Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. J J Fenton, M S Weyrich, S Durbin, Y Liu, H Bang, J Melnikow, 10.1001/jama.2018.3712JAMA. 319Fenton, J.J.; Weyrich, M.S.; Durbin, S.; Liu, Y.; Bang, H.; Melnikow, J. Prostate-Specific Antigen-Based Screening for Prostate Cancer: Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2018, 319, 1914-1931. [CrossRef]

Prostate cancer screening practices in a large, integrated health system. A D Misra-Hebert, B Hu, E A Klein, A Stephenson, G B Taksler, M W Kattan, M B Rothberg, 10.1111/bju.13793BJU Int. 120PubMedMisra-Hebert, A.D.; Hu, B.; Klein, E.A.; Stephenson, A.; Taksler, G.B.; Kattan, M.W.; Rothberg, M.B. Prostate cancer screening practices in a large, integrated health system: 2007-2014. BJU Int. 2017, 120, 257-264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Effect of a Low-Intensity PSA-Based Screening Intervention on Prostate Cancer Mortality: The CAP Randomized Clinical Trial. R M Martin, J L Donovan, E L Turner, C Metcalfe, G J Young, E I Walsh, J A Lane, S Noble, S E Oliver, S Evans, 10.1001/jama.2018.0154JAMA. 319PubMedMartin, R.M.; Donovan, J.L.; Turner, E.L.; Metcalfe, C.; Young, G.J.; Walsh, E.I.; Lane, J.A.; Noble, S.; Oliver, S.E.; Evans, S.; et al. Effect of a Low-Intensity PSA-Based Screening Intervention on Prostate Cancer Mortality: The CAP Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2018, 319, 883-895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Serum cholesterol and risk of high-grade prostate cancer: Results from the REDUCE study. J Jamnagerwalla, L E Howard, E H Allott, A C Vidal, D M Moreira, R Castro-Santamaria, G L Andriole, M R Freeman, S J Freedland, 10.1038/s41391-017-0030-9Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 21PubMedJamnagerwalla, J.; Howard, L.E.; Allott, E.H.; Vidal, A.C.; Moreira, D.M.; Castro-Santamaria, R.; Andriole, G.L.; Freeman, M.R.; Freedland, S.J. Serum cholesterol and risk of high-grade prostate cancer: Results from the REDUCE study. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2018, 21, 252-259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The role of cholesterol metabolism and cholesterol transport in carcinogenesis: A review of scientific findings, relevant to future cancer therapeutics. P M Cruz, H Mo, W J Mcconathy, N Sabnis, A G Lacko, 10.3389/fphar.2013.00119Front. Pharmacol. PubMedCruz, P.M.; Mo, H.; McConathy, W.J.; Sabnis, N.; Lacko, A.G. The role of cholesterol metabolism and cholesterol transport in carcinogenesis: A review of scientific findings, relevant to future cancer therapeutics. Front. Pharmacol. 2013, 4, 119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The fat side of prostate cancer. G Zadra, C Photopoulos, M Loda, 10.1016/j.bbalip.2013.03.010Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1831PubMedZadra, G.; Photopoulos, C.; Loda, M. The fat side of prostate cancer. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2013, 1831, 1518-1532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Statins and prostate cancer diagnosis and grade in a veterans population. W R Farwell, L W ; D&apos;avolio, R E Scranton, E V Lawler, J M Gaziano, 10.1093/jnci/djr108J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 103Farwell, W.R.; D'Avolio, L.W.; Scranton, R.E.; Lawler, E.V.; Gaziano, J.M. Statins and prostate cancer diagnosis and grade in a veterans population. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2011, 103, 885-892. [CrossRef]

Blood lipid levels and prostate cancer risk; a cohort study. D E Kok, J G Van Roermund, K K Aben, M Heijer, D W Swinkels, E Kampman, L A Kiemeney, 10.1038/pcan.2011.30Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 14Kok, D.E.; van Roermund, J.G.; Aben, K.K.; den Heijer, M.; Swinkels, D.W.; Kampman, E.; Kiemeney, L.A. Blood lipid levels and prostate cancer risk; a cohort study. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2011, 14, 340-345. [CrossRef]

Low levels of apolipoprotein A-I and HDL are associated with risk of prostate cancer in the Swedish AMORIS study. M Van Hemelrijck, G Walldius, I Jungner, N Hammar, H Garmo, E Binda, A Hayday, M Lambe, L Holmberg, 10.1007/s10552-011-9774-zCancer Causes Control CCC. 22Van Hemelrijck, M.; Walldius, G.; Jungner, I.; Hammar, N.; Garmo, H.; Binda, E.; Hayday, A.; Lambe, M.; Holmberg, L. Low levels of apolipoprotein A-I and HDL are associated with risk of prostate cancer in the Swedish AMORIS study. Cancer Causes Control CCC 2011, 22, 1011-1019. [CrossRef]

Cholesterol Levels in Blood and the Risk of Prostate Cancer: A Meta-analysis of 14 Prospective Studies. L Yupeng, Z Yuxue, L Pengfei, C Cheng, Z Yashuang, L Dapeng, D Chen, 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1329Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 24YuPeng, L.; YuXue, Z.; PengFei, L.; Cheng, C.; YaShuang, Z.; DaPeng, L.; Chen, D. Cholesterol Levels in Blood and the Risk of Prostate Cancer: A Meta-analysis of 14 Prospective Studies. Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 2015, 24, 1086-1093. [CrossRef]

Based on biomedical index data: Risk prediction model for prostate cancer. H Guo, X Jia, H Liu, 10.1097/MD.0000000000025602Medicine. 100Guo, H.; Jia, X.; Liu, H. Based on biomedical index data: Risk prediction model for prostate cancer. Medicine 2021, 100, e25602. [CrossRef]

Serum lipids and prostate cancer. M M Garrido, J C Marta, R M Ribeiro, L C Pinheiro, J T Guimarães, 10.1002/jcla.23705J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 35PubMedGarrido, M.M.; Marta, J.C.; Ribeiro, R.M.; Pinheiro, L.C.; Guimarães, J.T. Serum lipids and prostate cancer. J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 2021, 35, e23705. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Impact of common medications on serum total prostate-specific antigen levels: Analysis of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. S L Chang, L C Harshman, J C Presti, Jr, 10.1200/JCO.2009.27.9406J. Clin. Oncol. Off. J. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. 28PubMedChang, S.L.; Harshman, L.C.; Presti, J.C., Jr. Impact of common medications on serum total prostate-specific antigen levels: Analysis of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. J. Clin. Oncol. Off. J. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. 2010, 28, 3951-3957. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The US Department of Agriculture Automated Multiple-Pass Method reduces bias in the collection of energy intakes. A J Moshfegh, D G Rhodes, D J Baer, T Murayi, J C Clemens, W V Rumpler, D R Paul, R S Sebastian, K J Kuczynski, L A Ingwersen, 10.1093/ajcn/88.2.324Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 88PubMedMoshfegh, A.J.; Rhodes, D.G.; Baer, D.J.; Murayi, T.; Clemens, J.C.; Rumpler, W.V.; Paul, D.R.; Sebastian, R.S.; Kuczynski, K.J.; Ingwersen, L.A.; et al. The US Department of Agriculture Automated Multiple-Pass Method reduces bias in the collection of energy intakes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 88, 324-332. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

National health and nutrition examination survey: Plan and operations. G Zipf, M Chiappa, K S Porter, Y Ostchega, B G Lewis, J Dostal, Vital Health Stat. Ser. 1 Programs Collect. Proced. 2013Zipf, G.; Chiappa, M.; Porter, K.S.; Ostchega, Y.; Lewis, B.G.; Dostal, J. National health and nutrition examination survey: Plan and operations, 1999-2010. Vital Health Stat. Ser. 1 Programs Collect. Proced. 2013, 1-37. Available online: https://stacks.cdc.gov/ view/cdc/21304 (accessed on 7 October 2021).

Association between baseline serum glucose, triglycerides and total cholesterol, and prostate cancer risk categories. R Arthur, H Møller, H Garmo, L Holmberg, P Stattin, H Malmstrom, M Lambe, N Hammar, G Walldius, D Robinson, 10.1002/cam4.665Cancer Med. 5Arthur, R.; Møller, H.; Garmo, H.; Holmberg, L.; Stattin, P.; Malmstrom, H.; Lambe, M.; Hammar, N.; Walldius, G.; Robinson, D.; et al. Association between baseline serum glucose, triglycerides and total cholesterol, and prostate cancer risk categories. Cancer Med. 2016, 5, 1307-1318. [CrossRef]

Relationship between body mass index and concentrations of prostate specific antigen: A cross-sectional study. Scand. Y Zhao, Y Zhang, X Wang, D Lin, Z Chen, 10.1080/00365513.2019.1703217J. Clin. Lab. Investig. 80Zhao, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, X.; Lin, D.; Chen, Z. Relationship between body mass index and concentrations of prostate specific antigen: A cross-sectional study. Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Investig. 2020, 80, 162-167. [CrossRef]

A pilot study analyzing PSA, serum testosterone, lipid profile, body mass index and race in a small sample of patients with and without carcinoma of the prostate. J H Mydlo, N L Tieng, M A Volpe, R Chaiken, J G Kral, 10.1038/sj.pcan.4500514Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 4Mydlo, J.H.; Tieng, N.L.; Volpe, M.A.; Chaiken, R.; Kral, J.G. A pilot study analyzing PSA, serum testosterone, lipid profile, body mass index and race in a small sample of patients with and without carcinoma of the prostate. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2001, 4, 101-105. [CrossRef]

Effect of body mass index on prostate-specific antigen and percentage free prostate-specific antigen: Results from a prostate cancer screening cohort of 1490 men. U Capitanio, P Perrotte, G C Hutterer, N Suardi, C Jeldres, S F Shariat, A Duclos, P Arjane, F Montorsi, P I Karakiewicz, 10.1111/j.1442-2042.2008.02192.xInt. J. Urol. Off. J. Jpn. Urol. Assoc. 16Capitanio, U.; Perrotte, P.; Hutterer, G.C.; Suardi, N.; Jeldres, C.; Shariat, S.F.; Duclos, A.; Arjane, P.; Montorsi, F.; Karakiewicz, P.I. Effect of body mass index on prostate-specific antigen and percentage free prostate-specific antigen: Results from a prostate cancer screening cohort of 1490 men. Int. J. Urol. Off. J. Jpn. Urol. Assoc. 2009, 16, 91-95. [CrossRef]

Observed effect of age and body mass index on total and complexed PSA: Analysis from a national screening program. A B Barqawi, B K Golden, C Donnell, M K Brawer, E D Crawford, 10.1016/j.urology.2004.10.074Urology. 65Barqawi, A.B.; Golden, B.K.; O'Donnell, C.; Brawer, M.K.; Crawford, E.D. Observed effect of age and body mass index on total and complexed PSA: Analysis from a national screening program. Urology 2005, 65, 708-712. [CrossRef]

Obesity-related plasma hemodilution and PSA concentration among men with prostate cancer. L L Bañez, R J Hamilton, A W Partin, R T Vollmer, L Sun, C Rodriguez, Y Wang, M K Terris, W J Aronson, J C Presti, Jr, 10.1001/jama.298.19.2275JAMA. 298Bañez, L.L.; Hamilton, R.J.; Partin, A.W.; Vollmer, R.T.; Sun, L.; Rodriguez, C.; Wang, Y.; Terris, M.K.; Aronson, W.J.; Presti, J.C., Jr.; et al. Obesity-related plasma hemodilution and PSA concentration among men with prostate cancer. JAMA 2007, 298, 2275-2280. [CrossRef]

Machine learning for the prediction of volume responsiveness in patients with oliguric acute kidney injury in critical care. Z Zhang, K M Ho, Y Hong, 10.1186/s13054-019-2411-zCrit. Care. 23PubMedZhang, Z.; Ho, K.M.; Hong, Y. Machine learning for the prediction of volume responsiveness in patients with oliguric acute kidney injury in critical care. Crit. Care 2019, 23, 112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Boosted Tree Model Reforms Multimodal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Infarct Prediction in Acute Stroke. M Livne, J K Boldsen, I K Mikkelsen, J B Fiebach, J Sobesky, K Mouridsen, 10.1161/STROKEAHA.117.019440Stroke. 49PubMedLivne, M.; Boldsen, J.K.; Mikkelsen, I.K.; Fiebach, J.B.; Sobesky, J.; Mouridsen, K. Boosted Tree Model Reforms Multimodal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Infarct Prediction in Acute Stroke. Stroke 2018, 49, 912-918. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Cox regression analysis with missing covariates via nonparametric multiple imputation. C H Hsu, M Yu, 10.1177/0962280218772592Stat. Methods Med. Res. 28PubMedHsu, C.H.; Yu, M. Cox regression analysis with missing covariates via nonparametric multiple imputation. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 2019, 28, 1676-1688. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Organizing and analyzing the activity data in NHANES. A Leroux, J Di, E Smirnova, E J Mcguffey, Q Cao, E Bayatmokhtari, L Tabacu, V Zipunnikov, J K Urbanek, C Crainiceanu, 10.1007/s12561-018-09229-9Stat. Biosci. 11PubMedLeroux, A.; Di, J.; Smirnova, E.; McGuffey, E.J.; Cao, Q.; Bayatmokhtari, E.; Tabacu, L.; Zipunnikov, V.; Urbanek, J.K.; Crainiceanu, C. Organizing and analyzing the activity data in NHANES. Stat. Biosci. 2019, 11, 262-287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Prostate cancer risk in the Swedish AMORIS study: The interplay among triglycerides, total cholesterol, and glucose. M Van Hemelrijck, H Garmo, L Holmberg, G Walldius, I Jungner, N Hammar, M Lambe, 10.1002/cncr.25758Cancer. 117Van Hemelrijck, M.; Garmo, H.; Holmberg, L.; Walldius, G.; Jungner, I.; Hammar, N.; Lambe, M. Prostate cancer risk in the Swedish AMORIS study: The interplay among triglycerides, total cholesterol, and glucose. Cancer 2011, 117, 2086-2095. [CrossRef]

Association between plasma total cholesterol concentration and incident prostate cancer in the CLUE II cohort. A M Mondul, S L Clipp, K J Helzlsouer, E A Platz, 10.1007/s10552-009-9434-8Cancer Causes Control. 21Mondul, A.M.; Clipp, S.L.; Helzlsouer, K.J.; Platz, E.A. Association between plasma total cholesterol concentration and incident prostate cancer in the CLUE II cohort. Cancer Causes Control 2010, 21, 61-68. [CrossRef]

Men with low serum cholesterol have a lower risk of high-grade prostate cancer in the placebo arm of the prostate cancer prevention trial. E A Platz, C Till, P J Goodman, H L Parnes, W D Figg, D Albanes, M L Neuhouser, E A Klein, I M Thompson, Jr, A R Kristal, 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0472Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 18Platz, E.A.; Till, C.; Goodman, P.J.; Parnes, H.L.; Figg, W.D.; Albanes, D.; Neuhouser, M.L.; Klein, E.A.; Thompson, I.M., Jr.; Kristal, A.R. Men with low serum cholesterol have a lower risk of high-grade prostate cancer in the placebo arm of the prostate cancer prevention trial. Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 2009, 18, 2807-2813. [CrossRef]

Role of serum cholesterol and statin use in the risk of prostate cancer detection and tumor aggressiveness. J Morote, A Celma, J Planas, J Placer, I De Torres, M Olivan, J Carles, J Reventós, A Doll, 10.3390/ijms150813615Int. J. Mol. Sci. 15Morote, J.; Celma, A.; Planas, J.; Placer, J.; de Torres, I.; Olivan, M.; Carles, J.; Reventós, J.; Doll, A. Role of serum cholesterol and statin use in the risk of prostate cancer detection and tumor aggressiveness. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014, 15, 13615-13623. [CrossRef]

Plasma total, LDL, and HDL cholesterol and risk of aggressive prostate cancer in the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort. Cancer Causes Control. E J Jacobs, V L Stevens, C C Newton, S M Gapstur, 10.1007/s10552-012-0006-y23Jacobs, E.J.; Stevens, V.L.; Newton, C.C.; Gapstur, S.M. Plasma total, LDL, and HDL cholesterol and risk of aggressive prostate cancer in the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort. Cancer Causes Control 2012, 23, 1289-1296. [CrossRef]

Body mass index and serum lipid profile influence serum prostate-specific antigen in Chinese men younger than 50 years of age. M Liu, J Y Wang, L Zhu, G Wan, 10.1038/aja.2010.104Asian J. Androl. 13Liu, M.; Wang, J.Y.; Zhu, L.; Wan, G. Body mass index and serum lipid profile influence serum prostate-specific antigen in Chinese men younger than 50 years of age. Asian J. Androl. 2011, 13, 640-643. [CrossRef]

Roles of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway in cell growth, malignant transformation and drug resistance. J A Mccubrey, L S Steelman, W H Chappell, S L Abrams, E W Wong, F Chang, B Lehmann, D M Terrian, M Milella, A Tafuri, 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.10.001Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1773PubMedMcCubrey, J.A.; Steelman, L.S.; Chappell, W.H.; Abrams, S.L.; Wong, E.W.; Chang, F.; Lehmann, B.; Terrian, D.M.; Milella, M.; Tafuri, A.; et al. Roles of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway in cell growth, malignant transformation and drug resistance. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2007, 1773, 1263-1284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Remnant lipoproteins induced proliferation of human prostate cancer cell, PC-3 but not LNCaP, via low density lipoprotein receptor. Y Sekine, H Koike, T Nakano, K Nakajima, S Takahashi, K Suzuki, 10.1016/j.canep.2009.04.004Cancer Epidemiol. 33PubMedSekine, Y.; Koike, H.; Nakano, T.; Nakajima, K.; Takahashi, S.; Suzuki, K. Remnant lipoproteins induced proliferation of human prostate cancer cell, PC-3 but not LNCaP, via low density lipoprotein receptor. Cancer Epidemiol. 2009, 33, 16-23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Remnant lipoproteins stimulate proliferation and activate MAPK and Akt signaling pathways via G protein-coupled receptor in PC-3 prostate cancer cells. Y Sekine, H Koike, T Nakano, K Nakajima, K Suzuki, 10.1016/j.cca.2007.04.016Clin. Chim. Acta Int. J. Clin. Chem. 383PubMedSekine, Y.; Koike, H.; Nakano, T.; Nakajima, K.; Suzuki, K. Remnant lipoproteins stimulate proliferation and activate MAPK and Akt signaling pathways via G protein-coupled receptor in PC-3 prostate cancer cells. Clin. Chim. Acta Int. J. Clin. Chem. 2007, 383, 78-84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]