# OPEN PEER REVIEW REPORT 2 Title: Transcription Factors Promote Neural Regeneration After Spinal Cord Injury Reviewer's Name: Florencia Labombarda Reviewer's country: Argentina

CorpusID: 248138840
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b7177b6a5c2d44a132d1c65be30f925b7400eb6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b7177b6a5c2d44a132d1c65be30f925b7400eb6)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

OPEN PEER REVIEW REPORT 2 Title: Transcription Factors Promote Neural Regeneration After Spinal Cord Injury Reviewer's Name: Florencia Labombarda Reviewer's country: Argentina


OPEN PEER REVIEW REPORT 2 Title: Transcription Factors Promote Neural Regeneration After Spinal Cord Injury Reviewer's Name: Florencia Labombarda Reviewer's country: Argentina
NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH www.nrronline.org Name of journal: Neural Regeneration Research Manuscript NO: NRR-D-21-00760


## COMMENTS TO AUTHORS

I recommend this perspective be published because it addresses the regeneration challenge in a very original way. The author demonstrates that virus-mediated expression of different neurogenic transcription factors can induce neural stem cell differentiation into neurons. In addition, the articles discussed in the perspective show that gene-therapy based on transcription factors also improve functional recovery. This proposal is an interesting strategy to face the regeneration challenge and opens a new therapeutic viewpoint This perspective covers a wonderful approach to the challenge of neural regeneration after spinal cord injury. The manuscript is well written, but some changes could be added to improve its quality. 1-First paragraph: The paragraph includes several statements whose bibliographic references are not quoted. Perhaps the most significative ones could be included.


## 2-

Nkx6 treatment decreases neuroinflammation and does not imply functional recovery while Gsk1 treatment does not modify neuroinflammation and ameliorates functional outcome. As some aspects of neuroinflammation could enhance regeneration, a small discussion on the beneficial role of inflammation might be included.


## 3-

Author explains that Gsx1 expression promotes 5-HT neuronal activity which enhances locomotor recovery. It would be interesting if the author mentioned that 5-HT is an activator of the central pattern generator; therefore, small improvements in serotoninergic spinal neurons could lead to a great functional recovery.