# UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL PAULISTA "JÚLIO DE MESQUITA FILHO" SYSTEMATIC REVIEW Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Laser de érbio na remoção de cerâmicas: uma revisão de literatura

CorpusID: 248727922
 
tags: #Medicine, #Engineering, #Materials_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38ccbb6790a08b0bd7a31f74adb5e7e9d6b33cff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38ccbb6790a08b0bd7a31f74adb5e7e9d6b33cff)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL PAULISTA "JÚLIO DE MESQUITA FILHO" SYSTEMATIC REVIEW Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Laser de érbio na remoção de cerâmicas: uma revisão de literatura


Nathalia Alves Zanini 
 
Amanda Caramel-Juvino 
 
Patrícia Aparecida 
-Universidade Federal do ABC, Centro de Engenharia, Modelagem e Ciências Sociais Aplicadas
Santo AndréBrazil

Ana 
 
Denise Maria Zezell 

Instituto de Pesquisas Energéticas e Nucleares
Centro de Lasers e Aplicações
Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia Campus de São José dos Campos
São PauloSPBrazil

UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL PAULISTA "JÚLIO DE MESQUITA FILHO" SYSTEMATIC REVIEW Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Laser de érbio na remoção de cerâmicas: uma revisão de literatura
10.4322/bds.2022.e31541 Braz Dent Sci 2022 Apr/Jun;25 (2): e3154
Background:The debonding of crowns and ceramic veneers with laser is already a reality in the clinic. It presents benefits in comparison to traditional removal with the use of a rotating instrument; however, there is still no consolidated protocol and many professionals use it without the necessary scientific basis. Objective: The aim of this work was to perform a literature review on the debonding of indirect ceramic restorations using the Er:YAG and Er,Cr:YSGG lasers to provide clinical professionals and the scientific community a careful analysis, and also to guiding the use of irradiation at laser for such procedures. Methods: Bibliographic searches were performed in the following databases: Pubmed, Web of Science and Google Scholar. According to the inclusion criteria adopted, twenty-seven clinical and in vitro studies were selected in the period from 2007 to 2021. In the present work, the composition of the crowns and facets, as well as the types of cement and the laser irradiation protocols adopted in the selected studies is detailed. Conclusions: It was concluded that the use of erbium lasers for debonding of indirect ceramic restorations proved to be more selective and conservative when compared to removal with a rotary diamond instrument. Furthermore, it was shown to be in more efficient in debonding different types of ceramics. However, there are great variations in the "debonding" protocols, which emphasizes the need for further studies that seek to standardize the irradiation protocols considering the different clinical situations.RESUMOAntecedentes: A remoção de coroas e facetas cerâmicas com laser já é uma realidade clínica e apresenta benefícios em relação à remoção tradicional com uso de instrumento rotatório diamantado; entretanto, ainda não existe um protocolo consolidado e muitos profissionais o utilizam sem o embasamento científico necessário. Objetivos: O objetivo deste trabalho foi realizar uma revisão da literatura sobre a remoção de restaurações cerâmicas indiretas utilizando os lasers Er:YAG e Er,Cr:YSGG para fornecer uma análise cuidadosa aos profissionais clínicos e à comunidade científica, além de orientar o uso da irradiação a laser para tal aplicação. Métodos: As buscas bibliográficas foram realizadas, nas seguintes bases de dados: Pubmed, Web of Science e Google Scholar. De acordo com os critérios de inclusão adotados, foram selecionados vinte e sete estudos clínicos e in vitro no período de 2007 a 2021. No presente trabalho, a composição das coroas e facetas, bem como os tipos de cimento e os protocolos de irradiação laser adotados nos estudos selecionados foram detalhados. Conclusão: Concluiu-se que o uso dos lasers de érbio para remoção de restaurações cerâmicas indiretas mostrou-se mais seletivo e conservador quando comparado à remoção com instrumento rotatório diamantado, além de ser eficiente na remoção de diferentes tipos de cerâmicas. No entanto, existem grandes variações nos protocolos de "debonding", o que enfatiza a necessidade de novos estudos que busquem uma padronização dos protocolos de irradiação considerando as diferentes situações clínicas.

## INTRODUCTION

In 1964 the first laser and medical equipment were developed in the areas of ophthalmology, dermatology and general surgery. In dentistry, applications of lasers in dental tissues were first described in the 1990s, and approval for clinical use in 1997 [1]. We have some types of lasers in dentistry, among those that can be used in hard tissues, we highlight the Erbium lasers that have the ability to cut enamel, dentin, cement and bone, in addition to soft tissues, and remove some pathologies, including caries lesions. Among the advantages reported by professionals and patients when using erbium lasers for the management of hard tissues, are the reduction of uncomfortable noises, decreased intra and postoperative sensitivity, as well as a certain selectivity in the removal of tissues, as each tissue has a specific amount of water. The use of lasers in dentistry can be used in virtually all specialties [2].

Currently, erbium lasers commercially available for dental use comprise of those that emit at 2.78 µm (Erbium-chromium:ytrriumscandium-gallium-garnet, Er:Cr:YSGG) and 2.94 µm (Erbium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet, Er:YAG) [3] wave lengths. These ones are well absorbed in both water and hydroxyapatite and the absorption by these chromophores allows the ablation of soft and hard tissues. An important detail to be considered is that the Er,Cr:YSGG laser has a greater absorption by the OHradicals of hydroxyapatite when compared to the Er:YAG laser, whose greater absorption occurs by the OHfrom the interstitial water. This fact allows higher temperature rises to be achieved during the ablation process performed with the Er,Cr:YSGG laser [3]. Briefly, the ablation process consists of heating and subsequent vaporization of the interstitial water, leading to micro-explosions of this subsuperficial water and the removal of the organic and inorganic portion of enamel and dentin that is above [2].

Erbium lasers are clinically applied to prepare enamel and dentin cavities, to remove decayed tissues, to improve the adhesion of direct restorations, indirect brackets and orthodontic appliances, as well as can be used for porcelain conditioning, dentin hypersensitivity management and since 2007, for the removal of crowns and ceramic veneers. The removal of ceramic crowns and veneers is traditionally performed with a diamond rotary instrument, which can be extremely time-consuming and uncomfortable for the patient. Furthermore, with the use of drills it is not possible to selectively remove enamel, resin cement or even the ceramic veneer [4]. Thus, the removal of ceramics using rotatory instruments can even cause damages in the enamel through the unnecessary removal of the tissue surface if the professional does not do it carefully and with the necessary irrigation. Depending on the energy density applied, the removal of prosthetic pieces with erbium lasers can be selective, considering the compositional differences between dental tissues, cement and ceramic prosthesis. In this way, different doses can be used to remove different tissues and materials, which is useful for preserving the remaining tissue, which cannot be achieved with the use of drills.

Erbium lasers have a strong interaction with the OHgroup present in the water molecules, so the photons will interact with the water molecules present in the resin cement, causing a photoablation it [5][6][7], that is why the debonding of veneers and crowns.

However, considering the wide variety of cement compositions, as well as the types and thickness of crowns and laminates, the protocols for removing these materials using erbium lasers are quite different in the literature. It is also possible to note that many dental professionals already use the equipment in the office without having appropriate knowledge about the laser conditions, as well as knowledge about the interactions of light with the tissue and even the risks involved if laser irradiation is used improperly. Considering the different dental specialties, literature shows that the use of laser irradiation as an adjunct to conventional techniques has important benefits, and some authors, such as Margolis [8], mentions that the Erbium laser is the "star wars" of dentistry. However, it is important to note that it is possible to achieve satisfactory results without causing damages to the surrounding tissues if we know this technology in depth.

For this reason, in order to guide the establishment of safe and effective protocols that use Er:YAG and Er, Cr:YSGG lasers for the removal of ceramic crowns and veneers, this study proposes to carry out a literature review on the subject. 


## MATERIAL AND METHODS

We carried out a literature review on the subject of debonding of ceramics with Er,Cr:YSGG laser. For that, PubMed and Web of science were used, in which manuscripts with a combination (and/or) of the following keywords were investigated: veneers debonding, debonding, Er,Cr:YSGG laser, Er:YAG laser, ceramics. The search was restricted between the years 2007 to 2021 considering that there are no publications on this subject, using laser irradiation, in prior years. As the inclusion criteria, it was considered the publication in the English language and peer-reviewed journals, proceedings, dissertations or thesis, which found 27 studies. This search was carried out by two authors working independently of each other and, after the research, the findings were compiled.


## RESULTS

Twenty-seven studies were selected for further analysis, including clinical cases, in vitro studies, ex vivo studies and a master's dissertation. In these works, the removal of crowns and laser veneers was approached in different ways, with changes in parameters, types of resin cement, types of ceramics and others. For didactic effects, the results were tabulated according to the type of study: Clinical Cases (Table I), master´s dissertation (Table II), in vitro Studies. (Table III).


## CRITICAL REVIEW

The first work on the subject reported in the literature was published in 2007 by Broome [9] in the proceedings of the Pract Proced Aesthet Dent Congress. In this work, the Er,Cr:YSGG laser was used to peel off the feldspar ceramic as per the protocol mentioned in Table I. Broome [9] describes the mechanism by which the facets were peeled off as a "denaturation" of the resin cement. He suggested that the laser energy passes through the laminate to interact with the ceramic-resin interface, where it selectively excites the water molecules in the resin. The author also noticed that feldspar ceramic veneers take between 5 and 30 seconds to remove, while pressed ceramics usually take between 20 seconds and 2 minutes, looking at darkened areas where there should be "denatured" resin, which he said was polished.

After clinical observation, the author also pointed out that the dental structure below the facet was not affected by the laser irradiation, requiring only minor corrections in the preparation for making new laminates [9]. As it is a pioneering work in the area, we consider the author's conclusions subjective since some methodological details have not been thoroughly described. In addition to that, the analysis carried out in a non-blind manner by a unique examinator may have promoted a bias conclusion of the study.

Following the reports of clinical cases in chronological order of publication, we noted the work of Van As [10] in 2012. This author removed crowns with an Er:YAG laser in the parameters presented in Table I, and concludes that the erbium laser has the ability to quickly remove all-porcelain restorations without causing iatrogens to the underlying dental organ. In addition, the author reported that the use of lasers for this purpose represents great promise for the triad of dental surgeons, patients and dental technicians. However, stated more research was needed to establish adequate protocols for each clinical situation. But, emphasising there was no doubt that the promise of erbium lasers for deboding veneers is an interesting alternative to the traditional methods used today.

In 2013, the work of Kursoglu and Gursoy [11], reports the use of the Er:YAG laser to remove venners in two clinical cases. For removal, the scanning method used was that described by Oztoprak et al. [6,33], with horizontal movements parallel to the structure and irradiation with a focal length of 2 mm. In this study, debonding was recommended due to the presence of fractures due to parafunctional habits, a common occurance when the patient has parafunctional habits, such as bruxism or tightness and does not use relaxation plates. Cranska published clinical cases in 2013 [12] and 2015 [13] using the Er:YAG laser to detach crowns and veneers. In the article published in 2015, the author reported that patients volunteered for the research after reading the previous article published in 2013, in search of treatment performed with laser irradiation. Thus, the authors emphasize the importance of scientific dissemination for the lay population.

In both studies above, the authors concluded that the laser enabled faster, easier and safer removal, but that more research is needed to establish adequate protocols for each clinical situation.

Spath and Smith [14] published clinical case reports in 2017 also using Er:YAG, along with a discussion of the types of materials, preparations and resin cements to be used. The authors concluded that the laser is the most conservative and efficient method of debonding different types of ceramics, especially in the anterior region. If there is adequate retention and strength, a traditional RMGI (resin-modified glass ionomer) cement would be indicated due to its moisture tolerance, easy cleaning and more predictable removal. Zanini NA et al.  Calabro et al. [15] published a clinical case report in 2019 in which the removal of 11 laminate veneers was also performed using Er:YAG. These were made of lithium disilicate with different thicknesses, 0.4 mm and 2.5 mm and had been cemented for 4 months with light-cured resin cement. As the thickness of the laminates was not the same, the removal time was over a variation and averaged 2 min 36 sec. According to the authors, the laminate veneer debonding was satisfactory and presented comfort during the procedure for both the patient and the dentist, mainly for the reduced time of the procedure and for the preservation of the remascating dental organ.

Bernal et al. [16] used the Er:YAG laser, without contact and with an average power of 3.2 to 4.0W and 20 Hz to remove the porcelain prosthesis, as the patient was not satisfied with the final aesthetic result and underwent a 1-year follow-up. The interesting thing about this clinical work is that the removal and cementation of the new crowns were performed on the same day. We see then the union of technologies in this case, as the laser and the Cad-Cam were used to streamline the rehabilitation process. The authors report the laser efficiency in debonding mainly by reducing the working time by 75% when compared to the diamond rotary instrument and highlight that this occurred due to the photoablation that the laser causes in the resin cement.

An important point to be discussed, considering the analysis of the manuscripts mentioned above, is that they are clinical case studies, without the presence of a randomized double blind clinical procedure with an adequate number of patients. Clinical cases, despite arousing the interest for new research to be carried out, give a partial and subjective idea of the real effects of the laser on the dental organ and its adjacent structures, as they present conclusions related to clinical observations without the application of a due statistical test with their standard deviations.

Considering now the study mentioned in Table II, Phillips [17] in 2012 performed a temperature analysis during the Er,Cr:YSGG laser irradiation of 5 different protocols. The temperature measurement was made using a thermocouple, which was left at rest until the reading inside the pulp chamber stabilized at room temperature. At that point, the HH506RA computer software was programmed to take temperature readings at one second intervals and a stopwatch to record the removal time. The author concluded that some protocols can increase the temperature of the pulp even using the water coolant. Furthermore, the 2.5 W / 25 Hz laser group was the safest protocol for removing veneers. Phillips [17] also reports that, after removing some specimens from the veneers, areas of what appeared to be carbonized resin cement were frequently observed both on the surface of the prepared tooth and on the internal surface of the veneer, although the author used refrigeration (30% water / 70% air). This observation is in agreement with the results of other studies [4,34,35], which also concluded that carbonization, fusion and other morphological changes on the tooth surface are more prominent when there is no water jet acting on the target site. According to Phillips [17], during the removal of the prostheses, the water spray is retained on the surface, while the photons heat the cement layer below and, therefore, there is no water in that location. Thus, the cooling effect of the air-water spray should eventually reach the resin-varnish interface; however, for a short period after the initial application, the laser is acting independently of any external cooling effect. For this reason, the author concludes that it would not be surprising to find that intrapulp temperature changes during removal of the laser laminate would be greater than intrapulp temperature changes during cavity preparation using the same laser protocols.

In 2015, Rechmann et al. [20] also performed a temperature analysis during take-off of total ceramic crowns with an Er:YAG laser. They detected an average takeoff time of 135 ± 35s and an increase of 5.4° ± 2.2° C in temperature at the ceramic-cement interface during debonding. The authors emphasize that in 12 of the 20 debonding procedures, the temperature never exceeded 5.5° C. During the remaining eight debonding procedures, the maximum observed temperature was 11.5° C for approximately 15 s in a single sample, while in the remaining seven samples the temperature increase was limited to 6.8 ± 0.5 C. After the temperature peaks occurred, they decreased to a range of 2 to 4° C above room temperature.

The increases above 5.5° C occurred when the irradiations were performed on one side and the additional cooling of the dental syringe on the opposite side to the irradiation. Considering the results reported, it is emphasized the importance of using the correct laser protocols to avoid irreversible damage to the pulp taking into account the classic study of Zach and Cohen [34] that affirm that the pulp temperature increase cannot exceed 5.5° C. The authors also argue that, using lower energies per pulse, it was noticed deterioration of the resin cement and the increase in the removal time, but it reduced the chances of having a harmful temperature increase in the pulp. In this work, it was also observed a large standard deviation due to the low number of samples and due to higher variations considering the time of irradiations and use of the water / air jet. The two studies that studied temperature rises during the removal of veneers emphasize the importance of refrigeration at the time of irradiation, in addition to showing that other factors such as ceramic and resin cement thickness, as well as the irradiation time and amount of energy delivered, can have a positive correlation with the increase in temperature.

The first in vitro study on this subject was published by Morford et al. [5] in 2011. In this work, the Er:YAG laser was also applied to remove facets from human incisors and, to determine the absorption characteristics in the infrared spectral range of the resin cement used, the authors performed FTIR (Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy) analysis of cements and veneers. FTIR technique revealed a strong peak probably related to silica (1100 cm -1 ) and also determined that EE (vitroceramic leucite) veneers do not have characteristic bands of H 2 O / OHabsorption (3750-3640 cm -1 and 3600-3400 cm -1 , respectively). The pressed ceramic veneers demonstrated the same characteristic absorption peaks (a strong peak of silica can overlap a phosphate peak, since the veneer contains small amounts of phosphate) and without water absorption bands. Thus, the authors predicted that the photons of the Er:YAG laser are not absorbed, but can be transmitted through the porcelain veneer. In addition, the authors showed that the FTIR spectra of RelyX shade A1 cement showed a strong peak probably related to silica (1100 cm -1 )and a broad H 2 O / OH absorption band (3750 to 3640 cm -1 and 3600 to 4400 cm -1 , respectively), which corresponds to the emission wavelength of the Er:YAG laser. Thus, RelyX cement absorbs photons from the Er:YAG laser and the ablation of this cement occurs. Therefore, it was observed that the photons of the laser are not absorbed by the facets or crowns, but pass through this material and will interact with the resin cement, promoting photoablation due to absorption by the silica and carbon that constitute the resin cements.

Oztoprak et al. [6] in 2012 and Iseri et al. [7] in 2014 used the Er:YAG laser on lithium disilicate discs bonded to bovine incisors with resin cements. Both works carried out shear strength tests and concluded that the laser reduces the shear stresses of resin cements when compared to non-irradiated groups, and the discs were easily removed from the teeth. The scanning method performed with horizontal movements parallel to the surface, described by Oztoprak et al. et al. [6] is used in several works in the literature, and is also described by the same author in a study carried out for the removal of polycrystalline ceramic brackets [33]. Yilmaz et al. [26] concluded in their study the same fact and added that acid attack adhesive systems showed higher values of shear strength when compared to self-etching systems.

In 2014, Rechmann et al. [18] and Rechmann et al. [19] published two articles on the removal of zirconia and lithium disilicate crowns with the Er:YAG laser. As performed by Morford et al. [5], these authors carried out analysis using FTIR spectroscopy and observed that the ceramic did not have water absorption bands, but the resin cement presented a broad absorption band for H 2 O and hydroxyl group. In addition, they found that, depending on the thickness of the ceramic, it transmits between 21% to 60% of the incident laser energy (for the EE-IPS Empress Esthetic-and E.max CAD groups), while the E.max ZirCAD material transmitted only 5% -10% of the incident energy. They concluded that these pulse energies are sufficient to cause photoablation in the resin cement and that the Variolink Venner needed 44% less energy from the laser to be detached. In the second part of the manuscript published in 2014, the researchers observed that all crowns were detached without fractures and damage to the underlying dentin. In resin cement, a deterioration was observed, but no carbonization in dentin and / or in the resin cement interface due to laser irradiation was detected. It was possible to show that different irradiation times may be necessary to detach different materials [19]. These works reveal why it is so difficult to have at an unique laser protocol for removing veneers. For establishment of the protocol, several factors should be considered, such as type of ceramic, material thickness, type of resin cement or not, since we have works that use resin-modified glass ionomer and show us the importance of advancing research in this field. The study of AlBalkhi et al. [22] reported different experimental groups by changing the laser irradiation parameters and the contact mode (contact and non-contact). The authors detected that the contactless mode was more efficient, since the withdrawal of the ceramics was performed more quickly (average of 12.6 s and 96.3 s in the groups without contact and with contact, respectively). The take off tests were performed with different laser parameters and it was noticed that the greater the power used, the shorter the detachment time and the higher the pulp temperature observed. The most observed fracture pattern was types 1 (adhesive failure between the internal surface of the varnish and resin cement) and 3 (resin cement fails in cohesive cementation). Giraldo-Cifuentes et al. [29] used the Er,Cr:YSGG laser and analyzed the fracture pattern after irradiation for ceramic removal. and observed that the fracture pattern was predominantly adhesive in both protocols used (4.0 and 2.7 J/cm 2 ).

Karagoz-Yildirak and Gozneli [23] applied the Er:YAG laser to remove lithium and leucite disilicate discs cemented in enamel and dentin. The authors compared the shear strength between irradiated and non-irradiated groups. After the shear test, some of them were subjected to re-bonding and a new adhesive strength test and fracture pattern analysis. The authors concluded that irradiation was an effective method for removing ceramic restorations and suggested that there is a relationship between the bond strength values and the failure modes. Similar to what was observed by ALBalkhi et al. [22] and Giraldo-Cifuentes et al. [29], the control and redebonding groups exhibited high bond strength to dental surfaces and most failures in the control and redeboding groups were adhesive and cohesive. According to the authors, the tooth surface and restoration would remain untouched and undamaged. The removal of all-ceramic restorations using the Er:YAG laser did not affect the values of the rebonding force in this protocol.

Yilmaz et al. [26] and Alikhasi et al. [27] both published in 2019 and used the Er,Cr:YSGG laser for the debonding of ceramic veneers. The first study aimed to assess whether different ceramic thicknesses (0.5 mm, 1 mm and 2 mm) and the type of resin cement used could influence the moment of debonding and concluded that the average shear strength decreases as decreasing the thickness of the veneer. In addition, it concluded that total etch type adhesive systems present higher values when compared to selfetching adhesive systems. The second paper, investigated the average variation in veneer removal time according to the type of material 103.68 ± 26.76, 106.58 ± 47.22 and 103.84 ± 32.90 seconds for feldspathic, lithium disilicate MO and lithium disilicate HT, respectively. The author also analyzed the increase in intrapulpal temperature during irradiation and found that it was below 1 °C in all groups following the protocols described in Table III, but a limitation of this study is the fact that the authors used bovine teeth instead of human teeth Zhang et al. [28] utilized the Er:YAG laser to remove 12 ceramic facets whose composition was not detailed by the authors. After removing the laminates, a morphological analysis was performed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), in addition to counting the number of pulses during irradiation. The morphological analysis confirmed that the structure of the dentin was not altered when using low energy density (19.94J/cm 2 ). In addition, the removal occurred without ablation or damage to any dental structure. Despite the data provided by the article, the sample number experimental group was very low (n=12), which leads to a large standard deviation, in addition to the lack of a control group to compare the morphological analyzes.

Grzech-Leśniak et al. [24] used the Er:YAG laser for debonding lithium disilicate crowns from titanium abutments and in November 2019 the same researchers published an article also using the Er:YAG laser to remove lithium disilicate crowns cemented in zirconia abutments [25]. Morphological and temperature analysis was performed in both articles. In their first published work, they used two types of cement, resinous and modified glass ionomer, and concluded that it is faster to remove lithium disilicate crowns with titanium abutments cemented with glass ionomer. The temperature increase was greater in the crown compared to the implant abutment. The type of cement did not affect the temperature changes.

The heat generated by Er:YAG irradiation did not appear to be high enough to have an adverse effect on implant osseointegration (From 1 to 10 minutes of irradiationranged from 18 ° to 20.8 ° for CR and 18 ° to 23 ° for RMGI on the abutment surface, and 22.1 ° to 24.6 ° for CR and 22 ° to 24.8 ° for RMGI on the crown surface). In the second paper, the variable cementation time was added, in which ten crowns were removed in 48 hours after cementation (short-term group -ST), while another 10 were removed for 6 months after cementation (long-term group -LT). To simulate a clinical situation and the possibility of reusing the crowns removed, the LT group was then collected after 48 hours (LTR). The LTR crowns were replaced again after 48 hours (LTRR). The authors concluded that long-term cementation may increase the removal time of zirconia abutment lithium disilicate crowns using Er:YAG, and this is not an invasive tool for removing stuck cement implants and should be considered a viable alternative. for rotary instruments related to the use of erbium laser for removal of crowns in implants.

Rabelo et al. [30] used the Er,Cr:YSGG laser to peel off ceramic veneers in human teeth submitted to a simulation of radiotherapy in vitro by gamma radiation. The SEM images showed degradation of prismatic structure of enamel after gamma + laser irradiation, which suggests that acid reconditioning for new laminate veneer bonding could be compromised and, mainly, that laser laminate removal protocol in a patient who has undergone radiation therapy to treat head and neck cancer shouldn´t be the same as that used for normoreactive patients.

Using the same laser, Zanini et al. [31] demonstrated the possibility of removal of RelyX U200 cement when used for bonding veneers. The authors reported that the Er,Cr:YSGG laser does not cause morphological changes in the enamel prisms when used for debonding, but that the attenuation coefficient values generated by the optical coherence tomography technique (OCT) suggest that the heat generated during irradiation can lead to interprismatic changes, probably related to chemical ones. In this study it was evidenced the importance of intensifying research aimed at controlling temperature during irradiations. This last study also confirm the findings evidenced by Phillips [17] and Rechmann et al. [20], which carried out a study in the area with the Er,Cr:YSGG and Er:YAG laser, respectively. Both report that if the laser is not used correctly, pulp damage may occur due to temperature increases.

The last study published until the beginning of 2021 was Golob-Deeb et al. [32], a very interesting study that carried out the analysis of temperature increase, removal time and morphological analysis of the remaining enamel. during irradiations with the Er:YAG and Er,CR:YSGG lasers. The work concludes that the average time for crown removal using the Er:YAG laser was 1 min 32.7 sec; for the Er,Cr:YSGG laser was 3 min 13.9 sec. The average temperature changes were 1.41 ± 1.36 °C for the Er:YAG laser and 2.2 ± 0.99 °C for the Er,Cr:YSGG laser. Additionally, through SEM analysis no damage or structural changes caused by the laser treatment of the erbium family was observed, in agreement with the work of Zanini et al. [31]. Despite the work having very promising results, we see as a disadvantage of the study the fact that they used resin-modified glass ionomer cement (RMGI) as cementation material, and this is not the material of choice for cementation of crowns and veneers of ceramic.


## DISCUSSION

Debonding with Erbium lasers is promising, as it is a very conservative intervention. The interaction of the laser occurs in the resin cement, more specifically promoting the photoablation of this material, as was demonstrated in the FTIR findings [5]. Er:YAG has great interaction with water and its absorption peaks are 3 µm and 10 µm, while Er,Cr:YSGG has strong interaction with the hydroxyl groups present in the resin cement molecules. The literature suggests that the morphological differences between cavities prepared with the two types of erbium lasers are practically null. Considering the difference in wavelength between Er:YAG (2,940 nm) and Er,Cr:YSGG (2,780 nm), it appears that surfaces irradiated with an Er,Cr:YSGG laser are more thermally affected than those irradiated with a laser Er:YAG [30,31,33,34]. The optical penetration depth of erbium lasers is only a few micromometers: 7 µm in enamel and 5 µm in dentine) [36], but the thermal penetration is greater than the optical penetration. This spread of heat to the adjacent tissues causes chemical changes in the enamel, as observed by the changes in the attenuation coefficients detected by Zanini et al. [31].

A very convenient way to decrease the heat generation on surface and in the pulp chamber is to cover the operation site with a thin layer of water [2]. Thus, a water spray with all erbium lasers is necessary to act as a heat sink and to avoid thermal damage to the underlying tissue. However, the work of Phillips [17] showed that even using water in some protocols, the temperature can rise above 5.5 o C depending on the laser energy per pulse adjusted. Rechmann et al. [20] also observed an increase in temperatures above 5.5 o C and concluded that irrigation performed improperly can lead to a harmful increase in temperature. In addition to irrigation, other factors may influence in the protocol, such as: composition of the ceramic, its thickness, the type of resin cement and the type of preparation that was made.

We cannot say which protocol is the most adequate or even the statistically ideal one, as we observed studies with quite divergent methodologies due to the large number of variables and combinations, the literature has of the items mentioned previously. Most of clinical studies used a smaller sample size than the ideal, increasing the chance of assuming as true a false premise for the proposed laser treatment technique.

Hence the importance of developing new studies including new materials and techniques that are constantly changing and enter the market every day, with such differentiated characteristics. Although we know that the topic has some limiting factors, including the high investment to develop the studies.

Despite the above, we have within our reach a technology that has real potential to cause less damage when compared to rotary diamond instruments at the time of take-off. It has advantages for both the dentist and the patient, but it must be used with caution in the appropriate parameters for each clinical situation.


## CONCLUSION

This literature review showed that:

• Laser take-off is more conservative for different types of ceramics;

• Care must be taken with the temperature rises during irradiations, but when used with the appropriate irrigation protocol of the equipment itself, damage can be avoided;

• There are different protocols used which depend on the type of ceramic and its thickness, type of cement, type of laser, irrigation systems and spray positioning;

• Both Er:YAG and Er,Cr:YSGG lasers are promising and effective lasers for debonding ceramic veneers and crowns, as long as they are employed under safe protocols. 


Braz Dent Sci 2022 Apr/Jun;25 (2): e3154

## Table I -
IArticles from Congress proceedings (Pract Proced Aesthet Dent) and clinical casesAuthor 
(Country, year) 
Patients Ceramic 
Cement 
Laser 

Laser Parameters 
Irradiation 
Time (s) 

Density 
Energy 
(J/cm 2 ) 
Mean 
Power (W) 

Repetition 
rate (Hz) 

Energy per 
pulse (mJ) 

Broome (USA, 2007) [9] 
ND 
Feldspatic 
ND 
Er,Cr:YSGG 
4 
25 
ND 
5-30 
ND 

Van As 
(Canada, 2012) [10] 
3 

IPS Empress 
Esthetic 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
5.25 
30 
175 
30-45 
ND 

IPS Empress 
Esthetic 

Cyanoacrylate 
Cement 
Er:YAG 
5.25 
30 
175 
45 
ND 

Lithium 
Disilicate 
(IPS e max) 

Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
6 
30 
200 
120 
ND 

Kursoglu and Gursoy 
(Turkey, 2013) [11] 
2 

IPS Empress 
Esthetic 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
3.5* 
20 
320 
9~2 

5.5* 
IPS Empress 
Esthetic 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
3.5* 
20 
320 
9 

Cranska (USA, 2013) [12] 
3 

Monolithic 
Zirconia 
ND 
Er:YAG 
2.0 
15 
135~6 0 
27* 

Zirconia 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
1.6 
8 
200 
ND 
40* 

Presable 
ND 
Er:YAG 
2.0 
15 
135 
ND 
27* 

Cranska (USA, 2015) [13] 
3 

Lithium 
Disilicate 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
3.0 
15 
200 
ND 
40* 

Monolithic 
zirconia 
ND 
Er:YAG 
2.0 
15 
135~1 20 
27* 

Bilayered 
zirconia 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
3.0 
15 
200 
ND 
40* 

Spath and Smith 
(USA, 2017) [14] 
1 
ND 
ND 
Er:YAG 
5 
15 
600~1 20 
21.23* 

Calabro et al. (Brazil, 
2019) [15] 
1 
Lithium 
disilicate 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
5 
20 
250 

12 sec to 
11 minutes 
(variation 
depending on 
the tooth) 

ND 

Bernal et al. 
(Brazil, 2021) [16] 
1 
Lithium 
disilicate 
ND 
Er:YAG 
3.4 to 4 
20 
0.16 to 0.2~5 400 (for 6 
elements) 
25.39 -31.74 
Zanini NA et al. 
Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review 

Zanini NA et al. 
Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review 

Table II -Master's dissertation, in vitro study 

Author 
(Country, 
year) 

Samples Ceramic Cement 
Laser 

Laser Parameters 
Irradiation 
Time (s) 

Density 
Energy 
(J/cm 2 ) 

Mean 
Power (W) 

Repetition 
rate (Hz) 

Energy per 
pulse (mJ) 

Phillips 
(USA, 2012) 
[17] 

30 (6 per 
group) 

Lithium 
disilicate 

resin 
cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 

0 
0 
0 
300~0* 

2.5 
25 
100 
146~35.38* 

3.5 
25 
140 
51~49.53* 

2.5 
35 
71 
300~25.12* 

3.5 
35 
100 
109~35.38* 

* Calculated by the authors. 
Source: article authors. 



## Table III -
IIIIn vitro works * Calculated by the authors. ND: Not detailed. Source: article authors. Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Zanini NA et al.Author 
(Country, year) 
Sample 
Ceramic 
Cement 
Laser 

Laser Parameters 
Irradiation Time 
(s) 

Density Energy 
(J/cm 2 ) 
Mean Power 
(W) 

Repetition rate 
(Hz) 

Energy per pulse 
(mJ) 

Morford et al. (USA, 
2011) [5] 

10 (5 for each 
group) 

IPS Empress 
Esthetic 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
0.70-3.5* 
10 
133 
113±76 
14* 

Lithium Disilicate 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
0.93-2.3* 
10 
133 
100±42 
14* 

Oztoprak et al. 
(Turkey, 2012) [6] 
80 
IPS Empress II 
(Lithium disilicate) 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
5 
50 
100 
3.6 and 9 
12.73* 

Iseri et al. (Turkey, 
2014) [7] 
60 
IPS Empress II 
(Lithium disilicate) 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
5 
50 
100 
9 
12.73* 

Rechmann et al. 
(USA, 2014) [18] 
ND 

IPS Empress 
Esthetic (EE) 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
1.26 and 5.08* 
10 

Pulse duration of 
100µs at 126 mJ/ 
pulse up to 300 µs at 
508 mJ/ pulse.~1 

00~13.26* -~53.5* 

E.max CAD 

E.max ZirCAD) 

Rechmann et al. 
(USA, 2014) [19] 

ND 

IPS E.max CAD 
Lithium-disilicate 
(LS2) 

Resin Cement 
Er:YAG~0.55 and 1.89* 
10 

Pulse duration 100µs 
at 126 mJ/pulse, and 
400ms at 590mJ/ 
pulse). 

E.max CAD 190±92~1 

3.26* -~62.11* 

IPS E.max ZirCAD 
Zirconiumoxide 
(ZrO2) 

ZirCAD featheredge 
crowns was 226±105 
ZirCAD crowns with 
regular margin it was 
312±102 

Rechmann et al. 
(USA, 2015) [20] 
20 
IPS E. max (Lithium 
Disilicate) 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
ND 
10 
560 
135±35~59* 

Gurney et al. (USA, 
2016) [21] 

20 (5 for each 
group) 

IPS E. max (Lithium 
Disilicate) 
Resin Cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 

3 
25 
30 to 90 
ND 

3.5 

ND 
4 
25 
5 

ALBalkhi et al. 
(Syria, 2018) [22] 

48 (8 for each 
group) 

IPS E. max (Lithium 
Disilicate) 
Resin Cement 

Er:YAG (No-Contact) 
5.4 
15 
360~6 
6.66*~3 

7.9* 

Er:YAG (Contact) 
5.4 
15 
360~3 7.9* 

Er:YAG (No-Contact) 
4 
10 
400~1 00*~42.11* 

Er:YAG (No-Contact) 
4 
15 
270~6 7.5*~28.42* 

Er:YAG (No-Contact) 
3 
10 
300~1 00*~31.58* 



## Table III -
IIIContinued...Author 
(Country, year) 
Sample 
Ceramic 
Cement 
Laser 

Laser Parameters 
Irradiation Time 
(s) 

Density Energy 
(J/cm 2 ) 
Mean Power 
(W) 

Repetition rate 
(Hz) 

Energy per pulse 
(mJ) 

Karagoz-Yildirak and 
Gozneli (Turkey, 
2020) [23] 

30 (15 for each 
group) 

Leucite 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG 
3 
10 
300 
ND~4 7.61* 
Lithium Disilicate 

Grzech-
Leśniak et al. (USA, 
2019) [24] 

40 (20 for each 
group) 

Lithium Disilicate 
/ titanium implant 
abutments 

Resin Cement (CR) 
and Glass Ionomer 
(RMGI) 

Er:YAG 
4.5 
15 
300 

CR( Resin Cement) 

~196.5 RMGI (Glass 

Ionomer) ~97.5~4 

7.61* 

Deeb et al. (USA, 
2019) [25] 

30 (10 for each 
group) 

Lithium disilicate 
/ zirconia implant 
abutments 

resin cement 
Er:YAG 
4.5 
15 
300 

LT(Long-term): 4 
min 42s LTR(Long-
term Recemention): 
3 min 24 s LTRR( 
long-term repeated 
recemention):3 min 
12 s~4 

7.61* 

Yilmaz et al. (Turkey, 
2019) [26] 
20 
Lithium disilicate 
resin cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 
5.5 
20 
275 
180~9 7.31* 

Alikhasi et al. (Iran, 
2019 [27] 

57 (19 for each 
group) 

Feldspathic 

Resin Cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 
2.5 
25 
ND 

103.68 ± 26.76 

ND 

Lithium disilicate 
MO (medium 
opacity) 

106.58 ± 47.22 

Lithium disilicate HT 
(high translucency) 
103.84 ± 32.90 

Zhang et al. (USA, 
2020) [28] 
12 
ND 
Resin Cement 
Er:YAG~0 .2 -0.6* 
30 
100 
328 ± 156~1 9.94* 

Giraldo-
Cifuentes et al. 
(Colombia, 2020) 
[29] 

42 (21 for each 
group) 
Feldspathic 
Resin Cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 

3 
50 
360J~1 20 
4 

4 
100 
240 J~6 0 
2.7 

Rabelo et al. (Brazil, 
2020) [30] 
10 
Lithium Disilicate 
Resin Cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 
1.41 
20~7 0~17.73~25 

Zanini et al. (Brazil, 
2020) [31] 

15 (5 for each 
group) 
Lithium disilicate 
Resin Cement 
Er,Cr:YSGG 

3 
20~1 

13~13.75 
40 

3.5~1 36~13.33 
48.14 

Golob-Deeb et al. 
(EUA, 2021 [32] 

12 

Zirconia 

Resin-modified glass 
ionomer cement 
(RMGI) 

Er:YAG 
4.5 
15 
300 

1 m 33.8 s 

ND 
13 

1m 31.5 s 

Er,Cr:YSGG 

4.5 
15 
300 

2m 34.7 s 

5 
3m 53.1 s 

* Calculated by the authors. ND: Not detailed. 
Source: article authors. 
Zanini NA et al. 
Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review 

Zanini NA et al. 
Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review 




Zanini NA et al. Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Zanini NA et al. Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Instituto de Pesquisas Energéticas e Nucleares, Centro de Lasers e Aplicações, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Email: zezell@usp.brDate submitted: 2021 July 18 
Accept submission: 2021 Nov 18 

Denise Maria Zezell 
(Corresponding address) 

Authors' ContributionsNAZ: Preparation, data collection, data analysis, Review and editing of the manuscript and rafted the manuscript. ACJ: Preparation, data collection, data analysis, Review and editing of the manuscript. PAA: Preparation, data collection, data analysis, Review and editing of the manuscript. DMZ: Preparation, data collection, data analysis, Review and editing of the manuscript.Conflict of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.FundingFAPESP, CAPES/PROCAD, CNPq.Regulatory StatementThis literature review was conducted through a search strategy in the following electronic databases PubMed, Web of Science and Google Scholar. The search was restricted to publications in the English language in peer-reviewed journals, proceedings, dissertations or theses, in which approval for ethics committee were obtained in their original work.Zanini NA et al.
Lasers in dentistry. H A Wigdor, J T WalshJr, Jdb Featherstone, S R Visuri, D Fried, J L Waldvogel, 10.1002/lsm.1900160202PMid:7769957Lasers Surg Med. 162Wigdor HA, Walsh JT Jr, Featherstone JDB, Visuri SR, Fried D, Waldvogel JL. Lasers in dentistry. Lasers Surg Med. 1995;16(2):103-33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/lsm.1900160202. PMid:7769957.

Erbium lasers in dentistry. G Van As, 10.1016/j.cden.2004.06.001PMid:15464563Dent Clin North Am. 484Van As G. Erbium lasers in dentistry. Dent Clin North Am. 2004;48(4):1017-59, viii. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. cden.2004.06.001. PMid:15464563.

Laser ablation of dental hard tissue: from explosive ablation to plasmamediated ablation. Lasers in Dentistry II. W Seka, Jdb Featherstone, D Fried, S R Visuri, J T Walsh, 10.1117/12.2387632672Seka W, Featherstone JDB, Fried D, Visuri SR, Walsh JT. Laser ablation of dental hard tissue: from explosive ablation to plasma- mediated ablation. Lasers in Dentistry II. 1996;2672:144-58. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.238763.

Using the erbium laser to remove porcelain veneers in 60 seconds. G A Van As, J Cosmet Dent. 28Van As GA. Using the erbium laser to remove porcelain veneers in 60 seconds. J Cosmet Dent. 2013;28:20-34.

YAG laser debonding of porcelain veneers. C K Morford, N C Buu, B M Rechmann, F C Finzen, A B Sharma, Rechmann P Er, 10.1002/lsm.21144Lasers Surg Med. 4310Morford CK, Buu NC, Rechmann BM, Finzen FC, Sharma AB, Rechmann P. Er:YAG laser debonding of porcelain veneers. Lasers Surg Med. 2011;43(10):965-74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ lsm.21144.

Effects of different application durations of scanning laser method on debonding strength of laminate veneers. M O Oztoprak, M Tozlu, U Iseri, F Ulkur, T Arun, 10.1007/s10103-011-0959-1PMid:21748323Lasers Med Sci. 274Oztoprak MO, Tozlu M, Iseri U, Ulkur F, Arun T. Effects of different application durations of scanning laser method on debonding strength of laminate veneers. Lasers Med Sci. 2012;27(4):713-6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10103-011-0959-1. PMid:21748323.

Effect of Er:YAG laser on debonding strength of laminate veneers. U Iseri, M O Oztoprak, Z Ozkurt, E Kazazoglu, T Arun, Iseri U, Oztoprak MO, Ozkurt Z, Kazazoglu E, Arun T. Effect of Er:YAG laser on debonding strength of laminate veneers.

. 10.4103/1305-7456.126243Eur J Dent. 8124966747Eur J Dent. 2014;8(1):58-62 http://dx.doi.org/10.4103/1305- 7456.126243. PMid:24966747.

The erbium laser: the " Star Wars" of dentistry. F S Margolis, 10.1016/j.aodf.2006.09.010PMid:17216764Alpha Omegan. 993Margolis FS. The erbium laser: the " Star Wars" of dentistry. Alpha Omegan. 2006;99(3):128-31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. aodf.2006.09.010. PMid:17216764.

Utilization of an Er, Cr:YSGG laser for the removal of all-ceramic restorations. P J Broome, PMid:17402628Pract Proced Aesthet Dent. 191Broome PJ. Utilization of an Er, Cr:YSGG laser for the removal of all-ceramic restorations. Pract Proced Aesthet Dent. 2007;19(1):23-5. PMid:17402628.

Laser removal of porcelain veneers. G Van As, Dentist TodayVan As G. Laser removal of porcelain veneers [Internet]. Dentist Today; 2012 [cited 2020 Sep 19]. Available from: https://www. dentistrytoday.com/technology/lasers/8090-laser-removal-of- porcelain-veneers

Removal of fractured laminate veneers with Er:YAG laser: report of two cases. P Kursoglu, H Gursoy, 10.1089/pho.2012.3410Photomed Laser Surg. 31123248979Kursoglu P, Gursoy H. Removal of fractured laminate veneers with Er:YAG laser: report of two cases. Photomed Laser Surg. 2013;31(1):41-3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/pho.2012.3410. PMid:23248979.

Removing all-ceramic restorations with lasers. J P Cranska, PMid:23802380Dent Today. 326Cranska JP. Removing all-ceramic restorations with lasers. Dent Today. 2013;32(6):101-2, 104. PMid:23802380.

Laser removal of all-ceramic restorations: solving a difficult clinical challenge. J P Cranska, PMid:26349274Dent Today. 343Cranska JP. Laser removal of all-ceramic restorations: solving a difficult clinical challenge. Dent Today. 2015;34(3):110-3. PMid:26349274.

Removal of modern ceramics. A Spath, C Smith, Compend Contin Educ Dent. 38528459251Spath A, Smith C. Removal of modern ceramics. Compend Contin Educ Dent. 2017;38(5):326-33. PMid:28459251.

Removal of 11 Laminate Veneers with Er-Yag Laser. D E Calabro, R Puglisi, Amm Mesquita, Res Rev J Dent Sci. 71Calabro DE, Puglisi R, Mesquita AMM. Removal of 11 Laminate Veneers with Er-Yag Laser. Res Rev J Dent Sci. 2019;7(1):62-8.

Retreatment of 6 ceramic restorations in a single session-the application of Er:YAG Laser and CAD/CAM technology: an 1 year follow up clinical evaluation. C Bernal, Emr Lee, D P Eduardo, Ama Souza, L Azevedo, 10.14295/bds.2021.v24i2.2234Braz Dent Sci. 242Bernal C, Lee EMR, Eduardo DP, Souza AMA, Azevedo L. Retreatment of 6 ceramic restorations in a single session-the application of Er:YAG Laser and CAD/CAM technology: an 1 year follow up clinical evaluation. Braz Dent Sci. 2021;24(2):1-7. http://dx.doi.org/10.14295/bds.2021.v24i2.2234.

Thermal changes in the dental pulp during Er,Cr:YSGG laser removal of IPS e.max press lithium disilicate veneers [Internet]. OhioLINK. W B Phillips, Phillips WB. Thermal changes in the dental pulp during Er,Cr:YSGG laser removal of IPS e.max press lithium disilicate veneers [Internet]. OhioLINK; 2012 [cited 2020 Sep 19].

Laser all-ceramic crown removal -a laboratory proof-of-principle study -phase 1 material characteristics. P Rechmann, Nch Buu, Bmt Rechmann, C Q Le, F C Finzen, J D Featherstone, Rechmann P, Buu NCH, Rechmann BMT, Le CQ, Finzen FC, Featherstone JD. Laser all-ceramic crown removal -a laboratory proof-of-principle study -phase 1 material characteristics.

. 10.1002/lsm.22279PMid:25125132Lasers Surg Med. 468Lasers Surg Med. 2014;46(8):628-35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ lsm.22279. PMid:25125132.

Laser all-ceramic crown removal -a laboratory proof-of-principle study -phase 2 crown debonding time. P Rechmann, N C Buu, B M Rechmann, F C Finzen, 10.1002/lsm.22280PMid:25125242Lasers Surg Med. 468Rechmann P, Buu NC, Rechmann BM, Finzen FC. Laser all-ceramic crown removal -a laboratory proof-of-principle study -phase 2 crown debonding time. Lasers Surg Med. 2014;46(8):636-43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/lsm.22280. PMid:25125242.

Laser allceramic crown removal and pulpal temperature -a laboratory proof-of-principle study. P Rechmann, Nch Buu, Bmt Rechmann, F C Finzen, 10.1007/s10103-015-1738-1PMid:25782432Lasers Med Sci. 308Rechmann P, Buu NCH, Rechmann BMT, Finzen FC. Laser all- ceramic crown removal and pulpal temperature -a laboratory proof-of-principle study. Lasers Med Sci. 2015;30(8):2087-93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10103-015-1738-1. PMid:25782432.

Using an Er, Cr: YSGG laser to remove lithium disilicate restorations: a pilot study. M L Gurney, S D Sharples, W B Phillips, D J Lee, 10.1016/j.prosdent.2015.08.003PMid:26460169J Prosthet Dent. 1151Gurney ML, Sharples SD, Phillips WB, Lee DJ. Using an Er, Cr: YSGG laser to remove lithium disilicate restorations: a pilot study. J Prosthet Dent. 2016;115(1):90-4. http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/j.prosdent.2015.08.003. PMid:26460169.

Efficiency of Er:YAG laser in debonding of porcelain laminate veneers by contact and noncontact laser application modes (in vitro study). M Albalkhi, E Swed, O Hamadah, 10.1111/jerd.12361PMid:29322655J Esthet Restor Dent. 303ALBalkhi M, Swed E, Hamadah O. Efficiency of Er:YAG laser in debonding of porcelain laminate veneers by contact and non- contact laser application modes (in vitro study). J Esthet Restor Dent. 2018;30(3):223-8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jerd.12361. PMid:29322655.

Evaluation of rebonding strengths of leucite and lithium disilicate veneers debonded with an Er:YAG laser. M Karagoz-Yildirak, R Gozneli, 10.1007/s10103-019-02872-8s10103-019-02872-8Lasers Med Sci. 35431486933Karagoz-Yildirak M, Gozneli R. Evaluation of rebonding strengths of leucite and lithium disilicate veneers debonded with an Er:YAG laser. Lasers Med Sci. 2020;35(4):853-60. http://dx.doi. org/10.1007/s10103-019-02872-8. PMid:31486933.

In vitro examination of the use of Er:YAG laser to retrieve lithium disilicate crowns from titanium implant abutments. K Grzech-Leśniak, S Bencharit, N Dalal, K Mroczka, J G Deeb, 10.1111/jopr.13077PMid:31125150J Prosthodont. 286Grzech-Leśniak K, Bencharit S, Dalal N, Mroczka K, Deeb JG. In vitro examination of the use of Er:YAG laser to retrieve lithium disilicate crowns from titanium implant abutments. J Prosthodont. 2019;28(6):672-6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ jopr.13077. PMid:31125150.

Using Er:YAG laser to remove lithium disilicate crowns from zirconia implant abutments: an in vitro study. J G Deeb, S Bencharit, N Dalal, A Abdulmajeed, K Grzech-Leśniak, 10.1371/journal.pone.0223924PLoS One. 141131689289Deeb JG, Bencharit S, Dalal N, Abdulmajeed A, Grzech-Leśniak K. Using Er:YAG laser to remove lithium disilicate crowns from zirconia implant abutments: an in vitro study. PLoS One. 2019;14(11):e0223924. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0223924. PMid:31689289.

The contribution of ceramic thickness and adhesive type on the de-bonding strength of dental ceramic veneers using Er,Cr:YSGG laser. B D Yilmaz, Z S Polat, A D Izgi, D T Gunduz, R S Dirihan, 10.17126/joralres.2019.021J Oral Res and Craniofacial Sciences. 82Yilmaz BD, Polat ZS, Izgi AD, Gunduz DT, Dirihan RS. The contribution of ceramic thickness and adhesive type on the de-bonding strength of dental ceramic veneers using Er,Cr:YSGG laser. J Oral Res and Craniofacial Sciences. 2019;8(2):131-9. https://doi.org/10.17126/joralres.2019.021.

Debonding time and dental pulp temperature with the Er, Cr: YSGG laser for debonding feldespathic and lithium disilicate veneers. M Alikhasi, A Monzavi, H Ebrahimi, M Pirmoradian, A Shamshiri, R Ghazanfari, 10.15171/jlms.2019.3431749948J Lasers Med Sci. 103Alikhasi M, Monzavi A, Ebrahimi H, Pirmoradian M, Shamshiri A, Ghazanfari R. Debonding time and dental pulp temperature with the Er, Cr: YSGG laser for debonding feldespathic and lithium disilicate veneers. J Lasers Med Sci. 2019;10(3):211-4. https:// doi.org/10.15171/jlms.2019.34. PMID: 31749948.

Erbium-doped, yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser debonding of porcelain laminate veneers: an ex vivo study. Y Zhang, J P Rocca, C Fornaini, Y Zhen, Z Zhao, E Merigo, Contemp Clin Dent. 9431772464Zhang Y, Rocca JP, Fornaini C, Zhen Y, Zhao Z, Merigo E. Erbium-doped, yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser debonding of porcelain laminate veneers: an ex vivo study. Contemp Clin Dent. 2020;9(4):570-3. PMid:31772464.

Cr:YSGG laser in the debonding of feldspathic porcelain veneers: an in vitro study of two different fluences. H Giraldo-Cifuentes, A España-Tost, J Arnabat-Dominguez, Er, https:/www.liebertpub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/photob.2019.4752Photomed Laser Surg. 3810Giraldo-Cifuentes H, España-Tost A, Arnabat-Dominguez J. Er,Cr:YSGG laser in the debonding of feldspathic porcelain veneers: an in vitro study of two different fluences. Photomed Laser Surg. 2020;38(10):1-6. https://doi.org/10.1089/ photob.2019.4752.

Human dental enamel evaluation after radiotherapy simulation and laminates debonding with Er,Cr:YSGG using SEM and EDS. T F Rabelo, C B Zamataro, N G Kuchar, N A Zanini, A C Juvino, M Del-Valle, 10.5935/2525-5711.20190022J Oral Diag. 41Rabelo TF, Zamataro CB, Kuchar NG, Zanini NA, Juvino AC, Del-Valle M, et al. Human dental enamel evaluation after radiotherapy simulation and laminates debonding with Er,Cr:YSGG using SEM and EDS. J Oral Diag. 2019;4(1):1-5. https://doi.org/10.5935/2525-5711.20190022.

Morphological, optical, and elemental analysis of dental enamel after debonding laminate veneer with Er,Cr:YSGG laser: a pilot study. N A Zanini, T F Rabelo, C B Zamataro, A Caramel-Juvino, P A Ana, D M Zezell, PMid:32978851Microsc Res Tech. 843Zanini NA, Rabelo TF, Zamataro CB, Caramel-Juvino A, Ana PA, Zezell DM. Morphological, optical, and elemental analysis of dental enamel after debonding laminate veneer with Er,Cr:YSGG laser: a pilot study. Microsc Res Tech. 2020;84(3):489-98. PMid:32978851.

Evaluation of Er:YAG and Er,Cr:YSGG laser irradiation for the debonding of prefabricated zirconia crowns. J Golob-Deeb, L Skrjanc, D Kanduti, C Carrico, Marquez Saturno, A Grzech-Leśniak, K , Golob-Deeb J, Skrjanc L, Kanduti D, Carrico C, Marquez Saturno A, Grzech-Leśniak K. Evaluation of Er:YAG and Er,Cr:YSGG laser irradiation for the debonding of prefabricated zirconia crowns.

. 10.17219/acem/127686PMid:33529502Adv Clin Exp Med. 301Adv Clin Exp Med. 2021;30(1):7-15. http://dx.doi.org/10.17219/ acem/127686. PMid:33529502.

Debonding of ceramic brackets by a new scanning laser method. M O Oztoprak, D Nalbantgil, A S Erdem, M Tozlu, T Arun, Oztoprak MO, Nalbantgil D, Erdem AS, Tozlu M, Arun T. Debonding of ceramic brackets by a new scanning laser method.

. 10.1016/j.ajodo.2009.06.024Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 138220691361Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2010;138(2):195-200. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2009.06.024. PMid:20691361.

Pulp response to externally applied heat. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. L Zach, G Cohen, 10.1016/0030-4220(65)90015-0PMid:1426366219Zach L, Cohen G. Pulp response to externally applied heat. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1965;19(4):515-30. http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/0030-4220(65)90015-0. PMid:14263662.

Tensile bond strength of dentin-resinous system interfaces conditioned with Er:YAG laser irradiation. M Gonćalves, S A Corona, M C Borsatto, P C Silva, J D Pécora, 10.1089/104454702753768070PMid:12017433J Clin Laser Med Surg. 202Gonćalves M, Corona SA, Borsatto MC, Silva PC, Pécora JD. Tensile bond strength of dentin-resinous system interfaces conditioned with Er:YAG laser irradiation. J Clin Laser Med Surg. 2002;20(2):89-93. http://dx.doi. org/10.1089/104454702753768070. PMid:12017433.

Removal of composite restoration from the root surface in the cervical region using Er: YAG Laser and Drill-in vitro study. W Zakrzewski, M Dobrzynski, P Kuropka, J Matys, M Malecka, J Kiryk, 10.3390/ma13133027PMid:32645864Materials (Basel). 13133027Zakrzewski W, Dobrzynski M, Kuropka P, Matys J, Malecka M, Kiryk J, et al. Removal of composite restoration from the root surface in the cervical region using Er: YAG Laser and Drill-in vitro study. Materials (Basel). 2020;13(13):3027. http://dx.doi. org/10.3390/ma13133027. PMid:32645864.