# A Review on SRAM Memory Design Using FinFET Technology

CorpusID: 249593104
 
tags: #Engineering, #Materials_Science, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de139ec252be4e69ad436583072c535808eeb46b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de139ec252be4e69ad436583072c535808eeb46b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review on SRAM Memory Design Using FinFET Technology


A Review on SRAM Memory Design Using FinFET Technology

International Journal of System Dynamics Applications
11610.4018/IJSDA.302665This article published as an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and production in any medium, provided the author of the original work and original publication source are properly credited. *Corresponding Author 1 T. Venkata Lakshmi, Gudlavalleru Engineering College, India* M. Kamaraju, Gudlavalleru Engineering College, IndiaCMOSFinFETShort Channel EffectSRAMStatic Noise Margin
An innovative technology named FinFET (fin field effect transistor) has been developed to offer better transistor circuit design and to compensate the necessity of superior storage system (SS). As gate loses control over the channel, CMOS devices face some major issues like increase in manufacturing cost, less reliability and yield, increase of ON current, short channel effects (SCEs), increase in leakage currents, etc. However, it is necessary for the memory to have less power dissipation, short access time, and low leakage current. The traditional design of SRAM (static RAM) using CMOS technology represents severe performance degradation due to its higher power dissipation and leakage current. Thus, a nano-scaled device named FinFET is introduced for designing SRAM since it has threedimensional design of the gate. FinFET has been used to improve the overall performance and has been chosen as a transistor of choice because it is not affected by SCEs. In this work, the researchers have reviewed various FinFET-based SRAM cells, performance metrics, and the comparison over different technologies.

## INTRoDUCTIoN

For a long time, the integration procedure used by the researchers is the VLSI (Very Large Scale Integration). The process in which millions of transistors are integrated into a single chip, thereby creating an IC (Integrated Circuit) is termed as VLSI. The advancements in the field of VLSI, brings rise of innovative technologies which further enhance the speed of circuit and also minimize the design constraints. Electronic gadgets have moved to the trend of miniaturization. Today, all the Smart Gadgets (SG) are introduced in small, portable and compact sizes. The most common circuits present in these devices are the memory and processor. For most of the designs, the need for memory is increasing nowadays. In today's development, beyond 85-90% of the chip area is occupied mainly by memory. The two memory devices namely Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) and Dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) provides significant performance for SSD (Solid State Drives). A solid-state drive (SSD) is a solid-state storage device that uses integrated circuit assemblies to store data persistently, typically using flash memory, and functioning as secondary storage in the hierarchy of computer storage. However, there is a necessity for reliable as well as quicker memory for different BACKGRoUND This section presents the basic concepts and related terminologies about FinFET and SRAM memory architecture.

• FinFET Technology: In today's era, one of the most suitable forms of FET is FinFET technology (Jurczak et al., 2009). This permits the execution and simulation of transistor applications in a faster way both in analog as well as digital domains. FinFET seem to be a better option for the future nano electronics because of its following characteristics such as compact susceptibility, high performance, minimized manufacturing costs and low power consumption (Dadoria et al., 2017;Guo et al., 2016). The bulk CMOS transistors can be replaced by means of FinFETs . This technology is an appropriate option for the design of memory sub-systems due to its standby power or low leakage current property (Garg & Singh, 2016).

The diagrammatic representation of FinFET is mentioned in Figure 1. The FinFET structure includes multiple perpendicular channels that appear similar to 'Fin' of fish, so it is named as FinFET. It is also known as Multi-Gate Device (MGD) which is built on a substrate. The gate is positioned on two, three or else four sides of the channel which forms a double gate arrangement. The source or drain region forms 'Fin' on the surface of silicon. The other name of FinFET is multi-gate transistor. The FinFET model includes the following regions: 3 • Gate-oxide region (SiO2): Highly doped poly-silicon region. • Low doping silicon Fin: Highly doped contact region between source and drain.

FinFET transistors can operate on dual model namely Tied-gate (TG) and Independent-gate (IG) mode (Girish, 2015). The 3D representation of FinFET-TG and IG mode is shown in Figure 2.

In TG-mode, both of the Front as well as Back Gates (FBGs) are tied to the similar Control Signal (CS). The design of TG-FinFET is simpler with shorted FBG. The SCEs are avoided by the TG-mode because this mode has greater gate-to-channel coupling. IG-FinFET combines the P-type parallel FinFET and tie with the BGs of N-type to ground in order to attain equivalent rising as well as falling delays. Both the FBGs are tied to different control signals in the IG-mode. FinFET devices ensure higher current density and faster switching times than the CMOS technology. Also, by minimizing the off-state leakage the SCEs are controlled.

Various design options are offered by the FinFET structures. It works on various modes such as IG, TG, hybrid and low power mode. The combination of both IG and low power mode is known as hybrid mode (Rajprabu et al., 2013). FinFET devices are similar to CMOS device from the view of Fabrication. But, FinFET offers superior performance gains at very low power due to higher gate control. To suppress the SCEs, gate-dielectric leakage currents the FinFET devices are used. FinFET is a favourable technique to bridge the technology gap between bulk CMOS and other novel devices, such as CNTFETs and Graphene FETs. Thus, FinFET technology is introduced as a new procedure for designing an SRAM cell with ultra-low leakage. Also, it advances the characteristics of SRAM cell in write, read, and in hold mode. Some of the advantages of FinFETs are: Insensitive to channel doping, Improved Matching and exceptional SCE control, Higher Gain and Low cost, More compact and better in driving current, Scaling density beyond planar devices (sub 20nm), Large effective channel width, Lower threshold and source-drain leakage, Scalability and Higher technological maturity than planar DG (Double-Gate) transistors.

• SRAM Memory: Static RAM is a kind of RAM that holds data in static form, until the memory has power. There is no need of periodic refreshing in SRAM. Since it is volatile in nature, the data gets lost if it is not powered. SRAM make use of bi-stable latching circuitry in order to store each bit. SRAM is used in internal CPU caches, workstations, PCs, and hard disk buffers etc. The array architecture of SRAM memory is shown in Figure 3.

The structure of SRAM array includes the following: Bit line, Sense amplifier, Word line, Row and Column decoder and Storage cell. Numerous words are stored in a single row and are selected simultaneously. Address word is divided into row and column addresses. To perform read or else write operation, only one row of memory is enabled by the row address whereas the column address selects one from the selected row. The storage cell is otherwise named as 1-bit memory cell or bit-cell which includes a latch circuit (2-cross coupled inverters) with dual main operating states. The data present in the storage cell can be represented as logic '1' or '0'. SRAM cell consists of 3 different operational states: Standby or Hold (Circuit is idle), Read (Request for data) and Write (contents updating).

SRAM memory cell normally consists of simple cross-coupled inverters that are connected back to back, and two access transistors (Tiwari et al., 2017). Whenever a word line (WL) is activated for read or write operation, the access transistors are turned ON connecting the cell to the complementary bit line (BL) columns. The most important advantage of this circuit topology is that the static power dissipation is very small, medium power consumption, small leakage current and need less time to access data (Bhaskar, 2017;Gavaskar & Ragupathy, 2017).


## oBJECTIVE

The main purpose of this work is to review the various SRAM memory design using FinFET technology. Some of the unique features of FinFET are work function engineering, mobility, corner effect, and volume inversion. FinFET based design structure offers improved performance, reduced cost and greater circuit functionality.

• Choice of sources: The choice of data starts by setting practical screening norms in order to make sure that only qualified publications are used in the review. In this survey, only the papers, reports, survey articles, editorial notes which are written in English is used and other languages are excluded. Eventually, 62 articles are considered for analysis. The important characteristics desirable for the selection procedure defines the indexed article exposure (belongs to magazines or else journals), study accessibility, and methods. Table 1 show the names of 4 search engines (SEs) used for the source selection. In this survey, the papers from 2008 to 2020 are chosen and the sources are taken from the SEs such as Wiley online library, IEEE, Springer and Elsevier. Figure 4 signifies the graphical review of particular sources used from the following years. This graph displays the assessment of number of papers from the year 2008 to 2020. 


## FinFET Based SRAM Cells

Advanced circuit methodology is essential to bridge the gap between power, area, robustness, frequency and quality in cases of maintaining the abundant manufacturing outcome. FinFET based structures are introduced as an alternate to bulk devices. Several methods have been implemented earlier, mainly to reduce the static power dissipation. However, these devices can only be able to decrease the leakage current variations. Thus, to boost the cell stability and to minimalize the leakage power various FinFET based SRAM cells are introduced.

• FinFET-6T SRAM cell: The 6T (6Transistor) SRAM (Limachia & Kothari, 2020) includes two cross-coupled (2-CC) inverters and dual access FinFET transistors. The 2-CC inverters consist of 4 transistors named as (XM3, XM4, XM5 and XM6). In SRAM, each bit is stored on these 4 FinFET transistors. The two access FinFETs are (XM1, XM2) and the source terminals are linked to BL and BLB (BLBar). 6T SRAM cell is widely used basic cell as it occupies smaller area. The dual access FinFETs are enabled when WL=1 and the bit lines are connected to latch which performs read or else write operation. When WL=0, the access transistors move to OFF state and BL, BLB are separated from the latch. The schematic diagram of FinFET based SRAM 6T cell is presented in Figure 5.

The three fundamental operations are read, write and hold (Banu & Shubham, 2017;. In hold mode, WL is attached to ground (GND). Hence the transistors XM5 and XM6 become OFF and separate the latching circuit from the bit lines. The remaining transistors (XM1, XM2, XM3 and XM4) forms a latch structure which holds a stored data until it is disconnected from the bit lines. During read mode, pre-charge the bit lines to VDD also WL is attached to VDD and the transistors XM5 and XM6 becomes ON. The transistors XM1 and XM4 are in OFF state if Q=1 and Q =0 and XM3 and XM2 becomes ON. Hence, the voltage level of BL sustains at VDD and BLB voltage level discharges. At write mode, WL is attached to VDD and makes the transistor XM5 and 7 XM6 ON. Then the node voltage level Q starts to rise up to the voltage level at which Q is ample to turn ON the transistors XM4 and XM2 and Q get drops.

• FinFET-7T SRAM cell: The representation of 7T-FinFET SRAM cell is mentioned in Figure  6. The 7T (7Transistor) cell design (Asli & Taghipour, 2017;Sneha et al., 2017) includes 2-CC inverters namely (XM3, XM4, XM5, and XM6) with an additional transistor (XM7) that is linked to the WL. Also, dual access transistors (XM1, XM2) are attached with the BL and BLB respectively. The leakage problem occurred in the 6T cell is solved using 7T FinFET structure.

To execute the read as well as write processes, the XM1 and XM2 transistors are attached to WL. During read and write operation, the dual bit lines serve as input or else output nodes, in order to detect the data from SRM cells using sense amplifier.

The working procedure defines that at hold mode, the WL is turned OFF and the transistors XM3 and XM4 become inactive. Due to logic 0 in SRAM cell, a sub-threshold leakage current flows via the transistors in OFF state. And the supplementary transistor XM7 performs feedback connection as well as disconnection and the SRAM cell depends only on the BLB to execute write operation (Ansari et al., 2015;Yang et al., 2016).

• FinFET-8T SRAM cell: The 8T (8Transistor) (Neelima et al., 2020) FinFET SRAM cell is introduced to overcome the limitations of 6T cell. The main problem is that the read and writes procedures are not decoupled. The cell with lower SNM (Static Noise Margin) during read mode possibly has enhanced write ability. Therefore, if the read, write functions are decoupled perfectly, the circuit designers have superior flexibility in optimizing read and write functions. The schematic representation of FinFET-8T SRAM cell is shown in Figure 7.

The 8T design is introduced to separate the read operation from write in order to attain improved stability when allowing low-voltage operations (Guler & Jha, 2019;Neelima et al., 2020). The 8T configuration represents that, addition of 2 FETs to a 6T cell offers a read processes which won't The upper section of 9T SRAM is similar to 6T cell design composed of (XM1, XM2, XM3, XM4, and Q & Q ). This primary sub-section is utilized to store data. The other section in 9T SRAM includes dual (XM5 and XM6) bit-line access transistors and one read access transistor (XM9). The operations of transistors (XM8 and XM7) depends on the data stored in the cell. XM9 depends on the separate read signal (RD). The write access transistors perform write access which is controlled by WBL and WBLB (write bit lines). Also, read access transistor executes read access which is controlled using RWL (Read word line). The schematic representation of 9T FinFET SRAM cell is mentioned in Figure 8.

9T cell design is introduced to solve the leakage problem identified on the 8T cell RBL. This causes change in data during read processes. 8T cell is limited to low-density applications that can be solved using 9T structure (Adding XM9 transistor in between XM7 and XM8). Therefore, leakage in BL is reduced significantly by the stack effect phenomena. In 9T SRAM, when OFF state transistors are connected in series, stacking takes place. Thus, the upper transistor source voltage will be somewhat higher than lower transistor source voltage in stack. The threshold voltage is increased due to higher voltage of the upper transistor. This increment of the threshold voltage reduces the leakage. Hence, this reduction is called stack effect.

• FinFET-10T SRAM cell: The 10T (10Transistor) SRAM cell includes 4 pull-up, 4 pull-down and 2 access transistors. The design of 10T cell using FINFET is shown in Figure 9. In order to minimize the power dissipation and leakage current, this 10T cell is introduced. The deployment of dual threshold-voltage technique is performed using the transistors in read path, which  FinFET based 10T design, minimize the leakage current using transistors (XM7, XM8, XM9 and XM10) when compared to 9T cell design. For read operation, the two access transistors are used to connect the pseudo nodes. The read stability is maintained well, as there is no flow of read current by storage nodes. To perform write operation, the node Q stores I value whereas Q stores 0. By applying a high supply voltage, the node Q is pulled down to '0' due to discharging through the access and the pull-up transistor.

• FinFET-11T SRAM cell: The 11T (11Transistor) SRAM is designed to improve the energy consumption. One of the main challenges in SRAM design is static power consumption. This 11T design focuses on minimizing the static power consumption and improving the performance at subthreshold region. The transistors XM2, XM4, XM5 and XM6 perform the similar characteristics as that of 6T SRAM cell. Also, the transistors (XM2, XM3) size is scaled down equivalent to the p-MOS transistor size. The 11T cell includes WL, BL, RWL and separate read, write ports (Karri & Jena, 2016;Maabi et al., 2016).

The schematic representation of FinFET 11T SRAM cell is shown in Figure 10. This cell attains low power dissipation due to its series connected drivers driven by BL, BLB and read buffers.

• FinFET-12T SRAM cell: The 12T (12Transistor) FinFET SRAM cell includes the following transistors such as XM3, XM7, XM4, XM5, XM8 and XM6, and differential Read or else Write ports, XM9, XM1, XM11, XM10, XM2 and XM12. Write Word-Line 1 (WWL1), WWL2, BL, and BLB are column-based whereas RWL and VGND (Virtual Ground) are row-based. The reduction in current and power validates 12T design approach (Rokbani et al., 2020;Yadav et al., 2017).  Figure 11 illustrates the schematic representation of 12T SRAM. This 12T bit-cell is intended for low-voltage operation. Internally the bit-cell cuts off supply voltage for either the left or right half-cell to weaken the pull-up network of the bit-cell during write operation. This structure advances writeability without using extra peripheral write assist circuits, related boosting and timing control circuits.

• FinFET-13T SRAM cell: SRAM cell stability is decreased by means of the following fluctuation effects of intrinsic parameter. Some of them are random dopant variation, line-edge roughness and variation in gate-oxide-thickness. 13T SRAM cell is designed to attain higher SM and better performance. The processes such as read (R) and write (W) are separated in most of these cells to attain greater NM. The 13T (13Transistor) structure (Saxena & Mehra, 2016) includes CC Schmitt trigger (ST) inverter, dual transistors in read path, and one MAL (write-access transistor) which is controlled by row-based WL, and MAR1 (read-access transistor) is controlled by row-based RWL. The ST13T SRAM cell includes design variation in the proposed representation with the transmission gate (TG) usage in access path. TG moves over the entire voltage range, i.e. strong '0' and strong '1' which increases the device performance. FinFETs provide improvements in power and energy consumption since they overcome the leakage problems of planar devices and deliver better performance (Guo & Stan, 2020).


## PERFoRMANCE METRICS

This section describes the FinFET based SRAM cell performance metrics. Some of the common metrics used to evaluate the performance of FinFET structures are as follows:

• Static Noise Margin (SNM): The standard metric which is used to measure the SRAM bit-cell stability is known as SNM. It depends on the cell ratio (CR), supply voltage and also pull up ratio (PR). Good SNM is required for the stability of SRAM cell. During read process, the ratio between sizes of driver transistor to the load transistor is named as CR. At, write operation the ratio between sizes of load transistor to the access transistor is termed as PR. SNM is also known as butterfly method. The representation of SNM or butterfly curve is mentioned in Figure 12.


## Figure 11. 12T-FinFET SRAM CELL

For 70% value of the SNM, the Driver transistor (DT) is responsible. Both read as well as write margin, is affected by means of SNM which is interrelated to the threshold voltages (THV) of the NMOS and PMOS devices in SRAM cells. Varying CR offers different speed of SRAM cell. If CR increases, then size of the DT also increases, whereas current also rises. As the current starts to increase, speed of SRAM cell also increases. By varying the CR value SNM is acquired. For different values of CR, we got diverse SNM in different technology of SRAM cell.

• Read Noise Margin (Read NM or RNM): The SRAM cell robustness is measured using RNM.

Read NM is directly proportional to CR. The pull-down FinFET should be higher than access transistors, in order to obtain higher RNM. Pull-up ratio depends on the transistor size. Therefore, RNM increases with increase in pull-up ratio value. Also, read margin is directly proportional to CR. The analysis of RNM procedure is similar to that of SNM. Read NM is defined to characterize the read ability of SRAM cell based on the voltage transfer curves (VTCs). The transistor's current model is used to measure RNM. Read NM is improved by pull-down transistor upsizing which further results in increasing the access FinFET gate length. A cautious FET device is essential to evade writing 1 accidentally in SRAM cell. CR determines how high the "0" storage node rises during a read access. Smaller CRs translate into a bigger voltage drop across the pull FinFET requiring a smaller noise voltage at the "0" node to trip the cell. • Write Noise Margin (WNM or Write NM): WNM is used to write data into SRAM cell. The maximum bit line voltage which is able to flip the FinFET -SRAM cell state when BLB voltage is kept high is known as WNM. Write NM is directly proportionate to pull-up ratio. Therefore, WNM increases with increase in pull-up ratio value. The maximum noise voltage (NV) present at bit lines (BLs) during successful write operation is called as WNM voltage. Write failure occurs only if the When NVs exceeds the WNM voltage. Higher the Write NM, greater is the stability. The use of access FinFET and weaker pull-up helps to store 1 to quicker discharge therefore facilitate a faster write 0. Thus, Write NM enhances with strong access and weak pull-up FinFET at the cell read margin. • Power and Delay: FinFET-SRAM cell PDi assesses the utility of cell in portable devices. The major benefit of SRAM using FinFET technology is low access time as well as small power dissipation. PD (propagation delay) is mainly influenced by column height in addition to wire delays in SRAM. Therefore delay is minimized by segmentation procedure. As the PDP (power- Figure 12. SNM representation delay-product) is constant for a device, then upsizing FinFET device decreases the delay with a little increased PDi. In order to decrease PDi, leakage currents required to be decreased with an increase in channel length (CL) or else higher transistor THV. • Temperature: This is an important metric, as the increase in temperature affects the performance of the device while it is turned ON or else OFF. Power dissipation (PDi) often leads to increase in device temperature. The local temperature rise can create circuit failure and can also influence power, performance and reliability. Temperature may have a considerable effect on other design parameters such as access time. With increase in temperature, the leakage current increases exponentially and hence, the power dissipation increases substantially in FinFET device. Hence, temperature is one of the most important performances metric in future VLSI circuit designs.


## PowER DELAy PRoDUCT (PDP)

PDP is measured by transient analysis performance of SRAM cells. It is a metric for energy consumption of a circuit. The product of gate delay and the average power defines PDP. Moreover, PDP favours the processor that operates at lower frequency. An efficient SRAM cell should have lower PDP for read and write operations. The size of transistor is set is attain minimum PDP by optimizing the transistor size which further minimize the delay without increasing the power consumption.


## ANALySIS oF SRAM FINFETS USING VARIoUS TECHNoLoGIES

This section describes the analysis for the various SRAM cell at different nm (nanometer) technology. Table 2 shows the performance analysis of 6T SRAM in 22 nm technology (Banu & Shubham, 2017) and the tool used is Predictive technology model library. Table 3 denotes the 6T SRAM comparison in CMOS and FinFET technology (Chiranjeevi & Jena, 2018). Table 4 represents the comparative performance of 6T SRAM in Planar and FinFET technology (Kumar & Chalil, 2019) in Hspice. Table 5 denotes the comparison of 7T with other SRAM cells (Sneha et al., 2017) and the simulation tool used is Tanner. The Table 6 indicates the comparative analysis of 7T SRAM (Garg & Singh, 2016) in H-spice tool. Table 7 shows the Comparison of FinFET 7T and 8T SRAM (Kushwah & Akashe, 2014) using Cadence Virtuoso Tool. Table 8 indicates the Comparison of 9T FinFET at different technologies (Vijapur & Uma, 2018) in Cadence software. Table 9 shows the comparison of 10T and 6T FinFET at 7-nm technology (Mushtaq & Sharma, 2020) in Cadence Virtuoso tool. Table  10 represents the comparison of 11T FinFET SRAM with other cells in 10-nm technology (Ensan et al., 2018). Table 11 denotes the 12T FinFET SRAM comparison in 32-nm technology (Rokbani et al., 2020) with HSPICE simulator. Table 12 depicts the 13T FinFET SRAM comparison in 22-nm technology (Saxena & Mehra, 2016) using Cadence Virtuoso Tool (V.6.1). Table 13, comparison of different FINFET-SRAM cell is analysed based on its technology, device name, technique used and special features. Table 13 represents the FinFET based SRAM comparison.     


## • Comparison of Various Finfet Based Sram Cells: From


## CoNCLUSIoN

In this survey, a number of SRAM design using FINFET technology have been reviewed. The presented analysis prove that it is better to design SRAM using FINFET because it has lower static power dissipation and delay as compare to CMOS SRAM cell and delay is also reduced in both operations. FinFETs have many advantage over the bulk MOSFET, such as FinFET developed with a process (fabrication) flow similar to conventional Silicon On Insulator (SOI) CMOS process  (Moradi & Tohidi, 2015) 22nm FINFET(9 T SRAM) Multi-threshold 3X lower power consumption Oh et al., (Oh et al., 2016) 22nm FINFET(9 T SRAM) Power Gated 9T SRAM Consumes less energy per read and writes operation, and smaller bit cell area.

Yadav et al., (Yadav et al., 2013) 32 nm FINFET (10T SRAM)


## Back-gate biasing and Built-in feedback mechanism

Back gate biasing and positive feedback boosts the stability.

Kaur et al., (Kaur et al., 2016) 16nm MOSFET, FINFET (10T SRAM)

Threshold voltage technique FINFET based memories will be used below 32nm without any SCE.

Pal et al., (Chiranjeevi & Jena, 2017) 32nm CMOS and FINFET (10T SRAM)

Supply voltage reduction Increase in RSNM by 20% and decrease in WSNM by 5% at 400 mV.

Farkhani et al., (Farkhani et al., 2014) 20nm FINFET (8TSRAM) Supply voltage Sub threshold swing (SS) is lower in FINFET design.

Kim et al., (Kim et al., 2008) 32nm FINFET(8 TSRAM) Back gate voltage Reducing the discharging activity during WRITE operation where as Double Gate MOSFET (DG-MOSFET) has complex fabrication process. FinFET has large packaging density compared to other DG MOSFET structures. To eliminate the SCEs, FinFET based SRAM models are presented. These models shows significant reduction in the leakage current and power dissipation when compared with conventional MOSFET based SRAM cell. Thus, this survey contributes to better understanding of the behaviour of FinFET based SRAM when low power, high speed, low leakage, and high performance are essential. Moreover, this FinFET-SRAM design is widely suited for various applications in the era of electronics such as in mobile technology, CPUs Processors, SD-RAMs etc. They are also used in different CMOS circuit low power applications. In future, Multi-Fin FinFET device can be used to enhance the driving capability of the device. This makes the era of electronics faster and reliable. However the fabrication techniques required meeting such stringent guidelines would be an issue which can also be analysed in future. Also, the transistor count may also be reduced while designing the SRAM to achieve better performance.

## Figure 1 .Figure 2 .
12Structure (a) TG FinFET 3D-view (b) IG FinFET 3D-view

## Figure 3 .
3Architecture of SRAM memory

## Figure 6 .
67T-FinFET SRAM CELLinterrupts the internal nodes of cell. Hence, this process needs Separate Read Word Line (RWL) and Write Word Line (WWL). Read mode operation is done by activating RWL and pre-charging RBL. The XM6 transistor turns ON if 1 gets stored at Q and creates a low resistance path for the cell current flow via RBL to GND detected by sense amplifier(Alias et al., 2019;Monica & Chandramohan, 2017).• FinFET-9T SRAM cell: The 9T (9Transistor) FINFET SRAM cell mainly includes dual subsections(Moradi & Tohidi, 2015;Oh et al., 2016;Sharma, 2016;Yatimi & Aroudam, 2018).

## Figure 7 .
7FinFET 8T-SRAM CELL enhances the current ON or else OFF ratio. The source of XM10 and gate of XM9 transistors are attached to RWL. Also, WWL, BL, BLB are linked to the access FinFETs. The write margin is improved by means of transistors XM7 and XM8. Here, the static current is minimized using access transistors new size assumption which is twice the size of pull-up transistors. Apart from access transistors, all the other transistors used in the design of 10T are fixed to a minimum possible gate length(Chiranjeevi & Jena, 2017;Ichihashi et al., 2018;Kaur et al., 2016;Singh et al., 2019;Yadav et al., 2013).

## Figure 8 .Figure 9 .
899T-FinFET SRAM CELL 10T-FinFET SRAM CELL

## Figure 10 .
1011T-FinFET SRAM CELL

## Table 1 .
1SE selectionNames of SE 
Link 


## Table 2 .
2Performance analysis of 6T SRAM in 22 nm technology (Banu & Shubham, 2017) 

Type/ Parameter 
Technology 
Write delay 
(ps) 

Read delay 
(ps) 

Write 
power 
(nW) 

Read power 
(nW) 
SNM (mV) 
Temperature 
( o C) 

Conventional 6T 
SRAM 
22 nm 
112 
947 
243 
746 
240 
25 

FinFET 6T SRAM 
22 nm 
98 
610 
1.6 
1.98 
280 
25 


## Table 3 .
3Comparison of 6T SRAM in CMOS and FinFET technology(Chiranjeevi & Jena, 2018) CMOS (45-16nm) 

Technology/ 
Parameter 
L(nm) 
W(nm) 
T OX (nm) 
V th0 HP 
V th0 LSTP 

HP 
LSTP 
NMOS 
PMOS 
NMOS 
PMOS 

45 nm 
45 
90 
1.25 
1.8 
0.46 
-0.49158 
0.6226 
-0.587 

32 nm 
32 
64 
1.15 
1.6 
0.49 
-0.49155 
0.63 
-0.5808 

16 nm 
16 
32 
0.95 
1.2 
0.47 
-0.43121 
0.68191 
-0.6862 

FinFET (16-7nm) 

Technology/ 
Parameter 
L(nm) 
W FIN (nm) 
H FIN (nm) 
WF HP 
WF LSTP 

NFET 
PFET 
NFET 
PFET 

16 nm 
20 
12 
26 
4.41 
4.76 
4.58 
4.59 

7 nm 
11 
6.5 
18 
4.42 
4.74 
4.61 
4.56 



## Table 4 .
4Comparative analysis of 6T SRAM in Planar and FinFET technology (Kumar & Chalil, 2019)Temp 
( o C) 

Planar (MOSFET) Technology 
FinFET Technology 

SNM 
(mV) 

Write 
margin 
(mV) 

Read 
current 
(A) 

Leakage 
current 
(A) 

Cell 
standby 
leakage 
current (A) 

SNM 
(mV) 

Write 
margin 
(mV) 

Read 
current 
(A) 

Leakage 
current (A) 

Cell 
standby 
leakage 
current (A) 

-40 
165.17 
274.43 
2.32E-05 
4.46E-11 
1.55E-11 
192.74 
302.43 
1.25E-04 
3.04E-11 
1.49E-11 

27 
156.12 
266.21 
2.24E-05 
1.15E-09 
4.41E-09 
184.23 
292.31 
1.18E-04 
2.35E-10 
1.02E-09 

40 
156.07 
265.11 
2.23E-05 
2.07E-09 
6.99E-09 
184.20 
292.02 
1.17E-04 
3.59E-10 
4.00E-09 

125 
129.15 
242.43 
19E-05 
4.37E-09 
9.81E-09 
175.57 
276.63 
1.10E-04 
7.02E-10 
6.22E-09 



## Table 5 .
5Comparison of 7T with other SRAM cells (Sneha et al., 2017)Table 7. Comparison of FinFET 7T and 8T SRAM (Kushwah & Akashe, 2014) Table 8. Comparison of 9T FinFET at different technologies (Vijapur & Uma, 2018)Parameters 
Technology 
6T 
FinFET(Tied) 

6T FinFET 
INDE 

7T SRAM-
Bit line 
replaced 

7T SRAM Bit 
line replaced 
and NMOS 
stack 

8T 
SRAM 

Power 
dissipation(watts) 
45 nm 
1.358e-006 
5.648e-007 
1.280e-007 
6.702e-008 
4.684e-
007 

Delay (sec) 
45 nm 
6.948e-010 
1.733e-009 
1.280e-007 
6.702e-008 
6.29e-
010 

Table 6. Comparative analysis of 7T SRAM (Garg & Singh, 2016) 

Technology/Parameter 
Average power 

( µW ) 

Delay 
(ns) 
Power Delay Product (fj) 

CMOS (22nm) 
0.169 
0.129 
0.0219 

CMOS (16nm) 
0.139 
0.223 
0.0311 

FinFET (22nm) 
0.023 
0.090 
0.0021 

FinFET (16nm) 
0.015 
0.002 
0.0028 


## Table 9 .
9Comparison of 10T and 6T FinFET at 7-nm technology (Mushtaq & Sharma, 2020) Table 10. Comparison of 11T FinFET SRAM with other cells in 10-nm technology (Ensan et al., 2018)Table 11. 12T FinFET SRAM comparison in 32-nm technology (Rokbani et al., 2020)Parameter/ 
Type 

Leakage power µW 

Propagation Delay 
(psec) 

PDP 
(aJ) 

SNM 
(mV) 

Read 
Write 
Read 
Write 
Read 
Write 
Read 
Write 

6T FinFET 10.68 
31.01 
12.8 
13.98 
136.8 
433 
124.45 
195 

10T 
INDEP 
FinFET 

7.26 
26.5 
18.01 
16.10 
129.6 
426.6 
106.06 
309.7 

Type/ 
Parameters 

SNM (mV) 
Delay (ps) 
Average 
power 
(nW) 

Static 
power 
(nW) 

PDP(aJ) 
Read 
Write 
Read 
Write 

7T 
70 
198 
491.8 
230.46 
194.95 
4.76 
128.28 

8T 
183 
80 
640.26 
1749.2 
226.72 
6.85 
701.38 

9T 
183 
225 
676.61 
275.09 
631.17 
4.37 
445.54 

11T 
175 
225 
676.17 
218.27 
137.66 
5.17 
168.57 

Type/Parameter 
Average power 

HOLD (nW) 
READ (nW) 
WRITE (nW) 

12T (CMOS) 
180.79 
161.30 
201.61 

12T (FinFET) 
14.06 
45.64 
60.06 


## Table 12 .
1213T FinFET SRAM comparison in 22-nm technology (Saxena & Mehra, 2016)Table 13. Few FinFET based SRAM comparison Efficient design solution for high performance and low energy consumption in the NTV region Improvement in read and write ability. Near threshold (Vth) operation and yield estimation method Minimum operating voltage of 0.3 V is achieved Moradi et al.,Type/VDD 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 

11T (Leakage power nW) 
1.2 
1.35 
1.55 
2.55 
5.1 
10.25 

13T (Leakage power nW) 
0.096 
0.586 
1.102 
1.986 
2.952 
6.102 

%Improvement 
92 
56.59 
28.90 
22.11 
42.11 
40.46 

Author Name 
Technology 
Name of Device 
Technique Used 
Special Features 

Sneha et al., 
(Sneha et al., 
2017) 

45nm 
7T FINFET 
SRAM 
Supply voltage-scaling 
RBL charging is not needed and Decrease in 
voltage supply 

Yang et al., 
(Yang et al., 
2016) 

14 nm 
FINFET 7 T 
SRAM 

Near threshold voltage (NTV) 
operation 

Ansari et al., 
(Ansari et al., 
2015) 

20nm 
FINFET 7T 
SRAM 
NTV operation 
High write, read margins and low write time 

Monica et al., 
(Monica & 
Chandramohan, 
2017) 

16 nm 
FINFET(8T 
SRAM) 
supply voltage-floating 
Yang et al., 
(Yatimi & 
Aroudam, 2018) 

22nm 
FINFET (single 
ended 9T SRAM 



Analysis of Low Power Reduction Techniques on Cache (SRAM) Memory. R Agrawal, V K Tomar, 10.1109/ICCCNT.2018.84940219th International Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT). IEEEAgrawal, R., & Tomar, V. K. (2018). Analysis of Low Power Reduction Techniques on Cache (SRAM) Memory. In 2018 9th International Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT) (pp. 1-7). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICCCNT.2018.8494021

Low-Power And High Performance Of An Optimized FinFET Based 8T SRAM Cell Design. N E Alias, A Hamzah, L P T Michael, U U Sheikh, M A Riyadi, 10.23919/EECSI48112.2019.8976925doi:10.23919/ EECSI48112.2019.89769256th International Conference on Electrical Engineering. IEEEComputer Science and Informatics (EECSIAlias, N. E., Hamzah, A., Michael, L. P. T., Sheikh, U. U., & Riyadi, M. A. (2019). Low-Power And High Performance Of An Optimized FinFET Based 8T SRAM Cell Design. In 2019 6th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Informatics (EECSI) (pp. 66-70). IEEE. doi:10.23919/ EECSI48112.2019.8976925

A near-threshold 7T SRAM cell with high write and read margins and low write time for sub-20 nm FinFET technologies. M Ansari, H Afzali-Kusha, B Ebrahimi, Z Navabi, A Afzali-Kusha, M Pedram, 10.1016/j.vlsi.2015.02.002Integration (Amsterdam). 50Ansari, M., Afzali-Kusha, H., Ebrahimi, B., Navabi, Z., Afzali-Kusha, A., & Pedram, M. (2015). A near-threshold 7T SRAM cell with high write and read margins and low write time for sub-20 nm FinFET technologies. Integration (Amsterdam), 50, 91-106. doi:10.1016/j.vlsi.2015.02.002

A Near-Threshold Soft Error Resilient 7T SRAM Cell with Low Read Time for 20 nm FinFET Technology. R N Asli, S Taghipour, 10.1007/s10836-017-5659-8Journal of Electronic Testing. 334Asli, R. N., & Taghipour, S. (2017). A Near-Threshold Soft Error Resilient 7T SRAM Cell with Low Read Time for 20 nm FinFET Technology. Journal of Electronic Testing, 33(4), 449-462. doi:10.1007/s10836-017-5659-8

Design and Performance Analysis of 6T SRAM cell in 22nm CMOS and FinFET technology Nodes. R Banu, P Shubham, 2017 International Conference on Recent Advances in Electronics and Communication Technology (ICRAECT). IEEEBanu, R., & Shubham, P. (2017). Design and Performance Analysis of 6T SRAM cell in 22nm CMOS and FinFET technology Nodes. In 2017 International Conference on Recent Advances in Electronics and Communication Technology (ICRAECT) (pp. 38-42). IEEE.

Design and analysis of low power SRAM cells. A Bhaskar, 10.1109/IPACT.2017.82448882017 Innovations in Power and Advanced Computing Technologies (i-PACT). IEEEBhaskar, A. (2017). Design and analysis of low power SRAM cells. In 2017 Innovations in Power and Advanced Computing Technologies (i-PACT) (pp. 1-5). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IPACT.2017.8244888

FinFET SRAM cell with improved stability and power for low power applications. S Birla, 10.29292/jics.v14i2.57Journal of Integrated Circuits and Systems. 142Birla, S. (2019). FinFET SRAM cell with improved stability and power for low power applications. Journal of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 14(2), 1-8. doi:10.29292/jics.v14i2.57

Hybrid gravitational search and pattern search-based image thresholding by optimising Shannon and fuzzy entropy for image compression. K Chiranjeevi, U Jena, 10.1080/19479832.2017.1338760International Journal of Image and Data Fusion. 83Chiranjeevi, K., & Jena, U. (2017). Hybrid gravitational search and pattern search-based image thresholding by optimising Shannon and fuzzy entropy for image compression. International Journal of Image and Data Fusion, 8(3), 236-269. doi:10.1080/19479832.2017.1338760

SAR image compression using adaptive differential evolution and pattern search based K-means vector quantization. K Chiranjeevi, U Jena, 10.5566/ias.1611Image Analysis & Stereology. 371Chiranjeevi, K., & Jena, U. (2018). SAR image compression using adaptive differential evolution and pattern search based K-means vector quantization. Image Analysis & Stereology, 37(1), 35-54. doi:10.5566/ias.1611

Vector quantisation using hybrid teaching learning and pattern search optimisation for image compression. K Chiranjeevi, U R Jena, A Harika, 10.1504/IJCSYSE.2016.081382International Journal of Computational Systems Engineering. 24Chiranjeevi, K., Jena, U. R., & Harika, A. (2016). Vector quantisation using hybrid teaching learning and pattern search optimisation for image compression. International Journal of Computational Systems Engineering, 2(4), 209-221. doi:10.1504/IJCSYSE.2016.081382

Low store energy, low VDDmin, 8T2R nonvolatile latch and SRAM with vertical-stacked resistive memory (memristor) devices for low power mobile applications. P.-F Chiu, M.-F Chang, C.-W Wu, C.-H Chuang, S.-S Sheu, Y.-S Chen, M.-J Tsai, 10.1109/JSSC.2012.2192661doi:10.1109/ JSSC.2012.2192661IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits. 476Chiu, P.-F., Chang, M.-F., Wu, C.-W., Chuang, C.-H., Sheu, S.-S., Chen, Y.-S., & Tsai, M.-J. (2012). Low store energy, low VDDmin, 8T2R nonvolatile latch and SRAM with vertical-stacked resistive memory (memristor) devices for low power mobile applications. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 47(6), 1483-1496. doi:10.1109/ JSSC.2012.2192661

Leakage reduction by using FinFET technique for nanoscale technology circuits. A K Dadoria, K Khare, T K Gupta, R P Singh, 10.1166/jno.2017.2002doi:10.1166/ jno.2017.2002Journal of Nanoelectronics and Optoelectronics. 123Dadoria, A. K., Khare, K., Gupta, T. K., & Singh, R. P. (2017). Leakage reduction by using FinFET technique for nanoscale technology circuits. Journal of Nanoelectronics and Optoelectronics, 12(3), 278-285. doi:10.1166/ jno.2017.2002

A robust and low-power near-threshold SRAM in 10-nm FinFET technology. S S Ensan, M H Moaiyeri, S Hessabi, 10.1007/s10470-018-1107-7Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing. 943Ensan, S. S., Moaiyeri, M. H., & Hessabi, S. (2018). A robust and low-power near-threshold SRAM in 10-nm FinFET technology. Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, 94(3), 497-506. doi:10.1007/s10470- 018-1107-7

A low-power single-ended SRAM in FinFET technology. S S Ensan, M H Moaiyeri, M Moghaddam, S Hessabi, 10.1016/j.aeue.2018.12.015doi:10.1016/j. aeue.2018.12.015AEÜ. International Journal of Electronics and Communications. 99Ensan, S. S., Moaiyeri, M. H., Moghaddam, M., & Hessabi, S. (2019). A low-power single-ended SRAM in FinFET technology. AEÜ. International Journal of Electronics and Communications, 99, 361-368. doi:10.1016/j. aeue.2018.12.015

Comparative study of FinFETs versus 22nm bulk CMOS technologies: SRAM design perspective. H Farkhani, A Peiravi, J M Kargaard, F Moradi, 10.1109/SOCC.2014.694897127th IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC). IEEEFarkhani, H., Peiravi, A., Kargaard, J. M., & Moradi, F. (2014). Comparative study of FinFETs versus 22nm bulk CMOS technologies: SRAM design perspective. In 2014 27th IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC) (pp. 449-454). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SOCC.2014.6948971

Measurement System Analysis and System Thinking in Six Sigma: How They Relate and How to Use Them. B J Galli, 10.4018/IJSDA.2020010103doi:10.4018/ IJSDA.2020010103International Journal of System Dynamics Applications. 91Galli, B. J. (2020). Measurement System Analysis and System Thinking in Six Sigma: How They Relate and How to Use Them. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, 9(1), 44-62. doi:10.4018/ IJSDA.2020010103

A comparative performance analysis of cmos and finfet based voltage mode sense amplifier. M Garg, B Singh, 10.1109/CICN.2016.1128th International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN). IEEEGarg, M., & Singh, B. (2016). A comparative performance analysis of cmos and finfet based voltage mode sense amplifier. In 2016 8th International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN) (pp. 544-547). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CICN.2016.112

An efficient design and analysis of low power SRAM memory cell for ULTRA applications. K Gavaskar, U S Ragupathy, 10.5958/2249-7315.2017.00035.1Asian Journal of Research in Social Sciences and Humanities. 71Gavaskar, K., & Ragupathy, U. S. (2017). An efficient design and analysis of low power SRAM memory cell for ULTRA applications. Asian Journal of Research in Social Sciences and Humanities, 7(1), 962-975. doi:10.5958/2249-7315.2017.00035.1

A Survey on the Performance Analysis of FinFET SRAM Cells for Different Technologies. Girish, Academic PressGirish. (2015). A Survey on the Performance Analysis of FinFET SRAM Cells for Different Technologies. Academic Press.

Three-Dimensional Monolithic FinFET-Based 8T SRAM Cell Design for Enhanced Read Time and Low Leakage. A Guler, N K Jha, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems. 274Guler, A., & Jha, N. K. (2019). Three-Dimensional Monolithic FinFET-Based 8T SRAM Cell Design for Enhanced Read Time and Low Leakage. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 27(4), 899-912.

FINFET technology featuring high mobility SiGe channel for 10nm and beyond. D Guo, G Karve, G Tsutsui, K Y Lim, R Robison, T Hook, R Vega, 10.1109/VLSIT.2016.75733602016 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology. IEEEGuo, D., Karve, G., Tsutsui, G., Lim, K. Y., Robison, R., Hook, T., & Vega, R. (2016). FINFET technology featuring high mobility SiGe channel for 10nm and beyond. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology (pp. 1-2). IEEE. doi:10.1109/VLSIT.2016.7573360

Design and Aging Challenges in FinFET Circuits and Internet of Things (IoT) Applications. In Circadian Rhythms for Future Resilient Electronic Systems. X Guo, M R Stan, 10.1007/978-3-030-20051-0_6SpringerGuo, X., & Stan, M. R. (2020). Design and Aging Challenges in FinFET Circuits and Internet of Things (IoT) Applications. In Circadian Rhythms for Future Resilient Electronic Systems (pp. 143-189). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-20051-0_6

Device circuit and technology co-optimisation for FinFET based 6T SRAM cells beyond N7. M K Gupta, P Weckx, S Cosemans, P Schuddinck, R Baert, D Yakimets, D Jang, 10.1109/ESSDERC.2017.80666402017 47th European Solid-State Device Research Conference (ESSDERC). IEEEGupta, M. K., Weckx, P., Cosemans, S., Schuddinck, P., Baert, R., Yakimets, D., & Jang, D. (2017). Device circuit and technology co-optimisation for FinFET based 6T SRAM cells beyond N7. In 2017 47th European Solid-State Device Research Conference (ESSDERC) (pp. 256-259). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ESSDERC.2017.8066640

10T Differential-Signal SRAM Design in a 14-nm FinFET Technology for High-Speed Application. M Ichihashi, Y Woo, A U K Muhammed, V Joshi, D Burnett, 10.1109/SOCC.2018.861854831st IEEE International Systemon-Chip Conference (SOCC). IEEEIchihashi, M., Woo, Y., Muhammed, A. U. K., Joshi, V., & Burnett, D. (2018). 10T Differential-Signal SRAM Design in a 14-nm FinFET Technology for High-Speed Application. In 2018 31st IEEE International System- on-Chip Conference (SOCC) (pp. 322-325). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SOCC.2018.8618548

Advances in production and applications of carbon nanotubes. X Jia, F Wei, 10.1007/978-3-030-12700-8_11Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. SpringerJia, X., & Wei, F. (2019). Advances in production and applications of carbon nanotubes. In Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (pp. 299-333). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-12700-8_11

Multi-Criterion Decision Making for Wireless Communication Technologies Adoption in IoT. A Juneja, S Juneja, V Bali, S Mahajan, 10.4018/IJSDA.2021010101International Journal of System Dynamics Applications. 101Juneja, A., Juneja, S., Bali, V., & Mahajan, S. (2021, January). Multi-Criterion Decision Making for Wireless Communication Technologies Adoption in IoT. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, 10(1), 1-15. doi:10.4018/IJSDA.2021010101

Review of FINFET technology. M Jurczak, N Collaert, A Veloso, T Hoffmann, S Biesemans, 10.1109/SOI.2009.5318794IEEE international SOI conference. IEEEJurczak, M., Collaert, N., Veloso, A., Hoffmann, T., & Biesemans, S. (2009). Review of FINFET technology. In In 2009 IEEE international SOI conference (pp. 1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SOI.2009.5318794

Fast vector quantization using a Bat algorithm for image compression. Engineering Science and Technology. C Karri, U Jena, an International Journal. 192Karri, C., & Jena, U. (2016). Fast vector quantization using a Bat algorithm for image compression. Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal, 19(2), 769-781.

Low power FinFET based 10T SRAM cell. Kaur, Gupta, Pahuja, Singh, Panday, Second International Innovative Applications of Computational Intelligence on Power, Energy and Controls with their Impact on Humanity (CIPECH). IEEEKaur, Gupta, Pahuja, Singh, & Panday. (2016). Low power FinFET based 10T SRAM cell. In 2016 Second International Innovative Applications of Computational Intelligence on Power, Energy and Controls with their Impact on Humanity (CIPECH) (pp. 227-233). IEEE.

New SRAM cell design for low power and high reliability using 32nm independent gate FinFET technology. Y B Kim, Y.-B Kim, F Lombardi, 10.1109/NDCS.2008.16IEEE International Workshop on Design and Test of Nano Devices, Circuits and Systems. IEEEKim, Y. B., Kim, Y.-B., & Lombardi, F. (2008). New SRAM cell design for low power and high reliability using 32nm independent gate FinFET technology. In 2008 IEEE International Workshop on Design and Test of Nano Devices, Circuits and Systems (pp. 25-28). IEEE. doi:10.1109/NDCS.2008.16

Design of a ternary FinFET SRAM cell. M N Kishor, S S Narkhede, 10.1109/CDAN.2016.75709042016 Symposium on Colossal Data Analysis and Networking (CDAN). IEEEKishor, M. N., & Narkhede, S. S. (2016). Design of a ternary FinFET SRAM cell. In 2016 Symposium on Colossal Data Analysis and Networking (CDAN) (pp. 1-5). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CDAN.2016.7570904

Performance Analysis of 6T SRAM Cell on Planar and FinFET Technology. A A Kumar, A Chalil, 10.1109/ICCSP.2019.86979282019 International Conference on Communication and Signal Processing (ICCSP). IEEEKumar, A. A., & Chalil, A. (2019). Performance Analysis of 6T SRAM Cell on Planar and FinFET Technology. In 2019 International Conference on Communication and Signal Processing (ICCSP) (pp. 375-379). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICCSP.2019.8697928

Analysis of leakage reduction technique on FinFET based 7T and 8T SRAM cells. R S Kushwah, S Akashe, 10.3103/S0735272714090015Radioelectronics and Communications Systems. 579Kushwah, R. S., & Akashe, S. (2014). Analysis of leakage reduction technique on FinFET based 7T and 8T SRAM cells. Radioelectronics and Communications Systems, 57(9), 383-393. doi:10.3103/S0735272714090015

Characterization of various FinFET based 6T SRAM cell configurations in light of radiation effect. M Limachia, N Kothari, 10.1007/s12046-020-1269-8Sadhana. 45131Limachia, M., & Kothari, N. (2020). Characterization of various FinFET based 6T SRAM cell configurations in light of radiation effect. Sadhana, 45(1), 31. doi:10.1007/s12046-020-1269-8

A low-power hierarchical FinFET-based SRAM. Maabi, Sayyah, Moaiyeri, Hessabi, Academic PressMaabi, Sayyah, Moaiyeri, & Hessabi. (2016). A low-power hierarchical FinFET-based SRAM. Academic Press.

An efficient feed foreword network model with sine cosine algorithm for breast cancer classification. S K Majhi, 10.4018/IJSDA.2018040101International Journal of System Dynamics Applications. 72Majhi, S. K. (2018). An efficient feed foreword network model with sine cosine algorithm for breast cancer classification. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, 7(2), 1-14. doi:10.4018/IJSDA.2018040101

Enabling cmos scaling towards 3nm and beyond. A Mocuta, P Weckx, S Demuynck, D Radisic, Y Oniki, J Ryckaert, 10.1109/VLSIT.2018.8510683doi:10.1109/ VLSIT.2018.85106832018 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology. IEEEMocuta, A., Weckx, P., Demuynck, S., Radisic, D., Oniki, Y., & Ryckaert, J. (2018). Enabling cmos scaling towards 3nm and beyond. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology (pp. 147-148). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ VLSIT.2018.8510683

A Novel 8T SRAM Cell using 16 nm FinFET Technology. M Monica, P Chandramohan, SASTech-Technical Journal of RUAS. 161Monica, M., & Chandramohan, P. (2017). A Novel 8T SRAM Cell using 16 nm FinFET Technology. SASTech- Technical Journal of RUAS, 16(1), 5-8.

Low-voltage 9T FinFETSRAM cell for low-power applications. F Moradi, M Tohidi, 10.1109/SOCC.2015.740692928th IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC). IEEEMoradi, F., & Tohidi, M. (2015). Low-voltage 9T FinFETSRAM cell for low-power applications. In 2015 28th IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC) (pp. 149-153). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SOCC.2015.7406929

Design and analysis of INDEP FinFET SRAM cell at 7-nm technology. &amp; Mushtaq, Sharma, International Journal of Numerical Modelling: Electronic Networks. Devices and FieldsMushtaq & Sharma. (2020). Design and analysis of INDEP FinFET SRAM cell at 7-nm technology. International Journal of Numerical Modelling: Electronic Networks, Devices and Fields.

Analytical modeling and simulation of multigate FinFET devices and the impact of high-k dielectrics on short channel effects (SCEs). V Narendar, R A Mishra, 10.1016/j.spmi.2015.06.004Superlattices and Microstructures. 85Narendar, V., & Mishra, R. A. (2015). Analytical modeling and simulation of multigate FinFET devices and the impact of high-k dielectrics on short channel effects (SCEs). Superlattices and Microstructures, 85, 357-369. doi:10.1016/j.spmi.2015.06.004

Design of 8TSram Using Finfet Technology. C H Neelima, T Ravinder, D Sudha, TEST Engineering & Management. 82Neelima, C. H., Ravinder, T., & Sudha, D. (2020). Design of 8TSram Using Finfet Technology. TEST Engineering & Management, 82, 3168-3171.

Power-gated 9T SRAM cell for low-energy operation. T W Oh, H Jeong, K Kang, Y Park, S.-O Jung, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems. 253Oh, T. W., Jeong, H., Kang, K., Juhyun Park, Y., & Jung, S.-O. (2016). Power-gated 9T SRAM cell for low-energy operation. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 25(3), 1183-1187.

Design and implementation of 6T SRAM using FinFET with low power application. J Panchal, V Ramola, Academic PressPanchal, J., & Ramola, V. (2017). Design and implementation of 6T SRAM using FinFET with low power application. Academic Press.

Software defect prediction using hybrid distribution Base balance instance selection and radial basis function classifier. M Panda, 10.4018/IJSDA.2019070103doi:10.4018/ IJSDA.2019070103International Journal of System Dynamics Applications. 83Panda, M. (2019). Software defect prediction using hybrid distribution Base balance instance selection and radial basis function classifier. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, 8(3), 53-75. doi:10.4018/ IJSDA.2019070103

Low-power data encoding/decoding for energy-efficient static random access memory design. G Pasandi, K Mehrabi, B Ebrahimi, S M Fakhraei, A Afzali-Kusha, M Pedram, 10.1049/iet-cds.2018.5564Devices & Systems. 138IET CircuitsPasandi, G., Mehrabi, K., Ebrahimi, B., Fakhraei, S. M., Afzali-Kusha, A., & Pedram, M. (2019). Low-power data encoding/decoding for energy-efficient static random access memory design. IET Circuits, Devices & Systems, 13(8), 1152-1159. doi:10.1049/iet-cds.2018.5564

Optimization of power and energy in FinFET based SRAM cell using adiabatic logic. S Patil, V S Kanchana Bhaaskaran, 10.1109/ICNETS2.2017.80679662017 International Conference on Nextgen Electronic Technologies: Silicon to Software (ICNETS2). IEEEPatil, S., & Kanchana Bhaaskaran, V. S. (2017). Optimization of power and energy in FinFET based SRAM cell using adiabatic logic. In 2017 International Conference on Nextgen Electronic Technologies: Silicon to Software (ICNETS2) (pp. 394-402). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICNETS2.2017.8067966

Performance Analysis of CMOS and FinFET Logic. Arun Rajprabu, Raj, Rajnarayanan, IOSR Journal of VLSI and Signal Processing. 21Rajprabu, Arun Raj, & Rajnarayanan. (2013). Performance Analysis of CMOS and FinFET Logic. IOSR Journal of VLSI and Signal Processing, 2(1), 1-6.

A Hybrid Hierarchical Heuristic-ACO With Local Search Applied to Travelling Salesman Problem, AS-FA-Ls. N Rokbani, P Kromer, I Twir, A M Alimi, 10.4018/IJSDA.2020070104International Journal of System Dynamics Applications. 93Rokbani, N., Kromer, P., Twir, I., & Alimi, A. M. (2020). A Hybrid Hierarchical Heuristic-ACO With Local Search Applied to Travelling Salesman Problem, AS-FA-Ls. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, 9(3), 58-73. doi:10.4018/IJSDA.2020070104

Low-power and high-speed 13T SRAM cell using FinFETs. S Saxena, R Mehra, 10.1049/iet-cds.2016.0287IET Circuits, Devices & Systems. 113Saxena, S., & Mehra, R. (2016). Low-power and high-speed 13T SRAM cell using FinFETs. IET Circuits, Devices & Systems, 11(3), 250-255. doi:10.1049/iet-cds.2016.0287

Ultra Low power dissipation in 9T SRAM design by using FinFET Technology. N Sharma, 10.1109/ICTBIG.2016.7892657doi:10.1109/ ICTBIG.2016.78926572016 International Conference on ICT in Business Industry & Government (ICTBIG). IEEESharma, N. (2016). Ultra Low power dissipation in 9T SRAM design by using FinFET Technology. In 2016 International Conference on ICT in Business Industry & Government (ICTBIG) (pp. 1-5). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ ICTBIG.2016.7892657

A Novel 20nm FinFET Based 10T SRAM Cell Design for Improved Performance. A Singh, Y Sharma, A Sharma, A Pandey, 10.1007/978-981-32-9767-8_43International Symposium on VLSI Design and Test. SpringerSingh, A., Sharma, Y., Sharma, A., & Pandey, A. (2019). A Novel 20nm FinFET Based 10T SRAM Cell Design for Improved Performance. In International Symposium on VLSI Design and Test (pp. 523-531). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-981-32-9767-8_43

Design of 7T FinFET based SRAM cell design for nanometer regime. G Sneha, B Hari Krishna, C Kumar, 10.1109/ICISC.2017.80686572017 International Conference on Inventive Systems and Control (ICISC). IEEESneha, G., Hari Krishna, B., & Ashok Kumar, C. (2017). Design of 7T FinFET based SRAM cell design for nanometer regime. In 2017 International Conference on Inventive Systems and Control (ICISC) (pp. 1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICISC.2017.8068657

Performance Parameters of Low Power SRAM cells: A Review. i-Manager's. Neema Tiwari, Rangra, Sharma, Journal on Circuits & Systems. 6125Tiwari, Neema, Rangra, & Sharma. (2017). Performance Parameters of Low Power SRAM cells: A Review. i-Manager's Journal on Circuits & Systems, 6(1), 25.

Comparative Analysis of Novel 9T Static Random Access Memory at different technologies of FinFET. P R Vijapur, B V Uma, International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics. 24118Vijapur, P. R., & Uma, B. V. (2018). Comparative Analysis of Novel 9T Static Random Access Memory at different technologies of FinFET. International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 118(24).

Double-gate FinFET process variation aware 10T SRAM cell topology design and analysis. N Yadav, S Dutt, M Pattnaik, G K Sharma, 10.1109/ECCTD.2013.66622152013 European Conference on Circuit Theory and Design (ECCTD). IEEEYadav, N., Dutt, S., Pattnaik, M., & Sharma, G. K. (2013). Double-gate FinFET process variation aware 10T SRAM cell topology design and analysis. In 2013 European Conference on Circuit Theory and Design (ECCTD) (pp. 1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ECCTD.2013.6662215

Stable, reliable, and bit-interleaving 12T SRAM for space applications: A device circuit co-design. N Yadav, A P Shah, S K Vishvakarma, 10.1109/TSM.2017.2718029IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing. 303Yadav, N., Shah, A. P., & Vishvakarma, S. K. (2017). Stable, reliable, and bit-interleaving 12T SRAM for space applications: A device circuit co-design. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 30(3), 276-284. doi:10.1109/TSM.2017.2718029

Power aware FinFET and lateral nanosheet FET targeting for 3nm CMOS technology. D Yakimets, M Garcia Bardon, D Jang, P Schuddinck, Y Sherazi, P Weckx, K Miyaguchi, 10.1109/IEDM.2017.82684292017 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM). IEEEYakimets, D., Garcia Bardon, M., Jang, D., Schuddinck, P., Sherazi, Y., Weckx, P., & Miyaguchi, K. (2017). Power aware FinFET and lateral nanosheet FET targeting for 3nm CMOS technology. In 2017 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) (pp. 20-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IEDM.2017.8268429

Single bit-line 7T SRAM cell for near-threshold voltage operation with enhanced performance and energy in 14 nm FinFET technology. Y Yang, H Jeong, S C Song, J Wang, G Yeap, S.-O Jung, 10.1109/TCSI.2016.2556118IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems. I, Regular Papers. 637Yang, Y., Jeong, H., Song, S. C., Wang, J., Yeap, G., & Jung, S.-O. (2016). Single bit-line 7T SRAM cell for near-threshold voltage operation with enhanced performance and energy in 14 nm FinFET technology. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems. I, Regular Papers, 63(7), 1023-1032. doi:10.1109/TCSI.2016.2556118

Standalone Photovoltaic System with Maximum Power Point Tracking: Modeling and Simulation. H Yatimi, E Aroudam, 10.4018/IJSDA.2018070105doi:10.4018/ IJSDA.2018070105International Journal of System Dynamics Applications. 73Yatimi, H., & Aroudam, E. (2018). Standalone Photovoltaic System with Maximum Power Point Tracking: Modeling and Simulation. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, 7(3), 94-111. doi:10.4018/ IJSDA.2018070105

The impact of scaling on single event upset in 6T and 12T SRAMs from 130 to 22 nm CMOS technology. N S Yusop, A N Nordin, M Azim Khairi, N F Hasbullah, 10.1080/10420150.2018.1542695Radiation Effects and Defects in Solids. 173Yusop, N. S., Nordin, A. N., Azim Khairi, M., & Hasbullah, N. F. (2018). The impact of scaling on single event upset in 6T and 12T SRAMs from 130 to 22 nm CMOS technology. Radiation Effects and Defects in Solids, 173(11-12), 1090-1104. doi:10.1080/10420150.2018.1542695

Circuit design in nano-scale CMOS technologies. K Zhang, 2018 IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC). IEEEZhang, K. (2018). Circuit design in nano-scale CMOS technologies. In 2018 IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC) (pp. 1-4). IEEE.

She has been working as an Associate Professor in Gudlavalleru Engineering College, a reputed Autonomous Engineering College in Andhra Pradesh, India. She received M.Tech Degree from the Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, JNTUK. Her current research interests are Low Power VLSI Design, Nano devices. T Venkata Lakshmi, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, IndiaCommunication Engineering at Jawaharlal Nehru Technological UniversityMicro electronics, Digital System DesignT. Venkata Lakshmi is a Research Scholar at the Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering at Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, India. She has been working as an Associate Professor in Gudlavalleru Engineering College, a reputed Autonomous Engineering College in Andhra Pradesh, India. She received M.Tech Degree from the Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, JNTUK. Her current research interests are Low Power VLSI Design, Nano devices, Micro electronics, Digital System Design.

He has published 152 papers in International Journals and International Conferences. Currently, he is guiding 6 Ph.D scholars and guided 2 scholars. His memberships are FIE, FIETE, Senior IEEE member & LISTE. His current research interests are Low Power VLSI Design, Embedded Systems, VLSI Signal Processing. M. Kamaraju is working as a Professor and Mentor (AS&A)in the Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering. India; Hyderabad, IndiaGudlavalleru Engineering College, an Autonomous NBA accredited College in Andhra PradeshMicro Processors and Micro Controllers and IoTM. Kamaraju is working as a Professor and Mentor (AS&A)in the Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering, Gudlavalleru Engineering College, an Autonomous NBA accredited College in Andhra Pradesh, India. He received a Ph.D in the area of Low Power VLSI in 2012 from Jawaharlal Nehru technological University, Hyderabad, India. He has published 152 papers in International Journals and International Conferences. Currently, he is guiding 6 Ph.D scholars and guided 2 scholars. His memberships are FIE, FIETE, Senior IEEE member & LISTE. His current research interests are Low Power VLSI Design, Embedded Systems, VLSI Signal Processing, Micro Processors and Micro Controllers and IoT.