# Article title: The impact of Patient Support Programs in Europe. A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 249873779
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca4cc945f26224e98c94d136269be8031efbc1e1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca4cc945f26224e98c94d136269be8031efbc1e1)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Article title: The impact of Patient Support Programs in Europe. A systematic literature review
September 2007 and June 2010.


Lilly and Company
MadridSpain

Article title: The impact of Patient Support Programs in Europe. A systematic literature review
September 2007 and June 2010.Journal name: The Patient -Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Affiliation and e-mail address of the corresponding author: Medical Affairs, Eli 1 This study presents persistence data for all 23,069 patients registered in the program and prescribed teriparatide between


The databases will be searched using both MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) and free-text terms, combined with the Boolean connectors "OR" and "AND". Additionally, specific filters will be applied for type of publication (observational study and pragmatic clinical trials), date of publication (17/03/2010 -17/03/2020) and language (English and Spanish), when available.

The list of MeSH and free-text terms and search strategy used are described in Table S1. 


## Search terms #30

Germany
#31 Austria #32 UK #33 "United Kingdom" #34 Belgium #35 Denmark #36 Greece #37 Finland #38 Ireland #39 Netherlands #40 Holland #41 Sweden #42 Poland #43 Bulgaria #44 Cyprus #45 Croatia #46 Slovakia #47 Estonia #48 Hungary #49 Luxembourg #50 Romania #51 Slovenia #52 Latvia #53 Lithuania #54 Malt #55
"Czech Republic" Search Strategy for Medline/PubMed (("Patient support program" OR "patient support plan" OR "home care" OR "domiciliary care" OR "patient care plan" OR "patient plan" OR "patient-centered care" OR "educational program" OR "patient reminder" OR "home care services" OR "home care services" [MeSH] OR "patient-centered care"[MeSH] OR "patient assistance program" OR "disease therapy management" OR "support care") AND (((longitudinal OR prospective OR retrospective OR transversal OR observational OR pragmatic) AND (study OR trial)) OR survey OR questionnaire)) AND ( 

## TABLE S1 .
S1Search strategy for MEDLINE/Pubmed Grey literature sourcesSearch terms 
Patient Support Program terms 
#1 
"Support Program" 
#2 
"Support Plan" 
#3 
"Home care" 
#4 
"Domiciliary care" 
#5 
"Patient care plan" 
#6 
"Patient plan" 
#7 
"patient-centered care" 
#8 
"Educational program" 
#9 
"Patient reminder" 
#10 
"Home care services" 
#11 
"Home care services" [MeSH] 
#12 
"Patient-centered care" [MeSH] 
#13 
"Patient assistance program" 
#14 
"Disease therapy management" 
#15 
"Support care" 
Study Design terms 
#16 
Longitudinal 
#17 
Prospective 
#18 
Retrospective 
#19 
Transversal 
#20 
Observational 
#21 
Pragmatic 
#22 
Study 
#23 
Trial 
#24 
Survey 
#25 
Questionnaire 
European countries terms 
#26 
Spain 
#27 
France 
#28 
Italy 
#29 
Portugal 




Spain OR France OR Italy OR Portugal OR Germany OR Austria OR UK OR "United Kingdom" OR Belgium OR Denmark OR Greece OR Finland OR Ireland OR Netherlands OR Holland OR Sweden OR Poland OR Bulgaria OR Cyprus OR Croatia OR Slovakia OR Estonia OR Hungary OR Luxembourg OR Romania OR Slovenia OR Latvia OR Lithuania OR Malt OR "Czech Republic")) Grey literature sources Google/Google Scholar Websites of the main pharmaceutical or medical devices companies (such as Pfizer, Biogen, Amgen, Sanofi, Takeda, etc.) The European Union electronic Register of Post-Authorization Studies (EU PAS Register) ClinicalTrials.gov International Society for Pharmacoeconomic and Outcomes Research (ISPOR) Other Pharmacoeconomics and outcomes Research websites

## Table S2 :
S2Quality assessment of the studies reviewed (Strobe)Ite 
m 
Nº 

Recommendation 
Pozzilli et al. 
2011{Pozzilli, 
2011 #11} 

Kohlmann et al 
2013{Kohlman 
n, 2013 #24} 

Rieckmann et 
al. 
2017{Rieckman 
n, 2019 #10} 

Murthy et 
al. 
2017{Murth 
y V, 2017 
#28} 

Van den Bosch et 
al. 2017{Van den 
Bosch F, 2017 #12} 

Nogues et al. 
2014{Nogues X, 
2014 #14} 

Van Maren et 
al. 2019{van 
Maren MA, 
2019 #19} 

Simons et al. 
2011{Simons, 
2011 #9} 

Title and 
abstract 

1 
a) 
Indicate 
the study's design with a 
commonly used term in the 
title or the abstract 

1 Abstract: A 
prospective 
, 
observation 
al cohort 
study was 
conducted. 

1 An Internet 
survey was 
conducted 

1 Final 
Analysis of 
the Non-
Interventiona 
l Study 
READOUTs 
mart 

0 
1 Abstract: In 
this 
prospective 
multi-centre 
observational 
cohort 
study… 
b) 
Provide 
in the abstract an 
informative and balanced 
summary of what was done 
and what was found 

0 
0 
0 
0 
1 Results from the 
PASSION 
Study. 
PASSION was a 
78-week post-
marketing 
observational 
study of RA 
patients. The 
primary 
endpoint was 
percentage of 
patients 
achieving the 
minimal 
clinically 
important 
difference 
(MCID; 
improvement of 
C0.22 compared 
to baseline) in 
Health 
Assessment 
Questionnaire 
(HAQ) 
Disability Index 
(HAQ-DI) at 
week 78. Most 
of the studied 
clinical 
outcomes and 
PROs showed 
significant 
improvements 
(p\0.05) from 
baseline to week 
Introduction 

Backgroun 
d/rationale 

2 Explain the scientific 
background and rationale 
for the investigation being 
reported 

1 The 
introductio 
n states that 
inteferon is 
a medicine 
for MS and 
that 
patients 
could 
benefit 
from 
support 
measures to 
increase 
adherence. 
It also 
explains 
the 
objectives 
of the 
associated 
PHP 

1 the 
importance 
of PSP in a 
disease like 
multiple 
sclerosis. 

1 The 
importance 
of adherence 
in diseases 
such as 
multiple 
sclerosis, 
and the role 
that PSPs 
play in 
increasing 
that 
adherence 

1 The 
introduct 
ion 
explains 
the types 
of 
lymphom 
as that 
exist, the 
most 
frequent 
therapies 
used for 
their 
treatment 
and the 
appearan 
ce of 
ibrutinib 
for the 
oral 
treatment 
of these 
diseases 

1 Rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) is 
a common 
autoimmune 
disease that is 
associated with 
progressive 
disability, 
systemic 
inflammation, 
early death, and 
socioeconomic 
costs. The treat-
to-target 
recommendation 
s in RA suggest 
that the primary 
treatment goal is 
to maximize 
long-term 
health-related 
quality of life 
through early 
diagnosis and 
intervention 
with effective 
therapies. Given 
the chronic 
nature of the 
disease as well 
as the often-
complex 
therapies 
administered, 
proper 
medication 
adherence 

1 The 
introduction 
shows the low 
adherence 
and 
persistence 
usually 
obtained in 
diseases such 
as 
osteoporosis, 
and highlights 
that there are 
studies that 
show that 
PSP can 
improve these 
results. 

1 Explains 
osteoporosis, 
the lines of 
treatment 
according to 
the 
guidelines 
and the help 
that the psp 
provides to 
the patients 
to know the 
disease and 
the 
treatment. 

1 The 
introduction 
discusses the 
advantages 
and 
challenges of 
oral 
chemotherap 
y, such as 
capecitabine, 
and the 
importance 
of adherence 
to treatment, 
noting that 
there are few 
studies on 
adherence to 
oral cancer 
treatment. It 
has also been 
shown that 
although 
adherence in 
cancer is 
high, patients 
sometimes 
need support. 
This study 
evaluates the 
intervention 
of a 
pharmaceutic 
al care 
programme 
for patients 
undergoing 

remains crucial 
for ensuring 
optimal 
treatment 
outcomes. PSPs 
are intended to 
improve 
compliance and 
treatment 
outcomes 
through multiple 
methods of 
interaction 
between 
caregivers and 
patients. 

treatment 
with oral 
chemotherap 
y 

Objectives 
3 State specific objectives, 
including any prespecified 
hypotheses 

1 To assess 
the impact 
of elements 
of the 
patient 
support 
program on 
adherence 

1 The goals of 
this 
research are 
(a) to 
evaluate 
MS patients 
needs and 
the PSP's 
role in 
meeting 
those needs, 
(b) to 
understand 
the drivers 
of MS PSP 
satisfaction 
and loyalty, 
and (c) to 
evaluate 
whether the 
use of one 
such MS 
PSP 
provides 
quantifiable 
, 
incremental 
benefit to 
patients 
(beyond the 
treatment 
itself ), as 
measured in 
patient-

1 Evaluated 
treatment 
adherence 
prospectivel 
y over 2 
years using 
the readout 
function of 
RebiSmart® 

0 
1 To examine the 
effectiveness of 
ADA on RA 
treatment course 
over time in the 
context of PSP 
utilization. 

1 The primary 
objective of 
this report is 
to present 
results of 
post-hoc 
analyses to 
describe 
persistence 
with, and 
reasons for 
withdrawal 
from, that 
program. We 
also 
compared the 
characteristics 
of patients 
who did and 
did not 
remain in the 
program to 
identify any 
differences 
between these 
patients. 

1 We aimed to 
assess 
whether an 
educational 
and 
motivational 
support 
program 
(EMSP) 
increased 2-
year 
treatment 
persistence 
with TPTD 
in patients 
with severe 
osteoporosis. 

1 In this study, 
we assessed 
the 
adherence of 
breast and 
colorectal 
cancer 
patients 
treated with 
capecitabine 
and the 
impact of a 
pharmaceutic 
al care 
intervention 
on patient 
adherence. 

reported 
health status 
(HS), health 
state utility 
(HSU), 
and/or 
health-
related 
quality of 
life 
(HRQL). 

Methods 

Study 
design 

4 Present key elements of 
study design early in the 
paper 

1 A 
prospective 
, 
observation 
al cohort 
study was 
conducted 
in 205 
centers 
across 14 
countries 
from three 
different 
regions: 
Europe, 
Middle 
East, and 
Asia. 

1 Survey 
1 Non-
interventiona 
l 
single-arm 
study 

1 Case 
study 

1 Post-marketing, 
multicenter, 
observational 
study of patients 
treated with 
ADA according 
to the local 
product label 
and local 
standard of care 
and having 
access to their 
country's PSP 

0 
1 
retrospective 
cohort study 

1 The study 
was 
conducted as 
a 
prospective, 
multi-centred 
observational 
cohort study 
with control 
group 

Setting 
5 Describe the setting, 
locations, and relevant 
dates, including periods of 
recruitment, exposure, 
follow-up, and data 
collection 

0 
1 The survey 
was 
administere 
d in January 
2010 and 
allowed 6 
weeks for 
participatio 
n, with a 
reminder 
sent after 3 
weeks. 

1 75 centers in 
Germany. 

0 
1 Sites in 
Australia, 
Belgium, Czech 
Republic, 
France, 
Germany, 
Greece, Israel, 
Mexico, 
Netherlands, 
Portugal, 
Puerto Rico, 
Slovakia, 

1 The 
educational 
program for 
patients 
receiving 
teriparatide in 
Spain began 
in July 2005. 
All patients 
registered and 
prescribed 
teriparatide 

1 From 
January 
2013 until 
May 2015, 
patients 
received a 
basic 
support 
program 
(BSP). From 
May 2015 
onwards, all 

1 The study 
was 
approved by 
the ethics 
committee of 
the 
University of 
Bonn, 
Germany. 
Patients were 
consecutivel 
y recruited at 

Locations: 
German 
BetaPlus. 

Switzerland, and 
the United 
Kingdom. The 
study duration 
was up to 78 
weeks 

between 
September 1, 
2007 and 
June 20, 2010 
were included 
in these 
analyses. All 
patients who 
choose to exit 
the program 
early are 
interviewed 
by telephone 
as to their 
reasons for 
withdrawal 
using open 
questioning. 
Surveys are 
also 
conducted 
during, and 
upon 
completion 
of, the 
program to 
assess the 
level of 
satisfaction 
with and 
benefits of the 
support 
program, 

patients 
received the 
educational 
and 
motivational 
support 
program 
(EMSP) 

three hospital 
sites (two 
departments 
of internal 
medicine and 
one 
department 
of obstetrics 
and 
gynaecology) 
and three 
ambulatory 
oncology 
practices 

Participan 
ts 

6 
a) 
Cohort 
study-Give the eligibility 
criteria, and the sources 
and methods of selection of 
participants. Describe 
methods of follow-up 

1 Patients 
with 
relapsing -
remitting 
MS 
(RRMS) or 
secondary 
progressive 
MS 
(SPMS). 
Clinical 
and patient 
reported 
data were 
collected at 
baseline 
and at four 
follow-up 
visits, at 
months 6, 
12, 18 and 
24 after 
inclusion. 
Measures 
were taken 
for 
Expanded 
Disability 
Scale 
(EDSS), 
QoL 
(FAMS), 
and Coping 
(WCQ). 

1 adult 
German MS 
patients 
who 
provided 
their E-mail 
addresses to 
the German 
BETAPLU 
S service 
provider 
and agreed 
to receive 
E-mail 
corresponde 
nce. 

1 12-65 years 
of age with 
relapsing-
remitting MS 
or with a 
single 
demyelinatin 
g event with 
an active 
inflammator 
y process, 
and had been 
prescribed sc 
IFN 
b-1a using 
the 
RebiSmart 
(R) 
autoinjector. 

1 Adult patients 
with a diagnosis 
of moderate-to-
severe RA who 
have had 
insufficient 
response to one 
or more disease-
modifying anti-
rheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs). 
Patients that 
were enrolled in 
the study and 
treated per 
standard of care 
were a priori 
categorized 
based on their 
participation in 
the PSP: ever 
(PSP users) vs. 
never (PSP non-
users) and 
outcomes were 
compared after 
adjusting for 
corresponding 
baseline values. 

1 Adult patients 
with 
osteoporosis 
who receive 
teriparatide as 
a once daily 
subcutaneous 
injection for 
up to 24 
months. 

1 Because 
delivery of 
TPTD is 
provided by 
one central 
pharmacy, 
we were 
able to 
include all 
Dutch 
patients who 
were 
prescribed 
TPTD in an 
outpatient 
setting for 
the treatment 
of 
osteoporosis 
from 
January 
2013 until 
January 
2018. TPTD 
is provided 
as a pre-
filled pen 
containing 
750 mcg 
TPTD, 
which is 
administered 
to be used as 
a daily 
subcutaneou 
s injection of 
20 mcg 
TPTD for 28 
consecutive 
days during 
a period of 
24 months 
during this 
24-month 
treatment 
period, 
patients 
received 26 
pre-filled 
pens. In this 
study, all 
patients 

1 The main 
inclusion 
criterion was 
that the 
patient 
started a 
chemotherap 
y regimen 
with 
capecitabine 
as a single 
agent or in 
combination 
with other 
agents for 
treatment of 
colorectal or 
breast 
cancer. 
Patients had 
to be 
included into 
the study 
within 2 
weeks after 
the beginning 
of 
capecitabine 
therapy. The 
minimum 
age was 
defined as 18 
years; 
patients had 
to be able to 
speak and 
read German 
language 
fluently and 
had to give 
written 
consent to 
participate. 
Exclusion 
criteria were 
any prior 
orally 
administrable 
chemotherap 
y and any 
disease 
compromisin 

were 
followed 
from the 
start of 
TPTD 
treatment 
until the end 
of treatment 
with a 
maximal 
follow-up 
period of 2 
years, 
nursing 
home 
admission 
(in that case, 
TPTD is no 
longer 
provided by 
the central 
pharmacy), 
or death. 

g the patient 
to fully 
understand 
the purpose 
and course of 
the study (for 
example, 
Alzheimer's 
disease). If 
an eligible 
patient was 
identified by 
one of the 
collaborating 
oncologists, 
the patient 
was 
contacted 
within 24 h 
to organize a 
first meeting 
to provide 
the patient 
with spoken 
and written 
information 
about the 
study. 
Patients 
received a 
leaflet with 
information 
about the 
prevention 
and 
management 
of adverse 
effects of 
chemotherap 
y. They were 
contacted at 
least once 
during each 
cycle of 
capecitabine 
chemotherap 
y to inquire 
about any 
current 
therapy-
related 
questions or 

problems and 
to reconfirm 
the ongoing 
individual 
therapeutic 
regimen. 
Issues 
discussed 
during these 
telephone 
consultations 
ranged from 
management 
of adverse 
effects, 
administratio 
n of 
chemotherap 
y and 
supportive 
therapy to 
questions 
regarding 
additional 
complementa 
ry treatment 
options. In 
some cases, 
the follow-up 
consultations 
took place on 
the hospital 
or oncology 
practice site. 
Case-control 
study-Give the eligibility 
criteria, and the sources 
and methods of case 
ascertainment and control 
selection. Give the 
rationale for the choice of 
cases and controls 
Cross-sectional 
study-Give the eligibility 
criteria, and the sources 
and methods of selection of 
participants 
b) 
Cohort 
study-For matched 
studies, give matching 
criteria and number of 
exposed and unexposed 

Case-control 
study-For matched 
studies, give matching 
criteria and the number of 
controls per case 
Variables 
7 Clearly define all 
outcomes, exposures, 
predictors, potential 
confounders, and effect 
modifiers. Give diagnostic 
criteria, if applicable 

1 EDDSS, 
WCQ, 
FAMS and 
CES-Q 
were 
explained 
and defined 
in the paper 

1 The 
qualitative 
findings 
identified 
several 
patient 
needs from 
a PSP 
program. 
The paper 
specifies the 
content of 
the survey 
instrument 

1 Quantitative 
Adherence 
data (date, 
tiem and 
dose for each 
injection): 
was defined 
as the 
poroportion 
of weeks for 
which 
inkjections 
were 
administered 
correctly 
according to 
the specified 
week 
schedule. 
PROS 
(FSMC, 
BDI-FS, 
MusiQoL 
and SDMT) 

0 
1 Health 
Assessment 
Questionnaire 
Disability Index 
(HAQ-DI), 
Work 
Productivity and 
Activity 
Impairment 
(WPAI), 
Compliance 
Questionnaire 
Rheumatology 
(CQR), 
Treatment 
Satisfaction 
Questionnaire 
for Medication 
(TSQM), 
Beliefs about 
Medicines 
Questionnaire 
(BMQ), Patient 
Activation 
Meeasure 
(PAM-13), 
Disease Acrivity 
Score (DAS28), 
Simplified 
Disease Activity 
Index (SDAI), 
Clinical Disease 
Activity Index 
(CDAI), 
ACR20/50/70 
responses rates 

1 Quantitative 
variables 
(patient age, 
patient 
satisfaction 
with the 
delivery 
device) and 
qualitative 
variables 
(patient 
gender and 
age category, 
prescribing 
physician, 
patients with 
previous 
fractures, 
movement 
through the 
program, 
persistence 
with the 
program, 
reasons for 
treatment 
withdrawal, 
patient 
satisfaction 
with the 
program) 

1 Persistence 
was defined 
as the act of 
continuing 
treatment for 
the 
prescribed 
duration 
without 
exceeding 
the 
permissible 
gap. Data 
were 
collected 
from the 
pharmacy's 
database 
including 
sex, age, 
weight, 
height, 
comorbiditie 
s and the 
method of 
TPTD 
administrati 
on (self-
administrati 
on, 
administrati 
on by 
a family 
member or 
by a home 
care nurse). 
Further, 
dates and 
reasons for 
additional 
phone calls 
or home 
visits (on 
request of 
the patient 
or based on 
the score of 

1 Adherence of 
patients of 
both study 
groups was 
analysed 
using the 
data 
uploaded 
from the 
MEMS™ 
vials and 
patients' 
notes 
regarding 
extraordinary 
openings. 
Overall 
adherence 
was 
calculated by 
dividing the 
number of 
actual 
openings 
recorded by 
the MEMS™ 
system by 
the number 
of expected 
openings. In 
addition, 
daily 
adherence 
was 
calculated by 
dividing the 
number of 
days with a 
correct 
number of 
openings of 
the MEMS™ 
vial by the 
number of 
days 
monitored. In 
the case of 

the 
medication 
adherence 
scoring tool) 
were 
registered. 
In addition 
to the 
reasons for 
treatment 
discontinuati 
on, adverse 
events 
related to 
TPTD 
use were 
also 
registered 
from 
December 
2013 
onwards. 

capecitabine 
therapy in 
this study, a 
day with a 
correct 
number of 
openings 
could either 
be a day with 
two openings 
(during the 2 
weeks of 
therapy) or 
with no 
opening 
(during the 7 
days of 
break). 
Therapy days 
with less or 
more than 
two openings 
or days with 
any number 
of openings 
during the 
scheduled 
therapy-free 
interval were 
counted as 
non-adherent 
days. 
Furthermore, 
adherence 
data were 
evaluated 
with regard 
to persistence 
with therapy. 
For this 
purpose, 
duration of 
capecitabine 
treatment 
was 
compared 
between both 
study groups 

Data 
sources/ 
measurem 
ent 

8* For each variable of 
interest, give sources of 
data and details of methods 
of assessment 
(measurement). Describe 
comparability of 
assessment methods if 
there is more than one 
group 

1 EDDSS, 
WCQ, 
FAMS and 
CES-Q 
were 
explained 
and defined 
in the paper 

1 All scale 
questions 
except 
frequency 
of using the 
PSP utilized 
a 10-point 
scale 
anchored at 
both ends. 
Frequency 
of PSP use 
was 
measured 
using a 7-
point 
scale with 
each point 
labeled (i.e., 
daily, 
several 
times per 
week, once 
per week, a 
few times 
per month, 
once every 
month, 
every 
couple of 
months, and 
never). 

1 Quantitative 
adherence 
data, FMSC. 
BDI-FS, 
MusiQoL 
and SDMT, 
were 
explained 
and defined 
in the paper 

0 
1 The overall 
HAQ-DI score 
is on a scale of 
0-3, zero 
indicating no 
disability and 3 
indicating 
complete 
disability. HAQ-
DI was 
measured at 
baseline and 
weeks 24, 52, 
and 78 and 
expressed as 
mean change 
from baseline. 
TheWPAI yields 
four scores: (1) 
percentage of 
work time 
missed because 
of ill health 
(absenteeism), 
(2) percentage 
impairment 
while working 
due to ill health 
(presenteesism), 
(3) percentage 
activity 
impairment due 
to ill health 
(activity 
impairment), 
and (4) an 
overall 
percentage work 
impairment 
score due to 
health problems 
(work 
productivity 
loss). CQR is 
measured with 
likert scale 
statements 
ranging from 1 
(do not agree at 
all) to 4 (agree 
very much). The 
total score is 

1 Quantitative 
variables 
(patient age, 
patient 
satisfaction 
with the 
delivery 
device) 
included the 
number of 
observations, 
mean, 
standard 
deviation, 
and/or 95% 
confidence 
intervals 
(CIs) for the 
mean. 
Qualitative 
variables 
(patient 
gender and 
age category, 
prescribing 
physician, 
patients with 
previous 
fractures, 
movement 
through the 
program, 
persistence 
with the 
program, 
reasons for 
treatment 
withdrawal, 
patient 
satisfaction 
with the 
program) 
were 
described by 
the number 
and the 
percentage of 
patients 
according to 
response 
categories. 
Persistence 

1 For this 
study, TPTD 
persistence 
was 
calculated 
using 
delivery 
dates and the 
number of 
pens 
delivered per 
delivery. For 
each 
delivery, a 
permissible 
gap was 
calculated as 
a gap of 28 
days plus 
extra days 
TPTD from 
the previous 
delivery. 
Thus, for 
examplewhe 
n a patient 
received a 
new pen 
while still 
having 
TPTD for 2 
days in the 
old pen, a 
permissible 
gap of 30 
days was 
used (2 days 
from the old 
pen + 28 
days from 
the new 
pen). In 
addition, 
patients 
were 
classified as 
persistent if 
they had 
received a 
minimum of 
24 pens 
because 

1 Adherence of 
patients of 
both study 
groups was 
analysed 
using the 
data 
uploaded 
from the 
MEMS™ 
vials and 
patients' 
notes 
regarding 
extraordinary 
openings. 
Overall 
adherence 
was 
calculated by 
dividing the 
number of 
actual 
openings 
recorded by 
the MEMS™ 
system by 
the number 
of expected 
openings. In 
addition, 
daily 
adherence 
was 
calculated by 
dividing the 
number of 
days with a 
correct 
number of 
openings of 
the MEMS™ 
vial by the 
number of 
days 
monitored. In 
the case of 
capecitabine 
therapy in 
this study, a 
day with a 
correct 

calculated by 
summing all 19 
items and 
subtracting 19 
from the total 
and dividing by 
0.57. The total 
score ranges 
between 0 
(complete non-
compliance) and 
100 (perfect 
compliance). 
TSQM: a score 
can be obtained 
for each sub-
domain by 
summing of the 
corresponding 
items 
transformed on 
a 0-100 scale; 
higher values 
indicate higher 
satisfaction, 
better perceived 
effectiveness, 
lower burden 
associated to 
side effects, 
better 
convenience. 
BMQ: Final 
scores as 
estimated using 
recorded 
answers on a 
five-point Likert 
scale, ranging 
from 1 = 
strongly 
disagree to 5 = 
strongly agree. 
Higher scores 
indicate stronger 
perceptions of 
the concerns and 
necessity of 
ADA. PAM-13: 
Items are scored 
on a five-point 
scale. The sum 

was measured 
as the 
proportion of 
patients who 
had not 
abandoned 
the 
educational 
support 
program at 3, 
6, 12, 18, or 
24 months. 
determined. 
Kaplan-
Meier 
estimates 
with 95% CIs 
of the 
percentages 
of patients 
staying in the 
education 
support 
program, 
once enrolled, 
for more than 
3, 6, 12, 18, 
or 24 months 
were 
determined.T 
he time until 
abandonment 
of the 
program was 
calculated as 
the time from 
the date of 
entry into the 
support 
program until 
premature 
abandonment 
of the 
program by 
the patient. 
Premature 
abandonment 
was defined 
as 
withdrawal 
from the 
program 

every pen 
contained 
more TPTD 
than 
necessary 
for the 
prescribed 
28 days of 
treatment 
per pen. So, 
if a patient 
used the pen 
until it was 
completely 
empty, 24 
pens were 
sufficient to 
complete the 
24-month 
treatment 
course. 

number of 
openings 
could either 
be a day with 
two openings 
(during the 2 
weeks of 
therapy) or 
with no 
opening 
(during the 7 
days of 
break). 
Therapy days 
with less or 
more than 
two openings 
or days with 
any number 
of openings 
during the 
scheduled 
therapy-free 
interval were 
counted as 
non-adherent 
days. 
Furthermore, 
adherence 
data were 
evaluated 
with regard 
to persistence 
with therapy. 
For this 
purpose, 
duration of 
capecitabine 
treatment 
was 
compared 
between both 
study groups. 
Duration of 
drug intake 
intervals was 
assessed as 
time between 
two openings 
of the 
MEMS™ 
container. 

of these scores 
is converted in a 
0-100 point 
scale 

before the 
period 
initially 
prescribed by 
the patient's 
healthcare 
provider had 
elapsed. The 
reasons for 
withdrawal 
from the 
program/treat 
ment were 
examined for 
all patients 
who had the 
opportunity to 
complete the 
program 
during the 
observational 
period, but 
did not. 
Similar 
analyses were 
also 
performed 
according to 
patient 
age.Patients 
abandoned 
the program 
by notifying 
the program 
nurse, during 
either a 
scheduled or 
unscheduled 
telephone 
call, that they 
were no 
longer 
injecting 
teriparatide. 

Intervals ≥24 
h were 
excluded 
from this 
analysis. 
Intervals of 
12±2 h were 
defined as 
adherent. 
Relative risk 
was 
calculated for 
intervals 
outside this 
timeframe. 
Also, the 
'number 
needed to 
treat' was 
calculated to 
prevent one 
non-adherent 
interval by 
the 
pharmaceutic 
al care 
intervention. 

Bias 
(sesgo) 

9 Describe any efforts to 
address potential sources of 
bias 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 The potential 
for selection 
bias could 
only be 
avoided using 
a randomized 
trial design. 
Therefore, the 
results of 
another 
similar 
program for 
improving 
osteoporosis 
medication 
adherence 
and 
persistence in 
the US are of 
interest. 

0 -
1 A parallel 
design could 
have led to 
significant 
contaminatio 
n bias 
because of 
the 
interaction 
that occurs 
between 
clinic 
patients. In 
addition, 
since 
blinding is 
not possible 
with this 
intervention, 
healthcare 
professionals 
might have 
adopted an 
approach to 
patient 
follow-up 
counseling 
that was 
dependent 
upon the 
intervention 
received. 
Therefore, 
we decided 
to recruit 
first the 
control group 
and 
subsequently 
the 
intervention 
group in each 
participating 
centre. 

Study size 

10 Explain how the study size 
was arrived at 

1 This 
sample size 
was 
estimated 
to 
guarantee 
with a loss 
to follow-
up of 20% 
still 
sufficiently 
precise 
estimates, 
also in 
subgroups 

1 German 
patients in 
BetaPlus 
PSP 

0 
0 
1 Sample size 
calculation of 
this study was 
based on the 
estimation 
precision 
approach. A 
total of 700 
patients were 
needed to 
estimate the 
95% confidence 
interval with 
3.7% precision 
(confidence 
band width of 
7.4%). With an 
estimated 
dropout rate of 
30%, 
approximately 
1000 patients 
should be 
enrolled into 
this study to 
maintain the 
precision of 
0.037. 

0 
1 Because 
delivery of 
TPTD is 
provided by 
one central 
pharmacy, 
we were 
able to 
include all 
Dutch 
patients who 
were 
prescribed 
TPTD in an 
outpatient 
setting for 
the treatment 
of 
osteoporosis 
from 
January 
2013 until 
January 
2018. TPTD 
is provided 
as a pre-
filled pen 
containing 
750 mcg 
TPTD, 
which is 
administered 
to be used as 
a daily 
subcutaneou 
s injection of 
20 mcg 
TPTD for 28 
consecutive 
days during 
a period of 
24 months. 
During 
this 24-
month 
treatment 
period, 
patients 
received 26 
pre-filled 
pens. In this 
study, all 

1 Daily 
adherence 
was selected 
as primary 
endpoint of 
this study; 
the other 
measured 
parameters 
were 
regarded as 
secondary 
endpoints. 
Since no 
prior data on 
daily 
adherence to 
capecitabine 
were 
available, we 
assumed a 
daily 
adherence of 
79.1% for the 
control group 
according to 
a published 
meta-
analysis [23]. 
Target daily 
adherence for 
the 
intervention 
group was 
95%. 
Assuming an 
alpha error of 
5% and an 
intra-patient 
correlation of 
0.25 
(estimated 
from the 
Pharmionic 
Knowledge 
Center 
database, 
Pharmionic 
Systems, 
Sion, 
Switzerland) 
resulted in a 

patients 
were 
followed 
from the 
start of 
TPTD 
treatment 
until the end 
of treatment 
with a 
maximal 
follow-up 
period of 2 
years, 
nursing 
home 
admission 
(in that case, 
TPTD is no 
longer 
provided by 
the central 
pharmacy), 
or death. 

sample size 
of 17 patients 
for each 
study group 
(power of 
80%). 
Considering 
a potential 
drop-out rate 
of 25% led to 
a final 
sample size 
of 22 patients 
for each 
group. 

Quantitati 
ve 
variables 

11 Explain how quantitative 
variables were handled in 
the analyses. If applicable, 
describe which groupings 
were chosen and why 

1 i.e. FAMS: 
A total 
score for 
overall 
QOL is 
derived by 
summing 
the scores 
for all 
subscales 
excluding 
'additional 
concerns'. 
It ranges 
from 0 to 
176 and a 
higher 
score 
reflects a 
better QOL 

1 All scale 
questions 
except 
frequency 
of using the 
PSP utilized 
a 10-point 
scale 
anchored at 
both ends. 
Frequency 
of PSP use 
was 
measured 
using a 7-
point 
scale with 
each point 
labeled (i.e., 
daily, 
several 
times per 
week, once 
per week, a 
few times 
per month, 
once every 
month, 

1 Qualitative 
adherence, 
reported for 
months 1-
24, was 
defined as 
the 
proportion of 
weeks for 
which 
injections 
were 
administered 
correctly 
according to 
the specified 
weekly 
schedule 

0 
1 Patient 
information was 
summarized 
using 
descriptive 
statistics, 
continuous 
variables were 
compared by 
analysis of 
variance, and 
discrete 
variables were 
analyzed using 
v2 tests. 
Clinically 
relevant 
secondary 
outcomes were 
compared 
between PSP 
users and PSP 
non-users. Non-
responder 
imputation 
(NRI) was used 
for response rate 
variables and 

every 
couple of 
months, and 
never). 

last-observation 
carried forward 
(LOCF) for 
continuous 
variables, as 
appropriate. For 
continuous 
variables, the 
mean and 
standard 
deviation are 
presented. 

Statistical 
methods 

12 
a) 
Describe 
all statistical methods, 
including those used to 
control for confounding 

1 To account 
for 
confoundin 
g factors 
influencing 
adherence, 
a logistic 
regression 
model was 
estimated 
with 
probability 
of being 
adherent at 
24-months 
as 
dependent 
variable. 

1 included 
analyses of 
variance 
with 
Bonferroni 
corrections 
to test for 
differences 
in means; 
chi-square 
tests for 
independen 
ce of 
categorical 
variables; 
and 
stepwise 
linear 
regression 
to 
determine 
drivers of 
PSP 
satisfaction 
and loyalty 
and HSU. 

1 Quantitative 
and 
qualitative 
adherence 
was 
described 
using basic 
statistical 
parameters 
-mean 
standard 
deviation 
(SD)] and 
median 
[range, 
interquartile 
range 
(IQR)]. 
Changes in 
patient-
reported 
outcomes 
were tested 
using the t 
test with a 
0.05 level of 
significance, 
while there 
was no 
correction 
for multiple 
testing 
(exploratory) 

1 Patient 
information was 
summarized 
using 
descriptive 
statistics, 
continuous 
variables were 
compared by 
analysis of 
variance, and 
discrete 
variables were 
analyzed using 
X2 tests. 

1 Quantitative 
variables 
(patient age, 
patient 
satisfaction 
with the 
delivery 
device) 
included the 
number of 
observations, 
mean, 
standard 
deviation, 
and/or 95% 
confidence 
intervals 
(CIs) for the 
mean. 
Qualitative 
variables 
(patient 
gender and 
age category, 
prescribing 
physician, 
patients with 
previous 
fractures, 
movement 
through the 
program, 
persistence 
with the 
program, 
reasons for 
treatment 

1 Patients 
were 
followed 
from the 
start of 
TPTD 
treatment 
until the end 
of treatment, 
nursing 
home 
admission 
(in that case, 
TPTD was 
no longer 
provided by 
the central 
pharmacy) 
or death. 
Treatment 
persistence 
was 
analysed 
using age-
and 
sexadjusted 
Cox 
proportional 
hazard 
models. In 
addition, the 
Cox 
proportional 
hazard 
model was 
adjusted for 
the TPTD 

1 The 
statistical 
analysis in 
this study 
was 
performed 
using 
SPSS™ for 
Windows, 
Version 15.0 
(SPSS Inc., 
USA) and 
Microsoft™ 
Excel 2000 
(Microsoft 
Corporation, 
USA). The 
non-
parametric 
Mann-
Whitney U 
test was used 
to compare 
adherence 
parameters in 
both patient 
groups. 
Duration of 
capecitabine 
treatment 
was 
compared by 
performing a 
Kaplan-
Meier 
survival 
analysis and 

withdrawal, 
patient 
satisfaction 
with the 
program) 
were 
described by 
the number 
and the 
percentage of 
patients 
according to 
response 
categories. 
Persistence 
was measured 
as the 
proportion of 
patients who 
had not 
abandoned 
the 
educational 
support 
program at 3, 
6, 12, 18, or 
24 months. 
determined. 
Kaplan-
Meier 
estimates 
with 95% CIs 
of the 
percentages 
of patients 
staying in the 
education 
support 
program, 
once enrolled, 
for more than 
3, 6, 12, 18, 
or 24 months 
were 
determined.T 
he time until 
abandonment 
of the 
program was 
calculated as 
the time from 
the date of 

administrati 
on (by 
patient 
himself vs. 
family 
members or 
home care), 
as it might 
influence the 
persistence. 
Data 
analyses 
were 
performed 
with SAS 
version 9.42. 

the logrank 
test. 
Influence of 
the 
intervention 
on regularity 
of intake 
intervals was 
evaluated by 
95% 
confidence 
intervals and 
the Chi-
square test. 
The level of 
significance 
was set to 
p<0.05. 

entry into the 
support 
program until 
premature 
abandonment 
of the 
program by 
the patient. 
Premature 
abandonment 
was defined 
as 
withdrawal 
from the 
program 
before the 
period 
initially 
prescribed by 
the patient's 
healthcare 
provider had 
elapsed. The 
reasons for 
withdrawal 
from the 
program/treat 
ment were 
examined for 
all patients 
who had the 
opportunity to 
complete the 
program 
during the 
observational 
period, but 
did not. 
Similar 
analyses were 
also 
performed 
according to 
patient 
age.Patients 
abandoned 
the program 
by notifying 
the program 
nurse, during 
either a 
scheduled or 

unscheduled 
telephone 
call, that they 
were no 
longer 
injecting 
teriparatide. 

b) 
Describe 
any methods used to 
examine subgroups and 
interactions 
c) 
Explain 
how missing data were 
addressed 

Missing data 
were 
accounted 
for using the 
last 
observation 
carried 
forward 
principle, 
whereby 
missing 
values were 
replaced by 

the last 
observed 
value for that 
particular 
variable. 

d) 
Cohort 
study-If applicable, 
explain how loss to follow-
up was addressed 
Case-control 
study-If applicable, 
explain how matching of 
cases and controls was 
addressed 
Cross-sectional 
study-If applicable, 
describe analytical methods 
taking account of sampling 
strategy 
e) 
Describe 
any sensitivity analyses 
Results 

Participan 
ts 

13 
* 

a) 
Report 
numbers of individuals at 
each stage of study-eg 
numbers potentially 
eligible, examined for 
eligibility, confirmed 
eligible, included in the 
study, completing follow-
up, and analysed 

1 A total of 
1077 
patients 
mainly 
from the 
Middle 
East region 
(59.2%) 
and Europe 
(39.8%) 
were 
included in 
this study. 
After 24 
months 700 
patients 
(65.0%) 
were 
completing 
this study. 

1 A total of 
368 of 392 
(93.9%) 
enrolled 
patients 
were 
included in 
the full 
analysis set. 

1 A total of 1025 
patients were 
included in the 
ITT population 
(ITT). Of these, 
499 (48.7%) 
patients were 
PSP users and 
526 (51.3%) 
were PSP non-
users. 

1 In total, 
1573 
patients 
were 
included of 
whom 649 
patients 
were 
instructed 
and treated 
according to 
the BSP, 530 
patients 
according to 
the BSP + 
letters and 
394 patients 
according to 
the EMSP 

b) 

Give 
reasons for non-
participation at each stage 

c) 
Consider 
use of a flow diagram 

1 Figure 1: 
Sample 
disposition 
(Pag E6) 

1 Figure 1. Pag 
290 

1 Fig 1. Pag 
1012 

Descriptiv 
e data 

14 
* 

a) 
Give 
characteristics of study 
participants (eg 
demographic, clinical, 
social) and information on 
exposures and potential 
confounders 

1 Table 1. 
P.122 
(Demograp 
hic and 
clinical 
characterist 
ics at 
baseline 

1 Table 1, 
Pag: E7 
(Responden 
ts 
Charactersti 
cs) 

1 Table 1. Pag 
179. 
(baseline 
demographic 
and disease 
characteristic 
s) 

1 Pacients 
receiving 
Ibrutinib 
for CLL 
or MCL 

1 Table 1. Pag 89 
(Baseline 
demographics 
and disease 
characteristics) 

1 Table 1. pag 
289 (baseline 
demographics 
and 
characteristics 
of 23,865 
patients 
enrolled in 
the 
educational 
support 
program for 
use of the 
teriparatide 
delivery 
device) 

1 Table 2. Pag 
1840 
(baseline 
characteristi 
cs of all 
patients 
treated with 
teriparatide 
according to 
the different 
support 
programs 

1 Table 1. Pag 
1014. 
Demographic 
characteristic 
s and a 
overview of 
the 
observation 
period, the 
number of 
completed 
capecitabine 
cycles and 
the number 
of additional 
medications 
b) 
Indicate 
number of participants with 
missing data for each 
variable of interest 
c) 
Cohort 
study-Summarise follow-
up time (eg, average and 
total amount) 

Outcome 
data 

15 
* 

Cohort study-Report 
numbers of outcome events 
or summary measures over 
time 

1 Table 3. 
p123. 
Demograph 
ic and 
clinical 
characterist 
ics 
according 
to the 
adherence 
to IFNB-1b 

1 Table 2. 
Pag. E8 
(Health 
Status by 
Self-repoted 
EDSS level) 

1 Quantitative 
adherence 
for the entire 
study 
period was 
high, with a 
mean (± SD) 
of 85.3% 
(± 24.8%); 
adherence 
was 89.6% 
(± 21.6%) 
for 
months 1-12 
and 83.3% 
(± 24.5%) 
for months 
13-24. 

0 
0 
1 Table 2. Pag 
291; Table 3, 
Pag 292 

1 Table 3. Pag 
1840. Two-
year 
persistence 
according to 
gender and 
age 
categories 
and reasons 
for treatment 
discontinuati 
on. Fig 1. 
Pag 1841. 
persistence 
with 
teriparatide 
according to 
the different 
support 
programs 

1 The 
observation 
period in the 
control group 
ranged from 
13 to 128 
days and in 
the 
intervention 
group from 9 
to 138 days. 
Tables 2 and 
3 show the 
adherence 
results for 
each patient 
over the 
observation 
period 
expressed in 
overall and 
daily 
adherence. 
The 
intervention 
group 
showed an 
increased but 
not 
significantly 
different 
mean overall 
adherence of 
97.9% 
(Median=99. 
0%, p=0.069, 
Mann-
Whitney U 
test) 
compared 
with a mean 
overall 
adherence of 
90.5% in the 
control group 
(Median=96. 
2%). Table 2. 
Adherence 
data of the 
control 
group. Table 
3: adherence 

datos of the 
intervention 
group 

Case-control study-
Report numbers in each 
exposure category, or 
summary measures of 
exposure 

0 

Cross-sectional study-
Report numbers of 
outcome events or 
summary measures 

0 

Main 
results 

16 
a) 
Give 
unadjusted estimates and, if 
applicable, confounder-
adjusted estimates and their 
precision (eg, 95% 
confidence interval). Make 
clear which confounders 
were adjusted for and why 
they were included 

1 Table 5 
p,124 
Logistic 
regression 

1 Table 6. 
Pag. E11 

1 Fig 1. Pag 
179. Table 2 
Pag 181 
(Patient 
responses to 
thealth 
economic 
questions) 

0 The 
feedback 
from 
patients 
has been 
positive 
and the 
program 
me may 
have 
helped 
some of 
them to 
continue 
taking 
ibrutinib 
on a 
long-
term 
basis. 
This is 
importan 
t as it is 
likely 
that more 
than 70% 
of CLL 
patients 
without 
del(17p) 
will be 
taking 
ibrutinib 
for 
longer 
than 36 
months 

1 The study met 
its primary 
endpoint with 
72.1% (as 
observed) and 
42.8% (NRI) of 
patients 
achieving the 
MCID in HAQ-
DI at week 78. 
A higher 
proportion of 
PSP users than 
non-users 
achieved the 
MCID in HAQ-
DI (48.1 vs. 
37.8%; p\0.001, 
NRI) at week 
78. Significant 
improvements 
from baseline to 
week 78 
overtime were 
observed in PSP 
users vs. PSP 
non-users in 
HAQ-DI (-0.53 
vs. -0.39; p = 
0.011), 
DAS28(CRP) (-
2.33 vs. -1.97; p 
= 0.018), SDAI 
(-24.5 vs. -19.8; 
p = 0.001), and 
CDAI (-22.66 
vs. -18.55; p = 
0.002). Fig 2 
(pag 91); Table 
3 (pag 92) 

1 Table 3, Pag 
292 

1 Two-year 
persistencew 
as 71.6% in 
the BSP 
group and 
78.4% in the 
EMSP group 
(p <0.001) 
(Table 3, 
Fig. 1). 
Based on the 
medication 
adherence 
scoring tool, 
in total, 42 
additional 
phone calls 
or home 
visits were 
conducted in 
the EMSP. 
The reasons 
for treatment 
discontinuati 
on were 
comparable 
between the 
three groups, 
except for 
the 
discontinuati 
on according 
to the side 
effects of 
TPTD use 
which was 
significantly 
lower in the 
EMSP group 
as compared 
with the 
BSP group 
(7.6% vs. 
14.6%, 
respectively, 
p value = 
0.014). Two-
year 
persistence 
with TPTD 
in patients 
who 

1 Tables 2 and 
3 show the 
adherence 
results for 
each patient 
over the 
observation 
period 
expressed in 
overall and 
daily 
adherence. 
The 
intervention 
group 
showed an 
increased but 
not 
significantly 
different 
mean overall 
adherence of 
97.9% 
(Median=99. 
0%, p=0.069, 
Mann-
Whitney U 
test) 
compared 
with a mean 
overall 
adherence of 
90.5% in the 
control group 
(Median=96. 
2%). Mean 
daily 
adherence 
was 
significantly 
(p=0.029) 
improved 
from 87.2% 
in the control 
group 
(Median=93. 
8%) to 
96.8% in the 
intervention 
group 
(Median=98. 
5%). Figures 

received the 
BSP + 
letters was 
73.8% vs. 
71.6%in the 
BSP group 
(Table 3, 
Fig. 1). 
Age-and 
sex-adjusted 
Cox 
regression 
analysis 
showed that 
the risk of 
non-
persistence 
was 28% 
lower in the 
EMSP group 
as compared 
with the 
BSP group 
(HR: 0.72; 
95% CI: 
0.55-0.93). 
Instructing 
and 
following 
patients 
according to 
the BSP + 
letters 
program did 
not reduce 
the risk of 
non-
persistence 
(HR: 0.90; 
95% CI: 
0.72-1.13). 
Because 
there was a 
difference in 
the way of 
administerin 
g TPTD in 
the different 
groups, the 
analysis was 
additionally 
adjusted for 

2 and 3 
illustrate the 
differences in 
overall and 
daily 
adherence 
between the 
two study 
groups. 
Moreover, 
the 
intervention 
led to a 
decrease of 
variability 
with regard 
to the 
adherence 
parameters in 
the 
intervention 
group. Table 
4 presents an 
overview of 
the total and 
relative 
number of 
patients in 
both groups 
with 
adherence 
parameters 
below 90% 
and 80%. 
Figure 4 
illustrates the 
comparison 
of the time 
period 
patients were 
kept on 
capecitabine 
chemotherap 
y between 
the control 
and 
intervention 
group. At the 
end of the 
observation 
period of 126 
days the 

the method 
of TPTD 
administrati 
on, resulting 
in the same 
significant 
lower risk of 
non-
persistence 
(HR: 0.72; 
95% CI: 
0.56-0.94). 
Among 
women, the 
risk of non-
persistence 
was 32% 
lower with 
the EMSP as 
compared 
with the 
BSP (HR: 
0.68; 95% 
CI: 0.52-
0.92), while 
inmen there 
was no 
difference in 
the risk of 
non-
persistence 
between the 
EMSP and 
BSP. 
Furthermore, 
in patients 
aged 70-79 
years, the 
risk of non-
persistence 
was 44% 
lower with 
the EMSP as 
compared 
with the 
BSP (HR: 
0.56; 95% 
CI: 0.36-
0.88). 

probability of 
still being 
treated with 
capecitabine 
in the control 
group was 
found to be 
48% and in 
the 
intervention 
group 83%. 
This 
difference 
was 
statistically 
significant 
(p=0.019, 
log-rank 
test). 

b) 
Report 
category boundaries when 

0 

continuous variables were 
categorized 

c) 
If 
relevant, consider 
translating estimates of 
relative risk into absolute 
risk for a meaningful time 
period 

0 

Other 
analyses 

17 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Discussion 

Key results 
18 Summarise key results with 
reference to study 
objectives 

1 Testing the 
differences 
in 
demographi 
c and 
disease 
characterist 
ics between 
adherent 
and non-
adherent 
patients we 
found the 
following 
factors 
negatively 
influencing 
adherence: 
older age of 
the 
patients, 
secondary 
progressive 
MS, a 
longer 
duration of 
MS 
disease, a 
higher 
EDSS 
score and a 
lower 
FAMS 
QOL score 
at 
inclusion. 

1 The results 
of this study 
indicate that 
MS patient 
needs vary 
by severity 
of the 
disease, 
duration of 
the 
disease, and 
gender. 
Patients in 
the early 
stages of the 
disease or 
patients 
diagnosed 
with MS for 
less than 2 
years 
consider 
learning to 
self-inject 
correctly 
and the 
impact 
of MS on 
fertility to 
be the most 
important 
need. 
As patients 
progress, 
these needs 

1 Patients 
using the 
RebiSmart® 
device in the 
current study 
showed high 
quantitative 
adherence 
measured 
prospectivel 
y over a 2-
year period. 

1 Novel 
drugs 
have 
changed 
the 
landscap 
e of 
chronic 
lymphoc 
ytic 
leukaemi 
a 
therapy. 
The 
You&i 
program 
me offers 
very 
good 
patient 
support 
Frequent 
contact 
through a 
support 
program 
me can 
help 
ensure 
complian 
ce with 
medicati 
on 
regimens 
Improve 
d 

1 The main 
purpose of the 
study was to 
provide 
information on 
the clinical, 
functional, and 
patient-reported 
outcomes in a 
real-life practice 
setting among 
RA patients that 
initiated ADA 
and were 
offered to 
participate in the 
PSP. To our 
knowledge, 
PASSION is the 
first prospective 
study to show a 
significant 
improvement in 
treatment and 
patient-reported 
outcomes in 
moderate to 
severe RA 
patients 
participating in 
PSP. Results 
from this post-
marketing 
observational 
multinational 
study showed 

1 This analysis 
shows that, 
using a 
telephonebase 
d educational 
support 
program, 
treatment 
persistence 
rates at 3, 6, 
12, and 18 
months for 
the 
teriparatide 
delivery 
device were 
high when 
considered 
against 
published 
'realworld' 
adherence 
rates to 
teriparatide in 
the US 
(56.7% at 1 
year and 19% 
at 2 years) 
and Germany 
(54.3% at 1 
year). At 12 
and 18 
months, 
74.8% and 
68.5% of 
patients, 

1 We found 
that 2-year 
persistence 
with TPTD 
was 
significantly 
higher 
(78.4%) in 
the EMSP 
group as 
compared 
with the 
BSP group 
(71.6%). 
The 
proportion 
of patients 
who stopped 
taking TPTD 
due to side 
effects was 
significantly 
lower in the 
EMSP group 
as compared 
with the 
BSP group. 
Patients 
instructed 
and followed 
according to 
the EMSP 
had a 28% 
lower risk of 
non-
persistence 

1 Our study 
revealed the 
potential of 
adherence 
enhancement 
by providing 
intensified 
pharmaceutic 
al care. The 
basis for the 
evaluation of 
adherence in 
this study 
were the two 
parameters 
overall and 
daily 
adherence as 
proposed by 
Vrijens and 
Goetghebeur 
[24]. It is 
remarkable 
that median 
overall 
adherence of 
96% in our 
control group 
was the same 
as that 
reported by 
Mayer et al. 
for 13 
metastatic 
breast cancer 
patients 

become less 
important 

survival 
with 
long-
term 
therapy 
significa 
ntly 
increases 
clinical 
activity 
and 
therefore 
workload 
s. A 
support 
program 
me can 
help as it 
means 
patients 
require 
fewer 
clinic 
visits 

that patients 
with moderate 
to severe RA 
who initiated 
ADA and 
enrolled in the 
PSP achieved an 
overall greater 
improvement in 
clinical, 
functional, and 
patient-reported 
outcomes as 
compared to the 
patients who 
initiated ADA 
without 
participation in 
the PSP. 

respectively, 
remained in 
the 
educational 
program. This 
represents the 
majority of 
patients 
receiving 
teriparatide in 
Spain during 
this period, as 
a review of 
prescription 
data indicated 
that aprox. 
80% of 
patients 
prescribed 
teriparatide 
entered the 
educational 
program 

during the 
24-month 
treatment 
compared 
with patients 
instructed 
and followed 
according to 
the BSP 

using the 
same method 
[19]. Median 
daily 
adherence of 
94% was 
found to be a 
bit lower 
compared 
with overall 
adherence in 
the control 
group. 

Limitation 
s 

19 Discuss limitations of the 
study, taking into account 
sources of potential bias or 
imprecision. Discuss both 
direction and magnitude of 
any potential bias 

1 There are 
limitations 
to this 
study 
which are 
worth 
mentioning 
. 
Most 
importantly 
it is a 
single arm 
study with 
a pre-post 
design 
which 
does not 
allow to 
strictly 
attribute 
changes 
observed to 
a certain 
condition 
due to the 

1 The main 
finding is 
based on 
patients' 
assessment 
of their HS 
under a 
hypothetical 
scenario. 
Such 
assessment 
may be 
fraught with 
overstateme 
nt of 
program 
impact. 
Second, the 
study lacks 
a 
sufficiently 
sized or 
matched 
control 
group not in 

1 vof the small 
number of 
patients 
included in 
subgroup 
analyses and 
the 
number of 
patients with 
missing data. 
Another 
limitation 
was the lack 
of a control 
or 
comparator 
group in the 
current study 

0 
1 As in any 
observational 
study, only 
observed 
confounders 
were accounted 
for, hence the 
findings of the 
study should be 
interpreted with 
the caution of 
unobserved 
confounding. 
Additionally, 
the study only 
collected data 
on study 
discontinuation 
rates and not on 
discontinuation 
of ADA 

1 These 
analyses have 
some 
limitations in 
that no 
control group 
was included 
and it is 
possible that 
patients who 
chose to be 
included in 
the program 
had a greater 
concern about 
their health 
and were 
more 
motivated 
than 
nonparticipan 
ts to receive 
treatment. 
Moreover, it 
was not 

1 First, it was 
not a 
randomised 
study but an 
evaluation of 
regular care 
monitoring 
programs. 
Due to the 
changes in 
the intake 
telephone 
visit, we did 
not have 
data 
regarding 
the medical 
history, 
weight and 
height of 
patients 
whose 
treatment 
was initiated 
during the 

1 A number of 
limitations 
have to be 
considered 
before 
interpreting 
the data. 
Apart from 
the relatively 
small number 
of patients, 
we chose a 
non-
randomized 
study design 
due to the 
fact that 
pharmaceutic 
al care must 
be regarded 
as a highly 
complex 
intervention 
[22]. A 
parallel 

lack of a 
(randomize 
d) control 
group. 

the PSP. 
Third, 
because this 
was an 
Internet 
survey, all 
data were 
self-
reported 
and not 
validated by 
a healthcare 
professional 
or 
caregiver. 

verified that 
patients were 
continuing to 
inject their 
treatment 
with 
teriparatide, 
rather patients 
were taken on 
their word 
when they 
were 
questioned 
during a 
telephone 
conversation, 
although they 
did continue 
to use and 
request 
additional 
needles for 
teriparatide 
injection. 

BSP and 
BSP + 
letters 
group. 
Second, 
systematic 
registration 
of the side 
effects was 
initiated 
from 
December 
2013 
onwards. 
Therefore, 
we were 
unable to 
identify if 
there was a 
difference in 
the type 
and/or 
severity of 
the reported 
side effects 
according to 
the different 
support 
programs. 
Third, the 
medication 
adherence 
scoring tool 
was 
developed 
by the 
employees 
of the 
pharmacy. 
To develop 
the scoring 
tool, the 
staff 
reviewed 
several 
already 
available 
medication 
adherence 
scoring tools 
and 
evaluated if 

design could 
have led to 
significant 
contaminatio 
n bias 
because of 
the 
interaction 
that occurs 
between 
clinic 
patients. In 
addition, 
since 
blinding is 
not possible 
with this 
intervention, 
healthcare 
professionals 
might have 
adopted an 
approach to 
patient 
follow-up 
counseling 
that was 
dependent 
upon the 
intervention 
received. 
Therefore, 
we decided 
to recruit 
first the 
control group 
and 
subsequently 
the 
intervention 
group in each 
participating 
centre. 

the scoring 
tools were 
able to 
identify 
patients with 
a knowledge 
gap or 
patientswho 
needed 
additional 
motivation 
in order to 
optimise 
adherence. 
Fourth, we 
were not 
able to study 
the 
costeffective 
ness of the 
EMSP 
versus the 
BSP because 
we did not 
have fracture 
data before. 

Interpretat 
ion 

20 Give a cautious overall 
interpretation of results 
considering objectives, 
limitations, multiplicity of 
analyses, results from 
similar studies, and other 
relevant evidence 

1 this study 
showed 
that 
adherence 
to IFNB-1b 
was 
maintained 
over a 2 
year period 
for 62% of 
patients. 
Adherence 
to IFNB-1b 
could be 
supported 
by 
autoinjector 
devices 
facilitating 
the 
administrati 
on of the 
drug and by 
the 
assistance 
of a nurse; 
this last 
Betaplus® 
element 
also being 
the most 
frequently 
chosen. 
Coping 
styles did 
not show to 
have 
substantial 
impact on 
adherence 
and 
remained 
largely 
stable over 
the course 
of the 
study. 

1 This study 
provides 
evidence 
that 
personal 
services 
provided by 
nurses are 
critical in 
fulfilling 
MS 
patients' 
needs, 
particularly 
early in 
disease, and 
improving 
their self-
reported HS 
across early 
to middle 
stages of 
disease. 

1 These 
findings 
demonstrate 
high 
quantitative 
adherence in 
patients 
using 
RebiSmart(R 
) and provide 
valuable 
information 
on 
PRO, 
cognitive 
performance 
and health 
economic 
aspects in 
this 
relapsing-
remitting MS 
population. 
High 
quantitative 
adherence 
was 
associated 
with a slight 
improvement 
in 
information 
processing 
speed and 
working 
memory and 
an overall 
tendency for 
more 
intensive 
self-
management 
of their 
disease 

1 The You 
& I 
program 
me helps 
patients 
taking a 
novel 
medicati 
on, 
ibrutinib, 
to 
comply 
with the 
regimen, 
understa 
nd their 
disease 
and learn 
about 
advances 
in 
treatment 
. Similar 
pharma-
led nurse 
support 
has been 
used to 
address 
challenge 
s specific 
to 
different 
diseases 
and 
drugs. 

1 The results from 
the PASSION 
study 
demonstrated 
that patients 
with moderate-
to-severe RA 
who initiated 
ADA and 
participated in 
the PSP 
achieved an 
overall 
significantly 
greater 
improvement in 
clinical, 
functional, and 
patient-reported 
outcomes when 
compared to 
patients who did 
not participate 
in the PSP while 
treated with 
ADA. This 
study 
indicates that 
participation in 
a PSP can have 
a positive effect 
on clinical and 
quality of life 
outcomes in RA 
patients such as 
physical 
functioning, 
treatment 
satisfaction, and 
activities 
impairment and 
may also have 
an impact on the 
treatment 
persistence and 
adherence. 

1 Patients with 
severe 
osteoporosis 
receiving 
teriparatide 
and enrolled 
in this 
educational 
support 
program had 
high 
persistence 
and 
satisfaction 
with the 
program 

1 The finding 
that the 2-
year 
persistence 
rate could be 
improved by 
almost 10 to 
78% might 
be clinically 
relevant for 
optimal 
treatment of 
high-risk 
osteoporotic 
patients, 
especially 
because 
there was a 
28% lower 
risk of 
TPTD 
discontinuati 
on because 
of side 
effects. 

1 The 
pharmaceutic 
al care 
intervention 
led to an 
improvement 
of both 
overall and 
daily 
adherence 
although 
only the 
difference in 
daily 
adherence 
was 
significantly 
different. 
The 
intervention 
resulted in a 
decrease of 
variability 
with regard 
to all 
assessed 
adherence 
parameters. 
This outcome 
of the 
adherence-
enhancing 
intervention 
is further 
documented 
by the fact 
that none of 
the patients 
of the 
intervention 
group 
showed an 
overall or 
daily 
adherence 
below 80% 

Generalisa 
bility 

21 Discuss the generalisability 
(external validity) of the 
study results 

1 With 
almost 60% 
of patients 
being from 
Middle 
Eastern 
countries, 
the regional 
set up of 
this study 
might 
affect the 
generalizab 
ility and 
intercultura 
l 
transferabil 
ity of the 
study 
results to 
other 
countries as 
cultural 
differences 
affect 
especially 
subjective 
concepts as 
coping and 
depression 

1 Iit will be 
important to 
validate 
these 
findings in 
other 
countries to 
understand 
if these 
findings are 
specific to 
German 
patients or 
can be 
generalized 
to a broader 
patient pool. 

0 
0 
1 As in any 
observational 
study, only 
observed 
confounders 
were accounted 
for, hence the 
findings of the 
study should be 
interpreted with 
the caution of 
unobserved 
confounding. 
Additionally, 
the study only 
collected data 
on study 
discontinuation 
rates and not on 
discontinuation 
of ADA; 
therefore no 
conclusions 
about drug 
adherence/persis 
tence can be 
made from the 
current analysis. 

1 A controlled 
study of the 
effectiveness 
of the 
educational 
program for 
the use of the 
teriparatide 
pen would 
provide 
valuable 
information 
quantifying 
the potential 
benefits of 
such 
programs, and 
could be 
considered 
for the future. 

1 Patients who 
are well 
informed and 
know what to 
expect during 
the course of 
therapy are 
better 
prepared how 
to manage 
adverse 
effects and 
the 
development 
of a therapy-
limiting 
dimension of 
toxic 
symptoms is 
less likely 
[28]. 
However, 
this 
observation 
may be due 
to chance 
imbalances 
in this small 
population 
and requires 
confirmation 
in a large 
randomized 
trial. The 
'number 
needed to 
treat' of six 
could allow 
the 
interpretation 
that a 
pharmaceutic 
al care 
programme 
for patients 
receiving 
twice daily 
capecitabine 
would 
prevent one 
non-adherent 
intake 

interval 
every three 
days. The 
authors are 
aware that it 
is not clear 
yet which 
extent of 
variability of 
the dosage 
interval is 
acceptable 
without 
consequence 
s for efficacy 
and toxicity. 
However, the 
result 
underlines 
the potential 
of 
pharmaceutic 
al care 
programmes. 
It is certainly 
worth 
developing 
such 
programmes 
as a 
multidiscipli 
nary 
approach to 
assure safe 
and effective 
oral 
anticancer 
therapy. 
Other information 

Funding 
22 Give the source of funding 
and the role of the funders 
for the present study and, if 
applicable, for the original 
study on which the present 
article is based 

1 This 
research 
was funded 
by Bayer 
Schering 
Pharma 
AG, 
Germany 

0 
1 The study 
and analyses 
as well as 
funding of 
the journal's 
article 
processing 
charges were 
supported by 
Merck 
Serono 
GmbH, 

1 This 
article 
has been 
supporte 
d and 
funded 
by 
Janssen 

1 AbbVie funded 
the study 
(NCT01383421) 
and article 
processing 
charges, and 
contributed to 
the study design, 
data collection, 
analysis, as well 
as the drafting, 
review, and 

1 This study 
was 
supported by 
Eli Lilly and 
Company, 
Spain 

1 ApotheekZo 
rg receives 
financial 
support from 
Eli Lilly 
Nederland 
B.V. to 
perform the 
patient 
support 
program and 

1 Partial 
funding was 
provided by 
Roche, 
Basel. 

Germany, an 
affiliate of 
Merck 
KGaA, 
Darmstadt, 
Germany. 

approval of the 
manuscript. 

to fund this 
study. 

* Give information separately for cases and 
controls in case-control studies and, if 
applicable, for exposed and unexposed groups 
in cohort and cross-sectional studies. 

TOTAL SCORE 
19 
19 
18 
6 
19 
18 
18 
20 



## Table S3 :
S3Summary of publications not passing stricter EMA criteria.Database Author/Year 
Country 
Pathology 
Product 

PSP sponsor or 
funding source 
of the study 

Services provided 
by the PSP 

Outcomes in 
the studies 

Design/type of 
study/ trial 

Pubmed 
Alcazar et al. 1 , 2016 
Spain 

Chronic 
obstructive 
pulmonary 
disease 
(COPD) 

-

Takeda 
Pharmaceutical 
Spain SA. 

Patient monitoring: 
Telephone calls 
SMS and e-mails 
by qualify nurses 

Clinical outcomes: 
Exacerbations control 
PROs outcomes: health 
status measured with 
the COPD assessment 
test (CAT) 

Observational 
prospective 
study -non 
comparative 

Pubmed 

Bourbeau et al. 2 , 2016 

NCT01241526 

France, 
Germany, 
Italy and 
Spain 

COPD 
-
Air Liquide 
Healthcare 

Educational 
program including 
home sessions, 
group or individual 
telephone sessions 
and phone 
education seasons. 

PROs outcomes: quality 
of life (QoL) 
Economic outcomes: 
number of unscheduled 
all-causes 
hospitalization. 

Pragmatic 
randomized 
controlled study 
-Comparative 

(compares an 
intervention group 
with the standard 
care group) 

Pubmed 
Brunot et al. 3 , 2018 
France 

Advanced 
hepatocellular 
carcinoma 

Sorafenib 
NO FUNDING 

Educational 
program including a 
visit before the first 
administration, 
Patient monitoring: 
weekly telephone 
calls, and visits with 
the nurse 

Clinical outcomes: 
Improved toxicity 
management of 
sorafenib that resulted in 
fewer dose reductions 

Observational 
retrospective. 
study -
Comparative 

(compares an 
educational group 
with the standard 
care group) 

Pubmed 
Bubak et al. 4 , 2019 
Germany 
Psoriasis 
-

University 
Medical Centre 
Mannheim, 
Heidelberg 
University. 

Educational 
program composed 
of two 120-min 
sessions 

Clinical outcomes: more 
favourable outcome for 
the patients 
PROs outcomes: Higher 
treatment adherence 

Pragmatic non-
randomised 
controlled study -
Comparative 

(compares an 
educational group 
with the standard 
care group) 

Pubmed 
Bujanda Sainz et al. 5 , 2014 
Spain 

Elderly 
patients (lived 
in foster 
home 
apartments) 

-

Department of 
Preventive 
Medicine and 
Public Health. 
Navarra 
University 

Educational 
program including 
group and 
individual 
motivation sessions 

PROs outcomes: 
Adherence to a 
Mediterranean Dietary 
Pattern 

Observational, 
cross-sectional 
study -
Comparative 

(before/after 
comparison) 

Pubmed 
Capodanno et al. 6 , 2019 
Italy 
Acute 
Leukaemia 

Chemotherapy 
at home 

Grade Onlus and 
algo by the 
Azienda Unità 
Sanitaria Locale-
IRCSS Reggio 
Emilia, Italy 

Patient monitoring: 
Home visits by a 
nurse and 
haematologist. 

Economic outcomes: 
Decrease of the number 
of hospitalisations and 
increment of the number 
of patients who died in 
their own home 

Observational 
retrospective 
study-
Comparative 

(compares an 
intervention group 

with historical 
data) 

Pubmed 
Closa et al. 7 , 2017 
Spain 
Orthogeriatric 
condicion. 
-
-

Home care: The 
geriatrics 
rehabilitation team 
visit to the patient's 
home. Nursing 
visits were limited 
to 7 per week: 
physiotherapy 
therapy lessons 
were limited to 5 
per week. 

Clinical outcomes: 
Degree of functional 
recovery 
Economic outcomes: 
direct cost of care and 
resource savings 
resulting from a 
reduction in acute 
hospital stay 

Observational 
prospective 
study -
Comparative 

(compares home-
based care 
programme with 
the conventional 
hospital-based 
care) 

Pubmed 
Craven et al. 8 , 2013 

United 
Kingdom 
(UK) 

Colorectal 
cancer 
Capecitabin 
-

Home care nurse 
(home visits) 
Patient monitoring: 
telephone care by 
nurses. 

Clinical outcomes: 
Toxicity grade 
PROs outcomes: Patient 
satisfaction 

Observational 
prospective 
study -
Comparative 

(compares home 
care nursing 
programme with 
standard care) 

MEDES 
Díaz-Gegúndez et al. 9 , 2011 
Spain 
Geriatric 
patients 
-
-

Home care: a 
doctor and a 
specialist nurse 
make follow-up 
visits in elderly 
homes, review and 
adaptation of 
pharmacological 
treatment, 
complementary 
tests, etc. 

Economic outcomes: 
Emergency visit rate, 
hospital admission rate, 
consumption of 
pharmaceuticals, 
direct/indirect costs, 
pharmacy costs avoided, 
emergency costs saved, 
emergency hospital 
admission costs saved, 
ambulance costs 
avoided 

Pragmatic non-
randomised 
controlled study 
-Comparative 

(compares 
intervention group 
with a control 
group (standard 
care)) 

IBECS 
Díez Martínez de Morentin et 
al. 10 , 2013 
Spain 

Attention-
deficit 
hyperactivity 
disorder 

Methylphenidate -

Educational 
Program: A 
psychoeducational 
program for parents 
led by nurse, was 
divided in two 
modules of 5 
weekly sessions of 
45 minutes 

Clinical Outcomes: 
TDAH evaluation scale 
(ADHD-RS) 
PROs outcomes: 
cuestionario de 
capacidades y 
dificutlades (SDQ), 
Family Environment 
Scale (FES), programme 
evaluation questionnaire 

Observational 
prospective 
study 
Comparative 

(compares a 
nurse-led 
psychoeducational 
programme with 
the use of 
medication alone) 

IBECS 
Domingo et al. 11 , 2011 
Spain 
Heart failure 
-
Philips 
Healthcare 

Patient monitoring: 
Telemonitoring 
system provide 
educational videos, 

PROs outcomes: QoL 
Economic outcomes: 
Hospitalisations during 
12 months before and 

Observational 
prospective 
study -
Comparative 

personalised 
messages and 
alarms. 

after inclusion were 
compared. 

(before/after 
comparison) 

Pubmed 
Giordano et al. 12 , 2011 
Italy 
Heart failure 
-

Italian Ministry of 
Health and by 
the Lombardy 
Region 

Patient monitoring: 
Home-based 
telemanagement 
program provided 
medical/nursing 
intervention via 
telephone. 

Clinical outcomes: 
Changes in clinical and 
functional status 
PROs outcomes: QoL 
Economic outcomes: 
rate of hospital 
readmission 

Observational 
retrospective 
study -
Comparative 

(before/after 
comparison) 

Pubmed 
Haines et al. 13 , 2018 
UK 
Vitiligo 

Narrowband 
ultraviolet-B 
light NB-UVB) 
and 
mometasone 
furoate 0,1% 
ointment 
(merck) 

National Institute 
for Health 
Research 

Educational 
program: All 
patients receive 
training in how to 
apply the ointment 
and in the use of 
the light therapy 
devices. A face-to-
face training with 
the research nurse 
is given. Additional 
training is provided 
(over the telephone 
or face-to-face) if 
needed. 

Clinical outcomes: 
percentage and pattern 
of repigmentation 
PROs outcomes: QoL 
and time burden of 
treatment 

Pragmatic 
randomised 
controlled study 
-Comparative 

(compares topical 
corticosteroid 
group, home-
based hand-held 
narrowband 
ultraviolet B-light 
group, or 
combination of the 
two group) 

Pubmed 
Hashimoto et al. 14 , 2011 
The 
Netherlands 

Severe 
refractory 
asthma 

Oral 
corticoesteroids 

The Netherlands 
Organization for 
Health Research 
and 
Development 
(ZonMw). 

Patient monitoring: 
Internet-based 
management tool 
comprises an 
electronic diary, 
treatment decision 
support for the 
patients, and 
monitoring support 
by a study nurse, 
responsible for 
coaching the 
patients. 

Clinical outcomes: 
Cumulative sparing of 
prednisone and asthma 
control 
PROs outcomes: QoL 
and patient's satisfaction 
with the tapering 
strategy. 
Economic outcomes: 
Days of hospitalisations 

Pragmatic 
randomised 
controlled study 
-Comparative 

(compares 
conventional 
treatment with 
internet-based 
monitoring 
system) 

IBECS 
Inoriza et al. 15 , 2017 
Spain 
Diabetes 
Emminens 
eConecta® 

Roche 
Diagnostic 

Patients monitoring 
including face-to-
face visits were 
scheduled at 6 and 
12 months, and 
home delivery of 
test strips 

Clinical outcomes: 
Degree of metabolic 
control according to 
initial glycosylated 
haemoglobin (%HbA1c) 
and at 12 months 
PROs outcomes: QoL 
and satisfaction with 
the programme 
Economic outcomes: 
number of visits to 
primary care, PA 
emergencies, outpatient 

Observational 
prospective 
study-
Comparative 
(parallel cohorts) 

(compares 
intervention group 
with control group) 

visits, hospital 
emergencies, 
hospitalisations (records 
and days of stay), 
consumption of 
medicines, consumption 
of test strips and 
compliance with referral 
to the programme. 

Pubmed 
Jack et al. 16 , 2013 
UK 
Hepatitis C 

Pegylated 
interferon alpha 
2a or 2b and 
ribavirin 

-

Home care: Nurses 
provide care and 
administer complex 
specialised 
medications, take 
blood and monitor 
patients, in the 
patient's home. 

PROs outcomes: 
Increased patients' 
access to and 
acceptability of 
treatment 

Observational 
retrospective 
study -
Comparative 

(compares home-
based with the 
most recent 
published analysis 
of the 
Trent Hepatitis C 
Virus Study Group 
cohort of patients) 

Pubmed 
Klek et al. 17 , 2014 
Poland 
Home enteral 
nutrition 
-
NO FUNDING 

Home care: 
Training was 
conducted in the 
patient's home, 
including the 
administration of 
diets, operation of 
wound care 
equipment and 
management of 
complications. 
Regular follow-up 
home visits were 
made every 2-3 
months, which 
included a 
nutritional 
reassessment, 
enteral access site 
evaluation and 
laboratory tests. 

Economic outcomes: 
Number of hospital 
admissions, length of 
hospital stay, intensive 
care unit stay, and costs 
of hospitalisation 

Observational 
prospective 
study -
Comparative 

(Before/after 
home enteral 
nutrition 
comparison) 

Pubmed 
Kreuz et al. 18 , 2012 
Germany 
Hereditary 
angioedema 

C1-esterase 
inhibitor 
CLS Behiring 

Educational 
program: Training 
for the 
administration of 
pC1-INH included 
providing written 
instructions and 
personal training by 
health care 
professionals 

Clinical outcomes: 
number of treatments 
(reflecting the number of 
attacks) in home and 
physician-based 
therapy, laryngeal 
attacks, the average 
time from the 
appearance of the first 
symptoms or symptoms 

Observational 
retrospective 
study -
Comparative 
(Before/after 
comparison) 

(hemophilia 
nurses). 

of oedema to the start of 
treatment 
Economic outcomes: the 
average number of days 
of hospitalisation 

Pubmed 
Kuin et al. 19 , 2016 
The 
Netherlands 

Crohn's 
disease 

Infliximab 
(Remicade®) 

Department of 
Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology 
of the Academic 
Medical Centre 
in Amsterdam 

Home care: Home 
administration of 
the treatment. The 
home care nurses 
were present during 
the entire duration 
of the infusion and 
stayed until one 
hour after the 
infusion had been 
completed. Vital 
signs were 
monitored at 
baseline and after 
the infusion. 

PROs outcomes: patient 
preferences 
Economic outcomes: 
Drug costs, supplies and 
the home care nursing 
service 

Observational 
prospective 
study -Cost 
comparative 

(compares home-
based infliximab 
infusions with 
hospital-based 
infliximab 
infusions) 

Pubmed 
Lebret et al. 20 , 2013 
France 

Primary solid 
tumour and 
with at least 
one bone 
metastasis 
secondary to 
a solid 
tumour 

Biphosphonate 
Zoledronic acid 
(Zometa®) 

-

Home care: home 
administration of 
zometa® 
Patient monitoring: 
telephone calls for 
follow-up 

PROs outcomes: Patient 
and nurse satisfaction, 
treatment compliance, 
compliance with practice 
guidelines and safety 

Observational 
prospective 
study -non 
comparative 

Pubmed 
Marinschek et al. 21 , 2014 
Austria 
Home enteral 
nutrition 
-

Department for 
General 
Paediatrics and 
Psychosomatic, 
Medical 
University of 
Graz 

Patient monitoring 

Clinical outcomes: 
Complete and partial 
weaning rate 

Observational 
retrospective 
study -
Comparative 

(compares the 
netcoaching group 
with onsite 
treatment group) 

Pubmed 
Martino et al. 22 , 2014 
Italy 
Peritoneal 
dialysis 
-
NO FUNDING 

Home care: Home 
visits by nurses. 
The nurse 
supervised the 
environment where 
the patient had the 
peritoneal dialysis, 
mistakes during the 
procedures, stored 
materials and 
conditions of the 
storage, and 
compliance. The 
nurse supported 
patients by 
suggesting possible 

Clinical outcomes: 
removal of peritoneal 
catheter, shift to HD, 
occurrence of kidney 
transplant, peritonitis 
episode 
Economic outcomes: 
days of hospitalisation 

Observational 
retrospective 
case-control 
study -
Comparative 

(compares 
patients supported 
by home visits 
with the control 
group (standard 
care at the 
center)) 

solutions and 
reinforcing patient's 
knowledge 

Pubmed 
McCall et al. 23 , 2016 
Ireland 

Children with 
leukemia or 
lymphoma 

Ara-
C (Cytarabine) 
chemotherapy 

Our Lady's 
Children's 
Hospital Crumlin 

Education program 
PROs outcomes: 
Parents' Satisfaction 

Observational 
cross-sectional 
study (by 
questionnaires) -
non comparative 

Pubmed 
Mercadante et al. 24 , 2014 
Italy 

Palliative 
sedation in 
advanced 
cancer 

Midazolam 
NO FUNDING 

Home care: 
physician and nurse 
visits. 

PROs outcomes: level of 
distress 

Observational 
prospective 
study -non 
comparative 

Pubmed 
Murie et al. 25 , 2012 
UK 

Gastro-
oesophageal 
reflux disease 
and 
nonulcerative 
dyspepsia 

Proton-pump 
inhibitor (PPI) -
Gaviscon 
Advance 
Aniseed 
Suspension 

Kingshill Medical 
Practice 

Educational 
program: Verbal 
and written 
educational 
information about 
their condition, its 
causes, risk factors, 
alternative 
treatment options to 
PPIs and lifestyle 
advice. 

Clinical outcomes: 
patients stopped their 
PPI or "stepped down" 
the dose 12 months after 
participating in the 
program 
Economic outcomes: 
Net savings of reducing 
PPI prescriptions and 
introducing alginate 

Observational, 
prospective 
study -non 
comparative 

Pubmed 
Pampaloni et al. 26 , 2015 
Italy 
Osteoporosis 
-

FIRMO 
Fondazione 
Raffaela Becagli 

Educational 
program: website 
with the educational 
program, "online" 
games, and 
scientific material 
on bone health, a 
classroom session 
conducted by 
nutritionist, deliver 
to the children the 
"student kit", 
nutritional survey 

PROs outcomes: 
Improving good 
nutritional habits 

Observational 
prospective 
study -
Comparative 

(before/after 
comparison) 

Pubmed 
Paneroni et al. 27 , 2013 
Italy 
COPD 
-

Five Italian 
rehabilitative 
respiratory 
departments 

Educational 
program 

PROs outcomes: 
acknowledgement 
acquired and adherence 
to the program. 

Observational, 
cross-sectional 
study -
(questionary -
Comparative 

(before/after 
comparison) 

Pubmed 
Quirós et al. 28 , 2019 
Spain 
Type 1 
diabetes 
-
Catalan National 
Health Service 

Education program 
for beginning 
continuous 
subcutaneous 

PROs outcomes: Patient 
experience and 
satisfaction 

Observational 
retrospective, 
cross-sectional 
study (online 

insulin infusion in 
which nurses and 
endocrinologist 
participate. The 
program consists of 
4 weekly visits in 
groups of 4 people 
over the first month. 

survey) -non 
comparative 

Pubmed 
Verbeek et al. 29 , 2011 
The 
Netherlands 

Type 1 
diabetes 
-
-

Educational 
program: four 
sessions of 1.5h 
each, during a 3-
month period. The 
sessions were 
conducted by a 
diabetic nurse 
specialist. 

Clinical outcomes: HbA 
1c reduction 

Observational 
retrospective 
study -
Comparative 

(Before/after 
comparison) 

*PSP described in the level 2 of the report 



## Table S4 :
S4Main characteristics of studied PSPs. MS: multiple sclerosis; RA: Rheumatoid arthritis; Pso: psoriasis, AS: ankylosing spondylitis; PsA: psoriatic arthritis; UC: ulcerative colitis; DM2: Diabetes Mellitus type 2; Home monitoring: where the health status was monitored by health personnel or a medical device; Home care: when an intervention such as treatment or administration of an infusion, among others, was performed by health professionals in patient's homePSP's name 
(product) 

Target 
population 
Objective 

Health 
professionals 
involved 

Services 
Supporting 
materials 

Contact 
methods 

Outcomes 
evaluated 

BetaPlus® PSP 
(Interferon β -
1b) 30,31 

MS 

To improve 
treatment 
adherence 

Physicians 
and nurses 

Educational 
Program 
and patient 
monitoring 

Educational 
material: 
Brochures, 
leaflets. Message 
reminders 
Online offers 

Face-to-
face and 
e-mail 

PROs 
outcomes 

RebiSTAR® 
(Interferon β -1a 
®) 32 

MS 

To provide 
patient 
support for 
self-injection 
and device 
handling. 

Physician 
Educational 
program 

Starter pack (does 
not specify the 
components) 

Face-to-
face 

Clinical 
outcomes 
PROs 
outcomes 
Economic 
outcomes 

You&i™ 
(Ibrutinib) 33 

Non-Hodgkin 
Lymphoma 

To provide 
patient 
education 
and support 

Nurses 

Educational 
program 
and patient 
monitoring 

Starter kit: 
information about 
ibrutinib 

Telephone 
call 

PROs 
outcomes 

AbbVie Care 2,0 
(Adalimumab) 

34-38 

RA, Pso, AS, 
PsA, Crohn's 
disease, and 
UC 

To provide 
patient 
education 
and support 
for self-
injection 

Nurses 

Educational 
program, 
patient 
monitoring 
and 
medication 
delivery 
(only 
available in 
some 
countries) 

Starter pack: 
educational 
material about the 
disease and 
adalimumab, 
injection guide, 
digital and print 
educational 
materials, 
medication 
reminders, 
dietician and 
psychological 
support, 
medication 
delivery 

Email 
contact 

Clinical 
outcomes 
PROs 
outcomes 
Economic 
outcomes 

Educational 
Support 
Program 
(Teriparatide) 

39,40 

Osteoporosis 

To provide 
patient 
support for 
self-injection 

Nurses 

Educational 
support 
program, 
patient 
monitoring 
and needles 
and 
medication 
delivery 

Educational 
material about the 
delivery device 
and osteoporosis, 
nurse telephone 
calls and call 
center. Regularly 
delivery of needles 
and medication 
delivery 

Face-to-
face and 
telephone 
call 

Clinical 
outcomes 
PROs 
outcomes 

T-Coach 
(Insuline 
Glargine U300) 

41-46 

DM2 

To provide 
patient 
education 
and support 

Nurses and 
diabetes 
educators 

Educational 
program 
and patient 
monitoring 

Not specified in 
the publication 

Telephone 
call 

Clinical 
outcomes 
PROs 
outcomes 

Adveva® 
(Clardrivine 
tablets) 

47,48 

MS 

To improve 
treatment 
adherence 

Nurses 
Patient 
monitoring 

Not specified in 
the publication 

Telephone 
call 

PROs 
outcomes 

Pharmaceutical 
Care Program 
(Capecitabine) 

49 

Cancer 
patients 

To improve 
treatment 
adherence 

Oncologist 
and 
pharmacist 

Educational 
program 
and patient 
monitoring 

Dosing schedule. 
Leaflet with 
information about 
prevention and 
management of 
adverse events in 
chemotherapy 

Telephone 
call 

PROs 
outcomes 



The evaluation of a remote support program on quality of life and evolution of disease in COPD patients with frequent exacerbations. B Alcazar, P De Lucas, J B Soriano, A Fernandez-Nistal, A Fuster, J M Gonzalez-Moro, 10.1186/s12890-016-0304-3BMC Pulm Med. 161140Alcazar B, de Lucas P, Soriano JB, Fernandez-Nistal A, Fuster A, Gonzalez-Moro JM, et al. The evaluation of a remote support program on quality of life and evolution of disease in COPD patients with frequent exacerbations. BMC Pulm Med. 2016;16(1):140.https://doi.org/10.1186/s12890-016-0304-3.

An international randomized study of a home-based self-management program for severe COPD: the COMET. J Bourbeau, P Casan, S Tognella, P Haidl, J B Texereau, R Kessler, 10.2147/COPD.S107151Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 11Bourbeau J, Casan P, Tognella S, Haidl P, Texereau JB, Kessler R. An international randomized study of a home-based self-management program for severe COPD: the COMET. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2016;11:1447-51.https://doi.org/10.2147/COPD.S107151.

Implementation of a Nursedriven Educational Program Improves Management of Sorafenib's Toxicities in Hepatocellular Carcinoma. A Brunot, Le Roy, F , Le Sourd, S , M Sadek, A Duval, M Crouzet, L , 10.1097/NCC.0000000000000521Cancer Nurs. 415Brunot A, Le Roy F, Le Sourd S, M'Sadek A, Duval M, Crouzet L, et al. Implementation of a Nurse- driven Educational Program Improves Management of Sorafenib's Toxicities in Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Cancer Nurs. 2018;41(5):418-23.https://doi.org/10.1097/NCC.0000000000000521.

Analyzing the value of an educational program for psoriasis patients: a prospective controlled pilot study. C Sm-L Bubak, L Schöben, W K Peitsch, A Schmieder, BMC Public Health. 1911535Bubak C SM-L, Schöben L, Peitsch WK, Schmieder A. Analyzing the value of an educational program for psoriasis patients: a prospective controlled pilot study. . BMC Public Health. 2019;19(1):1535. .

Evaluation of a nutritional intervention among elderly people: the Edumay project. E Bujanda Sainz De Murieta, Bbg, I Zazpe, B Lasheras, M Bes-Rastrollo, Nutr Hosp. 301Bujanda Sainz de Murieta E BBG, Zazpe I, Lasheras B, Bes-Rastrollo M. Evaluation of a nutritional intervention among elderly people: the Edumay project Nutr Hosp 2014 Jul;30(1):132-9

Home care of acute leukaemia patients: From active therapy to end-of-life and palliative care. The 3-year experience of a single centre. I Capodanno, E Tamagnini, P Alfieri, K Codeluppi, S Luminari, F Merli, 10.1111/ejh.13224Eur J Haematol. 1025Capodanno I, Tamagnini E, Alfieri P, Codeluppi K, Luminari S, Merli F. Home care of acute leukaemia patients: From active therapy to end-of-life and palliative care. The 3-year experience of a single centre. Eur J Haematol. 2019;102(5):424-31.https://doi.org/10.1111/ejh.13224.

Hospital-at-home Integrated Care Program for Older Patients With Orthopedic Processes: An Efficient Alternative to Usual Hospital-Based Care. C Closa, Mm, S J Santaeugènia, M Inzitari, A Ribera, M Gallofré, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 189Closa C MM, Santaeugènia SJ, Inzitari M, Ribera A, Gallofré M. . Hospital-at-home Integrated Care Program for Older Patients With Orthopedic Processes: An Efficient Alternative to Usual Hospital-Based Care J Am Med Dir Assoc 2017 Sep;18(9):780-4

Is a nurse-led telephone intervention a viable alternative to nurse-led home care and standard care for patients receiving oral capecitabine? Results from a large prospective audit in patients with colorectal cancer. O Craven, C A Hughes, A Burton, M P Saunders, A Molassiotis, Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 223413Craven O, Hughes CA, Burton A, Saunders MP, Molassiotis A. Is a nurse-led telephone intervention a viable alternative to nurse-led home care and standard care for patients receiving oral capecitabine? Results from a large prospective audit in patients with colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2013;22(3):413-

. 10.1111/ecc.12047https://doi.org/10.1111/ecc.12047.

Evaluación de un programa de intervención en residencias geriátricas para reducir la frecuentación hospitalaria. M Díaz-Gegúndez, Pg, C Sanz-Ballester, M Boada-Mejorana, S Terré-Ohme, D Ruiz-Poza, Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol [Internet]. 46Díaz-Gegúndez M PG, Sanz-Ballester C, Boada-Mejorana M, Terré-Ohme S, Ruiz-Poza D. . Evaluación de un programa de intervención en residencias geriátricas para reducir la frecuentación hospitalaria Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol [Internet] 2011;46:261-4 Available from: http://wwwelsevieres/es/linksolver/ft/pii/S0211139X1100093X.

. A Díez Martínez De Morentin, Tricas Sec, S Sauras, Beunza Nuin, M , Pereda Sotos, T , Machiñena Gracia, K , Díez Martínez de Morentin A SEC, Tricas Sauras S, Beunza Nuin M, Pereda Sotos T, Machiñena Gracia K. .

Eficacia de un programa de psicoeducación aplicado por enfermeras y dirigido a padres de niños con Trastorno por Déficit de Atención e Hiperactividad Rev Psiquiatr infanto-juv. 30Eficacia de un programa de psicoeducación aplicado por enfermeras y dirigido a padres de niños con Trastorno por Déficit de Atención e Hiperactividad Rev Psiquiatr infanto-juv 30(1):55-63

Telemonitorización no invasiva en pacientes ambulatorios con insuficiencia cardiaca: efecto en el número de hospitalizaciones, días de ingreso y calidad de vida Estudio CARME (Catalan Remote Management Evaluation)^ies. M Domingo, Lj, B González, E Crespo, R López, A Ramos, Rev esp cardiol (Ed impr). 644Domingo M LJ, González B, Crespo E, López R, Ramos A, et al. . Telemonitorización no invasiva en pacientes ambulatorios con insuficiencia cardiaca: efecto en el número de hospitalizaciones, días de ingreso y calidad de vida Estudio CARME (Catalan Remote Management Evaluation)^ies Rev esp cardiol (Ed impr) 64(4):277-85

Home-based telemanagement in chronic heart failure: an 8-year single-site experience. A Giordano, E Zanelli, S Scalvini, 10.1258/jtt.2011.110201J Telemed Telecare. 177Giordano A, Zanelli E, Scalvini S. Home-based telemanagement in chronic heart failure: an 8-year single-site experience. J Telemed Telecare. 2011;17(7):382-6.https://doi.org/10.1258/jtt.2011.110201.

Home interventions and light therapy for the treatment of vitiligo (HI-Light Vitiligo Trial): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. R H Haines, K S Thomas, A A Montgomery, J C Ravenscroft, P Akram, J R Chalmers, 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018649BMJ Open. 84Haines RH, Thomas KS, Montgomery AA, Ravenscroft JC, Akram P, Chalmers JR, et al. Home interventions and light therapy for the treatment of vitiligo (HI-Light Vitiligo Trial): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2018;8(4):e018649.https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017- 018649.

Internet-based tapering of oral corticosteroids in severe asthma: a pragmatic randomised controlled trial. S Hashimoto, A T Brinke, A C Roldaan, I H Van Veen, G M Moller, J K Sont, 10.1136/thx.2010.153411Thorax. 666Hashimoto S, Brinke AT, Roldaan AC, van Veen IH, Moller GM, Sont JK, et al. Internet-based tapering of oral corticosteroids in severe asthma: a pragmatic randomised controlled trial. Thorax. 2011;66(6):514- 20.https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.2010.153411.

Efectividad e impacto económico de un programa de atención integrada con soporte de telemedicina a pacientes diabéticos tipo 2 tratados con insulina (estudio GITDIABE) Aten prim (Barc. J M Inoriza, Pérez Ia, X Berruezo, Inoriza Nadal, C Coderch, J , 49InternetInoriza JM IA, Pérez Berruezo X, Inoriza Nadal C, Coderch J. Efectividad e impacto económico de un programa de atención integrada con soporte de telemedicina a pacientes diabéticos tipo 2 tratados con insulina (estudio GITDIABE) Aten prim (Barc, Ed impr) [Internet] 49(3):131-9 Available from: https://wwwelsevieres/es-revista-atencion-primaria-27-articulo-efectividad-e-impacto-economico-un- S0212656716301718.

. K Jack, Bj, A Holiday, G Heard, B Thomson, Jack K BJ, Holiday A, Heard G, Thomson B. .

Hepatitis C therapy at home: a hospital and home care partnership. Br J Nurs. 229Hepatitis C therapy at home: a hospital and home care partnership Br J Nurs 2013 May;22(9):518-23

Home enteral nutrition reduces complications, length of stay, and health care costs: results from a multicenter study. S Klek, A Hermanowicz, G Dziwiszek, K Matysiak, K Szczepanek, P Szybinski, 10.3945/ajcn.113.082842Am J Clin Nutr. 1002Klek S, Hermanowicz A, Dziwiszek G, Matysiak K, Szczepanek K, Szybinski P, et al. Home enteral nutrition reduces complications, length of stay, and health care costs: results from a multicenter study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;100(2):609-15.https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.082842.

Home therapy with intravenous human C1-inhibitor in children and adolescents with hereditary angioedema. W Kreuz, E Rusicke, I Martinez-Saguer, E Aygoren-Pursun, C Heller, T Klingebiel, 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03240.xTransfusion. 521Kreuz W, Rusicke E, Martinez-Saguer I, Aygoren-Pursun E, Heller C, Klingebiel T. Home therapy with intravenous human C1-inhibitor in children and adolescents with hereditary angioedema. Transfusion. 2012;52(1):100-7.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03240.x.

Remicade infusions at home: An alternative setting of infliximab therapy for patients with Crohn's disease. S Kuin, Ss, G R Van Den Brink, C Y Ponsioen, P Fockens, D Haens, G R , Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 282Kuin S SS, Van Den Brink GR, Ponsioen CY, Fockens P, D'Haens GR, et al. . Remicade infusions at home: An alternative setting of infliximab therapy for patients with Crohn's disease Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;28(2):222-5

Home-based zoledronic acid infusion therapy in patients with solid tumours: compliance and patient-nurse satisfaction Support Care Cancer. T Mj-L Lebret, A Lortholary, C El Kouri, L Bastit, M Ktiouet, 2013/01/0921Lebret T MJ-L, Lortholary A, El Kouri C, Bastit L, Ktiouet M, et al. . Home-based zoledronic acid infusion therapy in patients with solid tumours: compliance and patient-nurse satisfaction Support Care Cancer 2013/01/09 2013 Jun;21(6):1613-20

Weaning children off enteral nutrition by netcoaching versus onsite treatment: a comparative study. S Marinschek, M Dunitz-Scheer, K Pahsini, B Geher, P Scheer, J Paediatr Child Health. 5011902Marinschek S, Dunitz-Scheer M, Pahsini K, Geher B, Scheer P. Weaning children off enteral nutrition by netcoaching versus onsite treatment: a comparative study. J Paediatr Child Health. 2014;50(11):902-

. 10.1111/jpc.12662https://doi.org/10.1111/jpc.12662.

Home visit program improves technique survival in peritoneal dialysis. F Martino, Az, G Mason, A Nayak, W Ariyanon, E Rettore, Blood Purif. 374Martino F AZ, Mason G, Nayak A, Ariyanon W, Rettore E, et al. . Home visit program improves technique survival in peritoneal dialysis Blood Purif 2014;37(4):286-90

Administration of Home Intravenous Chemotherapy to Children by their Parents: Parents' Evaluation of a Nationwide Program. C Mccall, Mm, C Hilliard, P Lannon, F Mckenna, A O&apos;marcaigh, J Pediatr Oncol Nurs. 342McCall C MM, Hilliard C, Lannon P, McKenna F, O'Marcaigh A, et al. . Administration of Home Intravenous Chemotherapy to Children by their Parents: Parents' Evaluation of a Nationwide Program J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 2016;34(2):122-9

Palliative sedation in patients with advanced cancer followed at home: a prospective study. S Mercadante, Pg, A Valle, F Aielli, A Casuccio, J Pain Symptom Manage. 475Mercadante S PG, Valle A, Aielli F, Casuccio A. . Palliative sedation in patients with advanced cancer followed at home: a prospective study J Pain Symptom Manage 2014 May;47(5):860-6

Glad you brought it up: a patient-centred programme to reduce proton-pump inhibitor prescribing in general medical practice. J Murie, Aj, R Simmonds, C De Wet, Qual Prim Care. 202Murie J AJ, Simmonds R, de Wet C. . Glad you brought it up: a patient-centred programme to reduce proton-pump inhibitor prescribing in general medical practice Qual Prim Care 2012;20(2):141-8

Growing Strong and Healthy with Mister Bone: An Educational Program to Have Strong Bones Later in Life Nutrients. B Pampaloni, Cl, G Gronchi, E Bartolini, S Fabbri, A Tanini, 7Pampaloni B CL, Gronchi G, Bartolini E, Fabbri S, Tanini A, et al. Growing Strong and Healthy with Mister Bone: An Educational Program to Have Strong Bones Later in Life Nutrients 2015 Dec;7(12):9985- 98

Feasibility and effectiveness of an educational program in Italian COPD patients undergoing rehabilitation Respir Care. M Paneroni, Ce, E Crisafulli, E Guffanti, A Fumagalli, A Bernasconi, 58Paneroni M CE, Crisafulli E, Guffanti E, Fumagalli A, Bernasconi A, et al. . Feasibility and effectiveness of an educational program in Italian COPD patients undergoing rehabilitation Respir Care 2013 Feb;58(2):327-33

Experiences and real life management of insulin pump therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes Endocrinol diabetes y Nutr. C Quirós, Jm, C Viñals, M Giménez, D Roca, J Escarrabill, 66Quirós C JM, Viñals C, Giménez M, Roca D, Escarrabill J, et al. . Experiences and real life management of insulin pump therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes Endocrinol diabetes y Nutr 2019 Feb;66(2):117-23

The influence of an educational program on the HbA(1c)-level of adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus: a retrospective study. S Verbeek, R C Vos, D Mul, M E Houdijk, 10.1515/jpem.2011.104J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 241-2Verbeek S, Vos RC, Mul D, Houdijk ME. The influence of an educational program on the HbA(1c)- level of adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus: a retrospective study. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2011;24(1-2):15-9.https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem.2011.104.

Supportive strategies to improve adherence to IFN beta-1b in multiple sclerosis--results of the betaPlus observational cohort study. C Pozzilli, B Schweikert, U Ecari, W Oentrich, 10.1016/j.jns.2011.04.026J Neurol Sci. 3071-2Pozzilli C, Schweikert B, Ecari U, Oentrich W. Supportive strategies to improve adherence to IFN beta- 1b in multiple sclerosis--results of the betaPlus observational cohort study. J Neurol Sci. 2011;307(1- 2):120-6.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2011.04.026.

The impact of a patient support program for multiple sclerosis on patient satisfaction and subjective health status. T Kohlmann, C Wang, J Lipinski, N Hadker, E Caffrey, M Epstein, 10.1097/JNN.0b013e31828a4161J Neurosci Nurs. 453Kohlmann T, Wang C, Lipinski J, Hadker N, Caffrey E, Epstein M, et al. The impact of a patient support program for multiple sclerosis on patient satisfaction and subjective health status. J Neurosci Nurs. 2013;45(3):E3-14.https://doi.org/10.1097/JNN.0b013e31828a4161.

Adherence to Subcutaneous IFN beta-1a in Multiple Sclerosis: Final Analysis of the Non-Interventional Study READOUTsmart Using the Dosing Log and Readout Function of RebiSmart. P Rieckmann, M Schwab, D Pohlau, I K Penner, T Wagner, E Schel, Adv Ther. 361175Rieckmann P, Schwab M, Pohlau D, Penner IK, Wagner T, Schel E, et al. Adherence to Subcutaneous IFN beta-1a in Multiple Sclerosis: Final Analysis of the Non-Interventional Study READOUTsmart Using the Dosing Log and Readout Function of RebiSmart. Adv Ther. 2019;36(1):175-

. 10.1007/s12325-018-0839-1https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-018-0839-1.

Imbruvica® (ibrutinib) patient support programme for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and mantle cell lymphoma. V Murthy, W S Paneesha, S , Br J Nurs. 2610InternetMurthy V, W.S., Paneesha S., Imbruvica® (ibrutinib) patient support programme for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and mantle cell lymphoma. Br J Nurs [Internet]. 2017;26(10):S20-5. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0- 85019701254&doi=10.12968%2Fbjon.2017.26.10.S20&partnerID=40&md5=1601488d1df20776666ea6 6f57e0d36e

Impact of Participation in the Adalimumab (Humira) Patient Support Program on Rheumatoid Arthritis Treatment Course: Results from the PASSION Study. F Van Den Bosch, O A Wassenberg, S Chen, N Wang, C Garg, V , Rheumatol Ther. 41Van den Bosch F, O.A., Wassenberg S, Chen N, Wang C, Garg V, et al., Impact of Participation in the Adalimumab (Humira) Patient Support Program on Rheumatoid Arthritis Treatment Course: Results from the PASSION Study. Rheumatol Ther. 2017;4(1):85-96.

AB1232 Estimating the economic value of a patient support program in rheumatoid arthritis in the united kingdom. A Ostor, G V Yang, M Chamberlain, C Skup, M , 1713Ostor A, G.V., Yang M, Chamberlain C, Skup M., AB1232 Estimating the economic value of a patient support program in rheumatoid arthritis in the united kingdom. 2018;1713.1-1713.

Post-marketing Observational Study to Evaluate the Incremental Impact of AbbVie's Patient Support Program on Patient Reported Outcomes and Health Resource Utilization in Inflammatory Arthritis, Psoriasis and Inflammatory Bowel Diseases in Hungary (VALUE). Clinicaltrials.gov. NCT02750800NCT02750800. Post-marketing Observational Study to Evaluate the Incremental Impact of AbbVie's Patient Support Program on Patient Reported Outcomes and Health Resource Utilization in Inflammatory Arthritis, Psoriasis and Inflammatory Bowel Diseases in Hungary (VALUE). Clinicaltrials.gov. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02750800. Accessed 15 Jan 1999.

Assessing the impact of patient support programs in adalimumab-treated adults with psoriasis in Europe. C Ryan, C Middleton, J Lucas, J Hetherington, B Calimlim, 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.117Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 9826InternetRyan C, Middleton C, Lucas J, Hetherington J, Calimlim B. Assessing the impact of patient support programs in adalimumab-treated adults with psoriasis in Europe. P-9826 [Internet]. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 2019 [cited 2020 Jul 1]. Available from: https://sci- hub.st/10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.117.

Assessing the impact of patient support programs on patient outcomes in adalimumab-treated patients with psoriasis in Europe. C Ryan, B Calimlim, J Lucas, M Skup, S Lobosco, 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.233Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 6451InternetRyan C, Calimlim B, Lucas J, Skup M, Lobosco S. Assessing the impact of patient support programs on patient outcomes in adalimumab-treated patients with psoriasis in Europe. P-6451 [Internet]. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 2018 [cited 2020 Jul 1]. Available from: https://sci- hub.st/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.233.

Use of an educational support program to assist patients receiving injectable osteoporosis treatment: experience with teriparatide. X Nogues, Luz Rentero, M Rodríguez, A L , 10.1185/03007995.2013.851659Curr Med Res Opin. 302Nogues X, Luz Rentero M, Rodríguez AL. Use of an educational support program to assist patients receiving injectable osteoporosis treatment: experience with teriparatide. Curr Med Res Opin. 2014;30(2):287-96.https://doi.org/doi: 10.1185/03007995.2013.851659.

Two-year persistence with teriparatide improved significantly after introduction of an educational and motivational support program. M A Maren, Wc, Jhm Driessen, J V Visser, F De Vries, K Van De Wijdeven, S Gevers, W F Lems, M H Emmelot-Vonk, Jpw Van Den Bergh, 10.1007/s00198-019-05052-0Osteoporos Int. 309Maren MA WC, Driessen JHM, Visser JV, de Vries F, van de Wijdeven K, Gevers S, Lems WF, Emmelot-Vonk MH, van den Bergh JPW. Two-year persistence with teriparatide improved significantly after introduction of an educational and motivational support program. Osteoporos Int 2019;30(9):1837- 44.https://doi.org/doi: 10.1007/s00198-019-05052-0.

Análisis observacional de un programa estructurado de soporte a pacientes con DM2 y en tratamiento con insulina glargina 300. López Giménez, C , C D P , 117InternetLópez Giménez C, C.D.P., Análisis observacional de un programa estructurado de soporte a pacientes con DM2 y en tratamiento con insulina glargina 300. P-117 [Internet].

Evaluación de un programa de soporte telefónico personalizado de ayuda al paciente diabético tipo 2 insulinizado con Glargina U300. González Carretero, J , P R J González Cecilio, J , Fernández López, S , Postigo Cruz, S , 232InternetGonzález Carretero J, P.R.J., González Cecilio J, Fernández López S, Postigo Cruz S., Evaluación de un programa de soporte telefónico personalizado de ayuda al paciente diabético tipo 2 insulinizado con Glargina U300. P-232 [Internet].

Análisis observacional retrospectivo de los resultados del T-Coach®, el programa de soporte a pacientes tratados con insulina glargina 300U en España. V Bellido Castañeda, B G D Morales, C García-Almeida, J , Muñoz Garach, A , Fernández Moreda, J , 170InternetBellido Castañeda V, B.G.D., Morales C, García-Almeida J, Muñoz Garach A, Fernández Moreda J, et al., Análisis observacional retrospectivo de los resultados del T-Coach®, el programa de soporte a pacientes tratados con insulina glargina 300U en España. P-170 [Internet].

Effect of telephone coaching support on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes treated with glargine U300 insulin. Bellido Guerrero, D , B C V Morales, C García-Almeida, J , Muñoz Garach, A , Fernández Morera, J , Congress of American Diabetes Association (ADA). 717Internet. cited 2020 Jul 1Bellido Guerrero D, B.C.V., Morales C, García-Almeida J, Muñoz Garach A, Fernández Morera J, et al, Effect of telephone coaching support on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes treated with glargine U300 insulin. P-717 [Internet]. Congress of American Diabetes Association (ADA). 2019 [cited 2020 Jul 1].

Experiencia clínica con el programa de teleasistencia T-Coach en DM-2 en tratamiento con insulina basal. P-141. Afán De La Ribera, S , Sierra Poyatos, J , Cárdenas Salas, J Lb, Silva Rodríguez, M , Suárez Vásconez, C , Vázquez Martínez, C , Congreso Sociedad Española de Endocrinología y Nutrición (SEENAfán de la Ribera S, Sierra Poyatos J, Cárdenas Salas J LB, Silva Rodríguez M, Suárez Vásconez C, Vázquez Martínez C. Experiencia clínica con el programa de teleasistencia T-Coach en DM-2 en tratamiento con insulina basal. P-141.Congreso Sociedad Española de Endocrinología y Nutrición (SEEN).

Impacto del programa de soporte telefónico a pacientes con diabetes mellitus tipo 2 tratados con insulina glargina U300 (Plataforma TCOACH). B González, L C Morales, C Santos, M , P-087InternetGonzález B, L.C., Morales C, Santos M Impacto del programa de soporte telefónico a pacientes con diabetes mellitus tipo 2 tratados con insulina glargina U300 (Plataforma TCOACH). P-087 [Internet].

Year 1 performance of adveva® a patient support programme (PSP) for patients taking MAVENCLAD® (Cladribine tablets) [Internet]. National clinical homecare association (NCHA). K Morgan, L N Lyons, M , cited 2020 Jul 1Morgan K, L.N., Lyons M., Year 1 performance of adveva® a patient support programme (PSP) for patients taking MAVENCLAD® (Cladribine tablets) [Internet]. National clinical homecare association (NCHA). 2020 [cited 2020 Jul 1]. Available from: https://www.clinicalhomecare.org/wp- content/uploads/2020/02/NCHA-2020-Morgan-et-al-Poster.pdf.

Year 1 performance of adveva®, a patient support programme (PSP) for patients taking MAVENCLAD® (cladribine tablets) for highly active relapsing remitting nultiple sclerosis (RRMS) in United Kingdom (UK). M Lyons, L N Morgan, K , 1593InternetLyons M, L.N., Morgan K., Year 1 performance of adveva®, a patient support programme (PSP) for patients taking MAVENCLAD® (cladribine tablets) for highly active relapsing remitting nultiple sclerosis (RRMS) in United Kingdom (UK). P-1593 [Internet].

European committee for treatment and research in multiple sclerosis (ECTRIMS). citedEuropean committee for treatment and research in multiple sclerosis (ECTRIMS). 2019 [cited 2020 Jul 1]. Available from: https://onlinelibrary.ectrims- congress.eu/ectrims/2019/stockholm/279735/kate.morgan.year.1.performance.of.adveva.a.patient.support. programme.28psp29.for.html?f=menu%3D6%2Abrowseby%3D8%2Asortby%3D2%2Amedia%3D3%2 Ace_id%3D1603%2Aot_id%3D21611.

Enhancing adherence to capecitabine chemotherapy by means of multidisciplinary pharmaceutical care. S Simons, S Ringsdorf, M Braun, U J Mey, P F Schwindt, Y D Ko, 10.1007/s00520-010-0927-5Support Care Cancer. 197Simons S, Ringsdorf S, Braun M, Mey UJ, Schwindt PF, Ko YD, et al. Enhancing adherence to capecitabine chemotherapy by means of multidisciplinary pharmaceutical care. Support Care Cancer. 2011;19(7):1009-18.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-010-0927-5