# Search Engine Optimization : An overview

CorpusID: 250194486
 
tags: #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd2888f3023cea5df8b65697b5f421ca1cd27b62](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd2888f3023cea5df8b65697b5f421ca1cd27b62)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Search Engine Optimization : An overview


Owesh Khatri 
Department of MCA


DrKirti Muley 
Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute of Management and Information Technology
Navi MumbaiIndia


Department of MCA
Student

Search Engine Optimization : An overview
(Online) 2581-9429E41F6809A53798138E3FF88027DF5E4010.48175/IJARSCT-5401Search engine optimizationseooff-page optimizationon-page optimizationmeta tagsgooglesearch engine
In today's world internet is growing with each passing day.Data is very huge and complex.To sort and manage this huge amount of data over large database search engine plays a very important role.Google is the basic and most widely used search engine through which we can optimize the website.With the help of search engine, we can actively gather the visitors to our site.Search engine is the most common part of our daily life.Because of this reason, a search engine plays a very important role as people can search and explore or find according to their needs.
Bright Work, Search Engine Marketing. 

Search Engine Essential Techniques. 

. Sitemap Importance, 

The Foremost Guidelines for Achieving Higher Ranking in Search Results through Search Engine Optimization. Muhammad Khalil Ur Rehman, Ahmed Naeem, Khan, International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology. 52March, 2013

Design and Implementation of a Cost Effective Ranking Adaptation Algorithm. K Chiranjeevi, K Archana, J Pradeep Kumar, ISROSET-International Journal of Scientific Research in Computer Science and Engineering

Exploring SEO Techniques for Web 2.0Websites. Najam Nazar, Publikationen registrerades 2009-08-25. Den ändrades senast 2013-04-04C. CarlssonJune 2009SwedenDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering Chalmers University of Technology Göteborg

. Vinit Kumar Gunjan, Monika Pooja, Amit , IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues. (Online): 1694-081493January 2012Search engine optimization with Google

A web server design using search engine optimization techniques for web intelligence for small organizations. P T Chung, S H Chung, C K Hui, 2012LISAT IEEE Long Island University Brooklyn NY USA

SEO. 

. Basics, Seo,