# Fungal Infection in Co-infected Patients With COVID-19: An Overview of Case Reports/Case Series and Systematic Review

CorpusID: 250329219
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f3c29e9d9ae3402878a768f149357a5d0dd6810](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f3c29e9d9ae3402878a768f149357a5d0dd6810)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Fungal Infection in Co-infected Patients With COVID-19: An Overview of Case Reports/Case Series and Systematic Review
published: 06 July 2022

PortugalRicardo Jorge 
Tong-Bao Liu 
Mehdi Goudarzi gudarzim@yahoo.com 
Mehdi Razzaghi-Abyaneh 
Sima Sadat Seyedjavadi 
Department of Mycology
Pasteur Institute of Iran
TehranIran

Parmida Bagheri 
Department of Biotechnology
Faculty of Life Sciences and Biotechnology
Shahid Beheshti University
TehranIran

Mohammad Javad Nasiri 
Department of Microbiology
School of Medicine
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Mehdi Razzaghi-Abyaneh 
Department of Mycology
Pasteur Institute of Iran
TehranIran

Mehdi Goudarzi 
Department of Microbiology
School of Medicine
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran


Southwest University
China

Fungal Infection in Co-infected Patients With COVID-19: An Overview of Case Reports/Case Series and Systematic Review
published: 06 July 202210.3389/fmicb.2022.888452Specialty section: This article was submitted to Virology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Microbiology Received: 02 March 2022 Accepted: 03 June 2022 Published: 06 July 2022REVIEW Edited by: Matthaios Papadimitriou-Olivgeris, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Switzerland Reviewed by: Raquel Sabino, National Institute of Health Dr. *Correspondence: Citation: Seyedjavadi SS, Bagheri P, Nasiri MJ, Razzaghi-Abyaneh M and Goudarzi M (2022) Fungal Infection in Co-infected Patients With COVID-19: An Overview of Case Reports/Case Series and Systematic Review. Front. Microbiol. 13:888452.


## INTRODUCTION

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) that started as a local epidemic but evolved within a few months into a worldwide pandemic with high morbidity and mortality rates, and the World Health Organization declared it as a global epidemic on January 30, 2020 (Dos Gorbalenya et al., 2020). The prognosis of this disease is severe in patients with underlying conditions. Diabetes, hypertension, cancer, chronic kidney disease, heart failure, and mental disorders increased mortality. However, success in developing specific therapeutic against COVID-19 infection is still needed (Robinson et al., 2022). Therefore, the most effective way to deal with an epidemic is to prevent further infection. The elevated prevalence of mortality and infection in patients with COVID-19 can be due to natural immunity and replication of the virus in the lower respiratory tract, and also due to superinfections and secondary infections, resulting in severe lung damage as well as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Zheng et al., 2003;Farhan et al., 2021). Patients with COVID-19 are found with co-infections with respiratory viruses, bacteria, fungi, and secondary infections that have been identified as a fatal predictor. From the outbreak of COVID-19, we found that fungal co-infection of patients with COVID-19 could significantly increase mortality rates (Yang S. et al., 2021). The significance of fungal co-infection in patients with COVID-19, however, especially in patients with severe and critical conditions, is still poorly understood . Invasive fungal infections, including aspergillosis and candidiasis, are frequent in hospitalized patients (Sadeghi et al., 2018;Jamzivar et al., 2019;Hughes et al., 2020;Nasir et al., 2020). Acute respiratory diseases, such as invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA), are common in intensive care units (ICUs) and immunocompromised patients (Prattes et al., 2021). Fungal infections, before or after COVID-19, are capable of complicating COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, and progression (Talento and Hoenigl, 2020). According to data obtained from other COVID-19 outbreaks [severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)], invasive aspergillosis and also other systemic fungal infections play a role in severe outcomes of patients in ICUs (Song et al., 2020). In addition, patients with COVID-19 with predisposing factors (mechanical ventilation, diabetes, and cytokine storm) were found with a dramatic increase in the incidence of opportunistic fungal infections Song et al., 2020). In contrast, because of the complicated medical situations of the patients with COVID-19 and the improper collection of the clinical species, many fungal infections in these patients are misidentified . Researchers are facing several challenges in the diagnosis and identification of fungal infections. In this systematic review, we reviewed the case reports and case series with patients with COVID-19 presenting fungal co-infections to evaluate the various aspects such as symptoms, diagnosis, and the most frequent etiological agents of patients with fungal co-infecting COVID-19, treatment, and outcome.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS


## Search Strategy

A comprehensive systematic literature search was conducted by reviewing original research papers published in Medline, Web of Science, and Embase databases. The following keywords were used for the search: "coronavirus, " "coronavirus infections, " "HCoV, " "nCoV, " "Covid, " "SARS, " "COVID-19, " "nCoV19, " "SARS-CoV-2, " "SARS coronavirus 2, " "2019 novel corona virus, " "Human, " "pneumonia, " "SARS, " "co-infection, " "Superinfection, " "fungus, " "mycosis, " "co-infect, " "secondary infection, " "mixed infection, " "Fungal infection, " "aspergillosis, " "CAPA, " and "upper respiratory" alone or in combination with "OR" and/or "AND." The search included English language studies from January 1, 2020 to November 30, 2021. Then, articles were kept if the title and abstract contained discussion about bacterial, fungal, and/or respiratory viral co-infection in patients with SARS-CoV-2. The systematic review was performed based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) instructions (Moher et al., 2010).


## Ethical Statement

As this study was a systematic review, it did not require any ethics committee approval.


## Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria

All case reports/case series that were about the fungal infection among patients with COVID-19 in English were evaluated. They included adequate data for analysis, namely, country of origin, the number of patients with COVID-19, and the number of cases with fungal infections, fungal species/group, clinical signs, laboratory results, diagnostic techniques, outcomes, and treatment. The following exclusion criteria were used: (1) only animal studies, (2) research on fungal infections only, (3) research on patients with COVID-19 only, (4) review articles, (5) meeting or congress abstracts, (6) editorials, (7) letters, (8) languages other than English, (9) meta-analyses or systematic reviews, (10) articles available only in abstract, and (11) duplicate studies.


## Study Selection and Data Extraction

The obtained studies were merged, followed by removing the duplicates using EndNote X7 (Thomson Reuters, United States). Two authors (PB and MG) separately screened the studies according to their titles and abstracts, considering the exclusion and inclusion criteria of this study. The full texts were analyzed by a third author (SS). Data extracted included the first author's last name, research type, publication year, country, number of patients with COVID-19, number of cases with fungal confection, co-infecting fungi, clinical symptoms, laboratory findings and outcomes, diagnostic methods, and treatment. The data were obtained by two independent individuals and validated by another investigator.


## Quality Assessment

Quality assessment was performed by a checklist provided by the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI).


## RESULTS


## Characteristics of the Selected Studies

Our search yielded 3,248 records from three databases; we excluded 1,648 duplicates and screened 1,600 articles. At the abstract and title review stage, we excluded 1,420 articles, leaving 180 articles for full-text review. After reviewing the full text of 180 studies, eventually, 71 articles met the inclusion criteria and were subjected to the final assessment (Figure 1). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of published data related to fungal co-infection in patients with COVID-19.


## The Frequency of Fungal Infections Among Patients With COVID-19

The characteristics of the 71 included articles are shown in Table 2. Fifty-four case reports and seventeen case series highlighted fungal co-infection in 60 and 121 patients with COVID-19, respectively. Conforming to the results of these studies, 181 patients with fungal infections had been declared among 188 patients with COVID-19 from 23 countries ( Table 2). Based on the data in this table, most of the patients in this study were reported from India (68 patients), United States (19 patients), Brazil (18 patients), and Spain/Egypt (12 patients for each), respectively. Among the cases with defined gender, 47 cases with fungal infections were women and 132 were  men. The rate of co-infection in the age group of less than 50 years and more than 50 years was 23.7 and 66.2%, respectively. Table 3 shows more details of the subgroup analysis of the studies. Among 19 types of comorbidities, diabetes (59.6%), hypertension (35.9%), and obesity (8.2%) were the commonest comorbidities. Fever (40.8%), cough (30.3%), dyspnea (23.7%), and shortness of breath (12.7%) were the commonest clinical symptoms in COVID-19 patients with fungal infections. Laboratory assessment of patients indicated that elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (>100 mg/L) (33.1%), high ferritin (>500 ng/mL) (18.2%), lymphopenia (<800 cells/µl) (16%), leukocytosis, and increased D-dimer (>1,000 ng/ml) (13.2%) were the most common findings ( Table 3).

Computerized tomography (CT) scan has been reported in studies as a diagnostic method employed for COVID-19, and its findings are as follows: ground-glass opacification (25.4%) and bilateral infiltrates (19.8%). The CT results in the majority of the assessed patients were ground-glass opacification. We also considered the patients' outcomes, and of 181 patients (mentioned in Table 2), 81 improved, 101 died, and in 12 patients, the outcome was unknown ( Table 3).

According to the results of this study (Table 4), RT-PCR was the most common laboratory technique for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in the study patients (43 articles). The most frequently used laboratory techniques for co-fungal detection within studies included 52 that used culture, 13 that used galactomannan (GM) and/or 1,3 β-D-glucan (BDG) detection test, 14 that used histopathology examination, and 14 that     (Table 5). In the study articles, the drugs applied to treat COVID-19 patients with fungal infections were characterized into three categories, namely, antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal drugs ( Table 6). Remdesivir (45.74%) and lopinavir/ritonavir (12%) were the most common antiviral drugs used. Among the antifungal drugs reported in Table 6, amphotericin B (50%) and voriconazole (22.16%) were widely used as an antifungal agent. Among the antifungal drugs reported in Table 6, amphotericin B (50%) and voriconazole (22.16%) were the most widely used antifungal agents for treating patients.


## DISCUSSION

This systematic review is a detailed description of fungal coinfections in patients with COVID-19. There is a special concern  for fungal infections, before or after COVID-19 exposure, which leads to treatment failure and deterioration of disease and imposes high healthcare costs on patients and hospitals. Overall, it is well established that all genders and ages are at risk for COVID-19 infection (Kalantari et al., 2020;Song et al., 2020;Talento and Hoenigl, 2020). In this systematic review, we analyzed 181 fungal patients with COVID-19 from 23 countries, and co-infection in the age group of over 50 years was higher than under 50 years (66.2 vs. 23.7%) which is in agreement with studies that exhibited elderly patients have a higher risk of COVID-19 infection and mortality. Our data are in concordance with a study conducted in the United Kingdom on co-infection patients with COVID-19 symptoms, which reported that the highest prevalence of co-infection patients was in the age group of 55-81 years (Hughes et al., 2020). In this connection, Senok et al. (2021) found that the mean age of patients with co-infections was 49.3 ± 12.5 years in the United Arab Emirates. These observations indicated that declined immune system ability and increasing comorbid conditions with age could be a rational justification for the observed increased infection in older patients. The patients' gender was assessed in 71 studies that indicated COVID-19 infection in men (72.9%) was higher than that of women (25.9%). A research performed by Senok et al. (2021) on patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the United Arab Emirates notified that the most cases (84.2%) were men. Garcia-Vidal et al. (2021) found that the majority of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Spain were in the age of 62 years and also the most cases (55.8%) were men. In a single-center experiment performed by Jin et al. (2020), in China, out of 43 patients with COVID-19, 51.2% were found to be men. As a finding, it can be inferred that sex hormones and X chromosomes as factors involved in innate and adaptive immunity may have an important role in less susceptibility to COVID-19 infection among women. Overall, the high occurrence of many diseases in men compared to women could likely indicate a shorter life expectancy in this sex. Consequently, gender would be considered a risk factor for higher morbidity and severity in patients with COVID-19.

The disease pattern of COVID-19 can range from mild to life-threatening pneumonia associated with bacterial and fungal co-infections (Mehta and Pandey, 2020). Due to the associated comorbidities [e.g., diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)] and immunocompromised conditions, these patients are prone to develop severe opportunistic infections. The findings of this study indicated that diabetes, hypertension, and obesity were the most common comorbidities reported in patients with fungal co-infections and COVID-19. This result is in line with the results of Abdalla et al. (2020) which indicated that diabetes, hepatitis B, and hypertension are the common comorbidities in patients with COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis. Other reports showed that in a patient with diabetes and leukemia, Aspergillus fumigatus was isolated from BAL (Dallalzadeh et al., 2021). Published data have indicated that obesity is a risk factor for infection with COVID-19 (Albashir, 2020;Yang J. et al., 2021). Based on the evidence, the relationship between inflammation and hypertension is well documented. Patients with inflammatory responses increase the disease's severity and complications, which make the infection worse. In line with our report, Mirzaei et al. (2021) in their review reported diabetes, obesity, and COPD as the most common underlying diseases in patients with COVID-19. Underlying factors could lead to the deterioration of the disease and make the scenario worse. However, the impact of comorbidities on COVID-19 must be carefully considered.

In this analysis, patients had various symptoms but fever, cough, dyspnea, diarrhea, and shortness of breath were the most common clinical symptoms among patients with fungal co-infections and COVID-19. So far, similar results have been reported in this context (Singhal, 2020;Team, 2020). One study of 53 cases of HIV co-infection with COVID-19 indicated that fever, cough, and respiratory and gastrointestinal problems were the most common clinical symptoms reported in patients with SARS-CoV-2-HIV co-infection . In another study performed by Galván Casas et al. (2020) in Spain, the most common clinical symptoms among patients with COVID-19 were found to be fever, cough, pneumonia, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, nausea, and dyspnea.

As stated in the literature, concurrent involvement of various microorganisms in patients with COVID-19 is a serious threat, especially in patients with underlying diseases, which can lead to exacerbation of complications and subsequently increase the mortality rate. Infection with this virus is related to immune dysregulation, overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, impaired cell-mediated immunity, and decreased CD4 and CD8 + T-cells that can increase the risk of invasive fungal infections (Hughes et al., 2020;Rawson et al., 2020;Farhan et al., 2021). However, there is scarce information regarding fungal coinfections and COVID-19. Therefore, adequate information is required on the simultaneous infection in patients with COVID-19 in adopting more appropriate treatment regimens for these patients. As it is well documented, patients with COVID-19 are at a greater risk of developing fungal infections because of its effect on the immune system and because treatments for COVID-19 can weaken the body's defenses against fungi (Pemán et al., 2020;Rawson et al., 2020). According to the evidence, the number of reports of fungal co-infections in patients with COVID-19 was steadily growing worldwide. Awareness of the possibility of fungal co-infection with COVID-19 is essential to reduce delays in diagnosis and treatment in order to help prevent severe illness and death from these infections. In this analysis, infection with Aspergillus spp., Mucor spp., Rhizopus spp., Candida spp., and P. jirovecii was the most recorded fungal co-infections in patients with COVID-19. Similar findings of the main fungal co-infections in patients with COVID-19, such as Aspergillus, were also reported by studies conducted in China and Spain (Pemán et al., 2020;Song et al., 2020). In other study performed by Hoenigl (2020) and Garcia-Vidal et al. (2021), the most fungal infections in patients with COVID-19 include aspergillosis, invasive candidiasis, and mucormycosis. A study conducted by Chen et al. (2020) indicated a high prevalence of opportunistic fungal pathogens, such as Aspergillus spp., Candida glabrata, and Candida albicans, in patients with COVID-19. In this connection, Peng et al. (2021) in their systematic review and meta-analysis noted a 0.12 pooled proportion of fungal co-infection in patients with COVID-19. In a recent metaanalysis of eighteen studies, Rawson et al. (2020) reported that 8% of patients with COVID-19 had bacterial/fungal co-infection. The findings of this study indicated that the most COVID-19-associated mucormycosis is found in India. A study conducted in 2021 found that more than 47,000 cases of COVID-19-associated mucormycosis were reported in just 3 months in India (Muthu et al., 2021). Uncontrolled diabetes and overuse of steroids for COVID-19 treatment are important risk factors.

Geological differences have influenced the occurrences of fungal co-infection. Based on this meta-analysis, the frequency of fungal co-infection in patients with COVID-19 was higher in Asia than in other continents. Peng et al. (2021) reported that the fungal co-infection rate was significantly higher in patients from Asia than non-Asian patients.

The use of proper diagnostic techniques is an important issue in the management of COVID-19 diseases. CT scan is considered a relatively high sensitive method for diagnosing cases of COVID-19. This diagnostic method can be a useful factor for diagnosis and assessment of the infection progression in patients with COVID-19. However, the aforementioned technique may not find the involvement of the lung in the first stages of the disease and may not reliably confirm COVID-19 in the patients. According to the CT scan findings obtained from case reports and case series research, ground-glass opacification and bilateral infiltrates were reported as the predominant features in patients with fungal co-infections and COVID-19. This finding was similar to the findings of Radpour et al. (2020) and Omidi et al. (2021).

Diagnosing fungal co-infections in patients with COVID-19 is a serious challenge for clinicians, and it requires detection by a comprehensive diagnostic test for the achievement of an effective treatment. According to the analysis performed in this study, culture was the most common diagnostic method for the presence of fungal infections. As presented in the current analysis, the frequency of fungi in research using nonmolecular assays is higher than in studies using molecular assays. As specified by Song et al. (2020), laboratory tests, including direct microscopic, culture, histopathology, BDG, realtime PCR, PCR, and MALDI-TOF techniques, can be used for the detection of fungal co-infections in patients with COVID-19. Since this laboratory evidence can alert us related to the severity of the disease, therefore, it is important to use these methods in combination for the diagnosis of fungal co-infections in these patients.

This study has some limitations. Since only case reports and case series studies have been selected for this review, they are more likely to be biased than other studies. Case studies and case series are descriptive and describe the patient's signs and symptoms. The prevalence and percentage of co-infection in them have not been studied. For this reason, it was not possible to perform meta-analysis calculations in this review. Therefore, the prevalence of fungal infections among patients with COVID-19 has not been calculated.


## CONCLUSION

There have been many reported cases of viral, fungal, and bacterial infections associated with COVID-19. In this study, we studied the association between fungal infections and COVID-19. We discussed the clinical characteristics, diagnosis, treatment, and mortality rate of patients with COVID-19 co-infected with fungal infections. Sometimes the diagnosis of fungal infections occurs later in patients with COVID-19, which causes the progression and severity of the disease. Both diseases have similar risk factors, such as old age, diabetes, immunodeficiency, HIV, and COPD. Finally, a regular program is recommended to detect fungal infections during the outbreak of COVID-19 and follow it up continuously to prevent the occurrence of these two diseases simultaneously.


## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

SS, MR-A, and MG designed the study. PB, MG, and MN performed the search, study selection, and data synthesis. SS and MG wrote the first draft of the manuscript. MN, MR-A, and SS revised the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.


## FUNDING

This study was financially supported by a research grant from the Research Deputy of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,Tehran,Iran (Grant No. 30923). The funding agency had no role in the design of the project, work execution, analyses, interpretation of the data, and manuscript writing and submission as well.

## FIGURE 1 |
1Flowchart of study selection for inclusion in the systematic review and meta-analysis.


used matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF) and/or molecular detection.From the fungal co-infections registered, the most common etiological agents were as follows: Aspergillus spp. (82 isolates), Mucor spp. (69 isolates), Rhizopus spp. (24 isolates), Candida spp. (21 isolates), Pneumocystis jirovecii (four isolates), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (three isolates), Coccidioides spp. and Cryptococcus neoformans (two for each), Trichosporon asahii (six isolates), and Histoplasma capsulatum and Lichteimia (Absidia) (one for each) were infections in patients with fungal-COVID-19

## TABLE 1 |
1Characteristics of included prevalence studies. Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org TABLE 1 | (Continued)References 
Published 
time 

Country Type of study Patients 
with 
COVID-19 

Patients 
with co-
infection 

Diagnostic 
method 
of COVID-19 

Diagnostic method of fungi 
Fungi 
Mean 
age 

Male/ 
Female 

Rubiano et al., 2021 
2020 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
PCR 
Direct immunofluorescence and PCR tests of BAL Pneumocystis jirovecii 
36 1M 

Werthman-Ehrenreich, 
2021 

2020 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
PCR 
Cultures of sinus 
Mucor spp. 
33 1F 

Chang et al., 2020 
2020 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
nr 
Serologic tests 
Coccidioides spp. 
48 1F 

Shah et al., 2020 
2020 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
nr 
Serologic tests 
Coccidioides spp. 
48 1M 

Mekonnen et al., 2021 
2021 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
nr 
Histopathology examination and fungal culture 
Rhizopus spp. 
60 1M 

De Francesco et al., 2020 
2020 
Italy 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Culture and RT-PCR of sputum 
Aspergillus fumigatus and 
Pneumocystis jirovecii 
Meijer et al., 2020 
2020 
Netherlands Case report 
1 
1 
PCR 
Culture of TA, detection of GM in TA, and BDG in 
serum 

Aspergillus fumigatus (triazole-resistant) 74 1F 

Passarelli et al., 2020 
2020 
Brazil 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Blood culture 
Cryptococcus neoformans 
75 1M 

Posteraro et al., 2020 
2020 
Italy 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Blood culture and MALDI-TOF 
Candida glabrata (resistant all 
echinocandins) 

79 1M 

Seitz et al., 2020 
2020 
Austria 
Case report 
1 
1 
PCR 
Culture of the removed central venous catheter 
Candida glabrata 
72 1M 

Ventoulis et al., 2020 
2020 
Greece 
Case report 
2 
2 
RT-PCR 
Blood cultures, direct microscopy, germ tube 
testing, biochemical testing, molecularly and 
sequencing 

Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
76-73 2M 

Do Monte Junior et al., 
2020 

2020 
Brazil 
Case report 
1 
1 
PCR 
Pathological examination 
Mucor spp. 
86 1M 

Schein et al., 2020 
2020 
France 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Detection of GM in sputum and blood, serology, 
serum PCR 

Aspergillus spp. 
87 1F 

Mehta and Pandey, 2020 
2020 
India 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Nasal biopsy and culture 
Mucor spp. 
60 1M 

Pasero et al., 2021 
2021 
Italy 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Bronchial aspirate culture, microbiological and 
histopathological examination 

Candida glabrata and Rhizopus spp. 
66 1M 

Nasri et al., 2020 
2020 
Iran 
Case report s 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Detection of GM in Serum 
Aspergillus spp. 
42 1F 

Placik et al., 2020 
2020 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Microbiological analysis of the intraoperative 
specimens 

Rhizopus spp. 
49 1M 

Prattes et al., 2021 
2021 
Austria 
Case report 
1 
1 
PCR 
ETA culture, Aspergillus lateral-flow device (LFD) in 
ETA 

Aspergillus fumigatus 
70 1M 

Ghelfenstein-Ferreira 
et al., 2021 

2021 
France 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
TA culture, quantitative PCR 
Aspergillus fumigatus 
56 1M 

Abdalla et al., 2020 
2020 
Qatar 
Case report 
2 
2 
PCR 
Lower respiratory culture 
Aspergillus niger (1/2), Aspergillus 
terreus (1/2), Candida albicans (2/2) 

66 2M 

Dos Santos et al., 2020 
2020 
Brazil 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Tongue scrape culture 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
67 1M 

Sharma et al., 2021 
2021 
Australia Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
ETA culture 
Aspergillus fumigatus 
66 1F 

Antinori et al., 2020 
2020 
Italy 
Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
BAL culture, detection of GM in serum 
Aspergillus fumigatus 
73 1M 

Al Osta et al., 2021 
2021 
Lebanon Case report 
1 
1 
nr 
Microscopic examination of the palate biopsy 
Mucor spp. 
62 1M 

Khatri et al., 2021 
2021 
United States Case report 
1 
1 
RT-PCR 
Culture of aspirate fluid along the anterior right 
upper chest wall 

Rhizopus microsporus 
68 1M 

(Continued) 

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 


## TABLE 2 |
2Frequency of fungal co-infection among patients with COVID-19 based on different subgroups. *n, number of patients with any variable; N, total number of COVID-19 patients with fungal co-infections.Types of study Number of 
studies 

Number of 
patients with 
COVID-19 

Number of 
patients with 
fungal 
co-infection 

% 

Case report 
54 
60 
60 
100 

Case series 
17 
128 
121 
94.53 

Continent 
Variables 
Number of 
patients with 
fungal 
co-infection 

n/N* 
% 

America 
42 
42/181 
23.2 

Asia 
90 
90/181 
49.7 

Europe 
36 
36/181 
19.8 

Australia 
1 
1/181 
0.55 

Africa 
12 
12/181 
6.6 

Gender 
Male 
132 
132/181 
72.9 

Female 
47 
47/181 
25.9 

nr 
2 
2/181 
1.1 

Age 
Less than 
50 years 

43 
43/181 
23.7 

More than 
50 years 

120 
122/181 
66.2 

nr 
18 
18/181 
9.9 



## TABLE 3 |
3Summary of the case reports/case series findings.Comorbidities 
Variables 
Number of 
patients with 
fungal 
co-infection 

n/N* 
% 

Obesity 
15 
15/181 8.2 

Hyperlipidemia 
7 
7/181 3.8 

Hypertension 
65 
65/181 35.9 

Diabetes 
108 
108/181 59.6 

Ischemic disease 
8 
8/181 4.4 

Metabolic acidosis 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Diabetes ketosis 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Smoker 
10 
10/181 5.5 

HIV 
3 
3/181 1.6 

Urinary tract infection 
3 
3/181 1.6 

Atrial fibrillation 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Kidney transplantation 
5 
5/181 2.7 

Heart transplantation 
2 
2/181 1.1 

Heart disease 
2 
2/181 1.1 

Depression 
1 
1/181 0.55 

Kidney injury 
9 
9/181 4.9 

Chronic liver disease 
1 
1/181 0.55 

Liver cirrhosis 
1 
1/181 0.55 

Renal failure 
8 
8/181 4.4 

Clinical 
manifestation 

Cough 
55 
55/181 30.3 

Fever 
74 
74/181 40.8 

Nausea 
2 
2/181 1.1 

Dyspnea 
43 
43/181 23.7 

Tachypnea 
18 
18/181 9.9 

Vomiting 
5 
5/181 2.7 

Fatigue 
7 
7/181 3.8 

Tachycardia 
11 
11/181 6 

Headache 
21 
21/181 11.6 

Chest pain 
2 
2/181 1.1 

Diarrhea 
15 
15/181 8.2 

Shortness of breath 
23 
23/181 12.7 

Malaise 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Sinus congestion 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Body ache 
3 
3/181 1.6 

Muscle ache 
2 
2/181 1.1 

Abdominal pain 
3 
3/181 1.6 

Chills 
2 
2/181 1.1% 

Sore throat 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Fungal infections 
evidences in 
patients with 
COVID-19 

Pulmonary embolism 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Proptosis 
15 
15/181 8.2 

Conjunctival chemosis 
8 
8/181 4.4 

Periorbital edema 
11 
11/181 6 

Facial swelling and sinusitis 
13 
13/181 7.1 

Sternal wound 
1 
1/181 0.55 

Encephalopathy 
1 
1/181 0.55 

Lid swelling and maxillary 
4 
4/181 2.2 

Soft tissue edema 
4 
4/181 2.2 

(Continued) 



## TABLE 3
3*n, number of patients with a specific variable; N, total number of COVID-19 patients with fungal co-infections; nr, not reported.| (Continued) 

Comorbidities 
Variables 
Number of 
patients with 
fungal 
co-infection 

n/N* 
% 

Ophthalmoplegia 
14 
14/181 7.7 

Dry skin and mucus 
6 
6/181 3.3 

Cerebral hemorrhage 
2 
2/181 1.1 

Renal failure 
7 
7/181 3.8 

Multi organ failure 
12 
12/181 6.6 

Sepsis shock 
14 
14/181 7.7 

Respiratory failure 
9 
9/181 4.9 

Laboratory findings Leukopenia 
3 
3/181 1.6 

Lymphopenia 
29 
29/181 16 

Leukocytosis 
22 
22/181 12.1 

High ferritin 
33 
33/181 18.2 

High pro-calcitonin 
20 
20/181 11 

Low albumin 
17 
17/181 9.3 

Thrombocytopenia 
5 
5/181 2.7 

High C-reactive protein 
60 
60/181 33.1 

High D-dimer 
24 
24/181 13.2 

Chest CT scan 
ground-glass opacity 
46 
46/181 25.4 

bilateral infiltrates 
36 
36/181 19.8 

Outcome 
Death 
101 
99/181 54.6 

Recovered 
81 
82/181 45.3 

nr 
12 
12/181 6.6 



## TABLE 4 |
4Diagnostic methods for patients with COVID-19 and fungal infection.COVID-19 detection Variables 
Number of 
studies 

RT-PCR 
40 

PCR 
20 

Molecular testing 
3 

nr 
8 

Fungal detection 
Culture 
52 

Detection of GM and/or BDG 
13 

Pneumocystis antigen detection 
3 

MALDI-TOF and/or molecular detection 
14 

Histopathology examination 
14 

Serologic tests 
3 

RT-PCR, real time-polymerase chain reaction; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; 
MALDI-TOF, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight; BDG, 1-3, 
β-D-glucan; GM, galactomannan; nr, not reported. 



## TABLE 5 |
5Fungal pathogens detected in patients with COVID-19.Fungal type Fungal genera Fungal species 
Number of isolates 

Candida 
Candida albicans 
9 

Candida glabrata 
2 

Candida glabrata (all 
echinocandins 
resistant) 

2 

Candida lusitaniae 
2 

Candida tropicalis 
1 

Candida krusei 
2 

Candida auris 
2 

Candida orthopsilosis 
1 

Aspergillus 
Aspergillus spp. 
4 

Aspergillus fumigatus 
50 

Aspergillus flavus 
18 

Aspergillus fumigatus 
(triazole-resistant) 

2 

Aspergillus niger 
5 

Aspergillus terreus 
1 

Aspergillus tubingensis 
1 

Aspergillus nidulans 
1 

Pneumocystis 
Pneumocystis jirovecii 
4 

Histoplasma 
Histoplasma 
capsulatum 

1 

Rhizopus 
Rhizopus microsporus 
2 

Rhizopus spp. 
5 

Rhizopus arrhizus 
14 

Rhizopus oryzae 
2 

Rhizopus azygosporus 
1 

Saccharomyces Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae 

3 

Cryptococcus 
Cryptococcus 
neoformans 

2 

Coccidioides 
Coccidioides spp. 
2 

Lichteimia 
Lichteimia (Absidia) 
spp. 

1 

Mucor 
Mucor spp. 
69 

Trichosporon 
Trichosporon asahii 
1 



## TABLE 6 |
6Agents used in the treatment of patients with fungal co-infection.Antiviral drug 
Agent 
Number of 
patients with 
co-infection 

n/N* (%) 

Remdesivir 
43 
43/94 (45.74) 

Lopinavir/ritonavir 
12 
12/94 (12.76) 

Oseltamivir 
7 
7/94 (7.44) 

Darunavir/ritonavir 
3 
3/94 (3.2) 

Hydroxychloroquine 
27 
27/94 (28.72) 

Dolutegravir/emtricitabine/ 
tenofovir 
alafenamide 

1 
1/94 (1.06) 

Bictegravir/emtricitabine/ 
tenofovir 
alafenamide 

1 
1/94 (1.06) 

Antibacterial 
drug 

Antibacterial drug 
82 
82/108 (75.9) 

Azithromycin 
26 
26/108 (24.1) 

Antifungal 
drugs 

Amphotericin B 
111 
111/185 (60) 

Anidulafungin 
8 
8/185 (4.3) 

Voriconazole 
41 
41/185 (22.16) 

Isavuconazole 
6 
6/185 (3.2) 

Micafungin 
6 
6/185 (3.2) 

Fluconazole 
10 
10/185 (5.4) 

Caspofungin 
9 
9/185 (4.8) 

Itraconazole 
3 
3/185 (1.6) 

*n, number of patients with any variable; N, total number of COVID-19 patients with 
fungal co-infections. 


July 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 888452
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
Conflict of Interest:The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
. S Abdalla, M A Almaslamani, S M Hashim, A S Ibrahim, A S Omrani, Fatal coronavirus disease 2019-associated pulmonary aspergillosisAbdalla, S., Almaslamani, M. A., Hashim, S. M., Ibrahim, A. S., and Omrani, A. S. (2020). Fatal coronavirus disease 2019-associated pulmonary aspergillosis;

. 10.1016/j.idcr.2020.e0093522935a report of two cases and review of the literature. IDCases 22:e00935. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2020.e00935

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) associated rhinocerebral mucormycosis and complications: a case report. Al Osta, S Atwi, G El Ahmar, N Bejjani, N Abillama, F Matli, K , 10.38179/ijcr.v2i1.102Int. J. Clin. Res. 2Al Osta, S., Atwi, G., El Ahmar, N., Bejjani, N., Abillama, F., and Matli, K. (2021). Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) associated rhinocerebral mucormycosis and complications: a case report. Int. J. Clin. Res. 2, 93-99. doi: 10.38179/ijcr.v2i1. 102

The potential impacts of obesity on COVID-19. A A D Albashir, 10.7861/clinmed.2020-0239Clin. Med. 20109Albashir, A. A. D. (2020). The potential impacts of obesity on COVID-19. Clin. Med. 20:e109. doi: 10.7861/clinmed.2020-0239

COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis: a case report from the COVID-19 surveillance program. M B Aldaas, D Goldsmith, Arnold , F W , 10.18297/jri/vol5/iss1/31Univ. Louisville J. Respir. Infect. 531Aldaas, M. B., Goldsmith, D., and Arnold, F. W. (2021). COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis: a case report from the COVID-19 surveillance program. Univ. Louisville J. Respir. Infect. 5:31. doi: 10.18297/jri/vol5/iss1/31

Rhinocerebral mucormycosis and COVID-19 pneumonia. K Alekseyev, L Didenko, B Chaudhry, 10.14740/jmc3637J. Med. Case Rep. 12Alekseyev, K., Didenko, L., and Chaudhry, B. (2021). Rhinocerebral mucormycosis and COVID-19 pneumonia. J. Med. Case Rep. 12, 85-89. doi: 10.14740/jmc3637

Trichosporon asahii fungemia and COVID-19 co-infection: an emerging fungal pathogen; case report and review of the literature. G A Ali, A Husain, H Salah, W Goravey, 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01244IDCases. 251244Ali, G. A., Husain, A., Salah, H., and Goravey, W. (2021). Trichosporon asahii fungemia and COVID-19 co-infection: an emerging fungal pathogen; case report and review of the literature. IDCases 25:e01244. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2021. e01244

Emergence of Candida auris in Brazil in a COVID-19 intensive care unit. J N D Almeida, E C Francisco, F Hagen, I B Brandão, F M Pereira, P H Dias, 10.3390/jof7030220J. Fungi. 7220Almeida, J. N. D., Francisco, E. C., Hagen, F., Brandão, I. B., Pereira, F. M., Presta Dias, P. H., et al. (2021). Emergence of Candida auris in Brazil in a COVID-19 intensive care unit. J. Fungi 7:220. doi: 10.3390/jof7030220

Pulmonary aspergillosis in two COVID-19 patients from Kuwait. K Alobaid, B Yousuf, E Al-Qattan, Z Muqeem, Al-Subaie , N , 10.1099/acmi.0.000201Access. Microbiol. 3201Alobaid, K., Yousuf, B., Al-Qattan, E., Muqeem, Z., and Al-Subaie, N. (2021). Pulmonary aspergillosis in two COVID-19 patients from Kuwait. Access. Microbiol. 3:000201. doi: 10.1099/acmi.0.000201

Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis complicating SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia: a diagnostic challenge. S Antinori, R Rech, L Galimberti, A Castelli, E Angeli, T Fossali, 10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101752Travel. Med. Infect. Dis. 38101752Antinori, S., Rech, R., Galimberti, L., Castelli, A., Angeli, E., Fossali, T., et al. (2020). Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis complicating SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia: a diagnostic challenge. Travel. Med. Infect. Dis. 38:101752. doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid. 2020.101752

Mucormycosis associated with covid19 in two kidney transplant patients. C Arana, R E Cuevas Ramírez, M Xipell, J Casals, A Moreno, S Herrera, 10.1111/tid.13652Transpl. Infect. Dis. 2313652Arana, C., Cuevas Ramírez, R. E., Xipell, M., Casals, J., Moreno, A., Herrera, S., et al. (2021). Mucormycosis associated with covid19 in two kidney transplant patients. Transpl. Infect. Dis. 23:e13652. doi: 10.1111/tid.13652

Imaging spectrum of acute invasive fungal rhinoorbital-cerebral sinusitis in COVID-19 patients: a case series and a review of literature. M M Ashour, T T Abdelaziz, D M Ashour, A Askoura, M I Saleh, Mahmoud , M S , 10.1016/j.neurad.2021.05.007J. Neuroradiol. 48Ashour, M. M., Abdelaziz, T. T., Ashour, D. M., Askoura, A., Saleh, M. I., and Mahmoud, M. S. (2021). Imaging spectrum of acute invasive fungal rhino- orbital-cerebral sinusitis in COVID-19 patients: a case series and a review of literature. J. Neuroradiol. 48, 319-324. doi: 10.1016/j.neurad.2021.05.007

COVID-19-associated histoplasmosis in an AIDS patient. R P Basso, V R Poester, J L Benelli, D A Stevens, H E Zogbi, I C D S Vasconcellos, 10.1007/s11046-020-00505-1Mycopathologia. 186Basso, R. P., Poester, V. R., Benelli, J. L., Stevens, D. A., Zogbi, H. E., Vasconcellos, I. C. D. S., et al. (2021). COVID-19-associated histoplasmosis in an AIDS patient. Mycopathologia 186, 109-112. doi: 10.1007/s11046-020-00505-1

COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis in ICU patients: report of five cases from Argentina. M F Benedetti, K H Alava, J Sagardia, R C Cadena, D Laplume, P Capece, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.11.003Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Benedetti, M. F., Alava, K. H., Sagardia, J., Cadena, R. C., Laplume, D., Capece, P., et al. (2021). COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis in ICU patients: report of five cases from Argentina. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 24-28. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.11.003

Fungal sinusitis post COVID 19 -a case series from a diagnostic microbiology laboratory. C S Bowalekar, R R Yadav, N Sharma, 10.18231/j.ijmr.2021.051Indian J. Med. Microbiol. 8Bowalekar, C. S., Yadav, R. R., and Sharma, N. (2021). Fungal sinusitis post COVID 19 -a case series from a diagnostic microbiology laboratory. Indian J. Med. Microbiol. 8, 249-255. doi: 10.18231/j.ijmr.2021.051

An acute pulmonary coccidioidomycosis coinfection in a patient presenting with multifocal pneumonia with COVID-19. C C Chang, R Senining, J Kim, R Goyal, 10.1177/2324709620972244J. Investig. Med. High Impact Case Rep. 82324709620972244Chang, C. C., Senining, R., Kim, J., and Goyal, R. (2020). An acute pulmonary coccidioidomycosis coinfection in a patient presenting with multifocal pneumonia with COVID-19. J. Investig. Med. High Impact Case Rep. 8:2324709620972244. doi: 10.1177/2324709620972244

Renal mucormycosis following COVID-19 treatment with immune modulators: a case report. D Chaudhary, A Behera, N Sharma, 10.18502/fem.v6i1.7684Front. Emerg. Med. 612Chaudhary, D., Behera, A., and Sharma, N. (2022). Renal mucormycosis following COVID-19 treatment with immune modulators: a case report. Front. Emerg. Med. 6:e12. doi: 10.18502/fem.v6i1.7684

Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. N Chen, M Zhou, X Dong, J Qu, F Gong, Y Han, 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30211-7Lancet. 395Chen, N., Zhou, M., Dong, X., Qu, J., Gong, F., Han, Y., et al. (2020). Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet 395, 507-513. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30211-7

Mixed etiology COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA)-a case report and brief review of the literature. C Costache, A Botan, R M Mihaila, I A Colosi, S B Buksa, R M Chiorescu, 10.3390/jof7100877J. Fungi. 7877Costache, C., Botan, A., Mihaila, R. M., Colosi, I. A., Buksa, S. B., and Chiorescu, R. M. (2021). Mixed etiology COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA)-a case report and brief review of the literature. J. Fungi 7:877. doi: 10.3390/jof7100877

Secondary infection with rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis associated with COVID-19. L O Dallalzadeh, D J Ozzello, C Y Liu, D O Kikkawa, B S Korn, 10.1080/01676830.2021.1903044Orbit. Epub ahead of printDallalzadeh, L. O., Ozzello, D. J., Liu, C. Y., Kikkawa, D. O., and Korn, B. S. (2021). Secondary infection with rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis associated with COVID-19. Orbit [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.1080/01676830.2021.1903044

Pneumocystis jirevocii and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection: a common feature in transplant recipients? Vaccines. M A De Francesco, F Alberici, N Bossini, F Scolari, F Pascucci, G Tomasoni, 10.3390/vaccines80305448544De Francesco, M. A., Alberici, F., Bossini, N., Scolari, F., Pascucci, F., Tomasoni, G., et al. (2020). Pneumocystis jirevocii and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection: a common feature in transplant recipients? Vaccines 8:544. doi: 10.3390/vaccines8030544

Rare and fatal gastrointestinal mucormycosis (Zygomycosis) in a COVID-19 patient: a case report. E S Do Monte Junior, M E L Santos, I B Ribeiro, G De Oliveira Luz, E R Baba, B S Hirsch, 10.5946/ce.2020.180Clin. Endosc. 53Do Monte Junior, E. S., Dos Santos, M. E. L., Ribeiro, I. B., de Oliveira Luz, G., Baba, E. R., Hirsch, B. S., et al. (2020). Rare and fatal gastrointestinal mucormycosis (Zygomycosis) in a COVID-19 patient: a case report. Clin. Endosc. 53, 746-749. doi: 10.5946/ce.2020.180

Oral mucosal lesions in a COVID-19 patient: new signs or secondary manifestations?. Dos Santos, J A Normando, A G C Da Silva, R L C De Paula, R M Cembranel, A C Santos-Silva, A R , 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.06.012Int. J. Infect. Dis. 97Dos Santos, J. A., Normando, A. G. C., da Silva, R. L. C., De Paula, R. M., Cembranel, A. C., Santos-Silva, A. R., et al. (2020). Oral mucosal lesions in a COVID-19 patient: new signs or secondary manifestations? Int. J. Infect. Dis. 97, 326-328. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.06.012

Isolation of Aspergillus spp. in respiratory samples of patients with COVID-19 in a Spanish tertiary care hospital. I Falces-Romero, M Ruiz-Bastián, B Díaz-Pollán, E Maseda, J García-Rodríguez, 10.1111/myc.13155Mycoses. 63and Sars-CoV-2 Working GroupFalces-Romero, I., Ruiz-Bastián, M., Díaz-Pollán, B., Maseda, E., García-Rodríguez, J., and Sars-CoV-2 Working Group. (2020). Isolation of Aspergillus spp. in respiratory samples of patients with COVID-19 in a Spanish tertiary care hospital. Mycoses 63, 1144-1148. doi: 10.1111/myc.13155

SARS-CoV-2 and immune-microbiome interactions: lessons from respiratory viral infections. C Farhan, M U Sohail, I Abdelhafez, S Salman, Z Attique, L Kamareddine, 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.02.071Int. J. Infect. Dis. 105Farhan, C., Sohail, M. U., Abdelhafez, I., Salman, S., Attique, Z., Kamareddine, L., et al. (2021). SARS-CoV-2 and immune-microbiome interactions: lessons from respiratory viral infections. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 105, 540-550. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid. 2021.02.071

Ventilator-associated pneumonia involving Aspergillus flavus in a patient with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from Argentina. N B Fernandez, D H Caceres, K D Beer, C Irrazabal, G Delgado, L Farias, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.07.001Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Fernandez, N. B., Caceres, D. H., Beer, K. D., Irrazabal, C., Delgado, G., Farias, L., et al. (2021). Ventilator-associated pneumonia involving Aspergillus flavus in a patient with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from Argentina. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 19-23. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.07.001

Late histopathologic characteristics of critically ill COVID-19 patients: different phenotypes without evidence of invasive aspergillosis, a case series. A W Flikweert, M J Grootenboers, D C Yick, A W Du Mée, N J Van Der Meer, T C Rettig, 10.1016/j.jcrc.2020.07.002J. Crit. Care. 59Flikweert, A. W., Grootenboers, M. J., Yick, D. C., du Mée, A. W., van der Meer, N. J., Rettig, T. C., et al. (2020). Late histopathologic characteristics of critically ill COVID-19 patients: different phenotypes without evidence of invasive aspergillosis, a case series. J. Crit. Care 59, 149-155. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc. 2020.07.002

Classification of the cutaneous manifestations of COVID−19: a rapid prospective nationwide consensus study in Spain with 375 cases. Galván Casas, C Catala, A Carretero Hernández, G Rodríguez−jiménez, P Fernández−nieto, D Rodríguez−villa, A Lario, 10.1111/bjd.19163Br. J. Dermatol. 183Galván Casas, C., Catala, A., Carretero Hernández, G., Rodríguez−Jiménez, P., Fernández−Nieto, D., Rodríguez−Villa Lario, A., et al. (2020). Classification of the cutaneous manifestations of COVID−19: a rapid prospective nationwide consensus study in Spain with 375 cases. Br. J. Dermatol. 183, 71-77. doi: 10.1111/bjd.19163

Incidence of co-infections and superinfections in hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study. C Garcia-Vidal, G Sanjuan, E Moreno-García, P Puerta-Alcalde, N Garcia-Pouton, M Chumbita, 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.07.041Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 27Garcia-Vidal, C., Sanjuan, G., Moreno-García, E., Puerta-Alcalde, P., Garcia- Pouton, N., Chumbita, M., et al. (2021). Incidence of co-infections and superinfections in hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 27, 83-88. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.07.041

Recovery of a triazole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus in respiratory specimen of COVID-19 patient in ICU-A case report. T Ghelfenstein-Ferreira, A Saade, A Alanio, S Bretagne, R A De Castro, S Hamane, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.06.006Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Ghelfenstein-Ferreira, T., Saade, A., Alanio, A., Bretagne, S., de Castro, R. A., Hamane, S., et al. (2021). Recovery of a triazole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus in respiratory specimen of COVID-19 patient in ICU-A case report. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 15-18. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.06.006

Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: the species and its viruses-a statement of the Coronavirus Study Group. A E Gorbalenya, S C Baker, R Baric, R J D Groot, C Drosten, A A Gulyaeva, 10.1101/2020.02.07.937862bioRxiv PreprintGorbalenya, A. E., Baker, S. C., Baric, R., Groot, R. J. D., Drosten, C., Gulyaeva, A. A., et al. (2020). Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: the species and its viruses-a statement of the Coronavirus Study Group. bioRxiv Preprint doi: 10.1101/2020.02.07.937862

Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis and hyperthermia in an immunocompetent patient with COVID-19. A Haglund, S Christensen, L Kristensen, J B Gertsen, L Buus, K R Lausch, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.11.004Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Haglund, A., Christensen, S., Kristensen, L., Gertsen, J. B., Buus, L., and Lausch, K. R. (2021). Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis and hyperthermia in an immunocompetent patient with COVID-19. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 29-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.11.004

Invasive fungal disease complicating Coronavirus Disease 2019: when it rains, it spores. M Hoenigl, 10.1093/cid/ciaa1342doi: 10.1093/ cid/ciaa1342Clin. Infect. Dis. 73Hoenigl, M. (2020). Invasive fungal disease complicating Coronavirus Disease 2019: when it rains, it spores. Clin. Infect. Dis. 73, e1645-e1648. doi: 10.1093/ cid/ciaa1342

Bacterial and fungal coinfection among hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study in a UK secondary-care setting. S Hughes, O Troise, H Donaldson, N Mughal, L S Moore, 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.06.025Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 26Hughes, S., Troise, O., Donaldson, H., Mughal, N., and Moore, L. S. (2020). Bacterial and fungal coinfection among hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study in a UK secondary-care setting. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 26, 1395-1399. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.06.025

COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis in a Japanese man: a case report. W Imoto, H Himura, K Matsuo, S Kawata, A Kiritoshi, R Deguchi, 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.02.026J. Infect. Chemother. 27Imoto, W., Himura, H., Matsuo, K., Kawata, S., Kiritoshi, A., Deguchi, R., et al. (2021). COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis in a Japanese man: a case report. J. Infect. Chemother. 27, 911-914. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2021.02.026

Unraveling the importance of molecules of natural origin in antifungal drug development through targeting ergosterol biosynthesis pathway. Iran. F Jamzivar, M Shams-Ghahfarokhi, M Khoramizadeh, N Yousefi, M Gholami-Shabani, M Razzaghi-Abyaneh, 10.18502/ijm.v11i6.2216doi: 10.18502/ ijm.v11i6.2216J. Microbiol. 11Jamzivar, F., Shams-Ghahfarokhi, M., Khoramizadeh, M., Yousefi, N., Gholami- Shabani, M., and Razzaghi-Abyaneh, M. (2019). Unraveling the importance of molecules of natural origin in antifungal drug development through targeting ergosterol biosynthesis pathway. Iran. J. Microbiol. 11, 448-459. doi: 10.18502/ ijm.v11i6.2216

Gender differences in patients with COVID-19: focus on severity and mortality. J.-M Jin, P Bai, W He, F Wu, X.-F Liu, D.-M Han, 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00152Front. Public Health. 8152Jin, J.-M., Bai, P., He, W., Wu, F., Liu, X.-F., Han, D.-M., et al. (2020). Gender differences in patients with COVID-19: focus on severity and mortality. Front. Public Health 8:152. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00152

Pulmonary aspergillosis and mucormycosis in a patient with COVID-19. A K Johnson, Z Ghazarian, K D Cendrowski, J G Persichino, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2021.03.006Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 32Johnson, A. K., Ghazarian, Z., Cendrowski, K. D., and Persichino, J. G. (2021). Pulmonary aspergillosis and mucormycosis in a patient with COVID-19. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 32, 64-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2021.03.006

Determination of COVID-19 prevalence with regards to age range of patients referring to the hospitals located in western Tehran. H Kalantari, A H H Tabrizi, F Foroohi, 10.1016/j.genrep.2020.100910Iran. Gene Rep. 21100910Kalantari, H., Tabrizi, A. H. H., and Foroohi, F. (2020). Determination of COVID- 19 prevalence with regards to age range of patients referring to the hospitals located in western Tehran, Iran. Gene Rep. 21:100910. doi: 10.1016/j.genrep. 2020.100910

A case series on post-COVID deadly fungal infection: mucormycosis. G Kalpana, A A Patil, M Shaan, M Verma, G Harshe, 10.18203/issn.2454-5929.ijohns20213287Int. J. Otorhinolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 42Kalpana, G., Patil, A. A., Shaan, M., Verma, M., and Harshe, G. (2021). A case series on post-COVID deadly fungal infection: mucormycosis. Int. J. Otorhinolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 42, 1503-1508. doi: 10.18203/issn.2454- 5929.ijohns20213287

A fatal case of Rhizopus azygosporus pneumonia following COVID-19. A Kanwar, A Jordan, S Olewiler, K Wehberg, M Cortes, Jackson , B R , 10.3390/jof7030174J. Fungi. 7174Kanwar, A., Jordan, A., Olewiler, S., Wehberg, K., Cortes, M., and Jackson, B. R. (2021). A fatal case of Rhizopus azygosporus pneumonia following COVID-19. J. Fungi 7:174. doi: 10.3390/jof7030174

A case report of COVID-19 associated pulmonary mucormycosis. N Khan, C G Gutierrez, D V Martinez, K C Proud, 10.22551/2020.28.0703.10172Arch. Clin. Cases. 7Khan, N., Gutierrez, C. G., Martinez, D. V., and Proud, K. C. (2020). A case report of COVID-19 associated pulmonary mucormycosis. Arch. Clin. Cases 7, 46-51. doi: 10.22551/2020.28.0703.10172

Mucormycosis after Coronavirus disease 2019 infection in a heart transplant recipient-case report and review of literature. A Khatri, K.-M Chang, I Berlinrut, F Wallach, 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101125J. Mycol. Med. 31101125Khatri, A., Chang, K.-M., Berlinrut, I., and Wallach, F. (2021). Mucormycosis after Coronavirus disease 2019 infection in a heart transplant recipient-case report and review of literature. J. Mycol. Med. 31:101125. doi: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021. 101125

Proven pulmonary aspergillosis in a COVID-19 patient: a case report. S Khodavaisy, N Khajavirad, S J Hashemi, A Izadi, S A D Manshadi, A Abdollahi, 10.18502/cmm.7.2.7031Curr. Med. Mycol. 7Khodavaisy, S., Khajavirad, N., Hashemi, S. J., Izadi, A., Manshadi, S. A. D., Abdollahi, A., et al. (2021). Proven pulmonary aspergillosis in a COVID-19 patient: a case report. Curr. Med. Mycol. 7, 39-42. doi: 10.18502/cmm.7.2.7031

Novel pathogens, same old habits. A call for evidence-based research in the fight against COVID-19. C Legnani, E Dusi, 10.1016/j.idnow.2021.01.004Infect. Dis. Now. 51Legnani, C., and Dusi, E. (2021). Novel pathogens, same old habits. A call for evidence-based research in the fight against COVID-19. Infect. Dis. Now 51, 632-633. doi: 10.1016/j.idnow.2021.01.004

Clinical and virological data of the first cases of COVID-19 in Europe: a case series. F.-X Lescure, L Bouadma, D Nguyen, M Parisey, P.-H Wicky, S Behillil, 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30200-0Lancet Infect. Dis. 20Lescure, F.-X., Bouadma, L., Nguyen, D., Parisey, M., Wicky, P.-H., Behillil, S., et al. (2020). Clinical and virological data of the first cases of COVID-19 in Europe: a case series. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 697-706. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30200- 0

. A Maini, G Tomar, D Khanna, Y Kini, H Mehta, V Bhagyasree, Maini, A., Tomar, G., Khanna, D., Kini, Y., Mehta, H., and Bhagyasree, V. (2021).

Sino-orbital mucormycosis in a COVID-19 patient: a case report. 10.1016/j.ijscr.2021.105957Int. J. Surg. Case Rep. 82105957Sino-orbital mucormycosis in a COVID-19 patient: a case report. Int. J. Surg. Case Rep. 82:105957. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2021.105957

COVID-19 and invasive fungal coinfections: a case series at a Brazilian referral hospital. A C Martins, E M Psaltikidis, T C De Lima, R Fagnani, A Z Schreiber, L De Oliveira Conterno, 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101175J. Mycol. Med. 31101175Martins, A. C., Psaltikidis, E. M., de Lima, T. C., Fagnani, R., Schreiber, A. Z., de Oliveira Conterno, L., et al. (2021). COVID-19 and invasive fungal coinfections: a case series at a Brazilian referral hospital. J. Mycol. Med. 31:101175. doi: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101175

Sinoorbital mucormycosis associated with corticosteroid therapy in COVID-19 infection. Z Mehrabi, M Salimi, K Niknam, F Mohammadi, H J Mamaghani, M R Sasani, 10.1155/2021/9745701Case Rep. Ophthalmol. Med. 20219745701Mehrabi, Z., Salimi, M., Niknam, K., Mohammadi, F., Mamaghani, H. J., Sasani, M. R., et al. (2021). Sinoorbital mucormycosis associated with corticosteroid therapy in COVID-19 infection. Case Rep. Ophthalmol. Med. 2021:9745701. doi: 10.1155/2021/9745701

Rhino-orbital mucormycosis associated with COVID-19. S Mehta, A Pandey, 10.7759/cureus.10726Cureus. 1210726Mehta, S., and Pandey, A. (2020). Rhino-orbital mucormycosis associated with COVID-19. Cureus 12:e10726. doi: 10.7759/cureus.10726

Azole-resistant COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis in an immunocompetent host: a case report. E F Meijer, A S Dofferhoff, O Hoiting, J B Buil, J F Meis, 10.3390/jof6020079J. Fungi. 679Meijer, E. F., Dofferhoff, A. S., Hoiting, O., Buil, J. B., and Meis, J. F. (2020). Azole-resistant COVID-19-associated pulmonary aspergillosis in an immunocompetent host: a case report. J. Fungi 6:79. doi: 10.3390/jof6020079

Acute invasive rhino-orbital mucormycosis in a patient with COVID-19-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome. Z K Mekonnen, D C Ashraf, T Jankowski, S R Grob, M R Vagefi, R C Kersten, 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001889Ophthalmic Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 37Mekonnen, Z. K., Ashraf, D. C., Jankowski, T., Grob, S. R., Vagefi, M. R., Kersten, R. C., et al. (2021). Acute invasive rhino-orbital mucormycosis in a patient with COVID-19-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome. Ophthalmic Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 37, e40-e80. doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001889

Co-infection with coronavirus disease 2019, previously undiagnosed human immunodeficiency virus, Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia and cytomegalovirus pneumonitis, with possible immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. E A Merchant, K Flint, D H Barouch, B M Blair, 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01153IDCases. 241153Merchant, E. A., Flint, K., Barouch, D. H., and Blair, B. M. (2021). Co-infection with coronavirus disease 2019, previously undiagnosed human immunodeficiency virus, Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia and cytomegalovirus pneumonitis, with possible immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. IDCases 24:e01153. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01153

COVID-19 among people living with HIV: a systematic review. H Mirzaei, W Mcfarland, M Karamouzian, H Sharifi, 10.1007/s10461-020-02983-AIDS Behav. 25Mirzaei, H., McFarland, W., Karamouzian, M., and Sharifi, H. (2021). COVID- 19 among people living with HIV: a systematic review. AIDS Behav. 25, 85-92. doi: 10.1007/s10461-020-02983-

A case series of invasive mucormycosis in patients with COVID-19 infection. N Mishra, V S S Mutya, A Thomas, G Rai, B Reddy, A Mohanan, 10.18203/issn.2454-5929.ijohns20211583doi: 10.18203/ issn.2454-5929.ijohns20211583Int. J. Otorhinolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 7Mishra, N., Mutya, V. S. S., Thomas, A., Rai, G., Reddy, B., Mohanan, A., et al. (2021). A case series of invasive mucormycosis in patients with COVID-19 infection. Int. J. Otorhinolaryngol. Head Neck Surg . 7, 867-870. doi: 10.18203/ issn.2454-5929.ijohns20211583

Putative invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in critically ill patients with COVID−19: an observational study from New York City. H Mitaka, D C Perlman, W Javaid, N Salomon, 10.1111/myc.13185doi: 10.1111/ myc.13185Mycoses. 63Mitaka, H., Perlman, D. C., Javaid, W., and Salomon, N. (2020). Putative invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in critically ill patients with COVID−19: an observational study from New York City. Mycoses 63, 1368-1372. doi: 10.1111/ myc.13185

Multi-triazole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection: a lethal combination. A Mohamed, T Hassan, M Trzos-Grzybowska, J Thomas, A Quinn, M O&apos;sullivan, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.06.005Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Mohamed, A., Hassan, T., Trzos-Grzybowska, M., Thomas, J., Quinn, A., O'Sullivan, M., et al. (2021). Multi-triazole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus and SARS-CoV-2 co-infection: a lethal combination. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 11-14. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.06.005

Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. D Moher, A Liberati, J Tetzlaff, D G Altman, 10.1016/j.ijsu.2010.02.007Int. J. Surg. 8Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., and Altman, D. G. (2010). Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Int. J. Surg. 8, 336-341. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2010.02.007

Epidemiology and pathophysiology of COVID-19-associated mucormycosis: India versus the rest of the world. V Muthu, S M Rudramurthy, A Chakrabarti, R Agarwal, 10.1007/s11046-021-00584-8doi: 10.1007/ s11046-021-00584-8Mycopathologia. 186Muthu, V., Rudramurthy, S. M., Chakrabarti, A., and Agarwal, R. (2021). Epidemiology and pathophysiology of COVID-19-associated mucormycosis: India versus the rest of the world. Mycopathologia 186, 739-754. doi: 10.1007/ s11046-021-00584-8

. N Nasir, J Farooqi, S F Mahmood, Jabeen , K , Nasir, N., Farooqi, J., Mahmood, S. F., and Jabeen, K. (2020).

COVID−19−associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA) in patients admitted with severe COVID−19 pneumonia: an observational study from Pakistan. 10.1111/myc.13135Mycoses. 63COVID−19−associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA) in patients admitted with severe COVID−19 pneumonia: an observational study from Pakistan. Mycoses 63, 766-770. doi: 10.1111/myc.13135

Fatal invasive pulmonary Aspergillosis in COVID-19 patient with acute myeloid leukemia in Iran. E Nasri, P Shoaei, B Vakili, H Mirhendi, S Sadeghi, S Hajiahmadi, 10.1007/s11046-020-00493-2Mycoses. 185Nasri, E., Shoaei, P., Vakili, B., Mirhendi, H., Sadeghi, S., Hajiahmadi, S., et al. (2020). Fatal invasive pulmonary Aspergillosis in COVID-19 patient with acute myeloid leukemia in Iran. Mycoses 185, 1077-1084. doi: 10.1007/s11046-020- 00493-2

Rhinocerebral mucormycosis in COVID-19 patient with diabetes a deadly trio: case series from the north-western part of India. H R Nehara, I Puri, V Singhal, I Sunil, B R Bishnoi, P Sirohi, 10.1016/j.ijmmb.2021.05.009Indian J. Med. Microbiol. 39Nehara, H. R., Puri, I., Singhal, V., Sunil, I., Bishnoi, B. R., and Sirohi, P. (2021). Rhinocerebral mucormycosis in COVID-19 patient with diabetes a deadly trio: case series from the north-western part of India. Indian J. Med. Microbiol. 39, 380-383. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmmb.2021.05.009

Oral candidiasis caused by ciclesonide in a patient with COVID-19 pneumonia: a case report and literature review. N Ohashi, Y Ideta, A Takeda, T Iwai, M Kioi, A Miyazaki, 10.1177/2050313X211048279SAGE Open Med. Case Rep. 9Ohashi, N., Ideta, Y., Takeda, A., Iwai, T., Kioi, M., Miyazaki, A., et al. (2021). Oral candidiasis caused by ciclesonide in a patient with COVID-19 pneumonia: a case report and literature review. SAGE Open Med. Case Rep. 9:2050313X211048279. doi: 10.1177/2050313X211048279

COVID-19 and cardiomyopathy: a systematic review. F Omidi, B Hajikhani, S N Kazemi, A Tajbakhsh, S Riazi, M Mirsaeidi, 10.3389/fcvm.2021.695206Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 8695206Omidi, F., Hajikhani, B., Kazemi, S. N., Tajbakhsh, A., Riazi, S., Mirsaeidi, M., et al. (2021). COVID-19 and cardiomyopathy: a systematic review. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 8:695206. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.695206

A challenging complication following SARS-CoV-2 infection: a case of pulmonary mucormycosis. D Pasero, S Sanna, C Liperi, D Piredda, G P Branca, L Casadio, 10.1007/s15010-020-01561-xInfection. 49Pasero, D., Sanna, S., Liperi, C., Piredda, D., Branca, G. P., Casadio, L., et al. (2021). A challenging complication following SARS-CoV-2 infection: a case of pulmonary mucormycosis. Infection 49, 1055-1060. doi: 10.1007/s15010-020- 01561-x

Detected SARS-CoV-2 in ascitic fluid followed by cryptococcemia: a case report. SN Compr. V C Passarelli, A H Perosa, L K De Souza Luna, D D Conte, O A Nascimento, J Ota-Arakaki, 10.1007/s42399-020-00574-9Clin. Med. 2Passarelli, V. C., Perosa, A. H., de Souza Luna, L. K., Conte, D. D., Nascimento, O. A., Ota-Arakaki, J., et al. (2020). Detected SARS-CoV-2 in ascitic fluid followed by cryptococcemia: a case report. SN Compr. Clin. Med. 2, 2414-2418. doi: 10.1007/s42399-020-00574-9

Human immunodeficiency virus and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 coinfection: a systematic review of the literature and challenges. R H Patel, A Acharya, H S Chand, M Mohan, S N Byrareddy, 10.1089/aid.2020.0284AIDS Res. Hum. Retrovir. 37Patel, R. H., Acharya, A., Chand, H. S., Mohan, M., and Byrareddy, S. N. (2021). Human immunodeficiency virus and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 coinfection: a systematic review of the literature and challenges. AIDS Res. Hum. Retrovir. 37, 266-282. doi: 10.1089/aid.2020.0284

Fungal co-infection in COVID-19 patients: should we be concerned?. J Pemán, A Ruiz-Gaitán, C García-Vidal, M Salavert, P Ramírez, F Puchades, 10.1016/j.riam.2020.07.001Rev. Iberoam. Micol. 37Pemán, J., Ruiz-Gaitán, A., García-Vidal, C., Salavert, M., Ramírez, P., Puchades, F., et al. (2020). Fungal co-infection in COVID-19 patients: should we be concerned? Rev. Iberoam. Micol. 37, 41-46. doi: 10.1016/j.riam.2020.07.001

Fungal co-infection in COVID-19 patients: evidence from a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Peng, Q Wang, H Mei, H Zheng, G Liang, X She, 10.18632/aging.202742Aging. 13Peng, J., Wang, Q., Mei, H., Zheng, H., Liang, G., She, X., et al. (2021). Fungal co-infection in COVID-19 patients: evidence from a systematic review and meta-analysis. Aging 13, 7745-7757. doi: 10.18632/aging.202742

Bronchopleural fistula development in the setting of novel therapies for acute respiratory distress syndrome in SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. D A Placik, W L Taylor, N M Wnuk, 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.09.026Radiol. Case Rep. 15Placik, D. A., Taylor, W. L., and Wnuk, N. M. (2020). Bronchopleural fistula development in the setting of novel therapies for acute respiratory distress syndrome in SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. Radiol. Case Rep. 15, 2378-2381. doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.09.026

Pan-echinocandin-resistant Candida glabrata bloodstream infection complicating COVID-19: a fatal case report. B Posteraro, R Torelli, A Vella, P M Leone, G De Angelis, E De Carolis, 10.3390/jof6030163doi: 10. 3390/jof6030163J. Fungi. 6163Posteraro, B., Torelli, R., Vella, A., Leone, P. M., De Angelis, G., De Carolis, E., et al. (2020). Pan-echinocandin-resistant Candida glabrata bloodstream infection complicating COVID-19: a fatal case report. J. Fungi 6:163. doi: 10. 3390/jof6030163

Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis complicating COVID-19 in the ICU-A case report. J Prattes, T Valentin, M Hoenigl, E Talakic, A C Reisinger, P Eller, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.05.001Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Prattes, J., Valentin, T., Hoenigl, M., Talakic, E., Reisinger, A. C., and Eller, P. (2021). Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis complicating COVID-19 in the ICU-A case report. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 2-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.05.001

COVID-19 evaluation by low-dose high resolution CT scans protocol. A Radpour, H Bahrami-Motlagh, M T Taaghi, A Sedaghat, M A Karimi, A Hekmatnia, 10.1016/j.acra.2020.04.016Acad. Radiol. 27901Radpour, A., Bahrami-Motlagh, H., Taaghi, M. T., Sedaghat, A., Karimi, M. A., Hekmatnia, A., et al. (2020). COVID-19 evaluation by low-dose high resolution CT scans protocol. Acad. Radiol. 27:901. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2020.04.016

Bacterial and fungal coinfection in individuals with coronavirus: a rapid review to support COVID-19 antimicrobial prescribing. T M Rawson, L S Moore, N Zhu, N Ranganathan, K Skolimowska, M Gilchrist, 10.1093/cid/ciaa530Clin. Infect. Dis. 71Rawson, T. M., Moore, L. S., Zhu, N., Ranganathan, N., Skolimowska, K., Gilchrist, M., et al. (2020). Bacterial and fungal coinfection in individuals with coronavirus: a rapid review to support COVID-19 antimicrobial prescribing. Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 2459-2468. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa530

COVID-19 triggering mucormycosis in a susceptible patient: a new phenomenon in the developing world?. S M Revannavar, P Supriya, L Samaga, V Vineeth, 10.1136/bcr-2021-241663BMJ Case Rep. 14241663Revannavar, S. M., Supriya, P., Samaga, L., and Vineeth, V. (2021). COVID-19 triggering mucormycosis in a susceptible patient: a new phenomenon in the developing world? BMJ Case Rep. 14:e241663. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-241663

COVID-19 therapeutics: challenges and directions for the future. P C Robinson, D F Liew, H L Tanner, J R Grainger, R A Dwek, R B Reisler, 10.1073/pnas.2119893119Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1192119893119Robinson, P. C., Liew, D. F., Tanner, H. L., Grainger, J. R., Dwek, R. A., Reisler, R. B., et al. (2022). COVID-19 therapeutics: challenges and directions for the future. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119:e2119893119. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2119893119

A case series of post COVID-19 mucormycosis-a neurological prospective. T Roushdy, E Hamid, 10.1186/s41983-021-00355-8Egypt. J. Neurol. Psychiatry Neurosurg. 57100Roushdy, T., and Hamid, E. (2021). A case series of post COVID-19 mucormycosis-a neurological prospective. Egypt. J. Neurol. Psychiatry Neurosurg. 57:100. doi: 10.1186/s41983-021-00355-8

Pneumocystis and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 coinfection: a case report and review of an emerging diagnostic dilemma. C Rubiano, K Tompkins, S A Sellers, B Bramson, J Eron, J B Parr, 10.1093/ofid/ofaa633Open Forum Infect. Dis. 8633Rubiano, C., Tompkins, K., Sellers, S. A., Bramson, B., Eron, J., Parr, J. B., et al. (2021). Pneumocystis and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 coinfection: a case report and review of an emerging diagnostic dilemma. Open Forum Infect. Dis. 8:ofaa633. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofaa633

Emergence of non-Candida albicans species: epidemiology, phylogeny and fluconazole susceptibility profile. G Sadeghi, M Ebrahimi-Rad, S Mousavi, M Shams-Ghahfarokhi, M Razzaghi-Abyaneh, 10.1016/j.mycmed.2017.12.008J. Mycol. Med. 28Sadeghi, G., Ebrahimi-Rad, M., Mousavi, S., Shams-Ghahfarokhi, M., and Razzaghi-Abyaneh, M. (2018). Emergence of non-Candida albicans species: epidemiology, phylogeny and fluconazole susceptibility profile. J. Mycol. Med. 28, 51-58. doi: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2017.12.008

Title of the article: paranasal mucormycosis in COVID-19 patient. M Saldanha, R Reddy, M J Vincent, 10.1007/s12070-021-02574-0Indian J. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. Epub ahead of printSaldanha, M., Reddy, R., and Vincent, M. J. (2021). Title of the article: paranasal mucormycosis in COVID-19 patient. Indian J. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.1007/s12070-021-02574-0

Role of tocilizumab for concomitant systemic fungal infection in severe COVID-19 patient: case report. A P Sari, N Darnindro, A Yohanes, M I Mokoagow, 10.1097/MD.0000000000025173Medicine. 10025173Sari, A. P., Darnindro, N., Yohanes, A., and Mokoagow, M. I. (2021). Role of tocilizumab for concomitant systemic fungal infection in severe COVID-19 patient: case report. Medicine 100:e25173. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000025173

Fatal aspergillosis complicating severe SARS-CoV-2 infection: a case report. F Schein, H Munoz-Pons, C Mahinc, R Grange, P Cathébras, Flori , P , 10.1016/j.mycmed.2020.101039J. Mycol. Med. 30101039Schein, F., Munoz-Pons, H., Mahinc, C., Grange, R., Cathébras, P., and Flori, P. (2020). Fatal aspergillosis complicating severe SARS-CoV-2 infection: a case report. J. Mycol. Med. 30:101039. doi: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2020.101039

Successful management of the first reported case in Austria of COVID-19 with ARDS. T Seitz, W Hoepler, L Weseslindtner, J Aberle, S Aberle, E Puchhammer-Stoeckl, 10.1007/s15010-020-01458-9Infection. 48Seitz, T., Hoepler, W., Weseslindtner, L., Aberle, J., Aberle, S., Puchhammer- Stoeckl, E., et al. (2020). Successful management of the first reported case in Austria of COVID-19 with ARDS. Infection 48, 647-651. doi: 10.1007/s15010- 020-01458-9

Coinfections in patients hospitalized with COVID-19: a descriptive study from the United Arab Emirates. A Senok, M Alfaresi, H Khansaheb, R Nassar, M Hachim, H Suwaidi, 10.2147/IDR.S314029Infect. Drug Resist. 14Senok, A., Alfaresi, M., Khansaheb, H., Nassar, R., Hachim, M., Al Suwaidi, H., et al. (2021). Coinfections in patients hospitalized with COVID-19: a descriptive study from the United Arab Emirates. Infect. Drug Resist. 14, 2289-2296. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S314029

The coincidence of 2 epidemics, coccidioidomycosis and SARS-CoV-2: a case report. A S Shah, A Heidari, V F Civelli, R Sharma, C S Clark, A D Munoz, 10.1177/2324709620930540J. Investig. Med. High Impact Case Rep. 82324709620930540Shah, A. S., Heidari, A., Civelli, V. F., Sharma, R., Clark, C. S., Munoz, A. D., et al. (2020). The coincidence of 2 epidemics, coccidioidomycosis and SARS-CoV- 2: a case report. J. Investig. Med. High Impact Case Rep. 8:2324709620930540. doi: 10.1177/2324709620930540

COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA): an Australian case report. A Sharma, A Hofmeyr, A Bansal, D Thakkar, L Lam, Z Harrington, 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.06.002Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31Sharma, A., Hofmeyr, A., Bansal, A., Thakkar, D., Lam, L., Harrington, Z., et al. (2021). COVID-19 associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA): an Australian case report. Med. Mycol. Case Rep. 31, 6-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.06.002

Fungal infections in COVID-19-positive patients: a lack of optimal treatment options. L N Silva, T P De Mello, L De Souza Ramos, M H Branquinha, M Roudbary, Dos Santos, A L S , 10.2174/156802662022200917110102Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 20Silva, L. N., de Mello, T. P., de Souza Ramos, L., Branquinha, M. H., Roudbary, M., and Dos Santos, A. L. S. (2020). Fungal infections in COVID-19-positive patients: a lack of optimal treatment options. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 20, 1951-1957. doi: 10.2174/156802662022200917110102

Mixed invasive molds among COVID-19 patients. V Singh, A Prasad, P K Panda, M Totaganti, A Tyagi, A Thaduri, 10.1101/2021.08.09.21261555medRxiv PreprintSingh, V., Prasad, A., Panda, P. K., Totaganti, M., Tyagi, A., Thaduri, A., et al. (2021). Mixed invasive molds among COVID-19 patients. medRxiv Preprint doi: 10.1101/2021.08.09.21261555

Coronavirus disease-associated mucormycosis from a tertiary care hospital in India: a case series. Y Singh, V Ganesh, S Kumar, N Patel, R Aggarwala, K D Soni, 10.7759/cureus.16152Cureus. 1316152Singh, Y., Ganesh, V., Kumar, S., Patel, N., Aggarwala, R., Soni, K. D., et al. (2021). Coronavirus disease-associated mucormycosis from a tertiary care hospital in India: a case series. Cureus 13:e16152. doi: 10.7759/cureus.16152

A review of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19). T Singhal, 10.1007/s12098-020-03263-6Indian J. Pediatr. 87Singhal, T. (2020). A review of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19). Indian J. Pediatr. 87, 281-286. doi: 10.1007/s12098-020-03263-6

Fungal co-infections associated with global COVID-19 pandemic: a clinical and diagnostic perspective from China. G Song, G Liang, W Liu, 10.1007/s11046-020-00462-9Mycopathologia. 185Song, G., Liang, G., and Liu, W. (2020). Fungal co-infections associated with global COVID-19 pandemic: a clinical and diagnostic perspective from China. Mycopathologia 185, 599-606. doi: 10.1007/s11046-020-00462-9

Fungal infections complicating COVID-19: with the rain comes the spores. A F Talento, M Hoenigl, 10.3390/jof6040279J. Fungi. 6279Talento, A. F., and Hoenigl, M. (2020). Fungal infections complicating COVID-19: with the rain comes the spores. J. Fungi 6:279. doi: 10.3390/jof6040279

The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-19)-China. E Team, 10.46234/ccdcw2020.032China CDC Wkly. 2Team, E. (2020). The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-19)-China, 2020. China CDC Wkly. 2, 113-122. doi: 10.46234/ccdcw2020.032

Photobiomodulation therapy and antimicrobial photodynamic therapy for orofacial lesions in patients with COVID-19: a case series. I S Teixeira, F S Leal, R Y Tateno, L F Palma, L Campos, 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2021.102281Photodiagnosis. Photodyn. Ther. 34102281Teixeira, I. S., Leal, F. S., Tateno, R. Y., Palma, L. F., and Campos, L. (2021). Photobiomodulation therapy and antimicrobial photodynamic therapy for orofacial lesions in patients with COVID-19: a case series. Photodiagnosis. Photodyn. Ther. 34:102281. doi: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2021.102281

Fatal VAP-related pulmonary aspergillosis by Aspergillus niger in a positive COVID-19 patient. L Trovato, M Calvo, G Migliorisi, M Astuto, F Oliveri, S Oliveri, 10.1016/j.rmcr.2021.101367Respir. Med. Case Rep. 32101367Trovato, L., Calvo, M., Migliorisi, G., Astuto, M., Oliveri, F., and Oliveri, S. (2021). Fatal VAP-related pulmonary aspergillosis by Aspergillus niger in a positive COVID-19 patient. Respir. Med. Case Rep. 32:101367. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2021. 101367

Rhino-orbital mucormycosis during steroid therapy in COVID-19 patients: a case report. A Veisi, A Bagheri, M Eshaghi, M H Rikhtehgar, M Rezaei Kanavi, R Farjad, 10.1177/11206721211009450Eur. J. Ophthalmol. Epub ahead of printVeisi, A., Bagheri, A., Eshaghi, M., Rikhtehgar, M. H., Rezaei Kanavi, M., and Farjad, R. (2021). Rhino-orbital mucormycosis during steroid therapy in COVID-19 patients: a case report. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.1177/11206721211009450

Bloodstream infection by Saccharomyces cerevisiae in two COVID-19 patients after receiving supplementation of Saccharomyces in the ICU. I Ventoulis, T Sarmourli, P Amoiridou, P Mantzana, M Exindari, G Gioula, 10.3390/jof6030098J. Fungi. 698Ventoulis, I., Sarmourli, T., Amoiridou, P., Mantzana, P., Exindari, M., Gioula, G., et al. (2020). Bloodstream infection by Saccharomyces cerevisiae in two COVID-19 patients after receiving supplementation of Saccharomyces in the ICU. J. Fungi 6:98. doi: 10.3390/jof6030098

Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia in an immunocompetent patient recovered from COVID-19. G Viceconte, A R Buonomo, A Lanzardo, B Pinchera, E Zappulo, R Scotto, 10.1080/23744235.2021.1890331Infect. Dis. 53Viceconte, G., Buonomo, A. R., Lanzardo, A., Pinchera, B., Zappulo, E., Scotto, R., et al. (2021). Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia in an immunocompetent patient recovered from COVID-19. Infect. Dis. 53, 382-385. doi: 10.1080/23744235. 2021.1890331

A case of fatal rhino-orbital mucormycosis associated with new onset diabetic ketoacidosis and COVID-19. S Waizel-Haiat, J A Guerrero-Paz, L Sanchez-Hurtado, S Calleja-Alarcon, L Romero-Gutierrez, 10.7759/cureus.13163Cureus. 1313163Waizel-Haiat, S., Guerrero-Paz, J. A., Sanchez-Hurtado, L., Calleja-Alarcon, S., and Romero-Gutierrez, L. (2021). A case of fatal rhino-orbital mucormycosis associated with new onset diabetic ketoacidosis and COVID-19. Cureus 13:e13163. doi: 10.7759/cureus.13163

Clinical characteristics of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with COVID-19 in Zhejiang, China: a retrospective case series. J Wang, Q Yang, P Zhang, J Sheng, J Zhou, T Qu, 10.1186/s13054-020-03046-7doi: 10.1186/ s13054-020-03046-7Crit. Care. 24299Wang, J., Yang, Q., Zhang, P., Sheng, J., Zhou, J., and Qu, T. (2020). Clinical characteristics of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with COVID-19 in Zhejiang, China: a retrospective case series. Crit. Care 24:299. doi: 10.1186/ s13054-020-03046-7

Mucormycosis with orbital compartment syndrome in a patient with COVID-19. A Werthman-Ehrenreich, 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.09.032Am. J. Emerg. Med. 42Werthman-Ehrenreich, A. (2021). Mucormycosis with orbital compartment syndrome in a patient with COVID-19. Am. J. Emerg. Med. 42, e264.e5-e264.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.09.032

Obesity aggravates COVID−19: a systematic review and meta−analysis. J Yang, J Hu, C Zhu, 10.1002/jmv.26237J. Med. Virol. 93Yang, J., Hu, J., and Zhu, C. (2021). Obesity aggravates COVID−19: a systematic review and meta−analysis. J. Med. Virol. 93, 257-261. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26237

Bacterial and fungal co-infections among COVID-19 patients in intensive care unit. S Yang, M Hua, X Liu, C Du, L Pu, P Xiang, 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104806Microbes Infect. 23104806Yang, S., Hua, M., Liu, X., Du, C., Pu, L., Xiang, P., et al. (2021). Bacterial and fungal co-infections among COVID-19 patients in intensive care unit. Microbes Infect. 23:104806. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104806

Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational study. X Yang, Y Yu, J Xu, H Shu, H Liu, Y Wu, 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30079-5Lancet Respir. Med. 8Yang, X., Yu, Y., Xu, J., Shu, H., Liu, H., Wu, Y., et al. (2020). Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational study. Lancet Respir. Med. 8, 475-481. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30079-5

The clinical characteristics of secondary infections of lower respiratory tract in severe acute respiratory syndrome. Z Zheng, R Chen, Y Li, X Liu, W He, Y Xu, Chin. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2Zheng, Z., Chen, R., Li, Y., Liu, X., He, W., Xu, Y., et al. (2003). The clinical characteristics of secondary infections of lower respiratory tract in severe acute respiratory syndrome. Chin. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2, 270-274.