# R E V I E W Is Nigella sativa an Effective Bodyweight Lowering Agent and a Mitigator of Obesity Risk? A Literature Review

CorpusID: 250463039
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/353404610fdc3309cf4933fe81c3dc80f1878d97](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/353404610fdc3309cf4933fe81c3dc80f1878d97)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

R E V I E W Is Nigella sativa an Effective Bodyweight Lowering Agent and a Mitigator of Obesity Risk? A Literature Review


Lubna Al Asoom lasoom@iau.edu.sa 
Physiology Department
College of Medicine
Lubna Al Asoom, Physiology Department, College of Medicine
Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University
DammamSaudi Arabia

Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University
Saudi Arabia, Tel +966 133335131P.O. 211431541Dammam

R E V I E W Is Nigella sativa an Effective Bodyweight Lowering Agent and a Mitigator of Obesity Risk? A Literature Review
10.2147/VHRM.S373702Correspondence:Nigella sativaobesitybodyweightBMIwaist-circumference
Obesity is one of the major health-threatening conditions nowadays. Nigella sativa (NS) is a medicinal plant that demonstrates multiple therapeutic effects. In the current review, we aim to evaluate the weight lowering effect of NS in both clinical trials and experimental studies and to explore the possible reported mechanisms of this effect. We searched PubMed and Web of science and retrieved 14 clinical trials and 5 experimental studies that justify our inclusion criteria. After the analysis of these articles, we can conclude that long-term administration of NS for 6-12 weeks can significantly lower bodyweight and other anthropometric indices. NS-oil is more potent than NS-powder in lowering bodyweight probably due to the higher concentration of fatty acids and thymoquinone. The weight lowering effect of NS is not a toxic effect, it conversely and preferably lowers the elevated liver enzymes in condition of fatty liver. It is also frequently accompanied by positive metabolic modifications, such as enhancement of lipid profile, lowering blood glucose and improving insulin resistance. Possible mechanisms for NS-bodyweight lowering effect might include an appetite-suppression effect, lowering caloric-intake and inhibition of intestinal glucose absorption. However, further experimental evidence is required to support these mechanisms or unveil new ones.

## Introduction

Obesity is a major health-threatening condition. It affects about 1.9 billion people in the year 2016 worldwide, and its incidence continues to increase exponentially. The prevalence of overweight and obesity has increased by four folds from the year 1975 to the year 2016 in both adults and children, according to the World Health Organization report. 1 The main concern about the increasing prevalence of obesity is that obesity is a risk factor for all-cause mortality and a predisposing factor for diabetes mellitus, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, stroke, and cancer. 2 One of the proposed theories for the explanation of the high incidence of obesity is the contemporary modifications of the modern lifestyle; people tend to rely in their nourishment on the highly processed food, which is rich in sugar and fat, and ignore the healthy ingredients of nature, which provide fibers, vitamins, and antioxidants. 3 Many natural products, which were frequently consumed by human in old ages, are found to be rich in antioxidants and provide numerous protective effects against multiple diseases, among which are the black seeds. 4 The black seed is a medicinal plant known generically as Nigella sativa Linn and it belongs to the family of Ranunculaceae. It is composed of fixed oil, proteins, alkaloids, saponin and essential oil. The main constituents of the essential oil are thymoquinone in addition to other fatty acids, such as palmitoleic acid, palmitic acid, arachic acid, and linoleic acid. 5 It is commonly used as a food herb and flavoring in the countries of the Middle East, India, and Iran. Furthermore, it is considered a natural remedy for multiple purposes, such as cough, asthma, stomach ache, vomiting, allergy, and eczema. 6 Currently, the therapeutic effects of Nigella sativa (NS) are supported by accumulating evidence in the literature from extensive research work. 7 Both experimental and clinical studies showed reproducible preferable effects of long-term supplementation of NS such as antioxidation and anti-inflammation. 8 Not only this but also the intake of NS culminates in specific and favorable modulations of cardiac structure and function, 9,10 vascular growth and regeneration, 11,12 and immunoregulatory effects. 13 NS in multiple studies demonstrated favorable modifications of the glucose and lipid metabolism in diabetic patients. 14 However, less attention was given to the direct effect of NS on bodyweight and BMI. Few systematic reviews and meta-analyses are available in the literature, which discussed the effect of NS as an anti-obesity agent in human clinical trials. However, these systematic reviews included either numerous metabolic parameters in the discussion, missed some negative studies, excluded animal studies, or included multiple herbs besides NS. [15][16][17] On the other hand, these reviews did not discuss the mechanisms of the anti-obesity effect of NS, particularly in regard to the bodyweight lowering effect. Therefore, in the present review, we aim to analyse and evaluate the effect of NS supplementation on the bodyweight and anthropometric values in both human and animal studies. Moreover, we aim to explore the reported mechanisms of NS weight-lowering effect if present.


## Methods

We searched the following databases: PubMed and Web of Science using the following terms: Nigella sativa or black seed and bodyweight, or anthropometric measures, waist-circumference, or appetite with no time restriction. PubMed search first yielded 170 articles and Web of Science yielded 281 articles. We excluded reviews and included only research articles, clinical trials, systematic reviews and meta-analyses. After meticulous review, we included studies that used NS supplementation as a crude substance, either powdered, oil or extract. Studies that used thymoquinone only -which is the active ingredient of NS-were excluded. We also excluded the studies that used NS in combination with other drugs or other natural products and did not show the sole effect of NS in any of the tested groups. The selected clinical trials and experimental studies were then evaluated using CONSORT checklist for herbal medicine and ARRIVE 2, respectively. The final number of included studies was 14 clinical trials, and 5 animal experimental studies ( Figure 1).


## Results

We have reviewed 14 clinical trials and 5 animal studies for understanding and evaluating the effect of long-term administration of NS on bodyweight. Most of the clinical studies include both male and female participants (8 studies), while 5 includes women only and one study includes men only. The targeted populations were diverse but all shared metabolic derangements such as diabetic patients, prediabetics, patients with autoimmune hypothyroidism, patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver or obese and overweight individuals. All the included studies employed an oral administration of NS capsules that either contain NS-powder or oil. Ten out of the 14 clinical studies revealed significant effect of NS on bodyweight, BMI, and waist circumference, and the effect was more consistent with the use of NS-oil ( Table 1). The experimental studies were mostly on rats (4 studies) and one on mice. Two of the animal studies were on male rats, one used both male and female rats, one used ovariectomised female rats, and one used female mice. The preparations of NS used in the experimental studies were either NS-oil, petroleum ether extract, or aqueous extract of NS-powder. The duration of NS feeding ranges from 6 to 12 weeks. Four out of 5 animal studies showed a significant effect of NS intake on the weight gain of the growing animals ( Table 2).

The mechanisms of the weight reduction effect of NS were investigated by some authors, and the proposed mechanisms include induction of anorexia, reduction of intestinal glucose absorption, reduction of insulin secretion and increase in adiponectin level (Table 3).


## Discussion

In this review, we aimed to evaluate the bodyweight reduction effect of NS and explore the possible underlying mechanisms of this effect. Most of the analysed studies, whether clinical trials or experimental studies, revealed that NS administration in the form of NS-oil or powdered capsules for 6-12 weeks can culminate in bodyweight reduction as well as enhancement of BMI, waist, and hip circumference. We observed that studies that utilized NS-oil in doses of 1-3g/day for 6-12 weeks showed more pronounced effect on the bodyweight and the other anthropometric parameters than those which employed NS-powder of equivalent doses. This might be related to the difference in the composition of these two preparations for NS. NS-oil has higher concentrations of fatty acids, such as linoleic acid, linolenic acid, and palmitic acid in addition to a higher concentration of thymoquinone. 38 concentration of multiple specific active compounds, such as thymoquinone, multiple fatty acids, catechin, rutin and gallic acid when they used different methods and solvents for the extraction of NS. 5 Therefore, higher NS-powder or extract doses might be needed to induce the bodyweight-lowering effect of NS, and this can explain why Al Asoom 33 who utilized 800 mg/Kg dose of powdered NS failed to demonstrate weight lowering effect in rats, while Meddah et al 35 who adopted 2g/Kg for rats showed a significant reduction of rat weight gain. In addition, the responsiveness of the targeted subjects in each of the included clinical trials might also be different, because those subjects suffer from different aspects of metabolic derangements; Some are healthy obese and overweight, but others are diabetics or patients with fatty liver or Hashimoto's hypothyroidism.

Furthermore, we believe that the weight-lowering effect of NS is a positive therapeutic effect and not a sign of toxicity based on the findings of multiple studies that showed an improvement of liver enzymes when diabetic patients or patients of fatty liver were treated by NS. 23,24 In addition, Le et al compared the acute effect of NS to Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) on isolated hepatocytes and found no toxic effect of NS. 36 Furthermore, the acute administration of high doses of NS-oil whether orally or intraperitoneally up to 28.8 mL/kg of bodyweight showed no signs of toxicity. Similarly, the oral administration of 6g/kg methanol extract of NS for 14 days showed no change in the activity of hepatic enzymes in   40 Thymoquinone also demonstrated in multiple studies a protective effect against the toxicity of chemotherapy in multiple types of cancer. 41  


## DovePress


## 501

Most of the analysed studies in this review reported the statistical significance and the safety of the weight-lowering effect of NS. However, one might argue the clinical significance of NS weight-lowering effect, but we can further illustrate that NS-weight lowering effect is also clinically significant based on the relatively large effect size of 0.6 for NS bodyweight-lowering and 0.4 for waist circumference reduction as reported by Safi et al 18 as well as the frequently and repeatedly demonstrated metabolic effect of NS on lowering blood lipids including triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL, blood glucose and HbA1C and the positive influence on HDL and insulin resistance. 23,29 In the study performed by Mostafa et al, 19 NS administration for 12 weeks was superior to metformin or diet restriction in modifying total cholesterol, LDL, and triglycerides. Moreover, the clinical significance of NS-weight lowering effect can also be augmented by lifestyle modifications such as caloric restriction and exercise training because evidence has been shown that the combined NS administration and lifestyle changes yielded better effect than each of these interventions separately. 27,42 


## Mechanisms of NS-Induced Bodyweight Reduction

Most of the retrieved literature reflecting the weight reduction effect of NS lacks the explanation and the evidence of the exact mechanism of this effect. Some studies proposed an anorexic effect of NS and aimed to estimate the food intake or appetite modifications. Mahdavi et al, 26 Farhangi et al, 25 and Safi et al 18 failed to demonstrate any difference in the total caloric intake of their NS-treated subjects compared to the control group, albeit Safi et al showed a reduction in appetite sensation using a visual scale of appetite before and after meals. On the other hand, Le et al 36 showed a significant reduction in food intake by rats fed with NS compared to control rats. Despite these efforts to estimate the caloric intake or the changes in the appetite, there is a lack of exploration of the appetite regulation pathways and the influence of multiple peptides on the satiety and hunger centers of the hypothalamus. 43 Few studies only, such as Moustafa et al 23 


## Limitations

The current review might be limited by the number of databases that were explored for related literature. In addition, the populations studied in the included articles were diverse in multiple metabolic diseases that might skew the interpretation of the effect of NS on bodyweight in healthy obese and overweight subjects.


## Conclusion

The current review showed that the administration of about 1-3 g/day of NS for 6-12 weeks can culminate in a reduction of the bodyweight and other anthropometric indices. It further showed the advancement in the NS-related research particularly in the field of metabolic derangement. About two decades ago, NS-reported studies focused mainly on the effect of NS on diabetic metabolic profiles such as hyperglycemia, HbA1c and insulin resistance. Later, the studies started to explore the possible prophylactic influence of NS through recruiting prediabetic and healthy obese and overweight individuals and reflect explicitly on the direct effect of NS on the bodyweight and anthropometric data as primary outcomes.

In this review, we found that NS-oil might be superior to other NS-preparations in regard to the weight-lowering effect, and the doses used in all the reported clinical and experimental studies are safe and provide positive metabolic modifications that can minimize the hazards of obesity such as lowering the lipid profile and liver enzymes.

Therefore, NS can be recommended for bodyweight reduction along with lifestyle modifications in the form of diet restriction and high physical activity. Nevertheless, identification of the best preparation of NS for the induction of the weightlowering effect is needed as well as the identification of the main active ingredients responsible for this effect. Moreover, large prospective clinical trials are also required to explore the efficacy and safety of NS on bodyweight in different age groups, such as children and adolescents. Finally, experimental work that focused on unveiling the exact mechanisms of NS bodyweightlowering effect is still needed, which might open new paths for extra-therapeutic applications of NS.


## Disclosure

The author reports no conflicts of interest in this work.


## Vascular Health and Risk Management


## Dovepress


## Publish your work in this journal

Vascular Health and Risk Management is an international, peer-reviewed journal of therapeutics and risk management, focusing on concise rapid reporting of clinical studies on the processes involved in the maintenance of vascular health; the monitoring, prevention and treatment of vascular disease and its sequelae; and the involvement of metabolic disorders, particularly diabetes. This journal is indexed on PubMed Central and MedLine. The manuscript management system is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review system, which is all easy to use. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors. 


,39 Dalle et al demonstrated different composition and https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702 DovePress Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 496

## Figure 1
1Flow diagram for the process of article selection. Abbreviations: NS, Nigella sativa; WoS, Web of science. Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702 DovePress 497


and Le et al, 36 showed a reduction in insulin secretion, and Mahdavi et al 37 demonstrated an increase in adiponectin. However, more mediators and peptides in the pathway of appetite and energy balance need to be explored. Meddah et al 35 showed an in vitro dose-dependent inhibition of intestinal glucose transport by NS. Similarly, Dalli et al, 5 using


Submit your manuscript here: https://www.dovepress.com/vascular-health-and-risk-management-journal Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 DovePress 505

## Table 1
1Clinical Trials That Tested the Effect of Nigella sativa (NS) on the Anthropometric Data. The Studies are Presented in a Descending Chronological Order https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702# 
Authors 
Type of 

Study 

Country 

of the 

Study 

Population and Groups 
Dose and Duration 
Anthropometric 

Effects 

Other Metabolic 

Effects 

1 
Safi et al 

2021. 18 

Crossover, 

double-

blinded, 

randomized 

controlled, 

clinical trial 

Iran 
39 women aged 25-55 years 

with BMI 27-35 kg/m 2 

divided into two groups: 

Group 1: NS 

Group 2: Placebo 

2 NS capsules/day (each 

capsule contains 

1000 mg of NS-oil) or 

placebo (capsules filled 

with paraffin oil-

produced by Barij 

Essence Pharmaceutical 

Co.) for 8 weeks then 4 

weeks washout then 

cross over for 8 weeks. 

Significant reduction 

of BW, WC, body fat 

mass, body 

fat percent, fat-free 

mass, and visceral fat 

area 

Sensation of appetite 

decreased significantly as 

assessed by a visual scale 

and no difference in 

dietary intake 

2 
Mostafa 

et al 

2021. 19 

Open label, 

randomized, 

study, 

no negative 

control 

Egypt 
117 obese prediabetic 

individuals 

age (18-65 years), 

participants with BMI ≥ 

30 kg/m 2 and subjects 

randomly allocated into 

three groups: 

Group 1: LM lifestyle (diet 

and exercise) 

Group 2: Metformin 

Group 3: NS 

-NS soft gelatin capsules 

containing 450 mg NS-oil 

twice daily (Total 900mg/ 

day-Baraka ® 450; Pharco 

Pharmaceutical 

Company) 

-Metformin 1000 mg/day. 

for six months 

NS-group showed 

significant reduction 

of BW and BMI 

Significant reduction in 

TC, triglyceride, LDL, 

FBG, HOMA-insulin 

resistance, fasting insulin 

serum and TNF-α level, 

3 
Hadi et al 

2021. 20 

Double 

blinded 

controlled 

clinical trial 

Iran 
43 patients with type 2 

diabetes (23 women and 

20 men; aged 53.5 ± 7.4 

years) 

Group 1: Treatment n=23. 

Group 2: control n=20 

Two 500-mg per day soft 

gel capsules containing 

NS-oil extract (Total 

1000mg/day) 

Placebo: two 500-mg 

per day soft gel capsules 

containing sunflower oil 

(Total 1000mg /day) 

for 8 weeks 

Significant reduction 

of BMI and WC. 

Significant reduction of 

HbA 1c , TC, triglyceride, 

LDL, SBP, and DBP 

4 
Tavakoli-

Rouzbehani 

et al 

2021. 21 

Double-

blinded, 

randomized, 

controlled 

clinical trial 

Iran 
60 patients with coronary 

artery disease divided into 

two groups: 

Group 1: NS 

Group 2: placebo 

2 g of NS-oil or 

sunflower oil as 

a placebo both in the 

form of soft gel capsules 

for 8 weeks 

Significant reduction 

of BW, BMI, WC, HC 

W/P ratio 

Significant reduction of 

SBP, DBP, and FBG 

5 
Shirazi et al 

2020. 22 

Double-

blinded 

randomized, 

controlled 

trial 

Iran 
140 menopausal women 

within the age of 45-60 

years old, who were 

suffering from metabolic 

syndrome divided into two 

equal groups: 

Group 1: NS n=70 

Group 2: Control n=7 

500 mg NS-vinegar 

extract daily or placebo 

(starch) for 8 weeks 

No significant 

difference in BW, and 

WC 

Significant difference in 

LDL, triglyceride, TC, 

and FBG 

(Continued) 

DovePress 

Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 

498 


## Table 1 (
1Continued).# 
Authors 
Type of 

Study 

Country 

of the 

Study 

Population and Groups 
Dose and Duration 
Anthropometric 

Effects 

Other Metabolic 

Effects 

11 Abdul Latiff 

et al 

2014. 28 

Open label 

crossover 

study 

Malaysia 
69 perimenopausal women 

aged 45-65 years divided 

randomly into two groups: 

Treatment group: NS then 

placebo 

Control group: placebo 

then NS 

Treatment 

group:1600mg/day of 

encapsulated pure 

powdered NS for 12 

weeks (local GMP 

compliant 

pharmaceutical company 

SabitBananiSdnBhd, 

Malaysia), then 2 weeks 

wash out, then another 

12 weeks with placebo. 

Control group: vice 

versa 

No significant change 

in body weight, waist 

circumference, BMI, 

W/H ratio. 

Significant decrease in 

LDL only. 

12 Bamosa 

et al 

2010. 29 

Randomized 

clinical trial 

Saudi 

Arabia. 

94 uncontrolled diabetic 

patients 

(43 males and 51 females) 

divided into 3 groups. 

1,2 or 3 g of grinded NS 

in capsules ((Bioextract 

(Pvt) Ltd, Sri Lanka) 

for 3 months adjuvant to 

antihyperglycemic agents 

No significant change 

in BW 

A dose of 2 gm/day 

caused significant 

reductions in FBG, 

2-hours postprandial 

glucose, insulin 

resistance, and HbA 1c 

13 Datau et al 

2010. 30 

Double-blind 

randomized 

Controlled 

clinical trial 

Indonesia 
39 Central obese men 

aged 30-45 years divided 

randomly into two groups 

Group 1: Treatment Group 

2: Control 

Treatment: two capsules 

of 750 mg of grinded NS 

twice daily (Total 3 g NS/ 

day) 

Placebo: two capsules of 

750 mg of flour twice daily 

which is equal to 3 g flour / 

day 

for three month 

Significant reduction 

of BW and WC in the 

treatment group in 

comparison to pre-

treatment and to the 

control group. 

14 Qidwai 

et al 

2009. 31 

Randomized, 

double-

blinded, 

controlled 

trial 

Pakistan 
73 individuals aged ≥18 

years, with serum total 

cholesterol level between 

>180 to <250 mg/dl or 

>250 mg/dl on statins for 

a minimum of one month 

divided into two groups: 

Group 1: NS n=39 

Group 2: Control n=34 

2 capsules of 500 mg 

crushed powdered NS 

(Total 2 gm/day) 

Control: Placebo. 

Both groups 

recommended dietary 

changes and lifestyle 

changes: dietary advice 

from dietician and brisk 

30-minute walk for 5 

days in a week, for six 

weeks 

No significant change 

was found in BMI, 

WC, and HC. 

No significant change 

was found in TC, LDL, 

HDL, triglyceride 

between NS and control. 

Abbreviations: ALT, alanine transaminase (Liver enzyme); AST, aspartate aminotransferase (liver enzyme); BMI, body mass index; BW, body weight; DBP, diastolic blood 
pressure; FBG, fasting blood glucose; HbA 1c, glycated hemoglobin; HC, hip circumference; HDL, high density lipoprotein; HOMA-insulin resistance, Homeostatic Model 
Assessment for Insulin Resistance; LDL, low density lipoprotein; NS, Nigella sativa; SBP, systolic blood pressure; TC, total cholesterol; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor alpha; T3, 
tri-iodothyronin (thyroid hormone); T4, thyroxine (thyroid hormone); TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VLDL, very low density 
lipoprotein; WC, waist circumference; W/H, waist/Hip ratio. 

https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702 

DovePress 

Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 

500 


## Table 2
2Experimental Studies That Tested the Effect of Nigella sativa (NS) on BodyweightAnimal 
Groups and Treatment 
Anthropometric Findings 
Other Metabolic 

Findings 

1 Anwar 

et al 

2021. 32 

40 female BALB/c mice 
4 equal groups: 

Group 1: Control 

Group 2: Letrozole 1mg/kg once daily 
for 8 weeks 

Group 3: Letrozole +NS-powder l0g/ 

kg commences at day 22 till the end of 
the experiment 

Group 4: Letrozole + NS-oil 4mL/Kg 

commences at day 22 till the end of 
the experiment 

Group 2: increase BW significantly 

compared to the other groups. 

Group 3 and 4 maintain 
a comparable BW to the control 

group and mainly group 3. 

2 Al Asoom 
2017. 33 

40 male albino Wistar rats 3 equal groups: 
The control group: equivalent volume 

of distilled water. 

The NS-treated group: 800 mg/Kg 
powdered NS in water solution daily. 

The exercise-trained group: training 
on a treadmill. 

The experiment continued for 8 weeks. 

No difference in final BW or BWG 
among all the groups 

3 Parhizkar 

et al 

2011. 34 

40 ovariectomized female 

Sprague Dawley rats, 

weighting 
250-350 g 

5 equal groups: 

Control: distilled water. 

Negative control: distilled water and 
conjugated equine estrogen (CEE) 

(200 mu g/kg/day) 

NS-group (three groups): 300, 600, 
1200 mg/kg/day 

For 21 days 

The NS-treated groups showed 

significant less BWG. 

Significant less 

LDL, HDL, and BG 

in NS-groups. 

4 Meddah 

et al 

2009. 35 

30 male and female 

(50:50) Sprague Dawley 

weighing 220-260 g 

3 equal groups: 

Control: no treatment 

NS-group: aqueous extract of crude 
powdered NS 2g/Kg/day 

Metformin group: metformin 300mg/ 

Kg/day for 6 weeks 
OGTT was performed before and 

after the NS, and metformin treatment 

(0, 6 weeks) 

BW was significantly lower in NS 

and Metformin groups compared 

to controls 

In vivo glucose 

tolerance test: 

chronic feeding of 
NS significantly 

reduced peak 

glucose level and 
area under the 

curve of OGTT. 

Metformin acutely 
and chronically 

lower peak glucose 

and AUC. 

5 Mai Le 

et al 
2004. 36 

14 Male Sprague-Dawley 

rats, aged 7 weeks and 
weighing approximately 

250 g 

2 equal groups: 

NS-group: petroleum ether extract 
equivalent to 2 g/kg/day of NS-powder. 

Control: equivalent volume of tap water 

by intragastric gavage. 
For 4 weeks 

Final body weight and weight gain 

was significantly less in NS 
compared to controls 

Significant 

reduction of 
insulin, and 

triglyceride and 

significant increase 
of HDL. 

Abbreviations: AUC, area under the curve; BG, blood glucose; BW, body weight; BWG, body weight gain; HDL, high density lipoprotein; LDL, low density lipoprotein; NS, 
Nigella sativa; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test. 

Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 

https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702 



## Table 3
3Clinical Trials and Experimental Studies That Explore the Mechanisms of Nigella sativa (NS) Effect on Bodyweight and Anthropometric Data Dietary intake was changed in both groups compared to the baseline, but the difference was not significant between the two groups.Sensation of appetite decreased significantly as assessed by a visual scale and no difference in dietary intake after NS-treatmentIn vitro examination showed NS dose-dependent inhibition of intestinal glucose transport Increased adiponectin levels NS-oil increased adiponectin in obese ladies after 8 weeks of treatment.Notes: *The same study mentioned inTable 1. **The same study mentioned inTable 2. ¥ Both articles belong to the same study.https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702 Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 different methods for NS extraction, also demonstrated an inhibition of intestinal glucose absorption by three different preparations of NS with a range of inhibition equals to 24.82-60.12%.# Study 
Proposed and Tested 

Mechanism 

Result 

1 Mahdavi 

et al 26 2015* ¥ 

Anorexic or reduce food 

intake 

2 Farhangi et al 25 

2016*. 

Anorexic or reduce food 

intake 

No significant difference in total dietary intake for 3 days 

3 Safi et al 18 
2021* 

Anorexic or reduce food 
intake 

4 Mai Le et al 36 
2004** 

Anorexic or reduce food 
intake 

Food intake was significantly less in NS (20 ± 3 g/day) versus control (27 ± 2 g/day). 

5 Meddah et al 35 
2009** 

Inhibition of intestinal 
glucose absorption 

6 Moustafa 
et al 23 2019* 

Decrease insulin secretion 
NS decreased fasting insulin secretion and enhanced insulin resistance 

7 Mai Le et al 36 
2004 

Decrease insulin secretion 
NS decreased fasting insulin secretion 

8 Mahdavi 
et al 37 2016 ¥ 


Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

World Health Organization. Health topics; Obesity. World Health Organization. Health topics; Obesity. Available from: https://www.who.int/health-topics/obesity. Accessed July 8, 2021.

Morbidity and mortality associated with obesity. M Abdelaal, C W Le Roux, N G Docherty, 10.21037/atm.2017.03.107doi:10.21037/ atm.2017.03.107Ann Transl Med. 57161Abdelaal M, le Roux CW, Docherty NG. Morbidity and mortality associated with obesity. Ann Transl Med. 2017;5(7):161. doi:10.21037/ atm.2017.03.107

A systematic literature review on obesity: understanding the causes & consequences of obesity and reviewing various machine learning approaches used to predict obesity. M Safaei, E A Sundararajan, M Driss, W Boulila, &apos; Shapi, 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104754doi:10.1016/j. compbiomed.2021.104754Comput Biol Med. 136104754Safaei M, Sundararajan EA, Driss M, Boulila W, Shapi'i A. A systematic literature review on obesity: understanding the causes & consequences of obesity and reviewing various machine learning approaches used to predict obesity. Comput Biol Med. 2021;136:104754. doi:10.1016/j. compbiomed.2021.104754

Spices for prevention and treatment of cancers. J Zheng, Y Zhou, Y Li, D P Xu, S Li, H B Li, 10.3390/nu8080495Nutrients. 88Zheng J, Zhou Y, Li Y, Xu DP, Li S, Li HB. Spices for prevention and treatment of cancers. Nutrients. 2016;8:8. doi:10.3390/nu8080495

Chemical composition analysis using HPLC-UV/GC-MS and inhibitory activity of different. M Dalli, N E Daoudi, S E Azizi, H Benouda, M Bnouham, N Gseyra, 10.1155/2021/9979419Biomed Res Int. 20219979419Dalli M, Daoudi NE, Azizi SE, Benouda H, Bnouham M, Gseyra N. Chemical composition analysis using HPLC-UV/GC-MS and inhibitory activity of different. Biomed Res Int. 2021;2021:9979419. doi:10.1155/2021/9979419

M Dalli, O Bekkouch, S E Azizi, A Azghar, N Gseyra, B L Kim, 10.3390/biom12010020Phytochemistry and pharmacological activities: a review. 1220Dalli M, Bekkouch O, Azizi SE, Azghar A, Gseyra N, Kim BL. Phytochemistry and pharmacological activities: a review (2019-2021). Biomolecules. 2021;12(1):20. doi:10.3390/biom12010020

Nigella sativa is a safe herbal product. A Bamosa, 10.1016/S2095-4964(14)60007-8J Integr Med. 121Bamosa A. Nigella sativa is a safe herbal product. J Integr Med. 2014;12(1):66. doi:10.1016/S2095-4964(14)60007-8

Effect of Nigella sativa (Black Seed) and thymoquinone on blood glucose in albino rats. Z A Hawsawi, B A Ali, A O Bamosa, 10.5144/0256-4947.2001.242Ann Saudi Med. 213-4Hawsawi ZA, Ali BA, Bamosa AO. Effect of Nigella sativa (Black Seed) and thymoquinone on blood glucose in albino rats. Ann Saudi Med. 2001;21(3-4):242-244. doi:10.5144/0256-4947.2001.242

Comparison of Nigella sativa-and exercise-induced models of cardiac hypertrophy: structural and electrophysiological features. L I Al-Asoom, Al-Shaikh Ba, A O Bamosa, M N El-Bahai, 10.1007/s12012-014-9244-4Cardiovasc Toxicol. 143Al-Asoom LI, Al-Shaikh BA, Bamosa AO, El-Bahai MN. Comparison of Nigella sativa-and exercise-induced models of cardiac hypertrophy: structural and electrophysiological features. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2014;14(3):208-213. doi:10.1007/s12012-014-9244-4

Effect of Nigella sativa supplementation to exercise training in a novel model of physiological cardiac hypertrophy. L I Al-Asoom, Al-Shaikh Ba, A O Bamosa, M N El-Bahai, 10.1007/s12012-014-9248-0Cardiovasc Toxicol. 143Al-Asoom LI, Al-Shaikh BA, Bamosa AO, El-Bahai MN. Effect of Nigella sativa supplementation to exercise training in a novel model of physiological cardiac hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2014;14(3):243-250. doi:10.1007/s12012-014-9248-0

. Al Asoom L. Inventor. Al Asoom L. Inventor;

Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, assignee. Method for effecting angiogenesis by administering Nigella sativa. Saudi Arabia. Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, assignee. Method for effecting angiogenesis by administering Nigella sativa. Saudi Arabia; 2020.

Molecular mechanisms of Nigella sativa-and Nigella sativa exercise-induced cardiac hypertrophy in rats. Al Asoom, L I , 10.1155/2021/5553022Evid Based Complement Altern Med. 20215553022Al Asoom LI. Molecular mechanisms of Nigella sativa-and Nigella sativa exercise-induced cardiac hypertrophy in rats. Evid Based Complement Altern Med. 2021;2021:5553022. doi:10.1155/2021/5553022

Immunomodulatory and therapeutic properties of the Nigella sativa L seed. M L Salem, 10.1016/j.intimp.2005.06.008Int Immunopharmacol. 5Salem ML. Immunomodulatory and therapeutic properties of the Nigella sativa L seed. Int Immunopharmacol. 2005;5(13-14):1749-1770. doi:10.1016/j.intimp.2005.06.008

. 10.2147/VHRM.S373702Vascular Health and Risk Management. 2022Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18 https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702

Nigella sativa improves glycemic control and ameliorates oxidative stress in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: placebo controlled participant blinded clinical trial. H Kaatabi, A O Bamosa, A Badar, 10.1371/journal.pone.0113486PLoS One. 102113486Kaatabi H, Bamosa AO, Badar A, et al. Nigella sativa improves glycemic control and ameliorates oxidative stress in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: placebo controlled participant blinded clinical trial. PLoS One. 2015;10(2):e0113486. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0113486

Effects of Nigella sativa supplementation on blood parameters and anthropometric indices in adults: a systematic review on clinical trials. A Mohtashami, M H Entezari, 10.4103/1735-1995.179889J Res Med Sci. 2121Mohtashami A, Entezari MH. Effects of Nigella sativa supplementation on blood parameters and anthropometric indices in adults: a systematic review on clinical trials. J Res Med Sci. 2016;21:21. doi:10.4103/1735-1995.179889

Effect of Nigella sativa supplementation on obesity indices: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. S M Mousavi, A Sheikhi, H K Varkaneh, M Zarezadeh, J Rahmani, A Milajerdi, 10.1016/j.ctim.2018.04.003Complement Ther Med. 38Mousavi SM, Sheikhi A, Varkaneh HK, Zarezadeh M, Rahmani J, Milajerdi A. Effect of Nigella sativa supplementation on obesity indices: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Complement Ther Med. 2018;38:48-57. doi:10.1016/j.ctim.2018.04.003

Effect of the herbal medicines in obesity and metabolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. M Payab, S Hasani-Ranjbar, N Shahbal, 10.1002/ptr.6547Phytother Res. 343Payab M, Hasani-Ranjbar S, Shahbal N, et al. Effect of the herbal medicines in obesity and metabolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. Phytother Res. 2020;34(3):526-545. doi:10.1002/ptr.6547

The effect of Nigella sativa on appetite, anthropometric and body composition indices among overweight and obese women: a crossover, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. S Safi, E Razmpoosh, H Fallahzadeh, 10.1016/j.ctim.2020.102653Complement Ther Med. 57102653Safi S, Razmpoosh E, Fallahzadeh H, et al. The effect of Nigella sativa on appetite, anthropometric and body composition indices among overweight and obese women: a crossover, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. Complement Ther Med. 2021;57:102653. doi:10.1016/j.ctim.2020.102653

Nigella sativa as a promising intervention for metabolic and inflammatory disorders in obese prediabetic subjects: a comparative study of Nigella sativa versus both lifestyle modification and metformin. T M Mostafa, S K Hegazy, S S Elnaidany, W A Shehabeldin, E S Sawan, 10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2021.107947J Diabetes Complications. 357107947Mostafa TM, Hegazy SK, Elnaidany SS, Shehabeldin WA, Sawan ES. Nigella sativa as a promising intervention for metabolic and inflammatory disorders in obese prediabetic subjects: a comparative study of Nigella sativa versus both lifestyle modification and metformin. J Diabetes Complications. 2021;35(7):107947. doi:10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2021.107947

Effect of Nigella sativa oil extract on cardiometabolic risk factors in type 2 diabetes: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. S Hadi, R Daryabeygi-Khotbehsara, P Mirmiran, 10.1002/ptr.6990Phytother Res. 357Hadi S, Daryabeygi-Khotbehsara R, Mirmiran P, et al. Effect of Nigella sativa oil extract on cardiometabolic risk factors in type 2 diabetes: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Phytother Res. 2021;35(7):3747-3755. doi:10.1002/ptr.6990

Effects of Nigella sativa oil supplementation on selected metabolic parameters and anthropometric indices in patients with coronary artery disease: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. O M Tavakoli-Rouzbehani, M Abbasnezhad, S Kheirouri, M Alizadeh, 10.1002/ptr.7115Phytother Res. 357Tavakoli-Rouzbehani OM, Abbasnezhad M, Kheirouri S, Alizadeh M. Effects of Nigella sativa oil supplementation on selected metabolic parameters and anthropometric indices in patients with coronary artery disease: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Phytother Res. 2021;35(7):3988-3999. doi:10.1002/ptr.7115

The effects of nigella sativa on anthropometric and biochemical indices in postmenopausal women with metabolic syndrome. M Shirazi, F Khodakarami, E Feizabad, M Ghaemi, 10.1007/s12020-020-02265-wEndocrine. 691Shirazi M, Khodakarami F, Feizabad E, Ghaemi M. The effects of nigella sativa on anthropometric and biochemical indices in postmenopausal women with metabolic syndrome. Endocrine. 2020;69(1):49-52. doi:10.1007/s12020-020-02265-w

Effect of Nigella sativa oil versus metformin on glycemic control and biochemical parameters of newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. Ham Moustafa, L M El Wakeel, M R Halawa, N A Sabri, A Z El-Bahy, A N Singab, 10.1007/s12020-019-01963-4Endocrine. 652Moustafa HAM, El Wakeel LM, Halawa MR, Sabri NA, El-Bahy AZ, Singab AN. Effect of Nigella sativa oil versus metformin on glycemic control and biochemical parameters of newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. Endocrine. 2019;65(2):286-294. doi:10.1007/s12020-019-01963-4

Effects of nigella sativa on various parameters in Patients of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. M Hussain, A G Tunio, L Akhtar, G S Shaikh, J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 293Hussain M, Tunio AG, Akhtar L, Shaikh GS. Effects of nigella sativa on various parameters in Patients of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2017;29(3):403-407.

The effects of Nigella sativa on thyroid function, serum Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) -1, Nesfatin-1 and anthropometric features in patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis: a randomized controlled trial. M A Farhangi, P Dehghan, S Tajmiri, M M Abbasi, 10.1186/s12906-016-1432-2BMC Complement Altern Med. 161471Farhangi MA, Dehghan P, Tajmiri S, Abbasi MM. The effects of Nigella sativa on thyroid function, serum Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) -1, Nesfatin-1 and anthropometric features in patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2016;16(1):471. doi:10.1186/s12906-016-1432-2

Effects of Nigella sativa oil with a low-calorie diet on cardiometabolic risk factors in obese women: a randomized controlled clinical trial. R Mahdavi, N Namazi, M Alizadeh, S Farajnia, 10.1039/C5FO00316DFood Funct. 66Mahdavi R, Namazi N, Alizadeh M, Farajnia S. Effects of Nigella sativa oil with a low-calorie diet on cardiometabolic risk factors in obese women: a randomized controlled clinical trial. Food Funct. 2015;6(6):2041-2048. doi:10.1039/C5FO00316D

Oxidative stress responses to nigella sativa oil concurrent with a low-calorie diet in obese women: a randomized, double-blind controlled clinical trial. N Namazi, R Mahdavi, M Alizadeh, S Farajnia, 10.1002/ptr.5417Phytother Res. 2911Namazi N, Mahdavi R, Alizadeh M, Farajnia S. Oxidative stress responses to nigella sativa oil concurrent with a low-calorie diet in obese women: a randomized, double-blind controlled clinical trial. Phytother Res. 2015;29(11):1722-1728. doi:10.1002/ptr.5417

Alternative supplement for enhancement of reproductive health and metabolic profile among perimenopausal women: a novel role of Nigella sativa. L A Latiff, S Parhizkar, M A Dollah, S T Hassan, Iran J Basic Med Sci. 1712Latiff LA, Parhizkar S, Dollah MA, Hassan ST. Alternative supplement for enhancement of reproductive health and metabolic profile among perimenopausal women: a novel role of Nigella sativa. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2014;17(12):980-985.

Effect of Nigella sativa seeds on the glycemic control of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. A O Bamosa, H Kaatabi, F M Lebdaa, A M Elq, A Al-Sultanb, Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 544Bamosa AO, Kaatabi H, Lebdaa FM, Elq AM, Al-Sultanb A. Effect of Nigella sativa seeds on the glycemic control of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 2010;54(4):344-354.

Efficacy of Nigella sativa on serum free testosterone and metabolic disturbances in central obese male. E A Datau, E E Surachmanto, K Pandelaki, J A Langi, Acta Med Indones. 423Datau EA, Surachmanto EE, Pandelaki K, Langi JA. Efficacy of Nigella sativa on serum free testosterone and metabolic disturbances in central obese male. Acta Med Indones. 2010;42(3):130-134.

Effectiveness, safety, and tolerability of powdered Nigella sativa (kalonji) seed in capsules on serum lipid levels, blood sugar, blood pressure, and body weight in adults: results of a randomized, double-blind controlled trial. W Qidwai, H B Hamza, R Qureshi, A Gilani, 10.1089/acm.2008.0367J Altern Complement Med. 156Qidwai W, Hamza HB, Qureshi R, Gilani A. Effectiveness, safety, and tolerability of powdered Nigella sativa (kalonji) seed in capsules on serum lipid levels, blood sugar, blood pressure, and body weight in adults: results of a randomized, double-blind controlled trial. J Altern Complement Med. 2009;15(6):639-644. doi:10.1089/acm.2008.0367

Impact of Nigella sativa on body weight, volume and weight of ovary in letrozole induced polycystic ovarian syndrome in mice. N Anwar, A Nadeem, K Naheed, 10.53350/pjmhs211592355Pak J Med Health Sci. 159Anwar N, Nadeem A, Naheed K, et al. Impact of Nigella sativa on body weight, volume and weight of ovary in letrozole induced polycystic ovarian syndrome in mice. Pak J Med Health Sci. 2021;15(9):2355-2357. doi:10.53350/pjmhs211592355

Coronary angiogenic effect of long-term administration of Nigella sativa. Al Asoom, L I , 10.1186/s12906-017-1795-zBMC Complement Altern Med. 171308Al Asoom LI. Coronary angiogenic effect of long-term administration of Nigella sativa. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2017;17(1):308. doi:10.1186/s12906-017-1795-z

Preventive effect of Nigella sativa on metabolic syndrome in menopause induced rats. S Parhizkar, L A Latiff, S A Rahman, M A Dollah, J Med Plant Res. 58Parhizkar S, Latiff LA, Rahman SA, Dollah MA. Preventive effect of Nigella sativa on metabolic syndrome in menopause induced rats. J Med Plant Res. 2011;5(8):1478-1484.

Nigella sativa inhibits intestinal glucose absorption and improves glucose tolerance in rats. B Meddah, R Ducroc, M El Abbes Faouzi, 10.1016/j.jep.2008.10.040J Ethnopharmacol. 1213Meddah B, Ducroc R, El Abbes Faouzi M, et al. Nigella sativa inhibits intestinal glucose absorption and improves glucose tolerance in rats. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009;121(3):419-424. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2008.10.040

The petroleum ether extract of Nigella sativa exerts lipid-lowering and insulin-sensitizing actions in the rat. P M Le, A Benhaddou-Andaloussi, A Elimadi, A Settaf, Y Cherrah, P S Haddad, 10.1016/j.jep.2004.04.030J Ethnopharmacol. 942-3Le PM, Benhaddou-Andaloussi A, Elimadi A, Settaf A, Cherrah Y, Haddad PS. The petroleum ether extract of Nigella sativa exerts lipid-lowering and insulin-sensitizing actions in the rat. J Ethnopharmacol. 2004;94(2-3):251-259. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2004.04.030

Changes of body composition and circulating adipokines in response to Nigella sativa oil with a calorie restricted diet in obese women. R Mahdavi, M Alizadeh, N Namazi, S Farajnia, 10.1016/j.hermed.2016.03.003J Herb Med. 62Mahdavi R, Alizadeh M, Namazi N, Farajnia S. Changes of body composition and circulating adipokines in response to Nigella sativa oil with a calorie restricted diet in obese women. J Herb Med. 2016;6(2):67-72. doi:10.1016/j.hermed.2016.03.003

Effects of oral Nigella sativa oil on the expression levels and serum concentrations of adiponectin, PPAR-gamma, and TNF-alpha in overweight and obese women: a study protocol for a crossover-designed, double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial. E Razmpoosh, S Safi, M Mazaheri, 10.1186/s13063-019-3568-0Trials. 201Razmpoosh E, Safi S, Mazaheri M, et al. Effects of oral Nigella sativa oil on the expression levels and serum concentrations of adiponectin, PPAR-gamma, and TNF-alpha in overweight and obese women: a study protocol for a crossover-designed, double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial. Trials. 2019;20(1). doi:10.1186/s13063-019-3568-0

Chemical composition of Nigella sativa L. seed extracts obtained by supercritical carbon dioxide. Vsk Tiruppur, H Pattekhan, S Divakar, Us K, 10.1007/s13197-010-0109-yJ Food Sci Technol. 476Tiruppur VSK, Pattekhan H, Divakar S, US K. Chemical composition of Nigella sativa L. seed extracts obtained by supercritical carbon dioxide. J Food Sci Technol. 2010;47(6):598-605. doi:10.1007/s13197-010-0109-y

A review of ethnobotany, phytochemistry, antimicrobial pharmacology and toxicology of Nigella sativa L. M S Hossain, A Sharfaraz, A Dutta, 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112182Biomed Pharmacother. 143112182Hossain MS, Sharfaraz A, Dutta A, et al. A review of ethnobotany, phytochemistry, antimicrobial pharmacology and toxicology of Nigella sativa L. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021;143:112182. doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112182

Combinatorial effect of thymoquinone with chemo agents for tumor therapy. S Jehan, J Huang, U Farooq, I Basheer, W Zhou, 10.1016/j.phymed.2022.153936Phytomedicine. 98153936Jehan S, Huang J, Farooq U, Basheer I, Zhou W. Combinatorial effect of thymoquinone with chemo agents for tumor therapy. Phytomedicine. 2022;98:153936. doi:10.1016/j.phymed.2022.153936

Nigella sativa oil with a calorie-restricted diet can improve biomarkers of systemic inflammation in obese women: a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. R Mahdavi, N Namazi, M Alizadeh, S Farajnia, 10.1016/j.jacl.2015.11.019J Clin Lipidol. 105Mahdavi R, Namazi N, Alizadeh M, Farajnia S. Nigella sativa oil with a calorie-restricted diet can improve biomarkers of systemic inflammation in obese women: a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Clin Lipidol. 2016;10(5):1203-1211. doi:10.1016/j.jacl.2015.11.019

Hypothalamic circuits regulating appetite and energy homeostasis: pathways to obesity. K Timper, J C Brüning, 10.1242/dmm.026609Dis Model Mech. 106Timper K, Brüning JC. Hypothalamic circuits regulating appetite and energy homeostasis: pathways to obesity. Dis Model Mech. 2017;10 (6):679-689. doi:10.1242/dmm.026609

. 10.2147/VHRM.S373702https://doi.org/10.2147/VHRM.S373702

. DovePress Vascular Health and Risk Management. 202218DovePress Vascular Health and Risk Management 2022:18