# CO survey of ARCHEOPS cold cores

CorpusID: 250672355
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d9d4b750a8a17293a106a6037cbcfe08aa2c8313](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d9d4b750a8a17293a106a6037cbcfe08aa2c8313)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

CO survey of ARCHEOPS cold cores


Erika Verebélyi everebelyi@astro.elte.hu 
Eötvös Loránd University
BudapestHungary

Martin Miller 
I. Physikalisches Institut
CologneGermany

L Viktor Tóth 
Eötvös Loránd University
BudapestHungary

Zoltán Makai 
I. Physikalisches Institut
CologneGermany

Gábor Marton 
Eötvös Loránd University
BudapestHungary

CO survey of ARCHEOPS cold cores
10.1088/1742-6596/218/1/012023
Density and velocity distribution of 13 molecular clouds have been derived from multi-isotopic multi-line CO observations. These observations are investigations of the initial conditions for star formation in cold molecular cloud cores. The targets were selected from the ARCHEOPS point sources (Désert et al.

## Introduction

Dense region of the molecular clouds are the birthplaces of stars. They can be gravitational bounded cores or diffuse group of clumps. The local environment and interactions play a dominant role in the life of these clouds and affect the efficiency of star formation. An external influence changes the structure and shape of the parent molecular cloud. The line-shape and velocity-distribution inside the cloud provide us indirect information on the external influence. (Steinacker et al. 2005, de Vries et al. 2007, Horváth et al. 1995 It would be important to explore the interstellar medium, locate molecular cloud cores and derive their main parameters (temperature, and density inside the cloud) and examine the impact of external forces at barely known regions. Test object might be selected from a large area survey of cold galactic ISM, like the Archeops balloon-born experiment. Description of the instrument, the observational strategy and calibrations are presented F.-X. Désert et al. (2008). This is what we have done and this paper discusses the observation and analysis of CO measurement of cold galactic cores selected from the Archeops bright submillimetre point source catalog.


## Target selection

A comparison of the Archeops bright point source-list to the Nagoya 13 CO-survey by Yonekura et al.(1997) and Dobashi et al. (1994) were completed. A sub-sample of 13 cold cores were chosen which have low dust temperature and were associeted with a 12 CO or 13 CO peak and preferably with extinction. (Kiss, 2009) 
(2-1) [A], C 18 O(2-1) [B], 12 CO(3-2) [C]
observation. Black lines represent the measured spectra, and grey lines the fitted Gaussian curves. There are velocity in km/s on the horizontal axis compared to the LSR, and brightness temperature in K on the vertical axis. A typical 12 CO(3-2) line spectra from the "tail" is showed in [D].

Our analysis will be reviewed for one chosen cloud, the ArchG106.88+05.29 because there are the strongest 12 CO (3-2) and 13 CO (2-1) lines and we could detect strong C 18 O (2-1) lines, too.


## Observations

Multiisotropic, multilevel CO-observations have been carried out with the KOSMA-3m (Kramer et al., 1998) telescope between 6 and 14, February in 2009. The telescope is located at Gornergrat in Switzerland, and is maintained by the I. Physikalisches Institut (Cologne, Germany) and Radioastronomisches Institut, University of Bonn. The observed transitions were 12 CO(3-2), 13 CO(2-1) and C 18 O(2-1) at 345.796, 220.399 and 219.560 GHz, respectively. The half power beamwidth of the telescope at these frequencies was 80, 120 and 120 arcsec. We used the OTF (on-the-fly) mode during the observation . OFF positions were picked from the CO survey of Dame et.al. (Dame et al. 1987). The integration time per positions was 4 seconds, and the grid-size was 60 arcsec. At first the 12 CO(3-2) and the 13 CO(2-1) observation were done simultaneously, than having chosen the maximum position the C 18 O(2-1) measurement was done to a smaller area, with a longer integration time. Our pointing sources were: Venus and Saturn. Our calibration sources were: DR21, Orion KL and W51A. The position error was about 10 arcsec and the calibration error was 10-15 %. After the observation the necessary calibration steps were done on the spot using the GILDAS data analysis package following the .


## Analysis

Calibrated sample-spectra are shown in the Figure 1. The lines from the 13 CO (2-1) and C 18 O (2-1) observations are mainly Gaussian (just like the sample-spectra) but in the core the 12 CO (3-2) line spectra have a prominent wing in the blue side which suggests a presence of outflow from an embedded YSO (see Fig. 1C). However, if we look to the tail and not to the core of the cloud we can get a different characteristic. Figure 2. shows the distribution of the three different CO-isotopomers. To follow the way of the definition of the core-size written in Wu 


## Figure 2.

Complex picture from the cloud: the different lines represent the half maximum or the peak intensity-contour of the three different transition. There are offsetcoordinates in arcmin units on both axis. The big dashed round shows the resolution of Archeops.  2000), an ellipse was fitted to the half maximum contour of the 13 CO-intensity ( Figure  3.) In this case the core is compact and spherical. After the basic calibration steps we can determine the brightness temperature from the spectra. Following the description of Wilson et al. (2008), the excitation temperature, the optical depth and the column densities are countable. The 12 CO excitation temperature of Arch106.88 is 21 K, and varied between 5 and 20 K for the other clouds of the sample. The column density to the 13 CO molecule has been also derived and we estimated the column density of the H 2 -molecule as well. The ratio between H 2 and 13 CO is N(H 2 )=7,89×10 5 N( 13 CO) taken from Beuther et al.(2000). All of these parameters are represented in the Table 1. Arch106.88 has a head-tail shape so we studied the velocity-gradient in its axis of symmetry. These axis were shown in the Figure 2. We found a very weak velocity gradient in the 12 COlines, but in the 13 CO line the effect is not detectable. Figure 4. shows the line velocities along the two axis, from the [−3 .5, 4 .5] to grad A, and from the [−4 .5, 4 .5] offset coordinate (grad B) as an initial position. The distribution of linewidth (FWHM) was also checked and is shown in Fig. 4.


## Results

• We detected 12 CO (3-2) and 13 CO (2-1) in all 13 selected cold Archeops clouds.

• C 18 O (2-1) was also detected in five of the clouds.

• Clouds structure and density distribution were obtained. We found a compact cloud core in 9 cases, and a diffuse structure in 4 cases.

• The sizes of the cores were estimated.

• The excitation temperature and the column densities of H 2 molecule were determined in the core position of each cloud.

• Velocity gradient was found in 4 cases.  (1), central position of the ellipse in offset coordinate (2), the major axis of the fitted ellipse (3), the ratio of the minor and major axis (4), the position angle (the different from east) (5), the exciting temperature of the 12 CO (6), the column density of H 2 (7), and the estimated distance of the cloud from (Yonekura et al. 1997)(8).

The data will be further used as input for Herschel target selection, observation and radiative transfer modelling.


### Acknowledgments

## Figure 1 .
1Calibrated spectra consist of the maximum intensity of the 13 CO

## Figure 3 .
3It shows the half maximum contour of the line area from the 13 CO(2-1) measurement with the fitted ellipse, and the two axis where we looked for the velocity and linewidth gradient. The small dots in the background indicate the grid of the observation. et al. (


5th Workshop of Young Researchers in Astronomy & Astrophysics IOP Publishing Journal of Physics: Conference Series 218 (2010) 012023 doi:10.1088/1742-6596/218/1/012023 Figure 4. The velocity (left) and linewidth-gradient (right) along the two axis from the 12 COobservation. There are distances on the vertical axis in the unit of pc, and there is a velocity and a linewidth on the horizontal axis. Both units are km/s. The equation of the fitted line are showed on the left corner of the diagram.Table 1. The name of the sourceName 
Offset coordinate 
a 
b/a 
PA 
T ex 
N(H 2 ) 
Distance 
[deg] [K] [×10 21 cm −2 ] 
[pc] 

ArchG106.88+05.29 
-2',1 : 6'.3 
3',3 0,70 
25 
21,0 
11,8 
910 


The KOSMA 3 m radiotelescope at Gornergrat-Sfid Observatory is operated by the University of Cologne and supported by special funding from the Land NRW. The Observatory is administered by the Internationale Stiftung Hochalpine Forschungsstationen Jungfraujoch und Gornergrat, Bern. This research was partly fund by OTKA K62 304.
. A Benoit, P Ade, A Amblard, R Ansari, E Aubourg, J Bartlett, J-P Bernard, R S Bhatia, A Blanchard, APh. 17101Benoit A, Ade P, Amblard A, Ansari R, Aubourg E, Bartlett J, Bernard J-P, Bhatia R S, Blanchard A, et al 2002 APh 17 101

. H Beuther, C Kramer, B Deiss, J Stutzki, A& A 362 1109Beuther H, Kramer C, Deiss B and Stutzki J 2000 A& A 362 1109

. F-X Désert, J F Macas-Prez, F Mayet, G Giardino, C Renault, J Aumont, A Benoit, J-Ph Bernard, N Ponthieu, A& A. 481411Désert F-X, Macas-Prez J F, Mayet F, Giardino G, Renault C, Aumont J, Benoit A, Bernard J-Ph, Ponthieu N, et al. 2008 A& A 481 411

. K Dobashi, J-Ph Bernard, Yonekura , Y Fukui, Y , ApJS. 95419Dobashi K, Bernard J-Ph, Yonekura Y and Fukui Y 1994 ApJS 95 419

. A Horváth, L V Tóth, Ap& SS. 233169Horváth A and Tóth L V 1995 Ap& SS 233 169

. Z Kiss, C Private Communication Kramer, H Beuther, R Simon, J Stutzki, G Winnewisser, ASPC. 217194Kiss Z., private communication Kramer C, Beuther H, Simon R, Stutzki J and Winnewisser G 2000 ASPC 217 194

. J Steinacker, A Bacmann, Henning Th, R Klessen, M Stickel, A& A. 434167Steinacker J, Bacmann A, Henning Th, Klessen R and Stickel M 2005 A& A 434 167

. C H De Vries, G Narayanan, R L Snell, IAUS. 237409de Vries C H, Narayanan G and Snell R L 2007 IAUS 237 409

T L ; Wilson, Y Wu, H Yan, J Wang, J Wu, Y Zhao, C Lei, Sun J Wang, L , The Tools of Radioastronomy. 21796Wilson T L, 2008 The Tools of Radioastronomy Wu Y, Yan H, Wang J, Wu J, Zhao Y, Lei C, Sun J and Wang L 2000 ASPC 217 96

. Y Yonekura, K Dobashi, A Mizuno, H Ogawa, Y Fukui, ApJS. 11021Yonekura Y, Dobashi K, Mizuno A, Ogawa H and Fukui Y 1997 ApJS 110 21

. 10.1088/1742-6596/218/1/012023Astronomy & Astrophysics IOP Publishing Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 218120235th Workshop of Young Researchers in Astronomy & Astrophysics IOP Publishing Journal of Physics: Conference Series 218 (2010) 012023 doi:10.1088/1742-6596/218/1/012023