# Alcohol Consumption During the First Year of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States: Results From a Nationally Representative Longitudinal Survey

CorpusID: 250732298
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e8b9ea690a5accc36af5b6d8127e6ef5fda4f35](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e8b9ea690a5accc36af5b6d8127e6ef5fda4f35)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Alcohol Consumption During the First Year of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States: Results From a Nationally Representative Longitudinal Survey


PhDCarolina Barbosa 
BAWilliam N Dowd 
Alan Barnosky 
Katherine J Ma 
PhDKarriker-Jaffe 
Alcohol Consumption During the First Year of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States: Results From a Nationally Representative Longitudinal Survey
10.1097/ADM.0000000000001018


T he coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is an ongoing global crisis with lasting effects on medical, psychological, and sociological problems. 1 The COVID-19 pandemic and related policies introduced new life stressors and disrupted daily living for most people in the United States. 2 Individuals often increase alcohol intake to cope with emotional stress, depression, anxiety, and chronic uncertainty, [3][4][5][6][7] and there is a concern that the current pandemic might drive lasting changes in drinking patterns.

Experience with previous outbreaks, natural disasters, and terrorist attacks shows sustained increases in alcohol consumption, binge drinking, and alcohol problems postevent. 3,8,9 The scale and duration of the current pandemic are unmatched by those prior events. If the COVID-19 pandemic is associated with sustained increases in alcohol consumption over time, it could exacerbate the already substantial physical, psychological, and social consequences of excessive alcohol use. 10 The prevalence of alcohol use and risky drinking have increased in the United States over the past decade, particularly in vulnerable populations, including females, older adults, racial/ethnic minorities, sexual minorities, and individuals with lower income. 11 Pandemic-driven increases in alcohol consumption might further exacerbate those disparities.

As reported in 2 recent systematic reviews, studies indicate increases in alcohol consumption in the United States during the early phase of the pandemic, particularly in certain segments of the population. 12,13 Only 2 studies-both published after the systematic reviews-used a longitudinal design, collected data beyond May of 2020, and focused on a representative sample. These 2 studies used a nationally representative panel of US adults 18 years or older, the Understanding America Study, to examine longitudinal changes in number of reported drinking days in the past week from March 11, 2020, through June 8, 2020, 14 or July 21, 2020. 15 Both studies found increases in the number of drinking days, with frequency of drinking peaking in early May and remaining at increased levels through mid-July. 14,15 However, the Understanding America Study survey did not collect measures of quantity consumed and thus could not examine changes in the total quantity of alcohol consumed per day or the prevalence of binge drinking or drinking above recommended guidelines.

It is important to understand changes in drinking patterns over a longer period after the beginning of the pandemic and examine if changes were more pronounced in specific demographic subgroups. The current study examines changes in drinks per month, binge drinking, and drinking above recommended guidelines from February 2020 to April, July, and November 2020, and assesses whether changes in drinking varied by (1) sex, (2) age, (3) race/ethnicity, (4) the presence of minor children in the household, (5) mental health problems (depression and anxiety), and (6) drinking to cope or (7) drinking for enhancement.


## METHODS


## Study Sample

We sampled adults 21 years or older from the Ipsos KnowledgePanel, a nationally representative online survey panel comprising more than 55,000 adults. For wave 1, a random sample of 1691 panel members were selected and invited to complete the survey in May 2020. A total of 1017 adults (60.1%) responded to the invitation, and 993 (58.7%) qualified for (ie, were 21 or older) and completed the survey. In December 2020, we conducted a second wave of data collection with respondents from wave 1. At wave 2, 792 respondents (79.8%) completed the survey. Two respondents who reported drinking an average of 60 or more drinks per day were removed, yielding a sample of 790. This study focuses on wave 2 respondents who reported drinking alcohol in at least one of the 4 months for which we collected data (N = 557). More survey details and differences between all wave 2 respondents and the subsample of drinkers selected for analysis are presented in the Appendix, http://links.lww.com/JAM/A350. This study received an exempt determination from the RTI International Institutional Review Board.


## Measures

The wave 1 survey collected information on alcohol consumption (quantity and frequency of standard drinks, maximum quantity and frequency, and binge drinking), depression and anxiety, history of alcohol-related problems, and employment status for February and April. 16 We also obtained relevant panel variables including demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Wave 2 included all wave 1 questions (most reassessed for both July and November) and additional questions including coping and enhancement motives for drinking, other substance use, and experience with COVID-19 (ie, whether the respondent or a loved one had a positive test or was hospitalized for COVID-19 and the impact of the pandemic on daily life). 17 Across the 2 survey waves, we assessed 3 drinking measures at 4 time points (February, April, July, and November):

(1) drinks per month, calculated as quantity times frequency, with an additional factor to account for maximum quantity and the frequency of drinking that amount during the month (an approach used in other national surveys of drinking behavior) 18 ; (2) drinking in excess of recommended guidelines in a given month, a binary measure identifying respondents who drank more than 3 drinks per day or more than 7 drinks per week for women and more than 4 drinks per day or more than 14 drinks per week for men 19 ; and (3) binge drinking, a binary measure identifying respondents who engaged in binge drinking, defined as drinking 5 or more drinks in a 2-hour period for men and 4 or more drinks in a 2-hour period for women, at least once during the month. 19 We measured respondent mental health in February and April (wave 1) and November (wave 2) using the Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2) for depression, and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 2-item (GAD-2) 20 for anxiety. We assessed drinking motives in February, July, and November using the Drinking Motives Questionnaire-Revised. 21 Several variables were available as panel variables, that is, we did not have to collect that data as they were provided by the panel vendor. Panel variables used in this study include age, sex, race/ethnicity, and prepandemic household composition (used to identify if there were children 17 years or younger living in the respondent's household) and socioeconomic status (ie, marital status, educational attainment, and income). More information on measures, including panel variables, is in the Appendix, http://links. lww.com/JAM/A350. Survey questions for both waves are in the Appendix, http://links.lww.com/JAM/A350.


## Analysis

First, we computed descriptive statistics for the sample of respondents who reported alcohol use across the study period (N = 557) and subgroup averages of the 3 drinking measuresdrinks per month, exceeding drinking guidelines, and binge drinking-for February 2020 (before the pandemic) and for 3 postpandemic months (April, July, and November 2020). Second, we examined changes over time in the 3 drinking measures based on 7 characteristics: (1) sex, (2) age, (3) race/ethnicity, (4) the presence of minor children in the household, (5) any evidence of mental health problems during the study period, and any evidence of (6) drinking to cope or (7) drinking for enhancement motives during the study period. We estimated regression models (described in the Appendix, http://links.lww.com/JAM/ A350) to assess whether changes in alcohol consumption measures varied between subgroups (eg, Was the increase/decrease in alcohol consumption from February to November for women different from the change for men?) or within subgroups defined by each characteristic (eg, Did women significantly increase/decrease alcohol consumption from February to November?).

Given the low proportion of missing data at each survey (less than 6%), we included only complete cases at each time point in our analyses, meaning that data were not missing for any of the identified variables. All analyses incorporated survey weights that account for probabilities of sample selection and survey nonresponse and are aligned with Current Population Survey benchmarks (survey weight details are in the Appendix, http://links.lww.com/JAM/A350). Statistical significance was assessed at the P < 0.05 level. Analyses were conducted using Stata version 16.1 (StataCorp) and R (R studio version 1.2.5001; R version 3.6.1). Missing data analysis is in the Appendix, http:// links.lww.com/JAM/A350.


## RESULTS

The main analytic sample includes 557 adults who reported drinking in at least one of the 4 survey months ( Table 1). The average age was 48.0 (SD, 16.6), 51.4% were between ages of 21 and 59 years, and 51.4% were female. The typical respondent was White and non-Hispanic (62.8%), had at least some college education (64.3%), did not have children (73.7%), was married (56.0%), and had an annual income of at least $50,000 (59.3%). Additional characteristics of the sample, drinker and abstinent status during the study period, and study measures are in the Appendix, http://links.lww.com/ JAM/A350. Figure 1 shows the weighted unadjusted means for the 3 outcomes at each time point. The overall trajectory is characterized by a sustained increase in alcohol consumption and risky drinking behavior throughout the pandemic period. As shown in Figure 1, most of the outcomes are significantly higher in all 3 postpandemic months (April, July, and November) relative to February. Overall drinks per month increased from 17 in February to about 23 drinks in April, July, and November 2020 (an increase of 36% in April, 39% in July, and 38% in November relative to February). The percentage of individuals exceeding drinking guidelines increased from 23% in February to 28% in April and July, and 32% in November (an increase of 27% in April, 24% in July, and 39% in November relative to February). The percentage of individuals binge drinking increased from 18% in February to 23% in April, 20% in July, and 24% in November (an increase of 26% in April, 10% in July, and 30% in November relative to February). Table 2 presents adjusted predicted values by month of analysis for key respondent groups for each of the 3 outcomes. For sex stratification, for example, the first row in Table 2 indicates that the average female respondent drank 12.0 drinks in February and increased to 17.4 in April. The bold text in that cell indicates that the April value is significantly larger than the February value. In addition, significant differences between groups in changes in outcomes from before to after the start of the pandemic are shaded. For example, the change in percentage exceeding drinking guidelines from February to April was significantly larger for females (30.0%−20.3% = 9.7%) compared with males (26.0%−23.1% = 2.9%). Overall, both females and males significantly increased drinks per month from February to April; this increase was sustained throughout November, and males kept consuming more drinks per month than females. Females showed sustained increases in exceeding drinking guidelines. The percentage of females who exceeded recommended guidelines significantly increased by 48%, 38%, and 54% from February to April, July, and November, respectively, with females surpassing males on this measure for all pandemic months, but not at baseline.

Drinks per month increased significantly for all age groups, except the youngest (ages 21-34), where increases did not achieve statistical significance despite increases in both usual frequency and usual quantity of drinking (albeit with larger variances in November compared with February). However, drinking in excess of recommended guidelines increased significantly for the youngest age group from February (21.7%) to November (34.2%). The change in drinks per month from February to July for the 50-to-64 age group was significantly larger than for the oldest respondents (ages 65 years and more), but that difference was not observed in other pandemic months.

In race/ethnicity stratifications, the percentage of Black respondents who exceeded drinking guidelines increased by 138%, 320%, and 508% from February to April, July, and November. Changes from February to July and November were significantly higher for Black respondents compared with White respondents. Black respondents also showed significantly larger increases in drinks per month and binge drinking from February to November, compared with White respondents. There were no significant differences in changes in drinking outcomes among White or Hispanic respondents, or for respondents who identified as something other than White, Black, or Hispanic.

Stratifying by children in the household, the number of drinks consumed per month increased significantly for respondents with and without children in the household, but the increase was significantly larger for those with children in the household from both February to April and from February to November. Drinks per month among respondents with children in the household increased from 22.4 to 36.8 from February to November (64% increase), with most of the observed increase happening between February and April (from 22.4 to 35.0 drinks per month). The changes in exceeding drinking guidelines and binge drinking were not different across these groups, but the increase in exceeding drinking guidelines after the beginning of the pandemic was significant only among respondents without children.

Stratifying by a positive screen for anxiety or depression, increases in drinks per month from February to November were significantly larger for those with a positive screen for anxiety or depression compared with those without. Respondents with a positive screen increased drinks per month by 46%, 68%, and 88%, in April, July, and November compared with February.

Those who reported drinking to cope showed significantly higher increases in drinks per month from February to all postpandemic months, compared with those who did not. Respondents who drink to cope increased drinks per month by 38%, 58%, and 56% in April, July, and November compared with February. Respondents who reported drinking for enhance-ment during the study period also had significantly larger increases in drinks per month from February to July and November, as well as significantly larger increases in drinking more than recommended guidelines (February to July and November) and binge drinking (February to July) than those who did not report drinking for enhancement. Respondents who drink for enhancement increased drinks per month by 30%, 39%, and 40% in April, July, and November compared with February.

We compared baseline characteristics of those with lower average drinks per month across April, July, and November than in February (ie, decreased drinking) with those who did not decrease drinking. Those who did not decrease drinking consumed an average of 23.8 drinks per month across April, July, and FIGURE 1. Changes in alcohol consumption outcomes: February to November 2020. Asterisks denote significant differences relative to February: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. Values in the table are adjusted predictions at the means of other coefficients. Regression models used to produce these estimates control for demographic characteristics and baseline socioeconomic status. Bold text indicates significant ( P < 0.05) differences within a row (eg, among females) relative to February. Shaded cells represent significant ( P < 0.05) differences between groups (eg, between females and males) relative to February. For race/ethnicity, all shaded cells represent significant differences between Black, non-Hispanic respondents, and other groups. There are no significant differences among White, non-Hispanic respondents; other, non-Hispanic respondents; and Hispanic respondents. Table A3 in Appendix, http://links.lww. com/JAM/A350, presents corresponding relative changes and confidence intervals. November and 11.4 drinks in February. Those who decreased drinking consumed an average of 19.5 drinks per month across April, July, and November and 28.4 drinks in February. We found that the group with postpandemic decrease in consumption (n = 175 [31%]; average decrease of 39%) consumed more drinks on average and included more binge drinkers and more individuals exceeding drinking guidelines in February compared with the group that did not decrease consumption (28.4 vs 11.4 drinks; 34% vs 12% binge drinking, and 40% drinking above recommended guidelines vs 15%, all P < 0.001). We did not find statistically significant differences in sociodemographic variables between the 2 groups.

We also examined differences by other respondent characteristics (see Appendix Table A4, http://links.lww.com/JAM/ A350). We did not find differential changes in drinking by whether respondents reported unemployment during the study period, pandemic-related reductions in income, or other impacts of COVID-19 on loved ones. We found significantly larger increases in consumption from February to November 2020but not for exceeding drinking guidelines or binge drinkingamong those reporting a direct impact of COVID-19 (eg, having to quarantine or becoming infected) and for those reporting a significant impact of COVID-19 on daily life compared with respondents who did not report such experiences.


## DISCUSSION

Analyses of the first wave of this national panel survey showed overall increases in alcohol consumption and that women, people with minor children in the home, and Black Americans differentially increased their drinking in the short term after the COVID-19 pandemic started (comparing February and April 2020). 16 The current study resurveyed respondents to the first survey and analyzed 2 waves of data, providing unique longitudinal data to address whether and for whom early patterns of increased alcohol consumption were sustained through November 2020. These unique longitudinal data suggest that, on average, the patterns of increased alcohol consumption, including increased excessive drinking and binge drinking, observed in the early phases of the pandemic were sustained. This aligns with 2 recent nationally representative surveys that reported frequency of drinking among US adults increased during the pandemic period, peaking in early May, and remaining at increased levels through mid-July. 14,15 However, those 2 studies only reported alcohol use frequency and were unable to describe the full spectrum of changes in drinking patterns. Individuals might increase drinking frequency yet still reduce average consumption if the amount consumed in each occasion decreases, or they might increase consumption to the point of placing themselves and others at increased risk of harm.

Compared with February 2020, we found that average drinks per month in April and November 2020 increased by 36% and 38%, respectively. Corresponding increases for the proportion exceeding drinking guidelines were 27% and 39%, and increases for binge drinking were 26% and 30%. Applied to the almost 133 million Americans 21 years or older who drank in 2020, 22,23 these changes translate to an increase of 840 million more drinks per month, with 11.7 million more people exceeding drinking guidelines, and 7.1 million more people binge drinking in November 2020 compared with February 2020. An increase in drinking of this magnitude will add to the known disease burden associated with alcohol. 10 The strategies put in place to reduce the public health impact of the virus had an impact on the psychological well-being of all, especially those most susceptible to the negative effects of decreased social interactions and disruptions to work, school, and leisure activities. These factors led to pandemic-related stress 2 and worsening mental health, 24,25 which may have contributed to increased alcohol intake to cope with emotional stress and chronic uncertainty, particularly in more vulnerable groups. We found differential increases in alcohol consumption during the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic by sex, race/ ethnicity, and children in the home. Previous studies, although cross-sectional and/or not nationally representative, have also found disproportionate impacts on alcohol consumption for women, Black people, and those with children in the household during the early phase of the pandemic in the Unites States. 12,13 In our study, sex differences in sustained changes in alcohol consumption were notable and warrant specific attention. The proportion exceeding drinking guidelines between February and November 2020 increased by 54% for women and by 32% for men, with more women than men exceeding recommended drinking guidelines between April and November 2020. Women are more likely to use alcohol to cope with stress, depression, and anxiety. 26 In the past 2 decades, alcohol consumption and alcohol-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and deaths have increased markedly among women. 27 The pandemic may continue to exacerbate these troubling trends. We also found alcohol consumption increased more for individuals with children in the household (64% increase between February and November 2020) than for those without children. Many parents had to "home-school" their children while continuing to work at home during the first year of the pandemic, which might have led to increased stress. Other studies have also found that having children in the household was related to increased alcohol consumption during the early phases of the pandemic, 28 and we show that those relationships were sustained over the longer term.

The percentage of Black respondents who exceeded drinking guidelines or engaged in binge drinking increased about 500% from February to November, and increases in the proportion of drinking more than the recommended guidelines were higher for Black respondents than for White respondents. This very large increase in risky drinking behavior in a historically marginalized group highlights the disproportionate effects of COVID-19 in African American communities and reflects the racial inequality and social exclusion that existed before the COVID-19 crisis. 29,30 In light of the drinking patterns observed for Black individuals, future studies should investigate the role of systemic racism and other types of discrimination on changes in alcohol use before and after the pandemic period to identify unique and synergistic effects of these stressors in marginalized communities and to identify resilience factors that may be strengthened in future interventions.

We found a larger increase in drinks per month for those who reported drinking to cope (57% increase between February and November 2020). These results extend findings of recent studies showing a relationship between drinking to cope and alcohol consumption during the first months of the pandemic. 28,31,32 There is a concern that drinking to cope with stressful and negative emotions during the pandemic might increase the risk for alcohol use disorders. 33 Future research is needed to investigate whether elevations in drinking observed persisted beyond November and whether there have been parallel changes in the incidence and prevalence of alcohol use disorders.

Decreases in postpandemic consumption were observed in 31% of our sample, and those decreasing drinking reported higher prepandemic consumption and riskier baseline drinking patterns. This shows that average increases in consumption were predominantly from those drinking less-and within recommended guidelines-at baseline. This is a cause for concern, as those individuals previously drinking within guidelines were responsible for larger increases during the pandemic period. However, it also should be noted that during the postpandemic months of April, July, and November, those who reduced their drinking still were drinking at higher levels than the baseline levels for those who did not reduce consumption.

Key strengths of our study include longitudinal data collection of detailed drinking patterns collected up to November 2020 and the use of a nationally representative panel of US adults. Some limitations should be noted. First, our estimates of alcohol consumption may underestimate total consumption, which is a well-known limitation of collecting self-reported survey data on substance use. 34 This underestimation may be concentrated among people who drink at a low frequency. 35 Recall bias might be larger for self-reported July consumption, as respondents look back to consumption 5 months before the survey. However, we reminded respondents of major holidays (eg, fourth of July) to help mitigate potential recall bias. Calendar-based methods might more accurately measure alcohol consumption, but these intensive measures were not within the scope of our Web-based survey. Second, the survey data are representative of the US civilian, noninstitutionalized population; as such, we did not reach some specialized populations disproportionally impacted by the pandemic (eg, prison and homeless populations). This is an area to be addressed through targeted research. Third, our analyses focused on those 21 years or older. Although our surveys included respondents aged 18 to 20 years at wave 1 (25 individuals), we excluded those individuals from these analyses as transitioning to legal drinking age during the study period could confound the impacts of the pandemic. However, future studies should analyze changes in drinking for underage individuals considering changes in social patterns and changes in access to alcohol, which included an increase in alcohol home deliveries. Fourth, we did not adjust for seasonality. Retail sales for April increased by 14% from 2019 to 2020, and the 4 months after February 2020 represent the 4 largest year-over-year increases for monthly sales on record (since 1993). 36 However, even though there is a correlation between sales and consumption, changes in alcohol sales do not translate to the same changes in alcohol consumption, and they also do not provide information on changes in alcohol drinking patterns. Usually, both February and April are months where self-reported consumption is low and self-reported consumption tends to be higher in November, December, January, and July.

Two studies 37,38 that reported monthly changes in self-reported alcohol consumption showed that there were no significant changes in self-reported consumption between February and April in those samples. This is when we see the largest change: from right before the pandemic to after restrictions were put in place. However, the same level of consumption should not be expected in all months, and future analyses should adjust for seasonality. Alcohol consumption usually increases during national holidays, when events and celebrations promote social gatherings. Adjusted results, however, will need to be interpreted carefully, because seasonal conditions that lead to higher or lower consumption may have been altered during the pandemic, particularly in the first 6 months when large get-togethers were discouraged and drinking at home increased. Fifth, results for respondents who are Black non-Hispanic (n = 54) or other non-Hispanic (n = 44) should be interpreted with caution because of small sample sizes.


## POLICY IMPLICATIONS

In response to the pandemic, policies affecting availability of alcohol substantially changed. In particular, there were substantial changes in alcohol retail policies for on-premise establishments (ie, restaurants and bars), allowing curbside pickup and relaxing home delivery restrictions, and off-premise establishments (ie, grocery and liquor stores) relaxing home delivery restrictions. 39 Although these policy changes initially were temporary, many states have moved to make them permanent. [40][41][42] Thus, further research should understand the impacts of changes in alcohol-related policies during the COVID-19 pandemic so policymakers can make informed decisions about alcohol control regulation.

Further epidemiologic surveillance, with a focus on marginalized groups, is needed to ascertain whether increases in alcohol consumption observed in this study are maintained over a longer horizon, including after pandemic conditions recede. This information is crucial to better plan behavioral health services and inform models of prevention for future pandemics. It is also important to provide public health warnings about excessive alcohol consumption to prevent adverse consequences for individuals and families, and additional costs to societies and health systems, and to promote alternative coping strategies in response to stressful experiences.

## TABLE 1 .
1Sample Characteristics-Unweighted n (557), and US Population-Weighted PercentagesCharacteristic 
n (%) 

Female 
51.4% 
Mean (SD) age* 
48.0 (16.6) 
Age groups* 
21-34 
95, 25.6% 
35-49 
132, 25.8% 
50-64 
176, 28.3% 
65+ 
154, 20.3% 
Race/ethnicity* 
White, non-Hispanic 
397, 62.8% 
Black, non-Hispanic 
47, 9.7% 
Other, non-Hispanic 
38, 7.9% 
Hispanic (any race) 
75, 19.6% 
Educational attainment* 
No college 
167, 35.7% 
Some college 
153, 29.9% 
4-Year degree 
237, 34.4% 
Household income* 
<$50,000 
207, 40.7% 
$50,000-$100,000 
232, 37.5% 
>$100,000 
118, 21.8% 
Married* 
346, 56.0% 
Children in the Household* 
126, 26.3% 
Positive score on the PHQ-2 or the GAD-2 in any month 
133, 28.3% 
Reported drinking to cope in any month 
235, 45.6% 
Reported drinking for enhancement in any month 
434, 79.1% 

*Measured before the first wave (May 2020) as panel variable. 


## TABLE 2 .
2Estimated Outcomes for Respondent GroupsDrinks Consumed 
Percentage Exceeding Drinking Guidelines 
Percentage Binge Drinking 

All 
Feb 
Apr 
Jul 
Nov 
Feb 
Apr 
Jul 
Nov 
Feb 
Apr 
Jul 
Nov 

Sex 
Female 
12.0 17.4 16.5 16.8 
20.3% 
30.0% 
28.1% 
31.3% 
15.3% 22.1% 
17.4% 
21.8% 
Male 
21.8 27.5 28.7 29.1 
23.1% 
26.0% 
27.1% 
30.6% 
16.7% 19.1% 
19.1% 
22.1% 
Age 
21-34 
15.3 18.7 20.2 21.9 
21.7% 
28.8% 
29.0% 
34.2% 
17.9% 23.0% 
17.9% 
27.2% 
35-49 
17.6 23.3 21.8 23.0 
24.1% 
31.2% 
30.7% 
33.5% 
22.7% 28.3% 
26.9% 
27.0% 
50-64 
17.0 24.4 26.8 22.9 
21.1% 
25.8% 
27.3% 
26.4% 
17.1% 18.9% 
22.1% 
21.4% 
64+ 
17.1 22.5 19.8 
23.3 
19.3% 
26.2% 
22.8% 
30.2% 
7.9% 13.3% 
8.3% 
13.2% 
Race/ethnicity 
White, non-Hispanic 
19.8 24.3 22.2 
23.2 
26.7% 
29.9% 
30.7% 
31.0% 
19.6% 22.7% 
21.1% 
22.7% 
Black, non-Hispanic 
8.2 
11.4 23.2 23.1 
6.0% 
14.3% 
25.2% 
36.5% 
5.1% 
9.5% 
16.6% 29.0% 
Other race, non-Hispanic 
12.9 21.2 35.3 25.3 
13.3% 
21.1% 
19.0% 
19.9% 
8.3% 11.4% 
14.6% 
14.0% 
Hispanic 
12.8 21.6 17.6 20.0 
23.1% 
34.0% 
23.4% 
33.2% 
18.3% 27.2% 
12.8% 
20.3% 
Children in household 
No 
14.7 17.6 17.7 17.6 
18.2% 
24.2% 
23.7% 
27.6% 
13.6% 17.4% 
15.0% 
18.9% 
Yes 
22.4 35.0 35.2 36.8 
31.4% 
38.7% 
38.8% 
40.2% 
23.1% 30.4% 
28.3% 
31.0% 
Ever PHQ+ or GAD+ 
No 
17.3 22.2 20.8 19.8 
20.2% 
27.3% 
27.8% 
26.4% 
15.5% 20.2% 
17.5% 
17.8% 
Yes 
15.8 23.1 26.6 29.7 
25.3% 
30.3% 
27.9% 
42.8% 
18.2% 22.0% 
19.8% 
32.1% 
Ever drinking to cope 
No 
12.4 15.5 12.0 12.9 
12.7% 
18.3% 
16.7% 
18.9% 
8.5% 12.1% 
9.5% 
11.0% 
Yes 
21.9 30.3 34.8 34.3 
32.8% 
39.8% 
41.0% 
45.6% 
25.8% 31.6% 
29.5% 
36.0% 
Ever drinking for enhancement 
No 
6.9 11.0 
4.5 
5.9 
8.4% 
9.9% 
5.0% 
6.3% 
5.6% 
8.3% 
2.6% 
4.0% 
Yes 
19.3 25.2 27.0 27.1 
25.2% 
32.8% 
33.7% 
37.4% 
18.9% 24.1% 
22.8% 
27.0% 


© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of the American Society of Addiction Medicine.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe authors acknowledge Mr Gregory Bloss, MA, MPP, of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism of the National Institutes of Health for his input and guidance.Dr Barbosa led all aspects of the study. Dr Dowd led the analysis, Mr Barnosky supported the analyses, and Dr Karriker-Jaffe provided analytic and conceptual support. All authors contributed to the writing and revising of the manuscript.
Mental health and the Covid-19 pandemic. B Pfefferbaum, C S North, N Engl J Med. 3836Pfefferbaum B, North CS. Mental health and the Covid-19 pandemic. N Engl J Med. 2020;383(6):510-512.

Well-being of parents and children during the COVID-19 pandemic: a national survey. S W Patrick, L E Henkhaus, J S Zickafoose, Pediatrics. 14642020016824Patrick SW, Henkhaus LE, Zickafoose JS, et al. Well-being of parents and children during the COVID-19 pandemic: a national survey. Pediatrics. 2020;146(4):e2020016824.

Past epidemics, natural disasters, COVID19, and mental health: learning from history as we deal with the present and prepare for the future. E Esterwood, S A Saeed, Psychiatr Q. 914Esterwood E, Saeed SA. Past epidemics, natural disasters, COVID19, and mental health: learning from history as we deal with the present and prepare for the future. Psychiatr Q. 2020;91(4):1121-1133.

Stress, vulnerability and adult alcohol relapse. S A Brown, P W Vik, T L Patterson, J Stud Alcohol. 565Brown SA, Vik PW, Patterson TL, et al. Stress, vulnerability and adult alco- hol relapse. J Stud Alcohol. 1995;56(5):538-545.

The contexts of heavy drinking: a systematic review of the combinations of context-related factors associated with heavy drinking occasions. O Stanesby, F Labhart, P Dietze, PLoS One. 147218465Stanesby O, Labhart F, Dietze P, et al. The contexts of heavy drinking: a sys- tematic review of the combinations of context-related factors associated with heavy drinking occasions. PLoS One. 2019;14(7):e0218465.

The association between stress and drinking: modifying effects of gender and vulnerability. D A Dawson, B F Grant, W J Ruan, Alcohol Alcohol. 405Dawson DA, Grant BF, Ruan WJ. The association between stress and drink- ing: modifying effects of gender and vulnerability. Alcohol Alcohol. 2005; 40(5):453-460.

Alcohol involvement as a function of co-occurring alcohol use disorders and major depressive episode: evidence from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. J A Cranford, S Nolen-Hoeksema, R A Zucker, Drug Alcohol Depend. 1172-3Cranford JA, Nolen-Hoeksema S, Zucker RA. Alcohol involvement as a function of co-occurring alcohol use disorders and major depressive epi- sode: evidence from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Re- lated Conditions. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2011;117(2-3):145-151.

Postdisaster course of alcohol use disorders in systematically studied survivors of 10 disasters. C S North, C L Ringwalt, D Downs, Arch Gen Psychiatry. 682North CS, Ringwalt CL, Downs D, et al. Postdisaster course of alcohol use disorders in systematically studied survivors of 10 disasters. Arch Gen Psy- chiatry. 2011;68(2):173-180.

Frequent binge drinking five to six years after exposure to 9/11: findings from the World Trade Center Health Registry. A E Welch, K Caramanica, C B Maslow, Drug Alcohol Depend. 140Welch AE, Caramanica K, Maslow CB, et al. Frequent binge drinking five to six years after exposure to 9/11: findings from the World Trade Center Health Registry. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014;140:1-7.

National, regional, and global burdens of disease from 2000 to 2016 attributable to alcohol use: a comparative risk assessment study. K Shield, J Manthey, M Rylett, Lancet Public Health. 51Shield K, Manthey J, Rylett M, et al. National, regional, and global burdens of disease from 2000 to 2016 attributable to alcohol use: a comparative risk assessment study. Lancet Public Health. 2020;5(1):E51-E61.

Trends in adult alcohol use and binge drinking in the early 21st-century United States: a meta-analysis of 6 national survey series. R A Grucza, K J Sher, W C Kerr, Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 4210Grucza RA, Sher KJ, Kerr WC, et al. Trends in adult alcohol use and binge drinking in the early 21st-century United States: a meta-analysis of 6 na- tional survey series. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2018;42(10):1939-1950.

The early impact of COVID-19 on the incidence, prevalence, and severity of alcohol use and other drugs: a systematic review. R A Schmidt, R Genois, J Jin, Drug Alcohol Depend. 228109065Schmidt RA, Genois R, Jin J, et al. The early impact of COVID-19 on the incidence, prevalence, and severity of alcohol use and other drugs: a system- atic review. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2021;228:109065.

Alcohol and other substance use during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review. A Roberts, J Rogers, R Mason, Drug Alcohol Depend. 229109150Pt ARoberts A, Rogers J, Mason R, et al. Alcohol and other substance use during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2021; 229(Pt A):109150.

Trends in US alcohol consumption frequency during the first wave of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. S Mcketta, C N Morrison, K Keyes, Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 454McKetta S, Morrison CN, Keyes K. Trends in US alcohol consumption fre- quency during the first wave of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2021;45(4):773-783.

Changes in drinking days among United States adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. C D Nordeck, K E Riehm, E J Smail, Addiction. 117Nordeck CD, Riehm KE, Smail EJ, et al. Changes in drinking days among United States adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Addiction. 2021; 117:331-340.

Alcohol consumption in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. C Barbosa, A J Cowell, W N Dowd, J Addict Med. 154Barbosa C, Cowell AJ, Dowd WN. Alcohol consumption in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. J Addict Med. 2021;15(4):341-344.

Life Panel Impacts of COVID-19 Survey: Item DRB_Q1d. Rand Corporation, Rand American, RAND Corporation. RAND American Life Panel Impacts of COVID-19 Survey: Item DRB_Q1d. n.d. Available at: https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/ toolkit_content/PDF/RAND_ALP_COVID19_Routine.pdf. Accessed October 20, 2020.

National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions-III (NESARC-III). Source and Accuracy Statement. B F Grant, A Chu, R Sigman, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 19n.d. Available atRethinking drinking: Alcohol & your healthGrant BF, Chu A, Sigman R, et al. National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions-III (NESARC-III). Source and Accuracy Statement. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 2014. 19. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA). Rethinking drinking: Alcohol & your health. n.d. Available at: https://www.rethinking drinking.niaaa.nih.gov/. Accessed May 29, 2020.

A 4-item measure of depression and anxiety: validation and standardization of the Patient Health Questionnaire-4 (PHQ-4) in the general population. B Löwe, I Wahl, M Rose, J Affect Disord. 1221-2Löwe B, Wahl I, Rose M, et al. A 4-item measure of depression and anxiety: validation and standardization of the Patient Health Questionnaire-4 (PHQ-4) in the general population. J Affect Disord. 2010;122(1-2):86-95.

Motivations for alcohol use among adolescents: development and validation of a four-factor model. M L Cooper, Psychol Assess. 62Cooper ML. Motivations for alcohol use among adolescents: development and validation of a four-factor model. Psychol Assess. 1994;6(2):117-128.

Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results From the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. PEP21-07-01-003Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. Rockville, MDHHS PublicationNSDUH Series H-56)Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Key Sub- stance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results From the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP21-07-01-003, NSDUH Series H-56). Rockville, MD: Center for Be- havioral Health Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2021. Available at: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/. Accessed November 15, 2021.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Available at: pdas.samhsa.gov/#/survey/ NSDUH-2019-DS0001/crosstab/?, 2020Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Sur- vey on Drug Use and Health, 2019. Available at: pdas.samhsa.gov/#/survey/ NSDUH-2019-DS0001/crosstab/?, 2020. Accessed October 28, 2021.

Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence in the United States: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. D S Hasin, F S Stinson, E Ogburn, Arch Gen Psychiatry. 647Hasin DS, Stinson FS, Ogburn E, et al. Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence in the United States: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64(7):830-842.

The comorbidity of depression and substance use disorders. J D Swendsen, K R Merikangas, Clin Psychol Rev. 202Swendsen JD, Merikangas KR. The comorbidity of depression and sub- stance use disorders. Clin Psychol Rev. 2000;20(2):173-189.

Sex differences in stress-related alcohol use. M R Peltier, T L Verplaetse, Y S Mineur, Neurobiol Stress. 10100149Peltier MR, Verplaetse TL, Mineur YS, et al. Sex differences in stress-related alcohol use. Neurobiol Stress. 2019;10:100149.

Using death certificates to explore changes in alcohol-related mortality in the United States. A M White, I P Castle, R W Hingson, Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 441White AM, Castle IP, Hingson RW. Using death certificates to explore changes in alcohol-related mortality in the United States, 1999 to 2017. Al- cohol Clin Exp Res. 2020;44(1):178-187.

Drinking to cope during COVID-19 pandemic: the role of external and internal factors in coping motive pathways to alcohol use, solitary drinking, and alcohol problems. J D Wardell, T Kempe, K K Rapinda, Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 4410Wardell JD, Kempe T, Rapinda KK, et al. Drinking to cope during COVID-19 pandemic: the role of external and internal factors in coping motive pathways to alcohol use, solitary drinking, and alcohol problems. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2020;44(10):2073-2083.

Social vulnerability and racial inequality in COVID-19 deaths in Chicago. S J Kim, W Bostwick, Health Educ Behav. 474Kim SJ, Bostwick W. Social vulnerability and racial inequality in COVID-19 deaths in Chicago. Health Educ Behav. 2020;47(4):509-513.

Assessing differential impacts of COVID-19 on black communities. G A Millett, A T Jones, D Benkeser, Ann Epidemiol. 47Millett GA, Jones AT, Benkeser D, et al. Assessing differential impacts of COVID-19 on black communities. Ann Epidemiol. 2020;47:37-44.

Early impact of the U.S. COVID-19 pandemic on drinking motives and alcohol use. C J Prestigiacomo, M A Liu, M H Plawecki, Subst Use Misuse. 569Prestigiacomo CJ, Liu MA, Plawecki MH, et al. Early impact of the U.S. COVID-19 pandemic on drinking motives and alcohol use. Subst Use Misuse. 2021;56(9):1383-1386.

Depression, environmental reward, coping motives and alcohol consumption during the COVID-19 pandemic. M D Mcphee, M T Keough, S Rundle, Front Psych. 11574676McPhee MD, Keough MT, Rundle S, et al. Depression, environmental re- ward, coping motives and alcohol consumption during the COVID-19 pan- demic. Front Psych. 2020;11:574676.

Drinking to cope with the pandemic: The unique associations of COVID-19-related perceived threat and psychological distress to drinking behaviors in American men and women. L M Rodriguez, D M Litt, S H Stewart, Addict Behav. 110106532Rodriguez LM, Litt DM, Stewart SH. Drinking to cope with the pandemic: The unique associations of COVID-19-related perceived threat and psycho- logical distress to drinking behaviors in American men and women. Addict Behav. 2020;110:106532.

Under-reporting of alcohol consumption in household surveys: a comparison of quantity-frequency, graduated-frequency and recent recall. T Stockwell, S Donath, M Cooper-Stanbury, Addiction. 998Stockwell T, Donath S, Cooper-Stanbury M, et al. Under-reporting of alco- hol consumption in household surveys: a comparison of quantity-frequency, graduated-frequency and recent recall. Addiction. 2004;99(8):1024-1033.

Estimating under-and overreporting of drinking in national surveys of alcohol consumption: identification of consistent biases across four English-speaking countries. T Stockwell, J Zhao, T Greenfield, Addiction. 1117Stockwell T, Zhao J, Greenfield T, et al. Estimating under-and over- reporting of drinking in national surveys of alcohol consumption: identifica- tion of consistent biases across four English-speaking countries. Addiction. 2016;111(7):1203-1213.

Retail sales: beer, wine, and liquor stores. 2022. Retrieved from FRED. U S Bureau, Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisAvailable at: https:// fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MRTSSM4453USSU.S. Census Bureau. Retail sales: beer, wine, and liquor stores. 2022. Re- trieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Available at: https:// fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MRTSSM4453USS. Accessed March 11, 2022.

Monthly variations in self-reports of alcohol consumption. Y I Cho, T P Johnson, M Fendrich, J Stud Alcohol. 622Cho YI, Johnson TP, Fendrich M. Monthly variations in self-reports of alco- hol consumption. J Stud Alcohol. 2001;62(2):268-272.

Seasonal variation in self-reports of recent alcohol consumption: racial and ethnic differences. C Carpenter, J Stud Alcohol. 643Carpenter C. Seasonal variation in self-reports of recent alcohol consump- tion: racial and ethnic differences. J Stud Alcohol. 2003;64(3):415-418.

Dataset of state alcohol-related laws during the COVID-19 emergency for on-premise and off-premise establishments as of October 15, 2020. Alcohol Policy Information System (APIS). Bethesda, MDNational Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism ; National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and AlcoholismNational Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Dataset of state alcohol-related laws during the COVID-19 emergency for on-premise and off-premise establishments as of October 15, 2020. Alcohol Policy Informa- tion System (APIS). Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 2020.

Changing the density of alcohol outlets to reduce alcohol-related problems. M Livingston, T Chikritzhs, R Room, Drug Alcohol Rev. 265Livingston M, Chikritzhs T, Room R. Changing the density of alcohol out- lets to reduce alcohol-related problems. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26(5): 557-566.

Do relaxed trading hours for bars and clubs mean more relaxed drinking? A review of international research on the impacts of changes to permitted hours of drinking. T Stockwell, T Chikritzhs, Crime Prev Community Saf. 113Stockwell T, Chikritzhs T. Do relaxed trading hours for bars and clubs mean more relaxed drinking? A review of international research on the impacts of changes to permitted hours of drinking. Crime Prev Community Saf. 2009; 11(3):153-170.

Alcohol consumption and the physical availability of take-away alcohol: systematic reviews and metaanalyses of the days and hours of sale and outlet density. A Sherk, T Stockwell, T Chikritzhs, J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 791Sherk A, Stockwell T, Chikritzhs T, et al. Alcohol consumption and the physical availability of take-away alcohol: systematic reviews and meta- analyses of the days and hours of sale and outlet density. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2018;79(1):58-67.