# ON THB FISH COLLEC1'IONS FROM KBRALA, DEPOSITED IN SOUTHERN REGIONAL STATION, ZOOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA BY NRM STOCKHOLM

CorpusID: 251696371
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7405b9c6b7018ee632f9c1c4044f0150e1f28135](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7405b9c6b7018ee632f9c1c4044f0150e1f28135)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

ON THB FISH COLLEC1'IONS FROM KBRALA, DEPOSITED IN SOUTHERN REGIONAL STATION, ZOOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA BY NRM STOCKHOLM


K Rema Devi 
T J Indra 
Emiliy Amma 
Manavala .. kurichi, Kanyakumari DistTamilnadu Sri 

Zoological Survey of India Southern Regional Station Madras
600 028


Maharashtra & Kerala



Peninsular India
Western Ghats, Southern KarnatakaTamilnadu

ON THB FISH COLLEC1'IONS FROM KBRALA, DEPOSITED IN SOUTHERN REGIONAL STATION, ZOOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA BY NRM STOCKHOLM
A1C074860AB676E21A0C3B3ECD54D331
Records of the Zoological Su r v e l of l"dI.SYSTEMATIC ACCOUNT Order : CLUPEIFORMES Family : CLUPEIDAE Subfamily PELLONULINAE 1. DayeJla malabarica (Day) 4 exs., 40'0-60'0 mm SL, F. 3399, 18.4.90,Vembanad lake at fish landing Kumarakam Dec. 87, ditch near Kottayam Rly.Stn.

## INTRODUCTION

In accordance with the request of the Department of Environment, the Scientists of the Swedish Museum Natural History, Erick Ahlander and Suzanne Wejland, working in collaboration with Dr. K. C. Jayaram, then Emeritus Scientist, S. R. S., deposited respresentative samples of their collections in S. R. S. in two lots made from different parts of Kerala during December, 1987 and March-April, 1990.The areas surveyed include Vembanad Lake, Meenachil River; KUlnarakom and Padiramanal in Kottayam District; Peermad, and Kallar, Pambar and Deyiyar Rivers in Idukki District j Achenkoil River in Pattanamthitta and Attingal and Kallar Rivers and Connemara fish market in Trivandrum.

The collections comprise 1018 specimens belonging to 56 species included under 37 genera, 22 families and 9 orders.The systematic list of the species is provided here following Menon (1993).Under each species is included the material examined (including number of specimens, length range, registration number and ~ocality and distribution).Tbe present collections are from southern ranges of the Western so Ghats.In his comprehensive check list of the fishes of India Menon (1993)


## DISCUSSION

The collections comprise 56 species of which 2 species, X iphophorus helleri Heckel and Oreochromis mossambica (Peters) are exotic, and four viz.Dayel/a malabarica (Day) Hyporhamphus limbalu,f (Vat), Terapon jarbua (Forsskal) and Euryglossa orienta/is (Bloch & Schneider) are euryhaline.The remaining SO are primary freshwater species (Menon, 1993), 24 species are endemic to India of which 23 are e~demic to Peninsular India.Among these IS species are endemic to the Western Ghats and 3 to the Western coastal plains.Nine species are common to India and Sri Lanka and the remaining 21 species are widespread in their distribution.

Though the collections cover the Districts of Kottayam, Idukki, Pathanamthitta and Trivandrum, most of the collections are from Meenachil River and Vembanad



Devi, 1995))p~ies fro~ West~rn Ghats of w~ich 108 species are ende~ic to this region.Records Dfthe Zo%gical Sur,ey oj [nlliaRemarks:Menon (1993)has syl10nymised H. atukoralt brlttanl Rema Devi & Menon with H. atukorali Deraniyagala.Kallar River at Vadasseri Kara Bridge; 1 ex., 25'0 mm., 4.4.90,PambarRiver at border of Chinnar Sanctuary; 5 exs., 59•0-74'0 mm., F. 3434, 6.4.90, Mannam .. bandam at Deviyar; 1 ex., 36'0 mm .•10.4.90, Attingal drainage, Kallar River and 27 exs., 64 0-77•0 mm, F. 3469, Attingal drainage, creek, Kallar River.Throughout India.Sri Lanka.Pakistan.Nepal.Bangladesh.115~OlDJD,F.1246,14.12.87,Vembanadlake,AUepey.India: KrishDa and Cauvery river systems, and Kerala, in Peninsuiat 11.Uypselobarbus korali Menon and Rema Devi 7 exs., 36-0-51'0 mm, F. 3427, Attingal drainage.Kallar River, 2 pairs of well Remarks: A dark band behind opercle and caudal dark tipped.Recently described as a new species and its relationship with If. curmuca and H. kD/US discussed (Paper Menon and RemaDevi, 1995).Datasio travancoria Hora and Law 1 ex., 65-0 mm, F. 3436, 6.4.90, Deviyar River at-Mannambandam.Peninsqlar lJ1di~: Kerala, Wynaad Hill ras_es and Nasaland and probably also lower Burma.28.Mystus eav8sios (Hamilton)1 ex., 38•0 mm, 4.4.90,PambarRiver a~ border of Chinnar Sanctuary.18S'0,F. 1236, 14.12.87,smallditch near Kottayam Rly.Stn.; 3 exs., 101'0-133'0 mm, lS.12.87,Kottayam.Records of the ZOlJ/ogico/ Survey of India Dlm~, F. 339~, 18.4.90,Vembanad lake, fish landin~ centre at Kumarakom.India.Afghanistan, Iran.Pakist~n.Nellal, Sri Lank~.Ban,ladesh i\nd B\1rm~.Red Sea.Per sian Gulf.Pakistan.India.Sri Lanka, througb the East Indies to China and Australia.
Records of the Zoo/Dgico/ Survey DJ IndiaFamily ; CoBITIDAE2'. Lepidocepbalus thermalis (Valenciennes) Family : SILURIDAE Family : OR YZIIDAE Order TB fRAODONTIFORMBSDistribution ~ India: Kerala. Sri Lanka. 1 ex., 46-0 mm., F. 3488, 26.3.90, Achenkoil River; I ex., 37•0 mm, 28.3.90. 34. Ompok bimaculatus (Bloch) Family TE1RAODONTIDAE 40. Oryzias melastigma (McClelland) 7 km. Upstream, Achenkoli River; 30 exs., 220-S0'0 mm, F. 3441, 4.4.90, Pambar River at border •of Chinnar Sanctuary and 2 exs., 40'0•43'0 mm, F. 3435, 6.4.90, 1 ex., 170•0 mm, F. 3391, 18.4.90, Vembanad lake, at fish landing qentre, 1 ex., 24•0 mm, 24.3.90, ditch near Kottayam Rly. Stn., 55. TetraodoD (MoDotretus) travaDcoricus Hora & Nair9. Parluciosoma daniconios (Hamilton-Buchanan) 1 ex., 60'0 mm., F. 1252, 5.12.87, Minachil River and rivelet, N. W. Kottayam; 7 exs., 56'0-71'0 mm, F. 3432, 24.3.90 a ditch near Kottayam Rly. Stn ; 3 exs. , S6'0-57'0 Deviyar River at Mannambandam. Distribution; Peninsular India and Sri Lanka. Kumarakom. 5 exs., 13•0-15•0 mm, F. 1278, Dec. '87, a ditch near Kottayam Rly. StD. ; 2 exs., Distribution: India. Bangladesh. Burma, Sri Lanka, 13•0-1S•0 mm, F. 1277, 5.12.87, Minachil River, N. W. Kottayam; 1 ex., 12•0 mm, Distribution: Throught India. Pakistan. Nepal. Bangladesh. Sri Lanka. Burma Thailand. Java. Sumatra. Borneo. China. 7.4.90, Vembanad Lake, Padiramanal Island.mm, F. 3419, 25.3.90, Achenkoil River, Pathanamthitta, near valamchizhi temple; 1 ex., Family : POECILIDAE Distribution: India: Kerala: Pamba River and Vembanad Lake; Minachil77•0 mm; F. 3486, 26.3.90, Achenkoil River I 4 exs., 30'0•48'0 mm, F. 3482, 28.3.90, Order : SILURIFORMES Family River and Shertallai. Family : HETEROPNEUSTIDAE 35. Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch) 41. Xiphophorus helleri Heckel 6 exs., 35'0-47'0 mm, F. 1247, 5.12.87 Peermed River. Pamba drainage, Burma and Thailand. Distribution: India: Western Ghats: Kerala. Distribution; Eastern Mexico, introduced into India. PLEURONECTIFORMES Order Family SOLEIDAE 3 exs., 1320-Distribution: India. Pakistan. Sri Lanka. Nepal! Bangladesh. Burma. Thailand 56. Euryglossa orientalis (Bloch.& Schneider)Subfamily : CYPRININAE Order : CHANNIFORMES 1 ex., 103•0 mm, F. 3400, 18.4.90, Vembanad Lake, from fish landing centre and Laos. 27. Mystos armatas (Day) 1 ex., 57'0 mm, F. 1258, 5.12.87, Minacbil River, N. W. Kottayam; 1 ex., 70'0 mm, Family CHANNIDA~ at Kumarakom.India. F. 3404, 16.3.90, Meenamthara River, Kottayam; t ex., 56'0 mm, F. 3452, 7.4.90, 10. Barbodes sarana subnasutos (Valenciennes) Order 42. CbanDa maruliu$ (Hamilton~Buchanan) CYPRINODONTIF()RMBS Achenkoil River at Mavelikara canal. Sub Order Family EXOCOEATOIDBI HEMlRAMPHIDAE 36. HyporJtamphus lim.batos. (Valenciennes) 2 exs., .116'0 and 170'0 tnPl, F. 3396, 18.4.90, Vembanad Lake, fish landing centre, Kumarakom. Distribution: Persian Gulf. Pakistan. India. Sri Lanka. Burma to Thailand and 2 exs., 17S.0-230•0 Distribution: India. Pakistan. Sri Lanka. Bangladesh. Nepal. Burma. Thailand and China, 43. ChaDDa orieDtalis Bloch and Schneider 1 e"., developed barbals, L. 1. 41-42 , Distribution I' India. Pakistan. Nepal. Bangladesh. B.urma. Malaya. Thailand. China. 1 ex., 46'0 mm, F. 1266, 14.12.87, Minachil River, 10 km. N. W. of Kottayam; Java. Borneo. Sumatra. 2 exs., 65•0 mm, F. 3431, 24.3.90, ditch near Kottayam Rly StD.; 1 ex., 51'0 mm,P. 3490, 26.3.90, Achenkoil River and 11 exs., 24'0•62'0 mm, P. 3459, 28.3.90, Pamba 29. Mystus golio (Hamilton) drainage, Kallar River.
Distribution: " D;stribution: DistributIon: India: Dakshina Kannada (South C~nara) to Trav8nCore hills.llecordsoj the Zoological Suryey (J/ln;ifJ BAGRIDAE 26.Distribution: 4 exs., 138'0-163'0 mm, F. 3401, 14.4.90,Cannemara fish market, Trivandrum and 2 exs., 116'0•135'0 mm, F. 3392, 18.4.90,Vembanad lake, fish landing centre, Kumarakom.Family : BELONIDAE 37. Xcnentodoo caocila (Hamilton-Buchanan) 1 ex., 175'0 mm, F. 3456, 24.3.90,Vembanad lake, near Kumarakom, DistributlDn: Distribution:

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe are 'grateful to the Director, Zoological Survey of India and Dr. P. T. Cherian, Officer-in-Charge, Southern Regional Station, Madras for providing all the necessary facilities and placing the fish material at our disposal.We also tkank him for going through the manuscript critically.Our thanks are due to a great extent, to Dr. A. G. K. Menon, Scientist emeritus for his valuable suggestion and for providing his checklist.Distribution: India.Pakistan.Nepal.Bangladesh.Burma.Sri Lanka.Malaya.Thailand.Java.Sumatra.Borneo. 30.Mfstlis malabarieas (J erdon ) 4 exs., 57•0-75•0 mm, F. 1245, Minachil River, 10 km.N. W. of Kottayam.Distribution: Peninsular India: Western Ghats of Kerala, Karnataka and Maharashtra.Distribution: Peninsular India: West Coast, from Kutch Southwards along the coast to south Kerala.Mystus montanos (Aplocheilos lineatus (Valenciennes)S exs., 39'0-58'0 mm., F. 1259, S.12.87" 'Minachil River and rivulet, N, W. Kottayam; 4 exs.,16•0•47'0 mm., F, 1249, 9.12•87~ Canal-still water, adjacent to ) Minachil River a 11 exs., 30•0-54'0 mm, F. 1243, 14.12.87,small ditch near Kottayam Rly Stn., 1 ex" 41'0 mm, F. 1264, IS.12Distribution: India: Kerala.Lake and adjoining water bodies in Kottayam, 18. species from Idukki, 16 spp.from Patbanamthitta and 10 spp.from Trivandrum.The typical hill stream loaches Bhavania australis (Jerdon) and the stone loach Noemacheilus «() triangularis (Day) are from Kallar River.One new species of N oemache.iluswas described from the Pamber drainage near Chinnar Sanctuary, Idukki District «(temaDevi and Indra, 1994).Garro mullya (Sykes) was identified from Achenkoil River, Pambar River and Kallar River.Horadandia atukorali Deraniyagala was represented in good numbers from ditches and ponds near Vembanad Lake and Kumarakom.Kottayam.This Sri Lankan species was only recently reported as a subspecies from Shertallai (RemaDevi and Menon. 1992).SUMMARYThe fish specimens collected from Kerala by Scientists of the Swedish Museum of Natural History and deposited in the Southern Regional Station, Zoological Survey of India, Madras, have been identified as 56 species and a systematic list of the species is provided.This includes one new species of N oemacheilus and a Sri Lankan species Horadandia atukorali Deraniyagala reported only recently from Shertallai, Kerala.
PuDtiol amphibios (Valenciennes). 

Achenkoil River at Mavelikara canal and river side I S exs. N W Minachil River, Kottayam, 55'0-60'0 mm, F. 3454, 16.3.90Meenamthara River. 102 exs., 55'0-66'0 mm, F. 1261, 14.12.87 Minachil River. 2 exs. Kottayam; 19 exs., 38'0-46'0 mm, F. 3465, 23.3.90, Meenachil River; 4 exs., 43'0-64•0, F. 3450, 7.4.90. 54'0-63'0 mm, F. 3428, to. 4. 90, AttingaJ drainage

PlIQtiu8 arulius arulius (Jerdon). 

Remarks: One pajr of minute ~arbels ; body with three dark vertical stripes; dorsal and caudal black tipped. Distribution: Peninsul~r India: Tamilnadu: Nil~iri (Cauvery drainage). 23-0 mm, 14.12_87, a ditcJl De~r .Ko~tay~m Raihyay Station. Wynaad, Kulathupuzha Tenmalai, Periyar Lake, Kerala

. Pontios chola. 

54•0 mm., F. 1262, 14.12Minacbil River. 10 Km. N. W. of Kottayam. Distribution: Throughout India. Pakistan. Nepal. Bangladesh. Burma and Sri Lanka. 87

Pontius maheeqla (Valenciennes). 

52•0-S7•0 mm, F. 1242, 14.12.87Achenkoil River, Madikara canal and River side. Distribution: Peninsular India: Goa. Karnataka, Kerala, TamiJnadu. Andhra Pradesh; Sri Lankaditch near Kottayam Rly. Stn. ; 2 exs., 65'0 mm., F. 3449, 7. 4.90

. Pontius melaoampyx melauampYIl (Day). 

31•0-38•0 mm, F. 3480, 1.4.90, Periyar drainage, ~allar. exs., 29"0-47-0 mm, F. 348', 26.3.90Riv~r. Achenkoil River; 8 exs. 2 exs. 25'0-37,0 mm, F. 3442, 4.4.90, Pambar River at border of Chinnar Sanctuary; 2 exs., 25-00 mm, 10.4.90, Attingal drainage, Kallar River I 8 exs., 13•0 .. 43'0 mm

Distribution: Peninsular India: Western Ghats: South Canara to Travancore hills. Also NiJgiris, Cauvery drainage. 17. PUDtius parrah Day 2 exs., 111'0•113'0 mm. 36'0-47'0 mm. F. 1257, S.12.87Connemara fish market, Trivandrum. Distribution: India: Kerala, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and Andhra Pradesh. Minachil River system, N. W. Kottayam3410Pontius pUDctatus Day 12 exs

Minachil River, 10 km. N. W. of Kottayam, 19 exs. 40'0-46'0 mm, F. 1263, 14.12.87Pakistan38Bangladesh; Burma. ThailandCanal adjacent to Minachil River, 2 exs. 0 mm, F. 3466, 23.3.90, Minachil River, close to Kottayam. Remarks: Predorsal 8; D 3/8 strong osseous, no barbel, L, tr. 4!/3j ; L.t. 22-24, L.I. pores, discontinuous, mostly complete, dorsal in some with 2 rows of spots, a blotch on caudal peduncle, sometimes this is band like encircling the caudal peduncle with blotches in the centre on either sides; a spot on 3rd or 4th scale behind opercle. Distribution: Throughout India

Vembanad lake, Allepey J 1 ex" 17•0 mm, 17.4.90, Vembanad artificial lake at Kumarakom tourist complex and 1 ex. Sri Lanka, 17'0 mm J 18.4.90Padiramanal island pond. Distribution: India: Peninsular India: Goa, Cutch, K~nataka, Tamilnadu. 19. Dec., 198823•0 mm

. Sri Lanka, 

NeoUssochilos wyoaadeosis (Day). 

Pambar River at Border of Chinnar Sanctual)'. Remarks: These juveniles collected from the eastern drainage have been tentatively identified as P. wynaadensis ; known to attain a size of 25'0 em TL. 14 cxs., 13'0-31'0 mm, 4.4.90KeralaIndia

Garra mollya (Sykes). 

Karimutty River, Mayoor; 9 exs. 2359'0•68'0 mm, F. 3418, 2'.3.90, AchenkoiJ, Pathanamthitta. river near tValamcbizbi temple; 1 ex., 63'0-mm, F. 3485, 26.3.90, Achenkoil River; 1 ex., 42'0 mm, F. 3458, 3.4.90. 0 mm, F. 3443, 4 .• 4.90

Pambar River, Attingal drainage creek, tributary of kallar River. Distribution: Throughout Peninsular India. Family Subfamily BA~ITORIDAE BALITORINAE. t border of Chinnar Sanctuary. 9 exs., 36.0-7 S•O mm., F. 3433, 6.4.90, Deviyar River, Mannambandam; 3 exs., 64'0-72'0 mm, F. 3467, 11.4.90

Bhavania australis (J erdon) 1 ex., 14•0 mm, 11.4.90, Attingal drainage, tributary of Kallar ~iver. Distribution: India: Southern Western Ghats : NiJgiris, Karnataka & Kerala. SubfamilyNO~MACHElLINAE

Noemaeheilus pambarensis Rema 'Devi and Indra 30 exs. 15•5-45'0 mm, F. 3496 & 4095; Pambar River, at border of Chinnar Sanctuary, Idukki (Rema Devi & Indra). Distribution: India: Western Ghats: Kerala : Idukki District, Pam bar River

24-0-44'0 mm, F. 3425, 10.4.90, Attingal drainage. 12.4.90Attingal drainage. Distribution: India: Western Ghats. Kerala3492Noemacheilos triangularis triangularis Day S exs

. CbaDDa pUBetatos (Bloch). 

Pambar River at border of Chinnar Sanctuary; 1 ex., 172'0 mm. 14.4.90Connemara fish market. 34050•29•0 mm, F. 3440, 4.4.90. Bloch

. exs., 111'0-130'0 mm, F. 3403Distribution: India. Pakistan. Sri Lanka. Bangladesh. . Nepal. Burma. Malay Archipelago. Thailand and South China. Order Family PERCIFORMES CICHLIDAE. Apr. '90fish pond near Paddy field Kumarakom

Etroplus maeulatus (Blocb). 

exs., 42~O.Sl•0 mm, F. 3453, 16.3.90, Meenamthara River, Minachil River system. 1256, 5.12.87. Minacbil River N. W. Kottayam i 15 exs., 33'0.57'0 mm, F. 123843•0 mm. small ditch near Kottayam Rly. StD. KottayamDec., '873Connemara fish market, Trivandrum. DistributiDn: Peninsular India: Tamilnadu, Kerala and South Karnataka2 exs" 41-'0-50'0 mm, F, 3477, 21.3.90, Meenamthara River; 3 exs., 34'0 .. 65'0 mm, F. 3471, 7.4.90, Vembanad lake, Padiramanel Island; 4 exs., 43-0•54'0 mm, F. 3446, 7.4.90, Achenkoil River at Mavelikara Canal; t ex., 53'0 mm, F. 3409, 14.4.90

. Sri Lanka, 

Etroplus sorateDsis (Bloch). 

53'0•73'0 mm, F. 1237, Dec. '87, small ditch near Kottayam Rly. Station

17•0 mm, 22.3.90, Minachil drainage, 1 Km. from Kottayam Rly. Stn. 2 exs. REFE.RENCES

Check List-Freshwater Fishes of India. A G K Menon, Z. S. I., Madras. Dept. of Environment. 4571993Govt. of India

Hyselobarbus kuvali (Pisces: Cyprinidae) a new large barb faom the South Western Rivers of Peninsular lndia. A G K Menon, Rema Devi, K , J. Bombay nat. Iflst. Soc". 9231995

Noemacheilus pambarens;s, a new loach (Cyprinoidei : Balitoridae): Noemacheilinae). Rema Devi, K T J Indra, Rec. ZDDI. Surv. India. 942-41994

Rema Devi, K Menon, A G K , HDradandia atukorali brittanl, a new subspecies of Rasborinae (pisces: Cyprinidae) from Kerala, South India, Tropical Fish Hobbyist. New Jersey1992. June, 1992