# CASE REPORT Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review

CorpusID: 251952269
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc098de0cd47a3d2a3c1f6a6fffa4b0d8af1d7c0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc098de0cd47a3d2a3c1f6a6fffa4b0d8af1d7c0)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

CASE REPORT Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review


Young-Jae Yee 
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial surgery
Oral Science Research Center
Yonsei University College of Dentistry


Dawool Han 
Department of Oral Pathology
Oral Cancer Research Institute
Yonsei University College of Dentistry


Chena Lee 
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Yonsei University College of Dentistry
SeoulKorea

Yonsei University College of Dentistry
50-1 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu03722SeoulKorea

Jun-Young Kim 
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial surgery
Oral Science Research Center
Yonsei University College of Dentistry


Jun-Young Kim 
CASE REPORT Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review
10.5125/jkaoms.2022.48.4.237paper submitted 2021. 11. 8 / revised 1st 2021. 12. 15, 2nd 2021. 12. 16 / accepted 2022. 1. 3]This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. CCNeoplasmBenign neoplasmTumorParotid glandTrismus [
J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022;48:237-241)Sclerosing polycystic adenosis (SPA) is a rare, asymptomatic disease that occurs mainly in the salivary glands. We report the case of a 51-year-old man who presented with trismus and pain upon mouth opening. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 2-cm mass located in the anterior portion of the left parotid gland. SPA was diagnosed based on histopathological examination of the surgical specimen. In pathologic findings, there was a well-circumscribed multicystic nodule in the parenchyma. Dense fibrosis and chronic non-specific inflammatory cells were observed in the stroma. In 13 previous reports on SPA, the most preferred treatment was superficial or total parotidectomy. This report suggests that simple excision of SPA preserves facial nerve function and facial volume.

## I. Introduction

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis (SPA) is a rare, usually asymptomatic, lesion of the salivary gland. It is considered a reactive, inflammatory disease and is mostly observed in the parotid gland (80%) 1 . Although SPA has characteristic features on histopathologic examination, including multiple lobules with sclerosing and hyalinized connective tissue, dilated cystic-like ducts, and ductal and acinar hyperplasia, it is difficult to diagnose clinically even with computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB). The World Health Organization classified SPA as a benign, non-neoplastic epithelial tumor in 2018 2 ; however, controversies regarding its possible malignancy remain. Further, previously reported cases of SPA were not accompanied by limited mouth opening. This article reports a case of a patient with SPA accompanied by acute trismus, which recovered after surgery.


## II. Case Report

A 51-year-old man presented with left preauricular area swelling of 3-4 years' duration. The patient had no other medical history besides being previously diagnosed with chronic hepatitis B. Initially, the swelling experienced by the patient was painless; it gradually became painful, and the patient developed limited mouth opening. Upon visiting a hospital, physical examination revealed swelling of the left preauricular area with induration tendency and tenderness upon palpation. The patient's maximal mouth opening was 35 mm and was accompanied by pain in the left preauricular area.

MRI revealed a 2-cm lobulated mass in the anterior portion of the left parotid gland. The mass was hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging and showed rim enhancement on a gadolinium-enhanced image. Local enhancement was found along the border of the mass. (Fig. 1) This finding led to the suspicion of a benign salivary gland tumor with cystic degeneration, such as a Warthin tumor. The tumor severely com- pressed the masseter muscle anteriorly, which was suspected to be related to the patient's trismus. Although superficial parotidectomy was planned, a cystlike mass was identified beneath the facial nerve. The parotid gland was repositioned after enucleation to decrease facial nerve weakness and preserve facial volume. After enucleation, the mass was 13 mm×5 mm×5 mm.

Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a nodular mass embedded within the parotid glandular parenchyma, showing multicystic changes. (Fig. 2. A) The multicystic nodule was well-circumscribed, but not encapsulated. Cystic dilatation of the salivary gland duct and tubuloacinar hyperplasia was observed. (Fig. 2. B-D) Furthermore, there were dense fibrosis and chronic non-specific inflammatory cells within the stroma. (Fig. 2. B, 2. C) A hyalinized nodule surrounded the atrophic duct, and some acini and ducts showed prominent eosinophilic cytoplasmic changes. After excision, maximal mouth opening within the normal range was recovered. The mouth opening was 50 mm at the time of suture removal and 56 mm at three months after surgery. Follow-up MRI performed after six months revealed no evidence of recurrence.


## III. Discussion

Thirteen studies have reported the presence of SPA in the parotid gland (Table 1) [3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14] ; all patients underwent total or superficial parotidectomy. The common clinical feature was a slowly growing and palpable but not painful SPA. No case with trismus was observed in these studies. Moreover, no recurrence was noted during a five-month to three-year followup.

MRI did not provide sufficient information for a diagnosis of SPA. Most previous reports characterized SPAs as lobular with T1 hypointensity and T2 hyperintensity on imaging. These imaging features are not common, and any type of benign salivary gland tumor, such as pleomorphic adenoma or Warthin tumor, can be considered in the differential diagnosis. FNAB has also been ineffective in the diagnosis of SPA, which was diagnosed in only one of 30 cases. This was presumed to be due to the difficulty in aspirating a focal solid mass, since SPA is mostly composed of cystic structures. Histopathologic examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining is considered effective for the diagnosis of SPA. SPA is unencapsulated but is typically well-circumscribed, with a sclerotic, hyalinized stroma. The ducts are usually dilated and show cystic changes. The ductal and acinar structures commonly display hyperplasia and apocrine-like metaplasia; sebaceous-like structures are rare. Gnepp et al. 15 described these structures as mucin-containing, squamous, sebaceouslike, ballooned cells. They also observed brightly eosinophilic, intracytoplasmic, and modified zymogen granules 15 .

Skálová et al. 16 reported immunoreactivity of progesterone and estrogen receptors. They reported that most epithelial cells of the cystic ducts, some foam cells lining the ducts, and the cells within the dysplastic foci expressed strong nuclear immunoreactivity for progesterone receptors (approximately 80%). On the other hand, staining for estrogen receptors was detected in approximately 20% of ductal cells in dysplastic foci only. This suggests that hormonal stimulation significantly affects the pathogenesis of SPA 16 .

Espinosa et al. 3 reported 36 patients with SPA in the parotid gland, of whom 61.1%, 22.2%, and 16.6% underwent superficial parotidectomy, total parotidectomy, and tumor enucleation, respectively. Gnepp et al. 15 also reported 13 patients with SPA in the parotid gland, of whom ten (76.9%) and three (23.1%) patients underwent parotidectomy and tumor excision, respectively. SPA recurrence is rare and often attributed to incomplete surgical excision or the presence of multiple lesions 5,15,17 . Complete excision and facial nerve preservation are most recommended for treatment of recurrent SPA. Additionally, SPA does not invade adjacent anatomical structures; hence, simple excision of the lesion is sufficient, and superficial or total parotidectomy should be considered for facial nerve preservation.

Whether SPA is a neoplasm and develops into a carcinoma remains controversial. SPA has been considered a reactive, inflammatory, pseudoneoplastic lesion 15,17 . Skálová et al. 16 described three patients with SPA who had varying degrees of dysplastic change within the epithelium, one of whom met the criteria for ductal carcinoma in situ. The apocrine subtype of salivary duct carcinoma is typically accompanied by apocrine differentiation, as is similarly observed in SPA. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway mutations are commonly observed in salivary duct carcinoma. Bishop et al. 18 revealed that ductal and acinar cells in SPA lose phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) expression. PI3K pathway alteration with PTEN mutations suggests the similarity between SPA and apocrine-type salivary duct carcinoma. Skálová et al. 19 surveyed six patients with SPA and found that cells of SPA are clonal. Therefore, it is evident that SPA is a neoplasm, not just a reactive, inflammatory disease.

SPA is a well-demarcated benign lesion, commonly misdiagnosed as Warthin tumor or pleomorphic adenoma. Although the literature describes the management of this lesion with superficial or total parotidectomy, simple excision is recommended considering its capability to prevent recurrence and preserve the facial nerve. Histologic examination is the standard method for diagnosis of SPA.


## ORCID

Young-Jae Yee, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7954-948X Dawool Han, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2203-313X Chena Lee, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8943-4192 Jun-Young Kim, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6596-6135

## Fig. 1 .Fig. 2 .
12Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 2-cm-sized mass in the anterior portion of the left parotid gland, compressing the masseter muscle anteriorly (A). The lesion is mainly T2-hyperintense; it is a rim-enhancing lesion with a small localized enhancing area (A, C). The lesion in T1-hypointense (B, D). (Asterisks: cystic area, Hollow arrow: masseter muscle, Arrowhead: solid area of the tumor) Young-Jae Yee et al: Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review. J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022 Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen through H&E staining. (A). A multicystic nodular mass within the parotid parenchyma was observed under low magnification. Original magnification, ×12.5. (B). The cysts lining the epithelium show simple or stratified cuboidal cells with oncocytic cytoplasm. Ductal hyperplasia, chronic non-specific inflammation, and dense fibrosis are present. Original magnification, ×100. (C). A characteristic hyalinized nodule surrounding the degenerative duct is observed (yellow arrow). Some acini and ducts show eosinophilic cytoplasmic changes (green arrows). Original magnification, ×200. (D). Some glandular ducts show sebaceous metaplasia (yellow arrow). Prominent lymphocytic infiltration and ductal hyperplasia are also observed (green arrow). Original magnification, ×200. Young-Jae Yee et al: Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review. J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022


(Fig. 2. C) Further, there was sebaceous metaplasia of the glandular duct.(Fig. 2. D) Considering the degenerative and reactive changes caused by inflammation, a final diagnosis of SPA was established.

## Table 1 .
1Literature review on sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid glandStudy 

Patient 
age (yr)/ 
sex (M/F) 

Presenting features 
Treatment 
Recurrence Follow-up period 

Espinosa et al. 3 (2017) 
64/F 
A 3-cm well defined, ovoid, mobile, and slightly 
tender lump located in the inferior portion of 
the right parotid gland 

SP 
Not described Not described 

77/F 
A painless, 2-cm well circumscribed parotid 
tumor that was not attached to the overlying 
skin 

TP 
Not described Not described 

Bharadwaj et al. 4 (2007) 
45/F 
A pea-sized lump behind the left angle of 
the mandible 

SP 
None 
3 yr 

Eliot et al. 5 (2012) 
25/F 
A 1-year history of painless swelling in the 
right parotid gland 

TP 
Not described Not described 

Tang et al. 6 (2016) 
74/F 
A 4-year history of a growing, painful, left-sided 
neck mass 

TP+SND (level II) 
Not described Not described 

Kim et al. 7 (2012) 
47/M 
A long-standing asymptomatic mass located in 
the left parotid gland 

Partial parotidectomy 
of the lower portion of 
the left parotid gland 

None 
5 mo 

Perottino et al. 8 (2010) 
68/M 
An isolated, mobile, pain-free, juxta-lobular 
2-cm-diameter mass that is firm on palpation 

Conservative subtotal 
parotidectomy 

None 
1 yr 

Kawai et al. 9 (2019) 
12/M 
Painless swelling of the right neck 
TP 
Not described Not described 
Petersson et al. 10 (2011) 
45/F 
An asymptomatic nodule 
SP 
Not described Not described 
Matsumoto et al. 11 (2016) 33/M 
A palpable, painless, and elastic hard mass in 
the left preauricular area without facial nerve 
paralysis 

SP 
None 
28 mo 

Kahraman et al. 12 (2020) 
35/F 
A slow-growing, painless, hard parotid mass, 
noticed recently 

TP 
Not described Not described 

Tokyol et al. 13 (2012) 
77/F 
A slow-growing mass 
SP 
None 
1 yr 
Fulciniti et al. 14 (2010) 
57/M 
A long-standing ovoid mass 
SP 
None 
5 mo 

(F: female, M: male, SP: superficial parotidectomy, TP: total parotidectomy, SND: selective neck dissection) 

Young-Jae Yee et al: Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review. J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022 

J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022;48:237-241
Authors' ContributionsY.J.Y. participated in data collection and wrote the manuscript. J.Y.K. participated in the study design. D.H., C.L., and J.Y.K. participated in coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Ethics Approval and Consent to ParticipateThis study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Yonsei University Dental Hospital (IRB No. 2-2021-0079). Informed consent was waived by the IRB.Conflict of InterestNo potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of salivary glands: a review with some emphasis on intraductal epithelial proliferations. F Petersson, 10.1007/s12105-013-0465-9Head Neck Pathol. 7SupplPetersson F. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of salivary glands: a review with some emphasis on intraductal epithelial prolifera- tions. Head Neck Pathol 2013;7(Suppl 1):S97-106. https://doi. org/10.1007/s12105-013-0465-9

WHO is in and WHO is out of the mouth, salivary glands, and jaws sections of the 4th edition of the WHO classification of head and neck tumours. R A Kennedy, 10.1016/j.bjoms.2017.12.009Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 56Kennedy RA. WHO is in and WHO is out of the mouth, salivary glands, and jaws sections of the 4th edition of the WHO clas- sification of head and neck tumours. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2018;56:90-5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjoms.2017.12.009

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: a systematic review and report of 2 new cases. C A Espinosa, L Rua, H E Torres, Fernández Del Valle, Á Fernandes, R P Devicente, J C , Espinosa CA, Rua L, Torres HE, Fernández Del Valle Á, Fer- nandes RP, Devicente JC. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: a systematic review and report of 2 new cases. J

. 10.1016/j.joms.2016.10.031Oral Maxillofac Surg. 75Oral Maxillofac Surg 2017;75:984-93. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.joms.2016.10.031

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland. G Bharadwaj, I Nawroz, B O&apos;regan, 10.1016/j.bjoms.2005.05.018Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 45Bharadwaj G, Nawroz I, O'Regan B. Sclerosing polycystic adeno- sis of the parotid gland. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2007;45:74-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjoms.2005.05.018

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis. C A Eliot, A B Smith, R D Foss, 10.1007/s12105-011-0317-4Head Neck Pathol. 6Eliot CA, Smith AB, Foss RD. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis. Head Neck Pathol 2012;6:247-9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105- 011-0317-4

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis: a rare tumor of the salivary glands. C G Tang, J B Fong, K L Axelsson, D Gurushanthaiah, 10.7812/TPP/15-147Perm J. 20Tang CG, Fong JB, Axelsson KL, Gurushanthaiah D. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis: a rare tumor of the salivary glands. Perm J 2016;20:e113-4. https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/15-147

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland. B C Kim, D H Yang, J Kim, S R Samayoa, H Y Na, E J Choi, 10.1097/SCS.0b013e318262d2a5J Craniofac Surg. 23Kim BC, Yang DH, Kim J, Samayoa SR, Na HY, Choi EJ, et al. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland. J Craniofac Surg 2012;23:e451-2. https://doi.org/10.1097/ SCS.0b013e318262d2a5

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: diagnosis and management. F Perottino, R Barnoud, A Ambrun, M Poupart, J C Pignat, O Merrot, 10.1016/j.anorl.2010.02.005Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis. 127Perottino F, Barnoud R, Ambrun A, Poupart M, Pignat JC, Merrot O. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: diagno- sis and management. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis 2010;127:20-2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anorl.2010.02.005

Juvenile sclerosing polycystic adenosis cytologically mimicking Warthin tumor. M Kawai, T Inoue, T Yonaga, K Mochizuki, T Nakazawa, K Masuyama, 10.1002/dc.24283Diagn Cytopathol. 47Kawai M, Inoue T, Yonaga T, Mochizuki K, Nakazawa T, Ma- suyama K, et al. Juvenile sclerosing polycystic adenosis cytologi- cally mimicking Warthin tumor. Diagn Cytopathol 2019;47:1208- 12. https://doi.org/10.1002/dc.24283

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: report of a bifocal, paucicystic variant with ductal carcinoma in situ and pronounced stromal distortion mimicking invasive carcinoma. F Petersson, P H Tan, J S Hwang, 10.1007/s12105-011-0242-6Head Neck Pathol. 5Petersson F, Tan PH, Hwang JS. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: report of a bifocal, paucicystic variant with duc- tal carcinoma in situ and pronounced stromal distortion mimicking invasive carcinoma. Head Neck Pathol 2011;5:188-92. https://doi. org/10.1007/s12105-011-0242-6

Surgical treatment of rare sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the deep parotid gland. N M Matsumoto, H Umezawa, R Ohashi, W X Peng, Z Naito, R Ogawa, 10.1097/GOX.0000000000000614Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 4645Matsumoto NM, Umezawa H, Ohashi R, Peng WX, Naito Z, Ogawa R. Surgical treatment of rare sclerosing polycystic ad- enosis of the deep parotid gland. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open 2016;4:e645. https://doi.org/10.1097/GOX.0000000000000614

Coexistence of sclerosing polycystic adenosis and dysgenetic polycystic disease of parotid, report of a case. D Kahraman, P Yalavac, E Akar, Ö Özen, Ö Günhan, 10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_502_18Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 63Kahraman D, Yalavac P, Akar E, Özen Ö, Günhan Ö. Coexistence of sclerosing polycystic adenosis and dysgenetic polycystic disease of parotid, report of a case. Indian J Pathol Microbiol 2020;63:109- 11. https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_502_18

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland presenting with a Warthin tumor. C Tokyol, F Aktepe, G S Hastürk, H Yıldız, M C Miman, 10.5606/kbbihtisas.2012.055Kulak Burun Bogaz Ihtis Derg. 22Tokyol C, Aktepe F, Hastürk GS, Yıldız H, Miman MC. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland presenting with a Warthin tumor. Kulak Burun Bogaz Ihtis Derg 2012;22:288-92. https://doi. org/10.5606/kbbihtisas.2012.055

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: report of one case diagnosed by fine-needle cytology with in situ malignant transformation. F Fulciniti, N S Losito, F Ionna, F Longo, C Aversa, G Botti, 10.1002/dc.21228Diagn Cytopathol. 38Fulciniti F, Losito NS, Ionna F, Longo F, Aversa C, Botti G, et al. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the parotid gland: report of one case diagnosed by fine-needle cytology with in situ malignant transformation. Diagn Cytopathol 2010;38:368-73. https://doi. org/10.1002/dc.21228

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the salivary gland: a report of 16 cases. D R Gnepp, L J Wang, M Brandwein-Gensler, P Slootweg, M Gill, J Hille, 10.1097/01.pas.0000186394.64840.1dAm J Surg Pathol. 30Gnepp DR, Wang LJ, Brandwein-Gensler M, Slootweg P, Gill M, Hille J. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the salivary gland: a report of 16 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 2006;30:154-64. https://doi. org/10.1097/01.pas.0000186394.64840.1d

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of parotid gland with dysplasia and ductal carcinoma in situ. A Skálová, M Michal, R H Simpson, I Stárek, J Prádná, M Pfaltz, 10.1007/s004280100481Virchows Arch. 440Report of three cases with immunohistochemical and ultrastructural examinationSkálová A, Michal M, Simpson RH, Stárek I, Prádná J, Pfaltz M. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of parotid gland with dysplasia and ductal carcinoma in situ. Report of three cases with immu- nohistochemical and ultrastructural examination. Virchows Arch 2002;440:29-35. https://doi.org/10.1007/s004280100481

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of major salivary glands. A clinicopathologic analysis of nine cases. B C Smith, G L Ellis, L J Slater, R D Foss, 10.1097/00000478-199602000-00004Am J Surg Pathol. 20Smith BC, Ellis GL, Slater LJ, Foss RD. Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of major salivary glands. A clinicopathologic analysis of nine cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:161-70. https://doi. org/10.1097/00000478-199602000-00004

Sclerosing polycystic "adenosis" of salivary glands: a neoplasm characterized by PI3K pathway alterations more correctly named sclerosing polycystic adenoma. J A Bishop, J Gagan, D Baumhoer, A L Mclean-Holden, B R Oliai, M Couce, 10.1007/s12105-019-01088-0Head Neck Pathol. 14Bishop JA, Gagan J, Baumhoer D, McLean-Holden AL, Oliai BR, Couce M, et al. Sclerosing polycystic "adenosis" of salivary glands: a neoplasm characterized by PI3K pathway alterations more cor- rectly named sclerosing polycystic adenoma. Head Neck Pathol 2020;14:630-6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-019-01088-0

Clonal nature of sclerosing polycystic adenosis of salivary glands demonstrated by using the polymorphism of the human androgen receptor (HUMARA) locus as a marker. A Skálová, D R Gnepp, R H Simpson, J E Lewis, D Janssen, R Sima, 10.1097/00000478-200608000-00002Am J Surg Pathol. 30Skálová A, Gnepp DR, Simpson RH, Lewis JE, Janssen D, Sima R, et al. Clonal nature of sclerosing polycystic adenosis of salivary glands demonstrated by using the polymorphism of the human an- drogen receptor (HUMARA) locus as a marker. Am J Surg Pathol 2006;30:939-44. https://doi.org/10.1097/00000478-200608000- 00002

. Y J Yee, D Han, C Lee, J Y Kim, How to cite this article: Yee YJ, Han D, Lee C, Kim JY.

Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review. 10.5125/jkaoms.2022.48.4.237J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg. 48Sclerosing polycystic adenosis arising in the parotid gland with trismus: a case report and literature review. J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 2022;48:237-241. https://doi.org/10.5125/ jkaoms.2022.48.4.237