# World Journal of Clinical Cases Prevention and management of adverse events following COVID-19 vaccination using traditional Korean medicine: An online survey of public health doctors Specialty type: Integrative and complementary medicine Provenance and peer review: Peer-review model: Single blind Peer-review report's scientific quality classification Grade A (Excellent): 0 Grade B (Very good): B Grade C (Good): C Grade D (Fair): D Grade E (Poor): 0 P-Reviewer

CorpusID: 252552881
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3655e10c62525002154d0d6fdd0633b6fda58f3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3655e10c62525002154d0d6fdd0633b6fda58f3d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

World Journal of Clinical Cases Prevention and management of adverse events following COVID-19 vaccination using traditional Korean medicine: An online survey of public health doctors Specialty type: Integrative and complementary medicine Provenance and peer review: Peer-review model: Single blind Peer-review report's scientific quality classification Grade A (Excellent): 0 Grade B (Very good): B Grade C (Good): C Grade D (Fair): D Grade E (Poor): 0 P-Reviewer
2022 October 6

W J 
Byungsoo Kang 
Hongmin Chu 
Bo-Young Youn 
Jungtae Leem 
Mahmoud Mz 
Saudi 
Byungsoo Kang 
Hongmin Korea 
Chu 
Bo-Young Youn 

Arabia; Nazari N
College of Korean Medicine
Daecheong Public Health Subcenter, Ongjin Public Healthcenter
Department of Preventive Medicine
College of Korean Medicine
Dongshin University
23105Naju-si 58245, South, Incheon, IncheonVij MIran, India, South Korea


Kyung Hee University
02447SeoulSouth Korea


College of Korean Medicine
Jungtae Leem
Wonkwang University
Jeollabuk-do54538IksanSouth Korea


Wonkwang University
460, Iksan-daero, Sin-dongIksanJeollabuk-doSouth Korea

World Journal of Clinical Cases Prevention and management of adverse events following COVID-19 vaccination using traditional Korean medicine: An online survey of public health doctors Specialty type: Integrative and complementary medicine Provenance and peer review: Peer-review model: Single blind Peer-review report's scientific quality classification Grade A (Excellent): 0 Grade B (Very good): B Grade C (Good): C Grade D (Fair): D Grade E (Poor): 0 P-Reviewer

World J Clin Cases
10282022 October 610.12998/wjcc.v10.i28.10053Received: April 5, 2022 Peer-review started: April 5, 2022 First decision: June 7, 2022 Revised: June 14, 2022 Accepted: August 22, 2022 Article in press: August 22, 2022WJCC https://www.wjgnet.com 10053 Volume 10 Issue 28 Submit a Manuscript: https://www.f6publishing.com ORIGINAL ARTICLE Retrospective Study Unsolicited article; Externally peer reviewed. Corresponding author: Jungtae Leem, KMD&PhD, Professor, College of Korean Medicine,
BACKGROUNDSince February 2021, vaccination against coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 has started in Korea.

## INTRODUCTION

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a highly infectious disease, with some severe cases developing severe acute respiratory syndrome [1][2][3]. Because the COVID-19 pandemic is not effectively controlled, many countries' health systems are subject to an excessive burden [4]. Therefore, preemptive vaccination strategies are essential for COVID-19 control. However, as the number of vaccination administrations increases, public concerns about adverse events (AEs) have also increased. Several typical AEs after the COVID-19 vaccination have been reported in Korea, such as fatigue, muscle pain, fever, headache, local pain at the injection site, joint pain, nausea, and diarrhea [5]. These AEs are not life-threatening; however, these symptoms may linger for an extended period of time. Since there are concerns over the growing rejection of vaccination due to AEs, effective management and research of the AEs of vaccinations are significant to achieve herd immunity against COVID- 19[6,7]. The effectiveness of vaccines has been proven through various studies, and a decrease in infection rate and mortality was found in the vaccinated population [8,9]. According to current guidelines about COVID-19 vaccination from the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC), those who have administered vaccination were recommended to apply cold compresses for local pain at the injection site and take acetaminophen for the prevention of having fever along with controlling AEs [10]. Until now, there have been insufficient studies in Korea on AEs after vaccination, and it is unknown whether the treatments effectively manage the vaccine AEs, reduce the duration of AEs, and facilitate returning daily life. Moreover, there are no guidelines for taking herbal medicine before and after vaccination. Herbal medicine is being well used to manage COVID-19 symptoms in China and Korea at the Korean medicine (KM) telemedicine centers [11]. Moreover, various traditional East Asian medicine modalities, including herbal medicines such as Qing-Fei-Pai-Du decoction, have been utilized to treat COVID-19 symptoms [12][13][14][15][16][17]. In addition, there is also a case in which Chinese medicine was used to manage vaccine AEs. When ginseng and influenza vaccines were administered in combination, it was reported that natural killer cell activity and antibody antagonism were higher in the combined administration group than in the single vaccine group [18]. Some studies regarding herbal medicine indicated positive potentials of herbal medicine for managing AEs of vaccination [18][19][20]. However, as with conventional Western medicine treatment, the clinical evidence on whether the complementary and alternative medicine treatments effectively prevent and manage vaccine AEs needs to be scrutinized. Due to the AEs of COVID-19 vaccine, there have been a higher number of vaccine rejections worldwide [21]. Thus, it is vital from a public health perspective to have adequate tools to manage the AEs effectively. There have been no official guidelines for KM treatment for management of vaccine AEs in Korea yet. In Japan, several cases treated with Kampo October 6, 2022

Volume 10 Issue 28 medicine have been reported [12]. One clinical trial was registered in the Korean Clinical Trial database (CRIS; Clinical Research Information Service, KCT0006252) and started subject enrollment [22]. As a vast number of Korean medicine doctors (KMDs) will be in favor of taking herbal medicine rather than conventional medication before or immediately after vaccination in order to manage the AEs of COVID-19 vaccination, a nationwide online survey was conducted on public health doctors of Korean medicine (PHDKMs) to collect the usage status of herbal medicine and any changes in symptoms. The study results will be used as a basis for KMDs to understand how the AEs of vaccines could be managed; in addition, the results of the PHDKMs' attitudes could be utilized as fundamental data for managing AEs of future vaccines in complementary and alternative medicine. Hence, the aim of this online survey study was to investigate the attitude of PHDKMs towards prevention and management of AEs of COVID-19 vaccination, and their perception about management of AEs using East Asian traditional medicine (EATM) intervention after COVID-19 vaccination. The study results obtained will help to develop a strategy to increase the vaccination rate through the appropriate use of EATM intervention when new infectious diseases are pandemic in the future.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS


## Study design

An online questionnaire was created using the online survey tool SurveyMonkey™ (www.surveymonkey.com, LLC; Palo Alto, CA, United States). The survey web-link was emailed to the association of public health doctors of Korean medicine (APKOM). Then, the association distributed the web-link to all PHDKMs. The research period was from April 19 to April 30, 2021.


## Ethical considerations

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of College of KM of Wonkwang University for the online survey protocol (WKIRB-202104-SB-022). Participants were recruited by the association and encouraged to read the questionnaire carefully. An electrical informed consent form, intended to protect personal information, was uploaded for the participants to review and continue the survey. Researchers collected only age, gender, other symptoms, AEs, medication after vaccination, and satisfaction to personal information protection. In addition, the recruited KMDs volunteered to participate in this survey and had an option not to participate without any penalties or harm. All data were used for research purposes only.


## Participants

As of April 1, 2021, there were 1047 PHDKMs in Korea, and the text message containing a link to participate in the survey was sent to all registered KMDs by the association. Newly appointed PHDKMs were excluded since the vaccination was not administered. After February 2021, the PHDKMs of Infectious Diseases Specialized Hospital started administering Pfizer's vaccine, and the rest of the KMDs had the AstraZeneca vaccine. The reason for recruiting the PHKMDs was that, unlike ordinary KMDs, PHKMDs were often assigned to various tasks related to COVID-19 response, such as epidemiological investigators. Hence, the purpose of this study was to seek perceptions and attitudes of PHKMDs who were currently engaged in actual quarantine and public health tasks, considering real-world practice and the value of public health and traditional medicine in a balanced way.


## Questionnaire development

Since there is no validated questionnaire for investigating AEs after COVID-19 vaccination and managing AEs using an herbal medication, we decided to develop a questionnaire based on various consultations from KM professors, KMDs, and medical doctors. Additionally, the questionnaire included a few meaningful questions from the previous cross-sectional survey about post-vaccination side-effects conducted in the United Kingdom [23]. By agreement with the research team, the questionnaire was developed in four categories: Participants' characteristics, AEs from the COVID-19 vaccination, managing COVID-19 AEs, and recommendation of using KM for potential COVID-19 AEs. For face validity, a pilot test was performed before the questionnaire was conducted, and the questions were modified according to the feedback (Supplementary material).


## General characteristics of the participants:

The participants' characteristics included the following: Age, gender, years in career, general health status, underlying diseases, potential exposure to COVID-19, and COVID-19 vaccination status.


## Adverse events from COVID-19 vaccination:

The AEs from the COVID-19 vaccination part of the survey asked seven questions to the participants. The first question was about the type of COVID-19 vaccination when administered. The second question was related to the experiences of any AEs from the vaccination. If the participants had experienced AEs, multiple answers were allowed among the given choices. If the participants did not experience AEs, they were allowed to jump to the recommendation category. The next question asked the severity of the AEs; the severity was measured using the numerical rating scale. The next two questions were focused on the time of the appearance of the AEs and the time that it took for AEs to disappear. The last question asked the participants if the AE disrupted working.


## Managing COVID-19 adverse events:

This part of the survey investigated the management of COVID-19 AEs. The first question was asked if the participants had taken any medication to prevent AEs before vaccination. The next two questions were regarding taking medication after vaccination for treating AEs, and the number of days was sought. The last two questions were related to using any KM modalities to treat AEs after vaccination other than taking herbal medicine. If the participants responded positively, they were asked to choose the KM modalities.

Recommendation of using KM for potential adverse events from COVID-19 vaccination: The last part of the survey dealt with the recommendation of using KM for AEs from the COVID-19 vaccination. The first question of this part asked the recommendation of taking herbal medicine in advance to prevent any AEs from the vaccination. For those who have answered the first question, they were also asked to recommend specific herbal medicine. Then, the next question asked the opinion of recommendation of KM modalities for potential AEs from the vaccination. If participants answered that the KM modalities were effective, they could choose any modalities that might show positive effects. The final question asked if KM treatment is helpful for people who might have AEs from the COVID-19 vaccination.


## Statistical analysis

This is a survey study without a control group, and descriptive analysis was performed. For categorical variables, frequency and ratio are presented. For continuous variables, the mean and standard deviation are presented. Statistical analyses were done by using Microsoft Excel and R software (version 4.0.3, http://r-project.org/). We did not use a specific cutoff time-point for the exclusion of responses.


## RESULTS


## General characteristics of participants

A total of 143 participants were recruited for this study. The 25-29 age group had the highest number of total participants (n = 107, 74.8%). Amid the participants, 45.5% (n = 65) had careers between 1 and 2 years, and 35% (n = 50) had careers between 3 and 4 years. Approximately 49% participants indicated that their health status was fair (n = 70). Only five participants had underlying diseases; the mentioned diseases were hypertension, rhinitis, gout, fatty liver disease, and cholinergic urticaria. No participants were exposed to COVID-19, and 65% participants were vaccinated during the survey (n = 93). The details of the general characteristics are shown in Table 1.


## Adverse events from COVID-19 vaccination

Except for one participant who had Pfizer vaccine (n = 1, 1.08%), all others had AstraZeneca vaccine (n = 92, 98.92%; Table 2). Among the vaccinated participants, 90 had AEs from the vaccination. As multiple answers were allowed to choose the kind of AEs experienced, muscle pain was chosen most commonly ( n = 75, 83.33%), and fever was chosen second most commonly (n = 67, 74.44%). In addition, the majority of the participants indicated that the severity of the AEs was moderate (n = 40, 44.44%). Seventy (77.78%) participants stated that the AEs occurred within 12 h from the injection, and 48 participants (53.33%) mentioned that the AEs disappeared within 48 h. More importantly, 50% of the participants (n = 45) said that the AEs were mild without having any deterioration for daily activities.


## Managing adverse events from COVID-19 vaccination

Although most participants did not take any medication for prevention of the AEs prior to vaccination ( n = 58, 62.37%), 52 (57.78%) of the participants had taken herbal medicine to treat the AEs after vaccination (Table 3). Regardless of the type of medication, the majority of the participants took 1 to 2 d of medication (n = 57, 63.33%). It was surprising that only three (3.33%) participants only used acupuncture among the KM modalities to treat the AEs other than taking herbal medication. The 38 participants (42.22%) mentioned herbal prescriptions that they took are Gumiganghwal-tang (n = 15, 16.77%, Jiuweiqianghuo-tang, Kumikyokatsu-to), Galgeun-tang (n = 9, 10%, Gegen-tang, Kakkon-to), Ssanghwa-tang (n = 5, 5.56%, Shuanghe-tang, Souwa-to), etc. In this study, herbal medicine was used to control vaccine AEs. Side effects due to herbal medicine were not reported.


## Recommendation of using KM for potential adverse events of COVID-19 vaccination

Fifty-seven (61.29%) participants said that they would recommend taking herbal medicine to prevent any AEs from the COVID-19 vaccination (Table 4). Nineteen (33.33%) participants mentioned that they would recommend specific herbal medicine for the prevention of AEs from the COVID-19 vaccination. 


## DISCUSSION

This study was the first to conduct a survey of traditional medicine doctors engaged in public health works regarding the prevention and management of AEs utilizing traditional medicine modalities before and after the COVID-19 vaccination. Ninety-seven percent of KMDs who received the vaccine complained of AEs such as muscle pain, fever, pain at the injection site, and fatigue. Moderate AEs were common, and AEs lasted more than 1 d in many cases. Fifteen percent of the participants took herbal medicines before vaccination to prevent AEs, and 57.78% took herbal medicines for post-vaccination management. More than 60% of the PHDKMs stated that they would recommend taking herbal medicines to manage AEs before vaccination and considered that KM treatments for vaccine AEs were October 6, 2022 Volume 10 Issue 28 helpful in public health. 


## COVID-19 and traditional medicine

As the pandemic lasted nearly 3 years, COVID-19 has had a tremendous impact on each country's economy and medical status and travel, trade, and restrictions on daily activities. For this reason, policymakers are seeking to return to pre-pandemic status via vaccination; however, a worldwide vaccine shortage has been the issue for all. Up to date, 24.3% of the world population have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and 3. 22 [27]. Non-replicating viral vector vaccines also get approval [26]. The Oxford Jenner Institute and AstraZeneca developed ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Vaccine (AZD1222) using nonreplicating chimpanzee adenovirus containing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) surface spike [28]. Janssen Pharmaceutical's vaccine, Ad26, is a single-dose vaccine that shows a safety profile in phase I study and a phase III trial is being conducted [29]. Common AEs of COVID-19 vaccines include fever, fatigue, headache, coldness, nausea, diarrhea, and muscle pain. Severe and rare AEs include anaphylaxis, thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome, myocarditis, and pericarditis[8,10]. Anxiety-related symptoms, including syncope, were also reported after vaccination [30]. According to an online survey conducted in Poland, 78% (1253) of vaccinated October 6, 2022

Volume 10 Issue 28 . Vaccine refusal due to AEs is a long-known threat to infectious disease management in the field of public health. In the United States, myocarditis has been reported after vaccination of COVID-19 mRNA vaccine to healthy soldiers, and anaphylaxis has also been observed after Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine inoculation [32]. However, the number of 11.1 cases per million doses is small [30]. It is well known that the misinformation and fear of AEs negatively affect the rate of accepting vaccination [33]. Recently, countries such as Romania have also struggled to increase coverage because of COVID-19 vaccine rejection due to an outdated trend of vaccine rejection [34]. Thus, developing public health strategies to prevent and manage vaccine AEs effectively is essential to increase COVID-19 vaccination rates and return to the pre-COVID era. Through this study, it was possible to explore the awareness and attitude of KMDs working in public health in managing AEs of vaccination utilizing KM. Most of the participants in this study reported the AEs of COVID-19 vaccination. It is vital to note that the response rate of recommending herbal medicine treatment for effective management of vaccine AEs was high. Sanghanron (Shang Han Lun, Treatise on Cold Damage and Miscellaneous Diseases), the oldest traditional Chinese medicine book, is a book to treat infectious diseases (refer to Sanghanron), and until recently, traditional medicine has been used to treat various infectious diseases in East Asia [35]. Various experimental studies and clinical studies have been conducted to elucidate the mechanism of herbal medicines in the treatment of COVID-19, and the results of the studies are being actively used in the treatment of COVID-19 in China [20]. Studies on herbal medicines to prevent AEs of vaccines or enhance vaccines' effectiveness are also being reported in East Asia. In this study, no side effects were reported after taking herbal medicine. One of herbal medicine's most known side effects is drug-induced liver damage. However, the risk of drug-induced liver damage from herbal medicines prescribed by professionals like KM doctors is around 1%, and most recover when they stop taking them [36][37][38][39][40]. From this point of view, this study is meaningful in that it confirmed the consensus on the AEs experienced during the vaccination process and management experience with herbal medicines through an online survey among the PHDKMs. The participants were highly inclined to recommend KM treatments to the general public. In addition to the existing experimental and clinical evidence of the effects of herbal medicines on vaccine AEs, it was confirmed through the experiences and opinions of experts that herbal medicines can be used to manage AEs of vaccines. Hence, these data can be used as fundamental research data on the role of KM in establishing a strategy to increase the vaccination rate by reducing vaccine rejection. However, there is no consensus on the types of recommended herbal medicines; therefore, additional research is much needed. Further research is also needed to explore how many clinical effects herbal medications have been used in the management of AEs and how they affect immune formation when combined with vaccines.


## Limitation, recommendation, and future perspective

This study has several strengths. First, to our knowledge, this study is the first to report the use of KM treatment after vaccination in Korea. Second, previous studies reported that AEs were severe in people in the 20s and 30s rather than in older people [4]. This study's data perhaps could be used in a homogeneous population with relatively severe AEs. Third, this study was conducted on KMDs working on public health; it has the advantage of obtaining fairly accurate data compared to other groups because of a high understanding of the types of AEs. There are also some limitations to this study. First, this research was based on self-reported AEs, which would have been biased and may not represent all KMDs. In addition, a bias may exist that gives more favorable answers to KM due to the fact that the participants were KMDs. Nonetheless, raw data itself is meaningful because it is the significant data that shows the public health workers' awareness of KM interventions. Since this survey was conducted after vaccination, the reported AEs could be overestimated or underestimated. Third, participants were recruited by the APKOM, further studies are needed to reflect the attitude of all KMDs. Lastly, when this survey was conducted on April 2021, there was no distinction between vaccination according to age according to national guidelines, and KMDs who were in their 20s were vaccinated with AZ vaccine. However, in May 2021, the same KMDs received the Pfizer-centered vaccinations due to a change in the guidelines. Finally, the study period was short (11 d), the number of people who responded to the questionnaire was less than 100, and the study design itself had intrinsic limitations in which no control group was established. Nevertheless, this study has the strength of being the first exploratory survey that can confirm the attitudes of using KM interventions after vaccination from KMDs.

Also, in this study, there was no statistically significant difference in the incidence of AEs between the group taking herbal medicine and the group taking Western medicine (14 herbal and 13 western medicine) before vaccination to prevent AEs. However, this study is not quantitatively or clinically confirming the difference in AEs after administration, but a questionnaire about the attitudes toward vaccines of traditional medicine practitioners in public health. Because the number of samples is small to verify the difference in the occurrence of AEs after administration, and the power is low accordingly, it is not possible to make a definitive conclusion about the occurrence of AEs after administration as a result of this study. In this regard, further studies are needed to figure out the clinical outcomes of usage of KM treatment for the post-vaccination AE management. From a clinical perspective, PHKMDs recommend herbal medicine and acupuncture for the AEs of vaccination management. In order to increase the vaccination rate when a new infectious disease is prevalent, herbal medicine or acupuncture should be actively used to manage the side effects of vaccination. In terms of clinical research, prospective, controlled, and multi-site clinical studies are needed to explore which kind of herbal prescription is effective for each side effect.

## Table 1
1Characteristics of participantsVariable 


## Table 2
2Adverse events from coronavirus disease 2019 vaccination 

No. Question 
Frequency (n = 93) Percent (%) 

1 
What type of COVID-19 vaccine have you been vaccinated? 

AstraZeneca 
92 
98.92 

Pfizer 
1 
1.08 

Moderna 
0 
0 

Janssen 
0 
0 

Novavax 
0 
0 

Others 
0 
0 

2 
Have you experienced any side effects? 

Yes 
90 
96.77 

No 
3 
3.23 

3 
If yes in 2 above, what kind of side effect have you experienced since vaccination? (multiple answers allowed) Frequency (n = 90) 

Fatigue 
61 
67.78 

Muscle pain 
75 
83.33 

Fever 
67 
74.44 

Headache 
45 
50.00 

Pain at the injection site 
65 
72.22 

Joint pain 
27 
30.00 

Nausea 
12 
13.33 

Diarrhea 
8 
8.89 

Others 
18 
20.00 

4 
What was the severity of the side effects experienced after vaccination? (use of numerical rating scale) 
Frequency (n = 90) 

None (0) 
0 
0.00 

Mild (1 to 3) 
21 
23.33 

Moderate (4 to 6) 
40 
44.44 

Severe (7 to 10) 
29 
32.22 

5 
How many hours did it take for side effects to occur after vaccination? 
Frequency (n = 90) 

1 to 12 
70 
77.78 

13 to 24 
20 
22.22 

6 
How many hours did it take for the side effects to disappear after the vaccination? 
Frequency (n = 90) 

1 to 24 
26 
28.89 

25 to 48 
48 
53.33 

49 to 72 h 
14 
15.56 

More than 72 h 
2 
2.22 

7 
Has your work been disrupted after an adverse vaccine reaction? 
Frequency (n = 90) 

(Mild) treatment is not required; have no problem performing activities of daily living 
45 
50.00 

(Moderate) treatment may be required; have slight problems performing activities of daily living 
39 
43.33 

(Severe) high-level treatment is required due to severe side effects as the aftereffects remain 
6 
6.67 

COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019. 



## Table 3
3Managing coronavirus disease 2019 adverse events 

No. Question 
Frequency (n = 
93) 

Percent 
(%) 

1 
Was medication taken to prevent adverse reactions prior to vaccination? 

None taken 
58 
62.37 

Herbal medicine 
14 
15.05 

Western medicine 
13 
13.98 

Both 
8 
8.60 

2 
How did you treat side effects after vaccination? (multiple choices are available) 
Frequency (n = 90) 

No response 
23 
25.56 

Herbal medicine 
52 
57.78 

Western medicine 
38 
42.22 

3 
If you have taken medication after vaccination, how long have you been taking the medication? (regardless of the 
type) 

Frequency (n = 90) 

None taken 
24 
26.67 

1 to 2 d 
57 
63.33 

More than 2 d 
9 
10.00 

4 
Did you use any Korean medicine modalities other than herbal medicine to treat side effects after vaccination? 
Frequency (n = 90) 

Yes 
3 
3.33 

No 
87 
96.67 

5 
If yes in 5 above, which treatment other than herbal medicine did you receive for the COVID-19 side effects? 
(multiple answers allowed) 

Frequency (n = 3) 

Acupuncture treatment 
3 
100.00 

Moxibustion treatment 
0 
0.00 

Cupping therapy 
0 
0.00 

Pharmacopuncture 
0 
0.00 

Chuna manual therapy 
0 
0.00 

Others 
0 
0.00 

COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019. 



## Table 4
4Recommendation of using Korean medicine for potential coronavirus disease 2019 adverse events 

No. Question 
Frequency (n = 
93) 

Percent 
(%) 

1 
Do you recommend taking herbal medicine in advance to prevent side effects from the COVID-19 vaccination? 

Highly recommend 
24 
25.81 

Recommend 
33 
35.48 

Neutral 
29 
31.18 

Not recommend 
7 
7.53 

Not recommend at all 
0 
0 

2 
If you are recommending for the prevention of side effects from the COVID-19 vaccination, which herbal medicine 
do you recommend? (multiple answers allowed) 

Not recommend 
15 
26.32 

Recommend with specific herbal medicine 
19 
33.33 

No response 
35 
61.40 

3 
Would you recommend Korean medicine treatment for potential side effects from the COVID-19 vaccination? 

Highly recommend 
20 
22.22 

Recommend 
35 
38.89 

Neutral 
31 
34.44 

Not recommend 
3 
3.33 

Not recommend at all 
1 
1.11 

No response 
3 
3.33 

4 
If it is helpful, which treatment do you recommend among Korean medicine treatments? (multiple answers 
allowed) 

Herbal medicine treatment 
69 
74.19 

Acupuncture treatment 
19 
20.43 

Moxibustion treatment 
7 
7.53 

Cupping therapy 
4 
4.30 

Pharmacopuncture 
2 
2.15 

Chuna manual therapy 
4 
4.30 

5 
Do you think Korean medicine treatment is helpful for the people in the case of adverse reactions to the COVID-19 
vaccine? 

Strongly Agree 
27 
29.03 

Agree 
43 
46.24 

Neutral 
20 
21.51 

Disagree 
3 
3.23 

Strongly Disagree 
0 
0.00 

COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019. 

respondents reported soreness at injection sites, 46.6% (746) limb pain, 30% (490) fatigue, and 24.5% 
(392) injection site swelling[31]
https://www.wjgnet.com
October 6, 2022 Volume 10 Issue 28
© 2022 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights reserved.

Conventional and Kampo Medicine in the Treatment of Mild to Moderate COVID-19: A Multicenter, Retrospective Observational Study Protocol by the Integrative Management in Japan for Epidemic Disease (IMJEDI Study-Observation). S Takayama, M Kashima, T Namiki, T Ito, R Ono, R Arita, N Saito, H Nakae, Y Irie, S Kobayashi, T Yoshino, T Ishigami, K Tanaka, T Nogami, S Minakawa, M Nagase, A Kashio, T Ishige, H Maehara, T Satio, S Sempuku, M Yamazaki, E Tahara, N Suda, K Nakamoto, T Mitsuma, H Sato, O Shimooki, Y Nakada, S Abe, T Masuda, H Kai, K Yokota, S Chiba, F Saitoh, Y Tanaka, S Koizumi, S Fujii, R Katori, M Kainuma, K Nochioka, S W Chiu, A Kikuchi, T Suzuki, M Mimura, T Yamaguchi, T Ishill, 10.1002/tkm2.1271Trad & Kampo Med. 8Takayama S, Kashima M, Namiki T, Ito T, Ono R, Arita R, Saito N, Nakae H, Irie Y, Kobayashi S, Yoshino T, Ishigami T, Tanaka K, Nogami T, Minakawa S, Nagase M, Kashio A, Ishige T, Maehara H, Satio T, Sempuku S, Yamazaki M, Tahara E, Suda N, Nakamoto K, Mitsuma T, Sato H, Shimooki O, Nakada Y, Abe S, Masuda T, Kai H, Yokota K, Chiba S, Saitoh F, Tanaka Y, Koizumi S, Fujii S, Katori R, Kainuma M, Nochioka K, Chiu SW, Kikuchi A, Suzuki T, Mimura M, Yamaguchi T, Ishill T. Conventional and Kampo Medicine in the Treatment of Mild to Moderate COVID-19: A Multicenter, Retrospective Observational Study Protocol by the Integrative Management in Japan for Epidemic Disease (IMJEDI Study-Observation). Trad & Kampo Med 2021; 8: 106-110 [DOI: 10.1002/tkm2.1271] 14

Potential Therapeutic Effect of Traditional Chinese Medicine on Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Review. Q Qiu, Y Huang, X Liu, F Huang, X Li, L Cui, H Luo, L Luo, 10.3389/fphar.2021.61140833841143Front Pharmacol. 11570893Qiu Q, Huang Y, Liu X, Huang F, Li X, Cui L, Luo H, Luo L. Potential Therapeutic Effect of Traditional Chinese Medicine on Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Review. Front Pharmacol 2020; 11: 570893 [PMID: 33343347 DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.570893] 611408 [PMID: 33841143 DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.611408]

Systems pharmacological study illustrates the immune regulation, anti-infection, anti-inflammation, and multi-organ protection mechanism of Qing-Fei-Pai-Du decoction in the treatment of COVID-19. J Zhao, S Tian, D Lu, J Yang, H Zeng, F Zhang, D Tu, G Ge, Y Zheng, T Shi, X Xu, S Zhao, Y Yang, W Zhang, 10.1016/j.phymed.2020.153315Phytomedicine. 85153315Zhao J, Tian S, Lu D, Yang J, Zeng H, Zhang F, Tu D, Ge G, Zheng Y, Shi T, Xu X, Zhao S, Yang Y, Zhang W. Systems pharmacological study illustrates the immune regulation, anti-infection, anti-inflammation, and multi-organ protection mechanism of Qing-Fei-Pai-Du decoction in the treatment of COVID-19. Phytomedicine 2021; 85: 153315 [PMID: 32978039 DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2020.153315]

Herb-drug interactions: a literature review. Z Hu, X Yang, P C Ho, S Y Chan, P W Heng, E Chan, W Duan, H L Koh, S Zhou, 10.2165/00003495-200565090-00005Drugs. 65Hu Z, Yang X, Ho PC, Chan SY, Heng PW, Chan E, Duan W, Koh HL, Zhou S. Herb-drug interactions: a literature review. Drugs 2005; 65: 1239-1282 [PMID: 15916450 DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200565090-00005]

Plant-Based Drugs and Vaccines for COVID-19. Vaccines (Basel) 2020; 9. N Mahmood, S B Nasir, K Hefferon, 10.3390/vaccines9010015Mahmood N, Nasir SB, Hefferon K. Plant-Based Drugs and Vaccines for COVID-19. Vaccines (Basel) 2020; 9 [PMID: 33396667 DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9010015]

The Adjuvant Effects on Vaccine and the Immunomodulatory Mechanisms of Polysaccharides From Traditional Chinese Medicine. D Wang, Y Liu, W Zhao, 10.3389/fmolb.2021.655570Front Mol Biosci. 8655570Wang D, Liu Y, Zhao W. The Adjuvant Effects on Vaccine and the Immunomodulatory Mechanisms of Polysaccharides From Traditional Chinese Medicine. Front Mol Biosci 2021; 8: 655570 [PMID: 33869288 DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.655570]

Vaccine Hesitancy and Rejection of a Vaccine for the Novel Coronavirus in the United States. S F Shih, A L Wagner, N B Masters, L A Prosser, Y Lu, B J Zikmund-Fisher, 10.3389/fimmu.2021.558270Front Immunol. 12558270Shih SF, Wagner AL, Masters NB, Prosser LA, Lu Y, Zikmund-Fisher BJ. Vaccine Hesitancy and Rejection of a Vaccine for the Novel Coronavirus in the United States. Front Immunol 2021; 12: 558270 [PMID: 34194418 DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.558270]

Herbal medicines for fatigue or brain fog in Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) survivors: a prospective pilot clinical study. T H Kim, 10.1101/2020.04.02.20050989Kim TH. Herbal medicines for fatigue or brain fog in Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) survivors: a prospective pilot clinical study. [cited 3 Apr 2022]. Available from: https://cris.nih.go.kr/cris/search/detailSearch.do/20001 [DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.02.20050989]

Vaccine side-effects and SARS-CoV-2 infection after vaccination in users of the COVID Symptom Study app in the UK: a prospective observational study. C Menni, K Klaser, A May, L Polidori, J Capdevila, P Louca, C H Sudre, L H Nguyen, D A Drew, J Merino, C Hu, S Selvachandran, M Antonelli, B Murray, L S Canas, E Molteni, M S Graham, M Modat, A D Joshi, M Mangino, A Hammers, A L Goodman, A T Chan, J Wolf, C J Steves, A M Valdes, S Ourselin, T D Spector, 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00224-3Lancet Infect Dis. 21Menni C, Klaser K, May A, Polidori L, Capdevila J, Louca P, Sudre CH, Nguyen LH, Drew DA, Merino J, Hu C, Selvachandran S, Antonelli M, Murray B, Canas LS, Molteni E, Graham MS, Modat M, Joshi AD, Mangino M, Hammers A, Goodman AL, Chan AT, Wolf J, Steves CJ, Valdes AM, Ourselin S, Spector TD. Vaccine side-effects and SARS-CoV-2 infection after vaccination in users of the COVID Symptom Study app in the UK: a prospective observational study. Lancet Infect Dis 2021; 21: 939-949 [PMID: 33930320 DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00224-3]

Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19). H Ritchie, E Mathieu, L Rodés-Guirao, C Appel, C Giattino, E Ortiz-Ospina, J Hasell, B Macdonald, D Beltekian, M Roser, 10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8citedRitchie H, Mathieu E, Rodés-Guirao L, Appel C, Giattino C, Ortiz-Ospina E, Hasell J, Macdonald B, Beltekian D, Roser M. Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19). [cited 19 September 2021] Available from: https://ourworldindata.org/covid- vaccinations [DOI: 10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8]

Beigel JH; mRNA-1273 Study Group. An mRNA Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 -Preliminary Report. L A Jackson, E J Anderson, N G Rouphael, P C Roberts, M Makhene, R N Coler, M P Mccullough, J D Chappell, M R Denison, L J Stevens, A J Pruijssers, A Mcdermott, B Flach, N A Doria-Rose, K S Corbett, K M Morabito, O&apos; Dell, S Schmidt, S D Swanson, P A Padilla, M Mascola, J R Neuzil, K M Bennett, H Sun, W Peters, E Makowski, M Albert, J Cross, K Buchanan, W Pikaart-Tautges, R Ledgerwood, J E Graham, B S , 10.1056/NEJMoa2022483N Engl J Med. 383Jackson LA, Anderson EJ, Rouphael NG, Roberts PC, Makhene M, Coler RN, McCullough MP, Chappell JD, Denison MR, Stevens LJ, Pruijssers AJ, McDermott A, Flach B, Doria-Rose NA, Corbett KS, Morabito KM, O'Dell S, Schmidt SD, Swanson PA 2nd, Padilla M, Mascola JR, Neuzil KM, Bennett H, Sun W, Peters E, Makowski M, Albert J, Cross K, Buchanan W, Pikaart-Tautges R, Ledgerwood JE, Graham BS, Beigel JH; mRNA-1273 Study Group. An mRNA Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 -Preliminary Report. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 1920-1931 [PMID: 32663912 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2022483] 25

Beigel JH; mRNA-1273 Study Group. Durability of Responses after SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 Vaccination. A T Widge, N G Rouphael, L A Jackson, E J Anderson, P C Roberts, M Makhene, J D Chappell, M R Denison, L J Stevens, A J Pruijssers, A B Mcdermott, B Flach, B C Lin, N A Doria-Rose, O&apos; Dell, S Schmidt, S D Neuzil, K M Bennett, H Leav, B Makowski, M Albert, J Cross, K Edara, V V Floyd, K Suthar, M S Buchanan, W Luke, C J Ledgerwood, J E Mascola, J R Graham, B S , 10.1056/NEJMc2032195N Engl J Med. 384Widge AT, Rouphael NG, Jackson LA, Anderson EJ, Roberts PC, Makhene M, Chappell JD, Denison MR, Stevens LJ, Pruijssers AJ, McDermott AB, Flach B, Lin BC, Doria-Rose NA, O'Dell S, Schmidt SD, Neuzil KM, Bennett H, Leav B, Makowski M, Albert J, Cross K, Edara VV, Floyd K, Suthar MS, Buchanan W, Luke CJ, Ledgerwood JE, Mascola JR, Graham BS, Beigel JH; mRNA-1273 Study Group. Durability of Responses after SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 Vaccination. N Engl J Med 2021; 384: 80-82 [PMID: 33270381 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMc2032195] 26

Gruber WC; C4591001 Clinical Trial Group. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine. F P Polack, S J Thomas, N Kitchin, J Absalon, A Gurtman, S Lockhart, J L Perez, Pérez Marc, G Moreira, E D Zerbini, C Bailey, R Swanson, K A Roychoudhury, S Koury, K Li, P Kalina, W V Cooper, D Frenck, R W HammittJr, L L Türeci, Ö Nell, H Schaefer, A Ünal, S Tresnan, D B Mather, S Dormitzer, P R Şahin, U Jansen, K U , 10.1056/NEJMoa2034577N Engl J Med. 383Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, Absalon J, Gurtman A, Lockhart S, Perez JL, Pérez Marc G, Moreira ED, Zerbini C, Bailey R, Swanson KA, Roychoudhury S, Koury K, Li P, Kalina WV, Cooper D, Frenck RW Jr, Hammitt LL, Türeci Ö, Nell H, Schaefer A, Ünal S, Tresnan DB, Mather S, Dormitzer PR, Şahin U, Jansen KU, Gruber WC; C4591001 Clinical Trial Group. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 2603-2615 [PMID: 33301246 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2034577]

Interim Results of a Phase 1-2a Trial of Ad26.COV2.S Covid-19 Vaccine. J Sadoff, Le Gars, M Shukarev, G Heerwegh, D Truyers, C De Groot, A M Stoop, J Tete, S Van Damme, W Leroux-Roels, I Berghmans, P J Kimmel, M Van Damme, P De Hoon, J Smith, W Stephenson, K E , De Rosa, S C Cohen, K W Mcelrath, M J Cormier, E Scheper, G Barouch, D H Hendriks, J Struyf, F Douoguih, M Van Hoof, J Schuitemaker, H , 10.1056/NEJMoa2034201N Engl J Med. 384Sadoff J, Le Gars M, Shukarev G, Heerwegh D, Truyers C, de Groot AM, Stoop J, Tete S, Van Damme W, Leroux-Roels I, Berghmans PJ, Kimmel M, Van Damme P, de Hoon J, Smith W, Stephenson KE, De Rosa SC, Cohen KW, McElrath MJ, Cormier E, Scheper G, Barouch DH, Hendriks J, Struyf F, Douoguih M, Van Hoof J, Schuitemaker H. Interim Results of a Phase 1-2a Trial of Ad26.COV2.S Covid-19 Vaccine. N Engl J Med 2021; 384: 1824-1835 [PMID: 33440088 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2034201] 28

. P M Folegatti, K J Ewer, P K Aley, B Angus, S Becker, S Belij-Rammerstorfer, D Bellamy, S Bibi, M Bittaye, E A Clutterbuck, C Dold, S N Faust, A Finn, A L Flaxman, B Hallis, P Heath, D Jenkin, R Lazarus, R Makinson, A M Minassian, K M Pollock, M Ramasamy, H Robinson, M Snape, R Tarrant, M Voysey, C Green, A D Douglas, Avs Hill, T Lambe, S C Gilbert, A J Pollard, Folegatti PM, Ewer KJ, Aley PK, Angus B, Becker S, Belij-Rammerstorfer S, Bellamy D, Bibi S, Bittaye M, Clutterbuck EA, Dold C, Faust SN, Finn A, Flaxman AL, Hallis B, Heath P, Jenkin D, Lazarus R, Makinson R, Minassian AM, Pollock KM, Ramasamy M, Robinson H, Snape M, Tarrant R, Voysey M, Green C, Douglas AD, Hill AVS, Lambe T, Gilbert SC, Pollard AJ;

Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, single-blind, randomised controlled trial. Covid Vaccine Trial Oxford, Group, 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31604-4Lancet. 396Oxford COVID Vaccine Trial Group. Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, single-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2020; 396: 467-478 [PMID: 32702298 DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31604-4]

Anxiety-Related Adverse Event Clusters After Janssen COVID-19 Vaccination -Five. A M Hause, J Gee, T Johnson, A Jazwa, P Marquez, E Miller, J Su, T T Shimabukuro, D K Shay, 10.15585/mmwr.mm7018e3MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 70Hause AM, Gee J, Johnson T, Jazwa A, Marquez P, Miller E, Su J, Shimabukuro TT, Shay DK. Anxiety-Related Adverse Event Clusters After Janssen COVID-19 Vaccination -Five U.S. Mass Vaccination Sites, April 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021; 70: 685-688 [PMID: 33956781 DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7018e3]

The Incidence and Severity of Post-Vaccination Reactions after Vaccination against COVID-19. Vaccines (Basel) 2021; 9. I Jęśkowiak, B Wiatrak, P Grosman-Dziewiszek, A Szeląg, 10.3390/vaccines9050502Jęśkowiak I, Wiatrak B, Grosman-Dziewiszek P, Szeląg A. The Incidence and Severity of Post-Vaccination Reactions after Vaccination against COVID-19. Vaccines (Basel) 2021; 9 [PMID: 34067955 DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9050502] 31

Allergic Reactions Including Anaphylaxis After Receipt of the First Dose of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine. T Shimabukuro, N Nair, 10.1001/jama.2021.0600JAMA. 325Shimabukuro T, Nair N. Allergic Reactions Including Anaphylaxis After Receipt of the First Dose of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine. JAMA 2021; 325: 780-781 [PMID: 33475702 DOI: 10.1001/jama.2021.0600]

The Model of "Informed Refusal" for Vaccination: How to Fight against Anti-Vaccinationist Misinformation without Disregarding the Principle of Self-Determination. Vaccines (Basel) 2021; 9. S D&apos;errico, E Turillazzi, M Zanon, R V Viola, P Frati, V Fineschi, 10.3390/vaccines9020110D'Errico S, Turillazzi E, Zanon M, Viola RV, Frati P, Fineschi V. The Model of "Informed Refusal" for Vaccination: How to Fight against Anti-Vaccinationist Misinformation without Disregarding the Principle of Self-Determination. Vaccines (Basel) 2021; 9 [PMID: 33535717 DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9020110]

Repertoires of Vaccine Refusal in Romania. Vaccines (Basel) 2020. C Toth, 10.3390/vaccines80407578Toth C. Repertoires of Vaccine Refusal in Romania. Vaccines (Basel) 2020; 8 [PMID: 33322096 DOI: 10.3390/vaccines8040757]

Could herbal medicine (Soshihotang) be a new treatment option for COVID-19. S Kwon, W Lee, Jin C Jang, I Jung, W S Moon, S K Cho, K H , 10.1016/j.imr.2020.100480Integr Med Res. 9100480Kwon S, Lee W, Jin C, Jang I, Jung WS, Moon SK, Cho KH. Could herbal medicine (Soshihotang) be a new treatment option for COVID-19? Integr Med Res 2020; 9: 100480 [PMID: 32742920 DOI: 10.1016/j.imr.2020.100480] 35

Liver enzyme abnormalities during concurrent use of herbal and conventional medicines in Korea: a retrospective study. N H Kim, H Y Jung, S Y Cho, S U Park, J M Park, C N Ko, 10.1016/j.phymed.2011.06.026Phytomedicine. 18Kim NH, Jung HY, Cho SY, Park SU, Park JM, Ko CN. Liver enzyme abnormalities during concurrent use of herbal and conventional medicines in Korea: a retrospective study. Phytomedicine 2011; 18: 1208-1213 [PMID: 21802919 DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2011.06.026]

Liver enzyme abnormalities in taking traditional herbal medicine in Korea: A retrospective large sample cohort study of musculoskeletal disorder patients. J Lee, J S Shin, M R Kim, J H Byun, S Y Lee, Y S Shin, H Kim, Byung Park, K Shin, B C Lee, M S Ha, I H , 10.1016/j.jep.2015.04.048J Ethnopharmacol. 169Lee J, Shin JS, Kim MR, Byun JH, Lee SY, Shin YS, Kim H, Byung Park K, Shin BC, Lee MS, Ha IH. Liver enzyme abnormalities in taking traditional herbal medicine in Korea: A retrospective large sample cohort study of musculoskeletal disorder patients. J Ethnopharmacol 2015; 169: 407-412 [PMID: 25956676 DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.04.048] 37

Battle Over Herb-Induced Liver Injury: Low Prevalence Confirmed through Secondary Evaluation and Research Team's Clarifying Rebuttal to Unwarranted Public Claims. J Lee, J S Shin, Y J Lee, M R Kim, B C Shin, J H Lee, M S Lee, I H Ha, 10.1089/acm.2018.0253J Altern Complement Med. 25Lee J, Shin JS, Lee YJ, Kim MR, Shin BC, Lee JH, Lee MS, Ha IH. Battle Over Herb-Induced Liver Injury: Low Prevalence Confirmed through Secondary Evaluation and Research Team's Clarifying Rebuttal to Unwarranted Public Claims. J Altern Complement Med 2019; 25: 260-264 [PMID: 30407070 DOI: 10.1089/acm.2018.0253] 38

A nationwide study of the incidence rate of herb-induced liver injury in Korea. J H Cho, D S Oh, S H Hong, H Ko, N H Lee, S E Park, C W Han, S M Kim, Y C Kim, K S Kim, C W Choi, S M Shin, K T Kim, H S Choi, J H Lee, J Y Kim, J Y Kang, D S Lee, Y C Ahn, C G Son, 10.1007/s00204-017-2007-9Arch Toxicol. 91Cho JH, Oh DS, Hong SH, Ko H, Lee NH, Park SE, Han CW, Kim SM, Kim YC, Kim KS, Choi CW, Shin SM, Kim KT, Choi HS, Lee JH, Kim JY, Kang JY, Lee DS, Ahn YC, Son CG. A nationwide study of the incidence rate of herb-induced liver injury in Korea. Arch Toxicol 2017; 91: 4009-4015 [PMID: 28634823 DOI: 10.1007/s00204-017-2007-9] 39

Influence of combined therapy with conventional and herbal medicines on liver function in 138 inpatients with abnormal liver transaminase levels. J H Shin, K Kim, H J Nam, 10.1186/s12906-016-1482-5BMC Complement Altern Med. 16496Shin JH, Kim K, Nam HJ. Influence of combined therapy with conventional and herbal medicines on liver function in 138 inpatients with abnormal liver transaminase levels. BMC Complement Altern Med 2016; 16: 496 [PMID: 27905922 DOI: 10.1186/s12906-016-1482-5]

. Koll Center, Parkway , 160Pleasanton, CA 94566, USA TelephoneKoll Center Parkway, Suite 160, Pleasanton, CA 94566, USA Telephone: +1-925-3991568