# and had been involved in bird surveys in Sarawak

CorpusID: 252559634
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d3bd94c3e628d1ba8796247993cbdf69d1d0753](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d3bd94c3e628d1ba8796247993cbdf69d1d0753)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

and had been involved in bird surveys in Sarawak
26 September 2022

DrSanjay Molur sanjay@threatenedtaxa.org 
DrNeelesh Dahanukar 
Managing Editor B Mr 
WILD/ZOO, CoimbatoreIndia Ravichandran 
DrMandar Paingankar 
DrUlrike Streicher 
Ms Priyanka Iyer 
DrB A Daniel 
Editorial Board DrRussel Mittermeier 
ProfMewa Singh 
Stephen D Nash 
DrFred Pluthero 
DrPriya Davidar 
DrMartin Fisher 
DrJohn Fellowes 
Prof. DrMirco Solé 
DrRajeev Raghavan 
Pune, IndiaEnglish Mira Bhojwani 
Canada Mr P Toronto 
Ilangovan 
Web Development 
Mrs Latha 
G Ravikumar 
Typesetting Mrs 
ZOO, CoimbatoreIndia Radhika 
Mrs 
ZOO, CoimbatoreIndia Geetha 
DrB Shivaraju 
DrR K Verma 
DrVatsavaya S Raju 
DrM Krishnappa 
Jnana Sahyadri 
DrK R Sridhar 
DrG P Sinha 
DrN P Balakrishnan 
Prof. DJ Bhat 
DrFerdinando Boero 
DrMerlin Franco 
DrB S Kholia 
DrPankaj Kumar 
Kadoorie Farm 
Botanic Garden Corporation 
Hong Kong chongleong@upm.edu.my 
V Sampath Kumar 
DrA J Solomon Raju 
DrVijayasankar Raman 
DrB Ravi ravi@threatenedtaxa.org 
Prasad Rao 
DrK Ravikumar 
DrNoor Azhar 
Mohamed Shazili 
DrM K Vasudeva Rao 
ProfA J Solomon Raju 
DrMandar Datar 
DrM K Janarthanam 
DrK Karthigeyan 
DrP Lakshminarasimhan 
DrLarry R Noblick 
DrK Haridasan 
PallavurPalakkad District 
DrIndia Kerala 
Analinda Manila-Fajard 
DrP A Sinu 
DrK P Rajesh 
DrDavid E Boufford 
DrRitesh Kumar Choudhary 
DrKannan C S Warrier 
DrR K Avasthi 
DrKailash Chandra 
DrRory Dow 
DrM Monwar Hossain 
Jayasilan Mohd-Azlan 
Alek Andrew 
Tuen 
Chong Leong Puan 
MohdRahah Mohamad Yakup 
Hasri Al 
Hafiz Haba 
Isa Sait 
Trevor Allen Nyaseng 
Fadziliah Sapian 0000-0002-3228-9625
Andrew Alek Tuen aatuen@unimas.my 
DrThreatened Taxa 
George Mathew 
DrSameer Padhye 
DrR M Sharma 
Retd ) Scientist 
DrManju Siliwal 
WILD, CoimbatoreTamil Nadu 
DrK A Subramanian 
DrP M Sureshan 
DrR Varatharajan 
DrEduard Vives 
DrR Sundararaj 
DrM Nithyanandan 
Environmental Department,La Ala Al 
Estate. Co. K.S.CKuwait Real 
DrHimender Bharti 
London, UKMr Purnendu Roy 
DrSaito Motoki 
DrSanjay Sondhi 
DrThi Phuong Nguyen 
Lien 
DrNitin Kulkarni 
DrLional Monod 
DrKurt R Arnold 
DrJames M Carpenter 
DrDavid M Claborn 
DrHeo Chong Chin 
DrR J Shiel 
DrSiddharth Kulkarni 
DrDharma Priyadarsanan 
ATREE, Bengaluru, IndiaRajan 
DrPhil Alderslade 
Marine Csiro 
Atmospheric Research 
DrHobart Australia 
John E N Veron 
DrDaniel Whitmore 
DrMihaly Foldvari 
DrJohn T D Caleb 
DrTopiltzin Contreras Macbeath 
DrE Vivekanandan 
DrDavor Zanella 
DrA Biju Kumar 
DrJ A Johnson 
DrR Ravinesh 
DrSushil K Dutta 
DrAnnemarie Ohler 
DrPritpal S Soorae 
DrWayne J Fuller 
DrS R Ganesh 
DrHem Sagar Baral 
DrChris Bowden 
DrJ W Duckworth 
DrRajiv S Kalsi 
M L N College 
Yamuna Nagar 
DrIndia Haryana 
V Santharam 
DrS Balachandran 
Bengaluru, IndiaMr J Praveen 
DrC Srinivasulu 
DrK S Gopi Sundar 
DrGombobaatar Sundev 
ProfReuven Yosef 
DrArkady Lelej 
DrMário Gabriel Santiago 
Santos 
DrGiovanni Amori 
DrAnwaruddin Chowdhury 
DrIndia Guwahati 
DrDavid Mallon 
DrP O Nameer 
DrIan Redmond 
DrKarin Schwartz 
DrLala A K Singh 
DrMewa Singh 
DrPaul Racey 
DrNishith Dharaiya 
DrSpartaco Gippoliti 
DrDan Challender 
DrBrian L Cypher 
DrS S Talmale 
ProfBahadur Karan 
Budhanilakantha Shah 
Municipality 
NepalKathmandu 
DrSusan Cheyne 
DrJamie R Wood 
DrRajeshkumar G Jani 
DrO N Tiwari 
DrL D Singla 
Guru Angad 
DrRupika S Rajakaruna 

Wildlife Information Liaison Development (WILD) Society & Zoo Outreach Organization (ZOO)
12 Thiruvannamalai Nagar641035Saravanampatti, CoimbatoreTamil NaduIndia


Uttar Pradesh
NoidaIndia


Government Science College Gadchiroli
442605MaharashtraIndia


Wildlife Veterinarian
EugeneOregonUSA


ZOO/WILD
641035CoimbatoreTamil NaduIndia


ZOO/WILD
641035CoimbatoreTamil NaduIndia


Executive Vice Chair
Conservation International
22202ArlingtonVirginiaUSA


Institute of Excellence
Ramanna Fellow and Life-Long Distinguished Professor, Biopsychology Laboratory
University of Mysore
570006MysuruKarnatakaIndia; Honorary Professor


Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research
Bangalore


National Institute of Advanced Studies
Bangalore


Scientific Illustrator
Dept. of Anatomical Sciences
Conservation International
Health Sciences Center
Room 045T-8


Stony Brook University
11794-8081Stony BrookNYUSA


TorontoCanada


Sigur Nature Trust
PO643223Chadapatti, NilgirisMavinhalla, Tamil NaduIndia


Battcock Centre for Experimental Astrophysics
Cavendish Laboratory
JJ Thomson AvenueCB3 0HECambridgeUK


The Kadoorie Institute
8/F


T.T. Tsui Building
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam RoadHong Kong


Departamento de Ciências Biológicas
Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz
Vice-coordenador do Programa de Pós-Graduação em Zoologia
Rodovia Ilhéus/Itabuna
Km 1645662-000)Salobrinho, Ilhéus -BahiaBrasil


Professor of Taxonomy
Kerala University of Fisheries & Ocean Studies
KochiKeralaIndia


ChennaiIndia


ZOO/WILD
CoimbatoreIndia


Fundraising/Communications Mrs. Payal B. Molur
CoimbatoreIndia


BengaluruKarnatakaIndia


Tropical Forest Research Institute
JabalpurIndia


Kakatiay University
Warangal, Andhra PradeshIndia


Kuvempu University
ShimogaKarnatakaIndia


Mangalore University
Mangalagangotri, MangaloreKarnatakaIndia


Dr. Gunjan Biswas
Vidyasagar University
MidnaporeWest BengalIndia


Botanical Survey of India
AllahabadIndia


Ret. Joint Director
BSI
CoimbatoreIndia


Dr. Shonil Bhagwat
Open University and University of Oxford
UK


Goa University
Retd, GoaIndia


Università del Salento
LecceItaly


Dr. Dale R. Calder
Royal Ontaro Museum
TorontoOntarioCanada


Dr. Cleofas Cervancia
Univ. of Philippines Los Baños College Laguna
Philippines


Dr. F.B. Vincent Florens
University of Mauritius
Mauritius


Curtin University
Malaysia


Dr. V. Irudayaraj
St. Xavier's College
Palayamkottai, Tamil NaduIndia


Botanical Survey of India
GangtokSikkimIndia


Botanical Survey of India
HowrahWest BengalIndia


Andhra University
VisakhapatnamIndia


University of Mississippi
USA


Sri Krishnadevaraya University
AnantpurIndia


Dr. Aparna Watve
Bengaluru, PuneKarnataka, MaharashtraIndia, India


Dr. Qiang Liu
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden
YunnanChina


Universiti Malaysia Terengganu
Kuala TerengganuMalaysia


Shiv Ranjani Housing Society
PuneMaharashtraIndia


Andhra University
VisakhapatnamIndia


Agharkar Research Institute
PuneMaharashtraIndia


Goa University
GoaIndia


Botanical Survey of India
India


Dr. Errol Vela
University of Montpellier
MontpellierFrance


Botanical Survey of India
HowrahIndia


Botanical Center
MiamiUSA


University of the Philippines Los Banos
LagunaPhilippines


Central University of Kerala
KasaragodKeralaIndia


Dr. Afroz Alam
Banasthali Vidyapith (accredited A grade by NAAC)
RajasthanIndia


Zamorin's Guruvayurappan College
GA College PO
KozhikodeKeralaIndia


Harvard University Herbaria
02138-2020CambridgeMAUSA


Agharkar Research Institute
PuneMaharashtraIndia


Dr. Navendu Page
Wildlife Institute of India
Chandrabani, DehradunUttarakhandIndia


Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding
Tamil NaduIndia


Rohtak University
HaryanaIndia


Dr. D.B. Bastawade
MaharashtraIndia


Dr. Partha Pratim Bhattacharjee
Tripura University
SuryamaninagarIndia


Zoological Survey of India
Jabalpur, Madhya PradeshIndia


Dr. Ansie Dippenaar-Schoeman
University of Pretoria
QueenswoodSouth Africa


National Museum of natural History Naturalis
The Netherlands Dr. Brian Fisher


California Academy of Sciences
USA


Dr. Richard Gallon
LL30 1UPllandudnoNorth Wales


Dr. Hemant V. Ghate
Modern College
PuneIndia


Jahangirnagar University
DhakaBangladesh


Mr. Jatishwor Singh Irungbam
Biology Centre CAS
Branišovská


Czech Republic. Dr. Ian J. Kitching
Natural History Museum
Cromwell RoadUK


Saravanampatti -Kalapatti Road
641035Saravanampatti, CoimbatoreTamil NaduIndia


Institute of Biodiversity and Environmental Conservation
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak



Faculty of Resource Science and Technology
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak


Institute of Biodiversity and Environmental Conservation
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak


Faculty of Forestry and Environment
Universiti Putra Malaysia



Forest Department Sarawak
Institute of Biodiversity and Environmental Conservation
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak
Sarawak Forestry Corporation


and had been involved in bird surveys in Sarawak
0974-790726 September 2022CFC1806D16ACE53346C7130C367E569910.11609/jott.7650.14.9.21818-21825Received 07 September 2021 | Final received 01 August 2022 | Finally accepted 03 September 2022Pipistrellus tenuis recorded during the small mammalian fauna studyManipurIndia. © Uttam Saikia Forest fragmentationforest health indicatorforest specialistinsectivorous birdsniche differentiation
Publisher Host Wildlife Information Liaison Development SocietyZoo Outreach Organization www.wild.zooreach.orgwww.zooreach.orgNo. 12, Thiruvannamalai Nagar,

## INTRODUCTION

Bird communities in the tropics can be good systems to investigate complex interactions among sympatric species (Mansor & Mohd Sah 2012;Styring et al. 2016;Mansor & Ramli 2017;Sherry et al. 2020).How communities are structured are dependent on how they partition their resources and differentiate niches.Understanding how sympatric species utilise their resources can provide evidence about the coexistence of potential competitors (Morin 1999).Coexisting species in a community separate their ecological needs by resource partitioning along temporal, spatial, and behavioural niches (Mohd-Azlan et al. 2014).In general, when resources are a limiting factor, competitive interactions between species can result in non-random pattern of resource use (Morin 1999).Some studies on closely related species have shown that birds partition food resources by utilising different vertical strata, or by differential use of microhabitats (Styring & Hussin 2004;Mohd-Azlan et al. 2014).

Insectivorous birds consume a substantial amount of arthropods, hence their ecological importance in many ecosystems is significant (Nyffeler et al. 2018).Many studies have demonstrated the effects of forest disturbance on insectivorous birds, which may be linked to the decline of insect communities particularly certain insect groups (Didham et al. 1996;Didham 1997;Şekercioğlu et al. 2002;Stratford & Stouffer 2015;Bowler et al. 2019).In the tropics, understory insectivores are characterized by high habitat specificity and lower mobility relative to other passerines (Şekercioğlu et al. 2002;Yong 2009).Thus birds of the understory strata are sensitive to forest disturbance (Thiollay 1992;Kattan et al. 1994;Stouffer & Bierregaard 1995;Canaday 1996;Stratford & Stouffer 1999) and they have adapted to occupy specialized niches when foraging for their insect prey (Sekercloğlu et al. 2002).For instance, small forest fragments have been shown to experience a decline in the number of invertebrates dwelling among the leaf litter and soil while increasing the generalist numbers at the forest edge (Didham et al. 1996;Didham et al. 1997).These changes can affect understorey insectivores that avoid relatively open or edge habitats and specialise on arthropod prey that hide within leaf litter and soil (Canaday 1996).

With the increasing reports on the effects of forest disturbance on arthropods in the tropics (Hamer et al. 1997;Chey et al. 1998;Holloway 1998;Lawton et al. 1998;Schowalter & Ganio 1999;Floren & Linsenmair 2001, 2003;Hartshorn et al. 2021), concerns over the associated effects on insectivorous birds are also raised.Equally, there is a need for more in-depth study on the foraging ecology of the tropical insectivorous birds in the tropics so as to determine which species are particularly affected by or resilient to forest disturbance.

In southeastern Asia, babblers primarily refer to two insectivorous families, namely Timaliidae (54 extant species) and Pellornidae (64 species), the majority of which rely on forest or wooded habitats.As many babbler species are sedentary, with poor ability to disperse across non-forest habitat (Yong 2009) In the tropical forests of Malaysia, babblers form a major portion of the diverse middle and understorey avian insectivores (38 species; Puan et al. 2020), with high numbers of congeneric and sympatric species (Lambert & Collar 2002).This makes them suitable candidates for the research on avian community ecology including trophic diversification, resource partitioning and functional morphology, all of which are essential in driving the associated biotic community assembly in the tropical forests.Such research is feasible by examining their diets, which comprises of indigestible exoskeletons of arthropods, as demonstrated in studies elsewhere on food partitioning (Kent & Sherry 2020; Sherry et al. 2020), seasonal dietary patterns in relation to changes in the environment (Poulin et al. 1992) or abundance of resources (Yard et al. 2004).In central Peninsular Malaysia, Mansor et al. (2018) found little dietary overlaps among 12 babbler species.Despite most being morphologically similar (Styring et al. 2016;Mansor & Ramli 2017;Puan et al. 2018), niche differentiation with respect to foraging tactics have been demonstrated based on opportunistic visual observations on the Malaysian babbler species (Mansor & Mohd Sah 2012;Mansor et al. 2015;Styring et al. 2016;Mansor & Ramli 2017).Owing to their diversity and specialised feeding guilds of being terrestrial, foliage and/or bark gleaning insectivores (Johns 1986;Mitra & Sheldon 1993;Yong et al. 2011), this study examined niche segregation, i.e., diet and foraging strata, of 15 sympatric babbler species found in Sarawak, Borneo.


# J TT


## MATERIALS AND METHODS


## Study sites

A total of nine sampling sites were chosen in Sarawak, eastern Malaysia, which can be grouped according to Pelagus (three sites), Ulu Baleh (three sites), and Baram (three sites) (Figure 1).Pelagus is located about 33 km from the Kapit town and the three sampling sites were Nanga Benin (2.165°N, 113.074°E),Nanga Pelagus Except the Pelagus National Park, all sampling sites comprised logged over secondary forests located close to human settlements and some agriculture lands.


## Bird sampling

From December 2014 to March 2016, three doublestacked mist-nets (measuring 9 × 4 m each) were deployed from 0600-1830 h for four consecutive days at each of the two sampling stations at each site.The distance of the two stations was 100-1000 m away from human settlement areas, so as to assess the effects of anthropogenic disturbance on birds in another study (Mohd-Azlan et al. unpubl. data).The double-stacked nets were set vertically to create six shelves representing foraging strata based on the distance from the forest floor, i.e.Shelves 1 and 2 were categorized as low strata (0-1.2 m from the forest floor), Shelves 3 and 4 as mid strata (1.3-2.4 m) and Shelves 5 and 6 as high strata (2.5-3.6 m).All birds caught were weighed, measured and had the capture shelve numbers recorded.


## Diet analysis

All babbler species, except juveniles and birds caught during the first hour of the sampling (Lopes et al. 2005), were administered with tartar emetic (Poulin & Lefebvre 1995;Zduniak 2005) before being released immediately.Depending on body weight and species, careful administration of acceptable concentration of tartar emetic solution (Sing-Tyan et al. 2017) will extract stomach contents via regurgitation.For every 100 g of the body mass, a dosage of 0.8 ml of 1.2% potassium antimony tartrate was used (Durães & Marini 2003).The regurgitated items and faeces were preserved using 70% alcohol in the field before being examined under a compound microscope in the laboratory.All prey items were identified up to taxonomic order and each order


## J TT

found in an individual sample was counted as one prey item.


## Data analysis

Analysis of bipartite ecological webs (Dormann et al. 2017) was performed to visualize and calculate indices representing the pattern of ecological networks among prey and predators.Berger-Parker dominance index was also calculated to determine whether babblers are specialized in food choice or polyphagous.Species diversity and evenness were assessed using Shannon (H') and Pielou's (J) evenness indices (Oksanen et al. 2013), respectively, whereas overlaps of prey items among babbler species were assessed using Pianka index (EcoSimR package; Gotelli & Ellison 2013).The outputs of prey item overlap analysis are a histogram of which its skewness represents the degree of overlap, i.e., leftskewed indicating a low overlap in the diet and rightskewed if otherwise.This is followed by two graphical plots with circles indicating the observed and simulated diet segregation pattern, i.e., a circle represents the relative consumption of prey category and its size is proportional to the level of such consumption.In other words, if there is no overlap of prey items among the babbler species, no circle will be present.Analyses were performed using R version 3.3.1 (R Core Team 2016).


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


## Species diversity and foraging strata

Over 4,800 net-hours, a total of 222 individuals representing 15 babbler species (nine from Pellorneidae and six from Timaliidae) were caught during this study (Table 1).This represents more than 50% of the babblers recorded in Sarawak.The Black-throated Babbler (Stachyris nigricollis, n = 32) was the most common species caught for all sites, followed by Short-tailed Babbler (Trichastoma malaccense, n = 25).The most common abundant species recorded for each site was White-chested Babbler (Trichastoma rostratum, n = 11) in Pelagus, Rufous-crowned Babbler (Malacopteron magnum, n = 18) in Ulu Baleh and Chestnut-winged Babbler (Stachyris erythroptera, n = 12) in Baram.Based on the Shannon diversity index, Ulu Baleh had the highest species diversity (H' = 2.314), followed by Baram (H' = 2.238) and Pelagus (H' = 2.193).The distribution of individuals among species was more even in Ulu Baleh and Baram compared to Pelagus (Table 1).

The babblers showed a segregation in foraging strata, with half of the species captured frequenting low strata while only three were at mid strata and four at high strata.Both, species richness and abundance were found to decrease when the foraging height increased.All species were found foraging mostly at a height of less than two meters, while others such as the Babbler Fluffy-backed Tit-babbler, Ferruginous, Scaly-crowned, Chestnut-rumped, Black-throated, Greyhooded Babblers only occasionally go higher (2.5-3.6 m), whereas the Black-capped Babbler is strictly below one meter.This implies some form of niche segregation among the sympatric babbler species.It should be noted that the foraging height recorded in this study was solely based on the vertical capture location of double-stacked mist-nets, which may not entirely represent the foraging height.It also covered flying height of the babblers.


## Diet composition

A total of 136 prey items were retrieved from regurgitated and faecal samples of 13 babbler species which comprised eight insect orders, plus one arachnid and one gastropod.Of those identifiable prey items, Coleoptera (41.5%),Hymenoptera (36.2%), and Araneae (12.3%) formed the major diet of babblers (Table 2).Based on analysis of bipartite ecological webs (Figure 2), Sooty-capped and Black-capped Babblers are specialists that feed solely on Coleoptera.Among all the babbler species, Fluffy-backed Tit-babbler seems to have the most generalized diet, covering seven insect orders.With respect to diet overlap analysis (Figure 3), the histogram was skewed to the left indicating that the diet overlap among the 13 babbler species was low.The prey items that heavily overlapped were from Categories 1 (for Araneae), 2 (Caterpillar), and 3 (Cicaedae).On the other hand, prey items that did not overlapped were from Categories 6 (Diptera), 9 (Hymenoptera), 10 (Orthoptera), and 11 (Phasmidae).

Being terrestrial, foliage and/or bark gleaning insectivores, the major prey groups of the babblers comprises of relatively more terrestrial (i.e., Coleoptera, Hymenopter,a and Araneae of understory level, similar to Mansor et al. (2018), except Blattodea) rather than aerial arthropods (but see Mansor et al. 2021).The abundance of Hymenoptera such as ants and Araneae (spiders) on the forest floor (Griffiths et al. 2018;Hartshorn et al. 2021) as well as those in the aerial leaf litter (Mansor et al. 2019) might be a reason that they formed a major portion of the babblers' diet.With respect to nutritional composition, Coleoptera and Araneae were found to contain higher portions of crude protein and lipids than Hymenoptera (Razeng & Watson 2015).Both protein and lipids (e.g., fats) are crucial for bird growth J TT    2000).Diet overlaps among babblers in this study were relatively low, consistent with reports from central Peninsular Malaysia (Mansor et al. 2018(Mansor et al. , 2021)).The differences noted in foraging tactics might be one of the factors influencing the diet of the babbler species and vice versa.In addition, low diet overlaps of these birds could also be due to potential shifts in foraging behaviour when joining heterospecific feeding flocks (Mansor et al. 2020), which awaits further investigation in the case of Bornean babblers.
0 2 Phasmida 1 1 0 2 Dictyoptera 0 1 1 2 Diptera 1 0 0 1 Cicaedae 0 1 0 1 Gastropods 1 0 0 1 Unidentified 5 0 1 6 (Klasing

## CONCLUSION

In the tropics where species diversity is high, resource partitioning and niche differentiation are essential evolutionary adaptions that lead to character displacement and reduce the competition among sympatric species (Wiens 1989).The use of different forest strata, either vertically or horizontally, and food resources by birds are common ecological strategies to reduce interspecific competition.Our study demonstrated the possible presence of spatial and trophic niche segregation among 15 babbler species in eastern Malaysia, some of which are likely to be specialists while others are generalists.Similar to other more localised



, and are associated especially to lower forest strata of forest interior, they serve as suitable indicators of the level of forest disturbance (Lambert & Collar 2002; Hamer et al. 2015).Past studies based on relative abundance have shown that certain babbler species (Hussin & Francis 2001; Lambert & Collar 2002; Moradi & Mohamed 2010) and even specific feeding guilds (Johns 1986; Yong et al. 2011) are sensitive to forest fragmentation.




(2.171°N, 113.055°E) and Nanga Peraran (2.193°N, 113.118°E) located along Batang Rajang River.Ulu Baleh is located along the Baleh River which is about 176 km from Kapit town.The three sampling sites were Nanga Gaat (1.645°N, 113.133°E),Putai (1.595°N, 113.791°E) and Long Singut (1.560°N, 114.202°E).Baram is located about 120 km from the Miri city.The three sampling sites were Long San (3.293°N, 114.779°E),Selunggo (3.208°N, 115.185°E) and Lio Mato (3.174°N, 3.174°E).


## Figure 1 .
1
Figure 1.Mist netted areas located in the interior parts of Sarawak within the Heart of Borneo Forest Complex: A-Long San | B-Selunggo | C-Lio Mato | D-Nanga Benin | E-Nanga Pelagus | F-Nanga Peraran | G-Putai | H-Long Singut | I-Nanga Gaat.


## Figure 2 .
2
Figure 2. Analysis of babbler diets according to prey taxa.Widths of links are scaled to reflect interaction frequencies, while bar sizes indicate total interaction frequencies (Voon et al. 2014): BSTB-Bold-striped tit-babbler | GHB-Grey-headed Babbler | CWB-Chestnut-winged Babbler | HB-Horsfield's Babbler | FB-Ferruginous Babbler | WCB-White-chested Babbler | SCCB-Scaly-crowned Babbler | CRB-Chestnut-rumped Babbler | SOCB-Sooty-capped Babbler | BCB-Black-capped Babbler | BTB-Black-throated Babbler | STB-Short-tailed Babbler | FBTB-Fluffy-backed Tit-babbler | Dict-Dictyoptera | Dip-Diptera | Cater-Caterpillar | Arach-Araneae | Cica-Cicaedae | Hym-Hymenoptera | Col-Coleoptera | Orthop-Orthoptera | Hemip-Hemiptera | Phas-Phasmida | Gas-Gastropoda.


## Figure 3 .
3
Figure 3. Diet overlap analysis (resource category input: 1-Araneae | 2-Caterpillar | 3-Cicaedae | 4-Coleoptera | 5-Dictyoptera | 6-Diptera | 7-Gastropoda | 8-Hemiptera | 9-Hymenoptera | 10-Orthoptera | 11-Phasmidae.


## Table 1 . Species and number of individuals of babblers caught in Pelagus, Ulu Baleh, and Baram.
1

## Table 2 . Prey item composition identified up to order.
2TaxaPelagusUlu BalehBaramTotalColeoptera21141954Hymenoptera8241547Araneae86216Orthoptera0224Hemiptera11
Journal of Threatened Taxa | www.threatenedtaxa.org | 26 September 2022 | 14(9): 21818-21825
Journal of Threatened Taxa | www.threatenedtaxa.org | 26 September 2022 | 14(9): 21818-21825 Diet and foraging strata of Malaysian babblers Mohd-Azlan et al
Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia, Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS/1/2020/WAB11/UNIMAS/02/3); Sarawak Energy Berhad (GL(I01)/ SEB/2014/01(02).The opinions expressed by the authors do not reflect the views of the Journal of Threatened Taxa, Wildlife Information Liaison Development Society, Zoo Outreach Organization, or any of the partners.The journal, the publisher, the host, and the partners are not responsible for the accuracy of the political boundaries shown in the maps by the authors.Floren, A. & K.E.Linsenmair (2003).How do beetle assemblages respond to anthropogenic disturbance?In: Basset, Y., V. Novotny, S.E.Miller & R.L. Kitching (eds).Arthropods of Tropical Forests.Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, I.L., USA.Gotelli, N.J. & A.M. Ellison (2013).EcoSimR, Version 1.00.Burlington, VT. http://www.uvm.edu/~ngotelli/EcoSim/EcoSim.htmlGriffiths, H.M., L.A. Ashton, A.E. Walker, F. Hasan, T.A. Evans, P. Eggleton & C.L. Parr (2018).Ants are the major agents of resource removal from tropical rainforests.Journal of Animal Ecology 87: 293-300.https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.12728Hamer, K.C., J.K. Hill, L.A. Lace & A.M. Langhan (1997).Ecological and biogeographic effects of forest disturbance on tropical butterflies of Sumba, Indonesia.Journal of Biogeography 24: 67-75.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.1997.tb00051.xHamer, K.C., R.J. Newton, F.A. Edwards, S. Benedick, S.H. Bottrell & D.P. Edwards (2015).Impacts of selective logging on insectivorous birds in Borneo: the importance of trophic position, body size and foraging height.Biological Conservation 188: 82-88.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2014.09.026Hartshorn, J. (2021).A review of forest management effects on terrestrial leaf litter inhabiting arthropods.Forests 12(1): 23.https://doi.org/10.3390/f12010023Holloway, J.D. (1998).The impact of traditional and modern cultivation practices, including forestry, on Lepidoptera diversity in Malaysia and Indonesia.In: Newbery, D.M., H.H.T. Prins & N. Brown (eds).Dynamics of Tropical Communities.Blackwell Science, Oxford.Johns, A.D. (1986).Effects of selective logging on the ecological organization of a peninsular Malaysian Rainforest avifauna.Forktail 1: 65-79.Kattan, G.H., H. Alvarez-Lópes & M. Giraldo (1994).Forest fragmentation and bird extinctions: San Antonio eight years later.Conservation Biology 8(1): 138-146.https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1739.1994.08010138.xKent, C.M. & T.W. Sherry (2020).Behavioural niche partitioning reexamined: do behavioural differences predict dietary differences in warbles?Ecology 101(8): e03077.https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.3077Klasing, K.C. (2000).Comparative Avian Nutrition.CAB International, Wallingford.Lawton, J.H., D.E.Bingnell, B. Bolton, G.F. Bloemers, P. Eggleton, P.M. Hammond, M. Hodda, R.D. Holt, T.B. Larsen, N.A. Mawdsley, N.E.Stork, D.S. Srivastava & A.D. Watt (1998).Biodiversity inventories, indicator taxa and effects of habitat modification in tropical forest.Nature 391: 72-76.Lopes, L.E., A.M. Fernandes & M.Â.Marini (2005).Diet of some Atlantic forest birds.Ararajuba 13(1): 95-103.Mansor, M.S., N.A. Abdullah, M.R.A. Halim, S.M. Nor & R. Ramli (2018).Diet of tropical insectivorous birds in lowland Malaysian rainforest.Journal of Natural History 52: 2301-2316.https://doi.org/10.1080/00222933.2018.1534015Mansor, M.S. & S.A.M. Sah (2012).Foraging patterns reveal niche separation in tropical insectivorous birds.Acta Ornithologica 47(1): 27-36.https://doi.org/10.3161/000164512X653890Mansor, M.S. & R. Ramli (2017).Foraging niche segregation in Malaysian babblers (Family: Timaliidae).PLoS ONE 12(3): e0172836.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172836Mansor, M.S., F.Z. Rozali, N.A. Abdullah, S.M. Nor & R. Ramli (2019).How important is aerial leaf litter for insectivorous birds foraging in a Malaysian tropical forest?Global Ecology and Conservation 20:21824J TT studies conducted in Malaysia, our study supported that different foraging tactics(Mansor & Mohd Sah 2012;Mansor et al. 2015Mansor et al. , 2018;;Styring et al. 2016;Mansor & Ramli 2017), foraging area and prey preference may have contributed to the difference in the diet of babblers (both Timaliidae and Pellornidae).Furthermore, prey size and type preference of the babblers in the Malaysian forests is believed to be influenced by predation and anti-predation strategies(Sherry et al. 2020)as well as possibly nutritional composition of the prey which deserve further investigation.Having a feeding guild that is more terrestrial, foliage and/or bark gleaning in nature at the understory strata may render babblers, particularly those with specific spatial and trophic niches, exceptionally sensitive to habitat disturbance and fragmentation(Zakaria & Nordin 1998;Yong 2009).This implies that protection of this bird group, among others, is essential when forest management practices are being made.Their ecological role as indicators of forest ecosystem health(Lambert & Collar 2002;Hamer et al. 2015) is supported by our findings.It is also worth mentioning that two Near Threatened babbler species, i.e., White-necked Babbler (Stachyris leucotis, a rare slope specialist) and Grey-breasted Babbler (Malacopteron albogulare, an uncommon peat-swamp and heath forest specialist;Yong et al. 2014) are also found on Borneo, although not recorded in our study.Both species deserve more research and protective measures pertaining to their ecological requirements, trophic and spatial niches.www.threatenedtaxa.orgThe Journal of Threatened Taxa (JoTT) is dedicated to building evidence for conservation globally by publishing peer-reviewed articles online every month at a reasonably rapid rate at www.threatenedtaxa.org.All articles published in JoTT are registered under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License unless otherwise mentioned.JoTT allows allows unrestricted use, reproduction, and distribution of articles in any medium by providing adequate credit to the author(s) and the source of publication.OPEN ACCESS
Long-term declines of European insectivorous bird populations and potential causes. D E Bowler, H Heldbjerg, A D Fox, M Jong, K Böhning-Gaese, 10.1111/cobi.13307Conservation Biology. 3352019

Loss of insectivorous birds along a gradient of human impact in Amazonia. C Canaday, 10.1016/0006-3207(95)00115-8Biological Conservation. 7711996

Canopy knockdown of arthropods in exotic plantation and natural forest in Sabah, north-east Borneo, using insecticidal mist-blowing. V K Chey, J D Holloway, C Hambler, M R Speight, 10.1017/S0007485300041511Bulletin of Entomological Research. 881998

Insects in fragmented forests: a functional approach. R K Didham, J Ghazoul, N E Stork, A J Davis, 10.1016/0169-5347(96)20047-3Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 1161996

The influence of edge effects and forest fragmentation on leaf-litter invertebrates in central Amazonia. R K Didham, Tropical Forest Remnants: Ecology, Management, and Conservation of Fragmented Communities. W F Laurence, R O BierregaardJr, Chicago, I.L., USAUniversity of Chicago Press1997

Identifying causes of patterns in ecological networks: opportunities and limitations. C F Dormann, J Fründ, H M Schaefer, 10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-110316-022928Evolution, and Systematics. 482017Annual Review of Ecology

An evaluation of the use of tartar emetic in the study of bird diets in the Atlantic forest of southeastern Brazil. R Durães, M Â Marini, 10.1648/0273-8570-74.3.270Journal of Field Ornithology. 7432003

The influence of anthropogenic disturbances on the structure of arboreal arthropod communities. A Floren, K E Linsenmair, 10.1016/j.gecco.2019.e00722Plant Ecology. 1532001

High-throuput sequencing reveals dietary segregation in Malaysian babblers. M S Mansor, F Z Rozali, S Davies, S M Nor, R Ramli, 10.1093/cz/zoab074Current Zoology. 6842021

The foraging tactics of Chestnut-winged Babbler (Stachyris erythroptera) and Abbott's Babbler (Malacocincla abbotti) in a lowland rainforest. M S Mansor, R Ramli, S A M Sah, Malaysia. Sains Malaysiana. 4452015

Shifts in foraging behaviour of heterospecific flocking birds in a lowland Malaysian rainforest. M S Mansor, S M Nor, R Ramli, 10.1016/j.beproc.2020.104229Behavioural Processes. 1801042292020

Use of an exotic tree plantation by Bornean lowland forest birds. S S Mitra, F H Sheldon, 10.2307/4088417Auk. 11031993

Avian speciesassemblage structure and indicator bird species of mangroves in the Australian monsoon tropics. J Mohd-Azlan, R Noske, M J Lawes, 10.1071/MU12018Emu. 1122012

J Mohd-Azlan, R A Noske, M J Lawes, 10.1111/btp.12108Resource partitioning by mangrove bird communities in north Australia. 201446

Responses of babblers (Timaliidae) to the forest edge-interior gradient in an isolated tropical rainforest in Peninsular Malaysia. H V Moradi, Z Mohamed, Journal of Tropical Forest Science. 2212010

. P Morin, Community Ecology. Blackwell Science Inc. 1999

Insectivorous birds consume an estimated 400-500 million tons of prey annually. The Science of. M Nyffeler, Ç H Şekercioğlu, C J Whelan, 10.1007/s00114-018-1571-zNature. 1057472018

Vegan: Community Ecology Package. F G Oksanen, R Blanchet, P Kindt, P R Legendre, R B Minchin, G L O'hara, P Simpson, M H H Solymos, H Stevens, Wagner, 2013R package version 2.0-9

Additional information on the use of tartar emetic in determining the diet of tropical birds. B Poulin, G Lefebvre, 10.2307/1369529Condor. 9741995

Tropical avian phenology in relation to abundance and exploitation of food resources. B Poulin, G Lefebvre, R Mcneil, 10.2307/1941476Ecology. 7361992

C L Puan, G Davison, K C Lim, Birds of Malaysia: Covering Peninsular Malaysia, Malaysian Borneo and Singapore. Lynx and BirdLife International Field Guilds. Lynx Edicions. Barcelona2020

Intersexual and interspecific morphometric variations among three sympatric babbler species from Peninsular Malaysia. C L Puan, A J Norehan, W L Ng, C S Y Yong, Malayan Nature Journal. 7012018

Nutritional composition of the preferred prey of insectivorous birds: popularity reflects quality. E Razeng, D M Watson, 10.1111/jav.00475Journal of Avian Biology. 4612015

R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Team Core, R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria2016

Invertebrate communities in a tropical rain forest canopy in Puerto Rico following Hurricane Hugo. T D Schowalter, L M Ganio, Ecological Entomology. 241999

Disapperarance of insectivorous birds from tropical forest fragments. Ç H Şekercioğlu, P R Ehrlich, G C Daily, D Aygen, D Goehring, R F Sandí, 10.1073/pnas.012616199Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amerca. 9912002

Insectivorous birds in the Neotropics: ecological radiations, specialization, and coexistence in species-rich communities. T W Sherry, C M Kent, N V Sánchez, Ç H Şekercioğlu, 10.1093/auk/ukaa049Auk. 13742020

The use of tartar emetic to study the diet of insectivorous birds in Borneo. P Sing-Tyan, F S Attiqqah, I Khatijah, M Y Rahah, A H H Mohd-Hasri, S Isa, A A Tuen, Malaysian Applied Biology. 4622017

Use of Amazonian forest fragments by understory insectivorous birds. P C Stouffer, R O Bierregaard, 10.2307/2265818Ecology. 761995

Forest fragmentation alters microhabitat availability for Neotropical terrestrial insectivorous birds. J A Stratford, P C Stouffer, 10.1016/j.biocon.2015.01.017Biological Conservation. 1882015

Foraging ecology and occurrence of seven sympatric babbler species (Timaliidae) in the lowland rainforest of Borneo and peninsular Malaysia. A R Styring, R Ragai, M Zakaria, F H Sheldon, 10.1093/cz/zow022Current Zoology. 6242016

Influence of selective logging on bird species diversity in a Guianan rain forest. J M Thiollay, Conservation Biology. 611992

J A Wiens, The Ecology of Bird Communities. Cambridge, IL, USACambridge University Press19891

Diets of insectivorous birds along the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon. H K Yard, C Van Riper, Iii , B T Brown, M J Kearsley, 10.1093/condor/106.1.106Arizona. Condor. 1062004

The Grey-breasted Babbler Malacopteron albogulare, a poorly known Sundaic species. D L Yong, K C Lim, J A Eaton, K H Tan, W T Lau, C Foley, BirdingASIA. 212014

Do insectivorous bird communities decline on land-bridge forest islands in Peninsular Malaysia. D L Yong, L Qie, N S Sodhi, L P Koh, K S H Peh, T M Lee, H C Lim, S L H Lim, 10.1017/S0266467410000520Journal of Tropical Ecology. 272011

Persistence of babbler (Timaliidae) communities in Singapore forests. D L Yong, Nature in Singapore. 22009

Comparison of visitation rates of frugivorous birds in primary and logged forest in Sabah lowland dipterocarp forest. M Zakaria, M Nordin, Tropical Biodiversity. 511998

Forced regurgitation with tartar emetic as an effective and safe method to study diet composition in Hooded Crow nestlings. P Zduniak, 10.1007/s10344-005-0090-3European Journal of Wildlife Research. 5122005