# Stuttering Treatment Approaches from the Past Two Decades: Comprehensive Survey and Review

CorpusID: 252637615
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/727d872e57d99ca6eb4c4572e60e1f9b234eb860](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/727d872e57d99ca6eb4c4572e60e1f9b234eb860)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Stuttering Treatment Approaches from the Past Two Decades: Comprehensive Survey and Review


Garima Gupta 
University of Waterloo
ONCanada

Shruti Chandra 
University of Waterloo
ONCanada

Kerstin Dautenhahn 
University of Waterloo
ONCanada

Torrey Loucks 
University of Alberta
Canada

# Advisor 
Stuttering Treatment Approaches from the Past Two Decades: Comprehensive Survey and Review
Equal contribution to this submission
This comprehensive survey and review presents stuttering treatment approaches that have been reported in the past 20 years in order to highlight the different characteristics in each intervention. The comprehensive survey presented in this article was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines to extract articles on stuttering interventions, published between 01/01/2000 and 01/08/2020. 11 formal programs, 9 fluency induction techniques and 7 adjunct therapy approaches were identified through the comprehensive survey and summarized. The most common results were the Lidcombe program and altered auditory feedback techniques. The comprehensive survey and review presented in this article strives to provide knowledge that can help researchers in other areas, such as Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), acquire a preliminary understanding of stuttering interventions and further the field of stuttering interventions with the introduction of technological advancements.

Introduction that strive to enhance fluency and reduce the disruptive effects of stuttering on other areas of life.

This comprehensive survey outlines the behavioural treatment approaches for stuttering that have been reported in the past two decades . Although the procedures for a systematic review were followed to identify the treatment approaches, we acknowledge that the review may not be exhaustive. The review does not entail evaluation of the identified interventions. Recent systematic reviews, such as those by Baxter et al. (2015), Baxter et al. (2016), Brignell et al. (2020), andConnery et al. (2020), Johnson et al. (2016) consider the efficacy of a subset of the behavioural interventions identified in this comprehensive survey. Information pertaining to the effectiveness of the listed interventions can be retrieved from such systematic reviews. Our review differs in that a broad swath of the field over 20 years was covered to identify comprehensively the diversity of treatment approaches reported from 2000-2020.

The present article is organized in three sections. Section 1 of the article outlines the procedure and the general results of the comprehensive survey of stuttering interventions. Section 2 provides identifies and describes behavioural interventions for stuttering reported in the past two decades. Section 3 ties up-and-coming technologies, such as artificial intelligence, to conventional stuttering interventions. This article concludes with a summary of the comprehensive survey, and its limitations and contributions to research in stuttering.


## Comprehensive Survey Procedure

Protocol & Information Sources This comprehensive survey of stuttering interventions followed the PRISMA guidelines established for systematic reviews. The search was completed in two major databases, ASHA (June 2020) and PubMed (August 2020), as well as the Google scholar (May 2020) search engine. The selected databases were used due to their relevance to the subject of stuttering and their reliability. For example, ASHA (American Speech -Language-Hearing Association) primarily covers publications pertinent to communication disorders.     The comprehensive survey further found that 37% percent of the extracted papers focused on adults (ages 18 to 64 years), 18% on preschool children (6 and under), 17% on adolescents (13 to 17), and 19% specified school-age children (7 to 12). An additional 9% included older adults (65 and over). In regards to gender, most of the extracted studies identified the category of male more frequently than female with a ratio of 2.5:1. In regards to frequency of reported nationality, 45 extracted papers (approximately 35% of the total extracted papers) studied Australians and 44 papers (approximately 34%) studied Americans. Canada (10), The Netherlands (7) and United Kingdom (6) were the three others frequently appearing participant nationalities. Approximately 1-4 studies were found for participants from other countries including: Iran (4), Germany (3), New Zealand (3), China (2), India (2), Israel (2), Nigeria (2), Austria (1), Belgium (1), Brazil (1), Bulgaria (1), Croatia (1), Denmark (1), Egypt (1), Finland (1), France (1), Indonesia (1), Italy (1), Malaysia (1), Pakistan (1), Poland (1), Singapore (1), South Africa (1), Spain (1), and Sweden (1).


## Behavioural Interventions for Stuttering

Behavioural interventions for stuttering include programs and techniques that strive to reduce stuttering severity and the frequency of stuttering symptoms or to teach new speech skills that emphasize fluency and naturalness (Hewat et al., 2006;Nye et al., 2013). Behavioural interventions for stuttering can be segregated into categories based on population (Blomgren, 2013). For pre-school children, the interventions are either direct or indirect, while for school-age children, adolescents and adults, the interventions primarily focus on fluency shaping or stuttering modification (Blomgren, 2013;Brignell et al., 2020). Most interventions for stuttering incorporate the principles of operant conditioning, which is "the process by which the frequency of a response is changed as a result of the consequences of that response" (Nittrouer & Cheney, 1984). It has been integrated in numerous interventions (e.g., Lidcombe Program) and fluency induction techniques (e.g., time-out) (Nittrouer & Cheney, 1984;Onslow et al., 2001;P. Reed & Howell, 2000;Sidavi & Fabus, 2010). Positive or negative reinforcement are implemented in these response-contingent approaches to increase or decrease the frequency of a response. Typically, positive reinforcement, which entails introduction of a desirable stimulus, and negative reinforcement, which includes removal of an undesirable stimulus, increase the frequency of a response (Nittrouer & Cheney, 1984). Research has shown that operant conditioning can decrease the frequency of stuttering to near zero levels (R. R. Martin et al., 1972;Onslow et al., 1990;C. G. Reed & Godden, 1977;Sidavi & Fabus, 2010). Within recent stuttering treatments such as the Lidcombe Program (see below), positive has been incorporated. In most treatments, positive reinforcement is more emphasized than negative reinforcement because studies have shown that stutter-free speech can be achieved without negative verbal contingencies (Donaghy et al., 2015;Swift et al., 2016). 


## Stuttering Intervention Categories


## Category 1: Direct vs. Indirect Treatments

This category of intervention applies to children (Blomgren, 2013). Direct interventions focus on explicitly altering the child's speech to improve fluency (Blomgren, 2013;de Sonneville-Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015;Frymark et al., 2010) through approaches that can include fluency shaping and stuttering modification described below (Frymark et al., 2010;Nippold, 2018). Direct treatments are delivered by the clinician or parent(s) trained by the clinician. In contrast, indirect treatments promote fluency by decreasing environmental or internal demands on the child (Blomgren, 2013;de Sonneville-Koedoot, Bouwmans, et al., 2015;de Sonneville-Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015;Frymark et al., 2010). For example, training the parent to alter their own speech and behaviour to facilitate fluency in the child' speech (Frymark et al., 2010).


## Category 2: Fluency Shaping and Stuttering Modification Treatments

Fluency shaping interventions, also called speech modification, speech restructuring or prolonged speech treatments, strive to promote speech fluency by teaching new speech patterns to the client (Alpermann et al., 2012;Blomgren, 2010;Nye et al., 2013). Examples of fluency enhancing techniques include stretched syllables, controlled rate, or slow speech (Blomgren, 2010(Blomgren, , 2013. In contrast, stuttering modification treatments are focused on cognitive and anxiolytic (i.e., anxiety-related) issues to promote acceptance and reduce fear or anxiety of stuttering, while teaching the client to stutter with decreased effort (Blomgren, 2010(Blomgren, , 2012(Blomgren, , 2013. Some examples of stuttering modification techniques include self-disclosure of stuttering, voluntary stuttering and ceasing avoidance behaviours (Blomgren, 2010).

In the following section, we offer brief summaries of the specific therapy programs, treatment approaches and fluency inducing techniques that were identified in our survey of interventions reported between 2000 and 2020 (see Table 1). It should be noted that the list of treatment programs, approaches and techniques are based on the frequency of reporting in the clinical literature, not on efficacy or popularity. Further, a large number of programs and approaches were identified, but not all could be described here, such as the Arabic Modified Fluency Shaping Program (Rifaie et al., 2016), Camp. Dream. Speak. Live. and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) are more recently developed intervention programs that show therapeutic potential, but are not described further in order to manage the length of the review (Beilby et al., 2012;Byrd et al., 2018;Freud et al., 2020). Several less common stuttering intervention techniques were identified that are also not described below, including (1) Dual Tasking (Metten et al., 2011;Nejati et al., 2013), (2) Dubbing (Tomaiuoli et al., 2006), (3) EMG Biofeedback (Block et al., 2004), and (4) Speech Motor Training (SMT) (Riley & Ingham, 2000). Figures 4 and 7 provide an overview of the frequency of the identified programs and techniques. 


## Programs for Pre-school Children

Lidcombe Program: Developed at the University of Sydney, Australia, this operant conditioning treatment program is for preschool children, under the age of 6 years (Guitar et al., 2015;Jones et al., 2000;Jones et al., 2005;Onslow et al., 2001). The Lidcombe program is administered by a parent or guardian in the child's routine environment (Jones et al., 2005;Miller & Guitar, 2009;Onslow et al., 2001;Unicomb et al., 2017). This program has two stages. In stage 1, the caregivers are trained in delivering feedback and positive reinforcement appropriately to the child and monitoring the child's stuttering (Jones et al., 2000;Lattermann et al., 2008;Onslow et al., 2001). Throughout stage 1, parents provide the treatment and monitor the child's progress (Lattermann et al., 2008). In stage 2, maintenance of fluency is the primary goal in this stage, and involves gradual reduction in both clinic visits and positive reinforcements.

Extensive research indicate children achieved low stuttering levels after the Lidcombe program and maintained these gains for 2 to 7 years after the treatment (Arnott et al., 2014;Jones et al., 2005;Kingston et al., 2003;Lattermann et al., 2008;McCulloch et al., 2017;Miller & Guitar, 2009;Rousseau et al., 2002;Vong et al., 2016).

Palin Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (Palin PCI): This therapy program involves both parent(s) and child (under 7 years) (Millard et al., 2018). The program aims to build the child's fluency and confidence as a communicator, while  (Millard et al., 2008;Millard et al., 2018). The program starts with in-clinic sessions, where interaction strategies, such as matching the child's speech rate, reducing language complexity, and turn-taking, are taught to parents (Millard et al., 2018). The parents implement these strategies during a six-week home consolidation period (Millard et al., 2018). Findings suggest that this program can facilitate fluency, improving communicative competence, and reducing parental concerns over their child's stuttering (Millard et al., 2008;Millard et al., 2018).

RESTART-Demands and Capacities Model (DCM) Program: RESTART-DCM is an indirect program, based on the Demands and Capacities Model (DCM), which states that a balance between demands (i.e., motoric, emotional, linguistic and cognitive demands) and capacities (i.e., communication) is essential for fluent speech (de Sonneville- Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015;Franken et al., 2005). The aim of RESTART-DCM is to introduce positive changes to the child's environment and abilities in order to 'match' their communication abilities and, thereby, reduce stuttering (de Sonneville-Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015;Millard et al., 2018). Parents are trained to decrease communicative demands (motoric, emotional, linguistic and/or cognitive) on the children (de Sonneville- Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015). They are also taught to provide their child with 15-minutes of special attention daily to boost the child's speaking confidence (de Sonneville-Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015;Franken et al., 2005). Treatment is gradually decreased depending on the parent's ability to foster a fluency enhancing environment and managing relapse (de Sonneville- Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015). Findings suggest the efficacy of RESTART-DCM program is comparable to the Lidcombe program at 18-months post-treatment mark (de Sonneville-Koedoot, Bouwmans, et al., 2015;de Sonneville-Koedoot, Stolk, et al., 2015).


## Programs for School-Age Children, Adolescents and Adults

American Institute for Stuttering (AIS) Intensive Therapy Program: This holistic program strives to provide therapy that improves stuttering and psychological management (Pollard, 2012). The primary goals of this program include: (a) acceptance of stuttering, (b) elimination of avoidance behaviours, (c) alteration in emotional and cognitive aspects of stuttering, (d) development of stuttering modification and fluency shaping techniques, and (e) provision of alternatives for continued speech management after the treatment (Pollard, 2012). The goals are accomplished through stuttering modification and speech fluency techniques, such as desensitization, group discussions, and speech restructuring (Pollard, 2012). Although further efficacy research is needed, the preliminary findings suggest that stuttering and social anxiety symptoms were reduced following the treatment (Pollard, 2012).

Camperdown Program: This hierarchical speech restructuring program aims to promote speech fluency in individuals who stutter. There are four stages in this program (Carey et al., 2014;Hearne et al., 2008;O'Brian et al., 2003): (1) Clients learn prolonged speech patterns, without reference to specific target behaviours along with self-evaluation techniques for judging stuttering severity and speech naturalness (Carey et al., 2014;O'Brian et al., 2003); (2) Group sessions in which clients practice natural sounding, stutter-free speech while continuing self-evaluation; (3) clients develop problem solving strategies for generalizing their stutter-free speech and; (4) Clients strive to maintain their treatment gains within and beyond clinic by keeping a stuttering severity rating of 1-2 (1 = no stuttering) and speech naturalness rating 1-3 (1 = extremely natural speech) for three consecutive weeks (Carey et al., 2014;Hearne et al., 2008;O'Brian et al., 2003). Participants who completed the Camperdown program "spoke with minimal stuttering rates up to 12 months after entry into a maintenance program" (O'Brian et al., 2003).  , 2007). Attitudes and/or avoidance behaviours are addressed using cognitive-behavioural strategies, including graded exposure to anxiety inducing talking situations and modification of ineffective or negative "self-talk" . In the transfer stage, the speech goals and the cognitive behavioural strategies are combined while progressing through a hierarchy of difficult talking situations and modifying their ineffective self-talk . In the maintenance stage, clients engage in selfpractice, attend refresher sessions, and participate in self-help groups . The majority of the participants from this program accomplished speech fluency with acceptable speech rates and maintained statistically and clinically significant speech gains and stuttering reductions at a five-year follow-up .

Kassel Stuttering Therapy (KST): KST is a modified version of the Precision Fluency Shaping Program (Euler et al., 2014;Giraud et al., 2008;Neumann et al., 2003;Neumann et al., 2005). It is a three-week intensive fluency shaping program with a one to two-year structured maintenance program. This program employs a computer program called speak: gentle, Bioservice Software, developed in Munich, Germany. The computer program provides biofeedback for syllable prolongation, soft voice onset, diaphragmatic breathing and smooth sound transitions (Euler et al., 2014;Giraud et al., 2008;Neumann et al., 2003;Neumann et al., 2005). In the maintenance program, clients monitor their practice on the computer and attend a two-three weekend refresher course (Euler et al., 2014). Research has documented longer-term effects on Kassel Stuttering Therapy (KST) for both objectively assessed speech disfluencies and subjectively assessed speech performance (Euler et al., 2014).


## Modifying Phonation Intervals (MPI):

The MPI treatment is fundamentally based on software that interfaces with an accelerometer placed on the neck that detects phonation (Ingham et al., 2001;Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). The MPI software displays phonation intervals (PIs) to provide the speaker with auditory and visual (bio)feedback regarding the number of and duration of PIs (Ingham et al., 2015;Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). In the four phases in this program, clients learn to eliminate short PI's from their speech in the clinic, which induces fluency. Then clients transfer this fluency outside the clinic and learn to maintain fluency over the long-term (Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). The client must reduce the frequency of short PI's along with maintaining speech naturalness criteria in order to progress through the phases (Ingham et al., 2001;Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). Findings suggest participants achieve low levels of stuttering, increased speech rates and acceptable naturalness (Ingham et al., 2015).


## Successful Stuttering Management Program (SSMP):

The SSMP is an intensive 3-week residential program (Blomgren et al., 2005;Tsiamtsiouris & Krieger, 2010) that incorporates stuttering modification techniques advocated by Van Riper (1973). The program consists of three phases: (1) confronting stuttering, (2) modifying stuttering, and (3) maintaining fluency (Blomgren et al., 2005). The confrontation phase entails identification of stuttering to modify the client's attitudes and perceptions. The modification phase uses behavioural techniques to reduce the severity of stuttering moments. The maintenance phase entails practice of the learned stuttering modification strategies outside the clinic. Findings indicate that the SSMP is an anxiolytic treatment but does not produce long term reductions in fluency (Blomgren et al., 2005;Tsiamtsiouris & Krieger, 2010).


## Treatment Support


## Fluency Induction Techniques

Altered Auditory Feedback (AAF): This is a collective term for techniques that electronically manipulate an individual's speech signal such that speakers hear a modified version of their own speech (Antipova et al., 2008;Lincoln et al., 2006;Lincoln et al., 2010;Unger et al., 2012). In general, the speaker receives a temporally and/or spectrally altered version of their own production (Hudock & Kalinowski, 2014;Lincoln et al., 2006). The three AAF techniques  tipova et al., 2008;Hudock & Kalinowski, 2014;Kiefte & Armson, 2008;Lincoln et al., 2006;Lincoln et al., 2010;Stuart & Kalinowski, 2004;Unger et al., 2012). The most well-known implementation for clinical use is the SpeechEasy, which is a self-contained, in-ear-device resembling a hearing aid. Other commercial AAF devices for clinic or home use are the Fluency Master or The Pocket Speech Lab (Antipova et al., 2008). Numerous clinical and experimental studies with people who stutter have demonstrated the fluency enhancing effects of AAF and promising clinical efficacy of the SpeechEasy (Antipova et al., 2008;Armson & Kiefte, 2008;Armson et al., 2006;Foundas et al., 2013;Gallop & Runyan, 2012;Hudock & Kalinowski, 2014;Lincoln et al., 2010;O'Donnell et al., 2008;Pollard et al., 2009;Ritto et al., 2016;Stuart & Kalinowski, 2004;Unger et al., 2012;Van Borsel et al., 2003).

Choral Reading: In choral reading, two or more individuals read a passage out loud in unison (Dechamma & Maruthy, 2018;Ingham et al., 2006;Kiefte & Armson, 2008;Rami et al., 2005;Saltuklaroglu et al., 2009). The effect of choral speech in reducing stuttering frequency is immediate and pronounced (Dechamma & Maruthy, 2018;Ingham et al., 2006;Kiefte & Armson, 2008;Rami et al., 2005;Saltuklaroglu et al., 2009) as stuttering disfluencies reduce between 90%-100% (Dechamma & Maruthy, 2018;Kiefte & Armson, 2008;Saltuklaroglu et al., 2009). Choral reading also induces speech naturalness and reductions in speech effort (Ingham et al., 2006). Pre-recorded speech can also be used as the "choral partner" for the person who stutters (Saltuklaroglu et al., 2009) but monitoring of stuttering symptoms still requires a human counterpart. Pre-recorded passages for practicing choral speech and playing back the exercise can be implemented easily in social robots.

Prolonged Speech: Slowing speech is a powerful fluency inducing technique and is integral to most speech restructuring therapies (Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). Prolonged speech involves producing elongated speech segments, which readily reduces disfluencies (Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). In the therapy context, clients learn to use a very slow speech rate that supports stutter-free speech (Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). Speaking rate is gradually increased, with the goal of maintaining fluency and improving speech naturalness. Some prolonged speech therapies result in unnatural-sounding speech (Matthews & Blomgren, 2016). The CSP and Camperdown programs implement prolonged speech to achieve fluent speech in the early stages of the program and then shape speech into a more controlled rate with acceptable naturalness (Hearne et al., 2008;Langevin et al., 2006;O'Brian et al., 2003;Venkatagiri, 2005).

Regulated Breathing: This technique is based on habit reversal, an intervention used for nervous habits and tics (Freeman & Friman, 2004;Woods et al., 2000). Regulated breathing strives to modify the breathing pattern of the individuals who stutter using components such as relaxation, awareness, competing response, motivation, and generalization training (Freeman & Friman, 2004;Woods et al., 2000).

Syllable-Timed Speech: This treatment involves saying each syllable in time to a rhythmic beat (Andrews et al., 2016;Law et al., 2018). For example, the patient paces their speech with the beat of a metronome (Law et al., 2018). Syllabletimed speech is thought to reduce stuttering by reducing stress contrasts across syllables (Law et al., 2018;Trajkovski et al., 2009) and controlling speech rate.

Time-out: This operant-conditioning technique involves a deliberate pause after a moment of stuttering (Hewat et al., 2006). The procedure, which can be administered by a clinician or self-administered by the client, is effective in reducing disfluency for adults, school-age and pre-school age children (Hewat et al., 2006;R. Martin & Berndt, 1970;R. R. Martin et al., 1972;Onslow et al., 1997).


## Adjunct Techniques

Cognitive Behavioural Therapy: CBT programs are implemented along with speech restructuring programs,  . CBT entails challenging negative thoughts through means, such as individual counseling, group problem-solving discussions, and systematic desensitization to stuttering (Gunn et al., 2019;. Commonly implemented CBT program for individuals who stutter is an individualized, online program called iGlebe (Gunn et al., 2019;Helgadóttir et al., 2014;. This program includes seven modules that strive to reduce social anxiety among individuals who stutter (Gunn et al., 2019;.

Self-Disclosure: Self-disclosure is fundamentally self-advertising, such that marginalized or stigmatized people share personal information about them with others (McGill et al., 2018). The purpose of self-disclosure is twofold: (1) to reduce the sensitivity to and/or promote acceptance of stuttering and (2) to reduce any negative listener biases (Healey et al., 2007;Lincoln & Bricker-Katz, 2008).

Self-Modelling: Self-modeling is a technique in which a target behaviour or maladaptive situation is recorded and reviewed by client and clinician to learn new skills or adjust to challenging environments (Cream et al., 2010;Cream et al., 2009;Harasym et al., 2015;Webber et al., 2004). This technique not only provides information about how to produce the target behaviour, but also enhances self-efficacy (Cream et al., 2010;Cream et al., 2009). Support Groups: In support or self-help groups, individuals who stutter gather to discuss similar experiences, struggles, avoidance behaviours and types of disfluencies (Boyle, 2013;Liddle et al., 2011;Yaruss et al., 2002). Support groups offer a multitude of benefits for individuals who stutter including: (1) increased opportunities for social interactions, (2) increased affiliation with a community comprised of people who stutter, (3) cognitive restructuring and changing beliefs about self-identity, (4) increased self-disclosure of stuttering to other people, and (5) improvements in self-acceptance, confidence, and self-image (Boyle, 2013;Trichon & Tetnowski, 2011;Yaruss et al., 2002).


## Technology-Driven Tools in Stuttering Interventions

Over the past few years, there has been considerable technological advancement in the field of speech therapy. Prominent technological tools used in the stuttering interventions, specifically, include AAF devices (e.g., SpeechEasy), metronomes, and EMG biofeedback. Other technological tools that are being increasingly used in stuttering interventions include virtual reality, telepractice and mobile applications. Virtual Reality (VR) includes computer-generated simulations in which users are immersed in the simulated version of real-world situations virtually. VR immersion interface includes a visual interface (headset) that can be combined with other interfaces (e.g., joystick, speakers) to provide immersive and dynamic experiences (Fuchs, 2017). This technology has been effectively used to support complimentary treatment approaches such as the adaptation effect and desensitization therapy in a controlled, safe and confidential (Brundage et al., 2016;Moıse-Richard et al., 2021).

Other than VR, speech-language pathologists have been increasingly reliant on telepractice since the COVID-19 pandemic (Kollia & Tsiamtsiouris, 2021). Telepractice allows for the provision of professional healthcare over the internet. These services can be synchronous (i.e., video or audio conferencing), asynchronous (i.e., e-mail) or hybrid (i.e., a combination of synchronous and asynchronous; Haynes & Langevin, 2010). Telepractice also includes benefits such as cost and time effectiveness, and increased accessibility to healthcare (e.g., decreased travel time, easy access from remote locations and during circumstances such as the COVID-19 pandemic; Brignell et al., 2021;Kollia & Tsiamtsiouris, 2021;McGill et al., 2019). Telepractice has been successfully Volume 11 Issue 2 (2022) ISSN: 2167ISSN: -1907 www.JSR.org incorporated in stuttering treatment programs, such as the Lidcombe and Camperdown programs.

To provide supplemental support for stuttering management, mobile applications have been developed. These applications can be accessed using smartphones and/or tablets. Commonly, these applications offer practice exercises that incorporate fluency induction and/or stuttering modification techniques, along with real-time feedback based on artificial intelligent evaluation of users' performance (Prasanna & Perera, 2019). SLPs have used mobile applications to support the clients' prescribed plan to boost fluency as well (Yuen et al., 2021). The use of technologies, such as those described above, can streamline treatment practices, enhance speech fluency and improve communication attitudes of people with stuttering (Almuhi, 2021).

Given the positive impact technological advancements can have on conventional treatments, it is worthwhile to investigate the potential for artificial intelligence (AI) in stuttering interventions. Investigation into the potential for AI-based technologies, such as social robots, can present novel and practical ways to assist SLPs and their clients with stuttering. Social robots are advanced AI-based technologies that "engage people in an interpersonal manner, communicating and coordinating their behaviour with humans through verbal, nonverbal, and/or affective modalities" (Breazeal et al., 2016). Social robots have been used in multiple healthcare areas, including supporting the wellbeing and functioning of persons with dementia, Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), diabetes and cancer (Casas et al, 2020). In the area of communication disorder, social robots have been employed to boost engagement in therapy sessions (Charron et al., 2019;Shimaya et al., 2016), enhance articulation, verbal participation and spontaneous conversations (Silvera-Tawil et. al., 2018), and phonological, morphosyntactical and semantic communication (Robles-Bykbaev et al., 2016).

Despite such promising results and constant innovation in stuttering interventions, investigations into the potential utility of social robots are nonexistent. To initiate exploration into potential of social robots for stuttering interventions, it is critical to understand the different stuttering treatment approaches that have been used or are being used to support individuals with this disorder. This comprehensive survey and review serves as a first step in informing researchers both in the fields of HRI and stuttering about the stuttering interventions that have been reported in the past two decades. With the knowledge of these treatment approaches, researchers in both fields can map the incorporation of social robots in conventional interventions.


## Conclusion

This article presents a comprehensive survey and review of stuttering interventions that have been reported between 2000 and 2020. As demonstrated in our comprehensive survey of stuttering interventions (see Table 1), there is a wide range of evidence-based behavioural intervention programs (11), fluency induction techniques (9) and adjunct treatment approaches (7) that support individuals who stutter. The most commonly reported treatment program is the Lidcombe Program and the most commonly reported fluency induction technique is altered auditory feedback (AAF). To the best of our knowledge, this constitutes a timely summary of current practice for stuttering interventions that provides a starting point for collaborative projects involving clinicians, clients, researchers and social roboticists.

While this article is quite wide-ranging and elaborate, there are limitations to this comprehensive survey. First, there were restrictions regarding the number of papers that could be accessed on two databases, ASHA and Google Scholar. ASHA restricted the number to 500 titles and Google Scholar restricted the number to 1000 titles per query. The second restriction of this comprehensive survey was the unfortunate unavailability of full-text for 113 extracted papers due to COVID-19 restrictions implemented by a number of libraries. The third limitation of this comprehensive survey was the limited the number of databases used for extracting papers. As the scope of the stuttering research is substantial, we limited ourselves to three databases.

Despite these limitations, the results from the comprehensive survey and review stuttering can will be adequately used to explore the potential applications of social robots to aid people with stuttering. Based on the knowledge gathered from this comprehensive survey and review, we plan to investigate the feasibility of social Volume 11 Issue 2 (2022) ISSN: 2167ISSN: -1907 www.JSR.org robots in stuttering therapy by conducting pilot studies in collaboration with SLPs. We further plan to conduct surveys to understand the perceptions of SLPs towards incorporation of social robots in specific stuttering interventions.

## Figure 1 .
1Systematic selection of research articles for the comprehensive survey.

## Figure 2 .
2Stuttering treatment Programs identified for pre-school children.

## Figure 3 .
3Stuttering treatment Programs identified for school-age children, adolescents and adults.

## Figure 4 .
4Identified stuttering treatment techniques for fluency induction.

## Figure 5 .
5Identified adjunct stuttering therapy approaches.

## Table 1 .
1Categorization of stuttering treatment programs and techniques identified between 2000 and 2020 according to intervention categories and target population.Formal Treatment Programs 
Category 
Target Population 
American Institute for Stuttering 
Integrated 
Adults 

Camperdown Program 
Fluency Shaping 
School-age children, adoles-
cents and adults 


Pereira, J.,de Melo, M., Franco, N., Rodrigues, F., Coelho, A., & Fidalgo, R. (2019). Using assistive robotics for aphasia rehabilitation.2019 Latin American Robotics Symposium (LARS), 2019 Brazilian Symposium on Robotics (SBR) and 2019 Workshop on Robotics in Education (WRE), 387-392. https://doi.org/10.1109/LARS-SBR-WRE48964.2019.00074 Volume 11 Issue 2 (2022) ISSN: 2167-1907 www.JSR.org
Rousseau, I., Packman, A.,Onslow, M., Dredge, R., & Harrison, E. (2002). Australian speech pathologists' use of the Lidcombe program of early stuttering intervention. Acquiring Knowledge in Speech, Language and Hearing, 4(2), 67-71. Saltuklaroglu, T., Kalinowski, J., Robbins, M., Crawcour, S., & Bowers, A. (2009). Comparisons of stuttering frequency during and after speech initiation in unaltered feedback, altered auditory feedback and choral speech conditions. International journal of language & communication disorders, 44 (6), Volume 11 Issue 2 (2022) ISSN: 2167-1907 www.JSR.org
AcknowledgementsThis research was undertaken, in part, thanks to funding from Canada 150 Research Chair Programme.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors report no declarations of interest.Ethics Approval StatementThe ethics approval from the Institutional Review board was not required, as the authors did not conduct research directly with human subjects.Funding Source DeclarationThis research was funded, in part, by the Canada 150 Research Chair Programme. Shruti Chandra, Garima Gupta, Kerstin Dautenhahn: Canada 150 Research Chair Programme
Evaluating adaptation effect in real versus virtual reality environments with people who stutter. A Almudhi, 10.1080/17434440.2021.1894124Expert Review of Medical Devices. Almudhi, A. (2021). Evaluating adaptation effect in real versus virtual reality environments with people who stutter. Expert Review of Medical Devices, 1-7. https://doi.org/10.1080/17434440.2021.1894124

Construct validity of modified time-interval analysis in measuring stuttering and trained speaking patterns. A Alpermann, W Huber, U Natke, K Willmes, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2011.11.006Journal of fluency disorders. 371Alpermann, A., Huber, W., Natke, U., & Willmes, K. (2012). Construct validity of modified time-interval analysis in measuring stuttering and trained speaking patterns. Journal of fluency disorders, 37 (1), 42-53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2011.11.006

Phase ii trial of a syllabletimed speech treatment for school-age children who stutter. C Andrews, S O&apos;brian, M Onslow, A Packman, R Menzies, R Lowe, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2016.06.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 48Andrews, C., O'Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Menzies, R., & Lowe, R. (2016). Phase ii trial of a syllable- timed speech treatment for school-age children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 48, 44-55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2016.06.001

Effects of altered auditory feedback (AFF) on stuttering frequency during monologue speech production. E A Antipova, S C Purdy, M Blakeley, S Williams, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2008.09.002Journal of fluency disorders. 334Antipova, E. A., Purdy, S. C., Blakeley, M., & Williams, S. (2008). Effects of altered auditory feedback (AFF) on stuttering frequency during monologue speech production. Journal of fluency disorders, 33 (4), 274-290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2008.09.002

10.1044/2014_JSLHR-S-13-0090treatment for early stuttering: A randomized controlled trial. 57treatment for early stuttering: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 57 (5), 1606-1618. https://doi.org/10.1044/2014_JSLHR-S-13-0090

The state of the art in non-pharmacological interventions for developmental stuttering. Part 1: A systematic review of effectiveness. S Baxter, M Johnson, L Blank, A Cantrell, S Brumfitt, P Enderby, E Goyder, 10.1111/1460-6984.12171International journal of language & communication disorders. 505Baxter, S., Johnson, M., Blank, L., Cantrell, A., Brumfitt, S., Enderby, P., & Goyder, E. (2015). The state of the art in non-pharmacological interventions for developmental stuttering. Part 1: A systematic review of effectiveness. International journal of language & communication disorders, 50 (5), 676-718. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460- 6984.12171

Nonpharmacological treatments for stuttering in children and adults: A systematic review and evaluation of clinical effectiveness, and exploration of barriers to successful outcomes. S Baxter, M Johnson, L Blank, A Cantrell, S Brumfitt, P Enderby, E Goyder, 10.3310/hta20020Health Technology Assessment. 202Baxter, S., Johnson, M., Blank, L., Cantrell, A., Brumfitt, S., Enderby, P., & Goyder, E. (2016). Non- pharmacological treatments for stuttering in children and adults: A systematic review and evaluation of clinical effectiveness, and exploration of barriers to successful outcomes. Health Technology Assessment, 20 (2), 1-302. https://doi.org/10.3310/hta20020

Acceptance and commitment therapy for adults who stutter: Psychosocial adjustment and speech fluency. J M Beilby, M L Byrnes, J S Yaruss, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.05.003Journal of Fluency Disorders. 374Beilby, J. M., Byrnes, M. L., & Yaruss, J. S. (2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy for adults who stutter: Psychosocial adjustment and speech fluency. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37 (4), 289-299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.05.003

Control of stuttering with EMG feedback. S Block, M Onslow, R Roberts, S White, 10.1080/14417040410001708521Advances in Speech Language Pathology. 62Block, S., Onslow, M., Roberts, R., & White, S. (2004). Control of stuttering with EMG feedback. Advances in Speech Language Pathology, 6 (2), 100-106. https://doi.org/10.1080/14417040410001708521

Stuttering treatment for adults: An update on contemporary approaches. M Blomgren, 10.1055/s-0030-1265760Seminars in speech and language. 3104Blomgren, M. (2010). Stuttering treatment for adults: An update on contemporary approaches. Seminars in speech and language, 31 (04), 272-282. https://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0030-1265760

Review of the successful stuttering management program. The science and practice of stuttering treatment: A symposium. M Blomgren, 10.1002/9781118702796Blomgren, M. (2012). Review of the successful stuttering management program. The science and practice of stuttering treatment: A symposium. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118702796

Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter: A review. M Blomgren, 10.2147/PRBM.S31450Psychology research and behavior management. 6Blomgren, M. (2013). Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter: A review. Psychology research and behavior management, 6, 9. https://doi.org/10.2147/PRBM.S31450

Intensive stuttering modification therapy. M Blomgren, N Roy, T Callister, R M Merrill, 10.1044/1092-4388(2005/035)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Blomgren, M., Roy, N., Callister, T., & Merrill, R. M. (2005). Intensive stuttering modification therapy. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2005/035)

A handbook on stuttering. O Bloostein, N Bernstein Ratner, Thompson/DelmarClifton Park, NYBloostein, O., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2008). A handbook on stuttering. Clifton Park, NY: Thompson/Delmar.

Psychological characteristics and perceptions of stuttering of adults who stutter with and without support group experience. M P Boyle, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2013.09.001Journal of fluency disorders. 384Boyle, M. P. (2013). Psychological characteristics and perceptions of stuttering of adults who stutter with and without support group experience. Journal of fluency disorders, 38 (4), 368-381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2013.09.001

C Breazeal, K Dautenhahn, T Kanda, Social robotics. Springer handbook of robotics. Breazeal, C., Dautenhahn, K., & Kanda, T. (2016). Social robotics. Springer handbook of robotics (pp. 1935-1972).

Interventions for children and adolescence who stutter: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and evidence map. A Brignell, M Krahe, M Downes, E Kefalianos, S Reilly, A Morgan, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105843Journal of Fluency Disorders. Brignell, A., Krahe, M., Downes, M., Kefalianos, E., Reilly, S., & Morgan, A. (2021). Interventions for children and adolescence who stutter: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and evidence map. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 105843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105843

A systematic review of interventions for adults who stutter. A Brignell, M Krahe, M Downes, E Kefalianos, S Reilly, A T Morgan, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2020.105766Journal of Fluency Disorders. Brignell, A., Krahe, M., Downes, M., Kefalianos, E., Reilly, S., & Morgan, A. T. (2020). A systematic review of interventions for adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 105766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2020.105766

The world health organization quality of life assessment (WHOQOL): Position paper from the world health organization. W Group, 10.1016/0277-9536(95)00112-kSocial science & medicine. 4110112Group, W. et al. (1995). The world health organization quality of life assessment (WHOQOL): Position paper from the world health organization. Social science & medicine, 41 (10), 1403-1409. https://doi.org/10.1016/0277- 9536(95)00112-k

Stuttering: An integrated approach to its nature and treatment. B Guitar, Lippincott Williams & WilkinsGuitar, B. (2013). Stuttering: An integrated approach to its nature and treatment. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Predicting treatment time and long-term outcome of the Lidcombe program: A replication and reanalysis. B Guitar, D Kazenski, A Howard, S F Cousins, E Fader, P Haskell, 10.1044/2015_AJSLP-13-0156American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology. 243Guitar, B., Kazenski, D., Howard, A., Cousins, S. F., Fader, E., & Haskell, P. (2015). Predicting treatment time and long-term outcome of the Lidcombe program: A replication and reanalysis. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 24 (3), 533-544. https://doi.org/10.1044/2015_AJSLP-13-0156

. A Gunn, R G Menzies, M Onslow, S O&apos;brian, A Packman, R Lowe, F D Helgadóttir, M Jones, Gunn, A., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., O'Brian, S., Packman, A., Lowe, R., Helgadóttir, F. D., & Jones, M. (2019).

Phase I trial of a standalone internet social anxiety treatment for adolescents who stutter: Ibroadway. 10.1111/1460-6984.12496International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders. 546Phase I trial of a standalone internet social anxiety treatment for adolescents who stutter: Ibroadway. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 54 (6), 927-939. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12496

Video self-modeling as a post-treatment fluency recovery strategy for adults. J Harasym, M Langevin, D Kully, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2015.01.003Journal of Fluency Disorders. 44Harasym, J., Langevin, M., & Kully, D. (2015). Video self-modeling as a post-treatment fluency recovery strategy for adults. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 44, 32-45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2015.01.003

Telepractice at the institute for stuttering treatment and research (ISTAR). E Haynes, M Langevin, Haynes, E., & Langevin, M. (2010). Telepractice at the institute for stuttering treatment and research (ISTAR).

Paper presented at the 13thInternational Stuttering Awareness Day online conference for ISAD on-line forum. Paper presented at the 13thInternational Stuttering Awareness Day online conference for ISAD on-line forum;

. October, October.

The effects of self-disclosure and non selfdisclosure of stuttering on listeners' perceptions of a person who stutters. E C Healey, R M Gabel, D E Daniels, N Kawai, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.12.003Journal of Fluency Disorders. 321Healey, E. C., Gabel, R. M., Daniels, D. E., & Kawai, N. (2007). The effects of self-disclosure and non self- disclosure of stuttering on listeners' perceptions of a person who stutters. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 32 (1), 51- 69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.12.003

Developing treatment for adolescents who stutter: A phase i trial of the Camperdown program. A Hearne, A Packman, M Onslow, S Brian, 10.1044/0161-1461(2008/07-0038)Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools. Hearne, A., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & O'Brian, S. (2008). Developing treatment for adolescents who stutter: A phase i trial of the Camperdown program. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2008/07-0038)

A standalone internet cognitive behavior therapy treatment for social anxiety in adults who stutter: Kitsch. F D Helgadóttir, R G Menzies, M Onslow, A Packman, S Brian, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2014.04.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 41Helgadóttir, F. D., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O'Brian, S. (2014). A standalone internet cognitive behavior therapy treatment for social anxiety in adults who stutter: Kitsch. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 47-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2014.04.001

A phase ii clinical trial of self-imposed time-out treatment for stuttering in adults and adolescents. S Hewat, S Hewat, M Onslow, A Packman, S Brian, 10.1080/09638280500165245Disability and Rehabilitation. 281Hewat, S., Hewat, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O'BriAn, S. (2006). A phase ii clinical trial of self-imposed time-out treatment for stuttering in adults and adolescents. Disability and Rehabilitation, 28 (1), 33-42. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638280500165245

Stuttering inhibition via altered auditory feedback during scripted telephone conversations. D Hudock, J Kalinowski, 10.1111/1460-6984.12053International journal of language & communication disorders. 491Hudock, D., & Kalinowski, J. (2014). Stuttering inhibition via altered auditory feedback during scripted telephone conversations. International journal of language & communication disorders, 49 (1), 139-147. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12053

. 10.1016/j.jfludis.2005.12.001Disorders. 311Disorders, 31 (1), 43-63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2005.12.001

Efficacy of the modifying phonation intervals (MPI) stuttering treatment program with adults who stutter. R J Ingham, J C Ingham, A K Bothe, Y Wang, M Kilgo, 10.1044/2015_AJSLP-14-0076American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology. 242Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Bothe, A. K., Wang, Y., & Kilgo, M. (2015). Efficacy of the modifying phonation intervals (MPI) stuttering treatment program with adults who stutter. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 24 (2), 256-271. https://doi.org/10.1044/2015_AJSLP-14-0076

Evaluation of a stuttering treatment based on reduction of short phonation intervals. R J Ingham, M Kilgo, J C Ingham, R Moglia, H Belknap, T Sanchez, 10.1044/1092-4388(2001/096)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Ingham, R. J., Kilgo, M., Ingham, J. C., Moglia, R., Belknap, H., & Sanchez, T. (2001). Evaluation of a stuttering treatment based on reduction of short phonation intervals. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2001/096)

Speech effort measurement and stuttering: Investigating the chorus reading effect. R J Ingham, A Warner, A Byrd, J Cotton, 10.1044/1092-4388(2006/048)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Ingham, R. J., Warner, A., Byrd, A., & Cotton, J. (2006). Speech effort measurement and stuttering: Investigating the chorus reading effect. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092- 4388(2006/048)

The state of the art in non-pharmacological interventions for developmental stuttering. Part 2: Qualitative evidence synthesis of views and experiences. M Johnson, S Baxter, L Blank, A Cantrell, S Brumfitt, P Enderby, E Goyder, https:/doi-org/10.1111/1460-6984.12182International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders. 511Johnson, M., Baxter, S., Blank, L., Cantrell, A., Brumfitt, S., Enderby, P., & Goyder, E. (2016). The state of the art in non-pharmacological interventions for developmental stuttering. Part 2: Qualitative evidence synthesis of views and experiences. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 51 (1), 3-17. https://doi- org/10.1111/1460-6984.12182

Treating stuttering in young children: Predicting treatment time in the Lidcombe program. M Jones, M Onslow, E Harrison, A Packman, 10.1044/jslhr.4306.1440Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. 436Jones, M., Onslow, M., Harrison, E., & Packman, A. (2000). Treating stuttering in young children: Predicting treatment time in the Lidcombe program. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43 (6), 1440-1450. https://doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4306.1440

. 10.1044/cicsd_25_S_8https://doi.org/10.1044/cicsd_25_S_8

A cross-cultural, longterm outcome evaluation of the ISTAR comprehensive stuttering program across Dutch and Canadian adults who stutter. M Langevin, W J Huinck, D Kully, H F Peters, H Lomheim, M Tellers, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.06.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 314Langevin, M., Huinck, W. J., Kully, D., Peters, H. F., Lomheim, H., & Tellers, M. (2006). A cross-cultural, long- term outcome evaluation of the ISTAR comprehensive stuttering program across Dutch and Canadian adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31 (4), 229-256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.06.001

Five-year longitudinal treatment outcomes of the ISTAR comprehensive stuttering program. M Langevin, D Kully, S Teshima, P Hagler, N N Prasad, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2010.04.002Journal of Fluency Disorders. 352Langevin, M., Kully, D., Teshima, S., Hagler, P., & Prasad, N. N. (2010). Five-year longitudinal treatment outcomes of the ISTAR comprehensive stuttering program. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35 (2), 123-140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2010.04.002

A randomized control trial to investigate the impact of the Lidcombe program on early stuttering in German-speaking preschoolers. C Lattermann, H A Euler, K Neumann, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2007.12.002Journal of fluency disorders. 331Lattermann, C., Euler, H. A., & Neumann, K. (2008). A randomized control trial to investigate the impact of the Lidcombe program on early stuttering in German-speaking preschoolers. Journal of fluency disorders, 33 (1), 52- 65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2007.12.002

Rhythmic speech and stuttering reduction in a syllable-timed language. T Law, A Packman, M Onslow, C K To, .-S Tong, M. C.-F Lee, K Y , .-S , 10.1080/02699206.2018.1480655Clinical linguistics & phonetics. 3210Law, T., Packman, A., Onslow, M., To, C. K.-S., Tong, M. C.-F., & Lee, K. Y.-S. (2018). Rhythmic speech and stuttering reduction in a syllable-timed language. Clinical linguistics & phonetics, 32 (10), 932-949. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699206.2018.1480655

Group therapy for school-aged children who stutter: A survey of current practices. H Liddle, S James, M Hardman, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2011.02.004Journal of fluency disorders. 364Liddle, H., James, S., & Hardman, M. (2011). Group therapy for school-aged children who stutter: A survey of current practices. Journal of fluency disorders, 36 (4), 274-279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2011.02.004

Self-disclosure of stuttering at the beginning of interactions may improve listeners' perceptions of people who stutter. Evidence-Based Communication Assessment and Intervention. M Lincoln, G Bricker-Katz, 10.1080/174895308020881612Lincoln, M., & Bricker-Katz, G. (2008). Self-disclosure of stuttering at the beginning of interactions may improve listeners' perceptions of people who stutter. Evidence-Based Communication Assessment and Intervention, 2 (2), 87-89. https://doi.org/10.1080/17489530802088161

Altered auditory feedback and the treatment of stuttering: A review. M Lincoln, A Packman, M Onslow, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.04.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 312Lincoln, M., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2006). Altered auditory feedback and the treatment of stuttering: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31 (2), 71-89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2006.04.001

An experimental investigation of the effect of altered auditory feedback on the conversational speech of adults who stutter. M Lincoln, A Packman, M Onslow, M Jones, 10.1044/1092-4388(2009/07-0266)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Lincoln, M., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Jones, M. (2010). An experimental investigation of the effect of altered auditory feedback on the conversational speech of adults who stutter. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2009/07-0266)

Perspectives on the effects of stuttering on the formation and maintenance of intimate relationships. G W Linn, A J Caruso, Journal of Rehabilitation. 64312Linn, G. W., & Caruso, A. J. (1998). Perspectives on the effects of stuttering on the formation and maintenance of intimate relationships. Journal of Rehabilitation, 64 (3), 12.

Stuttering research and practice: Bridging the gap. W H Manning, Progress under the surface and over timeManning, W. H. (1999). Progress under the surface and over time. Stuttering research and practice: Bridging the gap, 123-130.

The effects of time-out on stuttering in a 12 year old boy. R Martin, L A Berndt, 10.1177/001440297003700410Exceptional Children. 374Martin, R., & Berndt, L. A. (1970). The effects of time-out on stuttering in a 12 year old boy. Exceptional Children, 37 (4), 303-304. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440297003700410

An experimental treatment with two preschool stuttering children. R R Martin, P Kuhl, S Haroldson, 10.1044/jshr.1504.743Journal of Speech and Hearing Research. 154Martin, R. R., Kuhl, P., & Haroldson, S. (1972). An experimental treatment with two preschool stuttering children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 15 (4), 743-752. https://doi.org/10.1044/jshr.1504.743

Modifying phonation intervals (MPI) stuttering therapy compared to standard prolonged speech treatment. Evidence-Based Communication Assessment and Intervention. D Matthews, M Blomgren, 10.1080/17489539.2016.116533610Matthews, D., & Blomgren, M. (2016). Modifying phonation intervals (MPI) stuttering therapy compared to standard prolonged speech treatment. Evidence-Based Communication Assessment and Intervention, 10 (1), 25-31. https://doi.org/10.1080/17489539.2016.1165336

Case file audit of Lidcombe program outcomes in a student-led stuttering clinic. J Mcculloch, M C Swift, B Wagnitz, 10.3109/17549507.2016.1159336International journal of speech-language pathology. 192McCulloch, J., Swift, M. C., & Wagnitz, B. (2017). Case file audit of Lidcombe program outcomes in a student-led stuttering clinic. International journal of speech-language pathology, 19 (2), 165-173. https://doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2016.1159336

Telepractice treatment of stuttering: A systematic review. M Mcgill, N Noureal, J Siegel, 10.1089/tmj.2017.031925Telemedicine and e-HealthMcGill, M., Noureal, N., & Siegel, J. (2019). Telepractice treatment of stuttering: A systematic review. Telemedicine and e-Health, 25 (5), 359-368. https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2017.0319

Self-report of self-disclosure statements for stuttering. M Mcgill, J Siegel, D Nguyen, S Rodriguez, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.09.004Journal of fluency disorders. 58McGill, M., Siegel, J., Nguyen, D., & Rodriguez, S. (2018). Self-report of self-disclosure statements for stuttering. Journal of fluency disorders, 58, 22-34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.09.004

International phase ii clinical trial of CBTpsych: A standalone internet social anxiety treatment for adults who stutter. R Menzies, S O&apos;brian, R Lowe, A Packman, M Onslow, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2016.06.002Journal of Fluency Disorders. 48Menzies, R., O'Brian, S., Lowe, R., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2016). International phase ii clinical trial of CBTpsych: A standalone internet social anxiety treatment for adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 48, 35-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2016.06.002

Supplementing stuttering treatment with online cognitive behavior therapy: An experimental trial. R Menzies, S O&apos;brian, A Packman, M Jones, F D Helgadóttir, M Onslow, 10.1016/j.jcomdis.2019.04.003Journal of Communication Disorders. 80Menzies, R., O'Brian, S., Packman, A., Jones, M., Helgadóttir, F. D., & Onslow, M. (2019). Supplementing stuttering treatment with online cognitive behavior therapy: An experimental trial. Journal of Communication Disorders, 80, 81-91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2019.04.003

An experimental clinical trial of a cognitive-behavior therapy package for chronic stuttering. R G Menzies, S O&apos;brian, M Onslow, A Packman, T St Clare, S Block, 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0070)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Menzies, R. G., O'Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., St Clare, T., & Block, S. (2008). An experimental clinical trial of a cognitive-behavior therapy package for chronic stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0070)

Anxiety and stuttering: Exploring a complex relationship. R G Menzies, M Onslow, A Packman, 10.1044/1058-0360.0801.03American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology. 81Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., & Packman, A. (1999). Anxiety and stuttering: Exploring a complex relationship. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 8 (1), 3-10. https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360.0801.03

In-clinic and standalone internet cognitive behavior therapy treatment for social anxiety in stuttering: A randomized trial of iGlebe. R G Menzies, A Packman, M Onslow, S O&apos;brian, M Jones, F D Helgadóttir, 10.1044/2019_JSLHR-S-18-0340Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. 626Menzies, R. G., Packman, A., Onslow, M., O'Brian, S., Jones, M., & Helgadóttir, F. D. (2019). In-clinic and standalone internet cognitive behavior therapy treatment for social anxiety in stuttering: A randomized trial of iGlebe. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 62 (6), 1614-1624. https://doi.org/10.1044/2019_JSLHR-S-18-0340

Dual tasking and stuttering: From the laboratory to the clinic. C Metten, H.-G Bosshardt, M Jones, J Eisenhuth, S Block, B Carey, S O&apos;brian, A Packman, M Onslow, R Menzies, 10.3109/09638288.2010.515701Disability and Rehabilitation. 3311Metten, C., Bosshardt, H.-G., Jones, M., Eisenhuth, J., Block, S., Carey, B., O'Brian, S., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Menzies, R. (2011). Dual tasking and stuttering: From the laboratory to the clinic. Disability and Rehabilitation, 33 (11), 933-944. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2010.515701

Is parent-child interaction therapy effective in reducing stuttering. S K Millard, A Nicholas, F M Cook, 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/046)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Millard, S. K., Nicholas, A., & Cook, F. M. (2008). Is parent-child interaction therapy effective in reducing stuttering? Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/046)

Palin parent-child interaction therapy: The bigger picture. American journal of speech-language pathology. S K Millard, P Zebrowski, E Kelman, 10.1044/2018_AJSLP-ODC11-17-019927Millard, S. K., Zebrowski, P., & Kelman, E. (2018). Palin parent-child interaction therapy: The bigger picture. American journal of speech-language pathology, 27 (3S), 1211-1223. https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_AJSLP- ODC11-17-0199

same levels of stuttering severity ratings and anxiety in school-age children and adolescents who stutter. 10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105830Journal of Fluency Disorders. 68105830same levels of stuttering severity ratings and anxiety in school-age children and adolescents who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 68, 105830. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105830

Attention training in rehabilitation of children with developmental stuttering. V Nejati, H R Pouretemad, H Bahrami, 10.3233/NRE-130847NeuroRehabilitation. 322Nejati, V., Pouretemad, H. R., & Bahrami, H. (2013). Attention training in rehabilitation of children with developmental stuttering. NeuroRehabilitation, 32 (2), 297-303. https://doi.org/10.3233/NRE-130847

. K Neumann, H A Euler, A W Von Gudenberg, A.-L Giraud, H Lanfermann, V Gall, C Preibisch, Neumann, K., Euler, H. A., von Gudenberg, A. W., Giraud, A.-L., Lanfermann, H., Gall, V., & Preibisch, C. (2003).

The nature and treatment of stuttering as revealed by fMRI: A within-and between-group comparison. 10.1016/j.jfludis.2003.07.003Journal of fluency disorders. 284The nature and treatment of stuttering as revealed by fMRI: A within-and between-group comparison. Journal of fluency disorders, 28 (4), 381-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2003.07.003

. K Neumann, C Preibisch, H A Euler, A W Von Gudenberg, H Lanfermann, V Gall, A.-L Giraud, Neumann, K., Preibisch, C., Euler, H. A., Von Gudenberg, A. W., Lanfermann, H., Gall, V., & Giraud, A.-L.

Cortical plasticity associated with stuttering therapy. 10.1016/j.jfludis.2004.12.002Journal of fluency disorders. 301Cortical plasticity associated with stuttering therapy. Journal of fluency disorders, 30 (1), 23-39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2004.12.002

Stuttering in preschool children: Direct versus indirect treatment. Language, speech, and hearing services in schools. M A Nippold, 10.1044/2017_LSHSS-17-006649Nippold, M. A. (2018). Stuttering in preschool children: Direct versus indirect treatment. Language, speech, and hearing services in schools, 49 (1), 4-12. https://doi.org/10.1044/2017_LSHSS-17-0066

Operant techniques used in stuttering therapy: A review. S Nittrouer, C Cheney, 10.1016/0094-730X(84)90011-1Journal of Fluency Disorders. 93Nittrouer, S., & Cheney, C. (1984). Operant techniques used in stuttering therapy: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 9 (3), 169-190. https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-730X(84)90011-1

Behavioral stuttering interventions for children and adolescents: A systematic review and meta-analysis. C Nye, M Vanryckeghem, J B Schwartz, C Herder, H M Turneriii, C Howard, 10.1044/1092-4388(2012/12-0036)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Nye, C., Vanryckeghem, M., Schwartz, J. B., Herder, C., TurnerIII, H. M., & Howard, C. (2013). Behavioral stuttering interventions for children and adolescents: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2012/12-0036)

The Camperdown program: Outcomes of a new prolonged-speech treatment model. S O&apos;brian, M Onslow, A Cream, A Packman, 10.1044/1092-4388(2003/073)Journal of speech. O'Brian, S., Onslow, M., Cream, A., & Packman, A. (2003). The Camperdown program: Outcomes of a new prolonged-speech treatment model. Journal of speech, language, and hearing research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2003/073)

The effectiveness of SpeechEasy during situations of daily living. J J O&apos;donnell, J Armson, M Kiefte, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2008.02.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 332O'Donnell, J. J., Armson, J., & Kiefte, M. (2008). The effectiveness of SpeechEasy during situations of daily living. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 33 (2), 99-119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2008.02.001

Direct early intervention with stuttering: Some preliminary data. M Onslow, L Costa, S Rue, 10.1044/jshd.5503.405Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders. 553Onslow, M., Costa, L., & Rue, S. (1990). Direct early intervention with stuttering: Some preliminary data. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55 (3), 405-416. https://doi.org/10.1044/jshd.5503.405

An operant intervention for early stuttering: The development of the Lidcombe program. M Onslow, R G Menzies, A Packman, 10.1177/0145445501251007Behavior modification. 251Onslow, M., Menzies, R. G., & Packman, A. (2001). An operant intervention for early stuttering: The development of the Lidcombe program. Behavior modification, 25 (1), 116-139. https://doi.org/10.1177/0145445501251007

Control of children's stuttering with response-contingent time-out: Behavioral, perceptual, and acoustic data. M Onslow, A Packman, S Stocker, J V Doorn, G M Siegel, 10.1044/jslhr.4001.121Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. 401Onslow, M., Packman, A., Stocker, S., Doorn, J. v., & Siegel, G. M. (1997). Control of children's stuttering with response-contingent time-out: Behavioral, perceptual, and acoustic data. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 40 (1), 121-133. https://doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4001.121

A preliminary report on outcomes of the American institute for stuttering intensive therapy program. R Pollard, https:/doi.org/10.1044/ffd22.1.5Perspectives on Fluency and Fluency Disorders. 221Pollard, R. (2012). A preliminary report on outcomes of the American institute for stuttering intensive therapy program. Perspectives on Fluency and Fluency Disorders, 22 (1), 5-15. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10

Effects of the SpeechEasy on objective and perceived aspects of stuttering: A 6-month, phase i clinical trial in naturalistic environments. R Pollard, J B Ellis, D Finan, P R Ramig, 10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0204)Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. Pollard, R., Ellis, J. B., Finan, D., & Ramig, P. R. (2009). Effects of the SpeechEasy on objective and perceived aspects of stuttering: A 6-month, phase i clinical trial in naturalistic environments. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0204)

Speakup-a mobile application to train and overcome stuttering. V Prasanna, I Perera, 10.1109/ICTer48817.2019.902372419th International Conference on Advances in ICT for Emerging Regions (ICTer). 250Prasanna, V., & Perera, I. (2019). Speakup-a mobile application to train and overcome stuttering. 2019 19th International Conference on Advances in ICT for Emerging Regions (ICTer), 250, 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTer48817.2019.9023724

Stuttering: An overview. J E Prasse, G E Kikano, American family physician. 779Prasse, J. E., & Kikano, G. E. (2008). Stuttering: An overview. American family physician, 77 (9), 1271-1276.

Choral reading with filtered speech: Effect on stuttering. M K Rami, J Kalinowski, M P Rastatter, D Holbert, M Allen, 10.2466/pms.100.2.421-431Perceptual and Motor Skills. 1002Rami, M. K., Kalinowski, J., Rastatter, M. P., Holbert, D., & Allen, M. (2005). Choral reading with filtered speech: Effect on stuttering. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 100 (2), 421-431. https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.100.2.421-431

An experimental treatment using verbal punishment with two preschool stutterers. C G Reed, A L Godden, 10.1016/0094-730X(77)90026-2Journal of Fluency Disorders. 23Reed, C. G., & Godden, A. L. (1977). An experimental treatment using verbal punishment with two preschool stutterers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 2 (3), 225-233. https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-730X(77)90026-2

Suggestions for improving the long-term effects of treatments for stuttering: A review and synthesis of frequency-shifted feedback and operant techniques. P Reed, P Howell, 10.1080/15021149.2000.11434158European journal of behavior analysis. 12Reed, P., & Howell, P. (2000). Suggestions for improving the long-term effects of treatments for stuttering: A review and synthesis of frequency-shifted feedback and operant techniques. European journal of behavior analysis, 1 (2), 89-106. https://doi.org/10.1080/15021149.2000.11434158

Efficacy of the Arabic modified fluency shaping program in the treatment of stuttering. N A Rifaie, A S Saber, S T K El-Din, Y A Sallam, A M Algamal, 10.4103/1012-5574.192546The Egyptian Journal of Otolaryngology. 324Rifaie, N. A., Saber, A. S., El-Din, S. T. K., Sallam, Y. A., Algamal, A. M., et al. (2016). Efficacy of the Arabic modified fluency shaping program in the treatment of stuttering. The Egyptian Journal of Otolaryngology, 32 (4), 306. https://doi.org/10.4103/1012-5574.192546

Acoustic duration changes associated with two types of treatment for children who stutter. G D Riley, J C Ingham, 10.1044/jslhr.4304.965Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. 434Riley, G. D., & Ingham, J. C. (2000). Acoustic duration changes associated with two types of treatment for children who stutter. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43 (4), 965-978. https://doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4304.965

Randomized clinical trial: The use of SpeechEasy® in stuttering treatment. A P Ritto, F S Juste, A Stuart, J Kalinowski, C R F De Andrade, 10.1111/1460-6984.12237International journal of language & communication disorders. 516Ritto, A. P., Juste, F. S., Stuart, A., Kalinowski, J., & de Andrade, C. R. F. (2016). Randomized clinical trial: The use of SpeechEasy® in stuttering treatment. International journal of language & communication disorders, 51 (6), 769-774. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12237

RAMSES: a robotic assistant and a mobile support environment for speech and language therapy. V E Robles-Bykbaev, M Lopez-Nores, J J Pazos-Arias, J Garcia-Duque, 10.1109/INTECH.2015.7173473Fifth International Conference on the Innovative Computing Technology. INTECHRobles-Bykbaev, V. E., Lopez-Nores, M., Pazos-Arias, J. J., & Garcia-Duque, J. (2015, May). RAMSES: a robotic assistant and a mobile support environment for speech and language therapy. In Fifth International Conference on the Innovative Computing Technology (INTECH 2015) (pp. 1-4). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/INTECH.2015.7173473

. 10.1080/136828208025469511000-1017. https://doi.org/10.1080/13682820802546951

Social acceptability of anomalous persons. L M Shears, C J Jensema, 10.1177/001440296903600204Exceptional Children. 362Shears, L. M., & Jensema, C. J. (1969). Social acceptability of anomalous persons. Exceptional Children, 36 (2), 91-96. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440296903600204

. J Shimaya, Y Yoshikawa, Y Matsumoto, H Kumazaki, H Ishiguro, M Mimura, M Miyao, Shimaya, J., Yoshikawa, Y., Matsumoto, Y., Kumazaki, H., Ishiguro, H., Mimura, M., & Miyao, M. (2016).

Advantages of indirect conversation via a desktop humanoid robot: Case study on daily life guidance for adolescents with autism spectrum disorders. 10.1109/ROMAN.2016.774521525th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive communication. RO-MANAdvantages of indirect conversation via a desktop humanoid robot: Case study on daily life guidance for adolescents with autism spectrum disorders. 2016 25th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive communication (RO-MAN), 831-836. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2016.7745215

A review of stuttering intervention approaches for preschool-age and elementary school-age children. Contemporary issues in communication science and disorders. A Sidavi, R Fabus, 10.1044/cicsd_37_S_1437Sidavi, A., & Fabus, R. (2010). A review of stuttering intervention approaches for preschool-age and elementary school-age children. Contemporary issues in communication science and disorders, 37 (Spring), 14-26. https://doi.org/10.1044/cicsd_37_S_14

Impact of stuttering on perception of occupational competence. F H Silverman, K K Paynter, 10.1016/0094-730X(90)90035-QJournal of Fluency Disorders. 152Silverman, F. H., & Paynter, K. K. (1990). Impact of stuttering on perception of occupational competence. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 15 (2), 87-91. https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-730X(90)90035-Q

Talk to me: The role of human-robot interaction in improving verbal communication skills in students with autism or intellectual disability. D Silvera-Tawil, D Bradford, C Roberts-Yates, 10.1109/ROMAN.2018.852569827th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication. RO-MANSilvera-Tawil, D., Bradford, D., & Roberts-Yates, C. (2018, August). Talk to me: The role of human-robot interaction in improving verbal communication skills in students with autism or intellectual disability. In 2018 27th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) (pp. 1-6). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2018.8525698

The perception of speech naturalness of post-therapeutic and altered auditory feedback speech of adults with mild and severe stuttering. A Stuart, J Kalinowski, 10.1159/000081082Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica. 566Stuart, A., & Kalinowski, J. (2004). The perception of speech naturalness of post-therapeutic and altered auditory feedback speech of adults with mild and severe stuttering. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 56 (6), 347-357. https://doi.org/10.1159/000081082

Parent verbal contingencies during the Lidcombe program: Observations and statistical modeling of the treatment process. M C Swift, M Jones, S O&apos;brian, M Onslow, A Packman, R Menzies, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2015.12.002Journal of fluency disorders. 47Swift, M. C., Jones, M., O'Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2016). Parent verbal contingencies during the Lidcombe program: Observations and statistical modeling of the treatment process. Journal of fluency disorders, 47, 13-26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2015.12.002

A clinician survey of speech and non-speech characteristics of neurogenic stuttering. C Theys, A Van Wieringen, F Luc, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2007.09.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 331Theys, C., Van Wieringen, A., & Luc, F. (2008). A clinician survey of speech and non-speech characteristics of neurogenic stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 33 (1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2007.09.001

The use of movie and spot dubbing in stuttering treatment. D Tomaiuoli, R Castiglione, F Del Gado, P Falcone, E Lucchini, E Pasqua, M Grazia, N Trajkovski, C Andrews, M Onslow, A Packman, S O&apos;brian, R Menzies, Treatment, and Self-help in Fluency Disorders: New Horizons. Proceedings of the International Fluency Association's 5th World Congress. Tomaiuoli, D., Castiglione, R., Del Gado, F., Falcone, P., Lucchini, E., Pasqua, E., & Grazia, M. (2006). The use of movie and spot dubbing in stuttering treatment. Research, Treatment, and Self-help in Fluency Disorders: New Horizons. Proceedings of the International Fluency Association's 5th World Congress, 130-135. Trajkovski, N., Andrews, C., Onslow, M., Packman, A., O'Brian, S., & Menzies, R. (2009).

Using syllable-timed speech to treat preschool children who stutter: A multiple baseline experiment. 10.1016/j.jfludis.2009.01.001Journal of fluency disorders. 341Using syllable-timed speech to treat preschool children who stutter: A multiple baseline experiment. Journal of fluency disorders, 34 (1), 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2009.01.001

Self-help conferences for people who stutter: A qualitative investigation. M Trichon, J Tetnowski, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2011.06.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 364Trichon, M., & Tetnowski, J. (2011). Self-help conferences for people who stutter: A qualitative investigation. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 36 (4), 290-295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2011.06.001

The successful stuttering management program: A preliminary report on outcomes. J Tsiamtsiouris, K Krieger, 10.1044/ffd20.1.20Perspectives on Fluency and Fluency Disorders. 20Tsiamtsiouris, J., & Krieger, K. (2010). The successful stuttering management program: A preliminary report on outcomes. Perspectives on Fluency and Fluency Disorders, 20 (1), 20-25. https://doi.org/10.1044/ffd20.1.20

Immediate effects of AAF devices on the characteristics of stuttering: A clinical analysis. J P Unger, C W Glück, J Cholewa, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.02.001Journal of Fluency Disorders. 372Unger, J. P., Glück, C. W., & Cholewa, J. (2012). Immediate effects of AAF devices on the characteristics of stuttering: A clinical analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37 (2), 122-134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.02.001

Evidence for the treatment of co-occurring stuttering and speech sound disorder: A clinical case series. R Unicomb, S Hewat, E Spencer, E Harrison, 10.1080/17549507.2017.1293735International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology. 193Unicomb, R., Hewat, S., Spencer, E., & Harrison, E. (2017). Evidence for the treatment of co-occurring stuttering and speech sound disorder: A clinical case series. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 19 (3), 251-264. https://doi.org/10.1080/17549507.2017.1293735

Delayed auditory feedback in the treatment of stuttering: Clients as consumers. J Van Borsel, G Reunes, Van Den, N Bergh, 10.1080/1368282021000042902International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders. 382Van Borsel, J., Reunes, G., & Van den Bergh, N. (2003). Delayed auditory feedback in the treatment of stuttering: Clients as consumers. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 38 (2), 119-129. https://doi.org/10.1080/1368282021000042902

Recent advances in the treatment of stuttering: A theoretical perspective. H Venkatagiri, 10.1016/j.jcomdis.2005.03.001Journal of communication disorders. 385Venkatagiri, H. (2005). Recent advances in the treatment of stuttering: A theoretical perspective. Journal of communication disorders, 38 (5), 375-393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2005.03.001

The Lidcombe program of early stuttering intervention for Malaysian families: Four case studies. E Vong, L Wilson, M Lincoln, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2016.07.003Journal of fluency disorders. 49Vong, E., Wilson, L., & Lincoln, M. (2016). The Lidcombe program of early stuttering intervention for Malaysian families: Four case studies. Journal of fluency disorders, 49, 29-39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2016.07.003

Effects of self-modelling on stuttering. M J Webber, A Packman, M Onslow, 10.1080/13682820310001644560International journal of language & communication disorders. 394Webber, M. J., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2004). Effects of self-modelling on stuttering. International journal of language & communication disorders, 39 (4), 509-522. https://doi.org/10.1080/13682820310001644560

Treatment of stuttering with regulated breathing: Strengths, limitations, and future directions. D W Woods, M P Twohig, R W Fuqua, J M Hanley, 10.1016/S0005-7894(00)80030-1Behavior therapy. 313Woods, D. W., Twohig, M. P., Fuqua, R. W., & Hanley, J. M. (2000). Treatment of stuttering with regulated breathing: Strengths, limitations, and future directions. Behavior therapy, 31 (3), 547-568. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7894(00)80030-1

Epidemiology of stuttering: 21st century advances. E Yairi, N Ambrose, N Grinager, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.11.002Journal of fluency disorders. Austin: Pro-ed. Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N.382Early childhood stutteringYairi, E., Ambrose, N., & Grinager, N. (2005). Early childhood stuttering. Austin: Pro-ed. Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (2013). Epidemiology of stuttering: 21st century advances. Journal of fluency disorders, 38 (2), 66-87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.11.002

Assessing quality of life in stuttering treatment outcomes research. J S Yaruss, 10.1016/j.jfludis.2010.05.010Journal of fluency disorders. 353Yaruss, J. S. (2010). Assessing quality of life in stuttering treatment outcomes research. Journal of fluency disorders, 35 (3), 190-202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2010.05.010

Speech treatment and support group experiences of people who participate in the national stuttering association. J S Yaruss, R W Quesal, L Reeves, L F Molt, B Kluetz, A J Caruso, J A Mcclure, F Lewis, 10.1016/S0094-730X(02)00114-6Journal of Fluency Disorders. 272Yaruss, J. S., Quesal, R. W., Reeves, L., Molt, L. F., Kluetz, B., Caruso, A. J., McClure, J. A., & Lewis, F. (2002). Speech treatment and support group experiences of people who participate in the national stuttering association. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 27 (2), 115-134. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0094-730X(02)00114-6

Development and pilot test for stuttering self-monitoring solution using telehealth. M.-C Yuen, S Y Chu, C H Wong, K F Ng, 2021 International Conference on COMmunication Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS). Yuen, M.-C., Chu, S. Y., Wong, C. H., & Ng, K. F. (2021). Development and pilot test for stuttering self-monitoring solution using telehealth. 2021 International Conference on COMmunication Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), 650-655.