# Clostridium subterminale infection in a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome: A case report and literature review

CorpusID: 252817827
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94a62c35eb8b92ca5b9547d470b3e3834534f0c8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94a62c35eb8b92ca5b9547d470b3e3834534f0c8)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Clostridium subterminale infection in a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome: A case report and literature review


Ying Zhou 
Sheng Wang 
Xing-Bei Weng 
Clostridium subterminale infection in a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome: A case report and literature review
10.1177/03000605221129558Date received: 5 June 2022; accepted: 12 September 2022Case ReportsClostridium subterminale16S rRNABacteraemiaLarge B-cell lymphomaHemophagocytic syndrome
Although uncommon, infection caused by Clostridium subterminale may be life threatening particularly in immunocompromised patients. We report here a rare presentation of a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome associated with C. subterminale bacteraemia. The management of the patient is described as well as a review of medical literature. Infection by Clostridium species, including C. subterminale, should be considered in a febrile patient with a haematologic malignancy. The case highlights the importance of using gene sequencing for identification of this anaerobic organism.

impact on human and animal health include C. difficile, C. perfringens, C. tetani, and C. botulinum. 3 Reports of infections caused by C. subterminale are rare. We present a case of C. subterminale bacteraemia in a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome.


## Methods

We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of a patient who was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome associated with C. subterminale bacteraemia. In addition, we searched the PubMed database for similar case reports of infections caused by C. subterminale. Our literature search identified 13 articles that described 14 case studies (Table 1). [4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16] The case study was approved by Ningbo First Hospital Ethics Committee (2021RS117) and signed informed consent was obtained from the patient for publishing his anonymised data. The reporting of this study conforms to CARE guidelines. 17 


## Case report

A 56-year-old man with an unexplained fever (maximum temperature 38.4 C) which had lasted for a week, presented to his local clinic. He had a mild dry cough, fatigue and a swollen left calf. Results of outpatient laboratory tests were as follows: white blood cells (WBC), 3.03 Â 10 9 /l; highsensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), 38.40 mg/l; platelets, 37.0 Â 10 9 /l. Infectious fever was considered and he was started on intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone 2 g qd. However, after 3 days he had failed to improve and was admitted to hospital.

On admission, routine examination indicated abnormal liver and kidney function and an electrolyte disorder. His HIV test result was negative. Indices of cellular immune function (including lymphocyte subsets) were decreased and suggested that the patient's immune function was impaired. Result were as follows: CD4 þ T cells, 28%; natural killer (NK) cells, 4%; CD3 þ CD25 þ T cells, 0.2%; CD4 þ CD25 þ T cells, 0.05%; CD3 þ /HLA-DRþ cells, 1.9%; CD8 þ /HLA-DRþ cells, 0.6%. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left calf suggested an inflammatory response. The patient was treated with IV piperacillin/ tazobactam 4.5 g every 8 h and oral tenofovir 300 mg qd. To maintain electrolyte balance, the patient also received IV 0.9% sodium chloride 100 ml qd and oral potassium chloride 0.5 g tds. However, after three days, symptoms had not improved.

On the day of admission, a blood sample was taken and cultured using BD BACTEC Plus Aerobic and Anaerobic blood culture bottles with BD BACTEC FX (BD Diagnostics, Sparks, MD). The colonies on the blood plate were observed to be flat and transparent, with irregular edges and tiny haemolysis rings. Gram staining was performed and Clostridium grampositive bacilli were observed. The strain 10798 was isolated from colonies and identified as C. fallax by the bioMerieux MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (MS) (VITEK MS, bioMerieux, France) system. However, bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed to confirm identification (specific primers: 27F: AGAGT TTGATCCTGGCTCAG, 1492R: GGTT ACCTTGTTACGACTT) and the 10798 strain was identified as C. subterminale (GenBank NR_113027).

On Day 4, following the results of the blood culture, the patient was started on IV levofloxacin 0.5g qd. Antiviral therapy, piperacillin/tazobactam and fluid rehydration were continued. On Day 9, a second blood culture was negative suggesting that the antibiotic treatment had been effective but the patient's serum ferritin was 1467 mg/l. A few phagocytes without obvious bone marrow involvement were found on bone On Day 11, the patient's fever had not improved, and so the patient was prescribed IV infusion of 20 g gamma globulins and 10 units of platelets. With the exception of fluid rehydration, all other treatments were stopped. Following the infusion, platelets increased from 37 Â 10 9 /l to 48 Â 10 9 /l. On Day 13, gamma globulin was discontinued. On Day 14, haemophagocytic syndrome was considered because its five diagnostic criteria had been established. These were: fever; haemphagocytosis in the bone marrow; decreased NK cell activity (decreased by 1.1%); serum ferritin !500 mg/l (1467 mg/l), elevated soluble CD25 !2400 U/ml (8850 U/ ml). Therefore, combined treatment of IV dexamethasone 10 mg/m 2 with etoposide (VP-16) 150 mg/m 2 was initiated and fluid hydration continued. The patient's temperature returned to normal the next day. Blood work showed WBC, 7.0 Â 10 9 /l and CRP:10.32 mg/l. The treatment appeared to be effective and so IV dexamethasone 15 mg qd and routine fluid rehydration were continued. On Day 17, adrenal biopsy indicated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with bilateral adrenal involvement. After evaluation, R-CEOP (i.e., rituximab, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, vincristine and oral prednisolone) chemotherapy was initiated. The patient developed paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia during chemotherapy, which was restored to normal rhythm using electric cardioversion. The patient was diagnosed as having diffuse large Bcell lymphoma with bilateral adrenal involvement, haemophagocytic syndrome, bacteraemia and left calf swelling. The patient's condition stabilised following treatment and his blood results were: WBC, 6.20 Â 10 9 /l; CRP, <0.5 mg/l; platelets, 150 Â 10 9 /l. The patient was discharged from hospital on Day 27.


## Discussion

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and haemophagocytic syndrome associated with C. subterminale bacteraemia.

Initially, using MALDI-TOF MS we identified the strain 10798 as C. fallax. In recent years, MALDI-TOF MS has been widely used as a rapid and reliable method for the identification of microorganisms. Microbial identification is achieved by searching databases containing mass spectra of peptides and proteins extracted from microorganisms of interest, using scoring algorithms to match analysed spectra against reference spectra. 18 The accuracy of MALDI-TOF MS in identifying clinical pathogenic anaerobes is 84% for species, and 92% for genus. Moreover, the identification accuracy of MALDI-TOF MS is 98% for Clostridium spp. However, the accuracy of MALDI-TOF MS is related to many factors, including, growth of bacteria, stability of the instrument, and capacity of the database. The rarity of this present case, may have led to an inadequate database comparison which may have led to the inaccurate identification of C. subterminale as C. fallax. Bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing is widely used for the identification of microbes because of advantages in sample throughput, cost, and sensitivity. 19,20 In this present case, the strain 10798 was correctly identified as C. subterminale by sequence-based bacterial analysis.

Susceptibility testing was not performed on the isolate which is a limitation of this case. However, although resistance to cephalosporins, clindamycin, aminoglycosides and quinolones has been reported, most Clostridium spp are sensitive to penicillin, carbapenems, glycopeptides and metronidazole. 14,16 In this present case, following identification of C. subterminale in blood culture, levofloxacin was initiated and used empirically to fight infection. After three days blood culture was negative for the bacilli and so demonstrated that the antibiotic treatment had been effective. However, the fever had not improved and haemophagocytic syndrome was suspected. After the diagnosis was confirmed, combined treatment of dexamethasone with etoposide was administered and on the following day the patient's temperature had returned to normal.

There is little available information about C. subterminale. It is an anaerobic, spore-forming Gram-positive bacterium usually found in soil. 11 We conducted a review of medical literature and found 13 articles that described 14 cases of infections caused by C. subterminale (Table 1). [4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16] The cases were reported from 1975 to 2022. Of the 14 cases, seven (50%) were reported after 2011, suggesting that detection rate has increased significantly over the last decade. Ten reports were from the USA, and one each in Switzerland, Japan, Germany, and Greece. Data on sex and age were available for 12 patients, of whom nine (75%) were male and ages ranged from 6-77 years. Although data are limited, the findings of the review suggest that men are more susceptible to C. subterminale infection and that the bacilli can affect all age groups. In terms of prognosis, five patients (42%) died, three of whom were immunocompromised and seven cases (50%) were diagnosed as bacteraemia or septicaemia. With regard to treatment, incision, drainage, or surgical debridement were essential for bacterial clearance, and so these procedures were performed in a majority of cases. Unsurprisingly, antibiotics were administrated in all cases, although susceptibility testing was only performed in two cases. 5,16 An overview of the 14 cases suggests that one of the most important risk factors for C. subterminale infection is deep tissue injury. Indeed, sources of C. subterminale infection include abscesses, wounds and blood. 15 Detection of C. subterminale, particularly in an immunocompromised patient, should trigger an immediate investigation into the potential source of the infection which may require surgical debridement and appropriate antibiotic coverage. 16 The patient in this present case was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, a haematological malignancy that severely affects immunity and is a major risk factor for infection. In addition, the patient had a swollen left calf which could have also been the source of the infection.

Although uncommon, infection caused by C. subterminale may be life threatening particularly in immunocompromised patients and should be considered together with other Clostridium spp in a febrile patient with a haematologic malignancy. The case also shows the importance of using gene sequencing for identification of this anaerobic organism.

## Table 1
1Summary of case studies reporting infections with Clostridium subterminale.Table 1 Continued.Study 
Country Sex Age Diagnosis 

IC 

Treatment 

Source of infection 

Prognosis 

Susceptibility 

testing 

Grobach et al., 
1975 4 

USA 
N/A N/A Empyema 

N/A N/A 

Pulmonary embolism and 
infarct 

N/A 

No 

Grobach et al., 
1975 4 

USA 
N/A N/A Empyema 

N/A N/A 

Skin and soft tissue injury N/A 

No 

Gubler et al., 
1989 5 

CZ 

M 

63 

Pleuropulmonary 

infection and empyema 
No Amoxycillin; amoxycillin/clavulanic 
acid; penicillin; chest tube drainage 

Left calf swelling 

Death 

Yes 

Denny et al., 
1994 6 

USA 

M 

16 
Multiple injuries sustained 
in a motor vehicle 
accident. 
No Ceftriaxone; penicillin; cefazolin; 
clindamycin; gentamicin; surgery 

and tracheostomy 

Facial fractures and soft 
tissue injuries 

Discharged No 

Neal et al., 1996 7 

USA 

F 

6 

Meningitis 
No Penicillin; cefotaxime; spinal tap; 

chloramphenicol 

Penetrating brain injury 

Discharged No 

Miyazaki et al., 
2003 8 

Japan 

F 

41 
Septicaemia; chronic 
myelogenous 
leukaemia 
Yes Ciprofloxacin; fluconazole; piperacil-
lin, gentamicin; vancomycin; cef-
tazidime; bone marrow aspiration 

Damaged mucosa 

Discharged No 

Tappe et al., 2009 9 

Germany M 

18 
Fracture of right forearm No Sultamicillin (ampicillin/sulbactam); 

clindamycin; surgery and drainage 

tube insertion 

Traumatic injury 

Discharged No 

Haussen et al., 
2011 10 

USA 

M 

51 
Septicaemia; acute lym-
phoblastic leukaemia 
Yes Cefepime; vancomycin; metronida-
zole; cefepime switched to imi-
penem; amoxicillin/clavulanate; 
peripherally inserted central 
catheter 

Damaged mucosa 
(ulceration near the 

anal verge) 

Death 

No 

Thind et al., 
2014 11 

USA 

M 

77 
Septicaemia; oesophageal 
cancer 
Yes Cefepime; vancomycin; metronida-
zole; stent placement or repeat 
endoscopy 

Damaged mucosa 
(stent placement or 
repeat endoscopy) 

Death 

No 

Daganou et al., 
2016 12 

Greece 

M 

50 
Septicaemia; spontaneous 
oesophageal rupture 
(Boerhaave syndrome) 
No Imipenem; vancomycin; metronida-
zole; thoracotomy; puncture of 
oesophageal effusion 

Acute mediastinitis 
caused by greens 
contaminated with 

C. subterminale 

Discharged No 

(continued) 

AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank all reviewers for their valuable comments and thank Matthew Thorne, PhD for his assistance in editing, and publication support services.Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.FundingThe authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by Ningbo Natural Science Foundation (2019A610381) and Ningbo Public Welfare Foundation (2019C50087), Ningbo Key Medical Support Discipline.ORCIDXing-bei Weng https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8893-1704
Reemergence of anaerobic bacteremia. B Lassmann, D R Gustafson, C M Wood, Clin Infect Di. 44Lassmann B, Gustafson DR, Wood CM, et al. Reemergence of anaerobic bacteremia. Clin Infect Di. 2007; 44: 895-900.

The role of anaerobic bacteria in bacteremia. I Brook, Anaerobe. 163183Brook I. The role of anaerobic bacteria in bacteremia. Anaerobe. 2010 Jun;16(3):183-

. R J Moore, J A Lacey, Genomics of the Pathogenic Clostridia. Microbiol Spectr. 73Moore RJ and Lacey JA. Genomics of the Pathogenic Clostridia. Microbiol Spectr 2019; 7(3).

Isolation of Clostridium in human infections: Evaluation of 114 cases. S L Grobach, H Thadepalli, J Infect Dis. 131Grobach SL and Thadepalli H. Isolation of Clostridium in human infections: Evaluation of 114 cases. J Infect Dis 1975; 131: S81-S85.

Pleuropulmonary infection due to Clostridium subterminale. J G Gubler, J Wuest, A Hany, J Infect. 19Gubler JG, Wuest J and Hany A. Pleuropulmonary infection due to Clostridium subterminale. J Infect 1989; 19: 277-280.

Clostridial infection following severe facial trauma. Bonawitz Dennyad, Sc, Ann Plast Surg. DennyAD and Bonawitz SC. Clostridial infection following severe facial trauma. Ann Plast Surg 1994; 313-316.

Clostridial meningitis as a result of craniocerebral arrow injury. G Neal, E F Downing, J Trauma. 40Neal G and Downing EF. Clostridial men- ingitis as a result of craniocerebral arrow injury. J Trauma 1996; 40: 476-480.

Clostridium subterminale Septicemia in a Recipient of Allogeneic Cord Blood Transplantation. K Miyazaki, T Mori, N Takayama, Intern Med. 42Miyazaki K, Mori T, Takayama N, et al. Clostridium subterminale Septicemia in a Recipient of Allogeneic Cord Blood Transplantation. Intern Med 2003; 42: 374-375.

Clostridium subterminale-Infection Secondary to an Open Fracture. D Tappe, G Valenza, T Duwe, Infections in Medicine. 261Tappe D, Valenza G, Duwe T, et al. Clostridium subterminale-Infection Secondary to an Open Fracture. Infections in Medicine 2009; 26: 1. Available online: https://www. patientcareonline.com/view/allergic-fungal- sinusitis

Clostridium subterminale sepsis in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia. D C Haussen, F Y Macedo, C V Caperton, Leuk Lymphoma. 52Haussen DC, Macedo FY, Caperton CV, et al. Clostridium subterminale sepsis in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 2011; 52: 1137-1138.

Clostridium subterminale septicemia in a patient with esophageal cancer. S K Thind, J I Preis, IDCases. 1Thind SK and Preis JI. Clostridium subter- minale septicemia in a patient with esopha- geal cancer. IDCases 2014; 1: 47-49.

Clostridium subterminale septicemia in an immunocompetent patient. M Daganou, A Kyriakoudi, H Moraitou, IDCases. 5Daganou M, Kyriakoudi A, Moraitou H, et al. Clostridium subterminale septicemia in an immunocompetent patient. IDCases 2016; 5: 43-45.

Botulism-like symptoms in an immunocompetent patient with Clostridium subterminale bacteremia. M Carrasquillo, L L Dever, A Sonyey, IDCases. 11Carrasquillo M, Dever LL and Sonyey A. Botulism-like symptoms in an immunocom- petent patient with Clostridium subterminale bacteremia. IDCases 2018; 11: 80-82.

An unusual odontogenic infection due to Clostridium subterminale in an immunocompetent patient: A case report and review of the literature. K Davis, D Gill, C P Mouton, IDCases. 12Davis K, Gill D, Mouton CP, et al. An unusual odontogenic infection due to Clostridium subterminale in an immunocom- petent patient: A case report and review of the literature. IDCases 2018; 12: 34-40.

Clostridium subterminale Septicemia in a Patient with Metastatic Gastrointestinal Adenocarcinoma. K M Trapani, L J Boghossian, E Caskey, Case Rep Infect Dis. 6031510Trapani KM, Boghossian LJ and Caskey E. Clostridium subterminale Septicemia in a Patient with Metastatic Gastrointestinal Adenocarcinoma. Case Rep Infect Dis 2018; 2018: 6031510.

Necrotizing Clostridium subterminale infection with an odontogenic origin. C J Grodzin, E B Henderson, A Velasquez, IDCases. 271416Grodzin CJ, Henderson EB, Velasquez A, et al. Necrotizing Clostridium subterminale infection with an odontogenic origin. IDCases. 2022; 27: e01416.

The CARE guidelines: consensus-based clinical case reporting guideline development. J J Gagnier, G Kienle, D G Altman, Headache. 53Gagnier JJ, Kienle G, Altman DG, et al; CARE Group. The CARE guidelines: consensus-based clinical case reporting guideline development. Headache 2013; 53: 1541-1547.

Rapid and robust MALDI-TOF MS techniques for microbial identification: a brief overview of their diverse applications. Jang Ksand Kim, Y H , J Microbiol. 56Jang KSand Kim YH. Rapid and robust MALDI-TOF MS techniques for microbial identification: a brief overview of their diverse applications. J Microbiol 2018; 56: 209-216.

Comparison of growth on mannitol salt agar, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, VITEK V R 2 with partial sequencing of 16S rRNA gene for identification of coagulase-negative Staphylococci. F A Ayeni, C Andersen, N Nørskov-Lauritsen, Microb Pathog. 105Ayeni FA, Andersen C and Nørskov- Lauritsen N. Comparison of growth on mannitol salt agar, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, VITEK V R 2 with partial sequencing of 16S rRNA gene for identifica- tion of coagulase-negative Staphylococci. Microb Pathog 2017; 105: 255-259.

A multi-amplicon 16S rRNA sequencing and analysis method for improved taxonomic profiling of bacterial communities. A E Schriefer, P F Cliften, M C Hibberd, J Microbiol Methods. 154Schriefer AE, Cliften PF, Hibberd MC, et al. A multi-amplicon 16S rRNA sequencing and analysis method for improved taxonom- ic profiling of bacterial communities. J Microbiol Methods 2018; 154: 6-13.