# A Review on HEVC Video Forensic Investigation under Compressed Domain

CorpusID: 253038400
 
tags: #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review on HEVC Video Forensic Investigation under Compressed Domain
2022. 2022

Neetu Singla 
Netaji Subhas University of Technology
New DelhiIndia

Sushama Nagpal sushma.nagpal@nsut.ac.in 
Netaji Subhas University of Technology
New DelhiIndia

Jyotsna Singh jyotsna.singh@nsut.ac.in 
Netaji Subhas University of Technology
New DelhiIndia

A Review on HEVC Video Forensic Investigation under Compressed Domain

Graphics and Signal Processing
552022. 202210.5815/ijigsp.2022.05.04Received: 28 January 2022; Accepted: 29 June 2022;This work is open access and licensed under the Creative Commons CC BY License.Index Terms: Digital ForensicsVideo ForensicsHEVC CodecTranscodingFake BitrateDouble Compression
In recent years, video forensic investigation has become a prominent research area, due to the adverse effect of fake videos on networks, people and society. This paper summarizes all the existing methodologies used for forgery detection in H.265/HEVC videos. HEVC video forgery is generally classified into two categories as video quality forgery and video content forgery. The occurrence of various forgeries such as transcoding, fake-bitrate, inter-frame forgery and intra-frame forgery is deeply analyzed based on features extracted from the HEVC compression domain. The major findings of this research are (i) Less focus on transcoding detection, (ii) Non-availability of HEVC forged video dataset (iii) More focus on double compression detection for forgery detection, and (iv) Non-consideration of adaptive-GOP structure. The forgery detection in the video is critically important due to its wide use as the primary source of information in criminal investigations and proving the authenticity of contents. So, the forgery detection accuracy is of major concern at the present time. Although, various forgery detection methods are developed in past but the findings of this review point out the need of developing more effective detection methods with high accuracy.

## Introduction

The growth of visual digital data including, images and videos, has been exponential in recent years. Every day, millions of video files are shared over social media sites such as Facebook, WhatsApp, YouTube, and Twitter [1,2]. These digital videos are frequently being utilized in a wide range of sectors, including entertainment, surveillance, news production, and evidence gathering. With the widespread availability of powerful and simple-to-use video editing tools, digital videos are increasingly vulnerable to forgery, compromising their authenticity and integrity [3,4]. The forged videos have the potential to have major implications in politics, the economy, law enforcement, and other spheres. As a result, video forensics has piqued the interest of many researchers in the field of information security.

Because of the huge amount of video data and the close correlation between adjoining frames, digital videos are usually stored and transmitted in compressed form [5,6]. Video coding techniques have evolved over the previous decade to facilitate improved data compression while ensuring high visual quality [7,8]. Fig. 1 depicts the progression of video codec standards from the 1990s to the present. JCT-VC (Joint Collaborative Team on Video Coding) has created a new generation video coding standard named, High-Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) [9]. Due to the widespread popularity of HEVC videos, forgers prefer to directly re-encode their lower definition videos into HEVCs, without improving video quality, to appear as HD videos [10]. This increases the popularity and profit gains when published on YouTube or other social media. Video forensic science is a branch of digital forensics that investigates the artefacts left behind by tampering to determine if a digital video is genuine or forged [11]. In the literature, a variety of techniques for video forensic analysis has been proposed. Several surveys have been presented to evaluate video forensic works [12][13][14][15]. Authors in [12] examined inter-frame and intra-frame forgery detection techniques on image and video data, but do not discuss transcoding and fake bitrate attacks. Shelke et al. [13] give an in-depth analysis of video forensic techniques, however, work on HEVC-coded videos is only briefly discussed. Few more surveys [14,15], offer an examination of forensic techniques on videos encoded with old coding standards, but these techniques may not be proficient in high-definition and ultra-high-definition video data generated these days. HEVC has a unique quad-tree-like coding structure. In the recent past, many authors have conducted HEVC video forensic investigations by discovering abnormalities in various coding units. To our knowledge, there are no published surveys on HEVC video forensic analysis that cover all potential HEVC video forgeries and focus on the detection features extracted from the compressed domain.

The column graph in Fig. 2 shows the proportion of articles that exploits features extracted specifically from the HEVC compression domain for forgery detection. The rest of the proportion includes generalized forgery detection techniques which are applicable to videos compressed using previous generations of codecs as well as HEVC. The major objectives of the present survey are as follows: (i) To discuss the key design elements and available tools for the HEVC video codec. (ii) Representation of the generalized architecture focusing on the generation of forged videos. (iii) Summarization of different types of video forgeries. (iv) Analysing the research gaps in the existing literature in the field of forgery detection to get future research perspectives. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 an overview of HEVC coding structure, highlighting the key feature domain for forgery detection is presented. Section 3, classifies various types of possible forgeries in HEVC videos. Further, the review of HEVC forgery detection approaches presented by various researchers is discussed in Section 4. Section 5 lists the major findings of this research. Finally, Section 6, concludes the study and provides the future research perspectives.


## Overview of HEVC Coding Structure

The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].

The general architecture of encoding and decoding a sequence of video frames is depicted in Fig. 3. A typical encoder divides each frame into multiple block-shaped units. These units are predicted using intra prediction (by referring to neighbouring regions in the same image) or inter prediction (by referring to neighbouring frames). The first frame of each GOP (Group of pictures) is always intra-predicted, while the rest of the frames are both intra or interpredicted. The residual information generated by the prediction unit is transformed, quantized and entropy encoded to generate a valid bitstream. This bitstream can be stored and transmitted. The decoder reverses this process by decompressing the bitstream to produce the sequence of frames. In comparison to previous coding standards, efficient partitioning and prediction algorithms have been adopted in the HEVC standard to provide increased compression efficiency. The following subsections briefly discuss the key design elements of the basic encoding unit. In literature, researchers have performed forensic investigations based on the artefacts found in these coding elements. 


## A. Coding units (CUs)

Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 


## B. Prediction units (PUs)

Image blocks can be predicted in two modes: intra or inter. At the CU level, the decision is made whether to code an image block using intra prediction or inter prediction. Every CU is further split into one or more PUs. HEVC allows prediction block sizes ranging from 64x64 to 4x4. For intra-prediction mode, except for the smallest coding block size, all prediction blocks are of the same size as the coding block. For intra predictions, reference is taken from previously transformed and decoded prediction blocks of the same picture. HEVC offers DC prediction, planar prediction, and 33 different directional predictions to improve intra signal prediction effectiveness. For inter prediction reference is taken from one or two neighbouring pictures. Compared to intra-prediction, HEVC supports symmetric as well as asymmetric shapes for inter-prediction units. To adapt to a variety of texture characteristics, intra prediction supports 5 sizes and inter prediction supports 25 different sizes in HEVC standard.


## C. Transform units (TUs)

Block transforms are used to encode the prediction residual. Every CU is recursively subdivided into one or more TUs. A residual TU quadtree structure, rooted at the CU level, is formed. The transform blocks at the leaf of the residual quadtree are processed by transform encoding. For the square transform blocks of sizes 4x4, 8x8, 16x16, and 32x32, integer transforms derived from Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) are defined. An integer transform generated from a kind of Discrete Sine Transform (DST) is described as an alternate for the 4x4 sized intra-predicted transform blocks. In contrast to prior standards, the HEVC architecture permits a transform block to extend across several prediction blocks for inter-predicted CUs. This exploits the inherent compression efficiency benefits of quadtreestructured partitioning. Fig. 5 depicts the CU partitioning, PU partitioning and TU partitioning for a portion of a video frame. Table 1 displays the various permitted sizes of the coding blocks, inter and intra prediction blocks and transform blocks.  A bitstream analyser is a graphical tool that allows users to examine in-depth coding information of an encoded bitstream. The HEVC analyser help video coding professional in analysing and visualizing the statistics of inherent design elements. Some of the popular HEVC analysers are GitlHEVCAnalyzer, openHEVC, Zond265, Elecard StreamEye, Parabola Explorer and CodecVisa [17,18]. Among these GitlHEVCAnalyzer and openHEVC provide opensource implementations, while the rest are commercial analysers.


## HEVC Video Forgeries

There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 


## A. Video Quality Forgery

HEVC videos are essentially high-quality videos. In this type of forgery, encoding characteristics of low-quality videos are altered in order to publish them as high-quality HEVC videos. Video quality forgeries are subdivided into Transcoding and Fake Bitrate.

Transcoding Video transcoding is the conversion of digital content from one encoding scheme to another. With the popularity of HEVC, as a symbol of high-quality videos, fraudsters re-encode their originally low-quality MPEG/AVC videos as HEVC videos. In order to gain more financial benefits from advertising and click-through rate, contents are transcoded using newer codecs, without any improvement in the quality. In the entertainment sector, where hundreds of hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, quality control measures must be extremely efficient. In [10,20,21], the authors presented forensic approaches for determining if it is an authentic HEVC video or it is generated by transcoding an existing MPEG/AVC video sequence.

Fake Bitrate Bitrate is another measure to judge the quality of a digital video. Fraudulent persons tend to increase the bitrate of videos without adding any more information, especially for videos that are shared over the Internet. In this scenario, the ostensibly high bitrate video would have been of inferior visual quality. Many internet bitrate conversion applications that can accomplish this operation are now available for free. These fake upscaled bitrate videos deceive media consumers and potentially waste a lot of storage space and network bandwidth. This paper provides a comparative analysis of the work presented by authors in [19,22,23] for fake bitrate attacks tested for varied bitrates and resolutions.


## B. Video Content Forgery

This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.


## Inter-frame Forgery

Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.


## HEVC Forensic Investigation

This section summarizes the various methods used by different researchers in past for the video forgery detection using the systematic methodology as given in Fig.10. The stepwise description of the methodology adopted for this survey is explained below. 1. Data Acquisition: Articles have been collected from google scholar with the help of keywords video forensics, video forgery detection, inter-frame forgery, object forgery, digital forensics etc. A total number of 352 articles have been collected.

2. Article Screening: An elimination approach based on the type of data used for forgery detection has been implemented in order to obtain the relevant articles. The collected research articles contain various articles performing forensic investigations on image data. Such articles are removed and articles with video data are retained. Further, articles investigating compression domain features of the HEVC codec are identified.

3. Categorization: The selected articles are categorized as per the general objective of forgery detection as transcoding detection, fake-bitrate detection, inter-frame forgery detection and intra-frame forgery detection.

4. Article Analysis: Finally, the working concept, model used, datasets, and the performance measures of existing methodologies are examined and analysed, in order to get depth knowledge of this field.

As discussed, any type of forgery operation requires the video sequence to be recompressed, which inevitably leaves artefacts in the fundamental characteristics of coding elements. Such artefacts have been actively investigated by several authors in the past. The Venn diagram in Fig. 11 shows the distributions of articles based on the coding unit utilized for forensic feature extraction. The objective of this section is to provide a comprehensive review of the techniques proposed in the literature for detecting various forgeries in HEVC-coded videos using compression domain features. The detection techniques are grouped into three categories: transcoding detection, fake bitrate detection, and double compression detection. The pie chart in Fig. 12 graphically depicts the proportion of articles published by various researchers among these three categories.  


## A. Transcoding detection techniques

Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 


## B. Fake Bitrate detection techniques

Rate control modes decide the number of bits to spend on a given frame. HEVC standard supports two rate control modes: CBR and VBR. Constant bitrate mode (CBR), forces the video encoder to always use a certain bitrate for all frames. Variable bitrate mode (VBR) enables the encoder to use more bits for complex and fast-moving content while saving bits from smooth textures. Rate control is a critical step in determining the size-quality trade-off. The higher the number of bits, the better the video quality. Using tools like FFmpeg a forger can re-encode an originally low-quality video with higher bitrates, to give the illusion of being a high-quality video.

To expose fake bitrate forgery Liang et al. [22] obtained PU statistics from the first P frame of each GOP. A 25-D feature vector is retrieved from the histogram of the PU partitions, known as HPP. An average of the HPP features of all GOPs in a video sequence is calculated to obtain the final detection feature. The features are then classified using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel to obtain an average accuracy of 87%.

In another study, the authors improved average accuracy by extracting multiple prediction features from both I and P frames [23]. Features extracted from I-frames include a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoICU), 5-D PU partitioning mode (PMoIPU) and 6-D intra partitioning modes (PMoIIPM). From P-frames, a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoPCU) and 25-D PU (PMoPPU) partitioning mode information is extracted. A systematic analysis of individual and combination of features is performed to detect videos with fake bitrate.

Recently, Yu et al. [19] proposed a 10-D feature vector named, PMF formed from the features extracted from intra and inter-prediction modes. HEVC introduced 35 intra-prediction modes. Out of these, Planar, DC, H0 and V0 are suitable for representing homogenous textures. Fake HD videos with low-quality origin have reduced texture complexity, thus during re-encoding more Planar, DC, H0 and V0 modes would be used for intra-prediction in comparison to videos with high-quality origin. A 4-D feature vector of intra-prediction modes is derived from each I-Frame. Further, a 6-D feature vector is extracted from P-frames and B frames, comprising information of Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. An ensemble classifier was employed to achieve state of art results with average accuracy near to 99%.

For detecting fake bitrates authors have conducted experiments on videos with both low-resolution (QCIF and CIF) and high-resolution (720p and 1080p). A comparison chart of average detection accuracies achieved by the above works are presented in Table 3. It has been observed that the higher the difference between the bitrate of first encoding and second encoding, the higher the variation in the prediction mode features thus, the higher the detection accuracy. Table  4 presents a summary of Fake bitrate detection techniques in HEVC videos. 


## C. Double Compression detection techniques

Based upon the parameter selection for recompression, we analyse double compression detection techniques by categorizing them into Non-aligned GOP, Same quantization parameter and Different quantization parameters for first and second encoding.


## Double Compression: Non-Aligned GOP

Inter-frame forgeries such as frame deletion, frame insertion or frame duplication involves alteration in the temporal sequence of the original video. This changes the original GOP structure causing some I-frames to be re-encoded as P-frames (I-P frames) as shown in Fig. 13 and some P frames to be reencoded as P frames (P-P frames). When compared to neighbouring P-P frames, relocated I-P frames possess abnormal characteristics in basic coding elements, such as variation in statistics of CU, PU and TU; disproportion of intra, inter and skip units; and disparity in Intra modes has been observed [26][27][28][29][30][31]. Authors in [26] counted the number of intra, inter and skip PUs and designed a feature vector named, SN-PUPM, by taking absolute difference with adjacent three frames. To reduce noise effects, twice averaging filters were introduced. Sequences with abnormal peak values at a periodic interval, indicating an I-P frames change, were classified as double compressed using the SVM classifier. However, when the adaptive GOP algorithm is employed, the proposed sequence-based approach fails because the periodic nature of the recompression traces would be destroyed.

Jiang et al. [27] proposed an enhanced approach for dealing with PU prediction mode statistics. Instead of classifying each sequence authors worked on GOP-based statistics. To generate PU sequences for each GOP unit, the ratio of I-PUs to S-PUs is first calculated. A three-tap median filter was used on PU sequences to reduce the impact of different video contents. A 6-D feature set was formed by applying several low-order statistics, including, maximum, minimum, average and variance. These GOP-based features were then classified using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). In order to render double compression decision score fusion practice was used. The approach works well for adaptive GOP but when the GOP size of the re-encoding operation is multiple of first encoding, the suggested technique fails.

Further, Wu et al. [28] combined the count of inter PUs with optical flow residuals to make a fusion feature. Their technique improved the detection of relocated I-P frames by 4.59% in comparison to the SNPUPM feature [26]. Hong et al. [32] developed a method for detecting frame deletion forgeries in HEVC encoded videos. They extracted three coding features, namely, intra CU area, residual energy of transform unit and statistics of TUs from the P-frame of each GOP. For a GOP of size N, 3 (N-1) sized feature vectors were generated. To check the authenticity of videos, these features are classified using LDA with k-NN and MLP classifiers. The proposed features are robust for detecting flawless frame deletion and forgery performed in static scenes. However, the technique can work only for fixed GOP sizes.

Recently, deep neural networks have been successfully applied in many areas of computer vision such as object recognition, action recognition, plant disease detection and image forgery detection. These models are capable of automatically learning features from visual data. The authors in [30,31] presented approaches by using a convolutional neural network. Authors in [30] proposed an attention-based two-stream ResNet (ATResNet) network integrated with LSTM model. To identify relocated I-frames two types of feature maps are extracted from compressed bitstream: CSM (CU size map) and CPM (CU prediction mode map). Spatial variations in generated maps are learned by a pre-trained ResNet network where an attention model was employed to optimize network weights and increase detection accuracy. The coding maps extracted from the input video are divided into short clips and LSTM was employed to capture temporal variations. The proposed model is efficient in learning spatio-temporal features, that outperform other forgery detection models.

He et al. [31] examined that low order statistics applied on the distribution of CU types, including intra, inter and skip CUs, can efficiently predict relocated I-frames under increased bitrate. Whereas these features are insufficient to detect relocated I-frames encoded with decreased bitrate. In the first stage, the authors proposed an efficient and compact 50-D feature vector consisting of information related to CU prediction modes, block sizes, and motion vectors. Using these features, an SVM classifier with RBF kernel was able to classify relocated I-frames with increased bitrate correctly. In the second stage, to discriminate between relocated I-frames compressed with decreased bitrate and single compressed frames a Convolutional neural network with dense connections (S-DenseNet) is built. This model learns spatio-temporal representations from CU-type information of three continuous frames and generates output probabilities at the softmax layer. The proposed CNN model obtains an accuracy of 88.51%. Table 5 comparatively studies HEVC double compression detection techniques under Non-aligned GOP.  [33][34][35] studied the recompression artefacts under aligned GOP structure and the same quantization parameter setting for first and second encoding. Jia et al. [33] proposed an approach utilizing the count of 4x4 PUs in each I-frame and computed standard deviation between the single compressed and double compressed versions of the video. Experiments were conducted for QP (22,24,26,28,32) and an appropriate threshold was selected for detection results. An accuracy of 82.22% was achieved. However, the testing dataset comprised low-resolution QCIF videos.

Elrowayati et al. [34] concatenated the intra-prediction modes with the DST coefficients of each 4x4 PU block extracted from I-frames. A feature named Average Number of Changing PBs (ANCPB) was formulated. ANCPBs are able to recognize the double compression under the same QP, however, the distinctive power of the feature followed a downward trend with the quality of the video.

A novel double compression detection approach under the same QP, based on PU modes in I-frames is presented by Jiang et al. [35]. The proposed feature vector, named Intra Prediction Unit Prediction Mode (IPUPM) composes PU statistics of block sizes: 4x4, 8x8 and 16x16; and intra prediction PU mode of each block with values varying between 0 to 34. The author claimed that by fusing different PU features accuracy of detection has been improved. Moreover, unlike the work in [33] experiments were carried out on HD sequences, resulting in more reliable outcomes. A comparative summary of proposed techniques is given in Table 6.  [36][37][38] presented their studies considering the different QPs for the two compressions. Huang et al. [36] analysed that the quantization errors in recompressed videos cause variation in DCT coefficients. The authors extracted a 136-D feature set consisting of four co-occurrence matrices of neighbouring DCT coefficients and several higher-order statistics, to prove this fact. The proposed algorithm performs well when the first quantization parameter is higher than the second quantization parameter, however, performance is poor when the first quantization parameter is lower or equal to the second quantization parameter.

Li et al. [37] combined the distribution of various TU sizes, specifically its mean, variance, kurtosis and skewness with the DCT coefficients. Authors developed a reduced feature set of size 17-D and achieved comparable detection accuracy to [37] with less computation cost requirements.

Fang et al. [38] proposed a novel methodology to study the influence of DCT coefficients based on transform unit partitioning. The authors extracted a set of three features including, the proportional distribution of DCT coefficients in different types of Tus (PDDC), the autocorrelation property of the DCT coefficients in 4x4 Tus (APDC), and the proportion distribution of the four types of TUs (PDTU). For experiments, only I-frames were considered. During feature selection it has been observed that for TUs of size 16x16 the distribution pattern of DCT coefficients in single and double compressed videos is not distinguishable, thus authors have skipped considering them in feature selection. Table 7 presents a summary of discussed techniques. 


## Discussion and Findings

The major findings derived from the literature concerning to the HEVC video forgery detection methods under the compression domain are summarized below:

 Finding 1: To conduct experiments, researchers have prepared their own forged dataset using uncompressed YUV sequences acquired from the Derf library 1 . However, due to the non-availability of a single repository of forged HEVC videos, a robust comparison of proposed techniques is not possible. Moreover, the library doesn't have videos comprising fast motion. The prime focus of video forgery is surveillance footage; however, the library lacks the collection of surveillance videos for investigation. A centralized repository of forged videos encoded with new generation codecs, such as HEVC, containing a diversity of contents is required.  Finding 2: Fig. 2 depict that only (20)(21)(22)% of the available literature related to the video forgery detection under the compression domain uses HEVC coding features.  Finding 3: The size of the CU, PU and TU partitioning type also plays a major role during the forgery detection. Fig. 10 show that studies related to prediction unit features have been exploited the most for investigations and no research article has utilized features from all three domains together. Moreover, transform unit features are never studied by articles detecting transcoding and fake bitrate forgeries.  Finding 4: The distribution of the forgery detection techniques as provided in Fig. 12 point out the very less attention of the researchers on transcoding detection. Transcoding is a major menace for social media users in the present time. Further, it is observed that the main focus of the researchers is on double compression detection, the reason being researchers working for inter-frame and intra-frame forgery detections have anticipated recompression detection.  Finding 5: This research highlights the presence of four kinds of forgeries such as transcoding, fake-bitrate, inter-frame forgery and intra-frame forgery in HEVC-coded videos. The various features, models, tools and performance measures used by the different authors in past for all types of forgeries are summarized in Table  2-6. To investigate video content forgeries, techniques based on the detection of double compression traces have been utilized. However, because a video can be recompressed while being transferred from one network to another, exclusive inter-frame and intra-frame forgery detection techniques for high-definition data are required.  Finding 6: The performances of a vast majority of the methodologies discussed in this survey depend on the use of fixed GOP structures, (assumes that the test video under investigation consists of GOPs with a fixed number of frames). However, HEVC compression standards use adaptive GOP structures, and the lengths of these GOPs can be up to 250 frames. Consequently, such techniques may fail entirely for realistic videos. Furthermore, algorithms that exploit relocated I-frames are also unsuitable for this encoding standard. As a result, approaches that take into account adaptive GOP must be developed.


## Conclusion

This paper provides an in-depth analysis of different HEVC video forgery detection techniques operated under the compression domain environment. Such analysis is done based on dataset, resolution, features, methods, type of forgery, performance measures along with their limitations. The present study reveals that most of the video forgery detection techniques addressed a single type of forgery detection instead of multiple forgeries which may be of great interest for future research in this field. Although various forgery detection methods have been developed in past, the findings given in Section 5 raise the need of developing more effective methods for the same. Further, the present survey will give deep insights to the researchers in the field of video forgery detection.

## Fig. 1 .
1Evolution of video coding standards.

## Fig. 2 .
2The proportion of HEVC articles. The blue part represents the proportion of forensic articles that exploits HEVC compression domain features and orange part represents the rest of video forensic articles.

## Fig. 3 .
3Block diagram of HEVC encoder-decoder.

## Fig. 4 .
4Partitioning of a CTU into CUs. (a) A CTU with partitioning. (b) Corresponding quadtree representation.

## Fig. 5 .
5(a) CU partitioning (b) PU partitioning (c) TU partitioning.

## Fig. 6 .
6Classification of HEVC video forgery.

## Fig. 8 .
8Example of inter-frame forgery. (a) Authentic video (b) Frame deletion forgery; frames containing a person's arrival are removed. (c) Frame insertion forgery; frames containing a person's arrival are inserted from some other footage (d) Frame duplication forgery; frames containing a person's arrival are duplicated.

## Fig. 9 .
9The general process of generating forged videos. (a) Transcoded (b) Fake Bitrate (c) Intra-frame forged and (d) Inter-frame forged.

## Fig.
Fig. 9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream

## Fig. 10 .
10The methodology adopted for the survey.

## Fig. 11 .
11Distributions of articles among various feature domains.

## Fig. 12 .
12The proportion of video forensic techniques proposed for various categories.

## Fig. 13 .
13Relocated I-frames in double compression

## Table 1 .
1Size chart of CU, PU and TU partitioning types in HEVC HEVC tools consist of software programs for generating and analysing standard HEVC bitstreams. To perform forensic investigations, researchers need test sequences encoded with the HEVC codec. These sequences can be obtained by encoding and decoding uncompressed YUV sequences with the help of coding software. For the HEVC standard, three open-source implementations are available: HM Reference Model, X265 and FFmpeg. While performing encoding operation the user can set desired configuration parameters such as GOP structure, quantization parameter (QP) value, rate control modes etc.CU 
PU for I-frames 
PU for P-frames 
TU 

64x64 
64x64 
64x64 
32x32 
16x16 
8x8 
64x64 

32x32 
32x32 
64x32 
32x24 
16x12 
8x4 
32x32 

16x16 
16x16 
32x64 
24x32 
12x16 
4x8 
16x16 

8x8 
8x8 
64x48 
32x16 
16x8 
4x4 
8x8 

4x4 
48x64 
16x32 
8x16 
4x4 

64x16 
32x8 
16x4 

16x64 
8x32 
4x16 

D. HEVC Tools 



## Table 2 .
2Study of transcoding detection techniquesRef. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Performance 
Tools 

[10] 
Frequency of uni-predicted and bi-predicted PUs 
Threshold Based 
Model 

352x288 
AUC= 
94.95 

FFmpeg, Commercial 
analyser 
[20] 
Statistics of PU types, 25-D feature from P-Frame and 
5-D feature from I-Frame of each GOP 

SVM classifier 
with RBF Kernel 

1280x720 
Accuracy= 
98.17% 

HM 12.0, JM 19.0, 
GitlHEVCAnalyzer 

[21] 
A 38-D features set of CU and PU partition types of I 
and first P frame of each GOP 

SVM with 
PolySVC kernel 

352x288, 
1920x1080 

Accuracy= 
98.98% 

HM, JM 


## Table 3 .
3Comparison of fake bitrate detection accuracy in QCIF, CIF, 720p, and 1080p videos (in percentage). The difference denotes the difference in bitrate between the first and second encodingsQCIF 
CIF 

Difference 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 

100 Kbps 
94.47 
94.67 
-
92.9 
94.63 
94.63 

200 Kbps 
100 
100 
98.5 
96.45 
98.2 
98.2 

300 Kbps 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 

720p 
1080p 

Difference 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 

<10 M 
91.7 
96.53 
-
92.25 
-
-

10-20 M 
97.91 
100 
98.96 
98.65 
96.83 
97.3 

>20 M 
100 
100 
100 
99.15 
100 
100 

Table 4. Study of fake bitrate detection techniques 

Ref. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Tools 
[22] 25-D HPP (Histogram of PU Partition Types) feature set 
from First P-frame of each GOP 

SVM with 
PolySVC kernel 

176 x 144, 352 x 288, 
1280x720, 1920x1080 

H.265/HEVC 
reference software 
[23] Coding unit prediction modes for I and P frames; Prediction 
unit prediction modes for I and P frames, Intra prediction 
modes of I-picture. 

SVM with 
PolySVC kernel 

176 x 144, 352 x 288, 
1280x720, 1920x1080 

H.265/HEVC 
reference software 

[19] A 4-D feature set extracted from DC, Planar, H0 and V0 
direction intra prediction modes; A 6-D feature set extracted 
from Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. 

Ensemble 
classifier 

176 x 144, 352 x 288, 
1280x720, 1920x1080 

x265, HM16.15 



## Table 5 .
5Study of double compression detection techniques under non-aligned GOP.Double Compression: Aligned GOP, Same QP Authors inRef. 
Features 
Feature 
Domain 

Model 
Resolution 
Performance 
Tools 

[26] 
Sequence of Number of Prediction 
Unit with Intra, Inter and Skip 
Prediction Modes (SN-PUPM) 

Sequence-
Based 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal 

Not Specified 
AUC = 0.9226 
Encoder X265 
Decoder 
HM16.15 
[27] 
A 6-D GOP-based feature set using 
average, variation and max of S-
PU's and I-PU's. 

GOP-
Based 

MLP Classifier with 
sigmoid function 
and RPROP 
optimizer 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Accuracy = 
94.31% 

x265 

[28] 
Optical flow residuals (OFRB-
NIPU); Prediction mode feature 
proposed by [26] 

Sequence-
Based 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

AUC = 0.9707 
Encoder X265 
Decoder 
HM16.15 
[29] 
Depth map of CU and TU partitions 
and grouping them in GoP units. 

GOP-
Based 

3-D Convolutional 
Neural Network 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Precision=0.9865 
Recall = 0.9869 
F1-score = 
0.9867 

HM, Low Delay 
P mode, 
Random Access 
mode 
[30] 
CU Size Map (CSM); CU Prediction 
mode Map (CPM) 

Frame-
Based 

Attention-based 
Ressidual Nework 
(ATResNet) and 
LSTM 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Accuracy = 
94.07% 
TPR = 92.96% 
TNR = 95.18% 

x265 

[31] 
Distribution of block size and 
prediction modes of CU types and 
Kullback-Leibler divergence 
between adjacent frames. 

Frame-
Based 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal; 
Shallow CNN with 
Dense connections 
(S-DenseNet) 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Accuracy = 
88.51% 

x265 

[32] 
Intra CU Area; Total TU Residual 
Energy; and Number of TUs 
extracted from P-Frames. 

GOP-
Based 

LDA and k-NN, 
MultiLayer 
Perceptron (MLP) 

832 x 480 
Accuracy 
LDA+k-
NN=0.823 MLP 
=0.883 

HM16.7 low-
delay P mode 



## Table 6 .
6Study of double compression detection techniques under same QP Quantized residual DST coefficients and Intra prediction modes of 4x4 PUs in I-frames. Double Compression: Aligned GOP, Different QP For the aligned GOP case, authors inRef. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Accuracy 
Tools 

[33] 
Standard deviation in number of 4×4 PUs of I-
frames (SDoPU) 

Threshold Based 
Model 

176x144 
82.23% 
HM10.0 

[34] 
Threshold Based 
Model 

Not specified 
83.24% 
HM10.0 

[35] 
Statistics of 4x4,8x8,16x16 PUs and Intra 
prediction modes in I-frames 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

97.55% 
FFmpeg 



## Table 7 .## Introduction

The growth of visual digital data including, images and videos, has been exponential in recent years. Every day, millions of video files are shared over social media sites such as Facebook, WhatsApp, YouTube, and Twitter [1,2]. These digital videos are frequently being utilized in a wide range of sectors, including entertainment, surveillance, news production, and evidence gathering. With the widespread availability of powerful and simple-to-use video editing tools, digital videos are increasingly vulnerable to forgery, compromising their authenticity and integrity [3,4]. The forged videos have the potential to have major implications in politics, the economy, law enforcement, and other spheres. As a result, video forensics has piqued the interest of many researchers in the field of information security.

Because of the huge amount of video data and the close correlation between adjoining frames, digital videos are usually stored and transmitted in compressed form [5,6]. Video coding techniques have evolved over the previous decade to facilitate improved data compression while ensuring high visual quality [7,8]. Fig. 1 depicts the progression of video codec standards from the 1990s to the present. JCT-VC (Joint Collaborative Team on Video Coding) has created a new generation video coding standard named, High-Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) [9]. Due to the widespread popularity of HEVC videos, forgers prefer to directly re-encode their lower definition videos into HEVCs, without improving video quality, to appear as HD videos [10]. This increases the popularity and profit gains when published on YouTube or other social media. Video forensic science is a branch of digital forensics that investigates the artefacts left behind by tampering to determine if a digital video is genuine or forged [11]. In the literature, a variety of techniques for video forensic analysis has been proposed. Several surveys have been presented to evaluate video forensic works [12][13][14][15]. Authors in [12] examined inter-frame and intra-frame forgery detection techniques on image and video data, but do not discuss transcoding and fake bitrate attacks. Shelke et al. [13] give an in-depth analysis of video forensic techniques, however, work on HEVC-coded videos is only briefly discussed. Few more surveys [14,15], offer an examination of forensic techniques on videos encoded with old coding standards, but these techniques may not be proficient in high-definition and ultra-high-definition video data generated these days. HEVC has a unique quad-tree-like coding structure. In the recent past, many authors have conducted HEVC video forensic investigations by discovering abnormalities in various coding units. To our knowledge, there are no published surveys on HEVC video forensic analysis that cover all potential HEVC video forgeries and focus on the detection features extracted from the compressed domain.

The column graph in Fig. 2 shows the proportion of articles that exploits features extracted specifically from the HEVC compression domain for forgery detection. The rest of the proportion includes generalized forgery detection techniques which are applicable to videos compressed using previous generations of codecs as well as HEVC. The major objectives of the present survey are as follows: (i) To discuss the key design elements and available tools for the HEVC video codec. (ii) Representation of the generalized architecture focusing on the generation of forged videos. (iii) Summarization of different types of video forgeries. (iv) Analysing the research gaps in the existing literature in the field of forgery detection to get future research perspectives. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 an overview of HEVC coding structure, highlighting the key feature domain for forgery detection is presented. Section 3, classifies various types of possible forgeries in HEVC videos. Further, the review of HEVC forgery detection approaches presented by various researchers is discussed in Section 4. Section 5 lists the major findings of this research. Finally, Section 6, concludes the study and provides the future research perspectives.


## Overview of HEVC Coding Structure

The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].

The general architecture of encoding and decoding a sequence of video frames is depicted in Fig. 3. A typical encoder divides each frame into multiple block-shaped units. These units are predicted using intra prediction (by referring to neighbouring regions in the same image) or inter prediction (by referring to neighbouring frames). The first frame of each GOP (Group of pictures) is always intra-predicted, while the rest of the frames are both intra or interpredicted. The residual information generated by the prediction unit is transformed, quantized and entropy encoded to generate a valid bitstream. This bitstream can be stored and transmitted. The decoder reverses this process by decompressing the bitstream to produce the sequence of frames. In comparison to previous coding standards, efficient partitioning and prediction algorithms have been adopted in the HEVC standard to provide increased compression efficiency. The following subsections briefly discuss the key design elements of the basic encoding unit. In literature, researchers have performed forensic investigations based on the artefacts found in these coding elements. 


## A. Coding units (CUs)

Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 


## B. Prediction units (PUs)

Image blocks can be predicted in two modes: intra or inter. At the CU level, the decision is made whether to code an image block using intra prediction or inter prediction. Every CU is further split into one or more PUs. HEVC allows prediction block sizes ranging from 64x64 to 4x4. For intra-prediction mode, except for the smallest coding block size, all prediction blocks are of the same size as the coding block. For intra predictions, reference is taken from previously transformed and decoded prediction blocks of the same picture. HEVC offers DC prediction, planar prediction, and 33 different directional predictions to improve intra signal prediction effectiveness. For inter prediction reference is taken from one or two neighbouring pictures. Compared to intra-prediction, HEVC supports symmetric as well as asymmetric shapes for inter-prediction units. To adapt to a variety of texture characteristics, intra prediction supports 5 sizes and inter prediction supports 25 different sizes in HEVC standard.


## C. Transform units (TUs)

Block transforms are used to encode the prediction residual. Every CU is recursively subdivided into one or more TUs. A residual TU quadtree structure, rooted at the CU level, is formed. The transform blocks at the leaf of the residual quadtree are processed by transform encoding. For the square transform blocks of sizes 4x4, 8x8, 16x16, and 32x32, integer transforms derived from Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) are defined. An integer transform generated from a kind of Discrete Sine Transform (DST) is described as an alternate for the 4x4 sized intra-predicted transform blocks. In contrast to prior standards, the HEVC architecture permits a transform block to extend across several prediction blocks for inter-predicted CUs. This exploits the inherent compression efficiency benefits of quadtreestructured partitioning. Fig. 5 depicts the CU partitioning, PU partitioning and TU partitioning for a portion of a video frame. Table 1 displays the various permitted sizes of the coding blocks, inter and intra prediction blocks and transform blocks.  A bitstream analyser is a graphical tool that allows users to examine in-depth coding information of an encoded bitstream. The HEVC analyser help video coding professional in analysing and visualizing the statistics of inherent design elements. Some of the popular HEVC analysers are GitlHEVCAnalyzer, openHEVC, Zond265, Elecard StreamEye, Parabola Explorer and CodecVisa [17,18]. Among these GitlHEVCAnalyzer and openHEVC provide opensource implementations, while the rest are commercial analysers.


## HEVC Video Forgeries

There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 


## A. Video Quality Forgery

HEVC videos are essentially high-quality videos. In this type of forgery, encoding characteristics of low-quality videos are altered in order to publish them as high-quality HEVC videos. Video quality forgeries are subdivided into Transcoding and Fake Bitrate.

Transcoding Video transcoding is the conversion of digital content from one encoding scheme to another. With the popularity of HEVC, as a symbol of high-quality videos, fraudsters re-encode their originally low-quality MPEG/AVC videos as HEVC videos. In order to gain more financial benefits from advertising and click-through rate, contents are transcoded using newer codecs, without any improvement in the quality. In the entertainment sector, where hundreds of hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, quality control measures must be extremely efficient. In [10,20,21], the authors presented forensic approaches for determining if it is an authentic HEVC video or it is generated by transcoding an existing MPEG/AVC video sequence.

Fake Bitrate Bitrate is another measure to judge the quality of a digital video. Fraudulent persons tend to increase the bitrate of videos without adding any more information, especially for videos that are shared over the Internet. In this scenario, the ostensibly high bitrate video would have been of inferior visual quality. Many internet bitrate conversion applications that can accomplish this operation are now available for free. These fake upscaled bitrate videos deceive media consumers and potentially waste a lot of storage space and network bandwidth. This paper provides a comparative analysis of the work presented by authors in [19,22,23] for fake bitrate attacks tested for varied bitrates and resolutions.


## B. Video Content Forgery

This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.


## Inter-frame Forgery

Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.


## HEVC Forensic Investigation

This section summarizes the various methods used by different researchers in past for the video forgery detection using the systematic methodology as given in Fig.10. The stepwise description of the methodology adopted for this survey is explained below. 1. Data Acquisition: Articles have been collected from google scholar with the help of keywords video forensics, video forgery detection, inter-frame forgery, object forgery, digital forensics etc. A total number of 352 articles have been collected.

2. Article Screening: An elimination approach based on the type of data used for forgery detection has been implemented in order to obtain the relevant articles. The collected research articles contain various articles performing forensic investigations on image data. Such articles are removed and articles with video data are retained. Further, articles investigating compression domain features of the HEVC codec are identified.

3. Categorization: The selected articles are categorized as per the general objective of forgery detection as transcoding detection, fake-bitrate detection, inter-frame forgery detection and intra-frame forgery detection.

4. Article Analysis: Finally, the working concept, model used, datasets, and the performance measures of existing methodologies are examined and analysed, in order to get depth knowledge of this field.

As discussed, any type of forgery operation requires the video sequence to be recompressed, which inevitably leaves artefacts in the fundamental characteristics of coding elements. Such artefacts have been actively investigated by several authors in the past. The Venn diagram in Fig. 11 shows the distributions of articles based on the coding unit utilized for forensic feature extraction. The objective of this section is to provide a comprehensive review of the techniques proposed in the literature for detecting various forgeries in HEVC-coded videos using compression domain features. The detection techniques are grouped into three categories: transcoding detection, fake bitrate detection, and double compression detection. The pie chart in Fig. 12 graphically depicts the proportion of articles published by various researchers among these three categories.  


## A. Transcoding detection techniques

Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 


## B. Fake Bitrate detection techniques

Rate control modes decide the number of bits to spend on a given frame. HEVC standard supports two rate control modes: CBR and VBR. Constant bitrate mode (CBR), forces the video encoder to always use a certain bitrate for all frames. Variable bitrate mode (VBR) enables the encoder to use more bits for complex and fast-moving content while saving bits from smooth textures. Rate control is a critical step in determining the size-quality trade-off. The higher the number of bits, the better the video quality. Using tools like FFmpeg a forger can re-encode an originally low-quality video with higher bitrates, to give the illusion of being a high-quality video.

To expose fake bitrate forgery Liang et al. [22] obtained PU statistics from the first P frame of each GOP. A 25-D feature vector is retrieved from the histogram of the PU partitions, known as HPP. An average of the HPP features of all GOPs in a video sequence is calculated to obtain the final detection feature. The features are then classified using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel to obtain an average accuracy of 87%.

In another study, the authors improved average accuracy by extracting multiple prediction features from both I and P frames [23]. Features extracted from I-frames include a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoICU), 5-D PU partitioning mode (PMoIPU) and 6-D intra partitioning modes (PMoIIPM). From P-frames, a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoPCU) and 25-D PU (PMoPPU) partitioning mode information is extracted. A systematic analysis of individual and combination of features is performed to detect videos with fake bitrate.

Recently, Yu et al. [19] proposed a 10-D feature vector named, PMF formed from the features extracted from intra and inter-prediction modes. HEVC introduced 35 intra-prediction modes. Out of these, Planar, DC, H0 and V0 are suitable for representing homogenous textures. Fake HD videos with low-quality origin have reduced texture complexity, thus during re-encoding more Planar, DC, H0 and V0 modes would be used for intra-prediction in comparison to videos with high-quality origin. A 4-D feature vector of intra-prediction modes is derived from each I-Frame. Further, a 6-D feature vector is extracted from P-frames and B frames, comprising information of Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. An ensemble classifier was employed to achieve state of art results with average accuracy near to 99%.

For detecting fake bitrates authors have conducted experiments on videos with both low-resolution (QCIF and CIF) and high-resolution (720p and 1080p). A comparison chart of average detection accuracies achieved by the above works are presented in Table 3. It has been observed that the higher the difference between the bitrate of first encoding and second encoding, the higher the variation in the prediction mode features thus, the higher the detection accuracy. Table  4 presents a summary of Fake bitrate detection techniques in HEVC videos. 


## C. Double Compression detection techniques

Based upon the parameter selection for recompression, we analyse double compression detection techniques by categorizing them into Non-aligned GOP, Same quantization parameter and Different quantization parameters for first and second encoding.


## Double Compression: Non-Aligned GOP

Inter-frame forgeries such as frame deletion, frame insertion or frame duplication involves alteration in the temporal sequence of the original video. This changes the original GOP structure causing some I-frames to be re-encoded as P-frames (I-P frames) as shown in Fig. 13 and some P frames to be reencoded as P frames (P-P frames). When compared to neighbouring P-P frames, relocated I-P frames possess abnormal characteristics in basic coding elements, such as variation in statistics of CU, PU and TU; disproportion of intra, inter and skip units; and disparity in Intra modes has been observed [26][27][28][29][30][31]. Authors in [26] counted the number of intra, inter and skip PUs and designed a feature vector named, SN-PUPM, by taking absolute difference with adjacent three frames. To reduce noise effects, twice averaging filters were introduced. Sequences with abnormal peak values at a periodic interval, indicating an I-P frames change, were classified as double compressed using the SVM classifier. However, when the adaptive GOP algorithm is employed, the proposed sequence-based approach fails because the periodic nature of the recompression traces would be destroyed.

Jiang et al. [27] proposed an enhanced approach for dealing with PU prediction mode statistics. Instead of classifying each sequence authors worked on GOP-based statistics. To generate PU sequences for each GOP unit, the ratio of I-PUs to S-PUs is first calculated. A three-tap median filter was used on PU sequences to reduce the impact of different video contents. A 6-D feature set was formed by applying several low-order statistics, including, maximum, minimum, average and variance. These GOP-based features were then classified using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). In order to render double compression decision score fusion practice was used. The approach works well for adaptive GOP but when the GOP size of the re-encoding operation is multiple of first encoding, the suggested technique fails.

Further, Wu et al. [28] combined the count of inter PUs with optical flow residuals to make a fusion feature. Their technique improved the detection of relocated I-P frames by 4.59% in comparison to the SNPUPM feature [26]. Hong et al. [32] developed a method for detecting frame deletion forgeries in HEVC encoded videos. They extracted three coding features, namely, intra CU area, residual energy of transform unit and statistics of TUs from the P-frame of each GOP. For a GOP of size N, 3 (N-1) sized feature vectors were generated. To check the authenticity of videos, these features are classified using LDA with k-NN and MLP classifiers. The proposed features are robust for detecting flawless frame deletion and forgery performed in static scenes. However, the technique can work only for fixed GOP sizes.

Recently, deep neural networks have been successfully applied in many areas of computer vision such as object recognition, action recognition, plant disease detection and image forgery detection. These models are capable of automatically learning features from visual data. The authors in [30,31] presented approaches by using a convolutional neural network. Authors in [30] proposed an attention-based two-stream ResNet (ATResNet) network integrated with LSTM model. To identify relocated I-frames two types of feature maps are extracted from compressed bitstream: CSM (CU size map) and CPM (CU prediction mode map). Spatial variations in generated maps are learned by a pre-trained ResNet network where an attention model was employed to optimize network weights and increase detection accuracy. The coding maps extracted from the input video are divided into short clips and LSTM was employed to capture temporal variations. The proposed model is efficient in learning spatio-temporal features, that outperform other forgery detection models.

He et al. [31] examined that low order statistics applied on the distribution of CU types, including intra, inter and skip CUs, can efficiently predict relocated I-frames under increased bitrate. Whereas these features are insufficient to detect relocated I-frames encoded with decreased bitrate. In the first stage, the authors proposed an efficient and compact 50-D feature vector consisting of information related to CU prediction modes, block sizes, and motion vectors. Using these features, an SVM classifier with RBF kernel was able to classify relocated I-frames with increased bitrate correctly. In the second stage, to discriminate between relocated I-frames compressed with decreased bitrate and single compressed frames a Convolutional neural network with dense connections (S-DenseNet) is built. This model learns spatio-temporal representations from CU-type information of three continuous frames and generates output probabilities at the softmax layer. The proposed CNN model obtains an accuracy of 88.51%. Table 5 comparatively studies HEVC double compression detection techniques under Non-aligned GOP.  [33][34][35] studied the recompression artefacts under aligned GOP structure and the same quantization parameter setting for first and second encoding. Jia et al. [33] proposed an approach utilizing the count of 4x4 PUs in each I-frame and computed standard deviation between the single compressed and double compressed versions of the video. Experiments were conducted for QP (22,24,26,28,32) and an appropriate threshold was selected for detection results. An accuracy of 82.22% was achieved. However, the testing dataset comprised low-resolution QCIF videos.

Elrowayati et al. [34] concatenated the intra-prediction modes with the DST coefficients of each 4x4 PU block extracted from I-frames. A feature named Average Number of Changing PBs (ANCPB) was formulated. ANCPBs are able to recognize the double compression under the same QP, however, the distinctive power of the feature followed a downward trend with the quality of the video.

A novel double compression detection approach under the same QP, based on PU modes in I-frames is presented by Jiang et al. [35]. The proposed feature vector, named Intra Prediction Unit Prediction Mode (IPUPM) composes PU statistics of block sizes: 4x4, 8x8 and 16x16; and intra prediction PU mode of each block with values varying between 0 to 34. The author claimed that by fusing different PU features accuracy of detection has been improved. Moreover, unlike the work in [33] experiments were carried out on HD sequences, resulting in more reliable outcomes. A comparative summary of proposed techniques is given in Table 6.  [36][37][38] presented their studies considering the different QPs for the two compressions. Huang et al. [36] analysed that the quantization errors in recompressed videos cause variation in DCT coefficients. The authors extracted a 136-D feature set consisting of four co-occurrence matrices of neighbouring DCT coefficients and several higher-order statistics, to prove this fact. The proposed algorithm performs well when the first quantization parameter is higher than the second quantization parameter, however, performance is poor when the first quantization parameter is lower or equal to the second quantization parameter.

Li et al. [37] combined the distribution of various TU sizes, specifically its mean, variance, kurtosis and skewness with the DCT coefficients. Authors developed a reduced feature set of size 17-D and achieved comparable detection accuracy to [37] with less computation cost requirements.

Fang et al. [38] proposed a novel methodology to study the influence of DCT coefficients based on transform unit partitioning. The authors extracted a set of three features including, the proportional distribution of DCT coefficients in different types of Tus (PDDC), the autocorrelation property of the DCT coefficients in 4x4 Tus (APDC), and the proportion distribution of the four types of TUs (PDTU). For experiments, only I-frames were considered. During feature selection it has been observed that for TUs of size 16x16 the distribution pattern of DCT coefficients in single and double compressed videos is not distinguishable, thus authors have skipped considering them in feature selection. Table 7 presents a summary of discussed techniques. 


## Discussion and Findings

The major findings derived from the literature concerning to the HEVC video forgery detection methods under the compression domain are summarized below:

 Finding 1: To conduct experiments, researchers have prepared their own forged dataset using uncompressed YUV sequences acquired from the Derf library 1 . However, due to the non-availability of a single repository of forged HEVC videos, a robust comparison of proposed techniques is not possible. Moreover, the library doesn't have videos comprising fast motion. The prime focus of video forgery is surveillance footage; however, the library lacks the collection of surveillance videos for investigation. A centralized repository of forged videos encoded with new generation codecs, such as HEVC, containing a diversity of contents is required.  Finding 2: Fig. 2 depict that only (20)(21)(22)% of the available literature related to the video forgery detection under the compression domain uses HEVC coding features.  Finding 3: The size of the CU, PU and TU partitioning type also plays a major role during the forgery detection. Fig. 10 show that studies related to prediction unit features have been exploited the most for investigations and no research article has utilized features from all three domains together. Moreover, transform unit features are never studied by articles detecting transcoding and fake bitrate forgeries.  Finding 4: The distribution of the forgery detection techniques as provided in Fig. 12 point out the very less attention of the researchers on transcoding detection. Transcoding is a major menace for social media users in the present time. Further, it is observed that the main focus of the researchers is on double compression detection, the reason being researchers working for inter-frame and intra-frame forgery detections have anticipated recompression detection.  Finding 5: This research highlights the presence of four kinds of forgeries such as transcoding, fake-bitrate, inter-frame forgery and intra-frame forgery in HEVC-coded videos. The various features, models, tools and performance measures used by the different authors in past for all types of forgeries are summarized in Table  2-6. To investigate video content forgeries, techniques based on the detection of double compression traces have been utilized. However, because a video can be recompressed while being transferred from one network to another, exclusive inter-frame and intra-frame forgery detection techniques for high-definition data are required.  Finding 6: The performances of a vast majority of the methodologies discussed in this survey depend on the use of fixed GOP structures, (assumes that the test video under investigation consists of GOPs with a fixed number of frames). However, HEVC compression standards use adaptive GOP structures, and the lengths of these GOPs can be up to 250 frames. Consequently, such techniques may fail entirely for realistic videos. Furthermore, algorithms that exploit relocated I-frames are also unsuitable for this encoding standard. As a result, approaches that take into account adaptive GOP must be developed.


## Conclusion

This paper provides an in-depth analysis of different HEVC video forgery detection techniques operated under the compression domain environment. Such analysis is done based on dataset, resolution, features, methods, type of forgery, performance measures along with their limitations. The present study reveals that most of the video forgery detection techniques addressed a single type of forgery detection instead of multiple forgeries which may be of great interest for future research in this field. Although various forgery detection methods have been developed in past, the findings given in Section 5 raise the need of developing more effective methods for the same. Further, the present survey will give deep insights to the researchers in the field of video forgery detection.

## Fig. 1 .
1Evolution of video coding standards.

## Fig. 2 .
2The proportion of HEVC articles. The blue part represents the proportion of forensic articles that exploits HEVC compression domain features and orange part represents the rest of video forensic articles.

## Fig. 3 .
3Block diagram of HEVC encoder-decoder.

## Fig. 4 .
4Partitioning of a CTU into CUs. (a) A CTU with partitioning. (b) Corresponding quadtree representation.

## Fig. 5 .
5(a) CU partitioning (b) PU partitioning (c) TU partitioning.

## Fig. 6 .
6Classification of HEVC video forgery.

## Fig. 8 .
8Example of inter-frame forgery. (a) Authentic video (b) Frame deletion forgery; frames containing a person's arrival are removed. (c) Frame insertion forgery; frames containing a person's arrival are inserted from some other footage (d) Frame duplication forgery; frames containing a person's arrival are duplicated.

## Fig. 9 .
9The general process of generating forged videos. (a) Transcoded (b) Fake Bitrate (c) Intra-frame forged and (d) Inter-frame forged.

## Fig.
Fig. 9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream

## Fig. 10 .
10The methodology adopted for the survey.

## Fig. 11 .
11Distributions of articles among various feature domains.

## Fig. 12 .
12The proportion of video forensic techniques proposed for various categories.

## Fig. 13 .
13Relocated I-frames in double compression

## Table 1 .
1Size chart of CU, PU and TU partitioning types in HEVC HEVC tools consist of software programs for generating and analysing standard HEVC bitstreams. To perform forensic investigations, researchers need test sequences encoded with the HEVC codec. These sequences can be obtained by encoding and decoding uncompressed YUV sequences with the help of coding software. For the HEVC standard, three open-source implementations are available: HM Reference Model, X265 and FFmpeg. While performing encoding operation the user can set desired configuration parameters such as GOP structure, quantization parameter (QP) value, rate control modes etc.CU 
PU for I-frames 
PU for P-frames 
TU 

64x64 
64x64 
64x64 
32x32 
16x16 
8x8 
64x64 

32x32 
32x32 
64x32 
32x24 
16x12 
8x4 
32x32 

16x16 
16x16 
32x64 
24x32 
12x16 
4x8 
16x16 

8x8 
8x8 
64x48 
32x16 
16x8 
4x4 
8x8 

4x4 
48x64 
16x32 
8x16 
4x4 

64x16 
32x8 
16x4 

16x64 
8x32 
4x16 

D. HEVC Tools 



## Table 2 .
2Study of transcoding detection techniquesRef. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Performance 
Tools 

[10] 
Frequency of uni-predicted and bi-predicted PUs 
Threshold Based 
Model 

352x288 
AUC= 
94.95 

FFmpeg, Commercial 
analyser 
[20] 
Statistics of PU types, 25-D feature from P-Frame and 
5-D feature from I-Frame of each GOP 

SVM classifier 
with RBF Kernel 

1280x720 
Accuracy= 
98.17% 

HM 12.0, JM 19.0, 
GitlHEVCAnalyzer 

[21] 
A 38-D features set of CU and PU partition types of I 
and first P frame of each GOP 

SVM with 
PolySVC kernel 

352x288, 
1920x1080 

Accuracy= 
98.98% 

HM, JM 


## Table 3 .
3Comparison of fake bitrate detection accuracy in QCIF, CIF, 720p, and 1080p videos (in percentage). The difference denotes the difference in bitrate between the first and second encodingsQCIF 
CIF 

Difference 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 

100 Kbps 
94.47 
94.67 
-
92.9 
94.63 
94.63 

200 Kbps 
100 
100 
98.5 
96.45 
98.2 
98.2 

300 Kbps 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 

720p 
1080p 

Difference 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 
[22] 
[23] 
[19] 

<10 M 
91.7 
96.53 
-
92.25 
-
-

10-20 M 
97.91 
100 
98.96 
98.65 
96.83 
97.3 

>20 M 
100 
100 
100 
99.15 
100 
100 

Table 4. Study of fake bitrate detection techniques 

Ref. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Tools 
[22] 25-D HPP (Histogram of PU Partition Types) feature set 
from First P-frame of each GOP 

SVM with 
PolySVC kernel 

176 x 144, 352 x 288, 
1280x720, 1920x1080 

H.265/HEVC 
reference software 
[23] Coding unit prediction modes for I and P frames; Prediction 
unit prediction modes for I and P frames, Intra prediction 
modes of I-picture. 

SVM with 
PolySVC kernel 

176 x 144, 352 x 288, 
1280x720, 1920x1080 

H.265/HEVC 
reference software 

[19] A 4-D feature set extracted from DC, Planar, H0 and V0 
direction intra prediction modes; A 6-D feature set extracted 
from Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. 

Ensemble 
classifier 

176 x 144, 352 x 288, 
1280x720, 1920x1080 

x265, HM16.15 



## Table 5 .
5Study of double compression detection techniques under non-aligned GOP.Double Compression: Aligned GOP, Same QP Authors inRef. 
Features 
Feature 
Domain 

Model 
Resolution 
Performance 
Tools 

[26] 
Sequence of Number of Prediction 
Unit with Intra, Inter and Skip 
Prediction Modes (SN-PUPM) 

Sequence-
Based 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal 

Not Specified 
AUC = 0.9226 
Encoder X265 
Decoder 
HM16.15 
[27] 
A 6-D GOP-based feature set using 
average, variation and max of S-
PU's and I-PU's. 

GOP-
Based 

MLP Classifier with 
sigmoid function 
and RPROP 
optimizer 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Accuracy = 
94.31% 

x265 

[28] 
Optical flow residuals (OFRB-
NIPU); Prediction mode feature 
proposed by [26] 

Sequence-
Based 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

AUC = 0.9707 
Encoder X265 
Decoder 
HM16.15 
[29] 
Depth map of CU and TU partitions 
and grouping them in GoP units. 

GOP-
Based 

3-D Convolutional 
Neural Network 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Precision=0.9865 
Recall = 0.9869 
F1-score = 
0.9867 

HM, Low Delay 
P mode, 
Random Access 
mode 
[30] 
CU Size Map (CSM); CU Prediction 
mode Map (CPM) 

Frame-
Based 

Attention-based 
Ressidual Nework 
(ATResNet) and 
LSTM 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Accuracy = 
94.07% 
TPR = 92.96% 
TNR = 95.18% 

x265 

[31] 
Distribution of block size and 
prediction modes of CU types and 
Kullback-Leibler divergence 
between adjacent frames. 

Frame-
Based 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal; 
Shallow CNN with 
Dense connections 
(S-DenseNet) 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

Accuracy = 
88.51% 

x265 

[32] 
Intra CU Area; Total TU Residual 
Energy; and Number of TUs 
extracted from P-Frames. 

GOP-
Based 

LDA and k-NN, 
MultiLayer 
Perceptron (MLP) 

832 x 480 
Accuracy 
LDA+k-
NN=0.823 MLP 
=0.883 

HM16.7 low-
delay P mode 



## Table 6 .
6Study of double compression detection techniques under same QP Quantized residual DST coefficients and Intra prediction modes of 4x4 PUs in I-frames. Double Compression: Aligned GOP, Different QP For the aligned GOP case, authors inRef. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Accuracy 
Tools 

[33] 
Standard deviation in number of 4×4 PUs of I-
frames (SDoPU) 

Threshold Based 
Model 

176x144 
82.23% 
HM10.0 

[34] 
Threshold Based 
Model 

Not specified 
83.24% 
HM10.0 

[35] 
Statistics of 4x4,8x8,16x16 PUs and Intra 
prediction modes in I-frames 

SVM classifier with 
RBF Kernal 

1920x1080, 
1280x720 

97.55% 
FFmpeg 



## Table 7 .
7Study of double compression detection techniques under different QP.Ref. 
Features 
Model 
Resolution 
Accuracy 
Tools 

[36] 
A 136-D feature set formed from co-
occurrence matrix of distribution of DCT 
coefficients 

SVM classifier with RBF 
Kernel 

176 × 144, 416 × 240, 832 × 480, 
1280×720, 1920×1080, 
2560×1600 

82.26% 
HM12.0 

[37] 
Distributions of Discrete Cosine 
Transform (DCT) coefficients and 
Transform Unit (TU) 

SVM classifier with RBF 
Kernel 

176 × 144, 416 × 240, 832 × 480, 
1280×720, 1920×1080, 
2560×1600 

82.11% 
HM12.0. 

[38] 
Proportional distribution of types of TUs 
(PDTU) 

SVM classifier with RBF 
Kernel 

1920×1080 
91.10% 
x265; 
HM16.15 


http://media.xiph.org/
Authors' ProfilesNeetu Singla is currently pursuing her PhD from the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi. She has received her MTech in Computer Engineering from Maharishi Markandeshwar University and BTech in Information Technology from Kurukshetra University. She has 12 years of experience in teaching. Her research interests include computer vision, video analytics, and video forensics.Sushama Nagpal is currently working as Professor in the Division of Computer Engineering at NSUT, New Delhi. She has almost 25 years of experience in teaching and has actively engaged herself in research. Her areas of interests include Software Quality Measurement, Data Warehouse, Data Mining/Machine Learning, Social Network Analysis and Recommender Systems. She has published various research papers in reputed international journals and conferences. She has reviewed number of research articles for reputed international journals and acted as Member, Technical Program Committee for international conferences.Jyotsna Singh is working as a Professor in the Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering atNetaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi. She has been working with the University for more than 20 years. She is a senior member of IEEE and a life member of IETE. She has also been on the technical program committees of various international conferences such as INDICON, SPIN, ICACCI, CCAIS etc. She has published papers in more than 50 Journals and conferences. Her research interests include Signal Processing, Multimedia Security, Image and Audio Compression.
Online social networks security and privacy: comprehensive review and analysis. A K Jain, S R Sahoo, J , Complex & Intelligent Systems. A. K. Jain, S. R. Sahoo and J. Kaubiyal, "Online social networks security and privacy: comprehensive review and analysis," Complex & Intelligent Systems, pp. 1-21, 2021.

K K Sindhu, B B Meshram, Digital Forensic Investigation Tools and Procedures. 4K. K. Sindhu and B. B. Meshram, "Digital Forensic Investigation Tools and Procedures," International Journal of Computer Network and Information Security, vol. 4, pp. 39-48, 2012.

A Review of Digital Video Tampering: From Simple Editing to Full Synthesis. P Johnston, E Elyan, Digital Investigation. 29P. Johnston and E. Elyan, "A Review of Digital Video Tampering: From Simple Editing to Full Synthesis," Digital Investigation, vol. 29, March 2019.

Systematic Review and Classification on Video Surveillance Systems. F F Chamasemani, L S Affendey, International Journal of Information Technology and Computer Science. 5F. F. Chamasemani and L. S. Affendey, "Systematic Review and Classification on Video Surveillance Systems," International Journal of Information Technology and Computer Science, vol. 5, pp. 87-102, 2013.

Rate-distortion optimization for video compression. G J Sullivan, T Wiegand, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 15G. J. Sullivan and T. Wiegand, "Rate-distortion optimization for video compression," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 15, pp. 74-90, 1998.

Video Forensics in Temporal Domain using Machine Learning Techniques. S P Jaiswal, S V Dhavale, International Journal of Computer Network and Information Security. 5S. P. Jaiswal and S. V. Dhavale, "Video Forensics in Temporal Domain using Machine Learning Techniques," International Journal of Computer Network and Information Security, vol. 5, pp. 58-67, 2013.

Three-dimensional Region Forgery Detection and Localization in Videos. X H Nguyen, Y Hu, M A Amin, K G Hayat, V T Le, D T Truong, International Journal of Image, Graphics and Signal Processing. 11X. H. Nguyen, Y. Hu, M. A. Amin, K. G. Hayat, V. T. Le and D. T. Truong, "Three-dimensional Region Forgery Detection and Localization in Videos," International Journal of Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, vol. 11, pp. 1-13, 2019.

Overview and Extensions of the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) and Beyond (Versatile Video Coding). S Subbarayappa, K Rao, S. Subbarayappa and K. Rao, "Overview and Extensions of the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) and Beyond (Versatile Video Coding)," December 2019.

Overview of the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) Standard. G J Sullivan, J.-R Ohm, W.-J Han, T Wiegand, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. 22G. J. Sullivan, J.-R. Ohm, W.-J. Han and T. Wiegand, "Overview of the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) Standard," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 22, pp. 1649-1668, 2012.

Detection of double AVC/HEVC encoding. A Costanzo, M Barni, 2016 24th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO). A. Costanzo and M. Barni, "Detection of double AVC/HEVC encoding," in 2016 24th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2016.

Development of a Video Tampering Dataset for Forensic Investigation. O Al-Sanjary, A Ahmed, G Sulong, Forensic Science International. 266O. Al-Sanjary, A. Ahmed and G. Sulong, "Development of a Video Tampering Dataset for Forensic Investigation," Forensic Science International, vol. 266, July 2016.

Image and Video Forensics: A Critical Survey. H Kaur, N Jindal, Wireless Personal Communications. 112H. Kaur and N. Jindal, "Image and Video Forensics: A Critical Survey," Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 112, pp. 1281-1302, 2020.

A comprehensive survey on passive techniques for digital video forgery detection. N Shelke, S Singh Kasana, Multimedia Tools and Applications. 80N. Shelke and S. Singh Kasana, "A comprehensive survey on passive techniques for digital video forgery detection," Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 80, pp. 1-64, February 2021.

Video content authentication techniques: a comprehensive survey. R Singh, N Aggarwal, Multimedia Systems. 24R. Singh and N. Aggarwal, "Video content authentication techniques: a comprehensive survey," Multimedia Systems, vol. 24, February 2017.

Recent Advances in Digital Multimedia Tampering Detection for Forensics Analysis. S Bourouis, R Alroobaea, A Alharbi, M Andejany, S Rubaiee, Symmetry. 12S. Bourouis, R. Alroobaea, A. Alharbi, M. Andejany and S. Rubaiee, "Recent Advances in Digital Multimedia Tampering Detection for Forensics Analysis," Symmetry, vol. 12, October 2020.

Block Partitioning Structure in the HEVC Standard. I.-K Kim, J Min, T Lee, W.-J Han, IEEE Transactions on. 22Circuits and Systems for Video TechnologyI.-K. Kim, J. Min, T. Lee and W.-J. Han, "Block Partitioning Structure in the HEVC Standard," Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 22, December 2012.

Gitlhevcanalyzer: Gitl hevc/h.265 analyzer based on qt. custom filters supported. Gitlhevcanalyzer: Gitl hevc/h.265 analyzer based on qt. custom filters supported.

A framework for video coding analyzer. S Jain, A Fell, A S Motra, 2016 IEEE Annual India Conference (INDICON). S. Jain, A. Fell and A. S. Motra, "A framework for video coding analyzer," in 2016 IEEE Annual India Conference (INDICON), 2016.

Detection of Double Compression for HEVC Videos with Fake Bitrate. L Xiaoyun, Z Li, Y Yang, Z Zhang, Y U Zhang, IEEE Access. L. Xiaoyun, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang and Y. U. Zhang, "Detection of Double Compression for HEVC Videos with Fake Bitrate," IEEE Access, vol. PP, pp. 1-1, September 2018.

Exposing Video Compression History by Detecting Transcoded HEVC Videos from AVC Coding. S Bian, H Li, T Gu, A C Kot, Symmetry. 1167S. Bian, H. Li, T. Gu and A. C. Kot, "Exposing Video Compression History by Detecting Transcoded HEVC Videos from AVC Coding," Symmetry, vol. 11, p. 67, 2019.

Detection of Transcoding from H.264/AVC to HEVC Based on CU and PU Partition Types. Z Zhang, C Liu, Z Li, L Yu, H Yan, Symmetry. 11Z. Zhang, C. Liu, Z. Li, L. Yu and H. Yan, "Detection of Transcoding from H.264/AVC to HEVC Based on CU and PU Partition Types," Symmetry, vol. 11, 2019.

Detection of Double Compression for HEVC Videos With Fake Bitrate. X Liang, Z Li, Y Yang, Z Zhang, Y Zhang, IEEE Access. 6X. Liang, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhang, "Detection of Double Compression for HEVC Videos With Fake Bitrate," IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 53243-53253, 2018.

Fake Bitrate Detection of HEVC Videos Based on Prediction Process. X Liang, Z Li, Z Li, Z Zhang, Symmetry. 11X. Liang, Z. Li, Z. Li and Z. Zhang, "Fake Bitrate Detection of HEVC Videos Based on Prediction Process," Symmetry, vol. 11, 2019.

Coarse-to-Fine Copy-Move Forgery Detection for Video Forensics. S Jia, Z Xu, H Wang, C Feng, T Wang, IEEE Access. S. Jia, Z. Xu, H. Wang, C. Feng and T. Wang, "Coarse-to-Fine Copy-Move Forgery Detection for Video Forensics," IEEE Access, vol. PP, pp. 1-1, March 2018.

Inter-frame forgery detection based on differential energy of residue. S M Fadl, Q Han, Q Li, IET Image Process. 13S. M. Fadl, Q. Han and Q. Li, "Inter-frame forgery detection based on differential energy of residue," IET Image Process., vol. 13, pp. 522-528, 2019.

HEVC Double Compression Detection Based on SN-PUPM Feature. Q Xu, T Sun, X Jiang, Y Dong, Q. Xu, T. Sun, X. Jiang and Y. Dong, "HEVC Double Compression Detection Based on SN-PUPM Feature," 2017.

Detection of Double Compressed HEVC Videos Using GOP-Based PU Type Statistics. X Jiang, P He, T Sun, R Wang, IEEE Access. 7X. Jiang, P. He, T. Sun and R. Wang, "Detection of Double Compressed HEVC Videos Using GOP-Based PU Type Statistics," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 95364-95375, 2019.

HEVC Double Compression Detection with Non-Aligned GOP Structures Based on a Fusion Feature with Optical Flow and Prediction Units. Q Wu, T Sun, X Jiang, K Xu, Q Xu, P He, 2019 12th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing. CISP-BMEIQ. Wu, T. Sun, X. Jiang, K. Xu, Q. Xu and P. He, "HEVC Double Compression Detection with Non-Aligned GOP Structures Based on a Fusion Feature with Optical Flow and Prediction Units," in 2019 12th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI), 2019.

Detection of Frame Deletion Using Convolutional Neural Network. J H Hong, Y Yoonmo, T O Byung, Journal of Broadcast Engineering. 23J. H. Hong, Y. Yoonmo and T. O. Byung, "Detection of Frame Deletion Using Convolutional Neural Network," Journal of Broadcast Engineering, vol. 23, p. 886-895, November 2018.

Frame-Wise Detection of Double HEVC Compression by Learning Deep Spatio-Temporal Representations in Compression Domain. P He, H Li, H Wang, S Wang, X Jiang, R Zhang, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia. 23P. He, H. Li, H. Wang, S. Wang, X. Jiang and R. Zhang, "Frame-Wise Detection of Double HEVC Compression by Learning Deep Spatio-Temporal Representations in Compression Domain," IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 23, pp. 3179-3192, 2021.

A Two-Stage Cascaded Detection Scheme for Double HEVC Compression Based on Temporal Inconsistency. P He, H Wang, R Zhang, Y Li, Security and Communication Networks202114P. He, H. Wang, R. Zhang and Y. Li, "A Two-Stage Cascaded Detection Scheme for Double HEVC Compression Based on Temporal Inconsistency," Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2021, p. 14, November 2021.

Detection of frame deletion in HEVC-Coded video in the compressed domain. J H Hong, Y Yang, B T Oh, Digit. Investig. 30J. H. Hong, Y. Yang and B. T. Oh, "Detection of frame deletion in HEVC-Coded video in the compressed domain," Digit. Investig., vol. 30, pp. 23-31, 2019.

Double hevc compression detection with the same qps based on the pu numbers. J Rui-Shi, L Zhao-Hong, Z Zhen-Zhen, L Dong-Dong, ITM Web Conf. 72010J. Rui-Shi, L. Zhao-Hong, Z. Zhen-Zhen and L. Dong-Dong, "Double hevc compression detection with the same qps based on the pu numbers," ITM Web Conf., 7:02010, 2016.

Tampering detection of double-compression with the same quantization parameter in HEVC video streams. A A Elrowayati, M F L Abdullah, A A Manaf, A S Alfagi, 2017 7th IEEE International Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering. A. A. Elrowayati, M. F. L. Abdullah, A. A. Manaf and A. S. Alfagi, "Tampering detection of double-compression with the same quantization parameter in HEVC video streams," in 2017 7th IEEE International Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering (ICCSCE), 2017.

Detection of HEVC Double Compression With the Same Coding Parameters Based on Analysis of Intra Coding Quality Degradation Process. X Jiang, Q Xu, T Sun, B Li, P He, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security. 15X. Jiang, Q. Xu, T. Sun, B. Li and P. He, "Detection of HEVC Double Compression With the Same Coding Parameters Based on Analysis of Intra Coding Quality Degradation Process," IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 250-263, 2020.

Detection of Double Compression for HEVC Videos Based on the Cooccurrence Matrix of DCT Coefficients. M Huang, R Wang, J Xu, D Xu, Q Li, IWDWM. Huang, R. Wang, J. Xu, D. Xu and Q. Li, "Detection of Double Compression for HEVC Videos Based on the Co- occurrence Matrix of DCT Coefficients," in IWDW, 2015.

Detection of double compression in HEVC videos based on TU size and quantised DCT coefficients. Q Li, R Wang, D Xu, IET Inf. Secur. 13Q. Li, R. Wang and D. Xu, "Detection of double compression in HEVC videos based on TU size and quantised DCT coefficients," IET Inf. Secur., vol. 13, pp. 1-6, 2019.

Detection of HEVC Double Compression with Different Quantization Parameters Based on Property of DCT Coefficients and TUs. Q Fang, X Jiang, T Sun, Q Xu, K Xu, 12th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing. CISP-BMEIQ. Fang, X. Jiang, T. Sun, Q. Xu and K. Xu, "Detection of HEVC Double Compression with Different Quantization Parameters Based on Property of DCT Coefficients and TUs," 2019 12th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI), pp. 1-6, 2019.