# Multimodal Learning for Multi-Omics: A Survey

CorpusID: 254096119
 
tags: #Mathematics, #Medicine, #Biology, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ebf69dfc9306f3c0f0dbb2bd6916b81f953d872a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ebf69dfc9306f3c0f0dbb2bd6916b81f953d872a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Multimodal Learning for Multi-Omics: A Survey


Sina Tabakhi 
Department of Computer Science
The University of Sheffield
SheffieldUnited Kingdom

Mohammod Naimul 
Islam Suvon 
Department of Computer Science
The University of Sheffield
SheffieldUnited Kingdom

Pegah Ahadian p.ahadian@mail.sbu.ac.ir 
Department of Computer Science
Shahid Beheshti University
TehranIran

Haiping Lu h.lu@sheffield.ac.uk 
Department of Computer Science
The University of Sheffield
SheffieldUnited Kingdom

Multimodal Learning for Multi-Omics: A Survey
Multimodal learningmulti-omicsdata fusionmachine learningdiagnostic systemscancer predictionopen-source software
With advanced imaging, sequencing, and profiling technologies, multiple omics data become increasingly available and hold promises for many healthcare applications such as cancer diagnosis and treatment. Multimodal learning for integrative multi-omics analysis can help researchers and practitioners gain deep insights into human diseases and improve clinical decisions. However, several challenges are hindering the development in this area, including the availability of easily accessible open-source tools. This survey aims to provide an up-to-date overview of the data challenges, fusion approaches, datasets, and software tools from several new perspectives. We identify and investigate various omics data challenges that can help us understand the field better. We categorize fusion approaches comprehensively to cover existing methods in this area.We collect existing open-source tools to facilitate their broader utilization and development. We explore a broad range of omics data modalities and a list of accessible datasets. Finally, we summarize future directions that can potentially address existing gaps and answer the pressing need to advance multimodal learning for multi-omics data analysis.

## Introduction

Information about phenomena in the natural world typically comes from multiple modalities. Each modality from a different source represents distinct statistical properties, and multimodal data include related information from various data modalities. Multimodal learning presents new insights into developing machine learning models that incorporate complementary information extracted across modalities to solve complex problems [1][2][3] in broad applications such as healthcare data analytics, 4 speech recognition, 5 image captioning, 6 human recognition, 7 multimedia content retrieval, 8 and finance. 9 Multimodal health data analytics is an important research area in multimodal learning that leverages multiple biomedical datasets to address real-world healthcare problems. Such massive datasets have been exponentially produced through technological advances in imaging, sequencing, and molecular profiling. 10,11 Finegrained biological omics data can be retrieved from different high-throughput platforms, enabling scientists to explore more complex life-threatening diseases with the aim of diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, prevention, and even cure. 12,13 Each omics data (i.e., genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, microbiomics, exposomics, etc.) has demonstrated value in studying the human body's biological processes independently. [14][15][16][17] Collectively, the integration of complementary information obtained from the interactions between omics data (also referred to as multi-omics analysis) offers a promising opportunity to create a deeper understanding of most progressive diseases. [18][19][20] Designing machine learning methods for multi-omics fusion to enhance decision-making even further is still a challenging and active research area for data scientists and biologists.

With the outstanding efforts of researchers and the vast investments of multiple institutes, notable projects have been completed and made publicly available to the research community. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 21 and The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) 22 projects have built large-scale multi-omics datasets with the aim of accelerating precision medicine. The availability of this wealth of data has now revolutionized our perspective on various cancers, giving us a more meaningful understanding of entire genomic changes. This provides opportunities to achieve better performance in managing several tasks, including clinical outcome prediction, sample classification, disease subtyping, survival analysis, and biomarker identification. 13,23,24 Although researchers have access to a wealth of various omics data, extracting information from them for clinical prediction is complex and remains a challenge. Multi-omics data involve different high-dimensional data with a relatively small number of patients, known as 'the curse of dimensionality', which gives rise to the overfitting of models with the lack of generalizability. 18,25 Moreover, the utilization of different platforms to generate omics data presents heterogeneous datasets with varying data distributions and types that need to be adequately tackled. 11,13 Another problem is related to measurement errors in sequencing technologies that produce missing values in omics datasets. 11,26 Complexity and noisiness lead to other challenges that are the nature of biological omics data and make multi-omics analysis difficult to work on. 13,25 Furthermore, multi-omics datasets are commonly imbalanced at the levels of class and/or feature, which biases learning models towards majority classes or omics with larger numbers of features. 10,26 The details of these challenges and their related sub-challenges are provided in Section 3.

Several efforts have been made to review multi-omics analysis. A summary of survey papers published on multi-omics analysis since 2020 is provided in Table 1. In terms of data challenges, most surveys have reviewed several of them but lack a comprehensive and structured list, and some challenges have yet to be discussed in detail. On the other hand, each paper has proposed different ways to categorize the current fusion methods. Although existing methods have been reviewed under these categorizations, a new class of techniques, joint feature selection, has not been explored. Moreover, some publications have used a flat organization for integration approaches, which does not reflect the similarities and differences among methods. Beyond these issues, public datasets and platforms are not well-studied in existing surveys. There is an increasing need to track high-quality, real-world benchmarks for reproducible research that can be achieved via data sharing. Furthermore, opensource software with the implementation of key methods is an essential resource that supports researchers in building their frameworks rapidly and having a comprehensive comparison in their experimental evaluation. Therefore, highly reusable In this survey, we provide a comprehensive overview of multimodal learning for multi-omics data, specifically focusing on the available data challenges, fusion approaches, and open data and tools. There are four contributions.

(i) We summarize a broad range of omics types, including radiomics and phenomics, their applications, and their relationships, as well as frequently used multi-omics datasets and online portals to discover datasets. (ii) We categorize key data challenges comprehensively with well-structured subchallenges to offer new perspectives on their similarities and differences. (iii) We group multi-omics fusion approaches into a new multi-level organization with a concise review of these approaches, particularly introducing a finer subcategorization for transformation and factorization and a new category termed joint feature selection. (iv) We collect active open-source software packages based on several criteria, including recency, citation, and GitHub popularity. To the best of our knowledge, this is a brand new collection with no similar ones in the literature of multiomics analysis. This list can help researchers become more aware of available resources and contribute to the multi-omics research community effectively and efficiently.

The rest of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief description of omics data. Section 3 investigates challenges and related sub-challenges of multi-omics data analysis. Section 4 explores various fusion approaches in multiomics integration. Section 5 introduces open-source software available for multiomics analysis. Section 6 reviews open-access multi-omics datasets along with portals for free download. Section 7 discusses existing gaps and promising future research directions. Finally, Section 8 concludes this study.


## Multi-Omics Data

Multi-omics data are derived from different sources: molecular omics data, radiomics, and phenomics. Molecular omics data are the traditional dimension of multi-omics data, which aim to analyze the molecular biology of human diseases and consist of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, epigenomics, microbiomics, and exposomics. Radiomics, on the other hand, studies medical images collected from medical imaging technologies. 29 Phenomics is another valuable dimension of multi-omics data that comprises clinical and biochemical data of individuals. 30 Each source of omics data has been separately studied to answer biomedical questions. While different sources of information are complementary and contribute to the discovery of unique aspects of diseases, the fusion of multiple omics modalities has widely been done in existing research. Therefore, introducing each modality of omics data and their potential applications in solving biomedical tasks helps researchers consider all omics modalities in the long run. 18,31   an overview of multiple modalities of omics data and their applications applied to biomedical studies. Besides, the multiple omics data and their fusion for various tasks are visually presented in Figure 1.

We review multi-omics data in the following two subsections based on their prevalence in the research field, including traditional molecular omics data and non-molecular omics data.


### Traditional molecular omics data

The human body is made of billions of building blocks called cells, and genes are placed inside them. Genes are small parts of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) with Protein production, degradation, and steady-state abundance rates Protein movement between subcellular compartments Protein involvement in metabolic pathways Protein interaction display used in the drug discovery process


## Metabolomics

The substrates and products of metabolism influenced by genetic and environmental factors are studied in metabolomics.


## Metabolite fingerprinting 44

Metabolic profiling Targeted analysis

Investigation of several human diseases (e.g., cancers and natural metabolic errors) Design improved therapeutic strategies Toxicology (i.e., toxicological effects) Pharmacology (i.e., nutrition)


## Microbiomics

The analysis of molecules involved in the structure and function of microbial communities in the human body is investigated in microbiomics to diagnose human diseases. complex structures that produce proteins for the development and maintenance of the human body. As a result, studying various constituents of genes helps diagnose, treat, and cure life-threatening human diseases such as cancers.

The rapid development of DNA sequencing into next-generation sequencing (NGS) has generated diverse molecular data named omics. 31,49 It has enabled bioinformaticians to analyze molecular omics, which offers a biological strategy for combining genomics with transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and epigenomics. Consequently, this integration provides knowledge about gene expression, gene activation, and protein levels, which play a vital role in responding to several biological tasks, including disease diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, prevention, and biomarker identification.

The complete set of genetic information for human development and growth is found in the genome and expressed by ribonucleic acid (RNA). The main aim of genomics is the study of the genome for extracting information from genes to determine variations in DNA sequences that can give rise to human diseases. The influence of diseases on the function of cells or living organisms is examined by transcriptomics through gene expression. In other words, transcriptomics identifies modifications in RNA, which is a decisive factor in the occurrence of diseases. Proteomics, on the other side, investigates the set of proteins produced in an organism, system, or biological setting to complement gained information from genomics. This type of omics data is generated by a key analytical technology called mass spectrometry (MS). 50 Metabolomics presents a fingerprint of the physiology of the cells by studying chemical processes involving cellular metabolites and their interactions to detect metabolic diseases and discover biomarkers. Epigenomics examines the modifications in gene function regulation without altering the DNA sequences. The availability of epigenomics can highlight a way to integrate gene expression changes and environmental cues that reveal complementary information in human disease detection. Another factor in shaping human diseases is microbiomes which consist of bacteria, archaea, fungi, algae, and protists. Microbiomics or microbiome science is an emerging area that investigates communities of particular microbial, known as microbiota, to identify microbes and viruses that result in disease. Beyond genetic, environmental exposures also play a decisive factor in several human diseases, such as skin disorders. Exposomics is the study of measuring the total environmental exposures during the individual's life to explore the harmful effects of exposures on health and understand the complicated interaction between genetic and environmental factors.

Several other omics types have been discovered but have not yet been incorporated into molecular omics analysis. Metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metaproteomics are additional molecular omics for which bioinformatics still encounters critical obstacles in their application, such as short reads of sequencing technologies, a high error rate in sequencing technologies, and economic reasons. 51 Furthermore, glycomics is a complete snapshot of glycans constructed in the cells, and its link with other types of omics data has yet to be developed. 52 


### Non-molecular omics data

With the progress in medical imaging technologies and the discovery of the importance of clinical data, complementary sources of omics data, called radiomics and phenomics, have emerged to add meaningful knowledge in solving biological problems.

In precision medicine, radiomics aims to extract quantitative features from medical images and analyze them to enable decision-making systems for a more accurate diagnosis. 53 The workflow of radiomics starts with acquiring image data generated in different modalities, such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and digital histopathology. When images have been collected, segmentation is typically carried out to find essential regions of images to simplify their representation. After that, the feature extraction process is executed to produce different feature types, such as histograms and shape-based features. The valuable features are then combined into specific matrices through mathematical algorithms. Finally, the outcome assessment is made based on machine learning models. 54 A critical step in the described workflow is access to the standardized image datasets. One of the big projects in collecting and organizing medical images of cancer is The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA), which facilitates easy and public access to images related to common cancers (e.g., lung cancer). 55 On the other hand, phenomics systematically measures the full set of qualitative and quantitative phenomes, including physical and biochemical traits. Phenomics examines the effect of an individual's environment and lifestyle on their genome-wide scale to assess the risk of diseases. 56 Phenomics includes electronic health record (EHR)-based phenotyping, the study of extracting information from EHRs to discover clinical characteristics of individuals that can improve our understanding of human health. 57 The genotype-phenotype relationship is an integrative point of view of genetic and phenotypic levels, which causes a unique understanding of complex human diseases. 30 


## Challenges in Multi-Omics Data Analysis

Working with multi-omics data has always resulted in a broad range of challenges that adversely affect learning tasks and should be overcome to improve performance. The arising challenges are fundamental to machine learning research and broadly fall into five categories briefly introduced in this section. Figure 2 summarizes the challenges and related sub-challenges in multi-omics data analysis.


### The curse of dimensionality

Biological data usually suffer from the small sample size problem because data collection is financially costly, and the number of clinical research participants is limited. 13,18 Therefore, most types of omics datasets contain a large number of features compared to only a relatively small number of patients, leading to the  classical phenomenon in machine learning named the curse of dimensionality. 23,58 Although many features are available in omics data, their correlation is very high, and some features do not highlight disease-specific indicators. 59,60 It becomes even more challenging when irrelevant and redundant features in each omics data type are integrated into the multi-omics analysis. Therefore, these features mislead the learning algorithm and limit the model's generalizability to unseen samples. Moreover, the computational complexity of developing a model will be substantially increased in the presence of high-dimensional datasets. 15,26,59 To tackle these problems, dimensionality reduction techniques have been applied to multi-omics data in two ways: feature selection and feature extraction. 13,61 Feature selection refers to methods that select a small number of features from the original set by removing irrelevant and redundant features. 62 Many studies have independently utilized feature selection on each omics data as a pre-processing step. 63-69 However, the redundancy among features across omics datasets can be missed, resulting in low-performance multi-omics analysis. A few researchers have recently tried to use feature selection by considering all omics datasets together to capture the interaction between different omics types. 70,71 Despite the consideration of molecular layer interactions, the computational cost of these methods is high.

Another strategy to reduce the dimensions of the input data is feature extraction, in which a new representation is constructed by projecting the initial feature set into a new space with lower dimensions. 72 The two frequently used methods are principal component analysis (PCA) 73 and its extensions (i.e., kernel PCA, 74,75 Bayesian PCA, 76 sparse PCA, 77 and consensus PCA 72 ) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). 78 Other methods proposed based on this approach are partial least squares, 79 canonical correlation analysis, 80 independent component analy-sis, 81 and multiblock discriminant analysis. 82 Graph representation learning is another promising technique for overcoming the curse of dimensionality by leveraging the graph structure, which has been investigated in several studies. 83-88


### Imbalance problem

Another frequent problem with multi-omics data is the imbalance problem, which can be seen at the class or feature level. Class imbalance naturally occurs in multiomics data when disease-specific classes are rare and comprise a small proportion of samples compared to other classes. This imbalance gives rise to the machine learning model's bias toward the majority classes, and the danger of overfitting increases. 89,90 Over and under-sampling 91-93 and cost-sensitive learning 94 are the most widely used machine learning techniques for balancing datasets.

Feature imbalance, on the other hand, refers to the different distribution of feature dimensionality within each omics data. One omics may have only hundreds of features, while another may contain thousands. As a result, the learning model is more likely to pay more attention to omics with a larger number of features, leading to a learning imbalance. 13,95 To deal with this problem, various strategies have been introduced, ranging from dimensionality reduction (see Section 3.1 for details) to late fusion (see Section 4.2 for details).


### Missing value

Missing values are an inevitable issue with multi-omics data that can occur in the process of omics data acquisition via high-throughput platforms. Data missingness can adversely affect the machine learning algorithms, leading to biased results and poor induction models. 96,97 Two forms of missing values include sample-wise and omics-wise missingness. 11,98 Sample-wise missing values are a traditional problem in machine learning, where part/all of the samples have missing values. While the simplest solution to this problem is to exclude patients with missing values, 70 the risk of losing significant information from the datasets increases and may result in selection bias. 18,99 These gaps can be filled with missing value imputation, a pervasive statistical strategy for replacing missing values with statistical estimates. Several imputation methods have been introduced in the literature, such as mean, median, and k-nearest neighbors. [100][101][102] Beyond single omics imputation, there is an increasing interest in integrative imputation strategies for achieving better results. 98,[103][104][105][106] In omics-wise missingness, biological samples are represented in some, but not all, omics datasets, which are referred to as 'partial datasets.' This issue exists in multi-omics data because of economic reasons, technical constraints, or experimental limitations. 11 Since most models in machine learning require complete datasets, a naive way to resolve this issue is to remove patients with missing omics. However, the data collection cost is high, and it is more appropriate to consider all available samples to address partial datasets. 107 Several researchers have developed models to work directly on partial datasets. 108-111


### Heterogeneity

Each omics type has been collected using different high-throughput technologies, which have produced heterogeneous datasets. The heterogeneity of multi-omics data generates various data distributions and different data types (e.g., discrete, continuous, numerical, and categorical). 26 This variety of data distributions and types causes a considerable challenge to the learning model. Therefore, utilizing appropriate normalization and scaling approaches before any analysis has an essential role in achieving better performance. 20,112,113 Another way to deal with heterogeneity is using late fusion to build a different model for each omics data and then combine the results (see Section 4.2 for details).


### Noisiness

Complex workflows for generating large-scale omics data have produced noisy multiomics data, which can arise as mislabeled samples or misvalued features. 114,115 Sample mislabeling is a well-known problem in healthcare research, and these noisy datasets can misguide the learning algorithms to find misleading patterns. Therefore, some necessary steps should be taken to rectify the errors. Mislabeled sample correction by matching methods has been used in several research works. 114,[116][117][118] Since there are unreliable samples in multi-omics data, unsupervised and selfsupervised methods may perform better than supervised methods, as reviewed in some papers. 71,[119][120][121] Misvalued features, on the other hand, can occur due to measurement errors or biological deviations. 13 Consequently, extracting meaningful information from multi-omics data is a challenging task that needs to be addressed appropriately. One technique to address this problem uses regulatory network strategies (e.g., RNA-protein interaction networks) to reduce noise based on interactions between biological datasets. 122 Some other efforts have been made to solve this problem in the literature. 123,124


## Multi-Omics Fusion Strategies

Multi-omics data fusion integrates information from multiple omics modalities to capture intra-omics and cross-omics interactions for a deeper insight into biological processes and better decision-making. It can leverage the interactions and supplementary information among omics data to provide richer knowledge compared to single omics learning. 125 Researchers have proposed a growing number of methods to fuse multi-omics data. We categorize all developed methods as shown in Figure  3 and discuss them in the following subsections.  


### Feature-level fusion

Feature-level fusion aims to integrate extracted features from input multi-omics data to capture richer information. Then, a learning model is applied to the integrated features to carry out downstream tasks. 126,127 Generally, feature-level fusion comprises early fusion, transformation, factorization, and joint feature selection strategies described in the following sections.


#### Early fusion

The early fusion approach directly concatenates each omics dataset to construct a single extensive dataset containing all features before being fed to learning algorithms. 128 Methods based on this approach benefit from cross-modality learning, which refers to learning by involving information obtained from multiple modalities. The development of this strategy is simple, and the final joint dataset can be used as the input for numerous classical machine learning algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANNs), 129 support vector machines (SVMs), 130 decision trees (DTs), 131 random forests (RFs), 132 and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN). 133 Training only one single algorithm in early fusion leads to a more straightforward pipeline for implementing this approach. 2 Despite the simplicity of early fusion, the newly generated single dataset has a higher dimensionality for a relatively smaller number of patients. This problem makes the model's training difficult, decreases the performance, and increases the computational time. 134 Since there is a noticeable difference in feature dimensionality in multi-omics data, another drawback of early fusion is the model's tendency to learn more from the omics with a larger number of features. 135 Employing dimensionality reduction techniques as a pre-processing step can reduce the adverse effects of these challenges by keeping a small number of discriminating features 23,26,[136][137][138] (see Section 3.1 for details).


#### Mixed fusion

In the mixed fusion approach, each original omics dataset is separately transformed into a new intermediate representation, after which they are merged to produce the final representation. At this stage, machine learning algorithms can be employed in the joint representation of multi-omics data. 13 Since the intermediate representations have a lower dimensionality, future analysis can be done more efficiently. Furthermore, using independent representations in the first step makes it possible to address the heterogeneity of multiple modalities. 134 Transformation, factorization, and joint feature selection are three categories of mixed fusion to be discussed in the following subsections.

Transformation. The goal of transformation-based methods is to project each unimodal dataset into a new subspace and combine these generated subspaces before building a learning model. These methods can integrate a different range of omics modalities for diagnostic tasks. 131 Strategies for generating the new subspace can be divided into four categories, kernel-based, graph-based, neural network-based, and probabilistic model-based fusions.

Kernel-based fusion is a well-known form of transformation that uses kernel functions to map original features onto a new space with higher dimensions. Kernels allow such methods to work in high-dimensional space to explore similarities and relationships between samples. 139 Several widely used kernel functions are linear, polynomial, sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, string, tree, graph, Gaussian, and radial basis functions. 140 Kernel-based methods are capable of applying different kernels to multiple omics datasets that provide various similarity metrics. SVM is a traditional machine learning algorithm for working with kernels. [141][142][143] Multiple kernel learning (MKL) is another algorithm that utilizes different kernels for multiple omics modalities to find correlations across modalities and consolidates them into a single kernel for further analysis. 2,[144][145][146] Other kernel-based fusion methods include semi-definite programming (SDP), SDP/SVM, 145 sequential minimal optimization MKL (SMO-MKL) 147 , relevance vector machine (RVM) 148 , Ada-boost RVM 149 , and kernel PCA. 150 Despite having attractive performance, this fusion approach is computationally expensive compared to other transformation-based techniques. 10 Graph-based fusion is becoming a prevalent technique for integrating multimodal data in biomedical and healthcare studies due to its capacity to capture molecular interactions. 87 This type of fusion is broadly accomplished in two ways. The first way models each modality as a graph and combines them to make a unified graph for establishing further analysis. 151 In the graphs created for each omics, nodes represent samples, and edges represent relationships between pairs of samples. These graphs are subsequently converted to similarity matrices in an iterative optimization process 152 or a single iteration algorithm. 108 In the final stage, matrices are fused to construct a single graph that can be fed into a machine learning model for performing learning tasks. 13 Similarity network fusion (SNF) is a graph-based method that fuses constructed similarity graphs of patients through an iterative process of updating similarities to identify cancer subtypes derived from a clustering algorithm. 152 Ranked SNF is an extension of SNF that uses a featureranking strategy for computing multi-omics features' rankings to build a final graph before applying spectral clustering. 151 Rappoport and Shamir 108 proposed a threestage graph-based fusion algorithm for clustering called NEighborhood-based Multi-Omics (NEMO) clustering. In the first stage, a similarity matrix was created for each omics modality based on patient relationships. Then, matrices were fused to generate a relative similarity matrix in a single iteration. Finally, the spectral clustering algorithm was used to cluster cancer samples. Ramirez et al. 153 , Kim et al. 154 , and Wen et al. 155 have presented more fusion methods based on graph.

In contrast to the previous strategy that fuses unimodal graphs directly, graph representation learning (also known as graph embedding) integrates latent representation spaces of graphs into a joint representation and feeds into machine learning models. In other words, each graph-structured input modality is encoded into a low-dimensional space to reflect the graph topology while preserving the original graph structure. Then, latent representations are combined to perform the downstream task. 87,88 Amor et al. 84 investigated multimodal learning on tissue-specific multi-omics data using a graph embedding model based on the variational autoencoder. In the first phase, RNA sequencing and gene methylation datasets were independently transformed into compact vectorial spaces using two graph convolutional neural networks. These representations were then incorporated and fed into the variational graph autoencoder model for the purpose of link prediction. Zeng et al. 85 proposed a graph-based fusion architecture using deep learning (deepDR) for in silico repositioning of drugs. They applied the random walk approach to convert each drug's structure into a vector representation, which they subsequently fused via a multimodal deep autoencoder for a prediction task. Graph information propagation network (GripNet) is a general framework to integrate several modalities using heterogeneous graph representation learning. In this framework, a new data structure named supergraph was defined to embed each modality in a compact space and pass messages between them for performing a specific task. 86 Since graphs are formed based on samples rather than features, the complexity of the whole pipeline does not significantly increase by adding new omics modalities.

Neural network-based fusion is a growing approach in the multi-omics research area due to its superior performance in numerous domains of multimodal learning. 156 In this approach, a network is trained with each modality from biological systems to learn a joint representation of the inputs. The hidden layers of the built networks are then passed into another neural network for more analysis. 5 The benefits of using neural networks for fusion are hierarchical representations via layers of neural networks, learning complex non-linear relationships of features, and scalability in terms of the number of omics. 11 Bica et al. 157 proposed a new neural network approach for the fusion of multi-omics data derived from TCGA. They used two feed-forward neural networks, each receiving specific omics data, to obtain cross-correlations in multiple omics data and combine them into a fully connected network for the prediction tasks. Lee et al. 158 and Alkhateeb et al. 159 presented other fusion methods based on neural networks.

An unsupervised class of neural network-based fusion is autoencoders that learn compact representations of input omics data through the encoder-decoder structure. Poirion et al. 160 introduced an algorithm in which an autoencoder is built for each omics data to link them for inferring survival subtypes. Zhang et al. 161 presented an unsupervised multi-omics integration method based on an autoencoder with three hidden layers to identify prognosis subtypes.

Convolutional neural networks have been extended to graph-based fusion. Multiomics graph convolutional network (MORONET) is a multi-omics fusion framework for classification that utilizes supervised convolutional networks for omics datasets. 133 Multi-omics graph convolutional network (M-GCN) is another multiomics fusion method developed based on convolutional neural networks for molecular subtyping. 162 Despite the strengths of neural network-based fusion methods, their performance depends on a large training sample size that is of limited availability in the multiomics field. Moreover, the neural network-based fusion approach lacks interpretability, an essential need for biologists to identify biological functions. 163 Probabilistic model-based fusion is commonly based on the hidden Markov model (HMM) to make probabilistic models that encode information as transition matrices and mix them for future tasks. 164 Markov chain models variables (a.k.a. states) and transition probabilities between states to produce a sequence of observations. The transition probabilities indicate the probability of moving from one state to another. 165 The ability of HMM to consider the correlations between states makes it an effective approach for analyzing multi-omics data. 166 The use of HMMs in biological analysis has been investigated in several works. 166,167 Another form of probabilistic model-based fusion is the Bayesian network approach, which constructs a directed acyclic graph to represent the probability distribution of each omics. 24 Fridley et al. 168 used a Bayesian hierarchical structure to fuse multiple types of genomics data with phenomics data to find genomics' direct and indirect effects on the phenotype. Wang et al. 169 introduced a Bayesian framework to combine genomics, transcriptomics, and epigenomics data for identifying the high-confidence risk genes of schizophrenia. As another example, Zhang et al. 170 developed a machine learning method, regional fine-mapping (RefMap), which is a hierarchical Bayesian framework for gene discovery in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In their work, epigenomics and transcriptomics have been integrated for gene discovery.

Factorization. Fusion based on factorization takes multiple omics modalities as input matrices and decomposes them into two parts: (i) factors that are common to all omics and (ii) weights for each modality. Common factors can be utilized for patient clustering, and weights help identify biomarkers. 23 The decomposition assumes that biological mechanisms can be detected by biological factors shared among multiple modalities. 13,171 Therefore, this type of fusion is capable of acquiring a complex inter-omics structure. Two approaches designed to perform factorization are covered in the following subsections.

Matrix factorization fusion factorizes multi-omics data matrices into the product of several matrices, including omics-specific weight matrices and a factor matrix. 23 As a result, data are projected into a shared latent space to find driving factors for diseases. In unimodal learning, the most popular matrix factorization is PCA, which decomposes the covariance matrix of data to extract underlying biological factors. 172 Various methods have been developed to generalize PCA for multi-omics fusion. Multi-omics factor analysis (MOFA), 173 joint and individual variation explained (JIVE), 174 joint non-negative matrix factorization (jNMF), 175 and integrative non-negative matrix factorization (iNMF) 176 are generalized PCAbased methods in which multiple omics modalities of the same biological samples are included in the analysis so features in each modality differ. In contrast, multi-study factor analysis (MSFA) 177 is another generalization wherein the same omics features from different biological samples obtained in multiple studies are included in the analysis. Additionally, several other works have introduced integration methods based on matrix factorization, including iCluster 178 and its extension iCluster+ 179 by utilizing maximum likelihood estimation and regularized generalized canonical correlation analysis (RGCCA). 180 Although matrix factorization has been extensively investigated in the literature, most existing methods considered a global shared space among omics modalities while neglecting partial common structures; a variable can be shared by two omics modalities but is not available in the third one. 176,181 For example, Gaynanova and Li 181 presented structural learning and integrative decomposition method (SLIDE) to model partially shared structures for multi-view fusion.

Tensor-based factorization typically constructs higher-order relationships among biological variables to extract factors that play essential roles in describing these relationships. 182 In other words, omics modalities are presented in a higher dimensional space in which the new dimension indicates the data modality. 183 Jung et al. 184 introduced a two-stage tensor-based factorization method (MONTI) for multi-omics analysis in cancer subtyping. In the first stage, non-negative tensor factorization was used to factorize tensors constructed from multi-omics data, and in the second stage, a representative feature subset was selected using L1 regularization.

Tensor-based factorization fusion can be computationally expensive, especially as the number of omics modalities increases. 182, 185 Teschendorff et al. 186 proposed a tensorial independent component analysis (tICA) based on independent component analysis. They used data tensors of order 4 for the epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS) dataset, which resulted in better efficiency in comparison to the current methods. Moreover, a number of attempts have been made to use Bayesian inference in tensor factorization. 187,188 Joint feature selection. This approach selects features with joint consideration of multiple omics modalities in the integration process. In most existing multi-omics fusion methods, feature selection is independently applied to each omics modality as a pre-processing step before integration. These methods reduce feature space independently so that the relationships between multiple omics could be lost during such pre-processing. 13,71 Several works have explored joint feature selection for multi-omics integration that can be categorized into single-point strategy and multi-agent systems.

The single-point strategy aims to select a subset of features from the whole omics data by starting from a specific point. This strategy iteratively adds new features selected from each omics data according to a statistical metric. El-Manzalawy et al. 70 presented a joint feature selection model applied to a multi-view cancer dataset. Their main idea was to generalize the minimum-redundancy and maximumrelevance statistical method developed for single-view feature selection to multiomics research via an incremental process.

Although this fusion strategy considers the correlation between omics data, its sensitivity to the starting feature is likely to result in limited performance. 189 Multi-agent systems (MAS) are an improvement over the single-point strategy in which several starting points are simultaneously selected to guide the feature selection procedure. In MAS, several independent agents collaborate with each other in a shared environment to solve a complex problem. The distributed and parallel problem-solving abilities, using knowledge of other agents through interactions, decision-making flexibility of individual agents, and reliability are essential features of MAS to handle complex problems. 190 Recently, Tabakhi and Lu 71 introduced a novel multi-agent system for multiomics data integration through an unsupervised feature selection approach. This method represented each omics data as a fully connected weighted graph. Then, agents communicated with each other and shared their knowledge to select the best feature subset from all omics datasets using an iterative procedure to improve performance.


### Decision-level fusion

Fusion at the decision level (also known as late fusion) builds multiple machine learning models independently on each omics modality and then aggregates predictions from these models for the final decision. This approach is flexible because different machine learning models can be constructed for each omics modality. 128 Majority voting, hierarchical classifiers, and ensemble-based methods are the most extensively used aggregators at the level of decision. [191][192][193][194] The ability to integrate various single-omics frameworks to build multimodal learning algorithms is the key strength of decision-level fusion. 13 In addition, having separate learning models enables this fusion approach to handle heterogeneity across multiple modalities. Because learning algorithms are independently trained on each omics data modality, late fusion can also address the feature imbalance problem.


## Open-Source Software

Despite a growing number of proposed methods in the literature, only a limited number of researchers have published the source code of their works, particularly in the earlier years. Moreover, because each developer follows different protocols while writing code, others may find it challenging to utilize the available code to conduct fair experiments for their studies. Standardizing codes by publishing research software with the implementation of state-of-the-art methods facilitates the community to reuse. This issue is rarely addressed in existing surveys on multi-omics.

This section presents a collection of open-source software that has implemented several multimodal learning algorithms for multi-omics. This collection has been based on the following criteria:

• Programming language: This criterion shows the popularity of each programming language among developers in this field. • Creation and last update: These two metrics indicate the recency and the software age over time. • GitHub stars: This measure demonstrates the reputation and influence of the software in the community. • Paper citations: This indicator helps understand the prevalence of the software in the current research. Table 3 summarizes a list of open-source software collected based on the above criteria by explaining covered modalities, used datasets, their functionality, and a link to their code repositories. In this table, the omics/modalities column refers to different types of omics, the datasets column indicates the names of multi-omics datasets used by the software, and the functionality column explains the various usages of the software.

By introducing this collection, we make researchers more aware of existing software and encourage developers to share the software of their methods on opensource platforms. Moreover, we believe that standardizing software in multi-omics research can benefit from the presentation of this list, for example, via integrating existing software into benchmark software.


## Multi-Omics Datasets

The accessibility of multi-omics datasets is vital for researchers to work on omics data challenges and obtain a deeper insight into diseases. One crucial step in conducting fair comparisons in the literature is utilizing public multi-omics datasets. With the growing number of datasets in the research field, it is helpful to curate a list of well-known and frequently used datasets. Moreover, with the variety of datasets, standardizing them on a platform can support the community to search and download datasets easily. We summarize these findings in the following two subsections.


### Datasets description

In this section, we briefly review important multi-omics datasets such as TCGA, 21,195,196 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), [197][198][199] and the Human Protein Atlas (HPA). 200 TCGA was initiated by the effort between the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Center for Cancer Genomics Research Institute (NHGRI) with the aim of collecting, molecularly characterizing, and analyzing many cancers in 2006. This initiative has processed more than 20,000 patients to represent 33 cancer types and provided over 2.5 petabytes of data from different modalities, including genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics. According to Google Scholar metrics, TCGA has been cited over 38,500 times as of July 2022, demonstrating the project's popularity among researchers. Another initiative is the KEGG program, conducted at Kyoto University as part of the Human Genome Program in 1995. The program's objective is to assign sets of genes in the genome with higher-order functional information that can help the biological interpretation of genomic information. KEGG has analyzed different omics types, including genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and other types. As another example, HPA collects transcriptomics and proteomics data for human tissue expression profiles. Table 4 lists other studies that focus on providing multi-omics data to enable the development of multi-omics fusion workflows.


### Online portals/platforms

In addition to the software outlined in Section 5 for facilitating the integration of multi-omics datasets, numerous portals/platforms exist for downloading multi- iDINGO is a package developed for groupspecific conditional dependencies estimation and differential network analysis between groups. This analysis is carried out within a single or integrative framework. 
2015 N/A N/A 40
ImmuNet provides an interactive and configurable web-based platform for researchers to easily explore numerous functional relationship networks related to the immune system.

http://immunet.princeton.edu/ ple omics modalities. These portals allow researchers to explore and access various omics modalities easily and optimize the reuse of datasets. Table 5 summarizes popular online portals in multi-omics research that can help the community discover datasets for their research and development.


## Discussion and Future Directions

Multimodal learning for multi-omics has become increasingly attractive in biomedical studies, especially with the availability and easy access to multiple omics modalities. 252 Multi-omics analysis offers growing opportunities for answering key biological questions by providing deep views on the underlying mechanisms of diseases. Therefore, extensive methods have been proposed to analyze the multiple biomedical data sources. The community needs to be aware of the recent methodologies for mitigating multi-omics data challenges, analytical methods, open-source software, and benchmark datasets to conduct comprehensive and reproducible experiments. Several recent attempts have been made to survey the field of multi-omics from different points of view, as summarized in Table 1. However, as shown in Table 1, a comprehensive review is still needed to provide an organized overview of current data challenges, introduce a more structured taxonomy of multi-omics approaches to cover recent works, present well-known and widely used datasets in the field with the available platforms to access them, and collect active software for analyzing multi-omics data. In this study, we have made efforts to address these needs, and the following interesting points deserve attention to progress in the research toward a better future.

• Integrate more omics modalities: Multi-omics data consist of molecular, imaging, and phenotypic data. Molecular data capture the information of different molecular layers, and many works in the literature have been carried out to fuse multiple molecular omics modalities. On the other hand, medical images have emerged from imaging techniques to strengthen the multi-omics research field by presenting meaningful information on disease diagnosis and treatment. Several frameworks have been widely developed to fuse medical images with gene expression data, creating a new field of study termed 'radiogenomics.' 253,254 Another source of omics data is phenomics, which is information about the phenotypic characteristics of individuals. This valuable dimension of data has been chiefly integrated into genome data, resulting in the creation of an informatics research direction named 'Phenoinformatics.' 255 Since the development of human diseases involves complex interactions of biological mechanisms, a comprehensive snapshot of the diseases can be obtained by analyzing different levels of information. A critical question in analyzing multiomics data is whether adding new omics data can boost our ability to perform biological tasks. However, with the multiple sources of omics modalities, researchers have been exploring integrating two dimensions of omics data simultaneously   18 ), as reviewed in Section 4. Therefore, we encourage the community to generalize their methods across all omics modalities to benefit from their complementary information. • Find better solutions for data challenges: Figure 2 has summarized many multi-omics data challenges, which have been the focus of many studies to facilitate further analysis. The curse of dimensionality is a critical challenge in multi-omics analysis that must be overcome. The presence of irrelevant and redundant features in multi-omics data makes it challenging to acquire informative patterns. 59,60 Many methods have separately applied dimensionality reduction techniques to each omics modality without taking inter-omics connections into account. As pointed out in Section 4.1.2, the utilization of feature selection on all omics modalities has been performed in several works, 70,71 which are computationally expensive for large-scale data. Moreover, leveraging graph representation learning to map input omics data into a low-dimensional space enables automatic dimensionality reduction, which can be helpful for downstream tasks. Therefore, proposing new efficient methods to consider interactions between multiple omics in an affordable computational efficiency will benefit such research. Another challenge is class/feature imbalance. Imbalance at the class level is a traditional machine learning challenge, and many approaches have been proposed to address it, such as over and under-sampling and cost-sensitive learning. [91][92][93][94] At the level of features, the imbalance problem specifically occurs in multimodal learning when different modalities with different feature dimensionality are fused. While the feature imbalance challenge can be implicitly dealt with through the late fusion approach, proposing explicit pre-processing strategies will also be helpful. The investigation of dimensionality reduction techniques is another potential direction for solutions to the imbalance challenge.

In the case of missing values, significant efforts are needed for partial datasets. Converting this type of data to a full dataset by removing samples with missing omics is a naive way yet regularly used in studies. The removed samples could contain useful information, which may enhance the outcomes if included. Another interesting area of research is about filling missing values in samples by independent imputation on each omics data. [100][101][102] Integrative imputation can potentially tackle this problem by leveraging the strengths of multiple omics.

Another specific characteristic of multi-omics data is heterogeneity. Various data distributions and different data types are found in the heterogeneous data. Some work has been introduced to normalize and scale the omics data properly. 20,112,113 Further development to deal with this challenge can be achieved by proposing accurate and appropriate fusion approaches.

Furthermore, multi-omics data are usually noisy and can often have mislabeled samples. Even though several error correction approaches have been successfully developed, 114,[116][117][118] leveraging unsupervised/self-supervised learning could shed new light on tackling this challenge.

• Investigate new fusion approaches: From a multi-omics data fusion point of view, there are a vast number of methods for integrating multi-omics data. Some of these methods have been generalized from other domains to multi-omics analysis. Although they have strongly performed in their domains, omics-specific properties can impose additional challenges. 182 There have been several attempts to build hierarchical models to incorporate the sequential organization among omics. [280][281][282] These models have been constructed based on the cause-effect relationships discovered in the molecular data. However, they rely on prior knowledge of omics interactions provided by experts, 13 which is challenging but deserves careful investigation in the future.

On the other hand, a new category of fusion approaches is joint feature selection, as discussed in Section 4.1.2. This category is a promising approach for combining omics data through a multimodal feature selection scheme. Despite its superior performance in diagnostic tasks, this approach requires new attempts to boost computational efficiency to deal with large-scale datasets.

Although it is important to integrate new omics data, several challenges can arise more severely, such as higher dimensionality of features, more noise for the learning model, and lower efficiency. To tackle these issues, new fusion methods need to be scalable with respect to the size of omics data. Based on the review in Section 4.1.2, the transformation-based approach, particularly graph representation learning, can be scalable and is among the promising ways to develop new fusion methods.

• Develop open-source multi-omics analysis software: Recently, open-source software has been increasingly used to develop complex real-world systems. At the same time, the area of machine learning has created a large number of efficient algorithms for a variety of applications. After analysis, we found that one major gap in Table 3 on open-sourced multi-omics data integration software is that most do not have up-to-date codebases or documentation. One reason was that there were few open-sourced software platforms earlier, and they did not have version control like GitHub. An open-source codebase and well-documented software are critical for further extension or modification. Therefore, to grow the field of integrative multi-omics analysis, we need more open-source software with high-quality documentation to enable and encourage more researchers to contribute to this field, thus lowering the entry barriers.

As explained earlier, one major future research direction that can add great value to multi-omics data analysis is the incorporation of radiomics and phenomics data. Limited software is available for fusing radiomics and phenomics with other molecular omics data. It can be seen from Table 3 that no software listed has used radiomics or phenomics data. The interoperability of various omics datasets needs to be enhanced to make them more accessible. A unified software framework will help with the seamless integration of such biomedical data.

To further advance multi-omics research, we highlight more succinctly the following key insights based on the current progress of the field to fill the gaps promptly (i) Integrating multiple modalities, including molecular, imaging, and phenotypic data, will drive the progress of the multi-omics studies forward by capturing their complementary information. Community-based standardization is a key enabler for such integration. For example, the European life science infrastructure for biological information (ELIXIR) 283 was initiated with the aim of providing a sustainable infrastructure for standardizing data to facilitate easy and open access to biological data. Because data availability boosts the strengths of multimodal analysis, we encourage researchers to contribute to these communities to accelerate open and reproducible research. (ii) Even with data standardized, great efforts are needed to mitigate the multiomics-related data challenges. For the curse of dimensionality, it is crucial to consider intra-omics and cross-omics interactions between different modalities. Modeling the interactions between omics modalities by leveraging graph embedding models or joint feature selection schemes is an exciting study area. In addition, we expect that the integrative imputation achieved by taking multiple omics into account will improve the machine learning model's capability to handle missing values. Finally, using unsupervised/self-supervised learning to overcome data noise will enable effective multi-omics analysis. (iii) With data challenges adequately handled, the next focus is the fusion of different omics modalities. Promising strategies include constructing hierarchical models through cause-effect relationships, leveraging graph embedding models, and jointly selecting a subset of features. Importantly, novel fusion models should be biologically interpretable and robust since they are at least as significant as the model's accuracy. (iv) We finally believe that the development of open-source and well-documented software will promote the growth of the integrative multi-omics analysis field. Several journals, such as Nature Machine Intelligence, enforce the publication of high-quality machine learning open-source software towards standardizing research software that follows the FAIR4RS (findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable principles for research software) guiding principles 284 that can improve code reusability significantly.


## Conclusion

With the availability of multiple omics data and their importance to biologists and data scientists in uncovering mechanisms underlying biological conditions, we provided a comprehensive review of multimodal learning for multi-omics from various perspectives: multi-omics data and their challenges, fusion approaches, public datasets and platforms, and open-source software. A brief description of different sources of omics data was presented with real biomedical applications. Moreover, the challenges in multi-omics data were highlighted in detail, and possible solutions to deal with them were introduced. A more structured taxonomy of multi-omics fusion approaches has also been proposed to better categorize currently developed methods. Furthermore, trustworthy and popular multi-omics benchmarks and platforms to download them were introduced. Another dimension we reviewed was active open-source software to help the community move forward faster. Finally, further directions for researchers were discussed to share promising research ideas. We hope this survey will help researchers understand better the state of the field in developing efficient and effective solutions to overcome challenges and push forward the study of multi-omics data analysis.

## Fig. 1 :
1Multiple omics modalities and their fusion for various tasks.

## Fig. 2 :
2Challenges and related sub-challenges in multi-omics data.

## Fig. 3 :
3Categorization of multi-omics data fusion approaches.

## Table 1 :
1A summary of survey papers on multi-omics analysis published since 2020.Reference 
Year Scope 
Challenges 
Fusion approaches 
Datasets 
Platforms 
Tools 

Kang et al. 11 
2022 A comprehensive overview 
of multi-omics data integra-
tion using deep learning 

The curse of dimensionality 
Missing values 
Heterogeneity 

Neural network-based 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Reel et al. 10 
2021 A background in multi-
omics data with an explo-
ration of integration strate-
gies and key challenges 

The curse of dimensionality 
Class imbalance 
Heterogeneity 

Early fusion 
Late fusion 
Transformation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Picard et al. 13 
2021 A mini-review of different 
challenges and integration 
approaches for multi-omics 
data analysis 

The curse of dimensionality 
Class and feature imbalance 
Missing values 
Heterogeneity 

Early fusion 
Late fusion 
Mixed fusion 
Hierarchical fusion 
Factorization 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Cantini et al. 23 
2021 A theoretical and practical 
review of several representa-
tive joint dimensionality re-
duction methods 

The curse of dimensionality 
Heterogeneity 

Graph-based 
Probabilistic model-based 
Factorization 

N/A 
N/A 
A single tool to 
implement several 
factorization-based 
methods 

Subramanian et al. 24 2020 A review of the tools and 
methods for multi-omics in-
tegration and the introduc-
tion of visualization portals 

The curse of dimensionality 
Heterogeneity 

Kernel-based 
Graph-based 
Probabilistic model-based 
Matrix-based factorization 

A few public multi-
omics datasets 

A set of portals for 
visualization and 
analysis of multi-
omics data 

A range of tools, 
each implemented for 
a specific multi-omics 
integration method 

Momeni et al. 25 
2020 A complete overview of the 
multi-omics challenges with 
a focus on feature selection 
and data fusion methods 

The curse of dimensionality 
Class imbalance 
Missing values 
Heterogeneity 
Complexity and noisiness 

Early fusion 
Late fusion 
Transformation 

Several cancer 
datasets in the 
TCGA 

N/A 
N/A 

Nicora et al. 27 
2020 An overview of multi-omics 
integration methods devel-
oped in oncology 

The curse of dimensionality 
Kernel-based 
Graph-based 
Neural network-based 
Probabilistic model-based 
Factorization 

N/A 
N/A 
A complete list of 
tools published in 
oncology papers 

Nguyen and Wang 28 
2020 A review of multiview learn-
ing methods in multi-omics 
analysis and their applica-
tions to biological systems 

The curse of dimensionality 
Heterogeneity 
Noisiness 

Transformation 
Factorization 

Some multi-omics 
benchmark datasets 

N/A 
N/A 


## Table 2 provides
2Multimodal Learning for Multi-Omics: A Survey 5Tasks 

Clinical outcome 
prediction 

Sample 
classification 

Disease subtyping 

Survival analysis 

Biomarker identification 



## Table 2 :
2Overview of multi-omics data and their various applications including diagnosis, prognosis, and precision medicine.Omics name 
Description 


## Table 3 :
3Open-source software tools for multi-omics analysis as of August 2022.Software tool 
Programming 
language 

Omics/Modalities 
Datasets 
Creation Last 
update 

GitHub 
stars 

Paper 
citations 

Functionality 
Repository link 

MultiBench 182 Python 
Language 
Image 
Video 
Audio 
Time-series 
Tabular 
Force sensors 
Proprioception sensor 
Optical flow 

MUStARD 201 
CMU-MOSI 202 
UR-FUNNY 203 
CMU-MOSEI 204 
MIMIC 205 
MuJoCo Push 206 
Vision & Touch 207 
Stocks-F&B 
Stocks-Health 
Stocks-Tech 
ENRICO 208 
Kinetics400-S 209 
MM-IMDb 23 
AV-MNIST 210 
Kinetics400-L 209 

2021 
2022 
181 
13 
MultiBench presents a unified pipeline to 
simplify and standardize data loading, ex-
perimental setup, and model evaluation 
for machine learning processes. MultiBench 
aims to evaluate domain generalization, time 
and space efficiency, and model robustness. 

https://github.com/pliang279/ 
MultiBench 

Momix 23 
R 
Transcriptomics 
Genomics 

TCGA 211 
Single-cell data 212 

2019 
2022 
48 
18 
Momix has implemented several representa-
tive joint dimensionality reduction methods 
for multi-omics analysis. This tool focuses 
on extracting biological information, clus-
tering samples, finding pathways/biological 
functions, and extracting representative fea-
tures. 

https://github.com/ 
cantinilab/momix-notebook 

Mergeomics 213 R 
Genomics 
Transcriptomics 
Proteomics 
Metabolomics 

GWAS 214 
TWAS 215 
EWAS 215 

2019 
2022 
3 
33 
The Mergeomics package has been developed 
with the aim of integrating multidimensional 
data to uncover disease-associated pathways 
and networks through a flexible pipeline. 

https://github.com/ 
jessicading/mergeomics 

MiBiOmics 216 R 
Taxonomics 
Proteomics 

TCGA 211 
TOE 217 

2019 
2022 
N/A 
15 
MiBiOmics is a standalone and web-based 
application to analyze single or multi-omics 
data. The application's pipeline enables 
multi-omics data exploration, integration, 
and analysis for broad users. 

https://gitlab.univ-nantes. 
fr/combi-ls2n/mibiomics 

mixOmics 218 
R 
Transcriptomics 
Metabolomics 
Metagenomics 
Proteomics 

TCGA 211 
Yeast 219 

2018 
2022 
106 
1361 
mixOmics has presented the implementation 
of many multivariate methods for the explo-
ration and integration of biological data, as 
well as dimensionality reduction and visual-
ization. 

https://github.com/ 
mixOmicsTeam/mixOmics 

OmicsPLS 220 R 
Transcriptomics 
Metabolomics 

CROATIA Korcula cohort 221 
2018 
2022 
24 
26 
OmicsPLS is a free, open-source implemen-
tation of the O2PLS algorithm for hetero-
geneous data integration that is capable 
of handling both low and high-dimensional 
datasets. 

https://github.com/ 
selbouhaddani/OmicsPLS 


## Table 4 :
4Multi-omics benchmark datasets collected by August 2022.Dataset 
Omics type 
Target 
Citations Web link 

TCGA 21,195,196,256-258 Genomics 
Epigenomics 
Transcriptomics 
Proteomics 

33 types of cancer 
38532 
https: 
//portal.gdc.cancer.gov/ 

KEGG 197-199 
Genomics 
Metabolomics 

Infectious diseases 
25554 
https://www.genome.jp/kegg 

HPA 200 
Genomics 
Transcriptomics 
Proteomics 

More than 17 types of 
cancer 

8166 
https: 
//www.proteinatlas.org/ 

HMDB 259 
Metabolomics 
Proteomics 

Kidney disease 
7471 
https://hmdb.ca/ 

PDB 260-262 
Proteomics 
Genomics 

Topical health matters 
(e.g., Zika, measles, 
coronavirus) 

4044 
https://pdb101.rcsb.org/ 

NSCLC 263,264 
Genomics 
Radiomics 

Lung cancer 
3551 
https: 
//wiki.cancerimagingarchive. 
net/display/Public/ 
NSCLC-Radiomics-Genomics 

NCI-60 265 
Genomics 
Transcriptomics 

60 types of human tu-
mors and cancers 

2700 
https: 
//dtp.cancer.gov/discovery_ 
development/nci-60/ 

ICGC 266 
Genomics 
Transcriptomics 

Lung, 
gynecologic, 
breast, gastrointesti-
nal, squamous, and re-
nal cancers 

2039 
https://dcc.icgc.org/ 

YeastMine 
Genomics 
Transcriptomics 

Oxidative stress and 
meningitis 

284 
https: 
//yeastmine.yeastgenome.org/ 
yeastmine/begin.do 

Mycoplasma genital-
ium 267 

Genomics 
Proteomics 

Pelvic Inflammatory 
Disease (PID) 

200 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax. 
cgi?mode=Info&id=txid2097 

GSE11352 223 
Transcriptomics 
Genomics 

Breast cancer 
177 
https: 
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ 
query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE11352 

GWAS 268 
Genomics 
Transcriptomics 
Proteomics 
Metabolomics 
Epigenomics 

Diabetes, heart dis-
eases, Parkinson, and 
Crohn 

53 
https: 
//ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/gwas/ 


## Table 5 :
5Popular online portals/platforms for multi-omics analysis. https://xena.ucsc.edu/ EMBL-EBI OLS 270 Allow users to search, browse, and visualize biomedical ontologies based on their meta-data from a centralized location Offer several preprocessed TCGA multi-omics data benchmarks Several TCGA multi-omics data http://acgt.cs.tau.ac. il/multi_omic_ benchmark/download.html ICGC Data Portal 273 Provide an interactive web-based platform to store, annotate, and explore large and complex cancer genomics datasets Over 84 worldwide cancer projects https://dcc.icgc.org/ repositories GDC Data Portal 274 Enable users to efficiently query and download high-quality and complete cancer data for analysis Genomic and clinical data from cancer research programs (e.g., TCGA, TARGET, CGCI) https://portal.gdc. cancer.gov/repository Present an open-source, open-access service allowing public access to a large available archive of cancer-related medical images Archive of medical images of cancer https://www. cancerimagingarchive. net/collections/ JGI Genome Portal 275 Provide a unified platform to search, download and explore JGI genomic databases JGI genomic databases https://genome.jgi.doe. gov/portal/ Offer a platform for storing and sharing genetic, phenotypic, and clinical data generated for biomedical research projects The repository of over 6,800 human datasets https: //ega-archive.org/ Depmap Portal 277 Allow the community to explore genetic and pharmacological dependencies CRISPR knockout screens from project Achilles and genomic data from the CCLE project https://depmap.org/ portal/download/ Canadian VirusSeq Data Portal Provide an open-source platform for all SARS-CoV-2 sequences and associated non-personal contextual data collected in Canada Present a web-based portal for exploring an extensive collection of omics datasets (i.e., transcriptomics and proteomics) and cellular perturbation signatures http://www.ilincs.org/ ilincs/datasets/portals LinkedOmics 279 Present a web tool for biologists and clinicians to access, analyze, and compare multi-omics data within and across tumor types 32 TCGA multi-omics data and 10 CPTAC cancer cohorts http: //www.linkedomics.org/Platform name 
Description 

S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu
S. Tabakhi, M.N.I. Suvon, P. Ahadian, & H. Lu and efficiently in future works:

Multimodal deep learning. J Ngiam, A Khosla, M Kim, J Nam, H Lee, A Ng, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning. the 28th International Conference on Machine LearningACMJ. Ngiam, A. Khosla, M. Kim, J. Nam, H. Lee, and A. Ng, "Multimodal deep learning," in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-11). ACM, 2011, pp. 689-696.

Multimodal machine learning: A survey and taxonomy. T Baltrušaitis, C Ahuja, L.-P Morency, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 412T. Baltrušaitis, C. Ahuja, and L.-P. Morency, "Multimodal machine learn- ing: A survey and taxonomy," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 423-443, 2018.

Multimodal learning with transformers: A survey. P Xu, X Zhu, D A Clifton, P. Xu, X. Zhu, and D. A. Clifton, "Multimodal learning with transformers: A survey," 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.06488

Practicing precision medicine with intelligently integrative clinical and multi-omics data analysis. Z Ahmed, Human Genomics. 141Z. Ahmed, "Practicing precision medicine with intelligently integrative clinical and multi-omics data analysis," Human Genomics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-5, 2020.

Deep multimodal learning for audiovisual speech recognition. Y Mroueh, E Marcheret, V Goel, 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEEY. Mroueh, E. Marcheret, and V. Goel, "Deep multimodal learning for audio- visual speech recognition," in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acous- tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2015, pp. 2130-2134.

Multimodal transformer with multi-view visual representation for image captioning. J Yu, J Li, Z Yu, Q Huang, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. 30J. Yu, J. Li, Z. Yu, and Q. Huang, "Multimodal transformer with multi-view visual representation for image captioning," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 4467-4480, 2019.

Multimodal biometric human recognition for perceptual human-computer interaction. R M Jiang, A H Sadka, D Crookes, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews). 406R. M. Jiang, A. H. Sadka, and D. Crookes, "Multimodal biometric human recognition for perceptual human-computer interaction," IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 676-681, 2010.

Multimodal language analysis with recurrent multistage fusion. P P Liang, Z Liu, A Zadeh, L.-P Morency, P. P. Liang, Z. Liu, A. Zadeh, and L.-P. Morency, "Multimodal language analysis with recurrent multistage fusion," 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.03920

Multimodal deep learning for finance: integrating and forecasting international stock markets. S I Lee, S J Yoo, The Journal of Supercomputing. 7610S. I. Lee and S. J. Yoo, "Multimodal deep learning for finance: integrating and forecasting international stock markets," The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 76, no. 10, pp. 8294-8312, 2020.

Using machine learning approaches for multi-omics data analysis: A review. P S Reel, S Reel, E Pearson, E Trucco, E Jefferson, Biotechnology Advances. 49107739P. S. Reel, S. Reel, E. Pearson, E. Trucco, and E. Jefferson, "Using machine learning approaches for multi-omics data analysis: A review," Biotechnology Advances, vol. 49, p. 107739, 2021.

A roadmap for multi-omics data integration using deep learning. M Kang, E Ko, T B Mersha, Briefings in Bioinformatics. 231M. Kang, E. Ko, and T. B. Mersha, "A roadmap for multi-omics data inte- gration using deep learning," Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 30 REFERENCES bbab454, 2022.

Deep learning based feature-level integration of multi-omics data for breast cancer patients survival analysis. L Tong, J Mitchel, K Chatlin, M D Wang, BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 201L. Tong, J. Mitchel, K. Chatlin, and M. D. Wang, "Deep learning based feature-level integration of multi-omics data for breast cancer patients sur- vival analysis," BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 2020.

Integration strategies of multi-omics data for machine learning analysis. M Picard, M.-P Scott-Boyer, A Bodein, O Périn, A Droit, Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal. 19M. Picard, M.-P. Scott-Boyer, A. Bodein, O. Périn, and A. Droit, "Integration strategies of multi-omics data for machine learning analysis," Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, vol. 19, pp. 3735-3746, 2021.

Machine learning on human muscle transcriptomic data for biomarker discovery and tissue-specific drug target identification. P Mamoshina, M Volosnikova, I V Ozerov, E Putin, E Skibina, F Cortese, A Zhavoronkov, Frontiers in Genetics. 9242P. Mamoshina, M. Volosnikova, I. V. Ozerov, E. Putin, E. Skibina, F. Cortese, and A. Zhavoronkov, "Machine learning on human muscle transcriptomic data for biomarker discovery and tissue-specific drug target identification," Fron- tiers in Genetics, vol. 9, p. 242, 2018.

Gene selection for microarray data classification using a novel ant colony optimization. S Tabakhi, A Najafi, R Ranjbar, P Moradi, Neurocomputing. 168S. Tabakhi, A. Najafi, R. Ranjbar, and P. Moradi, "Gene selection for microar- ray data classification using a novel ant colony optimization," Neurocomputing, vol. 168, pp. 1024-1036, 2015.

Combining machine learning and metabolomics to identify weight gain biomarkers. F L Dias-Audibert, L C Navarro, D N De Oliveira, J Delafiori, C F O R Melo, T M Guerreiro, F T Rosa, D L Petenuci, M A E Watanabe, L A Velloso, A R Rocha, R R Catharino, Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology. 86F. L. Dias-Audibert, L. C. Navarro, D. N. de Oliveira, J. Delafiori, C. F. O. R. Melo, T. M. Guerreiro, F. T. Rosa, D. L. Petenuci, M. A. E. Watanabe, L. A. Velloso, A. R. Rocha, and R. R. Catharino, "Combining machine learning and metabolomics to identify weight gain biomarkers," Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, vol. 8, p. 6, 2020.

Machine learning in epigenomics: Insights into cancer biology and medicine. E Arslan, J Schulz, K Rai, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Reviews on Cancer. 18762188588E. Arslan, J. Schulz, and K. Rai, "Machine learning in epigenomics: Insights into cancer biology and medicine," Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)- Reviews on Cancer, vol. 1876, no. 2, p. 188588, 2021.

Multimodal biomedical AI. J N Acosta, G J Falcone, P Rajpurkar, E J Topol, Nature Medicine. 289J. N. Acosta, G. J. Falcone, P. Rajpurkar, and E. J. Topol, "Multimodal biomedical AI," Nature Medicine, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1773-1784, 2022.

Cooperative learning for multiview analysis. D Y Ding, S Li, B Narasimhan, R Tibshirani, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 119382202113119D. Y. Ding, S. Li, B. Narasimhan, and R. Tibshirani, "Cooperative learning for multiview analysis," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 119, no. 38, p. e2202113119, 2022.

State of the field in multi-omics research: from computational needs to data mining and sharing. M Krassowski, V Das, S K Sahu, B B Misra, Frontiers in Genetics. 11610798M. Krassowski, V. Das, S. K. Sahu, and B. B. Misra, "State of the field in multi-omics research: from computational needs to data mining and sharing," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 11, p. 610798, 2020.

The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan-Cancer analysis project. J N Weinstein, E A Collisson, G B Mills, K R Shaw, B A Ozenberger, K Ellrott, I Shmulevich, C Sander, J M Stuart, Nature Genetics. 4510J. N. Weinstein, E. A. Collisson, G. B. Mills, K. R. Shaw, B. A. Ozenberger, K. Ellrott, I. Shmulevich, C. Sander, and J. M. Stuart, "The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan-Cancer analysis project," Nature Genetics, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1113- 1120, 2013.

International cancer genome consortium fata portal-a one-stop shop for cancer genomics data. J Zhang, J Baran, A Cros, J M Guberman, S Haider, J Hsu, Y Liang, E Rivkin, J Wang, B Whitty, M Wong-Erasmus, L Yao, A Kasprzyk, Database. 201126J. Zhang, J. Baran, A. Cros, J. M. Guberman, S. Haider, J. Hsu, Y. Liang, E. Rivkin, J. Wang, B. Whitty, M. Wong-Erasmus, L. Yao, and A. Kasprzyk, "International cancer genome consortium fata portal-a one-stop shop for can- cer genomics data," Database, vol. 2011, p. bar026, 2011.

Benchmarking joint multi-omics dimensionality reduction approaches for the study of cancer. L Cantini, P Zakeri, C Hernandez, A Naldi, D Thieffry, E Remy, A Baudot, 2021. REFERENCES 31Nature Communications. 121L. Cantini, P. Zakeri, C. Hernandez, A. Naldi, D. Thieffry, E. Remy, and A. Baudot, "Benchmarking joint multi-omics dimensionality reduction ap- proaches for the study of cancer," Nature Communications, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 2021. REFERENCES 31

Multi-omics data integration, interpretation, and its application. I Subramanian, S Verma, S Kumar, A Jere, K Anamika, Bioinformatics and Biology Insights. 141177932219899051I. Subramanian, S. Verma, S. Kumar, A. Jere, and K. Anamika, "Multi-omics data integration, interpretation, and its application," Bioinformatics and Bi- ology Insights, vol. 14, p. 1177932219899051, 2020.

A survey on single and multi omics data mining methods in cancer data classification. Z Momeni, E Hassanzadeh, M S Abadeh, R Bellazzi, Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 107103466Z. Momeni, E. Hassanzadeh, M. S. Abadeh, and R. Bellazzi, "A survey on single and multi omics data mining methods in cancer data classification," Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 107, p. 103466, 2020.

Machine learning and integrative analysis of biomedical big data. B Mirza, W Wang, J Wang, H Choi, N C Chung, P Ping, Genes. 10287B. Mirza, W. Wang, J. Wang, H. Choi, N. C. Chung, and P. Ping, "Machine learning and integrative analysis of biomedical big data," Genes, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 87, 2019.

Integrated multi-omics analyses in oncology: a review of machine learning methods and tools. G Nicora, F Vitali, A Dagliati, N Geifman, R Bellazzi, Frontiers in Oncology. 101030G. Nicora, F. Vitali, A. Dagliati, N. Geifman, and R. Bellazzi, "Integrated multi-omics analyses in oncology: a review of machine learning methods and tools," Frontiers in Oncology, vol. 10, p. 1030, 2020.

Multiview learning for understanding functional multiomics. N D Nguyen, D Wang, PLOS Computational Biology. 1641007677N. D. Nguyen and D. Wang, "Multiview learning for understanding functional multiomics," PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 16, no. 4, p. e1007677, 2020.

Radiomics: extracting more information from medical images using advanced feature analysis. P Lambin, E Rios-Velazquez, R Leijenaar, S Carvalho, R G Van Stiphout, P Granton, C M Zegers, R Gillies, R Boellard, A Dekker, H J Aerts, European Journal of Cancer. 484P. Lambin, E. Rios-Velazquez, R. Leijenaar, S. Carvalho, R. G. van Stiphout, P. Granton, C. M. Zegers, R. Gillies, R. Boellard, A. Dekker, and H. J. Aerts, "Radiomics: extracting more information from medical images using advanced feature analysis," European Journal of Cancer, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 441-446, 2012.

Phenomics: the systematic study of phenotypes on a genome-wide scale. R M Bilder, F Sabb, T Cannon, E London, J Jentsch, D S Parker, R Poldrack, C Evans, N Freimer, Neuroscience. 1641R. M. Bilder, F. Sabb, T. Cannon, E. London, J. Jentsch, D. S. Parker, R. Pol- drack, C. Evans, and N. Freimer, "Phenomics: the systematic study of phe- notypes on a genome-wide scale," Neuroscience, vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 30-42, 2009.

Integrative omics for health and disease. K J Karczewski, M P Snyder, Nature Reviews Genetics. 195K. J. Karczewski and M. P. Snyder, "Integrative omics for health and disease," Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 299-310, 2018.

Structural genomics and its importance for gene function analysis. J Skolnick, J S Fetrow, A Kolinski, Nature Biotechnology. 183J. Skolnick, J. S. Fetrow, and A. Kolinski, "Structural genomics and its im- portance for gene function analysis," Nature Biotechnology, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 283-287, 2000.

From GWAS to function: using functional genomics to identify the mechanisms underlying complex diseases. E Cano-Gamez, G Trynka, Frontiers in Genetics. 11424E. Cano-Gamez and G. Trynka, "From GWAS to function: using functional genomics to identify the mechanisms underlying complex diseases," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 11, p. 424, 2020.

Comparative genomics. R C Hardison, PLOS Biology. 1258R. C. Hardison, "Comparative genomics," PLOS Biology, vol. 1, no. 2, p. e58, 2003.

The human gene mutation database: providing a comprehensive central mutation database for molecular diagnostics and personalised genomics. P D Stenson, E V Ball, K Howells, A D Phillips, M Mort, D N Cooper, P. D. Stenson, E. V. Ball, K. Howells, A. D. Phillips, M. Mort, and D. N. Cooper, "The human gene mutation database: providing a comprehensive cen- tral mutation database for molecular diagnostics and personalised genomics," pp. 1-4, 2009.

DNA methylation. R Singal, G D Ginder, Blood, The Journal of the American Society of Hematology. 9312R. Singal and G. D. Ginder, "DNA methylation," Blood, The Journal of the American Society of Hematology, vol. 93, no. 12, pp. 4059-4070, 1999.

Histone modification levels are predictive for gene expression. R Karlić, H.-R Chung, J Lasserre, K Vlahoviček, M Vingron, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 1077R. Karlić, H.-R. Chung, J. Lasserre, K. Vlahoviček, and M. Vingron, "His- tone modification levels are predictive for gene expression," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 2926-2931, 2010.

Non-coding RNA genes and the modern RNA world. S R Eddy, Nature 32 REFERENCES Reviews Genetics. 212S. R. Eddy, "Non-coding RNA genes and the modern RNA world," Nature 32 REFERENCES Reviews Genetics, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 919-929, 2001.

Applications of DNA microarrays in biology. R B Stoughton, Annual Review of Biochemistry. 74R. B. Stoughton, "Applications of DNA microarrays in biology," Annual Re- view of Biochemistry, vol. 74, pp. 53-82, 2005.

RNA-Seq methods for transcriptome analysis. R Hrdlickova, M Toloue, B Tian, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: RNA. 811364R. Hrdlickova, M. Toloue, and B. Tian, "RNA-Seq methods for transcriptome analysis," Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: RNA, vol. 8, no. 1, p. e1364, 2017.

R E Banks, M J Dunn, D F Hochstrasser, J.-C Sanchez, W Blackstock, D J Pappin, P J Selby, Proteomics: new perspectives, new biomedical opportunities. 356R. E. Banks, M. J. Dunn, D. F. Hochstrasser, J.-C. Sanchez, W. Blackstock, D. J. Pappin, and P. J. Selby, "Proteomics: new perspectives, new biomedical opportunities," The Lancet, vol. 356, no. 9243, pp. 1749-1756, 2000.

Functional proteomics mapping of a human signaling pathway. F Colland, X Jacq, V Trouplin, C Mougin, C Groizeleau, A Hamburger, A Meil, J Wojcik, P Legrain, J.-M Gauthier, Genome Research. 147F. Colland, X. Jacq, V. Trouplin, C. Mougin, C. Groizeleau, A. Hamburger, A. Meil, J. Wojcik, P. Legrain, and J.-M. Gauthier, "Functional proteomics mapping of a human signaling pathway," Genome Research, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1324-1332, 2004.

Structural proteomics. S Renfrey, J Featherstone, Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 13S. Renfrey and J. Featherstone, "Structural proteomics," Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, vol. 1, no. 3, p. 175-176, 2002.

Metabolite fingerprinting and profiling in plants using NMR. P Krishnan, N Kruger, R Ratcliffe, Journal of Experimental Botany. 56410P. Krishnan, N. Kruger, and R. Ratcliffe, "Metabolite fingerprinting and pro- filing in plants using NMR," Journal of Experimental Botany, vol. 56, no. 410, pp. 255-265, 2005.

The microbiome and cancer. R F Schwabe, C Jobin, Nature Reviews Cancer. 1311R. F. Schwabe and C. Jobin, "The microbiome and cancer," Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 800-812, 2013.

Merging the exposome into an integrated framework for "omics" sciences. E J Price, C M Vitale, G W Miller, A David, R Barouki, K Audouze, D I Walker, J.-P Antignac, X Coumoul, V Bessonneau, J Klánová, 25103976iScienceE. J. Price, C. M. Vitale, G. W. Miller, A. David, R. Barouki, K. Audouze, D. I. Walker, J.-P. Antignac, X. Coumoul, V. Bessonneau, and J. Klánová, "Merging the exposome into an integrated framework for "omics" sciences," iScience, vol. 25, no. 3, p. 103976, 2022.

Applications of radiomics in precision diagnosis, prognostication and treatment planning of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. S P Haider, B Burtness, W G Yarbrough, S Payabvash, Cancers of the Head & Neck. 51S. P. Haider, B. Burtness, W. G. Yarbrough, and S. Payabvash, "Applications of radiomics in precision diagnosis, prognostication and treatment planning of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas," Cancers of the Head & Neck, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-19, 2020.

A translational view of the genetics of lipodystrophy and ectopic fat deposition. M B Lanktree, C T Johansen, T R Joy, R A Hegele, Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science. 94M. B. Lanktree, C. T. Johansen, T. R. Joy, and R. A. Hegele, "A translational view of the genetics of lipodystrophy and ectopic fat deposition," Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science, vol. 94, pp. 159-196, 2010.

Next-generation biology: sequencing and data analysis approaches for non-model organisms. R R Da Fonseca, A Albrechtsen, G E Themudo, J Ramos-Madrigal, J A Sibbesen, L Maretty, M L Zepeda-Mendoza, P F Campos, R Heller, R J Pereira, Marine Genomics. 30R. R. da Fonseca, A. Albrechtsen, G. E. Themudo, J. Ramos-Madrigal, J. A. Sibbesen, L. Maretty, M. L. Zepeda-Mendoza, P. F. Campos, R. Heller, and R. J. Pereira, "Next-generation biology: sequencing and data analysis ap- proaches for non-model organisms," Marine Genomics, vol. 30, pp. 3-13, 2016.

A uniform proteomics MS/MS analysis platform utilizing open XML file formats. A Keller, J Eng, N Zhang, X Li, R Aebersold, Molecular Systems Biology. 11A. Keller, J. Eng, N. Zhang, X.-j. Li, and R. Aebersold, "A uniform proteomics MS/MS analysis platform utilizing open XML file formats," Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2005-0017, 2005.

Metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics approaches for microbiome analysis: supplementary issue: bioinformatics methods and applications for big metagenomics data. V Aguiar-Pulido, W Huang, V Suarez-Ulloa, T Cickovski, K Mathee, G Narasimhan, Evolutionary Bioinformatics. 12V. Aguiar-Pulido, W. Huang, V. Suarez-Ulloa, T. Cickovski, K. Mathee, and G. Narasimhan, "Metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics ap- proaches for microbiome analysis: supplementary issue: bioinformatics meth- ods and applications for big metagenomics data," Evolutionary Bioinformatics, vol. 12, pp. EBO-S36 436, 2016.

Rise of systems glycobiology and personalized glycomedicine: why REFERENCES 33. T Kunej, T. Kunej, "Rise of systems glycobiology and personalized glycomedicine: why REFERENCES 33

and how to integrate glycomics with multiomics science?. OMICS: A Journal of Integrative Biology. 2312and how to integrate glycomics with multiomics science?" OMICS: A Journal of Integrative Biology, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 615-622, 2019.

Radiomics in oncology: a practical guide. J D Shur, S J Doran, S Kumar, D Dafydd, K Downey, J P O&apos;connor, N Papanikolaou, C Messiou, D.-M Koh, M R Orton, Radiographics. 416J. D. Shur, S. J. Doran, S. Kumar, D. Ap Dafydd, K. Downey, J. P. O'Connor, N. Papanikolaou, C. Messiou, D.-M. Koh, and M. R. Orton, "Radiomics in oncology: a practical guide," Radiographics, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1717-1732, 2021.

Radiomics in oncology, part 1: technical principles and gastrointestinal application in CT and MRI. D Caruso, M Polici, M Zerunian, F Pucciarelli, G Guido, T Polidori, F Landolfi, M Nicolai, E Lucertini, M Tarallo, B Bracci, I Nacci, C Rucci, E Iannicelli, A Laghi, Cancers. 13112522D. Caruso, M. Polici, M. Zerunian, F. Pucciarelli, G. Guido, T. Polidori, F. Landolfi, M. Nicolai, E. Lucertini, M. Tarallo, B. Bracci, I. Nacci, C. Rucci, E. Iannicelli, and A. Laghi, "Radiomics in oncology, part 1: technical principles and gastrointestinal application in CT and MRI," Cancers, vol. 13, no. 11, p. 2522, 2021.

The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA): maintaining and operating a public information repository. K Clark, B Vendt, K Smith, J Freymann, J Kirby, P Koppel, S Moore, S Phillips, D Maffitt, M Pringle, L Tarbox, F Prior, Journal of Digital Imaging. 266K. Clark, B. Vendt, K. Smith, J. Freymann, J. Kirby, P. Koppel, S. Moore, S. Phillips, D. Maffitt, M. Pringle, L. Tarbox, and F. Prior, "The Cancer Imag- ing Archive (TCIA): maintaining and operating a public information reposi- tory," Journal of Digital Imaging, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 1045-1057, 2013.

Phenomics: the next challenge. D Houle, D R Govindaraju, S Omholt, Nature Reviews Genetics. 1112D. Houle, D. R. Govindaraju, and S. Omholt, "Phenomics: the next challenge," Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 855-866, 2010.

Electronic health records based phenotyping in next-generation clinical trials: a perspective from the nih health care systems collaboratory. R L Richesson, W E Hammond, M Nahm, D Wixted, G E Simon, J G Robinson, A E Bauck, D Cifelli, M M Smerek, J Dickerson, R L Laws, R A Madigan, S A Rusincovitch, C Kluchar, R M Califf, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 20e2R. L. Richesson, W. E. Hammond, M. Nahm, D. Wixted, G. E. Simon, J. G. Robinson, A. E. Bauck, D. Cifelli, M. M. Smerek, J. Dickerson, R. L. Laws, R. A. Madigan, S. A. Rusincovitch, C. Kluchar, and R. M. Califf, "Electronic health records based phenotyping in next-generation clinical trials: a perspec- tive from the nih health care systems collaboratory," Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. e2, pp. e226-e231, 2013.

the e, "A computational framework for complex disease stratification from multiple large-scale datasets. B De Meulder, D Lefaudeux, A T Bansal, A Mazein, A Chaiboonchoe, H Ahmed, I Balaur, M Saqi, J Pellet, S Ballereau, N Lemonnier, K Sun, I Pandis, X Yang, M Batuwitage, K Kretsos, J Van Eyll, A Bedding, T Davison, P Dodson, C Larminie, A Postle, J Corfield, R Djukanovic, K F Chung, I M Adcock, Y.-K Guo, P J Sterk, BMC Systems Biology. Manta, A. Rowe, F. Baribaud, C. Auffray, U. B. S. G. the, and T. C.12160B. De Meulder, D. Lefaudeux, A. T. Bansal, A. Mazein, A. Chaiboonchoe, H. Ahmed, I. Balaur, M. Saqi, J. Pellet, S. Ballereau, N. Lemonnier, K. Sun, I. Pandis, X. Yang, M. Batuwitage, K. Kretsos, J. van Eyll, A. Bedding, T. Davison, P. Dodson, C. Larminie, A. Postle, J. Corfield, R. Djukanovic, K. F. Chung, I. M. Adcock, Y.-K. Guo, P. J. Sterk, A. Manta, A. Rowe, F. Baribaud, C. Auffray, U. B. S. G. the, and T. C. the e, "A computa- tional framework for complex disease stratification from multiple large-scale datasets," BMC Systems Biology, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 60, 2018.

A review of feature selection and feature extraction methods applied on microarray data. Z M Hira, D F Gillies, Advances in Bioinformatics. 2015Z. M. Hira and D. F. Gillies, "A review of feature selection and feature extrac- tion methods applied on microarray data," Advances in Bioinformatics, vol. 2015, pp. 1-13, 2015.

Variable selection in omics data: A practical evaluation of small sample sizes. A Kirpich, E A Ainsworth, J M Wedow, J R Newman, G Michailidis, L M Mcintyre, PlOS One. 136197910A. Kirpich, E. A. Ainsworth, J. M. Wedow, J. R. Newman, G. Michailidis, and L. M. McIntyre, "Variable selection in omics data: A practical evaluation of small sample sizes," PlOS One, vol. 13, no. 6, p. e0197910, 2018.

Feature selection methods for big data bioinformatics: a survey from the search perspective. L Wang, Y Wang, Q Chang, Methods. 111L. Wang, Y. Wang, and Q. Chang, "Feature selection methods for big data bioinformatics: a survey from the search perspective," Methods, vol. 111, pp. 21-31, 2016.

Integrative analysis to identify race-associated metabolite biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma. C Wu, F Zhou, J Ren, X Li, Y Jiang, S Ma ; Y. Chen, M E Barefoot, R S Varghese, K Wang, C Di Poto, H W Ressom, 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE8A selective review of multi-level omics data integration using variable selectionC. Wu, F. Zhou, J. Ren, X. Li, Y. Jiang, and S. Ma, "A selective review of multi-level omics data integration using variable selection," High-Throughput, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 4, 2019. 34 REFERENCES 63. Y. Chen, M. E. Barefoot, R. S. Varghese, K. Wang, C. Di Poto, and H. W. Res- som, "Integrative analysis to identify race-associated metabolite biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma," in 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 5300-5303.

MOGONET integrates multi-omics data using graph convolutional networks allowing patient classification and biomarker identification. T Wang, W Shao, Z Huang, H Tang, J Zhang, Z Ding, K Huang, Nature Communications. 121T. Wang, W. Shao, Z. Huang, H. Tang, J. Zhang, Z. Ding, and K. Huang, "MOGONET integrates multi-omics data using graph convolutional networks allowing patient classification and biomarker identification," Nature Commu- nications, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 2021.

Integrated multi-omics analysis using variational autoencoders: application to pan-cancer classification. X Zhang, J Zhang, K Sun, X Yang, C Dai, Y Guo, 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). IEEEX. Zhang, J. Zhang, K. Sun, X. Yang, C. Dai, and Y. Guo, "Integrated multi-omics analysis using variational autoencoders: application to pan-cancer classification," in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). IEEE, 2019, pp. 765-769.

Human multi-omics data pre-processing for predictive purposes using machine learning: a case study in childhood obesity. Á Torres-Martos, A Anguita-Ruiz, M Bustos-Aibar, S Cámara-Sánchez, R Alcalá, C M Aguilera, J Alcalá-Fdez, International Work-Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering. SpringerÁ. Torres-Martos, A. Anguita-Ruiz, M. Bustos-Aibar, S. Cámara-Sánchez, R. Alcalá, C. M. Aguilera, and J. Alcalá-Fdez, "Human multi-omics data pre-processing for predictive purposes using machine learning: a case study in childhood obesity," in International Work-Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering. Springer, 2022, pp. 359-374.

Statistical analysis of proteomics data: a review on feature selection. M Lualdi, M Fasano, Journal of Proteomics. 198M. Lualdi and M. Fasano, "Statistical analysis of proteomics data: a review on feature selection," Journal of Proteomics, vol. 198, pp. 18-26, 2019.

Evaluating feature-selection stability in nextgeneration proteomics. W W B Goh, L Wong, Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. 14051650029W. W. B. Goh and L. Wong, "Evaluating feature-selection stability in next- generation proteomics," Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biol- ogy, vol. 14, no. 05, p. 1650029, 2016.

Statistical data processing in clinical proteomics. S Smit, H C Hoefsloot, A K Smilde, Journal of Chromatography B. 8661-2S. Smit, H. C. Hoefsloot, and A. K. Smilde, "Statistical data processing in clinical proteomics," Journal of Chromatography B, vol. 866, no. 1-2, pp. 77- 88, 2008.

Min-redundancy and max-relevance multi-view feature selection for predicting ovarian cancer survival using multi-omics data. Y El-Manzalawy, T.-Y Hsieh, M Shivakumar, D Kim, V Honavar, BMC Medical Genomics. 113Y. El-Manzalawy, T.-Y. Hsieh, M. Shivakumar, D. Kim, and V. Honavar, "Min-redundancy and max-relevance multi-view feature selection for predict- ing ovarian cancer survival using multi-omics data," BMC Medical Genomics, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 19-31, 2018.

Multi-agent feature selection for integrative multiomics analysis. S Tabakhi, H Lu, 2022 44th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). IEEES. Tabakhi and H. Lu, "Multi-agent feature selection for integrative multi- omics analysis," in 2022 44th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1638- 1642.

Dimension reduction techniques for the integrative analysis of multi-omics data. C Meng, O A Zeleznik, G G Thallinger, B Kuster, A M Gholami, A C Culhane, Briefings in Bioinformatics. 174C. Meng, O. A. Zeleznik, G. G. Thallinger, B. Kuster, A. M. Gholami, and A. C. Culhane, "Dimension reduction techniques for the integrative analysis of multi-omics data," Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 628-641, 2016.

What is principal component analysis?. M Ringnér, Nature Biotechnology. 263M. Ringnér, "What is principal component analysis?" Nature Biotechnology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 303-304, 2008.

Nonlinear component analysis as a kernel eigenvalue problem. B Schölkopf, A Smola, K.-R Müller, Neural Computation. 105REFERENCES 35B. Schölkopf, A. Smola, and K.-R. Müller, "Nonlinear component analysis as a kernel eigenvalue problem," Neural Computation, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1299-1319, 1998. REFERENCES 35

Multi-omics data fusion via a joint kernel learning model for cancer subtype discovery and essential gene identification. J Feng, L Jiang, S Li, J Tang, L Wen, Frontiers in Genetics. 12647141J. Feng, L. Jiang, S. Li, J. Tang, and L. Wen, "Multi-omics data fusion via a joint kernel learning model for cancer subtype discovery and essential gene identification," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 12, p. 647141, 2021.

Bayesian principal component analysis. M N Nounou, B R Bakshi, P K Goel, X Shen, Journal of Chemometrics: A Journal of the Chemometrics Society. 1611M. N. Nounou, B. R. Bakshi, P. K. Goel, and X. Shen, "Bayesian principal component analysis," Journal of Chemometrics: A Journal of the Chemomet- rics Society, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 576-595, 2002.

Sparse principal component analysis via regularized low rank matrix approximation. H Shen, J Z Huang, Journal of Multivariate Analysis. 996H. Shen and J. Z. Huang, "Sparse principal component analysis via regularized low rank matrix approximation," Journal of Multivariate Analysis, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 1015-1034, 2008.

PCA versus LDA. A M Martinez, A C Kak, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 232A. M. Martinez and A. C. Kak, "PCA versus LDA," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 228-233, 2001.

Methods for the integration of multi-omics data: mathematical aspects. M Bersanelli, E Mosca, D Remondini, E Giampieri, C Sala, G Castellani, L Milanesi, BMC Bioinformatics. 172M. Bersanelli, E. Mosca, D. Remondini, E. Giampieri, C. Sala, G. Castellani, and L. Milanesi, "Methods for the integration of multi-omics data: mathemat- ical aspects," BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 167-177, 2016.

A penalized matrix decomposition, with applications to sparse principal components and canonical correlation analysis. D M Witten, R Tibshirani, T Hastie, Biostatistics. 103D. M. Witten, R. Tibshirani, and T. Hastie, "A penalized matrix decomposi- tion, with applications to sparse principal components and canonical correla- tion analysis," Biostatistics, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 515-534, 2009.

Independent component analysis for unraveling the complexity of cancer omics datasets. N Sompairac, P V Nazarov, U Czerwinska, L Cantini, A Biton, A Molkenov, Z Zhumadilov, E Barillot, F Radvanyi, A Gorban, U Kairov, A Zinovyev, International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 20184414N. Sompairac, P. V. Nazarov, U. Czerwinska, L. Cantini, A. Biton, A. Molkenov, Z. Zhumadilov, E. Barillot, F. Radvanyi, A. Gorban, U. Kairov, and A. Zinovyev, "Independent component analysis for unraveling the com- plexity of cancer omics datasets," International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 20, no. 18, p. 4414, 2019.

Multiblock discriminant analysis for integrative genomic study. M Kang, D.-C Kim, C Liu, J Gao, Biomed Research International. 2015M. Kang, D.-C. Kim, C. Liu, and J. Gao, "Multiblock discriminant analysis for integrative genomic study," Biomed Research International, vol. 2015, pp. 1-10, 2015.

Graph representation learning. W L Hamilton, Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. 143W. L. Hamilton, "Graph representation learning," Synthesis Lectures on Ar- tificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1-159, 2020.

Graph representation learning on tissue-specific multi-omics. A Amor, P Lio, V Singh, R V Torné, H A Terre, A. Amor, P. Lio, V. Singh, R. V. Torné, and H. A. Terre, "Graph representation learning on tissue-specific multi-omics," 2021. [Online].

DeepDR: a network-based deep learning approach to in silico drug repositioning. X Zeng, S Zhu, X Liu, Y Zhou, R Nussinov, F Cheng, Bioinformatics. 3524X. Zeng, S. Zhu, X. Liu, Y. Zhou, R. Nussinov, and F. Cheng, "DeepDR: a network-based deep learning approach to in silico drug repositioning," Bioin- formatics, vol. 35, no. 24, pp. 5191-5198, 2019.

GripNet: Graph information propagation on supergraph for heterogeneous graphs. H Xu, S Sang, P Bai, R Li, L Yang, H Lu, Pattern Recognition. 133108973H. Xu, S. Sang, P. Bai, R. Li, L. Yang, and H. Lu, "GripNet: Graph information propagation on supergraph for heterogeneous graphs," Pattern Recognition, vol. 133, p. 108973, 2023.

Graph representation learning in biomedicine and healthcare. M M Li, K Huang, M Zitnik, Nature Biomedical Engineering. M. M. Li, K. Huang, and M. Zitnik, "Graph representation learning in biomedicine and healthcare," Nature Biomedical Engineering, pp. 1-17, 2022.

Multimodal representation learning on graphs. Y Ektefaie, G Dasoulas, A Noori, M Farhat, M Zitnik, Y. Ektefaie, G. Dasoulas, A. Noori, M. Farhat, and M. Zitnik, "Multimodal representation learning on graphs," 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.03299

A meta-analysis of overfitting in machine learning. R Roelofs, V Shankar, B Recht, S Fridovich-Keil, M Hardt, J Miller, L Schmidt, Advances 36 REFERENCES in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc32R. Roelofs, V. Shankar, B. Recht, S. Fridovich-Keil, M. Hardt, J. Miller, and L. Schmidt, "A meta-analysis of overfitting in machine learning," in Advances 36 REFERENCES in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 9179--9189.

A learning method for the class imbalance problem with medical data sets. D.-C Li, C.-W Liu, S C Hu, Computers in Biology and Medicine. 405D.-C. Li, C.-W. Liu, and S. C. Hu, "A learning method for the class imbalance problem with medical data sets," Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 509-518, 2010.

Imbalanced multi-label learning for identifying antimicrobial peptides and their functional types. W Lin, D Xu, Bioinformatics. 3224W. Lin and D. Xu, "Imbalanced multi-label learning for identifying antimicro- bial peptides and their functional types," Bioinformatics, vol. 32, no. 24, pp. 3745-3752, 2016.

Large-scale multi-omics analysis suggests specific roles for intragenic cohesin in transcriptional regulation. J Wang, M Bando, K Shirahige, R Nakato, Nature Communications. 131J. Wang, M. Bando, K. Shirahige, and R. Nakato, "Large-scale multi-omics analysis suggests specific roles for intragenic cohesin in transcriptional regula- tion," Nature Communications, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 2022.

Survey on deep learning with class imbalance. J M Johnson, T M Khoshgoftaar, Journal of Big Data. 61J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, "Survey on deep learning with class imbalance," Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-54, 2019.

Training cost-sensitive neural networks with methods addressing the class imbalance problem. Z.-H Zhou, X.-Y Liu, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 181Z.-H. Zhou and X.-Y. Liu, "Training cost-sensitive neural networks with meth- ods addressing the class imbalance problem," IEEE Transactions on Knowl- edge and Data Engineering, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 63-77, 2005.

Integrated multi-omics analysis of ovarian cancer using variational autoencoders. M T Hira, M Razzaque, C Angione, J Scrivens, S Sawan, M Sarker, Scientific Reports. 111M. T. Hira, M. Razzaque, C. Angione, J. Scrivens, S. Sawan, and M. Sarker, "Integrated multi-omics analysis of ovarian cancer using variational autoen- coders," Scientific Reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 2021.

Handling missing values when applying classification models. M Saar-Tsechansky, F Provost, Journal of Machine Learning Research. M. Saar-Tsechansky and F. Provost, "Handling missing values when applying classification models," Journal of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1625-1657, 2007.

A survey on missing data in machine learning. T Emmanuel, T Maupong, D Mpoeleng, T Semong, B Mphago, O Tabona, Journal of Big Data. 81T. Emmanuel, T. Maupong, D. Mpoeleng, T. Semong, B. Mphago, and O. Tabona, "A survey on missing data in machine learning," Journal of Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1-37, 2021.

A review of integrative imputation for multiomics datasets. M Song, J Greenbaum, J Luttrell, I V , W Zhou, C Wu, H Shen, P Gong, C Zhang, H.-W Deng, Frontiers in Genetics. 11570255M. Song, J. Greenbaum, J. Luttrell IV, W. Zhou, C. Wu, H. Shen, P. Gong, C. Zhang, and H.-W. Deng, "A review of integrative imputation for multi- omics datasets," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 11, p. 570255, 2020.

Assessing missing data assumptions in EHR-based studies: a complex and underappreciated task. S Haneuse, D Arterburn, M J Daniels, JAMA Network Open. 42S. Haneuse, D. Arterburn, and M. J. Daniels, "Assessing missing data assump- tions in EHR-based studies: a complex and underappreciated task," JAMA Network Open, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. e210 184-e210 184, 2021.

S Theodoridis, K Koutroumbas, Pattern recognition. ElsevierS. Theodoridis and K. Koutroumbas, Pattern recognition. Elsevier, 2006.

Sparse convolutional denoising autoencoders for genotype imputation. J Chen, X Shi, Genes. 109652J. Chen and X. Shi, "Sparse convolutional denoising autoencoders for genotype imputation," Genes, vol. 10, no. 9, p. 652, 2019.

Addressing missing values in routine health information system data: an evaluation of imputation methods using data from the democratic republic of the congo during the covid-19 pandemic. S Feng, C Hategeka, K A Grépin, Population Health Metrics. 191S. Feng, C. Hategeka, and K. A. Grépin, "Addressing missing values in routine health information system data: an evaluation of imputation methods using data from the democratic republic of the congo during the covid-19 pandemic," Population Health Metrics, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2021.

An integrative imputation method based on multi-omics datasets. D Lin, J Zhang, J Li, C Xu, H.-W Deng, Y.-P Wang, BMC Bioinformatics. 171D. Lin, J. Zhang, J. Li, C. Xu, H.-W. Deng, and Y.-P. Wang, "An integra- tive imputation method based on multi-omics datasets," BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 2016.

. A N Barbeira, S P Dickinson, R Bonazzola, J Zheng, H E Wheeler, J M Torres, E S Torstenson, K P Shah, T Garcia, T L Edwards, E A Stahl, 37A. N. Barbeira, S. P. Dickinson, R. Bonazzola, J. Zheng, H. E. Wheeler, J. M. Torres, E. S. Torstenson, K. P. Shah, T. Garcia, T. L. Edwards, E. A. Stahl, REFERENCES 37

. L M Huckins, F Aguet, K G Ardlie, B B Cummings, E T Gelfand, G Getz, K Hadley, R E Handsaker, K H Huang, S Kashin, K J Karczewski, M Lek, X Li, D G Macarthur, J L Nedzel, D T Nguyen, M S Noble, C. A. Trowbridge, T. Tukiainen, N. S. Abell, B. Balliu, R. Barshir, O. Basha, A. Battle, G. K. Bogu, A. Brown, C. D. Brown, S. EL. M. Huckins, F. Aguet, K. G. Ardlie, B. B. Cummings, E. T. Gelfand, G. Getz, K. Hadley, R. E. Handsaker, K. H. Huang, S. Kashin, K. J. Kar- czewski, M. Lek, X. Li, D. G. MacArthur, J. L. Nedzel, D. T. Nguyen, M. S. Noble, A. V. Segrè, C. A. Trowbridge, T. Tukiainen, N. S. Abell, B. Balliu, R. Barshir, O. Basha, A. Battle, G. K. Bogu, A. Brown, C. D. Brown, S. E.

Exploring the phenotypic consequences of tissue specific gene expression variation inferred from GWAS summary statistics. L S Castel, C Chen, D F Chiang, F N Conrad, J R Damani, O Davis, E T Delaneau, B E Dermitzakis, E Engelhardt, P G Eskin, L Ferreira, E R Frésard, D Gamazon, A D H Garrido-Martín, G Gewirtz, M J Gliner, R Gloudemans, I M Guigo, B Hall, Y Han, F He, C Hormozdiari, B Howald, E Y Jo, Y Kang, S Kim, T Kim-Hellmuth, G Lappalainen, X Li, B Li, S Liu, M I Mangul, I C Mccarthy, P Mcdowell, J Mohammadi, S B Monlong, M Montgomery, A W Muñoz-Aguirre, A B Ndungu, M Nobel, H Oliva, J J Ongen, N Palowitch, P Panousis, Y Papasaikas, P Park, A J Parsana, C B Payne, J Peterson, F Quan, C Reverter, A Sabatti, M Saha, A J Sammeth, A A Scott, R Shabalin, M Sodaei, B E Stephens, B J Stranger, J H Strober, Sul, Nature Communications. 911825Castel, L. S. Chen, C. Chiang, D. F. Conrad, F. N. Damani, J. R. Davis, O. Delaneau, E. T. Dermitzakis, B. E. Engelhardt, E. Eskin, P. G. Ferreira, L. Frésard, E. R. Gamazon, D. Garrido-Martín, A. D. H. Gewirtz, G. Gliner, M. J. Gloudemans, R. Guigo, I. M. Hall, B. Han, Y. He, F. Hormozdiari, C. Howald, B. Jo, E. Y. Kang, Y. Kim, S. Kim-Hellmuth, T. Lappalainen, G. Li, X. Li, B. Liu, S. Mangul, M. I. McCarthy, I. C. McDowell, P. Mo- hammadi, J. Monlong, S. B. Montgomery, M. Muñoz-Aguirre, A. W. Ndungu, A. B. Nobel, M. Oliva, H. Ongen, J. J. Palowitch, N. Panousis, P. Papasaikas, Y. Park, P. Parsana, A. J. Payne, C. B. Peterson, J. Quan, F. Reverter, C. Sabatti, A. Saha, M. Sammeth, A. J. Scott, A. A. Shabalin, R. Sodaei, M. Stephens, B. E. Stranger, B. J. Strober, J. H. Sul et al., "Exploring the phenotypic consequences of tissue specific gene expression variation inferred from GWAS summary statistics," Nature Communications, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 1825, 2018.

Integrative transcriptome imputation reveals tissue-specific and shared biological mechanisms mediating susceptibility to complex traits. W Zhang, G Voloudakis, V M Rajagopal, B Readhead, J T Dudley, E E Schadt, J L M Björkegren, Y Kim, J F Fullard, G E Hoffman, P Roussos, Nature Communications. 1013834W. Zhang, G. Voloudakis, V. M. Rajagopal, B. Readhead, J. T. Dudley, E. E. Schadt, J. L. M. Björkegren, Y. Kim, J. F. Fullard, G. E. Hoffman, and P. Roussos, "Integrative transcriptome imputation reveals tissue-specific and shared biological mechanisms mediating susceptibility to complex traits," Nature Communications, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 3834, 2019.

Handling missing rows in multi-omics data integration: multiple imputation in multiple factor analysis framework. V Voillet, P Besse, L Liaubet, M Cristobal, I González, BMC Bioinformatics. 171V. Voillet, P. Besse, L. Liaubet, M. San Cristobal, and I. González, "Handling missing rows in multi-omics data integration: multiple imputation in multiple factor analysis framework," BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 2016.

Bayesian integrative model for multi-omics data with missingness. Z Fang, T Ma, G Tang, L Zhu, Q Yan, T Wang, J C Celedón, W Chen, G C Tseng, Bioinformatics. 3422Z. Fang, T. Ma, G. Tang, L. Zhu, Q. Yan, T. Wang, J. C. Celedón, W. Chen, and G. C. Tseng, "Bayesian integrative model for multi-omics data with miss- ingness," Bioinformatics, vol. 34, no. 22, pp. 3801-3808, 2018.

NEMO: cancer subtyping by integration of partial multi-omic data. N Rappoport, R Shamir, Bioinformatics. 3518N. Rappoport and R. Shamir, "NEMO: cancer subtyping by integration of partial multi-omic data," Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 18, pp. 3348-3356, 2019.

Partial multi-view clustering. S.-Y Li, Y Jiang, Z.-H Zhou, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence28S.-Y. Li, Y. Jiang, and Z.-H. Zhou, "Partial multi-view clustering," in Proceed- ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 28, no. 1, 2014.

A network embedding based method for partial multi-omics integration in cancer subtyping. H Xu, L Gao, M Huang, R Duan, Methods. 192H. Xu, L. Gao, M. Huang, and R. Duan, "A network embedding based method for partial multi-omics integration in cancer subtyping," Methods, vol. 192, pp. 67-76, 2021.

MONET: multi-omic module discovery by omic selection. N Rappoport, R Safra, R Shamir, PLOS Computational Biology. 1691008182N. Rappoport, R. Safra, and R. Shamir, "MONET: multi-omic module dis- covery by omic selection," PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 16, no. 9, p. e1008182, 2020.

Harmonization 38 REFERENCES of quality metrics and power calculation in multi-omic studies. S Tarazona, L Balzano-Nogueira, D Gómez-Cabrero, A Schmidt, A Imhof, T Hankemeier, J Tegnér, J A Westerhuis, A Conesa, Nature Communications. 111S. Tarazona, L. Balzano-Nogueira, D. Gómez-Cabrero, A. Schmidt, A. Imhof, T. Hankemeier, J. Tegnér, J. A. Westerhuis, and A. Conesa, "Harmonization 38 REFERENCES of quality metrics and power calculation in multi-omic studies," Nature Com- munications, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 2020.

Adventures in multi-omics I: Combining heterogeneous datasets via relationships matrices. D Akdemir, R Knox, J Isidro-Sánchez, D. Akdemir, R. Knox, and J. Isidro-Sánchez, "Adventures in multi-omics I: Combining heterogeneous datasets via relationships matrices," 2020. [Online].

A community effort to identify and correct mislabeled samples in proteogenomic studies. S Yoo, Z Shi, B Wen, S Kho, R Pan, H Feng, H Chen, A Carlsson, P Edén, W Ma, M Raymer, E J Maier, Z Tezak, E Johanson, D Hinton, H Rodriguez, J Zhu, E Boja, P Wang, B Zhang, Patterns. 25100245S. Yoo, Z. Shi, B. Wen, S. Kho, R. Pan, H. Feng, H. Chen, A. Carlsson, P. Edén, W. Ma, M. Raymer, E. J. Maier, Z. Tezak, E. Johanson, D. Hinton, H. Rodriguez, J. Zhu, E. Boja, P. Wang, and B. Zhang, "A community effort to identify and correct mislabeled samples in proteogenomic studies," Patterns, vol. 2, no. 5, p. 100245, 2021.

reGenotyper: detecting mislabeled samples in genetic data. K Zych, B L Snoek, M Elvin, M Rodriguez, K J Van Der Velde, D Arends, H.-J Westra, M A Swertz, G Poulin, J E Kammenga, R Breitling, R C Jansen, Y Li, PLOS One. 122171324K. Zych, B. L. Snoek, M. Elvin, M. Rodriguez, K. J. Van der Velde, D. Arends, H.-J. Westra, M. A. Swertz, G. Poulin, J. E. Kammenga, R. Breitling, R. C. Jansen, and Y. Li, "reGenotyper: detecting mislabeled samples in genetic data," PLOS One, vol. 12, no. 2, p. e0171324, 2017.

A tool for RNA sequencing sample identity check. J Huang, J Chen, M Lathrop, L Liang, Bioinformatics. 2911J. Huang, J. Chen, M. Lathrop, and L. Liang, "A tool for RNA sequencing sample identity check," Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1463-1464, 2013.

A probabilistic multi-omics data matching method for detecting sample errors in integrative analysis. E Lee, S Yoo, W Wang, Z Tu, J Zhu, GigaScience. 8780E. Lee, S. Yoo, W. Wang, Z. Tu, and J. Zhu, "A probabilistic multi-omics data matching method for detecting sample errors in integrative analysis," GigaScience, vol. 8, no. 7, p. giz080, 2019.

Detecting sample swaps in diverse NGS data types using linkage disequilibrium. N Javed, Y Farjoun, T J Fennell, C B Epstein, B E Bernstein, N Shoresh, Nature Communications. 111N. Javed, Y. Farjoun, T. J. Fennell, C. B. Epstein, B. E. Bernstein, and N. Shoresh, "Detecting sample swaps in diverse NGS data types using linkage disequilibrium," Nature Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-8, 2020.

PINSPlus: a tool for tumor subtype discovery in integrated genomic data. H Nguyen, S Shrestha, S Draghici, T Nguyen, Bioinformatics. 3516H. Nguyen, S. Shrestha, S. Draghici, and T. Nguyen, "PINSPlus: a tool for tumor subtype discovery in integrated genomic data," Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 16, pp. 2843-2846, 2019.

Multi-omics integration-a comparison of unsupervised clustering methodologies. G Tini, L Marchetti, C Priami, M.-P Scott-Boyer, Briefings in Bioinformatics. 204G. Tini, L. Marchetti, C. Priami, and M.-P. Scott-Boyer, "Multi-omics inte- gration-a comparison of unsupervised clustering methodologies," Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1269-1279, 2019.

Unsupervised multi-omics data integration methods: a comprehensive review. N Vahabi, G Michailidis, Frontiers in Genetics. 13N. Vahabi and G. Michailidis, "Unsupervised multi-omics data integration methods: a comprehensive review," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 13, pp. 854 752- 854 752, 2022.

Integrate multi-omics data with biological interaction networks using multi-view factorization autoencoder (MAE). T Ma, A Zhang, BMC Genomics. 2011T. Ma and A. Zhang, "Integrate multi-omics data with biological interac- tion networks using multi-view factorization autoencoder (MAE)," BMC Ge- nomics, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1-11, 2019.

Integrative clustering methods for multi-omics data. X Zhang, Z Zhou, H Xu, C.-T Liu, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics. 1553X. Zhang, Z. Zhou, H. Xu, and C.-T. Liu, "Integrative clustering methods for multi-omics data," Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics, p. e1553, 2022.

Evaluation and comparison of multiomics data integration methods for cancer subtyping. R Duan, L Gao, Y Gao, Y Hu, H Xu, M Huang, K Song, H Wang, Y Dong, C Jiang, C Zhang, S Jia, PLOS Computational Biology. 1781009224R. Duan, L. Gao, Y. Gao, Y. Hu, H. Xu, M. Huang, K. Song, H. Wang, Y. Dong, C. Jiang, C. Zhang, and S. Jia, "Evaluation and comparison of multi- omics data integration methods for cancer subtyping," PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 17, no. 8, p. e1009224, 2021.

Multi-omics approaches to disease. Y Hasin, M Seldin, A Lusis, 2017. REFERENCES 39Genome Biology. 181Y. Hasin, M. Seldin, and A. Lusis, "Multi-omics approaches to disease," Genome Biology, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2017. REFERENCES 39

A comprehensive overview of biometric fusion. M Singh, R Singh, A Ross, Information Fusion. 52M. Singh, R. Singh, and A. Ross, "A comprehensive overview of biometric fusion," Information Fusion, vol. 52, pp. 187-205, 2019.

A Ross, 10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_157Fusion, feature-level. Boston, MASpringer USA. Ross, Fusion, feature-level. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2009, pp. 597-602. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5 157

Computational strategies for single-cell multi-omics integration. N Adossa, S Khan, K T Rytkönen, L L Elo, Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal. 19N. Adossa, S. Khan, K. T. Rytkönen, and L. L. Elo, "Computational strategies for single-cell multi-omics integration," Computational and Structural Biotech- nology Journal, vol. 19, pp. 2588-2596, 2021.

ATHENA: Identifying interactions between different levels of genomic data associated with cancer clinical outcomes using grammatical evolution neural network. D Kim, R Li, S M Dudek, M D Ritchie, BioData Mining. 61D. Kim, R. Li, S. M. Dudek, and M. D. Ritchie, "ATHENA: Identifying inter- actions between different levels of genomic data associated with cancer clini- cal outcomes using grammatical evolution neural network," BioData Mining, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2013.

Breast cancer prognostics using multi-omics data. S Ma, J Ren, D Fenyö, AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings. 201652S. Ma, J. Ren, and D. Fenyö, "Breast cancer prognostics using multi-omics data," AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings, vol. 2016, p. 52, 2016.

Machine learning and systems genomics approaches for multi-omics data. E Lin, H.-Y. Lane, Biomarker Research. 51E. Lin and H.-Y. Lane, "Machine learning and systems genomics approaches for multi-omics data," Biomarker Research, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-6, 2017.

Diagnostic classification of cancers using extreme gradient boosting algorithm and multi-omics data. B Ma, F Meng, G Yan, H Yan, B Chai, F Song, Computers in Biology and Medicine. 121103761B. Ma, F. Meng, G. Yan, H. Yan, B. Chai, and F. Song, "Diagnostic classifi- cation of cancers using extreme gradient boosting algorithm and multi-omics data," Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 121, p. 103761, 2020.

MOGONET integrates multi-omics data using graph convolutional networks allowing patient classification and biomarker identification. T Wang, W Shao, Z Huang, H Tang, J Zhang, Z Ding, K Huang, Nature Communications. 121T. Wang, W. Shao, Z. Huang, H. Tang, J. Zhang, Z. Ding, and K. Huang, "MOGONET integrates multi-omics data using graph convolutional networks allowing patient classification and biomarker identification," Nature Commu- nications, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 2021.

Methods of integrating data to uncover genotype-phenotype interactions. M D Ritchie, E R Holzinger, R Li, S A Pendergrass, D Kim, Nature Reviews Genetics. 162M. D. Ritchie, E. R. Holzinger, R. Li, S. A. Pendergrass, and D. Kim, "Meth- ods of integrating data to uncover genotype-phenotype interactions," Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 85-97, 2015.

Transcriptomic and metabolomic data integration. R Cavill, D Jennen, J Kleinjans, J J Briedé, Briefings in Bioinformatics. 175R. Cavill, D. Jennen, J. Kleinjans, and J. J. Briedé, "Transcriptomic and metabolomic data integration," Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 891-901, 2016.

Integration of clinical chemistry, expression, and metabolite data leads to better toxicological class separation. J S Spicker, S Brunak, K S Frederiksen, H Toft, Toxicological Sciences. 1022J. S. Spicker, S. Brunak, K. S. Frederiksen, and H. Toft, "Integration of clinical chemistry, expression, and metabolite data leads to better toxicological class separation," Toxicological Sciences, vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 444-454, 2008.

Multi-omics integration in biomedical research: a metabolomics-centric review. M A Wörheide, J Krumsiek, G Kastenmüller, M Arnold, Analytica Chimica Acta. 1141M. A. Wörheide, J. Krumsiek, G. Kastenmüller, and M. Arnold, "Multi-omics integration in biomedical research: a metabolomics-centric review," Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 1141, pp. 144-162, 2021.

Integrative clustering methods of multi-omics data for molecule-based cancer classifications. D Wang, J Gu, Quantitative Biology. 41D. Wang and J. Gu, "Integrative clustering methods of multi-omics data for molecule-based cancer classifications," Quantitative Biology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 58-67, 2016.

A comparison of graph-and kernel-based omics data integration algorithms for classifying complex traits. K K Yan, H Zhao, H Pang, BMC Bioinformatics. 181K. K. Yan, H. Zhao, and H. Pang, "A comparison of graph-and kernel-based omics data integration algorithms for classifying complex traits," BMC Bioin- formatics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 2017.

In-depth analysis of SVM kernel learning and its components. I Roman, R Santana, A Mendiburu, J A Lozano, Neural Computing and Applica-40 REFERENCES tions. 33I. Roman, R. Santana, A. Mendiburu, and J. A. Lozano, "In-depth analysis of SVM kernel learning and its components," Neural Computing and Applica- 40 REFERENCES tions, vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 6575-6594, 2021.

Support-vector networks. C Cortes, V Vapnik, Machine Learning. 20C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, "Support-vector networks," Machine Learning, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 273-297, 1995.

Support vector machine applications in computational biology. B Schölkopf, K Tsuda, J.-P Vert, MIT PressB. Schölkopf, K. Tsuda, and J.-P. Vert, Support vector machine applications in computational biology. MIT Press, 2004, pp. 71-92.

Support vector machines and kernels for computational biology. A Ben-Hur, C S Ong, S Sonnenburg, B Schölkopf, G Rätsch, PLOS Computational Biology. 4101000173A. Ben-Hur, C. S. Ong, S. Sonnenburg, B. Schölkopf, and G. Rätsch, "Support vector machines and kernels for computational biology," PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 4, no. 10, p. e1000173, 2008.

Multiple kernel learning algorithms. M Gönen, E Alpaydın, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 12M. Gönen and E. Alpaydın, "Multiple kernel learning algorithms," Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2211-2268, 2011.

A statistical framework for genomic data fusion. G R Lanckriet, T De Bie, N Cristianini, M I Jordan, W S Noble, Bioinformatics. 2016G. R. Lanckriet, T. De Bie, N. Cristianini, M. I. Jordan, and W. S. Noble, "A statistical framework for genomic data fusion," Bioinformatics, vol. 20, no. 16, pp. 2626-2635, 2004.

A pathway-based data integration framework for prediction of disease progression. J A Seoane, I N Day, T R Gaunt, C Campbell, Bioinformatics. 306J. A. Seoane, I. N. Day, T. R. Gaunt, and C. Campbell, "A pathway-based data integration framework for prediction of disease progression," Bioinformatics, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 838-845, 2014.

Classifying breast cancer subtypes using multiple kernel learning based on omics data. M Tao, T Song, W Du, S Han, C Zuo, Y Li, Y Wang, Z Yang, Genes. 103200M. Tao, T. Song, W. Du, S. Han, C. Zuo, Y. Li, Y. Wang, and Z. Yang, "Classifying breast cancer subtypes using multiple kernel learning based on omics data," Genes, vol. 10, no. 3, p. 200, 2019.

Sparse bayesian learning and the relevance vector machine. M E Tipping, Journal of Machine Learning Research. 1M. E. Tipping, "Sparse bayesian learning and the relevance vector machine," Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 1, no. Jun, pp. 211-244, 2001.

Prediction of human functional genetic networks from heterogeneous data using rvm-based ensemble learning. C.-C Wu, S Asgharzadeh, T J Triche, D Z D&apos;argenio, Bioinformatics. 266C.-C. Wu, S. Asgharzadeh, T. J. Triche, and D. Z. D'Argenio, "Prediction of human functional genetic networks from heterogeneous data using rvm-based ensemble learning," Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 807-813, 2010.

Unsupervised multiple kernel learning for heterogeneous data integration. J Mariette, N Villa-Vialaneix, Bioinformatics. 346J. Mariette and N. Villa-Vialaneix, "Unsupervised multiple kernel learning for heterogeneous data integration," Bioinformatics, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1009-1015, 2018.

Integrative network fusion: a multi-omics approach in molecular profiling. M Chierici, N Bussola, A Marcolini, M Francescatto, A Zandonà, L Trastulla, C Agostinelli, G Jurman, C Furlanello, Frontiers in Oncology. 101065M. Chierici, N. Bussola, A. Marcolini, M. Francescatto, A. Zandonà, L. Trastulla, C. Agostinelli, G. Jurman, and C. Furlanello, "Integrative net- work fusion: a multi-omics approach in molecular profiling," Frontiers in On- cology, vol. 10, p. 1065, 2020.

Similarity network fusion for aggregating data types on a genomic scale. B Wang, A M Mezlini, F Demir, M Fiume, Z Tu, M Brudno, B Haibe-Kains, A Goldenberg, Nature Methods. 113B. Wang, A. M. Mezlini, F. Demir, M. Fiume, Z. Tu, M. Brudno, B. Haibe- Kains, and A. Goldenberg, "Similarity network fusion for aggregating data types on a genomic scale," Nature Methods, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 333-337, 2014.

Classification of cancer types using graph convolutional neural networks. R Ramirez, Y.-C Chiu, A Hererra, M Mostavi, J Ramirez, Y Chen, Y Huang, Y.-F Jin, Frontiers in Physics. 8203R. Ramirez, Y.-C. Chiu, A. Hererra, M. Mostavi, J. Ramirez, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, and Y.-F. Jin, "Classification of cancer types using graph con- volutional neural networks," Frontiers in Physics, vol. 8, p. 203, 2020.

Knowledge boosting: a graph-based integration approach with multiomics data and genomic knowledge for cancer clinical outcome prediction. D Kim, J.-G Joung, K.-A Sohn, H Shin, Y R Park, M D Ritchie, J H Kim, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 221D. Kim, J.-G. Joung, K.-A. Sohn, H. Shin, Y. R. Park, M. D. Ritchie, and J. H. Kim, "Knowledge boosting: a graph-based integration approach with multi- omics data and genomic knowledge for cancer clinical outcome prediction," Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 109-120, 2015.

. Y Wen, X Song, B Yan, X Yang, L Wu, D Leng, S He, X Bo, Multi- REFERENCES 41Y. Wen, X. Song, B. Yan, X. Yang, L. Wu, D. Leng, S. He, and X. Bo, "Multi- REFERENCES 41

dimensional data integration algorithm based on random walk with restart. BMC Bioinformatics. 221dimensional data integration algorithm based on random walk with restart," BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1-22, 2021.

Deep multimodal learning: A survey on recent advances and trends. D Ramachandram, G W Taylor, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 346D. Ramachandram and G. W. Taylor, "Deep multimodal learning: A survey on recent advances and trends," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 96-108, 2017.

Multi-omics data integration using cross-modal neural networks. I Bica, P Velickovic, H Xiao, P Li, Proceedings of the 26th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning (ESANN 2018). the 26th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning (ESANN 2018)I. Bica, P. Velickovic, H. Xiao, and P. Li, "Multi-omics data integration using cross-modal neural networks," in Proceedings of the 26th European Sympo- sium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning (ESANN 2018), 2018.

MildInt: deep learningbased multimodal longitudinal data integration framework. G Lee, B Kang, K Nho, K.-A Sohn, D Kim, Frontiers in Genetics. 10617G. Lee, B. Kang, K. Nho, K.-A. Sohn, and D. Kim, "MildInt: deep learning- based multimodal longitudinal data integration framework," Frontiers in Ge- netics, vol. 10, p. 617, 2019.

Deep learning in multi-omics data integration in cancer diagnostic. A Alkhateeb, A A Tabl, L Rueda, Deep Learning for Biomedical Data Analysis. SpringerA. Alkhateeb, A. A. Tabl, and L. Rueda, "Deep learning in multi-omics data integration in cancer diagnostic," in Deep Learning for Biomedical Data Anal- ysis. Springer, 2021, pp. 255-271.

Deep learning data integration for better risk stratification models of bladder cancer. O B Poirion, K Chaudhary, L X Garmire, AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings. 2018197O. B. Poirion, K. Chaudhary, and L. X. Garmire, "Deep learning data integra- tion for better risk stratification models of bladder cancer," AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings, vol. 2018, p. 197, 2018.

Deep learning-based multi-omics data integration reveals two prognostic subtypes in high-risk neuroblastoma. L Zhang, C Lv, Y Jin, G Cheng, Y Fu, D Yuan, Y Tao, Y Guo, X Ni, T Shi, Frontiers in Genetics. 9477L. Zhang, C. Lv, Y. Jin, G. Cheng, Y. Fu, D. Yuan, Y. Tao, Y. Guo, X. Ni, and T. Shi, "Deep learning-based multi-omics data integration reveals two prognostic subtypes in high-risk neuroblastoma," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 9, p. 477, 2018.

Molecular subtyping of cancer based on robust graph neural network and multi-omics data integration. C Yin, Y Cao, P Sun, H Zhang, Z Li, Y Xu, H Sun, Frontiers in Genetics. 13C. Yin, Y. Cao, P. Sun, H. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Xu, and H. Sun, "Molecular subtyping of cancer based on robust graph neural network and multi-omics data integration," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 13, pp. 1-14, 2022.

Interpretation of network-based integration from multi-omics longitudinal data. A Bodein, M.-P Scott-Boyer, O Perin, K.-A. Lê Cao, A Droit, Nucleic Acids Research. 505A. Bodein, M.-P. Scott-Boyer, O. Perin, K.-A. Lê Cao, and A. Droit, "Inter- pretation of network-based integration from multi-omics longitudinal data," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. e27-e27, 2022.

A survey on deep multimodal learning for computer vision: advances, trends, applications, and datasets. K Bayoudh, R Knani, F Hamdaoui, A Mtibaa, The Visual Computer. 388K. Bayoudh, R. Knani, F. Hamdaoui, and A. Mtibaa, "A survey on deep multimodal learning for computer vision: advances, trends, applications, and datasets," The Visual Computer, vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 2939-2970, 2022.

Factorial hidden markov models. Z Ghahramani, M Jordan, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, D. Touretzky, M. Mozer, and M. Hasselmo. MIT Press8Z. Ghahramani and M. Jordan, "Factorial hidden markov models," in Ad- vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, D. Touretzky, M. Mozer, and M. Hasselmo, Eds., vol. 8. MIT Press, 1995.

Hidden markov models and their applications in biological sequence analysis. B.-J Yoon, Current Genomics. 106B.-J. Yoon, "Hidden markov models and their applications in biological se- quence analysis," Current Genomics, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 402-415, 2009.

Biological random walks: multi-omics integration for disease gene prioritization. M Gentili, L Martini, M Sponziello, L Becchetti, Bioinformatics. 3817M. Gentili, L. Martini, M. Sponziello, and L. Becchetti, "Biological random walks: multi-omics integration for disease gene prioritization," Bioinformatics, vol. 38, no. 17, pp. 4145-4152, 2022.

A Bayesian integrative genomic model for pathway analysis of complex traits. B L Fridley, S Lund, G D Jenkins, L Wang, Genetic Epidemiology. 364B. L. Fridley, S. Lund, G. D. Jenkins, and L. Wang, "A Bayesian integrative genomic model for pathway analysis of complex traits," Genetic Epidemiology, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 352-359, 2012.

A Bayesian framework that integrates multi-omics data and gene networks predicts risk genes from schizophrenia GWAS data. Q Wang, R Chen, F Cheng, Q Wei, Y Ji, H Yang, X Zhong, R Tao, References Z Wen, J S Sutcliffe, C Liu, E H Cook, N J Cox, B Li, Nature Neuroscience. 225Q. Wang, R. Chen, F. Cheng, Q. Wei, Y. Ji, H. Yang, X. Zhong, R. Tao, 42 REFERENCES Z. Wen, J. S. Sutcliffe, C. Liu, E. H. Cook, N. J. Cox, and B. Li, "A Bayesian framework that integrates multi-omics data and gene networks predicts risk genes from schizophrenia GWAS data," Nature Neuroscience, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 691-699, 2019.

Genome-wide identification of the genetic basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. S Zhang, J Cooper-Knock, A K Weimer, M Shi, T Moll, J N Marshall, C Harvey, H G Nezhad, J Franklin, C Dos Santos, K Souza, C Ning, J Wang, A A Li, S Dilliott, E Farhan, I Elhaik, M R Pasniceanu, C Livesey, E Eitan, K P Hornstein, I Kenna, N R Blair, M Wray, M Kiernan, A Neto, R Chio, W Cauchi, P Robberecht, P Van Damme, P Corcia, O Couratier, R Hardiman, M Mclaughin, V Gotkine, N Drory, V Ticozzi, J H Silani, L H Veldink, Van Den, M Berg, J S Carvalho, M Mora Pardina, P Povedano, M Andersen, N A Weber, A Başak, C Al-Chalabi, P J Shaw, K E Shaw, J E Morrison, J D Landers, J H Glass, L Veldink, P J Ferraiuolo, M P Shaw, Snyder, Neuron. 1106S. Zhang, J. Cooper-Knock, A. K. Weimer, M. Shi, T. Moll, J. N. Mar- shall, C. Harvey, H. G. Nezhad, J. Franklin, C. dos Santos Souza, K. Ning, C. Wang, J. Li, A. A. Dilliott, S. Farhan, E. Elhaik, I. Pasniceanu, M. R. Livesey, C. Eitan, E. Hornstein, K. P. Kenna, I. Blair, N. R. Wray, M. Kier- nan, M. Mitne Neto, A. Chio, R. Cauchi, W. Robberecht, P. van Damme, P. Corcia, P. Couratier, O. Hardiman, R. McLaughin, M. Gotkine, V. Drory, N. Ticozzi, V. Silani, J. H. Veldink, L. H. van den Berg, M. de Carvalho, J. S. Mora Pardina, M. Povedano, P. Andersen, M. Weber, N. A. Başak, A. Al- Chalabi, C. Shaw, P. J. Shaw, K. E. Morrison, J. E. Landers, J. D. Glass, J. H. Veldink, L. Ferraiuolo, P. J. Shaw, and M. P. Snyder, "Genome-wide identification of the genetic basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis," Neuron, vol. 110, no. 6, pp. 992-1008, 2022.

More is better: recent progress in multi-omics data integration methods. S Huang, K Chaudhary, L X Garmire, Frontiers in Genetics. 884S. Huang, K. Chaudhary, and L. X. Garmire, "More is better: recent progress in multi-omics data integration methods," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 8, p. 84, 2017.

Pattern recognition and machine learning. C M Bishop, N M Nasrabadi, Springer4C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi, Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer, 2006, vol. 4, no. 4.

Multi-omics factor analysis-a framework for unsupervised integration of multi-omics data sets. R Argelaguet, B Velten, D Arnol, S Dietrich, T Zenz, J C Marioni, F Buettner, W Huber, O Stegle, Molecular Systems Biology. 1468124R. Argelaguet, B. Velten, D. Arnol, S. Dietrich, T. Zenz, J. C. Marioni, F. Buet- tner, W. Huber, and O. Stegle, "Multi-omics factor analysis-a framework for unsupervised integration of multi-omics data sets," Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 14, no. 6, p. e8124, 2018.

Joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) for integrated analysis of multiple data types. E F Lock, K A Hoadley, J S Marron, A B Nobel, The Annals of Applied Statistics. 71523E. F. Lock, K. A. Hoadley, J. S. Marron, and A. B. Nobel, "Joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) for integrated analysis of multiple data types," The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 523, 2013.

Discovery of multi-dimensional modules by integrative analysis of cancer genomic data. S Zhang, C.-C Liu, W Li, H Shen, P W Laird, X J Zhou, Nucleic Acids Research. 4019S. Zhang, C.-C. Liu, W. Li, H. Shen, P. W. Laird, and X. J. Zhou, "Discovery of multi-dimensional modules by integrative analysis of cancer genomic data," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 40, no. 19, pp. 9379-9391, 2012.

A non-negative matrix factorization method for detecting modules in heterogeneous omics multi-modal data. Z Yang, G Michailidis, Bioinformatics. 321Z. Yang and G. Michailidis, "A non-negative matrix factorization method for detecting modules in heterogeneous omics multi-modal data," Bioinformatics, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1-8, 2016.

Multi-study factor analysis. R Vito, R Bellio, L Trippa, G Parmigiani, Biometrics. 751R. De Vito, R. Bellio, L. Trippa, and G. Parmigiani, "Multi-study factor anal- ysis," Biometrics, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 337-346, 2019.

Integrative clustering of multiple genomic data types using a joint latent variable model with application to breast and lung cancer subtype analysis. R Shen, A B Olshen, M Ladanyi, Bioinformatics. 2522R. Shen, A. B. Olshen, and M. Ladanyi, "Integrative clustering of multiple genomic data types using a joint latent variable model with application to breast and lung cancer subtype analysis," Bioinformatics, vol. 25, no. 22, pp. 2906-2912, 2009.

Pattern discovery and cancer gene identification in integrated cancer genomic data. Q Mo, S Wang, V E Seshan, A B Olshen, N Schultz, C Sander, R S Powers, M Ladanyi, R Shen, Proceedings of the National Academy of REFERENCES. 43Q. Mo, S. Wang, V. E. Seshan, A. B. Olshen, N. Schultz, C. Sander, R. S. Pow- ers, M. Ladanyi, and R. Shen, "Pattern discovery and cancer gene identification in integrated cancer genomic data," Proceedings of the National Academy of REFERENCES 43

. Sciences. 11011Sciences, vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 4245-4250, 2013.

Regularized generalized canonical correlation analysis. A Tenenhaus, M Tenenhaus, Psychometrika. 762A. Tenenhaus and M. Tenenhaus, "Regularized generalized canonical correla- tion analysis," Psychometrika, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 257-284, 2011.

Structural learning and integrative decomposition of multi-view data. I Gaynanova, G Li, Biometrics. 754I. Gaynanova and G. Li, "Structural learning and integrative decomposition of multi-view data," Biometrics, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 1121-1132, 2019.

MultiBench: multiscale benchmarks for multimodal representation learning. P P Liang, Y Lyu, X Fan, Z Wu, Y Cheng, J Wu, L Chen, P Wu, M A Lee, Y Zhu, R Salakhutdinov, L.-P Morency, P. P. Liang, Y. Lyu, X. Fan, Z. Wu, Y. Cheng, J. Wu, L. Chen, P. Wu, M. A. Lee, Y. Zhu, R. Salakhutdinov, and L.-P. Morency, "MultiBench: multiscale benchmarks for multimodal representation learning," 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07502

Tensor decompositions and applications. T G Kolda, B W Bader, SIAM Review. 513T. G. Kolda and B. W. Bader, "Tensor decompositions and applications," SIAM Review, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 455-500, 2009.

MONTI: a multi-omics nonnegative tensor decomposition framework for gene-level integrative analysis. I Jung, M Kim, S Rhee, S Lim, S Kim, Frontiers in Genetics. 1635I. Jung, M. Kim, S. Rhee, S. Lim, and S. Kim, "MONTI: a multi-omics non- negative tensor decomposition framework for gene-level integrative analysis," Frontiers in Genetics, p. 1635, 2021.

Tensor factorization via matrix factorization. V Kuleshov, A Chaganty, P Liang, Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. V. Kuleshov, A. Chaganty, and P. Liang, "Tensor factorization via matrix factorization," in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 2015, pp. 507- 516.

Tensorial blind source separation for improved analysis of multi-omic data. A E Teschendorff, H Jing, D S Paul, J Virta, K Nordhausen, Genome Biology. 191A. E. Teschendorff, H. Jing, D. S. Paul, J. Virta, and K. Nordhausen, "Tenso- rial blind source separation for improved analysis of multi-omic data," Genome Biology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-18, 2018.

Bayesian tensor factorization for multi-way analysis of multi-dimensional EEG. Y Tang, D Chen, L Wang, A Y Zomaya, J Chen, H Liu, Neurocomputing. 318Y. Tang, D. Chen, L. Wang, A. Y. Zomaya, J. Chen, and H. Liu, "Bayesian tensor factorization for multi-way analysis of multi-dimensional EEG," Neu- rocomputing, vol. 318, pp. 162-174, 2018.

Bayesian tensor factorization-drive breast cancer subtyping by integrating multi-omics data. Q Liu, B Cheng, Y Jin, P Hu, Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 125103958Q. Liu, B. Cheng, Y. Jin, and P. Hu, "Bayesian tensor factorization-drive breast cancer subtyping by integrating multi-omics data," Journal of Biomed- ical Informatics, vol. 125, p. 103958, 2022.

Relevance-redundancy feature selection based on ant colony optimization. S Tabakhi, P Moradi, Pattern Recognition. 489S. Tabakhi and P. Moradi, "Relevance-redundancy feature selection based on ant colony optimization," Pattern Recognition, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2798-2811, 2015.

Multi-agent systems: A survey. A Dorri, S S Kanhere, R Jurdak, IEEE Access. 6A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, "Multi-agent systems: A survey," IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 28 573-28 593, 2018.

Machine-learning-based late fusion on multi-omics and multiscale data for non-small-cell lung cancer diagnosis. F Carrillo-Perez, J C Morales, D Castillo-Secilla, O Gevaert, I Rojas, L J Herrera, Journal of Personalized Medicine. 124601F. Carrillo-Perez, J. C. Morales, D. Castillo-Secilla, O. Gevaert, I. Rojas, and L. J. Herrera, "Machine-learning-based late fusion on multi-omics and multi- scale data for non-small-cell lung cancer diagnosis," Journal of Personalized Medicine, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 601, 2022.

MOLI: multiomics late integration with deep neural networks for drug response prediction. H Sharifi-Noghabi, O Zolotareva, C C Collins, M Ester, Bioinformatics. 3514H. Sharifi-Noghabi, O. Zolotareva, C. C. Collins, and M. Ester, "MOLI: multi- omics late integration with deep neural networks for drug response prediction," Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 14, pp. i501-i509, 2019.

SALMON: survival analysis learning with multi-omics neural networks on breast cancer. Z Huang, X Zhan, S Xiang, T S Johnson, B Helm, C Y Yu, J Zhang, P Salama, M Rizkalla, Z Han, K Huang, Frontiers in Genetics. 10166Z. Huang, X. Zhan, S. Xiang, T. S. Johnson, B. Helm, C. Y. Yu, J. Zhang, P. Salama, M. Rizkalla, Z. Han, and K. Huang, "SALMON: survival analy- sis learning with multi-omics neural networks on breast cancer," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 10, p. 166, 2019.

Multi-omics in-44 REFERENCES tegration in the age of million single-cell data. Z Miao, B D Humphreys, A P Mcmahon, J Kim, Nature Reviews Nephrology. 1711Z. Miao, B. D. Humphreys, A. P. McMahon, and J. Kim, "Multi-omics in- 44 REFERENCES tegration in the age of million single-cell data," Nature Reviews Nephrology, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 710-724, 2021.

Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature. 4747353The Cancer Genome Atlas Research NetworkThe Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, "Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma," Nature, vol. 474, no. 7353, pp. 609-615, 2011.

Comprehensive molecular characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 4877407The Cancer Genome Atlas NetworkThe Cancer Genome Atlas Network, "Comprehensive molecular characteriza- tion of human colon and rectal cancer," Nature, vol. 487, no. 7407, pp. 330-337, 2012.

KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. M Kanehisa, S Goto, Nucleic Acids Research. 281M. Kanehisa and S. Goto, "KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 27-30, 2000.

Toward understanding the origin and evolution of cellular organisms. M Kanehisa, Protein Science. 2811M. Kanehisa, "Toward understanding the origin and evolution of cellular or- ganisms," Protein Science, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 1947-1951, 2019.

KEGG: integrating viruses and cellular organisms. M Kanehisa, M Furumichi, Y Sato, M Ishiguro-Watanabe, M Tanabe, Nucleic Acids Research. 49D1M. Kanehisa, M. Furumichi, Y. Sato, M. Ishiguro-Watanabe, and M. Tanabe, "KEGG: integrating viruses and cellular organisms," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 49, no. D1, pp. D545-D551, 2021.

Tissue-based map of the human proteome. M Uhlén, L Fagerberg, B M Hallström, C Lindskog, P Oksvold, A Mardinoglu, Åsa Sivertsson, C Kampf, E Sjöstedt, A Asplund, I Olsson, K Edlund, E Lundberg, S Navani, C A Szigyarto, J Odeberg, D Djureinovic, J O Takanen, S Hober, T Alm, P.-H Edqvist, H Berling, H Tegel, J Mulder, J Rockberg, P Nilsson, J M Schwenk, M Hamsten, K Von Feilitzen, M Forsberg, L Persson, F Johansson, M Zwahlen, G Heijne, J Nielsen, F Pontén, Science. 34762201260419M. Uhlén, L. Fagerberg, B. M. Hallström, C. Lindskog, P. Oksvold, A. Mardinoglu,Åsa Sivertsson, C. Kampf, E. Sjöstedt, A. Asplund, I. Ols- son, K. Edlund, E. Lundberg, S. Navani, C. A.-K. Szigyarto, J. Odeberg, D. Djureinovic, J. O. Takanen, S. Hober, T. Alm, P.-H. Edqvist, H. Berling, H. Tegel, J. Mulder, J. Rockberg, P. Nilsson, J. M. Schwenk, M. Hamsten, K. von Feilitzen, M. Forsberg, L. Persson, F. Johansson, M. Zwahlen, G. von Heijne, J. Nielsen, and F. Pontén, "Tissue-based map of the human proteome," Science, vol. 347, no. 6220, p. 1260419, 2015.

Towards multimodal sarcasm detection (an obviously perfect paper). S Castro, D Hazarika, V Pérez-Rosas, R Zimmermann, R Mihalcea, S Poria, Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational LinguisticsS. Castro, D. Hazarika, V. Pérez-Rosas, R. Zimmermann, R. Mihalcea, and S. Poria, "Towards multimodal sarcasm detection (an obviously perfect pa- per)," in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- putational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4619-4629.

MOSI: multimodal corpus of sentiment intensity and subjectivity analysis in online opinion videos. A Zadeh, R Zellers, E Pincus, L.-P Morency, A. Zadeh, R. Zellers, E. Pincus, and L.-P. Morency, "MOSI: multimodal corpus of sentiment intensity and subjectivity analysis in online opinion videos," 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06259

UR-FUNNY: A multimodal language dataset for understanding humor. M K Hasan, W Rahman, A B Zadeh, J Zhong, M I Tanveer, L.-P Morency, M E Hoque, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP)Association for Computational LinguisticsM. K. Hasan, W. Rahman, A. B. Zadeh, J. Zhong, M. I. Tanveer, L.-P. Morency, and M. E. Hoque, "UR-FUNNY: A multimodal language dataset for understanding humor," in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empir- ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.

Multimodal language analysis in the wild: CMU-MOSEI dataset and interpretable dynamic fusion graph. A B Zadeh, P P Liang, S Poria, E Cambria, L.-P Morency, Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics1A. B. Zadeh, P. P. Liang, S. Poria, E. Cambria, and L.-P. Morency, "Multi- modal language analysis in the wild: CMU-MOSEI dataset and interpretable dynamic fusion graph," in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As- sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2018, pp. 2236-2246.

MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care database. A E Johnson, T J Pollard, L Shen, L , . H Lehman, M Feng, M Ghassemi, B Moody, P Szolovits, L Anthony Celi, R G Mark, Scientific Data. 31REFERENCES 45A. E. Johnson, T. J. Pollard, L. Shen, L.-w. H. Lehman, M. Feng, M. Ghassemi, B. Moody, P. Szolovits, L. Anthony Celi, and R. G. Mark, "MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care database," Scientific Data, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2016. REFERENCES 45

Multimodal sensor fusion with differentiable filters. M A Lee, B Yi, R Martín-Martín, S Savarese, J Bohg, 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE10451M. A. Lee, B. Yi, R. Martín-Martín, S. Savarese, and J. Bohg, "Multimodal sensor fusion with differentiable filters," in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Con- ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 10 444- 10 451.

Making sense of vision and touch: Learning multimodal representations for contact-rich tasks. M A Lee, Y Zhu, P Zachares, M Tan, K Srinivasan, S Savarese, L Fei-Fei, A Garg, J Bohg, IEEE Transactions on Robotics. 363M. A. Lee, Y. Zhu, P. Zachares, M. Tan, K. Srinivasan, S. Savarese, L. Fei-Fei, A. Garg, and J. Bohg, "Making sense of vision and touch: Learning multi- modal representations for contact-rich tasks," IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 582-596, 2020.

Enrico: A dataset for topic modeling of mobile UI designs. L A Leiva, A Hota, A Oulasvirta, 22nd International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. L. A. Leiva, A. Hota, and A. Oulasvirta, "Enrico: A dataset for topic modeling of mobile UI designs," in 22nd International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, 2020, pp. 1-4.

The Kinetics human action video dataset. W Kay, J Carreira, K Simonyan, B Zhang, C Hillier, S Vijayanarasimhan, F Viola, T Green, T Back, P Natsev, M Suleyman, A Zisserman, W. Kay, J. Carreira, K. Simonyan, B. Zhang, C. Hillier, S. Vijayanarasimhan, F. Viola, T. Green, T. Back, P. Natsev, M. Suleyman, and A. Zisserman, "The Kinetics human action video dataset," 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.06950

Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 4907418The Cancer Genome Atlas NetworkThe Cancer Genome Atlas Network, "Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours," Nature, vol. 490, no. 7418, pp. 61-70, 2012.

Gated multimodal units for information fusion. J Arevalo, T Solorio, M Montes-Y Gómez, F A González, J. Arevalo, T. Solorio, M. Montes-y Gómez, and F. A. González, "Gated multimodal units for information fusion," 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.01992

CentralNet: A multilayer approach for multimodal fusion. V Vielzeuf, A Lechervy, S Pateux, F Jurie, Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops. the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) WorkshopsV. Vielzeuf, A. Lechervy, S. Pateux, and F. Jurie, "CentralNet: A multilayer approach for multimodal fusion," in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops, 2018, pp. 575-589.

Mergeomics: multidimensional data integration to identify pathogenic perturbations to biological systems. L Shu, Y Zhao, Z Kurt, S G Byars, T Tukiainen, J Kettunen, L D Orozco, M Pellegrini, A J Lusis, S Ripatti, B Zhang, M Inouye, V.-P Mäkinen, X Yang, BMC Genomics. 171L. Shu, Y. Zhao, Z. Kurt, S. G. Byars, T. Tukiainen, J. Kettunen, L. D. Orozco, M. Pellegrini, A. J. Lusis, S. Ripatti, B. Zhang, M. Inouye, V.- P. Mäkinen, and X. Yang, "Mergeomics: multidimensional data integration to identify pathogenic perturbations to biological systems," BMC Genomics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 2016.

The grapevine genome sequence suggests ancestral hexaploidization in major angiosperm phyla. O Jaillon, J M Aury, B Noel, A Policriti, C Clepet, A Casagrande, N Choisne, S Aubourg, N Vitulo, C Jubin, A Vezzi, F Legeai, P Hugueney, C Dasilva, D Horner, E Mica, D Jublot, J Poulain, C Bruyère, A Billault, B Segurens, M Gouyvenoux, E Ugarte, F Cattonaro, V Anthouard, V Vico, C D Fabbro, M Alaux, G D Gaspero, V Dumas, N Felice, S Paillard, I Juman, M Moroldo, S Scalabrin, A Canaguier, I L Clainche, G Malacrida, E Durand, G Pesole, V Laucou, P Chatelet, D Merdinoglu, M Delledonne, M Pezzotti, A Lecharny, C Scarpelli, F Artiguenave, M E Pè, G Valle, M Morgante, M Caboche, A F Adam-Blondon, J Weissenbach, F Quétier, P Wincker, Nature. 449O. Jaillon, J. M. Aury, B. Noel, A. Policriti, C. Clepet, A. Casagrande, N. Choisne, S. Aubourg, N. Vitulo, C. Jubin, A. Vezzi, F. Legeai, P. Hugueney, C. Dasilva, D. Horner, E. Mica, D. Jublot, J. Poulain, C. Bruyère, A. Billault, B. Segurens, M. Gouyvenoux, E. Ugarte, F. Cattonaro, V. Anthouard, V. Vico, C. D. Fabbro, M. Alaux, G. D. Gaspero, V. Dumas, N. Felice, S. Paillard, I. Ju- man, M. Moroldo, S. Scalabrin, A. Canaguier, I. L. Clainche, G. Malacrida, E. Durand, G. Pesole, V. Laucou, P. Chatelet, D. Merdinoglu, M. Delle- donne, M. Pezzotti, A. Lecharny, C. Scarpelli, F. Artiguenave, M. E. Pè, G. Valle, M. Morgante, M. Caboche, A. F. Adam-Blondon, J. Weissenbach, F. Quétier, and P. Wincker, "The grapevine genome sequence suggests an- cestral hexaploidization in major angiosperm phyla," Nature, vol. 449, pp. 463-467, 2007.

From gwas to gene: transcriptome-wide association studies and other methods to functionally understand gwas discoveries. B Li, M D Ritchie, Frontiers in Genetics. 12B. Li and M. D. Ritchie, "From gwas to gene: transcriptome-wide associa- tion studies and other methods to functionally understand gwas discoveries," Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 12, pp. 1-15, 2021.

MiBiOmics: an interactive web application for multi-omics data exploration and integration. J Zoppi, J.-F Guillaume, M Neunlist, S Chaffron, BMC Bioinformatics. 221J. Zoppi, J.-F. Guillaume, M. Neunlist, and S. Chaffron, "MiBiOmics: an in- teractive web application for multi-omics data exploration and integration," BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2021.

Integrating TARA oceans datasets using unsupervised multiple kernel learning. J Mariette, N Villa-Vialaneix, J. Mariette and N. Villa-Vialaneix, "Integrating TARA oceans datasets using unsupervised multiple kernel learning," 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/05/18/139287

mixOmics: an R package for 'omics feature selection and multiple data integration. F Rohart, B Gautier, A Singh, K.-A. Lê Cao, PLOS Computational Biology. 13111005752F. Rohart, B. Gautier, A. Singh, and K.-A. Lê Cao, "mixOmics: an R package for 'omics feature selection and multiple data integration," PLOS Computa- tional Biology, vol. 13, no. 11, p. e1005752, 2017.

Low oxygen levels as a trigger for enhancement of respiratory metabolism in saccharomyces cerevisiae. E Rintala, M Toivari, J.-P Pitkänen, M G Wiebe, L Ruohonen, M Penttilä, BMC Genomics. 101E. Rintala, M. Toivari, J.-P. Pitkänen, M. G. Wiebe, L. Ruohonen, and M. Penttilä, "Low oxygen levels as a trigger for enhancement of respiratory metabolism in saccharomyces cerevisiae," BMC Genomics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1-19, 2009.

Integrating omics datasets with the OmicsPLS package. S E Bouhaddani, H.-W Uh, G Jongbloed, C Hayward, L Klarić, S M Kie, J Houwing-Duistermaat, BMC Bioinformatics. 191S. e. Bouhaddani, H.-W. Uh, G. Jongbloed, C. Hayward, L. Klarić, S. M. Kie lbasa, and J. Houwing-Duistermaat, "Integrating omics datasets with the OmicsPLS package," BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2018.

Harnessing the information contained within genome-wide association studies to improve individual prediction of complex disease risk. D M Evans, P M Visscher, N R Wray, Human Molecular Genetics. 1818D. M. Evans, P. M. Visscher, and N. R. Wray, "Harnessing the information contained within genome-wide association studies to improve individual pre- diction of complex disease risk," Human Molecular Genetics, vol. 18, no. 18, pp. 3525-3531, 2009.

Causal analysis approaches in ingenuity pathway analysis. A Krämer, J Green, J PollardJr, S Tugendreich, Bioinformatics. 304A. Krämer, J. Green, J. Pollard Jr, and S. Tugendreich, "Causal analysis approaches in ingenuity pathway analysis," Bioinformatics, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 523-530, 2014.

Whole-genome cartography of estrogen receptor α binding sites. C.-Y Lin, V B Vega, J S Thomsen, T Zhang, S L Kong, M Xie, K P Chiu, L Lipovich, D H Barnett, F Stossi, A Yeo, J George, V A Kuznetsov, Y K Lee, T H Charn, N Palanisamy, L D Miller, E Cheung, B S Katzenellenbogen, Y Ruan, G Bourque, C.-L Wei, E T Liu, PLOS Genetics. 36C.-Y. Lin, V. B. Vega, J. S. Thomsen, T. Zhang, S. L. Kong, M. Xie, K. P. Chiu, L. Lipovich, D. H. Barnett, F. Stossi, A. Yeo, J. George, V. A. Kuznetsov, Y. K. Lee, T. H. Charn, N. Palanisamy, L. D. Miller, E. Cheung, B. S. Katzenellen- bogen, Y. Ruan, G. Bourque, C.-L. Wei, and E. T. Liu, "Whole-genome car- tography of estrogen receptor α binding sites," PLOS Genetics, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 1-19, 2007.

TNF induces distinct gene expression programs in microvascular and macrovascular human endothelial cells. D Viemann, M Goebeler, S Schmid, U Nordhues, K Klimmek, C Sorg, J Roth, Journal of Leukocyte Biology. 801D. Viemann, M. Goebeler, S. Schmid, U. Nordhues, K. Klimmek, C. Sorg, and J. Roth, "TNF induces distinct gene expression programs in microvascular and macrovascular human endothelial cells," Journal of Leukocyte Biology, vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 174-185, 2006.

A community-driven global reconstruction of human metabolism. I Thiele, N Swainston, R M T Fleming, A Hoppe, S Sahoo, M K Aurich, H Haraldsdottir, M L Mo, O Rolfsson, M D Stobbe, S G Thorleifsson, R Agren, C Bölling, S Bordel, A K Chavali, P Dobson, W B Dunn, L Endler, D Hala, M Hucka, D Hull, D Jameson, N Jamshidi, J J Jonsson, N Juty, S Keating, I Nookaew, N Le Novère, N Malys, A Mazein, J A Papin, N D Price, E Selkov, M I Sigurdsson, E Simeonidis, N Sonnenschein, K Smallbone, A Sorokin, J H G M Van Beek, D Weichart, I Goryanin, J Nielsen, H V Westerhoff, D B Kell, P Mendes, B Ø Palsson, Nature Biotechnology. 315REFERENCES 47I. Thiele, N. Swainston, R. M. T. Fleming, A. Hoppe, S. Sahoo, M. K. Aurich, H. Haraldsdottir, M. L. Mo, O. Rolfsson, M. D. Stobbe, S. G. Thorleifsson, R. Agren, C. Bölling, S. Bordel, A. K. Chavali, P. Dobson, W. B. Dunn, L. Endler, D. Hala, M. Hucka, D. Hull, D. Jameson, N. Jamshidi, J. J. Jon- sson, N. Juty, S. Keating, I. Nookaew, N. Le Novère, N. Malys, A. Mazein, J. A. Papin, N. D. Price, E. Selkov, M. I. Sigurdsson, E. Simeonidis, N. Son- nenschein, K. Smallbone, A. Sorokin, J. H. G. M. van Beek, D. Weichart, I. Goryanin, J. Nielsen, H. V. Westerhoff, D. B. Kell, P. Mendes, and B. Ø. Palsson, "A community-driven global reconstruction of human metabolism," Nature Biotechnology, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 419-425, 2013. REFERENCES 47

Towards a knowledge-based human protein atlas. M Uhlen, P Oksvold, L Fagerberg, E Lundberg, K Jonasson, M Forsberg, M Zwahlen, C Kampf, K Wester, S Hober, H Wernerus, L Björling, F Ponten, Nature Biotechnology. 2812M. Uhlen, P. Oksvold, L. Fagerberg, E. Lundberg, K. Jonasson, M. Forsberg, M. Zwahlen, C. Kampf, K. Wester, S. Hober, H. Wernerus, L. Björling, and F. Ponten, "Towards a knowledge-based human protein atlas," Nature Biotech- nology, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 1248-1250, 2010.

DrugBank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug targets. D S Wishart, C Knox, A C Guo, D Cheng, S Shrivastava, D Tzur, B Gautam, M Hassanali, Nucleic Acids Research. 36suppl 1D. S. Wishart, C. Knox, A. C. Guo, D. Cheng, S. Shrivastava, D. Tzur, B. Gau- tam, and M. Hassanali, "DrugBank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug targets," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 36, no. suppl 1, pp. D901- D906, 2008.

MetaboAnalyst 4.0: towards more transparent and integrative metabolomics analysis. J Chong, O Soufan, C Li, I Caraus, S Li, G Bourque, D S Wishart, J Xia, Nucleic Acids Research. 46W1J. Chong, O. Soufan, C. Li, I. Caraus, S. Li, G. Bourque, D. S. Wishart, and J. Xia, "MetaboAnalyst 4.0: towards more transparent and integrative metabolomics analysis," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 46, no. W1, pp. W486- W494, 2018.

HMDB: a knowledgebase for the human metabolome. D S Wishart, C Knox, A C Guo, R Eisner, N Young, B Gautam, D D Hau, N Psychogios, E Dong, S Bouatra, R Mandal, I Sinelnikov, J Xia, L Jia, J A Cruz, E Lim, C A Sobsey, S Shrivastava, P Huang, P Liu, L Fang, J Peng, R Fradette, D Cheng, D Tzur, M Clements, A Lewis, A Souza, A Zuniga, M Dawe, Y Xiong, D Clive, R Greiner, A Nazyrova, R Shaykhutdinov, L Li, H J Vogel, I Forsythe, Nucleic Acids Research. 37suppl 1D. S. Wishart, C. Knox, A. C. Guo, R. Eisner, N. Young, B. Gautam, D. D. Hau, N. Psychogios, E. Dong, S. Bouatra, R. Mandal, I. Sinelnikov, J. Xia, L. Jia, J. A. Cruz, E. Lim, C. A. Sobsey, S. Shrivastava, P. Huang, P. Liu, L. Fang, J. Peng, R. Fradette, D. Cheng, D. Tzur, M. Clements, A. Lewis, A. De Souza, A. Zuniga, M. Dawe, Y. Xiong, D. Clive, R. Greiner, A. Nazy- rova, R. Shaykhutdinov, L. Li, H. J. Vogel, and I. Forsythe, "HMDB: a knowl- edgebase for the human metabolome," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 37, no. suppl 1, pp. D603-D610, 2009.

Integrated pathway-level analysis of transcriptomics and metabolomics data with IMPaLA. A Kamburov, R Cavill, T M Ebbels, R Herwig, H C Keun, Bioinformatics. 2720A. Kamburov, R. Cavill, T. M. Ebbels, R. Herwig, and H. C. Keun, "Inte- grated pathway-level analysis of transcriptomics and metabolomics data with IMPaLA," Bioinformatics, vol. 27, no. 20, pp. 2917-2918, 2011.

A gene expression database for the molecular pharmacology of cancer. U Scherf, D T Ross, M Waltham, L H Smith, J K Lee, L Tanabe, K W Kohn, W C Reinhold, T G Myers, D T Andrews, D A Scudiero, M B Eisen, E A Sausville, Y Pommier, D Botstein, P O Brown, J N Weinstein, Nature Genetics. 243U. Scherf, D. T. Ross, M. Waltham, L. H. Smith, J. K. Lee, L. Tanabe, K. W. Kohn, W. C. Reinhold, T. G. Myers, D. T. Andrews, D. A. Scudiero, M. B. Eisen, E. A. Sausville, Y. Pommier, D. Botstein, P. O. Brown, and J. N. Weinstein, "A gene expression database for the molecular pharmacology of cancer," Nature Genetics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 236-244, 2000.

E-CELL: software environment for whole-cell simulation. M Tomita, K Hashimoto, K Takahashi, T S Shimizu, Y Matsuzaki, F Miyoshi, K Saito, S Tanida, K Yugi, J C Venter, R Hutchison, C , Bioinformatics. 151M. Tomita, K. Hashimoto, K. Takahashi, T. S. Shimizu, Y. Matsuzaki, F. Miyoshi, K. Saito, S. Tanida, K. Yugi, J. C. Venter, and r. Hutchison, C A, "E-CELL: software environment for whole-cell simulation," Bioinformatics, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 72-84, 1999.

Mycoplasma genitalium: whole genome sequence analysis, recombination and population structure. M C Fookes, J Hadfield, S Harris, S Parmar, M Unemo, J S Jensen, N R Thomson, BMC Genomics. 181M. C. Fookes, J. Hadfield, S. Harris, S. Parmar, M. Unemo, J. S. Jensen, and N. R. Thomson, "Mycoplasma genitalium: whole genome sequence analysis, recombination and population structure," BMC Genomics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1-11, 2017.

iDINGO-integrative differential network analysis in genomics with shiny application. C A Class, M J Ha, V Baladandayuthapani, K.-A Do, Bioinformatics. 347C. A. Class, M. J. Ha, V. Baladandayuthapani, and K.-A. Do, "iDINGO-integrative differential network analysis in genomics with shiny application," Bioinformatics, vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 1243-1245, 2018.

Escher: a web application for building, sharing, and embedding data-rich visualizations of biological pathways. Z A King, A Dräger, A Ebrahim, N Sonnenschein, N E Lewis, B O Palsson, PLOS Computational Biology. 1181004321Z. A. King, A. Dräger, A. Ebrahim, N. Sonnenschein, N. E. Lewis, and B. O. Palsson, "Escher: a web application for building, sharing, and embedding data-rich visualizations of biological pathways," PLOS Computational Biol- ogy, vol. 11, no. 8, p. e1004321, 2015.

Recon3D enables a threedimensional view of gene variation in human metabolism. E Brunk, S Sahoo, D C Zielinski, A Altunkaya, A Dräger, N Mih, F Gatto, A Nilsson, G A Gonzalez, M K Aurich, A Prlić, A Sastry, A D Danielsdottir, A Heinken, A Noronha, P W Rose, S K Burley, R M T Fleming, J Nielsen, I Thiele, B O Palsson, Nature Biotechnology. 363E. Brunk, S. Sahoo, D. C. Zielinski, A. Altunkaya, A. Dräger, N. Mih, F. Gatto, A. Nilsson, G. A. Preciat Gonzalez, M. K. Aurich, A. Prlić, A. Sastry, A. D. Danielsdottir, A. Heinken, A. Noronha, P. W. Rose, S. K. Burley, R. M. T. Fleming, J. Nielsen, I. Thiele, and B. O. Palsson, "Recon3D enables a three- dimensional view of gene variation in human metabolism," Nature Biotechnol- ogy, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 272-281, 2018.

K Sidiropoulos, G Viteri, C Sevilla, S Jupe, M Webber, M Orlic-Milacic, B Jassal, B May, V Shamovsky, C Duenas, K Rothfels, L Matthews, H Song, L Stein, R Haw, P D&apos;eustachio, P Ping, H Hermjakob, A Fabregat, Reactome enhanced pathway visualization. 33K. Sidiropoulos, G. Viteri, C. Sevilla, S. Jupe, M. Webber, M. Orlic-Milacic, B. Jassal, B. May, V. Shamovsky, C. Duenas, K. Rothfels, L. Matthews, H. Song, L. Stein, R. Haw, P. D'Eustachio, P. Ping, H. Hermjakob, and A. Fab- regat, "Reactome enhanced pathway visualization," Bioinformatics, vol. 33, no. 21, pp. 3461-3467, 2017.

Utilization of soluble starch by a recombinant corynebacterium glutamicum strain: growth and lysine production. G Seibold, M Auchter, S Berens, J Kalinowski, B J Eikmanns, Journal of Biotechnology. 1242G. Seibold, M. Auchter, S. Berens, J. Kalinowski, and B. J. Eikmanns, "Utiliza- tion of soluble starch by a recombinant corynebacterium glutamicum strain: growth and lysine production," Journal of Biotechnology, vol. 124, no. 2, pp. 381-391, 2006.

Genome-scale metabolic modelling of hepatocytes reveals serine deficiency in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. A Mardinoglu, R Agren, C Kampf, A Asplund, M Uhlen, J Nielsen, Nature Communications. 51A. Mardinoglu, R. Agren, C. Kampf, A. Asplund, M. Uhlen, and J. Nielsen, "Genome-scale metabolic modelling of hepatocytes reveals serine deficiency in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease," Nature Communications, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-11, 2014.

GIM3E: condition-specific models of cellular metabolism developed from metabolomics and expression data. B J Schmidt, A Ebrahim, T O Metz, J N Adkins, B Ø Palsson, D R Hyduke, Bioinformatics. 2922B. J. Schmidt, A. Ebrahim, T. O. Metz, J. N. Adkins, B. Ø. Palsson, and D. R. Hyduke, "GIM3E: condition-specific models of cellular metabolism developed from metabolomics and expression data," Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 22, pp. 2900-2908, 2013.

Metabolic and transcriptional response to cofactor perturbations in escherichia coil. A K Holm, L M Blank, M Oldiges, A Schmid, C Solem, P R Jensen, G N Vemuri, Journal of Biological Chemistry. 28523A. K. Holm, L. M. Blank, M. Oldiges, A. Schmid, C. Solem, P. R. Jensen, and G. N. Vemuri, "Metabolic and transcriptional response to cofactor perturba- tions in escherichia coil," Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 285, no. 23, pp. 17 498-17 506, 2010.

3Omics: a web-based systems biology tool for analysis, integration and visualization of human transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data. T.-C Kuo, T.-F Tian, Y J Tseng, BMC Systems Biology. 71T.-C. Kuo, T.-F. Tian, and Y. J. Tseng, "3Omics: a web-based systems biol- ogy tool for analysis, integration and visualization of human transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data," BMC Systems Biology, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2013.

Computational prediction of human metabolic pathways from the complete human genome. P Romero, J Wagg, M L Green, D Kaiser, M Krummenacker, P D Karp, Genome Biology. 61P. Romero, J. Wagg, M. L. Green, D. Kaiser, M. Krummenacker, and P. D. Karp, "Computational prediction of human metabolic pathways from the com- plete human genome," Genome Biology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-17, 2005.

Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using david bioinformatics resources. D W Huang, B T Sherman, R A Lempicki, Nature Protocols. 41D. W. Huang, B. T. Sherman, and R. A. Lempicki, "Systematic and integra- tive analysis of large gene lists using david bioinformatics resources," Nature Protocols, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 44-57, 2009.

Entrez gene: genecentered information at NCBI. D Maglott, J Ostell, K D Pruitt, T Tatusova, Nucleic Acids Research. 331D. Maglott, J. Ostell, K. D. Pruitt, and T. Tatusova, "Entrez gene: gene- centered information at NCBI," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 33, no. suppl 1, pp. D54-D58, 2005.

. R Apweiler, A Bairoch, C H Wu, W C Barker, B Boeckmann, S Ferro, E Gasteiger, H Huang, R Lopez, M Magrane, M J Martin, D A Natale, C O&apos;donovan, N Redaschi, L L Yeh, UniProt: the universal protein REFERENCES 49R. Apweiler, A. Bairoch, C. H. Wu, W. C. Barker, B. Boeckmann, S. Ferro, E. Gasteiger, H. Huang, R. Lopez, M. Magrane, M. J. Martin, D. A. Natale, C. O'Donovan, N. Redaschi, and L. L. Yeh, "UniProt: the universal protein REFERENCES 49

. Nucleic Acids Research. 32suppl 1knowledgebase," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 32, no. suppl 1, pp. D115-D119, 2004.

Extension of the visualization tool MapMan to allow statistical analysis of arrays, display of coresponding genes, and comparison with known responses. B Usadel, A Nagel, O Thimm, H Redestig, O E Blaesing, N Palacios-Rojas, J Selbig, J Hannemann, M C Piques, D Steinhauser, W.-R Scheible, Y Gibon, R Morcuende, D Weicht, S Meyer, M Stitt, Plant Physiology. 1383B. Usadel, A. Nagel, O. Thimm, H. Redestig, O. E. Blaesing, N. Palacios- Rojas, J. Selbig, J. Hannemann, M. C. Piques, D. Steinhauser, W.-R. Scheible, Y. Gibon, R. Morcuende, D. Weicht, S. Meyer, and M. Stitt, "Extension of the visualization tool MapMan to allow statistical analysis of arrays, display of coresponding genes, and comparison with known responses," Plant Physiology, vol. 138, no. 3, pp. 1195-1204, 2005.

The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): a model organism database providing a centralized, curated gateway to arabidopsis biology, research materials and community. S Y Rhee, W Beavis, T Z Berardini, G Chen, D Dixon, A Doyle, M Garcia-Hernandez, E Huala, G Lander, M Montoya, N Miller, L A Mueller, S Mundodi, L Reiser, J Tacklind, D C Weems, Y Wu, I Xu, D Yoo, J Yoon, P Zhang, Nucleic Acids Research. 311S. Y. Rhee, W. Beavis, T. Z. Berardini, G. Chen, D. Dixon, A. Doyle, M. Garcia-Hernandez, E. Huala, G. Lander, M. Montoya, N. Miller, L. A. Mueller, S. Mundodi, L. Reiser, J. Tacklind, D. C. Weems, Y. Wu, I. Xu, D. Yoo, J. Yoon, and P. Zhang, "The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): a model organism database providing a centralized, curated gate- way to arabidopsis biology, research materials and community," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 224-228, 2003.

Cell illustrator 4.0: a computational platform for systems biology. M Nagasaki, A Saito, E Jeong, C Li, K Kojima, E Ikeda, S Miyano, In Silico Biology. 101-2M. Nagasaki, A. Saito, E. Jeong, C. Li, K. Kojima, E. Ikeda, and S. Miyano, "Cell illustrator 4.0: a computational platform for systems biology," In Silico Biology, vol. 10, no. 1-2, pp. 5-26, 2010.

Interactive big data resource to elucidate human immune pathways and diseases. D Gorenshteyn, E Zaslavsky, M Fribourg, C Park, A Wong, A Tadych, B Hartmann, R Albrecht, A García-Sastre, S Kleinstein, O Troyanskaya, S Sealfon, Immunity. 433D. Gorenshteyn, E. Zaslavsky, M. Fribourg, C. Park, A. Wong, A. Tadych, B. Hartmann, R. Albrecht, A. García-Sastre, S. Kleinstein, O. Troyanskaya, and S. Sealfon, "Interactive big data resource to elucidate human immune pathways and diseases," Immunity, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 605-614, 2015.

BioGRID: a general repository for interaction datasets. C Stark, B.-J Breitkreutz, T Reguly, L Boucher, A Breitkreutz, M Tyers, Nucleic Acids Research. 34suppl 1C. Stark, B.-J. Breitkreutz, T. Reguly, L. Boucher, A. Breitkreutz, and M. Ty- ers, "BioGRID: a general repository for interaction datasets," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 34, no. suppl 1, pp. D535-D539, 2006.

Methods for biological data integration: perspectives and challenges. V Gligorijević, N Pržulj, Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 1211220150571V. Gligorijević and N. Pržulj, "Methods for biological data integration: per- spectives and challenges," Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol. 12, no. 112, p. 20150571, 2015.

Combining molecular and imaging metrics in cancer: radiogenomics. R Lo Gullo, I Daimiel, E A Morris, K Pinker, Insights into Imaging. 111R. Lo Gullo, I. Daimiel, E. A. Morris, and K. Pinker, "Combining molecular and imaging metrics in cancer: radiogenomics," Insights into Imaging, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-17, 2020.

Z Bodalal, S Trebeschi, T D L Nguyen-Kim, W Schats, R Beets-Tan, Radiogenomics: bridging imaging and genomics. 44Z. Bodalal, S. Trebeschi, T. D. L. Nguyen-Kim, W. Schats, and R. Beets- Tan, "Radiogenomics: bridging imaging and genomics," Abdominal Radiology, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 1960-1984, 2019.

Plant photosynthesis phenomics data quality control. L Xu, J A Cruz, L J Savage, D M Kramer, J Chen, Bioinformatics. 3111L. Xu, J. A. Cruz, L. J. Savage, D. M. Kramer, and J. Chen, "Plant photo- synthesis phenomics data quality control," Bioinformatics, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1796-1804, 2015.

Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma. D A Levine, Nature. 4977447D. A. Levine, "Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma," Nature, vol. 497, no. 7447, pp. 67-73, 2013.

Comprehensive molecular characterization of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Nature. 4997456The Cancer Genome Atlas Research NetworkThe Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, "Comprehensive molecular char- acterization of clear cell renal cell carcinoma," Nature, vol. 499, no. 7456, pp. 43-49, 2013.

Comprehensive molecular char-50 REFERENCES acterization of urothelial bladder carcinoma. Nature. 5077492The Cancer Genome Atlas Research NetworkThe Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, "Comprehensive molecular char- 50 REFERENCES acterization of urothelial bladder carcinoma," Nature, vol. 507, no. 7492, pp. 315-322, 2014.

. D S Wishart, Y D Feunang, A Marcu, A C Guo, K Liang, R Vázquez-Fresno, T Sajed, D Johnson, C Li, N Karu, Z Sayeeda, E Lo, N Assempour, M Berjanskii, S Singhal, D Arndt, Y Liang, H Badran, J Grant, A Serra-Cayuela, Y Liu, R Mandal, V Neveu, A Pon, C Knox, M Wilson, C Manach, A Scalbert, Nucleic Acids Research. 46D1HMDB 4.0: the human metabolome databaseD. S. Wishart, Y. D. Feunang, A. Marcu, A. C. Guo, K. Liang, R. Vázquez- Fresno, T. Sajed, D. Johnson, C. Li, N. Karu, Z. Sayeeda, E. Lo, N. Assem- pour, M. Berjanskii, S. Singhal, D. Arndt, Y. Liang, H. Badran, J. Grant, A. Serra-Cayuela, Y. Liu, R. Mandal, V. Neveu, A. Pon, C. Knox, M. Wilson, C. Manach, and A. Scalbert, "HMDB 4.0: the human metabolome database for 2018," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 46, no. D1, pp. D608-D617, 2018.

Protein Data Bank (PDB): database of three-dimensional structural information of biological macromolecules. J L Sussman, D Lin, J Jiang, N O Manning, J Prilusky, O Ritter, E E Abola, Acta Crystallographica Section D: Biological Crystallography. 546J. L. Sussman, D. Lin, J. Jiang, N. O. Manning, J. Prilusky, O. Ritter, and E. E. Abola, "Protein Data Bank (PDB): database of three-dimensional struc- tural information of biological macromolecules," Acta Crystallographica Sec- tion D: Biological Crystallography, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1078-1084, 1998.

The worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB): ensuring a single, uniform archive of PDB data. H Berman, K Henrick, H Nakamura, J L Markley, Nucleic Acids Research. 35suppl 1H. Berman, K. Henrick, H. Nakamura, and J. L. Markley, "The worldwide Pro- tein Data Bank (wwPDB): ensuring a single, uniform archive of PDB data," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 35, no. suppl 1, pp. D301-D303, 2007.

A series of PDB-related databanks for everyday needs. W G Touw, C Baakman, J Black, T A Beek, E Krieger, R P Joosten, G Vriend, Nucleic Acids Research. 43D1W. G. Touw, C. Baakman, J. Black, T. A. Te Beek, E. Krieger, R. P. Joosten, and G. Vriend, "A series of PDB-related databanks for everyday needs," Nu- cleic Acids Research, vol. 43, no. D1, pp. D364-D368, 2015.

The biology and management of non-small cell lung cancer. R S Herbst, D Morgensztern, C Boshoff, Nature. 5537689R. S. Herbst, D. Morgensztern, and C. Boshoff, "The biology and management of non-small cell lung cancer," Nature, vol. 553, no. 7689, pp. 446-454, 2018.

Non-small-cell lung cancer. P Goldstraw, D Ball, J R Jett, T Le Chevalier, E Lim, A G Nicholson, F A Shepherd, The Lancet. 3789804P. Goldstraw, D. Ball, J. R. Jett, T. Le Chevalier, E. Lim, A. G. Nicholson, and F. A. Shepherd, "Non-small-cell lung cancer," The Lancet, vol. 378, no. 9804, pp. 1727-1740, 2011.

The NCI60 human tumour cell line anticancer drug screen. R H Shoemaker, Nature Reviews Cancer. 610R. H. Shoemaker, "The NCI60 human tumour cell line anticancer drug screen," Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 813-823, 2006.

International network of cancer genome projects. Nature. 4647291The International Cancer Genome ConsortiumThe International Cancer Genome Consortium, "International network of can- cer genome projects," Nature, vol. 464, no. 7291, pp. 993-998, 2010.

C L Schoch, S Ciufo, M Domrachev, C L Hotton, S Kannan, R Khovanskaya, D Leipe, R Mcveigh, K O&apos;neill, B Robbertse, S Sharma, V Soussov, J P Sullivan, L Sun, S Turner, I Karsch-Mizrachi, NCBI taxonomy: a comprehensive update on curation, resources and tools. 121C. L. Schoch, S. Ciufo, M. Domrachev, C. L. Hotton, S. Kannan, R. Khovan- skaya, D. Leipe, R. Mcveigh, K. O'Neill, B. Robbertse, S. Sharma, V. Soussov, J. P. Sullivan, L. Sun, S. Turner, and I. Karsch-Mizrachi, "NCBI taxonomy: a comprehensive update on curation, resources and tools," Database, vol. 1, p. 21, 2020.

GWAS Atlas: a curated resource of genome-wide variant-trait associations in plants and animals. D Tian, P Wang, B Tang, X Teng, C Li, X Liu, D Zou, S Song, Z Zhang, Nucleic Acids Research. 48D1D. Tian, P. Wang, B. Tang, X. Teng, C. Li, X. Liu, D. Zou, S. Song, and Z. Zhang, "GWAS Atlas: a curated resource of genome-wide variant-trait as- sociations in plants and animals," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 48, no. D1, pp. D927-D932, 2020.

Visualizing and interpreting cancer genomics data via the xena platform. M J Goldman, B Craft, M Hastie, K Repečka, F Mcdade, A Kamath, A Banerjee, Y Luo, D Rogers, A N Brooks, J Zhu, D Haussler, Nature Biotechnology. 386M. J. Goldman, B. Craft, M. Hastie, K. Repečka, F. McDade, A. Kamath, A. Banerjee, Y. Luo, D. Rogers, A. N. Brooks, J. Zhu, and D. Haussler, "Vi- sualizing and interpreting cancer genomics data via the xena platform," Nature Biotechnology, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 675-678, 2020.

A new ontology lookup service at EMBL-EBI. S Jupp, T Burdett, C Leroy, H E Parkinson, Workshop on Semantic Web Applications and Tools for Life Sciences. 2REFERENCES 51S. Jupp, T. Burdett, C. Leroy, and H. E. Parkinson, "A new ontology lookup service at EMBL-EBI," in Workshop on Semantic Web Applications and Tools for Life Sciences, vol. 2, 2015, pp. 118-119. REFERENCES 51

Discovering and linking public omics data sets using the omics discovery index. Y Perez-Riverol, M Bai, F Da Veiga Leprevost, S Squizzato, Y M Park, K Haug, A J Carroll, D Spalding, J Paschall, M Wang, N Toro, T Ternent, P Zhang, N Buso, N Bandeira, E W Deutsch, D S Campbell, R C Beavis, R M Salek, U Sarkans, R Petryszak, M Keays, E Fahy, M Sud, S Subramaniam, A Barbera, R C Jiménez, A I Nesvizhskii, S.-A Sansone, C Steinbeck, R Lopez, J A Vizcaíno, P Ping, H Hermjakob, Nature Biotechnology. 355Y. Perez-Riverol, M. Bai, F. da Veiga Leprevost, S. Squizzato, Y. M. Park, K. Haug, A. J. Carroll, D. Spalding, J. Paschall, M. Wang, N. del Toro, T. Ter- nent, P. Zhang, N. Buso, N. Bandeira, E. W. Deutsch, D. S. Campbell, R. C. Beavis, R. M. Salek, U. Sarkans, R. Petryszak, M. Keays, E. Fahy, M. Sud, S. Subramaniam, A. Barbera, R. C. Jiménez, A. I. Nesvizhskii, S.-A. Sansone, C. Steinbeck, R. Lopez, J. A. Vizcaíno, P. Ping, and H. Hermjakob, "Dis- covering and linking public omics data sets using the omics discovery index," Nature Biotechnology, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 406-409, 2017.

Multi-omic and multi-view clustering algorithms: review and cancer benchmark. N Rappoport, R Shamir, Nucleic Acids Research. 4620N. Rappoport and R. Shamir, "Multi-omic and multi-view clustering algo- rithms: review and cancer benchmark," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 46, no. 20, pp. 10 546-10 562, 2018.

The international cancer genome consortium data portal. J Zhang, R Bajari, D Andric, F Gerthoffert, A Lepsa, H Nahal-Bose, L D Stein, V Ferretti, Nature Biotechnology. 374J. Zhang, R. Bajari, D. Andric, F. Gerthoffert, A. Lepsa, H. Nahal-Bose, L. D. Stein, and V. Ferretti, "The international cancer genome consortium data portal," Nature Biotechnology, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 367-369, 2019.

Toward a shared vision for cancer genomic data. R L Grossman, A P Heath, V Ferretti, H E Varmus, D R Lowy, W A Kibbe, L M Staudt, New England Journal of Medicine. 37512R. L. Grossman, A. P. Heath, V. Ferretti, H. E. Varmus, D. R. Lowy, W. A. Kibbe, and L. M. Staudt, "Toward a shared vision for cancer genomic data," New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 375, no. 12, pp. 1109-1112, 2016.

The genome portal of the department of energy joint genome institute: 2014 updates. H Nordberg, M Cantor, S Dusheyko, S Hua, A Poliakov, I Shabalov, T Smirnova, I V Grigoriev, I Dubchak, Nucleic Acids Research. 42D1H. Nordberg, M. Cantor, S. Dusheyko, S. Hua, A. Poliakov, I. Shabalov, T. Smirnova, I. V. Grigoriev, and I. Dubchak, "The genome portal of the department of energy joint genome institute: 2014 updates," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 42, no. D1, pp. D26-D31, 2014.

The European genomephenome archive in 2021. M A Freeberg, L A Fromont, T D&apos;altri, A F Romero, J Ciges, A Jene, G Kerry, M Moldes, R Ariosa, S Bahena, D Barrowdale, M Barbero, D Fernandez-Orth, C Garcia-Linares, E Garcia-Rios, F Haziza, B Juhasz, O Llobet, G Milla, A Mohan, M Rueda, A Sankar, D Shaju, A Shimpi, B Singh, C Thomas, S De La Torre, U Uyan, C Vasallo, P Flicek, R Guigo, A Navarro, H Parkinson, T Keane, J Rambla, Nucleic Acids Eesearch. 50D1M. A. Freeberg, L. A. Fromont, T. D'Altri, A. F. Romero, J. Ciges, A. Jene, G. Kerry, M. Moldes, R. Ariosa, S. Bahena, D. Barrowdale, M. Barbero, D. Fernandez-Orth, C. Garcia-Linares, E. Garcia-Rios, F. Haziza, B. Juhasz, O. Llobet, G. Milla, A. Mohan, M. Rueda, A. Sankar, D. Shaju, A. Shimpi, B. Singh, C. Thomas, S. de la Torre, U. Uyan, C. Vasallo, P. Flicek, R. Guigo, A. Navarro, H. Parkinson, T. Keane, and J. Rambla, "The European genome- phenome archive in 2021," Nucleic Acids Eesearch, vol. 50, no. D1, pp. D980- D987, 2022.

Defining a cancer dependency map. A Tsherniak, F Vazquez, P G Montgomery, B A Weir, G Kryukov, G S Cowley, S Gill, W F Harrington, S Pantel, J M Krill-Burger, R M Meyers, L Ali, A Goodale, Y Lee, G Jiang, J Hsiao, W F Gerath, S Howell, E Merkel, M Ghandi, L A Garraway, D E Root, T R Golub, J S Boehm, W C Hahn, Cell. 1703A. Tsherniak, F. Vazquez, P. G. Montgomery, B. A. Weir, G. Kryukov, G. S. Cowley, S. Gill, W. F. Harrington, S. Pantel, J. M. Krill-Burger, R. M. Meyers, L. Ali, A. Goodale, Y. Lee, G. Jiang, J. Hsiao, W. F. Gerath, S. Howell, E. Merkel, M. Ghandi, L. A. Garraway, D. E. Root, T. R. Golub, J. S. Boehm, and W. C. Hahn, "Defining a cancer dependency map," Cell, vol. 170, no. 3, pp. 564-576, 2017.

Connecting omics signatures and revealing biological mechanisms with iLINCS. M Pilarczyk, M Fazel-Najafabadi, M Kouril, B Shamsaei, J Vasiliauskas, W Niu, N Mahi, L Zhang, N A Clark, Y Ren, S White, R Karim, H Xu, J Biesiada, M F Bennett, S E Davidson, J F Reichard, K Roberts, V Stathias, A Koleti, D Vidovic, D J B Clarke, S C Schürer, A Ma&apos;ayan, J Meller, M Medvedovic, Nature Communications. 1314678M. Pilarczyk, M. Fazel-Najafabadi, M. Kouril, B. Shamsaei, J. Vasiliauskas, W. Niu, N. Mahi, L. Zhang, N. A. Clark, Y. Ren, S. White, R. Karim, H. Xu, J. Biesiada, M. F. Bennett, S. E. Davidson, J. F. Reichard, K. Roberts, V. Stathias, A. Koleti, D. Vidovic, D. J. B. Clarke, S. C. Schürer, A. Ma'ayan, J. Meller, and M. Medvedovic, "Connecting omics signatures and revealing biological mechanisms with iLINCS," Nature Communications, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 4678, 2022.

LinkedOmics: analyzing 52 REFERENCES multi-omics data within and across 32 cancer types. S V Vasaikar, P Straub, J Wang, B Zhang, Nucleic Acids Research. 46D1S. V. Vasaikar, P. Straub, J. Wang, and B. Zhang, "LinkedOmics: analyzing 52 REFERENCES multi-omics data within and across 32 cancer types," Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 46, no. D1, pp. D956-D963, 2018.

Knowledge-primed neural networks enable biologically interpretable deep learning on single-cell sequencing data. N Fortelny, C Bock, Genome Biology. 211N. Fortelny and C. Bock, "Knowledge-primed neural networks enable bio- logically interpretable deep learning on single-cell sequencing data," Genome Biology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1-36, 2020.

NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by linking ligands to target genes. R Browaeys, W Saelens, Y Saeys, Nature Methods. 172R. Browaeys, W. Saelens, and Y. Saeys, "NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by linking ligands to target genes," Nature Methods, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 159-162, 2020.

Transcription factors: bridge between cell signaling and gene regulation. P Weidemüller, M Kholmatov, E Petsalaki, J B Zaugg, Proteomics. 2123-242000034P. Weidemüller, M. Kholmatov, E. Petsalaki, and J. B. Zaugg, "Transcription factors: bridge between cell signaling and gene regulation," Proteomics, vol. 21, no. 23-24, p. 2000034, 2021.

ELIXIR: a distributed infrastructure for european biological data. L C Crosswell, J M Thornton, Trends Biotechnol. 305L. C. Crosswell and J. M. Thornton, "ELIXIR: a distributed infrastructure for european biological data," Trends Biotechnol, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 241-242, 2012.

. N P Hong, D S Katz, M Barker, A.-L Lamprecht, C Martinez, F E Psomopoulos, J Harrow, L J Castro, M Gruenpeter, P A Martinez, T Honeyman, A Struck, A Lee, A Loewe, B Van Werkhoven, C Jones, D Garijo, E Plomp, F Genova, H Shanahan, J Leng, M Hellström, M Sandström, M Sinha, M Kuzak, P Herterich, Q Zhang, S Islam, S.-A Sansone, T Pollard, U D Atmojo, A Williams, A Czerniak, A Niehues, A C Fouilloux, B Desinghu, C Goble, C Richard, C Gray, C Erdmann, D Nüst, D Tartarini, E Ranguelova, H Anzt, I Todorov, J Mcnally, J Moldon, J Burnett, J Garrido-Sánchez, K Belhajjame, L Sesink, L Hwang, M R Tovani-Palone, M D Wilkinson, M Servillat, M Liffers, M Fox, N Miljković, N Lynch, P Martinez Lavanchy, S Gesing, S Stevens, S Martinez Cuesta, S Peroni, S Soiland-Reyes, T Bakker, T Rabemanantsoa, V Sochat, Y Yehudi, R F Wg, 10.15497/RDA00068FAIR principles for research software (FAIR4RS principles)," 2022. [OnlineN. P. Chue Hong, D. S. Katz, M. Barker, A.-L. Lamprecht, C. Martinez, F. E. Psomopoulos, J. Harrow, L. J. Castro, M. Gruenpeter, P. A. Martinez, T. Honeyman, A. Struck, A. Lee, A. Loewe, B. van Werkhoven, C. Jones, D. Garijo, E. Plomp, F. Genova, H. Shanahan, J. Leng, M. Hellström, M. Sandström, M. Sinha, M. Kuzak, P. Herterich, Q. Zhang, S. Islam, S.-A. Sansone, T. Pollard, U. D. Atmojo, A. Williams, A. Czerniak, A. Niehues, A. C. Fouilloux, B. Desinghu, C. Goble, C. Richard, C. Gray, C. Erdmann, D. Nüst, D. Tartarini, E. Ranguelova, H. Anzt, I. Todorov, J. McNally, J. Moldon, J. Burnett, J. Garrido-Sánchez, K. Belhajjame, L. Sesink, L. Hwang, M. R. Tovani-Palone, M. D. Wilkinson, M. Servillat, M. Liffers, M. Fox, N. Miljković, N. Lynch, P. Martinez Lavanchy, S. Gesing, S. Stevens, S. Martinez Cuesta, S. Peroni, S. Soiland-Reyes, T. Bakker, T. Rabemanantsoa, V. Sochat, Y. Yehudi, and R. F. WG, "FAIR principles for research software (FAIR4RS principles)," 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068