# D R A F T Where the Minor Things Are: A Pan-Eukaryotic Survey Suggests Neutral Processes May Dominate Minor Spliceosomal Intron Evolution

CorpusID: 254247979
 
tags: #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88926803eeb69f68a8cf414bc6b9132503bd5333](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88926803eeb69f68a8cf414bc6b9132503bd5333)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

D R A F T Where the Minor Things Are: A Pan-Eukaryotic Survey Suggests Neutral Processes May Dominate Minor Spliceosomal Intron Evolution


Graham E Larue 
Quantitative and Systems Biology Graduate Program
University of California Merced
MercedCAUSA

Scott W Roy scottwroy@gmail.com 
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology
University of California Merced
MercedCAUSA

D R A F T Where the Minor Things Are: A Pan-Eukaryotic Survey Suggests Neutral Processes May Dominate Minor Spliceosomal Intron Evolution

Spliceosomal introns are gene segments removed ("spliced") from RNA transcripts by large ribonucleoprotein machineries called spliceosomes. In some eukaryotes a second spliceosome (the minor/ U12-type) is responsible for processing a tiny minority of introns. Despite its seemingly modest role, minor splicing has persisted for roughly 1.5 billion years of eukaryotic evolution. Identifying and cataloging minor introns in > 3000 eukaryotic genomes, we report diverse evolutionary histories including surprisingly high numbers of minor introns in some fungi and green algae, repeated massive loss, as well as several general biases in the positional and genic distributions of minor introns. We estimate that ancestral minor intron densities were comparable to those of the most minor intron-rich species, suggesting a trend of long-term stasis. Finally, three findings suggest a major role for neutral processes in minor intron evolution. First, we find highly similar patterns of minor and major intron evolution, in contrast to the predictions of both functionalist and deleterious models. Second, we find that observed functional biases among minor intron-containing genes are largely explained by these genes' greater ages. Third, we find no association of intron splicing with cell proliferation in a minor intronrich fungus, suggesting that regulatory roles are lineage-specific and thus cannot offer a general explanation for minor splicing's persistence. These data constitute the most comprehensive view to date of modern minor introns, their evolutionary history, and the forces shaping minor splicing, and provide a foundation for future studies of these remarkable genomic elements.minor introns | U12-type introns | intron evolution | spliceosomal introns | minor spliceosome | U12-type | bioinformaticsCorrespondence: graham@glarue.net,

# Introduction

Spliceosomal introns are sequences in eukaryotic genes that are removed (spliced) from the pre-mRNA transcripts of genes by machinery known as the spliceosome prior to maturation and nuclear export of the final mRNA [92,51,37]. For the better part of a decade after spliceosomal introns (hereafter simply introns) were first characterized in eukaryotic genomes [36,29,7,8,60], it was assumed that all introns shared a fixed set of consensus dinucleotide termini-GT at the beginning (5 ′ side) and AG at the end (3 ′ side)-and were processed by the same core machinery [54,34]. This view was revised after the discovery of a small number of introns with AT-AC termini [34,30], and shortly thereafter an entirely separate spliceosome was described that could process these aberrant introns [89,88], termed the U12 or minor spliceosome. The minor spliceosome, like its counterpart now known as the major/U2 spliceosome, has origins early in eukaryotic evolution [73]. Since minor introns were first documented as having AT-AC termini, it has been shown that the majority of minor introns in most species are in fact of the GT-AG subtype, although an increasing diversity of termini (so-called "non-canonical" introns, with boundaries that aren't GT-AG, GC-AG or AT-AC) seem to be able to be processed in certain contexts and to varying degrees by both spliceosomes [25,12,64,81,56]. Until very recently [41], in every genome investigated minor introns have been found to comprise only a tiny fraction (<∼0.05%) of the total set of introns; despite this, they have also been found to be well-conserved over hundreds of millions of years of evolution (e.g., 96% of minor introns in human are conserved in chicken, 83% in octopus (Fig. 2)).

While minor introns were almost certainly present in early eukaryotes [73] and are retained in a wide variety of eukaryotic lineages [48,56], to date only two lineages-animals and plants -are known to retain more than a few dozen minor introns [56]. Interestingly, in contrast to the massive minor intron loss observed in many lineages, minor intron complements in certain clades are remarkably evolutionarily stable. This contrasting pattern of retention versus massive loss raises a puzzle of minor spliceosomal intron function: if minor introns are not functionally important why are they almost entirely conserved over hundreds of millions of years in some lineages; yet if they are important, how can they be repeatedly decimated or lost entirely in other lineages?

Two observations are particularly relevant to the question of minor spliceosomal intron function. First, over the past ten or so years, some studies have proposed roles for minor introns in cellular differentiation, with decreased minor splicing activity driving downregulation of minor introncontaining genes (MIGs) associated with cessation of cell cycling [27,22,39]. Most compellingly, a recent study showed that the splicing regulator SR10 is regulated at the level of minor splicing, with inefficient splicing leading to downregu-lation of other SR proteins whose pro-splicing activities promote cell cycle progression [52]. Interestingly, a negative association of minor splicing with cell differentiation has also been argued for in plants [27,2]. This pattern is curious, given that the common ancestor of animals and plants is thought to have been unicellular and thus not to have undergone terminal differentiation (although recent findings of multicellular stages as well as differentiation-like processes across diverse eukaryotes may ultimately call this common assumption into question [57,9]).

Second, minor introns have been reported to show functional biases, being disproportionately found in genes encoding various core cellular functions including DNA repair, RNA processing, transcription and cell cycle functions that largely appear to hold between plants and animals [27,11] (though the strength of these associations is questioned somewhat in [5]). Particularly given the above evidence that regulation of minor splicing regulates core cellular processes, these patterns would seem to be consistent with an ancient role for minor splicing in cell cycle regulation, that could have been secondarily recruited for multicellular differentiation separately in animals and plants. However, other explanations remain possible. What is needed to understand the evolutionary history and importance of minor spliceosomal introns is genomic and regulatory characterization of additional lineages with relatively large complements of minor spliceosomal introns.

Because minor introns possess sequence motifs distinct from major introns [10,11], it is possible to identify them using sequence-based bioinformatic methods [56,1,11,3,80,43]. Previous studies have cataloged the presence/absence of minor introns/spliceosome components across multiple eukaryotic genomes using various custom tools, [48,3,80,1], but many of these studies were necessarily constrained in their analyses by the limits of the data available at the time, and by the lack of a published or otherwise convenient computational method to identify minor introns.

In this work, with the substantially larger and more diverse genomic datasets now publicly accessible coupled with the intron classification program intronIC [56], we have been able to aggregate minor intron presence/absence data with higher fidelity than earlier works across a much larger sample of eukaryotic species. By compiling a catalogue of minor introns across thousands of eukaryotic species, we provide an unprecedentedly general portrait of minor intron characteristics, diversity, and distribution, and test several important hypotheses about minor intron evolution and function. In addition, we use the discovery of hundreds of minor spliceosomal introns in a mycorrhizal fungus to characterize several features of the minor spliceosomal system across cell types, and suggest that the functional biases long observed in minor introns may largely be explained by the age bias of their parent genes.


# Methods


## Data acquisition

Genomes and annotations for 3,108 eukaryotic species were downloaded from the online databases hosted by NCBI (Ref-Seq and GenBank), JGI and Ensembl using custom Python scripts, and taxonomic information for each species was retrieved from the NCBI Taxonomy Database [24] using a Python script. We used NCBI as our primary resource, since it contains the largest number of species and in many cases serves as the upstream source for a number of other genome resources. Additional species available only from JGI and Ensembl were included for completeness, as were GenBank genomes with standard annotation files (GTF or GFF; species with only GBFF annotations were excluded). GenBank annotations in particular are of highly variable quality and may be preliminary, draft or otherwise incomplete, which is one of the reasons we chose to also include annotation BUSCO scores for all species. Accession numbers (where available) and retrieval dates of the data for each species are available under the following DOI: https://doi.org/10. 6084/m9.figshare.20483655.


## Identification of spliceosomal snRNAs

Each genome was searched for the presence of the minor snRNAs U11, U12, U4atac and U6atac using INFERNAL v1.3.3 [58] with covariance models retrieved from Rfam (RF00548, RF00007, RF00618, RF00619). The default Evalue cutoff of 0.01 was used to identify positive snRNA matches, and any snRNA with at least one match below the E-value cutoff was considered present.


## Classification of minor introns

For every genome with annotated introns, intronIC v1.2.3 [56] was used to identify putative minor introns using default settings which includes introns defined by exon features (e.g., introns in UTRs) and excludes any introns shorter than 30 nt. Although our substrate data includes UTR introns -at least some of which appear to be involved in the regulation of gene expression [6,16,84,79,50] -the analyses performed in this study include only introns in protein-coding regions of genes. UTR introns generally are an understudied class of introns, and almost nothing is known about minor introns in UTRs; exploring this in more detail would certainly be an exciting avenue for future research.


## Identification of orthologous introns

A set of custom software was used to identify orthologs between various species as described previously [41].

Briefly, transcriptomes for each species in a group were generated using the longest isoforms of each gene (https://github.com/glarue/cdseq). Then, the program reciprologs (https://github.com/ glarue/reciprologs) was used in conjunction with 2.5 Intron position within transcripts and intron phase DIAMOND v2.0.13 (flags: --very-sensitive --eva lue 1e-10) to identify reciprocal best hits (RBHs) between all pairs of species, and to construct an undirected graph using the RBHs as edges. The maximal cliques of such a graph represent orthologous clusters where all members are RBHs of one another. In certain cases, when only orthologous MIGs were required (as opposed to all orthologs), reciprologs was run as part of a pipeline using the --subset argument in combination with separately generated lists of MIGs for each species, which dramatically decreases runtime by constraining the query lists to only include MIGs (producing identical results to the subset of a full alignment containing MIGs). Full ortholog searches were required for all ancestral density reconstructions as well as all comparisons of minor and major intron conservation/loss (e.g., Fig. 5a).

Orthologous groups were aligned at the protein level using a combination of MAFFT v7.453 and Clustal Omega v1.2.4, and intron positions within the alignments were computed using a custom Python pipeline (following the approach in [68]). Local alignment quality of ≥ 40% conserved amino acid identity (without gaps) over a window of 10 residues both upstream and downstream of each intron position was required. Introns of the same type in the same position within orthologs so aligned were considered conserved. For the analyses of putative intron type conversions (e.g., minor-to-major), major introns were required to have scores ≤ −30 instead of the default threshold of 0 to minimize the inclusion of minor introns with borderline scores as major-type, and intron alignments containing introns with such borderline scores (a tiny fraction of the total alignments) were excluded. Intron sliding (the shifting of an individual intron's boundaries within a gene versus its ancestral location) [85] is not explicitly accounted for by our pipeline (an intron sliding event would be categorized as intron loss in the containing gene); however, this phenomenon is at most very rare and unlikely to meaningfully affect our results [63,67,85,77].


## Intron position within transcripts and intron phase

Included in the output of intronIC [56] is information about the relative position of each intron within its parent transcript, represented as a percentage of the total length of coding sequence, as well as intron phase (for introns defined by CDS features). These were extracted for every species and used in the associated analyses.


## Non-canonical minor introns

Species were first analyzed to assess the number of putative non-canonical minor introns they contained, and those with the highest numbers of non-canonical minor introns were used to perform multiple alignments of different pairs of species. From these alignments, all orthologous intron pairs with a minor intron (minor-minor or minor-major) were collected, and used to build clusters (subgraphs) of orthologous introns. For animals, human was used in a majority of the alignments to facilitate the generation of larger subgraphs (where the same intron shared between different pairwise alignments will group the alignments together); for plants, Elaeis guineensis served the same purpose.


## BUSCO analysis

Translated versions of the transcriptomes of all species were searched for broadly-conserved eukaryotic genes using BUSCO v5.3.2 [82] and the BUSCO lineage eukaryota_o db10. Complete BUSCO scores were then integrated into the overall dataset (e.g., Fig. 1 and Fig. 4).


## Curation of minor intron data/edge cases

Due to the number of genomes involved in our analyses, there may be some number of introns that appear superficially similar to minor introns simply by chance, and intronIC is unable to filter out such introns because it does not account for additional factors like local context, presence/absence of snRNAs, etc. In general this is not an issue, as the number of false-positive minor introns per genome is usually very small. However, when summarizing aggregate eukaryotic data and attempting to provide a resource to be used as a reference, we felt that some amount of curation was warranted to avoid the inclusion of obviously spurious results. We therefore used the following heuristics in deciding whether to designate a given species as either confidently containing or not containing minor introns-species not meeting either set of criteria were assigned a minor intron density color of gray in Fig. 1. First, it is important to note that intronIC will automatically try to adjust intron boundaries by a short distance if the starting boundaries are non-canonical and there is a strong minor 5 ′ SS motif within ∼10 bp of the annotated 5 ′ SS. In some poorly-annotated species, or species with otherwise aberrant intron motifs this can lead to increased false positives in the form of putatively minor introns with "corrected" splice boundaries. Such introns are documented by intronIC in the output, so it is possible to determine their proportion in the final number of minor introns reported. The criteria for presence of minor introns in our dataset is a corrected minor intron fraction of ≤ 0.25, ≥ 3 called minor introns and at least two minor snR-NAs.

The criteria for absence of minor introns (assigned the color black in the minor intron density color strip in Fig. 1) is either of the following: ≤ 3 called minor introns and fewer than two minor snRNAs; ≤ 5 called minor introns and fewer than two minor snRNAs and fewer than five uncorrected AT-AC minor introns and either annotated in RefSeq or with a BUSCO score greater than or equal to B Q1 − (1.5 × B IQR ), where B is all the BUSCO scores of the broad RefSeq category to which the species belongs (i.e., "vertebrates", "invertebrates", "plants", "protozoa", "fungi"), B Q1 is the first quartile of such scores and B IQR is the inner quartile range of such scores. The idea behind this metric is to only assign confident minor intron loss to species whose BUSCO scores aren't extremely low; very low BUSCO scores could indicate real gene loss or incomplete annotations, and neither of those scenarios forecloses on the possibility that the species may have minor introns (whereas a species with a high BUSCO score and a very low number of minor introns/minor snR-NAs is more likely to be genuinely lacking either/both). Finally, species with very low numbers of minor introns and minor snRNAs but very high minor intron densities (≥ 1%) were categorized as uncertain to account for a small number of edge cases with massive intron loss and spurious false positives that, due to the low number of total introns, misleadingly appear to be cases of outstandingly high minor intron density (e.g., Leishmania martiniquensis). Importantly, Fig. 1 still includes the raw values for each species matching the above criteria; it is only the minor intron density color which is adjusted to indicate lack of confidence.


## Calculation of summary statistics (introns/kbp CDS, transcript length, etc.)

Transcriptomes for all species were generated using a custom Python script (https://github.com/glarue/ cdseq). Briefly, each annotated transcript's length was calculated as the sum of its constituent CDS features, and the longest isoform for each gene was selected. The number of introns per transcript was computed based on the same data, and combined with the transcript length to calculate introns/kbp coding sequence for each gene. Intron lengths were extracted directly from intronIC output, as was intron phase and intron position as a fraction of transcript length (where the position of each intron, taken as the point position in the coding sequence where the intron occurs, is calculated as the cumulative sum of the preceding coding sequence divided by the total length of coding sequence in the transcript). For comparisons of intron densities and gene lengths of MIGs and non-MIGs, species with fewer than ten putative minor introns were excluded to avoid inclusion of spurious minor intron calls.


## Ancestral intron density reconstruction

Reconstructions of ancestral intron complements in different nodes was performed as described in [69]. Briefly, for a set of three species α, β and γ where γ is an outgroup to α and β (i.e., α and β are sister with respect to γ), introns shared between any pair of species are (under the assumption of negligible parallel intron gain) a priori part of the set of introns in the ancestor of α and β. For all introns shared between a given species pair, for example α and γ (but not necessarily β) N αγ , the probability of an intron from that set being found in β (in other words, the fraction of ancestral introns retained in β) isP
β = N αβγ N αγ ,
where N αβγ is the number of introns shared between all three species. Deriving these fractions of ancestral introns for each of the aligned species, we then define N Ω as the total number of ancestral introns, and its relationship to the conservation states of introns in the alignments of the three species as
N αβγ = N Ω (P α ·P β ·P γ ),
the product of the ancestral intron number and the fraction of ancestral introns present in each species. Finally, solving for the number of ancestral introns we get the estimatê
N Ω = N αβ · N αγ · N βγ (N αβγ ) 2 .
Performing the above procedure for both major and minor introns in a given alignment allowed us to estimate the ancestral minor intron density for the corresponding node aŝ
ρ minor =N Ω minor N Ω minor +N Ω major · 100%.
However, without some point of referenceρ minor is difficult to interpret, as the genes included in the alignments are not an especially well-defined set-because these genes are simply all of the orthologs found between a given trio of species, their composition is likely to change at least somewhat for each unique group of aligned species representing the same ancestral node. We dealt with this by normalizing to a chosen reference species included in each group. For example, in our reconstructions of intron densities in the ancestor of Diptera, human was used as the outgroup and was therefore present in all alignments. After calculating the estimated minor intron density in the Dipteran ancestor, we then divided that value by the minor intron density in the human genes present in the same alignments to produce the estimated ancestral minor intron density relative to the corresponding minor intron density in human. Because using human as the outgroup for reconstructions of fungal and plant ancestors results in very small absolute numbers of minor introns, kingdom-specific outgroups were chosen instead: the estimates of ancestral fungal densities are relative to Rhizophagus irregularis, and those for plants are relative to Lupinus angustifolius. Because multiple species combinations were used to estimate the minor intron density at each ancestral node, we report the mean value over all n estimates for each node
ρ minor = 1 n n i=1ρ minor i ,
± the standard error (Fig. 10).

As has been pointed out in other contexts, ancestral state reconstructions may be confounded by several different factors [32,23,18]. Many such concerns are minimized in our specific application given that a) the traits under consideration are not complex, but rather the simple binary presence/absence of discrete genetic elements, b) calculations are restricted to introns present in well-aligning regions of orthologs (thereby avoiding issues with missing gene annotations in a given species, since alignments must include sequences from all species to be considered) and c) the contribution of parallel intron gain, especially of minor introns, 2.11 Differential gene expression is likely to be very small [71,86,15]. There are a number of other potential sources of bias in our analyses, however, which are worth addressing. First, our ancestral intron density estimates are (to a large, though not complete, extent) dependent upon the accuracy of the phylogenetic relationships in Fig. 1. Ideally, we would have perfect confidence in all of the relationships underlying each node's reconstruction, but such an undertaking is beyond both the scope of this paper and the expertise of its authors. While we have done our best to be assiduous in choosing nodes with wellresolved local phylogenies-which is one reason we have not provided similar reconstructions for a much larger number of nodes with less-confident phylogenetic relationships-it remains the case that our reconstructions are only fully informative with respect to the tree upon which they are based. That being said, unless the phylogeny for a given node is so incorrect as to have mistaken one of the ingroups for the outgroup (i.e., the chosen outgroup was not in fact an outgroup), the reconstruction should still represent the ancestor of the two ingroup species. Second, we are relying on the correct identification of minor introns within each species to allow us to identify conserved/non-conserved minor introns in multi-species alignments. Although the field in general lacks a gold-standard set of verified minor introns upon which to evaluate classifier performance, the low empirical false-positive rate of intronIC (as determined by the number of minor introns found in species with compelling evidence for a lack of minor splicing) and the high degree of correspondence of its classifications with previously-published data suggests that our analyses are capturing the majority of the minor introns in each alignment. There is also the possibility that many minor introns are unannotated in many genomes (and in fact, for certain annotation pipelines we know that this has historically been the case). This concern is mediated somewhat by the fact that, because we are only considering gene models that produce well-aligning protein sequences across multiple species, our alignments are unlikely to contain unannotated introns of either type. Unannotated minor introns, necessarily residing in completely unannotated genes, would of course not be considered in our analyses, which would result in a shrinking of the total number of orthologous genes compared. Due to the law of small numbers, this could raise concerns that the chosen samples may not reliably represent the complete data with sufficient confidence. We have done what we can to combat this by choosing species with annotations of high quality (as assessed by BUSCO completeness, for example), and by using multiple combinations of species to reconstruct each node-for reconstructions based upon a large number of different alignments, the low standard errors of the estimates give us some confidence that this kind of missing data is unlikely to qualitatively change our results.


## Differential gene expression

Single-end RNA-seq reads from previously-published celltype-specific sequencing of Rhizophagus irregularis [38] (four biological replicates per cell type) were pseudoaligned to a decoy-aware version of the transcriptome using Salmon v1.6.0 [62] (with non-default arguments --seqBias --s oftclip). The Salmon output was then formatted with tximport v1.14.2 [83], and differential gene expression (DGE) analysis was performed using DESeq2 v1.26.0 [49] with the following arguments: test="LRT", useT=TRU E, minReplicatesForReplace=Inf, minmu=1e-6, reduced=∼1. For each pairwise combination of cell types, genes with significant DGE values (Wald p-value < 0.05) were retained for further analysis.


## Rhizophgaus z-score metric

Following the methodology used by Sandberg et al. to assign a proliferation index to cell types [76], z-scores were calculated per feature (whether for gene expression or intron retention/splicing efficiency) across all cell-type replicates (n=20), and then summarized for each cell type by the mean value of the corresponding replicate z-scores (departing from the reference method in this aspect). Prior to conversion to z-scores, the raw gene expression data was normalized by running the output from tximport through the fpkm() function in DESeq2. For group z-score comparisons (e.g., proliferation-index genes, minor introns vs. major introns), the median of the top 50% of z-scores from each group was used. As the z-score calculation requires there to be variation across samples, certain genes/introns were necessarily omitted under this metric.


## Intron retention and splicing efficiency

For each RNA-seq sample, IRFinder-S v2.0 [53] was used to compute intron retention levels for all annotated introns. Introns with warnings of "LowSplicing" and "Low-Cover" were excluded from downstream analyses. Across replicates within each cell type, a weighted mean retention value was calculated for each intron, with weights derived by combining the average number of reads supporting the two intron-exon junctions and the total number of reads supporting the exon-exon junction.

Intron splicing efficiency was calculated as previously described [41]. Briefly, RNA-seq reads were mapped to splicejunction sequence constructs using Bowtie v1.2.3 [40] (excluding multiply-mapping reads using the non-default argument -m 1). Introns with fewer than five reads supporting either the corresponding exon-exon junction or one of the intron-exon junctions (or both) were excluded. For each intron, the proportion of reads mapped to the intron-exon junction(s) versus the exon-exon junction was used to assign a splicing efficiency value for each sample (see reference for details). Within each cell type, the weighted mean of replicate splicing efficiency values for each intron was calculated in the same manner as for intron retention.


## Spliceosome-associated gene expression

Orthologs of human spliceosome components were found in Rhizophagus irregularis via a reciprocal-best-hit approach (https://github.com/glarue/reciprologs) using BLAST v2.9.0+ [14] with an E-value cutoff of 1 × 10 −10 . Four genes from each splicing system (major and minor) were identified in Rhizophagus by this approach, consisting of orthologs to human minor spliceosome genes ZMAT5 (U11/U12-20K), RNPC3 (U11/U12-65K), SNRNP35 (U11/U12-35K), and SNRNP25 (U11/U12-25K) and major spliceosome genes SF3A1 (SF3a120), SF3A3 (SF3a60), SNRNP70 (U1-70K) and SNRPA1 (U2 A ′ ). Gene expression values generated by Salmon for each set of genes in each cell type were averaged across replicates, and pairwise comparisons between cell types were made for the same set of genes (e.g., minor spliceosome genes in IS vs. MS). The significance of differences in expression between paired gene sets from different cell types was assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, with p-values corrected for multiple testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg method.


# Results


## Minor intron diversity in thousands of eukaryotic genomes

In order to better assess the landscape of minor intron diversity in eukaryotes, we used the intron classification program intronIC [56] to process ∼270 million intron sequences and uncover minor intron numbers for over 3000 publicly-available eukaryotic genomes, representing to our knowledge the largest and most diverse collection of minor intron data assembled to date (Fig. 1, underlying plain text data available at https://doi.org/10.6084/ m9.figshare.20483655).

Of the 1844 genera represented in our data, 1172 (64%) have well-supported evidence of minor introns in at least one species (see Methods for details), while the remaining 672 appear to lack minor introns in all available constituent species. Consistent with previous studies [11,3,35,80,1,87,44,56,90], minor intron numbers and densities (fractions of introns in a given genome classified as minor type) vary dramatically across the eukaryotic tree; average values are highest in vertebrates and other animals, while variation between species appears to be lowest within land plants. Conservation of minor introns between different pairs of species is largely consistent with previously-published results [1,3,44,56] (Fig. 2). The intriguing pattern of punctuated wholesale loss of minor introns is apparent within many larger clades in our data, along with a number of striking cases of minor intron enrichment in otherwise depauperate groups.


### Minor intron enrichment

A number of cases of minor-intron-rich lineages are worth highlighting. As shown in Fig. 3, the highest known minor intron density is found within the Amoebozoa; our recentlyreported data in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum [41] dwarfs all other known instances of local minor intron enrichment and appears to be an extremely rare example of significant minor intron gain. In the present study, we also find relatively high numbers of minor introns (compared to other amoebozoan species) in both the flagellar amoeba Pelomyxa schiedti (n=90) and the variosean amoeba Protostelium aurantium (labeled Planoprotostelium fungivorum 1 in Fig. 1) (n=265). Although the numbers of minor introns in these species conserved with minor introns in other lineages (e.g., human) are very low, in all cases we find at least some degree of conservation. For example, in alignments between human and P. aurantium orthologs, 11% of human minor introns are conserved as minor introns in P. aurantium, comparable to proportions shared between human and many plant species [56]; in alignments with P. schiedti the proportion of conserved human minor introns is closer to 2.5%, although this appears to largely be due to massive minor-to-major conversion of ancestral minor introns in P. schiedti, as 69% of the human minor introns in those alignments are paired with major introns in P. schiedti.

As reported by Gentekaki et al. [28], the parasitic microbe Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 within the stramenopiles contains hundreds of minor introns, although our pipeline identifies ∼45% fewer (n=253) than previously described. Interestingly, the Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 minor introns we identify are highly enriched for the AT-AC subtype (77% or 196/253, where AT-AC introns are only ∼26% of all minor introns in human), and the classic minor intron bias away from phase 0 is inverted, with 49% (124/253) of the putative minor introns in Blastocystis being phase 0. Blastocystis also has the shortest average minor intron length in the data we analyzed at just under 42 bp (median 39 bp) (introns shorter than 30 bp were systematically excluded in all species).

Surprisingly, we find unusually high minor intron densities in a number of fungal species, a kindgom which until now was not known to contain significant numbers of minor introns. In particular, the Glomeromycete species Rhizophagus irregularis has a minor intron density comparable to that of humans (0.272%, n=205), and Basidiobolus meristosporus, in the Zoopagomycota, has one of the highest minor intron densities outside of the Amoebozoa (0.554%, n=249) (Fig. 4). We do not find any convincing support for minor introns in either of the two largest fungal groups, Ascomycota and Basidiomycota, which seem to have lost most if not all of the required minor snRNAs in the vast majority of species, as has been previously reported [48,3].

Our analysis confirms the presence of a small number of minor introns in the oomycete genus Phytopthora as reported by other groups [73,3] (Fig. 4), and in addition we find that members of the stramenopile water mould genus Saprolegnia contain dozens of minor introns each. While any species with            Fig. 1. Minor intron densities for thousands of eukaryotic species. The colored strip following the species name represents the relative minor intron density (darker = lower, brighter = higher, gray values indicate species for which the estimated values are less confident, and may be enriched for false positives; see Methods). Additional data from inside to outside is as follows: minor intron density (%), number of minor introns, presence/absence of minor snRNAs in the annotated transcriptome (red: U11, light blue: U12, yellow: U4atac, purple: U6atac), BUSCO score versus the eukaryotic BUSCO gene set, average overall intron density in introns/kbp coding sequence. Taxonomic relationships based upon data from the NCBI Taxonomy Database [24]; figure generated using iTOL [42] .  a very low number reported number of minor introns raises concerns about false positives, subsets of minor introns from each of these lineages have been found in conserved positions with minor introns in distantly-related species in our analyses, and minor snRNAs in each of the aforementioned genomes provides further evidence for the existence of bona fide minor introns in these species (Fig. 4). Interestingly, given its sister placement to the broadly minor-intron-poor nematode clade, the cactus worm Priapulus caudatus appears to be quite minor-intron rich (n=330, 0.316%), with substantial minor intron conservation to other metazoan lineages.    Fig. 4. Minor intron densities and other metadata for selected species of interest. Graphical elements are as described in Fig. 1.

Within the protostomes, one of the two sister clades of bilateria, there are cases of relative minor intron enrichment in both arachnids (Arachnida) and molluscs (Mollusca) (Fig. 1,  Fig. 4), as well as in the brachiopod species Lingula anatina and the horseshoe crab Limulus polyphemus. The order of ticks Ixodida, including Ixodes scapularis, Dermacentor silvarum and Rhipicephalus, has a much higher average minor intron density than other groups within Acari, which includes both mites and ticks and has seen substantial loss of minor introns in many of its lineages.

On the other side of the bilaterian tree, minor intron densities in deuterostomes are far more homogeneous. Vertebrates have consistently high minor intron densities (∼0.3%), with only a handful of exceptions in our data that are very likely due to incomplete or otherwise problematic annotations (for an example, see Liparis tanakae in Fig. 1, an individual species with dramatically lower minor intron densities than surrounding taxa, with a low BUSCO score and no indication of minor spliceosome loss). The remaining deeply-diverging clades within deuterostomes have minor intron densities comparable to vertebrates (the starfish Asterias rubens being on the high side of vertebrate densities, for example) with the exception of tunicates, which appear to have lost a significant fraction of their ancestral minor intron complement (and minor splicing apparatus, in the case of the highly-transformed species Oikopleura dioica).

In their seminal paper examining spliceosomal snRNAs in various eukaryotic lineages, Dávila López et al. [48] report a number of clades without some/any minor snR-3.2 Minor introns have lower average conservation than major introns NAs. Based upon our larger dataset, it now seems clear that some of these groups do in fact have both minor introns and most if not all of the canonical minor snRNAs. These include the Acropora genus of coral, which has an average minor intron density higher than that of most vertebrates; within the fungal phylum Chytridiomycota the Chytridiomycete species Spizellomyces punctatus as well as a number of Neocallimastigomycetes including Piromyces finnis and Neocallimastix californiae; the genus of blood flukes Schistosoma; and all of the species of Streptophyta included in the previously-published analysis (see Fig. 1 in [48]). Notably, we also find minor introns (confirmed by comparative genomic methods) in the green algal species Chara braunii (n=166) and Klebsormidium nitens (n=110), representatives of a group which until now was thought to lack minor splicing entirely [48,3,73], as well as in the Glaucophyte alga Cyanophora paradoxa (n=77) (which may have transformed minor splicing machinery, as we find significant hits to only the U11 snRNA in that species).


### Minor intron depletion

Punctuated and dramatic loss of minor introns is a hallmark feature of the minor splicing landscape, and it remains an outstanding question why certain lineages undergo either partial or complete loss of their ancestral minor intron complements [90]. Previous work has delineated many groups that appear to lack either minor introns, minor splicing components or both [3,73,48], but the diversity and scope of more recentlyavailable data motivated us to revisit this topic. In addition to the underlying data presented in Fig. 1, there are a number of cases of severe and/or complete minor intron loss that we highlight here. First, the amoebozoan Acanthamoeba castellanii has been found to contain both minor splicing apparatus as well as a limited number of minor-like intron sequences [73]. While it remains likely that this species contains a small number of minor introns based upon previous evidence, we do not find conservation of any of the twelve Acanthamoeba introns our pipeline classified as minor in either human or the more closely-related amoeobozoan Protostelium aurantium. This may not be particularly surprising, given the low absolute number of minor introns under consideration-between Protostelium aurantium and human, for example, ∼23% of Protostelium minor introns are conserved, and there are only two minor introns from Acanthamoeba in regions of good alignment with human orthologs. Furthermore, we do find a single shared minor intron position between Acanthamoeba and human when we disregard the local alignment quality and simply consider all introns in identical positions within aligned regions, which amounts to 20% of Acanthamoeba minor introns in such alignments.

Among clades with extreme but incomplete loss (a classic case in animals being Diptera), notable examples include the Acari (ticks and mites), bdelloid rotifers, and the springtail (Collembola) subclass of hexapods, We find no evidence at all for minor introns in the following taxa, many of which have not been reported before (those with citations corroborate earlier studies): tardigrades (e.g., Hypsibius exemplaris), Discoba (e.g., Trypanosoma, Leishmania) [48], Orchrophyta (stramenopiles), Alveolata (protists) [3,48]. The Acari, in addition to an overall extreme reduction in minor introns within the clade generally, also contains a number of cases of apparent (by comparative genomic analysis) complete loss in the parasitic mite Tropilaelaps mercedesae (though minor introns are present in sister taxa) and the earth mite Halotydeus destructor. We also report two other novel cases of apparent complete minor intron loss outside of Acari. First, in the Dipteran clade Chironomidae, we find scant evidence of minor introns in Clunio marinus, Polypedilum vanderplanki and Belgica antarctica, all of which also appear to be missing between half and three-quarters of their minor snRNAs. Second, the copepod species of crustaceans Tigriopus californicus and Eurytemora affinis each lack both conserved minor introns and 75% of the minor snRNA set.


## Minor introns have lower average conservation than major introns

A persistent result in the minor intron literature is that minor introns are more highly conserved than major introns (specifically, between animals and plants and even more specifically, between human and Arabidopsis thaliana) [4], although this assertion has been contradicted by at least one more recent analysis [56]. The claim that minor intron conservation exceeds major intron conservation largely rests upon the numbers of introns of both types found in identical positions within 133 alignments of orthologous human-Arabidopsis sequences, as reported in Table 1 of Basu et al. [4]. For major (U2-type) introns, they report 115 conserved as major in aligned ortholog pairs, and 1391 as either not present in one of the two orthologs or present as a minor intron; for minor (U12-type) introns, they find 20 conserved and 135 missing/converted. For each intron type, taking the number conserved and dividing by the total number of introns of that type present in the alignments results in conservation percentages of 7.6% ( 115 115+1391 ) for major introns and 12.9% ( 20 20+135 ) for minor introns (although the aforementioned values are not explicitly stated in the text), leading to the conclusion that minor introns are more highly conserved between human and Arabidopsis than are major introns. To the extent that we correctly understand their approach, however, we believe there may be a complication with this analysis.

Examining the ortholog pairs the authors provide in the supplementary data, it is evident that many of the same Arabidopsis sequences are present in multiple ortholog pairs, which suggests that a standard reciprocal-best-hit criteria for ortholog identification was not employed and that certain introns will be counted multiple times within the orthologous alignments. As many minor introns occur in larger paralogous gene families, this methodology could lead to artificial inflation of the calculated minor intron conservation, especially given the small absolute number of minor introns involved. To attempt to more thoroughly address the question of minor vs. major conservation, we identified orthologs in many different pairs of species across a range of evolution-ary distances (see Methods), and calculated intron conservation using the same metric as above. Within more than 100 such comparisons between animals and plants (and more than 60 between animals and fungi), we find no cases where minor intron conservation exceeds major intron conservation (Fig. 5a).

Furthermore, we observe only a handful of cases where minor intron conservation marginally exceeds major intron conservation in alignments of more closely-related species (∼3% greater between the starfish Asterias rubens and the stony coral Orbicella faveolata, for example). In the specific case of human-Arabidopsis considered by Basu et al., our data show minor intron conservation to be around half that of major intron conservation (Table 1). Thus, in the final analysis we find no compelling support for the idea that minor introns are in general more conserved than major introns and in fact, the opposite seems to be true in the vast majority of cases.


## Major

Minor
p F isher N cons N var conservation (%) N cons N var conservation (%)
2052 14162 12.7 7 120 5.5 0.015 Table 1.


## Comparison of major and minor intron conservation between human and

Arabidopsis thaliana. Ncons indicates the number of introns of each type conserved as the same type in both human and Arabidopsis. Nvar indicates the total number of introns (of both species) present in the alignments where the corresponding position in the opposing sequence either does not contain an intron, or contains an intron of the other type.


## Minor intron loss vs. conversion

When an ancestral minor intron ceases to be a minor intron, it is thought to happen primarily in one of two ways: the entire intron sequence could be lost via, for example, reverse transcriptase-mediated reinsertion of spliced mRNA [44,17,90,33], or the intron could undergo sequence changes sufficient to allow it to be recognized instead by the major spliceosome [11,21,20,26]. From first-principles arguments based on the greater information content of the minor intron motifs [11,10,21] along with empirical analyses [44], it is assumed that intron conversion proceeds almost universally unidirectionally from minor to major. Previous work has also shown that the paradigm of full intron loss (sequence deletion) appears to dominate over conversion in minor introns [44]; we wondered whether any exceptions to this general pattern might exist. First, we assembled a manually-curated sample of species with significant/complete minor intron loss, along with a number of species with much higher minor intron conservation for comparison. For each selected species, we chose an additional species to compare against as well as a species to serve as an outgroup, and then identified orthologs between all members of the group to allow us to identify ancestral major/minor introns (see Methods for details) and estimate fractions of each intron type retained. Considering loss to include both sequence deletion as well as type conversion (which we assume to be unidirectional from minor to major, as discussed above), Fig. 5b shows that minor intron loss is more pronounced than major intron loss in the species we examined (also shown more generally in Fig. 5a).

We can, however, also decompose the phenomena contributing to the higher degree of loss of minor introns and ask whether the contribution of sequence deletion specifically, for example, differs between the two types. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that this form of intron loss is very similar between the two types of introns in species which have lost significant fractions of their minor introns (Fig. 5c). Because the selected species were chosen based upon putative loss of minor introns and the sample size is low, it is difficult to interpret the apparent bias toward minor intron deletion in the vertebrates and plants in Fig. 5c. For the other species, however, this data suggests that there is not a particular selective pressure toward removing minor intron sequences themselves-at least not any more than there is pressure to remove intron sequences generally-in instances of pronounced minor intron upheaval.

We can also look at the other side of the minor intron loss coin, namely conversion from minor to major type. Here, we find that in many instances loss via deletion does indeed outstrip conversion (as reported by [44]), sometimes dramatically so, but there are interesting exceptions. The leech Helobdella robusta (HelRob), for example, which seems to have retained a large fraction of its ancestral major introns, has lost ∼80% of its minor introns primarily through conversion to major-type (Fig. 5d). By contrast, the annelid worm Dimorphilus gyrociliatus (DimGyr), found in a clade (Polychaeta) sister to Helobdella robusta, has undergone a seemingly independent loss of minor introns of similar proportion to Helobdella under a very different modality, with loss (deletion) outweighing conversion (Fig. 5d). It is unclear what forces are responsible for the relative contributions of each mechanism; in Helobdella, the major intron sequences are slightly more degenerate at the 5 ′ SS end than in e.g., human, which might lower the barrier to entry for would-be minorto-major converts. This, however, is mere speculation and more work is needed to better characterize these dynamics. It should be noted that under the current analysis we cannot differentiate between losses, and conversions followed by subsequent loss. Our conversion estimates, therefore, should be taken as lower bounds.


## Positional biases of major and minor introns

It has been known for many years that introns often exhibit a 5 ′ bias in their positions within transcripts [55,45,74]. This can be explained in large part due to biased intron loss: because a primary mechanism of intron loss (and, to a more limited extent, gain) is thought to occur via the reversetranscriptase mediated (and 3 ′ -biased) insertion of spliced mRNA [70,72,19], over time such a process would tend to result in higher concentrations of introns closer to the 5 ′ end of transcripts. Less attention has been paid to the positional biases of minor introns specifically, although at least one study [4]  that minor introns appear to be especially over-represented in the 5 ′ portions of transcripts in both human and Arabidopsis thaliana. We were curious to see whether the same patterns were present in our own data and whether they generalized beyond the two species so far examined. We selected two sets of species to highlight-for the first, we chose lineages with substantial numbers of minor introns from a variety of groups; for the second, we picked species with significant inferred amounts of minor intron loss to investigate whether any 5 ′ bias might be more extreme in the remaining minor introns. In our analysis, we confirm the 5 ′ bias as previously described [4] in Arabidopsis thaliana (Fig. 6a), although we do not find the same difference as shown in the earlier study between major and minor intron positions in human.

More broadly, our results point to a less-clear picture than earlier work might suggest-while we do find a number of cases in animals where minor introns are more 5 ′ -biased than major introns (Fig. 6b, Amphibalanus amphitrite and Trichinella spiralis), the pattern is not broadly significant and is occasionally reversed (e.g., Ixodes scapularis), albeit in animal species with less-dramatic minor intron loss (Fig. 6a). Within plants, however, there does seem to be a clearer pattern, with a much higher fraction of plants species in both groups displaying a strong 5 ′ bias in their minor introns. To determine how widespread this pattern of greater relative 5 ′ bias in minor introns is, we searched our entire dataset for species with a) significant differences in minor intron occurrence between the 5 ′ and 3 ′ halves of trancripts (as assessed by a two-tailed exact binomial test, where presence in the 5 ′ half of a transcript was considered a success, mirroring the approach of ref. [4]), b) significant differences between major and minor positions as determined by a twotailed Mann-Whitney U test and c) median minor intron positions more 5 ′ biased than median major intron positions. Among such species, plants are highly over-represented (Table 2, p = 8.9 × 10 −68 by a Fisher's exact test). It is possible that this pattern, taken together with the higher degree of stability of minor intron densities in plants, reflects an ancient loss of minor introns in the plant ancestor, the signature of which is now shared broadly among extant species. It might also suggest a unique and/or more consistent paradigm for minor intron loss in plants, distinct from the haphazard process seemingly at work within other parts of the eukaryotic tree where losses have occurred both more recently and more frequently.


## Phase biases of minor introns

Spliceosomal introns can occur at one of three positions relative to protein-coding sequence: between codons (phase 0), after the first nucleotide of a codon (phase 1) or after the second (phase 2). In most species, major introns display a bias toward phase 0 2 [59,47] (Fig. 7a), while minor introns are biased away from phase 0 [11,56] (Fig. 7b).

It remains an unsettled issue why minor introns are biased in this way-one theory proposed by Moyer et al. [56] suggests that such bias could arise from preferential conversion of phase 0 minor introns to major type, which would over time lead to the observed pattern. Here, we wanted to make use of the size of our dataset to better characterize the diversity of intron phase more broadly, and identify any exceptions to the general rule. As shown in Fig. 7c, the phase distributions of major introns are fairly tightly grouped. On average, for major introns in minor-intron-containing species, phase 0 makes up 47%, phase 1 30% and phase 2 23%. In addition, the proportions of phase 0 and phase 1 introns are quite highly correlated (see caption of Fig. 7c). Minor introns, on the other hand, are less consistent in their phase distribution and have a lower phase 0 to phase 1 correlation, although the majority cluster relatively tightly around the average value of phase 0, 22% (Fig. 7d).

It is intriguing that a small number of species appear to have much higher fractions of phase 0 minor introns (Figures  7d and 7e). What's more, these species (with the notable exception of Blastocystis sp. subtype 1, addressed below) all have very low absolute numbers of minor introns (Fig. 7e). While these data are not necessarily incompatible with the conversion paradigm mentioned above (which might predict minor introns in species with pronounced loss to show especially strong bias away from phase 0, although with such small numbers of remaining minor introns it may simply be that stochasticity dominates), it at least invites further investigation into the forces underlying the phase biases in minor introns generally.

The species Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 is similar to the other unusual cases mentioned in its reduced minor intron bias away from phase 0, but is remarkable for the number of minor introns involved (n=253). It is also interesting that its minor intron phase distribution is almost identical to the distribution of phases in its major introns (not shown). While this raises the possibility that the minor introns in Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 are false-positives, the fact that we find a) all four minor snRNAs in the genome, b) a (small but non-zero) number of its minor introns conserved in Lingula anatina (not shown) and c) putative minor introns in a closely-related species (Blastocystis hominis) provides evidence that they are likely real. Assuming they are bona fide minor introns, another possible explanation for the phase 0 enrichment could be that they have been more recently gained, and (under the conversion hypothesis) have not yet had time to develop the 3.6 Non-canonical minor intron splice boundaries significant differences between minor and major introns are indicated with asterisks (two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.001; *** p < 0.0001; ns=not significant). Note that in some cases of significant differences between the two intron types, e.g., within animals, the set with greater 5 ′ bias is the major introns.

phase bias present in older minor intron sets. More thorough comparative genomics work within the clade after additional species become available would help to clarify the evolutionary picture.


## Non-canonical minor intron splice boundaries

The vast majority (> 98.5%) of major introns in most eukaryotic genomes begin with the dinucleotide pair GT, and end with the pair AG [12,13,56,80], with an additional much smaller contingent of GC-AG introns present in many genomes. When minor introns were first discovered, they were initially characterized largely by their distinct AT-AC termini [30,34]. However, it was subsequently discovered that in fact the majority of minor introns in most species share the same terminal boundaries as major introns [21,11], although the AT-AC subtype may constitute a more significant fraction of minor introns in certain species [90,65,56,1,3]. Over time, additional non-canonical (i.e., not GT-AG, GC-AG or AT-AC) subtypes of minor introns have been identified in various organisms [61,1,56,80,44], but these analyses 3.7 Minor intron-containing genes are longer and more intron-rich than genes with major introns only have been limited to species for which there were available minor intron annotations which until now were quite limited.

Because non-canonical introns do not (by definition) look like normal introns, it can be difficult to differentiate between biological insights and annotation errors when examining eukaryotic diversity at scale. For example, a recent report on non-canonical introns in diverse species described significant enrichment of CT-AC introns in fungi [25]. However, and as addressed briefly in the paper itself, CT-AC boundaries happen to be the exact reverse-complement of the canonical GT-AG boundaries. Additional sequence features of these introns, such as a high occurrence of C 5 nt upstream of the 3 ′ SS (which would perfectly match the hallmark +5G were the intron on the other strand) and an enrichment in +1C after the 3 ′ SS (corresponding to the canonical -1G at the 5 ′ SS on the other strand) make it very likely in our estimation that such introns are in fact incorrectly annotated due to some combination of technical errors and antisense transcripts. To combat issues of this sort, we first performed multiple within-kingdom alignments of various animal and plant species with high relative levels of annotated non-canonical minor intron boundaries. Conserved introns were then clustered across many different alignments to form conserved intron sets, which were then filtered to include only minor introns in sets where at least two minor introns were found (see Methods for details). These sets of introns are much less likely to contain spurious intron sequences, although they also may not fully represent more recent or lineage-specific boundary changes and they do not include introns from every species in our collected data.

Our results in animals (Fig. 8a) and plants (Fig. 8b) are largely consistent with previous data on non-canonical minor introns [61,80,44], with only small differences in the rank-order within each set. The set of plant non-canonical minor intron termini is both less-diverse and more lopsided than the animal set; while the most common non-canonical termini is AT-AA in both kingdoms, almost 75% of all noncanonical minor introns we identify in plants are of the AT-AA subtype, versus less than half that proportion for the same subtype in animals. Interestingly, the second most common non-canonical termini in animals, AT-AT, is almost entirely absent in plants.

As can be seen in Table 3, the majority of non-canonical termini differ by a single nucleotide from a canonical terminus; only GT-TA, GT-CA, AT-GA, AT-CG, CT-AT, and AT-GT in animals and AT-TT, AT-CA, AT-CG, AT-GA, and AT-GT in plants differ by more than one nucleotide, and each are only a tiny minority of the total non-canonical set. Additionally, there are small differences between the consensus sequences outside of the terminal dinucleotides between the different subtypes of minor introns (Fig. 8c), and also within the same subtype between animals and plants. The most prominent examples of the latter are in the following subtypes: GT-GG (AT motif immediately preceeding the 3 ′ SS, and ATG motif immediately following it in plants), AT-AG (-1C from the 3 ′ SS in animals) and GT-AT (-1A in animals).


## Minor intron-containing genes are longer and more intron-rich than genes with major introns only

Across the eukaryotic tree, genomes can vary widely in the number of introns contained in an average gene [72]. Some vertebrate genes have dozens or even hundreds of introns (e.g., the gene titin in human), whereas most genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae lack introns entirely. Given the fact that minor introns appear to be arranged nonrandomly throughout genomes where they are found [56,43,80,1] a natural question to ask is to what extent and in what ways are minor intron-containing genes (MIGs) different than those without minor introns? As far as we are aware, while various aspects of this question have been addressed by different groups [4,11,35], relatively little attention has been paid to possible differences in a number of basic gene attributes, namely gene length (excluding introns) and number of introns per unit coding sequence or "genic intron density" (a coinage we will use here to distinguish from our more frequent usage in this paper of "intron density" to describe some number of introns in terms of their relative share of the total introns in the genome). Strikingly, when we compare the genic intron density of MIGs to all other genes in species with minor introns, we find that MIGs are universally more intron-dense on average than non-MIGs (Fig. 9a). Furthermore, it appears that average MIG lengths (excluding intron sequences) are longer than other genes in the vast majority of species with minor introns (Fig. 9b)   gene length, none of those differences are statistically significant (Mann-Whitney U test, p ≥ 0.05). An in-depth analysis of this qualitative finding is beyond the scope of the current paper, but it seems an underappreciated difference between the two intron types and would benefit from further investigation.


## Comparison of minor and major intron lengths

While a number of studies have compared the length distributions of the different intron types in a limited assortment of genomes [43,91,56], without a large set of minor intron containing species to compare within it has been difficult to gauge the extent to which minor intron lengths might differ from major intron lengths. With the comprehensive minor intron data we have collected, we were able to ask a very basic question: what is the general relationship between average major and minor intron lengths? At a high level, the answer appears to be that major and minor intron lengths are roughly linearly correlated (Fig. 9c)-species with longer average major intron length tend to also have longer average minor intron length (Spearman's ρ = 0.625 for median values, p = 5.08 × 10 −16 ). One interesting aspect of the data in Fig. 9c is shown more clearly in the inset plot (which is simply the subset of the data in the main plot with length ≤ 1000 bp): certain species have significant minor intron loss 3.9 Reconstruction of ancestral minor intron densities (small markers) and large differences between average minor and major intron lengths. It should be noted that the set of species in that region is enriched for Drosophila (a taxonomically over-represented genus in the sequence databases), but includes many additional insect species as well.

Although it is not clear what immediate conclusions can be drawn from this data, some additional questions are raised: Were shorter minor introns especially selected against in these lineages, such that the remaining minor introns are disproportionately long? What is driving variation within, for example, Drosophila such that in some species the difference between minor and major is relatively modest (Drosophila busckii, major=65 bp and minor=189 bp) and in others, it's much more stark (Drosophila biarmipes, major=77 bp and minor=677 bp)? It should be noted as well that for Drosophila specifically, almost all of the minor introns are conserved within the genus, so the previous example is made more interesting because 100% of the D. busckii minor introns are shared with D. biarmipes, yet are far longer in the latter than the former. It did occur to us to check whether minor introns in these outlier species happen to be (for whatever reason) in genes with longer-than-average intron size, and although we have not done so systematically we have checked a number of more extreme cases and have found the same pattern recapitulated between minor and major introns of the same genes. For example, in the black soldier fly Hermetia illucens, the median minor intron length is 4019 bp and the median major intron length is only 105 bp. Comparing minor to major within only the minor intron-containing genes changes things, but not qualitatively-the median major intron length becomes 399.5 bp, but the difference between minor and major is still significant (p = 0.0025 by one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test under the alternative hypothesis that minor intron lengths are longer).


## Reconstruction of ancestral minor intron densities

In an attempt to quantify some of the evolutionary dynamics leading to the variegated pattern of minor intron densities we see in extant lineages, we sought to estimate minor intron densities for certain ancestral nodes throughout the eukaryotic tree (see Methods). For each selected node, we identified pairs of species for which the node is the most recent common ancestor and, in combination with an outgroup species, performed three-way protein-level alignments to allow us to define intron states for each species within the alignments. Then, using the procedure described in [69], we calculated the number of minor and major introns estimated to have been present in the aligned regions in the ancestral genome, and repeated this process using many different combinations of species for each node to derive average values across all such comparisons. Because the absolute number of introns present in the aligned regions in the ancestor is not a particularly easy value to interpret, for reconstructions within a given kingdom we normalized the ancestral density of each intron type by a chosen reference species from that kingdom present in every alignment (see Methods for details). The reference species for animals, fungi and plants were Homo sapiens (minor intron density 0.276%), Rhizophagus irregularis (minor intron density 0.272%) and Lupinus angustifolius (minor intron density 0.273%), respectively. Fig. 10 shows both distributions of minor intron densities in constituent species from each terminal clade (violin plots), as well as estimates of ancestral minor intron densities at various nodes (colored boxes) as fractions of the density of minor introns in the aligned regions of the reference species (i.e., ancestral densities > 1 indicate minor intron enrichment relative to the reference species, and ancestral densities <1 indicate reduction). As shown in Fig. 10, ancestral minor intron densities were, in large part, modestly higher than minor intron densities in the relatively minor-intron-rich reference species, with the exception of a number of episodes of pronounced loss in the ancestors of Diptera, Pancrustacea and Zoopagomycota. The apparent enrichment of minor introns in the ancestor of Chelicerata is interesting, as it suggests there may have been some amount of minor intron gain along that branch from the arthropod ancestor. This result needs to be qualified, however, by noting that in that region of the tree we were constrained by lack of available data to using only Limulus polyphemus for one of the two ingroup species, as well as the fact that in any given reconstruction, the calculated intron density is limited to the genes involved in the reconstruction. With similar caveats, the low inferred ancestral minor intron density of Zoopagomycota is notable as that group contains Basidiobolus meristosporus, which has the highest minor intron density so far discovered in fungi (0.554%). Overall, these results paint a picture of ancestral minor intron complements as generally analogous to those of minor intron rich extant species, and highlight the quixotic nature of minor intron loss dynamics throughout eukaryotic diversity. It would be interesting to have these results expanded upon once phylogenetic uncertainty has been reduced throughout the tree and even more diverse genomes are available for analysis.


## Unprecedented minor intron density in the fungus Rhizophagus irregularis

In our broad survey of eukaryotic species, we found a large number of putative minor introns in the mycorrhizal fungus Rhizophagus irregularis, a member of the Glomeromycota group of fungi. There is clear correspondence between minor-versus-major spliceosomal sequence characteristics in the two primary differentiating parts of the introns, namely the 5 ′ splice site and the 3 ′ branchpoint structure (Fig. 11a), and consensus sequence features closely follow those previously found in animals and plants (Fig. 11b). A subset of minor introns were found at conserved gene positions with minor introns in other fungi, animals and plants (Fig. 11c,d), further increasing our confidence that these introns represent bona fide minor spliceosomal introns. Searches of the genome provided further evidence for presence of many minor spliceosome-specific proteins as well as all four minor  Fig. 10. Minor intron density distributions in selected clades, and ancestral reconstructions of minor intron densities at selected nodes. Ancestral density node label color indicates relative enrichment (blue) or reduction (red) relative to the reference species in the alignments. For animals, the reference is Homo sapiens; for plants the reference is Lupinus angustifolius; for fungi the reference is Rhizophagus irregularis.


## 3.11

No evidence for increased minor splicing in proliferating cells of R. irregularis spliceosome-specific non-coding RNAs (U11, U12, U4atac, and U6atac) (Fig. 11e,f). As found previously in animals and plants, we found a distinctive distribution of intron phase (position at which introns interrupt the coding codon series, whether between codons (phase 0) or after the first or second nucleotide of a codon (phase 1 and 2, respectively): whereas major introns typically show the pattern (ph0 > ph1 > ph2), minor introns in R. irregularis followed the minor pattern in animals and plants (ph1 > ph2 > ph0; [43,56]) (Fig. 11g). In total, we predict that 199 introns in R. irregularis are minortype (0.275% of 72,285 annotated introns), orders of magnitude higher than for other fungal species previously reported to contain minor introns (∼4 in Rhizopus oryzae and ∼20 in Phycomyces blakesleeanus) [3].


## No evidence for increased minor splicing in proliferating cells of R. irregularis

We next sought to test whether R. irregularis, like animals and plants, upregulates splicing of minor introns in proliferating cells. We used published transcriptomic data from five cell types (four replicates each), and assessed likely proliferation profiles of the six cell types using the previously published proliferation index (PI) approach. Briefly, we first identified putative orthologs of genes known to be associated with cell proliferation in humans. For each such putative PI ortholog, z-scores were calculated for all 20 samples, and those z-scores were then used for comparison across cell types as well as for comparisons within cell types between putative PI orthologs and other genes. This allowed us to calculate relative proliferation scores for all five cell types. While 4 5 cell types showed similar PI values, one cell type, immature spores, showed substantially and significantly higher values (Fig. 12a), a pattern that also held when we look at the more straightforward metric of adjusted FPKM values (Fig. 13). This overall significance notwithstanding, it should be noted that only a small fraction of genes included in the PI individually showed significant differences in expression between cell types. In addition, we noted that many non-PI genes are also overexpressed in immature spores relative to other cell types; while one interpretation of this result is that it reflects generally more active gene expression in proliferating cells, it does provide a caveat for the overall strength of the observed difference.

We then tested the association between markers of minor spliceosomal activity and these proliferation scores. We first looked for systematic differences in overall gene expression of MIGs between cell types with different proliferation scores, using various approaches. First, using the same zscore based approach as for the proliferation score (though with MIGs instead of putative PI orthologs), we found that MIGs were in fact more highly expressed in cell types with higher proliferation scores (Fig. 12b). On the other hand, we found that very few MIGs reached significant levels of differential expression, and were in fact underrepresented among genes that showed significant differential expression in multiple comparisons between cell types of different proliferation index scores (e.g., 4.2% of minor intron-containing genes compared to 21.9% of other genes in the IS-MS comparison). In total, these results suggest that expression of MIGs shows a detectable but only moderate association with proliferation index in R. irregularis, in contrast to the robust results previously observed in humans.

We next compared the efficiency of minor intron splicing between cell types. Contrary to our hypothesis that minor splicing would be more active in proliferating cells, we found that minor intron retention was in fact significantly (though only modestly) higher in proliferating cells (Fig. 12c). This result held whether we used z-score-based metrics or the intron retention values themselves, and whether we used splicing efficiency or intron retention as our metric. We also assessed expression of the minor splicing machinery itself (i.e., the known components of the minor spliceosome). In comparisons between immature spores and other cell types, no component individually showed higher expression, however collectively the machinery was 3.5x more highly expressed in immature spores than other cell types, reaching significance when considered collectively. However, the major spliceosomal machinery also showed a similar pattern (with 5x higher expression), and as such it seems that lower expression of the minor splicing machinery could be part of a larger pattern of up/regulation of core molecular functions in proliferating/quiescent cells.

The observed association between minor intron splicing and cell proliferation in animals resonates with the longstanding finding that minor introns are overrepresented in genes involved in core cellular processes. Given that minor intron splicing in Rhizophagus does not appear to be associated with cell proliferation, we probed these patterns more deeply.

Gene ontology analysis of Rhizophagus MIGs revealed a curious pattern in which GO results were highly dependent on the control dataset used. Because of the dearth of Rhizophagus functional annotations, GO analyses were necessarily run by identifying human orthologs of Rhizophagus MIGs. When GO analysis was run on these orthologs as a subset of all human genes, a number of overrepresented functional categories were found, in large part mirroring results for humans. However, we realized that there is a potential bias in this analysis: all human genes present in the Rhizophagus MIG ortholog set have Rhizophagus orthologs, thus excluding most human genes (only 14%, 3190/23257, had identified Rhizophagus orthologs), and in particular animalspecific genes. Remarkably, when we limited our GO analysis control group to human genes with Rhizophagus orthologs, we found much less functional overrepresentation (Table 4).

Notably, a similar concern applies to human MIGs in general: because nearly all human minor introns are quite old, human MIGs are commensurately old, which could drive functional correlations given known differences in functional categories between genes of different ages. Indeed, when we performed a GO analysis of human MIGs with Rhizophagus orthologs, limiting the reference set to human genes    with Rhizophagus orthologs (a rough surrogate for gene age given that, unlike baker's yeast, Rhizophagus may not have lost many ancestral genes [75]), we found a much lower degree of functional enrichment (Table 5). These results support the conclusion that the long-standing result that minor introns are functionally overrepresented in core cellular processes may be largely explained by the fact that minor introns fall primarily in evolutionarily older genes, which are overrepresented in core cellular functions. Interestingly, when we compared all human MIGs (given that minor intron presence strongly suggests that a gene is ancient) to human genes with Rhizophagus orthologs, we did see a significant number of overrepresented functional categories (https: //doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.20483841). It is not entirely clear why all MIGs, but not MIGs with Rhizophagus orthologs, show substantial functional differences relative to all genes with Rhizophagus orthologs. Insofar as MIGs are ancient genes, MIGs without Rhizophagus orthologs likely represent losses in fungi; gene losses are likely to be functionally biased, perhaps explaining the observed pattern.


# Discussion


## An expanded view of minor intron diversity

Over the last decade (and after many if not all of the most prominent papers examining minor intron diversity were published), there has been a marked increase in the number of annotated genomes publicly available for bioinformatic analysis. Ten years ago, for example, NCBI had annotated fewer than 60 genomes-it now lists over 800, and that is counting only annotations performed by NCBI itself. The breadth of data now available has enabled us to undertake a much more sweeping, if necessarily less focused, assessment of minor in-tron diversity than has ever been possible before, uncovering a wide variety of both novel and confirmatory information about minor intron dynamics across the eukaryotic tree. We have shown for the first time the presence of substantial numbers of minor introns as well as minor spliceosomal snRNAs in a variety of lineages previously thought to be lacking them, including green algae, fungi and stramenopiles. In addition, we have described findings contradicting a number of longstanding results in the minor intron literature, and have highlighted various underappreciated differences between MIGs and other genes while broadening the scope of earlier, more limited analyses.

Although we have endeavored to be as careful as possible in curating the data we have reported, as with most computational studies of this scale there is bound to be some noise, especially given our reliance on existing gene annotations derived from heterogeneous pipelines. One persistent issue in bioinformatic analyses of minor introns is the lack of a gold standard, empirically-verified set of minor intron sequences. While comparative genomics can do a great deal of heavy lifting in this regard, it is often a time-consuming process at scale and the field in general would benefit greatly from a ground-truth set of minor introns. We look forward to this type of data-based upon minor spliceosome profiling or another similar empirical method-being used to improve the accuracy of minor intron identification and as a result, furthering our understanding of minor introns and their evolutionary dynamics.


## A complex history of minor intron evolution

These results underscore a complex history of minor intron evolution. We greatly expand the number of major eukaryotic groups known to contain minor introns including multiple unicellular lineages, highlighting the punctate distribution of minor introns. We show that multiple distantly-related lineages of fungi contain minor intron densities comparable to animals and plants. However, these three groups show dramatically different patterns of minor intron distribution. At one extreme, land plants show a high degree of minor intron stasis, with similar minor intron densities across nearly all studied plants. At the other extreme, fungi exhibit a wide diversity, with high minor intron densities in multiple lineages, greatly reduced numbers in multiple others, and complete absence from the globally dominant group Dikarya. Animals are somewhat intermediate, with minor intron presence in nearly all groups, but a range from very high to very low densities, and even multiple independent complete losses of minor introns. Of particular interest is the case of Dipterans, which exhibit massive reduction across the group, and yet almost no cases of complete loss. If is of great interest why these few minor introns have been so strongly retained across this clade. The diversity of minor intron conservation is also observed in terms of rates, with remarkable stasis in some groups (particularly vertebrates) contrasting with rapid turnover within single genera (e.g., Blastocystis, 92% (11/12) of minor introns in alignments between Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 and Blastocystis hominis lost in B. hominis).

We also document the remarkable diversity of the mechanisms by which minor introns are lost from genomes, ranging from nearly complete intron deletion to nearly complete conversion into major introns.

Our ancestral reconstructions suggest that ancestors of major groups (plants, animals, fungi) likely had modern densities comparable to the most minor intron-rich modern organisms (aside from the exceptional case of Physarum [41]). Coupled with very little evidence for de novo minor intron creation, this suggests a portrait in which modern organisms are largely minor intron-rich insofar as they have retained ancestral minor intron complements. The implied portrait contrasts with notions of multicellular organism has "highlyevolved"; rather, higher minor intron complements largely reflect lack of evolutionary change. The same contrast applies to within-kingdom comparisons: in particular, the animal lineages that have lost their minor spliceosomal systems (nematodes, myxozoa, oikopleuridae, tardigrades) have all been found to be generally fast-evolving at the genome level, including in terms of ancestral loss of spliceosomal introns overall ( [46,66,55], GEL and SWR unpublished data).


## Many features of minor intron evolution are consistent with neutral evolution

Attempts to make sense of the minor introns have generally alternatively argued they are functionally important or deleterious. Arguments for minor introns' importance have noted their over-representation in genes with certain functions, associations of minor splicing with cell differentiation including apparent master regulatory roles, and one influential study finding greater evolutionary conservation of minor introns. Arguments that minor introns are deleterious tend to invoke their generally lower efficiency of splicing in addition to the complications and costs associated with maintaining two separate spliceosomal machineries. Our results are not supportive of either of these perspectives as a general explanation for minor introns across eukaryotes. First, we report that apparent functional biases among minor intron-containing genes may be largely explained by minor introns bias towards ancient genes: because most minor introns are old, most MIGs are old, and core cellular processes are over-represented among old genes. This suggests that minor intron distributions across genes could simply reflect largely unbiased minor intron gain in ancestral genomes, followed by a lack of minor gain in more recent evolutionary time. Second, from our preliminary data in the minor intron-rich fungus Rhizophagus irregularis it does not appear that minor splicing is associated with cell proliferation in this species, suggesting that such an association may be specific to certain lineages and thus not capable of explaining general features of minor introns across eukaryotes. Third, we find a remarkably constant (though slight) trend for lesser, not greater, conservation of minor introns compared to major introns. Interestingly, we find very similar rates of intron loss by genomic deletion for minor and major introns, suggesting that minor introns' somewhat lower overall evolutionary conservation reflects minor introns' "extra" mechanism of loss through conversion to major introns. Our finding of similar rates of minor and major intron deletion is also not as predicted if minor introns are deleterious relative to major introns. Notably, this lack of an excess of minor intron loss is also observed in the lineages experiencing high degrees of minor-to-major conversion, which represent the best candidates for lineages in which minor introns might be deleterious. In total, then, our results suggest that neutral processes can explain much of the observed minor intron pattern across eukaryotes. This is not to say that all minor intron evolution is neutral, particularly in light of important cases of regulated and alternative splicing of minor introns; however, it may be the case that neutral processes govern most minor introns under most circumstances, and thus dominate the patterns across both genomes and lineages.


## Secondary recruitment of ancient machineries for cell cycle regulation

Prior to the current work, we perceived a chicken and egg problem of functional biases among MIGs [11,44] and control of cell proliferation by regulation of minor splicing ( [27,52,2]: that is, how could the regulatory control evolve without the functional bias, by why would the functional bias evolve without the regulatory function? We thus sought to illuminate this question by studying a third minor intron-rich lineage. The current findings that the observed functional biases appear to be largely explained by minor introns' bias towards older genes, and older genes bias towards core cellular functions, suggest an answer. Thus, functional biases could have initially evolved due to these gene age biases, and this functional bias could then have secondarily been recruited to regulate cell proliferation in animals in plants.

While this scenario makes sense schematically, is remains a remarkable contention that decreased minor splicing could evolve a function in cell regulation; insofar as MIGs represent a quasi-random subset of ancient genes, it seems likely that a global reduction in minor splicing would have a wide variety of impacts, many of them likely costly. Thus how failure to process a quasi-randomly chosen set of ancestral genes could evolve as a regulatory mechanism remains puzzling, and will require additional work across diverse minor intron-containing lineages.

Our results do not support the emerging dominant hypothesis for the existence of minor introns, namely that minor introns provide a means for regulation of cell cycle progression. The reported lack of cell cycle-regulated minor intron splicing in fungi suggests that this association is not a general phenomenon, correspondingly weakening the hypothesis that such a function could explain the persistence of minor introns across eukaryotes generally. However, given the possibility that it may be fungi that are atypical, having secondarily lost this function, discovery and study of additional minor intronrich lineages is a priority, as is development and testing of alternative hypotheses for the origins and functional biases of minor intron-containing genes.


## Limitations of the Rhizophagus analysis

Possible caveats of this analysis arise from two surrogates that we have employed. First, to assess cell cycle activity/proliferation of cell types, we have used orthologs of human genes associated with proliferation. The possibility of turnover of gene expression patterns raises the concern that these genes are not an appropriate gene set to assess proliferation. Indeed, while clear statistical differences in proliferation are seen when PI genes are viewed collectively, only a small fraction (∼5-10%) individually show significantly different expression between cell types. However, similar comparisons with model fungi attest to generally good conservation of genes' association with proliferation, consistent with an ancient core of cell cycle regulation. Second, we have used available transcriptomic data not specifically generated for the purposes of comparing proliferation, potentially leading to noise in the data. However, the general pattern observed, in which developing spores show the highest proliferation index, mirrors intuitive expectations, suggesting that our proliferation scores are capturing at least some of the relevant biological phenomena. Testing of transcriptomic effects of direct manipulations of cell cycle would be very useful to confirm (or refute) our results.


# Data availability

Plain text data for Fig. 1 is archived on FigShare at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.


## 20483655.

Additional versions of certain figures, including a rectangular version of Fig. 1 and interactive versions of the plots in Fig. 9 are available at https://github.com/glarue/minor_introns.


# Bibliography


6 

## 5


## Fig. 3 .
3Average minor intron density (percentage of introns which are minor type; blue bars) in various eukaryotic clades. Integer numbers following clade names denote number of species represented. Outer circle indicates the minor intron density of the human genome. Taxonomic relationships based upon data from the NCBI Taxonomy Database[24].

## Fig. 5 .
5Conservation and loss of minor and major introns. (a) Comparison of major (y-axis) vs. minor (x-axis) intron conservation across hundreds of pairs of species. Bilat.-non-bilat.: bilaterian vs. non-bilaterian (animal); Deut.-prot.: deuterostome vs. protostome. The yellow triangle indicates levels of conservation of major and minor introns between Homo sapiens and Arabidopsis thaliana as reported by Basu et al. [4]. Size of markers indicates number of minor introns conserved between each pair. (b) Minor vs. major intron loss, where "loss" includes both sequence deletion and conversion to an intron of the other type. Bars indicate standard error of the mean for averaged values. Marker size represents relative minor intron density. Species abbreviations are as follow: AdiRic: Adineta ricciae, AllFus: Allacma fusca, BatSal: Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans, BruMal: Brugia malayi, CioInt: Ciona intestinalis, CluMar: Clunio marinus, DapPul: Daphnia pulicaria, DimGyr: Dimorphilus gyrociliatus, DroMel: Drosophila melanogaster, EchMul: Echinococcus multilocularis, EntMai: Entomophaga maimaiga, FolCan: Folsomia candida, GalOcc: Galendromus occidentalis, HelRob: Helobdella robusta, HyaAzt: Hyalella azteca, IntLin: Intoshia linei, MucLus: Mucor lusitanicus, OpiFel: Opisthorchis felineus, PolVan: Polypedilum vanderplanki, SpiPun: Spizellomyces punctatus, StyCla: Styela clava, TetUrt: Tetranychus urticae, TriNat: Trichinella nativa, TroMer: Tropilaelaps mercedesae, VarJac: Varroa jacobsoni.(c) Minor vs. major intron loss, where "loss" represents actual deletion of the intron sequence. Other elements as inFig. 5b. (d)Minor intron loss vs. conversion, where "loss" represents actual deletion of the intron sequence. Other elements as inFig. 5b.

## Fig. 6 .
6Intron position distributions for major (red) and minor (yellow) introns in selected species. (a) Species enriched in minor introns. (b) Species with significant inferred minor intron loss; white dots represent individual minor introns. For both plots: Dashed lines represent the first, second and third quartiles of each distribution. Statistically

## Fig. 7 .
7Minor and major intron phase biases. (a) and (b): Phase distributions of major and minor introns, respectively, in various species. Numbers at the ends of bars represent the total number of constituent introns. (c) Proportions of phase 1 (y-axis) vs. phase 0 (x-axis) for major introns in species with minor introns. Correlation of phase 0 to phase 1: ρs = −0.81, p = 0.0. (d) Proportions of phase 1 (y-axis) vs. phase 0 (x-axis) of minor introns in various species. Correlation of phase 0 to phase 1: ρs = −0.48, p = 2.14 × 10 −87 (e) Unusually high proportions of phase 0 minor introns in certain species. Numbers at the end of each bar represent the total number of constituent introns. Proportions of phase 0 minor introns for all species are significantly different from expected values derived from the proportion of phase 0 minor introns in human (phase 0 vs. sum of other phases, Boschloo's exact test p < 0.05 ).

## Fig. 8 .
8Non-canonical minor intron motifs in animals and plants. (a) and (b): Non-canonical intron termini found in conserved minor introns in animals and plants, respectively. (c) Sequence motifs of the 5 ′ SS, BPS and 3 ′ SS regions of non-canonical minor introns in animals and plants. The terminal dinucleotide pairs are highlighted in gray.

## Fig. 9 .
9Features of MIGs and minor introns. (a) and (b): Median genic intron density (introns/kbp coding sequence) and gene length (sum of CDS), respectively, for major-intron-only genes (y-axis) vs. minor intron-containing genes (x-axis). (c) Median major intron length (y-axis) vs. median minor intron length (x-axis) for all species with high-confidence minor introns. Size of markers indicates number of minor introns in the genome. Inset: The subset of the same data with length ≤ 1000 bp.

## Fig. 11 .
11RhiIrr TTAACAGATGGAAATCCTAATTGCGTAAATA atatcctttt...tatgttattcttaataatactattttacac ATATCCAAACTATCTTGAATTCGAATAAGGAT HomSap TTAACTGATGGGAATGAAAAGGCCATCAGAA gtatccttat...tgcagatgttttcttaactgtgtcctgtag ATGTGCAAGACATCATCACAAGGAATCAGAAG NemVec CTGACTGATGGAAATCTGGAATCTGTTCAAA gtatcctttg...gtacaaagcctccttaatttacttgacaag ATATTGATCACATTATTGAAAAGAACATTGAA AraTha ATCTCCGATGGAAACCCCCAAGTAGTCAATT gtatccttca...tttggattcattgatgtacttaacatccag ATATTAAACGTAACATAGAAACCAACTCCATG PhyPat CTTACCGACGGAAATCCTCATGTTGTGGAAT gtacgtcatc...atctagtttgttccactgtttcggttgcag ATATACAAAAGAATATTACAGCAAATAATGAG VPS35 (XM_025323226.1, intron 2) K L S P K S Y Y E L Y M A I F D E L R H L RhiIrr GCTTTAACTCCAAAACATTATTATGAACTCT gtatcttttt...atcaaccttgacgaaatgttttacggaaag ATATGGCAATTTTTGATGCTCTCCGACACCTC HomSap ATGTTATCACCAAAGAGTTACTATGAACTTT gtatcttttg...ttatttttagtccttaatcataattaaaag ATATGGCCATTTCTGATGAACTGCACTACTTG NemVec CTGCTTTCGCCAAAAAGTTACTACGAGCTGT gtatccttgt...tgttgttaaattctttaacatgttgactag ACATGGCAATATCTGATGAGCTTCGCCATCTA AraTha AAGCTCTCTCCTCAGAAATATTACGATCTCT gtagattcca...agtttctaattatttttccttctaatttag ATATGAGAGCTTTCGATCAATTGAGGCAGCTG PhyPat AAGTTGTCTCCGCAGAAATACTACGAGCTCT gtatccggac...tgaggtttgatgcccttgacctgcaacaag ACATGAGGACTTTCGATGAGCTGAGGCAGCTGEXO1 (XM_025315603.1, intron 6) . L D E D L D F A G P . M P Q D I A L G I RhiIrr GATATTTCACTTGATACGGATTATATTGGATC gtatcctata...gttgtaaagatgtcttaactcgaataatag TAACATGGATAAAAATATCGCCTTAGGTATT HomSap GTTGATCCTGAAACACTAAGCTACGCTGGGCA gtatcctttc...atacatttttccttaatcttgctaatctag ATATGTTGATGATTCCATAGCTCTTCAAATA NemVec TCTCATGACCACAACCTGCACTTCGCTGGACC gtatccttgc...tactgtaacactccttgacctgtactatag TGCGATGCCCAGGGATAAAGCACTTGGCATA AraTha AACCTTGGTGAAGATTCAGATTTTGTAGGCCC atatcctttg...acatctaattgatttcttaacataattcac ATCGATGCCACAAGATATTGCTAAGGGTATA PhyPat GAACTTGACACCAACCTAGACTTTCTGGGACC atatcctctt...tcacctgttatacacttaaccctgacctac GCACCTCCCTCAGACAACTGCCACAGCCATC Evidence of minor introns and splicing machinery in Physarum polycephalum. (a) BPS vs. 5 ′ SS scores for Rhizophagus irregularis, showing the expected cloud of introns with minor-intron-like 5 ′ SS and BPS scores in the first quadrant. (b) Comparison of minor intron sequence motifs in Rhizophagus, human and Arabidopsis. (c) Conservation of Rhizophagus minor and major introns in different species. (d) Examples of minor introns in Rhizophagus in conserved alignments with minor introns in other species. (e) The four minor snRNAs U11, U12, U4atac and U6atac found in Rhizophagus. (f) Comparison of minor intron phase distributions in different species, showing the expected pattern in Rhizophagus. Species abbreviations are as follow: HomSap: Homo sapiens, NemVec: Nematostella vectensis, AraTha: Arabidopsis thaliana, PhyPat: Physcomitrium patens, RhiMic: Rhizopus microsporus, ZeaMay: Zea mays, GalGal: Gallus gallus.

## Fig. 12 .
12(a) Comparison of expression of proliferation-index genes (PI, light purple) and all other genes (Non-PI, dark purple) across cell types, n=70 PI and n=9276 non-PI in each cell type. (b) As in (a), but for minor intron-containing genes (MIGs) compared to non-MIGs; n=96 MIG and n=9249 non-MIG for each cell type. (c) Intron retention values across cell types for U12-(blue, left) and U2-type (orange, right) introns. Cell types are labeled as described in the text.


3.1 Minor intron diversity in thousands of eukaryotic genomesCorvus 

monedulo 

ides 
Corvus 

cornix 
Corvus 

kubaryi 

Corvus 

brachyrhyn 

chos 

Cnemophi 

lus loriae 
Oriolus 

oriolus 

Aphelocom 

a coerulesce 

ns 

Rhagologu 

s leucostigm 

a 

Daphoenos 

itta chrysopter 

a 

Falcunculu 

s frontatus 
Aleadryas 

rufinucha 

Eulacestom 

a nigropectus 

Pachyceph 

ala philippinen 

sis 

Erythrocerc 

us mccallii 

Machaerirh 

ynchus 
nigripectus 
Dicrurus 

megarhync 

hus 

Chloropsis 

hardwickii 
Chloropsis 

cyanopogon 
Irena 
cyanogastra 
Ifrita kowaldi 
Ptilorrhoa 

leucosticta 
Struthidea 

cinerea 
Vireo 
altiloquus 
Dryoscopus 

gambensis 
Lanius 
ludovicianus 
Myiagra 
hebetior 
Callaeas 

wilsoni 

Edolisoma 

coerulescen 

s 

Orthonyx 

spaldingii 
Platysteira 

castanea 
Emberiza 

fucata 
Calcarius 

ornatus 
Passerina 

amoena 

Pheucticus 

melanocepha 

lus 
Loxia 
leucoptera 
Loxia 
curvirostra 
Serinus 
canaria 
Peucedramus 

taeniatus 
Urocynchram 

us pylzowi 
Prunella 
fulvescens 
Prunella 
himalayana 
Pyrgilauda 

ruficollis 
Passer 
montanus 
Chloebia 
gouldiae 

Onychostruthu 

s taczanowskii 
Vidua chalybeata 

Vidua macroura 
Taeniopygia 

guttata 
Lonchura 
striata 
Promerops 

cafer 
Leptocoma 

aspasia 
Molothrus 
ater 
Quiscalus 
mexicanus 
Melanocharis 

versteri 
Dicaeum 
eximium 
Setophaga 
kirtlandii 
Oreocharis 
arfaki 
Motacilla 
alba 
Ploceus 
nigricollis 
Cettia cetti 
Hippolais 
icterina 
Sylvietta 
virens 
Hylia prasina 
Acrocephalus 

arundinaceus 
Panurus 
biarmicus 
Sinosuthora 
webbiana 
Pomatostomus 

ruficeps 
Illadopsis 
cleaveri 
Pteruthius 
melanotis 
Pomatorhinus 

ruficollis 
Erpornis 
zantholeuca 
Mystacornis 
crossleyi 
Oxylabes 
madagascariensis 
Zosterops 
hypoxanthus 
Zosterops 
borbonicus 
Hypocryptadius 

cinnamomeus 
Sterrhoptilus 
dennistouni 
Brachypodius 
atriceps 
Pycnonotus 
jocosus 
Nicator chloris 
Hirundo rustica 
Cisticola juncidis 

Leiothrix lutea 
Horornis vulcanius 

Rhadina sibilatrix 
Alaudala cheleensis 
Locustella ochotensis 

Aegithalos caudatus 
Mionectes macconnelli 

Empidonax 
traillii 
Pachyramphus 
minor 
Sapayoa aenigma 
Tachuris rubrigastra 
Neopipo cinnamomea 
Opistho comus hoazin 
Nothop rocta ornata 

Nothop rocta pentlan dii 
Nothop 

rocta perdica ria 

Nothoc ercus nigroca pillus 
Nothoc ercus julius 

Cryptur ellus undulat us 
Cryptur ellus soui 
Tinamu s guttatu s 
Apteryx mantell i 
Apteryx rowi 

Dromai 

us novaeh ollandia e 
Struthio camelu s 

Alligato r mississ ippiens 

is 

Alligato r sinensi s 

Crocod ylus porosu s 
Gaviali s ganget icus 
Chryse mys picta 

Trache mys scripta 
Terrape ne carolin a 

Chelon oidis abingd onii 
Gophe 

rus evgood ei 

Maurem ys mutica 
Maurem ys reeves ii 

Platyst ernon megac ephalu m 

Chelon ia mydas 

Dermo chelys coriace a 
Chelyd ra serpen tina 
Pelodis cus sinens is 
Notech is scutatu s 
Pseud onaja textilis 
Ophiop hagus hannah 
Naja naja 

Crotalu s 
adama nteus 
Crotalu s 

tigris 

Bothro ps 

jararac a 

Protob othrops mucros quama tus 
Thamn ophis elegan s 
Thamn ophis sirtalis 

Panthe rophis guttatu s 
Python bivittatu s 

Scelop orus undula tus 

Phryno soma platyrh inos 
Anolis carolin ensis 
Pogona vitticep s 

Varanu s 
komod oensis 

Zootoc a 

vivipara 

Lacerta agilis 

Podarc is 

muralis 

Gekko japonic us 

Sphaer odactyl us 

townse ndi 

Mustela putoriu s 
Mustela ermine a 
Neogal e 

vison 

Enhydr a 

lutris 

Lontra canade nsis 
Gulo gulo 

Halicho erus grypus 

Leptony chotes weddel lii 
Miroung a 

leonina 

Phoca vitulina 

Neomo nachus schauin slandi 
Vulpes vulpes 
Vulpes lagopus 
Canis lupus 

Nyctere utes procyon oides 
Ursus arctos 

Ursus maritim us 

Ailuropo da 
melano leuca 

Zalophu s californi anus 
Callorhi nus ursinus 
Eumeto pias jubatus 
Odoben us 

rosmaru s 

Puma concolo r 

Puma yagouar oundi 
Lynx pardinus 

Lynx canaden sis 
Felis catus 

Prionailu rus 
bengale nsis 

Leopard us 

geoffroy i 

Panther a leo 

Panther a pardus 
Panther a tigris 

Acinony x jubatus 
Crocuta crocuta 
Hyaena hyaena 
Suricata suricatta 

Lagenor hynchus obliquide ns 
Globicep hala melas 
Orcinus orca 

Tursiops truncatu s 

Neophoc aena asiaeorie ntalis 
Phocoen a sinus 

Delphina pterus leucas 
Monodon monocer os 
Physeter catodon 
Lipotes vexillifer 

Pontopo ria 

blainville i 

Balaenop tera 

acutoros trata 

Balaenop tera 

physalus 

Balaenop tera 

musculus 

Bos 

taurus 

Bos 

indicus 

Bos 
indicus x bos 

taurus 

Bos 

mutus 

Bison bison 
Bubalus bubalis 
Capra hircus 
Ovis aries 

Oryx dammah 

Cervus canadens is 
Cervus elaphus 
Cervus hanglu 

Odocoileu s virginianu s 
Muntiacus muntjak 

Camelus bactrianus 

Camelus dromedar ius 
Camelus ferus 
Vicugna pacos 
Sus 

scrofa 

Myotis lucifugus 
Myotis myotis 
Myotis brandtii 
Myotis davidii 
Pipistrellus kuhlii 
Eptesicus fuscus 

Miniopteru s natalensis 
Artibeus jamaicens is 
Sturnira hondurens is 
Desmodus rotundus 
Phyllostom us 

discolor 

Rhinolophu s ferrumequi num 
Molossus molossus 
Hipposider os 

armiger 

Pteropus alecto 

Pteropus vampyrus 
Pteropus giganteus 

Rousettus aegyptiacu s 
Talpa occidentalis 
Condylura cristata 

Galemys pyrenaicus 
Erinaceus europaeus 
Sorex araneus 
Equus asinus 
Equus caballus 

Equus przewalskii 
Ceratotheriu m simum 
Manis javanica 

Manis pentadactyla 

Mus 

caroli 

Mus 

musculus 

Mus 

pahari 

Rattus norvegicus 
Rattus rattus 

Grammomys surdaster 
Mastomys coucha 
Arvicanthis niloticus 

Meriones unguiculatus 
Peromyscus leucopus 

Peromyscus maniculatus 
Onychomys torridus 
Neotoma lepida 
Microtus oregoni 

Microtus ochrogaster 
Arvicola amphibius 
Cricetulus griseus 
Mesocricetus auratus 
Nannospalax galili 

Jaculus jaculus 

Fukomys damarensis 
Heterocephalu s glaber 
Cavia 

porcellus 

Octodon degus 
Chinchilla lanigera 
Marmota marmota 
Marmota monax 

Marmota flaviventris 
Urocitellus parryii 

Ictidomys tridecemlineatus 
Dipodomys ordii 

Dipodomys spectabilis 
Castor 

canadensis 

Ochotona princeps 
Ochotona curzoniae 
Oryctolagus cuniculus 
Macaca 

fascicularis 

Macaca 

mulatta 

Macaca 

nemestrina 

Cercocebus atys 
Papio 

anubis 

Theropithecus gelada 

Mandrillus leucophaeus 
Chlorocebus sabaeus 
Rhinopithecus bieti 

Rhinopithecus roxellana 

Piliocolobus tephrosceles 
Colobus 

angolensis 

Trachypithecus francoisi 
Pan paniscus 
Pan troglodytes 
Gorilla 

gorilla 

Homo 

sapiens 

Pongo 

abelii 

Nomascus 

leucogenys 

Hylobates 

moloch 

Sapajus 

apella 

Cebus 

imitator 

Callithrix 

jacchus 

Saimiri 

boliviensis 

Aotus 

nancymaae 

Carlito 

syrichta 

Lemur 

catta 

Propithecus 

coquereli 

Microcebus 

murinus 

Otolemur 

garnettii 

Tupaia 

chinensis 

Galeopterus 

variegatus 

Echinops 

telfairi 

Trichechus 

manatus 

Loxodonta 

africana 

Orycteropus 

afer 

Elephantulus 

edwardii 

Chrysochloris 

asiatica 

Dasypus 

novemcinctus 

Choloepus 

didactylus 

Trichosurus 

vulpecula 

Vombatus 

ursinus 

Phascolarctos 

cinereus 

Gracilinanus 

agilis 

Monodelphis 

domestica 

Dromiciops 

gliroides 

Sarcophilus 

harrisii 

Ornithorhynchus 

anatinus 

Tachyglossus 

aculeatus 

Bufo bufo 

Bufo gargarizans 
Engystomops 

pustulosus 

Ranitomeya 

imitator 

Eleutherodactylus 

coqui 

Lithobates catesbeianus 
Rana temporaria 
Nanorana parkeri 
Xenopus laevis 

Xenopus tropicalis 
Hymenochirus 

boettgeri 

Rhinatrema bivittatum 
Microcaecilia unicolor 
Geotrypetes seraphini 
Protopterus annectens 
Latimeria chalumnae 
Notothenia coriiceps 
Dissostichus mawsoni 
Trematomus bernacchii 
Gymnodraco acuticeps 
Pseudochaenichthys georgianus 
Cottoperca gobio 
Etheostoma cragini 

Etheostoma spectabile 
Perca flavescens 
Perca fluviatilis 
Sander lucioperca 
Liparis tanakae 
Cyclopterus lumpus 
Gasterosteus aculeatus 
Pungitius pungitius 
Anarrhichthys ocellatus 
Plectropomus leopardus 
Epinephelus lanceolatus 

S ebastes 

umbrosus Takifugu 
rubripes Takifugu 
flavidus Takifugu 
bimaculatus Tetraodon 
nigroviridis Larimichthys 
crocea Collichthys 
lucidus Nibea 
albiflora Morone 
saxatilis Cheilinus 
undulatus Notolabrus 
celidotus Labrus 
bergylta Micropterus 

salmoides Siniperca 
chuatsi Sparus 
aurata Acanthopagrus 

latus 

Chelmon 

rostratus Poecilia 
formosa Poecilia 
latipinna Poecilia 
mexicana Poecilia 
reticulata Xiphophorus 

couchianus 

Xiphophorus 

maculatus 

Xiphophorus 

hellerii 

Gambusia 

affinis 
Cyprinodon 

tularosa 

Cyprinodon 

variegatus 

Fundulus 

heteroclitus 
Nematolebias 

whitei 
Austrofundulus 

limnaeus 

Kryptolebias 

marmoratus 
Nothobranchius 

furzeri 

Oryzias 

javanicus 

Oryzias 

melastigma 

Oryzias 

latipes 

Menidia 

menidia 
Melanotaenia 

boesemani 

Maylandia 

zebra 

Pundamilia 

nyererei 
Haplochromis 

burtoni 

Astatotilapia 

calliptera 

Oreochromis 

aureus 

Oreochromis 

niloticus 

Simochromis 

diagramma 
Neolamprologus 

brichardi Archocentrus 
centrarchus 

Stegastes 

partitus 
Acanthochromis 

polyacanthus Amphiprion 
ocellaris 
Parambassis 

ranga Salarias 
fasciatus 

Gouania 

willdenowi 
Hippoglossus 

hippoglossus Hippoglossus 
stenolepis Paralichthys 
olivaceus Scophthalmus 
maximus Solea 
senegalensis 
Cynoglossus 

semilaevis Seriola 
dumerili 

Seriola 

lalandi 

Caranx 

melampygus 
Echeneis 

naucrates 

Toxotes 

jaculatrix 

Lates 

calcarifer 
Xiphias 

gladius 
Mastacembelus 

armatus 

Monopterus 

albus Betta 
splendens 
Anabas 

testudineus 
Periophthalmus 

magnuspinnatus 

Boleophthalmus 

pectinirostris 

Sphaeramia 

orbicularis Thunnus 
albacares Thunnus 
maccoyii Hippocampus 

comes 

Syngnathus 

acus Thalassophryne 
amazonica 

Lucifuga 

dentata Myripristis 
murdjan Coryphaenoides 

rupestris 

Gadus 

morhua 
Oncorhynchus 

tshawytscha 

Oncorhynchus 

keta 

Oncorhynchus 

kisutch 

Oncorhynchus 

mykiss 

Oncorhynchus 

nerka 

Salvelinus 

sp. 

iw2-2015 

Salvelinus 

namaycush Salmo 

salar 

Salmo 

trutta Coregonus 

sp. 

'balchen' 

Coregonus 

clupeaformis 

Esox 

lucius 
Sinocyclocheilu 

s 
grahami 

Sinocyclocheilu 

s 
anshuiensis 

Sinocyclocheilu 

s 
rhinocerous 

Carassius 

auratus 

Cyprinus 

carpio Onychostoma 

macrolepis 

Puntigrus 

tetrazona 

Danionella 

translucida 

Danio 

rerio Pimephales 

promelas 

Anabarilius 

grahami 

Triplophysa 

tibetana 

Hemibagrus 

wyckioides 

Tachysurus 

fulvidraco 

Ameiurus 

melas 

Ictalurus 

punctatus 

Bagarius 

yarrelli 

Silurus 

meridionalis Clarias 
magur Pangasianod 

on 
hypophthalm 

us 

Pygocentrus 

nattereri 

Colossoma 

macropomum 

Astyanax 

mexicanus 
Electrophoru 

s 
electricus 

Chanos 

chanos 

Alosa 

sapidissima Alosa 
alosa Clupea 
harengus Denticeps 
clupeoides 

Paramormy 

rops 

kingsleyae 

Scleropage 

s 
formosus 

Megalops 

cyprinoides 

Megalops 

atlanticus 

Albula 

glossodonta Anguilla 
anguilla 
Atractosteu 

s 
spatula 

Lepisosteu 

s 
oculatus 

Acipenser 

ruthenus 

Polyodon 

spathula 

Erpetoichth 

ys 
calabaricus 

Polypterus 

senegalus 

Chiloscylliu 

m 
plagiosum 

Chiloscylliu 

m 
punctatum 

Rhincodon 

typus 

Scyliorhinu 

s 
torazame 

Scyliorhinu 

s 
canicula 

Carcharod 

on 
carcharias 

Amblyraja 

radiata 

Callorhinc 

hus 

milii 

Petromyzo 

n 
marinus 

Eptatretus 

burgeri 

Ciona 

intestinalis 

Styela 

clava 
Oikopleur 

a 
dioica 

Branchios 

toma 

floridae 

Branchios 

toma 

belcheri 

Branchios 

toma 

lanceolatu 

m 

Acanthast 

er 
planci 

Patiria 

miniata 

Asterias 

rubens 

Lytechinu 

s 
variegatu 

s 

Strongylo 

centrotus 

purpuratu 

s 

Aposticho 

pus 

japonicus 

Anneissia 

japonica 

Saccoglo 

ssus 

kowalevs 

kii 

Drosophi 

la 
santomea 

Drosophi 

la 
erecta 

Drosophi 

la 
mauritian 

a 

Drosophi 

la 
melanoga 

ster 

Drosophi 

la 
sechellia 

Drosophi 

la 
simulans 

Drosophi 

la 
teissieri 

Drosophi 

la 
yakuba 

Drosophi 

la 
ananassa 

e 

Drosophi 

la 
pandora 

Drosoph 

ila 
bipectina 

ta 

Drosoph 

ila 
ironensis 

Drosoph 

ila 
biarmipe 

s 

Drosoph 

ila 
subpulch 

rella 

Drosoph 

ila 
suzukii 

Drosoph 

ila 
bunnand 

a 

Drosoph 

ila 
serrata 

Drosoph 

ila 
kikkawai 

Drosoph 

ila 
takahash 

ii 

Drosoph 

ila 
pseudota 

kahashii 

Drosoph 

ila 
rhopaloa 

Drosoph 

ila 
eugracili 

s 

Drosoph 

ila 
elegans 

Drosoph 

ila 
ficusphil 

a 

Drosoph 

ila 
miranda 

Drosoph 

ila 
persimili 

s 

Drosoph 

ila 
pseudoo 

bscura 

Drosoph 

ila 
subobsc 

ura 

Drosoph 

ila 
guanche 

Drosoph 

ila 
obscura 

Drosoph 

ila 
setifemu 

r 

Drosoph 

ila 
williston 

i 

Drosoph 

ila 
mojaven 

sis 

Drosoph 

ila 
navojoa 

Drosoph 

ila 
arizonae 

Drosoph 

ila 
hydei 

Drosoph 

ila 
sulfuriga 

ster 

Drosoph 

ila 
albomic 

ans 

Drosoph 

ila 
rubida 

Drosoph 

ila 
novame 

xicana 

Drosoph 

ila 
virilis 

Drosoph 

ila 
innubila 

Drosoph 

ila 
busckii 

Drosop 

hila 
grimsha 

wi 

Zaprion 

us 
bogorie 

nsis 

Scaptod 

rosophi 

la 
lebanon 

ensis 

Bactroc 

era 
tryoni 

Bactroc 

era 
latifrons 

Bactroc 

era 
dorsalis 

Bactroc 

era 
oleae 

Zeugod 

acus 

cucurbi 

tae 

Ceratiti 

s 
capitata 

Rhagol 

etis 
pomone 

lla 

Rhagol 

etis 
zephyri 

a 

Teleops 

is 
dalman 

ni 

Glossin 

a 
austeni 

Glossin 

a 
pallidip 

es 

Glossin 

a 
morsita 

ns 
morsita 

ns 

Glossin 

a 
fuscipe 

s 

Glossin 

a 
palpalis 

gambie 

nsis 

Glossin 

a 
brevipa 

lpis 

Lucilia 

sericata 

Lucilia 

cuprina 

Sarcop 

haga 

bullata 

Stomox 

ys 
calcitra 

ns 

Musca 

domes 

tica 

Megas 

elia 
scalaris 

Herme 

tia 
illucens 

Anophe 

les 
melas 

Anophe 

les 
quadria 

nnulatu 

s 

Anophe 

les 
coluzzi 

i 

Anoph 

eles 

merus 

Anoph 

eles 

gambia 

e 

Anoph 

eles 

arabien 

sis 

Anoph 

eles 

christy 

i 

Anoph 

eles 

epirotic 

us 

Anoph 

eles 

culicifa 

cies 

Anoph 

eles 

funestu 

s 

Anoph 

eles 
minimu 

s 

Anoph 

eles 
macula 

tus 

Anoph 

eles 
stephe 

nsi 

Anoph 

eles 
farauti 

Anoph 

eles 
dirus 

Anoph 

eles 
atropar 

vus 

Anoph 

eles 
sinens 

is 

Anoph 

eles 
darling 

i 

Anoph 

eles 
albima 

nus 

Aedes 

aegypt 

i 

Aedes 

albopic 

tus 

Culex 

pipiens 

Culex 

quinqu 

efascia 

tus 

Clunio 

marinu 

s 

Belgica 

antarct 

ica 

Polype 

dilum 

vander 

planki 

Culicoi 

des 
sonore 

nsis 

Contar 

inia 
nasturt 

ii 

Mayetio 

la destruc 

tor 

Bradys 

ia coprop 

hila 

Bradys 

ia odoriph 

aga 

Phlebo 

tomus 

papata 

si 

Lutzom 

yia 
longipa 

lpis 

Acromy 

rmex 

heyeri 

Acromy 

rmex 

insinua 

tor 

Acromy 

rmex 

charrua 

nus 

Acromy 

rmex 

echinat 

ior 

Trachym 

yrmex 

septent 

rionalis 

Trachym 

yrmex 

cornetz 

i 

Trachym 

yrmex 

zeteki 

Atta 
colomb 

ica 

Atta 
cephalo 

tes 

Cyphom 

yrmex 

costatu 

s 

Pseudo 

atta 
argentin 

a 

Monom 

orium 

pharaon 

is 

Solenop 

sis 
invicta 

Temnot 

horax 

curvispi 

nosus 

Temnot 

horax 

longispi 

nosus 

Vollenh 

ovia 
emeryi 

Pogono 

myrmex 

barbatu 

s 

Wasma 

nnia 
auropun 

ctata 

Lasius 

niger 

Nylande 

ria fulva 

Campon 

otus 
floridanu 

s 

Formica 

exsecta 

Dinopon 

era 
quadrice 

ps 

Odontom 

achus 

brunneu 

s 

Harpegn 

athos 

saltator 

Eciton 

burchell 

ii 

Oocerae 

a biroi 

Linepith 

ema 
humile 

Pseudom 

yrmex 

gracilis 

Bombus 

impatien 

s 

Bombus 

vancouv 

erensis 

Bombus 

vosnese 

nskii 

Bombus 

bifarius 

Bombus 

pyrosom 

a 

Bombus 

terrestris 

Apis 
laboriosa 

Apis 
mellifera 

Apis 
cerana 

Apis 
dorsata 

Apis 
florea 

Heterotri 

gona 
itama 

Melipona 

quadrifas 

ciata 

Frieseom 

elitta 
varia 

Eufriesea 

mexican 

a 

Habropo 

da laboriosa 

Ceratina 

calcarata 

Megalop 

ta genalis 

Dufourea 

novaean 

gliae 

Nomia 

melande 

ri 

Osmia 

bicornis 

Osmia 

lignaria 

Megachil 

e rotundata 

Ampulex 

compress 

a 

Colletes 

gigas 

Vespa 

velutina 

Vespa 

crabro 

Vespa 

mandarin 

ia 

Vespula 

pensylvan 

ica 

Polistes 

canadens 

is 

Polistes 

fuscatus 

Polistes 

dominula 

Cotesia 

congrega 

ta 

Cotesia 

typhae 

Cotesia 

glomerata 

Microplitis 

demolitor 

Diachasm 

a alloeum 

Fopius 

arisanus 

Chelonus 

insularis 

Aphidius 

gifuensis 

Venturia 

canescens 

Trichomalo 

psis 
sarcophag 

ae 

Nasonia 

vitripennis 

Trichogram 

ma brassicae 

Trichogram 

ma pretiosum 

Ceratosole 

n solmsi 

Copidosom 

a floridanum 

Leptopilina 

heterotom 

a 

Belonocne 

ma kinseyi 

Neodiprion 

fabricii 

Neodiprion 

lecontei 

Neodiprion 

pinetum 

Diprion 
similis 

Athalia 
rosae 

Orussus 

abietinus 

Cephus 

cinctus 

Vanessa 

atalanta 

Vanessa 

tameamea 

Vanessa 

cardui 

Melitaea 

cinxia 

Maniola 

hyperantus 

Maniola 

jurtina 

Pararge 

aegeria 

Bicyclus 

anynana 

Danaus 
plexippus 

plexippus 

Danaus 
chrysippus 

Heliconius 

melpomene 

Brenthis 

ino 

Pieris 
macdunnoug 

hi 

Pieris 
napi 

Pieris 
rapae 

Pieris 
brassicae 

Zerene 
cesonia 

Colias 
croceus 

Papilio 
xuthus 

Papilio 
machaon 

Papilio 
polytes 

Iphiclides 

podalirius 

Parnassius 

apollo 

Aricia 
agestis 

Spodoptera 

litura 

Spodoptera 

frugiperda 

Helicoverpa 

armigera 

Helicoverpa 

zea 

Trichoplusia 

ni 

Arctia 
plantaginis 

Amyelois 
transitella 

Galleria 
mellonella 

Chilo suppressalis 

Bombyx 
mori 

Bombyx 
mandarina 

Manduca 
sexta 

Hyposmocoma 

kahamanoa 

Plutella 
xylostella 

Eumeta 
japonica 

Gonioctena 

quinquepunctat 

a 

Leptinotarsa 

decemlineata 

Diabrotica 
virgifera 

Callosobruchus 

maculatus 

Anoplophora 

glabripennis 

Tribolium 
madens 

Tribolium 
castaneum 

Asbolus 
verrucosus 

Tenebrio 
molitor 

Coccinella 
septempunctata 

Harmonia 
axyridis 

Aethina 
tumida 

Brassicogethes 

aeneus 

Dendroctonus 

ponderosae 

Sitophilus 
oryzae 

Lamprigera 
yunnana 

Photinus 
pyralis 

Abscondita 
terminalis 

Ignelater 
luminosus 

Agrilus planipennis 

Onthophagus 
taurus 

Nicrophorus 
vespilloides 

Chrysoperla 
carnea 

Ctenocephalides 

felis 

Aphis craccivora 
Aphis glycines 
Aphis gossypii 

Rhopalosiphum 

maidis 

Melanaphis 
sacchari 

Diuraphis 
noxia 

Myzus persicae 

Acyrthosiphon 
pisum 

Sipha flava 
Cinara cedri 

Trialeurodes 
vaporariorum 

Bemisia tabaci 

Diaphorina 
citri 

Apolygus lucorum 

Nesidiocoris 
tenuis 

Cimex lectularius 
Rhodnius prolixus 

Halyomorpha 
halys 

Homalodisca 
vitripennis 

Nilaparvata lugens 
Frankliniella occidentalis 
Thrips palmi 
Pediculus humanus corporis 
Coptotermes formosanus 
Zootermopsis nevadensis 
Cryptotermes secundus 
Blattella germanica 
Schistocerca piceifrons 
Schistocerca americana 
Cloeon dipterum 
Ephemera danica 
Ischnura elegans 
Ladona fulva 
Folsomia candida 
Orchesella cincta 
Allacma fusca 
Penaeus chinensis 
Penaeus japonicus 
Penaeus monodon 
Penaeus vannamei 
Chionoecetes opilio 
Portunus trituberculatus 
Homarus americanus 
Procambarus clarkii 
Armadillidium vulgare 
Armadillidium nasatum 
Trinorchestia longiramus 

Hyalella azteca 

Caligus rogercresseyi 

Tigriopus californicus 

Eurytemora affinis 

Pollicipes pollicipes 

Amphibalanus amphitrite 

Daphnia pulicaria 

Daphnia magna 

Daphnia pulex 

Daphnia galeata 

Notodromas monacha 

Cyprideis torosa 

Darwinula stevensoni 

Strigamia maritima 

Dermatophagoides farinae 

Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 

Euroglyphus maynei 

Sarcoptes scabiei 

Tyrophagus putrescentiae 

Blomia tropicalis 

Medioppia subpectinata 

Oppiella nova 

Leptotrombidium deliense 

Dinothrombium tinctorium 

Halotydeus destructor 

Fragariocoptes setiger 

Tetranychus urticae 

Rhipicephalus sanguineus 

Rhipicephalus microplus 

Dermacentor silvarum 

Ixodes persulcatus 

Ixodes scapularis 

Haemaphysalis longicornis 

Hyalomma asiaticum 

Varroa destructor 

Varroa jacobsoni 

Tropilaelaps mercedesae 

Galendromus occidentalis 

Caerostris extrusa 

Caerostris darwini 

Araneus ventricosus 

Argiope bruennichi 

Trichonephila inaurata 

Trichonephila clavata 

Trichonephila clavipes 

Nephila pilipes 

Oedothorax gibbosus 

Parasteatoda tepidariorum 

Stegodyphus dumicola 

Stegodyphus mimosarum 

Centruroides sculpturatus 

Nymphon striatum 

Limulus polyphemus 

Hypsibius exemplaris 

Ramazzottius varieornatus 

Brugia timori 

Brugia malayi 

Onchocerca flexuosa 

Onchocerca volvulus 

Acanthocheilonema viteae 

Cercopithifilaria johnstoni 

Loa loa 

Thelazia callipaeda 

Gongylonema pulchrum 

Toxocara canis 

Anisakis simplex 

Enterobius vermicularis 

Dracunculus medinensis 

Caenorhabditis auriculariae 

Caenorhabditis bovis 

Caenorhabditis japonica 

Caenorhabditis brenneri 

Caenorhabditis nigoni 

Caenorhabditis briggsae 

Caenorhabditis elegans 

Caenorhabditis remanei 

Diploscapter pachys 

Pristionchus pacificus 

Bursaphelenchus xylophilus 

Bursaphelenchus okinawaensis 

Aphelenchus avenae 

Meloidogyne graminicola 

Meloidogyne enterolobii 

Ditylenchus destructor 

Strongyloides ratti 

Steinernema carpocapsae 

Halicephalobus sp. nkz332 

Ancylostoma duodenale 

Ancylostoma ceylanicum 

Ancylostoma caninum 

Necator americanus 

Cylicostephanus goldi 

Strongylus vulgaris 

Oesophagostomum dentatum 

Teladorsagia circumcincta 

Haemonchus placei 

Dictyocaulus viviparus 

Angiostrongylus cantonensis 

Angiostrongylus costaricensis 

Trichinella sp. t9 

Trichinella sp. t6 

Trichinella sp. t8 

Trichinella britovi 

Trichinella papuae 

Trichinella zimbabwensis 

Trichinella spiralis 

Trichinella nativa 

Trichinella nelsoni 

Trichinella pseudospiralis 

Trichinella patagoniensis 

Trichuris trichiura 

Trichuris suis 

Soboliphyme baturini 

Priapulus caudatus 

Schistosoma japonicum 

Schistosoma mansoni 

Schistosoma haematobium 

Schistosoma bovis 

Schistosoma mattheei 

Schistosoma margrebowiei 

Trichobilharzia regenti 

Paragonimus westermani 

Paragonimus heterotremus 

Paragonimus kellicotti 

Paragonimus skrjabini miyazakii 

Fasciolopsis buski 

Echinostoma caproni 

Opisthorchis felineus 

Opisthorchis viverrini 

Clonorchis sinensis 

Echinococcu 

s granulosus 
Echinococcu 

s multilocularis 
Hydatigera taeniaeformi s 

Rodentolepis nana 

Mesocestoid es corti 

Spirometra erinaceieuro paei 

Dibothriocep halus latus 

Sparganum proliferum 

Protopolysto ma xenopodis 

Macrostomu m lignano 

Elysia chlorotica 

Elysia marginata 

Plakobranch us ocellatus 

Biomphalar ia glabrata 

Bulinus truncatus 

Candidula unifasciata 

Aplysia californica 

Batillaria attramentar ia 

Pomacea canaliculata 

Haliotis rubra 

Haliotis rufescens 

Lottia gigantea 

Gigantopel ta aegis 

Crassostre a gigas 

Crassostre a virginica 

Mizuhopec 

ten yessoensis 
Pecten maximus 

Mytilus galloprovin cialis 

Dreissena polymorph a 

Mercenaria mercenaria 

Octopus sinensis 

Octopus bimaculoid es 

Sepia pharaonis 

Owenia fusiformis 

Lamellibra chia satsuma 

Streblospi o benedicti 

Capitella teleta 

Dimorphilu s gyrociliatu s 

Helobdella robusta 

Intoshia linei 

Bugula neritina 

Pomphorh ynchus laevis 

Lingula anatina 

Rotaria sp. silwood1 

Rotaria sp. silwood2 

Rotaria socialis 

Rotaria sordida 

Adineta ricciae 

Adineta vaga 

Adineta steineri 

Didymod actylos carnosus 

Seison nebaliae 

Hofstenia miamia 

Stylopho ra pistillata 

Pocillopo ra damicorn is 

Acropora millepora 

Acropora digitifera 

Orbicella faveolata 

Actinia tenebros a 

Actinia equina 

Nematos tella vectensis 

Exaiptas 

ia diaphana 
Dendron 

ephthya gigantea 
Xenia sp. carnegie -2017 

Myxobol us squamal is 

Hennegu ya salminico la 

Theloha nellus kitauei 

Hydra vulgaris 

Clytia hemisph aerica 

Trichopla 

x sp. h2 
Trichopla x adhaere ns 

Mnemio psis leidyi 

Ephydat ia muelleri 

Amphim edon queensl andica 

Mucor ambiguu 

s 

Mucor lusitanic us 

Mucor circinatu s 

Mucor plumbeu s 

Mucor saturnin 

us 

Apophys omyces sp. bc1015 

Apophy somyce 

s sp. bc1021 

Apophy somyce s sp. bc1034 

Apophy somyce s ossiform is 

Thamni dium elegans 

Parasite lla parasitic a 

Rhizopu s microsp orus 

Rhizopu s delemar 

Rhizopu s azygosp orus 

Choane phora cucurbit arum 

Absidia repens 

Hesselt inella vesiculo sa 

Phycom yces blakesle eanus 

Syncep halastru m racemo sum 

Umbelo psis isabellin 

a 

Umbelo psis vinacea 

Umbelo psis sp. pmi 123 

Jimgerd 

emanni a flammic orona 
Endogo ne sp. flas-f59 071 

Bifigura tus adelaid ae 

Racoce tra fulgida 

Racoce tra persica 

Gigasp ora rosea 

Gigasp ora margar ita 

Dentisc utata erythro pus 

Dentisc utata heterog ama 

Scutello spora calospo ra 
Cetrasp ora pellucid a 
Diversi spora eburne a 
Diversi spora epigaea 
Acaulo spora colomb iana 
Acaulo spora morrow iae 
Rhizop hagus sp. mucl 43196 
Rhizop hagus clarus 
Rhizop 

hagus irregula ris 
Funnel iformis mossea e 
Funnel iformis caledo nium 
Glomu s cerebri 

forme 

Claroid eoglom us candid um 
Ambisp ora gerdem annii 
Ambisp ora leptotic 

ha 

Geosip hon pyriform is 
Paragl omus brasilia 

num 

Paragl omus occultu m 

Spizell omyce s sp. 'palust ris' 
Spizell omyce s puncta tus 
Powell omyce s 

hirtus 

Chytrio myces conferv ae 
Rhizoc losmat ium globos um 
Batrac hochyt rium dendro batidis 
Batrac hochyt rium salama ndrivor ans 
Synchy trium microb alum 
Synchy trium endobi oticum 
Blyttiom yces helicus 
Cauloc hytrium protost elioides 
Piromy ces sp. 

e2 

Piromy ces finnis 
Neocal limastix californ iae 
Neocal limastix sp. 

jgi-202 0a 

Anaero myces robustu s 
Gonap odya prolifer a 
Smittiu m 
angust um 

Smittiu m 
megaz ygospo rum 

Smittiu m 
mucron atum 

Smittiu m 

simulii 

Smittiu m 

culicis 

Zancud omyces culiseta e 
Furculo myces boome rangus 
Coema nsia reversa 
Linderin a 
pennisp ora 

Dimarg aris cristallig ena 
Entomo phthora muscae 
Entomo phaga maimai ga 
Conidio bolus coronat us 
Basidio bolus meristo sporus 
Syncep halis pseudo plumiga leata 
Piptoce phalis cylindro spora 
Thamno cephali s sphaero spora 
Paramic rosporid ium saccam oebae 
Rozella allomyc is 
Catenar ia 
anguillu lae 

Allomyc es 
macrog ynus 

Olpidium bornova nus 
Fungal sp. 

no.1491 9 

Fungal sp. 

no.1124 3 
Salping oeca rosetta 
Monosig a brevicol lis 
Fonticul a alba 
Capsas pora owczarz aki 
Sphaero forma arctica 
Brassica cretica 
Brassica carinata 
Brassica napus 
Brassica rapa 
Brassica oleracea 
Eruca vesicaria 
Raphan us 

sativus 

Sinapis alba 
Crambe hispanic a 
Cakile maritima 
Arabidop sis 

halleri 

Arabidop sis 

lyrata 

Arabidop sis 
thaliana x arabidop sis 

arenosa 

Arabidop sis 

thaliana 

Arabidop sis 

suecica 

Capsella rubella 
Capsella grandiflo ra 
Camelina sativa 
Isatis tinctoria 
Myagrum perfoliatu m 
Lepidium sativum 
Rorippa islandica 
Euclidium syriacum 
Malcolmi a maritima 
Iberis amara 
Arabis nemoren sis 
Thlaspi arvense 
Descurai nia 

sophioide s 

Microthla spi 

erraticum 

Lunaria annua 
Caulanth us 
amplexica ulis 

Boechera stricta 
Stanleya pinnata 
Eutrema salsugine um 
Meniocus linifolius 
Diptychoc arpus strictus 
Schrenkie lla 

parvula 

Tarenaya hasslerian a 
Cleome violacea 
Carica papaya 
Gossypium schwendim anii 
Gossypium mustelinu m 
Gossypium darwinii 
Gossypium tomentosu m 
Gossypium trilobum 
Gossypium harknessii 
Gossypium klotzschia num 
Gossypium armourian um 
Gossypium laxum 
Gossypium lobatum 
Gossypium gossypioid es 
Gossypium davidsonii 
Gossypium aridum 
Gossypium barbadens e 
Gossypium hirsutum 
Gossypium arboreum 
Gossypium raimondii 
Gossypium anomalum 
Gossypium stocksii 
Gossypium australe 
Hibiscus syriacus 
Herrania umbratica 
Theobroma cacao 
Corchorus olitorius 
Corchorus capsularis 
Durio 

zibethinus 

Citrus sinensis 
Citrus clementina 
Citrus trifoliata 
Citrus unshiu 
Mangifera indica 
Pistacia vera 
Acer 

yangbiense 

Corymbia citriodora 
Eucalyptus grandis 
Punica granatum 
Vigna 

radiata 

Vigna 

angularis 

Vigna 

unguiculata 

Vigna 

umbellata 

Phaseolus acutifolius 
Phaseolus lunatus 
Phaseolus vulgaris 
Glycine max 
Glycine soja 
Mucuna pruriens 
Cajanus cajan 
Spatholobus suberectus 

Abrus 

precatorius 

Trifolium pratense 
Trifolium subterraneum 
Trifolium medium 
Medicago truncatula 
Cicer 

arietinum 

Lotus 

japonicus 

Arachis 

hypogaea 

Arachis 

duranensis 

Arachis 

ipaensis 

Lupinus angustifolius 
Lupinus 

albus 

Senna 

tora 
Prosopis alba 
Prunus 

avium 

Prunus 

dulcis 

Prunus 

persica 

Prunus 

mume 

Prunus 

armeniaca 

Malus 

baccata 

Malus 

domestica 

Pyrus 
x bretschneideri 
Pyrus 
ussuriensis x pyrus 

communis 

Fragaria 

vesca 

Rosa 

chinensis 
Parasponia andersonii 
Cannabis 

sativa 

Trema 

orientale 

Rhamnella rubrinervis 
Ziziphus 

jujuba 

Morus 

notabilis 

Populus 

euphratica 

Populus 

alba 

Populus 

trichocarpa 

Populus 

deltoides 

Populus 

tomentosa 

Salix 

suchowensis 

Salix 

brachista 

Salix 

dunnii 
Jatropha 

curcas 

Hevea 

brasiliensis 

Manihot 

esculenta 

Ricinus 

communis 

Quercus 

suber 

Quercus 

lobata 

Castanea 

dentata 

Juglans 

regia 

Juglans 

microcarpa 
x juglans 

regia 

Carya 

illinoinensis 

Morella 

rubra 

Carpinus 

fangiana 

Cucurbita 

argyrosperma 

Cucurbita 

maxima 

Cucurbita 

moschata 

Cucurbita 

pepo 

Cucumis 

melo 

Cucumis 

sativus 

Benincasa 

hispida 

Momordica 

charantia 

Cephalotus 

follicularis 

Tripterygium 

wilfordii 

Vitis vinifera 
Vitis riparia 
Solanum 

pennellii 

Solanum 

lycopersicum 

Solanum 

chilense 

Solanum commersonii 
Solanum tuberosum 
Capsicum 

baccatum 

Capsicum annuum 
Capsicum chinense 
Datura stramonium 
Nicotiana attenuata 
Nicotiana sylvestris 
Nicotiana tabacum 
Nicotiana tomentosiformis 
Cuscuta campestris 
Cuscuta australis 
Ipomoea nil 
Ipomoea triloba 
Salvia hispanica 
Salvia splendens 
Perilla frutescens 
Striga asiatica 
Phtheirospermum japonicum 

Handroanthus impetiginosus 

Genlisea aurea 

Olea europaea 
Erythranthe guttata 
Sesamum indicum 
Buddleja alternifolia 
Dorcoceras hygrometricum 

Coffea eugenioides 
Coffea canephora 
Coffea arabica 
Lithospermum erythrorhizon 

Mikania micrantha 
Helianthus annuus 
Erigeron canadensis 
Lactuca saligna 
Lactuca sativa 
Cynara cardunculus 

Daucus carota 
Apium graveolens 
Rhododendron williamsianum 

Rhododendron simsii 
Rhododendron griersonianum 

Vaccinium darrowii 

Actinidia rufa 
Camellia sinensis 
Impatiens glandulifera 

Nyssa sinensis 
Spinacia oleracea 
Chenopodium quinoa 

Beta vulgaris 
Amaranthus hypochondriacus 

Kalanchoe fedtschenkoi 

Kalanchoe laxiflora 

Panicum hallii 
Panicum virgatum 

Setaria italica 
Setaria viridis 
Digitaria exilis 
Dichanthelium oligosanthes 

Urochloa fusca 
Miscanthus lutarioriparius 

Miscanthus sinensis 

Sorghum bicolor 

Zea mays 
Paspalum vaginatum 
Oropetium thomaeum 

Eleusine coracana 
Eragrostis curvula 
Triticum dicoccoides 
Triticum aestivum 
Triticum turgidum 
Thinopyrum 

intermedium 
Aegilops tauschii 
Hordeum 

vulgare 

Brachypodium 

mexicanum 
Brachypodium 

sylvaticum 
Brachypodium 

hybridum 
Brachypodium 

stacei 

Brachypodium 

distachyon 
Lolium rigidum 
Oryza sativa 
Oryza brachyantha 
Zizania 

palustris 
Carex littledalei 
Ananas 

comosus 

Joinvillea 

ascendens 
Musa balbisiana 
Musa acuminata 
Ensete 

ventricosum 
Zingiber 

officinale 

Phoenix 

dactylifera 

Elaeis 

guineensis 
Dendrobium 

catenatum 

Dendrobium 

chrysotoxum 
Phalaenopsis equestris 

Vanilla 

planifolia 

Apostasia 

shenzhenica 
Asparagus 

officinalis 

Dioscorea 

cayenensis 
Dioscorea 

alata 

Spirodela 

intermedia 
Spirodela 

polyrhiza 
Zostera 

marina 

Acorus 

americanus 
Aquilegia 

coerulea 
Thalictrum thalictroides 

Coptis 

chinensis 

Papaver 

somniferum 
Macleaya 

cordata 
Kingdonia uniflora 
Macadamia integrifolia 
Telopea 

speciosissima 
Nelumbo 

nucifera 
Tetracentron sinense 
Aristolochia fimbriata 
Nymphaea thermarum 

Nymphaea colorata 
Amborella trichopoda 

Thuja 

plicata 
Pinus 

taeda 
Ceratopteris richardii 
Selaginella moellendorffii 

Physcomitrium patens 
Ceratodon purpureus 

Sphagnum fallax 
Sphagnum magellanicum 
Marchantia polymorpha 

Marchantia paleacea 

Chara 

braunii 
Klebsormidium nitens 
Chlamydomona s incerta 
Chlamydomon as eustigma 
Chlamydomon as reinhardtii 
Chlamydomon as schloesseri 
Chlamydomon as sp. 

uwo 

241 

Volvox 

reticuliferus 
Volvox 

africanus 
Volvox 

carteri 
Gonium pectorale 
Dunaliella salina 
Edaphochlam ys debaryana 

Tetrabaena socialis 
Raphidocelis subcapitata 
Monoraphidiu m neglectum 
Scenedesmu s sp. 

nrel 

46b-d3 

Scenedesmu s sp. 

pabb004 
Chromochlor is zofingiensis 
Chlorella desiccata nom. 

nud. 
Chlorella variabilis 
Micractinium conductrix 
Auxenochlor ella 

protothecoid es 
Helicosporid ium 

sp. 
atcc 

50920 
Coccomyxa subellipsoide a 

Coccomyxa sp. 

obi 
Botryococcu s braunii 

Trebouxia sp. 

a1-2 

Ostreococcu s sp. 

'lucimarinus ' 
Ostreococcu s tauri 
Bathycoccu s prasinos 
Micromonas commoda 

Micromonas pusilla 
Pycnococcu s provasolii 

Chloropicon primus 
Ostreobium quekettii 

Plasmodium inui 
Plasmodium ovale 
Plasmodium gonderi 
Plasmodium cynomolgi 
Plasmodium knowlesi 

Plasmodiu m vivax 
Plasmodiu m fragile 
Plasmodiu m malariae 
Plasmodiu m gaboni 
Plasmodiu m sp. 

gorilla clade g2 
Plasmodiu m sp. 

gorilla clade g1 
Plasmodiu m sp. 

gorilla clade g3 
Plasmodiu m falciparum 
Plasmodiu m 

reichenow i 

Plasmodiu m 

sp. 
drc-itaito 
Plasmodiu m 

berghei 

Plasmodiu m 

chabaudi 
Plasmodiu m 

vinckei 
Plasmodiu m 

yoelii 

Plasmodiu m 

relictum 

Plasmodiu m 

gallinaceu m 
Plasmodiu m 

coatneyi 

Hepatocy stis 

sp. 
ex 
piliocolobu s tephrosce les 

Babesia ovata 
Babesia sp. 

xinjiang 
Babesia bovis 
Babesia bigemina 

Babesia microti 
Theileria orientalis 

Theileria equi 
Theileria annulata 

Theileria parva 
Cardiosp oridium cionae 
Cryptosp oridium hominis 

Cryptosp oridium felis 
Cryptosp oridium anderson i 

Cryptosp oridium tyzzeri 
Cryptosp oridium sp. 

chipmunk genotype i 
Cryptosp oridium meleagri dis 
Cryptosp oridium ubiquitum 

Cryptosp oridium parvum 

Cryptosp oridium 

muris 

Cryptosp 

oridium 

bovis 

Cryptosp 

oridium 

ryanae 
Eimeria 

brunetti 
Eimeria 

necatrix 
Eimeria 

praecox 
Eimeria 

mitis 

Eimeria 

acervulin 

a 

Eimeria 

tenella 
Eimeria 

maxima 

Cyclospo 

ra 
cayetane 

nsis 

Besnoiti 

a 
besnoiti 

Neospor 

a 
caninum 
Toxoplas 

ma 
gondii 

Cystoiso 

spora 

suis 

Porospo 

ra 
cf. 
gigantea 

b 

Porospo 

ra 
cf. 
gigantea 

a 

Gregarin 

a 
niphand 

rodes 

Parame 

cium 

octaurel 

ia 

Parame 

cium 

pentaure 

lia 

Parame 

cium 

primaure 

lia 

Parame 

cium 

tetraure 

lia 

Parame 

cium 

sonnebo 

rni 

Tetrahym 

ena 

thermop 

hila 

Ichthyop 

hthirius 

multifiliis 

Pseudo 

cohnilem 

bus 

persalin 

us 

Oxytrich 

a 
trifallax 

Stylonyc 

hia 
lemnae 

Halteria 

grandin 

ella 

Symbio 

dinium 

sp. 
ccmp25 

92 

Symbio 

dinium 

sp. 
kb8 

Symbio 

dinium 

sp. 
ccmp24 

56 

Symbio 

dinium 

natans 

Symbio 

dinium 

microad 

riaticum 

Symbio 

dinium 

pilosum 

Symbio 

dinium 

necroap 

petens 

Polarell 

a 
glacialis 

Amoeb 

ophrya 

sp. 
a25 

Amoeb 

ophrya 

sp. 
a120 

Perkins 

us 
chesap 

eaki 

Perkins 

us 
sp. 
bl 
2016 

Perkins 

us 
marinus 
Perkins 

us 
olseni 




minor introns conserved between D. melanogaster and L. polyphemus, which is 88.9% of the Drosophila minor introns present in the alignment, but only 4.3% of Limulus minor introns. Full names of species are as follows: Homo sapiens, Gallus gallus, Xenopus tropicalis, Latimeria chalumnae, Asterias rubens, Limulus polyphemus, Ixodes scapularis, Apis mellifera, Drosophila melanogaster, Priapulus caudatus, Lingula anatina, Octopus sinensis, Acropora millepora, Basidiobolus meristosporus, Rhizophagus irregularis, Arabidopsis thaliana, Lupinus angustifolius, Nicotiana tabacum, Zea mays, Amborella trichopoda, Sphagnum fallaxLarue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are 
bioRχiv | 7 

96.0 
480 96.5 
493 96.0 
406 88.7 
243 76.0 
174 79.1 
178 30.3 
64 
4.4 
8 
61.2 
120 83.5 
222 82.7 
201 81.4 
210 24.7 
24 23.2 
22 
7.9 
7 
8.0 
7 
5.7 
5 
6.0 
5 
8.2 
8 
10.1 
10 

95.2 
480 
97.0 
478 96.1 
390 88.5 
238 76.1 
162 76.9 
173 31.1 
64 
4.6 
8 
61.2 
115 82.3 
218 82.2 
199 81.4 
215 25.3 
23 21.3 
20 10.3 
9 
8.2 
7 
8.5 
7 
9.2 
8 
8.4 
8 
10.4 
10 

92.5 
493 94.3 
478 
96.2 
428 89.4 
245 77.4 
181 77.6 
184 28.3 
63 
4.2 
8 
60.2 
121 82.0 
218 82.5 
208 81.5 
216 22.3 
21 21.3 
19 
9.8 
9 
10.0 
9 
10.2 
10 
7.5 
7 
8.7 
8 
13.6 
14 

90.2 
406 92.6 
390 95.1 
428 
89.8 
220 75.6 
158 76.5 
153 30.4 
56 
4.5 
7 
61.9 
104 84.0 
204 81.2 
173 83.5 
192 21.4 
18 21.2 
17 
9.5 
7 
9.1 
6 
8.1 
6 
8.0 
6 
7.7 
6 
11.6 
10 

70.2 
243 71.5 
238 71.2 
245 72.1 
220 
76.6 
219 72.1 
207 25.7 
67 
3.6 
8 
58.0 
159 80.9 
305 81.2 
255 81.2 
285 20.6 
28 25.2 
28 10.7 
11 14.4 
16 11.3 
12 14.9 
15 13.4 
16 15.7 
18 

71.9 
174 71.1 
162 74.8 
181 72.8 
158 89.4 
219 
86.9 
239 29.5 
66 
4.3 
8 
63.4 
128 84.5 
223 87.3 
200 83.3 
190 20.6 
21 21.2 
18 10.7 
9 
12.2 
10 11.9 
10 
7.1 
6 
11.1 
10 14.1 
13 

74.8 
178 75.2 
173 75.1 
184 74.3 
153 90.0 
207 89.8 
239 
31.5 
70 
3.9 
8 
62.7 
131 84.3 
209 87.0 
201 85.0 
187 25.3 
24 23.0 
20 11.1 
9 
11.6 
10 11.4 
10 12.1 
11 13.0 
12 16.5 
14 

80.0 
64 80.0 
64 77.8 
63 80.0 
56 93.1 
67 84.6 
66 88.6 
70 
11.0 
9 
76.9 
50 96.2 
77 83.1 
54 89.2 
66 21.6 
8 
19.4 
6 
12.0 
3 
17.4 
4 
11.5 
3 
11.5 
3 
16.7 
4 
14.3 
4 

88.9 
8 100.0 
8 100.0 
8 
77.8 
7 100.0 
8 
88.9 
8 
88.9 
8 
75.0 
9 
77.8 
7 
91.7 
11 100.0 
9 
88.9 
8 100.0 
1 
33.3 
1 100.0 
2 100.0 
2 100.0 
2 100.0 
2 100.0 
2 100.0 
2 

72.3 
120 71.4 
115 71.2 
121 68.4 
104 89.8 
159 77.1 
128 78.9 
131 33.8 
50 
5.8 
7 
83.2 
149 90.2 
148 83.9 
141 27.3 
21 23.7 
14 10.3 
6 
8.5 
5 
9.8 
6 
9.1 
6 
10.9 
7 
8.1 
5 

70.7 
222 71.9 
218 72.4 
218 75.6 
204 88.4 
305 79.6 
223 77.4 
209 33.0 
77 
5.4 
11 59.8 
149 
90.7 
293 82.1 
256 23.9 
28 23.8 
25 11.8 
11 12.7 
13 12.1 
13 11.0 
11 13.0 
14 12.6 
13 

70.0 
201 71.6 
199 71.0 
208 69.2 
173 87.9 
255 78.1 
200 78.2 
201 24.1 
54 
4.7 
9 
63.8 
148 87.7 
293 
81.9 
226 25.0 
27 21.7 
20 13.4 
13 12.2 
12 
9.5 
9 
13.0 
12 12.1 
12 14.9 
14 

60.0 
210 63.4 
215 61.5 
216 60.2 
192 75.8 
285 68.3 
190 65.4 
187 25.5 
66 
3.6 
8 
55.1 
141 71.3 
256 72.4 
226 
20.0 
28 16.2 
19 13.5 
15 12.6 
15 10.8 
13 10.0 
12 12.6 
15 10.4 
14 

39.3 
24 35.4 
23 33.3 
21 33.3 
18 45.2 
28 36.2 
21 42.9 
24 15.4 
8 
2.0 
1 
38.9 
21 43.8 
28 42.2 
27 41.2 
28 
43.4 
36 11.4 
4 
17.5 
7 
15.0 
6 
18.9 
7 
9.8 
4 
10.5 
4 

44.0 
22 40.8 
20 38.0 
19 37.8 
17 49.1 
28 40.0 
18 40.8 
20 13.6 
6 
2.2 
1 
35.9 
14 47.2 
25 44.4 
20 36.5 
19 40.0 
36 
5.3 
2 
5.0 
2 
7.5 
3 
4.8 
2 
7.7 
3 
9.3 
4 

15.6 
7 
20.9 
9 
22.0 
9 
17.1 
7 
26.2 
11 20.9 
9 
20.0 
9 
8.6 
3 
6.7 
2 
18.2 
6 
27.5 
11 31.7 
13 31.9 
15 11.1 
4 
6.1 
2 
87.9 
153 85.0 
147 85.2 
127 80.0 
120 68.6 
81 

14.6 
7 
14.9 
7 
16.7 
9 
14.0 
6 
28.1 
16 20.0 
10 20.8 
10 10.8 
4 
5.3 
2 
13.2 
5 
26.0 
13 23.5 
12 30.0 
15 15.2 
7 
4.8 
2 
77.7 
153 
85.3 
185 86.6 
161 78.1 
157 69.2 
101 

9.4 
5 
13.0 
7 
15.9 
10 12.0 
6 
21.8 
12 20.0 
10 18.5 
10 
7.0 
3 
5.3 
2 
15.0 
6 
23.6 
13 19.6 
9 
22.8 
13 15.4 
6 
7.7 
3 
78.2 
147 87.7 
185 
86.4 
165 78.2 
147 72.6 
106 

10.2 
5 
16.0 
8 
14.3 
7 
13.0 
6 
25.9 
15 11.8 
6 
20.4 
11 
6.7 
3 
5.4 
2 
13.3 
6 
23.9 
11 23.5 
12 22.2 
12 15.9 
7 
5.0 
2 
76.0 
127 86.1 
161 85.1 
165 
82.7 
148 71.9 
105 

16.0 
8 
17.0 
8 
16.7 
8 
16.7 
6 
30.2 
16 22.7 
10 24.5 
12 
9.8 
4 
5.1 
2 
16.7 
7 
31.8 
14 26.7 
12 29.4 
15 
9.5 
4 
7.9 
3 
70.6 
120 79.7 
157 79.0 
147 82.7 
148 
75.4 
107 

17.9 
10 19.2 
10 21.5 
14 18.5 
10 31.6 
18 24.5 
13 25.9 
14 10.0 
4 
5.1 
2 
13.2 
5 
27.7 
13 25.9 
14 24.6 
14 
8.3 
4 
10.3 
4 
61.4 
81 72.7 
101 74.1 
106 75.0 
105 73.3 
107 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

Percentage of minor introns conserved in first species vs. second 

Fig. 2. Pairwise minor intron conservation between various species. Bottom num-
ber is the number of minor introns conserved between the pair; top number is the 
number of conserved minor introns as a percentage of the minor introns present 
in the alignments for the associated species (the row species). For example, there 
are eight Coleoptera 
Amphiesm enoptera 
Dipter a 
Hym enop tera 
Neu ropt erid a 
Sip hon apt era 
Pa ran eop 

tera 

Po lyn 
eo pte 
ra 

Pa lae op ter a 
Co lle mb ola 
Cr us ta ce a 
M yr ia po da 
Ix od in ae 
R hi pi ce ph al in ae 
H ae m ap hy sa lin ae 
H ya 

lo 
m 

m 
in 
ae 

M 
es 
os 
tig 
m 

at 
a 

A ca 

rif 
or 
m 
es 

Ar 
an 

ea 
e 

Sc 
or pi on 

es 

Py 
cn 
og 
on 
ida 

Me 
ros 
tom 

ata 

Ta rdi gra 

da 

Ne ma tod a 
Sca 
lido pho 

ra 

Sac oglo ssa 
Eupu lmon ata 
Hygro phila 
Tectipleu ra 
Sorbeoconcha Architaenioglossa 
Vetigastropoda 
Patellogas 

tropoda 
Neomp 

halina 
Ostre 

ida 

Myti 

lida 

Pec 

tinid 

a 

He 
tero 

con 

chi 
a 

De 
cap 
od 
ifor 
me 
s 

Oc 
top 
od 
ifo 
rm 
es 

Po 
lyc 
ha 
eta 
inc 
er 
tae 
se 
dis 

Se 
de 
nt 
ar 
ia 

Cl 
ite 
lla 
ta 

Ac 
an 
th 
oc 
ep 
ha 
la 

B 
ra 
ch 
io 
po 
da 

P 
la 
ty 
he 
lm 
in 
th 
es 

M 
es oz oa 
B ry oz oa 
G na 
th ife ra 

D eu 
te ro st om ia 
Xe na co el om or ph a 
An 
th oz oa 
My xo zo a 
Hy dro zo a 
Pla coz oa 
Cte nop hor a 
Por ifera 
Sync epha lis 
Piptoc ephal is 
Sigmoid eomyce taceae 
Entomophtho romycetes 
Basidiobolomycetes 
Kickxellomycotina 
Neocallimas tigomycetes 

Chytridi omycet es 
Mono bleph aridom ycete s 

Muc orom 
ycot ina 
Mor tiere 
llom yco tina 
Glo 
me rom 
yco tina 
Mic ros po rid ia 
Bla 
sto 
cla dio my co ta 
Ol pid iom yc ota 

As co m yc ot a 
Ba sid 

io m yc ot a 
U nc la ss ifi ed fu ng i 
C ho an 

of la ge 

lla ta 
F ila 
st er ea 

Ic 
ht hy os po 

re a 

La 
m 

ia 

ce 
ae 

B ig no 

ni ac 

ea 
e 

Le 
nt ib ul ar 

ia ce 

ae 

O le ac 

ea 
e 

Ph 
ry m ac 

ea 
e 

Or 
ob 
an 
ch ac ea 

e 

Pe 
da lia ce ae 

Sc rop 
hu lar iac ea e 
Ge sne 

riac 
eae 

Gen 
tian ales 
Sola nale s 
Borag inales 
Ericace ae 
Actinidiace ae 
Theaceae 
Balsaminaceae 
Cichorioideae 
Asteroid 

eae 

Cardu 

oideae 

Apia 

les 

Cor 

nale 

s 

Ros 

ids 

Ca 
ryo 
phy 

llal 
es 

Sa 
xifr 
ag 
ale 
s 

Lil 
iop 
sid 
a 

Pr 
ot 
ea 
les 

Ra 
nu 
nc 
ul 
al 
es 

Tr 
oc 
ho 
de 
nd 
ra 
le 
s 

P 
ip 
er 
al 
es 

N 
ym 
ph 
ae 
al 
es 

A 
m 
bo 
re 
lla 
le 
s 

A cr 
og ym 

no sp er 

m ae 

P ol 
yp od io ps id a 
Ly 
co po 
di op 
si da 
M ar ch an tio ph yt a 
Br yo ph 

yt a 
Ch ar op hy ce ae 
Kle 
bs orm idi op hy ce ae 
Ch lor op hy ta 
Sa r 
Am oeb ozo a 
Hap tista 
Disco ba 
Metam onada 
Rhodoph yta 
Cryptophyceae 
Apusozoa 




. While there are a number of cases where the median non-MIG gene length exceeds the median MIGAnimals 
Plants 

Termini 
% Count Termini 
% Count 
AT-AA 
29 
823 AT-AA 73.6 
690 
AT-AT 
24.7 
701 GT-GG 12.3 
115 
AT-AG 
23.2 
658 AT-AG 
6.7 
63 
GT-AT 
11.3 
319 GT-AT 
2 
19 
GT-GG 
5.6 
159 GT-TG 
1.6 
15 
GT-CG 
1.6 
46 TT-AG 
1.3 
12 
GT-TG 
1 
29 AT-CA 
0.6 
6 
CT-AC 
0.8 
24 GT-CG 
0.5 
5 
GG-AG 
0.7 
21 AT-AT 
0.4 
4 
GA-AG 
0.5 
14 AT-TT 
0.2 
2 
TT-AG 
0.4 
10 
GT-TA 
0.1 
3 
GT-CA 
0.1 
3 
AT-GA 
0.1 
3 
AT-GC 
0.1 
3 
CT-AG 
0.1 
2 
AT-CG 
0.1 
2 
CT-AT 
0.1 
2 
AT-CC 
0.1 
2 
AT-GT 
0.1 
2 



## Table 3 .
3Non-canonical minor intron termini in animals and plants. Termini with only a single occurrence are excluded.

## Table 4 .
4GO term enrichment for MIGs in Rhizophagus (RiMIGs), compared to all human-Rhizophagus orthologs (Hs-Ri). E: expected, O/U: over/under, FE: fold enrichment, FDR: false-discovery rate.4.1 An expanded view of minor intron diversity 




Table 5. GO term enrichment for human MIGs with Rhizophagus orthologs (HsMIGS w/RiO), compared to all human-Rhizophagus orthologs (Hs-Ri). E: expected, O/U: over/under, FE: fold enrichment, FDR: false-discovery rate.GO term 

Hs-Ri HsMIGs 

w/RiO 

E 
O/U FE 
FDR 

intracellular transport (GO:0046907) 
434 
54 
29.65 + 
1.82 4.27E-02 
small molecule metabolic process (GO:0044281) 
549 
12 
37.51 -
.32 
1.67E-03 
carboxylic acid metabolic process (GO:0019752) 
309 
2 
21.11 -
.09 
9.13E-04 
oxoacid metabolic process (GO:0043436) 
314 
2 
21.45 -
.09 
8.72E-04 
organic acid metabolic process (GO:0006082) 
319 
2 
21.79 -
.09 
1.12E-03 


| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
Incorrectly labeled in the NCBI database as Planoprotostelium fungivorum; originally described as Planoprotostelium fungivorum in[31] but subsequently corrected in the main text (the incorrect usage remains in the supplemental materials); see[78] for supporting evidence of its classification as Pr. aurantium. Credit to Marek Eliáš for this addendum.
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
We note here for posterity the most striking case of this bias we have found in the yeast species Candida maltosa (which lacks minor introns), where all ∼1000 annotated major introns appear to be phase 0(Fig. 7c, bottom-right corner).
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are
| bioRχiv Larue et al. | Where the Minor Things Are

. At-Aa, 29.03%AT-AA: 29.03% (823)

. Gt-Gg, 561GT-GG: 5.61% (159)

AT-AA: 73.64% (690GT-CG: 1.62% (46) Other: 4.55% (129). GT-CG: 1.62% (46) Other: 4.55% (129) AT-AA: 73.64% (690)

U12DB: a database of orthologous U12-type spliceosomal introns". en. Tyler S Alioto, http:/nar.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkl796D110-D115. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkl796Nucleic Acids Res. 35.Database issue. Tyler S Alioto. "U12DB: a database of orthologous U12-type spliceosomal introns". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 35.Database issue (Jan. 2007), pp. D110-D115. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkl796. URL: http : / / nar . oxfordjournals . org / lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkl796.

RNA Binding Motif Protein 48 Is Required for U12 Splicing and Maize Endosperm Differentiation". en. Fang Bai, 10.1105/tpc.18.007541532-298X. DOI: 10. 1105/tpc.18.00754Plant Cell. 313Fang Bai et al. "RNA Binding Motif Protein 48 Is Re- quired for U12 Splicing and Maize Endosperm Dif- ferentiation". en. In: Plant Cell 31.3 (Mar. 2019), pp. 715-733. ISSN: 1040-4651, 1532-298X. DOI: 10. 1105/tpc.18.00754. URL: http://dx.doi. org/10.1105/tpc.18.00754.

U12 type introns were lost at multiple occasions during evolution". en. Sebastian Bartschat, Tore Samuelsson, http:/bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2164-11-106DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2164-11-106BMC Genomics. 111Sebastian Bartschat and Tore Samuelsson. "U12 type introns were lost at multiple occasions during evo- lution". en. In: BMC Genomics 11.1 (Feb. 2010), p. 106. ISSN: 1471-2164. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2164-11-106. URL: http://bmcgenomics. biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/ 1471-2164-11-106.

U12 intron positions are more strongly conserved between animals and plants than U2 intron positions. Malay Kumar Basu, 10.1186/1745-6150-3-191745-6150. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1745 -6150 -3 -19Biol. Direct. 319Malay Kumar Basu et al. "U12 intron positions are more strongly conserved between animals and plants than U2 intron positions". In: Biol. Direct 3 (Jan. 2008), p. 19. ISSN: 1745-6150. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1745 -6150 -3 -19. URL: http : / / www . pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender. fcgi ? artid = 2426677 % 7B & %7Dtool = pmcentrez%7B&%7Drendertype=abstract.

Minor spliceosome inactivation causes microcephaly, owing to cell cycle defects and death of self-amplifying radial glial cells". en. Marybeth Baumgartner, 10.1242/dev.1663221477-9129. DOI: 10 . 1242 / dev . 166322Development. 145Marybeth Baumgartner et al. "Minor spliceosome in- activation causes microcephaly, owing to cell cycle de- fects and death of self-amplifying radial glial cells". en. In: Development 145.17 (Aug. 2018). ISSN: 0950- 1991, 1477-9129. DOI: 10 . 1242 / dev . 166322. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev. 166322.

Introns in UTRs: Why we should stop ignoring them. A Alicia, Bicknell, 10.1002/bies.201200073DOI: 10 . 1002 / bies . 201200073Bioessays. 34Alicia A Bicknell et al. "Introns in UTRs: Why we should stop ignoring them". In: Bioessays 34.12 (2012), pp. 1025-1034. ISSN: 0265-9247. DOI: 10 . 1002 / bies . 201200073. URL: http : / / dx . doi.org/10.1002/bies.201200073.

Variable and constant parts of the immunoglobulin light chain gene of a mouse myeloma cell are 1250 nontranslated bases apart". en. C Brack, Tonegawa, 10.1073/pnas.74.12.5652ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas.74.12.5652Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74. 12C Brack and S Tonegawa. "Variable and constant parts of the immunoglobulin light chain gene of a mouse myeloma cell are 1250 nontranslated bases apart". en. In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74.12 (Dec. 1977), pp. 5652-5656. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas.74.12.5652. URL: http://dx.doi. org/10.1073/pnas.74.12.5652.

Organization and expression of eucaryotic split genes coding for proteins". en. R Breathnach, P Chambon, 10.1146/annurev.bi.50.070181.002025Annu. Rev. Biochem. 50R Breathnach and P Chambon. "Organization and ex- pression of eucaryotic split genes coding for proteins". en. In: Annu. Rev. Biochem. 50 (1981), pp. 349-383. ISSN: 0066-4154. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.bi. REFERENCES 50.070181.002025. URL: http://dx.doi. org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . bi . 50 . 070181 . 002025.

Light-regulated collective contractility in a multicellular choanoflagellate". en. Thibaut Brunet, 10.1126/science.aay2346Science. 366Thibaut Brunet et al. "Light-regulated collective con- tractility in a multicellular choanoflagellate". en. In: Science 366.6463 (Oct. 2019), pp. 326-334. ISSN: 0036-8075, 1095-9203. DOI: 10.1126/science. aay2346. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126/science.aay2346.

Classification of introns: U2-type or U12-type. C Burge, P A Sharp, 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80479-1Cell 91. 7C Burge and P A Sharp. "Classification of introns: U2-type or U12-type". In: Cell 91.7 (1997), pp. 875- 879. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674(00 ) 80479 -1. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80479-1.

Evolutionary fates and origins of U12-type introns". en. C B Burge, R A Padgett, P A Sharp, 10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80292-01097-2765. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S1097 -2765(00 ) 80292 -0Mol. Cell. 26C B Burge, R A Padgett, and P A Sharp. "Evolution- ary fates and origins of U12-type introns". en. In: Mol. Cell 2.6 (Dec. 1998), pp. 773-785. ISSN: 1097-2765. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S1097 -2765(00 ) 80292 -0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1097- 2765(00)80292-0.

Analysis of canonical and non-canonical splice sites in mammalian genomes". en. M Burset, V V Seledtsov, Solovyev, 10.1093/nar/28.21.43641362- 4962. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / 28 . 21 . 4364Nucleic Acids Res. 28M Burset, I A Seledtsov, and V V Solovyev. "Analysis of canonical and non-canonical splice sites in mam- malian genomes". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 28.21 (Nov. 2000), pp. 4364-4375. ISSN: 0305-1048, 1362- 4962. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / 28 . 21 . 4364. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.21. 4364.

SpliceDB: database of canonical and non-canonical mammalian splice sites". en. M Burset, V V Seledtsov, Solovyev, Nucleic Acids Res. 291M Burset, I A Seledtsov, and V V Solovyev. "SpliceDB: database of canonical and non-canonical mammalian splice sites". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 29.1 (Jan. 2001), pp. 255-259. ISSN: 0305-1048.

BLAST+: architecture and applications". en. Christiam Camacho, 10.1186/1471-2105-10-421DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471-2105-10-421BMC Bioinformatics. 10Christiam Camacho et al. "BLAST+: architecture and applications". en. In: BMC Bioinformatics 10 (Dec. 2009), p. 421. ISSN: 1471-2105. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471-2105-10-421. URL: http://dx.doi. org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421.

Patterns of intron gain and conservation in eukaryotic genes. Liran Carmel, 10.1186/1471-2148-7-192DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471 -2148 -7 -192BMC Evol. Biol. 7Liran Carmel et al. "Patterns of intron gain and con- servation in eukaryotic genes". In: BMC Evol. Biol. 7 (2007), p. 192. ISSN: 1471-2148. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471 -2148 -7 -192. URL: http : / / www . pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender. fcgi ? artid = 2151770 & tool = pmcentrez & rendertype=abstract.

Effect of 5'UTR introns on gene expression in Arabidopsis thaliana". en. Y W Betty, Chung, 10.1186/1471-2164-7-120BMC Genomics. 7Betty Y W Chung et al. "Effect of 5'UTR introns on gene expression in Arabidopsis thaliana". en. In: BMC Genomics 7 (May 2006), p. 120. ISSN: 1471- 2164. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-7-120. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2164-7-120.

The role of reverse transcriptase in intron gain and loss mechanisms". en. E Noa, Roy Cohen, Liran Shen, Carmel, 10.1093/molbev/msr1921537-1719. DOI: 10. 1093 / molbev / msr192Mol. Biol. Evol. 291Noa E Cohen, Roy Shen, and Liran Carmel. "The role of reverse transcriptase in intron gain and loss mech- anisms". en. In: Mol. Biol. Evol. 29.1 (Jan. 2012), pp. 179-186. ISSN: 0737-4038, 1537-1719. DOI: 10. 1093 / molbev / msr192. URL: http : / / dx . doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msr192.

Some Limitations of Ancestral Character-State Reconstruction When Testing Evolutionary Hypotheses. W Clifford, Cunningham, 1076-836XSyst. Biol. 48Clifford W Cunningham. "Some Limitations of An- cestral Character-State Reconstruction When Testing Evolutionary Hypotheses". In: Syst. Biol. 48.3 (1999), pp. 665-674. ISSN: 1063-5157, 1076-836X. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2585333.

A role for reverse transcripts in gene conversion". en. L K Derr, J N Strathern, 10.1038/361170a0DOI: 10. 1038/361170a0Nature. 361L K Derr and J N Strathern. "A role for reverse tran- scripts in gene conversion". en. In: Nature 361.6408 (Jan. 1993), pp. 170-173. ISSN: 0028-0836. DOI: 10. 1038/361170a0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1038/361170a0.

A mutational analysis of U12-dependent splice site dinucleotides". en. C Rosemary, John D Dietrich, Richard A Fuller, Padgett, RNA. 119Rosemary C Dietrich, John D Fuller, and Richard A Padgett. "A mutational analysis of U12-dependent splice site dinucleotides". en. In: RNA 11.9 (Sept. 2005), pp. 1430-1440. ISSN: 1355-8382.

Terminal intron dinucleotide sequences do not distinguish between U2-and U12-dependent introns. C Rosemary, Robert Dietrich, Richard A Incorvaia, Padgett, 10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80016-7DOI: 10 . 1016 / S1097 -2765(00English. In: Mol. Cell. 11Rosemary C Dietrich, Robert Incorvaia, and Richard A Padgett. "Terminal intron dinucleotide sequences do not distinguish between U2-and U12-dependent introns". English. In: Mol. Cell 1.1 (Dec. 1997), pp. 151-160. ISSN: 1097-2765. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S1097 -2765(00 ) 80016 -7. URL: http : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / S1097276500800167 % 5Cnhttp : / / ac . els -cdn . com / S1097276500800167 / 1 -s2 . 0 -S1097276500800167 -main . pdf ? _tid = 06fb8d62 -1209 -11e2 -bf6e - 00000aacb35d & acdnat = 1349784255 _ a887e0227a9aed594e325340d7d7b7f5.

Early developmental arrest and impaired gastrointestinal homeostasis in U12-dependent splicing-defective Rnpc3-deficient mice". en. Karen Doggett, 10.1261/rna.068221.1181469-9001. DOI: 10 . 1261 / rna . 068221 . 118RNA 24. 12Karen Doggett et al. "Early developmental arrest and impaired gastrointestinal homeostasis in U12- dependent splicing-defective Rnpc3-deficient mice". en. In: RNA 24.12 (Dec. 2018), pp. 1856-1870. ISSN: 1355-8382, 1469-9001. DOI: 10 . 1261 / rna . 068221 . 118. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10.1261/rna.068221.118.

Phylogenetic uncertainty can bias the number of evolutionary transitions estimated from ancestral state reconstruction methods". en. Sebastian Duchêne, Robert Lanfear, 10.1002/jez.b.22638J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 324Sebastian Duchêne and Robert Lanfear. "Phylogenetic uncertainty can bias the number of evolutionary tran- sitions estimated from ancestral state reconstruction methods". en. In: J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 324.6 (Sept. 2015), pp. 517-524. ISSN: 1552-5007, 1552- 5015. DOI: 10.1002/jez.b.22638. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.22638.

The NCBI Taxonomy database". en. Scott Federhen, 10.1093/nar/gkr11781362-4962. DOI: 10. 1093/nar/gkr1178Nucleic Acids Res. 40.Database issue. Scott Federhen. "The NCBI Taxonomy database". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 40.Database issue (Jan. 2012), pp. D136-43. ISSN: 0305-1048, 1362-4962. DOI: 10. 1093/nar/gkr1178. URL: http://dx.doi. org/10.1093/nar/gkr1178.

Animal, Fungi, and Plant Genome Sequences Harbor Different Non-Canonical Splice Sites". en. Katharina Frey, Boas Pucker, 10.3390/cells9020458Cells 9. Katharina Frey and Boas Pucker. "Animal, Fungi, and Plant Genome Sequences Harbor Different Non- Canonical Splice Sites". en. In: Cells 9.2 (Feb. 2020). ISSN: 2073-4409. DOI: 10.3390/cells9020458. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3390 / cells9020458.

Initial recognition of U12-dependent introns requires both U11/5' splicesite and U12/branchpoint interactions". en. M J Frilander, J A Steitz, 10.1101/gad.13.7.851DOI: 10 . 1101 / gad . 13 . 7 . 851Genes Dev. 13M J Frilander and J A Steitz. "Initial recognition of U12-dependent introns requires both U11/5' splice- site and U12/branchpoint interactions". en. In: Genes Dev. 13.7 (Apr. 1999), pp. 851-863. ISSN: 0890-9369. DOI: 10 . 1101 / gad . 13 . 7 . 851. URL: http : //dx.doi.org/10.1101/gad.13.7.851.

Aberrant splicing in maize rough endosperm3 reveals a conserved role for U12 splicing in eukaryotic multicellular development. M Christine, Gault, http:/www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616173114Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. the National Academy of Sciences114Christine M Gault et al. "Aberrant splicing in maize rough endosperm3 reveals a conserved role for U12 splicing in eukaryotic multicellular development". In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.11 (2017), E2195-E2204. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1616173114. URL: http:// www . pnas . org / lookup / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas.1616173114.

Extreme genome diversity in the hyper-prevalent parasitic eukaryote Blastocystis". en. Eleni Gentekaki, 10.1371/journal.pbio.2003769PLoS Biol. 159Eleni Gentekaki et al. "Extreme genome diversity in the hyper-prevalent parasitic eukaryote Blastocystis". en. In: PLoS Biol. 15.9 (Sept. 2017), e2003769. ISSN: 1544-9173, 1545-7885. DOI: 10.1371/journal. pbio.2003769. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pbio.2003769.

Why genes in pieces?. W Gilbert, 10.1038/271501a0DOI: 10 . 1038/271501a0W Gilbert. Why genes in pieces? 1978. DOI: 10 . 1038/271501a0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1038/271501a0.

Conserved sequences in a class of rare eukaryotic nuclear introns with non-consensus splice sites. S L Hall, R A Padgett, 10.1006/jmbi.1994.1377DOI: 10 . 1006/jmbi.1994.1377J. Mol. Biol. 239S L Hall and R A Padgett. "Conserved sequences in a class of rare eukaryotic nuclear introns with non-consensus splice sites". In: J. Mol. Biol. 239.3 (1994), pp. 357-365. ISSN: 0022-2836. DOI: 10 . 1006/jmbi.1994.1377. URL: http://www. sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii/S0022283684713775.

Multiple Roots of Fruiting Body Formation in Amoebozoa". en. Falk Hillmann, 10.1093/gbe/evy0111759-6653. DOI: 10 . 1093 / gbe / evy011Genome Biol. Evol. 102Falk Hillmann et al. "Multiple Roots of Fruiting Body Formation in Amoebozoa". en. In: Genome Biol. Evol. 10.2 (Feb. 2018), pp. 591-606. ISSN: 1759-6653. DOI: 10 . 1093 / gbe / evy011. URL: http : / / dx . doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evy011.

Accuracy of ancestral state reconstruction for non-neutral traits. R Barbara, Holland, 10.1038/s41598-020-64647-4DOI: 10. 1038 / s41598 -020 -64647 -4en. In: Sci. Rep. 101Barbara R Holland et al. "Accuracy of ancestral state reconstruction for non-neutral traits". en. In: Sci. Rep. 10.1 (May 2020), p. 7644. ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10. 1038 / s41598 -020 -64647 -4. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 -020 - 64647-4.

Origin of spliceosomal introns and alternative splicing. Manuel Irimia, Scott William Roy, 10.1101/cshperspect.a0160711943-0264. DOI: 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016071Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6. 6Manuel Irimia and Scott William Roy. "Origin of spliceosomal introns and alternative splicing". In: Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6.6 (2014). ISSN: 1943-0264. DOI: 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016071. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101/cshperspect.a016071.

A reappraisal of non-consensus mRNA splice sites. I J , Jackson , Nucleic Acids Res. 19I J Jackson. "A reappraisal of non-consensus mRNA splice sites". In: Nucleic Acids Res. 19.14 (July 1991), pp. 3795-3798. ISSN: 0305-1048. URL: http: / / www . pubmedcentral . nih . gov / articlerender . fcgi ? artid = 328465 & tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.

U12-type Spliceosomal Introns of Insecta. J Janice, 10.7150/ijbs.3933Int. J. Biol. Sci. 83J Janice et al. "U12-type Spliceosomal Introns of In- secta". In: Int. J. Biol. Sci. 8.3 (Jan. 2012), pp. 344- 352. ISSN: 1449-2288. DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.3933. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.7150/ijbs. 3933.

The rabbit beta-globin gene contains a large large insert in the coding sequence". en. A J Jeffreys , R A Flavell, 10.1016/0092-8674(77)90172-6In: Cell. 12A J Jeffreys and R A Flavell. "The rabbit beta-globin gene contains a large large insert in the coding se- quence". en. In: Cell 12.4 (Dec. 1977), pp. 1097- 1108. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674(77 ) 90172 -6. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org/10.1016/0092-8674(77)90172-6.

Detailed close-ups and the big picture of spliceosomes". en. S Melissa, Jurica, 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.05.005315-320. ISSN: 0959-440X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2008 . 05 . 005Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 183Melissa S Jurica. "Detailed close-ups and the big pic- ture of spliceosomes". en. In: Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 18.3 (June 2008), pp. 315-320. ISSN: 0959-440X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2008 . 05 . 005. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2008.05.005.

Structure-Specific Regulation of Nutrient Transport and Metabolism in Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi". en. Hiromu Kameoka, 10.1093/pcp/pcz1221471-9053. DOI: 10 . 1093 / pcp / pcz122Plant Cell Physiol. 6010Hiromu Kameoka et al. "Structure-Specific Regula- tion of Nutrient Transport and Metabolism in Arbus- cular Mycorrhizal Fungi". en. In: Plant Cell Physiol. 60.10 (Oct. 2019), pp. 2272-2281. ISSN: 0032-0781, 1471-9053. DOI: 10 . 1093 / pcp / pcz122. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / pcp / pcz122.

Splicing segregation: the minor spliceosome acts outside the nucleus and controls cell proliferation". en. Harald König, 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.043ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007.09.043Cell. 131Harald König et al. "Splicing segregation: the minor spliceosome acts outside the nucleus and controls cell proliferation". en. In: Cell 131.4 (Nov. 2007), pp. 718- 729. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007.09.043. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.043.

Aligning short sequencing reads with Bowtie. Ben Langmead, https:/currentprotocols.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/0471250953.bi1107s32Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics. 32Ben Langmead. "Aligning short sequencing reads with Bowtie". In: Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics 32.1 (2010), pp. 11-17. ISSN: 1934-3396. URL: https : / / currentprotocols . onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1002 / 0471250953.bi1107s32.

Expansion and transformation of the minor spliceosomal system in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum". en. Marek Graham E Larue, Scott W Eliáš, Roy, 10.1016/j.cub.2021.04.0501879-0445. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cub.2021.04.050Curr. Biol. 31. 14Graham E Larue, Marek Eliáš, and Scott W Roy. "Ex- pansion and transformation of the minor spliceosomal system in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum". en. In: Curr. Biol. 31.14 (July 2021), 3125-3131.e4. ISSN: 0960-9822, 1879-0445. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cub.2021.04.050. URL: http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.04.050.

Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL) v5: an online tool for phylogenetic tree display and annotation". en. Ivica Letunic, Peer Bork, 10.1093/nar/gkab301Nucleic Acids Res. 49Ivica Letunic and Peer Bork. "Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL) v5: an online tool for phylogenetic tree dis- play and annotation". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 49.W1 (July 2021), W293-W296. ISSN: 0305-1048, 1362- 4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab301. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab301.

A computational scan for U12-dependent introns in the human genome sequence". en. Aaron Levine, Richard Durbin, 10.1093/nar/29.19.4006Nucleic Acids Res. 29Aaron Levine and Richard Durbin. "A computational scan for U12-dependent introns in the human genome sequence". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 29.19 (Oct. 2001), pp. 4006-4013. ISSN: 0305-1048, 1362-4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.19.4006. URL: http: / / nar . oupjournals . org / cgi / content / abstract / 29 / 19 / 4006 % 5Cnhttp : / / www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/ PMC60238/pdf/gke532.pdf.

Evolutionary dynamics of U12-type spliceosomal introns". en. Chiao-Feng Lin, 10.1186/1471-2148-10-47DOI: 10 . 1186/1471-2148-10-47BMC Evol. Biol. 10Chiao-Feng Lin et al. "Evolutionary dynamics of U12- type spliceosomal introns". en. In: BMC Evol. Biol. 10 (Feb. 2010), p. 47. ISSN: 1471-2148. DOI: 10 . 1186/1471-2148-10-47. URL: http://www. pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender. fcgi ? artid = 2831892 & tool = pmcentrez & rendertype=abstract.

The excess of 5' introns in eukaryotic genomes". en. Kui Lin, Da-Yong Zhang, 10.1093/nar/gki9701362-4962. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gki970Nucleic Acids Res. 33Kui Lin and Da-Yong Zhang. "The excess of 5' in- trons in eukaryotic genomes". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 33.20 (Nov. 2005), pp. 6522-6527. ISSN: 0305- 1048, 1362-4962. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gki970. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/ gki970.

The recent origins of spliceosomal introns revisited". en. J M LogsdonJr, 10.1016/s0959-437x(98)80031-2ISSN: 0959-437X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / s0959 -437xCurr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 86J M Logsdon Jr. "The recent origins of spliceoso- mal introns revisited". en. In: Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 8.6 (Dec. 1998), pp. 637-648. ISSN: 0959-437X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / s0959 -437x(98 ) 80031 -2. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0959 - 437x(98)80031-2.

Intron phase correlations and the evolution of the intron/exon structure of genes". en. M Long, W Rosenberg, Gilbert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92M Long, C Rosenberg, and W Gilbert. "Intron phase correlations and the evolution of the intron/exon struc- ture of genes". en. In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92.26 (Dec. 1995), pp. 12495-12499. ISSN: 0027- 8424.

Computational screen for spliceosomal RNA genes aids in defining the phylogenetic distribution of major and minor spliceosomal components. Marcela Davila Lopez, Magnus Alm Rosenblad, Tore Samuelsson, http:/nar.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkn142DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkn142Nucleic Acids Res. 369Marcela Davila Lopez, Magnus Alm Rosenblad, and Tore Samuelsson. "Computational screen for spliceo- somal RNA genes aids in defining the phyloge- netic distribution of major and minor spliceoso- mal components". In: Nucleic Acids Res. 36.9 (May 2008), pp. 3001-3010. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkn142. URL: http : / / nar . oxfordjournals . org / lookup / doi / 10 . 1093/nar/gkn142.

Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2". en. Wolfgang Michael I Love, Simon Huber, Anders, 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8DOI: 10 . 1186 / s13059 -014 -0550 -8Genome Biol. 15. 12Michael I Love, Wolfgang Huber, and Simon Anders. "Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2". en. In: Genome Biol. 15.12 (2014), p. 550. ISSN: 1465-6906. DOI: 10 . 1186 / s13059 -014 -0550 -8. URL: http : / / dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550- 8.

Gene expression enhancement mediated by the 5 UTR intron of the rice rubi3 gene varied remarkably among tissues in transgenic rice plants. Jianli Lu, 10.1007/s00438-008-0333-61617-4623. DOI: 10.1007/ s00438 -008 -0333 -6Mol. Genet. Genomics. 2796Jianli Lu et al. "Gene expression enhancement medi- ated by the 5 UTR intron of the rice rubi3 gene varied remarkably among tissues in transgenic rice plants". In: Mol. Genet. Genomics 279.6 (June 2008), pp. 563- 572. ISSN: 1617-4615, 1617-4623. DOI: 10.1007/ s00438 -008 -0333 -6. URL: https : / / doi . org/10.1007/s00438-008-0333-6.

A day in the life of the spliceosome". en. Gregory Matera, Zefeng Wang, 10.1038/nrm3742Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 152A Gregory Matera and Zefeng Wang. "A day in the life of the spliceosome". en. In: Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15.2 (Feb. 2014), pp. 108-121. ISSN: 1471-0072, 1471-0080. DOI: 10.1038/nrm3742. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrm3742.

Srsf10 and the minor spliceosome control tissue-specific and dynamic SR protein expression. Stefan Meinke, 10.7554/eLife.56075en. In: Elife 9. Stefan Meinke et al. "Srsf10 and the minor spliceo- some control tissue-specific and dynamic SR pro- tein expression". en. In: Elife 9 (Apr. 2020). ISSN: 2050-084X. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.56075. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 56075.

IRFinder: assessing the impact of intron retention on mammalian gene expression". en. Robert Middleton, 10.1186/s13059-017-1184-4Genome Biol. 181Robert Middleton et al. "IRFinder: assessing the im- pact of intron retention on mammalian gene expres- sion". en. In: Genome Biol. 18.1 (Mar. 2017), p. 51. ISSN: 1465-6906. DOI: 10.1186/s13059-017- 1184 -4. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186/s13059-017-1184-4.

A catalogue of splice junction sequences". en. S M Mount, Nucleic Acids Res. 102S M Mount. "A catalogue of splice junction se- quences". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 10.2 (Jan. 1982), pp. 459-472. ISSN: 0305-1048.

Eukaryotic intron loss". en. Tobias Mourier, C Daniel, Jeffares, 10.1126/science.1080559Science. 300Tobias Mourier and Daniel C Jeffares. "Eukaryotic intron loss". en. In: Science 300.5624 (May 2003), pp. 1393-1393. ISSN: 0036-8075, 1095-9203. DOI: 10.1126/science.1080559. URL: http:// dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1080559.

Comprehensive database and evolutionary dynamics of U12-type introns". en. C Devlin, Moyer, 10.1093/nar/gkaa464Nucleic Acids Res. 48Devlin C Moyer et al. "Comprehensive database and evolutionary dynamics of U12-type introns". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 48.13 (July 2020), pp. 7066-7078. ISSN: 0305-1048, 1362-4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/ gkaa464. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093/nar/gkaa464.

The protistan origins of animal cell differentiation. R Sebastián, Iñaki Najle, Ruiz-Trillo, https:/www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9781315388212/chapters/10.1201/b21831-2ISBN: 9781315388229. DOI: 10 . 1201 / b21831 -2Origin and Evolution of Metazoan Cell Types. CRC PressSebastián R Najle and Iñaki Ruiz-Trillo. "The pro- tistan origins of animal cell differentiation". In: Ori- gin and Evolution of Metazoan Cell Types. CRC Press, Apr. 2021, pp. 13-26. ISBN: 9781315388229. DOI: 10 . 1201 / b21831 -2. URL: https : / / www . taylorfrancis . com / books / 9781315388212 / chapters / 10 . 1201 / b21831-2.

Infernal 1.1: 100-fold faster RNA homology searches". en. P Eric, Sean R Nawrocki, Eddy, 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt5091367-4811. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btt509Bioinformatics. 29Eric P Nawrocki and Sean R Eddy. "Infernal 1.1: 100-fold faster RNA homology searches". en. In: Bioinformatics 29.22 (Nov. 2013), pp. 2933-2935. ISSN: 1367-4803, 1367-4811. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btt509. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btt509.

Phase distribution of spliceosomal introns: implications for intron origin". en. Maki Hung D Nguyen, Naoya Yoshihama, Kenmochi, BMC Evol. Biol. 669Hung D Nguyen, Maki Yoshihama, and Naoya Ken- mochi. "Phase distribution of spliceosomal introns: implications for intron origin". en. In: BMC Evol. Biol. 6 (Sept. 2006), p. 69.

Splicing of messenger RNA precursors". en. R A Padgett, 10.1146/annurev.bi.55.070186.0053511119-1150. ISSN: 0066-4154. DOI: 10 . 1146 / annurev . bi . 55 . 070186 . 005351Annu. Rev. Biochem. 55R A Padgett et al. "Splicing of messenger RNA pre- cursors". en. In: Annu. Rev. Biochem. 55 (1986), pp. 1119-1150. ISSN: 0066-4154. DOI: 10 . 1146 / annurev . bi . 55 . 070186 . 005351. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev. bi.55.070186.005351.

A comprehensive survey of noncanonical splice sites in the human transcriptome. G E Parada, http:/nar.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gku744DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gku744Nucleic Acids Res. 42G E Parada et al. "A comprehensive survey of non- canonical splice sites in the human transcriptome". In: Nucleic Acids Res. 42.16 (2014), pp. 10564-10578. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gku744. URL: http : / / nar . oxfordjournals . org / lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gku744.

Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression". en. Rob Patro, 10.1038/nmeth.41971548-7105. DOI: 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4197Nat. Methods. 14Rob Patro et al. "Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression". en. In: Nat. Methods 14.4 (Apr. 2017), pp. 417-419. ISSN: 1548- 7091, 1548-7105. DOI: 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4197. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmeth. 4197.

Is there any intron sliding in mammals?" en. Irina V Poverennaya, A Nadezhda, Potapova, Sergey, Spirin, 10.1186/s12862-020-01726-0BMC Evol. Biol. 201Irina V Poverennaya, Nadezhda A Potapova, and Sergey A Spirin. "Is there any intron sliding in mam- mals?" en. In: BMC Evol. Biol. 20.1 (Dec. 2020), p. 164. ISSN: 1471-2148. DOI: 10.1186/s12862- 020-01726-0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1186/s12862-020-01726-0.

Genomewide analyses supported by RNA-Seq reveal noncanonical splice sites in plant genomes". en. Boas Pucker, Samuel F Brockington, 10.1186/s12864-018-5360-zDOI: 10 . 1186 / s12864 -018 -5360 -z. URLBMC Genomics. 191Boas Pucker and Samuel F Brockington. "Genome- wide analyses supported by RNA-Seq reveal non- canonical splice sites in plant genomes". en. In: BMC Genomics 19.1 (Dec. 2018), p. 980. ISSN: 1471-2164. DOI: 10 . 1186 / s12864 -018 -5360 -z. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12864 - 018-5360-z.

Origin and evolution of spliceosomal introns". en. Igor B Rogozin, 10.1186/1745-6150-7-111745-6150. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1745 - 6150 -7 -11Biol. Direct. 7111Igor B Rogozin et al. "Origin and evolution of spliceo- somal introns". en. In: Biol. Direct 7.1 (Apr. 2012), p. 11. ISSN: 1745-6150. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1745 - 6150 -7 -11. URL: http : / / www . biology - direct.com/content/7/1/11.

Remarkable interkingdom conservation of intron positions and massive, lineagespecific intron loss and gain in eukaryotic evolution. Igor B Rogozin, 10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00558-XISSN: 0960-9822. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0960 -9822(03 ) 00558 -X. URLCurr. Biol. 1303558Igor B Rogozin et al. "Remarkable interkingdom con- servation of intron positions and massive, lineage- specific intron loss and gain in eukaryotic evolution". In: Curr. Biol. 13.17 (2003), pp. 1512-1517. ISSN: 0960-9822. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0960 -9822(03 ) 00558 -X. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016/S0960-9822(03)00558-X.

Intronization, de-intronization and intron sliding are rare in Cryptococcus. S W Scott W Roy, 10.1186/1471-2148-9-192DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471 -2148 -9 -192BMC Evol. Biol. 9S W Scott W Roy. "Intronization, de-intronization and intron sliding are rare in Cryptococcus". In: BMC Evol. Biol. 9 (Jan. 2009), p. 192. ISSN: 1471-2148. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1471 -2148 -9 -192. URL: http : / / www . biomedcentral . com / 1471 - 2148/9/192/.

Large-scale comparison of intron positions in mammalian genes shows intron loss but no gain". en. Alexei Scott W Roy, Walter Fedorov, Gilbert, 10.1073/pnas.1232297100ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1232297100Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100. 12Scott W Roy, Alexei Fedorov, and Walter Gilbert. "Large-scale comparison of intron positions in mam- malian genes shows intron loss but no gain". en. In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100.12 (June 2003), pp. 7158-7162. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1232297100. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org/10.1073/pnas.1232297100.

Complex early genes". W Scott, Walter Roy, Gilbert, 10.1073/pnas.0408355101DOI: 10 . 1073/pnas.0408355101In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1026Scott W Roy and Walter Gilbert. "Complex early genes". In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102.6 (Feb. 2005), pp. 1986-1991. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10 . 1073/pnas.0408355101. URL: http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24057835.

The pattern of intron loss. W Scott, Walter Roy, Gilbert, 10.1073/pnas.0408274102DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0408274102Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102Scott W Roy and Walter Gilbert. "The pattern of intron loss". In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102.3 (2005), pp. 713-718. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0408274102. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org/10.1073/pnas.0408274102.

How Common Is Parallel Intron Gain? Rapid Evolution Versus Independent Creation in Recently Created Introns in Daphnia". en. Roy Scott William, 10.1093/molbev/msw0911537-1719. DOI: 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw091Mol. Biol. Evol. 33Scott William Roy. "How Common Is Parallel Intron Gain? Rapid Evolution Versus Independent Creation in Recently Created Introns in Daphnia". en. In: Mol. Biol. Evol. 33.8 (Aug. 2016), pp. 1902-1906. ISSN: 0737-4038, 1537-1719. DOI: 10 . 1093 / molbev / msw091. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093/molbev/msw091.

The evolution of spliceosomal introns: patterns, puzzles and progress. William Scott, Walter Roy, Gilbert, 10.1038/nrg1807DOI: 10 . 1038 / nrg1807Nat. Rev. Genet. 73Scott William Roy and Walter Gilbert. "The evolu- tion of spliceosomal introns: patterns, puzzles and progress". In: Nat. Rev. Genet. 7.3 (Mar. 2006), pp. 211-221. ISSN: 1471-0056. DOI: 10 . 1038 / nrg1807. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038/nrg1807.

An early evolutionary origin for the minor spliceosome". en. G Anthony, Russell, 10.1038/nature05228Nature. 443Anthony G Russell et al. "An early evolutionary origin for the minor spliceosome". en. In: Nature 443.7113 (Oct. 2006), pp. 863-866. ISSN: 0028-0836, 1476- 4687. DOI: 10.1038/nature05228. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature05228.

On biased distribution of introns in various eukaryotes". en. A Sakurai, 10.1016/s0378-1119(02)01035-1ISSN: 0378-1119. DOI: 10.1016/ s0378 -1119(02Gene. 30002A Sakurai et al. "On biased distribution of introns in various eukaryotes". en. In: Gene 300.1-2 (Oct. 2002), pp. 89-95. ISSN: 0378-1119. DOI: 10.1016/ s0378 -1119(02 ) 01035 -1. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0378 -1119(02 ) 01035-1.

Coupling of spliceosome complexity to intron diversity". en. Jade Sales-Lee, 10.1016/j.cub.2021.09.0041879- 0445. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2021 . 09 . 004Curr. Biol. 31Jade Sales-Lee et al. "Coupling of spliceosome com- plexity to intron diversity". en. In: Curr. Biol. 31.22 (Nov. 2021), 4898-4910.e4. ISSN: 0960-9822, 1879- 0445. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2021 . 09 . 004. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub. 2021.09.004.

Proliferating Cells Express mRNAs with Shortened 3' Untranslated Regions and Fewer MicroRNA Target Sites". en. Rickard Sandberg, 10.1126/science.11553901095-9203. DOI: 10 . 1126 / science.1155390Science. 320Rickard Sandberg et al. "Proliferating Cells Ex- press mRNAs with Shortened 3' Untranslated Re- gions and Fewer MicroRNA Target Sites". en. In: Science 320.5883 (June 2008), pp. 1643-1647. ISSN: 0036-8075, 1095-9203. DOI: 10 . 1126 / science.1155390. URL: https://science. sciencemag . org / content / 320 / 5883 / 1643.

Splice Sites Seldom Slide: Intron Evolution in Oomycetes". en. Miklós Steven Sêton Bocco, Csűrös, 10.1093/gbe/evw157DOI: 10 . 1093 / gbe / evw157Genome Biol. Evol. 8Steven Sêton Bocco and Miklós Csűrös. "Splice Sites Seldom Slide: Intron Evolution in Oomycetes". en. In: Genome Biol. Evol. 8.8 (Aug. 2016), pp. 2340-2350. ISSN: 1759-6653. DOI: 10 . 1093 / gbe / evw157. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/gbe/ evw157.

Variation in the SSUrDNA of the Genus Protostelium Leads to a New Phylogenetic Understanding of the Genus and of the Species Concept for Protostelium mycophaga (Protosteliida, Amoebozoa)". en. D L John, Jeffery D Shadwick, Frederick W Silberman, Spiegel, 10.1111/jeu.124761550-7408. DOI: 10. 1111 / jeu . 12476J. Eukaryot. Microbiol. 653John D L Shadwick, Jeffery D Silberman, and Fred- erick W Spiegel. "Variation in the SSUrDNA of the Genus Protostelium Leads to a New Phylogenetic Un- derstanding of the Genus and of the Species Concept for Protostelium mycophaga (Protosteliida, Amoebo- zoa)". en. In: J. Eukaryot. Microbiol. 65.3 (May 2018), pp. 331-344. ISSN: 1066-5234, 1550-7408. DOI: 10. 1111 / jeu . 12476. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org/10.1111/jeu.12476.

A retained intron in the 3'-UTR of Calm3 mRNA mediates its Staufen2-and activity-dependent localization to neuronal dendrites". en. Tejaswini Sharangdhar, 10.15252/embr.2017443341469-3178. DOI: 10 . 15252 / embr . 201744334EMBO Rep. 18Tejaswini Sharangdhar et al. "A retained intron in the 3'-UTR of Calm3 mRNA mediates its Staufen2-and activity-dependent localization to neuronal dendrites". en. In: EMBO Rep. 18.10 (Oct. 2017), pp. 1762-1774. ISSN: 1469-221X, 1469-3178. DOI: 10 . 15252 / embr . 201744334. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org/10.15252/embr.201744334.

Comprehensive splice-site analysis using comparative genomics". en. Nihar Sheth, 10.1093/nar/gkl556DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkl556Nucleic Acids Res. 34Nihar Sheth et al. "Comprehensive splice-site anal- ysis using comparative genomics". en. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 34.14 (Aug. 2006), pp. 3955-3967. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkl556. URL: http : / / www . pubmedcentral . nih . gov / articlerender.fcgi?artid=1557818%7B& %7Dtool=pmcentrez%7B&%7Drendertype= abstract.

Lessons from non-canonical splicing. R Christopher, Lorea Sibley, Jernej Blazquez, Ule, 10.1038/nrg.2016.46DOI: 10. 1038/nrg.2016.46Christopher R Sibley, Lorea Blazquez, and Jernej Ule. Lessons from non-canonical splicing. 2016. DOI: 10. 1038/nrg.2016.46. URL: http://dx.doi. org/10.1038/nrg.2016.46.

BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. A Felipe, Simão, 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv3511460-2059. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btv351Bioinformatics. Felipe A Simão et al. "BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs". In: Bioinformat- ics (2015). ISSN: 1367-4803, 1460-2059. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btv351. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics/btv351.

Differential analyses for RNAseq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences. Charlotte Soneson, Mark D Michael I Love, Robinson, 10.12688/f1000research.7563.2DOI: 10 . 12688 / f1000research . 7563 . 2en. In: F1000Res. 4. Charlotte Soneson, Michael I Love, and Mark D Robinson. "Differential analyses for RNA- seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences". en. In: F1000Res. 4 (Dec. 2015), p. 1521. ISSN: 2046-1402. DOI: 10 . 12688 / f1000research . 7563 . 2. URL: http : //dx.doi.org/10.12688/f1000research. 7563.2.

Animal microRNAs confer robustness to gene expression and have a significant impact on 3???UTR evolution. Alexander Stark, 10.1016/j.cell.2005.11.023ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 11 . 023Cell. 123Alexander Stark et al. "Animal microRNAs confer ro- bustness to gene expression and have a significant im- pact on 3???UTR evolution". In: Cell 123.6 (2005), pp. 1133-1146. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 11 . 023. URL: http : / / dx . doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.11.023.

Intron "sliding" and the diversity of intron positions. Arlin Stoltzfus, https:/www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.94.20.10739DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 20 . 10739Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. the National Academy of Sciences94Arlin Stoltzfus et al. "Intron "sliding" and the diver- sity of intron positions". In: Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences 94.20 (1997), pp. 10739- 10744. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 20 . 10739. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/ 10.1073/pnas.94.20.10739. URL: https: //www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas. 94.20.10739.

Conservation versus parallel gains in intron evolution. V Alexander, Sverdlov, 10.1093/nar/gki316Nucleic Acids Res. 33Alexander V Sverdlov et al. "Conservation versus par- allel gains in intron evolution". In: Nucleic Acids Res. 33.6 (2005), pp. 1741-1748. ISSN: 0305-1048, 1362- 4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki316. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gki316.

ERISdb: a database of plant splice sites and splicing signals". en. Wojciech Michał, Szcześniak, 10.1093/pcp/pct001e10. ISSN: 0032-0781. DOI: 10 . 1093 / pcp / pct001Plant Cell Physiol. 542Michał Wojciech Szcześniak et al. "ERISdb: a database of plant splice sites and splicing signals". en. In: Plant Cell Physiol. 54.2 (Feb. 2013), e10. ISSN: 0032-0781. DOI: 10 . 1093 / pcp / pct001. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / pcp / pct001.

Highly diverged U4 and U6 small nuclear RNAs required for splicing rare AT-AC introns". en. J A W Y Tarn, Steitz, 10.1126/science.273.5283.18241824-1832. ISSN: 0036-8075. DOI: 10 . 1126 / science.273.5283.1824Science. 273W Y Tarn and J A Steitz. "Highly diverged U4 and U6 small nuclear RNAs required for splicing rare AT- AC introns". en. In: Science 273.5283 (Sept. 1996), pp. 1824-1832. ISSN: 0036-8075. DOI: 10 . 1126 / science.273.5283.1824. URL: http://dx. doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 273 . 5283 . 1824.

A novel spliceosome containing U11, U12, and U5 snRNPs excises a minor class (AT-AC) intron in vitro. Y Woan, Joan Tarn, Steitz, 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81057-0ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0092 -8674(00 ) 81057 -0. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 -8674(00Cell. 84Woan Y Tarn and Joan a Steitz. "A novel spliceosome containing U11, U12, and U5 snRNPs excises a mi- nor class (AT-AC) intron in vitro". In: Cell 84 (1996), pp. 801-811. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0092 -8674(00 ) 81057 -0. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 -8674(00 ) 81057-0.

The significant other: splicing by the minor spliceosome". en. J Janne, Turunen, 10.1002/wrna.1141DOI: 10 . 1002 / wrna . 1141Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA. 41Janne J Turunen et al. "The significant other: splic- ing by the minor spliceosome". en. In: Wiley Inter- discip. Rev. RNA 4.1 (Jan. 2013), pp. 61-76. ISSN: 1757-7004. DOI: 10 . 1002 / wrna . 1141. URL: http : / / www . pubmedcentral . nih . gov / articlerender.fcgi?artid=3584512%7B& %7Dtool=pmcentrez%7B&%7Drendertype= abstract.

Intron-Genome Size Relationship on a Large Evolutionary Scale. E Alexander, Vinogradov, J. Mol. Evol. 493Alexander E Vinogradov. "Intron-Genome Size Rela- tionship on a Large Evolutionary Scale". In: J. Mol. Evol. 49.3 (Sept. 1999), pp. 376-384. ISSN: 0022- 2844.

Spliceosome structure and function. L Cindy, Reinhard Will, R Lührmann, Luhrmann, http:/cshperspectives.cshlp.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/cshperspect.a003707DOI: 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a003707Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 37Cindy L Will, Reinhard Lührmann, and R Luhrmann. "Spliceosome structure and function". In: Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3.7 (July 2011), pp. 1-2. ISSN: 1943-0264. DOI: 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a003707. URL: http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / lookup / doi / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect.a003707.