# The effectiveness of employer branding in attracting talented employee: Systematic literature review

CorpusID: 254299528
 
tags: #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/036c65d5095865a3fa523e2203497d7515dcf93b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/036c65d5095865a3fa523e2203497d7515dcf93b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The effectiveness of employer branding in attracting talented employee: Systematic literature review
Published: 27 November 2022

Nur Muhammad Sirojuddin nurmuhammadsirojuddin@gmail.com 
Master of Management
State University of Malang
East JavaIndonesia

Sopiah 
Master of Management
State University of Malang
East JavaIndonesia

The effectiveness of employer branding in attracting talented employee: Systematic literature review

ASIAN JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
20223Published: 27 November 202210.53402/ajebm.v1i3.235Received: 19 October 2022 Accepted: 24 November 2022CONTACT Nur Muhammad Sirojuddin-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/), which allows others to share the work with an acknowledgement of the work's authorship and initial publication in this journal.
KEYWORDSAttracting and keeping the ideal employees at the moment is a challenge for businesses. For businesses to be successful, it is essential to develop tactics and implement plans of activities that will support them establish a competitive place on the industry for top experts. Employer branding is a process used by top management to establish a specificity for the job and maintain the firm's public image. Employer branding is a term where the company presents the firm's reputation and credibility where extant workers' favourable phrase of tongue promotes the recent institution to the outside world. Employer branding is crucial in persuading talented people to apply to the company. The goal of this Systematic Literature Review is to examine employer branding's effectiveness in luring potential employees in greater detail as well as the aspects that contribute to its development. The result of this research is that despite the fact that each company had a distinctive branding strategy, job applicants were not actually aware of it. Instead of the strategic branding image that firms are working to create and promote, potential applicants seem to be drawn to businesses based on their past interactions with them and the perceptions of them that already exist in the community. This shows that in order to continue luring in the top candidates, these businesses must be more watchful and worried about influencing staff thoughts through effective and deliberate communication of their branding initiatives to potential employees. Employer Branding; Talented Employee; Employee Management; Literature Review

## Introduction

The multiplicity of staff' national origins is growing as a result of globalization. Companies should keep in mind that the level of devotion of the workforce is determined by how flexiblely they control, handle, and integrate top potential. (Deery & Jago, 2015;Du Plessis & Sukumaran, 2015;Gonzalez-Cruz et al., 2019) Employees in their organization. One of the biggest difficulties in corporate management over the past decade has been attracting and keeping talent. The most profitable businesses will be those that make an effort to educate experts, who have emerged as the strongest strategic asset (Blasco et al., 2014;Jim enez & de PeopleMatters, 2015).

All organizations place a high priority on pairing individuals to the jobs that best suit them since doing so can help them gain a competitive benefit by recruiting, acquiring, and managing talented people (Barney, 1986;Greening & Turban, 2000;Yu & Cable, 2010). The reputation of an organization, which can be influenced by the information provided about the company to potential employees, is a factor that employers must take into account when making job selection decisions (Tkalac Veri & Sini ori, 2018). Job seekers still have questions about their future business and workplace conditions, despite the fact that material on corporate websites might provide some insight into what it might be like to work there (Yu, 2014).

According to Moroko and Uncles (2008), brand image is a constant effort meant to convey to both present and potential employees how desirable and advantageous this environment is. Employer branding, according to Sulivan (2004), creates a perception of the company as a fantastic place to work. In agreement with this viewpoint, Minchington (2001) makes the claim that "the employer brand is the perception of the company among current workers and aware of the impact as a fantastic work environment.

Employer branding is considered one of the effective approaches for businesses to increase organizational attractiveness and hence engage potential employees, according to empirical study (Jonsen et al., 2019;Sharma & Tanwar, 2021). Organizations must modify their tactics to match the new target market as millennials and generation Z begin to work (Sharma & Tanwar, 2021).

To achieve the desired results, businesses must, however, employ these branding methods properly. According to Backhaus and Tikoo (2004), if employer branding is poor, it will not draw in the right people, which will ultimately result in higher hiring and selection costs as well as significant time, energy, and financial outlays.

In order to give a general summary of the effectiveness of adopting employer branding in luring bright employees, this study used a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) technique. In light of this context, it was deemed useful to investigate the brand image employed by businesses, to comprehend the strategies employed by businesses, to investigate how potential applicants recognize these methods, and to determine the degree to which these potential applicants are drawn to these business models. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to examine employer branding techniques and determine how successfully these initiatives have reached potential employees as well as how interested these candidates are to these organizations as a result of these strategies.


## Methods

In this study, we used Systematic Literature Review (SLR) as an analytical method in order to come up with an assessment of the scientific topics that the author has highlighted in the introduction. Depending on the Eligible Studies Article for Systematic Review and Meta Analysis, SLR (PRISMA).

Two literature searches are employed in the identification stage, and they will be conducted on Google Scholar, an online database with a substantial collection of academic works. A search for further information is also done during the identification stage's second procedure. The next stage of screening involves removing redundant or duplicate material when the search procedure is finished. Along with the article's title, abstract, and keywords being filtered. search results are examined, and titles, abstracts, and keywords are chosen based on previously established qualifying criteria. The screening step includes the time frame based on 2017 to 2022.

Identification, screening, and inclusion are the three procedures under which the search's steps are broken down. This action complies with PRISMA 2020's (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) recommendations. PRISMA is a set of minimum standards based on evidence that are intended to assist authors in reporting various systematic reviews and metanalyses that evaluate benefits. PRISMA focuses on methods that authors can employ to guarantee accurate and thorough reporting of these kinds of investigations. After amassing a large number of papers that match the keywords, the following step for researchers is to retrieve information from the publications using the defined admittance standards. This aims to concentrate the data gathered so that researchers can locate literature that complies with the standards.

The criterion sources listed below were utilized to evaluate the conditions for data admittance for this study: Talented individuals nowadays must first be aware of the firm in order to judge how good it is and whether all of its norms, values, and cultures align with their preferences. They must also understand the organization's current state and its history. How can Facebook, which is well known to many potential candidates, consistently outperform other recruiting agencies in attracting quality individuals.


## 2.

Keppeler, F. and Papenfuß, U., 2021

Public Administration Review Understanding whether greater public workplace brands can benefit from both brand components that are shared by many public employers as well as from attracting primary target groups by highlighting unique features of one public employer is crucial because some companies may be better able to draw in particular target demographics than others. This study aims to inspire academics in the fields of public administration, HRM, and branding to conduct employer branding research in order to influence initiatives to enhance public employers' hiring procedures.


## 3.

Aslam, S. and Shamsuddin, F., 2022.

International Journal of Economics, Business and Management Studies (EBMS)

What kind of information affects recruiting in its first stages is not well understood. This study uses data on media platforms credibility overall, data on employer branding, and information on employer image. As far as the researcher is aware, the three exogenous variables and one endogenous variable were not evaluated combined while taking the Malaysian banking industry into consideration.


## 4.

Reis, I., Sousa, M.J. and Dionísio, A., 2021.


## Sustainability

Demand from consumers has increased, which has quickly led to shorter and shorter life cycles for products and processes. This environment of rapid change, the global financial system, and technological advancement has brought a previously unheard-of emphasis on the value of knowledge-holding individuals within organizations. The goal of the current research is to demonstrate the value of the EB idea for talent management, particularly as a tool. 5.

PRWMSC, W. and Adikaram, A.S., 2017.


## The 8th International Research

Conference on Management and Finance, Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Thus, it was clear that although job advertisements were intended to provide the groundwork for a relationship between an organization and a prospective employee, the three organizations under study had failed in this goal by failing to convey their distinctiveness and allure to candidates. The three firms under study also revealed such distinctive and primary branding methods, with Unilever focused on its distinctive corporate culture as its principal brand image, and Brandix emphasizing international assignments and exposure. 6.

Slamiaty, M., Arief, N.N. and Ariyanto, K., 2022


## Management and Economics Review

The characteristics of employer branding for Generation Z are defined by this research. The goal of this production is to improve employer branding for the younger generation by updating and renewing previous concepts. Four elements of Generation Z's workplace branding were produced by this research. It is more challenging to develop an employer brand than a product brand. There are numerous businesses that recruit individuals by offering wages that are greater than those in the industry, but they are unable to keep them for an extended period of time because the business's rules, culture, and environment are insufficient to do so. How did Microsoft establish and strengthen its employer brand to the extent that it has today? Microsoft thinks its employees are knowledgeable individuals who young people just entering the field can learn from, not only from a technical standpoint but also on how to market ideas and discoveries. 8.

Purbasari, R., Arinawati, L. and Suryanto, S., 2021


## Journal of Applied Business and Economic

The study's findings indicate that the employee satisfaction variable of PT's millennial employees is significantly and favorably impacted by the employer brand variable. The findings also demonstrate the importance of the employer brand's measurement accuracy to millennial employees at PT's performance management. This indicates that the employer brand can raise the millennial employees at PT's employee satisfaction factor. 9.

Ekhsan, M. and Fitri, N., 2021.


## Jurnal Ekonomi Bisnis, Manajemen dan Akuntansi

Job Contentment Level at Samsung Electronics Considering the data from the findings of the Samsung Culture study, it is clear that a key factor in a company's capacity to remain viable is its ability to both retain personnel and recruit new hires. 10.

Ekhsan, M., Jayanti, N.K.P.A. and Parashakti, R.D., 2021.


## Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial dan Kewirausahaan

The findings of this study are consistent with earlier research showing that motivation in applying for jobs is significantly influenced by company's reputation. Through firm reputation, employer branding has a positive and significant impact on job applicants' interest. The desire in applying for a job is positively and significantly impacted by a company's reputation. 11.

Kristianto, N.A. and Handoyo, S., 2020.


## Jurnal Psikologi: Media Ilmiah Psikologi

It is possible to infer from the findings of this study that company branding has an influence on staff, with employee satisfaction serving as a mediator variable. In order to improve competition for goods and services from the micro to the macro level, it is anticipated that technology will be able to convince local businesses to access the global market. 12.

Rehatta, P.N.R., Sijabat, A., Tutupoho, S., Muskita, F.I. and Waly, N., 2022.


## Management Studies and Entrepreneurship Journal

Work engagement can be used to mediate the impact of employer branding on turnover intentions. For example, positive employee perceptions of a company's employer branding can increase employee engagement at PT Federal International Finance Ambon, increasing the likelihood that employees will increase the company's profitability. 13.

Windayanti, W. and Febrian, W.D.F., 2022.


## Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial dan Kewirausahaan

This is consistent with Croston's assertion that employee engagement is not the same as job satisfaction; rather, it is a conduct that is attained after employees feel satisfied, then become aware of the business, which leads to a realization of the employee's role in the overall system of a company.

14.

Nguyen, M.T. and Huynh, C.M., 2022


## Munich Personal RePEc Archive

In order to improve potential applicants' perceptions of a firm, which in turn inspires people to apply for a position, employer branding of a company chooses to set of activities that produce the desired advantage or so. This study intends to look into how management students in three major provinces in Vietnam's Southern Key Economic Region, including Ho Chi Minh City, feel about applying for jobs based on the five factors of company branding.


## 15.

Prasetyaningtyas, S.W., Sim, M., Triantoro, B.H. and Allen, A., 2022.

Jurnal Bisnis dan Manajemen Generation Z has the skills it needs in the labor marketbut more people choose to work freelance because they don't like to commit, and they tend to live for the present. This is evidenced by the variables of leadership and vision and THE USE OF EMPLOYER BRANDING DIMENSIONS TO ATTRACT FRESH GRADUATES. According to, one solution to win the talent war competition is to use an employer branding strategy. Then companies will "fight" each other to find the best employees. This phenomenon is commonly referred to as talent war.


## 16.

Sharma, M. and Verma, P., 2022.

EasyChair. Employee branding is a theory that fosters a sense of belonging among staff members, as well as a sense of satisfaction and pride in being a part of the organization. It also denotes the social standing, civilization, and business strategy of a business, structures arrangement with brand marketing efforts, and attracts promising job candidates. 17.

Azam, M., 2022. SSRN The employer branding and job characteristics theories are strengthened by this research investigation. According to a concept of internal or external determinants derived from studies by and, leadership styles and organizational personality are internal determinants of employer brand image. Two elements that influence to an employer's favorable status and appeal are professionalism and corporate reputation. 18.

Sharma, A. and Raj, R., 2022.


## Journal of Positive School Psychology

As a conclusion, the literature has pointed to human resource management activities, organizational product promotion, leadership, and brand-oriented assistance as the primary determinant factors of employee branding.


## 19.

Kele, J.E. and Cassell, C.M., 2022.

British Journal of Management.

Our research demonstrates the difficulties of four law firms' usage and administration of employee engagement in response to calls to investigate the inconsistency between employer branding and variety managing. 20.

Staniec, I. and Kalińska-Kula, M., 2021.


## Problems and Perspectives in Management

The methodology contends that corporate branding shows concern for present workers and increases their loyalty by treating them as internal clients. As a result, the business gains a competitive edge by improving the efficiency of serving external clients, exceeding their expectations relative to the competition, and providing superior customer service. 21.

Tien, N.H., 2022.


## International Journal of All Multidisciplinary Research Studies

Every firm should prioritize creating and growing their brand because, if done well, doing so will allow them to assess where they are in the market. In any organization, workers desire a working environment that supports financial security and professional advancement.


## 22.

Ahmed, S., Mumtaz, M.U., Lodhi, R.N. and Idresss, A., 2022.

KASBIT Business Journal Employer branding, which has been demonstrated to be successful by numerous studies in a variety of businesses, including industrial, is the instrument that researchers have to promote employee-employer attachment. This will be a first step in getting employers involved with their workforce. This has demonstrated that the worker value argument differs depending on the industry; certain businesses favor a small number of specialized advantages, while others favor a wider variety of advantages.


## 23.

Tien, N.H., 2022.


## International Journal of All Multidisciplinary Research Studies

Some people start developing new purchasing habits now that e-commerce has advanced to the point that buyers may finish the entire purchase and sale procedure with only a few clicks. Due to the usage of online payment methods on travel websites, choosing a tour is now simpler and more comfortable for visitors. Money and time will be saved, but there is also a variety of data available.


## 24.

Rzemieniak, M. and Wawer, M., 2021.


## Sustainability

The investigations conducted allow us to conclude that the sexual identity of the participants who represent generation Z has a major impact on how employers are evaluated for their strategies and how substantial EB is based on ecological sustainability. 25.

Pantchev, N. and Juntunen, J., 2022.

International Journal of Marketing Science

The following chapter will go into more detail about EURES. This study will look at employer branding and Finnish businesses who take part in virtual hiring fairs called European Online Job Days that are hosted by EURES members in various ETA and EU nations. The EURES initiative, which aims to facilitate the free movement of


## Discussion


## Employer branding

Since the middle of the 1990s, the idea of an employer brand has been popularized. Rather than the image of a corporation in the trade, brand image is regarded as the branding image of the firm as an employer. According to a Harvard Business Review article, huge companies like Unilever, Shell, or P&G implemented programs like: exactly like they did to develop their business identity in the traditional client base, establish their brand as a company in the job industry, which caused the subject of employer branding to become of major interest between 2004 and 2008. This reality is a result of the recruiting industry becoming more and more competitive as businesses try to hire good and better personnel.

Employer branding, according to Baclhaus & Tikoo (2004), is "a concept used to separate a firm from its opponents" by stressing distinctive qualities of its business environment. This is done by highlighting key characteristics of a profession or corporation environment.

To attract the potential staff and fire the incorrect ones from the organization is the objective of employer branding. Employer brand implementation at the outset of a company's employer brand strategy is primarily focused on maintaining the proper employees who are highly productive rather than all employees. Additionally, the goal of putting the employer brand idea into action is to attract, recruit, educate, and keep the best personnel while also boosting business profitability by increasing employee efficiency and job performance (Collins, 2001;Amelia, 2017). workers, is one of the services run by the European Union. This study will look at EURES and its gatherings for European Internet Job Days and look into how Finnish firms use the network and employer branding activities. 26

Botella-Carrubi, D., Gil-Gomez, H., Oltra-Badenes, R. and Jabaloyes-Vivas, J.M., 2021.


## Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja

The goal of this research is to examine employer branding as a tool for encouraging employees' loyalty to the company. demonstrate that activities pertaining to career advancement and benefits have a favorable impact on all three characteristics of dedication. A research of employer branding's effects on the three aspects of company loyalty dedication, emotional relationship, and normative commitment-would also be beneficial. 27.

Ivančević, S. and Vlastelica, T., 2022.

International Journal of Marketing Science

We conducted research using Herzberg's multiple hypothesis of employee engagement, starting from the assumption that perception company physical attraction is multifaceted and contains of institutional as well as professions, in terms of determining and invent a conceptual workplace appearance theoretical structure as the basis for tailored interaction with the Millenials. The content of such an EVP can then be shared with both current and prospective employees in order to draw in and keep them. 28.

Susilo, S.R. and Widhianto, C.W., 2022.


## Jurnal Ilmiah Bisnis dan Ekonomi Asia

A systematic methodology is now necessary to hire fresh, prospective people. This is done in order to grow the likelihood that a candidate will apply, participate in the recruitment process, and join the company if elected, as well as to attract the best talent the company expects to be competitive. As a result, the business needs to attract individuals with prospective abilities and skills. Due to the growing difficulties in finding qualified talents with the necessary skills, the need for qualified and talented individuals has sparked a talent war in the industry. 29.

Eser, H., 2022 International Conference on Tourism Research

Understanding how data collection and assessment offer different options for product organization can help you gain a competitive edge. Due to the extensive use of technological advancement through cellular gadgets and social media, the hotel sector has experienced a significant increase in "data output" in recent years. Large volumes of data can be collected and stored because to this developing technology. 30.

Eden, E., 2022 International Conference on Tourism Research

With job application behaviours as the outcome variable, this study investigates the effects of inclusion & diversity statements in job vacancies on applicants' P. Moreover, in the highly international context of the Netherlands, it is interesting to explore how the relationship differs between international and Dutch participants.


## The effectiveness of employer branding

Many businesses compete with one another to entice prospective employees away from other businesses. To make the hiring process productive and profitable, businesses must create, promote, and express real employer brands. According to Mik and Miudová (2018), the most important activity in the employee lifecycle is talent recruitment. It is crucial since a company's employees are its most important asset. Companies spend a lot of time and money searching for "the best and the brightest" people. Employer branding can increase employee engagement, well-being, and loyalty as well as guarantee the person-organization fit during the hiring process (Tanwar & Kumar, 2019;Alves et al., 2020;Behrends et al., 2020;Benrass-Noailles & Viot, 2021).

Employer branding has developed into a critical corporate instrument and has been expanded by a variety of complimentary and multidisciplinary concepts, including talent management, performance management techniques, and reputation (Martin, Gollan and Grigg, 2011;Theurer et al., 2018).

Employer branding seeks to set a business apart from rivals on the basis of its job opportunities, distinctive employment opportunities, and desired workplace status (Ambler and Barrow, 1996). (Edwards, 2010;Jonsen et al., 2019;Martin, 2008).

The workplace environment and culture are an important part of employer branding, according to the literature assessment. The ideal workplace for the candidate will promote work-life balance, entrepreneurial ideals, and an environment that makes them feel confident. For Generation Z, achieving work-life balance is crucial (Hinduan et al., 2020;Ozkan & Solmaz, 2015;Deloitte, 2018) The main motive is to spend time with family and engage in activities they enjoy. Additionally, they require power and freedom in their work (Rzemieniak & Wawer, 2021, Deloitte, 2018. It is critical to boost their self-confidence and entrepreneurship skills.

Employer brand theories and dimensions were included in this study since they were more comprehensive and fit with the study's variables and model. (Melin, 2005) Here are the five dimensions of the employer brand that Melin (2005) describes:


## Work-life balance

Individual and professional duties must coexist in harmony for there to be a healthy work-life balance. The elements of work-life balance, according to Melin (2005), include business trip, placement, flexible hours, daycare, shift work, holiday, and connectivity. Here are some reasons why work-life balance is crucial and why many employees strive to attain it: decreased tension and exhaustion, better cognitive and emotional health, increased output at work, better interactions with others.


## Benefits and Compensations

Every form of payment or reward that is given to staffs and results from their employment is their compensation (Dessler, 2015). The components of perks and compensations, according to Melin (2005), are wage, reward, payroll deductions, and medical benefits. Salaries and bonuses are the most important hygiene factors in HRM since they help keep staff engaged. It motivates workers to perform at the maximum level possible at work by offering benefits depending on their actions and accomplishments.


## Work Environment

The whole of the equipment and supplies used, the setting in which a person works, as well as his or her working arrangements both independently and collaboratively, make up the work environment (Sedarmayanti, 2009 (2015) and Rahardjo (2014) indicated a significant connection between work environment variables and job performance.


## Company Culture

A company's "corporate culture" is a set of beliefs or values that it has ingrained and that will direct how its employees behave and make decisions (Jasfar, 2009). Corporate culture is also a common meaning framework embraced by employees that sets the company apart from competitors (Robbins, 2009). According to Melin (2005), the scale of the business, the caliber of the senior leadership, the level of technology, and the climate for taking risks are all aspects of company culture. There are numerous advantages that a firm can reap if its company culture is strong. However, there are a number of elements that need to be addressed when a number of business operations are not going as planned. The following elements will have an impact on company culture: Encouragement, leadership style, dialogue, workplace arrangement, discipline, and personal values.


## Product / Company Brand Strength

According to Hatch & Schultz (2003), brands affect not only the perception that consumers have of them but also the perception that all stakeholders-including partnerships, clients, investors, and society-form and own. Melin (2005) states that firm success, reputation, and the experience of working there are the building blocks of a strong product/company brand. Product branding is one of the most often employed tactics and has several advantageous aspects. The corporation may benefit from product branding in addition to the potential rise in profits.


## Conclusion

The creation of employer branding has recently been cited by various authors as a viable technique for businesses looking to attract and keep the greatest human skills. There hasn't been much written about its application, though, and there is still no scientifically acknowledged measurement method.

In a setting where the idea of employer branding is growing in popularity, the purpose of the latest article was to examine the employer branding strategies of the three leading bosses, as well as the effectiveness of those methods in terms of how well they were conveyed to prospective staff members and how well they managed to win over their hearts and minds.

Finally, it became clear that despite the fact that each company had a distinctive branding strategy, job applicants were not actually aware of it. Instead of the strategic branding image that firms are working to create and promote, potential applicants seem to be drawn to businesses based on their past interactions with them and the perceptions of them that already exist in the community. This shows that in order to continue luring in the top candidates, these businesses must be more watchful and worried about influencing staff' thoughts through effective and deliberate communication of their branding initiatives to potential employees.

This article comes to the conclusion that employer branding is a crucial factor in the development or collapse of the company. Targeting the industry's accomplishments through employer branding encourages prospective workers to remain with the firm for the long term.

## Figure 1 .
1Prism Flowchart

## Table 1 .
1Data Inclusion CriteriaType 
Inclusion 
Literature Type 
Research article 
Year of the Publication 
2017-2022 
Origin of Literature 
International and national Literature 
Language 
Literature in English and Indonesia 
Literature Standard 
Scopus and Sinta indexed Literature 
Research Methods 
Descriptive 

Results 

No 
Researcher & year 
Tittle 
Research results 
1. 
Tien, N. H., 2022. 
International Journal of All 
Multidisciplinary 
Research 
Studies 




). According toMelin (2005), factors that contribute to a positive work environment include a good boss, good coworkers, acknowledgment, independence, work challenges, reducing work, task significance, and project management.Workplace factors can influence work performance, according to studies by Hanafi & Yohana(2017)and Inamizu (2016). Meanwhile, Pradnyana et al. (2018)'s study's results show that the physical working environment can regulate the connection between worker ability and productivity. Similarly, the findings of studies by Jayaweera
Nur Muhammad Sirojuddin, Sopiah
AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank all the parties involved in this research.FundingThis research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Analysis of employer branding strategy of Facebook and experiences for Vietnam high-tech corporation. N H Tien, Tien, N.H., 2022. Analysis of employer branding strategy of Facebook and experiences for Vietnam high-tech corporation.

Employer branding and recruitment: Social media field experiments targeting future public employees. F Keppeler, U Papenfuß, Public Administration Review. 814Keppeler, F. and Papenfuß, U., 2021. Employer branding and recruitment: Social media field experiments targeting future public employees. Public Administration Review, 81(4), pp.763-775.

Employer Branding And Social Media In Context Of Malaysian Banking Industry. S Aslam, F Shamsuddin, EPRA International Journal of Economics. 94Business and Management Studies (EBMS)Aslam, S. and Shamsuddin, F., 2022. Employer Branding And Social Media In Context Of Malaysian Banking Industry. EPRA International Journal of Economics, Business and Management Studies (EBMS), 9(4), pp.46-48.

Employer branding as a talent management tool: A systematic literature revision. I Reis, M J Sousa, A Dionísio, Sustainability. 131910698Reis, I., Sousa, M.J. and Dionísio, A., 2021. Employer branding as a talent management tool: A systematic literature revision. Sustainability, 13(19), p.10698.

Employer Branding Strategies Used By Top Sri Lankan Companies In Attracting Prospective Employees. S Weerakotuwa, Weerakotuwa, S., Employer Branding Strategies Used By Top Sri Lankan Companies In Attracting Prospective Employees.

Generation Z's Employer Branding and Their Correlation to The Intention to Apply for a Company. M Islamiaty, N N Arief, K Ariyanto, Management and Economics Review. 72Islamiaty, M., Arief, N.N. and Ariyanto, K., 2022. Generation Z's Employer Branding and Their Correlation to The Intention to Apply for a Company. Management and Economics Review, 7(2), pp.212-227.

Microsoft's Employer branding and experiences for Vietnam corporations. N H Tien, Tien, N.H., 2022. Microsoft's Employer branding and experiences for Vietnam corporations.

Pengaruh Employer Brand Terhadap Employee Engagement Pada Pt. R Purbasari, L Arinawati, S Suryanto, Telekomunikasi Indonesia. JABE (Journal of Applied Business and Economic). 82Purbasari, R., Arinawati, L. and Suryanto, S., 2021. Pengaruh Employer Brand Terhadap Employee Engagement Pada Pt. Telekomunikasi Indonesia. JABE (Journal of Applied Business and Economic), 8(2), pp.128-145.

Pengaruh employer branding terhadap minat melamar pekerjaan dengan reputasi perusahaan sebagai variabel mediasi. M Ekhsan, N Fitri, Manajemen dan Akuntansi (JEBMA). 12Jurnal Ekonomi BisnisEkhsan, M. and Fitri, N., 2021. Pengaruh employer branding terhadap minat melamar pekerjaan dengan reputasi perusahaan sebagai variabel mediasi. Jurnal Ekonomi Bisnis, Manajemen dan Akuntansi (JEBMA), 1(2), pp.97-107.

Pengaruh Employer Branding Terhadap Minat Melamar Pekerjaan Dengan Kompensasi Sebagai Variabel Mediasi. M Ekhsan, N K P A Jayanti, R D Parashakti, N A Kristianto, S Handoyo, Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial dan Kewirausahaan (JPMK). 2118Jurnal Psikologi: Media Ilmiah PsikologiEkhsan, M., Jayanti, N.K.P.A. and Parashakti, R.D., 2021. Pengaruh Employer Branding Terhadap Minat Melamar Pekerjaan Dengan Kompensasi Sebagai Variabel Mediasi. Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial dan Kewirausahaan (JPMK), 2(1), pp.16-29. Kristianto, N.A. and Handoyo, S., 2020. Pengaruh Employer Branding terhadap Employee Retention dengan Employee Engagement sebagai Mediator. Jurnal Psikologi: Media Ilmiah Psikologi, 18(01).

Pengaruh Employer Branding Terhadap Turnover Intention Di Mediasi Oleh Employee Engagement Pada PT. Federal International Finance Ambon. P N R Rehatta, A Sijabat, S Tutupoho, F I Muskita, N Waly, Management Studies and Entrepreneurship Journal (MSEJ). 36Rehatta, P.N.R., Sijabat, A., Tutupoho, S., Muskita, F.I. and Waly, N., 2022. Pengaruh Employer Branding Terhadap Turnover Intention Di Mediasi Oleh Employee Engagement Pada PT. Federal International Finance Ambon. Management Studies and Entrepreneurship Journal (MSEJ), 3(6), pp.3346-3358.

Peranan Employer Branding Dan Motivasi Kerja Untuk Menciptakan Employee Engagement Di Universitas Xyz. W Windayanti, W D F Febrian, Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial dan Kewirausahaan (JPMK). 22Windayanti, W. and Febrian, W.D.F., 2022. Peranan Employer Branding Dan Motivasi Kerja Untuk Menciptakan Employee Engagement Di Universitas Xyz. Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial dan Kewirausahaan (JPMK), 2(2), pp.1-8.

The impact of employer branding on job application intention: Evidence from business undergraduates in Vietnam. M T Nguyen, C M Huynh, Nguyen, M.T. and Huynh, C.M., 2022. The impact of employer branding on job application intention: Evidence from business undergraduates in Vietnam.

The Use Of Employer Branding Dimensions To Attract Fresh Graduates. S W Prasetyaningtyas, M Sim, B H Triantoro, A Allen, Jurnal Bisnis dan Manajemen. 231Prasetyaningtyas, S.W., Sim, M., Triantoro, B.H. and Allen, A., 2022. The Use Of Employer Branding Dimensions To Attract Fresh Graduates. Jurnal Bisnis dan Manajemen, 23(1), pp.3-15.

The Role of Employer Branding & Employee Branding in the Modern Corporate World. M Sharma, P Verma, Sharma, M. and Verma, P., 2022. The Role of Employer Branding & Employee Branding in the Modern Corporate World (No.

The Relationship Between Internal Employer Branding and Talent Retention: A Theoretical Investigation for the Development of a Conceptual Framework. M Azam, Available at SSRN 4095621Azam, M., 2022. The Relationship Between Internal Employer Branding and Talent Retention: A Theoretical Investigation for the Development of a Conceptual Framework. Available at SSRN 4095621.

HR Practices and Employee Satisfaction: The Mediating Role of Employer Branding. A Sharma, R Raj, Journal of Positive School Psychology. 62Sharma, A. and Raj, R., 2022. HR Practices and Employee Satisfaction: The Mediating Role of Employer Branding. Journal of Positive School Psychology, 6(2), pp.3488-3496.

The face of the firm: the impact of employer branding on diversity. J E Kele, C M Cassell, British Journal of Management. Kele, J.E. and Cassell, C.M., 2022. The face of the firm: the impact of employer branding on diversity. British Journal of Management.

Internal employer branding as a way to improve employee engagement. Problems and Perspectives in Management. I Staniec, M Kalińska-Kula, Tien, N.H.1933Google's Employer Branding and experiences for Vietnam high. tech corporationStaniec, I. and Kalińska-Kula, M., 2021. Internal employer branding as a way to improve employee engagement. Problems and Perspectives in Management, 19(3), p.33. Tien, N.H., 2022. Google's Employer Branding and experiences for Vietnam high-tech corporation.

Establishing Employer Branding through Employee Value Proposition for Nurses: Evidence from Private and Public Hospitals of Pakistan. S Ahmed, M U Mumtaz, R N Lodhi, A Idresss, KASBIT Business Journal. 152Ahmed, S., Mumtaz, M.U., Lodhi, R.N. and Idresss, A., 2022. Establishing Employer Branding through Employee Value Proposition for Nurses: Evidence from Private and Public Hospitals of Pakistan. KASBIT Business Journal, 15(2), pp.158-171.

Employer branding in the context of the company's sustainable development strategy from the perspective of gender diversity of generation. N H Tien, M Rzemieniak, M Wawer, N Pantchev, J Juntunen, Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja. Marketing. Botella-Carrubi, D., Gil-Gomez, H., Oltra-Badenes, R. and Jabaloyes-Vivas, J.M.132Z. SustainabilityTien, N.H., 2022. Employer branding strategy of Amazon and experiences for Vietnam high tech corporations. Rzemieniak, M. and Wawer, M., 2021. Employer branding in the context of the company's sustainable development strategy from the perspective of gender diversity of generation Z. Sustainability, 13(2), p.828. Pantchev, N. and Juntunen, J., 2022. Employer branding in European Online Job Days virtual recruitment events-A case study. Marketing. Botella-Carrubi, D., Gil-Gomez, H., Oltra-Badenes, R. and Jabaloyes-Vivas, J.M., 2021. Employer branding factors as promoters of the dimensions of employee organizational commitment. Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja, 34(1), pp.1836- 1849.

Effective Content For Digital Employer Branding. S Ivančević, T Vlastelica, Crodim: International Journal Of Marketing Science. 51Ivančević, S. and Vlastelica, T., 2022. Effective Content For Digital Employer Branding. Crodim: International Journal Of Marketing Science, 5(1), pp.77-88.

Effect Of Employer Branding And Prestige On Intention To Apply In The Top 5 E-Commerce In Indonesia. S R Susilo, C W Widhianto, Jurnal Ilmiah Bisnis dan Ekonomi Asia. 162Susilo, S.R. and Widhianto, C.W., 2022. Effect Of Employer Branding And Prestige On Intention To Apply In The Top 5 E- Commerce In Indonesia. Jurnal Ilmiah Bisnis dan Ekonomi Asia, 16(2), pp.241-259.

Big Data, Social Media and Employer Branding: An exploratory study from the hospitality industry. H Eser, International Conference on Tourism Research. 15Eser, H., 2022, May. Big Data, Social Media and Employer Branding: An exploratory study from the hospitality industry. In International Conference on Tourism Research (Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 110-116).

Attracting Top Talent with the Use of Employer Branding: Do Diversity Statements in Job Vacancies Make a Difference?. E Eden, Master's thesisEden, E., 2022. Attracting Top Talent with the Use of Employer Branding: Do Diversity Statements in Job Vacancies Make a Difference? (Master's thesis).