# Online Self-Regulated Learning Strategies in the Process of Writing Undergraduate Thesis: A Survey Study

CorpusID: 254322580
 
tags: #Education

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad74c0a0235305b5896aa10307634969f822243a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad74c0a0235305b5896aa10307634969f822243a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Online Self-Regulated Learning Strategies in the Process of Writing Undergraduate Thesis: A Survey Study


Astri Hapsari 
English Education Department
Universitas Islam Indonesia
Indonesia

Tiara Ayu Fatmasari 
English Education Department
Universitas Islam Indonesia
Indonesia

Online Self-Regulated Learning Strategies in the Process of Writing Undergraduate Thesis: A Survey Study

Journal of English and Education (JEE)
8210.20885/jee.v8i2.24333Article History: Received: June 26, 2022 Revised: October 30, 2022 Accepted: November 30, 2022JOURNAL OF ENGLISH AND EDUCATION Available at https://journal.uii.ac.id/JEE Article Info AbstractEFL writinghigher educationonline learningself-regulated learning strategiesundergraduate thesis
This survey study aims to identify EFL undergraduate students' online self-regulated learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses during COVID-19 pandemic. 97 senior students agreed to participate in this study. This study used a 24-item questionnaire adapted from Barnard et al. (2009) Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ). The results revealed that the participants' online self-regulated learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses from the highest to lowest mean score were: environment structuring, help-seeking, selfevaluation, goal setting, time management, and task strategies. Environment structuring had the highest average score, indicating that undergraduate English Education students were able to choose and arrange places for online learning to minimize distractions so that their learning could run optimally. However, the ability of selfregulated learning strategies in the task strategy domain had the lowest average score. The results displays that in the process of writing undergraduate theses, participants' ability in task strategies needed to be improved. For further research, the researchers recommend further investigation on the relationship between undergraduate students' motivation and ability in implementing their self-regulated online learning strategies in writing undergraduate thesis. Future research should also include metacognitive learning strategies and re-examine the relationship of undergraduate students' online self-regulated learning strategies to their online learning performance in writing undergraduate theses.

## INTRODUCTION

Online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic creates new learning problems for students in higher education. According to Nugroho et al. (2020), there are new problems experienced by college students during the COVID-19 pandemic including insufficient internet quota, unstable internet connection, having trouble in understanding learning material, and insufficient learning materials. Thesis writing is a cognitive thinking process carried out by students as a determinant for obtaining a bachelor's degree in higher education context (Mahfudhoh, 2019). Academic achievement is highly associated with publications in academia (Nicholls, 2005) and undergraduate thesis writing is the gate to attaining a bachelor's degree. According to Mahfudhoh (2019), thesis writing is also defined as a type of writing that is metacognitive and requires a high level of responsibility in problem-solving and decision-making, and students are required to have a high level of skill and toughness in the writing process. Some problems, such as difficulties in responding to the lecturer's feedback (Sandria, 2021), making time to revise the drafts Pravita & Kuswandono, 2022), adapting from offline thesis supervision to online thesis supervision , getting access and permission to collect data at schools (Dewi, 2022), are identified in the process of writing a thesis during online learning at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. To deal with the problems in the process of writing undergraduate thesis, students need to practice self-regulated learning strategies to survive in emergency teaching. Research that discusses self-regulated learning strategies in thesis writing is very important. According to Hallberg and Olsson et al. (2017), self-regulated learning strategies in thesis writing need to be done because there are many students who take thesis writing courses but do not finish them by the appointed time.

Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) is the process when students create and implement learning strategies in accordance with their interests and goal setting while regulating and controlling their cognition, behavior, and motivation (Barnard-Brak et al., 2010a). Self-regulated learning strategies have six domains: goal setting, time management, task strategy, environment structuring, help-seeking, and self-evaluation (Barnard et al, 2009). Research that examines Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) has been conducted since the mid-1980s to understand how students control their learning process. One of the researchers who consistently studied SRL is Zimmerman (1998), who described the SRL process in terms of goal setting, task strategies, imagery, self-instruction, time management, self-monitoring, self-evaluation, selfconsequences, environmental structuring, and help-seeking. According to Zimmerman (1998), what is clear from these naturalistic accounts of learning and performance is that selfregulation techniques are more than just ways to acquire and apply knowledge in formal learning settings. Zimmerman (1998) elaborated that once mastered, they are also used throughout life to act effectively in informal contexts, such as at home.

According to Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a), self-regulated learning is based on the assumption that in the learning process, individuals can act as causal agents in their own lives. Selfregulated learning is also known as self-centered learning, or agents acting on their environment. An agent is a person's expertise in acting and making decisions that affect his life (Martin, 2004). From these agentic perspectives, self-regulated learning is seen from a variety of theoretical frameworks that support a self-determinist perspective. Meanwhile, from a social cognitive standpoint, the development of self-regulated learning skills and strategies is a function of the two-way interaction which take the form of reciprocal causes (Barnard-Brak et al., 2010a). The two-way interaction process is influenced by personal, behavioral, and environmental factors that adapt, modify, and change as they interact with one another (Barnard-Brak et al., 2010a). Students can acquire the abilities and skills of planning and selecting appropriate cognitive and metacognitive strategies if they choose and use self-regulated strategies. Ally (2004) argued that students enrolling in online learning environment have different learning experiences fundamentally from those who experience face-to-face learning because of decreased interaction with their peers and instructors. As a consequence, these students must be more proactive and autonomous in their learning process. Meanwhile, Ivanič (2004) argued that students' writing in universities should be understood as text, cognitive process, event, and part of sociocultural or political context when framing writing development in the universities.

Several researchers have studied self-regulated learning strategies in online learning. Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a) conducted a study on self-regulated learning in an online learning environment. The result revealed five different self-regulated learners' profiles: super selfregulators, competent self-regulators, forethought-endorsing self-regulators, performance/reflection self-regulators, and non-or minimal self-regulators. The study also indicated that in accordance with self-regulated learners' profiles, there were significant differences among individual learners in their academic achievement; for example, minimal self-regulators are both associated with similar, poorer academic outcomes (e.g., lower GPAs). Published in the same year, Barnard-Bark et al. (2010b) also conducted a study to determine whether the online self-regulatory skills of learners changed over time as associated with being immersed in their first online learning environment. They found that learners' online self-regulatory skills were not different significantly across time. In other words, students do not develop self-regulation automatically with their online learning experiences. They suggested that developing students' self-regulatory skills should be considered in designing online courses. Kirmizi (2014) compared 237 students' self-regulated learning skills employed by regular, distance, and evening English Language and Literature (ELL) students at Karabuk University. The study investigated self-regulated learning strategies, such as goal setting, environment structuring, time management, help-seeking, self-evaluation, and metacognition by adapting two instruments to collect data: Online Self-Regulated Learning Scale (OSLQ) and Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ). The results indicated that the three groups have relatively high levels of selfregulated learning strategies, but evening students have the highest level of self-regulation, and successful students employ more self-evaluation and metacognition strategies compared to other groups. Seker (2015) examined the use of self-regulated learning by foreign language learners and its role in language attainment. The results of this study reveal that SRL is the most important factor in the prediction of language attainment and may need to take special consideration of SRL and its role in language attainment. Another researcher who researched self-regulated learning was Chien (2016) who examined the self-regulated learning of Taiwanese EFL scholars with and without technology. Chien (2016) concluded the following two main findings. The first was participants' instructional strategies for self-regulated learning followed the 3Ps, presentation, practice, and production. Second, participants perceived learning strategies without technology to be more effective, compared to those applied with online resources and applications.

In Indonesian context, Lidiawati and Helsa (2021) examined how online self-regulated learning strategies impact student learning engagement. The results of this study show that self-regulated learning has a significant role in student engagement. Students who have SRL tend to be actively involved in the learning process such as showing initiative, optimistic, monitoring learning outcomes, doing evaluation, and enduring through challenges to complete assignments, and being able to successfully achieve learning goals. Finally, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Redjeki and Hapsari (2022) identified online self-regulated learning strategies of first-year English as a foreign language (EFL) undergraduate students. This study included 81 EFL undergraduate students from batch 2020 majoring in English Language Education at an Indonesian private university who enrolled at the university when it adopted online learning as the learning mode due to COVID-19 pandemic. The results reveal that the participants had the highest self-regulated learning strategies in the domain of environment structuring, specifically in arranging and determining the best place to learn English. They had, however, lower self-regulated learning strategies in task strategies and time management domains, particularly when it comes to preparing questions when learning English.

For university students, online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic poses unique challenges. To withstand emergency learning, they must put up a self-regulated learning approach. Individuals who are self-regulated in their learning appear to attain more favorable academic results than individuals who are not self-regulated in their learning, according to Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a). However, some English language education majors complained about common issues, such as arranging schedules for online learning and lacking motivation to learn the references and resources for their undergraduate thesis drafts. Based on previous research (Barnard-Brak et al., (2010a); Barnard-Brak et al., (2010b) (2022)), to the best of the authors' knowledge, there is no study which describes undergraduate students' online selfregulated learning strategies in the Indonesian context, particularly for those in the process of writing undergraduate theses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, to fill the research gap on self-regulated online learning strategies at the time of the COVID-19 pandemic, this research aims to discuss specifically undergraduate students' self-regulated online learning strategies in the process of writing an undergraduate thesis.


## RESEARCH METHOD

This study was designed to examine self-regulated learning strategies in online learning for students majoring in English Language Education who were in the process of writing their undergraduate theses. This study used a quantitative research design by conducting a survey using Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) as an instrument adapted from Barnard et al. (2009). The reason researchers chose the instrument is because it has been tested valid by the previous research conducted by Barnard-Brak et al. (2010b). This study involved senior undergraduate students who were working on their undergraduate thesis as participants. Due to the online learning policy that was created to adhere to the safety protocols of COVID-19, the students experienced online platforms-mediated learning during their supervision in writing their undergraduate theses. The reason the researchers chose these participants as the target population was because the researchers were interested in capturing the profile of self-regulated learning strategies of the students who were in the process of writing their undergraduate theses.

The population in this study is 128 undergraduate students at the Department of English Language Education. In this study, purposive sampling was chosen. Based on the sample size calculation, there are 97 students (i.e., 33 males and 64 females) who agreed to participate in the online survey. All the selected participants should have enrolled and passed the Thesis Proposal Writing and Thesis Proposal Defense courses, and are continuing their undergraduate thesis drafts to undergraduate thesis supervision. All selected participants gave their consent to participate in the statement of approval in the online questionnaire instrument that was provided using Google Form. In the statement, they were informed that the participation in the study is voluntary and that the confidentiality of their answers are guaranteed. The researchers created the online questionnaire (Appendix 1) in Google Form and distributed the link via WhatsApp to the target participants.

The instrument used was Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) questionnaire (Barnard et al., 2009). The OSLQ is a 24-item scale with a 5-point Likert-type response format which has values ranging from strongly agree (5) to strongly disagree (1). Higher levels of self-regulation in online learning are indicated by higher scores on this scale. The questionnaire was translated into Indonesian and the translation was validated by the second author who was the first author's undergraduate thesis supervisor. The instrument which consists of six domains is presented in Table 1. Each of these items refers to Barnard et al (2009)'s domain of OSLQ: goal setting (5 items), environment structuring (4 items), task strategies (4 items), time management (3 items), helpseeking (4 items), and self-evaluation (4 items). The questionnaire used the 5-scale Likert scale ranging from Strongly Agree to Strongly Disagree.

In terms of validity, this instrument had been tested valid by previous researchers (Barnard-Bark et al., 2010a;Barnard-Bark et al., 2010b;Kirmizi, 2014). In this study, the researchers adapted the instrument from the previous researchers and translated the instrument into Indonesian. To ensure the Indonesian translation's content validity, the first author asked the validation from the second author, who is the first author's undergraduate thesis supervisor. In terms of reliability, Creswell (2014) argues that reliability is closely related to the consistency of a measure. In this study, the researchers adapted the original instrument from Barnard et al. (2009) resulting in the reliability value for Cronbach Alpha in high consistency between items on this instrument, which was 0.93.

The data collection and analysis were done by implementing several steps: (1) reviewing the literature to understand the construct and content of the instrument; (2) adapting the questionnaire from Barnard et al. (2009) Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) as an instrument in this study using the 5-likert type scale; (3) translating the content of the instrument into Indonesian; (4) checking the content of the instrument that had been translated and asked for the thesis supervisor's approval; (5) distributing questionnaires to English Language Education students batch 2018 who were writing their undergraduate theses and collecting the responses via WhatsApp groups; (6) conducting validity and reliability tests using SPSS; (8) performing data analysis using Microsoft Excel; (9) presenting the data in diagram and tables.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This survey study analyzed a group of EFL undergraduate students' self-regulated learning strategies during online learning who were in the process of writing their undergraduate theses at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. A total of 97 participants participated voluntarily in the study and completed the survey. According to the data analysis, the average mean scores from the highest to the lowest were: the environment structuring domain ( The mean scores and standard deviation calculated based on the results of the participants' responses are presented in Figure 1.


## Figure 1. Self-Regulated Strategies on Online Learning

Even though this study adapted Barnard et al. (2009)'s instrument and examined how participants carry out self-regulated learning strategies during online learning, it is different from the study from Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a). This study is contextualized specifically to capture the participants' self-regulated online learning strategies in the process of writing the undergraduate thesis while Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a)'s research focuses more on the profile of self-regulated learning skills for students enrolled in online degree programs at large public universities located in the Southwestern United States.

High levels of online self-regulated learning strategies were revealed from the mean score of the sub-scales. The highest domain is the environment structuring domain (M=4.21, SD=.913). The undergraduate students' profile on environment structuring online selfregulated learning strategies is presented in Table 2. The domain of environment structuring is the self-regulation strategy most participants chose to use in online learning. This is because during the pandemic, some of them returned to their hometown where internet access was not as fast as the one they used to have in their boarding home. As Lynch & Dembo (2004) describes, students in distance learning study in a controlled and structured context in a classroom so that they need to be able to structure their own learning environment. Consequently, they needed to find a comfortable place with fast internet access for when they had feedback sessions synchronously via Zoom or asynchronously via Gmail. The results shows that students had a high self-regulated learning strategy in determining a supportive place during online learning to keep their progress in writing their theses.

Help-seeking is the second highest online self-regulated learning strategy chosen by the participants (M=3.85, SD=.959). The results are presented in Table 3. Choosing tutors, teachers, or other knowledgeable individuals, as well as selecting books for reference, is the act of help-seeking in the self-regulation learning strategies (Zimmerman, 2011). However, the sub-scales on Barnard et al. (2009)' instrument only focuses on peer or instructor's help and did not cover self-help attempts such as selecting written references as a help-seeking strategy. The data shows that the highest average value is in Q19 with M=4.08 and SD=.970 of which the statement says "If needed, I try to meet my classmates face-to-face". This result suggests that the participants perceived offline peer support as their priority for help-seeking strategy. This result aligns with the second author's observation that during undergraduate thesis supervision, students tend to respond to feedback faster and better if the written corrective feedback in their manuscript was supported by synchronous feedback sessions via Zoom. This was in line with the other result which shows that the lowest average result is in Q20 with M=3.46 and SD=.975 of which the statement is "I am persistent in getting help from the instructor through email". The mean score and standard deviation for all items in the help-seeking domain are M=3.85 and SD=.959. However, the result is different from Mahfudhoh (2019)'s study who found that most of the students chose help-seeking for selfregulated learning strategy as their priority when writing their undergraduate theses. The reason why help-seeking ranks second after environment structuring is because the study was conducted during the work andstudy from home policy, which caused most students to be away from their university. On the other hand, in Mahfudoh (2019)'s study, the undergraduate supervision feedback sessions were mostly in face-to-face offline session.

The third highest mean score belongs to the domain of self-evaluation (M=3.78, SD=.888). The participants' profile on self-evaluation as online self-regulated learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses is displayed in Table 4 below. The fourth domain is goal setting (M=3.65, SD=.914). Student's profile of online selfregulated learning strategies for goal setting in the process of writing their undergraduate theses is shown in Table 5 below. average value is in Q4 (M=3.83, SD=.861) "I set goals to help me manage studying time for my online courses". However, thesis supervisors should pay more attention to delivering quality feedback because the lowest mean score is in Q5 (M=3.32, SD=1.068 ) of which the statement says "I don't compromise the quality of my work because it is online". The result indicates that the students might be a bit reluctant to focus more on their self-regulation related to the quality of their undergraduate thesis manuscript . Thesis supervisors should put more attention to motivating them to write high-quality undergraduate thesis manuscripts that might result in the publication of the work in reputable academic journals. As Anderson, Ronning, De Vries & Martinson (2007) highlighted, the number of publications and citations are intertwined with scholarship prestige, public funding, and university rankings.

The fifth domain is related to time management (M=3.60, SD=.931). Students' online selfregulated learning strategies' preferences for time management in the process of writing undergraduate thesis are shown in Table 6 below.  (2008) reviewed, was one of the problems that English as a second language researchers faced in publishing their research internationally. Therefore, as English foreign language learners, discipline in time management should be practiced and developed early in the process of writing an undergraduate thesis.

Finally, the sixth domain is related to task strategies (M=3.43, SD=.981). Table 11 presents the task strategies domain of the participants' online self-regulated learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses. 


## CONCLUSIONS

The participants' online self-regulated learning strategies during the process of writing undergraduate thesis had been described. The domain with the highest mean score is in the environment structuring, while the second highest mean score is in the help-seeking, followed by self-evaluation, goal setting, time management, and the lowest mean score is the task strategy). The highest mean score is in Q6 "I choose the location where I study to avoid too much distraction" while the lowest mean score is in Q12 "I prepare my questions before joining in the chat room and discussion". In sum, it can be said that the participants had good self-regulation online learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. They most likely used environment structuring, helpseeking, and self-evaluation as self-regulated learning strategies. However, the ability of selfregulated learning strategies in the task strategy domain had the lowest average score. The result showed that the ability in task strategies possessed was still lacking. According to the finding, in the process of writing undergraduate thesis, the participants' ability in task strategies needed to be improved. For further research, the researchers recommend further investigation on the relationship between undergraduate students' motivation and ability in implementing their self-regulated online learning strategies in writing their undergraduate theses. Future research should also include metacognitive learning strategies and re-examine the relationship of undergraduate students' online self-regulated learning strategies to their online learning performance in writing their undergraduate theses.

There are some limitations to this study. First, the scope of the study was limited to one batch of students who are in progress in writing their undergraduate thesis with fully online learning thesis supervision during the COVID-19 pandemic. As a consequence, the result might not be generalized in a larger context and situation. Second, this study was not supported by participants' interviews which could potentially enrich the discussion on the results of how and why some strategies had higher mean scores than the others.

Despite these limitations, this study contributes to the scholarship of EFL academic writing I try to take more thorough notes for my online courses because notes are even more important for learning online than in a regular classroom. in the higher education context in describing students' online self-regulated learning strategies at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. This study is the first attempt at survey study for the said topic, therefore it can be conceptually adopted by other researchers working in a similar context in post-COVID-19 pandemic. Practically, this study also has implications for instructors supervising online undergraduate thesis writing. First, undergraduate thesis supervisors should ensure that their thesis supervisees diligently fill in their undergraduate thesis writing progress at the faculty web-based undergraduate thesis system (Sistem Informasi Manajemen Tugas Akhir/SIM TA). By being disciplined in writing the process and recording it in the system, students will have better awareness of goal setting, time management, and task strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses.

Second, undergraduate thesis supervisors should encourage theses supervisees to set a goal to publish their undergraduate thesis manuscript and strengthen their identity as researchers in the making as part of goal-setting strategies. By doing so, students can be more enthusiastic in practicing their online self-regulated learning strategies when working on their undergraduate theses.


## APPENDIX

Indonesian Translation of Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) questionnaire (Barnard et al., 2009).


## Items

Statement Domains 1

Saya menetapkan standar untuk tugas saya dalam kursus online. Penetapan Tujuan 2

Saya menetapkan tujuan jangka pendek (harian atau mingguan) serta tujuan jangka panjang (bulanan atau semester). 3

Saya menjaga standar yang tinggi untuk pembelajaran saya dalam kursus online saya. 4

Saya menetapkan tujuan untuk membantu saya mengatur waktu belajar untuk kursus online saya. 5

Saya tidak mengkompromikan kualitas pekerjaan saya karena ini online. 6

Saya memilih lokasi di mana saya belajar untuk menghindari terlalu banyak gangguan. Penataan Lingkungan 7

Saya menemukan tempat yang nyaman untuk belajar. 8

Saya tahu di mana saya bisa belajar paling efisien untuk kursus online. 9

Saya memilih waktu dengan sedikit gangguan untuk belajar untuk kursus online saya. 10

Saya mencoba membuat catatan yang lebih teliti untuk kursus online saya karena catatan bahkan lebih penting untuk belajar online daripada di kelas reguler.

Strategi Tugas 11 Saya membacakan materi instruksional yang diposting online untuk melawan gangguan. 12

Saya menyiapkan pertanyaan saya sebelum bergabung di ruang obrolan dan diskusi. 13

Saya mengerjakan masalah ekstra dalam kursus online saya selain yang ditugaskan untuk menguasai konten kursus. 14 Saya mengalokasikan waktu belajar ekstra untuk kursus online saya karena saya tahu ini menuntut waktu.

Manajemen Waktu 15 Saya mencoba menjadwalkan waktu yang sama setiap hari atau setiap minggu untuk belajar kursus online saya, dan saya mengamati jadwalnya. 16

Meskipun kami tidak harus menghadiri kelas harian, saya tetap berusaha mendistribusikan waktu belajar saya secara merata di setiap hari. 17

Saya menemukan seseorang yang berpengetahuan luas dalam konten kursus sehingga saya dapat berkonsultasi dengannya ketika saya membutuhkan bantuan.

Pencarian Bantuan 18 Saya berbagi masalah saya dengan teman sekelas saya secara online sehingga kami tahu apa yang kami perjuangkan dan bagaimana menyelesaikan masalah kami. 19

Jika diperlukan, saya mencoba untuk bertemu dengan teman sekelas saya secara langsung. 20

Saya gigih dalam mendapatkan bantuan dari instruktur melalui email. 21

Saya merangkum pembelajaran saya dalam kursus online untuk menguji pemahaman saya tentang apa yang telah saya pelajari.

Evaluasi Diri


## 22

Saya bertanya pada diri sendiri banyak pertanyaan tentang materi kursus ketika belajar untuk kursus online. 23

Saya berkomunikasi dengan teman sekelas saya untuk mengetahui apa yang saya lakukan di kelas online saya. 24

Saya berkomunikasi dengan teman sekelas saya untuk mengetahui apa yang saya pelajari yang berbeda dari apa yang mereka pelajari.


; Seker (2015); Chien (2016); Lidiawati & Helsa (2021); Redjeki & Hapsari

## Table 1 .
1Barnard et al., (2009) Domains and Items of OSLQ:Domains 
Number of Items 
Items Number 

Goal Setting 
5 
1,2,3,4,5 

Environment Structuring 
4 
6,7,8,9 

Task Strategies 
4 
10,11,12,13 

Time Management 
3 
14,15,16 

Help-Seeking 
4 
17,18,19,20 

Self-Evaluation 
4 
21,22,23,24 



## Table 2 .
2Environment Structuring DomainStatements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

I choose the location where I study to avoid too much 
distraction 

97 
4.37 
.870 

I find a comfortable place to study. 
97 
4.24 
1 

I know where I can study most efficiently for online 
courses. 

97 
4.19 
.860 

I choose a time with few distractions for studying for 
my online courses. 

97 
4.07 
.923 



## Table 3 .
3Help Seeking Domain 

Statements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

If needed, I try to meet my classmates face-to-face. 
97 
4.08 
.970 

I find someone who is knowledgeable in course 
content so that I can consult with him or her when I 
need help. 

97 
3.96 
.969 

I share my problems with my classmates online so we 
know what we are struggling with and how to solve 
our problems. 

97 
3.91 
.991 

I am persistent in getting help from the instructor 
through email. 

97 
3.46 
.975 



## Table 4 .
4Self-Evaluation DomainIn the distance learning self-evaluation, self-evaluation strategies became more important because students were away from their peers and instructors. According to the result, the highest average value is in Q24 with M=3.92 and SD=.902 with the statement "I communicate with my classmates to find out what I am learning that is different from what they are learning". The result represents how the participants in this study maintained communication with their peers in their process of writing their undergraduate theses despite the fact that they lived in different regions in Indonesia. Meanwhile, the lowest average result is in Q23 with M=3.69 and SD=.902 of which the statement is "I communicate with my classmates to find out how I am doing in my online classes". This result indicates that the participants chose peer evaluation on what they were learning rather than how they were doing in the online sessions when working on writing their undergraduate theses.

## Table 5 .
5Goal Setting DomainStatements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

I set goals to help me manage studying time for my 
online courses. 

97 
3.83 
.861 

I keep a high standard for my learning in my online 
courses. 

97 
3.81 
.845 

I set standards for my assignments in online courses. 
97 
3.74 
.923 

I set short-term (daily or weekly) goals as well as 
long-term goals (monthly or for the semester). 

97 
3.55 
.943 

I don't compromise the quality of my work because 
it is online. 

97 
3.32 
1 

Based on data from the goal-setting domain survey results (M=3.60, SD=.914), the 
participants were aware of setting goals as demonstrated by the result that the highest 



## Table 6 .
6Time Management Domain 

Statements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

I try to schedule the same time every day or every 
week to study for my online courses, and I observe 
the schedule. 

97 
3.64 
.911 

I allocate extra studying time for my online courses 
because I know it is time-demanding. 

97 
3.62 
.811 

Although we don't have to attend daily classes, I still 
try to distribute my studying time evenly across 
days. 

97 
3.54 
1 

The data from the time management domain survey results showed that the highest average 
value is in Q15 with M=3.64 and SD=.911 of which the statement is "I try to schedule the same 
time every day or every week to study for my online courses, and I observe the schedule". Then the 
lowest average result is in Q16 with M=3.54 and SD=1.072 of which the statement is "Although 
we don't have to attend daily classes, I still try to distribute my studying time evenly across days". 
Even though students chose scale 3-4 for time management domain-which means they are 
mostly neither agree or disagree with the statements-undergraduate thesis supervisors 
should make them become more attentive of their time management. Lack of time, as Uzuner 


## Table 7 .## INTRODUCTION

Online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic creates new learning problems for students in higher education. According to Nugroho et al. (2020), there are new problems experienced by college students during the COVID-19 pandemic including insufficient internet quota, unstable internet connection, having trouble in understanding learning material, and insufficient learning materials. Thesis writing is a cognitive thinking process carried out by students as a determinant for obtaining a bachelor's degree in higher education context (Mahfudhoh, 2019). Academic achievement is highly associated with publications in academia (Nicholls, 2005) and undergraduate thesis writing is the gate to attaining a bachelor's degree. According to Mahfudhoh (2019), thesis writing is also defined as a type of writing that is metacognitive and requires a high level of responsibility in problem-solving and decision-making, and students are required to have a high level of skill and toughness in the writing process. Some problems, such as difficulties in responding to the lecturer's feedback (Sandria, 2021), making time to revise the drafts Pravita & Kuswandono, 2022), adapting from offline thesis supervision to online thesis supervision , getting access and permission to collect data at schools (Dewi, 2022), are identified in the process of writing a thesis during online learning at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. To deal with the problems in the process of writing undergraduate thesis, students need to practice self-regulated learning strategies to survive in emergency teaching. Research that discusses self-regulated learning strategies in thesis writing is very important. According to Hallberg and Olsson et al. (2017), self-regulated learning strategies in thesis writing need to be done because there are many students who take thesis writing courses but do not finish them by the appointed time.

Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) is the process when students create and implement learning strategies in accordance with their interests and goal setting while regulating and controlling their cognition, behavior, and motivation (Barnard-Brak et al., 2010a). Self-regulated learning strategies have six domains: goal setting, time management, task strategy, environment structuring, help-seeking, and self-evaluation (Barnard et al, 2009). Research that examines Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) has been conducted since the mid-1980s to understand how students control their learning process. One of the researchers who consistently studied SRL is Zimmerman (1998), who described the SRL process in terms of goal setting, task strategies, imagery, self-instruction, time management, self-monitoring, self-evaluation, selfconsequences, environmental structuring, and help-seeking. According to Zimmerman (1998), what is clear from these naturalistic accounts of learning and performance is that selfregulation techniques are more than just ways to acquire and apply knowledge in formal learning settings. Zimmerman (1998) elaborated that once mastered, they are also used throughout life to act effectively in informal contexts, such as at home.

According to Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a), self-regulated learning is based on the assumption that in the learning process, individuals can act as causal agents in their own lives. Selfregulated learning is also known as self-centered learning, or agents acting on their environment. An agent is a person's expertise in acting and making decisions that affect his life (Martin, 2004). From these agentic perspectives, self-regulated learning is seen from a variety of theoretical frameworks that support a self-determinist perspective. Meanwhile, from a social cognitive standpoint, the development of self-regulated learning skills and strategies is a function of the two-way interaction which take the form of reciprocal causes (Barnard-Brak et al., 2010a). The two-way interaction process is influenced by personal, behavioral, and environmental factors that adapt, modify, and change as they interact with one another (Barnard-Brak et al., 2010a). Students can acquire the abilities and skills of planning and selecting appropriate cognitive and metacognitive strategies if they choose and use self-regulated strategies. Ally (2004) argued that students enrolling in online learning environment have different learning experiences fundamentally from those who experience face-to-face learning because of decreased interaction with their peers and instructors. As a consequence, these students must be more proactive and autonomous in their learning process. Meanwhile, Ivanič (2004) argued that students' writing in universities should be understood as text, cognitive process, event, and part of sociocultural or political context when framing writing development in the universities.

Several researchers have studied self-regulated learning strategies in online learning. Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a) conducted a study on self-regulated learning in an online learning environment. The result revealed five different self-regulated learners' profiles: super selfregulators, competent self-regulators, forethought-endorsing self-regulators, performance/reflection self-regulators, and non-or minimal self-regulators. The study also indicated that in accordance with self-regulated learners' profiles, there were significant differences among individual learners in their academic achievement; for example, minimal self-regulators are both associated with similar, poorer academic outcomes (e.g., lower GPAs). Published in the same year, Barnard-Bark et al. (2010b) also conducted a study to determine whether the online self-regulatory skills of learners changed over time as associated with being immersed in their first online learning environment. They found that learners' online self-regulatory skills were not different significantly across time. In other words, students do not develop self-regulation automatically with their online learning experiences. They suggested that developing students' self-regulatory skills should be considered in designing online courses. Kirmizi (2014) compared 237 students' self-regulated learning skills employed by regular, distance, and evening English Language and Literature (ELL) students at Karabuk University. The study investigated self-regulated learning strategies, such as goal setting, environment structuring, time management, help-seeking, self-evaluation, and metacognition by adapting two instruments to collect data: Online Self-Regulated Learning Scale (OSLQ) and Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ). The results indicated that the three groups have relatively high levels of selfregulated learning strategies, but evening students have the highest level of self-regulation, and successful students employ more self-evaluation and metacognition strategies compared to other groups. Seker (2015) examined the use of self-regulated learning by foreign language learners and its role in language attainment. The results of this study reveal that SRL is the most important factor in the prediction of language attainment and may need to take special consideration of SRL and its role in language attainment. Another researcher who researched self-regulated learning was Chien (2016) who examined the self-regulated learning of Taiwanese EFL scholars with and without technology. Chien (2016) concluded the following two main findings. The first was participants' instructional strategies for self-regulated learning followed the 3Ps, presentation, practice, and production. Second, participants perceived learning strategies without technology to be more effective, compared to those applied with online resources and applications.

In Indonesian context, Lidiawati and Helsa (2021) examined how online self-regulated learning strategies impact student learning engagement. The results of this study show that self-regulated learning has a significant role in student engagement. Students who have SRL tend to be actively involved in the learning process such as showing initiative, optimistic, monitoring learning outcomes, doing evaluation, and enduring through challenges to complete assignments, and being able to successfully achieve learning goals. Finally, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Redjeki and Hapsari (2022) identified online self-regulated learning strategies of first-year English as a foreign language (EFL) undergraduate students. This study included 81 EFL undergraduate students from batch 2020 majoring in English Language Education at an Indonesian private university who enrolled at the university when it adopted online learning as the learning mode due to COVID-19 pandemic. The results reveal that the participants had the highest self-regulated learning strategies in the domain of environment structuring, specifically in arranging and determining the best place to learn English. They had, however, lower self-regulated learning strategies in task strategies and time management domains, particularly when it comes to preparing questions when learning English.

For university students, online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic poses unique challenges. To withstand emergency learning, they must put up a self-regulated learning approach. Individuals who are self-regulated in their learning appear to attain more favorable academic results than individuals who are not self-regulated in their learning, according to Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a). However, some English language education majors complained about common issues, such as arranging schedules for online learning and lacking motivation to learn the references and resources for their undergraduate thesis drafts. Based on previous research (Barnard-Brak et al., (2010a); Barnard-Brak et al., (2010b) (2022)), to the best of the authors' knowledge, there is no study which describes undergraduate students' online selfregulated learning strategies in the Indonesian context, particularly for those in the process of writing undergraduate theses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, to fill the research gap on self-regulated online learning strategies at the time of the COVID-19 pandemic, this research aims to discuss specifically undergraduate students' self-regulated online learning strategies in the process of writing an undergraduate thesis.


## RESEARCH METHOD

This study was designed to examine self-regulated learning strategies in online learning for students majoring in English Language Education who were in the process of writing their undergraduate theses. This study used a quantitative research design by conducting a survey using Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) as an instrument adapted from Barnard et al. (2009). The reason researchers chose the instrument is because it has been tested valid by the previous research conducted by Barnard-Brak et al. (2010b). This study involved senior undergraduate students who were working on their undergraduate thesis as participants. Due to the online learning policy that was created to adhere to the safety protocols of COVID-19, the students experienced online platforms-mediated learning during their supervision in writing their undergraduate theses. The reason the researchers chose these participants as the target population was because the researchers were interested in capturing the profile of self-regulated learning strategies of the students who were in the process of writing their undergraduate theses.

The population in this study is 128 undergraduate students at the Department of English Language Education. In this study, purposive sampling was chosen. Based on the sample size calculation, there are 97 students (i.e., 33 males and 64 females) who agreed to participate in the online survey. All the selected participants should have enrolled and passed the Thesis Proposal Writing and Thesis Proposal Defense courses, and are continuing their undergraduate thesis drafts to undergraduate thesis supervision. All selected participants gave their consent to participate in the statement of approval in the online questionnaire instrument that was provided using Google Form. In the statement, they were informed that the participation in the study is voluntary and that the confidentiality of their answers are guaranteed. The researchers created the online questionnaire (Appendix 1) in Google Form and distributed the link via WhatsApp to the target participants.

The instrument used was Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) questionnaire (Barnard et al., 2009). The OSLQ is a 24-item scale with a 5-point Likert-type response format which has values ranging from strongly agree (5) to strongly disagree (1). Higher levels of self-regulation in online learning are indicated by higher scores on this scale. The questionnaire was translated into Indonesian and the translation was validated by the second author who was the first author's undergraduate thesis supervisor. The instrument which consists of six domains is presented in Table 1. Each of these items refers to Barnard et al (2009)'s domain of OSLQ: goal setting (5 items), environment structuring (4 items), task strategies (4 items), time management (3 items), helpseeking (4 items), and self-evaluation (4 items). The questionnaire used the 5-scale Likert scale ranging from Strongly Agree to Strongly Disagree.

In terms of validity, this instrument had been tested valid by previous researchers (Barnard-Bark et al., 2010a;Barnard-Bark et al., 2010b;Kirmizi, 2014). In this study, the researchers adapted the instrument from the previous researchers and translated the instrument into Indonesian. To ensure the Indonesian translation's content validity, the first author asked the validation from the second author, who is the first author's undergraduate thesis supervisor. In terms of reliability, Creswell (2014) argues that reliability is closely related to the consistency of a measure. In this study, the researchers adapted the original instrument from Barnard et al. (2009) resulting in the reliability value for Cronbach Alpha in high consistency between items on this instrument, which was 0.93.

The data collection and analysis were done by implementing several steps: (1) reviewing the literature to understand the construct and content of the instrument; (2) adapting the questionnaire from Barnard et al. (2009) Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) as an instrument in this study using the 5-likert type scale; (3) translating the content of the instrument into Indonesian; (4) checking the content of the instrument that had been translated and asked for the thesis supervisor's approval; (5) distributing questionnaires to English Language Education students batch 2018 who were writing their undergraduate theses and collecting the responses via WhatsApp groups; (6) conducting validity and reliability tests using SPSS; (8) performing data analysis using Microsoft Excel; (9) presenting the data in diagram and tables.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This survey study analyzed a group of EFL undergraduate students' self-regulated learning strategies during online learning who were in the process of writing their undergraduate theses at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. A total of 97 participants participated voluntarily in the study and completed the survey. According to the data analysis, the average mean scores from the highest to the lowest were: the environment structuring domain ( The mean scores and standard deviation calculated based on the results of the participants' responses are presented in Figure 1.


## Figure 1. Self-Regulated Strategies on Online Learning

Even though this study adapted Barnard et al. (2009)'s instrument and examined how participants carry out self-regulated learning strategies during online learning, it is different from the study from Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a). This study is contextualized specifically to capture the participants' self-regulated online learning strategies in the process of writing the undergraduate thesis while Barnard-Brak et al. (2010a)'s research focuses more on the profile of self-regulated learning skills for students enrolled in online degree programs at large public universities located in the Southwestern United States.

High levels of online self-regulated learning strategies were revealed from the mean score of the sub-scales. The highest domain is the environment structuring domain (M=4.21, SD=.913). The undergraduate students' profile on environment structuring online selfregulated learning strategies is presented in Table 2. The domain of environment structuring is the self-regulation strategy most participants chose to use in online learning. This is because during the pandemic, some of them returned to their hometown where internet access was not as fast as the one they used to have in their boarding home. As Lynch & Dembo (2004) describes, students in distance learning study in a controlled and structured context in a classroom so that they need to be able to structure their own learning environment. Consequently, they needed to find a comfortable place with fast internet access for when they had feedback sessions synchronously via Zoom or asynchronously via Gmail. The results shows that students had a high self-regulated learning strategy in determining a supportive place during online learning to keep their progress in writing their theses.

Help-seeking is the second highest online self-regulated learning strategy chosen by the participants (M=3.85, SD=.959). The results are presented in Table 3. Choosing tutors, teachers, or other knowledgeable individuals, as well as selecting books for reference, is the act of help-seeking in the self-regulation learning strategies (Zimmerman, 2011). However, the sub-scales on Barnard et al. (2009)' instrument only focuses on peer or instructor's help and did not cover self-help attempts such as selecting written references as a help-seeking strategy. The data shows that the highest average value is in Q19 with M=4.08 and SD=.970 of which the statement says "If needed, I try to meet my classmates face-to-face". This result suggests that the participants perceived offline peer support as their priority for help-seeking strategy. This result aligns with the second author's observation that during undergraduate thesis supervision, students tend to respond to feedback faster and better if the written corrective feedback in their manuscript was supported by synchronous feedback sessions via Zoom. This was in line with the other result which shows that the lowest average result is in Q20 with M=3.46 and SD=.975 of which the statement is "I am persistent in getting help from the instructor through email". The mean score and standard deviation for all items in the help-seeking domain are M=3.85 and SD=.959. However, the result is different from Mahfudhoh (2019)'s study who found that most of the students chose help-seeking for selfregulated learning strategy as their priority when writing their undergraduate theses. The reason why help-seeking ranks second after environment structuring is because the study was conducted during the work andstudy from home policy, which caused most students to be away from their university. On the other hand, in Mahfudoh (2019)'s study, the undergraduate supervision feedback sessions were mostly in face-to-face offline session.

The third highest mean score belongs to the domain of self-evaluation (M=3.78, SD=.888). The participants' profile on self-evaluation as online self-regulated learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses is displayed in Table 4 below. The fourth domain is goal setting (M=3.65, SD=.914). Student's profile of online selfregulated learning strategies for goal setting in the process of writing their undergraduate theses is shown in Table 5 below. average value is in Q4 (M=3.83, SD=.861) "I set goals to help me manage studying time for my online courses". However, thesis supervisors should pay more attention to delivering quality feedback because the lowest mean score is in Q5 (M=3.32, SD=1.068 ) of which the statement says "I don't compromise the quality of my work because it is online". The result indicates that the students might be a bit reluctant to focus more on their self-regulation related to the quality of their undergraduate thesis manuscript . Thesis supervisors should put more attention to motivating them to write high-quality undergraduate thesis manuscripts that might result in the publication of the work in reputable academic journals. As Anderson, Ronning, De Vries & Martinson (2007) highlighted, the number of publications and citations are intertwined with scholarship prestige, public funding, and university rankings.

The fifth domain is related to time management (M=3.60, SD=.931). Students' online selfregulated learning strategies' preferences for time management in the process of writing undergraduate thesis are shown in Table 6 below.  (2008) reviewed, was one of the problems that English as a second language researchers faced in publishing their research internationally. Therefore, as English foreign language learners, discipline in time management should be practiced and developed early in the process of writing an undergraduate thesis.

Finally, the sixth domain is related to task strategies (M=3.43, SD=.981). Table 11 presents the task strategies domain of the participants' online self-regulated learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses. 


## CONCLUSIONS

The participants' online self-regulated learning strategies during the process of writing undergraduate thesis had been described. The domain with the highest mean score is in the environment structuring, while the second highest mean score is in the help-seeking, followed by self-evaluation, goal setting, time management, and the lowest mean score is the task strategy). The highest mean score is in Q6 "I choose the location where I study to avoid too much distraction" while the lowest mean score is in Q12 "I prepare my questions before joining in the chat room and discussion". In sum, it can be said that the participants had good self-regulation online learning strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. They most likely used environment structuring, helpseeking, and self-evaluation as self-regulated learning strategies. However, the ability of selfregulated learning strategies in the task strategy domain had the lowest average score. The result showed that the ability in task strategies possessed was still lacking. According to the finding, in the process of writing undergraduate thesis, the participants' ability in task strategies needed to be improved. For further research, the researchers recommend further investigation on the relationship between undergraduate students' motivation and ability in implementing their self-regulated online learning strategies in writing their undergraduate theses. Future research should also include metacognitive learning strategies and re-examine the relationship of undergraduate students' online self-regulated learning strategies to their online learning performance in writing their undergraduate theses.

There are some limitations to this study. First, the scope of the study was limited to one batch of students who are in progress in writing their undergraduate thesis with fully online learning thesis supervision during the COVID-19 pandemic. As a consequence, the result might not be generalized in a larger context and situation. Second, this study was not supported by participants' interviews which could potentially enrich the discussion on the results of how and why some strategies had higher mean scores than the others.

Despite these limitations, this study contributes to the scholarship of EFL academic writing I try to take more thorough notes for my online courses because notes are even more important for learning online than in a regular classroom. in the higher education context in describing students' online self-regulated learning strategies at the time of COVID-19 pandemic. This study is the first attempt at survey study for the said topic, therefore it can be conceptually adopted by other researchers working in a similar context in post-COVID-19 pandemic. Practically, this study also has implications for instructors supervising online undergraduate thesis writing. First, undergraduate thesis supervisors should ensure that their thesis supervisees diligently fill in their undergraduate thesis writing progress at the faculty web-based undergraduate thesis system (Sistem Informasi Manajemen Tugas Akhir/SIM TA). By being disciplined in writing the process and recording it in the system, students will have better awareness of goal setting, time management, and task strategies in the process of writing their undergraduate theses.

Second, undergraduate thesis supervisors should encourage theses supervisees to set a goal to publish their undergraduate thesis manuscript and strengthen their identity as researchers in the making as part of goal-setting strategies. By doing so, students can be more enthusiastic in practicing their online self-regulated learning strategies when working on their undergraduate theses.


## APPENDIX

Indonesian Translation of Online Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire (OSLQ) questionnaire (Barnard et al., 2009).


## Items

Statement Domains 1

Saya menetapkan standar untuk tugas saya dalam kursus online. Penetapan Tujuan 2

Saya menetapkan tujuan jangka pendek (harian atau mingguan) serta tujuan jangka panjang (bulanan atau semester). 3

Saya menjaga standar yang tinggi untuk pembelajaran saya dalam kursus online saya. 4

Saya menetapkan tujuan untuk membantu saya mengatur waktu belajar untuk kursus online saya. 5

Saya tidak mengkompromikan kualitas pekerjaan saya karena ini online. 6

Saya memilih lokasi di mana saya belajar untuk menghindari terlalu banyak gangguan. Penataan Lingkungan 7

Saya menemukan tempat yang nyaman untuk belajar. 8

Saya tahu di mana saya bisa belajar paling efisien untuk kursus online. 9

Saya memilih waktu dengan sedikit gangguan untuk belajar untuk kursus online saya. 10

Saya mencoba membuat catatan yang lebih teliti untuk kursus online saya karena catatan bahkan lebih penting untuk belajar online daripada di kelas reguler.

Strategi Tugas 11 Saya membacakan materi instruksional yang diposting online untuk melawan gangguan. 12

Saya menyiapkan pertanyaan saya sebelum bergabung di ruang obrolan dan diskusi. 13

Saya mengerjakan masalah ekstra dalam kursus online saya selain yang ditugaskan untuk menguasai konten kursus. 14 Saya mengalokasikan waktu belajar ekstra untuk kursus online saya karena saya tahu ini menuntut waktu.

Manajemen Waktu 15 Saya mencoba menjadwalkan waktu yang sama setiap hari atau setiap minggu untuk belajar kursus online saya, dan saya mengamati jadwalnya. 16

Meskipun kami tidak harus menghadiri kelas harian, saya tetap berusaha mendistribusikan waktu belajar saya secara merata di setiap hari. 17

Saya menemukan seseorang yang berpengetahuan luas dalam konten kursus sehingga saya dapat berkonsultasi dengannya ketika saya membutuhkan bantuan.

Pencarian Bantuan 18 Saya berbagi masalah saya dengan teman sekelas saya secara online sehingga kami tahu apa yang kami perjuangkan dan bagaimana menyelesaikan masalah kami. 19

Jika diperlukan, saya mencoba untuk bertemu dengan teman sekelas saya secara langsung. 20

Saya gigih dalam mendapatkan bantuan dari instruktur melalui email. 21

Saya merangkum pembelajaran saya dalam kursus online untuk menguji pemahaman saya tentang apa yang telah saya pelajari.

Evaluasi Diri


## 22

Saya bertanya pada diri sendiri banyak pertanyaan tentang materi kursus ketika belajar untuk kursus online. 23

Saya berkomunikasi dengan teman sekelas saya untuk mengetahui apa yang saya lakukan di kelas online saya. 24

Saya berkomunikasi dengan teman sekelas saya untuk mengetahui apa yang saya pelajari yang berbeda dari apa yang mereka pelajari.


; Seker (2015); Chien (2016); Lidiawati & Helsa (2021); Redjeki & Hapsari

## Table 1 .
1Barnard et al., (2009) Domains and Items of OSLQ:Domains 
Number of Items 
Items Number 

Goal Setting 
5 
1,2,3,4,5 

Environment Structuring 
4 
6,7,8,9 

Task Strategies 
4 
10,11,12,13 

Time Management 
3 
14,15,16 

Help-Seeking 
4 
17,18,19,20 

Self-Evaluation 
4 
21,22,23,24 



## Table 2 .
2Environment Structuring DomainStatements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

I choose the location where I study to avoid too much 
distraction 

97 
4.37 
.870 

I find a comfortable place to study. 
97 
4.24 
1 

I know where I can study most efficiently for online 
courses. 

97 
4.19 
.860 

I choose a time with few distractions for studying for 
my online courses. 

97 
4.07 
.923 



## Table 3 .
3Help Seeking Domain 

Statements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

If needed, I try to meet my classmates face-to-face. 
97 
4.08 
.970 

I find someone who is knowledgeable in course 
content so that I can consult with him or her when I 
need help. 

97 
3.96 
.969 

I share my problems with my classmates online so we 
know what we are struggling with and how to solve 
our problems. 

97 
3.91 
.991 

I am persistent in getting help from the instructor 
through email. 

97 
3.46 
.975 



## Table 4 .
4Self-Evaluation DomainIn the distance learning self-evaluation, self-evaluation strategies became more important because students were away from their peers and instructors. According to the result, the highest average value is in Q24 with M=3.92 and SD=.902 with the statement "I communicate with my classmates to find out what I am learning that is different from what they are learning". The result represents how the participants in this study maintained communication with their peers in their process of writing their undergraduate theses despite the fact that they lived in different regions in Indonesia. Meanwhile, the lowest average result is in Q23 with M=3.69 and SD=.902 of which the statement is "I communicate with my classmates to find out how I am doing in my online classes". This result indicates that the participants chose peer evaluation on what they were learning rather than how they were doing in the online sessions when working on writing their undergraduate theses.

## Table 5 .
5Goal Setting DomainStatements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

I set goals to help me manage studying time for my 
online courses. 

97 
3.83 
.861 

I keep a high standard for my learning in my online 
courses. 

97 
3.81 
.845 

I set standards for my assignments in online courses. 
97 
3.74 
.923 

I set short-term (daily or weekly) goals as well as 
long-term goals (monthly or for the semester). 

97 
3.55 
.943 

I don't compromise the quality of my work because 
it is online. 

97 
3.32 
1 

Based on data from the goal-setting domain survey results (M=3.60, SD=.914), the 
participants were aware of setting goals as demonstrated by the result that the highest 



## Table 6 .
6Time Management Domain 

Statements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

I try to schedule the same time every day or every 
week to study for my online courses, and I observe 
the schedule. 

97 
3.64 
.911 

I allocate extra studying time for my online courses 
because I know it is time-demanding. 

97 
3.62 
.811 

Although we don't have to attend daily classes, I still 
try to distribute my studying time evenly across 
days. 

97 
3.54 
1 

The data from the time management domain survey results showed that the highest average 
value is in Q15 with M=3.64 and SD=.911 of which the statement is "I try to schedule the same 
time every day or every week to study for my online courses, and I observe the schedule". Then the 
lowest average result is in Q16 with M=3.54 and SD=1.072 of which the statement is "Although 
we don't have to attend daily classes, I still try to distribute my studying time evenly across days". 
Even though students chose scale 3-4 for time management domain-which means they are 
mostly neither agree or disagree with the statements-undergraduate thesis supervisors 
should make them become more attentive of their time management. Lack of time, as Uzuner 


## Table 7 .
7Task Strategies DomainStatements 
N 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 

Journal of English and Education (JEE), 8(2), 2022, 58-72

Foundations of educational theory for online learning. M Ally, Anderson T.Athabasca University PressThe theory and practice of online learningAlly, M. (2004). Foundations of educational theory for online learning. In Anderson T. (Ed.), The theory and practice of online learning (pp. 15-44). Athabasca University Press.

The perverse effects of competition on scientists' work and relationships. M Anderson, E A Ronning, R De Vries, B C Martinson, 10.1007/s11948-007-9042-5Science and Engineering Ethics. 134Anderson, M., Ronning, E. A., De Vries, R., & Martinson, B. C. (2007). The perverse effects of competition on scientists' work and relationships. Science and Engineering Ethics, 13(4), 437-461. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-007-9042-5

The relationship of epistemological beliefs with self-regulatory skills in the online course environment. L Barnard, W Y Lan, S M Crooks, V O Paton, Journal of Online and Learning Teaching. 43Barnard, L., Lan, W. Y., Crooks, S. M., & Paton, V.O. (2008a). The relationship of epistemological beliefs with self-regulatory skills in the online course environment. Journal of Online and Learning Teaching, 4(3), 261-266.

Online self-regulatory learning behaviors as a mediator in the relationship between online course perceptions with achievement. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning. L Barnard-Brak, V O Paton, W Y Lan, 10.19173/irrodl.v9i2.5169Barnard-Brak, L., Paton, V. O., & Lan, W. Y. (2008b). Online self-regulatory learning behaviors as a mediator in the relationship between online course perceptions with achievement. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 9(2), 1- 11. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v9i2.516

Measuring self-regulation in online and blended learning environments. The Internet and Higher Education. L Barnard, W Y Lan, Y M To, V O Paton, S L Lai, 10.1016/j.iheduc.2008.10.00512Barnard, L., Lan, W. Y., To, Y. M., Paton, V. O., & Lai, S. L. (2009). Measuring self-regulation in online and blended learning environments. The Internet and Higher Education, 12(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2008.10.005

Profiles in self-regulated learning in the online learning environment. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning. L Barnard-Brak, V O Paton, W Y Lan, 10.19173/irrodl.v11i1.76911Barnard-Brak, L., Paton, V. O., & Lan, W. Y. (2010a). Profiles in self-regulated learning in the online learning environment. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 11(1), 61-80. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v11i1.769

Self-regulation across time of firstgeneration online learners. L Barnard-Brak, V O Paton, W Y Lan, 10.1080/09687761003657572Research in Learning Technology. 181Barnard-Brak, L., Paton, V.O., & Lan, W.Y. (2010b). Self-regulation across time of first- generation online learners. Research in Learning Technology, 18(1), 61-70. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687761003657572

Taiwanese EFL undergraduates' self-regulated learning with and without technology. C W Chien, 10.1080/17501229.2016.1264076Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching. 131Chien, C. W. (2016). Taiwanese EFL undergraduates' self-regulated learning with and without technology. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 13(1), 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2016.1264076

Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed. J W Creswell, SAGE Publications, IncCreswell, J. W. (2014). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed. SAGE Publications, Inc.

Students' difficulties in writing thesis during COVID-19 pandemic. I G A E S Dewi, Journal of Educational Study. 21Dewi, I. G. A. E. S. (2022). Students' difficulties in writing thesis during COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Educational Study, 2(1), 111-118.

. 10.36663/joes.v2i1.268https://doi.org/10.36663/joes.v2i1.268

Self-Regulated learning in students' thesis writing. D Hallberg, U Olsson, International Journal of Teaching and Education. 51Hallberg, D., & Olsson, U. (2017). Self-Regulated learning in students' thesis writing. International Journal of Teaching and Education, 5(1), 13-24.

Validity and reliability in quantitative studies. R Heale, A Twycross, 10.1136/eb-2015-102129Evidence-Based Nursing. 183Heale, R., & Twycross, A. (2015). Validity and reliability in quantitative studies. Evidence- Based Nursing, 18(3). 66-67. https://doi.org/10.1136/eb-2015-102129

Self-regulated learning strategies employed by regular, evening, and distance education English Language and Literature students. The Anthropologist. O Kirmizi, 10.1080/09720073.2014.1189156318Kirmizi, O. (2014). Self-regulated learning strategies employed by regular, evening, and distance education English Language and Literature students. The Anthropologist, 18(2), 447-460. https://doi.org/10.1080/09720073.2014.11891563

Discourses of Writing and Learning to Write. R Ivanič, 10.1080/09500780408666877Language and Education. 183Ivanič, R. (2004). Discourses of Writing and Learning to Write. Language and Education, 18(3), 220-245. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500780408666877

Online learning during COVID-19 pandemic: How selfregulated learning strategies impact student engagement?. K R Lidiawati, H Helsa, Jurnal Psibernetika. 141Lidiawati, K. R., & Helsa, H. (2021). Online learning during COVID-19 pandemic: How self- regulated learning strategies impact student engagement? Jurnal Psibernetika, 14(1), 1-10.

The relationship between self-regulation and online learning in a blended learning context. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning. R Lynch, M Dembo, 10.19173/irrodl.v5i2.1895Lynch, R., & Dembo, M. (2004). The relationship between self-regulation and online learning in a blended learning context. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 5(2), 1-16. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v5i2.189

Students' Self-regulated learning process in thesis writing at English Language Education Department of UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya. R Mahfudhoh, Undergraduate thesis, UIN Sunan AmpelMahfudhoh, R. (2019). Students' Self-regulated learning process in thesis writing at English Language Education Department of UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya. [Undergraduate thesis, UIN Sunan Ampel].

Digital Library UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya. Digital Library UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya. http://digilib.uinsby.ac.id/38608/

Self-regulated learning, social cognitive theory, and agency. J Martin, 10.1207/s15326985ep3902_4Educational Psychologist. 393Martin, J. (2004). Self-regulated learning, social cognitive theory, and agency. Educational Psychologist, 39(3), 135-145. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep3902_4

The challenge to scholarship: Rethinking learning, teaching. G Nicholls, Routledge, Nicholls, G. (2005). The challenge to scholarship: Rethinking learning, teaching and research. Routledge.

Constraints and solutions in the implementation of online lesson in higher education. S A Nugroho, A F Wati, F E Dianastiti, 10.36567/jalabahasa.v16i2.700Jurnal Ilmiah Kebahasaan. 162Nugroho, S. A., Wati, A. F., & Dianastiti, F. E., (2020). Constraints and solutions in the implementation of online lesson in higher education. Jurnal Ilmiah Kebahasaan, 16(2), 196-205. https://doi.org/10.36567/jalabahasa.v16i2.700

Students' problem of academic writing competencies, challenges in online thesis supervision, and the solutions: thesis supervisors' perspectives. J Nurkamto, Djatmika, L A Prihandoko, TEFLIN Journal. 133Nurkamto, J., Djatmika, & Prihandoko, L. A. (2022). Students' problem of academic writing competencies, challenges in online thesis supervision, and the solutions: thesis supervisors' perspectives. TEFLIN Journal, (33)1, 123-147.

. 10.15639/teflinjournal.v33i1/123-147http://dx.doi.org/10.15639/teflinjournal.v33i1/123-147

Writing anxiety and academic procrastination on undergraduate thesis writing: The role of self-regulation. A R Pravita, P Kuswandono, 10.30762/jeels.v9i1.4010Journal of English Education and Linguistics Studies. 19Pravita, A. R., & Kuswandono, P. (2022). Writing anxiety and academic procrastination on undergraduate thesis writing: The role of self-regulation. Journal of English Education and Linguistics Studies, (9)1, 1-25. https://doi.org/10.30762/jeels.v9i1.4010

Complexities of online thesis supervision during the COVID-19 pandemic: EFL lecturers' perceptions. L A Prihandoko, Djatmika, J Nurkamto, 10.2991/assehr.k.220201.047Proceedings of the 67th TEFLIN International Virtual Conference & the 9th ICOELT 2021 (TEFLIN ICOELT 2021). the 67th TEFLIN International Virtual Conference & the 9th ICOELT 2021 (TEFLIN ICOELT 2021)624Prihandoko, L. A., Djatmika, & Nurkamto, J. (2022). Complexities of online thesis supervision during the COVID-19 pandemic: EFL lecturers' perceptions. Proceedings of the 67th TEFLIN International Virtual Conference & the 9th ICOELT 2021 (TEFLIN ICOELT 2021), 624, 262-269. https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.220201.047

EFL undergraduate students' online self-regulated learning strategies during COVID-19 pandemic. G P D Redjeki, A Hapsari, Celtic: A Journal of Culture, English Language Teaching, Literature and Linguistics. 91Redjeki, G. P. D., & Hapsari, A. (2022). EFL undergraduate students' online self-regulated learning strategies during COVID-19 pandemic. Celtic: A Journal of Culture, English Language Teaching, Literature and Linguistics, 9(1), 82-96.

. 10.22219/celtic.v9i1.21066https://doi.org/10.22219/celtic.v9i1.21066

EFL students' perceptions of the online undergraduate thesis supervision process. N S Sandria, Jurnal Penelitian. 117Sandria, N. S. (2021). EFL students' perceptions of the online undergraduate thesis supervision process. Jurnal Penelitian, Pendidikan, dan Pembelajaran, 17(1).

Social cognitive theory and self-regulated learning. D H Schunk, B.J. Zimmerman & D.H. SchunkLawrence Erlbaum AssociatesSelf-regulated learning and academic achievement. 2nd ed.Schunk, D. H. (2001). Social cognitive theory and self-regulated learning. In B.J. Zimmerman & D.H. Schunk, (Eds). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement (2nd ed.) (pp. 83-110). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

The use of self-regulation strategies by foreign language learners and its role in language achievement. M Seker, 10.1177/1362168815578550Language Teaching Research. 205Seker, M. (2020). The use of self-regulation strategies by foreign language learners and its role in language achievement. Language Teaching Research, 20(5), 600-618. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168815578550

Sampling techniques & determination of sample size in aplied statistics research: An overview. A S Singh, M B Masuku, International Journal of Economics. 112Commerce and ManagementSingh, A. S., & Masuku, M. B., (2014). Sampling techniques & determination of sample size in aplied statistics research: An overview. International Journal of Economics, Commerce and Management (2)11, 1-22.

Multilingual scholars' participation in core/ global academic communities: A literature review. S Uzuner, 10.1016/j.jeap.2008.10.007Journal of English for Academic Purposes. 74Uzuner, S. (2008). Multilingual scholars' participation in core/ global academic communities: A literature review. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 7(4), 250- 263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2008.10.007

Process of writing as mediational tool in higher education. A L Wittek, Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research. 623Wittek, A. L. (2018). Process of writing as mediational tool in higher education. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 62(3), 444-460.

. 10.1080/00313831.2016.1258664https://doi.org/10.1080/00313831.2016.1258664

Academic studying and the development of personal skill: A selfregulatory perspective. B J Zimmerman, Educational Psychologist. 332-3Zimmerman, B. J. (1998). Academic studying and the development of personal skill: A self- regulatory perspective. Educational Psychologist, 33(2-3), 73-86.

. 10.1080/00461520.1998.9653292https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.1998.9653292

Motivational sources and outcomes of self-regulated learning and performance. B J Zimmerman, B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. SchunkTaylor FrancisHandbook of self-regulation of learning and performanceZimmerman, B. J. (2011). Motivational sources and outcomes of self-regulated learning and performance. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance (pp. 49-64). Taylor Francis.