# Prevalence and determinants of anaemia among men in rural India: Evidence from a nationally representative survey

CorpusID: 254331209
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/30006b372cb04233481ad47befe8de22fe34880f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/30006b372cb04233481ad47befe8de22fe34880f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Prevalence and determinants of anaemia among men in rural India: Evidence from a nationally representative survey


Aditya Singh 
Department of Geography
Banaras Hindu University
Uttar PradeshVaranasiIndia

Sumit Ram Id *sumitram657@gmail.com 
Department of Geography
Banaras Hindu University
Uttar PradeshVaranasiIndia

Shivani Singh Id 
India Health Action Trust
Lucknow

Uttar Pradesh
India

Pooja Tripathi 
Department of Geography
Banaras Hindu University
Uttar PradeshVaranasiIndia

Prevalence and determinants of anaemia among men in rural India: Evidence from a nationally representative survey
10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159RESEARCH ARTICLE
Anaemia among men is a significant health issue which has not been given due importance. Only a handful of studies have captured the prevalence of anaemia among men. There is dearth of evidence base on anaemia among men in India. Therefore, this study attempts to fill this research gap by examining the socioeconomic, geographic, health-related, and behavioural differentials of anaemia among rural men in India. We analysed a cross-sectional sample of 61,481 men aged between 15-54 and living in rural areas from the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5), conducted in 2019-21. Bivariate statistics and multivariable logistic regression were employed to assess the factors associated with anaemia. In rural India, three out of ten men were found to be anaemic. Older men [49-54 years] (Odds Ratio: 1.10, 95% CI, 1.00-1.21), men without a formal education (OR: 1.36, 95% CI, 1.26-1.47), those from Scheduled Tribes (OR: 1.48, 95% CI, 1.39-1.58) and men who belonged to the poorest wealth quintile (OR: 1.24, 95% CI: 1.25-1.35) had a higher risk of anaemia. Men who were underweight were more likely to be anaemic (OR: 1.36, 95% CI: 1.30-1.43). When compared to the central region, men from the eastern (OR: 1.47, 95% CI: 1.39-1.55) parts of India had higher a risk of anaemia. The findings suggest the need to recognise anaemia among men as a public health issue. When developing policy, significant variation in socioeconomic, geographic, health-related, and behavioural factors must be taken into account. Men should also be screened on a regular basis in order to reduce the national burden of anaemia.

## Introduction

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), anaemia is a disorder in which the number or haemoglobin concentration of red blood cells is below normal which subsequently results in the decreased oxygen-carrying capacity of blood [1] Haemoglobin is an iron-containing protein in the red blood cells (RBC) that transports oxygen from the lungs to the tissues and carries carbon dioxide from tissues back to lungs [2]. Nutritional deficiencies, particularly iron deficiency is the main reason behind this disease although deficiencies in vitamins B9, Data and methods


## Data source

The data comes from the latest round of National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5) carried out by International Institute for Population Sciences during 2019-2021 under the supervision of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. NFHS, the Indian version of the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), is a nationally representative cross-sectional survey that collects data on a wide range of demographic, socioeconomic, and health-related issues. Using a two-stage stratified random sampling method, NFHS-5 interviewed 724115 women aged 15 to 49 years and 101839 men aged 15-54 years from 636699 households. Response rate was 97% and 92% for women and men respectively. Through a series of biomarker tests and measurements, the clinical, anthropometric, and biochemical (CAB) component of the NFHS-5 provided critical estimates of the prevalence of malnutrition, anaemia, hypertension, high blood glucose levels, waist and hip circumference, Vitamin D3, HbA1c, and malaria parasites. The survey covered 707 districts from 28 states and 8 UTs. A uniform sample design, which is representative at the national, state/UT, and district level, was adopted in each round of the survey [8].

The Biomarker Schedule contained measurements of height, weight, and haemoglobin levels for children; measurements of height, weight, waist and hip circumference, and haemoglobin levels for women aged 15-49 years and men aged 15-54 years; and blood pressure and random blood glucose levels for women and men aged 15 years and over. Additionally, both men and women were requested to provide a few more drops of blood from a finger prick for laboratory testing for HbA1c, malaria parasites, and Vitamin D3 [8].

We made a request to the DHS Program to provide us with the NFHS data. Once we received the permission to use the data, we downloaded the Men's data file (MR) and the Household Member data file (PR). MR and PR datasets were then merged to avail the information on anaemia among men in India.


## Ethics approval and consent to participate

The present study has used secondary data, which is available in the public domain. The dataset has no identifiable information of the survey participants. Therefore, no ethical approval is required for this study.


## Sample

Fig 1 depicts the process of sample selection for the present study. Out of the 111,179 eligible men aged 15-54 years selected for the state module, 101839 men who were normally inhabitants and spent the night before the survey in their homes were interviewed. 92820 men consented to have their haemoglobin levels checked. For this study, 31339 out of the 92820 men were excluded as they belonged to urban areas. Our study was limited to remaining 61481 men residing in rural areas.


## Anaemia testing

The authors did not collect blood specimens for anaemia testing for this study. These were collected under NFHS-5 by health investigators from eligible men aged 15 to 54 with their consent. Blood samples were drawn from a drop of blood taken from a finger prick (or a heel prick for children age 6-11 months) [8] and collected in a microcuvette, a single-use pipette. Concentration of haemoglobin was analysed on-site with HemoCue Hb 201+ analyser. Introduced in 1990, the HemoCue Hb 201+ is a battery-operated portable device used for quantitative determination of haemoglobin level in undiluted, capillary or venous blood. It converts the haemoglobin into methemoglobin and combines it with azide to form azidemethemoglobin followed by measurement of transmittance and haemoglobin absorbance [22][23][24].


## Dependent variable

The dependent variable in this study was whether or not the respondents were anaemic. Men were considered to have anaemia in any form if their haemoglobin concentration was less than 13.0 g/dL, mildly anaemic if it was 12.0-12.9 g/dL, moderately anaemic if it was 9.0-11.9 g/dL, and severely anaemic if it was less than 8.9 g/dL, according to WHO criteria [25]. The study developed a dichotomous variable for prevalence of anaemia. Men with a haemoglobin level less than 13g/dl were considered 'anaemic' and coded '1' while men having a haemoglobin level greater than 13g/dl were classified as 'not anaemic' and coded '0'. We did not take into account the three categories of anaemia: mild, moderate, and severe.


## Independent variables

Definitions, categories and codes of independent variables are enlisted in Table 1. A wide range of variables were found to predict anaemia among men [26][27][28]. To illustrate, as a proxy for household income, the wealth index was chosen as a gauge of economic inequality. This is 


## PLOS GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH

Determinants of anaemia among men in rural India Table 1. Description of the variables.


## Independent variables Description (Codes)


## Socio-economic variables

Age (in years) Age of men has five categories: [15][16][17][18][19] (0) Household wealth Household wealth is divided into five categories: poorest, poorer, middle, richer and richest. For the calculation of wealth index, households were given scores based on the number and kinds of consumer goods they own, ranging from a television to a bicycle or car, and housing characteristics such as source of drinking water, toilet facilities, and flooring materials. These scores were derived using principal component analysis. National wealth quintiles were compiled by assigning the household score to each usual (de jure) household member, ranking each person in the household population by their score, and then dividing the distribution into five equal categories, each with 20% of the population [8].

Work status Whether a man currently works or not: no (0) and yes (1) Marital status Marital status has three categories: never married (0), currently married (1), and formerly in union (2) which includes widowed, separated, divorced and deserted. 


## Geographic variable


## Region


## Health related variables

Body Mass Index It is defined as the ratio between the weight of a man in kilogram divided by the squared height in meter. Body mass index is divided into four categories underweight (<18.5 kg/m 2 ), normal (18.5-24.99 kg/m 2 ), overweight (25-32 kg/m 2 ) and obese (> 32 kg/m 2 )

Blood sugar level It has three categories: normal (0), random blood glucose less than 140 g/dl; high (1), random blood glucose level of 141-160 mg/dl; and very high (2), random blood glucose level of more than 160 mg/dl.


## Behavioural variables

Media exposure It refers to how often men watch television, read newspapers, and listen to the radio. Exposure to mass media was defined as men using them every day or at least once a week [coded as yes (1)]. Men who used it less than once a week or never [marked as no (0)] were regarded to have no media exposure.


## Consumption of nonvegetarian food

Men's consumption of egg, fish, and chicken/meat. Men who consumed the abovementioned foods every day and at least once a week were classified as eating nonvegetarian food [coded as yes (1)], and men who ate them less than once a week or not at all were classified as not eating non-vegetarian food [coded as no (0)]

Alcohol consumption Frequency of drinking alcohol having four categories: never (0), less than once in a week (1), once a week (2), daily (3) Currently smokes Men using any of bidi, cigarette, hookah or cigar were coded as '1' yes and 0 'no' otherwise.

Use of smokeless tobacco Men using forms of smokeless tobacco (gutkha with paan, khaini, nassi) were coded as '1' yes and 0 'no' otherwise.

a measure of household wealth that is determined to be reliable based on both expenditure and income metrics [8]. Wealth index was one of the key predictors of this study. BMI was also one of the significant determinants of anaemia among men which was classified into four categories i.e., underweight (<18.5 kg/m 2 ), normal (18.5-24.99 kg/m 2 ), overweight (25-32 kg/ m 2 ), and obese (>32kg/m 2 ). Age, education, social group, religion, and alcohol consumption were other important factors of anaemia in men. These variables could be categorised into four domains namely socioeconomic factors, community variables, health-related variables and behavioural characteristics. All the variables in present study were selected only after extensive review of literature and according to data availability. Fig 2 depicts a conceptual framework that shows the factors affecting anaemia among men.


## Statistical analysis

Bivariate statistics was used to analyse the prevalence of anaemia among rural men by their background characteristics. The analysis was weighted for two-stage sampling design. Thus, weighted estimates were presented. Sampling weights (importance weight: iw) were included in the study. The 'svyset' command was used in Stata to account for clustering at the PSU level. Since our dependent variable was binary in nature, we employed binary logistic regression to assess the effects of the predictor variables on the dichotomous dependent variable of the study. Chi-square test was performed to check if the independent variables were associated with the dependent variable. Only those variables that were found statistically significant 


## PLOS GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH

Determinants of anaemia among men in rural India (p<0.05) were included in the regression models. We applied four models, i.e., model 1 included socioeconomic variables; model 2 included statistically significant variables from model 1 variables and geographic variable. Model 3 contained significant variables from model 2 and health-related variables. The final model included significant variables from model 3 and behavioural variables. The equation of a single-level binary logistic regression model can be specified as:
Log ðP=1À PÞ ¼ b 0 þ b 1 x 1 þ ... þ b 2 x 2
Where, P indicates the probability of an event (prevalence of anaemia in this study), β 0 is the intercept on y axis, βi indicates the regression coefficients associated with the reference group, x i is the independent variable.

The results of logistic regression models are presented in the form of odds ratios with p-values and 95% confidence intervals (CI). We calculated Variance Inflation Factors (VIFs) for the final model to check whether multicollinearity among the independent variables existed. The VIFs for all the independent variables were considerably small (below 2.5) indicating that multicollinearity was not a problem for the models (results not shown). Stata 16 was used for analysing the unit level data [29]. ArcMap (version 10.5) was used to create the choropleth maps [30]. Table 2 present the sociodemographic profile of the men in rural India. About 17% men were aged between 15-19 years. One in every seven men had no formal education. About a quarter of all men belonged to SC group, while 12.4% men belonged to ST group. The Hindu faith was practised by the vast majority of men (81%). Nearly one-fourth men belonged to the poorest wealth quintile. Around 30% men were from the eastern region of India. At the time of the survey, roughly two-thirds of men were married. About 18% of men were underweight (BMI less than 18.5 kg/m2). Around 28% of men used smokeless tobacco, while 45% smoked cigarettes. Table 3 depicts the prevalence of anaemia among rural men in the country by various background characteristics. Overall, about one-fourth men in India were found to have anaemia. One out of every five urban men while three out of every ten rural men were anaemic in India (Fig 3). The prevalence of anaemia among rural men was highest in the age group 50-54 (34.1%) followed by the age group 15-19 years (33.8%). Men aged 20-29 years (22.9%) had the lowest prevalence of anaemia. Prevalence of anaemia decreased with increase in education. Men with no education had the highest prevalence of anaemia. ST men (30.9%) showed the highest prevalence of anaemia among the social groups. Anaemia prevalence was significantly higher among Muslim men and lower among Christian men. A steady decline was observed in the prevalence of anaemia with increase in household wealth. About one-third rural men belonging to the poorest households had anaemia.


## Results


## Profile of the respondents


## Differentials in prevalence of anaemia by background characteristics

Anaemia prevalence was highest in the eastern region (34.1%) while lowest in the southern region (18.5%). The north, west, north-west and central regions reported 27.2%, 28.9%, 26.9% and 25% prevalence of anaemia, respectively. Anaemia was inversely related with BMI as prevalence of anaemia was 34.7% among underweight men versus 19.3% among men who were overweight. Men who drank alcohol daily and used smokeless tobacco had slightly higher occurrence of anaemia than who did not consume it. 


## Estimates from logistic regression analysis for anaemia among men in rural India

The results from the logistic regression models are presented in Table 4. The men within the age bracket 20-29 years and 30-39 years were 33% and 26% less likely to be anaemic than men aged 15-19. Men aged 50-54 years were slightly more likely to be anaemic (OR: 1.10, 95% CI, 1.00-1.21). Men with no formal education were 36% more likely (95% CI, 1.26-1.47) to be anaemic than men who obtained higher education. Men with primary education were a quarter times more likely (95% CI, 1.15-1.34) to have anaemia as compared to men with higher education. Men from to ST category (OR: 1.48, 95% CI, 1.39-1.58) had significantly higher likelihood of being anaemic as compared to men of 'Others' category. The odds of being anaemic were 36% higher among Muslim men (95% CI, 1.27-1.45) and 48% lower among Christian men (95% CI, 0.48-0.57) as compared to Hindu men. The more the wealth, the lesser the risk to suffer from anaemia. Men from the richest wealth quintile were 29% less likely to suffer from anaemia (95% CI, 0.66-0.78) than those from the poorest wealth quintile. The odds of anaemia among men from the east region of the country were 47% (95% CI, 1.39-1.55) higher than those from the central region. Men belonging to the north, west and north-east regions were 27%, 28%, and 24% more likely to suffer from anaemia. However, the odds of anaemia among men were lower by 19% (95% CI, 0.76-0.87) in the south region. Men who were underweight had 36% (95% CI, 1.30-1.43) more likelihood of being anaemic whereas obese men were 23% (95% CI, 0.68-0.86) less likely to suffer from anaemia as compared to men with normal BMI. The risk of anaemia among men using smokeless tobacco was more (OR:1.15, 95% CI, 1.08-1.22) than those not using the same.  unequal distribution of an element within a geographic area is depicted through gradients of the same colour. The higher the value or prevalence, the darker the shade [31]. The states as well as districts of India were classified into six categories according to prevalence of anaemia (%). West Bengal, Tripura, Assam, UT Jammu and Kashmir (>35%) were found to have highest anaemia prevalence among rural men followed by Bihar, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Gujarat (28%-35%). South Indian states i.e., Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala,) as well as Manipur and Nagaland showed lowest prevalence.


## Spatial analysis

Districts of West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir (>50%) showed the highest prevalence of anaemia among rural men followed by some districts of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh (40%-50%). The lowest prevalence was found in some districts of Manipur, Nagaland, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu (<10%).


## Discussion

An estimated one-fourth of Indian rural men aged 15 to 54 years were found to be anaemic. In the last four years, the prevalence of anaemia has only risen [8]. The findings suggested that the prevalence of anaemia varies by sociodemographic characteristics among rural men. Rural men who were 49-54 years old, had no formal education, belonged to ST group, were Muslim, or from the poorest wealth quintile, lived in the eastern region, were underweight, and consumed alcohol and smokeless tobacco on a daily basis were more likely to have anaemia. At both the state and district levels, there was significant geographical variation in the prevalence of anaemia.

Older men, aged 50-54 years, were more likely to be anaemic, followed by adolescents (15-19 years). However, the prevalence of anaemia was lowest in the 20-29 age group. Older men are more vulnerable to anaemia, possibly as a result of suffering from other chronic diseases such as diabetes, chronic kidney diseases, hypertension [32]. Previous research has yielded similar results [26,33], although none of these studies have been conducted specifically on rural men. Education level emerged to be a significant determinant of anaemia. Rural men with no education were most vulnerable to anaemia. Men with a higher level of education were less likely to develop anaemia. Previous studies also corroborate the same [19,34]. Disease awareness and knowledge, as well as the necessity of sanitation and health care, are raised through education. It also encourages people to listen to and accept the advice of health professionals [35,36].

Men in the ST category were more likely to be anaemic than men from other social groups. STs have a long history of being marginalised, with the majority of them still living in remote areas of the country. As a result, poor diet and a lack of access to healthcare services could be linked to their increased risk of anaemia [37]. Various studies have found that SCs and STs generally have poor health outcomes, underscoring the importance of caste prejudices. Despite affirmative actions by the Indian government post-1947, people from SC/ST groups remain deprived in a variety of areas, including health [38][39][40].

Muslim men had greater risk of anaemia, which is similar to the findings from an earlier study [20]. This study also found that Christian men living in rural India were at significantly lower risk of anaemia, which was not highlighted previously by any scientific study and requires further investigation. However, these results need to be cautiously interpreted as the sample size for Muslim and Christian population was small and sample distribution was highly skewed.  Household wealth was strongly associated with anaemia. The wealthier the household, the lesser the risk of anaemia. Several researches have explored the linkage between poverty and malnutrition. Poverty makes it difficult for people to eat a healthy diet and get health care [41,42]. Low socioeconomic position can exacerbate the prevalence of anaemia in a variety of ways, including a poor living and working environment, unhealthy habits such as smoking and limited access to health care, and a lack of health literacy [40]. In developing countries, people from poorer households are more likely to suffer anaemia than those from wealthy homes [43] due to factors such as substandard housing, hunger, and increased disease exposure.

A significant geographical variation in the prevalence of anaemia among rural men was also noted in this study. The likelihood of being anaemic was maximum among men belonging to the eastern region. A recent study on anaemia among men also pointed out higher prevalence of anaemia among men in the eastern India [21]. A previous study on anaemia among children also highlighted that people from central and eastern region were associated with higher risk of being anaemic [44]. However, this study found that men from the north, west and north-east region were more likely to suffer from anaemia compared to men in the central region. The differentials in population composition from one region to another could play a vital role in spatial variation in anaemia. Anaemia was significantly associated with BMI in this study. Rural men with lower BMI, who were underweight, had a higher risk of anaemia. It is a well-researched fact that underweight persons have higher likelihood to be anaemic, as low BMI is caused by a lack of a balanced and healthy diet [45]. Men who drank alcohol on a regular basis had a higher risk of anaemia than men who did not consume alcohol. A population based study on India offered a similar finding [19]. Frequent consumption of alcohol leads to deterioration of health and a number of other chronic illnesses which are linked with anaemia.

There was no significant relationship found between anaemia prevalence and media exposure, blood sugar, and non-vegetarian food consumption. Previous studies have found a link between anaemia and these variables. It has been noted that as blood sugar levels rise, the likelihood of being anaemic also rises [46]. Another study on women in Afghanistan found a strong negative correlation between anaemia risk and meat consumption frequency [47]. Since the above-mentioned study was conducted on women, we should exercise caution while comparing the results of the current study with the findings from other studies. It was also found that women who took iron tablets or syrup at regular intervals had a lower risk of anaemia [48]. Thus, further research is needed to investigate the effect of such interventions in men.

The Indian government has devised a number of programmes and policies aimed at reducing the prevalence of anaemia in the country. Almost all of them, however, primarily target women of reproductive age and children. The National Nutritional Anaemia Control Program (NNACP), for example, was established in 1970 with the goals of encouraging regular consumption of iron-rich foods, providing iron and folate supplements to susceptible groups, and identifying and treating severely anaemic patients [49]. The 12-by-12 Initiative (2007) was launched in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with the goal of every child having a haemoglobin level of 12 grams by the age of 12 years by 2012 [50]. The National Iron Plus Initiative (NIPI) was launched in 2013 with the goal of providing free iron and folic acid supplements to adolescent boys and girls (10-19 years) as well as women of reproductive age, such as pregnant and breastfeeding women. The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare started the Weekly Iron and Folic Acid Supplementation (WIFS) initiative in 2013 under the National Health Mission to prevent anaemia among teenagers (NHM). Another initiative, Anaemia Mukt Bharat (2018), aimed to cut anaemia in young children, teenage boys and girls, pregnant and breastfeeding women, and women of reproductive age by half [50]. It is therefore recommended that the government and policymakers expand the scope of programs such as Anaemia Mukt Bharat and Iron supplementation programs to include sub-strata of rural aged men who are more susceptible to anaemia. Additionally, more research is needed to design such health interventions for men, keeping the sociodemographic and cultural context in sight.

This study has a few limitations that should be mentioned. First, because the data for this study comes from a cross-sectional survey, the relationship between dependent and independent variables demonstrated in this paper should be interpreted as association, and not as causality. Second, the model in this study uses only those variables that were available in the dataset. Some predictor variables may have been left out which may have resulted in what is known as omitted variable bias. We were unable to include folate, vitamin B12, or vitamin A intake as predictor variables in the model due to a lack of data. Third, the nationwide representative survey measured haemoglobin concentrations with a battery-operated portable Hemo-CueHb 201+ analyser, which may have underestimated the results when compared to laboratory testing (Didzun et al., 2019). Future research should take these limitations into account to get a more accurate and comprehensive picture of the prevalence of anaemia among rural men in India.


## Conclusion

Anaemia among rural men, just like it is among women and children, is a serious public health concern in India. Anaemia was found in three out of ten rural men. High-risk groups were older men, men without education, Muslim and STs, men from the poorest households, and men who were underweight. The benefits of existing programs and policies related to anaemia eradiation should be extended to men as well. In addition, targeted interventions among susceptible groups of rural men are advised as a way to reduce the prevalence of anaemia. Men's haemoglobin levels should be checked on a regular basis and for that purpose appropriate screening facilities should to be made available closer to their residences so that they can be screened easily. When developing policies, it is important to keep geographical regions with high anaemia prevalence in mind. A comprehensive strategy based on the aforementioned proposals could be beneficial to reduce burden of anaemia among men in rural India.


## Author Contributions

Conceptualization: Aditya Singh.

Data curation: Sumit Ram. 

## Fig 1 .
1Sample selection for the present study. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159.g001


has four categories: Hindu (1), Muslim (1), Christian (2) and others. Other included all religious groups other than Hindu, Muslim and Christian

## Fig 2 .
2Conceptual framework showing factors affecting anaemia. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159.g002

## Figs 4
4and 5 show the spatial distribution of prevalence of anaemia among men across the Indian states and districts respectively using choropleth map. It is a technique through which

## Fig 3 .
3Trend of anaemia prevalence among rural men and men overall in India, NFHS. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.

## Fig 4 .
4Map showing state wise prevalence anaemia among rural men in India, NFHS-5, 2019-21. (All the maps used are the authors' own creations. As far as the base layer is concerned, we used a free GIS file from https://spatialdata. dhsprogram.com/boundaries/#view=table&countryId=IA for national and sub-national boundaries).https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159.g004

## Fig 5 .
5Map showing district wise prevalence of anaemia among rural men in India, NFHS-5, 2019-21. (All the maps used are the authors' own creations. As far as the base layer is concerned, we used a free GIS file from https:// spatialdata.dhsprogram.com/boundaries/#view=table&countryId=IA for national and sub-national boundaries). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159.g005

## Formal analysis :
analysisAditya Singh, Sumit Ram. Investigation: Aditya Singh, Shivani Singh. Methodology: Aditya Singh, Sumit Ram. Software: Sumit Ram. Supervision: Aditya Singh, Shivani Singh.


PLOS GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTHPLOS Global Public Health | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159 December 1, 2022 
1 / 20 

a1111111111 
a1111111111 
a1111111111 
a1111111111 
a1111111111 


## Table 2 .
2Profile of the respondents, India, 2019-21.Background Characteristics 
n 
% 

Age (in years) 

15-19 
10329 
16.8 

20-29 
17061 
27.8 

30-39 
15592 
25.4 

40-49 
13157 
21.4 

50-54 
5349 
8.7 

Level of education 

No education 
8853 
14.4 

Primary 
8423 
13.7 

Secondary 
35597 
57.9 

Higher 
8607 
14.0 

Social group 

SC 
14202 
23.1 

ST 
7624 
12.4 

OBC 
27543 
44.8 

Others 
12173 
19.8 

Religion 

Hindu 
8546 
81.0 

Muslim 
8546 
13.9 

Christian 
1721 
2.8 

Others 
1414 
2.3 

Household wealth 

Poorest 
14878 
24.2 

Poorer 
16047 
26.1 

Middle 
14694 
23.9 

Richer 
11067 
18.0 

Richest 
4734 
7.7 

Marital status 

Never married 
22555 
34.2 

Currently married 
42465 
64.3 

Work status 

No 
14817 
24.1 

Yes 
46664 
75.9 

Region 

South 
14264 
23.2 

North 
5164 
8.4 

Central 
7808 
12.7 

East 
17891 
29.1 

West 
12235 
19.9 

North-East 
4119 
6.7 

Body Mass Index 

Underweight 
11067 
18.0 

Normal 
38057 
61.9 

Overweight 
10390 
16.9 

Obese 
1967 
3.2 

Media exposure 

No 
24285 
39.5 

(Continued ) 


## Table 2 .Table 3 .
23(Continued) Notes: n = Sample of rural men who agreed for haemoglobin testing, All % are weighted. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159.t002 Differentials in the prevalence of anaemia among rural men by background characteristics, India, 2019-21.Background Characteristics 
n 
% 

Yes 
37196 
60.5 

Consumption non-vegetarian food 

No 
19182 
31.2 

Yes 
42299 
68.8 

Alcohol consumption 

Never 
47340 
77.0 

Less than once a week 
5841 
9.5 

Once a week 
6087 
9.9 

Almost every day 
2213 
3.6 

Currently smokes 

No 
33876 
55.1 

Yes 
27605 
44.9 

Use of smokeless tobacco 

No 
44020 
71.6 

Yes 
17461 
28.4 

Total 
61481 
100.00 



## Table 3 .
3(Continued) Notes: P value based on chi-square test. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159.t003Background characteristics 
Prevalence of anaemia (%) 
P value 
Chi-Square Value 

No 
29.1 

Yes 
24.9 

Consumption of non-vegetarian food 
0.129 
2.29 

No 
26.3 

Yes 
26.9 

Alcohol consumption 
<0.001 
76.01 

Never 
27.4 

Less than once a week 
23.4 

Once a week 
24.8 

daily 
28.6 

Currently smokes 
0.001 
11.38 

No 
26.2 

Yes 
27.3 

Use of smokeless tobacco 
<0.001 
32.52 

No 
26.1 

Yes 
28.2 

Total 
28.1 



## Table 4 .
4Odds ratios (with 95% CI) for anaemia among men by their background characteristics, India, 2019-21.Model 1 

Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 

CI (95%) 
CI (95%) 
CI (95%) 
CI (95%) 

Independent Variables 
OR Upper Lower P value OR Upper Lower P value OR Upper Lower P value OR Upper Lower P value 

Socioeconomic variables 
Age 

15-19 
Ref. 
Ref. 
Ref. 
Ref. 

20-29 
0.62 0.58 
0.66 
0.000 0.61 0.57 
0.65 
0.000 0.66 0.62 
0.70 
0.000 0.67 0.63 
0.71 
0.000 

30-39 
0.65 0.60 
0.70 
0.000 0.65 0.60 
0.70 
0.000 0.72 0.67 
0.78 
0.000 0.74 0.69 
0.80 
0.000 

40-49 
0.79 0.73 
0.86 
0.000 0.79 0.73 
0.86 
0.000 0.88 0.81 
0.96 
0.002 0.91 0.84 
0.99 
0.032 

50-54 
0.95 0.86 
1.04 
0.027 0.95 0.87 
1.04 
0.286 1.06 0.96 
1.16 
0.252 1.10 1.00 
1.21 
0.052 

Level of education 

No education 
1.36 1.26 
1.46 
0.000 1.38 1.28 
1.18 
0.000 1.32 1.13 
1.43 
0.000 1.36 1.26 
1.47 
0.000 

Primary 
1.26 1.17 
1.36 
0.000 1.25 1.16 
1.35 
0.000 1.21 1.12 
1.30 
0.000 1.24 1.15 
1.34 
0.000 

Secondary 
1.18 1.11 
1.25 
0.000 1.17 1.10 1.24 
0.000 1.14 1.08 
1.21 
0.000 1.16 1.09 
1.23 
0.000 

Higher 
Ref. 
Ref. 
Ref. 
Ref. 

Social group 

Others 
Ref. 
Ref. 
Ref. 
Ref. 

SC 
1.03 0.97 
1.09 
0.345 1.08 1.01 
1.15 
0.016 1.06 0.99 
1.12 
0.072 1.07 1.00 
1.13 
0.044 

SC 
1.43 1.34 
1.52 
0.000 1.47 1.38 
1.57 
0.000 1.47 1.38 
1.56 
0.000 1.48 1.39 
1.58 
0.000 

OBC 
0.94 0.90 
0.99 
0.029 1.01 0.96 
1.07 
0.725 1.00 0.94 
1.05 
0.877 0.99 0.94 
1.05 
0.783 


## Table 4 .
4(Continued) Notes: OR: Odds ratio, CI: Confidence interval, Ref.: Reference category.Model 1 

Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 

CI (95%) 
CI (95%) 
CI (95%) 
CI (95%) 

Independent Variables 
OR Upper Lower P value OR Upper Lower P value OR Upper Lower P value OR Upper Lower P value 

Normal 
Ref. 
Ref. 

Underweight 
1.36 1.30 
1.43 
0.000 1.36 1.30 
1.43 
0.000 

Overweight 
0.76 0.72 
0.80 
0.000 0.76 0.72 
0.80 
0.000 

Obese 
0.76 0.68 
0.86 
0.000 0.77 0.68 
0.86 
0.000 

Blood sugar 

Normal 
Ref. 

High 
1.07 0.99 
1.15 
0.086 

Very High 
1.07 0.98 
1.17 
0.141 

Behavioural variables 
Media exposure 

No 
Ref. 

Yes 
1.03 1.00 
1.08 
0.087 

Consumption of non-vegetarian 
food 

No 
Ref. 

Yes 
1.03 0.98 
1.07 
0.217 

Alcohol consumption 

Never 
Ref. 

Less than once a week 
0.85 0.80 
0.90 
0.000 

Once a week 
0.91 0.85 
0.96 
0.001 

Almost every day 
0.96 0.88 
1.05 
0.412 

Currently smokes 

No 
Ref. 

Yes 
1.15 1.08 
1.22 
0.022 

Use of smokeless tobacco 

No 
Ref. 

Yes 
1.07 1.01 
1.13 
0.016 


PLOS Global Public Health | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0001159 December 1, 2022
Religion
WHO. Health Topics. Anaemia. World Health Organisation. WHO. Health Topics. Anaemia. World Health Organisation. 2022.

Bumc0019-0239. Marengo-Rowe Aj, Proc Baylor Univ Med Cent. 19Marengo-rowe AJ. Bumc0019-0239. Proc Baylor Univ Med Cent. 2006; 19: 239-245.

Anaemias: Tools for Effective Prevention. World Health Organization. Who, WHO. Nutritional Anaemias: Tools for Effective Prevention. World Health Organization. 2017.

The Global Burden of Anemia GBD 2013 Anemia Collaborators and Nicholas J Kassebaum. N J Kassebaum, Hematol Clin. 30Kassebaum NJ. The Global Burden of Anemia GBD 2013 Anemia Collaborators and Nicholas J Kasse- baum. Hematol Clin. 2016; 30: 247-308.

Global nutrition targets 2025: Anaemia policy brief (WHO/NMH/NHD/14.4). Geneva: World Health Organization. GenevaWHO. Global nutrition targets 2025: Anaemia policy brief (WHO/NMH/NHD/14.4). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. Geneva; 2014.

Goal 2 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Goal 2 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs.

WHO. Global Nutrition Report: 2021. Glob Nutr Rep. WHO. Global Nutrition Report: 2021. Glob Nutr Rep. 2021.

International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. 2021. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5). India. MumbaiInternational Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and ICF. 2021. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5), 2019-21: India. Mumbai; 2021.

Anaemia, prenatal iron use, and risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes: Systematic review and meta-analysis. B A Haider, I Olofin, M Wang, D Spiegelman, M Ezzati, W W Fawzi, 10.1136/bmj.f344323794316BMJ. 347Haider BA, Olofin I, Wang M, Spiegelman D, Ezzati M, Fawzi WW. Anaemia, prenatal iron use, and risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2013; 347: 1-19. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f3443 PMID: 23794316

Prenatal hemoglobin levels and early cognitive and motor functions of one-year-old children. M O Mireku, L L Davidson, G K Koura, S Oué Draogo, M J Boivin, X Xiong, 10.1542/peds.2015-049126055847Pediatrics. 136Mireku MO, Davidson LL, Koura GK, Oué draogo S, Boivin MJ, Xiong X, et al. Prenatal hemoglobin lev- els and early cognitive and motor functions of one-year-old children. Pediatrics. 2015; 136: e76-e83. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2015-0491 PMID: 26055847

The impact of anemia on child mortality: An updated review. S P Scott, L P Chen-Edinboro, L E Caulfield, Murray-Kolb Le, 10.3390/nu612591525533005Nutrients. 6Scott SP, Chen-Edinboro LP, Caulfield LE, Murray-Kolb LE. The impact of anemia on child mortality: An updated review. Nutrients. 2014; 6: 5915-5932. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu6125915 PMID: 25533005

Risk of maternal mortality in women with severe anaemia during pregnancy and post partum: a multilevel analysis. J Daru, J Zamora, B M Ferná Ndez-Félix, J Vogel, O T Oladapo, N Morisaki, 10.1016/S2214-109X%2818%2930078-029571592Lancet Glob Heal. 6Daru J, Zamora J, Ferná ndez-Félix BM, Vogel J, Oladapo OT, Morisaki N, et al. Risk of maternal mortal- ity in women with severe anaemia during pregnancy and post partum: a multilevel analysis. Lancet Glob Heal. 2018; 6: e548-e554. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(18)30078-0 PMID: 29571592

The Economics of iron deficiency. S Horton, Ross J Corrigendum, 10.1016/j.foodpol.2006.08.002Food Policy. 28Horton S, Ross J. Corrigendum to: '"The Economics of iron deficiency"' [Food Policy 28 (2003) 51-75]. 2007; 32: 141-143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2006.08.002

Reversing productivity losses from iron deficiency: The economic case. J M H , 10.1093/jn/132.4.794S11925484J Nutr. 132J.M. H. Reversing productivity losses from iron deficiency: The economic case. J Nutr. 2002; 132: 794S-801S. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/132.4.794S PMID: 11925484

Public Health Foundaton of India I for HM and E. India: Health of the Nation ' s States-The India State-Level Disease Burden Initiative. New Delhi, India. New Delhi, IndiaIndian Council of Medical ResearchIndian Council of Medical Research, Public Health Foundaton of India I for HM and E. India: Health of the Nation ' s States-The India State-Level Disease Burden Initiative. New Delhi, India. New Delhi, India.; 2017.

Inequality, chronic undernutrition, maternity, and diabetes mellitus as the determinant of anemia among ever-married women in Bangladesh. Gmr Islam, 10.1186/s12889-021-10362-2BMC Public Health. 2133549086Islam GMR. Inequality, chronic undernutrition, maternity, and diabetes mellitus as the determinant of anemia among ever-married women in Bangladesh. BMC Public Health. 2021; 21: 1-11. https://doi. org/10.1186/s12889-021-10362-2 PMID: 33549086

Global, regional, and national trends in haemoglobin concentration and prevalence of total and severe anaemia in children and pregnant and non-pregnant women for 1995-2011: A systematic analysis of population-representative data. G A Stevens, M M Finucane, L M De-Regil, C J Paciorek, S R Flaxman, F Branca, 10.1016/S2214-109X%2813%2970001-9Lancet Glob Heal. 125103581Stevens GA, Finucane MM, De-Regil LM, Paciorek CJ, Flaxman SR, Branca F, et al. Global, regional, and national trends in haemoglobin concentration and prevalence of total and severe anaemia in chil- dren and pregnant and non-pregnant women for 1995-2011: A systematic analysis of population-repre- sentative data. Lancet Glob Heal. 2013; 1: 16-25. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70001-9 PMID: 25103581

Trends and drivers of change in the prevalence of anaemia among 1 million women and children in India. P H Nguyen, S Scott, R Avula, L M Tran, P Menon, 10.1136/bmjgh-2018-00101030397516BMJ Glob Heal. 3Nguyen PH, Scott S, Avula R, Tran LM, Menon P. Trends and drivers of change in the prevalence of anaemia among 1 million women and children in India, 2006 to 2016. BMJ Glob Heal. 2018; 3: 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2018-001010 PMID: 30397516

Anaemia among men in India: a nationally representative cross-sectional study. O Didzun, J W De Neve, A Awasthi, M Dubey, M Theilmann, T Bä Rnighausen, 10.1016/S2214-109X%2819%2930440-131708149Lancet Glob Heal. 7Didzun O, De Neve JW, Awasthi A, Dubey M, Theilmann M, Bä rnighausen T, et al. Anaemia among men in India: a nationally representative cross-sectional study. Lancet Glob Heal. 2019; 7: e1685- e1694. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(19)30440-1 PMID: 31708149

Socio-economic inequality in anaemia among men in India: a study based on cross-sectional data. P Kumar, H Sharma, D Sinha, 10.1186/s12889-021-11393-5BMC Public Health. 2134233633Kumar P, Sharma H, Sinha D. Socio-economic inequality in anaemia among men in India: a study based on cross-sectional data. BMC Public Health. 2021; 21: 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889- 021-11393-5 PMID: 34233633

Prevalence and risk factors of anaemia among men: A study based on Empowered Action Group states. P Kumar, H Sharma, K K Patel, 10.1177/026010602098234833472523India. Nutr Health. 27Kumar P, Sharma H, Patel KK. Prevalence and risk factors of anaemia among men: A study based on Empowered Action Group states, India. Nutr Health. 2021; 27: 191-198. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0260106020982348 PMID: 33472523

HemoCue system for hemoglobin measurement. Evaluation in anemic and nonanemic children. A R Cohen, J Seidl-Friedman, 10.1093/ajcp/90.3.3023414603Am J Clin Pathol. 90Cohen AR, Seidl-Friedman J. HemoCue system for hemoglobin measurement. Evaluation in anemic and nonanemic children. Am J Clin Pathol. 1988; 90: 302-305. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcp/90.3.302 PMID: 3414603

An azide-methemoglobin method for hemoglobin determination in blood. G Vanzetti, 5900720J Lab Clin Med. 67Vanzetti G. An azide-methemoglobin method for hemoglobin determination in blood. J Lab Clin Med. 1966; 67: 116-126. PMID: 5900720

Hemoglobin Point-of-Care Testing: The HemoCue System. F Sanchis-Gomar, J Cortell-Ballester, H Pareja-Galeano, G Banfi, G Lippi, 10.1177/221106821245756022961038J Lab Autom. 18Sanchis-Gomar F, Cortell-Ballester J, Pareja-Galeano H, Banfi G, Lippi G. Hemoglobin Point-of-Care Testing: The HemoCue System. J Lab Autom. 2013; 18: 198-205. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 2211068212457560 PMID: 22961038

World health organization hemoglobin cut-off points for the detection of anemia are valid for an Indonesian population. H Khusun, Y Ray, W Schultink, Dhs Dillon, 10.1093/jn/129.9.166910460202J Nutr. 129Khusun H, Ray Y, Schultink W, Dillon DHS. World health organization hemoglobin cut-off points for the detection of anemia are valid for an Indonesian population. J Nutr. 1999; 129: 1669-1674. https://doi. org/10.1093/jn/129.9.1669 PMID: 10460202

Anemia among men in Malaysia: A population-based survey in 2019. S M Awaluddin, N A Shahein, Nca Rahim, Nam Zaki, N H Nasaruddin, T A Saminathan, 10.3390/ijerph18201092234682667Int J Environ Res Public Health. 18Awaluddin SM, Shahein NA, Rahim NCA, Zaki NAM, Nasaruddin NH, Saminathan TA, et al. Anemia among men in Malaysia: A population-based survey in 2019. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182010922 PMID: 34682667

Prevalence and determinants of anemia among adult males in a rural area of Haryana, India. S Kant, R Kumar, S Malhotra, R Kaur, P Haldar, 10.2991/jegh.k.190513.00131241871J Epidemiol Glob Health. 9Kant S, Kumar R, Malhotra S, Kaur R, Haldar P. Prevalence and determinants of anemia among adult males in a rural area of Haryana, India. J Epidemiol Glob Health. 2019; 9: 128-134. https://doi.org/10. 2991/jegh.k.190513.001 PMID: 31241871

Extent of Anaemia among Preschool Children in EAG States, India: A Challenge to Policy Makers. R K Singh, S Patra, 10.1155/2014/86875225140250Anemia. Singh RK, Patra S. Extent of Anaemia among Preschool Children in EAG States, India: A Challenge to Policy Makers. Anemia. 2014; 2014. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/868752 PMID: 25140250

StataCorp. Stata: Statistical Software. College Station, TX: College Station. StataCorp. Stata: Statistical Software. College Station, TX: College Station, TX: StataCorp LLC.; 2019.

CA: ESRI INC. ESRI. ArcMap Software. Redlands. ESRI. ArcMap Software. Redlands, CA: ESRI INC, 2016.; 2016.

Choropleth map legend design for visualizing the most influential areas in article citation disparities: A bibliometric study. Med (United States). T W Chien, H Y Wang, C F Hsu, S C Kuo, M Liu, 10.1097/MD.00000000000175273159312798Chien TW, Wang HY, Hsu CF, Kuo SC, Liu M. Choropleth map legend design for visualizing the most influential areas in article citation disparities: A bibliometric study. Med (United States). 2019; 98. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000017527 PMID: 31593127

Prevalence and correlates of anaemia in essential hypertension. B Paul, N C Wilfred, R Woodman, C Depasquale, 10.1111/j.1440-1681.2008.05031.x18759858Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 35Paul B, Wilfred NC, Woodman R, DePasquale C. Prevalence and correlates of anaemia in essential hypertension. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2008; 35: 1461-1464. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1681. 2008.05031.x PMID: 18759858

General characteristics of anemia in postmenopausal women and elderly men. T T Duman, G Aktas, Meryem Atak, B Kocak, M Z Kurtkulagi, O Bilgin, S , 10.1080/13685538.2019.159557130945964Aging Male. 23Duman TT, Aktas G, Meryem Atak B, Kocak MZ, Kurtkulagi O, Bilgin S. General characteristics of ane- mia in postmenopausal women and elderly men. Aging Male. 2021; 23: 780-784. https://doi.org/10. 1080/13685538.2019.1595571 PMID: 30945964

Prevalence and risk factors for anemia severity and type in Malawian men and women: Urban and rural differences. A L Adamu, A Crampin, N Kayuni, A Amberbir, O Koole, A Phiri, 10.1186/s12963-017-0128-2Popul Health Metr. 1528356159Adamu AL, Crampin A, Kayuni N, Amberbir A, Koole O, Phiri A, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for anemia severity and type in Malawian men and women: Urban and rural differences. Popul Health Metr. 2017; 15: 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12963-017-0128-2 PMID: 28356159

Effect of nutrition education on hemoglobin level in pregnant women: A quasi-experimental study. D R Sunuwar, R K Sangroula, N S Shakya, R Yadav, N K Chaudhary, Pms Pradhan, 10.1371/journal.pone.021398230897129PLoS One. 14Sunuwar DR, Sangroula RK, Shakya NS, Yadav R, Chaudhary NK, Pradhan PMS. Effect of nutrition education on hemoglobin level in pregnant women: A quasi-experimental study. PLoS One. 2019; 14: 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213982 PMID: 30897129

The influence of education on health: An empirical assessment of OECD countries for the period 1995-2015. V Raghupathi, W Raghupathi, 10.1186/s13690-020-00402-532280462Arch Public Heal. 78Raghupathi V, Raghupathi W. The influence of education on health: An empirical assessment of OECD countries for the period 1995-2015. Arch Public Heal. 2020; 78: 1-18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690- 020-00402-5 PMID: 32280462

Determinants of neonatal mortality in rural India. A Singh, A Kumar, A Kumar, 10.7717/peerj.7523734339Singh A, Kumar A, Kumar A. Determinants of neonatal mortality in rural India, 2007-2008. 2013; 2007- 2008. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.75 PMID: 23734339

Decomposing malnutrition inequalities between Scheduled Castes and Tribes and the remaining Indian population. E Van De Poel, N Speybroeck, 10.1080/1355785080260993119259879Ethn Heal. 14Van De Poel E, Speybroeck N. Decomposing malnutrition inequalities between Scheduled Castes and Tribes and the remaining Indian population. Ethn Heal. 2009; 14: 271-287. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 13557850802609931 PMID: 19259879

The pervasive and persistent influence of caste on child mortality in India. P Dommaraju, V Agadjanian, S Yabiku, 10.1007/s11113-008-9070-0Popul Res Policy Rev. 27Dommaraju P, Agadjanian V, Yabiku S. The pervasive and persistent influence of caste on child mortal- ity in India. Popul Res Policy Rev. 2008; 27: 477-495. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-008-9070-0

Caste-based social inequalities and childhood anemia in India: Results from the National Family Health Survey (NFHS) 2005-2006 Chronic Disease epidemiology. BMC Public Health. P Vart, A Jaglan, K Shafique, 10.1186/s12889-015-1881-42604461815Vart P, Jaglan A, Shafique K. Caste-based social inequalities and childhood anemia in India: Results from the National Family Health Survey (NFHS) 2005-2006 Chronic Disease epidemiology. BMC Pub- lic Health. 2015; 15: 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-1881-4 PMID: 26044618

Spatial distribution and determinant factors of anaemia among women of reproductive age in Ethiopia: A multilevel and spatial analysis. K T Kibret, C Chojenta, D &apos;arcy, E Loxton, D , 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-02727630948614BMJ Open. 9Kibret KT, Chojenta C, D'Arcy E, Loxton D. Spatial distribution and determinant factors of anaemia among women of reproductive age in Ethiopia: A multilevel and spatial analysis. BMJ Open. 2019; 9. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2018-027276 PMID: 30948614

Factors affecting anaemia among women of reproductive age in Nepal: A multilevel and spatial analysis. D R Sunuwar, D R Singh, B Adhikari, S Shrestha, Pms Pradhan, 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-04198233782019BMJ Open. 11Sunuwar DR, Singh DR, Adhikari B, Shrestha S, Pradhan PMS. Factors affecting anaemia among women of reproductive age in Nepal: A multilevel and spatial analysis. BMJ Open. 2021; 11. https://doi. org/10.1136/bmjopen-2020-041982 PMID: 33782019

Anaemia in low-income and middle-income countries. Y Balarajan, U Ramakrishnan, E Shankar, A H Subramanian, S , 10.1016/S0140-6736%2810%2962304-521813172Lancet. 37810Balarajan Y, Ramakrishnan U, Ö zaltin E, Shankar AH, Subramanian S V. Anaemia in low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet. 2011; 378: 2123-2135. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10) 62304-5 PMID: 21813172

Socio-economic inequality and spatial heterogeneity in anaemia among children in India: Evidence from NFHS-4 (2015-16). H Sharma, S K Singh, S Srivastava, 10.1016/j.cegh.2020.04.009Clin Epidemiol Glob Heal. 8Sharma H, Singh SK, Srivastava S. Socio-economic inequality and spatial heterogeneity in anaemia among children in India: Evidence from NFHS-4 (2015-16). Clin Epidemiol Glob Heal. 2020; 8: 1158- 1171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cegh.2020.04.009

An investigation on prevalence of Anaemia in relation to BMI and nutrient intake among adult rural population of West Bengal. A Pal, S De, P Sengupta, P Maity, P C Dhara, 10.2427/8915India. Epidemiol Biostat Public Heal. 11Pal A, De S, Sengupta P, Maity P, Dhara PC. An investigation on prevalence of Anaemia in relation to BMI and nutrient intake among adult rural population of West Bengal, India. Epidemiol Biostat Public Heal. 2014; 11: 1-10. https://doi.org/10.2427/8915

Iron deficiency anemia and glucose metabolism. A T Soliman, De Sanctis, V Yassin, M Soliman, N , 10.23750/abm.v88i1.604928467345Acta Biomed. 88Soliman AT, De Sanctis V, Yassin M, Soliman N. Iron deficiency anemia and glucose metabolism. Acta Biomed. 2017; 88: 112-118. https://doi.org/10.23750/abm.v88i1.6049 PMID: 28467345

Reducing anemia prevalence in Afghanistan: Socioeconomic correlates and the particular role of agricultural assets. A Flores-Martinez, G Zanello, B Shankar, N Poole, 10.1371/journal.pone.015687827271735PLoS One. 11Flores-Martinez A, Zanello G, Shankar B, Poole N. Reducing anemia prevalence in Afghanistan: Socio- economic correlates and the particular role of agricultural assets. PLoS One. 2016; 11: 1-23. https:// doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0156878 PMID: 27271735

Individual and Facility-Level Determinants of Iron and Folic Acid Receipt and Adequate Consumption among Pregnant Women in Rural Bihar. A Wendt, R Stephenson, M Young, A Webb-Girard, C Hogue, U Ramakrishnan, 10.1371/journal.pone.012040425793866India. PLoS One. 10Wendt A, Stephenson R, Young M, Webb-Girard A, Hogue C, Ramakrishnan U, et al. Individual and Facility-Level Determinants of Iron and Folic Acid Receipt and Adequate Consumption among Pregnant Women in Rural Bihar, India. PLoS One. 2015; 10: e0120404. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0120404 PMID: 25793866

National nutritional anaemia control programme in India. A Kumar, 11243085Indian J Public Health. 43Kumar A. National nutritional anaemia control programme in India. Indian J Public Health. 1999; 43: 3- 5,16. PMID: 11243085

India steps ahead to curb anemia: Anemia Mukt Bharat. P V Bhatia, D P Sahoo, S P Parida, Indian J Community Heal. 30Bhatia PV, Sahoo DP, Parida SP. India steps ahead to curb anemia: Anemia Mukt Bharat. Indian J Community Heal. 2018; 30: 312-316.