# Impact of HRM Leadership on Industrial Growth -A Review

CorpusID: 254358611
 
tags: #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d230e8d5d7704c62b392927b27fe7039be56058b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d230e8d5d7704c62b392927b27fe7039be56058b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Impact of HRM Leadership on Industrial Growth -A Review


Yashaswee Dash 
International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN
Department of Management, C.V
Raman Global University
2582-2160• Website: www.ijfmr.com •, BhubaneswarOdishaIndia

Impact of HRM Leadership on Industrial Growth -A Review
Volume 4, Issue 6, November-December 2022 1HR leaderorganizationgrowthemployeesuccesscareer
Managerial leadership is most indispensable for growth of any organization. Especially HR leaders play a most critical role for the success of any business organization. They must be much innovative, strategic and commanding while redressing raised grievances of various employees. Their creative advice must bear motivational spirit by using emotional intelligence. HRM personnel need be tranquil with powerful personality to solve interpersonal conflicts. HR team should help employees to work in a congenial environment so that they can freely put forth their grievances causing hindrances for excellent work performance. Behavioral flexibility of HR leaders is often essential while dealing with different employees for outstanding performance climacteric for growth of the organization. HR leader needs to read the mind of employees and use emotional intelligence for enhancement of their zeal and skill necessary for growth of the organization in this competitive world surpassing all challenges.

## INTRODUCTION:

Managers, in general, play a crucial role for the growth of any industry. They provide an effective leadership for accelerating the development. Especially the involvement of dynamic HRM system is very much climacteric. HR managers should be a visionary,affiliative, democratic as well as commanding. Organizational success largely depends on HRM since it plays a significant role in motivating employees towards their job satisfaction through operational machinery.


## The Critical Role of HRM:

Endless efforts are necessary to achieve the developmental goals at any cost for which sky is the limit in the language of Jeff Bezos (Anders, 2012). HR leaders need be socially dominant to influence in group situations. Strategic openness shows strong relationship and it must be devoid of emotionality. The grievances raised be employees before HR team must be pragmaticallyanalysed keeping the structural background of organization in view. It should be addressed tactfully up to emotional satisfaction of the concerned employee. Confident suggestion to the aggrieved employee needs be given to restore motivational performance in the existing set up. Creative advice to employees based on analytical mind and futuristic vision is also another self-efficacy of HR leaders.


## Emotional Intelligence (EI):

Emotional intelligence is another hidden criterion for effective HR leadership. It helps a leader to sense others need and read their reactions. One who can effectively manage emotions will feel it easier to influence a person with sympathy coated with enthusiasm for better performance. It will certainly help to neutralize irritation of various employees. All HR leaders should have the ability to understand and manage the emotions of employees in positive ways. This can help relieve his personal stress and give chance to communicate effectively to overcome situational challenges along with relationship management with the employees. Emotionally intelligent people can evaluate other's need, study reaction of employees in a particular work environment, assess the situation and take decision accordingly to motivate the people for the benefit of organization. So on the whole EI is an important tool of HR personnel to handle different situations tactfully with motivational forces behind it.


## Behavioral Aspects of HRM:

The behavioral dimension of HR leaders is very vast and challenging. For attaining definite goals, HR team's step is no less vital, although importance of behavior of leaders of an organization, in general, is emphasized earlier (Stogdill and Coons, 1951). Motivational behavioral factors much influence to perform assigned tasks within stipulated time. It also needs helping an employee to consider his personal problem in a friendly communicating environment and extending possible support with appreciation. This kind of approach would certainly add effectiveness of employee's performance. So, behavioral pattern of HRM practices needs to be employee oriented through interpersonal relationship. It would no doubt strengthen the production oriented leader like qualities. In such type of environment, focus on accomplishment of team task can be more compatible. Enhancement of loyalty of employees to the organization can be fostered with greater job satisfaction.


## HRM -Employee Relationship:

Leaders showing higher range of consideration to their employees provide greater job satisfaction (Graeff, 1997) along with motivation for better work performances. So, behavioral flexibility of leaders particularly HR leaders in different situations ensures appreciable successfulness (House and Aditya, 1997). Besides, the style of HR leader's operation demands different approaches in different countries. For example, Chinese cultural traits need more emphasis on politeness, considerateness and unselfishness (Ng et al, 2008). It is stated that relationship oriented leaders perform best in moderate control situation (Perry et al, 2010). So it is accepted that leader-member relationship provides mutual trust, respect and confidence among the employees.

When someone feels discouraged to handle a difficult task in job, he needs supportive suggestions of HRM in order to restore confidence and overcome performance based problems. Even if HRM must come forward to deal with personal problems of any employee by suggesting alternatives and factual advices. Effective HR leaders get actively involved in providing higher skills for attaining qualitative performance and enhancing potentiality of employees (Bradford and Cohen, 1984). It would help them for faster career development with greater satisfaction and employee commitment to the organization.


## Efforts of HRM for Employee's Career Growth:

HR leaders should also encourage the employees to focus on their career growth and set specific goal to achieve through personal excellent performances. The concern of employee for career progress need be taken in to account. It would inspire a person to work hard to achieve his definite goal related to his career growth. HR leaders should provide mentorship to their employees and encourage them for self improvement, so that they can perform their task satisfactorily with consistent enthusiasm. They should be advised for self assessment of their work performances and diagonise own loopholes. They must be imparted with new skills through special coaching sessions. Enough support should be provided when someone gets frustrated or discouraged in respective work places. Personal experiences can be shared with them and sufficient strategic information need be inculcated helpful for promotional opportunities in the organization. Additional suggestions may be given to an employee to improve his performances. Besides, it is also important to admire and recognize the significant contributions made by the employees to the organizations. It will strengthen the confidence and provide encouragement for Volume 4, Issue 6, November-December 2022 3 performing still better. Also letter of commendation should be served to those persons achieving difficult goals by using own innovative ideas.


## Conclusion:

In a nut shell it can be told that HRM is one of the important pillars of a successful organization. In many cases, this section's efficiency plays a crucial role in providing guidance, dealing with career problems, solving interpersonal conflicts, managing talents and developing specific strategies for rapid growth of any organization. HRM can also create career dreams, provide relevant feedback, facilitate skill enhancement programmesand be a perennial source of inspiration for all stake holders in an organization. Through solving raised grievances and other issues of employees, HRM can undoubtedly work as a frontliner to accept many challenges and solving it strategically for the alround growth of the organization.
 Volume 4, Issue 6, November-December 2022

Managing for excellence: The guide to developing high performance organizations. D L Bradford, A R Cohen, John Wiley PublNew YorkBradford, D.L. & Cohen, A.R. (1984) Managing for excellence: The guide to developing high performance organizations. John Wiley Publ., New York.

Evolution of situational leadership theory: A (critical Review. C L Graaef, Leadership Quaterly. 8Graaef, C.L. (1997) Evolution of situational leadership theory: A (critical Review. Leadership Quaterly, 8 (2): 153-170.

The social scientific study of leadership. R J House, R N Aditya, J. Management. 233House R.J. & Aditya, R.N. (1997) The social scientific study of leadership. J. Management, 23 (3): 422-429.

Personality and leader effectiveness: A moderated Mediation Model of Leadership, Self-efficacy, Job demands and Job Autonomy. K Y Ng, S Ang, K Chan, J. Applied Psychology. 934Ng, K.Y., Ang, S. & Chan, K. (2008) Personality and leader effectiveness: A moderated Mediation Model of Leadership, Self-efficacy, Job demands and Job Autonomy. J. Applied Psychology, 93 (4): 733-743.

The downside of goal focussed leadership: The role of personality in subordinate exhusstion. S J Perry, L A Witt, L M Penny, L Atwater, J. Applied Psychology. 956Perry, S.J., Witt, L.A., Penny, L.M. & Atwater, L. (2010) The downside of goal focussed leadership: The role of personality in subordinate exhusstion. J. Applied Psychology, 95(6): 1145-1153.

Leader behavior: Its description and measurement. R M Stogdill, A E Coons, Research Monograph. 88Bureau of Business Research, Ohio State UniversityStogdill, R.M. & Coons, A.E. (1951) Leader behavior: Its description and measurement. Research Monograph No. 88, Bureau of Business Research, Ohio State University, USA.