# Lumbar Spinal Canal Stenosis in Acromegaly: A Case Report and Literature Review

CorpusID: 254404078
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7bac41e0550fb90c7d56607f09716ba6ab6b1bac](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7bac41e0550fb90c7d56607f09716ba6ab6b1bac)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Lumbar Spinal Canal Stenosis in Acromegaly: A Case Report and Literature Review
2093-2098, 2023. 2093-2098, 2023

Miyako Yoshizawa 
Kosuke Nagai 
Shoko Asano 
Takeshi Hori 
Kiyoshi Takagawa 
Akira Shimatsu 
Lumbar Spinal Canal Stenosis in Acromegaly: A Case Report and Literature Review

Intern Med
622093-2098, 2023. 2093-2098, 20232093 CASE REPORTacromegalyspinal canal stenosishypertrophy of yellow ligamentinsulin-like growth factor-1IGF-1osteoarthropathy
A 60-year-old Japanese man diagnosed with acromegaly at 28 years old had difficulty walking due to worsening back pain. He had been treated with somatostatin analog since 57 years old, but his pain and numbness continued to worsen. Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging showed disc bulging at L3/4 and L4/5, and he was diagnosed with lumbar spinal canal stenosis due to hypertrophy of the yellow ligament. Patients with acromegaly may complain of osteoarthropathy, so we must pay attention to the symptoms of spinal canal stenosis in collaboration with orthopedic specialists.

## Introduction

Acromegaly is a rare, intractable endocrine disease, and its average annual prevalence in Japan was recently estimated to be 92 cases per million (1). The clinical manifestations of acromegaly range from subtle signs of acral overgrowth, soft tissue swelling, arthralgia, jaw prognathism, hyperglycemia, and hyperhidrosis to florid osteoarthritis, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and respiratory and cardiac failure (2,3). Growth hormone (GH) directly [and indirectly via insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)] promotes bone metabolism, periarticular soft tissue thickening, fibrosis, and calcification (4,5). In the spine, acromegaly has been shown to be related to degenerative osteoarticular disease, axial arthropathy, vertebral fracture, and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) (6,7). DISH is an ankylosing hyperostosis of the spine characterized by flowing paravertebral ossification (8).

We herein report a patient with a long history of acromegaly who exhibited spinal canal stenosis. Lumbar decompressive laminectomy was performed with success, and we evaluated the histopathology of the hypertrophic yellow ligament. We also review the literature concerning acromegaly associated with spinal canal stenosis.


## Case Report

A 60-year-old Japanese man had difficulty walking due to worsening backache and pain in both lower legs, and he was admitted to our hospital. He had noticed a change in his facial appearance since around 20 years old. At 28 years old, he was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus at a routine medical checkup. At that time, he was found to have characteristic acromegalic features, and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 15×10-mm pituitary tumor. Transsphenoidal surgery was performed when he was 30 years old, and after surgery, octreotide acetate (100 μg/ day, subcutaneous) treatment was initiated; it was discontinued when he was 34 years old due to financial reasons. At 46 years old, he resumed treatment with oral bromocriptine (15 mg/day), but his serum levels of IGF-1 remained elevated (300-400 ng/mL). At 50 years old, he noticed back pain and numbness in his lower legs. When he reached 57 years old, lanreotide autogel (90 mg/month) treatment was initiated, and his serum levels of IGF-1 decreased from 268 Intern Med 62: 2093-2098, 2023 DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.0763-22 to 163 ng/mL, and then remained around 150 ng/mL (Fig. 1). However, the pain and numbness in both lower legs worsened, and lumbar MRI revealed severe lumbar spinal canal stenosis.

On admission, his height and weight were 188 cm and 96.1 kg, respectively (body mass index 27.2 kg/m 2 ). His blood pressure was 157/87 mmHg, and the bone mineral density value of his left forearm bone was 0.765 g/cm 2 [young adult mean (YAM) 99%]. His serum GH and IGF-1 levels were 1.2 ng/mL and 125 ng/mL, respectively (ageadjusted normal range of IGF-1: 79-232 ng/mL) ( Table 1). His facial appearance showed typical acromegalic features with mandibular prominence, prognathism, and macroglossia. He had no cardiovascular or respiratory abnormalities nor any malignant complications. He denied knee joint pain or coxalgia. A neurological examination showed moderate loss of light touch and pinprick sensation in the distal legs, and both patella and Achilles deep tendon reflexes were attenuated. Muscle weakness and atrophy were not observed in either lower leg, but the motor nerve conduction velocities of the bilateral tibial nerves were moderately decreased (right: 35.7 m/s, left: 36.3 m/s), and potentials of the bilateral sural nerves were not evoked. As shown in Table 1, he had poorly controlled diabetes mellitus and low 25hydroxyvitamin D levels, but the serum levels of electrolytes and calcium regulating hormones were within normal limits. His anterior pituitary function was preserved. We did not examine the body composition during lanreotide treatment.

Cranial X-ray showed enlargement of the frontal sinus, bulging of the brow arch, and mandibular protrusion (Fig. 2a). Pituitary MRI showed no apparent residual tumor (Fig. 2b, c). Lumbar X-ray Photograph showed no calcification of spinal ligaments (Fig. 3a), and lumbar MRI showed disc bulging and thickened yellow ligament at L3/4 and L4/ 5, which were considered the cause of his spinal canal stenosis (Fig. 3b, c).

Lumbar decompressive laminectomy (L3/4, L4/5 bilaterally) was performed. Strong thickening of the yellow ligament was observed to have caused severe spinal cord compression, and the bone and ligament were removed to relieve the compression. There was no apparent abnormality in the removed bones or ligaments, but microscopy of the yellow ligament tissue showed angiogenesis and mild mononuclear cell infiltration (Fig. 4a). Elastica van Gieson (EVG) staining showed an irregular mixture of areas where elastic fibers were densely preserved and areas where elastic fibers had disappeared and only collagen fibers were present, suggesting a degenerative process (Fig. 4b). Postoperatively, the patient's spinal canal stenosis was improved (Fig. 3d), his numbness disappeared, and his back pain was relieved.


## Discussion

We described a patient with long-standing acromegaly who suffered from lumbar spinal canal stenosis. Because the diagnosis of acromegaly is often made more than 10 years after the onset of the disease, the majority of affected individuals present with complications of the disease, including osteoarthropathy, at the time of the diagnosis (9). He had been 28 years old when he was diagnosed with acromegaly and had no symptoms of spinal canal stenosis at the time of the diagnosis. However, over time, the spinal canal stenosis gradually progressed and required surgical treatment. Lumbar decompressive laminectomy relieved the patient's backache and paresthesia. A histopathological examination revealed yellow ligament hypertrophy. No ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL), ossification of the yellow ligament (OYL), or DISH was identified.  Osteoarthropathy is one of the most frequent clinical complications of acromegaly. Early in the course of the disease, elevated GH and IGF-1 levels promote growth of the soft tissue, the articular cartilage, and periarticular ligaments. As a result, the cartilage lining thickens and the joint space becomes "congested" with ensuing limitation in the body's range of movement. The vicious cycle of "traumagrowth-trauma" is activated, and the disease acquires the characteristics and features of degenerative joint disease (4).

Osteoarthropathy can be reversed by normalizing GH and IGF-1 levels only at the initial stage. If the disease is left uncontrolled or even controlled for long periods, the osteoarticular sequelae cannot be modified by any treatment of acromegaly (10). Irreversible changes of bones may coincide with the findings in an experimental rat model reported by Iikubo et al. (11), who reported the effects of exogenous ad-ministration of IGF-1 on the histopathological changes in the tongue and mandibular bone. In the mandibular condyle of the rats, the cartilaginous layer width, bone matrix ratio, and number of osteoblasts were all increased during treatment. After treatment, the tongue enlargement and histopathological changes of the tongue and mandibular condyle were reversed, but the morphological skeletal changes in the mandible remained. These findings demonstrated the reversibility of soft tissue growth and irreversible effects of IGF-1 on bone.

With regard to the axial arthropathy observed in acromegaly, Scarpa et al. studied 54 patients with active acromegaly plus sex-, age-, and body mass index-matched healthy controls (7). Features of DISH were observed in 11 patients (20%); the disease duration was correlated with the vertebral body height or intervertebral space height, and  lumbar mobility was correlated with thorax expansion. They concluded that chronic GH and IGF-I excess typically affects the axial skeleton, with the development of severe alterations of the spine morphology and function until features of DISH occur.

We surveyed the literature dealing with spinal canal stenosis and acromegaly. As shown in Table 2, 15 cases (10 men, 5 women) have been reported since 1982 (12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(17)(18)(19)(20)(21)(22)(23)(24)(25). Spinal canal stenosis spanning multiple vertebrae from the cervical to lumbar spine was observed in 7 patients, cervical stenosis was detected in 6 patients, thoracic stenosis was identified in 9 patients, and lumbar stenosis was demonstrated in 10 patients. Ossification of the spinal ligaments (OPLL and/or OYL) was reported in 7 patients. We further investigated the relationships between the calcification of the spinal ligaments and estimated duration of acromegaly, diabetes mellitus, or obesity. To our surprise, none of the 5 patients with relatively long periods of acromegaly (16-32 years) had ossification of the ligaments. However, 5 out of 6 patients with a relatively short duration (6-12 years) did have ligament ossification. Therefore, factors other than the disease duration might have affected the ossification of the spinal ligaments. Although diabetes mellitus and obesity have been reported as independent risk factors for OPLL in Japanese subjects (26), we detected no association of the reported patients with acromegaly, possibly due to the small number of such patients.

All 10 patients who underwent decompressive surgery showed symptom improvement after surgery. However, Shibuta et al. reported a 55-year-old man with a 32-year history of acromegaly who had become wheelchair-bound at 52 years old due to severe muscle atrophy (22). Poor control of IGF-1 over a long period may result in irreversible sequalae of spinal stenosis if left untreated. It is thus important that physicians collaborate with orthopedic specialists and pay close attention to the progression of patients' osteoarthropathy and any symptom suggestive of spinal canal stenosis. Our case was complicated by poorly controlled diabetes mellitus for a long time, so his numbness may have been a symptom of diabetic neuropathy. However, the fact that his numbness improved after the operation suggests that his symptoms were mainly caused by spinal canal stenosis.

There was only one previous report of a pathological examination of the excised ligaments (24). The authors described heterotopic endochondral new bone formation with lamellar and woven bone, consistent with OYL. The histopathological findings of the present case of acromegaly were compatible with those observed in non-acromegalic lumbar canal stenosis, except for ossification (27). We found no specific causes of the modifications of the calcium metabolism, calcification, or new bone formation in spinal ligaments of acromegaly with a relatively long duration. Various growth factors and hormones, such as calciumregulating hormones, glucose and fat metabolism, sex hormones, vitamin A, and local growth factors including transforming growth factor-β1, have been reported to play a role in the progression of spinal ligament ossification (28). Future studies should therefore try to elucidate the effects of various interactions between multiple factors.


## Conclusion

The present case and previously reported cases of acromegaly demonstrate that the complication of spinal canal stenosis may occur in case of long-term uncontrolled active acromegaly and contribute to an impaired quality of life. Rigid, early control of acromegaly is required to prevent irreversible morphological changes.

## Figure 1 .
1Clinical course of the acromegalic patient with lumbar canal stenosis up to admission.

## Figure 2 .
2Cranial X-ray (a) showing the enlargement of the frontal sinus, bulging of the brow arch, and mandibular protrusion. Sagittal (b) and coronal (c) sections of pituitary MRI show an enlarged sella after surgery and no apparent residual tumor.

## Figure 3 .
3Preoperative lumbar X-P (a) shows no calcification of spinal ligaments. Sagittal (b) and axial (c) sections of preoperative lumbar MRI show disc bulging and a thickened yellow ligament at L3/4 and L4/5, which were considered the cause of the patient's spinal canal stenosis. Postoperative sagittal lumbar MRI (d) showing the improvement of spinal canal stenosis.

## Figure 4 .
4(a) Resected yellow ligament tissue showing angiogenesis and a mild mononuclear cell infiltration (Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, 4×). (b) EVG staining showing an irregular mixture of areas where elastic fibers are densely preserved and areas where elastic fibers have disappeared and only collagen fibers are present (4×).

## Table 1 .
1Laboratory and Hormonal Data on Admission.BUN 
17.4 mg/dL 
TSH 
0.4 μU/mL 
Cr 
0.9 mg/dL 
FT3 
2.0 pg/mL 
Na 
139 mEq/L 
FT4 
0.7 ng/dL 
K 
4.6 mEq/L 
PRL 
<0.6 ng/mL 
Cl 
102 mEq/L 
ACTH 
44.5 pg/mL 
Albumin 
4.2 g/dL 
Cortisol 
13.8 μg/dL 
Ca 
9.3 mg/dL 
LH 
0.5 mIU/mL 
IP 
4.2 mg/dL 
FSH 
4.2 mIU/mL 
Intact PTH 
36 pg/mL 
Free testosterone 
13.9 pg/mL 
25(OH)VitD 
14.5 ng/mL 
GH 
1.2 ng/mL 
Serum NTx 
11 nM BCE/L 
IGF-1* 
125.0 ng/mL 
BAP 
5.3 μg/L 
*IGF-1: age adjusted normal range: 79-232 
FBS 
173 mg/dL 
PRA 
0.6 ng/mL/h 
HbA1c 
10.1 % 
Aldosterone 
16.4 ng/dL 



## Table 2 .
2Summary of Reported Cases of Spinal Canal Stenosis Associated with Acromegaly. n.d.: not described, OALL: ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligaments, OPLL: ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligaments, OYL: ossification of the yellow ligamentsNo. Age, Sex 
Estimated period 
of acromgaly, yrs 
Diabetes BMI 
Location of spinal involvemnt 
Ligament 
ossification 
Surgery Outcome 
Ref. 
Cervical 
Thoracic 
Lumbo-sacral 

1 
54, M 
30 
n.d. 
n.d. 
-
-
L2/3 
No 
Yes 
Improved 
12 
2 
55, M 
8 
n.d. 
n.d. 
C2-4 
Th9-11 
L2-5 
OPLL/OALL 
No 
n.d. 
13 
3 
33, M 
n.d. 
n.d. 
n.d. 
-
-
L2-4 
No 
No 
Improved 
14 
4 
32, M 
n.d. 
n.d. 
n.d. 
-
-
L2-5 
n.d. 
n.d. 
n.d. 
15 
5 
49, F 
n.d. 
n.d. 
n.d. 
-
-
L2-4 
n.d. 
n.d. 
n.d. 
15 
6 
66, M 
16 
Yes 
24.6 
C2-5 
-
-
No 
No 
n.d. 
16 
7 
56, M 
10 
n.d. 
n.d. 
Th6-12 
L1-3 
OYL 
Yes 
Improved 
17 
8 
36, F 
n.d. 
n.d. 
32.7 
C5-7 
Th1-12 
-
OYL/OPLL 
Yes 
Improved 
18 
9 
51, F 
6 
Yes 
20 
C5-7 Th2/3, Th9/10 
L1-5 
OYL/OPLL 
Yes 
Improved 
19 
10 
36, M 
12 
Yes 
21.4 
-
Th11-L1 
L1/2 
OYL/OPLL 
Yes 
Improved 
20 
11 
40, M 
16 
No 
n.d. C5-T1 
Th1-12 
L1-5 
No 
Yes 
Improved 
21 
12 
55, M 
32 
n.d. 
n.d. 
-
-
L5/S1 
No 
No 
n.d. 
22 
13 
41, M 
12 
n.d. 
21.1 
-
Th12/L1 
-
No 
Yes 
Improved 
23 
14 
55, F 
n.d. 
n.d. 
n.d. 
-
Th7-11 
-
OYL 
Yes 
Improved 
24 
15 
47, F 
9 
No 
27.6 
C5-7 Th1-3, Th6-11 
-
OPLL 
Yes 
Improved 
25 
16 
60, M 
32 
Yes 
27.2 
-
-
L3-5 
No 
Yes 
Improved Present case 


The patient gave his written informed consent for the publication of anonymous data from his medical records.The authors state that they have no Conflict of Interest (COI).
Prevalence, incidence, comorbidities, and treatment patterns among Japanese patients with acromegaly: a descriptive study using a nationwide claims database. K Matsubayashi, K Kawakami, Endocr J. 67Matsubayashi K, Kawakami K. Prevalence, incidence, comorbidi- ties, and treatment patterns among Japanese patients with ac- romegaly: a descriptive study using a nationwide claims database. Endocr J 67: 997-1006, 2020.

Medical progress: acromegaly. S Melmed, N Engl J Med. 355Melmed S. Medical progress: acromegaly. N Engl J Med 355: 2558-2573, 2006.

Systemic complications of acromegaly: epidemiology, pathogenesis, and management. A Colao, D Ferone, P Marzullo, G Lombardi, Endocr Rev. 25Colao A, Ferone D, Marzullo P, Lombardi G. Systemic complica- tions of acromegaly: epidemiology, pathogenesis, and manage- ment. Endocr Rev 25: 102-152, 2004.

Arthropathy in acromegaly. Z Killinger, J Payer, I Lazúrová, Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 36Killinger Z, Payer J, Lazúrová I, et al. Arthropathy in acromegaly. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 36: 713-720, 2010.

Arthropathy in acromegaly: a questionnaire-based estimation of motor disability and its relation with quality of life and work productivity. L M Fatti, B Cangiano, G Vitale, Pituitary. 22Fatti LM, Cangiano B, Vitale G, et al. Arthropathy in acromegaly: a questionnaire-based estimation of motor disability and its rela- tion with quality of life and work productivity. Pituitary 22: 552- 560, 2019.

New bone formation in acromegaly: pathogenetic implications for diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. G O Littlejohn, S Hall, C A Brand, A Davidson, Clin Exp Rheumatol. 4Littlejohn GO, Hall S, Brand CA, Davidson A. New bone forma- tion in acromegaly: pathogenetic implications for diffuse idi- opathic skeletal hyperostosis. Clin Exp Rheumatol 4: 99-104, 1986.

Acromegalic axial arthropathy: a clinical case-control study. R Scarpa, De Brasi, D Pivonello, R , J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 89Scarpa R, De Brasi D, Pivonello R, et al. Acromegalic axial ar- thropathy: a clinical case-control study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89: 598-603, 2004.

Paravertebral ligamentous ossification: DISH, OPLL and OLF. S Ehara, T Shimamura, R Nakamura, R Yamazaki, Eur J Radiol. 27Ehara S, Shimamura T, Nakamura R, Yamazaki R. Paravertebral ligamentous ossification: DISH, OPLL and OLF. Eur J Radiol 27: 196-205, 1998.

Features at diagnosis of 324 patients with acromegaly did not change from 1981 to 2006: acromegaly remains underrecognized and under-diagnosed. T J Reid, K D Post, J N Bruce, Nabi Kanibir, M , Reyes - Vidal, C M Freda, P U , Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 72Reid TJ, Post KD, Bruce JN, Nabi Kanibir M, Reyes-Vidal CM, Freda PU. Features at diagnosis of 324 patients with acromegaly did not change from 1981 to 2006: acromegaly remains under- recognized and under-diagnosed. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 72: 203- 208, 2010.

Progression of acromegalic arthropathy despite long-term biochemical control: a prospective, radiological study. K M Claessen, S R Ramautar, A M Pereira, Eur J Endocrinol. 167Claessen KM, Ramautar SR, Pereira AM, et al. Progression of ac- romegalic arthropathy despite long-term biochemical control: a prospective, radiological study. Eur J Endocrinol 167: 235-244, 2012.

Morphological and histopathological changes in orofacial structures of experimentally developed acromegaly-like rats: an overview. M Iikubo, I Kojima, M Sakamoto, A Kobayashi, H Ikeda, T Sasano, Int J Endocrinol. 254367Iikubo M, Kojima I, Sakamoto M, Kobayashi A, Ikeda H, Sasano T. Morphological and histopathological changes in orofacial struc- tures of experimentally developed acromegaly-like rats: an over- view. Int J Endocrinol 2012: 254367, 2012.

Acromegaly and spinal stenosis. Case report. N Epstein, M Whelan, V Benjamin, J Neurosurg. 56Epstein N, Whelan M, Benjamin V. Acromegaly and spinal steno- sis. Case report. J Neurosurg 56: 145-147, 1982.

Acromegaly and spinal canal stenosis. E Urasaki, T Kodama, Y Matsukado, No Shinkei Geka (Neurol Surg). 11in JapaneseUrasaki E, Kodama T, Matsukado Y. Acromegaly and spinal canal stenosis. No Shinkei Geka (Neurol Surg) 11: 983-987, 1983 (in Japanese).

Postmyelographic cauda equina syndrome in an asymptomatic acquired spinal stenosis of a young acromegalic. C C Woo, J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 11Woo CC. Postmyelographic cauda equina syndrome in an asymp- tomatic acquired spinal stenosis of a young acromegalic. J Ma- nipulative Physiol Ther 11: 118-123, 1988.

Lumbar spinal canal stenosis associated with giantism and acromegaly. N Aita, S Kikuchi, K Umegakeda, Ortho Surg Traumatol. 32in JapaneseAita N, Kikuchi S, Umegakeda K. Lumbar spinal canal stenosis associated with giantism and acromegaly. Ortho Surg Traumatol 32: 1747-1752, 1989 (in Japanese).

A case of spinal stenosis in acromegaly. K Tokito, K Machigashira, Y Hokazu, M Nomoto, M Osame, M Suehara, Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi (J Jpn Soc Intern Med). 79in JapaneseTokito K, Machigashira K, Hokazu Y, Nomoto M, Osame M, Suehara M. A case of spinal stenosis in acromegaly. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi (J Jpn Soc Intern Med) 79: 535-536, 1990 (in Japa- nese).

A case of the ossification of yellow ligament in the thoraco-lumbar spine in acromegaly. S Kimura, Y Nagai, G Kyogoku, M Kanayama, Hokkaido Orthop Surg Traumatol. 36in JapaneseKimura S, Nagai Y, Kyogoku G, Kanayama M. A case of the ossi- fication of yellow ligament in the thoraco-lumbar spine in ac- romegaly. Hokkaido Orthop Surg Traumatol 36: 127-131, 1992 (in Japanese).

A case of calcified spinal canal ligaments associated with acromegaly. G Nishimura, Y Doiguchi, T Okubo, T Watanabe, T Tuneoka, Orthop Surg). 46Seikei Geka. in JapaneseNishimura G, Doiguchi Y, Okubo T, Watanabe T, Tuneoka T. A case of calcified spinal canal ligaments associated with ac- romegaly. Seikei Geka (Orthop Surg) 46: 447-450, 1995 (in Japa- nese).

A case of acromegaly associated with variegated spinal disorders. T Suga, E Murakami, M Ishizuka, No Shinkei Geka. 24Neurol Surg). in JapaneseSuga T, Murakami E, Ishizuka M, et al. A case of acromegaly as- sociated with variegated spinal disorders. No Shinkei Geka (Neu- rol Surg) 24: 927-932, 1996 (in Japanese).

A case of the ossification of the yellow ligament in the thoracicolumbar spine associated with acromegaly. H Takahashi, T Yonekura, T Okuaki, K Okajima, M Motegi, Rinsho Seikei Geka. 33Clin Orthop Surg). in JapaneseTakahashi H, Yonekura T, Okuaki T, Okajima K, Motegi M. A case of the ossification of the yellow ligament in the thoracico- lumbar spine associated with acromegaly. Rinsho Seikei Geka (Clin Orthop Surg) 33: 819-822, 1998 (in Japanese).

Spinal canal stenosis in acromegaly; a case report. Y Sekino, Y Shimabatake, Y Mohri, N Shikano, Orthop Surg Traumatol. 45in JapaneseSekino Y, Shimabatake Y, Mohri Y, Shikano N. Spinal canal steno- sis in acromegaly; a case report. Orthop Surg Traumatol 45: 591- 594, 2002 (in Japanese).

Inversed champagne bottle type muscle atrophy observed in acromegaly. Y Shibuta, H Nodera, R Kaji, J Tokushima Natl Hosp. 1Shibuta Y, Nodera H, Kaji R. Inversed champagne bottle type muscle atrophy observed in acromegaly. J Tokushima Natl Hosp 1: 15-16, 2010.

A case of spinal canal stenosis with acromegaly. K Miura, M Ninomiya, Japanese). 27Miura K, Ninomiya M. A case of spinal canal stenosis with ac- romegaly. Arch Niigata Soc Orthop Surg 27: 17-20, 2011 (in Japa- nese).

Ossified ligamentum flavum causing spinal cord compression in a patient with acromegaly. R F Schmidt, I M Goldstein, J K Liu, J Clin Neurosci. 20Schmidt RF, Goldstein IM, Liu JK. Ossified ligamentum flavum causing spinal cord compression in a patient with acromegaly. J Clin Neurosci 20: 1599-1603, 2013.

Acromegaly presenting with myelopathy due to ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament: a case report. D Kamakura, K Fukutake, K Nakamura, BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 22353Kamakura D, Fukutake K, Nakamura K, et al. Acromegaly pre- senting with myelopathy due to ossification of posterior longitudi- nal ligament: a case report. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 22: 353, 2021.

High body mass index after age 20 and diabetes mellitus are independent factors for ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine in Japanese subjects: a case-control study in multiple hospitals. G Kobashi, M Washio, K Okamoto, Spine. 29PhilaKobashi G, Washio M, Okamoto K, et al. High body mass index after age 20 and diabetes mellitus are independent factors for ossi- fication of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine in Japa- nese subjects: a case-control study in multiple hospitals. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 29: 1006-1010, 2004.

Hypertrophied ligamentum flavum in lumbar spinal canal stenosis. Pathogenesis and morphologic and immunohistochemical observation. M Yoshida, K Shima, Y Taniguchi, T Tamaki, T Tanaka, Spine. 17PhilaYoshida M, Shima K, Taniguchi Y, Tamaki T, Tanaka T. Hypertro- phied ligamentum flavum in lumbar spinal canal stenosis. Patho- genesis and morphologic and immunohistochemical observation. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 17: 1353-1360, 1992.

Hormones and growth factors in the pathogenesis of spinal ligament ossification. H Li, L S Jiang, L Y Dai, Eur Spine J. 16Li H, Jiang LS, Dai LY. Hormones and growth factors in the pathogenesis of spinal ligament ossification. Eur Spine J 16: 1075- 1084, 2007.

The Internal Medicine is an Open Access journal distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. To view the details of this license. please visitThe Internal Medicine is an Open Access journal distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. To view the details of this license, please visit (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc-nd/4.0/).

. The Japanese Society of Internal Medicine Intern Med. 62The Japanese Society of Internal Medicine Intern Med 62: 2093-2098, 2023