# Personal protective equipment for COVID-19 among healthcare workers in an emergency department: An exploratory survey of workload, thermal discomfort and symptoms of heat strain

CorpusID: 254435480
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2a3d0a7f7795432e9286ed07c692844f560fba77](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2a3d0a7f7795432e9286ed07c692844f560fba77)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Personal protective equipment for COVID-19 among healthcare workers in an emergency department: An exploratory survey of workload, thermal discomfort and symptoms of heat strain


Andrew Hunt 
School of Biomedical Sciences
Faculty of Health
Queensland University of Technology
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

Joseph Ting 
School of Public Health and Social Work
Faculty of Health
Queensland University of Technology
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

Department of Emergency Medicine
Mater Hospital
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

Daniel Schweitzer 
Centre for Neurosciences
Mater Hospital
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

Wesley Hospital
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

School of Medicine
The University of Queensland
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

E-Liisa Laakso 
Mater Research Institute
The University of Queensland
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

Menzies Health Institute Queensland
Griffith University
Gold CoastQueenslandAustralia

Ian Stewart 
School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences
Faculty of Health
Queensland University of Technology
BrisbaneQueenslandAustralia

Personal protective equipment for COVID-19 among healthcare workers in an emergency department: An exploratory survey of workload, thermal discomfort and symptoms of heat strain
10.1111/1742-6723.14152ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Objectives: To examine workload, thermal discomfort and heat-related symptoms among healthcare workers (HCWs) in an Australian ED during the COVID-19 pandemic.

## Introduction

Personal protective equipment (PPE) is required to protect frontline doctors, nurses and allied health professionals (healthcare workers [HCWs]) from cross-infection. In past epidemics of highly infectious diseases • The majority of HCWs experience thermal discomfort wearing PPE. • More than half of HCWs reported headaches, and >30% felt dizzy or faint.

• Further research into physiological strain, performance and patient outcomes is warranted.

such as Ebola, SARS and Zika, PPE has been critical to protecting HCWs from infection. 1 PPE increases thermal insulation around the body and impairs evaporative heat loss. 2,3 Consequently, wearers may experience thermal discomfort and heat strain including elevated core and skin temperatures, sweat losses, and heart rates. 4 Elevated thermal discomfort from wearing PPE may also impair the performance of complex cognitive tasks. 5 As such, careful consideration should be given to the impacts of PPE among HCWs. Several studies have recently reported aspects of thermal discomfort among HCWs during the COVID-19 pandemic. Internationally, over 50% of HCWs report heat as an adverse effect of PPE. [6][7][8][9] Among HCWs in the UK's National Health Service, the vast majority reported feeling 'hot', were 'very uncomfortable' wearing PPE, and stated that the PPE impaired their physical performance. 5 Almost all surveyed Dutch HCWs reported heat strain symptoms when wearing PPE compared to only 30% when not wearing PPE. 10 In Singapore and India, over three quarters of HCWs experienced excessive sweating, thirst and exhaustion. 11 Several limitations of these studies exist, including the use of a range of questionnaires and scales for workload, thermal discomfort, and heat-related symptoms, with varied levels of validation and standardisation. Moreover, these studies did not focus on HCWs in EDs, nor has a study been conducted on the Australian medical population. Therefore, the present study aimed to examine workload, thermal discomfort, and heat-related symptoms among HCWs in an Australian ED during the COVID-19 pandemic.


## Methods


## Participants

A cross-sectional study design was employed to assess thermal comfort, workload and symptoms of heat strain among emergency and critical care staff at a metropolitan hospital in Brisbane, Australia. All staff were eligible to complete an anonymous online survey at the end of their work shift. Links to the survey were distributed via email and made available in break rooms. Respondents provided demographic information including their self-reported age, sex, height, weight, role (e.g. doctor, nurse), and whether they wore PPE during their shift, rated as either Full PPE (including a gown/apron, an N95 mask, eye protection and gloves), Partial PPE (some, but not all, of the items listed for full PPE), or usual uniform or scrubs. PPE requirements were defined by the Australian Government's contact and droplet precautions guidelines for PPE use in routine care of patients with suspected, probable or confirmed COVID-19. 12 The data collection period occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic and spanned from June 2021 to March 2022. While the environment within the ED was air conditioned (20-24 C), Brisbane summer and winter temperatures (minimum and maximum) in Brisbane average 22-30 C and 10-22 C, respectively. Participants were informed about the survey prior to commencing, and submission of their responses constituted consent to participate. The study was approved by the Mater Misericordiae Ltd. Human Research Ethics Committee (EC00332, project ID 69541). The study is reported in accordance with STROBE guidelines.


## Standardised scales and assessments

The survey consisted of scales and indices for evaluating three aspects of heat stress: workload, thermal discomfort and heat strain symptoms. Optionally, participants were also invited to write comments about their experiences wearing PPE during their shift.


## Workload

Workload is an important consideration for assessing heat stress, as the physical aspects of work increase metabolic heat production and nonphysical aspects may be exacerbated by heat strain. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration's task load index (NASA-TLX) was used to assess six aspects of staff workload over the shift. 13 As previously described by Hoonakker et al. 14 with intensive care nurses, respondents were asked to rate six subscales on a 20-step scale, resulting in a score from 0 (low) to 100 (high), including physical, mental, and temporal demands, as well as their performance, effort and frustration (Appendix S1). The raw scores were used for analysis, and overall workload (the average of the six subscales) was also calculated for each participant. 14 


## Thermal discomfort

The International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) provides comprehensive guidance on assessing the thermal environment in various occupational settings. 15 The guidance aims to identify concerns affecting health and safety and to outline risk management strategies according to the specific context observed. Respondents were asked to answer the questions with respect to how they felt while wearing PPE (or with respect to how they felt wearing their usual scrubs/ uniform). They rated their thermal comfort on a 5-point scale from comfortable to extremely uncomfortable, thermal sensation on a 7-point scale from hot to cold, thermal preference on a 7-point scale from much warmer to much cooler, stickiness (sweatiness) on a 4-point scale from not sweaty to very sweaty, tolerability on a 5-point scale from perfectly tolerable to intolerable, and acceptance as acceptable or unacceptable 15 (Appendix S2).


## Heat strain symptoms

The Environmental Symptoms Questionnaire (ESQ) contains a subscale known as the index of subjective heat illness (SHI). 16,17 The ESQ-SHI comprises 22 symptoms related to exertional heat illness that are rated on a 6-point scale from 0 (not at all) to 5 (extreme) (Appendix S3). The sum of each symptom's score is taken as the overall index value. The ESQ-SHI has also been used in other populations wearing PPE including American football players, 18 


## Results

Fifty-nine ED staff completed the survey (27 male, 31 female, one prefer not to answer), representing a response rate of 41%. Response rates for nurses (n = 18) and doctors (n = 32) were 17% and 94%, respectively. Other staff (n = 9) included allied health professionals, phlebotomists, wards persons and students.

Respondents  (2), P = 0.169). Overall workload did not differ based on sex (w = 451.5, P = 0.199), nor was it related to age (r = 0.830, P = 0.543) or BMI (r = 0.205, P = 0.129). The NASA-TLX revealed moderate to high ratings across all subscales (Fig. 1). Subscale ratings between the roles were not significantly different, with the exception of physical workload (H(2) = 14.97, P < 0.001), for which doctors tended to have lower scores than nurses and other staff.


## Thermal discomfort

Overall, staff reported thermal discomfort during their shift (Fig. 2). Eighty-one percent of respondents reported thermal sensation to be slightly warm, warm, or hot, and 88% reported being uncomfortable, ranging from slightly to extremely. While 34% of respondents had a preference to be neither warmer nor cooler, 58% desired to be slightly cooler or cooler. The majority (73%) of respondents reported being sweaty to some degree, mostly slightly. Although 61% described the conditions as slightly difficult to tolerate, only 22% found it unacceptable. The levels of PPE worn showed significant positive relationships with thermal sensation (P = 0.042) and sweatiness (P = 0.023).


## Heat-related symptoms and comments

Staff reported a range of heat-related symptoms during their shift (Fig. 3). Ninety-seven percent reported experiencing at least one heat-strain symptom. Feeling thirsty, warm, tired, and irritable were commonly reported (>60%). More than 50% reported slight or greater feelings of light-headedness or headache and approximately 30% reported feeling dizzy, faint, or weak to a slight or greater degree. The median ESQ-SHI was 14 (IQR 8-29). The ESQ-SHI was not significantly correlated with age (r = À0.053, P = 0.691) or BMI (r = À0.040, P = 0.770), but was significantly positively related to overall workload (r = 0.366, P = 0.005). The ESQ-SHI was not significantly different between roles (H(2) = 0.286, P = 0.352), PPE levels (H(2) = 4.107, P = 0.128) or sexes (W = 443, P = 0.708).

Sixteen respondents provided comments about their experience wearing PPE (Table S1). Four comments related to experience of heat, five focused on the impact of the PPE, six described how PPE affected their work practices, and one highlighted how their performance and efficiency was affected.


## Discussion

Our exploratory survey confirms that thermal discomfort among Australian HCWs in an ED is very common when wearing PPE (88%). Moreover, moderate to high workloads and heat-related symptoms suggest HCWs are experiencing a level of heat strain. Further research into physiological strain, task performance, and patient care is warranted as effective management practices may be required to avoid excessive strain and performance deterioration.

The SARS-CoV-2 variant has brought about unprecedented challenges for HCWs. Importantly, a number of occupational implications have emerged, including the use of PPE across emergency and critical care settings. EDs are regularly congested, and clinicians frequently must multitask across a range of cognitively and procedurally demanding tasks. As such, there is concern that the ability to perform a range of diagnostic and procedurally demanding tasks optimally may in part be hampered by the application of PPE. 5,10 In the present study, the NASA-TLX demonstrated overall workload among doctors, nurses, and other staff was moderate to high, similar to previous reports among intensive care nurses. 14 Physical and temporal demands add to the thermal burden experienced by HCWs by increasing metabolic heat production, and similar to the physical demands indicated via the NASA-TLX subscale in the present study, a previous study also confirmed moderate to vigorous physical activity among emergency nurses in Australia. 21 Mental demands, effort and frustration, which were rated moderate to high (Fig. 1), may be exacerbated by thermal discomfort and heat strain. In addition, many individual comments related to work practices (Table S1), such as ensuring regular breaks to reduce physical demands and allow for rehydration. For these reasons, and similar to HCWs in the NHS, 5 carefully managing HCW workloads may be an important avenue to mitigate the adverse effects of PPE.

Heat is internationally recognised as a prominent adverse effect for HCWs wearing PPE. [6][7][8][9] While previous research has used a range of scales and questionnaires, we followed the guidance of the ISO to evaluate thermal discomfort. 15 Elevated thermal discomfort is concerning as HCWs have reported adverse effects of wearing PPE on the performance of complex cognitive tasks, impairing their attentional focus, decision making and problem solving abilities. 5 Furthermore, thermal discomfort may degrade infection control because of frequent donning and doffing of PPE, reported among 77% of HCWs in the NHS. 5 Finally, thermal discomfort may be a precursor to heat strain symptoms.

Heat strain symptoms are an indication that the physiological mechanisms regulating body temperature may be compromised. The high proportion of Australian HCWs experiencing heat strain symptoms while wearing PPE in the present study is comparable to similar populations abroad. 5,10,11 Concerningly, more than 50% reported light-headedness or headache and approximately 30% reported feeling dizzy, faint, or weak in the present study. These symptoms may predispose HCWs to accidents and injuries. Furthermore, the median ESQ-SHI in the present study (14.0) was comparable to military personnel successfully completing an outdoor march (mean 15.0), but lower than experienced by personnel who withdraw from the march because of their symptoms (mean 28.4). 20 This comparison highlights that wearing PPE, even in an air-conditioned hospital environment, elevates heat strain comparably to physically demanding outdoor work without PPE. While the present study captures heat-strain symptoms over a single shift, research among outdoor workers in Northern Australia highlights that workers experience a range of moderate to severe heat strain symptoms on daily and weekly bases. 22 Not only do they report the adverse effects of heat on work tasks, but also on their sleep, appetite and relationships with friends and family. 22 Concerningly, regular exposure to heat-strain symptoms from wearing PPE may have adverse effects beyond the workplace.

Not only does the primary focus on reducing contagion risk for HCWs neglect the physiological and cognitive stresses incurred by PPE, but a range of other health concerns also arise. Skin injuries, predominantly facial, are known to occur because of device-related pressure, prolonged moisture retention and skin tears. 23 Furthermore, many HCWs develop PPE-associated headaches or exacerbation of their pre-existing headache disorders, 24 and there are concerns about procedural dexterity and surgical performance being impaired by PPE. 25 Overall, a comprehensive approach should be considered to implement effective management practices that mitigate excessive strain and performance deterioration while ensuring the protection offered by PPE to HCWs.

Several limitations of the present study should be acknowledged. First, the study recruited only a small sample size from a single institution, which may limit the generalisability of the findings. Of note, only four respondents wore usual scrubs (no PPE), thus caution should be exercised when interpreting the relationship found between PPE level and thermal discomfort parameters. Second, the self-report nature of the assessments cannot rule out potential biases from respondents. Third, the cross-sectional design of the study does not enable conclusions to be drawn regarding whether wearing PPE affects task performance and patient outcomes by elevating heat strain in HCWs. However, the level of discomfort and heat-related symptoms reported, coupled with the individual comments suggests a potential impact is concerningly plausible. How and if PPE impacts patient care will need to be explored further through controlled research studies. Such research should objectively measure physiological responses (core and skin temperatures, heart rate and sweat loss) and indicators of task performance alongside perceptual measures when wearing standard scrubs with and without PPE.

In conclusion, ED HCWs experience thermal discomfort when wearing PPE. Combined with their workloads, HCWs experienced symptoms related to heat strain. Therefore, careful consideration should be given to managing heat strain among HCWs when wearing PPE in an ED. Further research into the effects of PPE on performance and patient outcomes is warranted. corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Figure 1 .
1Boxplot of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's task load index subscale scores across the staff roles.

## Figure 2 .
2The number of respondents providing each rating of thermal discomfort across the personal protective equipment levels.


and military personnel.19,20 Data analysis Continuous variables were assessed by the Shapiro-Wilk test and summarised as the median and interquartile range (IQR) when not normally distributed. Categorial variables are summarised as counts and percentages. Thermal discomfort was examined by the levels of PPE worn by staff. The NASA-TLX subscales were compared among doctors, nurses and other staff. Associations between continuous variables were examined with Pearson correlations. Differences in group medians were assessed with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test or Kruskal Wallis test for continuous variables, and Fisher's exact tests were used to compare categorical variables with the low sample size and cell counts. Statistical significance was accepted at α < 0.05. : tidyr, dplyr, userfriendlyscience, ggplot2, grid, gridextra, car, stringr, viridis and psych.Data 
visualisation 
and 
ana-
lysis was performed in R Studio 
(version 
1.3.1093) 
with 
the 
following packages
© 2022 The Authors. Emergency Medicine Australasia published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australasian College for Emergency Medicine.
© 2022 The Authors. Emergency Medicine Australasia published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australasian College for Emergency Medicine. THERMAL DISCOMFORT WEARING PPE
AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank the staff who gave their time to complete this survey. Open access publishing facilitated by Queensland University of Technology, as part of the Wiley -Queensland University of Technology agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.Competing interestsNone declared.Data availability statementThe data that support the findings of this study are available from theSupporting informationAdditional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher's web site: Appendix S1. NASA task load index. Appendix S2. Thermal discomfort. Appendix S3. Environmental Symptoms Questionnairesubjective heat illness.Table S1. Individual comments about wearing PPE.
Personal protective equipment for preventing highly infectious diseases due to exposure to contaminated body fluids in healthcare staff. J H Verbeek, B Rajamaki, S Ijaz, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 411621Verbeek JH, Rajamaki B, Ijaz S et al. Personal protective equipment for preventing highly infectious dis- eases due to exposure to contami- nated body fluids in healthcare staff. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2020; 4: CD011621.

Ebola response: modeling the risk of heat stress from personal protective clothing. A W Potter, J A Gonzalez, X Xu, PLoS One. 10143461Potter AW, Gonzalez JA, Xu X. Ebola response: modeling the risk of heat stress from personal protec- tive clothing. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0143461.

Assessment of textiles for use in operating theatres with respect to the thermal comfort of surgeons. A Bogdan, I Sudoł-Szopi Nska, T Szopinski, Fibres Text. East. Eur. 19Bogdan A, Sudoł-Szopi nska I, Szopinski T. Assessment of textiles for use in operating theatres with respect to the thermal comfort of surgeons. Fibres Text. East. Eur. 2011; 19: 65-9.

Physiological evaluation of personal protective ensembles recommended for use in West Africa. A Coca, T Quinn, J-H Kim, Disaster Med. Public Health Prep. 11Coca A, Quinn T, Kim J-H et al. Physiological evaluation of personal protective ensembles recommended for use in West Africa. Disaster Med. Public Health Prep. 2017; 11: 580-6.

Heat stress and PPE during COVID-19: impact on health care workers' performance, safety and well-being in NHS settings. S L Davey, B J Lee, T Robbins, J. Hosp. Infect. 108Davey SL, Lee BJ, Robbins T et al. Heat stress and PPE during COVID-19: impact on health care workers' performance, safety and well-being in NHS settings. J. Hosp. Infect. 2021; 108: 185-8.

Personal protective equipment use by healthcare workers in intensive care unit during the early phase of COVID-19 pandemic in Italy: a secondary analysis of the PPE-SAFE survey. M Ippolito, M Ramanan, D Bellina, Ther. Adv. Infect. Dis. 8Ippolito M, Ramanan M, Bellina D et al. Personal protective equipment use by healthcare workers in inten- sive care unit during the early phase of COVID-19 pandemic in Italy: a secondary analysis of the PPE-SAFE survey. Ther. Adv. Infect. Dis. 2021; 8: 1-10.

Personal protective equipment and intensive care unit healthcare worker safety in the COVID-19 era (PPE-SAFE): an international survey. A Tabah, M Ramanan, K B Laupland, J. Crit. Care. 59Tabah A, Ramanan M, Laupland KB et al. Personal protective equipment and intensive care unit healthcare worker safety in the COVID-19 era (PPE-SAFE): an international survey. J. Crit. Care 2020; 59: 70-5.

A web survey to evaluate the thermal stress associated with personal protective equipment among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. A Messeri, M Bonafede, E Pietrafesa, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 183861Messeri A, Bonafede M, Pietrafesa E et al. A web survey to evaluate the thermal stress associ- ated with personal protective equip- ment among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021; 18: 3861.

Personal protective equipment use by healthcare workers in intensive care unit during the COVID-19 pandemic in Japan: comparative analysis with the PPE-SAFE survey. T Unoki, M Tamoto, A Ouchi, Acute Med. Surg. 7584Unoki T, Tamoto M, Ouchi A et al. Personal protective equipment use by healthcare workers in intensive care unit during the COVID-19 pandemic in Japan: comparative analysis with the PPE-SAFE survey. Acute Med. Surg. 2020; 7: e584.

Heat strain and use of heat mitigation strategies among COVID-19 healthcare workers wearing personal protective equipment-a retrospective study. C Bongers, J Q De Korte, M Zwartkruis, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 19Bongers C, de Korte JQ, Zwartkruis M et al. Heat strain and use of heat mitigation strategies among COVID-19 healthcare workers wearing personal protec- tive equipment-a retrospective study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022; 19: 1905.

Heat stress and thermal perception amongst healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in India and Singapore. J Lee, V Venugopal, P K Latha, Lee J, Venugopal V, Latha PK et al. Heat stress and thermal per- ception amongst healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in India and Singapore.

. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 178100Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020; 17: 8100.

Guidance on the minimum recommendations for the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) in hospitals during the COVID-19 outbreak. 2020Australian GovernmentAustralian Government. Guidance on the minimum recommendations for the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) in hospitals during the COVID-19 outbreak (version 7). 2020.

Nasa-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX); 20 years later. S G Hart, Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet. 50Hart SG. Nasa-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX); 20 years later. Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet. 2006; 50: 904-8.

International Organisation for Standardardisation. Ergonomics of the thermal environment -Assessment of the influence of the thermal environment using subjective judgement scales. P Hoonakker, P Carayon, A P Gurses, IIE Trans. Healthc. Syst. Eng. 1Measuring workload of ICU nurses with a questionnaire survey: the NASA Task Load Index (TLX)Hoonakker P, Carayon P, Gurses AP et al. Measuring work- load of ICU nurses with a question- naire survey: the NASA Task Load Index (TLX). IIE Trans. Healthc. Syst. Eng. 2011; 1: 131-43. 15. International Organisation for Standardardisation. Ergonomics of the thermal environment -Assess- ment of the influence of the thermal environment using subjective judge- ment scales (ISO 10551:2001).

. Geneva , Geneva, 2001.

Subjective reports of heat illness. R F Johnson, D J Merullo, Marriot BM, ed. Nutritional Needs in Hot Environments: Applications for Military Personnel in Field Operations. Washington, DCNational Academic PressJohnson RF, Merullo DJ. Subjective reports of heat illness. In: Marriot BM, ed. Nutritional Needs in Hot Environments: Applications for Military Personnel in Field Oper- ations. Washington, DC: National Academic Press, 1993; 277-93.

Measurement of subjective reactions to extreme environments: The environmental symptoms questionnaire. J B Sampson, J L Kobrick, R F Johnson, Mil. Psychol. 6Sampson JB, Kobrick JL, Johnson RF. Measurement of sub- jective reactions to extreme envi- ronments: The environmental symptoms questionnaire. Mil. Psychol. 1994; 6: 215-33.

Perceptual responses while wearing an American football uniform in the heat. E C Johnson, M S Ganio, E C Lee, J. Athl. Train. 45Johnson EC, Ganio MS, Lee EC et al. Perceptual responses while wearing an American football uni- form in the heat. J. Athl. Train. 2010; 45: 107-16.

Soldiers' perceived versus actual heat strain in a jungle environment. A Fogarty, A Hunt, C Burdon, Extreme Physiol. Med. 421Fogarty A, Hunt A, Burdon C. Sol- diers' perceived versus actual heat strain in a jungle environment. Extreme Physiol. Med. 2015; 4: A21.

Heat strain during military training activities: the dilemma of balancing force protection and operational capability. A P Hunt, D C Billing, M J Patterson, J N Caldwell, Temperature. 3Hunt AP, Billing DC, Patterson MJ, Caldwell JN. Heat strain during military training activities: the dilemma of balancing force protec- tion and operational capability. Temperature 2016; 3: 307-17.

The accumulation of, and associations between, nurses' activity levels within their shift in the emergency department. S E Chappel, B Aisbett, J Considine, N D Ridgers, Ergonomics. 63Chappel SE, Aisbett B, Considine J, Ridgers ND. The accumulation of, and associations between, nurses' activity levels within their shift in the emergency department. Ergonomics 2020; 63: 1-10.

The impact of perceived heat stress symptoms on workrelated tasks and social factors: a cross-sectional survey of Australia's monsoonal north. S Carter, E Field, E Oppermann, M Brearley, Appl. Ergon. 82102918Carter S, Field E, Oppermann E, Brearley M. The impact of perceived heat stress symptoms on work- related tasks and social factors: a cross-sectional survey of Australia's monsoonal north. Appl. Ergon. 2020; 82: 102918.

The prevalence, characteristics, and prevention status of skin injury caused by personal protective equipment among medical staff in fighting COVID-19: a multicenter, cross-sectional study. Q Jiang, S Song, J Zhou, Adv. Wound Care. 9Jiang Q, Song S, Zhou J et al. The prevalence, characteristics, and prevention status of skin injury caused by personal protective equipment among medical staff in fighting COVID-19: a multicenter, cross-sectional study. Adv. Wound Care 2020; 9: 357-64.

Headaches associated with personal protective equipment -a cross-sectional study among frontline healthcare workers during COVID-19. Jjy Ong, C Bharatendu, Y Goh, Headache. 60Ong JJY, Bharatendu C, Goh Y et al. Headaches associated with personal protective equipment -a cross-sectional study among front- line healthcare workers during COVID-19. Headache 2020; 60: 864-77.

Impact of personal protective equipment on surgical performance during the COVID-19 pandemic. Y Anez Benítez, C Güemes, A Aranda, J , World J. Surg. 44Y anez Benítez C, Güemes A, Aranda J et al. Impact of personal protective equipment on surgical performance during the COVID-19 pandemic. World J. Surg. 2020; 44: 2842-7.