# A review of common mental health problems in the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic in South Asia

CorpusID: 254876361
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d85ed2fb1b9a8bd214eb0bea35872426ff066b47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d85ed2fb1b9a8bd214eb0bea35872426ff066b47)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review of common mental health problems in the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic in South Asia
0123456789

Arifa Farzana Tanha 
7,8,9 · Md. Rabiul Islam 10Potenza 6

· Nusrat 
7,8,9 · Md. Rabiul Islam 10Potenza 6

Hossain Sheba 
7,8,9 · Md. Rabiul Islam 10Potenza 6

Md Saiful Islam 
7,8,9 · Md. Rabiul Islam 10Potenza 6

Marc N 
7,8,9 · Md. Rabiul Islam 10Potenza 6

A review of common mental health problems in the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic in South Asia
13012345678910.1007/s12144-022-04106-7Accepted: 29 November 2022Current PsychologyCOVID-19 · Depression · Anxiety · Stress · Fear · Suicidal tendency
The coronavirus disease  pandemic has negatively impacted people's lives, neurobiological health, and general well-being throughout the world. South Asian countries have experienced high frequencies of psychiatric concerns that have worsened during the pandemic. This review aimed to determine the aggregated prevalence of common mental health problems (e.g., depression, fear, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal tendencies) and their associated factors among community populations in South Asian countries. Following the PRISMA guidelines, a comprehensive literature search was undertaken using multiple databases, including PubMed, Scopus, Global Health, Google Scholar and ResearchGate to retrieve articles. Overall, 22 articles were included. The prevalence of concerns ranged widely with respect to estimates of symptoms of depression (10.2-85.9%), fear (38.5-88.8%), anxiety (8.1-62.5%), stress (10.56-91.77%), and insomnia (13.32-53.45%). In addition, the prevalence of suicidal ideation was estimated to range between 5% and 8%. Factors associated with mental health concerns included socio-demographic, behavioral and health-related measures, and COVID-19 pandemic-related stressors. The findings suggest poor mental health among general populations in South Asia during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, identifying individuals with mental health concerns and implementing interventions including mental health counseling appear warranted among these populations.

## Introduction

The unexpected outbreak of the 2019 coronavirus disease  has considerably increased worldwide mortality and morbidity (WHO, 2019). Healthcare systems and economies have been striving to manage COVID-19-related challenges. Most countries have imposed measures that have included quarantines, spatial distancing, stay-at-home orders, lockdowns, and border closures to limit the spread of this novel pathogen (Chaudhry et al., 2020;Tabari et al., 2020). While healthcare providers and public health specialists have focused on containing the virus' spread, the COVID-19 pandemic and associated restrictive measures have taken a significant toll on individuals' mental health and well-being (Bueno-Notivol et al., 2021;Deng et al., 2021;Hossain et al., 2020b;Salari et al., 2020).

The COVID-19 illness and pandemic have been associated with neuropsychiatric symptoms including delirium, anxiety, depression, insomnia, and suicidality (Troyer et al., 2020). Multiple studies focusing on mental health during lockdown revealed that when people become limited to a certain setting, their mental health often suffered (Amerio et al., 2020;Rossi et al., 2020;Singh et al., 2020;Webb, 2021). Quarantines have previously been linked to mental health issues, notably anxiety, depression, panic, irritability, somatic disorders, and insomnia (Hossain et al., 2020a). Fear and uncertainty about the disease, particularly perceived vulnerability, treatment, and control measures, exposure to misinformation in the media concerning COVID-19, social isolation and loneliness, and economic challenges have all contributed to mental health problems (Hossain et al., 2020a;Tasnim et al., 2020). Previous research suggests that emergency health crises have had deleterious influences on people's mental health (Chong et al., 2004;Wu et al., 2009;Yip et al., 2010). For instance, during the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Ebola outbreaks, there were upsurges in depression, anxiety, panic attacks, and suicidal behaviors (Chew et al., 2020). Certain groups may be particularly vulnerable. For example, elderly people and migrant workers may lack economic flexibility and be vulnerable to medical concerns, potentially increasing health risks related to the pandemic and their social impact. People with pre-existing mental disorders may be at higher risk of health concerns including infections due to lack of supervision and inadequate adherence to preventive measures (Hao et al., 2020b). To date, most research has been conducted via online surveys that have employed non-specific methods to measure overall mental well-being.

Due to dense populations and limited resources, developing countries, particularly those in South Asia, had already been working to address high mortality and morbidity rates, and such efforts often needed to be increased during the COVID-19 pandemic (Bhutta et al., 2020). During the onset of the pandemic, mental health services were often reduced, despite an increased demand for psychiatric treatment (Galea et al., 2020;Roy et al., 2021). During the pandemic, it has been challenging to systematically identify people with mental disorders who have been affected by the outbreak, especially in countries with limited resources (Kar et al., 2020;Rahman et al., 2020). Limited mental health care was (and often continues to be) available in developing countries during the pandemic. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 80% of industrialized countries have been providing mental health care through telemedicine and teletherapy, whereas less than half of underdeveloped countries have been doing so during the early stages of the pandemic (WHO, 2020). During the COVID-19 pandemic, a study was conducted in Bangladesh to evaluate the prevalence of psychological issues such as perceived stress, anxiety, and depression among Bangladeshi citizens and found that a wide variety of participants had various levels of depression, anxiety, and stress (Ahmed et al., 2022). According to a recent meta-analysis, the worldwide prevalence of stress remained at 29.6%, anxiety at 31.9%, and depression at 33.7% (Salari et al., 2020). Suicidal behaviors, daily activities in home quarantine, and failure to take COVID-19 preventive measures have been correlated with depression , whereas higher levels of insomnia have been linked to generalized anxiety (Lahiri et al., 2021). The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries account for 23.7% of the global population, with a large part of this group being under the age of 35 years old; i.e., the working class and hence an economically productive population. In comparison to other Asian and Western countries, South Asian countries (including the SAARC countries) have greater rates of COVID-19 infections in young populations, thus impacting the global economy (Sultana & Reza, 2020). Jean Goff, regional director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in South Asia, recently said that natural calamities, such as massive flooding, rain, and landslides, complicate efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic in South Asian countries. These events may generate significant social and environmental impact and change (UNICEF, 2020). Furthermore, the mental health gap (mhGAP) can reach up to 90% in lowand middle-income countries (LMICs), many of which are in South Asia (Patel et al., 2010).

Given the vulnerability of South Asians to the psychological stressors associated with the current COVID-19 pandemic, various studies, as well as systematic reviews, have been conducted to investigate mental health concerns, including mood disorders, stigmatization, fear, anxiety, depression, suicidal behavior, insomnia, low self-esteem, poor self-control, and other adverse mental health measures (Hossain et al., 2021b;. However, to the best of the authors' knowledge, there is a dearth of evidence that has been compiled on estimates of the prevalence of common mental health problems like fear, stress, anxiety, depression, suicidal behaviors, and insomnia at the regional and national levels. Consequently, to fill this knowledge gap, a systematic review was performed considering the prevalence of common mental health problems (e.g., depression, fear, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal tendencies) and associated factors among the general population in South Asia, which may well guide future investigation on mental health in this region and inform health-related decision-making.


## Methods


## Search strategy

The current study followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systemic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guideline for performing a comprehensive review (Moher et al., 2010 


## Study selection criteria

Initially, each publication was screened based on its title and abstract. Then, the full-text article was reviewed to determine whether it should be added or not. Articles were included in this review if the studies met the following criteria: (i) from a South Asian jurisdiction, (ii) a cross-sectional investigation, (iii) conducted after the onset of the pandemic, (iv) used standard tools for assessing mental health problems, (v) reported prevalence and/or correlates of common mental health problems (e.g., depression, fear, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal tendencies), (vi) published in a peer-reviewed journal, and (vii) published in English.


## Data eligibility

There were 479 articles initially gathered from different sources, and 79 of those articles were found through keyword searches in other sources such as Internet references, empirical or evidence-based articles, thesis and dissertations, conference proceedings, and papers to add linked literatures, with 350 articles remaining after the duplicates were removed. Next, titles and abstracts for each article were reviewed, and 290 articles were removed for not being appropriate. Of the remaining 60 full-text articles, 22 studies met inclusion criteria and were included in the final analysis. Thirty-eight of the full-text articles were excluded for being (i) review articles, (ii) qualitative studies, and (iii) mixed-method studies (i.e., both qualitative and quantitative) (Fig. 1).


## Data extraction

A data file was created using Microsoft Excel for the information set of the included articles. The following criteria were used to extract data: (i) first author and year of publication, (ii) specific group and sample size, (iii) sampling method, (iv) sample characteristics, (v) assessment tools, (vi) cut-off scores, (vii) prevalence, (viii) associated factors, and (ix) prevalence assessment criteria.


## Results


## Characteristics of the included studies

Following the inclusion criteria, 22 cross-sectional surveybased studies were included in this review. All selected studies were conducted between 2020 and 2022. Only twelve studies gave participants' mean ages, and the number of participants ranged from 340 to 13,654. The Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS-21) was the most commonly used scale for detecting the prevalence of depression, anxiety, and stress (n = 9), with other scales such as the Impact of Event Scale-Revised (IES-R), Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression (CES-D), The World Health Organization -Five Well-Being Index (WHO-5), General Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7), Warwick Edinburg Mental Well-being Scale (WEMWBS), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), Insomnia Severity Index (ISI-7), Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Self-Rating Depression Scale (SDS), Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (SAS), and Coronavirus Anxiety Scale (CAS) also used. Nine studies assessed the prevalence estimates of depression, anxiety, and stress, as well as their associated factors, while the remaining studies assessed depression or anxiety or stress and fear, insomnia, and suicidal ideation ( Table 1).


## Prevalence of stress, anxiety, depression, fear, suicidal tendencies, and insomnia

The prevalence estimates of stress, anxiety, depression, fear, suicidal tendencies, and insomnia varied across studies.


## Stress

The prevalence of stress ranged from 10.56 to 91.77% in twelve manuscripts using instruments including the DASS-21 and PSS (Ahmed et al., 2022;Basnet et al., 2021;Dawa et al., 2021;Faruk et al., 2021;Grover et al., 2020;Hazarika et al., 2021;Islam et al., 2020b;Lahiri et al., 2021;Rahman et al., 2020Rahman et al., , 2021Riaz et al., 2021;Siddique et al., 2021). The pooled prevalence of mild to extremely severe stress was 50.30%. One study that showed the lowest overall prevalence of stress noted significantly higher stress among unemployed individuals (Dawa et al., 2021). In another study, COVID-19-related stress was reported to affect 91.77% of participants and result in insomnia (Lahiri et al., 2021).


## Anxiety

The prevalence of mild to severe anxiety ranged from 8.1 to 62.5% (Ahmed et al., 2022;Balkhi et al., 2020;Basnet et al., 2021;Bhatta et al., 2021;Das et al., 2021;Dawa et al., 2021;Faruk et al., 2021;Gaur et al., 2020 ;Grover et al., 2020;Hazarika et al., 2021;Hossain et al., 2021a;Islam et al., 2020a;Rahman et al., 2021Rahman et al., , 2021Riaz et al., 2021;Siddique et al., 2021). The lowest reported prevalence (8.1%) was detected under a low-to-high threshold model, and women had a higher prevalence and more anxiety-related symptomatology (Bhatta et al., 2021). The pooled prevalence of mild to severe anxiety was 35.81%.


## Depression

The prevalence estimates of mild to severe depression ranged from 10.5 to 85.9% (Ahmed et al., 2022;Basnet et al., 2021;Das et al., 2021;Dawa et al., 2021;Faruk et al., 2021;Gaur et al., 2020 ;Grover et al., 2020;Hazarika et al., 2021;Hossain et al., 2021a;Islam et al., 2021;Mamun et al., 2021;Rahman et al., 2021Rahman et al., , 2021Riaz et al., 2021;Ripon et al., 2020;Siddique et al., 2021). The pooled prevalence of mild to severe   ; SDS = Self-Rating Depression Scale; SAS = Self-Rating Anxiety Scale; PSQI = Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index depression was 37.36% and depression seemed most common in older people (89.5%), those with higher education levels (81.2%), those reporting single marital status (84.95%), women (87.1%), and isolated individuals (87.1%) (Ripon et al., 2020).


## Fear

Fear was reported in two studies, and the estimated prevalence of mild to severe fear among South Asians ranged from 38.5 to 88.8%, with a pooled prevalence estimate of 63.65% (Balkhi et al., 2020;Grover et al., 2020). Most survey respondents (88.8%) were afraid of going to packed areas like markets and department stores and preferred to stay at home (58%) (Balkhi et al., 2020). In addition, over one-third of individuals (38.5%) felt afraid about becoming infected with COVID-19 (Grover et al., 2020).


## Suicidal tendencies

With estimates varying according to age, gender (females at seemingly greater risk), smoking status, or fear of COVID-19, 5-8% of the population appeared at elevated risk for suicidal ideation in relation to severe depression Mamun et al., 2021). In one study, the mean score on the item 'Stress influences my mind to commit suicide was 2.09 out of 6 (1 = not applicable, 6 = strongly agree), indicating that some people were dissatisfied with their current situation and wished to die (Islam et al., 2020b). Suicidal thoughts or ideation were often accompanied by depression . The pooled prevalence estimate of suicidal ideation was 6.5%.


## Insomnia

Insomnia was reported in three studies, with an estimated prevalence ranging from 13.32 to 53.45% (Bajaj et al., 2020;Gaur et al., 2020 ;Lahiri et al., 2021). The prevalence of insomnia was higher among people living in metropolitan regions (26%), Muslim individuals (33%), and women (22%) (Gaur et al., 2020 ). The pooled prevalence estimate of insomnia was 29.25%.


## Factors associated with stress, anxiety, depression, fear, suicidal tendencies, and insomnia


## Socio-demographic factors


## Age

Most studies associated age with depression, anxiety, stress, suicidal tendencies, and insomnia. In two studies, there was no association between age and stress (Dawa et al., 2021;Islam et al., 2020b). Anxiety symptoms were more frequent/severe in an 18-30 year-old age group, compared with a 31-40 year-old age group. On the other hand, a 41-50 year-old cohort showed lower levels of depression, anxiety, and stress than one aged 51-60 years (Ahmed et al., 2022). Regarding insomnia, the comparatively younger population (Age Level A1: age range 19-29 years) experienced considerably more insomnia than the older populations (Age Level A3: age range 36-41 years and Age Level A4: age > 41 years) (Bajaj et al., 2020). Suicidal ideation was also more prevalent among the younger individuals .


## Gender

Multiple studies indicated a relationship between gender and depression, anxiety, stress, suicidal ideation, and insomnia (Bajaj et al., 2020;Bhatta et al., 2021;Faruk et al., 2021;Gaur et al., 2020 ;Mamun et al., 2021;Riaz et al., 2021;Ripon et al., 2020). Considerably more depression, anxiety, and stress have been reported among females (Ahmed et al., 2022). Participants with suicidality were also more likely to be female . Similarly, females were more likely than males to experience insomnia (Bajaj et al., 2020). Females' mean scores of stress, anxiety, and depression were higher than those of males (Rehman et al., 2021).


## Income

Depression, anxiety, and insomnia were two times more likely in those who were worried about losing income and earning less than those who had steady jobs (Gaur et al., 2020 ). Depression was more common (91.1%) among those who earned the equivalent of over 877.74 US dollars per month (75,000 Bangladeshi Taka [BDT]) compared to those who earned less than 228.54 US dollars per month (20,000 Bangladeshi Taka [BDT]) (Ripon et al., 2020).


## Education

Graduate students were more likely than undergraduate students to be concerned about their health safety at home and to be worried on a daily basis following the outbreak. A higher percentage of undergraduates considered giving up their studies or requesting a leave of absence from their academic institution due to COVID-19 or delayed or curtailed their usage of healthcare facilities (Balkhi et al., 2020). Participants with secondary education had considerably higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress than those who had completed their graduation. Furthermore, those with a graduate degree reported less depression and anxiety (Ahmed et al., 2022).


## Place of residence

There was a significant link between individuals' place of residence and anxiety and insomnia. The prevalence estimates of anxiety and insomnia were higher (11% and 26%, respectively) among persons living in metropolitan areas, and they were lowest amongst rural-dwelling individuals (6% and 14%, respectively) (Gaur et al., 2020 ). Considering COVID-19 risk zones, individuals who were the most confident in their current place's safety appeared to report less stress, whereas those who had the least confident about the safety of their current residence appeared to experience more depression, anxiety, and stress (Rahman et al., 2021).


## Marital status

In one study, unmarried participants showed greater levels of depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms than married participants (Ahmed et al., 2022). On the other hand, Bhatta et al. reported more prevalent anxiety among individuals who were married compared to unmarried people (9.9% versus 7.8%) (Bhatta et al., 2021).


## Behavioral and health-related factors


## Physical and mental health

Participants reported stress, depression, anxiety, fear, and suicidal ideation in relation to their mental and physical health concerns or previous illnesses (Balkhi et al., 2020;Bhatta et al., 2021;Gaur et al., 2020 ;Hazarika et al., 2021;Islam et al., 2021;Mamun et al., 2021;Rahman et al., 2021). When comparing moderately anxious respondents to extremely concerned respondents regarding their mental health, there was a significant link between being moderately anxious and low depression, anxiety, and stress scores. Participants with a history of physical illness or COVID-19 symptoms reported higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress than those without. People with a previous infection were reported to be more anxious (Rahman et al., 2021). Suicidal thoughts were also associated with health concerns .


## Sleep problems

COVID-19-related anxiety was more common among people who had trouble sleeping as compared to those without sleep difficulties (Bhatta et al., 2021). During the COVID-19 pandemic, sleeplessness was related to the intensity of depression (Bajaj et al., 2020). Loneliness was also linked to insomnia (Lahiri et al., 2021).


## Smoking status and alcohol use

Suicidal tendencies and depression have been associated with tobacco smoking and alcohol use .


## COVID-19-related factors


## COVID-19-related perceptions

Suicidal ideation was associated with a lower level of COVID-19-related knowledge and preventative actions. Individuals with suicidal thoughts as compared to those without were more likely to have major depression . More than 40% of respondents in one study believed that they had not received sufficient information regarding quarantining, and they were 0.67 times safer than those who reported having such knowledge during the COVID-19 pandemic (Ripon et al., 2020).


## Fear of COVID-19 infection

Studies reported that fear of contracting COVID-19 was associated with depression, anxiety, and stress (Grover et al., 2020;Islam et al., 2021;Islam et al., 2020b;Ripon et al., 2020). In contrast, having relatives or friends with COVID-19 appeared to induce anxiety. COVID-19 generated fear in most participants, and the fear along with stress generated by COVID-19 appeared to negatively impact sleep (Islam et al., 2020b).


## COVID-19-related symptoms

COVID-19 symptoms (fever, exhaustion, and dry cough) were associated with higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Individuals reporting having experienced COVID-19 infection were more prone to be anxious than those without infection (Rahman et al., 2021).


## Other potential risk factors

Other potential risk factors related to depression, anxiety, stress, and fear have included (i) social life (Rahman et al., 2021), (ii) having lost a part-time job (Rahman et al., 2021), (iii) professions (Ahmed et al., 2022), (iv) quarantine (Ripon et al., 2020), (v) worrying about one's future career (Islam et al., 2020b), (vi) having food crisis (Islam et al., 2020b), (vii) financial difficulties (Islam et al., 2020b), (viii) working in the public sector (Hazarika et al., 2021), (ix) cognitive emotion regulation (Riaz et al., 2021), (x) sickness in a family member or among peers (Balkhi et al., 2020;Islam et al., 2020b), (xi) living in a COVID-19 risk zone (Bhatta et al., 2021), (xii) unemployment (Dawa et al., 2021), and (xiii) obesity .


## Discussion

In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, this review explored mental health concerns among people living in South Asia. In addition to estimating prevalence rates for mental health concerns in general populations living in South Asia, we systematically identified 22 cross-sectional studies following the PRISMA guideline and statistically analyzed the pooled prevalence of depression, fear, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal ideation in the collective sample.

The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted people's psychology globally. The existing social systems have undergone significant modifications as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic (Ramkissoon, 2022a). Fear, anxiety, and depression have been described as psychiatric responses to infectious breakouts. Interruptions in regular activities, uncertainties about one's employment and economic instability, well-being of one's friends and family, available treatments, and disease information have been described as contributory factors for generating such symptoms (Chew et al., 2020). Furthermore, those reporting suicidality were more likely to experience severe depressive symptoms, be unfamiliar with COVID-19, and participate in fewer COVID-19 preventative practices . The findings suggest that as a result of the lockdown, South Asians appear at elevated risk of mental health problems. Ramkissoon's (2020Ramkissoon's ( , 2022b research demonstrates that people who live alone can naturally take pro-social and pro-environmental stances, which can be beneficial for both their health and the health of the planet.

To the best of our knowledge, the present review is the first to systematically consider South Asians' stress, anxiety, depression, fear, suicidal tendencies, and insomnia during the COVID-19 pandemic. South Asians were found to frequently experience depression (10.2-85.9%), fear (38.5-88.8%), anxiety (8.1-62.5%), stress (10.56-91.77%), insomnia (13.32-53.45%), and suicidal ideation (5-8%) during the COVID-19 pandemic. The pooled prevalence estimates of depression, fear, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal ideation were 37.36%, 63.65%, 35.81%, 50.30%, 29.25%, and 6.5%, respectively. The findings resonate with a large-scale survey conducted in China during the COVID-19 pandemic. Huang and Zhao studied 7,236 people in China and found high prevalence estimates of general anxiety (35.1%), depression (20.1%), and sleep problems (18.2%) in the general population (Huang & Zhao, 2020). Healthcare workers (HCWs) had particularly poor quality of sleep and slept for the shortest amounts of time. HCWs showed signs of health-related worry and remorse. Roughly half of health professionals reported depression, while 44.7% and 36.1% reported anxiety and sleeping problems, respectively, in a survey conducted in China (Liu et al., 2020). Pandemicrelated variables such as regional COVID-19 outbreaks, a personal history of COVID-19 infection or symptoms, fear of COVID-19, and financial troubles may exacerbate depression, anxiety, stress, or insomnia (Bhatta et al., 2021;Gaur et al., 2020;Grover et al., 2020;Islam et al., 2020b;Rahman et al., 2021;Ripon et al., 2020).

Younger age, female gender, income, education, metropolitan residence, and marital status were found to be potential risk factors associated with mental health concerns, although precise findings varied somewhat across studies. Regarding physical and mental health, sleep problems, smoking status, and alcohol use were also among potential behavioral and health-related risk variables. Poor comprehension of and behaviors connected to the COVID-19 pandemic, quarantines, COVID-19-associated symptoms, and fear of COVID-19 exposure and infection may all contribute to depression, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal tendencies. COVID-19 patients had an increased likelihood of psychological distress than did psychiatric patients and healthy subjects (Hao et al., 2020a).

Finally, other variables linked to mental health concerns included individuals' social lives, loss of jobs, and professions. Quarantines, concerns about one's future career, food crises, financial challenges, working in the public sector, cognitive emotion regulation, and sickness in the family or among peers were also implicated.

As stated above, COVID-19 has had far-reaching psychosocial impacts around the world, and the countries of South Asia may face specific challenges in dealing with them. The World Psychiatric Association has emphasized the role of psychiatrists, the protection of the mentally unwell, and the need to improve the quality of psychiatric research and care in official declarations (Stewart & Appelbaum, 2020). As a result, integrating medical students into the healthcare system could help battle the COVID-19 pandemic in both community and hospital settings (Tran et al., 2020).

During the pandemic, a focus on mental health initiatives has been important. First and foremost, based on the current findings and potential risk factors, extra attention should be paid to those who have been at risk of developing major psychiatric disorders and related phenomena such as depression, anxiety, stress, insomnia, and suicidal tendencies. Increasing social connections can aid in the development of better coping mechanisms in the face of the pandemic (Ramkissoon, 2021), as research on depressive symptoms (43.5%) during the COVID-19 pandemic has linked them to routine activities during home confinement such as playing videogames .

It has been proposed that psychological health or educational authorities should hold regular seminars on mental health wellness to encourage and assist the general public in managing their health concerns. Furthermore, governments should provide assistance based on the circumstances and conditions of those who have been suffering.

Individual efforts such as quitting smoking, drinking less alcohol, taking care of one's health, and getting sufficient high-quality sleep may help people cope with psychological symptoms. Moreover, cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), particularly internet-based CBT, may represent an important evidence-based treatment for mental health concerns during a pandemic Zhang & Ho, 2017). Additionally, protecting against the dissemination of false information that might generate fear and anxiety among the general population appears important.


## Strengths

This article systematically reviewed studies of general populations in South Asia with respect to common mental concerns (depression, anxiety, fear, suicidal tendencies, insomnia, and stress) experienced during the COVID-19 outbreak. The article examined and summarized the literature, highlighted potential risk factors and made recommendations for addressing mental health concerns during the pandemic.


## Limitations of the study

The present study has some limitations. The study may not be representative of each psychological outcome as there were differences in the assessment tools used in the primary research and a limited number of studies for particular measures. We cannot establish causal relationships as only crosssectional studies were included. Furthermore, no qualitative or mixed-methods papers were included; thus, the review was not comprehensive, and rather focused on studies that were exclusively quantitative. Selection biases also cannot be excluded. Online-based studies are also subject to biases in data collection and may have limited representation. Only including English-language articles may turn out to be a drawback as well. As a result, generalizations regarding mental health among the general population should be made cautiously.


## Conclusion

The psychological toll of the pandemic on South Asians appears to be significant. The current review presents a summary of depression, anxiety, stress, fear, suicidal tendencies, and insomnia prevalence estimates, as well as related factors, among populations in South Asia during the early portion of the COVID-19 pandemic. An unprecedented threat to the general population's mental health in South Asian nations is posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to leveling the viral transmission pattern, prevention must be given top emphasis. Government policy that combines viral risk reduction with measures to lessen risks to mental health seems very much needed. Mental health should be included within primary health care systems.

## Fig. 1
1PRISMA flow-chart of the present systematic review


= Anxiety; *D = Depression; ***S = Stress; ****SI = Suicidal Ideation; *****F = Fear; ******I = Insomnia. Abbreviations: NR = Not Reported; DASS = Depress Anxiety Stress Scale; WEMWBS = Warwick Edinburg Mental Well-being scale; GAD = General Anxiety Disorder; PHQ = Patient Health Questionnaire; PSS = Perceived Stress Scale; CAS = Coronavirus Anxiety Scale; ISI = Insomnia Severity Index; IES-R = Impact of Event Scale-Revised; CES-D = Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression; WHO-5 Well-being index = The World Health Organization-Five Well-Being Index; S (1-6) = self-developed six-point Likert scale (1-6)


). A comprehensive literature search was conducted from September 2021 to March 2022. Databases included PubMed, Scopus, and Global Health; Google Scholar and Research-Gate, which were searched to retrieve articles. The following keywords were used in the search strategy: (depression OR anxiety OR stress OR mental health OR psychological impact OR fear OR suicidal tendency OR insomnia); AND (COVID-19 OR pandemic); AND (South Asia Region OR South Asians OR Bangladesh OR Bhutan OR India OR Pakistan OR Nepal OR Sri Lanka OR Afghanistan OR Maldives); AND (COVID-19 OR pandemic).

## Table 1
1Characteristics of the included studies in the present reviewFirst Author and 
Publication Year 

Specific Group; 
Sample Size (n) 
Sampling Procedure Sample Character-

istics 

Assessment Tool 
Cutoff Score(s) Prevalence Rate(s) Associated Risk 

Factors 

Prevalence Assess-

ment Criteria 

Rahman et al. 
(2021) 

General Populations 

of Bangladesh; 
614 

Convenient and 
snowball 

≥ 18 years 

DASS-21 

NR 

S: Nor-
mal = 53.06%; 
Mild= 
13.30% & Moder-
ate = 12.08% 
D: Nor-
mal = 38.68%; 
Moder-

ate = 21.41% 
& Extremely 
severe = 16.82% 

A: Nor-
mal = 49.85%; 
Moder-

ate = 19.88% 
& Extremely 
severe = 17.12% 

S: Age, gender, 
education, 
Socio-economic 

condition, social 

life, part time job, 
feeling concerned 

of mental health 
and Physical 
health condition. 

D: Age, gender, 
marital sta-
tus, education, 
socio-economic 

condition, social 

life, part time job, 
feeling concerned 

of mental health 
and Physical 
health condition. 

A: Age, gender, 
marital sta-
tus, education, 
socio-economic 

condition, social 

life, part time job, 
feeling concerned 

of mental health 
and physical 
health condition 

Normal to extremely 
severe 

Ahmed et al. (2022) General populations 

of Bangladesh; 
500 

NR 

18-57 years; Mean 
age: 25.95 ± 7.57y 

DASS-21 and 
WEMWBS 

A ≥ 10, 
D ≥ 14, 
S ≥ 17 

A*: 39.8% 
D**: 43% 
S***: 34.8% 

D, A and S: Age, 
Gender, educa-
tion, profession, 
and marital status 

Mild to extremely 
severe 

AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to express the most profound gratitude to all of the authors and participants who were involved in the previously published studies.Data availability Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.DeclarationsEthical approval Because this is a systematic review, we have depended on the authors of the reviewed articles to abide by the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later addenda and to obtain informed consent from their research participants. We had no contact with human participants during the preparation of this review. As such, no informed consent was sought and the ethical approval was not obtained from any institutional review board.Informed consentAs it is a review paper, the informed consent was not obtained from the participants.Competing interestsThe authors report no conflicts of interest with the topic of this work. Marc N. Potenza has consulted for and advised Opiant Pharmaceuticals, Idorsia Pharmaceuticals, Baria-Tek, AXA, Game Day Data and the Addiction Policy Forum; has been involved in a patent application with Yale University and Novartis; has received research support from the Mohegan Sun Casino and Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling; has participated in surveys, mailings or telephone consultations related to drug addiction, impulse control disorders or other health topics; and has consulted for law offices and gambling entities on issues related to impulse control or addictive disorders. The other authors report no disclosures.
COVID-19 outbreak in Bangladesh and associated psychological problems: an online survey. O Ahmed, M Z Ahmed, S M Alim, A , H M Khan, M A U Jobe, M C , 10.1080/07481187.2020.1818884Death Studies. 465Ahmed, O., Ahmed, M. Z., Alim, S. M., A, H. M., Khan, M. A. U., & Jobe, M. C. (2022). COVID-19 outbreak in Bangladesh and associated psychological problems: an online survey. Death Stud- ies, 46(5), 1080-1089. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 07481 187. 2020. 18188 84

COVID-19 lockdown: housing built Environment's Effects on Mental Health. A Amerio, A Brambilla, A Morganti, A Aguglia, D Bianchi, F Santi, S Capolongo, 10.3390/ijerph17165973International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 1617Amerio, A., Brambilla, A., Morganti, A., Aguglia, A., Bianchi, D., Santi, F., … Capolongo, S. (2020). COVID-19 lockdown: hous- ing built Environment's Effects on Mental Health. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(16). https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijerp h1716 5973

Worry and insomnia as risk factors for depression during initial stages of COVID-19 pandemic in India. S Bajaj, K S Blair, A Schwartz, M Dobbertin, R J R Blair, 10.1371/journal.pone.0243527PLoS One. 151227Bajaj, S., Blair, K. S., Schwartz, A., Dobbertin, M., & Blair, R. J. R. (2020). Worry and insomnia as risk factors for depression during initial stages of COVID-19 pandemic in India. PLoS One, 15(12), e0243527. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 02435 27

. F Balkhi, A Nasir, A Zehra, R Riaz, 10.7759/cureus.7923Psychological and behavioral response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemicBalkhi, F., Nasir, A., Zehra, A., & Riaz, R. (2020). Psychological and behavioral response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

. Cureus, 10.7759/cureus.792312Cureus, 12(5), e7923. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7759/ cureus. 7923

Depression, stress and anxiety among residents of Nepal during COVID-19 Lockdown. S Basnet, B Bhandari, B Gaire, P Sharma, R M Shrestha, 10.3126/jaar.v8i1.38423Journal of Advanced Academic Research. 81Basnet, S., Bhandari, B., Gaire, B., Sharma, P., & Shrestha, R. M. (2021). Depression, stress and anxiety among residents of Nepal during COVID-19 Lockdown. Journal of Advanced Academic Research, 8(1), 53-62. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3126/ jaar. v8i1. 38423

Prevalence and factors influencing COVID-19 anxiety among nepalese Population during the COVID-19 pandemic. K R Bhatta, P Shrestha, K Khati, P R Joshi, N S Thagunna, K Shrestha, T P Pokharel, 10.25215/0903.076The International Journal of Indian Psychology. 93Bhatta, K. R., Shrestha, P., Khati, K., Joshi, P. R., Thagunna, N. S., Shrestha, K., & Pokharel, T. P. (2021). Prevalence and factors influencing COVID-19 anxiety among nepalese Population dur- ing the COVID-19 pandemic. The International Journal of Indian Psychology, 9(3). https:// doi. org/ 10. 25215/ 0903. 076

. Z A Bhutta, B Basnyat, S Saha, R Laxminarayan, Bhutta, Z. A., Basnyat, B., Saha, S., & Laxminarayan, R. (2020).

COVID-19 risks and response in South Asia. 10.1136/bmj.m1190BMJ. 368COVID-19 risks and response in South Asia. BMJ, 368, m1190. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. m1190

Prevalence of depression during the COVID-19 outbreak: a meta-analysis of communitybased studies. J Bueno-Notivol, P Gracia-García, B Olaya, I Lasheras, R López-Antón, J Santabárbara, 10.1016/j.ijchp.2020.07.007International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology. 211100196Bueno-Notivol, J., Gracia-García, P., Olaya, B., Lasheras, I., López- Antón, R., & Santabárbara, J. (2021). Prevalence of depression during the COVID-19 outbreak: a meta-analysis of community- based studies. International Journal of Clinical and Health Psy- chology, 21(1), 100196. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijchp. 2020. 07. 007

A country level analysis measuring the impact of government actions, country preparedness and socioeconomic factors on COVID-19 mortality and related health outcomes. EClinicalMedicine. R Chaudhry, G Dranitsaris, T Mubashir, J Bartoszko, S Riazi, 10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.10046425Chaudhry, R., Dranitsaris, G., Mubashir, T., Bartoszko, J., & Riazi, S. (2020). A country level analysis measuring the impact of govern- ment actions, country preparedness and socioeconomic factors on COVID-19 mortality and related health outcomes. EClinicalMedi- cine, 25, 100464. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. eclinm. 2020. 100464

Narrative synthesis of psychological and coping responses towards emerging infectious disease outbreaks in the general population: practical considerations for the COVID-19 pandemic. Q H Chew, K C Wei, S Vasoo, H C Chua, K Sim, 10.11622/smedj.2020046Singapore Medical Journal. 7Chew, Q. H., Wei, K. C., Vasoo, S., Chua, H. C., & Sim, K. (2020). Narrative synthesis of psychological and coping responses towards emerging infectious disease outbreaks in the general population: practical considerations for the COVID-19 pandemic. Singapore Medical Journal, 61(7), 350-356. https:// doi. org/ 10. 11622/ smedj. 20200 46

Psychological impact of severe acute respiratory syndrome on health workers in a tertiary hospital. M Y Chong, W C Wang, W C Hsieh, C Y Lee, N M Chiu, W C Yeh, C L Chen, 10.1192/bjp.185.2.127British Journal of Psychiatry. 185Chong, M. Y., Wang, W. C., Hsieh, W. C., Lee, C. Y., Chiu, N. M., Yeh, W. C., … Chen, C. L. (2004). Psychological impact of severe acute respiratory syndrome on health workers in a tertiary hospi- tal. British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 127-133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1192/ bjp. 185.2. 127

Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health among general bangladeshi population: a cross-sectional study. R Das, M R Hasan, S Daria, M R Islam, 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-045727British Medical Journal Open. 114Das, R., Hasan, M. R., Daria, S., & Islam, M. R. (2021). Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health among general bangladeshi population: a cross-sectional study. British Medical Journal Open, 11(4), e045727. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop en-2020-045727

Psychological Status during COVID-19 pandemic among the General Population. G Dawa, T Jigme, T Sonam, D Prem, D Choki, S Lhakpa, L Dolkar, Bhutan JournalNX. 704Dawa, G., Jigme, T., Sonam, T., Prem, D., Choki, D., Lhakpa, S., … Dolkar, L. (2021). Psychological Status during COVID-19 pan- demic among the General Population. Bhutan JournalNX, 7(04), 352-359.

The prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep disturbances in COVID-19 patients: a meta-analysis. J Deng, F Zhou, W Hou, Z Silver, C Y Wong, O Chang, Q K Zuo, 10.1111/nyas.14506Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 14861Deng, J., Zhou, F., Hou, W., Silver, Z., Wong, C. Y., Chang, O., … Zuo, Q. K. (2021). The prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep disturbances in COVID-19 patients: a meta-analysis. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1486(1), 90-111. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ nyas. 14506

Mental health and well-being of indigenous people during the COVID-19 pandemic in Bangladesh. M O Faruk, U Ching, K U A Chowdhury, 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e07582Heliyon. 77Faruk, M. O., Ching, U., & Chowdhury, K. U. A. (2021). Mental health and well-being of indigenous people during the COVID-19 pan- demic in Bangladesh. Heliyon, 7(7), e07582. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. heliy on. 2021. e07582

The Mental Health Consequences of COVID-19 and physical distancing: the need for prevention and early intervention. S Galea, R M Merchant, N Lurie, 10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1562JAMA Internal Medicine. 1806Galea, S., Merchant, R. M., & Lurie, N. (2020). The Mental Health Consequences of COVID-19 and physical distancing: the need for prevention and early intervention. JAMA Internal Medicine, 180(6), 817-818. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jamai ntern med. 2020. 1562

A study of depression, anxiety and insomnia during COVID-19 lockdown in India. K Gaur, K Kashri, A Sharma, H Pachori, Demography India. 49Gaur, K., Kashri, K., Sharma, A., & Pachori, H. (2020). A study of depression, anxiety and insomnia during COVID-19 lockdown in India. Demography India, 49, 140-152.

Psychological impact of COVID-19 lockdown: an online survey from India. S Grover, S Sahoo, A Mehra, A Avasthi, A Tripathi, A Subramanyan, Y C Reddy, 10.4103/psychiatry.IndianJPsychiatry_427_20Indian Journal of Psychiatry. 624Grover, S., Sahoo, S., Mehra, A., Avasthi, A., Tripathi, A., Subraman- yan, A., … Janardran Reddy, Y. C. (2020). Psychological impact of COVID-19 lockdown: an online survey from India. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 62(4), 354-362. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4103/ psych iatry. India nJPsy chiat ry_ 427_ 20

A quantitative and qualitative study on the neuropsychiatric sequelae of acutely ill COVID-19 inpatients in isolation facilities. F Hao, W Tam, X Hu, W Tan, L Jiang, X Jiang, R C M Ho, 10.1038/s41398-020-01039-2Translational Psychiatry. 101355Hao, F., Tam, W., Hu, X., Tan, W., Jiang, L., Jiang, X., … Ho, R. C. M. (2020a). A quantitative and qualitative study on the neuropsy- chiatric sequelae of acutely ill COVID-19 inpatients in isolation facilities. Translational Psychiatry, 10(1), 355. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41398-020-01039-2

Do psychiatric patients experience more psychiatric symptoms during COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown? A casecontrol study with service and research implications for immunopsychiatry. F Hao, W Tan, L Jiang, L Zhang, X Zhao, Y Zou, W Tam, 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.04.069Brain Behavior and Immunity. 87Hao, F., Tan, W., Jiang, L., Zhang, L., Zhao, X., Zou, Y., … Tam, W. (2020b). Do psychiatric patients experience more psychiatric symptoms during COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown? A case- control study with service and research implications for immunop- sychiatry. Brain Behavior and Immunity, 87, 100-106. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bbi. 2020. 04. 069

The psychological impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated risk factors during the initial stage among the general population in India. M Hazarika, S Das, S S Bhandari, P Sharma, 10.5958/2394-2061.2021.00009.4Open Journal of Psychiatry & Allied Sciences. 121Hazarika, M., Das, S., Bhandari, S. S., & Sharma, P. (2021). The psy- chological impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated risk factors during the initial stage among the general population in India. Open Journal of Psychiatry & Allied Sciences, 12(1), 31-35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5958/ 2394-2061. 2021. 00009.4

Mental Health Strategies to combat the psychological impact of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) beyond paranoia and panic. C S Ho, C Y Chee, R C Ho, 10.47102/annals-acadmedsg.202043Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore. 493Ho, C. S., Chee, C. Y., & Ho, R. C. (2020). Mental Health Strategies to combat the psychological impact of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) beyond paranoia and panic. Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore, 49(3), 155-160. https:// doi. org/ 10. 47102/ annals-acadm edsg. 202043

Psychological states of bangladeshi people and associated factors during the outbreak of COVID-19: a cross-sectional survey. Emerging Trends in Drugs Addictions and Health, 1, 100012. M M Hossain, K Hsan, M S Islam, S K Nath, 10.1016/j.etdah.2021.100012Hossain, M. M., Hsan, K., Islam, M. S., & Nath, S. K. (2021a). Psycho- logical states of bangladeshi people and associated factors during the outbreak of COVID-19: a cross-sectional survey. Emerging Trends in Drugs Addictions and Health, 1, 100012. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. etdah. 2021. 100012

Prevalence of anxiety and depression in South Asia during COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis. M M Hossain, M Rahman, N F Trisha, S Tasnim, T Nuzhath, N T Hasan, P Ma, 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e06677Heliyon7Hossain, M. M., Rahman, M., Trisha, N. F., Tasnim, S., Nuzhath, T., Hasan, N. T., … Ma, P. (2021b). Prevalence of anxiety and depres- sion in South Asia during COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heliyon, 7(4), e06677. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. heliy on. 2021. e06677

Mental health outcomes of quarantine and isolation for infection prevention: a systematic umbrella review of the global evidence. M M Hossain, A Sultana, N Purohit, 10.4178/epih.e2020038Epidemiology and Health. 42Hossain, M. M., Sultana, A., & Purohit, N. (2020a). Mental health outcomes of quarantine and isolation for infection prevention: a systematic umbrella review of the global evidence. Epidemiology and Health, 42, e2020038. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4178/ epih. e2020 038

Epidemiology of mental health problems in COVID-19: a review. M M Hossain, S Tasnim, A Sultana, F Faizah, H Mazumder, L Zou, P Ma, 10.12688/f1000research.24457.1Hossain, M. M., Tasnim, S., Sultana, A., Faizah, F., Mazumder, H., Zou, L., … Ma, P. (2020b). Epidemiology of mental health prob- lems in COVID-19: a review. F1000Research, 9, 636. https:// doi. org/ 10. 12688/ f1000 resea rch. 24457.1

Generalized anxiety disorder, depressive symptoms and sleep quality during COVID-19 outbreak in China: a web-based cross-sectional survey. Y Huang, N Zhao, 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.112954Psychiatry Research. 288112954Huang, Y., & Zhao, N. (2020). Generalized anxiety disorder, depressive symptoms and sleep quality during COVID-19 outbreak in China: a web-based cross-sectional survey. Psychiatry Research, 288, 112954. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. psych res. 2020. 112954

Panic and generalized anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic among bangladeshi people: an online pilot survey early in the outbreak. M S Islam, M Z Ferdous, M N Potenza, 10.1016/j.jad.2020.06.049Journal of Affective Disorders. 276Islam, M. S., Ferdous, M. Z., & Potenza, M. N. (2020a). Panic and generalized anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic among bang- ladeshi people: an online pilot survey early in the outbreak. Jour- nal of Affective Disorders, 276, 30-37. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jad. 2020. 06. 049

Exploring COVID-19 stress and its factors in Bangladesh: a perception-based study. S M D Islam, M Bodrud-Doza, R M Khan, M A Haque, M A Mamun, 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04399Heliyon. 67Islam, S. M. D., Bodrud-Doza, M., Khan, R. M., Haque, M. A., & Mamun, M. A. (2020b). Exploring COVID-19 stress and its factors in Bangladesh: a perception-based study. Heliyon, 6(7), e04399. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. heliy on. 2020. e04399

Depressive symptoms associated with COVID-19 preventive practice measures, daily activities in home quarantine and suicidal behaviors: findings from a large-scale online survey in Bangladesh. M S Islam, R Tasnim, M S H Sujan, M Z Ferdous, M T Sikder, J H B Masud, M D Griffiths, 10.1186/s12888-021-03246-7BMC Psychiatry. 211273Islam, M. S., Tasnim, R., Sujan, M. S. H., Ferdous, M. Z., Sikder, M. T., Masud, J. H. B., … Griffiths, M. D. (2021). Depres- sive symptoms associated with COVID-19 preventive prac- tice measures, daily activities in home quarantine and suicidal behaviors: findings from a large-scale online survey in Bang- ladesh. BMC Psychiatry, 21(1), 273. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12888-021-03246-7

Coping with mental health challenges during COVID-19. S Kar, S M Yasir Arafat, R Kabir, P Sharma, 10.1007/978-981-15-4814-7_16Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Therapeutics. S. K. SaxenaKar, S., Yasir Arafat, S. M., Kabir, R., & Sharma, P. (2020). Coping with mental health challenges during COVID-19. In S. K. Sax- ena (Ed.), Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Epidemiol- ogy, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Therapeutics (pp. 199-213).

. Springer Singapore, 10.1007/978-981-15-4814-7_161007/ 978-981-15-4814-7_ 16Springer Singapore. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-981-15-4814-7_ 16

Correlates of insomnia among the adults during COVID19 pandemic: evidence from an online survey in India. A Lahiri, S S Jha, R Acharya, A Dey, A Chakraborty, 10.1016/j.sleep.2020.11.020Sleep Medicine. 77Lahiri, A., Jha, S. S., Acharya, R., Dey, A., & Chakraborty, A. (2021). Correlates of insomnia among the adults during COVID19 pan- demic: evidence from an online survey in India. Sleep Medicine, 77, 66-73. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. sleep. 2020. 11. 020

Online mental health services in China during the COVID-19 outbreak. S Liu, L Yang, C Zhang, Y T Xiang, Z Liu, S Hu, B Zhang, 10.1016/s2215-0366(20)30077-8The Lancet Psychiatry. 74Liu, S., Yang, L., Zhang, C., Xiang, Y. T., Liu, Z., Hu, S., & Zhang, B. (2020). Online mental health services in China during the COVID-19 outbreak. The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(4), e17-e18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s2215-0366(20) 30077-8

The COVID-19 pandemic and serious psychological consequences in Bangladesh: a population-based nationwide study. M A Mamun, N Sakib, D Gozal, A I Bhuiyan, S Hossain, M Bodrud-Doza, A H Pakpour, 10.1016/j.jad.2020.10.036Journal of Affective Disorders. 279Mamun, M. A., Sakib, N., Gozal, D., Bhuiyan, A. I., Hossain, S., Bod- rud-Doza, M., … Pakpour, A. H. (2021). The COVID-19 pan- demic and serious psychological consequences in Bangladesh: a population-based nationwide study. Journal of Affective Dis- orders, 279, 462-472. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jad. 2020. 10. 036

Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. D Moher, A Liberati, J Tetzlaff, D G Altman, 10.1016/j.ijsu.2010.02.007International Journal of Surgery. 85Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G. (2010). Pre- ferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. International Journal of Surgery (London England), 8(5), 336-341. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijsu. 2010. 02. 007

Reducing the treatment gap for mental disorders: a WPA survey. V Patel, M Maj, A J Flisher, M J De Silva, M Koschorke, M Prince, 10.1002/j.2051-5545.2010.tb00305.xWorld Psychiatry. 93Patel, V., Maj, M., Flisher, A. J., De Silva, M. J., Koschorke, M., & Prince, M. (2010). Reducing the treatment gap for mental disor- ders: a WPA survey. World Psychiatry, 9(3), 169-176. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/j. 2051-5545. 2010. tb003 05.x

The NIMH global mental health research community and COVID-19. A Rahman, J A Naslund, T S Betancourt, C J Black, A Bhan, W Byansi, M L Wainberg, 10.1016/s2215-0366(20)30347-3The Lancet Psychiatry. 7Rahman, A., Naslund, J. A., Betancourt, T. S., Black, C. J., Bhan, A., Byansi, W., … Wainberg, M. L. (2020). The NIMH global men- tal health research community and COVID-19. The Lancet Psy- chiatry, 7(10), 834-836. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s2215-0366(20) 30347-3

Assessing the psychological condition among general people of Bangladesh during COVID-19 pandemic. M M Rahman, S J Khan, M S Sakib, S Chakma, N F Procheta, Z A Mamun, M M Rahman, 10.1080/10911359.2020.1848688Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment. 311-4Rahman, M. M., Khan, S. J., Sakib, M. S., Chakma, S., Procheta, N. F., Mamun, Z. A., … Rahman, M. M. (2021). Assessing the psy- chological condition among general people of Bangladesh during COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment, 31(1-4), 449-463. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10911 359. 2020. 18486 88

COVID-19 place Confinement, Pro-Social, pro-environmental behaviors, and residents' wellbeing: a new conceptual Framework. H Ramkissoon, 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02248Frontiers in Psychology. 11Ramkissoon, H. (2020). COVID-19 place Confinement, Pro-Social, pro-environmental behaviors, and residents' wellbeing: a new con- ceptual Framework. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 2248. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2020. 02248

Place Affect Interventions during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. H Ramkissoon, 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.726685Frontiers in Psychology. 12Ramkissoon, H. (2021). Place Affect Interventions during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 726685. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2021. 726685

COVID-19 adaptive interventions: implications for Wellbeing and Quality-of-life. H Ramkissoon, 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.810951Frontiers in Psychology. 13810951Ramkissoon, H. (2022a). COVID-19 adaptive interventions: implica- tions for Wellbeing and Quality-of-life. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, 810951. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2022. 810951

Prosociality in times of separation and loss. Current Opinion in Psychology. H Ramkissoon, 10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.11.00845101290Ramkissoon, H. (2022b). Prosociality in times of separation and loss. Current Opinion in Psychology, 45, 101290. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. copsyc. 2021. 11. 008

Depression, anxiety and stress among Indians in Times of COVID-19 Lockdown. U Rehman, M G Shahnawaz, N H Khan, K D Kharshiing, M Khursheed, K Gupta, R Uniyal, 10.1007/s10597-020-00664-xCommunity Mental Health Journal. 571Rehman, U., Shahnawaz, M. G., Khan, N. H., Kharshiing, K. D., Khur- sheed, M., Gupta, K., … Uniyal, R. (2021). Depression, anxi- ety and stress among Indians in Times of COVID-19 Lockdown. Community Mental Health Journal, 57(1), 42-48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10597-020-00664-x

Psychological problems in general population during COVID-19 pandemic in Pakistan: role of cognitive emotion regulation. M Riaz, M Abid, Z Bano, 10.1080/07853890.2020.18532161080/ 07853 890. 2020. 18532Annals of Medicine. 53116Riaz, M., Abid, M., & Bano, Z. (2021). Psychological problems in general population during COVID-19 pandemic in Pakistan: role of cognitive emotion regulation. Annals of Medicine, 53(1), 189- 196. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 07853 890. 2020. 18532 16

R K Ripon, S S Mim, A E Puente, S Hossain, M M H Babor, S A Sohan, N Islam, 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e05481COVID-19: psychological effects on a COVID-19 quarantined population in. BangladeshRipon, R. K., Mim, S. S., Puente, A. E., Hossain, S., Babor, M. M. H., Sohan, S. A., & Islam, N. (2020). COVID-19: psychological effects on a COVID-19 quarantined population in Bangladesh.

. Heliyon, 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e054816Heliyon, 6(11), e05481. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. heliy on. 2020. e05481

COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown measures impact on mental health among the general population in Italy. R Rossi, V Socci, D Talevi, S Mensi, C Niolu, F Pacitti, G Di Lorenzo, 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00790Frontiers in Psychiatry. 11790Rossi, R., Socci, V., Talevi, D., Mensi, S., Niolu, C., Pacitti, F., … Di Lorenzo, G. (2020). COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown meas- ures impact on mental health among the general population in Italy. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 11, 790. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 2020. 00790

Mental health implications of COVID-19 pandemic and its response in India. A Roy, A K Singh, S Mishra, A Chinnadurai, A Mitra, O Bakshi, 10.1177/0020764020950769International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 675Roy, A., Singh, A. K., Mishra, S., Chinnadurai, A., Mitra, A., & Bak- shi, O. (2021). Mental health implications of COVID-19 pan- demic and its response in India. International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 67(5), 587-600. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00207 64020 950769

Prevalence of stress, anxiety, depression among the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review and metaanalysis. N Salari, A Hosseinian-Far, R Jalali, A Vaisi-Raygani, S Rasoulpoor, M Mohammadi, B Khaledi-Paveh, 10.1186/s12992-020-00589-wGlobalization and Health. 161Salari, N., Hosseinian-Far, A., Jalali, R., Vaisi-Raygani, A., Rasoul- poor, S., Mohammadi, M., … Khaledi-Paveh, B. (2020). Preva- lence of stress, anxiety, depression among the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Globalization and Health, 16(1), 57. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12992-020-00589-w

Financial Difficulties Correlate with Mental Health among bangladeshi residents amid COVID-19 pandemic: findings from a cross-sectional survey. A B Siddique, S D Nath, M S Islam, T H Khan, S Pardhan, M Z Amin, K N Koly, 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.755357Frontiers in Psychiatry. 12755357Siddique, A. B., Nath, S. D., Islam, M. S., Khan, T. H., Pardhan, S., Amin, M. Z., … Koly, K. N. (2021). Financial Difficulties Cor- relate with Mental Health among bangladeshi residents amid COVID-19 pandemic: findings from a cross-sectional survey. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 12, 755357. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 2021. 755357

Impact of COVID-19 and lockdown on mental health of children and adolescents: a narrative review with recommendations. S Singh, D Roy, K Sinha, S Parveen, G Sharma, G Joshi, 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113429Psychiatry Research. 293113429Singh, S., Roy, D., Sinha, K., Parveen, S., Sharma, G., & Joshi, G. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 and lockdown on mental health of children and adolescents: a narrative review with recommenda- tions. Psychiatry Research, 293, 113429. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. psych res. 2020. 113429

COVID-19 and psychiatrists' responsibilities: a WPA position paper. D E Stewart, P S Appelbaum, 10.1002/wps.20803World Psychiatry. 193Stewart, D. E., & Appelbaum, P. S. (2020). COVID-19 and psychia- trists' responsibilities: a WPA position paper. World Psychiatry, 19(3), 406-407. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ wps. 20803

Are SAARC countries prepared to combat COVID-19 to save young, working-age population?. F Sultana, H M Reza, 10.3934/publichealth.2020036AIMS Public Health7Sultana, F., & Reza, H. M. (2020). Are SAARC countries prepared to combat COVID-19 to save young, working-age population? AIMS Public Health, 7(3), 440-449. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3934/ publi cheal th. 20200 36

International Public Health responses to COVID-19 outbreak: a rapid review. P Tabari, M Amini, M Moghadami, M Moosavi, 10.30476/ijms.2020.85810.1537Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences. 453Tabari, P., Amini, M., Moghadami, M., & Moosavi, M. (2020). Inter- national Public Health responses to COVID-19 outbreak: a rapid review. Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences, 45(3), 157-169. https:// doi. org/ 10. 30476/ ijms. 2020. 85810. 1537

Impact of rumors and misinformation on COVID-19 in social media. S Tasnim, M M Hossain, H Mazumder, 10.3961/jpmph.20.094Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health Yebang Uihakhoe Chi. 533Tasnim, S., Hossain, M. M., & Mazumder, H. (2020). Impact of rumors and misinformation on COVID-19 in social media. Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health Yebang Uihakhoe Chi, 53(3), 171-174. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3961/ jpmph. 20. 094

Mobilizing medical students for COVID-19 responses: experience of Vietnam. B X Tran, L H Vo, H T Phan, H Q Pham, G T Vu, H T Le, R C Ho, 10.7189/jogh.10.020319Journal of Global Health. 10220319Tran, B. X., Vo, L. H., Phan, H. T., Pham, H. Q., Vu, G. T., Le, H. T., … Ho, R. C. (2020). Mobilizing medical students for COVID- 19 responses: experience of Vietnam. Journal of Global Health, 10(2), 020319. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7189/ jogh. 10. 020319

Are we facing a crashing wave of neuropsychiatric sequelae of COVID-19? Neuropsychiatric symptoms and potential immunologic mechanisms. E A Troyer, J N Kohn, S Hong, 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.04.027Brain Behavior and Immunity. 87Troyer, E. A., Kohn, J. N., & Hong, S. (2020). Are we facing a crashing wave of neuropsychiatric sequelae of COVID-19? Neuropsychi- atric symptoms and potential immunologic mechanisms. Brain Behavior and Immunity, 87, 34-39. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bbi. 2020. 04. 027

Millions of children affected by devastating flooding in South Asia, with many more at risk as COVID-19 brings further challenges. Unicef, UNICEF (2020). Millions of children affected by devastating flooding in South Asia, with many more at risk as COVID-19 brings further challenges. https:// www. unicef. org/ rosa/ press-relea ses/ milli ons- child ren-affec ted-devas tating-flood ing-south-asia-many-more- risk-COVID-19. Accessed 20 Mar 2022.

COVID-19 lockdown: a perfect storm for older people's mental health. L Webb, 10.1111/jpm.12644Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing. 282300Webb, L. (2021). COVID-19 lockdown: a perfect storm for older peo- ple's mental health. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 28(2), 300. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jpm. 12644

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). WHO. WHO (2019). Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). https:// www. cdc. gov/ coron avirus/ 2019-ncov/ cdcre sponse/ about-COVID-19. html. Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

COVID-19 Disrupting mental health services in most countries, WHO survey. WHO. 19-disru pting-mental-health-servi ces-in-mostcount ries-who-surveyWHO (2020). COVID-19 Disrupting mental health services in most countries, WHO survey. https:// www. who. int/ news/ item/ 05-10- 2020-COVID-19-disru pting-mental-health-servi ces-in-most- count ries-who-survey. Accessed 18 Mar 2022.

The psychological impact of the SARS epidemic on hospital employees in China: exposure, risk perception, and altruistic acceptance of risk. P Wu, Y Fang, Z Guan, B Fan, J Kong, Z Yao, C W Hoven, 10.1177/070674370905400504The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. 545Wu, P., Fang, Y., Guan, Z., Fan, B., Kong, J., Yao, Z., … Hoven, C. W. (2009). The psychological impact of the SARS epidemic on hos- pital employees in China: exposure, risk perception, and altruistic acceptance of risk. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 54(5), 302-311. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 07067 43709 05400 504

The impact of epidemic outbreak: the case of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and suicide among older adults in Hong Kong. P S Yip, Y T Cheung, P H Chau, Y W Law, 10.1027/0227-5910/a000015Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention. 312Yip, P. S., Cheung, Y. T., Chau, P. H., & Law, Y. W. (2010). The impact of epidemic outbreak: the case of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and suicide among older adults in Hong Kong. Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention, 31(2), 86-92. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1027/ 0227-5910/ a0000 15

Moodle: the cost effective solution for internet cognitive behavioral therapy (I-CBT) interventions. Technology and Health Care. M W Zhang, R C Ho, 10.3233/thc-16126125Zhang, M. W., & Ho, R. C. (2017). Moodle: the cost effective solution for internet cognitive behavioral therapy (I-CBT) interventions. Technology and Health Care, 25(1), 163-165. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3233/ thc-161261

Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law. Springer Nature or its licensor. Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.