# A cross-sectional survey of climate and COVID-19 crises in young people in Indian slums: context, psychological responses, and agency

CorpusID: 255253915
 
tags: #Sociology, #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/68276fcd9d7189082223241fdb7e8371eab11fa6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/68276fcd9d7189082223241fdb7e8371eab11fa6)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A cross-sectional survey of climate and COVID-19 crises in young people in Indian slums: context, psychological responses, and agency


Sandhya Kanaka Yatirajula 
Prasanna School of Public Health, Manipal Academy of Higher Education
University of New South Wales
2052SydneyNSW, ManipalAustralia, India

Lokender Prashad 
Prasanna School of Public Health, Manipal Academy of Higher Education
University of New South Wales
2052SydneyNSW, ManipalAustralia, India

Mercian Daniel 
Prasanna School of Public Health, Manipal Academy of Higher Education
University of New South Wales
2052SydneyNSW, ManipalAustralia, India

Pallab K Maulik 
Prasanna School of Public Health, Manipal Academy of Higher Education
University of New South Wales
2052SydneyNSW, ManipalAustralia, India

A cross-sectional survey of climate and COVID-19 crises in young people in Indian slums: context, psychological responses, and agency
The George Institute for Global Health, 308, Third Floor, Elegance Tower, Plot No. 8, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi, 110025, India c The George Institute for Global Health, Imperial College London,
Background COVID-19 and the climate crisis have caused unprecedented disruptions across the world. Climate change has affected the mental health and wellbeing of children and adolescent. Young people with a mental illness and without social support are at an increased risk of climate change induced mental ill-health. COVID-19 resulted in a marked increase of psychological distress. Increase in depression, anxiety and insomnia have increased due to the upheavals that people were experiencing including loss of livelihood and breaking of social bonds.

## Introduction

COVID-19 and the climate crisis are two major events that have caused unprecedented disruptions across the world. 1 COVID-19 has emerged as an urgent threat for individuals, communities, populations and global health; on the other hand, climate change has been having adverse impacts that are not immediately apparent. 2 COVID-19 has adversely affected daily life as people knew it and has also affected the globe. 3 The climate crisis has led to changes that is affecting the planet as a whole and is resulting in significant damage that may have an adverse impact on health. Climate change might create a sense of complete loss of agency and a feeling of hopelessness, 4 a sense that precious time was lost and it is now too late to prevent the dangers of climate change, 5  research the notion of agency in the context of climate change 6 and COVID-19 or any future pandemics that might strike the world. COVID-19 has affected the marginalised and vulnerable populations more than others 7 and poor countries face significant risks given their high population density, poorer general health of the population and weak ill-prepared health systems. 8 Effect of climate change on mental health and wellbeing Climate change affects mental health and wellbeing of children and adolescent. Extreme weather events have detrimental effects on mental health and are a source of trauma and distress. 9 Van Neiuwenhuizen and colleagues 9 also found that the awareness of the existence of climate crisis was associated with emotional distress. Negative emotional responses such as feelings of guilt, pain, anxiety, and demoralization are associated with the awareness of climate change and its looming threats. 10 These negative emotional responses could also take on more serious forms of psychiatric disorders, such as anxiety and depressive disorders, stress-related disorders, substance abuse, and suicide ideation. 11 Further, young people with a mental illness and without social support are at an increased risk of climate change induced mental ill-health 9 and the additional stress of climate change can affect their recovery. 10 However, it has been found that although climate change causes distress, the emotional responses that it triggers such as anger and hope may led to behaviours that are proenvironmental such as climate action or activism. 11 Effects of COVID-19 on mental health and wellbeing of young people Irrespective of whether they were infected with the virus or not, COVID-19 resulted in a marked increase of psychological distress. 12 Anguish, uncertainty, fear of death, anxiety, increased alcohol, and substance use was widely reported, and internet addiction increased. 13 The various measures that were put in place to stop the spread of the virus, had the effect of increasing anxiety. Quarantines reduced people's sense of security and increased the isolation and loneliness that people experienced. 14 Peretti-Watel and colleagues 15 found an increase in depression, and anxiety among respondents who had been diagnosed with COVID-19 than those who had not due to loss of livelihood and disruption of social support systems. The most adversely affected were women and young adults. 16 Studies have also found that poor housing quality affects adolescent development and worsens their emotional and behavioral functioning and lowers their cognitive skills. 17 India's urban population is about 30% and 17% of them live in urban slums. 18 As urbanisation is rapidly rising in the country, the proportion of urban slum dwellers has seen a sharp rise from 43 million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011 and these numbers are expected to continue growing. 18 Slums typically tend to be densely populated and such areas have been found to be more vulnerable to climate change 19,20 and COVID-19. 21 Slums dwellers are often affected by heat waves, flash flood 22 because of poor housing facilities or their homes being location in low-lying areas. [23][24][25] These factors coupled with their poor socioeconomic status makes them more vulnerable to climate change. 26 Research has also shown that many slums in Indian cities have one room dwellings, shared toilets and shared sources of water making home quarantine impossible for suspected COVID-19 cases and increasing slum vulnerability to COVID-19. 27 


## Methods


## Study area

The study entitled Psychological responses to the climate and COVID-19 crises in young people, and their agency to


## Research in context

Evidence before this study Climate change and COVID-19 have adversely affected mental health and wellbeing of people, especially young people. Engaging in action gives a sense of purpose and build resilience that better prepares young people to face future crises and pandemics.


## Added value of this study

This study examines the effect of the double burden of COVID-19 and climate change on young people living in slums in a low-and middle-income country, such as India. Study participants reported negative impacts of COVID on their mental wellbeing, but this did not increase their concern for the climate; and despite having climate and COVID agency, young people in the study area did not engage in increased action to mitigate either climate change or COVID-19.

Implications of all the available evidence Given India's large youth population, there is enormous potential that can be tapped into, if the youth are motivated to act on their climate and COVID-19 agency to stop and reverse climate change. This in turn will promote mental wellbeing and build their resilience to deal with future crises. However, young people must be provided with adequate support from decision makers, health professionals and indeed the society at large need, to prevent burnt out or disillusionment. There is also a need to build awareness among young people about psychological effects of climate change and facilitate actions that they would like to take to mitigate such effects at individual and community levels.

Articles build the world they hope to see was conducted in July 2021 in the city of Faridabad (Harivihar A and B and Chhajuram blocks) in North India and Jubilee Hills in the city of Hyderabad in South India. The slums were purposively selected as part of an ongoing study MentAL Health Risk Factors among Older AdoleseNts living in Urban SluMs: An InTervention to Improve ResIlience (ANUMATI) 28 based on population size, accessibility, and proximity to regional field offices.


## Study design and study objectives

This was an exploratory study which adopted a cross sectional survey design which aimed at capturing the potential synergies between psychological distress arising from the emerging COVID-19 crisis and the existing climate change crisis, with a particular focus on the mental health consequences in young people.

The specific study objectives were.

1. To understand the perceptions, thoughts, and feelings in responses of study participants to both climate and COVID-19 crises 2. To understand the concerns and desires for the future that the study participants wanted to see "built back" from the COVID-19 crisis, and 3. To understand the sense of agency of the study participants to contribute to the changes that they want to see, particularly with regard to the COVID-19 and climate crises

This study was adapted from a larger study that is being conducted by researchers at Imperial College London, 29 entitled The Climate Cares study and is intended as a rapid-response pilot investigation, capturing the potential synergies between psychological distress arising from the emerging COVID-19 crisis and the existing climate change crisis, with a particular focus on the mental health consequences in young people in India, Philippines, the USA, and the Caribbean countries of Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana and Barbados. Ethics approval was sought from The George Institute Independent Ethics Committee.


## Sample size

The research team wanted to survey a total of 500 participants between the age of 16-24 from across both sites (250 per site). However, to account for loss to follow up, 600 adolescents and young people between the ages of 16-24 (300 per site) were randomly selected using simple random sampling (SRS) technique. Using the random number generation function, the study participants were selected from the population aged 16-24 years from the pre-existing ANUMATI project census database of 9905 households with a population of 40,013. The ANUMATI sites were purposively and pragmatically selected because they were urban slums located close to our offices in the cities of Faridabad and Hyderabad. In the population, 20% were between 16 and 24 years old. Of these 600, 536 consented to participate in the survey (266 from Faridabad and 270 from Hyderabad) and were included into the study cohort. For participants below 18 years, both parental consent and assent from the participants, was sought.


## Inclusion criteria

i) Name featuring in the ANUMATI census database ii) Aged between 16 and 24 years and had provided written consent to participate in the survey Exclusion criteria i) Under 16 or above 24 years as reported in the ANUMATI project census database ii) Insufficient local language skills, i.e. inability to understand the information sheet iii) Participants who refused to provide written consent iv) Participants with either severe physical or mental ill health which prevented them from consenting


## Tools and scales used

Kuppuswamy's Socioeconomic Scale 30 is a composite score of education and occupation of the head of the family along with monthly income of the family, that classifies families into Upper, Upper Middle, Lower Middle, Upper Lower and Lower class. This tool was developed in India and has been used widely in India.

Composite climate concern and covid concern scores were both measured using eight items. Responses were collected on a 3-point Likert like scale of 0-3, where 0 means disagree and 3 means completely agree. The responses to each of the eight items were added to arrive at a composite score. The composite score lies between 0 and 24, where a higher score is interpreted as higher distress.

Covid Agency and Climate Agency Scales the climate agency scale combines Reser and colleagues' 31 selfefficacy and personal responsibility scales to measure self-reported agency to respond to climate change. The composite score lies between −18 and +18, where value in minus or 0 means low agency and value above 1 is consider as having agency. The climate agency scale was adapted to measure self-reported agency regarding the COVID-19 pandemic with minimal changes to the wording. 'The dimensions of agency included respondents: being aware of actions they could take as an individual to combat the crisis (awareness); feeling capable of making behavioural changes (capability); believing their actions will make a difference (self-efficacy), positively affect their perspective on the crisis (change perspective), and encourage others to act (influence on others); feeling that people in general have control over the crisis (control); believing that the crisis is avoidable (avoidability); experiencing a sense of urgency to act (urgency); and feeling a sense of responsibility to act (responsibility).' 29 (e729) Impact of range and strength of feelings on daily life (wellbeing) was measured on a scale of 0-10 asking the following question "Do your thoughts or feelings around the COVID-19 pandemic ever interfere with your wellbeing or cause problems for you in any way? Rate on a scale of 0 to 10, with 0 being never and 10 being all the time". The higher the score, the worse the condition or the higher is the interference on wellbeing.

Positive and negative impacts of COVID-19 and climate change the COVID-19 Adolescent Symptom & Psychological Experience Questionnaire (CASPE), 32 was adapted to assess the nature and severity of a variety of negative and positive impacts of climate change and COVID -19. The questionnaire was adapted to make it more relevant to the India context. The 13 events post COVID which had a negative impact and the 11 events which had a positive impact were identified by adolescents living in urban slums who were part of another adolescent specific study Adolescents' Resilience and Treatment Needs for Mental Health in Indian Slums (ARTEMIS). 33 Some of the items identified were common with the events listed in Climate Cares UK study survey instrument. No changes were made in the list of 11 climate change events which had a negative impact. However, in the present study, two options were dropped from the list of 8 items that had a positive impact in the context of climate change.

Overall Covid negative impact variable-the impact was asked via the question "Overall, how much has the COVID-19 pandemic, and the resulting changes, affected your life in a negative way?" and was collected on fivepoint Likert scale of 1-5, where 1 means unaffected by COVID and 5 means COVID had affected life extremely. For the purpose of interpretation, this variable was recoded into three categories (Not at all was retained as is; a little and moderately were clubbed together and labelled as 'Moderately' and a lot and extremely were clubbed together and labelled as 'Extremely').

The questions that were used to calculate the composite climate concern and covid concern, the impact of range and strength of feelings on daily life (wellbeing) and the overall Covid negative impact variable were taken from the Climate Cares UK study (1-s2.0-S2542519622001723-mmc1.pdf (els-cdn.com)).

The survey questionnaire comprising of all the above (socio-demographic status and key instruments) were translated to Hindi and Telugu (the two local languages spoken in Faridabad and Hyderabad respectively) and back-translated to English, and then used to collect data.


## Data collection

Date collection was done between 1st July and 31st July 2021 by trained field staff who received virtual training in June 2021. Data was collected electronically in RedCap (https://www.project-redcap.org/) by the field staff using 7-inch tablets. All data was checked for errors which were corrected during the data cleaning process. There were no missing values.


## Ethics declaration

All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of The George Institute for Global Health, New Delhi, India (Ref. no. 03/2021). The study is in line with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments.

Consent Informed Consent has been obtained from all study participants and from their parents/guardian if the participant was under 18 years of age.


## Role of the funding source

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-forprofit sectors, therefore no funders had any role in study design, data collection, data analysis, interpretation, and writing of the report.


## Results


## Socio-demographic profile

The study was conducted with slum dwellers between 16 and 24 years of age and the mean age of the study participants was found to be 20.76 years; with the number of females and males being nearly equal at 51.7% and 48.4% respectively. Majority of respondents had completed secondary schooling (67.7%), followed by graduation and above (21.6%). Few had received no formal school education (1.9%) and 8.8% were educated till primary level. Majority of the respondents lived in their natal homes (92%). About three-fourths of the respondents were unmarried.

A large majority of the participants belonged to upper lower class (67%) followed by lower middle (17.7%), lower (13.0%) and very small proportion belonged to the upper middle class (2.6%).


## Climate change and psychological response

The study participants had mean climate concern score of 9.8 (SD 5.34, Range 0-24). The mean score of impact of range and strength of feelings on daily life score was found to be 5.35 (SD 1.84, Range 2-10). Respondents were asked to select the top five climate changes/events that had a negatively affected them from a list of 11 items. The most important negative impact of climate change experienced by the respondents was the direct effect of "extreme weather events" (Table 1) (52.4%).

Many respondents (88%) reported having climate agency. Table 2 shows the events associated with climate change that had a positive effect on the respondents.

The study participants were also asked about their involvement in any climate change related activities. Findings show that the action/involvement around issues of climate change was low among the respondents; only 10% of adolescents reported that they were involved Articles in climate change related activity prior to Covid-19. Of this 10%, 42.3% had participated in tree plantation in school and community, 28.9% had attended lecture/ talks, 27% had participating in poster making competitions, 7.7% had attending workshops and 3.0% had participating in essay writing competitions around the climate change theme.


## Covid-19 and psychological responses

Of the 536 respondents, most had never contracted COVID-19 or been in contact with someone with COVID-19 (Table 3).

Among the respondents, 75.9% felt that COVID-19 had a moderate to adverse effect on their lives, 17% reported that the changes triggered by COVID-19 were extreme, and 7.1% felt that COVID-19 had not affected their lives negatively. Amongst the respondents, the mean COVID concern score was 9.8 (SD 5.36, Range 0-24), and the score on strengths and feelings was 5.5 (SD 1.72, Range 2-10) which is in the mid-range but tending towards poorer wellbeing.

Respondents ranked the positive and negative events in their daily life in the context of COVID-19 (Table 4). "Financial problems faced by their families" was the significant negative consequence selected from a list of 13 items and getting more time to relax (67.9%) was the most significant positive effect that the respondents selected from a list of 12 items.

Young people's agency is defined as 'the capacity to act and shape their own lives. 34 Of the respondents, 91.6% reported having some agency to overcome the COVID crises and the rest suggested inadequate agency.


## Comparison between COVID-19 and climate change

The study explored how the respondents' concern about climate change varied before the COVID-19 pandemic vis-a-vis after the COVID-19 pandemic had struck, especially feelings of worry and activism around both COVID and climate change. There is not much data on young people's climate concern in this urban slum before COVID-19. Data from the current study shows that a little more than half (51.7%) were less worried; about a third (31.2%) had no changes in their level of worry; and only 17.2% reported that they were more worried about climate change after the COVID_19 pandemic had struck.

The study explored if the COVID-19 pandemic had in any way influenced the action that respondents were taking to mitigate the climate crisis ( Table 5). The results indicate that only 12.9% said that they were doing more for the environment than they had done before COVID, while a larger number (22%) had actually done fewer things for the environment or switched to less environmentally friendly behaviours and 15.9% mentioned not doing anything for the environment, post the pandemic.


## Discussion

This is the first study, to the best of our knowledge, which focuses on impact of COVID- 19  Gaining a sense of purpose and/or identity by fighting against climate change 52.6

Feeling inspired to connect more with the natural world 50.9

Seeing others change their behaviour as a result of my own actions against climate change 42.4  Not seeing friends in person 25.8


## Positive events/changes in daily life due to COVID-19

Getting more time to relax 67.9

Getting more time to watch more television/movies 58.4

Getting more recreational time on the phone/computer 57.7

Spending more time with family 51.5

Getting more time to sleep 47.2 change among adolescents and young people living in urban slums in a low-and middle-income country (LMIC). It provides knowledge about how adolescents and young people from such disadvantaged communities have been impacted by COVID-19 and climate change, both positively and negatively, and highlights some of the factors that they have adopted to face those situations and their sense of agency to contribute to changes for the future that they would like to see especially with regards to COVID-19 and climate crises. This is important given the impact that both climate change and COVID has on the lives of all individuals but particularly on young people's future. 35,36 Further, this study is significant as is it confirms that there is concern among adolescents and young people about the climate crisis even in poorer settings. Effect of climate change on everyday life: the findings show that most study participants reported nearly similar negative interference of climate change and COVID-19 on their everyday life and similar climate and COVID-19 concern scores. When the impact of climate change in the lives of the study participants were felt in a more tangible way like experiencing extreme weather events, either personally or having seen its impacts on their family members, it had a negative impact on them. This was unlike the Climate Cares study conducted in the United Kingdom 29 which found that for the sample surveyed (young people aged 16-24 years, n = 530), there was distress reported due to the climate crisis, although the study participants were not directly affected by it. This could be due to poor knowledge about health impacts, especially psychological impact among adolescents living in urban slum communities in the current study, which in part could be a reflection of the quality of education received by them or exposure to such messages through social media or print media. Research also shows that general mental health awareness is low among adolescents and young adults in this setting 37,38 and this can also be a key factor for this finding. The climate change events which had positive effects on the respondents were related to action around improving the environment which perhaps gave a sense of purpose to the respondents.

Earlier research has shown that climate change related anxiety is quite common among young adults, and it is unevenly distributed, being more common among those who care more about environmental issues 39 or who have experienced some impacts of climate change. 40 Effect of COVID-19 on everyday life: the study found that the overall COVID-19 concern scores were in the mid-range, rather than high, which can be attributed to the fact that a large majority of the respondents had not contracted COVID-19 despite the devastating second wave. An examination of the events that impacted the study participants most negatively for COVID-19 were related to loss of income, loss of mobility and loss of social contact. A majority of people living in slums in India work in the informal sector. 41 The lockdowns imposed in the wake of COVID-19 resulted in informal sector closures 42 and slum dwellers losing their income sources which reduced their capability to fight the pandemic. On the other hand, events that had a positive impact on their wellbeing despite COVID-19 were related to opportunity to unwind, relax, and take life easy -be it watching movies, using the internet, spending time with family or sleeping. Leisure activities have a significant role to play in promoting good mental health. 43 Leisure activities help to alleviate the adverse effects of experiences that cause stress and endanger mental and physical health. 44 The Climate Cares study found that for the sample surveyed, COVID-19 had negatively affected the social life, study and leisure activities of the respondents, which was similar to what our study participants had reported. The current study participants were largely from the lower economic section and were negatively affected by the loss of income/ job. In comparison, the participants of the Climate Cares study, who lived in a high-income country (UK) and came from a more affluent background had fewer concerns about job loss and financial problems. This difference reiterates the importance of studying vulnerable populations such as those living in urban slums in LMICs.

Climate activism in India: in India, civil society organisations (CSOs) like Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI), have focused on climate science research in line with international bodies like Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 45 Others have advocated for environmental justice and emphasized on human rightsbased approaches and inclusive solutions to climate change because the most marginalised people are the ones who are most vulnerable to climate disasters due to lack of resources and adaptability. 46 Some Indian CSOs have also set up coalitions and networks, such as Climate Action Network South Asia (CANSA) which works closely both with CSOs and the government on climate change. 47 Young adults have been at the forefront of much of the recent climate-focused activism. Indian youth activism is relatively nascent but has picked up since 2008 with setting up of youth organisations that have organised workshops and trainings to build awareness about climate change among young


## Climate action post COVID-19 Percent

Doing things for the environment more often, or adopted some new environmentally friendly behaviours 12.9 Doing about the same as before, no more or less 49.3 Doing fewer things for the environment, or switched to some less environmentally friendly behaviours


## 22.0

Not doing anything for the environment 15.9 Articles people and facilitate youth participation in climate activism both in India 48 and at international levels. 49,50 Climate activism and its impacts on mental health: climate activism is associated with resilience and positive development, 9 and it has also been found that strong psychological responses to the climate crisis can be part of a healthy and adaptive process, and therefore should not always be 'pathologised'. 51 An increase in agency and action related to climate change was found to help reduce the effects of distress related to climate change on mental health and wellbeing by researchers. 52 Schwartz and colleagues 44 found a significant association between climate activism and climate change anxiety; people who were not engaged in climate activism experienced greater climate change anxiety, cognitive emotional impairment, and major depressive symptoms. Similarly, previous research has shown that agency is an important capability 34 ; and young people's engagement in community and civic action helped them to feel in control during the COVID crisis. 53 Climate agency and COVID agency: our study showed, that for both, climate change and COVID, most respondents reported having a sense of agency but that did not lead to action. Majority did the same things for the environment as they had done in the pre-COVID days or had actually done fewer things for the environment or had switched to less environmentally friendly behaviours. This seems to resonate with what others have observed, 39 which is that 'climate change anxiety is correlated with emotional but not behavioral responses to climate change'. One of the ways of encouraging participation, is to enlist and engage young people to initiate mitigating actions. Studies have shown that giving young people a sense of purpose and involving them in action helps to build resilience 44 which in turn helps them to deal with the stress and strains that adverse climate events or pandemics might throw to them. 9 However, it is also important to recognise that policy makers and researchers often do not give importance to the feelings and hopes of young people which has adverse impacts for their mental wellbeing as well as for the possible actions that could be taken to mitigate the climate crisis. 54 As more and more young people are getting involved in climate-related action and are getting aware of climate-related information distress can result. This can also lead to larger conflicts with the administrations in the form of demonstrations and disruptions to social living. Hence policy makers should channelise youth energy appropriately and constructively and governments should facilitate processes that provide opportunities to youth to build their future, by ensuring that adequate support is in place to avoid burnout, and help young people cope with feelings of frustration, prevent disillusionment and demoralization. Policy action initiated by the government can help to reduce the impact of climate change. The Government of India launched National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) in 2008, which focuses on developing eight critical areas such as promoting solar energy, mission water, sustainable agriculture, and sustainable habitats. Besides these, action at the local level by people and communities have helped to mitigate the impact of climate change, such as rooftop rainwater harvesting and building of community tanks in the north-eastern states. 55 Further the study participants did not seem to relate COVID-19 to climate change and their concern for climate change did not increase significantly post COVID-19; this could be because the immediacy of climate change might have diminished in the face of COVID-19 whose impacts are more evident. 2 Limitations: a limitation of this study is that this study did not included persons with severe physical or mental illnesses so we cannot comment on the impact of COVID-19 or climate change on those with such severe health conditions. Another limitation of this study is that it reports findings when COVID-19 was evolving in India. However, some of these findings could have changed now as the pandemic has evolved and people have also found multiple ways to cope with it. Similarly, climate change and its effects can be extremely variable, though more sustained environmental and related health effects of climate change are gradually being felt in different parts of the world. From a research perspective, this calls for future surveys of similar nature to understand how some of these measures change over time and across different communities, especially across vulnerable communities such as those in this study. This study did not explore the role of media, especially social media in the spread of mis-and disinformation in the context of COVID-19, which WHO term as the 'infodemic'. 56 Social media and other digital platforms were used to spread fake news, propaganda and misinformation that was noted to be as dangerous as the disease itself. 57 However social media was also found to have a positive impact on the mental wellbeing of high school students, by giving them the opportunity to stay connected with others as well as provide entertainment. 58 Social media has also had a positive impact on the spread of climate awareness among the youth in India. Adve 48 noted that images, videos and articles related to climate change from India and the world, helped to "transformed the depth of awareness of climate change" in the Indian youth.

India has a large youth population and there is an opportunity to strengthen young people's climate and COVID agency and provide them with platforms to act meaningfully. To conclude while much has been done to promote young people's activism on climate change and COVID-19, much more needs to be done. The COVID-19 pandemic has brought about the realisation that cities need to focus on improving the conditions of their slums. Research has shown that COVID-19, much like the plague pandemic in the Articles www.thelancet.com Vol 13 June, 2023 1300s, has made affluent residents of cities realise that they are deeply inter-connected and dependent on household help who largely live in slums and are at high risk for disease transmission. 59 It is especially important to ensure that young people from marginalised communities are part of such action and their voices are included in policy discourse, since they are physically and psychologically more vulnerable to adverse climate events and building social capital helps to combat the stress that adverse climatic events generate. 60 However, for this to happen, concerted action needs to be taken by a wide range of stakeholders including policymakers, industrialists, health professional and the society at large. Health professionals can empower young people to manage their mental health by making using of technology to self-monitor their mental health and promote peer support. 61 Finally it is important to develop 'strong social networks of supportive relationships' 62 and build the collective resilience of the community to deal with both climate change and pandemics such as COVID-19. 63


## Contributors

The paper was conceptualised by PKM in discussion with all authors. The data analysis was done by LP. SKY wrote the original draft, which was reviewed and edited by LP, MD and PKM. All authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


## Data sharing statement

Relevant anonymized data, metadata and the study protocol are available with the corresponding author and can be shared on receiving a request from anyone for research purposes, as part of a data-sharing agreement, once this paper is published.


which is why it is important to *Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: syatirajula@georgeinstitute.org.in (S.K. Yatirajula), lokenderlokender@gmail.com (L. Prashad), mdaniel@georgeinstitute.org.in (M. Daniel), pmaulik@georgeinstitute.org.in (P.K. Maulik).


and climate Events or changes associated with climate change with negative effect on life PercentExperiencing more extreme weather events where you live (e.g. severe heatwaves, 
heavier storms, more rain) 

52.4 

Personal experience with effects of climate change (e.g. experienced natural disasters 
resulting from climate change such as floods) 

44.6 

Family or friends have experienced the effects of climate change 
43.4 

Seeing natural environments that you care about change for the worse 
40.3 

Concerns for the health and safety of yourself and/or your loved ones 
34.3 

Table 1: Top five events or changes associated with climate change that have had a negative effect 
on your life (N = 536). 

Events 
Percent 

Feeling inspired to live a more eco-friendly life, with improved health and wellbeing 
62.3 

Feeling inspired and/or empowered by the actions of others to fight climate change 
53.9 



## Table 2 :
2Events or changes associated with climate change that have a positive effect on your life (N = 536).Experience of COVID-19 
Percent 

I tested positive for COVID-19 
1.3 

I think I might have had COVID-19 (e.g. symptoms were present), but was not tested 
5.0 

I have had to self-isolate because I had been in close contact with someone who had 
or was suspected of having COVID-19 

3.5 

I have no direct experience with COVID-19 
90.1 



## Table 3 :
3Experience of COVID-19 (N = 536).Negative events/changes in daily life due to COVID-19 
Percent 

Financial problems for you or your family 
58.4 

Having to stay at home 
38.4 

Thinking about how many people are dying because of 
the virus 

36.6 

You lost your job 
29.3 



## Table 4 :
4Top five most negative events/changes in daily life in the context of COVID-19 (N = 536).Articles 



## Table 5 :
5Climate action post COVID-19 (N = 536).
www.thelancet.com Vol 13 June, 2023
Declaration of interestsThe author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. SKY is supported by the Adolescents' Resilience and Treatment nEeds for
A COVID-19 recovery for climate. Science. D Rosenbloom, J Markard, 368Rosenbloom D, Markard J. A COVID-19 recovery for climate. Sci- ence. 2020;368(6490):447-457. Available from: https://science.sci encemag.org/content/368/6490/447.

The intersection of climate change with the era of COVID-19. S M Zang, I Benjenk, S Breakey, E Pusey-Reid, P K Nicholas, Public Health Nurs. 382321Zang SM, Benjenk I, Breakey S, Pusey-Reid E, Nicholas PK. The intersection of climate change with the era of COVID-19. Public Health Nurs. 2021;38(2):321.

COVID-19: lessons for the climate change emergency. R D Manzanedo, P Manning, Sci Total Environ. 742140563Manzanedo RD, Manning P. COVID-19: lessons for the climate change emergency. Sci Total Environ. 2020;742:140563.

Efficacy, action, and support for reducing climate change risks. A Bostrom, A L Hayes, K M Crosman, Risk Anal. 394805Bostrom A, Hayes AL, Crosman KM. Efficacy, action, and support for reducing climate change risks. Risk Anal. 2018;39(4):805.

The work after "It's too late" (to prevent dangerous climate change). S C Moser, Wiley Interdiscip Rev Clim Change. 111606Moser SC. The work after "It's too late" (to prevent dangerous climate change). Wiley Interdiscip Rev Clim Change. 2019;11(1):e606.

Themes of climate change agency: a qualitative study on how people construct agency in relation to climate change. H Toivonen, Humanit Soc Sci Commun. 91Toivonen H. Themes of climate change agency: a qualitative study on how people construct agency in relation to climate change. Humanit Soc Sci Commun. 2022;9(1):1-11.

The moment to see the poor. J Von Braun, S Zamagni, M S Sorondo, Science. 3686488214von Braun J, Zamagni S, Sorondo MS. The moment to see the poor. Science. 2020;368(6488):214.

Economic Analysis & Policy Division | Dept of Economic & Social Affairs | United Nations. Un/Desa Policy Brief, 2020COVID-19 and the least developed countriesUN/DESA Policy Brief #66. COVID-19 and the least developed countries. Economic Analysis & Policy Division | Dept of Economic & Social Affairs | United Nations; 2020. Available from: https:// www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/publication/un-desa-policy- brief-66-covid-19-and-the-least-developed-countries/.

The effects of climate change on child and adolescent mental health: clinical considerations. A Van Nieuwenhuizen, K Hudson, X Chen, A R Hwong, Curr Psychiatry Rep. 231288van Nieuwenhuizen A, Hudson K, Chen X, Hwong AR. The effects of climate change on child and adolescent mental health: clinical considerations. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2021;23(12):88.

The List of Threatening Experiences: the reliability and validity of a brief life events questionnaire. T S Brugha, D Cragg, Acta Psychiatr Scand. 821Brugha TS, Cragg D. The List of Threatening Experiences: the reliability and validity of a brief life events questionnaire. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1990;82(1):77-81.

Regulating worry, promoting hope: how do children, adolescents, and young adults cope with climate change?. M Ojala, Int J Environ Sci Educ. 74Ojala M. Regulating worry, promoting hope: how do children, ad- olescents, and young adults cope with climate change? Int J Environ Sci Educ. 2012;7(4):537-561.

Post-traumatic stress disorder and comorbid depression among survivors of the 1999 earthquake in Turkey. E Salcioglu, M Basoglu, M Livanou, Disasters. 312Salcioglu E, Basoglu M, Livanou M. Post-traumatic stress disorder and comorbid depression among survivors of the 1999 earthquake in Turkey. Disasters. 2007;31(2):115-129.

Prevalence and predictors of PTSS during COVID-19 outbreak in China hardest-hit areas: gender differences matter. N Liu, F Zhang, C Wei, Psychiatry Res. 287287112921Liu N, Zhang F, Wei C, et al. Prevalence and predictors of PTSS during COVID-19 outbreak in China hardest-hit areas: gender differences matter. Psychiatry Res. 2020;287(287):112921. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165178 12030545X#bib0009.

. COVID-19): situation report. 2020:73WHO. Coronavirus disease. WHO. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): situation report. 2020:73.

Anxiety, depression and sleep problems: a second wave of COVID-19. P Peretti-Watel, C Alleaume, D Léger, F Beck, P Verger, Gen Psychiatr. 335100299Peretti-Watel P, Alleaume C, Léger D, Beck F, Verger P. Anxiety, depression and sleep problems: a second wave of COVID-19. Gen Psychiatr. 2020;33(5):e100299.

Climate change, environment pollution, covid-19 pandemic and mental health. D Marazziti, P Cianconi, F Mucci, L Foresi, C Chiarantini, A D Vecchia, Sci Total Environ. 773145182Marazziti D, Cianconi P, Mucci F, Foresi L, Chiarantini C, Vecchia AD. Climate change, environment pollution, covid-19 pandemic and mental health. Sci Total Environ. 2021;773:145182.

Relations between housing characteristics and the well-being of low-income children and adolescents. R L Coley, T Leventhal, A D Lynch, M Kull, Dev Psychol. 499Coley RL, Leventhal T, Lynch AD, Kull M. Relations between housing characteristics and the well-being of low-income children and adolescents. Dev Psychol. 2013;49(9):1775-1789. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3766502/.

Primary census abstract-data highlights/primary census abstract. New Delhi: Government of India. India Census Of, Census of India. Primary census abstract-data highlights/primary census abstract. New Delhi: Government of India; 2011.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. M L Parry, O F Canziani, J P Palutikof, P J Van Der Linden, C E Hanson, Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: contribution of working group II to the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. CambridgeCambridge University PressSummary for policymakersIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Summary for poli- cymakers. In: Parry ML, Canziani OF, Palutikof JP, van der Linden PJ, Hanson CE, eds. Climate change 2007: impacts, adapta- tion and vulnerability: contribution of working group II to the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2007:7-22.

Climate change and health in urban informal settlements in low-and middle-income countries -a scoping review of health impacts and adaptation strategies. F H Borg, Greibe Andersen, J Karekezi, C , Glob Health Action. 14Borg FH, Greibe Andersen J, Karekezi C, et al. Climate change and health in urban informal settlements in low-and middle-income countries -a scoping review of health impacts and adaptation strategies. Glob Health Action. 2021;14:1908064.

UN-habitat COVID-19 response plan. UN-habitat COVID-19 response plan; 2020. Available from: https:// unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2020/04/final_un-habitat_covid-19_ response_plan.pdf.

The challenge of slums-global report on human settlements. London: UN Habitat. Un-Habitat, Un-Habitat. The challenge of slums-global report on human settle- ments. London: UN Habitat; 2003.

Adapting to climate change: cities and the urban poor. P Feiden, Washington, DC: International Housing CoalitionFeiden P. Adapting to climate change: cities and the urban poor. Washington, DC: International Housing Coalition; 2011.

Climate change impacts on urban poor: a study on slum people in Dhaka city. K Amjad, IOSR J Humanit Soc Sci. 249Series. 10Amjad K. Climate change impacts on urban poor: a study on slum people in Dhaka city. IOSR J Humanit Soc Sci. 2019;24(9):40-75. Series. 10.

Towards pro-poor adaptation to climate change in the urban centres of low-and middle-income countries. D Satterthwaite, C Moser, International Institute for Environment and DevelopmentLondon, EnglandSatterthwaite D, Moser C. Towards pro-poor adaptation to climate change in the urban centres of low-and middle-income countries. London, England: International Institute for Environment and Development; 2008.

Climate change vulnerability in urban slum communities: investigating household adaptation and decision-making capacity in the Indian Himalaya. R Pandey, J M Alatalo, K Thapliyal, citedPandey R, Alatalo JM, Thapliyal K, et al. Climate change vulnera- bility in urban slum communities: investigating household adap- tation and decision-making capacity in the Indian Himalaya [cited 2019

. Ecol Indic. 90Ecol Indic. 2018;90:379-391. Available from: https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1470160X18301869

Habitat vulnerability in slum areas of India-what we learnt from COVID-19?. M Das, A Das, B Giri, R Sarkar, S Saha, Int J Disaster Risk Reduct. 6565102553Das M, Das A, Giri B, Sarkar R, Saha S. Habitat vulnerability in slum areas of India-what we learnt from COVID-19? Int J Disaster Risk Reduct. 2021;65(65):102553. Available from: https://www.science direct.com/science/article/pii/S2212420921005148?via%253Dihub.

COVID-19, adversities and depression among older adolescents in urban slums of India. M Daniel, L Prashad, A Kaur, Asian J Psychiatr. 74103194Daniel M, Prashad L, Kaur A, et al. COVID-19, adversities and depression among older adolescents in urban slums of India. Asian J Psychiatr. 2022;74:103194.

Psychological responses, mental health, and sense of agency for the dual challenges of climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic in young people in the UK: an online survey study. E L Lawrance, N Jennings, V Kioupi, R Thompson, J Diffey, A Vercammen, Lancet Planet Health. 69Lawrance EL, Jennings N, Kioupi V, Thompson R, Diffey J, Vercammen A. Psychological responses, mental health, and sense of agency for the dual challenges of climate change and the COVID- 19 pandemic in young people in the UK: an online survey study. Lancet Planet Health. 2022;6(9):e726-e738. Available from: https:// www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(22)00172- 3/fulltext.

Manual of socioeconomic status (urban). B Kuppuswamy, 8Delhi: ManasayanKuppuswamy B. Manual of socioeconomic status (urban). Delhi: Manasayan; 1981;8:66-72.

Public risk perceptions, understandings and responses to climate change in Australia and Great Britain: interim report. Wales: Griffith University, Climate Change Response Program. J Reser, N Pidgeon, A Spence, G Bradley, I Glndon, M Ellul, Queensland, Australia, and Understanding Risk Centre, Cardiff UniversityReser J, Pidgeon N, Spence A, Bradley G, Glndon I, Ellul M. Public risk perceptions, understandings and responses to climate change in Australia and Great Britain: interim report. Wales: Griffith Univer- sity, Climate Change Response Program, Queensland, Australia, and Understanding Risk Centre, Cardiff University; 2011.

Assessment of COVID-19 experiences (ACE) for adolescents -research tracker and facilitator. osf. io. J Pfeifer, C D Ladouceur, M L Byrne, Pfeifer J, Ladouceur CD, Byrne ML, et al. Assessment of COVID-19 experiences (ACE) for adolescents -research tracker and facilitator. osf. io; 2020.

An intervention to reduce stigma and improve management of depression, risk of suicide/self-harm and other significant emotional or medically unexplained complaints among adolescents living in urban slums: protocol for the ARTEMIS project. S K Yatirajula, S Kallakuri, S Paslawar, Trials. 23612Yatirajula SK, Kallakuri S, Paslawar S, et al. An intervention to reduce stigma and improve management of depression, risk of suicide/self-harm and other significant emotional or medically unexplained complaints among adolescents living in urban slums: protocol for the ARTEMIS project. Trials. 2022;23:612.

Conceptualizing agency in the lives and actions of rural young people. E Robson, S Bell, N Klocker, Global perspectives on rural childhood and youth: young rural lives. Panelli R, Punch S, Robson ENew York: RoutledgeRobson E, Bell S, Klocker N. Conceptualizing agency in the lives and actions of rural young people. In: Panelli R, Punch S, Robson E, eds. Global perspectives on rural childhood and youth: young rural lives. New York: Routledge; 2007.

Increases in depression and anxiety symptoms in adolescents and young adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. M T Hawes, A K Szenczy, D N Klein, G Hajcak, B D Nelson, Psychol Med. 5214Hawes MT, Szenczy AK, Klein DN, Hajcak G, Nelson BD. In- creases in depression and anxiety symptoms in adolescents and young adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Psychol Med. 2021;52(14):1-9. Available from: https://www.cambridge.org/core/ journals/psychological-medicine/article/increases-in-depression-and- anxiety-symptoms-in-adolescents-and-young-adults-during-the-covid19- pandemic/F10C068F4D7A7AEDF2699A517904C1EB.

Climate anxiety in children and young people and their beliefs about government responses to climate change: a global survey. C Hickman, E Marks, P Pihkala, Lancet Planet Health. 2021Hickman C, Marks E, Pihkala P, et al. Climate anxiety in children and young people and their beliefs about government responses to climate change: a global survey. Lancet Planet Health. 2021

Mental health literacy in low-and middle-income countries. D S L Bhugra, Bhugra D, Moussaoui D, Craig TJOxford Univ PressOxford textbook of social psychiatryBhugra D. Mental health literacy in low-and middle-income countries. In: Bhugra D, Moussaoui D, Craig TJ, eds. Oxford text- book of social psychiatry. S.L.: Oxford Univ Press; 2022.

What adolescent girls know about mental health: findings from a mental health literacy survey from an Urban slum setting in India. P Chandra, G Saraf, G Desai, G Rao, Indian J Psychol Med. 405433Chandra P, Saraf G, Desai G, Rao G. What adolescent girls know about mental health: findings from a mental health literacy survey from an Urban slum setting in India. Indian J Psychol Med. 2018;40(5):433.

Development and validation of a measure of climate change anxiety. S Clayton, B T Karazsia, J Environ Psychol. 69101434Clayton S, Karazsia BT. Development and validation of a measure of climate change anxiety. J Environ Psychol. 2020;69:101434.

Leisure activities and the risk of amnestic mild cognitive impairment in the elderly. J Verghese, A Levalley, C Derby, citedVerghese J, LeValley A, Derby C, et al. Leisure activities and the risk of amnestic mild cognitive impairment in the elderly [cited 2019

. Neurology. 666Neurology. 2006;66(6):821-827. Available from: https://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1415273/

Living environment and health of urban poor: a study in Mumbai. S K Karn, S Shikura, H Hideki, Econ Polit Wkly. 3834Karn SK, Shikura S, Hideki H. Living environment and health of urban poor: a study in Mumbai. Econ Polit Wkly. 2003;38(34):3579- 3586.

COVID-19 and the world of work. Second edition Updated estimates and analysis. International Labour Organization. Ilo, Monitor, ILO. ILO Monitor: COVID-19 and the world of work. Second edition Updated estimates and analysis. International Labour Organization;

Gender-based analyses of coping with stress among professional managers: leisure coping and nonleisure coping. Y Iwasaki, K Mackay, J Mactavish, J Leis Res. 371Iwasaki Y, Mackay K, Mactavish J. Gender-based analyses of coping with stress among professional managers: leisure coping and non- leisure coping. J Leis Res. 2005;37(1):1-28.

Climate change anxiety and mental health: environmental activism as buffer. S Schwartz, L Benoit, S Clayton, 10.1007/s12144-022-02735-6Curr Psychol. Schwartz S, Benoit L, Clayton S, et al. Climate change anxiety and mental health: environmental activism as buffer. Curr Psychol. 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12144-022-02735-6.

Critical knowledge gaps that influence India's role in global and domestic climate change platforms'. New Delhi: Centre for Policy Research. N K Dubash, Dubash NK. 'Critical knowledge gaps that influence India's role in global and domestic climate change platforms'. New Delhi: Centre for Policy Research; 2015.

Environmentalism and public policy: environmental justice: grassroots activism and its impact on public policy decision making. R D Bullard, G S Johnson, J Soc Issues. 563Bullard RD, Johnson GS. Environmentalism and public policy: environmental justice: grassroots activism and its impact on public policy decision making. J Soc Issues. 2000;56(3):555-578.

Adapting water management to climate change: institutional involvement, inter-institutional networks and barriers in India. A Azhoni, I Holman, S Jude, Glob Environ Change. 44Azhoni A, Holman I, Jude S. Adapting water management to climate change: institutional involvement, inter-institutional networks and barriers in India. Glob Environ Change. 2017;44: 144-157.

Coming of age of India's youth climate movement. N Adve, Adve N. Coming of age of India's youth climate movement [cited 2023 Jan 16].

The India Forum. The India Forum; 2021. Available from: https:// www.theindiaforum.in/article/coming-age-india-s-youth-climate- movement.

Being a young climate activist. S Antusch, Nat Hum Behav. 611Antusch S. Being a young climate activist. Nat Hum Behav. 2022; 6(11):1450-1451.

Youth shine at the launch of India pavilion at COP27 in Egypt. IndiaTimes; 2022. Youth shine at the launch of India pavilion at COP27 in Egypt. IndiaTimes; 2022 [cited 2023 Jan 16]. Available from: https://www. indiatimes.com/explainers/news/youth-shine-at-the-launch-of-india- pavilion-at-cop27-in-egypt-584051.html.

Climate anxiety does not need a diagnosis of a mental health disorder. N Bhullar, M Davis, R Kumar, P Nunn, D Rickwood, Lancet Planet Health. 65383Bhullar N, Davis M, Kumar R, Nunn P, Rickwood D. Climate anxiety does not need a diagnosis of a mental health disorder. Lancet Planet Health. 2022;6(5):e383.

The impact of climate change on mental health and emotional wellbeing: a narrative review of current evidence, and its implications. E L Lawrance, R Thompson, J Newberry Le Vay, L Page, N Jennings, Int Rev Psychiatry. 345Lawrance EL, Thompson R, Newberry Le Vay J, Page L, Jennings N. The impact of climate change on mental health and emotional wellbeing: a narrative review of current evidence, and its implica- tions. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2022;34(5):443-498.

Debate: promoting capabilities for young people's agency in the COVID-19 outbreak. G Pavarini, D Lyreskog, K Manku, R Musesengwa, I Singh, Child Adolesc Ment Health. 253Pavarini G, Lyreskog D, Manku K, Musesengwa R, Singh I. Debate: promoting capabilities for young people's agency in the COVID-19 outbreak. Child Adolesc Ment Health. 2020;25(3):187-188.

Not about us without us" -the feelings and hopes of climate-concerned young people around the world. J Diffey, S Wright, J O Uchendu, Int Rev Psychiatry. 345Diffey J, Wright S, Uchendu JO, et al. "Not about us without us" - the feelings and hopes of climate-concerned young people around the world. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2022;34(5):499-509.

Climate change, water and gender: impact and adaptation in North-Eastern Hills of India. N Singh, O P Singh, Int Soc Work. 583Singh N, Singh OP. Climate change, water and gender: impact and adaptation in North-Eastern Hills of India. Int Soc Work. 2015; 58(3):375-384.

Managing the COVID-19 infodemic: promoting healthy behaviours and mitigating the harm from misinformation and disinformation. World Health Organization. 2020World Health OrganizationWorld Health Organization. Managing the COVID-19 infodemic: promoting healthy behaviours and mitigating the harm from misinformation and disinformation. World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/news/item/23-09- 2020-managing-the-covid-19-infodemic-promoting-healthy-behav- iours-and-mitigating-the-harm-from-misinformation-and-disinfor mation.

COVID-19 infodemic: the role of social media and other digital platforms. Jem Lacsa, J Public Health. 44341Lacsa JEM. COVID-19 infodemic: the role of social media and other digital platforms. J Public Health. 2021;44:e341.

Social media and students' wellbeing: an empirical analysis during the covid-19 pandemic. H Tkáčová, M Pavlíková, Z Jenisová, P Maturkanič, R Králik, Sustainability. 131810442Tkáčová H, Pavlíková M, Jenisová Z, Maturkanič P, Králik R. Social media and students' wellbeing: an empirical analysis during the covid-19 pandemic. Sustainability. 2021;13(18):10442.

Crowding has consequences: prevention and management of COVID-19 in informal urban settlements. L Von Seidlein, G Alabaster, J Deen, J Knudsen, Build Environ. 188107472von Seidlein L, Alabaster G, Deen J, Knudsen J. Crowding has consequences: prevention and management of COVID-19 in informal urban settlements. Build Environ. 2020;188:107472.

The impact of climate change and natural disasters on vulnerable populations: a systematic review of literature. M A Benevolenza, L Derigne, J Hum Behav Soc Environ. 292Benevolenza MA, DeRigne L. The impact of climate change and natural disasters on vulnerable populations: a systematic review of literature. J Hum Behav Soc Environ. 2018;29(2):266-281.

What mental health professionals and organisations should do to address climate change. A Monsell, J Krzanowski, L Page, S Cuthbert, G Harvey, BJPsych Bull. 454Monsell A, Krzanowski J, Page L, Cuthbert S, Harvey G. What mental health professionals and organisations should do to address climate change. BJPsych Bull. 2021;45(4):215-221.

Minding the ecological body: neuropsychoanalysis and ecopsychoanalysis. J Dodds, Front Psychol. 44125Dodds J. Minding the ecological body: neuropsychoanalysis and ecopsychoanalysis. Front Psychol. 2013;4(4):125.

The psychology of climate anxiety. J Dodds, BJPsych Bull. 454Dodds J. The psychology of climate anxiety. BJPsych Bull. 2021; 45(4):222-226. Available from: https://www.cambridge.org/core/ journals/bjpsych-bulletin/article/psychology-of-climate-anxiety/26A C9DF2FCD1A0BCC42070CCDFD8CDB3.