# Post-discharge Thromboembolic Events in COVID-19 Patients: A Review on the Necessity for Prophylaxis

CorpusID: 255475933
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ae6d63ccae7a7402104f99c2147c4a6e5990729](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ae6d63ccae7a7402104f99c2147c4a6e5990729)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Post-discharge Thromboembolic Events in COVID-19 Patients: A Review on the Necessity for Prophylaxis


MDForough Mehrabi 
MDMelina Farshbafnadi 
MD, PhDNima Rezaei 
Post-discharge Thromboembolic Events in COVID-19 Patients: A Review on the Necessity for Prophylaxis
10.1177/10760296221148477COVID-19D-dimervenous thromboembolismdeep vein thrombosiscoagulopathy
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) affects the respiratory system of patients and is characterized by pneumonia with hypoxemia. Hospitalized patients and particularly those admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) may encounter a cascade of coagulopathies, which may lead to macrovessel thrombotic events such as pulmonary embolism (PE), deep vein thrombosis (DVT), or arterial thromboembolism (ATE). These events can result in serious life-threatening diseases including cerebrovascular stroke and myocardial infarction. Despite all available information about the incidence, prevention, and treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE) among hospitalized patients, few data are available on the incidence of both symptomatic and subclinical VTE after discharge. Therefore, there is no precise suggestion or guideline for prophylaxis against VTE in post-discharge period, and some controversies exist over the current guidelines. In the present study, we aimed to review and summarize available literature upon incidence, prevention, diagnosis, and therapeutic approaches for VTE in COVID-19 patients. Also, the pathogenic mechanisms of VTE in infected individuals with COVID-19 were discussed.

## Introduction

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) affects the respiratory system leading to pneumonia with hypoxemia in nearly 20% of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID- 19) patients. 1 COVID-19 is accompanied by an increased risk of symptomatic venous thromboembolism (VTE). 2,3 COVID-19 patients admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) are prone to encounter some coagulopathies with hypercoagulable state, such as enhanced fibrinogen concentration, D-dimer levels, and factor VIII activity. 4,5 Endothelial injury and subsequent activation of thrombin generation is the main mechanism behind this immunothrombotic phenomenon. 6 This may lead to macrovessel thrombotic events like pulmonary embolism (PE), deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and arterial thromboembolism (ATE). [7][8][9][10][11][12][13] In addition, pneumopathyinduced local coagulopathies and microvascular thrombosis may occur in patients. 14,15 Although the exact incidence of VTE is unknown, large studies have reported an incidence of 6.2% for PE and 9.4% for DVT in COVID-19 ICU-admitted patients. 10 Previous studies have shown that prescription of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), in either prophylactic or therapeutic doses, improves clinical outcomes of hospitalized patients; however, subclinical VTE may occur in these patients. 14,[16][17][18][19] Systematic evaluation of asymptomatic DVT using leg ultrasound has revealed an incidence of 11.9% to 22.5% in non-ICU and 65% to 69% in ICU-admitted patients. [20][21][22][23] There is little data on the incidence of subclinical and symptomatic VTE after discharge. 2 On the other hand, there is no prophylactic strategy for VTE in post-discharge period. 24 Some studies suggest no prophylactic role; however, others believe in personalized approach according to thrombotic as well as bleeding risk factors. 25,26 Moreover, previous epidemiologic studies have shown that up to 80% of all hospital-related VTEs occur after discharge. 27 In the present study, we aimed to review available data on incidence, prevention, diagnosis and treatment of post-discharge VTE in COVID-19 patients.


## COVID-19 and VTE: Involved Mechanisms and Processes

Although the pathophysiology of VTE in COVID-19 infection has not been completely uncovered yet, some mechanisms and processes may have a role in this condition. For example, increased levels of hypercoagulability indices, such as D-dimer, fibrinogen, and factor VIII, have been reported in all cases with COVID-19. Also, a decrease in the levels of protein S, protein C, and antithrombin has been implicated. 28 Besides, there are records for the existence of coagulopathy in COVID-19 subjects with higher levels of lactate dehydrogenase, D-dimer, and total bilirubin. 29 Coagulation disorders are linked with VTE, and in this line, several studies have been documented. For instance, an investigation on 115 COVID-19 patients approved SARS-CoV-2 RNA presence in platelets and high cytokine levels related to platelets. 30 Histopathologic results from 38 subjects infected with this novel virus manifested neutrophil extracellular traps (DNA networks originated from extracellular neutrophils), neutrophil-platelet aggregates, and microvascular thrombi. 31 Thromboembolism pathogenesis in COVID-19 than non-COVID-19 ailments may be more dependent on platelets, endothelial inflammation, acquired antiphospholipid antibodies, hypercoagulability related to elevated coagulation factor level, and reduced levels of endogenous anticoagulant proteins. 28,32 It is thought that the increased risk of VTE in COVID-19 can be in light of hyperinflammation, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and immobilization. 8 In the early stages of this viral infection, hypoxia and inflammation along with acute lung injury give rise to a profound inflammatory condition because of cytokine storm, excess, and uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, like interferon gamma (IFN-γ), IL-1, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and interleukin 6 (IL-6) indicating that there is evidence for thrombotic occurrences. 33,34 Similarly, this increase in the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines is also observed in Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV). 35 In other words, when SARS-COV-2 arrives at the alveolar epithelium through the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, the secretion of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines occurs , 36,37 which in turn results in the stimulation of epithelial cells, neutrophils, and monocytes ( Figure 1). Indeed, the infection of endothelial cells can be occurred by the ACE2 receptor, causing endothelial stimulation and dysfunction, and subsequently coagulation cascade activation that forms fibrin clot and thrombin. 38,39 In the lung tissue of infected subjects with COVID-19, there is a report implicating catastrophic microvascular damage along with complement activation components, like C4d and C5b-9, and serine protease related to mannose-binding lectin. 40 Also, macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) can take part in the hypercoagulable situation and cytokine storm observed in COVID-19. This syndrome occurs while the activated antigen-presenting cells have no capability to be lysis through natural killer (NK) cells or CD8 T cells. 41 Incidence of post-Discharge VTE Table 1 summarizes the findings of studies which have assessed post-discharge thrombotic events in COVID-19 patients. In a study by London's King College researchers, they evaluated 1877 patients after discharge for a COVID-19-related admission and reported 9 episodes of hospital-associated VTE (HA-VTE) within 42 days which is equal to an incidence rate of 4.8 per 1000 discharges. They compared this rate with the data from 2019 in which 18,159 cases who were discharged following any medical conditions (except for COVID-19) were assessed and found an incidence of 3.1 per 1000 for HA-VTE. As a result, they concluded that hospitalization following COVID-19 does not raise the risk for HA-VTE in comparison with other medical conditions. 42 They have also mentioned that their local protocol provides thromboprophylaxis to COVID-19 patients only during admission and it is withdrawn upon discharge.

In a retrospective study, 163 patients with COVID-19 who were discharged without thromboprophylaxis were evaluated. 43 The incidence rate of thrombotic events was 2.5% (4 out of 163) consisting of ischemic stroke, intracardiac thrombus, segmental PE, and thrombosed arteriovenous fistula. The researchers have also reported a median duration of 23 days from discharge to thrombotic event. It is worth mentioning that none of the 13 patients who were discharged with thromboprophylaxis experienced thrombotic or hemorrhagic events.

In a cohort of 146 patients, from Leuven University hospitals (Belgium), who were followed for 6 weeks after discharge from a COVID-19 hospitalization, only 1 case of asymptomatic DVT and 1 case of bilateral PE were reported. 2 They were a 65-year-old female with history of non-active malignancy and a 68-year-old male with severe myopathy and 47 days of ICU hospitalization, respectively. Some patients (except the 2 with VTEs) in this cohort were receiving a post-discharge thromboprophylaxis with low-dose enoxaparin for 2 to 6 weeks after discharge, based on individualized risk assessment. Researchers have concluded that VTE after discharge is infrequent and thromboprophylaxis can be withheld in a majority of patients who have no major risk factors.

In a comprehensive cohort of 1529 COVID-19 patients from major Iranian cites (Tabriz, Zanjan, and Qom), they were followed for at least 45 days after discharge. Researchers reported a cumulative rate of symptomatic VTE of 0.2%. 44 No risk factors have been suggested for post-discharge VTE according to the low incidence rate; however, older age, history of cancer and diabetes were among the early all-cause death. Klok et al. also securitized the incidence of arterial thrombotic complications and VTE in 184 consecutive patients with COVID-19 who had been referred to the ICU. For all patients, the minimum standard-dose thromboprophylaxis was prescribed, and diagnostic assessments were carried out only in suspected patients of VTE clinically. This published report indicated that the incidence of arterial thrombotic events (ATE) and VTE are 3.7% and 27%, respectively. 8 Giannis et al. followed 4906 COVID-19 patients for a mean duration of 90 days. 45 Post-discharge thromboprophylaxis was prescribed in 12.7% of the patients and VTE was diagnosed in 76 patients (1.55%) post-discharge. In addition, ATE was diagnosed in 84 (1.71%) patients.


## Diagnosis of COVID-19-Related VTE

Reviewing the literature, we realized that there are no united guidelines upon diagnosis of VTE in COVID-19 patients, neither hospitalized nor following discharge.

In King's college hospitals, physicians do not perform any routine screening of asymptomatic patients. In case of clinical suspicion, D-dimer and pretest probability are conducted prior to VTE imaging. 42 Any VTE which is diagnosed after a surgical operation or following a 2-day hospitalization, and occurs within 90 days of discharge, is considered as a HA-VTE.

Regarding imaging options, venous duplex ultrasound was used to systematically screen DVT in all the patients in Leuven study. 2 Also, in patients suspected of PE, other imaging explorations, such as echocardiography and computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA), are performed. 46 PE and DVT diagnosis are challenging in subjects with COVID-19. PE symptoms overlap with COVID-19 symptoms, and mild symptoms may fail to observe in a case that already had suffered breath shortness. In parallel, the detection of clinical manifestation of DVT may be more difficult in COVID-19, and while curing clinicians mainly focus on the respiratory situation and do not evaluate lower extremities systematically for DVT signs. 47 Serum biological and inflammatory markers can be considered as other complementary options for predicting post-discharge VTE, beside clinical manifestations. Association of the higher levels of D-dimer with poor clinical outcomes, and also its correlation with thrombotic complications, resulted in early suggestions about the role of D-dimer levels on decision-making for clinical management of patients with COVID-19. 48-50 A prospective cohort have shown that patients with SARS-Cov-2 infection have sustained elevations in D-dimer levels and this occurs more commonly in older patients and those with severe acute disease. 51 The same study has suggested that the elevated D-dimer levels cannot explain the systemic coagulation activation or the low-grade DIC, as there are no links between D-dimer and other markers of coagulation or inflammation (eg, CRP). In Engelen et al. study, patients in ICU had significantly higher D-dimer levels than those on ward, both during hospitalization and at the time of discharge. 2 However, the difference between D-dimer level was no longer significant for 6 weeks after discharge. Interestingly, the trajectories of D-dimer level from discharge to follow-up point were not significantly different between patients with and without post-discharge thromboprophylaxis. 2 In sum, it seems that the predictive role of D-dimer for COVID-19 coagulopathies in post-discharge setting has remained unknown. 52 In case of a D-dimer level higher than 2000 ng/mL or clinical suspicion, CT pulmonary angiogram or ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan can also be performed. In the viewpoint of laboratory tests, coagulopathy assessment, particularly hypercoagulopathy, is hard to achieve by common coagulation tests, which comprise evaluation of platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), fibrinogen levels, and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). These landmarks can be prognosis factors for VTE associated with COVID-19. Viscoelastic hemolytic assessments, like rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM) and thromboelastography (TEG), have more validity for coagulopathy detection compared with common coagulation tests. 53,54 Addition of tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) to standard ROTEM is a new diagnostic entity which has been used by a small study with 22 COVID-19 patients. 55 This is a viscoelastic assay method which measures changes in viscoelastic parameters during clot formation and fibrinolysis. 56 Researchers conducted routine hemostasis tests as well as tPA ROTEM during ICU admission and 6 months after ICU discharge. They reported that tPA ROTEM measures were returned to normal values at the sixth month of discharge; however, D-dimer and fibrinogen levels were remained elevated. Gibson Figure 2 summarizes the approaches of diagnosing VTE related to COVID-19.


## Prevention of COVID-19-Associated VTE (Thromboprophylaxis)

King's college hospitals have a protocol of intermediate-dose enoxaparin for patients who are admitted to critical care with COVID-19 from April 22, 2020; however, this is stopped at the time of discharge. 42 In addition, patients receive recommendations upon symptoms of VTE, at their discharge summary. Researchers have also mentioned that a short course of extended thromboprophylaxis could have decreased the incidence of post-discharge VTE by about 40% to 50%, as all the post-discharge events were occurred at early phase. 59 However, this may increase the risk of bleeding about 2 to 3 times and this is the reason that it has not been considered as a standard protocol so far. 60 Belgian society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis and the local guideline of the Leuven University hospitals, consider prophylaxis with 0.5mg/kg daily enoxaparin in the ward and 0.5mg/kg twice daily in the ICU setting. 61,62 As for the other healthcare facilities, the guidelines for post-discharge prophylaxis are lacking in Leuven. So, it was prescribed for patients with known risk factors, such as atrial fibrillation, obesity, VTE, heart failure, aged over 70 years, and mechanical heart valve, with 0.5mg/kg daily enoxaparin for 2 to 6 weeks. No major bleeding events were reported in patients who received postdischarge thromboprophylaxis. In the Iranian study, it was also concluded that the routine prescription of extended thromboprophylaxis may not lead to an evident clinical benefit. 44 American guidelines have already restricted the routine extended thromboprophylaxis for medically ill patients, and it seems that these recommendations can be also applied in postdischarge period of COVID-19 patients. 63 Giannis et al. attached to their local guideline on the extended thromboprophylaxis with direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) (rivaroxaban 10 mg orally) or LMWH (enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneous daily) in COVID-19 discharged patients. This regimen was prescribed for 30 days following discharge if the patient had an IMPROVE VTE score of higher than 3 or a D-dimer level of twofold as upper limit of normal. 45 Several studies have also compared the effects of thrombophylactic anticoagulation (low dose) and therapeutic anticoagulation (high dose). Generally, therapeutic doses of anticoagulation were seemed to decrease mortality. However, in some studies, there were no significant differences found. Furthermore, some studies that had found statistically significant differences in mortality rates between the 2 groups were not able to associate that mortality rate to thrombotic events. [64][65][66][67][68][69] Table 1 summarizes the studies comparing low-dose and high-dose anticoagulation in hospitalized COVID-19 patients.

Ramacciotti et al. conducted a study on hospitalized COVID-19 patients who were more at risk for post-discharge thromboembolism. All patients had received thromboprophylaxis with standard doses of heparin while they were hospitalized. Following discharge, patients randomly received rivaroxaban for 35 days or no anticoagulation following discharge. Patients who received extended thromboprophylaxis had better clinical outcomes in comparison to patients who didn't receive extended prophylaxis. 70 Moreover, in the severe stage of COVID-19, the utilization of intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) has been proposed in order to prevent VTE ( Figure 3). 46 IPC is described as a mechanical device that diminishes VTE by the elevation of blood flow speed and reduction of hypercoagulability by the IPC performance inducing fibrinolytic function of vessel walls 71 (Figure 3).


## Therapeutic Options for COVID-19-Associated VTE

Several therapeutic approaches have been recommended for VTE related to COVID-19. Anticoagulation treatment is known as the main therapy for patients with VTE. The current guidelines suggested that anticoagulation agents should be administrated in suspected patients with intermediate or high clinical possibility when awaiting the findings of diagnostic tests, particularly in PE cases. 72 In the case of the parenteral way having priority for treatment, weight-regulated therapeutic-dose LMWH can be the first selection, whereas unfractionated heparin (UFH) infusion or subcutaneous fondaparinux can be utilized as an alternative approach. 37 UFH, as an anticoagulant agent, hamper the production or extension of blood clots. UFH can bind to the enzyme inhibitor antithrombin, and thus, neutralizes the impact of thrombin and other involved coagulation factors in blood clotting, namely X, IX, XI, and XII. 73 This anticoagulant needs to be infused continuously or frequently because of its short half-life, around 1 h. 74 But, LMWH has more half-life, 4 to 5 h, which can be dosed once daily. Heparin can create serious complications, such as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), a potentially lifethreatening circumstance. 75 Another factor binding to antithrombin is fondaparinux which does not suppress thrombin, unlike heparin. In fact, fondaparinux binding to antithrombin inhibits factor Xa, which in turn leads to coagulation suppression. 76 It also has more half-life compared with heparin and can be prescribed once daily by subcutaneous injection. 77 Using fondaparinux is not accompanied by HIT because it does not interplay with platelets. 78 However, this factor Xa inhibitor is more expensive in comparison with the heparin so its use may be limited. 75 Some documents stated that fibrinolytic therapy can be used as a potential tool in the treatment of systemic thrombotic events associated with COVID-19. However, it is expressed that this type of therapy in severe COVID-19 may create an increased risk of hemorrhagic occurrences, consisting of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and intracranial hemorrhage. 79 Recently, harnessing some immunotherapeutic agents, like monoclonal antibodies, have been offered in COVID-19-associated VTE. 80 Monoclonal antibodies are formed by white blood cells exposed to a specific viral protein, which subsequently is cloned to create antibodies targeting viruses. In addition to COVID-19, these antibodies were previously used to treat some viral infections, for example, rabies and Ebola. 81 Monoclonal antibodies have a potential for inhibition of several coagulation factors, such as tissue factor, factor VIII, and factor IX. 82 Another therapeutic choice for COVID-19 cases with coagulopathy disorders is using P2Y12 inhibitors. 83 The P2Y12 receptor, which is classified in the subgroup of Gi-coupled adenosine diphosphate receptors, has a substantial role in the aggregation and activation of platelets. Thus, the suppression of the receptor can have a positive role in thrombotic event treatment. 84 Despite this, the risk of bleeding in this therapeutic candidate is present. 83 


## Conclusion

In conclusion, we found that there is no united reliable guideline for post-discharge thromboprophylaxis in patients with COVID-19-related hospitalization. In addition, it seems that extended thromboprophylaxis for patients with COVID-19 is not of vital necessity due to the low incidence rate of post-discharge VTE syndromes which are comparable with other medical conditions than COVID-19. Furthermore, we realized that D-dimer and inflammatory markers does not seem to play an important role as predictive indicators of post-discharge thrombosis. However, all the related studies believe that there is a need for more structured clinical trials and prospective cohorts to make physicians able for more precise decision making. 


## Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


## Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


## ORCID iD

Nima Rezaei https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3836-1827

## Figure 1 .
1Some of the involved mechanisms in venous thromboembolism (VTE) related to COVID-19. Abbreviations: COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; IL-1, interleukin-1; IL-6, interleukin-6; IFNγ; interferon gamma; NETs, neutrophil extracellular traps; TNF-α; tumor necrosis factor alpha.

## Figure 2 .
2Flowchart of diagnostic methods for venous thromboembolism (VTE) related to COVID-19. Abbreviation: COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; VDU, venous duplex ultrasound.

## Figure 3 .
3Flowchart concerning methods of prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) related to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).

## Table 1 .
1Summary of Studies Comparing low-Dose and High-Dose Anticoagulation in the Outcomes of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Patients.Author, Year 
Population 

Therapeutic-Dose Drug (High 
Dose) 

Prophylactic-Dose Drug (low 
Dose) 
Outcome 

Al-Banaa, 2022 64 Critically ill adults with 
COVID-19 

Subcutaneous enoxaparin 
1 mg/kg twice daily or 
1.5 mg/kg daily or a 
continuous intravenous 
infusion of unfractionated 
heparin 

Subcutaneous LMWH 40 mg 
once daily or unfractionated 
heparin 5000 IU twice or 
thrice daily 

Administrating 
therapeutic-dose 
anticoagulation was 
associated with reduced 
adjusted inpatient mortality 
rates in comparison to 
prophylactic dose. 
Hoogenboom, 
2022 65 

Critically ill COVID-19 
patients 

Subcutaneous heparin or 
Lovenox (enoxaparin) at a 
dose of 40 mg twice daily 

(a) Any heparin drip; (b) Eliquis 
(apixaban), Xarelto 
(rivaroxaban), Pradaxa 
(dabigatran), or Coumadin 
(warfarin) at a typical 
therapeutic dose strength; or 
(c) Lovenox (enoxaparin) at 
a dose of 1 mg/kg twice daily 
or 1.5 mg/kg daily 

Therapeutic-dose AC 
regimens did not provide a 
survival benefit over 
prophylactic-dose AC 
regimens. 

Ionescu, 2021 66 Hospitalized 
COVID-19 patients 

Intravenous unfractionated 
heparin or subcutaneous 
enoxaparin at doses of 1 mg/ 
kg twice daily or 1.5 mg/kg 
once daily, or intravenous 
argatroban infusion, or 
subcutaneous fondaparinux 
at doses of 5-10 mg once 
daily, or oral anticoagulants 
(warfarin, apixaban, 
rivaroxaban, and dabigatran) 

Subcutaneous injection of 
unfractionated heparin at 
doses of 5000 units twice or 
thrice daily or subcutaneous 
enoxaparin injection at doses 
of 30-40 mg once daily, or 
subcutaneous fondaparinux 
at a dose of 2.5 mg once daily 

Higher doses of 
anticoagulation were 
associated with prolonged 
survival, especially in 
critically ill patients, 

Lopes, 2021 67 
Hospitalized 
COVID-19 patients 
(aged ≥18 years) 
hospitalised with 
COVID-19 and 
elevated D-dimer 
concentration 

Stable patients: In-hospital oral 
rivaroxaban (20 mg or 
15 mg daily) 

Standard venous 
thromboembolism (VTE) 
prophylaxis with enoxaparin 
(40 mg daily) or 
unfractionated heparin 

In-hospital therapeutic 
anticoagulation did not 
improve clinical outcomes 
and increased bleeding in 
comparison to prophylactic 
anticoagulation 

Unstable patients: 
Subcutaneous enoxaparin 
(1 mg/kg twice per day) or 
intravenous unfractionated 
heparin (to achieve a 0.3-0.7 
IU/mL anti-Xa 
concentration) followed by 
rivaroxaban to day 30 
Sholzberg, 
2021 68 

Hospitalized 
COVID-19 patients 
and with increased 
D-dimer levels 

Therapeutic-dose heparin 
Prophylactic-dose heparin 
In hospitalized moderately ill 
COVID-19 patients with 
increased D-dimer 
therapeutic heparin was not 
significantly associated with 
a reduction in the primary 
outcome 
REMAP-CAP 
Investigators, 
2021 69 

Critically ill COVID-19 
patients 

Therapeutic-dose heparin 
Prophylactic-dose heparin 
Results disprove the 
hypothesis that routine 
therapeutic-dose 
anticoagulation benefits 
critically ill patients with 
COVID-19 

Abbreviation: LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin. 



et al. and Spyropoulos et al. studies have assessed the risk of VTE using the International Medical Prevention Registry on Venous Thromboembolism (IMPROVE)-DD VTE score which has been validated for patients both with and without COVID-19. 57,58

Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the Chinese center for disease control and prevention. Z Wu, J M Mcgoogan, JAMA. 32313Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the Chinese center for disease control and prevention. JAMA. 2020;323(13):1239-1242.

Venous thromboembolism in patients discharged after COVID-19 hospitalization. M M Engelen, C Vandenbriele, T Balthazar, Semin Thromb Hemost. 474Engelen MM, Vandenbriele C, Balthazar T, et al. Venous throm- boembolism in patients discharged after COVID-19 hospitaliza- tion. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2021;47(4):362-371.

Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. F Zhou, T Yu, R Du, Lancet. 395Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mor- tality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a ret- rospective cohort study. Lancet. 2020;395(10229):1054-1062.

Hypercoagulability of COVID-19 patients in intensive care unit: a report of thromboelastography findings and other parameters of hemostasis. M Panigada, N Bottino, P Tagliabue, J Thromb Haemost. 187Panigada M, Bottino N, Tagliabue P, et al. Hypercoagulability of COVID-19 patients in intensive care unit: a report of thromboe- lastography findings and other parameters of hemostasis. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(7):1738-1742.

Hematological findings and complications of COVID-19. E Terpos, I Ntanasis-Stathopoulos, I Elalamy, Am J Hematol. 957Terpos E, Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I, Elalamy I, et al. Hematological findings and complications of COVID-19. Am J Hematol. 2020;95(7):834-847.

Coronavirus disease 2019 coagulopathy: disseminated intravascular coagulation and thrombotic microangiopathy-either, neither, or both. M Levi, J Thachil, Semin Thromb Hemost. 467Levi M, Thachil J. Coronavirus disease 2019 coagulopathy: dis- seminated intravascular coagulation and thrombotic microangiop- athy-either, neither, or both. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2020;46(7):781-784.

Hospitalized COVID-19 patients and venous thromboembolism: a perfect storm. A C Spyropoulos, J I Weitz, Am Heart Assoc. 1422Spyropoulos AC, Weitz JI. Hospitalized COVID-19 patients and venous thromboembolism: a perfect storm. Am Heart Assoc. 2020;142(2):129-132.

Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19. F A Klok, Mjha Kruip, Njm Van Der Meer, 10.1016/j.thromres.2020.04.013doi:10.1016/j. thromres.2020.04.013Thromb Res. 191Klok FA, Kruip MJHA, van der Meer NJM, et al. Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19. Thromb Res. 2020;191:145-147. doi:10.1016/j. thromres.2020.04.013.

Thrombotic complications and anticoagulation in COVID-19 pneumonia: a New York city hospital experience. A Hanif, S Khan, N Mantri, Ann Hematol. 9910Hanif A, Khan S, Mantri N, et al. Thrombotic complications and anticoagulation in COVID-19 pneumonia: a New York city hospi- tal experience. Ann Hematol. 2020;99(10):2323-2328.

Thrombosis in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in a New York city health system. S Bilaloglu, Y Aphinyanaphongs, S Jones, E Iturrate, J Hochman, J S Berger, JAMA. 3248Bilaloglu S, Aphinyanaphongs Y, Jones S, Iturrate E, Hochman J, Berger JS. Thrombosis in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in a New York city health system. JAMA. 2020;324(8):799-801.

COVID-19 and thrombotic or thromboembolic disease: implications for prevention, antithrombotic therapy, and follow-up: JACC state-of-the-art review. B Bikdeli, M V Madhavan, D Jimenez, J Am Coll Cardiol. 7523Bikdeli B, Madhavan MV, Jimenez D, et al. COVID-19 and thrombotic or thromboembolic disease: implications for preven- tion, antithrombotic therapy, and follow-up: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75(23):2950-2973.

Pulmonary arterial thrombosis in COVID-19 with fatal outcome: results from a prospective, single-center, clinicopathologic case series. S F Lax, K Skok, P Zechner, Ann Intern Med. 1735Lax SF, Skok K, Zechner P, et al. Pulmonary arterial thrombosis in COVID-19 with fatal outcome: results from a prospective, single-center, clinicopathologic case series. Ann Intern Med. 2020;173(5):350-361.

Autopsy findings and venous thromboembolism in patients with COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. D Wichmann, J-P Sperhake, M Lütgehetmann, Ann Intern Med. 1734Wichmann D, Sperhake J-P, Lütgehetmann M, et al. Autopsy find- ings and venous thromboembolism in patients with COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2020;173(4):268-277.

Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia. N Tang, D Li, X Wang, Z Sun, 10.1111/jth.14768J Thromb Haemost. 184Tang N, Li D, Wang X, Sun Z. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor prognosis in patients with novel corona- virus pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(4):844-847. doi:10.1111/jth.14768.

COVID-19 autopsies. L M Barton, E J Duval, E Stroberg, S Ghosh, S Mukhopadhyay, Am J Clin Pathol. 1536Barton LM, Duval EJ, Stroberg E, Ghosh S, Mukhopadhyay S. COVID-19 autopsies, Oklahoma, USA. Am J Clin Pathol. 2020;153(6):725-733.

Heparin in COVID-19 patients is associated with reduced in-hospital mortality: The Multicenter Italian CORIST Study. Di Castelnuovo, A Costanzo, S Antinori, A , Thromb Haemost. 1218Di Castelnuovo A, Costanzo S, Antinori A, et al. Heparin in COVID-19 patients is associated with reduced in-hospital mortality: The Multicenter Italian CORIST Study. Thromb Haemost. 2021;121(8):1054-1065.

Hypercoagulopathy in severe COVID-19: implications for acute care. A A Waite, D O Hamilton, R Pizzi, W Ageno, I D Welters, Thromb Haemost. 12012Waite AA, Hamilton DO, Pizzi R, Ageno W, Welters ID. Hypercoagulopathy in severe COVID-19: implications for acute care. Thromb Haemost. 2020;120(12):1654-1667.

Impact of implementation of an individualised thromboprophylaxis protocol in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19: a longitudinal controlled before-after study. B Stessel, C Vanvuchelen, L Bruckers, Thromb Res. 194Stessel B, Vanvuchelen C, Bruckers L, et al. Impact of implemen- tation of an individualised thromboprophylaxis protocol in criti- cally ill ICU patients with COVID-19: a longitudinal controlled before-after study. Thromb Res. 2020;194:209-215.

COVID-19 and its implications for thrombosis and anticoagulation. J M Connors, J H Levy, Blood. 13523Connors JM, Levy JH. COVID-19 and its implications for throm- bosis and anticoagulation. Blood. 2020;135(23):2033-2040.

Incidence of deep vein thrombosis among non-ICU patients hospitalized for COVID-19 despite pharmacological thromboprophylaxis. A Santoliquido, A Porfidia, A Nesci, J Thromb Haemost. 189Santoliquido A, Porfidia A, Nesci A, et al. Incidence of deep vein thrombosis among non-ICU patients hospitalized for COVID-19 despite pharmacological thromboprophylaxis. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(9):2358-2363.

Incidence of asymptomatic deep vein thrombosis in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and elevated D-dimer levels. P Demelo-Rodríguez, E Cervilla-Muñoz, L Ordieres-Ortega, Thromb Res. 192Demelo-Rodríguez P, Cervilla-Muñoz E, Ordieres-Ortega L, et al. Incidence of asymptomatic deep vein thrombosis in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and elevated D-dimer levels. Thromb Res. 2020;192:23-26.

Venous thrombosis among critically ill patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). J Nahum, T Morichau-Beauchant, F Daviaud, JAMA Netw Open. 352010478Nahum J, Morichau-Beauchant T, Daviaud F, et al. Venous thrombosis among critically ill patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(5):e2010478.

High incidence of venous thromboembolic events in anticoagulated severe COVID-19 patients. J F Llitjos, M Leclerc, C Chochois, J Thromb Haemost. 187Llitjos JF, Leclerc M, Chochois C, et al. High incidence of venous thromboembolic events in anticoagulated severe COVID-19 patients. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(7):1743-1746.

Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of VTE in patients with coronavirus disease 2019: CHEST guideline and expert panel report. L K Moores, T Tritschler, S Brosnahan, Chest. 1583Moores LK, Tritschler T, Brosnahan S, et al. Prevention, diagno- sis, and treatment of VTE in patients with coronavirus disease 2019: CHEST guideline and expert panel report. Chest. 2020;158(3):1143-1163.

American Society of Hematology living guidelines on the use of anticoagulation for thromboprophylaxis in patients with COVID-19: May 2021 update on the use of intermediate-intensity anticoagulation in critically ill patients. A Cuker, E K Tseng, R Nieuwlaat, doi:10.1182/ bloodadvances.2021005493Blood Adv. 520Cuker A, Tseng EK, Nieuwlaat R, et al. American Society of Hematology living guidelines on the use of anticoagulation for thromboprophylaxis in patients with COVID-19: May 2021 update on the use of intermediate-intensity anticoagulation in crit- ically ill patients. Blood Adv. 2021;5(20):3951-3959. doi:10.1182/ bloodadvances.2021005493.

Subcommittee on perioperative, critical care thrombosis, haemostasis of the scientific, standardization committee of the international society on thrombosis and haemostasis. Scientific and standardization committee communication: clinical guidance on the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. A Spyropoulos, J Levy, W Ageno, J Thromb Haemost. 188Spyropoulos A, Levy J, Ageno W, et al. Subcommittee on periop- erative, critical care thrombosis, haemostasis of the scientific, standardization committee of the international society on throm- bosis and haemostasis. Scientific and standardization committee communication: clinical guidance on the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(8):1859-1865.

Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis and risk for acutely medically ill patients stratified by different ages and renal disease status. A Amin, W R Neuman, M Lingohr-Smith, B Menges, J Lin, Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 251076029618823287Amin A, Neuman WR, Lingohr-Smith M, Menges B, Lin J. Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis and risk for acutely medically ill patients stratified by different ages and renal disease status. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2019;25: 1076029618823287.

Diagnosis, management, and pathophysiology of arterial and venous thrombosis in COVID-19. G Piazza, D A Morrow, 10.1001/jama.2020.23422JAMA. 32424Piazza G, Morrow DA. Diagnosis, management, and pathophysi- ology of arterial and venous thrombosis in COVID-19. JAMA. 2020;324(24):2548-2549. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.23422.

The potential of low molecular weight heparin to mitigate cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 patients: a retrospective clinical study. C Shi, C Wang, H Wang, 10.1111/cts.12880Clin Transl Sci. 136Shi C, Wang C, Wang H, et al. The potential of low molecular weight heparin to mitigate cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 patients: a retrospective clinical study. Clin Transl Sci. 2020;13(6):1087-1095. doi:10.1111/cts.12880

Platelets can associate with SARS-Cov-2 RNA and are hyperactivated in COVID-19. Y Zaid, F Puhm, I Allaeys, Circ Res. 12711Zaid Y, Puhm F, Allaeys I, et al. Platelets can associate with SARS-Cov-2 RNA and are hyperactivated in COVID-19. Circ Res. 2020;127(11):1404-1418.

Immunothrombotic dysregulation in COVID-19 pneumonia is associated with respiratory failure and coagulopathy. L Nicolai, A Leunig, S Brambs, Circulation. 14212Nicolai L, Leunig A, Brambs S, et al. Immunothrombotic dysregu- lation in COVID-19 pneumonia is associated with respiratory failure and coagulopathy. Circulation. 2020;142(12):1176-1189.

Venous and arterial thromboembolic complications in COVID-19 patients admitted to an academic hospital in. C Lodigiani, G Iapichino, L Carenzo, Thromb Res. 191Lodigiani C, Iapichino G, Carenzo L, et al. Venous and arterial thromboembolic complications in COVID-19 patients admitted to an academic hospital in Milan, Italy. Thromb Res. 2020;191:9-14.

Characterizing the immune responses of those who survived or succumbed to COVID-19: can immunological signatures predict outcome?. R Sami, F Fathi, N Eskandari, M Ahmadi, R Arefnezhad, H Motedayyen, 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155439doi:10. 1016/j.cyto.2021.155439Cytokine. 140155439Sami R, Fathi F, Eskandari N, Ahmadi M, ArefNezhad R, Motedayyen H. Characterizing the immune responses of those who survived or succumbed to COVID-19: can immunological signatures predict outcome? Cytokine. 2021;140:155439. doi:10. 1016/j.cyto.2021.155439.

Venous thromboembolism in COVID-19: towards an ideal approach to thromboprophylaxis, screening, and treatment. M R Aryal, R Gosain, A Donato, 10.1007/s11886-020-01327-9Curr Cardiol Rep. 22752Aryal MR, Gosain R, Donato A, et al. Venous thromboembolism in COVID-19: towards an ideal approach to thromboprophylaxis, screening, and treatment. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2020;22(7):52. doi:10.1007/s11886-020-01327-9.

Immune environment modulation in pneumonia patients caused by coronavirus: SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Z Yao, Z Zheng, K Wu, Z Junhua, 10.18632/aging.103101Aging (Albany NY). 129Yao Z, Zheng Z, Wu K, Junhua Z. Immune environment modula- tion in pneumonia patients caused by coronavirus: SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2. Aging (Albany NY). 2020;12(9):7639-7651. doi:10.18632/aging.103101.

COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. P Mehta, D F Mcauley, M Brown, E Sanchez, R S Tattersall, J J Manson, Lancet. 395Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall RS, Manson JJ. COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet. 2020;395(10229):1033-1034.

Venous thromboembolism in COVID-19. S Schulman, Y Hu, S Konstantinides, Thromb Haemost. 12012Schulman S, Hu Y, Konstantinides S. Venous thromboembolism in COVID-19. Thromb Haemost. 2020;120(12):1642-1653.

The hypercoagulable state in COVID-19: incidence, pathophysiology, and management. M Y Abou-Ismail, A Diamond, S Kapoor, Y Arafah, L Nayak, Thromb Res. 194Abou-Ismail MY, Diamond A, Kapoor S, Arafah Y, Nayak L. The hypercoagulable state in COVID-19: incidence, pathophysiology, and management. Thromb Res. 2020;194:101-115.

Bidirectional relation between inflammation and coagulation. M Levi, T Van Der Poll, H R Büller, Circulation. 10922Levi M, van der Poll T, Büller HR. Bidirectional relation between inflammation and coagulation. Circulation. 2004;109(22):2698-2704.

Complement associated microvascular injury and thrombosis in the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 infection: a report of five cases. C Magro, J J Mulvey, D Berlin, Transl Res. 220Magro C, Mulvey JJ, Berlin D, et al. Complement associated microvascular injury and thrombosis in the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 infection: a report of five cases. Transl Res. 2020;220:1-13.

The immunology of macrophage activation syndrome. C B Crayne, S Albeituni, K E Nichols, R Q Cron, 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00119Front Immunol. 10119Crayne CB, Albeituni S, Nichols KE, Cron RQ. The immunology of macrophage activation syndrome. Front Immunol. 2019;10:119. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00119.

Postdischarge venous thromboembolism following hospital admission with COVID-19. L N Roberts, M B Whyte, L Georgiou, Blood. 13611Roberts LN, Whyte MB, Georgiou L, et al. Postdischarge venous thromboembolism following hospital admission with COVID-19. Blood. 2020;136(11):1347-1350.

Postdischarge thrombosis and hemorrhage in patients with COVID-19. R Patell, T Bogue, A Koshy, Blood. 13611Patell R, Bogue T, Koshy A, et al. Postdischarge thrombosis and hemorrhage in patients with COVID-19. Blood. 2020;136(11): 1342-1346.

Incidence of symptomatic venous thromboembolism following hospitalization for coronavirus disease 2019: prospective results from a multi-center study. F Rashidi, S Barco, F Kamangar, Thromb Res. 198Rashidi F, Barco S, Kamangar F, et al. Incidence of symptomatic venous thromboembolism following hospitalization for coronavi- rus disease 2019: prospective results from a multi-center study. Thromb Res. 2021;198:135-138.

Postdischarge thromboembolic outcomes and mortality of hospitalized patients with COVID-19: the CORE-19 registry. D Giannis, S L Allen, J Tsang, Blood. 13720Giannis D, Allen SL, Tsang J, et al. Postdischarge thromboem- bolic outcomes and mortality of hospitalized patients with COVID-19: the CORE-19 registry. Blood. 2021;137(20):2838- 2847.

Prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism associated with coronavirus disease 2019 infection: a consensus statement before guidelines. Z Zhai, C Li, Y Chen, 10.1055/s-0040-1710019doi:10.1055/ s-0040-1710019Thromb Haemost. 1206Zhai Z, Li C, Chen Y, et al. Prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism associated with coronavirus disease 2019 infection: a consensus statement before guide- lines. Thromb Haemost. 2020;120(6):937-948. doi:10.1055/ s-0040-1710019.

Incidence of venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. S Middeldorp, M Coppens, T F Van Haaps, 10.1111/jth.14888doi:10. 1111/jth.14888J Thromb Haemost. 188Middeldorp S, Coppens M, van Haaps TF, et al. Incidence of venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(8):1995-2002. doi:10. 1111/jth.14888.

COVID19 Coagulopathy in Caucasian patients. H Fogarty, L Townsend, Ni Cheallaigh, C , Br J Haematol. 1896Fogarty H, Townsend L, Ni Cheallaigh C, et al. COVID19 Coagulopathy in Caucasian patients. Br J Haematol. 2020;189(6):1044-1049.

Pulmonary embolism in patients with coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia: a narrative review. Y Sakr, M Giovini, M Leone, Ann Intensive Care. 101Sakr Y, Giovini M, Leone M, et al. Pulmonary embolism in patients with coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia: a narrative review. Ann Intensive Care. 2020;10(1):1-13.

Intensity of anticoagulation and survival in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 pneumonia. A Hsu, Y Liu, A S Zayac, A J Olszewski, J L Reagan, Thromb Res. 196Hsu A, Liu Y, Zayac AS, Olszewski AJ, Reagan JL. Intensity of anticoagulation and survival in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 pneumonia. Thromb Res. 2020;196:375-378.

Prolonged elevation of Ddimer levels in convalescent COVID-19 patients is independent of the acute phase response. L Townsend, H Fogarty, A Dyer, J Thromb Haemost. 194Townsend L, Fogarty H, Dyer A, et al. Prolonged elevation of D- dimer levels in convalescent COVID-19 patients is independent of the acute phase response. J Thromb Haemost. 2021;19(4):1064-1070.

Evaluation of variation in D-dimer levels among COVID-19 and bacterial pneumonia: a retrospective analysis. B Yu, X Li, J Chen, J Thromb Thrombolysis. 503Yu B, Li X, Chen J, et al. Evaluation of variation in D-dimer levels among COVID-19 and bacterial pneumonia: a retrospective anal- ysis. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2020;50(3):548-557.

Screening of COVID-19-associated hypercoagulopathy using rotational thromboelastometry. Y Iwasaki, T Shiga, D Konno, 10.1016/j.jclinane.2020.109976doi:10. 1016/j.jclinane.2020.109976J Clin Anesth. 67Iwasaki Y, Shiga T, Konno D, et al. Screening of COVID-19-associated hypercoagulopathy using rotational throm- boelastometry. J Clin Anesth. 2020;67:109976-109976. doi:10. 1016/j.jclinane.2020.109976.

Ability of thromboelastography to detect hypercoagulability: a systematic review and metaanalysis. W Brown, M Lunati, M Maceroli, J Orthop Trauma. 346Brown W, Lunati M, Maceroli M, et al. Ability of thromboelastog- raphy to detect hypercoagulability: a systematic review and meta- analysis. J Orthop Trauma. 2020;34(6):278-286.

Hemostasis and fibrinolysis in COVID-19 survivors 6 months after intensive care unit discharge. A M Hulshof, D C Braeken, C Ghossein-Doha, Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 5612579Hulshof AM, Braeken DC, Ghossein-Doha C, et al. Hemostasis and fibrinolysis in COVID-19 survivors 6 months after intensive care unit discharge. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2021;5(6): e12579.

Early platelet recovery following cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass. S Van Poucke, K Stevens, R Wetzels, Platelets. 278Van Poucke S, Stevens K, Wetzels R, et al. Early platelet recovery following cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass. Platelets. 2016;27(8):751-757.

The IMPROVEDD VTE risk score: incorporation of D-Dimer into the IMPROVE score to improve venous thromboembolism risk stratification. C M Gibson, A C Spyropoulos, A T Cohen, TH open. 101Gibson CM, Spyropoulos AC, Cohen AT, et al. The IMPROVEDD VTE risk score: incorporation of D-Dimer into the IMPROVE score to improve venous thromboembolism risk stratification. TH open. 2017;1(01):e56-e65.

Validation of the IMPROVE-DD risk assessment model for venous thromboembolism among hospitalized patients with COVID-19. A C Spyropoulos, S L Cohen, E Gianos, Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 52Spyropoulos AC, Cohen SL, Gianos E, et al. Validation of the IMPROVE-DD risk assessment model for venous thromboembo- lism among hospitalized patients with COVID-19. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2021;5(2):296-300.

Extended thromboprophylaxis with direct oral anticoagulants for medical patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. D L Tao, J Y Bien, T G Deloughery, J J Shatzel, Blood. 1295Tao DL, Bien JY, DeLoughery TG, Shatzel JJ. Extended thrombo- prophylaxis with direct oral anticoagulants for medical patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood. 2017;129(5): 653-655.

Extended-duration venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients with recently reduced mobility: a randomized trial. R D Hull, S M Schellong, V F Tapson, Ann Intern Med. 1531Hull RD, Schellong SM, Tapson VF, et al. Extended-duration venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients with recently reduced mobility: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153(1):8-18.

Anticoagulant therapy in COVID-19 critically ill: should we go for more. C Vandenbriele, L Van Aelst, T Balthazar, J Kardiol. 5705Vandenbriele C, Van Aelst L, Balthazar T, et al. Anticoagulant therapy in COVID-19 critically ill: should we go for more. J Kardiol. 2020;57(05):168-170.

Belgian Clinical guidance on anticoagulation management in hospitalised and ambulatory patients with COVID-19. T Vanassche, C Orlando, K Vandenbosch, Acta Clin Belg. 772Vanassche T, Orlando C, Vandenbosch K, et al. Belgian Clinical guidance on anticoagulation management in hospitalised and ambulatory patients with COVID-19. Acta Clin Belg. 2020;77(2):280-285.

American Society of hematology 2018 guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: prophylaxis for hospitalized and nonhospitalized medical patients. H Schunemann, M Cushman, A Burnett, 10.1182/bloodadvances.2018022954doi: 10. 1182/bloodadvances.2018022954Blood Adv. 222Schunemann H, Cushman M, Burnett A, et al. American Society of hematology 2018 guidelines for management of venous throm- boembolism: prophylaxis for hospitalized and nonhospitalized medical patients. Blood Adv. 2018;2(22):3198-3225. doi: 10. 1182/bloodadvances.2018022954.

Low versus high dose anticoagulation in patients with coronavirus 2019 pneumonia at the time of admission to critical care units: a multicenter retrospective cohort study in the Beaumont healthcare system. K Al-Banaa, A Alshami, E Elhouderi, 10.1371/journal.pone.0265966PLOS ONE. 173265966Al-Banaa K, Alshami A, Elhouderi E, et al. Low versus high dose anticoagulation in patients with coronavirus 2019 pneumonia at the time of admission to critical care units: a multicenter retrospec- tive cohort study in the Beaumont healthcare system. PLOS ONE. 2022;17(3):e0265966. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0265966.

Prophylactic versus therapeutic dose anticoagulation effects on survival among critically ill patients with COVID-19. W S Hoogenboom, J Q Lu, B Musheyev, 10.1371/journal.pone.0262811PLOS ONE. 171262811Hoogenboom WS, Lu JQ, Musheyev B, et al. Prophylactic versus therapeutic dose anticoagulation effects on survival among criti- cally ill patients with COVID-19. PLOS ONE. 2022;17(1): e0262811. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0262811.

Association of anticoagulation dose and survival in hospitalized COVID-19 patients: a retrospective propensity score-weighted analysis. F Ionescu, I Jaiyesimi, I Petrescu, 10.1111/ejh.13533Eur J Haematol. 1062Ionescu F, Jaiyesimi I, Petrescu I, et al. Association of anticoagu- lation dose and survival in hospitalized COVID-19 patients: a ret- rospective propensity score-weighted analysis. Eur J Haematol. 2021;106(2):165-174. doi:10.1111/ejh.13533.

Therapeutic versus prophylactic anticoagulation for patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 and elevated D-dimer concentration (ACTION): an open-label, multicentre, randomised, controlled trial. R D Lopes, Pgm De Barros E Silva, Rhm Furtado, 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01203-4doi:10. 1016/S0140-6736Lancet. 39721Lopes RD, de Barros e Silva PGM, Furtado RHM, et al. Therapeutic versus prophylactic anticoagulation for patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 and elevated D-dimer con- centration (ACTION): an open-label, multicentre, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet. 2021;397(10291):2253-2263. doi:10. 1016/S0140-6736(21)01203-4.

Effectiveness of therapeutic heparin versus prophylactic heparin on death, mechanical ventilation, or intensive care unit admission in moderately ill patients with COVID-19 admitted to hospital: RAPID randomised clinical trial. M Sholzberg, G H Tang, H Rahhal, Br Med J. 3752400Sholzberg M, Tang GH, Rahhal H, et al. Effectiveness of thera- peutic heparin versus prophylactic heparin on death, mechanical ventilation, or intensive care unit admission in moderately ill patients with COVID-19 admitted to hospital: RAPID randomised clinical trial. Br Med J. 2021;375:n2400.

Therapeutic Anticoagulation with Heparin in critically Ill patients with Covid-19. ; Remap-Cap Investigators, Activ-4a Investigators; Attacc Investigators, 10.1056/NEJMoa2103417N Engl J Med. 3859REMAP-CAP investigators; ACTIV-4a investigators; ATTACC investigators, et al. Therapeutic Anticoagulation with Heparin in crit- ically Ill patients with Covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2021;385(9):777- 789. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2103417.

Rivaroxaban versus no anticoagulation for post-discharge thromboprophylaxis after hospitalisation for COVID-19 (MICHELLE): an open-label, multicentre, randomised, controlled trial. E Ramacciotti, Barile Agati, L Calderaro, D , 10.1016/s0140-6736(21)02392-8doi:10. 1016/s0140-6736Lancet. 39921Ramacciotti E, Barile Agati L, Calderaro D, et al. Rivaroxaban versus no anticoagulation for post-discharge thromboprophylaxis after hos- pitalisation for COVID-19 (MICHELLE): an open-label, multicentre, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet. 2022;399(10319):50-59. doi:10. 1016/s0140-6736(21)02392-8.

Intermittent pneumatic compression for venous thromboembolism prevention: a systematic review on factors affecting adherence. R Greenall, R E Davis, BMJ Open. 10937036Greenall R, Davis RE. Intermittent pneumatic compression for venous thromboembolism prevention: a systematic review on factors affecting adherence. BMJ Open. 2020;10(9):e037036.

ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism developed in collaboration with the European respiratory society (ERS). S V Konstantinides, G Meyer, C Becattini, 10.1093/eurheartj/ehz405doi:10.1093/ eurheartj/ehz405Eur Heart J. 414Konstantinides SV, Meyer G, Becattini C, et al. 2019 ESC guide- lines for the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embo- lism developed in collaboration with the European respiratory society (ERS). Eur Heart J. 2020;41(4):543-603. doi:10.1093/ eurheartj/ehz405.

Heparin enhances the specificity of antithrombin for thrombin and factor Xa independent of the reactive center loop sequence: evidence for an exosite determinant of factor Xa specificity in heparin-activated antithrombin. Y-J Chuang, R Swanson, S M Raja, S T Olson, J Biol Chem. 27618Chuang Y-J, Swanson R, Raja SM, Olson ST. Heparin enhances the specificity of antithrombin for thrombin and factor Xa inde- pendent of the reactive center loop sequence: evidence for an exosite determinant of factor Xa specificity in heparin-activated antithrombin. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(18):14961-14971.

Low molecular weight heparins and heparinoids. J W Eikelboom, G J Hankey, 10.5694/j.1326-5377.2002.tb04807.xdoi:10.5694/j. 1326-5377.2002.tb04807.xMed J Aust. 1776Eikelboom JW, Hankey GJ. Low molecular weight heparins and heparinoids. Med J Aust. 2002;177(6):379-383. doi:10.5694/j. 1326-5377.2002.tb04807.x.

Primary prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism in people undergoing major amputation of the lower extremity. D R Herlihy, M Thomas, Q H Tran, V Puttaswamy, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 7710525Herlihy DR, Thomas M, Tran QH, Puttaswamy V. Primary pro- phylaxis for venous thromboembolism in people undergoing major amputation of the lower extremity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;7(7):010525.

Fondaparinux, a synthetic pentasaccharide: the first in a new class of antithrombotic agents -the selective factor Xa inhibitors. K A Bauer, D W Hawkins, P C Peters, 10.1111/j.1527-3466.2002.tb00081.xCardiovasc Drug Rev. 201Bauer KA, Hawkins DW, Peters PC, et al. Fondaparinux, a synthetic pentasaccharide: the first in a new class of antithrombotic agents -the selective factor Xa inhibitors. Cardiovasc Drug Rev. 2002;20(1):37- 52. doi:10.1111/j.1527-3466.2002.tb00081.x.

Venous thromboembolism: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism (deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism) in patients admitted to hospital. Ncg Centre-Acute, U K Cc, Centre-Acute NCG, UK CC. Venous thromboembolism: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism (deep vein throm- bosis and pulmonary embolism) in patients admitted to hospital. 2010.

Fondaparinux sodium: a selective inhibitor of factor Xa. K A Bauer, 10.1093/ajhp/58.suppl_2.S14.Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 58suppl_2Bauer KA. Fondaparinux sodium: a selective inhibitor of factor Xa. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2001;58(suppl_2):S14-S17. doi:10.1093/ajhp/58.suppl_2.S14.

Thrombosis in COVID-19. T C Hanff, A M Mohareb, J Giri, J B Cohen, J A Chirinos, 10.1002/ajh.25982.Am J Hematol. 9512Hanff TC, Mohareb AM, Giri J, Cohen JB, Chirinos JA. Thrombosis in COVID-19. Am J Hematol. 2020;95(12):1578- 1589. doi:10.1002/ajh.25982.

Acute deep vein thrombosis in COVID 19 hospitalized patients. Risk factors and clinical outcomes. A Bozzani, G Tavazzi, V Arici, 10.1177/0268355520958598.doi:10. 1177/0268355520958598Phlebology. 363Bozzani A, Tavazzi G, Arici V, et al. Acute deep vein throm- bosis in COVID 19 hospitalized patients. Risk factors and clinical outcomes. Phlebology. 2020;36(3):240-242. doi:10. 1177/0268355520958598.

Monoclonal antibodies for COVID-19. E C Lloyd, T N Gandhi, L A Petty, 10.1001/jama.2021.1225JAMA. 32510Lloyd EC, Gandhi TN, Petty LA. Monoclonal antibodies for COVID-19. JAMA. 2021;325(10):1015-1015. doi:10.1001/jama. 2021.1225.

The use of antibodies to coagulation factors for anticoagulant therapy. M Jacquemin, J-M Saint-Remy, Curr Med Chem. 1117Jacquemin M, Saint-Remy J-M. The use of antibodies to coagula- tion factors for anticoagulant therapy. Curr Med Chem. 2004;11(17):2291-2296.

Cardiovascular complications of COVID-19: pharmacotherapy perspective. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. A H Talasaz, H Kakavand, B Van Tassell, 35Talasaz AH, Kakavand H, Van Tassell B, et al. Cardiovascular complications of COVID-19: pharmacotherapy perspective. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2021;35(2):249-259.

Effect of P2Y12 inhibitors on survival free of organ support among non-critically ill hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a randomized clinical trial. J S Berger, L Z Kornblith, M N Gong, 10.1001/jama.2021.23605JAMA. 3273Berger JS, Kornblith LZ, Gong MN, et al. Effect of P2Y12 inhibi- tors on survival free of organ support among non-critically ill hos- pitalized patients with COVID-19: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2022;327(3):227-236. doi:10.1001/jama.2021.23605.