# Perception of information to Swedish melanoma patients in routine clinical practice - a cross-sectional survey

CorpusID: 255832386
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bbf4329612f07849616ae9d825fa857992bab834](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bbf4329612f07849616ae9d825fa857992bab834)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Perception of information to Swedish melanoma patients in routine clinical practice - a cross-sectional survey


Helena Tufvesson Stiller 
Rasmus Mikiver 
Srinivas Uppugunduri 
Marcus Schmitt-Egenolf 
Perception of information to Swedish melanoma patients in routine clinical practice - a cross-sectional survey
10.1186/s12885-022-09208-wTufvesson Stiller et al. BMC Cancer (2022) 22:159 RESEARCH This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article' s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article' s to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.CancerInformationMelanomaOncologyQuality of lifePatient reported outcome measures
Background: Comprehensible, relevant information empowers patients, allowing them to take an active part in their care. We aim to investigate how Swedish melanoma patients perceive information provided in routine clinical practice and explore the correlation between satisfaction with information, symptoms and functioning scales, and quality of life.Methods:A cross-sectional study where EORTC QLQ-C30, EORTC QLQ-INFO25 and EQ-5D-3L questionnaires were sent to 1213 patients by post and 792 responded (65%).Results: Only 0.5% reported that they wished to have received less information. The amount of information received and the satisfaction with that information was age-dependent, where older patients reported receiving less information than younger patients. Middle-aged patients were more satisfied with the information compared to both younger and older patients. The perception of having received sufficient information correlated negatively with anxiety. Higher satisfaction with the information also correlated positively with scores for functioning scales and negatively with degree of symptoms. No difference was perceived in information levels between disease stage apart from the scale "information about other services", where patients with more severe disease reported receiving more information. Men and women reported equal satisfaction concerning the information received.Conclusions: Patients lack sufficient information and age affects the perception of it. It is of utmost importance to tailor the information to suit the individual needs of a given patient, as satisfaction with the information received correlates with the patient's well-being.
 Tufvesson Stiller et al. BMC Cancer (2022) 22:159 
and sex [8]. Treatment regimens also vary considerably in relation to the stage of disease [9]. The needs are therefore likely to differ between subgroups of patients and we have previously been able to show that tumour thickness influences quality of life as well as function and symptoms [10]. The psychosocial needs of melanoma patients, need to be studied further [11] to find ways of improving their quality of life.

In this population-based study, we investigate how the perception of information given in routine clinical practice differs between subgroups of melanoma patients. We explore furthermore if the satisfaction with information is connected to function, symptoms and quality of life.


## Patients and Methods


## Study design

We performed a cross-sectional survey employing a questionnaire covering quality of life, information and symptoms. The study was approved by the local ethics committee in Umeå, Sweden (approval no 2014/58-31) and is in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki. Paper questionnaires, a return envelope and an information letter were mailed to patients during 2015 as described previously [10]. A reminder letter and a new paper questionnaire were sent after a month when necessary. The questionnaires reached the patients 9-15 months after melanoma diagnosis.


## Instruments

The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Core 30 version 3.0 (EORTC QLQ-C30 v3.0) consists of 30 questions divided into 9 multi-item scales: 5 functional scalesphysical, role, cognitive, emotional, and social function; 3 symptom scales -fatigue, pain, nausea & vomiting as well as a global health and quality of life scale. The single items dyspnoea, insomnia, appetite loss, constipation, diarrhoea and financial problems are also included. The questionnaire has been translated and validated in a Swedish setting [12].

The EORTC Information Module (QLQ-INFO25) consists of 25 questions divided into 4 scales concerning information about the disease (4 items), medical tests (3 items), treatment (6 items) and other services (4 items) as well as 8 single items [13]. All analysis of data is performed according to the guidelines previously published in the EORTC QLQ-C30 Scoring Manual [14]. In addition, we also used 5 generic questions regarding the health-related quality of life according to the EQ-5D-3 L. These cover the areas mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression [15].


## Patient population

The patient population has been described previously [10]. Briefly, patients were considered eligible if they were diagnosed with cutaneous malignant melanoma during 2013-2014, residing in the south-eastern or northern region of Sweden, were over 18 years old and registered in the Swedish melanoma register. The two regions were chosen based on accessibility of data. 1308 patients were identified from the register out of which 95 patients were excluded; 86 had deceased, 4 had moved to other parts of Sweden, 4 had emigrated, and 1 had an unknown address. The remaining 1213 patients were included. Patients consented to the study by sending in the questionnaire. The data generated during the current study are not publicly available as Swedish law does not allow the publication of personal data from the register, but a selection of parameters can be acquired from the Swedish melanoma register on request and upon ethical approval.


## Variables and Statistics

All scores of the EORTC QLQ-C30 and QLQ-INFO25 questionnaires were transformed to a value between 0 and 100 according to the EORTC guidelines. Higher scores for the global health and quality of life, functioning scales, information scales and information single items are positive as they represent a higher level of functioning or information. In contrast, higher scores are negative for the symptom scales, as they represent a greater degree of symptoms. Results are reported as mean. The Mann-Whitney test was used to compare groups in different scales. The tests were two-sided and a p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 25 software (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) or R version 3.5.1. (R Core Team, Vienna, Austria). Missing data was handled by pairwise deletion.


## Results

A total of 792 patients responded out of 1213 included (response rate = 65.3%). The responders were representative for the study population in terms of region of residence, sex, age, tumour site, histological subtype, tumour thickness, tumour ulceration, stage and extended surgery of the primary tumour ( Table 1). 78% of the questionnaires were complete, 10% were missing an answer to one question and 12% were missing answers to two or more questions. Since not all respondents answered all questions, the number of respondents varies between scales and items as noted in the figures.


## Satisfaction with information in relation to quality of life and symptoms

To understand how information perception is connected to quality of life, we linked the results from QLQ-INFO25, the questions from EQ-5D-3L and the previously published QLQ-C30 [10].

The perception of having received sufficient amount of information correlated positively with scores on function scales and quality of life ( Fig. 1), showing that patients who are well informed experience a higher degree of functioning. Significant differences between patients who were satisfied with information compared to those not satisfied could be seen for all function scales: physical (p < 0.001), role (p = 0.004), emotional (p < 0.001), cognitive (p < 0.001) and social function (p < 0.001); For the Global Health Scale (p < 0.001) and the symptom scales with the items fatigue (p < 0.001), pain (p < 0.001), dyspnoea (p = 0.001), insomnia (p = 0.003), appetite loss (p < 0.001), constipation (p = 0.005) and diarrhoea (p = 0.003).

In a similar manner, the perception of having received sufficient amount of information correlated negatively with anxiety or depression (ρ=-0.250, p < 0.001) (Fig. 2). Thus patients who feel uninformed are at higher risk for anxiety and depression.


## Age dependency

We found that the amount of information received was age-dependent, where older patients reported receiving less information than younger (Fig. 3 A).

Patients aged 40-69 years reported receiving most information while patients aged 80+ reported receiving the least amount. The oldest patients (80+) were least satisfied with the information given and felt the least need to receive more information. Only 0.5% of patients wanted to receive less information. Middleaged patients (40-79) were more satisfied with the information compared to both younger and older patients (Fig. 3 A). Men and women reported similar satisfaction with information received.


## Stage dependencies

We detected no difference in information levels perceived based on disease stage apart from the scale "information about other services" where patients with more severe disease reported receiving more information (p < 0.001) (Fig. 3B).


## Discussion

We present here a cross-sectional population based study, using internationally validated questionnaires where melanoma patients were selected based on the region of residence and year of diagnosis alone. We provide a representative population of patients with respect to melanoma type, stage, age as well as other relevant parameters. Better functioning and less symptoms correlated with higher satisfaction with the amount of information received. Further, older patients were less satisfied with information compared to middle-aged patients. Information is perceived equally across tumour stages. Taken together, patients feel insufficiently informed and this problem spans across several areas.


## Satisfaction with information in relation to functioning and anxiety

Melanoma patients report a high quality of life when compared to the general public [4,16], but there are differences within this patient group. Patients with thin melanomas (≤ 2 mm) report functioning and quality of life on similar levels as the healthy public while patients with thicker melanomas report lower levels of functioning on several scales as well as lower quality of life [10] .

We show here that satisfaction with information is a second factor correlating with functioning and quality of life. Higher satisfaction with the information correlates positively with functioning and negatively with degree of symptoms. We found that in patients unsatisfied with the amount of information, functioning and quality of life is lower compared to satisfied patients, regardless of disease stage. Satisfaction with information correlated negatively with anxiety and depression which is in line with both earlier cross-sectional [4] and longitudinal [2,17] studies. We were unable to investigate causality in our study due to lack of longitudinal data. However, our results are compatible with the pattern described in earlier studies. The relationship between satisfaction with information and anxiety has been proven by others to be bidirectional, where satisfaction with information at baseline predicts anxiety levels after a year as well as vice versa [17]. Other studies have shown that the level of melanoma associated anxiety and depression is higher at the beginning of treatment, diminishing over time [18] and settles at a level slightly above the general population in long-term survivors [19]. Even though our study was conducted several months after diagnosis, there was still a large proportion of patients with anxiety/depression problems, indicating that this is an area where better support from the health care system would be of great benefit. Since patients with metastatic melanoma treated with immunotherapy are at an increased risk of emotional distress including anxiety and depression [20,  21], there is a significant unmet need for proper support and information in this group. The lack of sufficient information causing anxiety also extends to informal caregivers of cancer patients [22]. Previous studies suggest that providing patients with proper information can prevent anxiety and depression later on [2,17]. Thus, providing patients with adequate information would be of potential benefit for the patients, caregivers and the health care system.


## Unmet information needs

A German study showed that as many as 25% of the patients felt they had received too much information [22]. In our study, only 0.5% reported that they wished to have received less information. This discrepancy may be caused by differences in culture [24], patient population, or the actual amount of information provided. Patients reported similar low amounts of information received as well as similar low satisfaction with that information across all disease stages in the current study. Similarly, an Australian study report unmet information needs in 40-50% of melanoma survivors [4]. The low number of patients that reported receiving too much information in our study indicate that patients are open to receiving more information.


## Age and gender dependencies

The amount of information received and the satisfaction with that information was age-dependent, where older patients reported receiving less information than younger. Middle-aged patients are more satisfied with the information compared to both younger and older patients. Hence, melanoma patients fit into the pattern described for other types of cancer [24]. This may be related to differences in preferences for different sources of information between older and younger melanoma patients and the way information is provided to them [25,26]. It is possible that health care workers and patients that are similar in age may communicate more efficiently. This could potentially explain the higher satisfaction with information in 40-69 year old patients seen in our study. As shown previously, younger individuals may be more inclined to search for information on the internet themselves compared to older patients. The most satisfying information however, is the one provided by health care staff [25]. In line with Brütting et al. [23], we also found lower levels of received information and satisfaction with information in elderly individuals. Interestingly, elderly patients do not wish to receive more information compared to other groups. As suggested previously [27], this may depend on elderly patients being primarily interested in the disease and its effects and being less interested in detailed information.

It is also possible that younger relatives take on a care giver role and, thus, assume responsibility for the information. This could explain why older individuals feel less informed but still do not request for additional information.

In all age groups, patients feel more informed in areas related to the disease and its treatment and less informed in areas related to other places of care, self-help and other services. This may be explained by the fact that information about the disease and treatment is relevant to all patients, while information about other services and different places of care may only be relevant for patients with a more severe disease.

Men and women reported equal satisfaction concerning the received information in our study. In contrast, a German study [23] showed that women often felt less informed compared to men in areas like information about the disease, diagnostics and psychological support.


## Limitations of the study

A longitudinal design could have provided insights relating to causality between anxiety and satisfaction with information. The questionnaires were sent 9-15 months after diagnosis which means severely ill patients may have deceased before the start of our study. It is also possible that patients may have forgotten some of the information that was given to them earlier in the process.

We lack detailed knowledge regarding the information provided to these patients. Further, it is, not only possible that patients may have received different information but also that they may interpret the same information differently.

As in many surveys, responder bias must be considered. Individuals with strong opinions are more likely to respond compared to individuals with less strong opinions.


## Clinical Implications

The information needs of melanoma patients and the ability of the health care system to meet those needs are of great importance for the physical and mental wellbeing of the patient. The need for information is most likely universal, but individual needs may vary, depending on factors such as age and capabilities. Health care practitioners should therefore prioritise personalized information as part of routine practice.


## Future research

It remains to be studied if improving information in unsatisfied patients will reduce the risk of developing anxiety or depression. Finding a suitable time point for measuring base line anxiety and depression could possibly improve satisfaction with information further on. It also remains to be studied if different ways of delivering information has any impact on the patients' wellbeing. There are relatively few studies on the connection between information and quality of life. As cancer is becoming more of a chronic condition and anxiety is an increasing problem, we need to understand how these questions may be addressed in order to give patients a better quality of life.


## Conclusions

It is of utmost importance to tailor the information towards the individual needs of a given patient, as the satisfaction with the information received impacts the patient's well-being. Demographic factors such as age needs to be taken into account. Care givers should therefore focus on addressing this unmet information need in melanoma patients.

## Fig. 1
1Results for EORTC QLQ-C30 in relation to satisfaction with information. Scales and items from EORTC QLQ-C30 presented by response to the question "Were you satisfied with the amount of information received" from EORTC QLQ-INFO25. A high index represents good function. * Significant difference between satisfaction with the information received (Not at all -A little and Quite a bit -Very much) for Global Health Status (p < 0.001), physical-(p < 0.001), role-(p = 0.004), emotional-(p < 0.001), cognitive-(p < 0.001) and social function (p < 0.001)

## Fig. 2 159 Fig. 3 (
21593Satisfaction with information in relation to Anxiety/Depression. Results for the question "Were you satisfied with the amount of information received" from EORTC QLQ-INFO25 in combination with the dimension Anxiety/Depression from EQ-5D-3L. Results are presented by cancer stage. Numbers inside the bars indicate number of patients in each group. A Spearman correlation of -0.250 was significant (p < 0.001) for all groups combined. Spearman correlation for stage I:-0,216 p <0.001, stage II:-0,334, p <0.001 and stage III-IV:-0,373, p = 0.004 (See figure on next page.) Fig. 3 EORTC QLQ-INFO25 presented by Age (panel A) and Stage (panel B). A: Middle aged patients report receiving more information compared to both younger and older patients. Patients aged 80+ report receiving the least amount and lowest satisfaction with information. Patients in all age groups score information related to medical tests, the disease and treatments high, indicating they are feeling informed about these areas, while the categories "information about things you can do to help yourself get well", "information about different places of care" and "information about other services" are scored lower, indicating patients are feeling less informed. 18-39 n = 64±1, 40-59 n = 240±6, 60-69 n = 204±12, 70-79 n = 167±9, 80+ n = 66 ± 9. B: Patients of all disease stages report similar levels of information in all areas except "Information about other services" where there is a statistically significant difference between patients with stage I-II and III-IV. Stage I n = 536±27, Stage II n = 142±9, Stage III-IV n = 59±3. * Significant difference between stage I-II and III-IV (p < 0.001) Tufvesson Stiller et al. BMC Cancer (2022) 22:See legend on previous page.)

## Table 1## Patients and Methods


## Study design

We performed a cross-sectional survey employing a questionnaire covering quality of life, information and symptoms. The study was approved by the local ethics committee in Umeå, Sweden (approval no 2014/58-31) and is in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki. Paper questionnaires, a return envelope and an information letter were mailed to patients during 2015 as described previously [10]. A reminder letter and a new paper questionnaire were sent after a month when necessary. The questionnaires reached the patients 9-15 months after melanoma diagnosis.


## Instruments

The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Core 30 version 3.0 (EORTC QLQ-C30 v3.0) consists of 30 questions divided into 9 multi-item scales: 5 functional scalesphysical, role, cognitive, emotional, and social function; 3 symptom scales -fatigue, pain, nausea & vomiting as well as a global health and quality of life scale. The single items dyspnoea, insomnia, appetite loss, constipation, diarrhoea and financial problems are also included. The questionnaire has been translated and validated in a Swedish setting [12].

The EORTC Information Module (QLQ-INFO25) consists of 25 questions divided into 4 scales concerning information about the disease (4 items), medical tests (3 items), treatment (6 items) and other services (4 items) as well as 8 single items [13]. All analysis of data is performed according to the guidelines previously published in the EORTC QLQ-C30 Scoring Manual [14]. In addition, we also used 5 generic questions regarding the health-related quality of life according to the EQ-5D-3 L. These cover the areas mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression [15].


## Patient population

The patient population has been described previously [10]. Briefly, patients were considered eligible if they were diagnosed with cutaneous malignant melanoma during 2013-2014, residing in the south-eastern or northern region of Sweden, were over 18 years old and registered in the Swedish melanoma register. The two regions were chosen based on accessibility of data. 1308 patients were identified from the register out of which 95 patients were excluded; 86 had deceased, 4 had moved to other parts of Sweden, 4 had emigrated, and 1 had an unknown address. The remaining 1213 patients were included. Patients consented to the study by sending in the questionnaire. The data generated during the current study are not publicly available as Swedish law does not allow the publication of personal data from the register, but a selection of parameters can be acquired from the Swedish melanoma register on request and upon ethical approval.


## Variables and Statistics

All scores of the EORTC QLQ-C30 and QLQ-INFO25 questionnaires were transformed to a value between 0 and 100 according to the EORTC guidelines. Higher scores for the global health and quality of life, functioning scales, information scales and information single items are positive as they represent a higher level of functioning or information. In contrast, higher scores are negative for the symptom scales, as they represent a greater degree of symptoms. Results are reported as mean. The Mann-Whitney test was used to compare groups in different scales. The tests were two-sided and a p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 25 software (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) or R version 3.5.1. (R Core Team, Vienna, Austria). Missing data was handled by pairwise deletion.


## Results

A total of 792 patients responded out of 1213 included (response rate = 65.3%). The responders were representative for the study population in terms of region of residence, sex, age, tumour site, histological subtype, tumour thickness, tumour ulceration, stage and extended surgery of the primary tumour ( Table 1). 78% of the questionnaires were complete, 10% were missing an answer to one question and 12% were missing answers to two or more questions. Since not all respondents answered all questions, the number of respondents varies between scales and items as noted in the figures.


## Satisfaction with information in relation to quality of life and symptoms

To understand how information perception is connected to quality of life, we linked the results from QLQ-INFO25, the questions from EQ-5D-3L and the previously published QLQ-C30 [10].

The perception of having received sufficient amount of information correlated positively with scores on function scales and quality of life ( Fig. 1), showing that patients who are well informed experience a higher degree of functioning. Significant differences between patients who were satisfied with information compared to those not satisfied could be seen for all function scales: physical (p < 0.001), role (p = 0.004), emotional (p < 0.001), cognitive (p < 0.001) and social function (p < 0.001); For the Global Health Scale (p < 0.001) and the symptom scales with the items fatigue (p < 0.001), pain (p < 0.001), dyspnoea (p = 0.001), insomnia (p = 0.003), appetite loss (p < 0.001), constipation (p = 0.005) and diarrhoea (p = 0.003).

In a similar manner, the perception of having received sufficient amount of information correlated negatively with anxiety or depression (ρ=-0.250, p < 0.001) (Fig. 2). Thus patients who feel uninformed are at higher risk for anxiety and depression.


## Age dependency

We found that the amount of information received was age-dependent, where older patients reported receiving less information than younger (Fig. 3 A).

Patients aged 40-69 years reported receiving most information while patients aged 80+ reported receiving the least amount. The oldest patients (80+) were least satisfied with the information given and felt the least need to receive more information. Only 0.5% of patients wanted to receive less information. Middleaged patients (40-79) were more satisfied with the information compared to both younger and older patients (Fig. 3 A). Men and women reported similar satisfaction with information received.


## Stage dependencies

We detected no difference in information levels perceived based on disease stage apart from the scale "information about other services" where patients with more severe disease reported receiving more information (p < 0.001) (Fig. 3B).


## Discussion

We present here a cross-sectional population based study, using internationally validated questionnaires where melanoma patients were selected based on the region of residence and year of diagnosis alone. We provide a representative population of patients with respect to melanoma type, stage, age as well as other relevant parameters. Better functioning and less symptoms correlated with higher satisfaction with the amount of information received. Further, older patients were less satisfied with information compared to middle-aged patients. Information is perceived equally across tumour stages. Taken together, patients feel insufficiently informed and this problem spans across several areas.


## Satisfaction with information in relation to functioning and anxiety

Melanoma patients report a high quality of life when compared to the general public [4,16], but there are differences within this patient group. Patients with thin melanomas (≤ 2 mm) report functioning and quality of life on similar levels as the healthy public while patients with thicker melanomas report lower levels of functioning on several scales as well as lower quality of life [10] .

We show here that satisfaction with information is a second factor correlating with functioning and quality of life. Higher satisfaction with the information correlates positively with functioning and negatively with degree of symptoms. We found that in patients unsatisfied with the amount of information, functioning and quality of life is lower compared to satisfied patients, regardless of disease stage. Satisfaction with information correlated negatively with anxiety and depression which is in line with both earlier cross-sectional [4] and longitudinal [2,17] studies. We were unable to investigate causality in our study due to lack of longitudinal data. However, our results are compatible with the pattern described in earlier studies. The relationship between satisfaction with information and anxiety has been proven by others to be bidirectional, where satisfaction with information at baseline predicts anxiety levels after a year as well as vice versa [17]. Other studies have shown that the level of melanoma associated anxiety and depression is higher at the beginning of treatment, diminishing over time [18] and settles at a level slightly above the general population in long-term survivors [19]. Even though our study was conducted several months after diagnosis, there was still a large proportion of patients with anxiety/depression problems, indicating that this is an area where better support from the health care system would be of great benefit. Since patients with metastatic melanoma treated with immunotherapy are at an increased risk of emotional distress including anxiety and depression [20,  21], there is a significant unmet need for proper support and information in this group. The lack of sufficient information causing anxiety also extends to informal caregivers of cancer patients [22]. Previous studies suggest that providing patients with proper information can prevent anxiety and depression later on [2,17]. Thus, providing patients with adequate information would be of potential benefit for the patients, caregivers and the health care system.


## Unmet information needs

A German study showed that as many as 25% of the patients felt they had received too much information [22]. In our study, only 0.5% reported that they wished to have received less information. This discrepancy may be caused by differences in culture [24], patient population, or the actual amount of information provided. Patients reported similar low amounts of information received as well as similar low satisfaction with that information across all disease stages in the current study. Similarly, an Australian study report unmet information needs in 40-50% of melanoma survivors [4]. The low number of patients that reported receiving too much information in our study indicate that patients are open to receiving more information.


## Age and gender dependencies

The amount of information received and the satisfaction with that information was age-dependent, where older patients reported receiving less information than younger. Middle-aged patients are more satisfied with the information compared to both younger and older patients. Hence, melanoma patients fit into the pattern described for other types of cancer [24]. This may be related to differences in preferences for different sources of information between older and younger melanoma patients and the way information is provided to them [25,26]. It is possible that health care workers and patients that are similar in age may communicate more efficiently. This could potentially explain the higher satisfaction with information in 40-69 year old patients seen in our study. As shown previously, younger individuals may be more inclined to search for information on the internet themselves compared to older patients. The most satisfying information however, is the one provided by health care staff [25]. In line with Brütting et al. [23], we also found lower levels of received information and satisfaction with information in elderly individuals. Interestingly, elderly patients do not wish to receive more information compared to other groups. As suggested previously [27], this may depend on elderly patients being primarily interested in the disease and its effects and being less interested in detailed information.

It is also possible that younger relatives take on a care giver role and, thus, assume responsibility for the information. This could explain why older individuals feel less informed but still do not request for additional information.

In all age groups, patients feel more informed in areas related to the disease and its treatment and less informed in areas related to other places of care, self-help and other services. This may be explained by the fact that information about the disease and treatment is relevant to all patients, while information about other services and different places of care may only be relevant for patients with a more severe disease.

Men and women reported equal satisfaction concerning the received information in our study. In contrast, a German study [23] showed that women often felt less informed compared to men in areas like information about the disease, diagnostics and psychological support.


## Limitations of the study

A longitudinal design could have provided insights relating to causality between anxiety and satisfaction with information. The questionnaires were sent 9-15 months after diagnosis which means severely ill patients may have deceased before the start of our study. It is also possible that patients may have forgotten some of the information that was given to them earlier in the process.

We lack detailed knowledge regarding the information provided to these patients. Further, it is, not only possible that patients may have received different information but also that they may interpret the same information differently.

As in many surveys, responder bias must be considered. Individuals with strong opinions are more likely to respond compared to individuals with less strong opinions.


## Clinical Implications

The information needs of melanoma patients and the ability of the health care system to meet those needs are of great importance for the physical and mental wellbeing of the patient. The need for information is most likely universal, but individual needs may vary, depending on factors such as age and capabilities. Health care practitioners should therefore prioritise personalized information as part of routine practice.


## Future research

It remains to be studied if improving information in unsatisfied patients will reduce the risk of developing anxiety or depression. Finding a suitable time point for measuring base line anxiety and depression could possibly improve satisfaction with information further on. It also remains to be studied if different ways of delivering information has any impact on the patients' wellbeing. There are relatively few studies on the connection between information and quality of life. As cancer is becoming more of a chronic condition and anxiety is an increasing problem, we need to understand how these questions may be addressed in order to give patients a better quality of life.


## Conclusions

It is of utmost importance to tailor the information towards the individual needs of a given patient, as the satisfaction with the information received impacts the patient's well-being. Demographic factors such as age needs to be taken into account. Care givers should therefore focus on addressing this unmet information need in melanoma patients.

## Fig. 1
1Results for EORTC QLQ-C30 in relation to satisfaction with information. Scales and items from EORTC QLQ-C30 presented by response to the question "Were you satisfied with the amount of information received" from EORTC QLQ-INFO25. A high index represents good function. * Significant difference between satisfaction with the information received (Not at all -A little and Quite a bit -Very much) for Global Health Status (p < 0.001), physical-(p < 0.001), role-(p = 0.004), emotional-(p < 0.001), cognitive-(p < 0.001) and social function (p < 0.001)

## Fig. 2 159 Fig. 3 (
21593Satisfaction with information in relation to Anxiety/Depression. Results for the question "Were you satisfied with the amount of information received" from EORTC QLQ-INFO25 in combination with the dimension Anxiety/Depression from EQ-5D-3L. Results are presented by cancer stage. Numbers inside the bars indicate number of patients in each group. A Spearman correlation of -0.250 was significant (p < 0.001) for all groups combined. Spearman correlation for stage I:-0,216 p <0.001, stage II:-0,334, p <0.001 and stage III-IV:-0,373, p = 0.004 (See figure on next page.) Fig. 3 EORTC QLQ-INFO25 presented by Age (panel A) and Stage (panel B). A: Middle aged patients report receiving more information compared to both younger and older patients. Patients aged 80+ report receiving the least amount and lowest satisfaction with information. Patients in all age groups score information related to medical tests, the disease and treatments high, indicating they are feeling informed about these areas, while the categories "information about things you can do to help yourself get well", "information about different places of care" and "information about other services" are scored lower, indicating patients are feeling less informed. 18-39 n = 64±1, 40-59 n = 240±6, 60-69 n = 204±12, 70-79 n = 167±9, 80+ n = 66 ± 9. B: Patients of all disease stages report similar levels of information in all areas except "Information about other services" where there is a statistically significant difference between patients with stage I-II and III-IV. Stage I n = 536±27, Stage II n = 142±9, Stage III-IV n = 59±3. * Significant difference between stage I-II and III-IV (p < 0.001) Tufvesson Stiller et al. BMC Cancer (2022) 22:See legend on previous page.)

## Table 1
1Background parameters for the responders and study populationRespondents 
Study population 

(n = 792; 65.3%) 
(N = 1213) 

Men 
Women 
Men 
Women 

Region (n, (%)) 

South East 
273 (70.2) 
281 (69.7) 
406 (68.6) 
417 (67.1) 

North 
116 (29.8) 
122 (30.3) 
186 (31.4) 
204 (32.9) 

Sex (n, (%)) 
389 (49) 
403 (51) 
592 (49) 
621 (51) 

Age (mean) 
65 
59 
64 
59 

Tumour site (n, (%)) 

Head/neck 
54 (13.9) 
33 (8.2) 
79 (13.3) 
54 (8.7) 

Upper extremity 
77 (19.8) 
87 (21.6) 
128 (21.6) 
134 (21.6) 

Lower extremity 
50 (12.9) 
145 (36) 
69 (11.7) 
207 (33.3) 

Trunk 
200 (51.4) 
131 (32.5) 
308 (52) 
217 (34.9) 

Hand, foot and subungual 
4 (1) 
6 (1.5) 
4 (0.7) 
8 (1.3) 

Missing 
4 (1) 
1 (0.2) 
4 (0.7) 
1 (0.2) 

Histopathological subtype (n, (%)) 

Superficial Spreading Melanoma 
260 (66.8) 
268 (66.5) 
398 (67.2) 
418 (67.3) 

Lentigo Maligna Melanoma 
17 (4.4) 
14 (3.5) 
28 (4.7) 
23 (3.7) 

Nodular Melanoma 
50 (12.9) 
57 (14.1) 
75 (12.7) 
86 (13.8) 

Acral Lentiginous Melanoma 
3 (0.8) 
6 (1.5) 
6 (1) 
9 (1.4) 

Other 
51 (13.1) 
45 (11.2) 
66 (11.1) 
65 (10.5) 

Missing 
8 (2.1) 
13 (3.2) 
19 (3.2) 
20 (3.2) 

Tumour thickness (n, (%)) 

<=1.00 mm 
210 (54) 
230 (57.1) 
321 (54.2) 
363 (58.5) 

1.01-2.00 mm 
92 (23.7) 
81 (20.1) 
136 (23) 
111 (17.9) 

2.01-4.00 mm 
53 (13.6) 
49 (12.2) 
74 (12.5) 
78 (12.6) 

>4.00 mm 
31 (8) 
40 (9.9) 
58 (9.8) 
66 (10.6) 

Missing 
3 (0.8) 
3 (0.7) 
3 (0.5) 
3 (0.5) 

Tumour ulceration (n, (%)) 

Present 
62 (15.9) 
62 (15.4) 
99 (16.7) 
97 (15.6) 

Absent 
309 (79.4) 
320 (79.4) 
461 (77.9) 
493 (79.4) 

Missing 
18 (4.6) 
21 (5.2) 
32 (5.4) 
31 (5) 

Stage (n, (%)) 

I 
277 (71.2) 
287 (71.2) 
423 (71.5) 
445 (71.7) 

II 
76 (19.5) 
81 (20.1) 
122 (20.6) 
132 (21.3) 

III -IV 
33 (8.5) 
30 (7.4) 
42 (7.1) 
39 (6.3) 

Missing 
3 (0.8) 
5 (1.2) 
5 (0.8) 
5 (0.8) 

Extended surgery of the primary tumour (n, (%)) 

Yes 
344 (88.4) 
362 (89.8) 
509 (86) 
542 (87.3) 

No 
35 (9) 
37 (9.2) 
71 (12) 
70 (11.3) 

Missing 
10 (2.6) 
4 (1) 
12 (2) 
9 (1.4) 

AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank Christer Lindholm for valuable support in the initial phase of the study, as well as the staff at the Regional Cancer Centre Southeast and Regional Cancer Centre North for valuable assistance. A special thank you should also be extended to all patients that took part in the study.Authors' contributionsHTS and MSE designed the study. HTS, SU and RM acquired the data. RM performed the statistical analysis. All authors were involved in data interpretation as well as manuscript preparation, editing and reviewing. The authors read and approved the final manuscript.FundingOpen access funding provided by Umea University. This research received no external funding but was completed as part of a PhD-program.Availability of data and materialsThe data that support the findings of this study are available from the Swedish melanoma register but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of the Swedish Melanoma Register.Declarations Ethics approval and consent to participateThe study was approved by the local ethics committee in Umeå, Sweden (approval no 2014/58-31). Paper questionnaires, a return envelope and an information letter were mailed to patients. Respondents consented by sending in the questionnaire.Consent for publicationNot applicable.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.
The Relation Between Having a Usual Source of Care and Ratings of Care Quality: Does Patient-Centered Communication Play a Role?. L J Finney Rutten, A A Agunwamba, E Beckjord, B W Hesse, R P Moser, N K Arora, J Health Commun. 20Finney Rutten LJ, Agunwamba AA, Beckjord E, Hesse BW, Moser RP, Arora NK. The Relation Between Having a Usual Source of Care and Ratings of Care Quality: Does Patient-Centered Communication Play a Role? J Health Commun. 2015;20:759-65.

Information needs in cancer patients across the disease trajectory. A prospective study. U Goerling, H Faller, B Hornemann, K Hönig, C Bergelt, I Maatouk, B Stein, M Teufel, Y Erim, F Geiser, Patient Educ Couns. 103Goerling U, Faller H, Hornemann B, Hönig K, Bergelt C, Maatouk I, Stein B, Teufel M, Erim Y, Geiser F et al: Information needs in cancer patients across the disease trajectory. A prospective study. Patient Educ Couns. 2020;103:120-6.

Does fear of cancer recurrence differ between cancer types? A study from the population-based PROFILES registry. M Van De Wal, L Van De Poll-Franse, J Prins, M Gielessen, Psychooncology. 25van de Wal M, van de Poll-Franse L, Prins J, Gielessen M: Does fear of cancer recurrence differ between cancer types? A study from the population-based PROFILES registry. Psychooncology. 2016;25:772-8.

Patient-reported outcomes in melanoma survivors at 1, 3 and 5 years post-diagnosis: a population-based cross-sectional study. K Lisy, J Lai-Kwon, A Ward, S Sandhu, N A Kasparian, J Winstanley, F Boyle, D Gyorki, K Lacey, J Bishop, Qual Life Res. 29Lisy K, Lai-Kwon J, Ward A, Sandhu S, Kasparian NA, Winstanley J, Boyle F, Gyorki D, Lacey K, Bishop J et al: Patient-reported outcomes in mela- noma survivors at 1, 3 and 5 years post-diagnosis: a population-based cross-sectional study. Qual Life Res. 2020;29:2021-7.

Nationell årsrapport för hudmelanom. C Ingvar, R Mikiver, L Ny, J Hansson, H Eriksson, I Vassilaki, R O Bagge, G Ullenhag, J: Swemr -Svenska Lapins, Melanomregistret, Ingvar C, Mikiver R, Ny L, Hansson J, Eriksson H, Vassilaki I, Bagge RO, Ullenhag G, Lapins J: SweMR -Svenska Melanomregistret. Nationell årsrapport för hudmelanom. In. https:// www. cance rcent rum. se/ samve rkan/ cance rdiag noser/ hud-och-ogon/ kvali tetsr egist er/: Regionalt Can- cercentrum Sydöst; 2020.

Emotional Distress: The Sixth Vital Sign in Cancer Care. B D Bultz, L E Carlson, J Clin Oncol. 23Bultz BD, Carlson LE: Emotional Distress: The Sixth Vital Sign in Cancer Care. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:6440-1.

Depression and anxiety in patients with cancer. A Pitman, S Suleman, N Hyde, A Hodgkiss, Brit Med J. 3611415Pitman A, Suleman S, Hyde N, Hodgkiss A: Depression and anxiety in patients with cancer. Brit Med J. 2018;361:k1415.

Trends in cutaneous malignant melanoma in Sweden 1997-2011: thinner tumours and improved survival among men. J Lyth, H Eriksson, J Hansson, C Ingvar, M Jansson, J Lapins, E Månsson-Brahme, P Naredi, U Stierner, G Ullenhag, Br J Dermatol. 1723Lyth J, Eriksson H, Hansson J, Ingvar C, Jansson M, Lapins J, Månsson- Brahme E, Naredi P, Stierner U, Ullenhag G, et al. Trends in cutaneous malignant melanoma in Sweden 1997-2011: thinner tumours and improved survival among men. Br J Dermatol. 2015;172(3):700-6.

Cutaneous melanoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment end follow-up. R Dummer, A Hauschild, A Guggenheim, U Keilholz, G Pentheroudakis, Ann Oncol. 237Dummer R, Hauschild A, Guggenheim A, Keilholz U, Pentheroudakis G. Cutaneous melanoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment end follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2012;23(supplement 7):vii86-91.

Health-related quality of life in patients with melanoma -characterization of a Swedish cohort. Tufvesson Stiller, H Mikiver, R Uppugunduri, S Lindholm, C , Månsson Brahme, E Schmitt-Egenolf, M , Br J Dermatol. 1822Tufvesson Stiller H, Mikiver R, Uppugunduri S, Lindholm C, Månsson Brahme E, Schmitt-Egenolf M: Health-related quality of life in patients with melanoma -characterization of a Swedish cohort. Br J Dermatol. 2020;182(2):506-8.

A systematic review examining factors influencing health related quality of life among melanoma cancer survivors. J-F Hamel, M Pe, C Coens, F Martinelli, Amm Eggermont, Y Brandberg, A Bottomley, Eur J Cancer. 69Hamel J-F, Pe M, Coens C, Martinelli F, Eggermont AMM, Brandberg Y, Bottomley A: A systematic review examining factors influencing health related quality of life among melanoma cancer survivors. Eur J Cancer. 2016;69:189-98.

The European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30: A qualityof-life instrument for use in international clinical trials in oncology. N K Aaronson, S Ahmedzai, B Bergman, M Bullinger, A Cull, N J Duez, A Filiberti, H Flechtner, S B Fleishman, Jcjm De Haes, J National Cancer Institute. 85Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, Bullinger M, Cull A, Duez NJ, Filiberti A, Flechtner H, Fleishman SB, de Haes JCJM et al: The European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30: A quality- of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials in oncology. J National Cancer Institute. 1993;85:365-76.

An international validation study of the EORTC QLQ-INFO25 questionnaire: An instrument to assess the information given to cancer patients. J I Arraras, E Greimel, O Sezer, W-C Chie, M Bergenmar, A Costantini, T Young, K K Vlasich, G Velikovai, Eur J Cancer. 46Arraras JI, Greimel E, Sezer O, Chie W-C, Bergenmar M, Costantini A, Young T, Vlasich KK, Velikovai G: An international validation study of the EORTC QLQ-INFO25 questionnaire: An instrument to assess the information given to cancer patients. Eur J Cancer. 2010;46:2726-38.

Brussels: European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer. P M Fayers, N K Aaronson, K Bjordal, M Groenvold, D Curran, A Bottomley, Eortc Quality Of Life, Group, The EORTC QLQ-C30 Scoring Manual. 3rd EditionFayers PM, Aaronson NK, Bjordal K, Groenvold M, Curran D, Bottomley A, EORTC Quality of Life Group: The EORTC QLQ-C30 Scoring Manual (3rd Edition) In. Brussels: European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer; 2001.

EuroQol -a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of life. Health Policy. 16The EuroQol GroupThe EuroQol Group. EuroQol -a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of life. Health Policy. 1990;16(3):199-208.

Health-related Quality of Life Measured by the EORTC QLQ-C30 Reference Values From a Large Sample of the Swedish Population. H Michelson, C Bolund, B Nilsson, Y Brandberg, Acta Oncologica. 394Michelson H, Bolund C, Nilsson B, Brandberg Y. Health-related Quality of Life Measured by the EORTC QLQ-C30 Reference Values From a Large Sample of the Swedish Population. Acta Oncologica. 2000;39(4):477-84.

The prospective relationship between satisfaction with information and symptoms of depression and anxiety in breast cancer: A structural equation modeling analysis. H Faller, A Strahl, M Richard, C Niehues, K Meng, Psychooncology. 2611Faller H, Strahl A, Richard M, Niehues C, Meng K: The prospective relation- ship between satisfaction with information and symptoms of depression and anxiety in breast cancer: A structural equation modeling analysis. Psychooncology. 2017;26(11):1741-8.

Coping with melanoma-related worry: a qualitative study of the experiences and support needs of patients with malignant melanoma. J Bird, P Coleman, S Danson, J Clin Nurs. 24Bird J, Coleman P, Danson S: Coping with melanoma-related worry: a qualitative study of the experiences and support needs of patients with malignant melanoma. J Clin Nurs. 2015;24:937-47.

convenient online submission • thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your field • rapid publication on acceptance • support for research data, including large and complex data types • gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year • At BMC, research is always in progress. Learn more biomedcentral.com/submissions Ready to submit your research Ready to submit your research ? Choose BMC. • Fast, Choose BMC and benefit from. • fast, convenient online submission • thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your field • rapid publication on acceptance • support for research data, including large and complex data types • gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year • At BMC, research is always in progress. Learn more biomedcentral.com/submissions Ready to submit your research Ready to submit your research ? Choose BMC and benefit from: ? Choose BMC and benefit from:

Depression, anxiety and quality of life in long-term survivors of malignant melanoma: a register-based cohort study. M E Beutel, S Fischbeck, H Binder, M Blettner, E Brähler, K Emrich, P Friedrich-Mai, B H Imruck, V Weyer, Sr Z, PLoS One. 101116440Beutel ME, Fischbeck S, Binder H, Blettner M, Brähler E, Emrich K, Friedrich-Mai P, Imruck BH, Weyer V, SR Z: Depression, anxiety and quality of life in long-term survivors of malignant melanoma: a register-based cohort study. PLoS One. 2015;10(1):e0116440.

Health-related quality of life, emotional burden, and neurocognitive function in the first generation of metastatic melanoma survivors treated with pembrolizumab: a longitudinal pilot study. A Rogiers, C Leys, De Cremer, J Awada, G Schembri, A Theuns, P , De Ridder, M Neyns, B , Support Care Cancer. 287Rogiers A, Leys C, De Cremer J, Awada G, Schembri A, Theuns P, De Ridder M, Neyns B. Health-related quality of life, emotional burden, and neurocognitive function in the first generation of metastatic melanoma survivors treated with pembrolizumab: a longitudinal pilot study. Support Care Cancer. 2020;28(7):3267-78.

An immunotherapy survivor population: health-related quality of life and toxicity in patients with metastatic melanoma treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors. A O&apos;reilly, P Hughes, J Mann, Z Lai, J J Teh, E Mclean, K Edmonds, K Lingard, D Chauhan, J Lynch, Support Care Cancer. 28O'Reilly A, Hughes P, Mann J, Lai Z, Teh JJ, Mclean E, Edmonds K, Lingard K, Chauhan D, Lynch J et al: An immunotherapy survivor population: health-related quality of life and toxicity in patients with metastatic mela- noma treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Support Care Cancer. 2020;28:561-70.

When Do We Need to Care About the Caregiver? Supportive Care Needs, Anxiety, and Depression Among Informal Caregivers of Patients With Cancer and Cancer Survivors. H Sklenarova, A Krümpelmann, M W Haun, H-C Friederich, J Huber, M Thomas, E C Winkler, W Herzog, M Hartmann, Cancer. 1219Sklenarova H, Krümpelmann A, Haun MW, Friederich H-C, Huber J, Thomas M, Winkler EC, Herzog W, Hartmann M: When Do We Need to Care About the Caregiver? Supportive Care Needs, Anxiety, and Depres- sion Among Informal Caregivers of Patients With Cancer and Cancer Survivors. Cancer. 2015;121(9):1513-9.

Unmet information needs of patients with melanoma in Germany. J Brütting, M Bergmann, M Garsarolli, R Rauschenberg, C Weber, C Berking, W Tilgen, D , Melanoma Res. 292Brütting J, Bergmann M, Garsarolli M, Rauschenberg R, Weber C, Berking C, Tilgen W, D S: Unmet information needs of patients with melanoma in Germany. Melanoma Res. 2018;29(2):196-204.

European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Group: Cross-cultural differences in information disclosure evaluated through the EORTC questionnaires. J I Arraras, E Greimel, W-C Chie, O Sezer, M Bergenmar, A Costantini, T Young, K K Vlasic, G Velikova, Psychooncol. 222Arraras JI, Greimel E, Chie W-C, Sezer O, Bergenmar M, Costantini A, Young T, Vlasic KK, Velikova G, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Group: Cross-cultural differences in information disclosure evaluated through the EORTC questionnaires. Psychooncol. 2013;22(2):268-75.

NVKH supporting group: Information-seeking and use of information resources among melanoma patients of German skin cancer centers. J Brütting, M Bergmann, M Garzarolli, R Rauschenberg, C Weber, C Berking, W Tilgen, D Schadendorf, F Meier, J der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft. 169Brütting J, Bergmann M, Garzarolli M, Rauschenberg R, Weber C, Berking C, Tilgen W, Schadendorf D, Meier F, NVKH supporting group: Information-seeking and use of information resources among melanoma patients of German skin cancer centers. J der Deutschen Dermatologis- chen Gesellschaft. 2018;16(9):1093-101.

NVKH: Sources of information and support for melanoma patients: differences between patients' and clinicians' preferences. J Brütting, M Bergmann, D Schadendorf, C Weber, W Tilgen, C Berking, F Meier, J der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft. 176Brütting J, Bergmann M, Schadendorf D, Weber C, Tilgen W, Berking C, Meier F, NVKH: Sources of information and support for melanoma patients: differences between patients' and clinicians' preferences. J der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft. 2019;17(6):652-4.

Patient Education About Treatment in Cancer Care An Overview of the Literature on Older Patients' Needs. J Jansen, J Van Weert, S Van Dulmen, T Heeren, J Bensing, Cancer Nurs. 304Jansen J, van Weert J, van Dulmen S, Heeren T, Bensing J: Patient Educa- tion About Treatment in Cancer Care An Overview of the Literature on Older Patients' Needs. Cancer Nurs. 2007;30(4):251-60.

Publisher's Note. Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub- lished maps and institutional affiliations.