# Cardiovascular manifestations of monkeypox virus outbreak: An overview of the reported cases

CorpusID: 256592326
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff6e2630d1161b70d541ccee17bdda907b60c0ae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff6e2630d1161b70d541ccee17bdda907b60c0ae)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Cardiovascular manifestations of monkeypox virus outbreak: An overview of the reported cases
Available online 3 February 2023

Amr Ehab El-Qushayri 
Faculty of Medicine
Minia University
MiniaEgypt

Abdelrahman G Tawfik 
Department of Pharmacotherapy
College of Pharmacy
The University of Utah
Salt Lake CityUTUnited States

Hani Mahmoud-Elsayed 
Department of Adult Cardiology
Aswan Heart Centre
Magdi Yacoub Foundation
AswanEgypt

Cardiovascular manifestations of monkeypox virus outbreak: An overview of the reported cases
Available online 3 February 202310.1016/j.hrtlng.2023.01.012Article History: Received 15 November 2022 Revised 20 January 2023 Accepted 20 January 2023A R T I C L E I N F OMonkeypox virus MPV Cardiovascular Pericarditis, Myocarditis
Elsevier has created a Monkeypox Information Center in response to the declared public health emergency of international concern, with free information in English on the monkeypox virus. The Monkeypox InformationCenter is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website.Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its monkeypox related research that is available on the Monkeypox Information Center -including this research content -immediately available in publicly funded repositories, with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source.These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the Monkeypox Information Center remains active.A B S T R A C TBackground: Monkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic DNA virus related to the orthopoxvirus family that causes also smallpox infection. Objectives: In this paper, we aimed to study the cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox. Method: A literature databases search was conducted on 20th October 2022 and limited to 2022 (the new outbreak) to collect all the relevant papers that discussed cardiovascular manifestations in Mpox. Results: The literature included 6 cases of myocarditis, one case of pericarditis, one case of myopericarditis and one case of atrial fibrillation. Of total 6 cases with completed data, ECG results and troponin levels were abnormal in 5 cases while only three cases had abnormal ECHO and CMR results. In the four cases who undergone chest X-rays, only one patient had non-specific retro-cardiac opacities. All patients (9 cases) recovered well from their cardiovascular manifestations with no deaths and only 3 of them required ICU admission. Conclusion: With the limited reported cases, we recommend performing cardiovascular examinations -in particular ECG and troponin levels-in order to exclude cardiovascular insult in patients with suspected Mpox -cardiovascular involvement. However, in our series the infection was mild in most patients with no mortality.

## Introduction

Monkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic DNA virus related to the orthopoxvirus family that causes also smallpox infection, and is first diagnosed in humans in 1970. 1 From the beginning of 2022, more than 70,000 cases were reported of Mpox infection in more than 50 countries, prompting the world health organization (WHO) to declare it as a public health concern. 2, 3 Mpox symptoms mainly included rash, fever, lymphadenopathy, fatigue and headache; however asymptomatic nature of the disease is reported as well. [4][5][6] Large respiratory droplets, close or direct contact with skin lesions, and possibly contaminated fomites are the common routes of Mpox spread. 7,8 Fortunately, Mpox is self-limited, and supportive treatment is sufficient based upon the reported literature. 9 Moreover, less than 5% of hospitalized patients had fatal outcomes. 10 Many viruses are related to cardiac infections. 11,12 In a large population study of Thornhill et al. across 16 countries and including more than 500 Mpox cases, the authors indicated that two Mpox patients experienced myocarditis and both patients recovered well with supportive treatment. 13 Moreover, two Mpox patients had high troponin levels and were complaining from chest pain and/or dyspnea were finally diagnosed with myocarditis. 14 Therefore, we aimed to collect all available evidence regarding the cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox and the associated outcomes of those patients.


## Method


## Database search and search procedure

We followed the guidelines of Liberati and colleagues which known as PRISMA checklist for conducting systematic reviews. 15 Five databases were searched on 20th October 2022 and limited to 2022 (the new outbreak). We used the search term "("monkeypox" OR "MPV" OR "monkeypox virus" OR "monkey pox") AND ("arrhythmia" OR "pericarditits" OR "myocardititis" OR "heart failure" OR "myocardial infarction" OR "acute coronary syndrome" OR "pericardial effusion" OR "heart")" to collect all the relevant papers from Scopus, Google Scholar, PubMed, Virtual Health Library and Web of Science.   Another round of searching was performed by using each keyword alone in Google Scholar to avoid missing any relevant paper. After transferring all the results of the database search, duplicates were excluded and the remaining records were transferred to an Excel sheet for facilitating the screening process. At least two authors scanned all papers via title and abstract then full text screening methods. A senior author revised all the screening results to ensure collecting all the available literature.

Inclusion criteria: We included all papers that discussed cardiologic manifestations of Mpox in 2022 without restriction to study design, language or country of patients.

Exclusion criteria: We excluded Mpox cases before the new pandemic in 2022, review papers and pre-print papers.


## Data extraction

The extraction sheet was done by the most experienced author together with the incorporation of the senior author. The extraction sheet included: study ID, age, sex, comorbid conditions, Mpox diagnostic method, symptoms and signs at admission, laboratory, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography (ECHO) and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) findings, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, treatment, outcome of patients and the final cardiovascular diagnosis.


## Quality of evidence

Based upon the study designs we found, we used two quality assessment tools to rate the quality of evidence. The National Institute of Health tool was used for the cohort and the cross-sectional studies and the Joanna Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal tool was used for the case reports studies (Table S1 and S2).


## Results


## Study selection and outcomes

We screened 2298 records in two steps. The first step was title and abstract screening at which we excluded 2264 records. The second step was full text screening which resulted in inclusion of 5 papers together with another 2 papers from manual search methods (Fig. 1).

We included 9 patients from 7 papers. 13,14,[16][17][18][19][20] Four cases were from USA, two from Canada, one from Portugal and two cases from the multicenter study. 13 The literature included 6 cases of myocarditis, one case of pericarditis, one case of myopericarditis and one case of atrial fibrillation (Fig. 2). Characteristics, symptoms, examination and laboratory data of patients were reported from 5 studies (6 patients) and missed in two studies, Thornhill et al. 13 and Miller et al., 19 (authors were emailed and did not reply to get the needed data) ( Table 1).

Regarding the 6 patients, all of them were male, diagnosed with PCR, presented with chest pain § dyspnea, chest tightness and decreased exercise tolerance. An elevated troponin was found in 5 cases (Fig. 3). ECG results were abnormal in 5 cases while only three cases had abnormal ECHO and three cases had abnormal CMR results (total tested 3). In the four cases who undergone chest X-ray, only one patient had non-specific retro-cardiac opacities. All patients (9 cases) recovered well from their cardiovascular manifestations with no deaths and only 3 of them required ICU admission.


## Discussion

Our results showed that six Mpox patients suffered from myocarditis, one patient suffered from pericarditis, one from myopericarditis and one from atrial fibrillation. Moreover, three out of nine patients  were admitted to ICU. Most of the patients were male with comorbidities such as HIV and syphilis. These comorbidities made them more susceptible to infections. 21 However, all the patients recovered from their cardiovascular manifestations, indicating the mild nature of the disease across the cardiovascular system without severe or lifethreatening complications in most cases. According to investigations, elevated troponin levels were reported in five cases, and also five cases had abnormal ECG findings, such as nonspecific ventricular repolarization abnormalities, sinus tachycardia with widespread ST elevation, evolution of ST-segment changes, sinus tachycardia with antero-lateral concave ST elevation and T wave inversions in the inferior and anterolateral leads. Finally, the cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and ECHO showed abnormalities in three cases.

Mpox is a viral infection endemic in Africa, especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. 22,23 Furthermore, on July 2022 the World Health Organization (WHO) declared Mpox as a global emergency. 2 Most of the cases were men who had sex with men (MSM). For instance, 98% of the patients in a study conducted on 528 confirmed cases of monkeypox infection in 16 countries were MSM. 24 The symptoms of Mpox were: rash, fever, headache, vomiting, conjunctivitis, oral ulceration, lymphadenopathy, sepsis, encephalitis and upper respiratory tract symptoms. In addition, the average hospitalization period was 13.3, and the mean treatment duration was five days. 25,26 Therefore, efforts were made to repurpose the smallpox vaccination to prevent Mpox cases. 27,28 Myocarditis was associated with many viral infections. 29,30 The most typical pathogenesis of viral myocarditis is lymphocytic myocarditis, which develops 10À14 days after infection and is accompanied by myonecrosis. This condition may be self-limited or culminate in fulminant myocarditis. 30 At the same time, the most common form of pericardial affection is pericarditis. It could progress to pericardial effusion, with tamponade in severe cases. Currently, the pathogenicity of how Mpox affects the cardiovascular system remains an area for further investigation. However, the immune-mediated cascade serves as the most accepted theory -until now-, derived from the fact that many cases of cardiac involvement were reported after smallpox vaccination. 31 Despite being a rare entity, appropriate diagnosis Àby the exclusion of other life-threatening conditions such as coronary ischemiaand close monitoring of Mpox patients who encounter cardiovascular complications are necessary to avoid clinical deterioration and to prevent the long-term sequelae. Furthermore, cardiovascular involvement should become one of the most important differential diagnoses when Mpox patients manifested with sudden onset chest pain and/or dyspnea. Moreover, further research is still needed to highlight the true prevalence, pathologic mechanisms, high risk patients, diagnostic algorithms and appropriate treatment agents for cardiovascular involvement in Mpox patients.


## Conclusion

With the limited reported cases, we recommend performing cardiovascular examinations -in particular ECG and troponin levels-in order to exclude cardiovascular insult in patients with suspected Mpox -cardiovascular involvement. However, in our series the infection was mild in most patients with no mortality.

## Fig. 1 .
1PRISMA flow diagram of the study process.

## Fig. 2 .
2The cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox patients.


virus, M= male, HIV= human immunodeficiency virus, PCR= polymerase chain reaction, CRP= C-reactive protein, CPK= creatine phosphokinase, WBCs= white blood cells, ESR= erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CMR= cardio magnetic resonance, ICU= intensive care unit, (-) = not reported, VIGIV = vaccinia immune globulin intravenous.

## Table 1
1Characteristics and outcomes of MPV cases. A.E. El-Qushayri et al. / Heart & Lung 59 (2023) 67À72Study ID 
Country 
Age 
Sex 
Comorbidities 
MPV 
diagnosis 

Symptoms and signs at 
admission 

Laboratory 
findings 

Chest X-ray 
findings 

ECG findings 
Echo findings 
CMR 
ICU 
admission 

Treatment 
Outcome Heart 
abnormality 

Pinho-2022 Portugal 
31 
M 
Pre-exposure pro-
phylaxis 
against HIV 

PCR 
Chest tightness radiat-
ing to the left upper 
extremity 

Elevated CRP, 
CPK, troponin I, 
and brain natri-
uretic peptide. 

Normal 
Sinus rhythm 
with nonspe-
cific ventricular 
repolarization 
abnormalities 

Normal 
Areas of increased sig-
nal intensity in the 
basal inferior and 
lateral segments 
were found, corre-
sponding to myo-
cardial edema. 
Subepicardial 
enhancement in the 
mid inferolateral 
segment and mid-
wall enhancement 
in the remaining 
inferior and lateral 
segments of the LV. 
parametric map-
ping demonstrated 
regional increase of 
T2 and indicated an 
abnormally 
expanded myocar-
dial extracellular 
volume in the lat-
eral wall. Postcon-
trast T1 mapping 
confirmed myocar-
dial gadolinium 
accumulation with 
a non-ischemic pat-
tern in the lateral 
wall. 

Yes 
Supportive 
care and 
exercise 
restriction 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Shaik-2022 USA 
51 
M 
À 
PCR 
Severe retrosternal 
chest pain radiating 
to the left arm and 
chest tightness after 
the commencement 
of the pain 

Elevated WBCs, 
CRP and ESR 

Normal 
Sinus tachycardia 
with wide-
spread ST ele-
vation in leads 
v1-v6 

Mild pericardial 
effusion 

À 
Yes 
1 gram of 
aspirin 

Recovery Pericarditis 

Tan 2022 
Canada 
40 
M 
HIV 
PCR 
Central, nonradiating, 
pressure-like chest 
pain but denied 
cough, palpitations, 
or shortness of 
breath 

Elevated troponin 
and creatine 
kinase 

Evolution of ST-
segment 
changes 

Moderate global 
left ventricular 
dysfunction 
with an ejec-
tion fraction of 
40% 

Small pericardial effu-
sion, and foci of late 
gadolinium 
enhancement in the 
basal/apical lateral 
segments corre-
sponding with focal 
edema 

À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myopericarditis 

Rodriguez-
Nava-
2022 

USA 
32 
M 
Syphilis 
PCR 
Chest pain and 
dyspnea 

Elevated troponin 
T and N-termi-
nal prohor-
mone B-type 
natriuretic 
peptide 

Normal 
Normal 
Normal 
À 
À 
Oral tecoviri-
mat and 

doxycycline 

Recovery 
Myocarditis 
37 
M 
Syphilis and HIV 
preexposure 
prophylaxis 

PCR 
Difficulty breathing 
and decreased exer-
cise tolerance with-
out chest pain, 
dyspnea after 
climbing a single 
flight of stairs, a 
marked decrease 
from his baseline. 

Elevated troponin 
T 

À 
T wave inversions 
in the inferior 
and anterolat-
eral leads 

Normal 
À 
À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Thornhill-
2022 

Multicenter À 
À 
HIV 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 
À 
À 
À 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 

(continued on next page) 



## Table 1 (## Introduction

Monkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic DNA virus related to the orthopoxvirus family that causes also smallpox infection, and is first diagnosed in humans in 1970. 1 From the beginning of 2022, more than 70,000 cases were reported of Mpox infection in more than 50 countries, prompting the world health organization (WHO) to declare it as a public health concern. 2, 3 Mpox symptoms mainly included rash, fever, lymphadenopathy, fatigue and headache; however asymptomatic nature of the disease is reported as well. [4][5][6] Large respiratory droplets, close or direct contact with skin lesions, and possibly contaminated fomites are the common routes of Mpox spread. 7,8 Fortunately, Mpox is self-limited, and supportive treatment is sufficient based upon the reported literature. 9 Moreover, less than 5% of hospitalized patients had fatal outcomes. 10 Many viruses are related to cardiac infections. 11,12 In a large population study of Thornhill et al. across 16 countries and including more than 500 Mpox cases, the authors indicated that two Mpox patients experienced myocarditis and both patients recovered well with supportive treatment. 13 Moreover, two Mpox patients had high troponin levels and were complaining from chest pain and/or dyspnea were finally diagnosed with myocarditis. 14 Therefore, we aimed to collect all available evidence regarding the cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox and the associated outcomes of those patients.


## Method


## Database search and search procedure

We followed the guidelines of Liberati and colleagues which known as PRISMA checklist for conducting systematic reviews. 15 Five databases were searched on 20th October 2022 and limited to 2022 (the new outbreak). We used the search term "("monkeypox" OR "MPV" OR "monkeypox virus" OR "monkey pox") AND ("arrhythmia" OR "pericarditits" OR "myocardititis" OR "heart failure" OR "myocardial infarction" OR "acute coronary syndrome" OR "pericardial effusion" OR "heart")" to collect all the relevant papers from Scopus, Google Scholar, PubMed, Virtual Health Library and Web of Science.   Another round of searching was performed by using each keyword alone in Google Scholar to avoid missing any relevant paper. After transferring all the results of the database search, duplicates were excluded and the remaining records were transferred to an Excel sheet for facilitating the screening process. At least two authors scanned all papers via title and abstract then full text screening methods. A senior author revised all the screening results to ensure collecting all the available literature.

Inclusion criteria: We included all papers that discussed cardiologic manifestations of Mpox in 2022 without restriction to study design, language or country of patients.

Exclusion criteria: We excluded Mpox cases before the new pandemic in 2022, review papers and pre-print papers.


## Data extraction

The extraction sheet was done by the most experienced author together with the incorporation of the senior author. The extraction sheet included: study ID, age, sex, comorbid conditions, Mpox diagnostic method, symptoms and signs at admission, laboratory, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography (ECHO) and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) findings, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, treatment, outcome of patients and the final cardiovascular diagnosis.


## Quality of evidence

Based upon the study designs we found, we used two quality assessment tools to rate the quality of evidence. The National Institute of Health tool was used for the cohort and the cross-sectional studies and the Joanna Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal tool was used for the case reports studies (Table S1 and S2).


## Results


## Study selection and outcomes

We screened 2298 records in two steps. The first step was title and abstract screening at which we excluded 2264 records. The second step was full text screening which resulted in inclusion of 5 papers together with another 2 papers from manual search methods (Fig. 1).

We included 9 patients from 7 papers. 13,14,[16][17][18][19][20] Four cases were from USA, two from Canada, one from Portugal and two cases from the multicenter study. 13 The literature included 6 cases of myocarditis, one case of pericarditis, one case of myopericarditis and one case of atrial fibrillation (Fig. 2). Characteristics, symptoms, examination and laboratory data of patients were reported from 5 studies (6 patients) and missed in two studies, Thornhill et al. 13 and Miller et al., 19 (authors were emailed and did not reply to get the needed data) ( Table 1).

Regarding the 6 patients, all of them were male, diagnosed with PCR, presented with chest pain § dyspnea, chest tightness and decreased exercise tolerance. An elevated troponin was found in 5 cases (Fig. 3). ECG results were abnormal in 5 cases while only three cases had abnormal ECHO and three cases had abnormal CMR results (total tested 3). In the four cases who undergone chest X-ray, only one patient had non-specific retro-cardiac opacities. All patients (9 cases) recovered well from their cardiovascular manifestations with no deaths and only 3 of them required ICU admission.


## Discussion

Our results showed that six Mpox patients suffered from myocarditis, one patient suffered from pericarditis, one from myopericarditis and one from atrial fibrillation. Moreover, three out of nine patients  were admitted to ICU. Most of the patients were male with comorbidities such as HIV and syphilis. These comorbidities made them more susceptible to infections. 21 However, all the patients recovered from their cardiovascular manifestations, indicating the mild nature of the disease across the cardiovascular system without severe or lifethreatening complications in most cases. According to investigations, elevated troponin levels were reported in five cases, and also five cases had abnormal ECG findings, such as nonspecific ventricular repolarization abnormalities, sinus tachycardia with widespread ST elevation, evolution of ST-segment changes, sinus tachycardia with antero-lateral concave ST elevation and T wave inversions in the inferior and anterolateral leads. Finally, the cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and ECHO showed abnormalities in three cases.

Mpox is a viral infection endemic in Africa, especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. 22,23 Furthermore, on July 2022 the World Health Organization (WHO) declared Mpox as a global emergency. 2 Most of the cases were men who had sex with men (MSM). For instance, 98% of the patients in a study conducted on 528 confirmed cases of monkeypox infection in 16 countries were MSM. 24 The symptoms of Mpox were: rash, fever, headache, vomiting, conjunctivitis, oral ulceration, lymphadenopathy, sepsis, encephalitis and upper respiratory tract symptoms. In addition, the average hospitalization period was 13.3, and the mean treatment duration was five days. 25,26 Therefore, efforts were made to repurpose the smallpox vaccination to prevent Mpox cases. 27,28 Myocarditis was associated with many viral infections. 29,30 The most typical pathogenesis of viral myocarditis is lymphocytic myocarditis, which develops 10À14 days after infection and is accompanied by myonecrosis. This condition may be self-limited or culminate in fulminant myocarditis. 30 At the same time, the most common form of pericardial affection is pericarditis. It could progress to pericardial effusion, with tamponade in severe cases. Currently, the pathogenicity of how Mpox affects the cardiovascular system remains an area for further investigation. However, the immune-mediated cascade serves as the most accepted theory -until now-, derived from the fact that many cases of cardiac involvement were reported after smallpox vaccination. 31 Despite being a rare entity, appropriate diagnosis Àby the exclusion of other life-threatening conditions such as coronary ischemiaand close monitoring of Mpox patients who encounter cardiovascular complications are necessary to avoid clinical deterioration and to prevent the long-term sequelae. Furthermore, cardiovascular involvement should become one of the most important differential diagnoses when Mpox patients manifested with sudden onset chest pain and/or dyspnea. Moreover, further research is still needed to highlight the true prevalence, pathologic mechanisms, high risk patients, diagnostic algorithms and appropriate treatment agents for cardiovascular involvement in Mpox patients.


## Conclusion

With the limited reported cases, we recommend performing cardiovascular examinations -in particular ECG and troponin levels-in order to exclude cardiovascular insult in patients with suspected Mpox -cardiovascular involvement. However, in our series the infection was mild in most patients with no mortality.

## Fig. 1 .
1PRISMA flow diagram of the study process.

## Fig. 2 .
2The cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox patients.


virus, M= male, HIV= human immunodeficiency virus, PCR= polymerase chain reaction, CRP= C-reactive protein, CPK= creatine phosphokinase, WBCs= white blood cells, ESR= erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CMR= cardio magnetic resonance, ICU= intensive care unit, (-) = not reported, VIGIV = vaccinia immune globulin intravenous.

## Table 1
1Characteristics and outcomes of MPV cases. A.E. El-Qushayri et al. / Heart & Lung 59 (2023) 67À72Study ID 
Country 
Age 
Sex 
Comorbidities 
MPV 
diagnosis 

Symptoms and signs at 
admission 

Laboratory 
findings 

Chest X-ray 
findings 

ECG findings 
Echo findings 
CMR 
ICU 
admission 

Treatment 
Outcome Heart 
abnormality 

Pinho-2022 Portugal 
31 
M 
Pre-exposure pro-
phylaxis 
against HIV 

PCR 
Chest tightness radiat-
ing to the left upper 
extremity 

Elevated CRP, 
CPK, troponin I, 
and brain natri-
uretic peptide. 

Normal 
Sinus rhythm 
with nonspe-
cific ventricular 
repolarization 
abnormalities 

Normal 
Areas of increased sig-
nal intensity in the 
basal inferior and 
lateral segments 
were found, corre-
sponding to myo-
cardial edema. 
Subepicardial 
enhancement in the 
mid inferolateral 
segment and mid-
wall enhancement 
in the remaining 
inferior and lateral 
segments of the LV. 
parametric map-
ping demonstrated 
regional increase of 
T2 and indicated an 
abnormally 
expanded myocar-
dial extracellular 
volume in the lat-
eral wall. Postcon-
trast T1 mapping 
confirmed myocar-
dial gadolinium 
accumulation with 
a non-ischemic pat-
tern in the lateral 
wall. 

Yes 
Supportive 
care and 
exercise 
restriction 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Shaik-2022 USA 
51 
M 
À 
PCR 
Severe retrosternal 
chest pain radiating 
to the left arm and 
chest tightness after 
the commencement 
of the pain 

Elevated WBCs, 
CRP and ESR 

Normal 
Sinus tachycardia 
with wide-
spread ST ele-
vation in leads 
v1-v6 

Mild pericardial 
effusion 

À 
Yes 
1 gram of 
aspirin 

Recovery Pericarditis 

Tan 2022 
Canada 
40 
M 
HIV 
PCR 
Central, nonradiating, 
pressure-like chest 
pain but denied 
cough, palpitations, 
or shortness of 
breath 

Elevated troponin 
and creatine 
kinase 

Evolution of ST-
segment 
changes 

Moderate global 
left ventricular 
dysfunction 
with an ejec-
tion fraction of 
40% 

Small pericardial effu-
sion, and foci of late 
gadolinium 
enhancement in the 
basal/apical lateral 
segments corre-
sponding with focal 
edema 

À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myopericarditis 

Rodriguez-
Nava-
2022 

USA 
32 
M 
Syphilis 
PCR 
Chest pain and 
dyspnea 

Elevated troponin 
T and N-termi-
nal prohor-
mone B-type 
natriuretic 
peptide 

Normal 
Normal 
Normal 
À 
À 
Oral tecoviri-
mat and 

doxycycline 

Recovery 
Myocarditis 
37 
M 
Syphilis and HIV 
preexposure 
prophylaxis 

PCR 
Difficulty breathing 
and decreased exer-
cise tolerance with-
out chest pain, 
dyspnea after 
climbing a single 
flight of stairs, a 
marked decrease 
from his baseline. 

Elevated troponin 
T 

À 
T wave inversions 
in the inferior 
and anterolat-
eral leads 

Normal 
À 
À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Thornhill-
2022 

Multicenter À 
À 
HIV 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 
À 
À 
À 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 

(continued on next page) 



## Table 1 (## Introduction

Monkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic DNA virus related to the orthopoxvirus family that causes also smallpox infection, and is first diagnosed in humans in 1970. 1 From the beginning of 2022, more than 70,000 cases were reported of Mpox infection in more than 50 countries, prompting the world health organization (WHO) to declare it as a public health concern. 2, 3 Mpox symptoms mainly included rash, fever, lymphadenopathy, fatigue and headache; however asymptomatic nature of the disease is reported as well. [4][5][6] Large respiratory droplets, close or direct contact with skin lesions, and possibly contaminated fomites are the common routes of Mpox spread. 7,8 Fortunately, Mpox is self-limited, and supportive treatment is sufficient based upon the reported literature. 9 Moreover, less than 5% of hospitalized patients had fatal outcomes. 10 Many viruses are related to cardiac infections. 11,12 In a large population study of Thornhill et al. across 16 countries and including more than 500 Mpox cases, the authors indicated that two Mpox patients experienced myocarditis and both patients recovered well with supportive treatment. 13 Moreover, two Mpox patients had high troponin levels and were complaining from chest pain and/or dyspnea were finally diagnosed with myocarditis. 14 Therefore, we aimed to collect all available evidence regarding the cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox and the associated outcomes of those patients.


## Method


## Database search and search procedure

We followed the guidelines of Liberati and colleagues which known as PRISMA checklist for conducting systematic reviews. 15 Five databases were searched on 20th October 2022 and limited to 2022 (the new outbreak). We used the search term "("monkeypox" OR "MPV" OR "monkeypox virus" OR "monkey pox") AND ("arrhythmia" OR "pericarditits" OR "myocardititis" OR "heart failure" OR "myocardial infarction" OR "acute coronary syndrome" OR "pericardial effusion" OR "heart")" to collect all the relevant papers from Scopus, Google Scholar, PubMed, Virtual Health Library and Web of Science.   Another round of searching was performed by using each keyword alone in Google Scholar to avoid missing any relevant paper. After transferring all the results of the database search, duplicates were excluded and the remaining records were transferred to an Excel sheet for facilitating the screening process. At least two authors scanned all papers via title and abstract then full text screening methods. A senior author revised all the screening results to ensure collecting all the available literature.

Inclusion criteria: We included all papers that discussed cardiologic manifestations of Mpox in 2022 without restriction to study design, language or country of patients.

Exclusion criteria: We excluded Mpox cases before the new pandemic in 2022, review papers and pre-print papers.


## Data extraction

The extraction sheet was done by the most experienced author together with the incorporation of the senior author. The extraction sheet included: study ID, age, sex, comorbid conditions, Mpox diagnostic method, symptoms and signs at admission, laboratory, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography (ECHO) and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) findings, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, treatment, outcome of patients and the final cardiovascular diagnosis.


## Quality of evidence

Based upon the study designs we found, we used two quality assessment tools to rate the quality of evidence. The National Institute of Health tool was used for the cohort and the cross-sectional studies and the Joanna Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal tool was used for the case reports studies (Table S1 and S2).


## Results


## Study selection and outcomes

We screened 2298 records in two steps. The first step was title and abstract screening at which we excluded 2264 records. The second step was full text screening which resulted in inclusion of 5 papers together with another 2 papers from manual search methods (Fig. 1).

We included 9 patients from 7 papers. 13,14,[16][17][18][19][20] Four cases were from USA, two from Canada, one from Portugal and two cases from the multicenter study. 13 The literature included 6 cases of myocarditis, one case of pericarditis, one case of myopericarditis and one case of atrial fibrillation (Fig. 2). Characteristics, symptoms, examination and laboratory data of patients were reported from 5 studies (6 patients) and missed in two studies, Thornhill et al. 13 and Miller et al., 19 (authors were emailed and did not reply to get the needed data) ( Table 1).

Regarding the 6 patients, all of them were male, diagnosed with PCR, presented with chest pain § dyspnea, chest tightness and decreased exercise tolerance. An elevated troponin was found in 5 cases (Fig. 3). ECG results were abnormal in 5 cases while only three cases had abnormal ECHO and three cases had abnormal CMR results (total tested 3). In the four cases who undergone chest X-ray, only one patient had non-specific retro-cardiac opacities. All patients (9 cases) recovered well from their cardiovascular manifestations with no deaths and only 3 of them required ICU admission.


## Discussion

Our results showed that six Mpox patients suffered from myocarditis, one patient suffered from pericarditis, one from myopericarditis and one from atrial fibrillation. Moreover, three out of nine patients  were admitted to ICU. Most of the patients were male with comorbidities such as HIV and syphilis. These comorbidities made them more susceptible to infections. 21 However, all the patients recovered from their cardiovascular manifestations, indicating the mild nature of the disease across the cardiovascular system without severe or lifethreatening complications in most cases. According to investigations, elevated troponin levels were reported in five cases, and also five cases had abnormal ECG findings, such as nonspecific ventricular repolarization abnormalities, sinus tachycardia with widespread ST elevation, evolution of ST-segment changes, sinus tachycardia with antero-lateral concave ST elevation and T wave inversions in the inferior and anterolateral leads. Finally, the cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and ECHO showed abnormalities in three cases.

Mpox is a viral infection endemic in Africa, especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. 22,23 Furthermore, on July 2022 the World Health Organization (WHO) declared Mpox as a global emergency. 2 Most of the cases were men who had sex with men (MSM). For instance, 98% of the patients in a study conducted on 528 confirmed cases of monkeypox infection in 16 countries were MSM. 24 The symptoms of Mpox were: rash, fever, headache, vomiting, conjunctivitis, oral ulceration, lymphadenopathy, sepsis, encephalitis and upper respiratory tract symptoms. In addition, the average hospitalization period was 13.3, and the mean treatment duration was five days. 25,26 Therefore, efforts were made to repurpose the smallpox vaccination to prevent Mpox cases. 27,28 Myocarditis was associated with many viral infections. 29,30 The most typical pathogenesis of viral myocarditis is lymphocytic myocarditis, which develops 10À14 days after infection and is accompanied by myonecrosis. This condition may be self-limited or culminate in fulminant myocarditis. 30 At the same time, the most common form of pericardial affection is pericarditis. It could progress to pericardial effusion, with tamponade in severe cases. Currently, the pathogenicity of how Mpox affects the cardiovascular system remains an area for further investigation. However, the immune-mediated cascade serves as the most accepted theory -until now-, derived from the fact that many cases of cardiac involvement were reported after smallpox vaccination. 31 Despite being a rare entity, appropriate diagnosis Àby the exclusion of other life-threatening conditions such as coronary ischemiaand close monitoring of Mpox patients who encounter cardiovascular complications are necessary to avoid clinical deterioration and to prevent the long-term sequelae. Furthermore, cardiovascular involvement should become one of the most important differential diagnoses when Mpox patients manifested with sudden onset chest pain and/or dyspnea. Moreover, further research is still needed to highlight the true prevalence, pathologic mechanisms, high risk patients, diagnostic algorithms and appropriate treatment agents for cardiovascular involvement in Mpox patients.


## Conclusion

With the limited reported cases, we recommend performing cardiovascular examinations -in particular ECG and troponin levels-in order to exclude cardiovascular insult in patients with suspected Mpox -cardiovascular involvement. However, in our series the infection was mild in most patients with no mortality.

## Fig. 1 .
1PRISMA flow diagram of the study process.

## Fig. 2 .
2The cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox patients.


virus, M= male, HIV= human immunodeficiency virus, PCR= polymerase chain reaction, CRP= C-reactive protein, CPK= creatine phosphokinase, WBCs= white blood cells, ESR= erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CMR= cardio magnetic resonance, ICU= intensive care unit, (-) = not reported, VIGIV = vaccinia immune globulin intravenous.

## Table 1
1Characteristics and outcomes of MPV cases. A.E. El-Qushayri et al. / Heart & Lung 59 (2023) 67À72Study ID 
Country 
Age 
Sex 
Comorbidities 
MPV 
diagnosis 

Symptoms and signs at 
admission 

Laboratory 
findings 

Chest X-ray 
findings 

ECG findings 
Echo findings 
CMR 
ICU 
admission 

Treatment 
Outcome Heart 
abnormality 

Pinho-2022 Portugal 
31 
M 
Pre-exposure pro-
phylaxis 
against HIV 

PCR 
Chest tightness radiat-
ing to the left upper 
extremity 

Elevated CRP, 
CPK, troponin I, 
and brain natri-
uretic peptide. 

Normal 
Sinus rhythm 
with nonspe-
cific ventricular 
repolarization 
abnormalities 

Normal 
Areas of increased sig-
nal intensity in the 
basal inferior and 
lateral segments 
were found, corre-
sponding to myo-
cardial edema. 
Subepicardial 
enhancement in the 
mid inferolateral 
segment and mid-
wall enhancement 
in the remaining 
inferior and lateral 
segments of the LV. 
parametric map-
ping demonstrated 
regional increase of 
T2 and indicated an 
abnormally 
expanded myocar-
dial extracellular 
volume in the lat-
eral wall. Postcon-
trast T1 mapping 
confirmed myocar-
dial gadolinium 
accumulation with 
a non-ischemic pat-
tern in the lateral 
wall. 

Yes 
Supportive 
care and 
exercise 
restriction 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Shaik-2022 USA 
51 
M 
À 
PCR 
Severe retrosternal 
chest pain radiating 
to the left arm and 
chest tightness after 
the commencement 
of the pain 

Elevated WBCs, 
CRP and ESR 

Normal 
Sinus tachycardia 
with wide-
spread ST ele-
vation in leads 
v1-v6 

Mild pericardial 
effusion 

À 
Yes 
1 gram of 
aspirin 

Recovery Pericarditis 

Tan 2022 
Canada 
40 
M 
HIV 
PCR 
Central, nonradiating, 
pressure-like chest 
pain but denied 
cough, palpitations, 
or shortness of 
breath 

Elevated troponin 
and creatine 
kinase 

Evolution of ST-
segment 
changes 

Moderate global 
left ventricular 
dysfunction 
with an ejec-
tion fraction of 
40% 

Small pericardial effu-
sion, and foci of late 
gadolinium 
enhancement in the 
basal/apical lateral 
segments corre-
sponding with focal 
edema 

À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myopericarditis 

Rodriguez-
Nava-
2022 

USA 
32 
M 
Syphilis 
PCR 
Chest pain and 
dyspnea 

Elevated troponin 
T and N-termi-
nal prohor-
mone B-type 
natriuretic 
peptide 

Normal 
Normal 
Normal 
À 
À 
Oral tecoviri-
mat and 

doxycycline 

Recovery 
Myocarditis 
37 
M 
Syphilis and HIV 
preexposure 
prophylaxis 

PCR 
Difficulty breathing 
and decreased exer-
cise tolerance with-
out chest pain, 
dyspnea after 
climbing a single 
flight of stairs, a 
marked decrease 
from his baseline. 

Elevated troponin 
T 

À 
T wave inversions 
in the inferior 
and anterolat-
eral leads 

Normal 
À 
À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Thornhill-
2022 

Multicenter À 
À 
HIV 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 
À 
À 
À 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 

(continued on next page) 



## Table 1 (## Introduction

Monkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic DNA virus related to the orthopoxvirus family that causes also smallpox infection, and is first diagnosed in humans in 1970. 1 From the beginning of 2022, more than 70,000 cases were reported of Mpox infection in more than 50 countries, prompting the world health organization (WHO) to declare it as a public health concern. 2, 3 Mpox symptoms mainly included rash, fever, lymphadenopathy, fatigue and headache; however asymptomatic nature of the disease is reported as well. [4][5][6] Large respiratory droplets, close or direct contact with skin lesions, and possibly contaminated fomites are the common routes of Mpox spread. 7,8 Fortunately, Mpox is self-limited, and supportive treatment is sufficient based upon the reported literature. 9 Moreover, less than 5% of hospitalized patients had fatal outcomes. 10 Many viruses are related to cardiac infections. 11,12 In a large population study of Thornhill et al. across 16 countries and including more than 500 Mpox cases, the authors indicated that two Mpox patients experienced myocarditis and both patients recovered well with supportive treatment. 13 Moreover, two Mpox patients had high troponin levels and were complaining from chest pain and/or dyspnea were finally diagnosed with myocarditis. 14 Therefore, we aimed to collect all available evidence regarding the cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox and the associated outcomes of those patients.


## Method


## Database search and search procedure

We followed the guidelines of Liberati and colleagues which known as PRISMA checklist for conducting systematic reviews. 15 Five databases were searched on 20th October 2022 and limited to 2022 (the new outbreak). We used the search term "("monkeypox" OR "MPV" OR "monkeypox virus" OR "monkey pox") AND ("arrhythmia" OR "pericarditits" OR "myocardititis" OR "heart failure" OR "myocardial infarction" OR "acute coronary syndrome" OR "pericardial effusion" OR "heart")" to collect all the relevant papers from Scopus, Google Scholar, PubMed, Virtual Health Library and Web of Science.   Another round of searching was performed by using each keyword alone in Google Scholar to avoid missing any relevant paper. After transferring all the results of the database search, duplicates were excluded and the remaining records were transferred to an Excel sheet for facilitating the screening process. At least two authors scanned all papers via title and abstract then full text screening methods. A senior author revised all the screening results to ensure collecting all the available literature.

Inclusion criteria: We included all papers that discussed cardiologic manifestations of Mpox in 2022 without restriction to study design, language or country of patients.

Exclusion criteria: We excluded Mpox cases before the new pandemic in 2022, review papers and pre-print papers.


## Data extraction

The extraction sheet was done by the most experienced author together with the incorporation of the senior author. The extraction sheet included: study ID, age, sex, comorbid conditions, Mpox diagnostic method, symptoms and signs at admission, laboratory, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography (ECHO) and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) findings, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, treatment, outcome of patients and the final cardiovascular diagnosis.


## Quality of evidence

Based upon the study designs we found, we used two quality assessment tools to rate the quality of evidence. The National Institute of Health tool was used for the cohort and the cross-sectional studies and the Joanna Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal tool was used for the case reports studies (Table S1 and S2).


## Results


## Study selection and outcomes

We screened 2298 records in two steps. The first step was title and abstract screening at which we excluded 2264 records. The second step was full text screening which resulted in inclusion of 5 papers together with another 2 papers from manual search methods (Fig. 1).

We included 9 patients from 7 papers. 13,14,[16][17][18][19][20] Four cases were from USA, two from Canada, one from Portugal and two cases from the multicenter study. 13 The literature included 6 cases of myocarditis, one case of pericarditis, one case of myopericarditis and one case of atrial fibrillation (Fig. 2). Characteristics, symptoms, examination and laboratory data of patients were reported from 5 studies (6 patients) and missed in two studies, Thornhill et al. 13 and Miller et al., 19 (authors were emailed and did not reply to get the needed data) ( Table 1).

Regarding the 6 patients, all of them were male, diagnosed with PCR, presented with chest pain § dyspnea, chest tightness and decreased exercise tolerance. An elevated troponin was found in 5 cases (Fig. 3). ECG results were abnormal in 5 cases while only three cases had abnormal ECHO and three cases had abnormal CMR results (total tested 3). In the four cases who undergone chest X-ray, only one patient had non-specific retro-cardiac opacities. All patients (9 cases) recovered well from their cardiovascular manifestations with no deaths and only 3 of them required ICU admission.


## Discussion

Our results showed that six Mpox patients suffered from myocarditis, one patient suffered from pericarditis, one from myopericarditis and one from atrial fibrillation. Moreover, three out of nine patients  were admitted to ICU. Most of the patients were male with comorbidities such as HIV and syphilis. These comorbidities made them more susceptible to infections. 21 However, all the patients recovered from their cardiovascular manifestations, indicating the mild nature of the disease across the cardiovascular system without severe or lifethreatening complications in most cases. According to investigations, elevated troponin levels were reported in five cases, and also five cases had abnormal ECG findings, such as nonspecific ventricular repolarization abnormalities, sinus tachycardia with widespread ST elevation, evolution of ST-segment changes, sinus tachycardia with antero-lateral concave ST elevation and T wave inversions in the inferior and anterolateral leads. Finally, the cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and ECHO showed abnormalities in three cases.

Mpox is a viral infection endemic in Africa, especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. 22,23 Furthermore, on July 2022 the World Health Organization (WHO) declared Mpox as a global emergency. 2 Most of the cases were men who had sex with men (MSM). For instance, 98% of the patients in a study conducted on 528 confirmed cases of monkeypox infection in 16 countries were MSM. 24 The symptoms of Mpox were: rash, fever, headache, vomiting, conjunctivitis, oral ulceration, lymphadenopathy, sepsis, encephalitis and upper respiratory tract symptoms. In addition, the average hospitalization period was 13.3, and the mean treatment duration was five days. 25,26 Therefore, efforts were made to repurpose the smallpox vaccination to prevent Mpox cases. 27,28 Myocarditis was associated with many viral infections. 29,30 The most typical pathogenesis of viral myocarditis is lymphocytic myocarditis, which develops 10À14 days after infection and is accompanied by myonecrosis. This condition may be self-limited or culminate in fulminant myocarditis. 30 At the same time, the most common form of pericardial affection is pericarditis. It could progress to pericardial effusion, with tamponade in severe cases. Currently, the pathogenicity of how Mpox affects the cardiovascular system remains an area for further investigation. However, the immune-mediated cascade serves as the most accepted theory -until now-, derived from the fact that many cases of cardiac involvement were reported after smallpox vaccination. 31 Despite being a rare entity, appropriate diagnosis Àby the exclusion of other life-threatening conditions such as coronary ischemiaand close monitoring of Mpox patients who encounter cardiovascular complications are necessary to avoid clinical deterioration and to prevent the long-term sequelae. Furthermore, cardiovascular involvement should become one of the most important differential diagnoses when Mpox patients manifested with sudden onset chest pain and/or dyspnea. Moreover, further research is still needed to highlight the true prevalence, pathologic mechanisms, high risk patients, diagnostic algorithms and appropriate treatment agents for cardiovascular involvement in Mpox patients.


## Conclusion

With the limited reported cases, we recommend performing cardiovascular examinations -in particular ECG and troponin levels-in order to exclude cardiovascular insult in patients with suspected Mpox -cardiovascular involvement. However, in our series the infection was mild in most patients with no mortality.

## Fig. 1 .
1PRISMA flow diagram of the study process.

## Fig. 2 .
2The cardiovascular manifestations of Mpox patients.


virus, M= male, HIV= human immunodeficiency virus, PCR= polymerase chain reaction, CRP= C-reactive protein, CPK= creatine phosphokinase, WBCs= white blood cells, ESR= erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CMR= cardio magnetic resonance, ICU= intensive care unit, (-) = not reported, VIGIV = vaccinia immune globulin intravenous.

## Table 1
1Characteristics and outcomes of MPV cases. A.E. El-Qushayri et al. / Heart & Lung 59 (2023) 67À72Study ID 
Country 
Age 
Sex 
Comorbidities 
MPV 
diagnosis 

Symptoms and signs at 
admission 

Laboratory 
findings 

Chest X-ray 
findings 

ECG findings 
Echo findings 
CMR 
ICU 
admission 

Treatment 
Outcome Heart 
abnormality 

Pinho-2022 Portugal 
31 
M 
Pre-exposure pro-
phylaxis 
against HIV 

PCR 
Chest tightness radiat-
ing to the left upper 
extremity 

Elevated CRP, 
CPK, troponin I, 
and brain natri-
uretic peptide. 

Normal 
Sinus rhythm 
with nonspe-
cific ventricular 
repolarization 
abnormalities 

Normal 
Areas of increased sig-
nal intensity in the 
basal inferior and 
lateral segments 
were found, corre-
sponding to myo-
cardial edema. 
Subepicardial 
enhancement in the 
mid inferolateral 
segment and mid-
wall enhancement 
in the remaining 
inferior and lateral 
segments of the LV. 
parametric map-
ping demonstrated 
regional increase of 
T2 and indicated an 
abnormally 
expanded myocar-
dial extracellular 
volume in the lat-
eral wall. Postcon-
trast T1 mapping 
confirmed myocar-
dial gadolinium 
accumulation with 
a non-ischemic pat-
tern in the lateral 
wall. 

Yes 
Supportive 
care and 
exercise 
restriction 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Shaik-2022 USA 
51 
M 
À 
PCR 
Severe retrosternal 
chest pain radiating 
to the left arm and 
chest tightness after 
the commencement 
of the pain 

Elevated WBCs, 
CRP and ESR 

Normal 
Sinus tachycardia 
with wide-
spread ST ele-
vation in leads 
v1-v6 

Mild pericardial 
effusion 

À 
Yes 
1 gram of 
aspirin 

Recovery Pericarditis 

Tan 2022 
Canada 
40 
M 
HIV 
PCR 
Central, nonradiating, 
pressure-like chest 
pain but denied 
cough, palpitations, 
or shortness of 
breath 

Elevated troponin 
and creatine 
kinase 

Evolution of ST-
segment 
changes 

Moderate global 
left ventricular 
dysfunction 
with an ejec-
tion fraction of 
40% 

Small pericardial effu-
sion, and foci of late 
gadolinium 
enhancement in the 
basal/apical lateral 
segments corre-
sponding with focal 
edema 

À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myopericarditis 

Rodriguez-
Nava-
2022 

USA 
32 
M 
Syphilis 
PCR 
Chest pain and 
dyspnea 

Elevated troponin 
T and N-termi-
nal prohor-
mone B-type 
natriuretic 
peptide 

Normal 
Normal 
Normal 
À 
À 
Oral tecoviri-
mat and 

doxycycline 

Recovery 
Myocarditis 
37 
M 
Syphilis and HIV 
preexposure 
prophylaxis 

PCR 
Difficulty breathing 
and decreased exer-
cise tolerance with-
out chest pain, 
dyspnea after 
climbing a single 
flight of stairs, a 
marked decrease 
from his baseline. 

Elevated troponin 
T 

À 
T wave inversions 
in the inferior 
and anterolat-
eral leads 

Normal 
À 
À 
Supportive 
care 

Recovery Myocarditis 

Thornhill-
2022 

Multicenter À 
À 
HIV 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 
À 
À 
À 
PCR 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
À 
Recovery Myocarditis 

(continued on next page) 



## Table 1 (
1Continued)Study ID 

Country 

Age 

Sex 

Comorbidities 

MPV 
diagnosis 
Symptoms and signs at 
admission 

Laboratory 
findings 

Chest X-ray 
findings 

ECG 

findings 

Echo 

findings 

CMR 

ICU 
admission 

Treatment 
Outcome Heart 

abnormality 

Brouillard-

2022 

Canada 

34 

M 

À 

PCR 

Chest pain 

Elevated WBCs, 
CRP and 
troponin 

Non-specific 
retro-car-

diac 
opacities 
Sinus tachycardia 
with 
antero-lateral 

concave ST 
elevation 

reduced LV 
ejection frac-

tion of 44% 
with reduced 
global longitu-
dinal strain 
(14.4%), espe-
cially in the 
anterior and 
lateral walls. 
LV ejection fraction 
was mildly reduced 
with mild LV dila-
tion. 
Possible myocardial 
edema. Similarly, 
high extra cellular 
volumes values 

were also suggestive 
of myocardial 
edema and/or 
injury. 

À 

Antibiotics, 
ibuprofen, 
colchicine 
andACE 
inhibitor 
Recovery Myocarditis 

Miller-2022 USA 


AcknowledgementNone.Supplementary materialsSupplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.hrtlng.2023.01.012.Authors' contributionAEE was responsible for the study design. All authors extracted the data, wrote the manuscript and approved the final version. All steps were supervised by HME.FundingNone.Declaration of Competing InterestNone.
A human infection caused by monkeypox virus in Basankusu Territory, Democratic Republic of the Congo. I D Ladnyj, P Ziegler, E Kima, Bull World Health Organ. 465Ladnyj ID, Ziegler P, Kima E. A human infection caused by monkeypox virus in Basankusu Territory, Democratic Republic of the Congo. Bull World Health Organ. 1972;46(5):593-597.

The WHO declaration of monkeypox as a global public health emergency. J B Nuzzo, L L Borio, L O Gostin, JAMA. 3287Nuzzo JB, Borio LL, Gostin LO. The WHO declaration of monkeypox as a global pub- lic health emergency. JAMA. 2022;328(7):615-617.

Monkeypox Outbreak Global Map. Cdc, 2022CDC. 2022 Monkeypox Outbreak Global Map. 2022; https://www.cdc.gov/poxvi rus/monkeypox/response/2022/world-map.html. Accessed 01/11/2022, 2022.

The outbreak of monkeypox 2022: an overview. M Hraib, S Jouni, M M Albitar, S Alaidi, Z Alshehabi, Ann Med Surg. 79104069Hraib M, Jouni S, Albitar MM, Alaidi S, Alshehabi Z. The outbreak of monkeypox 2022: an overview. Ann Med Surg. 2022;79: 104069.

The clinical manifestations and severity of the 2022 monkeypox outbreak among 4080 patients. A Reda, L Hemmeda, A M Brakat, R Sah, A E El-Qushayri, Travel Med Infect Dis. 50102456Reda A, Hemmeda L, Brakat AM, Sah R, El-Qushayri AE. The clinical manifestations and severity of the 2022 monkeypox outbreak among 4080 patients. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2022;50: 102456.

Asymptomatic monkeypox infection: a call for greater control of infection and transmission. The Lancet Microbe. A Reda, A E El-Qushayri, J Shah, Reda A, El-Qushayri AE, Shah J. Asymptomatic monkeypox infection: a call for greater control of infection and transmission. The Lancet Microbe. 2022.

Human-to-human transmission of monkeypox virus. A Vaughan, E Aarons, J Astbury, Emerg Infect Dis. 264Vaughan A, Aarons E, Astbury J, et al. Human-to-human transmission of monkey- pox virus, United Kingdom, October 2018. Emerg Infect Dis. 2020;26(4):782-785.

. Monkeypox: background information.UK Health Security Agency. Monkeypox: background information.UK Health Security Agency, 2018 (https:// www.gov.uk/guidance/monkeypox).

The changing epidemiology of human monkeypox-a potential threat? a systematic review. E M Bunge, B Hoet, L Chen, PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 16210141Bunge EM, Hoet B, Chen L, et al. The changing epidemiology of human monkey- pox-a potential threat? a systematic review. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022;16(2): e0010141.

Clinical features, hospitalisation and deaths associated with monkeypox: a systematic review and meta-analysis. V A Benites-Zapata, J R Ulloque-Badaracco, E A Alarcon-Braga, Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 21136Benites-Zapata VA, Ulloque-Badaracco JR, Alarcon-Braga EA, et al. Clinical features, hospitalisation and deaths associated with monkeypox: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2022;21(1):36.

Myocarditis with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. Circulation. B Bozkurt, I Kamat, P J Hotez, 144Bozkurt B, Kamat I, Hotez PJ. Myocarditis with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. Circula- tion. 2021;144(6):471-484.

Fig. 3. laboratory, examination and outcomes data of Mpox patients. Fig. 3. laboratory, examination and outcomes data of Mpox patients.

. A E El-Qushayri, Heart & Lung. 59A.E. El-Qushayri et al. / Heart & Lung 59 (2023) 67À72

Recognizing COVID-19-related myocarditis: the possible pathophysiology and proposed guideline for diagnosis and management. B Siripanthong, S Nazarian, D Muser, Heart Rhythm. 179Siripanthong B, Nazarian S, Muser D, et al. Recognizing COVID-19-related myocar- ditis: the possible pathophysiology and proposed guideline for diagnosis and man- agement. Heart Rhythm. 2020;17(9):1463-1471.

Monkeypox virus infection in humans across 16 countries-AprilÀJune 2022. J P Thornhill, S Barkati, S Walmsley, N Engl J Med. 3878Thornhill JP, Barkati S, Walmsley S, et al. Monkeypox virus infection in humans across 16 countries-AprilÀJune 2022. N Engl J Med. 2022;387(8):679-691.

Myocarditis attributable to monkeypox virus infection in 2 patients, United States. G K Rodriguez-Nava, Filardo Peter, D Thomas, Emerging Infect Dis. 2812Rodriguez-Nava GK, Peter, Filardo Thomas D, et al. Myocarditis attributable to monkeypox virus infection in 2 patients, United States, 2022. Emerging Infect Dis. 2022;28(12).

The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. A Liberati, D G Altman, J Tetzlaff, PLoS Med. 671000100Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting system- atic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med. 2009;6(7): e1000100.

Atypical clinical presentation of monkeypox complicated by myopericarditis. Paper presented at: Open Forum Infectious Diseases. Dhj Tan, Li Shelby, Maggie, Tan DHJ, Shelby, Li Maggie, et al. Atypical clinical presentation of monkeypox compli- cated by myopericarditis. Paper presented at: Open Forum Infectious Diseases. 2022.

Monkeypox-associated pericarditis: a maiden case. Tav D Shaik, T H Nasr, A Makki, Cureus J Med Sci. 149Shaik TAV D, Nasr TH, Makki A, et al. Monkeypox-associated pericarditis: a maiden case. Cureus J Med Sci. 2022;14(9).

Acute MyocarditisÀa new manifestation of Monkeypox infection? JACC: Case Reports. Aib Pinho, Vasconcelos Marta, Mariana, Pinho AIB, Marta, Vasconcelos Mariana, et al. Acute MyocarditisÀa new manifesta- tion of Monkeypox infection? JACC: Case Reports. 2022.

Severe monkeypox in hospitalized patients-United States. M J Miller, MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 71Miller MJ. Severe monkeypox in hospitalized patients-United States, August 10ÀOctober 10, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022;71.

Monkeypox associated myocarditis: a case report. P Brouillard, A Valin-Thorburn, Y Provost, IDCases. 20221628Brouillard P, Valin-Thorburn A, Provost Y, et al. Monkeypox associated myocarditis: a case report. IDCases. 2022:e01628.

Monkeypox in a patient with controlled HIV infection initially presenting with fever, painful pharyngitis, and tonsillitis. F Fischer, A Mehrl, M Kandulski, S Schlosser, M M€ Uller, S Schmid, Medicina (Kaunas). 1058Fischer F, Mehrl A, Kandulski M, Schlosser S, M€ uller M, Schmid S. Monkeypox in a patient with controlled HIV infection initially presenting with fever, painful phar- yngitis, and tonsillitis. Medicina (Kaunas). 2022;58(10).

Emergence of monkeypox as the most important orthopoxvirus infection in humans. N Sklenovsk A, M Van Ranst, Front Public Health. 6241Sklenovsk a N, Van Ranst M. Emergence of monkeypox as the most important orthopoxvirus infection in humans. Front Public Health. 2018;6:241.

Human monkeypox: epidemiologic and clinical characteristics, diagnosis, and prevention. E Petersen, A Kantele, M Koopmans, Infect Dis Clin North Am. 334Petersen E, Kantele A, Koopmans M, et al. Human monkeypox: epidemiologic and clinical characteristics, diagnosis, and prevention. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2019;33 (4):1027-1043.

Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis of monkeypox. Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis of monkeypox. (2022). Accessed: 28 Oct 2022: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/epidemiology-clini cal-manifestations-and-diagnosis-of-monkeypox.

Symptomatology, prognosis, and clinical findings of Monkeypox infected patients during COVID-19 era: a systematic-review. V Jaiswal, P Nain, D Mukherjee, Jaiswal V, Nain P, Mukherjee D, et al. Symptomatology, prognosis, and clinical find- ings of Monkeypox infected patients during COVID-19 era: a systematic-review.

. Immun Inflamm Dis. 1011722Immun Inflamm Dis. 2022;10(11):e722.

A systematic review of the epidemiology of human monkeypox outbreaks and implications for outbreak strategy. E M Beer, V B Rao, PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 13107791Beer EM, Rao VB. A systematic review of the epidemiology of human monkeypox outbreaks and implications for outbreak strategy. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019;13(10): e0007791.

Repositioning potentials of smallpox vaccines and antiviral agents in monkeypox outbreak: a rapid review on comparative benefits and risks. M R Islam, M J Hossain, A Roy, Health Sci Reports. 55798Islam MR, Hossain MJ, Roy A, et al. Repositioning potentials of smallpox vaccines and antiviral agents in monkeypox outbreak: a rapid review on comparative bene- fits and risks. Health Sci Reports. 2022;5(5):e798.

Receipt of first and second doses of JYNNEOS vaccine for prevention of monkeypox -United States. J L Kriss, P M Boersma, E Martin, MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 7143Kriss JL, Boersma PM, Martin E, et al. Receipt of first and second doses of JYNNEOS vaccine for prevention of monkeypox -United States, May 22-October 10, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022;71(43):1374-1378.

Comparison of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in childrenÀrelated myocarditis, classic viral myocarditis, and COVID-19 vaccine-related myocarditis in children. T Patel, M Kelleman, Z West, J Am Heart Assoc. 11924393Patel T, Kelleman M, West Z, et al. Comparison of multisystem inflammatory syn- drome in childrenÀrelated myocarditis, classic viral myocarditis, and COVID-19 vaccine-related myocarditis in children. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022;11(9): e024393.

An overview of the immune mechanisms of viral myocarditis. N Lasrado, J Reddy, Rev Med Virol. 306Lasrado N, Reddy J. An overview of the immune mechanisms of viral myocarditis. Rev Med Virol. 2020;30(6):1-14.

Incidence and follow-up of inflammatory cardiac complications after smallpox vaccination 1. R E Eckart, S S Love, J E Atwood, J Am Coll Cardiol. 441Eckart RE, Love SS, Atwood JE, et al. Incidence and follow-up of inflammatory car- diac complications after smallpox vaccination 1 . J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44(1):201- 205.