# Medicine ® Escherichia coli-related disseminated intravascular coagulation Case report and literature review

CorpusID: 256946582
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d24a69d09ae9e0806ed41090a9b5d1e5dc047ab](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d24a69d09ae9e0806ed41090a9b5d1e5dc047ab)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Medicine ® Escherichia coli-related disseminated intravascular coagulation Case report and literature review


MM a ,Junjun Wu 
MM a ,Huaming Li 
MMYufang Wang 
Rong Xu 
Medicine ® Escherichia coli-related disseminated intravascular coagulation Case report and literature review
10.1097/MD.0000000000032750Clinical Case Report 1coagulation abnormalitiescoagulation disorderscase reportDICEscherichia coliprocalcitoninsepsisthrombocytopenia
Background: Escherichia coli can cause severe infections. The latter can lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The importance of an early diagnosis of DIC is illustrated through this case report.Aim: Review the utility and shortcomings of representative clinical indicators of E coli infection and DIC.Case report: A 48-year-old man presented with diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting with fever of 2-day duration, during which consciousness was lost for 12 hour. Hematology was undertaken. The coagulation profile, liver function, and kidney function were determined, and blood cultures undertaken. The final diagnosis was acute gastroenteritis complicated by DIC. Meropenem (1.0 g, q8h, i.v.) was started, along with active replacement of fluids. Anticoagulant therapy (low-molecular-weight heparin 0.4 mL, q.d.s.) was given. Plasma supplementation of coagulation factors and albumin was applied. On day-5 of therapy, hematology showed the platelet count, D-dimer level, and prothrombin time to be improved significantly. Low-molecular-weight heparin treatment was stopped and antibiotic treatment was continued for 1 week. The patient made a full recovery.Conclusions: In severe infection, timely assessment of the platelet count, procalcitonin level, coagulation function, as well as rational use of antibiotics, can improve the prognosis of patients.Abbreviations: CRP = c-reactive protein, DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation, E coli = Escherichia coli, INR = international normalized ratio, PARs = proteinase-activated receptors.

## Introduction

Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that arises when the body's response to infection causes injury to its own tissues and organs. Sepsis can also cause multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome. Sepsis can lead to admission to the intensive care unit, and mortality from sepsis can kill 30% to 50% of patients suffering from it. [1,2] In the early stages of sepsis, a clotting cascade triggered by activation of tissue factors initiates the exogenous clotting pathway. [3] Prothrombin and thrombin are activated by tissue factors compounded with factor VII. The resulting impairment of anticoagulation and fibrinolysis can lead to microvascular thrombosis and consume various coagulation factors. These actions lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which further promotes ischemia and hypoxia, tissue damage, and multiple-organ failure.

Early and timely diagnosis of organ injury can delay the occurrence and development of DIC. Combination of clinical data with laboratory tests and scoring according to International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis guidelines can improve the prognosis of patients with DIC.

Here, we report the data of a 48-year-old man with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fever, and multiple-organ insufficiency due to Escherichia coli infection. We review the utility and shortcomings of representative clinical indicators of E coli infection and DIC.


## Case report

The patient was a 48-year-old man, presented with diarrhea with fever of 2-day duration. During this time, he lost consciousness for 12 hour. Two hours after eating cured meat, the patient had watery stools, nausea, chills and fever, and vomited his stomach contents; the highest body temperature reached was 38.3°C He self-administered Tylenol™ tablets. Symptoms were relieved, and he did not suffer chest tightness, cough/phlegm, headache, dizziness, hematemesis, black stools, abdominal pain, or other discomfort.

The next morning, 2 hour after eating cured meat, the symptoms stated above recurred. Convulsions, foaming at the mouth, and other discomfort were not observed. His family members sent him to the emergency department of our hospital.

Obvious abnormalities were not found upon computed tomography of the head. He was treated with cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium (intravenous drip) to counteract an infection. Dexamethasone was given to ablate inflammation. Fluids were administered to aid rehydration. He was admitted to our department for further treatment.


### Medical history and family history

He had been taking amlodipine besylate (5 mg, p.o.) once-daily for long-term treatment of hypotension. Good control of blood pressure had been documented. He nor his family had a history of drug allergy.


### Physical examination upon hospital admission

The patient had a body temperature of 37.4°C, respiratory rate of 20 times/minute, blood pressure of 116/76 mm Hg, and pulse of 84 times/minute. Skin temperature was normal, purple lines and "flower spots" were absent, and normal circulation of extremities was documented. Thick breathing sounds in both lungs and a wheezing sound at the end of exhalation in the left lung were noted, but no obvious dry or wet rales in either lung. The heart rate was 84 times/min with a heart murmur was absent. Tenderness and rebound pain in the whole abdomen were not observed, and bowel sounds were 6 times/minute. Edema in the lower extremities was not observed.


### Laboratory tests

In the emergency department, hematology revealed a white blood cell count of 12.9 × 10 9 /L, hemoglobin level of 165 g/L, platelet count of 202 × 10 9 /L, percent neutrophils of 76.4%, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 105.3 mg/L. Levels of procalcitonin of 37.454 ng/mL, alanine aminotransferase of 273 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase of 520 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 756 U/L, creatinine of 153 μmol/L, and troponin of 1.921 ng/ mL were documented. In terms of coagulation function, the prothrombin time (PT) was 12.3 seconds, International Normalized Ratio (INR) was 1.1, and D-dimer level was 6.56 mg/L. Electrocardiography indicated a sinus rhythm.

Upon admission to hospital, antibiotic (meropenem, 1.0 g, q8h, i.v.) treatment was initiated. Three days after treatment initiation, hematology revealed the CRP level and percent neutrophils (89.8%) to be increased (108.0 mg/L), and white blood cell count (8.8 × 10 9 /L), red blood cell count (4.18 × 10 12 /L), hemoglobin level (123 g/L), and platelet count (33 × 10 9 /L) to be decreased. Levels of alanine aminotransferase (1265 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (2563 U/L), creatine kinase (4585 U/L), creatine phosphokinase-MB (62 U/L), creatinine (92 μmol/L), glucose (9.28 mmol/L), lactate dehydrogenase (704 U/L), and troponin (1.522 ng/mL) were increased, whereas the potassium level (3.36 mmol/L) was reduced. Levels of direct bilirubin (33.0 μmol/L), glutamyl phthalate (156 U/L), α-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (596 U/L), indirect bilirubin (33.4 μmol/L), total bilirubin (66.4 μmol/L), procalcitonin (26.469 ng/mL), B-type natriuretic peptide precursor (1348.0 pg/mL), D-dimer (15.68 mg/L), fibrinogen (4.02 g/L), as well as PT (14.1 seconds), were increased. Sepsis with dominant DIC was considered. Four days after treatment initiation, the laboratory report stated that blood culture was positive for E coli.


### Imaging

Ultrasound of the liver, bile, pancreas, and spleen indicated fatty liver disease. Ultrasound of the urinary system showed no obvious abnormality.


### Final diagnosis

The final diagnosis was acute gastroenteritis complicated by DIC.


### Treatment

After hospital admission, meropenem (1.0 g, q8h, i.v.) was started, along with active replacement of fluids. DIC was diagnosed on day-3 of treatment. Anticoagulant therapy (low-molecular-weight heparin, 0.4 mL, q.d.s.) was given (Fig. 1). Meanwhile, plasma supplementation of coagulation factors and albumin was applied. On day-5 of therapy, hematology showed the platelet count, D-dimer level, and PT to be improved significantly ( Fig. 2A-D). Treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin was stopped and antibiotic treatment was continued for 1 week. Repeat hematology showed the CRP level and procalcitonin to be improved ( Fig. 2A-D). Table 1 describes the laboratory results from day 1 to day 14 after the event.


### Outcome and follow-up

The patient was cured and discharged 22 days after hospital admission. At 1-month follow-up, hematology findings, coagulation function, the biochemical profile, and myocardial-enzyme profiles were within the normal range.


## Discussion

Our middle-aged patient developed the gastroenteritis-related symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea due eating undercooked cured meat, did not pay attention to the early signs of dehydration, and progressed to a shocked state. Upon hospital admission, he presented with hypovolemic shock. Laboratory tests suggested multiple-organ dysfunction. After hospital admission, hematology suggested progressive decline in the platelet count, increase in D-dimer level, PT prolongation, and hypofibrinogenemia. Subsequent blood-culture results suggested sepsis-dominant DIC. Distinguishing sepsis from DIC is very important for the early diagnosis, early treatment, and improved prognosis of DIC patients. If thrombocytopenia occurs, megakaryocytes produce platelets to maintain the physiological hemostasis of the body. If body tissue is damaged, substances are released to shrink blood vessels. Platelets also activate the coagulation system so that the fibrinogen in plasma is converted to fibrin and, finally, the fibrin network is formed. Thrombocytopenia also mediates inflammation, [4,5] and the immune response. The causes of thrombocytopenia include decreased production, [6] increased consumption, or increased destruction of platelets in the spleen.

Thrombocytopenia in severe infection is an independent risk factor for severe disease. Platelets can induce neutrophils to capture pathogenic microorganisms. [7] Also, platelet-neutrophil interactions induce transcellular synthesis and overactivation of neutrophils, resulting in increased secretion of proinflammatory molecules. In mice, researchers [8] have shown that platelet loss promotes the spread of bacteria, leading to increased inflammation throughout the body and an increased risk of death. Among them, the toll-like receptor 2 (rs111200466) and toll-like receptor 4 (rs11536889) variants, [9] in platelets are prognostic factors for DIC, which can lead to severe organ dysfunction and high mortality. Therefore, platelets play an important part in severe infection.


### Clotting abnormality

Sepsis-associated DIC is characterized by reduced levels of endogenous coagulation inhibitors (including antithrombin). However, the KyberSept tria [10] failed to demonstrate that use of high doses of antithrombin had a beneficial effect upon mortality in patients with severe sepsis. Tagami and colleagues [11] reintegrated national data and found that a supplemental dose of antithrombin was efficacious against sepsis-related DIC.

Cytokines mediate coagulation disorders in systemic inflammatory activities. Tissue factors are the main moieties that mediate thrombin generation and the imbalance/dysfunction of normal physiological anticoagulation mechanisms. [12] Coagulation function can also affect inflammatory activities. [13,14] The most important manner in which thrombin affects inflammation is binding of proteinase-activated receptors (PARs). Four types of PAR (1-4) have been identified, and all belong to a family with transmembrane domains: G-proteincoupled receptors. [15] Activating PARs induces a pro-inflammatory response. [16,17] 


### Disseminated intravascular coagulation

DIC is not an isolated disease. It is often secondary to other diseases, such as severe infection, tumor, major obstetric events, severe trauma, immune reaction, heat shock, etc. [18] In 2001, the International Society for Thrombosis and Hemostasis defined DIC as "an acquired syndrome characterized by activation of intravascular coagulation and loss of location due to various causes that may originate from and lead to damage to the microvascular system and, if severe enough, organ dysfunction. [10] The diagnostic criteria for DIC are proposed in this guideline. Refer to the following table. In the simplified version of DIC diagnosis, although there is no difference in mortality between the 2 groups, sepsis-related coagulation disorders may be valuable in detecting suitable candidates for anticoagulant therapy in sepsis. [18] DIC is significantly higher in judging disease severity and mortality than non-DIC patients, but it cannot predict the results after adjusting for disease severity. [19] In addition to pathogen-induced coagulation activation, other important pathways (e.g., injury-related molecular patterns, neutrophil extracellular traps, extracellular vesicles, [20] glycocalyx injury) are also involved in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced DIC. [21] In addition, experiments have revealed that obese piglets showed severe DIC and pro-coagulant reactions, and that obesity aggravated the occurrence and development of DIC. [3] 


### Procalcitonin

Procalcitonin is an intracellular precursor of calcitonin, secreted by thyroid C cells, and can be used as a biomarker of bacterial, viral, and non-bacterial infections. Under normal circumstances, procalcitonin > 0.25 ng/mL can indicate bacterial infection. Studies have shown that although the procalcitonin level cannot guide when antibiotic therapy should be started, it is valuable for knowing when to discontinue antibiotic therapy. [22] Guidelines for sepsis management set by Sager R et al in 2016 stated that the procalcitonin level could be used as a reference index to shorten the course of antibiotic therapy, but that it should be combined with clinical data. [23] The CRP level is increased in viral and noninfectious diseases. The specificity and accuracy of procalcitonin and CRP in sepsis have been compared. [24] An increase in the procalcitonin level should be combined with data on the renal function and cardiac function of patients. [25] Even though procalcitonin is cleared not only in the kidneys, in chronic kidney disease, the procalcitonin level can be increased even if infection is absent. [26] Even though procalcitonin is cleared not only in the kidneys, in chronic kidney disease, the procalcitonin level can be increased even if infection is absent. [27] Even though procalcitonin is cleared not only in the kidneys, in chronic kidney disease, the procalcitonin level can be increased even if infection is absent. [27] 3.4. Escherichia coli E coli is a common pathogenic bacterium found in the bloodstream infections of hospitalized patients. [28] It infects surgical sites, the urinary tract, and pelvis. [29] Thomas-Rüddel and colleagues showed that in patients with peritoneal dialysis-associated peritonitis, patients with E coli infection were more likely to need mechanical ventilation and to be hospitalized. [30] Also, patients with extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing E coli tend to have longer hospitalization due to catheter-associated infection. [30] Antibiotics are used widely, which has led to the problem of antibiotic resistance. For an infection caused by E coli, the selection of antibiotics is also a difficult problem. In vitro experiments have suggested that carbapenem antibiotics are efficacious against E coli, but the sensitivity of E coli is decreasing. [32] In carbapenem-resistant E coli, the resistance of E coli is also increasing gradually. [33,34] Selection of efficacious antibiotics, whether to use a combination of drugs or a single drug, and how to monitor the effects of antibiotics are important issues.


## Conclusions

This case study has shown that, in severe infection, timely assessment of the platelet count, procalcitonin level, coagulation function, as well as rational use of antibiotics, can improve the prognosis of patients. 

## Figure 1 .
1Changes in coagulation function and platelet count after anticoagulant therapy. www.md-journal.com

## Figure 2 .
2Changes in the leukocyte count, platelet count, prothrombin time, and D-dimer level after anticoagulation treatment (low-molecular-weight heparin).

## Table 1
1Describes the laboratory results from day 1 to day 14 after the event.ALT = alanine aminotransferase, AST = aspartate aminotransferase, CRP = c-reactive protein, INR = international normalized ratio, LDH = lactate dehydrogenase, WBC = white blood cell.Blood laboratory Blood data 
Day1 
Day2 
Day3 
Day4 
Day5 
Day8 
Day14 discharge 
Day 22 Follow up 

WBC 10 9 /L (3.5-9.5) 
12.9 
10.6 
8.8 
10.9 
10.2 
6.9 
5 
PLT 10 9 /L (125-350) 
202 
85 
33 
45 
89 
318 
335 
179 
HB g/L (130-175) 
165 
120 
123 
128 
129 
123 
119 
150 
CRP mg/L (0-10) 
105.3 
99 
108 
56.3 
3.9 
<0.5 
<0.5 
7.3 
N% (40-75) 
76.4 
94.8 
89.8 
85 
53.7 
48.4 
48.5 
81 
Procalcitonin ng/mL (0-0.046) 
37.454 
39.876 
47.471 
26.469 
1.722 
0.073 
0.029 
ALT U/L (0-50) 
273 
542 
1265 
871 
365 
114 
42 
<0.01 
AST U/L (15-40) 
520 
2563 
483 
409 
80 
31 
22 
28 
Tot. Bilirubin μmol/L (0-26.0) 
39 
66.4 
37.5 
18.4 
20.8 
13 
Direct Bilirubin μmol/L (0-8.0) 
20.3 
33.4 
15.6 
8.3 
7.5 
4.6 
Potassium mmol/L 
(3.50-5.30) 

3.47 
3.19 
3.36 
3.92 
3.43 
4.24 
3.64 

GGT U/L (10-60) 
103 
156 
139 
144 
89 
51 
Creatinine μmol/L (57-97) 
153 
82 
117 
78 
81 
91 
94 
LDH μmol/L (120-250) 
296 
2491 
1462 
404 
239 
193 
127 
168 
Troponin ng/mL (0.0-0.040) 
0.088 
1.921 
1.857 
0.409 
0.156 
0.015 
Glucose mmol/L (3.90-6.10) 
9.37 
8.6 
9.28 
9.33 
7.22 
4.98 
4.22 
6.34 
Fibrinogen g/L (2.0-4.0) 
3.53 
3.34 
4.02 
5.13 
4.9 
4.02 
3.49 
APTT s (22.0-35.0) 
27.1 
31.6 
35.8 
31.3 
28.3 
28.6 
28.1 
PT s (9.0-14.0) 
12.3 
12.7 
14.1 
10.8 
11 
11.8 
11.2 
INR (0.8-1.24) 
1.1 
1.14 
1.26 
0.96 
0.98 
1.05 
1 
D-Dimer mg/L (0.00-0.55) 
6.56 
1.22 
15.68 
1.38 
0.72 
0.41 
0.32 


AcknowledgmentsThe authors appreciate the patient's consent to present this case.
Severe sepsis and septic shock. D C Angus, T Van Der Poll, N Engl J Med. 369Angus DC, van der Poll T. Severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:840-51.

The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-3). M Singer, C S Deutschman, C W Seymour, JAMA. 315Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016;315:801-10.

Impact of obesity on endotoxin-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation. T Duburcq, A Tournoys, V Gnemmi, Shock. 44Duburcq T, Tournoys A, Gnemmi V, et al. Impact of obesity on endotoxin-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation. Shock. 2015;44:341-7.

The era of thromboinflammation: platelets are dynamic sensors and effector cells during infectious diseases. L Guo, M T Rondina, Front Immunol. 102204Guo L, Rondina MT. The era of thromboinflammation: platelets are dynamic sensors and effector cells during infectious diseases. Front Immunol. 2019;10:2204.

Modification of immunological features in human platelets during sepsis. V X Raque, S J Carlos, R R Eduardo, Immunol Invest. 47Raque VX, Carlos SJ, Eduardo RR, et al. Modification of immuno- logical features in human platelets during sepsis. Immunol Invest. 2018;47:196-211.

Impact of thrombocytopenia on outcome of patients admitted to ICU for severe community-acquired pneumonia. N Brogly, P Devos, N Boussekey, J Infect. 55Brogly N, Devos P, Boussekey N, et al. Impact of thrombocytopenia on outcome of patients admitted to ICU for severe community-acquired pneumonia. J Infect. 2007;55:136-40.

Platelets in defense against bacterial pathogens. M R Yeaman, Cell Mol Life Sci. 67Yeaman MR. Platelets in defense against bacterial pathogens. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010;67:525-44.

. Wu, 102:7 www.md-journal.comMedicine. Wu et al. • Medicine (2023) 102:7 www.md-journal.com

Thrombocytopenia impairs host defense during murine Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia. F E Van Den Boogaard, M Schouten, S F De Stoppelaar, Crit Care Med. 43van den Boogaard FE, Schouten M, de Stoppelaar SF, et al. Thrombocytopenia impairs host defense during murine Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia. Crit Care Med. 2015;43:e75-83.

Associations among disseminated intravascular coagulation, thrombocytopenia cytokines/chemokines and genetic polymorphisms of toll-like receptor 2/4 in Chinese patients with sepsis. S Jiang, J Ma, S Ye, J Inflamm Res. 15Jiang S, Ma J, Ye S, et al. Associations among disseminated intravascu- lar coagulation, thrombocytopenia cytokines/chemokines and genetic polymorphisms of toll-like receptor 2/4 in Chinese patients with sepsis. J Inflamm Res. 2022;15:1-15.

Caring for the critically ill patient. High-dose antithrombin III in severe sepsis: a randomized controlled trial. B L Warren, A Eid, P Singer, JAMA. 286Warren BL, Eid A, Singer P, et al. Caring for the critically ill patient. High-dose antithrombin III in severe sepsis: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;286:1869-78.

Antithrombin concentrate use in sepsis-associated disseminated intravascular coagulation: re-evaluation of a "pendulum effect" drug using a nationwide database. T Tagami, J Thromb Haemost. 16Tagami T. Antithrombin concentrate use in sepsis-associated dis- seminated intravascular coagulation: re-evaluation of a "pendu- lum effect" drug using a nationwide database. J Thromb Haemost. 2018;16:458-61.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation: an update on pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapeutic strategies. C Papageorgiou, G Jourdi, E Adjambri, Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 249_supplPapageorgiou C, Jourdi G, Adjambri E, et al. Disseminated intravascu- lar coagulation: an update on pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapeutic strategies. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2018;24(9_suppl):8S-28S.

Coagulation in patients with severe sepsis. M Levi, T Poll, Semin Thromb Hemost. 41Levi M, Poll T. Coagulation in patients with severe sepsis. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2015;41:0099-015.

Inflammation and coagulation. M Levi, T Van Der Poll, Crit Care Med. 382SupplLevi M, van der Poll T. Inflammation and coagulation. Crit Care Med. 2010;38(2 Suppl):S26-34.

Thrombin signalling and protease-activated receptors. S R Coughlin, Nature. 407Coughlin SR. Thrombin signalling and protease-activated receptors. Nature. 2000;407:258-64.

Protease-activated receptors in hemostasis. M T Nieman, Blood. 128Nieman MT. Protease-activated receptors in hemostasis. Blood. 2016;128:169-77.

Efficacy of piperacillin-tazobactam and cefotaxime against Escherichia coli hyperproducing TEM-1 in a mouse peritonitis infection model. F B Hertz, M R Andreasen, S R Almind, Int J Antimicrob Agents. 59106543Hertz FB, Andreasen MR, Almind SR, et al. Efficacy of piperacillin-tazobac- tam and cefotaxime against Escherichia coli hyperproducing TEM-1 in a mouse peritonitis infection model. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2022;59:106543.

External validation of the two newly proposed criteria for assessing coagulopathy in sepsis. K Yamakawa, J Yoshimura, T Ito, Thromb Haemost. 119Yamakawa K, Yoshimura J, Ito T, et al. External validation of the two newly proposed criteria for assessing coagulopathy in sepsis. Thromb Haemost. 2019;119:203-12.

Epidemiology of disseminated intravascular coagulation in sepsis and validation of scoring systems. S Saito, S Uchino, M Hayakawa, J Crit Care. 50Saito S, Uchino S, Hayakawa M, et al. Epidemiology of disseminated intravascular coagulation in sepsis and validation of scoring systems. J Crit Care. 2019;50:23-30.

Bacteria-released outer membrane vesicles promote disseminated intravascular coagulation. E Wang, Y Liu, X Qiu, Thromb Res. 178Wang E, Liu Y, Qiu X, et al. Bacteria-released outer membrane ves- icles promote disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thromb Res. 2019;178:26-33.

Sepsis-induced coagulopathy and disseminated intravascular coagulation. T Iba, J H Levy, Anesthesiology. 132Iba T, Levy JH. Sepsis-induced coagulopathy and disseminated intra- vascular coagulation. Anesthesiology. 2020;132:1238-45.

Procalcitonin: a promising tool or just another overhyped test?. R Paudel, P Dogra, A A Montgomery-Yates, Int J Med Sci. 17Paudel R, Dogra P, Montgomery-Yates AA, et al. Procalcitonin: a prom- ising tool or just another overhyped test? Int J Med Sci. 2020;17:332-7.

Procalcitonin-guided diagnosis and antibiotic stewardship revisited. R Sager, A Kutz, B Mueller, BMC Med. 1515Sager R, Kutz A, Mueller B, et al. Procalcitonin-guided diagnosis and antibiotic stewardship revisited. BMC Med. 2017;15:15.

The diagnostic accuracy of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein for sepsis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. M Tan, Y Lu, H Jiang, J Cell Biochem. 120Tan M, Lu Y, Jiang H, et al. The diagnostic accuracy of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein for sepsis: a systematic review and meta-analy- sis. J Cell Biochem. 2019;120:5852-9.

Procalcitonin monitoring as a guide for antimicrobial therapy: a review of current literature. E W Covington, M Z Roberts, J Dong, Pharmacotherapy. 38Covington EW, Roberts MZ, Dong J. Procalcitonin monitoring as a guide for antimicrobial therapy: a review of current literature. Pharmacotherapy. 2018;38:569-81.

The plasma elimination rate and urinary secretion of procalcitonin in patients with normal and impaired renal function. M Meisner, T Lohs, E Huettemann, Eur J Anaesthesiol. 18Meisner M, Lohs T, Huettemann E, et al. The plasma elimination rate and urinary secretion of procalcitonin in patients with normal and impaired renal function. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2001;18:79-87.

Use of procalcitonin in patients with various degrees of chronic kidney disease including renal replacement therapy. E Grace, R M Turner, Clin Infect Dis. 59Grace E, Turner RM. Use of procalcitonin in patients with various degrees of chronic kidney disease including renal replacement therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59:1761-7.

Epidemiology and outcome of primary community-acquired bacteremia in adult patients. M Ortega, M Almela, J A Martinez, Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 26Ortega M, Almela M, Martinez JA, et al. Epidemiology and outcome of primary community-acquired bacteremia in adult patients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2007;26:453-7.

Influence of pathogen and focus of infection on procalcitonin values in sepsis patients with bacteremia or candidemia. Thomas-Rüddel, Do, B Poidinger, M Kott, Crit Care. 22128Thomas-Rüddel DO, Poidinger B, Kott M, et al. Influence of pathogen and focus of infection on procalcitonin values in sepsis patients with bacteremia or candidemia. Crit Care. 2018;22:128.

Clinical and microbiological characteristics of peritoneal dialysis-related peritonitis caused by Escherichia coli in southern Taiwan. W Lin, C Tseng, A Wu, Eur J Clin Microbiol. 37Lin W, Tseng C, Wu A, et al. Clinical and microbiological characteristics of peritoneal dialysis-related peritonitis caused by Escherichia coli in southern Taiwan. Eur J Clin Microbiol. 2018;37:1699-707.

Clinical characteristics of patients with community-acquired complicated intra-abdominal infections: a prospective, multicentre, observational study. S S Jean, W C Ko, Y Xie, Int J Antimicrob Agents. 44Jean SS, Ko WC, Xie Y, et al. Clinical characteristics of patients with community-acquired complicated intra-abdominal infections: a pro- spective, multicentre, observational study. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2014;44:222-8.

Molecular characteristics of extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae causing intra-abdominal infections from 9 tertiary hospitals in China. K Liao, Y Chen, M Wang, Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 87Liao K, Chen Y, Wang M, et al. Molecular characteristics of extend- ed-spectrum β-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae causing intra-abdominal infections from 9 tertiary hospi- tals in China. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2017;87:45-8.

Bacterial resistance surveillance in China: a report from Mohnarin. Y H Xiao, J Wang, Y Li, Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 27Xiao YH, Wang J, Li Y. Bacterial resistance surveillance in China: a report from Mohnarin 2004-2005. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2008;27:697-708.

Epidemiology of carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae infections: report from the China CRE network. Y Zhang, Q Wang, Y Yin, Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 62Zhang Y, Wang Q, Yin Y, et al. Epidemiology of carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae infections: report from the China CRE network. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018;62.