# The Mass Distribution of Quasars in Optical Time-domain Surveys

CorpusID: 257482373
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af05f3e340f3f94a8d4119ef0da6258a71536b13](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af05f3e340f3f94a8d4119ef0da6258a71536b13)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Mass Distribution of Quasars in Optical Time-domain Surveys
2023

Mouyuan Sun 
Department of Astronomy
Xiamen University
361005XiamenFujianChina

The Mass Distribution of Quasars in Optical Time-domain Surveys

MNRAS
0002023Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZPreprint 13 March 2023 Compiled using MNRAS L A T E X style file v3.0quasars: general -quasars: supermassive black holes -accretion, accretion discs
The determination of supermassive black hole (SMBH) masses is the key to understanding the host galaxy build-up and the SMBH mass assembly histories. The SMBH masses of non-local quasars are frequently estimated via the single-epoch virial black-hole mass estimators, which may suffer from significant biases. Here we demonstrate a new approach to infer the mass distribution of SMBHs in quasars by modelling quasar UV/optical variability. Our inferred black hole masses are systematically smaller than the virial ones by 0.3 ∼ 0.6 dex; the ∼ 0.3 dex offsets are roughly consistent with the expected biases of the virial black-hole mass estimators. In the upcoming time-domain astronomy era, our methodology can be used to constrain the cosmic evolution of quasar mass distributions.

# INTRODUCTION

The mass distribution of supermassive black holes (SMBHs) in galaxy centres is vital for our understanding of their mass assembly histories, the active galactic nucleus (AGN) feedback energy budget, and the evolution of host galaxies. For distant AGNs (including quasars, i.e., luminous AGNs with broad emission lines), their SMBH masses (MBH) are often estimated via the reverberation mapping method (Blandford & McKee 1982) and its simplified version, the single-epoch virial black-hole mass estimators (for a review, see, e.g., Shen 2013). The two methods are built upon the assumption that the broad emission-line regions (BLRs), which are photoionized by the central engine and emit broad emission lines, are virialized. The virial mass estimators are calibrated (e.g., Onken et al. 2004) with respect to the famous MBH-σ relation (Ferrarese & Merritt 2000;Gebhardt et al. 2000) under the assumption that AGNs have similar virial factors. It has been shown that the virial black hole mass (MBH,vir) has substantial intrinsic uncertainties ( 0.4 dex) and suffers from systematic biases ( 0.3 dex; see, e.g., Shen & Kelly 2010). Ongoing (e.g., Du et al. 2016;Homayouni et al. 2020;Yu et al. 2022) and future reverberation mapping campaigns may considerably improve the accuracy of MBH,vir by monitoring a large quasar sample and modelling their BLR structures (e.g., Pancoast et al. 2014;.

In the upcoming time-domain era of astronomy, scaling relations between MBH and AGN variability properties are often proposed to estimate MBH since AGN variability is unambiguous in various wavelengths. Previous studies often focus on the X-ray excess variance and find that the correspond-E-mail: msun88@xmu.edu.cn ing mass estimation precision is comparable to the reverberation mapping method (e.g., Zhou et al. 2010;. Some works take an alternative approach by adopting the MBH-galaxy total stellar mass (M ) scaling relations to model the ensemble X-ray variability and constrain the mass distribution of AGNs in deep X-ray surveys (e.g., Georgakakis, Papadakis, & Paolillo 2021). In the next decade, the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory will comprehensively measure AGN variability in the optical bands (e.g., Brandt et al. 2018). While several studies have discussed the possibility to use optical variability to estimate MBH (e.g., Kelly & Shen 2013;Burke et al. 2021), the validity of such a method has not yet been well demonstrated.

In this study, we aim to constrain the mass distribution of quasars by modelling their optical structure functions measured from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Stripe 82 (S82; MacLeod et al. 2012) and the Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System Survey (Pan-STARRS; Chambers et al. 2016;Flewelling et al. 2020) light curves. The manuscript is formatted as follows. In Section 2, we present the observed quasar variability. In Section 3, we introduce our quasar variability forward modelling procedures. In Section 4, we show the modelling results. Summary and future prospects are made in Section 5. We focus on the 2114 quasars at redshift 1.4 < z < 1.8 because the redshift distribution of our quasar sample peaks at this range. The median redshift for the selected quasars is 1.6. We cross-match the selected quasars with the quasar property catalogue of Shen et al. (2011) to obtain their bolometric luminosities (L bol ) and MBH,vir; our conclusions remain unchanged if we use the updated quasar property catalogue of Wu & Shen (2022). The selected quasars are divided into five log L bol bins; each bin has the same number of quasars. Hence, the log L bol bins are defined as follows: [45.79, 45.97], [45.97, 46.10], [46.10, 46.25], [46.25, 46.47], and [46.47, 46.77].


# OBSERVATIONS

The SDSS S82 data have five bands, i.e., ugriz. The Pan-STARRS survey has grizy filters. The SDSS gri and Pan-STARRS gri have similar filter response curves; the SDSS z differ significantly from Pan-STARRS z. Hence, we focus on the SDSS and Pan-STARRS gri light curves. For the redshift ranges of our selected quasars, according to the SDSS composite spectrum (Vanden Berk et al. 2001), the r-band flux is emission-line free; g and i fluxes have weak inevitable contamination due to Mg ii and C iii] (Figure 1). We assume that such contamination is negligible (see, e.g., MacLeod et al. 2012) in our subsequent analysis.

Following Suberlak, Ivezić, & MacLeod (2021), we use the SDSS S82 standard stars v4.2 of Thanjavur et al. (2021) to find the difference (δm diff ) of the SDSS and Pan-STARRS magnitudes at each band as a function of the SDSS g − r colour index,
δm diff = A + B(mg − mr) ,(1)
where mg and mr are the apparent magnitudes in SDSS g and r bands, respectively. We use the g−r colour index rather than the g − i one because the r band is emission-line free ( Figure 1). For g, r, and i bands, we find that A = 0.01836, 0.0009, and 0.0199, and B = 0.154, 0.001, and 0.008, respectively. Then, we use the empirical correction of Eq. 1 and quasar g − r colour indexes to convert the observed Pan-STARRS magnitudes into the corresponding SDSS magnitudes and construct merged quasar light curves. We adopt the SDSS S82 and Pan-STARRS merged light curves to calculate the squared structure functions (SF 2 ) which measure the statistical variance of quasar magnitude fluctuations (∆m) at a given band and a fixed rest-frame time separation (∆t). We consider twenty-two ∆t which are evenly spaced between rest-frame 1 day and 2, 000 days in logarithmic space. For each ∆t, the corresponding variability amplitude of ∆m is calculated via the squared normalized average absolute deviation (squared NAAD),
SF 2 (∆t) ≡ σ 2 NAAD = π 2 × |∆m − ∆m| 2 ,(2)
where ∆m represents the average value of ∆m; the factor, π/2, ensures that σ 2 NAAD is identical to the variance if the distribution of ∆m is perfectly Gaussian. We do not subtract ∆m fluctuations due to magnitude measurement uncertainties. Hence, on very short ∆t (e.g., ∼ 1 day), σ 2 NAAD traces the measurement uncertainties of ∆m; on timescales of ≥ 10 days (in rest-frame), σ 2 NAAD probes quasar intrinsic variability.

The observed squared structure functions are shown in Figure 2. As shown in previous SDSS S82 studies (e.g., MacLeod et al. 2012;Suberlak, Ivezić, & MacLeod 2021), the squared structure functions increase with ∆t and anti-correlate with wavelengths and quasar luminosities, which agree well with the Corona Heated Accretion disc Reprocessing (CHAR) model predictions . It has been shown that the CHAR model can reproduce the ensemble structure functions of SDSS S82 light curves . 


# MODELLING THE OBSERVED STRUCTURE FUNCTIONS

We use the CHAR model (for the implemented physics, please refer to  to generate mock light curves; then, we compare the squared structure functions of the mock data with the observed ones. SMBHs are assumed to be Schwarzschild black holes, and the inner and outer boundaries of the accretion discs are 3 RS and 3000 RS (where RS is the Schwarzschild radius), respectively. To use the CHAR model, we have to assign four parameters, namely, L bol , MBH, the dimensionless viscosity parameter α, and the variability amplitude (δmc) of the magnetic fluctuations in the CHAR model. We consider two cases for α, i.e., α = 0.2 and α = 0.4 (e.g., King, Pringle, & Livio 2007). We also assume that δmc is independent of MBH or L bol , which are the remaining two parameters.

Different from our previous study , which only uses SDSS S82 light curves and probes rest-frame timescales of ∆t 500 days), we now do not fix the model MBH to MBH,vir since the latter suffers from various biases and has substantial uncertainties (for a review, see, e.g., Shen 2013). Instead, we take a forward-modelling approach and consider the correlation between MBH and the total stellar mass (M ) of their host galaxies (e.g., Sun et al. 2015;, and references therein), i.e.,
log(MBH/M ) = log(M /M ) − s ,(3)
with the intrinsic scatter follows a log-normal distribution, whose standard deviation is σint. We assume that the probability density function of M is a summation of two Schechter functions, and we adopt the continuity model parameters (at redshift z = 1.6) obtained by Leja et al. (2020, see their appendix B). For the value of s (i.e., the normalization of the scaling relation), we consider five cases, i.e., 10 s = 500, 1000, 2000, 4000, and 8000, respectively. For σint, we explore three values, i.e., σint = 0.3 dex, 0.6 dex, and 1.2 dex, respectively. That is, we consider 5 × 3 = 15 cases (for a summary, see Table 1). It should be noted that this approach is equivalent to assuming a specific intrinsic distribution of log MBH, which is a convolution of the summation of two Schechter functions and a normal distribution (whose mean and standard deviation are s and σint, respectively). Due to various selection effects, the log MBH distribution of the observed quasars are different from the intrinsic one. Below, we will simulate the detectable mock quasars by applying selection cuts to the intrinsic log MBH distribution. Our mock light-curve simulation process is similar to that of Georgakakis, Papadakis, & Paolillo (2021). First, we randomly sample mock galaxies (with M ) according to the galaxy stellar mass function of Leja et al. (2020). Second, for each mock galaxy, we assign an SMBH with MBH according to Eq. 3. Third, we assume the Eddington ratio distribution of AGNs follows the Schechter function, i.e.,
dt d log λ Edd ∝ λ Edd λ Edd,cut −γ exp(−λ Edd /λ Edd,cut ) ,(4)
where λ Edd represents the Eddington ratio; the slope γ and λ Edd,cut are fixed 1 to be 0.2 and 0.4 (Jones et al. 2016), respectively. The lower limit of log λ Edd is fixed to be −4 (i.e., much smaller than the observed log λ Edd for quasars) for Case 1; the lower limits of λ Edd for other cases are adjusted to ensure that their corresponding mean values of log L bol are identical to that of Case 1. Note that our models can reproduce the observed quasar luminosity function. Fourth, we calculate the corresponding bolometric luminosity (L bol ) and convert it into the 3000 continuum luminosity (L3000, i.e., λL λ at λ = 3000 ) by adopting a constant bolometric correction 2 of 5 (whose intrinsic scatter follows a log-normal distribution with the standard deviation of 0.3), and obtain the corresponding i-band apparent magnitude (mi) and the FWHM of Mg ii (see Eq. 8 in Shen et al. 2011). Fifth, we select mock quasars with mi brighter than 20.3 mag and the FWHM of Mg ii larger than 10 3 km s −1 (hereafter the "detectable" mock quasars); the mi limit of 20.3 mag corresponds to the 95-th percentile of the mi distribution of the 2114 quasars in Section 2. Sixth, for each luminosity bin introduced in Section 2, we randomly select the same number of mock quasars whose L bol (i.e., 5L3000) fall into the luminosity bin. Seventh, for each selected mock quasar, we use its L bol and MBH and the CHAR model to calculate their multi-wavelength light curves. The mock light curves share the same sampling pattern as real observations. In this procedure, δmc (i.e., the magnetic fluctuation amplitude) is unknown and should be determined according to observations. To save the computation time, we calculate the mock light curves for a given δmc (denoted as δmc,0), which is independent of L bol , MBH, and α. The model ensemble squared structure functions for other choices of δmc can be obtained by multiplying the factor c = (δmc/δmc,0) 2 with the model squared ensemble structure functions for δmc,0. Finally, we calculate the model ensemble squared structure functions (SF 2 mock ) with the same methodology aforementioned. We repeat the calculation 64 times to estimate the statistical dispersion of a squared structure function.

We use the following statistic for each luminosity bin and each band to fit the model against the data and determine δmc, i.e.,
χ 2 p,L,λ = (log SF 2 obs − log(c × SF 2 mock + SF 2 err )) 2 σ 2 tot + ln(2πσ 2 tot ) ,(5)
where SF 2 err represents the squared ensemble structure function due to magnitude measurement errors. Note that SF 2 err depends upon L and λ (see the observed squared structure functions on short timescales in Figure 2). The variance σ 2 tot = (c 2 σ 2 SF + σ 2 err )/(ln(10) × (c × SF 2 mock + SF 2 err )) 2 , where σ 2 SF and σ 2 err represent the variance of SF 2 mock and SF 2 err , respectively. We then use Scipy's optimization function to find the best-fitting parameters that minimizes
χ 2 p = χ 2 p,L,λ .(6)
There are sixteen free parameters: the first one is c, and the remaining fifteen ones are for SF 2 err (five luminosity bins and three bands) which are well determined by SF 2 obs on timescales of ≤ 4 days.

To measure the goodness of fit, we compute the two-sample Anderson-Darling test statistic (A obs ) between the observed and best-fitting mock squared structure functions for each luminosity bin and each band. We only use data points with ∆t > 10 days since the structure functions are dominated by measurement errors on shorter timescales. Indeed, the squared ensemble structure functions on ∆t 10 days are larger than those on ∆t = 1 day by a factor of 1.2 ∼ 2.0 (with a median value of 1.4), i.e., the intrinsic quasar squared ensemble structure functions are 20% ∼ 100% of those due to measurement errors. Then, we adopt the "random subset selection" (RSS) method (which is widely used in the interpolated cross-correlation analysis) to assess the distribution of the statistic of the Anderson-Darling test. That is, we randomly select (with replacement) N data points from an observed structure function with N data points; only data points with unique ∆t are used to construct a "fake" structure function; if the data point of the "fake" structure function is larger than ten, we apply the two-sample Anderson-Darling test to the observed and "fake" structure functions and store the corresponding statistic (A fake ). We repeat these procedures 10, 000 times. For each luminosity bin at each band, we can obtain the NAAD of the Anderson-Darling test statistic (σA). The final statistic (A obs,tot ) between the best-fitting and observed structure functions for all luminosity bins and bands is the weighted average of A obs in each luminosity bin and band and the weighting factor is 1/σ 2 A . We can also obtain the corresponding fake total statistic (A fake,tot ), which is the weighted average of A fake , for the 20, 000 RSS simulations. If the best-fitting and observed structure functions are the same (the null hypothesis), we expect that the probability (p null ) for having A fake,tot ≥ A obs,tot in the 10, 000 RSS simulations is not small. Given that we have 20, 000 RSS simulations, if none of A fake,tot is larger than A obs,tot , we can conclude that p null 0.5/20000 = 2×10 −5 . We reject models with p null < 0.05 (i.e., log p null < −1.3).


# RESULTS

We compare models with the same s and σint but different α. As an illustration, we fix 10 s = 500 and σint = 0.3 dex 3 and present the model squared structure functions with α = 0.2 (α = 0.4) in the upper (middle) rows of Figure 2. The model with α = 0.2 fits the observed squared structure functions poorly and its p null is much smaller than the alternative model with α = 0.4. In fact, for all the 15 models with α = 0.2, their corresponding p null are much smaller than 0.04%. Hence, the model squared structure functions with α = 0.2 are statistically rejected for these luminous quasars (with L bol 10 45.9 erg s −1 ). In the subsequent analysis, we focus on models with α = 0.4.

We can now compare model squared structure functions of various α = 0.4 models with observed ones. The model and observed squared structure functions for [10 s = 500, σint = 0.3 dex] and [10 s = 500, σint = 1.2 dex] (both with α = 0.4) are presented in Figure 2. Unlike the latter model (with p null 2 × 10 −5 ), the former one (with p null = 0.14) is not statistically rejected by the observations, demonstrating the possibility to constrain MBH distributions from quasar variability.

We can calculate the goodness of fit between the observed and model squared structure functions for different choices of s and σint which are the normalization and intrinsic scatter of the MBH-M relation, respectively. The results (corresponding to α = 0.4) are presented in the left panel of Figure 3. Cases with σint ≥ 1.2 dex have log p null < −2.7 (i.e., p null < 0.2%, which is smaller than the probability to be outside the 3σ regions of a Gaussian distribution) and are firmly rejected. Case 1 (i.e., 10 s = 500 and σint = 0.3 dex) can explain the observed structure functions, which is consistent with recent results of the non-evolution of the MBH-M relation (e.g., Sun et al. 2015;). In the right panel of Figure 3, we plot the mean (log(MBH/M )) and NAAD (σ obs ) of the black-hole mass distributions of "detectable" mock quasars for all cases. Due to the selection effects (i.e., one can only detect luminous quasars), there is a clear correlation between log(MBH/M ) and σ obs . The model squared structure functions of cases with log(MBH/M ) = 8.2 ∼ 8.6 and σ obs = 0.3 ∼ 0.45 dex are similar to the observed ones and have large p null (the right panel of Figure 3).

We show the distributions of log MBH for the four cases with highest p null (see solid curves with shaded regions in Figure 4). Comparing with log MBH,vir, our log MBH for the four cases are systematically smaller by 0.3 ∼ 0.6 dex. 4 This sys-4 In , we successfully reproduce the observed ensemble structure functions of SDSS S82 light curves with the CHAR model and M BH,vir . This is because the light curves used in  only include SDSS S82 observations and are shorter than this work. The SDSS S82 light curves can only probe the ensemble structure functions on rest-frame timescales 500 tematic offset likely resembles the systematic biases of virial black-hole mass as mentioned by (Shen & Kelly 2010, see their figure 2). Kelly & Shen (2013 modelled these biases and inferred the bias-corrected log MBH distribution from log MBH,vir for SDSS detected quasars. The log MBH distributions for the two cases with [10 s = 500, σint = 0.3 dex] and [10 s = 2000, σint = 0.36 dex] are on average smaller than KS2013 by only 0.12 dex or 0.06 dex, respectively. For the other two cases, the log MBH distributions are on average smaller than that of KS2013 by no more than 0.4 dex. Hence, in our opinion, the inferred mass distribution is acceptable.


# SUMMARY AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

In this work, we have demonstrated the possibility to infer the MBH distribution of quasars by modelling their UV/optical multi-wavelength ensemble structure functions. Some of our MBH distributions is roughly consistent with the previous study of Kelly & Shen (2013) that fully accounts for the statistical biases of Mvir,BH. Comparing with existing quasar MBH measurement methods, our approach does not rely on the knowledge of the unknown BLR structure. Basing on several assumptions (i.e., all galaxies harbour AGNs, MBH and M are correlated, and the distribution of M and AGN Eddington ratios follow the Schechter function; see Section 3), we have also constrained the normalization and intrinsic scatter of the possible correlation between MBH and M at redshift z 1.6. Compared with SDSS and Pan-STARRS, LSST can provide deeper (by 3 ∼ 5 mag) and higher cadence time-domain surveys (e.g., Brandt et al. 2018). Hence, its data can extend our analysis to lower black-hole mass ranges. We can also explore complex models involving different Eddington ratio distributions, the black-hole mass distributions, and SMBH spins. The results can also be used to calibrate the virial black hole at various redshifts.   

## Figure 2 .
2An illustration of the observed (points) squared structure functions versus the model (solid curves) and 1σ uncertainties (i.e., shaded regions) for models with two different α values or M BH distributions (shown in the fourth column). The M BH distributions are controlled by 10 s and σ int . The upper, middle, and bottom rows correspond to models with [10 s = 500, σ int = 0.3 dex, α = 0.2], [10 s = 500, σ int = 0.3 dex, α = 0.4], and [10 s = 500, σ int = 1.2 dex, α = 0.4], respectively. The first, second, and third columns represent the results for g, r, and i bands, respectively. Panels in the same column have exactly the same observed squared structure functions whose error bars are estimated via 1/Np, where Np is the number of data pairs in each ∆t bin; error bars are smaller than point sizes in most ∆t bins. The p null value is calculated by simultaneously considering the observed squared structure functions of all five luminosity bins and three bands; hence, p null is the same in each row. The model with [10 s = 500, σ int = 0.3 dex, α = 0.4] fits the observations better than other two models with either different α or σ int . Note that the results in this figure are for the luminosity bin 46.10 ≤ log(L bol /[erg s −1 ]) < 46.25; the results for other four luminosity bins are presented in Appendix A.

## Figure 3 . 6 Figure 4 .
364Left: the "allowed" normalization and intrinsic scatter of the M BH − M * relation for α = 0.4. The colours of data points correspond to the null hypothesis probability (i.e., if the model is true, the probability to generate the observed or even larger discrepancy between the data and the model prediction). The black and pink dashed curves indicate the parameter space with log p null > −1.3 (i.e., 2σ) and log p null > −2.6 (i.e., 3σ). No model has log p null > −0.49 (i.e., 1σ). Right: The average and NAAD of the M BH distributions for mock quasars that are "detectable" (i.e., brighter than 20.34 mag in the i-band and have broad emission lines). Due to the selection effects, there is a clear correlation between the mean and NAAD of the mass distributions of the "detectable" mock quasars. 10 s = 500, σ int = 0.3 10 s = 2000, σ int = 0.3 10 s = 2000, σ int = 0.6 10 s = 8000, σ int = 0.The distributions of log M BH for the four cases with the highest p null values (the green, yellow, red, and purple curves). The blue-shaded regions represent the distribution of the virial black-hole mass (log M BH,vir ). The black curve shows the blackhole mass function of KS2013. Our log M BH is, on average, smaller than log M BH,vir by 0.3 ∼ 0.6 dex. The mean log M BH values of the models with [10 s = 500, σ int = 0.3 dex] and [10 s = 2000, σ int = 0.6 dex] are slightly smaller than KS2013 by 0.12 dex and 0.06 dex, respectively.

## Figure A5 .Figure A6 .
A5A6The same as Figure 2, but for the luminosity bin 45.79 ≤ log(L bol /[erg s −1 ]) < 45.97. The same as Figure 2, but for the luminosity bin 45.97 ≤ log(L bol /[erg s −1 ]) < 46.10.

## Figure A7 .Figure A8 .
A7A8The same as Figure 2, but for the luminosity bin 46.25 ≤ log(L bol /[erg s −1 ]) < 46.47. The same as Figure 2, but for the luminosity bin 46.47 ≤ log(L bol /[erg s −1 ]) < 46.77.


Following Suberlak, Ivezić, & MacLeod (2021), we use the SDSS S82 quasar light curves and Pan-STARRS observations to explore quasar variations on observed-frame timescales up to 15 years. The SDSS S82 quasar light curves (each light curve typically contains 40 data points) are downloaded from https://faculty.washington.edu/ ivezic/cmacleod/qso_dr7/Southern.html. Then, we crossmatch each SDSS S82 quasar with the Pan-STARRS second data release (https://catalogs.mast.stsci.edu/ panstarrs/; each light curve typically has twelve observations) to extend the light-curve duration.4000 
5000 
6000 
7000 
8000 

Observed-frame wavelength [Å] 

0 

2 

4 

6 

8 

10 

Flux or response 

g-band 
r -band 
i-band 

Figure 1. Transmission curves of SDSS (solid curves) and Pan-
STARRS (dashed curves) gri bands. The purple curve represents 
the SDSS composite spectrum at redshift z = 1.6. Contamination 
due to strong UV emission lines, e.g., C iv and Lyα, are negligible 
in our studies. 



## Table 1 .
1The normalization (10 s ) and intrinsic scatter (σ int ) of 
the M BH -M relation 

Case 
10 s 
σ int 

1 
500 
0.3 
2 
500 
0.6 
3 
500 
1.2 
4 
1000 
0.3 
5 
1000 
0.6 
6 
1000 
1.2 
7 
2000 
0.3 
8 
2000 
0.6 
9 
2000 
1.2 
10 
4000 
0.3 
11 
4000 
0.6 
12 
4000 
1.2 
13 
8000 
0.3 
14 
8000 
0.6 
15 
8000 
1.2 


MNRAS 000, 1-7 (2023)
We also tried to set γ = 0.6 (e.g.,Aird et al. 2012) and found that our conclusions remain largely unchanged.2  We confirm that our results remain the same if we use the luminosity-dependent bolometric correction factor.
The resulting M BH distribution is close toKelly & Shen (2013), who obtain their M BH distribution by carefully correcting for biases in virial black-hole masses.MNRAS 000, 1-7 (2023)
This paper has been typeset from a T E X/L A T E X file prepared by the author.MNRAS 000, 1-7 (2023)
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe thank J.X. Wang and Y.Q. Xue for helpful discussion. We thank the anonymous referee for his/her helpful comments that improved the manuscript. M.Y.S. acknowledges support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-11973002), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (No. 2022J06002), and the China Manned Space Project grant (No. CMS-CSST-2021-A06 and CMS-CSST-2021-B11).Funding for the SDSS and SDSS-II has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Japanese Monbukagakusho, the Max Planck Society, and the Higher Education Funding Council for England. The SDSS website is http://www.sdss.org/.days for quasars at z = 1.6. On such timescales, models with different M BH have similar structure functions (seeFigure 2). Hence, the SDSS S82 light curves are too short to constrain M BH .(Campana 2017).DATA AVAILABILITYThe SDSS S82 light curves can be downloaded from https://faculty.washington.edu/ivezic/cmacleod/qso_ dr7/Southern.html. The Pan-STARRS second data release site is https://catalogs.mast.stsci.edu/panstarrs/. The CHAR model light curves are available upon reasonable request.APPENDIX AIn this section, we illustrate our modelling results for other luminosity bins (Figures A5, A6, A7, and A8).
. J Aird, A L Coil, J Moustakas, M R Blanton, S M Burles, R J Cool, D J Eisenstein, 10.1088/0004-637X/746/1/90ApJ. 74690Aird J., Coil A. L., Moustakas J., Blanton M. R., Burles S. M., Cool R. J., Eisenstein D. J., et al., 2012, ApJ, 746, 90. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/746/1/90

. R D Blandford, C F Mckee, 10.1086/159843ApJ. 255419Blandford R. D., McKee C. F., 1982, ApJ, 255, 419. doi:10.1086/159843

. V Botte, S Ciroi, P Rafanelli, F Di Mille, 10.1086/420803AJ. 1273168Botte V., Ciroi S., Rafanelli P., Di Mille F., 2004, AJ, 127, 3168. doi:10.1086/420803

. W N Brandt, Q Ni, G Yang, S F Anderson, R J Assef, A J Barth, F E Bauer, arXiv:1811.06542arXivBrandt W. N., Ni Q., Yang G., Anderson S. F., Assef R. J., Barth A. J., Bauer F. E., et al., 2018, arXiv, arXiv:1811.06542

. C J Burke, Y Shen, O Blaes, C F Gammie, K Horne, Y.-F Jiang, X Liu, 10.1126/science.abg9933Sci. 373789Burke C. J., Shen Y., Blaes O., Gammie C. F., Horne K., Jiang Y.-F., Liu X., et al., 2021, Sci, 373, 789. doi:10.1126/science.abg9933

. R Campana, ascl.soft. ascl:1708.016Campana R., 2017, ascl.soft. ascl:1708.016

. K C Chambers, E A Magnier, N Metcalfe, H A Flewelling, M E Huber, C Z Waters, L Denneau, arXiv:1612.05560arXivChambers K. C., Magnier E. A., Metcalfe N., Flewelling H. A., Huber M. E., Waters C. Z., Denneau L., et al., 2016, arXiv, arXiv:1612.05560

. P Du, K.-X Lu, Z.-X Zhang, Y.-K Huang, K Wang, C Hu, J Qiu, 10.3847/0004-637X/825/2/126ApJ. 825126Du P., Lu K.-X., Zhang Z.-X., Huang Y.-K., Wang K., Hu C., Qiu J., et al., 2016, ApJ, 825, 126. doi:10.3847/0004- 637X/825/2/126

. L Ferrarese, D Merritt, 10.1086/312838ApJL. 5399Ferrarese L., Merritt D., 2000, ApJL, 539, L9. doi:10.1086/312838

. H A Flewelling, E A Magnier, K C Chambers, J N Heasley, C Holmberg, M E Huber, W Sweeney, 10.3847/1538-4365/abb82dApJS. 7Flewelling H. A., Magnier E. A., Chambers K. C., Heasley J. N., Holmberg C., Huber M. E., Sweeney W., et al., 2020, ApJS, 251, 7. doi:10.3847/1538-4365/abb82d

. K Gebhardt, R Bender, G Bower, A Dressler, S M Faber, A V Filippenko, R Green, 10.1086/312840ApJL. 53913Gebhardt K., Bender R., Bower G., Dressler A., Faber S. M., Filippenko A. V., Green R., et al., 2000, ApJL, 539, L13. doi:10.1086/312840

. A Georgakakis, I Papadakis, M Paolillo, 10.1093/mnras/stab2818MNRAS. 5083463Georgakakis A., Papadakis I., Paolillo M., 2021, MNRAS, 508, 3463. doi:10.1093/mnras/stab2818

. Y Homayouni, J R Trump, C J Grier, K Horne, Y Shen, W N Brandt, K S Dawson, 10.3847/1538-4357/ababa9ApJ. 90155Homayouni Y., Trump J. R., Grier C. J., Horne K., Shen Y., Brandt W. N., Dawson K. S., et al., 2020, ApJ, 901, 55. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ababa9

. J D Hunter, 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55CSE. 990Hunter J. D., 2007, CSE, 9, 90. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.55

. M L Jones, R C Hickox, C S Black, K N Hainline, M A Dipompeo, A D Goulding, 10.3847/0004-637X/826/1/12ApJ. 82612Jones M. L., Hickox R. C., Black C. S., Hainline K. N., DiPompeo M. A., Goulding A. D., 2016, ApJ, 826, 12. doi:10.3847/0004- 637X/826/1/12

. B C Kelly, Y Shen, 10.1088/0004-637X/764/1/45ApJ. 76445Kelly B. C., Shen Y., 2013, ApJ, 764, 45. doi:10.1088/0004- 637X/764/1/45

. B C Kelly, T Treu, M Malkan, A Pancoast, J.-H Woo, 10.1088/0004-637X/779/2/187ApJ. 779187Kelly B. C., Treu T., Malkan M., Pancoast A., Woo J.-H., 2013, ApJ, 779, 187. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/779/2/187

. A R King, J E Pringle, M Livio, 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.11556.xMNRAS. 3761740King A. R., Pringle J. E., Livio M., 2007, MNRAS, 376, 1740. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.11556.x

. J Leja, J S Speagle, B D Johnson, C Conroy, P Van Dokkum, M Franx, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7e27ApJ. 893111Leja J., Speagle J. S., Johnson B. D., Conroy C., van Dokkum P., Franx M., 2020, ApJ, 893, 111. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab7e27

. J Li, J D Silverman, X Ding, M A Strauss, A Goulding, M Schramm, H M Yesuf, 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2301ApJ. 922142Li J., Silverman J. D., Ding X., Strauss M. A., Goulding A., Schramm M., Yesuf H. M., et al., 2021, ApJ, 922, 142. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac2301

. S.-S Li, S Yang, Z.-X Yang, Y.-J Chen, Y.-Y Songsheng, H.-Z Liu, P Du, 10.3847/1538-4357/ac116eApJ. 9209Li S.-S., Yang S., Yang Z.-X., Chen Y.-J., Songsheng Y.-Y., Liu H.-Z., Du P., et al., 2021, ApJ, 920, 9. doi:10.3847/1538- 4357/ac116e

. C L Macleod, Ž Ivezić, B Sesar, W De Vries, C S Kochanek, B C Kelly, A C Becker, 10.1088/0004-637X/753/2/106ApJ. 753106MacLeod C. L., Ivezić Ž., Sesar B., de Vries W., Kochanek C. S., Kelly B. C., Becker A. C., et al., 2012, ApJ, 753, 106. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/753/2/106

. I M Mchardy, P Arévalo, P Uttley, I E Papadakis, D P Summons, W Brinkmann, M J Page, 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12411.xMNRAS. 382985McHardy I. M., Arévalo P., Uttley P., Papadakis I. E., Summons D. P., Brinkmann W., Page M. J., 2007, MNRAS, 382, 985. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12411.x

. C A Onken, L Ferrarese, D Merritt, B M Peterson, R W Pogge, M Vestergaard, A Wandel, 10.1086/424655ApJ. 615645Onken C. A., Ferrarese L., Merritt D., Peterson B. M., Pogge R. W., Vestergaard M., Wandel A., 2004, ApJ, 615, 645. doi:10.1086/424655

. A Pancoast, B J Brewer, T Treu, D Park, A J Barth, M C Bentz, J.-H Woo, 10.1093/mnras/stu1419MNRAS. 4453073Pancoast A., Brewer B. J., Treu T., Park D., Barth A. J., Bentz M. C., Woo J.-H., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 3073. doi:10.1093/mnras/stu1419

. Y Shen, BASI. 4161Shen Y., 2013, BASI, 41, 61

. Y Shen, B C Kelly, 10.1088/0004-637X/713/1/41ApJ. 71341Shen Y., Kelly B. C., 2010, ApJ, 713, 41. doi:10.1088/0004- 637X/713/1/41

. Y Shen, G T Richards, M A Strauss, P B Hall, D P Schneider, S Snedden, D Bizyaev, 10.1088/0067-0049/194/2/45ApJS. 19445Shen Y., Richards G. T., Strauss M. A., Hall P. B., Schneider D. P., Snedden S., Bizyaev D., et al., 2011, ApJS, 194, 45. doi:10.1088/0067-0049/194/2/45

. K L Suberlak, Ž Ivezić, C Macleod, 10.3847/1538-4357/abc698ApJ. 90796Suberlak K. L., Ivezić Ž., MacLeod C., 2021, ApJ, 907, 96. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abc698

. M Sun, J R Trump, W N Brandt, B Luo, D M Alexander, K Jahnke, D J Rosario, 10.1088/0004-637X/802/1/14ApJ. 80214Sun M., Trump J. R., Brandt W. N., Luo B., Alexander D. M., Jahnke K., Rosario D. J., et al., 2015, ApJ, 802, 14. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/802/1/14

. M Sun, Y Xue, W N Brandt, W.-M Gu, J R Trump, Z Cai, Z He, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab789eApJ. 891178Sun M., Xue Y., Brandt W. N., Gu W.-M., Trump J. R., Cai Z., He Z., et al., 2020, ApJ, 891, 178. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab789e

. M Sun, Y Xue, H Guo, J Wang, W N Brandt, J R Trump, Z He, 10.3847/1538-4357/abb1c4ApJ. 9027Sun M., Xue Y., Guo H., Wang J., Brandt W. N., Trump J. R., He Z., et al., 2020, ApJ, 902, 7. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abb1c4

. K Thanjavur, Ž Ivezić, S S Allam, D L Tucker, J A Smith, S Gwyn, 10.1093/mnras/stab1452MNRAS. 5055941Thanjavur K., Ivezić Ž., Allam S. S., Tucker D. L., Smith J. A., Gwyn S., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 5941. doi:10.1093/mnras/stab1452

. Vanden Berk, D E Richards, G T Bauer, A Strauss, M A Schneider, D P Heckman, T M York, D G , 10.1086/321167AJ. 122549Vanden Berk D. E., Richards G. T., Bauer A., Strauss M. A., Schneider D. P., Heckman T. M., York D. G., et al., 2001, AJ, 122, 549. doi:10.1086/321167

. Walt S Van Der, S C Colbert, G Varoquaux, 10.1109/MCSE.2011.371322van der Walt S., Colbert S. C., Varoquaux G., 2011, CSE, 13, 22. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37

. Q Wu, Y Shen, 10.3847/1538-4365/ac9eadApJS. 26342Wu Q., Shen Y., 2022, ApJS, 263, 42. doi:10.3847/1538- 4365/ac9ead

. Z Yu, P Martini, A Penton, T M Davis, C S Kochanek, G F Lewis, C Lidman, arXiv:2208.05491arXivYu Z., Martini P., Penton A., Davis T. M., Kochanek C. S., Lewis G. F., Lidman C., et al., 2022, arXiv, arXiv:2208.05491

. X.-L Zhou, S.-N Zhang, D.-X Wang, L Zhu, 10.1088/0004-637X/710/1/16ApJ. 71016Zhou X.-L., Zhang S.-N., Wang D.-X., Zhu L., 2010, ApJ, 710, 16. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/710/1/16