# Co-occurrence of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma of the organ of Zuckerkandl resected simultaneously by laparoscopy: a rare case report and literature review

CorpusID: 257695654
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85f2aeee60e982fcc46e09cbfa33d8eaa8fbe3ba](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85f2aeee60e982fcc46e09cbfa33d8eaa8fbe3ba)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Co-occurrence of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma of the organ of Zuckerkandl resected simultaneously by laparoscopy: a rare case report and literature review
2023

Zhi Chang 
Jiwen Shang 
Shushang Yang 
Wuyao Qin 
Hao Cui 
Jiwen Shang 

Third Hospital of Shanxi Medical University
Shanxi Bethune Hospital
Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences
Tongji Shanxi Hospital
TaiyuanChina


Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences
Shanxi Medical University
Shanxi Bethune Hospital


Tongji Shanxi Hospital
030032TaiyuanChina

Co-occurrence of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma of the organ of Zuckerkandl resected simultaneously by laparoscopy: a rare case report and literature review

Journal of International Medical Research
513202310.1177/03000605231161211Date received: 1 November 2022; accepted: 15 February 2023Case Reports Corresponding author: ! The Author(s) 2023 Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions/home/imr Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).PheochromocytomaparagangliomaZuckerkandl organlaparoscopysuccinate dehydrogenase subunit Bblood pressure
Pheochromocytomas (PHEOs) and paragangliomas are generally grouped as rare chromaffin cell tumors. The co-occurrence of PHEOs and paragangliomas of the organ of Zuckerkandl (POZ) is extremely rare. The most common symptom of pheochromocytoma-paraganglioma (PPGL) is hypertension, and open surgery is still recommended for the treatment of large PPGLs. Herein, we report a case of a successful simultaneous laparoscopic resection of a large PHEO accompanied by POZ in a 40-year-old man with normal blood pressure. DNA analysis revealed a mutation in the succinate dehydrogenase subunit B in both the PHEO and the POZ. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of tumors occurring simultaneously in these two locations. We believe that the co-occurrence of PHEO and POZ is extremely rare, and the possibility of PPGL cannot be ruled out in patients with normal blood pressure. The decision to perform laparoscopic surgery remains questionable for patients with a large PHEO and POZ. In addition, a genetic examination should be performed to identify the existence of PPGL-related inherited syndromes.

## Introduction

Pheochromocytomas (PHEOs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) are rare catecholaminesecreting tumors that have an annual incidence of six per million people. 1 Excessive secretion of catecholamines can lead to hypertension, and typical symptoms include headache, palpitation, and hyperhidrosis. 2,3 Approximately 80% of cases originate from the adrenal medulla (PHEO), and approximately 20% occur within extra-adrenal sites (PGL). PGL occurs mainly in the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis. Paragangliomas of the organ of Zuckerkandl (POZ)-which consist of paraaortic paraganglia located between the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery or renal artery and the level of the aortic bifurcation-represent approximately half of all PGLs. 2,4 Surgical resection is the firstchoice treatment for pheochromocytomaparaganglioma (PPGL or PHEO/PGL). Open surgery is still recommended for PHEOs or POZ with a tumor diameter !5 cm, and the security of laparoscopic procedures remains dubious. 1 The cooccurrence of PHEO and POZ is extraordinarily interesting, and no clear guidance exists on the choice of surgical approach. Herein, we report a case of PHEO accompanied by a POZ !5 cm in diameter. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of tumors occurring simultaneously in these two locations. We successfully performed simultaneous laparoscopic resection in this patient and reviewed the literature on PPGL. The reporting of this study conforms to CARE guidelines. 5


## Case report

A 40-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of sporadic episodes of palpitations and intermittent diaphoresis. His blood pressure and heart rate were within the normal range, and no abnormalities were observed on physical examination. However, the patient's serum and urinary catecholamines were elevated (Table 1). A computed tomography (CT) scan ( Figure 1) of the abdomen and pelvis showed a rounded mass (5.14 cm Â 4.31 cm) in the right adrenal gland and an irregularly shaped mass (7.55 cm Â 4.71 cm) at the umbilical level between the retroperitoneal inferior vena cava and the abdominal aorta. The irregularly shaped tumor was located in the Zuckerkandl organ area. However, the patient did not undergo a 123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine ( 123 I-MIBG) scan because of financial considerations. Instead, brain magnetic resonance imaging and neck ultrasonography were performed to exclude the presence of PPGL-related genetic syndrome. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with PHEO and concurrent POZ. The patient was treated with phenoxybenzamine for 2 weeks to prevent intraoperative cardiovascular accidents and postoperative hypotensive shock. After consulting with general medicine and vascular, cardiology, anesthesiology, and other disciplines, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery and was prepared for possible conversion to open surgery.

After the induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a 70 left lateral  decubitus position, and 10-mm, 10-mm, 10-mm, and 5-mm trocars were implanted 2 cm above the umbilicus, under the costal margin, beside the right rectus abdominis, and under the xiphoid process, respectively. Laparoscopy was used for observation following pneumoperitis activation. First, the triangular ligament of the liver was excised, the liver was lifted, and the upper pole of the right kidney was exposed. The right colon was carefully separated and pushed away to expose the right kidney. The descending and horizontal segments of the duodenum were then pushed to expose the inferior vena cava and right renal vein. After further separation, we observed an irregular tumor of approximately 7.55 cm Â 4.71 cm in size with a capsule and abundant nutrient vessels at the upper level of the tumor. We separated and ligated the vessels individually and continued to separate downward along the tumor surface. A blood vessel from the abdominal aorta was suspected of supplying the tumor. After clamping using hem-o-lok clamps, the mass in the abdominal cavity was completely removed (Figure 2). The right central adrenal vein was then located and disconnected upward along the lateral side of the inferior vena cava. The mass was separated along the plane between the psoas major muscle and the tumor body. The blood vessels supplying the tumor were carefully dissected. Finally, the adrenal mass was completely removed along its periphery ( Figure 2). The patient's blood pressure remained stable throughout the surgery, except when the blood pressure soared to 190/110 mmHg when contact was made with the adrenal mass. The operation lasted 130 minutes, and intraoperative blood loss was approximately 100 mL. Postoperative pathological results confirmed the diagnosis of right PHEO accompanied by POZ (Figure 3). Microscopically, the tumor cells were round or polygonal with abundant cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining showed loss of succinate dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB) protein expression and negative chromogranin A. An SDHB mutation was revealed by DNA analysis in both the PHEO and the POZ. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient remained well, and evidence of recurrence was not observed on CT. Serum and urinary catecholamine levels were within the normal range (Table 1).


## Discussion

PGL mostly occurs in the Zuckerkandl organ, which was first described as an unusual lymph node by Emil Zuckerkandl in 1901. 6,7 Our team previously published a case of the successful laparoscopic resection of a large POZ. 4 PHEO was accompanied by POZ, and the diameter of both tumors was >5 cm, which is extremely rare. Laparoscopic surgery in this situation is more complex and necessitates a multidisciplinary team. 8 Patients with PPGL account for 0.2% to 0.6% of the population with hypertension and exhibit paroxysmal (approximately 48%) or persistent (approximately 29%) hypertension and even hypertensive crisis, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, and shock. 9,10 However, the clinical manifestations of PPGL differ considerably. Regardless of whether the catecholamine level in serum and urine is elevated, clinical signs of PPGL can be minimal or absent; this state is clinically termed "silent PPGL." Some researchers accept that silent PPGL may be caused by the low number of catecholamine receptors in the cardiovascular framework. [11][12][13] However, misdiagnosis and missed diagnoses are likely to occur in this situation. Therefore, the possibility of PPGL must be considered if paroxysmal signs or symptoms are present. Similarly, our patient had no hypertension other than occasional symptoms of palpitations and hyperhidrosis, which are typical manifestations of PPGL. In addition, the clinical manifestations of POZ may occur in retroperitoneal tumor compression that causes ureteral and small intestinal obstructions. 14,15 The diagnosis of PPGL is particularly important because of the negative consequences of misdiagnosis or missed diagnoses. In accordance with the Endocrine Society guideline, the initial biochemical test should include measurements of plasma-free or urinary fractionated metanephrines. 16 123 I-MIBG imaging is a more specific type of functional imaging than CT scans. 17 Our patient did not undergo a 123 I-MIBG scan examination for financial reasons. However, given the catecholamine spectrum and CT findings, a diagnosis of PHEO accompanied by POZ was established.

PPGL can synthesize and store excess catecholamines. When released, especially during anesthesia induction or tumor manipulation, catecholamines may cause life-threatening cardiovascular complications. 18 Therefore, adequate preoperative management is crucial before PPGL surgery. Reasonable preoperative preparation can significantly reduce perioperative complications. 19 The Endocrinology Society guideline recommends oral administration of phenoxybenzamine or other a-adrenergic receptor blockers for 7 to 14 days and a high-sodium diet and fluid intake before surgery. 16 Currently, the universal view is that laparoscopic resection is an optional procedure for tumors with a diameter of 5 cm or larger and should be performed based on tumor features and the surgeon's experience and technique. 1 Both the PHEO and the POZ had diameters of >5 cm in our patient. Laparoscopic surgery was successfully performed given our surgical team's previous experience and the support of vascular, general, cardiology, anesthesiology, and other specialties. 4 Notably, the patient's blood pressure soared to 190/110 mmHg during the operation when we touched the adrenal tumor. However, the blood pressure remained stable (fluctuation range: 120/80 mmHg to 130/85 mmHg) when the abdominal tumor was removed. The reason could be that most POZ are often nonfunctional and are called "silent POZ." 4 Some studies have suggested that POZ may lack tyrosine hydroxylase-the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis-leading to defective synthesis of catecholamines. Alternatively, these tumors may arise from primitive neural crest cells that do not secrete catecholamines. 20 In addition, among the catecholamines secreted by PPGL, epinephrine can only be released by PHEO, with very rare exceptions. This is because epinephrine is converted by norepinephrine under the action of phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase, which is produced by the adrenal medullary chromaffin cells. Therefore, POZ originating from extra-adrenal sites cannot secrete epinephrine. 21 Previously, 10% of PPGL cases were believed to be inherited. However, a recent study showed that at least 60% of patients have germline or somatic mutations in PPGL-related genes, with at least 30% of these mutations being hereditary. 22,23 To date, at least 19 PPGL-related gene mutations have been identified. Because of certain genotype-phenotype correlations, patients with PPGL-especially those who are young or have a family history, patients with bilateral or multiple PPGL, and relatives of PPGL susceptibility gene mutation carriers-should undergo genetic examination. 24 Moreover, germline SDHx, particularly SDHB mutations, are associated with a higher risk of malignancy. 25 SDHB immunohistochemistry is a reliable alternative marker for identifying SDH mutations; thus, all PPGLs should be screened with SDHB immunohistochemistry. 2,23 The loss of immunohistochemical expression of SDHB in our patient implied the possibility of an SDH mutation, and further genetic examination confirmed the existence of an SDHB mutation. The patient's relatives refused to undergo genetic testing despite our recommendation; therefore, we suggested a regular physical examination.

Approximately 10% to 30% of PPGLs relapse or metastasize, and distinguishing between benign and malignant tumors using preoperative biochemistry tests, imaging examinations, and pathological results without metastasis is difficult. 26 The World Health Organization renamed "malignant pheochromocytoma"

to "metastatic pheochromocytoma" in 2017, and PGLs were no longer considered benign tumors. 6 In their review of 135 POZ patients, Anuradha Subramanian and Vijay Maker 27 showed that 9% of patients had metastatic disease at the time of initial surgery, 4% had prior resections of PHEOs 6 to 16 years before POZ excision, and 11% returned with recurrence or metastatic disease.

Importantly, the POZ in our patient was removed in three pieces because of severe adhesion during resection that can cause local recurrence; severe adhesion may be a limitation of laparoscopy for large tumors. However, we believe that magnifying imaging of the laparoscopic system can be used to perform more delicate operations and may be more advantageous than open surgery for complex anatomical cases. Therefore, a surgical method for such large multiple tumors must be confirmed with large-sample studies.

In conclusion, co-occurrence of PHEO and POZ is extremely rare, and the possibility of PPGL in patients with normal blood pressure cannot be ruled out.

The decision to perform laparoscopic surgery remains questionable for patients with a large PHEO and POZ. In addition, a genetic examination should be performed to identify the existence of PPGL-related inherited syndromes.

## Figure 1 .
1Computed tomography findings: Right adrenal mass (red arrow) and abdominal mass (black arrow). (a) Transverse plane of right adrenal mass. (b) Transverse plane of abdominal mass and (c) Coronal plane (1) abdominal aorta (2) right renal artery.

## Figure 2 .
2Photograph of the gross pathology of the right adrenal and abdominal masses. (d) The abdominal tumor is irregular and was separated into three parts during the operation and (e) The right adrenal mass was well-circumscribed and encapsulated.

## Figure 3 .
3Microscopic features of the PHEO (f) and POZ (g). The tumor cells were arranged in nests (hematoxylin-eosin staining Â 100). PHEO: Pheochromocytoma, POZ: paraganglioma of the organ of Zuckerkandl.

## Table 1 .
1Blood and urine analysis.Preoperative 
6-month follow-up 
Reference values 

Blood 
Epinephrine 
32 pg/mL 
45 pg/mL 
0-125 pg/mL 
Norepinephrine 
4211 pg/mL 
188 pg/mL 
0-600 pg/mL 
Dopamine 
30 pg/mL 
52 pg/mL 
0-100 pg/mL 
Metanephrine 
11 pg/mL 
15 pg/mL 
0-62 pg/mL 
Normetanephrine 
1534 pg/mL 
33 pg/mL 
0-145 pg/mL 
Urine 
Epinephrine 
10 mg/24 h 
12 mg/24 h 
0-20 mg/24 h 
Norepinephrine 
1410 mg/24 h 
29 mg/24 h 
0-90 mg/24 h 
Dopamine 
1850 mg/24 h 
310 mg/24 h 
0-600 mg/24 h 
Metanephrine 
151 mg/24 h 
141 mg/24 h 
62-207 mg/24 h 
Normetanephrine 
5590 mg/24 h 
290 mg/24 h 
125-510 mg/24 h 
Vanillylmandelic acid 
36 mg/24 h 
4 mg/24 h 
0.0-7.5 mg/24 h 

AcknowledgementWe thank the patient for allowing this report of their treatment for this rare disease to be published.Author contributionsSupervision: JS, SY, WQ, and HC. Writing -original draft: ZC. Writing -review and editing: ZC.Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors declare no conflict of interest in preparing this article.Ethics statementWritten consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the journal editor.FundingThe authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This study was supported by the Shanxi Province Science and Technology Fund (Award No. 201903D321130), which provided financial support for manuscript revision and data collection.ORCID iDsZhi Chang https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4162-160X Wuyao Qin https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2903-0767
. H Neumann, Young Wj, C Eng, Paraganglioma Pheochromocytoma, N Engl J Med. 381Neumann H, Young WJ and Eng C. Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma. N Engl J Med 2019; 381: 552-565.

Pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma: recent updates in genetics, biochemistry, immunohistochemistry, metabolomics, imaging and therapeutic options. K Antonio, Mmn Valdez, L Mercado-Asis, Gland Surg. 9Antonio K, Valdez MMN, Mercado-Asis L, et al. Pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma: recent updates in genetics, biochemistry, immunohistochemistry, metabolomics, imaging and therapeutic options. Gland Surg 2020; 9: 105-123.

Approach to pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in children and adolescents: A retrospective clinical study from a tertiary care center. B Ardicli, I R User, A O Ciftci, J Pediatr Urol. 17Ardicli B, User IR, Ciftci AO, et al. Approach to pheochromocytoma and para- ganglioma in children and adolescents: A retrospective clinical study from a tertiary care center. J Pediatr Urol 2021; 17: 400-401.

Laparoscopic resection of a large clinically silent paraganglioma at the organ of Zuckerkandl: a rare case report and review of the literature. X Ren, J Shang, R Ren, BMC Urol. 20156Ren X, Shang J, Ren R, et al. Laparoscopic resection of a large clinically silent paragan- glioma at the organ of Zuckerkandl: a rare case report and review of the literature. BMC Urol 2020; 20: 156.

The CARE guidelines: consensus-based clinical case reporting guideline development. J J Gagnier, G Kienle, D G Altman, Headache. 53Gagnier JJ, Kienle G, Altman DG, et al. The CARE guidelines: consensus-based clinical case reporting guideline development. Headache 2013; 53: 1541-1547.

The Diagnosis and Clinical Significance of Paragangliomas in Unusual Locations. S L Asa, S Ezzat, O Mete, J Clin Med. 7280Asa SL, Ezzat S and Mete O. The Diagnosis and Clinical Significance of Paragangliomas in Unusual Locations. J Clin Med 2018; 7: 280.

Emil Zuckerkandl and his delightful little organ. W B Ober, Pathol Annu. 18Ober WB. Emil Zuckerkandl and his delightful little organ. Pathol Annu 1983; 18: 103-119.

Pheochromocytoma: An approach to diagnosis. E Sardella, A B Grossman, Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 34101346Sardella E and Grossman AB. Pheochromocytoma: An approach to diag- nosis. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020; 34: 101346.

Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma-an update on diagnosis, evaluation, and management. A Jain, R Baracco, G Kapur, Pediatr Nephrol. 35Jain A, Baracco R and Kapur G. Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma-an update on diagnosis, evaluation, and man- agement. Pediatr Nephrol 2020; 35: 581-594.

Pheochromocytoma with Acute Noncardiac Pulmonary Edema: A Report of One Case and the Review of Literature. Y Liu, N Wang, S Li, Cancer Invest. 39Liu Y, Wang N, Li S, et al. Pheochromocytoma with Acute Non- cardiac Pulmonary Edema: A Report of One Case and the Review of Literature. Cancer Invest 2021; 39: 908-913.

Perioperative hypertensive crisis in clinically silent pheochromocytomas: report of four cases. S J Shen, H M Cheng, A W Chiu, Chang Gung Med J. 28Shen SJ, Cheng HM, Chiu AW, et al. Perioperative hypertensive crisis in clinically silent pheochromocytomas: report of four cases. Chang Gung Med J 2005; 28: 44-50.

Pheochromocytoma: an uncommon presentation of an asymptomatic and biochemically silent adrenal incidentaloma. S K Kota, S K Kota, S Panda, Malays J Med Sci. 19Kota SK, Kota SK, Panda S, et al. Pheochromocytoma: an uncommon presen- tation of an asymptomatic and biochemical- ly silent adrenal incidentaloma. Malays J Med Sci 2012; 19: 86-91.

The clinical utility of circulating neuroendocrine gene transcript analysis in well-differentiated paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas. M Peczkowska, J Cwikla, M Kidd, Peczkowska M, Cwikla J, Kidd M, et al. The clinical utility of circulating neuroendocrine gene transcript analysis in well-differentiated paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas.

. Eur J Endocrinol. 176Eur J Endocrinol 2017; 176: 143-157.

Extraadrenal pheochromocytoma: a cause of ureteral obstruction. S Yadav, S K Singh, S K Sharma, J Urol. 163264Yadav S, Singh SK, Sharma SK, et al. Extra- adrenal pheochromocytoma: a cause of ure- teral obstruction. J Urol 2000; 163: 264.

Massive organ of Zuckerkandl inducing small bowel obstruction. M Blecha, C Galanopolous, D Dharkar, J Am Coll Surg. 201Blecha M, Galanopolous C, Dharkar D, et al. Massive organ of Zuckerkandl induc- ing small bowel obstruction. J Am Coll Surg 2005; 201: 480-481.

Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J W Lenders, Q Y Duh, G Eisenhofer, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 99Lenders JW, Duh QY, Eisenhofer G, et al. Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014; 99: 1915-1942.

European Association of Nuclear Medicine Practice Guideline/Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging Procedure Standard 2019 for radionuclide imaging of phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma. D Taieb, R J Hicks, E Hindie, Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 46Taieb D, Hicks RJ, Hindie E, et al. European Association of Nuclear Medicine Practice Guideline/Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging Procedure Standard 2019 for radionuclide imaging of phaeochro- mocytoma and paraganglioma. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2019; 46: 2112-2137.

Perioperative Management of Pheochromocytoma. J Naranjo, S Dodd, Y N Martin, J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 31Naranjo J, Dodd S and Martin YN. Perioperative Management of Pheochromocytoma. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2017; 31: 1427-1439.

Preoperative management of the pheochromocytoma patient. K Pacak, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 92Pacak K. Preoperative management of the pheochromocytoma patient. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007; 92: 4069-4079.

Biochemically silent abdominal paragangliomas in patients with mutations in the succinate dehydrogenase subunit B gene. H J Timmers, K Pacak, T T Huynh, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 93Timmers HJ, Pacak K, Huynh TT, et al. Biochemically silent abdominal paragangliomas in patients with mutations in the succinate dehydrogenase subunit B gene. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008; 93: 4826-4832.

. Moon, P Mattei, Paraganglioma Pheochromocytoma, Semin Pediatr Surg. 29150926Moon JK and Mattei P. Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma. Semin Pediatr Surg 2020; 29: 150926.

Paraganglioma and phaeochromocytoma: from genetics to personalized medicine. J Favier, L Amar, A P Gimenez-Roqueplo, Nat Rev Endocrinol. 11Favier J, Amar L and Gimenez-Roqueplo AP. Paraganglioma and phaeochromocy- toma: from genetics to personalized medi- cine. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2015; 11: 101-111.

Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)-deficient neoplasia. A J Gill, Histopathology. 72Gill AJ. Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)- deficient neoplasia. Histopathology 2018; 72: 106-16.

Pheochromocytoma: a genetic and diagnostic update. L B Mercado-Asis, K I Wolf, I Jochmanova, Endocr Pract. 24Mercado-Asis LB, Wolf KI, Jochmanova I, et al. Pheochromocytoma: a genetic and diagnostic update. Endocr Pract 2018; 24: 78-90.

Genetic stratification of inherited and sporadic phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma: implications for precision medicine. R Casey, H Neumann, E R Maher, Hum Mol Genet. 29Casey R, Neumann H and Maher ER. Genetic stratification of inherited and spo- radic phaeochromocytoma and paragan- glioma: implications for precision medicine. Hum Mol Genet 2020; 29: R128-R137.

Predictors of recurrence of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: a multicenter study in Piedmont, Italy. M Parasiliti-Caprino, B Lucatello, C Lopez, Hypertens Res. 43Parasiliti-Caprino M, Lucatello B, Lopez C, et al. Predictors of recurrence of pheochro- mocytoma and paraganglioma: a multicen- ter study in Piedmont, Italy. Hypertens Res 2020; 43: 500-510.

Organs of Zuckerkandl: their surgical significance and a review of a century of literature. A Subramanian, V K Maker, Am J Surg. 192Subramanian A and Maker VK. Organs of Zuckerkandl: their surgical significance and a review of a century of literature. Am J Surg 2006; 192: 224-234.