# A Survey on Causal Inference for Recommendation

CorpusID: 257637133
 
tags: #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/301b07ecba0864c5bad4039d6a0bc93687417443](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/301b07ecba0864c5bad4039d6a0bc93687417443)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Survey on Causal Inference for Recommendation
August 2018

Huishi Luo 
Fuzhen Zhuang 
Huishi Luo 
Fuzhen Zhuang 
Ruobing Xie 
Hengshu Zhu 
Deqing Wang 

Institute of Artificial Intelligence
RUOBING XIE
WeChat Search Application Department
Beihang University
TencentChina, China


DEQING WANG
SKLSDE
School of Computer Science
HENGSHU ZHU
the Career Science Laboratory
BOSS Zhipin
China


Beihang University
China

A Survey on Causal Inference for Recommendation

J. ACM
3711137August 2018CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Recommender systems Additional Key Words and Phrases: Recommender SystemsCausal InferenceCausal Learning ACM Reference Format:
Recently, causal inference has attracted increasing attention from researchers of recommender systems (RS), which analyzes the relationship between a cause and its effect and has a wide range of real-world applications in multiple fields. Causal inference can model the causality in recommender systems like confounding effects and deal with counterfactual problems such as offline policy evaluation and data augmentation. Although there are already some valuable surveys on causal recommendations, these surveys introduce approaches in a relatively isolated way and lack theoretical analysis of existing methods. Due to the unfamiliarity with causality to RS researchers, it is both necessary and challenging to comprehensively review the relevant studies from the perspective of causal theory, which might be instructive for the readers to propose new approaches in practice. This survey attempts to provide a systematic review of up-to-date papers in this area from a theoretical standpoint. Firstly, we introduce the fundamental concepts of causal inference as the basis of the following review. Then we propose a new taxonomy from the perspective of causal techniques and further discuss technical details about how existing methods apply causal inference to address specific recommender issues. Finally, we highlight some promising directions for future research in this field.

# INTRODUCTION

Recommender systems (RS), working as filtering systems to present personalized information to users and alleviate information overload, have been widely deployed in various online applications, including e-commerce, social networks, and multimedia services. Recently, an emerging research direction has attracted increasing attention from RS researchers, which explores the synergies of advanced machine learning with a traditional statistics field, causal inference. Causal inference [32,54] works to analyze the relationship between a cause and its effect [93], which has a wide range of real-world applications in both academic and industrial domains, such as medicine [63,122], political science [119], and online advertising evaluation [25,71]. Treatment effect estimation is a fundamental problem in causal inference, often applied in policy evaluation. For example, in pharmaceutical research, where we are interested in the effect of a drug on lifespan, we need to answer a causal question involving a so-called intervention or treatment: What is the probability that a typical patient would survive in years if made to take the drug? A large-scale randomized controlled trial is the golden solution but it may suffer from the expense and even ethical issues. Therefore, in most cases, we can only estimate the effect from non-randomized observational data, where the correlation between the drug and survival does not imply causation, because factors including age, gender, and severity of the disease may affect the outcomes.

Causality for recommendation has been widely used in uplift modeling for policy effect evaluation [43,100], but it was not until the last few years that research has tended to focus on applying it to model training. Common recommendation scenarios in practice, including click-through rate (CTR) prediction and post-click metric prediction, etc., can be abstracted into causal problems, and causal inference can be applied in different stages of the entire RS project, such as preliminary data collection [147], representations learning of users and items embeddings [48,78,142], objective optimization [8,83,85], and policy evaluation offline and online [112,116,117]. The ability of causal recommender systems to outperform traditional approaches due to the following two strengths ( Fig. 1):

1) Model cause and effect. Current machine learning systems, including RS, operate almost exclusively in a statistical mode [95], which focuses on the correlation between variables. However, in applications, we care more about causality rather than correlation, and it is well known that "Correlation is not causation". For example, a movie recommendation platform recorded a female user who has finished watching an action movie, so it concludes that she likes action movies and makes many recommendations for related action movies. Nevertheless, the user may have watched the movie due to its popularity rather than her inherent preference for action movies in fact. Therefore, the spurious correlation between user interest and movie genres learned by traditional recommender systems may lead to a degraded user experience. In contrast, causal recommendation systems can learn the causal effects of users' individual interest as well as conformity on the interaction outcome (i.e., watching), respectively, so that action movies will not be incorrectly recommended later. Modeling cause and effect enables causality-based recommender systems to 1) measure the causal effects on user interaction of source variables of a wide range of bias, such as popularity [148,176] and exposure [74,141], thus performing effective debiasing, which is currently the most common application of causal Manuscript submitted to ACM inference for recommendation; 2) better control of RS due to decomposition and inference of the causal effect of variables, for example, leveraging the causal effect of certain bias to improve recommendation accuracy [176].

2) Answer counterfactual questions. Many recommender system problems, including data augmentation, out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization, and policy evaluation, are essentially counterfactual problems, that is, the situation

where the values of some causal variables are different from reality. In terms of the data augment problem, as a significant complementary resource of the observed data [147], the counterfactual data needs to answer questions such as "What would be the user's interaction if the recommended items had been different?" or "What would be the probability of click if an item had been recommended to a user who has not been recommended before?". The OOD problem refers to the recommendation which violates the Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) assumption of the interactions between training and testing periods [48]. Traditional recommendation may learn false associations between users and items, while causal recommender systems adopt the counterfactual means to find invariant or unchangeable variables or causal relationships in the recommendation task and reuse them to generalize when the distribution changes. For example, if a pregnant female user had purchased red high heels before pregnancy, a traditional recommendation system might continue to make recommendations of high heels, but a causal inference system can learn the causal relationship between high heels and pregnancy status through causal tools like causal graph. Therefore, when the user's status shifts (identified from the user's behavior like purchasing baby products), the causal recommender system no longer recommends high-heeled shoes but retains the user's preference for the red color and recommends red clothing instead. Uplift modeling estimates the increase, or uplift, in user interactions caused by recommendations, which is a counterfactual problem because one needs to estimate the difference between two mutually exclusive outcomes for an item (either item is recommender or not for a specific user). In addition to the above issues, counterfactuals can also optimize beyond-accuracy objectives such as fairness and explainability. For example, to ensure fairness, sensitive features like sex and race can be modified and removed in the counterfactual world [73], and explainability can be attained by comparing the real world with the counterfactual world to search for user interactions that affect recommendation results [33,133].

It is worth mentioning that there are some existing surveys [29,152,182] of causal inference for recommender systems. However, they are limited due to the following reasons. First, they do not provide a comprehensive taxonomy of causal recommender systems. Specifically, [152] only discusses recommendation methods of potential outcome framework [108], and approaches investigated in [29,182] are mainly classified from the application perspectives,

i.e., issues of recommender systems, but our work provides a taxonomy of the existing methods of both two causal frameworks, involving the Neyman-Rubin potential outcome (PO) framework [108,129] and the Pearl structural causal model (SCM) framework [91][92][93], from the perspective of causal inference theory systematically, more helpful for readers to apply causal methods to recommender systems in follow-up studies. Second, since this area is increasingly popular, our survey also introduces a lot of recently published papers not covered by [29,152,182]. We collect the papers related to causal inference-based recommender alpgorithms on renowned conference proceedings and journals and visualize the statistics of them concerning the published year and causal inference framework in Fig. 2.

This paper provides a comprehensive summary of the work on causal recommender systems.  Fig. 2. Statistics of the publications related to causal recommendations, grouped by the publication year and causal inference framework. Only work concerning specific industrial algorithms is used in visualization, which means many articles discussing fundamental theories are not involved.

general counterfactuals-based, respectively. Future research directions are openly discussed in Section 7. The last section concludes this survey. The main contributions of this survey are summarized below.

• Novel taxonomy: We separate various causal recommendation methods into three major categories based on the causal framework they adopt, which may be more instructive than existing taxonomies for the readers to integrate causal inference with recommender systems and propose new approaches in practice (see Section 3.3).

• Comprehensive review: Over one hundred and twenty causal recommendation papers from the last century to 2023 are introduced, explained, and summarized, which might give readers a comprehensive overview of causality for recommendation. • Open discussion: Research directions for applying causality to improve recommendation methods in the academic and industrial areas are openly discussed.


# RELATED WORK

Some areas related to causal inference may be unfamiliar to recommender system researchers; thus, we introduce them and carefully clarify the connections and differences between them and causal inference.

Causal Discovery [98]: Causal discovery is a crucial technique in causality. Causality is the science of cause and effect [97]. In Pearl's theory, causality contains two fundamental problems: the first is to prove that one variable is the cause of another or find the cause of a variable, and the second is to draw a conclusion of what might be the effects if changing the value of a variable. The former corresponds to causal discovery, also called causal structure learning, seeking to discover causal relations, which are stable physical mechanisms in nature and manifest themselves in determined functional relationships between variables, from the data based on some causal assumptions that are hardly testable in observational studies [94]. The latter corresponds to causal inference, which estimates the outcome after an intervention with a given causal relationship (usually a causal structure obtained by causal discovery or empirically based hypotheses) [93,97,164]. In other words, the former is the basis of the latter, because it is impossible to tell what variables would be affected by an intervention without a causal structure, and thus no interventions and counterfactuals can be implemented. For example, we cannot determine the effect of opening umbrellas on rain if we do not know the causal relevance between them since they always coincide. Note that most methods for causal discovery rely on the SCM framework [88]. Bayesian Inference: Bayesian inference is a popular approach to data analysis based on Bayes' theorem, where all observed and unobserved parameters are given a joint probability distribution, i.e., the prior and data distributions, to

Manuscript submitted to ACM inference prior distribution [137]. Bayesian inference is regarded as one of key techniques and integral components in both PO and SCM: In PO, with assignment mechanisms and the definition of potential outcomes, a Bayesian model can be used to connect the treatment and potential outcomes in real world or counterfactual world; in SCM, Bayesian networks are widely used as causal graphs to present causal associations between variables. Nevertheless, there is a primary distinction between Bayesian inference and causal inference. Bayesian inference is causality-free statistics that focus on associations, such as dependence, likelihood, etc., which can be formulated in terms of distribution functions.

However, what is unique to causal inference is that causal concepts cannot be defined from statistics associations alone. As the example mentioned above, it is impossible to tell from the statistics whether raining causes the behavior of opening umbrellas or vice versa. This core distinction leads to two differences between Bayesian inference and causal inference in their specific manifestations, including assumptions and notations. 1) Bayesian inference is based on associational assumptions, which, even untested, are testable in principle [94]. However, as for causal inference, causal assumptions, in contrast, cannot be verified even in principle unless we proactively influence the observed data, i.e., resort to experimental control. In general, the sensitivity to priors in Bayesian statistics, such as the IID assumption, will decrease with increasing sample size, while sensitivity to prior causal assumptions, say that whether to open umbrellas does not affect the weather, remains substantial regardless of sample size. 2) New notations are introduced to causal inference as causal expressions compared with Bayesian statistics, which will be presented in detail in Section 3.


# FOUNDATION

In this section, background information and several important concepts of causal inference and recommender systems are introduced to facilitate readers' understanding of the inter-study of the two research fields. The notations used in this survey are listed for convenience. At the end of this section, we set up categorizations of causal recommendations.


## Causal Inference

In this part, we will give a brief review of two representative frameworks of causal inference, including the potential outcome (PO) framework by Rubin et al. [54,108,129] and the structural causal models (SCM) framework by Pearl et al. [91][92][93] . Note that these two frameworks are logically equivalent [93].

3.1.1 Potential Outcome Framework. The Potential Outcomes Framework (aka the Neyman-Rubin Causal Model) [54, 108? ] is the most widely used framework across many disciplines. With a hypothetical treatment (or manipulation, intervention), the causal effect, i.e., treatment effect, is defined as the difference between the potential outcomes under treatment and control for the same unit [54].

Definition 1 (Unit). A unit refers to the research object in the potential framework.

A unit can be a physical object, an individual, or a collection of objects or persons, such as a classroom or a market, at a particular point in time [54]. In recommendation research, a user-item pair will usually be defined as a unit. It should be noticed that the same physical object or person at a different time is a different unit. This is a reasonable restriction, considering the same user will make different decisions at a different time even if exposed to the same item due to factors like preference shift, mood, occasion and so on.

Definition 2 (Treatment). Treatment can be defined as the action applied to a unit.

This paper focuses on binary treatment (e.g., recommend or not), the most common setting in the recommendation field. In practice, we refer to the more active treatment simply as the "treatment" = 1 and the other treatment as the "control" = 0. Potential Outcome. For each treatment-unit pair, the potential outcome is the outcome that the treatment is applied to the unit, denoted as ( = ) (ignoring unit). For a unit, only the potential outcome corresponding to the treatment actually taken will be observed, denominated as observed outcome, while others are referred to as counterfactual outcomes. The fundamental problem of causal inference in PO framework is that we can never obtain both observed and counterfactual outcomes for a unit: it is impossible to realize all treatments and observe the corresponding outcomes. Treatment Effect/ Causal effect. Treatment effect is represented by the difference between the potential outcomes under treatment and control for the same unit, formulated as:
TE = ( = 1) − ( = 0),(1)
where ( = 1) and ( = 0) are the potential treated and control outcome of the unit, respectively. Treatment effect like Equation 1 is also called Individual Treatment Effect. Furthermore, the treatment effect can be defined at the population and subpopulation levels. At the population level, Average Treatment Effect (ATE) is the expectation of ITE over the whole population [40], denoted as:
ATE = E[ ( = 1) − ( = 0)].(2)
The ATE on the subpopulation level is often of particular interest; thus we define Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE) on the units with the same features = as:
CATE = E[ ( = 1| = ) − ( = 0| = )].(3)
Assumptions. Despite the simple definition of the causal effect, the fundamental problem in causal inference, i.e., the missing data problem, appear to be a major obstacle to the estimation of the causal effect. Therefore, it is critical to make additional assumptions.

Assumption 1 (SUTVA). The potential outcomes for any unit do not vary with the treatments assigned to other units.

For each unit, there are no different forms or versions of each treatment level, which lead to different potential outcomes.

The stable unit treatment value assumption, or SUTVA [54] is the most fundamental assumption in causal inference, incorporating both the No Interference idea that treatments applied to one unit do not affect the outcome for another unit and the No Hidden Variations of Treatments concept that for each unit there is only a single version of each treatment level. The second assumption, ignorability or unconfoundedness [110], states that treatment assignment is free from dependence on the potential outcomes. In other words, within subpopulations defined by the values of observed background variables, or covariates, the treatment assignment is random. The ignorability assumption rules out unmeasured confounders, which causally influences both the treatment and the outcome ( ). Pr( = 1| ) is called the propensity score [106]. The last assumption is positivity, or overlap:

Manuscript submitted to ACM In large data samples, positivity requires that there are both treated and control units for all values of the covariates.

In contrast to the untestable ignorability assumption [54], positivity can be tested from observed data. The combination of unconfoundedness and positivity is referred to as "strong ignorability [106]. "

3.1.2 Structural Causal Models Framework. Structural causal models (SCM) [91][92][93] serve as a comprehensive causality framework, which unifies graphical models, nonparametric structural equations, and counterfactual and interventional logic. The most significant advantage of SCM is its intuitive structure of real-world causal dependencies based on graphical models as well as the wise and friendly symbiosis between counterfactual and graphical methods. Causal Graph. A causal graph, or a causal diagram, is usually a Bayesian network, which describes the causal relations between variables by a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), where the nodes represent the variables and the edges record the causal relations. Causal graphs play an essential role in the SCM framework, for they provide a vivid representation of sets of variables that are relevant to each other in any given state of knowledge, and serves as a carrier of conditional independence relationships along the order of construction, through which we can confirm whether it satisfies the criteria such that certain causal inference methods can be applied [93]. d-Separation. We first review the concept of dependency-separation (d-Separation) as the knowledge base for conditional independence. There are three typical causal graphs of three disjoint sets of variables, shown in Figure 3, with the help of which we can characterize any pattern of arrows in the network. In the chain (Figure 3(a)), is the that transmits the effect of to . In the fork (Figure 3(b)), is often called a common cause or confounder of and . A confounder will make and statistically correlated even though there is no direct causal link between them, which may give rise to a so-called spurious correlation in the application. In the collider (Figure 3(c)), though and are independent to begin with, conditioning on (i.e., knowing the value of) will make them dependent. A good example is three features of Hollywood actors: Talent → Celebrity ← Beauty [23]. Although beauty and talent are completely unrelated to one another in the general population, an unanticipated negative correlation is found between talent and beauty if we only focus on famous actors: a celebrity is unattractive increases our belief that he or she is talented [97]. This negative correlation is sometimes called collider bias or the "explain-away" effect. A path means a sequence of consecutive edges (of any directionality) in the graph, and we regard stopping the flow of dependency between the variables that are connected by such paths as blocked. In the chain and fork, the path between and will be blocked by conditioning on , while in the collider, any conditioning on will introduce a correlation between them.

The formal definition of d-separation or blocking is defined as follows.


## Definition 3 (d-Separation).

A path is said to be d-separated (or blocked) by conditioning on a set of nodes Z if and only if one of the two conditions is satisfied:

(1) The path contains a chain → → or a fork ← → such that the middle node is in Z;

(2) The path contains a collider such that the middle node is not in Z and such that no descendant of is in Z. where the former is an abstraction of the latter. In its general form, a structural equation of a variable is defined as:


## Manuscript submitted to ACM
= ( , ),(4)
where (connoting parents) stands for the set of variables that directly determine the value of and where represents exogenous variables or errors (or "disturbances") due to omitted factors. For example, the causal graph in Fig. 4(a) is associated with the structural model as:  Fig. 4(a), Equations 5 will be modified as:
             = ( ), = ( , ), = ( , , ),(5)             = ( ), = 0 , = ( , 0 , ),(6)
the graphical description of which is shown in Fig. 4
(b).
It is crucial to note that Pr( = | ( = )) and Pr( = | = ) are not the same. For example. the fork structure ( Fig.3(b))might represent the causal mechanism that connects the number of sales at a local ice cream shop on that day ( ), a day's temperature in a city ( ), and the number of violent crimes in the city on that day ( ) [35]. Because both ice cream sales and violent crime are more common in hot weather, a positive correlation might be found when estimate ( = | = ). However, as illustrated in manipulated graphical model of Figure 4, crime rates are independent of ice cream sales , which results in a different Pr( = | ( = )) from Pr( = | = ).


## Manuscript submitted to ACM

Although causal graph manipulation is the most fundamentalist approach to calculating Pr( = | ( = )), it can be challenging and even impossible in reality. Fortunately, we can estimate Pr( = | ( = )) from observed data with the following causal effect rule:

Definition 4 (The Causal Effect Rule). Given a graph in which a set of variables are designated as the parents of , the causal effect of on is given by
Pr( = | ( = )) = ∑︁ Pr( = | = , = )Pr( = ) = ∑︁ Pr( = , = , = ) Pr( = | = ) ,(7)
where ranges over all the combinations of values that the variables in can take.

The most important benefit brought by the rule is that it enables us to finish the do-calculus purely on passive observational data [159]. The factor Pr( = | = ) is the propensity score, and Equation 7 is named inverse propensity score (Section 4.1.2) in PO framework, which partly reflects the unity of the two frameworks. 3.1.3 Comparison between the two frameworks. As mentioned above, the two frameworks are equivalent logically:

an assumption or a theorem can be translated to its counterpart in the other, and a problem solved in one framework would yield the same solution in another [35,93]. For example, Pr( = | ( = )) in the SCM is equivalent to Pr( ( = ) = ) in the PO, which the regular assessment in a controlled experiment, in which the distribution of is estimated for each level of a random variable . Causal effects that are measured between the results of the counterfactual world and the real world can be estimated conveniently in both frameworks. However, there are several important differences between PO and SCM. The most significant difference is that PO does not assume the causal relations between concerned variables, while SCM makes assumptions of causal mechanisms among a set of variables or searches for ones based on some assumptions. In other words, any given PO model corresponds to multiple causal graphs in SCM. For PO, it can be a strength for PO that causal effects can be reasoned without knowing the causal model, and be a weakness either. According to the unconfoundednes assumption, all confounders should be observed to infer a correct treatment effect since the mechanism is unknown, almost impossible in practice [2]. In contrast, in SCM, causal diagrams allow us to work with causal effects by interventions on the fewest number of variables or the observed variables as much as possible.


## Recommender Systems

Recommender systems predict users' preferences and proactively recommend items users might like [104,171] to alleviate information overload.


### Recommendation Techniques.

RSs are usually classified into the following three categories [1,171]: content-based, collaborative filtering (CF), and hybrid. Content-based recommendation learns to recommend primarily based on comparisons across items' and users' auxiliary information [171], such as items' human-set tags, images, texts, and users' sex. Collaborative filtering recommender systems recommend items according to user/item historical interactions,

i.e., explicit (e.g., user's previous ratings) or implicit feedback (e.g., click behavior) [171]. Hybrid approaches are those that combine collaborative filtering and content-based methods.

If we review the model structure, recommender systems can generally be divided into shallow models, neural network models, and GNN-based models [28]. Shallow models involve methods that directly calculate the similarity of interactions and CF methods with matrix factorization (MF) [66] or factorization machine (FM) [103], but suffer from insufficient learning of users' complicated interest. Neural network models are proposed to solve this issue, with the advantage of high-order feature interactions [39]. . Background features , aka., covariates are usually formulated as a high dimensional sparse vector containing information such as user ID, item ID, user profile, item category, etc. The interaction label , or the outcome, can be explicit feedback (e.g., rating) or implicit feedback (such as click and watch behavior).

In normal circumstances, researchers prefer choosing whether to recommend as the treatment. Therefore, the observed dataset can be denoted as
O = {( = 1, , }| | O | 1 ∈ T × X × Y,
where T means the treatment space, X is the feature spaces, and Y is the label space. In general, the observed dataset is obtained with the deployed recommender policy ; thus O will be specifically expressed as O if we are concerned about the policy. Note that settings of , , vary slightly according to specific work. It would be better to understand with reference to the context.


## Existing Categorizations of Causal Recommendation

There are several categorization criteria for causal recommender systems. For example, similar to [164], Yao et.al. [152] divides biases in RS into three categories from the perspective of violating what causal assumptions are adopted in the standard PO framework. 1) Position bias and conformity bias can be seen as violations of the SUTVA assumption if recommender systems do not pay enough attention to the positions of items and users' social networks. 2) Unconfoundedness and positivity are crucial assumptions in the recoverability of the target estimated. However, the former can be violated by popularity bias, and the latter can be violated by exposure bias, both of which result in the problem of missing not at random (MNAR). 3) The final bias violates some model-specific assumptions.

According to the survey [29], existing work of causal recommendation can be categorized into three groups: for addressing data bias, for addressing data missing and noise, and for beyond-accuracy objectives. 1) Causal debiasing work can be further divided into several subcategories based on the specific bias, such as popularity bias, clickbait bias, and exposure bias.

2) The problem of data missing refers to the usually-discussed data sparsity issue in RS, and data noise stems from unreliable implicit signals and delayed feedback. In order to alleviate these issues, researchers use the Manuscript submitted to ACM counterfactual technique to augment insufficient data and adjust sample weights. Besides, some causal recommender systems are designed for beyond-accuracy objectives like explainability, diversity and fairness. [182] summarizes different causal inference techniques with an emphasis on debiasing, explainability promotion, and generalization improvement.

The three studies mentioned above are pioneering efforts in this field, and each has a distinct focus on the causal frameworks it discussed. However, this paper will systematically classify causal inference for RS from a new perspective of the employed causal approach. We regard that, although it is quite convenient for researchers, especially those in RS industry, to speed up the implementation of causal RS techniques from the perspective of what application issues they aim to address, continuous research and significant breakthroughs of in-depth integration of causal inference and recommender systems require a comprehensive understanding of causal techniques, including their strengths as well as their limitations, which our work will have a greater contribution.


# PO-BASED METHOD

Many causal recommendation approaches, especially in early research, focus on applying the potential outcome framework proposed by Donald B. Rubin [54,108,129] to the effect evaluation of the recommendation policy, more specifically, on the optimization functions in traditional deep-learning-based methods and on the reward functions in reinforcement-learning-based methods. Figure 5 provides the strategies, the objectives concerning the PO framework. As shown in Figure 5, There are generally two strategies in the potential outcome framework for RS, i.e., inverse propensity score and causal effect. It is worth mentioning that in this survey, a model estimating causal effects without a causal graph will be regarded as a PO-based model, while a model with a causal graph will be regarded as an SCM-based one, though both frameworks involve the estimation of causal effects. In this section, some related causal recommendation approaches are introduced in proper order according to the strategies shown in Figure 5.


## Propensity Score Strategy

Let's consider the process by which the recommendation system works, where given background variables ∼ Pr( ), also referred to as pre-treatment variables or covariates [54], (e.g., user and item features, time of the day, etc.), a recommender policy plays a role as a decision-making system, which makes a decision of whether to take an active treatment ∼ ( | ) (e.g., recommend an item), and the potential outcome ∼ Pr( | , ), i.e., "reward" in the reinforcement learning context (e.g., click indicator), will be observed [113]. For example, in online markets, information like user profile, historical consumptions, and products in the cart will be treated as context variables , according to which the policy will produce a list of recommended items (i.e., treatment ), and the logged reward can be the click signal, conversions, or revenue, etc. The effectiveness of the policy can be evaluated through its running expected reward, formulated as:
( ) := ∭ Pr( | , ) ( | )Pr( ) = E Pr( ) ( | )Pr( | , ) [ ].(8)
To learn the optimal policy
∈ arg max ∈⋄ ( ),(9)
where Π means the policy class, an online A/B test will be the best choice [37,65], but suffers from high expense. A substitute and common practice is offline evaluation, by calculating an estimator^for the reward of a target policy  using logged data O 0 collected by a logging policy 0 (which is different from ) [113]. However, like many other empirical sciences, offline evaluation is challenged with the problem of missing not at random (MNAR).


## Causal Recommendation

To address this issue, early approaches tend to predict the missing data directly [130] but have accentuated the problem of high bias [112,143]. Recently, many researchers have resorted to the propensity score ( ) in causality to recover the data distribution. For example, ExpoMF [74] first predicts the exposure matrix and then uses the exposures (i.e., propensity scores) to guide the model of the interaction matrix, which is inspired by the separation between propensity scores and potential outcomes in the PO framework. Similarly, Wang et al. [138] propose SERec to integrate social exposure into collaborative filtering. A refreshing work is that Wang et al. [144] aim to overcome the confounder issue with propensity score. They regard correlations among the interacted items as bringing indirect evidence for confounders and propose the deconfounded recommenders. They first build an exposure model to estimate the propensity score and then use this exposure model to estimate a substitute for the unobserved confounders, conditional on which the final outcome model (specifically in [144], a rating model based on matrix factorization) is trained. In addition, inspired by [24,59], Chen et al. [13] propose IOBM (Interactional Observation-Based Model)to estimate propensity score in interaction settings, which learns low-dimensional embeddings as a substitute for unobservable confounders . Specifically, it learns individual embeddings to capture the potential outcome information from specific exposure events. Based on individual embeddings, the interactional embeddings, which uncovers the hidden relationship among single exposure events and utilizes query context information to apply attention, are learned through the bidirectional LSTM model.

Propensity-based methods can be further divided into approaches based on inverse propensity score (IPS) and

approaches based on doubly robust (DR) (Fig.7). One of the greatest strengths of applying propensity-based methods in RS is that most of them are unbiased and model-agnostic, simply deployed on the objective function for policy evaluation directly or for policy learning indirectly.


### Missing Not At Random.

In this part, we will introduce the phenomena and factors of missing not at random, to provide explanations and conclusions of challenges in recommender systems in a causal language to understand existing work better.

Recommendation algorithms often obey the missing at random (MAR) [109] assumption but may lead to biased prediction and suboptimal policy [75,82]. The MAR condition essentially states that the probability that a potential outcome is missing does not depend on the value of that potential outcome and can be easily violated in recommender systems [82]. For example, on movie rating websites, movies with high ratings are less likely to be missing compared to movies with low ratings [99]. The issue of missing not at random (MNAR) has been demonstrated by Marlin and

Zemel [82] and it is a phenomena stemming from selection bias and confounding bias [18,152].

Selection bias, or sampling bias, is usually discussed in the prediction task and can be further classified into model selection bias and user self-selection bias [152]. For example, the case that the platform may systematically recommend pop music to younger users who may be more active on the service regardless of genre preferences [83] will be regarded as model selection bias [83,166] and can be eliminated by random recommendation. User self-selection bias [4,23], on the contrary, can not be removed by randomization of recommendation [18]. It is caused by preferential exclusion of samples from the data [4]. A typical example is a song recommender system, in which users usually rate songs they like or dislike and seldom rate what they feel neutral about [111]. Some of the most frequently discussed biases like popularity bias [148,176] and exposure bias [74,138] will lead to model selection bias, while conformity bias [176,179] and clickbait bias [141] fall under user self-selection bias as a result of user preference.

Confounding bias [49,93] arises from the confounder described in Section 3.1.2, which affects both the treatment and the outcome, illuminated in Figure6(b). Alternatively, it can be identified if the probabilistic distribution representing the statistical association is not always equivalent to the interventional distribution, i.e., Pr( | ) ≠ Pr( | ( )) [40].

A notable example of confounding bias is that a system trained with historical user interactions may over recommend items that the user used to like, and the user's decision (i.e., outcome) is also affected by historical interactions [140].

Both biases can lead to invalid estimates of causality from the data, and they are not mutually exclusive because selection bias does not explicitly involve causality. Many model selection biases, including popularity bias and exposure bias, are also confounding biases. As for user self-selection bias, the model in Fig. 6 (a) gives an illustration of its causal nature in which is a variable affected by both (treatment) and (outcome), indicating entry into the data pool [4].

Therefore, confounding bias is significantly different from user self-selection bias from the causal perspective. The


## ExpoMF [WWW'16]

Propensity Scores in RSs: are modeled with exposure information.


## PBM [WSDM '17]

Position-based Propensity: assumes that the propensity score depends on position.


## SERec [AAAI'18]

Social exposure: is integrated to model propensity scores.


## 1983

Propensity score & IPS: are proposed for the unbiased estimation of causal effect.


## CPBM [SIGIR '19]

Contextual Position-Based Propensity: assumes that the propensity score is determined by position and query context features.


## IOBM [SIGIR'21]

Interactions between observations/clicks: are incorporated to predict propensity scores with the bidirectional LSTM model.  former originates from common causes, whereas the latter originates from common outcomes [23]. The former stems from the systematic bias introduced during the treatment assignment, while the latter comes from the systematic bias during the collection of units into the sample [18].


## DLCE [RecSys


### Inverse Propensity

Score. Inverse Propensity Score (IPS) [51,75,105,106], also named as inverse propensity weighting (IPW), or inverse propensity of treatment weighting (IPTW), is one of the favorite counterfactual techniques and has inspired a lot of causal inference methods in RS, especially for unbiased learning [59]. Propensity score is the probability of receiving the treatment given covariates , formulated as:
( ) = Pr ( = 1 | ).(10)
IPS assigns a weight to each sample:
= ( ) + 1 − 1 − ( ) ,(11)
which indicates the inverse probability of receiving the observed treatment and control. The unbiasedness of IPS can be proven [105]. More specifically, for the reward estimation of recommendation policy, IPS adjusts the distribution of background features in the logged dataset to be consistent with that during tests online, formulated as:
IPS ; O 0 := 1 O 0 | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 ( ) 0 ( ) · = 1 O 0 | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 Pr ( = 1 | ) Pr 0 ( = 1 | ) · ,(12)
where we assume that only positive feedback is taken into account, and = ( ) 0 ( ) is the ratio of the evaluation and logged policies. Note that in most applications in RS, IPS is model-agnostic, applied to the training objective function for policy evaluation directly or for policy learning indirectly.

Much IPS-based recommendation focuses on data debiasing in user interactions, mainly selection bias [70,115,116,118,120,154,174,177]. For example, [120] is a representative work adopting IPS to recommender system for the elimination of selection bias, in which the recommendation algorithm is based on matrix factorization and propensity Manuscript submitted to ACM Approach Inspired by Propensity Score

ExpoMF [74] Propensity score MF Exposure bias 2016 SERec [138] Propensity score MF Social recommendation 2018 Dcf [144] Propensity score MF Unobserved confounding bias 2020 CNFI [174] Propensity score MF Implicit feedback 2021 IOBM [13] Propensity score Bi-LSTM [38] Interactional Despite the unbiasedness strength of IPS, the inaccurate estimation of the unknown propensity ( ) or sample weight, which results in high variance [34], becomes the biggest obstacle to achieving it. To alleviate this problem, modified versions of IPS have been proposed to control variance and applied to RS, including Self Normalized IPS [120,177], Clipped IPS [115,118], Reward interaction IPS [83], and Regularized per-Item IPS [80]. Self Normalized Inverse Propensity Scoring (SNIPS) [132] rescales the estimate of the original IPS without any parameters to reduce the high variance, which is:^S
NIPS ; O 0 := | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 ( ) 0 ( ) −1 | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 ( ) 0 ( ) · ,(13)
and is introduced to RS by works like [120] and [177] to alleviate selection bias. Clipped IPS (CIPS) [115,118] tightens the bound of the sample weight by introducing a scalar value hyperparameter CIPS , formulated as:
CIPS ; O 0 := 1 O 0 | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 min ( ) 0 ( ) , CIPS · ,(14)
which has a lower variance but gives away its unbiasedness. McInerney et al. [83] loosen the SUTVA assumption and propose Reward interaction IPS (RIPS) for sequential recommendations, which assumes a causal model in which users interact with a list of items from the top to the bottom. RIPS uses iterative normalization and lookback to estimate the average reward and achieves a better bias-variance trade-off than IPS. In addition to high variance, violation of the Unconfoundedness assumption is another challenge of utilizing IPS in RS. That is, the treatment mechanism is identifiable [35,86] from observed covariates due to the existence of unobserved ones, which leads to the inaccurate estimate of propensity score and the disagreement between the online and offline evaluations. To address the uncertainty brought by the identifiability issue, [158] proposes minimax empirical risk formulation, which can be converted to an adversarial game between two recommendation models via duality arguments and relaxations.

More recently, Liu et al. [80] propose Regularized per-item IPS (RIIPS) with an additional penalty function that constrains the difference in recommended outcomes between the deployed system and the new system so that the explosion of propensity scores can be avoided.


### Doubly Robust.

Doubly Robust (DR) [22,26,56,143] is another powerful and effective causal method account for the MNAR issue. To understand DR, let us consider the two common-used approaches to mitigate against MNAR: direct method (DM) [7] and IPS [114]. The former designs a model (linear regression, deep neural network, etc.) to directly learn the missing outcomes based on the observed data, which has low variance due to the advantage of supervised learning but suffers from high bias caused by unmet IID assumptions, denoted as [114]: where^( , ) is the estimated outcomes. The latter, though unbiased theoretically, often causes training losses to oscillate stemming from the inverse of propensity with high variance [134]. What DR does is to combine the direct method and IPS, which takes advantage of both and overcomes their limitations:
DM 0 ; O 0 ,^( , ) := 1 |O 0 | | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 Pr ( = 1 | )^( , ) ,(15)DR ; O 0 ,^ :=^D M ; O 0 ,^( , ) + 1 |O 0 | | O 0 | ∑︁ =1 ( ) 0 ( ) ( −^( , )) .(16)
DR uses the estimated outcomes to decrease the variance of IPS. It is also doubly robust in that it is consistent with the policy reward value if either the propensity scores or the imputed outcomes are accurate for all user-item pairs [114,143].

By the way, advanced versions like Switch-DR [145] and DRos (Doubly Robust with Optimistic Shrinkage) [131] are proposed to further control the variance.

Based on the above advantages, DR has found an increasingly wide utilization in RS [41,64,87,155,166,172]. Yuan et al. [166] propose a propensity-free doubly robust method to address the issue that samples with low propensity scores are absent in the observed dataset. Zhang et al. [172] propose Multi-DR based on a multi-task learning framework to address selection bias and data sparsity issues in CVR estimation. Gun et al. [41] propose the MRDR (more robust doubly robust) estimator to further reduce the variance caused by inaccurate imputed outcomes in DR while retaining its double robustness. In addition, Kiyohara et al. [64] expand previous RIPS to Cascade Doubly Robust estimator, which has the same user interaction assumption as RIPS. Xiao et al. [155] propose an information bottleneck-based approach to effectively learn the DR estimator for the estimation of recommendation uplift, with the hope of a better trade-off between the bias and variance of propensity scores.


## Causal Effect Strategy

The most critical and fundamental role of causal inference is to estimate the causal effects from observational data, which has a variety of applications in real-world recommender systems. Some works are dedicated to enhancing the causal effect of a recommender policy, i.e., uplift, and therefore deploy the causal effect as a direct or indirect optimization goal for higher platform benefits. Other works introduce treatment effects to recommender systems for beyond-uplift objectives. Note that in the PO framework, the causal relationship between variables will not be discussed while calculating causal effect, and all variables affecting potential outcomes except treatment will be treated as covariates.


### Causal Effect for Uplift. Uplift, in terms of the causal effect of recommendations, refers to the increase in user

interactions purely caused by recommendations. Typical evaluations of recommender systems regard the positive user interactions as a success, such as clicks, purchases, and high rates. However, these interactions may have remained even without recommendations, which can be illustrated by the conclusion of [124] that more than 75% of click-throughs would still occur in the absence of recommendations. Therefore, the industry looks favorably on the uplift as the recommendation metric in expectation of higher reward.

It is a natural application to introduce the causality concepts such as ATE and CATE for uplift modeling since the definition of uplift is a counterfactual problem and consistent with the objective of causal effect estimation [161,173].

Causal approaches with traditional machine learning methods for uplift estimation are proposed in [43,55,55,89,100,101]. Regarding recommender systems, uplift estimation on online A/B testing suffers from the high expense and large fluctuations due to user self-selection bias [116], while uplift estimated offline is bedeviled by a wide variety of biases that could lead to MNAR. In order to deal with these issues, much of the literature has been published. Sato et al. [117] utilize SNIPS-based ATE to accomplish offline uplift-based evaluation. Goldenberg [19,43,173], there are two closely related metrics for uplift modeling, uplift and Qini curves, the latter of which is evaluated based on the ranking of conditional treatment effect estimations.


### Causal Effect beyond Uplift.

There are some other impressive recommendation works with causal effect [8,84,107,136,163,169]. For example, [84] adapts a Bayesian model to infer the causal impact of new track releases, which may be an essential consideration in the design of music recommendation platforms. [169] minimizes the distance between the traditional attention weights in the recommendation method and the ITE to reflect the true impact of the features on the interactions. [107] and [8] frames causal inference as a domain adaptation problem and leverages ITE with a large sample of biased data and a small sample of unbiased data to eliminate the bias problems, which are described in more detail in 6.1.


# SCM-BASED METHOD

Unlike the PO framework, Structural Causal Model explicitly expresses the causal relationship between variables on a causal graph, based on the experiences, before analyzing the causal effect. Its intuitive features make it win undivided admiration among researchers in computer field. In this section, the corresponding strategies is classified according to their causal structures, i.e., collider, mediator, and confounder. We focus on how researchers abstract recommendation issues into causal problems with causal graphs and exploit tools in causal inference to cope with it.


## Causal Recommendation with Collider Structure

As represented in Figure 3 [35]. In this case, given = 10, knowing = 3 means we can immediately calculate that = 7.

Thus, and are dependent, given that = 10. This characteristic inspires us that in RS issues with collider structure, knowing the common effect and one of the causes would provide information for another effect [178]. individual interest as well as users' conformity, which is independent of user interest and describes how users tend to follow other people, and provides a causal graph as shown in Fig. 8 (a). From this point of view, DICE splits user and item embeddings into interest and conformity embeddings, respectively, and learns disentangled representations with conformity-specific and interest-specific data, driven by the colliding effect: if a user interacts with a less popular item, not conforming to the mainstream, it usually indicates that the user is highly interested in the item itself, and vice versa.

Further, [20] proposes CIGC (Causal Incremental Graph Convolution), which includes a new operator named CED (Colliding Effect Distillation), to efficiently retrain graph convolution network (GCN) based recommender models. CED frames the whole incremental training phase as a causal graph (see Fig. 8 (b)) and create a collider between inactive nodes , and new data , , which is represented as the pair-wise distance. Therefore, the incremental integration data can update both , and , , since conditioning on the collider opens the path → , ↔ , .


## Causal Recommendation with Mediator Structure

When one variable causes another, it may not do it directly but through a set of mediating variables instead. For example, an item purchased by your friends increases your purchase probability not only directly through the recommendation that integrates social network, but also indirectly through increased trust in the item.

The distinction between direct and indirect effects of the change of treatment on outcome is key to the utilization of the mediator structure, which can be done by conditioning on the mediating variable traditionally [35]. Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 9 (a), the total effect (ToE) of = on is defined as: 
= ( = , ( = )) − ( = * , ( = * )),(17)= ( = , ( = * )) − ( = * , ( = * )).(18)
TIE is defined as the difference between TE and NIE, denoted as:
= − = ( = , ( = )) − ( = , ( = * )),(19)
which represents the effect of on through the indirect path → → . TE can also be decomposed into natural indirect effect (NIE) and total direct effect (TDE). NIE represents the effect of on through the mediator, i.e., → → , while the direct effect on → is blocked by setting as * , denoted as:
= ( = * , ( = )) − ( = * , ( = * )).(20)
In linear systems, NIE and TIE have the same value, and NDE and TDE have the same value [35,96].

However, if there are confounders of the mediator and the outcome, as the case of [148] shown in Fig. 9 (b), conditioning on the mediator means conditioning on a collider, and thus indirect dependence will pass through the confounder to the outcome and misguide the calculation of indirect effect. To tackle the problem, we should intervene on the mediator, which involves counterfactuals. The controlled direct effect (CDE) on of is defined as:
= ( ( = ), ( = )) − ( ( = * ), ( = )).(21)
The difference between NDE and CDE is explained in [35].

Some works are generally interested in how much of the treatment's causal effect on variable is direct and how much is indirect, which is usually explored with the technique of mediation analysis [5,62], similar to SCM but without exogenous variables and the introduction of counterfactuals. For example, in early studies, [16] conducts an experiment varying the level of social presence over hundreds of testers and examines the effect of social presence on users' reuse intention and trust through mediation analysis. A similar structure is used to evaluate how electronic word-of-mouth affects user interactions in [81]. Further, Yin et al. [165] aim to separate the direct effects of the change in user behaviors in the tested product from the effect of changes in user behaviors in other products, aka induced changes, for example, the effects of significant lifts in CTR on the recommendation list and of significant decreases in CTR on organic search Some other works utilize Pearl's counterfactual tool to cope with mediator structure in order to improve accuracy [27,148,159]. Wei et al. [148] explore the popularity issue with the SCM framework and formulate the causal graph as 

where (·) denotes the sigmoid function, and is a hyper-parameter that represents ( ( = * , = * )), the reference situation of ( ( = , = )). With counterfactual inference, MACR could rank items without popularity bias by reducing the direct effect from item properties to the ranking score.

The work by Xu et al. [159] regards the user interaction history as a mediator ( Fig. 10 (a)) and proposes CCF (Causal Collaborative Filtering) to estimate Pr( = | = , ( = )), where , is a user-item pair and is the preference score for the pair. More specifically, = ℎ ( = ) is a database retrieval operation that returns a user's interaction history from the observational data, = 0 ( = , = ℎ) means the recommended item returned from the already deployed recommendation system based on the user and the user's interaction history, and = ( = , = )

represents the estimation of unbiased user preference on the item. Pr( = | = , ( = )) adopts the conditional intervention to consider both observed and unobserved (counterfactual) interaction history, as presented in Fig. 10 (b).

The derivation result of Pr( = | = , ( = )) is given:
Pr( = | = , ( = )) ≈Pr( = | = , ( = 0 ( = , = ℎ))) = ∑︁ ℎ Pr( | , ℎ, 0 ( , ℎ))Pr(ℎ | )(23)
It is tempting to conclude that if trained only with observed history ℎ, f(U=u, I=i) would naturally degenerate to the original recommendation model 0 ( = , = ℎ). Therefore, Xu et al. adopt a heuristic-based approach to generate counterfactual history ℎ ′ .


## Causal Recommendation with Confounder Structure

There is a large volume of published studies investigating the confounding structures in recommendation since a lot of data biases widespread in recommender systems are, essentially, confounding biases mentioned in Section 4.1.1.

Approaches to tackle confounder structures of existing literature can be categorized into four types: with back-door adjustment, with instrumental variables, with front-door adjustment, and with deep learning based intervention. (2) it is not blocked (it has no collider).

Back-door path help us to identify confounders, which is the central node of a fork on a back-door path of ( , ). The

following two examples will help to illustrate it [97]. In Fig. 11 (a), there is one back-door path from to , ← → , indicating that is the confounder. For the estimation the effect of on , we should eliminate the confounding bias by either controlling to block the back-door path or running a randomized controlled experiment. Note that → ← → is blocked by the collider at and, therefore, not a back-door path. In Fig. 11 (b), we can control for to close the back-door path ← ← → . Here we present the formal definition of the back-door criterion to deal with the confounding effects.

Definition 6 (Back-door Criterion). Given a pair of treatment and outcome variable , a set of variables satisfied the back-door criterion if blocks all back-door paths of ( , ).

If a set of variables satisfies the back-door criterion for and , the causal effect of on is given by the formula:
Pr( = | ( = )) = ∑︁ Pr( = | = , = )Pr( = ),(24)
which adjusts fewer variables compared to the Causal Effect Rule (Definition 4).

Manuscript submitted to ACM (a) (b) Fig. 11. Causal graphs illustrating the back-door path. To see what this means in practice, let us look at a concrete example, as presented in Fig 12. Suppose we need to evaluate the effect of recommendation ( ) on user's click behavior ( ) of a newly deployed recommendation strategy on an online shopping platform. However, the time-varying consuming desire ( ) makes it difficult to compare the effect with that of the existing one. For example, users might be more willing to spend due to the proximity of holidays, resulting in a seemly better recommendation effect of the tested policy. However, the consuming desire is unmeasurable for do-calculation. Instead, we could control for an observed variable, the number of recent interactions , that fits the back-door criterion from to . Therefore, adjusting for to block the back-door path ← → → will give us the true causal effect of recommendation on click , formulated as:
Pr( = | ( = )) = ∑︁ Pr( = | = , = )Pr( = ).(25)
Some literature on recommendation issues with confounder structures introduces the theory of back-door criterion [52,124,135,141]. [52] utilizes the back-door criterion to verify whether or not word-of-mouth recommendations can influence users' evaluation of the recommended items. Sharma et al. [124] treat an instantaneous shock in direct traffic as an instrumental variable to answer the counterfactual question from purely observational data: how much interaction activity would there have been on the online shopping website if recommendations were absent, and apply the back-door criterion to block the possible unobserved confounding effect between the "exposure" and "click" , as Fig. 13 shown. Besides, Tran et al. [135] consider the job personal recommendation issue in Disability Employment Services and present a causality-based method to tackle the problem, in which the covariate set is determined by the back-door criterion.

In addition to leveraging back-door adjustment, some works block the back-door path by the direct intervention on the treatment variable [47,102,140,142,168,176]. For example, Wang et al. [140] propose the framework named DecRS (Deconfounded Recommender System) to eliminate bias amplification through intervention on the user representation , which removes the effect of the historical user distribution over item groups on , as Fig. 14 (a) shown. Zhang et al. [176] propose PDA (Popularity-bias Deconfounding and Adjusting) to eliminate the effect of item popularity through intervention on the item (see Fig. 14 (b)), denoted as:
Pr( = | ( = , = )) = ∑︁ Pr( | , , )Pr( | , ) = Pr( | , , )Pr( ),(26)
where denotes the user representation and represents interactions. Pr( | , , ) and Pr( ) are learned separately.

It is worth mentioning that PDA can leverage popularity bias to enhance the recommendation performance by adjusting Pr( ) in the inference stage, which can be regarded as counterfactual inference.

In the above literature elaboration, we may find a series of works that accomplish the integration of SCM-based causal inference and recommender systems with a similar pattern, as shown in Fig. 15: they first analyze the causal relationship between the variables regarding the concern issue and formulate the causal graph based on it; after theoretical analysis, a multi-task or separated structure is adopted to learn the causal effects of the variables on the potential outcome in the training phase; once the training has been completed, appropriate variables are selected to intervene during the inference stage, i.e., they are set to counterfactual values directly or indirectly, and the outcome is estimated based on applicable causal rules (e.g., backdoor adjustment, TIE, etc.) to conduct counterfactual inference.


### Instrumental

Variable-based Approach. The instrumental variable (IV) method is such a powerful approach for learning causal effects with confounders that it can be done even without controlling for, or collecting data on, the confounders [97]. The instrumental variable causally influences the outcome only through the treatment (Fig. 16 (1) ̸⊥ ⊥ | ; and

(2) ⊥ ⊥ | ( ), .

In practice, IV is often implemented in a two-stage lease squares (2SLS) procedure.


## Manuscript submitted to ACM

Fit the disentangled items in the interventional equation separately, and adjust the outcome with desired popularity bias during model inference.


## PDA [SIGIR'21]

Counterfactual inference without separate structures


## Learning effects with separate structures

Perform multi-task learning to achieve the effect of each cause during training and remove the effect of item popularity during testing.


## MACR [KDD'21]

Model each value of confounding feature with a separate expert module, and use the intervened estimation during inference.


## DCR [2022]

Decompose the causal effect into two partial effects through the mediator, learn them simultaneously with multi-task framework, and fuse them to conduct the front-door adjustment in the inference stage.


## HCR [2022]

Adjust inputting exposure features to estimate TIE in the model inference stage.


## CR [SIGIR'21]

Inspired by the collider effect, separate embeddings for interest and conformity and learn them under multi-task framework.


## DICE [WWW'21]

Counterfactual inference with separate structures Fig. 15. Separate-learning-counterfactual-inference, a common pattern of SCM-based causal inference for recommender systems, learns causal effect with a separate structure or multi-task framework and performs counterfactual inference during testing. Though a popular tool, instrumental variable seems to find little application in recommender systems because of the difficulty of finding variables that satisfy the conditions of instrumental variables. As already cited above, Sharma et al. [124] utilize an instantaneous shock in direct traffic as an instrumental variable to evaluate the recommendation effect. Si et al. [126] propose a model-agnostic framework named IV4Rec that effectively decomposes the embedding vectors into two parts: the causal part indicating a user's personal preference for an item, and the non-causal part merely reflects the statistical dependencies between users and items such as exposure mechanism and display position,  [162] Intervention on the treatment MF, LightGCN, etc. Data insufficiency 2021 CauSeR [42].

Intervention on the treatment SR-GNN [153] Popularity bias in SBRSs 2021 MCT [135] Back-door criterion, CATE (self-designed) Disability employment 2021 DecRS [140] Intervention on the treatment FM, NFM [44] Bias amplification 2021 PDA [176] Intervention with users' search behaviors as the instrumental variable. More specifically, it modifies the traditional IV method, using the residual of the least square regression as the causal embedding instead of discarding it. The causal graph is illustrated in Fig. 17.


## 5.3.3

The Front-door-based Approach. The front-door adjustment [54] is another popular method for learning causal effects with unobserved confounders, in which we condition on a set of variables that satisfies the front-door criterion.

Definition 8 (Front-door Criterion). Given a pair of treatment and outcome variable , a set of variables is said to satisfy the front-door criterion if:

(1) intercepts all directed paths from to ;

(2) there is no back-door path from to ; and

(3) all back-door paths from to are blocked by .

A graph depicting the front-door criterion is shown in Fig. 18 (a). In practice, is usually the mediator of the causal effect → . With the help of , the causal effect of on can be calculated as follows:

Definition 9 (Front-Door Adjustment)). If satisfies the front-door criterion relative to ( , ) and Pr( , ) > 0, then the causal effect of on is given by the formula
Pr( | ( )) = ∑︁ Pr( | ( ))Pr( | ( )) = ∑︁ Pr( | ) ∑︁ ′ Pr | ′ , Pr ′ .(27)
Zhu et al. [181] propose HCR (Hidden Confounder Removal) framework to mitigate hidden confounding effects by front-door adjustment, in which user and item feature and are treatments, post-click user behaviors are the concerned outcome, and the click feedback acts as the mediator that satisfies the front-door criterion, as Fig. 18 (b) shown. However, in real-world recommendation scenarios, confounding bias also exists in the estimation of the click feedback, which means it is not competent to perform the front-door adjustment. In fact, the front-door adjustment, like the IV method, finds little application in recommender systems because of the lack of eligible variables. Some works integrate reinforcement learning-based recommender systems with causal inference to tackle the confounding issue. For example, DEMER (deconfounded multi-agent environment reconstruction) [123] is proposed following the generative adversarial training framework to model the hidden confounder, which affects both actions and rewards as an agent interacts with the environment and thus obstructs an effective reconstruction of the environment, by treating the hidden confounder as a hidden policy. In [162], user representations are considered as a confounder of the recommendation lists and users' interactions on recommendation lists. To alleviate this confounding bias, CPR (counterfactual personalized ranking framework) builds the recommender simulator to generate new training samples based on the causal graph.

As for session-based recommender systems (SBRSs), Gupta et al. [42] propose the CauSeR (Causal Session-based

Recommendations) framework to perform deconfounded training to handle popularity bias. COCO-SBRS [128] adopts a self-supervised approach to pre-train a recommendation model to learn the causalities in SBRSs, so as to eliminate confounding bias and make accurate next item recommendations. In terms of GNN-based recommendations, Gas et al. infer the unobserved confounders existing in representation learning with the CVAE model [127] and apply it to GNN-based strategy [30].


# GENERAL COUNTERFACTUALS-BASED METHODS

Some causal recommender approaches are established based on the general concept of counterfactuals, the world that does not exist but can be reasoned with some fundamental law and human intuition. In this section, we will introduce related strategies from the perspective of recommender issues they try to address, including domain adaptation, data augmentation, fairness, and explanation.  [157] "Minimum" counterfactuals (self-designed) 2021 CASR [147] "Minimum" counterfactuals NARM [69], STAMP [79], SASRec [60] 2021 CauseRec [170] Counterfactuals (self-designed, sequential recommendation) 2021 POEM [76] Counterfactuals GCN 2022

Fairness [73] Counterfactuals (self-designed) 2021 F-UCB [53] Counterfactuals UCB 2022 CLOVER [149] Counterfactuals MELU [68] 2022

Explanation PRINCE [33] "Minimum" counterfactuals HIN [125] 2020 CountER [133] "Minimum" counterfactuals (black-box) 2021


## Domain Adaptation

RSs are trained and evaluated offline with the supervision of previously-collected data, which usually suffers from selection bias and confounding bias. It results in a gap between the training goal and the true recommendation objective, and, therefore, a sub-optimal recommender algorithm. To address this issue, we hope to evaluate the training policy on the unbiased data, which is collected from the randomized treatment policy. However, uniform data is always expensive and small-scale. To take full advantage of the uniform data, researchers train the recommender systems with a small amount of unbiased data and a large amount of biased data, with the hope of learning the counterfactual distribution of the biased data, which is both a counterfactual problem and a domain adaptation problem.

[107] and [8] train recommender policies on biased and unbiased data, and add regulation terms to the loss function so that the distance of parameters between the two policies in the inspiration of individual treatment effect is controllable. [166] trains an unbiased imputation model to impute the labels of all observed and unobserved events in biased and unbiased data, and learns the final CTR model by combining the two data with the propensity-free doubly robust method. Further, [77] propose KDCRec (Knowledge Distillation framework for Counterfactual Recommendation)

in which the teacher network with unbiased data as input is used to guide the biased model via four approaches.


## Data Augmentation

Data augmentation is an uncontroversial counterfactual problem, such as answering the question: "what would be the user's decision if a different item had been exposed?". Therefore, some works are trying to integrate counterfactuals into the procedure of data augmentation.

Xiong et al. [157] generate new data samples by users' feature-level preference for review-based recommendation.

To generate more effective samples, they leverage the "minimum" idea in counterfactuals, learning the "minimum" change of the user feature-level preference that can "exactly" reverse the preference ranking of the user on a given item pair. For example, if slightly increasing the price attention of a user who had purchased an iPhone will make Xiaomi more attractive to her, this will be regarded as an effective counterfactual sample. Similarly, CASR (Counterfactual Data-Augmentation Sequential Recommendation) [147] generates the counterfactual sequence of items by "minimally" changing the user's historical items, such that her currently interacted item can be "exactly" altered.

The CauseRec (Counterfactual User Sequence Synthesis for Sequential Recommendation) proposed by Zhang et al. [170] generates counterfactual data in a different way. It identifies indispensable and dispensable concepts in the Manuscript submitted to ACM historical behavior sequence. The former can represent a meaningful aspect of the user's interest, while the latter indicates noisy behaviors that are less important in representing user interest. Therefore, it is reasonable to argue that replacing indispensable concepts in the original user sequence incurs a preference deviation of the original user representation, while replacing the dispensable ones still has a similar user representation, which CauseRec realizes through contrastive learning. Liu et al. [76] focus on the recommendation scenario where users are exposed with decision factor-based persuasion texts, i.e., persuasion factors, and generate new training samples by making simple but reasonable counterfactual assumptions about user behaviors, including:

• If a user clicks on an item without the existence of persuasion factors, the user will still be likely to click on it with a matching persuasion factor. • If a user does not click on an item with the existence of persuasion factors, the user will not click on it when the persuasion factor does not exist.


## Fairness and Explanation

The counterfactual technique is a natural tool for the evaluation of fairness since we can compare the outcome (ratings, recommendation lists, etc.) in the real world and in the counterfactual world in which only users' sensitive features (e.g., gender and race) are intervened [53,149]. As for explanation, counterfactuals describe a dependency on the external facts that lead to certain outcomes, and thus allow researchers to reason about the behavior of a black-box algorithm [? ]. Literature on counterfactual explanation also resorts to the "minimum" idea in counterfactuals. For example, [33] presents PRINCE (Provider-side Interpretability with Counterfactual Evidence) to search for a set of minimal actions performed by the user that, if removed, changes the recommendation to a different item, in a heterogeneous information network with users, items, and so on. To understand the point, consider the following example. If a user who has bought an iPhone and followed

MacBook receives a recommendation about AirPods and would not have received it if she had not bought iPhone, PRINCE will regard the behavior "purchase of iPhone" as the explanation of the recommendation. Similarly, CountER (Counterfactual Explainable Recommendation) proposed by [133] seeks the minimum changes of item features that exactly reverse the recommendation decision.


# OPENING PROBLEMS AND FUTURE DIRECTION

The introduction of causal inference into recommender systems is still relatively recent, and there are still many promising but unexplored research directions, which we will discuss in this section.

Causal assumptions in recommendations. To extract causality knowledge from statistical data, causal inferencebased methods are conducted with several causal assumptions. Although much of the existing work employ causal inference methods, these assumptions are often not explicitly clarified or even violated. To address this issue, existing work either ignores it or makes simple assumptions about data distributions. Therefore, estimating the impact of violations of causal assumptions on experimental results is crucial for bridging the gap between modern recommender system design and causal inference. For example, the positivity assumption is essential in PO-based approaches for the unbiased estimation of causal effect, but the data sparsity problem of recommender systems makes it difficult to satisfy.

Considering that a small difference in recommendation accuracy may lead to a huge rise and fall in platform revenue, the effect of the violation of causal assumptions and that of artificial assumptions on predictions should be investigated.

Transfer learning and Out-of-distribution recommendation. Due to the data sparsity issue of recommendation systems, it will be a wise and practical choice to transfer user and item knowledge from other domains to improve prediction performance during cold start, offline evaluation, or online test, which is a transfer learning problem. Even in the same dataset, natural shifts of user preference or artificial bias also cause a violation of the IID hypothesis, which is an out-of-distribution (OOD) recommendation issue [48]. The core of both transfer learning and OOD recommendation is to transfer beneficial shared knowledge, such as users' inherent and unchanged preferences. Thus they can be formulated as invariant learning in some cases [146]. As we mentioned in Section 1, causal inference works to discover the unchangeable causal relationship in data, which can be reused in new domains. From this perspective, adopting causal inference to improve robustness and generalization ability to accomplish cross-domain or OOD recommendation is a promising direction, and some exciting attempts can be found recently [48,139]. Dynamic recommendation. Modern recommender systems usually involve feedback loops and dynamic updates.

Therefore, it is crucial to incorporate loops into the causality-based methods to accurately model the dynamic and iterative data collection process for recommender systems [160]. Some impressive work has also been proposed [11,42,67,140]. However, uncontrolled feedback loops may give rise to issues like the Matthew effect, echo chambers [11,31,160] and bias amplification [11,140]. Original debiasing approaches (e.g., back-door adjustment) cannot be applied directly due to the change in the form of causal models. Therefore, deconfounding in multi-step and feedback loop-involved causal models is still an open research field.


# CONCLUSION

In this survey paper, we have summarized the mechanisms and the strategies of causal inference for recommender systems, from the theoretical perspective: PO framework-based, SCM framework-based and general counterfactualsbased. The survey gives the clear description about the strengths of causal inference for recommendations and manages to use a unified symbol system to describe a large number of existing causal recommender approaches. We hope this survey can well help researchers in the recommendation field to utilize and innovate. Manuscript submitted to ACM

## Fig. 1 .
1Strengths of causal inference for recommendation.

## Assumption 2 (
2Unconfoundedness / Ignorability). Treatment assignment is independent to the potential outcomes, i.e., ⊥ ( = 0), ( = 1)| , also written as Pr( = 1| , ( = 0), ( = 1)) = Pr( = 1| ), where denotes the background variables.

## Fig. 3 .
3Graphical models of three typical types of causal structures. Assumption 3 (Positivity). 0 < Pr( = | = ) < 1, ∀ , .

## Fig. 4 .
4Examples of the structural equation and intervention.Structural Equations. Beside causal graph, structural equation is another representation of causal information,


exogenous variables.A set of equations in the form of Equation 4 is called a structural model; if each variable has a distinct equation in which it appears on the left-hand side, then the model is called a structural causal model. Intervention. The do-calculus allows researchers to complete intervention, interpreted as controlling the value of a variable, by purely mathematical means instead of by carrying out a physical experiment, which is one of the outstanding contributions of Pearl's SCM framework. The do-calculus involves the do-operation, like ( = ), which denotes the intervention of setting the variable to , realizing by blocking the effect of 's parents on and set the value of as . For example, if we ( = 0 ) on the model in


Counterfactuals. Counterfactuals are employed to emphasize our wish to compare two outcomes under the exact same conditions, differing only in one aspect: the antecedent, or hypothetical condition citeglymour2016causal. For example, in the counterfactual question "What would be the user's interaction if the recommended items had been different?" mentioned above in the 1, we would like to compare the user's interaction under the same conditions except for the recommended item. Counterfactuals, situations which are non-existent in reality, cannot be inferred by do-calculus. Fortunately, Pearl [93] proposed a new set of notations: Pr( ( = 1)| = 0, = ( = 0)) indicates the probability of the outcome ( = 1) would be if the observed treatment value is = 0, given the fact that we observe = ( = 0) in the data.


For example, Wide & Deep [15] jointly trains linear models and deep neural networks to combine the benefits of memorization and generalization. Deep factorization machine (DeepFM) [39] combines traditional factorization machine (FM) with multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) in parallel. Graph neural networks (GNN) adopt embedding propagation to aggregate neighborhood embedding iteratively. GNN-based methods have become the new state-of-the-art approaches in recommender systems [28]. 3.2.2 Notation. Considering a general recommender system, we assume O and O − denote the observed dataset and unobserved dataset. Each observed sample includes the treatment , background features , and an interaction label

## Fig. 5 .
5Strategies of the causal inference for recommendation.

## Fig. 6 .
6Causal explanation of user self-selection bias and confounding bias.

## Fig. 7 .
7Illustration of propensity score strategies for recommendation.

## Fig. 8 .
8(c), a collider node occurs when it receives effects from two or more other factors. Collider exists in recommender systems. For instance, item positions in the ranking list are influenced by user preference Causal graphs of collider in recommender systems.Analyzing the dependency between variables in collider structures will contribute to its utilization in recommendersystems. Although and are independent, i.e., for all and , Pr( = | = ) = Pr( = ), conditioning on the collision node produces a dependence between the node's parents, i.e., for some , , , Pr( = | = , = ) = Pr( = | = ). To understand the point, let us consider the most basic example where = + , and and are independent variables

## Fig. 9 .Fig. 10 .
910Causal graphs of mediators in recommender systems, where , , and denote cause, effect, mediator and confounder variable of the mediator and the outcome, respectively. (a-b) Causal graphs of the CCF model before and after intervention. and are user and item representation, respectively, is preference score, and denotes user interaction history.results on the final insignificant lifts in the sitewide CVR during the A/B test of a new version of recommendationmodule. Therefore, they use causal mediation analysis (CMA) of potential outcome framework to estimate causal effects of the induced changes and also discuss the estimation under the situation that multiple unmeasured causally-dependent mediators exist with the help of a directed acyclic graph.

## Fig. 9 (
9b) shown, in which the probability of interaction is influenced by three main factors: user-item matching ( ( , ) → ), item popularity ( → ) and user conformity ( → ), the last two of which are usually ignored by existing models and thus result in the terrible Matthew effect. Following this causal graph, Wei et al. propose MACR (Model-Agnostic Counterfactual Reasoning), a multi-task framework that consists of three modules to jointly learn the effects of → , & → → , and → , respectively during recommender training and estimates TIE of on in counterfactual inference: = − = ( = , = , = ( = , = )) − ( = , = , ( = ( = * , = * ))) = ( ( = , = )) * ( = ) * ( = ) − ( ( = * , = * )) * ( = ) * ( = ) =^ * (^) * (^) − * (^) * (^) ,


Back-door-based Approach. Before introducing the back-door adjustment approaches, let us briefly review the definitions of back-door path and back-door criterion [54]. Definition 5 (Back-door Path). Given a pair of treatment and outcome variable , a path connecting and is a back-door path for ( , ) if it satisfies that (1) it is not a directed path (it contains an arrow pointing into ); and

## Fig. 12 .Fig. 13 .
1213A causal graph representing the relationship between recommendation ( ), click ( ), consuming desire ( ), and number of recent interactions . The dotted circle indicates this variable is unobservable. A causal graph showing the relationships between a sudden shock in traffic ( ), total exposure of the focal product ( ), product demand and , recommendation click-through of related product from the focal product ( ). The focal product experiences an instantaneous shock in traffic while the product recommended shown alongside does not. means direct exposure of product (e.g., through search or browsing), which is not influenced by recommendation.

## Fig. 14 .
14(a) The causal graph used in DecRS, where and denote user and item representation, represents the user historical distribution over item groups, is the group-level user representation, and is the prediction score. (b) The causal graph of PDA, in which and denote user and item representation, is the item popularity, and stands for user interactions.

## Fig. 16 .Fig. 17 .
1617The causal graph of a general setup for instrumental variables, where is an instrumental variable. The causal graph of IV4Rec, which reconstructs treatment by leveraging search queries as instrumental variables to decompose treatment into causal part and non-causal part and combining them with different weights. is a set of unmeasurable confounders and represents users' interaction.

## Fig. 18 .
18(a) A graphical model representing the front-door path, in which denotes the treatment, and denotes outcomes. Unobserved confounders exist in the causal effect → , and are variables that satisfy the front-door criterion. (b) The Causal graph for illustrating the relationship in the HCR framework. : user features, : hidden confounders, : item features affected by , : post-click interactions, : click behaviors. 5.3.4 Deconfounded Recommender Algorithms. Instead of directly introducing causal technique, some literature expands sheer recommendation algorithms to deal with confounders under the inspiration of analysis from the perspective of causal inference. For example, [11] modifies several traditional recommendation algorithms to explore the impact of algorithmic confounding, which has found that the data-algorithm feedback loop amplifies the homogenization of user behavior without corresponding gains in utility and also amplifies the impact of recommendation systems on item consumption.

## Definition 10 (
10Counterfactual Fairness). A recommender model is counterfactually fair if, for any possible user with features = and = : Pr( | , ) = Pr( | , ( ′ )) (28) For any value and ′ , where denotes the potential outcome for user . are users' sensitive features and are causally -independent features. Based on the counterfactual fairness, Li et al. generate sensitive feature-independent user embeddings through adversary learning [73]. They train a predictor to learn the filtered embedding and an adversarial classifier to predict the sensitive features from the learned representation simultaneously. For the reinforcement learning-based recommendation, Huang et al. propose the F-UCB (fair causal bandit) [53], picking arms from a subset of arms at each round in which all the arms satisfy counterfactual fairness constraint that users receive similar rewards regardless of their sensitive attributes.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research work is supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2021ZD0113602, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 62176014, 62276015, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.


The rest of this survey is organized into six sections. Section 2 introduces the Related Work, which clarifies the difference between causal inference for recommendation and other related causal techniques. Section 3 introduces the basic concepts within recommendation and causal inference of both frameworks and the notations used in this survey. Sections 4, 5, and 6 interpret causal recommendation approaches from the perspective of causal techniques: PO-based, SCM-based, andManuscript submitted to ACM 
2012 
2014 
2016 
2018 
2020 
2022 

Year 

0 

5 

10 

15 

20 

Number of papers 

Category 
PO 
SCM 
General counterfactuals 

Category 
PO 
SCM 
General counterfactuals 




unobserved confounding bias unobserved confounding bias unobserved confounding bias, bias amplification, popularity bias, etc.PO-based Method 

Propensity Score 
Strategy 

Strategy 

Approach Inspired by 
Propensity Score 

Approach with Inverse 
Propensity Score (IPS) 

Approach with Doubly 
Robust (DR) 

Objective 
Unconfoundedness 

Unbiased 

Low variance 

Causal Effect 
Strategy 

Causal effect for 
Uplift 

Causal effect 
beyond Uplift 

SCM-based Method 

Model with Collider 
Structure 

Model with 
Mediator Structure 

Approach for Causal 
Effect Estimation 

Approach for 
accuracy 

Model with 
Confounder 
Structure 

Back-Door-based 
Approach 

Back-Door 
Adjustment 

Intervention on 
treatment 
Instrumental 
Variable-based 
Approach 

Front-Door-based 
Approach 

Deconfounded 
Recommender 
Algorithm 
General 
Counterfactuals 
-based Methods 

Strategy for Domain 
Adaptation 

Strategy for Data 
Augmentation 

Strategy for Fairness 
and Explanation 

exposure bias, unobserved 
confounding bias, etc. 

selection 
bias, 
observed 
confounding bias, unobserved 
confounding bias, fairness, etc. 

selection bias, data sparsity, 
uplift, etc. 

popularity bias 

causal effect estimation 

popularity bias, user history 
bias 

exposure bias, causal effect 
estimation, popularity bias, 
etc. 



## Table 1 .
1Summary of propensity score strategies for recommendation.Category 
Model 
Causal method 
Backbone model 
Issue of concern 
Year 




scores are estimated via naive Bayes or logistic regression. Similarly, Saito et al.[115] estimate the exposure propensity for each user-item pair and Sato et al.[118] propose the DLCE (Debiased Learning for the Causal Effect) model with IPS-based estimators to evaluating unbiased ranking uplift. Unbiased IPS-based uplift is also concerned by[117]. In addition,[177] proposes UR-IPW (User Retention Modeling with Inverse Propensity Weighting) to model revisit rate estimation accounting for the selection bias problem and[72] adjusts domain weights based on IPS to reduce domain bias. Though IPS-based methods do not require an explicit analysis of the causal correlation between variables, some works[17,21,83] still discuss causal graphs as an excellent guide to accurate model. For example, Ding et al.[21] leverage a causal graph to explain the risk of unmeasurable confounders on the accuracy of propensity estimation and propose RD (Robust Deconfounder) with the sensitivity analysis, obtaining the bound of propensity score to enhance the robustness of methods against unmeasured confounders. Li et al.[70] construct the DENC (De-bias Network Confounding in Recommendation). This causal graph-based recommendation framework disentangles three determinants for the outcomes, including inherent factors, social network-based confounder and exposure, and estimates each of them with a specific component, respectively. By the way, there are some works[10,17,177] integrate multi-task models with IPS to learn propensity scores and user interactions simultaneously.In addition to debiasing, some IPS-based methods are dedicated to addressing other issues that abound in RS[67,85,175]. For example, Mehrotra et al.[85] proposes an unbiased estimator of user satisfaction based on IPS to jointly optimize for supplier fairness and consumer relevance. Besides, the CBDF (Counterfactual Bandit with Delayed Feedback)observation bias 2021 

Approach 
with Inverse 
Propensity 
Score (IPS) 

MF-IPS [120] 
IPS, SNIPS 
MF 
Selection bias 
2016 
PBM [59] 
IPS 
SVM-Rank [57, 58] 
Position bias 
2017 
[85] 
IPS 
(reinforcement learning) 
Fairness 
2018 
Multi-IPW [172] 
IPS 
Multi-task DNN 
Selection bias 
2019 
CPBM [24] 
IPS 
SVM-Rank 
Selection bias 
2019 
ULRMF,ULBPR [117] 
IPS, SNIPS, ATE 
MF 
Uplift 
2019 
DLCE [118] 
CIPS 
MF 
Unobserved confounding bias 2020 
Rel-MF [115] 
CIPS 
MF 
Unobserved confounding bias 2020 
[17] 
IPS 
Multi-task DNN 
Observed confounding bias 
2020 
RIPS [83] 
RIPS 
(model-agnostic) 
Slate recommendation 
2020 
ACL-[158] 
IPS 
(adversarial learning) 
Identifiability 
2020 

UR-IPW [177] 
SNIPS 
Multi-task DNN 

Post-click revisit effect 
&selection bias 

2021 

[72] 
IPS 
(model-agnostic) 
Domain bias 
2021 
CBDF [175] 
IPS 
(reinforcement learning) 
Delayed feedback 
2021 

RD&BRD [21] 

IPS/DR/ 
AutoDebias [12] 

MF 
Unobserved confounding bias 2022 

DENC [70] 
IPS 
(self-designed) 
Selection bias 
2022 
CET [10] 
IPS 
BERT 
False negative 
2022 
CAFL [67] 
IPS 
MF 
Feedback loop 
2022 
RIIPS [80] 
RIIPS 
Two-tower structure 
Selection bias 
2022 

Approach 
with Doubly 
Robust 

Propensity-free DR [166] 
DR 
FFM [167] 
Selection bias 
2019 
Multi-DR [172] 
DR 
Multi-task DNN 
Selection bias 
2019 
MRDR-DL [41] 
MRDR 
MF 
Selection bias 
2021 
Cascade-DR [64] 
Cascade-DR 
MF 
High variance of RIPS 
2022 
ASPIRE [87] 
DR, ATE 
LightGBM [61] 
Uplift 
2022 
DRIB [155] 
DR 
MF 
Unobserved confounding bias 2022 

algorithm [175] re-weights the observed feedback with importance sampling, which is determined by a survival model 

to deal with delayed feedbacks. The CAFL (causal adjustment for feedback loops) [67] extends the IPS estimator to 

break feedback loops. 



## Table 2 .
2Summary of causal effect strategies for recommendation.Category 
Model 
Causal method 
Backbone model 
Issue of concern 
Year 

Causal 
effect 
for 
Uplift 

ULRMF, ULBPR [117] 
IPS, SNIPS, ATE 
MF 

Uplift 

2019 
[36] 
CATE 
Xgboost [14] 
2020 

AUUC-max [6] 
CATE 

Linear 
/Wide & Deep 

2021 

CausCF [156] 
CATE 
MF 
2021 
ASPIRE [87] 
DR, ATE 
LightGBM [61] 
2022 

Causal 
effect 
beyond 
Uplift 

[107] 
ITE 

Linear/regularized 
kernel methods 

Domain adaptation 
2017 

CausE [8] 
ITE 
MF 
Domain adaptation 
2018 

[84] 
TE 

Structural 
state-space model [9] 

Causal effect of 
a new track release 

2020 

CACF [169] 
ITE 
(self-designed) 
Unobserved confounding bias 
2021 

MCRec [163] 
CATE 
DIN [180] 

Device-cloud 
recommendation 

2022 

LRIR [136] 
ITE, ATE 
(self-designed) 
Disability employment 
2022 




et al.[36] leverage the Retrospective Estimation technique that relies solely on data with positive outcomes for CATE-based uplift modeling, which makes it especially suited for many recommendation scenarios where only the treatment outcomes are observable.[6] learns a model that directly optimizes an upper bound on AUUC, a popular uplift metric based on the uplift curves and unified with ATE[161]. In addition, CausCF[156] extends the classical MF to the tensor factorization with three dimensions-user, item, and treatment effect for better uplift performance. It is worth mentioning that in the uplift modeling literature


Though collider structures permeate RSs, they are usually compounded by other causal relationships and are treated as other causal structures, which results in minor literature discussing purely colliders. A representative work is DICE [179], which is proposed by Zheng et al. and tracks the popularity issue from the user's perspective instead of eliminating popularity bias from the item's perspective. Zheng et al. argue that users' interactions are driven by

## Table 3 .
3Summary of recommendation models with collider structure and mediator structure.= * refers to the situation where the value of is different from the reality, i.e., counterfactual. Total effect can be further decomposed into natural direct effect (NDE) and total indirect effect (TIE). NDE reflects the effect of on through the direct path, i.e., → , while is set to the value when = * :Category 
Model 
Causal method 
Backbone model 
Issue of concern 
Year 

Causal 
recommendation 
with collider structure 

DICE [179] 
(causal view) 
MF(multi-task) 
Popularity bias 
2021 

CIGC [20] 

Intervention on 
the cause factor 

LightGCN [45] 
GCN model retraining 
2022 

Causal 
recommendation 
with mediator 
structure 

[16] 
Mediation analysis 
-
Effect of social presence 
2011 
[81] 
Mediation analysis 
-
Effect of informational factors 
2013 
CMA [165] 
NDE, TIE 
-
Effect of induced change 
2019 

CCF [159] 

Intervention on 
the mediator, 
counterfactuals 

NCF [46], 
GRU4Rec [50], etc. 

Historical bias 
2021 

MACR [148] 
TIE 

MF, LightGCN 
(multi-task) 

Popularity bias 
2021 

CIRS [27] 

Intervention on 
the mediator 

PPO [121] 
Filter bubble [90] 
2022 



## Table 4 .
4Summary of recommendation models with confounder structure.Model 
Causal method 
Backbone model 
Issue of concern 
Year 

[52] 
Back-door criterion 
MF 
Effect of WOM recommendation 
2012 
[124] 
Back-door adjustment, IV 
-
Effect of recommendations 
2015 
[11] 
-
MF, etc. 
Feedback loop bias 
2018 
DEMER [123] 
-
(RL) 
Unobserved confounding bias 
2019 
CPR 


Here, RL means reinforcement learning and WOM means word-of-mouth.on the treatment 
MF 
Popularity bias 
2021 

CR [141] 
Back-door criterion, TIE 

MMGCN [150] 
(multi-task) 

Clickbait 
2021 

DCR [47] 
Intervention on the treatment 
NFM 
Observed confounding bias 
2022 
CaDSI [142] 
Intervention on the treatment 
(self-designed) 
Observed confounding bias 
2022 
D2Q [168] 
Intervention on the treatment 
(self-designed) 
Duration bias 
2022 
DeSCoVeR [102] 
Intervention on the treatment 
(self-designed) 
Venue recommendation 
2022 
IV4Rec [126] 
IV 
DIN, NRHUB [151] 
Recommendation using search data 
2022 
HCR [181] 
Front-door adjustment 
MMGCN 
Unobserved confounding bias 
2022 
COCO-SBRS [128] Intervention on the treatment 
(self-designed) 
Unobserved confounding bias in SBRSs 
2023 



## Table 5 .
5Summary of recommendation models with general counterfactuals.Category 
Model 
Causal inference method 
Backbone model 
Year 

Domain 
adaptation 

[107] 
ITE 
Linear/regularized kernel methods 
2017 
[8] 
ITE 
Matrix factorization 
2018 
Propensity-free DR [166] 
DR 
FFM 
2019 
KDCRec [77] 
ITE 
MF (knowledge distillation) 
2020 

Data 
augmentation 

CF2 
Manuscript submitted to ACM

Toward the next generation of recommender systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. Gediminas Adomavicius, Alexander Tuzhilin, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 17Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. 2005. Toward the next generation of recommender systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 17, 6 (2005), 734-749.

A distinction between causal effects in Structural and Rubin Causal Models. Dionissi Aliprantis, Dionissi Aliprantis. 2015. A distinction between causal effects in Structural and Rubin Causal Models. (2015).

Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. D Joshua, Angrist, W Guido, Donald B Imbens, Rubin, Journal of the American statistical Association. 91Joshua D Angrist, Guido W Imbens, and Donald B Rubin. 1996. Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. Journal of the American statistical Association 91, 434 (1996), 444-455.

Controlling selection bias in causal inference. Elias Bareinboim, Judea Pearl, In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. 2012. Controlling selection bias in causal inference. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 100-108.

The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. M Reuben, David A Baron, Kenny, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 511173Reuben M Baron and David A Kenny. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 51, 6 (1986), 1173.

Uplift modeling with generalization guarantees. Artem Betlei, Eustache Diemert, Massih-Reza Amini, Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningArtem Betlei, Eustache Diemert, and Massih-Reza Amini. 2021. Uplift modeling with generalization guarantees. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 55-65.

The offset tree for learning with partial labels. Alina Beygelzimer, John Langford, Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningAlina Beygelzimer and John Langford. 2009. The offset tree for learning with partial labels. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 129-138.

Causal embeddings for recommendation. Stephen Bonner, Flavian Vasile, Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsStephen Bonner and Flavian Vasile. 2018. Causal embeddings for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 104-112.

Inferring causal impact using Bayesian structural time-series models. H Kay, Fabian Brodersen, Jim Gallusser, Nicolas Koehler, Steven L Remy, Scott, The Annals of Applied Statistics. Kay H Brodersen, Fabian Gallusser, Jim Koehler, Nicolas Remy, and Steven L Scott. 2015. Inferring causal impact using Bayesian structural time-series models. The Annals of Applied Statistics (2015), 247-274.

Hard Negatives or False Negatives: Correcting Pooling Bias in Training Neural Ranking Models. Yinqiong Cai, Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Qingyao Ai, Ruqing Zhang, Xueqi Cheng, Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementYinqiong Cai, Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Qingyao Ai, Ruqing Zhang, and Xueqi Cheng. 2022. Hard Negatives or False Negatives: Correcting Pooling Bias in Training Neural Ranking Models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 118-127.

How algorithmic confounding in recommendation systems increases homogeneity and decreases utility. J B Allison, Chaney, M Brandon, Barbara E Stewart, Engelhardt, Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsAllison JB Chaney, Brandon M Stewart, and Barbara E Engelhardt. 2018. How algorithmic confounding in recommendation systems increases homogeneity and decreases utility. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 224-232.

Autodebias: Learning to debias for recommendation. Jiawei Chen, Hande Dong, Yang Qiu, Xiangnan He, Xin Xin, Liang Chen, Guli Lin, Keping Yang, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalJiawei Chen, Hande Dong, Yang Qiu, Xiangnan He, Xin Xin, Liang Chen, Guli Lin, and Keping Yang. 2021. Autodebias: Learning to debias for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 21-30.

Adapting Interactional Observation Embedding for Counterfactual Learning to Rank. Mouxiang Chen, Chenghao Liu, Jianling Sun, C H Steven, Hoi, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalMouxiang Chen, Chenghao Liu, Jianling Sun, and Steven CH Hoi. 2021. Adapting Interactional Observation Embedding for Counterfactual Learning to Rank. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 285-294.

Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. Tianqi Chen, Carlos Guestrin, Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningAssociation for Computing MachineryTianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Association for Computing Machinery, 785-794.

Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. Heng-Tze, Levent Cheng, Jeremiah Koc, Tal Harmsen, Tushar Shaked, Hrishi Chandra, Glen Aradhye, Greg Anderson, Wei Corrado, Mustafa Chai, Ispir, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems. the 1st Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender SystemsHeng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra, Hrishi Aradhye, Glen Anderson, Greg Corrado, Wei Chai, Mustafa Ispir, et al. 2016. Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems. 7-10.

The influence of social presence on customer intention to reuse online recommender systems: The roles of personalization and product type. Jaewon Choi, Hong Joo Lee, Yong Cheol Kim, International Journal of Electronic Commerce. 16Jaewon Choi, Hong Joo Lee, and Yong Cheol Kim. 2011. The influence of social presence on customer intention to reuse online recommender systems: The roles of personalization and product type. International Journal of Electronic Commerce 16, 1 (2011), 129-154.

Deconfounding user satisfaction estimation from response rate bias. Konstantina Christakopoulou, Madeleine Traverse, Trevor Potter, Emma Marriott, Daniel Li, Chris Haulk, H Ed, Minmin Chi, Chen, Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. Konstantina Christakopoulou, Madeleine Traverse, Trevor Potter, Emma Marriott, Daniel Li, Chris Haulk, Ed H Chi, and Minmin Chen. 2020. Deconfounding user satisfaction estimation from response rate bias. In Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 450-455.

Identification of causal effects in the presence of selection bias. D Juan, Jin Correa, Elias Tian, Bareinboim, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence33Juan D Correa, Jin Tian, and Elias Bareinboim. 2019. Identification of causal effects in the presence of selection bias. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33. 2744-2751.

A large scale benchmark for uplift modeling. Eustache Diemert, Artem Betlei, Christophe Renaudin, Massih-Reza Amini, KDD. Eustache Diemert, Artem Betlei, Christophe Renaudin, and Massih-Reza Amini. 2018. A large scale benchmark for uplift modeling. In KDD.

Causal incremental graph convolution for recommender system retraining. Sihao Ding, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Yong Liao, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems. Sihao Ding, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Yong Liao, Jun Shi, and Yongdong Zhang. 2022. Causal incremental graph convolution for recommender system retraining. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2022).

Addressing unmeasured confounder for recommendation with sensitivity analysis. Sihao Ding, Peng Wu, Fuli Feng, Yitong Wang, Xiangnan He, Yong Liao, Yongdong Zhang, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningSihao Ding, Peng Wu, Fuli Feng, Yitong Wang, Xiangnan He, Yong Liao, and Yongdong Zhang. 2022. Addressing unmeasured confounder for recommendation with sensitivity analysis. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 305-315.

Doubly robust policy evaluation and optimization. Miroslav Dudík, Dumitru Erhan, John Langford, Lihong Li, Statist. Sci. 29Miroslav Dudík, Dumitru Erhan, John Langford, and Lihong Li. 2014. Doubly robust policy evaluation and optimization. Statist. Sci. 29, 4 (2014), 485-511.

Endogenous selection bias: The problem of conditioning on a collider variable. Felix Elwert, Christopher Winship, Annual review of sociology. 4031Felix Elwert and Christopher Winship. 2014. Endogenous selection bias: The problem of conditioning on a collider variable. Annual review of sociology 40 (2014), 31.

Intervention harvesting for context-dependent examination-bias estimation. Zhichong Fang, Aman Agarwal, Thorsten Joachims, Proceedings of the 42nd international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 42nd international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalZhichong Fang, Aman Agarwal, and Thorsten Joachims. 2019. Intervention harvesting for context-dependent examination-bias estimation. In Proceedings of the 42nd international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 825-834.

Covariate balancing propensity score for a continuous treatment: Application to the efficacy of political advertisements. Christian Fong, Chad Hazlett, Kosuke Imai, The Annals of Applied Statistics. 12Christian Fong, Chad Hazlett, and Kosuke Imai. 2018. Covariate balancing propensity score for a continuous treatment: Application to the efficacy of political advertisements. The Annals of Applied Statistics 12, 1 (2018), 156-177.

Doubly robust estimation of causal effects. Michele Jonsson Funk, Daniel Westreich, Chris Wiesen, Til Stürmer, Alan Brookhart, Marie Davidian, American journal of epidemiology. 173Michele Jonsson Funk, Daniel Westreich, Chris Wiesen, Til Stürmer, M Alan Brookhart, and Marie Davidian. 2011. Doubly robust estimation of causal effects. American journal of epidemiology 173, 7 (2011), 761-767.

Chongming Gao, Wenqiang Lei, Jiawei Chen, Shiqi Wang, Xiangnan He, Shijun Li, Biao Li, Yuan Zhang, Peng Jiang, arXiv:2204.01266CIRS: Bursting Filter Bubbles by Counterfactual Interactive Recommender System. arXiv preprintChongming Gao, Wenqiang Lei, Jiawei Chen, Shiqi Wang, Xiangnan He, Shijun Li, Biao Li, Yuan Zhang, and Peng Jiang. 2022. CIRS: Bursting Filter Bubbles by Counterfactual Interactive Recommender System. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01266 (2022).

Graph neural networks for recommender system. Chen Gao, Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Yong Li, Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningChen Gao, Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, and Yong Li. 2022. Graph neural networks for recommender system. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 1623-1625.

Chen Gao, Yu Zheng, Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Yong Li, arXiv:2208.12397Causal Inference in Recommender Systems: A Survey and Future Directions. arXiv preprintChen Gao, Yu Zheng, Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, and Yong Li. 2022. Causal Inference in Recommender Systems: A Survey and Future Directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12397 (2022).

Deconfounding Representation Learning Based on User Interactions in Recommendation Systems. Junruo Gao, Mengyue Yang, Yuyang Liu, Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. SpringerJunruo Gao, Mengyue Yang, Yuyang Liu, and Jun Li. 2021. Deconfounding Representation Learning Based on User Interactions in Recommendation Systems. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Springer, 588-599.

Understanding echo chambers in e-commerce recommender systems. Yingqiang Ge, Shuya Zhao, Honglu Zhou, Changhua Pei, Fei Sun, Wenwu Ou, Yongfeng Zhang, Proceedings of the 43rd international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 43rd international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalYingqiang Ge, Shuya Zhao, Honglu Zhou, Changhua Pei, Fei Sun, Wenwu Ou, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2020. Understanding echo chambers in e-commerce recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 43rd international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2261-2270.

Causality and statistical learning. Andrew Gelman, Andrew Gelman. 2011. Causality and statistical learning.

PRINCE: Provider-side interpretability with counterfactual explanations in recommender systems. Azin Ghazimatin, Oana Balalau, Rishiraj Saha Roy, Gerhard Weikum, Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningAzin Ghazimatin, Oana Balalau, Rishiraj Saha Roy, and Gerhard Weikum. 2020. PRINCE: Provider-side interpretability with counterfactual explanations in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 196-204.

Offline a/b testing for recommender systems. Alexandre Gilotte, Clément Calauzènes, Thomas Nedelec, Alexandre Abraham, Simon Dollé, Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningAlexandre Gilotte, Clément Calauzènes, Thomas Nedelec, Alexandre Abraham, and Simon Dollé. 2018. Offline a/b testing for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 198-206.

Causal inference in statistics: A primer. Madelyn Glymour, Judea Pearl, Nicholas P Jewell, John Wiley & SonsMadelyn Glymour, Judea Pearl, and Nicholas P Jewell. 2016. Causal inference in statistics: A primer. John Wiley & Sons.

Free lunch! retrospective uplift modeling for dynamic promotions recommendation within roi constraints. Dmitri Goldenberg, Javier Albert, Lucas Bernardi, Pablo Estevez, Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. Dmitri Goldenberg, Javier Albert, Lucas Bernardi, and Pablo Estevez. 2020. Free lunch! retrospective uplift modeling for dynamic promotions recommendation within roi constraints. In Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 486-491.

The netflix recommender system: Algorithms, business value, and innovation. A Carlos, Neil Gomez-Uribe, Hunt, ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS). 6Carlos A Gomez-Uribe and Neil Hunt. 2015. The netflix recommender system: Algorithms, business value, and innovation. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS) 6, 4 (2015), 1-19.

Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks. Alex Graves, Mohamed Abdel-Rahman, Geoffrey Hinton, 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEEAlex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2013. Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE, 6645-6649.

DeepFM: a factorization-machine based neural network for CTR prediction. Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, Xiuqiang He, Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial IntelligenceHuifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, and Xiuqiang He. 2017. DeepFM: a factorization-machine based neural network for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 1725-1731.

A survey of learning causality with data: Problems and methods. Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, Richard Hahn, Huan Liu, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 53Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, P Richard Hahn, and Huan Liu. 2020. A survey of learning causality with data: Problems and methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 53, 4 (2020), 1-37.

Enhanced doubly robust learning for debiasing post-click conversion rate estimation. Siyuan Guo, Lixin Zou, Yiding Liu, Wenwen Ye, Suqi Cheng, Shuaiqiang Wang, Hechang Chen, Dawei Yin, Yi Chang, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalSiyuan Guo, Lixin Zou, Yiding Liu, Wenwen Ye, Suqi Cheng, Shuaiqiang Wang, Hechang Chen, Dawei Yin, and Yi Chang. 2021. Enhanced doubly robust learning for debiasing post-click conversion rate estimation. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 275-284.

CauSeR: Causal Session-based Recommendations for Handling Popularity Bias. Priyanka Gupta, Ankit Sharma, Pankaj Malhotra, Lovekesh Vig, Gautam Shroff, Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementPriyanka Gupta, Ankit Sharma, Pankaj Malhotra, Lovekesh Vig, and Gautam Shroff. 2021. CauSeR: Causal Session-based Recommendations for Handling Popularity Bias. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 3048-3052.

Causal inference and uplift modelling: A review of the literature. Pierre Gutierrez, Jean-Yves Gérardy, International Conference on Predictive Applications and APIs. PMLR. Pierre Gutierrez and Jean-Yves Gérardy. 2017. Causal inference and uplift modelling: A review of the literature. In International Conference on Predictive Applications and APIs. PMLR, 1-13.

Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics. Xiangnan He, Tat-Seng Chua, Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalXiangnan He and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 355-364.

Lightgcn: Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, Meng Wang, Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalXiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Meng Wang. 2020. Lightgcn: Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 639-648.

Neural collaborative filtering. Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, Tat-Seng Chua, Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web. the 26th International Conference on World Wide WebXiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. Neural collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web. 173-182.

Addressing Confounding Feature Issue for Causal Recommendation. Xiangnan He, Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Chonggang Song, Lingling Yi, Guohui Ling, Yongdong Zhang, ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS. 23 pagesXiangnan He, Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Chonggang Song, Lingling Yi, Guohui Ling, and Yongdong Zhang. 2023. Addressing Confounding Feature Issue for Causal Recommendation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) (2023), 23 pages.

CausPref: Causal Preference Learning for Out-of-Distribution Recommendation. Yue He, Zimu Wang, Peng Cui, Hao Zou, Yafeng Zhang, Qiang Cui, Yong Jiang, Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. the ACM Web Conference 2022Yue He, Zimu Wang, Peng Cui, Hao Zou, Yafeng Zhang, Qiang Cui, and Yong Jiang. 2022. CausPref: Causal Preference Learning for Out-of- Distribution Recommendation. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. 410-421.

Causal knowledge as a prerequisite for confounding evaluation: an application to birth defects epidemiology. Sonia Miguel A Hernán, Martha M Hernández-Díaz, Allen A Werler, Mitchell, American journal of epidemiology. 155Miguel A Hernán, Sonia Hernández-Díaz, Martha M Werler, and Allen A Mitchell. 2002. Causal knowledge as a prerequisite for confounding evaluation: an application to birth defects epidemiology. American journal of epidemiology 155, 2 (2002), 176-184.

Balázs Hidasi, Alexandros Karatzoglou, arXiv:1511.06939Linas Baltrunas, and Domonkos Tikk. 2015. Session-based recommendations with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprintBalázs Hidasi, Alexandros Karatzoglou, Linas Baltrunas, and Domonkos Tikk. 2015. Session-based recommendations with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06939 (2015).

A generalization of sampling without replacement from a finite universe. G Daniel, Donovan J Horvitz, Thompson, Journal of the American statistical Association. 47Daniel G Horvitz and Donovan J Thompson. 1952. A generalization of sampling without replacement from a finite universe. Journal of the American statistical Association 47, 260 (1952), 663-685.

Exploring social influence via posterior effect of word-of-mouth recommendations. Junming Huang, Xue-Qi Cheng, Hua-Wei Shen, Tao Zhou, Xiaolong Jin, Proceedings of the fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningJunming Huang, Xue-Qi Cheng, Hua-Wei Shen, Tao Zhou, and Xiaolong Jin. 2012. Exploring social influence via posterior effect of word-of-mouth recommendations. In Proceedings of the fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 573-582.

Achieving Counterfactual Fairness for Causal Bandit. Wen Huang, Lu Zhang, Xintao Wu, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence36Wen Huang, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. 2022. Achieving Counterfactual Fairness for Causal Bandit. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 36. 6952-6959.

W Guido, Donald B Imbens, Rubin, Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences. Cambridge University PressGuido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. 2015. Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences. Cambridge University Press.

Uplift modeling for clinical trial data. Maciej Jaskowski, Szymon Jaroszewicz, ICML Workshop on Clinical Data Analysis. 46Maciej Jaskowski and Szymon Jaroszewicz. 2012. Uplift modeling for clinical trial data. In ICML Workshop on Clinical Data Analysis, Vol. 46. 79-95.

Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. Nan Jiang, Lihong Li, International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. 2016. Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 652-661.

Optimizing search engines using clickthrough data. Thorsten Joachims, Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningThorsten Joachims. 2002. Optimizing search engines using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 133-142.

Training linear SVMs in linear time. Thorsten Joachims, Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningThorsten Joachims. 2006. Training linear SVMs in linear time. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 217-226.

Unbiased learning-to-rank with biased feedback. Thorsten Joachims, Adith Swaminathan, Tobias Schnabel, Proceedings of the tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningThorsten Joachims, Adith Swaminathan, and Tobias Schnabel. 2017. Unbiased learning-to-rank with biased feedback. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 781-789.

Self-attentive sequential recommendation. Wang-Cheng Kang, Julian Mcauley, 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). IEEEWang-Cheng Kang and Julian McAuley. 2018. Self-attentive sequential recommendation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). IEEE, 197-206.

LightGBM: a highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, Tie-Yan Liu, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing SystemsGuolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2017. LightGBM: a highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 3149-3157.

Correlation and causality. A David, Kenny, WileyNew YorkDavid A Kenny. 1979. Correlation and causality. New York: Wiley (1979).

Machine learning methods for developing precision treatment rules with observational data. C Ronald, Robert M Kessler, Alex Bossarte, Alan M Luedtke, Jose R Zaslavsky, Zubizarreta, Behaviour Research and Therapy. 120103412Ronald C Kessler, Robert M Bossarte, Alex Luedtke, Alan M Zaslavsky, and Jose R Zubizarreta. 2019. Machine learning methods for developing precision treatment rules with observational data. Behaviour Research and Therapy 120 (2019), 103412.

Doubly robust off-policy evaluation for ranking policies under the cascade behavior model. Haruka Kiyohara, Yuta Saito, Tatsuya Matsuhiro, Yusuke Narita, Nobuyuki Shimizu, Yasuo Yamamoto, Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningHaruka Kiyohara, Yuta Saito, Tatsuya Matsuhiro, Yusuke Narita, Nobuyuki Shimizu, and Yasuo Yamamoto. 2022. Doubly robust off-policy evaluation for ranking policies under the cascade behavior model. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 487-497.

Online controlled experiments at large scale. Ron Kohavi, Alex Deng, Brian Frasca, Toby Walker, Ya Xu, Nils Pohlmann, Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningRon Kohavi, Alex Deng, Brian Frasca, Toby Walker, Ya Xu, and Nils Pohlmann. 2013. Online controlled experiments at large scale. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1168-1176.

Matrix factorization techniques for recommender systems. Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, Chris Volinsky, Computer. 42Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. 2009. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender systems. Computer 42, 8 (2009), 30-37.

Breaking Feedback Loops in Recommender Systems with Causal Inference. Karl Krauth, Yixin Wang, Michael I Jordan , arXiv:2207.01616arXiv preprintKarl Krauth, Yixin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. 2022. Breaking Feedback Loops in Recommender Systems with Causal Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01616 (2022).

Melu: Meta-learned user preference estimator for cold-start recommendation. Hoyeop Lee, Jinbae Im, Seongwon Jang, Hyunsouk Cho, Sehee Chung, Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningHoyeop Lee, Jinbae Im, Seongwon Jang, Hyunsouk Cho, and Sehee Chung. 2019. Melu: Meta-learned user preference estimator for cold-start recommendation. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 1073-1082.

Neural attentive session-based recommendation. Jing Li, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Zhaochun Ren, Tao Lian, Jun Ma, Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge ManagementJing Li, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Zhaochun Ren, Tao Lian, and Jun Ma. 2017. Neural attentive session-based recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 1419-1428.

Be causal: De-biasing social network confounding in recommendation. Qian Li, Xiangmeng Wang, Zhichao Wang, Guandong Xu, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data. TKDDQian Li, Xiangmeng Wang, Zhichao Wang, and Guandong Xu. 2022. Be causal: De-biasing social network confounding in recommendation. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) (2022).

Matching via dimensionality reduction for estimation of treatment effects in digital marketing campaigns. Sheng Li, Nikos Vlassis, Jaya Kawale, Yun Fu, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial IntelligenceSheng Li, Nikos Vlassis, Jaya Kawale, and Yun Fu. 2016. Matching via dimensionality reduction for estimation of treatment effects in digital marketing campaigns. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 3768-3774.

Debiasing Learning based Cross-domain Recommendation. Siqing Li, Liuyi Yao, Shanlei Mu, Wayne Xin Zhao, Yaliang Li, Tonglei Guo, Bolin Ding, Ji-Rong Wen, Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningSiqing Li, Liuyi Yao, Shanlei Mu, Wayne Xin Zhao, Yaliang Li, Tonglei Guo, Bolin Ding, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2021. Debiasing Learning based Cross-domain Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 3190-3199.

Towards personalized fairness based on causal notion. Yunqi Li, Hanxiong Chen, Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, Yongfeng Zhang, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalYunqi Li, Hanxiong Chen, Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Towards personalized fairness based on causal notion. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 1054-1063.

Modeling user exposure in recommendation. Dawen Liang, Laurent Charlin, James Mcinerney, David M Blei, Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web. the 25th International Conference on World Wide WebDawen Liang, Laurent Charlin, James McInerney, and David M Blei. 2016. Modeling user exposure in recommendation. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web. 951-961.

Statistical analysis with missing data. J A Roderick, Little, Donald B Rubin, John Wiley & Sons793Roderick JA Little and Donald B Rubin. 2019. Statistical analysis with missing data. Vol. 793. John Wiley & Sons.

Modeling Persuasion Factor of User Decision for Recommendation. Chang Liu, Chen Gao, Yuan Yuan, Chen Bai, Lingrui Luo, Xiaoyi Du, Xinlei Shi, Hengliang Luo, Depeng Jin, Yong Li, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningChang Liu, Chen Gao, Yuan Yuan, Chen Bai, Lingrui Luo, Xiaoyi Du, Xinlei Shi, Hengliang Luo, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. 2022. Modeling Persuasion Factor of User Decision for Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 3366-3376.

Xiuqiang He, Weike Pan, and Zhong Ming. 2020. A general knowledge distillation framework for counterfactual recommendation via uniform data. Dugang Liu, Pengxiang Cheng, Zhenhua Dong, Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalDugang Liu, Pengxiang Cheng, Zhenhua Dong, Xiuqiang He, Weike Pan, and Zhong Ming. 2020. A general knowledge distillation framework for counterfactual recommendation via uniform data. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 831-840.

Xiuqiang He, Weike Pan, and Zhong Ming. 2021. Mitigating confounding bias in recommendation via information bottleneck. Dugang Liu, Pengxiang Cheng, Hong Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, Fifteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. Dugang Liu, Pengxiang Cheng, Hong Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, Xiuqiang He, Weike Pan, and Zhong Ming. 2021. Mitigating confounding bias in recommendation via information bottleneck. In Fifteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 351-360.

STAMP: short-term attention/memory priority model for session-based recommendation. Qiao Liu, Yifu Zeng, Refuoe Mokhosi, Haibin Zhang, Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningQiao Liu, Yifu Zeng, Refuoe Mokhosi, and Haibin Zhang. 2018. STAMP: short-term attention/memory priority model for session-based recommen- dation. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 1831-1839.

Practical Counterfactual Policy Learning for Top-K Recommendations. Yaxu Liu, Jui-Nan Yen, Bowen Yuan, Rundong Shi, Peng Yan, Chih-Jen Lin, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningYaxu Liu, Jui-Nan Yen, Bowen Yuan, Rundong Shi, Peng Yan, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2022. Practical Counterfactual Policy Learning for Top-K Recommendations. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1141-1151.

Impact of informational factors on online recommendation credibility: The moderating role of source credibility. Chuan Luo, Xin Robert Luo, Laurie Schatzberg, Choon Ling Sia, Decision Support Systems. 56Chuan Luo, Xin Robert Luo, Laurie Schatzberg, and Choon Ling Sia. 2013. Impact of informational factors on online recommendation credibility: The moderating role of source credibility. Decision Support Systems 56 (2013), 92-102.

Collaborative prediction and ranking with non-random missing data. M Benjamin, Richard S Marlin, Zemel, Proceedings of the third ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the third ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsBenjamin M Marlin and Richard S Zemel. 2009. Collaborative prediction and ranking with non-random missing data. In Proceedings of the third ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 5-12.

Counterfactual evaluation of slate recommendations with sequential reward interactions. James Mcinerney, Brian Brost, Praveen Chandar, Rishabh Mehrotra, Benjamin Carterette, Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningJames McInerney, Brian Brost, Praveen Chandar, Rishabh Mehrotra, and Benjamin Carterette. 2020. Counterfactual evaluation of slate recommen- dations with sequential reward interactions. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 1779-1788.

Inferring the Causal Impact of New Track Releases on Music Recommendation Platforms through Counterfactual Predictions. Rishabh Mehrotra, Prasanta Bhattacharya, Mounia Lalmas, Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. Rishabh Mehrotra, Prasanta Bhattacharya, and Mounia Lalmas. 2020. Inferring the Causal Impact of New Track Releases on Music Recommendation Platforms through Counterfactual Predictions. In Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 687-691.

Towards a fair marketplace: Counterfactual evaluation of the trade-off between relevance, fairness & satisfaction in recommendation systems. Rishabh Mehrotra, James Mcinerney, Hugues Bouchard, Mounia Lalmas, Fernando Diaz, Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge ManagementRishabh Mehrotra, James McInerney, Hugues Bouchard, Mounia Lalmas, and Fernando Diaz. 2018. Towards a fair marketplace: Counterfactual evaluation of the trade-off between relevance, fairness & satisfaction in recommendation systems. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 2243-2251.

Graphical models for processing missing data. Karthika Mohan, Judea Pearl, J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 116Karthika Mohan and Judea Pearl. 2021. Graphical models for processing missing data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 116, 534 (2021), 1023-1037.

ASPIRE: Air Shipping Recommendation for E-commerce Products via Causal Inference Framework. Abhirup Mondal, Anirban Majumder, Vineet Chaoji, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningAbhirup Mondal, Anirban Majumder, and Vineet Chaoji. 2022. ASPIRE: Air Shipping Recommendation for E-commerce Products via Causal Inference Framework. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 3584-3592.

arXiv:2204.01543MZ Naser. 2022. Causality, Causal Discovery, and Causal Inference in Structural Engineering. arXiv preprintMZ Naser. 2022. Causality, Causal Discovery, and Causal Inference in Structural Engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01543 (2022).

Uplift Modeling with ROC: An SRL Case Study. Houssam Nassif, Finn Kuusisto, Elizabeth S Burnside, Jude W Shavlik, ILP (late breaking papers). Citeseer. Houssam Nassif, Finn Kuusisto, Elizabeth S Burnside, and Jude W Shavlik. 2013. Uplift Modeling with ROC: An SRL Case Study.. In ILP (late breaking papers). Citeseer, 40-45.

The filter bubble: How the new personalized web is changing what we read and how we think. Eli Pariser, PenguinEli Pariser. 2011. The filter bubble: How the new personalized web is changing what we read and how we think. Penguin.

Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Judea Pearl, Morgan kaufmannJudea Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan kaufmann.

Causal diagrams for empirical research. Judea Pearl, Biometrika. 82Judea Pearl. 1995. Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika 82, 4 (1995), 669-688.

Causality (2 ed.). Judea Pearl, 10.1017/CBO9780511803161Cambridge University PressJudea Pearl. 2009. Causality (2 ed.). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511803161

Causal inference. Judea Pearl, Causality: Objectives and Assessment. Judea Pearl. 2010. Causal inference. Causality: Objectives and Assessment (2010), 39-58.

Theoretical Impediments to Machine Learning With Seven Sparks from the Causal Revolution. Judea Pearl, Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningJudea Pearl. 2018. Theoretical Impediments to Machine Learning With Seven Sparks from the Causal Revolution. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 3-3.

Direct and indirect effects. Judea Pearl, Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The Works of Judea Pearl. Judea Pearl. 2022. Direct and indirect effects. In Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The Works of Judea Pearl. 373-392.

The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect. Judea Pearl, Dana Mackenzie, Basic Books, Inc., USA1st ed.Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie. 2018. The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect (1st ed.). Basic Books, Inc., USA.

Elements of causal inference: foundations and learning algorithms. Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, Bernhard Schölkopf, The MIT PressJonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2017. Elements of causal inference: foundations and learning algorithms. The MIT Press.

Ranking with non-random missing ratings: influence of popularity and positivity on evaluation metrics. Bruno Pradel, Nicolas Usunier, Patrick Gallinari, Proceedings of the sixth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the sixth ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsBruno Pradel, Nicolas Usunier, and Patrick Gallinari. 2012. Ranking with non-random missing ratings: influence of popularity and positivity on evaluation metrics. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 147-154.

Using control groups to target on predicted lift: Building and assessing uplift model. Nicholas Radcliffe, Direct Marketing Analytics Journal. Nicholas Radcliffe. 2007. Using control groups to target on predicted lift: Building and assessing uplift model. Direct Marketing Analytics Journal (2007), 14-21.

Real-world uplift modelling with significance-based uplift trees. J Nicholas, Patrick D Radcliffe, Surry, TR-2011-1Stochastic SolutionsWhite PaperNicholas J Radcliffe and Patrick D Surry. 2011. Real-world uplift modelling with significance-based uplift trees. White Paper TR-2011-1, Stochastic Solutions (2011), 1-33.

DeSCoVeR: Debiased Semantic Context Prior for Venue Recommendation. Sailaja Rajanala, Arghya Pal, Manish Singh, C-W Raphaël, Koksheik Phan, Wong, Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalSailaja Rajanala, Arghya Pal, Manish Singh, Raphaël C-W Phan, and KokSheik Wong. 2022. DeSCoVeR: Debiased Semantic Context Prior for Venue Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2456-2461.

Factorization machines. Steffen Rendle, 2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. IEEESteffen Rendle. 2010. Factorization machines. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. IEEE, 995-1000.

Recommender systems: introduction and challenges. Francesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, Bracha Shapira, Recommender systems handbook. SpringerFrancesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, and Bracha Shapira. 2015. Recommender systems: introduction and challenges. In Recommender systems handbook. Springer, 1-34.

Model-based direct adjustment. Paul R Rosenbaum, Journal of the American statistical Association. 82Paul R Rosenbaum. 1987. Model-based direct adjustment. Journal of the American statistical Association 82, 398 (1987), 387-394.

The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. R Paul, Donald B Rosenbaum, Rubin, Biometrika. 70Paul R Rosenbaum and Donald B Rubin. 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70, 1 (1983), 41-55.

Predicting counterfactuals from large historical data and small randomized trials. Nir Rosenfeld, Yishay Mansour, Elad Yom-Tov, Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion. the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web CompanionNir Rosenfeld, Yishay Mansour, and Elad Yom-Tov. 2017. Predicting counterfactuals from large historical data and small randomized trials. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion. 602-609.

Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized Studies. Donald B Rubin, Journal of Educational Psychology. 66Donald B Rubin. 1974. Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized Studies. Journal of Educational Psychology 66, 5 (1974), 688-701.

Inference and missing data. Donald B Rubin, Biometrika. 63Donald B Rubin. 1976. Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63, 3 (1976), 581-592.

Formal mode of statistical inference for causal effects. Donald B Rubin, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference. 25Donald B Rubin. 1990. Formal mode of statistical inference for causal effects. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 25, 3 (1990), 279-292.

Asymmetric tri-training for debiasing missing-not-at-random explicit feedback. Yuta Saito, Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalYuta Saito. 2020. Asymmetric tri-training for debiasing missing-not-at-random explicit feedback. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 309-318.

Counterfactual learning and evaluation for recommender systems: Foundations, implementations, and recent advances. Yuta Saito, Thorsten Joachims, Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsYuta Saito and Thorsten Joachims. 2021. Counterfactual learning and evaluation for recommender systems: Foundations, implementations, and recent advances. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 828-830.

Off-Policy Evaluation for Large Action Spaces via Embeddings. Yuta Saito, Thorsten Joachims, International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. Yuta Saito and Thorsten Joachims. 2022. Off-Policy Evaluation for Large Action Spaces via Embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 19089-19122.

Evaluating the Robustness of Off-Policy Evaluation. Yuta Saito, Takuma Udagawa, Haruka Kiyohara, Kazuki Mogi, Yusuke Narita, Kei Tateno, 10.1145/3460231.3474245Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsAmsterdam, Netherlands; New York, NY, USAAssociation for Computing MachineryRecSys '21)Yuta Saito, Takuma Udagawa, Haruka Kiyohara, Kazuki Mogi, Yusuke Narita, and Kei Tateno. 2021. Evaluating the Robustness of Off-Policy Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (Amsterdam, Netherlands) (RecSys '21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 114-123. https://doi.org/10.1145/3460231.3474245

Unbiased recommender learning from missing-not-atrandom implicit feedback. Yuta Saito, Suguru Yaginuma, Yuta Nishino, Hayato Sakata, Kazuhide Nakata, Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningYuta Saito, Suguru Yaginuma, Yuta Nishino, Hayato Sakata, and Kazuhide Nakata. 2020. Unbiased recommender learning from missing-not-at- random implicit feedback. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 501-509.

Online Evaluation Methods for the Causal Effect of Recommendations. Masahiro Sato, Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsMasahiro Sato. 2021. Online Evaluation Methods for the Causal Effect of Recommendations. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 96-101.

Uplift-based evaluation and optimization of recommenders. Masahiro Sato, Janmajay Singh, Sho Takemori, Takashi Sonoda, Qian Zhang, Tomoko Ohkuma, Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender SystemsMasahiro Sato, Janmajay Singh, Sho Takemori, Takashi Sonoda, Qian Zhang, and Tomoko Ohkuma. 2019. Uplift-based evaluation and optimization of recommenders. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 296-304.

Unbiased learning for the causal effect of recommendation. Masahiro Sato, Sho Takemori, Janmajay Singh, Tomoko Ohkuma, Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. Masahiro Sato, Sho Takemori, Janmajay Singh, and Tomoko Ohkuma. 2020. Unbiased learning for the causal effect of recommendation. In Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 378-387.

Econometric methods for causal evaluation of education policies and practices: a non-technical guide. Martin Schlotter, Guido Schwerdt, Ludger Woessmann, Education Economics. 19Martin Schlotter, Guido Schwerdt, and Ludger Woessmann. 2011. Econometric methods for causal evaluation of education policies and practices: a non-technical guide. Education Economics 19, 2 (2011), 109-137.

Recommendations as treatments: Debiasing learning and evaluation. Tobias Schnabel, Adith Swaminathan, Ashudeep Singh, Navin Chandak, Thorsten Joachims, PMLRInternational Conference on Machine Learning. Tobias Schnabel, Adith Swaminathan, Ashudeep Singh, Navin Chandak, and Thorsten Joachims. 2016. Recommendations as treatments: Debiasing learning and evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 1670-1679.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, Oleg Klimov, arXiv:1707.06347Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprintJohn Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 (2017).

Can we learn individual-level treatment policies from clinical data?. Uri Shalit, Biostatistics. 21Uri Shalit. 2020. Can we learn individual-level treatment policies from clinical data? Biostatistics 21, 2 (2020), 359-362.

Environment reconstruction with hidden confounders for reinforcement learning based recommendation. Wenjie Shang, Yang Yu, Qingyang Li, Zhiwei Qin, Yiping Meng, Jieping Ye, Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningWenjie Shang, Yang Yu, Qingyang Li, Zhiwei Qin, Yiping Meng, and Jieping Ye. 2019. Environment reconstruction with hidden confounders for reinforcement learning based recommendation. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 566-576.

Estimating the causal impact of recommendation systems from observational data. Amit Sharma, Jake M Hofman, Duncan J Watts, Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and ComputationAmit Sharma, Jake M Hofman, and Duncan J Watts. 2015. Estimating the causal impact of recommendation systems from observational data. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. 453-470.

A survey of heterogeneous information network analysis. Chuan Shi, Yitong Li, Jiawei Zhang, Yizhou Sun, S Yu Philip, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 29Chuan Shi, Yitong Li, Jiawei Zhang, Yizhou Sun, and S Yu Philip. 2016. A survey of heterogeneous information network analysis. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 29, 1 (2016), 17-37.

A Model-Agnostic Causal Learning Framework for Recommendation using Search Data. Zihua Si, Xueran Han, Xiao Zhang, Jun Xu, Yue Yin, Yang Song, Ji-Rong Wen, Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. the ACM Web Conference 2022Zihua Si, Xueran Han, Xiao Zhang, Jun Xu, Yue Yin, Yang Song, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2022. A Model-Agnostic Causal Learning Framework for Recommendation using Search Data. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. 224-233.

Learning structured output representation using deep conditional generative models. Kihyuk Sohn, Xinchen Yan, Honglak Lee, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems2Kihyuk Sohn, Xinchen Yan, and Honglak Lee. 2015. Learning structured output representation using deep conditional generative models. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems-Volume 2. 3483-3491.

Wenzhuo Song, Shoujin Wang, Yan Wang, Kunpeng Liu, Xueyan Liu, Minghao Yin, arXiv:2301.13364A Counterfactual Collaborative Session-based Recommender System. arXiv preprintWenzhuo Song, Shoujin Wang, Yan Wang, Kunpeng Liu, Xueyan Liu, and Minghao Yin. 2023. A Counterfactual Collaborative Session-based Recommender System. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13364 (2023).

On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments. Essay on principles. Section 9. Jerzy Splawa-Neyman, M Dorota, T P Dabrowska, Speed, Statist. Sci. Jerzy Splawa-Neyman, Dorota M Dabrowska, and TP Speed. 1990. On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments. Essay on principles. Section 9. Statist. Sci. (1990), 465-472.

Training and testing of recommender systems on data missing not at random. Harald Steck, Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningHarald Steck. 2010. Training and testing of recommender systems on data missing not at random. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 713-722.

Doubly robust off-policy evaluation with shrinkage. Yi Su, Maria Dimakopoulou, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Miroslav Dudík, PMLRInternational Conference on Machine Learning. Yi Su, Maria Dimakopoulou, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Miroslav Dudík. 2020. Doubly robust off-policy evaluation with shrinkage. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 9167-9176.

The self-normalized estimator for counterfactual learning. Adith Swaminathan, Thorsten Joachims, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems2Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. 2015. The self-normalized estimator for counterfactual learning. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems-Volume 2. 3231-3239.

Counterfactual explainable recommendation. Juntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, Yunqi Li, Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementJuntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, Yunqi Li, Xu Chen, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Counterfactual explainable recommendation. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 1784-1793.

Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforcement learning. Philip Thomas, Emma Brunskill, International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. Philip Thomas and Emma Brunskill. 2016. Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2139-2148.

Recommending the Most Effective Intervention to Improve Employment for Job Seekers with Disability. Thuc Duy Ha Xuan Tran, Jiuyong Le, Lin Li, Jixue Liu, Yanchang Liu, Tony Zhao, Waters, Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningHa Xuan Tran, Thuc Duy Le, Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, Jixue Liu, Yanchang Zhao, and Tony Waters. 2021. Recommending the Most Effective Intervention to Improve Employment for Job Seekers with Disability. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 3616-3626.

What is the Most Effective Intervention to Increase Job Retention for this Disabled Worker. Thuc Duy Ha Xuan Tran, Jiuyong Le, Lin Li, Jixue Liu, Yanchang Liu, Tony Zhao, Waters, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningHa Xuan Tran, Thuc Duy Le, Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, Jixue Liu, Yanchang Zhao, and Tony Waters. 2022. What is the Most Effective Intervention to Increase Job Retention for this Disabled Worker?. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 3981-3991.

Bayesian statistics and modelling. Sarah Rens Van De Schoot, Ruth Depaoli, Bianca King, Kaspar Kramer, Märtens, G Mahlet, Marina Tadesse, Andrew Vannucci, Duco Gelman, Joukje Veen, Willemsen, Nature Reviews Methods Primers. 1Rens van de Schoot, Sarah Depaoli, Ruth King, Bianca Kramer, Kaspar Märtens, Mahlet G Tadesse, Marina Vannucci, Andrew Gelman, Duco Veen, Joukje Willemsen, et al. 2021. Bayesian statistics and modelling. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 1, 1 (2021), 1-26.

Collaborative filtering with social exposure: A modular approach to social recommendation. Menghan Wang, Xiaolin Zheng, Yang Yang, Kun Zhang, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence32Menghan Wang, Xiaolin Zheng, Yang Yang, and Kun Zhang. 2018. Collaborative filtering with social exposure: A modular approach to social recommendation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 32.

Out-of-distribution Generalization with Causal Invariant Transformations. Ruoyu Wang, Mingyang Yi, Zhitang Chen, Shengyu Zhu, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern RecognitionRuoyu Wang, Mingyang Yi, Zhitang Chen, and Shengyu Zhu. 2022. Out-of-distribution Generalization with Causal Invariant Transformations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 375-385.

Deconfounded recommendation for alleviating bias amplification. Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Xiang Wang, Tat-Seng Chua, Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningWenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Xiang Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. Deconfounded recommendation for alleviating bias amplification. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 1717-1725.

Clicks can be cheating: Counterfactual recommendation for mitigating clickbait issue. Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, Tat-Seng Chua, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalWenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. Clicks can be cheating: Counterfactual recommendation for mitigating clickbait issue. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 1288-1297.

Xiangnan He, Min Lin, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2022. Causal Representation Learning for Out-of-Distribution Recommendation. Wenjie Wang, Xinyu Lin, Fuli Feng, Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. the ACM Web Conference 2022Wenjie Wang, Xinyu Lin, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Min Lin, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2022. Causal Representation Learning for Out-of-Distribution Recommendation. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022. 3562-3571.

Doubly robust joint learning for recommendation on data missing not at random. Xiaojie Wang, Rui Zhang, Yu Sun, Jianzhong Qi, PMLRInternational Conference on Machine Learning. Xiaojie Wang, Rui Zhang, Yu Sun, and Jianzhong Qi. 2019. Doubly robust joint learning for recommendation on data missing not at random. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 6638-6647.

Causal inference for recommender systems. Yixin Wang, Dawen Liang, Laurent Charlin, David M Blei, Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. Yixin Wang, Dawen Liang, Laurent Charlin, and David M Blei. 2020. Causal inference for recommender systems. In Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 426-431.

Optimal and adaptive off-policy evaluation in contextual bandits. Yu-Xiang Wang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudık, PMLRInternational Conference on Machine Learning. Yu-Xiang Wang, Alekh Agarwal, and Miroslav Dudık. 2017. Optimal and adaptive off-policy evaluation in contextual bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 3589-3597.

Invariant Preference Learning for General Debiasing in Recommendation. Zimu Wang, Yue He, Jiashuo Liu, Wenchao Zou, S Philip, Peng Yu, Cui, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningZimu Wang, Yue He, Jiashuo Liu, Wenchao Zou, Philip S Yu, and Peng Cui. 2022. Invariant Preference Learning for General Debiasing in Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1969-1978.

Counterfactual data-augmented sequential recommendation. Zhenlei Wang, Jingsen Zhang, Hongteng Xu, Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Ji-Rong Wen, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalZhenlei Wang, Jingsen Zhang, Hongteng Xu, Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2021. Counterfactual data-augmented sequential recommendation. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 347-356.

Model-agnostic counterfactual reasoning for eliminating popularity bias in recommender system. Tianxin Wei, Fuli Feng, Jiawei Chen, Ziwei Wu, Jinfeng Yi, Xiangnan He, Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningTianxin Wei, Fuli Feng, Jiawei Chen, Ziwei Wu, Jinfeng Yi, and Xiangnan He. 2021. Model-agnostic counterfactual reasoning for eliminating popularity bias in recommender system. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 1791-1800.

Comprehensive fair meta-learned recommender system. Tianxin Wei, Jingrui He, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningTianxin Wei and Jingrui He. 2022. Comprehensive fair meta-learned recommender system. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1989-1999.

MMGCN: Multi-modal graph convolution network for personalized recommendation of micro-video. Yinwei Wei, Xiang Wang, Liqiang Nie, Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multimedia. the 27th ACM International Conference on MultimediaXiangnan He, Richang Hong, and Tat-Seng ChuaYinwei Wei, Xiang Wang, Liqiang Nie, Xiangnan He, Richang Hong, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2019. MMGCN: Multi-modal graph convolution network for personalized recommendation of micro-video. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multimedia. 1437-1445.

Neural news recommendation with heterogeneous user behavior. Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Mingxiao An, Tao Qi, Jianqiang Huang, Yongfeng Huang, Xing Xie, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing. the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language ProcessingChuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Mingxiao An, Tao Qi, Jianqiang Huang, Yongfeng Huang, and Xing Xie. 2019. Neural news recommendation with heterogeneous user behavior. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). 4874-4883.

On the Opportunity of Causal Learning in Recommendation Systems: Foundation, Estimation, Prediction and Challenges. Peng Wu, Haoxuan Li, Yuhao Deng, Wenjie Hu, Quanyu Dai, Zhenhua Dong, Jie Sun, Rui Zhang, Xiao-Hua Zhou, International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Peng Wu, Haoxuan Li, Yuhao Deng, Wenjie Hu, Quanyu Dai, Zhenhua Dong, Jie Sun, Rui Zhang, and Xiao-Hua Zhou. 2022. On the Opportunity of Causal Learning in Recommendation Systems: Foundation, Estimation, Prediction and Challenges. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Session-based recommendation with graph neural networks. Shu Wu, Yuyuan Tang, Yanqiao Zhu, Liang Wang, Xing Xie, Tieniu Tan, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence33Shu Wu, Yuyuan Tang, Yanqiao Zhu, Liang Wang, Xing Xie, and Tieniu Tan. 2019. Session-based recommendation with graph neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33. 346-353.

Unbiased learning to rank in feeds recommendation. Xinwei Wu, Hechang Chen, Jiashu Zhao, Li He, Dawei Yin, Yi Chang, Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningXinwei Wu, Hechang Chen, Jiashu Zhao, Li He, Dawei Yin, and Yi Chang. 2021. Unbiased learning to rank in feeds recommendation. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 490-498.

Towards unbiased and robust causal ranking for recommender systems. Teng Xiao, Suhang Wang, Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data MiningTeng Xiao and Suhang Wang. 2022. Towards unbiased and robust causal ranking for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 1158-1167.

Bin Cui, and Bolin Ding. 2021. CausCF: Causal Collaborative Filtering for Recommendation Effect Estimation. Xu Xie, Zhaoyang Liu, Shiwen Wu, Fei Sun, Cihang Liu, Jiawei Chen, Jinyang Gao, Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementXu Xie, Zhaoyang Liu, Shiwen Wu, Fei Sun, Cihang Liu, Jiawei Chen, Jinyang Gao, Bin Cui, and Bolin Ding. 2021. CausCF: Causal Collaborative Filtering for Recommendation Effect Estimation. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 4253-4263.

Counterfactual Review-based Recommendation. Kun Xiong, Wenwen Ye, Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang Zhang, Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementKun Xiong, Wenwen Ye, Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang Zhang, and Jun Zhou. 2021. Counterfactual Review-based Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 2231-2240.

Adversarial counterfactual learning and evaluation for recommender system. Da Xu, Chuanwei Ruan, Evren Korpeoglu, Sushant Kumar, Kannan Achan, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing SystemsDa Xu, Chuanwei Ruan, Evren Korpeoglu, Sushant Kumar, and Kannan Achan. 2020. Adversarial counterfactual learning and evaluation for recommender system. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 13515-13526.

Shuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, Yunqi Li, Zuohui Fu, Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, arXiv:2102.01868Causal collaborative filtering. arXiv preprintShuyuan Xu, Yingqiang Ge, Yunqi Li, Zuohui Fu, Xu Chen, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2021. Causal collaborative filtering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01868 (2021).

Dynamic Causal Collaborative Filtering. Shuyuan Xu, Juntao Tan, Zuohui Fu, Jianchao Ji, Shelby Heinecke, Yongfeng Zhang, Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementShuyuan Xu, Juntao Tan, Zuohui Fu, Jianchao Ji, Shelby Heinecke, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2022. Dynamic Causal Collaborative Filtering. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 2301-2310.

Uplift modeling from separate labels. Florian Ikko Yamane, Jamal Yger, Masashi Atif, Sugiyama, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 31Ikko Yamane, Florian Yger, Jamal Atif, and Masashi Sugiyama. 2018. Uplift modeling from separate labels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 (2018).

Top-N Recommendation with Counterfactual User Preference Simulation. Mengyue Yang, Quanyu Dai, Zhenhua Dong, Xu Chen, Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementMengyue Yang, Quanyu Dai, Zhenhua Dong, Xu Chen, Xiuqiang He, and Jun Wang. 2021. Top-N Recommendation with Counterfactual User Preference Simulation. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 2342-2351.

Device-cloud Collaborative Recommendation via Meta Controller. Jiangchao Yao, Feng Wang, Xichen Ding, Shaohu Chen, Bo Han, Jingren Zhou, Hongxia Yang, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningJiangchao Yao, Feng Wang, Xichen Ding, Shaohu Chen, Bo Han, Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. 2022. Device-cloud Collaborative Recommendation via Meta Controller. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 4353-4362.

Jing Gao, and Aidong Zhang. 2021. A survey on causal inference. Liuyi Yao, Zhixuan Chu, Sheng Li, Yaliang Li, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD). 15Liuyi Yao, Zhixuan Chu, Sheng Li, Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, and Aidong Zhang. 2021. A survey on causal inference. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 15, 5 (2021), 1-46.

The identification and estimation of direct and indirect effects in A/B tests through causal mediation analysis. Xuan Yin, Liangjie Hong, Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningXuan Yin and Liangjie Hong. 2019. The identification and estimation of direct and indirect effects in A/B tests through causal mediation analysis. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 2989-2999.

Improving ad click prediction by considering non-displayed events. Jui-Yang Bowen Yuan, Meng-Yuan Hsia, Hong Yang, Chih-Yao Zhu, Zhenhua Chang, Chih-Jen Dong, Lin, Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge ManagementBowen Yuan, Jui-Yang Hsia, Meng-Yuan Yang, Hong Zhu, Chih-Yao Chang, Zhenhua Dong, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2019. Improving ad click prediction by considering non-displayed events. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 329-338.

One-class field-aware factorization machines for recommender systems with implicit feedbacks. Meng-Yuan Bowen Yuan, Jui-Yang Yang, Hong Hsia, Zhirong Zhu, Zhenhua Liu, Chih-Jen Dong, Lin, Bowen Yuan, Meng-Yuan Yang, Jui-Yang Hsia, Hong Zhu, Zhirong Liu, Zhenhua Dong, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2019. One-class field-aware factorization machines for recommender systems with implicit feedbacks. (2019).

Deconfounding Duration Bias in Watch-time Prediction for Video Recommendation. Ruohan Zhan, Changhua Pei, Qiang Su, Jianfeng Wen, Xueliang Wang, Guanyu Mu, Dong Zheng, Peng Jiang, Kun Gai, Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data MiningRuohan Zhan, Changhua Pei, Qiang Su, Jianfeng Wen, Xueliang Wang, Guanyu Mu, Dong Zheng, Peng Jiang, and Kun Gai. 2022. Deconfounding Duration Bias in Watch-time Prediction for Video Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 4472-4481.

Causally attentive collaborative filtering. Jingsen Zhang, Xu Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge ManagementJingsen Zhang, Xu Chen, and Wayne Xin Zhao. 2021. Causally attentive collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 3622-3626.

Causerec: Counterfactual user sequence synthesis for sequential recommendation. Shengyu Zhang, Dong Yao, Zhou Zhao, Tat-Seng Chua, Fei Wu, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalShengyu Zhang, Dong Yao, Zhou Zhao, Tat-Seng Chua, and Fei Wu. 2021. Causerec: Counterfactual user sequence synthesis for sequential recommendation. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 367-377.

Deep learning based recommender system: A survey and new perspectives. Shuai Zhang, Lina Yao, Aixin Sun, Yi Tay, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 52Shuai Zhang, Lina Yao, Aixin Sun, and Yi Tay. 2019. Deep learning based recommender system: A survey and new perspectives. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 52, 1 (2019), 1-38.

Large-scale causal approaches to debiasing post-click conversion rate estimation with multi-task learning. Wenhao Zhang, Wentian Bao, Xiao-Yang Liu, Keping Yang, Quan Lin, Hong Wen, Ramin Ramezani, Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020. The Web Conference 2020Wenhao Zhang, Wentian Bao, Xiao-Yang Liu, Keping Yang, Quan Lin, Hong Wen, and Ramin Ramezani. 2020. Large-scale causal approaches to debiasing post-click conversion rate estimation with multi-task learning. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020. 2775-2781.

A unified survey of treatment effect heterogeneity modelling and uplift modelling. Weijia Zhang, Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 54Weijia Zhang, Jiuyong Li, and Lin Liu. 2021. A unified survey of treatment effect heterogeneity modelling and uplift modelling. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 8 (2021), 1-36.

Causal neural fuzzy inference modeling of missing data in implicit recommendation system. Weina Zhang, Xingming Zhang, Dongpei Chen, Knowledge-Based Systems. 222106678Weina Zhang, Xingming Zhang, and Dongpei Chen. 2021. Causal neural fuzzy inference modeling of missing data in implicit recommendation system. Knowledge-Based Systems 222 (2021), 106678.

Counterfactual reward modification for streaming recommendation with delayed feedback. Xiao Zhang, Haonan Jia, Hanjing Su, Wenhan Wang, Jun Xu, Ji-Rong Wen, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalXiao Zhang, Haonan Jia, Hanjing Su, Wenhan Wang, Jun Xu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2021. Counterfactual reward modification for streaming recommendation with delayed feedback. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 41-50.

Chonggang Song, Guohui Ling, and Yongdong Zhang. 2021. Causal intervention for leveraging popularity bias in recommendation. Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Tianxin Wei, Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information RetrievalYang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Tianxin Wei, Chonggang Song, Guohui Ling, and Yongdong Zhang. 2021. Causal intervention for leveraging popularity bias in recommendation. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 11-20.

User Retention: A Causal Approach with Triple Task Modeling. Yang Zhang, Dong Wang, Qiang Li, Yue Shen, Ziqi Liu, Xiaodong Zeng, Zhiqiang Zhang, Jinjie Gu, Derek F Wong, IJCAI. Yang Zhang, Dong Wang, Qiang Li, Yue Shen, Ziqi Liu, Xiaodong Zeng, Zhiqiang Zhang, Jinjie Gu, and Derek F Wong. 2021. User Retention: A Causal Approach with Triple Task Modeling.. In IJCAI. 3399-3405.

Yang Zhang, Wenjie Wang, Peng Wu, Fuli Feng, and Xiangnan He. 2022. Causal Recommendation: Progresses and Future Directions. Yang Zhang, Wenjie Wang, Peng Wu, Fuli Feng, and Xiangnan He. 2022. Causal Recommendation: Progresses and Future Directions. https: //causalrec.github.io/

Disentangling user interest and conformity for recommendation with causal embedding. Yu Zheng, Chen Gao, Xiang Li, Xiangnan He, Yong Li, Depeng Jin, Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. the Web Conference 2021Yu Zheng, Chen Gao, Xiang Li, Xiangnan He, Yong Li, and Depeng Jin. 2021. Disentangling user interest and conformity for recommendation with causal embedding. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. 2980-2991.

Deep interest network for click-through rate prediction. Guorui Zhou, Xiaoqiang Zhu, Chenru Song, Ying Fan, Han Zhu, Xiao Ma, Yanghui Yan, Junqi Jin, Han Li, Kun Gai, Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data MiningGuorui Zhou, Xiaoqiang Zhu, Chenru Song, Ying Fan, Han Zhu, Xiao Ma, Yanghui Yan, Junqi Jin, Han Li, and Kun Gai. 2018. Deep interest network for click-through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 1059-1068.

Xinyuan Zhu, Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Xun Yang, arXiv:2205.07499Dingxian Wang, and Xiangnan He. 2022. Mitigating Hidden Confounding Effects for Causal Recommendation. arXiv preprintXinyuan Zhu, Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Xun Yang, Dingxian Wang, and Xiangnan He. 2022. Mitigating Hidden Confounding Effects for Causal Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07499 (2022).

Yaochen Zhu, Jing Ma, Jundong Li, arXiv:2301.00910Causal Inference in Recommender Systems: A Survey of Strategies for Bias Mitigation, Explanation, and Generalization. arXiv preprintYaochen Zhu, Jing Ma, and Jundong Li. 2023. Causal Inference in Recommender Systems: A Survey of Strategies for Bias Mitigation, Explanation, and Generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00910 (2023).