# The Application of Driver Models in the Safety Assessment of Autonomous Vehicles: A Survey

CorpusID: 257766793
 
tags: #Computer_Science, #Engineering

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/76bfcc3b962405341c76e4e5a581b6b05f974e31](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/76bfcc3b962405341c76e4e5a581b6b05f974e31)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Application of Driver Models in the Safety Assessment of Autonomous Vehicles: A Survey


Cheng Wang 
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
EH8 9ABEdinburghUnited Kingdom

Fengwei Guo 
Vehicle Safety Institute
Graz University of Technology
8010GrazAustria

Ruilin Yu 
State Key Laboratory of Automotive Simulation and Control
Jilin University
130025ChangchunChina

Luyao Wang 
State Key Laboratory of Automotive Simulation and Control
Jilin University
130025ChangchunChina

Yuxin Zhang 
State Key Laboratory of Automotive Simulation and Control
Jilin University
130025ChangchunChina

The Application of Driver Models in the Safety Assessment of Autonomous Vehicles: A Survey
A R T I C L E I N F OAutonomous vehicles Driver models Vehicle safety Verification & validation Safety assessment
A B S T R A C T Driver models play a vital role in developing and verifying autonomous vehicles (AVs). Previously, they are mainly applied in traffic flow simulation to model driver behavior. With the development of AVs, driver models attract much attention again due to their potential contributions to AV safety assessment. The simulation-based testing method is an effective measure to accelerate AV testing due to its safe and efficient characteristics. Nonetheless, realistic driver models are prerequisites for valid simulation results. Additionally, an AV is assumed to be at least as safe as a careful and competent driver, which is modeled by driver models as well. Therefore, driver models are essential for AV safety assessment from the current perspective. However, no comparison or discussion of driver models is available regarding their utility to AVs in the last five years despite their necessities in the release of AVs. This motivates us to present a comprehensive survey of driver models in the paper and compare their applicability. Requirements for driver models as applied to AV safety assessment are discussed. A summary of driver models for simulation-based testing and AV benchmarks is provided. Evaluation metrics are defined to compare their strength and weakness. Finally, potential gaps in existing driver models are identified, which provide direction for future work. This study gives related researchers especially regulators an overview and helps them to define appropriate driver models for AVs.

## Introduction

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) have been intensively studied in recent years. This significantly drives the evolution of vehicles to a smarter and more intelligent level. As an example of the achievements, Level 2 systems (SAE J3016, 2021) have been introduced into the market recently. Although drivers may not use level 2 systems as intended and thus additional risks emerge (Kim et al., 2022), the level 2 systems could in principle increase driving safety and comfort by controlling both the longitudinal and lateral motion of a vehicle. To further increase autonomy, Level 3 systems are supposed to be the goal for the next stage by shifting the entire dynamic driving tasks (DDT) to the systems themself in a predefined operational design domain (ODD) (SAE J3016, 2021). Before bringing Level 3 systems into the market, corresponding verification and validation (V&V) procedures are essential to prove their safety. However, numerous known and unknown unsafe scenarios exist due to the complexity of the open world and the system itself, as well as the increasing interaction with road users, the safety validation without an explicit stop criterion seems infeasible. Thus, the typical question "How safe is safe enough" (Liu et al., 2019a) arises.

To answer this question, defining safety goals for autonomous vehicles (AVs) becomes imperative. The safety goals differ across AV functions and systems. A safety goal in ISO 26262 (ISO, 2018) is defined as a low and acceptable residual risk for electric/electronic systems. In contrast, the accident rate per kilometer is described in ISO 21448 (ISO, 2022) as the validation target for AVs. Recently, the newly released EU regulation 2022/1426 (European Union, 2022) defines the accident rate per hour as the validation target to avoid the influence of speed. The accident rate of human drivers given a specific confidence interval is usually determined by statistic analysis (Oboril et al., 2022). In this way, the derived validation target is the goal that an AV is expected to achieve. A similar concept is proposed in (Kauffmann et al., 2022;ISO: ISO/TR 4804, 2020) where a positive risk balance (PRB) compared with human driving performance is suggested prior to the launch of AVs.

However, it is difficult to prove that any given system in each specific ODD has achieved the validation target. This is not only because finding the baseline accident rate for each specific ODD is a cumbersome task, but also because the amount of testing to validate the accident rates for any given system can be insurmountable (Kalra and Paddock, 2016). Further, large-scale testing in the actual ODD, before another type of validation, may put the rest of the traffic at unreasonable risk . Those are some of the issues raised, that make the use of driver models an important tool, for setting the requirements, and validating AV technologies. Motivated by this, the UNECE released regulation No.157 (UN ECE, 2021) for L3 Automated Lane Keeping Systems (ALKS) with a maximum driving speed of 130 km/h. This regulation suggests that an AV's performance shall be ensured at least to the level at which a careful and competent human driver could minimize the risks. To depict a competent and careful human driver, two driver performance models are introduced. They are a reaction time-based driver model (the Japanese driver model Figure 1: The application of driver models for AV safety verification. (a) represents the determination of reasonably foreseeable parameter ranges using collected data; (b) illustrates the collision avoidance capability of a driver model using adaptive sampling within the parameter ranges; (c) depicts an AV's collision avoidance capability using adaptive sampling within the parameter ranges. The AV is supposed to perform better than the reference driver model, as the comparison between (b) and (c) shows.

(Experts of Japan, 2020)) and a fuzzy safety model (FSM (Mattas et al., 2022)), respectively. Cut-in, cut-out, and deceleration scenarios with various parameter combinations are simulated to determine under which situation a collision occurs and which does not. The simulation results are used as a guide when testing AVs in the same test scenarios to identify whether AVs can avert some collisions or cause more collisions. Fig. 1 illustrates the concrete application process of a driver model to determine its collision avoidance capability. First, reasonably foreseeable parameter ranges (Nakamura et al., 2022) are determined by the collected data from the real world. They are defined as likely occurring scenarios within a specific ODD and period. According to risk acceptance and relevant exposure, the limits of reasonably foreseeable parameter ranges vary. Subsequently, sampling techniques such as uniform sampling and adaptive sampling (Wang et al., 2022b) are applied to generate concrete scenarios (Menzel et al., 2018) based on the parameter ranges and correlations. Finally, the collision avoidance capability of a driver model is determined by distinguishing collision and non-collision scenarios executed in simulations.

In addition, driver models are essential for the simulationbased method (Weber et al., 2020;Espineira et al., 2021) for AV V&V. In the simulation-based method, AVs are tested in a virtual environment with surrounding vehicles powered by driver models. Due to the huge test effort involved in the distance-based method, shifting V&V to simulations seems an inevitable choice to escape from the "approval trap". As indicated in (Wachenfeld and Winner, 2016), 6.62 billion test kilometers must be driven to prove that an AV is approximately twice as good as human-driven vehicles at a significant level of 5% according to the fatal accidents from the German Federal Statistical Office. If non-careful and competent drivers are excluded from the statistics, the test kilometers would further increase. With this fact in mind, projects like VV-Method (VVM, 2022) and SET Level (SET Level, 2022) are initiated to develop a seamless chain of reasoning for the proof of safety and a holistic tool chain. Both projects emphasize the importance of the simulationbased method.

Even in the simulation-based method, four subcategories (P.E.A.R.S. Consortium, 2021) are recommended by P.E.A.R.S (an open consortium to harmonize the prospective effectiveness assessment of active safety systems by simulation):

1. Direct usage of real-world cases (i.e., reconstructed crash or field data) without any changes. 2. Usage of real-world cases plus varying the initial values by means of distribution. 3. Deriving scenario mechanisms and distributions from real-world cases and selecting a low number of representative cases. 4. Deriving scenario mechanisms and distributions from real-world cases and applying sampling to generate multiple cases.

The last subcategory is suggested by Fries et al. (Fries et al., 2022) and Kaufmann et al. (Kauffmann et al., 2022) because this approach does not directly rely on real-world cases but establishes the link to them via distributions. Since no predefined trajectories are available, a driver model is required to update the state of surrounding vehicles with given initial states during the simulation. According to the level of detail to represent a traffic flow, microscopic, mesoscopic, and macroscopic simulation models are distinguished (Ferrara et al., 2018;Hoogendoorn and Bovy, 2001). In microscopic simulation, the space-time behavior of vehicles and drivers as well as their interactions are modeled at a high level of detail. Low dynamics are described in aggregate terms using probability distribution functions and the dynamics of these distributions are governed by individual drivers' behavior in mesoscopic simulation. In macroscopic simulation, traffic flow is represented as large road networks, measured in terms of characteristics such as speed, flow, and density. Apparently, driver models for AV safety assessment can be applied to microscopic and macroscopic simulations. Specifically, driver models are helpful to model the driving behavior of each individual vehicle to evaluate AV's performance to handle driving tasks in short-term concrete scenarios. Similarly, they can be applied in macroscopic simulation for analyzing the impact of AVs on traffic flow. As a result, driver models play a vital role in the safety assessment of AVs. Nevertheless, since AV certification is challenging and achieving PRB with driver models as references remain under exploration, little review regarding their application for AV verification is currently available despite the fact that the driver model has been studied for decades. In the recent five years, Singh and Kathuria (Singh and Kathuria, 2021) discussed the study of driving behavior using naturalistic driving data. Similarly, a review was conducted in (Gouribhatla and Pulugurtha, 2022) to analyze the effect of advanced features such as adaptive cruise control (ACC) on driver behavior. Park and Zahabi (Park and Zahabi, 2022) presented a review of human performance models focusing on human cognition and interactions with in-vehicle technology. A survey on car-following models was performed in (Matcha et al., 2020;Ahmed et al., 2021) without covering AV safety assessment, which is the same as the reviews made five years ago, e.g., Rahman et al. (Rahman et al., 2013) and Moridpour et al. (Moridpour et al., 2010) gave a review of lane-changing models in 2013 and 2012, respectively. Therefore, we are motivated to present a detailed and holistic review of currently available driver models in terms of their application for AV safety assessment by considering the following three research questions:

• RQ1: what are the requirements on the driver models for AV safety assessment?

• RQ2: what driver models are available in this context considering the requirements?

• RQ3: What kind of driver models are appropriate for what kind of AV safety assessment tasks?

To the best of the authors' knowledge, no survey on driver models focuses on their application in AV safety assessment. Additionally, lateral avoidance is also an important maneuver, apart from the models for longitudinal braking when confronting a critical situation, appropriate driver models for lateral avoidance are also included, whereas few surveys about driver models take this into account. After answering these three research questions, we discuss the current gaps and future research directions. Therefore, our contributions to the work are as follows:

• requirements on driver models for AV safety assessment are derived, which facilitates AV developers to develop their driver models for AV testing;

• a comprehensive survey of driver models is presented. This gives developers and regulators an overview of the current status;

• appropriate driver models for AV safety assessment are compared based on our proposed metrics. Thus, a selection of appropriate models for related researchers is possible by our comparison;

• a thoughtful discussion of possible driver models for AV certification is given to indicate future working directions.

Section 2 primarily addresses the requirements for driver models in terms of their application in AV safety assessment, as well as the scope of relevant driver models. Based on the determined scope, the driver models aiming at modeling driver behavior in simulations are elaborated in Section 3. Section 4 deals with the collision avoidance capability of driver models for benchmark applications. Subsequently, the applicability of driver models for AV safety assessment is highlighted in Section 5. Based on the analysis, a discussion is conducted and limitations are identified in Section 6. Lastly, the conclusion and future works are summarized in Section 7.


## Functions and requirements

In this section, we first explore where driver models are helpful for AV V&V. Based on this, we analyze what requirements those specific needs impose on the driver models. These derived requirements serve as a foundation for the detailed description of currently available driver models in the following sections and indicate potentially the current gaps for future research.


### Functions

Regarding the functions of driver models in AV V&V, simulation-based testing, and reference models are the two places where driver models are typically applied. Fig. 2 presents four different functions of driver models in simulationbased testing. Note, we assume a low penetration rate of AVs. The surrounding vehicles are driven by humans. Therefore, the driver models discussed in the paper focus on modeling human drivers' behavior rather than AVs'. In Fig. 2a, the trajectories of surrounding vehicles are predefined, which are typically retrieved from naturalistic driving data, traffic accident data, etc., or are generated by, for example, a constant velocity model given their initial states. This kind of driver model is simple but suffers from unrealistic driving behavior.

Many car-following models are proposed, such as the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) (Treiber et al., 2000), with the goal to enable longitudinal interaction between vehicles. As illustrated in Fig. 2b, the surrounding vehicle shows its "politeness" to enable the merging of the ego vehicle. By calibrating model parameters using naturalistic driving data, the driver models are statistically shown to be capable of recreating realistic traffic flow (Sharma et al., 2019). However, car-following models do not fully portray driving behavior in the real world. Necessary lateral driving behavior is also common in daily driving situations. Therefore, lane-changing models are studied, which further increase the interaction level. Fig. 2c shows an example, where the surrounding vehicle overtakes a slow leading vehicle. This makes the decision-making of the ego vehicle face a more realistic driving challenge, and thus more valuable to test AVs.

Recently, the stochasticity of information processing and situation understanding are considered when modeling driver models in order to simulate inattentive or distracted driving behaviors of human drivers (Kitajima et al., 2022). This driver model is categorized as cognitive models (Tattegrain-Veste et al., 1996), in which the internal processes and states that produce the behavior are modeled. Predictive models (Tattegrain-Veste et al., 1996), on the other hand, attempt to simulate the driver behavior without necessarily considering the underlying processes that lead to the behavior. The cause-and-effect relationships between the behavior and the external factors are ignored, which results in limited predictive capabilities (Siebke et al., 2022). Thus, cognitive models aim to model the entire reaction process of a human driver when dealing with driving situations.

In addition, driver models can also be utilized as a reference for AVs. For instance, an AV is to be blamed if it causes an accident, while a careful and competent driver does not in the same driving scenario (Koopman and Widen, 2023). To model a reference driver model for AVs, the safety performance of the driver model itself shall be convincing and acceptable. Otherwise, the safety performance of AVs may still be unsatisfying if a less competent driver model is taken as the reference. Since drivers' peak performance capabilities are usually elicited in critical scenarios, while routine scenarios elicit typical (not necessarily the best) behavior (Shinar and Oppenheim, 2011), a reference driver model is developed based on driver performance data in critical scenarios. An example is the Japanese driver model (Experts of Japan, 2020), where trained drivers are employed to conduct emergency braking experiments to determine model parameters. By analyzing the collision avoidance capability of the reference driver model in the test scenarios derived from an AV's ODD, we can determine whether the AV would avoid more collisions or even cause more collisions in the same test scenarios. While the test scenarios can be simulated by using driver models for simulations, a joint application of these two types of models is possible.

Consequently, driver models play a vital role in the safety assessment of AVs. In simulation-based testing, various driving scenarios can be simulated with the help of predictive driver models. In particular, driving behavior with "surprises" can be created by cognitive models, which could result in some known or even unknown critical scenarios for AVs. Thus, predictive and cognitive driver models are valuable to test AVs. In addition, driver models can also be regarded as references when assessing the safety performance of AVs, if the driver models could represent careful and competent human drivers. By comparing the safety performance of a reference driver model and an AV in the same test scenario, the safety evaluation of the AV is possible.


### Requirements

In order to provide sound and credible test results, a high-validity simulated environment is usually required. To this end, the driver behavior in simulation shall be humanlike to simulate realistic driving scenarios in the real world, and the interaction between various road users shall be reasonable. Therefore, interaction-aware and human-like driver models are demanded in simulation-based testing. We emphasize that human-like trajectories do not necessarily mean interaction-aware. For instance, a well-calibrated driver model could possibly deliver human-like trajectories but may fail to interact with surrounding vehicles properly. Note, when it comes to interaction, we refer to driver models' proactive reaction to other vehicles. How the AV will react to the surrounding vehicles is out of scope. Additionally, different driver characteristics are essential to be modeled because aggressive and defensive drivers behave differently and thus result in scenarios with different criticality. Finally, cognitive capabilities are essential for the driver models to consider the situation understanding process, with the aim to simulate possible human errors while during.

How to consider "careful" and "competent" is vital for the reference driver models. Careful can be interpreted as timely risk awareness. A careless driver may lead to a collision due to late risk recognition, which will make an AV risky based on this reference. In contrast, a too-careful driver could be too conservative, which undermines the mobility of an AV. Therefore, timely risk-aware decision-making is fundamental for reference driver models. Competent, on the other hand, focuses on excellent driving capability. While driving capability is not fully demonstrated in nominal scenarios, driving performance in critical scenarios is a more appropriate measure. Nevertheless, the driving capability among drivers varies, for instance, the driving performance of a less skilled driver in critical scenarios could still be an unsatisfying reference for AVs. Hence, the experiment data from skilled and experienced drivers to build a reference driver model is more compelling. As a result, capability dominant driver models are needed to articulate competence. Fig. 3 shows the two fundamental requirements of a careful and competent driver when dealing with critical scenarios.


### Classification

The derived requirements provide a solid basis for exploring existing driver models and identifying their gaps. The identified driver models by the authors to cover the aforementioned requirements are categorized in Fig. 4.

With respect to driver models for simulations, we categorize the identified driver models for their suitability to meet the requirements of interaction-aware, human-like, driver characteristics and cognitive capabilities. This includes existing car-following, lane-changing, and cognitive models. The human cognition process is included in cognitive models to model driving errors, whereas car-following and lane-changing models belong to predictive models by focusing on the driver behavior itself. For each type of model, we further classify the models according to their model characteristics.

In addition to driver models for simulation, driver models as references are elaborated in terms of their risk-aware considerations and driving capability modeling processes. These models attempt to model a driver's reaction to an imminent situation. Representative examples from this category are the Japanese model (Experts of Japan, 2020) defined in UNECE Regulation No.157 (UN ECE, 2021). The reference driver models in the regulation consider braking as the strategy to avoid collisions. As an extension, reference driver models that include evasive steering maneuvers are essential, as the evasive steering maneuver is also a decent action for collision avoidance if free space is available on the side (Eckert et al., 2011). Furthermore, simultaneous steering and braking maneuvers can reduce the braking distance further if a collision is inevitable (Choi and Kang, 2017a). Therefore, we review not only braking models, but also steering models and braking & steering models in the paper. Consequently, the review benefits developers and regulators to develop a comprehensive driver model for AV safety verification. For each possible maneuver, we further divide them into different categories considering their modeling processes.


## Driver models for simulations

In this section, we present existing driver models for simulation-based testing and describe which requirements discussed in Section 2.2 are considered in the models. In particular, car-following and lane-changing models focusing on different types of interaction are distinguished.


### Car-following models

Car-following models are common driver models for modeling longitudinal interaction. Various car-following models, such as Gipps model (Gipps, 1981), Newell model (Newell, 2002), and Optimal Velocity (OV) model (Bando et al., 1995) have been developed since the Gazis-Herman-Rothery (GHR) model (Chandler et al., 1958) was proposed. To simulate the interaction, stimulus and reaction are considered in car-following models. The relative state between the preceding and following vehicles is usually used as a stimulus, while the deceleration of the following vehicle is the reaction. For instance, the GHR model (Chandler et al., 1958) utilizes relative speed as a stimulus item, while the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) model (Treiber et al., 2000) does not define an explicit stimulus item, but uses the state of the preceding vehicle directly. Unlike the IDM model, psychological-physical carfollowing models aim to define a psychologically safe distance as a stimulus account. For instance, Wiedemann introduced the term "perceptual threshold" to define the minimum value of a stimulus that the driver can perceive and respond to (Wiedemann, 1974). Once the following driver believes that the relative distance to the preceding vehicle is less than the psychological safety distance, the driver starts to slow down. Conversely, the driver accelerates to reach the psychological safety distance. Considering the way the brain estimates the collision time, Andersen et al. (Andersen and Sauer, 2007) proposed the Driving-by-Visual-Angle (DVA) model, which uses the visual angle and its change rate as variables for the driver to make acceleration/deceleration decisions.

However, it is difficult for psychological-physical models to find a balance between simplicity and performance due to the complex perceptual processes of the drivers. Cellular Automaton (CA) is a promising approach to address this challenge. It is defined as a dynamical system that evolves in discrete time dimensions according to certain local rules in a cellular space composed of cells with discrete and finite states. The empty cells in front and the current velocity of the following vehicle are coded as stimuli. Since the model developed by Nagel and Schreckenberg (NaSch) (Nagel and Schreckenberg, 1992), many improved CA-related driver  (Gipps, 1981;Treiber et al., 2000;Jia et al., 2001;Xu et al., 2007) (Gipps, 1986;Toledo et al., 2003;Schakel et al., Figure 4: The review scope of the paper and the classification of driver models. Car-following, lane-changing, and cognitive models are discussed in terms of their applications in testing AVs in simulations. For driver models as references, braking, steering, and a combination of both for collision avoidance are elaborated.

models are proposed such as considering driver characteristics (Zamith et al., 2015;Malecki et al., 2023).

With the advent of big data and the rapid improvement of data collection technology, high-precision and largesample trajectory data can be obtained easily, stimulating the development of data-driven car-following models. Instead of adhering to various theoretical assumptions and pursuing mathematical derivations in a strict sense, data-driven models use non-parametric methods to mine the intrinsic information of trajectory data and build car-following models with high prediction accuracy. For instance, backpropagation (BP) neural networks (Jia et al., 2001), radial basis function neural network (Xu et al., 2007;Zhou et al., 2009), and fuzzy neural networks (Huang and Ren, 1999;Ma, 2006;Li et al., 2007) were proposed to model car-following behavior. However, the generalization of these models in unseen situations is usually limited. Support vector regression is a regression algorithm based on the support vector machine framework. It can be used for regression fitting of trajectory data. This method follows the principle of structural risk minimization and theoretically has stronger data learning and generalization abilities than artificial neural networks. An exemplary application is the model studied by Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2018). Based on the assumption that drivers tend to exhibit similar driving behaviors when facing the same driving scenario, He et al. (He et al., 2015) searched the K similar historical driving scenarios for the most likely driving behaviors, which were then used as model output to generate a KNN (K-nearest-neighbor) car-following model. Compared to other data-driven models with opaque structures, the KNN model has a clearer modeling structure and is more understandable.

Deep learning (DL) models, compared to traditional neural network models, usually have multiple hidden layers and a correspondingly huge number of neuronal connection weights, thresholds, and other parameters. Various DLbased car-following models have been concentrated in the past five years (Zhou et al., 2017;Wang et al., 2018b;Lee et al., 2019;Liu et al., 2022). For instance, both Zhou et al. (Zhou et al., 2017) and Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2018b) proposed car-following models based on recurrent neural networks (RNN) by taking continuous historical time series and vehicle dynamic data as input, while the output is the desired speed for the following vehicle. The results show that their models perform well in predicting the trajectory of the following vehicle.

However, the high accuracy of DL models comes at the expense of data dependency, high computational costs, and poor generalization. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) addresses these issues to some extent. Zhu et al. (Zhu et al., 2018) used the difference between simulated speed and observed speed as the reward function and considered a 1 s reaction delay to build a car-following model. The model reproduced human-like car-following behavior and showed better generalization ability, as the agent learned decisionmaking mechanisms from the training data, rather than parameter estimation through data fitting. As an extension, Hart et al. (Hart et al., 2021) incorporated the idea of driving styles in the reward function to simulate different driver characteristics.

Both the traditional analytical and recent data-driven models can be applied in simulations to generate the carfollowing behavior of surrounding vehicles to test AVs. The analytical models are simple and interpretable, while the data-driven models show superiority in modeling humanlike driving behavior and driver characteristics. Depending on the training data, data-driven models could also incorporate careless or distracted driving behavior to consider cognitive processes. Generally, data-driven models show a promising trend.


### Lane-changing models

Another sort of driver model required in simulations to provide more diversified traffic scenarios for testing AVs is lane-changing models. From the interaction perspective, free, cooperative, and forced lane-changing are proposed (Hidas, 2002;P. Hidas, 2005). In cooperative and forced lane-changing, the follower slows down reluctantly or willingly to create enough space for the lane changer to insert.

The stimulus, like in car-following models, is the first stage in determining lane-changing maneuvers. However, the stimulus is complicated in lane-changing models, since mandatory lane-changing (MLC) and discretionary lanechanging (DLC) Yang and Koutsopoulos (1996); Toledo et al. (2003) exist. MLC happens when the driver must leave the current lane (e.g., to use an off-ramp or avoid a lane blockage), and DLC happens when the driver performs a lane change to improve driving conditions (e.g., to increase the desired speed in the case of a slow leading vehicle).

The Gipps model (Gipps, 1986) is a type of rule-based lane-changing model, which considers the necessity, desirability, and safety when deciding lane-changing. Factors that affect lane-changing are predefined and their importance is evaluated deterministically. Three zones depending on the distance to the intended turn are defined to govern the driver's behavior for the intended lane-changing. More specifically, a desired speed is kept if the intended turn is far away, while lane changes to the turning lanes or adjacent lanes are considered in the middle zone. When the intended turn is close, the driver focuses on keeping the correct lane and ignores gaining other advantages. Due to the clearly structured triggering conditions, the model has been applied in several traffic simulations (Christen and Huang, 2008;Casas et al., 2010). However, the variability in individual driver behavior (Rahman et al., 2013), parameter estimation (Toledo et al., 2003), and applicability in congested scenarios (Moridpour et al., 2010) are not addressed. Yang and Koutsopoulos (Yang and Koutsopoulos, 1996) defined four steps to model a lane-changing maneuver: the decision to consider a lane-changing, the choice of the target lane, the search for an acceptable gap, and the execution of the change. Different from the Gipps model, the initiation of an MLC is described with a probability that depends on the distance to the intended turn. Although driver characteristics are modeled to some degree, parameter estimation and validation of the model are missing. Afterward, Ahmed's model (Ahmed et al., 1996;Ahmed, 1999) also considers lane-changing probabilistically. The probability of MLC and DLC is calculated in a discrete choice framework. However, a rigid separation between MLC and DLC could be unrealistic in some scenarios because once the MLC is activated, other considerations such as DLC are ignored.

Therefore, Toledo (Toledo et al., 2003) developed an integrated probabilistic lane-changing model in which MLC and DLC can take effect simultaneously. To evaluate the model, a comparison between separate and integrated MLC & DLC was performed. The results demonstrated the importance of incorporating trade-offs between MLC and DLC into a lane-changing model.

The minimizing overall braking induced by lane change (MOBIL) (Kesting et al., 2007) model, on the other hand, measures both the attractiveness of a given lane (i.e., its utility) and the risk associated with lane changes. The reaction is a single-lane acceleration. When a lane change is considered, it is assumed that a driver makes a trade-off between the expected advantage and the disadvantage imposed on other drivers. The advantages are measured by the difference in the accelerations after and before the lane change, while the disadvantages are quantified by the deceleration imposed on the lag vehicle. The MOBIL model has the advantage of transferring the assessment of the traffic situation to the acceleration function of the car-following model, allowing for a compact and general model formulation with only a few additional parameters. Nevertheless, empirical justification, model calibration, and validation remain unaddressed.

The lane-changing model with relaxation and synchronization (LMRS) (Schakel et al., 2012) is another example to integrate three different incentives including route following, speed gaining, and right keeping into a single desire. By comparing the single desire with three predefined thresholds, no lane-changing, free lane-changing, synchronized lane-changing, and cooperative lane-changing are distinguished. To calibrate and validate the model, the data from a segment of highways was applied. The results demonstrated the reproduction of reality in terms of lane volume distributions and lane-specific speeds.

Due to the lack of flexibility under dynamic driving situations and the resulting poor performance, data-driven approaches are motivated by training properly on large sample datasets. For instance, a neural network (Ren et al., 2019), a deep belief network (DBN) (Xie et al., 2019), and a support vector machine (SVN) (Liu et al., 2019b) are applied to model lane-changing decisions. Additionally, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) also shows great potential (Wang et al., 2018a;Shi et al., 2019;Peng et al., 2022). Since a lane-changing process incorporates a sequence of actions and the action to be executed affects the ultimate goal of the task, RL shows great potential to deal with this kind of problem. However, the mapping from state-action pairs to the total return (usually called Q-value) increases significantly with the size of state-action spaces, thus neural networks are applied to model this mapping.


### Cognitive models

The goal of cognitive models is to simulate the human cognition process while driving, which includes perception, recognition, decision-making, and action, as illustrated in Fig. 5. As the human cognitive process is considered, driver errors such as inattentive driving and misjudgment can occur in the perception, decision-making, and action processes. The modeling of driver errors is a distinct difference compared to those predictive models. Original cognitive models such as ACT-R (Anderson et al., 2004), Soar (Aasman and others, 1995), and QN-MHP (Liu et al., 2006) are based on psychological cognitive architectures. These models can facilitate the understanding of driver behavior in the context of general human abilities and constraints. However, they are not suitable for simulation in arbitrary dynamic environments due to their complex structures.

Recently, cognitive models aiming to simulate realistic traffic environments have been proposed. Driver failures that cause crashes can be simulated by taking into account inattentive or distracted driving during the information acquisition process in the cognitive models. A multi-agent traffic simulation software named Re:sim is proposed in (Kitajima et al., 2022) to model driver agents and their interactions with AVs. In the model, a driver agent perceives the surrounding objects in his line of sight and field of view. The relative states of the observed objects are then calculated, and recognition labels such as preceding or oncoming are assigned to them. Subsequently, hazardous objects are identified, and the risk of collision is estimated. Based on this judgment, the agent decides to operate and react using driving models such as the Weidemann following model (Wiedemann, 1974).

Similarly, the stochastic cognitive model (SCM) (Witt et al., 2018;Fries et al., 2022) consists of six modules: information acquisition, mental model, situation manager, action manager, action implementation, and driver characteristics. In information acquisition, the visual perception of the driver for perceiving the environment, such as the gaze allocation and fixation duration on a specific area of interest, is modeled. The mental model calculates and stores relevant driving states of observed objects. The situational risk is evaluated by the situation manager, which controls the action manager to provide an appropriate action for the action implementation. Importantly, the SCM model provides the opportunity to parameterize the driver characteristics so that the driver's perception and cognition, compliance with traffic rules can be flexibly adjusted. Unlike the SCM model, the DReaM model (Siebke et al., 2021) focuses on urban traffic, particularly junction scenarios. Aside from that, the DReaM model has a similar structure to the SCM model.


## Driver models as references

Driver models used as references for AV safety verification shall represent careful and competent drivers' driving abilities. A less skilled and experienced driver doesn't qualify to be used as a reference. Otherwise, the safety performance of an AV could be unsatisfying, if a bad reference is referred. To develop careful and competent driver models, critical scenarios are generally essential since excellent driving abilities are typically shown in critical scenarios. Note, once a careful and competent driver model is available, it can be used as a reference in both nominal and critical situations. As discussed in Section 2.2, risk-aware and capability dominate driver models are needed. More specifically, a driver is capable of identifying a risk in time to avoid an unnecessary intense response to a situation, and meantime all possible maneuvers to avoid or mitigate a collision are utilized.

Thus, we discuss in the following how the different driver models consider risk awareness. Braking is the most common reaction of drivers in critical situations. However, research (Eidehall et al., 2007) shows that if a collision can not be avoided by braking only, steering behavior is also performed by drivers. The combination of braking and steering has the potential to reduce the probability of a collision further. Therefore, all these three collision avoidance maneuvers are studied to present a holistic overview of driver models in critical situations. Cognitive models are not discussed even though some of them such as SCM (Fries et al., 2022) are supposed to be applicable in critical situations, their validity is not demonstrated.


### Braking models

We raise two questions during the review process to guide us in selecting driver models to fulfill the "risk-aware" and "capability dominant" requirements.

• Q1: What conditions cause an emergency braking maneuver to be activated?

• Q2: What models are appropriate for describing emergency braking maneuvers?

Regarding the triggering strategy Q1: visual perception and critical metrics are usually used. Visual looming is a typical representative of visual perception, which refers to the optical size and expansion of a preceding vehicle on the retina (Fajen, 2005;Markkula et al., 2016). To quantify this visual looming, the inverse tau (Lee, 1976), defined as −1 =̇∕ , is applied, wherėrepresents the preceding vehicle's optical expansion rate on the driver's retina, and is the optical size. The inverse tau increases with the collision risk level. However, Markkula (Markkula, 2014) argued that a driver's braking is not initiated by exceeding a perceptual threshold, but by the accumulation of noisy perceptual evidence over time. Following this idea, Svärd et al. (Svärd et al., 2021) proposed a driver model for initiating and modulating pre-crash brake response to deal with offroad glance behavior. In this model, the initiation time is obtained by the noisy accumulation of perceptual evidence for and against braking. Similarly, Waymo proposes a surprisebased stimulus, which is determined by the violations of the subject's current belief to its prior belief . Besides visual perception, criticality metrics are employed to estimate situation risk. In (UN ECE, 2021), hard braking is applied when a challenging vehicle cuts in and the Time-to-collision (TTC) is smaller than 2 s. According to the study in (Schneemann and Gohl, 2016), the TTC for braking onset in urban environments is between 3 and 4 s, while the threshold for participants in the driving test is 2.5 s. Besides TTC, time-to-brake (TTB) is also used in some cases, which means the time left to avoid a critical situation by braking. For instance, a value of 0 is used as the threshold to activate the emergency braking maneuver in (Keller et al., 2011). Some driver models aim to model risk without an explicit threshold. Depending on the risk level, different deceleration values are applied. The fuzzy safety model (FSM) (Mattas et al., 2020) models the longitudinal risk by defining a safe and an unsafe distance. If the actual distance is larger than the safe distance, no risk exists. Conversely, the highest risk is shown if the actual distance is below the unsafe distance. The risk is interpolated if the distance is between the two distance boundaries. Similarly, the risk-response driver model (Zhao et al., 2020) utilizes risk field theory to model situation risk and then respond correspondingly according to the risk level. For emergency braking model Q2: The car-following models discussed in Section 3.1 are inappropriate to be used as a comparison reference for AV safety verification because they do not focus on a driver's braking reaction process to imminent situations, but rather on kinematic behavior at the vehicle level in nominal situations. The study in (Markkula et al., 2012) shows that the Gipps and GHR models exhibit unsatisfying behavior in critical scenarios. Depending on the modeling method, emergency braking models to answer Q2 can be roughly divided into two categories: "last second" braking models and risk anticipated braking models.

"Last second" braking models: These models are designed to simulate the response delay that divers may experience during emergency braking. The Japanese driver model proposed in (Experts of Japan, 2020) is a typical one in this category, where only braking is considered for collision avoidance. The driver model is separated into three segments: "Perception", "Decision" and "Braking". A risk perception point is defined to activate the decision and braking. In cut-in scenarios, the risk begins when the cut-in vehicle exceeds the normal lateral wandering zone and the TTC is below 2 s. Once risk is identified, the driver releases the gas pedal and steps on the braking pedal, this reaction delay time is 0.75 s. The deceleration rate then increases linearly until it reaches the max deceleration of 0.744 g. Subsequently, the maximum deceleration rate is maintained.

The Responsibility Sensitive Safety model (RSS)(Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017) describes the rules that an AV should follow in order not to cause accidents proactively. The longitudinal safety distance considers the worst situation where the preceding vehicle decelerates with maximum deceleration, and the following vehicle accelerates with maximum acceleration and then decelerates moderately after the reaction time. A conservative distance is obviously assumed from this definition. Similar to RSS, the Safety Force Field (Nistér et al., 2019) aims to guarantee that no unsafe situations are caused by the ego. If all actors in traffic had such a guarantee, no unsafe situations or collisions would occur. However, if the penetration rate of AVs is quite low, AVs will show very conservative behavior and may not be acceptable if the RSS model is utilized as the safety requirement for AVs. This unpleasant driving behavior will be lessened as the penetration rate increases.

Since the driver reaction time is an important parameter in this type of model and varies among drivers and situations, a classification is made based on the characteristics of reaction time: fixed reaction time (Bando et al., 1998;Treiber et al., 2006), variable buffer-based reaction time (Basak et al., 2013;Witt et al., 2018) and random sampling reaction time (Przybyla et al., 2012). Fixed reaction time means that the reaction time is a fixed value. Variable buffer-based reaction time enables the selection of different independent variables (e.g., speed, distance, or indicator state). For each selected variable, a reaction time is drawn based on the underlying distribution. The random sampling of brake reaction time attempts to model distraction by using sufficient statistical samples to characterize stochastic distributions of reaction time, which can be fed into a braking model for crash prediction (Przybyla et al., 2012). Despite its simplicity, the reaction time model is assumed to be an important role in critical scenarios, describing the driver's extreme operating behavior in emergency situations.

Risk anticipated braking models: Different from the "last second" braking models, the deceleration profile is adjusted according to the risk level in risk anticipated reaction models. Warren (Warren, 2006) described the braking process based on the tau theory, where the brake-pedal position is adjusted according to Equation (1). pedal is a stiffness parameter determining the speed of pedal adjustments. is the noisy term.̇is the target margin value anḋis the change rate of .


## Δ = pedal (̇−̇) +

(1) Similar to the model, the deceleration-error model (Fajen, 2005) adjusts the deceleration by comparing the current deceleration to an ideal deceleration, where the ideal deceleration is defined as the deceleration wheṅequals -0.5. To capture the flexibility of the stiffness parameter in the deceleration-error model, an action boundary for describing the braking urgency is defined in (Harrison et al., 2016), beyond which a collision is unavoidable. If a situation becomes urgent, the proximity to the action boundary decreases, and the driver should apply braking with increasing strength.

Braking models using fuzzy logic theory show a similar concept, where human decision-making processes are approximated (Zhang and Prevedouros, 2011) according to the perceived risk. In addition, the possibility of considering various driving styles and driving environments (Fernandez and Ito, 2016) can be included in fuzzy logic. Three steps are included in the fuzzy reasoning process. Fuzzification converts the input values to fuzzy values based on predefined rules. Then, the inference engine mimics human reasoning by performing fuzzy inference on the inputs. The output fuzzy variables are finally converted to executable values by defuzzification. The states of the following vehicle and the preceding vehicle are commonly used as input values, and the output values are brake angle or brake pressure (Mamat and Ghani, 2009;Basjaruddin et al., 2016;Rizianiza and Shoodiqin, 2021). Recently, the Fuzzy Safety Model (FSM) (Mattas et al., 2022) for rear-end collisions is proposed. Depending on the scenario type, longitudinal and eventually lateral distances are checked against the safe distance to judge if the braking should be initiated. Unlike previous studies, two fuzzy surrogate safety metrics are explicitly employed to evaluate the situation risk. Subsequently, a proper deceleration corresponding to the risk level is performed.

From the above analysis, we discover the following commonalities of the discussed collision avoidance braking models. First, a risk perception metric is essential in order to trigger the braking model. Either visual perception or criticality metrics are applied to estimate the situation risk. Second, there is a distinction between "last second" and "risk anticipate" braking models. Models like RSS have fixed deceleration profiles, while other models like FSM have adjustable deceleration profiles depending on the risk level. We use Fig. 6 to summarize the braking models. Due to the special application for AV safety verification, interpretability is an important factor for the models in order to provide an understandable reference for such safety-critical systems. Additionally, near-crash and crash data are limited, hindering the application of data-driven models in this case.


### Evasive steering models

Similar to the braking models, two research questions are proposed based on the "risk-aware" and "capability dominant" requirements:

• Q1: What conditions cause an evasive steering model to be activated?

• Q2: What models are appropriate for describing evasive steering maneuvers?

For the triggering strategy Q1: Time-to-Collision (TTC) is the most common metric to activate evasive steering maneuvers despite its simplicity. For instance, A TTC threshold of 2.5 s is utilized in (Llorca et al., 2011). They demonstrated that the proposed approach can perform human-like pedestrian collision avoidance maneuvers by steering with a maximum driving speed of 30 km/h. Zhao et al.  consider 0.75 s for the threshold of TTC for an emergency evasion maneuver. Similarly, a two-dimensional TTC with a threshold of 5 s is defined for a data-driven evasive steering model , while Time-to-Steer (TTS) with a value of 0 is used (Keller et al., 2011) to initiate an evasive maneuver. TTS represents the time left to avoid a critical situation by steering.

A "threat metric" related to acceleration or jerk level is utilized to trigger an evasion steering maneuver, which is defined by a cubic polynomial with zero derivatives at the knots. The number of knots and their position depends on the number of objects along the path and their position. However, the threshold of the "threat metric" is not presented (Eidehall and Madås, 2013).

Some studies define the trigger moment implicitly. Shiller (Shiller and Sundar, 1998) suggested using the clearance curve to determine the "last point" for an evasive steering maneuver, where the "last point" was the minimal longitudinal distance beyond which an obstacle cannot be avoided by steering at a given initial speed. Similarly, Isermann et al. (Isermann et al., 2012) argue that the timing to evade is determined by at what distance the evasion must be executed so that a collision is still preventable. They utilize a sigmoid function to describe the evasive trajectory. Park et al.  assume that braking is first applied, and the steering maneuver must wait until collision by braking is no longer possible. Furthermore, the required lateral acceleration should be larger than a threshold beyond which the collision can be averted by steering.

For the evasive steering model Q2: We divide the existing evasive steering models into three categories based on the various ways to generate the evasive trajectories: analytical trajectories, optimization-based, and data-driven models. Note we do not focus on the execution of the evasive maneuver, which is the task of a controller. Instead, generating an evasive trajectory is the topic once an evasive maneuver is essential.

Mathematical expressed analytical trajectories are commonly used to generate evasive steering maneuvers. For example, sinusoidal and exponential curves are applied to generate evasive lateral maneuvers with a given lateral offset (Durali et al., 2006). In addition, a fifth-order polynomial in curvilinear coordinates is employed for the purpose of minimizing jerk in (Donà et al., 2019). Since a fifth-order polynomial has a zero lateral velocity and acceleration at both the initial ( 0 , 0 ) and the final position ( , ), it ensures the vehicle's stability after avoidance. An implementation of a fifth-order polynomial is demonstrated in (Soudbakhsh et al., 2013;He et al., 2019), as expressed in Equation (2).

( ) = [10( ) 3 − 15( ) 4 + 6( ) 5 ]

(2)

In (Soudbakhsh et al., 2011;Soudbakhsh and Eskandarian, 2015), a trapezoidal acceleration profile is utilized to generate the evasive trajectory. Based on this concept, Dona et al. (Donà et al., 2023) study a simple kinematic evasive steering model to the end of estimating the minimum time to perform an evasive steering maneuver. They argue that simplicity and generality are important for regulatory adoption. To the authors' best knowledge, this is the first work that attempts to derive a safety benchmark model for evasive steering maneuvers until now. However, whether the model is capability dominant is unclear. A comparison between human drivers' evasive action time (Shah and Lee, 2021) and the minimum time derived from the model is meaningful.

Apart from using predefined analytical trajectories, an alternative is the optimization-based trajectory generation. Typically, an objective with some constraints is defined. The problem is then solved by optimization techniques such as IPOPT solver (Wächter and Biegler, 2006). In (Soudbakhsh et al., 2013), lateral acceleration and steering rate are defined as the optimization objectives. They show that the proposed trajectory optimization technique requires less time than that of the trapezoidal acceleration profile for an evasive steering maneuver. The model predictive control (MPC) is also widely used for evasive trajectory generation Wurts et al., 2021) because of the advantages of an explicit definition of constraints and sub-optimal performance (Shim et al., 2012). However, the vehicle dynamic model and even the tire model considered in MPC may hinder its application as a reference because vehicle-specific calibration is needed.

Lastly, A deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm Fehér et al., 2020), which could learn the sequential decision-making process over continuous action spaces, was used to model evasive behaviors. Another data-driven model proposed by Das and Mishra (Das and Mishra, 2022) attempted to avoid collisions using left and right turn maneuvers that are learned from a dataset. We found that few machine learning-based evasive steering models are currently available. This may be due to the lack of training data in critical situations. Figure 7: The process of an evasive steering maneuver performed by a driver. If a driver perceives a situation risk that necessitates a response, the steering maneuver is executed by changing the lateral acceleration after the reaction time.

From the above analysis, we could find that most literature focuses on the modeling of evasive maneuver itself, while limited research is conducted about human drivers' evasive capabilities in critical situations (Zhao et al., 2018;Shah and Lee, 2021). As a result, it is difficult to argue the proposed reference models are capability dominant. Additionally, analytical trajectories are promising because of their simplicity and less reliance on specific vehicles. Finally, we use Fig. 7 to illustrate the general process of the evasive maneuver in case of a critical situation. The situation risk is estimated. When the evasive maneuver is possible, e.g., enough free space at the steering side, the lateral acceleration changes accordingly to finally generate the evasive trajectory after a certain reaction time.


### Braking and steering models

To avoid collisions, braking is an effective measure. The evasive steering maneuver allows a later intervention than the braking maneuver, while simultaneously braking and steering maneuvers can further reduce the evasive length and enable a further later intervention (Ackermann et al., 2015). Thus, simultaneously braking and steering are considered the very "last second" action (Choi and Kang, 2017b). The driver model proposed by Jurecki and Stańczyk (Jurecki and Stańczyk, 2009) synthetics these two maneuvers analytically. In the driver model, the braking model is described as follows:
D + W 1̇= W 2 Δ ( − R ) + W 3 rel rel (3)
where D is deceleration; Δ represents the lateral relative distance; R is the driver's reaction time; W 1 , W 2 and W 3 are model constant parameters. rel and rel are the longitudinal relative velocity and distance, respectively. The corresponding steering model is expressed by:
+ W 4̇= W 5 Δ ( − R )(4)
W 4 and W 5 are another model parameters. These model parameters are identified based on 450 trials with 30 drivers. Schorn and Isermann (Schorn and Isermann, 2006) employ a sigmoidal function to generate the desired trajectory, which is followed by a feedforward control to execute braking and steering. Similarly, many studies (Falcone et al., Table 1 The metrics for evaluating driver models in terms of their applications in AV safety assessment


## Aims

Evaluation metrics Descriptions Typical models Possible applications Simulation Accuracy Accuracy refers to the degree to which a driver model is able to reproduce the actual driving behavior of human drivers considering the "interaction-aware" and "human-like" requirements. An accurate driver model will produce results that are very close to the actual human driving behavior in different scenarios. This is important for a valid and credible AV safety assessment.

Machine learning-based driver models (Xie et al., 2019;Wang et al., 2018b) Microscopic simulations Adaptability Driver models shall demonstrate their adaptability to different situations. Human driver behavior can vary across different situations. Thus, the driver model needs to adapt to these varying situations and reflect the corresponding changes in driver behavior. This adaptability is essential for accurately modeling human driving behavior and evaluating AV safety performance in simulations.

The models considering driver characteristics (Liao et al., 2019;Zhang et al., 2018) Mileage-based simulation Variability Driver models shall reflect the variability in human driver behavior, which arises from the complex processes of perception, cognition, and decision-making. Even for an identical driver in the same situations, various behaviors including errors may be exhibited. Those driving behavior uncertainties are valuable to test the robustness and safety of AVs in simulations.

The model with stochastic brake reaction time (Przybyla et al., 2012); the SCM (Fries et al., 2022) Testing AVs' ability to handle the behavioral diversity of surrounding human drivers within the same scenario.


## Reference

Risk awareness The driver model shall perceive risk in time to present "careful". Careless and conservative drivers are not suitable to be treated as benchmarks for AVs.

The FSM (Mattas et al., 2020) Deriving safety requirements for AVs.


## Capability domination

The driver model shall be representative of human drivers to present "competent". A less skilled or experienced drivers are not suitable to be treated as benchmarks for AVs. The Japanese driver model (UN ECE, 2021) Deriving safety requirements for AVs.

Interpretability Using a driver model as a benchmark for evaluating AV safety performance means that it serves as a criterion in the evaluation. As a criterion, its definition should be clear and interpretable to ensure the reliability of the evaluation and gain the public's trust.

The RSS model (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017); the analytical models  Defining benchmark for AV safety assessment 2007; Hajiloo et al., 2021;Li et al., 2022;Wang et al., 2022a) nowadays use the model predictive control (MPC) technique to control the steering angle and the brakes with given constraints and objectives. As a result, the optimization-based methods demonstrate a tendency to deal with simultaneous braking and steering.

Recently, Waymo developed a non-impaired with eyes on the conflict (NIEON) reference driver model (Scanlon et al., 2022), with the goal to provide a benchmark for AV safety assessment. For braking actions, NIEON applies a constant jerk up to a maximum deceleration, which is similar to the Japanese driver model. The difference is that they employ surprise-based response timing defined by Waymo as well . For the evasive steering model, they used a pure pursuit controller to follow the pre-maneuver trajectory at a given preview point. They demonstrated that the NIEON can be used as a benchmark for AVs. The model is a pioneering reference driver model that considers both braking and evasive steering maneuvers although the generation of pre-maneuver trajectory is not fully described.


## Applicability

In this section, we first define evaluation metrics for driver models in the two applications discussed in the paper. Next, we summarize and categorize the aforementioned driver models based on their model characteristics. We then analyze the potential applications and suitability of different driver model categories for the two different applications based on the proposed evaluation metrics to answer the RQ3 finally.


### Evaluation metrics

As we assume a low penetration rate of AVs, the surrounding vehicles are controlled by driver models in simulations. To simulate realistic traffic scenarios for testing AVs and increase the credibility of the testing results, the driver model shall meet the requirements discussed in Section 2.2. Thus, we define three concrete evaluation metrics: accuracy, adaptability, and variability, which are presented in Table 1, along with their descriptions and examples of typical models that best meet each evaluation metric. Additionally, possible applications are provided, for which this evaluation metric is particularly relevant.

A reference driver model, on the other hand, used as a benchmark for AVs, shall represent the capabilities of careful and competent drivers. Its underlying logic is that an AV shall demonstrate superior performance compared to a careful and competent human driver in the same testing scenarios, i.e., it can successfully avoid collisions in those scenarios in which a careful and competent human driver can do. Considering the requirements derived in Section 2.2, a reference driver model for AV safety evaluation shall satisfy three evaluation metrics: risk awareness, capability domination, and interpretability, as depicted in Table 1. As a benchmark for evaluating the performance of AV, interpretability and transparency are crucial for regulation (Fagnant and Kockelman, 2015) and insurances (Grosso et al., 2021).

Aside from the evaluation criteria provided in Table 1, we additionally consider the simplicity of each sort of driver model, which is desirable though not mandatory. To capture the diverse human driver behavior and different driving situations, simulations must be run on many scenarios or driving miles, often necessitating the use of methods such as the Monte Carlo method. Moreover, concrete scenarios frequently involve multiple vehicles controlled by human drivers. Therefore, reducing the complexity of the driver model can help to minimize computational costs.


### Applicability analysis

This subsection evaluates the summarized driver models in terms of their applications for AV safety assessment. First, we discuss the driver models in terms of their suitability for simulation-based testing. We divide the driver models into the following four categories. Linear model: a linear relationship between the factors considered and the output of the driver model (e.g. acceleration) is modeled, such as the GHR (Xie et al., 2019) car-following model; Non-linear model: the relationship between the stimulus and the output of the model is nonlinear or probability distributed, such as fuzzy theory-based model (Kikuchi, 1992) and stochastic reaction time model (Przybyla et al., 2012); Data-driven model: datadriven models capture the interaction and driving behavior by training on data, such as the recurrent neural network in (Zhou et al., 2017) and deep bayesian network model in (Xie et al., 2019). Table 2 compares the above-categorized driver models in meeting the proposed evaluation metrics for simulations. In the table, "+" symbol indicates that the model is able to meet the evaluation metric. Conversely, "-" means the metric is challenging for the model. Nonlinear and data-driven models demonstrate superior capability in meeting more evaluation metrics than linear models, particularly in three out of the four evaluation metrics. The key distinguishing factor between nonlinear and data-driven models is the trade-off between complexity and accuracy. Nonlinear models exhibit relatively lower complexity and are thus more appropriate for scenarios that demand extensive simulation calculations, such as those involving high mileage and multi-scenario coverage. In contrast, data-driven models, particularly those utilizing deep learning techniques, consider more feature dimensions and exhibit higher-order nonlinearity, which leads to higher accuracy but also entails increased complexity and computational costs.

In the application where driver models serve as references, the comparative results are summarized in Table 3 and Table 4. As described in Section 4.1, we compare "last second" and risk anticipated braking models in terms of their application as benchmarks. while analytic models, optimization-based models, and data-driven models are employed for evasive steering models, as described in Section 4.2.

The "last second" braking models such as (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017; Experts of Japan, 2020) have the advantages of capability domination by good calibration on the data of trained drivers in critical braking experiments (Liu et al., 2021). Meantime, they generally have better interpretability and lower complexity because of explicitly defined math relations. However, they usually fail to meet risk awareness requirements because the activation time is fixed and usually very late to avoid false positive emergency braking. The risk anticipated braking models such as (Mattas et al., 2022), on the other hand, are risk-aware and capability dominant. They also meet the requirements of interpretability and simplicity. Thus, they are preferred to "last second" braking models when deploying them as benchmarks for AVs.

In lateral evasive situations, optimization-based and data-driven models are risk-aware since they consider safety in constraints or training data, while analytical models do not model safety inherently. In addition, analytical and optimization-based models are currently little studied, and few experiments demonstrate that they can represent the "competent" aspect. The data-driven models are supposed to reach the driving performance level of a skilled driver, as demonstrated in (Wu et al., 2019). Nonetheless, the analytic models show advantages in interpretability and simplicity, while the optimization-based models are generally  understandable through explicitly defined objectives and constraints, but their simplicity is less satisfying due to the complex solving process. Because the studies of reference driver models for simultaneously braking and steering are few and currently limited to MPC techniques, a comparison with other models in terms of their suitability as benchmarks is not considered in the paper.


## Discussion

In this paper, we investigated the functions of driving models in the safety assessment of AVs. The guidance for safety engineers to select appropriate driving models for AV safety evaluation in simulations or for determining AV safety performance levels compared to careful and competent drivers was provided by addressing three research questions. Meanwhile, we compared the different driver models in terms of their suitability for simulations and references against proposed metrics and identified current gaps. To the authors' best knowledge, this is the first work that summarizes driver models in terms of their applications for AV safety assessment.

For RQ1, we first analyzed where driver models are used for AV safety assessment. We discovered that they are typically used in simulations to control surrounding vehicles for generating test environments of AVs and showcase new functions as benchmarks for AVs. Based on these potential applications, we discussed the corresponding requirements. More specifically, interaction-aware decisionmaking, human-like behavior, driver characteristics, and cognitive process are important for driver models in simulations, while risk-aware and capability dominate driver models are expected as AV safety evaluation references. These two different applications and the derived requirements pose a solid foundation for the driver models to be reviewed in the paper.

For RQ2, we presented an overview of driver models based on the defined scope in the paper. Various carfollowing and lane-changing models were described under the category of predictive models. It is observed that applying artificial intelligence (AI) to model both lateral and longitudinal driving behavior shows a trend to meet the diverse requirements. Due to the inscrutability of AI, Hybrid models that combine AI and analytic models to increase explainability while maintaining high fidelity are being investigated (Bhattacharyya et al., 2021). Additionally, cognitive models that aim to model driving behavior in nominal traffic and critical scenarios show promising results except for the high model complexity. Regarding driver models as references, we outlined possible maneuvers, including collision avoidance by braking, collision avoidance by steering, and collision avoidance by simultaneous braking and steering to build capability dominate drivers. In addition, we considered the timing for triggering avoidance maneuvers, which is essential when initiating collision avoidance maneuvers.

For RQ3, we first proposed metrics corresponding to the defined requirements to assess the reviewed driver models. Based on these metrics, we are able to analyze the strengths and weaknesses of each driver model, which facilitates the determination of its applicability. For the driver models for simulations, non-linear and data-driven models are promising. If higher accuracy is desired and the computational cost is acceptable, data-driven models are better choices. Conversely, non-linear models are preferred if a relatively lower accuracy can be tolerated in exchange for the lower computational cost. As computer hardware performance rapidly advances, the high complexity of datadriven models may no longer be a concern in the future, making them the optimal choice. Regarding driver models as references, analytical models are compelling since they can exhibit high interpretability and simplicity. However, whether they are capability dominant compared to skilled and experienced human drivers is less studied. Lastly, if the interpretability issue of data-driven models can be addressed in the future, they could also become a good choice.

Compared to the work in (Siebke et al., 2022), we analyzed in-depth various types of driver models as references for AV safety assessment and discussed their applicability by analyzing their strengths and weakness, while they focused on a discussion about human error modeling in traffic simulations. For some other surveys, either they only review one category of driver models like car-following models (Han et al., 2022), or driver models for AV safety assessment are not considered in their reviews (Singh and Kathuria, 2021;Park and Zahabi, 2022).

Based on the discussion in Section 2, We restricted our evaluation to driver models that are suitable for either AV safety assessment in a simulation environment or AV approval by displaying their benchmark functions. Thus, other topics like driver behavior analysis and error modeling are not considered. However, the relevant driving models are thoroughly identified. Thus, the discussion and the derived phenomena are pertinent. The proposed metrics to evaluate different types of driver models are summarized considering our two applications for AV safety assessment. Therefore, they are limited to our purpose, and a comprehensive evaluation of driver models, including their applications in other domains, should be further studied.

Generally, our paper provides a fundamental consideration of currently existing driver models for AV safety assessment. On the one hand, it can aid policymakers, such as the working party of Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations in UNECE, to choose appropriate driver models when drafting regulations for AV approval. On the other hand, safety or simulation engineers could utilize suitable driver models depending on their demands to conduct their simulations to provide evidence to support a holistic safety argumentation for their developed AVs.

In summary, the paper surveys driver models to answer three research questions regarding their applications for AV safety assessment. By summarizing the identified relevant papers, we are able to present guidance on what type of driver models are suitable for what type of task. Compared to other related works, our work presents a holistic overview of driver models, focusing on their applications in AV safety assessment. The survey is generally helpful for policymakers and developers.


## Conclusion and future work

The paper presented a comprehensive review of existing driver models regarding their applications in AV safety assessment and discussed their suitability by proposing evaluation metrics derived from analyzed requirements. To the authors' best knowledge, this is the first work that summarizes driver models' functions for AV safety assessment. The work provides insightful guidance for policymakers and simulation engineers when formulating AV release regulations or conducting AV safety assessments in simulations.

Based on the results, we have the following findings: 1) AI-based driver models have attracted much attention recently to model both lateral and longitudinal driving behavior in nominal situations. In particular, reinforcement learning-based models in simulation-based testing are promising; 2) cognitive models show great benefit by including human errors in the models to simulate, for example, inattentive driving; 3) Analytical models has the advantages of interpretability and simplicity when used as benchmarks compared to optimization-based and data-driven models. Nevertheless, more studies about the capability of analytical models are needed to demonstrate their representativeness of competent human drivers.

Meantime, these findings indicate future working directions. More open-sourced driver simulator datasets and crash datasets are desirable in comparison to the number of open-sourced naturalistic driving datasets such as HighD (Krajewski et al., 2018), AD4CHE (Zhang et al., 2023) and pNEUMA dataset (Barmpounakis and Geroliminis, 2020). The data is valuable for studying driver steering, steering and braking behavior in critical situations. In this way, a holistic driver model incorporating different maneuvers at different stages of a collision could be created as a reference instead of a single emergency braking model. Explainable AI must be prioritized to achieve both high interpretability and performance. In all, the paper provides a solid foundation for future driver models for AV safety assessment.


## Declarations of interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 


## CRediT authorship contribution statement

## Figure 2 :
2The application of driver models in simulation-based testing. (a) trajectories of surrounding vehicles are predefined; (b) the behavior of surrounding vehicles is longitudinally controlled; (c) both lateral and longitudinal behavior of surrounding vehicles are controlled; (d) the information acquisition process is included in driver models besides longitudinal and lateral control.

## Figure 3 :
3Risk-aware and capability dominant driver models as references for AV safety assessment.

## Figure 5 :
5The information flow to build a cognitive model. The driver perceives the stimulus and processes the information under possible driver errors. Based on the situation understanding result, decisions are made, where car-following and lanechanging models are applied. Finally, actions are executed in response to the stimulus.

## Figure 6 :
6An illustration of the braking process for collision avoidance. The situation risk is estimated by a risk perception metric. When an emergency braking maneuver is necessary, deceleration onsets after a certain reaction time. The maximum deceleration is either constant or adjusted according to the situation risk level.

## Table 2
2Evaluation and Comparison of Driver Models with Different Model Characteristics in Terms of their suitability for Simulation PurposesEvaluation metrics Linear models 
Non-linear 
models 

Data-
driven 

Variability 
-
+ 
+ 
Adaptability 
-
+ 
+ 
Simplicity 
+ 
+ 
-
Accuracy 
-
-
+ 



## Table 3
3Evaluation and comparison of braking models with different model characteristics in terms of their suitability for reference purposesEvaluation metrics 
(Braking) 

"Last second" 
braking model 

Risk anticipated 
braking model 

Risk awareness 
-
+ 
Capability domination 
+ 
+ 
Interpretability 
+ 
+ 
Simplicity 
+ 
+ 



## Table 4
4Evaluation and comparison of evasive steering models with different model characteristics in terms of their suitability for reference purposesEvaluation metrics 
(Steering) 

Analytical 
models 

Optimization-
based 

Data-
driven 

Risk awareness 
-
+ 
+ 
Capability domination 
unkown 
unkown 
+ 
Interpretability 
+ 
+ 
-
Simplicity 
+ 
-
-




Cheng Wang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Software, Writing -original draft, Writing -review & editing.. Fengwei Guo: Methodology, Visualization, Formal analysis, Writing -original draft, Writing -review & editing. Ruilin Yu: Writing -original draft, Writingreview & editing. Luyao Wang: Writing -original draft, Writing -review & editing. Yuxin Zhang: Funding acquisition, Project administration, Methodology, Discussion Writing -review & editing..

Modelling driver behaviour in Soar. J Aasman, Research Leidschendam, The NetherlandsAasman, J., others, 1995. Modelling driver behaviour in Soar. KPN Research Leidschendam, The Netherlands.

Collision avoidance with combined braking and steering. C Ackermann, J Bechtloff, R Isermann, 6th International Munich Chassis Symposium 2015: chassis. tech plus. SpringerAckermann, C., Bechtloff, J., Isermann, R., 2015. Collision avoidance with combined braking and steering, in: 6th International Munich Chassis Symposium 2015: chassis. tech plus, Springer. pp. 199-213.

A review of car-following models and modeling tools for human and autonomous-ready driving behaviors in micro-simulation. H U Ahmed, Y Huang, P Lu, Smart Cities. 4Ahmed, H.U., Huang, Y., Lu, P., 2021. A review of car-following models and modeling tools for human and autonomous-ready driving behaviors in micro-simulation. Smart Cities 4, 314-335.

Models of freeway lane changing and gap acceptance behavior. K Ahmed, M Ben-Akiva, H Koutsopoulos, R Mishalani, Transportation and traffic theory. 13Ahmed, K., Ben-Akiva, M., Koutsopoulos, H., Mishalani, R., 1996. Models of freeway lane changing and gap acceptance behavior. Transportation and traffic theory 13, 501-515.

Modeling drivers' acceleration and lane changing behavior. K I Ahmed, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyPhD ThesisAhmed, K.I., 1999. Modeling drivers' acceleration and lane changing behavior. PhD Thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Optical Information for Car Following: The Driving by Visual Angle (DVA) Model. G J Andersen, C W Sauer, 10.1518/001872007X230235Human Factors. 49Andersen, G.J., Sauer, C.W., 2007. Optical Information for Car Following: The Driving by Visual Angle (DVA) Model. Human Factors 49, 878- 896. doi:10.1518/001872007X230235.

An integrated theory of the mind. J R Anderson, D Bothell, M D Byrne, S Douglass, C Lebiere, Y Qin, Psychological review. 1111036Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S., Lebiere, C., Qin, Y., 2004. An integrated theory of the mind. Psychological review 111, 1036.

Analysis of optimal velocity model with explicit delay. M Bando, K Hasebe, K Nakanishi, A Nakayama, 10.1103/PhysRevE.58.5429Physical Review E. 58Bando, M., Hasebe, K., Nakanishi, K., Nakayama, A., 1998. Analysis of optimal velocity model with explicit delay. Physical Review E 58, 5429- 5435. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.58.5429.

Dynamical model of traffic congestion and numerical simulation. M Bando, K Hasebe, A Nakayama, A Shibata, Y Sugiyama, 10.1103/PhysRevE.51.1035Physical Review E. 51Bando, M., Hasebe, K., Nakayama, A., Shibata, A., Sugiyama, Y., 1995. Dynamical model of traffic congestion and numerical simulation. Phys- ical Review E 51, 1035-1042. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.51.1035.

On the new era of urban traffic monitoring with massive drone data: The pneuma large-scale field experiment. Transportation research part C: emerging technologies 111. E Barmpounakis, N Geroliminis, Barmpounakis, E., Geroliminis, N., 2020. On the new era of urban traffic monitoring with massive drone data: The pneuma large-scale field experiment. Transportation research part C: emerging technologies 111, 50-71.

Modeling reaction time within a traffic simulation model. K Basak, S N Hetu, Zheminli, C L Azevedo, H Loganathan, T Toledo, Runminxu, Yanxu, Li-Shiuanpeh, M Ben-Akiva, 16th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems. ITSCBasak, K., Hetu, S.N., ZheminLi, Azevedo, C.L., Loganathan, H., Toledo, T., RunminXu, YanXu, Li-ShiuanPeh, Ben-Akiva, M., 2013. Model- ing reaction time within a traffic simulation model, in: 16th Interna- tional IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC

. Ieee , The Hague, 10.1109/ITSC.2013.6728249doi:10.1109/ ITSC.2013.6728249Netherlands, IEEE, The Hague, Netherlands. pp. 302-309. doi:10.1109/ ITSC.2013.6728249.

Hardware simulation of automatic braking system based on fuzzy logic control. N C Basjaruddin, K Kuspriyanto, S Suhendar, D Saefudin, V A Azis, Journal of Mechatronics, Electrical Power, and Vehicular Technology. 7Basjaruddin, N.C., Kuspriyanto, K., Suhendar, S., Saefudin, D., Azis, V.A., 2016. Hardware simulation of automatic braking system based on fuzzy logic control. Journal of Mechatronics, Electrical Power, and Vehicular Technology 7, 1-6.

A hybrid rule-based and data-driven approach to driver modeling through particle filtering. R Bhattacharyya, S Jung, L A Kruse, R Senanayake, M J Kochenderfer, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 23Bhattacharyya, R., Jung, S., Kruse, L.A., Senanayake, R., Kochenderfer, M.J., 2021. A hybrid rule-based and data-driven approach to driver modeling through particle filtering. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 13055-13068.

Traffic simulation with aimsun. Fundamentals of traffic simulation. J Casas, J L Ferrer, D Garcia, J Perarnau, A Torday, Casas, J., Ferrer, J.L., Garcia, D., Perarnau, J., Torday, A., 2010. Traffic simulation with aimsun. Fundamentals of traffic simulation , 173-232.

Traffic Dynamics: Studies in Car Following. R E Chandler, R Herman, E W Montroll, 10.1287/opre.6.2.165doi:10.1287/ opre.6.2.165Operations Research. 6Chandler, R.E., Herman, R., Montroll, E.W., 1958. Traffic Dynamics: Studies in Car Following. Operations Research 6, 165-184. doi:10.1287/ opre.6.2.165.

Simultaneous braking and steering control method based on nonlinear model predictive control for emergency driving support. C Choi, Y Kang, International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems. 15SpringerChoi, C., Kang, Y., 2017a. Simultaneous braking and steering control method based on nonlinear model predictive control for emergency driving support. International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems 15, 345-353. Publisher: Springer.

Simultaneous braking and steering control method based on nonlinear model predictive control for emergency driving support. C Choi, Y Kang, International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems. 15Choi, C., Kang, Y., 2017b. Simultaneous braking and steering control method based on nonlinear model predictive control for emergency driving support. International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems 15, 345-353.

The Driver Model of the traffic flow simulation PELOPS -modelling and application possibilities. F Christen, Q Huang, 2nd Berlin Expert Conference on Driver Modelling "Driver Modelling in Science and Economy. Berlin, GermanyChristen, F., Huang, Q., 2008. The Driver Model of the traffic flow simulation PELOPS -modelling and application possibilities, in: 2nd Berlin Expert Conference on Driver Modelling "Driver Modelling in Science and Economy", pp. 1-16. Place: Berlin, Germany.

A Machine Learning approach for collision avoidance and path planning of mobile robot under dense and cluttered environments. S Das, S K Mishra, Computers and Electrical Engineering. 103108376Das, S., Mishra, S.K., 2022. A Machine Learning approach for collision avoidance and path planning of mobile robot under dense and cluttered environments. Computers and Electrical Engineering 103, 108376.

Towards Bi-Dimensional driver models for automated driving system safety requirements: Validation of a kinematic model for evasive lane-change maneuvers. R Donà, K Mattas, B Ciuffo, IET Intelligent Transport Systems Publisher. Wiley Online LibraryDonà, R., Mattas, K., Ciuffo, B., 2023. Towards Bi-Dimensional driver models for automated driving system safety requirements: Validation of a kinematic model for evasive lane-change maneuvers. IET Intelligent Transport Systems Publisher: Wiley Online Library.

On the Stability and Robustness of Hierarchical Vehicle Lateral Control With Inverse/Forward Dynamics Quasi-Cancellation. R Donà, G P Rosati Papini, M Da Lio, L Zaccarian, 10.1109/TVT.2019.2941379IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. 68Donà, R., Rosati Papini, G.P., Da Lio, M., Zaccarian, L., 2019. On the Stability and Robustness of Hierarchical Vehicle Lateral Control With Inverse/Forward Dynamics Quasi-Cancellation. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 68, 10559-10570. doi:10.1109/TVT.2019.2941379.

Collision avoidance maneuver for an autonomous vehicle. M Durali, G A Javid, A Kasaiezadeh, 9th IEEE International Workshop on Advanced Motion Control. IEEEDurali, M., Javid, G.A., Kasaiezadeh, A., 2006. Collision avoidance ma- neuver for an autonomous vehicle, in: 9th IEEE International Workshop on Advanced Motion Control, 2006., IEEE. pp. 249-254.

Emergency steer & brake assist: a systematic approach for system integration of two complementary driver assistance systems. A Eckert, B Hartmann, M Sevenich, P Rieth, 22nd International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV). Eckert, A., Hartmann, B., Sevenich, M., Rieth, P., 2011. Emergency steer & brake assist: a systematic approach for system integration of two complementary driver assistance systems, in: 22nd International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV), pp. 13-16.

Real time path planning for threat assessment and collision avoidance by steering. A Eidehall, D Madås, 16th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC 2013). IEEEEidehall, A., Madås, D., 2013. Real time path planning for threat assess- ment and collision avoidance by steering, in: 16th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC 2013), IEEE. pp. 916-921.

Toward autonomous collision avoidance by steering. A Eidehall, J Pohl, F Gustafsson, J Ekmark, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 8Eidehall, A., Pohl, J., Gustafsson, F., Ekmark, J., 2007. Toward autonomous collision avoidance by steering. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 8, 84-94.

Modeling road user response timing in naturalistic settings: a surprise-based framework. J Engström, S Y Liu, A Dinparastdjadid, C Simoiu, arXiv:2208.08651arXiv preprintEngström, J., Liu, S.Y., Dinparastdjadid, A., Simoiu, C., 2022. Modeling road user response timing in naturalistic settings: a surprise-based frame- work. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08651 .

Realistic LiDAR with noise model for real-time testing of automated vehicles in a virtual environment. J P Espineira, J Robinson, J Groenewald, P H Chan, V Donzella, IEEE Sensors Journal. 21European Union, 2022. European regulation 2022/1426Espineira, J.P., Robinson, J., Groenewald, J., Chan, P.H., Donzella, V., 2021. Realistic LiDAR with noise model for real-time testing of automated vehicles in a virtual environment. IEEE Sensors Journal 21, 9919-9926. European Union, 2022. European regulation 2022/1426. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX: 32022R1426Źfrom=EN.

Competent and Careful human driver performance model. Japan Experts Of, Experts of Japan, 2020. Competent and Careful human driver performance model. URL: https://wiki.unece.org/download/attachments/113344748/ FRAV-07-10.pdf?api=v2.

Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: opportunities, barriers and policy recommendations. D J Fagnant, K Kockelman, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice. 77Fagnant, D.J., Kockelman, K., 2015. Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: opportunities, barriers and policy recommendations. Trans- portation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 77, 167-181.

Calibration, information, and control strategies for braking to avoid a collision. B R Fajen, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance. 31480Fajen, B.R., 2005. Calibration, information, and control strategies for braking to avoid a collision. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 31, 480.

A model predictive control approach for combined braking and steering in autonomous vehicles. P Falcone, F Borrelli, J Asgari, H E Tseng, D Hrovat, 2007 Mediterranean Conference on Control & Automation, IEEE. Falcone, P., Borrelli, F., Asgari, J., Tseng, H.E., Hrovat, D., 2007. A model predictive control approach for combined braking and steering in autonomous vehicles, in: 2007 Mediterranean Conference on Control & Automation, IEEE. pp. 1-6.

Hierarchical evasive path planning using reinforcement learning and model predictive control. Á Fehér, S Aradi, T Bécsi, IEEE Access. 8Fehér, Á., Aradi, S., Bécsi, T., 2020. Hierarchical evasive path planning using reinforcement learning and model predictive control. IEEE Access 8, 187470-187482.

Driver classification for intelligent transportation systems using fuzzy logic. S Fernandez, T Ito, 2016 IEEE 19th international conference on intelligent transportation systems (ITSC). IEEEFernandez, S., Ito, T., 2016. Driver classification for intelligent transporta- tion systems using fuzzy logic, in: 2016 IEEE 19th international confer- ence on intelligent transportation systems (ITSC), IEEE. pp. 1212-1216.

Microscopic and mesoscopic traffic models, in: Freeway traffic modelling and control. A Ferrara, S Sacone, S Siri, SpringerFerrara, A., Sacone, S., Siri, S., 2018. Microscopic and mesoscopic traffic models, in: Freeway traffic modelling and control. Springer, pp. 113- 143.

Driver Behavior Model for the Safety Assessment of Automated Driving. A Fries, F Fahrenkrog, K Donauer, M Mai, F Raisch, 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), IEEE. Fries, A., Fahrenkrog, F., Donauer, K., Mai, M., Raisch, F., 2022. Driver Behavior Model for the Safety Assessment of Automated Driving, in: 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), IEEE. pp. 1669-1674.

A behavioural car-following model for computer simulation. P Gipps, 10.1016/0191-2615(81)90037-0Transportation Research Part B: Methodological. 15Gipps, P., 1981. A behavioural car-following model for computer simu- lation. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 15, 105-111. doi:10.1016/0191-2615(81/90037-0.

A model for the structure of lane-changing decisions. P G Gipps, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological. 20Gipps, P.G., 1986. A model for the structure of lane-changing decisions. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 20, 403-414.

Vehicles, Advanced Features, Driver Behavior, and Safety: A Systematic Review of the Literature. R P Gouribhatla, S S Pulugurtha, 10.4236/jtts.2022.123026doi:10.4236/ jtts.2022.123026Journal of Transportation Technologies. 12Gouribhatla, R.P., Pulugurtha, S.S., 2022. Vehicles, Advanced Features, Driver Behavior, and Safety: A Systematic Review of the Literature. Journal of Transportation Technologies 12, 420-438. doi:10.4236/ jtts.2022.123026.

How will vehicle automation and electrification affect the automotive maintenance, repair sector?. M Grosso, I Cristinel Raileanu, J Krause, M Alonso Raposo, A Duboz, A Garus, A Mourtzouchou, B Ciuffo, 10.1016/j.trip.2021.100495Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives. 12100495Grosso, M., Cristinel Raileanu, I., Krause, J., Alonso Raposo, M., Duboz, A., Garus, A., Mourtzouchou, A., Ciuffo, B., 2021. How will vehicle automation and electrification affect the automotive maintenance, repair sector? Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 12, 100495. doi:10.1016/j.trip.2021.100495.

Modeling driver's evasive behavior during safety-critical lane changes: Two-dimensional time-to-collision and deep reinforcement learning. H Guo, K Xie, M Keyvan-Ekbatani, arXiv:2209.15133arXiv preprintGuo, H., Xie, K., Keyvan-Ekbatani, M., 2022. Modeling driver's eva- sive behavior during safety-critical lane changes: Two-dimensional time-to-collision and deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15133 .

Integrated Steering and Differential Braking for Emergency Collision Avoidance in Autonomous Vehicles. R Hajiloo, M Abroshan, A Khajepour, A Kasaiezadeh, S K Chen, 10.1109/TITS.2020.2984210doi:10.1109/ TITS.2020.2984210IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 22Hajiloo, R., Abroshan, M., Khajepour, A., Kasaiezadeh, A., Chen, S.K., 2021. Integrated Steering and Differential Braking for Emergency Collision Avoidance in Autonomous Vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 22, 3167-3178. doi:10.1109/ TITS.2020.2984210.

Modeling the car-following behavior with consideration of driver, vehicle, and environment factors: A historical review. J Han, X Wang, G Wang, 8179Sustainability 14Han, J., Wang, X., Wang, G., 2022. Modeling the car-following behavior with consideration of driver, vehicle, and environment factors: A histor- ical review. Sustainability 14, 8179.

Affordance-based perception-action dynamics: A model of visually guided braking. H S Harrison, M T Turvey, T D Frank, Psychological Review. 123305Harrison, H.S., Turvey, M.T., Frank, T.D., 2016. Affordance-based perception-action dynamics: A model of visually guided braking. Psy- chological Review 123, 305.

Formulation and validation of a carfollowing model based on deep reinforcement learning. F Hart, O Okhrin, M Treiber, arXiv:2109.14268arXiv preprintHart, F., Okhrin, O., Treiber, M., 2021. Formulation and validation of a car- following model based on deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.14268 .

Emergency steering control of autonomous vehicle for collision avoidance and stabilisation. Vehicle system dynamics. X He, Y Liu, C Lv, X Ji, Y Liu, Taylor & Francis57He, X., Liu, Y., Lv, C., Ji, X., Liu, Y., 2019. Emergency steering control of autonomous vehicle for collision avoidance and stabilisation. Vehicle system dynamics 57, 1163-1187. Publisher: Taylor & Francis.

A simple nonparametric car-following model driven by field data. Z He, L Zheng, W Guan, 10.1016/j.trb.2015.07.010Transportation Research Part B: Methodological. 80He, Z., Zheng, L., Guan, W., 2015. A simple nonparametric car-following model driven by field data. Transportation Research Part B: Method- ological 80, 185-201. doi:10.1016/j.trb.2015.07.010.

Modelling lane changing and merging in microscopic traffic simulation. P Hidas, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 10Hidas, P., 2002. Modelling lane changing and merging in microscopic traffic simulation. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 10, 351-371.

State-of-the-art of vehicular traffic flow modelling. S P Hoogendoorn, P H Bovy, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. the Institution of Mechanical Engineers215Hoogendoorn, S.P., Bovy, P.H., 2001. State-of-the-art of vehicular traffic flow modelling. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part I: Journal of Systems and Control Engineering 215, 283-303.

Use of neural fuzzy networks with mixed genetic/gradient algorithm in automated vehicle control. S Huang, W Ren, 10.1109/41.807993conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. 46Huang, S., Ren, W., 1999. Use of neural fuzzy networks with mixed genetic/gradient algorithm in automated vehicle control. IEEE Trans- actions on Industrial Electronics 46, 1090-1102. doi:10.1109/41.807993. conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics.

Collision-avoidance systems PRORETA: Situation analysis and intervention control. R Isermann, R Mannale, K Schmitt, Control Engineering Practice. 20Isermann, R., Mannale, R., Schmitt, K., 2012. Collision-avoidance systems PRORETA: Situation analysis and intervention control. Control Engi- neering Practice 20, 1236-1246.

Road vehicles -Functional safety. 26262-1:2018ISO. ISO, 2018. ISO 26262-1:2018(en), Road vehicles -Functional safety. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/43464.html.

Road Vehicles -Safety and security for automated driving systems -Design, verification and validation methods. ISO: ISO/TR 4804ISO, 2022. ISO 21448:2022: Road vehicles-Safety of the intended functionality. ISO, 2022. ISO 21448:2022: Road vehicles-Safety of the intended functionality. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/77490.html. ISO: ISO/TR 4804, 2020. Road Vehicles -Safety and security for auto- mated driving systems -Design, verification and validation methods.

Development of a Car-following Model Based on Artificial Neural Networks. H Jia, Z Juan, X Wang, Journal of Highway and Transportation Research and Development. 18Jia, H., Juan, Z., Wang, X., 2001. Development of a Car-following Model Based on Artificial Neural Networks. Journal of Highway and Transportation Research and Development 18, 92-94.

Driver model for the analysis of preaccident situations. R Jurecki, T Stańczyk, Vehicle System Dynamics. 47Jurecki, R., Stańczyk, T., 2009. Driver model for the analysis of pre- accident situations. Vehicle System Dynamics 47, 589-612.

Driving to safety: How many miles of driving would it take to demonstrate autonomous vehicle reliability?. N Kalra, S M Paddock, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice. 94Kalra, N., Paddock, S.M., 2016. Driving to safety: How many miles of driving would it take to demonstrate autonomous vehicle reliability? Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 94, 182-193.

Positive risk balance: a comprehensive framework to ensure vehicle safety. N Kauffmann, F Fahrenkrog, L Drees, F Raisch, Ethics and Information Technology. 24Kauffmann, N., Fahrenkrog, F., Drees, L., Raisch, F., 2022. Positive risk balance: a comprehensive framework to ensure vehicle safety. Ethics and Information Technology 24, 1-16.

Active pedestrian safety by automatic braking and evasive steering. C G Keller, T Dang, H Fritz, A Joos, C Rabe, D M Gavrila, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 12Keller, C.G., Dang, T., Fritz, H., Joos, A., Rabe, C., Gavrila, D.M., 2011. Active pedestrian safety by automatic braking and evasive steering. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 12, 1292- 1304.

General lane-changing model MOBIL for car-following models. A Kesting, M Treiber, D Helbing, Transportation Research Record. Kesting, A., Treiber, M., Helbing, D., 2007. General lane-changing model MOBIL for car-following models. Transportation Research Record 1999, 86-94.

Car-following model based on fuzzy inference system. S Kikuchi, Transportation Research Record. Kikuchi, S., 1992. Car-following model based on fuzzy inference system. Transportation Research Record , 82-82.

Is driving automation used as intended? Real-world use of partially automated driving systems and their safety consequences. H Kim, M Song, Z Doerzaph, Transportation research record. 2676Kim, H., Song, M., Doerzaph, Z., 2022. Is driving automation used as intended? Real-world use of partially automated driving systems and their safety consequences. Transportation research record 2676, 30-37.

A Nationwide Impact Assessment of Automated Driving Systems on Traffic Safety Using Multiagent Traffic Simulations. S Kitajima, H Chouchane, J Antona-Makoshi, N Uchida, J Tajima, 10.1109/OJITS.2022.3165769doi:10.1109/ OJITS.2022.3165769IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. 3Kitajima, S., Chouchane, H., Antona-Makoshi, J., Uchida, N., Tajima, J., 2022. A Nationwide Impact Assessment of Automated Driving Systems on Traffic Safety Using Multiagent Traffic Simulations. IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems 3, 302-312. doi:10.1109/ OJITS.2022.3165769.

A Reasonable Driver Standard for Automated Vehicle Safety. Available at SSRN 4475181. P Koopman, W H Widen, Koopman, P., Widen, W.H., 2023. A Reasonable Driver Standard for Automated Vehicle Safety. Available at SSRN 4475181 .

The highd dataset: A drone dataset of naturalistic vehicle trajectories on german highways for validation of highly automated driving systems. R Krajewski, J Bock, L Kloeker, L Eckstein, 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEEKrajewski, R., Bock, J., Kloeker, L., Eckstein, L., 2018. The highd dataset: A drone dataset of naturalistic vehicle trajectories on german highways for validation of highly automated driving systems, in: 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), IEEE. pp. 2118-2125.

A Theory of Visual Control of Braking Based on Information about Time-to-Collision. D N Lee, 10.1068/p050437doi:10.1068/ p050437Perception. 5Lee, D.N., 1976. A Theory of Visual Control of Braking Based on Infor- mation about Time-to-Collision. Perception 5, 437-459. doi:10.1068/ p050437.

Integrated deep learning and stochastic car-following model for traffic dynamics on multi-lane freeways. S Lee, D Ngoduy, M Keyvan-Ekbatani, 10.1016/j.trc.2019.07.023Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 106Lee, S., Ngoduy, D., Keyvan-Ekbatani, M., 2019. Integrated deep learning and stochastic car-following model for traffic dynamics on multi-lane freeways. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 106, 360-377. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2019.07.023.

Research on car-following modeling and simulation based on fuzzy neural network. D Li, X Liu, J Rong, J Hu, Journal of Beijing University of Technology. 33Li, D., Liu, X., Rong, J., Hu, J., 2007. Research on car-following modeling and simulation based on fuzzy neural network. Journal of Beijing University of Technology 33, 398-401.

Emergency collision avoidance strategy for autonomous vehicles based on steering and differential braking. H Li, T Zheng, F Xia, L Gao, Q Ye, Z Guo, Scientific Reports. 1222647Li, H., Zheng, T., Xia, F., Gao, L., Ye, Q., Guo, Z., 2022. Emergency collision avoidance strategy for autonomous vehicles based on steering and differential braking. Scientific Reports 12, 22647.

A car-following model accounting for the driving habits. P Liao, T Q Tang, T Wang, J Zhang, 10.1016/j.physa.2019.03.027Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 525Liao, P., Tang, T.Q., Wang, T., Zhang, J., 2019. A car-following model accounting for the driving habits. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 525, 108-118. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2019.03.027.

Learning-based stochastic driving model for autonomous vehicle testing. L Liu, S Feng, Y Feng, X Zhu, H X Liu, Transportation research record. 2676Liu, L., Feng, S., Feng, Y., Zhu, X., Liu, H.X., 2022. Learning-based stochastic driving model for autonomous vehicle testing. Transportation research record 2676, 54-64.

How safe is safe enough for self-driving vehicles. P Liu, R Yang, Z Xu, Risk analysis. 39Liu, P., Yang, R., Xu, Z., 2019a. How safe is safe enough for self-driving vehicles? Risk analysis 39, 315-325.

Calibration and evaluation of responsibility-sensitive safety (rss) in automated vehicle performance during cut-in scenarios. S Liu, X Wang, O Hassanin, X Xu, M Yang, D Hurwitz, X Wu, Transportation research part C: emerging technologies 125. 103037Liu, S., Wang, X., Hassanin, O., Xu, X., Yang, M., Hurwitz, D., Wu, X., 2021. Calibration and evaluation of responsibility-sensitive safety (rss) in automated vehicle performance during cut-in scenarios. Transporta- tion research part C: emerging technologies 125, 103037.

Queueing Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP) A computational architecture for multitask performance in human-machine systems. Y Liu, R Feyen, O Tsimhoni, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI). 13Liu, Y., Feyen, R., Tsimhoni, O., 2006. Queueing Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP) A computational architecture for multitask per- formance in human-machine systems. ACM Transactions on Computer- Human Interaction (TOCHI) 13, 37-70.

A novel lane change decision-making model of autonomous vehicle based on support vector machine. Y Liu, X Wang, L Li, S Cheng, Z Chen, IEEE access. 7Liu, Y., Wang, X., Li, L., Cheng, S., Chen, Z., 2019b. A novel lane change decision-making model of autonomous vehicle based on support vector machine. IEEE access 7, 26543-26550.

Autonomous pedestrian collision avoidance using a fuzzy steering controller. D F Llorca, V Milanés, I P Alonso, M Gavilán, I G Daza, J Pérez, M A Sotelo, IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems. 12Llorca, D.F., Milanés, V., Alonso, I.P., Gavilán, M., Daza, I.G., Pérez, J., Sotelo, M.A., 2011. Autonomous pedestrian collision avoidance using a fuzzy steering controller. IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems 12, 390-401.

A Neural-Fuzzy Framework for Modeling Car-following Behavior. X Ma, 10.1109/ICSMC.2006.3845602006 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Ma, X., 2006. A Neural-Fuzzy Framework for Modeling Car-following Behavior, in: 2006 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp. 1178-1183. doi:10.1109/ICSMC.2006.384560. iSSN: 1062-922X.

Multi-agent Cellular Automaton Model for Traffic Flow Considering the Heterogeneity of Human Delay and Accelerations. K Malecki, P Górka, M Gokieli, International Conference on Computational Science. SpringerMalecki, K., Górka, P., Gokieli, M., 2023. Multi-agent Cellular Automaton Model for Traffic Flow Considering the Heterogeneity of Human Delay and Accelerations, in: International Conference on Computational Sci- ence, Springer. pp. 539-552.

Fuzzy logic controller on automated car braking system. M Mamat, N Ghani, 2009 IEEE International Conference on Control and Automation. IEEEMamat, M., Ghani, N., 2009. Fuzzy logic controller on automated car braking system, in: 2009 IEEE International Conference on Control and Automation, IEEE. pp. 2371-2375.

Modeling driver control behavior in both routine and near-accident driving. G Markkula, 10.1177/1541931214581185doi:10.1177/ 1541931214581185Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting58Markkula, G., 2014. Modeling driver control behavior in both rou- tine and near-accident driving. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 58, 879-883. doi:10.1177/ 1541931214581185.

A Review of Near-Collision Driver Behavior Models. G Markkula, O Benderius, K Wolff, M Wahde, 10.1177/0018720812448474doi:10.1177/ 0018720812448474Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 54Markkula, G., Benderius, O., Wolff, K., Wahde, M., 2012. A Review of Near-Collision Driver Behavior Models. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 54, 1117-1143. doi:10.1177/ 0018720812448474.

A farewell to brake reaction times? Kinematics-dependent brake response in naturalistic rear-end emergencies. G Markkula, J Engström, J Lodin, J Bärgman, T Victor, 10.1016/j.aap.2016.07.007Accident Analysis & Prevention. 95Markkula, G., Engström, J., Lodin, J., Bärgman, J., Victor, T., 2016. A farewell to brake reaction times? Kinematics-dependent brake response in naturalistic rear-end emergencies. Accident Analysis & Prevention 95, 209-226. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2016.07.007.

Simulation Strategies for Mixed Traffic Conditions: A Review of Car-Following Models and Simulation Frameworks. B N Matcha, S N Namasivayam, M Hosseini Fouladi, K C Ng, S Sivanesan, S Y Eh Noum, 10.1155/2020/8231930Journal of Engineering. 2020Matcha, B.N., Namasivayam, S.N., Hosseini Fouladi, M., Ng, K.C., Sivane- san, S., Eh Noum, S.Y., 2020. Simulation Strategies for Mixed Traffic Conditions: A Review of Car-Following Models and Simulation Frame- works. Journal of Engineering 2020, 1-22. doi:10.1155/2020/8231930.

Driver models for the definition of safety requirements of automated vehicles in international regulations. Application to motorway driving conditions. K Mattas, G Albano, R Donà, M C Galassi, R Suarez-Bertoa, S Vass, B Ciuffo, 10.1016/j.aap.2022.106743Accident Analysis & Prevention. 174106743Mattas, K., Albano, G., Donà, R., Galassi, M.C., Suarez-Bertoa, R., Vass, S., Ciuffo, B., 2022. Driver models for the definition of safety require- ments of automated vehicles in international regulations. Application to motorway driving conditions. Accident Analysis & Prevention 174, 106743. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2022.106743.

Fuzzy Surrogate Safety Metrics for real-time assessment of rear-end collision risk. A study based on empirical observations. K Mattas, M Makridis, G Botzoris, A Kriston, F Minarini, B Papadopoulos, F Re, G Rognelund, B Ciuffo, Accident Analysis & Prevention. 148105794Mattas, K., Makridis, M., Botzoris, G., Kriston, A., Minarini, F., Pa- padopoulos, B., Re, F., Rognelund, G., Ciuffo, B., 2020. Fuzzy Surrogate Safety Metrics for real-time assessment of rear-end collision risk. A study based on empirical observations. Accident Analysis & Prevention 148, 105794.

Scenarios for development, test and validation of automated vehicles. T Menzel, G Bagschik, M Maurer, 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). Menzel, T., Bagschik, G., Maurer, M., 2018. Scenarios for development, test and validation of automated vehicles, in: 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 1821-1827.

Lane changing models: a critical review. S Moridpour, M Sarvi, G Rose, Transportation letters. 2Moridpour, S., Sarvi, M., Rose, G., 2010. Lane changing models: a critical review. Transportation letters 2, 157-173.

A cellular automaton model for freeway traffic. K Nagel, M Schreckenberg, 10.1051/jp1:1992277Journal de Physique I. 2Nagel, K., Schreckenberg, M., 1992. A cellular automaton model for freeway traffic. Journal de Physique I 2, 2221-2229. doi:10.1051/jp1: 1992277.

Defining reasonably foreseeable parameter ranges using real-world traffic data for scenario-based safety assessment of automated vehicles. H Nakamura, H Muslim, R Kato, S Préfontaine-Watanabe, H Nakamura, H Kaneko, H Imanaga, J Antona-Makoshi, S Kitajima, N Uchida, IEEE Access. 10Nakamura, H., Muslim, H., Kato, R., Préfontaine-Watanabe, S., Nakamura, H., Kaneko, H., Imanaga, H., Antona-Makoshi, J., Kitajima, S., Uchida, N., others, 2022. Defining reasonably foreseeable parameter ranges using real-world traffic data for scenario-based safety assessment of automated vehicles. IEEE Access 10, 37743-37760.

A simplified car-following theory: a lower order model. G F Newell, 10.1016/S0191-2615(00)00044-8Transportation Research Part B: Methodological. 36Newell, G.F., 2002. A simplified car-following theory: a lower order model. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 36, 195-205. doi:10.1016/S0191-2615(00/00044-8.

The safety force field. D Nistér, H L Lee, J Ng, Y Wang, NVIDIA White PaperNistér, D., Lee, H.L., Ng, J., Wang, Y., 2019. The safety force field. NVIDIA White Paper .

F Oboril, C Buerkle, A Sussmann, S Bitton, S Fabris, arXiv:2205.02621MTBF Model for AVs-From Perception Errors to Vehicle-Level Failures. arXiv preprintOboril, F., Buerkle, C., Sussmann, A., Bitton, S., Fabris, S., 2022. MTBF Model for AVs-From Perception Errors to Vehicle-Level Failures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02621 .

Modelling vehicle interactions in microscopic simulation of merging and weaving. P Hidas, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 13P. Hidas, 2005. Modelling vehicle interactions in microscopic simulation of merging and weaving. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 13, 37-62.

Emergency collision avoidance by steering in critical situations. J Park, D Kim, K Huh, International journal of automotive technology. 22Park, J., Kim, D., Huh, K., 2021. Emergency collision avoidance by steering in critical situations. International journal of automotive technology 22, 173-184.

A Review of Human Performance Models for Prediction of Driver Behavior and Interactions With In-Vehicle Technology. J Park, P.E.A.R.S. ConsortiumM Zahabi, P.E.A.R.S. Consortium10.1177/00187208221132740Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Prospective effectiveness assessment for road safety: OverviewPark, J., Zahabi, M., 2022. A Review of Human Performance Models for Prediction of Driver Behavior and Interactions With In-Vehicle Technology. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , 001872082211327doi:10.1177/00187208221132740. P.E.A.R.S. Consortium, 2021. Prospective effectiveness assessment for road safety: Overview. URL: https://wiki.unece.org/download/ attachments/123666581/VMAD-SG2-1203%20PEARS%20Presentation.pdf?api= v2.

An Integrated Model for Autonomous Speed and Lane Change Decision-Making Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. J Peng, S Zhang, Y Zhou, Z Li, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 23Peng, J., Zhang, S., Zhou, Y., Li, Z., 2022. An Integrated Model for Autonomous Speed and Lane Change Decision-Making Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta- tion Systems 23, 21848-21860.

Simplified, data-driven, errorable car-following model to predict the safety effects of distracted driving. J Przybyla, J Taylor, J Jupe, X Zhou, 10.1109/ITSC.2012.63389132012 15th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems. Anchorage, AK, USAIEEEPrzybyla, J., Taylor, J., Jupe, J., Zhou, X., 2012. Simplified, data-driven, errorable car-following model to predict the safety effects of distracted driving, in: 2012 15th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE, Anchorage, AK, USA. pp. 1149-1154. doi:10.1109/ITSC.2012.6338913.

Review of Microscopic Lane-Changing Models and Future Research Opportunities. M Rahman, M Chowdhury, Y Xie, Y He, 10.1109/TITS.2013.2272074IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 14Rahman, M., Chowdhury, M., Xie, Y., He, Y., 2013. Review of Mi- croscopic Lane-Changing Models and Future Research Opportunities. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 14, 1942- 1956. doi:10.1109/TITS.2013.2272074.

A new lane-changing model with consideration of driving style. G Ren, Y Zhang, H Liu, K Zhang, Y Hu, International Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems Research. 17Ren, G., Zhang, Y., Liu, H., Zhang, K., Hu, Y., 2019. A new lane-changing model with consideration of driving style. International Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems Research 17, 181-189.

Automatic braking system using fuzzy logic method. I Rizianiza, D Shoodiqin, Journal of Physics: Conference Series. IOP Publishing12005Rizianiza, I., Shoodiqin, D., 2021. Automatic braking system using fuzzy logic method, in: Journal of Physics: Conference Series, IOP Publishing. p. 012005.

Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles. Sae J3016, 10.4271/J3016_202104SAE J3016, 2021. Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Re- lated to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehi- cles. URL: https://doi.org/10.4271/J3016_202104, doi:https://doi.org/ 10.4271/J3016_202104.

Collision avoidance effectiveness of an automated driving system using a human driver behavior reference model in reconstructed fatal collisions. J Scanlon, K Kusano, J Engström, T Victor, Waymo, LLCScanlon, J., Kusano, K., Engström, J., Victor, T., 2022. Collision avoidance effectiveness of an automated driving system using a human driver behavior reference model in reconstructed fatal collisions. Waymo, LLC .

Integrated lane change model with relaxation and synchronization. W J Schakel, V L Knoop, B Van Arem, Transportation Research Record. 2316Schakel, W.J., Knoop, V.L., van Arem, B., 2012. Integrated lane change model with relaxation and synchronization. Transportation Research Record 2316, 47-57.

Analyzing driver-pedestrian interaction at crosswalks: A contribution to autonomous driving in urban environments. F Schneemann, I Gohl, 10.1109/IVS.2016.75353612016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). Schneemann, F., Gohl, I., 2016. Analyzing driver-pedestrian interaction at crosswalks: A contribution to autonomous driving in urban environ- ments, in: 2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 38-43. doi:10.1109/IVS.2016.7535361.

Automatic steering and braking for a collision avoiding vehicle. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 39, 378-383. SET Level, 2022. The SET Level project. M Schorn, R Isermann, Schorn, M., Isermann, R., 2006. Automatic steering and braking for a collision avoiding vehicle. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 39, 378-383. SET Level, 2022. The SET Level project. URL: https://setlevel.de/en/ project.

Analysis of effects of driver's evasive action time on rear-end collision risk using a driving simulator. D Shah, C Lee, Journal of safety research. 78ElsevierShah, D., Lee, C., 2021. Analysis of effects of driver's evasive action time on rear-end collision risk using a driving simulator. Journal of safety research 78, 242-250. Publisher: Elsevier.

On a formal model of safe and scalable self-driving cars. S Shalev-Shwartz, S Shammah, A Shashua, arXiv:1708.06374arXiv preprintShalev-Shwartz, S., Shammah, S., Shashua, A., 2017. On a formal model of safe and scalable self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06374 .

Is more always better? the impact of vehicular trajectory completeness on car-following model calibration and validation. A Sharma, Z Zheng, A Bhaskar, Transportation research part B: methodological. 120Sharma, A., Zheng, Z., Bhaskar, A., 2019. Is more always better? the impact of vehicular trajectory completeness on car-following model calibration and validation. Transportation research part B: methodological 120, 49- 75.

Driving decision and control for automated lane change behavior based on deep reinforcement learning. T Shi, P Wang, X Cheng, C Y Chan, D Huang, 2019 IEEE intelligent transportation systems conference (ITSC). IEEEShi, T., Wang, P., Cheng, X., Chan, C.Y., Huang, D., 2019. Driving decision and control for automated lane change behavior based on deep reinforcement learning, in: 2019 IEEE intelligent transportation systems conference (ITSC), IEEE. pp. 2895-2900.

Emergency Lane-Change Maneuvers of Autonomous Vehicles. Z Shiller, S Sundar, 10.1115/1.2801319doi:10.1115/1.2801319Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control. 120Shiller, Z., Sundar, S., 1998. Emergency Lane-Change Maneuvers of Autonomous Vehicles. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control 120, 37-44. URL: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2801319, doi:10.1115/1.2801319. _eprint: https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/dynamicsystems/article-

Autonomous vehicle collision avoidance system using path planning and model-predictive-controlbased active front steering and wheel torque control. T Shim, G Adireddy, H Yuan, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of automobile engineering. 226Shim, T., Adireddy, G., Yuan, H., 2012. Autonomous vehicle collision avoidance system using path planning and model-predictive-control- based active front steering and wheel torque control. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of automobile engineering 226, 767-778.

Review of models of driver behaviour and development of a unified driver behaviour model for driving in safety critical situations, in: Human Modelling in Assisted Transportation. D Shinar, I Oppenheim, SpringerShinar, D., Oppenheim, I., 2011. Review of models of driver behaviour and development of a unified driver behaviour model for driving in safety critical situations, in: Human Modelling in Assisted Transportation. Springer, pp. 215-223.

Report on design of modules for the stochastic traffic simulation. C Siebke, M Bäumler, M Ringhand, I M Mai, F Elrod, I G Prokop, Technische Universität DresdenSiebke, C., Bäumler, M., Ringhand, M., Mai, I.M., Elrod, F., Prokop, I.G., 2021. Report on design of modules for the stochastic traffic simulation. Technical Report. Technische Universität Dresden.

What do traffic simulations have to provide for virtual road safety assessment? human error modeling in traffic simulations. C Siebke, M Mai, G Prokop, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. Siebke, C., Mai, M., Prokop, G., 2022. What do traffic simulations have to provide for virtual road safety assessment? human error modeling in traffic simulations. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems .

Analyzing driver behavior under naturalistic driving conditions: A review. H Singh, A Kathuria, 10.1016/j.aap.2020.105908Accident Analysis & Prevention. 150105908Singh, H., Kathuria, A., 2021. Analyzing driver behavior under naturalistic driving conditions: A review. Accident Analysis & Prevention 150, 105908. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2020.105908.

Steering control collision avoidance system and verification through subject study. D Soudbakhsh, A Eskandarian, IET intelligent transport systems. 9Soudbakhsh, D., Eskandarian, A., 2015. Steering control collision avoid- ance system and verification through subject study. IET intelligent transport systems 9, 907-915.

Vehicle collision avoidance maneuvers with limited lateral acceleration using optimal trajectory control. D Soudbakhsh, A Eskandarian, D Chichka, Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control. 13541006Soudbakhsh, D., Eskandarian, A., Chichka, D., 2013. Vehicle collision avoidance maneuvers with limited lateral acceleration using optimal trajectory control. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control 135, 041006.

An emergency evasive maneuver algorithm for vehicles. D Soudbakhsh, A Eskandarian, J Moreau, 14th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), IEEE. Soudbakhsh, D., Eskandarian, A., Moreau, J., 2011. An emergency evasive maneuver algorithm for vehicles, in: 2011 14th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), IEEE. pp. 973-978.

Computational modeling of driver pre-crash brake response, with and without off-road glances: Parameterization using real-world crashes and nearcrashes. M Svärd, G Markkula, J Bärgman, T Victor, 10.1016/j.aap.2021.106433doi:10.1016/ j.aap.2021.106433Accident Analysis & Prevention. 163106433Svärd, M., Markkula, G., Bärgman, J., Victor, T., 2021. Computa- tional modeling of driver pre-crash brake response, with and without off-road glances: Parameterization using real-world crashes and near- crashes. Accident Analysis & Prevention 163, 106433. doi:10.1016/ j.aap.2021.106433.

H Tattegrain-Veste, T Bellet, A Pauzié, A Chapon, Computational driver model in transport engineering: COSMODRIVE. Transportation research record 1550. Tattegrain-Veste, H., Bellet, T., Pauzié, A., Chapon, A., 1996. Computa- tional driver model in transport engineering: COSMODRIVE. Trans- portation research record 1550, 1-7.

Modeling integrated lane-changing behavior. T Toledo, H N Koutsopoulos, M E Ben-Akiva, Transportation Research Record. 1857Toledo, T., Koutsopoulos, H.N., Ben-Akiva, M.E., 2003. Modeling inte- grated lane-changing behavior. Transportation Research Record 1857, 30-38.

Congested traffic states in empirical observations and microscopic simulations. M Treiber, A Hennecke, D Helbing, Physical review E. 621805Treiber, M., Hennecke, A., Helbing, D., 2000. Congested traffic states in empirical observations and microscopic simulations. Physical review E 62, 1805.

Delays, inaccuracies and anticipation in microscopic traffic models. M Treiber, A Kesting, D Helbing, 10.1016/j.physa.2005.05.001Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications. 360Treiber, M., Kesting, A., Helbing, D., 2006. Delays, inaccuracies and antic- ipation in microscopic traffic models. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 360, 71-88. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.05.001.

UN Regulation No. 157 -Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regards to Automated Lane Keeping Systems. U N Ece, UN ECE, 2021. UN Regulation No. 157 -Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regards to Automated Lane Keeping Sys- tems. URL: http://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/ 36fd3041-807a-11eb-9ac9-01aa75ed71a1.

The release of autonomous vehicles. W Wachenfeld, H Winner, Autonomous driving. SpringerWachenfeld, W., Winner, H., 2016. The release of autonomous vehicles, in: Autonomous driving. Springer, pp. 425-449.

On the implementation of an interiorpoint filter line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. A Wächter, L T Biegler, Mathematical programming. 106Wächter, A., Biegler, L.T., 2006. On the implementation of an interior- point filter line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical programming 106, 25-57.

Online safety assessment of automated vehicles using silent testing. C Wang, K Storms, H Winner, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 23Wang, C., Storms, K., Winner, H., 2021. Online safety assessment of automated vehicles using silent testing. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 13069-13083.

Integrated Control of Steering and Braking for Effective Collision Avoidance with Autonomous Emergency Braking in Automated Driving. D Wang, K Nazem Tahmasebi, D Chen, 30Wang, D., Nazem Tahmasebi, K., Chen, D., 2022a. Integrated Control of Steering and Braking for Effective Collision Avoidance with Au- tonomous Emergency Braking in Automated Driving, in: 2022 30th

10.1109/MED54222.2022.9837228Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED). Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), pp. 945- 950. doi:10.1109/MED54222.2022.9837228.

A Reinforcement Learning Based Approach for Automated Lane Change Maneuvers. P Wang, C Y Chan, A De La Fortelle, 10.1109/IVS.2018.8500556doi:10.1109/ IVS.2018.85005562018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). Wang, P., Chan, C.Y., de La Fortelle, A., 2018a. A Reinforcement Learning Based Approach for Automated Lane Change Maneuvers, in: 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 1379-1384. doi:10.1109/ IVS.2018.8500556.

Capturing Car-Following Behaviors by Deep Learning. X Wang, R Jiang, L Li, Y Lin, X Zheng, F Y Wang, 10.1109/TITS.2017.2706963910-920. doi:10.1109/ TITS.2017.2706963conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 19Wang, X., Jiang, R., Li, L., Lin, Y., Zheng, X., Wang, F.Y., 2018b. Capturing Car-Following Behaviors by Deep Learning. IEEE Trans- actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 19, 910-920. doi:10.1109/ TITS.2017.2706963. conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems.

Safety Performance Boundary Identification of Highly Automated Vehicles: A Surrogate Model-Based Gradient Descent Searching Approach. Y Wang, R Yu, S Qiu, J Sun, H Farah, 10.1109/TITS.2022.3191088IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 23Wang, Y., Yu, R., Qiu, S., Sun, J., Farah, H., 2022b. Safety Perfor- mance Boundary Identification of Highly Automated Vehicles: A Sur- rogate Model-Based Gradient Descent Searching Approach. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 23809-23820. doi:10.1109/TITS.2022.3191088.

The dynamics of perception and action. W H Warren, 10.1037/0033-295X.113.2.358Psychological Review. 113Warren, W.H., 2006. The dynamics of perception and action. Psychological Review 113, 358-389. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.113.2.358.

A simulation-based, statistical approach for the derivation of concrete scenarios for the release of highly automated driving functions, in: AmE 2020-Automotive meets Electronics; 11th GMM-Symposium, VDE. N Weber, D Frerichs, U Eberle, Weber, N., Frerichs, D., Eberle, U., 2020. A simulation-based, statistical approach for the derivation of concrete scenarios for the release of highly automated driving functions, in: AmE 2020-Automotive meets Electronics; 11th GMM-Symposium, VDE. pp. 1-6.

Simulation des StraBenverkehrsflusses. R Wiedemann, GermanyInstitut fur Verkehrswesen. University of KarlsruheWiedemann, R., 1974. Simulation des StraBenverkehrsflusses. Institut fur Verkehrswesen. University of Karlsruhe, Germany .

Modelling stochastic gaze distribution for multi-agent traffic simulation: Impact of driver characteristics and situational traffic circumstances on the driver's gaze behaviour. M Witt, P Ring, L Wang, K Kompaß, G Prokop, 10.17185/duepublico/48594Kognitive Systeme. Witt, M., Ring, P., Wang, L., Kompaß, K., Prokop, G., 2018. Modelling stochastic gaze distribution for multi-agent traffic simulation: Impact of driver characteristics and situational traffic circumstances on the driver's gaze behaviour. Kognitive Systeme 2018. doi:10.17185/duepublico/ 48594.

End-to-End Driving Model for Steering Control of Autonomous Vehicles with Future Spatiotemporal Features. T Wu, A Luo, R Huang, H Cheng, Y Zhao, 10.1109/IROS40897.2019.8968453doi:10.1109/ IROS40897.2019.89684532019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). Wu, T., Luo, A., Huang, R., Cheng, H., Zhao, Y., 2019. End-to-End Driv- ing Model for Steering Control of Autonomous Vehicles with Future Spatiotemporal Features, in: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 950-955. doi:10.1109/ IROS40897.2019.8968453. iSSN: 2153-0866.

Collision imminent steering at high speeds on curved roads using one-level nonlinear model predictive control. J Wurts, J L Stein, T Ersal, IEEE Access. 9Wurts, J., Stein, J.L., Ersal, T., 2021. Collision imminent steering at high speeds on curved roads using one-level nonlinear model predictive control. IEEE Access 9, 39292-39302.

A data-driven lane-changing model based on deep learning. D F Xie, Z Z Fang, B Jia, Z He, Transportation research part C: emerging technologies. 106Xie, D.F., Fang, Z.Z., Jia, B., He, Z., 2019. A data-driven lane-changing model based on deep learning. Transportation research part C: emerging technologies 106, 41-60.

Development of a Car-following Model Based on Combined Neural Network Model. X Xu, J Rong, L Wang, Journal of Highway and Transportation Research and Development. 24Xu, X., Rong, J., Wang, L., 2007. Development of a Car-following Model Based on Combined Neural Network Model. Journal of Highway and Transportation Research and Development 24, 130-132.

A microscopic traffic simulator for evaluation of dynamic traffic management systems. Q Yang, H N Koutsopoulos, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 4Yang, Q., Koutsopoulos, H.N., 1996. A microscopic traffic simulator for evaluation of dynamic traffic management systems. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 4, 113-129.

A new stochastic cellular automata model for traffic flow simulation with drivers' behavior prediction. M Zamith, R C P Leal-Toledo, E Clua, E M Toledo, G V De Magalhães, Journal of computational science. 9ElsevierZamith, M., Leal-Toledo, R.C.P., Clua, E., Toledo, E.M., de Magalhães, G.V., 2015. A new stochastic cellular automata model for traffic flow simulation with drivers' behavior prediction. Journal of computational science 9, 51-56. Publisher: Elsevier.

Study on Driving Decision-Making Mechanism of Autonomous Vehicle Based on an Optimized Support Vector Machine Regression. J Zhang, Y Liao, S Wang, J Han, 10.3390/app8010013Applied Sciences. 813Zhang, J., Liao, Y., Wang, S., Han, J., 2018. Study on Driving Decision-Making Mechanism of Autonomous Vehicle Based on an Optimized Support Vector Machine Regression. Applied Sciences 8, 13. doi:10.3390/app8010013.

User perceptions of signalised intersection level of service using fuzzy logic. L Zhang, P D Prevedouros, Transportmetrica. 7Zhang, L., Prevedouros, P.D., 2011. User perceptions of signalised inter- section level of service using fuzzy logic. Transportmetrica 7, 279-296.

The AD4CHE Dataset and its Application in Typical Congestion Scenarios of Traffic Jam Pilot Systems. Y Zhang, C Wang, R Yu, L Wang, W Quan, Y Gao, P Li, 10.1109/TIV.2023.3260902IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles. Zhang, Y., Wang, C., Yu, R., Wang, L., Quan, W., Gao, Y., Li, P., 2023. The AD4CHE Dataset and its Application in Typical Congestion Scenarios of Traffic Jam Pilot Systems. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , 1-12doi:10.1109/TIV.2023.3260902.

How do drivers respond to driving risk during car-following? Risk-response driver model and its application in human-like longitudinal control. X Zhao, R He, J Wang, Accident Analysis & Prevention. 148105783Zhao, X., He, R., Wang, J., 2020. How do drivers respond to driving risk during car-following? Risk-response driver model and its application in human-like longitudinal control. Accident Analysis & Prevention 148, 105783.

Emergency steering evasion assistance control based on driving behavior analysis. Z Zhao, L Zhou, Y Luo, K Li, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 20Zhao, Z., Zhou, L., Luo, Y., Li, K., 2018. Emergency steering evasion as- sistance control based on driving behavior analysis. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 20, 457-475.

Emergency Steering Evasion Assistance Control Based on Driving Behavior Analysis. Z Zhao, L Zhou, Y Luo, K Li, 10.1109/TITS.2018.2814687doi:10.1109/ TITS.2018.2814687IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 20Zhao, Z., Zhou, L., Luo, Y., Li, K., 2019. Emergency Steering Evasion Assistance Control Based on Driving Behavior Analysis. IEEE Trans- actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 20, 457-475. doi:10.1109/ TITS.2018.2814687.

Application of artificial neural network and particle swarm optimization in car-following model. L Zhou, D Wang, W Li, Journal of Jilin University (Engineering and T echnology EditionZhou, L., Wang, D., Li, W., 2009. Application of artificial neural network and particle swarm optimization in car-following model. Journal of Jilin University (Engineering and T echnology Edition) , 896-899.

A recurrent neural network based microscopic car following model to predict traffic oscillation. M Zhou, X Qu, X Li, 10.1016/j.trc.2017.08.027doi:10.1016/ j.trc.2017.08.027Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 84Zhou, M., Qu, X., Li, X., 2017. A recurrent neural network based micro- scopic car following model to predict traffic oscillation. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 84, 245-264. doi:10.1016/ j.trc.2017.08.027.

Human-like autonomous car-following model with deep reinforcement learning. M Zhu, X Wang, Y Wang, 10.1016/j.trc.2018.10.024Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 97Zhu, M., Wang, X., Wang, Y., 2018. Human-like autonomous car-following model with deep reinforcement learning. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 97, 348-368. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2018.10.024.