# The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review

CorpusID: 258227879
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review
Published: 18 April 2023

Roxane Cool 
Yvan Vandenplas 

Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB)
BrusselUZ


KidZ Health Castle
1090BrusselsBelgium

The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review
Published: 18 April 202310.3390/nu15081942Received: 12 March 2023 Revised: 8 April 2023 Accepted: 13 April 2023Citation: Cool, R.; Vandenplas, Y. The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review. Nutrients 2023, 15, 1942. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/nu15081942 Academic Editor: Hans Demmelmair Copyright: This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/). nutrients Reviewprebioticfructooligosaccharidegalactooligosaccharideinulinhuman milk oligosaccha- rideinfant formulainfectionantibiotic
Breastfeeding plays a protective role against infections, partially through the prebiotic effect of human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs). Aiming to mimic these beneficial capacities, there is an ongoing search to make infant formula closer to human milk, including by adding oligosaccharides. Over the past two decades, multiple studies have been published on different types of prebiotics and their role in reducing infection rates in infants. This review aims to answer the question of whether there is evidence that the addition of oligosaccharides to infant formula decreases the prevalence of infection, and whether the effect is influenced by the kind of oligosaccharide added. The review of the literature reveals an important heterogeneity, including different types and dosages of prebiotics, different intervention periods and inclusion criteria, etc., making it impossible to formulate a consensus about the efficacy of adding prebiotics to infant formula. We would cautiously suggest that supplementation with galactooligosaccharides (GOSs)/fructooligosaccharides (FOSs) seems to have a beneficial effect on infection rates. For HMOs, more studies about the different types of HMOs are necessary to make any deductions. GOSs alone, inulin, and MOSs (bovine-milkderived oligosaccharides) do not reduce the incidence of infections. The combination of GOSs and PDX (polydextrose) was found to play a protective role in one study. The evidence of the effect of prebiotics in reducing the use of antibiotics is low. The many lacunas in the direction of study uniformity offer many opportunities for further research.

## Introduction

Human milk offers multiple advantages in comparison to infant formula, such as a more balanced development of the immune system, decreased prevalence of infections, and better cognitive development [1][2][3]. These differences are at least partially related to the differences in the intestinal microbiota composition of breastfed infants compared to formula-fed infants, particularly with respect to Bifidobacteria species [4][5][6].

Breast milk is rich in bioactive elements with a protective role against infections, including immunoglobulins, lactoperoxidase, lysozymes, lactobacilli, and human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) [7]. As the third most abundant component in human milk, HMOs reach concentrations of >20 g/L in colostrum and 12-14 g/L in mature milk during early lactation. There are many confounding variables influencing the amount of HMOs in relation to the duration of lactation [8]. HMOs are complex carbohydrates of which more than 200 types have been identified in human milk. In secretor mothers, 2 -fucosyllactose (2 -FL) is the most common. Only one to a few percent of the HMOs are absorbed through the intestinal wall; the majority of the HMOs reach the colon intact. HMOs are prebiotics with obvious bifidogenic effects on the gut microbiota. Different mechanisms of action have been identified for HMOs, such as anti-adhesive and antimicrobial effects [9,10], decreased intestinal permeability, and modulation of the intestinal immune response [11], infectious diseases [10,12], and immune [13,14] and brain development [15,16]. Some studies tend to link the prebiotic effect with the composition of the HMOs [12].

The mean annual infection rate in children under three years is three to five [17,18] which generates multiple healthcare visits, important morbidity and mortality, but also economic burdens for the family and society [19]. Taking into account the positive effects of breastfeeding on the infection rates, there is an ongoing search to make infant formula closer to mother's milk. Several tracks are being explored, such as adding probiotics [20], supplementation with DHA/ARA/EPA (docosahexaenoic acid/arachidonic acid/eicosapentaenoic acid) [21], and milk fat globule membrane (MFGM) [22,23].

Another widely investigated track is the supplementation of infant formula with oligosaccharides (OSs) in order to simulate the same advantageous effect as the HMOs. It was initially impossible to synthesise HMOs; thus, the first trials used OSs such as fructoor galactooligosaccharides (FOSs, GOSs), inulin, polydextrose (PDX), etc., It was only after 2014 that it became possible to synthesise OSs in sufficient amounts and at sufficient quality with an identical structure to that of HMOs through precision fermentation by genetically modified microorganisms. There are currently only a limited number of HMOs available and approved for use in infant formula and in nutritional supplements. These HMOs include 2 -FL, 3 -FL, DFL, LNT, LNnT, 3 -SL, and 6 -SL. These synthetic HMOs are all short-chain OSs.

Multiple randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were performed during the past two decades to improve our understanding of the potential beneficial effects of prebiotic OSs added to infant formula. All of these studies showed that the currently established prebiotic OSs are well tolerated [24,25]. Some studies tend to show a reduction in the prevalence of infections and antibiotic prescriptions [26][27][28]. However, these results are disputed in other studies reporting no benefit. Systematic reviews on the effect of prebiotics on infection could no show a difference according to the type of prebiotic [24,29]. It remains unclear whether these outcomes differ for synthesised human OSs or other established prebiotic OSs. This article aims to review the literature regarding the effects of different types of prebiotics on infection rates and antibiotic use.


## Materials and Methods

This review aimed to answer the question of whether there is evidence that the addition of oligosaccharides to infant formula can decrease the prevalence of infection, and whether the effect is influenced by the kind of oligosaccharide added (Table 1). We also cross-checked references cited in RCTs and (systematic) reviews on the subject. We only included RCTs published in English. There were no restrictions on the date of publication or on the duration of the trials. There were no exclusion criteria regarding the type of infant formula or gender. The focus of this review is on prebiotics. Depending on how they were used, studies with complementation of probiotics were included. If the probiotics were only added in the intervention group, the study was excluded. Studies where probiotics were administered to both the intervention and the control group were included. In case of lack of clarity in the article, an email was sent to the designated corresponding author. In case of persistent ambiguity, the article was excluded.


## Results

After our literature search, we selected 17 publications, which we divided into three groups.


### Galactooligosaccharides (GOSs)/Fructooligosaccharides (FOSs)

We found six publications reporting on four trials with short-chain (sc) GOSs and longchain (lc) FOSs, as listed in Table 2 [26,27,[30][31][32][33]. All patients were healthy term infants born in Europe. Two trials reported short-and long-term observations (six months [30] to two years [26] and one year [32] to five years [33]). A total of 2206 participants were included, of whom 946 participants received scGOSs/lcFOSs in a range of 4 to 8 g/L. A total of 960 participants were included in the control group and received unsupplemented infant formula. In the study of van Stuijvenberg et al. [32,33], a third group with breastfeeding was included as a reference group. One study was not blinded [27]. In one study, only patients with a parental history of atopy were included [26,30], whereas parental atopic history was an exclusion criterion in two other studies [31][32][33].

In the trial reported by Arslanoglu et al., the effect of 8 g/L GOSs/FOSs was evaluated in infants with a parental atopic history. During the six months of intervention, a difference was noted in the prevalence of infections (p = 0.01), recurrent infections (p < 0.05), and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections (p < 0.05) [30]. Antibiotic intake tended to be lower, but this was not statistically significant (p = 0.1). After an observation of two years, the number of infections was still lower (p < 0.01), and a statistically significant difference in antibiotic use was observed (p < 0.05) [26]. There were also less upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) (p < 0.01). Furthermore, this trial showed a trend of a lower incidence of urinary tract infections (p = 0.06).

In an open controlled trial by Bruzzese et al., infants were given 4 g/L GOSs/FOSs over the course of one year [27]. The included patients were 15 to 120 days old at inclusion and had a minimum of two weeks of exclusive breastfeeding. In this study, the prevalence of diarrhoea episodes was lower (p = 0.015). The number of URTIs was comparable (p = 0.4), but the number of recurrent URTIs tended to be lower (p = 0.06). Only 60% of the participants had at least one URTI, but there were no precise observations about the annual infection rate per child. The mean antibiotic use was lower (p = 0.038), as was the number children receiving two or more antibiotic courses per year (p = 0.004).

Bocquet et al. investigated the effects of 4 g/L GOSs/FOSs added to infant formula [31]. Bifidobacterium animalis subspecies lactis (B. lactis) was added to both the control and intervention formula, given to 278 and 290 infants, respectively. After an intervention and observation time of 12 months, there were no differences in the overall infection rates (p = 0.18), nor in the different types of infections (i.e., upper and lower RTIs, gastrointestinal infections, and others). There were no differences in antibiotic use (p = 0.3).  The fourth study explored the outcomes of 6.8 g/L GOSs/FOSs and 1.2 g/L pectinederived acidic OSs added to infant formula (n = 414), compared to standard formula (n = 416) and breastfeeding (n = 300), during an intervention period of 12 months. The primary outcome was the number of episodes of fever, defined by a rectal temperature > 38.5 • C. After the observation periods of 1 and 5 years, no differences in the occurrence of fever episodes were reported (p > 0.05 [32] and p = 0.22 [33], respectively). However, in a per protocol analysis, a reduction in fever in the first 6 months was reported (p < 0.05) [32]. Overall, a low infection rate (1.15/child/year) was reported. However, it is noteworthy that more infection episodes were reported in the breastfeeding group, especially for 'runny or blocked nose'.


### Human Milk Oligosaccharides

We retained six publications on human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) ( Table 3) [28,[34][35][36][37][38] involving a total of 1571 infants, conducted in America, Europe, and Asia. Five studies included only healthy term infants, and one study examined the effects of HMOs on infants with cow's milk allergy (CMA). HMOs were added in a range of 0.25 g/L to 5.8 g/L, using 2 -FL, LNnT, 3 -FL, LNT, 3 -SL, and 6 -SL.

The first study was published in 2015 by Marriage et al. In this study, four groups were compared: (i) formula supplemented with 2.2 g/L GOSs and 0.2 g/L 2 -FL; (ii) 1.4 g/L GOSs and 1 g/L 2 -FL; (iii) in the control group, infant formula with 2.4 g/L GOSs; and (iv) a breastfed reference group. After an intervention and observation period of four months, there were more infections in the second intervention group (38/109) and in the control group (28/109) compared to the first intervention group (11/104) (p < 0.05) [34]. These results were not compared to the breastfeeding group. It should be noted that the control group received a prebiotic as well, and that the total dosage of prebiotic was 2.4 g/L in each group. Considering this study setup and its results, which are difficult to interpret, this study was not considered in our conclusions.

In the study by Puccio et al., formula was supplemented with 2 -FL and LNnT for six months [28]. After an observation period of 12 months, fewer infections (p = 0.051) and a decreased use of antibiotics (p < 0.05) were reported. Furthermore, there was less bronchitis (p < 0.01) and a lower incidence of RTIs (p < 0.05).

Storm and co-workers added a small amount of 2 -FL (0.25 g/L) to partially hydrolysed formula containing B. lactis over a period of six weeks. The control formula contained B. lactis as well. In the adverse events, they observed a reduction in the incidence of infections, which was low in both groups (9/38 vs. 3/40; p = 0.05) [35]. Due to the small sample of participants (78 infants), short period of intervention, and low infection rate, this study was not included in our conclusions.

In two RCTs, published by Parschat and Lasekan, a mix of five HMOs (5.75 g/L) was added to infant formula over the course of four months. Both investigations reported no decrease in infection rates. In the study of Parschat et al., the infection rate was 32/113 vs. 28/112 (p = 0.54) [36]. In the study of Lasekan et al., the antipyretic use was comparable (4/128 and 4/126), as was the antibiotic use (4/128 vs. 4/126) [38]. However, the study of Lasekan was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic, where the infection rates in infants were generally low (7.6% of included patients), which is likely to have had an impact on these observations. When added to extensively hydrolysed formula in a study population of 190 infants, 2 -FL and LNnT were associated with a reduction in the frequency of a range of infections [37]. In the subgroups, there was a risk reduction of 34% for lower RTIs (13/94 vs. 20/96; p = 0.25). There was no difference in the incidence of URTIs (p = 0.77); however, the frequency of URTIs per year was lower (p = 0.003). Further analyses showed a reduction in otitis media (p = 0.17; relative risk reduction 70%) and fewer gastrointestinal infections (p = 0.021). There were no reductions in antipyretic (p = 0.6) or antibiotic use (p = 0.8).


### Other Prebiotics

Studies concerning other prebiotics are listed in Table 4.     When only adding 4.4-5 g/L GOSs to infant formula until the age of one year, no significant reduction in the prevalence of infections was reported [39]. This conclusion was held after observing 365 infants until the age of one year, where there was no reduction in URTIs (p = 0.44), recurrent URTIs (p = 0.87), episodes of diarrhoea (p = 0.36), or in the prescription rate of antibiotics (p = 0.48). In this trial, only infections diagnosed by a paediatrician were included.

The combination of high amounts (20-25%) of beta-palmitic acid and 5 g/L GOSs during a period of three to six months did not result in a reduction in overall infections (p = 0.63), nor in the gastrointestinal (p = 0.75) or respiratory infections (p = 0.63) [41]. The overall infection rate in this trial was remarkably low (3/22 vs. 2/19).

A publication from 2018 explored the combination of GOSs and PDX supplemented to infant formula given to 400 randomised participants over the course of 48 weeks [40]. The results showed a reduction in RTIs during the 48 weeks (p = 0.02), but this difference was no longer detected at the age of 96 weeks (p > 0.05). Recurrent RTIs remained lower in the intervention group at 46 and 96 weeks (p = 0.04). There was no difference in the total antibiotic use (58/118 vs. 58/104), but there were fewer participants using antibiotics more than three times during the 96 weeks (p = 0.05). There were no statistically significant differences in the number of episodes of acute diarrhoea (62/118 vs. 65/104; p > 0.05).

In addition to GOSs, other prebiotics were explored. After a supplementation of 7.2 g/L bovine-milk-derived oligosaccharide (MOS) until the age of six months, Estorminos et al. observed no differences in upper (59/114 vs. 57/112) and lower (24/114 vs. 24/112) RTIs [42].

The use of 8 g/L long-and short-chain oligofructose-enriched inulin as a prebiotic added to infant formula for one year did not result in significantly different numbers of infections compared to a standard formula (51 vs. 62%, respectively; p = 0.186) [43]. However, enrichment of infant formula with oligofructose-inulin reduced the duration of the infections (p = 0.03). The infection rate in infants was generally low in this trial.


## Discussion


### Overall Incidence of Infections

When analysing the evidence of the supplementation of infant formula with GOSs/FOSs, half of the studies showed a reduction in the infection rate. The other half showed limited or no infection reduction.

The evidence for a reduction in infection when supplementing infant formula with HMOs is not conclusive. When not including the studies of Storm et al. and Marriage et al., we can conclude that Parschat et al. and Lasekan et al. reported no reduction in infection rates [36,38]. Vandenplas et al. showed a relative risk reduction for infection, but it was not statistically significant [37]. Only Puccio et al. reported a significant reduction in infections, as a secondary outcome [28].

GOSs, alone or supplemented with high-dose β-palmitic acid, did not reduce the incidence of infection [39,41]. The same conclusion was noted for the supplementation of inulin [43] or MOS [42] as prebiotics in infant formula. In one study where GOSs and PDX were combined as a supplement, there was a reduction in RTIs during the period of intervention and a prolonged reduction in recurrent RTIs after ending the prebiotic [40].


### Upper Respiratory Tract Infections

Out of four studies, one showed that supplementation with GOSs/FOSs resulted in a reduction in the incidence of URTIs in a short-and long-term observation [26,30]. Another trial did not show a reduction [27]. The other manuscript discussing GOSs/FOSs did not present data on URTIs.

Two studies with HMOs showed no reduction in the total number of episodes of URTIs [28,37], although a reduction in the annual frequency was reported in the second study [37]. The effect on URTIs was not reported in the other trials concerning HMO supplementation.

GOS/PDX supplementation during the first 48 weeks of life was reported to reduce URTIs during this period, but this effect could not be confirmed after 96 weeks [40]. GOSs [39], GOSs with high amounts β-palmitic acid [41], and MOSs [42] did not have an impact on this type of infection.


### Lower Respiratory Tract Infection

In all of the trials, the incidence of LRTIs was low or not examined. Focusing on GOSs/FOSs, no reduction in LRTIs was proven in two studies [26,27]. HMOs were associated with a reduction in the incidence of LRTIs in one study [28]. A second trial showed a relative risk reduction of 33.7% after adding HMOs [37]. MOSs had no influence on LRTIs [42]. Other prebiotic studies did not examine LRTIs.


### Gastrointestinal Infections

According to data from four studies, GOSs/FOSs do not reduce the rate of gastrointestinal infections [26,30,31,33]. However, in the study of van Stuijvenberg et al. in 2015, a reduction in the duration of infection was reported [33]. In only one study a reduction in GI infections was reported for GOSs/FOSs [27]. Gastrointestinal infections were reported to be statistically insignificantly reduced (p = 0.2), with a relative risk reduction of 40% in one HMO study [37]. Supplementation with GOSs [39], GOSs/PDX [40], or βPA/GOSs [41] did not influence this type of infection.


### Other Infections

GOS/FOS supplementation for one year showed a small reduction in the incidence of urinary tract infections during a period of two years in one study [26]. In one trial, there were zero versus four urinary tract infections in a total population of 194 participants after adding HMOs [37].


### Antibiotic Use

Concerning the addition of GOSs/FOSs to infant formula, three trials showed a reduction in antibiotic use [26,27,30], which is disputed by three other studies [31][32][33] in which there was no difference. The reduction in antibiotic use after adding HMOs to infant formula was only demonstrated in one study [28], while it was refuted in two others [37,38]. Supplementation with GOSs or GOSs/PDX did not influence the incidence of antibiotic use [39,40]. A GOS/PDX trial suggested a reduction in recurrent (>3 times/year) use [39,40].


### Variables and Confounders

Some variables and confounders in the different trials could have had an influence on the study outcomes and the infection rates:


#### Probiotics

The systematic review of Zhao in 2022 concluded that probiotics supplemented to infant formula have a positive effect on URTIs in infants [20]. Considering this, the possible effect of the prebiotic could have been underestimated in the studies where a probiotic was added to infant formula in both the intervention and the control groups, such as the RCTs of Storm et al. and Bocquet et al. [31,35].


#### Breastfeeding

The literature shows that breastfeeding during the first four to six months has a significant influence on the infection rate during infancy [44,45]. However, some studies already show an advantage after breastfeeding the first two weeks [46]. It is interesting to reflect on the possible (positive) effects of breastfeeding in the included trials. In most of the studies, the influence of breastfeeding could be considered to be low, as the infants were included before the age of 2-4 weeks. In contrast, in the study of Bruzzese et al., it was impossible to exclude a possible effect of breastfeeding; hence, exclusive breastfeeding during the first two weeks of life was an inclusion criterion [27]. Moreover, inclusion was allowed until the age of four months; thus, breastfeeding was possible during this period. The same influence of breastfeeding can be discussed in the other studies. Furthermore, in some studies, breastfeeding was allowed in the intervention group, along with the infant formula containing the prebiotic, without specifying how much breastfeeding was given [26,27,30,32,33].


#### Dose and Intervention Period

There is an important heterogeneity in the different studies concerning the dose of prebiotics. In the subcategory of GOSs/FOSs, a range of 4 to 8 g/L was added to infant formula in the different trials. This variety was even greater in interventional studies with HMOs, which were supplemented between 0.25 g/L and 5.8 g/L.

If we look at the time period in which the prebiotic is taken, there is a diversity between six weeks and one year. If we take into account that most of the literature suggests that breastfeeding has the greatest advantage against infection during the first six months of life, we could hypothesise that it would be beneficial to add the prebiotic at least during this period. However, it remains unclear what supplemental advantage is offered by adding the prebiotic to infant formula for a longer period.

In the studies in which the observation time was longer than the intervention period, different outcomes were noted. Puccio noted a health advantage at least until the age of 12 months, after taking HMOs until the age of six months [28]. This prolonged prebiotic effect was also noted in the trial of Arslanoglu using scGOSs/lcFOSs [26]. Regarding the intake of GOSs/PDX, they only observed a reduction in respiratory infections during the 48 weeks in which the prebiotic was taken, but this effect was no longer observed in the following 48 weeks [40].


#### Type of Prebiotic

The first studies examined the effects of a combination of short-chain GOSs and longchain GOSs. The currently available HMOs are all short-chain HMOs. At present, there are no comparative studies examining the differences between short-and long-chain prebiotics. Hence, it is impossible to conclude whether the complexity of the OS has an influence on the prebiotic effect and the infection rate.


#### Low Infection Rates

The mean annual infection rate in children under three years is three to five [17,18]. In the studies investigated in this review, the incidence of infection in infants and young children varied widely but was lower than expected overall. The low infection rates in the different trials could have led to minimising the observed effect.

A possible confounder in the number of infections registered is the diagnostic criteria for infection. For example, in the study of Sierra et al., all diagnoses had to be made by a paediatrician. In the study of van Stuijvenberg et al., only a fever of >38.5 • C was a criterion for infection. Both of these examples could have led to an underestimation of the actual incidence. This is in contrast to the inclusion criteria in the study of Bocquet et al., where parents were asked to keep a diary and to note all signs of infections [31]. These diaries were reviewed by a paediatrician on a regular basis, and diagnoses could be made retrospectively.

Another important confounder could be found in the study of Lasekan et al. The inclusion and follow-up of patients occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is known that the prevalence of all types of infections was very low in children during this period, as a result of quarantine and the limitation of social contacts [47].


#### Atopy/Allergy

In some studies, parental atopic history was an exclusion criterion, focusing the research on healthy infants-for example, in the trials of Van Stuijvenberg et al. and Bocquet et al. [31][32][33]. In contrast, parental history of atopy was an inclusion criterion in other studies [26,30]. Given the fact that parental history of atopy enhances the risk of atopy for the child, and that atopy is relied to more infections [48,49], it might be possible that those children would receive a greater advantage from the prebiotic effect. This assumption has not yet been investigated.


#### Caesarean Section

Caesarean section is also considered to be a contributor to enhanced infection rates. Only in the study of Puccio et al. did a sub-analysis show a more important prebiotic effect in the infants born by caesarean than in those born by vaginal birth [28].


#### Setting

We may hypothesise that with the current high socioeconomic hygienic standards and low infection rates, the supplementation of prebiotics does not trigger a change great enough to detect on a large scale. It could be interesting to investigate the differences in outcomes related to place and socioeconomic setting.

These variables and confounders create an important heterogeneity in the different publications, making it impossible to draw stringent conclusions or conduct meta-analyses.


### Systematic Reviews

No systematic reviews are discussed in this review, as they combine all types of prebiotics in their analyses. However, prebiotics have been reviewed in multiple systematic reviews in different ages. In the systematic review of Skorka et al., published in 2018, the effects of prebiotics in infant formula were explored. In this review, trials with HMOs were excluded. They concluded that supplementation with FOSs, GOSs, and/or acidic OSs had no influence on the frequency of gastrointestinal infections, respiratory tract infections, or antibiotic treatment. Their main conclusion was that there is no existing robust evidence to recommend the routine use of prebiotic-supplemented formula, but they attributed this to a lack of strong evidence [24]. Williams et al., in 2021, published a systematic review on the effects of prebiotics, synbiotics, and short-chain fatty acids on respiratory tract infections and immune function in all ages. This review concluded that supplementation with prebiotics-especially Oss-may play a role in reducing the incidence and duration of respiratory tract infections in infants and children. There is insufficient evidence of this protective effect for the adult population [50]. Rashidi et al. concluded in 2021 that supplementation with prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics in infant formula (PRO-formula) plays a protective role against respiratory tract infections. However, analyses of the different subgroups showed no significant association between the consumption of probiotics, prebiotics, or synbiotics and respiratory tract infections [29].


### Future

Taking into account the possible effects of the variables and confounders, more comparative research should be initiated to investigate their influence on the outcome.

In addition, in the existing literature, only a limited number of HMOs have been examined. Indeed, 2 Fl and LNnT are the two most common HMOs in human milk. However, it remains uncertain which HMOs provide a protective effect against infections. Hopefully, the ongoing study of van Stigt et al. will give us more clarity on the different components of human milk and their protective role against respiratory tract infections [51].

Furthermore, once the positive effects of the types of prebiotics are more clear, it will be interesting to investigate the cost-benefit analysis of the prebiotics added to infant formula to reduce the incidence of dropout of day care, hospitalisations, medications, parents staying home, etc., taking into account the different costs of the production of the different OSs. To conduct this analysis, more data are needed about the infection duration, which has only been discussed in a few studies.


## Conclusions

Due to study heterogeneity, it remains impossible to formulate a consensus about the efficacy of adding prebiotics to infant formula. All currently established prebiotics are well tolerated. FOS/GOS supplementation seems to have a beneficial effect on infection rates. For HMOs, more studies about the different types of HMOs are necessary to make any deductions. GOSs, inulin, and MOSs do not reduce the incidence of infections. However, inulin seems to have a positive effect on the duration of infection. The combination of GOSs and PDX showed a protective role in one study. The evidence of the effects of prebiotics in reducing the use of antibiotics is low. Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical review and approval were waived for this study due to the fact that this is a review paper with no inclusion of original data.

Informed Consent Statement: Patient consent was waived due to the fact that this is a review paper with no inclusion of original data.


(p = 0.06); difference smaller at 12 months (p = 0.5) Results are written as absolute values or as mean values ± standard deviations. BF: breastfeeding, GOS: galactooligosaccharide, FOS: fructooligosaccharide, β-PA: beta palmitic acid, MOS: bovine-milk-derived oligosaccharide, PDX: polydextrose, (L)RTI: (lower) respiratory tract infection, lc: long-chain, sc: short-chain, GI: gastrointestinal; NS: not significnat.

## Author
Contributions: R.C. performed the literature search and wrote the first version of the review. Y.V. reviewed and contributed until the final version. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding.

## Table 1 .
1Research question and PICO (population, intervention, control, and outcomes) formulation.Is there a link between the type of prebiotic added to infant formula and the reduction in the incidence of infection in infants? Reduction in the incidence of infectionsSecondary outcomes: Reduction in the prescription of antibiotics and their links with the type of prebiotic. Effects on subtypes of infection (e.g., upper airway, lower airway, intestinal infection, others) To answer this question, a literature search was conducted in PubMed and Embase. The literature search strategy was formulated using the following terms: Oligosaccharide OR FOS OR GOS OR fructooligosaccharide OR fructo-oligosaccharide OR galactooligosaccharide OR galacto-oligosaccharide OR prebiotic OR HMO OR human milk oligosaccharide OR LNnT OR 2 FL OR inulin OR PDX OR polydextrose. AND infection OR infectious OR respiratory tract infection OR RTI OR URTI OR fever OR antibiotic. AND formula milk OR milk OR formula OR infant formula.Patient 
Term healthy infants < 6 months 

Intervention 
Prebiotics added to infant formula 

Control 
Infant formula 

Outcome 

Primary outcome: 

## Table 2 .
2Overview of references with GOSs/FOSs.First Author, 
Year 
[Reference] 

Country 
Inclusion Criteria; 
Age at Inclusion 

Intervention 
(Number Included) 

Control 
(Number 
Included) 

Duration of 
a. Intervention 
b. Observation 

Outcomes 

Arslanoglu, 
2007 
[30] 

Italy 

Term infants with 
parental atopic 
history; 
<2 weeks 

EHF 
+ GOSs/FOSs 9:1 8 g/L 
(+/− BF first 6 weeks) 
(102) 

EHF 
(104) 

a. 6 months 
b. 6 months 

Primary outcomes 
• Infectious episodes: 21/102 vs. 47/104 (p= 0.01) 
• Infections requiring antibiotics: 11/102 vs. 22/104 (p= 0.1) 
• Recurrent infections: 4/102 vs. 13/104 (p < 0.05) 
• URTIs: 14/102 vs. 30/104 (p=0.07) 
• GI infections: 1/102 vs. 4/104(p =0.18) 
Secondary outcome 
• Faecal Bifidobacteria: mean 10.3 vs. 8.7 colony-forming units/g stool (p < 0.01) 

Arslanoglu, 
2008 
[26] 

Italy 

Term infants with 
parental atopic 
history; 
<2 weeks 

EHF 
+ GOSs/FOSs 9:1 8 g/L 
(+/− BF first 6 weeks) 
(66) 

EHF 
(68) 

a. 6 months 
b. 2 years 

Primary outcomes 
• Allergic manifestations (p < 0.05) 
-Atopic dermatitis 13.6% vs. 27.9% 
-Recurrent wheezing 7.6% vs. 20.6% 
-Allergic urticaria 1.5% vs. 10.3% 
Secondary outcomes 
• Growth: mean body weight and length were similar 
• Infectious episodes 
-Overall infections: mean 4.1 ± 3.1 vs. 5.9 ± 4.1(p < 0.01) 
-URTIs: mean 2.1 ± 1.8 vs. 3.2 ± 2.2 (p < 0.01) 
-LRTIs: mean 0.9 ± 1.1 vs. 1.3 ± 0.8 (p > 0.05) 
-GI infections: mean 0.4 ± 0.7 vs. 0.6 ± 0.9(p > 0.05) 
-Infections requiring antibiotics: mean 1.8 ± 2.3 vs. 2.7 ± 2.4 (p < 0.05) 
-Urinary tract infections: 0 ± 0 vs. 0.1 ± 0.5 (p = 0.06) 

Bruzzese, 
2009 
[27] 

Italy 

Healthy term infants 
after at least 2 weeks 
of exclusive 
breastfeeding; 
15-120 days 

Infant formula 
+ GOSs/FOSs 9:1 4 g/L 
(169) 

Infant formula 
(173) 

a. 1 year 
b. 1 year 

Primary outcomes 
• Diarrhea episode/child: mean 0.12 ± 0.04 vs. 0.29 ± 0.05 (p = 0.015) 
• URTIs: 60/94 vs. 65/109 (p = 0.4) 
• Recurrent URTIs: 17/60 vs. 29/65 (p = 0.06) 
• LRTIs: 4/94 vs. 6/109 (p > 0.05) 
• Antibiotics prescribed: 1.03 ± 0.15 vs. 1.48 ± 0.16 (p = 0.038) 
Secondary outcomes 
• Growth 
-Average weight, length, and head circumference: similar in both groups 
-Mean body weight: increased at 3 and 6 months, similar at 9 and 12 months 
-Mean body length: greater (p < 0.05) 
-Mean head circumference: similar 


## Table 2 .
2Cont. Anthropometric measurements: similar in both groups • Tolerance: no differences in daily stool frequency and consistency or overall acceptance of the formula • Adverse events: 60% in each group had one or more AE; none was related to the study formula ITT analysis: median 1.19 [0.2-9.34] vs. 1.16 [0.2-6.38] (p > 0.05) -PP analysis for first 6 months: median 0.13 [0.12-2.31] vs. 0.13 [0.12-2.36] (p < 0.05) • Antibiotic use: median 0.05 [0.05-0.11] vs. 0.05 [0.05-0.16] (p > 0.05) Results are written as absolute numbers, as mean values ± standard deviations, or as median values [25-75th percentiles]. EHF: extensively hydrolysed formula, BF: breastfeeding, GOS: galactooligosaccharide, FOS: fructooligosaccharide, OS: oligosaccharide, U/L RTI: upper/lower respiratory tract infection, GI: gastrointestinal, ITT: intention to treat, PP: per protocol.First Author, 
Year 
[Reference] 

Country 
Inclusion Criteria; 
Age at Inclusion 

Intervention 
(Number Included) 

Control 
(Number 
Included) 

Duration of 
a. Intervention 
b. Observation 

Outcomes 

Bocquet, 
2013 
[31] 

France 
Healthy term infants; 
<42 days 

Infant formula 
+ B. lactis 
+ GOSs/FOSs 9:1 4 g/L 
(261) 

Infant formula 
+ B. lactis 
(267) 

a. 1 year 
b. 1 year 

Primary outcomes 
• Mean number of infections: 4.9 ± 3.2 vs. 4.5 ± 3.2 (p = 0.18) 
• No differences in type of infection 
-GI infections (p > 0.1) 
-Antibiotic use: 1.0 ± 1.2 vs. 0.9 ± 1.2 (p = 0.3) 
Secondary outcomes 
• van 
Stuijvenberg, 
2011 
[32] 

Netherlands, 
Austria, 
Switzerland, 
Italy, 
Germany 

Healthy term infants; 
<8 weeks 

Infant formula 
+ GOSs/FOSs 9:1 6.8 g/L 
+ pectine-derived acidic 
OSs 1.2 g/L 
(414) 

• Infant formula 
(416) 
• Breastfeeding 
(300) 

a. 1 year 
b. 1 year 

Primary outcomes 
• Fever episodes: 
-van 
Stuijvenberg, 
2015 
[33] 

Netherlands, 
Austria, 
Switzerland, 
Italy, 
Germany 

Healthy term infants; 
<8 weeks 

Infant formula 
+ GOSs/FOSs 9:1 6.8 g/L 
+ pectine-derived acidic 
OSs 1.2 g/L 
(232) 

• Infant formula 
(243) 
• Breastfeeding 
(197) 

a. 1 year 
b. 5 years 

Primary outcomes 
• Fever episodes at 3 to 5 years: median episodes per year 
1.17 [0.5-2.08] vs. 1.2 [0.52-2.57] (p = 0.22) 
• Episodes of coughing, wheezing, vomiting, and diarrhoea: similar (p > 0.1) 
Secondary outcomes 
• Duration of diarrhoea in days: median 1 (0-4) vs. 2 (0-7) (p = 0.01) 
• Duration of coughing, wheezing, rhinitis, and vomiting: similar (p > 0.1) 
• Runny nose: median episodes per year in the breastfed infants 
3.62 [1.97-5.76] vs. intervention group 2.59 [1.02-5.26] 
vs. control group 2.19 [0.99-4.95] 
• Antibiotic use: 172/232 vs. 203/243 (p > 0.05) 
• Antipyretic use: 224/232 vs. 237/243 (p > 0.05) 



## Table 3 .
3Overview of references with HMOs.First Author, 
Year 
[Reference] 

Country 
Inclusion Criteria; 
Age at Inclusion 

Intervention 
(Number Included) 

Control 
(Number 
Included) 

Duration 
a. Intervention 
b. Observation 

Outcomes 

Marriage, 
2015 
[34] 

USA 
Healthy term infants; 
<5 days 

• Test 1 (T1) 
Infant formula 
+ GOSs 2.2 g/L 
+ 2 -FL 0.2 g/L 
(104) 
• Test 2 (T2) 
Infant formula 
+ GOSs 1.4 g/L 
+ 2 -FL 1 g/L 
(109) 

• Control (C) 
Infant formula 
+ GOSs 2.4 g/L 
(101) 
• Breastfeeding (BF) 
(106) 

a. 4 months 
b. 4 months 

Primary outcome 
Anthropometric measures: no difference in mean weight, length, and head circumference 
Secondary outcomes 
• Mean daily formula intake: similar 
• Tolerance: 
-Stool per day: more in BF group, similar in T1-T2-C group (p < 0.01) 
-Stool consistency: higher in formula groups vs. BF 
-Spitting and vomiting: more in T1-T2-C group versus BF group (p < 0.05) 
• Adverse events: 
-More infections in C and T2 groups (RTI, OM, viral infections, oral candidiasis): 
Test 1 11/104 vs. Test 2 38/109 vs. Control 28/101 (p < 0.05) 
-Eczema: more in C group (5) than T1 and T2 (0) (p < 0.05) 
• 2 FL uptake in plasma and excretion in urine: 
-Plasma uptake higher in BF > T2 > T1 
-Urine excretion BF, T2 > T1 > C 

Puccio, 
2017 
[28] 

Italy, 
Belgium 

Healthy term infants; 
<14 days 

Infant formula 
+ 2 -FL 1 g/L 
+ LNnT 0.5 g/L 
(88) 

Infant formula 
(87) 

a. 6 months 
b. 12 months 

Primary outcome 
Weight gain: similar in both groups 
Secondary outcomes 
• Other anthropometric measures: similar 
• Formula intake: similar 
• GI tolerance: similar 
• Stools softer at 1 and 2 months, no differences > 2 months 
• Behavioural patterns: similar 
• Morbidity 
-Infants with at least 1 infection: 69.3% vs. 82.8% (p = 0.051) 
-Bronchitis: 9/88 vs. 24/87 (p < 0.01) 
-LRTIs: 17/88 vs. 30/87 (p < 0.05) 
-Antibiotic use: 37/88 vs. 53/87 (p < 0.05) 

Storm, 
2019 
[35] 

USA 
Healthy term infants; 
<19 days 

Partially hydrolysed 
formula + B. lactis+ 2 -FL 
0.25 g/L 
(38) 

Partially 
hydrolysed 
formula+ B. lactis 
(40) 

a. 6 weeks 
b 6 weeks 

Primary outcome 
Tolerance: GSQ 20.9 ± 4.8 vs. 20.7 ± 4.3 (p = 0.82) 
Secondary outcomes 
• Stool frequency, consistency, and ease of passing: similar 
• Spit up, vomiting, crying, fussing: no difference 
• Formula intake: similar 
• Adverse events: -infections: 9/40 vs. 3/38-p 0.05-URTI: 0/38 vs. 4/10 (p = 0.12) 
• Anthropometric measures: similar 


## Table 3 .
3Cont.Legend: Results are written as absolute values or as mean values ± standard deviations; BF: breastfeeding, CMPA: cow's milk protein allergy, AE: adverse event, T: test, TG: test group, C: control, CG: control group, GI: gastrointestinal, U/L RTI: upper/lower respiratory tract infection, GOS: galactooligosaccharide, IGSQ: Infant Gastrointestinal Symptom Questionnaire, RRR: relative risk reduction, MRSC: mean rank stool consistency.First Author, 
Year 
[Reference] 

Country 
Inclusion Criteria; 
Age at Inclusion 

Intervention 
(Number Included) 

Control 
(Number 
Included) 

Duration 
a. Intervention 
b. Observation 

Outcomes 

Parschat, 
2021 
[36] 

Germany, 
Italy, 
Spain 

Healthy term infants; 
<14 days 

Infant formula 
+ 2 FL 2.99 g/L 
+ 3 FL 0.75 g/L 
+ LNT 1.5 g/L 
+ 3 SL 0.23 g/L 
+ 6 SL 0.28 g/L 
(113) 

• Infant formula 
(112) 
• Breastfeeding 
(116) 

a. 4 months 
b. 6 months 

Primary outcome 
Weight gain: none inferior 
Secondary outcomes 
• Other anthropometric measures: similar 
• GI tolerance: similar 
• Defaecation: stools softer and more frequent 
• Adverse events: 
-Incidence of AEs was similar in CG and TG, higher than the BF group 
-Incidence of infections similar in the 3 groups: 
32/113 vs. 28/112 vs. 34/116 (p = 0.5 and 0.8) 

Vandenplas, 
2022 
[37] 

Europe, 
Singa-
pore 

Infants with CMPA; 
<6 months 

EHF 
+ 2 FL 1 g/L 
+ LNnT 0.5 g/L 
Reduced protein content 
(2.2 g/dL) 
(94) 

EHF 
(protein 2.47 g/dL) 
(96) 

a. 4 months 
b. 4 months 

Primary outcome 
Weight gain: none inferior 
Secondary outcomes 
• Other anthropometric measures: similar 
• Safety:rate of AE similar 
• Morbidity: infections 
-LRTIs: 13/94 vs. 20/6 (p = 0.25); RRR 34% 
-URTIs: 60 in 39 infants (41.5%) vs. 94 in 42 infants (43.8%) 
(p = 0.77); RRR 5.2% 
-Frequency URTIs: 1.5 vs. 2.2 episodes/year; 0.09 vs. 0.15 episode/month ( p = 0.003) 
-GI infections: 10/94 vs. 17/96 (p = 0.21);-RRR 40% 
-Other viral infections: 19/94 vs. 19/96(p =1) 
-Urinary tract infections: 4/94 vs. 0/96 (p = 0.06) 
-Antibiotic use: 23/94 vs. 25/96 (p = 0.82) 
-Antipyretic use: 35/94 vs. 40/96 (p = 0.6) 

Lasekan, 
2022 
[38] 

USA 
Healthy term infants; 
<14 days 

Infant formula+ 2 FL 3 
g/L+ 3 FL 0.8 g/L+ LNT 
1.5 g/L+ 3 SL 0.2 g/L+ 6 
SL 0.3 g/L 
(130) 

• Infant formula 
(129) 
• Breastfeeding 
(104) 

a. 4 months 
b. 4 months 

Primary outcome 
Weight gain and other anthropometric measures: similar 
Secondary outcomes 
• GI tolerance 
-Vomit/spit up: similar (p = 0.5) 
-Stools softer (higher MRSC (p = 0.038) and more frequent (p = 0.004) 
• Adverse events: 
-Number of AEs similar: 31.7% vs. 32% vs. 26.5% 
-Antipyretic use: 4/130 vs. 4/129 vs. 8/104 (p > 0.05) 
-Antibiotic use: 4/130 vs. 4/129 vs. 4/104 (p > 0.05) 



## Table 4 .
4Overview of references with other prebiotics. Patients with RRI until 96 weeks: 24/118 vs. 33/104 (p = 0.039) -Antibiotics prescribed: 58/118 vs. 58/104 (p > 0.05) -Patients > 3 x antibiotics prescribed: 22/118 vs. 26/104 (p = 0.056) -Acute gastroenteritis: 62/118 vs. 65/104 (p = 0.064)First author, 
Year 
[Reference] 

Country 
Inclusion Criteria; 
Age at Inclusion 

Intervention 
[Number Included] 

Control 
[Number 
Included] 

Duration 
a. Intervention 
b. Observation 

Outcome 

Sierra, 
2014 
[39] 

Spain 
Healthy term infants; 
<8 weeks 

Infant formula 
+ GOSs 4.4 g/L 
Follow-on formula 
+ GOSs 5 g/L 
(177) 

Infant formula 
Follow-on formula 
(188) 

a. 1 year 
b. 1 year 

Primary outcomes 
• Effects on intestinal microbiota: lower faecal pH (p = 0.019); lower decreasing trend 
of secretory IgA (p = 0.08); lower butyric acid concentration (p = 0.04); ncreased 
Bifidobacterium counts (p = 0.01) 
• Frequency of defecation higher (p < 0.001) 
• Softer stools (p < 0.05) 
• Infections: 
-Episodes of URTI/infant: 1.84 ± 2.01 vs. 1.65 ± 1.83 (p = 0.4) 
-Episodes of diarrhoea/infant: 0.27 ± 0.67 vs. 0.20 ± 0.52 (p = 0.36) 
-Use of antibiotics: 17.8% vs. 19.8% (p = 0.48) 
• Allergic manifestations: 39/132 vs. 28/132 (p = 0.12) 

Ranucci, 
2018 
[40] 

Italy 

Term infants with 
parental atopic 
history; 
Day 0 

Infant formula 
+ GOSs/PDX 1:1 4 g/L 
(+/− BF) 
(201) 

• Infant formula 
(+/− BF) 
(199) 
• Breastfeeding 
(140) 

a. 48 weeks 
b. 96 weeks 

Primary outcome 
• Incidence of atopic dermatitis: 
-at 48 weeks: 49/118 vs. 50/104 (p = 0.62) 
-at 96 weeks: 56/118 vs. 60/104 (p = 0.28) 
Secondary outcomes 
• Infections 
-Infants with at least 1 RTI 
at 48 weeks: 39/118 vs. 50/104 (p = 0.023) 
at 96 weeks: 77/118 vs. 73/104 (p > 0.05) 
-• Intestinal microbiology: 
-Bifidobacteria load higher (p = 0.01) 
-Link between RI and lower Bifidobacteria load 

Nomayo, 
2020 
[33] 

Germany 
Healthy term infants; 
<10 days 

Infant formula+ high 
amounts β-PA (20-25%) 
+ GOS 5 g/L 
(47) 

• Infant formula 
(β-PA <10%) 
(47) 
• Breastfeeding 
(34) 

a. 12 weeks to 
6 months 
b. 1 year 

Primary outcome s 
• Faecal Bifidobacteria: total count median 
4.4 ± 5.4 × 108 vs. 0.7 ± 2.1 × 108 (p < 0.01) 
• Infections: Overall: 3/22 vs. 2/19 (p = 0.65) 
-GI infections: 0/22 vs. 0/19 
-RTI: 3/22 vs. 2/19 (p = 0.65) 


## Table 4 .
4Cont.First author, 
Year 
[Reference] 

Country 
Inclusion Criteria; 
Age at Inclusion 

Intervention 
[Number Included] 

Control 
[Number 
Included] 

Duration 
a. Intervention 
b. Observation 

Outcome 

Estorninos, 
2021 
[35] 

Philippines 
Healthy term infants; 
21-26 days 

Alpha-lactalbumin and 
sn-2 palmitates enriched 
infant formula 
+ MOSs 7.2 g/L 
(115) 

Alpha-lactalbumin 
and sn-2 palmitates 
enriched infant 
formula 
(115) 

a. 6 months 
b. 6 months 

Primary outcome 
• Weight gain similar (p = 0.7) 
• Stool consistency was softer (p = 0.005) 
• Tolerance: similar 
Secondary outcomes 
• Adverse events: 
-URTIs: 59/115 vs. 57/115 
-LRTIs: 24/115 vs. 24/115 

Neumer, 
2021 
[36] 

Spain, 
Belgium 

Healthy term infants; 
<4 months 

Infant formula 
+ sc/lc inulin 1:1 8 g/L 
(81) 

Infant formula 
(79) 

a. 1 year 
b. 1 year 

Primary outcomes 
• Number of infections: mean 0.64 ± 1.05 vs. 0.55 ± 1.04 (p > 0.05) 
• Lower mean duration infections in intervention group (p = 0.034) 
Secondary outcomes 
• Anthropometric measures: similar 
• Allergic manifestations: overall very low 
• Wellbeing: total daily crying lower, but NS (p = 0.06) 
• Gastrointestinal tolerance: similar 
• Intestinal microbiota: 
-Total bacterial counts were similar; 
-Bifidobacterium count at 6 months: median 8.91 [8.31-9.41] vs. 8.15 [7.24-9.09] 

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Conflicts of Interest:The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Breast-feeding: A Commentary by the ESPGHAN Committee on Nutrition. C Agostoni, C Braegger, T Decsi, S Kolacek, B Koletzko, K F Michaelsen, W Mihatsch, L A Moreno, J Puntis, R Shamir, 10.1097/MPG.0b013e31819f1e05J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 49PubMedAgostoni, C.; Braegger, C.; Decsi, T.; Kolacek, S.; Koletzko, B.; Michaelsen, K.F.; Mihatsch, W.; Moreno, L.A.; Puntis, J.; Shamir, R.; et al. Breast-feeding: A Commentary by the ESPGHAN Committee on Nutrition. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2009, 49, 112-125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Breastfeeding and neurodevelopmental outcomes. B L Horta, B A De Sousa, C L De Mola, 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000453Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care. 21PubMedHorta, B.L.; De Sousa, B.A.; De Mola, C.L. Breastfeeding and neurodevelopmental outcomes. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2018, 21, 174-178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Breastfeeding in the 21st century: Epidemiology, mechanisms, and lifelong effect. C G Victora, R Bahl, A J Barros, G V Franca, S Horton, J Krasevec, S Murch, M J Sankar, N Walker, N C Rollins, 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01024-7Lancet. 387PubMedVictora, C.G.; Bahl, R.; Barros, A.J.; Franca, G.V.; Horton, S.; Krasevec, J.; Murch, S.; Sankar, M.J.; Walker, N.; Rollins, N.C.; et al. Breastfeeding in the 21st century: Epidemiology, mechanisms, and lifelong effect. Lancet 2016, 387, 475-490. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Analysis of Intestinal Flora Development in Breast-Fed and Formula-Fed Infants by Using Molecular Identification and Detection Methods. H J Harmsen, A C Wildeboer-Veloo, G C Raangs, A A Wagendorp, N Klijn, J G Bindels, G W Welling, 10.1097/00005176-200001000-00019J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 30Harmsen, H.J.; Wildeboer-Veloo, A.C.; Raangs, G.C.; Wagendorp, A.A.; Klijn, N.; Bindels, J.G.; Welling, G.W. Analysis of Intestinal Flora Development in Breast-Fed and Formula-Fed Infants by Using Molecular Identification and Detection Methods. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2000, 30, 61-67. [CrossRef]

Physiology of Consumption of Human Milk Oligosaccharides by Infant Gut-associated Bifidobacteria. S Asakuma, E Hatakeyama, T Urashima, E Yoshida, T Katayama, K Yamamoto, H Kumagai, H Ashida, J Hirose, M Kitaoka, 10.1074/jbc.M111.248138J. Biol. Chem. 286Asakuma, S.; Hatakeyama, E.; Urashima, T.; Yoshida, E.; Katayama, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Kumagai, H.; Ashida, H.; Hirose, J.; Kitaoka, M. Physiology of Consumption of Human Milk Oligosaccharides by Infant Gut-associated Bifidobacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 2011, 286, 34583-34592. [CrossRef]

Linking Human Milk Oligosaccharides, Infant Fecal Community Types, and Later Risk To Require Antibiotics. B Berger, N Porta, F Foata, D Grathwohl, M Delley, D Moine, A Charpagne, L Siegwald, P Descombes, P Alliet, 10.1128/mBio.03196-19Mbio. 2020Berger, B.; Porta, N.; Foata, F.; Grathwohl, D.; Delley, M.; Moine, D.; Charpagne, A.; Siegwald, L.; Descombes, P.; Alliet, P.; et al. Linking Human Milk Oligosaccharides, Infant Fecal Community Types, and Later Risk To Require Antibiotics. Mbio 2020, 11, e03196-19. [CrossRef]

Human breast milk: A review on its composition and bioactivity. N J Andreas, B Kampmann, K M Le-Doare, 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2015.08.013Early Hum. Dev. 91Andreas, N.J.; Kampmann, B.; Le-Doare, K.M. Human breast milk: A review on its composition and bioactivity. Early Hum. Dev. 2015, 91, 629-635. [CrossRef]

The Mean of Milk: A Review of Human Milk Oligosaccharide Concentrations throughout Lactation. B Soyyılmaz, M H Mikš, C H Röhrig, M Matwiejuk, A Meszaros-Matwiejuk, L K Vigsnaes, 10.3390/nu13082737Nutrients. 13Soyyılmaz, B.; Mikš, M.H.; Röhrig, C.H.; Matwiejuk, M.; Meszaros-Matwiejuk, A.; Vigsnaes, L.K. The Mean of Milk: A Review of Human Milk Oligosaccharide Concentrations throughout Lactation. Nutrients 2021, 13, 2737. [CrossRef]

The sialylated fraction of milk oligosaccharides is partially responsible for binding to enterotoxigenic and uropathogenic Escherichia coli human strains. S Martin-Sosa, M J Martin, P Hueso, 10.1093/jn/131.10.3067J. Nutr. 132Martin-Sosa, S.; Martin, M.J.; Hueso, P. The sialylated fraction of milk oligosaccharides is partially responsible for binding to enterotoxigenic and uropathogenic Escherichia coli human strains. J. Nutr. 2002, 132, 3067-3072. [CrossRef]

Human milk oligosaccharides inhibit growth of group B. A E Lin, C A Autran, A Szyszka, T Escajadillo, M Huang, K Godula, A R Prudden, G.-J Boons, A L Lewis, K S Doran, 10.1074/jbc.M117.789974J. Biol. Chem. 292Lin, A.E.; Autran, C.A.; Szyszka, A.; Escajadillo, T.; Huang, M.; Godula, K.; Prudden, A.R.; Boons, G.-J.; Lewis, A.L.; Doran, K.S.; et al. Human milk oligosaccharides inhibit growth of group B. J. Biol. Chem. 2017, 292, 11243-11249. [CrossRef]

Human Milk Components Modulate Toll-Like Receptor-Mediated Inflammation. Y He, N T Lawlor, D S Newburg, 10.3945/an.115.010090Adv. Nutr. 7PubMedHe, Y.; Lawlor, N.T.; Newburg, D.S. Human Milk Components Modulate Toll-Like Receptor-Mediated Inflammation. Adv. Nutr. 2016, 7, 102-111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Human Milk Oligosaccharides and Associations With Immune-Mediated Disease and Infection in Childhood: A Systematic Review. A M Doherty, C J Lodge, S C Dharmage, X Dai, L Bode, A J Lowe, 10.3389/fped.2018.00091Front. Pediatr. 691PubMedDoherty, A.M.; Lodge, C.J.; Dharmage, S.C.; Dai, X.; Bode, L.; Lowe, A.J. Human Milk Oligosaccharides and Associations With Immune-Mediated Disease and Infection in Childhood: A Systematic Review. Front. Pediatr. 2018, 6, 91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Innate Immunity and Human Milk. D S Newburg, 10.1093/jn/135.5.1308J. Nutr. 135PubMedNewburg, D.S. Innate Immunity and Human Milk. J. Nutr. 2005, 135, 1308-1312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Human Milk Oligosaccharides Influence Neonatal Mucosal and Systemic Immunity. S M Donovan, S S Comstock, 10.1159/000452818Ann. Nutr. Metab. 69Suppl. 2Donovan, S.M.; Comstock, S.S. Human Milk Oligosaccharides Influence Neonatal Mucosal and Systemic Immunity. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2016, 69 (Suppl. 2), 41-51. [CrossRef]

Human Milk Oligosaccharides: 2 -Fucosyllactose (2 -FL) and Lacto-N-Neotetraose (LNnT) in Infant Formula. Y Vandenplas, B Berger, V P Carnielli, J Ksiazyk, H Lagström, M Sanchez Luna, N Migacheva, J.-M Mosselmans, J.-C Picaud, M Possner, 10.3390/nu10091161Nutrients. 101161Vandenplas, Y.; Berger, B.; Carnielli, V.P.; Ksiazyk, J.; Lagström, H.; Sanchez Luna, M.; Migacheva, N.; Mosselmans, J.-M.; Picaud, J.-C.; Possner, M.; et al. Human Milk Oligosaccharides: 2 -Fucosyllactose (2 -FL) and Lacto-N-Neotetraose (LNnT) in Infant Formula. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1161. [CrossRef]

Human Milk Oligosaccharides: Health Benefits, Potential Applications in Infant Formulas, and Pharmacology. M Wiciński, E Sawicka, J Gębalski, K Kubiak, B Malinowski, 10.3390/nu12010266Nutrients. 12Wiciński, M.; Sawicka, E.; Gębalski, J.; Kubiak, K.; Malinowski, B. Human Milk Oligosaccharides: Health Benefits, Potential Applications in Infant Formulas, and Pharmacology. Nutrients 2020, 12, 266. [CrossRef]

Epidemiology and Risk Factors of Infection in Early Childhood. N H Vissing, B L Chawes, M A Rasmussen, H Bisgaard, 10.1542/peds.2017-0933Pediatrics. 141Vissing, N.H.; Chawes, B.L.; Rasmussen, M.A.; Bisgaard, H. Epidemiology and Risk Factors of Infection in Early Childhood. Pediatrics 2018, 141, e20170933. [CrossRef]

Epidemiology of viral respiratory infections. A S Monto, 10.1016/S0002-9343(01)01058-0Am. J. Med. 112Suppl. 6AMonto, A.S. Epidemiology of viral respiratory infections. Am. J. Med. 2002, 112 (Suppl. 6A), S4-S12. [CrossRef]

The cost of community-managed viral respiratory illnesses in a cohort of healthy preschool-aged children. S B Lambert, K M Allen, R C Carter, T M Nolan, 10.1186/1465-9921-9-11Respir. Res. 911Lambert, S.B.; Allen, K.M.; Carter, R.C.; Nolan, T.M. The cost of community-managed viral respiratory illnesses in a cohort of healthy preschool-aged children. Respir. Res. 2008, 9, 11. [CrossRef]

Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst. Y Zhao, B R Dong, Q Hao, 10.1002/14651858.cd006895.pub4Rev. 2022, 8, CD006895. [CrossRefZhao, Y.; Dong, B.R.; Hao, Q. Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2022, 8, CD006895. [CrossRef]

Enrichment of infant formula with long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and risk of infection and allergy in the nationwide ELFE birth cohort. M Adjibade, C Davisse-Paturet, J Y Bernard, K Adel-Patient, A Divaret-Chauveau, S Lioret, M A Charles, B De Lauzon-Guillain, 10.1111/all.15137Allergy. 2022PubMedAdjibade, M.; Davisse-Paturet, C.; Bernard, J.Y.; Adel-Patient, K.; Divaret-Chauveau, A.; Lioret, S.; Charles, M.A.; de Lauzon- Guillain, B. Enrichment of infant formula with long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and risk of infection and allergy in the nationwide ELFE birth cohort. Allergy 2022, 77, 1522-1533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Infant formula enriched with milk fat globule membrane, long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, synbiotics, gangliosides, nucleotides and sialic acid reduces infections during the first 18 months of life: The COGNIS study. F Herrmann, A Nieto-Ruiz, N Sepúlveda-Valbuena, M T Miranda, E Diéguez, J Jiménez, R De-Castellar, M García-Ricobaraza, J A García-Santos, M G Bermúdez, 10.1016/j.jff.2021.104529J. Funct. Foods. 83Herrmann, F.; Nieto-Ruiz, A.; Sepúlveda-Valbuena, N.; Miranda, M.T.; Diéguez, E.; Jiménez, J.; De-Castellar, R.; García- Ricobaraza, M.; García-Santos, J.A.; Bermúdez, M.G.; et al. Infant formula enriched with milk fat globule membrane, long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, synbiotics, gangliosides, nucleotides and sialic acid reduces infections during the first 18 months of life: The COGNIS study. J. Funct. Foods 2021, 83, 104529. [CrossRef]

Clinical Benefits of Milk Fat Globule Membranes for Infants and Children. O Hernell, N Timby, M Domellöf, B Lönnerdal, 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.02.077J. Pediatr. 173PubMedHernell, O.; Timby, N.; Domellöf, M.; Lönnerdal, B. Clinical Benefits of Milk Fat Globule Membranes for Infants and Children. J. Pediatr. 2016, 173, S60-S65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Infant formulae supplemented with prebiotics: Are they better than unsupplemented formulae? An updated systematic review. A Skórka, M Pieścik-Lech, M Kołodziej, H Szajewska, 10.1017/S0007114518000120Br. J. Nutr. 119PubMedSkórka, A.; Pieścik-Lech, M.; Kołodziej, M.; Szajewska, H. Infant formulae supplemented with prebiotics: Are they better than unsupplemented formulae? An updated systematic review. Br. J. Nutr. 2018, 119, 810-825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Infant Formula Supplemented with Biotics: Current Knowledge and Future Perspectives. S Salminen, B Stahl, G Vinderola, H Szajewska, 10.3390/nu12071952Nutrients. 12Salminen, S.; Stahl, B.; Vinderola, G.; Szajewska, H. Infant Formula Supplemented with Biotics: Current Knowledge and Future Perspectives. Nutrients 2020, 12, 1952. [CrossRef]

Early Dietary Intervention with a Mixture of Prebiotic Oligosaccharides Reduces the Incidence of Allergic Manifestations and Infections during the First Two Years of Life. S Arslanoglu, G E Moro, J Schmitt, L Tandoi, S Rizzardi, G Boehm, 10.1093/jn/138.6.1091J. Nutr. 138Arslanoglu, S.; Moro, G.E.; Schmitt, J.; Tandoi, L.; Rizzardi, S.; Boehm, G. Early Dietary Intervention with a Mixture of Prebiotic Oligosaccharides Reduces the Incidence of Allergic Manifestations and Infections during the First Two Years of Life. J. Nutr. 2008, 138, 1091-1095. [CrossRef]

A formula containing galacto-and fructo-oligosaccharides prevents intestinal and extra-intestinal infections: An observational study. E Bruzzese, M Volpicelli, V Squeglia, D Bruzzese, F Salvini, M Bisceglia, P Lionetti, M Cinquetti, G Iacono, S Amarri, 10.1016/j.clnu.2009.01.008Clin. Nutr. 28Bruzzese, E.; Volpicelli, M.; Squeglia, V.; Bruzzese, D.; Salvini, F.; Bisceglia, M.; Lionetti, P.; Cinquetti, M.; Iacono, G.; Amarri, S.; et al. A formula containing galacto-and fructo-oligosaccharides prevents intestinal and extra-intestinal infections: An observational study. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 28, 156-161. [CrossRef]

Effects of Infant Formula With Human Milk Oligosaccharides on Growth and Morbidity: A randomized multicenter trial. G Puccio, P Alliet, C Cajozzo, E Janssens, G Corsello, N Sprenger, S Wernimont, D Egli, L Gosoniu, P Steenhout, 10.1097/MPG.0000000000001520J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 64Puccio, G.; Alliet, P.; Cajozzo, C.; Janssens, E.; Corsello, G.; Sprenger, N.; Wernimont, S.; Egli, D.; Gosoniu, L.; Steenhout, P. Effects of Infant Formula With Human Milk Oligosaccharides on Growth and Morbidity: A randomized multicenter trial. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2017, 64, 624-631. [CrossRef]

Effect of infant formula supplemented with prebiotics and probiotics on incidence of respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. K Rashidi, M Darand, N Garousi, A Dehghani, S Alizadeh, 10.1016/j.ctim.2021.102795Complement. Ther. Med. 63Rashidi, K.; Darand, M.; Garousi, N.; Dehghani, A.; Alizadeh, S. Effect of infant formula supplemented with prebiotics and probiotics on incidence of respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Complement. Ther. Med. 2021, 63, 102795. [CrossRef]

Early Supplementation of Prebiotic Oligosaccharides Protects Formula-Fed Infants against Infections during the First 6 Months of Life. S Arslanoglu, G E Moro, G Boehm, 10.1093/jn/137.11.2420J. Nutr. 137Arslanoglu, S.; Moro, G.E.; Boehm, G. Early Supplementation of Prebiotic Oligosaccharides Protects Formula-Fed Infants against Infections during the First 6 Months of Life. J. Nutr. 2007, 137, 2420-2424. [CrossRef]

Effect of Infant and Follow-on Formulas Containing B lactis and Galacto-and Fructo-oligosaccharides on Infection in Healthy Term Infants. A Bocquet, E Lachambre, C Kempf, L Beck, 10.1097/MPG.0b013e318297f35eJ. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 57PubMedBocquet, A.; Lachambre, E.; Kempf, C.; Beck, L. Effect of Infant and Follow-on Formulas Containing B lactis and Galacto-and Fructo-oligosaccharides on Infection in Healthy Term Infants. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2013, 57, 180-187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Do prebiotics reduce the number of fever episodes in healthy children in their first year of life: A randomised controlled trial. M Van Stuijvenberg, A M Eisses, C Grüber, F Mosca, S Arslanoglu, G Chirico, C P Braegger, J Riedler, G Boehm, P J Sauer, 10.1017/S0007114511004053Br. J. Nutr. 106PubMedVan Stuijvenberg, M.; Eisses, A.M.; Grüber, C.; Mosca, F.; Arslanoglu, S.; Chirico, G.; Braegger, C.P.; Riedler, J.; Boehm, G.; Sauer, P.J. Do prebiotics reduce the number of fever episodes in healthy children in their first year of life: A randomised controlled trial. Br. J. Nutr. 2011, 106, 1740-1748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Similar Occurrence of Febrile Episodes Reported in Non-Atopic Children at Three to Five Years of Age after Prebiotics Supplemented Infant Formula. M Van Stuijvenberg, J Stam, C Grüber, F Mosca, S Arslanoglu, G Chirico, C P Braegger, J Riedler, G Boehm, P J J Sauer, 10.1371/journal.pone.0129927PLoS ONE. 10Van Stuijvenberg, M.; Stam, J.; Grüber, C.; Mosca, F.; Arslanoglu, S.; Chirico, G.; Braegger, C.P.; Riedler, J.; Boehm, G.; Sauer, P.J.J.; et al. Similar Occurrence of Febrile Episodes Reported in Non-Atopic Children at Three to Five Years of Age after Prebiotics Supplemented Infant Formula. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0129927. [CrossRef]

Infants Fed a Lower Calorie Formula With 2 FL Show Growth and 2 FL Uptake Like Breast-Fed Infants. B J Marriage, R H Buck, K C Goehring, J S Oliver, J A Williams, 10.1097/MPG.0000000000000889J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 61Marriage, B.J.; Buck, R.H.; Goehring, K.C.; Oliver, J.S.; Williams, J.A. Infants Fed a Lower Calorie Formula With 2 FL Show Growth and 2 FL Uptake Like Breast-Fed Infants. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2015, 61, 649-658. [CrossRef]

2'-Fucosyllactose Is Well Tolerated in a 100% Whey, Partially Hydrolyzed Infant Formula with. H M Storm, J Shepard, L M Czerkies, B Kineman, S S Cohen, H Reichert, R Carvalho, 10.1177/2333794x19833995Glob. Pediatr. Health. 6Storm, H.M.; Shepard, J.; Czerkies, L.M.; Kineman, B.; Cohen, S.S.; Reichert, H.; Carvalho, R. 2'-Fucosyllactose Is Well Tolerated in a 100% Whey, Partially Hydrolyzed Infant Formula with. Glob. Pediatr. Health 2019, 6, 2333794X19833995. [CrossRef]

Clinical Evaluation of 16-Week Supplementation with 5HMO-Mix in Healthy-Term Human Infants to Determine Tolerability, Safety, and Effect on Growth. K Parschat, C Melsaether, K R Jäpelt, S Jennewein, 10.3390/nu13082871Nutrients. 13PubMedParschat, K.; Melsaether, C.; Jäpelt, K.R.; Jennewein, S. Clinical Evaluation of 16-Week Supplementation with 5HMO-Mix in Healthy-Term Human Infants to Determine Tolerability, Safety, and Effect on Growth. Nutrients 2021, 13, 2871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Effects of an Extensively Hydrolyzed Formula Supplemented with Two Human Milk Oligosaccharides on Growth, Tolerability, Safety and Infection Risk in Infants with Cow's Milk Protein Allergy: A Randomized. Y Vandenplas, M Żołnowska, R B Canani, S Ludman, Z Tengelyi, A Moreno-Álvarez, A E N Goh, M L Gosoniu, B.-A Kirwan, M Tadi, 10.3390/nu14030530Nutrients. 2022Multi-Center TrialVandenplas, Y.;Żołnowska, M.; Canani, R.B.; Ludman, S.; Tengelyi, Z.; Moreno-Álvarez, A.; Goh, A.E.N.; Gosoniu, M.L.; Kirwan, B.-A.; Tadi, M.; et al. Effects of an Extensively Hydrolyzed Formula Supplemented with Two Human Milk Oligosaccharides on Growth, Tolerability, Safety and Infection Risk in Infants with Cow's Milk Protein Allergy: A Randomized, Multi-Center Trial. Nutrients 2022, 14, 530. [CrossRef]

Growth and Gastrointestinal Tolerance in Healthy Term Infants Fed Milk-Based Infant Formula Supplemented with Five Human Milk Oligosaccharides (HMOs): A Randomized Multicenter Trial. J Lasekan, Y Choe, S Dvoretskiy, A Devitt, S Zhang, A Mackey, K Wulf, R Buck, C Steele, M Johnson, 10.3390/nu14132625Nutrients. 2022Lasekan, J.; Choe, Y.; Dvoretskiy, S.; Devitt, A.; Zhang, S.; Mackey, A.; Wulf, K.; Buck, R.; Steele, C.; Johnson, M.; et al. Growth and Gastrointestinal Tolerance in Healthy Term Infants Fed Milk-Based Infant Formula Supplemented with Five Human Milk Oligosaccharides (HMOs): A Randomized Multicenter Trial. Nutrients 2022, 14, 2625. [CrossRef]

Prebiotic effect during the first year of life in healthy infants fed formula containing GOS as the only prebiotic: A multicentre, randomised, double-blind and placebo-controlled trial. C Sierra, M.-J Bernal, J Blasco-Alonso, R Martínez, J Dalmau, I Ortuño, B Espín, M.-I.; Gil Vasallo, D Ortega, M.-L Vidal, 10.1007/s00394-014-0689-9Eur. J. Nutr. 54Sierra, C.; Bernal, M.-J.; Blasco-Alonso, J.; Martínez, R.; Dalmau, J.; Ortuño, I.; Espín, B.; Vasallo, M.-I.; GIL Ortega, D.; Vidal, M.-L.; et al. Prebiotic effect during the first year of life in healthy infants fed formula containing GOS as the only prebiotic: A multicentre, randomised, double-blind and placebo-controlled trial. Eur. J. Nutr. 2015, 54, 89-99. [CrossRef]

Galacto-Oligosaccharide/Polidextrose Enriched Formula Protects against Respiratory Infections in Infants at High Risk of Atopy: A Randomized Clinical Trial. G Ranucci, V Buccigrossi, E Borgia, D Piacentini, F Visentin, L Cantarutti, P Baiardi, M Felisi, M I Spagnuolo, S Zanconato, 10.3390/nu10030286Nutrients. 10Ranucci, G.; Buccigrossi, V.; Borgia, E.; Piacentini, D.; Visentin, F.; Cantarutti, L.; Baiardi, P.; Felisi, M.; Spagnuolo, M.I.; Zanconato, S.; et al. Galacto-Oligosaccharide/Polidextrose Enriched Formula Protects against Respiratory Infections in Infants at High Risk of Atopy: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Nutrients 2018, 10, 286. [CrossRef]

Infant formula with cow's milk fat and prebiotics affects intestinal flora, but not the incidence of infections during infancy in a double-blind randomized controlled trial. A Nomayo, A Schwiertz, R Rossi, K Timme, J Foster, R Zelenka, J Tvrdik, F Jochum, 10.1186/s40348-020-00098-1Mol. Cell. Pediatr. 2020, 7, 6. [CrossRef. PubMedNomayo, A.; Schwiertz, A.; Rossi, R.; Timme, K.; Foster, J.; Zelenka, R.; Tvrdik, J.; Jochum, F. Infant formula with cow's milk fat and prebiotics affects intestinal flora, but not the incidence of infections during infancy in a double-blind randomized controlled trial. Mol. Cell. Pediatr. 2020, 7, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Infant formula containing bovine milk-derived oligosaccharides supports age-appropriate growth and improves stooling pattern. E Estorninos, R B Lawenko, E Palestroque, J Lebumfacil, M Marko, C I Cercamondi, 10.1038/s41390-021-01541-3Pediatr. Res. 91PubMedEstorninos, E.; Lawenko, R.B.; Palestroque, E.; Lebumfacil, J.; Marko, M.; Cercamondi, C.I. Infant formula containing bovine milk-derived oligosaccharides supports age-appropriate growth and improves stooling pattern. Pediatr. Res. 2022, 91, 1485-1492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Long-Term Safety and Efficacy of Prebiotic Enriched Infant Formula-A Randomized Controlled Trial. F Neumer, O Urraca, J Alonso, J Palencia, V Varea, S Theis, M Rodriguez-Palmero, J Moreno-Muñoz, F Guarner, G Veereman, 10.3390/nu13041276Nutrients. 13Neumer, F.; Urraca, O.; Alonso, J.; Palencia, J.; Varea, V.; Theis, S.; Rodriguez-Palmero, M.; Moreno-Muñoz, J.; Guarner, F.; Veereman, G.; et al. Long-Term Safety and Efficacy of Prebiotic Enriched Infant Formula-A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients 2021, 13, 1276. [CrossRef]

Breastfeeding and childhood acute otitis media: A systematic review and meta-analysis. G Bowatte, R Tham, K J Allen, D J Tan, M Lau, X Dai, C J Lodge, 10.1111/apa.13151Acta Paediatr. 104PubMedBowatte, G.; Tham, R.; Allen, K.J.; Tan, D.J.; Lau, M.; Dai, X.; Lodge, C.J. Breastfeeding and childhood acute otitis media: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Paediatr. 2015, 104, 85-95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding. M S Kramer, R Kakuma, 10.1002/14651858.CD003517.pub2Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 003517Kramer, M.S.; Kakuma, R. Optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2012, 2012, CD003517. [CrossRef]

A community study of clinical traits and risk factors for human metapneumovirus and respiratory syncytial virus infection during the first year of life. , M.-L Von Linstow, M Høgh, S A Nordbø, J Eugen-Olsen, A Koch, B Høgh, 10.1007/s00431-007-0643-4Eur. J. Pediatr. 167Von Linstow, M.-L.; Høgh, M.; Nordbø, S.A.; Eugen-Olsen, J.; Koch, A.; Høgh, B. A community study of clinical traits and risk factors for human metapneumovirus and respiratory syncytial virus infection during the first year of life. Eur. J. Pediatr. 2008, 167, 1125-1133. [CrossRef]

Investigation of the prevalence of non-COVID-19 infectious diseases during the COVID-19 pandemic. C Tanislav, K Kostev, 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.12.006Public Health. 203Tanislav, C.; Kostev, K. Investigation of the prevalence of non-COVID-19 infectious diseases during the COVID-19 pandemic. Public Health 2022, 203, 53-57. [CrossRef]

Response to infections in patients with asthma and atopic disease: An epiphenomenon or reflection of host susceptibility?. K M James, R S Peebles, T V Hartert, 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.05.056J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 130James, K.M.; Peebles, R.S.; Hartert, T.V. Response to infections in patients with asthma and atopic disease: An epiphenomenon or reflection of host susceptibility? J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2012, 130, 343-351. [CrossRef]

Asthma, other atopic conditions and risk of infections in 105 519 general population never and ever smokers. J Helby, B G Nordestgaard, T Benfield, S E Bojesen, 10.1111/joim.12635J. Intern. Med. 282Helby, J.; Nordestgaard, B.G.; Benfield, T.; Bojesen, S.E. Asthma, other atopic conditions and risk of infections in 105 519 general population never and ever smokers. J. Intern. Med. 2017, 282, 254-267. [CrossRef]

The Effects of Prebiotics, Synbiotics, and Short-Chain Fatty Acids on Respiratory Tract Infections and Immune Function: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. L M Williams, I L Stoodley, B S Berthon, L G Wood, 10.1093/advances/nmab114Adv. Nutr. 2022Williams, L.M.; Stoodley, I.L.; Berthon, B.S.; Wood, L.G. The Effects of Prebiotics, Synbiotics, and Short-Chain Fatty Acids on Respiratory Tract Infections and Immune Function: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Adv. Nutr. 2022, 13, 167-192. [CrossRef]

Analysing the protection from respiratory tract infections and allergic diseases early in life by human milk components: The PRIMA birth cohort. A H Van Stigt, K O Rengerink, K W M Bloemenkamp, W De Waal, S M P J Prevaes, T.-M Le, F Van Wijk, M Nederend, A H Hellinga, C S Lammers, 10.1186/s12879-022-07107-wBMC Infect. Dis. 2022, 22, 152. [CrossRef. PubMedVan Stigt, A.H.; Rengerink, K.O.; Bloemenkamp, K.W.M.; de Waal, W.; Prevaes, S.M.P.J.; Le, T.-M.; van Wijk, F.; Nederend, M.; Hellinga, A.H.; Lammers, C.S.; et al. Analysing the protection from respiratory tract infections and allergic diseases early in life by human milk components: The PRIMA birth cohort. BMC Infect. Dis. 2022, 22, 152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods. Disclaimer/Publisher&apos;s Note, instructions or products referred to in the contentDisclaimer/Publisher's Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.