# Exploring Knowledge and Awareness of HCV Infection and Screening Test: A Cross-Sectional Survey Among an Italian Sample

CorpusID: 258375409
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63724a863069903d4d3f6d4f2722ede020491cb4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63724a863069903d4d3f6d4f2722ede020491cb4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Exploring Knowledge and Awareness of HCV Infection and Screening Test: A Cross-Sectional Survey Among an Italian Sample
2023

Giuseppina Lo Moro 
Giacomo Scaioli 
Lorenzo Vola 
Laura Guastavigna 
Roberta Frattin 
Elisabetta De Vito 
· Fabrizio 
Bert 
Roberta Siliquini 
Exploring Knowledge and Awareness of HCV Infection and Screening Test: A Cross-Sectional Survey Among an Italian Sample

Journal of Community Health
48202310.1007/s10900-023-01218-4Accepted: 31 March 2023 / Published online: 28 April 2023ORIGINAL PAPERHCV · HCV screening · Knowledge · General population
Addressing HCV represents a public health priority, especially in Italy, which has the highest HCV prevalence in Europe. This study primarily aimed to explore knowledge about the HCV infection and awareness of the existence of the HCV screening test in Italy, before the implementation of awareness campaigns in 2022. An online cross-sectional survey was conducted (December 2021-January 2022). The primary outcomes were: Disease Knowledge Score (DKS), Prevention and Transmission Knowledge Score (PTKS) (for both: scoring from 0 to 100%, higher scores corresponded to higher knowledge), and being unaware of the existence of the HCV screening. The final sample consisted of 813 participants. The median DKS was 75% (IQR = 66.7-83.3), the median PTKS was 46.2% (IQR = 38.5-53.8), and 23.2% of participants were unaware of HCV screening. Higher education, health-related study or profession, history of accidental injuries, being affected by HCV and having actively searched for information on HCV had positive associations with DKS.LGBT males showed significantly lower DKS. Considering PTKS, participants affected by HCV the disease had a negative association with this score. Having a postgraduate education reduced the likelihood of not knowing about the HCV screening test, while having at least one family member affected by hepatitis C increased this probability. This study highlighted a concerning lack of knowledge about prevention and transmission, indicating a need for targeted education campaigns. The findings emphasized the importance of information and motivation and identified male LGBT + individuals as a vulnerable group with limited disease knowledge. Future research should concern the effectiveness of awareness campaigns.Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Introduction

Hepatitis C represents an important global public health priority, as it is responsible for 71.1 million chronic infections, 1.75 million new infections per year and over 340,000 deaths per year [1][2][3]. In the European Union (EU), an estimated 3.9 million people have chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection [4], which is seven times more prevalent than human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection [5]. Additionally, 300,000 new cases and 64,000 deaths from HCV infection are recorded each year [6]. Furthermore, several studies have shown that the morbidity and mortality rates from hepatitis C may be underestimated, as the infection often progresses asymptomatically or it is responsible for extra-hepatic complications that makes the diagnosis of HCV infection more difficult [7][8][9].

Without a greater investment in diagnostic testing and treatment, the virus is expected to continue to spread globally reaching 13 million new cases and 1.1 million deaths by 2030 [2]. For this reason, and thanks to the introduction in 2011 of Directly Acting Antivirals (DAAs), which have revolutionized therapeutic perspectives allowing healing in over 95% of cases treated, in May 2016 the World Health Organization (WHO) approved the Global Health Sector Strategies (GHSS-2016(GHSS- -2021) that aim to achieve elimination of viral hepatitis by 2030 [10]. Consequently, many countries adopted these recommendations and launched campaigns to eliminate the infection.

Italy, which has the highest prevalence of HCV in Europe [11], has developed the National Plan for the Prevention of Viral Hepatitis B and C (PNEV), which includes innovative DAA drugs fund [12]. With the help of DAAs, over 232,000 patients with chronic hepatitis C have been treated, i.e. the highest number of patients treated in Europe [13]. However, the proportion of patients undergoing diagnostic-therapeutic pathways is expected to decrease between 2023 and 2025, along with the increase in the pool of infected but undiagnosed individuals that is currently already high [14]. A study estimated that in 2019 there were 280,000 individuals in Italy with undetected infection and/or not receiving treatments [15]. Without the implementation of a screening program aimed at identifying all infected people, achieving WHO targets will be unlikely [16,17].

Therefore, in May 2021, the Italian Ministry of Health promoted a regulation for a national program providing free HCV screening tests for specific risk categories, including injecting drug users (IDUs) and prisoners, as well as individuals born between 1969 and 1989. The program included serological tests to search for HCV antibodies and rapid tests, such as capillary test [18]. The national HCV screening test was in an experimental phase until December 2021 [18,19]. It is worth noting that, alongside the screening strategy, it is necessary to address the issue upstream by increasing the knowledge of this pathology and raising awareness of risk factors, correct behaviors to avoid contagion, early diagnosis, and therapy [20].

Therefore, in this context, it is substantial to explore the population's knowledge and awareness of this disease, its prevention, and its screening, to identify potential gaps that need to be addressed to bolster the elimination strategy. Thus, just before the beginning of the implementation of the screening program along with awareness campaign in all Italian regions, the present study primarily aimed to explore knowledge about the HCV infection and awareness of the existence of the HCV screening test. The main objective was to assess the level of knowledge regarding the clinical features and treatment of the disease, critical aspects of infection prevention, transmission, and screening test, and to investigate any associated factors. Secondarily, this work aimed to describe attitudes towards this disease and behaviors, such as undergoing HCV test and sharing potentially contaminated items, and to evaluate any associated variables.


## Methods

Between December 2021 and January 2022, a cross-sectional study was conducted in Italy by administering a questionnaire among a sample from the Italian general population. Inclusion criteria for the recruitment were being over 18 years old and understanding the Italian language. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and the protocol was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the University of Turin. The research was conducted using the Computer-Assisted Web Interview (CAWI) method. A link to access the questionnaire was distributed online on social media (mainly Facebook and Twitter) through the official page of the School of Hygiene and Preventive Medicine of the University of Turin and the profiles of the researchers involved in the study, obtaining a convenience sample. The questionnaire was administered through the online platform LimeSurvey (https:// www. limes urvey. org/), provided by the University of Turin. Before accessing the questionnaire, the participants had to accept the informed consent form for data processing and the privacy policy. The questionnaire was voluntary and completely anonymous.


## The Questionnaire

The questionnaire was primarily developed by the researchers based on the available literature. The questionnaire was structured in four sections. The first section collected information about demographics and HCV-related risk factors to identify different risk groups. The three remaining sections aimed at gathering data on knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding HCV, respectively [2, 21,22].

The first section collected demographic information such as age, gender and sexual orientation, nationality, region of residency, living condition, presence of children, educational level, and occupation. The occupation specifically explored professionals like healthcare workers, piercers and tattoo artist, barbers, beauticians/chiropodists, i.e. workers at risk for HCV infection [23,24]. Residency in an urban context or not was explored since for other infectious diseases, e.g. HIV, rural inhabitants were more likely to know less and were at greater risk of infection [25,26]. Therefore, the number of inhabitants of city of residence of participants was asked, defining urban centers as cities with at least 50,000 inhabitants [27]. This section also collected a few health-related characteristics of both participants and their family members, e.g. chronic diseases, previous HCV test and related result. To identify different risk categories, several specific questions were asked about HCV risk factors, such as history of blood transfusion, reclusion, use of injectable drugs, contact with drug addiction centers, and frequency of using of sexual protection [15]. The second section addressed the level of knowledge by using two scores developed based on scientific literature data [6,21,22,[28][29][30]. The first score was the Disease Knowledge Score, i.e. the first primary outcome of the present study. Notions of basic clinic, symptomatology, and therapy were assessed (12 items, shown in Supplemental Table S1). The Prevention and Transmission Knowledge Score represented the second primary outcome, exploring ways of transmission and preventive behaviors (13 items, shown in Supplemental Table S2). For both Knowledge Scores, both true and false statements were presented and the percentage of correct answers represented the total score. Higher scores corresponded to higher knowledge. Then, participants were asked if they knew about the existence of a screening test for HCV. Being unaware of such test was the last primary outcome. Participants were also asked to select the correct definition of "screening test" to explore their understanding of the topic.

The third section aimed at exploring the attitudes towards HCV infection. The attitude score, i.e. a secondary outcome of this paper, was built out of five different items, about behaviors participants would perform in case of contact with an HCV-positive individual. One point was assigned to each wrong or useless behavior, resulting in a score ranging from 0 to 5 (items listed in Supplemental Table S3). A higher score represented worse/wrong attitudes. Also, the willingness to undergo an HCV test was explored, e.g. participants were asked if they would take a test in case of positive contact and if they would take it if it was administered in association with the COVID-19 test. Participants were asked if they perceived themselves as at risk of contracting HCV and if they were worried about hepatitis C.

In the fourth section, participants were asked if they had ever been tested for HCV (secondary outcome). This section was dedicated to examine different practices related to higher risk of contracting HCV, such as sharing potentially blood-contaminated items (e.g. razors, toothbrush, nail clippers, and earrings) (last secondary outcome). Participants were asked if they were blood donor, had piercings or tattoos, or received aesthetic treatments (e.g. manicure, pedicure, permanent makeup). To better describe the actual risk of exposure to HCV, specific time periods were used to define the answers. For blood donation, 1992 was taken into account: in 1992 the Italian protocols for assessing the eligibility of blood and plasma donors were updated, ensuring the safety and quality of blood donations [31]. For piercings and tattoos, in 1998 the Italian Ministry of Health issued new regulations governing the hygiene and safety of body art practices [24]. In this section, researchers also explored the health educational background, e.g. participants were asked if they personally sought out information and/or if they previously participated in HCV-specific or bloodborne disease health educational programs. Sources of information were explored. Lastly, the participants' willingness and preferred modality to receive further information on this topic were assessed.

At the end of the online questionnaire, a list of useful websites was displayed to turn the survey into a learning opportunity. A link was also provided to access the European Test Finder, which allows participant to easily access screening test for HCV, HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.


## Statistical Analysis

All variables underwent descriptive analysis. As the Shapiro-Wilk test indicated non-normal distributions, the median and interquartile range (IQR) were utilized to describe the scalar variables. Chi-square tests and Mann-Whitney tests (Kruskal Wallis where appropriate) were run to assess differences in the distribution of the outcomes across the questionnaire variables.

To explore predictors of the outcomes, multivariable regression models adjusted for age and gender were executed. Linear regressions were used for scalar outcomes (Disease Knowledge Score; Prevention and Transmission Knowledge Score; attitude score) and logistic regressions were used for binary outcomes (being unaware of HCV screening test; having undergone HCV test; sharing blood-contaminated items). The multivariable models were achieved with a stepwise forward selection process, with a univariable p-value < 0.250 as the main criterion [32]. Results were expressed as adjusted Odds Ratios (adjOR) (logistic regression), adjusted Coefficients (adjCoef) (linear regression), and 95% Confidence Intervals (95% CI).

The software SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science, version 27) and STATA (v16) were used. Missing values were excluded. A p-value less than 0.05 was necessary to deem the results as significant.


## Results


## Characteristics of the Sample

The final sample consisted of 813 participants. Females accounted for 75.1% of the sample. The median age was 33 years (IQR = 28-45). Almost half of the participants (47.1%) had a high school diploma or lower educational level. Details on sociodemographic characteristics are described in Table 1.

HCV-related information is fully described in Table 2. Most of the participants (99.4%) were aware of hepatitis C existence, and 4.1% tested positive for HCV. Moreover, 10.5% of the participants reported having at least one family member who tested positive for HCV and 3.2% stated having an HCV-positive partner. Only 7.3% declared they participated in a health education program on HCV.

Risk factors and risk behaviors are reported in Table 3. Regarding job categories at risk for HCV infection, 16.1% of participants declared themselves as healthcare professionals, while only 2.7% fell into higher risk professions such as tattoo artists and/or piercers, barbers/hairdressers, beauticians, and chiropodists. A total of 1.5% of the participants reported a history of incarceration. Among the habits that increase the risk of infection, 0.6% reported a history of alcoholism, and 2.3% reported a history of injective drugs. Regarding practices that increase HCV risk, 6.9% underwent transfusions/organ donations, 52.6%  Tables:  Table S4)


## Primary Outcomes

The median Disease Knowledge Score was 75% (IQR = 66.7-83.3), while the median Prevention and Transmission Knowledge score was 46.2% (IQR = 38.5-53.8). Only 23.2% of participants were unaware of the existence of HCV screening test. Concerning the characteristics of  Tables (Tables S1, S2, and S5). The distribution of the Disease Knowledge Score was significantly different across several variables, such as educational level, belonging to the health sector, having undergone HCV testing, having had an HCV-positive partner or family member, condom frequency of use, having had an accidental injury, the perceived subjective risk of contracting the disease, having participated in an HCV educational program, and having received information on the subject either passively or actively.

As for the Prevention and Transmission Knowledge Score, it was distributed differently across a few variables, such as having HCV and being willing to undergo testing in case of contact with HCV-positive individuals.

Lastly, awareness of the HCV screening test showed significant associations with place of birth, region of residence, educational level, and being or having relatives affected by HCV.

Detailed information about the relationships with the primary outcomes is presented in Tables 1, 2 and 3.


## Secondary Outcomes

The median attitude score was 0 (IQR = 0-1). A total of 43.4% declared that they have undergone HCV test in the past and 31.8% shared potentially blood-contaminated items.

Descriptive analyses of the items of the attitude score are available in Supplementary Tables (Tables S3). The distribution of the Attitude Score was not significantly associated with any of the considered sociodemographic variables. Having undergone an HCV test was significantly associated with having children, living in an urban environment, education, belonging to the health care sector (both workers and students). Sharing potentially bloodcontaminated showed significant associations with living alone and belonging to the health care sector (both workers and students). Several variables regarding HCV-related information, risk factors, and behaviors showed significant associations with all secondary outcomes. Detailed information about the relationships with the secondary outcomes is presented in Supplementary Tables (Table S6, S7, and S8).


## Regression Models


## Primary Outcomes

The multivariable regression models of the primary outcomes are reported in Table 4.

Several variables were significantly associated with the Disease Knowledge Score. University or higher education, health-related study or profession, history of accidental injuries, being affected by HCV and having actively searched for information on HCV were positively associated with this outcome.


## Significant p-values in bold

LGBT males showed significantly lower scores compared with heterosexual males. Taking into consideration the Prevention and Transmission Knowledge Score only one variable resulted to have a significant association: participants affected by HCV the disease had a negative association with this score.

Regarding being unaware of the existence of the HCV screening test, postgraduate education and living in Central Italy were associated with a lower likelihood of not knowing about the test. Having at least one family member affected by hepatitis C increased the probability of reporting this outcome.


## Secondary Outcomes

The multivariable regression models of the secondary outcomes are reported in Table 5.

Regarding the attitude score, the Disease Knowledge Score and being a blood donor showed negative association with the outcome, while the Prevention and Transmission Knowledge score and age showed positive association.

Considering the previous execution of the HCV test, there was a higher likelihood of being a health care worker, living in an urban context, having children, having donated blood or received blood transfusions before 1992, perceiving subjective HCV risk, often wearing protection during sex, not having occasional sexual intercourses, having an HCV-positive partner, and being informed on HCV. A higher Disease Knowledge Score was associated with a higher probability of reporting this outcome.

Age, living alone, and being affected by HCV were associated with a lower likelihood of sharing potentially contaminated items, while being willing to undergo HCV screening test in case of positive contact showed a higher likelihood.


## Discussion

The present study primarily aimed to assess HCV-related knowledge (both about the disease and its prevention and transmission) and awareness about the existence of HCV screening test and to explore potentially associated factors. Secondarily, this work aimed to evaluate attitudes towards this disease and behaviors, such as undergoing HCV test and sharing potentially contaminated items, analyzing which factors may influence these outcomes.

First, it is worth noting that the percentages of right answers were higher for the Disease Knowledge Score (75%) than for the Prevention and Transmission Knowledge Score (46%). While these findings highlight a fair knowledge on the disease, the knowledge about prevention and transmission is poor and alarming from a public health perspective. This result could direct the efforts of awareness campaigns towards this gap. The gap between the two aforementioned types of knowledge is not new; for instance, Zainiddinov and colleagues highlighted a similar scenario concerning HIV [33].

Concerning the potential predictors of the two Knowledge Scores in the multivariable models, several considerations should be made. HCV-positive patients reported significant associations with both outcomes, but in opposite directions. On the one hand, these participants were more aware of the features and complications of the disease; on the other hand, they were less likely to be informed on how to transmit the infection. Hence, although the information conveyed to patients (likely by their treating physician) appeared to effectively increase awareness of the clinical implications and severity, it did not seem to enhance the knowledge necessary to substantially reduce transmission. The association between knowledge about the disease and having such disease has also been reported for sexual transmitted diseases, such as HIV [34]. Interestingly, no other variables were associated with the Prevention and Transmission Knowledge score, suggesting that even the categories of the population that are well-informed about HCV need to receive specific education on prevention and transmission, which are the most crucial topics to reduce the spread. Regarding the categories of participants who are better informed about the disease, the findings of the present paper showed significant associations for highly educated participants, healthcare workers and students, participants who actively sought information, and individuals who have had accidental injuries with blood-contaminated items. The relationship between higher levels of education and higher disease knowledge has already been described for HCV [35,36] and for many other conditions, such as HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases [36][37][38][39]. Similarly, it is not surprising to find a positive association between the Disease Knowledge Score and being healthcare students/workers, who represent a specific population with, in general, higher health literacy [40,41], or with participants who have had accidental injuries, as they may have received information about the possible risks related to the injury. Also individuals who actively searched for information on HCV were more likely to score high on the Disease Knowledge score. This is particularly relevant considering the Information-Motivation-Behavioral Skills model proposed by Fisher and colleagues for HIV preventive behavior [42]. Indeed, both information and motivation are essential in engaging preventive behaviors: participants with high knowledge and high interest in searching for information might represent a specific group of people who are more prone to change their behaviors. However, the fact that there was no association between these above-mentioned categories and a higher Prevention and Transmission knowledge was unexpected and may represent a relevant issue that should be further investigated, especially considering healthcare worker education and information that can be found through active searching.

The current study has brought attention to male LGBT + individuals as a vulnerable group with limited Disease Knowledge. This indicates an urgent need for awareness campaigns targeted specifically towards this population. Indeed, men who have sex with men are known to have a higher burden of hepatitis and other sexually transmitted diseases than the general population [43].

With regards to the third outcome, the majority of participants demonstrated awareness of the HCV screening test. This implies that even though information campaigns about the screening program were not extensively carried out in most regions of Italy during the study period, participants were knowledgeable (or at least had an idea) about the existence of the test. Future studies on the Italian population should compare these results with data collected after the implementation of awareness campaigns aimed at incentivizing participation in the HCV screening program. Participants with higher education reported greater awareness, consistent with the previously discussed findings related to knowledge about the disease, as well as those residing in Central Italy. The latter result could potentially be attributed to the possibility that awareness campaigns started earlier in certain regions of Central Italy. A comparative analysis of HCV screening test planning at the regional level could reveal best practices and serve as a model for developing more effective health promotion plans. It is noteworthy that individuals with HCV-positive family members had a lower level of awareness regarding the screening test, indicating the need for more comprehensive information dissemination not only to HCV-positive patients but also to those in their immediate circles.

The study of secondary outcomes (i.e. attitude score, having undergone HCV test, and sharing blood-contaminated items) highlighted some relevant issues. First, attitudes in case of contact with an HCV-positive individual were quite good. Interestingly, while high disease knowledge was associated with better attitudes as one would expect, high prevention and transmission knowledge was associated with worse/ wrong attitudes. This could happen for several reason related to the perception towards the disease. Perhaps, if someone has a high level of knowledge about how HCV is transmitted, they may overestimate the risk of contracting the virus through casual contact with an infected person. This could lead to unnecessary avoidance or fear of HCV-positive individuals. Indeed, despite advances in understanding HCV and how it is spread, there is still a lot of stigma surrounding the virus. People who have a high level of knowledge about HCV transmission may be more likely to hold stigmatizing attitudes towards HCV-positive individuals, as seen, for instance, among healthcare professionals [44,45].

The role of risk perception was also relevant with regard to the second secondary outcome, which was having been tested for HCV. First, it should be noted that our sample reported a quite higher percentage of people tested for HCV compared with other Italian data on university students [46]; however, differences in sample composition probably explain this result. In terms of risk perception, several items related to an overall high risk perception and a high interest towards the disease (such     [49][50][51]. Considering the last secondary outcome, a substantial percentage of the sample usually shared potentially blood-contaminated items, indicating that most people are not concerned about the objects they use in their daily lives, but they probably see them as less dangerous tools than those more closely associated with infections in the common imagination, such as syringes. It is worth noting that, despite not showing higher levels of knowledge regarding prevention and transmission, HCVpositive individuals have shown to share these objects less frequently, suggesting that they have been informed about the appropriate behaviors to follow and demonstrate good habits. The present study had some limitations. First, using a cross-sectional design allows hypothesis formulation, but not causal relationships identification between predictors and outcomes. Another limitation was the opportunistic sampling and the use of social media invites for the questionnaire, which limited participation to those who are registered. Finally, it is not possible to determine if and where the awareness campaigns had already been initiated.

In conclusion, this study provided important insights into the knowledge and awareness of HCV among a sample from the general population in Italy. The results highlighted a concerning lack of knowledge about prevention and transmission, indicating a need for targeted education campaigns to bridge this gap. The findings also emphasized the importance of information and motivation, indicating the need for comprehensive and easily accessible information sources. Moreover, the study identified LGBT + men as a vulnerable group with limited disease knowledge, underlining the need for targeted awareness campaigns. Overall, the study's findings have important implications for public health campaigns aimed at reducing the spread of HCV. It is vital to improve knowledge and awareness of prevention and transmission among the general population, as well as to provide comprehensive information to vulnerable groups. The study's results could guide future research and inform the development of effective health promotion plans. Another important area of future research could concern the effectiveness of awareness campaigns on participation in HCV screening programs. By comparing the results of this study with those of a potential future study conducted after the implementation of specific information campaigns on the subject, the effectiveness and impact of such campaigns could be evaluated.

## Table 1
1Socio-demographic characteristics of the sample and relationships with primary outcomesSignificant p-values in bold 



## Table 2
2HCV-related information and relationships with primary outcomes Significant p-values in bold Being willing to get HCV screening test when getting a COVID-19 rapid test the screening, among those who declared to know its existence, 34.1% thought it measured the severity of symptoms. Descriptive analyses of the items of the knowledge scores and of the variables related to the screening test are available in SupplementaryCharacteristic 
Overall sample Disease knowledge 
score 

Prevention & transmis-
sion knowledge score 

HCV screening test awareness 

n = 813 
N (%) 

Median (IQR) p 
Median (IQR) 
p 
No 
n = 173 
N (%) 

Yes 
n = 574 
N (%) 

p 

Having heard of hepatitis C before 
No 
5 (0.6) 
70.9 (58.3-75) 0.283 
42.3 (34.6-50) 0.471 
1 (25.0) 
3 (75.0) 
0.930 
Yes 
808 (99.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
172 (23.1) 571 (76.9) 
Knowing the correct definition of "screening test" 
No 
212 (27.6) 
66.7 (66.7-75) < 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.484 
42 (20.4) 164 (79.6) 0.186 
Yes 
556 (72.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
131 (24.2) 410 (75.8) 
Subjective perceived risk of contracting HCV infection 
Not at risk 
602 (82.2) 
75 (66.7-75) < 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.342 
134 (22.3) 468 (77.7) 0.183 
At risk 
130 (17.8) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-46.2) 
36 (27.7) 94 (72.3) 
Being worried about hepatitis C 
No 
617 (84.3) 
75 (66.7-83.3) < 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.390 
145 (23.5) 472 (76.5) 0.681 
Yes 
115 (15.7) 
66.7 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
25 (21.7) 90 (78.3) 
Having being tested for HCV 
No/Don't know 
460 (56.6) 
75 (66.7-83.3) < 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.935 
101 (23.9) 321 (76.1) 0.568 
Yes 
353 (43.4) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
72 (22.2) 253 (77.8) 
Being HCV positive 
No 
773 (95.1) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.001 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.020 
172 (24.2) 539 (75.8) 0.012 
Yes 
33 (4.1) 
75 (75-83.3) 
38.5 (38.5-46.2) 
1 (3.3) 
29 (96.7) 
Don't know 
7 (0.9) 
75 (58.3-75) 
46.2 (38.5-46.2) 
0 (0.0) 
6 (100.0) 
No 
28 (3.8) 
66.7 (58.3-75) 0.004 
46.2 (30.8-53.8) 0.639 
8 (28.6) 
20 (71.4) 0.494 
Yes 
704 (96.2) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
162 (23.0) 542 (77.0) 
Being willing to undergo HCV screening test in case of positive contact 
No 
30 (4.1) 
66.7 (58.3-75) 0.126 
38.5 (30.8-38.5) < 0.001 8 (26.7) 
22 (73.3) 0.648 
Yes 
702 (95.9) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
162 (23.1) 540 (76.9) 
Having participated in an HCV prevention program 
No 
674 (92.7) 
75 (66.7-83.3) < 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.917 
160 (23.7) 514 (76.3) 0.420 
Yes 
53 (7.3) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-46.2) 
10 (18.9) 43 (81.1) 
Being interested in receiving more information about HCV 
No 
201 (27.6) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.261 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.056 
52 (25.9) 149 (74.1) 0.327 
Yes 
526 (72.4) 
75 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
118 (22.4) 408 (77.6) 
Having received information about HCV 
Not informed (nether passively nor 
actively) 

388 (53.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) < 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.101 
95 (24.5) 293 (75.5) 0.664 

Actively informed (± passively 
informed) 

265 (36.5) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-46.2) 
57 (21.5) 208 (78.5) 

Only passively informed 
74 (10.2) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
18 (24.3) 56 (75.7) 


## Table 3
3Risk factors, behaviors, and relationships with primary outcomes Having ever had an accidental wound caused by a syringe or other instrument contaminated by blood and/or other body fluidsCharacteristic 
Overall sample Disease knowledge score Prevention & transmis-
sion knowledge score 

HCV screening test awareness 

n = 813 
N (%) 

Median (IQR) 
p 
Median (IQR) 
p 
No 
n = 173 
N (%) 

Yes 
n = 574 
N (%) 

p 

Sharing contaminated items 
No 
496 (68.2) 
75 (66.7-75) 
0.465 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.289 112 (22.6) 384 (77.4) 0.453 
Yes 
231 (31.8) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
58 (25.1) 173 (74.9) 
Having ever had a sexual intercourse 
No 
35 (4.3) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.881 
38.5 (38.5-53.8) 0.032 10 (37.0) 17 (63.0) 0.082 
Yes 
778 (95.7) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
163 (22.6) 557 (77.4) 
Frequency of condom use for occasional sex 
Never/almost never 
129 (15.9) 
75 (66.7-75) 
0.014 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.109 27 (22.9) 91 (77.1) 0.980 
Sometimes 
62 (7.6) 
66.7 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
12 (20.7) 46 (79.3) 
Often 
98 (12.1) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
20 (22.2) 70 (77.8) 
Always 
139 (17.1) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
30 (22.7) 102 (77.3) 
Do not have occasional sex 
385 (47.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
84 (24.1) 265 (75.9) 
Having a HCV positive partner 
No/Don't know 
787 (96.8) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.025 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.674 167 (23.1) 555 (76.9) 0.919 
Yes 
26 (3.2) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-46.2) 
6 (24.0) 
19 (76.0) 
Having an addicted partner or housemate 
No/Don't know 
775 (95.3) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.098 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.630 166 (23.3) 546 (76.7) 0.650 
Yes 
38 (4.7) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
7 (20.0) 
28 (80.0) 
Having HCV positive family members 
No 
670 (82.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.002 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.665 142 (22.9) 477 (77.1) 0.005 
Yes 
85 (10.5) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
26 (34.2) 50 (65.8) 
Don't know 
58 (7.1) 
66.7 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
5 (9.6) 
47 (90.4) 
Incarceration personal history 
No 
801 (98.5) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.411 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.709 171 (23.2) 565 (76.8) 0.693 
Yes 
12 (1.5) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (30.8-53.8) 
2 (18.2) 
9 (81.8) 
Alcoholism personal history 
No 
808 (99.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.066 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.177 173 (23.3) 569 (76.7) 0.218 
Yes 
5 (0.6) 
66.7 (66.7-66.7) 
38.5 (30.8-46.2) 
0 (0.0) 
5 (100.0) 
Being an injective drug user (IDU) 
No 
793 (97.7) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.384 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.702 172 (23.6) 556 (76.4) 0.061 
Yes 
19 (2.3) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (46.2-46.2) 
1 (5.3) 
18 (94.7) 
No 
718 (88.3) 
75 (66.7-75) 
< 0.001 46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.910 151 (22.9) 509 (77.1) 0.617 
Yes 
95 (11.7) 
75 (75-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-46.2) 
22 (25.3) 65 (74.7) 
Being a blood donor 
No 
527 (64.9) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.304 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.360 119 (24.7) 363 (75.3) 0.181 
Yes 
285 (35.1) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
54 (20.4) 211 (79.6) 
Having received blood donation 
No 
757 (93.1) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.969 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.652 161 (23.2) 533 (76.8) 0.772 
At least one before 1992 
16 (2.0) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
38.5 (38.5-61.5) 
2 (15.4) 
11 (84.6) 
Only after 1992 
40 (4.9) 
75 (66.7-79.2) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
10 (25) 
30 (75) 


## Table 3 (continued)
3Characteristic 
Overall sample Disease knowledge score Prevention & transmis-
sion knowledge score 

HCV screening test awareness 

n = 813 
N (%) 

Median (IQR) 
p 
Median (IQR) 
p 
No 
n = 173 
N (%) 

Yes 
n = 574 
N (%) 

p 

Having piercings 
No 
205 (25.3) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.266 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.747 41 (21.6) 149 (78.4) 0.224 
At least one performed independently 
54 (6.7) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
7 (14) 
43 (86) 
At least one performed professionally 
before 98 

248 (30.6) 
75 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
62 (26.8) 169 (73.2) 

At least one performed professionally 
after 98 

304 (37.5) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
63 (23) 
211 (77) 

Having Tattoos 
No 
501 (61.9) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.149 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.372 105 (22.9) 354 (77.1) 0.436 
At least one performed not profession-
ally 

50 (6.2) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
10 (21.3) 37 (78.7) 

At least one performed professionally 
before 1998 

15 (1.9) 
75 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
1 (7.1) 
13 (92.9) 

At least one performed professionally 
after 1998 

244 (30.1) 
75 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
57 (25.3) 168 (74.7) 

Having received an aesthetic treatment 
No 
385 (47.4) 
75 (66.7-83.3) 0.328 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 0.672 77 (21.8) 277 (78.2) 0.628 
Yes 
427 (52.6) 
75 (66.7-75) 
46.2 (38.5-53.8) 
95 (24.2) 297 (75.8) 


## Table 4
4Regression models of primary outcomesDisease knowledge score 
Prevention & transmission 
knowledge score 

Not being aware of HCV 
screening test existence 

adjCoef (95% CI) 
p 
adjCoef (95% CI) 
p 
adjOR (95% CI) 
p 

Age 
− 0.03 (− 0.10; 0.03) 
0.306 
0.00 (− 0.09; 0.08) 
0.929 1.00 (0.99; 1.02) 0.622 
Gender and sexual orientation, ref.: heterosexual male 
Heterosexual female 
0.74 (− 0.98;2.45) 
0.399 
− 0.33 (− 2.99; 2.32) 
0.807 1.69 (0.82; 3.46) 0.152 
LGBT male 
− 5.01 (− 8.73; − 1.28) 0.009 
− 0.64 (− 5.58; 4.29) 
0.798 1.13 (0.36; 3.56) 0.835 
LGBT female 
− 0.39 (− 3.04; 2.26) 
0.773 
− 1.51 (− 5.22; 2.19) 
0.423 1.96 (0.77; 4.95) 0.157 
Asexual (both genders) 
4.29 (− 3.64; 12.22) 
0.289 
0.96 (− 9.63; 11.54) 
0.859 1.33 (0.13; 13.89) 0.810 
Genderqueer 
− 2.40 (− 10.23; 5.42) 0.547 
− 6.75 (− 17.21; 3.72) 0.206 * 
* 
Educational level, ref.: high school or lower 
University degree 
2.15 (0.62; 3.68) 
0.006 
0.83 (− 1.22; 2.88) 
0.426 0.98 (0.64; 1.51) 0.929 
Masters/PhD 
3.03 (0.98; 5.08) 
0.004 
0.91 (− 1.77; 3.60) 
0.504 0.39 (0.19; 0.78) 0.008 
Living in an urban context, ref.: no 
Yes 
0.02 (− 1.35; 1.39) 
0.975 
-
-
1.01 (0.68; 1.51) 0.953 
Living alone, ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
− 1.20 (− 3.72; 1.32) 
0.351 -
-
Health care worker, ref.: no 
Yes 
3.49 (1.45; 5.54) 
0.001 
− 1.16 (− 3.82; 1.49) 
0.390 1.30 (0.74; 2.26) 0.358 
Health care student, ref.: no 
Yes 
6.25 (3.97; 8.53) 
< 0.001 − 1.92 (− 4.94; 1.10) 
0.212 1.18 (0.45; 2.17) 0.583 
Being a blood donor, ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
0.30 (− 1.53; 2.14) 
0.747 0.83 (0.55; 1.25) 0.369 
Being an injective drug user (IDU), ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
-
-
0.52 (0.05; 5.08) 0.577 
Knowing the correct definition of "screening test", ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
-
-
1.39 (0.88; 2.22) 0.161 
Subjective perceived risk of contracting HCV infection, ref.: not at risk 
At risk 
-
-
-
-
1.45 (0.87; 2.43) 0.157 
Being interested in receiving more information about HCV, ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
1.39 (− 0.62; 3.41) 
0.176 -
-
Having a HCV positive partner, ref.: no/don't know 
Yes 
0.62 (− 3.71; 4.95) 
0.780 
-
-
-
-
Having an addicted partner or housemate, ref.: no/don't know 
Yes 
1.30 (− 2.39; 5.00) 
0.489 
-
-
-
-
Having ever had an accidental wound caused by a syringe or other contaminated instrument, ref.: no 
Yes 
3.48 (1.32; 5.64) 
0.002 
-
-
-
-
Residency, ref.: northern Italy 
Centre Italy 
-
-
-
-
0.49 (0.26; 0.90) 0.022 
Southern Italy 
-
-
-
-
0.69 (0.40; 1.19) 0.183 
Place of birth, ref.: born in Italy with both Italian parents 
Born Abroad 
− 1.06 (− 5.09; 2.97) 
0.607 
-
-
0.38 (0.08; 1.73) 0.209 
Born in Italy with at least one foreign parent 
− 2.81 (− 5.62; 0.00) 
0.050 
-
-
0.60 (0.24; 1.50) 0.273 
Having HCV positive family members, ref.: no 
Yes 
1.27 (− 0.94; 3.48) 
0.260 
1.36 (− 1.54; 4.26) 
0.357 1.85 (1.04; 3.30) 0.036 
Don't know 
− 1.52 (− 4.16; 1.12) 
0.258 
1.156 (− 2.38; 4.69) 
0.521 0.45 (0.17; 1.21) 0.115 
Being HCV positive, ref.: no 
Yes 
6.78 (3.00; 10.56) 
< 0.001 − 5.49 (− 10.49; − 0.49 0.031 0.14 (0.02; 1.25) 0.078 
Don't know 
0.58 (− 6.58; 7.74) 
0.873 
− 3.60 (− 13.08; 5.89) 0.457 * 
* 


## Table 4 (
4continued) 

Disease knowledge score 
Prevention & transmission 
knowledge score 

Not being aware of HCV 
screening test existence 

adjCoef (95% CI) 
p 
adjCoef (95% CI) 
p 
adjOR (95% CI) 
p 

Having piercings, ref.: no 
At least one performed independently 
-
-
-
-
0.50 (0.17; 1.53) 0.226 
At least one performed professionally before 98 -
-
-
-
0.99 (0.49; 1.98) 0.971 
At least one performed professionally after 98 
-
-
-
-
0.74 (0.36; 1.52) 0.415 
Having tattoos, ref.: no 
At least one performed independently 
− 0.81 (− 3.59; 1.98) 
0.570 
1.58 (2.00; 5.15) 
0.387 1.29 (0.55; 3.01) 0.553 
At least one performed professionally before 98 2.19 (− 2.53; 6.92) 
0.363 
− 0.98 (− 7.28; 5.31) 
0.759 0.24 (0.03; 1.95) 0.182 
At least one performed professionally after 98 
− 0.49 (− 2.02; 1.04) 
0.530 
1.29 (− 0.77; 3.35) 
0.220 1.30 (0.83; 2.02) 0.248 
Having received an aesthetic treatment, ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
− 0.78 (− 2.86; 1.30) 
0.461 -
-
Having received information about HCV, ref.: not informed (nether passively nor actively) 
Actively informed (± passively informed) 
4.59 (2.96; 6.22) 
< 0.001 − 0.53 (− 2.67; 1.59) 
0.620 -
-
Only passively informed 
2.30 (− 0.004; 4.60) 
0.050 
0.99 (− 2.07; 4.05) 
0.524 -
-


## Table 5
5Regression models of secondary outcomes Working as tattoo artist, piercer, chiropodist, or barber, ref.: no Subjective perceived risk of contracting HCV infection, ref.: not at risk Having an addicted partner or housemate, ref.: no/don't know Frequency of condom use for occasional sex, ref.: never/almost never as a high subjective perceived risk of contracting HCV infection, wearing condoms or not having occasional sex,and being informed about HCV) were associated with a higher likelihood of having been tested. Overall, individuals who have a higher overall risk perception of HCV may be more likely to get tested for the virus due to their motivation to protect their health, awareness of the potential consequences of infection (as shown by the relationship between Disease Knowledge Score and this outcome), and increased information-seeking behavior. Some authors have reported that people who underestimate the infection attach less value to medical monitoring[46][47][48]. Not surprisingly, certain groups may have a higher likelihood of being tested for HCV, due to their increased risk of exposure to the virus (i.e. healthcare workers, people with children, blood donors, blood recipients, and individuals with a positive partner). For instance, healthcare workers may have access to routine testing as part of their job, blood donors and recipients are often screened for HCV as a precautionary measure. Interestingly, urban populations had a higher likelihood of being tested for HCV, probably due to better access to healthcare services and fewer stigmatizing Significant p-values in bold *Omitted for insufficient sample sizeAttitude score 
Having being tested for 
HCV 

Sharing contaminated 
items 

adjCoef (95% CI) 
p 
adjOR (95% CI) 
p 
adjOR (95% CI) p 

Age 
0.01 (0.0008; 0.01) 
0.027 1.00 (0.98; 1.03) 
0.925 
0.98 (0.96; 1.00) 0.037 
Gender and sexual orientation, ref.: heterosexual male 
Heterosexual female 
− 0.10 (− 0.29; 0.08) 
0.277 0.89 (0.42; 1.89) 
0.768 
0.83 (0.43; 1.59) 0.576 
LGBT male 
− 0.16 (− 0.46; 0.14) 
0.288 2.42 (0.68; 8.69) 
0.175 
1.30 (0.49; 3.43) 0.595 
LGBT female 
− 0.13 (− 0.37; 0.11) 
0.291 1.55(0.58; 4.11) 
0.378 
1.40 (0.61; 3.21) 0.423 
Asexual (both genders) 
0.1 (− 0.53; 0.72) 
0.766 1.24 (0.15; 10.22) 0.841 
* 
* 
Genderqueer 
− 0.32 (− 0.96; 0.32) 
0.325 1.78 (0.18; 18.12) 0.625 
0.79 (0.06; 7.61) 0.753 
Educational level, ref.: high school or lower 
University degree 
0.02 (− 0.1; 0.15) 
0.698 0.96 (0.59; 1.57) 
0.885 
1.05 (0.70; 1.57) 0.810 
Masters/PhD 
0.03 (− 0.14; 0.20) 
0.722 1.78 (0.93; 3.41) 
0.082 
0.91 (0.53; 1.57) 0.764 
Living in an urban context, ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.07 (− 0.18; 0.04) 
0.205 1.61 (1.05; 2.48) 
0.029 
1.26 (0.88; 1.81) 0.203 
Living alone, ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
-
-
0.27 (0.15; 0.51) < 0.001 
Having children, ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.01 (− 0.15; 0.14) 
0.934 2.34 (1.28; 4.28) 
0.006 
-
-
Health care worker, ref.: no 
Yes 
0.08 (− 0.09; 0.25) 
0.382 2.41 (1.27; 4.58) 
0.007 
1.61 (0.96; 2.70) 0.071 
Yes 
-
-
-
-
0.25 (0.05; 1.19) 0.082 
Health care student, ref.: no 
Yes 
0.01 (− 0.19; 0.18) 
0.941 1.47 (0.75; 2.88) 
0.262 
1.32 (0.75; 2.34) 0.336 
Incarceration personal history, ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.42 (− 0.96; 0.12) 
0.124 -
-
-
-
Being a blood donor, ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.14 (− 0.25; − 0.03) 
0.013 1.93 (1.25; 2.95) 
0.003 
1.13 (0.79; 1.63) 0.491 
Having received blood donation, ref.: no 
At least one before 1992 
-
-
5.32 (1.13; 25.13) 0.035 
-
-
Only after 1992 
-
-
1.89 (0.77; 4.65) 
0.167 
-
-
Being an injective drug user (IDU), ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.11 (− 0.56; 0.33) 
0.621 -
-
-
-
At risk 
− 0.09 (− 0.24; 0.07) 
0.268 2.56 (1.39; 4.72) 
0.003 
1.03 (0.64; 1.67) 0.896 
Being worried about hepatitis C, ref.: no 
Yes 
-
-
0.62 (0.33; 1.17) 
0.140 
-
-
Being interested in receiving more information about HCV, ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.12 (− 0.24; 0.00) 
0.054 -
-
-
-
Having a HCV positive partner, ref.: no/don't know 
Yes 
− 0.13 (− 0.47; 0.22) 
0.473 20.93 (2.13; 205.7) 0.009 
0.61 (0.17; 2.12) 0.435 
Yes 
0.04 (− 0.28; 0.36) 
0.803 1.28 (0.39; 4.22) 
0.689 
-
-
Number of partners 
-
-
1.04 (0.96; 1.13) 
0.351 
-
-
Sometimes 
-
-
1.56 (0.61; 4.00) 
0.358 
-
-
Often 
-
-
2.49 (1.10; 5.65) 
0.029 
-
-
Always 
-
-
2.02 (0.96; 4.28) 
0.065 
-
-
Do not have occasional sex 
-
-
2.18 (1.14; 4.19) 
0.019 
-
-


## Table 5 (continued)
5Having ever had an accidental wound caused by a syringe or other contaminated instrument, ref.: no Place of birth, ref.: born in Italywith both Italian parents Having received information about HCV, ref.: not informed (nether passively nor actively) Being willing to undergo HCV screening test in case of positive contact, ref.: noAttitude score 
Having being tested for 
HCV 

Sharing contaminated 
items 

adjCoef (95% CI) 
p 
adjOR (95% CI) 
p 
adjOR (95% CI) p 

Yes 
− 0.11 (− 0.29; 0.06) 
0.212 4.11 (1.92; 8.83) 
< 0.001 -
-
Born Abroad 
-
-
3.24 (0.85; 12.42) 0.086 
-
-
Born in Italy with at least one foreign parent 
-
-
1.09 (0.43; 2.78) 
0.850 
-
-
Residency, ref.: northern Italy 
Centre Italy 
− 0.03 (− 0.18; 0.11) 
0.650 -
-
-
-
Southern Italy 
0.12 (− 0.03; 0.26) 
0.121 -
-
-
-
Not in Italy 
− 0.11 (− 0.64; 0.42) 
0.684 -
-
-
-
Having HCV positive family members, ref.: no 
Yes 
− 0.17 (− 0.35; 0.00) 
0.055 1.85 (0.95; 3.61) 
0.069 
-
-
Don't know 
0.01 (− 0.20; 0.22) 
0.944 1.01 (0.40; 2.53) 
0.982 
Being HCV positive, ref.: no 
Yes 
0.08 (− 0.28; 0.43) 
0.669 -
-
0.10 (0.01; 0.79) 0.030 
Don't know 
− 0.56 (− 1.15; 0.02) 
0.057 -
-
1.46 (0.23; 9.19) 0.684 
Having Piercings, ref.: no 
At least one performed independently 
− 0.05 (− 0.32; 0.23) 
0.734 0.96 (0.30; 3.03) 
0.940 
1.85 (0.73; 4.69) 0.193 
At least one performed professionally before 
98 

− 0.02 (0.21; 0.17) 
0.849 1.48 (0.68; 3.20) 
0.324 
1.78 (0.90; 3.52) 0.098 

At least one performed professionally after 98 0.09 (− 0.10; 0.29) 
0.360 1.36 (0.62; 3.00) 
0.448 
1.19 (0.61; 2.32) 0.615 
Having Tattoos, ref.: no 
At least one performed independently 
0.18 (− 0.06; 0.42) 
0.133 2.28 (0.87; 5.94) 
0.093 
1.63 (0.78; 3.43) 0.194 
At least one performed professionally before 
98 

− 0.08 (− 0.47; 0.30) 
0.668 2.28 (0.51; 10.17) 0.283 
1.56 (0.42; 5.85) 0.509 

At least one performed professionally after 98 − 0.06 (− 0.18; 0.07) 
0.373 0.89 (0.55; 1.46) 
0.658 
1.19 (0.80; 1.78) 0.384 
Actively informed (± passively informed) 
− 0.11 (− 0.24; 0.03) 
0.110 6.61 (4.10; 10.68) < 0.001 -
-
Only passively informed 
− 0.13 (− 0.31; 0.06) 
0.173 5.25 (2.69; 10.23) < 0.001 -
-
Yes 
-
-
2.09 (0.63; 7.01) 
0.231 
3.72 (1.06; 13.11) 0.041 
Disease Knowledge Score 
− 0.01 (− 0.01; − 0.00002) 0.049 1.03 (1.01; 1.06) 
0.009 
1.00 (0.98; 1.02) 0.971 
Prevention & Transmission Knowledge Score 
0.01 (0.003; 0.01) 
0.001 1.00 (0.98; 1.02) 
0.883 
1.00 (0.99; 1.02) 0.859 
Attitude score 
-
-
0.86 (0.63; 1.17) 
0.337 
0.91 (0.70; 1.18) 0.484 

Journal of Community Health (2023) 48:769-783
Data Availability The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.DeclarationsCompeting Interests The authors have no relevant financial or nonfinancial interests to disclose.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
Polaris Observatory. HBV At-A-Glance and HCV At-A-Glance. Cda Foundation, Global hepatitis report. World Health OrganizationCDA Foundation. (2022). Polaris Observatory. HBV At-A-Glance and HCV At-A-Glance. Retrieved from https:// cdafo und. org/ polar is-count ries-datab ase/ 2. WHO. (2017). Global hepatitis report. World Health Organi- zation. Retrieved from https:// apps. who. int/ iris/ rest/ bitst reams/ 10825 95/ retri eve

Global prevalence and genotype distribution of hepatitis C virus infection in 2015: A modelling study. S Blach, S Zeuzem, M Manns, I Altraif, A.-S Duberg, D H Muljono, I Waked, S M Alavian, M.-H Lee, F Negro, F Abaalkhail, A Abdou, M Abdulla, A A Rached, I Aho, U Akarca, I Al Ghazzawi, S Al Kaabi, F Al Lawati, Razavi, 10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30181-9The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology. 23Blach, S., Zeuzem, S., Manns, M., Altraif, I., Duberg, A.-S., Muljono, D. H., Waked, I., Alavian, S. M., Lee, M.-H., Negro, F., Abaalkhail, F., Abdou, A., Abdulla, M., Rached, A. A., Aho, I., Akarca, U., Al Ghazzawi, I., Al Kaabi, S., Al Lawati, F., … Razavi, H. (2017). Global prevalence and genotype distribution of hepatitis C virus infection in 2015: A modelling study. The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 2(3), 161-176. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S2468-1253(16) 30181-9.

Current prevalence of chronic hepatitis B and C virus infection in the general population, blood donors and pregnant women in the EU/EEA: A systematic review. S H I Hofstraat, A M Falla, E F Duffell, S J M Hahné, A J Amato-Gauci, I K Veldhuijzen, L Tavoschi, 10.1017/S0950268817001947Epidemiology and Infection. 14514Hofstraat, S. H. I., Falla, A. M., Duffell, E. F., Hahné, S. J. M., Amato-Gauci, A. J., Veldhuijzen, I. K., & Tavoschi, L. (2017). Current prevalence of chronic hepatitis B and C virus infection in the general population, blood donors and pregnant women in the EU/EEA: A systematic review. Epidemiology and Infection, 145(14), 2873-2885. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0950 26881 70019 47

Global prevalence of injecting drug use and sociodemographic characteristics and prevalence of HIV, HBV, and HCV in people who inject drugs: A multistage systematic review. L Degenhardt, A Peacock, S Colledge, J Leung, J Grebely, P Vickerman, J Stone, E B Cunningham, A Trickey, K Dumchev, M Lynskey, P Griffiths, R P Mattick, M Hickman, S Larney, 10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30375-3The Lancet Global Health. 512Degenhardt, L., Peacock, A., Colledge, S., Leung, J., Grebely, J., Vickerman, P., Stone, J., Cunningham, E. B., Trickey, A., Dum- chev, K., Lynskey, M., Griffiths, P., Mattick, R. P., Hickman, M., & Larney, S. (2017). Global prevalence of injecting drug use and sociodemographic characteristics and prevalence of HIV, HBV, and HCV in people who inject drugs: A multistage systematic review. The Lancet Global Health, 5(12), e1192-e1207. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S2214-109X(17) 30375-3.

Fact sheet: Hepatitis C in the WHO european region. World Health Organization. (2021). Fact sheet: Hepatitis C in the WHO european region. Retrieved from https:// www. euro. who. int/ en/ health-topics/ commu nicab le-disea ses/ hepat itis/ data-and-stati stics/ fact-sheet-hepat itis-c-in-the-who-europ ean-region-2021

EASL recommendations on treatment of hepatitis C: Final update of the series☆. J.-M Pawlotsky, F Negro, A Aghemo, M Berenguer, O Dalgard, G Dusheiko, F Marra, M Puoti, H Wedemeyer, 10.1016/j.jhep.2020.08.018Journal of Hepatology. 735Pawlotsky, J.-M., Negro, F., Aghemo, A., Berenguer, M., Dalgard, O., Dusheiko, G., Marra, F., Puoti, M., & Wedemeyer, H. (2020). EASL recommendations on treatment of hepatitis C: Final update of the series☆. Journal of Hepatology, 73(5), 1170-1218. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jhep. 2020. 08. 018

Guidelines for the care and treatment of persons diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Who, Who. Retrieved. 15WHO. (2018). Guidelines for the care and treatment of persons diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Who. Retrieved 15 July https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ books/ NBK53 1733/

Hepatitis C treatment: Where are we now? International. N J Burstow, Z Mohamed, A I Gomaa, M W Sonderup, N A Cook, I Waked, C W Spearman, S D Taylor-Robinson, 10.2147/IJGM.S127689Journal of General Medicine. 10Burstow, N. J., Mohamed, Z., Gomaa, A. I., Sonderup, M. W., Cook, N. A., Waked, I., Spearman, C. W., & Taylor-Robinson, S. D. (2017). Hepatitis C treatment: Where are we now? Interna- tional Journal of General Medicine, 10, 39-52. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2147/ IJGM. S1276 89

Global health sector strategy on viral hepatitis 2016-2021. Global Hepatitis Programme Department of HIV/AIDS. World Health Organization. (2016). Global health sector strat- egy on viral hepatitis 2016-2021. Global Hepatitis Programme Department of HIV/AIDS. Retrieved from https:// apps. who. int/ iris/ handle/ 10665/ 246177

Systematic review on hepatitis B and C prevalence in the EU/ EEA. Stockholm. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. (2016). Systematic review on hepatitis B and C prevalence in the EU/ EEA. Stockholm. Retrieved from https:// www. ecdc. europa. eu/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ media/ en/ publi catio ns/ Publi catio ns/ syste matic- review-hepat itis-B-C-preva lence. pdf

Declining prevalence and increasing awareness of HCV infection in Italy: A population-based survey in five metropolitan areas. A Andriulli, T Stroffolini, A Mariano, M R Valvano, I Grattagliano, A M Ippolito, A Grossi, G Brancaccio, C Coco, M Russello, A Smedile, E Petrini, S Martini, G B Gaeta, M Rizzetto, 10.1016/j.ejim.2018.02.015European Journal of Internal Medicine. 53Andriulli, A., Stroffolini, T., Mariano, A., Valvano, M. R., Gratt- agliano, I., Ippolito, A. M., Grossi, A., Brancaccio, G., Coco, C., Russello, M., Smedile, A., Petrini, E., Martini, S., Gaeta, G. B., & Rizzetto, M. (2018). Declining prevalence and increasing aware- ness of HCV infection in Italy: A population-based survey in five metropolitan areas. European Journal of Internal Medicine, 53, 79-84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejim. 2018. 02. 015

Aggiornamento dati DAAs. AIFA (Italian Medicines AgencyAIFA (Italian Medicines Agency). (2022). Aggiornamento dati DAAs. Retrieved from https:// www. aifa. gov. it/ aggio rname nto- epati te-c

Forecasting Hepatitis C liver disease burden on real-life data. Does the hidden iceberg matter to reach the elimination goals?. L A Kondili, S Robbins, S Blach, I Gamkrelidze, A L Zignego, M R Brunetto, G Raimondo, G Taliani, A Iannone, F P Russo, T A Santantonio, M Zuin, L Chessa, P Blanc, M Puoti, M Vinci, E M Erne, M Strazzabosco, M Massari, A Craxì, 10.1111/liv.13901Liver International. 3812Kondili, L. A., Robbins, S., Blach, S., Gamkrelidze, I., Zignego, A. L., Brunetto, M. R., Raimondo, G., Taliani, G., Iannone, A., Russo, F. P., Santantonio, T. A., Zuin, M., Chessa, L., Blanc, P., Puoti, M., Vinci, M., Erne, E. M., Strazzabosco, M., Massari, M., … Craxì, A. (2018). Forecasting Hepatitis C liver disease burden on real-life data. Does the hidden iceberg matter to reach the elimination goals? Liver International, 38(12), 2190-2198. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ liv. 13901.

Estimated prevalence of undiagnosed HCV infected individuals in Italy: A mathematical model by route of transmission and fibrosis progression. L A Kondili, M Andreoni, A Alberti, S Lobello, S Babudieri, A S Roscini, A Craxi, 10.1016/j.epidem.2021.100442Epidemics. 34Kondili, L. A., Andreoni, M., Alberti, A., Lobello, S., Babudieri, S., Roscini, A. S., & Craxi, A. (2021). Estimated prevalence of undiagnosed HCV infected individuals in Italy: A mathematical model by route of transmission and fibrosis progression. Epidem- ics 34, 100442. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. epidem. 2021. 100442

Optimizing diagnostic algorithms to advance hepatitis C elimination in Italy: A cost effectiveness evaluation. A Marcellusi, F S Mennini, M Ruf, C Galli, A Aghemo, M R Brunetto, L A Kondili, 10.1111/liv.15070Liver International. 421Marcellusi, A., Mennini, F. S., Ruf, M., Galli, C., Aghemo, A., Brunetto, M. R., & Kondili, L. A. (2022). Optimizing diagnos- tic algorithms to advance hepatitis C elimination in Italy: A cost effectiveness evaluation. Liver International 42(1), 26-37. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ liv. 15070

DECRETO 14 maggio 2021 Esecuzione dello screening nazionale per l'eliminazione del virus dell'HCV. L A Kondili, I Gamkrelidze, S Blach, A Marcellusi, M Galli, S Petta, F S Mennini, 10.1111/liv.14408Liver International. 407Optimization of hepatitis C virus screening strategies by birth cohort in Italy. 21A04075) (GU n.162 del 8-7-2021Kondili, L. A., Gamkrelidze, I., Blach, S., Marcellusi, A., Galli, M., Petta, S., & Mennini, F. S. (2020). Optimization of hepatitis C virus screening strategies by birth cohort in Italy. Liver Inter- national, 40(7), 1545-1555. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ liv. 14408 18. Italian government. (2021). DECRETO 14 maggio 2021 Esecuz- ione dello screening nazionale per l'eliminazione del virus dell'HCV. (21A04075) (GU n.162 del 8-7-2021)

Documento di indirizzo dell'Associazione Italiana per lo Studio del Fegato per l'uso razionale dei farmaci anti-HCV disponibili in Italia. S Petta, Petta, S. (2020). Documento di indirizzo dell'Associazione Itali- ana per lo Studio del Fegato per l'uso razionale dei farmaci anti- HCV disponibili in Italia. Retrieved from https:// www. webai sf. org/ wp-conte nt/ uploa ds/ 2020/ 12/ DOCUM ENTO-HCV-14_ 12_ 20. pdf

Treatment as prevention and cure towards global eradication of hepatitis C virus. L M Hagan, P R Wolpe, R F Schinazi, 10.1016/j.tim.2013.09.008Trends in Microbiology. 2112Hagan, L. M., Wolpe, P. R., & Schinazi, R. F. (2013). Treatment as prevention and cure towards global eradication of hepatitis C virus. Trends in Microbiology, 21(12), 625-633. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tim. 2013. 09. 008

Assessment of knowledge, attitude and practice towards hepatitis among patients visiting the hepatitis clinic in tertiary care hospital. R E Mustafa, S Mushtaq, N Akhtar, M A Yameen, JPMA The Journal of the Pakistan Medical Association. 698Mustafa, R. E., Mushtaq, S., Akhtar, N., & Yameen, M. A. (2019). Assessment of knowledge, attitude and practice towards hepatitis among patients visiting the hepatitis clinic in tertiary care hos- pital, Rawalpindi, Pakistan. JPMA The Journal of the Pakistan Medical Association, 69(8), 1136-1141.

. H Karimi-Sari, M E Bayatpoor, M Aftabi Khotbesara, M S Ebrahimi, Z Sattari, P Sattari, S M Alavian, Karimi-Sari, H., Bayatpoor, M. E., Aftabi Khotbesara, M., Ebra- himi, M. S., Sattari, Z., Sattari, P., & Alavian, S. M. (2017).

Knowledge, attitude, and practice of Iranian health sciences students regarding hepatitis B and C virus infections: A national survey. 10.1016/j.ajic.2017.07.012e135-e141American Journal of Infection Control. 4511Knowledge, attitude, and practice of Iranian health sciences stu- dents regarding hepatitis B and C virus infections: A national sur- vey. American Journal of Infection Control, 45(11), e135-e141. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajic. 2017. 07. 012

Role of beauty treatment in the spread of parenterally transmitted hepatitis viruses in Italy. A Mariano, A Mele, M E Tosti, A Parlato, G Gallo, P Ragni, C Zotti, P Lopalco, M G Pompa, G Graziani, T Stroffolini, 10.1002/jmv.20182Journal of Medical Virology. 742Mariano, A., Mele, A., Tosti, M. E., Parlato, A., Gallo, G., Ragni, P., Zotti, C., Lopalco, P., Pompa, M. G., Graziani, G., & Strof- folini, T. (2004). Role of beauty treatment in the spread of paren- terally transmitted hepatitis viruses in Italy. Journal of Medical Virology, 74(2), 216-220. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jmv. 20182

Linee guida del ministero della sanità per l'esecuzione di procedure di tatuaggio e piercing in condizioni di sicurezza. Ministero della salute.Ministero della salute. (1998). Linee guida del ministero della sanità per l'esecuzione di procedure di tatuaggio e piercing in condizioni di sicurezza.

High HIV prevalence and risk of infection among rural-to-urban migrants in various migration stages in China: A systematic review and meta-analysis. L Zhang, E P F Chow, H J Jahn, A Kraemer, D P Wilson, 10.1097/OLQ.0b013e318281134fSexually Transmitted Diseases. 402Zhang, L., Chow, E. P. F., Jahn, H. J., Kraemer, A., & Wilson, D. P. (2013). High HIV prevalence and risk of infection among rural-to-urban migrants in various migration stages in China: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 40(2), 136-147. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ OLQ. 0b013 e3182 81134f

Talking about, knowing about HIV/AIDS in Canada: A rural-urban comparison. The Journal of Rural Health: Official Journal of the American Rural Health Association and the National Rural Health Care Association. T C Veinot, R Harris, P Cacoub, L Gragnani, C Comarmond, A L Zignego, 10.1016/j.dld.2014.10.005Digestive and Liver Disease: Official Journal of the Italian Society of Gastroenterology and the Italian Association for the Study of the Liver. 273Extrahepatic manifestations of chronic hepatitis C virus infectionVeinot, T. C., & Harris, R. (2011). Talking about, knowing about HIV/AIDS in Canada: A rural-urban comparison. The Journal of Rural Health: Official Journal of the American Rural Health Association and the National Rural Health Care Asso- ciation, 27(3), 310-318. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1748-0361. 2010. 00353.x 27. European commission. (n.d.). Global Human Settlement Layer. Retrieved from https:// ghsl. jrc. ec. europa. eu/ degur baDefi niti ons. php 28. Cacoub, P., Gragnani, L., Comarmond, C., & Zignego, A. L. (2014). Extrahepatic manifestations of chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Digestive and Liver Disease: Official Journal of the Italian Society of Gastroenterology and the Italian Association for the Study of the Liver, 46(5):S165-S173. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. dld. 2014. 10. 005

Treatment of hepatitis C: The use of the new pangenotypic direct-acting antivirals in "special populations. S Pol, L Parlati, 10.1111/liv.13626Liver International: Official Journal of the International Association for the Study of the Liver. 38SupplPol, S., & Parlati, L. (2018). Treatment of hepatitis C: The use of the new pangenotypic direct-acting antivirals in "special populations". Liver International: Official Journal of the Inter- national Association for the Study of the Liver, 38(Suppl 1), 28-33. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ liv. 13626

Risk factors for and incidence of acute hepatitis C after the achievement of blood supply safety in Italy: Results from the national surveillance system. E Spada, A Mele, A Mariano, O Zuccaro, M E Tosti, 10.1002/jmv.23485Journal of Medical Virology. 853& SEIEVA collaborating groupSpada, E., Mele, A., Mariano, A., Zuccaro, O., Tosti, M. E., & SEIEVA collaborating group. (2013). Risk factors for and incidence of acute hepatitis C after the achievement of blood supply safety in Italy: Results from the national surveillance system. Journal of Medical Virology, 85(3), 433-440. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jmv. 23485

Decreto Ministeriale datato 15 gennaio 1991. Protocolli per l'accertamento della idoneità del donatore di sangue ed emoderivati. Ministero della saluteMinistero della salute. (1991). Decreto Ministeriale datato 15 gennaio 1991. Protocolli per l'accertamento della idoneità del donatore di sangue ed emoderivati.

Applied logistic regression. D Hosmer, S Lemeshow, John Wiley & SonsHosmer, D., & Lemeshow, S. (1989). Applied logistic regres- sion. John Wiley & Sons

Trends and predictors of knowledge about HIV/AIDS and its prevention and transmission methods among women in Tajikistan. The European Journal of Public Health. H Zainiddinov, N Habibov, 10.1093/eurpub/ckw07726Zainiddinov, H., & Habibov, N. (2016). Trends and predictors of knowledge about HIV/AIDS and its prevention and transmission methods among women in Tajikistan. The European Journal of Public Health, 26(6), 1075-1079. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ eurpub/ ckw077

A survey on knowledge, prevention, and occurrence of sexually transmitted infections among freshmen from four Italian Universities. L Cegolon, M Bortolotto, S Bellizzi, A Cegolon, L Bubbico, G Pichierri, G Mastrangelo, C Xodo, 10.3390/ijerph19020897International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. Cegolon, L., Bortolotto, M., Bellizzi, S., Cegolon, A., Bubbico, L., Pichierri, G., Mastrangelo, G., & Xodo, C. (2022). A survey on knowledge, prevention, and occurrence of sexually transmit- ted infections among freshmen from four Italian Universities. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijerp h1902 0897

A survey of the knowledge of and testing rate for Hepatitis C in the general population in South Korea. G H Choi, E S Jang, J W Kim, S H Jeong, 10.5009/gnl19296Gut and Liver. 146Choi, G. H., Jang, E. S., Kim, J. W., & Jeong, S. H. (2020). A survey of the knowledge of and testing rate for Hepatitis C in the general population in South Korea. Gut and Liver, 14(6), 808-816. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5009/ gnl19 296

Hepatitis B, C and human immunodeficiency virus knowledge among the general Greek population: Results from the Hprolipsis nationwide survey. S Kaskafetou, A Karakosta, V Sypsa, N Kalpourtzi, M Gavana, A Vantarakis, G Rachiotis, G Chlouverakis, G Trypsianis, P V Voulgari, Y Alamanos, G Papatheodoridis, G Touloumi, M Kantzanou, 10.1186/s12889-022-14353-9BMC Public Health. 2212026Kaskafetou, S., Karakosta, A., Sypsa, V., Kalpourtzi, N., Gavana, M., Vantarakis, A., Rachiotis, G., Chlouverakis, G., Trypsianis, G., Voulgari, P. V., Alamanos, Y., Papatheodoridis, G., Touloumi, G., & Kantzanou, M. (2022). Hepatitis B, C and human immunodeficiency virus knowledge among the general Greek population: Results from the Hprolipsis nationwide sur- vey. BMC Public Health, 22(1), 2026. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12889-022-14353-9

Fatores determinantes de conhecimentos. M B Fontes, R C Crivelaro, A M Scartezini, D D Lima, A A De Garcia, R T Fujioka, 10.1590/1413-81232017224.12852015Brasil. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva. 224atitudes e práticas em DST/Aids e hepatites virais, entre jovens de 18 a 29 anosFontes, M. B., Crivelaro, R. C., Scartezini, A. M., Lima, D. D., de Garcia, A. A., & Fujioka, R. T. (2017). Fatores deter- minantes de conhecimentos, atitudes e práticas em DST/Aids e hepatites virais, entre jovens de 18 a 29 anos, no Brasil. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 22(4), 1343-1352. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/ 1413-81232 017224. 12852 015

How little do we know about HIV and STIs prevention? Results from a web-based survey among the general population. A De Vito, A Colpani, B Zauli, M C Meloni, M Fois, V Fiore, G A Pintus, A G Nardi, S Babudieri, G Madeddu, 10.3390/healthcare10061059Healthcare (Basel SwitzerlandDe Vito, A., Colpani, A., Zauli, B., Meloni, M. C., Fois, M., Fiore, V., Pintus, G. A., Nardi, A. G., Babudieri, S., & Madeddu, G. (2022). How little do we know about HIV and STIs prevention? Results from a web-based survey among the general population. Healthcare (Basel Switzerland). https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ healt hcare 10061 059.

Associação de conhecimento sobre DST e grau de escolaridade entre conscritos em alistamento ao Exército Brasileiro. Brasil. A E Miranda, D Ribeiro, E F Rezende, G F M Pereira, V M Pinto, V Saraceni, 10.1590/S1413-812320130002000201590/ S1413-81232 01300 02000 20Ciência & Saúde Coletiva. 182Miranda, A. E., Ribeiro, D., Rezende, E. F., Pereira, G. F. M., Pinto, V. M., & Saraceni, V. (2013). Associação de conhecimento sobre DST e grau de escolaridade entre conscritos em alistamento ao Exército Brasileiro. Brasil, 2007. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 18(2), 489-497. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/ S1413-81232 01300 02000 20

The comparison of health literacy between health science and non-health science members-A cross sectional study of multifaceted public health affair. F L Cuthino, M Sheilini, R Chandrababu, 10.1016/j.cegh.2021.100893Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health. 12Cuthino, F. L., Sheilini, M., & Chandrababu, R. (2021). The com- parison of health literacy between health science and non-health science members-A cross sectional study of multifaceted pub- lic health affair. Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health, 12, 100893. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cegh. 2021. 100893.

Searching for an alliance with journalism: A survey to investigate health literacy in Italy. G Lo Moro, D Catozzi, G Voglino, M R Gualano, A Savatteri, R Crocetta, F Bert, R Siliquini, 10.4415/ANN_22_04_10Annali dell'Istituto Superiore di Sanita. 584Lo Moro, G., Catozzi, D., Voglino, G., Gualano, M. R., Savatteri, A., Crocetta, R., Bert, F., & Siliquini, R. (2022). Searching for an alliance with journalism: A survey to investigate health literacy in Italy. Annali dell'Istituto Superiore di Sanita, 58(4), 293-302. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4415/ ANN_ 22_ 04_ 10

Empirical tests of an information-motivation-behavioral skills model of AIDS-preventive behavior with gay men and heterosexual university students. J D Fisher, W A Fisher, S S Williams, T E Malloy, 10.1037/0278-6133.13.3.238Health Psychology: Official Journal of the Division of Health Psychology American Psychological Association. 133Fisher, J. D., Fisher, W. A., Williams, S. S., & Malloy, T. E. (1994). Empirical tests of an information-motivation-behavioral skills model of AIDS-preventive behavior with gay men and het- erosexual university students. Health Psychology: Official Journal of the Division of Health Psychology American Psychological Association, 13(3), 238-250. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037// 0278-6133. 13.3. 238

Evidence and knowledge gaps on the disease burden in sexual and gender minorities: A review of systematic reviews. K Blondeel, L Say, D Chou, I Toskin, R Khosla, E Scolaro, M Temmerman, 10.1186/s12939-016-0304-1International Journal for Equity in Health. 15116Blondeel, K., Say, L., Chou, D., Toskin, I., Khosla, R., Scolaro, E., & Temmerman, M. (2016). Evidence and knowledge gaps on the disease burden in sexual and gender minorities: A review of systematic reviews. International Journal for Equity in Health, 15(1), 16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12939-016-0304-1

Experiences of UK patients with hepatitis C virus infection accessing phlebotomy: A qualitative analysis. A Clements, J Grose, H Skirton, 10.1111/nhs.12173Nursing & Health Sciences. 172Clements, A., Grose, J., & Skirton, H. (2015). Experiences of UK patients with hepatitis C virus infection accessing phlebotomy: A qualitative analysis. Nursing & Health Sciences, 17(2), 214-222. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ nhs. 12173

Health care-seeking experiences for people who inject drugs with hepatitis C: Qualitative explorations of stigma. E J Austin, J I Tsui, M P Barry, E Tung, S N Glick, M Ninburg, E C Williams, 10.1016/j.jsat.2021.108684Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment. 137Austin, E. J., Tsui, J. I., Barry, M. P., Tung, E., Glick, S. N., Nin- burg, M., & Williams, E. C. (2022). Health care-seeking experi- ences for people who inject drugs with hepatitis C: Qualitative explorations of stigma. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 137, 108684. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jsat. 2021. 108684

Intention to screen for Hepatitis C among university students: Influence of different communicative scenarios. P Diotaiuti, S Mancone, L Falese, M Ferrara, F Bellizzi, G Valente, S Corrado, F Misiti, 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.873566Frontiers in Psychiatry. Diotaiuti, P., Mancone, S., Falese, L., Ferrara, M., Bellizzi, F., Valente, G., Corrado, S., & Misiti, F. (2022). Intention to screen for Hepatitis C among university students: Influence of different communicative scenarios. Frontiers in Psychiatry. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 2022. 873566

Understanding patient perceptions and risk for hepatitis C screening. S Grannan, 10.1111/jvh.12692Journal of Viral Hepatitis. 248Grannan, S. (2017). Understanding patient perceptions and risk for hepatitis C screening. Journal of Viral Hepatitis, 24(8), 631-635. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jvh. 12692

Screening and preventive medication. N J Wald, 10.1177/0969141316650712Journal of Medical Screening. 244Wald, N. J. (2017). Screening and preventive medication. Journal of Medical Screening, 24(4), 169-169. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 09691 41316 650712

A cross-sectional survey of potential factors, motivations, and barriers influencing research participation and retention among people who use drugs in the rural USA. A T Hetrick, A M Young, M R Elman, S Bielavitz, R L Alexander, M Brown, E N Waddell, P T Korthuis, K E Lancaster, 10.1186/s13063-021-05919-wTrials. 221Hetrick, A. T., Young, A. M., Elman, M. R., Bielavitz, S., Alex- ander, R. L., Brown, M., Waddell, E. N., Korthuis, P. T., & Lan- caster, K. E. (2021). A cross-sectional survey of potential factors, motivations, and barriers influencing research participation and retention among people who use drugs in the rural USA. Trials, 22(1), 948. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s13063-021-05919-w

Challenges facing a rural opioid epidemic: Treatment and prevention of HIV and Hepatitis C. A J Schranz, J Barrett, C B Hurt, C Malvestutto, W C Miller, 10.1007/s11904-018-0393-0Current HIV/AIDS Reports. 153Schranz, A. J., Barrett, J., Hurt, C. B., Malvestutto, C., & Miller, W. C. (2018). Challenges facing a rural opioid epidemic: Treatment and prevention of HIV and Hepatitis C. Current HIV/AIDS Reports, 15(3), 245-254. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11904-018-0393-0

Provider workforce assessment in a rural Hepatitis C epidemic. R P Westergaard, L J Stockman, H A Hyland, S M Guilfoyle, J J Fangman, J M Vergeront, 10.1177/2150131914560229Journal of Primary Care & Community Health. 63Westergaard, R. P., Stockman, L. J., Hyland, H. A., Guilfoyle, S. M., Fangman, J. J., & Vergeront, J. M. (2015). Provider workforce assessment in a rural Hepatitis C epidemic. Journal of Primary Care & Community Health, 6(3), 215-217. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 21501 31914 560229