# A systematic literature review of indicators measuring food security

CorpusID: 258488770
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Agricultural_And_Food_Sciences

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ded17a28c4e9618285110516ca2a827e1fbabeb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ded17a28c4e9618285110516ca2a827e1fbabeb)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A systematic literature review of indicators measuring food security


Ioannis Manikas 
Beshir M Ali 
Balan Sundarakani 
A systematic literature review of indicators measuring food security
10.1186/s40066-023-00415-7Manikas et al. Agriculture & Food Security (2023) 12:10 REVIEW This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article' s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article' s to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Open Access Agriculture & Food SecurityDataFood insecurityIndexIndicatorsMeasurementScale
Measurement is critical for assessing and monitoring food security. Yet, it is difficult to comprehend which food security dimensions, components, and levels the numerous available indicators reflect. We thus conducted a systematic literature review to analyse the scientific evidence on these indicators to comprehend the food security dimensions and components covered, intended purpose, level of analysis, data requirements, and recent developments and concepts applied in food security measurement. Data analysis of 78 articles shows that the household-level calorie adequacy indicator is the most frequently used (22%) as a sole measure of food security. The dietary diversity-based (44%) and experience-based (40%) indicators also find frequent use. The food utilisation (13%) and stability (18%) dimensions were seldom captured when measuring food security, and only three of the retrieved publications measured food security by considering all the four food security dimensions. The majority of the studies that applied calorie adequacy and dietary diversity-based indicators employed secondary data whereas most of the studies that applied experience-based indicators employed primary data, suggesting the convenience of collecting data for experience-based indicators than dietary-based indicators. We confirm that the estimation of complementary food security indicators consistently over time can help capture the different food security dimensions and components, and experience-based indicators are more suitable for rapid food security assessments. We suggest practitioners to integrate food consumption and anthropometry data in regular household living standard surveys for more comprehensive food security analysis. The results of this study can be used by food security stakeholders such as governments, practitioners and academics for briefs, teaching, as well as policy-related interventions and evaluations.

## Introduction

Providing sufficient, affordable, nutritious, and safe food for the growing global population remains a challenge for human society; this task is made further difficult when governments are expected to provide food security without causing climate change, degrading water and land resources, and eroding biodiversity [1]. As long as food self-sufficiency and citizens' wellbeing depend on sustainable food security, food security will remain a global priority [2,3]. According to the 1996 World Food Summit definition, food security is achieved 'when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life' [4].

This definition by the Food and Agriculture Organization has laid the foundation for the four food security dimensions [5]: availability, access, utilisation, and stability. Relatedly, any kind of food security analysis, programme, and monitoring, with respect to predefined targets, requires valid and reliable food security measurement. However, measuring such a non-observable concept as a latent construct has remained challenging because of its complex and evolving nature: it has many dimensions and components [6], and involves a continuum of situations, invalidating the application of dichotomous/binary measures [7]. Food security measurement poses two fundamental yet distinct problems [8]: determining what is being measured and how it is measured.

The what question refers to the use of appropriate indicators for the different dimensions (availability, access, utilisation, and stability) and components (quantity, quality, safety, and cultural acceptability/preference), while the how question refers to the methodology applied for computing the indicators (i.e. data, methods, and models).

Scholars have proposed a variety of indicators to measure food security. Over this time, the definition and operational concept of food security has changed as well, and, with it, the type of indicators and methodologies used to gauge it. One such important change is the paradigm shift 'from the global and the national to the household and the individual, from a food-first perspective to a livelihood perspective, and from objective indicators to subjective perception' [6]. Despite the call to harmonize measurements for better coordination and partnerships, to date, there remains no consensus among governments, quasi-legal agencies, or researchers on the indicators and methodologies that should be applied for measuring and monitoring food security at global, national, household, and individual levels [9]. Instead, an overabundance of indicators makes it difficult to ascertain which indicators reflect which dimensions (availability, access, utilization, or stability), components (quantity, quality, safety, cultural acceptability/preferences), and levels (global, national, regional, household or individual) of food security [10]. The number of food security dimensions or components assessed also greatly vary in the literature. Indicators that assess only a specific dimension or component oversimplify the outcomes and do not reveal the full extent of food insecurity, for example. Although such highly specific indicators do help conceptualise and reveal food insecurity, they still fail to accurately show trade-offs among the different dimensions, components, and intervention strategies. There is ultimately a possibility of shifting the food insecurity problem from one dimension/component to another.

The practical limitations of existing food security measurements were once again exposed by 2019 coronavirus pandemic , the Scientific Group for the United Nations Food Systems Summit [11] that 'the world does not have a singular source of information to provide real-time assessments of people facing acute food insecurity with the geographic scale to cover any country of concern, the ability to update forecasts frequently and consistently in near real-time' . They further stated that current early warning systems lack suitable indicators to monitor the degradation of food systems. Aggravating this problem, these measurement indicators are not standardised, making comparisons among indicators over space and time complicated [9]. First, some of the indicators are composite indicators measuring two or more food security dimensions, whereas others measure individual dimensions. Second, some of the indicators focus on factors contributing to food security than on food security outcomes. Third, some indicators are quantitative, whereas others are qualitative measures based on individuals' perceptions. Fourth, the levels of analysis greatly vary as well because some indicators are global and national measures, whereas others are household and individual measures. Fifth, the intended purposes of the indicators range from advocacy tools to monitoring and evaluating progress towards defined policy targets.

Although numerous food security indicators have been developed for use in research, there is no agreement on the single 'best' food security indicator among scientists or practitioners for measuring, analysing, and monitoring food security [12,9]. The different international agencies also use their own sets of food security indicators (e.g. World Food Programme: Food Consumption Score (FCS), United States Agency for International Development (USAID): Household Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS); FAO: Prevalence of Undernourishment (POU) and Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES); and Economic Intelligence Unit (EIU): Global Food Security Index (GFSI)). An ideal food security indicator should capture all the four food security dimensions at individual level (rather than at national or regional or household levels) to reflect the 1996 World Food Summit definition of food security. However, most of the available indicators are measures of food access at the household level. 1 In practical use, only a few indicators that 'satisfactorily capture each requisite dimension of food security and that are relatively easy to collect can be identified and adopted at little detriment to a broader agenda' [9], which we attempt herein. In the light of the foregoing discussion, the main objective of this study was to critically review food security indicators and methodologies published in scientific articles using systematic literature review (SLR). The specific objectives were as follows:

(1) To identify and characterize food security indicators with respect to dimensions and components covered, methods and models of measurement, level of analysis, data requirements and sources, intended purpose of application, and strengths and weaknesses;

(2) To review and summarise the scientific articles published since the last decade by the indicators used, intended purpose, level of analysis, study region/country, and data source; (3) To quantitatively characterize the food security dimensions and components covered in the literature, and to review scientific articles that measured all the four food security dimensions; and (4) To identify and review recent developments and concepts applied in food security measurement.

Although there exist a few review studies on food security measurement in the literature (e.g. [8,10,[13][14][15], the present study is more comprehensive as it covers a wide range of food security indicators, levels of measurement, and analysis of data requirements and sources. Moreover, unlike the existing review studies in the literature, the current study applies the SLR methodology to the analysis of food security indicators and measurement.


## Methods


## Review methodology

We followed a two-stage approach in this review. First, we identified the commonly used food security indicators based on recent (review) articles on food security measurement [8-10, 14, 15]. Using the retrieved information from these articles (and their references), the identified indicators were characterised (in terms of the dimensions and components covered, methods of measurement, level of analysis, intended uses, validity and reliability, and data requirements and sources). Tables 1,  2, 3, 4 present the summary of the characterisation of the identified food security indicators: experience-based indicators (Table 1), national-level indicators (Table 2), dietary intake, diversity and expenditure-based indicators (Table 3), and indicators reflecting coping strategies and anthropometry measures (Table 4). This first-stage analysis was used to address the first objective of the study. In the second stage, the SLR was conducted.


## Literature searching and screening processes

We applied the SLR methodology to systematically search, filter, and analyse scientific articles on food security measurement. The SLR is a commonly applied and accepted research methodology in the literature [39]. Although the SLR methodology is widely applied in different disciplines such as the health and life sciences, its application in economics is limited. However, it has recently been applied in agricultural economics (e.g. [40][41][42][43]. In this study, we closely followed the six steps of a systematic review process [39], namely, (a) defining research questions, (b) formulating search strings, (c) filtering studies based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, (d) conducting quality assessment of the filtered studies, (e) collecting data from the studies that passed quality assessment, and (f ) analysing the data. The literature screening process that we followed is also in line with the guidelines in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Statement (PRISMA) [44].

The bibliographic databases of Scopus and Web of Science (WoS) were used to search scientific articles on food security measurement (i.e. indicators, data, and methods) and help us answer the research question 'How has food in/security been measured in the literature?' Two categories of search strings were applied: One focussing on food security indicators (Category A), and another one on data requirement and sources of food security measurement (Category B). Specifically, the search strings ("food security" OR "food insecurity" OR "food availability" OR "food affordability" OR "food access" OR "food utilization" OR "food utilisation" OR "food stability" OR "nutrition security" OR "nutrition insecurity") AND ("measurement" OR "indicators" OR "metrics" OR "index" OR "assessment" OR "scales") were used for Category A. For Category B, we used ("food security" OR "food insecurity" OR "food availability" OR "food affordability" OR "food access" OR "food utilization" OR "food utilisation" OR "food stability" OR "nutrition security" OR "nutrition insecurity") AND ("data" OR "big data" OR "datasets" OR "survey" OR "questionnaire"). The retrieved articles together with some of the inclusion and exclusion criteria, and the number of retrieved articles at each step, are presented in Fig. 1. The following inclusion and exclusion criteria were also used during the literature searching and screening process in addition to those criteria presented in Fig. 1: (a) Search field: title-abstract-keywords (Scopus); topic (WoS), (b) Time frame: 2010-09/03/2021, (c) Language: English, (d) Field of research: Agricultural and Biological Sciences 2 ; Economics, Econometrics and Finance (Scopus); Agricultural Economics Policy; Food Sciences Technology (WoS), and (e) Type: journal articles (Category A); journal articles, data, survey, database (Category B). We limited our literature search to publications from 2010 onwards since it was during this period that due attention has been given to the harmonisation of food security measurement. 3 This was also evident from        [38] the 2013 special issue of Global Food Security journal on the theme Measuring Food and Nutrition Security. 4 As we noted above, an ideal food security indicator should capture all the four food security dimensions at individual level to reflect the 1996 World Food Summit definition of food security. We reviewed only those articles that have explicitly measured food in/security by applying at least one food security indicator. These indicators, measuring at least one of the four food security dimensions, were identified based on recent (review) articles on food security measurement [8-10, 14, 15]. A total of 110 articles were selected for full content review after the pre-screening process based on title, keyword and abstract review (Fig. 1). After the full content review, 32 articles were further excluded. Fourteen of these were excluded, as they did not measure food security explicitly (e.g. [45,46] or the food security indicator/method of measurement was not described (e.g. [47] or they used 'inappropriate' indicators that do not capture at least one of the four food security dimensions (e.g. [48]. For example, Koren and Bagozzi [48] used per capita cropland as a food security measure, which is not a valid indicator for the multidimensional food security concept (it cannot even fully capture the food availability dimension). Thirteen publications that we classified as methodological, two review articles [49,50], and three articles on seed insecurity [51], marine food insecurity [52] and political economy of food security [53] were also excluded. Finally, we reviewed, analysed, and summarised the scientific evidence of 78 articles on food security measurement (see Additional file 1 for the list of the articles and the data). The validity and reliability of the SLR have been ensured by specifying the SLR setting following Kitchenham et al. [39], and by providing sufficient information regarding the literature extraction and screening processes. Moreover, the three authors have double-checked the correctness of the processes such as definitions of search strings and inclusion-exclusion criteria, and confirming the retrieved data and data interpretation to reduce bias. The limitations of the study are also discussed (see under the "Discussion" section). † In Scopus, since the 'agricultural and biological sciences' domain is very broad, we excluded studies in the areas of biology, chemistry, ecology, environment, forestry, aquaculture, and plant/crop sciences. 


## Results


## Review of articles by region, indicators used, intended purpose, and level of analysis

Following the exclusion of the non-pertinent articles (Fig. 1), 78 articles were included in our food security measurement dataset for the analysis (Additional file 1). Relatively, more publications were retrieved from the years 2019 and 2020 whereas there were no articles from 2010. 5 The journals of Food Security (33%) and Food Policy (14%) are the main sources of the retrieved articles (Fig. 2). The journals in the field of agricultural economics are also important sources of the retrieved articles (15%). Figure 3 depicts the distribution of the retrieved articles by region/country of study focus. Sub-Sahara Africa has been the main focus of the studies, followed by Asia. At country level, USA (8 studies) and Ethiopia (7 studies) were the most studied countries. Besides the studies represented in Fig. 3, we identified nine other studies focusing at global and regional levels: global [7,12,54,55], developing countries (Slimane et al. [56]), Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region [57], Latin America and Caribbean [58], and Sub Sahara Africa [59,23]. Despite food insecurity being a global issue, there is lack of studies covering the different parts of the world (e.g. MENA region, Latin America and Europe). Figure 4 shows the summary of the number of articles by the type of food security indicator that they applied. Seventeen articles applied the household-level calorie adequacy (i.e. undernourishment) indicator, making it the most frequently used one. This indicator measures calorie availability relative to the calorie requirement of the household by accounting for age and sex differences of the household members (note that this indicator is different from FAO's Prevalence of Undernourishment (POU) indicator (Table 2; [13]). A household is considered as food insecure if the available calorie is lower than the household's calorie requirement. This indicator has been used in the literature to assess the prevalence of food insecurity [35,36,[60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67], for programme evaluation [68,66], and to analyse food security determinants [35,60,66,67,[69][70][71]. Some studies addressed the main drawback of the calorie adequacy indicator (its failure to account for diet quality) by measuring both calorie and micronutrient adequacy [54,65,70,72].

Out of the 17 studies that applied the calorie adequacy indicator, three articles [35,69,71] classified households into food secure and food insecure based on the amount of expenditure on food that is required to purchase the minimum caloric requirement. A household is classified as food insecure if the expenditure on food is less than the predetermined threshold amount required for achieving the minimum caloric requirement. This A subjective (self-reported) version of the household calorie adequacy indicator, the Food Adequacy Questionnaire (FAQ), was also used in 4 of the 78 articles (Fig. 4). Tambo et al. [73] and Smith and Frankenberger [74] measured food insecurity as the number of months of inadequate food provisioning during the last year owing to lack of resources. Bakhtsiyarava et al. [75] used FAQ to derive a binary measure of food security based on self-reported shortage of food in the last year, whereas Verpoorten et al. [23] measured food security using the question 'Over the past year, how often, if ever, have you or anyone in your family gone without enough food to eat? Never/Just once or twice/Several times/Many times/ Always' . Although these simple food security measures based on FAQ can usefully capture a household's experience of food insecurity and for conducting preliminary assessments, they are prone to subjective biases [24]. A comparison of studies is complicated because FAQ's measures are not standardised (e.g. differences in phrases and scales used in the questions).

The dietary diversity indicators Household Diet Diversity Score (HDDS), Women Diet Diversity Score (WDDS), Individual Diet Diversity Score (IDDS), and Food Consumption Score (FCS) were also frequently used in the literature (Fig. 4). About 44% of the publications used diet diversity indicators for measuring food security. (Additional file 2: Tables S1, S2) summarise the studies that applied the dietary diversity score measures (HDDS, WDDS, IDDS) and FCS. Most of the studies applied the diversity score indicators for estimating food insecurity prevalence (Additional file 2: Table S1). Bakhtsiyarava et al. [75], Bolarinwa et al. [76], Islam et al. [77], and Sibhatu and Qaim [78] applied HDDS when analysing the determinants of food security. Tambo et al. [73] and Islam et al. [68] used HDDS as a measure of food security for program evaluation.

The main weakness of the dietary diversity measures is that they do not account for the quantity and quality of the consumed diet (nutritional value); for instance, consumption of very small quantities of certain foods would raise the diversity score without contributing much to a household's/individual's nutritional and micronutrient supply [78]. HDDS does not also account for intra-household diet diversity. Thus, a higher diet diversity score does not necessarily mean a better household/individual food security. Most of the retrieved articles addressed these drawbacks by combining diversity measures with other food security indicators (Additional file 2: Table S1). For example, Sibhatu and Qaim [78] applied HDDS and WDDS in combination with measures of calorie and micronutrient adequacy. Tambo et al. [73] combined HDDS and WDDS with the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES) and FAQ, whereas Bolarinwa et al. [76] integrated HDDS and per capita food expenditure.

There is also a difference in the literature regarding the recall period used when measuring dietary diversity, namely, 7 days vs 24 h (Additional file 2: Table S1). A 7 day recall period leads to higher diversity scores than a 24 h recall period because it considers the daily variation in food consumption [78]. Although the 7 day recall period is associated with higher respondent bias, conclusions drawn from a 24 h recall period may also be misleading, as some relevant food groups might not be considered in the food security assessment (e.g. livestock products that food insecure households seldom consume daily) [78]. It is therefore important to consider the differences in recall periods when designing measurement.

About 57% of the studies that employed FCS (Additional file 2: Table S2) used it to estimate food insecurity prevalence [36, 65, 70, 79-81, 83, 84]. Four other studies applied FCS to analyse the determinants of food security [85][86][87][88], whereas two used it for impact evaluation [89,90].

D'Souza and Jolliffe [85] showed how applying two different food security indicators (per capita daily caloric intake and FCS) could lead to different conclusions when analysing the effect of food price shock on household food security. They estimated the marginal effects of wheat price increase on per capita daily caloric intake and FCS using unconditional quantile regression for each decile of the food security distribution. They found that households with lower calorie intake (food insecure households) did not exhibit a decline in per capita calorie intake because of the wheat price increase. However, households with higher calorie intake (food secure households) exhibited a higher reduction in per capita calorie intake in response to the price increase. On the other hand, the FCS estimation results showed that the most vulnerable households exhibited larger reductions in dietary diversity (FCS) in response to higher wheat prices compared with the households at the top of the FCS distribution (households with higher FCS). Thus, the most vulnerable households might maintain their calorie intake by compromising diet quality. These results imply that food security monitoring or impact assessments based solely on calorie intake could be misleading, and may have severe long-term implications for households' well-being. In this regard, analysis based on dietary diversity-based measures (e.g. FCS) provides more insights into the effects of shocks on household food security (diet quality) across the entire food security distribution [85]. However, Ibok et al. [36] (Fig. 4). HFIAS is the most widely used experience-based indicator (11 articles), followed by HFSSM (9 articles) and FIES (5 times). ELCSA and HHS have been used three times each. HFIAS was primarily used for estimating the prevalence of food insecurity, whereas its adapted version HHS was mainly used for analysing the determinants of food insecurity (Additional file 2: Table S3). The HFSSM was mainly used to analyse the determinants of household level food security in the US (six articles) (Additional file 2: Table S4). Courtemanche et al. [91] and Burke et al. [19] used HFSSM for program evaluation, respectively, to analyse the effects of Walmart Supercenters (which increase food availability at lower food prices) on household food security and school-based nutrition assistance programs on child food security (Additional file 2: Table S4).

Romo-Aviles and Ortiz-Hernández [92] used the ELCSA food security indicator to analyse the differences in food, energy, and nutrients supplies among Mexican households according to their food insecurity status (Additional file 2: Table S4). In the first stage, they applied an ordinal regression model to analyse the determinants of household food insecurity status. In the second stage, they analysed the effect of food insecurity (i.e. a household's food insecurity state as an independent variable) on household's energy and nutrient supplies by using the ordinary least squares (OLS) model. Sandoval et al. [66] compared ELCSA and the household calorie adequacy indicator in food security analysis: prevalence estimation, determinants analysis, and program evaluation. They concluded that the two indicators provided very different food insecurity prevalence estimates, and the determinants were shown to vary significantly. The results of the programme evaluation also showed that the magnitude of the effect of a cash transfer program was significantly larger when using the 'objective' undernourishment indicator than the 'subjective' ELCSA food security indicator.

The majority of the five studies that used the FAO's FIES indicator analysed the determinants of food security at regional and global levels, whereas one study [73] used it for program evaluation to assess the effect of provisions of a plant health service on food insecurity prevalence among farming households (Additional file 2: Table S5). About 45% and 37% of the retrieved articles applied food security indicators to analyse food security determinants and for food insecurity prevalence estimation, respectively. The calorie adequacy indicator (11 articles), FCS (8 articles), HDDS (7 articles), HFSSM (7 articles), and HFIAS (7 articles) were the most frequently used indicators in this regard. The calorie adequacy indicator (11 articles), FCS (10 articles), HDDS (8 articles), and HFIAS (7 articles) were the most applied indicators for estimating food insecurity prevalence.

About 60% of the retrieved studies measured food security at household-level while 20% of them assessed food security at individual-level. The most frequently used household-level indicators were the calorie adequacy indicator (14 articles), FCS (13 articles), and HDDS (12 articles). The experience-based household food security indicators HFIAS and HFSSM were also used nine and seven times, respectively. For individual-level analyses, the following child anthropometry measures were mostly used: stunning (four times), wasting (three times), and underweight (three times). The individual-level food security indicators WDDS and BMI were also used four times each.


## Summary of indicators by study region and data source

As shown in Fig. 3, the main focus areas of the 78 publications were Sub Sahara Africa and South (east) Asia. These studies employed different indicators in different countries. The type of FS indicator employed in these studies by country is summarised in Fig. 6 (reported only for those countries where at least two indicators were used). The HFSSM indicator was used 7 times in the USA (the highest at country level), which is expected as the HFSSM is used for monitoring household-level food security in the USA. The HDDS was used four times in Kenya whereas the calorie adequacy indicator and HDDS were used three-times each in Ethiopia and Bangladesh.

About 42% of the 78 studies employed primary data. The majority of these 33 studies applied experience-based indicators: HFIAS (9 articles), HFSSM (6 articles), and other experience-based indicators (4 articles). Dietary diversity-based indicators (12 articles) and calorie adequacy indicator (8 articles) were also applied frequently by studies that employed primary data (Fig. 7). The distributions of the 33 studies that employed primary data by region is as follow: Africa (15 articles), Asia (7 articles), Central and South America (4 articles), Europe (2 articles) and North America (5 articles). The USA and Ethiopia are the countries with the highest number of studies by country (5 and 4 studies, respectively) (Fig. 7). The majority of the studies that applied calorie adequacy indicator and FCS have employed secondary data whereas most of the studies that applied experience-based indicators have employed primary data (Fig. 8). This may imply the fact that collecting data for experience-based indicators is convenient compared to the other type indicators such as the dietary-based ones.


## Quantitative characterization of food security dimensions and components

An ideal food security indicator should capture all the four food security dimensions (availability, access, utilization and stability) and components (quantity, quality, safety and preference). Because 'measuring food security explicitly' was one of our inclusion criteria for selecting articles (Fig. 1), and as the most commonly used food security indicators in the literature are measures of food access (Tables 1, 2, 3, 4), all the 78 articles measured the food access dimension. However, the utilisation (13%) and stability (18%) dimensions of food security were seldomly captured. For measuring food utilisation, six of the ten articles applied anthropometry measures [64,68,79,[93][94][95][96]. Izraelov and Silber [7] applied the Global Food Security Index (GFSI), which allows measuring food utilisation as a construct using 11 indicators. Slimane et al. [56] derived an indicator of food utilisation from 'access to improved water sources and access to improved sanitation facilities' , which are two of the ten indicators of the food utilisation dimension in FAO's Suite of Food Security Index (Table 2; [29]. In the literature, the stability dimension has commonly been captured by using (i) composite indices [7,12], (ii) the concepts of vulnerability [35,36,61,69,86] and resilience [74,88,90], (iii) econometric approaches [76,88,96] (iv) dynamic farm household optimisation model [97], and (v) measuring food security over time/seasons [76,83]. Almost all the studies analysed the quantity and quality components of food security, whereas the food safety and preference/cultural acceptability components were rarely captured during food security measurements. Although these components are critical in achieving food security according to the 1996 World Food Summit definition of food security, only 2 and 18 studies (out of the 78 articles) captured the food safety and preference components, respectively. Most of the studies (11 articles) that captured the preference component applied the HFIAS indicator, as the second question of the HFIAS 9-items questionnaire addresses the preference food security component. On the other hand, Izraelov and Silber [7] using the GFSI and Ambikapathi et al. [98] using an experience-based food security indicator captured the food safety component. Only 3 of the 78 publications employed a comprehensive food security measurement, where they measured food security by explicitly considering all the four food security dimensions [7,12,96]. Caccavale and Giuffrida [12] and Izraelov and Silber [7] used composite food security indices to capture the four food security dimensions, while Upton et al. [96] applied a moment-based panel data econometric approach to the concept of development resilience in food security measurement. Caccavale and Giuffrida [12] developed the Proteus Composite Index (PCI) for measuring food security at national level. PCI can be used to monitor the food security progresses of countries by comparing within (over time) and between countries. It addresses the shortcomings of other composite indicators in terms of weighting, normalisation, and sensitivity. The PCI is constructed from 21 indicators: availability (2 indicators), access (7 indicators), utilisation (2 indicators), and stability (10 indicators) ( Table 5). Eleven of these indicators were adopted from FAO's Suite of food security Index [30].

Izraelov and Silber [7] is the only study (out of the 78 publications) that applied the GFSI for measuring food security at national level. Like FAO's Suite of Food Security Index, the GFSI is a composite food security indicator that measures all the four dimensions of food security. Because the GFSI primarily assesses and monitors food security at a national level (i.e. ranking of countries based on the GFSI score), Izraelov and Silber [7] investigated the sensitiveness of the rankings of countries to the list of indicators used for the different dimensions and to the set of weights elicited from the panel of experts of the Economic Intelligence Unit by employing PCA and/or data envelopment analysis (DEA) methods. The authors concluded that the rankings based on the GFSI are robust in relation to both the expert weights used and the choice of indicators. The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) (2021) produces the GFSI index each year by using 69 indicators covering the four dimensions of food security: availability, affordability (accessibility), quality and safety (utilization), and natural resources and resilience (stability).

Upton et al. 's [96] defined four axioms that an ideal food security measure must reflect. Relying on the 1996 World Food Summit food security definition [4], they defined the following four axioms: a. Scale axiom: it addresses both individuals and households at different scale of aggregation (e.g. regions) reflecting 'all people'; People of concern originated (IDPs and refugees), share of total population No People of concern hosted (IDPs and refugees), share of total population No People affected by disasters (10-year weighted), share of total population No Damage from disasters in US$ (10-year weighted), share of GDP No b. Time axiom: reflecting 'at all times' , it captures the food stability dimension to account for both predictable and unpredictable variability of food security over time; c. Access axiom: derived from 'physical, social and economic access' , it captures the food access (and implicitly the availability) dimensions; and d. Outcomes axiom: reflecting on "an active and healthy life", it reflects the food utilization dimension, which captures the dietary, nutrition, and/or health outcomes.

Upton et al. [96] did note that no food security measure at the time satisfied all these four axioms in the literature. In response, they employed a stochastic dynamic measure of well-being based on the concept of development resilience [99]. Barrett and Constas [99] defined development resilience as 'the capacity over time of a person/household... to avoid poverty in the face of various stressors and in the wake of myriad shocks. If and only if that capacity is and remains high over time, then the unit is resilient' (p. 14). [100,101] demonstrated the econometric implementation of the stochastic dynamic measure of well-being at multiple scales using household or individual survey data. They showed how a measure of household or individual wellbeing and resilience can be estimated, and aggregated at regional or national level using a system of conditional moment functions. By adopting the [100,101] moments-based (dynamic) panel data econometric approach, Upton et al. [96] used the resilience concept in food security measurement to reflect the above four axioms as follows:

a. The scale axiom is satisfied by estimating food security at the individual or household level, and then by aggregating it into higher-level groups (e.g. regions). b. The time/stability axiom is captured by using [100,101] dynamic approach. c. The access axiom is considered by conditioning the moments of the food security distribution regarding economic, physical, and social factors that influence food access. d. The outcome (utilisation) axiom is considered by using nutritional status indicators as dependent variables in the econometric model. Upton et al. [96] used HDDS and child MUAC as outcome indicators.


## Recent developments in food security measurement

The concepts of vulnerability and resilience have only recently been introduced in food security measurement and analysis. Rather than directly measuring food security or food insecurity, researchers have been seeking to measure vulnerability to food insecurity and food security resilience, and their respective determinants/ drivers. Out of the 78 publications, 5 and 4 articles respectively employed the concepts of vulnerability [35,36,61,69,86] and resilience [74,88,90,96] in their food security measurement and analysis. Ibok et al. [36] developed the Vulnerability to Food Insecurity Index (VFII) for measuring the vulnerability of households to food insecurity, and validated it by comparing the estimates of vulnerability to food insecurity with the traditional food insecurity measures (calorie adequacy, CSI, FCS). The VFII is a composite index constructed from three dimensions ( Table 6): exposure (probability of covariate shock occurring), sensitivity (previous/accumulative experience of food insecurity), and adaptive capacity (how households respond, exploit opportunities, resist or recover from food insecurity shocks, which is the coping ability of households). A set of indicators are used for each of the three dimensions (Table 6). By defining thresholds, Ibok et al. [36] assigned households into one of the three categories: highly vulnerable, mildly vulnerable, and not vulnerable to food insecurity. The results showed that VFII has a weak positive correlation with FCS and per capita calorie adequacy, whereas it has a negative correlation with CSI. Some of the households with poor calorie per capita consumption were classified as not vulnerable to food insecurity, whereas some households with acceptable calorie per capita consumption were identified as highly vulnerable to food insecurity. The authors concluded that a household's vulnerability to food insecurity can be better measured using CSI than using FCS and per capita calorie adequacy (using the VFII as a benchmark). [86] analysed the effects of households' vulnerability to different climatic hazards on their food access by employing a generalised linear regression model. They used FCS as a measure of household food access, concluding that households that are vulnerable to flood were found to be more likely to be food insecure (i.e. to have a low FCS) than less vulnerable households.

Vaitla et al. [88] and Upton et al. [96] employed dynamic panel data modelling to measure the food security resilience of households. They analysed the determinants of food security status at a point in time, and its food security resilience by using different food security indicators. They defined resilience as 'the probability that a household is truly above a chosen food security cut-off, given its underlying assets, demographic characteristics, and past food security status' . Similar to Upton et al. [96], they used the moments (mean and variance) of the food security score over time to estimate resilience as the probability of attaining a given level of food security.

Vaitla et al. [88] used FCS and RCSI as a dependent variable in their dynamic panel data model. They concluded that the determinants of a household's food security status and food security resilience are different. They also showed that the drivers of food security resilience vary across the two food security measures used as dependent variables.

Lascano Galarza [90] investigated the effects of food assistance on a household's food security status at a point in time, and its food security resilience, by applying FAO's Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis II framework. The author used FCS and food expenditure as measures of food security when evaluating the effects of the food assistance program and the household's resilience on food security status. Factor analysis and multiple indicators multiple causes models were used to construct the resilience score and to analyse its effect on food security. The resilience score was derived from four indicators: assets, access to basic services, social safety nets, and adaptive capacity. The author ultimately found a significant positive association of food assistance programmes with a household's food security status and food security resilience.

Smith and Frankenberger [74] analysed the effects of resilience capacity in reducing the effect of shocks on household food security using HHS and FAQ (number of months of inadequate household food access) as measures of food security. The results of their fixed effect panel data model showed that resilience capacity enhancing attributes such as household assets, human capital, social capital, information access, women empowerment, diversity of livelihood, safety nets, and market access reduce the negative effect of flooding on household food security.


## Discussion


## Which food security indicator is the best?

Although numerous food security indicators have been developed for use in research, there is no agreement on the single 'best' food security indicator among scientists or practitioners for measuring, analysing, and monitoring food security [9,12]. The different international agencies also use their own sets of food security indicators (e.g. World Food Programme: FCS, USAID: HFIAS; FAO: POU and FIES; and EIU: GFSI). Figure 9 summarises the most applied food security indicators according to the level of analysis and the food security dimensions that they intend to reflect. The level of analysis ranges from macro (e.g. national) to micro (e.g. individual) levels, and the measured food security dimension from availability to utilisation. An ideal food security indicator should capture all the four food security dimensions at individual level to reflect the 1996 World Food Summit definition of food security. However, most of the available indicators are measures of food access at the household level (Fig. 9). Only a few composite and anthropometry indicators can measure food utilisation (besides availability and access) at national and individual levels, respectively. On  [29], and PCI [12] can allow to directly measure the stability dimension of food security while also capturing the other three food security dimensions at national level. In general, there exist an inherent trade-off when choosing one indicator over another type of indicator because the various classes of food security indicators reflect different aspects of food security [96] such as dimensions, components, levels of analysis (e.g. national vs individual), and data requirement (subjective vs objective; recall period of 1 year vs 24 h). Therefore, most of the commonly used indicators can be considered as mutually complementary than substitutes for one another. The subjective experience-based indicators, for example, measure a household's experience of anxiety/ worry/hunger arising from lack of food access, whereas the objective dietary diversity-based indicators measure a household's access to diverse food, reflecting a household's caloric intake and diet quality. Household dietary diversity-based and caloric adequacy indicators also complement each other because sufficient calorie might be achieved with low food quality (without diversified diet), whereas a diverse diet might not be enough to meet a household's caloric requirement. Noting this complementarity, Bolarinwa et al. [76] classified households into three categories of food insecurity (food secure, partially food insecure, and completely food insecure) by integrating two indicators: HDDS and per capita food expenditure (where the food expenditure reflects caloric adequacy).


## Data requirements of food security measurement

The most critical challenge of a comprehensive food security measurement and analysis is generating reliable data consistently for estimating complementary food security indicators (at the individual level) [13]. Measuring food security with a high frequency consistently over time (e.g. quarterly instead of annually) at the individual level by applying a set of complementary indicators (e.g. calorie/nutrient adequacy and anthropometry measures) can help us better analyse and monitor food security (Fig. 10). A national level food security measurement at a point in time (e.g. using POU) is less informative for decision-making compared with measuring food security every year (or ideally in real-time) at the household level (e.g. using calorie adequacy). Integrating food consumption and anthropometry information in regular national household living standard surveys can also be crucial to eliminating the limitations of current measurement approaches, especially because nutrition, food consumption, health, and income are interrelated [13]. De Haen et al. [13] rightly remind us that to improve the reliability and accuracy of a nation's food security measurement and analysis, 'the focus should be on generating more timely, comprehensive, and consistent household surveys that cover food consumption and anthropometry, [which] allow much better assessment of the prevalence of food insecurity and undernutrition, as well as of trends and driving forces. ' That is, first, generating data from a nationally representative sample through comprehensive household surveys allows us to estimate a set of complementary indicators reflecting the different aspects of food security measurement (dimensions, components, outcomes, behavioural responses, coping mechanisms) (Fig. 10). Second, comprehensive surveys help measure both the prevalence of food insecurity and its drivers/determinants. Third, it is critical to generate these data consistently over time so that the progress towards food security can be monitored, drivers can be analysed over time, and food insecurity can be detected well in advance. This approach could address the UN Scientific Group's criticism [11] that 'existing early warning systems lack indicators to adequately monitor degradation of food systems. ' Fourth, the data allow us to analyse and evaluate the effects of programmes and interventions (over time) at different levels (individual, household, and national). It also opens opportunities to conduct development research in food, nutrition, health, and poverty [13].

In summary, we suggest the following points in the light of the above discussions for a comprehensive food security measurement:

• Food security should be measured at the individual (or at least at household) level by applying a set of complementary food security indicators to capture the availability, access, and utilisation dimensions of food security. Combining anthropometry measures with other objective food security indicators (e.g. calorie adequacy or dietary diversity indicators) will further allow us to capture these three dimensions. • The fourth dimension of food security, i.e. the stability dimension, can be captured by producing the estimates of the complementary food security indicators over time or in real time. A repeated high frequency food security measurement (if possible by using near real-time data) is thus preferable, as it can also help to identify the onset of food insecurity in time, to evaluate interventions/programs, and to monitor food security progresses. • The behavioural aspects of food insecurity and the cultural acceptability of food can be measured by using one of the experience-based measures. For example, FAO's FIES can be applied to estimate the prevalence and severity of food insecurity at individual level. Because the FIES has been applied in more than 100 countries, countries can compare their respective food security states with each other. • The use of experience-based indicators (e.g. FIES)

allows conducting rapid food security assessments as the data collection is easier compared to the objective food security indicators (e.g. calorie adequacy). • Integrating food consumption (intake, expenditure, and diet diversity) and anthropometry information in regular national household living standard surveys enables us to collect complete and consistent data for estimating complementary food security indicators in food security analyses.


## Study limitations and future research

In this study, we identified and characterized the most commonly applied food security indicators in the literature with respect to the dimensions and components covered, methods and models of measurement, level of analysis, data requirements and sources, intended purpose of application, and strengths and weaknesses. Subsequently, we analysed data on food security measurement from 78 peer-reviewed articles, and suggested the estimation of complementary food security indicators consistently over time for conducting a comprehensive analysis by taking all the four food security dimensions and components into account. In order to select the set of these complementary food security indicators that would be applicable to a specific context (e.g. country or region), we recommend to conduct a Delphi study by involving food security experts, policy-makers and other relevant stakeholders. In addition, we limited the literature search to two databases (Scopus and WoS) and included only peer-reviewed articles in this study. Therefore, we suggest to extend this study by broadening the literature type by including the grey literature (e.g. reports, book chapters and conference proceedings) and by searching from other databases, which reduce the publication bias. Moreover, we followed the 1996 World Food Summit definition of food security [5], which provided the foundation for the four food security dimensions (availability, access, utilisation, and stability). Accordingly, in this study, we organised the literature review on food security measurement over these four dimensions. However, food system researchers have recently noted the need to update the definition of food security in reference to sustainable food systems, for example, by including new food security dimensions [102][103][104]. Clapp et al. [103], for example, proposed the inclusion of two extra dimensions (sustainability and agency) to improve the framework of food security analyses. The inclusion of these two extra dimensions guarantees that every human being has access to healthy and nutritious food, not only now but also in the future. In this regard, sustainability can be considered as a pre-requisite for long-term food security [103,104]. Therefore, we recommend future research to operationalize literature reviews according to the six food security dimensions (i.e. availability, access, utilisation, stability, sustainability and agency). Furthermore, most existing studies about food security measurement in the literature are based on the 1996 World Food Summit definition of food security [5]. Food security analyses based on this definition narrows the scope of the food security concept, and do not support system level analysis by considering other components of the food system. For example, food security is a subset (component) of the Food Systems Approach, which takes food environments, food supply chains, individual factors, external food system drivers, consumer behaviour, and food system outcomes (e.g. food security and health outcomes) into account [105][106][107][108]. Therefore, given the increasing attention to the Food Systems Approach and system level analyses in the literature, the Food Systems Approach can be used as a framework for operationalising future literature reviews on food security.


## Conclusion

We critically reviewed numerous food security indicators and methodologies published in scientific articles since the last decade using the SLR methodology. We reviewed, analysed, and summarised the results of 78 articles on food security measurement. We found that the household-level calorie adequacy measure was the most frequently used indicator in the literature as a sole measure of food security. Dietary diversity indicators (HDDS, WDDS, IDDS, and FCS) and experience-based indicators (HFSSM, FIES, HFIAS, HHS, ELCSA) were almost equally in use and popular. In terms of the food security dimensions, food utilisation (13%) and stability (18%) were seldom captured. Caccavale and Giuffrida [12], Izraelov and Silber [7], and Upton et al. [96] are the only studies that measured food security by considering all four dimensions. We also found that the majority of the studies that applied calorie adequacy and dietary diversity-based indicators employed secondary data whereas most of the studies that applied experience-based indicators employed primary data, suggesting the convenience/ simplicity of collecting data for experience-based indicators than dietary-based indicators. The use of experiencebased indicators allows conducting rapid food security

## Fig. 1
1duplicated articles from Category A and B: Scopus (n = 201) and Web of Science (n = 249) Selection of articles on the basis of information contained in the abstract (n = 199) Exclusion of articles not focused on food security assessment (n = 89) Selection of articles on the basis of full text review (n = 110) Exclusion of articles that do not explicitly measure food security by applying at least one food security indicator (n = 32) Articles included in the sample for the analysis (n = 78) Retained articles after removing duplicates from the two search categories: Scopus (n = 504) and Web of Science (n = 1082)Exclusion of duplicated articles from the two databases, and articles not focused on food security analysis, on the basis of information contained in the title and keywords (n = 1387) Literature searching and screening criteria

## Fig. 2 Fig. 3
23Number of articles per journal (total number of articles: 78) Summary of articles by country (Note: Some articles focus on more than one country, resulting in 89 articles by study area)

## Fig. 4
4Summary of the publications by the type of food security indicators employed measure allows us to account for the effect of food price inflation on household's food access.

## Figure 5
5summarises the data on the proportion of articles according to the number of indicators used per article. About 58% of the 78 articles used only one indicator in their food security analysis. The HFSSM and household calorie adequacy indicator have respectively been used eight and seven times as the sole food security indicator in food security analyses. HFIAS (four times), FIES (three times), and FCS (three times) were also used as the only measures of food security. The experiencebased indicators (HFSSM, HFIAS, and FIES) are the most frequently used indicators as a single measure of food security in the literature, whereas the other categories of food security indicators (dietary diversity, anthropometric, and coping strategy) are mostly used in combination with other indicators. Three studies (out of the 78 articles) applied at least six food security indicators (one study used eight indicators while the other two studies used six indicators each). Islam et al. [68] applied eight food security indicators to analyse the effects of microcredit programme participation on household food security. They applied the calorie adequacy indicator, HDDS (number of food groups consumed), Food Variety Score (FVS, number of food items consumed), three child anthropometry measures (stunning, wasting, underweight), and two women anthropometry measures (body mass index [BMI] and mid-upper arm circumference [MUAC]) as measures of food security. Bühler et al. [79] applied six indicators (FCS, Reduced Coping Strategy Index [RCSI], HFIAS, and child stunning, wasting and underweight) to evaluate the relationship between household's food security status and individual's nutritional outcomes. The indicators FCS, RCSI, and HFIAS were used to measure a household's food security status, whereas the anthropometry measures were used as indicators of individual's nutritional outcomes. Maxwell et al. [83] also applied six food security indicators (Coping Strategy Index [CSI], RCSI, FCS, HDDS, HFIAS, and HHS) to compare the estimates of food insecurity prevalence over seasons of the most frequently used indicators.

## Fig. 5 10 Fig. 6
5106Summary articles by the number of indicators used per article (N = 78) Manikas et al. Agriculture & Food Security (2023) 12:Summary of studies by country and indicators applied [Note: Multiple indicators could be used per study, and a study may cover multiple countries]

## Fig. 6 continuedFig. 7 Fig. 8
678Manikas Summary of indicators used by country and data source [Note: Multiple indicators could be used per study, and a study may cover multiple countries] Manikas et al. Summary of indicators used by data source [Note: Multiple indicators could be used per study]

## Fig. 9
9Summary of the retrieved indicators according to the level of analysis and food security dimensions

## Fig. 10
10High frequency food security measurement for better food security analysis.

## Table 1
1Summary of characterization of experience-based food security indicatorsIndicators 

Description/ 

method 

Recall period 
Level of analysis Dimension 

covered 

Components 

covered 
Possible purpose Validity and 

Reliability 

Data 
requirement and 
availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Household Food 
Security Survey 
Module (HFSSM) 
(Bickel [111]) 

Measures house-
holds' experience 

of FI using 18-item 
questionnaire (the 

8 questions only 
for households 
with children) 
Used to monitor 
FS in USA 
Categorical scale 

based on the 
sum of affirma-
tive responses (4 
categories) 
-Continuous scale 

(0-9.3) based on a 
Rasch model with 
cut-off points 
1 year; 1 month 
possible 

Household 

Access 

Quantity, per-
ceived quality 

-Estimate FI 
prevalence 

-Monitor trends in 
FI at national level 
Program monitor-

ing, evaluation 
and targeting 

Valid and reliable 
[10], Gulliford et al. 
[17]) 

Can be collected 
using the 18-items 
questionnaire 
-It is simple to 
implement, and 

has also a validated 
short version with 
6-questions. It 

does not quantify/ 
assess 'actual' food 
consumption, and 

diet quality 

Food Insecurity 
Experience Scale 

(FIES) 
(FAO [18]) 

Measures individ-

ual's experience of 
FI using an 8-item 
questionnaire 

Used by FAO to 
monitor global FS 
Categorical scale 

based on the 
sum of affirma-
tive responses (4 
categories) 
Continuous scale 

based on a Rasch 
model with cut-off 
points 

1 year 

Individual 

Access 

Quantity, per-
ceived quality 

Estimate preva-
lence of FI 
FS monitoring at 
global (SDG) and 
national levels 
Program monitor-

ing and evaluation 
Valid and reliable Can be collected 

via the 8-items 
questionnaire 

For most countries 
data is available 
from FAO's survey 
via Gallup Inc 

Comparable FS 
estimates across 
countries/cultures/ 
sub-populations; 

FAO provides soft-
ware program and 
learning materials 

for computing FIES. 
Yet, FIES is compli-
cated for non-
specialists, does not 
quantify the 'actual' 
food consumption 
and diet quality, 
does not measure 
child FS 


## Table 2
2Summary of characterization of national level food security indicatorsIndicators 

Description/ 

method 

Recall 
period 
Level of analysis Dimension covered Components 

covered 
Possible purpose Validity 

and 
Reliability 

Data 
requirement and 
availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Prevalence of 
undernourishment 

(POU) [13],FAO 
[113]) 

Estimates the 
proportion of a 
population with 

dietary energy 
deficiency relative to 

the minimum calorie 
requirement of an 

average individual in 

the population 
Derived from 
three parameters: 
amount of available 
calorie for domes-

tic consumption, 
minimum amount of 
calorie required by 
the population, and 
inequality in access 

to the available 
calories 
Expressed as a 
percentage of 
undernourished 

households relative 

to the total popula-
tion 

1 year 

National 

Availability 

Quantity 

Estimate prevalence 

of undernourish-
ment 
Monitor trends in 
undernourishment 

at national and 
global levels 

Not valid, 
and low 
reliability [8, 

13] 

National food 
balance sheets 
(FAO); Household 
Income and 
Expenditure 

Surveys; official 
data on popula-
tion size and 
composition 
It provides insight 
into levels and 
trends of under-
nourishment; 

facilitate global 

and regional 
FS governance. 
Yet, it does not 
provide informa-
tion on the actual 
distribution of the 
number of hungry 
people within the 
population; proxy 

of calorie availability 
for calorie intake; 
energy deficiency is 
not a valid measure 
of FI; micronutrients 
are not considered, 
overstate food avail-
ability in FBS due to 
not accounting for 
food losses 

Global Food 
Security Index 
(GFSI) [26] 

Composite index 
(0-100) by aggre-
gating multiple 
indicators, using 
expert weights, or 
weighting methods: 

DEA and PCA 

1 year 

National 

All four 

Quantity, Quality, 
Safety 

Analysing the 
factors influencing 
food security 
Monitoring FS at 

global level 

Valid and 
reliable 

EIU 
It provides insights 
into the vulnerabil-
ity of a nation's food 
system by attribut-

ing to the causes. 
Yet, it focuses 
on analysis of FS 
determinants, and 

do not measure FS 
outcomes 


## Table 2 (continued)
2FS food security, FI food insecurity, EIU economic intelligence unitIndicators 

Description/ 

method 

Recall 
period 
Level of analysis Dimension covered Components 

covered 
Possible purpose Validity 

and 
Reliability 

Data 
requirement and 
availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Global Hunger 
Index (GHI) 
(Pangaribowo [27], 
Wiesmann [28]) 

Composite indicator 

for analysing the 
extent, trend and 
cause of hunger 
worldwide 
Calculated as the 
arithmetic mean of 

three components 
of hunger: under-
nourishment, child 
underweight and 

stunning and child 
mortality 

Five GHI categories, 
which are deter-
mined based on 
randomly selected 
cut-off points 

1 year 

National 

Access, Utilisation 

Quantity, 
Quality, 
Safety 

Estimate prevalence 

of hunger 
Monitor trends in 
poverty at national 

and global levels 

Not valid 
and low 
reliability as 

it depends 
on POU 
FAO (prevalence 
of undernutri-
tion), WHO (child 
underweight), 

UNICEF (child 
morality) 
It provides insight 
into levels & trends 
of hunger; facilitate 
global and regional 
poverty govern-
ance. Suffers from 
double counting 
arising from the 
correlation of the 

three components 
of hunger used to 
construct GHI 

Suite of Food 
Security index 

[29, 30] 

Composite index 
(0-100) covering all 

the four dimensions 
of FS. The multiple 
dimensions and 
indicators are nor-
malised, and then 
aggregated using 

a set of weights, for 
example based on 

PCA 

1 year 

National 

All four 

All 

Estimate prevalence 

of FI 
Monitor trends in 

FS at national and 
global levels 

Validity and 
reliability 

not demon-
strated 
FAO compiles 
annual data 

for different 
countries, and are 
openly accessible 

at FAOSTAT 

It accounts for all 
the FS dimensions 
and components, 
provides insight 

into levels & trends 
of FI; facilitate 
global and regional 

FS governance, 
availability of data 

from FAO. No stand-
ardised weighting 
and normalisation 
methods 



## Table 3
3Summary of characterization of dietary intake, diversity and expenditure-based food security indicatorsIndicators 

Description/method 

Recall period 

Level of 
analysis 

Dimension 
covered 

Components 

covered 

Possible 
purpose 

Validity and 
reliability 

Data 
requirement 

and availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Food con-
sumption 

score (FCS) 
(WFP [31]) 
Composite indicator that considers dietary 
diversity, consumption frequency, and diet 
quality (nutritional values of various food 
groups) 
Given f 
as the number of days each food group 

was consumed within the last seven days, FCS 
is measured as: 
FCS = 

2f 
staple + 

3f 
pulse + 

1f 

vegetable 

+1f 
fruit + 

4f 
animal,fish + 

4f 
dairy + 

0.5f 
sugar + 

0.5f 

oil 

The total score (0-112) is used to classify 
households into one of the three groups based 

on the thresholds 

7 days 

Household Access 

Quantity, 
Quality 
-Estimate FI 
prevalence 

-Program 
monitoring, 
evaluation 

and target-
ing 

Not valid and 
reliable [32] 
Dietary records, 
Food Frequency 
Questionnaires 

Household 
Consumption 

and Expenditure 
Survey 
Easy to apply and 
allows for rapid FS 
assessment. Yet, it 

does not account 
for amount/quan-
tity of food con-
sumed, micronutri-

ent intakes and 
intra-household 

allocations, the cut-

off points (thresh-
olds) for classifying 
households into 
different classes 

are not valid; Prone 
to measurement 
error as it relies 
on respondent 
memory 

Household 

dietary 
diversity 
score (HDDS) 
(Swindale 

and Bilinsky 
[33]) 
A qualitative measure by counting the number 
of food groups (of 12 groups) consumed by 
a household within the recall period: cereals; 
roots/tubers; vegetables; fruits; meat/poultry/ 

offal; eggs; fish/seafood; pulses/legumes/ 
nuts; milk/milk products; oil/fats; sugar/honey; 
and miscellaneous (others). The FAO version 
contains 16 food groups 

1 or 7 days 

Household Access 

Quantity, 
Quality 
-Estimate FI 
prevalence 

-Program 
monitoring, 
evaluation 
Not valid and 
reliable [32] 
Dietary records, 
Food Frequency 
Questionnaires 

Household 
Consumption 

and Expenditure 
Survey 

Simple and easy to 
understand 

It has not been 
validated as a 
proxy for adequacy 
of particular 
macronutrients 

or micronutrients 
(diet quality). There 
is no universally 
accepted cut-off for 

this indicator 
Prone to measure-
ment error as it 
relies on respond-
ent memory 


## Table 3 (continued)
3Indicators 

Description/method 

Recall period 

Level of 
analysis 

Dimension 
covered 

Components 

covered 

Possible 
purpose 

Validity and 
reliability 

Data 
requirement 

and availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Women's and 
individual 
dietary diver-
sity scores 
[34] 
A qualitative measure of individual's access to a 
diverse of food items. It reflects dietary quality 

by accounting the adequacy of micronutrient 
of the diet) 
A simple count of food items consumed of 
the 16 food groups: cereals; vitamin A-rich 
vegetables and tubers; white roots and tubers; 
dark-green leafy vegetables; other vegetables; 
vitamin A-rich fruits; other fruits; organ meat; 
flesh meat; eggs; fish; legumes, nuts, and seeds; 
dairy; oils and fats; sweets; condiments) 

1 or 7 days 

Individual Access 

Quantity, 
Quality 
-Estimate FI 
prevalence 

at individual 
level 

-Program 
monitoring, 
evaluation 

and target-
ing 

Validated for 
women aged 
15-49 years 
old, and 
reliability not 
checked [10] 
Dietary records, 
food frequency 
questionnaires 
Provides insights 

into adequacy 
of macro-and 
micronutrients at 

individual level. 

Also, proven to be 
a good measure of 
household macro-
nutrient adequacy 

and household 
nutrition insecurity. 
Prone to measure-
ment error as it 
relies on respond-
ent memory 

Calorie 
Adequacy 
Indicator [35, 

36] 
Measures a household's calorie adequacy (the 
availability of calorie relative to the calorie 
requirement of the household by accounting 

for age and sex differences OR the amount of 
expenditure on food that is required to pur-

chase the minimum caloric requirement 
-two categories: adequate calorie, food secure, 
and inadequate calorie food insecure 

1 year/1 week/1 
month 

Household Access 

Quantity 

-Estimate FI 
prevalence 

-program 
monitoring, 
evaluation 

and target-
ing 

Like POU, 
not a valid 
measure of 

FS, and low 
reliability 
Dietary records, 
Food Frequency 
Questionnaires 

Household 
Consumption 

and Expenditure 
Survey 
It provides insight 
into levels & trends 
of household level 
undernourishment. 

Yet, it does not 
account for dietary 
quality as energy 
deficiency is not a 

valid measure of 
FI; micronutrients 
are not considered; 
does not account 
for inequality in 
access to the avail-
able calories 


## Table 4
4Summary of characterization of food security indicators reflecting Coping Strategies and Anthropometry MeasuresIndicators 

Description/ 

method 
Recall period Level of analysis Dimension 

covered 

Components 

covered 
Possible purpose Validity and 

Reliability 

Data 
requirement and 
availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Coping Strategy 
Index (CSI) 
(Maxwell and 
Caldwell [37]) 

Assess what peo-
ple do when they 
cannot access 
enough food 

A total of 12 to 15 
coping strategies 

are identified 
through focus 
groups, and 
these strategies 
are assigned into 
one of the four 
categories: Dietary 
change, Short-
term measures 
to increase food 
availability, Short-

term measures 
to decrease the 
number of people 

to feed and 
Rationing 
Calculated as a 
weighted average 

of the frequency 
of the coping 
strategies as: 

CSI 
i = 

w 
j S 

ij , 

where w 
j is the 
weight assigned 

to j th 
coping strat-

egy ( S 
ij ) used by 
the i th 

household. 

The weight ( w 

j ) 

ranges between 1 
(least severe cat-
egory) to 4 (most 
severe coping 
behaviour) 

7 day 

Household 

Access 

All 

Analysis of causes 

and conse-
quences of FI, 
Impact evaluation, 
Monitoring 

Early warning 

Valid, but reliabil-
ity not checked 
[10] 

Data collection 
on a series of 
questions on how 
households are 
responding to 

food shortages, 
through focus 
group discussions 

Relatively simple 

and allows rapid 
assessment. Yet, it 

is a context-specific 
measure, and 
relatively expensive. 

Also, no standard-
ised cut-off points 


## Table 4 (continued)
4Indicators 

Description/ 

method 
Recall period Level of analysis Dimension 

covered 

Components 

covered 
Possible purpose Validity and 

Reliability 

Data 
requirement and 
availability 

Strengths and 
weaknesses 

Reduced CSI 

Same with CSI, 
but allows FS 
comparison across 
different contexts 

by using five 
predefined coping 
strategies, with 
universal set of 
severity weight-
ings: Eating less-
preferred foods 

(1.0), Borrowing 
food/money from 

friends and rela-
tives (2.0), Limiting 
portions at meal-

time (1.0), Limiting 
adult intake (3.0), 
and Reducing the 
number of meals 

per day (1.0). The 
weighted sum 

of the frequen-
cies of these five 
strategies (0-56) 

used for assigning 
households 

7 day 

Household 

Access 

Quantity, Quality, 
Preference 

Surveillance, in 

the early stages of 
FS crises, and can 
also be combined 
with the HHS for 
analysing serious 

and prolonged FS 
crises 

Valid, but reliabil-
ity not checked 
[10] 

Data collec-
tion on the 
five predefined 
strategies on how 
households are 
responding to 

food shortages, 
through focus 
group discussions 

Standardised for 

different contexts, 
relatively simple and 
allows rapid assess-
ment. Yet, relatively 
expensive, and no 
agreed threshold/ 
cut-off for interpret-
ing the scores 

Anthropometry 

measures 

-Assessing indi-
viduals' nutritional 
outcomes in rela-

tion to the height, 
weight and body 
size of individuals 
-Simple calcula-
tions, and Z-score 
with cut-off points 

-

Individual 

Utilisation 

Quantity, quality, 
safety 

-Measuring 

the effect of 
undernutrition on 
individuals' health 

and wellbeing 
-Mapping of 
nutritional security 
-Evaluating relief 

and emergency 
programs 
Reliable and valid WHO; Demo-

graphic and 
Health Surveys; 
Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Surveys 
Highly standardized, 
allow mapping of 
nutritional security 

at national and local 
levels. Yet, they are 
indirect measure 

of FS, generally 
expensive and time 
consuming 


noted that FCS (and per capita calorie adequacy) are not good indicators of household's vulnerability to food insecurity compared with CSI. In response, they developed the Vulnerability to Food Insecurity Index. About 40% of the retrieved publications used experience-based indicators (Household Food Insecurity Access Scale [HFIAS], Household Hunger Scale [HHS], Household Food Security Survey Module [HFSSM], Latin American and Caribbean Household Food Security Scale [ELCSA], Food Insecurity Experience Scale [FIES]) for measuring food security

## Table 5
5Indicators per food security dimension used in Proteus Composite Index[12] Dimension 
Indicators 


## Table 6
6Indicators used for constructing the vulnerability to food insecurity index[36] Livelihood activities Income from savings, rental of properties and other sources Estimated revenue from non-farm enterprises Total yield of crops harvested (kg)Household literacy Years of schooling for household heads the other hand, the stability dimension can be captured by estimating food security indicators over time or as described above in ''Quantitative characterization of food security dimensions and components'' Sect. The three composite indicators GFSI[26], Suite of Food Security IndexDimension 
Indicators 
Description of variables 

Exposure 
Health shock 
Illness of income earning member 

Unemployment shock 
Job loss 

Civil conflict shock 
Theft of crops, cash, livestock or other 
Kidnapping/Hijacking/robbery/assault 

Agro-climatic shock 
Poor rain that caused harvest failure 
Flooding that caused harvest failure 

Food price shock 
Increase in price of major food items consumed 

Sensitivity 
Malnutrition 
Length/height-for-age (stunting) 

Child mortality 
Total number of children dead in each household 

Hunger 
Number of days' households gone without eating any food 

Adaptive capacity 
Wealth Index 
Household assets used to assess information 
Mobility assets used in households 
Livelihood assets own by households 
Housing structure characteristics 

Access to infrastructure 
Household distance to nearest major road (km) 
Household distance to nearest market (km) 
Time taken to walk from home to water source (minutes) 


Detailed discussion on this issue can be found in''Which food security indicator is the best?'' Sect.
In Scopus, since the research field ' Agricultural and Biological Sciences' domain is very broad, we excluded studies in the areas of biology, chemistry, ecology, environment, forestry, aquaculture, and plant/crop sciences during the literature search (via "AND NOT").3 In line with this, our final food security measurement dataset does not contain articles from 2010 Additional file 1.
The call to the special issue can be retrieved from the journal's website: https:// www. scien cedir ect. com/ journ al/ global-food-secur ity/ speci al-issue/ 10F64 2R6J6K.
This confirms the lack of due attention given to the standardization and harmonisation of food security measurement prior to 2010, and the lack of consensus among researchers, practitioners, or governments on the indicators and methodologies that should be applied for measuring and monitoring food security.
AcknowledgementsWe are grateful to Maha AlDhaheri for the support at the initial stage of the literature searching and screening processes.assessments whereas the use of complementary indicators is required for food security monitoring over time. We conclude that the use of complementary food security indicators, instead a single indicator, better capture the different food security dimensions and components,this approach is also beneficial for analyses at different levels. The results of this study, specifically the analysis on data requirements for food security measurement, can be used by food security stakeholders such as governments, practitioners and academics for briefs, teaching, as well as policy-related interventions and evaluations.Supplementary InformationThe online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s40066-023-00415-7.Additional file 1: Data and list of articles used in the systematic literature review on food security measurement (N = 78).Table S1. Summary of the publications that applied dietary diversity score indicators.Table S2. Summary of the publications that used Food Consumption Score (FCS).Table S3. Summary of the publications that used HFIAS and HHS.Table S4. Summary of the publications that used HFSSM and ELCSA.Table S5. Summary of the publications that used FIES.Additional file 2:Competing interestsThe authors have no relevant financial or non-financial competing interests to disclose.
Food insecurity among college students in West Texas. B Abu, W Oldewage-Theron, Br Food J. 1213Abu B, Oldewage-Theron W. Food insecurity among college students in West Texas. Br Food J. 2019;121(3):738-54.

Measuring food insecurity during the COVID-19 pandemic of spring 2020. S Ahn, F B Norwood, Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 431Ahn S, Norwood FB. Measuring food insecurity during the COVID-19 pandemic of spring 2020. Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 2021;43(1):162-8.

Can internet surveys mimic food insecurity rates published by the US government?. S Ahn, T A Smith, F B Norwood, Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 422Ahn S, Smith TA, Norwood FB. Can internet surveys mimic food insecu- rity rates published by the US government? Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 2020;42(2):187-204.

Declaration of the world summit on food security. Fao, FAO (2009). Declaration of the world summit on food security. Rome. http:// www. fao. org/ filea dmin/ templ ates/ wsfs/ Summit/ Docs/ Final_ Decla ration/ WSFS09_ Decla ration. pdf Accessed 24 Feb 2021.

fores try/ 13128-0e6f3 6f27e 00910 55bec 28ebe 830f4 6b3. Fao, Food Security: FAO policy brief. FAO (2006). Food Security: FAO policy brief. http:// www. fao. org/ fores try/ 13128-0e6f3 6f27e 00910 55bec 28ebe 830f4 6b3. pdf. Accessed 25 Feb 2021.

Food security: a post-modern perspective. S Maxwell, Food Policy. 21Maxwell S. Food security: a post-modern perspective. Food Policy. 1996;21:155-70.

An assessment of the global food security index. M Izraelov, J Silber, Food Secur. 11Izraelov M, Silber J. An assessment of the global food security index. Food Secur. 2019;11:1135-52.

Validity and reliability of food security measures. C Cafiero, H R Melgar-Quiñonez, T J Ballard, A W Kepple, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1331Cafiero C, Melgar-Quiñonez HR, Ballard TJ, Kepple AW. Validity and reli- ability of food security measures. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014;1331:230-48.

Towards better measurement of household food security: harmonizing indicators and the role of household surveys. C Carletto, A Zezza, R Banerjee, Glob Food Sec. 2Carletto C, Zezza A, Banerjee R. Towards better measurement of house- hold food security: harmonizing indicators and the role of household surveys. Glob Food Sec. 2013;2:30-40.

Prevalence of food insecurity among women in northern Jordan. H A Bawadi, R F Tayyem, A N Dwairy, N Al-Akour, J Health Popul Nutr. 30149Bawadi HA, Tayyem RF, Dwairy AN, Al-Akour N. Prevalence of food insecurity among women in northern Jordan. J Health Popul Nutr. 2012;30(1):49.

Building resilience to vulnerabilities, shocks and stresses-action track 5. T W Hertel, I Elouafi, F Ewert, M Tanticharoen, Hertel, TW., Elouafi, I, Ewert, F. and Tanticharoen, M. (2021). Building resilience to vulnerabilities, shocks and stresses-action track 5. https:// www. un. org/ sites/ un2. un. org/ files/5-action_ track-5_ scien tific_ group_ draft_ paper_8-3-2021. pdf. Assessed 20 June 2021.

The Proteus composite index: towards a better metric for global food security. O M Caccavale, V Giuffrida, World Dev. 126104709Caccavale OM, Giuffrida V. The Proteus composite index: towards a bet- ter metric for global food security. World Dev. 2020;126: 104709.

Experiences and drivers of food insecurity in Guatemala's dry corridor: insights from the integration of ethnographic and household survey data. L Beveridge, S Whitfield, S Fraval, M Van Wijk, J Van Etten, L Mercado, J Hammond, Davila Cortez, L , Gabriel Suchini, J Challinor, A , Frontiers Sustain Food Syst. 365Beveridge L, Whitfield S, Fraval S, van Wijk M, van Etten J, Mercado L, Hammond J, Davila Cortez L, Gabriel Suchini J, Challinor A. Experiences and drivers of food insecurity in Guatemala's dry corridor: insights from the integration of ethnographic and household survey data. Frontiers Sustain Food Syst. 2019;3:65.

Hromi-Fiedler A. Food security measurement and governance: assessment of the usefulness of diverse food insecurity indicators for policy makers. R Pérez-Escamilla, M B Gubert, B Rogers, Glob Food Sec. 14Pérez-Escamilla R, Gubert MB, Rogers B, Hromi-Fiedler A. Food security measurement and governance: assessment of the usefulness of diverse food insecurity indicators for policy makers. Glob Food Sec. 2017;14:96-104.

Why identifying households by degree of food insecurity matters for policymaking. R Pérez-Escamilla, M Vilar-Compte, P Gaitan-Rossi, Global Food Secur. 26100459Pérez-Escamilla R, Vilar-Compte M, Gaitan-Rossi P. Why identifying households by degree of food insecurity matters for policymaking. Global Food Secur. 2020;26:100459.

The prevalence and risk of food insecurity in the Nordic Region: preliminary results. A Borch, U Kjaernes, J Consum Policy. 392Borch A, Kjaernes U. The prevalence and risk of food insecurity in the Nordic Region: preliminary results. J Consum Policy. 2016;39(2):261-74.

The 18 Household Food Security Survey items provide valid food security classifications for adults and children in the Caribbean. M C Gulliford, C Nunes, B Rocke, BMC Public Health. 61Gulliford MC, Nunes C, Rocke B. The 18 Household Food Security Survey items provide valid food security classifications for adults and children in the Caribbean. BMC Public Health 2006;6(1):1-8

Methods for estimating comparable rates of food insecurity experienced by adults throughout the world. Rome: FAO. Fao, FAO. Methods for estimating comparable rates of food insecurity expe- rienced by adults throughout the world. Rome: FAO. 2016.

A randomized controlled trial of three school meals and weekend food backpacks on food security in Virginia. M Burke, C Cabili, D Berman, S Forrestal, P Gleason, J Acad Nutr Diet. 1211Burke M, Cabili C, Berman D, Forrestal S, Gleason P. A randomized controlled trial of three school meals and weekend food backpacks on food security in Virginia. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2021;121(1):S34-45.

An adapted household food insecurity access scale is a valid tool as a proxy measure of food access for use in urban Iran. N Salarkia, M Abdollahi, M Amini, T R Neyestani, Food Security. 62Salarkia N, Abdollahi M, Amini M, Neyestani TR. An adapted household food insecurity access scale is a valid tool as a proxy measure of food access for use in urban Iran. Food Security. 2014;6(2):275-82.

ELCSA): Manual de uso y aplicaciones. FAO. Escala Latinoamericana y Caribena de Seguridad AlimentariaFAO Regional Office, Latin AmericaSantiago, ChileFAO. Escala Latinoamericana y Caribena de Seguridad Alimentaria (ELCSA): Manual de uso y aplicaciones. Santiago, Chile: FAO Regional Office, Latin America. 2012.

Introducing a simple measure of household hunger for cross-cultural use. M Deitchler, T Ballard, A Swindale, J Coates, Washington, DCTechnical Note No. 12: Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project-2Deitchler M, Ballard T, Swindale A, Coates J. Introducing a simple measure of household hunger for cross-cultural use. Technical Note No. 12. Washington, DC: Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project-2. 2011.

Self-reported food insecurity in Africa during the food price crisis. M Verpoorten, A Arora, N Stoop, J Swinnen, Food Policy. 39Verpoorten M, Arora A, Stoop N, Swinnen J. Self-reported food insecu- rity in Africa during the food price crisis. Food Policy. 2013;39:51-63.

Was the global food crisis really a crisis? Simulations versus self-reporting IFPRI discussion paper No 01087. Washington: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). D Headey, Headey D. Was the global food crisis really a crisis? Simulations versus self-reporting IFPRI discussion paper No 01087. Washington: Interna- tional Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI); 2011.

The impact of hermetic storage bag supply and training on food security in Tanzania. Food Security. M J Chegere, R Lokina, A G Mwakaje, 12Chegere MJ, Lokina R, Mwakaje AG. The impact of hermetic storage bag supply and training on food security in Tanzania. Food Security. 2020;12(6):1299-316.

Global food security index 2020: addressing structural inequalities to build strong and sustainable food systems. London: Economist Group. EIU (Economist Intelligence UnitEIU (Economist Intelligence Unit). Global food security index 2020: addressing structural inequalities to build strong and sustainable food systems. London: Economist Group; 2021.

Food and nutrition security indicators: a review. FOOD SECURE working paper 05. E H Pangaribowo, N Gerber, M Torero, Pangaribowo EH, Gerber N, Torero M. Food and nutrition security indicators: a review. FOOD SECURE working paper 05. 2013.

A Global Hunger Index: Measurement Concept, Ranking of Countries, and Trends. FCND Discussion Paper 212, IFPRI. D Wiesmann, Wiesmann D. A Global Hunger Index: Measurement Concept, Ranking of Countries, and Trends. FCND Discussion Paper 212, IFPRI. 2006.

The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2013. The multiple dimensions of food security. FAORomeFAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) (2013a). The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2013. The multiple dimensions of food security. FAO, Rome.

New approaches to the measurement of food security. Fao, AFCAS. 23FAO, 2013b. New approaches to the measurement of food security. AFCAS 23, 2013. Accessed 13 Apr 2021. http:// www. fao. org/ filea dmin/ templ ates/ ess/ docum ents/ afcas 23/ Prese ntati ons/ AFCAS_ 9d_ New_ appro aches_ to_ the_ measu rement_ of_ food_ secur ity. pdf.

Food consumption analysis: calculation and use of the food consumption score in food security analysis. Technical Guidance Sheet. WFP Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping. World Food Wfp, Program, WFP, World Food Program. Food consumption analysis: calculation and use of the food consumption score in food security analysis. Technical Guidance Sheet. WFP Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping, February 2008. 2008.

Verifying validity of the household dietary diversity score: an application of rasch modeling. W Vellema, S Desiere, D &apos;haese, M , Food Nutr Bull. 371Vellema W, Desiere S, D'Haese M. Verifying validity of the household dietary diversity score: an application of rasch modeling. Food Nutr Bull. 2016;37(1):27-41.

Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) for measurement of household food access: Indicator Guide (v.2). Washington, DC: FHI 360/Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project. A Swindale, P Bilinsky, Swindale A, Bilinsky P. Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) for measurement of household food access: Indicator Guide (v.2). Washing- ton, DC: FHI 360/Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project. 2006.

Guidelines for measuring household and individual dietary diversity. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization. Fao, FAO. Guidelines for measuring household and individual dietary diver- sity. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization; 2011.

Vulnerability of smallholder rural households to food insecurity in Eastern Ethiopia. A Bogale, Food Secur. 44Bogale A. Vulnerability of smallholder rural households to food insecu- rity in Eastern Ethiopia. Food Secur. 2012;4(4):581-91.

Advancing a new index for measuring household vulnerability to food insecurity. O W Ibok, H Osbahr, C Srinivasan, Food Policy. 84Ibok OW, Osbahr H, Srinivasan C. Advancing a new index for measuring household vulnerability to food insecurity. Food Policy. 2019;84:10-20.

D Maxwell, R Caldwell, The Coping Strategies Index: Field Methods Manual. Atlanta, GAsecond ed. CAREMaxwell D, Caldwell R. The Coping Strategies Index: Field Methods Manual, second ed. CARE, Atlanta, GA. 2008. https:// docum ents. wfp. org/ stell ent/ groups/ public/ docum ents/ manual_ guide_ proced/ wfp21 1058. pdf. Accessed 29 May 2021.

Measurement drives diagnosis and response": gaps in transferring food security assessment to the urban scale. G Haysom, G Tawodzera, Food Policy. 74Haysom G, Tawodzera G. "Measurement drives diagnosis and response": gaps in transferring food security assessment to the urban scale. Food Policy. 2018;74:117-25.

Systematic literature reviews in software engineering-a systematic literature review. B Kitchenham, O P Brereton, D Budgen, M Turner, J Bailey, S Linkman, Inf Softw Technol. 517Kitchenham B, Brereton OP, Budgen D, Turner M, Bailey J, Linkman S. Systematic literature reviews in software engineering-a systematic literature review. Inf Softw Technol. 2009;51:7.

What is the future of abandoned agricultural lands? A systematic review of alternative trajectories in Europe. C M Fayet, K H Reilly, Van Ham, C Verburg, P H , Land Use Policy. 112105833Fayet CM, Reilly KH, Van Ham C, Verburg PH. What is the future of aban- doned agricultural lands? A systematic review of alternative trajectories in Europe. Land Use Policy. 2022;112: 105833.

Measuring farmer risk preferences in Europe: a systematic review. P Iyer, M Bozzola, S Hirsch, M Meraner, R Finger, J Agric Econ. 711Iyer P, Bozzola M, Hirsch S, Meraner M, Finger R. Measuring farmer risk preferences in Europe: a systematic review. J Agric Econ. 2020;71(1):3-26.

The effects of non-tariff measures on agrifood trade: a review and meta-analysis of empirical evidence. F G Santeramo, E Lamonaca, J Agric Econ. 703Santeramo FG, Lamonaca E. The effects of non-tariff measures on agri- food trade: a review and meta-analysis of empirical evidence. J Agric Econ. 2019;70(3):595-617.

Evaluation of geographical label in consumers' decision-making process: a systematic review and metaanalysis. F G Santeramo, E Lamonaca, Food Res Int. 131108995Santeramo FG, Lamonaca E. Evaluation of geographical label in consumers' decision-making process: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Food Res Int. 2020;131: 108995.

The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. M J Page, J E Mckenzie, P M Bossuyt, I Boutron, T C Hoffmann, C D Mulrow, D Moher, Syst Rev. 101Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, Moher D. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for report- ing systematic reviews. Syst Rev. 2021;10(1):1-11.

Food security and poverty in Mexico: the impact of higher global food prices. O G Dávila, Food Secur. 24Dávila OG. Food security and poverty in Mexico: the impact of higher global food prices. Food Secur. 2010;2(4):383-93.

Global food security and food riots-an agent-based modelling approach. D Natalini, G Bravo, A W Jones, Food Security. 115Natalini D, Bravo G, Jones AW. Global food security and food riots-an agent-based modelling approach. Food Security. 2019;11(5):1153-73.

Do high food prices increase food insecurity in the United States?. C A Gregory, A Coleman-Jensen, Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 354Gregory CA, Coleman-Jensen A. Do high food prices increase food insecurity in the United States? Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 2013;35(4):679-707.

From global to local, food insecurity is associated with contemporary armed conflicts. O Koren, B E Bagozzi, Food Secur. 85Koren O, Bagozzi BE. From global to local, food insecurity is associated with contemporary armed conflicts. Food Secur. 2016;8(5):999-1010.

From food availability to nutritional capabilities: advancing food security analysis. F Burchi, De Muro, P , Food Policy. 60Burchi F, De Muro P. From food availability to nutritional capabilities: advancing food security analysis. Food Policy. 2016;60:10-9.

Household assets and food security: evidence from the survey of program dynamics. B Guo, J Fam Econ Issues. 321Guo B. Household assets and food security: evidence from the survey of program dynamics. J Fam Econ Issues. 2011;32(1):98-110.

On developing a scale to measure chronic household seed insecurity in semi-arid Kenya and the implications for food security policy. M Mucioki, B Pelletier, T Johns, L W Muhammad, G M Hickey, Food Security. 103Mucioki M, Pelletier B, Johns T, Muhammad LW, Hickey GM. On developing a scale to measure chronic household seed insecurity in semi-arid Kenya and the implications for food security policy. Food Security. 2018;10(3):571-87.

Measurement and implications of marine food security in the Western Indian Ocean: an impending crisis? Food Secur. S F Taylor, M J Roberts, B Milligan, R Ncwadi, 11Taylor SF, Roberts MJ, Milligan B, Ncwadi R. Measurement and implications of marine food security in the Western Indian Ocean: an impending crisis? Food Secur. 2019;11(6):1395-415.

Food security in Iraq: results from quantitative and qualitative surveys. E Woertz, Food Secur. 93Woertz E. Food security in Iraq: results from quantitative and qualita- tive surveys. Food Secur. 2017;9(3):511-22.

Spatiotemporal trends in adequacy of dietary nutrient production and food sources. O Geyik, M Hadjikakou, B A Bryan, Glob Food Sec. 24100355Geyik O, Hadjikakou M, Bryan BA. Spatiotemporal trends in adequacy of dietary nutrient production and food sources. Glob Food Sec. 2020;24: 100355.

Who are the world's food insecure? New evidence from the food and Agriculture Organization's food insecurity experience scale. M D Smith, M P Rabbitt, A Coleman-Jensen, World Dev. 93Smith MD, Rabbitt MP, Coleman-Jensen A. Who are the world's food insecure? New evidence from the food and Agriculture Organiza- tion's food insecurity experience scale. World Dev. 2017;93:402-12.

The role of sectoral FDI in promoting agricultural production and improving food security. M B Slimane, M Huchet-Bourdon, H Zitouna, Int Econ. 145Slimane MB, Huchet-Bourdon M, Zitouna H. The role of sectoral FDI in promoting agricultural production and improving food security. Int Econ. 2016;145:50-65.

Food security in selected Middle East and North Africa (MENA) countries: an intercountry comparison. N Omidvar, D Ahmadi, K Sinclair, H Melgar-Quiñonez, Food Secur. 113Omidvar N, Ahmadi D, Sinclair K, Melgar-Quiñonez H. Food security in selected Middle East and North Africa (MENA) countries: an inter- country comparison. Food Secur. 2019;11(3):531-40.

Assessing food insecurity in Latin America and the Caribbean using FAO's food insecurity experience scale. M D Smith, W Kassa, P Winters, Food Policy. 71Smith MD, Kassa W, Winters P. Assessing food insecurity in Latin America and the Caribbean using FAO's food insecurity experience scale. Food Policy. 2017;71:48-61.

Food security measures in Sub-Saharan Africa A validation of the LSMS-ISA scale. O Bertelli, J Afr Econom. 291Bertelli O. Food security measures in Sub-Saharan Africa A validation of the LSMS-ISA scale. J Afr Econom. 2020;29(1):90-120.

How disaggregated should information be for a sound food security policy? Food Secur. M K Bashir, S Schilizzi, 5Bashir MK, Schilizzi S. How disaggregated should information be for a sound food security policy? Food Secur. 2013;5(4):551-63.

Vulnerability to food insecurity in rural Punjab Pakistan. M K Bashir, S Schilizzi, R Sadler, G Ali, Emerald Publishing LimitedBingleyBashir MK, Schilizzi S, Sadler R, Ali G. Vulnerability to food insecurity in rural Punjab Pakistan. Bingley: Emerald Publishing Limited; 2018.

Measuring food security status among households in Osun State Nigeria. W O Fawole, B Ozkan, F A Ayanrinde, British Food Journal. Bingley. Emerald Group Publishing LimitedFawole WO, Ozkan B, Ayanrinde FA. Measuring food security status among households in Osun State Nigeria. British Food Journal. Bing- ley: Emerald Group Publishing Limited; 2016.

Measuring disaggregate level food insecurity via multivariate small area modelling: evidence from rural districts of Uttar Pradesh. S Guha, H Chandra, India. Food Secur. 13Guha S, Chandra H. Measuring disaggregate level food insecurity via multivariate small area modelling: evidence from rural districts of Uttar Pradesh, India. Food Secur. 2021;13:1-19.

Are the World Food Programme's food consumption groups a good proxy for energy deficiency? Food Security. M Lovon, A Mathiassen, 6Lovon M, Mathiassen A. Are the World Food Programme's food con- sumption groups a good proxy for energy deficiency? Food Security. 2014;6(4):461-70.

How well does the food consumption score capture diet quantity, quality and adequacy across regions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)? Food Security. W Marivoet, E Becquey, B Van Campenhout, 11Marivoet W, Becquey E, Van Campenhout B. How well does the food consumption score capture diet quantity, quality and adequacy across regions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)? Food Security. 2019;11(5):1029-49.

Comparison between experiencebased and household-undernourishment food security indicators: a cautionary tale. L A Sandoval, C E Carpio, M Garcia, Nutrients. 12113307Sandoval LA, Carpio CE, Garcia M. Comparison between experience- based and household-undernourishment food security indicators: a cautionary tale. Nutrients. 2020;12(11):3307.

Food availability and livelihood strategies among rural households across Uganda. J Wichern, M T Van Wijk, K Descheemaeker, R Frelat, P J Van Asten, K E Giller, Food Secur. 96Wichern J, van Wijk MT, Descheemaeker K, Frelat R, van Asten PJ, Giller KE. Food availability and livelihood strategies among rural households across Uganda. Food Secur. 2017;9(6):1385-403.

Microcredit programme participation and household food security in rural Bangladesh. A Islam, C Maitra, D Pakrashi, R Smyth, J Agric Econ. 672Islam A, Maitra C, Pakrashi D, Smyth R. Microcredit programme partici- pation and household food security in rural Bangladesh. J Agric Econ. 2016;67(2):448-70.

Analysis of households' vulnerability to food insecurity and its influencing factors in east Hararghe Ethiopia. M Sileshi, R Kadigi, K Mutabazi, S Sieber, J Econom Struct. 81Sileshi M, Kadigi R, Mutabazi K, Sieber S. Analysis of households' vulner- ability to food insecurity and its influencing factors in east Hararghe Ethiopia. J Econom Struct. 2019;8(1):1-17.

Agricultural commercialisation and nutrition in smallholder farm households. S O Ogutu, T Gödecke, M Qaim, J Agric Econ. 712Ogutu SO, Gödecke T, Qaim M. Agricultural commercialisa- tion and nutrition in smallholder farm households. J Agric Econ. 2020;71(2):534-55.

Water security and rural household food security: empirical evidence from the Mzinyathi district in South Africa. S Sinyolo, M Mudhara, E Wale, Food Security. 64Sinyolo S, Mudhara M, Wale E. Water security and rural household food security: empirical evidence from the Mzinyathi district in South Africa. Food Security. 2014;6(4):483-99.

Improving nutrition security through agriculture: an analytical framework based on national food balance sheets to estimate nutritional adequacy of food supplies. J E Arsenault, R J Hijmans, K H Brown, Food Secur. 73Arsenault JE, Hijmans RJ, Brown KH. Improving nutrition security through agriculture: an analytical framework based on national food balance sheets to estimate nutritional adequacy of food supplies. Food Secur. 2015;7(3):693-707.

Do plant clinics improve household food security? Evidence from Rwanda. J A Tambo, B Uzayisenga, I Mugambi, M Bundi, J Agric Econ. 721Tambo JA, Uzayisenga B, Mugambi I, Bundi M. Do plant clinics improve household food security? Evidence from Rwanda. J Agric Econ. 2021;72(1):97-116.

Does resilience capacity reduce the negative impact of shocks on household food security? Evidence from the 2014 floods in Northern Bangladesh. L C Smith, T R Frankenberger, World Dev. 102Smith LC, Frankenberger TR. Does resilience capacity reduce the nega- tive impact of shocks on household food security? Evidence from the 2014 floods in Northern Bangladesh. World Dev. 2018;102:358-76.

A nonparametric analysis of household-level food insecurity and its determinant factors: exploratory study in Ethiopia and Nigeria. M Bakhtsiyarava, T G Williams, A Verdin, S D Guikema, Food Security. 131Bakhtsiyarava M, Williams TG, Verdin A, Guikema SD. A nonparamet- ric analysis of household-level food insecurity and its determinant factors: exploratory study in Ethiopia and Nigeria. Food Security. 2021;13(1):55-70.

Intertemporal evaluation of household food security and its determinants: evidence from Rwanda. Food Security. O D Bolarinwa, K Ogundari, A B Aromolaran, 12Bolarinwa OD, Ogundari K, Aromolaran AB. Intertemporal evaluation of household food security and its determinants: evidence from Rwanda. Food Security. 2020;12(1):179-89.

Farm diversification and food and nutrition security in Bangladesh: empirical evidence from nationally representative household panel data. Ahms Islam, J Von Braun, A L Thorne-Lyman, Ahmed Au, Food Secur. 103Islam AHMS, von Braun J, Thorne-Lyman AL, Ahmed AU. Farm diver- sification and food and nutrition security in Bangladesh: empirical evidence from nationally representative household panel data. Food Secur. 2018;10(3):701-20.

Assessing household food insecurity experience in the context of deforestation in Cameroon. Pit Ngome, C Shackleton, A Degrande, E J Nossi, F Ngome, Food Policy. 84Ngome PIT, Shackleton C, Degrande A, Nossi EJ, Ngome F. Assessing household food insecurity experience in the context of deforestation in Cameroon. Food Policy. 2019;84:57-65.

Matching food security and malnutrition indicators: evidence from Southeast Asia. D Bühler, R Hartje, U Grote, Agric Econ. 494Bühler D, Hartje R, Grote U. Matching food security and mal- nutrition indicators: evidence from Southeast Asia. Agric Econ. 2018;49(4):481-95.

Measuring poverty for food security analysis: consumption-versus asset-based approaches. L Hjelm, A Mathiassen, A Wadhwa, Food Nutr Bull. 373Hjelm L, Mathiassen A, Wadhwa A. Measuring poverty for food security analysis: consumption-versus asset-based approaches. Food Nutr Bull. 2016;37(3):275-89.

Alternatives to calorie-based indicators of food security: an application of machine learning methods. M Hossain, C Mullally, M N Asadullah, Food Policy. 84Hossain M, Mullally C, Asadullah MN. Alternatives to calorie-based indi- cators of food security: an application of machine learning methods. Food Policy. 2019;84:77-91.

How do indicators of household food insecurity measure up? An empirical comparison from Ethiopia. D Maxwell, B Vaitla, J Coates, Food Policy. 47Maxwell D, Vaitla B, Coates J. How do indicators of household food insecurity measure up? An empirical comparison from Ethiopia. Food Policy. 2014;47:107-16.

Comparing measures of urban food security in Accra. C Tuholske, K Andam, J Blekking, T Evans, K Caylor, Ghana. Food Secur. 12Tuholske C, Andam K, Blekking J, Evans T, Caylor K. Comparing meas- ures of urban food security in Accra, Ghana. Food Secur. 2020;12:1-15.

Food insecurity in vulnerable populations: coping with food price shocks in Afghanistan. A D&apos;souza, D Jolliffe, Am J Agr Econ. 963D'Souza A, Jolliffe D. Food insecurity in vulnerable populations: coping with food price shocks in Afghanistan. Am J Agr Econ. 2014;96(3):790-812.

Beyond the risks to food availability-linking climatic hazard vulnerability with the food access of delta-dwelling households. Food Secur. M M Islam, Al Mamun, M A , 12Islam MM, Al Mamun MA. Beyond the risks to food availability-linking climatic hazard vulnerability with the food access of delta-dwelling households. Food Secur. 2020;12(1):37-58.

Establishing a robust technique for monitoring and early warning of food insecurity in post-conflict South Sudan using ordinal logistic regression. L B Lokosang, S Ramroop, S L Hendriks, Agrekon. 504Lokosang LB, Ramroop S, Hendriks SL. Establishing a robust tech- nique for monitoring and early warning of food insecurity in post-conflict South Sudan using ordinal logistic regression. Agrekon. 2011;50(4):101-30.

How the choice of food security indicators affects the assessment of resilience-an example from northern Ethiopia. Food Secur. B Vaitla, J D Cissé, J Upton, G Tesfay, N Abadi, D Maxwell, 12Vaitla B, Cissé JD, Upton J, Tesfay G, Abadi N, Maxwell D. How the choice of food security indicators affects the assessment of resilience-an example from northern Ethiopia. Food Secur. 2020;12(1):137-50.

The impact of new Rice for Africa (NERICA) adoption on household food security and health in the Gambia. L Dibba, M Zeller, A Diagne, Food Secur. 95Dibba L, Zeller M, Diagne A. The impact of new Rice for Africa (NERICA) adoption on household food security and health in the Gambia. Food Secur. 2017;9(5):929-44.

Resilience to food insecurity: Theory and empirical evidence from international food assistance in Malawi. Lascano Galarza, M X , J Agric Econ. 713Lascano Galarza MX. Resilience to food insecurity: Theory and empirical evidence from international food assistance in Malawi. J Agric Econ. 2020;71(3):936-61.

Do Walmart supercenters improve food security?. C Courtemanche, A Carden, X Zhou, M Ndirangu, Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 412Courtemanche C, Carden A, Zhou X, Ndirangu M. Do Walmart supercenters improve food security? Appl Econ Perspect Policy. 2019;41(2):177-98.

Energy and nutrient supply according to food insecurity severity among Mexican households. M Romo-Aviles, L Ortiz-Hernández, Food Security. 105Romo-Aviles M, Ortiz-Hernández L. Energy and nutrient supply accord- ing to food insecurity severity among Mexican households. Food Security. 2018;10(5):1163-72.

Food security and nutritional status of children under-five in households affected by HIV and AIDS in Kiandutu informal settlement. P M Chege, Z W Ndungu, B M Gitonga, J Health Popul Nutr. 351Chege PM, Ndungu ZW, Gitonga BM. Food security and nutritional status of children under-five in households affected by HIV and AIDS in Kiandutu informal settlement, Kiambu County, Kenya. J Health Popul Nutr. 2016;35(1):1-8.

Household food insecurity access scale and dietary diversity score as a proxy indicator of nutritional status among people living with HIV/AIDS. F M Hussein, A Y Ahmed, O S Muhammed, PLoS ONE. 136199511Hussein FM, Ahmed AY, Muhammed OS. Household food insecurity access scale and dietary diversity score as a proxy indicator of nutri- tional status among people living with HIV/AIDS, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia, 2017. PLoS ONE. 2018;13(6): e0199511.

Association between household food insecurity and nutritional outcomes among children in Northeastern of Peninsular Malaysia. I A Naser, R Jalil, Wmw Muda, Wsw Nik, Z M Shariff, M R Abdullah, Nurs Res Pract. 83304Naser IA, Jalil R, Muda WMW, Nik WSW, Shariff ZM, Abdullah MR. Asso- ciation between household food insecurity and nutritional outcomes among children in Northeastern of Peninsular Malaysia. Nurs Res Pract. 2014;8(3):304.

Food security as resilience: reconciling definition and measurement. J B Upton, J D Cissé, C B Barrett, Agric Econ. 47S1Upton JB, Cissé JD, Barrett CB. Food security as resilience: reconciling definition and measurement. Agric Econ. 2016;47(S1):135-47.

Food security outcomes in agricultural systems models: case examples and priority information needs. C F Nicholson, E C Stephens, B Kopainsky, P K Thornton, A D Jones, D Parsons, J Garrett, Agric Syst. 188103030Nicholson CF, Stephens EC, Kopainsky B, Thornton PK, Jones AD, Parsons D, Garrett J. Food security outcomes in agricultural systems models: case examples and priority information needs. Agric Syst. 2021;188: 103030.

Food purchase patterns indicative of household food access insecurity, children's dietary diversity and intake, and nutritional status using a newly developed and validated tool in the Peruvian Amazon. R Ambikapathi, J D Rothstein, P P Yori, M P Olortegui, G Lee, M N Kosek, L E Caulfield, Food Secur. 104Ambikapathi R, Rothstein JD, Yori PP, Olortegui MP, Lee G, Kosek MN, Caulfield LE. Food purchase patterns indicative of household food access insecurity, children's dietary diversity and intake, and nutritional status using a newly developed and validated tool in the Peruvian Amazon. Food Secur. 2018;10(4):999-1011.

Toward a theory of resilience for international development applications. C B Barrett, M A Constas, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 11140Barrett CB, Constas MA. Toward a theory of resilience for international development applications. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2014;111(40):14625-30.

Estimating development resilience a conditional moments based approach Working Paper. J D Cissé, C B Barrett, Cornell University. IthacaCissé, J.D. and Barrett, C.B. (2015). Estimating development resilience a conditional moments based approach Working Paper. Cornell Univer- sity. Ithaca

Estimating development resilience: a conditional moments-based approach. J D Cissé, C B Barrett, J Dev Econ. 135Cissé JD, Barrett CB. Estimating development resilience: a conditional moments-based approach. J Dev Econ. 2018;135:272-84.

Food security and sustainability: can one exist without the other? Public Health Nutr. E M Berry, S Dernini, B Burlingame, A Meybeck, P Conforti, 18Berry EM, Dernini S, Burlingame B, Meybeck A, Conforti P. Food security and sustainability: can one exist without the other? Public Health Nutr. 2015;18(13):2293-302.

The case for a sixdimensional food security framework. J Clapp, W G Moseley, B Burlingame, P Termine, Food Policy. 106102164Clapp J, Moseley WG, Burlingame B, Termine P. The case for a six- dimensional food security framework. Food Policy. 2021;106:102164.

Martinho VJPD. Food security and sustainability: discussing the four pillars to encompass other dimensions. Rdpf Guiné, Mldj Pato, Cad Costa, Ddvtad Costa, Pbcd Silva, Foods. 10112732Guiné RDPF, Pato MLDJ, Costa CAD, Costa DDVTAD, Silva PBCD, Mar- tinho VJPD. Food security and sustainability: discussing the four pillars to encompass other dimensions. Foods. 2021;10(11):2732.

Conceptualizing food systems for global environmental change research. P J Ericksen, Glob Environ Chang. 181Ericksen PJ. Conceptualizing food systems for global environmental change research. Glob Environ Chang. 2008;18(1):234-45.

Sustainable food systems concept and framework. Fao, 10FAO. Sustainable food systems concept and framework. 2021. Accessed 10 Nov 2021. http:// www. fao. org/ about/ what-we-do/ so4.

A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global environmental change. Food security. J Ingram, 3Ingram J. A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global environmental change. Food security. 2011;3(4):417-31.

The food systems approach: sustainable solutions for a sufficient supply of healthy food. S Van Berkum, J Dengerink, R Ruben, Wageningen: Wageningen Economic Research. Van Berkum S, Dengerink J, Ruben R. The food systems approach: sus- tainable solutions for a sufficient supply of healthy food. Wageningen: Wageningen Economic Research; 2018.

Dietary quality and usual intake of underconsumed nutrients and related food groups differ by food security status for rural, midwestern food pantry clients. B N Wright, J A Tooze, R L Bailey, Y Liu, R L Rivera, L Mccormack, S Stluka, L Franzen-Castle, B Henne, D Mehrle, D Remley, J Acad Nutr Diet. 1209Wright BN, Tooze JA, Bailey RL, Liu Y, Rivera RL, McCormack L, Stluka S, Franzen-Castle L, Henne B, Mehrle D, Remley D. Dietary quality and usual intake of underconsumed nutrients and related food groups differ by food security status for rural, midwestern food pantry clients. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2020;120(9):1457-68.

Guide to measuring household food security, revised. G Bickel, M Nord, C Price, W Hamilton, J Cook, Food and Nutrition Service. 31US Department of AgricultureBickel G, Nord M, Price C, Hamilton W, Cook J. Guide to measuring household food security, revised 2000 [Online]. US Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. 2000. Available: https:// fnspr od. azure edge. net/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ FSGui de. pdf. Accessed 31 Mar 2021.

Household Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS) for Measurement of Household Food Access: Indicator Guide (v. 3). Jennifer Coates, Anne Swindale, Paula Bilinsky, FHI 360/FANTA. 2007Washington, D.CCoates, Jennifer, Anne Swindale, Paula Bilinsky. Household Food Insecu- rity Access Scale (HFIAS) for Measurement of Household Food Access: Indicator Guide (v. 3). Washington, D.C.: FHI 360/FANTA. 2007.

Measurement and Assessment of Food Deprivation and Undernutrition. Fao, Proceedings of anInternational Symposium, FAO, Rome. 2003. Publisher's Note. anInternational Symposium, FAO, Rome. 2003. Publisher's NoteFAO. Measurement and Assessment of Food Deprivation and Undernu- trition. In: Proceedings of anInternational Symposium, FAO, Rome. 2003. Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub- lished maps and institutional affiliations.