# Roman CCS White Paper Gravitational Wave Detection with Relative Astrometry using Roman's Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey Roman Core Community Survey: Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey

CorpusID: 259262307
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42f19caf909e6ea129c48f8978353650271be373](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42f19caf909e6ea129c48f8978353650271be373)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Roman CCS White Paper Gravitational Wave Detection with Relative Astrometry using Roman's Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey Roman Core Community Survey: Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey
26 Jun 2023

Olivier Doré olivier.p.dore@jpl.nasa.gov 
Yijun yijunw@caltech.edu 
Ali Wang 
Roman CCS White Paper Gravitational Wave Detection with Relative Astrometry using Roman's Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey Roman Core Community Survey: Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey
26 Jun 2023List of contributing authors (including affiliation and email):Scientific Categories: supermassive black holes and active galaxies Additional scientific keywords: gravitational wavessupermassive black holesquasars Submitting Author Name: Kris Pardo Affiliation: University of Southern California
Gravitational waves (GWs) are a new avenue of observing our Universe. So far, we have seen them in the 10-100 Hz range, and there are hints that we might soon detect them in the nanohertz regime. Multiple efforts are underway to access GWs across the frequency spectrum; however, parts of the frequency space are currently not covered by any planned or future observatories. Photometric surveys can bridge the microhertz gap in the spectrum between LISA and Pulsar Timing Arrays (PTAs) through relative astrometric measurements. Similar to PTA measurements, these astrometric measurements rely on the correlated spacetime distortions produced by gravitational waves at Earth, which induce coherent, apparent stellar position changes on the sky. To detect the microhertz GWs with an imaging survey, a combination of high relative astrometric precision, a large number of observed stars, and a high cadence of exposures are needed. Roman's proposed core community survey, the Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (RGBTDS), would have all of these components. RGBTDS would be sensitive to GWs with frequencies ranging from 7.7 × 10 −8 Hz to 5.6 × 10 −4 Hz, which opens up a unique GW observing window for supermassive black hole binaries and their waveform evolution. We note that small changes to the survey could enhance Roman's sensitivity to GWs, making it possible to observe the GW background signal that PTAs have recently hinted at with an SNR ∼ 70.1

## Introduction Detecting Gravitational Waves with Photometric Surveys

Astrometry is one possible way to observe GWs and fill the gaps in the spectrum [22,23,24]. Similar to PTAs, this method works by looking for correlated distortions produced by a GW passing through the Earth and distorting the spacetime at Earth. PTAs look for the time delay or early arrival of radio signals, which occur when GWs distort distances along the line of sight to pulsars. The astrometric measurements rely on the correlated spacetime distortions produced by gravitational waves at Earth, which induce coherent, apparent stellar position changes on the sky (Figure 1). Many papers have considered looking for astrometric GWs with Gaia [23,24]; however, Gaia does not have the frequency resolution (i.e., observing cadence) to cover the microhertz band. In addition, Gaia's data processing, which subtracts out large-scale correlated motions on the sky, would make searching for GWs particularly challenging. However, recent work [25,26] has proposed instead using relative astrometry to search for GWs -this allows any photometric survey to be used as a GW probe, provided it has sufficient relative astrometric resolution, a large number of surveyed stars, and frequent exposures of the same region of the sky. The Roman Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (RGBTDS) [27] would have all of the components necessary to make Roman a GW probe. In the following, we briefly explore the survey parameters that would enable this science.


## Survey Design Considerations

The amplitude of a GW, typically called the "strain", h, is a measure of the fractional change in length caused by a GW. However, for typical sources (e.g., the stochastic GWB), the relevant strain for estimating the sensitivity is typically the characteristic strain, h c , which can be related to the power spectrum of a given h(t) signal. For an astrometric survey, we can approximate the characteristic strain sensitivity as [26]:
h c ∼ σ θ 2f T cad N s N exp ,(1)
where σ θ is the dimensionless relative astrometric precision, N s is the number of stars observed, N exp is the number of exposures, f is the frequency, and T cad is the time between exposures. Note that the sensitivity relies heavily on the number of stars and the number of exposures. Because photometric surveys often have flexible pointing directions and exposure times, this makes them easily able to increase their GW sensitivity. In addition, searches for transiting exoplanets often try to maximize these two survey characteristics. To target certain regions in frequency space in the GW spectrum, a survey needs to have an appropriate exposure frequency. For a survey with a cadence of T cad and total survey duration T survey , the corresponding GW frequencies are:
1 T survey f 1 2T cad .(2)
Because the frequency is set by the relatively flexible cadence and survey times, this makes Roman a versatile probe of GWs. For generic surveys with T cad ∼ 10 min − 1 hour and several year baselines, this provides sensitivity to the GW spectrum between LISA and PTA, which is currently inaccessible through any direct GW experiments (see Figure 2).


## The "mean" deflection signal

We note that Roman, like most telescopes, takes relative astrometric measurements, recording only the relative positions of objects with each other and across the exposures with its nominal astrometric resolution. The absolute positions will be determined by referencing guide stars, and by the telescope pointing with larger uncertainty. Consequently, the pointing reconstruction strategy of Roman will likely absorb deflections uniform across the field of view (FoV). We refer to this almost uniform deflection as the FoV mean signal, which is by unobservable for FoV smaller than the correlation length of the on-sky GW signal.

The right panels of Figure 1 show the astrometric deflection in an approximate Roman FoV, assuming the telescope is in the Galactic plane and points directly to the Galactic center. This FoV model has roughly the same area as the true FoV of Roman, but differs in shape. We adopt it here for simplicity, and note that it does not significantly change our results here. The bottom panel shows the total deflection pattern while the upper panel shows the deflection pattern after subtracting the mean deflection. If there are no changes to the RGBTDS, this is expected to be the actual observed signal, which is about 100 times smaller in strain amplitude compared to the mean signal [25].

There are a few mitigation strategies that could be employed here. The first would be to try to subtract the mean signal using onboard instrument readings. This is worth considering closely. Another strategy would involve slightly modifying the RGBTDS. Currently, the RGBTDS involves monitoring 7 fields, with exposures of each field interleaved. This means that every single exposure would be subject to the mean subtraction issue we mention here. If instead, only one field is used and Roman stared at the one field contiguously over each 72 day period, this would cut down on the mean subtraction issue considerably. There would still be some mean subtraction, since Roman would likely need to stabilize its pointing after drifting for some amount of time. However, this would enable full sensitivity to GW signals at frequencies higher than this stabilization frequency. Ignoring any new stars that could be observed by going deeper in this one field, there would be some trade-off given that fewer stars would be observed. However this is an O(1) change in sensitivity compared to the O(100) increase in sensitivity from keeping the mean signal.


## Prospects for detecting GWs with Roman

The currently planned RGBTDS remarkably has each of the three key components needed for a successful astrometric detection of GWs:

• Large Number of Stars Surveyed: a total of N s ∼ 10 8 stars with W145 AB < 23 [27].

• Frequent and Numerous Exposures of the Same Region: a 15-minute observing cadence with six 72-day observational seasons spread out over the nominal 5-year mission time is expected. These constraints then give a conservative frequency range as: 7.7 × 10 −8 Hz < Ω < 5.6 × 10 −4 Hz, a unique window in the GW spectrum. Additionally, each of these ∼ 10 8 stars would be imaged ∼ 41, 000 times, yielding high sensitivity to GWs.

• High Relative Astrometric Precision: Roman's relative astrometry has a precision of 1.1 mas for a single exposure, estimated for H AB = 21.6 stars [28].

These features give Roman a frequency sensitivity perfectly between LISA and PTA, and a high sensitivity to GW strain (see Fig. 2). However, previous analytic estimates [25,26] suggest that the GW strain amplitudes would be considerably curbed if the mean signal could not be recovered, as discussed above. If the optimal survey discussed above occurs, which could recover the mean signal, then Roman would be capable of observing single supermassive black hole binaries with mass M c ∼ 10 9 M at signal-to-noise ratio SNR≥ 3 out to a luminosity distance d L ∼ 1 Gpc. In addition, Roman would be able to detect the stochastic GWB with an estimated SNR ∼ 70, if the expected signal is at the level currently hinted at by various PTA collaborations, h c (f ) = 2.8 × 10 −15 (f /1 yr) −2/3 [13,14,15,16]. If we cannot recover the mean, Roman would still be sensitive to M c ∼ 10 9 M at signal-to-noise ratio SNR≥ 3 out to a luminosity distance d L ∼ 10 Mpc, which is not a large enough volume to expect sources this massive. However, Roman would still be sensitive to the stochastic GWB with an estimated SNR ∼ 1 and set interesting and unique limits on SMBH populations and evolution. a face-on GW source at zenith. It is clear that the deflection magnitude is largest on the Galactic plane. Deflections induced by the plus and cross polarizations are orthogonal, and the quadrupolar pattern is clear. The right panels show the astrometric deflection in a square Field of View (FoV), assuming the telescope is in the Galactic plane and points directly to the Galactic center. This FoV model has roughly the same area as the true FoV of the Roman Space Telescope but differs in shape. We adopt it nonetheless in our analysis for simplicity.

The bottom panel shows the total deflection pattern while the upper panel shows the deflection pattern after subtracting the mean deflection. This is expected to be the actual observed signal, as the pointing reconstruction strategy of the Roman Space Telescope will likely absorb deflections uniform across the FoV. A measure of the magnitude of the mean-subtracted deflections is the divergence of dn integrated across the FoV, since the mean deflection field has zero divergence. For the particular GW source position and telescope pointing in Figure 1, we compute the integrated divergence of the astrometric deflection in Equation 5 to be Al 2 FoV assuming small FoV side length l FoV , where A is the GW amplitude. From the top right panel in Figure 1 and the divergence theorem, the integrated divergence is proportional to l FoV h|dn ms |i, where h|dn ms |i is the average magnitude of the mean-subtracted deflections. This scaling relation is confirmed numerically using various l FoV . For any small-FoV, relative-astrometry telescope, we may estimate the observable deflection signal by h|dn ms |i ⇡ l FoV l FoV,RST h|dn ms,RST |i ,  The arrows denote the maximal change in apparent position produced by a GW with frequency ∼10 −6 Hz. Black arrows correspond to the real part of the waveform at GW phase φ = 0 (plus polarization), and the red arrows correspond to that at φ = π/4 (cross polarization). Right: Simulated deflections within Roman's FOV between two expsorues of the RGBTDS. The lower panel shows the total deflection, and the upper panel shows the deflection after subtracting the mean, since the mean is expected to be absorbed in the pointing reconstruction. Reproduced from Ref. [25].  

## 4 FIG. 1 .
41Illustration of the expected stellar astrometric deflections. Left: Orthographically projected dn for a subset of stars observed by Gaia in the northern hemisphere onto the galactic plane [inspired by a very similar plot in 24]. The North Galactic pole is at the center which is also the position of the GW source. Black arrows correspond to the real part of the waveform at GW phase = 0 (plus polarization), and the red arrows correspond to that at = ⇡/4 (cross polarization). The source is a 10 9 M equal-mass binary black hole at 1 Mpc at (l = 90 deg, b = 90 deg) in galactic coordinates, emitting GWs at 10 6 Hz. This inclination angle is set to i = 0 (i.e. face-on) and the polarization angle is = 0. Right: Deflections within the Roman Space Telescope's FOV during the EML survey. The lower panel shows the total deflection, and the upper panel shows the deflection after subtracting the mean, since the mean is expected to be absorbed in the pointing reconstruction; for further discussion see Section IV. Star coordinates are selected from the Gaia Data Release 2 catalog, with brightness 0 < G < 9 [31, 32]. Density of stars reflects only a subset of the true stellar density in the catalog.

## Figure 1 :
1Illustration of the expected stellar astrometric deflections. Left: Orthographically projected GW deflections from a 10 9 M equal-mass SMBH binary at 1 Mpc at the center.

## Figure 2 :
2Projected characteristic strain, h c , sensitivity for Roman RGBTDS, the GW optimized survey we describe here, and other experiments and signals.[4] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, and et al. Tests of General Relativity with GW170817. Phys. Rev. Lett., 123(1):011102, July 2019. [5] T. Baker, E. Bellini, P. G. Ferreira, M. Lagos, J. Noller, and I. Sawicki. Strong Constraints on Cosmological Gravity from GW170817 and GRB 170817A. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(25):251301, December 2017. [6] Jose María Ezquiaga and Miguel Zumalacárregui. Dark Energy After GW170817: Dead Ends and the Road Ahead. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(25):251304, December 2017. [7] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, and et al. A gravitational-wave standard siren measurement of the Hubble constant. Nature, 551(7678):85-88, November 2017.[8] Pau Amaro-Seoane, Heather Audley, Stanislav Babak, John Baker, Enrico Barausse, et al. Laser Interferometer Space Antenna. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:1702.00786, February 2017. [9] Zoltan Haiman et al. Massive Black Hole Binaries as LISA Precursors in the High Latitude Time Domain Survey. Roman Core Community Survey White Paper, 2023.

GW150914: First results from the search for binary black hole coalescence with Advanced LIGO. B P Abbott, R Abbott, T D Abbott, M R Abernathy, F Acernese, K Ackley, C Adams, T Adams, P Addesso, R X Adhikari, Phys. Rev. D. 9312122003B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, and et al. GW150914: First results from the search for binary black hole coalescence with Advanced LIGO. Phys. Rev. D, 93(12):122003, June 2016.

GW170817: Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Neutron Star Inspiral. B P Abbott, Phys. Rev. Lett. 11916161101B. P. Abbott et al. GW170817: Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Neutron Star Inspiral. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(16):161101, October 2017.

GW170817: Measurements of Neutron Star Radii and Equation of State. B P Abbott, R Abbott, T D Abbott, F Acernese, K Ackley, C Adams, T Adams, P Addesso, R X Adhikari, V B Adya, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12116161101B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, F. Acernese, K. Ackley, C. Adams, T. Adams, P. Addesso, R. X. Adhikari, V. B. Adya, and et al. GW170817: Measurements of Neutron Star Radii and Equation of State. Phys. Rev. Lett., 121(16):161101, October 2018.

The NANOGrav Program for Gravitational Waves and Fundamental Physics. Scott Ransom, A Brazier, S Chatterjee, T Cohen, J M Cordes, M E Decesar, P B Demorest, J S Hazboun, M T Lam, R S Lynch, M A Mclaughlin, S M Ransom, X Siemens, S R Taylor, S J Vigeland, In Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society. 51195Scott Ransom, A. Brazier, S. Chatterjee, T. Cohen, J. M. Cordes, M. E. DeCesar, P. B. Demorest, J. S. Hazboun, M. T. Lam, R. S. Lynch, M. A. McLaughlin, S. M. Ransom, X. Siemens, S. R. Taylor, and S. J. Vigeland. The NANOGrav Program for Gravitational Waves and Fundamental Physics. In Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, volume 51, page 195, September 2019.

The European Pulsar Timing Array: current efforts and a LEAP toward the future. R D Ferdman, R Van Haasteren, C G Bassa, M Burgay, I Cognard, A Corongiu, N D&apos;amico, G Desvignes, J W T Hessels, G H Janssen, A Jessner, C Jordan, R Karuppusamy, E F Keane, M Kramer, K Lazaridis, Y Levin, A G Lyne, M Pilia, A Possenti, M Purver, B Stappers, S Sanidas, R Smits, G Theureau, Classical and Quantum Gravity. 27884014R. D. Ferdman, R. van Haasteren, C. G. Bassa, M. Burgay, I. Cognard, A. Corongiu, N. D'Amico, G. Desvignes, J. W. T. Hessels, G. H. Janssen, A. Jessner, C. Jordan, R. Karuppusamy, E. F. Keane, M. Kramer, K. Lazaridis, Y. Levin, A. G. Lyne, M. Pilia, A. Possenti, M. Purver, B. Stappers, S. Sanidas, R. Smits, and G. Theureau. The European Pulsar Timing Array: current efforts and a LEAP toward the future. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 27(8):084014, April 2010.

E S Phinney, astro-ph/0108028A Practical Theorem on Gravitational Wave Backgrounds. arXiv eprints. E. S. Phinney. A Practical Theorem on Gravitational Wave Backgrounds. arXiv e- prints, pages astro-ph/0108028, August 2001.

. Zaven Arzoumanian, Nanograv CollaborationPaul T Baker, Nanograv CollaborationHarsha Blumer, Nanograv CollaborationBence Bécsy, Nanograv CollaborationAdam Brazier, Nanograv CollaborationPaul R Brook, Nanograv CollaborationSarah Burke-Spolaor, Nanograv CollaborationShami Chatterjee, Nanograv CollaborationSiyuan Chen, Nanograv CollaborationJames M Cordes, Nanograv CollaborationNeil J Cornish, Nanograv CollaborationFronefield Crawford, Nanograv CollaborationH Cromartie, Nanograv CollaborationMegan E Decesar, Nanograv CollaborationPaul B Demorest, Nanograv CollaborationTimothy Dolch, Nanograv CollaborationJustin A Ellis, Nanograv CollaborationElizabeth C Ferrara, Nanograv CollaborationWilliam Fiore, Nanograv CollaborationEmmanuel Fonseca, Nanograv CollaborationNathan Garver-Daniels, Nanograv CollaborationPeter A Gentile, Nanograv CollaborationDeborah C Good, Nanograv CollaborationJeffrey S Hazboun, Nanograv CollaborationA Holgado, Nanograv CollaborationKristina Islo, Nanograv CollaborationRoss J Jennings, Nanograv CollaborationMegan L Jones, Nanograv CollaborationAndrew R Kaiser, Nanograv CollaborationDavid L Kaplan, Nanograv CollaborationLuke Zoltan Kelley, Nanograv CollaborationJoey Shapiro Key, Nanograv CollaborationNima Laal, Nanograv CollaborationMichael T Lam, Nanograv CollaborationT W Joseph, Nanograv CollaborationDuncan R Lazio, Nanograv CollaborationJing Lorimer, Nanograv CollaborationRyan S Luo, Nanograv CollaborationDustin R Lynch, Nanograv CollaborationMaura A Madison, Nanograv CollaborationMclaughlin, Nanograv CollaborationM F Chiara, Nanograv CollaborationJerry P Mingarelli, Nanograv CollaborationJoseph K Sun, Nanograv CollaborationStephen R Swiggum, Nanograv CollaborationJacob E Taylor, Nanograv CollaborationMichele Turner, Nanograv CollaborationSarah J Vallisneri, Nanograv CollaborationCaitlin A Vigeland, Nanograv CollaborationWitt, Nanograv CollaborationThe NANOGrav. Ng, David J. Nice, Timothy T. Pennucci, Nihan S. Pol, Scott M. Ransom, Paul S. Ray, Brent J. Shapiro-Albert, Xavier Siemens, Joseph Simon, Renée Spiewak, Ingrid H. Stairs, Daniel R. Stinebring, Kevin Stovall,12234ApJLZaven Arzoumanian, Paul T. Baker, Harsha Blumer, Bence Bécsy, Adam Brazier, Paul R. Brook, Sarah Burke-Spolaor, Shami Chatterjee, Siyuan Chen, James M. Cordes, Neil J. Cornish, Fronefield Crawford, H. Thankful Cromartie, Megan E. Decesar, Paul B. Demorest, Timothy Dolch, Justin A. Ellis, Elizabeth C. Ferrara, William Fiore, Em- manuel Fonseca, Nathan Garver-Daniels, Peter A. Gentile, Deborah C. Good, Jef- frey S. Hazboun, A. Miguel Holgado, Kristina Islo, Ross J. Jennings, Megan L. Jones, Andrew R. Kaiser, David L. Kaplan, Luke Zoltan Kelley, Joey Shapiro Key, Nima Laal, Michael T. Lam, T. Joseph W. Lazio, Duncan R. Lorimer, Jing Luo, Ryan S. Lynch, Dustin R. Madison, Maura A. McLaughlin, Chiara M. F. Mingarelli, Cherry Ng, David J. Nice, Timothy T. Pennucci, Nihan S. Pol, Scott M. Ransom, Paul S. Ray, Brent J. Shapiro-Albert, Xavier Siemens, Joseph Simon, Renée Spiewak, In- grid H. Stairs, Daniel R. Stinebring, Kevin Stovall, Jerry P. Sun, Joseph K. Swiggum, Stephen R. Taylor, Jacob E. Turner, Michele Vallisneri, Sarah J. Vigeland, Caitlin A. Witt, and Nanograv Collaboration. The NANOGrav 12.5 yr Data Set: Search for an Isotropic Stochastic Gravitational-wave Background. ApJL, 905(2):L34, December 2020.

Common-red-signal analysis with 24. S Chen, R N Caballero, Y J Guo, A Chalumeau, K Liu, G Shaifullah, K J Lee, S Babak, G Desvignes, A Parthasarathy, H Hu, E Van Der Wateren, J Antoniadis, A S Bak Nielsen, C G Bassa, A Berthereau, M Burgay, D J Champion, I Cognard, M Falxa, R D Ferdman, P C C Freire, J R Gair, E Graikou, L Guillemot, J Jang, G H Janssen, R Karuppusamy, M J Keith, M Kramer, X J Liu, A G Lyne, R A Main, J W Mckee, M B Mickaliger, B B P Perera, D Perrodin, A Petiteau, N K Porayko, A Possenti, A Samajdar, S A Sanidas, A Sesana, L Speri, B W Stappers, G Theureau, C Tiburzi, A Vecchio, J P W Verbiest, J Wang, L Wang, H Xu, MNRAS. 5084yr high-precision timing of the European Pulsar Timing Array: inferences in the stochastic gravitational-wave background searchS. Chen, R. N. Caballero, Y. J. Guo, A. Chalumeau, K. Liu, G. Shaifullah, K. J. Lee, S. Babak, G. Desvignes, A. Parthasarathy, H. Hu, E. van der Wateren, J. Antoniadis, A. S. Bak Nielsen, C. G. Bassa, A. Berthereau, M. Burgay, D. J. Champion, I. Cognard, M. Falxa, R. D. Ferdman, P. C. C. Freire, J. R. Gair, E. Graikou, L. Guillemot, J. Jang, G. H. Janssen, R. Karuppusamy, M. J. Keith, M. Kramer, X. J. Liu, A. G. Lyne, R. A. Main, J. W. McKee, M. B. Mickaliger, B. B. P. Perera, D. Perrodin, A. Petiteau, N. K. Porayko, A. Possenti, A. Samajdar, S. A. Sanidas, A. Sesana, L. Speri, B. W. Stappers, G. Theureau, C. Tiburzi, A. Vecchio, J. P. W. Verbiest, J. Wang, L. Wang, and H. Xu. Common-red-signal analysis with 24-yr high-precision timing of the European Pulsar Timing Array: inferences in the stochastic gravitational-wave background search. MNRAS, 508(4):4970-4993, December 2021.

. Boris Goncharov, R M Shannon, D J Reardon, G Hobbs, A Zic, M Bailes, M Cury Lo, S Dai, M Kerr, M E Lower, R N Manchester, R Mandow, H , Boris Goncharov, R. M. Shannon, D. J. Reardon, G. Hobbs, A. Zic, M. Bailes, M. Cury lo, S. Dai, M. Kerr, M. E. Lower, R. N. Manchester, R. Mandow, H. Mid- 7

On the Evidence for a Common-spectrum Process in the Search for the Nanohertz Gravitational-wave Background with the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array. M T Dleton, A Miles, E Parthasarathy, N Thrane, X Thyagarajan, X J Xue, A D Zhu, Y Cameron, R Feng, C J Luo, J Russell, R Sarkissian, S Spiewak, J B Wang, L Wang, S Zhang, Zhang, ApJL. 917219dleton, M. T. Miles, A. Parthasarathy, E. Thrane, N. Thyagarajan, X. Xue, X. J. Zhu, A. D. Cameron, Y. Feng, R. Luo, C. J. Russell, J. Sarkissian, R. Spiewak, S. Wang, J. B. Wang, L. Zhang, and S. Zhang. On the Evidence for a Common-spectrum Process in the Search for the Nanohertz Gravitational-wave Background with the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array. ApJL, 917(2):L19, August 2021.

. J Antoniadis, Z Arzoumanian, S Babak, M Bailes, A S Bak Nielsen, P T Baker, C G Bassa, B Bécsy, A Berthereau, M Bonetti, A Brazier, P R Brook, M Burgay, S Burke-Spolaor, R N Caballero, J A Casey-Clyde, A Chalumeau, D J Champion, M Charisi, S Chatterjee, S Chen, I Cognard, J M Cordes, N J Cornish, F Crawford, H T Cromartie, K Crowter, S Dai, M E Decesar, P B Demorest, G Desvignes, T Dolch, B Drachler, M Falxa, E C Ferrara, W Fiore, E Fonseca, J R Gair, N Garver-Daniels, B Goncharov, D C Good, E Graikou, L Guillemot, Y J Guo, J S Hazboun, G Hobbs, H Hu, K Islo, G H Janssen, R J Jennings, A D Johnson, M L Jones, A R Kaiser, D L Kaplan, R Karuppusamy, M J Keith, L Z Kelley, M Kerr, J S Key, M Kramer, M T Lam, W G Lamb, T J W Lazio, K J Lee, L Lentati, K Liu, J Luo, R S Lynch, A G Lyne, D R Madison, R A Main, R N Manchester, A. McEwen, J. W. McKee, M. A. McLaughlin, M. B. Mickaliger, C. M. FJ. Antoniadis, Z. Arzoumanian, S. Babak, M. Bailes, A. S. Bak Nielsen, P. T. Baker, C. G. Bassa, B. Bécsy, A. Berthereau, M. Bonetti, A. Brazier, P. R. Brook, M. Burgay, S. Burke-Spolaor, R. N. Caballero, J. A. Casey-Clyde, A. Chalumeau, D. J. Champion, M. Charisi, S. Chatterjee, S. Chen, I. Cognard, J. M. Cordes, N. J. Cornish, F. Crawford, H. T. Cromartie, K. Crowter, S. Dai, M. E. DeCesar, P. B. Demorest, G. Desvignes, T. Dolch, B. Drachler, M. Falxa, E. C. Ferrara, W. Fiore, E. Fonseca, J. R. Gair, N. Garver-Daniels, B. Goncharov, D. C. Good, E. Graikou, L. Guillemot, Y. J. Guo, J. S. Hazboun, G. Hobbs, H. Hu, K. Islo, G. H. Janssen, R. J. Jennings, A. D. Johnson, M. L. Jones, A. R. Kaiser, D. L. Kaplan, R. Karuppusamy, M. J. Keith, L. Z. Kelley, M. Kerr, J. S. Key, M. Kramer, M. T. Lam, W. G. Lamb, T. J. W. Lazio, K. J. Lee, L. Lentati, K. Liu, J. Luo, R. S. Lynch, A. G. Lyne, D. R. Madison, R. A. Main, R. N. Manchester, A. McEwen, J. W. McKee, M. A. McLaughlin, M. B. Mickaliger, C. M. F.

The International Pulsar Timing Array second data release. C Mingarelli, D J Ng, S Nice, A Os Lowski, T T Parthasarathy, B B P Pennucci, D Perera, A Perrodin, N S Petiteau, N K Pol, A Porayko, S M Possenti, P S Ransom, D J Ray, C J Reardon, A Russell, L M Samajdar, S Sampson, J M Sanidas, K Sarkissian, L Schmitz, A Schult, G Sesana, R M Shaifullah, B J Shannon, X Shapiro-Albert, J Siemens, T L Simon, L Smith, R Speri, I H Spiewak, B W Stairs, D R Stappers, J K Stinebring, S R Swiggum, G Taylor, C Theureau, M Tiburzi, E Vallisneri, A Van Der Wateren, J P W Vecchio, S J Verbiest, H Vigeland, J B Wahl, J Wang, L Wang, C A Wang, S Witt, X J Zhang, Zhu, Search for an isotropic gravitational wave background. 510Mingarelli, C. Ng, D. J. Nice, S. Os lowski, A. Parthasarathy, T. T. Pennucci, B. B. P. Perera, D. Perrodin, A. Petiteau, N. S. Pol, N. K. Porayko, A. Possenti, S. M. Ransom, P. S. Ray, D. J. Reardon, C. J. Russell, A. Samajdar, L. M. Sampson, S. Sanidas, J. M. Sarkissian, K. Schmitz, L. Schult, A. Sesana, G. Shaifullah, R. M. Shannon, B. J. Shapiro-Albert, X. Siemens, J. Simon, T. L. Smith, L. Speri, R. Spiewak, I. H. Stairs, B. W. Stappers, D. R. Stinebring, J. K. Swiggum, S. R. Taylor, G. Theureau, C. Tiburzi, M. Vallisneri, E. van der Wateren, A. Vecchio, J. P. W. Verbiest, S. J. Vigeland, H. Wahl, J. B. Wang, J. Wang, L. Wang, C. A. Witt, S. Zhang, and X. J. Zhu. The International Pulsar Timing Array second data release: Search for an isotropic gravitational wave background. MNRAS, 510(4):4873-4887, March 2022.

Stochastic Gravitational Wave Background: Upper Limits in the 10 −6 to 10 −3 Hz Band. J W Armstrong, L Iess, P Tortora, B Bertotti, ApJ. 5992J. W. Armstrong, L. Iess, P. Tortora, and B. Bertotti. Stochastic Gravitational Wave Background: Upper Limits in the 10 −6 to 10 −3 Hz Band. ApJ, 599(2):806-813, Decem- ber 2003.

Asteroids for microhertz gravitational-wave detection. Michael A Fedderke, Peter W Graham, Surjeet Rajendran, arXiv:2112.11431arXiv e-printsMichael A. Fedderke, Peter W. Graham, and Surjeet Rajendran. Asteroids for micro- hertz gravitational-wave detection. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:2112.11431, December 2021.

Gravitational wave timing array. María José Bustamante-Rosell, Joel Meyers, Noah Pearson, Cynthia Trendafilova, Aaron Zimmerman, Phys. Rev. D. 105444005María José Bustamante-Rosell, Joel Meyers, Noah Pearson, Cynthia Trendafilova, and Aaron Zimmerman. Gravitational wave timing array. Phys. Rev. D, 105(4):044005, February 2022.

. Alberto Sesana, Natalia Korsakova, Manuel Arca Sedda, Vishal Baibhav, Enrico Barausse, Simon Barke, Emanuele Berti, Matteo Bonetti, Pedro R Capelo, Chiara Caprini, Juan Garcia-Bellido, Zoltan Haiman, Karan Jani, Oliver Jennrich, Peter H Johansson, Fazeel Mahmood Khan, Valeriya Korol, Astrid Lamberts, Alessandro Lupi, Alberto Mangiagli, Lucio Mayer, Germano Nardini, Fabio Pacucci, Antoine Petiteau, AlviseAlberto Sesana, Natalia Korsakova, Manuel Arca Sedda, Vishal Baibhav, Enrico Ba- rausse, Simon Barke, Emanuele Berti, Matteo Bonetti, Pedro R. Capelo, Chiara Caprini, Juan Garcia-Bellido, Zoltan Haiman, Karan Jani, Oliver Jennrich, Peter H. Johansson, Fazeel Mahmood Khan, Valeriya Korol, Astrid Lamberts, Alessandro Lupi, Alberto Mangiagli, Lucio Mayer, Germano Nardini, Fabio Pacucci, Antoine Petiteau, Alvise

Unveiling the gravitational universe at µ-Hz frequencies. Surjeet Raccanelli, John Rajendran, Lijing Regan, Alessandro Shao, Nicola Spallicci, Marta Tamanini, Niels Volonteri, Kaze Warburton, Miguel Wong, Zumalacarregui, Experimental Astronomy. 513Raccanelli, Surjeet Rajendran, John Regan, Lijing Shao, Alessandro Spallicci, Nicola Tamanini, Marta Volonteri, Niels Warburton, Kaze Wong, and Miguel Zumalacarregui. Unveiling the gravitational universe at µ-Hz frequencies. Experimental Astronomy, 51(3):1333-1383, June 2021.

. 06/16/2023ESA Science & Technology. LISA Mission Summary. ESA Science & Technology. LISA Mission Summary. https://sci.esa.int/web/ lisa/-/61367-mission-summary, November 2021. Accessed 06/16/2023.

Astrometric effects of a stochastic gravitational wave background. Laura G Book, Flanagan, Phys. Rev. D. 83224024Laura G. Book andÉannaÉ. Flanagan. Astrometric effects of a stochastic gravitational wave background. Phys. Rev. D, 83(2):024024, January 2011.

Astrometric Search Method for Individually Resolvable Gravitational Wave Sources with Gaia. Christopher J Moore, Deyan P Mihaylov, Anthony Lasenby, Gerard Gilmore, Phys. Rev. Lett. 11926261102Christopher J. Moore, Deyan P. Mihaylov, Anthony Lasenby, and Gerard Gilmore. Astrometric Search Method for Individually Resolvable Gravitational Wave Sources with Gaia. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(26):261102, December 2017.

Gaia-like astrometry and gravitational waves. Sergei A Klioner, Classical and Quantum Gravity. 35445005Sergei A. Klioner. Gaia-like astrometry and gravitational waves. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 35(4):045005, February 2018.

Gravitational wave detection with photometric surveys. Yijun Wang, Kris Pardo, Tzu-Ching Chang, Olivier Doré, Phys. Rev. D. 103884007Yijun Wang, Kris Pardo, Tzu-Ching Chang, and Olivier Doré. Gravitational wave detection with photometric surveys. Phys. Rev. D, 103(8):084007, April 2021.

Constraining the stochastic gravitational wave background with photometric surveys. Yijun Wang, Kris Pardo, Tzu-Ching Chang, Olivier Doré, Phys. Rev. D. 106884006Yijun Wang, Kris Pardo, Tzu-Ching Chang, and Olivier Doré. Constraining the stochastic gravitational wave background with photometric surveys. Phys. Rev. D, 106(8):084006, October 2022.

. B , Scott Gaudi, Rachel Akeson, Jay Anderson, Etienne Bachelet, David P Bennett, Aparna Bhattacharya, Valerio Bozza, Sebastiano Calchi Novati, Calen B Henderson, Samson A Johnson, Jeffrey Kruk, Jessica R Lu, Shude Mao, Benjamin T Montet, David M Nataf, Matthew T Penny, Radoslaw Poleski, Clément Ranc, Kailash Sahu, Auxiliary' Science with the WFIRST Microlensing Survey. BAAS. Shvartzvald, David N. Spergel, Daisuke Suzuki, Keivan G. Stassun, and Rachel A. Street513211B. Scott Gaudi, Rachel Akeson, Jay Anderson, Etienne Bachelet, David P. Bennett, Aparna Bhattacharya, Valerio Bozza, Sebastiano Calchi Novati, Calen B. Henderson, Samson A. Johnson, Jeffrey Kruk, Jessica R. Lu, Shude Mao, Benjamin T. Montet, David M. Nataf, Matthew T. Penny, Radoslaw Poleski, Clément Ranc, Kailash Sahu, Yossi Shvartzvald, David N. Spergel, Daisuke Suzuki, Keivan G. Stassun, and Rachel A. Street. 'Auxiliary' Science with the WFIRST Microlensing Survey. BAAS, 51(3):211, May 2019.

Robyn E Sanderson, Andrea Bellini, Stefano Casertano, Jessica R Lu, Peter Melchior, Mattia Libralato, David Bennett, Michael Shao, Jason Rhodes, Astrometry with the Wide-Field Infrared Space Telescope. Sangmo Tony Sohn, Sangeeta Malhotra, Scott Gaudi, S. Michael Fall, Ed Nelan, Puragra Guhathakurta, Jay Anderson, and Shirley Ho544005WFIRST Astrometry Working GroupWFIRST Astrometry Working Group, Robyn E. Sanderson, Andrea Bellini, Stefano Casertano, Jessica R. Lu, Peter Melchior, Mattia Libralato, David Bennett, Michael Shao, Jason Rhodes, Sangmo Tony Sohn, Sangeeta Malhotra, Scott Gaudi, S. Michael Fall, Ed Nelan, Puragra Guhathakurta, Jay Anderson, and Shirley Ho. Astrometry with the Wide-Field Infrared Space Telescope. Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 5:044005, October 2019.