# a focus on use by people over 75 years of age: a review of AIHW data

CorpusID: 259354441
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/795460f048770e5b5ad01551f11d3508988f493d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/795460f048770e5b5ad01551f11d3508988f493d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

a focus on use by people over 75 years of age: a review of AIHW data
August 2023. 1993-2020

Natasha Reid 
Centre for Health Services Research
the University of Queensland
BrisbaneQLD

Thakeru Gamage 
Centre for Health Services Research
the University of Queensland
BrisbaneQLD

Stephen J Duckett 
The University of Melbourne
MelbourneVIC

Leonard C Gray 
Centre for Health Services Research
the University of Queensland
BrisbaneQLD

a focus on use by people over 75 years of age: a review of AIHW data

MJA
2193August 2023. 1993-202010.5694/mja2.52026


T he population of the developed world is ageing rapidly. 1 Older adults are more likely to present to hospital with more than one health condition, and multimorbidity is associated with longer hospital stays. 2,3 Consequently, pressure on hospital capacity is expected to increase, as are the mean costs of patient care. 4

The number of public hospital beds, relative to population size, has steadily declined in recent years, but the number of presentations has increased. 5 The Australasian College for Emergency Medicine reported that the number of hospital presentations per 1000 people increased by 3% between 2016-17 and 2020-21, but that the number of available hospital beds per 1000 people declined by 4%. 6 This has led to hospitals frequently operating beyond the 85% bed occupancy rate recommended by the Australian Medical Association. 7 A high degree of bed occupancy has negative consequences for hospital care, particularly in emergency departments, 8,9 including higher risks of hospital-associated infections and poorer staff health. 9 We have previously reported that the impact of rising admission numbers on bed occupancy rates during 1993-2002 had been offset by the declining mean length of stay for multiple day hospitalisations; further, the proportion of beds occupied by older patients remained constant, despite population ageing. 10 However, a recent European modelling study projected that offsetting demand by reducing lengths of stay would become insufficient by 2030, by which point the shift in demand to beds for the care of older people and for chronic care would dominate. 11 To determine whether a similar change might be emerging in Australia, we have extended our earlier examination of hospital admissions, hospital bed utilisation, and mean length of stay, to cover the period 1993-94 to 2019-20.


## Methods

We examined Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) separation statistics for private and public hospitals for the financial years 1993-94 to 2019-20. 12 Data were downloaded as CSV files and graphs were prepared in Excel (Microsoft).

We extracted data on numbers of hospital separations, hospital bed utilisation (bed-days), and mean hospital length of stay (days). Hospital separations include hospital discharges, transfers from one care type to another, and deaths. Bed utilisation is recorded by the AIHW as "one" for same-day separations (eg, renal dialysis; people admitted from an emergency department and discharged on the same day) and as the number of nights for multiple day admissions (midnight as the census point). Hospital length of stay was based on total stay (acute and subacute) and calculated by subtracting the date of admission from the date of separation, less any leave days. Further information Results: Between 1993-94 and 2019-20, the Australian population grew by 44%; the number of people aged 75 years or more increased from 4.6% to 6.9% of the population. The annual number of hospital separations increased from 4.61 million to 11.33 million (146% increase); the annual hospital separation rate increased from 261 to 435 per 1000 people (66% increase), most markedly for people aged 75 years or more (from 745 to 1441 per 1000 people; 94% increase). Total bed utilisation increased from 21.0 million to 29.9 million bed-days (42% increase), but the bed utilisation rate did not change markedly (1993-94, 1192 bed-days per 1000 people; 2019-20, 1179 bed-days per 1000 people), primarily because the mean hospital length of stay for multiple day admissions declined from 6.6 days to 5.4 days; for people aged 75 years or more it declined from 12.2 to 7.1 days. However, declines in stay length have slowed markedly since 2017-18. Total bed utilisation was 16.8% lower than projected from 1993-94 rates, and was 37.3% lower for people aged 75 years or more.

Conclusion: Hospital bed utilisation rates declined although admission rates increased during 1993-94 to 2019-20; the proportion of beds occupied by people aged 75 years or more increased slightly during this period. Containing hospital costs by limiting bed availability and reducing length of stay may no longer be a viable strategy. Research about definitions are available on the AIHW METEOR website. 13 AIHW data are reported by 5year age group; as in our earlier publication, 10 we report summary data (absolute numbers and proportions) and bed utilisation rates for three age categories (under 65 years, 65-74 years, 75 years or more) and mean hospital length of stay for six categories (under 65, 65-69, 70-74, 75-79, 80-84, 85 years or more). We calculated population hospital separation and bed utilisation rates (number per 1000 population) using Australian Bureau of Statistics annual population estimates. 14 We also calculated a projected bed utilisation figure for each financial year by applying the 1993-94 rate to the corresponding population number.


## Ethics approval

As our report is based on publicly available data, we did not seek formal ethics approval.


## Results

The Australian population increased from 17.6 million in 1993-94 to 25.7 million in 2019-20 (44% growth). The number of people aged 75 years or more increased 115%, from 815 584 (4.6% of the population) to 1 754 435 (6.9%) (Box 1). The changes in hospital utilisation across this period are summarised in Box 2.


## Hospital separations

The annual total number of hospital separations increased from 4.61 million in 1993-94 to 11.33 million in 2019-20 (146% increase): from 3.30 million to 6.49 million for people under 65 years of age (96% increase), from 0.70 million to 2.28 million for people aged 65-74 years (226% increase), and from 0.61 million to 2.57 million for people aged 75 years or more (323% increase) (Box 3). The proportion of separations for people aged 75 years or more increased from 13.2% to 22.7%.

The annual number of same-day separations increased from 1.70 million to 6.76 million (298% increase); the number for people aged 75 years or more increased from 0.13 million to 1.42 million (977% increase). The annual number of multiple day 1 Australian population, 1993-94 to 2019-20, by age group* * Data source: Australian Bureau of Statistics. 14 The data for this figure are included in the Supporting Information, 


## Mean hospital length of stay

The mean length of stay for multiple day hospital admissions declined from 6.6 days in 1993-94 to 5.4 days in 2019-20 (18% reduction). For patients under 65 years of age it declined from 4.9 to 4.6 days (7% reduction), for people aged 65-74 from 8.4 to 5.8 days (31% reduction), and for people aged 75 years or more from 12.2 to 7.1 days (42% reduction); the mean stay for patients aged 85 years or more declined from 15.2 to 7.7 days (49% reduction). The decline in all age groups has slowed markedly since 2017-18 (Box 8).


## Discussion

We have described bed utilisation in Australian public and private hospitals during 1993-94 to 2019-20, with a particular focus on use by older people. We have previously reported  10 The number of hospital admissions continued to increase during 2002-03 to 2019-20, most markedly admissions of people aged 75 years or more, but the decline in mean length of stay has slowed, with minimal change for any age group in the past few years. The bed utilisation rate has continued to decline for all age groups, but the proportion for people aged 75 years or more has increased.

Most studies of hospital service use do not report these characteristics by age group, making comparisons difficult. The changes in Australia were broadly similar to those reported in the United States, where overall mean length of stay declined by 0.2% per year during 2003-2012, and bed utilisation declined from 64% to 62% during 2007-2017. 15 Shorter hospital stays, particularly for older people, could be explained by the increasing availability of alternative care models (eg, the Transition Care Program, 16 home care packages), improved hospital processes and practices (eg, discharge planning, care coordination), and improved clinical care (eg, early patient mobility). However, shorter hospital stays could also reflect inappropriate discharge practices. Investigations of associations between reduced length of stay and adverse outcomes, such as 30-day readmissions, often find no significant association 17 or that longer stays are a risk factor for re-admission. 18 Changes in mean hospital length of stay could also reflect changes in administrative or coding practices, such as increases in the numbers of administrative transfers within hospitals and same-day transfers between hospitals on the same site. Linkage of data across multiple time points would be needed to determine whether the changes in separation numbers and length of stay are associated; that is, to assess whether people are released from hospital early only to be re-admitted with related problems.

Nevertheless, the decline in hospital length of stay could not continue indefinitely, and there is evidence that the limit has been approached during the past few years, 11 posing challenges for hospital systems and policy makers. Members of the "baby boomer" generation, the oldest of whom are now more than 75 years old, have more health risk factors than earlier generations, including physical inactivity, low fruit and vegetable intake, and higher prevalence of obesity and diabetes. 19 Combined with declining mortality rates, these complex, chronic health conditions will increase the pressure on hospital systems, even if hospital stays are as short as reasonably possible and care is diverted to outpatient or hospital-in-the-home settings when feasible. 15 Health service planning, provision, and policy will need to be adjusted in response to population ageing. For instance, hospital Research bed utilisation and length of stay have not declined markedly for people under 65 years of age; reducing both would be one avenue for relieving the burden on hospitals. Indeed, it has been reported that hospital utilisation during the final one to three years of life is greater for middle-aged (55-64 years) than older patients (65 years or more), and greatest for people aged 35-44 years. 20 Technological advances may help reduce hospital stays for younger patients, but investing more in the prevention of chronic and age-related diseases will be important, including treating disease risk factors early, reducing their prevalence, preventing or slowing the progression of disease, and reducing morbidity and complication rates. 21 Other approaches include training and new care pathways for older adults, social reorganisation to ensure that care is both accessible and used, and ensuring that older adults remain integrated in their communities. 22 Limitations AIHW hospital data are comprehensive, include data for both public and private hospitals across Australia, and cover more than 25 years. However, the data were available only in aggregate form, so we could not delve deeper into differences by disease status or location. Further, we could not determine from these data the factors that influence changes in hospital bed use, nor whether rises in recorded admission numbers reflect real increases or are an artifact of coding changes or clinical practices, including greater numbers of subacute care beds, hospital substitution, and increased use of the maintenance care classification. Analysis of longitudinal data linked with other health and medical records would be needed to address these questions.


## Conclusion

Hospital bed utilisation rates declined and separation rates increased during 1993-94 to 2019-20. The proportion of beds occupied by people aged 75 years or more increased, associated with a slow in the decline of mean hospital length of stay. Containing hospital costs by limiting bed availability and reducing length of stay may not be viable in the near future. The capacity of a health system to provide care depends not only on bed availability but also on the ability to substitute ambulatory and home-based alternatives for traditional overnight care. Life course disease prevention and health promotion are also important for improving health in older people and reducing the need for acute care across life.

Hospital bed utilisation should be re-examined in the next five to ten years to determine, among other questions, the impact on hospitals of the more than 5.5 million baby boomers, 23 most of whom will by then be 75 years of age or older. The ongoing health impact of COVID-19, including persistent impairment of exercise capacity, chronic fatigue, and damage to body systems and organs, 24 may also contribute to chronic health conditions, causing even greater pressure on hospital systems. Epidemiologists, public health experts, and policy makers should monitor these factors in order to mitigate future risks.  


The known: Mean hospital length of stay declined in Australia during the period 1993-94 to 2001-02, while the number of hospital admissions and the bed utilisation rate increased.The new: Hospital utilisation data for the period 1993-94 to 2019-20 indicate that the decline in mean hospital length of stay has slowed considerably, particularly for people aged 75 years or more. The proportions of admissions and bed utilisation for people in this age group have increased.The implications: Restricting the availability of beds and reducing hospital lengths of stay may have reached their limits.

## *
Data source: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 12 The data for this figure are included in the Supporting Information, table 4; age-group-based population proportions are depicted in the Supporting Information, figure 3. ◆ 6 Multiple day admission hospital bed utilisation rates, Australia (public and private), 1993-94 to 2019-20, by age group* * Data source: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 12 The data for this figure are included in the Supporting Information,

## table 1 ;
1age-group-based population proportions are depicted in the Supporting Information, figure 1. ◆ 2 Hospital utilisation, Australia (public and private), 1993-94 and 2019-20: summary, by age group*Characteristic/age group (years) 
1993-94 
2019-20 

Proportional 
difference 

Population change 
17 634 808 
25 365 745 
44% 

0-64 
15 582 160 
21 325 615 
37% 

65-74 
1 237 064 
2 285 695 
85% 

≥ 75 
815 584 
1 754 435 
115% 

All admissions 
4 608 764 
11 326 362 
146% 

Separations 

0-64 
3 302 860 
6 485 342 
96% 

65-74 
698 641 
2 274 367 
226% 

≥ 75 
607 263 
2 566 653 
323% 

Separation rate (per 1000 population) 
261 
435 
66% 

0-64 
212 
294 
39% 

65-74 
565 
971 
72% 

≥ 75 
745 
1441 
94% 

Length of stay (days), mean 
4.6 
2.7 
-40% 

0-64 
3.4 
2.40 
-29% 

65-74 
5.6 
2.5 
-55% 

≥ 75 
9.8 
3.7 
-63% 

Bed utilisation (bed-days) 
21 022 925 
29 905 564 
42% 

0-64 
11 220 678 
15 095 516 
35% 

65-74 
3 881 263 
5 575 478 
44% 

≥ 75 
5 920 984 
9 234 570 
56% 

Bed utilisation rate (per 1000 population) 
1192 
1179 
-1% 

0-64 
720 
708 
-2% 

65-74 
3137 
2439 
-22% 

≥ 75 
7260 
5264 
-28% 

Continues 


## table 5 . ◆
5
All hospital separations, Australia (public and private), 1993-94 to 2019-20, by age group*
© 2023 The Authors. Medical Journal of Australia published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of AMPCo Pty Ltd.
* Data source: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.12 The data for this figure are included in the Supporting Information,table 6. ◆
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.Mean hospital length of stay for multiple day admissions, Australia (public and private),1993-94 to 2019-20, by age group* * Data source: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.12The data for this figure are included in the Supporting Information,  Are you a practice manager seeking qualified doctors? find the right doctor for your practice on JOBS.MJA.COM.AU
81b2f 4f8-c0f2-46a0-86c1-64b7d 1d311 c2/State-of-Emerg ency-D32-MSTC. https://acem.org.au/getme dia/81b2f 4f8-c0f2- 46a0-86c1-64b7d 1d311 c2/State-of-Emerg ency-D32-MSTC (viewed Mar 2023).

. Australian Medical Association. Public hospital report card. Australian Medical Association. Public hospital report card 2011. 3 Nov 2011. https://www.ama. com.au/artic les/ama-public-hospi tal-report- card-2011 (viewed June 2022).

Sorry: we're full! Access block and accountability failure in the health care system. G Innes, CJEM. 17Innes G. Sorry: we're full! Access block and accountability failure in the health care system. CJEM 2015; 17: 171-179.

Hospital bed occupancy: more than queuing for a bed. A D Keegan, Med J Aust. 193Keegan AD. Hospital bed occupancy: more than queuing for a bed. Med J Aust 2010; 193: 291-293. https://www.mja.com.au/journ al/2010/193/5/hospi tal-bed-occup ancy-more- queui ng-bed

Trends in the use of hospital beds by older people in Australia: 1993-2002. L C Gray, M A Yeo, S J Duckett, Med J Aust. 181Gray LC, Yeo MA, Duckett SJ. Trends in the use of hospital beds by older people in Australia: 1993-2002. Med J Aust 2004; 181: 478-481. https://www.mja.com.au/journ al/2004/181/9/ trends-use-hospi tal-beds-older-people-austr alia-1993-2002

The impact of an ageing population on the required hospital capacity: results from forecast analysis on administrative data. K Van Den Heede, N Bouckaert, C Van De Voorde, Eur Geriatr Med. 10Van Den Heede K, Bouckaert N, Van de Voorde C. The impact of an ageing population on the required hospital capacity: results from forecast analysis on administrative data. Eur Geriatr Med 2019; 10: 697-705.

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Principal diagnosis data cubes (Cat. no. WEB 216). Updated 8Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Principal diagnosis data cubes (Cat. no. WEB 216). Updated 8 July 2022. https://www.aihw. gov.au/repor ts/hospi tals/princ ipal-diagn osis- data-cubes (viewed Mar 2023).

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. METEOR: metadata online registry. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. METEOR: metadata online registry. https:// meteor.aihw.gov.au/conte nt/181162 (viewed Mar 2023).

state and territory population. Reference period. Australian Bureau of Statistics. NationalviewedAustralian Bureau of Statistics. National, state and territory population. Reference period December 2022. 15 June 2023. https://www. abs.gov.au/stati stics/ peopl e/popul ation/ natio nal-state-and-terri tory-popul ation/ dec-2022 (viewed June 2022).

Baby boomers and beds: a demographic challenge for the ages. Z Song, T G Ferris, J Gen Intern Med. 33Song Z, Ferris TG. Baby boomers and beds: a demographic challenge for the ages. J Gen Intern Med 2018; 33: 367-369.

Flinders Consulting for the Department of Health (Australia). 31National evaluation of the Transition Care ProgramFlinders Consulting for the Department of Health (Australia). National evaluation of the Transition Care Program. 31 May 2008. https:// apo.org.au/node/2652 (viewed June 2022).

Associations between reduced hospital length of stay and 30-day readmission rate and mortality: 14-year experience in 129 Veterans Affairs hospitals. P J Kaboli, J T Go, J Hockenberry, Ann Intern Med. 157Kaboli PJ, Go JT, Hockenberry J, et al. Associations between reduced hospital length of stay and 30-day readmission rate and mortality: 14-year experience in 129 Veterans Affairs hospitals. Ann Intern Med 2012; 157: 837-845.

Impact of length of stay on readmission in hospitalized patients. J S Rachoin, K S Aplin, S Gandhi, Cureus. 1210669Rachoin JS, Aplin KS, Gandhi S, et al. Impact of length of stay on readmission in hospitalized patients. Cureus 2020; 12: e10669.

The health of Australian baby boomers. N Humpel, K O&apos;loughlin, Y Wells, H Kendig, Australas J Ageing. 29Humpel N, O'Loughlin K, Wells Y, Kendig H. The health of Australian baby boomers. Australas J Ageing 2010; 29: 8-13.

Use of acute hospital beds does not increase as the population ages: results from a seven year cohort study in Germany. R Busse, C Krauth, F W Schwartz, J Epidemiol Community Health. 56Busse R, Krauth C, Schwartz FW. Use of acute hospital beds does not increase as the population ages: results from a seven year cohort study in Germany. J Epidemiol Community Health 2002; 56: 289-293.

Australian Institute of Health Welfare. AUS 178). CanberraAIHWAustralia's health 2014 (CatAustralian Institute of Health Welfare. Australia's health 2014 (Cat. no. AUS 178). Canberra: AIHW, 2014. https://www.aihw.gov.au/repor ts/austr alias-healt h/austr alias-health-2014/overview (viewed June 2022).

The 2030 problem: caring for aging baby boomers. J R Knickman, E K Snell, Health Serv Res. 37Knickman JR, Snell EK. The 2030 problem: caring for aging baby boomers. Health Serv Res 2002; 37: 849-884.

bout our generations: where are Australia's baby boomers, generation X & Y and iGeneration? In: 3235.0. Population by age and sex, regions of Australia. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Talkin0Feat ure%20Art icle1 2014Australian Bureau of Statistics. Talkin' 'bout our generations: where are Australia's baby boomers, generation X & Y and iGeneration? In: 3235.0. Population by age and sex, regions of Australia, 2014. 18 Aug 2015. https://www. abs.gov.au/ausst ats/abs@.nsf/Previ ouspr oduct s/3235.0Feat ure%20Art icle1 2014 (viewed June 2022).

Pathophysiology and mechanism of long COVID: a comprehensive review. D Castanares-Zapatero, P Chalon, L Kohn, Ann Med. 54Castanares-Zapatero D, Chalon P, Kohn L, et al. Pathophysiology and mechanism of long COVID: a comprehensive review. Ann Med 2022; 54: 1473-1487. ■