# Increasing Care for Patients with Mental Disorders Thought Community Empowerment: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 259587079
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77a93f01dc3716a8d82310c0b7f2f3267cf77f53](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77a93f01dc3716a8d82310c0b7f2f3267cf77f53)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Increasing Care for Patients with Mental Disorders Thought Community Empowerment: A Literature Review
June 2023

Yosua Aldrin Kaligis 
Master of Nursing
Universitas Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta
YogyakartaIndonesia

Shanti Wardaningsih 
Master of Nursing
Universitas Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta
55183Yogyakarta, YogyakartaIndonesia

Increasing Care for Patients with Mental Disorders Thought Community Empowerment: A Literature Review

Jurnal Aisyah: Jurnal Ilmu Kesehatan
82June 202310.30604/jika.v8i2.1831Article history: Received 21 January 2023 Accepted 1 April 2023ARTICLE INFO A B S T R A C T


## INTRODUCTION

When a person is in good mental health, he or she can grow physically, intellectually, spiritually, and socially. As a result, the person can recognize his or her own strengths, deal with stress, produce results at work, and give back to the community. (Lipson and Eisenberg 2018). According to (McLafferty et al. 2017). Achieving mental health in humans entails creating harmony in the way this same mind functions as well as being able to handle issues, feel content, and start taking care of yourselves.

Worldwide, especially in Indonesia, there is still a serious issue with mental health (Tsai 2019). Approximately 35 million people suffer from depression, 60 million from bipolar illness, 47.5 million from dementia, and million from schizophrenia, according to WHO data from 2016. The number of persons who suffer from mental diseases is continuously rising due to biological, psychological, and societal reasons. The strain on the state and people's capacity to work may be long-term effects of this (Ministry of Health, 2016). According to the WHO World Health Organization (2016), Indonesia is rated fourth in the world with the greatest population and the highest number of individuals suffering from mental disorders, or over 26 million individuals, ranging from mild to severe mental diseases.

Similar to iceberg concerns, the prevalence of mental health issues is growing every year. In the globe today, particularly in Indonesia, mental health is still a serious health issue. Around 35 million people have depression, 60 million experience bipolar disorder, 21 million experience schizophrenia, and 47.5 million experience dementia, according to WHO figures for 2016 (Ministry of Health, 2016). The prevalence of mental diseases is rising in Indonesia due to a variety of biological, psychological, and social causes as well as the country's diverse population, which has an effect on the state's financial burden and the long-term ability of people to work.

According to the 2018 Riskesdas data, mental illnesses are becoming more common in Indonesia. 9.8% of Riskesdas' patients had emotional or mental health difficulties (depression and anxiety). Compared to Riskesdas data from 2013, this implies an increase of 6%. According to the high increase in emotional mental health issues by age group, the age group 65-75 years and older had the highest percentage, up to 28.6%. This was followed by the age group 55-64 years, up to 11%, the age group 45-54 years, and the age group 15-24 years, which had a higher percentage, up to 10%. (Riskesdas, 2018).

Compared to those who suffer from other medical conditions, people with mental problems frequently experience more stigma and discrimination from their community. negatively affecting sufferers as well as family members, including attitudes of exclusion, denial, and being left out. Human rights violations are more likely to occur in people with mental illnesses. (Usraleli et al. 2020) In China, there is a knowledge and experience gap in the field of treating mental health diseases. These health cadres can learn more and develop their skills more quickly. (Yang et al., 2018). In Liberia, there is still a dearth of mental health professionals and a significant stigma associated with having a mental illness. (Gwaikolo et al., 2017). Health professionals in Indonesia, such as cadres, need to be trained and coached so they can manage health services and inform the public about health more effectively. (Nafiah and Kamalah 2021).

The forefront of community health care are the corps. (Susmiatin and Sari 2021). It has been demonstrated through prior research that empowering cadres can improve Community Mental Health Nursing (CMHN) target accomplishment. In Indonesia, the creation and training of mental health cadres is one method of community empowerment in mental health care. Cadres play a crucial role in the community because, via counseling, outreach, and observing the mental health of those around them, they may assist the people there in achieving optimal mental health. (Nafiah and Kamalah 2021).

Efforts to empower the community towards mental health can be achieved with the management of health services, especially community-based mental health services. One form of this community mental health service management approach is the introduction of early detection of mental disorders that can be carried out by the community (cadres) themselves. This can facilitate the handling of mental disorders in the community. One approach to community mental health nursing is to establish Mental Health Alert Villages (DSSJ), which are villages whose residents have the resources and ability to deal with mental health problems on their own. CMHN nurses are health workers who work in the community and with the community, especially community leaders, by training community leaders, religious leaders, and health cadres (Ministry of Health, 2013). The empowerment approach to health services is used with several assumptions, namely that the empowerment approach will have a good impact on patients because their health status is more controlled and patients are able to make the best choice to overcome or improve their health status with the support of health workers.

Based on the discussion above, the researcher is interested in conducting a review on "community empowerment in increasing awareness in patients with mental disorders."


## METHODS

This literature review uses a systematic approach and selection process. Library sources were searched from national and international databases, including: PudMed, Proquest, and Google Scholar. The search technique uses certain keywords from the research question. The keywords/phrases to be used in the search are Community Empowerment and Community Concern and Community Involvement and Mental Disorders. The search is restricted to publications published between 2017 -2022. Language restrictions are also used to limit searches for published articles only in English and Indonesian, and judging by the inclusion criteria that have been determined, the inclusion criteria used to determine an article that is eligible to be included in this review are articles related to community empowerment in improving care for patients with mental disorders, articles published in the last 5 years (2017-2022), articles in English and full text, articles in English and full text, articles in English and full text, articles in English and full text, articles in English and full text, articles in English and The article selection process complies with the Preferred Reporting Systematic Review (PRISMA) guidelines. (Moher et al. 2009). A total of 43,253 articles were found in the first search of the three databases, indicating that they were highly relevant to the topics reviewed between 2017 and 2022. After publishing duplicate articles and screening titles and summaries, 92 articles took the next step in full-text review and eligibility by criteria. Specified inclusions. Next, the quality of the 2 qualifying studies was examined and summarized in the final report of this literature review.


## RESULT AND DISCUSSION

After the researcher selects and extracts the data for each article obtained, a detailed description regarding the name of the researcher, title, research design, characteristics of the respondents, objectives, interventions and results, this research is summarized in the To find out the form of social support for residents with mental disorders

The family provides social support, such as instrumental support. The support provided by the community is group support. And social support from the government, namely information support (Susanti, et al.,2021) The The results of the literature review show that people with mental disorders can be helped by empowering people with mental disorders. Empowerment of people with mental disorders in the community has a role in improving the quality of their daily lives and also providing preventive measures. with the existence of empowerment in the community so that it helps both improve capabilities and help access health services in a monitored manner.


## Community Mental Health Campaign

The mental health movement emphasizes efforts to help and improve the quality of human life in the broad realm of prevention in certain communities. This effort is not only carried out by health workers but also by community empowerment through activities to provide understanding, raise public awareness, and foster concern for mental health problems in the community. (Adella and Purnamasari 2022).

In social communication, mental health campaigns also serve a communication function. Campaigns are run to educate or inform the public so that they can change their behavior in a positive direction. This is the role of instrumental communication. According (Widjaya, Erna, and Wardaningsih 2020). Instrumental communication is communication that has the aim of informing, teaching, encouraging, changing attitudes, moving actions, and entertaining. The communication process can meet personal and work needs, such as expressing empathy, giving a test, or making a good impression. Like the research conducted by Adella in 2022, where the mental health campaign media uses posters as instrumental in educating the public about mental disorders, the community responds well to the posters and the public before and after being given mental health campaign education, which shows that there is an increased participant understanding of medium to high categories.


## Community Social Support for People with Mental Disorders

In accordance with Law Number 18 of 2014 concerning Mental Health, which is aimed at ensuring that everyone can achieve a good quality of life and provide health services in an integrated, comprehensive, and sustainable manner through promotional, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, Broadly speaking, the law contains one of them, namely the need for community participation in protecting and empowering ODGJ (people with mental disorders) in the form of assistance, which can be in the form of personnel, funds, facilities, treatment for people with mental disorders (ODGJ), and protection against acts of violence, creating a conducive environment, and providing skills training.

Social support is generally interpreted as the existence of other people who can be trusted, people who can make someone feel cared for, valued, and loved. Social support provided by the community for people with mental disorders comes from social interaction. The social interaction occurs with sufferers and with sufferers' families. Social support is the availability and concern of someone who can be relied upon (Karangora, 2012).

According to research (Kumalasari, Wardana, and Martiana 2020), when there is emotional support from the community for families and people with mental disorders who provide empathy to bring them to health services, it shows community social support for families and people with mental disorders. Appreciative support is given by the community, which gives praise to people with mental disorders in carrying out worship or daily activities. As well as caring for people with mental disorders, the community provides support so they can continue to work. instrumental support, in which society provides opportunities for people with mental disorders to work productively. Social support that is obtained by individuals from their surrounding environment, both from their family and the surrounding community, will affect the way they deal with stress and anxiety in their daily lives. Individuals who receive social support from other individuals will feel loved, valued, and like they are part of their social environment. (Syarifah et al.,2021). In research (Syarifah et al., 2021), which has an overview of community social support for people with mental disorders by people in the living environment, be it neighbors, community groups, or community leaders, to increase individual coping resources and assist in psychological adjustment to a problem or illness to prevent stress. According to Maulana (2021), which has an overview of community social support for people with mental disorders by people in the living environment, be it neighbors, community groups, or community leaders, to increase individual coping resources and assist in psychological adjustment to a problem or illness to prevent stress. According to Maulana (2016), social support is needed for the recovery of mental disorders by providing psychological support. People with mental disorders feel inferior when they return to live in society after being treated in a mental hospital.


## Empowerment of Cadres in the Early Detection of Mental Health

The importance of cadre training on early detection of mental disorders is so that cadres can recognize and be able to treat mental disorders early based on the signs and symptoms that appear, in addition to providing conducive conditions for patients. Early detection also functions to improve and maintain the mental health of patients and their families and is a source of problems regarding family psychiatric problems. in research (Susanti et al., 2021), where cadre empowerment is carried out through training in order to increase cadre knowledge in carrying out early detection of mental disorders.

Training for cadres is given by small group discussion (lecture and question and answer), using a module on the detection of mental disorders. The training was given in 2 meetings, with a duration of 2 hours for each meeting. From the research results, it is illustrated that the cadres' knowledge of early detection has increased significantly after being given training through health education using modules on early detection and has had a significant influence. With the presence of mental health cadres, it is hoped that they can become the spearhead for promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative mental patients and their families in the community. This can increase the productivity of patients with mental disorders and improve mental health in the community. In research (Grant et al. 2021) empowerment uses the Community Mental Health Education and Detection Tool (CMED), which shows the need for tools such as CMED to help promote mental health to the community, which is carried out regularly, and this tool conducts screenings of mental health conditions. The use of this tool provides benefits to society. First, the CMED tool is a health promotion tool that can increase local community knowledge and health by looking at the mental condition of the family. Second, it becomes a media referral channel that identifies whether the referral pathway is appropriate for mental health disorders. Third, provide understanding to people with mental disorders who are being monitored, as well as guidance in using CMED tools to improve the health of people with mental disorders and their families.

The need for supportive supervision and mentoring for the public health team cannot be ignored, given the strong relationship with CHW program performance Likewise with Mueller (2020), where research develops community-based health care that has a good effect on empowering the community by using media with a new approach to community-based integrated mental health care called Gemein Depsychiatrische Basisversorgung (GBV). Includes an initial needs assessment and an individually tailored mental health treatment plan as core elements of an integrated mental health care process.

According to research (Halimah 2021) the role of community cadres in the Aji Mumpung program is in a communicative strategy in which they make observations on early detection activities in the community such as providing information on early detection schedules and conducting consultations with.The role of cadres in the community and family is to gather as much information as possible for further action. An informative communication strategy is a communication strategy where the message consists of information that is conveyed as it is according to the facts. That the Aji Mumpung program has two red lines, namely examination and treatment, as well as community education, both of which are part of the ODGJ empowerment process. These two red lines were then implemented into four activities, namely: early detection, home visits, and counseling. Efri Widianti and Imas Rafiyah (2017 also stated that by empowering the community to carry out early detection of mental health problems, cadres' knowledge of community mental health problems has increased and they can carry out early detection of mental health problems.

In dealing with the persistence of cases of mental disorders in their area, mental health cadres can take several actions, including mobilizing cadres who have attended mental disorder detection cadre training to conduct health education about mental disorders directly to the community, either in formal or informal activities. For example, in monthly posyandu and posbindu activities. The cadres can pass on the knowledge gained to other cadres who have not attended the training or to the wider community.


## Community Empowerment in Building Community Mental Health

Families and communities are involved in handling cases of mental disorders, starting from early detection, treatment options, and treatment to individual needs-oriented rehabilitation. Psychiatric rehabilitation is an effort to overcome obstacles and limitations in a person as a result of mental disorders, especially severe mental disorders, so that they are able to play an active role in normal social life. What is the government's role in empowering people with mental disorders, such as providing comprehensive facilities and facilities both in the leech sector and in the health service, mental hospital, and village apparatus, according to research (Asih, 2017), where roles involve various sectors to have a good impact on families or people with mental disorders? Where the village head plays an important role, where the village head demonstrates concern by providing vehicles for residents, alert villages, and motivation to the community in an effort to build community mental health by attempting to provide a budget focused on providing medicine and a budget for human resource development through training from doctors and nurses who provide mental health knowledge in the community.

In research (Asih, 2017), it was revealed that where efforts are made by a community that cares about mental health and wants to continue to improve the quality of life of sufferers, As a result, improving the quality of life for people with mental disorders requires the entire community and the environment to pay attention and care.It is hoped that through community empowerment activities, patients with mental disorders will not only be a concern for each of their families, but also a concern for the quality of life of sufferers in the local environment.

Therefore, in order to maintain the stability of the patient's soul, it is necessary to develop or train the ability of existing human resources in the surrounding community to deal with patients who relapse unexpectedly. The community is one of the supporting environments that can be empowered in accordance with the opinion put forward by George R. Terry, as well as several figures such as Gary Dessler, Peter Sheal, and Armstrong, as well as Stephen Robbins, who stated that the community is a human resource that can be developed and will be an investment in human capital that can be developed. The price is expensive in accordance with the concept of human capital (Armstrong, 2014). Communities that will be empowered to increase their dignity in accordance with their needs to develop community mental health must be developed according to their needs.


## Community Participation in Caring for People with Mental Disorders

Empowerment is an appropriate treatment goal for psychosis (Berry, Allott, Emsley, Ennion, & Barrowclough, 2014;Tolman & Kurtz, 2012). What's more, people with mental disorders themselves identify empowerment as a key factor in the treatment process. In research (Yotsidi and Kounenou 2018), empowerment has a relationship role with other people (namely, family, peers, the therapy team, and sensitive people in society). Personal relationships include volunteer and neighbor contributions, initiatives by various local agencies (e.g., cultural associations, churches), and the role of community medical support services in establishing contact and participation in patients with mental disorders.

Yotsidi revealed that participants had training programs according to their interests, for example, cooking, computer courses, and handicrafts. where it is needed so that it is productive and does not depend on other people. In addition, recreation is provided, such as painting and sports, which can be organized by local institutions. And supporting mental, social, and employment health is a supporting factor for improving treatment services for people with mental disorders. The mental health community can be a bridge between people with mental disorders broadly, both holding group discussions and increasing the abilities of people with mental disorders with various activities, establishing social relationships, and preparing people with mental disorders to work in social institutions. counseling patients to provide individual understanding and ways of managing problems in community-based services to prevent stigma among people with mental disorders. Mental Health Service User Experience on Integration. (Rise, Westerlund, Bjrgen, & Steinsbekk, 2014).

In his research, Yotsidi emphasized the importance of community health services being able to adapt to their needs by providing support to people with mental disorders and implementing focus group discussions between communities in order to provide participation for people with mental disorders.


## Empowerment Training on the Use of Health Services in Strengthening Mental Health

Empowerment is the most appropriate solution to address the complexity of mental disorders. Empowerment is basically an effort to restore the productivity of people with mental disorders with a series of structured plans (Suprajitno & Liani, 2016). Empowerment of people with mental disorders can be carried out by health services that are oriented towards mental health recovery and education with integrated programs and services (Livana, 2018).

In research (Abayneh et al. 2017), it was revealed that empowerment training in health services provided benefits. In a qualitative study, respondents stated that training provided interesting and useful topics, and training that used interesting words provided a good focus on the community. Whereas in a quantitative study, participants experienced an increase in understanding after attending training, and respondents expressed that they had new skills that could be used.

In Abayneh's research, it shows a positive value in increasing knowledge and mental health recovery. This research is closer to the Photo Voice media, which supports participants to play an active role in conveying complex mental disorders. as well as the active involvement of participants in the photovoice process so as to provide new skills such as photography and group work. which has a positive impact, such as increased self-confidence and selfesteem.as well as health services reveal the adoption of healthier lifestyles such as reduced alcohol consumption, effective drug use, better social interaction, and presence in health services. And the training process provides social benefits such as building relationships, learning together, and sharing experiences.


## STUDY LIMITATIONS

This article is only limited to searching the twelve databases that were analyzed due to the lack of research discussing this matter, and all literature sources obtained in this study are articles in English and Indonesian.


## CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

Conclusions and recommendations. This article has presented several reviews of research results related to community empowerment programs related to caring for patients with mental disorders. After reviewing the 12 articles, it can be concluded that with the empowerment carried out in the community, various programs in health services are available in the community environment. The results from the literature show a positive impact on increasing the productivity of people with mental disorders as well as providing community care for families and people with mental disorders, preventing discrimination and stigma, and providing opportunities for people with mental disorders to socialize. Community mental health services play a role in preventive or curative programs. With the availability of mental health services in the community, access will be easier and the progress of the treatment can be better monitored.

## table :
:Tabel 1. Data ExtractionAuthor/ 
Years 

Title 
Design 
Location 
Sample/ 
population 

Destination 
Findings/ Results 

(Adella, et 
al.,2022) 

Agent of Change 
Cares for the 
Mental Health of 
the Pakualaman 
Community, 
Yogyakarta 

Qualitative & 
Quantitative 

Pakualaman, 
Yogyakarta 

Respondents 
were 15 
mental health 
cadres 
throughout 
Pakualaman 
RW, and 10 
ODGJ family 

Increase the 
knowledge of 
mental health 
cadres, care givers 
and the 
Pakualaman 
community by 
providing 

Qualitative results show that 
mental health cadres and 
caregivers learned more about 
mental disorders, their causes, 
how to deal with mental 
patients, the role of the family 
and the environment for ODGJ, 
and how to communicate 

Records identified from* Databases (n = 43,253) 
PubMed: 9,893 
PreGuest: 15,242 

Google scholar:18,100 

Records screened 
(n=43,243) 

Reports sought for retrieval 
(n=92) 

Reports assessed for eligibility 
(n=41) 

Studies included in review 
(n=12) 

Records removed before screening 

Duplicate records removed (n=10) 
(n=10) 

Records excluded**(43,243) 
Protocol: 15,792 
Topic: 27,379 

Reports not retrieved 
(n=41) 

Identification 

Screening 

Included 

Identification of studies via databases and registers 

Figure 1: PRISMA flow diagram 
members/ 
caregivers 

psychoeducation 
and campaigns 
about mental 
health, the causes 
of ODGJ, types of 
mental disorders, 
and their 
treatment 

effectively with ODGJ. 
Quantitative results show that 
mental health cadres and 
caregivers' scores and level of 
understanding went up before 
and after the mentoring 
process. 

(Halimah, et 
al.,2021) 

Mlilir Community 
Health Center 
Communication 
Strategy for 
Empowering 
People with 
Mental Disorders 
(ODGJ) Through 
Aji Mumpung 
Dolopo District, 
Madiun Regency 

Quantitative 
Madiun, 
Indonesia 
There were 5 
respondents 
who 
participated in 
this study, 
including the 
chairperson of 
the Mlilir 
Health Center, 
mental 
programmers 
at the Mlilir 
Health Center, 
mental cadres, 
the deputy 
head of the 
PKK, and the 
ODGJ family. 

Learn how the 
Mlilir Health 
Center's 
communication 
strategy helps 
people with mental 
disorders in the Aji 
Mumpung 
program. 

The results show two programs, 
namely examination and 
treatment as well as health 
education in the community. 
Both of these are implemented 
with four activities: early 
detection, mental health 
promotion, home visits, and 
health counseling. Cadres 
become the primary executors 
of four activities. Using 
effective, informative, and 
persuasive communication 
becomes an important synergy. 

(Kumalasari,et 
al.,2021) 

Social support for 
residents with 
mental disorders 
in Jogonalan 
Kidul, 
Tirtonirmolo, 
Kasihan, and 
Bantul 

Quantitative 
Bantul, 
Indonesia 

The informants 
in this study 
were nine, 
including 
family, 
community, 
government, 
nurses, and 
cadres. 


Jurnal Aisyah: Jurnal Ilmu Kesehatan ISSN 2502-4825 (print), ISSN 2502-9495 (online)
Jurnal Aisyah: Jurnal Ilmu Kesehatan

Agent Of Change Peduli Kesehatan Jiwa Masyarakat Pakualaman Yogyakarta. Adella Shinta, Seminar Nasional Psikologi. 11Adella., & Shinta. (2022). Agent Of Change Peduli Kesehatan Jiwa Masyarakat Pakualaman Yogyakarta. Seminar Nasional Psikologi, (11).

A handbook of human resource management practice. M Armstrong, 10.1007/s10551-011-1141-1Human Resource Management. Armstrong, M. (2014). A handbook of human resource management practice. Human Resource Management. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-011-1141-1

Dukungan Sosial Bagi Warga Penderita Gangguan Jiwa di. Arsitha Kumalasari, Amika Wardana, 24.DOI10.21831/dimensia.v8i1.35566Jurnal Kajian Sosiologi. Jogonalan KidulArsitha Kumalasari.,& Amika Wardana. (2019). Dukungan Sosial Bagi Warga Penderita Gangguan Jiwa di Jogonalan Kidul, Tirtonirmolo, Kasihan, Bantul. Dimensia: Jurnal Kajian Sosiologi. 24.DOI 10.21831/dimensia.v8i1.35566

National guidance and district-level practices in the supervision of community health workers in South Africa: A qualitative study. T Assegaai, H Schneider, 10.1186/s12960-019-0360-xHuman Resources for Health. 171Assegaai, T., & Schneider, H. (2019). National guidance and district-level practices in the supervision of community health workers in South Africa: A qualitative study. Human Resources for Health, 17(1), 25. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-019-0360-x

Pemberdayaan Dalam Membangun Kesehatan Jiwa Komunitas (Studi Kasus Di Kabupaten Magelang). Asih Widowati, Jurnal Impuls STIKES Binawan. 6Asih Widowati. (2017). Pemberdayaan Dalam Membangun Kesehatan Jiwa Komunitas (Studi Kasus Di Kabupaten Magelang). Jurnal Impuls STIKES Binawan, 6. ISSN: 2442- 7039

Perceived empowerment in people with a dual diagnosis of schizophrenia spectrum disorder and substance misuse. K Berry, R Allott, R Emsley, S Ennion, C Barrowclough, 10.1007/s00127-013-0776-xSocial Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology. 493Berry, K., Allott, R., Emsley, R., Ennion, S., & Barrowclough, C. (2014). Perceived empowerment in people with a dual diagnosis of schizophrenia spectrum disorder and substance misuse. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 49(3), 377-384. doi:10.1007/s00127-013-0776-x

Effectiveness of Resource Groups for Improving Empowerment, Quality of Life, and Functioning of People With Severe Mental Illness: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Cathelijn Tjaden, ; Msc, L Cornelis, 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2021.2880JAMA Psychiatry. 7812Cathelijn Tjaden, MSc; Cornelis L. (2019). Effectiveness of Resource Groups for Improving Empowerment, Quality of Life, and Functioning of People With Severe Mental Illness: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2021;78(12):1309-1318. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2021.2880

Buku Ajar Kesehatan Mental. K S Dewi, UPT UNDIP Press SemarangSemarangDewi, K.S., (2012). Buku Ajar Kesehatan Mental. Semarang: UPT UNDIP Press Semarang.

Pemberdayaan Masyarakat dalam Pelaksanaan Deteksi Dini Permasalahan Kesehatan Jiwa di Desa Jayaraga Kecamatan Tarogong Kidul KabupatenGarut. Efri Widianti Dan Imas Rafiyah, Jurnal Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat UNPAD. Efri Widianti dan Imas Rafiyah. (2017) Pemberdayaan Masyarakat dalam Pelaksanaan Deteksi Dini Permasalahan Kesehatan Jiwa di Desa Jayaraga Kecamatan Tarogong Kidul KabupatenGarut. Jurnal Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat UNPAD, 191 -195

The development of a Community Mental Health Education and Detection (CMED) tool in South Africa. Grant, 100023.DOI.10.1016/j.ssmmh.2021.100023SSM -Mental Health. 1Grant. (2021). The development of a Community Mental Health Education and Detection (CMED) tool in South Africa. SSM - Mental Health 1 (2021) 100023. DOI. 10.1016/j.ssmmh.2021.100023

Health system preparedness for integration of mental health services in rural Liberia. W S Gwaikolo, B A Kohrt, J L Cooper, BMC Health Services Research. 171Gwaikolo, W. S., Kohrt, B. A., & Cooper, J. L. (2017). Health system preparedness for integration of mental health services in rural Liberia. BMC Health Services Research, 17(1), 1-10.

. 10.1186/s12913-017-2447-1https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-017-2447-1

Halimah, Strategi Komunikasi Puskesmas Mlilir Dalam Pemberdayaan Orang Dengan Gangguan Jiwa Melalui Program Aji Mumpung Kecamatan Dolopo Kabupaten Madiun. Commerciums. Halimah. (2021). Strategi Komunikasi Puskesmas Mlilir Dalam Pemberdayaan Orang Dengan Gangguan Jiwa Melalui Program Aji Mumpung Kecamatan Dolopo Kabupaten Madiun. Commerciums, 27-141

Buku Ajar Komunikasi Kesehatan. Cetakan ke-1. Rawamangun: PRENADA MEDIA GROUP. R A Harahap, F E Putra, Harahap, R.A. dan Putra, F.E. (2019). Buku Ajar Komunikasi Kesehatan. Cetakan ke-1. Rawamangun: PRENADA MEDIA GROUP.

Upaya peningkatan kesehatan jiwa masayarakat melalui pelatihan kader kesehatan jiwa di wilayah kerja Puskesmas Sunyaragi Kota Cirebon. E Hidayat, A B Santoso, Edukasi Masyarakat Sehat Sejahtera (EMaSS): Jurnal Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat. 11Hidayat, E., & Santoso, A. B. (2019). Upaya peningkatan kesehatan jiwa masayarakat melalui pelatihan kader kesehatan jiwa di wilayah kerja Puskesmas Sunyaragi Kota Cirebon. Edukasi Masyarakat Sehat Sejahtera (EMaSS): Jurnal Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat, 1(1), 42-49.

. 10.37160/emass.v1i1.189https://doi.org/10.37160/emass.v1i1.189

Pengaruh pelatihan kader jiwa erhadap jumlah kunjungan lansia di Desa Karangbong Kecamatan Pajarakan Kabupaten Probolinggo. I A Isnawati, R Yunita, Jurnal Kesehatan Mesencephalon. 42Isnawati, I. A., & Yunita, R. (2018). Pengaruh pelatihan kader jiwa erhadap jumlah kunjungan lansia di Desa Karangbong Kecamatan Pajarakan Kabupaten Probolinggo. Jurnal Kesehatan Mesencephalon, 4(2).

. 10.36053/mesencephalon.v4i2.78https://doi.org/10.36053/mesencephalon.v4i2.78

Mental health, behavioural problems and treatment seeking among students commencing university in Northern Ireland. M Mclafferty, C R Lapsley, E Ennis, C Armour, S Murphy, B P Bunting, A J Bjourson, E K Murray, S M Neill, 10.1371/journal.pone.0188785PLOS ONE. 1212McLafferty, M., Lapsley, C. R., Ennis, E., Armour, C., Murphy, S., Bunting, B. P., Bjourson, A. J., Murray, E. K., & O'Neill, S. M. (2017). Mental health, behavioural problems and treatment seeking among students commencing university in Northern Ireland. PLOS ONE, 12(12), e0188785. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188785

Effectiveness and costeffectiveness of a community-based mental health care programme (GBV) for people with severe mental illness in Germany: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Annabel Mueller Stierlin, Sandra, Biomedcentral. 598Mueller Stierlin., Annabel Sandra. (2020). Effectiveness and cost- effectiveness of a community-based mental health care programme (GBV) for people with severe mental illness in Germany: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Biomedcentral, 598

. 10.1016/j.ssmmh.2021.100023https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssmmh.2021.100023

Pelatihan deteksi dini gangguan jiwa pada kader kesehatan di Desa Bugangan Kabupaten Pekalongan. H Nafiah, A D Kamalah, Jurnal EMPATI (Edukasi Masyarakat, Pengabdian Dan Bakti235Nafiah, H., & Kamalah, A. D. (2021). Pelatihan deteksi dini gangguan jiwa pada kader kesehatan di Desa Bugangan Kabupaten Pekalongan. Jurnal EMPATI (Edukasi Masyarakat, Pengabdian Dan Bakti), 2(1), 35.

. 10.26753/empati.v2i1.514https://doi.org/10.26753/empati.v2i1.514

The impact of mental health recovery narratives on recipients experiencing mental health problems: Qualitative analysis and change model. Rennick Egglestone, Stefan, 10.1371/journal.pone.0226201PLOS ONE. Rennick Egglestone., Stefan. (2019). The impact of mental health recovery narratives on recipients experiencing mental health problems: Qualitative analysis and change model. PLOS ONE, e0226201. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226201

Safely cared for or empowered in mental health care? Yes, please. M B Rise, H Westerlund, D Bjørgen, A Steinsbekk, 10.1177/0020764012471278The International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 602Rise, M. B., Westerlund, H., Bjørgen, D., & Steinsbekk, A. (2014). Safely cared for or empowered in mental health care? Yes, please. The International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 60(2), 134-138. doi:10.1177/0020764012471278

Badan Penelitian dan. Pengembangan. Kesehatan. Kementerian. RI tahun. Riset Kesehatan Dasar (Riskesdas)Riset Kesehatan Dasar (Riskesdas) (2018). Badan Penelitian dan. Pengembangan. Kesehatan. Kementerian. RI tahun. 2018.

The Phenomenon of Family Empowerment in Caring for People with Mental Disorders. Santosa, Heru, Journal of Medical Sciences. 9Santosa., Heru. (2019). The Phenomenon of Family Empowerment in Caring for People with Mental Disorders. Journal of Medical Sciences. 2021 Sep 26; 9(G):124-127.

. 10.3889/oamjms.2021.6912https://doi.org/10.3889/oamjms.2021.6912

Empowerment training to support service user involvement in mental health system strengthening in rural Ethiopia: a mixed-methods pilot study. Sisay Abayneh, BMC Health Services Research. 22880Sisay Abayneh. (2022). Empowerment training to support service user involvement in mental health system strengthening in rural Ethiopia: a mixed-methods pilot study. BMC Health Services Research, 22:880.

. 10.1186/s12913-022-08290-xhttps://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-08290-x

Susi Susanti, Pengaruh Pelatihan Kader Terhadap Pengetahuan Dan Sikap Tentang Deteksi Dini Gangguan Jiwa. Susi Susanti. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan Kader Terhadap Pengetahuan Dan Sikap Tentang Deteksi Dini Gangguan Jiwa.

. Jurnal Riset Kesehatan Poltekkes Depkes Bandung. Jurnal Riset Kesehatan Poltekkes Depkes Bandung, 368-380.

. 10.34011/juriskesbdg.v13i2.1792https://doi.org/10.34011/juriskesbdg.v13i2.1792.

Dukungan sosial untuk orang dengan gangguan jiwa di daerah miskin: Studi kasus di Gunungkidul. S Surahmiyati, B H Yoga, M Hasanbasri, 10.22146/bkm.25649Berita Kedokteran Masyarakat. 338403Surahmiyati, S., Yoga, B. H., & Hasanbasri, M. (2017). Dukungan sosial untuk orang dengan gangguan jiwa di daerah miskin: Studi kasus di Gunungkidul. Berita Kedokteran Masyarakat, 33(8), 403. https://doi.org/10.22146/bkm.25649

Gambaran Dukungan Sosial Masyarakat Terhadap Orang dengan Gangguan Jiwa. Health Care. Fadilla Syarifah Nurul, Jurnal Kesehatan. 102Syarifah Nurul Fadilla. (2021). Gambaran Dukungan Sosial Masyarakat Terhadap Orang dengan Gangguan Jiwa. Health Care: Jurnal Kesehatan 10 (2) Desember 2021 (278-286)

. 10.36763/healthcare.v10i2.134https://doi.org/10.36763/healthcare.v10i2.134

. W.-T Tsai, ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION POLICY FOR PURSUING SUSTAINABLE CAMPUS: EXPERIENCE FROM TAIWAN HIGHER EDUCATION. Environmental Engineering and Management Journal. 183Tsai, W.-T. (2019). ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION POLICY FOR PURSUING SUSTAINABLE CAMPUS: EXPERIENCE FROM TAIWAN HIGHER EDUCATION. Environmental Engineering and Management Journal, 18(3), 685- 692.

. 10.30638/eemj.2019.062https://doi.org/10.30638/eemj.2019.062

Experiences of mental health service users on their empowerment and social integration in the community. Vasiliki Yotsidi, Kalliope Kounenoub, The European Journal of Counselling Psychology. 71Vasiliki Yotsidi., Kalliope Kounenoub. (2018). Experiences of mental health service users on their empowerment and social integration in the community. The European Journal of Counselling Psychology, 2018, Vol. 7(1), 165-180.

. 10.5964/ejcop.v7i1.147https://doi.org/10.5964/ejcop.v7i1.147.

Sustanibility Factor Related with the Implementation of Community Mental Health Nursing (CMHN) in South and West Jakarta. N E Winahayu, B A Keliat, I Y Wardani, Jurnal Ners. 9Winahayu, N.E., Keliat, B.A., & Wardani, I.Y. (2014). Sustanibility Factor Related with the Implementation of Community Mental Health Nursing (CMHN) in South and West Jakarta. Jurnal Ners. Vol. 9: 305-312.

. 10.20473/jn.v9i2.2682https://doi.org/10.20473/jn.v9i2.2682

The effect of a community mental health training program for multidisciplinary staff. B X Yang, T E Stone, S A Davis, 10.1016/j.apnu.2017.12.007Archives of Psychiatric Nursing. 323Yang, B. X., Stone, T. E., & Davis, S. A. (2018). The effect of a community mental health training program for multidisciplinary staff. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 32(3),413-417. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnu.2017.12.007