# Role of various pharmacologic agents in alveolar bone regeneration: A review

CorpusID: 259865127
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ea5472c065b6870b7a72a62df474f471125a4fd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ea5472c065b6870b7a72a62df474f471125a4fd9)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Role of various pharmacologic agents in alveolar bone regeneration: A review
13 July 2023

Shreya Bagwe 
DrVini Mehta vini.mehta@statsense.in 
Public Health Dentistry


Ankita Mathur 
Dr. D.Y. Patil Dental College and Hospital
Dr. D.Y. Patil VidyapeethPeriodontology, Pimpri, PuneMaharashtra

Abhishek Kumbhalwar 
Research Consultant
STAT SENSE
Srushti 10, Sector 1 D

Amba Township Pvt. Ltd
Trimandir, AdalajGujaratIndia

Ashok Bhati 
Department of Preventive Dental Sciences


College of Dentistry
Jazan University
Saudi Arabia


Department of Public Health Dentistry
Dr. D.Y. Patil Dental College and Hospital
Dr. D.Y. Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune -411 018PimpriMaharashtraIndia

Role of various pharmacologic agents in alveolar bone regeneration: A review
13 July 2023D12F229FE300CC87C6907D4D59C0DCBE10.4103/njms.njms_436_21Received: 15 July 2021, Revised: 21 October 2021, Accepted: 02 November 2021,Alveolar boneperiodontalpharmacologic 10.4103/njms.njms_436_21
Alveolar bone and gingiva are components of the periodontium that house the tooth.It constantly adapts itself to the masticatory forces and position of the tooth.However, localized diseases like chronic periodontitis and certain systemic diseases destroy periodontal tissues, which include the alveolar bone.Various pharmacological agents are being explored for their pleiotropic properties to combat the destruction of alveolar bone.This review focuses on the role of pharmacological agents in alveolar bone regeneration.

## INTRODUCTION

The alveolar process is the portion of the maxilla and mandible that forms and supports the tooth sockets (alveoli). [1]The alveolar bone consists of both the inorganic and organic segments.These components play an important role in the remodeling of alveolar bone as it is subjected to rapid remodeling during tooth eruption, due to the forces of mastication, and also adapting itself to teeth position. [2]Furthermore, the alveolar bone similar to other bones in the body, being a reservoir of minerals, plays an important role in maintaining mineral homeostasis.

However, certain systemic diseases such as osteoporosis, diabetes mellitus, and localized diseases like periodontitis can destroy the periodontium which also includes the alveolar bone. [3]The release of pro-inflammatory mediators such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), IL-6, and prostaglandins (PGE2) due to the diseases or the pharmacologic agents (glucocorticoids) [4] cause increased bone resorption by stimulating osteoclasts (bone-resorbing cells) and inhibiting osteoblasts (bone-forming cells).This destruction of the periodontal attachment apparatus ultimately leads to loss of the tooth. [5]The purpose of periodontal treatment is to restore the periodontal soft tissues and also focus on new bone formation.In addition to conventional mechanical therapy, various pharmacologic agents are administered as an adjunct to boost the restoration of soft and hard tissues of the periodontium by exerting their effect at the molecular level.

Along with the conventional drugs which are being used, new therapeutic strategies are being tested for halting the periodontal destruction and promoting regeneration of periodontal tissues.The present review focuses on the role National Journal of Maxillofacial Surgery / Volume 14 / Issue 2 / May-August 2023 of pharmacologic agents in periodontal regeneration with emphasis on the regeneration of alveolar bone.


## AGENTS PROMOTING ALVEOLAR BONE REGENERATION -BISPHOSPHONATES

Being similar in structure to pyrophosphate, the bisphosphonates have an affinity to the bone tissue. [6]To date, the bisphosphonates are classified into three generations [Figure 1] depending on side chains. [7]They act by inhibiting bone resorption by selectively adsorbing to the mineral surfaces and causing internalization of osteoclasts at the molecular level, which impacts the osteoclasts at the cellular level, thus inhibiting their osteoclastic activity. [8]hey also act on osteoblasts and osteocytes by preventing their apoptosis by binding and inhibiting protein tyrosine phosphatase. [9]ineni et al. conducted a study that compared the effect of 400 µg alendronate with β-Tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP) against β-TCP alone. [10]The study included 60 subjects who were randomly divided into two groups and the clinical parameters were assessed at baseline, 3 and 6 months with bone levels being assessed at baseline and 6 months.The authors concluded that the combination proved better clinical outcomes and bone formation when compared to β-TCP alone.

Akram et al. conducted a meta-analysis assessing the efficacy of bisphosphonate as an adjunct to scaling and root planning (SRP). [11]They inferred that although systemic and local bisphosphonate therapy as an adjunct to SRP yielded favorable outcomes in periodontitis patients in short-term, precaution should be taken that the patient may be at risk of developing osteoradionecrosis of the jaw. [12]meta-analysis on the synergistic effect of 1% alendronate with platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) was conducted in 2019. [13]his meta-analysis included studies that had compared the use of 1% alendronate with PRF alone in periodontal bone regeneration.The combination of PRF and 1% alendronate focuses on the advantages of both agents.PRF is a rich reservoir of growth factors that promote wound healing, angiogenesis, differentiation, and proliferation of cells to form soft tissues and bone, respectively.On the other hand, alendronate, belonging to the bisphosphonate family, targets osteoclasts impairing bone resorption.The authors concluded that PRF plus 1%ALN had better clinical outcomes when compared to PRF alone during periodontal regeneration. [14]NSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a group of antipyretic drugs, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory in nature. [15]PGE2 are one of the key components responsible for alveolar bone loss in periodontal inflammation.It is a pro-inflammatory mediator generated by the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme in the metabolism of arachnoid acid. [16]Selective COX-2 inhibitor drugs such as flurbiprofen and naproxen inhibit the action of the COX enzyme, thus inhibiting the production of PGE2. [17]Jeffcoat et al. compared the topical effect of ketorolac to the systemic effect of flurbiprofen for inhibition of alveolar bone loss in chronic periodontitis.They concluded that ketorolac rinse preserved more alveolar bone compared to systemic flurbiprofen. [18] a meta-analysis, Wang et al. assessed the efficacy of topical application of host modulating agents. [19]Their meta-analysis highlighted that topical application of NSAIDs had a favorable effect in decreasing alveolar bone resorption which was similar to the effect on systemic administration of NSAIDs.


## A N T I M I C R O B I A L A G E N T S -T E T R A C Y C L I N E S , SUBANTIMICROBIAL DOSE DOXYCYCLINE (SDD) AND CHEMICALLY MODIFIED TETRACYCLINES (CMT'S)

Antimicrobial agents like tetracycline possess certain nonantibiotic properties such as anti-inflammatory, proteolysis, angiogenesis, apoptosis, and increased metabolism of bone. [20]Matrix metalloproteinases are zinc-dependent enzymes secreted by many infiltrating cells of periodontium which are responsible for the degradation of collagen and alveolar bone. [21]Doxycycline [22] and minocycline [23] are agents belonging to the tetracycline family which possesses anti-metalloproteinase properties.The action of doxycycline for enhancing alveolar bone regeneration is explained in Figure 2. [24] Periostat (doxycycline hyclate 20 mg) is Food and Drug Administration approved and accepted by American Dental Association and is the only drug that can be administered systemically as an adjunct to SRP in chronic periodontitis patients.It is prescribed twice daily for 3 months till a maximum of 9 months.It helps in reducing alveolar bone loss by inhibiting enzymes, cytokines, and osteoclasts. [25]nocycline is another drug that belongs to the tetracycline family.It promotes bone formation by increasing the proliferation of human bone marrow osteoblastic cells without affecting their phenotype and function.Ma et al.

investigated minocycline-loaded poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (MINO-PLGA) electrospun membrane on osteogenesis in the in-vitro and in-vivo environment.They concluded that in an in vitro environment, MINO-PLGA electrospun membrane demonstrated osteoblast attachment.In an in-vivo environment (rat model), they concluded that MINO-PLGA promoted osteogenesis after periodontitis.Thus MINO-PLGA could offer advantages such as reducing patient visits, encouraging patient compliance, and improving the outcomes, making it a sustained released therapeutic strategy in future. [26]emically modified tetracyclines are a group of antimicrobial agents synthesized by altering the chemical structure of tetracyclines to reap additional benefits. [27]They are shown to inhibit osteoclastic properties.They modify the structure of osteoclasts by altering the ruffled border of osteoclasts and increasing the clear zone (site of no bone resorption) in osteoclasts. [28]They are shown to inhibit osteoclastogenesis and promote their apoptosis when administered at different concentrations. [29]However, more human trials are needed to assess the efficacy of chemically modified tetracycline on bone regeneration.Azithromycin is a macrolide antibiotic drug with additional immunomodulatory properties. [30]The triple role of azithromycin is well known.The suppression of periodontal pathogens, anti-inflammatory action, and persistence at low levels in macrophages and fibroblasts in periodontal tissues which help in the healing, make azithromycin a suitable candidate as an adjunct to mechanical therapy in the treatment of periodontitis. [31]rsch reported healing of periodontium and regeneration of alveolar bone after systemic administration of azithromycin.The regeneration of bone in periodontium was attributed to the accumulation of azithromycin in inflammatory cells which help, in downregulating pro-inflammatory cytokines.The authors proposed that the descending periodontal inflammation encouraged bone formation. [32]ATINS Stains are a group of drugs that are potent inhibitors of the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMG CoA reductase).This enzyme is responsible for the production of cholesterol in the liver.Thus the statins are hypocholesterolemic drugs. [33][36] Statins are classified based on their solubility as to whether they are fat-soluble (lipophilic) or water-soluble (hydrophilic).The statins are listed in Table 1. [37]


## EFFECT OF STATINS ON THE METABOLISM OF BONE

Statins affect bone metabolism by three mechanisms [38] (1) decrease osteoclastogenesis, (2) increase osteogenesis, and (3) decrease bone resorption.[41][42] Yazawa et al. demonstrated in an in-vitro study the positive effect of simvastatin on proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of human periodontal cells due to inhibition of the mevalonate pathway. [43]adeep and Thorat investigated the efficacy of 1.2% simvastatin gel in patients with chronic periodontitis. [44]The clinical parameters were recorded at 1, 2, 4, and 6 months.The radiographic bone level was assessed at baseline and 6 months.It was observed that there was an improvement in clinical parameters and significant bone fill on local application of simvastatin after SRP.The authors attributed this increase in bone fill to the expression of the bone morphogenetic protein, the anti-inflammatory property of statin, and angiogenesis during wound healing.Pradeep et al. evaluated the efficacy of local application of 1.2% simvastatin gel as an adjunct to scaling and root planing in chronic periodontitis patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus to improve clinical parameters and bone formation. [45]This study reported a decrease in sulcus bleeding index and pocket depth with an increase in clinical attachment level and bone fill in Type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with chronic periodontitis.Gupta et al. conducted a meta-analysis to assess the osteopromotive ability of simvastatin along with its healing potential on soft tissue and temporomandibular cartilage. [46]The authors concluded that simvastatin has shown a positive treatment outcome in alveolar bone regeneration due to its bone stimulation characteristics.

In a meta-analysis conducted by Sinjab et al., the authors studied the efficacy of statins in localized intrabony defects. [47]hey concluded that locally delivered statins as an adjunct to SRP were beneficial in increasing the bone fill percentage along with improvement in other periodontal parameters.In a study conducted by Muniz et al. to study the efficacy of statins on periodontal regeneration, the authors observed that simvastatin and rosuvastatin significantly improved the resolution of intrabony defects when they were compared to controls. [48]The authors concluded that stains improved periodontal parameters when used as an adjunct to SRP rather than with SRP alone or with a placebo.


## HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY-PARATHYROID HORMONE

The parathyroid hormone (PTH) is secreted by the parathyroid gland for the maintenance of calcium and phosphorus levels in plasma.While the catabolic effects of PTH on bone is well  known, it has also been recognized to have an anabolic effect on bone. [49]For PTH to exert a catabolic or anabolic effect, it depends on its dose of administration.PTH is said to exert anabolic effects at intermittent doses. [50]The anabolic effect of PTH is explained in Figure 4. [51][52][53][54][55] A few animal studies were conducted to investigate the effect of PTH on alveolar bone loss in experimental periodontitis.[58] In a human study, it was found that teriparatide, a recombinant form of PTH, was administered to patients after periodontal surgery for 1 year.They observed that PTH therapy improved the bone level and also the clinical attachment level. [59]TROGEN AND SELECTIVE ESTROGEN RECEPTOR MODULATORS It has been proved that estrogen deficiency in rats increased bone loss in postmenopausal women.[60] Estrogen decreases bone resorption by inhibiting osteoclastic activity and differentiation by modifying the production of cytokines by osteoblasts and monocytes that are stimulatory and inhibitory.[61,62] Similar to estrogen are Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators which exert partial or full estrogen effect in tissues.They similarly inhibit bone resorption by halting the production of cytokines which promote differentiation of osteoclasts and promote apoptosis of osteoclasts.[63] ANTI-CYTOKINE THERAPY This group of drugs is mainly indicated for the treatment of chronic inflammatory and diseases which are autoimmune in origins such as Crohn's disease, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis, ulcerative colitis, and rheumatoid arthritis.These drugs target pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6, T-cells, and B-cells. Of tese, TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6 promote bone resorption and have a detrimental effect on osteoblasts.[64] Savioli et al. evaluated the periodontal status in rheumatoid arthritis patients 6 months before after commencement of anti-cytokine therapy.[65] The authors observed that there was an improvement in periodontal parameters, which were probing depth, gingival bleeding, and clinical attachment level.

The authors concluded that anticytokine therapy improved periodontal disease parameters in rheumatoid arthritis patients.However, this study did not assess the effect on alveolar bone.Yang et al. performed an animal study to prove the efficacy of locally applied anticytokine antibodies for osteogenesis around bioactive implants.They observed that when compared to local application of steroids, locally applied anti-cytokine therapy could enhance new bone formation.However, it could not suppress the localized inflammation and swelling when compared to the steroid group. [66]TAMINS Vitamin D is a corticosteroid that is synthesized from 7-dehydrocholesterol during a photochemical reaction under the effect of ultraviolet radiation on the skin or is consumed through digestion. [67]Vitamin D plays an important role in calcium homeostasis.It absorbs calcium from the intestine, bone, and kidney to maintain the serum calcium level. [68]part from its calcium homeostasis properties, Vitamin D also exerts anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties. [69]hwalfenberg have highlighted the influence of Vvitamin D in the pathogenesis of periodontal disease through immunomodulation, causing increased bone mineral density, decreasing bone resorption, and combating against mediators of periodontal disease. [70]Fakheran et al. conducted a systematic review to evaluate the effect of Vitamin D on periodontal healing after periodontal surgery. [71]The authors concluded that decreased serum levels of Vitamin D would negatively affect the healing after periodontal surgery, thus highlighting the fact that Vitamin D may be critical for healing post periodontal surgery.It was proposed that Vitamin D alone or as supplementation to alendronate or teriparatide after periodontal surgery exerted an anti-inflammatory effect and enabled anabolic agents (alendronate and teriparatide) for bone formation in the oral cavity. [72]complex vitamins are a group of water-soluble vitamins.They include riboflavin, folic acid, nicotinamide, pantothenic acid, pyridoxine, and cyanocobalamin. [73]These micronutrients are essential for the maintenance of gingival health and aids in wound healing. [74,75]Mohammadi et al. evaluated the effect of folic acid on bone in cyclosporine administered rats.The authors concluded that folic acid may have a protective effect on bone against cyclosporine-induced bone loss. [76]Akpınar et al. demonstrated the effect of B complex vitamins in ligature-induced periodontitis in rats. [77]he authors investigated the effect of B complex vitamins on 64 rats by administering one vitamin for each group which was Riboflavin 50 mg/kg daily (RBF50), Nicotinamide 50 mg/kg daily (NA50), Folic acid 50 mg/kg daily (FA50), Riboflavin 100 mg/kg daily (RBF100), Nicotinamide 100 mg/kg daily (NA100) group, and Folic acid 100 mg/kg daily (FA100).

The authors observed that osteoblastic activity was greater in the riboflavin and nicotinamide group compared to the control group.They concluded that nicotinamide, folic acid, and riboflavin, when administered in different dosages, increased osteoblastic activity, decreased the number of osteoclasts which helped in reducing alveolar bone loss in experimental periodontitis in the rat model.


## METFORMIN

Metformin (1, 1-dimethyl biguanide) HCl is a second-generation biguanide oral antidiabetic agent indicated for the treatment of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.Recently metformin has been investigated for its osteopromotive properties. [78]Studies have shown that metformin exerts this effect through two mechanisms. [79,80]In a recent meta-analysis, Najeeb et al. investigated the efficacy of metformin in the management of periodontitis which included animal and human studies. [81]The human studies included metformin as an adjunct to nonsurgical therapy, the addition of metformin to PRF in intrabony defects.The authors concluded that metformin is effective in improving the clinical parameters following surgical or nonsurgical therapy.However, longitudinal, histologic, and bacterial studies were required to assess the long-term benefits of metformin.


## FUTURE THERAPEUTIC TARGETS

[84] Though some drugs inhibit the activity of these molecules in systemic diseases, still these drugs have not been used for treatment for periodontitis.86] These molecules can act as therapeutic targets for the future development of pharmacologic agents, which can inhibit alveolar bone resorption and promote alveolar bone regeneration.


## CONCLUSION

The increased understanding of the pathogenesis of the periodontal disease, its devastating effect on periodontal soft tissues and alveolar bone have led to the exploration of various characteristics of conventional pharmacologic agents.The actions of these agents at the molecular level to arrest the osteoclastic resorption and promote osteoblastic activity have been demonstrated in in-vitro and in-vivo studies.However, certain questions such as the associated risks with long-term administration of these drugs, the amount of dose administered, the route of administration, the requirement of a carrier, or vehicle for the drug remain unanswered.

There is a need for multicentre trials to address the above queries which accompany the pharmacologic agents.This will facilitate the dentist to plan a treatment that will target the molecules responsible for downregulating alveolar bone resorption and up-regulating those for alveolar bone regeneration.


## Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

## Figure 1 :
1
Figure 1: Classification of bisphosphonates


## Figure 2 :
2
Figure 2: Action of doxycycline on alveolar bone regeneration


## Figure 3 :
3
Figure 3: Role of statins in bone metabolism


## Figure 4 :
4
Figure 4: Anabolic action of parathyroid hormone on bone by (i) secretion of growth factors, (ii) promoting exit from the cell cycle, (iii) expanding lifespan of osteoblasts, (iv) acts on osteocytes, (v) stimulating quiescent cells to form osteoblasts


## Table 1 : Classification of statins according to solubility Type of solubility Statin
1
Water-soluble (hydrophilic)Pravastatin, Pitavastatin, and Rosuvastatin Fat-soluble (lipophilic) Atorvastatin, Fluvastatin, Lovastatin and Simvastatin

Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.
Anatomy of the Periodontium Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. 12 th ed. J P Fiorellini, P G Stathopoulou, 2015ElsevierSt. Louis, Missouri

Molecular and cellular biology of alveolar bone. J Sodek, M D Mckee, Periodontol. 242000 2000

Influence of Systemic conditions. Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. 12 th ed. P R Klokkevold, B L Mealey, 2015ElsevierSt. Louis, Missouri

Glucocorticoids and bone: Consequences of endogenous and exogenous excess and replacement therapy. R S Hardy, H Zhou, M J Seibel, M S Cooper, Endocr Rev. 392018

Physiological features of periodontal regeneration and approaches for periodontal tissue engineering utilizing periodontal ligament cells. B B Benatti, K G Silvério, M Z Casati, E A Sallum, F H NocitiJr, J BiosciBioeng. 1032007

Bisphosphonates: Mechanism of action and role in clinical practice. M T Drake, B L Clarke, S Khosla, Mayo Clin Proc. 832008

Mechanisms of action of bisphosphonates: Similarities and differences and their potential influence on clinical efficacy. R G Russell, N B Watts, F H Ebetino, M J Rogers, Osteoporos Int. 19733592008

Bisphosphonates: Mode of action and pharmacology. R G Russell, Pediatrics. 11922007Suppl

Alendronate has an anabolic effect on bone through the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. G Duque, D Rivas, J Bone Miner Res. 222007

Effect of alendronate with β TCP bone substitute in surgical therapy of periodontal intra-osseous defects: A randomized controlled clinical trial. R Naineni, V Ravi, D K Subbaraya, J S Prasanna, V R Panthula, R R Koduganti, J Clin Diagn Res. 102016

Efficacy of bisphosphonate as an adjunct to nonsurgical periodontal therapy in the management of periodontal disease: A systematic review. Z Akram, T Abduljabbar, S V Kellesarian, Abu Hassan, M I Javed, F Vohra, F , Br J Clin Pharmacol. 832017

Osteonecrosis of the maxilla and mandible in patients with advanced cancer treated with bisphosphonate therapy. C L Estilo, C H Van Poznak, T Wiliams, G C Bohle, P T Lwin, Q Zhou, Oncologist. 132008

Synergistic application of platelet-rich fibrin and 1% alendronate in periodontal bone regeneration: A meta-analysis. F Li, P Jiang, J Pan, C Liu, L Zheng, Biomed Res Int. 91481832019. 2019

Basics of platelet-rich fibrin therapy. R J Miron, M Bishara, J Choukroun, Dent Today. 362017

Host modulation therapy with anti-inflammatory agents. P M Preshaw, Periodontol. 762000. 2018

Prostaglandins and inflammation. E Ricciotti, G A Fitzgerald, Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 312011

The effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (selective and non-selective) on the treatment of periodontal diseases. G E Salvi, N P Lang, Curr Pharm Des. 112005

A comparison of topical ketorolac, systemic flurbiprofen, and placebo for the inhibition of bone loss in adult periodontitis. M K Jeffcoat, M S Reddy, S Haigh, W Buchanan, M J Doyle, M P Meredith, J Periodontol. 661995

Topical host-modulating therapy for periodontal regeneration: A systematic review and meta-analysis. B Wang, J Shao, J Fu, J A Jansen, X F Walboomers, C R Hooijmans, Tissue Eng Part B Rev. 252019

Tetracyclines: Nonantibiotic properties and their clinical implications. A N Sapadin, R Fleischmajer, J Am Acad Dermatol. 542006

Mechanisms of connective tissue matrix destruction in periodontitis. J J Reynolds, M C Meickle, Periodontol. 142000. 1997

A non-antimicrobial tetracycline inhibits gingival matrix metalloproteinases and bone loss in Porphyromonas gingivalis-induced periodontitis in rats. L M Golub, R T Evans, T F Mcnamara, H M Lee, N S Ramamurthy, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 7321994

Minocycline reduces gingival collagenolytic activity during diabetes. Preliminary observations and a proposed new mechanism of action. L M Golub, H M Lee, G Lehrer, A Nemiroff, T F Mcnamara, R Kaplan, J Periodontal Res. 181983

Tetracyclines inhibit connective tissue breakdown by multiple non-antimicrobial actions. L M Golub, H M Lee, M E Ryan, W V Giannobile, J Payne, T Sorsa, Adv Dent Res. 121998

Host modulation. M E Ryan, Y Gu, Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. 12 th ed. St. LouisElsevierMissouri

Minocycline-loaded PLGA electrospun membrane prevents alveolar bone loss in experimental peridontitis. Y Ma, J Song, H N Almassri, D Zhang, T Zhang, Y Cheng, X Wu, Drug Deliv. 272020

A non-antibacterial chemically-modified tetracycline inhibits mammalian collagenase activity. L M Golub, T F Mcnamara, D' Angelo, G Greenwald, R A Ramamurthy, N S , J Dent Res. 661987

Effects of tetracyclines on bone metabolism. A T Vernillo, B R Rifkin, Adv Dent Res. 121998

Chemically modified tetracyclines act through multiple mechanisms directly on osteoclast precursors. S G Holmes, K Still, D J Buttle, N J Bishop, P S Grabowski, Bone. 352004

Azithromycin modulates neutrophil function and circulating inflammatory mediators in healthy human subjects. O Uli, V Erakovi, I Epelak, K Bariši, K Brajša, E Ferenči, Eur J Pharmacol. 4502002

Azithromycin in periodontal treatment: More than an antibiotic. R Hirsch, H Deng, M N Laohachai, J Periodontal Res. 472012

Periodontal healing and bone regeneration in response to azithromycin. R Hirsch, Aust Dent J. 552010

Systematic review of the effect of adherence to statin treatment on critical cardiovascular events and mortality in primary prevention. E Martin-Ruiz, A Olry-De-Labry-Lima, R Ocaña-Riola, D Epstein, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 232018

Statins and oxidative stress in the cardiovascular system. M Margaritis, F Sanna, C Antoniades, Curr Pharm Des. 232017

Simvastatin decreases IL-6 and IL-8 production in epithelial cells. K Sakoda, M Yamamoto, Y Negishi, J K Liao, K Node, Y Izumi, J Dent Res. 852006

Bacteriostatic effect of simvastatin on selected oral streptococci in vitro. E J Whitaker, A Alshammari, Contemp Clin Dent. 82017

Statins and bone formation. I R Garrett, G Gutierrez, G R Mundy, Curr Pharm Des. 72001

Statins, bone metabolism and treatment of bone catabolic diseases. Y Zhang, A D Bradley, D Wang, R A Reinhardt, Pharmacol Res. 882014

Effects of atorvastatin on periodontitis of rats subjected to glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. L H Sousa, E V Linhares, J T Alexandre, M R Lisboa, F Furlaneto, R Freitas, J Periodontol. 872016

Simvastatin inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced osteoclastogenesis and reduces alveolar bone loss in experimental periodontal disease. J Jin, X Zhang, Z Lu, Y Li, M F Lopes-Virella, H Yu, J Periodontal Res. 492014

Protective mechanisms of simvastatin in experimental periodontal disease. R Dalcico, A M De Menezes, O B Deocleciano, R B Oriá, M L Vale, R A Ribeiro, J Periodontol. 842013

Fluvastatin inhibits osteoclast differentiation and Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide-induced alveolar bone erosion in mice. N K Pokhrel, Y G Kim, J Y Kim, H H Kim, Y Lee, J Periodontol. 882017

. National Journal of Maxillofacial Surgery. 142May-August 2023

Simvastatin promotes cell metabolism, proliferation, and osteoblastic differentiation in human periodontal ligament cells. H Yazawa, B Zimmermann, Y Asami, J P Bernimoulin, J Periodontol. 762005

Clinical effect of subgingivally delivered simvastatin in the treatment of patients with chronic periodontitis: A randomized clinical trial. A R Pradeep, M S Thorat, J Periodontol. 2010

Efficacy of subgingivally delivered 1.2% atorvastatin in the treatment of chronic periodontitis in patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled clinical trial. M Kumari, S S Martande, A R Pradeep, S B Naik, J Periodontol. 872016

The impact of simvastatin intervention on the healing of bone, soft tissue, and TMJ cartilage in dentistry: A systematic review and meta-analysis. S Gupta, Del Fabbro, M Chang, J , Int J Implant Dent. 5172019

The effect of locally delivered statins on treating periodontal intrabony defects: A systematic review and meta-analysis. K Sinjab, N Zimmo, G H Lin, M P Chung, L Shaikh, H L Wang, J Periodontol. 882017

The effect of statins on periodontal treatment-a systematic review with meta-analyses and meta-regression. F W Muniz, K Taminski, J Cavagni, Celeste Rk Weidlich, P Rösing, C K , Clin Oral Investig. 222018

On the stimulation of new bone-formation with parathyroid extract and irradiated ergosterol. H Selye, Endocrinology193216

The effects of programmed administration of human parathyroid hormone fragment (1-34) on bone histomorphometry and serum chemistry in rats. H Dobnig, R T Turner, Endocrinology. 1381997

IGF-I receptor is required for the anabolic actions of parathyroid hormone on bone. Y Wang, S Nishida, B M Boudignon, A Burghardt, H Z Elalieh, M M Hamilton, J Bone Miner Res. 222007

Increased bone formation by intermittent parathyroid hormone administration is due to the stimulation of proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells in bone marrow. S Nishida, A Yamaguchi, T Tanizawa, N Endo, T Mashiba, Y Uchiyama, Bone. 151994

Parathyroid hormone uses multiple mechanisms to arrest the cell cycle progression of osteoblastic cells from G1 to S phase. L Qin, X Li, J K Ko, N C Partridge, J Biol Chem. 2802005

Increased bone formation by prevention of osteoblast apoptosis with parathyroid hormone. R L Jilka, R S Weinstein, T Bellido, P Roberson, A M Parfitt, S C Manolagas, J Clin Invest. 1041999

Chronic elevation of parathyroid hormone in mice reduces expression of sclerostin by osteocytes: A novel mechanism for hormonal control of osteoblastogenesis. T Bellido, A A Ali, I Gubrij, L I Plotkin, Q Fu, O Brien, C A , Endocrinology. 1462005

Evidence that intermittent treatment with parathyroid hormone increases bone formation in adult rats by activation of bone lining cells. H Dobnig, R T Turner, Endocrinology. 1361995

Parathyroid hormone protects against periodontitis-associated bone loss. S P Barros, M A Silva, M J Somerman, F H NocitiJr, J Dent Res. 822003

Effect of intermittent PTH administration in the periodontitis associated bone loss in ovariectomized rats. M R Marques, M D Da Silva, F R Manzi, Cesar - Neto, J B Nociti, F H Barros, S P , Arch Oral Biol. 502005

Teriparatide and osseous regeneration in the oral cavity. J D Bashutski, R M Eber, J S Kinney, E Benavides, S Maitra, T M Braun, N Engl J Med. 3632010

Mediators of periodontal osseous destruction and remodeling: Principles and implications for diagnosis and therapy. L K Mccauley, R M Nohutcu, J Periodontol. 732002

Cytokines, bone remodeling, and estrogen deficiency: A 1998 update. R L Jilka, Bone. 231998

Estrogen and bone loss. R Pacifici, Adv Organ Biol. 51998

Mechanisms of alveolar bone destruction in periodontitis. Z Schwartz, J Goultschin, D D Dean, B D Boyan, Periodontol. 1420001997

Bone effects of biologic drugs in rheumatoid arthritis. A Corrado, A Neve, N Maruotti, F P Cantatore, Clin Dev Immunol. 9459452013. 2013

Persistent periodontal disease hampers anti-tumor necrosis factor treatment response in rheumatoid arthritis. C Savioli, A C Ribeiro, G M Fabri, A L Calich, J Carvalho, C A Silva, J Clin Rheumatol. 182012

Anticytokine activity enhances osteogenesis of bioactive implants. F Yang, X Zhang, H Huang, G Wu, K Lippuner, E B Hunziker, Tissue Eng Part A. 272021

Vitamin D and its impact on oral health--an update. S H Stein, D A Tipton, J Tenn Dent Assoc. 912011

Vitamin D and periodontal disease. Y Amano, K Komiyama, M Makishima, J Oral Sci. 512009

Newly identified actions of the Vitamin D endocrine system. M R Walters, Endocr Rev. 131992

A review of the critical role of Vitamin D in the functioning of the immune system and the clinical implications of Vitamin D deficiency. G K Schwalfenberg, Mol Nutr Food Res. 552011

Effect of Vitamin D level on periodontal treatment outcomes: A systematic review. O Fakheran, Z Khodadadi-Bohlouli, A Khademi, Gen Dent. 672019

Vitamin D inhibits the expression of interleukin-8 in human periodontal ligament cells stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis. X Tang, Y Pan, Y Zhao, Arch Oral Biol. 582013

B Vitamins and the brain: Mechanisms, dose and efficacy a review. D O Kennedy, Nutrients. 8682016

Serum Vitamin B12 is inversely associated with periodontal progression and risk of tooth loss: A prospective cohort study. G Zong, B Holtfreter, A E Scott, H Volzke, A Petersmann, T Dietrich, J Clin Periodontol. 432016

Improvement in periodontal healing after periodontal surgery supported by nutritional supplement drinks. J Lee, J C Park, U W Jung, S H Choi, K S Cho, Y K Park, J Periodontal Implant Sci. 442014

Protective effect of folic acid on cyclosporine-induced bone loss in rats. A Mohammadi, L Omrani, L R Omrani, F Kiani, A Eshraghian, Z Azizi, Transpl Int. 252012

Comparative effects of riboflavin, nicotinamide and folic acid on alveolar bone loss: A morphometric and histopathologic study in rats. A Akpınar, N C Karakan, A L Alpan, Ssa Dogan, F Goze, O Poyraz, Srp Arh Celok Lek. 1442016

The blooming of the French liliac. L A Witters, J Clin Invest. 1082001

Protective effect of metformin on periapical lesions in rats by decreasing the ratio of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand/osteoprotegerin. L Liu, C Zhang, Y Hu, B Peng, J Endod. 382012

The effect of metformin on alveolar bone in ligature-induced periodontitis in rats: A pilot study. E J Bak, H G Park, M Kim, S W Kim, S Kim, S H Choi, J Periodontol. 812010

Efficacy of metformin in the management of periodontitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. S Najeeb, M S Zafar, Z Khurshid, S Zohaib, S A Madathil, M Mali, Saudi Pharm J. 262018

Expression of cathepsin-K in gingival crevicular fluid of patients with periodontitis. M Mogi, J Otogoto, Arch Oral Biol. 522007

IKK {beta} as a target for treatment of inflammation induced bone loss. M G Ruocco, Karin M , Ann Rheum Dis. 6442005Suppl

RANKL inhibition through osteoprotegerin blocks bone loss in experimental periodontitis. Q Jin, J A Cirelli, C H Park, J V Sugai, M TabaJr, P J Kostenuik, J Periodontol. 782007

Canonical Wntsignaling in differentiated osteoblasts controls osteoclast differentiation. D A Glass, P Bialek, J D Ahn, M Starbuck, M S Patel, H Clevers, Dev Cell. 82005

A therapeutic strategy uses histone deacetylase inhibitors to modulate the expression of genes involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Y L Chung, M Y Lee, A J Wang, L F Yao, Mol Ther. 82003