# BMC Geriatrics An overview of innovative living arrangements within long-term care and their characteristics: a scoping review

CorpusID: 259952382
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae65c6a584e22420074dd087fe9d08c2c21e7f93](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae65c6a584e22420074dd087fe9d08c2c21e7f93)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

BMC Geriatrics An overview of innovative living arrangements within long-term care and their characteristics: a scoping review


Mara Brouwers mpj.brouwers@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Mara Brouwers 
Damien S E Broekharst 
Bram De Boer 
Wim G Groen 
Hilde Verbeek 
BMC Geriatrics An overview of innovative living arrangements within long-term care and their characteristics: a scoping review
10.1186/s12877-023-04158-9R E S E A R C H Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article' s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article' s to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Brouwers et al. BMC Geriatrics (2023) 23:442 *Correspondence: Full list of author information is available at the end of the article Page 2 of 13 Brouwers et al. BMC Geriatrics (2023) 23:442
Background Within long-term care, a culture change (e.g. focus on increasing autonomy in everyday life) is leading to the development of innovative living arrangements for older adults. Insight into characteristics of innovative living arrangements, which are described as an alternative to regular nursing homes, is lacking. This review aims to provide an overview of innovative living arrangements and to describe their defining characteristics.Methods A scoping review was performed following the framework of Arksey and O'Malley. The preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses with extension, for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) was also followed. The databases PubMed, PsycInfo, CINAHL, and Web of Science were searched. Articles, published between 2012 and 2023 were included when they presented an innovative living arrangement as an alternative to regular nursing homes. A thematic analysis was performed, describing the physical, social, and organizational environment of the innovative living arrangements.Results Fifty-six articles were identified describing seven types of distinct innovative living arrangements: small-scale living, the green house model, shared housing arrangements, green care farms, dementia villages, group homes, intergenerational living, and an 'other' category. The themes included supporting autonomy and creating a small-scale and/or homelike environment, which were emphasized in most innovative living arrangements. Other themes, such as involvement of the community, focus on nature, integration of work tasks, and involvement of family members, were emphasized in a subsection of the described living arrangements. Twenty-eight articles reported on the effects of the innovative living environment on residents, family members, or staff members. Most articles (N = 22) studied resident-related outcomes, focusing mainly on quality of life and aspects of daily life.Conclusion More insight into the mechanisms of the social and organizational environments is needed, which may lead to greater transparency and homogeneity regarding the description of living arrangements. This review shows that more knowledge is needed about the potential key elements of innovative living arrangements, especially related to their social and organizational environment. This may provide a better guide for developers within longterm care.Publisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Background

In long-term care, during the past decades, there has been a shift in perspective from a medical approach (e.g. predominant focus on physical care needs) to a more psychosocial approach (e.g. primarily focus on quality of life) [1,2]. In nursing homes, the traditional focus has primarily been on quality of care and health outcomes. As a consequence there has been an increased orientation towards physical care needs rather than on improving or maintaining quality of life [3]. This medical approach is reflected by the care environment of traditional nursing homes, which are often closed environments, isolated from the community, leading to residents being largely inactive throughout the day [4]. However, residents living in an environment that is less constrained may provide the residents with opportunities to maintain meaningful relationships [5].

The limitations of traditional nursing homes are increasingly being recognized and are leading to a change in culture, one that promotes a resident-directed approach as well as emphasis on quality of life. New insights show that the physical, social, and organizational environment of living arrangements and their interplay are important for achieving positive outcomes for residents [6]. Consequently, alternative living arrangements, which aim to better fit this culture change, have been, and are being, developed. These alternative living arrangements attempt to drastically change the physical, social, and organizational environment to create a better person-environment fit with the aim to improve functioning and quality of life. Examples of alternative living arrangements are, for example, small-scale living (e.g. a joint household with small groups of residents and a fixed team of care staff, centered around household task) [7] or green care farms (e.g. a homelike care environment where agricultural activities are combined with care activities) [8].

The design of the physical environment can be viewed as a therapeutic resource in itself (e.g. facilitating activities indoors and outdoors) that promotes well-being and quality of life among older people [9,10]. Furthermore, optimizing the social environment and providing person-centred care may also be related to an increase in quality of life [11]. Staff members (e.g. care staff, therapists) play an essential role in supporting the residents' independence, as they can guide the environment and interactions in a way that stimulates individuality and independence (e.g. empowering residents, avoiding labelling, getting to know residents personally) [12]. Lastly, optimizing the organizational environment (e.g. supportive management, and empowerment of staff members) may relate to a better quality of care in nursing homes [13]. Positive changes in the work environment (e.g. supporting quality of care and ensuring health and personal well-being) seem to result in better teamwork, increased continuity of care, and better resident outcomes [14].

Despite the fast development of alternative living arrangements, research concerning their effectiveness with regard to improving functioning and quality of life is scarce and shows mixed results. There are some indications that innovative living arrangements lead to better outcomes (e.g. greater job satisfaction, social engagement among residents, satisfaction with care of residents, and physical activity of residents) [8,[15][16][17]. Other articles, however, have not found such effects [17][18][19][20].

Authors have described various innovative living arrangements, but their defining characteristics remain unclear. One review has already looked into innovative living arrangements, but the authors focused solely on small-scale living environments [21]. This means that living arrangements offering an alternative to regular nursing homes that are not small-scale were excluded, although they might offer an innovative alternative to regular nursing homes. A complete overview of innovative living arrangements is lacking and more insight is necessary into the components of innovative living arrangements that offer an alternative to regular nursing homes. Therefore, the aim of this scoping review is to provide an overview of the literature concerning innovative living arrangements that are presented as an alternative to regular nursing homes. Furthermore, we aim to describe the defining characteristics and overarching themes addressed by these innovative living arrangements.


## Methods

A scoping review was conducted following the five stages described by Arksey and O'Malley [22]. Furthermore, to increase reliability and transparency, the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses with extension, for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) was used; see Supporting File 1 for the word file PRISMA-ScR Checklist [23].


## Stage 1: identifying the research question

The following research questions were formulated: What innovative living arrangements are presented in the literature that offer an alternative to regular living Keywords Innovative living arrangements, Innovation, Long-term care, 24-hour care, Nursing home care, Older adults, Scoping review arrangements? What are the defining characteristics of these innovative living arrangements?


## Stage 2: identifying relevant studies

To identify potential studies, four electronic databases were searched: PsycInfo, CINAHL, PubMed, and Web of Science. The word file containing the full search string can be found in Supporting File 2. The PCC (population, concept, and context) mnemonic was used to build the search string [24]. The search terms included key terms related to the target group (e.g. older adults), established 'alternative' living arrangements (e.g. green care farms), and a combination of facility names (e.g. nursing home) and terms related to innovation. Additionally, for each of these key terms, the plural tense and conjugates were also included. A librarian checked and finalized the search string for all included databases. Our first search was performed on 5 July 2022. However, to make sure the review was up-to-date, an update was performed on 22 May 2023. Additionally, reference lists of all included articles and reference lists of reviews were searched to identify additional potentially relevant articles. When an article referred to another article for the definition of a specific living arrangement and it was traceable and relevant, the article could still qualify.


## Stage 3: study selection

Articles published in the Dutch or English language between 2012 and May 2023 were included. As the purpose of this review was to identify recent developments within the long-term care landscape, this review focuses on articles published in the last decade. Articles were included if they: (1) consisted of original research articles describing primary data; (2) described a living arrangement as an alternative to regular nursing homes that offer 24-hour care; (3) presented a description of an innovative living arrangement; (4) described an innovative living arrangement that offers 24-hour care (psychogeriatric as well as somatic care needs) to older adults with complex care needs. An article was excluded when: (1) it did not present original data (e.g. opinion paper); (2) the innovative living arrangement described did not offer 24-hour long-term care; (3) the described innovative living arrangement was not yet operational; (4) the living arrangement focused on short-term stay, rehabilitation, or hospital stay. See Table 1 for overview of the inclusion and exclusion criteria.

All articles were imported into EndNote [25] and Rayyan review managing software [26], which were used for the remainder of the screening process. Both the first author (MB) and a fellow researcher (DB) independently screened the articles based on their titles and abstracts. Before the actual screening process, about 50 articles were test-screened to make sure all in-and exclusion criteria were clear. In the second phase, both researchers independently screened the full-text articles and again determined whether the articles met the eligibility criteria. Any discrepancies between their outcomes were discussed and resolved by re-evaluating them together against the criteria and, if necessary, by discussing the articles with the entire research team to reach a consensus.


## Stage 4: charting the data

A data extraction form was developed. The form included: (1) an extensive description of the innovative living arrangement: name; location; the number and characteristics of residents; the number of units/buildings; a general description; and a description of the physical, social, and organizational environment; (2) the main characteristics of the article: title; date; authors; research question(s); and study design (i.e. observational, quasiexperimental, experimental, and qualitative); (3) sample and sample characteristics; data collection method; and description of data analyses; (4) the primary study outcomes.


## Stage 5: collating, summarizing, and reporting the results

Data analysis consisted of conducting a thematic analysis [27] of the descriptions of the alternative living arrangements. The data was analyzed following the six phases of Nowell, Norris [27]. First, the researchers familiarized themselves with the included articles by reading them thoroughly. Second, an extensive description of the innovative living arrangements was created based on the various descriptions in the individual articles. Specifically, the physical, social, and organizational environments were described and presented in a table. The concepts were grouped into overarching living arrangements, based on overlap in their description. Then the components mentioned in the descriptions were coded. Third, these codes were grouped into overarching themes (e.g. homelike environment, community involvement, etc.). Fourth, all themes were discussed with the last author. Fifth, based on these discussions, the themes were further defined and renamed in such a way to capture the essence of the theme. Last, all themes were described in a report, leading to the results section.


## Results

In total, 7616 articles were identified. After removal of all duplicates, 5186 articles were included for screening. Figure 1 presents the PRISMA 2020 flow diagram [28] showing the search results. Title/Abstract screening has led to 173 articles eligible for full-text screening. Evaluation of these articles according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria resulted in the inclusion of 56 articles suitable for the scoping review. The snowballing method did not lead to identification of new articles. Finally, 56 articles were selected to answer our research question. These articles described a total of seven distinctive innovative living arrangements: (1) small-scale living [15,16,18,[29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39], (2) the green house model [40][41][42][43][44][45][46][47], (3) shared housing arrangements [48][49][50][51][52][53][54], (4) green care farms [20,[55][56][57][58][59][60][61], (5) dementia villages [40,[62][63][64][65][66], (6) group homes [67][68][69], and (7) intergenerational living [70][71][72]. Some articles, however, could not be grouped into one overarching living arrangement because they did not describe the same overarching elements (a household model of residential aged care [73], household model units [74,75], intensive service housing [76], a non-traditional residential care facility [77], the Woodside place model [78], a small-scale homelike unit [79], and a homelike dementia care facility [80]) and were described as an 'other' category. An overview of the identified types of innovative living arrangements and their characteristics is provided in Table 2.


## Study characteristics

Studies on innovative living arrangements were performed in the following countries: the Netherlands    
(N = 26), the United States (N = 8), Germany (N = 8), Bel- gium (N = 4), Japan (N = 3), Denmark (N = 2), Australia (N = 2), Ireland (N = 2), Canada (N = 2), Finland (N = 1),

## Themes

By analysing the data based on the physical, social, and organizational environment of the described innovative living arrangements, the following themes emerged: promoting autonomy, small-scale/homelike environment, involvement of community, focus on nature, integration of work tasks, and involvement of family members. These themes describe the similarities and differences among the innovative living arrangements and lead to a clear overview of the characteristics of the described living arrangements.


## Promoting autonomy

Six out of seven arrangements and two articles in the 'other' category (household model of residential aged care and household model units) emphasized the importance of promoting autonomy. In most arrangements, autonomy is fostered by normalizing daily life and offering choice, meaning that the residents live their lives as normally as possible, minimizing rigid routines, that are often seen in more regular nursing homes. This is often encouraged by involving residents in daily household tasks. Centering the daily lives of residents around daily routines is applied in small-scale living, the green house model, and shared housing arrangements. Green care farms also focus on daily routines but emphasize nature and farm-based daily activities (e.g. feeding the animals and gardening). Although almost all living arrangements emphasize the importance of promoting autonomy, a clear definition of what autonomy entails is often missing. Furthermore, more information on how they exactly aim to promote autonomy is often not provided.


## Small-scale homelike environment

Five out of seven living arrangements focus on creating a small-scale and/or homelike environment. Small-scale living, the green house model, shared housing arrangements, green care farms, group homes, and two living arrangements of the 'other' category (the Woodside place model, and a small-scale homelike unit) focus on creating both a small-scale and homelike environment. Dementia villages and the remaining four living arrangements of the 'other' category focus solely on creating a homelike environment, although dementia villages implicitly suggest that there is also small scale-ness, as residents are divided into smaller group homes in the village. The interpretation of small scale-ness seems to differ among, but also within, living arrangements. They differ in group size from 6 to 16 residents, showing diversity in the considered appropriate number of residents for small scaleness. Most living arrangements describe at-homeness in a similar manner, as the facility often resembles an archetypal house with a kitchen, living room, and selfcontained apartment. The articles mostly focus on the physical appearance of at-homeness, but the authors provide little to no information about the role of the social and organizational environment in creating a homelike atmosphere.


## Integration of work tasks

Three living arrangements (small-scale living, green house model, and green care farm) and two articles of the 'other' category (household model of residential aged care and household model units) focus on integrated tasks of staff members. This entails that staff members not only perform care-related tasks, but also domestic, social, and recreational tasks. The living arrangement that stands out here is the green house model, as this arrangement has created new care roles, named the Shahbazim and the Guide. The Shahbazim are the direct care staff who are responsible for a broad array of tasks (e.g. resident care, household tasks, activities, and staff scheduling). The Guide, with an office outside the green house, acts as a coach and supervises the Shahbazim in all non-clinical aspects. The living arrangements that do not specifically mention the integration of tasks of staff members do often mention a de-institutionalized way of working (e.g. not wearing uniforms, hiding institutional aspects such as a nursing station, having a fixed team of staff members).


## Involvement of the community

Two living arrangements emphasize involvement of the community. Within intergenerational living older residents live together with students, and the community and others in need of support are also encouraged to visit. Shared housing arrangements stress the importance of community volunteers and their social involvement in caring for the residents. Other living arrangements do not explicitly describe the involvement of the neighbourhood. These arrangements focus more on creating community within the living arrangement, by creating a family-like household of residents and staff members. This is broadened in dementia villages, where an entire 'village-type' accommodation is created to create a community on its own for the residents. The focus is more on the inside community, rather than the community outside the dementia village.


## Focus on nature

Two living arrangements (i.e. green care farms and dementia villages) explicitly mention the focus on nature.

In green care farms, nature has a prominent role. The daily lives of residents revolve around agricultural activities. There are animals and plants present, and the facility is often part of some sort of farm. Going outside and being involved with nature is encouraged in green care farms. Articles describing a dementia village also mention the presence of a park but residents are not explicitly encouraged to be engaged with nature. Within different small-scale living arrangements (small-scale living, the green house model, and group homes), there are individual differences in the use of nature. Some articles describe the presence of an outdoor space and/or garden, while other articles do not mention this. In these living arrangements, the presence of nature seems to be location-specific, rather than concept-specific. Shared housing arrangements, on the other hand, seem to focus more on urban locations, and do not focus on, or mention, nature.


## Involvement of family members

A few articles explicitly describe the role of family in the living arrangement. In shared housing arrangements, there is a strong emphasis on the involvement of family members. They serve as key people for the residents and nursing staff. For example, some articles describe that they are involved in all aspects of care provision, decision-making, household tasks, and activities [49][50][51]. In small-scale living, some articles describe that family members determine the organization of daily life together with the residents and staff members [15,16,18,31,39]. None of the other living arrangements explicitly describe the family involvement.


## Effectiveness

Twenty-eight articles reported on the effects of the alternative living environment on either residents, family members, or staff members. Most articles (N = 22) studied resident-related outcomes, with eight articles focusing on quality of life. The articles showed mixed results, from no effect on quality of life (N = 5) [18,20,50,53,54], to effects only on sub-scales of the quality of life questionnaires used (N = 2) [34,37]. Only one article showed a significant effect on quality of life of residents when family members were actively involved within shared housing arrangements [49]. Other articles focused mainly on outcomes related to the daily/social life of residents. These articles include a diverse number of outcome measures. Most articles showed a positive effect on some -but not all -outcome measures [16,29,35,58,74,75,79]. Four articles studied staff member-related outcomes, all focusing on job characteristics. Three articles showed positive outcomes for job-related characteristics (e.g. stress, burnout, and job satisfaction) [15,31,32], and one showed a negative effect on fatigue and no effect on the other outcomes [33]. Two articles studied familyrelated outcomes, showing that family members felt less burdened and more satisfied with the alternative living environment [18,35].


## Discussion

This scoping review has presented an overview of alternative living arrangements within long-term care and their core characteristics. Seven overarching living arrangements have been identified: small-scale living, the green house model, shared housing arrangements, green care farms, dementia villages, group homes, intergenerational living, and an 'other' category. Emerging themes of these living arrangements are the importance of stimulating and supporting autonomy. Furthermore, most living arrangements focus on creating a small-scale and/or homelike environment. The other themes -involvement of the community, focus on nature, integration of tasks staff members, and involvement of family membersare emphasized in some of the described living arrangements. Quality of life, and outcomes related to daily/ social life have been the most studied measures.

In most articles, the main focus is on the physical environment, where the features of the indoor and outdoor areas are often described in detail. For example, the authors describe what makes a location 'homelike' , including the physical features (e.g. the furniture is recognizable and placed in a manner that facilitates social interaction, there are animals present, personal belongings are present). Even though recent insights highlight the importance of the social and organizational environment [6], most descriptions of alternative living arrangements lack specific information on these components. It is important to have congruence between the physical, social and organizational environment to promote optimal well-being and daily functioning [6]. Only describing and focusing on the physical environment gives an incomplete overview of the functioning of living arrangements. When looking at the example of at-homeness, research shows that it is more than just the physical environment. It also entails a feeling of autonomy, feeling safe and respected by staff members and other residents, and building meaningful relationships [81]. A meaning of home is a combination of physical, social, and individual aspects [82], showing that next to a home-like physical environment, older adults perceive 'feeling at home' as being able to preserve their personal identity, experiencing continuity in life, feelings of belonging, and being active [83]. This illustrates that the social and organizational features are just as important as physical features in understanding how a living arrangement operates.

One of the core themes throughout most living arrangements is the promotion/support of autonomy. Most articles describe that autonomy is supported by letting residents determine how to spend their daily lives and performing meaningful activities, such as doing household chores. The articles do not define autonomy explicitly and how support of autonomy is operationalized within alternative living arrangements. Autonomy focuses on independence and self-determination, meaning that independence of action, speech, and thought is important [84]. For residents with complex care needs, autonomy is not always a given, due to their increase in care dependency. Nevertheless, research focusing on autonomy within long-term care emphasizes the importance of relational autonomy, meaning that the social environment plays an important role in facilitating autonomy [85]. How the social environment facilitates autonomy within the included living arrangements, however, remains rather abstract and unclear. Despite the fact that living arrangements stress the importance of autonomy, researchers have not explained how to apply this philosophy to residents with complex care needs in practice. What is needed, for example, is a description of what role the staff members have in supporting autonomy and how they can operationalize this in practice. Relationships between staff and residents can either facilitate or inhibit autonomy [85], and more and more practices to facilitate autonomy, such as reablement (which focuses on mitigating the impact of dementia on functioning and dementia) are being developed [86].

Innovation is often associated with the use of technology. Notably, the role of technology is not described in the included articles concerning innovative living arrangements. The presence of technology in long-term care is becoming more prominent; examples include socially assistive robots, and technology to prevent falls and to ensure safety [87,88]. Governmental, academic, and private organizations are increasingly developing and deploying technology in ageing services [89]. These technologies range from sensors (e.g. bio-sensors and motion sensors) to virtual reality and remote communication possibilities [89]. More insight is needed regarding the role of technology in these living arrangements -for example, enabling the autonomy of residents to move around by using GPS -and why this aspect is not represented properly in the published literature. A possible explanation is that technology in long-term care is still in a rather exploratory phase. The available research concerning technology shows mixed results in terms of effectiveness [87,88]. Another possible explanation is that we did not explicitly include terms related to technology in our search string, meaning that we might not have found these articles.

A few limitations of this scoping review should be addressed. First, there is a possibility that the search string did not identify all relevant living arrangements, as terminology varies among articles and living arrangements. Second, articles that are not written in English or Dutch/Flemish were excluded, and grey literature was excluded as well, meaning that some relevant living arrangements might not have been included. Third, we only performed backward snowballing, meaning that we did thus not perform forward snowballing and might have missed relevant articles. Fourth, there is a delay between current practice and the literature, meaning there may be other innovative arrangements available or tested that we could not capture with our literature-based review. Lastly, there is a lot of variety in the amount of information provided among the identified arrangements. Some articles present a clear case study with an extensive description of the living arrangements, while others provide minimal description. This reality made it challenging to extract data and to identify the core themes among the living arrangements.

Although there is an increasing interest in innovative living arrangements, much is still unknown. This review has attempted to provide an overview of innovative living arrangements described in the literature and to describe their core characteristics. The results of this scoping review show that living arrangements using the same terminology can still differ quite a lot in operationalization. Greater clarity should be provided about the underlying physical, social, and organizational mechanisms that define an alternative living arrangement. There is a lot of diversity within alternatives for regular nursing homes. Future effectiveness studies are easier to carry out when descriptions of key elements are transparent. Furthermore, gaining insight into the physical, social, and organizational environment of alternative living arrangements will improve the knowledge of developers in longterm care, providing them with support when developing alternative living arrangements.


## Conclusion

For future research, it is important to identify the working components of not only the physical environment, but also the social and organizational components to broaden our understanding of the underlying working mechanisms of alternative living arrangements. When developing, it is key to not only think about the physical environment, but also consider how to operationalize the vision of the living arrangement.

Developers should consider what role staff members will have, how the social surrounding will be utilized, and how care should be organized within the physical setting. When evaluating an innovative living arrangement, it is key to not only consider the physical environment, but to consider the social and organizational environment as well. Therefore, a better understanding of the mechanisms of alternative living arrangements may provide a better guide for developers within longterm care. This review shows that more knowledge is needed about potential key elements of innovative living arrangements, especially related to their social and organizational environment.

## France (N = 1 )
1, and China (N = 1). The included articles consisted of 25 qualitative studies, 3 observational quantitative studies, and 28 (quasi-)experimental quantitative studies. In general, 28 quantitative studies were performed, focusing on the effects in small-scale living (N = 11), the green house model (N = 3), shared housing arrangements (N = 5), green care farms (N = 3), group homes (N = 2), and the 'other' category (N = 5). Most articles focused on quality of life (N = 10), physical health (N = 8), job characteristics (N = 6), and variables related to social engagement/activities of daily life (N = 6).

## Table 1
1Inclusion and exclusion criteriaPCC element 
Inclusion criteria 
Exclusion criteria 
Population 
Older adults with a complex care need, in need of 24-hour 
care. 

Participants that do not have a complex need, are not in need of 
24-hour care, or are young. 
Concept 
Long-term care facilities that offer 24-hour care to older 
persons with a complex care need. This entails 24-hour care 
in both psychogeriatric, as well as somatic care needs. 
Long-term care facilities that offer long-term care, so care for 
an extensive period of time, to older persons. 
Long-term care facilities that are presented as different/inno-
vative in comparison with traditional 24-hour long-term care. 
The facility has to be operational. 

Long-term care facilities that do not offer long-term 24-hour care 
(in psychogeriatric needs and ADL assistance) or care concepts 
that offer 24-hour care to adults or youth. 
Long-term care facilities that provide acute (or secondary acute) 
care, such as hospitals and revalidation centers. 
Traditional long-term care facilities or implemented interventions 
within existing traditional long-term care facilities. 
Long-term care facilities that are not yet operational and present 
possible frameworks or best practices. 
Context 
Long-term care facilities for older adults 
Short-term care, such a rehabilitation or hospital stay, or long-term 
care for a group, other than older adults in need of 24-hour care. 



Fig. 1Flowchart data-selection process Brouwers et al.Daily life is largely determined by the residents, family caregivers, and nursing staff. There is more personal contact due to the fixed team of nursing staff and person-centred care.The tasks of staff members are integrated, meaning they carry out domestic, social, and recreational tasks in addition to care tasks. There is often a fixed team of staff members that take care of the residents.BMC Geriatrics 
(2023) 23:442 

Living 
arrangement 

Articles; 
Country 

Number of 
residents 

Articles 
design 
General description 
Physical environment Social environment 

Organizational environment 

Small-scale 

living 
14 Articles [15, 
16, 18, 29-39]; 
the Nether-
lands, Belgium 

6-16 resi-
dents per 
household 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 

(N = 11) [15, 
16, 31-39], 
obser-
vational 
quantitative 

(N = 1) [29], 
Qualitative 

(N = 2) [18, 
30] 
A small group of older people 
forming a household together 

in a home-like environment. 
Normalization of daily life is 
emphasized, by supporting 

their capabilities and focusing 
on meaningful activities (e.g. 
social participation and house-
hold chores). 

The facility resembles 
an archetypal house, 
with homelike features 
(e.g. a kitchen, living 
room, single bedrooms, 
and an entrance). 
Daily household tasks are centred around 
activities of daily life (e.g. doing laundry, 
preparing meals together, and cleaning). 

Green house 
model 

8 Articles 
[40-47]; United 
States 

8-12 resi-
dents per 
household 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 

(N = 3) [44, 
45, 47], 
Qualita-

tive (N = 5) 
[40-43, 46] 
The green house model was 
developed by William Thomas 

and is based on the Eden 
Alternative in the US. The 

model emphasizes a homelike 
environment and significantly 
transformed care staff roles. 

This model includes 
small-scale and home-

like facilities, with a 
family-style physical 
environment. 
Normalized daily activities are promoted, 

such as doing laundry or cooking, and 
green house homes encourage and sup-
port autonomy. 

Certified nursing assistants, referred 

to as the 'Shahbazim' , are at the 
centre of the green house model. 
They work in self-managed teams 
and have integrated tasks (e.g. 
resident care, household chores, 

and staff scheduling). Nurses have 
a more visiting and clinical role. The 
so-called 'Guide' , whose office is 
outside the home, often guides staff 
members. Green houses are often 
opened alongside a large nursing 
home, called a 'legacy home' . 

Shared 
housing 
arrangements 
7 Articles [48-
54]; Germany 

6-8 
residents 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantita-

tive (N = 5) 
[49-51, 53, 
54], 
Obser-
vational 
quantitative 

(N = 1) [52], 
Qualitative 

(N = 1) [48] 
This approach is an alterna-
tive to regular nursing homes, 
where a small group of older 
people in need of care live 
together in a small-scale, 
homelike living facility. 

It is a regular apartment 
building, usually in an 
urban setting, with a 
small-scale, homelike 
appearance. 
The daily routines focus on 'family living' 
and living as self-determinedly and nor-
mally as possible, by doing household 
chores together. Family is also involved 

by participating in the daily life in shared 
housing arrangements and acting as 
legal representatives. As shared housing 
arrangements are located in residen-

tial districts, residents are encouraged 
to participate in the social life of the 
community. 

Shared housing arrangements are 
not connected with residential care, 
as care is provided by community 
care services. Shared housing ar-
rangements are long-term, meaning 

that residents do not have to move 
to a nursing home when their care 
needs are increasing. 



## Table 2
2An overview of the identified types of innovative living arrangements and their characteristicsLiving 
arrangement 

Articles; 
Country 

Number of 
residents 

Articles 
design 
General description 
Physical environment Social environment 

Organizational environment 

Green care 
farms 
8 Articles [20, 
55-61]; The 
Netherlands 

6-60 
residents 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 

(N = 3) [20, 
56, 58], 
Qualitative 

(N = 5) [55, 
57, 59-61] 
In green care farms, agricul-
tural activities are combined 
with care services for several 
groups, such as older people 
with dementia. They provide 
care in a small-scale, homelike 
environment on the terrain of 

a farm. 

Green care farms offer a 
familiar and small-scale, 
homelike environment. 

The facility often re-
sembles an archetypal 
house. Animals, plants, 
and natural aspects are 
present. 
Green care farms focus on meaning-
ful activities in everyday life as well as 
autonomy. Residents are encouraged to 
participate in a range of activities that 

are meaningful and stimulating, such as 
domestic (e.g. cooking, doing laundry), 
work-related (e.g. feeding animals, 
gardening), social (e.g. coffee break), and 
recreational (e.g. reading, playing games) 
activities. Due to free access to outdoor 
areas, residents always have the opportu-
nity to go outside. 

Green care farms differ in the degree 

of farming and care, meaning that 
some farms are actual farms with 

a profitable production. For other 
locations, care is the main source 

of income. The farmers are often 
personally involved in developing 

the care vision and motivating staff 
members. Staff members have 
integrated tasks 

Dementia 
village 
6 Articles [40, 
62-66]; The 
Netherlands, 
Denmark, 
Germany 

52-152 
Residents, 

but divided 
into smaller 
group 
homes 

Qualitative 

(N = 5) [40, 
62-65] 
(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 

(N = 1) [66] 
A dementia village introduces 
a non-institutional village-type 
of accommodation, often 
located in a mid-sized town. It 
originates from the dementia 
village of Hogeweyk in the 
Netherlands. It aims to create 

an environment that enables 
residents to live as normally as 
possible, while still feeling part 

of the local community. 

The village is devel-
oped in such a way as 
to resemble a familiar 
environment for the 

residents (e.g. a high 
street, town square, su-
permarket, activity cen-

tre, connecting paths 
between residences, 

and gardens). 
Residents are matched and placed into 

the same home, based on their back-
ground. Autonomy is encouraged by 
normalizing daily life and being able to 

choose what to do during the day. 

The environment is designed to pro-
tect, but not restrict the residents. 
Professional and institutional fea-

tures are hidden as well as possible. 
Staff members and caregivers wear 
clothing that fits the lifestyle, so no 
uniforms are worn. 

Group homes 3 Articles 

[67-69]; Japan 

5-12 
residents 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 

(N = 2) [67, 
69], 
Obser-
vational 
quantitative 

(N = 1) [68] 
A group-living based facility for 
residents with dementia. 

A small-scale and 
homelike environment 

in a familiar community. 
There is particular attention paid to 
familiar relationships and each patient's 
lifestyle. Staff members live together 
with residents. 

At least one staff member per three 
residents is allocated as full-time 
personnel. 

Intergenera-

tional living 

3 Articles 
[70-72]; the 
Netherlands 

166 
residents 

Qualita-

tive (N = 3) 
[70-72] 
In this living environment, 
students and older residents 

live together. This living 
environment is based on social 
reciprocity and a feeling of 
community. 

The setting is a large 
institutional building. 
There is one student for every 25 
residents in the intergenerational living 
environment. The students act as 'good 
neighbours' and share experiences 

and perform activities with the older 
residents. In return, older residents 

share their experiences. Reciprocity is 
key within this vision. The location has 
a central place in the community. Older 
people, students, and others in need of 
support live together and the broader 
community is welcome as well. 

Students who study nursing or 
medicine are not allowed, to pro-

mote a more natural environment. 
In exchange for free accommoda-
tion, students perform 30 hours 
per month of social-type work. 
Caregivers and volunteers are in 
charge of care services and the an-
nual budget. There is a 'yes'-culture 
within the organization, to motivate 

all those involved to propose ideas 
and solutions. 



## Table 2 (continued)
2Living 
arrangement 

Articles; 
Country 

Number of 
residents 

Articles 
design 
General description 
Physical environment Social environment 

Organizational environment 

Other: 
Household 

model of resi-
dential aged 
care [73] 

Australia 

16-30 resi-
dents per 
household 
Qualitative A homelike environment that 
focuses on positive ageing and 
maintaining a sense of 'self' . 

A home-like appear-
ance with a kitchen, 
dining room, and self-
contained apartments. 
There are no fixed schedules. Continuous 
access to food and the ability to choose 

is central to this model. 

The staff member responsible for co-
ordinating the household is named 
'Homemaker' . Staff members are 
encouraged to work autonomously 

and perform integrated tasks. 

Household 

model units 
[74, 75] 

2 Articles; 
Ireland 

16-18 
residents 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 

(N = 2) 
This homelike environment 
emphasizes autonomy and 

privacy. 

This homelike environ-
ment features open 
plan areas. 
There are no fixed schedules and 
autonomy is encouraged by offering 
choices. 

There is a new staff role, called 
'Homemaker' . This person's role is 

defined by the kitchen and house-
hold tasks. He/she has a constant 
monitoring presence in the open 

plan area. 

Intensive 

service hous-

ing [76] 

Finland 

/ 
Qualitative Homelike housing units 
located in intensive service 
housing facilities. 'Home' is a 
strongly emphasized word. 

The unit is decorated 
with the residents' be-
longings. Movement is 
restricted. 
The central idea of this arrangement is 
homemaking, thus prioritizing homelike 

and domestic-style care. 

The resident pays for all services 
(e.g. Rent, care, meals, cleaning) 
separately. 

Non-
traditional 
residential 

care facility 
[77] 

Australia 

/ 
Qualitative This approach utilizes prin-
ciples of environmental design 
to create a dementia-friendly 
environment. 

The building has an 
open floor plan and 

a homelike, domestic 
appearance. 
Employees initiate spontaneous group 
activities, instead of planning them. 

/ 

Woodside 

place model 
[78] 

Canada 

12 residents 
per 
Household 

(Quasi-)ex-
perimental 
quantitative 
This approach provides a sup-
portive and secure homelike 
environment, with a focus on 
supporting autonomy. 

The environment is a 
small and homelike set-
ting, with a household 
with a small dining 
room, kitchen, and 
bedrooms as the core 
component. 
The social environment emphasizes a 
normal way of living, adapted to 
cultural values 

/ 

small-scale 

homelike unit 

[79] 

Canada 
12 residents (Quasi-)ex-

perimental 
quantitative 
This approach creates a small-
scale homelike unit. 

The environment in-
cludes a short corridor 
with single bedrooms 
and a single-loaded 
floor plan. 

/ 

In the daytime, 1.5 nurses and two 
care aides work at the location. 

Homelike 
dementia 

care facility 
[80] 

China 
20 residents Qualitative This approach aims to create 
a homelike environment for 
people with dementia 

This environment 
includes a residential 
area, activity areas, and 
common areas 
Residents can engage in various activi-

ties, including homelike activities (e.g. 
household chores, exercising). 

/ 

Table 2 (continued) 

AcknowledgementsThe RELOCARE consortium consists of.Supplementary InformationThe online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi. org/10.1186/s12877-023-04158-9.Supplementary Material 1Supplementary Material 2
Culture change models and resident health outcomes in long-term care. N L Hill, A M Kolanowski, P Milone-Nuzzo, A Yevchak, J Nurs Scholarsh. 431Hill NL, Kolanowski AM, Milone-Nuzzo P, Yevchak A. Culture change models and resident health outcomes in long-term care. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2011;43(1):30-40.

Examining the nursing home physical environment through policy-driven culture change. E Roberts, A Pulay, J Hous Elderly. 322Roberts E, Pulay A. Examining the nursing home physical environment through policy-driven culture change. J Hous Elderly. 2018;32(2):241-62.

Beyond the medical model: the culture change revolution in long-term care. E F White-Chu, W J Graves, S M Godfrey, A Bonner, P Sloane, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 106White-Chu EF, Graves WJ, Godfrey SM, Bonner A, Sloane P. Beyond the medi- cal model: the culture change revolution in long-term care. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2009;10(6):370-8.

Daily (in) activities of nursing home residents in their wards: an observation study. M Den Ouden, M H Bleijlevens, J M Meijers, S M Zwakhalen, S M Braun, F E Tan, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 1611den Ouden M, Bleijlevens MH, Meijers JM, Zwakhalen SM, Braun SM, Tan FE, et al. Daily (in) activities of nursing home residents in their wards: an observa- tion study. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2015;16(11):963-8.

The nature of relationships in alternative dementia care environments. E C Wiersma, A Pedlar, Can J Aging. 271Wiersma EC, Pedlar A. The nature of relationships in alternative dementia care environments. Can J Aging. 2008;27(1):101-8.

The Homestead: developing a conceptual Framework through Co-Creation for Innovating Long-Term Dementia Care environments. B De Boer, B Bozdemir, J Jansen, M Hermans, Jph Hamers, H Verbeek, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 181de Boer B, Bozdemir B, Jansen J, Hermans M, Hamers JPH, Verbeek H. The Homestead: developing a conceptual Framework through Co-Creation for Innovating Long-Term Dementia Care environments. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;18(1).

Dementia care redesigned: Effects of small-scale living facilities on residents, their family caregivers, and staff. H Verbeek, S M Zwakhalen, E Van Rossum, T Ambergen, G I Kempen, J P Hamers, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 119Verbeek H, Zwakhalen SM, van Rossum E, Ambergen T, Kempen GI, Hamers JP. Dementia care redesigned: Effects of small-scale living facili- ties on residents, their family caregivers, and staff. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2010;11(9):662-70.

Green care farms as innovative nursing homes, promoting activities and social interaction for people with dementia. B De Boer, J P Hamers, S M Zwakhalen, F E Tan, H C Beerens, H Verbeek, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 181de Boer B, Hamers JP, Zwakhalen SM, Tan FE, Beerens HC, Verbeek H. Green care farms as innovative nursing homes, promoting activities and social interaction for people with dementia. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2017;18(1):40-6.

The therapeutic design of environments for people with dementia: a review of the empirical research. K Day, D Carreon, C Stump, Gerontologist. 404Day K, Carreon D, Stump C. The therapeutic design of environments for people with dementia: a review of the empirical research. Gerontologist. 2000;40(4):397-416.

The relationship between the quality of the built environment and the quality of life of people with dementia in residential care. R Fleming, B Goodenough, L-F Low, L Chenoweth, H Brodaty, Dementia. 154Fleming R, Goodenough B, Low L-F, Chenoweth L, Brodaty H. The relationship between the quality of the built environment and the quality of life of people with dementia in residential care. Dementia. 2016;15(4):663-80.

Personcentered care and quality of life of patients with dementia in long-term care facilities. S Terada, E Oshima, O Yokota, C Ikeda, S Nagao, N Takeda, Psychiatry Res. 2051-2Terada S, Oshima E, Yokota O, Ikeda C, Nagao S, Takeda N, et al. Person- centered care and quality of life of patients with dementia in long-term care facilities. Psychiatry Res. 2013;205(1-2):103-8.

The fundamentals of person-centered care for individuals with dementia. S Fazio, D Pace, J Flinner, B Kallmyer, Gerontologist. 581SupplFazio S, Pace D, Flinner J, Kallmyer B. The fundamentals of person-centered care for individuals with dementia. Gerontologist. 2018;58(Suppl 1):10-S9.

The impact of work culture on quality of care in nursing homes-a review study. B Andr, E Sjvold, T Rannestad, G I Ringdal, Scand J Caring Sci. 283Andr B, Sjvold E, Rannestad T, Ringdal GI. The impact of work culture on quality of care in nursing homes-a review study. Scand J Caring Sci. 2014;28(3):449-57.

Nurses' perceptions of their professional practice environment in relation to job satisfaction: a review of quantitative studies. P Lambrou, A Merkouris, N Middleton, E Papastavrou, Health Sci J. Lambrou P, Merkouris A, Middleton N, Papastavrou E. Nurses' perceptions of their professional practice environment in relation to job satisfaction: a review of quantitative studies. Health Sci J. 2014.

The impact of organizational innovations in nursing Homes on Staff perceptions: a secondary data analysis. J Adams, H Verbeek, S M Zwakhalen, J Nurs Scholarsh. 491Adams J, Verbeek H, Zwakhalen SM. The impact of organizational innovations in nursing Homes on Staff perceptions: a secondary data analysis. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2017;49(1):54-62.

Effects of small-scale, home-like facilities in dementia care on residents' behavior, and use of physical restraints and psychotropic drugs: a quasiexperimental study. H Verbeek, S M Zwakhalen, E Van Rossum, T Ambergen, G I Kempen, J P Hamers, Int Psychogeriatr. 264Verbeek H, Zwakhalen SM, van Rossum E, Ambergen T, Kempen GI, Hamers JP. Effects of small-scale, home-like facilities in dementia care on residents' behavior, and use of physical restraints and psychotropic drugs: a quasi- experimental study. Int Psychogeriatr. 2014;26(4):657-68.

There's no Place Like Home": a scoping review on the impact of Homelike Residential Care Models on Resident-, Family-, and staff-related outcomes. D Ausserhofer, M Deschodt, De Geest, S Van Achterberg, T Meyer, G Verbeek, H , J Am Med Dir Assoc. 178Ausserhofer D, Deschodt M, De Geest S, van Achterberg T, Meyer G, Verbeek H, et al. There's no Place Like Home": a scoping review on the impact of Homelike Residential Care Models on Resident-, Family-, and staff-related outcomes. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2016;17(8):685-93.

Small-scale, homelike facilities in dementia care: a process evaluation into the experiences of family caregivers and nursing staff. H Verbeek, S M Zwakhalen, E Van Rossum, G I Kempen, J P Hamers, Int J Nurs Stud. 491Verbeek H, Zwakhalen SM, van Rossum E, Kempen GI, Hamers JP. Small-scale, homelike facilities in dementia care: a process evaluation into the experi- ences of family caregivers and nursing staff. Int J Nurs Stud. 2012;49(1):21-9.

Quality of life of residents with dementia in traditional versus smallscale long-term care settings: a quasi-experimental study. A H De Rooij, K G Luijkx, J Schaafsma, A G Declercq, P M Emmerink, J M Schols, Int J Nurs Stud. 498de Rooij AH, Luijkx KG, Schaafsma J, Declercq AG, Emmerink PM, Schols JM. Quality of life of residents with dementia in traditional versus small- scale long-term care settings: a quasi-experimental study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2012;49(8):931-40.

Quality of care and quality of life of people with dementia living at green care farms: a crosssectional study. B De Boer, Jph Hamers, Smg Zwakhalen, Fes Tan, H Verbeek, BMC Geriatr. 171155de Boer B, Hamers JPH, Zwakhalen SMG, Tan FES, Verbeek H. Quality of care and quality of life of people with dementia living at green care farms: a cross- sectional study. BMC Geriatr. 2017;17(1):155.

Small, homelike care environments for older people with dementia: a literature review. H Verbeek, E Van Rossum, S M Zwakhalen, G I Kempen, J P Hamers, Int Psychogeriatr. 212Verbeek H, Van Rossum E, Zwakhalen SM, Kempen GI, Hamers JP. Small, homelike care environments for older people with dementia: a literature review. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009;21(2):252-64.

Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework. H Arksey, O Malley, L , Int J Soc Res Methodol. 81Arksey H, O'Malley L. Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework. Int J Soc Res Methodol. 2005;8(1):19-32.

PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation. A C Tricco, Lillie E Zarin, W O&apos;brien, K K Colquhoun, H Levac, D , Ann Intern Med. 1697Tricco AC, Lillie E, Zarin W, O'Brien KK, Colquhoun H, Levac D, et al. PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169(7):467-73.

Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews. JBI Evid synthesis. M D Peters, C Marnie, A C Tricco, D Pollock, Z Munn, L Alexander, 18Peters MD, Marnie C, Tricco AC, Pollock D, Munn Z, Alexander L, et al. Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews. JBI Evid syn- thesis. 2020;18(10):2119-26.

. M Hupe, X J Endnote, Electron, Resour Med Libr. 163-4Hupe M, EndNote XJ, Electron. Resour Med Libr. 2019;16(3-4):117-9.

Rayyan-a web and mobile app for systematic reviews. M Ouzzani, H Hammady, Z Fedorowicz, A Elmagarmid, Syst Rev. 51210Ouzzani M, Hammady H, Fedorowicz Z, Elmagarmid A. Rayyan-a web and mobile app for systematic reviews. Syst Rev. 2016;5(1):210.

Thematic analysis: striving to meet the trustworthiness criteria. L S Nowell, J M Norris, D E White, N J Moules, Int J Qual Methods. 1611609406917733847Nowell LS, Norris JM, White DE, Moules NJ. Thematic analysis: striv- ing to meet the trustworthiness criteria. Int J Qual Methods. 2017;16(1):1609406917733847.

The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. M J Page, J E Mckenzie, P M Bossuyt, I Boutron, T C Hoffmann, C D Mulrow, Syst Rev. 101Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. Syst Rev. 2021;10(1):1-11.

The relationship between small-scale care and activity involvement of residents with dementia. D Smit, J De Lange, B Willemse, A M Pot, Int Psychogeriatr. 245Smit D, de Lange J, Willemse B, Pot AM. The relationship between small-scale care and activity involvement of residents with dementia. Int Psychogeriatr. 2012;24(5):722-32.

How architectural design affords experiences of freedom in residential care for older people. I Van Steenwinkel, B D De Casterl, A Heylighen, J Aging Stud. 41Van Steenwinkel I, de Casterl BD, Heylighen A. How architectural design affords experiences of freedom in residential care for older people. J Aging Stud. 2017;41:84-92.

The relationship between small-scale nursing home care for people with dementia and staff's perceived job characteristics. B M Willemse, M Depla, D Smit, A M Pot, Int Psychogeriatr. 265Willemse BM, Depla M, Smit D, Pot AM. The relationship between small-scale nursing home care for people with dementia and staff's perceived job char- acteristics. Int Psychogeriatr. 2014;26(5):805-16.

Working in small-scale, homelike dementia care: effects on staff burnout symptoms and job characteristics. A quasi-experimental, longitudinal study. S M Zwakhalen, J P Hamers, E Van Rossum, T Ambergen, G I Kempen, H Verbeek, J Res Nurs. 232Zwakhalen SM, Hamers JP, van Rossum E, Ambergen T, Kempen GI, Verbeek H. Working in small-scale, homelike dementia care: effects on staff burnout symptoms and job characteristics. A quasi-experimental, longitudinal study. J Res Nurs. 2018;23(2):109-22.

Professional Caregivers' Mental Health problems and burnout in small-scale and traditional Long Term Care Settings for Elderly People with Dementia in the Netherlands and Belgium. A De Rooij, K G Luijkx, A G Declercq, Pmj Emmerink, J Schols, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 1355de Rooij A, Luijkx KG, Declercq AG, Emmerink PMJ, Schols J. Professional Care- givers' Mental Health problems and burnout in small-scale and traditional Long Term Care Settings for Elderly People with Dementia in the Netherlands and Belgium. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2012;13(5):5.

Quality of life of residents with dementia in traditional versus smallscale long-term care settings: a quasi-experimental study. A De Rooij, K G Luijkx, J Schaafsma, A G Declercq, Pmj Emmerink, J Schols, Int J Nurs Stud. 498de Rooij A, Luijkx KG, Schaafsma J, Declercq AG, Emmerink PMJ, Schols J. Quality of life of residents with dementia in traditional versus small- scale long-term care settings: a quasi-experimental study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2012;49(8):931-40.

Family caregiver perspectives on social relations of elderly residents with dementia in small-scale versus traditional long-term care settings in the Netherlands and Belgium. A De Rooij, K G Luijkx, N Spruytte, Pmj Emmerink, J Schols, A G Declercq, J Clin Nurs. 2121de Rooij A, Luijkx KG, Spruytte N, Emmerink PMJ, Schols J, Declercq AG. Family caregiver perspectives on social relations of elderly residents with dementia in small-scale versus traditional long-term care settings in the Netherlands and Belgium. J Clin Nurs. 2012;21(21):3106-16.

Rest-activity rhythms in small scale homelike care and traditional care for residents with dementia. J S Kok, I J Berg, Gcg Blankevoort, Eja Scherder, BMC Geriatr. 171137Kok JS, Berg IJ, Blankevoort GCG, Scherder EJA. Rest-activity rhythms in small scale homelike care and traditional care for residents with dementia. BMC Geriatr. 2017;17(1):137.

Quality of life in small-scaled homelike nursing homes: an 8-month controlled trial. J S Kok, Mma Nielen, Eja Scherder, Health Qual Life Outcomes. 16138Kok JS, Nielen MMA, Scherder EJA. Quality of life in small-scaled homelike nursing homes: an 8-month controlled trial. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2018;16(1):38.

Small scale homelike special care units and traditional special care units: effects on cognition in dementia; a longitudinal controlled intervention study. J S Kok, M J Van Heuvelen, I J Berg, E J Scherder, BMC Geriatr. 1647Kok JS, van Heuvelen MJ, Berg IJ, Scherder EJ. Small scale homelike special care units and traditional special care units: effects on cognition in dementia; a longitudinal controlled intervention study. BMC Geriatr. 2016;16:47.

Kleinschalig wonen voor ouderen met dementie: De invloed op bewoners, mantelzorgers en medewerkers = Small-scale, homelike care environments for people with dementia: Effects on residents, family caregivers and nursing staff. H Verbeek, Smg Zwakhalen, E Van Rossum, Gijm Kempen, Jph Hamers, Tijdschr Gerontol en Geriatr. 446Verbeek H, Zwakhalen SMG, van Rossum E, Kempen GIJM, Hamers JPH. Kleinschalig wonen voor ouderen met dementie: De invloed op bewoners, mantelzorgers en medewerkers = Small-scale, homelike care environments for people with dementia: Effects on residents, family caregivers and nursing staff. Tijdschr Gerontol en Geriatr. 2013;44(6):261-71.

Innovative Communities: A global nursing perspective. S L Baumann, Nurs Sci Q. 343Baumann SL. Innovative Communities: A global nursing perspective. Nurs Sci Q. 2021;34(3):316-21.

Sustaining Culture Change: Experiences in the Green House Model. B Bowers, K Nolet, N Jacobson, Health Serv Res. 51Bowers B, Nolet K, Jacobson N. Sustaining Culture Change: Experiences in the Green House Model. Health Serv Res. 2016;51:398-417.

Developing the green house nursing care team: variations on development and implementation. B J Bowers, K Nolet, Gerontologist. 54Bowers BJ, Nolet K. Developing the green house nursing care team: variations on development and implementation. Gerontologist. 2014;54:53-64.

From nursing home to Green House: changing contexts of elder care in the United States. M Loe, C D Moore, J Appl Gerontol. 316Loe M, Moore CD. From nursing home to Green House: changing contexts of elder care in the United States. J Appl Gerontol. 2012;31(6):755-63.

Longitudinal psychological outcomes of the small-scale nursing home model: a latent growth curve zero-inflated Poisson model. J Y Yoon, R L Brown, B J Bowers, S S Sharkey, S D Horn, Int Psychogeriatr. 276Yoon JY, Brown RL, Bowers BJ, Sharkey SS, Horn SD. Longitudinal psychologi- cal outcomes of the small-scale nursing home model: a latent growth curve zero-inflated Poisson model. Int Psychogeriatr. 2015;27(6):1009-16.

The effects of the Green House nursing home model on ADL function trajectory: a retrospective longitudinal study. J Y Yoon, R L Brown, B J Bowers, S S Sharkey, S D Horn, Int J Nurs Stud. 53Yoon JY, Brown RL, Bowers BJ, Sharkey SS, Horn SD. The effects of the Green House nursing home model on ADL function trajectory: a retrospective longitudinal study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2016;53:238-47.

The Green House model of nursing Home Care in design and implementation. L W Cohen, S Zimmerman, D Reed, P Brown, B J Bowers, K Nolet, Health Serv Res. 51Cohen LW, Zimmerman S, Reed D, Brown P, Bowers BJ, Nolet K, et al. The Green House model of nursing Home Care in design and implementation. Health Serv Res. 2016;51:352-77.

Nontraditional small House nursing Homes have fewer COVID-19 cases and deaths. S Zimmerman, C Dumond-Stryker, M Tandan, J S Preisser, C J Wretman, A Howell, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 223Zimmerman S, Dumond-Stryker C, Tandan M, Preisser JS, Wretman CJ, Howell A, et al. Nontraditional small House nursing Homes have fewer COVID-19 cases and deaths. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2021;22(3):489-93.

Shared Housing arrangements in Germany-An Equitable Alternative to Long Term Care Services beyond Homes and Institutions?. L F Doetter, A Schmid, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 152Doetter LF, Schmid A. Shared Housing arrangements in Germany-An Equi- table Alternative to Long Term Care Services beyond Homes and Institutions? Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15(2).

Family visits in shared-housing arrangements for residents with dementia-a cross-sectional study on the impact on residents' quality of life. J Grske, S Meyer, A Worch, K Wolf-Ostermann, BMC Geriatr. 1514Grske J, Meyer S, Worch A, Wolf-Ostermann K. Family visits in shared-housing arrangements for residents with dementia-a cross-sectional study on the impact on residents' quality of life. BMC Geriatr. 2015;15:14.

More staff = better quality of life for people with dementia? Results of a secondary data analysis in german shared-housing arrangements. J Grske, A Schmidt, K Wolf-Ostermann, Isr J Health Policy Res. 8126Grske J, Schmidt A, Wolf-Ostermann K. More staff = better quality of life for people with dementia? Results of a secondary data analysis in german shared-housing arrangements. Isr J Health Policy Res. 2019;8(1):26.

How to measure quality of life in shared-housing arrangements? A comparison of dementia-specific instruments. J Grske, H Verbeek, P Gellert, T Fischer, A Kuhlmey, K Wolf-Ostermann, Qual Life Res. 232Grske J, Verbeek H, Gellert P, Fischer T, Kuhlmey A, Wolf-Ostermann K. How to measure quality of life in shared-housing arrangements? A comparison of dementia-specific instruments. Qual Life Res. 2014;23(2):549-59.

Nutritional status of caredependent people with dementia in shared-housing arrangements-a oneyear follow-up. S Meyer, J Grske, A Worch, K Wolf-Ostermann, Scand J Caring Sci. 294Meyer S, Grske J, Worch A, Wolf-Ostermann K. Nutritional status of care- dependent people with dementia in shared-housing arrangements-a one- year follow-up. Scand J Caring Sci. 2015;29(4):785-92.

Quality of Care and its impact on Quality of Life for Care-Dependent Persons with Dementia in Shared-Housing arrangements: results of the Berlin WGQual-Study. K Wolf-Ostermann, A Worch, J Grske, Appl Nurs Res. 271Wolf-Ostermann K, Worch A, Grske J. Quality of Care and its impact on Quality of Life for Care-Dependent Persons with Dementia in Shared- Housing arrangements: results of the Berlin WGQual-Study. Appl Nurs Res. 2014;27(1):33-40.

Health outcomes and quality of life of residents of shared-housing arrangements compared to residents of special care units-results of the Berlin DeWeGE-study. K Wolf-Ostermann, A Worch, T Fischer, I Wulff, J Grske, J Clin Nurs. 2121Wolf-Ostermann K, Worch A, Fischer T, Wulff I, Grske J. Health outcomes and quality of life of residents of shared-housing arrangements compared to residents of special care units-results of the Berlin DeWeGE-study. J Clin Nurs. 2012;21(21):3047-60.

Innovating dementia care; implementing characteristics of green care farms in other long-term care settings. Y Buist, H Verbeek, B De Boer, S R De Bruin, Int Psychogeriatr. 307Buist Y, Verbeek H, de Boer B, de Bruin SR. Innovating dementia care; imple- menting characteristics of green care farms in other long-term care settings. Int Psychogeriatr. 2018;30(7):1057-68.

The physical environment of nursing Homes for people with dementia: traditional nursing Homes, small-scale living Facilities, and Green Care Farms. Healthc (Basel). B De Boer, H C Beerens, M A Katterbach, M Viduka, B M Willemse, H Verbeek, 6de Boer B, Beerens HC, Katterbach MA, Viduka M, Willemse BM, Verbeek H. The physical environment of nursing Homes for people with dementia: traditional nursing Homes, small-scale living Facilities, and Green Care Farms. Healthc (Basel). 2018;6(4).

Working at Green Care Farms and other innovative small-scale long-term Dementia Care Facilities requires different competencies of Care Staff. B De Boer, Y Buist, S R De Bruin, R Backhaus, H Verbeek, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 18de Boer B, Buist Y, de Bruin SR, Backhaus R, Verbeek H. Working at Green Care Farms and other innovative small-scale long-term Dementia Care Facilities requires different competencies of Care Staff. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18(20).

Green Care Farms as innovative nursing Homes, promoting activities and Social Interaction for people with dementia. B De Boer, J P Hamers, S M Zwakhalen, F E Tan, H C Beerens, H Verbeek, J Am Med Dir Assoc. 181de Boer B, Hamers JP, Zwakhalen SM, Tan FE, Beerens HC, Verbeek H. Green Care Farms as innovative nursing Homes, promoting activities and Social Interaction for people with dementia. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2017;18(1):40-6.

Experiences of family caregivers in green care farms and other nursing home environments for people with dementia: a qualitative study. B De Boer, H Verbeek, Smg Zwakhalen, Jph Hamers, BMC Geriatr. 191149de Boer B, Verbeek H, Zwakhalen SMG, Hamers JPH. Experiences of family caregivers in green care farms and other nursing home environments for people with dementia: a qualitative study. BMC Geriatr. 2019;19(1):149.

End-of-life care for people with dementia on a green care farm during the COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative study. K D Smit, S R Bolt, B De Boer, H Verbeek, Jmm Meijers, BMC Geriatr. 221956Smit KD, Bolt SR, de Boer B, Verbeek H, Meijers JMM. End-of-life care for people with dementia on a green care farm during the COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative study. BMC Geriatr. 2022;22(1):956.

How the interrelated physical, social and organizational environment impacts daily life of residents with dementia on a Green Care Farm. K Rosteius, B De Boer, S Staudacher, J Schols, H Verbeek, Front Public Health. 10946962Rosteius K, de Boer B, Staudacher S, Schols J, Verbeek H. How the interrelated physical, social and organizational environment impacts daily life of residents with dementia on a Green Care Farm. Front Public Health. 2022;10:946962.

Architectural hybrids for living across the lifespan: lessons from dementia. E Chrysikou, C Tziraki, D Buhalis, Serv Ind J. 381Chrysikou E, Tziraki C, Buhalis D. Architectural hybrids for living across the lifespan: lessons from dementia. Serv Ind J. 2017;38(1):4-26.

Moments of meaning: enacted narratives of occupational engagement within a dementia town. K Kielsgaard, S Horghagen, D Nielsen, H K Kristensen, J Occup Sci. 284Kielsgaard K, Horghagen S, Nielsen D, Kristensen HK. Moments of meaning: enacted narratives of occupational engagement within a dementia town. J Occup Sci. 2021;28(4):510-24.

Creating a meaningful everyday life: perceptions of relatives of people with dementia and healthcare professionals in the context of a danish dementia village. Dement (London). H Peoples, L F Pedersen, L Moestrup, 19Peoples H, Pedersen LF, Moestrup L. Creating a meaningful everyday life: perceptions of relatives of people with dementia and healthcare profes- sionals in the context of a danish dementia village. Dement (London). 2020;19(7):2314-31.

Professionalised intimacy: how dementia care workers navigate between domestic intimacy and institutional detachment. T Haeusermann, Sociol Health Illn. 405Haeusermann T. Professionalised intimacy: how dementia care workers navi- gate between domestic intimacy and institutional detachment. Sociol Health Illn. 2018;40(5):907-23.

Alzheimer Village": Assessment of Alzheimer's disease representations in the general population: a cross sectional phone survey. M Pech, C Meillon, M Marquet, J F Dartigues, Amieva H The, Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 8112328Pech M, Meillon C, Marquet M, Dartigues JF, Amieva H. The "Alzheimer Village": Assessment of Alzheimer's disease representations in the general population: a cross sectional phone survey. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2022;8(1):e12328.

Japanese translation and validation of the Environmental Assessment Tool-Higher Care. S Brennan, T Doan, K Bennett, Y Hashimoto, R Fleming, Herd. 144Brennan S, Doan T, Bennett K, Hashimoto Y, Fleming R. Japanese translation and validation of the Environmental Assessment Tool-Higher Care. Herd. 2021;14(4):75-92.

Health Conditions, Treatment, and care of residents with dementia in Group Living-Based Care Facilities (Group Homes): perspectives of Group Home Managers. T Junko, S Yasuyoshi, M Kenichi, Care Manag J. 153Junko T, Yasuyoshi S, Kenichi M. Health Conditions, Treatment, and care of residents with dementia in Group Living-Based Care Facilities (Group Homes): perspectives of Group Home Managers. Care Manag J. 2014;15(3):117-22.

The vital prognosis of elderly adults living in a group home in their mid-eighties. K Todoroki, Y Ikeya, S Fukui, C Tanaka, K Sekine, R Imazeki, J Physiol Sci. 675Todoroki K, Ikeya Y, Fukui S, Tanaka C, Sekine K, Imazeki R, et al. The vital prog- nosis of elderly adults living in a group home in their mid-eighties. J Physiol Sci. 2017;67(5):561-8.

Intergenerational housing: the case of Humanitas Netherlands. M E Arentshorst, R R Kloet, A Peine, J Hous Elderly. 333Arentshorst ME, Kloet RR, Peine A. Intergenerational housing: the case of Humanitas Netherlands. J Hous Elderly. 2019;33(3):244-56.

The implications of a new paradigm of care on the built environment. The Humanitas Deventer model: innovative practice. Dement (London). D Landi, G Smith, 19Landi D, Smith G. The implications of a new paradigm of care on the built environment. The Humanitas Deventer model: innovative practice. Dement (London). 2020;19(8):2911-8.

Towards responsible Rebellion: how Founders Deal with Challenges in establishing and governing innovative living arrangements for older people. K M Rusinovic, M E Van Bochove, S Koops-Boelaars, Z Tavy, J Van Hoof, Int J Environ Res Public Health. 1717Rusinovic KM, van Bochove ME, Koops-Boelaars S, Tavy Z, van Hoof J. Towards responsible Rebellion: how Founders Deal with Challenges in establishing and governing innovative living arrangements for older people. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(17).

The influence of the built environment in enacting a household model of residential aged care for people living with a mental health condition: a qualitative post-occupancy evaluation. P Carnemolla, D Debono, F Hourihan, S Hor, H Robertson, J Travaglia, Health Place. 71102624Carnemolla P, Debono D, Hourihan F, Hor S, Robertson H, Travaglia J. The influence of the built environment in enacting a household model of residential aged care for people living with a mental health condition: a qualitative post-occupancy evaluation. Health Place. 2021;71:102624.

Comparing communal environments using the Assessment Tool for Occupation and Social Engagement: using interactive occupation and social engagement as outcome measures. M Morgan-Brown, G Chard, Br J Occup Ther. 772Morgan-Brown M, Chard G. Comparing communal environments using the Assessment Tool for Occupation and Social Engagement: using interactive occupation and social engagement as outcome measures. Br J Occup Ther. 2014;77(2):50-8.

Engaging life in two irish nursing home units for people with dementia: quantitative comparisons before and after implementing household environments. M Morgan-Brown, R Newton, M Ormerod, Aging Ment Health. 171Morgan-Brown M, Newton R, Ormerod M. Engaging life in two irish nursing home units for people with dementia: quantitative comparisons before and after implementing household environments. Aging Ment Health. 2013;17(1):57-65.

Eldercare service redesign in Finland: deinstitutionalization of long-term care. A Anttonen, O Karsio, J Soc Serv Res. 422Anttonen A, Karsio O. Eldercare service redesign in Finland: deinstitutionaliza- tion of long-term care. J Soc Serv Res. 2016;42(2):151-66.

Comparison of a traditional and non-traditional residential care facility for persons living with dementia and the impact of the environment on occupational engagement. K Richards, R Cruz, S Harman, K Stagnitti, Aust Occup Ther J. 626Richards K, D'Cruz R, Harman S, Stagnitti K. Comparison of a traditional and non-traditional residential care facility for persons living with dementia and the impact of the environment on occupational engagement. Aust Occup Ther J. 2015;62(6):438-48.

Eight years of data on residents in small dementia-care settings suggest functional performance is maintained. D L Milke, J Leask, C George, S Ziolkowski, J Hous Elderly. 293Milke DL, Leask J, George C, Ziolkowski S. Eight years of data on residents in small dementia-care settings suggest functional performance is maintained. J Hous Elderly. 2015;29(3):298-328.

Effects of Physical Environment on Health and Behaviors of residents with dementia in Long-Term Care Facilities. Sook Young, L Chaudhury, H Hung, L , Res Gerontol Nurs. 102Sook Young L, Chaudhury H, Hung L. Effects of Physical Environment on Health and Behaviors of residents with dementia in Long-Term Care Facilities. Res Gerontol Nurs. 2017;10(2):81-91.

A sense of home for people with dementia in a long-term care facility: a design perspective. J Chen, S M Gramegna, A Biamonti, Health Place. 79102957Chen J, Gramegna SM, Biamonti A. A sense of home for people with dementia in a long-term care facility: a design perspective. Health Place. 2023;79:102957.

Home is Home:" exploring the meaning of Home across Long-Term Care settings. D Cater, O Tunalilar, D L White, S Hasworth, J Winfree, J Hous Elderly. 363Cater D, Tunalilar O, White DL, Hasworth S, Winfree J. Home is Home:" explor- ing the meaning of Home across Long-Term Care settings. J Hous Elderly. 2022;36(3):321-38.

Meaning of home in later life as a concept to understand older adults' housing needs: results from the 7 agefriendly cities pilot project in Qubec. C Bigonnesse, M Beaulieu, S Garon, J Hous Elderly. 284Bigonnesse C, Beaulieu M, Garon S. Meaning of home in later life as a concept to understand older adults' housing needs: results from the 7 age- friendly cities pilot project in Qubec. J Hous Elderly. 2014;28(4):357-82.

Finding home': a grounded theory on how older people 'find home'in long-term care settings. A Cooney, Int J Older People Nurs. 73Cooney A. Finding home': a grounded theory on how older people 'find home'in long-term care settings. Int J Older People Nurs. 2012;7(3):188-99.

Autonomy and long-term care. G J Agich, Oxford University PressUSAAgich GJ. Autonomy and long-term care. Oxford University Press, USA; 1993.

Facilitators and barriers to autonomy: a systematic literature review for older adults with physical impairments, living in residential care facilities. J Van Loon, K Luijkx, M Janssen, I De Rooij, B Janssen, Ageing Soc. 415van Loon J, Luijkx K, Janssen M, de Rooij I, Janssen B. Facilitators and barriers to autonomy: a systematic literature review for older adults with physical impairments, living in residential care facilities. Ageing Soc. 2021;41(5):1021-50.

A comprehensive approach to reablement in dementia. C J Poulos, A Bayer, L Beaupre, Clare L Poulos, R G Wang, R H , Transl Res Clin Interv. 33Alzheimer's DementPoulos CJ, Bayer A, Beaupre L, Clare L, Poulos RG, Wang RH, et al. A compre- hensive approach to reablement in dementia. Alzheimer's Dement: Transl Res Clin Interv. 2017;3(3):450-8.

Scoping review on the use of socially assistive robot technology in elderly care. J Abdi, A Al-Hindawi, T Ng, M P Vizcaychipi, BMJ open. 8218815Abdi J, Al-Hindawi A, Ng T, Vizcaychipi MP. Scoping review on the use of socially assistive robot technology in elderly care. BMJ open. 2018;8(2):e018815.

Digital care technologies in people with dementia living in long-term care facilities to prevent falls and manage behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia: a systematic review. Dky Chan, Lkm Chan, Y M Kuang, Mnv Le, B Celler, Eur J Ageing. 2021Chan DKY, Chan LKM, Kuang YM, Le MNV, Celler B. Digital care technologies in people with dementia living in long-term care facilities to prevent falls and manage behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia: a systematic review. Eur J Ageing. 2021:1-15.

Technology for long-term care. S H Tak, L E Benefield, D F Mahoney, Res Gerontol Nurs. 31Tak SH, Benefield LE, Mahoney DF. Technology for long-term care. Res Geron- tol Nurs. 2010;3(1):61-72.