# The Effectiveness of Evidence-Based Teaching Practices in Biomedical Sciences on Students' Learning Experience: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 260027043
 
tags: #Medicine, #Education

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc01ab0e5d5dbbff4c15d4a8d2ef22d5dd077659](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc01ab0e5d5dbbff4c15d4a8d2ef22d5dd077659)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The Effectiveness of Evidence-Based Teaching Practices in Biomedical Sciences on Students' Learning Experience: A Systematic Literature Review
2023

Tirtha Goradia tirtha.goradia@postgrad.curtin.edu.au 
Biosciences Department, Endeavour College of Natural Health
6004PerthWAAustralia

Susan Blackley 
School of Education
Curtin University
6102PerthWAAustralia

Daniel C Southam 
School of Molecular and Life Sciences
Curtin University
6102PerthWAAustralia

Ricky R Lareu 
Curtin Medical School and Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute
Curtin University
6102PerthWAAustralia


Tirtha Goradia


The Effectiveness of Evidence-Based Teaching Practices in Biomedical Sciences on Students' Learning Experience: A Systematic Literature Review

International Journal of Innovation in Science and Mathematics Education
311202355 Corresponding author:Evidence-based teaching practicesbiomedical sciencesstudent performancestudent attitude
The traditional didactic approach to teaching in biomedical sciences falls short of providing students with the 21 st century competencies necessary to meet the socioeconomic demands placed upon them. Tertiary biomedical science educators have sought empirical evidence to identify the best practices to meet these demands, each of which have an element of actively involving students in their learning, as opposed to passive and didactic instructional approaches. This review synthesises the literature on evidence-based teaching practices (EBTPs) implemented in biomedical science disciplines and investigates the impact of EBTPs on students' learning experiences through a systematic review. Seventy-eight studies were analysed, providing a comprehensive review of teaching practices that supported active learning in biomedical science disciplines. The findings revealed that EBTPs had significant impact on students' academic performance and learning experiences to enhance higherorder thinking skills and self-directed learning, despite the variation in educational setting. A range of instructional strategies and technologies that supported active learning experiences were identified in this review, and the findings provide an evidence base to inform pedagogical decisions regarding the implementation of EBTPs and may serve as an impetus for instructors to implement active learning strategies based on this empirical evidence.

## Introduction

Evidence-based teaching practices (EBTPs) are instructional practices based on empirical evidence and encompass a variety of pedagogies that range from social-constructivist learning to personalised learning, enhance active learning, and are based on student-centred learning approaches (Frost et al., 2018;Soto, 2020). Some researchers classify teaching approaches across three dimensions of teachers' instructional practice: cognitive activation, classroom management, and providing student learning support (Depaepe & König, 2018;Voss, Kunter, & Baumert, 2011). Cognitive activation refers to instructional practices that enhance students' learning. Classroom management denotes instructional practices that encompass classroom time management and student behaviour. Student support addresses the provision of encouragement and adaptive learning support. Voss et al. (2011) emphasised that instructors' use of teaching practices should be based on knowledge of classroom management, teaching methods, classroom assessment, and student heterogeneity. Other researchers posit that instructional practices should incorporate active learning strategies, formative and summative assessment approaches, inclusive teaching practices, reflective practices, group discussions, and practices that provide clarity around learning objectives and expectations (Bathgate et al., 2019;Wieman & Gilbert, 2014).

Many educators in the biomedical sciences emphasise the use of student-centred active learning approaches (Colthorpe, Zimbardi, Bugarcic, & Smith, 2015;Jumah & Ruland, 2015;Kim, Speed, & Macaulay, 2019). Biomedical science students require the necessary skills to meet the demands of the 21 st century. The Framework for 21 st Century Learning identifies the 4Cs (critical thinking and problem solving, communication, collaboration, and creativity and innovation skills) that encompass the 21 st century skills (Partnership for 21st Century Learning, 2007). Literature shows that the shift from didactic teaching to use of student-centred active learning approaches has improved students' learning experiences and academic performance thereby enhancing their 21 st century skills (Freeman et al., 2014;Solomon et al., 2018;Whitworth, 2016). The meta-analysis conducted by Rahman and Lewis (2020) evaluated the effectiveness of evidence-based instructional practices, specifically in tertiary chemistry education, on students' academic performance. Ninety-nine studies were evaluated, and the instructional practices investigated were cooperative learning, collaborative learning, problembased learning, process-oriented guided inquiry learning, peer-led team learning, and flipped classroom. The results revealed positive impact on students' academic performance, although, the effectiveness was lower for cumulative assessment when compared with single-topic assessment. Assessment topic coverage and setting size were identified as confounding variables that hindered a comparison of the relative effectiveness of the instructional practices. Similarly, Freeman et al. (2014) meta-analysed 225 studies to investigate the effectiveness of active learning in tertiary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses. Their results indicated that the average examination scores improved by 6% when active learning was used in comparison to traditional lecturing. Active learning activities identified in the studies included group activities, in-class worksheets, clickers, problem-based learning, and studio classrooms.

The impact of active learning strategies has also been investigated in nursing education. Breytenbach, Ten Ham-Baloyi and Jordan (2017) conducted a literature review of 16 studies and identified eight teaching strategies used by nurse educators: e-learning, concept mapping, Internet-based learning, web-based learning, problem-based learning, case studies, and evidence-based learning. Interestingly, gaming, as a teaching method, was found to be less preferable when compared to formal, traditional teaching. Problem-based learning, although more enjoyable, did not reveal any increase in knowledge outcomes when compared to lecturebased formal teaching strategy. A similar finding was noted about learning through case studies. Concept mapping, internet-based learning, and evidence-based interactive strategies resulted in positive impact on knowledge outcomes. The authors suggest the use of multiple teaching strategies in nursing classrooms to meet students' needs and different learning styles. Other studies investigated simulation and flipped classrooms in nursing education (Jumah & Ruland, 2015;Njie-Carr et al., 2017) respectively. The findings of the review by Jumah and Ruland (2015) indicated that simulation had significant positive outcomes when compared to traditional lecturing in skill performance, competence, and student satisfaction. Similarly, Njie-Carr (2017), in their review of flipped classroom models in nursing education, found positive outcomes from collaborative learning, active learning, critical thinking and decision-making skills for effective patient management, however, with a recommendation of more rigorous studies using adequate sample sizes and sound research design.

It is evident from this literature that many biomedical science academics are redesigning their curriculum and incorporating instructional practices to provide active learning opportunities for students. Despite the growing awareness of EBTPs, there seems to be some resistance towards implementing EBTPs by instructors (Bathgate et al., 2019), and so it is important to convey the benefits of EBTPs to the wider academic community. It is essential to inform the biomedical science instructors that there is a body of evidence that supports active learning in biomedical science. Systematic reviews are generally considered to provide the best evidence for all research questions (Gopalakrishnan & Ganeshkumar, 2013). This systematic literature review investigates the literature on EBTPs implemented in those disciplines with biomedical science as their foundation, and further explores the effectiveness of teaching practices on students' learning experiences. The working definition of 'biomedical sciences' as applicable to this study includes: all fields of biology, molecular sciences, and medicine that focus on human health. The aim of this review is to investigate the best available literature on EBTPs that can be used by biomedical science instructors. The research questions framing this study are:

1. What are the EBTPs being used in biomedical science education? 2. What is the impact of EBTPs on students' learning experience?


## Method

The protocol for this systematic review was developed using preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analyses (PRISMA-P) (Shamseer et al., 2015). This framework allowed for transparency, accuracy, completeness, and documentation of this systematic review.


## Search Strategies

Studies were identified using ERIC, CINAHL PLUS, A+ Education databases and Google Scholar. The following keywords were used in conducting the search: evidence-based teaching practice (EBTP), research-based instructional practice (RBIP), and active learning. EBTP and RBIP terminologies are interchangeably used in literature, hence both these terminologies were used in the search process. The disciplines included in the search were: medicine, nursing, pharmacy, biomedical science, genomics, molecular biology, virology, microbiology, immunology, biochemistry, anatomy, physiology, radiation, pharmacology, laboratory medicine, and medical radiation science. So as to yield valid and recent results, the search was restricted to peer-reviewed journal articles ranging from 2015 to 2021.


## Inclusion Criteria

The inclusion criteria were established at the beginning of the work and included studies that: (i) investigated the effects of EBTPs, (ii) can be implemented in face-to-face classrooms, or online or blended modes, as well as theory, or laboratory or practical sessions, (iii) involved a course in medicine, nursing, pharmacy, biomedical science, genomics, molecular biology, virology, microbiology, immunology, biochemistry, anatomy, physiology, radiation, pharmacology, laboratory medicine or medical radiation science, (iv) involved empirical studies only, and (v) included data on outcome measures on some aspect of student academic performance or student learning experiences.


## Data Analysis

The review synthesised empirical data that were obtained from different research designs. The process followed the guidelines indicated by Creswell (2018) that include: organising data for analysis, examining all of the data to reflect on the overall meaning, coding all of the data, and generating themes. The themes were categories of EBTPs that studies commonly implemented.


## Critical Appraisal

The rigour of the studies was established using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) (Hong, Gonzalez-Reyes, & Pluye, 2018) as it supports critical appraisal for all types of study designs. As this review would include heterogeneous study designs, MMAT was considered appropriate for this systematic review. Risk of bias was assessed for individual studies by screening information on research questions, methodology, recruitment of participants, sampling strategy, integration of qualitative and quantitative data, and outcome data as relevant to individual studies. Each criterion was assigned a response of either 'yes', 'no', or 'inconclusive'. A study was considered to be at moderate risk if it received two or more 'no' responses, while a study was considered to be at low risk if it received two or more 'yes' responses.


## Results


## Search Strategy

The search yielded 546 studies, and 13 duplicates were removed. The titles and abstracts for 533 articles were screened for potential eligibility of implementing EBTPs. They were sourced from various types of publications such as books, abstracts, conference papers, editorials, as well as, dissertations. Studies written in languages other than English were excluded. Based on the described methodology and eligibility criteria, the review identified 78 relevant papers. Three studies were qualitative, 65 studies were quantitative, and 10 studies used mixedmethods designs. Figure 1 provides a flow chart of the search strategy along with the outcomes. Critical appraisal of the 78 studies included in this systematic review indicated low level of bias for 73 studies and moderate level of bias for five studies. 


## Study Characteristics

Of the 78 studies, three were conducted in biochemistry courses, three in anatomy and physiology courses, and one in a pathobiology course. Other courses involved students enrolled in various undergraduate degree programs such as dentistry, medicine, pharmacy, nursing, chiropractic, paramedic bioscience, and molecular biology.


## Outcomes

The EBTPs ranged from process oriented guided inquiry learning (POGIL), clicker responses, flipped classroom, student-centred learning with group discussions, educational gaming, inquiry-based learning, case-based learning, Interteaching, use of formative assessments, debates, and various active learning exercises. These active learning strategies involved students participating in group discussions, oral research presentations, think-pair quizzes, blog construction, image-based exercises, as well as drawing anatomical components. Many EBTPs were complemented with technologies such as FlowJo cytometry analysis software for detecting fluorescent-labelled molecules, mobile augmented reality technology, ultrasound, spirometry devices, and computer-based simulators, while others were supported with educational tools such as analogical models and visual field defects masks. Outcome measures for studies included pass and fail rates, student grades, student satisfaction, educational activity outcomes, exam performance, attitudes towards the practices, student perceptions, and scores on critical thinking skills.


## Discussion

This systematic review sought to answer two research questions: (1) What are the EBTPs being used in biomedical science education? and (2) What is the impact of EBTPs on students' learning experience?


## Evidence-Based Teaching Practices in Biomedical Science

There is an implication on educators that they implement pedagogies that enhance skills in students to meet the demands of the 21 st century (Kivunja, 2014). Accordingly, 21 st century pedagogies identified in the literature include, but are not limited to, inquiry-based learning, problem-based learning, collaborative learning, experiential learning, constructivist learning, personalised learning, and flipped-classroom learning. These pedagogies utilise the social constructivism view of learning, whereby, students construct knowledge by interacting with other learners (Vygotsky & Kozulin, 1986). The instructional strategies identified in this review align with the 21 st century pedagogies discussed in the literature. These are: problem-based learning, team-based learning or collaborative learning, flipped classroom, simulation, POGIL, case-based learning, project-based learning, formative evaluation, and inclusive pedagogies. Educators conceptualised and operationalised the instructional strategies differently based on the nature of the course taught, year level, and size of the class.

Flipped classroom intervention included pre-class and in-class active learning activities that ranged from use of jigsaw activity to use of clickers, debates, group projects, case studies, guest speakers that allowed peer interactions and team-based learning. Most of the pre-class learning materials ranged from PowerPoint slides, videos and reading resources. Two studies adopted semi-flipped model slightly different to that of others whereby only a few lectures in the whole term were flipped with the remainder of the sessions presented in the traditional didactic style (Chan, Tang, Chow, & Wong, 2021;Gorres-Martens, Segovia, & Pfefer, 2016). Workload and technical issues were some of the barriers identified in the studies towards implementation of the flipped model. This implies that the flipped model needs a design that has an appropriate blend of pre and in-class activities.

Simulation as an instructional strategy was used mainly in nursing and medicine cohorts where students required to learn physiology and pathophysiology concepts within a clinical context. Jumah and Ruland (2015) describe simulation as a pedagogical approach that replicates real life situations to allow learners to practice decision making and perfect psychomotor skills in a safe environment. Based on this description, studies in the current review that implemented simulation were analysed. The findings of this review were similar to those identified in the literature in terms of student satisfaction, skill performance, knowledge acquisition, and selfconfidence.

A comparative analysis of case-based learning, collaborative learning and problem-based learning revealed overlapping components amongst these instructional strategies. Collaborative learning was established by getting students to work in groups to solve case studies, problem-solving, debates, teaching to peers, paper presentations, and designing exam questions. Similarly, case-based learning presents an umbrella term that encompasses a range of instructional strategies, including inquiry-based learning, problem-based learning, and project-based learning (Derfoufi et al., 2015) where students work on case studies. The assessment coverage varied across the studies with most studies employing single-topic assessments or assessments on modules that employed the intervention. Very few studies used cumulative assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention (Cleveland, Olimpo, & DeChenne-Peters, 2017;Huitt, Killins, & Brooks, 2015). Variation in setting size was also identified across the studies that implemented these instructional strategies and should be considered as a confounding variable while comparing the effectiveness of the instructional strategies.

Six studies used an inquiry learning process as an instructional method, two closely associated with POGIL that allows students to practise process skills (problem solving, deductive reasoning, communication, and self-assessment) while engaged in a guided inquiry (Bentley, Robinson, & Ruscitti, 2015;Brown, 2016;Eberlein et al., 2008;King, Van der Touw, Spowart, & Lawlor, 2016;Nybo & May, 2015;Sinnayah, Rathner, Loton, Klein, & Hartley, 2019). This approach allowed students to apply their content-based knowledge to process-specific knowledge using scientific process. Positive outcomes were identified in all the studies that employed inquiry-learning process. Inclusive strategies involved hands-on activities to cater to auditory, visual, and kinaesthetic learners. This involved use of board games, puzzle, physical models, props, and drawing.


## Impact Of Evidence-Based Teaching Practices on Students' Learning Experience

The outcome measures were thematically categorised into four major themes: students' performance, students' attitudes, higher-order thinking skills, and self-directed learning. Each of these themes are discussed in the following sections.


## Students' Performance

The EBTPs implemented in the studies had significant effects on students' performance, which was determined by evaluating either pass and fail rates or grades for the enrolled units. Postintervention, statistically significant results were noted in the mean test scores denoting significant improvement in performance. One study, that implemented a pre-lecture screencast with a multiple-choice question (MCQ) quiz, showed improvement in average grades for MCQ quizzes from the first attempt to last attempt (Kinsella, Mahon, & Lillis, 2017). However, there was no noticeable impact on academic achievement when compared to the previous year. Possible reasons suggested by the authors are the learners' varied levels of prior knowledge, and pre-lecture screencasts not being a part of continual assessment. These factors may have deterred students from engaging with the screencast resources. Two studies revealed a significant increase in knowledge retention (Kulak & Newton, 2015;Raupach et al., 2016). Of equal importance was the difference in the academic achievement noted in strongly-performing and poorly-performing students that was found in a study conducted by Carrasco, Behling, and Lopez (2019). The strongly-performing students benefitted from group work, while poorlyperforming students benefitted from individual work when preparing for Readiness Assurance Test exercises (Carrasco et al., 2019).

Similarly, Green, Cates, White, and Farchione (2016) investigated the effect of collaborative practical tests on students' understanding of gross anatomy. The findings revealed that there was no correlation between collaborative practical tests and the final exam mark, suggesting that collaborative practical testing is not effective in improving individual student exam marks. A negative outcome was also revealed in a study by Grosas, Raju, Schuett, Chuck, and Millar (2016) that implemented formative assessment process as an EBTP. Formative assessments caused minimal improvement in the final exam performance and the researchers concluded that the ineffective feedback provided in the assessments did not empower students to improve their achievement. Additionally, another study by Carlson, Chandra, Hobbs, and Steele (2019) that used clay modelling as an active learning strategy did not reveal any significant improvement in exam performance, while indicating that time restrictions, group dynamics, and task instructions could be factors hindering the desired outcome.


## Positive Attitudes

The purpose of implementing EBTPs is to maximise learning experiences for students. This can be achieved by creating engaging learning materials, creating opportunities for students to engage with peers and instructors, constructively aligning assessment tasks to the desired learning outcomes, providing opportunities for critical thinking, and, most importantly, making explicit the connections between the content and future professions. To that end, the EBTPs explored in this review created positive environments that were conducive to student learning. Students' perceptions gathered through survey responses revealed positive attitudes towards various aspects of learning components: teamwork (Brown, 2016;Huitt et al., 2015;Tarhan & Ayyildiz, 2015); usefulness of resources in learning (Fyfe, Fyfe, Dye, & Radley-Crabb, 2018); learning experiences (Abraham, Vashe, & Torke, 2015;Chen, Kelly, Hayes, Van Reyk, & Herok, 2016;Derfoufi et al., 2015;Gorres-Martens et al., 2016;Kulak & Newton, 2015;Matsuda, Azaiza, & Salani, 2017;Muthukrishnan et al., 2019;Youngwanichsetha, Kritcharoen, Chunuan, Kala, & Phumdoung, 2020); interest in biochemistry (Tarhan & Ayyildiz, 2015); accessibility to the instructor (Gonzalez & Gadbury-Amyot, 2016), cognitive load (Gross, Wright, & Anderson, 2017); engagement in scientific inquiry (Brown, 2016); experiment instructions (King et al., 2016); relevance of the teaching practices (King et al., 2016); exam experience (Ahlstrom & Holmberg, 2021); empathy towards older persons (Lucchetti, Duarte, Assis, Laurindo, Lucchetti, 2019); enjoyment (Kukolja Taradi & Taradi, 2016), and use of technology (Hardie et al., 2020).


## Higher-Order Thinking Skills

Educators have highlighted that within biomedical science disciplines students are required to develop scientific inquiry, experimental, research-based, and critical thinking skills (Breytenbach et al., 2017;Colthorpe et al., 2015;Njie-Carr et al., 2017). Skills, such as critical analysis, problem-solving, collaboration, and team-work, allow health workers to work interdependently and to make sound scientific and clinical decisions based on evidence (Brown, Alshiraihi, Hassell, & Lanning, 2020). To that end, this review identified EBTPs that promote such higher-order thinking skills. Teaching practices such as case-based learning, group discussions, flipped classroom approaches, and gaming have improved problem-solving, critical thinking skills, and communication skills (Chan et al., 2021;Cicuto & Torres, 2016;Derfoufi et al., 2015;Mahaffey, 2019;Marcondes et al., 2015;Montrezor, 2016;Muthukrishnan et al., 2019;Youngwanichsetha et al., 2020). In the study by Lucchetti et al. (2019), that used a combination of different active learning methods including simulated scenarios, real-patient encounters, gaming, and jigsaw puzzles, improvements in clinical skills for geriatric medicine were identified. These skills were assessed using the validated tool, the Clinical Skills Assessment questionnaire. Similarly, Styers, Van Zandt, and Hayden (2018) investigated the effect of a flipped classroom approach using the Critical Thinking Assessment Test on students' critical thinking skills. The results indicate higher post-test Critical Thinking Assessment Test scores especially from under-represented minority students (Styers et al., 2018). Active learning strategies, such as use of debate, dialogical narrative approach, and guided-inquiry based instruction, promoted critical thinking and stimulated higher-order thinking skills as students were involved in thinking, questioning, processing, and then presentation of scientific data (Ghiam, Loftus, & Kamel-ElSayed, 2019;Hardie et al., 2020;Kedraka & Kourkoutas, 2018;Mumtaz & Latif, 2017;Nybo & May, 2015). The outcome measures for these studies were gathered by evaluating students' opinions through focus group interviews. Similarly, EBTP such as deep reading of papers implemented in a study by Peng (2017) enhanced research skills as students got involved in literature search, analysing, evaluating, and presenting of research data.


## Self-Directed Learning

Self-directed learning is defined as an ability to control, manage, and plan learning actions, and encompasses cognitive strategies such as rehearsal, metacognitive strategies such as monitoring and planning, and resource management strategies such as seeking peer support (Broadbent & Poon, 2015). These active learning strategies allow students to achieve positive academic outcomes and the clinical skills required in biomedical science disciplines. Findings from a study that implemented Interteaching, a behavioural approach to learning, whereby instructors prepared study guides, revealed that students undertook responsibility for their own learning and showed improvement in their study habits (Estridge & Owens, 2018). Another study that implemented a flipped classroom model identified enhanced metacognitive awareness as an outcome (Chan et al., 2021). Similarly, McLean, Attardi, Faden, and Goldszmidt (2016) in their study on flipped classroom and learning behaviours identified that students developed independent learning strategies such as note-taking, reviewing, and metacognitive awareness such as time management, understanding and reflection, as well as highly-valued opportunities for peer interactions. Further, the findings revealed that students spent less time on multi-tasking behaviours and preferred a 'just-in-time' teaching approach. Data from questionnaires and focus group interviews revealed that teaching practices complemented with technology supported students in their self-directed learning as students improved in their organising, retrieving, collaborating, and presenting skills (Abraham et al., 2018;Garrett, Jackson, & Wilson, 2015).


## Conclusion

This study sought to provide a biomedical science discipline-specific synthesis of EBTPs through a systematic review. To that end, the identified literature comprised of robust research studies that included qualitative, quantitative descriptive, experimental, quasi-experimental, and mixed-methods research studies to date. The results revealed that cohorts using EBTPs have positive impact on academic performance and student learning experience. The findings of this study contribute to the body of literature to reveal that EBTPs in biomedical science promote active learning and are based on sound evidence. Clearly, the teaching approaches identified in this review allowed for cognitive activation in students, classroom management, and student learning support thereby meeting critical dimensions of teachers' instructional practice. It is not within the scope of this review to suggest superiority of one instructional strategy over the other. However, instructors are encouraged to refer to these EBTPs and consider what is the best suitable in a given educational setting.


## Implications for Practice

This systematic review was intended to inform instructors within the biomedical science disciplines about the advantages of using EBTPs. It is highly recommended that multiple active learning strategies are implemented alongside the lecture materials so that they serve as complementary strategies. Successful implementation of EBTPs will require institutions to provide instructors with necessary resources in regards to professional learning as well as funding resources wherever applicable. This has implications for higher education institutions, educators, policy makers, administrators, and health practitioners involved in curriculum and pedagogical decisions related to the implementation of EBTPs.

## Figure 1 .
1PRISMA flowchart for the systematic review detailing the databases searched, the number of duplicates screened, the number of abstracts screened, and the full texts retrieved. 78 articles retrieved.
AcknowledgementsThis work was undertaken as part of a doctoral program.FundingThis research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Modified directed self-learning sessions in physiology with prereading assignments and Pecha Kucha Talks: Perceptions of students. R R Abraham, S Torke, J Gonsalves, S N Narayanan, M G Kamath, J Prakash, K S Rai, 10.1152/advan.00048.2017Advances in Physiology Education. 421Abraham, R. R., Torke, S., Gonsalves, J., Narayanan, S. N., Kamath, M. G., Prakash, J., & Rai, K. S. (2018). Modified directed self-learning sessions in physiology with prereading assignments and Pecha Kucha Talks: Perceptions of students. Advances in Physiology Education, 42(1), 26-31. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00048.2017

Heart shots": A classroom activity to instigate active learning. R R Abraham, A Vashe, S Torke, 10.1152/advan.00027.2015Advances in Physiology Education. 393Abraham, R. R., Vashe, A., & Torke, S. (2015). "Heart shots": A classroom activity to instigate active learning. Advances in Physiology Education, 39(3), 189-191. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00027.2015

A comparison of three interactive examination designs in active learning classrooms for nursing students. L Ahlstrom, C Holmberg, 10.1186/s12912-021-00575-6BMC Nursing. 201Ahlstrom, L., & Holmberg, C. (2021). A comparison of three interactive examination designs in active learning classrooms for nursing students. BMC Nursing, 20(1), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12912-021-00575-6

Perceived supports and evidence-based teaching in college STEM. M Bathgate, O Aragón, A Cavanagh, J Waterhouse, J Frederick, M Graham, 10.1186/s40594-019-0166-3International Journal of STEM Education. 61Bathgate, M., Aragón, O., Cavanagh, A., Waterhouse, J., Frederick, J., & Graham, M. (2019). Perceived supports and evidence-based teaching in college STEM. International Journal of STEM Education, 6(1), 1- 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-019-0166-3

Using guided inquiry and the information search process to develop research confidence among first year anatomy students. D C Bentley, A C Robinson, R J Ruscitti, 10.1002/ase.1527Anatomical Sciences Education. 86Bentley, D. C., Robinson, A. C., & Ruscitti, R. J. (2015). Using guided inquiry and the information search process to develop research confidence among first year anatomy students. Anatomical Sciences Education, 8(6), 564-573. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ase.1527

An integrative literature review of evidencebased teaching strategies for nurse educators. C Breytenbach, W Ham-Baloyi, P J Jordan, 10.1097/01.NEP.0000000000000181Nursing Education Perspectives. 384Breytenbach, C., Ten Ham-Baloyi, W., & Jordan, P. J. (2017). An integrative literature review of evidence- based teaching strategies for nurse educators. Nursing Education Perspectives, 38(4), 193-197. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NEP.0000000000000181

Self-regulated learning strategies & academic achievement in online higher education learning environments: A systematic review. The Internet and Higher Education. J Broadbent, W L Poon, 10.1016/j.iheduc.2015.04.00727Broadbent, J., & Poon, W. L. (2015). Self-regulated learning strategies & academic achievement in online higher education learning environments: A systematic review. The Internet and Higher Education, 27, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2015.04.007

Evaluating the effectiveness of a practical inquiry-based learning bioinformatics module on undergraduate student engagement and applied skills. J A L Brown, 10.1002/bmb.20954Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education. 443Brown, J. A. L. (2016). Evaluating the effectiveness of a practical inquiry-based learning bioinformatics module on undergraduate student engagement and applied skills. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 44(3), 304-313. https://doi.org/10.1002/bmb.20954

Clinical sciences-leading the way in competency-based biomedical education. M A Brown, I Alshiraihi, K Hassell, S Lanning, 10.3390/vetsci7010023Vet Sci. 7123Brown, M. A., Alshiraihi, I., Hassell, K., & Lanning, S. (2020). Clinical sciences-leading the way in competency-based biomedical education. Vet Sci, 7(1), 23. https://doi.org/10.3390/vetsci7010023

Clay modeling in a sophomore-level anatomy laboratory: Will active learning improve student performance? HAPS Educator. D Carlson, S Chandra, N Hobbs, J Steele, 10.21692/haps.2019.00823Carlson, D., Chandra, S., Hobbs, N., & Steele, J. (2019). Clay modeling in a sophomore-level anatomy laboratory: Will active learning improve student performance? HAPS Educator, 23(2), 358-365. https://doi.org/10.21692/haps.2019.008

A novel grading strategy for team-based learning exercises in a hands-on course in molecular biology for senior undergraduate underrepresented students in medicine resulted in stronger student performance. G A Carrasco, K C Behling, O J Lopez, 10.1002/bmb.21200Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education. 472Carrasco, G. A., Behling, K. C., & Lopez, O. J. (2019). A novel grading strategy for team-based learning exercises in a hands-on course in molecular biology for senior undergraduate underrepresented students in medicine resulted in stronger student performance. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 47(2), 115-123. https://doi.org/10.1002/bmb.21200

Enhancing generic capabilities and metacognitive awareness of first-year nursing students using active learning strategy. C W H Chan, F W K Tang, K M Chow, C L Wong, 10.1186/s12912-021-00601-7BMC Nursing. 201Chan, C. W. H., Tang, F. W. K., Chow, K. M., & Wong, C. L. (2021). Enhancing generic capabilities and metacognitive awareness of first-year nursing students using active learning strategy. BMC Nursing, 20(1), 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12912-021-00601-7

The use of simulation as a novel experiential learning module in undergraduate science pathophysiology education. H Chen, M Kelly, C Hayes, D Van Reyk, G Herok, 10.1152/advan.00188.2015Advances in Physiology Education. 403Chen, H., Kelly, M., Hayes, C., van Reyk, D., & Herok, G. (2016). The use of simulation as a novel experiential learning module in undergraduate science pathophysiology education. Advances in Physiology Education, 40(3), 335-341. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00188.2015

Implementing an active learning environment to influence students' motivation in biochemistry. C A T Cicuto, B B Torres, 10.1021/acs.jchemed.5b00965Journal of Chemical Education. 936Cicuto, C. A. T., & Torres, B. B. (2016). Implementing an active learning environment to influence students' motivation in biochemistry. Journal of Chemical Education, 93(6), 1020-1026. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5b00965

Investigating the relationship between instructors' use of active-learning strategies and students' conceptual understanding and affective changes in introductory biology: A comparison of two active-learning environments. L M Cleveland, J T Olimpo, S E Dechenne-Peters, 10.1187/cbe.16-06-0181CBE -Life Sciences Education. 162Cleveland, L. M., Olimpo, J. T., & DeChenne-Peters, S. E. (2017). Investigating the relationship between instructors' use of active-learning strategies and students' conceptual understanding and affective changes in introductory biology: A comparison of two active-learning environments. CBE -Life Sciences Education, 16(2), 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.16-06-0181

Progressive development of scientific literacy through assessment in inquiry-based biomedical science curricula. K Colthorpe, K Zimbardi, A Bugarcic, A Smith, International Journal of Innovation in Science and Mathematics Education. 235Colthorpe, K., Zimbardi, K., Bugarcic, A., & Smith, A. (2015). Progressive development of scientific literacy through assessment in inquiry-based biomedical science curricula. International Journal of Innovation in Science and Mathematics Education, 23(5), 52-64. https://catalogue.curtin.edu.au/permalink/f/iiil99/TN_proquest2248366524

Research design : qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. J W Creswell, / John W. Creswell, J. David CreswellSAGE Publications, IncThousand Oaks, CaliforniaFifth editionCreswell, J. W. a. (2018). Research design : qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches / John W. Creswell, J. David Creswell (Fifth edition.. ed.). Thousand Oaks, California : SAGE Publications, Inc.

General pedagogical knowledge, self-efficacy and instructional practice: Disentangling their relationship in pre-service teacher education. Teaching and Teacher Education. F Depaepe, J König, 10.1016/j.tate.2017.10.00369Depaepe, F., & König, J. (2018). General pedagogical knowledge, self-efficacy and instructional practice: Disentangling their relationship in pre-service teacher education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 69, 177- 190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2017.10.003

Impact of active teaching methods implemented on therapeutic chemistry module: Performance and impressions of first-year pharmacy students. S Derfoufi, A Benmoussa, J El Harti, Y Ramli, J Taoufik, S Chaouir, 10.5278/ojs.jpblhe.v0i0.1207Journal of Problem Based Learning in Higher Education. 32Derfoufi, S., Benmoussa, A., El Harti, J., Ramli, Y., Taoufik, J., & Chaouir, S. (2015). Impact of active teaching methods implemented on therapeutic chemistry module: Performance and impressions of first-year pharmacy students. Journal of Problem Based Learning in Higher Education, 3(2), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.5278/ojs.jpblhe.v0i0.1207

Pedagogies of engagement in science: A comparison of PBL, POGIL, and PLTL. T Eberlein, J Kampmeier, V Minderhout, R S Moog, T Platt, P Varma-Nelson, H B White, 10.1002/bmb.20204Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education. 364Eberlein, T., Kampmeier, J., Minderhout, V., Moog, R. S., Platt, T., Varma-Nelson, P., & White, H. B. (2008). Pedagogies of engagement in science: A comparison of PBL, POGIL, and PLTL. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 36(4), 262-273. https://doi.org/10.1002/bmb.20204

Effectiveness of interteaching with senior baccalaureate nursing students. K M Estridge, J K Owens, Delta Kappa Gamma Bulletin. 845Estridge, K. M., & Owens, J. K. (2018). Effectiveness of interteaching with senior baccalaureate nursing students. Delta Kappa Gamma Bulletin, 84(5), 14-25.

Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and mathematics. S Freeman, S L Eddy, M Mcdonough, M K Smith, N Okoroafor, H Jordt, M P Wenderoth, 10.1073/pnas.1319030111Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States. the National Academy of Sciences of the United States111Freeman, S., Eddy, S. L., McDonough, M., Smith, M. K., Okoroafor, N., Jordt, H., & Wenderoth, M. P. (2014). Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and mathematics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States, 111(23), 8410-8415. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319030111

SPARCT: A STEM professional academy to reinvigorate the culture of teaching. L Frost, J Greene, T Huffman, B Johnson, T Kunberger, L Goodson, Journal of STEM Education: Innovations & Research. 191Frost, L., Greene, J., Huffman, T., Johnson, B., Kunberger, T., & Goodson, L. (2018). SPARCT: A STEM professional academy to reinvigorate the culture of teaching. Journal of STEM Education: Innovations & Research, 19(1), 62-69.

The Anatomage table: Differences in student ratings between initial implementation and established use. Focus on Health Professional Education: A Multidisciplinary. S Fyfe, G Fyfe, D Dye, H Radley-Crabb, 10.11157/fohpe.v19i2.215Journal. 192Fyfe, S., Fyfe, G., Dye, D., & Radley-Crabb, H. (2018). The Anatomage table: Differences in student ratings between initial implementation and established use. Focus on Health Professional Education: A Multi- disciplinary Journal, 19(2), 41-52. https://doi.org/10.11157/fohpe.v19i2.215

Augmented reality m-learning to enhance nursing skills acquisition in the clinical skills laboratory. B M Garrett, C Jackson, B Wilson, 10.1108/ITSE-05-2015-0013Interactive Technology and Smart Education. 124Garrett, B. M., Jackson, C., & Wilson, B. (2015). Augmented reality m-learning to enhance nursing skills acquisition in the clinical skills laboratory. Interactive Technology and Smart Education, 12(4), 298-314. https://doi.org/10.1108/ITSE-05-2015-0013

Dialogical narrative approach to enhance critical thinking and student engagement during lecture-based classes. Focus on Health Professional Education: A Multi-disciplinary. B K Ghiam, S Loftus, S Kamel-Elsayed, 10.3316/ielapa.002981294027764Journal. 203Ghiam, B. K., Loftus, S., & Kamel-ElSayed, S. (2019). Dialogical narrative approach to enhance critical thinking and student engagement during lecture-based classes. Focus on Health Professional Education: A Multi-disciplinary Journal, 20(3), 30-43. https://doi.org/10.3316/ielapa.002981294027764

Using Twitter for teaching and learning in an oral and maxillofacial radiology course. S M Gonzalez, C C Gadbury-Amyot, 10.1002/j.0022-0337.2016.80.2.tb06070.xJournal of Dental Education. 802Gonzalez, S. M., & Gadbury-Amyot, C. C. (2016). Using Twitter for teaching and learning in an oral and maxillofacial radiology course. Journal of Dental Education, 80(2), 149-155. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.0022- 0337.2016.80.2.tb06070.x

Systematic reviews and meta-analysis: Understanding the best evidence in primary healthcare. S Gopalakrishnan, P Ganeshkumar, 10.4103/2249-4863.109934Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care. 21Gopalakrishnan, S., & Ganeshkumar, P. (2013). Systematic reviews and meta-analysis: Understanding the best evidence in primary healthcare. Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care, 2(1), 9-14. https://doi.org/10.4103/2249-4863.109934

Positive outcomes increase over time with the implementation of a semiflipped teaching model. B K Gorres-Martens, A R Segovia, M T Pfefer, 10.1152/advan.00034.2015Advances in Physiology Education. 401Gorres-Martens, B. K., Segovia, A. R., & Pfefer, M. T. (2016). Positive outcomes increase over time with the implementation of a semiflipped teaching model. Advances in Physiology Education, 40(1), 32-37. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00034.2015

Do collaborative practical tests encourage studentcentered active learning of gross anatomy?. R A Green, T Cates, L White, D Farchione, 10.1002/ase.1564Anatomical Sciences Education. 93Green, R. A., Cates, T., White, L., & Farchione, D. (2016). Do collaborative practical tests encourage student- centered active learning of gross anatomy? Anatomical Sciences Education, 9(3), 231-237. https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.1564

Determining if active learning through a formative assessment process translates to better performance in summative assessment. A B Grosas, S R Raju, B S Schuett, J.-A Chuck, T J Millar, 10.1080/03075079.2014.988704Studies in Higher Education. 419Grosas, A. B., Raju, S. R., Schuett, B. S., Chuck, J.-A., & Millar, T. J. (2016). Determining if active learning through a formative assessment process translates to better performance in summative assessment. Studies in Higher Education, 41(9), 1595-1611. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2014.988704

Effects of image-based and text-based active learning exercises on student examination performance in a musculoskeletal anatomy course. M M Gross, M C Wright, O S Anderson, 10.1002/ase.1684Anatomical Sciences Education. 105Gross, M. M., Wright, M. C., & Anderson, O. S. (2017). Effects of image-based and text-based active learning exercises on student examination performance in a musculoskeletal anatomy course. Anatomical Sciences Education, 10(5), 444-455. https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.1684

Nursing & midwifery students' experience of immersive virtual reality storytelling: An evaluative study. P Hardie, A Darley, L Carroll, C Redmond, A Campbell, S Jarvis, 10.1186/s12912-020-00471-5BMC Nursing. 191Hardie, P., Darley, A., Carroll, L., Redmond, C., Campbell, A., & Jarvis, S. (2020). Nursing & midwifery students' experience of immersive virtual reality storytelling: An evaluative study. BMC Nursing, 19(1), N.PAG-N.PAG. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12912-020-00471-5

Improving the usefulness of a tool for appraising the quality of qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods studies, the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT). Q N Hong, A Gonzalez-Reyes, P Pluye, 10.1111/jep.12884Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice. 243Hong, Q. N., Gonzalez-Reyes, A., & Pluye, P. (2018). Improving the usefulness of a tool for appraising the quality of qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods studies, the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT). Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 24(3), 459-467. https://doi.org/10.1111/jep.12884

Team-based learning in the gross anatomy laboratory improves academic performance and students' attitudes toward teamwork. T W Huitt, A Killins, W S Brooks, 10.1002/ase.1460Anatomical Sciences Education. 82Huitt, T. W., Killins, A., & Brooks, W. S. (2015). Team-based learning in the gross anatomy laboratory improves academic performance and students' attitudes toward teamwork. Anatomical Sciences Education, 8(2), 95-103. https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.1460

A critical review of simulation. J A B Jumah, J P Ruland, 10.5958/0974-9357.2015.00151.8International Journal of Nursing Education. 73Jumah, J. A. B., & Ruland, J. P. (2015). A critical review of simulation-based on nursing education research: 2004-2011. International Journal of Nursing Education, 7(3), 135-139. https://doi.org/10.5958/0974- 9357.2015.00151.8

Debates in teaching bioethics. K Kedraka, Y Kourkoutas, 10.5430/jct.v7n1p32Journal of Curriculum and Teaching. 71Kedraka, K., & Kourkoutas, Y. (2018). Debates in teaching bioethics. Journal of Curriculum and Teaching, 7(1), 32-41. https://doi.org/10.5430/jct.v7n1p32

Barriers and strategies: Implementing active learning in biomedical science lectures. A M Kim, C J Speed, J O Macaulay, 10.1002/bmb.21190Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education. 471Kim, A. M., Speed, C. J., & Macaulay, J. O. (2019). Barriers and strategies: Implementing active learning in biomedical science lectures. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 47(1), 29-40. https://doi.org/10.1002/bmb.21190

A scoping study investigating student perceptions towards inquiry based learning in the laboratory. N King, T Van Der Touw, L Spowart, C Lawlor, 10.30935/scimath/9472European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education. 43King, N., Van der Touw, T., Spowart, L., & Lawlor, C. (2016). A scoping study investigating student perceptions towards inquiry based learning in the laboratory. European Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 4(3), 305-314. https://doi.org/10.30935/scimath/9472

Using pre-lecture activities to enhance learner engagement in a large group setting. G K Kinsella, C Mahon, S Lillis, 10.1177/1469787417715205Active Learning in Higher Education. 183Kinsella, G. K., Mahon, C., & Lillis, S. (2017). Using pre-lecture activities to enhance learner engagement in a large group setting. Active Learning in Higher Education, 18(3), 231-242. https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787417715205

Innovative pedagogies in higher education to become effective teachers of 21st century skills: Unpacking the learning and innovations skills domain of the new learning paradigm. C Kivunja, 10.5430/ijhe.v3n4p37International Journal of Higher Education. 34Kivunja, C. (2014). Innovative pedagogies in higher education to become effective teachers of 21st century skills: Unpacking the learning and innovations skills domain of the new learning paradigm. International Journal of Higher Education, 3(4), 37-48. https://doi.org/10.5430/ijhe.v3n4p37

Making physiology learning memorable: A mobile phone-assisted case-based instructional strategy. S Kukolja Taradi, M Taradi, 10.1152/advan.00187.2015Advances in Physiology Education. 403Kukolja Taradi, S., & Taradi, M. (2016). Making physiology learning memorable: A mobile phone-assisted case-based instructional strategy. Advances in Physiology Education, 40(3), 383-387. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00187.2015

An investigation of the pedagogical impact of using case-based learning in a undergraduate biochemistry Course. V Kulak, G Newton, 10.5430/ijhe.v4n4p13International Journal of Higher Education. 44Kulak, V., & Newton, G. (2015). An investigation of the pedagogical impact of using case-based learning in a undergraduate biochemistry Course. International Journal of Higher Education, 4(4), 13-24. https://doi.org/10.5430/ijhe.v4n4p13

Is it possible to teach Geriatric Medicine in a stimulating way? Measuring the effect of active learning activities in Brazilian medical students. A L G Lucchetti, B S V F Duarte, T V Assis, B O Laurindo, G Lucchetti, 10.1111/ajag.12626Australasian Journal on Ageing. 382Lucchetti, A. L. G., Duarte, B. S. V. F., Assis, T. V., Laurindo, B. O., & Lucchetti, G. (2019). Is it possible to teach Geriatric Medicine in a stimulating way? Measuring the effect of active learning activities in Brazilian medical students. Australasian Journal on Ageing, 38(2), e58-e66. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajag.12626

A flavor perception game designed to introduce basic chemical sensation of taste modalities to undergraduate nursing and exercise science students. A L Mahaffey, 10.21692/haps.2019.019HAPS Educator. 232Mahaffey, A. L. (2019). A flavor perception game designed to introduce basic chemical sensation of taste modalities to undergraduate nursing and exercise science students. HAPS Educator, 23(2), 446-456. https://doi.org/10.21692/haps.2019.019

A puzzle used to teach the cardiac cycle. F K Marcondes, M J C S Moura, A Sanches, R Costa, P Oliveira De Lima, F C Groppo, M E C Amaral, P Zeni, K C Gaviao, L H Montrezor, 10.1152/advan.00116.2014Advances in Physiology Education. 391Marcondes, F. K., Moura, M. J. C. S., Sanches, A., Costa, R., Oliveira de Lima, P., Groppo, F. C., Amaral, M. E. C., Zeni, P., Gaviao, K. C., & Montrezor, L. H. (2015). A puzzle used to teach the cardiac cycle. Advances in Physiology Education, 39(1), 27-31. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00116.2014

Flipping the classroom without flipping out the students: Working with an instructional designer in an undergraduate evidence-based nursing practice course. Y Matsuda, K Azaiza, D Salani, Quarterly Review of Distance Education. 181Matsuda, Y., Azaiza, K., & Salani, D. (2017). Flipping the classroom without flipping out the students: Working with an instructional designer in an undergraduate evidence-based nursing practice course. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 18(1), 17-27.

Flipped classrooms and student learning: Not just surface gains. S Mclean, S M Attardi, L Faden, M Goldszmidt, 10.1152/advan.00098.2015Advances in Physiology Education. 401McLean, S., Attardi, S. M., Faden, L., & Goldszmidt, M. (2016). Flipped classrooms and student learning: Not just surface gains. Advances in Physiology Education, 40(1), 47-55. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00098.2015

Performance in physiology evaluation: Possible improvement by active learning strategies. L H Montrezor, 10.1152/advan.00022.2016Advances in Physiology Education. 404Montrezor, L. H. (2016). Performance in physiology evaluation: Possible improvement by active learning strategies. Advances in Physiology Education, 40(4), 454-457. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00022.2016

Learning through debate during problem-based learning: An active learning strategy. S Mumtaz, R Latif, 10.1152/advan.00157.2016Advances in Physiology Education. 313Mumtaz, S., & Latif, R. (2017). Learning through debate during problem-based learning: An active learning strategy. Advances in Physiology Education, 31(3), 390-394. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00157.2016

Planning, implementation, and evaluation of multicomponent, case-based learning for first-year Indian medical undergraduates. S P Muthukrishnan, D S Chandran, N Afreen, M Bir, S G Dastidar, H Jayappa, B Mattoo, A Navneet, J Poorasamy, A Roy, A Sharma, D Ghosh, K K Deepak, 10.1152/advan.00080.2019Advances in Physiology Education. 434Muthukrishnan, S. P., Chandran, D. S., Afreen, N., Bir, M., Dastidar, S. G., Jayappa, H., Mattoo, B., Navneet, A., Poorasamy, J., Roy, A., Sharma, A., Ghosh, D., & Deepak, K. K. (2019). Planning, implementation, and evaluation of multicomponent, case-based learning for first-year Indian medical undergraduates. Advances in Physiology Education, 43(4), 504-511. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00080.2019

An integrative review of flipped classroom teaching models in nursing education. V P S Njie-Carr, E Ludeman, M C Lee, D Dordunoo, N M Trocky, L S Jenkins, 10.1016/j.profnurs.2016.07.001Journal of Professional Nursing. 332Review ArticleNjie-Carr, V. P. S., Ludeman, E., Lee, M. C., Dordunoo, D., Trocky, N. M., & Jenkins, L. S. (2017). An integrative review of flipped classroom teaching models in nursing education [Review Article]. Journal of Professional Nursing, 33(2), 133-144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.profnurs.2016.07.001

Effectiveness of inquiry-based learning in an undergraduate exercise physiology course. L Nybo, M May, 10.1152/advan.00161.2014Advances in Physiology Education. 392Nybo, L., & May, M. (2015). Effectiveness of inquiry-based learning in an undergraduate exercise physiology course. Advances in Physiology Education, 39(2), 76-80. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00161.2014

Partnership for 21st Century Learning. 26/07Washington DCFramework for 21st Century LearningPartnership for 21st Century Learning. (2007). Framework for 21st Century Learning. Washington DC. Retrieved 26/07/2018, from http://www.p21.org/our-work/p21-framework

Promoting active learning of graduate student by deep reading in biochemistry and microbiology pharmacy curriculum. R Peng, 10.1002/bmb.21038Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education. 454Peng, R. (2017). Promoting active learning of graduate student by deep reading in biochemistry and microbiology pharmacy curriculum. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 45(4), 305- 312. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bmb.21038

Evaluating the evidence base for evidence-based instructional practices in chemistry through meta-analysis. T Rahman, S E Lewis, 10.1002/tea.21610Journal of Research in Science Teaching. 575Rahman, T., & Lewis, S. E. (2020). Evaluating the evidence base for evidence-based instructional practices in chemistry through meta-analysis. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 57(5), 765-793. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21610

Test-enhanced learning of clinical reasoning: A crossover randomised trial. T Raupach, J C Andresen, K Meyer, L Strobel, M Koziolek, W Jung, J Brown, S Anders, 10.1111/medu.13069Medical Education. 507Raupach, T., Andresen, J. C., Meyer, K., Strobel, L., Koziolek, M., Jung, W., Brown, J., & Anders, S. (2016). Test-enhanced learning of clinical reasoning: A crossover randomised trial. Medical Education, 50(7), 711- 720. https://doi.org/10.1111/medu.13069

Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: Elaboration and explanation. L Shamseer, D Moher, M Clarke, D Ghersi, A Liberati, M Petticrew, P Shekelle, L A Stewart, P.-P Group, 10.1136/bmj.g7647BMJ. 349g7647Shamseer, L., Moher, D., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., Liberati, A., Petticrew, M., Shekelle, P., Stewart, L. A., & Group, P.-P. (2015). Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA- P) 2015: Elaboration and explanation. BMJ, 349(g7647), 1-25. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g7647

A combination of active learning strategies improves student academic outcomes in first-year paramedic bioscience. P Sinnayah, J A Rathner, D Loton, R Klein, P Hartley, 10.1152/advan.00199.2018Advances in Physiology Education. 432Sinnayah, P., Rathner, J. A., Loton, D., Klein, R., & Hartley, P. (2019). A combination of active learning strategies improves student academic outcomes in first-year paramedic bioscience. Advances in Physiology Education, 43(2), 233-240. http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/advan.00199.2018

A mixed-methods investigation of clicker implementation styles in STEM. E D Solomon, M D Repice, J M Mutambuki, D A Leonard, C A Cohen, J Luo, R F Frey, 10.1187/cbe.17-08-0180CBE -Life Sciences Education. 217Solomon, E. D., Repice, M. D., Mutambuki, J. M., Leonard, D. A., Cohen, C. A., Luo, J., & Frey, R. F. (2018). A mixed-methods investigation of clicker implementation styles in STEM. CBE -Life Sciences Education, 17(2). https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.17-08-0180

Teaching on purpose and with a purpose: The Scarecrow, lion & Tin Woodman. PRIMUS. H Soto, 10.1080/10511970.2019.166643930Soto, H. (2020). Teaching on purpose and with a purpose: The Scarecrow, lion & Tin Woodman. PRIMUS, 30(7), 827-836. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511970.2019.1666439

Active learning in flipped life science courses promotes development of critical thinking skills. M L Styers, P A Van Zandt, K L Hayden, 10.1187/cbe.16-11-0332CBE -Life Sciences Education. 173Styers, M. L., Van Zandt, P. A., & Hayden, K. L. (2018). Active learning in flipped life science courses promotes development of critical thinking skills. CBE -Life Sciences Education, 17(3), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.16-11-0332

The views of undergraduates about problem-based learning applications in a biochemistry Course. L Tarhan, Y Ayyildiz, 10.1080/00219266.2014.888364Journal of Biological Education. 492Tarhan, L., & Ayyildiz, Y. (2015). The views of undergraduates about problem-based learning applications in a biochemistry Course. Journal of Biological Education, 49(2), 116-126. https://doi.org/10.1080/00219266.2014.888364

Assessing teacher candidates' general pedagogical/psychological knowledge: Test construction and validation. T Voss, M Kunter, J Baumert, 10.1037/a0025125Journal of Educational Psychology. 1034Voss, T., Kunter, M., & Baumert, J. (2011). Assessing teacher candidates' general pedagogical/psychological knowledge: Test construction and validation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(4), 952-969. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025125

Recasting a traditional laboratory practical as a "design-your-own protocol" to teach a universal research skill. D E Whitworth, 10.1002/bmb.20948Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education. 444Whitworth, D. E. (2016). Recasting a traditional laboratory practical as a "design-your-own protocol" to teach a universal research skill. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 44(4), 377-380. https://doi.org/10.1002/bmb.20948

The teaching practices inventory: a new tool for characterizing college and university teaching in mathematics and science. C Wieman, S Gilbert, 10.1187/cbe.14-02-0023-corrCBE Life Sciences Education. 133Wieman, C., & Gilbert, S. (2014). The teaching practices inventory: a new tool for characterizing college and university teaching in mathematics and science. CBE Life Sciences Education, 13(3), 552-569. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.14-02-0023-corr

Flipped classroom learning experiences of graduate nursing students in advanced pathophysiology and pharmacology in midwifery course. S Youngwanichsetha, S Kritcharoen, S Chunuan, S Kala, S Phumdoung, 10.37506/ijone.v12i1.3696International Journal of Nursing Education. 121Youngwanichsetha, S., Kritcharoen, S., Chunuan, s., Kala, S., & Phumdoung, S. (2020). Flipped classroom learning experiences of graduate nursing students in advanced pathophysiology and pharmacology in midwifery course. International Journal of Nursing Education, 12(1), 85-89. https://doi.org/10.37506/ijone.v12i1.3696

L S Vygotsky, A Kozulin, Thought and language. MIT PressVygotsky, L. S., & Kozulin, A. (1986). Thought and language. MIT Press