# SELF ASSESSMENTS OF CORPORATE BOARDS: SHORT OVERVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

CorpusID: 260418027
 
tags: #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/114b0f179e1fdfe54d73039bc8292da1f31943de](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/114b0f179e1fdfe54d73039bc8292da1f31943de)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

SELF ASSESSMENTS OF CORPORATE BOARDS: SHORT OVERVIEW OF THE LITERATURE


Arnrun Saeby Thorarinsdottir 
School of Business
University of Iceland
ReykjavíkIceland

ThrosturOlaf Sigurjonsson 
School of Business
University of Iceland
ReykjavíkIceland

AudurArna Arnardottir 
Reykjavik University
ReykjavíkIceland

SELF ASSESSMENTS OF CORPORATE BOARDS: SHORT OVERVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Received: 15.05.2023 Accepted: 24.05.2023International Online Conference (June 8, 2023) "NEW OUTLOOKS FOR THE SCHOLARLY RESEARCH IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE" 13 How to cite: Thorarinsdottir, A. S., Sigurjonsson, T. O., & Arnardottir, A. A. (2023). Self assessments of corporate boards: Short overview of the literature. In M. Tutino, V. Santolamazza, & A. Kostyuk (Eds.), New outlooks for the scholarly research in corporate governance (pp. 13-18). Virtus Interpress.Corporate BoardsBoard of DirectorsBoard DynamicsBoard EvaluationBoard Self- Assessment JEL Classification: M140M10M12


Following failures and high-profile corporate governance scandals of the 1980s, regulations targeting listed companies were introduced. In addition, new compliance requirements and guidelines were formulated for boards to follow (Ingley & Van der Walt, 2005;Pettigrew, 1992). In the years 2000-2009, significant reforms were then made to the corporate governance guidelines. Then again, in response to a series of high-profile scandals and mistakes. These failures and scandals in corporate governance led to increased pressure being placed on boards and how they can manage their business adequately (Van der Walt & Ingley, 2000). Shareholders and other stakeholders began to demand that boards show more responsibility and professionalism in board work (Kiel & Nicholson, 2005;Long, 2006;Minichilli et al., 2007;Van der Walt & Ingley, 2000). For boards to demonstrate better and more efficient governance, it was considered important that boards evaluate their own performance (Kiel & Nicholson, 2005). A board evaluation was supposed to confirm that all board members are working and fulfilling their roles (Spencer Stuart, 2004). The reasoning behind the introduction of board evaluation is on the one hand to promote the efficiency of boards (Berg, 2007) and on the other hand to increase the responsibility of boards, in the sense that boards do what they are supposed to do (Huse, 2007).

Discussions about board evaluations began in the 1990s. However, the idea of board evaluations was not properly recognized until after the global financial crisis that took place in the years 2007-2009. Then the policy on board evaluation began to spread more widely and more countries began to implement board evaluation requirements in their guidelines for good corporate governance ( terms of e.g., competitive environment, tasks, and problems (Kiel & Nicholson, 2005). The ways of success can, therefore, be of all kinds, which is reflected in the different models of board success that have been presented (Nicholson et al., 2012;Nordberg & Booth, 2019b).

Much of the previous (older) research related to board performance focused on how board structure, demographics, or composition affect performance. Then, often, financial indicators are used as a measure. But most of these studies have been contradictory and results unclear (Dalton & Dalton, 2011;Forbes & Milliken, 1999; Kuoppama ki, 2018; Leblanc & Gillies, 2003). In addition, these previous studies provide limited understanding and insight into board performance (Roberts, 2002;Leblanc & Schwartz, 2007;Zahra & Pearce, 1989). This has led scholars to realize that board success has to do with more factors than just those related to board structure, demographics and composition (Forbes & Milliken, 1999;Leblanc & Gillies, 2003;Leblanc & Schwartz, 2007;Pye & Pettigrew, 2005;Zona & Zattoni, 2007).

Today, most academics agree that a multidisciplinary approach is needed and that boards are a group or team that makes decisions. It is also necessary to take into account the behavioral factors that occur in the activities of boards and how it affects the performance or success of boards (Charas, 2015;Forbes & Milliken, 1999;Jansen, 2021;Nicholson & Kiel, 2004b;Nordberg & Booth, 2019a). At the same time, scholars seem to generally agree that board success is fundamentally about the outcomes of "tasks" that occur when certain roles are performed (Nicholson & Kiel, 2004b;Levrau & Van den Berghe, 2007). The models that have been put forward support this, as they all have in common to rely on a multi-theoretical approach. As well as highlighting the complex relationship between corporate performance and board performance and how it can vary from company to company. Furthermore, these models give a good picture of the complexity of the interaction between various factors that are believed to influence the success of boards (Nordberg & Booth, 2019a).


Nordberg & Booth, 2019a; Booth & Nordberg, 2021; Pho, 2022). Today, many companies or boards generally recognize the importance of performing and evaluating their performance regularly (Booth & Nordberg, 2021; Fenwick & Vermeulen, 2018). In addition, it is generally believed that board evaluation is a useful tool for evaluating the success of board performance (Ingley & Van der Walt, 2002, 2005; Leblanc, 2005; Leblanc & Schwartz, 2007; Long, 2006; Minichilli et al., 2007; Gabrielsson & Huse, 2004; Kiel & Nicholson, 2005). But the prerequisite for that is that the evaluation is well organized and that clear goals and criteria are set in advance based on those goals (Huse, 2007; Kiel & Nicholson, 2005; Minichilli et al., 2007; Rasmussen, 2010, 2015). Systematic and well-planned evaluation can then bring about various benefits for companies, boards as a whole and individual board members. For example, improved leadership skills, clearer roles and responsibilities, better collaboration, more responsibility, better decisionmaking, better communication, and more effective board operations (Kiel et al., 2018). On the other hand, there is no standard assessment tool, as no "one size" can fit all boards (Carretta et al., 2010; Kiel & Nicholson, 2005; Minichilli et al., 2007; Soana & Crisci, 2017). Since boards can differ in

Service tasks of board of directors: A literature review and research agenda in an era of new governance practices. C Åberg, M Bankewitz, M Knockaert, 10.1016/j.emj.2019.04.006European Management Journal. 375Åberg, C., Bankewitz, M., & Knockaert, M. (2019). Service tasks of board of directors: A literature review and research agenda in an era of new governance practices. European Management Journal, 37(5), 648-663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2019.04.006

Qualitative research methods for the social sciences. B L Berg, California State UniversityBerg, B. L. (2007). Qualitative research methods for the social sciences. California State University.

Self or other: Directors attitudes towards policy initiatives for external board evaluation. B Booth, D Nordberg, 10.1057/s41310-020-00094-xInternational Journal of Disclosure and Governance. 182Booth, B., & Nordberg, D. (2021). Self or other: Directors attitudes towards policy initiatives for external board evaluation. International Journal of Disclosure and Governance, 18(2), 120-135. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41310- 020-00094-x

Assessing effectiveness and compliance of banking boards. A Carretta, V Farina, P Schwizer, 10.1108/13581981011093677Journal of Financial Regulation and Compliance. 184Carretta, A., Farina, V., & Schwizer, P. (2010). Assessing effectiveness and compliance of banking boards. Journal of Financial Regulation and Compliance, 18(4), 356-369. https://doi.org/10.1108/13581981011093677

Improving corporate performance by enhancing team dynamics at the board level. S Charas, 10.1057/jdg.2013.35International Journal of Disclosure and Governance. 122Charas, S. (2015). Improving corporate performance by enhancing team dynamics at the board level. International Journal of Disclosure and Governance, 12(2), 107-131. https://doi.org/10.1057/jdg.2013.35

Integration of micro and macro studies in governance research: CEO duality, board composition, and financial performance. D R Dalton, C M Dalton, Journal of Management. 372Dalton, D. R., & Dalton, C. M. (2011). Integration of micro and macro studies in governance research: CEO duality, board composition, and financial performance. Journal of Management, 37(2), 404-411.

. 10.1177/0149206310373399https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206310373399

Evaluating the board of directors: International practice (European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI), Law Working Paper No. M Fenwick, E P M Vermeulen, 10.2139/ssrn.3253929Fenwick, M., & Vermeulen, E. P. M. (2018). Evaluating the board of directors: International practice (European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI), Law Working Paper No. 425/2018). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3253929

Cognition and corporate governance: Understanding boards of directors as strategic decision-making groups. D P Forbes, F J Milliken, 10.2307/259138Academy of Management Review. 243Forbes, D. P., & Milliken, F. J. (1999). Cognition and corporate governance: Understanding boards of directors as strategic decision-making groups. Academy of Management Review, 24(3), 489-505. https://doi.org/10.2307/259138

Context, behavior, and evolution: Challenges in research on boards and governance. International Studies of Management and Organization. J Gabrielsson, M Huse, 10.1080/00208825.2004.1104370434Gabrielsson, J., & Huse, M. (2004). Context, behavior, and evolution: Challenges in research on boards and governance. International Studies of Management and Organization, 34(2), 11-36. https://doi.org/10.1080 /00208825.2004.11043704

Board influence on a firm"s long-term success: Australian evidence. L He, R He, E Evans, 10.1016/j.jbef.2020.100327Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance. 27He, L., He, R., & Evans, E. (2020). Board influence on a firm"s long-term success: Australian evidence. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 27, Article 100327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2020.100327

Promising avenue or dead end street? A meta analytic review of the Forbes and Milliken model of board behaviour. K Heemskerk, Heemskerk, K. (2019). Promising avenue or dead end street? A meta analytic review of the Forbes and Milliken model of board behaviour.

. 10.1108/CG-01-2018-0017Corporate Governance. 193Corporate Governance, 19(3), 471-489. https://doi.org/10.1108/CG-01-2018-0017

Boards, governance and value creation: The human side of corporate governance. M Huse, 10.1017/CBO9780511611070Cambridge University PressHuse, M. (2007). Boards, governance and value creation: The human side of corporate governance. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017 /CBO9780511611070

Board dynamics and the politics of appraisal. C Ingley, N Van Der Walt, 10.1111/1467-8683.00281Corporate Governance: An International Review. 103Ingley, C., & Van der Walt, N. (2002). Board dynamics and the politics of appraisal. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 10(3), 163-174. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8683.00281

Do board processes influence director and board performance? Statutory and performance implications. Corporate Governance: An International Review. C Ingley, N Van Der Walt, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2005.00456.x13Ingley, C., & Van der Walt, N. (2005) Do board processes influence director and board performance? Statutory and performance implications. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13(5), 632-653. https://doi.org/10.1111 /j.1467-8683.2005.00456.x

Board processes revisited: An exploration of the relationship between board processes, board role performance and board effectiveness in comparable European listed companies. P A M Jansen, 10.1108/CG-08-2020-0361Corporate Governance. 217Jansen, P. A. M. (2021). Board processes revisited: An exploration of the relationship between board processes, board role performance and board effectiveness in comparable European listed companies. Corporate Governance, 21(7), 1337-1361. https://doi.org/10.1108/CG-08-2020-0361

Evaluating boards and directors. G C Kiel, G J Nicholson, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2005.00455.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 135Kiel, G. C., & Nicholson, G. J. (2005). Evaluating boards and directors. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13(5), 613-631. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8683.2005.00455.x

Reviewing your board: Advantages of board evaluation. In Reviewing your board -A guide to board and director evaluation. G Kiel, G Nicholson, J Tunny, J Beck, Kiel, G., Nicholson, G., Tunny, J., & Beck, J. (2018). Reviewing your board: Advantages of board evaluation. In Reviewing your board -A guide to board and director evaluation. AICD. https://www.hopgoodganim.com.au /page/knowledge-centre/publications/reviewing-your-board-advantages-of- board-evaluation

Concepts of board performance: Review of performance metrics in boards research. M Kuoppama Ki, 10.5430/jms.v9n3p41Journal of Management and Strategy. 93Kuoppama ki, M. (2018). Concepts of board performance: Review of performance metrics in boards research. Journal of Management and Strategy, 9(3), 41-53. https://doi.org/10.5430/jms.v9n3p41

Assessing board leadership. Corporate Governance: An International Review. R Leblanc, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2005.00457.x13Leblanc, R. (2005). Assessing board leadership. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13(5), 654-666. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 8683.2005.00457.x

The coming revolution in corporate governance. R Leblanc, J Gillies, Ivey Business Journal. Leblanc, R., & Gillies, J. (2003). The coming revolution in corporate governance. Ivey Business Journal. https://iveybusinessjournal.com /publication/the-coming-revolution-in-corporate-governance/

The black box of board process: Gaining access to a difficult subject. R Leblanc, M S Schwartz, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2007.00617.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 155Leblanc, R., & Schwartz, M. S. (2007). The black box of board process: Gaining access to a difficult subject. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 15(5), 843-851. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8683.2007.00617.x

Corporate governance and board effectiveness: Beyond formalism. A Levrau, L Van Den Berghe, No. 2007/03Vlerick Leuven Gent Working PaperLevrau, A., & Van den Berghe, L. (2007). Corporate governance and board effectiveness: Beyond formalism (Vlerick Leuven Gent Working Paper No. 2007/03). https://repository.vlerick.com/handle/20.500.12127/2267

This year"s model: Influences on board and director evaluation. T Long, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2006.00529.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 146Long, T. (2006). This year"s model: Influences on board and director evaluation. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 14(6), 547-557. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8683.2006.00529.x

Board evaluations: Making a fit between the purpose and the system. A Minichilli, J Gabrielsson, M Huse, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2007.00591.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 154Minichilli, A., Gabrielsson, J., & Huse, M. (2007). Board evaluations: Making a fit between the purpose and the system. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 15(4), 609-622. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 8683.2007.00591.x

A framework for diagnosing board effectiveness. G J Nicholson, G C Kiel, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2004.00386.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 124Nicholson, G. J., & Kiel, G. C. (2004a). A framework for diagnosing board effectiveness. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 12(4), 442-460. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8683.2004.00386.x

Breakthrough board performance: How to harness your board"s intellectual capital. G J Nicholson, G C Kiel, 10.1108/14720700410521925Corporate Governance. 41Nicholson, G. J., & Kiel, G. C. (2004b). Breakthrough board performance: How to harness your board"s intellectual capital. Corporate Governance, 4(1), 5-23. https://doi.org/10.1108/14720700410521925

Board evaluations: Contemporary thinking and practice. G J Nicholson, G C Kiel, J A Tunny, 10.4135/9781446200995.n14T. Clarke & D. BransonThe SAGE handbook of corporate governanceNicholson, G. J., Kiel, G. C., & Tunny, J. A. (2012). Board evaluations: Contemporary thinking and practice. In T. Clarke & D. Branson (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of corporate governance (pp. 285-324) SAGE. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446200995.n14

Evaluating boards: A policy agenda in need of perspective (Director Notes. D Nordberg, R Booth, 10.2139/ssrn.3422733The Conference Board Inc. Nordberg, D., & Booth, R. (2019a). Evaluating boards: A policy agenda in need of perspective (Director Notes). The Conference Board Inc. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3422733

Evaluating the effectiveness of corporate boards. D Nordberg, R Booth, 10.1108/CG-08-2018-0275Corporate Governance. 192Nordberg, D., & Booth, R. (2019b). Evaluating the effectiveness of corporate boards. Corporate Governance, 19(2), 372-387. https://doi.org/10.1108/CG-08- 2018-0275

Three conceptual models of board role performance. C H Ong, D Wan, 10.1108/14720700810879196Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society. 83Ong, C. H., & Wan, D. (2008). Three conceptual models of board role performance. Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society, 8(3), 317-329. https://doi.org/10.1108/14720700810879196

On studying managerial elites. A M Pettigrew, 10.1002/smj.4250130911Strategic Management Journal. 13S2Pettigrew, A. M. (1992). On studying managerial elites. Strategic Management Journal, 13(S2), 163-182. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250130911

Board evaluation practices review: A first glimpse of Philippine listed banks and holding companies. D C B Pho, Philippine Management Review. 291Pho, D. C. B. (2022). Board evaluation practices review: A first glimpse of Philippine listed banks and holding companies. Philippine Management Review, 29(1), 69-108. https://pmr.upd.edu.ph/index.php/pmr/article/view/362

Studying board context, process and dynamics: Some challenges for the future. A Pye, A Pettigrew, 10.1111/j.1467-8551.2005.00445.xBritish Journal of Management. 16s1Pye, A., & Pettigrew, A. (2005). Studying board context, process and dynamics: Some challenges for the future. British Journal of Management, 16(s1), 27-38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8551.2005.00445.x

Corporate governance in Norway; The development of a board evaluation model with special emphasis on large listed companies. J Rasmussen, City University LondonUnpublished Doctoral thesisRasmussen, J. (2010). Corporate governance in Norway; The development of a board evaluation model with special emphasis on large listed companies [Unpublished Doctoral thesis, City University London].

Do board evaluations measure board effectiveness? The case of large listed companies in Norway. International Studies of Management & Organization. J Rasmussen, 10.1080/00208825.2015.100599945Rasmussen, J. (2015). Do board evaluations measure board effectiveness? The case of large listed companies in Norway. International Studies of Management & Organization, 45(1), 80-98. https://doi.org/10.1080 /00208825.2015.1005999

Building the complementary board. The work of the Plc chairman. J Roberts, 10.1016/S0024-6301(02)00106-1Long Range Planning. 355Roberts, J. (2002). Building the complementary board. The work of the Plc chairman. Long Range Planning, 35(5), 493-520. https://doi.org/10.1016 /S0024-6301(02)00106-1

Board evaluation process in Italy: How far is it from the UK standard? Corporate Board: Role, Duties and Composition. M G Soana, G Crisci, 10.22495/cbv13i3art113Soana, M. G., & Crisci, G. (2017). Board evaluation process in Italy: How far is it from the UK standard? Corporate Board: Role, Duties and Composition, 13(3), 6-18. https://doi.org/10.22495/cbv13i3art1

Beyond the basics: Getting the most from board evaluations. Spencer Stuart, Cornerstone of the Board: The New Corporate Governance Committee. 1Spencer Stuart. (2004). Beyond the basics: Getting the most from board evaluations. Cornerstone of the Board: The New Corporate Governance Committee, 1(2).

Making sense of board effectiveness: A socio-cognitive perspective. S Sur, 10.1108/CG-05-2012-0039Corporate Governance. 142Sur, S. (2014). Making sense of board effectiveness: A socio-cognitive perspective. Corporate Governance, 14(2), 162-180. https://doi.org/10.1108 /CG-05-2012-0039

Evaluating board effectiveness: The changing context of strategic governance. N Van Der Walt, C Ingley, 10.1080/738552741Journal of Change Management. 14Van der Walt, N., & Ingley, C. (2000). Evaluating board effectiveness: The changing context of strategic governance. Journal of Change Management, 1(4), 313-331. https://doi.org/10.1080/738552741

Boards of directors and corporate financial performance: A review and integrative model. S A Zahra, J A Pearce, Ii, 10.1177/014920638901500208Journal of Management. 152Zahra, S. A., & Pearce, J. A., II. (1989). Boards of directors and corporate financial performance: A review and integrative model. Journal of Management, 15(2), 291-334. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920638901500208

Beyond the black box of demography: Board processes and task effectiveness within Italian firms. Corporate Governance: An International Review. F Zona, A Zattoni, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2007.00606.x15Zona, F., & Zattoni, A. (2007). Beyond the black box of demography: Board processes and task effectiveness within Italian firms. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 15(5), 852-864. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 8683.2007.00606.x