# Overview of Stingless Bees in Brazil (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini)

CorpusID: 260598282
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4f1a3a6d4c772a71537a3974642172dd2cd37d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4f1a3a6d4c772a71537a3974642172dd2cd37d4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Overview of Stingless Bees in Brazil (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini)


David Silva Nogueira 
Instituto Federal de Educação Ciência e Tecnologia do Amazonas
São Gabriel da CachoeiraAMBrazil

Overview of Stingless Bees in Brazil (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini)
10.12741/ebrasilis.v16.1041EntomoBrasilis 16: e1041 (2023)classificationgeographic distributionsurveyspeciestaxonomy
Species richness of stingless bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) was organized and updated from previously published data. From this research, we found 28 genera with 259 valid species and 62 undescribed species, in addition, brief comments on the classification used and geographical occurrences were included.

## MATERIAL AND METHODS

The data presented here are in agreement with CamaRgo et al. (2013) and PedRo (2014), as well as other publications dealing with taxonomic decisions, species/subgenera descriptions or new geographic records after PedRo (2014) (laRoCa & almeida 2015(laRoCa & almeida , 2017melo 2015, 2021PedRo & CoRdeiRo 2015;masCena et al. 2017;Rasmussen & gonzalez 2017;alvaRez & luCia 2018;JaRamillo et al. 2019;nogueiRa 2016;nogueiRa et al. 2017nogueiRa et al. , 2019nogueiRa et al. , 2020anogueiRa et al. , 2020bnogueiRa et al. , 2021nogueiRa et al. , 2022anogueiRa et al. , 2022bguevaRa et al. 2020;oliveiRa et al. 2020;alvaRez et al. 2021;alves et al. 2021;engel 2021a, 2021bengel et al. 2021;Felix & FReitas 2021;baRRos et al. 2022;engel 2022a, 2022b, 2022c, 2022dFeRReiRa et al. 2022;RibeiRo et al. 2023).

It is important to note that interpretations of undescribed species and under review species may differ from PedRo (2014) for the interpretation presented here.

number, totaling 40 from Brazil (76 in total), followed by Plebeia Schwarz, 1938, with 17 from Brazil (47 in total) and Scaptotrigona Moure, 1942 with 16 from Brazil (47 in total) ( Figure 2).


## DISCUSSION

Systematic. Since PedRo (2014), 59 new species of stingless bees have been described for the Neotropical region, 16 of them with occurrence records for Brazil. The largest increase in new species was in the genus Scaptotrigona Moure, 1942, with a total of 26 described in eight years (2015)(2016)(2017)(2018)(2019)(2020)(2021)(2022), seven of which with records for Brazil (laRoCa & almeida 2015(laRoCa & almeida , 2017engel 2022a, 2022b, 2022cnogueiRa et al. 2022a).

Despite the increase in the number of valid species, the following synonyms were compiled: Frieseomelitta meadewaldoi (= F. francoi Moure, 1946and = F. freiremaiai Moure, 1963) (oliveiRa et al. 2011, Scaura latitarsis (= S. tenuis (Ducke, 1916 and Tetragona clavipes (= T. elongata (Lepeletier, 1836)  , here we consider them as distinct genera, since we performed a phylogenetic analysis based on in morphological data that recovered both as sister genera, supported by one and two synapomorphic characters, respectively (nogueiRa 2016),   Regarding the classification adopted for  , 1916)] are morphologically different and can be considered as distinct subgenera.


## Richness of bees.

Regarding species richness, in addition to the update from PedRo (2014), we organized these data into states and regions of Brazil, thus, the northern region was clearly highlighted, with almost twice as many species (n=197, totaling 39.47%) compared to the Midwest (n=99). This highlight was main for the following states: Amazonas (n=128), Pará (n=119) and Rondônia (n=82) (Figure 1). These numbers are promising, since the Amazon region has areas with low sampling rates compared to other Brazilian biomes, in addition to the great logistical difficulty and sampling standardization (silveiRa et al. 2002).

The Midwest region is composed of part of the Amazon Forest and the Pantanal, but its largest area is Cerrado. The southeast region has many researches and surveys, so a great sampling effort has already been used to collect bees in this region (viotti et al. 2013;andRade et al. 2021), thus, a richness of 70 species for this region (totaling 14.02%), being only above the South region (7.21%).

The species richness in the South region was the lowest (n=36, totaling 7.21%), and this was already expected, since the species richness of Meliponini decreases as the distance from the equator increases and in the more species are concentrated in humid forests that make use of preexisting cavities, such as trunks (Roubik 1989;silveiRa et al. 2002).

Fauna surveys are essential to improve knowledge about the different taxa and also serve as a basis for several studies, as well as the elaboration of laws, such as, for example, the use and management of stingless bees according to the place of occurrence, as it already happens in Brazil.

It is undeniable that much of what is known today about stingless bees in terms of taxonomy or classification can be modified, since there are still many groups that need revision and have many species to be described, in addition there are few studies on phylogeny of specific groups. Like Scaptotrigona and Plebeia which although some species have been recently described, most of them do not occur in Brazil, which makes a systematic review of Brazilian species necessary, as well as a phylogenetic analysis to improve knowledge about these groups. ********** Table S1. Stingless bees found in Brazil (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). # Species is under taxonomic review, so its validity or occurrence records may change in the future. $ Species found only in Brazilian territory. * Geographical record uncertain. Brazilian states: Acre (AC); Alagoas (AL); Amapá (AP); Amazonas (AM); Bahia (BA); Ceará (CE); Distrito Federal (DF), Espírito Santo (ES); Goiás (GO); Maranhão (MA); Mato Grosso (MT); Mato Grosso do Sul (MS); Minas Gerais (MG); Pará (PA); Paraíba (PB); Paraná (PR); Pernambuco (PE); Piauí (PI); Rio de Janeiro (RJ); Rio Grande do Norte (RN); Rio Grande do Sul (RS); Rondônia (RO); Roraima (RR); Santa Catarina (SC); São Paulo (SP); Sergipe (SE) and Tocantins (TO).      


## Genus/subgenus

## Figure 1 .
1Number of valid species of stingless bees in Brazil. North region: Acre (AC), Amazonas (AM), Amapá (AP), Pará (PA), Rondônia (RO), Roraima (RR) and Tocantins (TO). Midwest region: Distrito Federal (DF), Goiás (GO), Mato Grosso (MT) and Mato Grosso do Sul (MS). Southeast region: Espírito Santo (ES), Minas Gerais (MG), Rio de Janeiro (RJ) and São Paulo (SP). Northeast region: Alagoas (AL), Bahia (BA), Ceará (CE), Maranhão (MA), Paraíba (PB), Pernambuco (PE), Piauí (PI), Rio Grande do Norte (RN) and Sergipe (SE). South region: Paraná (PR), Santa Catarina (SC) and Rio Grande do Sul (RS). Scale bar in kilometers.


unlike the resolution found by Rasmussen & CameRon(2010), based on molecular data, in which Scaura was recovered as paraphyletic genus.

## M
. (E.) amazonica Schulz, 1905 $ AC, AP, AM, PA, RO M. (E.) asilvai Moure, 1971 $ AL, BA, CE, MG, PB, PE, PI, RN, SE M. (E.) bicolor Lepeletier, 1836 BA, ES, MG, PR, RJ, RS, SC, SP M. (E.) marginata Schwarz, 1932 $ AP, AM, MT, PA, RO, RR M. (E.) ogilviei Schwarz, 1932 PA, MT M. (E.) puncticollis Friese, 1902 AM*, MA, PA M. (E.)torrida Friese, 1916 MT*, PR, RS, SC, SP M. (E.) tumupasae Schwarz, 1932 AC M. (Meliponiella) 4 2 M. (M.) illustris Schwarz, 1932 PA, MT M. (M.) bradleyi Schwarz, 1932 AP, AM, MT, PA, RO, RR M. (Mouremelia) 3 2 M. (M.) fuliginosa Lepeletier, 1836 AC, AM, BA, ES, MT, PA, PI*, SP M. (M.) titania Gribodo, 1893 AM M. (Melikerria) 10 5[+1] M. (M.) compressipes (Fabricius, 1804) AP, AM, RR, TO M. (M.) fasciculata Smith, 1854 $ MA, MT, PA, PI, TO M. (M.) grandis Guérin, 1834 AC, AM, MT, RO M. (M.) interrupta Latreille, 1811 AP, AM, PA M. (M.) quinquefasciata Lepeletier, 1836 # CE, DF, ES, GO, MT, MS, MG, PR, RJ, RS, RO, SC, SP, TO M. (Melipona) 13 5[+1] M. (M.) favosa (Fabricius, 1798) RR M. (M.) mandacaia Smith, 1863 $ AL, BA, CE, PB, PE, PI, RN, SE


M. (Melipona) (cont...) M. (M.) orbignyi (Guérin, 1844) MT, MS M. (M.) quadrifasciata Lepeletier, 1836 AL, BA, ES, GO, MS, MG, PB, PR, PE, RJ, RS, SC, SP, SE M. (M.) subnitida Ducke, 1910 $ AL, BA, CE, MA, PB, PE, PI, RN, SE M. (Michmelia) 33 18[+10] M. (M.) brachychaeta Moure, 1950 MT, RO M. (M.) captiosa Moure, 1962 AP, AM M. (M.) capixaba Moure & Camargo, 1994 $ ES M. (M.) cramptoni Cockerell, 1920 RR M. (M.) crinita Moure & Kerr, 1950 AC, AM, RO M. (M.) dubia Moure & Kerr, 1950 $ AC, AM, RO M. (M.) eburnea Friese, 1900 AC, AM M. (M.) flavolineata Friese, 1900 # $ CE, MA, PA, TO M. (M.) fulva Lepeletier, 1836 AP, AM, PA, RR M. (M.) fuscopilosa Moure & Kerr, 1950 AC, AM M. (M.) lateralis Erichson, 1848 AP, AM, PA, RR M. (M.) melanoventer Schwarz, 1932 $ AC*, AM, MA, MT, PA, RO M. (M.) mondury Smith, 1863 $ BA, CE, ES, MG, PR, RJ, RS*, SC, SP M. (M.) nebulosa Camargo, 1988 AC, AM, PA M. (M.) paraensis Ducke, 1916 # AP, AM, PA M. (M.) rufiventris Lepeletier, 1836 # $ BA, GO, MT, MS, MG, PI, SP M. (M.) scutellaris Latreille, 1811 $ AL, BA, CE, PB, PE, RN, SE M. (M.) seminigra Friese, 1903 # AC, AM, MA, MT, PA, RO, RR, TO


and = T. dissecta Moure, 2000) (nogueiRa et al. 2022b). engel et al. (2021) have described Nanoplebeia Engel, 2021 as a subgenus of Plebeia Schwarz, 1938, here we consider it as a valid genus to better position it in relation to the phylogenetic analysis of Rasmussen & CameRon (2010), which recovered Plebeia as a polyphyletic genus, since it had Friesella Moure, 1946 and Lestrimelitta Friese, 1903 as part of the same clade "Plebeia". Regarding the clade Scaura+Schwarzula, although some authors have considered Schwarzula Moure, 1946 as a subgenus of Scaura (gRüteR 2020; engel et al. 2021)Although 

## Table 1 .
1Comparative data from this study with data from PedRo (2014).Pedro (2014) 
This study 




Tetragona as a subgenus of Trigona, with Ptilotrigona and Camargoia as synonyms of T. (Tetragona).Tetragona Lepeletier 
& Serville, 1828, Ptilotrigona Moure, 1951 and Camargoia 
Moure, 1989, we prefer to keep only Tetragona as a valid 
genus, containing the others as their subgenera. This 
classification is similar to that of miCheneR (2007), who treats 
Regarding the genus Trigona Jurine, 1807, the classification 
into species groups adopted by Rasmussen & CamaRgo (2008) 
and nogueiRa et al. (2020b) was similar to that proposed by 
engel et al. (2021), except for the taxonomic formalization of 
groups into subgenera. Although we considered the division 
of the genus into subgenera according to engel et al. (2021), the 
groups of amalthea species [T. amalthea (Olivier, 1789) and T. 
truculenta Almeida, 1984] and spinipes [T. spinipes (Fabricius, 
1793), T. hyalinata (Lepeletier, 1836), T. dallatorreana Friese, 
1900, T. branneri Cockerell, 1912 e T. amazonensis (Ducke


In this region there is intense agricultural exploitation and although there are few surveys (e.g.,FeRReiRa et al. 2022), this area demonstrates a considerable richness of bees, including the Meliponini, since they totaled 99 species (totaling 19.83%) being below only the North region.For the Northeast region, which has a mosaic of dunes, remnants of the Atlantic Forest and where the Caatinga biome predominates, there is generally low bee richness and a low number of species per genus (zanella 2000; zanella & maRtins 2003), contradicting these data, we obtained 97species of Meliponini (19.83%), being above Southeastern 
(n=70, totaling 14.02%) and South (n=36, totaling 7.21%). 




CF, DS, Nogueira, FF, Oliveira & ML, Oliveira, 2023.   Nogueira, DS, FF Oliveira & ML Oliveira, 2022b. Revision of 
the Tetragona clavipes (Fabricius, 1804) species-group 
(Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). Zootaxa, 5119: 1-64. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.5119.1.1 
Oliveira, FF, CR Madella-Auricchio & BM Freitas, 2020. A new 
species of Paratrigona Schwarz, 1938 from northeastern 
Brazil, with notes on the type material of Melipona 
lineata Lepeletier, 1836 (Hymenoptera: Anthophila: 
Apidae). Journal of Natural History, 54: 1637-1659. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00222933.2020.1819455 
Oliveira, FF, D Urban & MS Engel, 2011. The identity of the 
Neotropical stingless bee Frieseomelitta meadewaldoi 
(Cockerell, 1915) (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Zookeys, 111: 
19-31. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3897/zookeys.111.1345 
Oliveira, ML & DS Nogueira, 2023. Apidae in Catálogo 
Taxonômico da Fauna do Brasil. PNUD. Available in: 
<http://fauna.jbrj.gov.br/fauna/faunadobrasil/5076>. 
[Access: 09.iv.2023]. 
Pedro, SRM & GD Cordeiro, 2015. A new species of the stingless 
bee Trichotrigona (Hymenoptera: Apidae, Meliponini). 
Zootaxa, 3956: 389-402. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11646/ 
zootaxa.3956.3.4 
Pedro, SRM, 2014. The stingless bee fauna in Brazil 
(Hymenoptera: Apidae). Sociobiology, 61: 348-354. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.13102/sociobiology.v61i4.348-354 
Rasmussen, C & JMF Camargo, 2008. A molecular phylogeny 
and the evolution of nest architecture and behavior in 
Trigona s.s. (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). Apidologie, 
39: 102-118. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/apido:2007051 
Rasmussen, C & VH Gonzalez, 2017. The neotropical stingless 
bee genus Nannotrigona Cockerell (Hymenoptera: Apidae: 
Meliponini): An illustrated key, notes on the types, and 

designation of lectotypes. Zootaxa, 4299: 191-220. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.4299.2.2 
Rasmussen, C & SA Cameron, 2010. Global stingless bee 
phylogeny supports ancient divergence, vicariance, and 
long distance dispersal. Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 99: 206-232. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-
8312.2009.01341.x 
Ribeiro, Review of Trigona (Nostotrigona) Engel, 2021 from Brazil 
with description of three new species (Hymenoptera: 
Apidae: Meliponini). Zootaxa, 5306: 349-366. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.5306.3.3 
Roubik, DW, 1989. Ecology and natural history of tropical 
bees. Cambridge University Press. 
Silveira, FA, GAR Melo & EAB Almeida, 2002. Abelhas 
Brasileiras: Sistemática e Identificação. Belo Horizonte. 
Viotti, MA, FR Moura & AP Lourenço, 2013. Species diversity 
and temporal variation of the orchid-bee fauna 
(Hymenoptera, Apidae) in a conservation gradient of a 
Rocky Field area in the Espinhaço range, state of Minas 
Gerais, Southeastern Brazil. Neotropical Entomology, 
42: 565-575. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13744-013-
0164-y 
Zanella, FCV & CF Martins. 2003. Abelhas da caatinga: 
Biogeografia, ecologia e conservação, p. 75-134. In: Leal, 
IR, M Tabarelli & JMC Silva (Eds.). Ecologia e conservação 
da caatinga. Editora Universitária, UFPE. 
Zanella, FCV, 2000. The bees of the Caatinga (Hymenoptera, 
Apoidea, Apiformes): a species list and comparative notes 
regarding their distribution. Apidologie, 31: 579-592. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1051/apido:2000148 



## Table S1 .
S1Continue... to be continued...

## Table S1 .
S1Continue... to be continued...
Overview of Stingless Bees in Brazil (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini)Nogueira(2023)
Volume 16, 2023 -www.entomobrasilis.org EntomoBrasilis 16: e1041
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe thank the anonymous reviewers for evaluating this manuscript.Genus/subgenus
Una especie nueva de Trigonisca y nuevos registros de abejas sin aguijón para la Argentina (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Caldasia. Lj &amp; M Alvarez, Lucia, 10.15446/caldasia.v40n2.7087040Alvarez, LJ & M Lucia, 2018. Una especie nueva de Trigonisca y nuevos registros de abejas sin aguijón para la Argentina (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Caldasia, 40: 232-245. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1544 6/caldasia.v40n2.70870

A new species of Plebeia Schwarz (Hymenoptera: Apidae) from the Argentine Yungas. Revista de la Sociedad Entomológica Argentina. L J Alvarez, &amp; C Flores, Rasmussen, 10.25085/rsea.80020680Alvarez, LJ, FF Flores & C Rasmussen, 2021. A new species of Plebeia Schwarz (Hymenoptera: Apidae) from the Argentine Yungas. Revista de la Sociedad Entomológica Argentina, 80: 35-41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.25085/ rsea.800206

Number of valid species of stingless bees that occur both in the entire Neotropical region and only in Brazil. Figure 2Figure 2. Number of valid species of stingless bees that occur both in the entire Neotropical region and only in Brazil.

Guia de identificação de abelhas sem ferrão da Bahia. Rmo Alves, Andrade, Carvalho-Zilse, Cal Waldschimidt, Carvalho, Gs Ribeiro, Hc Vilas Boas, Oliveira, Vasconcelos, Rocha, Lopes, Ir Souza Filho, &amp; J Pereira Eo Malheiro, Junior, Curitiba, Editora CRVAlves, RMO, MAP Andrade, GA Carvalho-Zilse, AM Waldschimidt, CAL Carvalho, GS Ribeiro, HC Vilas Boas, MP Oliveira, BM Vasconcelos, MAS Rocha, ES Lopes, IR Souza Filho, EO Malheiro & J Pereira Junior, 2021. Guia de identificação de abelhas sem ferrão da Bahia. Curitiba, Editora CRV.

Bee (Hymenoptera: Apidae) inventory in the Parque Estadual Morro do Diabo. T O Andrade, Ramos, Nw Perioto, &amp; Lara, Crf Brandão, 10.1080/00222933.2020.1856432Journal of Natural History. 54Andrade, TO, KS Ramos, NW Perioto, RIR Lara & CRF Brandão, 2021. Bee (Hymenoptera: Apidae) inventory in the Parque Estadual Morro do Diabo, São Paulo, Brazil. Journal of Natural History, 54: 2529-2541. DOI: https://doi.org/10.10 80/00222933.2020.1856432

Discover Life bee species guide and world checklist. J &amp; J Ascher, Pickering, Access: 22.iii.2022Ascher, J & J Pickering, 2022. Discover Life bee species guide and world checklist. Available in: <https://www.discoverlife.org/> [Access: 22.iii.2022].

The bee fauna (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) in Cerrado and Cerrado-Amazon Rainforest transition sites in Tocantins state, Northern Region of Brazil. Sso Barros, Oliveira Júnior, Oliveira, Ng Andrade, &amp; Oliveira, Mal Bragança, 10.1590/1676-0611-BN-2022-1344Biota Neotropica. 2220221344Barros, SSO, WP Oliveira Júnior, FF Oliveira, NG Andrade, RJ Oliveira & MAL Bragança, 2022. The bee fauna (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) in Cerrado and Cerrado-Amazon Rainforest transition sites in Tocantins state, Northern Region of Brazil. Biota Neotropica, 22: e20221344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/1676-0611-BN-2022-1344

Catalogue of Bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) in the Neotropical Region -online version. Jmf Camargo, &amp; Pedro, Gar Melo, Moure, JS, D Urban & GAR MeloMeliponini Lepeletier, 1836. Access: 22.ii.2022Camargo, JMF, SEM Pedro & GAR Melo, 2013. Meliponini Lepeletier, 1836. In: Moure, JS, D Urban & GAR Melo (Eds.). Catalogue of Bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) in the Neotropical Region -online version. Available in: <http:// www.moure.cria.org.br/catalogue>. [Access: 22.ii.2022].

Jmf Camargo, Biogeografia histórica dos Meliponini (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Apinae) da região Neotropical. Vit, P (Ed.). Abejas sin Aguijón y Valorización Sensorial de su Miel. Mérida, APIBA-DIGECEXUniversidad de los AndesCamargo, JMF, 2008. Biogeografia histórica dos Meliponini (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Apinae) da região Neotropical, pp. 13-26. In: Vit, P (Ed.). Abejas sin Aguijón y Valorización Sensorial de su Miel. Mérida, APIBA-DIGECEX, Universidad de los Andes.

A key to the species of Nanoplebeia, with descriptions of four new species (Hymenoptera: Apidae). M S Engel, 10.17161/jom.i106.15735Journal of Melittology. 106Engel, MS, 2021a. A key to the species of Nanoplebeia, with descriptions of four new species (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Journal of Melittology, 106: 1-14. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17161/jom.i106.15735

A key to the subgenera of the stingless bee genus Melipona (Hymenoptera: Apidae). M S Engel, Engel, MS, 2021b. A key to the subgenera of the stingless bee genus Melipona (Hymenoptera: Apidae).

. Entomologist&apos;s Monthly Magazine, 10.31184/M00138908.1574.4102157Entomologist's Monthly Magazine, 157: 273-281. DOI: https://doi.org/10.31184/M00138908.1574.4102

Notes on South American stingless bees of the genus Scaptotrigona (Hymenoptera: Apidae), Part I: short-bristle species, the tubiba species group. Entomologist's Monthly Magazine. M S Engel, 10.31184/M00138908.1581.4087158Engel MS, 2022a. Notes on South American stingless bees of the genus Scaptotrigona (Hymenoptera: Apidae), Part I: short-bristle species, the tubiba species group. Entomologist's Monthly Magazine, 158: 41-59. DOI: https://doi.org/10.31184/M00138908.1581.4087

Part II: Subgroup A of the postica species group. M S Engel, 10.17161/jom.i110.17001Notes on South American stingless bees of the genus Scaptotrigona. 110Hymenoptera: Apidae)Engel, MS, 2022b. Notes on South American stingless bees of the genus Scaptotrigona (Hymenoptera: Apidae), Part II: Subgroup A of the postica species group. Journal of Melittology, 110: 1-51. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17161/jom. i110.17001

Part III: A revised infrageneric classification and new species. M S Engel, 10.17161/jom.i111.17013Notes on South American stingless bees of the genus Scaptotrigona. 111Hymenoptera: Apidae)Engel, MS, 2022c. Notes on South American stingless bees of the genus Scaptotrigona (Hymenoptera: Apidae), Part III: A revised infrageneric classification and new species. Journal of Melittology, 111: 1-29. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17161/ jom.i111.17013

New species of the stingless bee genus Plebeia (Hymenoptera: Apidae). M S Engel, 10.17161/jom.i114.18568Journal of Melittology. 114Engel, MS, 2022d. New species of the stingless bee genus Plebeia (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Journal of Melittology, 114: 1-28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17161/jom.i114.18568

Stingless bees in Miocene amber of southeastern China (Hymenoptera: Apidae). M S Engel, Herhold, David, &amp; Jc Wang, Thomas, 10.17161/jom.i105.15734Journal of Melittology. 105Engel, MS, HW Herhold, SR David, B Wang & JC Thomas, 2021. Stingless bees in Miocene amber of southeastern China (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Journal of Melittology, 105: 1-83. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17161/jom.i105.15734

Richness and distribution of the meliponine fauna (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in the State of Ceará, Brazil. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências. Ja &amp; Bm Felix, Freitas, 10.1590/0001-37652021201907679320190767Felix, JA & BM Freitas, 2021. Richness and distribution of the meliponine fauna (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in the State of Ceará, Brazil. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências, 93: e20190767. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/0001-3765202120190767

Critical role of native forest and savannah habitats in retaining neotropical pollinator diversity in highly mechanized agricultural landscapes. Jva Ferreira, Storck-Tonon, Ramos, Costa, Ds Nogueira, Mahlmann, Oliveira, Pereira, &amp; Silva, Ca Peres, 10.1016/j.agee.2022.108084Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment. 338108084Ferreira, JVA, D Storck-Tonon, AWP Ramos, HCM Costa, DS Nogueira, T Mahlmann, ML Oliveira, MJB Pereira, DJ Silva & CA Peres, 2022. Critical role of native forest and savannah habitats in retaining neotropical pollinator diversity in highly mechanized agricultural landscapes. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 338: 108084. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2022.108084

Stingless bee: their behavior, ecology and evolution. C Grüter, 10.1007/978-3-030-60090-7SpringerGrüter C, 2020. Stingless bee: their behavior, ecology and evolution. Springer. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 030-60090-7

D A Guevara, Gonzalez &amp; R Ospina, 10.15446/caldasia.%20v42n1.75511Stingless robber bees of the genus Lestrimelitta in Colombia (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). Caldasia. 42Guevara, DA, VH Gonzalez & R Ospina, 2020. Stingless robber bees of the genus Lestrimelitta in Colombia (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). Caldasia, 42: 17-29. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15446/caldasia. v42n1.75511

Stingless bees of the genus Nannotrigona Cockerell (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in Colombia. J Jaramillo, &amp; Ospina, Vh Gonzalez, 10.11646/zootaxa.4706.2.8Zootaxa. 4706Jaramillo, J, R Ospina & VH Gonzalez, 2019. Stingless bees of the genus Nannotrigona Cockerell (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in Colombia. Zootaxa, 4706: 349-365. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.4706.2.8

Scaptotrigona marialiceae, a new species of neotropical stingless bee (Hym., Anthophila), from southern Brazil. S &amp; Mc Laroca, Almeida, 10.5380/abpr.v44i1-2.40580Acta Biológica Paranaense. 44Laroca, S & MC Almeida, 2015. Scaptotrigona marialiceae, a new species of neotropical stingless bee (Hym., Anthophila), from southern Brazil. Acta Biológica Paranaense, 44: 1-6. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5380/abpr.v44i1-2.40580

Scaptotrigona guimaraesensis, uma nova espécie de abelha sem ferrão (Hym., Anthophila) do centro-oeste brasileiro. S &amp; Mc Laroca, Almeida, Acta Biológica Paranaense. 46Laroca, S & MC Almeida, 2017. Scaptotrigona guimaraesensis, uma nova espécie de abelha sem ferrão (Hym., Anthophila) do centro-oeste brasileiro. Acta Biológica Paranaense, 46: 1-8.

First record of the stingless bee Lestrimelitta rufa (Friese) (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in NE Brazil and its cleptobiotic behavior. V M Mascena, Nogueira, &amp; Bm Silva, Freitas, 10.13102/sociobiology.v64i3.1262Sociobiology. 64Mascena, VM, DS Nogueira, CM Silva & BM Freitas, 2017. First record of the stingless bee Lestrimelitta rufa (Friese) (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in NE Brazil and its cleptobiotic behavior. Sociobiology, 64: 359-362. DOI: https://doi.org/10.13102/sociobiology.v64i3.1262

New species of the stingless bee genus Schwarziana (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Gar Melo, 10.1016/j.rbe.2015.08.001Revista Brasileira de Entomologia. 59Melo, GAR, 2015. New species of the stingless bee genus Schwarziana (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Revista Brasileira de Entomologia, 59: 290-293. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. rbe.2015.08.001

A new subgenus of the stingless bee genus Melipona (Hymenoptera, Apidae), with a key to the subgenera. Gar Melo, 10.5380/abp.v50i1-4.83177Acta Biológica Paranaense. 50Melo, GAR, 2021. A new subgenus of the stingless bee genus Melipona (Hymenoptera, Apidae), with a key to the subgenera. Acta Biológica Paranaense, 50: 33-38. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5380/abp.v50i1-4.83177

The Bees of the World. C D Michener, The Johns Hopkins University Press2nd EdMichener, CD, 2007. The Bees of the World. 2nd Ed. The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Sistemática de Scaura Schwarz. D S Nogueira, Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini), com notas biológicas. Dissertation (Master in Biological Sciences: Entomology). Nogueira, DS, 2016. Sistemática de Scaura Schwarz, 1938 (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini), com notas biológicas. Dissertation (Master in Biological Sciences: Entomology).

Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia. Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia. Available in: <https://repositorio.inpa.gov.br/handle/1/12518>

Review of Scaura Schwarz. D S Nogueira, Santos Júnior, &amp; Ml Oliveira, Oliveira, 10.11646/zootaxa.4712.4.1Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). 4712Nogueira, DS, JE Santos Júnior, FF Oliveira & ML Oliveira, 2019. Review of Scaura Schwarz, 1938 (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). Zootaxa, 4712: 451-496. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.4712.4.1

The real taxonomic identity of Trigona latitarsis Friese, 1900, with notes on type specimens. D S Nogueira, &amp; Ml Oliveira, Oliveira, Hymenoptera, ApidaeNogueira, DS, FF Oliveira & ML Oliveira, 2017. The real taxonomic identity of Trigona latitarsis Friese, 1900, with notes on type specimens (Hymenoptera, Apidae).

. 10.3897/zookeys.713.11653Zookeys. 713Zookeys, 713: 113-130. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3897/ zookeys.713.11653

A new species of Tetragona Lepeletier & Serville, 1828 from the "truncata group" and new distribution records of T. truncata Moure, 1971 (Hymenoptera: Apidae). D S Nogueira, &amp; Ml Rasmussen, Oliveira, 10.1007/s13744-020-00822-6Neotropical Entomology. 50Nogueira, DS, C Rasmussen & ML Oliveira, 2021. A new species of Tetragona Lepeletier & Serville, 1828 from the "truncata group" and new distribution records of T. truncata Moure, 1971 (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Neotropical Entomology, 50: 68-77. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13744-020-00822-6

Redescription of Nogueirapis Moure. D S Nogueira, &amp; Ml Ribeiro, Oliveira, Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). with two new species from the Amazon forestNogueira, DS, CF Ribeiro & ML Oliveira, 2020a. Redescription of Nogueirapis Moure, 1953 with two new species from the Amazon forest (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini).

. 10.11646/zootaxa.4859.1.6Zootaxa. 4859Zootaxa, 4859: 138-150. DOI: https://doi.org/10.11646/ zootaxa.4859.1.6

A Interface do Conhecimento sobre Abelhas 2. D S Nogueira, &amp; Ml Ribeiro, Oliveira, 10.22533/at.ed.3682001106Taxonomia histórica de Nogueirapis Moure. Oliveira-Junior, JMB & LB CalvãoNogueira, DS, CF Ribeiro & ML Oliveira, 2020b. Taxonomia histórica de Nogueirapis Moure, 1953, Scaura Schwarz, 1938, Tetragona Lepeletier & Serville, 1828 e Trigona Jurine, 1807 (Apidae: Meliponini), p. 63-77. In: Oliveira-Junior, JMB & LB Calvão (Eds.). A Interface do Conhecimento sobre Abelhas 2. Atena Editora. DOI https://doi.org/10.22533/ at.ed.3682001106

Two new species of Scaptotrigona Moure, 1942 from the Amazon forest. D S Nogueira, Santos-Silva, Carvalho, Carvalho-Zilse, &amp; Ml Rmo Alves, Oliveira, 10.12741/ebrasilis.v15.e985Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). EntomoBrasilis. 15985Nogueira, DS, JA Santos-Silva, MM Carvalho, GA Carvalho- Zilse, RMO Alves & ML Oliveira, 2022a. Two new species of Scaptotrigona Moure, 1942 from the Amazon forest (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). EntomoBrasilis, 15: e985. DOI: https://doi.org/10.12741/ebrasilis.v15.e985