# Case Series Case Series Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid and heterologous osteosarcoma-like differentiation: a case report and literature review

CorpusID: 261097592
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/515f8aeb588efac6091163f6a9b64aa7dbd340f9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/515f8aeb588efac6091163f6a9b64aa7dbd340f9)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Case Series Case Series Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid and heterologous osteosarcoma-like differentiation: a case report and literature review
2023

Saleh Abuorouq 
Department of Clinical Medical Sciences
Faculty of Medicine
Urology Division
Yarmouk University
21163IrbidJordan

Firas Sahawneh 
Department of Urology
Private Sector
21110IrbidJordan

Omar Halalsheh 
Department of Urology
Faculty of Medicine
Jordan University of Science and Technology
22110IrbidJordan

Husam K Haddad 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Ministry of Health
11118AmmanJordan

Raed Mekail 
Department of Urology
Private Sector
21110IrbidJordan

Hiba Alzoubi 
Department of Basic Medical Sciences
Pathology Division
Faculty of Medicine
Yarmouk University
21163IrbidJordan

Mo&apos;ath Alrjoub 
Department of Pathology and Microbiology
Faculty of Medicine
Jordan University of Science and Technology
22110IrbidJordan

Hashem A Serhan habuserhan@hamad.qa 
Department of Ophthalmology
Hamad Medical Corporations
3050DohaQatar

Correspondence address. Department of Ophthalmology
Hamad Medical Corporations
PO Box: 3050DohaQatar

Case Series Case Series Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid and heterologous osteosarcoma-like differentiation: a case report and literature review

Journal of Surgical Case Reports
8202310.1093/jscr/rjad476Received: June 30, 2023. Accepted: August 5, 2023
Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (CRCC) is a subtype of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with a favorable prognosis. Sarcomatoid differentiation in RCC is assumed to be the outcome of the parent tumor's dedifferentiation and associated with poorer prognosis. Sarcomatoid differentiation can be detected in CRCC as well as other subtypes, but the occurrence of divergent osteosarcoma-like components in sarcomatoid CRCC is extremely unusual. Only six cases have been previously reported in the literature, we reviewed them and presented the seventh case in a 71-year-old male who had a left kidney heterogeneous mass. The resected tumor showed a sarcoma-like spindle cell area with an adjacent osteosarcoma area producing lacy bone material and bony trabeculae in a hard area mixed with a typical CRCC. In conclusion, sarcomatoid CRCC with osteosarcomatous differentiation is a very rare tumor and should be kept in mind especially when dealing with small or frozen sections biopsies.

## INTRODUCTION

Chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (CRCC) are an uncommon type of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) that accounts for around 5% of all RCC cases [1]. In general, CRCC has a better prognosis than other RCC subtypes [1]. Sarcomatoid change in RCC occurs when a parent tumor dedifferentiates into a higher-grade malignancy and it is typically characterized by a big size, poor prognosis, and significant cytological atypia, with highly atypical spindle cells resembling a sarcoma [2,3]. Sarcomatoid dedifferentiation can happen in any kind of RCC, including clear-cell carcinoma, papillary RCC, collecting-duct carcinoma, and in CRCC [2]. The occurrence of heterologous osteosarcoma-like components in sarcomatoid CRCC is extremely unusual [4][5][6][7][8][9]. We present the seventh case of this rare entity of osteosarcoma component arising in sarcomatoid CRCC, and review of the previous six cases reported in the literature [4][5][6][7][8][9], with a thorough discussion of the main differential diagnosis of such masses.


## CASE REPORT

A 71-year-old Jordanian male with a known case of hypertension presented with left f lank pain for 3 months. An abdominal computed tomography (CT scan) revealed a huge, 20 × 12 × 7 cm left renal solid mass, disrupting the upper two-third of renal parenchyma, with thick dystrophic calcifications, and causing displacement of the surrounding bowel structure (Fig. 1). Clinically, a renal tumor was suspected and left nephrectomy was performed. The patient recovered well after the operation without any surgical complications.

The lesion was immediately fixed in a 10% formalin-buffered solution for 48 h after surgical excision and embedded in paraffin.  The paraffin tissue blocks were divided into 5-μm sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Additional 5-μm histological sections were kept for the immunohistochemical analysis. Grossly, the resected specimen consisted of the left kidney, weighing 2100.0 grams and measuring 20.0 × 11.0 × 7.0 cm with an attached ureter measuring 4.0 × 0.7 × 0.7 cm. Serial sectioning shows a heterogeneous mass lesion involving the whole kidney measuring 20.0 × 16.0 × 12.0 cm. The mass lesion is necrotic and friable with about 50% showing necrosis and focally the tumor was so hard that it could not be cut. The mass lesion has pushing peripheral margins with a lobulated appearance and invading the perinephric and sinus fat.

The microscopic examination of the kidney tumor showed a biphasic pattern composed of 10% of classic malignant chromophobe epithelial components mixed with the high-grade sarcomatoid neoplasm (50%; Fig. 2A and B) intermingled with areas showing atypical lacy mineralized bone material and focal well-formed bony trabeculae were also identified ( Fig. 2C and D). The chromophobe component showed polygonal cells with centrally located round hyperchromatic nuclei, pale, granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and faint cytoplasmic borders ( Fig. 2A). The sarcomatoid area shows large, pleomorphic, mitotically active spindle cells, and extensive necrosis (Fig. 2B). The tumor cells in the chromophobe are strongly and diffusely positive for Cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and negative for Carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-IX; Fig. 3A and B).

Additionally, the sarcomatoid area shows focal strong positivity for CK AE1/AE3 (Fig. 3C). The focal immunohistochemical expression of cytokeratin ( 


## DISCUSSION

CRCC constitutes about 5% of surgically resected renal epithelial tumors [1]. The average age of patients with CRCC is 60 years, and the mortality rate is <10% [1]. CRCC has a low malignant potential and a favorable prognosis [10]. However, it is a highly aggressive tumor when it appears with sarcomatoid differentiation or necrosis of the sarcomatoid region [2]. The disease-specific survival rate for RCC with sarcomatoid transformation was 22% in the study of de Peralta-Venturina et al. [2], which is lower than that of RCC without sarcomatoid differentiation (79%).

Sarcomatoid differentiation is common in CRCC, accounting for 9% of all RCC subtypes. de Peralta-Venturina et al. investigated 100 kidney tumors and discovered that sarcomatoid differentiation occurred at a rate of 8% in conventional RCC, 9% in chromophobe RCC, 3% in papillary RCC, 29% in collecting duct carcinoma, and 11% in unclassified RCC [2,11]. The presence of a sarcomatoid component has been linked to an increased risk of metastasis and a poor prognosis [2,5,11]. Moreover, the typical 5-year disease-specific survival rate of CRCC is close to 100%, with a progression-free survival rate of 94%, and drops to levels equivalent to other sarcomatoid RCCs. In most cases, the dedifferentiated sarcomatoid component, are homologous in type; malignant fibrous histiocytomas (44%), fibrosarcomas (53%), and 3% are unclassified sarcomatoid tumor, but the occurrence of heterologous osteosarcoma is extremely rare [2]. The sarcomatoid component's proportion may vary from case to case. However, de Peralta Venturina et al. study found no significant correlation between cases with a high and low percentage of sarcomatoid regions, and TNM stages are the sole independent predictors of survival.

Only six cases of osteosarcoma-like differentiation in sarcomatoid CRCC have been reported in the literature [4][5][6][7][8][9]. Table 1 summarizes the primary clinical and pathologic aspects of these cases as well as the present case. Most of the cases of CRCC with osteosarcoma differentiation were diagnosed in patients in their seventh decade, which is older than the average age at which CRCC without osteosarcoma differentiation is usually diagnosed [7]. More than 50% of the cases showed a high percentage of sarcomatoid components and were associated with extensive necrosis. Most of these patients presented with frequent regional or distant metastases and short survival as shown in Table 1.

Regarding CRCC, it has recently been demonstrated that the epithelial and sarcomatoid components of chromophobe RCC have different genetic abnormalities than pure chromophobe RCC, implying that multiple chromosomal gains are important factors in the sarcomatoid transformation [12]. According to Akhtar et al. [3], the development of sarcomatoid cells in CRCC may be connected with its unique genetic profile, which makes the cells prone to hyperploidization. Brunelli et al. [12] conducted considerable research on this result, discovering that both the epithelium and sarcomatoid elements in a CRCC exhibit different genetic anomalies. Multiple gains of Chromosomes 1, 2, 6, 10, and 17.15 are seen in sarcomatoid CRCC. Additionally, Quiroga-Garza et al. [6] reported a CRCC case with sarcomatoid differentiation, as well as a metastatic periaortic lymph node tumor with only a sarcomatoid component. These findings lend credence to the existence of a tumor progression pathway from chromophobe to sarcomatoid RCC. However, the precise sequence of genetic events involved in this change is still unknown.

Reporting such cases is very important, especially when dealing with retroperitoneal small biopsies or frozen section biopsies, which make the differential diagnosis more challenging. This is especially crucial when this biopsy shows the osteosarcomatous component, which could either be originating from the kidney as in our case, or secondarily involving the kidney. The differential diagnosis approach for such cases included extraskeletal osteosarcoma in the retroperitoneum or sarcomatoid RCC with osteosarcomatous differentiation. Extraskeletal osteosarcoma, on the other hand, is most commonly found in the lower extremities (46.6%), upper extremities (20.5%), or the retroperitoneum (17%) [7,13,14]. In our case, the synchronous presence of welldifferentiated chromophobe and dedifferentiated sarcomatoid components, the transition between these areas, and the focal cytokeratin positivity in the sarcomatoid areas were used to make the diagnosis of sarcomatoid RCC, and excluding extraskeletal osteosarcoma of the retroperitoneum. In summary, we report a case of sarcomatoid CRCC with osteosarcoma differentiation that is apparently the seventh reported case of heterologous sarcomatoid CRCC. However, because of the rarity of this occurrence, the exact relationship between the existence of heterologous osteosarcomatous components, in particular, and prognosis remains unknown. Additionally, this rare tumor should be taken into consideration when dealing with small biopsies of retroperitoneal masses or frozen sections biopsy of retroperitoneal or kidney masses.

## Figure 1 .
1CT scan axial (A, B) showing left renal solid mass, disrupting the upper two-third of renal parenchyma, with thick dystrophic calcifications (B).

## Figure 2 .
2(A) The CRCC area (×40). (B) Sarcomatoid areas showing atypical lacy mineralized bone material and large pleomorphic spindle cell proliferation with necrosis (×40). (C, D) Osteosarcomatous areas showing atypical lacy mineralized bone material, and atypical spindle cells existing between the osteoid (×40).

## Figure 3 .
3(A) The areas of CRCC were positive for CK7 (×40) and (B) negative for CA-IX (×40). The osteosarcoma-like areas were focally and strongly positive for CK AE1/AE3 (×40).


Fig. 3C) by the sarcomatoid cells along with the close relation with a pure CRCC led us toward the diagnosis of sarcomatoid CRCC with osteosarcomatous differentiation.

## Table 1 .
1Review of the literature on sarcomatoid CRCC with osteosarcomatoid differentiation. Lymph node metastasis Left radical nephrectomy Chromophobe RCC with Abbreviations: YOP, year of publications; F, female; M, male; NA, not applicable.Authors 
(YOP) 

Ethnicity 

Age 
Gender Kidney Presentation 

CT scan 

Metastasis 

Management 
Histopathological findings Outcome 

Refer-
ence 

Itoh T. et al. 
(2002) 

Japanese 

74 

M 

Right 
Fatigue, anorexia, a huge 
palpable mass on the 
posterior hypochondriac 
region, and marked 
abdominal distention from 

ileus 
Huge retroperitoneal mass with 
calcification, which destroyed the 

lower half of the right kidney and 
directly invaded the ascending and 
sigmoid colon 

Multiple intra-abdominal 
dissemination and liver 

and pulmonary 
metastases 

Nephrectomy and 

ascending colon 
resection because the 
tumor invaded the colon. 

Chromophobe RCC with 
osteosarcoma-like 

differentiation (66%) and 

focal sarcomatoid area. 
Extensive necrosis. 

Died 2 months after the 
diagnosis 

[4] 

Gira F. et al. 
(2008) 

NA 

73 

F 

Left 
Fatigue, increasing 
abdominal pain, and 
hematuria 

Heterogeneous left kidney mass 

(19 × 

12 × 
23 cm), relegated the 

kidney upper-medially into the 
retroperitoneum with focal 

calcification 

Lung nodule 

Nephrectomy 

Chromophobe RCC (10%) 

with sarcomatoid 
dedifferentiation and 
osteosarcoma-like divergent 

differentiation. Extensive 

necrosis and hemorrhage 

Died shortly after the 
operation as a 
consequence of the 
disseminated disease 

[5] 

Quiroga G. 

et al. 

(2009) 

NA 

63 

F 

Left 
Episodes of nausea and 

mild left flank pain for 

2 months 

Upper pole left renal mass with 
renal vein involvement 

Multiple pulmonary 
nodules, along with 
hepatic and bone 
(sacral) metastases. 
Left radical nephrectomy 
with a periaortic lymph 
node dissection, as well 
as left adrenalectomy 
and splenectomy and 
radiotherapy and 
chemotherapy for 

distant metastatic 
disease 

Chromophobe RCC with 
sarcomatoid 
dedifferentiation (70%) and 

5% of osteosarcomatous and 
chondrosarcomatous 

components. 

Tumor necrosis (40%). 

Alive for the 10 months 
after the diagnosis 

[6] 

Li YF et al. 
(2010) 

Taiwanese 78 

F 

Right 
Fatigue, anorexia, and a 
huge palpable mass in the 
posterior hypochondriac 
region 
Huge, ill-defined heterogeneous 
kidney mass 14.2 × 

14.5 × 
15.9 cm 

and several adjacent enlarged 
lymph nodes 

None 

Nephrectomy 

Chromophobe RCC with 
sarcomatoid-like 
differentiation 
Alive 6 months after 
diagnosis 

[7] 

Sari A. et al. 
(2011) 

NA 

49 

NA 

Left 
Abdominal pain for 

2 months 

Solid mass of 25 × 
20 cm in size that 

extended from the level of the left 

renal hilus to the iliac wing origin 
with a regular outer contour and 
necrosis foci 

None 

Nephrectomy 

Sarcomatoid CRCC with 
osteosarcomatous 

differentiation 
Died because of surgical 
complications 

[8] 

Bharti S 
(2020) 

NA 

64 

F 

Left 
Palpable mass in the lower 

left abdomen and 
hematuria 

Heterogeneous peripherally 

enhanced tumor with a central 
hypovascular area 
sarcomatous differentiation 
containing osteosarcoma 
component 

NA 

[9] 

The 
present 

case 

Jordanian 71 

M 

Left 
Left flank pain for 
3 months 

Huge, 20 × 

12 × 
7 cm left renal solid 

mass, disrupting the upper two-third 

of renal parenchyma, with thick 
dystrophic calcifications, and 
causing displacement of the 
surrounding bowel structure 

None 

Nephrectomy 

CRCC (10%) with 
sarcomatoid and 
osteosarcoma-like 

differentiation. 

Extensive necrosis 
Alive one month after the 
operation 


CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTNone declared.FUNDINGOpen Access funding provided by the Qatar National Library.DATA AVAILABILITYAll data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.
World Health Organization Classification of Tumors, Pathology and Genetics of Tumors of the Urinary System and Male Genital Organs. J Epstein, J Eble, I Sesterhenn, G E Sauter, IARC PressLyonEpstein J, Eble J, Sesterhenn I, Sauter GE. World Health Organiza- tion Classification of Tumors, Pathology and Genetics of Tumors of the Urinary System and Male Genital Organs. Lyon: IARC Press, 2004, 30-1.

Sarcomatoid differentiation in renal cell carcinoma: a study of 101 cases. M De Peralta-Venturina, H Moch, M Amin, P Tamboli, S Hailemariam, M Mihatsch, Am J Surg Pathol. 25de Peralta-Venturina M, Moch H, Amin M, Tamboli P, Haile- mariam S, Mihatsch M, et al. Sarcomatoid differentiation in renal cell carcinoma: a study of 101 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 2001;25: 275-84.

Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma: the chromophobe connection. Mmd Akhtar, Amd Tulbah, Ahmd Kardar, Mamd Ali, Am J Surg Pathol. 21Akhtar MMD, Tulbah AMD, Kardar AHMD, Ali MAMD. Sarco- matoid renal cell carcinoma: the chromophobe connection. Am J Surg Pathol 1997;21:1188-95.

Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with osteosarcoma-like differentiation. T Itoh, K Chikai, S Ota, T Nakagawa, A Takiyama, G Mouri, Am J Surg Pathol. 26Itoh T, Chikai K, Ota S, Nakagawa T, Takiyama A, Mouri G, et al. Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with osteosarcoma-like differentiation. Am J Surg Pathol 2002;26:1358-62.

Dedifferentiated chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with massive osteosarcoma-like divergent differentiation: a singular entity in the spectrum of retroperitoneal calcifying tumors. F A Gira, A Barbieri, G Fellegara, M Zompatori, D Corradi, Int J Surg Pathol. 18Gira FA, Barbieri A, Fellegara G, Zompatori M, Corradi D. Ded- ifferentiated chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with massive osteosarcoma-like divergent differentiation: a singular entity in the spectrum of retroperitoneal calcifying tumors. Int J Surg Pathol 2010;18:419-23.

Sarcomatoid chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with heterologous sarcomatoid elements. A case report and review of the literature. G Quiroga-Garza, H Khurana, S Shen, A G Ayala, J Y Ro, Arch Pathol Lab Med. 133Quiroga-Garza G, Khurana H, Shen S, Ayala AG, Ro JY. Sarco- matoid chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with heterologous sarcomatoid elements. A case report and review of the literature. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2009;133:1857-60.

Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with osteosarcoma differentiation: case report and literature review. Y F Li, T L Cha, J S Jin, C P Yu, Urol Int. 85Li YF, Cha TL, Jin JS, Yu CP. Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with osteosarcoma differentiation: case report and literature review. Urol Int 2010;85:470-4.

Sarcomatoid chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with osteosarcoma-like differentiation which presented as a retroperitoneal mass: a case report. A Sari, G Evcım, M Ermete, S Gür, Turk Patoloji Derg. 27Sari A, Evcım G, Ermete M, Gür S. Sarcomatoid chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with osteosarcoma-like differentiation which presented as a retroperitoneal mass: a case report. Turk Patoloji Derg 2011;27:164-8.

Sarcomatoid chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with heterologous component. S Bharti, G R Choudhary, N J Bharti, P K Garg, B S Arsha, P A Elhence, Iran J Pathol. 15Bharti S, Choudhary GR, Bharti NJ, Garg PK, Arsha BS, Elhence PA. Sarcomatoid chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with heterologous component. Iran J Pathol 2020;15: 57-61.

Prognostic impact of histologic subtyping of adult renal epithelial neoplasms: an experience of 405 cases. M B Amin, M B Amin, P Tamboli, J Javidan, H Stricker, M D-P Venturina, Am J Surg Pathol. 26Amin MB, Amin MB, Tamboli P, Javidan J, Stricker H, Venturina M d-P, et al. Prognostic impact of histologic subtyping of adult renal epithelial neoplasms: an experience of 405 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 2002;26:281-91.

Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma: histomorphologic characteristics and evaluation of conventional pathologic prognostic parameters in 145 cases. M B Amin, G P Paner, I Alvarado-Cabrero, A N Young, H J Stricker, R H Lyles, Am J Surg Pathol. 32Amin MB, Paner GP, Alvarado-Cabrero I, Young AN, Stricker HJ, Lyles RH, et al. Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma: histomorpho- logic characteristics and evaluation of conventional pathologic prognostic parameters in 145 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 2008;32: 1822-34.

Chromosomal gains in the sarcomatoid transformation of chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. M Brunelli, S Gobbo, P Cossu-Rocca, L Cheng, O Hes, B Delahunt, Mod Pathol. 20Brunelli M, Gobbo S, Cossu-Rocca P, Cheng L, Hes O, Delahunt B, et al. Chromosomal gains in the sarcomatoid transforma- tion of chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. Mod Pathol 2007;20: 303-9.

Extraskeletal osteosarcoma. A clinicopathologic review of 26 cases. B L Bane, H L Evans, J Y Ro, C H Carrasco, D J Grignon, R S Benjamin, Cancer. 65Bane BL, Evans HL, Ro JY, Carrasco CH, Grignon DJ, Benjamin RS, et al. Extraskeletal osteosarcoma. A clinicopathologic review of 26 cases. Cancer 1990;65:2762-70.

Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in Japan: multi-institutional study of 20 patients from the Japanese musculoskeletal oncology group. T Torigoe, Y Yazawa, T Takagi, A Terakado, H Kurosawa, J Orthop Sci. 12Torigoe T, Yazawa Y, Takagi T, Terakado A, Kurosawa H. Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in Japan: multi-institutional study of 20 patients from the Japanese musculoskeletal oncology group. J Orthop Sci 2007;12:424-9.