# OVERVIEW ON THE THEORY OF DOUBLE FLAG VARIETIES FOR SYMMETRIC PAIRS

CorpusID: 263310810
 
tags: #Mathematics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85a9d149a5f1360e4d706fc433eb245242b59c29](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85a9d149a5f1360e4d706fc433eb245242b59c29)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

OVERVIEW ON THE THEORY OF DOUBLE FLAG VARIETIES FOR SYMMETRIC PAIRS
Sep 2023

Lucas Fresse 
Kyo Nishiyama 
OVERVIEW ON THE THEORY OF DOUBLE FLAG VARIETIES FOR SYMMETRIC PAIRS
Sep 2023
Let G be a connected reductive algebraic group and its symmetric subgroup K. The variety X = K/Q × G/P is called a double flag variety, where Q and P are parabolic subgroups of K and G respectively.In this article, we make a survey on the theory of double flag varieties for a symmetric pair (G, K) and report entirely new results and theorems on this theory.Most important topic is the finiteness of K-orbits on X. We summarize the classification of X of finite type, which are scattered in the literatures. In some respects such classifications are complete, and in some cases not. In particular, we get a classification of double flag varieties of finite type when a symmetric pair is of type AIII, using the theorems of Homma who describes "indecomposable" objects of such double flag varieties. Together with these classifications, newly developed embedding theory provides double flag varieties of finite type, which are new. Other ingredients in this article are Steinberg theory, generalization of Robinson-Schensted correspondence, and orbit classification via quiver representations.We hope this article is useful for those who want to study the theory of double flag varieties.K. N. is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number #21K03184.

Let G be a connected reductive algebraic group over the complex number field C and θ ∈ Aut G an involutive automorphism. There will be no harm in considering an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero, but we use C for simplicity. The fixed point subgroup K = G θ is called a symmetric subgroup and (G, K) is called a symmetric pair. The subgroup K is also reductive, but it is not connected in general. In this paper, we assume K is connected, although most of the theory will go fine if we take the connected component of G θ as K.

We concentrate on the cases where G is classical. Let us list irreducible classical symmetric pairs referring to [Hel78,§ 10.3].

(AI) (SL n , SO n ) § § 6.2 and 6.3; § 15.3 (AII) (SL 2n , Sp 2n ) § § 6.2 and 6.3; § 15.4 (AIII) (SL n , (GL p × GL q ) ∩ SL n ) (n = p + q) Table 9 in § 8.2 (Below, we will consider (GL n , GL p × GL q ), which is easier to handle.) (BDI) (SO n , SO p × SO q ) (n = p + q) § § 6.2 and 6.3; § § 15.7, 15.8, 15.9 (DIII) (SO 2n , GL n ) § § 6.2 and 6.3; § 15.10 (CI) (Sp 2n , GL n ) § § 6.2 and 6.3; § 15.5 (CII) (Sp 2n , Sp 2p × Sp 2q ) (n = p + q) § § 6.2 and 6.3; § 15.6

Remark 1.1.

(1) For each type we mention relevant sections, which contain the tables of double flag varieties of finite type (for details, see the explanation below). For the tables of the triple flag varieties of finite type, see the tables in § § 6.4 and 6.5.

(2) Sometimes (BDII) refers to (SO n+1 , SO n ) (see [MT91,§ 6.3], for example), but we include this into (BDI) for convenience. Further, in occasions, we separate (BDI) into (BI) and (DI) according as n is odd or even.

Let (G, K) be a symmetric pair. For parabolic subgroups Q of K and P of G, we call X = K/Q × G/P a double flag variety on which K acts diagonally. The study of double flag varieties started a decade ago by [NO11]. Since then, there appeared many works on them; we mention [HT12, KO13, HNOO13, KM14, FN16, FN20, FN21, FN23, NOr18, Hom21] for example. Double flag varieties are intimately related to triple flag varieties (in fact, such triple flag varieties are considered to be special cases of double flag varieties, see § 4). There are also many works on these triple/multiple flag varieties, e.g., [MWZ99,MWZ00,Ste03,Tra09,FGT09,Mat13,Mat15,Mat19,BDSEK17]. The main interests of these papers are proving finiteness of orbits, classifications of multiple flag varieties with finitely many orbits, and generalizations of Steinberg theory including combinatorics such as Robinson-Schensted correspondence. There have been many results including various classification tables of double/triple flag varieties with finitely many orbits and they scattered over in different places.

In this paper, we summarize important properties, classification results and tables in the theory of double flag varieties from various resources, and explain general theory of Steinberg maps. We try to keep the description understandable not only for experts but also for readers from different fields. In the course of making summary, we have obtained many of entirely new results or improvements on existent theorems. These new results, which advance our understanding of the theory, are in Parts 2-4.

Let us explain the content of the paper.

In Part 1, we introduce basics on double/triple flag varieties. We begin with the well known theory of flag varieties and Bruhat decompositions, under the action of G or K acts. If X is a smooth G-variety, then the action of G induces a Hamiltonian action on the cotangent bundle T * X and it provides a moment map. We introduce the conormal variety as the null fiber of the moment map, and describe the irreducible decomposition of the conormal variety using conormal bundles of orbits, if there exist only finitely many orbits.

In Part 2, we discuss finiteness of orbits on double flag varieties, which is crucial in the Steinberg theory developed below. If there are only finitely many K-orbits on X = K/Q × G/P , X is called of finite type. Since X/K ≃ Q\G/P , it is equivalent to having finitely many Q orbits on G/P . In particular, if Q = B K is a Borel subgroup of K, classification of the double flag variety of finite type amounts that of K-spherical partial flag varieties G/P . This classification is achieved by He-N-Ochiai-Oshima [HNOO13]. They also classified the double flag variety of finite type in the case where P = B G is a Borel subgroup of G. We reproduce the classification in § 6 together with the key ideas of the proofs. In fact the classification is reduced to that of multiplicity free action on certain space of nilpotent elements (see § 6.1). Together with these results, we also collect the tables of triple flag varieties of finite type in § § 6.4 and 6.5. They are quoted from [MWZ99,MWZ00], [Ste03], [Mat15,Mat19]. These classifications are used later to obtain further examples of double flag varieties of finite type.

To classify general double flag varieties of finite type, it is useful to apply representation theory of quivers and consider suitable subcategories of representations. The usage of quiver representations was first introduced by Magyar-Weyman-Zelevinsky [MWZ99] for triple flag varieties based on the theory of Gabriel [Gab72], and Kac [Kac80a,Kac82]. We explain core ideas of these theories in § 7.

For the classification of double flag varieties of finite type (for type AIII), Homma [Hom21] introduced joint flag category and joint flag varieties which correspond to the quiver representations associated with the flags in the double flag varieties. Using his idea and results, we classify the double flag varieties of finite type in the case of the symmetric pairs of type AIII. Homma actually classified indecomposable quiver representations of finite type, and it is not immediate to get the explicit form of double flag varieties. Our Table 9 in § 8.2 presents precisely when given parabolic subgroups contribute to the double flag varieties of finite type, and this completes the classification in the case of type AIII (Corollary 8.6).

For the symmetric pair (G, K) = (GL n , GL p × GL q ) (n = p + q) of type AIII, we also present a classification of K-orbits on X = K/B K × G/P in terms of indecomposable quiver representations, where B K is a Borel subgroup of K and P is a maximal parabolic subgroup of G. See Theorem 9.4 in § 9.2.

In Part 3, we explain the Steinberg theory for double flag varieties. For a symmetric pair (G, K), denote by g and k the Lie algebras of G and K respectively. Let g = k + s be the Cartan decomposition, where s is the (−1)-eigenspace of θ ∈ Aut g (we denote the differential of θ by the same letter). Note that s is isomorphic to the tangent space of G/K at the base point eK, on which K acts. We denote by N the nilpotent variety of g and put N k = N ∩ k and N s = N ∩ s. Due to the work of Kostant, Mal'cev and , [Kos63,KR71], see also [CM93]) it is known that there are only finitely many K-orbits in both of the nilpotent varieties N k and N s . If X has finitely many K-orbits, then there exists a natural orbit map Φ k : X/K → N k /K by using moment maps. In the classical case where X = G/B × G/B is the product of two full flag varieties on which K = G acts diagonally, this reduces to the classical Steinberg's theory [Ste88]. Namely, there exists a map W G ≃ (G/B × G/B)/G → N /G called the Steinberg map, where W G denotes the Weyl group of G. In the case of type A, the set of nilpotent orbits N /G is parameterized by Young diagrams (or partitions) and the fibers of the Steinberg map are identified with the pairs of standard Young tableaux. In such a way, the Steinberg map is identified with the Robinson-Schensted correspondence (RS correspondence), a combinatorial procedure. Therefore, in our situation, the orbit map Φ k : X/K → N k /K thus obtained is a generalization of the Steinberg map. In addition, in the case of double flag variety, we get one extra map Φ s : X/K → N s /K if certain condition called "nil-projection assumption" holds (see Assumption 10.1 in § 10.1 for details). The map Φ k is called the symmetrized Steinberg map and Φ s is called exotic one. In § 11, for symmetric pairs of type AIII, we explain combinatorial procedures to get these two Steinberg maps, which are generalization of RS correspondence.

In this respect, Nil-projection Assumption is very important. We propose a conjecture that says it always holds whenever the double flag variety is of finite type. For example, this is valid when the parabolic subgroup P ⊂ G has abelian unipotent radical. See Conjecture 10.7 and Proposition 10.3.

Part 4 is devoted to the study of embedding theory of double flag varieties. Since the double flag varieties of finite type are completely classified when the symmetric pair is of type AIII, if we can embed a double flag variety of another type into one of type AIII, so that the structure of orbits is preserved, then we get various examples of double flag varieties of finite type. In [FN21], this attempt is carried out for the double flag varieties of type CI. In this paper, we generalize it to a large family of double flag varieties (Theorem 12.3 and Proposition 15.1 in § 15.1) and get fairly large, new families of double flag varieties of finite type (see § § 15.3-15.10). The embedding theory is equally applicable to triple flag varieties (Theorem 15.2 in § 15.2), and we also recover the results in [NO11].

The advantage of the embedding theory is that it also provides the classification of orbits in terms of the orbits in type AIII. This corresponds to the classical theory of Jordan type of nilpotent orbits for general classical groups. We give such examples in § 16, which are taken from [FN21]. One more advantage of the embedding theory is that it behaves functorially in Steinberg theory. However, we still do not prove the full commutativity between embeddings and Steinberg maps, which are left to Conjecture 14.1.

Finally, let us make some important remarks. Although we get a large portion of double flag varieties of finite type (we believe so), the complete classification of them is still open. Also, in this article, we only deal with classical groups, and classification of double flag varieties of finite type for exceptional groups are widely open. Parametrizations of K-orbits on X should be interesting and we are expecting new combinatorial structures on orbits and Steinberg maps, which are fruitful subjects.

We only work over algebraically closed field, namely over C, but the same problem over the field of real numbers (or even over p-adic numbers) will be interesting from the view point of infinite dimensional unitary representations (see [KM14,KO13] and [NOr18] for example).

The K-orbit space on X admits a natural action of Hecke algebras (see our recent paper [FN22]), and there should be a rich theory like Springer theory, or categorical study over perverse sheaves since there are finitely many orbits. In this respect, we mention [FGT09,Tra09] and [SS13,SS14a,SS14b].

As we mention above the tables in this paper do not exhaust the double flag varieties of finite type (in some cases, it is complete though). However, they give rich examples of them, and we indicate the sections and table numbers at the beginning of this introduction together with the classification of the classical symmetric pairs. We hope they are useful for readers.

Part 1. Double flag varieties for symmetric pairs


## Flag varieties and moment maps

In this section we introduce (without proofs) basic notions related to flag varieties, which are needed later. For the proofs and more detailed description, see [Bor91,Spr98,Hum75] and references therein. Also we will review some facts on moment maps. For this we refer the readers to [CG97].

2.1. Flag varieties. Let G be a connected reductive algebraic group over the complex number field C. Most of the story in this article goes through over an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero without changes. However, we prefer a simpler assumption which will highlight the key points of the theory.

A subgroup B = B G of G is called a Borel subgroup if it is maximal among connected solvable subgroups of G. It is well known that all the Borel subgroups are conjugate to each other by inner automorphisms of G, and moreover self-normalizing, i.e., B = N G (B) = N G (b), where b denotes the Lie algebra of B.

Theorem 2.1. The homogeneous space G/B is a projective variety (hence compact). As a set, it can be identified with the set of all Borel subgroups in G, as well as the set of all Borel subalgebras in g = Lie(G).

The projective variety B = G/B is called a complete flag variety (or a full flag variety), and is independent of choice of B. The adjective "complete" is often omitted, but it is sometimes useful to tell a difference from "partial" flag varieties.

A closed subgroup P of G is called parabolic if it contains a Borel subgroup. Then P is automatically connected. As well as Borel subgroups, P is self-normalizing: P = N G (P ) = N G (p), where p is the Lie algebra of P . In the following, we will denote the Lie algebra of a reductive (or "Lie") group G by its corresponding lower case German letter g.

Theorem 2.2. A homogeneous space G/P is projective if and only if P is parabolic. As a set, it can be identified with the set of all parabolic subgroups in G that are conjugate to P . Similarly, G/P can be identified with the set of all parabolic subalgebras in g that are conjugate to p.

If P is a parabolic subgroup, the projective variety P = G/P is called a (partial ) flag variety. There is a natural projection G/B → G/P with fiber P/B which is also a flag variety for a smaller group, namely, a Levi subgroup of P . We often omit the word "partial" and simply call flag variety if there is no need to distinguish "complete" ones and "partial" ones.

In the following, the cotangent bundle of flag varieties will play an important role. Since the tangent
space at b ∈ G/B = B is g/b (note that the stabiliser of b is N G (b) = B), we get the cotangent space T * b B = (g/b) * at b.
By choosing a non-degenerate invariant bilinear form on g, we can identify (g/b) * with the nilradical n of b. Thus the cotangent bundle can be described as
T * B ≃ G × B n ≃ {(b 1 , x) ∈ B × g | x ∈ n 1 }, (2.1)
where in the second expression B is considered to be the set of Borel subalgebras as explained above and n 1 is the nilradical of a Borel subalgebra b 1 . In a very similar way, we can describe the cotangent bundle of a partial flag variety P = G/P . So let p 1 ∈ P be a parabolic subalgebra conjugate to p, and denote its nilpotent radical by u 1 (we will denote a Levi decomposition by P = LU, where L is a Levi part and U its unipotent radical in general). Then we get
T * P ≃ G × P u ≃ {(p 1 , x) ∈ P × g | x ∈ u 1 }. (2.2)
2.2. Moment maps. Let X be a smooth variety on which G acts. We call X a smooth G-variety for short. The cotangent bundle T * X inherits a natural structure of symplectic variety which is
G-invariant. Choose (x, ξ) ∈ T * X, where x ∈ X and ξ ∈ T * x X. The tangent space of T * X at (x, ξ) is T x X ⊕ T ξ (T * x X) ≃ T x X ⊕ T * x X,
and there is a natural symplectic form ω, for which T x X⊕T * x X is a polar decomposition by Lagrangian subspaces T x X and T * x X (for the paring between T x X and T * x X, we adopt the natural pairing coming from the definition of algebraic dual).

Pick a point x ∈ X and consider a map v x : G → X, v x (g) = gx. The differential (at e ∈ G) of this map induces a map from g to T x X, which we denote by the same letter v x by abuse of notation. For A ∈ g, v x (A) is simply a vector field generated by the action of exp tA on X. Let us consider a G-equivariant map
µ X : T * X → g * , µ X ((x, ξ))(A) = ξ(v x (A)) for A ∈ g, (2.3)
which is called a "moment map" 1 . Let us apply the framework above to flag varieties. At a point b ∈ B which is represented by a Borel subalgebra b 1 , the tangent space is given by
T b B = g/b 1 and the cotangent space is T * b B = (g/b 1 ) * ≃ n 1 .
The vector field generated by A ∈ g is just A mod b 1 . Thus we get
µ B : T * B → g * , µ B ((b 1 , x))(A) = x, A for x ∈ n 1 , A ∈ g, (2.4)
where ·, · denotes the nondegenerate invariant bilinear form on g. Note that x kills b 1 so that the last expression is well defined. By this formula, if we identify g and g * by the invariant bilinear form (we always do so below),
µ B ((b 1 , x)) = x ((b 1 , x) ∈ T * B) (2.5)
and it is just the second projection. From this formula, since x is nilpotent, the image of the moment map Im µ B is contained in N g , the nilpotent variety of g. It is easy to see that in fact Im µ B = N g . Thus we get µ B : T * B → N g . This map is known to be birational, and gives a resolution of singularity of the nilpotent variety N g called the Springer resolution ( [Spr69]; see [Slo80] for details). Similarly, for the partial flag variety P = G/P , the moment map is also the second projection µ P ((p 1 , x)) = x ((p 1 , x) ∈ T * P; p 1 ∈ P, x ∈ u 1 ).

(2.6) In this case, the image Im µ P = Ad(G) u is the closure of a certain nilpotent orbit. This orbit is called a Richardson orbit associated with the parabolic subalgebra p, and often denoted by O P . Unfortunately µ P : T * P → O P is not a resolution in general (see [Spa76], [BM83,§ 3.5], [Jan04, § 8.8] for example). It is a resolution if the nilpotent orbit is even or G = GL n . Let us return back to a general G-variety X and the moment map µ X : T * X → g above. We identify g * with g as we mentioned.

Take a point x 0 ∈ X and consider the G-orbit O = G · x 0 . We define a Lagrangian subvariety T * O X ⊂ T * X as follows.
T * O X = {(x, ξ) ∈ T * X | x ∈ O, ξ ∈ (T x O) ⊥ }. (2.7)
The subvariety T * O X is called the conormal bundle of the orbit O. Lemma 2.3. Put Y = µ −1 X (0) ⊂ T * X, the null fiber of the moment map. Then it is a disjoint union of all conormal bundles.
Y = O∈X/G T * O X (disjoint). (2.8)
If there are only finitely many G-orbits in X, Y is an equidimensional variety of dimension dim X, and its irreducible components are given by the closures of conormal bundles:
Irr(Y ) = {T * O X | O ∈ X/G}. Proof. That Y is a disjoint union of conormal bundles is straightforward from definitions. Since dim T * O X = dim X,
if there appear only finitely many of them, clearly their closures give irreducible components and hence Y is equidimensional of dimension dim X.

Since Y consists of conormal bundles, we call Y = µ −1 X (0) a conormal variety. Corollary 2.4. Assume that there are only finitely many G-orbits in X. There exists a natural bijection between irreducible components of the conormal variety Y and the Gorbits in X: X/G ≃ Irr(Y ), which maps O ∈ X/G to the closure of its conormal bundle
T * O X ⊂ Y .

## Orbits in flag varieties: known results, summary

We give basic facts on the orbits in flag varieties, which should be well-known. See [Bor91, Spr98, Hum75] for example.

3.1. Bruhat decomposition. Let B ⊂ G be a Borel subgroup and fix a Levi decomposition B = T N, where T is a maximal torus (in G) and N the unipotent radical. The finite group W = N G (T )/T is called the Weyl group of G, and it coincides with the Weyl group of the root system of G. We often pick representatives for each element in W , and if there is no confusion we simply write w ∈ W for an element w ∈ N G (T ).

We have a double coset decomposition
G = w∈W BwB, (3.1)
which is called the Bruhat decomposition. From this, we know B-orbits on the complete flag variety B = G/B have representatives in W . Thus B/B ≃ W . Let P be a parabolic subgroup which contains T . In this case P is called standard. We get the standard Levi decomposition P = LU, where L is a Levi subgroup containing T and U is the unipotent radical. Since L is reductive, we can consider the Weyl group W L of L, which is considered to be a subgroup of W = W G . We also denote W L as W P .

There is a generalization of the Bruhat decomposition extending to the case of partial flag varieties.

Lemma 3.1. Let P be a parabolic subgroup. Recall the notation B = G/B and P = G/P .

(1) B/P ≃ P/B ≃ W/W P (2) For another parabolic subgroup P ′ of G, the generalized Bruhat decomposition P/P ′ ≃ W P \W/W P ′ holds. In particular, we get P \G/P = P/P ≃ W P \W/W P . If X is an irreducible normal G-variety on which a Borel subgroup B acts with finitely many B-orbits, the variety X is called spherical. The following theorem is well known.

Theorem 3.2 (Brion [Bri86], Vinberg [Vin86]). An irreducible normal G-variety X has finitely many B-orbits if and only if it admits an open B-orbit.

From above considerations, flag varieties are spherical. Spherical varieties are ubiquitous in representation theory and bear many nice properties. For this, see Brion [Bri12], Knop  3.2. Symmetric pairs. Let θ be an involutive automorphism of G and K = G θ the subgroup of fixed points of θ. The pair (G, K) is called a symmetric pair and K a symmetric subgroup. The quotient space G/K is called an affine symmetric space. Note that since the group K is closed and reductive, the quotient G/K is indeed an affine variety.

If G is simply connected, then K is connected. However, without the assumption, it need not be connected in general. In the following, we always assume K is connected 2 .

Example 3.3. For G = GL n (C), put θ(g) = I p,q gI p,q (g ∈ G), where I p,q = diag(1 p , −1 q ) with 1 m being the identity matrix of size m. Then K = GL p (C) × GL q (C), blockdiagonally embedded into G. The pair (GL n (C), GL p (C) × GL q (C)) is said to be a symmetric pair of type AIII.

Next, let us consider G = Sp 2n (C), the symplectic group of size 2n (and rank n) preserving the standard symplectic form.

Sp 2n (C) = {g ∈ GL 2n (C) | t gJ n g = J n }, where J n = 0 1 n −1 n 0 .

(3.

2)

The involution θ(g) = I n,n gI n,n (g ∈ G) defines K ≃ GL n (C). This symmetric pair (Sp 2n (C), GL n (C)) is called of type CI. Finally, let us consider G = GL n (C) with the involution θ(g) = t g −1 . In this case K = O n (C) is an orthogonal group, which is not connected but has 2 connected components.

3.3. KGB theory: K-orbits in flag varieties. The following lemma is well known, but we will give a proof which will clarify some parametrization of K-orbits in G/B. Lemma 3.4. G/K is a G-spherical variety, i.e., a Borel subgroup B of G has finitely many orbits in G/K.

The lemma is equivalent to the claim that the double coset space B\G/K is finite, which is further equivalent to that there are finitely many K-orbits in the complete flag variety G/B.

Proof. We will show there are finitely many K-orbits on B = G/B. For this, we follow the strategy of Millićič [Mil93, § H.2, Theorem 1] (see also [RS94, Remark 1.8]). We fix a θ-stable Borel subgroup B, which always exists (see [Ste68,Theorem 7.2]). Consider the double flag variety B 2 = G/B × G/B, on which G acts diagonally. We define another G action on B 2 , which is called the θ twisted G action, by
δ θ (g)(B 1 , B 2 ) := (gB 1 , θ(g)B 2 ) g ∈ G, (B 1 , B 2 ) ∈ B 2 .
We denote the double flag variety with this twisted action by B 2 θ . As G-varieties, B 2 and B 2 θ are isomorphic via Φ : B 2 → B 2 θ , Φ(B 1 , B 2 ) = (B 1 , θ(B 2 )).

Thus B 2 θ /δ θ (G) ≃ W by the Bruhat decomposition. Let us denote the twisted G-orbit corresponding to w ∈ W by O θ w . Let X = ∆(B) = {(B 1 , B 1 ) | B 1 ∈ B} ⊂ B 2 θ be the (non-twisted) diagonal embedding.

We will show that any irreducible component of X ∩ O θ w is precisely a single K-orbit, which implies there are finitely many orbits in X ∩ O θ w . Since {O θ w } w∈W covers B 2 θ as well as X, we conclude X ≃ B has finitely many K-orbits (note that the twisted action and the natural diagonal action of K coincides).

Take ξ ∈ X ∩ O θ w and consider its tangent space:
T ξ (X ∩ O θ w ) ⊂ T ξ X ∩ T ξ O θ w . (3.3)
Since ξ ∈ X, it can be written as ξ = (xB, xB) ∈ X for some x ∈ G. Then the right hand side of (3.3) is
{(y + b x , y + b x ) | y ∈ g} ∩ {(y + b x , θ(y) + b x ) | y ∈ g} ⊂ g/b x ⊕ g/b x . (3.4)
From this, considering (y + b x , y + b x ) in the left hand side of (3.4), we conclude that y − θ(y) ∈ b x which implies y = 1 2 (y + θ(y)) + 1 2 (y − θ(y)) ∈ k + b x .

This shows in fact we can take y ∈ k modulo b x . We denote the K-orbit through ξ by O K . The above arguments show
T ξ X ∩T ξ O θ w ⊂ T ξ O K . On the other hand, since O K ⊂ X ∩O θ w , it follows T ξ O K ⊂ T ξ (X ∩ O θ w ). Together with Equation (3.3), we get T ξ O K ⊂ T ξ (X ∩ O θ w ) ⊂ T ξ X ∩ T ξ O θ w ⊂ T ξ O K . (3.5)
Thus all the terms in the above containments are equal in fact. Now consider an irreducible component Z of X ∩ O θ w . We choose a point ξ from the set of smooth points in Z. Then T ξ Z = T ξ O K holds by the above consideration, which means O K is open dense in Z and we get Z = O K .

If ξ 0 ∈ Z \O K , the general theory of algebraic variety tells dim
T ξ 0 Z ≥ dim Z = dim O K . While ξ 0 ∈ O K \ O K , and in that case, dim K · ξ 0 < dim O K holds. Thus we get dim T ξ 0 Z ≥ dim Z = dim O K > dim K · ξ 0 = dim T ξ 0 (X ∩ O θ w ) ≥ dim T ξ 0 Z, contradiction. Thus we conclude exactly Z = O K holds.
So irreducible components of X ∩ O θ w are K-orbits and coincide with connected components. They are finite in number.

Remark 3.5. By Theorem 3.2, the above lemma is equivalent to the claim that there is an open dense B-orbit in G/K. It is not hard to prove the existence of an open dense B-orbit. In fact, it suffices to show g = k + b for a certain Borel subalgebra.

It is known that there is a θ-split Borel subalgebra b (see [Vus74]). Here, the term "θ-split" means θ(b) is the opposite Borel subalgebra of b, so that we have g = b + θ(b). Take an arbitrary x ∈ g and write it as x = x 1 + x 2 for x 1 ∈ b and x 2 ∈ θ(b). Then we have x 2 = x 2 + θ(x 2 ) − θ(x 2 ) and clearly x 2 + θ(x 2 ) ∈ k, θ(x 2 ) ∈ b. This proves that x ∈ k + b, and hence proves g = k + b for a θ-split b.

Corollary 3.6. There exists a natural bijection
B/K = K\G/B ≃ w∈I Irr(X ∩ O θ w ),
where I = {w ∈ W | θ(w) = w −1 } is the set of θ-twisted involutions and X and O θ w are given in the proof of Lemma 3.4.

Proof. Except for the condition w ∈ I , the claim has been already established in the proof of the above lemma.

If X ∩O θ w is not empty, then there exists g ∈ G which satisfies (gB, gB) = (gB, θ(g)wB). By [Spr85, Theorem 4.2], a representative of the double coset KvB (v ∈ G) can be chosen so that vθ(v) −1 ∈ N G (T ), where T is a θ-stable maximal torus in B, which is also assumed to be θ-stable. Thus, if we translate gB by K, we can assume (vB, vB) = (vB, θ(v)wB) for some v with the property vθ(
v) −1 ∈ N G (T ). Since vB = θ(v)wB, we get v −1 θ(v)w ∈ B. This means v −1 θ(v)w ∈ T and w = vθ(v) −1 in W = N G (T )/T . Thus we see θ(w) = θ(vθ(v) −1 ) = θ(v)v −1 = w −1 , which concludes that w ∈ I .
From the corollary, we get a natural projection There is an another way to parameterize K\G/B by using nilpotent orbits and their Springer fibers. For this, see [CNT12,Tra99] and references therein.
B/K = K\G/B → I ,(3.
3.4. Reductive subgroups acting on flag varieties. There is a classification of reductive subgroups H in G which act spherically on a partial flag variety G/P for any P by Avdeev and Petukhov [AP21]. In particular these subgroups H have finitely many orbits in G/P . There are many examples of such subgroups other than symmetric subgroups, which we already consider (see Lemma 3.4 above).


## Product of flag varieties

For applications of the theory of moment maps introduced in §2, we need a G-variety X with finitely many orbits. For example, if X is a product of partial flag varieties G/P 1 and G/P 2 , where P i (i = 1, 2) are parabolic subgroups, then the diagonal action of G on X = G/P 1 × G/P 2 has finitely many orbits. To see this, we note
X/G = (G/P 1 × G/P 2 )/G ≃ P 1 \G/P 2 ≃ W P 1 \W G /W P 2 ,
where the last isomorphism is given by the Bruhat decomposition (see Lemma 3.1). In this way, we also get a parametrization of G-orbits in X.

It is natural to ask the problem of when a product of flag varieties has finitely many orbits under the diagonal action of G.


### Triple flag varieties.

Theorem 4.1. Let G be a classical group of type A, B, C, D. and P i (1 ≤ i ≤ k) parabolic subgroups of G. If the product G/P 1 × G/P 2 × · · · × G/P k admits finitely many G-orbits under the diagonal G-action then k ≤ 3 holds.

The case k = 1 is trivial, and as mentioned above, the case k = 2 reduces to the Bruhat decomposition. So, in this case, the number of orbits is always finite.

Let us assume k = 3, and consider a triple flag variety G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/P 3 . In general this variety has infinitely many G-orbits, but there are many interesting cases where they admit a finite number of orbits. For classical groups, those cases are classified by Magyar-Weyman-Zelevinsky [MWZ99,MWZ00] and Matsuki [Mat15,Mat19], which gives Theorem 4.1. In [MWZ99,MWZ00], they also classified orbits in terms of quiver representations (see § 8.1 below for type A). For odd orthogonal groups, Matsuki [Mat13] classified orbits in the case of (I) in [Mat15, Theorem 1.6].

The classification of multiple flag varieties of finite type for exceptional groups remains open, except for the cases of type G 2 and F 4 (see [BDSEK17]). It is known the number k of the flag varieties of finite type is less than or equal to 4 for type E 6 , E 7 , E 8 , that it is 3 for type F 4 , and that there is no multiple flag varieties for type G 2 if k is greater than 2 ([Pop07, Theorem 2]). Actually the result of Popov [Pop07, Theorem 2] specifies the upper bound of the number of flag varieties for which the multiple flag varieties admit an open orbit. We reproduce a table in [Pop07] here for the convenience of readers. For the number b G specified in Table 1, if a multiple flag variety G/P 1 × G/P 2 × · · · × G/P d has an open G-orbit then d ≤ b G holds.
Table 1. Number b G Type of G A n (n ≥ 1) B n (n ≥ 1) C n (n ≥ 2) D n (n ≥ 4) E 6 E 7 E 8 F 4 G 2 b G n + 2 n + 1 n + 1 n 4 4 4 3 2
For type A n , Shimamoto [Shi20] proved that the condition is best possible, i.e., there exists an open orbit in an (n + 2)-tuple flag variety.

Even if there is an open orbit, it does not imply the finiteness of orbits. However, if one of the parabolic subgroups is a Borel subgroup, the existence of an open orbit tells that the multiple flag variety is of finite type. Stembridge [Ste03] gets a complete classification of the triple flag varieties G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/B with B being a Borel subgroup of G, including exceptional cases. For a summary, we refer the readers to [HNOO13, Table 1]. In this case, there is no such triple flag variety for type E 8 , F 4 , G 2 . 4.2. Double flag varieties for symmetric pairs. Let us interpret the triple flag varieties in a different way from explained below. Let G = G × G and put P = P 2 × P 3 , a parabolic subgroup of G. Choose an involution Θ on G as a flip of pairs, namely we put Θ(g 1 , g 2 ) = (g 2 , g 1 ) for (g 1 , g 2 ) ∈ G. For this involution, the fixed point subgroup is the diagonal embedding of G into G×G, which we denote by K ≃ G, the symmetric subgroup associated with Θ. Hence we can (and do) identify P 1 with a parabolic subgroup of K, and we write Q = P 1 . Thus we see
K/Q × G/P ≃ G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/P 3 (4.1)
is the triple flag variety on which K ≃ G acts. Note that K/Q is a flag variety for the symmetric subgroup K and G/P is a flag variety for G. Following this example, let us define a double flag variety for a symmetric pair. Thus, now we consider G with an involution θ, and denote the corresponding symmetric subgroup by K = G θ . We pick a parabolic subgroup Q ⊂ K of K and a parabolic subgroup P ⊂ G of G. We call the following variety a double flag variety for the symmetric pair (G, K), on which K acts diagonally,
X = K/Q × G/P.
(4.

2)

The above discussion shows that triple flag varieties are special cases of double flag varieties.

Our main interest in this paper is the theory of double flag varieties of symmetric pairs.

Example 4.2. We keep the notation in Example 3.3. Let us consider a symmetric pair of type AIII:
(G, K) = (GL n (C), GL p (C) × GL q (C)) (n = p + q),
where K is embedded into G block diagonally. A parabolic subgroup P of G is determined by a composition a = (a 1 , . . . , a r ) of n. We denote the parabolic subgroup determined by this composition a by P a . If we pick a standard basis {e i | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} and define a standard flag F (a) associated with a by
F (a) : V 0 = {0} ⊂V 1 ⊂ V 2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ V r = C n , V i = e k | 1 ≤ k ≤ a 1 + a 2 + · · · + a i . (4.3)
The parabolic subgroup P a is defined to be the stabilizer of the flag F (a), which has diagonal blocks of size a 1 , a 2 , . . . , a r and blockwise upper triangular. Similarly, take compositions b = (b 1 , . . . , b l 1 ) of p and c = (c 1 , . . . , c l 2 ) of q. Then Q = P b × P c up to K-conjugacy, and K/Q = GL p /P b × GL q /P c is a product of flag varieties of type A. Thus we get a double flag variety
X = K/Q × G/P = GL p /P b × GL q /P c × GL n /P a (4.4) on which K = GL p × GL q acts.
Example 4.3. We continue examining the examples given in Example 3.3, and consider a symmetric pair of type CI: (G, K) = (Sp 2n (C), GL n (C)). Let V be a symplectic vector space of dimension 2n with a symplectic form , , and V = V + ⊕ V − a polar decomposition of V by Lagrangian subspaces V ± . For a composition a of n and F (a) = (V + i ) n i=1 the corresponding flag of isotropic subspaces inside V + (cf. Equation (4.3)), we define the subgroup of elements in G which stabilize F (a) and denote it by P a . Put
V − i = (V + n−i ) ⊥ = {v ∈ V − | v, V + i = 0}. (4.5)
It is the dual flag of F (a) inside V − . An element h ∈ P a preserves both the flag F (a) and its dual.

Part 2. Double flag varieties of finite type


## Finiteness criterions

We will apply the theory explained in § 2.2 to the double flag varieties of symmetric pairs. For this purpose, it is important to know if there are finitely many orbits on a double flag variety. Thus we say, a double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P is of finite type if there are only finitely many K-orbits on X. Although the classification of the double flag varieties of finite type is still largely open, there are several different classifications of such varieties.

Roughly speaking, there are three major methods to classify the K-orbits on X. Let us explain them briefly.

(1) Since X/K ≃ P \G/Q, the double coset decomposition by (P, Q) will give the classification. This is the strategy used in [HNOO13], but explicit decomposition is often very subtle. In [HNOO13], the decomposition is reduced to that of unipotent subgroups, and by linearization, it further reduced to the multiplicity free representations if one of P or Q is a Borel subgroup.

(2) A double flag variety can be considered as configuration spaces of flags (or vector spaces). In this viewpoint, the theory of quiver representations is useful, especially for type A groups. This idea first appeared in [MWZ99,MWZ00] for triple flag varieties, and then applied to the double flag variety by Homma in [Hom21]. We will explain this in detail later in § 7.

(3) Let N k be the nilpotent variety of k. Then there is a well defined map between the orbit spaces Φ k : X/K → N k /K (see § 10 for the precise definition). We call this map a symmetrized Steinberg map. Since the space of nilpotent orbits N k /K is finite and wellunderstood, if we can determine the fiber of the map Φ k , it will produce the classification of X/K. The fibers often can be described by some combinatorial objects related to Weyl group representations (like Robinson-Schensted correspondence), though there is no general theory yet. The origin of this method is the classical Steinberg theory, and it is generalized to double flag varieties of type AIII in [FN16,FN20,FN21,FN23]; see also § 11 below.


## Double flag varieties associated to Borel subgroups

Let us assume that either (1) G is a simple algebraic group, which is simply connected, and K = G θ is the fixed point subgroup of an involution θ as above; or

(2) G = G 1 × G 1 with K = ∆G 1 , which is the fixed point subgroup of the "flip" (see § 4.2 around Equation (4.1)). Here G 1 is a simple, simply connected algebraic group.

Note that in both cases K is connected. For a double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P , if one of P or Q is a Borel subgroup of G or K respectively, then there is a complete classification of X of finite type in this setting due to He-N-Ochiai-Oshima [HNOO13].

6.1. Ideas of the proofs. Let us explain the ideas of the proofs in accordance with [HNOO13].

We begin with the case where Q = B K is a Borel subgroup. Take a θ-stable Borel subgroup B of G and θ-stable maximal torus T ⊂ B, which always exist. Put
B K = B θ = B ∩ K. Since B is θ-stable, B K is a Borel subgroup of K.
Let P be a parabolic subgroup of G which contains B. Choose a Levi decomposition P = LU, where U is the unipotent radical and T ⊂ L, i.e., the decomposition is standard.

Lemma 6.1. L∩K is a connected reductive subgroup of K and L∩B K is a Borel subgroup of L ∩ K.

Proof. Note that P ′ := P ∩ θ(P ) is a minimal θ-stable parabolic subgroup among those that contain P ∩ K. It is easy to see
L ′ := L ∩ θ(L) is a Levi part of P ′ . Since P ′ is θ-stable, Q ′ = P ′ ∩ K is a parabolic subgroup of K whose Levi component is L ′ ∩ K. Now L ∩ K = L ∩ θ(L) ∩ K = L ′ ∩ K is reductive and connected, since it is a Levi component of a parabolic subgroup Q ′ . Since L ′ ∩ B is a θ-stable Borel subgroup of L ′ , L ∩ B K = L ∩ θ(L) ∩ B K = L ′ ∩ B K = (L ′ ∩ B) θ is a Borel subgroup of L ∩ K.
Let u be the Lie algebra of the unipotent radical U of P . We denote
s = g −θ = {x ∈ g | θ(x) = −x},
(6.1) so that g = k + s is the Cartan decomposition with respect to θ.

The following theorem is a key theorem for the classification. To prove this theorem, the following theorem due to Panyushev is essential.
Theorem 6.3 (Panyushev [Pan99, Theorem 2.1])
. Let G be a connected reductive algebraic group and X a smooth G-variety. For a smooth locally closed G-stable subvariety M of X, the following (1)-(3) are equivalent.

(1) The G-variety X is spherical.

(2) The normal bundle T M X is G-spherical.

(3) The conormal bundle T * M X is G-spherical. Proof of Theorem 6.2. Let us assume u ∩ s is spherical. We will prove that X := G/P is a spherical K-variety so that it contains finitely many B K -orbits.

Let O be a K-orbit through the base point p = eP . By Panyushev's theorem, it suffices to prove that the conormal bundle T * O X is K-spherical. For that, let us see existence of an
open B − K -orbit, where B − K is the opposite Borel subgroup of B K . Since P contains B K by assumption, the tangent space of O at p is (k + p)/p = (Lie(B − K ) + p)/p. Thus we conclude B − K · p ⊂ O is open dense. The conormal direction of O at p is (k + p) ⊥ = s ∩ p ⊥ = s ∩ u, which is a L ∩ K-variety. Note that L ∩ K is reductive by Lemma 6.1. The stabilizer Stab B − K (p) = (P ∩ K) ∩ B − K ⊃ L ∩ B − K , which is a Borel subgroup of L ∩ K by the same lemma. Since u ∩ s is spherical, there is a dense open L ∩ B − K -orbit, and we get an open B − K -orbit on T * O X.
The converse implication is proved by following the above arguments in reversed order. By Theorem 6.2, the classification of the double flag varieties of finite type is reduced to the classification of spherical linear actions (they are often called multiplicity free actions, too). This is already done by Kac [Kac80b], and independently by Benson-Ratcliff [BR96] and Leahy [Lea98].

Next, we consider the case where P = B is a Borel subgroup of G. For this case, we only quote a key theorem in [HNOO13].

To do so, we choose a θ-stable parabolic subgroup P ′ of G which cuts out Q, i.e., Q = P ′ ∩ K, which is always possible. By taking conjugation, we can also assume B is θstable and P ′ contains B. Let P ′ = L ′ U ′ be the standard Levi decomposition with respect to a θ-stable maximal torus T ⊂ B, and P L ′ min be a minimal theta split parabolic subgroup of L ′ . Here, "theta split" means θ(P L ′ min ) becomes the opposite parabolic subgroup of P L ′ min . Put M ′ = P L ′ min ∩ K and denote by M ′ 0 its connected component. Thus, again, the classification reduces to that of spherical linear actions.

Let us summarize the classifications of double flag varieties of finite types where one of the parabolic subgroups is a Borel subgroup into several tables in § § 6.2-6.5 for the convenience and later use. These tables are all quoted from [HNOO13], [Ste03], [MWZ99,MWZ00] and [Mat15,Mat19], with modifications to the present paper.  


### Classification when
P = B G is a Borel subgroup of G./Q × G/B G of finite type g k Π K \ J K (Q = Q J K ) sl 2n sp 2n α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • α n • k s n ≥ 2 {α 1 }; {α 3 } if n = 3; any subset of Π K if n = 2 sl p+q sl p ⊕ sl q ⊕ C α 1 • α 2 • α p−1 • p + q ≥ 3 1 ≤ p ≤ q β 1 • β 2 • β q−1 • {α 1 }, {α p−1 }, {β 1 }, {β q−1 }; {β i }(∀i) if p = 2, any subset of Π K if p = 1 so 2n+2 so 2n ⊕ C α 1 • α n−2 • α n−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α n • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ n ≥ 3 {α n−1 }, {α n } so 2n+1 so 2n α 1 • α n−2 • α n−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α n • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ n ≥ 3 any subset of Π K so 2n+2 so 2n+1 α 1 • α n−1 • α n • C Q n ≥ 3 any subset of Π K so 2n+2 sl n+1 ⊕ C α 1 • α 2 • α n • n ≥ 3 {α 1 }, {α n } sp 2(p+q) sp 2p ⊕ sp 2q α 1 • α p−1 • α p • k s 1 ≤ p ≤ q β 1 • β q−1 • β q • k s {α 1 }, {β 1 }; {α p } if p ≤ 3; {β q } if p ≤ 2; {β q } if q ≤ 3; {α 1 , α 2 } if p = 2; {β 1 , β 2 } if q = 2; {β i }(∀i), {β i , β j }(∀i, j) if p = 1 f 4 so 9 α 1 • α 2 • α 3 • α 4 • C Q {α i }(∀i), {α 1 , α 2 } e 6 so 10 ⊕ C α 1 • α 2 • α 3 • α 4 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α 5 • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ {α 1 } e 6 f 4 α 1 • α 2 • α 3 • C Q α 4 • {α 1 } 6.3. Classification when Q = B K is a Borel subgroup of K.K/B K × G/P of finite type g k Π \ J (P = P J ) sl n α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • sl n so n {α i }(∀i) sl 2m sp 2m {α i }(∀i), {α i , α i+1 }(∀i), {α 1 , α i }(∀i), {α i , α n−1 }(∀i), 2m = n ≥ 4 {α 1 , α 2 , α 3 }, {α n−3 , α n−2 , α n−1 }, {α 1 , α 2 , α n−1 }, {α 1 , α n−2 , α n−1 } sl p+q sl p ⊕ sl q ⊕ C {α i }(∀i), {α i , α i+1 }(∀i), p + q = n 1 ≤ p ≤ q {α 1 , α i }(∀i), {α i , α n−1 }(∀i); {α i , α j }(∀i, j) if p = 2; any subset of Π if p = 1 so 2n+1 α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • α n • C Q so p+q so p ⊕ so q {α 1 }, {α n }; p + q = 2n + 1 1 ≤ p ≤ q {α i }(∀i) if p = 2; any subset of Π if p = 1 so 2n α 1 • α 2 • α n−2 • α n−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α n • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ so p+q so p ⊕ so q † {α 1 }, {α n−1 }, {α n }; p + q = 2n 1 ≤ p ≤ q {α i }(∀i), {α i , α n−1 }(∀i), {α i , α n }(∀i) if p = 2; n ≥ 4 any subset of Π if p = 1 so 2n sl n ⊕ C ‡ {α 1 }, {α 2 }, {α 3 }, {α n−1 }, {α n }, n ≥ 4 {α 1 , α 2 }, {α 1 , α n−1 }, {α 1 , α n }, {α n−1 , α n }, {α 2 , α 3 } if n = 4 sp 2n α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • α n • k s sp 2n sl n ⊕ C {α 1 }, {α n } sp 2(p+q) sp 2p ⊕ sp 2q {α 1 }, {α 2 }, {α 3 }, {α n }, {α 1 , α 2 }, p + q = n 1 ≤ p ≤ q {α i }(∀i) if p ≤ 2, {α i , α j }(∀i, j) if p = 1 f 4 α 1 • α 2 • α 3 • C Q α 4 • f 4 so 9 {α 1 }, {α 2 }, {α 3 }, {α 4 }, {α 1 , α 4 } e 6 α 1 • α 3 • α 4 • α 5 • α 2 • α 6 • e 6 sp 8 {α 1 }, {α 6 } e 6 sl 6 ⊕ sl 2 {α 1 }, {α 6 } e 6 so 10 ⊕ C {α 1 }, {α 2 }, {α 3 }, {α 5 }, {α 6 }, {α 1 , α 6 } e 6 f 4 {α 1 }, {α 2 }, {α 3 }, {α 5 }, {α 6 }, {α 1 , α 2 }, {α 2 , α 6 }, {α 1 , α 3 }, {α 5 , α 6 } †
The subalgebra k of g is not unique for (g, k) ≃ (so 8 , so 7 ), (so 8 , so 6 ⊕C), (so 8 , so 5 ⊕so 3 ). See [HNOO13,Remark 5.3] for details. ‡ For g ≃ so 4n , a symmetric subalgebra k that is isomorphic to sl 2n ⊕ C is not unique up to inner automorphisms of g. Here we take K as the Levi part L Π\{αn} of the parabolic subgroup P Π\{αn} .
e 7 α 1 • α 3 • α 4 • α 5 • α 2 • α 6 • α 7 • e 7 sl 8 {α 7 } e 7 so 12 ⊕ sl 2 {α 7 } e 7 e 6 ⊕ C {α 1 }, {α 2 }, {α 7 } 6.4.
Triple flag variety of finite type I. If one of the parabolic subgroup P 3 is a Borel subgroup B G of G, the triple flag varieties X = G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/B G are classified by Stembridge [Ste03]. We reproduce his classification here. Table 4:
G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/B of finite type g (Π \ J 1 , Π \ J 2 ) up to switching J 1 and J 2 sl n+1 α 1 • α 2 • α n • ({α i }, {α j })(∀i, j), ({α 1 , α i }, {α j })(∀i, j), ({α i , α n }, {α j })(∀i, j), ({α i , α i+1 }, {α j })(∀i, j), ({α i , α j }, {α 2 })(∀i, j), ({α i , α j }, {α n−1 })(∀i, j), ({α 1 }, any), ({α n }, any) so 2n+1 α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • α n • C Q ({α 1 }, {α i })(∀i), ({α n }, {α n }) so 2n α 1 • α 2 • α n−2 • α n−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α n • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ n ≥ 4 ({α 1 }, {α i })(∀i), ({α i }, {α j })(i = 1, 2, 3, j = n − 1, n), ({α n−1 }, {α n−1 }), ({α n−1 }, {α n }), ({α n }, {α n }), ({α 1 }, {α i , α n−1 })(∀i), ({α 1 }, {α i , α n })(∀i), ({α n−1 }, {α 1 , α 2 }), ({α n }, {α 1 , α 2 }), ({α i }, {α j , α k })(i = n − 1, n, {j, k} ⊂ {1, n − 1, n}), ({α 3 }, {α 2 , α 4 }) if n = 4, ({α 4 }, {α 2 , α 3 }) if n = 4 sp 2n α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • α n • k s ({α 1 }, {α i })(∀i), ({α n }, {α n }) e 6 α 1 • α 3 • α 4 • α 5 • α 2 • α 6 • ({α i }, {α j })(i = 1, 6, j = 4), ({α 1 }, {α 1 , α 6 }), ({α 6 }, {α 1 , α 6 }) e 7 α 1 • α 3 • α 4 • α 5 • α 2 • α 6 • α 7 • ({α 7 }, {α 1 }), ({α 7 }, {α 2 }), ({α 7 }, {α 7 })
6.5. Triple flag variety of finite type II. In this subsection, we list triple flag varieties X = G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/P 3 of finite type, where G is classical. These classifications are quoted from the tables of [MWZ99, MWZ00, Mat15, Mat19]. We only list the triples when P i = P J i (i = 1, 2, 3) are proper parabolic subgroups, where J i ⊂ Π is a subset of simple roots which generates the Levi part of P i . 6.5.1. Type A. We quote the results from [MWZ99, Theorem 2.2] except for the trivial case of double flag variety, which is denoted (A q,r ). In the following table, G = GL n and the numbering of simple roots Π is given as in § 6.4. (We use different labeling α, β, γ to indicate the simple roots for P 1 , P 2 and P 3 respectively.) Table 5. Type A triple flag varieties of finite type
code in [MWZ99] Π \ J 1 Π \ J 2 Π \ J 3 (D r+2 ) {α i } {β j } any subset (|P 3 | = r) (E 6 ) {α i } {β j1 , β j2 } {γ k1 , γ k2 } (E 7 ) |P 1 | = 2 |P 2 | = 3 |P 3 | = 4 (E 8 ) |P 1 | = 2 |P 2 | = 3 |P 3 | = 5 (E (a) r+3 ) {α 2 }, {α n−2 } |P 2 | = 3 any subset (|P 3 | = r) (E (b) r+3 ) {α i } {β j , β j+1 }, {β 1 , β j }, {β j , β n−1 } any subset (|P 3 | = r) (S q,r ) {α 1 }, {α n−1 } any subset (|P 2 | = q) any subset (|P 3 | = r)
6.5.2. Type B. We quote the results from [Mat15, Theorem 1.6]. In the following table, G = SO 2n+1 and the numbering of simple roots Π is given as in § 6.4. 
code in [Mat15] Π \ J 1 Π \ J 2 Π \ J 3 (I) {α n } {β n } any subset (II) {α 1 } {β j } any subset (III) {α i } {β j } {γ n } (IV) {α i } {β n } {γ i , γ j } 6.5.3. Type C.
We quote the results from [MWZ00, Theorem 1.2] except for the trivial case of double flag variety, which is denoted (SpA q,r ). G = Sp 2n and the numbering of simple roots Π is given as in § 6.4. (We use different labeling α, β, γ to indicate the simple roots for P 1 , P 2 and P 3 respectively.) 
code in [MWZ00] Π \ J 1 Π \ J 2 Π \ J 3 (SpD r+2 ) {α n } {β n } any subset (|P 3 | = r) (SpE 6 ) {α n } {β i } {γ j } (SpE 7 ) {α n } {β i } {γ j , γ n } (SpE 8 ) {α n } {β i } {γ j 1 , γ j 2 } (SpE (b) r+3 ) {α n } {β 1 } any subset (|P 3 | = r) (SpY r+4 ) {α 1 } {β i } any subset (|P 3 | = r) 6.5.4. Type D.
We quote the results from [Mat19, Theorem 1.7]. In the following table, G = SO 2n and the numbering of simple roots Π is given as in § 6.4. (See Table 8 on the next page.)


## Quivers and multiple flag varieties

As we explained in § 4.1 and § 4.2, triple flag varieties are a special case of double flag varieties of symmetric pairs. For classical groups, those multiple flag varieties and their orbits have fruitful descriptions in terms of quiver representations. To see it, let us explain the theory of Kac on quiver representations. 
code in [Mat19] Π \ J 1 Π \ J 2 Π \ J 3 (I-1) {α 1 } {β j } any subset (I-2) {α 1 } {β j , β n−1 }, {β j , β n } any subset (II) {α n−1 }, {α n } {β 1 }, {β 2 }, {β 3 }, {β 1 , β 2 }, {β 1 , β n−1 }, {β 1 , β n }, {β n−1 }, {β n }, {β n−1 , β n } any subset (III-1) {α n−1 }, {α n } {β j } (4 ≤ j ≤ n − 2) {γ k } (III-2) {α n−1 }, {α n } {β j } (4 ≤ j ≤ n − 2) {γ k1 , γ k2 } (III-3) {α n−1 }, {α n } {β j } (4 ≤ j ≤ n − 2) {γ 1 , γ k , γ ν } (ν ∈ {n − 1, n}), {γ k , γ k+1 , γ ν } (ν ∈ {n − 1, n}), {γ k , γ n−1 , γ n }, {γ 1 , γ 2 , γ k+2 }, {γ 1 , γ k+1 , γ k+2 }, {γ k , γ k+1 , γ k+2 } (III-4) {α n−1 }, {α n } {β j } (4 ≤ j ≤ n − 2) {γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3 , γ ν } (ν ∈ {n − 1, n}), {γ 1 , γ 2 , γ n−1 , γ n }, {γ 1 , γ n−2 , γ n−1 , γ n }, {γ n−3 , γ n−2 , γ n−1 , γ n }, {γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3 , γ 4 } 7.
1. Orbits in quiver representations: Theory of Kac. Let Q = (Q 0 , Q 1 ) be a quiver, where Q 0 is the set of vertices, and Q 1 is the set of arrows. Each e ∈ Q 1 has the unique initial vertex s(e) and the terminal one t(e). So, in general, Q is an oriented graph, which admits multiple edges and loops. However, in this paper, we only consider simply laced acyclic quivers with single edges and no loop. A representation π of the quiver Q is an assignment of a vector space V i to each vertex i ∈ Q 0 together with an assignment of a linear map f e : V s(e) → V t(e) for each arrow e ∈ Q 1 . The collection of dimensions d(π) = (dim V i ) i∈Q 0 is called the dimension vector. Two representations π and π ′ are said to be isomorphic if there are isomorphisms ϕ i :
V i → V ′ i (i ∈ Q 0 ) such that for each e ∈ Q 1 , the diagram V i fe G G ϕ i V j ϕ j V ′ i f ′ e G G V ′ j (where i = s(e) and j = t(e))
is commutative.

Fix a dimension vector α ∈ Z Q 0 ≥0 , and consider all the representations π of Q with the same dimension vector α. Denote the space of such representations by
M α (Q) = {π ∈ Rep Q | d(π) = α}.
For this variety, we fix vector spaces V i for each i ∈ Q 0 . Let G α = i∈Q 0 GL α i , which acts naturally on M α (Q) and it is easy to see that the orbits of G α represent isomorphism classes of representations of Q with dimension vector α.

Obviously, every finite dimensional representation of a quiver Q decomposes into a direct sum of indecomposable representations. There exists an ingenious description of such indecomposable modules by Kac ([Kac80a,Kac82]), which is originally due to Gabriel for the Dynkin quiver of finite type ( [Gab72]). Kac's idea is to relate the quiver to a Cartan matrix A defined by
A = 2I Q 0 − R, where R = (r i,j ) i,j∈Q 0 , r i,j = #{e ∈ Q 1 | {s(e), t(e)} = {i, j}}.
Thus, r i,j denotes the number of edges which connect i and j so that R is a so-called adjacency matrix of the underlying graph of Q. We define a quadratic form in
x = (x i ) i∈Q 0 by (x|x) = 1 2 t xAx = x 2 − 1 2 i,j∈Q 0 r i,j x i x j ,
which is called a Tits form. The following lemma is easy to prove, but the statement is crucial below.
Lemma 7.1. dim M α (Q) − (dim G α − 1) = 1 − (α|α).
Note that the action of G α on M α (Q) is not effective and G α /C × acts effectively. Let g(A) be the Kac-Moody Lie algebra defined by the Cartan matrix A = (a i,j ) i,j∈Q 0 (cf. [Kac90]), and Π = {α i | i ∈ Q 0 } the set of simple roots so that it satisfies (α i |α j ) = 1 2 a i,j . Let Γ = { i∈Q 0 k i α i | k i ∈ Z} be the root lattice and define Γ + = { i k i α i | k i ≥ 0}. We can (and do) identify a dimension vector α = (k i ) i∈Q 0 with an element i∈Q 0 k i α i in Γ + . Denote ∆ and ∆ + its root system and the set of positive roots respectively. There are notions of real roots ∆ + re and imaginary roots ∆ + im , the definitions of which we refer the readers to [Kac90]. (2) There exists a unique isomorphism class of indecomposable modules in M α (Q) if and only if α ∈ ∆ + re , which is equivalent to (α|α) = 1. In this case, indecomposable modules in M α (Q) consist of an open dense orbit of G α .

(3) If α ∈ ∆ + im , then there are infinitely many isomorphism classes of indecomposable modules in M α (Q). There exists a family of orbits of indecomposable modules with 1 − (α|α) parameters.


### Orbits in triple flag varieties. Let us briefly introduce the classification after

Magyar-Weyman-Zelevinsky [MWZ99,MWZ00] in the case of type A.

Let a = (a 1 , . . . , a ℓa ) be a composition of n. We allow zero for several components. For this a, we define a flag variety
Fℓ a = {F = (F i ) ℓa i=1 | dim F i+1 /F i = a i for 1 ≤ i < ℓ a }, where we put F 0 = {0} for convenience. Note that F ℓa = C n =: V . Consider N-tuple of compositions (a 1 , a 2 , . . . , a N ), where each a j = (a (j) i ) ℓ j i=1
is a composition of n. Define a multiple flag variety X = Fℓ a 1 × Fℓ a 2 × · · · × Fℓ a N = N j=1 Fℓ a j . For X , consider a star shaped quiver Q. The underlying graph of Q is a tree, which has N-branches of length ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , . . . , ℓ N with a unique root. The orientation is given from the end vertex of each branch toward the root vertex. We give an example of 3-branched quiver below. Here, each branch represents flags associated to the compositions a, b, c, of length p, q and r respectively.
• F 1 f 1 • . . . . . . • F p−1 f p−1 • F ′ 1 f ′ 1 G G • . . . ... G G • F ′ q−1 f ′ q−1 G G • V • F ′′ r−1 f ′′ r−1 o o • . . . ... o o • F ′′ 1 f ′′ 1 o o
We can associate a point in X
(F (j) ) N j=1 ∈ N j=1
Fℓ a j = X with a representation of Q. Namely, in the j-th branch of Q, we associate the flag
F (j) = (F (j) i ) ℓ j i=1 ∈ Fℓ a j with a representation • F (j) 1 ϕ (j) 1 G G • F (j) 2 ϕ (j) 2 G G • . . . ... G G • F (j) ℓ j −1 ϕ (j) ℓ j −1 G G • V = F (j) ℓ j where ϕ (j) k : F (j) k → F (j)
k+1 is the inclusion map. In this way points in X are embedded into the representation space Rep Q of the quiver. To make use of this scheme ultimately, we consider a full subcategory of Rep Q consisting of those objects corresponding to N-tuples of flags of length ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , . . . , ℓ N . Let M F (a 1 , . . . , a N ) be the set of objects in Rep Q which are isomorphic to representations corresponding to the multiple flags in X = N j=1 Fℓ a j . Then sum up all of these to get a full subcategory
M F = M F ℓ 1 ,...,ℓ N = M F (a 1 , . . . , a N ) ⊂ Rep Q,
where the union is taken over tuples of compositions of n (of nonnegative integers including zero) with prescribed lengths, and n moves over all nonnegative integers. This subcategory is clearly additive and closed under the decomposition. To state it more precisely, let π ∈ M F and decompose it into indecomposable representations in Rep Q:
π = k π k (π k ∈ Rep Q : indecomposable).
Because the category Rep Q is equivalent to a category of modules of the path algebra of Q, the Krull-Schmidt theorem applies. Thus a decomposition is always possible and it is indeed unique. It is easy to see the direct summands π k 's are belonging to M F again. So the decomposition is indeed in the category M F . By Kac's theorem, the dimension vector d k = dim π k is a positive root of the Kac-Moody algebra g(A). Moreover if d k is real, i.e. (d k |d k ) = 1, then π k is the unique indecomposable object (up to isomorphism) with the dimension vector d k . If d k is imaginary, i.e., (d k |d k ) ≤ 0, there are infinitely many non-isomorphic classes of indecomposable objects with dimension vector d k .

Let X = Fℓ a 1 × Fℓ a 2 × · · · × Fℓ a N be a multiple flag variety. We identify a multiple flag x ∈ X with a representation π ∈ Rep Q. Then d = dim π does not depend on the choice of x ∈ X . The decomposition of π into indecomposables π = k π k induces a decomposition of d = k dim π k .

Let Λ = Λ ℓ 1 ,ℓ 2 ,...,ℓ N = {dim σ | σ ∈ M F }. Then the above considerations read as
d = k d k where d k ∈ Λ.
Theorem 7.4. Let d be the dimension vector of any π ∈ M F corresponding to an Ntuple of flags x ∈ X = N j=1 Fℓ a j . It is independent of the choice of x, but only depending on (a j ) N j=1 .

(1) The multiple flag variety X is of finite type if and only if the following condition (FT) holds.
(FT) If there is a decomposition d = d ′ + d ′′ in Λ then (d ′ |d ′ ), (d ′′ |d ′′ ) ≥ 1.
(2) If it is of finite type, N must be less than or equal to 3 (at most a triple flag variety). Moreover, GL(V )-orbits in X are in bijection with decomposition d = k d k where d k ∈ Λ and (d k |d k ) = 1.


## Proof.

(1) If there is a summand d ′ where (d ′ |d ′ ) ≤ 0, then d ′ corresponds to an imaginary root, and we know there are infinitely many orbits. Moreover, there are infinitely many such orbits that correspond to representations of the quiver with injective maps. (Indeed, the fact that d ′ is imaginary combined with Lemma 7.1 implies that every orbit in M d ′ (Q) has positive codimension therein; in addition, the subset of representations with injective maps is dense because of the reason of the rank, thus of the same dimension as M d ′ (Q), hence it is itself the union of infinitely many orbits.) So direct summands should satisfy (d ′ |d ′ ) ≥ 1. On the other hand if (FT) holds, we consider the unique decomposition by indecomposable representations. Pick a dimension vector d ′ of any indecomposable summand. Note that d ′ is a root, which is imaginary or real. By (FT), we get (d ′ |d ′ ) ≥ 1 and we know d ′ cannot be imaginary. Therefore it is a real root and there is only one isomorphism class. In this way, any decomposition produces only one isomorphism class and there are only finitely many of them.

(2) Let us rewrite the Tits' form (d|d) in terms of ((a j ) N j=1 ). It is easy to see
(d|d) = 1 2 N j=1 a j 2 − (N − 2)n 2 (n = dim V ).
Using this formula, we can easily find that (a 1 , . . . , a 4 ) = ((1 2 ), (1 2 ), (1 2 ), (1 2 )) (we omit 0's) corresponds to an imaginary root. However, if N ≥ 4, then the dimension vector corresponding to this particular (a 1 , . . . , a 4 ) appears as a summand of any dimension vector. Thus they are not of finite type.


## Finite type double flag varieties of type AIII

Now we return back to the double flag variety X of type AIII.

8.1. Joint varieties and finiteness criterions. To find out double flag varieties of finite type, we can also use the same idea along that of [MWZ99]. For the double flag varieties of symmetric pairs of type AIII, this is carried out by Hiroki Homma [Hom21]. Let us explain it below. Consider a triple flag variety
X (a, b, c) = Fℓ a × Fℓ b × Fℓ c
where a, b, c are compositions of n that satisfy the condition
ℓa−1 i=1 a i + ℓ b −1 j=1 b j = n. Sometimes we will write ( ℓa−1 i=1 a i , ℓ b −1 j=1 b j ) = (p, q). Thus, if we write a ′ = (a i ) ℓa−1 i=1
for the sequence obtained from a after removing the last part of the composition, then a ′ is a composition of p and b ′ is that of q. Hereafter, we keep this notation a ′ for the above meaning. Let us fix (p, q) and n = p + q, and denote K = GL(V + ) × GL(V − ), where V + = C p , V − = C q . Under this setting, we consider a double flag variety
X = X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) = K/Q × G/P = GL p /Q 1 × GL q /Q 2 × GL n /P, (8.1)
where Q 1 , Q 2 , P are parabolic subgroups of GL p , GL q and GL n respectively such that GL p /Q 1 = Fℓ a ′ , GL q /Q 2 = Fℓ b ′ , and GL n /P = Fℓ c . After Homma, we define a joint variety JF(a, b, c) by
JF(a, b, c) = {((F a i ) ℓa i=1 , (F b i ) ℓ b i=1 , (F c i ) ℓc i=1 ) ∈ Fℓ a × Fℓ b × Fℓ c | F c ℓc = V = F a ℓa−1 ⊕ F b ℓ b −1 }.
More generally, given a triple (ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , ℓ 3 ) of positive integers, we consider triples of compositions (a, b, c) such that (ℓ a , ℓ b , ℓ c ) = (ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , ℓ 3 ) and
ℓa−1 i=1 a i + ℓ b −1 j=1 b j = ℓ 3 k=1 c k (8.2)
and the semigroup Λ J = Λ J ℓ 1 ,ℓ 2 ,ℓ 3 := {(a, b, c) satisfying (8.2)} formed by such triples. Moreover, we consider the quiver Q of triple branches of length ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , ℓ 3 . Then any element of JF(a, b, c) determines a representation of Q with the linear maps all injective as explained before. Let J (a, b, c) be the full subcategory of Rep Q consisting of all the objects obtained in this way. For studying the decompositions by indecomposables we need a larger subcategory. We sum up all J (a, b, c) when (a, b, c) ∈ Λ J and denote the full subcategory of such objects by J .

The next lemma clarifies the relation of the K-orbits on the double flag varieties and the isomorphism classes of quiver representations. The proof of the lemma is straightforward and we will omit it.

Lemma 8.1. There are natural bijections between (1) isomorphism classes in J (a, b, c) as representations of quiver;

(2) GL(V )-orbits on the joint flag variety JF(a, b, c);

(3) K-orbits in the double flag variety X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) defined in (8.1).

In the next lemma, we also point out some general properties of the orbits. If F , G are objects in J , then we denote by Hom(F , G) the complex vector space of morphisms of quiver representations, and we set
F , G = dim Hom(F , G). (8.3)
Clearly F , G only depends on F , G up to their isomorphism classes. We actually focus on K-orbits of X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) and, if F is an element of J (a, b, c), then we denote the corresponding K-orbit by O F via Lemma 8.1.
Lemma 8.2. (1) dim O F = p 2 + q 2 − F , F .
(2) Given F , F ′ ∈ J (a, b, c) the following implication holds:
O F ⊂ O F ′ =⇒ I, F ≥ I, F ′ for all indecomposable object I ∈ J .
Proof.

(1) Since F ∈ J (a, b, c), due to the definition of J (a, b, c), every element in Hom(F , F ) corresponds to an element f ∈ End(V ) such that f (F ) ⊂ F for all subspace F in F . Moreover, V + and V − themselves are among the subspaces of F hence we must have f ∈ gl(V + ) × gl(V − ) = k, and finally
Hom(F , F ) ∼ = {f ∈ k : f (F ) ⊂ F ∀F ∈ F } = Lie(Stab K (F )).
Thus we get F , F = dim Stab K (F ), and consequently dim O F = dim K/ Stab K (F ) = p 2 + q 2 − F , F .

(2) follows from a general property of quiver representations; see e.g. [Rie86].

Remark 8.3.

(1) Note that
p 2 + q 2 = dim X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) + 1 2 a 2 + b 2 + c 2 − n 2
hence the formula in Lemma 8.2 (1) is an analogue of [MWZ99, Proposition 4.6].

(2) The natural question is whether the converse of the implication in Lemma 8.2 (2) is valid. There is a similar discussion in [MWZ99, Proposition 4.5]. In Theorem 9.4 below we will show the equivalence for one particular double flag variety.

Now we concentrate on the study of the isomorphism classes in J as representations of the quiver Q.

Lemma 8.4. Any representation π ∈ J of Q decomposes into indecomposables in Rep Q uniquely as
π = k π k ,
where each indecomposable module π k belongs to J .

This lemma can be obtained in the same way as in the case of multiple flag varieties, and we omit the proof. Note that in a composition a, we allow parts a i to be zero. Let a + be the list of nonzero parts of a arranged in nonincreasing order. For (a, b, c) ∈ Λ J , let d(a, b, c) be the corresponding dimension vector, i.e., the collection of dimensions of the subspaces in the triple of flags. (1) The double flag variety X = X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) is of finite type.

(
2) Any µ = (a 0 , b 0 , c 0 ) ∈ Λ J such that λ − µ ∈ Λ J satisfies (d(µ)|d(µ)) ≥ 1. (3) There is no µ = (a 0 , b 0 , c 0 ) ∈ Λ J with λ − µ ∈ Λ J such that (a ′+ 0 , b ′+ 0 , c 0 )
is in the following list up to switching the first two partitions.  (1 7 )).

The equivalence of (1) and (2) is already explained above. For deriving the equivalence with (3), the proof is given in [Hom21, Theorem 2.13] based on case-by-case analysis.

We also point out that Homma's results include the complete list of indecomposable representations of the quiver in the case where X is of finite type; see [Hom21, Theorem 2.15]. In principle this yields a parametrization of the orbits in terms of quiver representations.

8.2. Classification of finite type double flag varieties of type AIII. It is not immediate to read off an actual classification of double flag varieties of finite type from Theorem 8.5. Here we give a complete list describing the parabolic subgroups Q = Q 1 × Q 2 ⊂ K and P ⊂ G.

Corollary 8.6. The double flag variety X = X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) of type AIII is of finite type if and only if it appears (up to switching Q 1 and Q 2 ) among those in Table 9.

In the table, we use the above identification of X with GL p /Q 1 × GL q /Q 2 × GL n /P . Moreover we let |P | = ℓ c , |Q 1 | = ℓ a − 1, |Q 2 | = ℓ b − 1. Table 9. Double flag varieties of finite type in type AIII
type P Q 1 Q 2 (PA-1) any Q = K or mirabolic (PA-2) any any GL 1 (PA-3) any maximal GL 2 (P6) |P | ≤ 6 maximal GL q (P4-1) |P | ≤ 4 |Q 1 | ≤ 4 GL q (P4-2)
|P | ≤ 4 and min c i = 1 any GL q (P3-1) |P | ≤ 3 and min c i = 1 any any (P3-2) |P | ≤ 3 and min c i = 2 any |Q 2 | ≤ 2 (P3-3) |P | ≤ 3 any GL q or mirabolic (P3-4) |P | ≤ 3 |Q 1 | ≤ 4 maximal (P2) |P | ≤ 2 (GL n or maximal) any any

Proof. We first observe that if λ = (a, b, c) contains some summand µ which is in the list given in Theorem 8.5 (3), then we must have |P | = ℓ c ≥ 3. Thus, if |P | = 1 or 2 (that is, P = GL n or maximal), then X will be of finite type. This corresponds to the last row (P2) in Table 9. Next, we consider the case where |P | = 3. Up to switching a and b, we can assume that |Q 1 | = ℓ a − 1 ≥ ℓ b − 1 = |Q 2 |. If min c i = 1, then λ has no summand arising in the list given in Theorem 8.5 (3). This gives (P3-1). Assuming min c i = 2, it is of finite type exactly when it avoids summands corresponding to the case ((1 3 ), (1 3 ), (2 3 )) in Theorem 8.5 (3), which happens if and only if |Q 2 | ≤ 2. This gives (P3-2). Finally, assuming that min c i ≥ 3, for being of finite type (a, b, c) has to avoid summands corresponding to ((1 3 ), (1 3 ), (2 3 )) and ((2 2 ), (1 5 ), (3 3 )), which happens if and only if |Q 2 | ≤ 2 and |Q 1 | ≤ 4, or |Q 2 | = 1, or (|Q 2 | = 2 and min{b 1 , b 2 } = 1). This gives (P3-3) and (P3-4).

Now suppose that |P | = 4. Still we can assume that |Q 1 | ≥ |Q 2 |. Then (a, b, c) will avoid summands corresponding to ((1 2 ), (1 2 ), (1 4 )) if and only if |Q 2 | = 1, that is Q 2 = GL q . In such a case, the first two triples in Theorem 8.5 (3) are automatically avoided, and to avoid the fourth one ((3), (1 5 ), (2 4 )), it is necessary and sufficient to have min c i = 1 or |Q 1 | ≤ 4 or q ≤ 2. This gives (P4-1), (P4-2), and (PA-2)-(PA-3) (in the special case |P | = 4).

Next let |P | ∈ {5, 6}. Still we assume |Q 1 | ≥ |Q 2 |. Then the fifth triple ((2), (1 3 ), (1 5 )) will be avoided if and only if q = 1 or |Q 1 | ≤ 2. In such a case, the other triples in Theorem 8.5 (3) are also avoided. This corresponds to (P6) and (PA-1)-(PA-2) (in the special case |P | ∈ {5, 6}).

Finally, let |P | ≥ 7. Still we assume |Q 1 | ≥ |Q 2 |. First note that we must have |Q 2 | = 1 (i.e., Q 2 = GL q ), otherwise ((1 2 ), (1 2 ), (1 4 )) cannot be avoided. If q = 1 or |Q 1 | = 1, then the six triples are avoided. If q = 2, then for avoiding the fifth triple we must have |Q 1 | ≤ 2, and in this case all the triples will be avoided. If q ≥ 3, then for avoiding the fifth and sixth triples we must have |Q 1 | = 1 or (|Q 1 | = 2 and min a i = 1) (i.e., Q 1 = GL p or mirabolic). This yields (PA-1), (PA-2), (PA-3).

Remark 8.7. The cases (PA-1)-(PA-3), and (P2) are already identified as finite type in [NO11]. But all the other cases contain new series of finite type double flag varieties.

8.3. Generalizations. Theorem 8.5 characterizes double flag varieties of the form X = (GL p × GL q )/Q × GL n /P with finitely many orbits of K := GL p × GL q . Actually, the fact that K is a symmetric subgroup of GL n does not play any role in the argument, and it is natural to consider the following more general problem.

Problem 8.8. Given a decomposition V = C n = V 1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ V N with p i := dim V i , characterize the sequences of compositions (a 1 , . . . , a N ; c) of p 1 , . . . , p N and n, respectively, such that the multiple flag variety
X = Fℓ a 1 (V 1 ) × · · · × Fℓ a N (V N ) × Fℓ c (V ) (8.4)
has finitely many orbits for L := GL p 1 × · · · × GL p N .

It is worth to note that, contrary to the case of usual multiple flag varieties of the form Fℓ c 1 (V ) × · · · × Fℓ c N (V ), for which it is necessary to have N ≤ 3 for having a finite number of GL n -orbits (see [MWZ99]), there exist multiple flag varieties X of the form (8.4) which are of finite type despite of an arbitrarily large number of factors N as shown in the next example.

Example 8.9. If we have c = (1, n − 1), so that Fℓ c (V ) = P(V ), then the variety X of (8.4) will have a finite number of L-orbits for any choice of N and a 1 , . . . , a N . Indeed, P(V ) has a finite number of T -orbits for any maximal torus T ⊂ GL n , hence a fortiori it contains a finite number of Q-orbits, so that X ∼ = L/Q × P(V ) has a finite number of L-orbits for any parabolic Q ⊂ L (since Q contains a maximal torus of GL n ).

The next example is less immediate; the justification relies on a straightforward generalization of the criterion in Theorem 8.5 (2) (we skip the details).

Example 8.10. Let V = C n = C p ⊕ C q ⊕ C with n = p + q + 1, p, q ≥ 1. Then the triple flag variety P p−1 × P q−1 × Gr r (C n ) ≃ GL p /P (1,p−1) × GL q /P (1,q−1) × GL 1 /GL 1 × GL n /P (r,n−r) has a finite number of GL p × GL q × GL 1 -orbits. Here Gr r (V ) denotes the Grassmann variety of r-dimensional subspaces in V .

To check this, it is sufficient to show that every dimension vector of the form d = (a 1 , a 2 , a 3 , c) with c = (r, n − r), a 1 = (1, p − 1, q + 1), a 2 = (1, q − 1, p + 1), a 3 = (1, n − 1) satisfies (d|d) ≥ 1. Now, for seeing this, we compute 2(d|d) = c 2 + a 1 2 + a 2 2 + a 3 2 − 2n 2 = r 2 + (n − r) 2 + 3 + (p − 1) 2 + (q + 1) 2 + (q − 1) 2 + (p + 1) 2 + (n − 1) 2 − 2n 2 = (r − 2) 2 + 2(p − r + 1 2 ) 2 + 2(q − r + 1 2 ) 2 + 1 ≥ 2.


## Orbits in the double flag variety of type AIII

In this section, we show a concrete example of classification of orbits in a double flag variety by using quiver representations. Thus we focus on the category of quiver representations J (a, b, c) and the double flag variety X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) of type AIII (cf. [FN20,FN23]). We summarize the notation which will be used below:

• n = p + q, r ≤ n are positive integers, and we set a = (1 p , q), b = (1 q , p), c = (r, n − r);
• V = C n = V + ⊕ V − where V + = C p × {0} q , V − = {0} p × C q , with standard
bases (e 1 , . . . , e n ) = (e + 1 , . . . , e + p , e − 1 , . . . , e − q );
• G = GL(V ) = GL n , K = GL(V + ) × GL(V − ) = GL p × GL q , P = P (r,n−r) = Stab G (C r × {0} n−r ), B K = B + p × B + q , where B + p ⊂ GL p , B + q ⊂ GL q
are subgroups of upper-triangular matrices corresponding to a ′ = (1 p ) and b ′ = (1 q ) respectively;
• X = X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) = K/B K × G/P ≃ (Fℓ(V + ) × Fℓ(V − )) × Gr r (V ).
9.1. Category of joint representations. We consider the quiver Q = T 2,p+1,q+1 indicated below, which is also denoted as S(p + 1, q + 1) in [MWZ99].
• Ð Ð ✁ ✁ ✁ ✁ ✁ ✁ ✁ ✁ • o o · · · o o • o o (p vertices) • G G • • ❂ ❂ ❂ ❂ ❂ ❂ ❂ ❂ • o o · · · o o • o o (q vertices)
We denote by J the full subcategory of quiver representations Rep Q consisting of the following representations
L p α~⑥ ⑥ ⑥ ⑥ ⑥ ⑥ ⑥ ⑥ L p−1 o o · · · o o L 1 o o C G G D M q β ❆ ❆ ❆ ❆ ❆ ❆ ❆ ❆ M q−1 o o · · · o o M 1 o o
where all maps are injective and Im α ⊕ Im β = D. Then J (a, b, c) is the subset of such representations satisfying dim C = r, dim D n = n, dim L i = i, dim M j = j for all i, j, so that the points in the double flag variety X = X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) correspond to the objects in J (a, b, c), for which D = V , L p = V + , and M q = V − hold.

In order to classify the K-orbits of X by applying Lemma 8.1, we describe the category J in more detail. From [Hom21], we can describe the indecomposable objects which arise in the decomposition of elements in J . For i ∈ {1, . . . , p}, we define  Figure 1 on page 35. For each one we include (in parentheses) a graphical representation, which will be explained in § 9.2 below.
L i • = (L i 1 , . . . , L i p ) such that L i k = e + i if k ≥ i 0 if k < i.
Recall that if F , G are objects in J , we have denoted by Hom(F , G) the complex vector space of morphisms of quiver representations, and set F , G = dim Hom(F , G).

Lemma 9.1. Let F ∈ J (a, b, c) be a quiver representation corresponding to the point
((F + k ) p k=1 , (F − ℓ ) q ℓ=1 , W ) ∈ X((a ′ , b ′ ); c)
. For all (i, j) ∈ {1, . . . , p} × {1, . . . , q}, we have
Hom(I + i , F ) = F + i ∩ W, Hom(I ′+ i , F ) = F + i , Hom(I − j , F ) = F − j ∩ W, Hom(I ′− j , F ) = F − j , Hom(I i,j , F ) = (F + i ⊕ F − j ) ∩ W. Proof. Straightforward.
9.2. Orbit decomposition of X. We recall some results and notation from [FN20,FN21,FN23]. Since
X = K/B K × G/P ≃ (Fℓ(V + ) × Fℓ(V − )) × Gr r (V )
, it is easy to see X/K ≃ B K \Gr r (V ). On the other hand, a point in Gr r (V ) represents an r-dimensional subspace of V , which can be represented as an image of rank r matrix A ∈ M n,r (dim V = n = p + q). It is well known that M • n,r /GL r ≃ Gr r (V ), where M • n,r denotes the set of full rank (i.e., rank r) matrices. Thus we get X/K ≃ B K \M • p+q,r /GL r . Figure 1. The indecomposable objects I + i , I ′+ i I − j , I ′− j , I i,j (for 1 ≤ i ≤ p and 1 ≤ j ≤ q) of the category M.
I + i • i + ❣ : L i • } } ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ e + i G G e + i M 0 • ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ I ′+ i • i + : L i • } } ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ 0 G G e + i M 0 • ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ I − j • j − ❣ : L 0 • } } ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ e − j G G e − j M j • ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ I ′− j • j − : L 0 • } } ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ 0 G G e − j M j • ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ I i,j • i + • j − : L i • { { ✇ ✇ ✇ ✇ ✇ ✇ ✇ ✇ ✇ e + i + e − j G G e + i , e − j M j • • • • • • • • • •
In this way, as a representative of an orbit in X/K, we can take a matrix from M • p+q,r . In fact, we can take "partial permutations" as representatives.

By T p,r we denote the set of partial permutation matrices of size (p, r), i.e., matrices τ of this shape with coefficients in {0, 1} and at most one 1 in each row and each column (consequently all the other entries are 0). We put
T = ω = τ 1 τ 2 τ 1 ∈ T p,r , τ 2 ∈ T q,r , T • = {ω ∈ T | rank ω = r} ⊂ T.
The latter subset T • is equipped with a natural right action of the symmetric group S r , and we finally put T = T • /S r . The set T is in bijection with X/K (see [FN20,Theorem 8.1]). More precisely, we can describe a representative of any K-orbit as follows. The range [ω] := Im ω is well defined whenever ω ∈ T. Let F + and F − denote the standard flags of V + and V − respectively.

Every orbit in the double flag variety X/K has a representative of the form
F ω := (F + , F − , [ω]) ∈ X (ω ∈ T).
Notation 9.2. (a) It is convenient to represent ω = τ 1 τ 2 ∈ T by the graph Γ(ω) given below.

• Γ(ω) has p + q vertices labeled with 1 + , . . . , p + and 1 − , . . . , q − , respectively.

• For every column of ω which contains two 1's, in the i-th and j-th rows of τ 1 and τ 2 , respectively, we join the vertices i + and j − of Γ(ω) with an edge. • For every column of ω which contains only one 1, situated in the i-th row of τ 1 (resp. in the j-th row of τ 2 ), we circle the corresponding vertex i + (resp. j − ) of Γ(ω), and call it a marked vertex. • In particular, the vertex i + (resp. j − ) is neither marked nor incident with an edge (we will call this "free point") if and only if the corresponding row of ω contains only 0's. 
For instance, ω =                        Γ(ω) = • • • • • 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + • • • 1 − 2 − 3 − ❅ ❅ ❅ ✏ ✏ ✏ ✏ ✏ ✏ ❣ ❣ .
(9.1) (b) Note that, according to the representation of the indecomposable objects of the category J given in Figure 1, the connected components of Γ(ω) give rise to a collection of indecomposable objects which we denote Indec(Γ(ω)). For instance, for the above ω, we have Indec(Γ(ω)) = {I + 5 , I ′+ 1 , I ′+ 3 , I ′− 2 , I 2,3 , I 4,1 }.

The next lemma easily follows from the definitions.   (3) For all ω, ω ′ ∈ T, we have
O ω ⊂ O ω ′ ⇐⇒ I, F ω ≥ I, F ω ′ for all indecomposable I ∈ J .
Proof.

(1) follows from [FN23, Theorem 2.2 (1)].

(2) follows from a combinatorial interpretation of F ω , F ω by using Lemmas 8.2 (1), 9.1, and 9.3.

(3) Following the notation of [FN23, §2.1], for (i, j) ∈ {0, 1, . . . , p} × {0, 1, . . . , q}, we denote by r i,j (ω) the number of marked points or edges of the subgraph of Γ(ω) formed by the vertices k + , ℓ − with 1 ≤ k ≤ i and 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ j. Then, Lemma 9.1 yields the equalities
I + i , F ω = r i,0 (ω), I ′+ i , F ω = i, I − j , F ω = r 0,j (ω), I ′+ j , F ω = j, I i,j , F ω = r i,j (ω).
This observation, combined with [FN23, Theorem 2.2 (4)], yields part (3) of the theorem.

Remark 9.5. The obtained dimension formula in Theorem 9.4 (2) is much simpler than the one given in [FN23, Theorem 2.2 (2)]. • G is a connected reductive group endowed with an involution θ ∈ Aut(G); • K := G θ is the corresponding symmetric subgroup and we assume that it is connected; • P ⊂ G and Q ⊂ K are parabolic subgroups, and we consider the double flag variety X := K/Q × G/P. By abuse of notation, let θ : g → g denote the differential of the involution θ, which is an involution of the Lie algebra. We also consider the Cartan decomposition
g = k ⊕ s, where s = {x ∈ g : θ(x) = −x}.
Let g → k, x → x θ and g → s, x → x −θ be the projections along this decomposition.

We apply the constructions of § 2.2 to the double flag variety X. In particular, we consider X as a K-variety with diagonal K-action. This gives rise to the moment map: q 1 ), (y, p 1 )) → x + y θ and we get the conormal variety Y := µ −1 (0) ∼ = {(y, q 1 , p 1 ) ∈ g × K/Q × G/P : y ∈ n p 1 , y θ ∈ n q 1 }.
µ : T * X → k ∼ = k * , ((x,
Here we recall that n p 1 and n q 1 respectively denote the nilradicals of the parabolic subalgebras p 1 ⊂ g and q 1 ⊂ k. By Lemma 2.3, Y is the disjoint union of the conormal bundles
Y = O∈X/K T * O X.
On the other hand, by using the moment map for the G-action on the second factor, we get a map φ : Y → Gn p ⊂ N g , (y, q 1 , p 1 ) → y, which is simply a projection to the first factor, and it is clearly K-equivariant. By composing with the projections along the Cartan decomposition, this finally yields two Kequivariant maps φ k : Y → Kn q ⊂ N k , (y, q 1 , p 1 ) → y θ and φ s : Y → s, (y, q 1 , p 1 ) → y −θ .

The image of φ k is clearly contained in the nilpotent variety N k . For φ s , we also expect that the image of φ s is contained in the nilpotent variety N s as well, but it is not always the case. See Propositions 10.3, 10.4 and Conjecture 10.7 below. From now on, we assume the following "nil-projection assumption".

Assumption 10.1. The image of the projection φ s : Y → s is contained in the nilpotent variety N s .

Note that the nilpotent variety N s has finite number of K-orbits due to [KR71].

For every orbit O ∈ X/K, the conormal bundle T * O X is K-stable and irreducible. Hence its images by φ k and φ s are K-stable irreducible subsets of N k and N s respectively. This means the closure of the image of O ∈ X/K by φ k (respectively φ s ) coincides with the closure of a single nilpotent K-orbit in N k (respectively N s ).

Definition 10.2. (1) The map φ k gives rise to a well-defined map
Φ k : X/K → N k /K, O → the unique K-orbit dense in φ k (T * O X)
, which we call the symmetrized Steinberg map.

(2) Similarly, under Assumption 10.1, we define the exotic Steinberg map, using φ s :
Φ s : X/K → N s /K, O → the unique K-orbit dense in φ s (T * O X) .
10.2. Assumption 10.1 for the exotic Steinberg map. To define the exotic Steinberg map, we need Assumption 10.1 above. In fact, when the group G is classical and the parabolic subgroup P of G has abelian unipotent radical, this condition always holds. More generally, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 10.3. Assumption 10.1 holds in the following situations.

(1) G = GL n and P ⊂ G is a maximal parabolic subgroup;

(2) G = Sp 2n and P ⊂ G is the stabilizer of a Lagrangian subspace or of a line;

(3) G = SO n and P ⊂ G is the stabilizer of an isotropic line or of a Lagrangian subspace (if n is even), or of a maximal isotropic subspace if n = 5;

In particular, this implies that Assumption 10.1 holds whenever G is classical and P has an abelian unipotent radical (see [RRS92]).

Proposition 10.4. Let (G, K) = (GL p+q , GL p × GL q ) (p, q ≥ 1) be a symmetric pair of type AIII. Then, Assumption 10.1 holds whenever we are in case (PA-1), (PA-2), (PA-3), (P3-1), (P3-3) with q = 2, (P3-4) with Q 1 maximal, or (P2) of Table 9.

In particular, this implies that Assumption 10.1 holds whenever the double flag variety X = G/P × K/Q is of finite type and P or Q is a Borel subgroup of G or K, respectively.

The propositions are shown case-by-case. In fact, they follow from the next technical lemma. (It would be interesting to have a more conceptual proof of the result.)

Lemma 10.5. (1) Let y ∈ M p+q be nilpotent and put
y = a b c d ∈ N gl p+q , v := a 0 0 d , w := 0 b c 0 ,
with (a, d) ∈ gl p × gl q , b ∈ M p,q , c ∈ M q,p . Assume that v is nilpotent and one of the following conditions (A)-(G) occurs. Then w is also nilpotent. (2) Let y ∈ gl n and let y * be the adjoint of y with respect to a given orthogonal or symplectic form on C n . Assume that v := 1 2 (y − y * ) is nilpotent and y 2 = 0. Then w := 1 2 (y + y * ) is also nilpotent. Proof. (1) We calculate y 2 = a 2 + bc ab + bd ca + dc d 2 + cb , (10.1) and get Tr y 2 = Tr a 2 + Tr d 2 + 2 Tr bc. Since y, a, and d are all nilpotent, we obtain Tr cb = 0. (10.2) (G) When q = 1, (10.2) already implies that cb = 0, thus (bc) 2 = b(cb)c = 0, and so w is nilpotent.

(F) When d = 0 and a 2 = 0, we see that
y 4 = (bc) 2 + abca bcab + abcb cabc + cbca (cb) 2 .
Whence 0 = Tr y 4 = Tr(bc) 2 +Tr abca+Tr(cb) 2 = 2 Tr(cb) 2 because Tr abca = Tr bca 2 = 0. If q = 2, since cb is a matrix of size 2 such that Tr(cb) = Tr(cb) 2 = 0, we conclude that (cb) 2 = 0, so that (bc) 3 = b(cb) 2 c = 0 holds. Therefore, w 3 = 0.

(D) If y 3 = 0 and d 2 = 0 (which holds in particular if q = 2), then we have 0 = y 3 = a 3 + abc + bca + bdc a 2 b + abd + bcb ca 2 + cbc + dca cab + cbd + dcb since d 2 = 0. Finally, multiplying the upper diagonal coefficient of (10.3) by a and using Tr a 4 = 0, we get 2 Tr(ca 2 b) = − Tr(bdca) = 0 (10.6) because of (10.5). Altogether, (10.4), (10.5), and (10.6) imply that Tr(cb) 2 = 0. When q = 2, this fact combined with (10.2) is sufficient for ensuring that (cb) 2 = 0, whence (bc) 3 = 0. Therefore, w 3 = 0.

(C) Here, in addition to y 3 = 0 and d 2 = 0, we assume that a 2 = 0. Hence we can replace a 3 , a 2 b, and ca 2 by zero in (10.3). Multiplying the lower left (resp. upper right) block of the above matrix by b on the left (resp. by c on the right), we obtain −bdca = (bc) 2 = −abdc, whence (bc) 4 = bdca 2 bdc = 0 (since a 2 = 0). Similarly it can be shown that (cb) 4 = 0, hence w is nilpotent.

(A) If y 2 = 0, then from (10.1) we have
w 2 = bc 0 0 cb = − a 2 0 0 d 2 = −v 2 .
Since v is nilpotent, we conclude that w is also nilpotent in this case. (E) Up to enlarging the size of the matrices by adding rows/columns of zeros, we can assume that p = q ≥ 2. By E (p) i,j we will denote the elementary matrix of size (p, p) with 1 at the position (i, j). Also, we can assume that rk a = 1 and d = 0 and, up to conjugation by GL p × GL p , we can assume that a = E (p) 1,2 . Fix ǫ ∈ {0, 1}. Then, we have
det(ǫv + w − t 1 2p ) = det ǫa − t 1 p b c −t 1 p = det((ǫa − t 1 p )(−t 1 p ) − bc) = det(t 2 1 p − bc − ǫt E (p) 1,2 ) = f (t 2 ) + ǫtg(t 2 ) with certain polynomials f, g. Since t 2p = det(v + w − t 1 2p ) = f (t 2 ) + t g(t 2 ) (because y = v + w is nilpotent), we conclude that g ≡ 0, hence det(w − t1 2p ) = t 2p
, and so w is nilpotent.

(B) Finally we assume that y 3 = 0 and rk y ≤ 2. For this remaining case, we reason by induction on p + q, with immediate initialization if p = 0 or q = 0. We have 2 ≥ rk y ≥ max{rk a, rk d}. Since we have already dealt with (A) and (C), we can assume that rk y = 2 and one of a 2 , d 2 is nonzero, say a 2 = 0, and so rk a = 2. Then up to conjugating under GL p × GL q , we can assume that
a = E (p) 1,2 + E (p) 2,3 .
Since rk y = 2, this implies in particular that the first column of y is zero. Let y ′ , v ′ , w ′ be the submatrices of y, v, w obtained by removing the first row and column. We can apply the induction hypothesis to y ′ , and we get that w ′ is nilpotent. Since the first column of w (like the one of y) is zero, we conclude that w is nilpotent.

(2) We have 0 = y 2 = (v + w) 2 = (v 2 + w 2 ) + (vw + wv). Since v * = −v and w * = w, we get that (v 2 +w 2 ) * = v 2 +w 2 and (vw+wv) * = −(vw+wv). Due to the uniqueness of the decomposition of a matrix as sum of self-adjoint and skewadjoint elements, we derive that v 2 + w 2 = vw + wv = 0. In particular, knowing that v is nilpotent, we conclude that w is nilpotent.

Example 10.6. In general, Assumption 10.1 will be valid if and only if the implication (y ∈ Gn p and y θ ∈ Kn q ) =⇒ y −θ ∈ N s (10.7)

holds. When P and Q are Borel subgroups, the left-hand side of (10.7) just means that y and y θ are nilpotent, and the implication of (10.7) is not true in general. Consider for instance the symmetric pair (G, K) = (GL 6 , GL 3 × GL 3 ) of type AIII, and Then we have y 4 = 0, (y θ ) 3 = 0, but y −θ / ∈ N s . However, note that the corresponding double flag variety is not of finite type.

We do not have a counterexample, where a double flag variety is of finite type, and the image of the projection φ s : Y → s is not contained in the nilpotent variety. Thus, based on the cases already solved by Propositions 10.3 and 10.4, we propose a conjecture here.

Conjecture 10.7 (Nil-projection Conjecture). If a double flag variety X is of finite type, then the image of the projection φ s : Y → s is contained in the nilpotent variety N s .


## Generalization of Robinson-Schensted correspondence

We keep the setting and notation of the previous section. Let us assume X has finitely many K-orbits, that is, X is of finite type, (11.1) and we further assume Assumption 10.1, i.e., the image of the projection φ s is contained in the nilpotent variety so that we have φ s : Y → N s . Because X is of finite type, as already pointed out in § 2.2, the conormal variety Y is equidimensional and the closures of the conormal bundles T * O X, for O ∈ X/K, are the irreducible components of Y. Moreover, in this case, the K-orbits in X can be described combinatorially, whereas nilpotent orbits have a well-known combinatorial description (see for example, [CM93]), hence the maps Φ k and Φ s can be explicitly described by the combinatorial data.

In the previous section, we have extended the setting of the classical work of Steinberg [Ste76], which deals with the standard double flag variety X = G/B × G/B on which G acts diagonally. This standard theory yields the classical Steinberg map Φ : W → N g /G, also considered in [HJ05]. In the next subsections, first we explain how classical Steinberg theory can be obtained as a particular case of the construction given above and recall from [Ste76,Ste88] the calculation of Φ in the case where G = K = GL n . Then we calculate Φ k and Φ s for the symmetric pair (G, K) = (GL n , GL p × GL q ) of type AIII and the double flag variety X considered in § 9. 11.1. Classical Steinberg map and Robinson-Schensted correspondence. Let us consider G = G × G and define θ ∈ Aut G as θ(g 1 , g 2 ) = (g 2 , g 1 ) ((g 1 , g 2 ) ∈ G), which is the "flip" of two components. Put K = G θ = ∆G, which is the diagonal embedding G ∆ ֒→ G. We identify K and G sometimes. Now consider the "parabolic" subgroup Q = K and a Borel subgroup B = B × B ⊂ G × G = G. Then the double flag variety associated with these data is
X = K/Q × G/B = G/B × G/B,
on which G(= K) acts diagonally. By virtue of Bruhat decomposition, X has finitely many G-orbits (G = K as noted above), parametrized by the elements of the Weyl group W = N G (T )/T , where T is a maximal torus in B. So let us write the decomposition as
X = G/B × G/B = w∈W O w where O w = G · (B, wB).
Note that the conormal direction at (B, wB) ∈ X is
(∆g) + (g/b, g/ w b) ⊥ = n ∩ w n,
where n ⊂ b = Lie(B) stands for the nilpotent radical of our Borel subalgebra, and the notation w b or w n stands for the conjugate by w ∈ W . Therefore the conormal bundles of orbits are given by
T * Ow X = G · {(b, w b, x) : x ∈ n ∩ w n}.
In the present situation, the nilpotent varieties are
N k = N θ = {(x, x) ∈ x ∈ N g } and N s = N −θ = {(x, −x) ∈ x ∈ N g }
and both are identified with N g . Since we have chosen Q = K, the symmetrized Steinberg map Φ k is the trivial map which assigns every orbit O w to the trivial orbit, and Assumption 10.1 is trivially satisfied. Then we focus on the (exotic) Steinberg map
Φ = Φ s : X/G ∼ = W → N g /G
which is explicitly given as Φ : w → (the unique nilpotent G-orbit O which intersects n ∩ w n densely).

Let us further assume G = GL n . In this case, the Steinberg map Φ can be computed explicitly, in terms of the Robinson-Schensted correspondence (RS correspondence)
RS : S n ∼ −→ λ⊢n STab(λ) × STab(λ), w → (RS 1 (w), RS 2 (w)).
Here, the union on the right-hand side is over partitions of n (equivalently, Young diagrams of size n) and STab(λ) denotes the set of standard Young tableaux of shape λ (i.e., the boxes of λ are filled with integers 1, 2, . . . , n and the filling is increasing in both directions, horizontal and vertical). Let us recall the definition and some properties of the RS correspondence briefly (see [Ful97] for more details).

Definition 11.1. (1) If T is a Young tableau and a an integer, let T ← a be the tableau obtained by inserting a into T as follows:

• If a is greater than or equal to every entry in the first row of T , then we insert a at the end of the first row of T . • Otherwise, let b be the biggest entry of the first row which is > a; we substitute b by a, and insert b into the subtableau formed by the remaining rows of T , according to the same rule.

(2) If a 1 , . . . , a k is a list of integers, let Rowinsert(a 1 , . . . , a k ) be the tableau obtained by inserting successively a 1 , . . . , a k according to the rule described above, that is, Rowinsert(a 1 , . . . , a k ) = (∅ ← a 1 ← · · · ← a k ).

(3) The tableau RS 1 (w) is defined by RS 1 (w) = Rowinsert(w 1 , . . . , w n ) while we define RS 2 (w) as the unique tableau such that the shape of the subtableau of RS 2 (w) of entries 1, . . . , k coincides with the shape of Rowinsert(w 1 , . . . , w k ).

For later use, we mention some properties of the Robinson-Schensted correspondence:

Proposition 11.2 (See, e.g., [Ful97,vL96]). (1) The map
RS = (RS 1 , RS 2 ) : S n → λ⊢n STab(λ) × STab(λ)
so obtained is a bijection.

(2) If w ∈ S n , then (RS 1 (w −1 ), RS 2 (w −1 )) = (RS 2 (w), RS 1 (w)).

(3) If w 0 : k → n − k + 1 is the longest element of S n , then RS 1 (ww 0 ) = t RS 1 (w), where t T denotes the transposition of a tableau T , and RS 1 (w 0 w) = t S(RS 1 (w)), where S stands for the Schützenberger involution (see [vL96, §2]).

Remark 11.3. More generally, if σ : {j 1 < . . . < j n } → {i 1 < . . . < i n } is a bijection, then we define RS 1 (σ) = Rowinsert(σ(j 1 ), . . . , σ(j n )), which is a Young tableau with entries i 1 , . . . , i n , and we can define RS 2 (σ) as the unique Young tableau of entries j 1 , . . . , j n such that sh RS 2 (σ)| {j 1 ,...,j k } = sh RS 1 (σ| {j 1 ,...,j k } ) for all k = 1, . . . , n,

where the notation on the left hand side stands for the shape of the subtableau of entries j 1 , . . . , j ℓ . Moreover, from Proposition 11.2 (b) we easily have RS 2 (σ) = RS 1 (σ −1 ).

Finally, we recall that nilpotent orbits of g = gl n are parametrized by the set P(n) = {λ ⊢ n} of partitions of n through Jordan normal form:
N gl n = λ⊢n O λ .
Let us denote the shape of a tableau T by sh T , which is also interpreted as a partition (or a Young diagram).

Theorem 11.4 (Steinberg, [Ste76,Ste88]). For G = GL n and X = G/B × G/B, the Steinberg map Φ : X/G ∼ = W → N g /G is given by, for w ∈ W , Φ : O w → O λ such that λ = sh(RS 1 (w)) = sh(RS 2 (w)). 11.2. Description of Steinberg maps for a double flag variety of type AIII. In this section, we use the same notation as in the beginning of § 9. Thus our double flag variety is
X = K/B K × G/P = GL p /B + p × GL q /B + q × GL n /P (r,n−r) ≃ Fℓ(V + ) × Fℓ(V − ) × Gr r (V ).
The purpose of this section is to give a combinatorial description of the Steinberg maps Φ k : X/K → N k /K and Φ s : X/K → N s /K.

To this end, we first need to review the combinatorial parametrization of the various orbit sets that appear in the picture.

11.2.1. Parametrization of N k /K. In the present case, the Cartan decomposition is g = k ⊕ s with
k = a 0 0 d : a ∈ gl p (C), d ∈ gl q (C) , s = 0 b c 0 : b ∈ M p,q (C), c ∈ M q,p (C) .
We have natural bijections N k ∼ = N gl p × N gl q and so N k /K ∼ = N gl p /GL p × N gl q /GL q ∼ = P(p) × P(q) where the last identification is through Jordan normal form.

11.2.2. Parametrization of N s /K. Nilpotent orbits of s are parametrized by a set of signed Young diagrams:

Definition 11.5. (a) A signed Young diagram (of signature (p, q)) is a Young diagram of size p + q whose boxes are filled in with p symbols + and q symbols − so that:

• two consecutive boxes of the same row have opposite signs, so that each row is a sequence of alternating signs; • we identify two such fillings up to permutation of rows, in particular we can standardize the filling in such a way that, among rows which have the same length, the rows starting with a + are above those starting with a − (if there is any). Let SYD(p, q) denote the set of signed Young diagrams of signature (p, q). For Λ ∈ SYD(p, q), the shape of Λ is an element of P(p + q), also denoted by sh(Λ).

Proposition 11.6 (see, e.g., [CM93,Oht91]). We have a bijection SYD(p, q) → N s /K, Λ → {x ∈ N s : ∀k ≥ 1, dim ker x k ∩ V ± = #Λ ≤k (±)}. 11.2.3. Parametrization of X/K by partial permutations. We recall from § 9.2 that the K-orbits of X are parametrized by the set T = ω = τ 1 τ 2 : τ 1 ∈ T p,r , τ 2 ∈ T q,r , rk ω = r /S r .

In fact, we have a bijection
T ∼ → X/K, ω → K(F + , F − , [ω])
where [ω] = Im ω and F + , F − are the standard flags of V + , V − , respectively (see Theorem 9.4). Note also that we have a graphical expression Γ(ω) of the elements ω ∈ T (see Notation 9.2).

11.2.4. Combinatorial Steinberg maps. Now, according to the parametrization of orbits from the previous subsections, the symmetrized and exotic Steinberg maps Φ k and Φ s can be considered as combinatorial maps Φ k : T → {(λ, µ) : λ ⊢ p, µ ⊢ q} and Φ s : T → SYD(p, q).

(11.2) By using these maps, we will finally reformulate another parametrization of X/K in terms of standard tableaux in Theorem 11.10, which clarifies the irreducible components of the conormal fibers of Steinberg maps. Let us describe these maps Φ k and Φ s explicitly.

11.3. Generalized Robinson-Schensted correspondence related to Φ k . The following theorem gives a complete algorithm to calculate the map Φ k : T → {(λ, µ) : λ ⊢ p, µ ⊢ q}.

Theorem 11.7. Let ω ∈ T. We use the following notation, relative to the graph Γ(ω):

• Let i 1 < . . . < i k , ℓ 1 < . . . < ℓ s , and ℓ ′ 1 , . . . , ℓ ′ s ′ be respectively the numbers of the end points, marked points, and free points, within the line of positive vertices of Γ(ω). Let j 1 < . . . < j k , m 1 < . . . < m t , and m ′ 1 , . . . , m ′ t ′ be similarly the numbers of the end points, marked points, and free points, within the negative vertices of Γ(ω).
• Let L, L ′ , M, M ′ be the vertical Young tableaux with entries {ℓ i } s i=1 , {ℓ ′ i } s ′ i=1 , {m i } t i=1 , {m ′ i } t ′ i=1
, respectively. Let σ : {j 1 , . . . , j k } → {i 1 , . . . , i k } be the bijection such that σ(j) = i whenever (i + , j − ) is an edge of Γ(ω). Then, the image of ω by the symmetrized Steinberg map is the pair of partitions
Φ k (ω) = (λ, µ) = sh(L · RS 1 (σ) · L ′ ) , sh(M · RS 2 (σ) · M ′ ) (11.3)
where · is the sliding operation of the plactic monoid (see [Ful97, §1.2-2.1]).

Example 11.8. For ω as in (9.1), we obtain
L · RS 1 (σ) · L ′ = 5 · 2 4 · 1 3 = 1 3 2 4 5 , M · RS 2 (σ) · M ′ = 2 · 1 3 = 1 3 2 , hence Φ k (ω) = (λ, µ) with λ = , µ = .
Remark 11.9. The properties of the row insertion algorithm also yield the following rephrasing of the formula giving Φ k (ω) = (λ, µ) in Theorem 11.7. Specifically, if we introduce the permutations w k,+ = 1 · · · s s + 1 · · · s + k s + k + 1 · · · p ℓ s · · · ℓ 1 σ(
j 1 ) · · · σ(j k ) ℓ ′ s ′ · · · ℓ ′ 1 ∈ S p , w k,− = 1 · · · t t + 1 · · · t + k t + k + 1 · · · q m t · · · m 1 σ −1 (i 1 ) · · · σ −1 (i k ) m ′ t ′ · · · m ′ 1 ∈ S q ,
then we obtain (λ, µ) = sh(RS 1 (w k,+ )), sh(RS 1 (w k,− )) .

Sketch of proof of Theorem 11.7. According to Definition 10, we need to consider the conormal bundle
T * Oω X = K · {(F + p , F + q ,
[ω], y) : y ∈ D ω } with the conormal direction D ω = {y ∈ n ω : y θ ∈ n + p × n + q }.

Here n ω = {y : Im y ⊂ [ω] ⊂ ker y} is the nilradical of the parabolic subalgebra determined by [ω] and n + p , n + q stand for the subalgebras of strictly upper triangular matrices of gl p and gl q , respectively.

For a ∈ gl p , it can be shown that ∃b, c, d such that a b c d ∈ D ω ⇐⇒ a ∈ n p ∩ Ad(w k,+ )n + p where w k,+ is as in Remark 11.9 above. A reformulation of Steinberg's Theorem 11.4 gives that the unique nilpotent GL p -orbit which intersects the linear space n p ∩ Ad(w k,+ )n + p is the one corresponding to the partition sh RS 1 (w k,+ ) = sh RS 2 (w k,+ ).

Arguing similarly with the block d and the permutation w k,− , we finally get that the product of nilpotent orbits that intersects the projection φ k (T *
Oω X) = K · {y θ : y ∈ D ω } densely is O λ × O µ with (λ, µ) = (sh RS 1 (w k,+ ), sh RS 1 (w k,− )).
This (combined with Remark 11.9) yields the claimed assertion. See [FN23,§ 4.3] for a complete proof.

As a byproduct of Theorem 11.7, we can determine the fibers of Φ k in terms of a combinatorial correspondence which extends the Robinson-Schensted correspondence. It involves the following sets of 5-tuples: for (λ, µ) ∈ P(p) × P(q), let T λ,µ = {(T 1 , T 2 ; λ ′ , µ ′ ; ν) | T 1 ∈ STab(λ), T 2 ∈ STab(µ), satisfying (⋆)} (11.4) where (⋆) ν ⊂ · λ ′ ⊂ · λ, ν ⊂ · µ ′ ⊂ · µ, and |λ ′ | + |µ ′ | = |ν| + r. Hereafter, |λ| stands for the size of a partition λ, and the notation λ ′ ⊂ · λ means that λ ′ is a Young subdiagram of λ such that the skew diagram λ \ λ ′ is column strip (i.e., it contains at most one box in each row).

Theorem 11.10. We use the notation of Theorem 11.7 and Remark 11.9. We have a commutative diagram
T Φ k ) ) ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ❀ ∼ gRS G G (λ,µ)∈P(p)×P(q) T λ,µ π { { ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ ✈ P(p) × P(q)
where π is the natural surjection and gRS is a bijection defined by gRS(ω) = L · RS 1 (σ) · L ′ , M · RS 2 (σ) · M ′ ; sh(L · RS 1 (σ)), sh(M · RS 2 (σ)); sh(RS 1 (σ)) .

(11.5)

In particular, gRS restricts to a bijection
Φ −1 k (λ, µ) ∼ −→ T λ,µ
for all (λ, µ) ∈ P(p) × P(q).

Proof. We only need to justify that the map gRS is a bijection; the rest of the statement will then follow from Theorem 11.7. First, we note that the considered map is well defined. Let (T 1 , T 2 ; λ ′ , µ ′ ; ν) denote the right-hand side of (11.5). The fact that λ \ λ ′ , λ ′ \ ν, µ \ µ ′ , and µ ′ \ ν are column strips follows from [Ful97, Proposition in §1.1], and by construction we have |λ ′ | + |µ ′ | = 2k + s + t = |ν| + r.

For showing the bijectivity, let (T 1 , T 2 ; λ ′ , µ ′ ; ν) ∈ T λ,µ . Two applications of [Ful97, Proposition in §1.1] yield a unique 6-tuple (S 1 , S 2 , L, L ′ , M, M ′ ), where S 1 , S 2 are Young tableaux of shape ν and L, L ′ , M, M ′ are vertical Young tableaux, all contents being disjoint, such that T 1 = L·S 1 ·L ′ , T 2 = M ·S 2 ·M ′ , λ ′ = sh(L·S 1 ), and µ ′ = sh([M]·S 2 ). Letting σ : J → I be the bijection associated with the pair (S 1 , S 2 ) via Robinson-Schensted correspondence, the data I, L, L ′ , J, M, M ′ , σ determine a unique element ω ∈ T fitting with the statement of Theorem 11.7, and by construction the mapping (T 1 , T 2 ; λ ′ , µ ′ ; ν) → ω so obtained is the inverse procedure of gRS.

Example 11.11. (1) Let (p, q, r) = (5, 3, 4). For ω as in (9.1) and Example 11.8, we obtain ω = e 2 e 4 e 5 0 e 3 e 1 0 e 2 Γ(ω) =
• • • • • 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + • • • 1 − 2 − 3 − ❅ ❅ ❅ ✏ ✏ ✏ ✏ ✏ ✏ ❣ ❣ , gRS(ω) = 1 3 2 4 5 , 1 3 2 ; ,
;

.

Here, to describe ω as a pair of partial permutations, we use e k for the k-th elementary basis vector, i.e., a column vector whose k-th entry is 1 and any other entries are 0 (we do not distinguish whether it is belonging to C p or C q for simplicity).

(2) We give another example for (p, q, r) = (5, 4, 4).

ω = e 1 e 2 e 3 e 5 e 2 e 4 0 e 3 Γ(ω) =
• • • • • 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + • • • • 1 − 2 − 3 − 4 − ❅ ❅ ❅ ❍ ❍ ❍ ❍ ❍ ✟ ✟ ✟ ✟ ✟ ❣ , gRS(ω) = 1 2 4 3 5 , 1 3 2 4 ; , ;
.

(3) Let p = q = r = n. In this case, T contains the subset
T 0 := ω σ = σ 1 n : σ ∈ S n .
Then we have gRS(ω σ ) = (RS 1 (σ), RS 2 (σ); λ, µ; ν)

with λ = µ = ν is the common shape of RS 1 (σ) and RS 2 (σ). In this way, gRS is indeed an extension of Robinson-Schensted correspondence.

(4) Let p = r ≥ 2 and q = 1. Then T contains three families of elements
{ω I i } p i=1 , {ω II i } p i=1
, and {ω III }, with respective graphical representations as below.
Γ(ω I i ) = • ❡ 1 + · · · • i + · · · • p + ❡ • 1 − ✟ ✟ ✟ ✟ , Γ(ω II i ) = • ❡ 1 + · · · • i + · · · • p + ❡ • 1 − ❡ , Γ(ω III ) = • ❡ 1 + · · · • 2 + ❡ · · · • p + ❡ • 1 − .
Their images by gRS are as follows. 
X = Fℓ(V ) × Fℓ(V ) × V,
with diagonal action of GL(V ), which is a slight variation of the triple flag variety
Fℓ(V ) × Fℓ(V ) × P(V ) = GL n /B n × GL n /B n × GL n /P mir ,
where P mir ⊂ GL n is mirabolic -the stabilizer of a line in V = C n . Then, using an explicit description of the conormal bundles to the orbits, he derives a mirabolic Robinson-Schensted correspondence ([Tra09, §3.3])
X/GL n ≃ {(w, σ) | w ∈ S n , σ a descent of w} ∼ −→ (λ,µ)∈P(n) 2 {(T 1 , T 2 , ν) | T 1 ∈ STab(λ), T 2 ∈ STab(µ), satisfying (⋆⋆)}, (11.6)
where a descent of w means a (possibly empty) sequence i 1 < . . . < i s with w(i 1 ) > . . . > w(i s ), and the property (⋆⋆) is given below (compare it with the condition (⋆) in § 11.3).

(⋆⋆) λ \ ν and µ \ ν are column strip, that is, ν ⊂ · λ and ν ⊂ · µ.

On the other hand, in [FN20], we consider an "open big cell" X • in the double flag variety X of type AIII below, X = (GL n /B n × GL n /B n ) × GL 2n /P (n,n) = K/B K × G/P S (P S := P (n,n) ).

If we denote by U • S the unipotent radical of the opposite parabolic subgroup P • S , the open big cell is defined as a K-stable subvariety
X • = K/B K × U • S P S /P S ≃ (GL n /B n × GL n /B n ) × M n , where (k 1 , k 2 ) ∈ K = GL n × GL n acts on M n by k 1 Ak −1 2 (A ∈ M n ).
It is obvious that X • /K ≃ B n \M n /B n , and the representatives of B n × B n -orbits in M n are precisely given by partial permutations T n,n (see § 9.2; for the proof, we refer to [Ful97], and also [FN23, Lemma 3.4]). In the notation there, the representatives are described as ω = τ 1 1 n with τ 1 ∈ T n,n (note that p = q = r = n, and 2n instead of n there). If we apply the algorithm for the generalized Robinson-Schensted correspondence explained in § 11.3, we precisely obtain (T 1 , T 2 , ν) in the right hand side of the Travkin's mirabolic RS correspondence (11.6) (note that L = M ′ = ∅ in Theorem 11.10 so that we do not need intermediate λ ′ and µ ′ because λ ′ = ν and µ ′ = µ). Thus we get a bijection
X • /K ≃ T n,n ∼ −→ (λ,µ)∈P(n) 2
{(T 1 , T 2 , ν) | T 1 ∈ STab(λ), T 2 ∈ STab(µ), satisfying (⋆⋆)} (11.7)

Consequently all of these five sets that appear in (11.6) and (11.7) are in bijection. In particular we get Proposition 11.12. There is a bijection between orbits in (GL n /B n ×GL n /B n ×C n )/GL n and (GL n /B n × GL n /B n × M n )/(GL n × GL n ).

We get this proposition comparing mirabolic/generalized RS correspondence. However, constructing bijection between Travkin's set {(w, σ) | w ∈ S n , σ ⊂ [n] is a decent in w} and the partial permutations T n,n is somewhat straightforward. In fact, for τ ∈ T n,n , we get a permutation matrix w ∈ S n by adding 1's in some columns i 1 , . . . , i k in such a way that i 1 < i 2 < · · · < i k and w(i 1 ) > w(i 2 ) > · · · > w(i k ), where k = n − rank τ . Then σ = {w(i 1 ), w(i 2 ), . . . , w(i k )} is a descent for w, and this actually gives a bijection between orbital representatives.

We thank Anthony Henderson for pointing out the bijection to us.

Remark 11.13. (1) In the mirabolic case, there is a natural map from the conormal variety to the enhanced nilpotent cone N gl n × V (see [AH08]), which is GL n -equivariant. It is interesting that the orbits (N gl n × V )/GL n are classified by the bipartitions Q n = {(µ, ν) | |µ|+|ν| = n} which is further in bijection with P = {(ν, λ) | |λ| = n, ν ⊂ · λ}. Note that the latter set P also classifies the pair (U, W ), where U is an irreducible unipotent representation of GL n (F q ), and W is an irreducible constituent of the restriction of U to the mirabolic subgroup P n (F q ) ( [Zel81]; see also [Tra09, § 2.2]).)

(2) For the symplectic group, Syu Kato developed a generalization of Deligne-Langlands theory over the exotic nilpotent cone ( [Kat09]). In this case, Henderson-Trapa [HT12] and Nandakumar-Rosso-Saunders [NRS18] establishes a kind of Robinson-Schensted correspondence called the exotic RS correspondence. They are also related to the set of bipartitions Q n or P.

(3) There is yet another bijection for T n,n by using so-called "admissible signed Young diagrams". For this, see [Sin20]. It is interesting to develop a general theory which explains all of these related results.

11.4. Combinatorial description of the exotic Steinberg map Φ s . The description of the exotic Steinberg map in terms of signed Young diagrams is more involved.

Theorem 11.14. Let ω ∈ T. With the notation of Theorem 11.7, we consider the bijections
w s,+ = m 1 · · · m t j 1 · · · j k q + 1 · · · q + s ′ −1 · · · −t σ(j 1 ) · · · σ(j k ) ℓ ′ s ′ · · · ℓ ′ 1 , (11.8) w s,− = ℓ 1 · · · ℓ s i 1 · · · i k p + 1 · · · p + t ′ −1 · · · −s σ −1 (i 1 ) · · · σ −1 (i k ) m ′ t ′ · · · m ′ 1 .
(11.9)

Then, the image of ω by the exotic Steinberg map is the signed Young diagram Φ s (ω) = Λ determined as follows. Here, #Λ ≤c (+), #Λ ≤c (−) and #λ ≤c denote the number of +'s (respectively −'s) boxes in the first c columns of Λ (respectively λ).

(1) For every c ≥ 1 even, #Λ ≤c (+) = #λ ≤c and #Λ ≤c (−) = #µ ≤c ,

where (λ, µ) = Φ k (ω).

(2) For every c ≥ 1 odd, #Λ ≤c (+) = s − t + #λ ′ ≤c and #Λ ≤c (−) = t − s + #µ ′ ≤c , where (λ ′ , µ ′ ) is the pair of Young diagrams given by (λ ′ , µ ′ ) = sh(RS 1 (w s,+ )), sh(RS 1 (w s,− )) .


## Sketch of proof.

In view of the definition of Φ s in Definition 10, we need to determine the nilpotent GL p × GL q -orbit of s which intersects the projection {y −θ : y ∈ D ω } densely, where D ω is the conormal direction already considered in the proof of Theorem 11.7.

Since every y ∈ D ω satisfies y 2 = 0, we already have
(y −θ ) 2m = (−1) m (y θ ) 2m for all m ≥ 1, all y ∈ D ω .
This, combined with Theorem 11.7, proves (1).

For showing (2), we need to characterize the blocks c ∈ M q,p satisfying the condition
∃a, b, d such that a b c d ∈ D ω .
This is done, again, by relying on Steinberg's result (Theorem 11.4), though the construction here is less direct than in Theorem 11.7; see [FN23,§4.4] for a complete proof.

Example 11.15.

(1) Taking again ω as in (9.1) and Example 11.8, we have w s,+ = 1 2 3 4 5 4 −1 2 3 1 and w s,− = 2 4 5 3 1 −1 , which (combined with the calculation of Φ k (ω) in Example 11.8) yields
λ ′ = , µ ′ = , and Λ = − + − + + + + − .
(2) Assume p = r ≥ 2 and q = 1 as in Example 11.11 (4). With the same notation as in Example 11.11, we obtain the following images by the exotic Steinberg map Φ s .
ω ω I i , i ≥ 1 ω II i , i ≥ 1 ω III Φ s (ω) + − + . . . − + + . . . + . . . + −
Unlike the case of the symmetrized Steinberg map, we have almost no information about the fibers of the exotic Steinberg map Φ s . It would be interesting to identify the fibers, which will give different parametrization of the orbits X/K in terms of a generalized Robinson-Schensted correspondence analogous to Theorem 11.10.


## Part 4. Embedding theory for double flag varieties

Let us return back to a general double flag variety associated with a symmetric pair. Thus (G, K) is a symmetric pair, P, Q being parabolic subgroups of G and K respectively, and we consider a double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P .

There exists a theory of orbit embedding (see [Oht08], [Nis14]), and one can apply it to the case of double flag varieties ( [FN21]). If X can be embedded into a larger, well-understood double flag variety, we can deduce finiteness of orbits or even orbit classifications from those of the larger double flag variety.


## Embedding of double flag varieties and their orbits

Let G be a (larger) connected reductive algebraic group over C, and let θ, σ ∈ Aut G be two involutions which are commutative. Let K = G θ be the fixed point subgroup of θ, and assume that our G is the fixed point subgroup of σ, i.e., G = G σ . Then (G, K) is a symmetric pair, and K = G θ = K σ = G ∩ K is a symmetric subgroup of both G and K. We assume all the subgroups G, K and K are connected.
G σ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ θ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ G σ = G θ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ ❈ K = G θ σ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ ④ K = G θ = G ∩ K = G σ,θ
For any parabolic subgroup P of G, there exists a σ-stable parabolic subgroup P of G satisfying P = P σ = P ∩ G. Similarly, for a parabolic subgroup Q of K, we choose a σstable parabolic subgroup Q of K such that Q = Q σ = Q∩K. We denote X = G/P×K/Q a double flag variety for (G, K), and X = G/P × K/Q as before. Then we get a natural embedding X ֒→ X, (gP, kQ) → (gP, kQ) (g ∈ G, k ∈ K) and we will use the same notation X for its embedded image in X. By abuse of notation, let σ also denote an automorphism of X defined by σ(g·P, k·Q) = (σ(g) · P, σ(k) · Q) so that σ is a K-equivariant automorphism on X, i.e., σ(h · x) = σ(h) · σ(x) holds for any h ∈ K and x ∈ X.

Definition 12.1. For a σ-stable subgroup H of G, let us denote
H −σ = {h ∈ H | σ(h) = h −1 }.
We say that the subgroup H admits (−σ)-square roots if for any h ∈ H −σ there exists an f ∈ H −σ which satisfies h = f 2 . In this case f is called a (−σ)-square root of h.

Lemma 12.2. If both P and Q admit (−σ)-square roots, then X coincides with the fixed point set X σ := {x ∈ X | σ(x) = x} of σ.

Proof. Take gP ∈ (G/P) σ . Then we get g −1 σ(g) ∈ P −σ since P is σ-stable. Therefore there exists a (−σ)-square root f ∈ P −σ of g −1 σ(g). By this definition gf = σ(g)f −1 = σ(gf ) holds, and hence gf ∈ G, which in turn implies gP = (gf )P belongs to G/P = G · P ⊂ G/P. The proof of kQ ∈ K/Q in K/Q is the same.

The natural K-equivariant embedding X ֒→ X induces an orbit map
ι :X/K G G X/K ∋ ∋ O ✤ G G O = K · O ,
which is not injective in general. (In the above, we often used the notation O to denote a K-orbit in X, but here we change it to O.) However, in a nice situation (like the following theorem), the map ι becomes an injection and we get O = O ∩ X is a single K-orbit.

Theorem 12.3. Let us consider the double flag varieties X = K/Q × G/P and X = K/Q × G/P above. We assume (E) The parabolic subgroups P and Q admit (−σ)-square roots, and, for any σ-stable parabolic subgroups P 1 ⊂ G and Q 1 ⊂ K which are conjugate to P and Q respectively, the intersection P 1 ∩ Q 1 also admits (−σ)-square roots. Under the condition (E), the following statements hold.

(1) The natural orbit map ι :
X/K → X/K defined by ι(O) = K · O for O ∈ X/K is injective, i.e., if we put O = ι(O), then it holds O = O ∩ X = O σ .
(2) For any K-orbit O in X, the intersection O ∩ X is either empty or a single K-orbit.

For the proof, we refer the readers to [FN21,Theorem 3.3], where Theorem 3.2 in [Nis14] is used in crucial way. Note that we do not need finiteness of the orbits for this theorem.

Corollary 12.4. Under the same notation and the condition (E) above, if the double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P is of finite type, then X = K/Q × G/P is also of finite type.


## Embedding of conormal bundles

From now on, we always assume the condition (E) in Theorem 12.3. Let us denote by G the Lie algebra of G. Similarly we will use German capital letters for the Lie algebras of the groups denoted by black board bold letters. We fix a nondegenerate invariant bilinear form on G which is also invariant under the involutions σ and θ once and for all, and we identify the duals of g, k and K with themselves using this bilinear form. Let us consider the cotangent bundles T * X and T * X. Since T * X ≃ (G × P u P ) × (K × Q u Q ), and u P and u Q are σ-stable, we have a natural extension of σ ∈ Aut X to the whole T * X. We prove Lemma 13.1. T * X is the set of σ-fixed points in T * X, i.e., (T * X) σ = T * X holds.

Proof. Let us prove (G × P u P ) σ = G × P u p . Take [g, u] ∈ G × P u P . Then σ([g, u]) = [σ(g), σ(u)] = [g, u] if and only if there exists p ∈ P such that σ(g) = gp and σ(u) = p −1 u. So we get p = g −1 σ(g) ∈ P −σ , and it has a (−σ)-square root f ∈ P −σ . From this, we know σ(gf ) = gf , which means gf ∈ G = G σ . Also we see
σ(f −1 u) = f σ(u) = f p −1 u = f f −2 u = f −1 u, which proves f −1 u ∈ (u P ) σ = u p . Thus [g, u] = [gf, f −1 u] ∈ G × P u p .
The proof for (K × Q u Q ) σ = K × Q u q is the same.

Let us denote the moment maps by
µ X : T * X → K * ≃ K, µ X : T * X → k * ≃ k. (13.1)
Clearly µ X commutes with σ and µ X T * X = µ X . Let Y X = µ −1 X (0) and Y X = µ −1 X (0) be the corresponding conormal varieties.

Theorem 13.2. Assume the condition (E) in Theorem 12.3.

(1) The set of fixed points in Y X is equal to Y X . Thus we get (Y X ) σ = Y X ∩ T * X = Y X .

(2) By Theorem 12.3, there is an embedding ι :
X/K ֒→ X/K. If we denote O = ι(O) for O ∈ X/K, we have (T * O X) σ = T * O X. Proof. (1) (Y X ) σ = (T * X) σ ∩ µ −1 X (0) = T * X ∩ µ −1 X (0) = T * X ∩ µ −1 X (0) = Y X . (2) Since O σ = O,
we prove the equality for the fiber. Take x = (Q 1 , P 1 ) ∈ O. Then as a point in K/Q × G/P, it is also written as x = (Q 1 , P 1 ), where Q 1 = Q σ 1 and P 1 = P σ 1 . The fiber of the conormal bundle at x is given by (T * O X) x = (Q 1 , P 1 ) + ∆K ⊥ , where ∆K denotes the diagonal embedding and ⊥ refers to the orthogonal space. Since all the subspaces appearing here are σ-stable, we see
(T * O X) σ x = (Q σ 1 , P σ 1 ) + ∆K σ ⊥ = (q 1 , p 1 ) + ∆k ⊥ = (T * O X) x .

## Compatibility with Steinberg maps

In this section we keep the assumption (E) in Theorem 12.3 so that we have an orbit embedding ι : X/K ֒→ X/K, which induces the embedding of the conormal bundle T * O X ֒→ T * O X. Recall the nilpotent varieties N k = N θ g and N s = N −θ g . Similarly, we get the nilpotent varieties N K and N S for G = Lie(G), where N S = N −θ G . Since N ±θ g are varieties of σ-fixed points in N ±θ G , we have natural orbit maps ι ±θ : N ±θ g /K → N ±θ G /K, ι ±θ (O) = K · O (O ∈ N ±θ g /K). The maps ι ±θ are not injective in general.

The Assumption 10.1 on the image of the Steinberg map clearly holds for X whenever it holds for X, which we assume below. Under this assumption, we get the Steinberg maps Φ ±θ : X/K → N ±θ g /K relative to X and also Φ ±θ : X/K → N ±θ G /K relative to X (here we use Φ ±θ instead of Φ k or Φ s , since we want to keep the formalism of the notations; see § 10). It is natural to expect the following.

Conjecture 14.1. The orbit embedding ι : X/K ֒→ X/K is compatible with the Steinberg maps Φ ±θ and Φ ±θ , i.e., the diagram below is commutative.
X/K _ ι Φ ±θ G G N ±θ g /K ι ±θ X/K Φ ±θ G G N ±θ G /K (14.1)
Unfortunately, the formalism of functoriality of taking σ-invariants does not imply Conjecture 14.1. Let O ⊂ X be a K-orbit corresponding to the K-orbit O = ι(O) in X. By the definition of Φ ±θ , there exists a non-empty K and σ-stable dense open subset
U ± ⊂ T * O X which satisfies U ± ⊂ (φ ±θ X ) −1 Φ ±θ (O) ∩ T * O X,(14.2)
where we denote the Steinberg maps by φ ±θ X : Y X → N ±θ G . Note that T * O X = (T * O X) σ by Theorem 13.2.

Lemma 14.2. The equality Φ ±θ (ι ±θ (O)) = ι ±θ (Φ ±θ (O)) holds (so that the diagram (14.1) commutes) if and only if U ± intersects with T * O X. Note that the commutativity of the diagram for θ follows from U + ∩ T * O X = ∅ (it is the same for −θ). If the condition holds for both of ±θ, an open set U :
= U + ∩ U − intersects with T * O X non-trivially, since T * O X is irreducible.

## Finiteness of orbits via embedding theory

In this section, we provide useful examples of the embedding theory explained above. In fact, it turns out to be a powerful tool for finding out new double flag varieties of finite type. We use this embedding theory in two different ways. One is for the embedding to triple flag varieties, and the other is that into double flag varieties of type AIII. We begin with the embedding into type AIII, and then come back to the triple flag varieties.

15.1. Embedding of double flag varieties into type AIII. Let G = GL n be a general linear group, and put M n = M n (C), which is an ambient vector space of G 3 . Let us consider two commuting involutions σ, θ ∈ Aut G defined by
θ(g) = I g I −1 , σ(g) = J t g −1 J −1 ,(15.1)
where I, J ∈ GL n are certain regular matrices. Since σ and θ are involutions, we must have I 2 = J 2 = 1 n up to nonzero constant multiple. Put
K = G θ = {g ∈ GL n | IgI −1 = g}, G = G σ , K = G θ = K σ
as before. Then the commutativity of θ and σ enforces J t I −1 = α IJ, i.e., σ(I) = αI, for some α ∈ C × . We allow I = 1 n (the identity matrix), and in that case we have K = G and K = G.

Proposition 15.1. Under the above setting, the condition (E) in Theorem 12.3 is satisfied for any choice of σ-stable parabolic subgroups P ⊂ G and Q ⊂ K. In particular, we get an embedding of orbits X/K ֒→ X/K of double flag varieties.

Proof. Let us prove that P admits (−σ)-square roots (Definition 12.1). To prove it, we follow the arguments in [Oht08, Theorem 1]. So, we define an anti-involution τ : M n → M n by τ (g) = J t gJ −1 = σ(g −1 ). This is a linear anti-algebra homomorphism. Take g ∈ P −σ , which means σ(g) = g −1 . Note that σ(g) = g −1 is equivalent to τ (g) = g. By an easy linear algebra argument, we get a polynomial f (T ) ∈ C[T ] in a variable T , which satisfies f (g) 2 = g. Since g is invertible, f (g) is also invertible and hence in G.

Since τ (f (g)) = f (τ (g)) = f (g), we get f (g) ∈ G −σ . To prove that f (g) ∈ P, we use a characterization of parabolic subgroups due to Kempf [Kem78,p. 305] and Mumford [MFK94, § 2.2]. Namely, there exists a one parameter subgroup λ : C × → G such that P = {g ∈ G | the limit lim t→0 λ(t)gλ(t) −1 =: g 0 exists}.

(15.2)

Using this, we see λ(t)f (g)λ(t) −1 = f (λ(t)gλ(t) −1 ) → f (g 0 ) has a limit, and conclude that f (g) ∈ P ∩ G −σ = P −σ . So f (g) is a desired (−σ)-square root of g.

For the parabolic subgroup Q, the arguments are similar, and we note f (g) ∈ K = G θ holds because θ is just a conjugation by I.

We did not use any particular properties of P and Q, so the same technique also proves that P 1 ∩ Q 1 admits (−σ)-square roots.

15.2. Embedding of double flag varieties into tripe flag varieties. Now let us consider the case of triple flag varieties.

Let G be a connected reductive group and K = G θ a symmetric subgroup of G fixed by a certain involution θ ∈ Aut G as above. We will embed a double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P into a triple flag variety X in K-equivariant way (cf. § 4). For that purpose, choose parabolic subgroups P 1 , P 2 , P 3 of G in the following way.

We take P 1 := P and P 2 := θ(P ). For the parabolic subgroup Q of K, we can choose a θ-stable parabolic subgroup P 3 ⊂ G which cuts out Q from K, i.e., P 3 = θ(P 3 ) and Q = P 3 ∩ K. Thus our triple flag variety is X = G/P 1 × G/P 2 × G/P 3 as in § 4.

We consider the following setting: G = G × G, P = P × θ(P ) ⊂ G σ, τ ∈ Aut G : involutions, σ(g 1 , g 2 ) := (θ(g 2 ), θ(g 1 ))

τ (g 1 , g 2 ) := (g 2 , g 1 )
K = G τ = {(g, g) | g ∈ G} ≃ G, Q = {(g, g) | g ∈ P 3 } ≃ P 3 G = G σ = {(g, θ(g)) | g ∈ G} ≃ G, K = G σ,τ = {(g, g) | g = θ(g)} ≃ G θ
Here we use the involution τ instead of θ, which is used in the former sections, because we want to keep the setting K = G θ . Now notice X = K/Q × G/P ≃ G/P 3 × G/P × G/θ(P ) (15.3) is the triple flag variety.

Theorem 15.2. Let G = GL n and consider θ(g) = J t g −1 J −1 for J which satisfies J 2 = 1 n . Apply the setting explained above in this subsection. Then we get an orbit embedding X = K/Q × G/P ֒→ K/Q × G/P = X, where X is the triple flag variety given in (15.3). In particular, if the triple flag variety X is of finite type, the double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P is of finite type.

Proof. We use Theorem 12.3. What we must prove is the condition (E). Let us see P −σ = {(g, θ(g −1 )) | g ∈ P } ≃ P,
Q −σ = {(g, g) | g ∈ P 3 , g −1 = θ(g)} ≃ P −θ 3 .
Since θ(g) = J t g −1 J −1 , the same argument of the proof of Proposition 15.1 can be applied. It is literally the same but after exchanging θ here and σ there (we are sorry for this kind of mess in the notation, but it is inevitable).

Remark 15.3. If we are interested in just the finiteness of orbits in a double flag variety, there is a simpler comparison with triple flag varieties. See Theorem 3.4 in [NO11]. The above Theorem 15.2 is a refinement of Theorem 3.1 in [NO11] for the above mentioned involution θ.

In the following, we list the tables of double flag varieties of finite type which are obtained by embedding into those of triple flag varieties of finite type as well as double flag varieties of type AIII. The readers are warned that the lists are far from complete, and they overlap the already given lists in § 6. Note also that, in these lists, we omit the trivial cases for which G = P or Q = K.

15.3. Type AI. We use Theorem 15.2 above. Let us consider GL 2n instead of GL n and the involution θ(g) = J t g −1 J −1 defined as follows:
J = 0 −Σ n Σ n 0 , Σ n = 1 . . . 1
Then our symmetric pair becomes (GL 2n , Sp 2n ). We compare the double flag variety X with the triple flag variety for type A, the table of finite type in § 6.5.1 gives the following table of finite type double flag variety.

To indicate parabolic subgroups, we use the subset of simple roots J ⊂ Π as in § 5, and the numbering of simple roots is indicated below.
GL 2n α 1 • α 2 • α 2n−1 • Sp 2n β 1 • β 2 • β n−1 • β n • k s (G, K) Π G \ J G (P = P J G ) Π K \ J K (Q = Q J K ) (GL 2n , Sp 2n ) {α i } any subset {α i , α j } {β n }
15.4. Type AII. Again we use Theorem 15.2 above. Let us consider the involution θ(g) = t g −1 so that J = 1 n in this case. Then our symmetric pair becomes (SL n , SO n ) (we prefer SL n rather than GL n ). We compare X with the triple flag variety of type A as in the former subsection and get the following table of finite type double flag varieties.

The numbering of simple roots is indicated below.
SL n α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • SO 2m α 1 • α m−2 • α m−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α m • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ (G, K) Π G \ J G (P = P J G ) Π K \ J K (Q = Q J K ) (SL n , SO n ) {α i } any subset {α i , α j } {β m−1 }, {β m } if n = 2m
15.5. Type CI. In the setting of § 15.1, we take 2n instead of n, and choose J = 0 −Σ n Σ n 0 , Σ n = 1 . . .


## 1

, and I = 1 n −1 n .

Thus we get an embedding X = K/Q × G/P = GL n /Q × Sp 2n /P ֒→ (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (GL n /Q 1 × GL n /Q 2 ) × GL 2n /P = X.

With this embedding, σ-stable parabolic subgroup P of G = GL 2n corresponds to a composition (c 1 , c 2 , . . . , c ℓ ) of 2n with c i = c ℓ−i+1 , i.e., central symmetric. Taking this into account, Table 9 of the finite type double flag varieties of type AIII tells us the following type CI double flag varieties of finite type. Each label of the following item indicates the labels in Table 9. (P2) P = P (n,n) , and Q is any parabolic subgroup. We call the parabolic subgroup P = P (n,n) a Siegel parabolic subgroup, which stabilizes a Lagrangian subspace. (P3-1) P = P (1,2n−2,1) , and any Q. We call the parabolic subgroup P = P (1,2n−2,1) a mirabolic parabolic subgroup of Sp 2n , which stabilizes a line. (P3-2) P = P (2,2n−4,2) or P (n−1,2,n−1) , and Q is a maximal parabolic subgroup. (P3-3) P is a maximal parabolic subgroup, which stabilizes an isotropic subspace, and Q = Q (1,n−1) or Q (n−1,1) is a mirabolic parabolic subgroup, which stabilizes a line (or a hyperplane). (P3-4) P is a maximal parabolic subgroup, and Q is a maximal parabolic subgroup.

• In the rest of the cases (P4-1), (P4-2), (P6), (PA-1) -(PA-3), there is no embedding. From this, we get the following type CI double flag varieties of finite type. To indicate parabolic subgroups, we use the subset of simple roots J ⊂ Π, and the numbering of simple roots is indicated below.
Sp 2n α 1 • α 2 • α n−1 • α n • k s GL n β 1 • β 2 • β n−1 • (G, K) Π G \ J G (P = P J G ) Π K \ J K (Q = Q J K ) (Sp 2n , GL n ) {α 1 }, {α n } any subset {α i } {β j }
Note that, in the first case, Q can be a Borel subgroup B K of K, and it already appeared in § 6.3. 15.6. Type CII. In the setting of § 15.1, we take 2n instead of n, 2p (respectively 2q)instead of p (respectively q), where n = p + q. Choose
J = 0 −Σ n Σ n 0 , Σ m = 1 . . . 1
, I = −I p,q I q,p , I p,q = 1 p −1 q .

Thus our embedding becomes X = (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (Sp 2p /Q 1 × Sp 2q /Q 2 ) × Sp 2n /P ֒→ (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (GL 2p /Q 1 × GL 2q /Q 2 ) × GL 2n /P = X.

We do not repeat the consideration for each cases of finite type double flag varieties of type AIII, but only list the table of type CII double flag varieties of finite type. The numbering of simple roots for G = Sp 2n is the same as type CI case, and those for K 1 = Sp 2p and K 2 = Sp 2q are also the same except for that we use {β 1 , . . . , β p } for K 1 and {γ 1 , . . . , γ q } for K 2 instead of α i 's. 
(G, K) Π G \ J G Π K 1 \ J K 1 Π K 2 \ J K 2 (P = P J G ) (Q 1 = Q J K 1 ) (Q 2 = Q J K 2 ) ({γ 1 } if q = 1 {α i } {β j }, {β j , β p } {γ q } {α 1 , α n } any subset ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 ) {α i , α n } {β j }, {β j , β p } ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 ) {α i , α j }, {α i , α j , α n } {β p } ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 )
any subset {β p } Q 2 = K 2 = Sp 2 if q = 1 any subset
{β 1 } if p = 1 ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 )
Note that the role of K 1 and K 2 are interchangeable. In this table, we miss so many cases which have been already listed in the case of P = B G or Q = B K (see § § 6.2 and 6.3). 15.7. Type BI (BDI). In the setting of § 15.1, we take 2n + 1 instead of n, 2p + 1 (respectively 2q)instead of p (respectively q), where n = p + q. Choose
J = Σ 2p+1 0 0 Σ 2q , Σ m = 1 . . . 1 , I = 1 2p+1 −1 2q .
Thus our embedding becomes X = (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (SO 2p+1 /Q 1 × SO 2q /Q 2 ) × SO 2n+1 /P ֒→ (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (GL 2p+1 /Q 1 × GL 2q /Q 2 ) × GL 2n+1 /P = X.

Below, we list the table of type BI (BDI) double flag varieties of finite type.

Here is the numbering of simple roots for G = SO 2n+1 and K 2 = SO 2q . The numbering for K 1 is similar as G and the difference is that we use {β 1 , . . . , β p } instead of α i 's. 
SO 2n+1 α 1 • α n−1 • α n • C Q SO 2q γ 1 • γ q−2 • γ q−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ γ q • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ (G, K) Π G \ J G Π K1 \ J K1 Π K2 \ J K2 (P = P J G ) (Q 1 = Q J K 1 ) (Q 2 = Q J K 2 ) (SO 2n+1 , SO 2p+1 × SO 2q ) {α 1 },{α i } ∅ (Q 1 = K 1 ) any subset {α i } {β j } {γ q−1 }, {γ q } {α i }, {α i , α j } ∅ (Q 1 = K 1 ) {γ q−1 }, {γ q }
any subset any subset Q 2 = SO 2 if q = 1 any subset Q 1 = SO 1 if p = 0 any subset 15.8. Type DI (BDI), even case. In the setting of § 15.1, we take 2n instead of n, 2p (respectively 2q) instead of p (respectively q), where n = p + q. Choose J = Σ 2p 0 0 Σ 2q , Σ m = 1 . . .


## 1

, I = 1 2p −1 2q .

Thus our embedding becomes X = (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (SO 2p /Q 1 × SO 2q /Q 2 ) × SO 2n /P ֒→ (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (GL 2p /Q 1 × GL 2q /Q 2 ) × GL 2n /P = X.

Below, we list the table of type DI (BDI) double flag varieties of finite type (even case).

Here is the numbering of simple roots for G = SO 2n . The numbering for K 1 and K 2 is similar as G and the difference is that we use {β 1 , . . . , β p } and {γ 1 , . . . , γ q }instead of α i 's. 15.9. Type DI (BDI), odd case. In the setting of § 15.1, we take 2n instead of n, 2p + 1 (respectively 2q + 1)instead of p (respectively q), where n = p + q + 1. Choose
SO 2n α 1 • α n−2 • α n−1 • ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ α n • ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ ✷ (G, K) Π G \ J G Π K1 \ J K1 Π K2 \ J K2 (P = P J G ) (Q 1 = Q J K 1 ) (Q 2 = Q J K 2 ) (SO 2n , SO 2p ×SO 2q ) {α 1 },J = Σ 2p+1 0 0 Σ 2q+1 , Σ m = 1 . . . 1 , I = 1 2p+1 −1 2q+1 .
Thus our embedding becomes X = (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (SO 2p+1 /Q 1 × SO 2q+1 /Q 2 ) × SO 2n /P ֒→ (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (GL 2p+1 /Q 1 × GL 2q+1 /Q 2 ) × GL 2n /P = X.

Below, we list the table of type DI (BDI) double flag varieties of finite type (odd case). The numbering of simple roots for G = SO 2n and K 1 = SO 2p+1 are the same as that of type BI and DI (even case) except for the labeling Greek letters. Thus our embedding becomes X = K/Q × G/P = GL n /Q × SO 2n /P ֒→ (K 1 /Q 1 × K 2 /Q 2 ) × G/P = (GL n /Q 1 × GL n /Q 2 ) × GL 2n /P = X.
(G, K) Π G \ J G Π K 1 \ J K 1 Π K 2 \ J K 2 (P = P J G ) (Q 1 = Q J K 1 ) (Q 2 = Q J K 2 ) (SO 2n , SO 2p+1 × SO 2q+1 ) {α 1 },
Below, we list the table of type DIII double flag varieties of finite type. The numbering of simple roots for G = SO 2n and K = GL n are the same as that of type DI and type CI respectively.

(G, K) Π G \ J G (P = P J G ) Π K \ J K (Q = Q J K ) (SO 2n , GL n ) {α 1 }, {α n−1 }, {α n } any subset
{α i } {β j }
We miss the case, where P is a Borel subgroup (hence can be any parabolic subgroup) and Π K \ J K = {β 1 } or {β n } (mirabolic case). See § 6.2.

16. An example of embedding theory for type CI into type AIII In this section, we give an example of the embedding of the case of type CI into type AIII based on [FN21]. As in § 15.5, let us begin with G = GL 2n and commuting involutions σ, θ ∈ Aut G defined by θ(g) = I −1 g I I = I n,n = diag(1 n , −1 n ), σ(g) = J −1 t g −1 J J = J n = −1 n 1 n .

Note that we use another convention for J which is different from § 12. We define a symplectic form on V = C 2n by (u, v) = t uJv. Note that V + = e 1 , e 2 , . . . , e n ⊂ V is a Lagrangian subspace with respect to this symplectic form, where e k denotes the k-th elementary basis vector as usual. Then K = G θ = GL n × GL n , G = G σ = Sp 2n , K = G θ ≃ GL n (16.1) are all connected, and (G, K) = (Sp 2n , GL n ) is a symmetric pair of type CI and (G, K) = (GL 2n , GL n × GL n ) is that of type AIII. Let us denote by B ± n a Borel subgroup of GL n consisting of upper/lower triangular matrices. Define
B K = B + n × B − n ⊂ K = GL n × GL n , P = Stab G (V + ) ⊂ G = GL 2n
both of which are a σ-stable. Then Q = B K = B σ K is a Borel subgroup in K and P = P S = P σ is the Siegel parabolic subgroup of G = Sp 2n stabilizing a Lagrangian subspace V + . Thus our double flag varieties are X = K/B × G/P = GL n /B n × Sp 2n /P S ≃ Fℓ n × LGr(C 2n ) (16.2) and X = K/B K × G/P = GL n /B + n × GL n /B − n × GL 2n /P (n,n) ≃ Fℓ n × Fℓ n × Gr n (C 2n ),
(16.3)
where LGr(V ) denotes the Lagrangian Grassmannian, the variety of all the Lagrangian subspaces in V = C 2n , and Fℓ n is the variety of complete flags in C n . We use the notation P (n,n) for the parabolic subgroup in GL 2n determined by the partition (n, n) of 2n.

Proposition 15.1 enables orbit embedding in this case.

Theorem 16.1. Let X and X be the double flag varieties defined in (16.2) and (16.3) respectively. Then the orbit map X/K → X/K is injective, i.e., for any K-orbit O in X, the intersection X ∩ O is either empty or a single K-orbit.

Let us describe the explicit embedding of orbits in this case. First, we clarify the explicit embedding map X → X and the involutive automorphism on X. Note the following isomorphism from § § 9.2 and 11.2.3. X/K ≃ B + n ×B − n \GL 2n /P (n,n) ≃ B + n ×B − n \Gr n (C 2n ) ≃ B + n ×B − n \M • 2n,n /GL n ≃ T • n /S n ,

where M • 2n,n denotes the set of 2n by n matrices of full rank (i.e., rank n), and T • = T • n is the set of pairs of partial permutation matrices which are full rank (see § 9.2). Note that we put the subscript n.

Let us explain the above isomorphism more precisely. Take ω = τ 1 τ 2 ∈ T • n . Then we can find matrices ξ 1 , ξ 2 ∈ M n such that g = τ 1 ξ 1 τ 2 −ξ 2 ∈ GL 2n = G is a regular matrix. Note that the coset gP does not depend on the choice of ξ 1 , ξ 2 but only depending on ω. A K-orbit O goes through (B K , gP) ∈ X is denoted by O ω .

Proof. Let us examine σ(ω) = ω mod S n . This means σ(ω) = ξ 2 ξ 1 = τ 1 s τ 2 s for some s ∈ S n .

As in the case of X/K (see (16.4)), there are natural bijections X/K ≃ (Fℓ n × LGr(C 2n ))/GL n ≃ B + n \Sp 2n /P S ≃ B + n \ LGr(C 2n ) ≃ B + n \S • 2n,n /GL n ≃ C • n /S n ,
(16.6) where S • 2n,n = {A ∈ M • 2n,n | t AJ n A = 0} = {A = A 1 A 2 ∈ M • 2n,n | t A 1 A 2 = t A 2 A 1 ∈ Sym n }.
(16.7)

Note that the actions of b ∈ B + n are all defined by the left multiplications by b 0 0 t b −1 . The above theorem tells that all these coset spaces are in bijection with C • n /S n .

## Theorem 6. 2 (
2He-N-Ochiai-Oshima [HNOO13, Theorem 4.2]). Let B K be a Borel subgroup of K and P = LU a parabolic subgroup of G as explained above. The double flag variety X = K/B K × G/P is of finite type if and only if the adjoint action of L ∩ K on u ∩ s is spherical.


Theorem 6.4 (He-N-Ochiai-Oshima [HNOO13, Theorem 4.4]). The double flag variety X = K/Q × G/B is of finite type if and only if the adjoint action of M ′ 0 on u ′ ∩ s is spherical.


Theorem 7.2 (Kac [Kac80a, Theorem 3]). (1) For any α ∈ Γ + , M α (Q) contains an indecomposable module if and only if α ∈ ∆ + .

## Lemma 7. 3 .
3Let x, y ∈ X be two N-tuples of flags and ξ, η ∈ Rep Q be the corresponding representations of the quiver. Then x and y are in the same GL(V )-orbit if and only if ξ and η are isomorphic as representations of Q.

## Theorem 8. 5 (
5Homma [Hom21, Proposition 2.12 and Theorem 2.13]). Let λ = (a, b, c) ∈ Λ J . The following conditions (1)-(3) are equivalent.

## ((1 3
3), (1 3 ), (2 3 )), ((2 2 ), (1 5 ), (3 3 )), ((1 2 ), (1 2 ), (1 4 )), ((3), (1 5 ), (2 4 )), ((2), (1 3 ), (1 5 )), ((3), (2 2 ),

## Furthermore, we set L 0 •
0= (L 0 1 , . . . , L 0 p ) with L 0 1 = . . . = L 0 p = 0. We define in the same way M j • = (M j 1 , . . . , M j q ) with e − j instead of e + i , and M 0 • = (M 0 1 , . . . , M 0 q ) = (0, . . . , 0). We deduce the indecomposable objects I + i , I ′+ i , I − j , I ′− j , I i,j depicted in

## Lemma 9. 3 .
3In the category J , we have a multiplicity free decomposition


Theorem 9.4. (1) The map T → X/K, ω → O ω := K · F ω , is a bijection.

## ( 2 )
2We have dim O ω = p 2 + q 2 − x = i ± : free point i − x: marked point #{marked points on the same row on the left of x, including x} − α: edge #{marked points and edges on the left of α, including α}.

## Part 3 .
3Steinberg theory for double flag varieties 10. Definition of Steinberg maps 10.1. Symmetrized and exotic Steinberg maps for double flag varieties. Recall the following general situation:

## (A) y 2
2= 0; (B) y 3 = 0 and rk y = 2; (C) y 3 = 0, a 2 = 0, and d 2 = 0; (D) y 3 = 0 and q = 2; (E) rk a ≤ 1 and d = 0; (F) q = 2, a 2 = 0, and d = 0; (G) q = 1.


upper right coefficient by c on the left, we get (cb) 2 = −ca 2 b − cabd. (10.4) Multiplying the lower diagonal coefficient by d on the right, we obtain Tr(cabd) = − Tr(cbd 2 ) − Tr(dcbd) = − Tr(cbd 2 ) = 0, (10.5)


{α n−1 }, {α n } any subset any subset{α 2 }, {α n−2 } any subset {γ q−1 }, {γ q } {α i }, {α i , α n−1 }, {α i , α n }, {α n−1 , α n } any subset ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 ) {α i } {β j }, {β j , β p−1 }, {β j , β p } {γ q−1 }, {γ q } {α i , α n−1 }, {α i , α n } {β j }, {β j , β p−1 }, {β j , β p } ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 ) {α i , α j }, {α i , α j , α n−1 }, {α i , α j , α n }, {α i , α n−1 , α n } {β p−1 }, {β p } ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 )any subset {β p−1 }, {β p } K 2 = SO 2 if q = 1


{α n−1 }, {α n } any subset any subset{α i }, {α n−1 , α n } any subset ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 ) {α i , α n−1 }, {α i , α n } {β j } ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 )any subset any subset K 2 = SO 1 if q = 0 15.10. Type DIII. In the setting of § 15.1, we take 2n instead of n, n instead of p (respectively q).


Classification when P = B G is a Borel subgroup of G 18 6.3. Classification when Q = B K is a Borel subgroup of K Symmetrized and exotic Steinberg maps for double flag varieties 37 10.2. Assumption 10.1 for the exotic Steinberg map 39 11. Generalization of Robinson-Schensted correspondence 42 11.1. Classical Steinberg map and Robinson-Schensted correspondence 42 11.2. Description of Steinberg maps for a double flag variety of type AIII 44 11.2.1. Parametrization of N k /K Generalized Robinson-Schensted correspondence related to Φ k 46 11.3.1. Relation to the Travkin's mirabolic Robinson-Schensted correspondence 49 11.4. Combinatorial description of the exotic Steinberg map Φ s 515. Finiteness criterions 
15 
6. Double flag varieties associated to Borel subgroups 
16 
6.1. Ideas of the proofs 
16 
6.2. 19 
6.4. Triple flag variety of finite type I 
21 
6.5. Triple flag variety of finite type II 
22 
6.5.1. Type A 
22 
6.5.2. Type B 
22 
6.5.3. Type C 
23 
6.5.4. Type D 
23 
7. Quivers and multiple flag varieties 
23 
7.1. Orbits in quiver representations: Theory of Kac 
24 
7.2. Orbits in triple flag varieties 
25 
8. Finite type double flag varieties of type AIII 
28 
8.1. Joint varieties and finiteness criterions 
28 
8.2. Classification of finite type double flag varieties of type AIII 
31 
8.3. Generalizations 
32 
9. Orbits in the double flag variety of type AIII 
33 
9.1. Category of joint representations 
33 
9.2. Orbit decomposition of X 
34 

Part 3. Steinberg theory for double flag varieties 
37 
10. Definition of Steinberg maps 
37 
10.1. 45 
11.2.2. Parametrization of N s /K 
45 
11.2.3. Parametrization of X/K by partial permutations 
45 
11.2.4. Combinatorial Steinberg maps 
45 
11.3. Part 4. Embedding theory for double flag varieties 
52 
12. Embedding of double flag varieties and their orbits 
52 
13. Embedding of conormal bundles 
54 
14. Compatibility with Steinberg maps 
55 
15. Finiteness of orbits via embedding theory 
56 
15.1. Embedding of double flag varieties into type AIII 
56 
15.2. Embedding of double flag varieties into tripe flag varieties 
57 
15.3. Type AI 
58 
15.4. Type AII 
58 
15.5. Type CI 
59 
15.6. Type CII 
60 
15.7. Type BI (BDI) 
61 
15.8. Type DI (BDI), even case 
61 
15.9. Type DI (BDI), odd case 
62 
15.10. Type DIII 
63 
16. An example of embedding theory for type CI into type AIII 
63 
References 
66 

1. Overview 




Proof. This follows from the Bruhat decomposition. See Borel [Bor91, § 14.16] and Springer [Spr98, Exercise 8.4.6(3)].


and others [Kno98, KVS06, KKPS19b, KKPS19a], Perrin [Per14], Timashev [Tim11] and references therein.

## Table 2 :
2Double flag variety K

## Table 3 :
3Double flag variety

## Table 6 :
6Type B triple flag varieties of finite type

## Table 7 :
7Type C triple flag varieties of finite type

## Table 8 .
8Type D triple flag varieties of finite type


Sp 2n , Sp 2p × Sp 2q ) {α 1 }, {α n }any subset any subset{α 2 }, {α n−1 } any subset {γ q } {α i } any subset ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 )


{α n } any subset any subset{α 2 } any subset {γ q−1 }, {γ q } {α i } any subset ∅ (Q 2 = K 2 )
Part 2. Double flag varieties of finite type
For any Hamiltonian symplectic G-variety, one can define a moment map. For general definition and properties of moment maps, see[CG97] and[Kos79].
Many of the facts and results below will hold after some modifications even if K is not connected, and for most of our purpose it is sufficient to take a connected component of the identity instead of the whole K.
Of course M n (C) is the Lie algebra of G, but its structure of a finite dimensional associative algebra is more important.
t τ 1 τ 2 = t τ 2 τ 1 ∈ Sym n .
There is a great possibility for the choice of ξ 1 , ξ 2 . In fact, we can choose ξ 1 , ξ 2 in such a way that ξ 1 ξ 2 ∈ T • n is also a pair of partial permutation of full rank and it satisfiesFor this, see[FN21,Lemma 4.4]. In the following, we always assume this.We define an involution on, which is denoted by the same letter σ by abuse of notation. Note that σ(ω) is determined modulo the right multiplication by S n .by the property t ξ 1 τ 1 − t ξ 2 τ 2 = 0. An easy calculation tells that d 1 = t τ 1 τ 1 + t τ 2 τ 2 is a diagonal matrix with diagonal entries 1 or 2, and so is d 2 = t ξ 1 ξ 1 + t ξ 2 ξ 2 . Thus we get t g −1 = gd −1 with d = diag(d 1 , d 2 ). From this, we computeand get σ(g)P = ξ 2 τ 2 ξ 1 −τ 1 P. This implies σ τ 1 τ 2 = ξ 2 ξ 1 .Theorem 16.3. For ω = τ 1 τ 2 ∈ T • n /S n , let O ω be the corresponding K-orbit in X. Then the following (1)-(4) are all equivalent.(1) O ω ∩ X = ∅, hence it is a single K-orbit.(2) σ(O ω ) = O ω , i.e., the K-orbit is σ-stable.(3) t τ 1 τ 2 ∈ Sym n .(4) t τ 2 τ 1 ∈ Sym n .In particular, the set of K-orbits in the double flag variety X = GL n /B + n × Sp 2n /P S of type CI is parametrized by C • n /S n , where
Orbit closures in the enhanced nilpotent cone. P N Achar, A Henderson, Advances in Mathematics. 2191P.N. Achar and A. Henderson, Orbit closures in the enhanced nilpotent cone, Advances in Mathematics 219 (2008), no. 1, 27-62.

Roman Avdeev, Alexey Petukhov, Spherical actions on isotropic flag varieties and related branching rules. 26Roman Avdeev and Alexey Petukhov, Spherical actions on isotropic flag varieties and related branching rules, Transform. Groups 26 (2021), no. 3, 719-774.

Dan Barbasch, Sergio Da Silva, Balázs Elek, Gautam Gopal Krishnan, arXiv:1708.06341Finite type multiple flag varieties of exceptional groups. Dan Barbasch, Sergio Da Silva, Balázs Elek, and Gautam Gopal Krishnan, Finite type multiple flag varieties of exceptional groups, arXiv:1708.06341 (2017).

Partial resolutions of nilpotent varieties, Analysis and topology on singular spaces. Walter Borho, Robert Macpherson, Astérisque. II102, Soc. Math. FranceIII (Luminy, 1981Walter Borho and Robert MacPherson, Partial resolutions of nilpotent varieties, Analysis and topology on singular spaces, II, III (Luminy, 1981), Astérisque, vol. 101-102, Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1983, pp. 23-74.

Armand Borel, Linear algebraic groups. New YorkSpringer-Verlag126second ed.Armand Borel, Linear algebraic groups, second ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 126, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991.

A classification of multiplicity free actions. Chal Benson, Gail Ratcliff, J. Algebra. 1811Chal Benson and Gail Ratcliff, A classification of multiplicity free actions, J. Algebra 181 (1996), no. 1, 152-186.

Quelques propriétés des espaces homogènes sphériques. Michel Brion, Manuscripta Math. 552Michel Brion, Quelques propriétés des espaces homogènes sphériques, Manuscripta Math. 55 (1986), no. 2, 191-198.

Highlights in Lie algebraic methods. Spherical varieties. New YorkBirkhäuser/Springer295, Spherical varieties, Highlights in Lie algebraic methods, Progr. Math., vol. 295, Birkhäuser/Springer, New York, 2012, pp. 3-24.

Representation theory and complex geometry. Neil Chriss, Victor Ginzburg, Birkhäuser Boston IncBoston, MANeil Chriss and Victor Ginzburg, Representation theory and complex geometry, Birkhäuser Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 1997.

H David, William M Collingwood, Mcgovern, Nilpotent orbits in semisimple Lie algebras, Van Nostrand Reinhold Mathematics Series. New YorkVan Nostrand Reinhold CoDavid H. Collingwood and William M. McGovern, Nilpotent orbits in semisimple Lie alge- bras, Van Nostrand Reinhold Mathematics Series, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1993.

Regular orbits of symmetric subgroups on partial flag varieties, Representation theory, complex analysis, and integral geometry. Dan Ciubotaru, Kyo Nishiyama, Peter E Trapa, Birkhäuser/SpringerNew YorkDan Ciubotaru, Kyo Nishiyama, and Peter E. Trapa, Regular orbits of symmetric subgroups on partial flag varieties, Representation theory, complex analysis, and integral geometry, Birkhäuser/Springer, New York, 2012, pp. 61-86.

Mirabolic affine Grassmannian and character sheaves. Michael Finkelberg, Victor Ginzburg, Roman Travkin, Selecta Math. (N.S.). 143-4Michael Finkelberg, Victor Ginzburg, and Roman Travkin, Mirabolic affine Grassmannian and character sheaves, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 14 (2009), no. 3-4, 607-628.

On the exotic Grassmannian and its nilpotent variety. Lucas Fresse, Kyo Nishiyama, Represent. Theory. 20Paging previously given as 1-31Lucas Fresse and Kyo Nishiyama, On the exotic Grassmannian and its nilpotent variety, Represent. Theory 20 (2016), 451-481, [Paging previously given as 1-31].

A Generalization of Steinberg Theory and an Exotic Moment Map. International Mathematics Research Notices. 80, A Generalization of Steinberg Theory and an Exotic Moment Map, International Mathematics Research Notices (2020), rnaa080.

Orbit embedding for double flag varieties and Steinberg maps, Lie groups, number theory, and vertex algebras. Contemp. Math. 768Amer. Math. Soc, Orbit embedding for double flag varieties and Steinberg maps, Lie groups, number theory, and vertex algebras, Contemp. Math., vol. 768, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2021, pp. 21-42.

Action of Hecke algebra on the double flag variety of type AIII. Lucas Fresse, Kyo Nishiyama, arXiv:2206.10476Adv. in Appl. Math. to appear) (2022)Lucas Fresse and Kyo Nishiyama, Action of Hecke algebra on the double flag variety of type AIII, Adv. in Appl. Math. (to appear) (2022), [arXiv:2206.10476].

On generalized Steinberg theory for type AIII. Lucas Fresse, Kyo Nishiyama, Algebr. Comb. 61Lucas Fresse and Kyo Nishiyama, On generalized Steinberg theory for type AIII, Algebr. Comb. 6 (2023), no. 1, 165-195.

William Fulton, Young Tableaux, With applications to representation theory and geometry. CambridgeCambridge University Press35William Fulton, Young tableaux, London Mathematical Society Student Texts, vol. 35, Cam- bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997, With applications to representation theory and geometry.

Unzerlegbare Darstellungen. I. Peter Gabriel, Manuscripta Math. 66309correctionPeter Gabriel, Unzerlegbare Darstellungen. I, Manuscripta Math. 6 (1972), 71-103; correc- tion, ibid. 6 (1972), 309.

Sigurdur Helgason, Differential geometry, Lie groups, and symmetric spaces. New YorkAcademic Press Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers80Sigurdur Helgason, Differential geometry, Lie groups, and symmetric spaces, Pure and Ap- plied Mathematics, vol. 80, Academic Press Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers], New York, 1978.

Orbital variety closures and the convolution product in Borel-Moore homology. Vladimir Hinich, Anthony Joseph, Selecta Math. (N.S.). 111Vladimir Hinich and Anthony Joseph, Orbital variety closures and the convolution product in Borel-Moore homology, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 11 (2005), no. 1, 9-36.

On orbits in double flag varieties for symmetric pairs. Xuhua He, Kyo Nishiyama, Hiroyuki Ochiai, Yoshiki Oshima, Transf. Groups. 18Xuhua He, Kyo Nishiyama, Hiroyuki Ochiai, and Yoshiki Oshima, On orbits in double flag varieties for symmetric pairs, Transf. Groups 18 (2013), 1091-1136.

Hiroki Homma, arXiv:2103.14509Double flag varieties and representations of quivers. Hiroki Homma, Double flag varieties and representations of quivers, arXiv: 2103.14509 (2021).

The exotic Robinson-Schensted correspondence. Anthony Henderson, Peter E Trapa, J. Algebra. 370Anthony Henderson and Peter E. Trapa, The exotic Robinson-Schensted correspondence, J. Algebra 370 (2012), 32-45.

Linear algebraic groups. James E Humphreys, Graduate Texts in Mathematics. 21Springer-VerlagJames E. Humphreys, Linear algebraic groups, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 21, Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1975.

Nilpotent orbits in representation theory, Lie theory. Jens Carsten Jantzen, Progr. Math. 228Birkhäuser BostonJens Carsten Jantzen, Nilpotent orbits in representation theory, Lie theory, Progr. Math., vol. 228, Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 2004, pp. 1-211.

Infinite root systems, representations of graphs and invariant theory. V G Kac, Invent. Math. 561V. G. Kac, Infinite root systems, representations of graphs and invariant theory, Invent. Math. 56 (1980), no. 1, 57-92.

Some remarks on nilpotent orbits. J. Algebra. 641, Some remarks on nilpotent orbits, J. Algebra 64 (1980), no. 1, 190-213.

Infinite root systems, representations of graphs and invariant theory. J. Algebra. II1, Infinite root systems, representations of graphs and invariant theory. II, J. Algebra 78 (1982), no. 1, 141-162.

Infinite-dimensional Lie algebras. G Victor, Kac, Cambridge University PressCambridgethird ed.Victor G. Kac, Infinite-dimensional Lie algebras, third ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.

An exotic Deligne-Langlands correspondence for symplectic groups. Syu Kato, Duke Math. J. 1482Syu Kato, An exotic Deligne-Langlands correspondence for symplectic groups, Duke Math. J. 148 (2009), no. 2, 305-371.

Instability in invariant theory. George R Kempf, Ann. of Math. 2George R. Kempf, Instability in invariant theory, Ann. of Math. (2) 108 (1978), no. 2, 299-316.

Classification of reductive real spherical pairs II. The semisimple case. F Knop, B Krötz, T Pecher, H Schlichtkrull, Transform. Groups. 242F. Knop, B. Krötz, T. Pecher, and H. Schlichtkrull, Classification of reductive real spherical pairs II. The semisimple case, Transform. Groups 24 (2019), no. 2, 467-510.

Classification of reductive real spherical pairs I. The simple case. Friedrich Knop, Bernhard Krötz, Tobias Pecher, Henrik Schlichtkrull, Transform. Groups. 241Friedrich Knop, Bernhard Krötz, Tobias Pecher, and Henrik Schlichtkrull, Classification of reductive real spherical pairs I. The simple case, Transform. Groups 24 (2019), no. 1, 67-114.

Classification of finite-multiplicity symmetric pairs. T Kobayashi, T Matsuki, Transform. Groups. 192T. Kobayashi and T. Matsuki, Classification of finite-multiplicity symmetric pairs, Trans- form. Groups 19 (2014), no. 2, 457-493.

Some remarks on multiplicity free spaces. Friedrich Knop, Representation theories and algebraic geometry. DordrechtKluwer Acad. Publ514Friedrich Knop, Some remarks on multiplicity free spaces, Representation theories and alge- braic geometry (Montreal, PQ, 1997), NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci., vol. 514, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1998, pp. 301-317.

Finite multiplicity theorems for induction and restriction. Toshiyuki Kobayashi, Toshio Oshima, Adv. Math. 248Toshiyuki Kobayashi and Toshio Oshima, Finite multiplicity theorems for induction and restriction, Adv. Math. 248 (2013), 921-944.

Bertram Kostant, Lie group representations on polynomial rings. 85Bertram Kostant, Lie group representations on polynomial rings, Amer. J. Math. 85 (1963), 327-404.

Quantization and representation theory, Representation theory of Lie groups. Cambridge Univ. PressCambridge, Quantization and representation theory, Representation theory of Lie groups, Cam- bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1979, pp. 287-316.

Orbits and representations associated with symmetric spaces. B Kostant, S Rallis, Amer. J. Math. 93B. Kostant and S. Rallis, Orbits and representations associated with symmetric spaces, Amer. J. Math. 93 (1971), 753-809.

Classification of smooth affine spherical varieties. Friedrich Knop, Bart Van Steirteghem, Transform. Groups. 113Friedrich Knop and Bart Van Steirteghem, Classification of smooth affine spherical varieties, Transform. Groups 11 (2006), no. 3, 495-516.

A classification of multiplicity free representations. Andrew S Leahy, J. Lie Theory. 82Andrew S. Leahy, A classification of multiplicity free representations, J. Lie Theory 8 (1998), no. 2, 367-391.

On semi-simple subgroups of Lie groups. A Malcev, Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS. Sér. Math. [Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR. 8A. Malcev, On semi-simple subgroups of Lie groups, Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS. Sér. Math. [Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR] 8 (1944), 143-174.

An example of orthogonal triple flag variety of finite type. Toshihiko Matsuki, J. Algebra. 375Toshihiko Matsuki, An example of orthogonal triple flag variety of finite type, J. Algebra 375 (2013), 148-187.

Orthogonal multiple flag varieties of finite type I: Odd degree case. J. Algebra. 425, Orthogonal multiple flag varieties of finite type I: Odd degree case, J. Algebra 425 (2015), 450-523.

Orthogonal multiple flag varieties of finite type II : even degree case. arXiv:1903.06335, Orthogonal multiple flag varieties of finite type II : even degree case, arXiv:1903.06335 (2019).

D Mumford, J Fogarty, F Kirwan, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. BerlinSpringer-Verlag34Geometric invariant theoryD. Mumford, J. Fogarty, and F. Kirwan, Geometric invariant theory, third ed., Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, vol. 34, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.

Dragan Miličić, Localization and Representation Theory of Reductive Lie Groups. Dragan Miličić, Localization and Representation Theory of Reductive Lie Groups, http://www.math.utah.edu/ milicic/Eprints/book.pdf, 1993.

Mamoru Mimura, Hirosi Toda, Translations of Mathematical Monographs. Providence, RIAmerican Mathematical Society91Topology of Lie groups. I, IIMamoru Mimura and Hirosi Toda, Topology of Lie groups. I, II, japanese ed., Translations of Mathematical Monographs, vol. 91, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1991.

Multiple flag varieties of finite type. Peter Magyar, Jerzy Weyman, Andrei Zelevinsky, Adv. Math. 1411Peter Magyar, Jerzy Weyman, and Andrei Zelevinsky, Multiple flag varieties of finite type, Adv. Math. 141 (1999), no. 1, 97-118.

Symplectic multiple flag varieties of finite type. J. Algebra. 2301, Symplectic multiple flag varieties of finite type, J. Algebra 230 (2000), no. 1, 245- 265.

Enhanced orbit embedding. Kyo Nishiyama, Comment. Math. Univ. St. Pauli. 631-2Kyo Nishiyama, Enhanced orbit embedding, Comment. Math. Univ. St. Pauli 63 (2014), no. 1-2, 223-232.

Double flag varieties for a symmetric pair and finiteness of orbits. Kyo Nishiyama, Hiroyuki Ochiai, J. Lie Theory. 211Kyo Nishiyama and Hiroyuki Ochiai, Double flag varieties for a symmetric pair and finiteness of orbits, J. Lie Theory 21 (2011), no. 1, 79-99.

Real double flag varieties for the symplectic group. Kyo Nishiyama, Ø Bent, Rsted, J. Funct. Anal. 2742Kyo Nishiyama and Bent Ø rsted, Real double flag varieties for the symplectic group, J. Funct. Anal. 274 (2018), no. 2, 573-604.

Irreducible components of exotic Springer fibres. V Nandakumar, D Rosso, N Saunders, J. Lond. Math. Soc. 2V. Nandakumar, D. Rosso, and N. Saunders, Irreducible components of exotic Springer fibres, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 98 (2018), no. 3, 609-637.

The closures of nilpotent orbits in the classical symmetric pairs and their singularities. Takuya Ohta, Tohoku Math. J. 2Takuya Ohta, The closures of nilpotent orbits in the classical symmetric pairs and their singularities, Tohoku Math. J. (2) 43 (1991), no. 2, 161-211.

An inclusion between sets of orbits and surjectivity of the restriction map of rings of invariants. Hokkaido Math. J. 373, An inclusion between sets of orbits and surjectivity of the restriction map of rings of invariants, Hokkaido Math. J. 37 (2008), no. 3, 437-454.

On the conormal bundle of a G-stable subvariety. Dmitri I Panyushev, Manuscripta Math. 992Dmitri I. Panyushev, On the conormal bundle of a G-stable subvariety, Manuscripta Math. 99 (1999), no. 2, 185-202.

On the geometry of spherical varieties. Nicolas Perrin, Transform. Groups. 191Nicolas Perrin, On the geometry of spherical varieties, Transform. Groups 19 (2014), no. 1, 171-223.

Tensor product decompositions and open orbits in multiple flag varieties. Vladimir L Popov, J. Algebra. 3131Vladimir L. Popov, Tensor product decompositions and open orbits in multiple flag varieties, J. Algebra 313 (2007), no. 1, 392-416.

Degenerations for representations of quivers with relations. Christine Riedtmann, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. 4Christine Riedtmann, Degenerations for representations of quivers with relations, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 19 (1986), no. 2, 275-301.

Parabolic subgroups with abelian unipotent radical. Roger Richardson, Gerhard Röhrle, Robert Steinberg, Invent. Math. 1103Roger Richardson, Gerhard Röhrle, and Robert Steinberg, Parabolic subgroups with abelian unipotent radical, Invent. Math. 110 (1992), no. 3, 649-671.

Combinatorics and geometry of K-orbits on the flag manifold. R W Richardson, T A Springer, Linear algebraic groups and their representations. Los Angeles, CA; Providence, RIAmer. Math. Soc153R. W. Richardson and T. A. Springer, Combinatorics and geometry of K-orbits on the flag manifold, Linear algebraic groups and their representations (Los Angeles, CA, 1992), Contemp. Math., vol. 153, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1993, pp. 109-142.

The Bruhat order on symmetric varieties. Complements To, Geom. Dedicata. 351-3, Complements to: "The Bruhat order on symmetric varieties" [Geom. Dedicata 35 (1990), no. 1-3, 389-436;

. Geom. Dedicata. 492MR1066573 (92e:20032)MR1066573 (92e:20032)], Geom. Dedicata 49 (1994), no. 2, 231- 238.

Description of infinite orbits on multiple projective spaces. Naoya Shimamoto, J. Algebra. 563Naoya Shimamoto, Description of infinite orbits on multiple projective spaces, J. Algebra 563 (2020), 404-425.

Rahul Singh, arXiv:2010.13918A robinson-schensted correspondence for partial permutations. Rahul Singh, A robinson-schensted correspondence for partial permutations, arXiv:2010.13918 (2020).

Simple singularities and simple algebraic groups. Peter Slodowy, Lecture Notes in Mathematics. 815SpringerPeter Slodowy, Simple singularities and simple algebraic groups, Lecture Notes in Mathe- matics, vol. 815, Springer, Berlin, 1980.

The fixed point set of a unipotent transformation on the flag manifold. N Spaltenstein, Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 79=Indag. Math. 5N. Spaltenstein, The fixed point set of a unipotent transformation on the flag manifold, Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 79=Indag. Math. (1976), no. no. 5,, 452-456.

The unipotent variety of a semi-simple group, Algebraic Geometry (Internat. Colloq. T A Springer, Tata Inst. Fund. Res. Oxford Univ. PressT. A. Springer, The unipotent variety of a semi-simple group, Algebraic Geometry (Internat. Colloq., Tata Inst. Fund. Res., Bombay, 1968), Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1969, pp. 373- 391.

Some results on algebraic groups with involutions, Algebraic groups and related topics. Kyoto/Nagoya; AmsterdamNorth-Holland6, Some results on algebraic groups with involutions, Algebraic groups and related topics (Kyoto/Nagoya, 1983), Adv. Stud. Pure Math., vol. 6, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985, pp. 525-543.

Linear algebraic groups. Progress in Mathematics. 9Birkhäuser Boston Incsecond ed., Linear algebraic groups, second ed., Progress in Mathematics, vol. 9, Birkhäuser Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 1998.

Exotic symmetric space over a finite field, I, Transform. T Shoji, K Sorlin, Groups. 183T. Shoji and K. Sorlin, Exotic symmetric space over a finite field, I, Transform. Groups 18 (2013), no. 3, 877-929.

Exotic symmetric space over a finite field. Transform. Groups. II3, Exotic symmetric space over a finite field, II, Transform. Groups 19 (2014), no. 3, 887-926.

Exotic symmetric space over a finite field. III, Transform. Groups. 194, Exotic symmetric space over a finite field, III, Transform. Groups 19 (2014), no. 4, 1149-1198.

Endomorphisms of linear algebraic groups. Robert Steinberg, American Mathematical SocietyProvidence, R.I.Robert Steinberg, Endomorphisms of linear algebraic groups, Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, No. 80, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1968.

On the desingularization of the unipotent variety. Invent. Math. 36, On the desingularization of the unipotent variety, Invent. Math. 36 (1976), 209-224.

An occurrence of the Robinson-Schensted correspondence. J. Algebra. 1132, An occurrence of the Robinson-Schensted correspondence, J. Algebra 113 (1988), no. 2, 523-528.

Multiplicity-free products and restrictions of Weyl characters, Represent. John R Stembridge, Theory. 7electronicJohn R. Stembridge, Multiplicity-free products and restrictions of Weyl characters, Repre- sent. Theory 7 (2003), 404-439 (electronic).

Invariant Theory and Algebraic Transformation Groups. A Dmitry, Timashev, Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences. 138SpringerHomogeneous spaces and equivariant embeddingsDmitry A. Timashev, Homogeneous spaces and equivariant embeddings, Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, vol. 138, Springer, Heidelberg, 2011, Invariant Theory and Algebraic Transformation Groups, 8.

Generalized Robinson-Schensted algorithms for real groups. Peter E Trapa, Internat. Math. Res. Notices. 15Peter E. Trapa, Generalized Robinson-Schensted algorithms for real groups, Internat. Math. Res. Notices (1999), no. 15, 803-834.

Mirabolic Robinson-Schensted-Knuth correspondence. Roman Travkin, Selecta Math. (N.S.). 143-4Roman Travkin, Mirabolic Robinson-Schensted-Knuth correspondence, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 14 (2009), no. 3-4, 727-758.

Complexity of actions of reductive groups. È B Vinberg, Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 20196È. B. Vinberg, Complexity of actions of reductive groups, Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 20 (1986), no. 1, 1-13, 96.

The Robinson-Schensted and Schützenberger algorithms, an elementary approach. A A Marc, Van Leeuwen, The Foata Festschrift, # R15. 3Marc A. A. van Leeuwen, The Robinson-Schensted and Schützenberger algorithms, an ele- mentary approach, vol. 3, 1996, The Foata Festschrift, # R15, pp. 1-32.

Opération de groupes réductifs dans un type de cônes presque homogènes. Thierry Vust, Bull. Soc. Math. France. 102Thierry Vust, Opération de groupes réductifs dans un type de cônes presque homogènes, Bull. Soc. Math. France 102 (1974), 317-333.

Representations of finite classical groups. Andrey V Zelevinsky, Lecture Notes in Mathematics. 869Springer-VerlagAndrey V. Zelevinsky, Representations of finite classical groups, Lecture Notes in Mathe- matics, vol. 869, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1981.

Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, F-54506, France Email address: lucas.fresse@univ-lorraine. Cnrs Université De Lorraine, Institutélie Cartan De, Lorraine , 7502Chuo-ku, Sagamiharafr Department of Mathematics, Aoyama Gakuin UniversityJapan Email address: kyo@math.aoyama.ac.jpUniversité de Lorraine, CNRS, InstitutÉlie Cartan de Lorraine, UMR 7502, Vandoeu- vre-lès-Nancy, F-54506, France Email address: lucas.fresse@univ-lorraine.fr Department of Mathematics, Aoyama Gakuin University, Fuchinobe 5-10-1, Chuo-ku, Sagamihara 252-5258, Japan Email address: kyo@math.aoyama.ac.jp