# Soil-transmitted helminth infections associated with wastewater and sludge reuse: a review of current evidence

CorpusID: 29159172
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0be0f41e4dc62b4ba2329064b9ca684dbf1d1eeb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0be0f41e4dc62b4ba2329064b9ca684dbf1d1eeb)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Soil-transmitted helminth infections associated with wastewater and sludge reuse: a review of current evidence


Isaac Dennis Amoah 
Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology
Durban University of Technology
DurbanSouth Africa

Anthony Ayodeji Adegoke 
Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology
Durban University of Technology
DurbanSouth Africa

Thor Axel Stenstr€ 
Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology
Durban University of Technology
DurbanSouth Africa

Soil-transmitted helminth infections associated with wastewater and sludge reuse: a review of current evidence
10.1111/tmi.13076Reviewsoil-transmitted helminthswastewater reusesludge reuseAscaris spphookwormToxocara spp
objective To review current evidence on infections related to the concentration of soil-transmitted helminth (STH) eggs in wastewater, sludge and vegetables irrigated with wastewater or grown on sludge-amended soils.method Search of Web of Science, Science Direct, PubMed and Google Scholar databases for publications reporting on STH egg concentration in wastewater, sludge and vegetables and for epidemiological studies on wastewater/sludge reuse and STH infections.results STH egg concentrations were variable but high in wastewater and sludge especially in developing countries. They ranged from 6 to 16 000 eggs/L in wastewater and from 0 to 23 000 eggs/g in sludge and far exceed limits set in the WHO guideline for wastewater/sludge reuse. Numbers of STH eggs on vegetables ranged from 0 to 100 eggs/g. The concentration of STH eggs in wastewater, sludge and vegetables therefore relates to risks of infection through different exposure routes.conclusion Epidemiological evidence reveals an increased prevalence of STH infections associated with direct exposure to wastewater or sludge (farmers) and consumption of vegetables grown on soil treated with it. This calls for increased efforts to reduce the adverse health impact of wastewater and sludge reuse in line with the WHO multi-barrier approach.

## Introduction

Wastewater and sludge reuse in agriculture have been promoted as a concept of sustainable development [1]. Wastewater may be used for irrigation either directly, or indirectly through the use of wastewater-contaminated surface water. Contamination of surface water with wastewater may occur due to poor infrastructure, such as non-treated effluents, leaky sewage pipes and faulty wastewater treatment plants [2]. The increase in the use of wastewater and sludge globally is driven by rapid urbanisation, growing water shortage and the benefits associated with the practice as irrigation water [1][2][3][4]. With approximately 330 km 3 of municipal wastewater produced per year [5], it is a reliable alternative water source for irrigation. Wastewater and sludge reuse is most predominant in developing and arid countries, but has also been documented in Northern America, Europe and Australia [2,[6][7][8]. Globally, wastewater-irrigated farms are estimated to cover 5-20 million hectares, with higher proportions in China [9] and Mexico [10]. When also accounting for wastewater-contaminated surface water, the total land area irrigated with wastewater is substantially higher [11]. The use of sludge is encouraged due to its high nutrient and organic material contents [12]. It is mostly applied as a soil amendment [13] to improve water retention of soil [14,15]. Sludge may also be used to rehabilitate degraded, exhausted and burnt soil [16,17].

Despite the many benefits of wastewater and sludge use in agriculture, these practices can have adverse impacts on human health [18,19]. Wastewater may contain contaminants that are harmful to health, such as metalloids/metals [20,21], excess nutrients, hormones [22][23][24], organic compounds such as pesticides, components of consumer products, pharmaceuticals and personal care products [25][26][27] and, most importantly, pathogenic microorganisms [28][29][30][31][32].

Among the microbial pathogens, soil-transmitted helminths (STHs) are of the most important health concern in wastewater and sludge reuse [19] especially in endemic regions, mainly due to their persistence in the 692 environment and the low infectious dose [33][34][35][36][37]. Concentration of STH eggs in wastewater/sludge is an indication of the health hazard of its application [38,39]. Despite the adoption of the WHO wastewater/sludge reuse guidelines and the development of local guidelines, where the suitability of these (wastewater and sludge) for reuse is covered, increased STH infections for different populations due to wastewater/sludge reuse continue to be reported. This review therefore presents the current evidence in relation to concentration of STH eggs in wastewater and sludge and reported adverse health effects (STH infections).


## Methods


## Search strategy

This review was based on a literature search of Web of Science, Science Direct, PubMed and Google Scholar databases. The keywords and word strings used were soil-transmitted helminths OR intestinal parasites OR Ascaris spp OR hookworm OR Trichuris spp OR Toxocara spp OR Taenia spp AND wastewater reuse OR sludge reuse. The organism search strings were repeated with AND compost OR vegetables OR crops OR plants; as well as with AND soil OR urine diversion (UD) toilet waste OR biosolids. Although Taenia spp is not a STH it was added to the review due to the similarity in survival characteristics in the environment, its epidemiology and transmission route with STHs [40].

Original articles reporting on STH egg concentrations in wastewater, sludge, compost and crops or vegetables were considered. Only peer-reviewed papers published in English were included. There were no restrictions on publication year or geographic location.

Article titles and abstracts were assessed to determine their suitability for inclusion in this review. Studies included can be categorised into publications on the concentration of STH eggs in wastewater and sludge reused in agriculture; publications that reported the concentration of these eggs on vegetables grown with wastewater or sludge; and publications that directly measured the impact of wastewater/sludge reuse on STH infections using epidemiological methods. Studies that reported infections other than STHs and Taenia spp were not included.


## Data extraction and analysis

The following information was collected from each article considered for this review: (1) geographic location of the study; (2) concentration of STH eggs in samples studied; (3) type of STH reported; (4) target population studied; (5) infection levels reported in each exposed population.

STH egg concentrations in wastewater, sludge and on vegetables from articles and reports were collated and captured in tables for easy representation. Measured impacts of wastewater/sludge reuse on STH infections were also collated and the reported odds of infection, odds ratios or prevalence of infection from exposure captured in tables.


## Results

The search yielded 175 articles, 150 from the search strings used and 25 from manual search. Of this number, 59 were included in this review. Figure 1 shows the process followed in arriving at the final number of articles reviewed. Of the 59 articles reviewed, 25 reported on the concentration of STH eggs in wastewater and sludge, 19 on STH contamination of vegetables irrigated with wastewater or grown on sludge-amended soils and 15 reported on the direct epidemiological link between wastewater/sludge reuse and STH infections.

Concentration of STH eggs in wastewater and sludge STH eggs are a major group of pathogens of concern with concentrations in wastewater and sludge that vary between locations due to differences in infection prevalence or intensity in the connected population. An estimated 3000 eggs/L may be found in wastewater from endemic regions [41,42]. Table 1 summarises reported concentrations of STH eggs found in wastewater and sludge. STH egg concentrations in developing countries are generally higher than in developed countries.


## Concentration of STH eggs on vegetables irrigated with wastewater or grown on sludge-amended soil

Contamination of vegetables with STH eggs due to wastewater and sludge reuse occurs when these are used for irrigation or fertilisation. Local factors such as impact of UV light, rain pattern and withholding time between irrigation/fertilisation and harvest determine the concentrations and risk. The impact of these factors on STH egg levels on vegetables has rarely been addressed [43][44][45]. Concentrations of STH eggs ranged from 0.027 eggs/ 100 g [43] to 10 eggs/100 g [44] ( Table 2). It is noteworthy that some of these did not report concentration of STH eggs but rather the prevalence of contamination in a particular region. Also, contamination may not always be from wastewater or sludge reuse but in some cases may have been from post-harvest handling of the produce.

Evidence of STH infections associated with wastewater and sludge reuse Direct exposure to wastewater or sludge during their application may result in STH infections, and consumption of the farm produce may result in infections due to the contamination. Several epidemiological studies established the association between wastewater/sludge reuse and STH infections (Table 3).  


## Discussion


## 694

the main concern, but impact from animals such as dogs and cats is also important where their faeces may contain eggs of Toxocara spp, which could lead to zoonotic infection. These eggs (Toxocara spp) are predominantly found in investigations of soil and playgrounds in developed countries, especially where pets are allowed [49,50], while their abundance may be more generally occurring in many developing countries. The generally high concentration of STH eggs in wastewater and sludge is reflected by the infection prevalence and is of concern especially in reuse scenarios. Reuse of the wastewater and sludge is one major route through which exposure to the eggs may occur and affect exposed farmers directly, while indirectly impacting broader groups such as community members and consumers of crops. Infection risks are based on a single STH egg dose. The concentrations of STH eggs reported in wastewater and sludge as presented in Table 1 reflect the risks based on their further deposit or reuse linked to human direct or indirect exposure. Exposure is mainly through the oral route for most STHs and additionally through skin penetration for hookworms. The concentrations found in the majority of the reported investigations (Table 1) exceed the WHO guideline values for wastewater/sludge reuse and result in infections far above the health target of ≤10 À6 disability adjusted life years (DALYs) [19]. Direct exposure to wastewater or sludge during application is the main route of exposure for farmers. The informal nature of wastewater or sludge reuse in many countries makes regulation difficult and also hinders implementation of effective public health awareness campaigns to reduce the impact of the practice on the health of farmers and the general population. Exposure to soil containing STH eggs may also result in increased infections. Due to the importance of soil in the transmission of these infections, several studies have focused on the prevalence and concentration of STH eggs in public parks, beaches, backyards and farmlands [51]. The prevalence and concentration of these eggs in soil varies greatly from 1.1 eggs/g [52] to 454.5 eggs/g [53]. Accumulation of STH eggs in farm soil occurs due to multiple applications of wastewater and sludge to the same parcel of land [51,54]. As this accumulation persists over time, the risk of infection is not diminished due to the latency period. Coupled with the persistence of these eggs in the environment of 10-12 months [55], STH egg concentrations on farm soil could be higher than concentrations in the wastewater or sludge resulting in higher infection risks [54,56]. For instance, Amoah et al. [54] reported an average concentration of 3.70 (AE0.23) eggs/g for Ascaris spp and 2.01 (AE0.23) eggs/g Community members Human excreta only Consumption of vegetables fertilised with human excreta resulted in high helminth infection rate Trang et al. [74] Farming households Wastewater No significant association was found between wastewater exposure and helminth infections Trang et al. [122] Adults and children Wastewater and human excreta

Wastewater exposure did not pose a significant risk for helminth infection Nguyen et al. [73] Women Excreta

The use of untreated faeces as fertiliser was significantly associated with infection with A. lumbricoides (OR = 1.2, 95% CI 1.0-1.6) Van der-Hoek et al. [1] Community members Human excreta only The use of human excreta as fertiliser was a significant risk factor for hookworm infection, especially among adult women Gumbo et al. [123] Male farmers Wastewater Farmers using wastewater for irrigation had a prevalence ratio of 1.50 for hookworm infections Habbari et al. [61] Children Wastewater Significant increase in prevalence of ascariasis for exposed children Bouhoum and Schwartzbrod [124] Children Wastewater Higher prevalence among exposed of any helminth infection (73% exposed vs. 30% unexposed), Ascaris infection (33% vs. 2%), and Trichuris infection (17% vs. 2%) Blumenthal et al. [61] Agricultural workers and their family members Wastewater Higher prevalence of Ascaris infection among exposed compared to unexposed for children. Children under 5 years had higher odds of infection (OR = 18.0) than children above 5 years (13.5) Cifuentes et al. [125] Agricultural workers and their family members Wastewater Higher prevalence of diarrheal disease (30% vs. 23%) and Ascaris infection (15% vs. 3%) for exposed children Amoah et al. [54] Agricultural workers and their family members Farming households Wastewater People having close contact with wastewater polluted surface water had a higher risk of helminth infections compared with those without contact Fuhrimann et al. [72] Community members Wastewater High prevalence of intestinal parasite infections for peri-urban farmers, using wastewater for irrigation, as compared to other groups for hookworm on farms in Ghana. Fixed time periods for survival may be difficult to give as conditions may vary greatly. Due to the low infection dose (essentially a male and female worm for multiplication in the body), a conservative approach has been taken with an essentially low occurrence of eggs in environmental samples. Direct exposure to wastewater and sludge has been reported as the main route of infection with STHs associated with reuse. However, Yajima et al. [57] reported an increased risk of STHs infections from consumption of vegetables fertilised with sludge rather than through direct exposure to sludge. The contamination of vegetables with STH eggs due to wastewater reuse is mainly dependent on the quality of the wastewater, the irrigation method used and the type of crops. WHO wastewater reuse guidelines relate the risk to the likelihood of contact, where for example the use of drip irrigation for high crops is given a reduction in the likelihood of infection risks of 4 log units of pathogens. A comparative value of 2 log units for low crops applies. A higher reduction in pathogens could be achieved with the use of subsurface irrigation, with 6 log units [19]. If instead sprinkler irrigation is used, this results in a higher risk due to the contact between potential STH eggs in water droplets and the crops, causing higher contamination of the vegetables. High ejection sprinkler irrigation may also result in exposure risks for communities residing close to the irrigation sites due to aerosols as reported in several earlier studies [58][59][60]. Furrow or flood irrigation may also increase the possibility of direct contact with the wastewater by farmers, increasing risks of infections [61,62].

Contamination of vegetables with STH eggs from wastewater-irrigated fields has been reported extensively [63][64][65][66][67][68] (Table 2). The relative impact of contamination from other activities or routes parallel to wastewater/ sludge reuse has not been demonstrated clearly. Contamination levels of STH eggs on vegetables are largely dependent on the quality of the wastewater/sludge as well as the irrigation method. Post-harvest practices such as hygiene of market women and even cleanliness of the markets during retail and transportation may result in additional contamination of the vegetables with STH eggs [69]. Uga et al. [70], reported that a high contamination of vegetables from markets occurred with both animal and human parasites. This could be attributed to both contaminations during cultivation and handling and storage practices at the various markets. Shuval et al. [71] reported that eggs of common STHs could survive on crops 4-12 months. These findings were instrumental in the development of the first WHO wastewater reuse guidelines.

Despite the established estimated risk levels of STH infections from wastewater/sludge reuse through QMRA, only a small number of studies have applied epidemiological assessments and methods to accurately measure the contribution of wastewater/sludge reuse to STH infections ( Table 3).

Independently of that, a review of the scarce literature shows an overwhelming evidence of increased risks of STH infections due to wastewater/sludge reuse [1,18,54,72,73] even if some studies were unable to establish links. For instance, Trang et al. [74] found no increase in STH infections from exposure to wastewater in Vietnam. The interlinkages between different contamination sources and transmission routes are essential in these types of studies. Pham-Duc et al. [75] found that hygiene was the main pre-disposing factor to an increased risk of parasitic infections (mainly protozoan) rather than exposure to wastewater or sludge. The epidemiological studies highlight a high incidence of STH infections among farmers and consumers of vegetables irrigated with wastewater or on sludge amended soil. The epidemiological approach may be more accurate in determination of risks of STH infections associated with wastewater/sludge reuse than the QMRA, but is dependent on large enough sample sizes, a well-documented background level of disease and appropriate control groups. In these situations, the QMRA approach is simpler and can be interlinked with the epidemiological studies. QMRA therefore is a valuable predictive tool and has been used extensively in estimating the risks of STH infections from wastewater or sludge reuse [31,56,[76][77][78][79][80][81]. The estimated risks are affected by several assumptions, which do not affect the epidemiological assessments to the same extent, like the dose of STH eggs ingested by exposed individuals (either assumed or calculated) and to a large extent the dose-response model used. These variations could result in under or over estimation of the associated risks. The use of different dose-response models to estimate infection risks from ingestion of the same dose would result in different risks estimates which creates a challenge for comparison. Despite the usefulness of the epidemiological methods as a golden standard, limitations also relate to the costs involved which is far higher than predictive estimates. These costs for epidemiological studies might be the driving force behind the increase use of the QMRA method in estimation of risks.

The use of either QMRA or epidemiological methods has established that wastewater or sludge reuse contributes significantly to increased STH infections. These risks are mainly due to the high concentration of STH eggs in the wastewater or sludge, which calls for the adoption of effective strategies for risks reduction and/or management. The WHO wastewater/sludge reuse guidelines suggested protective measures that will ensure a 6-7 log unit reduction in pathogen concentrations, thereby reducing risks of infections for both farmers and consumers. These measures, referred to as the multiple barrier approach, include the following:

• Wastewater/sludge treatment: The concentration of STH eggs after treatment varies depending on the treatment technology. For instance, the highest reduction in helminth eggs (1-3 log units) has been reported with low rate biological processes such as waste stabilisation ponds, wastewater storage and treatment reservoirs and constructed wetlands [19]. Therefore, reuse scenarios could be developed based on the type of treatment technology available or the treatment technology could be chosen based on the intended reuse. Background values like the ones summarised in Table 1 can then be applied in comparative assessments of the reduction efficiency and variability.

• Control of human exposure to the pathogens in the wastewater/sludge: This could be achieved through the use of protective gear such as boots, gloves, nose masks, etc. However, this is rare, especially in developing countries, where the practice is common, due to the financial constraints. In this context, both background information of contamination levels (Table 1) and follow-up epidemiological evidences (Table 3) are of importance and should be linked with risk-reduction strategies.

• Crop restriction: This measure helps ensure that the choice of crops irrigated or grown is dependent on the quality of wastewater/sludge so as to protect health. However, the WHO reuse guidelines acknowledge that this will not be possible in countries where a monitoring regime is not in place. Wastewater/sludge reuse in most countries is informal and driven by economic reasons; therefore, this barrier may not be effectively implemented. By a combination of information on incidence of STH infections in an area or region, risk assumptions may be reached, which combined with irrigation practices and potential occurrence (Tables 1 and 2) can give an indication for handling practices.

• Wastewater application technique: The type of irrigation technique plays a major role in contamination of crops with pathogens from wastewater. Different irrigation methods carry varying risks in relation to contamination of vegetables, exposure of farmers and communities living close to irrigation sites.

• Cessation of irrigation before harvest: Pathogens will naturally die depending on their survival ability; therefore, cessation of irrigation days before harvest has been suggested to result in reduction of contamination. However, this might not necessarily result in reduction of viable STH eggs due to their high persistence in the environment.

• Food preparation techniques: The pathogen reduction possible depends on the food preparation method, for instance washing in water and hypochlorite solution may result in 1-3 log units reduction, peeling of fruits and root vegetables 2 log reduction and cooking may result in 5-6 log unit reduction in pathogens. The food preparation method may therefore be instrumental in public health protection [19] where a higher and comparative assessment as related to the epidemiological outcomes (Table 3) would give a better decision base for the future.

The WHO wastewater/sludge reuse guideline also recommends a guideline value of ≤1 helminth egg per gram or litre of sludge or wastewater intended for unrestricted agriculture. Some researchers suggest the reduction of this guideline value to ≤0.1 helminth egg per gram or litre, especially in situations where children are exposed [82]. However, in resource-limited countries where prevalences of STH infections are high and causing high concentrations of eggs in the wastewater/sludge, this may not be achievable. In such situations, the use of the QMRA approach may provide an option to determine the least quality required for specific uses. This may result in the preparation of different application guidelines depending on the quality achievable with the treatment options available in such settings. The multiple barrier approach should always be advocated for in these situations.

The Sanitation Safety Plan (SSP) Manual prepared by WHO [83] makes it easier to implement these wastewater/sludge reuse guidelines by presenting a stepwise approach to incorporation of reuse scenarios to sanitation. This manual presents six modules for the planning of sanitation systems, from generation through to collection, transportation, to treatment and reuse. The SSP manual accounts for risks of reuse through the use of the QMRA approach which applies the principle of hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) based on the Stockholm framework for preventive risk assessment and management. The WHO wastewater/sludge reuse guidelines as well as the SSPs provide means for effective reuse of wastewater and sludge whiles protecting public health, but they must be adapted to the local context so as to ensure usefulness. In this context, better background information on occurrence, like presented in Tables 1  and 2, and a broader epidemiological evidence base (Table 3) can be useful in decision-making and management of reuse schemes.


## Conclusion

STH eggs in wastewater and sludge continue to pose serious risks for farmers and other farm workers, including consumers through contamination of vegetables with these eggs. From the scarce studies on epidemiological links between wastewater/sludge reuse and STH infections, it can be concluded that this practice contributes significantly to increased infections. Implementation of the WHO wastewater/sludge reuse guidelines and sanitation safety plans may be instrumental in reducing the risks associated with wastewater/sludge reuse. These guidelines present interventions that may provide additional layers of protection even in cases where the quality of wastewater or sludge being used is poor. The SSPs also provide steps that could be adapted to local contexts for safe reuse of wastewater and sludge. We suggest the adaptation of the WHO wastewater/sludge reuse guidelines and SSPs to local contexts by involving farmers, communities and policy makers to ensure their effective implementation.  (12) 

## Figure 1
1STH eggs in wastewater and sludge pose a threat to human health upon direct or indirect exposure. Concentration of these eggs in faecal materials varies greatly depending on the infection levels within the connected populations[46, 47]. Infected individuals can excrete 10 2 -10 4 eggs/g daily, contributing to high concentrations in wastewater and sludge[48]. Human faecal matter is Number of articles obtained through the search process and the studies reviewed based on eligibility criteria.


WastewaterIncreased odds of infection for farmers for both Ascaris spp and hookworm for farmers and family members as compared to unexposed populations, especially in the raining season Pham-Duc et al.[18]   


: 5453-5459. 36. Stephenson LS, Latham MC, Ottesen EA. Malnutrition and parasitic helminth infections. Parasitology 2000: 121 (Suppl): S23-S38. 37. Toze S. Reuse of effluent water-benefits and risks. Agric Water Manag 2006: 80(57): 147-159. 38. Zdybel J, Cencek T, Karamon J, Kłap ec T. Effectiveness of selected stages of waste water treatment in elimination of eggs of intestinal parasites. Bull Vet Inst Pulawy 2015: 59 (1): 51-57. 39. Gaspard PG, Wiart J, Shwartzbrod J. Urban sludge reuse in agriculture: waste treatment and parasitological risk. Biores Technol 1995: 52(1): 37-40. 40. Asha A, Okello A, Khamlome B, Inthavong P, Allen J, Thompson RCA. Controlling Taenia solium and soil transmitted helminths in a northern Lao PDR village: impact of a triple dose albendazole regime. Acta Tropical 2017: 174: 171-178. 41. Kamizoulis G. Setting health based targets for water reuse (in agriculture). Desalination 2008: 218(1-3): 154-163. 42. Mara D, Sleigh A. Estimation of Ascaris infection risks in children under 15 from the consumption of wastewater irrigated carrots. J Water Health 2010: 8(1): 35-38. 43. Amahmid O, Asmama S, Bouhoum K. The effect of waste water reuse in irrigation on the contamination level of food crops by Giardia cysts and Ascaris eggs. Int J Food Microbiol 1999: 49(1-2): 19-26. 44. Anh VT, Tram NT, Klank LT, Cam PD, Dalsgaard A. Faecal and protozoan parasite contamination of water spinach (Ipomoea aquatica) cultivated in urban wastewater in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Tropic Med Int Health 2007: 12 (suppl. 2): 73-81. 45. Hajjami K, Ennaji MM, Fouad S, Oubrim N, Cohen N. Wastewater reuse for irrigation in morocco: helminth eggs contamination's level of irrigated crops and sanitary risk (a case study of Settat and Soualem Regions). J Bacteriol Parasitol 2013: 4: 163. https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-9597. 1000163. 46. Chan MS. The global burden of intestinal nematode infections-Fifty years on. Parasitol Today 1997: 13: 438-443. 47. Mara D, Horan N. Handbook of Water and Wastewater Microbiology. Academic Press: London, 2003. ISBN 0-12-470100-0. 48. Smith H, Rose JB. Waterborne Cryptosporidiosis: current Status. Parasitol Today 1998: 14: 14-22. 49. Kostopoulou D, Claerebout E, Arvanitis D et al. Abundance, zoonotic potential and risk factors of intestinal 700

## Table 1 Concentration
1of STH eggs in wastewater and sludge 
from different locations 

Country 

Wastewater 
(eggs/L) 
Sludge (eggs/g) 
References 

Egypt 
6-42 
Mean: 67; 
Maximum: 735 

[84] 

Ghana 
12.9-15.1 
13-94 
[55, 85, 86] 
Morocco 
840 
3.3-13.3 
[87, 88] 
South Africa 
772 
25-185 
[89-91] 
Tunisia 
15-30 
0-4 
[87, 92-94] 
Brazil 
166-202 
75 
[85, 95] 
United States 
1-16 
2-776 
[85, 96-98] 
Mexico 
6-98 
73-177 
[85, 99] 
Peru 
115-273 
60-260 
[87, 100] 
Japan 
80 
1-51 
[87] 
China 
840 
2300 
[87] 
Syria 
800 
[87] 
Vietnam 
450-16000 
[101] 
Pakistan 
142-558 
[102] 
Ukraine 
60 
No data 
[87] 
France 
9 
5-7 
[85, 103] 
Germany 
No data 
<1 
[85] 
Great Britain 
No data 
<6 
[85] 
Spain 
0-1 
867 
[104-107] 



## Table 2
2Prevalence and concentration of STH and other helminth eggs contamination on vegetables Taenia spp, Ascaris spp, Toxocara spp and Strongyloides eggs. 8.4 eggs/100 g (mint, coriander, alfalfa). 30% (of 126) (A variety of vegetables) Ascaris spp., Hookworm, Trichuris spp., Taenia/Echinococcus spp., and Strongyloides stercoralis 0% (of 1130 for cabbage) 1.0% (of 1130 for eggplant) 1.3% (of 1130 for carrot) 2.3% (of 1130 for cucumber)Type Of STH 
Concentration 
Location 
References 

Ascaris spp. 
0.018 eggs/100 g 
Morocco 
[43] 
0.027 eggs/100 g 
0.27 eggs/100 g (Coriander) 
0.46 eggs/100 g (Mint) 
0.07 eggs/100 g (Carrots) 
0.16 eggs/100 g (Radish) 
Ascaris spp. 
1-3 eggs/100 g (Lettuce) 
Turkey 
[108] 
0-3 eggs/100 g (Parsley) 
0-2 eggs/100 g (Spinach) 
All helminth eggs 
10 eggs/100 g (water spinach) 
Cambodia 
[44] 
All helminth eggs 
2.3 eggs/100 g (Lettuce) 
Ghana 
[109] 
Ascaris lumbricoides, Hookworm, Enterobius vermicularis, 
Trichuris trichiura, Taenia and Strongyloides larvae 

0.8-3.7 eggs/100 g (lettuce) 
Ethiopia 
[110] 

Morocco 
[45] 
All STHs 
32.6% (of 304) (a variety of vegetables) 
Iran 
[111] 
Ascaris spp 
2% (of 141)* 
Iran 
[112] 
Ascaris spp, Trichuris trichiura and Hookworm 
44.2% (of 172) (a variety of vegetables) 
India 
[113] 
All STHs 
57.8% (of 199) (a variety of vegetables) 
Nigeria 
[114] 
Ascaris spp 
19-96% (of 126) 
Libya 
[115] 
Toxocara spp 
3-48% (of 126) 
Taenia spp 
6-8.2% (of 1130 for lettuce) 
Nigeria 
[63] 
2.All helminths 
6.3% (of 111) (A variety of vegetables) 
Turkey 
[64] 
All helminths 
36.9% (of 118) (A variety of vegetables) Palestine 
[116] 
Intestinal parasites 
61% (of 168) (lettuce) 
Ghana 
[117] 
18% (of 168) (tomato) 
Intestinal parasites 
13.5% (of 260)* 
Sudan 
[118] 
All STHs 
16.2% (of 270)* 
Saudi Arabia [65] 
Intestinal parasites 
8.4% (of 383)* 
Iran 
[119] 
Intestinal parasites 
14.6% (of 383)* 
Iran 
[120] 

*Not specified. 


## Table 3
3Studies reporting on the association between wastewater/sludge use in agriculture and STH infectionsAuthor/Year 
Target group 
Practice 
Health risk and conclusions 

Pham-Duc et al. [121] 
Farming households 
Wastewater and 
excreta 

Contact with wastewater was a significant risk factor for 
helminth infection (OR = 1.5, 95% CI 1.1-2.2) in general 
and also specifically for Ascaris lumbricoides infection 
(OR = 2.1, 95% CI 1.4-3.2). Significant risk factors for 
Trichuris trichiura infection include the use of human 
excreta (OR = 1.5, 95% CI 1.0-2.3) 
Yajima et al. [57] 


## 18 .
18Pham-Duc P, Nguyen-Viet H, Hattendorf J et al. Ascaris lumbricoides and Trichuris trichiura infections associated with wastewater and human excreta use in agriculture in Vietnam. Parasitol Int 2013: 62(2): 172-180. 19. WHO-World Health Organization. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater-Volume 2: Wastewater Use in Agriculture. WHO-World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2006. 20. Castells XE. V ıas de tratamiento y valorizaci on de fangos de depuradora: Reciclaje de residuos industriales. Ed. D ıaz de Santos: Madrid, 2012. 21. Lam S, Nguyen-Viet H, Tuyet-Hanh TT, Nguyen-Mai H, Harper S. Evidence for public health risks of wastewater and excreta management practices in Southeast Asia: a scoping review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2015: 12 (10): 12863-12885. 22. Burkholder J, Libra B, Weyer P et al. Impacts of waste from concentrated animal feeding operations on water quality. Environ Health Perspect 2007: 115(2): 308-312. 23. Dalsgaard A. Special issue: wastewater use-Food safety and health aspects. Tropic Med Health 2007: 12(2): 1-90. 24. Arvaniti OS, Stasinakis AS. Review on the occurrence, fate and removal of perfluorinated compounds during wastewater treatment. Sci Total Environ 2015: 524-525: 81-92. 25. Harrison EZ, Oakes SR, Hysell M, Hay A. Organic chemicals in sewage sludges. Sci Total Environ 2006: 367(2-3): 481-497. 26. Semblante GU, Hai FI, Huang X, Ball AS, Price WE, Nghiem LD. Trace organic contaminants in biosolids: impact of conventional wastewater and sludge processing technologies and emerging alternatives. J Hazard Mater 2015: 300(14): 1-17. 27. Yang S, Hai FI, Price WE, McDonald J, Khan SJ, Nghiem LD. Occurrence of trace organic contaminants in wastewater sludge and their removals by anaerobic digestion. Biores Technol 2016: 210(8): 153-159. 28. Gerba CP, Smith JE Jr. Sources of pathogenic microorganisms and their fate during land application of wastes. J Environ Qual 2005: 34(1): 42-48. 29. Jim enez B, Austin A, Cloete E, Plasha C, Beltran N. Biological risks to foods crops fertilized with Ecosan sludge. Water Sci Technol 2007: 55(7): S21-S29. 30. Krzyzanowski F Jr, Lauretto MS, Nardocci AC, Sato MIZ, Razzolini MTP. Assessing the probability of infection by Salmonella due to sewage sludge use in agriculture under several exposure scenarios for crops and soil ingestion. Sci Total Environ 2016: 568(12): 66-74. 31. Navarro I, Jim enez B, Lucario S, Cifuentes E. Application of helminth ova infection dose curve to estimate the risks associated with biosolid application on soil. J Water Health 2009: 7(1): 31-44. 32. Pepper IL, Zerzghi H, Brooks JP, Gerba CP. Sustainability of land application of Class B biosoloids. J Environ Qual 2008: 37: S58-S67. 33. Crompton DWT, Nesheim MC. Nutritional impact of intestinal helminthiasis during the human life cycle. Annu Rev Nutr 2002: 22: 35-59. 34. Melvin DM, Brooke MM, Sadun EH. Common Intestinal Helminths of Humans. DHEW Publication No. (CDC) 80-8286, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2001. 35. Nelson KL, Darby JL. Inactivation of viable Ascaris eggs by reagents during enumeration. Appl Environ Microbiol 2001: 67
© 2018 The Authors. Tropical Medicine & International Health Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Tropical Medicine and International Health volume 23 no 7 pp 692-703 july 2018 I. D. Amoah et al. Helminth infections associated with wastewater reuse
© 2018 The Authors. Tropical Medicine & International Health Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
AcknowledgementWe are grateful for the financial support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (Grant Number: OPP1122681) and from the South African Research Chairs Initiative of the Department of Science and Technology and National Research Foundation of South Africa. We also thank the Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology and the Faculty of Health Sciences, Durban University of Technology.
A Valuable Resource for Agriculture: a Case Study from Haroonabad. W Van Der Hoek, Mul Hassan, Jhj Ensink, S Feenstra, Raschid-Sally L , Munir S Urban Wastewater, Research Report. 63International Water Management Institutevan der Hoek W, Hassan MUL, Ensink JHJ, Feenstra S, Raschid-Sally L, Munir S. Urban Wastewater: A Valuable Resource for Agriculture: a Case Study from Haroon- abad, Pakistan'. Research Report 63, Colombo, Sri Lanka. International Water Management Institute, 2002. pp. 2-5.

Wastewater irrigation in the developing world-Two case studies from the Kathmandu Valley in Nepal. T Rutkowski, L Raschid-Sally, S Buechler, Agric Water Manag. 88Rutkowski T, Raschid-Sally L, Buechler S. Wastewater irri- gation in the developing world-Two case studies from the Kathmandu Valley in Nepal. Agric Water Manag 2007: 88: 83-91.

Low-cost Options for Reducing Consumer Health Risks from Farm to Fork where Crops Are Irrigated with Polluted Water in West Africa. P Amoah, B Keraita, M Akple, P Drechsel, R C Abaidoo, F Konradsen, International Water Management Institute2011Research Report 141Amoah P, Keraita B, Akple M, Drechsel P, Abaidoo RC, Konradsen F. Low-cost Options for Reducing Consumer Health Risks from Farm to Fork where Crops Are Irrigated with Polluted Water in West Africa. International Water Management Institute. Research Report 141, pp, 2011.

Informal irrigation in urban West Africa: An overview. P Drechsel, S Graefe, M Sonou, O Cofie, Research Report. 102International Water Management InstituteDrechsel P, Graefe S, Sonou M, Cofie O. Informal irriga- tion in urban West Africa: An overview, Research Report 102, International Water Management Institute, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 2006.

Global wastewater and sludge production, treatment and use. J Mateo-Sagasta, Raschid-Sally , L Thebo, A , Drechsel P, Qadir M Wichelns DSpringerDordrecht Heidelberg; New YorkWastewater-Economic Asset in an Urbanizing WorldMateo-Sagasta J, Raschid-sally L, Thebo A. Global wastewater and sludge production, treatment and use. In: Drechsel P, Qadir M Wichelns D (eds). Wastewater-Eco- nomic Asset in an Urbanizing World. Springer, Dordrecht Heidelberg: New York;

. London, London, 2015, 15-38.

The status of wastewater reuse practice in the Mediterranean basin. A N Angelakis, M H Marecos Do Monte, L Bontoux, T Asano, Water Res. 10Angelakis AN, Marecos do Monte MH, Bontoux L, Asano T. The status of wastewater reuse practice in the Mediter- ranean basin. Water Res 1999: 33(10): 2201-2217.

Website: Mediterranean network on wastewater reclamation and reuse. J Crook, International Seminar on Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse. Keynote Speech Presented at MED-REUNET 1 ProjectCrook J. Water reuse-an overview. Keynote Speech Pre- sented at MED-REUNET 1 Project, International Seminar on Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse, Izmir, Turkey, 25-26 September 2003, 2003. Website: Mediterranean net- work on wastewater reclamation and reuse. www.med-re unet.com

Sustainable water use in Europe, Part 2: demand management. C Lallana, W Krinner, T Estrela, S Nixon, J Leonard, J M Berland, No. 19Environmental Issues. DenmarkReportLallana C, Krinner W, Estrela T, Nixon S, Leonard J, Berland JM. Sustainable water use in Europe, Part 2: demand management. In: Environmental Issues. Report No. 19. European Environment Agency. Denmark, 2001.

Wastewater use in irrigated agriculture. P Drechsel, Aev Evans, Irrigat Drain Syst. 20101Drechsel P, Evans AEV. Wastewater use in irrigated agri- culture. Irrigat Drain Syst 2010: 24(1): 1-3.

A review of policy and standards for wastewater reuse in agriculture: A Latin American perspective. A Peasey, U J Blumenthal, D D Mara, G Ruiz-Palacois, Water Eng. Dev. Ctr. Peasey A, Blumenthal UJ, Mara DD, Ruiz-Palacois G. 2000. A review of policy and standards for wastewater reuse in agriculture: A Latin American perspective. Water Eng. Dev. Ctr., Loughborough, UK.

United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). The United Nations World Water Development Report. WWAP. ParisWastewater: The Untapped ResourceWWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Pro- gramme). The United Nations World Water Development Report 2017. Wastewater: The Untapped Resource. UNESCO: Paris, 2017.

Influence of long-term storage operating conditions on the reduction of viable Ascaris eggs in sewage sludge for agricultural reuse. R Pompeo, C Andreoli, Alcântara De Castro, E Aisse, M , Water Air Soil Pollut. 2016144Pompeo R, Andreoli C, Alcântara de Castro E, Aisse M. Influence of long-term storage operating conditions on the reduction of viable Ascaris eggs in sewage sludge for agri- cultural reuse. Water Air Soil Pollut 2016: 227(144): 1-14.

Organic matter, importance and experience of its use in agriculture. A Julca-Otiniano, L Meneses-Florian, R Blas-Sevillano, S Bello-Amez, IDESIA. 9Julca-Otiniano A, Meneses-Florian L, Blas-Sevillano R, Bello-Amez S. Organic matter, importance and experience of its use in agriculture. IDESIA 2006: 24(9): 49-61.

Cu and Zn in a sewage sludge-treated soil. M B Almendro-Candel, J Navarro-Pedreño, I Lucas, Jord Vidal, M M Garc Ia S Anchez, E , Mataix Solera, J Movement, Fe, Waste Management and the Environment. Almorza D, Brebbia CA, Sales D, Popov VMn; Barcelona, SpainWIT PressAlmendro-Candel MB, Navarro-Pedreño J, G omez Lucas I, Jord an Vidal MM, Garc ıa S anchez E, Mataix Solera J. Movement of Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn in a sewage sludge-trea- ted soil. In: Almorza D, Brebbia CA, Sales D, Popov V (eds). Waste Management and the Environment. WIT Press: Barcelona, Spain, 2002. pp. 311-320.

Mobility of cadmium, chromium and nickel through the profile of a calcisol treated with sewage-sludge in the southeast of Spain. J Navarro-Pedreño, M B Almendro-Candel, M M Vidal, J Mataix-Solera, E Garc Ia-S Anchez, Environ Geol. 448Navarro-Pedreño J, Almendro-Candel MB, Jord an-Vidal MM, Mataix-Solera J, Garc ıa-S anchez E. Mobility of cad- mium, chromium and nickel through the profile of a cal- cisol treated with sewage-sludge in the southeast of Spain. Environ Geol 2003: 44(8): 545-553.

El uso de enmiendas en la restauraci on de suelos quemados. C Guerrero, I Mataix-Solera, J , Incendios forestales. Suelos y Erosi on h ıdrica. CEMACAM: AlcoyCaja Mediterr aneoGuerrero C, G omez I, Mataix-Solera J. El uso de enmien- das en la restauraci on de suelos quemados. In: Caja Medi- terr aneo (ed). Incendios forestales, Suelos y Erosi on h ıdrica. CEMACAM: Alcoy, 2007, 119-154.

Control de la degradaci on de sue. R Jim Enez, A M Alvarez, Jim enez R, Alvarez AM. Control de la degradaci on de sue-

parasitism amongst dog and cat populations: the scenario of Crete. Ed , Greece. Parasites Vectors. 10Universidad Aut onoma de Madrid: MadridEd. Universidad Aut onoma de Madrid: Madrid, 2005. parasitism amongst dog and cat populations: the scenario of Crete, Greece. Parasites Vectors 2017: 10: 43-55.

Parasitic zoonoses associated with dogs and cats: a survey of Portuguese pet owners' awareness and deworming practices. A Pereira, A Martins, H Brancal, Parasites Vectors. 2016Pereira A, Martins A, Brancal H et al. Parasitic zoonoses associated with dogs and cats: a survey of Portuguese pet owners' awareness and deworming practices. Parasites Vec- tors 2016: 9: 245-254.

Contamination of the soil by eggs of geohelminths in rural areas of Lodz district (Poland). J Blaszkowska, P Kurnatowski, P Damiecka, Helminthologia. 20112Blaszkowska J, Kurnatowski P, Damiecka P. Contamina- tion of the soil by eggs of geohelminths in rural areas of Lodz district (Poland). Helminthologia 2011: 48(2): 67- 76.

Contamination of public squares and parks with parasites in Erbil city. K Nooraldeen, Iraq. Ann Agric Environ Med. 22Nooraldeen K. Contamination of public squares and parks with parasites in Erbil city, Iraq. Ann Agric Environ Med 2015: 22: 418-420.

Soil contamination by parasite eggs in rural village in the Philippines. S Horiuchi, Vgv Paller, S Uga, Trop Biomed. 30Horiuchi S, Paller VGV, Uga S. Soil contamination by par- asite eggs in rural village in the Philippines. Trop Biomed 2013: 30: 495-503.

Contribution of wastewater irrigation to soil transmitted Helminths infection among vegetable farmers in Kumasi. I D Amoah, A Abubakari, T A Stenstr€ Om, R C Abaidoo, R Seidu, Ghana. PLoS Neglect Tropic Dis. 2016105161Amoah ID, Abubakari A, Stenstr€ om TA, Abaidoo RC, Seidu R. Contribution of wastewater irrigation to soil transmitted Helminths infection among vegetable farmers in Kumasi, Ghana. PLoS Neglect Tropic Dis 2016: 10(12): e0005161.

Helminth eggs inactivation efficiency by faecal sludge dewatering and co-composting in tropical climates. D Kone 0, O Cofie, Zurbr€, Water Res. Kone 0 D, Cofie O, Zurbr€ ugg C et al. Helminth eggs inacti- vation efficiency by faecal sludge dewatering and co-com- posting in tropical climates. Water Res 2007: 41(19): 4397-4402.

Quantitative microbial risk assessment of wastewater and faecal sludge reuse in Ghana. R Seidu, P Drechsel, P Amoah, 33rd WEDC International Conference. Accra, GhanaSeidu R, Drechsel P, Amoah P et al. Quantitative microbial risk assessment of wastewater and faecal sludge reuse in Ghana. 33rd WEDC International Conference, Accra, Ghana, 2008.

High latrine coverage is not reducing the prevalence of soil-transmitted helminthiasis in Hoa Binh province. A Yajima, P Jouquet, D D Trung, Vietnam. Trans Royal Soc Tropic Med Hygiene. 1033Yajima A, Jouquet P, Trung DD et al. High latrine cover- age is not reducing the prevalence of soil-transmitted helminthiasis in Hoa Binh province, Vietnam. Trans Royal Soc Tropic Med Hygiene 2009: 103(3): 237-241.

Wastewater reuse and exposure to Legionella organisms. B Fattal, H Bercovier, M Derai-Cochin, H I Shuval, Water Resour. 19Fattal B, Bercovier H, Derai-Cochin M, Shuval HI. Wastewater reuse and exposure to Legionella organisms. Water Resour 1985: 19: 693-696.

Viral antibodies in agricultural populations exposed to aerosols from wastewater irrigation during a viral disease outbreak. B Fattal, M Margalith, H I Shuval, Y Wax, A Morag, Am J Epidemiol. 125Fattal B, Margalith M, Shuval HI, Wax Y, Morag A. Viral antibodies in agricultural populations exposed to aerosols from wastewater irrigation during a viral disease outbreak. Am J Epidemiol 1987: 125: 899-906.

Antibodies to polioviruses in an Israeli population and overseas volunteers. M Margalith, A Morag, B Fattal, J Med Virol. 30Margalith M, Morag A, Fattal B. Antibodies to polio- viruses in an Israeli population and overseas volunteers. J Med Virol 1990: 30: 68-72.

The risk of enteric infections associated with wastewater reuse; the effect of season and degree of storage of wastewater. U J Blumenthal, E Cifuentes, S Bennett, M Quigley, G Ruiz-Palacios, Trans Royal Soc Tropic Med Hygiene. 952Blumenthal UJ, Cifuentes E, Bennett S, Quigley M, Ruiz- Palacios G. The risk of enteric infections associated with wastewater reuse; the effect of season and degree of storage of wastewater. Trans Royal Soc Tropic Med Hygiene 2001: 95(2): 131-137.

K Habbari, A Tifnouti, G Bitton, A Mandil, Geohelminthic infections associated with raw wastewater reuse for agricultural purposes in. Beni-Mellal, Morocco48Habbari K, Tifnouti A, Bitton G, Mandil A. Geohelminthic infections associated with raw wastewater reuse for agricul- tural purposes in Beni-Mellal, Morocco. Parasitol Int 2000: 48(3): 249-254.

Prevalence of helminth parasites found on vegetables sold in Maiduguri, Northeastern Nigeria. N B Adamu, J Y Adamu, D Mohammed, Food Control. 20121Adamu NB, Adamu JY, Mohammed D. Prevalence of hel- minth parasites found on vegetables sold in Maiduguri, Northeastern Nigeria. Food Control 2012: 25(1): 23-26.

Prevalence of helminth eggs in raw vegetables consumed in Burdur. R Adanir, F Tasci, Turkey. Food Control. 31Adanir R, Tasci F. Prevalence of helminth eggs in raw veg- etables consumed in Burdur, Turkey. Food Control 2013: 31: 482-484.

Prevalence of intestinal parasites in leafy vegetables in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Al-Megrin Wai, Int J Zool Res. 5Al-Megrin WAI. Prevalence of intestinal parasites in leafy vegetables in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Int J Zool Res 2010: 5: 20-23.

Seasonal study of parasitic contamination in fresh salad vegetables marketed in Shahrekord. A A Fallah, Y Makhtumi, K Pirali-Kheirabadi, Iran. Food Control. 604Fallah AA, Makhtumi Y, Pirali-Kheirabadi K. Seasonal study of parasitic contamination in fresh salad vegetables marketed in Shahrekord, Iran. Food Control 2016: 60(4): 538-542.

Contamination of commonly consumed raw vegetables with soil transmitted helminth eggs in Mazandaran province, Northern Iran. A Rostami, M Ebrahimi, S Mehravar, V F Omrani, S Fallahi, H Behniafar, Int J Food Microbiol. 201612Rostami A, Ebrahimi M, Mehravar S, Omrani VF, Fallahi S, Behniafar H. Contamination of commonly consumed raw vegetables with soil transmitted helminth eggs in Mazandaran province, Northern Iran. Int J Food Microbiol 2016: 225(12): 54-58.

Detection of parasites in commonly consumed raw vegetables. D S Said, Alexandria J Med. 48Said DS. Detection of parasites in commonly consumed raw vegetables. Alexandria J Med 2012: 48: 345-352.

Produce handling and processing practices. L R Beuchat, J H Ryu, Emerg Infect Dis. 19974Beuchat LR, Ryu JH. Produce handling and processing practices. Emerg Infect Dis 1997: 3(4): 5-7.

Parasite egg contamination of vegetables from a suburban market in Hanoi, Vietnam. S Uga, Ntv Hoa, S Noda, Nepal Med College J. 112Uga S, Hoa NTV, Noda S et al. Parasite egg contamination of vegetables from a suburban market in Hanoi, Vietnam. Nepal Med College J 2009: 11(2): 75-78.

Wastewater Irrigation in Developing Countries: Health Effects and Technical Solutions. H L Shuval, A Adin, B Fattal, E Rawitz, P Yekutiel, Washington, D.C.World Bank Technical Paper Number 51Shuval HL, Adin A, Fattal B, Rawitz E, Yekutiel P. Wastewater Irrigation in Developing Countries: Health Effects and Technical Solutions. World Bank Technical Paper Number 51. Washington, D.C., 1986.

Risk of intestinal parasitic infections in people with different exposures to wastewater and fecal sludge in Kampala, Uganda: a cross-sectional study. S Fuhrimann, M S Winkler, N B Kabatereine, 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004469PLoS Neglect Tropic Dis. 2016104469Fuhrimann S, Winkler MS, Kabatereine NB et al. Risk of intestinal parasitic infections in people with different expo- sures to wastewater and fecal sludge in Kampala, Uganda: a cross-sectional study. PLoS Neglect Tropic Dis 2016: 10 (3): e0004469. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd. 0004469.

Intestinal helminth infections among reproductive age women in Vietnam: prevalence, co-infection and risk factors. P H Nguyen, K C Nguyen, T D Nguyen, Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 5Nguyen PH, Nguyen KC, Nguyen TD et al. Intestinal hel- minth infections among reproductive age women in Viet- nam: prevalence, co-infection and risk factors. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 2006: 37(5): 865-874.

Low risk for helminth infection in wastewater-fed rice cultivation in Vietnam. D T Trang, W Van Der Hoek, P D Cam, J Water Health. 4Trang DT, van der Hoek W, Cam PD. Low risk for hel- minth infection in wastewater-fed rice cultivation in Viet- nam. J Water Health 2006: 4: 321-331.

Risk factors for Entamoeba histolytica infection in an agricultural community in Hanam province. P Pham Duc, H Nguyen-Viet, J Hattendorf, J Zinsstag, Dac Cam, P Odermatt, P , Vietnam. Parasites Vectors. Pham Duc P, Nguyen-Viet H, Hattendorf J, Zinsstag J, Dac Cam P, Odermatt P. Risk factors for Entamoeba his- tolytica infection in an agricultural community in Hanam province, Vietnam. Parasites Vectors 2011: 4: 102.

Parasitological risk assessment from wastewater reuse for disposal in soil in developing countries. S A Cutolo, R P Piveli, J G Santos, Water Sci Technol. 20128Cutolo SA, Piveli RP, Santos JG et al. Parasitological risk assessment from wastewater reuse for disposal in soil in developing countries. Water Sci Technol 2012: 65(8): 1357-1367.

QMRA of intestinal nematode infection via multimedia exposure pathways. A Kundu, H R Poma, M W Jenkins, V B Rajal, S Wuertz, International Environmental Modelling and Software Society (iEMSs) 7th Intl. Congress on Env. Modelling and Software. Ames DP, Quinn NWT, Rizzoli AESan Diego, CA, USAKundu A, Poma HR, Jenkins MW, Rajal VB, Wuertz S. QMRA of intestinal nematode infection via multimedia exposure pathways. In: Ames DP, Quinn NWT, Rizzoli AE (Eds.), International Environmental Modelling and Soft- ware Society (iEMSs) 7th Intl. Congress on Env. Modelling and Software, San Diego, CA, USA, 2014.

A quantitative microbial risk assessment of helminth ova in reusing sludge for agricultural production in developing countries. I Navarro, Jim , B Cifuentes, E Lucario, S , Risk Anal. 6Navarro I, Jim enez B, Cifuentes E, Lucario S. A quantita- tive microbial risk assessment of helminth ova in reusing sludge for agricultural production in developing countries. Risk Anal 2008: 6: 65-74.

Occurrence and fate of Ascaris lumbricoides ova in biosolids in Victoria, Australia: a human health risk assessment of biosolids storage periods. N A O&apos;connor, A Surapaneni, D Smith, D Stevens, Water Sci Technol. 2017O'Connor NA, Surapaneni A, Smith D, Stevens D. Occur- rence and fate of Ascaris lumbricoides ova in biosolids in Victoria, Australia: a human health risk assessment of bio- solids storage periods. Water Sci Technol 2017: 76: 1332- 1346.

Microbial risk assessment of local handling and use of human faeces. C Sch€ Onning, T Westrell, Stenstr€, Ta, J Water Health. 5Sch€ onning C, Westrell T, Stenstr€ om TA et al. Microbial risk assessment of local handling and use of human faeces. J Water Health 2007: 5: 117-128.

Quantification of the health risk associated with wastewater reuse in Accra, Ghana: a contribution toward local guidelines. R Seidu, A Heistad, P Amoah, P Drechsel, P D Jenssen, Stenstr€, Ta, J Water Health. 6Seidu R, Heistad A, Amoah P, Drechsel P, Jenssen PD, Stenstr€ om TA. Quantification of the health risk associated with wastewater reuse in Accra, Ghana: a contribution toward local guidelines. J Water Health 2008a: 6: 461- 471.

Guidelines for the microbiological quality of treated wastewater used in agriculture: recommendations for revising WHO guidelines. U J Blumenthal, D D Mara, A Peasey, G Ruiz-Palcios, R Stott, Bull World Health Organ. 789Blumenthal UJ, Mara DD, Peasey A, Ruiz-Palcios G, Stott R. Guidelines for the microbiological quality of treated wastewater used in agriculture: recommendations for revis- ing WHO guidelines. Bull World Health Organ 2000: 78 (9): 1104-1116.

Sanitation Safety Planning: Manual For Safe Use and Disposal of Wastewater, Greywater and Excreta. WHO PressWorld Health Organization; Geneva, SwitzerlandWHO-World Health OrganizationWHO-World Health Organization. Sanitation Safety Plan- ning: Manual For Safe Use and Disposal of Wastewater, Greywater and Excreta. WHO Press, World Health Orga- nization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2016.

Parasite removal by natural wastewater treatment systems: Performance of waste stabilization ponds and constructed wetlands. R Stott, E May, D D Mara, Proceedings of the 5th IWA Waste Stabilization Ponds, 2-5 April. Auckland. the 5th IWA Waste Stabilization Ponds, 2-5 April. AucklandNew ZealandStott R, May E, Mara DD. Parasite removal by natural wastewater treatment systems: Performance of waste stabi- lization ponds and constructed wetlands. Proceedings of the 5th IWA Waste Stabilization Ponds, 2-5 April. Auck- land, New Zealand, 2002.

Sludge treatment and management, chapter 10. B Jimenez, L Wang, Municipal Wastewater Management in Developing Countries: Principles and Engineering. International Water Association Publishing. Ujang Z, Henze MLondon, UKJimenez B, Wang L. Sludge treatment and management, chapter 10. In: Ujang Z, Henze M (eds). Municipal Wastewater Management in Developing Countries: Princi- ples and Engineering. International Water Association Pub- lishing: London, UK, 2006. pp. 237-292.

Use of Moringa oleifera seed extracts to reduce helminth egg numbers and turbidity in irrigation water. M E Sengupta, B Keraita, A Olsen, Water Res. 4611Sengupta ME, Keraita B, Olsen A et al. Use of Moringa oleifera seed extracts to reduce helminth egg numbers and turbidity in irrigation water. Water Res 2011: 46(11): 3646-3656.

Communicating Current Research and Educational Topics and Trends in Applied Microbiology. Jimenez-Cisneros, Be, C Maya-Rendon, M endez-Vilas A. Badajoz, SpainHelminths and sanitationJimenez-Cisneros BE, Maya-Rendon C. Helminths and san- itation. In: M endez-Vilas A (Ed.), Communicating Current Research and Educational Topics and Trends in Applied Microbiology. Formatex Research Center, Badajoz, Spain, 2007. pp. 60-71.

Health risks of raw sewage with particular reference to Ascaris in the discharge zone of El Jadida (Morocco). Fzl Moubarrad, O Assobhei, Desalination. Moubarrad FZL, Assobhei O. Health risks of raw sewage with particular reference to Ascaris in the discharge zone of El Jadida (Morocco). Desalination 2007: 215(1-3): 120- 126.

Concentration of soil-transmitted Helminth eggs in sludge from South Africa and Senegal: a probabilistic estimation of infection risks associated with agricultural application. I D Amoah, P Reddy, R Seidu, Stenstr€, Ta, J Environ Manage. 206Amoah ID, Reddy P, Seidu R, Stenstr€ om TA. Concentra- tion of soil-transmitted Helminth eggs in sludge from South Africa and Senegal: a probabilistic estimation of infection risks associated with agricultural application. J Environ Manage 2018: 206: 1020-1027.

Removal of soil-transmitted helminth egg in selected centralized and decentralized wastewater treatment plants in South Africa and Lesotho: health implications for direct and indirect exposure to the effluents (Under review). I D Amoah, R Seidu, P Reddy, Stenstr€, Ta, Environ Sci Pollut Res. 17Amoah ID, Seidu R, Reddy P, Stenstr€ om TA. Removal of soil-transmitted helminth egg in selected centralized and decentralized wastewater treatment plants in South Africa and Lesotho: health implications for direct and indirect exposure to the effluents (Under review). Environ Sci Pollut Res 2017: 17: 1-13.

The use of effluent from an anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) for irrigation in a peri-urban community. S Pillay, K Foxon, N Rodda, M Smith, C Buckley, 3rd International Ecological Sanitation Conference. DFID, EcoSanRes. Ecosan GTZCSIR: Durban, South AfricaPillay S, Foxon K, Rodda N, Smith M, Buckley C. The use of effluent from an anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) for irri- gation in a peri-urban community. In: Ecosan GTZ (ed.), 3rd International Ecological Sanitation Conference. DFID, EcoSanRes, CSIR: Durban, South Africa, 2005. pp. 445- 449.

Parasitic contamination in wastewater and sludge samples in Tunisia using three different detection techniques. Lba Khouja, V Cama, L Xiao, Parasitol Res. 1Khouja LBA, Cama V, Xiao L. Parasitic contamination in wastewater and sludge samples in Tunisia using three dif- ferent detection techniques. Parasitol Res 2010: 107(1): 109-116.

Date-palm fibers media filters as a potential technology for tertiary domestic wastewater treatment. K Riahi, A B Mammou, B B Thayer, J Hazard Mater. Riahi K, Mammou AB, Thayer BB. Date-palm fibers media filters as a potential technology for tertiary domestic wastewater treatment. J Hazard Mater 2009: 161(2-3): 608-613.

Anaerobic membrane bioreactor treatment of domestic wastewater in Tunisia. A Saddoud, M Ellouze, A Dhouib, S Sayadi, Desalination. 78Saddoud A, Ellouze M, Dhouib A, Sayadi S. Anaerobic membrane bioreactor treatment of domestic wastewater in Tunisia. Desalination 2007: 207(78): 205-215.

Detection and quantification of viable Ascaris sp. and other helminth eggs in sewage sludge. V K Bastos, S A Cutolo, Mco Doria, Mtp Razzolini, Int J Environ Health Res. 201323Bastos VK, Cutolo SA, Doria MCO, Razzolini MTP. Detection and quantification of viable Ascaris sp. and other helminth eggs in sewage sludge. Int J Environ Health Res 2013: 23(4): 352-362.

Precision and accuracy of an assay for detecting Ascaris eggs in various biosolid matrices. D D Bowman, M D Little, R S Reimers, Water Res. 379Bowman DD, Little MD, Reimers RS. Precision and accu- racy of an assay for detecting Ascaris eggs in various bioso- lid matrices. Water Res 2003: 37(9): 2063-2072.

Effect of electron beam irradiation on bacterial and Ascaris ova loads and volatile organic compounds in municipal sewage sludge. J Engohang-Ndong, R M Uribe, R Gregory, M Gangoda, M G Nickelsen, P Loar, Radiat Phys Chem. 112Engohang-Ndong J, Uribe RM, Gregory R, Gangoda M, Nickelsen MG, Loar P. Effect of electron beam irradiation on bacterial and Ascaris ova loads and volatile organic compounds in municipal sewage sludge. Radiat Phys Chem 2015: 112: 6-12.

Removal of pathogenic and indicator microorganisms by a full-scale water reclamation facility. J B Rose, L J Dickson, S R Farrah, R P Carnahan, Water Res. 11Rose JB, Dickson LJ, Farrah SR, Carnahan RP. Removal of pathogenic and indicator microorganisms by a full-scale water reclamation facility. Water Res 1996: 30(11): 2785- 2797.

The effects of temperature, pH, and ammonia concentration on the inactivation of Ascaris eggs in sewage sludge. B M Pecson, J A Barrios, B E Jimenez, K L Nelson, Water Res. 13Pecson BM, Barrios JA, Jimenez BE, Nelson KL. The effects of temperature, pH, and ammonia concentration on the inactivation of Ascaris eggs in sewage sludge. Water Res 2007: 41(13): 2893-2902.

Presence of helminth eggs in domestic wastewater and its removal at low temperature UASB reactors in Peruvian highlands. R Yaya-Beas, E Cadillo-La-Torre, K Kujawa-Roeleveld, J B Van Lier, G Zeeman, Water Res. 90Yaya-Beas R, Cadillo-La-Torre E, Kujawa-Roeleveld K, van Lier JB, Zeeman G. Presence of helminth eggs in domestic wastewater and its removal at low temperature UASB reactors in Peruvian highlands. Water Res 2016: 90: 286-293.

. Yen-Phi Vt, A Rechenburg, B Vinneras, J Clemens, T Kistemann, Pathogens in septage in Vietnam. Sci Total Environ. 20109Yen-Phi VT, Rechenburg A, Vinneras B, Clemens J, Kiste- mann T. Pathogens in septage in Vietnam. Sci Total Envi- ron 2010: 408(9): 2050-2053.

Wastewater-irrigated vegetables: market handling versus irrigation water quality. Jhj Ensink, T Mahmood, A Dalsgaard, Tropical Med Int Health. 2SupplEnsink JHJ, Mahmood T, Dalsgaard A. Wastewater-irri- gated vegetables: market handling versus irrigation water quality. Tropical Med Int Health 2007: 12(Suppl 2): 2-7.

Monitoring of bacterial and parasitological contamination during various treatment of sludge. C Gantzer, P Gaspard, L Huyard, A Dumouthier, N Schwartzbrod, J , Water Res. 16Gantzer C, Gaspard P, G alvez L, Huyard A, Dumouthier N, Schwartzbrod J. Monitoring of bacterial and parasito- logical contamination during various treatment of sludge. Water Res 2002: 35(16): 3763-3770.

Occurrence and removal of parasites enteric bacteria and faecal contamination indicators in wastewater natural reclamation systems in Tenerife-Canary Islands. N Abreu-Acosta, L Vera, Spain. Ecol Eng. 373Abreu-Acosta N, Vera L. Occurrence and removal of para- sites enteric bacteria and faecal contamination indicators in wastewater natural reclamation systems in Tenerife-Canary Islands, Spain. Ecol Eng 2011: 37(3): 496-503.

. P Molleda, I Blanco, G Ansola, Luis E De, Ecol Eng. 33Molleda P, Blanco I, Ansola G, de Luis E. Removal of wastewater pathogen indicators in a constructed wetland in Leon, Spain. Ecol Eng 2008: 33: 252-257.

The occurrence of intestinal parasites in swine slurry and their removal in activated sludge plants. R Reinoso, E Becares, Biores Technol. 4Reinoso R, Becares E. The occurrence of intestinal para- sites in swine slurry and their removal in activated sludge plants. Biores Technol 2008: 99(4): 6661-6665.

Efficiency of natural systems for removal of bacteria and pathogenic parasites from wastewater. R Reinoso, L A Torres, Sci Total Environ. 3952-3Reinoso R, Torres LA, B ecares E. Efficiency of natural systems for removal of bacteria and pathogenic parasites from wastewater. Sci Total Environ 2008: 395(2-3): 80- 86.

The contamination of various fruit and vegetable with Enterobius vermicularis, Ascaris eggs, Entamoeba histolytica cysts and Giardia cysts. € O Erdo, Food Control. 6Erdo grul € O, S ßener H. The contamination of various fruit and vegetable with Enterobius vermicularis, Ascaris eggs, Entamoeba histolytica cysts and Giardia cysts. Food Con- trol 2005: 16(6): 557-560.

Effect of low-cost irrigation methods on microbial contamination of lettuce irrigated with untreated wastewater. B Keraita, F Konradsen, P Drechsel, R C Abaidoo, Tropical Med Int Health. 122Keraita B, Konradsen F, Drechsel P, Abaidoo RC. Effect of low-cost irrigation methods on microbial contamination of lettuce irrigated with untreated wastewater. Tropical Med Int Health 2007: 12(2): 15-22.

Microbiological quality of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) irrigated with wastewater in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and effect of green salads washing methods. D Woldetsadik, P Drechsel, B Keraita, F Itanna, B Erko, H Gebrekidan, Int J Food. 20173Woldetsadik D, Drechsel P, Keraita B, Itanna F, Erko B, Gebrekidan H. Microbiological quality of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) irrigated with wastewater in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and effect of green salads washing methods. Int J Food 2017: 4: 3.

Prevalence of parasitic contamination in vegetables used for raw consumption in Shahrekord, Iran: influence of season and washing procedure. A A Fallah, K Pirali-Kheirabadi, F Shirvani, S S Saei-Dehkordi, Food Control. 25Fallah AA, Pirali-Kheirabadi K, Shirvani F, Saei-Dehkordi SS. Prevalence of parasitic contamination in vegetables used for raw consumption in Shahrekord, Iran: influence of sea- son and washing procedure. Food Control 2012: 25: 617- 620.

Prevalence of intestinal parasites in vegetables consumed in Ardabil. A Daryani, G H Ettehad, M Sharif, L Ghorbani, H Ziaei, Iran. Food Control. 19Daryani A, Ettehad GH, Sharif M, Ghorbani L, Ziaei H. Prevalence of intestinal parasites in vegetables consumed in Ardabil, Iran. Food Control 2008: 19: 790-794.

Prevalence of intestinal helminth eggs on vegetables grown in wastewater-irrigated areas of Titagarh West Bengal. N Gupta, D K Khan, S C Santra, India. Food Control. 20Gupta N, Khan DK, Santra SC. Prevalence of intestinal helminth eggs on vegetables grown in wastewater-irrigated areas of Titagarh West Bengal, India. Food Control 2009: 20: 942-945.

Contamination of vegetables sold in markets with helminth eggs in Zaria metropolis. B Maikai, I Elisha, E Baba-Onoja, Food Control. 28Maikai B, Elisha I, Baba-Onoja E. Contamination of veg- etables sold in markets with helminth eggs in Zaria metro- polis, Kaduna State-Nigeria. Food Control 2012: 28: 345- 348.

Parasitological contamination in salad vegetables in Tripoli-Libya. A K Abougrain, M H Nahaisi, N S Madi, M M Saied, K S Ghenghesh, Food Control. 21Abougrain AK, Nahaisi MH, Madi NS, Saied MM, Ghen- ghesh KS. Parasitological contamination in salad vegetables in Tripoli-Libya. Food Control 2010: 21: 760-762.

Prevalence of intestinal parasites and microbial contamination in common edible vegetables used in Gaza Governorate. A I Al-Hindi, A A Elmanama, S Khalaf, Palestine. J Food Safety Hygiene. 20162Al-Hindi AI, Elmanama AA, Khalaf S. Prevalence of intestinal parasites and microbial contamination in com- mon edible vegetables used in Gaza Governorate, Palestine. J Food Safety Hygiene 2016: 2(1-2): 21-25.

A comparative survey of the prevalence of human parasites found in fresh vegetables sold in supermarkets and open-aired markets in. K O Duedu, E A Yarnie, P B Tetteh-Quarcoo, S K Attah, E S Donkor, P F Ayeh-Kumi, BMC Res Notes. 7836Duedu KO, Yarnie EA, Tetteh-Quarcoo PB, Attah SK, Donkor ES, Ayeh-Kumi PF. A comparative survey of the prevalence of human parasites found in fresh vegetables sold in supermarkets and open-aired markets in Accra, Ghana. BMC Res Notes 2014: 7: 836.

Parasitic contamination of fresh vegetables sold at central markets in Khartoum state. M A Mohamed, E E Siddig, A H Elaagip, Amm Edris, A A Nasr, Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 201617Mohamed MA, Siddig EE, Elaagip AH, Edris AMM, Nasr AA. Parasitic contamination of fresh vegetables sold at cen- tral markets in Khartoum state, Sudan. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob 2016: 15: 17.

The parasitic contamination of farm vegetables in Asadabad City, West of Iran. M Matini, T Shamsi-Ehsan, A H Maghsood, Avicenna J Clin Microbiol Infect. 201732474Matini M, Shamsi-Ehsan T, Maghsood AH. The parasitic contamination of farm vegetables in Asadabad City, West of Iran, in 2014. Avicenna J Clin Microbiol Infect 2017: 4: e32474.

The prevalence of parasitic contamination of vegetables consumed in Malayer City. K Rahmati, M Fallah, A H Maghsood, T Shamsi-Ehsan, M Matini, 10.5812/ajcmi.42380Avicenna J Clin Microbiol Infect. 2017242380West of IranRahmati K, Fallah M, Maghsood AH, Shamsi-Ehsan T, Matini M. The prevalence of parasitic contamination of vegetables consumed in Malayer City, West of Iran, in 2014. Avicenna J Clin Microbiol Infect 2017: 4(2): e42380. https://doi.org/10.5812/ajcmi.42380.

Diarrhoeal diseases among adult population in an agricultural community Hanam province, Vietnam, with high wastewater and excreta reuse. P Pham-Duc, H Nguyen-Viet, J Hattendorf, BMC Public Health. 14978Pham-Duc P, Nguyen-Viet H, Hattendorf J et al. Diar- rhoeal diseases among adult population in an agricultural community Hanam province, Vietnam, with high wastewa- ter and excreta reuse. BMC Public Health 2014: 14: 978.

Helminth infections among people using wastewater and human excreta in peri-urban agriculture and aquaculture in Hanoi. D T Trang, K Mølbak, P D Cam, A Dalsgaard, Tropical Med Int Health. 12Trang DT, Mølbak K, Cam PD, Dalsgaard A. Helminth infections among people using wastewater and human exc- reta in peri-urban agriculture and aquaculture in Hanoi, Vietnam. Tropical Med Int Health 2007: 12: 82-90.

The health implications of wastewater reuse in vegetable irrigation: a case study from Malamulele, South Africa. J R Gumbo, E M Malaka, J O Odiyo, L Nare, Int J Environ Health Res. 20103Gumbo JR, Malaka EM, Odiyo JO, Nare L. The health implications of wastewater reuse in vegetable irrigation: a case study from Malamulele, South Africa. Int J Environ Health Res 2010: 20(3): 201-211.

Epidemiological study of intestinal helminthiasis in a Marrakech raw sewage spreading zone. K Bouhoum, J Schwartzbrod, Zentralblatt f€ ur Hygiene und Umweltmedizin. Bouhoum K, Schwartzbrod J. Epidemiological study of intestinal helminthiasis in a Marrakech raw sewage spread- ing zone. Zentralblatt f€ ur Hygiene und Umweltmedizin 1998: 200: 553-561.

Epidemiologic setting of the agricultural use of sewage: Valle Del Mezquital. E Cifuentes, U Blumenthal, G Ruiz-Palacios, S Bennett, A Peasey, Salud Publica Mex. 361Cifuentes E, Blumenthal U, Ruiz-Palacios G, Bennett S, Peasey A. Epidemiologic setting of the agricultural use of sewage: Valle Del Mezquital, Mexico. Salud Publica Mex 1994: 36(1): 3-9.

Helminth ova control in wastewater and sludge for agriculture reuse. Jimenez-Cisneros, Be, Water Health. 2Jimenez-Cisneros BE. Helminth ova control in wastewater and sludge for agriculture reuse. Water Health 2006: 2: 1-12.