# Symptom management during and after treatment with concurrent chemoradiotherapy for oropharyngeal cancer: A review of the literature and areas for future research

CorpusID: 32221554
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7a1600770b438184eb301970eee4191ffe1ecfa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7a1600770b438184eb301970eee4191ffe1ecfa)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Symptom management during and after treatment with concurrent chemoradiotherapy for oropharyngeal cancer: A review of the literature and areas for future research


Heidi Mason hmason@med.umich.edu 
Mary Beth Derubeis 
Nancy Burke 
Melissa Shannon 
Danielle Karsies 
Gregory Wolf 
Avi Eisbruch 
Francis Worden 
Heidi Mason 
Mary Beth Derubeis 
Nancy Burke 
Melissa Shannon 
Danielle Karsies 
Gregory Wolf 
Avi Eisbruch 
Francis Worden 

MINIREVIEWS
220 April 102016|Volume 7|Issue 2|


School of Nursing
University of Michigan
48109-5482Ann ArborMIUnited States


School of Nursing
University of Michigan
400 North Ingalls48109-5482Ann ArborMIUnited States

Symptom management during and after treatment with concurrent chemoradiotherapy for oropharyngeal cancer: A review of the literature and areas for future research
10.5306/wjco.v7.i2.220Received: May 29, 2015 Peer-review started: June 2, 2015 First decision: August 22, 2015 Revised: November 11, 2015 Accepted: January 16, 2016 Article in press: January 19, 2016 Published online: April 10, 2016Author contributions: All authors contributed to the acquisition of data, writing, and revision of this manuscript. Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors have no real or potential conflicts of interest. Open-Access: This article is an open-access article which was selected by an in-house editor and fully peer-reviewed by external reviewers. It is distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-nc/4.0/ Correspondence to: Heidi Mason, RN, MSN, ACNP-BC,Head and neck cancerChemoradiotherapyDepressionFatigueCachexiaNauseaDesquamationMucositisVomiting
Patients with locally advanced oropharyngeal cancer are at risk for poor outcomes due to the multi-modal nature of treatment and the potential for treatmentrelated toxicity. Although treatment with concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy has drastically reduced the need for a debilitating and disfiguring surgery, treatment related toxicities are often difficult to control. Acute toxicities include mucositis, skin desquamation, depression, cachexia, fatigue and nausea and vomiting. Failure to control these symptoms can adversely affect the patient's ability to complete their treatment regimen. Although there are many promising new treatments in the area of symptom management for this patient population, a review of the literature reflects the need for more research.

## INTRODUCTION

Patients with locally advanced oropharyngeal cancer are at risk for poor outcomes due to the multi-modal nature of treatment and the potential for treatmentrelated toxicity. The primary treatment of patients with locally advanced oropharyngeal cancer no longer includes the debilitating and disfiguring surgery of the past. Currently, the primary treatment is a non-surgical, organ preservation approach that avoids permanent alteration of the patient's ability to speak and swallow. Chemoradiotherapy -concurrent chemotherapy with radiation therapy-for 7 wk has replaced surgery as the standard of care [1] . Although organ preservation is possible in many of these patients, both the short-and long-term side effects of chemoradiotheraphy can also be debilitating. Common acute toxicities include mucositis, skin desquamation, depression and anxiety, cachexia, fatigue, nausea and vomiting [2] . When these toxicities are not properly managed they can lead to treatment delays, chemotherapy dose deviations, hospitalizations and poor quality of life [3] . Increased severity of side effects including mucositis, dermatitis and hematological toxicities can have a negative impact on survival rates and quality of life, as well as decrease treatment efficacy secondary to delays in treatment [4] . Research findings suggest that treatment with chemoradiotheraphy has dramatically increased the supportive care needs of the patient with advanced oropharyngeal cancer [5] .

Both emotional and physical functioning may be affected in this patient population [6] . One third of patients have a high symptom burden prior to beginning treatment secondary to their cancer. These pre-treatment symptoms include pain, fatigue, distress and disturbed sleep, which have a negative impact on the patient's nutritional status [7] . This necessitates a unique individual symptom profile to be developed for personalized management of each patient [8] .

Although treatment with chemoradiotherapy, rather than surgery, has improved the lives of these patients in many ways, it has also dramatically increased their supportive care needs. Managing these symptoms is key to avoiding treatment delays, chemotherapy dose deviations and hospitalizations [9] . Although there are many promising new treatments in this area, a review of the literature reflects the need for more research.


## A REVIEW OF TREATMENT AND


## SUPPORTIVE CARE


## Mucositis

Mucositis is a major concern during chemoradiotherapy and can cause pain, poor nutrition and decreased quality of life. In patients receiving aggressive tumor treatment, incidence rates of mucositis as high as 80% have been reported [10] . Mucositis is known to be more severe and last longer in patients receiving chemoradiation compared to radiation alone. The risk of oral mucositis is higher for smokers, the elderly, those with a high alcohol intake and patients with a lower body mass index [11] . The standard of care continues to be good oral hygiene, dietary adjustments (such as avoiding spicy foods) and medication [12] . The pain of mucositis is often described as a burning sensation. Narcotics can help ease the pain, but does not completely eliminate the discomfort, especially during eating. This will often lead to difficulty maintain ing adequate caloric intake, leading to subsequent weight loss. Prophylatic placement of a feeding tube is controversial, secondary to the increased risk of esophageal stenosis during radiation if the patient does not continue to swallow or perform swallowing exercises during therapy. Guidelines from The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) only support prophylatic placement in patients with significant weight loss, dysphaqia, aspiration, dehydration or comorbiditles that impact the ability to eat or drink [12] . The placement of feeding tubes is not without risk. Complications include bleeding, bowel perforation, infection, potential seeding of tumors and swallowing resistance, all leading to a greater risk of fibrosis and long-term dependence. One randomized study conducted in a curative setting, however, demonstrated that patients who had a feeding tube placed prior to the start of treatment reported higher qualities of life (QoL) following treatment [13] . Another randomized clinical trial in a palliative setting using the prophylactic placement of feeding tubes demonstrated higher post-treatment quality of life in this patient population [14] . Even with high-dose narcotics, patients receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy for head and neck cancer are still not able to achieve adequate pain control from oral mucositis [15] . Hence, the development of pharmacological treatments for oral mucositis is urgent [15] . Since narcotics are not as effective in controlling burning pain, further research in this area is crucial.

Some treatments, however, have been shown to be effective. The European Society for Medical Oncology guidelines recommend the prophylactic use of Benzydamine, which has been shown to lower the severity of pain associated with mucositis [16] . Additionally, lactobacillus lozenges were also found to reduce the incidence of oral mucositis [17] . Low-level laser therapy (LLLT), which has been used for over a decade in Europe and South America to prophylactically treat mucositis in head and neck cancer patients during radiation therapy, has demonstrated positive results. LLLT, administered three times per week after radiation therapy, is thought to work on the mitochondria to displace the nitric oxide that is generated from radiation therapy. It is now being studied in the United States. The procedure is not presently reimbursed, therefore, further research is still necessary in this area [18] . Neuropathic pain due to oral mucositis is common [10] . Use of gabapentin or pregabalin has been found to be useful in controlling pain and limiting the use of other narcotics [10] . A study of 155 patients discovered that using a doxepin rinse (25 mg in 5 mL of water) improved mucositis pain when compared to a placebo (pc 0.001). Doxepin, a tricyclic antidepressant, most likely functions locally on nerves in the oral cavity [19] . Based on current literature, it is clear that more research in the area of neuropathic pain and mucositis is warranted.

Currently, there is not a FDA approved cytoprotective agent that reliably reduces or prevents radiation indiced mucositis. There are clinical trials investigating the use of innate immune defense regulators (IDR). Mucositis has been linked to the dysregulation of innate defense mechanisms. This can lead to a cascade of inflammatory action, causing further damange to the mucosal lining [20] . This is still under investigation, but looks to be promising.

The standard of care for oral mucositis continues to be excellent oral hygiene. NCCN guidelines for oral hygiene recommend that patients brush their teeth with a soft toothbrush twice per day, floss once per day and rinse with a bland rinse. A simple bland rinse is saline, sodium bicarbonate and water [3] . Moreover, patient education is an important component. In one study, patients who received an oral care protocol suffered less pain from oral mucositis and reported improved QoL compared to patients in the control group [21] .

In general, development of pharmacological treatments for oral mucositis is urgent, in addition to further research for LLLT and IDRs.


## Skin desquamation

Skin desquamation is also a major source of discomfort for this patient population. Radiation causes direct tissue injury and inflammation. This leads to an increased expression of epithelial growth factor receptors in keratinocytes, which assist in repopulation [22] . Grade 1 skin desquamation is mild erythema or dry desquamation. Grade 2 desquamation involves erythema and moist desquamation in the skin folds. Grade 3 desquamation demonstrates erythema and more wide-spread moist desquamation [23] . The skin should be dry and clean prior to the patient's radiation treatment. Patients should be counseled to avoid sunlight and skin irritants. Aquaphor, aloe vera, biafine or nonperfumed moisturizers are recommended for dry desquamation. Patients should avoid clothes that rub. Moreover, they should use mild soaps and detergents. Drying gels, zinc oxide past, silver sulfadizine or a chlorhexidine-based solution without alcohol are suggest for moist desquamation. It is important to watch for infections [24] .


## Depression and fatigue

Current literature supports that depression is a significant problem for patients receiving treatment for head and neck cancer [25][26][27][28][29] . Depression is experienced by 22%-57% of these patients [30] . The incidence of suicide is four times higher in head and neck cancer patients than in the general population [31] . This also contributes to greater difficulty with smoking cessation among smokers, which can indirectly compromise treatment outcomes. Although depression appears to be highest at diagnosis and during active treatment, it may continue for up to 6 mo following treatment, leading to frustration and further isolation since patients are unable to return to their normal activities of daily living [32][33][34][35] . One study found a direct correlation between overall symptom severity and the patient's radiation dosage and depression level [36] . The severity of symptoms and depression increased as radiation treatments progressed, peaking around 2 mo from the start of therapy.

Anti-depressants and anti-anxiety medications are often necessary during treatment. Since there are higher rates of mental health issues and elevated risks of suicide in this population, anti-depressants have a positive effect on patients. After assessing a patient's perception of the benefit of including a psychologist in their care, one trial found that integrated psychological care improves care for head and neck cancer patients [37] . Assessment for the presence of psychosocial distress has led to early intervention for patients and their loved ones. Use of The NCCN's Emotional Distress Thermometer assessment tool demonstrated patient distress -worry, fatigue, pain, nervousness and depression [38] . The use of the thermometer prompted the providers to refer their patients with high distress levels to an onsite social worker.

Fatigue is a common treatment-related side effect of chemoradiotherapy and can be more pronounced when patients experience pain. Fatigue tends to peak within the first 12 wk following the completion of radiation, and these symptoms can remain an issue for up to 2 years post radiation therapy [39] . It often leads to a sedentary lifestyle during the course of treatment, despite substantial evidence demonstrates that QoL can be enhanced with the use of moderate physical activity [40,41] .

Although little research has been done specifically with head and neck cancer patients, the literature supports the use of exercise to improve quality of life in the domain of emotional well-being, self-esteem, social functioning, pain and anxiety in cancer patients during and after treatment [42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49][50] . Physical activity was shown to be beneficial with depression and fatigue in men receiving androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer [51] . Another study also found exercise intervention to be beneficial on psychological distress from cancer patients receiving chemotherapy with low to moderate levels of baseline psychomorbidity [51] . Yet another study demonstrates the positive effects of moderate activity in improving depression and fatigue in cancer patients [52] . A prospective randomized clinical trial compared resistance exercise, walking and a home program with a trainer via phone to usual care. Signs of improvement (P < 0.05) were seen in mental health, night time sleeping and strength [53] . Capozzi et al [54] concluded that progressive strength training programs are feasible for head and neck cancer survivors during and following treatment. Such programs are associated with improved acute and chronic fitness outcomes and symptom management.

More research is needed in the area of exercise and depression, as well as the use of exercise as a tool to prevent fatigue and depression in head and neck cancer patients [55] .


## Cachexia and sarcopenia

Head and neck cancer patients experience one of the highest rates of malnutrition, with 25%-50% being classified as nutritionally compromised prior to initiation of treatment [56] . A study comparing elderly patients (over 65) with those under 65 found that the elderly patients under intensive nutritional support were able to tolerate aggressive therapy as well as the group under 65 [57] . The literature supports that early and intensive nutrition intervention can minimize weight loss and physical functioning while improving overall QoL [58,59] .

Another study found that nutritional counseling had an equal or greater benefit than oral supplementation, thereby highlighting the importance of dietitians on the multidisciplinary team [60] . Ensuring adequate nutritional support through regular nutrition therapy in combination with oral supplements has been shown to decrease the incidence of mucositis, dysphaqia and skin desquamation [61] . Sarcopenia (the isolated loss of lean body mass) has been shown to negatively affect locoregional control, overall survival and disease specific survival [62] .


## Nausea and vomiting

Nausea and vomiting can affect a patient's ability to tolerate and complete treatment. The risk of posttreatment nausea and vomiting is higher in patients under 40, those with a prior history of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting (CINV), high pre-treatment expectations and those with weight loss of greater than 5% from their baseline. Alternatively, patients with a history of alcohol abuse have a lower incidence of CINV [63] . Our own clinical practice has demonstrated that a history of motion sickness and nausea during pregnancy can also be predictors of difficulty in controlling chemotherapy induced nausea. Pre-treatment assessment for the presence of such risk factors is as vital as prophylactic treatment of nausea and can help increase the likelihood of treating nausea while preventing anticipatory nausea [64] . Since more intensive treatment regimens integrate concurrent chemotherapy along with radiation, nausea and vomiting associated with these treatments have become a greater concern in recent years. Following standard prevention guidelines based on emetogenicity can help reduce CIVN, but complete prevention remains challenging because of individual patient factors [65] . NCCN guidelines recommend that chemotherapeutic agents deemed as moderate to highly emetogenic, such as platinum based agents, should be administered with prophylactic antiemetics from different drug classes. These should include a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist (that inhibits serotonin), a substance P and Neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist and dexamethasone [66] . Adding olanzaphine to moderate or highly emetogenic chemotheraputic regimen can increase the complete control rate of nausea and vomiting [67] . A newer agent, sustained-release Granisetron (a 5-HT3 receptor antagonism), has been shown to prevent acute and delayed nausea and vomiting over multiple cycles of chemotherapy regimen that are moderately to highly emetogenic. The transdermal administration of this drug makes it ideal for patients having difficulty swallowing secondary to pain, tumor or nausea.

Furthermore, non-pharmacological approaches to treatment of nausea are important. Ettinger et al [68] suggests preventing dyspepsia, eating small frequent meals at room temperature, keeping well hydrated and maintaining electrolyte balance. The use of ginger as an effective antiemetic is also a promising treatment during the acute phase of nausea and vomiting. It appears to work through 5-HT3 receptor antagonism [69] . It has not, however, proven beneficial in the delayed phases of nausea and vomiting [70,71] . Additionally, there are some alternative therapies, such as oral marijuana, that have shown to be effective both alone and in combination with other traditional antiemetics [72,73] . More research in the prevention of nausea and vomiting is needed, especially in the treatment of delayed nausea and vomiting. Delayed nausea and vomiting is a multifactorial problem and may not be triggered by serotonin alone, hence, cannabis may be an effective alternative. However, toxicities, such as delirium, disturbance in coordination, memory and perception loss, tachycardia and hyperemesis, make cannabis as the first line of therapy less appealing [74,75] .


## COMPREHENSIVE SYMPTOM


## MANAGEMENT

Patients receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy for head and neck cancer have significant side effects which threaten to limit their ability to complete their treatment course without interruptions or dose reductions. Mason et al [9] found that head and neck cancer patients receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy benefit from close monitoring for toxicities by nurse practitioners. In a retrospective trial, patients seen weekly in a nurse practitioner symptom management clinic had less hospitalizations, dose reductions and treatment deviations. This illustrates the importance of having providers, trained in symptom management, follow these patients closely during and immediately after treatment. Mucositis and adequate pain control remain areas of major concern. Insufficient treatment of these symptoms leads to malnutrition, dehydration and increased fatigue. While narcotics are often necessary, the use of adjunctive medications needs to be further explored. Although several promising treatments to avoid mucositis are being analyzed, further research is warranted. Vigilant monitoring with a multidisciplinary team is essential. Registered dietitians, social workers, physicians and nurse practitioners are crucial members of the head and neck cancer team and should be readily available for consultation during clinic. Treatment for nausea and vomiting, in the delayed setting and with patients deemed to be more sensitive to the emetic effects of chemotherapy, needs further attention. The literature supports the importance of following established guidelines in treating nausea and vomiting, yet individualized assessment and recommendations are vital since personal characteristics play an important role in a patient's ability to tolerate chemotherapy. Exercise, depression and fatigue are all inter-related, and there is ample research available regarding the importance of exercise. More specific research relating to patient's with head and neck cancer receiving concurrent chemoratiotherapy is needed, especially since the rate of suicide is substantially higher in this population.

Finally, patients receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy for head and neck cancer require close monitoring by a multi-disciplinary health care team to ensure adequate symptom management. Such a multidisciplinary in the optimal setting provides the expertise to promote the best possible care of these complex patients.
 © 2016 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights reserved.
April 10, 2016|Volume 7|Issue 2| WJCO|www.wjgnet.com
Mason H et al . Symptom management and head neck cancer
Mason H et al . Symptom management and head neck cancer © 2016 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights reserved.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Current trends in initial management of hypopharyngeal cancer: the declining use of open surgery. R P Takes, P Strojan, C E Silver, P J Bradley, M Haigentz, G T Wolf, A R Shaha, D M Hartl, J Olofsson, J A Langendijk, A Rinaldo, A Ferlito, 10.1002/hed.21613]2Head Neck. 34Takes RP, Strojan P, Silver CE, Bradley PJ, Haigentz M, Wolf GT, Shaha AR, Hartl DM, Olofsson J, Langendijk JA, Rinaldo A, Ferlito A. Current trends in initial management of hypopharyngeal cancer: the declining use of open surgery. Head Neck 2012; 34: 270-281 [PMID: 22228621 DOI: 10.1002/hed.21613] 2

Head and neck cancer. A Argiris, M V Karamouzis, D Raben, R L Ferris, 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60728-X]Lancet. 371Argiris A, Karamouzis MV, Raben D, Ferris RL. Head and neck cancer. Lancet 2008; 371: 1695-1709 [PMID: 18486742 DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60728-X]

NCCN Task Force Report. prevention and management of mucositis in cancer care. W Bensinger, M Schubert, K K Ang, D Brizel, E Brown, J G Eilers, L Elting, B B Mittal, M A Schattner, R Spielberger, N S Treister, A M Trotti, 18289497J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 6Suppl 1: S1-21; quiz S22-S24Bensinger W, Schubert M, Ang KK, Brizel D, Brown E, Eilers JG, Elting L, Mittal BB, Schattner MA, Spielberger R, Treister NS, Trotti AM. NCCN Task Force Report. prevention and management of mucositis in cancer care. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 2008; 6 Suppl 1: S1-21; quiz S22-S24 [PMID: 18289497]

Postoperative concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for high-risk squamouscell carcinoma of the head and neck. J S Cooper, T F Pajak, A A Forastiere, J Jacobs, B H Campbell, S B Saxman, J A Kish, H E Kim, A J Cmelak, M Rotman, M Machtay, J F Ensley, K S Chao, C J Schultz, N Lee, K K Fu, 10.1056/NEJMoa032646]5N Engl J Med. 350Cooper JS, Pajak TF, Forastiere AA, Jacobs J, Campbell BH, Saxman SB, Kish JA, Kim HE, Cmelak AJ, Rotman M, Machtay M, Ensley JF, Chao KS, Schultz CJ, Lee N, Fu KK. Postoperative concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for high-risk squamous- cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 1937-1944 [PMID: 15128893 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa032646] 5

Radiation therapy for head and neck cancers. I Mallick, J N Waldron, 10.1016/j.soncn.2009.05.002Semin Oncol Nurs. 25Mallick I, Waldron JN. Radiation therapy for head and neck cancers. Semin Oncol Nurs 2009; 25: 193-202 [PMID: 19635398 DOI: 10.1016/j.soncn.2009.05.002]

Symptom Burden and Quality of Life in Advanced Head and Neck Cancer Patients: AIIMS Study of 100 Patients. A K Gandhi, S Roy, A Thakar, A Sharma, B K Mohanti, 10.10.4103/0973-1075.138389]7Indian J Palliat Care. 20Gandhi AK, Roy S, Thakar A, Sharma A, Mohanti BK. Symptom Burden and Quality of Life in Advanced Head and Neck Cancer Patients: AIIMS Study of 100 Patients. Indian J Palliat Care 2014; 20: 189-193 [PMID: 25191005 DOI: 10.10.4103/0973-1075.138389] 7

The symptom burden of treatment-naive patients with head and neck cancer. E Y Hanna, T R Mendoza, D I Rosenthal, G B Gunn, P Sehra, E Yucel, C S Cleeland, 10.1002/cncr.29097Cancer. 121Hanna EY, Mendoza TR, Rosenthal DI, Gunn GB, Sehra P, Yucel E, Cleeland CS. The symptom burden of treatment-naive patients with head and neck cancer. Cancer 2015; 121: 766-773 [PMID: 25369213 DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29097]

Nutrition impact symptoms in a population cohort of head and neck cancer patients: multivariate regression analysis of symptoms on oral intake, weight loss and survival. A Farhangfar, M Makarewicz, S Ghosh, N Jha, R Scrimger, L Gramlich, V Baracos, 25017804Oral Oncol. 50Farhangfar A, Makarewicz M, Ghosh S, Jha N, Scrimger R, Gramlich L, Baracos V. Nutrition impact symptoms in a population cohort of head and neck cancer patients: multivariate regression analysis of symptoms on oral intake, weight loss and survival. Oral Oncol 2014; 50: 877-883 [PMID: 25017804 DOI: 10.1016/ joraloncolgy.2014.06.009]

Outcomes evaluation of a weekly nurse practitioner-managed symptom management clinic for patients with head and neck cancer treated with chemoradiotherapy. H Mason, M B Derubeis, J C Foster, J M Taylor, F P Worden, 10.1188/13ONF.40-06APOncol Nurs Forum. 40Mason H, DeRubeis MB, Foster JC, Taylor JM, Worden FP. Outcomes evaluation of a weekly nurse practitioner-managed symptom management clinic for patients with head and neck cancer treated with chemoradiotherapy. Oncol Nurs Forum 2013; 40: 581-586 [PMID: 24007925 DOI: 10.1188/13ONF.40-06AP]

Mucositis incidence, severity and associated outcomes in patients with head and neck cancer receiving radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy: a systematic literature review. A Trotti, L A Bellm, J B Epstein, D Frame, H J Fuchs, C K Gwede, E Komaroff, L Nalysnyk, M D Zilberberg, 10.1016/S0167-8140(02)00404-8Radiother Oncol. 66Trotti A, Bellm LA, Epstein JB, Frame D, Fuchs HJ, Gwede CK, Komaroff E, Nalysnyk L, Zilberberg MD. Mucositis incidence, severity and associated outcomes in patients with head and neck cancer receiving radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy: a systematic literature review. Radiother Oncol 2003; 66: 253-262 [PMID: 12742264 DOI: 10.1016/S0167-8140(02)00404-8]

Changes and predictors of radiation-induced oral mucositis in patients with oral cavity cancer during active treatment. S C Chen, Y H Lai, B S Huang, C Y Lin, K H Fan, J T Chang, 25586214Eur J Oncol Nurs. 19Chen SC, Lai YH, Huang BS, Lin CY, Fan KH, Chang JT. Changes and predictors of radiation-induced oral mucositis in patients with oral cavity cancer during active treatment. Eur J Oncol Nurs 2015; 19: 214-219 [PMID: 25586214 DOI: 10.1016/ j.ejon.2014.12.001]

Symptom management during the radiation oncology treatment course: a practical guide for the oncology clinician. S Fogh, S S Yom, 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.09.020Semin Oncol. 41Fogh S, Yom SS. Symptom management during the radiation oncology treatment course: a practical guide for the oncology clinician. Semin Oncol 2014; 41: 764-775 [PMID: 25499635 DOI: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2014.09.020]

Gastrostomy in head and neck cancer: current literature, controversies and research. P T Bradley, T Brown, V Paleri, 10.1097/moo.0000000000000135Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 23Bradley PT, Brown T, Paleri V. Gastrostomy in head and neck cancer: current literature, controversies and research. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015; 23: 162-170 [PMID: 25692626 DOI: 10.1097/moo.0000000000000135]

Impact of the prophylactic gastrostomy for unresectable squamous cell head and neck carcinomas treated with radio-chemotherapy on quality of life: Prospective randomized trial. S Salas, K Baumstarck-Barrau, M Alfonsi, L Digue, D Bagarry, N Feham, R J Bensadoun, T Pignon, A Loundon, J L Deville, M Zanaret, R Favre, F Duffaud, P Auquier, 10.1016/j.radonc.2009.05.016Radiother Oncol. 93Salas S, Baumstarck-Barrau K, Alfonsi M, Digue L, Bagarry D, Feham N, Bensadoun RJ, Pignon T, Loundon A, Deville JL, Zanaret M, Favre R, Duffaud F, Auquier P. Impact of the prophylactic gastrostomy for unresectable squamous cell head and neck carcinomas treated with radio-chemotherapy on quality of life: Prospective randomized trial. Radiother Oncol 2009; 93: 503-509 [PMID: 19524315 DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2009.05.016]

Symptom profile of nasopharyngeal cancer patients during radiation therapy. H Y Huang, D J Wilkie, M M Schubert, L L Ting, 11898144Cancer Pract. 8Huang HY, Wilkie DJ, Schubert MM, Ting LL. Symptom profile of nasopharyngeal cancer patients during radiation therapy. Cancer Pract 2000; 8: 274-281 [PMID: 11898144 DOI: 10.1111/ j.1523-5394.2000.86007]

Benzydamine HCl for prophylaxis of radiationinduced oral mucositis: results from a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J B Epstein, S Silverman, D A Paggiarino, S Crockett, M M Schubert, N N Senzer, P B Lockhart, M J Gallagher, D E Peterson, F G Leveque, 10.1002/1097-0142Cancer. 92Epstein JB, Silverman S, Paggiarino DA, Crockett S, Schubert MM, Senzer NN, Lockhart PB, Gallagher MJ, Peterson DE, Leveque FG. Benzydamine HCl for prophylaxis of radiation- induced oral mucositis: results from a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Cancer 2001; 92: 875-885 [PMID: 11550161 DOI: 10.1002/1097-0142]

Lactobacillus brevis CD2 lozenges reduce radiationand chemotherapy-induced mucositis in patients with head and neck cancer: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study. A Sharma, G K Rath, S P Chaudhary, A Thakar, B K Mohanti, S Bahadur, Sharma A, Rath GK, Chaudhary SP, Thakar A, Mohanti BK, Bahadur S. Lactobacillus brevis CD2 lozenges reduce radiation- and chemotherapy-induced mucositis in patients with head and neck cancer: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study.

. 21741230Eur J Cancer. 48Eur J Cancer 2012; 48: 875-881 [PMID: 21741230 DOI: 10.1016/ j/ejca.2011.06.010]

Laser treatment halts oral mucositis in its tracks. A Quinn, R C Gholz, Proceedings of The Oncology Nursing Society 40th Annual Congress. The Oncology Nursing Society 40th Annual CongressQuinn A, Gholz RC. Laser treatment halts oral mucositis in its tracks. Proceedings of The Oncology Nursing Society 40th Annual Congress; 2015-04-24

Doxepin rinse versus placebo in the treatment of acute oral mucositis pain in patients receiving head and neck radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy: a phase III, randomized, double-blind trial (NCCTG-N09C6 [Alliance]). J L Leenstra, R C Miller, R Qin, J A Martenson, K J Dornfeld, J D Bearden, D R Puri, P J Stella, M A Mazurczak, M D Klish, P J Novotny, R L Foote, C L Loprinzi, 24733799J Clin Oncol. 32Leenstra JL, Miller RC, Qin R, Martenson JA, Dornfeld KJ, Bearden JD, Puri DR, Stella PJ, Mazurczak MA, Klish MD, Novotny PJ, Foote RL, Loprinzi CL. Doxepin rinse versus placebo in the treatment of acute oral mucositis pain in patients receiving head and neck radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy: a phase III, randomized, double-blind trial (NCCTG-N09C6 [Alliance]). J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1571-1577 [PMID: 24733799 DOI: 10.1200/ JCO.2013.53.2630]

A biological approach to mucositis. S T Sonis, 15330370J Support Oncol. 2Sonis ST. A biological approach to mucositis. J Support Oncol 2004; 2: 21-32; discussion 35-36 [PMID: 15330370]

Ontogeny of inflammatory cell responsiveness: superoxide anion generation by phorbol ester-stimulated fetal, neonatal, and adult bovine neutrophils. C B Clifford, D O Slauson, N R Neilsen, M M Suyemoto, R D Zwahlen, D H Schlafer, 2547714Inflammation. 13Clifford CB, Slauson DO, Neilsen NR, Suyemoto MM, Zwahlen RD, Schlafer DH. Ontogeny of inflammatory cell responsiveness: superoxide anion generation by phorbol ester-stimulated fetal, neonatal, and adult bovine neutrophils. Inflammation 1989; 13: 221-231 [PMID: 2547714 DOI: 10.118/14.CJON.E.118-E125]

Radiation dermatitis: clinical presentation, pathophysiology, and treatment. S R Hymes, E A Strom, C Fife, 16384753J Am Acad Dermatol. 54Hymes SR, Strom EA, Fife C. Radiation dermatitis: clinical presentation, pathophysiology, and treatment 2006. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006; 54: 28-46 [PMID: 16384753 DOI: 10.1016/ Jaad.2005.08.054]

Common terminology criteria for adverse events. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Nih Nci. 43Common terminology criteria for adverse events. U.S. Depart- ment of Health and Human Services. Nih Nci 2009; 4: 3

Consensus guidelines for the management of radiation dermatitis and coexisting acne-like rash in patients receiving radiotherapy plus EGFR inhibitors for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Bernier, J Bonner, J B Vermorken, R J Bensadoun, R Dummer, J Giralt, G Kornek, A Hartley, R Mesia, C Robert, S Segaert, K K Ang, 10.1093/annoc/mdm400Ann Oncol. 19Bernier J, Bonner J, Vermorken JB, Bensadoun RJ, Dummer R, Giralt J, Kornek G, Hartley A, Mesia R, Robert C, Segaert S, Ang KK. Consensus guidelines for the management of radiation dermatitis and coexisting acne-like rash in patients receiving radiotherapy plus EGFR inhibitors for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Ann Oncol 2008; 19: 142-149 [PMID: 17785763 DOI: 10.1093/annoc/mdm400]

Depressive symptoms, smoking, drinking, and quality of life among head and neck cancer patients. S A Duffy, D L Ronis, M Valenstein, K E Fowler, M T Lambert, C Bishop, J E Terrell, 10.1176/appi.psy48.2.142Psychosomatics. 48Duffy SA, Ronis DL, Valenstein M, Fowler KE, Lambert MT, Bishop C, Terrell JE. Depressive symptoms, smoking, drinking, and quality of life among head and neck cancer patients. Psychosomatics 2007; 48: 142-148 [PMID: 17329608 DOI: 10.1176/appi.psy48.2.142]

Distress overlaps with anxiety and depression in patients with head and neck cancer. M Pandey, N Devi, B C Thomas, S V Kumar, R Krishnan, K Ramdas, 10.1002/pon1123Psychooncology. 16Pandey M, Devi N, Thomas BC, Kumar SV, Krishnan R, Ramdas K. Distress overlaps with anxiety and depression in patients with head and neck cancer. Psychooncology 2007; 16: 582-586 [PMID: 17109494 DOI: 10.1002/pon1123]

Caregiver-reported neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients undergoing treatment for head and neck cancer: a pilot study. S M Bond, D K Hawkins, B A Murphy, 10.1097/NCC.0b013e31829194a3Cancer Nurs. 37Bond SM, Hawkins DK, Murphy BA. Caregiver-reported neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients undergoing treatment for head and neck cancer: a pilot study. Cancer Nurs 2014; 37: 227-235 [PMID: 23619332 DOI: 10.1097/NCC.0b013e31829194a3]

Comparing the distress thermometer (DT) with the patient health questionnaire (PHQ)-2 for screening for possible cases of depression among patients newly diagnosed with advanced cancer. M Lazenby, J Dixon, M Bai, R Mccorkle, 10.1016/oraloncology.2014.07.003Palliat Support Care. 12Lazenby M, Dixon J, Bai M, McCorkle R. Comparing the distress thermometer (DT) with the patient health questionnaire (PHQ)-2 for screening for possible cases of depression among patients newly diagnosed with advanced cancer. Palliat Support Care 2014; 12: 63-68 [PMID: 24468423 DOI: 10.1016/oraloncology.2014.07.003]

Psychological distress in patients and caregivers over the course of radiotherapy for head and neck cancer. H Badr, V Gupta, A Sikora, M Posner, 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.07.003Oral Oncol. 50Badr H, Gupta V, Sikora A, Posner M. Psychological distress in patients and caregivers over the course of radiotherapy for head and neck cancer. Oral Oncol 2014; 50: 1005-1011 [PMID: 25091150 DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.07.003]

The prevalence of psychological distress by cancer site. J Zabora, K Brintzenhofeszoc, B Curbow, C Hooker, S Piantadosi, 11180574Psychooncology. 101<19:AID-PON501>3.0.coZabora J, BrintzenhofeSzoc K, Curbow B, Hooker C, Piantadosi S. The prevalence of psychological distress by cancer site. Psychooncology 2001; 10: 19-28 [PMID: 11180574 DOI: 10.1002/ 1099-1611(20010/02)10:1<19:AID-PON501>3.0.co]

High suicide risk found for patients with head and neck cancer. J L Zeller, 10.1011/jama296.14.17.6JAMA. 296Zeller JL. High suicide risk found for patients with head and neck cancer. JAMA 2006; 296: 1716-1717 [PMID: 17032977 DOI: 10.1011/jama296.14.17.6]

Prevalence and correlates of depression among patients with head and neck cancer: a systematic review of implications for research. M E Haisfield-Wolfe, D B Mcguire, K Soeken, J Geiger-Brown, De Forge, B R , 10.1188/09.ONF.E107-E125Oncol Nurs Forum. 36Haisfield-Wolfe ME, McGuire DB, Soeken K, Geiger-Brown J, De Forge BR. Prevalence and correlates of depression among patients with head and neck cancer: a systematic review of implications for research. Oncol Nurs Forum 2009; 36: E107-E125 [PMID: 19403439 DOI: 10.1188/09.ONF.E107-E125]

Value of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale in the follow up of head and neck cancer patients. L A Joseph, J A Routledge, M P Burns, R Swindell, A J Sykes, N J Slevin, S E Davidson, 10.1017/S0022215113000078J Laryngol Otol. 127Joseph LA, Routledge JA, Burns MP, Swindell R, Sykes AJ, Slevin NJ, Davidson SE. Value of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale in the follow up of head and neck cancer patients. J Laryngol Otol 2013; 127: 285-294 [PMID: 23398854 DOI: 10.1017/S0022215113000078]

Long-term quality of life of patients with head and neck cancer. A De Graeff, J R De Leeuw, Ros Wj Hordijk, G J Blijham, G H Winnubst, J A , 10.1097/00005537-200001000-00018Laryngoscope. 110de Graeff A, de Leeuw JR, Ros WJ, Hordijk GJ, Blijham GH, Winnubst JA. Long-term quality of life of patients with head and neck cancer. Laryngoscope 2000; 110: 98-106 [PMID: 10646723 DOI: 10.1097/00005537-200001000-00018]

Body image and depressive symptoms in patients with head and neck cancer: an important relationship. B A Rhoten, J Deng, M S Dietrich, B Murphy, S H Ridner, 10.1007/s00520-014-2312-2Support Care Cancer. 22Rhoten BA, Deng J, Dietrich MS, Murphy B, Ridner SH. Body image and depressive symptoms in patients with head and neck cancer: an important relationship. Support Care Cancer 2014; 22: 3053-3060 [PMID: 24925049 DOI: 10.1007/s00520-014-2312-2]

Changes of symptoms and depression in oral cavity cancer patients receiving radiation therapy. S C Chen, Y H Lai, C T Liao, C C Lin, J T Chang, 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.02.024Oral Oncol. 46Chen SC, Lai YH, Liao CT, Lin CC, Chang JT. Changes of symptoms and depression in oral cavity cancer patients receiving radiation therapy. Oral Oncol 2010; 46: 509-513 [PMID: 20308004 DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.02.024]

Integrated psychological care in head and neck cancer: Views from health care providers, patients, and supports. M T Jesse, M E Ryan, A Eshelman, T Ghanem, A M Williams, L R Miller-Matero, K Yaremchuk, 10.1002/lary.25059Laryngoscope. 125Jesse MT, Ryan ME, Eshelman A, Ghanem T, Williams AM, Miller-Matero LR, Yaremchuk K. Integrated psychological care in head and neck cancer: Views from health care providers, patients, and supports. Laryngoscope 2015; 125: 1345-1351 [PMID: 25447289 DOI: 10.1002/lary.25059]

Incorporating patient-reported outcomes to improve emotional distress screening and assessment in an ambulatory oncology clinic. A C Chiang, S Buia Amport, D Corjulo, K L Harvey, R Mccorkle, 10.1200/JOP.2015.003954J Oncol Pract. 11Chiang AC, Buia Amport S, Corjulo D, Harvey KL, McCorkle R. Incorporating patient-reported outcomes to improve emotional distress screening and assessment in an ambulatory oncology clinic. J Oncol Pract 2015; 11: 219-222 [PMID: 25873062 DOI: 10.1200/JOP.2015.003954]

Time course and predictors for cancer-related fatigue in a series of oropharyngeal cancer patients treated with chemoradiation therapy. D E Spratt, M Sakae, N Riaz, B H Lok, S Essandoh, M Hsu, Z Zhang, K Schupak, J Setton, N Y Lee, 10.1634/theoncologist.2011-0437Oncologist. 17Spratt DE, Sakae M, Riaz N, Lok BH, Essandoh S, Hsu M, Zhang Z, Schupak K, Setton J, Lee NY. Time course and predictors for cancer-related fatigue in a series of oropharyngeal cancer patients treated with chemoradiation therapy. Oncologist 2012; 17: 569-576 [PMID: 22398160 DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2011-0437]

Physical activity and quality of life in head and neck cancer survivors. L Q Rogers, K S Courneya, K T Robbins, J Malone, A Seiz, L Koch, K Rao, M Nagarkar, 10.1007/s00520-006-0044-7Support Care Cancer. 14Rogers LQ, Courneya KS, Robbins KT, Malone J, Seiz A, Koch L, Rao K, Nagarkar M. Physical activity and quality of life in head and neck cancer survivors. Support Care Cancer 2006; 14: 1012-1019 [PMID: 16538497 DOI: 10.1007/s00520-006-0044-7]

Effects of exercise on cancer-related fatigue. F C Dimeo, 11598888Cancer. 92Dimeo FC. Effects of exercise on cancer-related fatigue. Cancer 2001; 92: 1689-1693 [PMID: 11598888]

Exercise interventions on health-related quality of life for people with cancer during active treatment. S I Mishra, R W Scherer, C Snyder, P M Geigle, D R Berlanstein, O Topaloglu, 10.1111/COA.2015Clin Otolaryngol. 37Mishra SI, Scherer RW, Snyder C, Geigle PM, Berlanstein DR, Topaloglu O. Exercise interventions on health-related quality of life for people with cancer during active treatment. Clin Otolaryngol 2012; 37: 390-392 [PMID: 23164265 DOI: 10.1111/COA.2015]

Exercise programs for patients with cancer improve physical functioning and quality of life. R Mcclellan, 10.1016/S1836-9553(13)70150-4J Physiother. 5957McClellan R. Exercise programs for patients with cancer improve physical functioning and quality of life. J Physiother 2013; 59: 57 [PMID: 23419919 DOI: 10.1016/S1836-9553(13)70150-4]

Relationship of exercise to quality of life in cancer patients beginning chemotherapy. L A Faul, H S Jim, S Minton, M Fishman, T Tanvetyanon, P B Jacobsen, 10.1016/j.painsymman.2010.07.019J Pain Symptom Manage. 41Faul LA, Jim HS, Minton S, Fishman M, Tanvetyanon T, Jacobsen PB. Relationship of exercise to quality of life in cancer patients beginning chemotherapy. J Pain Symptom Manage 2011; 41: 859-869 [PMID: 21330097 DOI: 10.1016/j.painsymman.2010.07.019]

Exercise Recommendations for Cancer-Related Fatigue, Cognitive Impairment, Sleep problems, Depression, Pain, Anxiety, and Physical Dysfunction: A Review. K Mustian, L Sprod, M Janelsins, L Peppone, S Mohile, 23667857Oncol Hematol Rev. 8Mustian K, Sprod L, Janelsins M, Peppone L, Mohile S. Exercise Recommendations for Cancer-Related Fatigue, Cognitive Impairment, Sleep problems, Depression, Pain, Anxiety, and Physical Dysfunction: A Review. Oncol Hematol Rev 2012; 8: 81-88 [PMID: 23667857]

The effect of oncologists' exercise recommendations on the level of exercise and quality of life in survivors of breast and colorectal cancer: A randomized controlled trial. J H Park, J Lee, M Oh, H Park, Chae J Kim, D I Lee, M K Yoon, Y J Lee, C W Park, S Jones, L W Kim, N K Kim, S I Jeon, J Y , 10.1002/CNCR.29400Cancer. 121Park JH, Lee J, Oh M, Park H, Chae J, Kim DI, Lee MK, Yoon YJ, Lee CW, Park S, Jones LW, Kim NK, Kim SI, Jeon JY. The effect of oncologists' exercise recommendations on the level of exercise and quality of life in survivors of breast and colorectal cancer: A randomized controlled trial. Cancer 2015; 121: 2740-2748 [PMID: 25965782 DOI: 10.1002/CNCR.29400]

Effects of exercise on fatigue, physical functioning, and emotional distress during radiation therapy for breast cancer. V Mock, K H Dow, C J Meares, P M Grimm, J A Dienemann, M E Haisfield-Wolfe, W Quitasol, S Mitchell, A Chakravarthy, I Gage, 9243585Oncol Nurs Forum. 24Mock V, Dow KH, Meares CJ, Grimm PM, Dienemann JA, Haisfield-Wolfe ME, Quitasol W, Mitchell S, Chakravarthy A, Gage I. Effects of exercise on fatigue, physical functioning, and emotional distress during radiation therapy for breast cancer. Oncol Nurs Forum 1997; 24: 991-1000 [PMID: 9243585]

Fatigue and quality of life outcomes of exercise during cancer treatment. V Mock, M Pickett, M E Ropka, Muscari Lin, E Stewart, K J Rhodes, V A Mcdaniel, R Grimm, P M Krumm, S Mccorkle, R , 10.1046/j.1523-5394.2001.009003119.x]Cancer Pract. 9Mock V, Pickett M, Ropka ME, Muscari Lin E, Stewart KJ, Rhodes VA, McDaniel R, Grimm PM, Krumm S, McCorkle R. Fatigue and quality of life outcomes of exercise during cancer treatment. Cancer Pract 2001; 9: 119-127 [PMID: 11879296 DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-5394.2001.009003119.x]

A randomized, controlled trial of aerobic exercise for treatment-related fatigue in men receiving radical external beam radiotherapy for localized prostate carcinoma. P M Windsor, K F Nicol, J Potter, 15274068Cancer. 101Windsor PM, Nicol KF, Potter J. A randomized, controlled trial of aerobic exercise for treatment-related fatigue in men receiving radical external beam radiotherapy for localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 2004; 101: 550-557 [PMID: 15274068 DOI: 10.1002/ CNCR20378]

Exercise may reduce depression but not anxiety in self-referred cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Post-hoc analysis of data from the 'Body & amp; Cancer' trial. J Midtgaard, M Stage, T Møller, C Andersen, M Quist, M Rørth, J Herrstedt, K Vistisen, B Christiansen, L Adamsen, 10.3109/028486x.2010.5431Acta Oncol. 50Midtgaard J, Stage M, Møller T, Andersen C, Quist M, Rørth M, Herrstedt J, Vistisen K, Christiansen B, Adamsen L. Exercise may reduce depression but not anxiety in self-referred cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Post-hoc analysis of data from the 'Body & amp; Cancer' trial. Acta Oncol 2011; 50: 660-669 [PMID: 21226544 DOI: 10.3109/028486x.2010.5431]

Physical activity for men receiving androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: benefits from a 16-week intervention. Culos-Reed Sn, J W Robinson, H Lau, L Stephenson, M Keats, S Norris, G Kline, P Faris, 10.1007/s00520-009-0694-3Support Care Cancer. 18Culos-Reed SN, Robinson JW, Lau H, Stephenson L, Keats M, Norris S, Kline G, Faris P. Physical activity for men receiving androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: benefits from a 16-week intervention. Support Care Cancer 2010; 18: 591-599 [PMID: 19609570 DOI: 10.1007/s00520-009-0694-3]

Effect of exercise on cancer-related fatigue: a meta-analysis. D Tomlinson, C Diorio, J Beyene, L Sung, 10.1097/PHM00000Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 93Tomlinson D, Diorio C, Beyene J, Sung L. Effect of exercise on cancer-related fatigue: a meta-analysis. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2014; 93: 675-686 [PMID: 24743466 DOI: 10.1097/PHM00000

Maintaining physical activity during head and neck cancer treatment: Results of a pilot controlled trial. S G Zhao, N B Alexander, Z Djuric, J Zhou, Y Tao, M Schipper, F Y Feng, A Eisbruch, F P Worden, S J Strath, S Jolly, 10.1002/hed.24162Head Neck. Epub ahead of printZhao SG, Alexander NB, Djuric Z, Zhou J, Tao Y, Schipper M, Feng FY, Eisbruch A, Worden FP, Strath SJ, Jolly S. Maintaining physical activity during head and neck cancer treatment: Results of a pilot controlled trial. Head Neck 2015; Epub ahead of print [PMID: 26445898 DOI: 10.1002/hed.24162]

Culos-Reed SN. A clinic-supported group exercise program for head and neck cancer survivors: managing cancer and treatment side effects to improve quality of life. L C Capozzi, K R Boldt, H Lau, L Shirt, B Bultz, 10.1007/s00520-014-2436-4Support Care Cancer. 23Capozzi LC, Boldt KR, Lau H, Shirt L, Bultz B, Culos-Reed SN. A clinic-supported group exercise program for head and neck cancer survivors: managing cancer and treatment side effects to improve quality of life. Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 1001-1007 [PMID: 25256377 DOI: 10.1007/s00520-014-2436-4]

Cancer prehabilitation: an opportunity to decrease treatment-related morbidity, increase cancer treatment options, and improve physical and psychological health outcomes. J K Silver, J Baima, 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31829b4afeAm J Phys Med Rehabil. 92Silver JK, Baima J. Cancer prehabilitation: an opportunity to decrease treatment-related morbidity, increase cancer treatment options, and improve physical and psychological health outcomes. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2013; 92: 715-727 [PMID: 23756434 DOI: 10.1097/PHM.0b013e31829b4afe]

. E Isenring, Clinical Nutrition for Oncology Patients. Sundry. MA: Jones & BartlettIsenring E. Clinical Nutrition for Oncology Patients. Sundry, MA: Jones & Bartlett, 2010: 165-185

Chemoradiotherapy in elderly patients with advanced head and neck cancer under intensive nutritional support. P H Chang, K Y Yeh, J S Huang, E Y Chen, S W Yang, C H Wang, 10.1111/ajco.12323Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 11Chang PH, Yeh KY, Huang JS, Chen EY, Yang SW, Wang CH. Chemoradiotherapy in elderly patients with advanced head and neck cancer under intensive nutritional support. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol 2015; 11: 228-235 [PMID: 25535674 DOI: 10.1111/ajco.12323]

Nutritional intervention improves the caloric and proteic ingestion of head and neck cancer patients under radiotherapy. Gonçalves Dias, M C De Fátima Nunes Marucci, M Nadalin, W Waitzberg, D L , 16229399Nutr Hosp. 20Gonçalves Dias MC, de Fátima Nunes Marucci M, Nadalin W, Waitzberg DL. Nutritional intervention improves the caloric and proteic ingestion of head and neck cancer patients under radiotherapy. Nutr Hosp 2005; 20: 320-325 [PMID: 16229399]

The impact of nutrition support on body composition in cancer outpatients receiving radiotherapy. E Isenring, S Capra, J Bauer, P S Davies, 10.1007/s00592-003-0054-6Acta Diabetol. 401SupplIsenring E, Capra S, Bauer J, Davies PS. The impact of nutrition support on body composition in cancer outpatients receiving radiotherapy. Acta Diabetol 2003; 40 Suppl 1: S162-S164 [PMID: 14618461 DOI: 10.1007/s00592-003-0054-6]

Impact of nutrition on outcome: a prospective randomized controlled trial in patients with head and neck cancer undergoing radiotherapy. P Ravasco, I Monteiro-Grillo, Marques Vidal, P Camilo, M E , 10.1002/hed.20221Head Neck. 27Ravasco P, Monteiro-Grillo I, Marques Vidal P, Camilo ME. Impact of nutrition on outcome: a prospective randomized controlled trial in patients with head and neck cancer undergoing radiotherapy. Head Neck 2005; 27: 659-668 [PMID: 15920748 DOI: 10.1002/hed.20221]

Nutritional counselling and oral nutritional supplements in head and neck cancer patients undergoing chemoradiotherapy. V Valentini, F Marazzi, M Bossola, F Miccichè, L Nardone, M Balducci, N Dinapoli, P Bonomo, R Autorino, S Silipigni, F Giuliani, C Tamanti, M C Mele, G E Martorana, 22257023J Hum Nutr Diet. 25Valentini V, Marazzi F, Bossola M, Miccichè F, Nardone L, Balducci M, Dinapoli N, Bonomo P, Autorino R, Silipigni S, Giuliani F, Tamanti C, Mele MC, Martorana GE. Nutritional counselling and oral nutritional supplements in head and neck cancer patients undergoing chemoradiotherapy. J Hum Nutr Diet 2012; 25: 201-208 [PMID: 22257023 DOI: 10.111/j.1365- 277x.2011.0122ox]

P091) sarcopenia/cachexia is associated with reduced survival and locoregional control in head and neck cancer patients receiving radiotherapy: results from quantitative imaging analysis of lean body mass. S Chamchod, C Fuller, A Grossberg, A Mohamed, J Heukelom, H Eichelberger, M Kantor, G Gunn, A Garden, S Frank, J Phan, B Beadle, H Skinner, W Morrison, D Ruzensky, D Rosenthal, 25930908Oncology. 29205153Chamchod S, Fuller C, Grossberg A, Mohamed A, Heukelom J, Eichelberger H, Kantor M, Gunn G, Garden A, Frank S, Phan J, Beadle B, Skinner H, Morrison W, Ruzensky D, Rosenthal D. (P091) sarcopenia/cachexia is associated with reduced survival and locoregional control in head and neck cancer patients receiving radiotherapy: results from quantitative imaging analysis of lean body mass. Oncology (Williston Park) 2015; 29: pii: 205153 [PMID: 25930908]

Determinants of postchemotherapy nausea and vomiting in patients with cancer. Quality of Life and Symptom Control Committees of the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. D Osoba, B Zee, J Pater, D Warr, J Latreille, L Kaizer, 8996132J Clin Oncol. 15Osoba D, Zee B, Pater J, Warr D, Latreille J, Kaizer L. Deter- minants of postchemotherapy nausea and vomiting in patients with cancer. Quality of Life and Symptom Control Committees of the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1997; 15: 116-123 [PMID: 8996132]

Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: the importance of acute antiemetic control. F M Schnell, 10.1634/theoncologist.8-2-187Oncologist. 8Schnell FM. Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: the importance of acute antiemetic control. Oncologist 2003; 8: 187-198 [PMID: 12697943 DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.8-2-187]

Prognostic factors for chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting. D Warr, 10.1016/je/phar.2013.10.015Eur J Pharmacol. 722Warr D. Prognostic factors for chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting. Eur J Pharmacol 2014; 722: 192-196 [PMID: 24157977 DOI: 10.1016/je/phar.2013.10.015]

National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Antiemesis (Version 2National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Antiemesis (Version 2.2015). Available from: URL: http://NCCN.org/professionals/ physician_gls/PDF/antiemesis.pdf

A review of olanzapine as an antiemetic in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and in palliative care patients. C Fonte, S Fatigoni, F Roila, 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.0210Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 95Fonte C, Fatigoni S, Roila F. A review of olanzapine as an antiemetic in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and in palliative care patients. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2015; 95: 214-221 [PMID: 25779971 DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.0210]

National Comprehensive Cancer Network serial online. D S Ettinger, D K Armstrong, M J Berger, S Barbour, P J Bierman, B Bradbury, G Ellis, S Kirkegaard, D D Kloth, M G Kris, D Lim, L B Michaud, L Nabati, K Noonan, H S Rugo, D Siler, S M Sorscher, S Stelts, L Stucky-Marshall, B Todaro, S G Urba, accessedEttinger DS, Armstrong DK, Berger MJ, Barbour S, Bierman PJ, Bradbury B, Ellis G, Kirkegaard S, Kloth DD, Kris MG, Lim D, Michaud LB, Nabati L, Noonan K, Rugo HS, Siler D, Sorscher SM, Stelts S, Stucky-Marshall L, Todaro B, Urba SG. National Comprehensive Cancer Network serial online. [accessed 2011

Is ginger beneficial for nausea and vomiting? An update of the literature. W Marx, N Kiss, L Isenring, 25872115Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 9Marx W, Kiss N, Isenring L. Is ginger beneficial for nausea and vomiting? An update of the literature. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care 2015; 9: 189-195 [PMID: 25872115 DOI: 10.1097/ SPC.0000000000000135]

Zingiber officinale) reduces acute chemotherapy-induced nausea: a URCC CCOP study of 576 patients. J L Ryan, C E Heckler, J A Roscoe, S R Dakhil, J Kirshner, P J Flynn, J T Hickok, G R Morrow, Ginger, 10.1007/s00520-011-1236-3Support Care Cancer. 20Ryan JL, Heckler CE, Roscoe JA, Dakhil SR, Kirshner J, Flynn PJ, Hickok JT, Morrow GR. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) reduces acute chemotherapy-induced nausea: a URCC CCOP study of 576 patients. Support Care Cancer 2012; 20: 1479-1489 [PMID: 21818642 DOI: 10.1007/s00520-011-1236-3]

Effect of ginger on acute and delayed chemotherapyinduced nausea and vomiting: a pilot, randomized, open-label clinical trial. Y Panahi, A Saadat, A Sahebkar, F Hashemian, M Taghikhani, E Abolhasani, 10.1177/1534735411433201Integr Cancer Ther. 11Panahi Y, Saadat A, Sahebkar A, Hashemian F, Taghikhani M, Abolhasani E. Effect of ginger on acute and delayed chemotherapy- induced nausea and vomiting: a pilot, randomized, open-label clinical trial. Integr Cancer Ther 2012; 11: 204-211 [PMID: 22313739 DOI: 10.1177/1534735411433201]

Cannabinoids in medicine: A review of their therapeutic potential. Ben Amar, M , 10.1016/j.lep.2006.02.001J Ethnopharmacol. 105Ben Amar M. Cannabinoids in medicine: A review of their therapeutic potential. J Ethnopharmacol 2006; 105: 1-25 [PMID: 16540272 DOI: 10.1016/j.lep.2006.02.001]

Therapeutic use of Cannabis sativa on chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting among cancer patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. F C Machado Rocha, S C Stéfano, R De Cássia Haiek, Rosa Oliveira, L M , Da Silveira, D X , 18625004Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 17Machado Rocha FC, Stéfano SC, De Cássia Haiek R, Rosa Oliveira LM, Da Silveira DX. Therapeutic use of Cannabis sativa on chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting among cancer patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl) 2008; 17: 431-443 [PMID: 18625004 DOI: 10.1111/ j.1365-2354.2008.00917]

Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review. M R Tramèr, D Carroll, F A Campbell, D J Reynolds, R A Moore, H J Mcquay, 10.1136/bmj.232.7303.16BMJ. 323Tramèr MR, Carroll D, Campbell FA, Reynolds DJ, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review. BMJ 2001; 323: 16-21 [PMID: 11440936 DOI: 10.1136/bmj.232.7303.16]

Medicinal cannabis in oncology practice: still a bridge too far?. F A De Jong, F K Engels, R H Mathijssen, L Van Zuylen, J Verweij, R P Peters, A Sparreboom, 10.1200/JCO.2005/04.150J Clin Oncol. 23de Jong FA, Engels FK, Mathijssen RH, van Zuylen L, Verweij J, Peters RP, Sparreboom A. Medicinal cannabis in oncology practice: still a bridge too far? J Clin Oncol 2005; 23: 2886-2891 [PMID: 15860846 DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2005/04.150]

. P-Reviewer , +1-925-223-8242 Fax: +1-925-223-8243Yamagata M S-Editor: Qiu S L-Editor: A E-EditorLi D Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc 8226 Regency DrivePleasanton, CA 94588, USA TelephoneP-Reviewer: Yamagata M S-Editor: Qiu S L-Editor: A E-Editor: Li D Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc 8226 Regency Drive, Pleasanton, CA 94588, USA Telephone: +1-925-223-8242 Fax: +1-925-223-8243

bpgoffice@wjgnet.com Help Desk. E-mail: bpgoffice@wjgnet.com Help Desk: http://www.wjgnet.com/esps/helpdesk.aspx http://www.wjgnet.com