# Endoscopic rendez-vous after damage control surgery in treatment of retroperitoneal abscess from perforated duodenal diverticulum: a techinal note and literature review

CorpusID: 4165984
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e3adda7fc6eb28ad80e3f65b42a2c3f6f29f93f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e3adda7fc6eb28ad80e3f65b42a2c3f6f29f93f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Endoscopic rendez-vous after damage control surgery in treatment of retroperitoneal abscess from perforated duodenal diverticulum: a techinal note and literature review


Ivan Barillaro 
Veronica Grassi 
Angelo De Sol 
Claudio Renzi 
Giovanni Cochetti 
Francesco Barillaro 
Alessia Corsi 
Alban Cacurri 
Adolfo Petrina 
Lucio Cagini 
Carlo Boselli 
Roberto Cirocchi 
Giuseppe Noya 
Endoscopic rendez-vous after damage control surgery in treatment of retroperitoneal abscess from perforated duodenal diverticulum: a techinal note and literature review
R E V I E W
Introduction:The duodenum is the second seat of onset of diverticula after the colon. Duodenal diverticulosis is usually asymptomatic, but duodenal perforation with abscess may occur.Case presentation: Woman, 83 years old, emergency hospitalised for generalized abdominal pain. On the abdominal tomography in the third portion of the duodenum a herniation and a concomitant full-thickness breach of the visceral wall was detected. The patient underwent emergency surgery. A surgical toilette of abscess was performed passing through the perforated diverticula and the Petzer's tube drainage was placed in the duodenal lumen; the duodenostomic Petzer was endoscopically removed 4 months after the surgery. Discussion: A review of medical literature was performed and our treatment has never been described.Conclusion: For the treatment of perforated duodenal diverticula a sequential two-stage non resective approach is safe and feasible in selected cases.

## Introduction

The duodenum is the most common site for diverticula after the colon [1]. Duodenal diverticula, which can be single or multiple, are found in 5-10% of radiologic and endoscopic exams [2]. In over 70% of cases they are localized in the second portion of the duodenum, less frequently in the third or the fourth one, exceptionally in the first one [2,3]. They are usually asymptomatic; on the other hand they can determine abdominal postprandial pain, dyspeptic disorders or colic-like pains [2]; diverticulitis, bleeding, perforation may rarely occur [4,5]. The first case report of duodenal diverticulosis, describing a diverticulum containing 22 gallstones, was performed in 1710 by Chomel [6]. Surgery is necessary only if symptoms are persistent or if complications arise [7]: the diagnosis of perforated diverticula of the third duodenal portion is late and the management is still matter of debate [8][9][10][11][12]. In this techinal note we report a new sequential treatment of perforated duodenal diverticula.


## Case presentation

Woman, 83 years old, emergency hospitalised for generalized abdominal pain. She reported some alimentary vomiting episodes and diarrheic bowel had occurred during the 3 days before admission and a history of colonic diverticular disease. In the physical examination globular abdomen and pain after deep palpation of the epi-mesogastric region were observed. Laboratory tests resulted within the normal range: leukocytes were 4720/mm 3 (normal range 4500-10800/mm 3 ), hematocrit was 50,5% (normal range 38-46%), haemoglobin was 11.4 g/dl (normal range 12-16 g/dl). The patient underwent plain abdominal X-Ray, which revealed neither free sub-diaphragmatic air nor air-fluid levels. Computed tomography (CT) scans, taken in emergency, showed a densitometric alteration in the periduodenal adipose tissue for the presence of multiple pools which extended along the right lateroconal fascia and occupied the anterior pararenal space, which includes the second and the third portion of the duodenum (Figure 1). At this exam a subtle perihepatic effusion layer was also detected. Within the third day from admission, after the onset of fever, leukocytosis, because of the increase of abdominal pain and the progressive clinical worsening a second abdominal CT scan was performed ( Figure 2). This last radiological exam allowed to definitively exclude pneumoperitoneum; a wall herniation in the third portion of the duodenum containing endoluminal material and a breach in the medial wall of the same bowel segment were observed. Furthermore, contiguously to the duodenal breach, within the adipose tissue, in the context of an underlying fluid layer, air bubbles were detected. Being these findings strongly suggestive of a locally confined perforation, the patient in sepsis (temperature 39°C, increased heart rate, leukocytes 16400/mm 3 ) underwent emergency surgery. A partial coloepiploic detachment, Kocher manoeuvre to the proximal half of the II duodenal portion and subsequent isolation of the III one were performed; at this level, on the upper edge, a perforated diverticulum occupied the retroperitoneal space and it was partly surrounded by an abscess. The large implant base of the diverticulum prevented both the resection and the direct suture, being the laceration too jagged, thickened and oedematous ( Figure 3). The septic condition of the patient prevented a derivation surgery, which would have been time consuming, demolitive and hazardous. A surgical toilette of abscess was performed passing through the perforated diverticula and the Petzer's tube drainage was placed in the duodenal lumen ( Figure 4). On the first postoperative week the patient was fed with parenteral nutrition, on the second week the patient started a liquid diet and on the 15th post-operative day the patient got a solid diet. No postoperative complications occurred and the patient was discharged on the 30th post-operative day. The duodenostomic Petzer was endoscopically removed 4 months after the surgery. The Petzer's drainage tube was grasped by endoscopic transgastric way and then removed outside by oral way. In relation to the general condition of the patient was necessary to insert a nasogastric tube into the duodenum for 15 days to reduce the possibility of leak. During the procedure a nasogastric tube, previously anchored on the cutaneous edge of the Petzer, was pulled in the duodenum without effort, being the former on guide of the latter. A drainage tube was percutaneously positioned in the fistulous tract with its distal extremity outside the duodenum. Radiologic follow up with Gastrographin® confirmed the right position both of the nasogastric tube in the duodenum at the level of the fistulous orifice and of the drainage tube inside the tract, at about 4 cm from the wall of the duodenum. The drainage tube was left in place for 15 days ( Figure 5). This procedure ensures less trauma and fewer potential complications in the subjects strongly debilitated. Fourteen days after, the patient underwent transit X-Ray with Gastromiro® which showed a normal passage of the contrast medium without any sign of spillages or fistulous tracts. Check-up carried out after 12 months shows normal results.


## Discussion

In our techinal note we reported a new surgical treatment of retroperitoneal abscess from diverticular perforation of  the III duodenal portion with endoscopic rendez-vous after damage control surgery. The advantage of this technique consists in performing a non-resective approach with no post operative complication rate. Duodenal diverticula located in the first portion have a low incidence; their site is on the anterior face or on the external right curve edge of the duodenum and their surgical management do not present remarkable technical difficulties. Duodenal diverticula are usually asymptomatic, surgery is needed in less than 3% of cases [8], when clinical manifestations or complications are observed. In about 10% of cases duodenal diverticula are symptomatic (bleeding, pain and nausea caused by distension or inflammation) [13,14] and they enter in the differential diagnosis of the acute abdomen [15][16][17]. Complications of duodenal diverticula are rare, but they could be devasting; the most frequent one is diverticulitis with perforation. Since diverticula of third portion are usually located in the retroperitoneal space, the onset of symptoms is often insidious and diagnosis is often delayed [18]. Even if several cases are described in which a conservative management with antibiotics and percutaneous drainage is preferred [19,20], this treatment should be taken only after a careful consideration. In literature, several types of treatments are described, both surgical or conservative, according to the patient's condition and the localization of the duodenal diverticulum: segmental duodenectomies, pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (p-p Whipple), diverticulectomies [11]. At the moment, the conventional treatment is diverticulectomy with duodenal closure and drainage positioning, especially when they are located in the retroperitoneal space [21][22][23]. The revision of the medical literature does not reveal any surgical treatment equal to ours for complicated diverticula in the third duodenal portion. A review of medical literature was performed; the research was restricted to studies published between September 1985 and December 2012. We reviewed 40 studies producing 64 cases. We considered the treatment of the perforated duodenal diverticulum; the results of this review was reported in Table 1. Perforations were most commonly located in the second (78% of cases) and in the third portion of the duodenum (17% of cases). The most common approach is surgical (80% of cases), although only few reports of conservative management with antibiotics and percutaneous drainage are available (3% of cases). The indications to a surgical intervention and eventually the choice of the correct surgical    When there is substantial inflammation of the duodenum, a diversion should be performed by a subtotal gastrectomy followed by Billroth II reconstruction, or a Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis (12% of cases). Only patients with mild disease are likely to benefit from nonoperative management. In the case described above, the demolition of the duodeno-cephalo-pancreatic region, as well as the confectioning of a bilio-digestive anastomosis of hepatic type or a choledochal jejunostomy for bypass purpose, were not affordable because of the septic conditions caused by the purulent peritonitis. Our treatment, to our knowledge, has never been described, and we propose it as a new and innovative treatment for partients whose general conditions do not allow demolitive invasive surgery.


## Conclusion

Our two-stage technique consisting in damage control surgery and endoscopic review enabled us to treat a patient with retroperitoneal abscess from the third portion of the duodenum for which a more demolishing surgical procedure was not recommended. This method implies a close multidisciplinary relation between the surgeon, the endoscopist and the interventional radiologist.


## Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviation CT: Computed tomography.


## Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors' contributions RC, AD, IB, AC were involved in pre-operative diagnosis and postoperative care. RC and CB conceived the study and participated in the design of the study. IB and VG wrote the manuscript. CR and FB participated in preparation of the figures. AC, LC, AP, GC helped in literature research and critically revised the manuscript. RC and GN coordinated the study. All authors contributed and approved the final version of the manuscript. 


## Author details

## Figure 1
1CT on admission.

## Figure 2
2CT after three days from the admission.

## Figure 3
3Intraoperative finding.

## Figure 4
4Petzer's tube drainage placement.

## Figure 5
5Nasogastric tube positioned in front of the diverticulum, anchored with a thread outside the drainage tube.

## Table 1
1Kind of treatment of perforated duodenal diverticulum reported in medical literatureAuthor 
Pz Duodenal 
portion 

Year Kind of treatment 
performed 

Type of treatment 

Surgical 
Non-surgical 

Thorson CM et al. [11] 
4 II portion 2012 Non operative management 
Bowel rest antibiotics 

Metcalfe MJ et al. [24] 
1 II portion 2010 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Gottschalk U et al. [25] 
1 II portion 2010 Endoscopical treatment 

Lee HH et al. [23] 
1 II portion 2010 Surgical treatment 
Laparoscopic Diverticulectomy 

Volchok J et al. [26] 
1 II portion 2009 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Lopez-Zarraga F et al. [27] 1 II portion 2009 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Ames JT et al. [28] 
8 II portion 2009 Surgical treatment and 
nonoperative management 

NR 
Bowel rest antibiotics 

III portion 

Guinier D et al. [29] 
1 II portion 2008 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 
NR 

Schnueriger B et al. [10] 5 II Portion 2008 Surgical treatment and 
nonoperative management 

-Segmental duodenectomy 
PTC tube, Bowel rest, 
Antibiotics 
III Portion 

IV Portion 
-Pylorus-preserving duodeno-
pancreatectomy (pp-Whipple) 

-Diverticulectomy 

Martinez-Cecilia D 
et al. [19] 

1 II Portion 2008 Conservative treatment 
NR 
Bowel Rest, Antibiotics 
and percutaneous drainage 

Huang RY et al. [20] 
1 II Portion 2007 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 
NR 

Hirota S et al. [30] 
1 II portion 2007 Surgical treatment 
NR 
NR 

Andromanakos N 
et al. [31] 

1 II Portion 2007 Surgical treatment 
Subtotal gastrectomy and antecolic 
anastomosis and retroperitoneal 
drainage 

NR 

Valenzuela Martínez MJ 
et al. [32] 

1 II Portion 2006 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Safioleas M et al. [33] 
1 II portion 2006 Surgical treatment 
Gastrojejunostomy, drenage 

Castellví J et al. [34] 
1 III Portion 2006 Surgical treatment 
Gastroenteroanastomosis and 
biliary drainage with Kehr, 
gastrojejunostomy 

NR 

Miller G et al. [8] 
3 II Portion 2005 Surgical treatment and 
nonoperative management 

Diverticulectomy, diversion 
(pyloric exclusion, 
gastrojejunostomy) 

Antibiotics, bowel rest 

III Portion 

Papalambros E et al. [35] 1 III Portion 2005 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy and duodenostomy 
at the second duodenal portion 

Lee VT et al. [36] 
1 II Portion 2005 Surgical treatment 
Roux -en-Y duodenojejunostomy. 

Bergman S et al. [22] 
1 II portion 2005 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy and duodenotomy 

Marhin WW et al. [37] 
2 II portion 2005 Surgical and conservative 
treatment 

Diverticulectomy 
Antibiotics therapy 

Yokomuro S et al. [7] 
1 II portion 2004 Surgical treatment 
Primary closure with drainage 

Sakurai Y et al. [6] 
1 II portion 2004 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Yarze JC et al. [38] 
1 II portion 2002 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Franzen D et al. [16] 
1 II portion 2002 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Atmani A et al. [39] 
2 II portion 2002 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy lateral 
duodenostomy, T tube 

Gulotta G et al. [40] 
1 II portion 2001 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulo-jejunostomy on a 
Roux-en-Y 

Eeckhout G et al. [41] 
1 II portion 2000 Percutaneous and endoscopic 
management 


## Table 1
1Kind of treatment of perforated duodenal diverticulum reported in medical literature (Continued) Rao PM et al. [15] 1 III portion 1999 Surgical treatment NR Poostizadeh A et al. [43] 1 III portion 1997 Surgical treatment Diverticulectomy, GastrostomyTsukamoto T et al. [42] 
2 II portion 1999 Surgical treatment and 
nonoperative management 

Diverticulectomy 
Antibiotics, percutaneous 
abscess drainage. 

Ido K et al. [44] 
1 II portion 1997 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

Cavanagh JE et al. [45] 
1 II portion 1996 Surgical treatment 
Malecot drainage in diverticulum 

Mehdi A et al. [46] 
2 II portion 1994 Surgical treatment 
Diverticulectomy 

III portion 

Guglielmi A et al. [47] 
2 II portion 1993 Surgical treatment 
Diverticuletomy, diversion 

Pugash RA et al. [48] 
2 II portion 1990 Surgical treatment 
Aspiration, drainage, T tube 

Steinman E et al. [49] 
2 II portion 1989 Surgical treatment 
Drainage 

III portion 

Beech RR et al. [50] 
1 II portion 1985 Surgical treatment 
Tube duodenostomy 

Stebbings WS et al. [51] 2 I portion 
1985 Surgical treatment 
Diverticuletomy, primary closure 
with drainage 

http://www.wjes.org/content/8/1/26
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and take full advantage of:
Duodenal diverticula and duodenal tumours, 1. In Oxford Text Book of Surgery. W T Knoefel, D W Rattner, Morris PJ, Malt RAOxford University PressNew YorkKnoefel WT, Rattner DW: Duodenal diverticula and duodenal tumours, 1. In Oxford Text Book of Surgery. Edited by Morris PJ, Malt RA. New York: Oxford University Press; 1994:943-946.

Small intestine. B M Evers, Sabiston textbook of surgery: the biological basis of modern surgical practice. Townsend CMBeauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL. Philadelphia18th editionEvers BM: Small intestine. In Sabiston textbook of surgery: the biological basis of modern surgical practice. 18th edition. Edited by Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company; 2008:1318-1319.

Stomaco e duodeno. R Dionigi, F Mosca, L Dominioni, G Dionigi, Chirurgia: basi teoriche e chirurgia generale. Dionigi R. MilanoElsevier Masson5033rd editionDionigi R, Mosca F, Dominioni L, Dionigi G: Stomaco e duodeno. In Chirurgia: basi teoriche e chirurgia generale. 3rd edition. Edited by Dionigi R. Milano: Elsevier Masson; 2002:503.

Small intestine. In Schwartz's principles of surgery. B M Evers, C M Townsend, J C Thompson, S I Shwartz, G T Shires, F C Spencer, J M Daly, J E Fischer, A C Galloway, MCGraw-Hill1247New York7th editionEvers BM, Townsend CM, Thompson JC: Small intestine. In Schwartz's principles of surgery. 7th edition. Edited by Shwartz SI, Shires GT, Spencer FC, Daly JM, Fischer JE, Galloway AC. New York: MCGraw-Hill; 1999:1247.

Report of a case of duodenal diverticulum containing gallstones. J B Chomel, Histoire Acad R Sci. 1710Chomel JB: Report of a case of duodenal diverticulum containing gallstones. Histoire Acad R Sci Paris 1710:48-50.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum successfully diagnosed preoperatively with abdominal CT scan associated with upper gastrointestinal series. Y Sakurai, H Miura, T Matsubara, J Gastroenterol. 39Sakurai Y, Miura H, Matsubara T, et al: Perforated duodenal diverticulum successfully diagnosed preoperatively with abdominal CT scan associated with upper gastrointestinal series. J Gastroenterol 2004, 39:379-383.

Simple closure of a perforated duodenal diverticulum: "a case report. S Yokomuro, E Uchida, Y Arima, J Nihon Med Sch. 71Yokomuro S, Uchida E, Arima Y, et al: Simple closure of a perforated duodenal diverticulum: "a case report". J Nihon Med Sch 2004, 71:337-339.

Perforated duodenal diverticulitis: a report of three cases. G Miller, C Mueller, D Yim, Dig Surg. 22Miller G, Mueller C, Yim D, et al: Perforated duodenal diverticulitis: a report of three cases. Dig Surg 2005, 22:198-202.

Successful management of perforated duodenal diverticulitis with intra-abdominal drainage and feeding jejunostomy: a case report and literature review. C F Chen, D C Wu, C W Chen, Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 24Chen CF, Wu DC, Chen CW, et al: Successful management of perforated duodenal diverticulitis with intra-abdominal drainage and feeding jejunostomy: a case report and literature review. Kaohsiung J Med Sci 2008, 24:425-429.

Diagnosis and management of the symptomatic duodenal diverticulum: a case series and a short review of the literature. B Schnueriger, S A Vorburger, V M Banz, J Gastrointest Surg. 12Schnueriger B, Vorburger SA, Banz VM, et al: Diagnosis and management of the symptomatic duodenal diverticulum: a case series and a short review of the literature. J Gastrointest Surg 2008, 12:1571-1576.

The perforated duodenal diverticulum. C M Thorson, Paz Ruiz, P S Roeder, R A , Arch Surg. 147Thorson CM, Paz Ruiz PS, Roeder RA, et al: The perforated duodenal diverticulum. Arch Surg 2012, 147:81-88.

Transduodenal diverticulectomy for periampullar diverticula. F Lida, World J Surg. 1979Lida F: Transduodenal diverticulectomy for periampullar diverticula. World J Surg 1979, 3(103-6):135-136.

CT findings in duodenal diverticulitis. M S Pearl, M C Hill, R K Zeman, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 187Pearl MS, Hill MC, Zeman RK: CT findings in duodenal diverticulitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2006, 187:392-395.

Major complications of small bowel diverticula. J W Donald, Ann Surg. 190Donald JW: Major complications of small bowel diverticula. Ann Surg 1979, 190:183-188.

Case 11: perforated duodenal diverticulitis. P M Rao, Radiology. 211Rao PM: Case 11: perforated duodenal diverticulitis. Radiology 1999, 211:711-713.

Solitary duodenal diverticulum with enterolith as a rare cause of acute abdomen. D Franzen, T Gürtler, U Metzger, Swiss Surg. 8Franzen D, Gürtler T, Metzger U: Solitary duodenal diverticulum with enterolith as a rare cause of acute abdomen. Swiss Surg 2002, 8:277-279.

Surgical complications of small bowel diverticula exclusive of Meckel's. R E Miller, R E Mccabe, P F Salomon, W G Knox, Ann Surg. 171Miller RE, McCabe RE, Salomon PF, Knox WG: Surgical complications of small bowel diverticula exclusive of Meckel's. Ann Surg 1970, 171:202-210.

CT findings of perforated duodenal diverticulitis. B Van Beers, J P Trigaux, T De Ronde, M Melange, J Comput Assist Tomogr. 13Van Beers B, Trigaux JP, De Ronde T, Melange M: CT findings of perforated duodenal diverticulitis. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1989, 13:528-530.

Conservative management of perforated duodenal diverticulum: a case report and review of the literature. D Martinez-Cecilia, A Arjona-Sanchez, M Gomez-Alvarez, World J Gastroenterol. 14Martinez-Cecilia D, Arjona-Sanchez A, Gomez-Alvarez M, et al: Conservative management of perforated duodenal diverticulum: a case report and review of the literature. World J Gastroenterol 2008, 14:1949-1951.

Diagnosis and treatment of a perforated duodenal diverticulum. R Y Huang, A E Romano, M E Stone, N Nathanson, Emerg Radiol. 13Huang RY, Romano AE, Stone ME, Nathanson N: Diagnosis and treatment of a perforated duodenal diverticulum. Emerg Radiol 2007, 13:285-287.

Juxtapapillary duodenal diverticula. T Lotveit, V Skar, M Osnes, Endoscopy. 20Lotveit T, Skar V, Osnes M: Juxtapapillary duodenal diverticula. Endoscopy 1988, 20:175-178.

Duodenal diverticulum with retroperitoneal perforation. S Bergman, J Koumanis, L A Stein, Can J Surg. 48332Bergman S, Koumanis J, Stein LA, et al: Duodenal diverticulum with retroperitoneal perforation. Can J Surg 2005, 48:332.

Laparoscopic diverticulectomy for a perforated duodenal diverticulum: a case report. H H Lee, J Y Hong, S N Oh, J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 20Lee HH, Hong JY, Oh SN, et al: Laparoscopic diverticulectomy for a perforated duodenal diverticulum: a case report. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2010, 20:757-760.

Isolated perforation of a duodenal diverticulum following blunt abdominal trauma. M J Metcalfe, T G Rashid, R R Bird, J Emerg Trauma Shock. 3Metcalfe MJ, Rashid TG, Bird RR: Isolated perforation of a duodenal diverticulum following blunt abdominal trauma. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2010, 3:79-81.

Duodenal diverticulum-a therapeutic challenge. U Gottschalk, C Becker, M Stöhr, Gastroenterol. 48Gottschalk U, Becker C, Stöhr M, et al: Duodenal diverticulum-a therapeutic challenge. Gastroenterol. 2010, 48:551-554.

Duodenal diverticulum: case report of a perforated extraluminal diverticulum containing ectopic pancreatic tissue. J Volchok, T Massimi, S Wilkins, Arch Surg. 144Volchok J, Massimi T, Wilkins S, et al: Duodenal diverticulum: case report of a perforated extraluminal diverticulum containing ectopic pancreatic tissue. Arch Surg 2009, 144:188-190.

Abdominal pain in a young woman. López Zárraga, F Saenz De Ormijana, J , Diez Orive, M , Eur Radiol. 19López Zárraga F, Saenz De Ormijana J, Diez Orive M, et al: Abdominal pain in a young woman. Eur Radiol 2009, 19:2783-2786. Nov.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum: clinical and imaging findings in eight patients. J T Ames, M P Federle, K M Pealer, Abdom Imaging. 34Ames JT, Federle MP, Pealer KM: Perforated duodenal diverticulum: clinical and imaging findings in eight patients. Abdom Imaging 2009, 34:135-139. Mar-Apr.

Spontaneous perforation of a retroperitoneal duodenal diverticulum. D Guinier, R Kovacs, J Chir. 145Guinier D, Kovacs R: Spontaneous perforation of a retroperitoneal duodenal diverticulum. J Chir (Paris) 2008, 145:287-288. May-Jun.

An elderly woman with duodenal perforation difficulty diagnose. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. S Hirota, T Tsujikawa, K Kitoh, 44Hirota S, Tsujikawa T, Kitoh K, et al: An elderly woman with duodenal perforation difficulty diagnose. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi 2007, 44:752-755.

An extended retroperitoneal abscess caused by duodenal diverticulum perforation: report of a case and short review of the literature. N Andromanakos, D Filippou, P Skandalakis, Am Surg. 73Andromanakos N, Filippou D, Skandalakis P, et al: An extended retroperitoneal abscess caused by duodenal diverticulum perforation: report of a case and short review of the literature. Am Surg 2007, 73:85-88.

Traumatic perforation of a duodenal diverticulum. M J Valenzuela Martínez, E Bonasa, J M Sánchez, Cir Esp. 80Valenzuela Martínez MJ, Bonasa E, Sánchez JM, et al: Traumatic perforation of a duodenal diverticulum. Cir Esp 2006, 80:224-226.

Pancreatic abscess due to perforation of duodenal diverticulum. M Safioleas, M K Stamatakos, G J Mouzopoulos, Chirurgia (Bucur). 101Safioleas M, Stamatakos MK, Mouzopoulos GJ, et al: Pancreatic abscess due to perforation of duodenal diverticulum. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2006, 101:523-524. Sep-Oct.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum. J Castellví, O Pozuelo, J Vallet, Cir Esp. 80Castellví J, Pozuelo O, Vallet J, et al: Perforated duodenal diverticulum. Cir Esp 2006, 80:174-175.

Retroperitoneal perforation of a duodenal diverticulum with colonic necrosis -report of a case. E Papalambros, E Felekouras, F Sigala, Zentralbl Chir. 130Papalambros E, Felekouras E, Sigala F, et al: Retroperitoneal perforation of a duodenal diverticulum with colonic necrosis -report of a case. Zentralbl Chir 2005, 130:270-273.

Mucosal repair of posterior perforation of duodenal diverticulitis using roux loop duodenojejunostomy. V T Lee, A Y Chung, K C Soo, Asian J Surg. 28Lee VT, Chung AY, Soo KC: Mucosal repair of posterior perforation of duodenal diverticulitis using roux loop duodenojejunostomy. Asian J Surg 2005, 28:139-141.

Management of perforated duodenal diverticula. W W Marhin, B J Amson, Can J Surg. 48Marhin WW, Amson BJ: Management of perforated duodenal diverticula. Can J Surg 2005, 48:79-80.

Duodenoscopic diagnosis of perforated periampullary diverticulitis. J C Yarze, Am J Gastroenterol. 97769Yarze JC: Duodenoscopic diagnosis of perforated periampullary diverticulitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2002, 97:769.

Perforated juxta-papillary duodenal diverticula: two cases. A Atmani, F Lachachi, M Sodji, Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 26Atmani A, Lachachi F, Sodji M, et al: Perforated juxta-papillary duodenal diverticula: two cases. Gastroenterol Clin Biol 2002, 26:285-288.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum: report of a case. G Gulotta, G Agosta, G Romano, Chir Ital. 53Gulotta G, Agosta G, Romano G: Perforated duodenal diverticulum: report of a case. Chir Ital 2001, 53:255-258. Jan-Feb.

Endoscopic treatment of a perforated duodenal diverticulum. G Eeckhout, J Vanstiphout, I Van Pottelbergh, Endoscopy. 32Eeckhout G, Vanstiphout J, Van Pottelbergh I, et al: Endoscopic treatment of a perforated duodenal diverticulum. Endoscopy 2000, 32:991-993.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum: report of two cases. T Tsukamoto, Y Ohta, H Hamba, Hepatogastroenterology. 46Tsukamoto T, Ohta Y, Hamba H, et al: Perforated duodenal diverticulum: report of two cases. Hepatogastroenterology 1999, 46:1755-1758. May-Jun.

Traumatic perforation of duodenal diverticulum. A Poostizadeh, K W Gow, T Al-Mahmeed, J Trauma. 43Poostizadeh A, Gow KW, Al-Mahmeed T, et al: Traumatic perforation of duodenal diverticulum. J Trauma 1997, 43:370-371.

Preoperative diagnosis of perforated duodenal diverticulum with ultrasonography. K Ido, H Agata, K Toshimitsu, Clin Ultrasound. 25Ido K, Agata H, Toshimitsu K, et al: Preoperative diagnosis of perforated duodenal diverticulum with ultrasonography. Clin Ultrasound 1997, 25:149-153. Mar-Apr.

Iatrogenic perforation of perivaterian duodenal diverticulum: report of a case. J E CavanaghJr, Can J Surg. 39Cavanagh JE Jr: Iatrogenic perforation of perivaterian duodenal diverticulum: report of a case. Can J Surg 1996, 39:336-338.

Duodenal diverticula--diagnosis and management of complicated forms: report of two clinical cases and review of the literature. A Mehdi, J Closset, J J Houben, Acta Chir Belg. 94Mehdi A, Closset J, Houben JJ, et al: Duodenal diverticula--diagnosis and management of complicated forms: report of two clinical cases and review of the literature. Acta Chir Belg 1994, 94:311-313. Nov-Dec.

The perforation of a para-Vater's duodenal diverticulum (a report of 2 clinical cases) Ann Ital Chir. A Guglielmi, G F Veraldi, F Leopardi, 64discussion 313Guglielmi A, Veraldi GF, Leopardi F, et al: The perforation of a para-Vater's duodenal diverticulum (a report of 2 clinical cases) Ann Ital Chir. May- Jun; 1993, 64:309-312. discussion 313.

Perforating duodenal diverticulitis. R A Pugash, S E O&apos;brien, G W Stevenson, Gastrointest Radiol. 15Pugash RA, O'Brien SE, Stevenson GW: Perforating duodenal diverticulitis. Gastrointest Radiol 1990, 15:156-158.

. E Steinman, E M Utiyama, R G Bevilacqua, Perforated duodenal diverticulum: a report of 2 casesSteinman E, Utiyama EM, Bevilacqua RG, et al: [Perforated duodenal diverticulum: a report of 2 cases].

. Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo. 44Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo 1989, 44:121-123. May-Jun.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum: treatment by tube duodenostomy. R R Beech, D L Friesen, C F Shield, Curr Surg. 42Beech RR, Friesen DL, Shield CF: Perforated duodenal diverticulum: treatment by tube duodenostomy. Curr Surg 1985, 42:462-465. Nov-Dec.

Perforated duodenal diverticulum: a report of two cases. W S Stebbings, J P Thomson, 10.1186/1749-7922-8-26Postgrad Med J. 61Stebbings WS, Thomson JP: Perforated duodenal diverticulum: a report of two cases. Postgrad Med J 1985, 61:839-840. doi:10.1186/1749-7922-8-26

Endoscopic rendez-vous after damage control surgery in treatment of retroperitoneal abscess from perforated duodenal diverticulum: a techinal note and literature review. Barillaro, World Journal of Emergency Surgery. 826Cite this article asCite this article as: Barillaro et al.: Endoscopic rendez-vous after damage control surgery in treatment of retroperitoneal abscess from perforated duodenal diverticulum: a techinal note and literature review. World Journal of Emergency Surgery 2013 8:26.