# Amelioration of Diabetes Mellitus Type II after Sleeve Gastrectomy-Data on Nationwide Survey on Quality Assurance in Bariatric Surgery in Germany *

CorpusID: 45480763
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8eeb7fce42224f6e010777e8e4af03fed6bf3f8b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8eeb7fce42224f6e010777e8e4af03fed6bf3f8b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Amelioration of Diabetes Mellitus Type II after Sleeve Gastrectomy-Data on Nationwide Survey on Quality Assurance in Bariatric Surgery in Germany *
Online December 2013

I El-Sayes 
Sachsenhausen Hospital
FrankfurtGermany

R Weiner 
Sachsenhausen Hospital
FrankfurtGermany

M Talai 
Helios Hospital
Bad SaarowGermany

S Wolff 
Department of General, Abdominal and Vascular Surgery
University Hospital Magdeburg
MagdeburgGermany

C Knoll 
Stat Consult
MagdeburgGermany

T Manger 
Department of General, Abdominal and Paediatric Surgery
SRH Hospital
GeraGermany

Institute of Quality Assurance in Surgery gGmbH
University Magdeburg
MagdeburgGermany

C Stroh 
Department of General, Abdominal and Paediatric Surgery
SRH Hospital
GeraGermany

Institute of Quality Assurance in Surgery gGmbH
University Magdeburg
MagdeburgGermany

Competence Network Obesity
Germany

Amelioration of Diabetes Mellitus Type II after Sleeve Gastrectomy-Data on Nationwide Survey on Quality Assurance in Bariatric Surgery in Germany *
Online December 201364578B0F002890B8328CB3A4D1559D3410.4236/ss.2013.412A002Received August 19, 2013; revised September 17, 2013; accepted September 25, 2013Sleeve GastrectomyDiabetes Mellitus Type IIDiabetes RemissionMetabolic Surgery
Introduction: Sleeve Gastrectomy (SG) is becoming more popular due to its weight reducing effect and promising anti-diabetic efficacy.However, long term results are still lacking.Methods: The study focuses on anti-diabetic efficacy of SG through retrospective analysis of data for patients who underwent SG in Germany from 2005 to 2011.Anti-diabetic efficacy was assessed at 1, 2 and up to 4 years after surgery.Results: 5400 morbidly obese patients underwent SG.Of these 5400 patients 13.2% (n = 712) were insulin treated (IT) and 21.6% (n = 1165) were non-insulin treated (NIT).Total follow-up was accomplished in 41.24% of patients.Percentage of remission and improvement (RI) at 1 year was 83.8% (80.2% for insulin treated (IT) vs. 85.1% for non-insulin treated (NIT)).RI% at 2 years dropped to 77.6% (76.9% for IT vs. 77.9%for NIT patients).With late follow up (up to 4 years), RI% was 65.9% (58.8% for IT vs. 66.7% for NIT patients).Difference between IT and NIT patients was insignificant.Conclusion: SG shows promising ant-diabetic efficacy at 1 year, 2 years and up to 4 years after surgery.This efficacy gradually drops with prolonged time interval after surgery and seems to be insignificantly higher among NIT vs. IT patients.

## Introduction

Sleeve Gastrectomy (SG) was initially described as the first step of biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch in super obese patients [1].Recently, stand-alone SG is gaining worldwide popularity, being a relatively non-technically demanding procedure with excellent results, in terms of substantial weight loss.Accordingly, SG is now approved as a definitive treatment in patients with a body mass index (BMI) >40 kg/m 2 or BMI >35 kg/m 2 in diabetic patients [2][3][4].This is due to the fact that SG has an extended spectrum of action which covers additional satisfactory improvement of diabetic state [2][3][4].It has also been proposed with encouraging results for diabetic non-morbidly obese patients with optimistic outcome [2][3][4].Being a relatively recent technique, long term effect of SG is currently under research.This nationwide survey demonstrates long term anti-diabetic efficacy of SG in morbidly obese Germans who underwent SG from 2005 to 2011.


## Patients and Methods


## *

Conflict of interest: German Bariatric Surgery Registry is supported by BMBF with No. 01GI1124.The corresponding author confirms no links to these firms.The topic is presented in an independent light and the information outlined is product neutral.# Corresponding author.

Patient selection: This data pool includes morbidly obese Germans who underwent SG between 2005 and 2011 in 107 hospitals cooperating with the German Bariatric Surgery Registry (GBSR), Institute of Quality Assurance in Surgery at the Otto-von-Guericke University of Magdeburg [5].Data were collected in a prospective manner.That is to say, every year a new sample of population is added to the already existing cohort.After complete data collection, retrospective statistical analysis was done.Inclusion criteria conformed to the National Institutes of Health Consensus criteria [6].The term (diabetes) refers to a clinical status with a fasting plasma glucose level of more than 126 mg/dl [7].

Assessment of diabetic profile was done at 1, 2 and up to 4 years after SG.Accordingly, patients fell into one of four presentations, namely: remission, improvement, no change and deterioration.Remission, which can be either partial (improvement) or complete, was defined as achieving glycaemia below the diabetic range (126 mg/dl) in the absence of active pharmacologic (anti-hyperglycemic medications, immunosuppressive medications) or surgical (ongoing procedures such as repeated replacements of endoluminal devices) therapy [8].


## Statistical Analysis of Data

Statistical analysis was performed by Stat Consult GmbH using SAS 9.2 software program.Descriptive statistical analysis was specified by presentation of absolute and relative frequencies for nominal values and mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum values for continuous variables.Median was considered for high variation.Descriptive statistics were extended by frequency tests for several values and variables.For further verification of the differences between the variables χ 2 -test was used.Significant differences are shown if p < 0.05.Continuous variables of two groups were compared with two sample t-Test.


## Results

The study included 5400 morbidly obese patients who underwent SG from 2005 through 2011.Their demographic data are demonstrated in Table 1.Of these 5400 patients who underwent SG 13.2% were insulin treated (IT) vs. 21.6% who were non-insulin treated (NIT).All these patients suffered on diabetes mellitus type II.Follow up was successfully accomplished in 34.7% patients after one year, 10.4% at two years and for 3.4% for patients up to 4 years.Those represent our cohort.This relatively low follow up rate is due to the fact that follow up program is not covered by the health insurance system in Germany.

Patients are divided in two major groups according to the anti-diabetic efficacy of SG: patients who show either remission or improvement of their diabetic status (RI) and those who show either no change of their diabetic status or deterioration (ND).Remission was defined of total loose of diabetes mellitus type II independent if the patient was treated with insulin or oral anti-diabetics.Several categories were defined patients could have a reduction of insulin dose at all, a reduction of the oral doses as well as a change from insulin to non-insulin treated diabetes type II.Also some patients developed diabetes in spite of weight reduction in case of better medical examinations.Table 2 illustrates all these changes as well as RI% among patients (total, IT and NIT) after SG at 1, 2 and up to 4 years (Table 3).RI% was higher, but statistically insignificant among NIT vs. IT patients at all follow up points.

Data on duration of diabetes prior to surgery were not available for these patients.


## Discussion

Weight gain has always been referred to as a risk factor for impaired glucose tolerance.Moreover, anti-diabetic agents are usually associated with weight gain [9].This twin association of diabetes and obesity was the corner stone for many studies centered upon simultaneous control of both metabolic disorders.Conservative methods proved to lack long-lasting efficacy [10].Surgery seems therefore to be the most suitable alternative [10].

Among variable surgical options, SG has recently emerged as a possible remedy for both diabetes and obesity.Anti-diabetic effect of SG has even been proved to precede its weight reducing effect [11].Being a relatively recent procedure, proper explanation of its mechanism of action is currently under research.It is suggested that SG is not simply an absolute restrictive maneuver.Fundus   resection, with resultant reduction of orixegenic ghrelin hormone, results primarily in post-operative weight loss.However, ghrelin hormone proved as well to have diabetogenic effect [12].This together with rapid gastric emptying, shorter bowel transit time and post-operative rise of serum incretins (glucagon-like-peptide-1 and peptide-YY) seem to augment its anti-diabetic effect [13,14].These findings could partly explain the anti-diabetic effect of SG.Although this potential to control diabetes seems to be higher with RYGB if compared to SG [15,16], SG seems however to have promisingresults.An efficacy of 88% was observed in less than one year after SG in diabetic patients [17].This group of patients required only 6 months to achieve a mean HbA1C level of 6%.Our re-sults go in accordance.Within one year after surgery, 83.8% of our patients had RI of their diabetic state.

Ruiz-Tovar et al. noticed that 83.3% of patients discontinued their hypoglycemic medications within one month after SG.These findings were maintained for 24 months after surgery [18].In this survey, a more or less stationary RI% was noticed at midterm follow up intervals of 2 years after SG, where RI% dropped slightly to 79.5%.

SG is the newest member among all obesity procedures.Long-term efficacy of SG is therefore currently lacking.However, some reports in literature studied the anti-diabetic efficacy of SG five years after surgery and attributed normalization of fasting blood sugar and HbA1C encountered in 76.9% of their patients to SG [19].We noticed that 65.9% of our patients maintained their diabetes free state with long-term follow up interval (up to 4 years).Abbatini et al. in analysis of long term effects of SG noticed an anti-diabetic efficacy, starting by 87.8% one year after surgery, gradually decreasing to 84.6% at two years and further dropped to 76.9% at five post-operative years.Similarly our cohort showed that 83.8% of patients achieved RI within 1 year after SG.This percentage dropped gradually to 77.6% at 2 years and 65.9% up to 4years after operation respectively.

Reports about anti-diabetic efficacy of SG highlighted a clinical situation of persisting diabetes after operation.This could be encountered in type 1 insulin treated diabetics with autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells.It is therefore recommended to exclude this condition before surgery to optimize surgical outcome [20].Schauer et al. similarly noticed an 87% reduction in the number of patients requiring oral anti-diabetic medications after surgery vs.only 79% reduction among the insulin requiring group [21].In the same way, NIT patients in our cohort showed a higher RI% than IT at all follow up intervals.This difference was statistically not significant.

Although this report demonstrates in our opinion long term outcome of a relatively recent surgical procedure, which is lacking in most published studies, our database lacks however accurate assessment of pre-and post-operative HbA1C levels.This is a limitation in this survey.Moreover, the follow up rate for our patients is relatively low.However, this is attributed to the fact that follow up of patients is not covered by health insurance service in Germany.


## Conclusion

In conclusion, SG is rapidly expanding in Germany, due to its promising results in terms of post-operative weight loss.Its anti-diabetic efficacy, even in IT patients, seems also to play a role in its growing popularity.However, long term assessment of its anti-diabetic efficacy is currently under evaluation.

## Table 1 . Demographic data of morbidly obese diabetics who underwent SG in Germany from 2005 through 2011 and incidence of associated co-morbidities.
1 Gender: Males1965 (36.4%) Females3435 (63.6%) Mean age in years:43.6 Males44.7 females42.9 Mean BMI in kg/m²:52.1 Males53.2 Females51.5 Percentage of patients withassociated co-morbidities89.7%(other than diabetes mellitus): Hypertension65.9% Skeletal diseases49.8% Sleep apnea26.9%

## Table 2 . Changes of diabetes mellitus type II at 1, 2 and up to 4 years after SG for IT, NIT patients and for the total cohort. At least one follow-up At one year (0.5 -1.5 years) At two years (1.5 -2.5 years) Up to four years (>2.5 years)
2Patients with follow-upN (%) 2227 (41.2%)N (%) 1873 (34.7%)N (%) 559 (10.4%)N (%) 131 (2.4%)After one yearAfter two yearsUp to four years(%)BMI (kg/m 2 )(%)BMI (kg/m 2 )(%)BMI (kg/m 2 )Reduction of insulinIT patients40.9 (n = 99)−12.95 (±5.24)39.7 (n = 31)−15.76 (±6.63)17.7 (n = 3)−19.81 (±4.48)Change from IT to NITIT to NIT patients4.6 (n = 11)−13.80 (±3.70)6.4 (n = 5)−16.93 (±6.85)--New onset of ITIT patients2.1 (n = 5)−7.65 (±10.75)5.1 (n = 4)−12.50 (±5.60)--Reduction of oral anti-diabeticsNIT patients34.8 (n = 152)−13.84 (±5.84)18.0 (n = 22)−13.28 (±5.85)22.2 (n = 6)−11.73 (±5.50)Change from NIT to ITNIT to IT patients0.9 (n = 4)−11.00 (±3.68)0.8 (n = 1)−5.93 (-)--New onset of NITNIT patients0.7 (n = 3)−8.22 (±4.19)0.8 (n = 1)−6.57 (-)11.1 (n = 3)−13.88 (±6.88)Remission and improvement (RI)Total diabetics83.8−14.48 (±5.71)77.6−16.17 (±7.01)65.9−15.40 (±6.41)IT patients80.2−14.15 (±5.96)76.9−16.03 (±6.51)58.8−20.18 (±6.72)NIT patients85.1−14.63 (±5.62)77.9−16.19 (±7.35)66.7−11.95 (±4.98)
IT: insulin treated, NIT: non-insulin treated.


## Table 3 . Follow-up rate of patients at 1, 2 and up to 4 years after primary SG. At least one follow-up At one year (0.75 -1.25 years) At two years (1.75 -2.25 years) Up to four years (>2.25 years)
3Patients with follow-upN (%) 2 227 (41.2%)N (%) 1 837 (34.7%)N (%) 599 (10.8%)N (%) 131 (2.4%)
IT: insulin treated, NIT: non-insulin treated.

AcknowledgementsWe thank the following firms for financially supporting the study: Johnson & Johnson MEDICAL GmbH, Ethicon Endo-Surgery Deutschland, Norderstedt Covidien Deutschland GmbH, Neustadt/Donau Pharm-Allergan GmbH, Ettlingen.
Longitudinal Gastrectomy as a Treatment for the High-Risk Super-Obese Patient. G Almogy, P F Crookes, G J Anthone, 10.1381/096089204323013479Obesity Surgery. 1442004

The First International Consensus Summit for Sleeve Gastrectomy (SG). M Deitel, R D Crosby, M Gagner, 10.1007/s11695-008-9471-5Obesity Surgery. 185October 25-27, 2007. 2008

The Second International Consensus Summit for Sleeve Gastrectomy. M Gagner, M Deitel, T L Kalberer, Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases. 54March 19-21, 2009. 2009

Sleeve Gastrectomy as a Single-Stage Bariatric Operation: Indications and Limitations. M Daskalakis, R A Weiner, 10.1159/000198239Obesity Facts. 2S12009

. C Stroh, R Weiner, T Horbach, K Adipositas, A Adipositaschirurgie, New Data on Quality Assurance in Bariatric Surgery in Germany. 13822013

NIH Conference Gastrointestinal Surgery for Severe Obesity. Consensus Development Conference Panel. 1991115

ADA Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2009. Diabetes Care. 32S12009American Diabetes Association

How Do We Define Cure of Diabetes?. J B Buse, S Caprio, W T Cefalu, Diabetes Care. 32112009

The Effects of Pharmacologic Agents for T2DM on Body Weight. F X Pi-Sunyer, 10.3810/pgm.2008.07.1785Postgraduate Medicine. 1202008

Surgical Approaches to the Treatment of Obesity: Bariatric Surgery. B R Smith, P Schauer, N T Nguyen, 10.1016/j.ecl.2008.08.001Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America. 3742008

Long-Term Effects of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy in Morbidly Obese Subjects with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. J S Todkar, S S Shah, P S Shah, J Gangwani, 10.1016/j.soard.2009.06.008Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases. 622010

Third International Summit: Current Status of Sleeve Gastrectomy. M Dietel, M Ganger, A L Erickson, R D Crosby, Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases. 762012

Scintigraphic Evaluation of Gastric Emptying in Obese Patients Submitted to Sleeve Gastrectomy Compared to Normal Subjects. I Braghetto, C Davanzo, O Korn, Obesity Surgery. 19112009

Type 2 Diabetes in Obese Patients with Body Mass Index of 30-35 kg/m 2 : Sleeve Gastrectomy versus Medical Treatment. F Abbatini, D Capoccia, G Casella, F Coccia, F Leonetti, N Basso, Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases. 812012

Short-Term Effects of Sleeve Gastrectomy on Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Severely Obese Subjects. J Vidal, A Ibarzabal, J Nicolau, Obesity Surgery. 1782007

Potential of Surgery for Curing Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. F Rubino, M Gagner, 10.1097/00000658-200211000-00003Annals of Surgery. 23652002

Early Postoperative Insulin-Resistance Changes after Sleeve Gastrectomy. M Rizzello, F Abbatini, G Casella, 10.1007/s11695-009-0017-2Obesity Surgery. 2012010

Midterm Impact of Sleeve Gastrectomy, Calibrated with a 50-Fr Bougie, on Weight Loss, Glucose Homeostasis, Lipid Profiles, and Comorbidities in Morbidly Obese Patients. J Ruiz-Tovar, I Oller, A Tomas, The American Surgeon. 7892012

Long-Term Remission of Type 2 Diabetes in Morbidly Obese Patients after Sleeve Gastrectomy. F Abbatini, D Capoccia, G Casella, E Soricelli, F Leonetti, N Basso, Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases. 942013

Update: Why Diabetes Does Not Resolve in Some Patients after Bariatric Surgery. M Deitel, Obesity Surgery. 2162011

Effect of Laparoscopic Roux-En y Gastric Bypass on Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. P R Schauer, B Burguera, S Ikramuddin, Annals of Surgery. 23842003