# A survey of pharmacists' perception of foundation level competencies in African countries

CorpusID: 4590391
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d257bf9d629d70812463b6b78483c9582a44578](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d257bf9d629d70812463b6b78483c9582a44578)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A survey of pharmacists' perception of foundation level competencies in African countries


Arit Udoh 
Andreia Bruno 
Ian Bates 
A survey of pharmacists' perception of foundation level competencies in African countries
10.1186/s12960-018-0280-1R E S E A R C H Open Access
Background: Evidence from published literature in pharmacy practice research demonstrate that the use of competency frameworks alongside standards of practice facilitate improvement in professional performance and aid expertise development. The aim of this study was to evaluate pharmacists' perception of relevance to practice of the competencies and behaviours contained in the FIP Global Competency Framework (GbCF v1). The overall objective of the study was to assess the validity of the GbCF v1 framework in selected countries in Africa. Methods: A cross-sectional survey of pharmacists practicing in 14 countries in Africa was conducted between November 2012 and December 2014. A combination of purposive and snowball sampling method was used. Data was analysed using SPSS v22. Results: A total of 469 pharmacists completed the survey questionnaire. The majority (91%) of the respondents were from four countries: Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa. The study results showed broad agreement on relevance to practice for 90% of the behaviours contained in the GbCF v1 framework. Observed disagreement was associated with area of pharmacy practice and the corresponding patient facing involvement (p ≤ 0.05). In general, the competencies within the 'pharmaceutical care' and 'pharmaceutical public health' clusters received higher weighting on relevance compared to the research-related competencies which had the lowest. Specific inter-country variability on weighting of relevance was observed in five behaviours in the framework although, this was due to disparity in 'degree of relevance' that was related to sample composition in the respective countries. Conclusion: The competencies contained in the GbCF v1 are relevant to pharmacy practice in the study population; however, there are some emergent differences between the African countries surveyed. Overall, the findings provide preliminary evidence that was previously lacking on the relevance of the GbCF v1 competencies to pharmacy practice in the countries surveyed.

## Background

Competent pharmacists improve therapeutic outcomes, minimise the risk associated with medicines use and assure patient safety through the provision of medicine expertise [1][2][3][4][5]. The central role pharmacists play within the health system underpins the demand for a competent and highly skilled workforce that is equipped with the requisite knowledge and skills relevant to population health needs [6][7][8]. This is of particular importance in resource-limited settings such as in sub-Saharan Africa where severe workforce shortages hamper access to health services including medicines expertise [9,10].

The International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP) is the global leadership body representing 3 million pharmacists and pharmaceutical scientists worldwide [11]. FIPEd, which is the pharmacy education and workforce development arm of the FIP, advocates the need to define and articulate the competencies that pharmacists require to consistently perform safely, effectively, and efficiently [12]. The overall objective is to provide an infrastructure for global guidance on the practice-based expectations of the pharmacy workforce [13].

Published research demonstrate that when competency frameworks are used alongside standards of practice: it facilitates improvement of pharmacists' performance [14][15][16][17], promotes the attainment and maintenance of fitness to practice [17,18], aids identification of knowledge gaps and learning needs [19], and fosters continuing professional development [20]. The findings of longitudinal studies show that using competency frameworks to identify knowledge gaps and tailor learning activities significantly improve pharmacists' performance (p ≤ 0.05) at 6 months [14,15,17], 9 months [16], and 12 months [18,20]. Similar findings from comparative studies conducted in United Kingdom [14,20] indicate that competency frameworks facilitate a more sustained improvement in pharmacists' performance (p < 0.001) in the intervention group at 12 months when compared to a control group that had no access to a framework. These findings have also been corroborated by other studies in Australia [15], Croatia [18], Serbia [17], and Singapore [16].

In 2012, FIPEd developed the FIP Global Competency Framework (GbCF v1) using evidence-based methodologies [21]. This framework was specifically designed to serve as a source document containing the core competencies expected of foundation level pharmacy practitioners (this means, pharmacists with less than 5 years practice experience) [13]. Since its development, the GbCF v1 has been successfully used to design pre-service education and training curriculum in a number of countries [22,23]. It has also been used to develop country-specific frameworks for inservice practitioners in Ireland [24], the Pacific Island countries [25], Croatia, Singapore and Serbia [21]. A previous survey that validated the GbCF v1 using evidence from 64 countries [26] showed that 70% of respondents ranked all the behaviours in the questionnaire as relevant to practice. However, respondents from countries in Africa comprised only 12.3% of the total sample in the survey [26]. The aim of this present study was therefore to evaluate pharmacists' perception of the relevance to practice of the competencies and behaviours contained in the GbCF v1, focusing on selected African countries.


## Methods


## Data collection and sampling

A cross-sectional survey of pharmacists practicing in selected countries in Africa was conducted between November 2012 and December 2014. A combination of purposive and snowball sampling method was used. Due to a lack of access to the pharmacy membership list of the respective countries in Africa, the URL link to the online survey was circulated centrally via email to the 35 FIP member organisations in Africa for onward distribution to their respective individual members. The FIP member organisations contacted were the leadership bodies representing practicing pharmacists in 24 countries in Africa (list provided in the Appendix). These organisations were selected based on availability of contact persons, expression of interest to participate when contacted and willingness to gather data. The survey invite was also disseminated through the FIP United Nations Education Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) University Twining Network (FIP UNESCO UNITWIN) in Africa. The survey URL link was further customised and distributed via social media and short message service platforms including Facebook®, Twitter®, WhatsApp® and Blackberry Messenger®. Respondents were encouraged to assist by forwarding the survey URL link to their colleagues and contacts. Email reminders were thereafter forwarded monthly through the aforementioned media until the end of the study. Due to the non-availability of reliable estimates on the number of pharmacists per country organisation represented in FIP, a sampling frame was not feasible and survey respondents were therefore recruited consecutively until the end of the study period.


## Survey questionnaire

An anonymous online questionnaire developed and validated in a previous study [26] was used. The questionnaire was fully reproduced from the GbCF v1 and comprised of 105 questions. Five questions related to demographic information while the remaining questions referred to the 100 GbCF v1 behavioural statements (labelled B1 through B100, and hereafter referred to as 'behaviours'). These behaviours are grouped under the 20 competency domains and four broad competency clusters in the framework (Table 1).


## Data analysis

Survey data was collected electronically, without transformation and analysed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22. To ensure data quality, a random 10% of the total survey sample was reviewed for coding errors with missing values replaced with code 999. Respondents' perception of relevance to practice of each of the behaviours was evaluated using a 4-point Likert scale. Respondents were required to rank each of the 100 GbCF v1 behaviours as 'not relevant' , of 'low relevance' , 'relevant' or 'highly relevant' to their practice. For the purpose of analysis and to ensure the results produced could be meaningfully interpreted, the response categories in the Likert scale were further aggregated. The 'highly relevant' and 'relevant' ratings were condensed into one category: 'relevant' , while the 'low relevance' and 'not relevant' ratings remained distinct categories. Agreement was evaluated by comparing the proportion (frequency and percentage) of the total ratings in the three categories. Consensus on relevance to practice was attained when not more than 10% of the respondents ranked a given behaviour as 'not relevant'. This threshold was defined empirically based on previous research involving pharmacists from 64 countries [26].

Pearson's chi-square (χ 2 ) test was used to assess homogeneity in the survey sample. The test of homogeneity was undertaken to ascertain whether the sample could be treated as a group irrespective of the number of replies received per country. The χ 2 test was also used to evaluate the relationship between weighting of relevance and area of practice for behaviours that showed a lack of consensus. In order to assess inter-country variability in responses, multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) via Pillia's trace test (V) was used to evaluate weighting of relevance per country per competency with confirmatory post hoc analysis conducted using Bonferroni correction.


## Ethical consideration

Formal ethical approval from the research ethics committee was not required for this study as it did not involve the use of identifiable patient information or data, rather the study recruited pharmacists and sought their views by virtue of their professional roles. However, consent to participate was sought from the respondents prior to completing the survey questionnaire. Participation was voluntary, and confidentiality was maintained at all times with responses remaining anonymous. All data collected in the research were stored in an encrypted database with hard copies kept in locked filling cabinets at the Department of Practice and Policy, UCL School of Pharmacy, United Kingdom. Access to study data was restricted to the three researchers directly involved with the study.


## Results


## Demography

Four hundred and sixty-nine pharmacists from 14 countries in Africa responded to the survey. Over half of the survey respondents were female (54%). The mean length of practice was 7.7 years (SD ± 8.1 years; min-max 1-43 years). Respondents with less than 5 years practice experience made up 47% of the sample while pre-registration candidates/ pharmacy students in their last year (internship) comprised 5.5%. The majority of the respondents were in hospital practice (56.7%). Table 2 shows the summary of the distribution of survey replies per country and area of pharmacy practice.


## Sample homogeneity

Four countries-Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa and Ghanaeach had more than 50 replies and made up 91% of the sample. Ten countries-Ethiopia, Egypt, Lesotho, Uganda, Tunisia, Namibia, Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwehad fewer than 20 survey replies each. The observed disparity in number of replies indicated two cluster groups: a 'high response group' made up of countries with more than 50  [15], Egypt [8], Zimbabwe [5], Uganda [3], Lesotho [3], Tunisia [5], Namibia, Ethiopia Sudan and
Tanzania (1 each)] b
Areas of pharmacy practice with fewer than 20 replies [includes pharmacy information [11], military and emergency [2] and laboratory and medicines control pharmacy [4]] replies each, and a 'low response group' made up of countries with fewer than 20 replies each. The number of replies also varied for the four competency clusters in the framework. Table 3 shows a summary of the distribution of replies for each competency cluster per country group.

The test for homogeneity in the survey sample showed that distribution of the ratings in the response categories (that is, in the 'relevant' , 'low relevance' and 'not relevant' categories) was strongly associated with the country group for 11 behaviours [(p < 0.01); Table 4]. These 11 behaviours were distributed across the four competency clusters in no observable pattern. The outcome of the χ 2 test implied homogeneity in responses between the country groups for 89% of the GbCF v1 behaviours. The low counts (frequency of less than 5) observed in the table cells within the group with low number of replies (N < 20 per country; Table 4) suggested an absence of data in this group rather than disparity in responses between countries. Given the χ 2 test known property of being imprecise in 'small' samples [27][28][29], it is likely that the test overestimated the relationship between the responses and the country group. Based on this, sample homogeneity was assumed and the survey replies were subsequently analysed as a group. Figure 1 shows the percentage of ratings in the 'relevant' category for the low response, high response, and  combined group of countries, respectively. The total ratings in the combined country groups indicate that at least 70% of survey respondents ranked all the behaviours in the framework as 'relevant'. This was not inclusive of the 'not relevant' and 'low relevant' ratings.


## Overall perception of relevance

Consensus on relevance to practice (N 'not relevant' < 10%) was obtained for 90 behaviours in the questionnaire. This included all the behaviours in the 'pharmaceutical public health' cluster, 84% in the 'pharmaceutical care' , 90% in 'organisation and management' and 92% in the 'professional and personal' cluster, respectively (please see Tables 5, 6, 7 and 8). The 10 behaviours with more than 10% of the total ratings in the 'not relevant' category, suggested disagreement on relevance to practice (Table 9). This observed disagreement was associated with area of pharmacy practice for six of the 'disagreed' behaviours (Table 9; P < 0.05). Behaviours that showed agreement (this means, N 'not relevant' ≤ 10%) were categorised as group 1; group 2 behaviours showed disagreement on relevance (N 'not relevant' > 10%) Fig. 1 Percentage of total ratings in the 'relevant' category per behaviour (not inclusive of ratings in the 'low relevance' and 'not relevant' categories). Numbers on the circumference refer to behaviour labels (1 through 100) while numbers on the vertical axis refer to percentage of total ratings  The disagreement was also associated with 'patient-facing role' in practice area [(P < 0.05); Table 10]. A higher percentage of the respondents in the 'non-patient' facing areas of practice (this means area of pharmacy practice with little or no daily patient interactions such as industrial and academic pharmacy) ranked the behaviours that showed disagreement in the 'pharmaceutical care' (B6, B13, B14, B20) and 'organisation and management' cluster (B32, B34, B58) as 'not relevant' compared to respondents in the 'patient-facing' practice areas (such as hospital and community pharmacy) ( Table 10). The converse was true for the research-related (B87 and B95) and quality control (B90) behaviours (Table 10). Ghana rated the B32, B45 and B55 behaviours 'relevant' compared to Nigeria (75%, 92%, 94% vs 70%, 70%, 79%, respectively). A lack of consensus on relevance was observed in the South Africa and Nigeria group for the B32 (N 'not relevant' = 11%) and B49 (N 'not relevant' = 11%) behaviours, respectively. Since only Nigeria and South Africa showed a lack of consensus (N 'not relevant' > 10%) on relevance to practice for three behaviours in the framework, it suggests that the inter-country variability in weighting of relevance observed in this study indicated differences in perception of 'degree of relevance' between countries. This variability is likely due to the disparity in sample composition in the respective countries given that Kenya had a higher percentage of the respondents in hospital practice (86%) while Nigeria and South Africa on the other hand had less than 50% respectively. Also, more than a third of the respondents from South Africa were in academic pharmacy compared to Nigeria, Kenya and Ghana with less than 7% each.


## Perception of relevance per competency per country


## Discussion

The disagreement observed in 10 behaviours in the GbCF v1 framework was mainly related to respondents' area of pharmacy practice and the corresponding patient-facing involvement, a finding that is consistent with evidence from previous research [26]. The disagreement in the four behaviours under the 'pharmaceutical care' cluster observed in academic and industrial pharmacy is also in line with the scope of practice of pharmacists in these areas given that they are not routinely involved in activities related to medicine assessment and medicines use. This also explains the disagreement observed in the three behaviours under the 'organisation and management' cluster.

On the other hand, the disagreement in the researchrelated behaviours (B87 and B95) under the 'professional and personal' cluster was not fully explained by area of pharmacy practice or 'patient-facing' involvement. A high percentage (N > 10%) of the respondents in academic and community pharmacy rated these same behaviours 'not relevant' , thereby adding to the increasing body of evidence from other studies that suggest that pharmacists are not routinely involved in research [30][31][32][33] and perceive their researchrelated roles to be of low importance [34][35][36][37]. It also corroborates the findings of published studies from Australia [38], United Kingdom [39] and Thailand [40] that show that  pharmacists generally perceive research-related behaviours and competencies included in developmental frameworks to be relatively low in relevance and rank them accordingly. Time constraints due to workload and a lack of supporting environment for pharmacy research are some of the barriers to participation in research-related activities in the workplace reported in existing literature [38,41,42]. Given that the survey respondents in our study included international pharmacists from different areas of pharmacy practice and with varying length of practice experience, this finding  Includes areas of pharmacy practice with fewer than 20 replies (these were pharmacy information [11], military and emergency pharmacy [2] and laboratory and medicines control pharmacy [4])

highlights the need to scale up efforts to build research capacity in this region.

Of particular interest is the finding that a high percentage (N > 15%) of community pharmacists from the countries represented in this survey ranked two dispensing-related behaviours: B13 (document and act upon dispensing errors) and B14 (implement and maintain a dispensing error report system and a near miss report system) 'not relevant' to practice. This suggests community pharmacy respondents from these countries do not routinely carry out these activities although this may have been due to the response rate and/or that the pharmacists were self-selecting. However, available evidence suggests this may also be related to the peculiarities of community pharmacy practice in countries with severe health workforce shortages such as Nigeria [43] and Zambia [44]. Studies show that dispensing activities in community pharmacies in Nigeria are mainly carried out by pharmacy assistants and in some instances, by sales personnel or clerks [43].

Furthermore, the finding may also be related to evidence that suggest that many countries including those in Africa either lack a defined medication error reporting system [45,46] or where available such systems are primarily independent and/or based within a specific healthcare facility [45,47]. Given the broad similarities in pharmacy practice reported in countries within the African region  [48] and published reports of high incidence of patient harm due to medication errors in some of the countries represented in this survey [49,50]. This finding underscores the need to review current practice and incorporate robust dispensing and medication error reporting processes in community practice with oversight functions by pharmacists in order to assure patient safety. Homogeneity in sample responses and the overall survey results indicate minimal disparity between countries in perception of relevance to practice for majority of the behaviours in the GbCF v1. This finding corroborates evidence from previous research [26] and provides evidence that was previously lacking on the relevance of the GbCF v1 competencies in these countries. The finding is in consonance with similar evidence from the field of medicine that demonstrates the relevance of the Canadian CanMEDS Physician Competency Framework to medical practice in the Netherlands [51], Denmark [52,53] and Australia [54]. It is also in line with evidence from studies that show consensus between countries in Europe on the relevance of a core set of competencies for pharmacy education and practice [42,55].

Although evidence from global studies have shown that continuous professional development (CPD) is mandatory in many countries in Africa, none of the countries represented in this survey have reported the availability of a validated competency framework for early career pharmacy practice [7,56]. Studies conducted in Ghana, Ethiopia and Sudan suggest that the lack of a structured post-registration pathway for skills development contribute to the comparatively lower levels of job satisfaction shown by early career pharmacists in these countries [57][58][59]. Our findings therefore provide preliminary evidence on the validity of a core set of competencies that can be further adapted to country context and used to design skill development and learning activities for pre-and in-service early career pharmacy practitioners in these countries. Our findings also suggests the feasibility of adapting the GbCF v1 to develop country-specific frameworks for use in facilitating performance improvement and identifying learning needs particularly in the four countries with comparatively high number of replies in this study.

This study has some limitations. The length of the survey questionnaire (105 questions presented over six pages) may have negatively impacted on the number of replies received. Findings from a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials show that the odds of a response decreases by more than half as the number of pages of a survey questionnaire increases [OR 0.39, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.45] [60]. This was particularly obvious with the consistent decrease in number of replies per additional competency cluster in the survey questionnaire (Additional file 1). Nonetheless, research also demonstrates that the variation in response rates per page of a questionnaire does not affect the quality of the overall responses received [61].

Online surveys are generally associated with low response rates particularly because it restricts the target populations to individuals with internet access [62,63]. This implies that potential respondents without Internet access were excluded from this survey, a feature that is significant given that our study was conducted in countries that have been shown to have comparatively higher cost and lower Internet accessibility [64,65]. However, the geographical location of the survey population, limited resources and time available for this research precluded the use of a telephone or postal survey. Participant self-selection and the non-probabilistic sample obtained via the purposive and snowball sampling technique in our study likely limits the generalisability of our findings. Studies show that self-selected participants are likely to be more intrinsically motivated than the general population [66]. This non-random sampling method was undertaken due to challenges with obtaining a sampling frame for the respective countries. For this same reason, it was difficult to estimate an optimal sample size a priori and to calculate a response rate. In spite of these limitations, the methods used in our study are established and pragmatic evidence-based approaches in pharmacy practice research [26,[38][39][40]. Furthermore, given that our study was an exploratory survey, our findings provide useful information on pharmacists' perception of relevance to practice of the competencies and behaviours contained in the GbCF v1 framework in the countries represented.

Further work is necessary to qualitatively explore expert opinion and obtain insight from other stakeholders including policy-makers and pharmacy leaders on the validity of these competencies in the respective countries. Also, a larger scale validation study is needed to obtain further inputs from practitioners in non-patient-facing roles such as industrial, administrative and academic pharmacy in this region. This will provide an opportunity for further review of the GbCF v1 competencies in relation to these specific areas of practice.


## Conclusion

The majority (90%) of the competencies in the framework as relevant to practice for the respondents in this survey, although there are some emergent differences in weighting of relevance between the countries represented. Overall, the findings provide preliminary evidence that was previously lacking on the relevance of the GbCF v1 competencies to pharmacy practice in these countries. 


Inter-country variability in responses was assessed for each of the 20 competencies in the questionnaire. For ease of interpretation, the analysis included 426 replies from four countries: Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa and Ghana with the 10 countries that had fewer than 20 survey replies each excluded. The result showed similarity in weighting of relevance for the competencies in the 'pharmaceutical public health' (Pillia's trace V = 0.025, F = 1.809, df = 6, p = 0.094), and 'professional and personal' (Pillia's trace V = 0.084, F = 1.270, df = 18, p = 0.2) clusters, respectively. Specific intercountry variability was observed in the 'pharmaceutical care' (Pillia's trace V = 0.083, F = 1.624, df = 18, p = 0.045), and 'organisation and management' (Pillia's trace V = 0.136, F = 2.279, df = 18, p = 0.002) clusters. Confirmatory post hoc analysis using Bonferroni correction showed the inter-country variability in responses observed within the 'pharmaceutical care' cluster was in three behaviours: B6 ['assessment of medicine (AM)]' and B25 and B27 ['patient consultation and diagnosis (PCD)'] competencies. This was between South Africa and Ghana [in B6: N 'relevant' = 47% vs 71%)], Nigeria and Kenya [in B25: N 'relevant' = 98 vs 89%], and Nigeria and Ghana [in B27: N 'relevant' = 98 vs 85%)]. In spite of the observed disparity in weighting of relevance, only South Africa showed a lack of consensus on relevance (N 'not relevant' = 15%) for this cluster and this was in the B6 behaviour. The disparity in the organisation and management cluster was in B32 ['budget and reimbursement (BR)'], B45 ['procurement (P)'] and B55 ['supply chain and management (SCM)'] competencies. More of the respondents from

## Table 2
2Survey replies per country per area of pharmacy practiceArea of practice 
Country N (%) 

Kenya 
Ghana 
Nigeria 
South Africa 
Others a 

Academic pharmacy 
1 (1.0) 
4 (4.3) 
11 (6.6) 
21 (32.8) 
6 (14.0) 

Administrative pharmacy 
6 (5.8) 
13 (14.0) 
4 (2.4) 
2 (3.1) 
4 (9.3) 

Community pharmacy 
2 (1.9) 
10 (10.8) 
41 (24.7) 
10 (15.6) 
10 (23.3) 

Hospital pharmacy 
89 (86.4) 
60 (64.5) 
80 (48.2) 
23 (35.9) 
14 (32.6) 

Industrial pharmacy 
1 (1.0) 
3 (3.2) 
26 (15.7) 
6 (9.4) 
5 (11.6) 

Others b 
4 (3.9) 
3 (3.2) 
4 (2.4) 
2 (3.1) 
4 (9.3) 

Total sample 
103 (22) 
93 (19.8) 
166 (35.4) 
64 (13.6) 
43 (9.2) 

a 

Countries with fewer than 50 replies each [includes Zambia 

## Table 1
1Components of the GbCF v1 frameworkCluster 
Composition and description 

Pharmaceutical public health 
Four behaviours labelled B1-B4 grouped under two competencies: 
'health promotion' and 'medicines information and advice' 

Pharmaceutical care 
25 behaviours labelled B5-B29 grouped under six competencies: 'assessment of medicines', 
'dispensing', 'medicines', 'monitor medicines therapy', 'patient consultation and diagnosis' 

Organisation and management 
32 behaviours labelled B30-B61 grouped under six competencies: 'budget and reimbursement', 
'human resource management', 'improvement of service', 'procurement', 'supply chain and 
management', and 'work place management' 

Professional and personal 
39 behaviours labelled B62-B100 grouped under six competencies: 'communication skills', 
'continuing professional education', 'legal and regulatory practice', 'professional and ethical 
practice', 'quality assurance and research in the workplace', 'self-management' 


## Table 4
4Behaviours showing association with country response groupCluster 
Competency 
Behaviour 
High response countries (N) 
Low response countries (N) 
χ 2 
value 

p 

Not 
relevant 

Low 
relevance 

Relevant Not 
relevant 

Low 
relevance 

Relevant 

Pharmaceutical 
public health 

Health 
promotion 

[B1] Assess primary healthcare needs 
10 
20 
396 
1* 
7 
35 
9.67 
0.01 

Medicines 
information 
and advice 

[B4] Identify sources, retrieve, evaluate, 
assess and disseminate relevant 
medicines information according to 
patients needs 

2* 
22 
402 
1* 
8 
34 
1.12 
0.01 

Pharmaceutical 
care 

Assessment 
of medicines 

[B6] Identify and act upon medicines 
interactions 

40 
68 
242 
3* 
15 
18 
9.56 
0.01 

Dispensing 
[B12] Dispense devices (e.g. inhalers) 
11 
18 
321 
0* 
9 
27 
20.54 < 0.001 

Medicines 
[B19] Ensure appropriate medicine 
route, dose, time, form and response 
for individual patients 

22 
21 
307 
5 
7 
24 
12.52 0.002 

Organisation 
and 
management 

Human 
resource 
management 

[B37] Participate and collaborate, 
advice in therapeutic decision-making 
and use appropriate decision referral 
in a multi-disciplinary team 

11 
23 
261 
4* 
6 
23 
9.4 
0.01 

Improvement 
of service 

[B42] Resolve, follow-up and prevent 
medicines related problems 

10 
23 
262 
1* 
9 
23 
12.8 
< 0.001 

Procurement 
[B44] Develop and implement a 
contingency plan for shortages 

11 
27 
257 
5 
2* 
26 
8.5 
0.01 

Supply chain 
management 

[B54] Implement system for 
documentation and record keeping 

11 
13 
271 
3* 
8 
22 
22.35 0.001 

Work place 
management 

[B61] Recognise and manage 
pharmacy resources (e.g. financial, 
infrastructure) 

9 
26 
260 
5 
3* 
25 
10.71 0.01 

Professional 
and personal 

Quality 
assurance and 
research in the 
workplace 

[B94] Implement, conduct and 
maintain a report system of 
pharmacovigilance (e.g. report 
adverse drug reactions) 

16 
11 
246 
2* 
6 
24 
11.88 0.003 

*Counts of less than 5 



## Table 3
3Distribution of survey replies per competency cluster per country response groupCompetency cluster 
Behaviour label 
Country response group (N) a 

Countries with high response b 
Countries with low response c 

Pharmaceutical public health 
B1-B4 
426 
43 

Pharmaceutical care 
B5-B29 
350 
36 

Organisation and management 
B30-B61 
295 
33 

Professional and personal 
B62-B100 
273 
32 

a 

Countries with more than 50 replies each were regrouped as the high response group while countries with fewer than this were the low response group 

b 

Includes Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa 

c 

Includes Zambia, Egypt, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Lesotho, Tunisia, Namibia, Ethiopia Sudan and Tanzania 


## Table 5
5Overall rating of behaviours within the pharmaceutical public health cluster Medicines information and advice B3. MIA | Counsel patients on the appropriate use of medicines and devices (including the selection, use, contraindications, storage, and side effects of non-prescription and prescription medicines) taking into account patients preferences B4. MIA | Identify sources, retrieve, evaluate, organise, assess and disseminate relevant medicines information according to the needs of patients and clients and providePharmaceutical public health competencies (n = 469) 
Not relevant 
Low relevance Relevant 
Group 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Health promotion 

B1. HP | Assess the primary healthcare needs (taking into account the cultural and 
social setting of the patient) 

11 
2.30 
27 
5.8 
431 
91.9 
1 

B2. HP | Advise on health promotion, disease prevention and control, and healthy 
lifestyle 

2 
0.4 
26 
5.5 
441 
94 
1 

3 
0.60 
23 
4.90 
443 
94.4 
1 

appropriate information 

3 
0.60 
30 
6.40 
436 
92.9 
1 



## Table 6
6Overall rating of behaviours in the pharmaceutical care cluster B14. D | Implement and maintain a dispensing error report system and a 'near misses' B16. D | Learn from and act upon previous 'near misses' and 'dispensing errors Medicines B17. M | Advise patients on proper storage conditions of the medicines and ensure that medicines are stored appropriately (e.g. humidity, temperature, expiry date, etc.)B18. M | Appropriately select medicines formulation and concentration for minor ailments (e.g. diarrhoea, constipation, cough, hay fever, insect bites, etc.) B20. M | Package medicines to optimise safety (ensuring appropriate re-packaging and labelling of the medicines)Pharmaceutical care competencies (n = 386) 
Not relevant 
Low relevance 
Relevant 
Group 

Count Row (N%) Count Row (N%) Count Row (N%) 

Assessment of medicines 

B5. AM | Appropriately select medicines (e.g. according to the patient, hospital, 
government policy, etc.) 

18 
4.7 
40 
10.4 
328 
85 
1 

B6. AM | Identify, prioritise and act upon medicine-medicine interactions; 
medicine-disease interactions; medicine-patient interactions; medicines-food 
interactions 

43 
11.1 
83 
21.5 
260 
67.4 
2 

Compounding medicines 

B7. CM | Prepare pharmaceutical medicines (e.g. extemporaneous, cytotoxic medicines), 
determine the requirements for preparation (calculations, appropriate formulation, 
procedures, raw materials, equipment etc.) 

25 
6.5 
61 
15.8 
300 
77.7 
1 

B8. CM | Compound under the good manufacturing practice for pharmaceutical (GMP) 
medicines 

35 
9.1 
61 
15.8 
290 
75.1 
1 

Dispensing 

B9. D | Accurately dispense medicines for prescribed and/or minor ailments and monitor 
the dispense (re-checking the medicines) 

19 
4.9 
43 
11.2 
324 
83.9 
1 

B10. D | Accurately report defective or substandard medicines to the appropriate 
authorities 

26 
6.7 
53 
13.7 
307 
79.5 
1 

B11. D | Appropriately validate prescriptions, ensuring that prescriptions are correctly 
interpreted and legal 

16 
4.1 
41 
10.6 
329 
85.2 
1 

B12. D | Dispense devices (e.g. Inhaler or a blood glucose meter) 
11 
2.8 
27 
7 
348 
90.2 
1 

B13. D | Document and act upon dispensing errors 
50 
13 
44 
11.4 
292 
75.6 
2 

report system 

43 
11.1 
46 
11.9 
297 
76.9 
2 

B15. D | Label the medicines (with the required and appropriate information) 
14 
5.2 
20 
3.6 
352 
91.2 
1 

19 
4.9 
27 
7 
340 
88.1 
1 

17 
4.9 
19 
4.4 
350 
90.7 
1 

33 
8.5 
42 
10.9 
311 
80.6 
1 

B19. M | Ensure appropriate medicines, route, time, dose, documentation, action, form 
and response for individual patients 

27 
7 
28 
7.3 
331 
85.8 
1 

39 
10.1 
47 
12.2 
300 
77.7 
2 

Monitor medicines therapy 

B21. MMT | Apply guidelines, medicines formulary system, protocols and treatment 
pathways 

11 
4.9 
19 
2.9 
356 
92.2 
1 

B22. MMT | Ensure therapeutic medicines monitoring, impact and outcomes (including 
objective and subjective measures) 

22 
5.7 
26 
6.7 
338 
87.6 
1 

B23. MMT | Identify, prioritise and resolve medicines management problems (including 
errors) 

12 
3.1 
19 
4.9 
355 
92 
1 

Patient consultation and diagnosis 

B24. PCD | Apply first aid and act upon arranging follow-up care 
18 
4.7 
29 
7.5 
339 
87.8 
1 

B25. PCD | Appropriately refer 
14 
3.6 
18 
4.7 
354 
91.7 
1 

B26. PCD | l Assess and diagnose based on objective and subjective measures 
12 
3.1 
21 
5.4 
353 
91.5 
1 

B27. PCD | Discuss and agree with the patients the appropriate use of medicines, taking 
into account patients preferences 

14 
3.6 
30 
7.8 
342 
88.6 
1 

B28. PCD | Document any intervention (e.g. document allergies, medicines and food, in 
patient medicines history) 

21 
5.4 
43 
11.1 
322 
83.4 
1 

B29. PCD | Obtain, reconcile, review, maintain and update relevant patient medication 
and diseases history 

18 
4.7 
28 
7.3 
340 
88.1 
1 

Group: 1 = agreement, 2 = disagreement 


## Table 7
7Overall rating of behaviours in the organisation and management clusterOrganisation and management competencies (n = 328) 
Not relevant 
Low relevance Relevant 
Group 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Budget and reimbursement 

B30. BR | Acknowledge the organisational structure 
16 
4.9 
45 
13.7 
267 
81.4 
1 

B31. BR | Effectively set and apply budgets 
20 
6.1 
53 
16.2 
255 
77.7 
1 

B32. BR | Ensure appropriate claim for the reimbursement 
40 
12.2 
54 
16.5 
234 
71.4 
2 

B33. BR | Ensure financial transparency 
21 
6.4 
45 
13.7 
262 
79.9 
1 

B34. BR | Ensure proper reference sources for service reimbursement 
34 
10.4 
56 
17.1 
238 
72.5 
2 

Human resources management 

B35. HRM | Demonstrate organisational and management skills (e.g. Know, understand 
and lead on medicines management; risk management; self-management; 
time management; people management; project management; 
policy management.) 

8 
2.4 
23 
7 
297 
90.6 
1 

B36. HRM | Identity and manage human resources and staffing issues 
13 
4 
37 
11.3 
278 
84.8 
1 

B37. HRM | Participate, collaborate, advice in therapeutic decision-making and use 
appropriate referral in a multi-disciplinary team 

15 
4.6 
29 
8.8 
284 
86.6 
1 

B38. HRM | Recognise and manage the potential of each member of the staff and 
utilise systems for performance management (e.g. carry out staff appraisals) 

12 
3.7 
33 
10.1 
283 
86.3 
1 

B39. HRM | Recognise the value of the pharmacy team and of a multidisciplinary team 7 
2.1 
25 
7.6 
296 
90.2 
1 

B40. HRM | Support and facilitate staff training and professional development 
9 
2.7 
23 
7 
296 
90.2 
1 

Improvement of service 

B41. IS | Identify and implement new services (according to local needs) 
7 
2.1 
35 
10.7 
286 
87.2 
1 

B42. IS | Resolve, follow up and prevent medicines related problems 
11 
3.4 
32 
9.8 
285 
86.9 
1 

Procurement 

B43. P | Access reliable information and ensure the most cost-effective medicines in 
the right quantities with the appropriate quality 

12 
3.7 
20 
6.1 
296 
90.2 
1 

B44. P | Develop and implement contingency plan for shortages 
16 
4.9 
29 
8.8 
283 
86.3 
1 

B45. P | Efficiently link procurement to formulary, to push/pull system (supply chain 
management) and payment mechanisms 

18 
5.5 
44 
13.4 
266 
81.1 
1 

B46. P | Ensure there is no conflict of interest 
19 
5.8 
43 
13.1 
266 
81.1 
1 

B47. P | Select reliable suppliers of high-quality products (including appropriate 
selection process, cost effectiveness, timely delivery) 

16 
4.9 
32 
9.8 
280 
85.4 
1 

B48. P | Supervise procurement activities 
23 
7.0 
34 
10.4 
271 
82.6 
1 

B49. P | Understand the tendering methods and evaluation of tender bids 
25 
7.6 
50 
15.2 
253 
77.1 
1 

Supply chain and management 

B50. SCM | Demonstrate knowledge in store medicines to minimise errors and 
maximise accuracy 

15 
4.6 
20 
6.1 
293 
89.3 
1 

B51. SCM | Ensure accurately verification of rolling stocks 
16 
4.9 
30 
9.1 
282 
86 
1 

B52. SCM | Ensure effective stock management and running of service with the 
dispensary 

17 
5.5 
18 
5.2 
293 
89.3 
1 

B53. SCM | Ensure logistics of delivery and storage 
16 
4.9 
23 
7 
289 
88.1 
1 

B54. SCM | Implement a system for documentation and record keeping 
14 
4.3 
21 
6.4 
293 
89.3 
1 

B55. SCM | Take responsibility for quantification of forecasting 
22 
7.0 
23 
6.7 
283 
86.3 
1 

Work place management 

B56. WPM | Address and manage day to day management issues 
8 
2.4 
20 
6.1 
300 
91.5 
1 

B57. WPM | Demonstrate the ability to take accurate and timely decisions and 
make appropriate judgments 

8 
2.4 
15 
4.6 
305 
93 
1 

B58. WPM | Ensure the production schedules are appropriately plan and manage 
35 
10.7 
52 
15.9 
241 
73.5 
2 


## Table 7
7Overall rating of behaviours in the organisation and management cluster (Continued)Organisation and management competencies (n = 328) 
Not relevant 
Low relevance Relevant 
Group 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

B59. WPM | Ensure the work time is appropriately plan and manage 
10 
3 
23 
7 
295 
89.9 
1 

B60. WPM | Improve and manage the provision of pharmaceutical services 
8 
2.4 
20 
6.1 
300 
91.5 
1 

B61. WPM | Recognise and manage pharmacy resources (e.g. financial, infrastructure) 
14 
4.3 
29 
8.8 
285 
86.9 
1 

Group: 1 = agreement, 2 = disagreement 


## Table 8
8Overall rating of behaviours in the professional and personal clusterProfessional and personal competencies (n = 305) 
Not relevant 
Low relevance Relevant 
Group 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Communication skills 

B62. CS | Communicate clearly, precisely and appropriately while being a mentor 
or tutor 

4 
1.3 
6 
2 
295 
96.7 
1 

B63. CS | Communicate effectively with health and social care staff, support staff, 
patients, carer, family relatives and clients/customers, using lay terms and 
checking understanding 

4 
1.3 
9 
3 
292 
95.7 
1 

B64. CS | Demonstrate cultural awareness and sensitivity 
6 
2.0 
17 
5.6 
282 
92.5 
1 

B65. CS | Tailor communications to patient needs 
5 
1.6 
15 
4.9 
285 
93.4 
1 

B66. CS | Use appropriate communication skills to build, report and engage with 
patients, health and social care staff and voluntary services (e.g. verbal and 
non-verbal) 

3 
< 0.1 
10 
3.3 
292 
95.7 
1 

Continuing professional development (CPD) 

B67. CPD | Document CPD activities 
10 
3.3 
36 
11.8 
259 
84.9 
1 

B68. CPD | Engage with students/interns/residents 
12 
3.9 
28 
9.2 
265 
86.9 
1 

B69. CPD | Evaluate currency of knowledge and skills 
8 
2.6 
25 
8.2 
272 
89.2 
1 

B70. CPD | Evaluate learning 
8 
2.6 
25 
8.2 
272 
89.2 
1 

B71. CPD | Identify if expertise needed outside the scope of knowledge 
9 
3.0 
31 
10.2 
265 
86.9 
1 

B72. CPD | Identify learning needs 
7 
2.3 
28 
9.2 
270 
88.5 
1 

B73. CPD | Recognise own limitations and act upon them 
5 
1.6 
20 
6.6 
280 
91.8 
1 

B74. CPD | Reflect on performance 
4 
1.3 
14 
4.6 
287 
94.1 
1 

Legal and regulatory practice 

B75. LRP | Apply and understands regulatory affairs and the key aspects of 
pharmaceutical registration and legislation 

7 
2.3 
23 
7.5 
275 
90.2 
1 

B76. LRP | Apply knowledge in relation to the principals of business economics 
and intellectual property rights including the basics of patent interpretation 

16 
5.2 
54 
17.7 
235 
77.1 
1 

B77. LRP | Be aware of and identify the new medicines coming to the market 
4 
1.3 
25 
8.2 
276 
90.5 
1 

B78. LRP | Comply with legislation for drugs with the potential for abuse 
5 
1.6 
11 
3.6 
289 
94.8 
1 

B79. LRP | Demonstrate knowledge in Marketing and Sale 
24 
7.9 
75 
24.6 
206 
67.5 
1 

B80. LRP | Engage with health and medicines policies 
3 
< 0.1 
31 
10.2 
271 
88.9 
1 

B81. LRP | Understand the steps needed to bring a medicinal product to the 
market including the safety, quality, efficacy and pharmacoeconomic 
assessments of the product 

18 
5.9 
41 
13.4 
246 
80.7 
1 

Professional and ethical practice 

B82. PEP | Demonstrate awareness of local/national codes of ethics 
5 
1.6 
14 
4.6 
286 
93.8 
1 

B83. PEP | Ensure confidentiality (with the patient and other healthcare 
professionals) 

4 
1.3 
10 
3.3 
291 
95.4 
1 

B84. PEP | Obtain patient consent (it can be implicit in occasions) 
10 
3.3 
21 
6.9 
274 
89.8 
1 

B85. PEP | Recognise own limitations 
5 
1.6 
14 
4.6 
286 
93.8 
1 

B86. PEP | Take responsibility for own action and for patient care 
5 
1.6 
11 
3.6 
289 
94.8 
1 

Quality assurance and research in the work place 

B87. QARWP | Apply research findings and understand the benefit risk 
(e.g. pre-clinical, clinical trials, experimental clinical-pharmacological 
research and risk management) 

34 
11.1 
48 
15.7 
223 
73.1 
2 

B88. QARWP | Audit quality of service (ensure that they meet local and national 
standards and specifications) 

26 
8.5 
34 
11.1 
245 
80.3 
1 

B89. QARWP | Developed and implement Standing Operating Procedures (SOP's) 
17 
5.6 
17 
5.6 
271 
88.9 
1 

B90. QARWP | Ensure appropriate quality control tests are performed and 
managed appropriately 

39 
12.8 
54 
17.7 
212 
69.5 
2 

B91. QARWP | Ensure medicines are not counterfeit and quality standards 
16 
5.2 
24 
7.9 
265 
86.9 
1 


## Table 8
8Overall rating of behaviours in the professional and personal cluster (Continued)Professional and personal competencies (n = 305) 
Not relevant 
Low relevance Relevant 
Group 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

Count Row 
(N%) 

B92. QARWP | Identify and evaluate evidence-base to improve the use of medicines 
and services 

16 
5.2 
32 
10.5 
257 
84.3 
1 

B93. QARWP | Identify, investigate, conduct, supervise and support research at the 
workplace (enquiry-driven practice) 

29 
9.5 
48 
15.7 
228 
74.8 
1 

B94. QARWP | Implement, conduct and maintain a report system of pharmacovigilance 
(e.g. report adverse drug reactions) 

17 
5.9 
18 
5.6 
270 
88.5 
1 

B95. QARWP | Initiate and implement audit and research activities 
33 
10.8 
52 
17.5 
220 
72.1 
2 

Self-management 

B96. SM | Apply assertiveness skills (inspire confidence) 
5 
1.6 
9 
3 
291 
95.4 
1 

B97. SM | Demonstrate leadership and practice management skills, initiative and efficiency 4 
1.3 
12 
3.9 
289 
94.8 
1 

B98. SM | Document risk management (e.g. critical incidents) 
14 
4.6 
28 
9.2 
263 
86.2 
1 

B99. SM | Ensure punctuality 
1 
< 0.1 
10 
3.3 
294 
96.4 
1 

B100. SM | Prioritise work and implement innovative ideas 
4 
1.3 
12 
3.9 
289 
94.8 
1 

Group: 1 = agreement, 2 = disagreement 



## Table 9
9Distribution of the 'not relevant' ratings in relation to area of pharmacy practice for the 10 behaviours showing disagreement Acad. academic pharmacy, Admin. administrative pharmacy, Comm. community pharmacy, Hosp. hospital pharmacy, Indus. industrial pharmacyCluster 
Competencies Behaviours 
Area of practice (%N 'not relevant') 
χ 2 value p 

Acad. Admin. Comm. Hosp. Indus. Others a 

Pharmaceutical 
care 

Assessment 
of medicines 

[B6] Identify, prioritise and act upon 
medicine-medicine interactions; 
medicine-disease interactions; 
medicine-patient interactions; 
medicines-food interactions (n = 43) 

20 
9.5 
0 
11.6 
21.9 
7.1 
23.5 
0.01 

Dispensing 
[B13] Document and act upon 
dispensing errors (n = 50) 

14.3 
19 
20 
7.6 
21.9 
35.7 
36.9 
< 0.001 

[B14] Implement and maintain a 
dispensing error report system and 
a 'near misses' report system (n = 43) 

17.1 
14.3 
20.3 
7.1 
12.5 
14.3 
15.9 
0.1 

Medicines 
[B20] Package medicines to optimise 
safety [ensuring appropriate re-packaging 
and labelling of the medicines] (n = 39) 

20 
9.5 
16.9 
4.4 
25 
14.3 
31.9 
< 0.001 

Organisation 
and 
management 

Budget and 
reimbursement 

[B32] Ensure appropriate claim for 
reimbursement (n = 40) 

24 
5 
10.9 
8.8 
24 
27.3 
20.1 
0.03 

[B34] Ensure proper reference sources for 
service reimbursement (n = 34) 

18.2 
5 
10.9 
7.8 
16 
27.3 
16.8 
0.08 

Workplace 
management 

[B58] Ensure production schedules are 
appropriately planned and managed (n = 35) 

15.2 
5 
19.6 
6.7 
20 
18.2 
17.4 
0.08 

Professional 
and personal 

Quality 
assurance and 
research in the 
workplace 

[B87] Apply research findings and understand 
the benefit risk [e.g. pre-clinical, clinical trials, 
experimental clinical-pharmacological research 
and risk management] (n = 34) 

12.5 
5 
20.9 
10.2 
9.1 
0 
20.4 
0.03 

[B90] Ensure appropriate quality control tests are 
performed and managed appropriately (n = 39) 

12.5 
0 
25.6 
11.9 
9.1 
9.1 
22.8 
0.01 

[B95] Initiate and implement audit and research 
activities (n = 33) 

12.5 
5 
20.9 
9 
9.1 
0 
15.78 
0.11 

a 



## Table 10
10Distribution of the 'not relevant' ratings in relation to patient-facing component in area of pharmacy practice for the 10 behaviours showing disagreement *Pharmacy areas involving daily patient interactions including hospital and community pharmacy ¶ Pharmacy areas not involving daily patient interactions including industrial, academic, administrative, laboratory and medicine control, and pharmacy informationCluster 
Competency 
Behaviour 
Patient-facing sectors* (N%) 
Non patient-facing sectors  ¶ (N%) χ 2 value p 

Not 
relevant 

Low 
relevance 

Relevant Not 
relevant 

Low 
relevance 

Relevant 

Pharmaceutical 
care 

Assessment 
of medicines 

[B6] Identify, prioritise and 
act upon medicine-medicine 
interactions; medicine-disease 
interactions; medicine-patient 
interactions; medicine-food 
interactions (n = 43) 

9.1 
21.1 
69.8 
18.2 
22.7 
59.1 
6.3 
0.04 

Dispensing 
[B13] Document and act upon 
dispensing errors (n = 50) 

11.4 
11.4 
77.2 
18.2 
11.4 
70.5 
2.8 
0.25 

[B14] Implement and maintain 
a dispensing error report 
system and a 'near misses' 
report system (n = 43) 

10.1 
13.4 
76.5 
14.8 
6.8 
78.4 
3.87 
0.15 

Medicines 
[B20] Package medicines to 
optimise safety [ensuring 
appropriate re-packaging and 
labelling of the medicines] 
(n = 39) 

7.4 
11.7 
80.9 
19.3 
13.6 
67 
11.45 
0.003 

Organisation 
and 
management 

Budget and 
reimbursement 

[B32] Ensure appropriate claim 
for the reimbursement (n = 40) 

10 
18.4 
71.6 
19.2 
10.3 
70.5 
6.56 
0.04 

[B34] Ensure proper reference 
sources for service 
reimbursement (n = 34) 

9.2 
16.8 
74 
14.1 
17.9 
67.9 
1.72 
0.44 

Work place 
management 

[58] Ensure the production 
schedules are appropriately 
plan and manage (n = 35) 

9.6 
18.4 
72 
14.1 
7.7 
78.2 
5.74 
0.06 

Professional 
and personal 

Quality 
assurance and 
research in the 
workplace 

[B87] Apply research findings 
and understand the benefit 
risk [e.g. pre-clinical, clinical 
trials, experimental clinical-
pharmacological research 
and risk management] (n = 34) 

11.7 
18.2 
82.4 
9.5 
8.1 
70.1 
5.02 
0.08 

[B90] Ensure appropriate 
quality control tests are 
performed and managed 
appropriately (n = 39) 

14.3 
21.2 
64.5 
8.1 
6.8 
85.1 
11.72 
0.003 

[B95] Initiate and implement 
audit and research activities 
(n = 33) 

11.3 
19.9 
68.8 
9.5 
8.1 
82.4 
6.19 
0.05 



## Table 11
11FIP member organisations and the respective countries in Africa Ordre National des Pharmaciens du Senegal Senegal 10. Pharmaceutical Society of South Africa South Africa 11. Sudanese Pharmacists Union Sudan 12. Pharmaceutical society of Uganda Uganda 13. Pharmaceutical Society of Zambia Zambia 14. Pharmaceutical Society of Zimbabwe Zimbabwe 15. Ordre National des Pharmaciens du Burkina Faso Burkina Faso 16. Conseil National de L'ordre des Pharmaciens du Cameroun Cameroun 17. Ordre National des Pharmaciens du Tchad N'Djamena Chad 18. Comseil National de l'ordre des Pharmaciens du Congo Congo 19. Pharmaceutical Society of Egypt Egypt 20. Syndicate of Pharmacists in Arab Republic of Egypt Egypt 21. Eritean Pharmaceutical Association Eritea 22. Ethiopian Pharmaceutical Association Ethiopia 23. Conseil National de l'ordre des Pharmaciens de Guinea Conakry Republic of Guinea 24. Conseil National de l'ordre des Pharmaciens de Cote d'Ivoire Cote d'IvoireS/N Organisation 
Country 

1. 
Pharmacy Council of Ghana 
Ghana 

2. 
Pharmaceutical Society of Kenya 
Kenya 

3. 
Ordre National des Pharmaciens de Madagascar 
Madagascar 

4. 
Pharmaceutical Association of Mauritius 
Mauritius 

5. 
Conseil Regional des Pharmaciens d'officine du 
Nord 

Morocco 

6. 
Conseil National de l'ordre des Pharmaciens du 
Mali 

Mali 

7. 
Pharmaceutical Society of Nigeria 
Nigeria 

8. 
Rwanda Pharmacists Association 
Rwanda 

9. 

AcknowledgementsThe authors thank Charles Ofei-Palm (Ghana), Onyimbo Kerama (Kenya), Prof. Sabiha Essack, Susan Buekes and GT Mahlatsi (South Africa), and Unoma Onugbolu and Kamilu Labaran (Nigeria) for their assistance with disseminating survey invite to pharmacists in their respective countries. We also thank the pharmacy leadership bodies in the countries represented in the survey for their interest in participating in our study.FundingThis research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.Availability of data and materials All authors had complete access to the data that supported the research.Authors' contributions IB conceived the study with inputs from AB and AU. AU designed the study, IB and AB provided input on methodology and reviewed interpretation of the outcome of the data analysis. All three authors read the draft manuscript for intellectual content and approved the final version.Ethics approval and consent to participate This study was exempted from formal ethical approval by the research ethics committee as it did not involve the use of identifiable patient information or data, rather the study recruited pharmacists and sought their views by virtue of their professional roles. Participants completed a consent page prior to participating in the survey.Consent for publication N/ACompeting interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Publisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and we will help you at every step:
Clinical pharmacy services, pharmacy staffing, and hospital mortality rates. C A Bond, C L Raehl, Pharmacother J Hum Pharmacol Drug Ther. 274Bond CA, Raehl CL. Clinical pharmacy services, pharmacy staffing, and hospital mortality rates. Pharmacother J Hum Pharmacol Drug Ther. 2007; 27(4):481-93.

Medical and nursing staff highly value clinical pharmacists in the emergency department. R J Fairbanks, J M Hildebrand, K E Kolstee, S M Schneider, M N Shah, Emerg Med J. 2410Fairbanks RJ, Hildebrand JM, Kolstee KE, Schneider SM, Shah MN. Medical and nursing staff highly value clinical pharmacists in the emergency department. Emerg Med J. 2007;24(10):716-8.

Improving patient and health system outcome through advanced pharmacy practice. S Giberson, S Yoder, M P Lee, U.S. Public Health ServiceOffice of the Chief Pharmacist. cited 2012 Oct 24] p. 1-95. (Report to the Surgeon GeneralGiberson S, Yoder S, Lee MP. Improving patient and health system outcome through advanced pharmacy practice. [Internet]. Office of the Chief Pharmacist, U.S. Public Health Service; 2011 Dec [cited 2012 Oct 24] p. 1-95. (Report to the Surgeon General). Available from: http://www.usphs.gov/ corpslinks/pharmacy/sc_comms_sg_report.aspx.

Using pharmacists to optimize patient outcomes and costs in the ED. G Jacknin, T Nakamura, A J Smally, R M Ratzan, Am J Emerg Med. 326Jacknin G, Nakamura T, Smally AJ, Ratzan RM. Using pharmacists to optimize patient outcomes and costs in the ED. Am J Emerg Med. 2014;32(6):673-7.

Documentation of pharmacists' interventions in an emergency department and associated cost avoidance. P Lada, G Delgado, Am J Health Syst Pharm. 641Lada P, Delgado G. Documentation of pharmacists' interventions in an emergency department and associated cost avoidance. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2007;64(1):63-8.

CPD and revalidation: our future is happening now. Z Austin, Res Soc Adm Pharm. 92Austin Z. CPD and revalidation: our future is happening now. Res Soc Adm Pharm. 2013;9(2):138-41.

International Pharmaceutical Federation. The 2012 FIP global pharmacy workforce report. The Hague: International Pharmaceutical Federation. International Pharmaceutical Federation. The 2012 FIP global pharmacy workforce report. The Hague: International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2012.

Advanced practice and specialisation in pharmacy: global report. The Hague, Netherlands: International Pharmaceutical FederationInternational Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP). Advanced practice and specialisation in pharmacy: global report 2015 [Internet]. The Hague, Netherlands: International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2015. Available from: http://www.fip.org/files/fip/PharmacyEducation/Adv_and_Spec_Survey/ FIPEd_Advanced_2015_web_v2.pdf. Accessed Mar 2018.

A universal truth: no health without a workforce. Brazil: Global Health Workforce Alliance and World Health Organization. 90Global Health Workforce AllianceGlobal Health Workforce Alliance. A universal truth: no health without a workforce. Brazil: Global Health Workforce Alliance and World Health Organization; 2013. p. 90. Available from: http://www.who.int/workforcealliance/ knowledge/resources/GHWA-a_universal_truth_report.pdf?ua=1.

Global pharmacy workforce intelligence: trends report. The Hague: International Pharmaceutical Federation. International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP)International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP). Global pharmacy workforce intelligence: trends report. The Hague: International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2015. Available from: http://www.fip.org/files/fip/ PharmacyEducation/Trends/FIPEd_Trends_report_2015_web.pdf.

About FIP-FIP-International Pharmaceutical Federation. InternetAbout FIP-FIP-International Pharmaceutical Federation [Internet]. [cited 2017 Jan 25]. Available from: https://www.fip.org/?page=menu_about.

Competence in the global pharmacy workforce: a discussion paper. I Bates, A Bruno, Int Pharm J. 232Bates I, Bruno A. Competence in the global pharmacy workforce: a discussion paper. Int Pharm J. 2008;23(2):30-3.

Towards a global competency framework. A Bruno, I Bates, T Brock, C Anderson, Am J Pharm Educ. 743Bruno A, Bates I, Brock T, Anderson C. Towards a global competency framework. Am J Pharm Educ. 2010;74(3):1-2.

A controlled study of the general level framework: results from the South of England competency study. S Antoniou, D G Webb, D Mcrobbie, J G Davies, J Wright, J Quinn, Pharm Educ. 5Antoniou S, Webb DG, McRobbie D, Davies JG, Wright J, Quinn J, et al. A controlled study of the general level framework: results from the South of England competency study. Pharm Educ. 2005;5:201-7.

Improvement in pharmacist's performance facilitated by an adapted competency-based general level framework. I Coombes, M Avent, L Cardiff, K Bettenay, J Coombes, K Whitfield, J Pharm Pract Res. 402Coombes I, Avent M, Cardiff L, Bettenay K, Coombes J, Whitfield K, et al. Improvement in pharmacist's performance facilitated by an adapted competency-based general level framework. J Pharm Pract Res. 2010; 40(2):111-8.

Use of a general level framework to facilitate performance improvement in hospital pharmacists in Singapore. V Rutter, C Wong, I Coombes, L Cardiff, C Duggan, M-L Yee, Am J Pharm Educ. 766107Rutter V, Wong C, Coombes I, Cardiff L, Duggan C, Yee M-L, et al. Use of a general level framework to facilitate performance improvement in hospital pharmacists in Singapore. Am J Pharm Educ. 2012;76(6):107.

Evaluation of competences at the community pharmacy settings. S Svetlana, T Ivana, C Tatjana, K Duskana, I Bates, Indian J Pharm Educ Res. 484Svetlana S, Ivana T, Tatjana C, Duskana K, Bates I. Evaluation of competences at the community pharmacy settings. Indian J Pharm Educ Res. 2014;48(4):22-30.

Individualized education and competency development of Croatian community pharmacists using the general level framework. A Meštrović, Ž Staničić, M O Hadžiabdić, I Mucalo, I Bates, C Duggan, Am J Pharm Educ. 76223Meštrović A, Staničić Ž, Hadžiabdić MO, Mucalo I, Bates I, Duggan C, et al. Individualized education and competency development of Croatian community pharmacists using the general level framework. Am J Pharm Educ. 2012;76(2):23.

Evaluation of Croatian community pharmacists' patient care competencies using the general level framework. A Meštrović, Z Staničić, M O Hadžiabdić, I Mucalo, I Bates, C Duggan, Am J Pharm Educ. 75236Meštrović A, Staničić Z, Hadžiabdić MO, Mucalo I, Bates I, Duggan C, et al. Evaluation of Croatian community pharmacists' patient care competencies using the general level framework. Am J Pharm Educ. 2011;75(2). Article 36.

The general level framework: use in primary care and community pharmacy to support professional development. E Mills, I Bates, D Farmer, G Davies, D G Webb, Int J Pharm Pract. 165Mills E, Bates I, Farmer D, Davies G, Webb DG. The general level framework: use in primary care and community pharmacy to support professional development. Int J Pharm Pract. 2008;16(5):325-31.

A global competency framework for services provided by pharmacy workforce: International Pharmaceutical Federation. FIP Education Initiatives. 21FIP Education Initiatives. A global competency framework for services provided by pharmacy workforce: International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2012. p. 21. https://www.fip.org/files/fip/PharmacyEducation/GbCF/GbCF_v1_ online_A4.pdf.

International Pharmaceutical Federation. Transforming our workforce [Internet]. International Pharmaceutical Federation. 232013 FIPEd global education report. The Hague: International Pharmaceutical FederationInternational Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP). 2013 FIPEd global education report. The Hague: International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2013. 52 p. 23. International Pharmaceutical Federation. Transforming our workforce [Internet]. International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2016 [cited 2017 Jan 25].

Core competency framework for pharmacists. Dublin: Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland. The Pharmaceutical Society of IrelandThe Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland. Core competency framework for pharmacists. Dublin: Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland; 2013. Available from: http://www.thepsi.ie/Libraries/Publications/PSI_Core_Competency_ Framework_for_Pharmacists.sflb.ashx.

The pharmacy competency framework for Pacific Island countries. A N Brown, B J Gilbert, A F Bruno, Gmc Bpharm, J Pharm Pract Res. 424Brown AN, Gilbert BJ, Bruno AF, BPharm GMC. The pharmacy competency framework for Pacific Island countries. J Pharm Pract Res. 2012;42(4):268-72.

The feasibility, development and validation of a global competency framework for pharmacy education. A F Bruno, School of Pharmacy, University of London. London: School of Pharmacy, University of LondonPhD thesisBruno AF. The feasibility, development and validation of a global competency framework for pharmacy education, PhD thesis. School of Pharmacy, University of London. London: School of Pharmacy, University of London; 2011.

Statistics review 8: qualitative data-tests of association. V Bewick, L Cheek, J Ball, Crit Care. 81Bewick V, Cheek L, Ball J. Statistics review 8: qualitative data-tests of association. Crit Care. 2004;8(1):46-53.

Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences. J Cohen, Lawrence Erlbaum AssociatesHillsdaleCohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.

Measures of association for nominal and ordinal variables. D Weisburd, C Britt, 10.1007/978-0-387-34113-2_13Statistics in criminal justice. Third. New YorkSpringer USWeisburd D, Britt C. Measures of association for nominal and ordinal variables. In: Statistics in criminal justice. Third. New York: Springer US; 2007. p. 335-380. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-34113-2_13.

Pharmacists' views on involvement in pharmacy practice research: strategies for facilitating participation. C Armour, M Brillant, I Krass, Pharm Pract. 52Armour C, Brillant M, Krass I. Pharmacists' views on involvement in pharmacy practice research: strategies for facilitating participation. Pharm Pract. 2007;5(2):59-66.

Hospital pharmacists' selfevaluation of their competence and confidence in conducting pharmacy practice research. A Awaisu, D Bakdach, R H Elajez, M Zaidan, Saudi Pharm J. 0Awaisu A, Bakdach D, Elajez RH, Zaidan M. Hospital pharmacists' self- evaluation of their competence and confidence in conducting pharmacy practice research. Saudi Pharm J. 2014;(0). Available from: http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1319016414001121. Accessed Mar 2018.

The state of science and research in clinical pharmacy. S C Fagan, D Touchette, J A Smith, K M Sowinski, L Dolovich, K L Olson, Pharmacother J Hum Pharmacol Drug Ther. 267Fagan SC, Touchette D, Smith JA, Sowinski KM, Dolovich L, Olson KL, et al. The state of science and research in clinical pharmacy. Pharmacother J Hum Pharmacol Drug Ther. 2006;26(7):1027-40.

Community pharmacists' attitudes towards research. K Rosenbloom, K Taylor, G Harding, Int J Pharm Pract. 82Rosenbloom K, Taylor K, Harding G. Community pharmacists' attitudes towards research. Int J Pharm Pract. 2000;8(2):103-10.

The willingness of community pharmacists to participate in a practice-based research network. J Hébert, M-C Laliberté, D Berbiche, E Martin, L Lalonde, Can Pharm J CPJ. 1461Hébert J, Laliberté M-C, Berbiche D, Martin E, Lalonde L. The willingness of community pharmacists to participate in a practice-based research network. Can Pharm J CPJ. 2013;146(1):47-54.

Thai pharmacists' attitudes and experiences of research. T Kanjanarach, S Numchaitosapol, Jaisa-Ard R, Res Soc Adm Pharm. 86Kanjanarach T, Numchaitosapol S, Jaisa-ard R. Thai pharmacists' attitudes and experiences of research. Res Soc Adm Pharm. 2012;8(6):e58-9.

Attitudes of community pharmacists regarding involvement in research. H Liddell, Pharm J. 256Liddell H. Attitudes of community pharmacists regarding involvement in research. Pharm J. 1996;256:905-7.

Factors influencing Australian community pharmacists' willingness to participate in research projects: an exploratory study. B Saini, M Brillant, J Filipovska, L Gelgor, B Mitchell, G Rose, Int J Pharm Pract. 143Saini B, Brillant M, Filipovska J, Gelgor L, Mitchell B, Rose G, et al. Factors influencing Australian community pharmacists' willingness to participate in research projects: an exploratory study. Int J Pharm Pract. 2006;14(3):179-88.

The development of a competency framework for pharmacists providing cancer services. C Carrington, J Weir, P Smith, J Oncol Pharm Pract. 173Carrington C, Weir J, Smith P. The development of a competency framework for pharmacists providing cancer services. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2011;17(3):168-78.

Development and piloting of a competency framework for pharmacy educational and practice supervisors. S C Jones, G Fleming, D Hay, M Ibrahim, M Pettit, E Wright, Pharm Educ. 121Jones SC, Fleming G, Hay D, Ibrahim M, Pettit M, Wright E, et al. Development and piloting of a competency framework for pharmacy educational and practice supervisors. Pharm Educ. 2012;12(1):14-9.

Pharmacist perceptions of new competency standards. P Maitreemit, P Pongcharoensuk, N Kapol, E P Armstrong, Pharm Pract. 63Maitreemit P, Pongcharoensuk P, Kapol N, Armstrong EP. Pharmacist perceptions of new competency standards. Pharm Pract. 2008;6(3):113-20.

Pharmacist provision of primary health care: a modified Delphi validation of pharmacists' competencies. N Kennie-Kaulbach, B Farrell, N Ward, S Johnston, A Gubbels, T Eguale, BMC Fam Pract. 131Kennie-Kaulbach N, Farrell B, Ward N, Johnston S, Gubbels A, Eguale T, et al. Pharmacist provision of primary health care: a modified Delphi validation of pharmacists' competencies. BMC Fam Pract. 2012;13(1):1-9.

The PHAR-QA project: quality assurance in European pharmacy education and training. Results of the European network Delphi round 1: PHAR-QA Newsletter. PHARMINE. J Atkinson, K D Paepe, A S Pozo, D Rekkas, D Volmer, J Hirvonen, Atkinson J, Paepe KD, Pozo AS, Rekkas D, Volmer D, Hirvonen J, et al. The PHAR-QA project: quality assurance in European pharmacy education and training. Results of the European network Delphi round 1: PHAR-QA Newsletter. PHARMINE; 2015. p. 1-31.

Community pharmacy in Warri, Nigeria: a survey of practice details. D U Adje, A N Oli, Sch Acad J Pharm SAJP. 25Adje DU, Oli AN. Community pharmacy in Warri, Nigeria: a survey of practice details. Sch Acad J Pharm SAJP. 2013;2(5):391-7.

Effect of trade liberalisation on community pharmacy in Zambia: a case study of the Copperbelt region. M C Machula, Internet] [MBA ThesisMachula MC. Effect of trade liberalisation on community pharmacy in Zambia: a case study of the Copperbelt region [Internet] [MBA Thesis].

The Copperbelt Uinversity School of Business Postgraduate Studies. [Zambia]: The Copperbelt Uinversity School of Business Postgraduate Studies; 2007. Available from: http://dspace.cbu.ac.zm:8080/jspui/bitstream/ 123456789/127/1/MACHULA%2c%20C.%20MOSES0001%20-%20Eff ect%20of%20trade%20liberalisation%20on%20community%20pharmacy. %20A%20case%20study%20of%20The%20Copperbelt%20University.PDF. Accessed Mar 2018.

Medication error reporting systems-lessons learnt. Executive summary of the findings [Internet]. International Pharmaceutical Federation. A-R Terzibanjan, R Laaksonen, M Weiss, M Airaksinen, T Wuliji, Terzibanjan A-R, Laaksonen R, Weiss M, Airaksinen M, Wuliji T. Medication error reporting systems-lessons learnt. Executive summary of the findings [Internet]. International Pharmaceutical Federation; 2008 [cited 2017 Oct 12].

Medical incidents in developing countries: a few case studies from Nigeria. F Chukwuneke, Niger J Clin Pract. 187Chukwuneke F. Medical incidents in developing countries: a few case studies from Nigeria. Niger J Clin Pract. 2015;18(7):20-4.

Strategies to reduce medication errors (II): Pharmaceutical Society of Ghana. E E Walker, Walker EE. Strategies to reduce medication errors (II): Pharmaceutical Society of Ghana; 2016. Available from: https://psgh.site-ym.com/page/ V5N3_medicationerror/Strategies-to-reduce-medication-errors-II.htm. Accessed Mar 2018.

Pharmacy in Africa. M Kassi, InternetKassi M. Pharmacy in Africa [Internet].

Patient safety in developing countries: retrospective estimation of scale and nature of harm to patients in hospitals. R M Wilson, P Michel, S Olsen, R W Gibberd, C Vincent, R El-Assady, Br Med J. 13344Wilson RM, Michel P, Olsen S, Gibberd RW, Vincent C, El-Assady R, et al. Patient safety in developing countries: retrospective estimation of scale and nature of harm to patients in hospitals. Br Med J. 2012;13:344.

Drug administration errors: time for national action. R L Llewellyn, P C Gordon, A R Reed, SAMJ South Afr Med J. 101Llewellyn RL, Gordon PC, Reed AR. Drug administration errors: time for national action. SAMJ South Afr Med J. 2011;101:319-20.

Introducing competency-based postgraduate medical education in the Netherlands. F Scheele, P Teunissen, S V Luijk, E Heineman, L Fluit, H Mulder, Med Teach. 303Scheele F, Teunissen P, Luijk SV, Heineman E, Fluit L, Mulder H, et al. Introducing competency-based postgraduate medical education in the Netherlands. Med Teach. 2008;30(3):248-53.

Danish Health and Medicines Authority. The seven roles of physicians. InternetDanish Health and Medicines Authority. The seven roles of physicians [Internet].

. Danish Health and Medicines Authority. Danish Health and Medicines Authority; 2014 [cited 2017 Jan 13].

Are some of the challenging aspects of the CanMEDS roles valid outside Canada?. C Ringsted, T L Hansen, D Davis, A Scherpbier, Med Educ. 408Ringsted C, Hansen TL, Davis D, Scherpbier A. Are some of the challenging aspects of the CanMEDS roles valid outside Canada? Med Educ. 2006;40(8):807-15.

The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. Fellowship statements and competencies. InternetThe Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. Fellowship statements and competencies [Internet].

The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. Australia Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia: The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists; 2012 [cited 2017 Jan 13] p. 3. Available from: https://www.ranzcp.org/Files/PreFellowship/2012- Fellowship-Program/Fellowship-Competencies.aspx.

Production of a framework of competences for pharmacy practice in the European Union. J Atkinson, B Rombaut, A S Pozo, D Rekkas, P Veski, J Hirvonen, Pharmacy. 22Atkinson J, Rombaut B, Pozo AS, Rekkas D, Veski P, Hirvonen J, et al. Production of a framework of competences for pharmacy practice in the European Union. Pharmacy. 2014;2(2):161-74.

International Pharmaceutical Federation. Continuing professional development and continuing education in pharmacy: a global report. International Pharmaceutical FederationThe Hague, NetherlandsInternetInternational Pharmaceutical Federation. Continuing professional development and continuing education in pharmacy: a global report [Internet]. The Hague, Netherlands: International Pharmaceutical Federation;

Assessment of human resources for pharmaceutical services in Ghana. M Duwiejua, D A Danquah, E Andrews-Annan, Available from: assessment of human resources for pharmaceutical serviecs in ghana. Pharmacy Council of Ghana, Ministry of Health, GhanaDuwiejua M, Danquah DA, Andrews-Annan E. Assessment of human resources for pharmaceutical services in Ghana [Internet]. Pharmacy Council of Ghana, Ministry of Health, Ghana; 2009 [cited 2017 Jun 17]. Available from: assessment of human resources for pharmaceutical serviecs in ghana.

Assessment of pharmacists workforce in Ethiopia. G B Gebretekle, T G Fenta, Ethiop J Health Dev. 272Gebretekle GB, Fenta TG. Assessment of pharmacists workforce in Ethiopia. Ethiop J Health Dev. 2013;27(2):1-10.

Assessment of human resources at the pharmaceutical sector [Internet]. The Republic of the Sudan Federal Ministry of Health, Directorate General of Pharmacy. Dhy Abuturkey, Abuturkey DHY. Assessment of human resources at the pharmaceutical sector [Internet]. The Republic of the Sudan Federal Ministry of Health, Directorate General of Pharmacy; 2012. Available from: https://www.hrhresourcecenter. org/node/5018.html. Accessed Mar 2018.

Follow-up by mail in clinical trials: does questionnaire length matter?. P Edwards, I Roberts, P Sandercock, C Frost, Control Clin Trials. 251Edwards P, Roberts I, Sandercock P, Frost C. Follow-up by mail in clinical trials: does questionnaire length matter? Control Clin Trials. 2004;25(1):31-52.

Does length of questionnaire matter? A randomised trial of response rates to a mailed questionnaire. C Iglesias, D Torgerson, J Health Serv Res Policy. 54Iglesias C, Torgerson D. Does length of questionnaire matter? A randomised trial of response rates to a mailed questionnaire. J Health Serv Res Policy. 2000;5(4):291-21.

Research methods in health: investigating health and health services. A Bowling, Open University Press525Berkshire3rd edBowling A. Research methods in health: investigating health and health services. 3rd ed. Berkshire: Open University Press; 2009. p. 525.

Surveys in social research. D De Vaus, Internet. 5th ed. Taylor & Francis; 2002. 379 p. Available fromde Vaus D. Surveys in social research [Internet]. 5th ed. Taylor & Francis; 2002. 379 p. Available from: http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=1IRDJEtBg48C. Accessed Mar 2018.

Study on international internet connectivity in sub-Saharan Africa. A report of the Regulatory and Market Environment Division (RME) of the Telecommunication Development Bureau and ITU-T Study Group 3. Abosse Akue-KpakpoGeneva, SwitzerlandAbosse Akue-Kpakpo, editor. Study on international internet connectivity in sub-Saharan Africa. A report of the Regulatory and Market Environment Division (RME) of the Telecommunication Development Bureau and ITU-T Study Group 3 [Internet]. International Telecommunication Union, Geneva, Switzerland; 2013 [cited 2017 Oct 12]. Available from: https://www.itu.int/ en/ITU-D/Regulatory-Market/Documents/IIC_Africa_Final-en.pdf.

Internet access for African countries. F K De Heer-Menlah, Ubiquity. 4de Heer-Menlah FK. Internet access for African countries. Ubiquity. 2002;(4). Article No. 4. https://ubiquity.acm.org/article.cfm?id=763949. Accessed Mar 2018.

Self-selection bias. R Olsen, Encyclopedia of survey research methods. Thousand Oaks. Lavrakas PJSAGE Publications, IncOlsen R. Self-selection bias. In: Lavrakas PJ, editor. Encyclopedia of survey research methods. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc.; 2008. p. 809-11.