# Edinburgh Medical Journal March 19 21 PRENATAL DEATH* Professor Keith's lecture included a general survey and ^iticism of anatomists and their work, and Professor Symington

CorpusID: 4732967
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb333f4b347bfb3213018a94093da16c0f0277a7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb333f4b347bfb3213018a94093da16c0f0277a7)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Edinburgh Medical Journal March 19 21 PRENATAL DEATH* Professor Keith's lecture included a general survey and ^iticism of anatomists and their work, and Professor Symington


Arthur Robinson 
Edinburgh Medical Journal March 19 21 PRENATAL DEATH* Professor Keith's lecture included a general survey and ^iticism of anatomists and their work, and Professor Symington



stipulation that pathology shall be excluded. Two lectures have already been delivered, the first by yofessor Arthur Keith, one of Professor Struthers' most 'stinguished pupils, the second by Professor Symington.

Professor Keith's lecture included a general survey and ^iticism of anatomists and their work, and Professor Symington ?scussed the relationship of the cerebral gyri to the inner surface of the cranial wall, in association with deductions which previously been made with regard to the importance of *, ?Se relationships and the conclusions that could be drawn from ern in the case of prehistoric skulls.

The two first lectures, therefore, were concerned with the P?stnatal period of life. To-day I propose to enter on the Prenatal field, to consider the occurrence of prenatal death and e sometimes consequent abortions, partly as subjects of .c*entific interest, and partly on account of their practical ^Portance to breeders of animals, to those who are concerned * The Sir John Struthers Lecture, delivered before the Royal College of burgeons of Edinburgh, 17th December 1920.

Vat V0L-XXVI. NO. III. 137 with the maintenance and possible increase of the human birth rate, and also to obstetricians in association with the advice which they give to some of their patients. It must be understood that by the term prenatal death is meant the death of ripe extruded ova, or of the zygotes formed by the union of such ova with spermatozoa before the termination of the normal period of gestation. There appears to be a general belief amongst the laity, and also amongst those who concern themselves with the falling birth rate, in different countries, that sterility and prenatal death and the commonly following abortions, in human subjects, are very generally, if not entirely, due either to disease of the mother, or of the father, or of both, or to their abnormal environment, and, if one may judge from the statements made m standard text-books of obstetrics, the same view is, to some extent, shared and taught by obstetricians, in which case it must influence their advice and treatment. It is apparently believed that any ripe extruded ovum is capable of being fertilised by any spermatozoon in any given group of healthy animals, and that the zygote so formed will produce a new normal living individual, at the end of the usual period of gestation, except in those few cases in which the most superficial examination shows that the embryo formed by the zygote is abnormal-Further it appears to be assumed that if the embryo is obviously abnormal the abnormality is due to external detrimental conditions, similar to those which have been imposed on growing embryos by experimenters interested in estimating the effects of various artificial conditions upon the gametes and zygotes of various groups of animals.

In a text-book of Midwifery published in 1917 under the editorship of Dr Comyns Berkley, Dr A. Russel Andrews, and Dr J. S. Fairbairn, it is admitted that abortion may be due to conditions of the ovum and embryo, such as abnormalities incompatible with life,1 but it is stated that the commonest causes are disease of the endometrium and uterine displacements in the earlier months, and syphilis and chronic metritis in the later months.

In his Practice of Obstetrics Dr J. C. Edgar, speaking of the causes of abortion, says " the causes in the ovum and embryo are many of them secondary to morbid conditions of the mother." 8 Dr J. C. Williams 27 states that the fcetal causes of abortion J38 are frequently due to abnormalities in the development of the embryo, but that abortion results more frequently from changes in the foetal appendages, which interfere with nutrition, such as excessive torsion of the cord, hydramnios, hydatiform mole, or syphilis.

All these statements may be more or less true, but the inference to be drawn from them is that the ovum and embryo have little or no direct influence in the production of abortion, and they do not explain why the embryo develops abnormally. Drs Tweedy25 and Wrench and other writers make no Mention of the ovum or zygote as a causative agent of abortion.

In a recent number of the British Medical Journal-there Was a leading article on "Nature's Teratological Experiments, inspired by Dr Browne's3 interesting work on Anencephalic foetuses. The writer of the article suggests that the causes of abnormalities may be mechanical, toxaemic, microbic, or toxic, as that definition of the term normal that I shall speak of the average prenatal death rate of any group as the normal prenatal death rate.

If prenatal death under ordinary conditions is a very common and normal occurrence, it must be taken into account when any estimate is made of the possible birth rate of a given group of mammals, and when the cause of abortion in a given case is being considered. It is on these accounts that I venture to bring the subject before you now, and let me say at once that the evidence upon which I shall rely for the proof of my thesis that prenatal death and abortion are both, in many cases, normal occurrences, is derived partly from my own observations upon one group of mammals, partly from data very kindly given to me by Mr James Wood of the Scottish Board of Agriculture in the case of another group, and partly upon the published statements of several investigators who have dealt with the embryological history and productive capacity of various mammals from quite other points of view than that with which I am at present concerned.

I have already mentioned the widespread belief that prenatal death is very largely if not entirely due to disease. That belief received strong support from the late Professor Franklin P. Mall of Havard,13 who examined a large number of human specimens sent to him from various parts of America.

Mall's observations led him to the conclusion that the membranes of nearly all pathological ova are pathological, and it appeared to him that " were the difficulty germinal in origin the changes should be successive from the smallest to the largest pathological embryos, and should not arise from various stages of normal embryos." It is somewhat difficult to determine exactly what Mall meant by the' statement I have quoted. It appears to mean that an embryo which has reached a comparatively advanced stage of development before it shows any obvious signs of degeneration was originally normal. Such a position is untenable, for it assumes that a mechanism which shows no obvious signs of defect when it is first put into action is normal* although it may have an invisible structural defect which must result in its breakdown before the end of its normal period of working life is attained.

If, however, the statement means that if the defect is germinal breakdown should occur at all periods, both pre-and post-natal, before the average life period is reached, then that is exactly what does occur.

The supposition that disease is most generally the cause ?f prenatal death has, however, not been without opponents vvho took the opposite view, and maintained that the embryo and not the mother was at fault; and there are others who have taken a neutral position, believing" that the evidence, hitherto produced, was not sufficient to justify a definite decision.

Before a decision can be made two preliminary necessities m"st be satisfied :?

1. The ovum extrusion rate must be known.

2. The actual birth-rate must be ascertained.

When both sets of data, gathered from a satisfactory number of cases, are available, inquiry must be made as to *he period at which prenatal death occurs, whether befoie 0r after fertilisation, and if after fertilisation whether before or after the attachment of the zygote to the uterine mucosa.

So far as I am aware the necessary data have not hitherto . een furnished for any group of mammals. In 19^4 Hammond lriquired into some factors controlling fertility in domestic animals,10 and he published a number of data with regard to P'SS and rabbits which are very helpful, and to which I shall ave to refer later, but, as he himself admits, they are not Efficient to justify a definite conclusion.

The data which I have to place before you to-day ^re more satisfactory, but still not all that could be desiied. The numbers, therefore, in the case of the horses, may e considered sufficient, but, as none of the mothers died or vvere killed, the ovaries and genital canals were not examined, in those respects the history is incomplete. The number of the ferrets is by no means so satisfactoiy,
V?L-xxvi. no. hi.
only 165 being available for the purpose in hand ; fortunately they represent 1643 ova, the ovum production rate being 9-95 per animal at each breeding period, as calculated by the number of corpora lutea present in the ovaries.

Each group in itself is insufficient, but the evidence of both corresponds so well with regard to some points, and the gaps in the evidence of one group are so well filled by that given by the other, that the two together provide a not unsatisfactory basis on which conclusions can be established.

Further, as will be shown later, the conclusions, based on the data obtained from the two groups, are supported by notes made in association with observations and experiments carried out with quite other objects in view than that of demonstrating the amount and cause of prenatal death.

Taking first the records of the horses, it must be noted that all the stallions were certified as healthy by the officials of the Board of Agriculture.

There is no record of the health of the mares, but as no farmer would attempt to breed from an unhealthy mare it may fairly be assumed that the mares also were healthy.

The mare ovulates at every heat period, whether inseminated or not, and at least one ovum is then extruded from one or the other ovary.

Occasionally twins are born ; sometimes, therefore two ova are extruded, but how often that occurs is not certainly known, consequently, in order that the prenatal loss extruded ova may not be overstated, I have assumed that not more than one ovum is extruded at each heat period.

If the mare is mated heat disappears, if the mating is successful, and remains absent until after parturition, but the mating is unsuccessful heat appears again after a certain number of days. There is no evidence, in the records, of remating, where the first mating was unsuccessful, but as the owners of the stallions were paid part of their fee after the mating, and the remaining part when a living foal was certified in the later months of gestation, and as each stallion served a certain limited district, there can be little doubt that some remating did occur, and that every opportunity was taken to secure fertilisation of the ova; nevertheless the final result of the matings, in the case of the Clydesdales, was that only 52 Pcr cent, of the mares were proved to be in foal, that is the pre' natal death rate of the extruded ova was 48 per cent., or, 111 ?ther words, of the 28,241 extruded ova 13,56? disappeared entirely.

The loss of ova placed in favourable circumstances for fertilisation was undoubtedly great in the Clydesdales, but it was greater still in the thoroughbreds, for out of their 3640 shed ova 2*36 disappeared, giving a proved foal rate of 42-32 Per cen^-? and a prenatal death rate of 58-68 per cent.

The records of the Clydesdales extend over six years, 3-1918 inclusive; those of the thoroughbreds over five years, 1913-1917 inclusive; and whilst the average prenatal Mortality rate, for the whole period, was that already stated, there was, in both groups, a yearly variation which is shown in Table I.   ______   Table I. The yearly variation will have to be taken into account yhen the cause of the variations of the prenatal mortality late ls discussed; in the meantime it is important to note that, whilst the yearly variations in both groups are not gieat,^ the variations found in association with the matings ot dividual stallions and of one stallion as compared with an?ther are very considerable.

As already stated, the average prenatal mortality rate of * e Clydesdales, during a period of six years, was 48 pei Cent, that actual percentage was met with only in the Case of one stallion which was mated with 286 mares during a PCt"iod of four years. I'our of the forty-four thoroughbreds were associated with a Prenatal mortality rate of 58 per cent., which is practically the average rate of the whole group for a period of five years.

. the remaining stallions of both groups were associated )v'th higher or lower rates varying from o to 100 per cent. 111 ^e case of the Clydesdales, and frcm 3478 to 98-07 per Cllt. in the case of the thoroughbreds.

i43

The range of the variations is shown in Table II. It is obvious, from the table, that in both groups more stallions are associated with a hypernormal than with a hyponormal prenatal death rate, and that the tendency to a hype1'" normal prenatal death rate is more marked in the case of the thoroughbreds than in that of the Clydesdales. The table also shows that there is a very marked prenatal loss of extruded ova in both groups, and that the variations of the loss ai'e greater in the case of the Clydesdales than in the case of the thoroughbreds.

Discussion of the cause of the variations must for the moment be deferred, but it may be pointed out now that the smaller range of variation in the thoroughbreds is possibly due to the circumstance that no thoroughbred stallion was mated with less than fourteen mares in any given year, whilst a considerable number of Clydesdale stallions were mated with fewer than ten mares in one year, and some with only one mare. Further discussion of this point at the present moment ls not essential for the immediate purpose, which is to show that prenatal death of extruded ova placed in favourable conditions for development is common and is not limited to one group of animals.

T he second series of animals available for the purpose in hand is the ferrets. Ferrets belong to a group of mammals far removed from the horses in zoological position, and they are sPecially useful for the present purpose not only on account of the comparatively small size of the ovaries, which, therefore, can readily be cut into serial sections for the microscopical examination of the corpora lutea, but also because the females belong to a relatively small group of female mammals which ovulate only after insemination, and in the case of the ferrets themselves, as I have shown in a previous communication,-0 only after sPermatozoa have entered the caudal third of the oviduct. On Account of this peculiarity it is quite certain that when corpora utea are present in the ovaries the animals have been successfully inseminated, and that the ova shed, if they passed into oviducts, had the opportunity of meeting spermatozoa.

Moreover each ovary, in the case of the ferret, is enclosed in a peritoneal capsule which communicates with the general cavit} the peritoneum only through a very small orifice, which is guarded by one of the fimbriae of the ovarian end of the oviduct; therefore the chance of the escape of ova into the peritoneal Cavity are small?nevertheless such escapes occur.

The uterus of the ferret consists of a very shoit body, whic 1 corresponds, practically, with the cervix of the human uterus, gestation never takes place in it; the gestation areas being Sltuated in the cornua and always in both cornua.

All my 165 ferrets were healthy. Some of them I received rom breeders by whom they were dispatched to me either Erectly after insemination or at some later peiiod. In the atter case they were kept separate from the male after the '^semination had taken place until they were sent to me, and thereafter until they were killed. Others were sent to me in the early part of the year; they came on heat, and were Geminated in my laboratory under my own supervision. 1 do not know the details of the feeding of the animals before they were sent to me, but they were all quite healthy when they arrived. In the laboratory they were fed with bread and milk, with occasional scraps of meat, and they remained healthy till they were killed, which in some cases was not until they had been in the laboratory for several months.

The environment in the laboratory was, to a certain extent, different from that of the breeding places, but it did not affect the health of the animals, and as the results obtained from the two groups, that is from those inseminated under the breeders observation and killed immediately or some time after their arrival at the laboratory, and those inseminated in the laboratory were practically the same, environment had, apparently, no effect on the prenatal death rate.

The ripe ovarian follicles of the ferret rupture from eighteen hours to three or four days after insemination. The reasons for the variation in the time which elapses between insemination and ovulation do not concern the present purpose and they have been dealt with in the communication already referred to.20

The number of ova shed by the 165 animals, as calculated by the number of corpora lutea in their ovaries, was 1643, that is about 9-95 per animal; therefore, although the number of animals is small the number of ova is more satisfactory.

The period of gestation in the ferret is usually forty-two days, and the animals were killed at intervals after insemination varying from eighteen hours to forty-two days.

The ovaries were cut into serial sections and the number of corpora lutea in each ovary was counted. The oviducts which run in the wall of the peri-ovarial peritoneal sac were cut with the ovaries.

Sometimes in the latter part of the fifth day, but more commonly on the sixth day, after extrusion from the ovaries, the ova or the zygotes formed from them enter the uterine cornua, and uterine cornua of the fifth, sixth, and seventh days were also cut into serial sections. Some ova from ten to twelve days after extrusion from the ovary were washed out of the uterine cornua and were examined in the fresh state before fixation and hardening; others were cut, in situ, into serial sections.

From the tenth to the twelfth day the gestation chambers become visible, as slightly swollen areas of the uterine cornua, and after the twelfth day it is possible to distinguish normal from abnormal zygotes by the size of the gestation chambers 146 A which they occupy, the zygote in the obviously small chambers being invariably in some stage of degeneration (Figs. I -7, Plate L).

From the thirteenth to the fourteenth day the placental part of the chorion of the zygote begins to fuse with the uterine decidua.

In ferrets, by microscopical examination of the ovaries in all stages of gestation it is possible to tell how many ova have been extruded in each animal after insemination has occurred ; and by microscopical examination of the oviducts and uterine c?rnua in the early stages and by macroscopical and microtopical examination of the uterine cornua, in later stages the number of zygotes which resulted and their normal or abnormal c?ndition can be ascertained. The results revealed by the Methods mentioned are shown in Table III.  The percentage prenatal death rate of the extruded ova of ferrets, as shown by the examination of the 165 specimens killed at various periods of gestation, is 24-16 per cent. That rate, however, is not the true prenatal death rate, comparable with the rate of the Clydesdale and thoroughbred horses ; it is merely the rate revealed by the killing of animals, not at the end of the gestation period, but at the end of various periods of gestation.

The figures in Table III. reveal an increase of 20-47 Per cent, between the prenatal death rate of the first two weeks of gestation and that of the last three weeks, whilst if the animals of the last four weeks are compared with those of the first two weeks, an increase of 11-8 per cent, in the prenatal death rate is found in the last four weeks as compared with the prenatal death rate of the first two weeks. In spite, therefore, of the small numbers available in the later period, as compared with the larger numbers in the earlier period, there can be little doubt that some of the ova and zygotes, which appeared to be normal in the first two weeks of gestation, would have shown signs of degeneration if the mothers had been killed in the later weeks.

Ferret breeders give the average birth rate of ferrets as 6 per animal at each breeding period, that is 600 per cent.

The ovum production rate, as estimated on my 165 animals, is 995 per cent.; therefore, comparing the birth rate as stated by the breeders with the ovum production rate of my specimens the prenatal death rate would be 39-23 per cent.

It is possible that the rate so calculated is too high, far the breeders are careful not to interfere with the mother or the young for several days after the birth period, under the impression that any interference is liable to cause the mother" to eat the young.

My own observations lead me to believe that if the number of the young was counted directly after parturition was completed it would be found that the average birth rate was more than six per animal, for I have notes of several cases of seven and nine young.

It is rare, however, for all the young of one brood to be of the same size and robustness, and I have noted, quite frequently, that some of the weaker animals died during the first five days after birth.

It must be admitted, however, that, with the material at present available, it is not possible to fix exactly the normal prenatal death rate of ferrets, but it may be said that it lS 148 certainly not more than 39"23 Per cent-> an<^ possibl) not be more than 35 per cent.

Fortunately for the purpose in hand the exact perce ^ is not of great importance; the main point is that t le recor show that in ferrets, as in Clydesdale and thoroug re or the prenatal death rate is high, that it occurs in associa 1 ^vith healthy animals placed in a normal environment, and tnat it is very variable, the variations in the ferret ranging between X'I9 per cent, and 100 per cent.

Prenatal death, however, is not limited to horses an > but the references to it are, in many cases, m^re y inC\ . , notes in communications dealing with entirely di erent su J , and the data given are too few to justify any conc usion exact amount; they are sufficient, however, to s it is both common and considerable in amount, an vari its incidence in different animals of the same group. lnu Duroc-Jerseys 9, and in Poland-Chinas 7;5, but, "nfortunatd^ the^e are no data to show the ovum production rate of those varieties.

In a second series of 7 sows, killed in various stages of gestation, Hammond found 126 corpora lutea in the ovaries, and 92 normal zygotes in the uteri; the prenatal death rate of the extruded ova was therefore 26-98 per cent., which is much lower than the prenatal death rate estimated upon the ovum extrusion rate of his first series and the average birth rate.

The difference between the two results emphasises the fact, already indicated by the ferrets, that prenatal death rate estimated upon the number of corpora lutea in the ovaries and the number of normal zygotes in the uteri of a series of animals killed in various stages of gestation does not give the true prenatal death rate, because it does not take into account the zygotes which were apparently normal in the earlier stages, but which would have undergone degeneration in the later periods.

Hammond's results, though they are based on small numbers, show that in swine, as in horses, ferrets, and marsupials, the prenatal death rate is large, and that, even in his small series, it varied from 000 per cent, to 47-61 per cent.

Hammond also examined a series of 38 rabbits which were killed from the ninth to the twenty-fifth day of gestation, and it appears from his table of results that the prenatal death rate of the series was 31-25 per cent., a figure which must be less than the total prenatal death rate, for the reasons given m association with the consideration of ferrets and swine, and it lS certainly less than that shown by contrasting the ovum production rate with the average birth rate.

In Hammond's series of rabbits the ovum production rate as shown by the number of corpora lutea was 9-6 per animal, that is 960 per cent. The average litter is stated by breeders as 5 per animal, or 5?? per cent., from which it follows that the total average prenatal death rate is 37-50 per cent.

Hammond's tables show that the prenatal death rate varies in rabbits as it does in other mammals, but the figures given do not permit a definite estimate of the amount of variation to be made.

In guinea-pigs it appears from the tables given by Stockard and Papanicolaou, in the record of their experiments on the modification of the germ cells in mammals,22 that the pre" natal death rate of normal non-inbred lines is 13-30 per centand in partially inbred lines 19-51 per cent., the estimate being based upon 238 animals of the former group and 45 the latter; but the figures given in Stockard's tables are not iS?

## Table II .
IIA. Clydesdales. 

No. of 
Stallions. 

9 

12 I 

26 
61 

Si, 

189 

1) 

No. of 
Mares. 

33) 

264 

1595 1-14.165 

4831 

7442 

286 

1977' 
7475 

2877 
850 

446 

134 
31; 

13,790 

P.N'.M.R. 
per cent. 

I to 19-9 
20 ? 29-9 
SO ? 39*9 
40 ? 47-9 

48 to 49*9 

5o ? 59*9 

69 ? 69-9 

70 ? 79-9 

80 ? 89-9 

90 ? 99-9 

B. Thoroughbreds. 

40 to 49-9 
50 
57-9 

58 to 58-9 

60 to 69-9 

7o ? 79-9 

80 ? 89-9 

90 ? 100 

Average P.N.M.R. 

per cent. 

o-ocA 

14-00 

25-45 h38 

34-27 

44-78,1 

48-00 

45-7o-\ 

54-Q2 

64-68 | 

70-82 ^57-5? 

83-63 

90-22 
IOO-OO^ 

34-781 
45-38 r50-90 

55-69 J 

58-57 

59-67^ 

63-38 
73-88 -66-So 

o-oo 

98-07] 



## Table III .
III?Ferrets.


In Dasyurus, amongst the marsupials, prenatal ea t? be of large amount, for Hill11 states that w 1 s S1 number of nipples of the adult female, and six, t ere ' aj Maximum number of the young she can rear, he las s ^ records of from 20 to 25 extruded ova, one of 3?> a" 35, of which 23 were normal and 12 abnormal, e no that cleavage abnormalities were frequently met w it ?Hill suggests that the occasional presence o eigi instead of six, and the excessive ovum production, in ica , ^asyurus was originally more prolific. That may Pos um case, but it also seems possible that the excessi, Production and zygote formation is, in a sense, a prec assure that a number of strong zygotes, sufficient to t^e species, shall be produced at each birth perio . the ovarie; of 27 animals killed just after the heat period, that ^e average number of corpora lutea was ^ a npriod is 20 the average number of ova extruded at each ea p ^ Per animal, whilst the average litter of young pigs 1 > niclicates a death rate of 40 per cent, of the s e 2?va* c1irface24 According to Rommel, quoted by Hammon a . e average litter in American breeds o swine is esss 

^ 

tiv 0r 

. 

In the case of swine, the sow ovulates 

* 

Gemination, and Hammond found (i9!4)> y e ' 

? 

j 

that 

' 


recent workers have supposed, and he assumes that if that is the ^ase> then, when our knowledge is sufficiently advanced we may ?Pe to prevent their occurrence, but he also suggests that the Causative agent may be something else. What the something ^Se is he does not attempt to explain ; possibly it is what r A. E. Giles, in his recently published and instructive book on tcrility in Women,9 classifies as "sexual incompatibility.Speaking of sex incompatibility, Dr Giles says "we have no nowledge of its mode of action, nor of the means by which it ^ight be overcome," but it is presumably to this named but Unknown cause that he attributes part at least of the sterile '^arriages in this country, which he estimates as 15 per cent, of c total marriages. As will be seen later, it is this so-called 'Se^ual incompatibility with which we are primarily concerned to-day. . ^f prenatal death, and the abortion which necessarily follows in certain groups of animals, is so usually caused by disease, as the statements of obstetricians would suggest, the subject ^?uld scarcely be admissible for the purposes of a lectuie delivered under the terms of Sir John Struthers will, but I Pr?pose to place before you evidence which shows that pi enatal J^ath of extruded ova, and of some of the zygotes formed from lem, is frequent and regular occurrence in some groups of lcalthy mammals under ordinary conditions, and any occuirence v^ich is usual in a group of animals, living under the ordinary c?nditions of life of the group, is normal. It is therefore under i39
-35 23-93 22-36 26-49 11-ii ii-ii 10-89 26-92 28-00 26-08 IO-OO 36-36 46-51 13-15 59-25 IOO-00 37-93 46-72 16-03 23-64 22-l8 | 18-60 I. 7-Si 47-79 24-16
& ait-pred bv auimals, and it is equally clear that it can be Modifications of the conditions of life. {To be continued.)