# T0XIC GOITRE: A SURVEY OF CASES TREATED DURING TEN YEARS *

CorpusID: 4744759
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f1f97768b5e6376b941bb26dce23174f1de3cb1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f1f97768b5e6376b941bb26dce23174f1de3cb1)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

T0XIC GOITRE: A SURVEY OF CASES TREATED DURING TEN YEARS *


M.DJohn Eason 
F R C P Edin 
H L Wallace 
M B 
F R C P Edin 
T0XIC GOITRE: A SURVEY OF CASES TREATED DURING TEN YEARS *

ttE object of this inquiry was to ascertain, as far as possible, present condition of patients who received non-surgical ^reatrnent for toxic goitre at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, Uring the ten-year period 1921 to 1930. To take each year SeParately would mean tedious repetition besides being of ?Ubtful value, since the number of cases seen in the course one year is comparatively small, and so, for the purpose this paper, the cases have been arranged into two groups ^?those who were treated in the hospital during 1921 to 1926, ^ a more recent group who received hospital treatment Uring the years 1927 to 1930. ^ One of the difficulties with which we were confronted was select some one or two of the many characters or symptoms ^lch made up the replies to the questionnaires, as the basis ^ Cessment of the effect of treatment and the present health the patient. For this purpose, capacity for work has been en as a reliable criterion, since its meaning is readily .. erstood and it applies practically to all patients who were ve at the time of inquiry. As a further point of interest size of the thyreoid gland, as estimated by the patient, is is survey. Although merely a rough estimate, it ,e^t that the average patient can give a reasonably accurate ^nion as to whether the gland is at present larger or smaller n on some previous occasion, or whether the swelling in the * has disappeared.Jhe procedure adopted in this inquiry was to send each ^ ent a simple questionnaire, which he or she was instructed U in and return to the Department. In cases where no to ^ Was received> a letter requesting information was written Pat rrie(^1'cal practitioner known to have last attended the ^etlt. Altogether questionnaires were sent to 315 patients ^re reP^es have been received regarding 261, of whom 236 females and 25 are males, thus leaving 54 patients unthe Statistical Research Department, The Royal Infirmary, 5?7

^reatrnent for toxic goitre at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, Uring the ten-year period 1921 to 1930. To take each year SeParately would mean tedious repetition besides being of ?Ubtful value, since the number of cases seen in the course one year is comparatively small, and so, for the purpose this paper, the cases have been arranged into two groups ^?those who were treated in the hospital during 1921 to 1926, ^ a more recent group who received hospital treatment Uring the years 1927 to 1930. ^ One of the difficulties with which we were confronted was select some one or two of the many characters or symptoms ^lch made up the replies to the questionnaires, as the basis ^ Cessment of the effect of treatment and the present health the patient. For this purpose, capacity for work has been en as a reliable criterion, since its meaning is readily .. erstood and it applies practically to all patients who were ve at the time of inquiry. As a further point of interest size of the thyreoid gland, as estimated by the patient, is is survey. Although merely a rough estimate, it ,e^t that the average patient can give a reasonably accurate ^nion as to whether the gland is at present larger or smaller n on some previous occasion, or whether the swelling in the * has disappeared.

Jhe procedure adopted in this inquiry was to send each ^ ent a simple questionnaire, which he or she was instructed U in and return to the Department. In cases where no to ^ Was received> a letter requesting information was written Pat rrie(^1'cal practitioner known to 


## 5?8

A ^eath in the 23 cases has been difficult to ascertain and we have only definite information regarding 14 of these. In 10 cases, death was due to toxic goitre and in four cases the cause death was stated to be anaemia, operation on the throat, cMoroform anaesthesia and lobar pneumonia respectively. In remaining nine cases the cause of death is unknown.   Of the four patients in this group who are known to died, three were originally treated with iodine and one \vlt rest and sedatives only.

Discussion.

The observations shown above call for discussion several points of view. As is to be expected, the findings the two groups of cases vary very considerably. In the n group, consisting of patients who were treated in the hosp1^ from 1921 to 1926, the mortality rate is naturally at a ^ higher level than in the other comparatively recent group ^ cases.

What appears to be of special interest, however, connection with the figures is the lowness of the mortality r in both the recent and the earlier groups as compared figures obtained elsewhere.


# ^4


## Toxic Goitre

In 1930, Fraser1 published an analysis of 50 cases of toxic goitre which had been observed in his wards during 1920 to *925. Twenty-four of these were treated surgically and 26 received non-surgical treatment. The mortality rate in those treated non-surgically was 38-5 per cent. These cases correspond closely to the cases we have reported in group 1 which the mortality rate is seen to be 16-1 per cent. In *931, Fraser2 published the results of treatment in 86 cases Emitted to his wards during 1926 to 1930. Of these, 48 received surgical and 38 non-surgical treatment. In the nonsurgical cases the mortality rate for this period was 34-2 Per cent. In our corresponding group of cases the mortality rate is only 3-4 per cent. This remarkable difference in Mortality rate is difficult to explain. The small numbers reported by Fraser may account to some extent for the discrepancy between his figures and those shown here, but ^is cannot be the whole explanation. It would seem that the Severity of the disease must vary considerably in different centres and that the type experienced in London is far more virulent than that occurring in Scotland. It may be also that ^e hospital population with which we are dealing is less Object to strain than in the other cases mentioned.

It is of interest to compare the results of surgically treated cases reported by Fraser with our non-surgical cases. For his earlier group, the mortality in cases treated by operation was l2'5 per cent, as compared with our medical mortality of I6>1 per cent. In his later group, the surgical mortality was 6'3 per cent, as compared with our medical mortality of 3-4 per Cent-It is not surprising, in view of the mortality rate in his ??n-surgical cases, that Fraser advocates surgical treatment ln toxic goitre whenever circumstances permit, but, obviously, fUch a plan must have a local rather than a universal application In the treatment of this disease. With regard to the figures shown here in connection with ? e Patients' capacity for work, it should be explained that J;Hess for work signifies fitness for a full day's work. A number da replies were received in which patients stated that on some vv^s they felt able for their work whilst on other days rest essential for their comfort. These have been included 0j.

?ngst the unfits in this inquiry, so that the high percentage Patients in both groups who indicate that they have become Pletely rehabilitated is very satisfactory. In the early V?L-xxxix. no. viii. group of cases, 79-5 per cent, of those who were unfit for work now state that they are quite able for their employment, and in the later group 71-8 per cent, are now capable of doing a full day's work.

Treatment.?In this survey of toxic goitre only cases treated by non-surgical measures have been dealt with, but it is incumbent upon us to make an attempt to justify any preference we may have for any one or other therapeutic method. This can only be done with the help of the data, the quantitative data of accumulated experience. It is only too manifest, however, that such facts are not forthcoming in any form which can be made the basis of scientific argument.

There has been practically no adoption in medicine of the alternate case method of treatment of which a series of figures might be available for comparison one with another. ^ suggestion that many cases of illness might be treated with a regimen of rest, diet and laxatives only, for the purpose of comparison with cases treated in this way, plus some form active medication, is liable to be censured as inhumane or a form of experimentation. If only these prejudices could be overcome it would not take co-operative efforts long to attain to conclusions which would be authoritative and of the greatest benefit to humanity.

In group 1 of this series we are fortunate in being able to compare the results of treatment by ordinary hospital regime and sedatives with more specific forms of treatment such as radium and iodine.

If we take capacity for work aS the criterion of the patient's present condition, it will be seen that 10 out of 14 cases, or 71-4 per cent, of patients treate with radium, have become fit for their work and have remain6 in good health. This might well be regarded as a high tribute to radium treatment if we were to ignore the results of the more old-fashioned methods of rest and sedatives. Of 42 patients treated with rest and sedatives only, 34 or 81 per centhave recovered good health and become fit for work. Of t^e 29 patients who received iodine treatment, 23 or 79-7 per centstate that they have become fit for their work. It must be admitted that when the patients belonging to this group v^er^ being treated at hospital, the dosage and the best methods application of radium were not completely understood, al1 ^ these results, therefore, cannot be regarded as altogether typ1^ of the more modern methods of radium treatment. A care Si4 lamination of the records does not suggest that cases treated ^vith radium or iodine were of a more severe type than those treated otherwise.

In the more recent cases belonging to group 2, sufficient time has scarcely elapsed to enable judgment to be passed on the results of the various methods of treatment. It is of lnterest, however, to compare the effects obtained so far from radium and iodine. Out of a total of 51 cases treated with radium in this group, 36, or 706 per cent., have recovered efficiently to enable them to carry out their usual employment, ^hereas 35 out of 45, or 77-8 per cent., of cases treated with l0dine state that they have become fit for their work. Since *he numbers of radium and non-radium cases correspond so cl?sely in this group, the similarity of the results obtained is interest. It may be objected that cases were selected for radium therapy on account of their severity, and that this founts for the comparatively disappointing results obtained y this method of treatment. A careful examination of the case-histories of these patients, however, does not reveal any SUch fallacy, although admittedly it is difficult to gauge accurately the severity of a case from the hospital record. The average age of the patients and the average duration of f^ttiptoms prior to reporting at hospital have been investigated . the radium and non-radium cases respectively, and the Sllnilarity of the results is striking. In cases treated with ^ lurn the average age was 32 years and the average duration . syniptoms 2-3 years. In cases treated with iodine and du -Ut rac^um> the average age was 32-6 years and the average ration 2-3 years. It is worthy of note, however, that the not^?rit^ Patients when undergoing radium treatment were confined to bed nor were their ordinary domestic activities ously restricted, although, of course, all heavy work was In the cases belonging to group 2 of this series we may righty assert that the high percentage of "cures" obtained in both the radium cases and the iodine cases is extremely satisfactory, but we cannot say that an equally good result would not have been obtained with a simple regimen of mental and physical rest without radium or iodine. Herein lies the fallacy in assessing the value of numerous, much-advertised, modern remedies.

Another difficulty which arises in connection with this particular disease is that toxic goitre is admittedly, in many instances, self-arresting, and if given sufficient time a high percentage of cases will become practically symptom-free without any treatment at all.

It will be seen in Tables IV. and VI. that a large number of patients who have now sufficiently recovered their strength to do a full day's work have not received any treatment since one year after leaving hospital-The majority of these were improved in health when seen f?r the last time at hospital, but they were not regarded as fit f?r full employment, yet in the course of time the symptoms have abated, and, in a number of cases, the thyreoid enlargement has diminished or disappeared?in other words, the disease has arrested itself. One is tempted to remark that had these cases been treated by operation in the first place they would now t>e quoted as a striking tribute to the success of surgical inter' vention in toxic goitre.

It is hoped at a future date to publish the results of a [actor, recourse should not be had to surgical interference with slight but ever-present risks, until non-surgical measures have been given a fair trial, except in severe cases of long landing.

It is a pleasure to acknowledge the co-operation of Professors ^arnwell, Ritchie and Murray Lyon, and Dr Comrie, who have lndly allowed us to make use of their case records in addition ?ur own.

We have also to thank Colonels M'Kendrick and f^arvey of the Royal College of Physicians Laboratory for eJPfal advice in connection with this paper.


accounted for in the ten-year period. To those critical of the mode in which statistical data are collected, this may be picked out for possible objection. It may be objected that the absence of a reply from a patient may well be regarded It is of interest to note that in additj011 to the cases dealt with in this paper, 122 patients suffer!1127 from toxic goitre were transferred from the medical to * surgical wards for operation during the ten-year period. Questionnaires were sent to 180 patients in this group al1^ replies were received from 143. Of these, 120 are known ^ be alive and 23 are known to be dead. The actual causeTABLE I.have last attended the 

^etlt. Altogether questionnaires were sent to 315 patients 

^re 

reP^es have been received regarding 261, of whom 236 

females and 25 are males, thus leaving 54 patients un-

the Statistical Research Department, The Royal Infirmary, 

5?7 
as representing some adverse result, such for instance aS 

death. We do not think, however, that such a presumpti?n 
would be entirely justified, although admittedly the problem 

of the " untraceables" is a difficult one. 

The data givel1 

below refer only to the cases in which definite replies have 

been received, but as already noted, the number of case5 

about whom there is no information is stated. 

It must be remembered that the cases analysed here are> 

to some extent, selected cases, in that they were regarded as 

being suitable for non-surgical treatment. Although this d?eS 
not necessarily mean that the symptoms were originally 

a 

mild character, one is entitled to assume that for some reaso ? 

be it age, duration, severity of symptoms, or the patieflt 

circumstances, these cases were considered to be suitable 

medical treatment. 

this number are included cases of toxic nodular goitre (pt s? 
called toxic adenoma) all of whom received surgical treatrne 

after suitable preparation in the medical wards. 

^ 

Mortality.?Group 1?Cases treated during 1921 to l9"^ 

Mortality Rate at the various Ages. (Group I.) 

Ages. 

15/20 
20/25 
25/30 
30/35 
35/40 
40/45 
45/50 
50/55 

Total 

Number of Cases. 

9 
34 

22 

25 

12 

16 

15 

10 

143 

Deaths. 

Mortality per Cent. 



## Table I .
Ishows the number of cases in the various age 

?r?ups, and also the deaths and the mortality rate in each of 

*hese groups. 

Group 2.?Cases treated during the four years 1927 to 1930. 

*35 questionnaires were sent out in this group and information 
as been received regarding 118 cases. Of these, it is known 
^at 114 are alive and 4 are dead. 
The cause of death is known in three cases, namely, diabetic 

Corna, toxic goitre and uraemia, and toxic goitre respectively. 

For comparison with group 1, the following table is shown. 



## TABLE II .
IIMortality Rate at the various Ages. working without undue effort and 29 still remain unfit. In ^ remaining four patients the symptoms were originally of a m" character and did not necessitate stopping their employment These have all remained able for their work. Thyreoid Gland.?In the questionnaires sent out, pati^ were asked to state whether the swelling in the neck ha > ^ their opinion, increased or diminished or whether it rernain^s unchanged in size, and the result of this enquiry is shown this group and the changes in the size of the thyreoid are shown as follows under the various headings. In the remaining two patients there has never been any Vlsible thyreoid enlargement.) Treatment.?An attempt has here been made to assess the Val 1Ue of any particular therapeutic measure in toxic goitre, arid for this purpose the treatment prescribed when the patients ^ere under hospital supervision and the treatment received Sl?Ce ?ne year after discharge from hospital have been correlated )Vlth the information regarding fitness or unfitness for work n tlie following tables:?Ages. 

15/20 

20/25 

25/30 
30/35 

35/40 

40/45 
45/50 
50/55 
55/60 

Total 

(Group 2.) 

Mortality por Cent. 

o 

o 

o 

4-5 
9.1 

o 

7-7 

o 

o 

3-4 

opacity for Work. Group i ?Information regarding 

city for work was received in 106 cases belonging to this 

^?UP-When first seen at hospital, 88 patients were unfit for 

e 

Glr ^vork. Of these, 70 are now carrying out their usual 

p 

Payment and 18 remain incapacitated. Of the remaining 18 

ch 

lGnts in whom the symptoms were originally of a mild 

l(.aracter and who felt able for their work when first examined, 

^ 

ttave maintained this condition and two are now unfit. 

ese points may be shown thus:? 

p. 

Unfit then. 

Fit then. 

now. 

Unfit now. 

Fit now. 
Unfit now. 

7o 
18 
16 

2 

? Ot 

? 

XXXIX. NO. VIII. 
509 

2 N 

John Eason and H. L. Wallace 

The average age at the commencement of treatment of the 

70 patients who were originally unfit for work and are no^v 
working was 31-6 years, and of the 18 who remain unfit* 
36-1 years. 
It is of interest to note that of the 70 patients who were 

originally unfit for work and have'since become fit, nine have 

successfully survived intercurrent infections such as influenza 
and tonsillitis, six others have given birth to healthy children 
and one has had a miscarriage. Of the 18 patients who remain 
unfit for their work, one has had scarlet fever and jaundice since 

leaving hospital, one has had pleurisy, another has had repeated 

attacks of cystitis and three others have since been confined. Nine 
of the 16 patients who were originally fit for work and have 

remained in this condition have since survived childbirth 

without ill effect. 

Group 2.?Information was received in 107 cases of whom 

103 were originally unfit for work. Of these, 74 are no*v 

Unfit then. 
Fit then. 
Fit now. 
Unfit now. 
Fit now. 

Unfit now. 
74 
29 
40 

At commencement of treatment the average age of the 

74 patients in this group, who were originally unfit for w?x 

and have since become fit, was 33-6 years, and of the 29 ^ 1 

remain incapacitated, 35-3 years. 

With regard to this group, it should be stated that f?u1^ 

of the patients who were originally incapacitated and are n 

fit for work have successfully survived intercurrent infecti0^ 

since leaving hospital, and one other has since given birth 

a healthy child without ill effect Of the 29 patients 

w 
^ 

remain unfit for their work, five have suffered from sev 

^ 

infections such as influenza and tonsillitis since they 

vV 

discharged from hospital. 

# 

ts 

follows:? 

_ 

Group 1.?Information was received from 105 patients 

5i? 
Larger. 

Unchanged. 

Smaller. 

Swelling gone. 

3 
34 
41 
25 

(The remaining two patients have never had any visible 

thyreoid enlargement.) 
Group 2.?Information was obtained from 100 patients in 

this group, and the results are shown as follows:? 

Larger. 

Unchanged. 

Smaller. 

Swelling gone. 

3 
39 
52 

4 

. 

(TABLE III.?Group i. 

(a) Original Treatment. 

vadil?ti 
rjays 

. 

? 

L?d'ne 

est and sedatives 

Unfit then. 

Fit now. 
Unfit now. 

IO 

3 
23 
3+ 

Total. 

14 
3 
29 
42 

Fit then. 

Fit now. 
Unfit now. 



## TABLE IV .
IVDeaths.?The original hospital treatment received by the 23 patients in this group who are known to be dead may be stated as follows:?Rest and sedatives 13, iodine 8, radium 2 cases respectively. The treatment received, if any, since leaving hospital is unknown.(b) Treatment since attending Hospital. 

&5? i : 

Nif1 anc^ sedatives 

Unfit then. 

Fit now. 

Unfit now. 

3 

o 

9 
9 
45 

i 

3 

io 

I 

Total. 

5 

I 

12 

19 

46 

Fit then. 

Fit now. 
Unfit now. 

(Treatment unknown in five cases in this group.) 

511 

L 
TABLE V.?Group 2. 

(a) Original Treatment. 

Unfit then. 

Fit now. Unfit now. 

Total. 

Fit then. 

Fit now. Unfit now. 

Radium 
Iodine 

Rest and sedatives 

36 

35 
3 

15 

10 

4 

51 

45 
7 

TABLE VI. 

(b) Treatment received since attending Hospital. 

Radium 
Iodine 
Rest and sedatives 
Nil 

. 

Unfit then. 

Fit now. 
Unfit now. 

18 

17 

25 

4 

12 

7 
6 

Total. 

22 

29 

21 

31 

Fit then. 

Fit now. Unfit now. 




Th e results of this investigation into the effects of the 5T5 various methods of treatment serve to emphasise the importance of having control cases for the purpose of comparison when an attempt is being made to gauge the efficacy of any therapeutic measure.1(ied. Whereas the restrictions placed on the patients 

the 
?thervvise were in most cases more severe, many of 

of ^ ^eing confined to bed for long periods. Herein lies one 

ab 

6 a^vantages of radium treatment in that it can bring 

?ut an amelioration of symptoms in toxic goitre without 

haveUS *ncomm?ding the patient. It is unfortunate that we 
Sedat'n0t 

a su^c*cnt numt?er of cases treated with rest and 

ficr, 

1Ves only f?r comparison with these radium and iodine 

sures. 




follow-up of cases of toxic goitre treated by operation f?r comparison with the figures shown here. Summary and Conclusions.?I. The response to a simp^ questionnaire sent to patients who had received non-surgica treatment for toxic goitre during a period of ten years has been very satisfactory, and replies were received from 261 out of 3l$ patients in this series.2. The mortality rate is extremely low as compared Wi figures obtained in another large centre, suggesting that the type of the disease, as treated in hospital, varies considerab y in different parts of the country. In a number of cases toxic goitre is a disorder vVh* tends to arrest itself in the course of time, and this should borne in mind when assessing the late results of any form of treatment.4-It cannot be said that the evidence obtained from this lflquiry shows conclusively that any particular method of non-SlJrgical treatment in toxic goitre should have prior claim when late results are being considered. Radium treatment, however, has the advantage that it can be employed with great benefit 111 ambulant cases. 5-The good results obtained by medical treatment in this Series of cases suggest that, where time is not an important, 

. 

3. 516 

A 

Toxic Goitre 


^EFERENCES.?1 Fraser, F. R., Brit. Med. Journ1930, ii., 811.raser, F. R.,Brit. Med. Journ., 1931, ii., 739.