# Acute kidney injury and pancreatitis due to scorpion sting: case report and literature review

CorpusID: 49571423
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ecb3c706292fa581bc5ddf48ce2d2f57e0b409e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ecb3c706292fa581bc5ddf48ce2d2f57e0b409e)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Acute kidney injury and pancreatitis due to scorpion sting: case report and literature review


Geraldo Bezerra 
Silva Junior 
Polianna Lemos 
Moura Moreira Albuquerque 
Universidade Federal do Ceará
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Médicas
Fortaleza, CearáBrazil

Centro de Informação e Assistência Toxicológica
Instituto Dr. José Frota
FortalezaCearáBrazil

Karla Do 
Nascimento Magalhaes 
Centro de Informação e Assistência Toxicológica
Instituto Dr. José Frota
FortalezaCearáBrazil

Tamiris De Castro Sales 
Centro de Informação e Assistência Toxicológica
Instituto Dr. José Frota
FortalezaCearáBrazil

José Hícaro 
Hellano Gonçalves 
Lima Paiva 
Faculdade de Medicina
Universidade Estadual do Ceará
Fortaleza, CearáBrazil

Elizabeth De 
Francesco Daher 
Universidade Federal do Ceará
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Médicas
Fortaleza, CearáBrazil

Geraldo Bezerra Da 
Silva Junior 
Universidade de Fortaleza
Curso de Medicina
Programas de Pós-Graduação em Saúde Coletiva e Ciências Médicas
Fortaleza, CearáBrazil

Curso de Medicina, Programas de Pós-Graduação em Saúde Coletiva e Ciências Médicas
Universidade de Fortaleza
Rua 25 de Março, 997, Bloco S, Sala S-01, CEP: 60811-905, FortalezaCEBrazil

Acute kidney injury and pancreatitis due to scorpion sting: case report and literature review
10.1590/S1678-9946201860030Received: 21 March 2018 Accepted: 8 May 2018Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 2018;60:e30 Page 1 of 10 REVIEW Correspondence to: This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License.Scorpionism Acute kidney injury Tityus stigmurus Acute pancreatitis
Despite the high number of accidents due to scorpion stings in Brazil, severe cases in adults are seldomly reported. In the Northeast region of Brazil, Tityus stigmurus is the most prevalent species. A 69 year-old woman who was stung by a scorpion attended the emergency room 5 hours after envenomation. She got worse due to abdominal pain. Clinical findings were concordant with class III scorpion envenomation (major systemic manifestations), complicated by acute kidney injury and acute pancreatitis. Intensive supportive therapy was adopted. In the follow-up, 3 months later, she was completely recovered. This report is being brought to recommend the thorough management of victims of scorpion accidents, enabling early diagnosis of severe complications, which could lead to death if aggressive supportive measures are not early and adequately taken.

## INTRODUCTION

Scorpion envenomation is reported in many parts of the world and is more frequent in tropical and subtropical countries 1,2 . It is an important public health problem in Brazil due to its high frequency and potential to cause severe clinical manifestations, which could even be fatal 3,4 . It is estimated that almost 2.5 million people in the world live in areas at risk for scorpion stings and more than 1.5 million of envenomations occur each year, causing around 2,600 deaths 5 . However, according to World Health Organization (2007), the real number of scorpion's stings in the world are underestimated 6 and literature data are insufficient 5 .

Since the early 2000s, the number of scorpion envenoming cases in Brazil have increased. In the State of Ceara, Northeast of Brazil, from 2007 to 2016, 28,402 accidents due to venomous animals were registered, from which 65.1% were caused by scorpion stings, followed by snakebites (23.4%) 7 .

Scorpion sting is a relevant cause of human envenomation, which is included in the group of neglected tropical diseases in developing countries 8 . Although 1,500 scorpion species have been described, about 30 species are considered dangerous to humans. In Brazil, the majority of scorpion envenomations are caused by four species: Tityus stigmurus, T. bahiensis, T. paraensis and T. serrulatus. Most scorpion sting victims present a benign course, but complications can occur, and severe envenoming is usually due to T. serrulatus [8][9][10] .

The diagnosis of scorpion sting is based on epidemiological features, clinical signs, symptoms, and exclusion of other etiologies. The clinical presentation of envenomation is relatively similar, regardless of the species, and includes neurotoxic syndromes mediated by sympathetic and parasympathetic systems 3,11 . Nevertheless, differences between species may depend on associated factors to each species and to each patient, such as age, part of the body stung, body mass, immune status, sensitivity to venom and time elapsed after sting 12 .

Most scorpion envenomations only cause immediate local pain, however it can be accompanied by swelling, hyperemia, paresthesia and piloerection. The development of systemic syndromes presumes a potential severity that can turn into a life-threatening emergency episode 1,13 , with cardiovascular complications (myocardial infarction, heart failure, shock, arrhythmia, or severe hypertension); pulmonary (including pulmonary edema); gastrointestinal (acute pancreatitis, peptic ulcer, bleeding); metabolic (hyperglycemia, hypocalcemia, hyperkalemia); and neurological complications (hypertensive encephalopathy, stupor, coma, convulsions) 11 .

According to Khattabi et al. 14 , there are three classifications for scorpion stings, which had been proposed by experts from many countries. This classification was based exclusively on signs and symptoms, not taking into account the risk factors, vulnerable groups for severity, animal species or time between the accident and medical assistance. Class I includes only local manifestations (burning sensation, necrosis, paresthesia, pain, petechiae). Class II includes minor manifestations, which are not lifethreatening (abdominal distension, hypertension, thirst, hyperthermia, urinary retention, hypothermia, vomiting, wheezing, hematuria, pancreatitis), although there was not total consensus for all signs and symptoms. Class III represents systemic injuries, severe manifestations, which offer threatening to life, such as cardiogenic, respiratory and neurologic failure.

There are few cases of kidney injury due to scorpion stings reported in the literature. The direct effect of scorpion venom on the kidneys and damage resulting from intravascular hemolysis disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), hemolytic uremic syndrome and hypovolemia have been investigated in clinical and experimental studies 15 . The early detection of the occurrence of acute kidney injury (AKI) is essential in these patients because the consequences can be very severe if not correctly managed.

Acute pancreatitis is another unusual manifestation after scorpion sting and has been described in human victims stung by the genre Tityus and Leiurus 16 . Pancreatitis diagnosis is based on clinical manifestations and laboratory tests such as elevated serum amylase and lipase. Moreover, abdominal pain, nauseas, vomiting are common signs and symptoms reported in acute pancreatitis secondary to scorpion sting 17 .

The aim of this study is to describe a rare case of a scorpion sting complicated by AKI and acute pancreatitis in an elderly patient successfully treated in a reference toxicological assistance center in Brazil, highlighting the main findings of the available studies in medical literature, providing brief guideline on its clinical management.


## CASE REPORT

A 69 year-old woman, with previous systemic arterial hypertension (SAH) and diabetes mellitus (DM), was stung in the right hand by a scorpion, which had been brought by the patient and been identified as a Tityus stigmurus, the most prevalent in Brazilian Northeastern. The animal was about 5 centimeters in length, with yellowish-brown color and a black line on the back. Toxicologists did not report the animal sex, but this species is parthenogenetic and the majority of these scorpions are female. This scorpion feeds mainly on cockroaches, which are abundant in residences from urban or rural areas. The accidents commonly happen inside the house, similarly to this reported case.

The time elapsed until emergency admission was about five hours after the sting and she reported severe abdominal pain, one episode of emesis and sweating. Seven hours after the sting, she presented worsening of symptoms and received vigorous venous hydration and primary medical care.

Upon admission, the patient presented a compromised general condition, lowered consciousness level (Glasgow Coma Scale Score of 11, in a scale from 3-15) and blood pressure was 150 x 110 mmHg. The clinical abdominal exam revealed pain on superficial palpation. Body temperature was normal (36 ºC). Cardiac auscultation was normal.

The arterial blood gas analysis (Table 1), performed in the emergency room, revealed increased lactate levels. The first electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, with left atrial hypertrophy and a possible old anteroseptal infarct. The second electrocardiogram presented sinus rhythm with signs of hypokalemia. An urgency ultrasonography was performed revealing moderate hepatic steatosis and normal-sized kidneys. The results of initial laboratory tests including creatinine, urea, chloride, creatine phosphokinase, coagulogram and sodium were all in the normal range ( Table 1). The values of glucose, liver enzymes (sAST and sALT), lipases, amylases, leukocyte count and D-lactate dehydrogenase (D-LDH) were increased. Additionally, the serum potassium value was decreased (below the normal range).

As soon as possible, intensive care measures were established based on the continuous monitoring of cardiac and respiratory function. Firstly, a rigorous water balance was performed and the patient received scopolamine bromide and tramadol intravenously resulting in efficient analgesia. She received promethazine (50 mg intramuscular) as a pre-antivenom treatment. Scorpion antivenom was administered (six vials intravenously), without anaphylactic symptoms. Prolonged fasting was prescribed for treatment of acute pancreatitis and insulin administration for glycemic control. Furthermore, she received potassium chloride (vials at 10%) in order to stabilize serum levels.

During hospital stay, the patient presented a hypertensive peak that reached 188 x 140 mmHg and she received captopril (25 mg), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg) and amlodipine (10 mg), with adequate blood pressure control. After the antivenom administration, the patient reported improvement of abdominal pain, while amylase and lipase returned to normal levels in a few days.

Despite the abdominal symptoms improvement, the patient developed non-oliguric AKI, according the KDIGO criteria 18 , two days after admission. The nephrologist's opinion was requested and a conservative treatment with  increase intravenous hydration was prescribed, and an improvement of the renal function was promptly observed ( Table 1). The patient progressed with clinical and laboratory improvement. After 11 days, the patient was completely stable and was discharged for an outpatient follow-up. She received a prescription of captopril (25 mg), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg) and subcutaneous insulin (NPH, 10 UI in the morning). Three months later, the patient returned with total recovery of renal and pancreatic functions, asymptomatic, with normal blood pressure (120 x 60 mmHg). The medicines for hypertension and diabetes were maintained.


## DISCUSSION

Scorpion envenomation is still a relevant environmental health issue in tropical and subtropical regions, such as Brazil. Severe cases are notified every year and deaths involving children were caused by Tityus genus [19][20][21] . The reported case highlighted rare complications in the same patient, AKI and acute pancreatitis, both potential fatal conditions, which were overcome with early and adequate intensive treatment.

In urban areas of the Northeast of Brazil, T. stigmurus is the most important health-threatening scorpion species 20 . Most reported cases occur in children younger than 15 years old and they freqquently represent severe envenomation 20 . In Brazil, epidemiological data are incomplete and controversial, so there is scarcity of clinical information about scorpion envenomation in adults, probably due to the reduced severity of cases.

Scorpion venoms are rich sources of small peptide toxins and the most important toxins with medical consequences are α-toxins, which consist of 61-76 polypeptides that bind to a specific site on the mammalian voltage-gated sodium channel. Once the toxins bind to a site, inhibition of the inactivation of that channel begins, resulting in prolonged depolarization and, hence, neuronal excitation 22 . Scorpion toxins have been studied worldwide and, recently, a new family of peptides of Tityus stigmurus called Hypotensins (TSTI0006C) 23 was discovered, showing a molecular mass of 2.7 kDa, absence of cysteines and presence of two C-terminal proline residues, which are bradykininpotentiating peptide signature. This hypotensin identified in T. stigmurus scorpion venom was able to potentiate the action of bradykinin inducing relaxation in mesenteric artery rings, independent of angiotensin converting enzymes, without cytotoxicity 23 .

The patient reported here was an old female presenting compromised general condition and abdominal pain secondary to scorpion sting, consistent with Class III scorpion envenomation (major systemic manifestations) within a period of 5 hours after the sting. She was then transferred to an intensive care unit for monitoring, not only due to her clinical condition, but also due to her comorbidities (diabetes mellitus, systemic arterial hypertension and advanced age). Although it is not common to find severe scorpion envenomations in adults, physicians should consider the risk of clinical complications if the patient has multiple comorbities. Otherwise, there are few studies focusing on elderly people regarding envenomations. Management of elderly people is always a challenge, in terms of associated clinical comorbidities and the greater medical, social and financial resources involved, inasmuch these patients are more prone to hemodynamically instability and are more vulnerable 24 . Interestingly, a study performed in patients over 65 years, victims of snakebite in the United States highlighted the existence of comorbidities and the use of a variety of medications, which may increase their risk of hemotoxicity, although the risk of bleeding and other complications was not increased in this group 25 .

Scorpion envenomations are ubiquitous. However, severe manifestations are rare. The venom has very low levels of enzyme activity compared to that of snakes or hymenoptera venom. However, in the present case, the patient presented local clinical manifestations as pain and edema, and systemic manifestations, such as somnolence, hypertension, abdominal pain and previous episodes of emesis. In human envenomations caused by the Tityus genus, neurological manifestations such as convulsion and lowering of the consciousness level have been described 20,21,26 . Other rare clinical conditions have been described due to scorpions, as ischemic stroke 27 , acute kidney injury 28 , myocardial dysfunction 29 and death.

Although scorpion venom causes an inflammatory reaction largely mediated by cytokines in the lungs, kidneys, heart and intestine of experimental rats 30 , acute pancreatitis is an unusual clinical manifestation caused by scorpion envenomation 29,31 . Bartholomew et al. 32 conducted an experimental study in dogs in order to clarify the etiology of acute scorpion pancreatitis in dogs that received venom of Tytius trinitatis. In this experiment, scorpion venom stimulated pancreatic exocrine secretion, associated with a serial rise in serum amylase. Otherwise, the autopsy findings of dogs demonstrated edema of duodenal papilla and duodenitis. In another study, effects were observed in the organs during various stages of scorpion envenomation due to T. trinitatis, such as salivation, lacrimation and cardiac arrhythmias. The authors suggested that the secretory action of the scorpion could also be caused by the release of acetylcholine from nerve endings to the pancreas 33 . Chen et al. 34 conducted a study with Australian possums to characterize the effects of Tityus serrulatus venom on the biliary gall bladder, Oddi's sphincter, duodenal motility and the pancreatic exocrine secretion. They demonstrated that intravenous or close intra-arterial infusion of scorpion venom resulted in transient profound responses in biliary and duodenal motility. These effects occurred early following infusion and could explain the upper gastrointestinal symptoms which accompany scorpion envenomation 34 .

There are very few cases reported about pancreatic involvement due to scorpion envenomation 13,17,35-38 , as summarized in Table 2. According to this review, the prevalence of acute pancreatitis due to scorpion in children is noteworthy, and in children abdominal pain and high levels of amylases can be absent upon admission. In the study of Bartholomew et al. 35 , which was described over a two-month period, 30 patients were admitted to hospital following scorpion stings of the Tityus genus in Trinidad. In this study, 24 cases of acute pancreatitis occurred right after the scorpion sting. In about 80% of cases hyperamylasemia was present 35 . The clinical presentation of our patient led the physician to investigate the cause of abdominal pain. Additionally, the increasing levels of amylases and lipases, allowed the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, which was fundamental for the improvement of the patient's management after fasting. It it possible that some cases of mild acute pancreatitis due to scorpionism were not identified because patients did not refer abdominal symptoms.

The mainstay of pancreatitis pathogenesis due to scorpion sting is the cholinergic discharge induced by its toxins 13,35-37 . Bartholomew et al. 35 discussed about the multiple mechanisms of acute pancreatitis. The authors reported obstruction of the common bile duct, a powerful effect on the autonomic nervous system, similarly to the salivation (purely neurogenic action), an appreciable amount of serotonin, which could lead to the increment of capillary permeability and free trypsin releasing kallikrein, which is a precursor of the hypotensive bradykinin. The toxin-mediated cholinergic discharge that takes place in the pancreas might promote premature activation of the enzymes produced within the acinar cell. These enzyme precursors, with inflammatory mediators, are released from the damaged pancreatic tissue and are capable of altering the function of the other organs, such as the lungs 37,38 . Acute pancreatitis due to scorpion is usually transient, selflimited and subsides until 48 h 17,36 , but it could progress to hemorrhagic pancreatitis and lead to death 13 . Several laboratory abnormalities have been described in scorpion envenomation, including elevation of renal and pancreatic biomarkers, electrolytic disorders, hyperglycemia, coagulation disturbances 17,20,21 . In the present case, we have observed alterations in hematologic and coagulation parameters, such as increased glucose, AST and ALT levels. This may be due to the increased sympathetic activation and venom's toxic effects.

In this case, AKI was associated to scorpionism. There are few studies about AKI due to T. stigmurus and several pathophysiology mechanisms have been proposed to AKI in other scorpion accidents, including direct effect of venom on the kidney and renal damage due to intravascular hemolysis, disseminated intravascular coagulation and hypovolemia 15 . The highest concentration of scorpion venom is in the kidneys, mainly because of the fast redistribution of the venom from the blood to the tissues coupled with the slow removal of venom from the kidney 39 . Similarly, to the effects of T. serrulatus venom in human kidneys, in perfused rat kidneys, the renal perfusion pressure and the renal vascular resistance have increased, while the glomerular filtration rate has decreased, probably due to a direct vasoconstrictor action leading to a decreased renal flow 39 . Scorpion venom causes an inflammatory reaction in the kidneys 23 . The imbalance between inflammatory mediators and hypotensins 23 is decisive to damage the kidneys. Otherwise, Jalali et al. 40 reported children under 10 years old admitted to an intensive care unit following a sting from Hemiscorpius lepturus in Iran and revealed isolated hemoglobinuria with or without renal failure. In experimental studies about H. lepturus venom on rats, the main renal histopathological findings were morphological changes in the proximal tubular cell and glomerular network, besides focal necrosis and hemorrhage, with and without edema in lipid-containing organs such as liver, kidney and spleen 40 . Unfortunately, in the case reported here, urine tests were not requested.

The pathogenesis of AKI following a scorpion sting involves diverse mechanisms. Firstly, the occurrence of intravascular hemolysis, which could not appear in urine if it is mild and could vary according to the scorpion species 41,42 . In some species, the rhabdomyolysis, following extensive tissue necrosis, may cause pigment nephropathy 43 . Haemoglobinuria could lead to AKI through multiple factors, such as mechanical obstruction by red blood cells casts, cytotoxic effects of oxidative stress induced by hemoglobin, heme, or iron released from red blood cells 41,44 and the worsening of renal vasoconstriction. Otherwise, vasodilation may lead to renal hypovolemia 23 . Finally, the antigen-antibody complexes may cause immune-complex glomerulonephritis, which require further immunofluorescent studies 41 . The direct toxic effect of venom could cause interstitial nephritis, release of cytokines and the vasodilatation may lead to ischemic tubular necrosis 43 . However, the renal failure is most likely not a direct nephrotoxic effect 45 , which remains to be investigated. Accordingly, some pathologic data from kidney biopsies revealed the association of these factors, such as direct nephrotoxicity of venom, haemoglobinuria, secondary to microvascular hemolysis and hypovolemia 28,43 .

Most reports about AKI due to scorpion stings are from Asia (Iran, Tunisia, Pakistan, Turkey and Israel) 15,40,42,[45][46][47][48][49] , and are more common in pediatric patients, as summarized in Table 3. Most patients developed AKI in the setting of hypovolemia and cardiac failure, associated with acute tubular necrosis, pigmenturia, hemolytic uremic syndrome or interstitial nephritis, besides hemolysis 15 . In all studies it was highlighted that hemoglobinuria was useful to differentiate some species of scorpion in Iran 42 . Therefore, some authors suggested the use of urine analysis as a gold standard in the diagnosis of AKI following scorpion stings 42 .

Interestingly, the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) measured on admission, presented high levels, which represents an inflammatory process in the kidney and signalizes the risk of chronic injuries, considering that it has direct effects on monocytes and influences the migration, proliferation and differentiation of leukocytes 2 . In human renal tubular epithelial cells, MCP-1 stimulates interleukin-6 (IL-6) secretion and intercellular expression of adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) synthesis. Furthermore, in podocytes, binding to the CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) it could induce migration of podocytes and a significant reduction of both microRNA and protein expressions of nephrin 50,51 . This is an important scenario to understand the role of macrophages in renal abnormalities due to scorpion sting. It is imperative to emphasize the good performance of MCP-1 in our patient to detect AKI before abnormalities in creatinine, urinary neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin (uNGAL) and kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1) collected about 5 hours after scorpion sting, even in a diabetic patient, who probably had kidney dysfunction because of her disease. The abdominal pain and laboratory findings were fundamental for the early diagnosis of acute pancreatitis and AKI in the patient, leading the physician to focus on the hemodynamic support in this case. Inasmuch there were drug treatment (with analgesics and antivenom), a multidisciplinary team composed of a nephrologist, a general clinician, a toxicologist chemist and nurses was essential to the outcome of our patient.

There are some limitations in this study including the lack of urinalysis and multiple analysis of kidney biomarkers to better clarify the pathophysiology of AKI in envenomations caused by T. stigmurus in humans. However, important findings that highlight scorpionism complications were described, and our patient's management may serve as guide in similar cases.


## CONCLUSION

Although envenomation cases due to Tityus stigmurus in Northeast Brazil and other tropical countries are often observed, severe manifestations are rare. Scorpion-related kidney injury and acute pancreatitis can occur in adults. The pathophysiology of AKI due to scorpionism is caused by multiple factors and the presence of blood in urine is one of the most common findings in the cases reported in the literature. The use of novel urinary biomarkers could be useful for the early diagnose of AKI in these accidents. Acute pancreatitis due to scorpionism have been reported mainly in children and could occur without increments of amylase and lipase. The diagnosis of systemic manifestation of envenomations due to scorpions, such as kidney and pancreatic injuries, is fundamental for the management of these patients.


## CONFLICT OF INTERESTS

All the authors declared no competing interests.


Aspartate aminotransferase; ALT: Alanine aminotransferase; D-LDH: D-lactate dehydrogenase; CK: Creatine phosphokinase; PT: Prothrombin time; aPTT: partial time of thromboplastin; uNGAL: Urinary Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin; KIM-1: Kidney Injury Molecule-1; MCP-1: Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1. *Ranges in Institutional Control Group (normalised to urinary creatinine) -MCP-1: 0-124.5pg/mgCr; uNGAL: 0.57-21.09ng/mgCr; KIM-1: 399.88-1162.09ng/mgCr. ** Not available. ***Arterial Gasometry

## Table 1 -
1Laboratory findings on admission and during the follow-up of the patient after the scorpion stingVariable 
Admission 
24 hours later 
Discharge 
3 months later 
Normal range 

Glucose (mg/dl) 
281 
235 
** 
** 
74 -106 

Potassium (mmol/l) 
3.24 
3.92 
3.06 
4.13 
3.5 -5.3 

Sodium (mmol/l) 
140 
141 
133 
142 
135 -148 

Chloride (mmol/l) 
100 
106 
93 
96 
96 -109 

Urea (mg/dl) 
27 
45 
50 
42 
13 -43 

Creatinine (mg/dl) 
0.8 
1.4 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 -1.1 

AST (U/L) 
85 
240 
** 
20 
< 32 

ALT (U/L) 
93 
242 
** 
19 
< 31 

PT (s) 
12.1 
14.2 
11.8 
11.4 
10 -14 

aPTT (s) 
22.2 
26.5 
24.8 
23.9 
22 -28 

Lipase (U/L) 
5442 
2121 
** 
70 
13 -60 

Amylase (U/L) 
1914 
1138 
135 
92 
< 84 

D-LDH (U/L) 
474 
** 
** 
319 
230 -460 

CK (U/L) 
91 
** 
** 
102 
< 170 

Hemoglobin (g/dl) 
14.2 
15.6 
9.9 
13.6 
11.3 -15.2 

Leukocytes (/mm³) 
11470 
7730 
10110 
5170 
3600 -10000 

Platelets (/mm³) 
164000 
162000 
218000 
202000 
150-450 (10 3 ) 

Creatinine (mg/dl) 
0.8 
2.4 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 -1.1 

Urea (mg/dl) 
27 
115 
50 
42 
13 -43 

MCP-1 (pg/mgCr) 
1576.97 
** 
** 
** 
* 

uNGAL (ng/mgCr) 
7.97 
** 
** 
** 
* 

KIM-1 (ng/mgCr) 
1180 
** 
** 
** 
* 

PH*** 
7.41 
** 
** 
** 
7.35 



## Table 2 -
2Case reports of pancreatic involvement due to scorpion stingReferences 
Number of 
cases 
Age a 
Scorpion Specie 
Initial 
presentation e 
Antivenom 
Complications f 
Outcome 
Pancreatic 
findings e 

Bartholomew 
et al., 1970 35 , 
Trinidad 

30 
(20 males) 
9 -57 c 
Tityus trinitatis 

Sialorrhea (16), 
abdominal pain 
(16), vomit (15), 
reddening and 
oedema in stung 
site 

No 
No 

Discharge 
without 
symptoms 

High amylase 
level (24), high 
transaminases 
levels (5) 

Sofer et al., 
1991 17 , Israel 

15 
(9 males) 
1 -14 

Leiurus 
quinquestriatus 
and Buthotus 
judaicus 

Abdominal pain 
(3), vomit (7), 
hematemesis (1), 
respiratory failure 
(1), hypertension 
(6), ventricular 
arrhythmias (1) 

No 

Respiratory failure 
(assisted ventilation) 
and Cardiac 
abnormalities 

1 death 
(ventricular 
arrhythmia) 

High level 
of serum 
immunoreactive 
cationic 
trypsin (13), 
hyperglycaemia 

Otero et 
al., 2004 36 , 
Colombia 

1 
(female) 
3 
Tityus asthenes Vomit, tachypnoea 
b 
b 

Discharge 
without 
symptoms 

Acute 
oedematous 
pancreatitis 

Sousa et al., 
2007 37 , Vene-
zuela 

2 
(2 males) 
8; 13 
Tityus 
neoespartanas 

Local pain in right 
foot (2), vomit 
(2), colic-like 
abdominal pain 
(2), sialorrhea (2), 
diaphoresis (2) 

03 vials in the 
13 year-old-
patient 

Cardiac abnormalities 
and pancreatic 
microcalcifications 
(abdominal 
ultrasound, 
1 year later) 

Discharge 
without 
symptoms 

High levels of 
amylase and 
lipase, edematous 
pancreatic pattern 
(abdominal 
ultrasound) 

Mouaffak et al., 
2012 38 , Africa 
1 
11 
Androctonus 
mauretanicus 

Abdominal pain, 
tachycardia, 
tachypnoea, 
agitation, fever 

b 
Priapism 

Discharge 
without 
symptoms 

Normal abdominal 
ultrasound 

Kumar et al., 
2012 13 , India 

1 
(male) 
8 
b 

Autonomic 
dysfunctions, 
pulmonary 
oedema, stung site 
-right foot without 
abnormalities 

b 

Haemorrhagic 
pancreatitis, 
myocarditis and 
pulmonary oedema 

Death 

Extensive paren-
chymal pancre-
atic necrosis 
accompanied by 
interstitial haemor-
rhagic pancreatitis 
(post-mortem 
diagnosis) 

a Years old; b Not reported; c Minimum -maximum; d Increase in serum creatinine or decrease in its clearance by more than 50% of standard values was 
considered as renal failure; e-number of patients with described characteristic were represented between parenthesis; f-haemorrhagic pancreatitis, pseudocyst 
formations. 


## Table 3 -
3Case reports of kidney involvement due to scorpion sting Years old; b Not reported; c Minimum -maximum; d Increase in serum creatinine or decrease in its clearance by more than 50% of standard values was considered as renal failure; e-number of patients with described characteristic were represented between parenthesis. * Some scorpion species common in Pakistan: Hemiscorpius lepturus, Mesobuthus tumulus, Androctonus crassicauda and M. eupeus. ** Some scorpion species common in Iran (Khuzistan scorpions): genera Buthus, Compsobuthus, and Hemiscorpius, of which Buthus sauloci is the commonest.References 
Number of 
cases 
Age a 
Scorpion 
Specie 

Initial 
presentation e 
Antivenom 
Pancreatic 
findings 
Dialysis e 
Outcome 
Kidney findings e 

Malhotra et al., 
1978 41 , Iran 

15 
(9 males) 
2.5 -60 c 
b 

Local ulceration 
in stung site (3), 
hemoglobinuria, 
oliguria, edema, 
hemolytic 
anemia and 
hemolytic 
jaundice 

No 
b 
Yes (5) 
b 

Hemoglobinuria, 
mesangial 
proliferation, 
variable degreed 
of tubular changes 
and mild interstitial 
infiltration (4) 

Chadha et al., 
1979 45 , Iran 

1 
(female) 
28 
b 

Bloody urine, 
breathless, 
severe hemolytic 
anemia, slight 
jaundice, puffy 
face, black 
necrotic area at 
the stung site, 
hypotension 

Yes (dose did 
not report) 
Yes 

Discharge (skin 
grafting was 
performed later) 

Hemoglobinuria, 
albuminuria, 
anuria (Not 
biopsied) 

Naqvi et al., 
1998 47 , Paki-
stan 

1 
(male) 
60 
b 

Severe local 
pain, swelling 
(foot), hematuria, 
torpor, cervical 
rigidity 

No 
Normal 
amylase 
Yes 

Death 
(Disseminated 
intravascular 
coagulation and 
shock) 

Hematuria, 
albuminuria, acute 
tubular necrosis in 
renal tissue 

Derakhshan 
et al., 2004 48 , 
Iran 

6 
<16 
b 
Haemolysis 
b 
b 
b 
b 
Acute tubular 
necrosis 

Valavi et al., 
2008 49 , India 

1 
(female) 
7 
Hemiscorpius 
lepturus 

Bloody urine, 
vomiting, 
agitation, 
restlessness, 
erythematic 
area with local 
oedema at the 
stung site 

Yes 
b 
Yes 
Discharge in 
dialysis program 

Hemoglobinuria, 
microscopic 
haematuria, 
proteinuria and 
erythrocyte casts, 
clinical diagnosis 
of haemolytic 
uremic syndrome 
(Not biopsied) 

Jalali et al., 
2010 40 , Iran 
102 
<10 
Hemiscorpius 
lepturus 
b 
b 
b 
b 

3 deaths 
(associated to 
AKI d ) 

Hemoglobinuria 
isolated (28) or 
with renal failure 
d (73) 

Naqvi, 2015 43 , 
Pakistan 

18 
(7 males) 
10.74 -47.7 c 
b 

Main stung site -
foot, severe local 
pain, tingling, 
numbness, 
burning 
sensation, 
oliguria-anuria 
(16), haematuria/ 
hematemesis 
(10) 

b 
b 
Yes (18) 

16 discharge (13 
with complete and 
3 with partial renal 
recovery) and 
2deaths (cardiac 
arrhythmia and 
cardiomyopathy) 

Haematuria (14), 
proteinuria (15), 
acute tubular 
necrosis and 
pigment casts 
without abnormal 
glomeruli (3) 

Ranaweera 
et al., 2015 28 , 
Sri-Lanka 

1 
53 
b 

Vomiting, 
abdominal pain, 
haemoglobinuria 
progressing to 
anuria 

No 
b 
Yes 

Discharge in 
dialysis program 
(death 4 months 
later) 

Haemorrhagic 
glomerular 
infarction with AKI 

Vazirianzadeh 
et al., 2017 42 , 
Iran 

103 
≤14 

Hemiscorpius 
lepturus and 
Androctonus 
crassicauda 

b 
b 
b 
b 
4 deaths 
Hemoglobinuria in 
different rates 

a 
Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 2018;60:e30 Acute kidney injury and pancreatitis due to scorpion sting: case report and literature review
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe are very grateful to the team of Physicians, Nurses, Pharmacists and Technicians from the Center for Information and Toxicological Assistance of the Instituto Dr. Jose Frota Hospital, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil, for the exceptional assistance provided for this patient and for all the others who seek for care in this institution and for the technical support for research. EFD and GBSJ received grants from CNPq (PQ-2). We also thank the Brazilian Post-Graduation Coordination (CAPES), the National Research Council (CNPq) and the Edson Queiroz Foundation/ University of Fortaleza for the financial support.
Epidemiology of scorpion envenomation in the State of Ceará, Northeastern Brazil. S S Furtado, J F Belmino, A G Diniz, R S Leite, Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 5815Furtado SS, Belmino JF, Diniz AG, Leite RS. Epidemiology of scorpion envenomation in the State of Ceará, Northeastern Brazil. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2016;58:15.

Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and the kidney. H Haller, A Bertram, F Nadrowitz, J Menne, Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 25Haller H, Bertram A, Nadrowitz F, Menne J. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and the kidney. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2016;25:42-9.

Scorpion envenomation. G K Isbister, H S Bawaskar, N Engl J Med. 371Isbister GK, Bawaskar HS. Scorpion envenomation. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:457-63.

Bites and stings from venomous animals: a neglected Brazilian tropical disease. P Cupo, Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 48Cupo P. Bites and stings from venomous animals: a neglected Brazilian tropical disease. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2015;48:639-41.

Epidemiological investigation on envenomation: from theory to practice. J P Chippaux, J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 18Chippaux JP. Epidemiological investigation on envenomation: from theory to practice. J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 2012;18:446-50.

Scorpion envenoming caused by Tityus cf. silvestris evolving with severe muscle spasms in the Brazilian Amazon. W M Monteiro, S S De Oliveira, G Pivoto, E C Alves, J A Sachett, C N Alexandre, Toxicon. 119Monteiro WM, de Oliveira SS, Pivoto G, Alves EC, Sachett JA, Alexandre CN, et al. Scorpion envenoming caused by Tityus cf. silvestris evolving with severe muscle spasms in the Brazilian Amazon. Toxicon. 2016;119:266-9.

Boletim epidemiológico: acidentes por animais peçonhentos. Fortaleza: Secretaria da Saúde. Ceará, Governo Do Estado, Secretaria Da Saúde, Ceará. Governo do Estado. Secretaria da Saúde. Boletim epidemiológico: acidentes por animais peçonhentos. Fortaleza: Secretaria da Saúde; 2016. [cited 2018 May 9].

Fundação Nacional de Saúde. Manual de diagnóstico e tratamento de acidentes por animais peçonhentos. 2ª ed. Brasília: Ministério da Saúde. Brasil, Ministério Da Saúde, Brasil. Ministério da Saúde. Fundação Nacional de Saúde. Manual de diagnóstico e tratamento de acidentes por animais peçonhentos. 2ª ed. Brasília: Ministério da Saúde; 2001.

Hiperglicemia na intoxicação escorpiônica experimental em cão. L Freire-Maia, C Ferreira, C G Silva, Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 57Freire-Maia L, Ferreira C, Silva CG. Hiperglicemia na intoxicação escorpiônica experimental em cão. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 1959;57:105-14.

Scorpionism in Brazil in the years 2000 to 2012. G C Reckziegel, V L Pinto, J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 20Reckziegel GC, Pinto VL. Scorpionism in Brazil in the years 2000 to 2012. J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 2014; 20:2-8.

Clinical and epidemiological aspects of scorpionism in the world: a systematic review. M S Santos, C G Silva, B S Neto, Grangeiro Júnior, C R Lopes, V H , Teixeira Júnior, A G , Wilderness Environ Med. 27Santos MS, Silva CG, Neto BS, Grangeiro Júnior CR, Lopes VH, Teixeira Júnior AG, et al. Clinical and epidemiological aspects of scorpionism in the world: a systematic review. Wilderness Environ Med. 2016;27:504-18.

Epidemiological and clinical aspects of scorpionism by Tityus trivittatus in Argentina. A R De Roodt, S I García, O D Salomón, L Segre, J A Dolab, R F Funes, Toxicon. 41de Roodt AR, García SI, Salomón OD, Segre L, Dolab JA, Funes RF, et al. Epidemiological and clinical aspects of scorpionism by Tityus trivittatus in Argentina. Toxicon. 2003;41:971-7.

Autopsy diagnosis of a death due to scorpion stinging -a case report. L Kumar, S K Naik, S S Agarwal, B K Bastia, J Forensic Leg Med. 19Kumar L, Naik SK, Agarwal SS, Bastia BK. Autopsy diagnosis of a death due to scorpion stinging -a case report. J Forensic Leg Med. 2012;19:494-6.

Classification of clinical consequences of scorpion stings: consensus development. A Khattabi, R Soulaymani-Bencheikh, S Achour, L R Salmi, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 105Khattabi A, Soulaymani-Bencheikh R, Achour S, Salmi LR. Classification of clinical consequences of scorpion stings: consensus development. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2011;105:364-9.

Scorpion sting nephropathy. S Viswanathan, C Prabhu, NDT Plus. 4Viswanathan S, Prabhu C. Scorpion sting nephropathy. NDT Plus. 2011;4:376-82.

. Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 6030Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 2018;60:e30

Acute kidney injury and pancreatitis due to scorpion sting: case report and literature review Page. 910Acute kidney injury and pancreatitis due to scorpion sting: case report and literature review Page 9 of 10

Scorpion-related cardiomyopathy and acute pulmonary edema in a child who is stung by Leiurus abdullahbayrami. M Dokur, M Dogan, E A Yagmur, Turk J Emerg Med. 17Dokur M, Dogan M, Yagmur EA. Scorpion-related cardiomyopathy and acute pulmonary edema in a child who is stung by Leiurus abdullahbayrami. Turk J Emerg Med. 2017;17:104-8.

Acute pancreatitis in children following envenomation by the yellow scorpion Leiurus quinquestriatus. S Sofer, H Shalev, Z Weizman, E Shahak, M Gueron, Toxicon. 29Sofer S, Shalev H, Weizman Z, Shahak E, Gueron M. Acute pancreatitis in children following envenomation by the yellow scorpion Leiurus quinquestriatus. Toxicon. 1991;29:125-8.

Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 2Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 2012;2

Severe scorpion envenomation in Brazil. Clinical, laboratory and anatomopathological aspects. P Cupo, M Jurca, M M Azevedo-Marques, J S Oliveira, S E Hering, Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 36Cupo P, Jurca M, Azevedo-Marques MM, Oliveira JS, Hering SE. Severe scorpion envenomation in Brazil. Clinical, laboratory and anatomopathological aspects. Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 1994;36:67-76.

Pediatric epidemiological aspects of scorpionism and report on fatal cases from Tityus stigmurus stings (Scorpiones: Buthidae) in State of Pernambuco. C M Albuquerque, Santana Neto, P L Amorim, M L Pires, S C , Brazil. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 46Albuquerque CM, Santana Neto PL, Amorim ML, Pires SC. Pediatric epidemiological aspects of scorpionism and report on fatal cases from Tityus stigmurus stings (Scorpiones: Buthidae) in State of Pernambuco, Brazil. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2013;46:484-9.

Clinical consequences of Tityus bahiensis and Tityus serrulatus scorpion stings in the region of Campinas, southeastern Brazil. F Bucaretchi, L C Fernandes, C B Fernandes, M M Branco, C C Prado, R J Vieira, Toxicon. 89Bucaretchi F, Fernandes LC, Fernandes CB, Branco MM, Prado CC, Vieira RJ, et al. Clinical consequences of Tityus bahiensis and Tityus serrulatus scorpion stings in the region of Campinas, southeastern Brazil. Toxicon. 2014;89:17-25.

Scorpion venom components that affect ionchannels function. V Quintero-Hernández, J M Jiménez-Vargas, G B Gurrola, H H Valdivia, L D Possani, Toxicon. 76Quintero-Hernández V, Jiménez-Vargas JM, Gurrola GB, Valdivia HH, Possani LD. Scorpion venom components that affect ion- channels function. Toxicon. 2013;76:328-42.

Homology modeling, vasorelaxant and bradykinin-potentiating activities of a novel hypotensin found in the scorpion venom from Tityus stigmurus. R J Machado, L G Junior, N K Monteiro, A A Silva-Junior, F C Portaro, E G Barbosa, Toxicon. 101Machado RJ, Junior LG, Monteiro NK, Silva-Junior AA, Portaro FC, Barbosa EG, et al. Homology modeling, vasorelaxant and bradykinin-potentiating activities of a novel hypotensin found in the scorpion venom from Tityus stigmurus. Toxicon. 2015;101:11-8.

Severe sepsis and septic shock in the elderly:an overview. P Nasa, D Juneja, O Singh, World J Crit Care Med. 1Nasa P, Juneja D, Singh O. Severe sepsis and septic shock in the elderly:an overview. World J Crit Care Med. 2012;1:23-30.

Epidemiology and clinical outcomes of snakebite in the elderly: a ToxIC database study. M B Spyres, A M Ruha, K Kleinschmidt, R Vohra, E Smith, A Padilla-Jones, Clin Toxicol (Phila). 56Spyres MB, Ruha AM, Kleinschmidt K, Vohra R, Smith E, Padilla- Jones A. Epidemiology and clinical outcomes of snakebite in the elderly: a ToxIC database study. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2018;56:108-12.

Envenenamento por Tityus stigmurus (Scorpiones; Buthidae) no Estado da Bahia. R M Lira-Da-Silva, A M Amorim, T K Brazil, Brasil. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 33Lira-da-Silva RM, Amorim AM, Brazil TK. Envenenamento por Tityus stigmurus (Scorpiones; Buthidae) no Estado da Bahia, Brasil. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2000;33:239-45.

Envenimation scorpionique compliqué d'un accident vasculaire cérébral ischemique. Y Bibiche, A Berdai, S Labib, M Harandou, Pan Afr Med J. 20315Bibiche Y, Berdai A, Labib S, Harandou M. Envenimation scorpionique compliqué d'un accident vasculaire cérébral ischemique. Pan Afr Med J. 2015;20:315.

Acute renal insufficiency after scorpion sting. G G Ranaweera, V Bavanthan, A L Nazar, M D Lokuhetty, Ceylon Med J. 60Ranaweera GG, Bavanthan V, Nazar AL, Lokuhetty MD. Acute renal insufficiency after scorpion sting. Ceylon Med J. 2015;60:31-2.

Myocardial dysfunction in children with scorpion sting envenomation. O P Mishra, R Prasad, Indian Pediatr. 52Mishra OP, Prasad R. Myocardial dysfunction in children with scorpion sting envenomation. Indian Pediatr. 2015;52:291-2.

Scorpion venom and the inflammatory response. V L Petricevich, Mediators Inflamm. 903295Petricevich VL. Scorpion venom and the inflammatory response. Mediators Inflamm. 2010;2010:903295.

Epidemiology of envenomations by terrestrial venomous animals in Brazil based on case reporting: from obvious facts to contingencies. J P Chippaux, J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 2113Chippaux JP. Epidemiology of envenomations by terrestrial venomous animals in Brazil based on case reporting: from obvious facts to contingencies. J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 2015;21:13.

Experimental studies on the aetiology of acute scorpion pancreatitis. C Bartholomew, K F Mcgeeney, J J Murphy, O Fitzgerald, H Sankaran, Br J Surg. 63Bartholomew C, McGeeney KF, Murphy JJ, Fitzgerald O, Sankaran H. Experimental studies on the aetiology of acute scorpion pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 1976;63:807-10.

Exocrine pancreatic response to the venom of the scorpion, Tityus trinitatis. C Bartholomew, J J Murphy, K F Mcgeeney, O Fitzgerald, Gut. 18Bartholomew C, Murphy JJ, McGeeney KF, Fitzgerald O. Exocrine pancreatic response to the venom of the scorpion, Tityus trinitatis. Gut. 1977;18:623-5.

Scorpion venom stimulates biliary/duodenal motility and pancreatic exocrine secretion. J W Chen, C X Shi, M J Teng, A C Schloithe, J Toouli, G T Saccone, Neurogastroenterol Motil. 16Chen JW, Shi CX, Teng MJ, Schloithe AC, Toouli J, Saccone GT. Scorpion venom stimulates biliary/duodenal motility and pancreatic exocrine secretion. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2004;16:447-54.

Acute scorpion pancreatitis in Trinidad. C Bartholomew, Br Med J. 1Bartholomew C. Acute scorpion pancreatitis in Trinidad. Br Med J. 1970;1:666-8.

Scorpion envenoming in two regions of Colombia: clinical, epidemiological and therapeutic aspects. R Otero, E Navío, F A Céspedes, M J Nuñez, L Lozano, E R Moscoso, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 98Otero R, Navío E, Céspedes FA, Nuñez MJ, Lozano L, Moscoso ER, et al. Scorpion envenoming in two regions of Colombia: clinical, epidemiological and therapeutic aspects. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2004;98:742-50.

Scorpionism due to Tityus neoespartanus (Scorpiones, Buthidae) in Margarita Island, northeastern Venezuela. L Sousa, J Boadas, D Kiriakos, A Borges, J Boadas, J Marcano, Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 40Sousa L, Boadas J, Kiriakos D, Borges A, Boadas J, Marcano J, et al. Scorpionism due to Tityus neoespartanus (Scorpiones, Buthidae) in Margarita Island, northeastern Venezuela. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2007;40:681-5.

Pancréatite aiguë : manifestation inhabituelle de l'envenimation scorpionique. Y Mouaffaka, F Bennaoui, M Boutbaoucht, A R El Abid, M Sbihi, S Younous, Arch Pediatr. 19Mouaffaka Y, Bennaoui F, Boutbaoucht M, El Abid AR, Sbihi M, Younous S. Pancréatite aiguë : manifestation inhabituelle de l'envenimation scorpionique. Arch Pediatr. 2012;19:1260-1.

Renal effects and vascular reactivity induced by Tityus serrulatus venom. R Sousa Alves, N R Nascimento, P S Barbosa, M R Kerntopf, L M Lessa, C M Sousa, Toxicon. 46Sousa Alves R, Nascimento NR, Barbosa PS, Kerntopf MR, Lessa LM, Sousa CM, et al. Renal effects and vascular reactivity induced by Tityus serrulatus venom. Toxicon. 2005;46:271-6.

A review of epidemiological, clinical and in vitro physiological studies of envenomation by the scorpion Hemiscorpius lepturus (Hemiscorpiidae) in Iran. A Jalali, M H Pipelzadeh, R Sayedian, E G Rowan, Toxicon. 55Jalali A, Pipelzadeh MH, Sayedian R, Rowan EG. A review of epidemiological, clinical and in vitro physiological studies of envenomation by the scorpion Hemiscorpius lepturus (Hemiscorpiidae) in Iran. Toxicon. 2010;55:173-9.

Acute renal failure following scorpion sting. K K Malhotra, C M Mirdehghan, H D Tandon, Am J Trop Med Hyg. 27Malhotra KK, Mirdehghan CM, Tandon HD. Acute renal failure following scorpion sting. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1978;27:623-6.

Evaluating some medical lab parameters among hospitalized children In Khuzestan following scorpion sting, SW Iran. B Vazirianzadeh, S Maraghi, M Samie, M Vazirianzadeh, M R Montazeri, A M Mofrad, Int J Sci Study. 5Vazirianzadeh B, Maraghi S, Samie M, Vazirianzadeh M, Montazeri MR, Mofrad AM. Evaluating some medical lab parameters among hospitalized children In Khuzestan following scorpion sting, SW Iran. Int J Sci Study. 2017;5:91-6.

Scorpion sting and acute kidney injury: case series from Pakistan. R Naqvi, Br J Med Med Res. 9Naqvi R. Scorpion sting and acute kidney injury: case series from Pakistan. Br J Med Med Res. 2015;9:19611.

AKI associated with macroscopic glomerular hematuria: clinical and pathophysiologic consequences. J A Moreno, C Martín-Cleary, E Gutiérrez, O Toldos, L M Blanco-Colio, M Praga, Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 7Moreno JA, Martín-Cleary C, Gutiérrez E, Toldos O, Blanco- Colio LM, Praga M, et al. AKI associated with macroscopic glomerular hematuria: clinical and pathophysiologic consequences. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:175-84.

Hemolysis, renal failure, and local necrosis following scorpion sting. J S Chadha, A Leviav, JAMA. 2411038Chadha JS, Leviav A. Hemolysis, renal failure, and local necrosis following scorpion sting. JAMA. 1979;241:1038.

Yellow jacket envenomation-related acute renal failure. S Viswanathan, C Prabhu, J Arulneyam, B Remalayam, M Adil, NDT Plus. 4Viswanathan S, Prabhu C, Arulneyam J, Remalayam B, Adil M. Yellow jacket envenomation-related acute renal failure. NDT Plus. 2011;4:167-9.

Acute renal failure developing after a scorpion sting. R Naqvi, A Naqvi, F Akhtar, A Rizvi, Br J Urol. 82295Naqvi R, Naqvi A, Akhtar F, Rizvi A. Acute renal failure developing after a scorpion sting. Br J Urol. 1998;82:295.

Spectrum of in-patient renal diseases in children: a report from Southern part Islamic Republic of Iran. A Derakhshan, Al Hashemi, G H Fallahzadeh, M H , Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 15Derakhshan A, Al Hashemi GH, Fallahzadeh MH. Spectrum of in-patient renal diseases in children: a report from Southern part Islamic Republic of Iran. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2004;15:12-7.

Hemolytic uremic syndrome following Hemiscorpius lepturus (scorpion) sting. E Valavi, M J Ansari, Indian J Nephrol. 18Valavi E, Ansari MJ. Hemolytic uremic syndrome following Hemiscorpius lepturus (scorpion) sting. Indian J Nephrol. 2008;18:166-8.

The monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/cognate CC chemokine receptor 2 system affects cell motility in cultured human podocytes. D Burt, G Salvidio, E Tarabra, F Barutta, S Pinach, P Dentelli, Am J Pathol. 171Burt D, Salvidio G, Tarabra E, Barutta F, Pinach S, Dentelli P, et al. The monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/cognate CC chemokine receptor 2 system affects cell motility in cultured human podocytes. Am J Pathol. 2007;171:1789-99.

Production and cytokine-mediated regulation of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 by human proximal tubular epithelial cells. W Prodjosudjadi, J S Gerritsma, N Klar-Mohamad, A F Gerritsen, J A Bruijn, M R Daha, Kidney Int. 48Prodjosudjadi W, Gerritsma JS, Klar-Mohamad N, Gerritsen AF, Bruijn JA, Daha MR, et al. Production and cytokine-mediated regulation of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 by human proximal tubular epithelial cells. Kidney Int. 1995;48:1477-86.