# Parathyroid cysts A review of 359 patients reported in the international literature

CorpusID: 51621202
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18bc83556e604e10a2cdeb67e683cd14a75f7d25](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18bc83556e604e10a2cdeb67e683cd14a75f7d25)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Parathyroid cysts A review of 359 patients reported in the international literature


MDTheodosios S Papavramidis 
MDAngeliki Chorti 
MDIoannis Pliakos 
PhDStavros Panidis 
MDAntonios Michalopoulos 
Parathyroid cysts A review of 359 patients reported in the international literature
10.1097/MD.0000000000011399parathyroid cyst, parathyroid glands
Background: Parathyroid cysts are lesions that represent 1-5% of neck masses. They are subdivided into two categories: functioning and non-functioning.The aim of the present review is to give a detailed account of all reported cases of parathyroid cysts in the literature and to analyze statistically the available data.Methods: A bibliographic research was performed from 1905 until 2016. A database with the patients' characteristics was made and analyzed statistically.Results: A total of 218 articles were found, reporting 359 cases of cysts. Mean age of patients was 49.24 y/o and the male/female ratio was 1:1.85. The most common locations were left thyroid lobe (113/358 patients, 31.6%), and superior mediastinum (69/358 patients, 19.3%), while the most common symptoms were neck mass (148/355 patients, 41.7%), compressive symptoms (73/355 patients, 206%) and hyperparathyroidism (62/355 patients, 17.5%). Non-functioning cysts were more frequent (220/357 patients, 61.6%). Regarding dimensions, mean diameter was 4.88 cm. Ultrasound and FNA are used for their diagnosis, while cystic fluid analysis may help the differential diagnosis. Recurrences were mentioned in 27/97 patients (27.8%) with available data. No deaths due to parathyroid cysts were mentioned in the literature.Conclusion: Parathyroid cysts should be taken into consideration in case of parathyroid dysfunction or asymptomatic neck mass. The surgeon's careful manipulations on the cyst are crucial for a definitive treatment.Abbreviations: AE1/2 = cytokeratin, CAM 5.3 = cell adhesion molecule 5.3, CT = computed tomography, FNA = fine needle aspiration, LCA = leukocyte common antigen, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PC = parathyroid cyst, PTH = parathormone, SMA = smooth muscle actin.

## Introduction

Parathyroid cysts (PCs) are relatively rare lesions, which represent less than 0.5% of parathyroid glands' pathologies and account for 1% to 5% of neck masses. [1][2][3][4][5][6] The first description of a PC was made by Sandström in 1880, [7] whereas the first report of surgical excision of a PC was made by Goris in 1905. [8] PCs can be subdivided into 2 main categories, depending on their hormonal activity: functioning and nonfunctioning ones. In the majority of cases, they are asymptomatic and are incidentally found, although there are also reports of clinically symptomatic lesions. Common sites that PCs are detected are the anterior neck and the mediastinum.

The aim of the present systematic review is to give a detailed account of all reported cases of PC in the literature and to analyze the available data, in order to completely characterize the entity from epidemiological, medical, and surgical aspects. diagnostic methods, histopathological findings of the cyst and the containing fluid, treatment, duration of hospitalization, and follow-up. The cases that fulfilled at least 8 of these 10 criteria have been included in the statistical analysis. Table 1 displays the number of cases presenting the criteria. An ethical approval is not required because this study is a review of the existing international literature.

In order to express results, descriptive statistics were used appropriately. Means, medians, and standard deviations were used for continuous variables. [9] The normal distribution of quantitative data has been checked using Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Nonparametric tests (Mann-Whitney U test) have been applied for the non-normal distribution data. Spearman rho test has been applied for the correlation between continuous variables. Kruskall-Wallis test and Chi-square test have been applied for the data correlated. 


## Results

Characteristics of PCs were determined concerning gender, age, localization of the PC, symptoms, clinical presentation, dimensions, diagnostic methods, histopathological findings and the containing fluid, treatment, duration of hospitalization, and follow up.


### Gender

Concerning gender, 35% of the patients were male (123 patients), while 65% were female (228 patients). The ratio between men and women was 1:1.85, suggesting a female predominance in the reported PC population.


### Age

Mean age of the population was 49.24 years, ranging from 8 to 88 years. It is concluded that PCs most frequently appeared in age ranges from 30 to 60 years.

We correlated the age distribution among male and female population and we found that there is no statistically significant difference between men and women. (Male Mean Rank: 187.14, Female Mean Rank: 169.27, U = 12,487.5, P = .115).


### Clinical manifestations

Furthermore, PCs can present with a wide variety of symptoms, ranging from asymptomatic neck masses to the different clinical manifestations of hyperparathyroidism. Our statistical analysis has shown that the most frequent symptom is neck mass (148/355 patients, 41.7%), while PCs presented as thyroid nodule in 25 of 355 patients (7%). Ten patients had a medical history of nephrolithiasis (2.8%), while 6 of 355 patients had thyroid dysfunction in general (1.7%). Parathyroid dysfunction was presented in 62 of 355 patients (17.5%), compressive symptoms in 73 of 355 patients (20.6%), and asthenia, weight loss, fatigue, and depression in 15 of 355 patients (4.2%). Another clinical presentation of PCs was neck pain in 6 of 355 patients (1.7%), while 8 of 355 patients (2.3%) were admitted to an emergency department with mental confusion and deterioration due to undiagnosed hyperparathyroidism. Last but not least, obesity was the main symptom in 2 of 355 patients (0.6%). Figure 2 summarizes all the above symptoms.   


### Localization

As far as the localization of the PCs is concerned, they can be found from the angle of the mandible until the mediastinum, as shown in Fig. 3. In our population, the most common site was the left thyroid lobe ( The correlation between age and location using Kruskall-Wallis test showed that there is a different distribution of age among several location of PCs, with anterior and posterior mediastinum coming first, then the thyroid lobes and last the angle of the mandible, as shown in Fig. 4 (P < .001).


### Clinical presentation

Furthermore, there are 2 main categories of PCs: the functioning and the nonfunctioning ones. Nonfunctioning PCs were found to be more frequent, as they represent 61.6% of the total amount of patients (220/357 patients).

The correlation between clinical presentation of PCs and gender has shown that there is statistically significant difference between male and female, as nonfunctioning PCs have a female predilection (nonfunctioning: Male = 26.5%, Female = 73.5%, P < .001). The percentages for the functioning PCs were Male = 48.5% and Female = 51.5% (P < .001), suggesting a slight predominance for female population. These results are presented in Fig. 5.

We also correlated age between categories of clinical presentation and came to the conclusion that there was a difference between functioning and nonfunctioning cysts, suggesting a predominance of functioning ones in older patients (U = 8002, P < .001). Figure 6 demonstrates these results.   Concerning treatment, 95.4% of patients with functioning cysts underwent surgical excision and 4.6% FNA, whereas 71.6% of patients with nonfunctioning cyst underwent surgical excision, 21.9% FNA and 6.5% sclerotherapy (P < .001), as shown in Fig. 7.


### Size

For the dimensions of PCs, there were data for 267 of 359 patients (74.3%). Mean diameter of the cyst was 4.81 ± 2.88 cm, ranging from 0.5 to 15 cm, as shown in Fig. 8.

We correlated dimensions and clinical presentation of PCs and found that there is no statistically significant difference of the diameter between 2 different categories of clinical presentation (U = 7617.5, P = .187).

Concerning gender, we concluded that male had bigger cysts than female (male mean rank = 156.55, female mean rank = 121.14, U = 6058, P < .001). This is demonstrated in Fig. 9.

As far as location is concerned, bigger cysts were located in the middle compartment of mediastinum, followed by the other compartments of mediastinum and then the thyroid lobes (P < .001), as shown in Fig. 10.

The correlation made between age and dimensions showed that there is difference between age distribution among dimensions of the PC (P = .005).


### Diagnostic methods

As far as diagnostic methods are concerned, the most useful tool has proved to be ultrasound, followed by FNA, as shown in Fig. 11. Other imaging techniques applied were computed tomography (CT) scan and plain radiograph, while surgical exploration is still of great importance for the diagnosis of PCs. Last but not least, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Tc99m scintigraphy can be helpful tools for the differential diagnosis of PCs. In the laboratory tests, 131 of 135 patients (97%) were found to have elevated PTH in cystic fluid, a fact that characterizes PCs.    


### Histopathological features

For the histopathology and immunohistochemistry of PCs, the majority of them consist of parathyroid tissue (190/192 patients, 98.9%), while thyroid tissue (9 patients) and thymic tissue (8 patients) can be presented. There were cases that presented fibrosis (43 patients) and bleeding into the cyst (23 patients).

There was not enough information about the immunohistochemical factors of PCs. AE1/2, CAM 5.3, Factor VIII, Calcitonin, LCA, and SMA were stained for 1 patient each. Pancytokeratin was positive for 2 patients, while thyroglobin was positive for 4 patients.

As far as cystic fluid analysis is concerned, there were data for 


### Treatment

For the treatment applied, surgical excision has been chosen in 269 of 333 patients (80.8%), whereas FNA has been done in 50 of 333 patients (15%). Sclerotherapy has been chosen in 14 patients (4.2%).

The correlation made between treatment applied and recurrence rate has shown that there is no statistically significant difference between surgical excision and FNA as far as recurrence rate (P = .590).


### Hospitalization and follow-up

The mean duration of hospitalization has been found to be 4.76 days, ranging from 1 day to 20 days, but we had data only for 30 of 359 patients (8.35%), so the results are not so reliable. The duration of hospitalization of patients who did not undergo thoracotomy should be only 1 day.

With data for 97 of 359 patients (27%), the mean follow-up period was 17.34 months, ranging from 0 months to 204 months. The cyst recurred in 27 of 97 patients (27.83%).


## Discussion

PCs are uncommon clinical entities, which arise in the neck and the mediastinum. They were first described by Sandström in 1880, [7] while Goris [8] (1905) reported their first surgical resection. [10] DeQuervain [11] published the first case of a mediastinal PC in 1925, whereas the first functioning PC was described by Greene et al [12] in 1952. [13] Noble and Borg [14] in 1936 was the first who resected surgically a functioning mediastinal PC. [15] Crile and Perryman (1953) [16] were the first to publish a case of the correct preoperative diagnosis of a PC using FNA. [17] PCs seem to have a female predilection with a male: female ratio1:3.5 and 1:2.5. [17][18][19][20][21][22] PCs more frequently appear in fourth and sixth decades. [19,[21][22][23][24] PCs can be subdivided into 2 main categories: functioning and nonfunctioning, regarding their hormone producing activity. [25][26][27][28] Functioning cysts count for 20% of PCs, as they were found in 0.3% to 3% of parathyroid   www.md-journal.com glands removed due to hyperparathyroidism. [29] Functioning PCs seem to be found predominantly in male patients (1.6:1), while nonfunctioning ones have a predilection for female. [10,13,17,27,[29][30][31][32] Regarding our study, functioning PCs have a similar distribution between male and female, while nonfunctioning ones of female are 2 times more frequent in females. Jarnagin and Clark [33] mentioned that the incidence of mediastinal PCs ranges from 2.5% to 22%, while the incidence of sternotomy in such cases ranges from 1.4% to 14%. According to our findings, mediastinal PCs' percentage is much higher and up to 33.5%.

It is important for us to notice that larger parathyroid glands and parathyroid glands of older patients tent to be located in the mediastinum (cervicomediastinal and lower). Both gravity and consistence of the surrounding tissues (less collagen in older people) probably lead to a displacement of the glands to lower positions.

Regarding location of PCs, it extends from the angle of the mandible to the mediastinum. [26,[34][35][36] The majority of PCs arise from the inferior parathyroid gland. [15,37] In the literature, there are several reports of both neck and mediastinal PCs, yet with a higher incidence of these in the neck. [15, Safran et al [31] referred to the incidence of neck PCs, which is 85% to 95% and mostly left-sided. [32,65,66] Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that there is a paucity of intrathyroidal and intrathymic cases of PCs. [67][68][69][70][71][72][73][74][75][76] We found that the larger cysts are pushed lower into the neck, ending up into the mediastinum.

PCs display a great variety of symptoms. The heterogeneous clinical presentation is attributed to the fact that PCs appear in different locations and are of variable functionality. The majority of cases are asymptomatic, presenting with an incidentally found neck mass, which can be palpable and mimic a thyroid nodule. [13,25,32,[77][78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85][86][87][88][89][90][91][92][93][94] Alvi et al [18] and Coates et al [95] reported that larger cysts can cause compressive symptoms and mediastinal ones can cause recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Compressive symptoms such as dysphagia, odynophagia, dyspnea, asthma, stridor, hoarseness, vein thrombosis, cough, vomiting, choking sensation are caused by displacement of the adjacent structures. [5,15,16,19,26,38,51,58,[95][96][97][98][99][100][101][102][103][104][105][106][107][108][109][110][111][112][113] Furthermore, there are references of vocal cord paralysis due to compression of PCs. [20,[114][115][116][117] On the contrary, PCs may present with hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, mental disturbances, depression, weight loss or obesity and fatigue, bone changes, osteomalacia, or there are only incidental laboratory findings. [14,22,25,29,35,69,77,113, In the majority of these cases, the cause of this parathyroid dysfunction is an adenoma, which coexisted with the PC or degenerated into a PC. PCs remain a rare cause of hyperparathyroidism. [139,[142][143][144] Fallon et al [145] reported 1 case of parathyroid gland hyperplasia instead of adenomas. Several cases of acute symptomatology, caused by hypercalcemic crisis or compression of adjacent structures, which are life-threatening conditions, have been reported in the literature. [146][147][148][149][150][151][152][153] Furthermore, hemorrhage into the PC has been reported and Manouras et al mentioned a case of bleeding into the cyst that caused acute hypercalcemic crisis. [15,102,129,143,149,154,155] Taniguchi et al [156] reported a case of a cervical hematoma caused by a PC. Glynn et al [157] published a case of multiple PCs. Cases of coexistence of PCs with other conditions such as pheochromocytoma and MEN-1 syndrome have been reported. [158,159] Our study supported the assumption that the most common clinical manifestation of PCs is an asymptomatic neck mass, while compressive symptoms are the second most frequent clinical presentation.

PCs occur rarely in children. According to the present review, only 4 cases have been reported, accounting for 1% of PCs. [42,98,160,161] The differential diagnosis of a PC includes a wide range of neck and mediastinal masses. PCs should be considered in the differential diagnosis of neck masses. [160] Therefore, in the differential diagnosis of PCs, one must consider thyroid goiter, thyroid cyst, thymic cyst, thyroid adenoma, and parathyroid carcinoma. [2,6,10,50,57,125,143,152,[162][163][164][165][166][167][168][169][170][171][172][173] Furthermore, thyroglossal duct cyst and branchial cleft cyst should be taken into consideration as neck masses that usually mimic PCs. Multiple studies support the assumption that test of the cystic fluid aspirated by FNA is the best method to distinguish PCs. PCs contain clear-watery fluid. Moreover, PCs contain high concentrations of PTH. [18,170,[174][175][176][177][178] As far the mediastinal PCs is concerned, they should be distinguished from vascular lesions, teratomas, lipomas, adenopathy, neuromas, thymomas, bronchogenic cysts, lymphagiomas, cystic hygromas, cysts and tumors of esophagus, trachea, nerves, lymphatics, and thyroid and parathyroid glands. [24,35,37,47,56,165,167,170,179] Imaging examinations and especially CT scan can differentiate vascular, solid, and cystic structures. [47,179] Aortography was used in a case of PC in order to be differentiated by vascular abnormalities. [92] Spitz [180] suggested that mediastinal malignancies and metastases should be considered in the differential diagnosis, especially in the elderly.

The diagnosis of PCs is far more characterized as a postoperative rather than preoperative one. [77,91,98,181,182] However, references in the literature reveal that there are several cases of PCs, which have been diagnosed preoperatively. [16,24,27,65,170,183,184] Hauet et al [165] suggested that the final diagnosis of PCs is based on biopsy. Korukluoglu et al [69] mentioned that a preoperative localization of the PC using scintigraphy or ultrasound would help in order that the bilateral neck surgical exploration is avoided.

On physical examination, PCs appear to be palpable firm, smooth, solitary, nontender lesions located in the neck or superior mediastinum. [65] The main imaging techniques that are used for the diagnosis of PCs are plain radiograph, CT scan, MRI, technitium radionuclide scintigraphy (Tc-scintigraphy), and ultrasound. Plain radiograph are usually used when the cyst is located in the mediastinum or lower neck. [55,185] CT and MRI scan has nonspecific findings, but they can easily reveal homogenous areas of cystic nature and are useful tools for the diagnosis, especially when there is symptomatology of vocal cord paralysis or if the cyst is mediastinal. [45,47,54,55,58,117,131,148,166,167,[186][187][188] The neck ultrasound examination is of great importance for the evaluation of PCs, as it reveals the cystic nature of the mass and its dimensions, is easily done and can be combined with FNA aspiration fluid. [3,21,44,50,69,131,143,148,151,168,171,[185][186][187][189][190][191][192][193][194] Microscopically, PCs are lined by cyboidal or columnar epithelium and are thin-walled white cysts. [15,22,117,139,162,195,196] Furthermore, other tissues such as thymic, bone, lymphoid, muscular, adipose, salivary, and mesenchymal can be found in the cyst wall. [27,111,147,[196][197][198][199] This pathology refers mainly to nonfunctioning cysts, whereas functioning ones lack this epithelium and are characterized more as pseudocysts. [2,92,131,200] Kuo et al [201] reported a case of an adenoma found lined in the cyst wall, surrounded by cyboid cells. References in the literature reveal that hyperfunctioning PCs can be formed by adenomatous tissue without any evidence of   97:28 Medicine adenoma or hyperplasia. [202] A case of a carcinoma found in a PC has been reported. [203] The cytological analysis of the cyst fluid includes the presence of small clusters of epithelial cells and fibroblasts, which are atypically proliferated and are mistaken for malignant cells. The fluid is colorless, clear-watery with high concentrations of CMPTH. [204][205][206][207] Although, it can also be hemorrhagic, most in cases of hemorrhage of an adenoma. [4,108] One case of high concentrations of ca19-9 in the cystic fluid has been reported. [208] Immunohistochemically, PCs stain positive for parathormonepeptide, glycogen, and focally for chromogranin. [115,195] The initial treatment of PCs is FNA, and in case of recurrence, surgical excision is recommended as the definitive treatment. [3,17,18,32,39,54,67,100,103,121,160,164,171,180,[211][212][213] A retrospective study carried out by Ippolito et al [198] have shown that from 14 patients who underwent FNA as initial treatment, 4 have a recurrence and a surgical excision followed. Until late 1970s, when Clark et al [65] first cured a PC with FNA, surgery was the main treatment. After then, several cases of PC were treated only with FNA. [175,177,214,215] In 1992, Okamura et al [216] suggested the injection of sclerosants as an alternative treatment of PCs. This technique was especially used in case of a recurrence of PCs after FNA in order that open surgery is avoided. [17,172,200,212,214] In the literature, there are several reports of sclerotherapy with tetracycline or ethanol injection used as treatment of PCs, especially in nonfunctioning ones. [170,178,[217][218][219] According to the clinical presentation of PCs, non-unctioning ones are treated with FNA, whereas functioning ones with surgical excision. [71,131,187,194,195,200,211,220,221] Mevio et al [187] and Béquignon et al [194] mentioned that nonfunctioning ones that recur or appear with compressive symptoms should be excised. Capezzone et al [67] added another reason for surgical excision of nonfunctioning PCs, which is esthetic concerns. Yang et al [222] reported a case series of 6 patients with nonfunctioning cysts who underwent surgical excision and no recurrence was documented within 2 to 9 years of follow-up. The main indications for surgery reported in the literature are hyperparathyroidism-functioning cysts, uncertain diagnosis of PCs, possibility for malignancy, presence of symptoms, and recurrences. [209,210] The intraoperative characteristics of the cyst that required surgical excision are the cyst is attached to the thyroid gland, the cyst wall has a whitish color and the cyst content is clear watery fluid, and the cyst is located in the lower neck. [39,183] Concerning the correct exeresis of the hyperfunctioning gland, we used the Miami criteria as per every hyperfunctioning parathyroid.

All the above treatments have their complications. Hemorrhage is reported as an early complication of FNA, while recurrence can occur as a late one. [200] After surgical excision of PCs, hypocalcemia, hypercalcemic crisis, hemorrhage, and recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy have been referred as postoperative complications. [18,65,172,195] Neck pain and neurotoxicity leading to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy seem to have an association with sclerotherapy. [172,210] We have however to comment a technical aspect probably leads to recurrence at the surgical technique. Those cysts have a very thin wall, and therefore, it is very difficult to excise them as a whole and without rupture. We would therefore consider the rupture of the cyst and its incomplete excision as the reason of recurrence.

In general, the prognosis is excellent in PCs. No recurrences or metastasis is observed, except for 14 cases of patients, from whom 10 patients appeared with 1 recurrence, 3 with 2 recurrences, and 1 with 3 recurrences within their follow-up period. [2,40,54,65,166,169,170,210,215,220,223,224] These recurrences appeared after the first FNA and surgical excision was mandatory as their definitive treatment. According to a study published by Lorenzo et al [224] in 2008, malignant transformation has not been noted in 10 years follow-up of a case of a recurrent PC, which needed repeated FNA due to patient's rejection to be operated. In the literature, there are no reports of malignancy of PCs. [18,160] No deaths have been noted due to PC and long-term survival of patient seems to be certain. [37,51] 


## Conclusion

We conclude that PCs are included in parathyroid glands' pathologies and should be taken into consideration in case of parathyroid dysfunction as well as in differential diagnosis of asymptomatic neck masses. Neck ultrasound accompanied by FNA and fluid analysis (fluid PTH measurement) are useful tools in the diagnosis of PCs. When surgical excision is chosen as the appropriate treatment, the surgeon's careful manipulations on the cyst, so that rupture is avoided, are crucial for a definitive treatment.


Excel 2007 (Microsoft Office Excel 2007, Jones, Chicago) and SPSS 22.0 (IBM Corp. Released 2013. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 22.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.) were employed to statistically analyze the data.

## Figure 2 .
2Frequencies of symptoms' categories.

## Figure 1 .
1Flow

## Figure 3 .
3Schematic localization of most frequent sites of parathyroid cysts. The diameter of the dot is proportional to the frequency of appearance.

## Figure 4 .
4Box-plot demonstrating age distribution among different locations of parathyroid cysts. (P < .001).

## Figure 5 .
5Correlation between gender and clinical presentation. (P < .001).

## Figure 7 .
7Correlation between treatment and clinical presentation. (P < .001).

## Figure 8 .
8Distribution of diameter of parathyroid cysts.

## Figure 6 .
6Age distribution among different categories of clinical presentation. (P < .001).

## Figure 9 .
9Box-plot demonstrating the distribution of dimensions among males and females. (P < .001


220 of 359 patients (61.28%), from whom 170 patients (77.3%) had watery/clear fluid, 15 patients (6.8%) had chocolate/brown fluid, 22 patients (10%) had hemorrhagic fluid, and 13 patients (5.9%) had turbid fluid. Concerning clinical presentation, 79.4% of nonfunctioning cysts had watery/clear cystic fluid and 40% chocolate/brown one, whereas 20.6% of functioning cysts had watery/clear cystic fluid and 60% chocolate/brown one (P < .001), as shown in Fig. 12.

## Figure 12 .
12Correlation between clinical presentation and cystic fluid. (P < .001).

## Figure 10 .
10Box-plot demonstrating the distribution of dimensions among different locations of parathyroid cysts. (P < .001).

## Figure 11 .
11Methods conducted for the diagnosis of parathyroid cysts.

## Table 1## Introduction

Parathyroid cysts (PCs) are relatively rare lesions, which represent less than 0.5% of parathyroid glands' pathologies and account for 1% to 5% of neck masses. [1][2][3][4][5][6] The first description of a PC was made by Sandström in 1880, [7] whereas the first report of surgical excision of a PC was made by Goris in 1905. [8] PCs can be subdivided into 2 main categories, depending on their hormonal activity: functioning and nonfunctioning ones. In the majority of cases, they are asymptomatic and are incidentally found, although there are also reports of clinically symptomatic lesions. Common sites that PCs are detected are the anterior neck and the mediastinum.

The aim of the present systematic review is to give a detailed account of all reported cases of PC in the literature and to analyze the available data, in order to completely characterize the entity from epidemiological, medical, and surgical aspects. diagnostic methods, histopathological findings of the cyst and the containing fluid, treatment, duration of hospitalization, and follow-up. The cases that fulfilled at least 8 of these 10 criteria have been included in the statistical analysis. Table 1 displays the number of cases presenting the criteria. An ethical approval is not required because this study is a review of the existing international literature.

In order to express results, descriptive statistics were used appropriately. Means, medians, and standard deviations were used for continuous variables. [9] The normal distribution of quantitative data has been checked using Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Nonparametric tests (Mann-Whitney U test) have been applied for the non-normal distribution data. Spearman rho test has been applied for the correlation between continuous variables. Kruskall-Wallis test and Chi-square test have been applied for the data correlated. 


## Results

Characteristics of PCs were determined concerning gender, age, localization of the PC, symptoms, clinical presentation, dimensions, diagnostic methods, histopathological findings and the containing fluid, treatment, duration of hospitalization, and follow up.


### Gender

Concerning gender, 35% of the patients were male (123 patients), while 65% were female (228 patients). The ratio between men and women was 1:1.85, suggesting a female predominance in the reported PC population.


### Age

Mean age of the population was 49.24 years, ranging from 8 to 88 years. It is concluded that PCs most frequently appeared in age ranges from 30 to 60 years.

We correlated the age distribution among male and female population and we found that there is no statistically significant difference between men and women. (Male Mean Rank: 187.14, Female Mean Rank: 169.27, U = 12,487.5, P = .115).


### Clinical manifestations

Furthermore, PCs can present with a wide variety of symptoms, ranging from asymptomatic neck masses to the different clinical manifestations of hyperparathyroidism. Our statistical analysis has shown that the most frequent symptom is neck mass (148/355 patients, 41.7%), while PCs presented as thyroid nodule in 25 of 355 patients (7%). Ten patients had a medical history of nephrolithiasis (2.8%), while 6 of 355 patients had thyroid dysfunction in general (1.7%). Parathyroid dysfunction was presented in 62 of 355 patients (17.5%), compressive symptoms in 73 of 355 patients (20.6%), and asthenia, weight loss, fatigue, and depression in 15 of 355 patients (4.2%). Another clinical presentation of PCs was neck pain in 6 of 355 patients (1.7%), while 8 of 355 patients (2.3%) were admitted to an emergency department with mental confusion and deterioration due to undiagnosed hyperparathyroidism. Last but not least, obesity was the main symptom in 2 of 355 patients (0.6%). Figure 2 summarizes all the above symptoms.   


### Localization

As far as the localization of the PCs is concerned, they can be found from the angle of the mandible until the mediastinum, as shown in Fig. 3. In our population, the most common site was the left thyroid lobe ( The correlation between age and location using Kruskall-Wallis test showed that there is a different distribution of age among several location of PCs, with anterior and posterior mediastinum coming first, then the thyroid lobes and last the angle of the mandible, as shown in Fig. 4 (P < .001).


### Clinical presentation

Furthermore, there are 2 main categories of PCs: the functioning and the nonfunctioning ones. Nonfunctioning PCs were found to be more frequent, as they represent 61.6% of the total amount of patients (220/357 patients).

The correlation between clinical presentation of PCs and gender has shown that there is statistically significant difference between male and female, as nonfunctioning PCs have a female predilection (nonfunctioning: Male = 26.5%, Female = 73.5%, P < .001). The percentages for the functioning PCs were Male = 48.5% and Female = 51.5% (P < .001), suggesting a slight predominance for female population. These results are presented in Fig. 5.

We also correlated age between categories of clinical presentation and came to the conclusion that there was a difference between functioning and nonfunctioning cysts, suggesting a predominance of functioning ones in older patients (U = 8002, P < .001). Figure 6 demonstrates these results.   Concerning treatment, 95.4% of patients with functioning cysts underwent surgical excision and 4.6% FNA, whereas 71.6% of patients with nonfunctioning cyst underwent surgical excision, 21.9% FNA and 6.5% sclerotherapy (P < .001), as shown in Fig. 7.


### Size

For the dimensions of PCs, there were data for 267 of 359 patients (74.3%). Mean diameter of the cyst was 4.81 ± 2.88 cm, ranging from 0.5 to 15 cm, as shown in Fig. 8.

We correlated dimensions and clinical presentation of PCs and found that there is no statistically significant difference of the diameter between 2 different categories of clinical presentation (U = 7617.5, P = .187).

Concerning gender, we concluded that male had bigger cysts than female (male mean rank = 156.55, female mean rank = 121.14, U = 6058, P < .001). This is demonstrated in Fig. 9.

As far as location is concerned, bigger cysts were located in the middle compartment of mediastinum, followed by the other compartments of mediastinum and then the thyroid lobes (P < .001), as shown in Fig. 10.

The correlation made between age and dimensions showed that there is difference between age distribution among dimensions of the PC (P = .005).


### Diagnostic methods

As far as diagnostic methods are concerned, the most useful tool has proved to be ultrasound, followed by FNA, as shown in Fig. 11. Other imaging techniques applied were computed tomography (CT) scan and plain radiograph, while surgical exploration is still of great importance for the diagnosis of PCs. Last but not least, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Tc99m scintigraphy can be helpful tools for the differential diagnosis of PCs. In the laboratory tests, 131 of 135 patients (97%) were found to have elevated PTH in cystic fluid, a fact that characterizes PCs.    


### Histopathological features

For the histopathology and immunohistochemistry of PCs, the majority of them consist of parathyroid tissue (190/192 patients, 98.9%), while thyroid tissue (9 patients) and thymic tissue (8 patients) can be presented. There were cases that presented fibrosis (43 patients) and bleeding into the cyst (23 patients).

There was not enough information about the immunohistochemical factors of PCs. AE1/2, CAM 5.3, Factor VIII, Calcitonin, LCA, and SMA were stained for 1 patient each. Pancytokeratin was positive for 2 patients, while thyroglobin was positive for 4 patients.

As far as cystic fluid analysis is concerned, there were data for 


### Treatment

For the treatment applied, surgical excision has been chosen in 269 of 333 patients (80.8%), whereas FNA has been done in 50 of 333 patients (15%). Sclerotherapy has been chosen in 14 patients (4.2%).

The correlation made between treatment applied and recurrence rate has shown that there is no statistically significant difference between surgical excision and FNA as far as recurrence rate (P = .590).


### Hospitalization and follow-up

The mean duration of hospitalization has been found to be 4.76 days, ranging from 1 day to 20 days, but we had data only for 30 of 359 patients (8.35%), so the results are not so reliable. The duration of hospitalization of patients who did not undergo thoracotomy should be only 1 day.

With data for 97 of 359 patients (27%), the mean follow-up period was 17.34 months, ranging from 0 months to 204 months. The cyst recurred in 27 of 97 patients (27.83%).


## Discussion

PCs are uncommon clinical entities, which arise in the neck and the mediastinum. They were first described by Sandström in 1880, [7] while Goris [8] (1905) reported their first surgical resection. [10] DeQuervain [11] published the first case of a mediastinal PC in 1925, whereas the first functioning PC was described by Greene et al [12] in 1952. [13] Noble and Borg [14] in 1936 was the first who resected surgically a functioning mediastinal PC. [15] Crile and Perryman (1953) [16] were the first to publish a case of the correct preoperative diagnosis of a PC using FNA. [17] PCs seem to have a female predilection with a male: female ratio1:3.5 and 1:2.5. [17][18][19][20][21][22] PCs more frequently appear in fourth and sixth decades. [19,[21][22][23][24] PCs can be subdivided into 2 main categories: functioning and nonfunctioning, regarding their hormone producing activity. [25][26][27][28] Functioning cysts count for 20% of PCs, as they were found in 0.3% to 3% of parathyroid   www.md-journal.com glands removed due to hyperparathyroidism. [29] Functioning PCs seem to be found predominantly in male patients (1.6:1), while nonfunctioning ones have a predilection for female. [10,13,17,27,[29][30][31][32] Regarding our study, functioning PCs have a similar distribution between male and female, while nonfunctioning ones of female are 2 times more frequent in females. Jarnagin and Clark [33] mentioned that the incidence of mediastinal PCs ranges from 2.5% to 22%, while the incidence of sternotomy in such cases ranges from 1.4% to 14%. According to our findings, mediastinal PCs' percentage is much higher and up to 33.5%.

It is important for us to notice that larger parathyroid glands and parathyroid glands of older patients tent to be located in the mediastinum (cervicomediastinal and lower). Both gravity and consistence of the surrounding tissues (less collagen in older people) probably lead to a displacement of the glands to lower positions.

Regarding location of PCs, it extends from the angle of the mandible to the mediastinum. [26,[34][35][36] The majority of PCs arise from the inferior parathyroid gland. [15,37] In the literature, there are several reports of both neck and mediastinal PCs, yet with a higher incidence of these in the neck. [15, Safran et al [31] referred to the incidence of neck PCs, which is 85% to 95% and mostly left-sided. [32,65,66] Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that there is a paucity of intrathyroidal and intrathymic cases of PCs. [67][68][69][70][71][72][73][74][75][76] We found that the larger cysts are pushed lower into the neck, ending up into the mediastinum.

PCs display a great variety of symptoms. The heterogeneous clinical presentation is attributed to the fact that PCs appear in different locations and are of variable functionality. The majority of cases are asymptomatic, presenting with an incidentally found neck mass, which can be palpable and mimic a thyroid nodule. [13,25,32,[77][78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85][86][87][88][89][90][91][92][93][94] Alvi et al [18] and Coates et al [95] reported that larger cysts can cause compressive symptoms and mediastinal ones can cause recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Compressive symptoms such as dysphagia, odynophagia, dyspnea, asthma, stridor, hoarseness, vein thrombosis, cough, vomiting, choking sensation are caused by displacement of the adjacent structures. [5,15,16,19,26,38,51,58,[95][96][97][98][99][100][101][102][103][104][105][106][107][108][109][110][111][112][113] Furthermore, there are references of vocal cord paralysis due to compression of PCs. [20,[114][115][116][117] On the contrary, PCs may present with hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, mental disturbances, depression, weight loss or obesity and fatigue, bone changes, osteomalacia, or there are only incidental laboratory findings. [14,22,25,29,35,69,77,113, In the majority of these cases, the cause of this parathyroid dysfunction is an adenoma, which coexisted with the PC or degenerated into a PC. PCs remain a rare cause of hyperparathyroidism. [139,[142][143][144] Fallon et al [145] reported 1 case of parathyroid gland hyperplasia instead of adenomas. Several cases of acute symptomatology, caused by hypercalcemic crisis or compression of adjacent structures, which are life-threatening conditions, have been reported in the literature. [146][147][148][149][150][151][152][153] Furthermore, hemorrhage into the PC has been reported and Manouras et al mentioned a case of bleeding into the cyst that caused acute hypercalcemic crisis. [15,102,129,143,149,154,155] Taniguchi et al [156] reported a case of a cervical hematoma caused by a PC. Glynn et al [157] published a case of multiple PCs. Cases of coexistence of PCs with other conditions such as pheochromocytoma and MEN-1 syndrome have been reported. [158,159] Our study supported the assumption that the most common clinical manifestation of PCs is an asymptomatic neck mass, while compressive symptoms are the second most frequent clinical presentation.

PCs occur rarely in children. According to the present review, only 4 cases have been reported, accounting for 1% of PCs. [42,98,160,161] The differential diagnosis of a PC includes a wide range of neck and mediastinal masses. PCs should be considered in the differential diagnosis of neck masses. [160] Therefore, in the differential diagnosis of PCs, one must consider thyroid goiter, thyroid cyst, thymic cyst, thyroid adenoma, and parathyroid carcinoma. [2,6,10,50,57,125,143,152,[162][163][164][165][166][167][168][169][170][171][172][173] Furthermore, thyroglossal duct cyst and branchial cleft cyst should be taken into consideration as neck masses that usually mimic PCs. Multiple studies support the assumption that test of the cystic fluid aspirated by FNA is the best method to distinguish PCs. PCs contain clear-watery fluid. Moreover, PCs contain high concentrations of PTH. [18,170,[174][175][176][177][178] As far the mediastinal PCs is concerned, they should be distinguished from vascular lesions, teratomas, lipomas, adenopathy, neuromas, thymomas, bronchogenic cysts, lymphagiomas, cystic hygromas, cysts and tumors of esophagus, trachea, nerves, lymphatics, and thyroid and parathyroid glands. [24,35,37,47,56,165,167,170,179] Imaging examinations and especially CT scan can differentiate vascular, solid, and cystic structures. [47,179] Aortography was used in a case of PC in order to be differentiated by vascular abnormalities. [92] Spitz [180] suggested that mediastinal malignancies and metastases should be considered in the differential diagnosis, especially in the elderly.

The diagnosis of PCs is far more characterized as a postoperative rather than preoperative one. [77,91,98,181,182] However, references in the literature reveal that there are several cases of PCs, which have been diagnosed preoperatively. [16,24,27,65,170,183,184] Hauet et al [165] suggested that the final diagnosis of PCs is based on biopsy. Korukluoglu et al [69] mentioned that a preoperative localization of the PC using scintigraphy or ultrasound would help in order that the bilateral neck surgical exploration is avoided.

On physical examination, PCs appear to be palpable firm, smooth, solitary, nontender lesions located in the neck or superior mediastinum. [65] The main imaging techniques that are used for the diagnosis of PCs are plain radiograph, CT scan, MRI, technitium radionuclide scintigraphy (Tc-scintigraphy), and ultrasound. Plain radiograph are usually used when the cyst is located in the mediastinum or lower neck. [55,185] CT and MRI scan has nonspecific findings, but they can easily reveal homogenous areas of cystic nature and are useful tools for the diagnosis, especially when there is symptomatology of vocal cord paralysis or if the cyst is mediastinal. [45,47,54,55,58,117,131,148,166,167,[186][187][188] The neck ultrasound examination is of great importance for the evaluation of PCs, as it reveals the cystic nature of the mass and its dimensions, is easily done and can be combined with FNA aspiration fluid. [3,21,44,50,69,131,143,148,151,168,171,[185][186][187][189][190][191][192][193][194] Microscopically, PCs are lined by cyboidal or columnar epithelium and are thin-walled white cysts. [15,22,117,139,162,195,196] Furthermore, other tissues such as thymic, bone, lymphoid, muscular, adipose, salivary, and mesenchymal can be found in the cyst wall. [27,111,147,[196][197][198][199] This pathology refers mainly to nonfunctioning cysts, whereas functioning ones lack this epithelium and are characterized more as pseudocysts. [2,92,131,200] Kuo et al [201] reported a case of an adenoma found lined in the cyst wall, surrounded by cyboid cells. References in the literature reveal that hyperfunctioning PCs can be formed by adenomatous tissue without any evidence of   97:28 Medicine adenoma or hyperplasia. [202] A case of a carcinoma found in a PC has been reported. [203] The cytological analysis of the cyst fluid includes the presence of small clusters of epithelial cells and fibroblasts, which are atypically proliferated and are mistaken for malignant cells. The fluid is colorless, clear-watery with high concentrations of CMPTH. [204][205][206][207] Although, it can also be hemorrhagic, most in cases of hemorrhage of an adenoma. [4,108] One case of high concentrations of ca19-9 in the cystic fluid has been reported. [208] Immunohistochemically, PCs stain positive for parathormonepeptide, glycogen, and focally for chromogranin. [115,195] The initial treatment of PCs is FNA, and in case of recurrence, surgical excision is recommended as the definitive treatment. [3,17,18,32,39,54,67,100,103,121,160,164,171,180,[211][212][213] A retrospective study carried out by Ippolito et al [198] have shown that from 14 patients who underwent FNA as initial treatment, 4 have a recurrence and a surgical excision followed. Until late 1970s, when Clark et al [65] first cured a PC with FNA, surgery was the main treatment. After then, several cases of PC were treated only with FNA. [175,177,214,215] In 1992, Okamura et al [216] suggested the injection of sclerosants as an alternative treatment of PCs. This technique was especially used in case of a recurrence of PCs after FNA in order that open surgery is avoided. [17,172,200,212,214] In the literature, there are several reports of sclerotherapy with tetracycline or ethanol injection used as treatment of PCs, especially in nonfunctioning ones. [170,178,[217][218][219] According to the clinical presentation of PCs, non-unctioning ones are treated with FNA, whereas functioning ones with surgical excision. [71,131,187,194,195,200,211,220,221] Mevio et al [187] and Béquignon et al [194] mentioned that nonfunctioning ones that recur or appear with compressive symptoms should be excised. Capezzone et al [67] added another reason for surgical excision of nonfunctioning PCs, which is esthetic concerns. Yang et al [222] reported a case series of 6 patients with nonfunctioning cysts who underwent surgical excision and no recurrence was documented within 2 to 9 years of follow-up. The main indications for surgery reported in the literature are hyperparathyroidism-functioning cysts, uncertain diagnosis of PCs, possibility for malignancy, presence of symptoms, and recurrences. [209,210] The intraoperative characteristics of the cyst that required surgical excision are the cyst is attached to the thyroid gland, the cyst wall has a whitish color and the cyst content is clear watery fluid, and the cyst is located in the lower neck. [39,183] Concerning the correct exeresis of the hyperfunctioning gland, we used the Miami criteria as per every hyperfunctioning parathyroid.

All the above treatments have their complications. Hemorrhage is reported as an early complication of FNA, while recurrence can occur as a late one. [200] After surgical excision of PCs, hypocalcemia, hypercalcemic crisis, hemorrhage, and recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy have been referred as postoperative complications. [18,65,172,195] Neck pain and neurotoxicity leading to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy seem to have an association with sclerotherapy. [172,210] We have however to comment a technical aspect probably leads to recurrence at the surgical technique. Those cysts have a very thin wall, and therefore, it is very difficult to excise them as a whole and without rupture. We would therefore consider the rupture of the cyst and its incomplete excision as the reason of recurrence.

In general, the prognosis is excellent in PCs. No recurrences or metastasis is observed, except for 14 cases of patients, from whom 10 patients appeared with 1 recurrence, 3 with 2 recurrences, and 1 with 3 recurrences within their follow-up period. [2,40,54,65,166,169,170,210,215,220,223,224] These recurrences appeared after the first FNA and surgical excision was mandatory as their definitive treatment. According to a study published by Lorenzo et al [224] in 2008, malignant transformation has not been noted in 10 years follow-up of a case of a recurrent PC, which needed repeated FNA due to patient's rejection to be operated. In the literature, there are no reports of malignancy of PCs. [18,160] No deaths have been noted due to PC and long-term survival of patient seems to be certain. [37,51] 


## Conclusion

We conclude that PCs are included in parathyroid glands' pathologies and should be taken into consideration in case of parathyroid dysfunction as well as in differential diagnosis of asymptomatic neck masses. Neck ultrasound accompanied by FNA and fluid analysis (fluid PTH measurement) are useful tools in the diagnosis of PCs. When surgical excision is chosen as the appropriate treatment, the surgeon's careful manipulations on the cyst, so that rupture is avoided, are crucial for a definitive treatment.


Excel 2007 (Microsoft Office Excel 2007, Jones, Chicago) and SPSS 22.0 (IBM Corp. Released 2013. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 22.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.) were employed to statistically analyze the data.

## Figure 2 .
2Frequencies of symptoms' categories.

## Figure 1 .
1Flow

## Figure 3 .
3Schematic localization of most frequent sites of parathyroid cysts. The diameter of the dot is proportional to the frequency of appearance.

## Figure 4 .
4Box-plot demonstrating age distribution among different locations of parathyroid cysts. (P < .001).

## Figure 5 .
5Correlation between gender and clinical presentation. (P < .001).

## Figure 7 .
7Correlation between treatment and clinical presentation. (P < .001).

## Figure 8 .
8Distribution of diameter of parathyroid cysts.

## Figure 6 .
6Age distribution among different categories of clinical presentation. (P < .001).

## Figure 9 .
9Box-plot demonstrating the distribution of dimensions among males and females. (P < .001


220 of 359 patients (61.28%), from whom 170 patients (77.3%) had watery/clear fluid, 15 patients (6.8%) had chocolate/brown fluid, 22 patients (10%) had hemorrhagic fluid, and 13 patients (5.9%) had turbid fluid. Concerning clinical presentation, 79.4% of nonfunctioning cysts had watery/clear cystic fluid and 40% chocolate/brown one, whereas 20.6% of functioning cysts had watery/clear cystic fluid and 60% chocolate/brown one (P < .001), as shown in Fig. 12.

## Figure 12 .
12Correlation between clinical presentation and cystic fluid. (P < .001).

## Figure 10 .
10Box-plot demonstrating the distribution of dimensions among different locations of parathyroid cysts. (P < .001).

## Figure 11 .
11Methods conducted for the diagnosis of parathyroid cysts.

## Table 1
1Cases of parathyroid cysts fulfilling criteria.Criteria 

Number of cases [%] 
(n = 359) 

Age 
351 [97.8] 
Sex 
351 [97.8] 
Symptoms 
355 [98.9] 
Location 
358 [99.7] 
Clinical presentation 
357 [99.4] 
Dimensions 
267 [74.3] 
Diagnostic methods 
357 [99.4] 
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry 
199 [55.43] 
Cystic fluid 
220 [61.28] 
Treatment 
333 [92.75] 
Postoperative values 
348 [96.9] 
Hospitalization 
30 [8.35] 
Follow-up 
97 [27] 
Recurrence 
98 [27.2] 


AcknowledgmentsWe would like to express our sincere gratitude to Mr. Georgios Tsoulfas and Mr. Joseph Vital for their notable contribution to the data collection.Author contributions
Prevalence of parathyroid cysts by neck ultrasound scan in unselected patients. C Cappelli, M Rotondi, I Pirola, J Endocrinol Invest. 32Cappelli C, Rotondi M, Pirola I, et al. Prevalence of parathyroid cysts by neck ultrasound scan in unselected patients. J Endocrinol Invest 2009;32:357-9.

Parathyroid cysts. A Arduc, Y A Tutuncu, B A Dogan, Am Surg. 81Arduc A, Tutuncu YA, Dogan BA, et al. Parathyroid cysts. Am Surg 2015;81:e163-5.

Parathyroid cyst: a case report. R Ciuni, S Ciuni, G Monaco, Ann Ital Chir. 81Ciuni R, Ciuni S, Monaco G, et al. Parathyroid cyst: a case report. Ann Ital Chir 2010;81:49-52.

Cytomorphology of cystic parathyroid lesions: report of four cases evaluated preoperatively by fine-needle aspiration. K S Lerud, S O Tabbara, D M Delvecchio, Diagn Cytopathol. 15Lerud KS, Tabbara SO, DelVecchio DM, et al. Cytomorphology of cystic parathyroid lesions: report of four cases evaluated preopera- tively by fine-needle aspiration. Diagn Cytopathol 1996;15:306-11.

Les kystes des parathyroıdes: a propos de six cas. T Delaunay, C Peillon, J L Manourvrier, The parathyroid cysts: report of six casesDelaunay T, Peillon C, Manourvrier JL, et al. Les kystes des parathyroıdes: a propos de six cas. [The parathyroid cysts: report of six cases].

. Ann Chir. 44Ann Chir 1990;44:231-5.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) assay of parathyroid cysts examined by fine-needle aspiration biopsy. J Silverman, P Khazanie, H T Norris, Am J Clin Pathol. 86Silverman J, Khazanie P, Norris HT, et al. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) assay of parathyroid cysts examined by fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Am J Clin Pathol 1986;86:776-80.

On a new gland in man and several mammals. I Sandström, Upsula Lak Foren Forh. 15441Sandström I. On a new gland in man and several mammals. Upsula Lak Foren Forh 1879;15:441.

Extirpation of three cystic parathyroid lobules. D Goris, Ann Soc Belge Chir. 5394Goris D. Extirpation of three cystic parathyroid lobules. Ann Soc Belge Chir 1905;5:394.

. Papavramidis, 97:28 www.md-journal.comPapavramidis et al. Medicine (2018) 97:28 www.md-journal.com

Medical Statistics. A Guide to Data Analysis and Critical Appraisal. J Peat, B Barton, Blackwell PublishingPeat J, Barton B. Medical Statistics. A Guide to Data Analysis and Critical Appraisal. 2005;Blackwell Publishing, 24-241.

Malignant hypercalcemia associated with a parathyroid macrocyst and the early genesis of a giant cell tumor. A Oh, P Mojica, M Sullivan, Am J Otolaryngol. 27Oh A, Mojica P, Sullivan M, et al. Malignant hypercalcemia associated with a parathyroid macrocyst and the early genesis of a giant cell tumor. Am J Otolaryngol 2006;27:54-7.

Chirugishe demonstrationen (Epithel-Kuperchen-Cysti). F , Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 551169deQuervain F. Chirugishe demonstrationen (Epithel-Kuperchen- Cysti). Schweiz Med Wochenschr 1925;55:1169.

Unusual manifestations after removal of parathyroid cyst. E K Greene, J M Greene, E C Busch, JAMA. 150Greene EK, Greene JM, Busch EC. Unusual manifestations after removal of parathyroid cyst. JAMA 1952;150:853-5.

Parathyroid cysts of the neck and mediastinum: case report. D A Linos, G Schoretsanitis, E Carvounis, Acta Chir Scand. 155Linos DA, Schoretsanitis G, Carvounis E. Parathyroid cysts of the neck and mediastinum: case report. Acta Chir Scand 1989;155:211-6.

Hyperparathyroidism complicated by hyperthyroidism. J F Noble, J F Borg, Arch Intern Med. 58Report of a caseNoble JF, Borg JF. Hyperparathyroidism complicated by hyperthy- roidism. Report of a case. Arch Intern Med 1936;58:846-59.

Giant functioning parathyroid cyst presenting as a retrosternal goitre. G D Mckay, T H Ng, G J Morgan, ANZ J Surg. 77McKay GD, Ng TH, Morgan GJ, et al. Giant functioning parathyroid cyst presenting as a retrosternal goitre. ANZ J Surg 2007;77:297-304.

Report of fivecases. G J Crile, R G Perryman, Surgery. 14Parathyroid cystsCrile GJ, Perryman RG. Parathyroid cysts. Report of fivecases. Surgery 1953;14:151-4.

Parathyroid cyst: an uncommon cause of a palpable neck mass and hypercalcemia. S Pinney, P Daly, West J Med. 170Pinney S, Daly P. Parathyroid cyst: an uncommon cause of a palpable neck mass and hypercalcemia. West J Med 1999;170:118-20.

Parathyroid cyst: current diagnostic and management principles. A Alvi, D Myssiorek, P Wasserman, Head Neck. 18Alvi A, Myssiorek D, Wasserman P. Parathyroid cyst: current diagnostic and management principles. Head Neck 1996;18:370-3.

. S Asfar, G Smith, Krukowski , Z. Parathyroid cysts. World J Surg. 6Asfar S, Smith G, Krukowski Z. Parathyroid cysts. World J Surg 1982;6:777-81.

Benign parathyroid cyst causing vocal fold paralysis: a case report and review of the literature. D H Coelho, H P Boey, Head Neck. 28Coelho DH, Boey HP. Benign parathyroid cyst causing vocal fold paralysis: a case report and review of the literature. Head Neck 2006;28:564-6.

Parathyroid cyst: diagnosis by sonography and needle aspiration. A J Deraimo, R A Kane, J F Katz, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 142DeRaimo AJ, Kane RA, Katz JF, et al. Parathyroid cyst: diagnosis by sonography and needle aspiration. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1984;142: 1227-8.

Parathyroid cyst. W Grunberg, O H Domingo, Am Surg. 77Grunberg W, Domingo OH. Parathyroid cyst. Am Surg 2013;77: e256-7.

Parathyroid cyst and hyperparathyroidism in Auckland. J B Koea, Jhf Shaw, N Z Med J. 101Koea JB, Shaw JHF. Parathyroid cyst and hyperparathyroidism in Auckland. N Z Med J 1988;101:655-6.

Parathyroid cysts. J Wood, K Johnson, M Hinds, Arch Surg. 92Wood J, Johnson K, Hinds M. Parathyroid cysts. Arch Surg 1966;92:785-90.

Mediastinal parathyroid cysts. R J Downey, R J Cerfolio, C Deschamps, Mayo Clin Proc. 70Downey RJ, Cerfolio RJ, Deschamps C, et al. Mediastinal parathyroid cysts. Mayo Clin Proc 1995;70:946-50.

Uncommon parathyroid mediastinal cyst compressing the trachea. D Agrawal, T K Lahiri, A Agrawal, Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci. 48Agrawal D, Lahiri TK, Agrawal A, et al. Uncommon parathyroid mediastinal cyst compressing the trachea. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci 2006;48:279-81.

Parathyroid cysts. J Rosenberg, R Orlando, M Ludwig, Am J Surg. 143Rosenberg J, Orlando R, Ludwig M, et al. Parathyroid cysts. Am J Surg 1982;143:474-80.

Clear parathyroid cysts and hyperparathyroidism. V Van Fossen, A Edis, Am Surg. 64Van Fossen V, Edis A. Clear parathyroid cysts and hyperparathyroid- ism. Am Surg 1998;64:1226-8.

A rare case of a parathyroid adenoma inside a parathyroid cyst. S Karras, I Koutelidakis, P Anagnostis, Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 58Karras S, Koutelidakis I, Anagnostis P, et al. A rare case of a parathyroid adenoma inside a parathyroid cyst. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol 2014;58:776-8.

Parathyroid cysts. G V Page, M L Burke, W T Metzger, Am Surg. 50Page GV, Burke ML, Metzger WT. Parathyroid cysts. Am Surg 1984;50:29-32.

Functioning parathyroid cyst. D Safran, South Med J. 91Safran D. Functioning parathyroid cyst. South Med J 1998;91:978-80.

Parathyroid cyst: diagnosis and treatment of an unusual surgical problem. B Mitmaker, S Lerman, E Lamoureux, Can J Surg. 34Mitmaker B, Lerman S, Lamoureux E, et al. Parathyroid cyst: diagnosis and treatment of an unusual surgical problem. Can J Surg 1991;34:59-61.

Mediastinal parathyroid cyst causing persistent hyperparathyroidism: case report and review of the literature. W Jarnagin, O H Clark, Surgery. 123Jarnagin W, Clark OH. Mediastinal parathyroid cyst causing persistent hyperparathyroidism: case report and review of the literature. Surgery 1997;123:709-11.

Parathyroid re-exploration. A R Shaha, Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 37Shaha AR. Parathyroid re-exploration. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2004;37:833-43.

Giant hyperplastic parathyroid gland in the mediastinum-partially cystic and calcified. S E Seltzer, J P Balikian, J C Birnholz, Radiology. 127Seltzer SE, Balikian JP, Birnholz JC, et al. Giant hyperplastic parathyroid gland in the mediastinum-partially cystic and calcified. Radiology 1978;127:43-4.

Giant functioning cervicomediastinal parathyroid cyst. G Buchanan, M M Gregory, Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 88Buchanan G, Gregory MM. Giant functioning cervicomediastinal parathyroid cyst. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1979;88:545-9.

Mediastinal parathyroid cysts revisited. T W Shields, S C Immerman, Ann Thorac Surg. 67Shields TW, Immerman SC. Mediastinal parathyroid cysts revisited. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:581-90.

Report of two cases and a review of the literature. S P Haid, H L Method, J M Beal, Arch Surg. 94Parathyroid cystsHaid SP, Method HL, Beal JM. Parathyroid cysts. Report of two cases and a review of the literature. Arch Surg 1967;94:421-6.

Parathyroid cyst: a rare cause of an anterior neck mass. B A Jha, N M Nagarkar, S Kochhar, J Laryngol Otol. 113Jha BA, Nagarkar NM, Kochhar S, et al. Parathyroid cyst: a rare cause of an anterior neck mass. J Laryngol Otol 1999;113:73-5.

A giant nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst. G Matton, Eur J Plast Surg. 14Matton G. A giant nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst. Eur J Plast Surg 1991;14:94-6.

Parathyroid cyst: case report of a rare surgical lesion of the neck. K A Mills, H L Aanning, S D J Med. 43Mills KA, Aanning HL. Parathyroid cyst: case report of a rare surgical lesion of the neck. S D J Med 1990;43:15-7.

Functioning and nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts: entities with different origin and clinical characteristics in 2 cases. L Mosso, J M López, P Trincado, Rev Med Chil. 125Article in SpanishMosso L, López JM, Trincado P, et al. [Functioning and non- functioning parathyroid cysts: entities with different origin and clinical characteristics in 2 cases]. [Article in Spanish]. Rev Med Chil 1997;125:1049-54.

Parathyroid cyst: a rare case report. R R Pai, R Verghese, K R Pai, Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 39Pai RR, Verghese R, Pai KR, et al. Parathyroid cyst: a rare case report. Indian J Pathol Microbiol 1996;39:297-8.

A case of nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst. H Sunose, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (Tokyo). 71Sunose H. A case of nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (Tokyo) 1999;71:477-80.

Radiology quiz case 1. Diagnosis: parathyroid cyst (PC). J Virbalas, E Ransom, A Kacker, Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 136Virbalas J, Ransom E, Kacker A. Radiology quiz case 1. Diagnosis: parathyroid cyst (PC). Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2010;136: 924, 926-927.

Parathyroid cysts,;1; a rare condition: a case report and review of the literature. C Codreanu, C M Codreanu, Chirurgia (Bucur). 106Codreanu C, Codreanu CM. Parathyroid cysts,;1; a rare condition: a case report and review of the literature. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2011;106:127-9.

Mediastinal parathyroid cyst. D College, P Rohatgi, J Comput Assist Tomogr. 7College D, Rohatgi P. Mediastinal parathyroid cyst. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1983;7:140-2.

. S Furuya, T Mimura, H Matsuoka, Parathyroid cyst and cervical thymic cyst. Horumon to Rinsho. 18Furuya S, Mimura T, Matsuoka H, et al. Parathyroid cyst and cervical thymic cyst. Horumon to Rinsho 1970;18:1015-20.

Transcervical thymectomy: an integral part of neck exploration for hyperparathyroidism. J B Freeman, B M Sherman, E E Mason, Arch Surg. 111Freeman JB, Sherman BM, Mason EE. Transcervical thymectomy: an integral part of neck exploration for hyperparathyroidism. Arch Surg 1976;111:359-64.

Parathyroid cyst and hyperparathyroidism. E Elizondo, M Amondarain, A José, Surgery. 143Elizondo E, Amondarain M, José A. Parathyroid cyst and hyperpara- thyroidism. Surgery 2008;143:447-8.

Giant functioning mediastinal parathyroid cyst: an unusual cause of exertional dyspnea and mild dysphagia. F Davoli, O Rena, E Pirondini, Arch Bronconeumol. 49Davoli F, Rena O, Pirondini E, et al. Giant functioning mediastinal parathyroid cyst: an unusual cause of exertional dyspnea and mild dysphagia. Arch Bronconeumol 2013;49:408-12.

Mediastinal parathyroid cyst report of a case and review of the literature. C Cruse, A Daouk, Am J Surg. 135Cruse C, Daouk A. Mediastinal parathyroid cyst report of a case and review of the literature. Am J Surg 1978;135:714-6.

. V Thomas De Montpréville, P Dartevelle, E Dulmet, Parathyroid cyst of the anterior mediastinum. Article in FrenchThomas de Montpréville V, Dartevelle P, Dulmet E. [Parathyroid cyst of the anterior mediastinum]. [Article in French].

. Ann Pathol. 13Ann Pathol 1983;13:247-9.

Parathyroid cysts. I Gough, Aust N Z J Surg. 69Gough I. Parathyroid cysts. Aust N Z J Surg 1999;69:404-6.

. H Hirano, Y Miyamoto, N Tsubota, Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi. 35Two patients with mediastinal parathyroid cysts. Article in JapaneseHirano H, Miyamoto Y, Tsubota N, et al. [Two patients with mediastinal parathyroid cysts]. [Article in Japanese]. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi 1997;35:82-8.

. A Hoskuldsdottir, H Kristvinsson, H Gudjonsson, Laeknabladid. 100Mediastinal parathyroid cyst: a case report. Article in IcelandicHoskuldsdottir A, Kristvinsson H, Gudjonsson H, et al. [Mediastinal parathyroid cyst: a case report]. [Article in Icelandic]. Laeknabladid 2014;100:453-5.

Parathyroid cyst: report of case in the mediastinum. N Petri, I Holten, J Laryngol Otol. 104Petri N, Holten I. Parathyroid cyst: report of case in the mediastinum. J Laryngol Otol 1990;104:56-7.

. M Shishido, M Nagao, Parathyroid cyst presenting as a mediastinal tumor. Article in JapaneseShishido M, Nagao M. [Parathyroid cyst presenting as a mediastinal tumor]. [Article in Japanese].

. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi. 34Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi 1996;34:894-7.

Parathyroid gland cyst as an unusual cause of superior mediastinal mass. O Supic, S Stepanov, Arch Oncol. 11Supic O, Stepanov S. Parathyroid gland cyst as an unusual cause of superior mediastinal mass. Arch Oncol 2003;11:25-6.

. K Togashi, Y Sato, M Yazawa, Mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Article in JapaneseTogashi K, Sato Y, Yazawa M. [Mediastinal parathyroid cyst]. [Article in Japanese].

. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 39Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi 1991;39:117-20.

Mediastinal parathyroid cyst: a case report and review of the literature. H Matsuoka, N Tsubota, M Yoshimura, Nippon Kokyuki Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 5Matsuoka H, Tsubota N, Yoshimura M. Mediastinal parathyroid cyst: a case report and review of the literature. Nippon Kokyuki Geka Gakkai Zasshi 1991;5:420-4.

A case of parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. S Akiyama, J Jpn Surg Assoc. 481359Akiyama S. A case of parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. J Jpn Surg Assoc 1987;48:1359.

Parathyroid cysts. K Alonso, M Podobnikar, A S Haraszti, J Med Assoc Ga. 73Alonso K, Podobnikar M, Haraszti AS. Parathyroid cysts. J Med Assoc Ga 1984;73:231-2.

Parathyroid cysts. L G Pascual, R S Canonge, G O Alfonso, Med Clin. 94518Pascual LG, Canonge RS, Alfonso GO, et al. Parathyroid cysts. Med Clin 1990;94:518.

. O H Clark, Parathyroid, Am J Surg. 135Clark OH. Parathyroid cysts. Am J Surg 1978;135:395-402.

Parathyroid cysts: a report of eleven cases including two associated with hyperparathyroid crisis. D B Calandra, K H Shah, R A Prinz, Surgery. 94Calandra DB, Shah KH, Prinz RA, et al. Parathyroid cysts: a report of eleven cases including two associated with hyperparathyroid crisis. Surgery 1983;94:887-92.

Ectopic intrathyroidal nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst. M Capezzone, E Morabito, P Bellitti, Endocr Pract. 13Capezzone M, Morabito E, Bellitti P, et al. Ectopic intrathyroidal nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst. Endocr Pract 2007;13:56-8.

An unusual "thyroid cyst": intrathyroidal parathyroid cyst. M Atwan, R Chetty, Endocr Pathol. 22Atwan M, Chetty R. An unusual "thyroid cyst": intrathyroidal parathyroid cyst. Endocr Pathol 2011;22:108-11.

Giant intrathyroidal parathyroid cystic adenoma. B Korukluoglu, E Ergul, S Yalcin, J Pak Med Assoc. 58592Korukluoglu B, Ergul E, Yalcin S. Giant intrathyroidal parathyroid cystic adenoma. J Pak Med Assoc 2008;58:592.

Hyperparathyroidism due to eutopic PTH secretion from an ectopic intrathymic parathyroid cyst. W H Hoi, Mks Leow, A Sule, Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 17Hoi WH, Leow MKS, Sule A, et al. Hyperparathyroidism due to eutopic PTH secretion from an ectopic intrathymic parathyroid cyst. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2011;17:511-3.

Parathyroid cyst -of the thymus. W G Mccluggage, Cfj Russell, P G Toner, Thorax. 50McCluggage WG, Russell CFJ, Toner PG. Parathyroid cyst -of the thymus. Thorax 1995;50:913-4.

Parathyroid cysts. L J Pyrtek, J Rosenberg, R Orlando, M Ludwig, L J Pyrtek, discussion of. 143Pyrtek LJ. Parathyroid cysts. In discussion of Rosenberg J, Orlando R, Ludwig M, Pyrtek LJ. Am J Surg 1982;143:473-80.

Mediastinal Parathyroid Adenomas and Carcinomas. A G Bondeson, N W Thompson, Lea and FebigerPliladelphia, PABondeson AG, Thompson NW. Mediastinal Parathyroid Adenomas and Carcinomas. Lea and Febiger, Pliladelphia, PA:1991.

Article in Italian. C Casella, Della Casa, D Baronchelli, C , Ann Ital Chir. 76Giant intrathyroidal parathyroid cyst with hyperparathyroidism: a case reportCasella C, Della Casa D, Baronchelli C, et al. [Giant intrathyroidal parathyroid cyst with hyperparathyroidism: a case report]. Article in Italian. Ann Ital Chir 2005;76:391-4.

Mixed multilocular ectopic thymic cyst with parathyroid element presenting as neck mass. P Gayatri, D Sanjay, N Ajay, Ann Acad Med. 41Gayatri P, Sanjay D, Ajay N, et al. Mixed multilocular ectopic thymic cyst with parathyroid element presenting as neck mass. Ann Acad Med 2012;41:271-2.

. Papavramidis, 9728Papavramidis et al. Medicine (2018) 97:28 Medicine

Hyperfunctioning intrathyroidal parathyroid cyst. M R Rickels, J E Langer, S J Mandel, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 89Rickels MR, Langer JE, Mandel SJ. Hyperfunctioning intrathyroidal parathyroid cyst. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:1051-2.

Hyperfunctioning parathyroid cysts: a case report. H Altun, A Özdemir, E Hamaloglu, Acta Chir Belg. 104Altun H, Özdemir A, Hamaloglu E, et al. Hyperfunctioning parathyroid cysts: a case report. Acta Chir Belg 2004;104:234-6.

A case of amyloid goiter associated with intrathyroid parathyroid and lymphoepithelial cyst. A G Abdou, M A Kandil, Endocr Pathol. 20Abdou AG, Kandil MA. A case of amyloid goiter associated with intrathyroid parathyroid and lymphoepithelial cyst. Endocr Pathol 2009;20:243-8.

Parathyroid cyst: an unusual cervical tumor. D C Mcgoon, D A Cooley, Surgery. 30Report of 3 casesMcGoon DC, Cooley DA. Parathyroid cyst: an unusual cervical tumor. Report of 3 cases. Surgery 1951;30:725-32.

In discussion of Fratkin LB. Parathyroid cyst: report of four cases. R L Johnsrud, Am Surg. 31Johnsrud RL. In discussion of Fratkin LB. Parathyroid cyst: report of four cases. Am Surg 1965;31:420-8.

Parathyroid cyst of the mediastinum. W C Thacker, V H Wells, E R Hall, Ann Surg. 174Thacker WC, Wells VH, Hall ER. Parathyroid cyst of the mediasti- num. Ann Surg 1971;174:969-75.

Nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. Y Hattori, J Jpn Assoc Chest Surg. 12Hattori Y. Nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. J Jpn Assoc Chest Surg 1998;12:543-8.

Report of three cases clinically simulating nodular goiter. D B Maxwell, Rcj Horn, J E Rhoads, Arch Surg. 64Cysts of the parathyroidMaxwell DB, Horn RCJ, Rhoads JE. Cysts of the parathyroid. Report of three cases clinically simulating nodular goiter. Arch Surg 1952;64:208-13.

A propos des kystes parathyroıdiens. M H Welti, Report of parathyroid cystsWelti MH. A propos des kystes parathyroıdiens [Report of parathyroid cysts].

. Mem Acad Chir. 72Mem Acad Chir 1946;72:33-5.

Nonfunctional parathyroid cystsreport of four cases and review of the Japanese literature. T Ishida, T Hosono, K Inoue, Horumon to Rinsho. 31Ishida T, Hosono T, Inoue K, et al. Nonfunctional parathyroid cysts- report of four cases and review of the Japanese literature. Horumon to Rinsho 1983;31:861-7.

Needle aspiration of nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts. A D Katz, D Dunkleman, Arch Surg. 119Katz AD, Dunkleman D. Needle aspiration of nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts. Arch Surg 1984;119:307-8.

Mediastinal parathyroid tumors. G A Higgins, Arch Surg. 123In discussion of Clark OHHiggins GA. Mediastinal parathyroid tumors [In discussion of Clark OH]. Arch Surg 1988;123:1096-100.

A case of non-functioning parathyroid cyst which was thought as a mediastinal tumor. Y Kawashima, Horumon to Rinsho. 36Kawashima Y. A case of non-functioning parathyroid cyst which was thought as a mediastinal tumor. Horumon to Rinsho 1988;36:473-5.

Misleading imaging results in the diagnosis of parathyroid cysts. C R Hughes, B Kanmaz, A T Isitman, Clin Nucl Med. 19Hughes CR, Kanmaz B, Isitman AT, et al. Misleading imaging results in the diagnosis of parathyroid cysts. Clin Nucl Med 1994;19:422-5.

A case of giant parathyroid cyst in the superior mediastinum. Nihon Rinsho Gekai Gekkia Zasshi. S Kumeda, R Kondo, H Watanabe, J Jpn Clin Surg Assoc. 57269supplKumeda S, Kondo R, Watanabe H. A case of giant parathyroid cyst in the superior mediastinum. Nihon Rinsho Gekai Gekkia Zasshi. J Jpn Clin Surg Assoc 1996;57(suppl):269.

Asymptotic parathyroid cyst: diagnostic difficulties (a case report). S Jaroszewicz, L Cyryłowski, M Chosia, Acta Chir Hung. 37Jaroszewicz S, Cyryłowski L, Chosia M, et al. Asymptotic parathyroid cyst: diagnostic difficulties (a case report). Acta Chir Hung 1998;37: 227-33.

Macrocysts of the parathyroids. R G Kooy, E V Ghislandi, IMJ Ill Med J. 156Kooy RG, Ghislandi EV. Macrocysts of the parathyroids. IMJ Ill Med J 1979;156:171-3.

Cysts of parathyroid glands. B Markalous, J Svarovsky, J Suchomelova, Otorinolaryngol Prague. 46Markalous B, Svarovsky J, Suchomelova J. Cysts of parathyroid glands. Otorinolaryngol Prague 1997;46:122-6.

Small nonfunctional parathyroid cysts: single institution experience. Fustar Preradovic, L Danic, D Dzodic, R , Endocr J. 64Fustar Preradovic L, Danic D, Dzodic R. Small nonfunctional parathyroid cysts: single institution experience. Endocr J 2017;64:151-6.

Recurrent nerve palsy due to parathyroid cyst. G Coates, K Pearman, Rtj Holl-Allen, Int Surg. 76Coates G, Pearman K, Holl-Allen RTJ. Recurrent nerve palsy due to parathyroid cyst. Int Surg 1991;76:192-3.

Thoracoscopic resection of a giant mediastinal parathyroid cyst. A Dell&apos;amore, N Asadi, T Bartalena, Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 62Dell'Amore A, Asadi N, Bartalena T, et al. Thoracoscopic resection of a giant mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2014;62:444-50.

Management of a mediastinal cyst causing hyperparathyroidism and tracheal obstruction. L Guvendik, L K Oo, S Roy, Ann Thorac Surg. 55Guvendik L, Oo LK, Roy S, et al. Management of a mediastinal cyst causing hyperparathyroidism and tracheal obstruction. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;55:167-8.

Asthma secondary to tracheal obstruction by parathyroid cyst. W Haque, J Roberts, M Dishop, Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol Extra. 5Haque W, Roberts J, Dishop M, et al. Asthma secondary to tracheal obstruction by parathyroid cyst. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol Extra 2010;5:131-3.

Visual vignette. Parathyroid cyst. J Orrego, Endocr Pract. 11292Orrego J. Visual vignette. Parathyroid cyst. Endocr Pract 2005;11:292.

. J A Pérez, M T Poblete, C Salem, Rev Med Chil. 131Symptomatic parathyroid cysts. Report of one case. Article in SpanishPérez JA, Poblete MT, Salem C. [Symptomatic parathyroid cysts. Report of one case] [Article in Spanish]. Rev Med Chil 2003;131: 432-5.

Stridor due to an unsuspected parathyroid cyst in a thirty-two-year-old woman with goiter. S Saberi, G M Doherty, N H Esfandiari, Thyroid. 20Saberi S, Doherty GM, Esfandiari NH. Stridor due to an unsuspected parathyroid cyst in a thirty-two-year-old woman with goiter. Thyroid 2010;20:1315-6.

A case of idiopathic neck bleeding from a parathyroid cyst. H Shibata, B Kuze, H Hayashi, Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 117Article in JapaneseShibata H, Kuze B, Hayashi H, et al. [A case of idiopathic neck bleeding from a parathyroid cyst] [Article in Japanese]. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho 2014;117:1194-9.

Mediastinal parathyroid cyst with tracheal constriction. Y Umemori, S Makihara, K Kotani, Jpn J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 50Umemori Y, Makihara S, Kotani K, et al. Mediastinal parathyroid cyst with tracheal constriction. Jpn J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2002;50: 85-7.

A case of parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. S Hayashi, Nihon-Kyobu Rinsho. 25Hayashi S. A case of parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. Nihon- Kyobu Rinsho 1966;25:350-4.

A case of parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. Y Narita, Rinsho Geka. 47Narita Y. A case of parathyroid cyst in the mediastinum. Rinsho Geka 1992;47:525-8.

A case of mediastinal parathyroid cyst. E Takahashi, A Kohno, A Narimatsu, Jpn J Clin Radiol. 33Takahashi E, Kohno A, Narimatsu A, et al. A case of mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Jpn J Clin Radiol 1988;33:393-6.

Kyste parathyroıdien me' diastinal. M Carlier, J Van Geertruyden, Mediastinal parathyroid cystCarlier M, Van Geertruyden J. Kyste parathyroıdien me' diastinal [Mediastinal parathyroid cyst].

. Sem Hopitaux Paris. 57Sem Hopitaux Paris 1981;57:501-4.

Cytomorphology of a mediastinal parathyroid cyst. V Marco, M A Carrasco, C Marco, Acta Cytol. 27Report of a case mimicking malignancyMarco V, Carrasco MA, Marco C, et al. Cytomorphology of a mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Report of a case mimicking malignancy. Acta Cytol 1983;27:688-92.

In discussion of Fratkin LB. Parathyroid cyst: report of four cases. W H Sutherland, A D Mckenzie, Am Surg. 31Sutherland WH, McKenzie AD. In discussion of Fratkin LB. Parathyroid cyst: report of four cases. Am Surg 1965;31:420-8.

Unusual diagnostic problems in the neck. O H Beahrs, K D Devine, Surg Clin North Am. 41Beahrs OH, Devine KD. Unusual diagnostic problems in the neck. Surg Clin North Am 1961;41:1069-75.

Propos de cinq nouvelles observations de kyste parathyroıdien. H Welti, R Gerard-Marchant, Report of five new observations of parathyroid cystsWelti H, Gerard-Marchant R. Propos de cinq nouvelles observations de kyste parathyroıdien [Report of five new observations of parathyroid cysts].

. Mem Acad Chir. 82Mem Acad Chir 1956;82:994-1001.

Acutely symptomatic benign mediastinal cysts. T Darras, L Lenaerts, J Jaucot, J Belge Radiol. 75Darras T, Lenaerts L, Jaucot J, et al. Acutely symptomatic benign mediastinal cysts. J Belge Radiol 1992;75:111-4.

. T Korhonen, E Alhava, A Seppä, Article in Finnish. Duodecim. 101Hyperparathyroidism and large parathyroid cystKorhonen T, Alhava E, Seppä A, et al. [Hyperparathyroidism and large parathyroid cyst]. Article in Finnish. Duodecim 1985;101:1380-2.

Parathyroid cyst with reccurent vocal cord paresis. A B Grey, J Shaw, N Anderson, Aust N Z J Surg. 63Grey AB, Shaw J, Anderson N, et al. Parathyroid cyst with reccurent vocal cord paresis. Aust N Z J Surg 1993;63:561-2.

Mediastinal parathyroid cysts. O Landau, D W Chamberlain, R S Kennedy, Ann Thorac Surg. 63Landau O, Chamberlain DW, Kennedy RS, et al. Mediastinal parathyroid cysts. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;63:951-3.

A benign parathyroid cyst presenting with hoarse voice. P Sen, N Flower, M Papesch, J Laryngol Otol. 114Sen P, Flower N, Papesch M, et al. A benign parathyroid cyst presenting with hoarse voice. J Laryngol Otol 2000;114:147-8.

Vocal cord paralysis secondary to a benign parathyroid cyst: a case report with clinical, imaging and pathological findings (2008:6b). E K Woo, R Simo, B Conn, Eur Radiol. 18Woo EK, Simo R, Conn B, et al. Vocal cord paralysis secondary to a benign parathyroid cyst: a case report with clinical, imaging and pathological findings (2008:6b). Eur Radiol 2008;18:2015-8.

Cystic parathyroid presenting as an apparent thyroid goiter. H Cao, C Lai, C Head, Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 265Cao H, Lai C, Head C, et al. Cystic parathyroid presenting as an apparent thyroid goiter. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2008;265: 1285-8.

Hypercalcemic crisis secondary to a functioning parathyroid cyst. D Albertson, R Marshall, W Jarman, Am J Surg. 141Albertson D, Marshall R, Jarman W. Hypercalcemic crisis secondary to a functioning parathyroid cyst. Am J Surg 1981;141:175-7.

Hyperparathyroidism with a functioning parathyroid cyst. I Ak, M F Acikalin, Clin Nucl Med. 32Ak I, Acikalin MF. Hyperparathyroidism with a functioning parathyroid cyst. Clin Nucl Med 2007;32:713-5.

Quiste paratiroideo e hiperparatiroidismo. J A Arratíbell, X Aribe, C Olalla, Cir Esp. 83Arratíbell JA, Aribe X, Olalla C, et al. Quiste paratiroideo e hiperparatiroidismo. Cir Esp 2008;83:94-100.

Occult hyperparathyroidism presenting as a parathyroid cyst. A Howell, J M Gumpel, R Hoffenberg, Proc R Soc Med. 65Howell A, Gumpel JM, Hoffenberg R. Occult hyperparathyroidism presenting as a parathyroid cyst. Proc R Soc Med 1972;65:881-2.

A parathyroid cyst and an adenoma associated with primary hyperparathyroidism: report of a case. H Inoue, Y Wakabayashi, T Konishi, Article in JapaneseInoue H, Wakabayashi Y, Konishi T, et al. [A parathyroid cyst and an adenoma associated with primary hyperparathyroidism: report of a case] [Article in Japanese].

. Hinyokika Kiyo. 36Hinyokika Kiyo 1990;36:1197-202.

. C Kasperk, H Buhr, F Raue, Endocrinously active parathyroid cysts. Their diagnosis by the determination of intact parathormone in thecyst fluid. Article in GermanKasperk C, Buhr H, Raue F, et al. [Endocrinously active parathyroid cysts. Their diagnosis by the determination of intact parathormone in thecyst fluid] [Article in German].

. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 117Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1992;117: 1093-6.

Coexistence of a parathyroid adenoma and parathyroid cyst causing primary hyperparathyroidism. G Ardito, G Fadda, D Danese, J Endocrinol Invest. 26Ardito G, Fadda G, Danese D, et al. Coexistence of a parathyroid adenoma and parathyroid cyst causing primary hyperparathyroidism. J Endocrinol Invest 2003;26:679-82.

Parathyroid cyst and multicystic parathyroid adenoma. K Kameyaga, K Mori, Acta Pathol Jpn. 12Kameyaga K, Mori K. Parathyroid cyst and multicystic parathyroid adenoma. Acta Pathol Jpn 1962;12:99-103.

A case of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 with growth hormone and prolactin secreting pituitary adenoma, functioning large parathyroid cyst, and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Y Kinoshita, H Nonaka, H Yamaguchi, Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 75Article in JapaneseKinoshita Y, Nonaka H, Yamaguchi H, et al. [A case of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 with growth hormone and prolactin secreting pituitary adenoma, functioning large parathyroid cyst, and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome] [Article in Japanese]. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi 1986;75:512-21.

Parathyroid carcinoma presenting as a giant mediastinal retrotracheal functioning cyst. F J Vazquez, L S Aparicio, C G Gallo, Singapore Med J. 48Vazquez FJ, Aparicio LS, Gallo CG, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma presenting as a giant mediastinal retrotracheal functioning cyst. Singapore Med J 2007;48:e304-7.

Massive extracapsular hemorrhage from a parathyroid cyst. K J Simcic, M T Mcdermott, G J Crawford, Arch Surg. 124Simcic KJ, McDermott MT, Crawford GJ, et al. Massive extracapsular hemorrhage from a parathyroid cyst. Arch Surg 1989;124:1347-50.

. K Sugimoto, T Umekawa, T Kurita, A case of functioning parathyroid cyst. Article in JapaneseSugimoto K, Umekawa T, Kurita T. [A case of functioning parathyroid cyst] [Article in Japanese].

. Hinyokika Kiyo. 43Hinyokika Kiyo 1997;43:903-6.

. K Tsujikawa, Y Kobayashi, S Yamaguchi, A case of functioning parathyroid cyst. Article in JapaneseTsujikawa K, Kobayashi Y, Yamaguchi S, et al. [A case of functioning parathyroid cyst] [Article in Japanese].

. Hinyokika Kiyo. 45Hinyokika Kiyo 1999;45: 547-9.

Macroscopic parathyroid cysts with primary hyperparathyroidism: report of a case. S Mizutani, T Sonoda, T Ohkawa, Hinyokika Kiyo. 8Mizutani S, Sonoda T, Ohkawa T, et al. Macroscopic parathyroid cysts with primary hyperparathyroidism: report of a case. Hinyokika Kiyo 1962;8:229-305.

Parathyroid cysts: functional and mediastinal. I B Margolis, R Wayne, C H Organ, Surgery. 77Margolis IB, Wayne R, Organ CH. Parathyroid cysts: functional and mediastinal. Surgery 1975;77:462-6.

Giant parathyroid adenoma: case presentation. D B Greer, Rocky Mountain Med J. 64Greer DB. Giant parathyroid adenoma: case presentation. Rocky Mountain Med J 1967;64:92-4.

A large intrathoracic parathyroid adenoma. P Daggett, Ida Johnston, D Lowe, Thorax. 31Daggett P, Johnston IDA, Lowe D. A large intrathoracic parathyroid adenoma. Thorax 1976;31:782-5.

Thoracoscopic resection of mediastinal parathyroid adenoma with cyst and hyperparathyroidism: a case report. M Shimizu, H Akamatsu, T Yoshizaki, Nippon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 45Shimizu M, Akamatsu H, Yoshizaki T, et al. Thoracoscopic resection of mediastinal parathyroid adenoma with cyst and hyperparathyroid- ism: a case report. Nippon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi 1997;45: 1972-5.

A case of mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Haigan. S Ohi, S Ohta, K Murakoshi, Jpn J Lung Cancer). 335793supplOhi S, Ohta S, Murakoshi K. A case of mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Haigan (Jpn J Lung Cancer) 1993;33(suppl 5):793.

. Papavramidis, 97:28 www.md-journal.comPapavramidis et al. Medicine (2018) 97:28 www.md-journal.com

Adenome parathyroıdien a symptomatologie re -nale pure chez une femme enceinte. Guerison chirugicale. Dosage de la parathromone dans le liquide de l' ade'nome kystique [Parathyroid adenoma with purely renal symptoms in a pregnant woman. H Chimenes, J Moreaux, C H Lefrileux, Surgical cure. Estimation of parathormone in the cystic adenoma liquidChimenes H, Moreaux J, Lefrileux CH, et al. Adenome parathyroıdien a symptomatologie re -nale pure chez une femme enceinte. Guerison chirugicale. Dosage de la parathromone dans le liquide de l' ade'nome kystique [Parathyroid adenoma with purely renal symptoms in a pregnant woman. Surgical cure. Estimation of parathormone in the cystic adenoma liquid].

. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 24Ann Endocrinol (Paris) 1963;24:642-9.

Parathyroid cyst and hyperparathyroidism. E Klein, A Yelin, G Ben-Ari, Int Surg. 64Klein E, Yelin A, Ben-Ari G. Parathyroid cyst and hyperparathyroid- ism. Int Surg 1979;64:79-81.

Hiperparatiroidismo por quiste gigante de paratiroides. C Zafon, R Simo, J A Baena, Hyperparathyroidism from giant parathyroid cystZafon C, Simo R, Baena JA, et al. Hiperparatiroidismo por quiste gigante de paratiroides [Hyperparathyroidism from giant parathyroid cyst].

. Med Clin. 109Med Clin 1997;109:198.

Hyperparathyroidism associated with a parathyroid cyst: an unusual presentation. E P Simkin, Br J Surg. 63Simkin EP. Hyperparathyroidism associated with a parathyroid cyst: an unusual presentation. Br J Surg 1976;63:927-8.

Sonography of thyroid and parathyroid. G A Gooding, Radiol Clin North Am. 31Gooding GA. Sonography of thyroid and parathyroid. Radiol Clin North Am 1993;31:967-89.

Primary hyperparathyroidism: functioning hemorrhagic parathyroid cyst. G Gooding, Q Y Quan-Yang Duh, J Clin Ultrasound. 25Gooding G, Quan-Yang Duh QY. Primary hyperparathyroidism: functioning hemorrhagic parathyroid cyst. J Clin Ultrasound 1997;25: 82-4.

Primary hyperparathyroidism associated with a cystic lesion in the neck: probable parathyroid cyst. C Arnaud, J Walker, R Ewer, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 21Arnaud C, Walker J, Ewer R. Primary hyperparathyroidism associated with a cystic lesion in the neck: probable parathyroid cyst. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1961;21:833-8.

Cystic parathyroid gland hyperplasia-hyperparathyroidism presenting as a neck mass. M Fallon, J Haines, S Teitelbaum, Am J Clin Pathol. 77Fallon M, Haines J, Teitelbaum S. Cystic parathyroid gland hyperplasia-hyperparathyroidism presenting as a neck mass. Am J Clin Pathol 1982;77:104-7.

. N Gattas, I Solt, N Loberant, Harefuah. 146Parathyroid cyst associated with acute respiratory failure and jugular vein thrombosis. Article in HebrewGattas N, Solt I, Loberant N, et al. [Parathyroid cyst associated with acute respiratory failure and jugular vein thrombosis] [Article in Hebrew]. Harefuah 2007;146:599-601.

Giant mediastinal parathyroid cyst: an unusual cause of hypercalcemic crisis report and review of the literature case. A T Gurbuz, M Peetz, Surgery. 120Gurbuz AT, Peetz M. Giant mediastinal parathyroid cyst: an unusual cause of hypercalcemic crisis report and review of the literature case. Surgery 1996;120:795-800.

. F Hongo, A Fujito, J Kato, Two cases of functioning parathyroid cysts. Article in JapaneseHongo F, Fujito A, Kato J, et al. [Two cases of functioning parathyroid cysts] [Article in Japanese].

. Hinyokika Kiyo. 44Hinyokika Kiyo 1998;44:661-5.

Intracystic hemorrhage in a mediastinal cystic adenoma causing parathyrotoxic crisis. A Manouras, K G Toutouzas, H Markogiannakis, Head Neck. 30Manouras A, Toutouzas KG, Markogiannakis H, et al. Intracystic hemorrhage in a mediastinal cystic adenoma causing parathyrotoxic crisis. Head Neck 2008;30:127-31.

Parathyroid crisis due to a cystic parathyroid adenoma. G Serrasolera, H G Fernándeza, J Q Juanalsa, Endocrinol Nutr. 58SerraSolera G, Fernándeza HG, Juanalsa JQ, et al. Parathyroid crisis due to a cystic parathyroid adenoma. Endocrinol Nutr 2011;58: 148-51.

Hypercalcemic crisis due to a mediastinal parathyroid cyst diagnosed by ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration. Y Zhu, N Li, L Lu, Chin Med J. 123Zhu Y, Li N, Lu L, et al. Hypercalcemic crisis due to a mediastinal parathyroid cyst diagnosed by ultrasound-guided fine needle aspira- tion. Chin Med J 2010;123:3731-3.

Presentation of 6 cases with parathyroid cysts and discussion of the literature. D Wirowski, C Wicke, H Bohner, Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 116Wirowski D, Wicke C, Bohner H, et al. Presentation of 6 cases with parathyroid cysts and discussion of the literature. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2008;116:501-6.

Giant double parathyroid adenoma presenting as a hypercalcaemic crisis. T J Fahey, E Hibbert, P Brady, Aust N Z J Surg. 65Fahey TJ, Hibbert E, Brady P, et al. Giant double parathyroid adenoma presenting as a hypercalcaemic crisis. Aust N Z J Surg 1995;65:292-4.

Spontaneous bleeding into a parathyroid cyst. J A Dick, K G Brame, W J Owen, Br J Surg. 72693Dick JA, Brame KG, Owen WJ. Spontaneous bleeding into a parathyroid cyst. Br J Surg 1985;72:693.

Spontaneous remission of hypercalcemia in a functioning parathyroid cyst. O Ozaki, M Sakamoto, Y Matsui, Jpn J Surg. 14Ozaki O, Sakamoto M, Matsui Y, et al. Spontaneous remission of hypercalcemia in a functioning parathyroid cyst. Jpn J Surg 1984;14:315-9.

Spontaneous retropharyngeal hematoma of a parathyroid cyst: report of a case. I Taniguchi, T Maeda, K Morimoto, Surg Today. 33Taniguchi I, Maeda T, Morimoto K, et al. Spontaneous retrophar- yngeal hematoma of a parathyroid cyst: report of a case. Surg Today 2003;33:354-7.

Multiple functional parathyroid cysts. N Glynn, J Cunningham, W Tormey, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 98Glynn N, Cunningham J, Tormey W, et al. Multiple functional parathyroid cysts. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:2641-2.

Phaeochromocytoma with ectopic calcitonin production and parathyroid cyst. T Kalager, E Glück, P Heimann, Br Med J. 221Kalager T, Glück E, Heimann P, et al. Phaeochromocytoma with ectopic calcitonin production and parathyroid cyst. Br Med J 1977;2:21.

A large functioning parathyroid cyst in a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. H Tamiya, M Miyakawa, H Suzuki, Endocr J. 60Tamiya H, Miyakawa M, Suzuki H, et al. A large functioning parathyroid cyst in a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Endocr J 2013;60:709-14.

Quiste paratiroideo: diagnóstico diferencial de tumoración cervical. L E Colindres, M A Rodríguez, I G Casado, An Pediatr. 58Colindres LE, Rodríguez MA, Casado IG, et al. Quiste paratiroideo: diagnóstico diferencial de tumoración cervical. An Pediatr 2003;58:188-90.

Parathyroid cysts: report of the sixth and youngest pediatric case. J Entwistle, C Pierce, D Johnson, J Pediatr Surg. 29Entwistle J, Pierce C, Johnson D, et al. Parathyroid cysts: report of the sixth and youngest pediatric case. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:1528-9.

Hypercalcemia associated with a parathyroid cyst. K J Cooper, Adk Hill, Y Sangwan, Ulster Med J. 63Cooper KJ, Hill ADK, Sangwan Y, et al. Hypercalcemia associated with a parathyroid cyst. Ulster Med J 1994;63:246-7.

Giant mediastinal masquerading as parathyroid a substernal cyst goiter. W Lydiatt, A Shaha, I Munshi, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 116Lydiatt W, Shaha A, Munshi I, et al. Giant mediastinal masquerading as parathyroid a substernal cyst goiter. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997;116:411-3.

An uncommon cause of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. E G Abate, V Bernet, G R May, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 97Abate EG, Bernet V, May GR, et al. An uncommon cause of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:4304-5.

Compression of the trachea by a mediastinal parathyroid cyst. E Hauet, M Paul, M Salu, Ann Thorac Surg. 64Hauet E, Paul M, Salu M. Compression of the trachea by a mediastinal parathyroid cyst. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;64:851-2.

A rare cystic lesion of the neck: parathyroid cyst. V Kaplanoglu, H Kaplanoglu, D Cılız, pii: bcr2013200813BMJ Case Rep. Kaplanoglu V, Kaplanoglu H, Cılız D, et al. A rare cystic lesion of the neck: parathyroid cyst. BMJ Case Rep 2013;2013:pii: bcr2013200813.

Nonfunctional mediastinal parathyroid cyst: imaging findings in two cases. H Kato, M Kanematsu, T Kiryu, Clin Imaging. 32Kato H, Kanematsu M, Kiryu T, et al. Nonfunctional mediastinal parathyroid cyst: imaging findings in two cases. Clin Imaging 2008;32:310-3.

Parathyroid cyst: often mistaken for a thyroid cyst. C Cappelli, E Gandossi, I Pirola, World J Surg. 312269Cappelli C, Gandossi E, Pirola I, et al. Parathyroid cyst: often mistaken for a thyroid cyst. World J Surg 2007;31:2269.

Concentrations of parathyroid hormone in functioning and non-functioning parathyroid cysts. J Röjdmark, J Monchik, Eur J Surg. 164Röjdmark J, Monchik J. Concentrations of parathyroid hormone in functioning and non-functioning parathyroid cysts. Eur J Surg 1998; 164:65-7.

Treatment of a nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst with tetracycline injection. A Sanchez, H Carretto, Head Neck. 15Sanchez A, Carretto H. Treatment of a nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst with tetracycline injection. Head Neck 1993;15:263-5.

. C E Piccinato, J Cherri, M A Llorach-Velludo, Nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst simulating thyroid nodule. Article in PortuguesePiccinato CE, Cherri J, Llorach-Velludo MA, et al. [Nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst simulating thyroid nodule] [Article in Portuguese].

. Rev Paul Med. 180Rev Paul Med 1990;180:236-8.

Nonfunctional parathyroid cyst: case report. Cem Nardi, R Da Silva, C Serafim, Sao Paulo Med J. 127Nardi CEM, da Silva R, Serafim C, et al. Nonfunctional parathyroid cyst: case report. Sao Paulo Med J 2009;127:382-4.

Parathyroid cyst: often mistaken for a thyroid cyst. M Ujiki, C Sturgeon, R Nayar, World J Surg. 321234Ujiki M, Sturgeon C, Nayar R, et al. Parathyroid cyst: often mistaken for a thyroid cyst. World J Surg 2008;32:1234.

Differentiation of thyroid from parathyroid cysts. S Stoffer, W Szpunar, C D Hawker, JAMA. 2431422Stoffer S, Szpunar W, Hawker CD. Differentiation of thyroid from parathyroid cysts. JAMA 1980;243:1422.

Parathyroid cysts. J Ginsberg, J Young, P Walfish, JAMA. 240Ginsberg J, Young J, Walfish P. Parathyroid cysts. JAMA 1978;240:1506-7.

. K Wakabayashi, T Takahashi, S Tejima, Parathyroid cyst. Article in JapaneseWakabayashi K, Takahashi T, Tejima S. [Parathyroid cyst] [Article in Japanese].

. Nihon Rinsho. 53Nihon Rinsho 1995;53:1004-7.

Unsuspected parathyroid cysts diagnosed by measurement of thyroglobulin and parathyroid hormone concentrations in fluid aspirates. F Pacini, A Antonelli, R Lari, Ann Intern Med. 102Pacini F, Antonelli A, Lari R, et al. Unsuspected parathyroid cysts diagnosed by measurement of thyroglobulin and parathyroid hormone concentrations in fluid aspirates. Ann Intern Med 1985; 102:793-4.

Immunoheterogeneity of parathyroid hormone in parathyroid cysts: diagnostic implications. J Birnbaum, A J Van Herle, J Endocrinol Invest. 12Birnbaum J, Van Herle AJ. Immunoheterogeneity of parathyroid hormone in parathyroid cysts: diagnostic implications. J Endocrinol Invest 1989;12:831-6.

Mediastinal tumors and cysts: collective review. Hnj Oldham, Ann Thorac Surg. 11Oldham HNJ. Mediastinal tumors and cysts: collective review. Ann Thorac Surg 1971;11:246-75.

Management of a functioning mediastinal parathyroid cyst. A Spitz, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 80Spitz A. Management of a functioning mediastinal parathyroid cyst. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:2866-8.

Hormone inactive parathyroid cyst: rare differential diagnosis in the evaluation of cervical cysts. G A Stavrou, R Jahns, P Flemming, Article in GermanStavrou GA, Jahns R, Flemming P, et al. [Hormone inactive parathyroid cyst: rare differential diagnosis in the evaluation of cervical cysts] [Article in German].

. Zentralbl Chir. 132Zentralbl Chir 2007;132:161-4.

Parathyroid cyst. B E Ferrara, S Hazell, T H Parker, South Med J. 78Ferrara BE, Hazell S, Parker TH, et al. Parathyroid cyst. South Med J 1985;78:528-32.

Large parathyroid cysts mimicking thyroid nodules. C A Wang, A L Vickery, F Maloot, Ann Surg. 175Wang CA, Vickery AL, Maloot F. Large parathyroid cysts mimicking thyroid nodules. Ann Surg 1972;175:448-53.

Cytological study of parathyroid cysts: based on 27 observations. A M Paseyro De Morelli, M L Iraola, J Maggiolo, Rev Arg Endocrinol Metab. 24Paseyro de Morelli AM, Iraola ML, Maggiolo J. Cytological study of parathyroid cysts: based on 27 observations. Rev Arg Endocrinol Metab 1987;24:96-8.

Supraclavicular mass in a woman with hyperparathyroidism. C Sistrom, J Hanks, P Feldman, Invest Radiol. 29Sistrom C, Hanks J, Feldman P. Supraclavicular mass in a woman with hyperparathyroidism. Invest Radiol 1994;29:244-7.

Hyperfunctioning cystic parathyroid glands: CT and sonographic findings. A G Krudy, J L Doppman, T H Shawker, AJR Am J Roentgenol. 142Krudy AG, Doppman JL, Shawker TH, et al. Hyperfunctioning cystic parathyroid glands: CT and sonographic findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1984;142:175-8.

Parathyroid cysts: description of two cases and review of the literature. E Mevio, E Gorini, M Sbrocca, Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 24Mevio E, Gorini E, Sbrocca M, et al. Parathyroid cysts: description of two cases and review of the literature. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital 2004;24:161-4.

A parathyroid cyst with mediastinal extension: report of a case. N Hockstein, O Dyce, A Ross, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 126Hockstein N, Dyce O, Ross A, et al. A parathyroid cyst with mediastinal extension: report of a case. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;126:578-80.

Parathyroid cysts. Pcj Chaffanjon, N Cardin, O Chabre, Ann Chir. 126Chaffanjon PCJ, Cardin N, Chabre O, et al. Parathyroid cysts. Ann Chir 2001;126:456-8.

Parathyroid cysts, a rare condition: case report. C Codreanu, Acta Endocrinol (Bucharest). 5Codreanu C. Parathyroid cysts, a rare condition: case report. Acta Endocrinol (Bucharest) 2009;5:411-5.

Parathyroid cyst: medical diagnosis and therapy. A Ramos-Gabatin, R L Young, D Schenk, South Med J. 75Ramos-Gabatin A, Young RL, Schenk D. Parathyroid cyst: medical diagnosis and therapy. South Med J 1982;75:1138-9.

Non-functional parathyroid cystdiagnostic pitfall: a case-report. S Polovina, Z Andjelkovic, D Micic, Vojnosanit Pregl. 72Polovina S, Andjelkovic Z, Micic D. Non-functional parathyroid cyst - diagnostic pitfall: a case-report. Vojnosanit Pregl 2015;72:1032-4.

Hyperparathyroidism caused by a functional parathyroid cyst. K Suzuki, A Sakuta, C Aoki, pii: bcr2012008290BMJ Case Rep. Suzuki K, Sakuta A, Aoki C, et al. Hyperparathyroidism caused by a functional parathyroid cyst. BMJ Case Rep 2013;2013:pii: bcr2012008290.

. A Béquignon, E Babin, S Moreau, Parathyroid cysts. Article in FrenchBéquignon A, Babin E, Moreau S, et al. [Parathyroid cysts] [Article in French].

. Ann Otolaryngol Chir Cervicofac. 118Ann Otolaryngol Chir Cervicofac 2001;118:378-81.

Parathyroid cysts: a case report and review of the literature. J Fortson, V Patel, V Henderson, Laryngoscope. 111Fortson J, Patel V, Henderson V. Parathyroid cysts: a case report and review of the literature. Laryngoscope 2001;111:1726-8.

Le kyste parathyroidien, une cause de tumefaction dans la region du cou. P Uwents, F Debruyne, P Delaere, Parathyroid cyst, aetiology of anterior lower neck massUwents P, Debruyne F, Delaere P, et al. Le kyste parathyroidien, une cause de tumefaction dans la region du cou [Parathyroid cyst, aetiology of anterior lower neck mass].

. Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol (Bord). 115Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol (Bord) 1994; 115:113-5.

. Papavramidis, 9728Papavramidis et al. Medicine (2018) 97:28 Medicine

Parathyroid cyst: report of a case. G D Perdue, I D Martin, Am Surg. 25Perdue GD, Martin ID. Parathyroid cyst: report of a case. Am Surg 1952;25:698-701.

A single-institution 25-year review of true parathyroid cysts. G Ippolito, F F Palazzo, F Sebag, Langenbecks Arch Surg. 391Ippolito G, Palazzo FF, Sebag F, et al. A single-institution 25-year review of true parathyroid cysts. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2006;391: 13-8.

Parathyroid cysts: diagnosis and management. P Ihm, T Dray, R A Sofferman, Laryngoscope. 111Ihm P, Dray T, Sofferman RA, et al. Parathyroid cysts: diagnosis and management. Laryngoscope 2001;111:1576-8.

Parathyroid cyst, a rare cause of cystic cervical lesion. C Ghervan, P Goel, Case report. Med Ultrason. 13Ghervan C, Goel P. Parathyroid cyst, a rare cause of cystic cervical lesion. Case report. Med Ultrason 2011;13:157-60.

Parathyroid cysts with primary hyperparathyroidism: report of a case. Y J Kuo, Y Okada, J Kawamura, Hinyokika Kiyo. 29Kuo YJ, Okada Y, Kawamura J, et al. Parathyroid cysts with primary hyperparathyroidism: report of a case. Hinyokika Kiyo 1983; 29:1531-5.

. T Katsumi, K Murayama, A Tada, Two cases of hyperfunctioning parathyroid cyst. Article in JapaneseKatsumi T, Murayama K, Tada A, et al. [Two cases of hyperfunction- ing parathyroid cyst] [Article in Japanese].

. Hinyokika Kiyo. 32Hinyokika Kiyo 1986;32:1026-9.

Carcinoma in a parathyroid cyst. J G Wright, R W Brangle, IMJ Ill Med J. 168Wright JG, Brangle RW. Carcinoma in a parathyroid cyst. IMJ Ill Med J 1985;168:98-100.

A Proposito de un caso. J Marti, Martin Arregi, F J Mutio, L , Parathyroid cyst. Report of one caseMarti J, Martin Arregi FJ, Mutio L, et al. Quiste Paratiroideo. A Proposito de un caso [Parathyroid cyst. Report of one case].

. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 53Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp 2002;53:302-4.

Diagnosis of parathyroid cysts. Y Oertel, E Wargotz, Am J Clin Pathol. 88Oertel Y, Wargotz E. Diagnosis of parathyroid cysts. Am J Clin Pathol 1987;88:252-3.

. S Nozeran, M Duquenne, S Guyetant, Diagnosis of parathyroid cysts: value of parathyroid hormone level in puncture fluid. Article in FrenchNozeran S, Duquenne M, Guyetant S, et al. [Diagnosis of parathyroid cysts: value of parathyroid hormone level in puncture fluid] [Article in French].

. Presse Med. 29Presse Med 2000;29:939-41.

Parathyroid cyst fluid: discrepancy between C-terminal and intact parathyroid hormone assays. S L Lee, Thyroid. 10Lee SL. Parathyroid cyst fluid: discrepancy between C-terminal and intact parathyroid hormone assays. Thyroid 2000;10:1125-6.

Functional giant parathyroid cyst with high concentration of CA19-9 in cystic fluid. T Makino, T Sugimoto, H Kaji, Endocr J. 50Makino T, Sugimoto T, Kaji H, et al. Functional giant parathyroid cyst with high concentration of CA19-9 in cystic fluid. Endocr J 2003;50:215-9.

Parathyroid gland cyst. G Kassaras, C Nissotakis, J Spiridakis, Am Surg. 76Kassaras G, Nissotakis C, Spiridakis J, et al. Parathyroid gland cyst. Am Surg 2010;76:e11-2.

Surgical management of recurrent parathyroid cyst. L Lassaletta, R Bernaldez, M Garcıa-Pallares, Auris Nasus Larynx. 29Lassaletta L, Bernaldez R, Garcıa-Pallares M, et al. Surgical management of recurrent parathyroid cyst. Auris Nasus Larynx 2002;29:83-5.

Parathyroid cyst: a case report and review of the literature. E Varaldo, M Minuto, Torre G , Ann Ital Chir. 73Varaldo E, Minuto M, Torre G. Parathyroid cyst: a case report and review of the literature. Ann Ital Chir 2001;73:343-5.

A large, nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst recurring after aspiration and subsequently cured by percutaneous ethanol injection. M Zingrillo, M R Ghiggi, A Liuzzi, J Clin Ultrasound. 24Zingrillo M, Ghiggi MR, Liuzzi A. A large, nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst recurring after aspiration and subsequently cured by percutaneous ethanol injection. J Clin Ultrasound 1996;24: 378-82.

Le cisti paratiroidee: considerazioni a proposito di un caso. A Cavallaro, G De Toma, G Cavallaro, Parathyroid cysts: comments apropos a caseCavallaro A, De Toma G, Cavallaro G, et al. Le cisti paratiroidee: considerazioni a proposito di un caso [Parathyroid cysts: comments apropos a case].

. Ann Ital Chir. 70Ann Ital Chir 1999;70:575-81.

Treatment of parathyroid cysts with fine-needle aspiration. B Shi, H Guo, N Tang, Ann Intern Med. 131Shi B, Guo H, Tang N. Treatment of parathyroid cysts with fine-needle aspiration. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:797-8.

Eleven cases of nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst: significance of needle aspiration in diagnosis and management. T Kodama, T Obara, Y Fujimoto, Endocrinol Jpn. 34Kodama T, Obara T, Fujimoto Y, et al. Eleven cases of nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst: significance of needle aspiration in diagnosis and management. Endocrinol Jpn 1987;34:769-77.

Sclerotherapy for benign parathyroid cysts. K Okamura, I Hioroshi, K Sato, Am J Surg. 163Okamura K, Hioroshi I, Sato K, et al. Sclerotherapy for benign parathyroid cysts. Am J Surg 1992;163:344-5.

Successful treatment of parathyroid cyst using ethanol sclerotherapy. M Akel, I Salti, S T Azar, Am J Med Sci. 317Akel M, Salti I, Azar ST. Successful treatment of parathyroid cyst using ethanol sclerotherapy. Am J Med Sci 1999;317:50-2.

Sclerosis with ethanol of a non-functioning parathyroid cyst. García Pascual, L , Endocrinol Nutr. 50García Pascual L. Sclerosis with ethanol of a non-functioning parathyroid cyst. Endocrinol Nutr 2003;50:81-3.

Symptomatic nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts: role of simple aspiration and ethanol ablation. J Y Sung, J H Baek, K S Kim, Eur J Radiol. 82Sung JY, Baek JH, Kim KS, et al. Symptomatic nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts: role of simple aspiration and ethanol ablation. Eur J Radiol 2013;82:316-20.

Diagnostic and therapeutic review of cystic parathyroid lesions. N Pontikides, S Karras, A Kaprara, Hormones. 11Pontikides N, Karras S, Kaprara A, et al. Diagnostic and therapeutic review of cystic parathyroid lesions. Hormones 2013;11:410-8.

Functional mediastinal parathyroid cyst: report of a case. I Mikami, K Koizumi, K Shimizu, Surg Today. 32Mikami I, Koizumi K, Shimizu K, et al. Functional mediastinal parathyroid cyst: report of a case. Surg Today 2002;32: 351-3.

. Z Yang, X H Chen, J G Fang, Clinical analysis on nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts: a report of six casesYang Z, Chen XH, Fang JG, et al. [Clinical analysis on nonfunctioning parathyroid cysts: a report of six cases].

. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 47Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi 2012;47:417-9.

Parathyroid cysts; Ten cases. A Hamy, S Masson, M F Heymann, Ann Chir. 127Hamy A, Masson S, Heymann MF, et al. Parathyroid cysts; Ten cases. Ann Chir 2002;127:203-7.

Recurrent parathyroid cyst; one case. J Lorenzo, G Fernandez, B Iglesias, An Med Interna. 25Lorenzo J, Fernandez G, Iglesias B, et al. Recurrent parathyroid cyst; one case. An Med Interna 2008;25:231-3.

. Papavramidis, 97:28 www.md-journal.comPapavramidis et al. Medicine (2018) 97:28 www.md-journal.com