# Thrombotic Microangiopathy with Polymyositis/Dermatomyositis: Three Case Reports and a Literature Review

CorpusID: 51894591
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19c4e502375041444fc704244a6575ed1a6ada47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19c4e502375041444fc704244a6575ed1a6ada47)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Thrombotic Microangiopathy with Polymyositis/Dermatomyositis: Three Case Reports and a Literature Review
2018. 2018

Saeko Yamada 
Hiroyuki Yamashita 
Masahiro Nakano 
Hiroaki Hatano 
Toshiharu Sasaki 
Yuko Takahashi 
Hiroshi Kaneko 
Thrombotic Microangiopathy with Polymyositis/Dermatomyositis: Three Case Reports and a Literature Review

Intern Med
572018. 20182259 CASE REPORTpolymyositis/dermatomyositisthrombotic microangiopathiesthrombotic thrombocytopenic purpurahemolytic-uremic syndrome
Thrombotic microangiopathies (TMAs) rarely accompany polymyositis/dermatomyositis. We treated three patients with dermatomyositis combined with TMA. A literature review identified 13 previously reported cases. Exacerbation of myositis at the time of the TMA onset was observed in 62.5% of all patients, suggesting that the TMA onset may be associated with autoantibody production. We also found that cases of TMA with polymyositis/dermatomyositis often had a poor treatment response rate (37.5%). Furthermore, even if treatment was effective, the mortality rate associated with subsequent complications was high, and the survival rate was low (18.8%). Therefore, careful attention should be paid to patient management after TMA treatment.

## Introduction

Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are connective tissue diseases (CTDs), and their principal clinical feature is symmetrical weakness of proximal muscle groups combined with elevated blood levels of muscle enzymes, particularly creatine phosphokinase (CK). The etiology is thought to be autoimmune in nature.

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura ( TTP ) and hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) were originally thought to be different diseases. Because both conditions involve organ damage caused by microvascular thrombosis, the diseases are now considered to be identical and are termed thrombotic microangiopathies (TMAs) (1). The common pathologies of TMAs are microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA), debilitating thrombocytopenia, and organ damage caused by microcirculatory disturbances. The principal difference between TTP and HUS is the mechanism of thrombus formation. The pathology of TTP involves thrombus for-mation attributable to excessive activation of von Willebrand factor (vWF), associated with a decrease in the activity level of ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin; a metalloprotease with 13 thrombospondin type 1 repeats). The pathology of HUS involves thrombus formation, which is attributable to excessive activation of complement components and the development of vascular endothelial cell disorders associated with the complement pathway. Furthermore, in terms of the etiology, HUS can be divided into typical HUS and atypical HUS (aHUS). In aHUS, mutations or autoantibodies lead to dysregulated complement activation, resulting in thrombus formation (2). However, based on recent advances in this field, aHUS was redefined, and secondary TMA was excluded (3,4). Secondary TMA (or secondary HUS) usually results from a coexisting disease or trigger, such as autoimmunity, transplantation, cancer, infection, certain cytotoxic drugs, or pregnancy.

The underlying mechanisms of secondary TMA are heterogeneous. TMA occasionally accompanies CTDs, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). However, TMA is only a rare complication of polymyositis/dermatomyositis (5). We herein report three cases of dermatomyositis with TMA, one of which was TTP associated with inhibitory autoantibodies against ADAMTS13. This is a chart review study of the medical records of 159 patients admitted to our hospital between January 1991 and August 2016 for the treatment of polymyositis or dermatomyositis. Among these patients, we found three with TMA.

We reviewed the literature to identify cases of TMA with dermatomyositis. We searched the Medline database using the terms "polymyositis" or "dermatomyositis," combined with "thrombotic microangiopathies," "thrombotic microangiopathy," "thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura," "atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome," or "secondary hemolyticuremic syndrome." The search was performed on papers published from 1946 to June 2016 and was limited to works in the English and Japanese languages. We determined the effectiveness of treatment based on the recovery of the number of platelets.

We evaluated the demographic data, including the age, sex, presence of polymyositis or dermatomyositis, interval from the onset of polymyositis or dermatomyositis to the development of TMA, TMA trigger, and treatment. Our ethics committee approved the study.


## Case Reports


## Case 1

The patient was a 69-year-old woman. In February 2008, she was diagnosed with dermatomyositis (anti-PL-7antibody positive) and interstitial pneumonia. Pulsed methylprednisolone (mPSL) (1,000 mg/day for 3 days) was commenced, and prednisolone (PSL) 50 mg/day (1 mg/kg/day) combined with tacrolimus (Tac) 4 mg/day was also administered. She experienced three relapses of the interstitial pneumonia and required sequential increases in the PSL doses. In July 2013 (when she was taking PSL 10 mg/day and Tac 4 mg/day), she was admitted to the hospital because of another relapse of interstitial pneumonia; her serum CK level was 212 U/L but then increased to 615 U/L; the PSL dose was thus increased to 30 mg/day on day 11 of hospitalization. In addition, intermittent intravenous injections of cyclophosphamide (IVCY) (500 mg) were commenced on day 17. However, the serum CK level continued to increase. Therefore, the PSL dose was increased to 80 mg/day on day 28 of hospitalization, and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was added on day 39.

The serum CK level decreased over time. However, thrombocytopenia was evident on day 28. We initially suspected that the IVCY had induced bone marrow suppression; however, the thrombocytopenia continued. We thought it possible that drug-induced thrombocytopenia was in play and discontinued all oral drugs apart from PSL on day 43 of hospitalization, but the thrombocytopenia continued. The patient began to exhibit abnormal behavior, such as washing her hair with toothpaste. On day 46, the laboratory findings were as follows: Hb level, 12.1 g/dL; white blood cell (WBC) count, 6,760/μL; and platelet count, 35,000/μL. The direct Coomb's test was negative, and the normal coagulation profile rendered disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) unlikely. Relevant biochemical findings included a markedly reduced serum haptoglobin level (0 mg/dL) and an elevated level of unconjugated serum bilirubin (1.3 mg/dL). Peripheral blood smears (PBSs) revealed extensive anisocytosis (fragmentation of red blood cells was not evaluated).

These laboratory findings were consistent with TMA. The patient did not have a fever or renal dysfunction. Plasma exchange was initiated on day 46 of hospitalization. After the eighth plasma exchange, the ADAMTS13 activity and anti-ADAMTS13 antibody status were found to be normal and negative, respectively. Therefore, we switched from plasma exchange to daily infusion of fresh-frozen plasma (5 units). The platelet count gradually increased and became normalized on day 115.


## Case 2

The patient was a 70-year-old man. In December 2014, he was diagnosed with dermatomyositis (anti-TIF1-γantibody positive). Pulsed mPSL (1,000 mg/day for 3 days) was commenced, and PSL (60 mg/day; 1.2 mg/kg/day) combined with IVIG (20 g/day; 400 mg/kg/day for 5 days) was also administered. In February 2015, gastric cancer was identified, and laparoscopic distal gastrectomy was performed. In March 2015, the dermatomyositis relapsed (both skin symptoms and muscle weakness were evident), so the PSL dose was increased to 30 mg/day, combined with IVIG 20 g/day (400 mg/kg/day for 5 days). However, the effects were inadequate. Thus, in April 2015, pulsed mPSL (1,000 mg/day for 3 days) was commenced, and the PSL dose was increased to 70 mg/day (intravenously). Left pleural effusion was noted, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis was identified on culture. He was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. On day 8 of hospitalization, sudden thrombocytopenia was evident (platelets 3,000/μL). The other laboratory findings were as follows: Hb level, 7.2 g/dL and WBC count, 4,030/μL. A peripheral blood film revealed fragmented erythrocytes. The direct Coomb's test was negative, and the normal coagulation profile rendered DIC unlikely. The relevant biochemical findings included a markedly reduced serum haptoglobin level (2 mg/dL) and an elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level (442 U/L; reference range, 119-229 U/L). Furthermore, PBSs revealed many fragmented red blood cells. The laboratory data were consistent with TMA. We stopped all drugs except for PSL in order to exclude the possibility of drug-induced thrombocytopenia and commenced plasma exchange. No ADAMTS 13 activity was detectable, and anti-ADAMTS13 IgG autoantibodies were evident. In addition, many von Willebrand multimers were apparent in the blood. We therefore diagnosed him with TTP. We continued daily plasma exchange, but the thrombocytopenia continued. Altered con-sciousness was evident on day 17 of hospitalization, and convulsions developed on day 18. Therefore, we added rituximab on day 19 and pulsed mPSL (1,000 mg/day for 3 days) and IVIG (17.5 g/day) on day 22. The PSL dose was increased to 70 mg/day. On day 44, the ADAMTS13 activity increased to 14.7%, and the anti-ADAMTS13 autoantibody status was negative. In addition, the haptoglobin level continued to increase. Therefore, plasma exchange was stopped. However, the thrombocytopenia remained (10,000 platelets/ μL), and the condition progressed to pancytopenia. Renal dysfunction also emerged (serum creatinine increased from 0.5 to 1.3 mg/dL). The patient was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) based on a bone marrow biopsy performed on day 121 of hospitalization. On day 101, bile duct inflammation and septic shock attributable to Enterobacter cloacae were apparent. He responded to both antibiotics and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). However, on day 143, he developed septic shock attributable to multi-drug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MDRP) and died on day 158.


## Case 3

The patient was a 65-year-old woman. In September 1996, she was diagnosed with dermatomyositis (anti-PL-7antibody-positive) and treated at another hospital. She experienced several relapses. The maximum prior PSL dose was 60 mg/day, and she had received both cyclosporine (CyA) and IVIG. In addition, she was diagnosed with MDS based on a bone marrow biopsy performed in September 2015. In January 2016, the dermatomyositis relapsed once more (serum CK level, 2,402 U/L), and she was admitted to our hospital. The PSL dose was increased to 70 mg/day. On hospital day 17, the platelet count began to decrease. Although all suspect drugs were stopped, the thrombocytopenia continued (39,000 platelets/μL on day 31). TMA was indicated by a decrease in the haptoglobin level to 2 mg/dL and notable erythrocyte fragmentation (1.62%). The other laboratory findings were as follows: Hb level, 10.9 g/dL; and WBC count, 9,970/μL. The direct Coomb's test was negative, the serum LDH level was elevated to 799 U/L (reference range, 119-229 U/L), and the serum creatinine level was elevated from 0.7 to 1.3 mg/dL. No obvious neuropsychiatric symptom was apparent. Based on these findings, plasma exchange was commenced. The ADAMTS13 activity decreased moderately (by 29.1%), and the anti-ADAMTS13 antibody status was slightly positive. We considered that the thrombocytopenia had been associated with secondary TMA rather than TTP. On day 41 of hospitalization, massive bleeding from a duodenal ulcer developed, and platelet transfusion was performed. Subsequently, the platelet count decreased from 34,000/μL to 22,000/μL, suggesting platelet destruction. However, the platelet count then began to increase naturally, and we stopped plasma exchange. On day 65, sudden thrombocytopenia developed once again (the platelet count fell from 97,000/μL to 17,000/μL). We were concerned that a TMA relapse had commenced and re-started plasma exchange. On day 74, she died suddenly from septic shock.


## Literature review and assessment of our cases


## Clinical features

Our Medline search identified 13 patients with TMA accompanied by polymyositis/dermatomyositis reported between 1946 and June 2016 (6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(17)(18). The mean age at the TMA onset was 59.7±9.3 years, and the man-to-woman ratio was 4:12 (25.0% men). The interval from the onset of polymyositis/dermatomyositis to the development of TMA ranged from 1 week to a few years. In our cases, the incidence rate was 1.9% (3 of 159 cases), the mean age at the TMA onset was 70.0±4.1 years, and the man-to-woman ratio was 1:2 (33.3% men). The interval from the disease onset to the TMA development ranged from 6 months to 10 years. Table 1 lists the clinical features of all 16 patients (including those previously reported and our current patients). We sought to compare the patients with secondary TMA and TTP; however, we were unable to distinguish secondary TMA from TTP because the ADAMTS13 activity had not been measured prior to 2011. The TMA triggers were clear in only three cases. Polymyositis/dermatomyositis was not well controlled in 10 of the 16 cases (62.5%). In terms of clinical symptoms, hemolytic anemia was confirmed in all cases.

Treatments and outcomes Table 2 lists the treatments and outcomes of all 16 patients. Only 3 of the 16 patients survived (survival rate, 18.8%). Treatment was effective in 6 patients (37.5%); the remaining 10 patients in whom treatment was not effective eventually died. Of the three patients who died despite effective treatment, two died from infections and one from electrocyte imbalance and fluid overload. Of the 10 patients who died without responding to treatment, 4 died of infections, 4 of causes associated with heart problems, 1 of diffuse alveolar hemorrhaging, and 1 of thrombosis.

In terms of treatment, glucocorticoids were given to all 16 patients, and plasma exchange was used to treat 11 (68.8%). One earlier case who survived received vincristine and IVIG, while another received only glucocorticoids. Our surviving cases received glucocorticoids and underwent plasma exchange. Two of our patients responded to such therapy.

Periods from the diagnosis to treatment and from treatment to death Table 3 lists the intervals from diagnosis to treatment and from treatment to death. The mean time from the development of thrombocytopenia to treatment and from the diagnosis of TMA to treatment was shorter in the treatmenteffective group than in the treatment-ineffective group (median, 4.5 days vs. 15.0 days, and 0 days vs. 1.0 days).

All 10 patients in whom treatment was not effective eventually died, and the interval between the TMA onset and death was shorter in the treatment-ineffective group than the treatment-effective group (median, 23 


## Discussion

TMA rarely accompanies polymyositis/dermatomyositis; only 13 cases have been previously reported. We treated three additional cases. The underlying mechanisms of TMA are heterogeneous. Matsuyama et al. found severe ADAMTS 13 activity deficiencies in only 16.5% of patients with CTD-TMA, associated with the presence of autoantibodies inhibiting ADAMTS13 (19). The pathogenesis of TTP involves the excessive accumulation (in the circulation) of unusually large vWF multimers because of an extremely low level (<5% normal) of plasma ADAMTS13 vWF-cleaving protease activity; such a deficiency may either be acquired or genetically determined (20). Several factors, including antibiotics, infections, and autoimmune disorders, may trigger the onset of acquired TTP. Few typical cases of TTP have been reported. In some cases, the ADAMTS13 activity decreases in the absence of inhibitory autoantibodies against ADAMTS13, or the ADAMTS13 activity level may in fact be normal. TTP seems to be associated with various pathologies. In our assessment, only 1 (Patient 2) of our 3 patients had TTP, and its trigger was unclear.

The pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the relationship between inflammatory myopathies and TMA remain obscure. Nevertheless, the association between TMA with polymyositis/dermatomyositis is unlikely to be coincidental, given the relative rarity of both conditions. In fact, polymyositis/dermatomyositis was not well controlled in 10 of the 16 cases (62.5%). Under certain circumstances, circulating autoantibodies in patients with autoimmune inflammatory muscle diseases may inhibit the plasma vWF-cleaving protease activity.

According to a review written in the 1960s by Amorosi and Ultmann, only 5% of patients with idiopathic TMA survived (21), with no effective therapy available. However, recent evidence indicates that plasma therapy (alone or in combination with other therapies) dramatically improves the prognosis of patients with TMA. The survival rate of TTP patients has recently been reported to be 96% (22) and was 75% in those with aHUS (23). In the present report, the survival rate of patients with TMA combined with polymyositis/dermatomyositis was 18.8%, which was far lower than the recently reported survival rates of patients with idiopathic TTP or aHUS.

We found no significant difference in the interval from thrombocytopenia to treatment or in that from the diagnosis of TMA to treatment between the treatment-effective and treatment-ineffective groups, indicating that an early diagnosis did not improve the response rate. However, a previous study suggested that the early introduction of plasma exchange for TMA patients might increase the survival rate (24). Therefore, early treatment may be desirable.

The low survival rate of the treatment-effective group (attributable to subsequent complications) is exceptional. The interval between the TMA onset and death was shorter in the treatment-ineffective than in the treatment-effective group. Therefore, the careful management of patients after TMA treatment is essential.

We were unable to identify any association between the TMA symptoms and treatment response. Because controlled prospective studies on TMA patients are lacking, treatment remains largely empirical. Treatment regimens are usually combined and may include glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and immunosuppressive drugs. We were unable to identify an optimum treatment approach.

Previous reports have only described a single case. To our knowledge, this is the first report to describe multiple cases of polymyositis/dermatomyositis complicated with TMA treated in a single institution. Because polymyositis/dermatomyositis combined with TMA is rare, it is difficult to perform clinical trials. Thus, the gradual accumulation of clinical case reports is important.


## Conclusion

We observed three rare cases of polymyositis/dermatomyositis combined with TMA. One case involved typical TTP, and two involved secondary TMA. TMA associated with polymyositis/dermatomyositis is often refractory to treatment and is associated with a poor survival rate. Even if treatment is effective, the mortality rate associated with subsequent complications is high. Therefore, careful attention should be paid to patient management after TMA treatment.


polymyositis, DM: dermatomyositis, TMA: thrombotic microangiopathies, (+) positive, (-) negative, N/A: not availableTable 2. Treatments and Outcomes of All 16 Patients (previously Reported Patients and Our Patients) with Thrombotic Microangiopathies Accompanied with Polymyositis/dermatomyositis.


.0 days vs. 135.3 Table 1. Clinical Features of All 16 Patients (previously Reported Patients and Our Patients) with Thrombotic Microangiopathies Accompanied with Polymyositis/ dermatomyositis.Patients 

Age/ 
Sex 

PM 
or 
DM 

TTP or 
secondary TMA 

From PM/ 
DM onset to 
TMA 

Trigger 

TMA with 
PM/DM 
exacerbation 

Neurologic 
manifestation 

Hemolytic 
anemia 

Platelet 
count 
[/μl] 

Renal 
disfunction 

Reference 

Treatment-effective group 



## Table 3 .
3Period from Diagnosis to Treatment and from Treatment to Death of All 16 Patients (previously Reported Patients and Our Patients) with Thrombotic Microangiopathies Accompanied with Polymyositis/dermatomyositis.Pt Outcome 
From thrombocytopenia 
to treatment 

From TMA diagnosis 
to treatment 
From TMA onset to death 
Reference 

Treatment-effective group 

1 
death 
N/A 
N/A 
15 days 
6 
2 
alive 
0 day 
0 day 
7 
3 
alive 
N/A 
N/A 
8 
4 
death 
0 day 
0 day 
8 months 
9 
5 
alive 
18 days 
0 day 
P resent case (Patient1) 
6 
death 
0 day 
0 day 
151 days 
Present case (Patient2) 

Treatment-ineffective group 

7 
death 
N/A 
2 days 
11 days 
1 0 
8 
death 
45 days 
3 days 
10 days 
1 1 
9 
death 
0 day 
0 day 
7 days 
1 2 
10 
death 
N/A 
N/A 
5 days 
1 3 
11 
death 
5 days 
0 day 
17 days 
1 4 
12 
death 
N/A 
N/A 
4 months 
15 
13 
death 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
16 
14 
death 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
17 
15 
death 
11 days 
0 day 
2 days 
1 8 
16 
death 
14 days 
1 day 
58 days 
Present case (Patient3) 

TMA: thrombotic microangiopathies 

days). 


PM: polymyositis, DM: dermatomyositis, TMA: thrombotic microangiopathies, GC: glucocorticoid, PE: plasma exchange, CAPD: continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, VCR: vincristine, HD: hemodialysis, IVIG: intravenous immunoglobulin, RTX: rituximab, MTX methotrexate, (+) positive, (-) negative, N/A: not available
The authors state that they have no Conflict of Interest (COI).Finacial SupportThe present study was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Research on Intractable Diseases from the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare of Japan.
Thrombotic microangiopathies. H Michael, Rosove, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 43Michael H. Rosove. Thrombotic microangiopathies. Semin Arthri- tis Rheum 43: 797-805, 2014.

. T S Jokiranta, Hus, Blood. 129Jokiranta TS. HUS and atypical HUS. Blood 129: 2847-2856, 2017.

How I treat thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome. M Scully, T Goodship, Br J Haematol. 164Scully M, Goodship T. How I treat thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome. Br J Haematol 164: 759-766, 2014.

Joint Committee for the Revision of Clinical Guides of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Japan. Clinical guides for atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome in Japan. H Kato, M Nangaku, H Hataya, Clin Exp Nephrol. 20Kato H, Nangaku M, Hataya H, et al; Joint Committee for the Re- vision of Clinical Guides of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Japan. Clinical guides for atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome in Japan. Clin Exp Nephrol 20: 536-543, 2016.

Registry of 919 patients with thrombotic microangiopathies across Japan: database of Nara Medical University during 1998-2008. Y Fujimura, M Matsumoto, Intern Med. 49Fujimura Y, Matsumoto M. Registry of 919 patients with throm- botic microangiopathies across Japan: database of Nara Medical University during 1998-2008. Intern Med 49: 7-15, 2010.

Plasmapheresis in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. B C Mcleod, K K Wu, W H Knospe, Arch Intern Med. 1401059Mcleod BC, Wu KK, Knospe WH. Plasmapheresis in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Arch Intern Med 140: 1059, 1980.

A case of dermatomyositis complicated by thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) which responded to combination of gammaglobulin and vincristine. Y Saito, K Hamamura, Y Kurata, T Sugimoto, Rinsho Ketsueki. 34in Japanese, Abstract in EnglishSaito Y, Hamamura K, Kurata Y, Sugimoto T. A case of dermato- myositis complicated by thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) which responded to combination of gammaglobulin and vincristine. Rin- sho Ketsueki 34: 68-73, 1993 (in Japanese, Abstract in English).

Thrombotic microangiopathy in an adult patient with clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis complicated with interstitial lung disease. T Sugimoto, T Hajiro, T Fujimoto, N Kojyo, M Horie, A Kashiwagi, Lupus. 16Sugimoto T, Hajiro T, Fujimoto T, Kojyo N, Horie M, Kashiwagi A. Thrombotic microangiopathy in an adult patient with clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis complicated with interstitial lung dis- ease. Lupus 16: 1004-1005, 2007.

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura with severe hypertension in a patient with systemic sclerosis sine scleroderma and polymyositis. M Iwagami, K Kubo, R Tanaka, Intern Med. 50Iwagami M, Kubo K, Tanaka R, et al. Thrombotic thrombocy- topenic purpura with severe hypertension in a patient with sys- temic sclerosis sine scleroderma and polymyositis. Intern Med 50: 2413-2416, 2011.

Dermatomyositis complicated by thrombocytopenic purpura. M A Sawdyk, J Jundt, Henry Ford Hosp Med. 33214Sawdyk MA, Jundt J. Dermatomyositis complicated by thrombo- cytopenic purpura. Henry Ford Hosp Med 33: 214, 1985.

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura as a complicating factor in a case of polymyositis and Sjogren syndrome. M Noda, M Kitagawa, F Tomoda, H Iida, AmJ Clin Pathol. 94217Noda M, Kitagawa M, Tomoda F, Iida H. Thrombotic thrombocy- topenic purpura as a complicating factor in a case of polymyositis and Sjogren syndrome. AmJ Clin Pathol 94: 217, 1990.

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and myoglobinuric acute renal failure following radiation therapy in a patient with polymyositis and cervical cancer. H Makino, Y Nagake, K Moriwaki, Intern Med. 34Makino H, Nagake Y, Moriwaki K, et al. Thrombotic thrombocy- topenic purpura and myoglobinuric acute renal failure following radiation therapy in a patient with polymyositis and cervical can- cer. Intern Med 34: 24-27, 1995.

Case report: thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura in a patient with polymyositis: therapeutic importance of early recognition and discussion of pathogenic mechanisms. T L Ellingson, K Wilske, D M Aboulafia, AmJ Med Sci. 303407Ellingson TL, Wilske K, Aboulafia DM. Case report: thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura in a patient with polymyositis: thera- peutic importance of early recognition and discussion of patho- genic mechanisms. AmJ Med Sci 303: 407, 1992.

A case of dermatomyositis complicated by thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Y Miyaoka, Y Urano, Y Nameda, Dermatology. 194Miyaoka Y, Urano Y, Nameda Y, et al. A case of dermatomyositis complicated by thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Dermatol- ogy 194: 68-71, 1997.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in a case of polymyositis associated with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome. Y Ishida, M Utikoshi, M Kurosaki, Intern Med. 37Ishida Y, Utikoshi M, Kurosaki M, et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in a case of polymyositis associated with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome. Intern Med 37: 694-699, 1998.

Retinopathy in a patient with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura complicated by polymyositis. T Matsuo, S Matsuura, H Nakagawa, Jpn J Ophthalmol. 44Matsuo T, Matsuura S, Nakagawa H. Retinopathy in a patient with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura complicated by polymyosi- tis. Jpn J Ophthalmol 44: 161-164, 2000.

Acute thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura following doxycycline treatment of Chlamydia pneumoniae infection in a patient with dermatomyositis. H H Knox-Macaulay, S N Adil, E M Ahmed, Clin Lab Haematol. 26Knox-Macaulay HH, Adil SN, Ahmed EM. Acute thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura following doxycycline treatment of Chlamydia pneumoniae infection in a patient with dermatomyosi- tis. Clin Lab Haematol 26: 147-151, 2004.

A fulminant case of systemic sclerosis/dermatomyositis complicating thrombotic microangiopathy and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. T Shoda, T Kotani, T Takeuchi, S Makino, T Hanafusa, J Jpn Respir Soc). 47in Japanese, Abstract in EnglishShoda T, Kotani T, Takeuchi T, Makino S, Hanafusa T. A fulmi- nant case of systemic sclerosis/dermatomyositis complicating thrombotic microangiopathy and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Ni- hon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi (J Jpn Respir Soc) 47: 227-231, 2009 (in Japanese, Abstract in English).

Heterogeneous pathogenic processes of thrombotic microangiopathies in patients with connective tissue diseases. T Matsuyama, M Kuwana, M Matsumoto, A Isonishi, S Inokuma, Y Fujimura, Thromb Haemost. 102Matsuyama T, Kuwana M, Matsumoto M, Isonishi A, Inokuma S, Fujimura Y. Heterogeneous pathogenic processes of thrombotic microangiopathies in patients with connective tissue diseases. Thromb Haemost 102: 371-378, 2009.

Unusually large plasma factor VIII: von Willebrand factor multimers in chronic relapsing thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. J L Moake, C K Rudy, J H Troll, N Engl J Med. 1307Moake JL, Rudy CK, Troll JH, et al. Unusually large plasma fac- tor VIII: von Willebrand factor multimers in chronic relapsing thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl J Med 1307: 1432- 1435, 1982.

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: Report of the 16 cases and review the literature. E L Amorosi, J E Ultmann, Medicine (Baltimore). 45Amorosi EL, Ultmann JE. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: Report of the 16 cases and review the literature. Medicine (Balti- more) 45: 139-159, 1996.

Comparison of plasma exchange with plasma infusion in the treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Canadian Apheresis Study Group. G A Rock, N Engl J Med. 325Rock GA. Comparison of plasma exchange with plasma infusion in the treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Cana- dian Apheresis Study Group. N Engl J Med 325: 393-397, 1991.

Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. M Noris, N Engl J Med. 361Noris M. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. N Engl J Med 361: 1676-1687, 2009.

Early plasmapheresis in patients with thrombptic thrombocytopenic purpura. E E Douzinas, K Markakis, A Karabinis, T Mandalaki, D Bilalis, P Fessas, Crit Care Med. 20Douzinas EE, Markakis K, Karabinis A, Mandalaki T, Bilalis D, Fessas P. Early plasmapheresis in patients with thrombptic throm- bocytopenic purpura. Crit Care Med 20: 57-61, 1992.

The Internal Medicine is an Open Access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. To view the details of this license. please visitThe Internal Medicine is an Open Access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. To view the details of this license, please visit (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc-nd/4.0/).

. The Japanese Society of Internal Medicine Intern Med. 57The Japanese Society of Internal Medicine Intern Med 57: 2259-2265, 2018