# New Concepts on Reversibility and Targeting of Liver Fibrosis; A Review Article

CorpusID: 52157695
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4cfe1aae42e707e934c683f207195d6b83277e05](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4cfe1aae42e707e934c683f207195d6b83277e05)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

New Concepts on Reversibility and Targeting of Liver Fibrosis; A Review Article
July 2018

Hedyeh Ebrahimi 
Biliary Diseases Research Center
The Liver
Pancreatic

Digestive Disease Research Institute
Shariati Hospital
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Endocrinology and Metabolism Population Sciences Institute
Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
Tehran

Mohammadreza Naderian 
Biliary Diseases Research Center
The Liver
Pancreatic

Digestive Disease Research Institute
Shariati Hospital
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Endocrinology and Metabolism Population Sciences Institute
Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
Tehran

Amir Ali Sohrabpour 
New Concepts on Reversibility and Targeting of Liver Fibrosis; A Review Article
July 201810.15171/mejdd.2018.103Middle East J Dig Dis/ Vol.10/ No.3/ Iran 3. Associate Professor, The Liver, Pan-creatic, and Biliary Diseases Research Center, Digestive Disease Research Institute, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran † These two authors contributed equally to this paperFibrosisGenetic therapyLiver cirrhosisTherapeuticsGene targeting
Currently, liver fibrosis and its complications are regarded as critical health problems. With the studies showing the reversible nature of liver fibrogenesis, scientists have focused on understanding the underlying mechanism of this condition in order to develop new therapeutic strategies. Although hepatic stellate cells are known as the primary cells responsible for liver fibrogenesis, studies have shown contributing roles for other cells, pathways, and molecules in the development of fibrosis depending on the etiology of liver fibrosis. Hence, interventions could be directed in the proper way for each type of liver diseases to better address this complication. There are two main approaches in clinical reversion of liver fibrosis; eliminating the underlying insult and targeting the fibrosis process, which have variable clinical importance in the treatment of this disease. In this review, we present recent concepts in molecular pathways of liver fibrosis reversibility and their clinical implications.

## INTRODUCTION

Cirrhosis, which is the final stage of liver fibrosis, is one of the major health-related concerns worldwide. According to the global reports, cirrhosis results in about 1 million deaths annually. 1 Among chronic diseases, after coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular accidents, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cirrhosis is the fourth leading cause of lost life years. 1 Liver fibrosis, the healing process as a response to a wide spectrum of chronic complications, including viral hepatitis, and alcoholic or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, 2 can encapsulate the injury in the first stages of the insult and is regarded as a protective and reversible response of the liver tissue to these subset of injuries. 3 However, if the damage remains for a longer period, liver fibrosis will lead to cirrhosis, which causes further life-threatening complications such as hepatocellular carcinoma. 4 Fibrosis formation is caused by imbalances in extracellular matrix (ECM) formation and its degeneration, which are regulated by extracellular enzymes; matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors; and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase (TIMPs), respectively.

Although a wide range of cells contribute to hepatic fibrogenesis, activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), one of the non-parenchymal cells in the liver, is shown to play a pivotal role in this process. 5 HSCs are the major source of cells that transform to myofibroblasts (MFs). These cells are the highly proliferative lineage that could accumulate at injury sites and promote ECM deposition. 6,7 Due to hepatic injury, autocrine and paracrine secretion of fibrogenic cytokines promote HSCs to transform from a quiescent form into an activated myofibroblastic state, which has a migratory and highly proliferative characteristic. Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and interleukin 1 (IL-1) are among the known cytokines involved in fibrogenesis pathways. Activated HSCs express fibrogenic proteins and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) while they lose their vitamin A storage. 2,8,9 Moreover, it is shown that extrahepatic cells, such as portal fibroblasts and bone marrow derived mesenchymal cells could also contribute to ECM synthesis as MF. 6,7 Furthermore, chronic hepatic insult induces hepatocyte apoptosis and these apoptotic bodies promote HSCs activation as well as secretion of fibrogenic cytokines from Kupffer cells (KCs). In response to liver injury, KCs evolve into their activated forms and express chemokine receptors, secrete inflammatory cytokines including C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2 (CCL2), and more importantly induce HSCs activation ( Figure 1). 2,10 Reversibility of Liver Fibrosis In most references, "regression" of liver fibrosis is referred to as resolution of fibrotic septa in the liver microstructure while "reversion" is considered as the more profound resolution to near normal pathology. 11 We use these terms accordingly in this review.


## Molecular pathways of fibrosis reversibility

An array of cells and cytokines are involved in the evolution of liver fibrosis. Among them, HSCs and MFs regardless of their origin 12 have more central role. [13][14][15] MFs secrete high amounts of collagen I/III, 16 express high levels of TIMP-1, regulate hepatic angiogenesis and vascular remodeling, [17][18][19] and increase vascular resistance by contractility properties. 20 Induction of MF apoptosis is believed to result in decreased amount of fibril-forming collagens, activation of MMPs that degrade collagens from ECM, and decreased vascular resistance in hepatic 


## : Molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in liver fibrogenesis

Liver fibrosis happens as a result of interactions between several molecular and cellular processes. Chronic hepatic injury promotes hepatocytes into apoptosis, and apoptotic hepatocyte bodies induce secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, TGF-β, PDGF, and IL-1) from KCs leading to HSCs activation and proliferation. Activated macrophages also release CCL2 that recruits LY6Chi monocytes and intensify inflammatory state. Moreover, activated HSCs express collagen fibers in addition to TIMP-1 that inhibits MMP activities and result in ECM accumulation. Tumor necrosis factor α, TNF-α; Transforming growth factor β, TGF-β; Platelet-derived growth factor, PDGF; Interleukin 1, IL-1; Kupffer cells, KCs; Hepatic stellate cells, HSCs; C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2, CCL2; Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase 1, TIMP-1; Matrix metalloproteinases, MMP; Extracellular matrix, ECM vasculature. The ultimate outcome in this process is the regression of liver fibrosis. Apoptosis of MFs can be induced by four mechanisms as described below: Table 1 summarizes some of the most important ligands, which interact with specific receptors and eventually lead to HSC or MF apoptosis. As described, other mechanisms contributing to fibrosis regression might be perpetuated by receptor-ligand interactions.


## 1-Receptor-ligand mediated MF apoptosis


## 2-Transcriptional factors involved in MF apoptosis

There are many transcriptional regulators, which may promote HSC/MF toward apoptosis or survival. The most important is nuclear factor kappa-lightchain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB), which interact with Bcl-2 protein family, p53, and many other factors within MF cells. 32-36 Expression of NF-κB guarantees MF survival. NF-κB in MF nucleus produces two anti-apoptotic proteins, namely Gadd45β and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2. Gadd45β has negative control on c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs). 37 In the cytoplasm, JNKs themselves regulate pro-apoptotic factors such as p53 and pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 (Bax and PUMA), 38 which lead to cytochrome c release from mitochondria and promote caspase-3 dependent apoptosis of MF. 33,39,40 Another important transcription factor in the resolution of hepatic fibrosis is peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ). PPAR-γ yields its effects through inhibition of PDGF-stimulated HSC activation, 41 TGF-β expression, 42 and decreasing collagen production. 41 Both in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that expression of PPAR-γ decreases during fibrogenic processes. 41,43,44 Re-expression of PPAR-γ may revert HSCs activation and may be of worth in resolution of hepatic fibrosis.


## 3-Role of ECM in MF apoptosis

It is well known that ECM components influence liver fibrosis. Intact collagen I and TIMP-1 promote MF survival 45,46 while MMPs especially MMP-2 47 oppose with collagen production and liver fibrosis. These interactions are mainly regulated by α/β integrin transmembrane proteins. α3/β2 integrin can prevent mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis in contrast to its antagonist that may activate p53 and give rise to apoptosis in MF cells. 48 Disruption in α3/β2 integrin causes increased amount of MMPs and a decrease in expression of TIMP-1; both of which promote MF apoptosis. 48 


## 4-Immune cells and their roles in fibrosis regression

Fibrosis formation in the liver is under close monitoring of the immune system. NK cells and IFN-γ play important role in resolution of hepatic fibrosis. NK cells have antifibrotic properties, which decrease with progression of liver fibrosis. 49 NK cells directly invade MF cells and induce MF apoptosis. 50,51 This process is mediated by TNFrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). 52,53 IFN-γ enhances the ability of NK cells in killing MFs and may induce HSC apoptosis.

It is noteworthy that TLR3 induces NK cells' activation. 54 IFN-γ mediates HSCs apoptosis 55 and inhibition of HSCs proliferation by producing type 1 IFN-β are other possible pathways acting under control of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3). 56


## Clinical Implications

Thanks to the recent molecular discoveries of the pathogenesis of liver fibrosis, applying interventions to reverse the process of fibrogenesis seems imminent. Two main approaches are pursued in clinical reversion of liver fibrosis. First, eliminating the underlying insult from the hepatocytes and the second, pointing to the fibrosis process after the effect of injuries on different components of liver tissues has ensued.


## Eliminating the underlying injuries

The first line of battling liver fibrosis is to eliminate the inciting stimulus. Spontaneous reversion of liver fibrosis is rarely reported, but there are many reports of fibrosis reversal following treatment of different types of underlying liver diseases, including autoimmune hepatitis, 57-59 hemochromatosis, 60,61 and biliary cirrhosis. 62 In the following paragraphs, reversibility of viral hepatitis, alcoholic hepatitis, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are discussed in more details.


## -Viral hepatitis

Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) have shown that treatment of chronic hepatitis B with oral nucleoside analogues not only delays fibrosis progres-sion, but also prevents decompensation in patients with advanced liver fibrosis. 63 Regression have been reported by lamivudine, 64 telbivudine, 65 entecavir, 66 adefovir 67 and tenofovir. 68 Also, interferonbased therapies improve histological outcomes, and decrease the incidence of cirrhosis, and the occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 69,70 Multiple trials have proven the effectiveness of treatment against hepatitis C. 71 Older treatment options for hepatitis C with peginterferon and/or ribavirin were associated with regression of liver fibrosis, 72 along with new options such as daclatasvir, sofosbuvir, and simeprevir. [73][74][75] The advent of highly efficacious direct antiviral agents (DAAs) with high rates of sustained virological response (SVR) in patients with hepatitis C is expected to be associated with promising effects on histology including fibrosis regression. 75 This regression in fibrosis results in decreased morbidity and mortality in patients with hepatitis C. 76 Recent studies have shown that statins may be associated with reduced risk of fibrosis progression in chronic hepatitis C. 77,78 -Alcoholic hepatitis Alcohol abstinence is the mainstay for fibrosis regression in alcoholic liver disease, and is accompanied by clinical and histological improvement. [79][80][81] Other drugs such as pentoxifylline, silymarin, and polyenylphosphatidylcholine (lecithin) might be of clinical importance in reversing fibrosis in alcoholic hepatitis. 82 -Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis Numerous drugs have been investigated to reverse fibrosis in NASH, the most advanced type of NAFLD. Based on meta-analyses, none is associated with regression in liver fibrosis. [83][84][85] Recent studies have shown that liraglutide, obeticholic acid, and telmisartan may reverse hepatic fibrosis in human subjects with NASH. [86][87][88] Weight loss has significant effect on histological features of NASH including liver fibrosis. 89,90 Several studies have shown improvement of steatosis and inflammation in patients with NAFLD after bariatric surgery. In a meta-analysis, authors looked at 766 paired liver biopsies from 15 different studies. The combined results showed that 91.6% of the patients had improvement in steatosis, 81.3% of the patients had improvement in steatohepatitis, and 65.5% of them had improvement in fibrosis. 91 Another Cochrane systematic review of 21 studies with histological outcomes of bariatric surgery looked at 21 prospective or retrospective cohort studies, which showed improvement of steatosis or inflammation in most studies except for four studies that showed worsening of fibrosis. 92 The fact that some studies showed worsening of liver fibrosis cannot be overlooked. Further long-term and well-designed prospective studies are needed to address these issues. Interestingly, in a meta-analysis, Singh and colleagues showed that up to 8% of patients with NAFL and 25% of patients with NASH have spontaneous improvement in the amount. 93

Pointing to the fibrosis process Opposing to fibrosis process, researchers have worked on different aspects of fibrosis development. Table 2 summarizes the most important aspects of fibrosis process, which are being targeted in order to reverse fibrosis progression. Figure 2 depicts various aspects of fibrosis process targeted by investigational agents.


## Future Prospect

As discussed earlier, understanding molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in fibrosis progression could be translated into therapeutic targets in the future. Epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation, non-coding RNAs, and histone modification has been shown to modify fibrogenesis process and are new frontiers in developing therapeutic approaches. Recent findings show that DNA methylation orchestrates HSCs trans-differentiation from quiescent state to activated form, suggesting that enzymes, which catalyze DNA methylation, could be potential new targets in battling fibrosis. [149][150][151] Another new area of research is the role of microR-NA-122 in amplification of HCV replication. While in vivo targeting of microRNA-122 and decreasing its level lead to reductions in HCV RNA level and also cholesterol, microRNA-122 deletion leads to recruitment of inflammatory cells and an increase in inflammatory mediators. [152][153][154][155] Further studies are  Induces MF apoptosis via induction of intracellular oxidative stress needed to differentiate between pharmacological targeting and genetic deletion of microRNA-122. Accordingly, epigenetic modifications are novel therapeutic targets in drug development and can potentially be used as non-invasive markers for assessing fibrosis. Recent advances offer cell therapy, more precisely cell transplantation, as a propitious candidate for treating liver fibrosis. 156,157 Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been shown to induce improvement in fibrotic liver due to their capacity to secrete anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory factors, in addition to trans-differentiation to hepatocyte. 158 Baligar and colleagues have recently demonstrated that bone marrow-derived CD45 (BM-CD45) cells are superior candidates for the treatment of the liver fibrosis through functional and structural improvement in fibrotic tissues. 159 Future trials are needed to validate effectiveness, and safety, and investigate the role of cell transplantation in treating hepatic fibrosis.


## CONCLUSION

Since liver fibrogenesis and ECM synthesis are dynamic and reversible phenomena, the process of HSCs activation is regarded as the main potential target for therapeutic interventions besides resolving the underlying insult. Future research will validate safety, effectiveness, and accuracy of therapeutic interventions and non-invasive strategies for assessing hepatic fibrosis. Interfering molecular mechanisms along with cell therapy and gene therapy are among the most valuable strategies for battling liver fibrosis. Future basic studies and then, animal and clinical trials will be prerequisites for reversing and targeting liver fibrosis.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to "Amir Asgharzadeh" whose artistic figures enabled us to prepare this manuscript much better.


## ETHICAL APPROVAL

There is nothing to be declared.


## CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The author declares no conflict of interest related to this work. 

## Fig. 1
1Fig.1: Molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in liver fibrogenesis

## Fig. 2 :
2Different strategies to oppose liver fibrosisThe most effective way is to eliminate the underlying insults (A), but some agents like glucocorticoid and UDCA decrease fibrogenesis by reducing the background inflammation and immune response (B). PPAR agonists, rIL-22, and some others target HSCs trans-differentiation (C), while TGF-β antagonists, bosentan, and caspase inhibitors inhibit downstream response cascade after HSCs activation (D). NF-κB inhibitors, melatonin, CB1R antagonists, CB2R agonists, and NK cells activators promote MF into apoptosis (E) but MMPs and TIMP inhibitors along with AB0023 (LOXL2 monoclonal antibody) augment scar degradation (F). Ursodeoxycholic acid, UDCA; Proliferator-activated receptor, PPAR; Interleukin 22-recombinant protein, rIL-22; Hepatic stellate cell, HSCs; Transforming growth factor β, TGF-β; Nuclear factor-κB, NF-κB; Cannabinoid receptor type 1, CB1R; Cannabinoid receptor type 2, CB2R; Natural killer, NK; Myofibroblast, MF; Matrix metalloproteinases, MMPs; Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases, TIMP; Lysyl oxidase like 2, LOXL2;

## 2003
2003. Cellular and molecular mechanisms in liver fibrogenesis. Arch Biochem Biophys 2014;548:20-37. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.02.015. 19. Valfre di Bonzo L, Novo E, Cannito S, Busletta C, Paternostro C, Povero D, et al. Angiogenesis and liver fibrogenesis. Histol Histopathol 2009;24:1323-41. doi: 10.14670/HH-24.1323. 20. Puche JE, Saiman Y, Friedman SL. Hepatic stellate cells and liver fibrosis. Compr Physiol 2013;3:1473-92. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c120035. 21. Caligiuri A, Bertolani C, Guerra CT, Aleffi S, Galastri S, Trappoliere M, et al. Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase modulates the activated phenotype of hepatic stellate cells. Hepatology 2008;47:668-76. doi: 10.1002/hep.21995. 22. Munoz-Luque J, Ros J, Fernandez-Varo G, Tugues S, Morales-Ruiz M, Alvarez CE, et al. Regression of fibrosis after chronic stimulation of cannabinoid CB2 receptor in cirrhotic rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008;324:475-83. doi:10.1124/jpet.107.131896. 23. Teixeira-Clerc F, Julien B, Grenard P, Tran Van Nhieu J, Deveaux V, Li L, et al. CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonism: a new strategy for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Nat Med 2006;12:671-6. doi:10.1038/nm1421. 24. Patsenker E, Stoll M, Millonig G, Agaimy A, Wissniowski T, Schneider V, et al. Cannabinoid receptor type I modulates alcohol-induced liver fibrosis. Mol Med 2011;17:1285-94. doi:10.2119/molmed.2011.00149.25. Parfieniuk A, Flisiak R. Role of cannabinoids in chronic liver diseases. World J Gastroenterol 2008;14:6109-14. doi:10.3748/wjg.14.6109. 26. Trebicka J, Racz I, Siegmund SV, Cara E, Granzow M, Schierwagen R, et al. Role of cannabinoid receptors in alcoholic hepatic injury: steatosis and fibrogenesis are increased in CB2 receptor-deficient mice and decreased in CB1 receptor knockouts. Liver Int 2011;31:860-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2011.02496.x. 27. Oakley F, Trim N, Constandinou CM, Ye W, Gray AM, Frantz G, et al. Hepatocytes express nerve growth factor during liver injury: evidence for paracrine regulation of hepatic stellate cell apoptosis. Am J Pathol 2003;163:1849-58. doi:10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63544-4. 28. Trim N, Morgan S, Evans M, Issa R, Fine D, Afford S, Wilkins B, Iredale J: Hepatic stellate cells express the low affinity nerve growth factor receptor p75 and undergo apoptosis in response to nerve growth factor stimulation. Am J Pathol 2000;156:1235-43. doi:10.Yu Y, Lu L, Qian X, Chen N, Yao A, Pu L, et al. Antifibrotic effect of hepatocyte growth factor-expressing mesenchymal stem cells in small-for-size liver transplant rats. Stem Cells Dev 2010;19:903-14. doi:10.1089/scd.2009.0254. 30. Xia JL, Dai C, Michalopoulos GK, Liu Y. Hepatocyte Growth Factor Attenuates Liver Fibrosis Induced by Bile Duct Ligation. Am J Pathol 2006;168:1500-12. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2006.050747. 31. Wang ZX, Wang ZG, Ran HT, Ren JL, Zhang Y, Li Q, et al. The treatment of liver fibrosis induced by hepatocyte growth factor-directed, ultrasound-targeted microbubble destruction in rats. Clin Imaging 2009;33:454-61. doi: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2009.07.001. 32. Mann J, Oakley F, Akiboye F, Elsharkawy A, Thorne AW, Mann DA. Regulation of myofibroblast transdifferentiation by DNA methylation and MeCP2: implications for wound healing and fibrogenesis. Cell Death Differell 2007;14:275-85. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4401979. 33. Watson MR, Wallace K, Gieling RG, Manas DM, Jaffray E, Hay RT, et al. NF-kappaB is a critical regulator of the survival of rodent and human hepatic myofibroblasts. J Hepatol 2008;48:589-97. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2007.12.019. 34. Luedde T, Schwabe RF. NF-kappaB in the liver--linking injury, fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011;8:108-18. doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2010.213. 35. Sunami Y, Leithauser F, Gul S, Fiedler K, Guldiken N, Espenlaub S, et al. Hepatic activation of IKK/NFkappaB signaling induces liver fibrosis via macrophage-mediated chronic inflammation. Hepatology 2012;56:1117-28. doi: 10.1002/hep.25711. 36. Elsharkawy AM, Mann DA. Nuclear factor-kappaB and the hepatic inflammation-fibrosis-cancer axis. Hepatology 2007;46:590-7. doi:10.1002/hep.21802.37. Oakley F, Meso M, Iredale JP, Green K, Marek CJ, Zhou X, et al. Inhibition of inhibitor of kappaB kinases stimulates hepatic stellate cell apoptosis and accelerated recovery from rat liver fibrosis. Gastroenterology 2005;128:108-20. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2004.10.003. 38. Schuler M, Green DR. Mechanisms of p53-dependent apoptosis. Biochem Soc Trans 2001;29:684-8. doi: 10.1042/ bst0290684. 39. Jones EV, Dickman MJ, Whitmarsh AJ. Regulation of p73-mediated apoptosis by c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Biochem J 2007;405:617-23. doi:10.1042/BJ20061778. 40. Oleinik NV, Krupenko NI, Krupenko SA. Cooperation between JNK1 and JNK2 in activation of p53 apoptotic pathway. Oncogene 2007;26:7222-30. doi:10.1038/ sj.onc.1210526. 41. Miyahara T, Schrum L, Rippe R, Xiong S, Yee Jr HF, Motomura K, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and hepatic stellate cell activation. J Biol Chem 2000;275:35715-22. doi:10.1074/jbc.M006577200. 42. Sun K, Wang Q, Huang XH. PPAR gamma inhibits growth of rat hepatic stellate cells and TGF beta-induced connective tissue growth factor expression. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2006;27:715-23. doi:10.1111/j.1745-7254.2006.00299.x. 43. Galli A, Crabb D, Price D, Ceni E, Salzano R, Surrenti C, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma transcriptional regulation is involved in platelet-derived growth factor-induced proliferation of human hepatic stellate cells. Hepatology 2000;31:101-8. doi:10.1002/hep.510310117. 44. Marra F, Efsen E, Romanelli RG, Caligiuri A, Pastacaldi S, Batignani G, et al. Ligands of peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma modulate profibrogenic and proinflammatory actions in hepatic stellate cells. Gastroenterology 2000;119:466-78. doi:10.1053/gast.2000.9365. 45. Issa R, Zhou X, Trim N, Millward-Sadler H, Krane S, Benyon C, et al. Mutation in collagen-1 that confers resistance to the action of collagenase results in failure of recovery from CCl4-induced liver fibrosis, persistence of activated hepatic stellate cells, and diminished hepatocyte regenera-tion. FASEB J cell apoptosis is inhibited by tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1. Comp Hepatol 2004;3 Suppl 1:S8. doi:10.1186/1476-5926-2-S1-S8. 47. Dudakov JA, Hanash AM, van den Brink MR. Interleukin-22: immunobiology and pathology. Annu Rev Immunol 2015;33:747-85. doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032414-112123. 48. Zhou X, Murphy FR, Gehdu N, Zhang J, Iredale JP, Benyon RC. Engagement of alphavbeta3 integrin regulates proliferation and apoptosis of hepatic stellate cells. J Biol Chem 2004;279:23996-4006. doi:10.1074/jbc.M311668200. 49. Jeong WI, Park O, Gao B. Abrogation of the antifibrotic effects of natural killer cells/interferon-gamma contributes to alcohol acceleration of liver fibrosis. Gastroenterology 2008;134:248-58. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2007.09.034. 50. Pellicoro A, Ramachandran P, Iredale JP, Fallowfield JA. Liver fibrosis and repair: immune regulation of wound healing in a solid organ. Nat Rev Immunol 2014;14:181-94. doi:10.1038/nri3623. 51. Tian Z, Chen Y, Gao B. Natural killer cells in liver disease. Hepatology 2013;57:1654-62. doi:10.1002/hep.26115. 52. Glassner A, Eisenhardt M, Kramer B, Korner C, Coenen M, Sauerbruch T, et al. NK cells from HCV-infected patients effectively induce apoptosis of activated primary human hepatic stellate cells in a TRAIL-, FasL-and NK-G2D-dependent manner. Lab Invest 2012;92:967-77. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.54. 53. Radaeva S, Sun R, Jaruga B, Nguyen VT, Tian Z, Gao B. Natural killer cells ameliorate liver fibrosis by killing activated stellate cells in NKG2D-dependent and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-dependent manners. Gastroenterology 2006;130:435-52. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.10.055. 54. Krizhanovsky V, Yon M, Dickins RA, Hearn S, Simon J, Miething C, et al. Senescence of activated stellate cells limits liver fibrosis. Cell 2008;134:657-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.049. 55. Jeong WI, Park O, Radaeva S, Gao B. STAT1 inhibits liver fibrosis in mice by inhibiting stellate cell proliferation and stimulating NK cell cytotoxicity. Hepatology 2006;44:1441-51. doi:10.1002/hep.21419. 56. Wang B, Trippler M, Pei R, Lu M, Broering R, Gerken G, et al. Toll-like receptor activated human and murine hepatic stellate cells are potent regulators of hepatitis C virus replication. J Hepatol 2009;51:1037-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.06.020. 57. Malekzadeh R, Mohamadnejad M, Nasseri-Moghaddam S, Rakhshani N, Tavangar SM, Sohrabpour AA, et al. Reversibility of cirrhosis in autoimmune hepatitis. Am J Med 2004;117:125-9. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2004.01.026. 58. Mohamadnejad M, Malekzadeh R, Nasseri-Moghaddam S, Hagh-Azali S, Rakhshani N, Tavangar SM, et al. Impact of immunosuppressive treatment on liver fibrosis in autoimmune hepatitis. Dig Dis Sci 2005;50:547-51. doi: 10.1007/s10620-005-2472-5. 59. Malekzadeh Z, Haghazali S, Sepanlou SG, Vahedi H, Merat S, Sotoudeh M, et al. Clinical features and long term outcome of 102 treated autoimmune hepatitis patients. Hepat Mon 2012;12:92-9. doi:10.5812/hepatmon.808. 60. Höblinger A, Erdmann C, Strassburg CP, Sauerbruch T, Lammert F. Coinheritance of hereditary spherocytosis and reversibility of cirrhosis in a young female patient with hereditary hemochromatosis. Eur J Med Res 2009;14:182-4. doi:10.1186/2047-783X-14-4-182. 61. Falize L, Guillygomarc'h A, Perrin M, Laine F, Guyader D, Brissot P, et al. Reversibility of hepatic fibrosis in treated genetic hemochromatosis: a study of 36 cases. Hepatology 2006;44:472-7. doi:10.1002/hep.21260. 62. Hammel P, Couvelard A, O'Toole D, Ratouis A, Sauvanet A, Flejou JF, et al. Regression of liver fibrosis after biliary drainage in patients with chronic pancreatitis and stenosis of the common bile duct. N Engl J Med 2001;344:418-23. doi:10.1056/NEJM200102083440604. 63. Papachrysos N, Hytiroglou P, Papalavrentios L, Sinakos E, Kouvelis I, Akriviadis E. Antiviral therapy leads to histological improvement of HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B patients. Ann Gastroenterol 2015;28:374-8. 64. Liaw YF, Sung JJ, Chow WC, Farrell G, Lee CZ, Yuen H, et al. Lamivudine for patients with chronic hepatitis B and advanced liver disease. N Engl J Med 2004;al. Telbivudine versus lamivudine in patients with chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 2007;357:2576-88. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa066422. 66. Schiff ER, Lee SS, Chao YC, Kew Yoon S, Bessone F, Wu SS, et al. Long-term treatment with entecavir induces reversal of advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011;9:274-6. doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2010.11.040. 67. Marcellin P, Chang TT, Lim SG, Sievert W, Tong M, Arterburn S, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of adefovir dipivoxil for the treatment of hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology 2008;48:750-8. doi: 10.1002/hep.22414. 68. Marcellin P, Gane E, Buti M, Afdhal N, Sievert W, Jacobson IM, et al. Regression of cirrhosis during treatment with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for chronic hepatitis B: a 5-year open-label follow-up study. Lancet 2013;381:468-75. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61425-1. 69. Lin SM, Yu ML, Lee CM, Chien RN, Sheen IS, Chu CM, et al. Interferon therapy in HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis reduces progression to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2007;46:45-52. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2006.08.021. 70. Buster EH, Hansen BE, Buti M, Delwaide J, Niederau C, Michielsen PP, et al. Peginterferon alpha-2b is safe and effective in HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B patients with advanced fibrosis. Hepatology 2007;46:388-94. doi: 10.1002/hep.21723. 71. George SL, Bacon BR, Brunt EM, Mihindukulasuriya KL, Hoffmann J, Di Bisceglie AM. Clinical, virologic, histologic, and biochemical outcomes after successful HCV therapy: a 5-year follow-up of 150 patients. Hepatology 2009;49:729-38. doi:10.1002/hep.22694. 72. Mendoza J, Trapero-Marugan M, Gonzalez-Moreno L, Jones EA, Gomez-Dominguez E, Moreno-Otero R. Hepatic fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C assessed by transient elastography: implications for determining the efficacy of antiviral therapy. Rev Esp Enferm Dig 2010;102:426-34. Mummadi RR, Kasturi KS, Chennareddygari S, Sood GK. Effect of bariatric surgery on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;6:1396-402. doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2008.08.012. 92. Chavez-Tapia NC, Tellez-Avila FI, Barrientos-Gutierrez T, Mendez-Sanchez N, Lizardi-Cervera J, Uribe M. Bariatric surgery for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in obese patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010:Cd007340. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007340.pub2. 93. Singh S, Allen AM, Wang Z, Prokop LJ, Murad MH, Loomba R. Fibrosis progression in nonalcoholic fatty liver vs nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of paired-biopsy studies. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:643-54. doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2014.04.014. 94. Duval F, Moreno-Cuevas JE, González-Garza MT, Maldonado-Bernal C, Cruz-Vega DE. Liver Fibrosis and Mechanisms of the Protective Action of Medicinal Plants Targeting Inflammation and the Immune Response. Int J Inflam 2015;2015:943497. doi:10.1155/2015/943497. 95. Machado SR, Parise ER, Carvalho L. Coffee has hepatoprotective benefits in Brazilian patients with chronic hepatitis C even in lower daily consumption than in American and European populations. Braz J Infect Dis 2014;18:170-6. doi:10.1016/j.bjid.2013.09.001. 96. Modi AA, Feld JJ, Park Y, Kleiner DE, Everhart JE, Liang TJ, et al. Increased caffeine consumption is associated with reduced hepatic fibrosis. Hepatology 2010;51:201-9. doi:10.1002/hep.23279. 97. Wang Q, Dai X, Yang W, Wang H, Zhao H, Yang F, et al. Caffeine protects against alcohol-induced liver fibrosis by dampening the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway in rat hepatic stellate cells. Int Immunopharmacol 2015;25:340-52. doi:10.1016/j.intimp.2015.02.012. 98. Hsu SJ, Lee FY, Wang SS, Hsin IF, Lin TY, Huang HC, et al. Caffeine ameliorates hemodynamic derangements and portosystemic collaterals in cirrhotic rats. Hepatology 2015;61:1672-84. doi:10.1002/hep.27679. 99. Shi J, Wu C, Lin Y, Chen YX, Zhu L, Xie WF. Long-term effects of mid-dose ursodeoxycholic acid in primary biliary cirrhosis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Gastroenterol 2006;101:1529-38. 100. Houglum K, Venkataramani A, Lyche K, Chojkier M. A pilot study of the effects of d-alpha-tocopherol on hepatic stellate cell activation in chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology 1997;113:1069-73. doi:10.1053/gast.1997.v113.pm9322499. 101. Chen L, Li L, Chen J, Li L, Zheng Z, Ren J, et al. Oleoylethanolamide, an endogenous PPAR-alpha ligand, attenuates liver fibrosis targeting hepatic stellate cells. Oncotarget 2015;6:42530-40. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.6466. 102. Jia H, Aw W, Saito K, Hanate M, Hasebe Y, Kato H. Eggshell membrane ameliorates hepatic fibrogenesis in human C3A cells and rats through changes in PPARgamma-Endothelin 1 signaling. Sci Rep 2014;4:7473. doi: 10.1038/srep07473. 103. Du J, Niu X, Wang R, Zhao S, Kong L, Zhang Y, et al. TLR4dependent signaling pathway modulation: A novel mechanism by which pioglitazone protects against nutritional fibrotic steatohepatitis in mice. Mol Med Rep 2016;13:2159-66. doi:10.3892/mmr.2016.4775. 104. Ding N, Hah N, Yu RT, Sherman MH, Benner C, Leblanc M, et al. BRD4 is a novel therapeutic target for liver fibrosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015;112:15713-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1522163112. 105. Yoshiji H, Kuriyama S, Noguchi R, Ikenaka Y, Yoshii J, Yanase K, et al. Amelioration of liver fibrogenesis by dual inhibition of PDGF and TGF-beta with a combination of imatinib mesylate and ACE inhibitor in rats. Int J Mol Med 2006;17:899-904. doi:10.3892/ijmm.17.5.899. 106. Huang ML, Li X, Meng Y, Xiao B, Ma Q, Ying SS, et al. Upregulation of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 2 in hepatic fibrosis by ACE inhibitors. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2010;37:e1-6. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1681.2009.05302.x. 107. Moreno M, Gonzalo T, Kok RJ, Sancho-Bru P, van Beuge M, Swart J, et al. Reduction of advanced liver fibrosis by short-term targeted delivery of an angiotensin receptor blocker to hepatic stellate cells in rats. Hepatology 2010;51:942-52. doi:10.1002/hep.23419. 108. Kim SY, Cho BH, Kim UH. CD38-mediated Ca2+ signaling contributes to angiotensin II-induced activation of hepatic stellate cells: attenuation of hepatic fibrosis

## Table 1 :
1Receptor-ligand mediated myofibroblast apoptosisLigand 
Receptor 
Molecular Mediation/Pathway 
Reference(s) 

Adiponectin 
Adipo-R1 
Decreasing TGF-β1 expression 

21 

Adipo-R2 
Suppressing PDGF-stimulation for HSCs proliferation 

Suppressing MF proliferation 

Inhibiting NF-κB and MF apoptosis 

Cannabinoids 
CB2R* 
Inducing intracellular oxidative stress and MF apoptosis 

22-26 

Nerve growth factor 
TrkA neurotrophin 
Inhibiting NF-κB and promoting MF apoptosis 

27,28 

TrkB neurotrophin 

TrkC neurotrophin 

Hepatocyte growth factor 
c-Met 
Suppressing PDGF-stimulation for HSCs proliferation 

29-31 

Suppressing MF proliferation 

Inhibiting TGF-β expression 

Promoting MF apoptosis 

* Cannabinoids may interact with CB1 receptor and promote fibrogenic processes by transdifferentiating HSCs to MF. CB1 receptor antagonists (SR141617A) may prevent fibrosis by blocking 
this pathway. 23 
Cannabinoids, CB; Hepatic stellate cell, HSCs; Nuclear factor-κB, NF-κB; Transforming growth factor, TGF-β; Platelet derived growth factor, PDGF; Myofibroblast, MF 


## Table 2 :
2Different strategies for reversing hepatic fibrosis Reducing inflammation and immune response before HSCs activationHerbal medicinesDifferent agents in this categories along with their mechanisms of action are discussed in detail elsewhereAgent 
Target 
Mechanism(s) 
Reference(s) 

1: 94 

Glucocorticoids 
Immune system 
Reduction of inflammation mostly in autoimmune hepatitis 

57 

Caffeine 
NA 
NA 

95-98 

Ursodeoxycholic acid 
(UDCA) 

Cholangiocytes 
Reduction in the cytotoxicity of bile acids 

99 

Protection of hepatocytes against bile acid-induced apoptosis 

2: Inhibiting HSCs activation 

α-tocopherol 
Oxidative stress 
pathway 
Decreasing oxidative stress 

100 

Thiazolidinediones 
PPAR Family 
Inhibition of PDGF stimulated HSCs activation 

101-103 

Oleoylethanolamide 
Modulation of the TLR4-mediated signaling pathway 

ESM (PPAR agonist) 

JQ1 (BRD4 antagonist) 
BRD4 
Abrogates cytokine-induced activation of HSCs 

104 

Imatinib mesylate 
PDGF 
Suppresses PDGF receptor phosphorylation and HSCs activation 

105 

ACE Inhibitors 
RAS 
Down regulate angiotensin II receptor on HSCs, which is responsible 
for HSCs proliferation and contraction 

106-110 

Suppress activation of HSCs by TGF-β expression 

Recombinant IL-22 
Th22 
Attenuation of HSC activation 

111 

Downregulation of the levels of inflammatory cytokines 

3: Inhibiting response cascade after HSCs activation 

GW6604 
(TGF-β antagonist) 
TGF-β 
Inhibition of TGF-β signal transduction 

112 

cytosporone B 
(NR4A1 gene agonist) 
TGF-β 
Termination in TGF-β signaling 

113 

Bosentan 
Endothelin 
Endothelium-receptor antagonist 

114 

Halofuginone 
Blocking collagen expression via inhibition of Smad3 phosphoryla-
tion downstream of the TGFβ signaling pathway 

115,116 

Caspase inhibitors 
Caspase 
Inhibit effector of apoptosis signaling in hepatocytes 

117 

FXR analogues 
FXR 
Improve hepatocyte integrity 

118,119 

Reduce HSCs contractility 

Reduce collagen I levels 

Inhibit TIMP-1 

4: Promoting activated HSCs (myofibroblasts) into apoptosis 

Gliotoxin 
NF-κB 
Inhibition of NF-κB pathway 

120,121 

Sulfasalazine 
NF-κB 
Inhibition of NF-κB pathway 

122 

Thalidomide 
NF-κB 
Inhibition of NF-κB pathway 

123 

Suppression of TNF-α and TGF-β1 production of Kupffer's cells 

Melatonin 
NF-κB 
Inhibiting necroptosis-associated inflammatory signaling 

124,125 

CB1R antagonists 
CB1R 
Inhibition of Smad3 phosphorylation downstream of the TGFβ signaling 
pathway 

126-128 

Reduce cellular proliferation 

Promote myofibroblasts apoptosis 

CB2R agonist 
CB2R 
Inhibits MF proliferation 

129,130 


Reversibility and Targeting of Liver Fibrosis
Ebrahimi et al.   
Middle East J Dig Dis/ Vol.10/ No.3/ July 2018
Ebrahimi et al.Middle East J Dig Dis/ Vol.10/ No.3/ July 2018

Lessons from Epidemiology: The Burden of Liver Disease. I A Rowe, 10.1159/000456580Dig Dis. 35Rowe IA. Lessons from Epidemiology: The Burden of Liver Disease. Dig Dis 2017;35:304-9. doi:10.1159/000456580.

New Concepts on Pathogenesis and Diagnosis of Liver Fibrosis. H Ebrahimi, M Naderian, A A Sohrabpour, Ebrahimi H, Naderian M, Sohrabpour AA. New Con- cepts on Pathogenesis and Diagnosis of Liver Fibrosis;

. 10.15171/mejdd.2016.29A Review Article. Middle East J Dig Dis. 8A Review Article. Middle East J Dig Dis 2016;8:166-78. doi:10.15171/mejdd.2016.29.

Reversal of liver cirrhosis: current evidence and expectations. Y K Jung, H J Yim, 10.3904/kjim.2016.268Korean J Intern Med. 32Jung YK, Yim HJ. Reversal of liver cirrhosis: cur- rent evidence and expectations. Korean J Intern Med 2017;32:213-28. doi:10.3904/kjim.2016.268.

Pathogenesis of liver cirrhosis. W C Zhou, Q B Zhang, L Qiao, doi: 10.3748/ wjg.v20.i23.7312World J Gastroenterol. 20Zhou WC, Zhang QB, Qiao L. Pathogenesis of liver cirrho- sis. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:7312-24. doi: 10.3748/ wjg.v20.i23.7312.

Modulation of hepatic stellate cells and reversibility of hepatic fibrosis. Y Huang, X Deng, J Liang, 10.1016/j.yexcr.2017.02.038Exp Cell Res. 352Huang Y, Deng X, Liang J. Modulation of hepatic stellate cells and reversibility of hepatic fibrosis. Exp Cell Res 2017;352:420-6. doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2017.02.038.

The characteristics of activated portal fibroblasts/myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis. D Karin, Y Koyama, D Brenner, T Kisseleva, 10.1016/j.diff.2016.07.001Differentiation. 92Karin D, Koyama Y, Brenner D, Kisseleva T. The char- acteristics of activated portal fibroblasts/myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis. Differentiation 2016;92:84-92. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2016.07.001.

Bone marrow endothelial progenitor cells activate hepatic stellate cells and aggravate carbon tetrachloride induced liver fibrosis in mice via paracrine factors. M Garg, S Kaur, A Banik, V Kumar, A Rastogi, S K Sarin, 10.1111/cpr.12355Cell prolif. 50Garg M, Kaur S, Banik A, Kumar V, Rastogi A, Sarin SK, et al. Bone marrow endothelial progenitor cells activate hepatic stellate cells and aggravate carbon tetrachloride induced liver fibrosis in mice via paracrine factors. Cell prolif 2017;50. doi:10.1111/cpr.12355.

Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor alpha Contributes to Human Hepatic Stellate Cell Proliferation and Migration. A Kikuchi, T Pradhan-Sundd, S Singh, S Nagarajan, N Loizos, S P Monga, 10.1016/j.ajpath.2017.06.009Am J Pathol. 187Kikuchi A, Pradhan-Sundd T, Singh S, Nagarajan S, Loizos N, Monga SP. Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Re- ceptor alpha Contributes to Human Hepatic Stellate Cell Proliferation and Migration. Am J Pathol 2017;187:2273- 87. doi:10.1016/j.ajpath.2017.06.009.

Role of interleukin-1 and its antagonism of hepatic stellate cell proliferation and liver fibrosis in the Abcb4(-/-) mouse model. F P Reiter, R Wimmer, L Wottke, R Artmann, J M Nagel, M O Carranza, 10.4254/wjh.v8.i8.401World J Hepatol. 8Reiter FP, Wimmer R, Wottke L, Artmann R, Nagel JM, Carranza MO, et al. Role of interleukin-1 and its antag- onism of hepatic stellate cell proliferation and liver fi- brosis in the Abcb4(-/-) mouse model. World J Hepatol 2016;8:401-10. doi:10.4254/wjh.v8.i8.401.

Pathogenesis of Kupffer Cells in Cholestatic Liver Injury. K Sato, C Hall, S Glaser, H Francis, F Meng, G Alpini, 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.06.003Am J Pathol. 186Sato K, Hall C, Glaser S, Francis H, Meng F, Alpini G. Patho- genesis of Kupffer Cells in Cholestatic Liver Injury. Am J Pathol 2016;186:2238-47. doi:10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.06.003.

Fibrosis and cirrhosis reversibility -molecular mechanisms. R G Gieling, A D Burt, D A Mann, 10.1016/j.cld.2008.07.001Clin Liver Dis. 12Gieling RG, Burt AD, Mann DA. Fibrosis and cirrhosis reversibility -molecular mechanisms. Clin Liver Dis 2008;12:915-37. doi:10.1016/j.cld.2008.07.001.

Origin of myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis. D A Brenner, T Kisseleva, D Scholten, Y H Paik, K Iwaisako, S Inokuchi, 10.1186/1755-1536-5-S1-S17Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair. 5117SupplBrenner DA, Kisseleva T, Scholten D, Paik YH, Iwaisako K, Inokuchi S, et al. Origin of myofibroblasts in liver fi- brosis. Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair 2012;5 Suppl 1:S17. doi:10.1186/1755-1536-5-S1-S17.

What's new in liver fibrosis? The origin of myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis. K Iwaisako, D A Brenner, T Kisseleva, 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.07002.xJ Gastroenterol Hepatol. 272SupplIwaisako K, Brenner DA, Kisseleva T. What's new in liver fibrosis? The origin of myofibroblasts in liver fibro- sis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;27 Suppl 2:65-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.07002.x.

Origin of myofibroblasts in the fibrotic liver in mice. K Iwaisako, C Jiang, M Zhang, M Cong, T J Moore-Morris, T J Park, 10.1073/pnas.1400062111Proc Natl Acad Sci. 111Iwaisako K, Jiang C, Zhang M, Cong M, Moore-Morris TJ, Park TJ, et al. Origin of myofibroblasts in the fibrotic liver in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014;111:E3297- 305. doi:10.1073/pnas.1400062111.

Mesothelial cells give rise to hepatic stellate cells and myofibroblasts via mesothelialmesenchymal transition in liver injury. Y Li, J Wang, K Asahina, 10.1073/pnas.1214136110Proc Natl Acad Sci. 110Li Y, Wang J, Asahina K. Mesothelial cells give rise to hepatic stellate cells and myofibroblasts via mesothelial- mesenchymal transition in liver injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013;110:2324-9. doi:10.1073/pnas.1214136110.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-7, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 are closely related to the fibroproliferative process in the liver during chronic hepatitis C. R Lichtinghagen, D Michels, C I Haberkorn, B Arndt, M Bahr, P Flemming, 10.1016/S0168-8278(00)00037-4J Hepatol. 34Lichtinghagen R, Michels D, Haberkorn CI, Arndt B, Bahr M, Flemming P, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-7, and tissue inhibitor of metallopro- teinase-1 are closely related to the fibroproliferative process in the liver during chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol 2001;34:239-47. doi:10.1016/S0168-8278(00)00037-4.

. E Novo, S Cannito, E Zamara, Valfre Di Bonzo, L Ca, - , Novo E, Cannito S, Zamara E, Valfre di Bonzo L, Ca-

Daclatasvir and asunaprevir treatment improves liver function parameters and reduces liver fibrosis markers in chronic hepatitis C patients. E Miyaki, M Imamura, N Hiraga, E Murakami, T Kawaoka, M Tsuge, 10.1111/hepr.12621Hepatol Res. 46Miyaki E, Imamura M, Hiraga N, Murakami E, Kawaoka T, Tsuge M, et al. Daclatasvir and asunaprevir treatment improves liver function parameters and reduces liver fi- brosis markers in chronic hepatitis C patients. Hepatol Res 2016;46:758-64. doi:10.1111/hepr.12621.

Simeprevir plus sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, to treat chronic infection with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 in non-responders to pegylated interferon and ribavirin and treatmentnaive patients: the COSMOS randomised study. E Lawitz, M S Sulkowski, R Ghalib, M Rodriguez-Torres, Z M Younossi, A Corregidor, 10.1016/S0140-6736Lancet. 38414Lawitz E, Sulkowski MS, Ghalib R, Rodriguez-Torres M, Younossi ZM, Corregidor A, et al. Simeprevir plus sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, to treat chronic in- fection with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 in non-respond- ers to pegylated interferon and ribavirin and treatment- naive patients: the COSMOS randomised study. Lancet 2014;384:1756-65. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61036-9.

Early changes in dynamic biomarkers of liver fibrosis in hepatitis C virus-infected patients treated with sofosbuvir. S Bernuth, E Yagmur, D Schuppan, M F Sprinzl, A Zimmermann, A Schad, 10.1016/j.dld.2015.09.015Dig Liver Dis. 48Bernuth S, Yagmur E, Schuppan D, Sprinzl MF, Zim- mermann A, Schad A, et al. Early changes in dynamic biomarkers of liver fibrosis in hepatitis C virus-in- fected patients treated with sofosbuvir. Dig Liver Dis 2016;48:291-7. doi:10.1016/j.dld.2015.09.015.

Brief communication: the relationship of regression of cirrhosis to outcome in chronic hepatitis C. V Mallet, H Gilgenkrantz, J Serpaggi, V Verkarre, A Vallet-Pichard, H Fontaine, Ann Intern Med. 149Mallet V, Gilgenkrantz H, Serpaggi J, Verkarre V, Val- let-Pichard A, Fontaine H, et al. Brief communication: the relationship of regression of cirrhosis to outcome in chronic hepatitis C. Ann Intern Med 2008;149:399-403.

Statin use is associated with a reduced risk of fibrosis progression in chronic hepatitis C. T G Simon, L Y King, H Zheng, R T Chung, 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.08.013J Hepatol. 62Simon TG, King LY, Zheng H, Chung RT. Statin use is associated with a reduced risk of fibrosis progression in chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol 2015;62:18-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.08.013.

Effect of addition of statins to antiviral therapy in hepatitis C virus-infected persons: Results from ERCHIVES. A A Butt, P Yan, H Bonilla, A B Abou-Samra, O S Shaikh, T G Simon, 10.1002/hep.27835Hepatology. 62Butt AA, Yan P, Bonilla H, Abou-Samra AB, Shaikh OS, Si- mon TG, et al. Effect of addition of statins to antiviral therapy in hepatitis C virus-infected persons: Results from ERCHIVES. Hepatology 2015;62:365-74. doi: 10.1002/hep.27835.

Rapid decline of liver stiffness following alcohol withdrawal in heavy drinkers. J B Trabut, V Thepot, B Nalpas, B Lavielle, S Cosconea, M Corouge, 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01737.xAlcohol Clin Exp Res. 36Trabut JB, Thepot V, Nalpas B, Lavielle B, Cosconea S, Corouge M, et al. Rapid decline of liver stiffness following alcohol withdrawal in heavy drinkers. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2012;36:1407-11. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01737.x.

. E Gelsi, R Dainese, R Truchi, E Marine-Barjoan, R Anty, Gelsi E, Dainese R, Truchi R, Marine-Barjoan E, Anty R,

Effect of detoxification on liver stiffness assessed by Fibroscan(R) in alcoholic patients. M Autuori, 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01374.xAlcohol Clin Exp Res. 35Autuori M, et al. Effect of detoxification on liver stiffness as- sessed by Fibroscan(R) in alcoholic patients. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2011;35:566-70. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01374.x.

Six month abstinence rule for liver transplantation in severe alcoholic liver disease patients. A Obed, S Stern, A Jarrad, T Lorf, 10.3748/wjg.v21.i14.4423World J Gastroenterol. 21Obed A, Stern S, Jarrad A, Lorf T. Six month abstinence rule for liver transplantation in severe alcoholic liver disease patients. World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:4423-6. doi:10.3748/wjg.v21.i14.4423.

Polyenephosphatidylcholine prevents alcoholic liver disease in PPARalpha-null mice through attenuation of increases in oxidative stress. W Okiyama, N Tanaka, T Nakajima, E Tanaka, K Kiyosawa, F J Gonzalez, 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.01.025J Hepatol. 50Okiyama W, Tanaka N, Nakajima T, Tanaka E, Kiyo- sawa K, Gonzalez FJ, et al. Polyenephosphatidylcholine prevents alcoholic liver disease in PPARalpha-null mice through attenuation of increases in oxidative stress. J Hep- atol 2009;50:1236-46. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2009.01.025.

Omega-3 supplementation and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. H M Parker, N A Johnson, C A Burdon, J S Cohn, H T O&apos;connor, J George, Parker HM, Johnson NA, Burdon CA, Cohn JS, O'Connor HT, George J. Omega-3 supplementation and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

. 10.1016/j.jhep.2011.08.018J Hepatol. 56J Hepatol 2012;56:944-51. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2011.08.018.

Meta-analysis: pioglitazone improves liver histology and fibrosis in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. E Boettcher, G Csako, F Pucino, R Wesley, R Loomba, 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2011.04912.xAliment Pharmacol Ther. 35Boettcher E, Csako G, Pucino F, Wesley R, Loomba R. Meta-analysis: pioglitazone improves liver histol- ogy and fibrosis in patients with non-alcoholic steato- hepatitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2012;35:66-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2011.04912.x.

A metaanalysis of randomized trials for the treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. G Musso, R Gambino, M Cassader, G Pagano, 10.1002/hep.23623Hepatology. 52Musso G, Gambino R, Cassader M, Pagano G. A meta- analysis of randomized trials for the treatment of nonal- coholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 2010;52:79-104. doi:10.1002/hep.23623.

Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): a multicentre, doubleblind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study. M J Armstrong, P Gaunt, G P Aithal, D Barton, D Hull, R Parker, 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00803-XLancet. 387Armstrong MJ, Gaunt P, Aithal GP, Barton D, Hull D, Parker R, et al. Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with non- alcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): a multicentre, double- blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study. Lancet 2016;387:679-90. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00803-X.

Effect of telmisartan on histological activity and fibrosis of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: A 1-year randomized control trial. S Alam, J Kabir, G Mustafa, U Gupta, S K Hasan, A K Alam, 10.4103/1319-3767.173762Saudi J Gastroenterol. 22Alam S, Kabir J, Mustafa G, Gupta U, Hasan SK, Alam AK. Effect of telmisartan on histological activity and fi- brosis of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: A 1-year random- ized control trial. Saudi J Gastroenterol 2016;22:69-76. doi:10.4103/1319-3767.173762.

Farnesoid X nuclear receptor ligand obeticholic acid for non-cirrhotic, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (FLINT): a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. B A Neuschwander-Tetri, R Loomba, A J Sanyal, J E Lavine, M L Van Natta, M F Abdelmalek, 10.1016/S0140-6736Lancet. 38514Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Loomba R, Sanyal AJ, Lavine JE, Van Natta ML, Abdelmalek MF, et al. Farnesoid X nuclear receptor ligand obeticholic acid for non-cirrhotic, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (FLINT): a multicentre, ran- domised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2015;385:956- 65. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61933-4.

Total body weight loss of >= 10 % is associated with improved hepatic fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. L M Glass, R C Dickson, J C Anderson, A A Suriawinata, J Putra, B S Berk, 10.1007/s10620-014-3380-3Dig Dis Sci. 60Glass LM, Dickson RC, Anderson JC, Suriawinata AA, Putra J, Berk BS, et al. Total body weight loss of >= 10 % is associated with improved hepatic fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Dig Dis Sci 2015;60:1024-30. doi:10.1007/s10620-014-3380-3.

Weight by CD38 ablation. E Vilar-Gomez, Y Martinez-Perez, L Calzadilla-Bertot, A Torres-Gonzalez, B Gra-Oramas, L Gonzalez-Fabian, 10.1074/jbc.M109.076216J Biol Chem. 285Vilar-Gomez E, Martinez-Perez Y, Calzadilla-Bertot L, Torres- Gonzalez A, Gra-Oramas B, Gonzalez-Fabian L, et al. Weight by CD38 ablation. J Biol Chem 2010;285:576-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.076216.

Losartan, an angiotensin-II type 1 receptor blocker, attenuates the liver fibrosis development of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in the rat. H Yoshiji, R Noguchi, Y Ikenaka, T Namisaki, M Kitade, K Kaji, 10.1186/1756-0500-2-70BMC Res Notes. 270Yoshiji H, Noguchi R, Ikenaka Y, Namisaki T, Kitade M, Kaji K, et al. Losartan, an angiotensin-II type 1 recep- tor blocker, attenuates the liver fibrosis development of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in the rat. BMC Res Notes 2009;2:70. doi:10.1186/1756-0500-2-70.

The role of the reninangiotensin system in liver fibrosis. M K Munshi, M N Uddin, S S Glaser, 10.1258/ebm.2011.010375Exp Biol Med. 236Munshi MK, Uddin MN, Glaser SS. The role of the renin- angiotensin system in liver fibrosis. Exp Biol Med (May- wood) 2011;236:557-66. doi:10.1258/ebm.2011.010375.

Interleukin-22 ameliorates liver fibrogenesis by attenuating hepatic stellate cell activation and downregulating the levels of inflammatory cytokines. D H Lu, X Y Guo, S Y Qin, W Luo, X L Huang, M Chen, 10.3748/wjg.v21.i5.1531World J Gastroenterol. 21Lu DH, Guo XY, Qin SY, Luo W, Huang XL, Chen M, et al. Interleukin-22 ameliorates liver fibrogenesis by atten- uating hepatic stellate cell activation and downregulating the levels of inflammatory cytokines. World J Gastroen- terol 2015;21:1531-45. doi:10.3748/wjg.v21.i5.1531.

Discovery of 4-{4-[3-(pyridin-2-yl)-1H-pyrazol-4-yl]pyridin-2-yl}-N-(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)benzamide (GW788388): a potent, selective, and orally active transforming growth factor-beta type I receptor inhibitor. F Gellibert, A C De Gouville, J Woolven, N Mathews, V L Nguyen, C Bertho-Ruault, 10.1021/jm0509905J Med Chem. 49Gellibert F, de Gouville AC, Woolven J, Mathews N, Nguyen VL, Bertho-Ruault C, et al. Discovery of 4-{4-[3-(pyridin-2-yl)-1H-pyrazol-4-yl]pyridin-2-yl}- N-(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)benzamide (GW788388): a potent, selective, and orally active transforming growth factor-beta type I receptor inhibitor. J Med Chem 2006;49:2210-21. doi:10.1021/jm0509905.

Orphan nuclear receptor NR4A1 regulates transforming growth factor-beta signaling and fibrosis. K Palumbo-Zerr, P Zerr, A Distler, J Fliehr, R Mancuso, J Huang, Palumbo-Zerr K, Zerr P, Distler A, Fliehr J, Mancuso R, Huang J, et al. Orphan nuclear receptor NR4A1 regulates transforming growth factor-beta signaling and fibrosis.

. 10.1038/nm.3777Nat Med. 21Nat Med 2015;21:150-8. doi:10.1038/nm.3777.

Endothelin antagonism in experimental hepatic fibrosis. Implications for endothelin in the pathogenesis of wound healing. D C Rockey, J J Chung, J Clin Invest. 98Rockey DC, Chung JJ. Endothelin antagonism in experimen- tal hepatic fibrosis. Implications for endothelin in the patho- genesis of wound healing. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1381-8.

Inhibition of transforming growth factor beta signaling by halofuginone as a modality for pancreas fibrosis prevention. O Zion, O Genin, N Kawada, K Yoshizato, S Roffe, A Nagler, 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181967670Pancreas. 38Zion O, Genin O, Kawada N, Yoshizato K, Roffe S, Na- gler A, et al. Inhibition of transforming growth factor beta signaling by halofuginone as a modality for pan- creas fibrosis prevention. Pancreas 2009;38:427-35. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181967670.

Halofuginone for fibrosis, regeneration and cancer in the gastrointestinal tract. M Pines, 10.3748/wjg.v20.i40.14778World J Gastroenterol. 20Pines M. Halofuginone for fibrosis, regeneration and cancer in the gastrointestinal tract. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:14778-86. doi:10.3748/wjg.v20.i40.14778.

The caspase inhibitor IDN-6556 attenuates hepatic injury and fibrosis in the bile duct ligated mouse. A Canbay, A Feldstein, E Baskin-Bey, S F Bronk, G J Gores, J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 308Canbay A, Feldstein A, Baskin-Bey E, Bronk SF, Gores GJ. The caspase inhibitor IDN-6556 attenuates hepatic injury and fibrosis in the bile duct ligated mouse. J Phar- macol Exp Ther 2004;308:1191-6.

Farnesoid X receptor targeting to treat nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. L Adorini, M Pruzanski, D Shapiro, 10.1016/j.drudis.2012.05.012Drug Discov Today. 17Adorini L, Pruzanski M, Shapiro D. Farnesoid X receptor targeting to treat nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Drug Discov Today 2012;17:988-97. doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2012.05.012.

Inhibition of endothelin-1-mediated contraction of hepatic stellate cells by FXR ligand. J Li, R Kuruba, A Wilson, X Gao, Y Zhang, S Li, 10.1371/journal.pone.0013955PloS one. 513955Li J, Kuruba R, Wilson A, Gao X, Zhang Y, Li S. Inhibi- tion of endothelin-1-mediated contraction of hepatic stel- late cells by FXR ligand. PloS one 2010;5:e13955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013955.

Gliotoxin-mediated apoptosis of activated human hepatic stellate cells. Y O Kweon, Y H Paik, B Schnabl, T Qian, J J Lemasters, D A Brenner, 10.1016/S0168-8278(03)00178-8J Hepatol. 39Kweon YO, Paik YH, Schnabl B, Qian T, Lemasters JJ, Brenner DA. Gliotoxin-mediated apoptosis of activated human hepatic stellate cells. J Hepatol 2003;39:38-46. doi:10.1016/S0168-8278(03)00178-8.

Gliotoxin ameliorates development of fibrosis and cirrhosis in a thioacetamide rat model. R Dekel, I Zvibel, S Brill, E Brazovsky, Z Halpern, R Oren, 10.1023/A:1024792529601Dig Dis Sci. 48Dekel R, Zvibel I, Brill S, Brazovsky E, Halpern Z, Oren R. Gliotoxin ameliorates development of fibrosis and cirrhosis in a thioacetamide rat model. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1642-7. doi:10.1023/A:1024792529601.

Sulfasalazine prevents the increase in TGF-beta, COX-2, nuclear NFkappaB translocation and fibrosis in CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis in the rat. E Chavez, L Castro-Sanchez, M Shibayama, V Tsutsumi, M G Moreno, P Muriel, 10.1177/0960327112438928Hum Exp Toxicol. 31Chavez E, Castro-Sanchez L, Shibayama M, Tsutsumi V, Moreno MG, Muriel P. Sulfasalazine prevents the increase in TGF-beta, COX-2, nuclear NFkappaB translocation and fibrosis in CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis in the rat. Hum Exp Toxicol 2012;31:913-20. doi: 10.1177/0960327112438928.

Anti-fibrotic effects of thalidomide on hepatic stellate cells and dimethylnitrosamine-intoxicated rats. L W Chong, Y C Hsu, Y T Chiu, K C Yang, Y T Huang, 10.1007/s11373-006-9079-5J Biomed Sci. 13Chong LW, Hsu YC, Chiu YT, Yang KC, Huang YT. An- ti-fibrotic effects of thalidomide on hepatic stellate cells and dimethylnitrosamine-intoxicated rats. J Biomed Sci 2006;13:403-18. doi:10.1007/s11373-006-9079-5.

Melatonin attenuates carbon tetrachloride-induced liver fibrosis via inhibition of necroptosis. H S Choi, J W Kang, S M Lee, 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.04.002Transl Res. 166Choi HS, Kang JW, Lee SM. Melatonin attenuates carbon tetrachloride-induced liver fibrosis via inhibi- tion of necroptosis. Transl Res 2015;166:292-303. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.04.002.

Melatonin limits the expression of profibrogenic genes and ameliorates the progression of hepatic fibrosis in mice. I Crespo, B San-Miguel, A Fernandez, J Ortiz De Urbina, J Gonzalez-Gallego, M J Tunon, 10.1016/j.trsl.2014.10.003Transl Res. 165Crespo I, San-Miguel B, Fernandez A, Ortiz de Urbina J, Gonzalez-Gallego J, Tunon MJ. Melatonin limits the expression of profibrogenic genes and ameliorates the progression of hepatic fibrosis in mice. Transl Res 2015;165:346-57. doi:10.1016/j.trsl.2014.10.003.

Suppression of CB1 cannabinoid receptor by lentivirus mediated small interfering RNA ameliorates hepatic fibrosis in rats. S W Chen, B Y Wu, S P Xu, K X Fan, L Yan, Y Gong, doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0050850PloS one. 750850Chen SW, Wu BY, Xu SP, Fan KX, Yan L, Gong Y, et al. Suppression of CB1 cannabinoid receptor by lentivi- rus mediated small interfering RNA ameliorates hepatic fibrosis in rats. PloS one 2012;7:e50850. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0050850.

Cannabinoid signaling and liver therapeutics. A Mallat, F Teixeira-Clerc, S Lotersztajn, 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.03.032J Hepatol. 59Mallat A, Teixeira-Clerc F, Lotersztajn S. Cannabinoid signaling and liver therapeutics. J Hepatol 2013;59:891- 6. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2013.03.032.

The peripheral cannabinoid receptor 1 antagonist VD60 efficiently inhibits carbon tetrachloride-intoxicated hepatic fibrosis progression. Y Wei, X L Kang, X Wang, 10.1177/1535370213514922Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 239Wei Y, Kang XL, Wang X. The peripheral cannabinoid receptor 1 antagonist VD60 efficiently inhibits car- bon tetrachloride-intoxicated hepatic fibrosis progres- sion. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 2014;239:183-92. doi: 10.1177/1535370213514922.

Antifibrogenic role of the cannabinoid receptor CB2 in the liver. B Julien, P Grenard, F Teixeira-Clerc, J T Van Nhieu, L Li, M Karsak, 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.050Gastroenterology. 128Julien B, Grenard P, Teixeira-Clerc F, Van Nhieu JT, Li L, Karsak M, et al. Antifibrogenic role of the cannabinoid re- ceptor CB2 in the liver. Gastroenterology 2005;128:742- 55. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.050.

Regression of Fibrosis after Chronic Stimulation of Cannabinoid CB2 Receptor in Cirrhotic Rats. J Muñoz-Luque, Ros J Fernández-Varo, G Tugues, S Morales-Ruiz, M Alvarez, C E , 10.1124/jpet.107.131896J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 324Muñoz-Luque J, Ros J, Fernández-Varo G, Tugues S, Mo- rales-Ruiz M, Alvarez CE, et al. Regression of Fibrosis after Chronic Stimulation of Cannabinoid CB2 Receptor in Cirrhotic Rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008;324:475- 83. doi:10.1124/jpet.107.131896.

Amelioration of hepatic fibrosis by NK cell activation. N Muhanna, Abu Tair, L Doron, S Amer, J Azzeh, M Mahamid, M , 10.1136/gut.2010.211136Gut. 60Muhanna N, Abu Tair L, Doron S, Amer J, Azzeh M, Ma- hamid M, et al. Amelioration of hepatic fibrosis by NK cell activation. Gut 2011;60:90-8. doi:10.1136/gut.2010.211136.

Impaired CD4(+) T cell stimulation of NK cell anti-fibrotic activity may contribute to accelerated liver fibrosis progression in HIV/HCV patients. A Glassner, M Eisenhardt, P Kokordelis, B Kramer, F Wolter, H D Nischalke, 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.029J Hepatol. 59Glassner A, Eisenhardt M, Kokordelis P, Kramer B, Wolter F, Nischalke HD, et al. Impaired CD4(+) T cell stimulation of NK cell anti-fibrotic activity may contribute to accel- erated liver fibrosis progression in HIV/HCV patients. J Hepatol 2013;59:427-33. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.029.

Adenoviral vector expressing hepatocyte growth factor promotes liver regeneration by preoperative injection: the advantages of performing selective injection to the remnant lobe. M Ueno, K Uchiyama, M Nakamori, K Ueda, M Iwahashi, S Ozawa, 10.1016/j.surg.2006.10.006Surgery. 141Ueno M, Uchiyama K, Nakamori M, Ueda K, Iwahashi M, Ozawa S, et al. Adenoviral vector expressing hepato- cyte growth factor promotes liver regeneration by preop- erative injection: the advantages of performing selective injection to the remnant lobe. Surgery 2007;141:511-9. doi:10.1016/j.surg.2006.10.006.

Low-dose simultaneous delivery of adenovirus encoding hepatocyte growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in dogs enhances liver proliferation without systemic growth factor elevation. H M Atta, A Al-Hendy, S A Salama, O G Shaker, O A Hammam, 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02056.xLiver Int. 29Atta HM, Al-Hendy A, Salama SA, Shaker OG, Hammam OA. Low-dose simultaneous delivery of adenovirus en- coding hepatocyte growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in dogs enhances liver proliferation without systemic growth factor elevation. Liver Int 2009;29:1022- 30. doi:10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02056.x.

Safety and pharmacokinetics of recombinant human hepatocyte growth factor (rh-HGF) in patients with fulminant hepatitis: a phase I/II clinical trial, following preclinical studies to ensure safety. A Ido, A Moriuchi, M Numata, T Murayama, S Teramukai, H Marusawa, 10.1186/1479-5876-9-55J Transl Med. 955Ido A, Moriuchi A, Numata M, Murayama T, Teramukai S, Marusawa H, et al. Safety and pharmacokinetics of re- combinant human hepatocyte growth factor (rh-HGF) in patients with fulminant hepatitis: a phase I/II clinical tri- al, following preclinical studies to ensure safety. J Transl Med 2011;9:55. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-9-55.

Enhanced effects of novel oridonin analog CYD0682 for hepatic fibrosis. F J Bohanon, X Wang, B M Graham, C Ding, Y Ding, G L Radhakrishnan, 10.1016/j.jss.2015.07.042J Surg Res. 199Bohanon FJ, Wang X, Graham BM, Ding C, Ding Y, Radhakrishnan GL, et al. Enhanced effects of novel ori- donin analog CYD0682 for hepatic fibrosis. J Surg Res 2015;199:441-9. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2015.07.042.

Antihepatic Fibrosis Effect of Active Components Isolated from Green Asparagus (Asparagus officinalis L.) Involves the Inactivation of Hepatic Stellate Cells. C Zhong, C Jiang, X Xia, T Mu, L Wei, Y Lou, 10.1021/acs.jafc.5b01490J Agric Food Chem. 63Zhong C, Jiang C, Xia X, Mu T, Wei L, Lou Y, et al. An- tihepatic Fibrosis Effect of Active Components Isolated from Green Asparagus (Asparagus officinalis L.) Involves the Inactivation of Hepatic Stellate Cells. J Agric Food Chem 2015;63:6027-34. doi:10.1021/acs.jafc.5b01490.

Disruption of transforming growth factor-beta signaling by curcumin induces gene expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptorgamma in rat hepatic stellate cells. S Zheng, A Chen, doi:10.1152/ ajpgi.00200Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 292Zheng S, Chen A. Disruption of transforming growth factor-beta signaling by curcumin induces gene ex- pression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- gamma in rat hepatic stellate cells. Am J Physiol Gas- trointest Liver Physiol 2007;292:G113-23. doi:10.1152/ ajpgi.00200.2006.

Smad7 prevents activation of hepatic stellate cells and liver fibrosis in rats. S Dooley, J Hamzavi, K Breitkopf, E Wiercinska, H M Said, J Lorenzen, 10.1016/S0016-5085(03)00666-8Gastroenterology. 125Dooley S, Hamzavi J, Breitkopf K, Wiercinska E, Said HM, Lorenzen J, et al. Smad7 prevents activation of hepat- ic stellate cells and liver fibrosis in rats. Gastroenterology 2003;125:178-91. doi:10.1016/S0016-5085(03)00666-8.

Curcumin regulates cell fate and metabolism by inhibiting hedgehog signaling in hepatic stellate cells. N Lian, Y Jiang, F Zhang, Jin H Lu, C Wu, X , 10.1038/labinvest.2015.59Lab Invest. 95Lian N, Jiang Y, Zhang F, Jin H, Lu C, Wu X, et al. Cur- cumin regulates cell fate and metabolism by inhibiting hedgehog signaling in hepatic stellate cells. Lab Invest 2015;95:790-803. doi:10.1038/labinvest.2015.59.

Curcumin targets multiple pathways to halt hepatic stellate cell activation: updated mechanisms in vitro and in vivo. Y Tang, doi:10.1007/ s10620-014-3487-6Dig Dis Sci. 60Tang Y. Curcumin targets multiple pathways to halt he- patic stellate cell activation: updated mechanisms in vitro and in vivo. Dig Dis Sci 2015;60:1554-64. doi:10.1007/ s10620-014-3487-6.

Targeting of alphav integrin identifies a core molecular pathway that regulates fibrosis in several organs. N C Henderson, T D Arnold, Y Katamura, M M Giacomini, J D Rodriguez, J H Mccarty, 10.1038/nm.3282Nat Med. 19Henderson NC, Arnold TD, Katamura Y, Giacomini MM, Rodriguez JD, McCarty JH, et al. Targeting of alphav in- tegrin identifies a core molecular pathway that regulates fibrosis in several organs. Nat Med 2013;19:1617-24. doi: 10.1038/nm.3282.

The alphavbeta1 integrin plays a critical in vivo role in tissue fibrosis. N I Reed, H Jo, C Chen, K Tsujino, T D Arnold, W F Degrado, 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5094Sci Transl Med. 7Reed NI, Jo H, Chen C, Tsujino K, Arnold TD, DeGrado WF, et al. The alphavbeta1 integrin plays a critical in vivo role in tissue fibrosis. Sci Transl Med 2015;7:288ra79. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5094.

Inhibition of hepatic fibrogenesis by matrix metalloproteinase-9 mutants in mice. M Roderfeld, R Weiskirchen, S Wagner, M L Berres, C Henkel, J Grotzinger, Roderfeld M, Weiskirchen R, Wagner S, Berres ML, Henkel C, Grotzinger J, et al. Inhibition of hepatic fibro- genesis by matrix metalloproteinase-9 mutants in mice.

. 10.1096/fj.05-4828comFASEB J. 20FASEB J 2006;20:444-54. doi:10.1096/fj.05-4828com.

Effective Prevention of Liver Fibrosis by Liver-targeted Hydrodynamic Gene Delivery of Matrix Metalloproteinase-13 in a Rat Liver Fibrosis Model. H Abe, K Kamimura, Y Kobayashi, M Ohtsuka, H Miura, R Ohashi, 10.1038/mtna.2015.49Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 5276Abe H, Kamimura K, Kobayashi Y, Ohtsuka M, Miura H, Ohashi R, et al. Effective Prevention of Liver Fibrosis by Liver-targeted Hydrodynamic Gene Delivery of Matrix Me- talloproteinase-13 in a Rat Liver Fibrosis Model. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 2016;5:e276. doi:10.1038/mtna.2015.49.

Antifibrotic effects of a tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 antibody on established liver fibrosis in rats. C J Parsons, B U Bradford, C Q Pan, E Cheung, M Schauer, A Knorr, 10.1002/hep.20425Hepatology. 40Parsons CJ, Bradford BU, Pan CQ, Cheung E, Schauer M, Knorr A, et al. Antifibrotic effects of a tissue in- hibitor of metalloproteinase-1 antibody on established liver fibrosis in rats. Hepatology 2004;40:1106-15. doi: 10.1002/hep.20425.

Allosteric inhibition of lysyl oxidase-like-2 impedes the development of a pathologic microenvironment. V Barry-Hamilton, R Spangler, D Marshall, S Mccauley, H M Rodriguez, M Oyasu, 10.1038/nm.2208Nat Med. 16Barry-Hamilton V, Spangler R, Marshall D, McCauley S, Rodriguez HM, Oyasu M, et al. Allosteric inhibition of lysyl oxidase-like-2 impedes the development of a patho- logic microenvironment. Nat Med 2010;16:1009-17. doi: 10.1038/nm.2208.

Modulation of lysyl oxidase-like 2 enzymatic activity by an allosteric antibody inhibitor. H M Rodriguez, M Vaysberg, A Mikels, S Mccauley, A C Velayo, C Garcia, 10.1074/jbc.M109.094136J Biol Chem. 285Rodriguez HM, Vaysberg M, Mikels A, McCauley S, Ve- layo AC, Garcia C, et al. Modulation of lysyl oxidase-like 2 enzymatic activity by an allosteric antibody inhibitor. J Biol Chem 2010;285:20964-74. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.094136.

Hepatic stellate cell transdifferentiation involves genome-wide remodeling of the DNA methylation landscape. A Page, P Paoli, Moran Salvador, E White, S French, J Mann, J , doi:10.1016/j. jhep.2015.11.024J Hepatol. 64Page A, Paoli P, Moran Salvador E, White S, French J, Mann J. Hepatic stellate cell transdifferentiation in- volves genome-wide remodeling of the DNA methyla- tion landscape. J Hepatol 2016;64:661-73. doi:10.1016/j. jhep.2015.11.024.

Epigenetics and the overhealing wound: the role of DNA methylation in fibrosis. R Neary, C J Watson, J A Baugh, doi:10.1186/ s13069-015-0035-8Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair. 818Neary R, Watson CJ, Baugh JA. Epigenetics and the over- healing wound: the role of DNA methylation in fibro- sis. Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair 2015;8:18. doi:10.1186/ s13069-015-0035-8.

Liver stiffness is influenced by a standardized meal in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus at different stages of fibrotic evolution. U Arena, M Lupsor Platon, C Stasi, S Moscarella, A Assarat, G Bedogni, 10.1002/hep.26343Hepatology. 58Arena U, Lupsor Platon M, Stasi C, Moscarella S, As- sarat A, Bedogni G, et al. Liver stiffness is influenced by a standardized meal in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus at different stages of fibrotic evolution. Hepatology 2013;58:65-72. doi:10.1002/hep.26343.

Treatment of HCV infection by targeting microRNA. H L Janssen, H W Reesink, E J Lawitz, S Zeuzem, M Rodriguez-Torres, K Patel, 10.1056/NEJMoa1209026N Engl J Med. 368Janssen HL, Reesink HW, Lawitz EJ, Zeuzem S, Rodri- guez-Torres M, Patel K, et al. Treatment of HCV infection by targeting microRNA. N Engl J Med 2013;368:1685- 94. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1209026.

Miravirsen dosing in chronic hepatitis C patients results in decreased microRNA-122 levels without affecting other microRNAs in plasma. M H Van Der Ree, A J Van Der Meer, A C Van Nuenen, J De Bruijne, S Ottosen, H L Janssen, 10.1111/apt.13432Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 43van der Ree MH, van der Meer AJ, van Nuenen AC, de Bruijne J, Ottosen S, Janssen HL, et al. Miravirsen dosing in chronic hepatitis C patients results in decreased microRNA-122 levels without affecting other microRNAs in plasma. Aliment Phar- macol Ther 2016;43:102-13. doi: 10.1111/apt.13432.

Silencing of microRNA-122 is an early event during hepatocarcinogenesis from non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Y Takaki, Y Saito, A Takasugi, K Toshimitsu, S Yamada, T Muramatsu, 10.1111/cas.12498Cancer Sci. 105Takaki Y, Saito Y, Takasugi A, Toshimitsu K, Yamada S, Muramatsu T, et al. Silencing of microRNA-122 is an early event during hepatocarcinogenesis from non-alco- holic steatohepatitis. Cancer Sci 2014;105:1254-60. doi: 10.1111/cas.12498.

. W C Tsai, S D Hsu, C S Hsu, T C Lai, S J Chen, R Shen, Tsai WC, Hsu SD, Hsu CS, Lai TC, Chen SJ, Shen R, et al.

MicroRNA-122 plays a critical role in liver homeostasis and hepatocarcinogenesis. 10.1172/JCI63455J Clin Invest. 122MicroRNA-122 plays a critical role in liver homeostasis and hepatocarcinogenesis. J Clin Invest 2012;122:2884- 97. doi:10.1172/JCI63455.

Cell transplantation as a non-invasive strategy for treating liver fibrosis. Expert. T Matsumoto, T Takami, I Sakaida, 10.1586/17474124.2016.1134313Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 10Matsumoto T, Takami T, Sakaida I. Cell transplantation as a non-invasive strategy for treating liver fibrosis. Ex- pert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;10:639-48. doi: 10.1586/17474124.2016.1134313 2016:1-10.

Intraportal Infusion of Bone Marrow Mononuclear or CD133+ Cells in Patients With Decompensated Cirrhosis: A Double-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. M Mohamadnejad, M Vosough, S Moossavi, S Nikfam, S Mardpour, S Akhlaghpoor, 10.5966/sctm.2015-0004Stem Cells Transl Med. 5Mohamadnejad M, Vosough M, Moossavi S, Nikfam S, Mardpour S, Akhlaghpoor S, et al. Intraportal Infusion of Bone Marrow Mononuclear or CD133+ Cells in Pa- tients With Decompensated Cirrhosis: A Double-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. Stem Cells Transl Med 2016;5:87-94. doi:10.5966/sctm.2015-0004.

Cell therapy in chronic liver disease. C T Nicolas, Y Wang, S L Nyberg, 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000262Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 32Nicolas CT, Wang Y, Nyberg SL. Cell therapy in chronic liver disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2016;32:189-94. doi:10.1097/MOG.0000000000000262.

Mukhopadhyay A. Molecular and Cellular Functions Distinguish Superior Therapeutic Efficiency of Bone Marrow CD45. P Baligar, S Mukherjee, V Kochat, A Rastogi, Baligar P, Mukherjee S, Kochat V, Rastogi A, Mukhopad- hyay A. Molecular and Cellular Functions Distinguish Superior Therapeutic Efficiency of Bone Marrow CD45

. 10.1002/stem.2210Cells Over Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Liver Cirrhosis. Stem cells. 34Cells Over Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Liver Cirrhosis. Stem cells 2016;34:135-47. doi:10.1002/stem.2210.