# Natural Phytotherapeutic Antioxidants in the Treatment of Mercury Intoxication-A Review

CorpusID: 52890219
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Chemistry

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7e9a0f02716398be83008a9ad2c5c20c01f8f47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7e9a0f02716398be83008a9ad2c5c20c01f8f47)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Natural Phytotherapeutic Antioxidants in the Treatment of Mercury Intoxication-A Review
2018

Velid Unsal velidunsal@artuklu.edu.tr 
Mardin Artuklu University
High School of Health and Central Research Laboratory
MardinTurkey

Natural Phytotherapeutic Antioxidants in the Treatment of Mercury Intoxication-A Review

Adv Pharm Bull
83201810.15171/apb.2018.043*Corresponding author: Velid Unsal, Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin


## Hg (Mercury)

Mercury (Hg) is a silver, fluid, bright, odorless heavy metal. The symbol is "Hg" and the atomic number is 80. The symbol Hg "hydrated silver" comes from the Latin term hydrargyrum. Mercury is a stable element with a valence of +2. 11,12 Metallic or elemental mercury (Hg°) are the naturally occurring main forms of mercury. In nature, elemental mercury is found in the form of organic and inorganic compounds. The industry is mainly used in medical devices such as mercury fluorescent lamps, blood pressure monitors and thermometers used in many areas. It is widely used as filler material in dentistry, mine melting, cement making and paper production. 13,14 In a study conducted in the United States, mercury was reported to be the third most common environmental metal. 15 Mercury exposure can occur through respiration, feeding and food chain. Mercury is a heavy metal that is extremely toxic, which can have multiple adverse effects, and ultimately leads to cell death. Mercury, dysfunction in the skeleton of the cell and in the endoplasmic reticulum, significant cytoplasmic acidosis causes loss of mitochondrial function. 16 Chemically, mercury and its compounds can be examined in 3 different categories, (As shown in Table 1). Elemental (metallic) Mercury; Elemental mercury may evaporate at room temperature. And steam is rapidly absorbed from the lungs and it spreads to the central nervous system. 17 Inorganic mercurials include ammoniated mercury(ClH2HgN), mercuric chloride (HgCl2), mercuric oxide (HgO), mercuric sulfide, mercuric iodide (HgI2) , and the phenylmercuric salts. (C8H8HgO2) Organic mercurials include ethylmercury (C2H5Hg + ), methylmercury (CH3Hg + ), thimerosal (merthiolate), and merbromin (C20H9Br2HgNa2O6 -mercurochrome). 18,19 Methyl and phenyl mercuric compounds, such as metallic mercury, erythematosus and pruritic skin diseases. 18,44,45 In people with tattoos containing red pigment of the origin of mercuric sulfur (cinnabar-vermilion, Chinese red), they may experience inflammation that is limited to this region within 6 months of tattooing. 18,46 Inflammation findings: Inflammation caused by the influence of heavy inorganic mercury causes the tendency to bleed in gingiva and oral mucosa. It increases the salivary secretion, causing sensation of metallic taste in the mouth. Gingiva, a gray line is formed, especially when the oral hygiene is bad. 29 Birth defects and reproductive system: There is also evidence that mercury poisoning leads to Young syndrome (bronchiectasis, low sperm count, impairs sperm quality.). [47][48][49] It has been determined that all forms of the mercury can pass to the placenta at varying gauges 50 Mercury exposure is dangerous for the baby, because the baby's neurological tissues develop during early gestation. 51 Immune system findings: Mercury compounds reduce the number of T lymphocytes. In addition, mercury exposure causes a decrease in T cell GSH content. Mercury is an immunotoxic agent. [52][53][54] In the case of inorganic mercury exposure, elimination occurs via urine and faeces. Organic mercury compounds predominantly excrete in humans. 11 Mercury, promotes the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydrogen peroxides. 55,56 


## ROS (Reactive Oxygen species)

Free radicals are highly active atoms or molecules that can be produced in many physiological and pathological processes, carrying one or more unpaired electrons in their orbit. These highly unstable atoms or molecules tend to react with molecules in their environment and to share these electrons. 57,58 Free radicals can be positively charged, negatively charged, or neutral and are most often formed by electron transfer in biological systems. The most important free radicals in biological systems are the oxygen radicals. In addition, another source of free radicals is the nitrogen molecule. There is no toxic effect of O2, but it becomes free oxygen radicals during aerobic cell metabolism. By partial reduction of O2, OH and O2are formed. [58][59][60] Superoxide Radical (O2 •-) Superoxide is the first radical to appear in living organisms. In almost all aerobic cells, reduction of oxygen by an electron takes place. 61 The superoxide radical plays an important role in the formation of other reactive oxygen species, such as H2O2, HO2or 1 O2. 58,62 The superoxide radical is produced either directly in mitochondria during oxidation or enzymatically by xanthine oxidase (XO), cytochrome p450 and other oxidases. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme or in H2O2 is spontaneously inactivated. 63,64 Combined with superoxide (O2 •-) and the free radical NO -, comes the reactive nitrogen derivative ONOO . (Peroxynitrite). ONOO-has harmful effects on direct proteins. 65


## Hydroxyl radical (•OH)

The hydroxyl radical is the most reactive radical. It reacts with lipids, polypeptides, proteins, DNA and other molecules (such as thiamine and guanosine). 62,66,67 Singlet oxygen ( 1 O2) Singlet oxygen is a nonradical and induced status. Compared with other ROS, singlet oxygen is rather mild and non toxic for mammalian tissue. 68 1 O2 is a cell signal and messenger; redox active agents regulate ion channel activity in animals and plants. In the human organism, singlet oxygen is both a signal and a weapon, with therapeutic potency against various pathogens such as microbes, viruses, and cancer cells. 62


## Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)

There is no unpaired electron in the hydrogen peroxide molecule, and so it is not a radical. Hydrogen peroxide can be generated through a dismutation reaction from superoxide anion by superoxide dismutase (SOD). 58,62,63 Enzymes such as amino acid oxidase (AAO) and xanthine oxidase (XO) also produce hydrogen peroxide from the superoxide anion. H2O2 is the least reactive molecule among ROS and is stable under physiological pH and temperature in the lack of metal ions. H2O2 can produce singlet oxygen thanks to react with superoxide anion or with HOCl or chloramines in living systems. 62,68 Free radical species (ROS) affect all important structures of cells such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, DNA and enzymes. 58,69 Effects of ROS on lipids and proteins Free radicals have to cross the cell membrane in order to interact with the cell components. Inasmuch as cell membranes are rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and cholesterol, they are easily affected by oxidant radicals. 70 Free radicals move away the hydrogen atom from the fatty acid chain. Lipid peroxidation is oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty plural form with free radicals. The main primary products of lipid peroxidation are lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH). This peroxidation results in products such as MDA, 4-hydroxynoneal (HNA), 8-iso-prostaglandin F2α (8-iso-PGF2α), alcohols, ethane and pentane. MDA is mutagenic since DNA can react with nitrogen bases. 58,71 Additionally it is genotoxic and carcinogenic on cell cultures. Membrane damage caused by lipid peroxidation is irreversible. MDA is the most mutagenic product of lipid peroxidation. 4-HNE is the most toxic. 4-HNE is considered as the second toxic messengers of free radicals, one of the major generators of oxidative stress and a major lipid peroxidation product. 58,70,72 8-Iso-prostaglandin F2α (8-iso-PGF2α), a major F2-isoprostane, is biosynthesized in vivo through nonenzymatic free radical-catalysed peroxidation of arachidonic acid. 21,22,58,70,73,74 Proteins are defined as the major targets of oxidative damage. The products of cellular metabolism or environmental induced ROS changes in the amino acids of proteins and cause loss of activity of protein function / enzymatic activity as well. 75,76 Oxidative protein modifications may take place in different ways. ROS directly interacts with protein or Interaction of compounds such as carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids with ROS can interact with proteins with the resulting products. 77 In this way, reactive and non-protein compounds react with proteins to form a wide array of structures. 78,79 Protein oxidation reactions are usually divided into modifying the protein construct and modifying the amino acid side chains. 80,81 In addition to the modification of the protein in proteins, amino acid side chains are target for ROS. Sulfide containing amino acids in the structure are highly sensitive to cysteine and methionine. 82 Aromatic structures are also the main targets for ROS. The oxidatively modified tyrosine, phenylalanine and tryptophan are usually oxidative damage a demonstration. 76 Oxidation of lysine, arginine, proline or threonine may result in the formation of carbonyl derivatives. 83,84 Protein carbonyls are among the most commonly used products for determination of the proteins of the oxides. 58,85 Protein carbonyl levels area well-used marker for oxidative stress. The toxic effects of mercury can be prevented by antioxidant defense mechanisms to a certain extent.


## Reactive nitrogen species (RNS)

NO reacts with the superoxide radical or molecular oxygen, leading to the formation of various reactive intermediates called reactive RNS. RNS consist of nitrite derivatives such as NO, NO2 -and OONO -. 86


## Nitric oxide (NO•)

Nitric Oxide (NO) is highly stable at high concentrations in an oxygen-free environment and stable at low concentrations in the presence of oxygen. NO is a signal molecule of low molecular weight known to be biologically active in mammalian cells. The NO radical is synthesized from L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase (NOS) enzyme catalysis in vascular endothelial cells. 87 NO is an important effector and messenger molecule that plays a role in various biological processes such as immune response, smooth muscle tone, apoptosis, angiogenesis and nervous system. 88 In addition, NO is a molecule that regulates numerous pathological and physiological states. 89 NO has very important physiological functions at low concentrations. NO binds with molecular oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide (NO2). Another important effect of NO is to produce a strong oxidant peroxynitrite (ONOO -. ). 90 NO is a mediator with autocrine and paracrine effects in hemostatic events and in the defense mechanisms of the organism. The most important function of NO is to function in parallel with the effects of interleukin-1 (IL-1) and cytokines in various tissues of the body. It is produced by macrophages, neutrophils, hepatocytes and endothelial cells. 91 However, at high concentrations it shows toxic effects on normal cells. Spontaneously decomposes to form nitrogen dioxide. 92 In mammals, NO can be produced with three different isoforms of enzymes NO synthase. NOS enzymes are found in two basic isoform. These; is called constitutive or structural (cNOS) and inducible (iNOS). Structural NOS enzymes have two isoforms, endothelial NOS (eNOS) and neuronal NOS (nOS). eNOS is located on the membrane and is synthesizing the endothelium-induced relaxation factor; nNOS produces NO2, the messenger molecule in the central nervous system and neurons. Structural NOS is Ca + 2 / calmodulin dependent as cofactor and produces small amounts of NO at intervals with low activity. 93,94 Peroxynitrite (OONO-) Peroxynitrite is an important biological oxidant formed by the reaction of nitric oxide and superoxide radicals. Peroxynitrite can cause oxidative damage, nitration, and S-nitrosylation of biomolecules including proteins, lipids, and DNA. 93 Peroxidation of lipids in the membrane distorts membrane integrity by reducing the fluidity, elasticity and permeability of the cell membrane. These radicals constantly increase the level of Ca 2 + in the cell and cause cytotoxic effect on the cell by inhibition of mitochondrial respiration and electron transport chain, decrease of ATP production and activation of radical generating enzymes. 95,96 Antioxidants Although free radical reactions are necessary for the defense mechanism of neutrophil, macrophage and other immune system cells, they result in overproduction of free radicals, tissue damage and cell death. The half life of ROS is short. However, they initiate free radical chain reactions that cause tissue damage. For this reason, defensive mechanisms against oxidative damage triggered by free radicals act. These are preventive mechanisms, repair mechanisms, physical defenses and antioxidant defenses. 57 Antioxidant defense is the prevention or delay of oxidation of oxidizing agents such as proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and DNA in living cells. The substances that play a role in this process are called 'antioxidants'. 97,98 Enzymatic antioxidants are Superoxide dismutase (SOD), Catalase (CAT), Glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), Glutathione reductase (GR), Glutathione S-Transferase (GST) ,enzymes. The SOD structure contains copper (Cu), zinc (Zn) and manganese (Mn). GSH-Px contains selenium ions. For this reason, these enzymes are called metalloenzymes. 99,100 In contrast to the intracellular environment, E and C vitamins, transferrin, ceruloplazmin, albumin, bilurubin, β-carotene are responsible for the non-enzymatic antioxidant defense in the extracellular environment. In addition, E and C vitamins have antioxidant properties within the cell. 58,65,72,101 Enzymatic antioxidants Superoxide dismutase (SOD): By catalyzing the conversion of O2•radical to H2O2, protects the cells from harmful effects of O2•radical. It also inhibits lipid peroxidation. SOD plays a role in controlling the levels of O2 •in the parts of the cell Superoxide dismutase activity varies with tissues. It is mainly intracellular and 10% is located outside the cell. 58 


## -Manganese superoxide dismutase (Mn SOD):

Mitochondrial Mn-SOD is a homotetramer containing one Manganese atom per subunit. Mn-SOD has the same reaction as Cu-Zn-SOD. However, it is a completely different enzyme in its structure. It contains Mn in its active site and is not stable. This form of SOD is not inhibited by cyanide. 105 


## Catalase (CAT):

Catalase is a hemoprotein that has four groups in its structure. Catalase converts hydrogen peroxide (H202) to water (H20). Catalase's effect is similar to SOD. 106 H2O2 + H2O2→H2O+1/2O2 Glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px): GSH-Px can be found in two forms, selenium-bound and seleniumbound. Selenium based group, reducing hydrogen peroxide and other organic peroxides. It consists of four members. These are GSH-Px1 (celluler-GSH-Px), GSH-Px2 (GSH-Px-gastrointestinal), GSH-Px3 (plasma-GSH-Px) and GSH Px4 (PH-GSH-Px), respectively. 107 -GSH-Px1 or cellular GSH-Px (cGSH-Px), tetrameric in structure is a cytosolic enzyme. GSH-Px1 is active against organic hydroperoxides and H2O2. 108 -GSH-Px 2, or gastrointestinal GSH-Px (GSH-Px-GI) found in the gastrointestinal tract, but not in the kidney, heart and lung. 109 112 Phase-II detoxification is a member of the enzyme family. In addition, it prevents oxidative products or foreign toxic substances from merging with other macromolecules in the body and provides them to be removed without harming the cell components. Therefore, GSTs are one of a group of enzymes that are very important guardians. 113 GSTs are divided into three families as mitochondrial, cytosolic and microsomal. 114 Mercapturic acid plays an important role in the initial reactions of biosynthesis. The mercapturic acid formation process catalyzed by GSHconjugation of GST is generally described as detoxification reactions. The ability to reduction feature GSTs protects membrane components from lipid peroxidation. In addition, 4-hydroxy alkenals, products of lipid peroxidation in aldehyde structure, are conjugated with GSH. 115 GSTs, also considered as one of the natural protective systems, have an important role in the detoxification of electrophilic xenobiotics such as herbicides, pesticides, anticancer drugs, chemical carcinogens and environmental pollutants. 116 Glutathione reductase (GR): Glutathione reductase is an antioxidant enzyme that converts oxidized glutathione (GSSG) to reduced glutathione (GSH). GR uses NADPH as the coenzyme when performing catalysis. 117 The physiological GSH-GSSG ratio in the cells is of great importance. In the absence of GCSG, the level of intracellular NADPH is reduce and GR is inactivate. As the intracellular level of GSSG increases due to the oxidative stress, GR re-activates. 118


## Nonenzymatic antioxidants

Nonenzymatic antioxidants; It is examined in two parts as natural antioxidants and synthetic antioxidants. This review will discuss natural antioxidants. For this reason, synthetic antioxidants were excluded from the discussion. 119 Glutathione (GSH): GSH is made from three amino acids: glycine, cysteine and glutamic acid. This tripeptide exists in reduced (GSH) and oxidized (GSSG) forms. The relative amounts of every form determine the cellular redox status (GSH/GSSG ratio) which is often used as a sign of antioxidative capacity of cells. Glutathione (GSH) has vital importance in fighting oxidative stress. It is a strong free radical and reactive oxygen species scavenger. 120,121 Vitamin E: Vitamin E has eight isoforms, α-, β-, γ-, and δ-tocopherol and α-, β-, γ-, and δ-tocotrienol. Vitamin E is a lipophilic radical-scavenging antioxidant. 122 Vitamin C: Vitamin C is a potent antioxidant protecting the body against endogenous and exogenous oxidative challenges. 123 Uric acid: Uric acid demonstrated its ability to scavenge reactive radicals resulting from harmful process, such as autoxidation of hemoglobin, or peroxide generation by macrophages. it is an efficient scavenger of singlet oxygen, peroxyl and hydroxyl radicals and protects erythrocyte membrane from lipid peroxidation. 124 Retinoids and carotenoids: Retinoids and carotenoids take place in the structure of lipids and cell membranes. In the singlet oxygen suppression to prevent the harmful effects of flavin and porphyrin, they work in preventing peroxide radicals. 101


## Discussion

Plants are an exogenous source of antioxidants taken in the diet. It is believed that two thirds of the plant species in the world have medical prescription, and almost all of them have excellent antioxidant potential. 125 Increased exogenous antioxidant supplementation or endogenous antioxidant defense has been found to be effective in combating undesirable effects of oxidative stress. 126 The main natural antioxidants present in vitamins and protecting the human body from harmful free radicals are mainly vitamins (C, E and A vitamins), flavonoids, carotenoids and polyphenols. 127 Phenolic compounds exhibit physiological properties such as anti-allergic, anti-atherogenic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anticancer, antithrombotic, cardiovascular and vasodilatory effects. [128][129][130] In addition, Fruits, spices and many medicinal herbs are rich sources of pharmacological properties. These agents have antioxidants, free radical scavengers and anti-toxic properties. 16,23,[131][132] As shown in Table 2, many natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning have been tested for detoxification. 


## Conclusion

In summary, this study provides evidence that some natural antioxidants play a protective role against Mercury-derived toxicity. It provides foundation of studies of natural phytotherapeutic agents on mercury treatment. This study also provided information for candidate antidote, pharmaceutical agents in the treatment of mercury-induced toxicity. However, high doses of antioxidant supplements often do not work well or can be harmful. More research is needed for effective and safe antioxidant doses against mercury poisoning.


## Ethical Issues

Not applicable.


,102,103 a-Copper and zinc containing (Cu-Zn SOD) dismutases (cytosolic SOD): It contains copper and zinc in its active site. The enzyme is located in the cytoplasm of the cells. Cyanide is an inhibitor of this enzyme. 104,105 b


-GSH-Px 3, A glycoprotein isolated from the lipid portion of the plasma. It is found in the lung, plasma and other extracellular fluids. 110 -GSH-Px 4 is expressed in the liver and gastrointestinal tract in humans. GSH-Px 4 or phospholipid GSH-Px (PH-GSH-Px) is found in cytosol, mitochondria and cell membrane. The enzyme reduces the phospholipid hydroperoxides to alcohols and protects the membrane against peroxidation in the absence of the most important antioxidant E vitamin. 111 | 369 Natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning-A Review Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376 Glutatyon S-transferaz (GST): Glutatyon Stransferazlar (GSTs) catalyze the nucleophilic attack of glutathione (GSH) tripeptide on electrophilic substrates in catalysis reactions.

## Table 2 .
2Some antioxidants used for treatment of mercury poisoning Berberine (100 mg/kg b.w) SOD↑, CAT↑ , GSH ↑ ; MDA ↓ GR ↑ Aralia elata polysaccharide (100 mg/kg daily i.p) CAT↑,SOD↓,MDA↓,GST↑,MPO↑ GSH-Px ↑ CAT ↑,GSH ↑,SOD↓, GR ↑,MDA (TBARS)↓ Natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning-A Review CAT↑,,MDA (LPO)↓,GST↑, GSH-Px ↑ CAT↑,MDA (LPO)↓,GST↑, GSH-Px ↑, SOD↑, Therefore, luteolin can serve as an alternative treatment to prevent renal damage.Models 
Study 
Design 
Materials 
Effect 
Mechanisms and 
Conclusion 
References 

HgCl2 ; 
(12 µmol kg −1 
b.w.) 

Wistar 
albino 
rats 

Curcumin-
80 mg kg −1 b.w , 
orally 

MDA ↓, GSH-Px ↑ CAT ↑ 
Oxidative stress 
inhibitor. 

133 

HgCl2 ; 
(1 mg/kg bw) 

Wistar 
albino 
rats 

Sodium selenite 
(0.25 mg/kg bw ) 
and/or vitamin E 
(100 mg/kg bw) + 

CAT ↑,GSH-Px↑,SOD↑, MDA↓ 

Sodium selenite and/or 
vitamin E could 
ameliorate the mercury 
induced testicular 
toxicity. 

134 

MeHgCl; 
(5 mg/kg 
bw/day) 

Male 
albino 
rats 

α-linolenic and 
α-eleostearic acid 
SOD ↑ CAT↑ ,GSH ↑, MDA ↓ 

Both are protective 
against mercury 
toxicity. 

135 


| Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376Unsal
| Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376Unsal
Conflict of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interests.
Free radicals, antioxidants in disease and health. L A Pham-Huy, H He, C Pham-Huy, Int J Biomed Sci. 42Pham-Huy LA, He H, Pham-Huy C. Free radicals, antioxidants in disease and health. Int J Biomed Sci 2008;4(2):89-96.

Low dose mercury toxicity and human health. F Zahir, S J Rizwi, S K Haq, R H Khan, 10.1016/j.etap.2005.03.007Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 202Zahir F, Rizwi SJ, Haq SK, Khan RH. Low dose mercury toxicity and human health. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 2005;20(2):351-60. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2005.03.007

Free radicals and antioxidant systems in health and disease. A J Sinclair, A H Barnett, J Lunec, Br J Hosp Med. 435Sinclair AJ, Barnett AH, Lunec J. Free radicals and antioxidant systems in health and disease. Br J Hosp Med 1990;43(5):334-44.

Phytotherapeutic and naturopathic adjuvant therapies in otorhinolaryngology. R R Ciuman, 10.1007/s00405-011-1755-zEur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2692Ciuman RR. Phytotherapeutic and naturopathic adjuvant therapies in otorhinolaryngology. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2012;269(2):389-97. doi: 10.1007/s00405-011-1755-z

Screening of radical scavenging activity of some medicinal and aromatic plant extracts. G Miliauskas, P R Venskutonis, T A Van Beek, 10.1016/j.foodchem.2003.05.007Food Chem. 852Miliauskas G, Venskutonis PR, Van Beek TA. Screening of radical scavenging activity of some medicinal and aromatic plant extracts. Food Chem 2004;85(2):231-7. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2003.05.007

Text Book of Industrial Pharmacognosy. London: Oscar publication. A N Kalia, Kalia AN. Text Book of Industrial Pharmacognosy. London: Oscar publication; 2005.

Molecular Basis for Mercury-Induced Alteration in Endothelial Function: NO and its Modulators. S Omanwar, B Saidullah, M Fahim, 10.4172/2329-6607.1000167Cardiovasc Pharm Open Access. 45167Omanwar S, Saidullah B, Fahim M. Molecular Basis for Mercury-Induced Alteration in Endothelial Function: NO and its Modulators. Cardiovasc Pharm Open Access 2015;4(5):167. doi: 10.4172/2329- 6607.1000167

Accumulation of mercury and its effect on antioxidant enzymes in brain, liver, and kidneys of mice. S Hussain, A Atkinson, S J Thompson, A T Khan, 10.1080/03601239909373219J Environ Sci Health B. 344Hussain S, Atkinson A, Thompson SJ, Khan AT. Accumulation of mercury and its effect on antioxidant enzymes in brain, liver, and kidneys of mice. J Environ Sci Health B 1999;34(4):645-60. doi: 10.1080/03601239909373219

Free radicals: Properties, sources, targets, and their implication in various diseases. A Phaniendra, D B Jestadi, L Periyasamy, 10.1007/s12291-014-0446-0Indian J Clin Biochem. 301Phaniendra A, Jestadi DB, Periyasamy L. Free radicals: Properties, sources, targets, and their implication in various diseases. Indian J Clin Biochem 2015;30(1):11-26. doi: 10.1007/s12291-014-0446-0

Antioxidant activity, phenol and flavonoid contents of some selected Iranian medicinal plants. F Pourmorad, S J Hosseinimehr, N Shahabimajd, Afr J Biotechnol. 511Pourmorad F, Hosseinimehr SJ, Shahabimajd N. Antioxidant activity, phenol and flavonoid contents of some selected Iranian medicinal plants. Afr J Biotechnol 2006;5(11):1142-5.

Agency for toxic substances and disease registry. G D Todd, D Wohlers, M Citra, Toxicology profile for pyrethrins and. Atlanta, GATodd GD, Wohlers D, Citra M. Agency for toxic substances and disease registry. Atlanta, GA: Toxicology profile for pyrethrins and

. | Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin. 83| Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376

Unsal pyrethroids. Department of Health and Human Services. Unsal pyrethroids. Department of Health and Human Services; 2003.

Metals, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration: A focus on iron, manganese and mercury. M Farina, D S Avila, J B Da Rocha, M Aschner, 10.1016/j.neuint.2012.12.006Neurochem Int. 625Farina M, Avila DS, da Rocha JB, Aschner M. Metals, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration: A focus on iron, manganese and mercury. Neurochem Int 2013;62(5):575-94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2012.12.006

Disorders of the nervous system, principles and practice of environmental medicine. J R Taylor, Tarcher ABPlenum Medical Book CompanyNew YorkTaylor JR. Disorders of the nervous system, principles and practice of environmental medicine. Tarcher AB, editor. New York: Plenum Medical Book Company;

Environmental exposure to mercury and its toxicopathologic implications for public health. P B Tchounwou, W K Ayensu, N Ninashvili, D Sutton, 10.1002/tox.10116Environ Toxicol. 183Tchounwou PB, Ayensu WK, Ninashvili N, Sutton D. Environmental exposure to mercury and its toxicopathologic implications for public health. Environ Toxicol 2003;18(3):149-75. doi: 10.1002/tox.10116

Mercury toxicity and antioxidants: Part 1: Role of glutathione and alpha-lipoic acid in the treatment of mercury toxicity. L Patrick, Altern Med Rev. 76Patrick L. Mercury toxicity and antioxidants: Part 1: Role of glutathione and alpha-lipoic acid in the treatment of mercury toxicity. Altern Med Rev 2002;7(6):456-71.

Mercury-induced dysfunctions in multiple organelles leading to cell death. C S Vergilio, C E Carvalho, E J Melo, 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.09.006Toxicol In Vitro. 291Vergilio CS, Carvalho CE, Melo EJ. Mercury-induced dysfunctions in multiple organelles leading to cell death. Toxicol In Vitro 2015;29(1):63-71. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.09.006

Acrodynia: A case report of two siblings. Y Horowitz, D Greenberg, G Ling, M Lifshitz, Arch Dis Child. 866453Horowitz Y, Greenberg D, Ling G, Lifshitz M. Acrodynia: A case report of two siblings. Arch Dis Child 2002;86(6):453.

Mercury exposure and cutaneous disease. A S Boyd, D Seger, S Vannucci, M Langley, J L Abraham, L E King, Jr , 10.1067/mjd.2000.106360J Am Acad Dermatol. 431Pt 1Boyd AS, Seger D, Vannucci S, Langley M, Abraham JL, King LE, Jr. Mercury exposure and cutaneous disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;43(1 Pt 1):81-90. doi: 10.1067/mjd.2000.106360

Heavy metal toxicity, part i: Arsenic and mercury. K A Graeme, C V Pollack, Jr , J Emerg Med. 161Graeme KA, Pollack CV, Jr. Heavy metal toxicity, part i: Arsenic and mercury. J Emerg Med 1998;16(1):45-56.

Mercury exposure and heart diseases. G Genchi, M S Sinicropi, A Carocci, G Lauria, A Catalano, 10.3390/ijerph14010074Int J Environ Res Public Health. 141Genchi G, Sinicropi MS, Carocci A, Lauria G, Catalano A. Mercury exposure and heart diseases. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2017;14(1):pii: E74. doi: 10.3390/ijerph14010074

Human mercury exposure and effects in Europe. A M Visnjevec, D Kocman, M Horvat, 10.1002/etc.2482Environ Toxicol Chem. 336Visnjevec AM, Kocman D, Horvat M. Human mercury exposure and effects in Europe. Environ Toxicol Chem 2014;33(6):1259-70. doi: 10.1002/etc.2482

Molecular mechanisms triggered by mercury. G Guzzi, La Porta, C A , 10.1016/j.tox.2007.11.002Toxicology. 2441Guzzi G, La Porta CA. Molecular mechanisms triggered by mercury. Toxicology 2008;244(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2007.11.002

Elemental mercury vapour toxicity, treatment, and prognosis after acute, intensive exposure in chloralkali plant workers. Part i: History, neuropsychological findings and chelator effects. R E Bluhm, R G Bobbitt, L W Welch, A J Wood, J F Bonfiglio, C Sarzen, 10.1177/096032719201100308Hum Exp Toxicol. 113Bluhm RE, Bobbitt RG, Welch LW, Wood AJ, Bonfiglio JF, Sarzen C, et al. Elemental mercury vapour toxicity, treatment, and prognosis after acute, intensive exposure in chloralkali plant workers. Part i: History, neuropsychological findings and chelator effects. Hum Exp Toxicol 1992;11(3):201-10. doi: 10.1177/096032719201100308

Bronchitis due to acute mercury inhalation. J K Haddad, E Stenberg, Jr , 10.1164/arrd.1963.88.4.543Am Rev Respir Dis. 88Report of two casesHaddad JK, Stenberg E, Jr. Bronchitis due to acute mercury inhalation. Report of two cases. Am Rev Respir Dis 1963;88:543-5. doi: 10.1164/arrd.1963.88.4.543

Acute mercury vapor poisoning. J P Soni, R U Singhania, A Bansal, G Rathi, Indian Pediatr. 293Soni JP, Singhania RU, Bansal A, Rathi G. Acute mercury vapor poisoning. Indian Pediatr 1992;29(3):365-8.

Psychiatric manifestations of mercury poisoning. G E Fagala, C L Wigg, 10.1097/00004583-199203000-00019J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 312Fagala GE, Wigg CL. Psychiatric manifestations of mercury poisoning. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1992;31(2):306-11. doi: 10.1097/00004583-199203000-00019

Mercuryinduced renal effects. B A Fowler, M H Whittaker, C G Elinder, Clinical Nephrotoxins. BostonSpringerFowler BA, Whittaker MH, Elinder CG. Mercury- induced renal effects. In Clinical Nephrotoxins. Boston: Springer; 2008.

Acute mercurial pneumonitis. J Milne, A Christophers, P De Silva, Br J Ind Med. 274Milne J, Christophers A, de Silva P. Acute mercurial pneumonitis. Br J Ind Med 1970;27(4):334-8.

Maxcy-rosenau-last Public Health & Preventive Medicine. USA: McGraw-Hill Companies. P Grandjean, Wallace RBHealth significance of metal exposuresGrandjean P. Health significance of metal exposures. In: Wallace RB, editor. Maxcy-rosenau-last Public Health & Preventive Medicine. USA: McGraw-Hill Companies; 2007.

Nephrotic syndrome in adult africans in nairobi. R D Barr, P H Rees, P E Cordy, A Kungu, B A Woodger, H M Cameron, Br Med J. 25806Barr RD, Rees PH, Cordy PE, Kungu A, Woodger BA, Cameron HM. Nephrotic syndrome in adult africans in nairobi. Br Med J 1972;2(5806):131-4.

Mercury intoxication simulating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. C R Adams, D K Ziegler, J T Lin, JAMA. 2505Adams CR, Ziegler DK, Lin JT. Mercury intoxication simulating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. JAMA 1983;250(5):642-3.

Diffuse lung disease caused by inhalation of mercury vapor. T J Hallee, 10.1164/arrd.1969.99.3.430Am Rev Respir Dis. 993Hallee TJ. Diffuse lung disease caused by inhalation of mercury vapor. Am Rev Respir Dis 1969;99(3):430-6. doi: 10.1164/arrd.1969.99.3.430

Survival after acute mercury vapor poisoning: role of intensive supportive care. K M Jaffe, D B Shurtleff, W O Robertson, 10.1001/archpedi.1983.02140340033008Am J Dis Child. 1378Jaffe KM, Shurtleff DB, Robertson WO. Survival after acute mercury vapor poisoning: role of intensive supportive care. Am J Dis Child 1983;137(8):749-51. doi: 10.1001/archpedi.1983.02140340033008

The mercury emergency and hamilton school children: A follow-up analysis. L George, F E Scott, D Cole, L Siracusa, C Buffett, W Hunter, Can J Public Health. 874George L, Scott FE, Cole D, Siracusa L, Buffett C, Hunter W, et al. The mercury emergency and hamilton school children: A follow-up analysis. Can J Public Health 1996;87(4):224-6.

Mercury and health. Marcia Mcnutt, 10.1126/science.1245924McNutt, Marcia. "Mercury and health." (2013): 1430- 1430. doi: 10.1126/science.1245924

Prenatal exposure to lead and cognitive deficit in 7-and 14-year-old children in the presence of concomitant exposure to similar molar concentration of methylmercury. T Yorifuji, F Debes, P Weihe, P Grandjean, 10.1016/j.ntt.2010.09.004Neurotoxicol Teratol. 332Yorifuji T, Debes F, Weihe P, Grandjean P. Prenatal exposure to lead and cognitive deficit in 7-and 14- year-old children in the presence of concomitant exposure to similar molar concentration of methylmercury. Neurotoxicol Teratol 2011;33(2):205-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2010.09.004

Social Work and Health Care in an Aging Society: Education, Policy, Practice, and Research. B Berkman, L Harootyan, Springer Publishing CompanyBerkman B, Harootyan L, editors. Social Work and Health Care in an Aging Society: Education, Policy, Practice, and Research. Springer Publishing Company; 2003.

Detoxication Mechanisms and the Role of Nutrition. G G Gibson, Tarcher ABPlenum Medical Book CompanyNew YorkPrinciples and Practise of Environmental MedicineGibson GG. Detoxication Mechanisms and the Role of Nutrition. In: Tarcher AB, editor. Principles and Practise of Environmental Medicine. New York: Plenum Medical Book Company; 1992.

Involvement of environmental mercury and lead in the etiology of neurodegenerative diseases. F Monnet-Tschudi, M G Zurich, C Boschat, A Corbaz, P Honegger, Rev Environ Health. 212Monnet-Tschudi F, Zurich MG, Boschat C, Corbaz A, Honegger P. Involvement of environmental mercury and lead in the etiology of neurodegenerative diseases. Rev Environ Health 2006;21(2):105-17.

Environmental mercury and its toxic effects. K M Rice, E M Walker, M Wu, C Gillette, E R Blough, 10.3961/jpmph.2014.47.2.74J Prev Med Public Health. 472Rice KM, Walker EM, Wu M, Gillette C, Blough ER. Environmental mercury and its toxic effects. J Prev Med Public Health 2014;47(2):74-83. doi: 10.3961/jpmph.2014.47.2.74

Enzymuria in workers exposed to inorganic mercury. L Barregard, B Hultberg, A Schutz, G Sallsten, Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 611-2373Barregard L, Hultberg B, Schutz A, Sallsten G. Enzymuria in workers exposed to inorganic mercury. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 1988;61(1-2):65-9. | 373

Natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning-A. Review Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin. 83Natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning-A Review Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376

Endocrine function in mercury exposed chloralkali workers. L Barregard, G Lindstedt, A Schutz, G Sallsten, Occup Environ Med. 518Barregard L, Lindstedt G, Schutz A, Sallsten G. Endocrine function in mercury exposed chloralkali workers. Occup Environ Med 1994;51(8):536-40.

Mercury vapor poisoning associated with hyperthyroidism in a child. T Karpathios, A Zervoudakis, C Theodoridis, P Vlachos, E Apostolopoulou, A Fretzayas, Acta Paediatr Scand. 805Karpathios T, Zervoudakis A, Theodoridis C, Vlachos P, Apostolopoulou E, Fretzayas A. Mercury vapor poisoning associated with hyperthyroidism in a child. Acta Paediatr Scand 1991;80(5):551-2.

Mercury exposure: Evaluation and intervention the inappropriate use of chelating agents in the diagnosis and treatment of putative mercury poisoning. J F Risher, S N Amler, 10.1016/j.neuro.2005.05.004Neurotoxicology. 264Risher JF, Amler SN. Mercury exposure: Evaluation and intervention the inappropriate use of chelating agents in the diagnosis and treatment of putative mercury poisoning. Neurotoxicology 2005;26(4):691- 9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2005.05.004

Mercury poisoning and acrodynia. D M Foulds, K C Copeland, R C Franks, 10.1001/archpedi.1987.04460020014006Am J Dis Child. 142Foulds DM, Copeland KC, Franks RC. Mercury poisoning and acrodynia. Am J Dis Child 1987:14(2):124-5. doi: 10.1001/archpedi.1987.04460020014006

Hazards of tattooing: Report of two cases of dermatitis caused by sensitization to mercury (cinnabar). R G Davis, U S Armed Forces Med J. 11Davis RG. Hazards of tattooing: Report of two cases of dermatitis caused by sensitization to mercury (cinnabar). U S Armed Forces Med J 1960;11:261-80.

Was young's syndrome caused by exposure to mercury in childhood?. W F Hendry, A &apos;hern, R P Cole, P J , BMJ. 3076919Hendry WF, A'Hern RP, Cole PJ. Was young's syndrome caused by exposure to mercury in childhood? BMJ 1993;307(6919):1579-82.

In vitro effect of lead, silver, tin, mercury, indium and bismuth on human sperm creatine kinase activity: A presumable mechanism for men infertility. M A Ghaffari, B Motlagh, Iran Biomed J. 151-2Ghaffari MA, Motlagh B. In vitro effect of lead, silver, tin, mercury, indium and bismuth on human sperm creatine kinase activity: A presumable mechanism for men infertility. Iran Biomed J 2011;15(1-2):38-43.

60-day chronic exposure to low concentrations of hgcl2 impairs sperm quality: Hormonal imbalance and oxidative stress as potential routes for reproductive dysfunction in rats. C S Martinez, J G Torres, F M Pecanha, J A Anselmo-Franci, D V Vassallo, M Salaices, 10.1371/journal.pone.0111202PLoS One. 911111202Martinez CS, Torres JG, Pecanha FM, Anselmo- Franci JA, Vassallo DV, Salaices M, et al. 60-day chronic exposure to low concentrations of hgcl2 impairs sperm quality: Hormonal imbalance and oxidative stress as potential routes for reproductive dysfunction in rats. PLoS One 2014;9(11):e111202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111202

Effects of elemental mercury vapor exposure on pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats. A J Steffek, J Dent Res. 66239Steffek AJ. Effects of elemental mercury vapor exposure on pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats. J Dent Res 1987;(66):239.

Maternalfetal distribution of mercury (203hg) released from dental amalgam fillings. M J Vimy, Y Takahashi, F L Lorscheider, 10.1152/ajpregu.1990.258.4.R939The American journal of physiology. 2584Pt 2Vimy MJ, Takahashi Y, Lorscheider FL. Maternal- fetal distribution of mercury (203hg) released from dental amalgam fillings. The American journal of physiology 1990;258(4 Pt 2):R939-45. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1990.258.4.R939

Immunotoxic effects of mercuric compounds on human lymphocytes and monocytes. I. Suppression of t-cell activation. B J Shenker, C Rooney, L Vitale, I M Shapiro, 10.3109/08923979209005410Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 143Shenker BJ, Rooney C, Vitale L, Shapiro IM. Immunotoxic effects of mercuric compounds on human lymphocytes and monocytes. I. Suppression of t-cell activation. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol 1992;14(3):539-53. doi: 10.3109/08923979209005410

Mercury-induced apoptosis in human lymphoid cells: Evidence that the apoptotic pathway is mercurial species dependent. B J Shenker, T L Guo, I M Shapiro, 10.1006/enrs.2000.4078Environ Res. 842Shenker BJ, Guo TL, Shapiro IM. Mercury-induced apoptosis in human lymphoid cells: Evidence that the apoptotic pathway is mercurial species dependent. Environ Res 2000;84(2):89-99. doi: 10.1006/enrs.2000.4078

Immunotoxic Effects of Mercury. R M Gardner, J F Nyland, Environmental Influences on the Immune System. ViennaSpringerGardner RM, Nyland JF. Immunotoxic Effects of Mercury. In: Environmental Influences on the Immune System. Vienna: Springer; 2016.

Reactivity of hg(ii) with superoxide: Evidence for the catalytic dismutation of superoxide by Hg(II). D M Miller, B O Lund, J S Woods, J Biochem Toxicol. 64Miller DM, Lund BO, Woods JS. Reactivity of hg(ii) with superoxide: Evidence for the catalytic dismutation of superoxide by Hg(II). J Biochem Toxicol 1991;6(4):293-8.

Hepatoprotective effects of taurine against mercury induced toxicity in rats. G Jagadeesan, Sankarsami Pillai, S , J Environ Biol. 284Jagadeesan G, Sankarsami Pillai S. Hepatoprotective effects of taurine against mercury induced toxicity in rats. J Environ Biol 2007;28(4):753-6.

Review: Free radicals, antioxidants, and the immune system. J A Knight, Ann Clin Lab Sci. 302Knight JA. Review: Free radicals, antioxidants, and the immune system. Ann Clin Lab Sci 2000;30(2):145-58.

Experimental hepatic carcinogenesis: Oxidative stress and natural antioxidants. V Unsal, E Belge-Kurutas, 10.3889/oamjms.2017.101Open Access Maced J Med Sci. 55Unsal V, Belge-Kurutas E. Experimental hepatic carcinogenesis: Oxidative stress and natural antioxidants. Open Access Maced J Med Sci 2017;5(5):686-91. doi: 10.3889/oamjms.2017.101

Role of oxidative stress in stem, cancer, and cancer stem cells. A A Dayem, H Y Choi, J H Kim, S G Cho, 10.3390/cancers2020859Cancers (Basel). 22Dayem AA, Choi HY, Kim JH, Cho SG. Role of oxidative stress in stem, cancer, and cancer stem cells. Cancers (Basel) 2010;2(2):859-84. doi: 10.3390/cancers2020859

A review of the interaction among dietary antioxidants and reactive oxygen species. H E Seifried, D E Anderson, E I Fisher, J A Milner, 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2006.10.007J Nutr Biochem. 189Seifried HE, Anderson DE, Fisher EI, Milner JA. A review of the interaction among dietary antioxidants and reactive oxygen species. J Nutr Biochem 2007;18(9):567-79. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2006.10.007

Free radicals and antioxidants: A personal view. B Halliwell, Nutr Rev. 528Pt 1Halliwell B. Free radicals and antioxidants: A personal view. Nutr Rev 1994;52(8 Pt 1):253-65.

Reactive oxygen species, aging, and antioxidative nutraceuticals. J Lee, N Koo, Min Db, 10.1111/j.1541-4337.2004.tb00058.xCompr Rev Food Sci Food Saf. 31Lee J, Koo N, Min DB. Reactive oxygen species, aging, and antioxidative nutraceuticals. Compr Rev Food Sci Food Saf 2004;3(1):21-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-4337.2004.tb00058.x

The role of oxygen free radicals in occupational and environmental lung diseases. V Vallyathan, X Shi, Environ Health Perspect. 1051SupplVallyathan V, Shi X. The role of oxygen free radicals in occupational and environmental lung diseases. Environ Health Perspect 1997;105 Suppl 1:165-77.

Chemical toxicity and reactive oxygen species. D V Parke, A Sapota, Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 94Parke DV, Sapota A. Chemical toxicity and reactive oxygen species. Int J Occup Med Environ Health 1996;9(4):331-40.

Antioxidants: Molecules, medicines, and myths. J M Gutteridge, B Halliwell, 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.071Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 3934Gutteridge JM, Halliwell B. Antioxidants: Molecules, medicines, and myths. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010;393(4):561-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.071

Fundamental aspects of reactive oxygen species, or what's the matter with oxygen?. I Fridovich, Ann N Y Acad Sci. 893Fridovich I. Fundamental aspects of reactive oxygen species, or what's the matter with oxygen? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999;893:13-8.

The evolution of free radicals and oxidative stress. J M Mccord, Am J Med. 1088McCord JM. The evolution of free radicals and oxidative stress. Am J Med 2000;108(8):652-9.

The physiology and pharmacology of singlet oxygen. T W Stief, Med Hypotheses. 604Stief TW. The physiology and pharmacology of singlet oxygen. Med Hypotheses 2003;60(4):567-72.

Free radicals, antioxidants and functional foods: Impact on human health. V Lobo, A Patil, A Phatak, N Chandra, 10.4103/0973-7847.70902Pharmacogn Rev. 48Lobo V, Patil A, Phatak A, Chandra N. Free radicals, antioxidants and functional foods: Impact on human health. Pharmacogn Rev 2010;4(8):118-26. doi: 10.4103/0973-7847.70902

Lipid peroxidation: Production, metabolism, and signaling mechanisms of malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. A Ayala, M F Munoz, S Arguelles, 10.1155/2014/360438Oxid Med Cell Longev. 360438Ayala A, Munoz MF, Arguelles S. Lipid peroxidation: Production, metabolism, and signaling mechanisms of malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2014;2014:360438. doi: 10.1155/2014/360438

Possible mutagens derived from lipids and lipid precursors. H Esterbauer, P Eckl, A Ortner, Mutat Res. 2383Esterbauer H, Eckl P, Ortner A. Possible mutagens derived from lipids and lipid precursors. Mutat Res 1990;238(3):223-33.

Oxidative/nitrosative stress in patients with modic changes: Preliminary controlled study. Spine (Phila Pa. E Belge Kurutas, M Senoglu, K Z Yuksel, V Unsal, I Altun, 10.1097/brs.000000000000073740Belge Kurutas E, Senoglu M, Yuksel KZ, Unsal V, Altun I. Oxidative/nitrosative stress in patients with modic changes: Preliminary controlled study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 2015;40(14):1101-7. doi: 10.1097/brs.0000000000000737

Radioimmunoassay of 8-iso-prostaglandin f2alpha: An index for oxidative injury via free radical catalysed lipid peroxidation. S Basu, Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 584Basu S. Radioimmunoassay of 8-iso-prostaglandin f2alpha: An index for oxidative injury via free radical catalysed lipid peroxidation. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1998;58(4):319-25.

Free radicals and antioxidants -quo vadis?. B Halliwell, 10.1016/j.tips.2010.12.002Trends Pharmacol Sci. 323Halliwell B. Free radicals and antioxidants -quo vadis? Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011;32(3):125-30. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2010.12.002

Free radical-mediated oxidation of free amino acids and amino acid residues in proteins. E R Stadtman, R L Levine, 10.1007/s00726-003-0011-2Amino Acids. 253-4Stadtman ER, Levine RL. Free radical-mediated oxidation of free amino acids and amino acid residues in proteins. Amino Acids 2003;25(3-4):207-18. doi: 10.1007/s00726-003-0011-2

Degradation of oxidized proteins in mammalian cells. T Grune, T Reinheckel, K J Davies, FASEB j. 117Grune T, Reinheckel T, Davies KJ. Degradation of oxidized proteins in mammalian cells. FASEB j 1997;11(7):526-34.

Singlet oxygen-mediated damage to proteins and its consequences. M J Davies, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 3053Davies MJ. Singlet oxygen-mediated damage to proteins and its consequences. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003;305(3):761-70.

Carbonyl modified proteins in cellular regulation, aging, and disease. R L Levine, Free Radic Biol Med. 329Levine RL. Carbonyl modified proteins in cellular regulation, aging, and disease. Free Radic Biol Med 2002;32(9):790-6.

Protein oxidation and proteolysis by the nonradical oxidants singlet oxygen or peroxynitrite. T Grune, L O Klotz, J Gieche, M Rudeck, H Sies, Free Radic Biol Med. 3011Grune T, Klotz LO, Gieche J, Rudeck M, Sies H. Protein oxidation and proteolysis by the nonradical oxidants singlet oxygen or peroxynitrite. Free Radic Biol Med 2001;30(11):1243-53.

Biochemistry and pathology of radical-mediated protein oxidation. R T Dean, S Fu, R Stocker, M J Davies, Biochem J. 324Pt 1Dean RT, Fu S, Stocker R, Davies MJ. Biochemistry and pathology of radical-mediated protein oxidation. Biochem J 1997;324 ( Pt 1):1-18.

Protein oxidation. E R Stadtman, R Levine, 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06187.xAnn NY Acad Sci. 8991Stadtman ER, Levine R. Protein oxidation. Ann NY Acad Sci 2000;899(1):191-208. doi: 10.1111/j.1749- 6632.2000.tb06187.x

Cysteine-mediated redox signaling: Chemistry, biology, and tools for discovery. C E Paulsen, K S Carroll, 10.1021/cr300163eChem Rev. 1137Paulsen CE, Carroll KS. Cysteine-mediated redox signaling: Chemistry, biology, and tools for discovery. Chem Rev 2013;113(7):4633-79. doi: 10.1021/cr300163e

Protein oxidation and 20s proteasome-dependent proteolysis in mammalian cells. R Shringarpure, T Grune, K J Davies, 10.1007/pl00000787Cell Mol Life Sci. 5810Shringarpure R, Grune T, Davies KJ. Protein oxidation and 20s proteasome-dependent proteolysis in mammalian cells. Cell Mol Life Sci 2001;58(10):1442-50. doi: 10.1007/pl00000787

Protein turnover by the proteasome in aging and disease. R Shringarpure, K J Davies, Free Radic Biol Med. 3211Shringarpure R, Davies KJ. Protein turnover by the proteasome in aging and disease. Free Radic Biol Med 2002;32(11):1084-9.

Protein carbonylation. Y J Suzuki, M Carini, D A Butterfield, 10.1089/ars.2009.2887Antioxid Redox Signal. 123Suzuki YJ, Carini M, Butterfield DA. Protein carbonylation. Antioxid Redox Signal 2010;12(3):323- 5. doi: 10.1089/ars.2009.2887

Analytical methods for 3-nitrotyrosine as a marker of exposure to reactive nitrogen species: A review. C Herce-Pagliai, S Kotecha, D E Shuker, 10.1006/niox.1998.0192Nitric Oxide. 25Herce-Pagliai C, Kotecha S, Shuker DE. Analytical methods for 3-nitrotyrosine as a marker of exposure to reactive nitrogen species: A review. Nitric Oxide 1998;2(5):324-36. doi: 10.1006/niox.1998.0192

Nitric oxide: Physiology, pathophysiology, and pharmacology. S Moncada, R M Palmer, E A Higgs, Pharmacol Rev. 432Moncada S, Palmer RM, Higgs EA. Nitric oxide: Physiology, pathophysiology, and pharmacology. Pharmacol Rev 1991;43(2):109-42.

The role of nitric oxide. V Kolb-Bachofen, A Kuhn, C V Suschek, 10.1093/rheumatology/kel287Rheumatology. 45suppl_3Kolb-Bachofen V, Kuhn A, Suschek CV. The role of nitric oxide. Rheumatology 2006;45(suppl_3):iii17- 9. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kel287

Nitric oxide reduces oxidative stress in cancer cells by forming dinitrosyliron complexes. S Sahni, J R Hickok, D D Thomas, 10.1016/j.niox.2018.03.003Nitric Oxide. 76Sahni S, Hickok JR, Thomas DD. Nitric oxide reduces oxidative stress in cancer cells by forming dinitrosyliron complexes. Nitric Oxide 2018;76:37- 44. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2018.03.003

Nitric oxide synthase structure and mechanism. M A Marletta, J Biol Chem. 26817Marletta MA. Nitric oxide synthase structure and mechanism. J Biol Chem 1993;268(17):12231-4.

Role of nitric oxide in inflammatory diseases. J N Sharma, A Al-Omran, S S Parvathy, 10.1007/s10787-007-0013-xInflammopharmacology. 156Sharma JN, Al-Omran A, Parvathy SS. Role of nitric oxide in inflammatory diseases. Inflammopharmacology 2007;15(6):252-9. doi: 10.1007/s10787-007-0013-x

Oxygen radicals, inflammation, and arthritis: Pathophysiological considerations and implications for treatment. R A Greenwald, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 204Greenwald RA. Oxygen radicals, inflammation, and arthritis: Pathophysiological considerations and implications for treatment. Semin Arthritis Rheum 1991;20(4):219-40.

Nitric oxide synthases: Regulation and function. U Forstermann, W C Sessa, 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr304Eur Heart J. 337Forstermann U, Sessa WC. Nitric oxide synthases: Regulation and function. Eur Heart J 2012;33(7):829- 37, 37a-37d. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr304

Enzymatic function of nitric oxide synthases. P J Andrew, B Mayer, Cardiovasc Res. 433Andrew PJ, Mayer B. Enzymatic function of nitric oxide synthases. Cardiovasc Res 1999;43(3):521-31.

Pathological implications of nitric oxide, superoxide and peroxynitrite formation. J S Beckman, J P Crow, Biochem Soc Trans. 212Beckman JS, Crow JP. Pathological implications of nitric oxide, superoxide and peroxynitrite formation. Biochem Soc Trans 1993;21(2):330-4.

Peroxynitrite formation from macrophage-derived nitric oxide. H Ischiropoulos, L Zhu, J S Beckman, Arch Biochem Biophys. 2982Ischiropoulos H, Zhu L, Beckman JS. Peroxynitrite formation from macrophage-derived nitric oxide. Arch Biochem Biophys 1992;298(2):446-51.

Antioxidants, oxidative damage and oxygen deprivation stress: A review. O Blokhina, E Virolainen, K V Fagerstedt, Ann Bot. 91Blokhina O, Virolainen E, Fagerstedt KV. Antioxidants, oxidative damage and oxygen deprivation stress: A review. Ann Bot 2003;91 Spec No:179-94.

Superoxide dismutase and stress tolerance. C Bowler, M V Montagu, D Inzé, 10.1146/annurev.pp.43.060192.000503Annu Rev Plant Biol. 431Bowler C, Montagu MV, Inzé D. Superoxide dismutase and stress tolerance. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2003;43(1):83-116. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pp.43.060192.000503

Antioxidant superoxide dismutase -a review: Its function, regulation in the testis, and role in male fertility. D D Mruk, B Silvestrini, M Y Mo, C Y Cheng, Contraception. 654Mruk DD, Silvestrini B, Mo MY, Cheng CY. Antioxidant superoxide dismutase -a review: Its function, regulation in the testis, and role in male fertility. Contraception 2002;65(4):305-11.

Selenium: Biochemical role as a component of glutathione peroxidase. J T Rotruck, A L Pope, H E Ganther, A B Swanson, D G Hafeman, W G Hoekstra, Science. 1794073Rotruck JT, Pope AL, Ganther HE, Swanson AB, Hafeman DG, Hoekstra WG. Selenium: Biochemical role as a component of glutathione peroxidase. Science 1973;179(4073):588-90.

Oxidative stress. H Sies, C Berndt, D P Jones, 10.1146/annurev-biochem-061516-045037Annu Rev Biochem. 86Sies H, Berndt C, Jones DP. Oxidative stress. Annu Rev Biochem 2017;86:715-48. doi: 10.1146/annurev- biochem-061516-045037

Mitochondrial function and redox control in the aging eye: Role of MsrA and other repair systems in cataract and macular degenerations. L A Brennan, M Kantorow, 10.1016/j.exer.2008.05.018Exp Eye Res. 882Brennan LA, Kantorow M. Mitochondrial function and redox control in the aging eye: Role of MsrA and other repair systems in cataract and macular degenerations. Exp Eye Res 2009;88(2):195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2008.05.018

Activity of superoxide dismutase obtained from senile cataract lens -effect of diabetes mellitus. T Panz, R Wojcik, K Krukar-Baster, Acta Biochim Pol. 554Panz T, Wojcik R, Krukar-Baster K. Activity of superoxide dismutase obtained from senile cataract lens -effect of diabetes mellitus. Acta Biochim Pol 2008;55(4):821-3.

Extracellular but not cytosolic superoxide dismutase protects against oxidant-mediated endothelial dysfunction. E L Foresman, F J Miller, Jr , 10.1016/j.redox.2013.04.003Redox Biol. 1Foresman EL, Miller FJ, Jr. Extracellular but not cytosolic superoxide dismutase protects against oxidant-mediated endothelial dysfunction. Redox Biol 2013;1:292-6. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2013.04.003

. Y Li, Antioxidants in Biology and Medicine. Nova Science Publishers, IncLi Y. Antioxidants in Biology and Medicine. New York: Nova Science Publishers, Inc; 2011.

Oxidative stress and the use of antioxidants in diabetes: Linking basic science to clinical practice. J S Johansen, A K Harris, D J Rychly, A Ergul, 375Johansen JS, Harris AK, Rychly DJ, Ergul A. Oxidative stress and the use of antioxidants in diabetes: Linking basic science to clinical practice. | 375

Natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning-A. Review Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin. 83Natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning-A Review Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376

. 10.1186/1475-2840-4-5Cardiovasc Diabetol. 45Cardiovasc Diabetol 2005;4:5. doi: 10.1186/1475- 2840-4-5

Biological significance of phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (PHGPX, GPX4) in mammalian cells. H Imai, Y Nakagawa, Free Radic Biol Med. 342Imai H, Nakagawa Y. Biological significance of phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (PHGPX, GPX4) in mammalian cells. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;34(2):145-69.

Glutathione peroxidases. R Brigelius-Flohe, M Maiorino, 10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.11.020Biochim Biophys Acta. 18305Brigelius-Flohe R, Maiorino M. Glutathione peroxidases. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013;1830(5):3289-303. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.11.020

Glutathione and glutathione-related enzymes in reproduction. A review. M F Knapen, P L Zusterzeel, W H Peters, E A Steegers, Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 822Knapen MF, Zusterzeel PL, Peters WH, Steegers EA. Glutathione and glutathione-related enzymes in reproduction. A review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999;82(2):171-84.

Human kidney proximal tubules are the main source of plasma glutathione peroxidase. N Avissar, D B Ornt, Y Yagil, S Horowitz, R H Watkins, E A Kerl, 10.1152/ajpcell.1994.266.2.C367Am J Physiol. 2662Pt 1Avissar N, Ornt DB, Yagil Y, Horowitz S, Watkins RH, Kerl EA, et al. Human kidney proximal tubules are the main source of plasma glutathione peroxidase. Am J Physiol 1994;266(2 Pt 1):C367-75. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.1994.266.2.C367

Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. B Halliwell, Jmc Gutteridge, Oxford University PressUSAHalliwell B, Gutteridge JMC. Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. USA: Oxford University Press; 2015.

Glutathione transferases. J D Hayes, J U Flanagan, I R Jowsey, 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.45.120403.095857Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 45Hayes JD, Flanagan JU, Jowsey IR. Glutathione transferases. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2005;45:51-88. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.45.120403.095857

Structure, catalytic mechanism, and evolution of the glutathione transferases. R N Armstrong, 10.1021/tx960072xChem Res Toxicol. 101Armstrong RN. Structure, catalytic mechanism, and evolution of the glutathione transferases. Chem Res Toxicol 1997;10(1):2-18. doi: 10.1021/tx960072x

Nomenclature for mammalian soluble glutathione transferases. B Mannervik, P G Board, J D Hayes, I Listowsky, W R Pearson, 10.1016/s0076-6879(05)01001-3Methods Enzymol. 401Mannervik B, Board PG, Hayes JD, Listowsky I, Pearson WR. Nomenclature for mammalian soluble glutathione transferases. Methods Enzymol 2005;401:1-8. doi: 10.1016/s0076-6879(05)01001-3

Conjugation and elimination of toxicants. G A Leblanc, W A Dauterman, Introduction to biochemical toxicology. Hodgson E, Smart RCNew YorkWiley3rd edLeBlanc GA, Dauterman WA. Conjugation and elimination of toxicants. In: Hodgson E, Smart RC, editors. Introduction to biochemical toxicology. 3rd ed. New York: Wiley; 2001.

Inhibition of glutathione S-transferases by thonningianin A, isolated from the african medicinal herb, thonningia sanguinea, in vitro. M A Gyamfi, Ohtani, Ii, E Shinno, Y Aniya, 10.1016/j.fct.2004.04.001Food Chem Toxicol. 429Gyamfi MA, Ohtani, II, Shinno E, Aniya Y. Inhibition of glutathione S-transferases by thonningianin A, isolated from the african medicinal herb, thonningia sanguinea, in vitro. Food Chem Toxicol 2004;42(9):1401-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2004.04.001

The role of glutathione reductase and related enzymes on cellular redox homoeostasis network. N Couto, J Wood, J Barber, 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.02.028Free Radic Biol Med. 95Couto N, Wood J, Barber J. The role of glutathione reductase and related enzymes on cellular redox homoeostasis network. Free Radic Biol Med 2016;95:27-42. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.02.028

Molecular organization of the glutathione reductase gene in drosophila melanogaster. M Candas, R S Sohal, S N Radyuk, V I Klichko, W C Orr, 10.1006/abbi.1996.9872Arch Biochem Biophys. 3392Candas M, Sohal RS, Radyuk SN, Klichko VI, Orr WC. Molecular organization of the glutathione reductase gene in drosophila melanogaster. Arch Biochem Biophys 1997;339(2):323-34. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1996.9872

Free radicals, natural antioxidants, and their reaction mechanisms. S B Nimse, D Pal, 10.1039/C4RA13315CRsc Adv. 535Nimse SB, Pal D. Free radicals, natural antioxidants, and their reaction mechanisms. Rsc Adv 2015;5(35):27986-8006. doi: 10.1039/C4RA13315C

. A Meister, Anderson Me Glutathione, 10.1146/annurev.bi.52.070183.003431Annu Rev Biochem. 52Meister A, Anderson ME. Glutathione. Annu Rev Biochem 1983;52:711-60. doi: 10.1146/annurev.bi.52.070183.003431

Effects of N-acetylcysteine, oral glutathione (GSH) and a novel sublingual form of gsh on oxidative stress markers: A comparative crossover study. B Schmitt, M Vicenzi, C Garrel, F M Denis, 10.1016/j.redox.2015.07.012Redox Biol. 6Schmitt B, Vicenzi M, Garrel C, Denis FM. Effects of N-acetylcysteine, oral glutathione (GSH) and a novel sublingual form of gsh on oxidative stress markers: A comparative crossover study. Redox Biol 2015;6:198-205. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2015.07.012

Role of vitamin e as a lipid-soluble peroxyl radical scavenger: In vitro and in vivo evidence. Niki E , 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.03.022Free Radic Biol Med. 66Niki E. Role of vitamin e as a lipid-soluble peroxyl radical scavenger: In vitro and in vivo evidence. Free Radic Biol Med 2014;66:3-12. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.03.022

Vitamin C and immune function. A C Carr, S Maggini, 10.3390/nu9111211Nutrients. 911Carr AC, Maggini S. Vitamin C and immune function. Nutrients 2017;9(11): pii: E1211. doi: 10.3390/nu9111211

The role of antioxidants in the chemistry of oxidative stress: A review. A M Pisoschi, A Pop, 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.04.040Eur J Med Chem. 97Pisoschi AM, Pop A. The role of antioxidants in the chemistry of oxidative stress: A review. Eur J Med Chem 2015;97:55-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.04.040

A review of the antioxidant potential of medicinal plant species. D Krishnaiah, R Sarbatly, R Nithyanandam, 10.1016/j.fbp.2010.04.008Food Bioprod Process. 893Krishnaiah D, Sarbatly R, Nithyanandam R. A review of the antioxidant potential of medicinal plant species. Food Bioprod Process 2011;89(3):217-33. doi: 10.1016/j.fbp.2010.04.008

Mitochondrial dysfunction in psychiatric and neurological diseases: Cause(s), consequence(s), and implications of antioxidant therapy. D M Kasote, M V Hegde, S S Katyare, 10.1002/biof.1093Biofactors. 394Kasote DM, Hegde MV, Katyare SS. Mitochondrial dysfunction in psychiatric and neurological diseases: Cause(s), consequence(s), and implications of antioxidant therapy. Biofactors 2013;39(4):392-406. doi: 10.1002/biof.1093

Antioxidant activity of food constituents: An overview. I Gulcin, 10.1007/s00204-011-0774-2Arch Toxicol. 863Gulcin I. Antioxidant activity of food constituents: An overview. Arch Toxicol 2012;86(3):345-91. doi: 10.1007/s00204-011-0774-2

Polyphenols and prevention of cardiovascular diseases. C Manach, A Mazur, A Scalbert, Curr Opin Lipidol. 161Manach C, Mazur A, Scalbert A. Polyphenols and prevention of cardiovascular diseases. Curr Opin Lipidol 2005;16(1):77-84.

Phenols in the plant and in man. The potential for possible nutritional enhancement of the diet by modifying the phenols content or profile. A J Parr, G P Bolwell, 10.1002/(SICI)10970010J Sci Food Agric. 8077<985::AID-JSFA572>3.0.CO;2-7Parr AJ. Bolwell GP. Phenols in the plant and in man. The potential for possible nutritional enhancement of the diet by modifying the phenols content or profile. J Sci Food Agric 2000;80(7):985-1012. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097 0010(20000515)80:7<985::AID- JSFA572>3.0.CO;2-7

Bioavailability and bioefficacy of polyphenols in humans. I. Review of 97 bioavailability studies. C Manach, G Williamson, C Morand, A Scalbert, C Remesy, 10.1093/ajcn/81.1.230SAm J Clin Nutr. 811SupplManach C, Williamson G, Morand C, Scalbert A, Remesy C. Bioavailability and bioefficacy of polyphenols in humans. I. Review of 97 bioavailability studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81(1 Suppl):230s-42s. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/81.1.230S

Protective effect of diallylsulphide against mercuric chloride-induced hepatic injury in rats. S Ansar, M Iqbal, 10.1177/0960327116629723Hum Exp Toxicol. 3512Ansar S, Iqbal M. Protective effect of diallylsulphide against mercuric chloride-induced hepatic injury in rats. Hum Exp Toxicol 2016;35(12):1305-11. doi: 10.1177/0960327116629723

Role of protective Pelargonium Sidoides root extract and Curcumin on Mushroom poisoning: An Experimental study in rats. V Unsal, E B Kurutaş, M Güngör, A M Emrah, 10.5138/09750185.2050Int J Phytomedicine. 92Unsal V, Kurutaş EB, Güngör M, Emrah AM. Role of protective Pelargonium Sidoides root extract and Curcumin on Mushroom poisoning: An Experimental study in rats. Int J Phytomedicine 2017;9(2):261-6. doi: 10.5138/09750185.2050

Detoxification and antioxidant effects of curcumin in rats experimentally exposed to mercury. R Agarwal, S K Goel, J R Behari, 10.1002/jat.1517J Appl Toxicol. 305Agarwal R, Goel SK, Behari JR. Detoxification and antioxidant effects of curcumin in rats experimentally exposed to mercury. J Appl Toxicol 2010;30(5):457- 68. doi: 10.1002/jat.1517

Mercuric chloride-induced testicular toxicity in rats and the protective role of sodium. S Kalender, F G Uzun, F Demir, M Uzunhisarcikli, A Aslanturk, Kalender S, Uzun FG, Demir F, Uzunhisarcikli M, Aslanturk A. Mercuric chloride-induced testicular toxicity in rats and the protective role of sodium

. | Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin. 83| Advanced Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2018, 8(3), 365-376

Unsal selenite and vitamin e. 10.1016/j.fct.2013.01.024Food Chem Toxicol. 55Unsal selenite and vitamin e. Food Chem Toxicol 2013;55:456-62. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.01.024

Studies on comparative efficacy of α -linolenic acid and α-eleostearic acid on prevention of organic mercury-induced oxidative stress in kidney and liver of rat. M Pal, M Ghosh, 10.1016/j.fct.2011.12.042Food Chem Toxicol. 503-4Pal M, Ghosh M. Studies on comparative efficacy of α -linolenic acid and α-eleostearic acid on prevention of organic mercury-induced oxidative stress in kidney and liver of rat. Food Chem Toxicol 2012;50(3- 4):1066-72. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2011.12.042

Dietary luteolin attenuates chronic liver injury induced by mercuric chloride via the Nrf2/Nf-κB/P53 signaling pathway in rats. H Zhang, X Tan, D Yang, J Lu, B Liu, R Baiyun, 10.18632/oncotarget.17334Oncotarget. 825Zhang H, Tan X, Yang D, Lu J, Liu B, Baiyun R, et al. Dietary luteolin attenuates chronic liver injury induced by mercuric chloride via the Nrf2/Nf-κB/P53 signaling pathway in rats. Oncotarget 2017;8(25):40982-93. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.17334

Zingiber officinale and 6-gingerol alleviate liver and kidney dysfunctions and oxidative stress induced by mercuric chloride in male rats: A protective approach. D Joshi, S K Srivastav, S Belemkar, V A Dixit, 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.04.108Biomed Pharmacother. 91Joshi D, Srivastav SK, Belemkar S, Dixit VA. Zingiber officinale and 6-gingerol alleviate liver and kidney dysfunctions and oxidative stress induced by mercuric chloride in male rats: A protective approach. Biomed Pharmacother 2017;91:645-55. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.04.108

Oral administration of moringa oleifera oil but not coconut oil prevents mercury-induced testicular toxicity in rats. S O Abarikwu, S Benjamin, S G Ebah, G Obilor, G Agbam, 10.1111/and.12597Andrologia. 491Abarikwu SO, Benjamin S, Ebah SG, Obilor G, Agbam G. Oral administration of moringa oleifera oil but not coconut oil prevents mercury-induced testicular toxicity in rats. Andrologia 2017;49(1). doi: 10.1111/and.12597

The neuroprotective effect of berberine in mercury-induced neurotoxicity in rats. Abdel Moneim, A E , 10.1007/s11011-015-9652-6Metab Brain Dis. 304Abdel Moneim AE. The neuroprotective effect of berberine in mercury-induced neurotoxicity in rats. Metab Brain Dis 2015;30(4):935-42. doi: 10.1007/s11011-015-9652-6

Rhubarb anthraquinones protect rats against mercuric chloride (HgCl2)-induced acute renal failure. D Gao, L N Zeng, P Zhang, Z J Ma, R S Li, Y L Zhao, 10.3390/molecules21030298Molecules. 213298Gao D, Zeng LN, Zhang P, Ma ZJ, Li RS, Zhao YL, et al. Rhubarb anthraquinones protect rats against mercuric chloride (HgCl2)-induced acute renal failure. Molecules 2016;21(3):298. doi: 10.3390/molecules21030298

Protective effect of diallyl disulfide on oxidative stress-injured neuronally differentiated PC12 cells. S H Koh, H Kwon, K H Park, J K Ko, J H Kim, M S Hwang, 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.10.006Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1332Koh SH, Kwon H, Park KH, Ko JK, Kim JH, Hwang MS, et al. Protective effect of diallyl disulfide on oxidative stress-injured neuronally differentiated PC12 cells. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005;133(2):176-86. doi: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.10.006

Ginkgo biloba extract protects against mercury(II)-induced oxidative tissue damage in rats. G Sener, O Sehirli, A Tozan, A Velioglu-Ovunc, N Gedik, G Z Omurtag, 10.1016/j.fct.2006.07.024Food Chem Toxicol. 454Sener G, Sehirli O, Tozan A, Velioglu-Ovunc A, Gedik N, Omurtag GZ. Ginkgo biloba extract protects against mercury(II)-induced oxidative tissue damage in rats. Food Chem Toxicol 2007;45(4):543-50. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2006.07.024

Protective role of aralia elata polysaccharide on mercury(II)-induced cardiovascular oxidative injury in rats. J Zhang, S Lu, H Wang, Q Zheng, 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2013.04.047Int J Biol Macromol. 59Zhang J, Lu S, Wang H, Zheng Q. Protective role of aralia elata polysaccharide on mercury(II)-induced cardiovascular oxidative injury in rats. Int J Biol Macromol 2013;59:301-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2013.04.047

Eruca sativa seeds possess antioxidant activity and exert a protective effect on mercuric chloride induced renal toxicity. M Sarwar Alam, G Kaur, Z Jabbar, K Javed, M Athar, 10.1016/j.fct.2006.11.013Food Chem Toxicol. 456Sarwar Alam M, Kaur G, Jabbar Z, Javed K, Athar M. Eruca sativa seeds possess antioxidant activity and exert a protective effect on mercuric chloride induced renal toxicity. Food Chem Toxicol 2007;45(6):910- 20. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2006.11.013

Can urtica dioica supplementation attenuate mercury intoxication in wistar rats?. W Siouda, C Abdennour, 10.14202/vetworld.2015.1458-1465Vet World. 812Siouda W, Abdennour C. Can urtica dioica supplementation attenuate mercury intoxication in wistar rats? Vet World 2015;8(12):1458-65. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2015.1458-1465

Antioxidative and free radical scavenging properties of piper cubeba (piperaceae) in mercury intoxicated mice, mus musculus. G Jagadeesan, E V Shakeela, Am J Pharm Health Res. 46Jagadeesan G, Shakeela EV. Antioxidative and free radical scavenging properties of piper cubeba (piperaceae) in mercury intoxicated mice, mus musculus. Am J Pharm Health Res 2016;4(6):23-35.

Tribulus terrestris extract protects against mercury-induced oxidative tissue damage in mice. T Sugunavarman, J Ganesan, S S Samipillai, J Ecobiotechnol. 21Sugunavarman T, Ganesan J, Samipillai SS. Tribulus terrestris extract protects against mercury-induced oxidative tissue damage in mice. J Ecobiotechnol 2010;2(1):59-65.

Restoration of Antioxidant Activity by Nacetylcysteine and Gallic Acid on Kidney Tissue of Mercuric Chloride Intoxicated Wistar Rats. Vanithasri Varadharajan, Jagadeesan Ganesan, Int J Appl Biol Pharm. 4Varadharajan, Vanithasri, and Jagadeesan Ganesan. "Restoration of Antioxidant Activity by N- acetylcysteine and Gallic Acid on Kidney Tissue of Mercuric Chloride Intoxicated Wistar Rats." Int J Appl Biol Pharm 4.4 (2013): 302-307.

Dietary luteolin protects against hgcl2-induced renal injury via activation of nrf2-mediated signaling in rat. X Tan, B Liu, J Lu, S Li, R Baiyun, Y Lv, 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2017.11.010J Inorg Biochem. 179Tan X, Liu B, Lu J, Li S, Baiyun R, Lv Y, et al. Dietary luteolin protects against hgcl2-induced renal injury via activation of nrf2-mediated signaling in rat. J Inorg Biochem 2018;179:24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2017.11.010