# A Review of occupation-based social classifications for social survey research

CorpusID: 52952660
 
tags: #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1eb532f01f9750d3653b2052d5d378befcfe20a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1eb532f01f9750d3653b2052d5d378befcfe20a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review of occupation-based social classifications for social survey research


Roxanne Connelly r.connelly@warwick.ac.uk 
The University of Warwick
CoventryUK

Vernon Gayle 
The University of Edinburgh
EdinburghUK

Paul S Lambert 
Department of Sociology
University of Stirling
StirlingUK

University of Warwick
CV4 7ALCoventryUK

DrRoxanne Connelly 
A Review of occupation-based social classifications for social survey research

Methodological Innovations
9Creative Commons Non Commercial CC-BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/) which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage). Corresponding author:Measuring occupationssocial stratificationsocial classificationsocial classmicroclass
This article is a review of issues associated with measuring occupations and using occupation-based socio-economic classifications in social science research. The review is orientated towards researchers who undertake secondary analysis of large-scale micro-level social science datasets. This article begins with an outline of how to handle raw occupational information. This is followed by an introduction to the two main approaches to measuring occupations and a third lesser known but intellectually innovative approach. The three approaches are social class schemes, social stratification scales and the microclass approach. International comparisons are briefly described and a discussion of intersectionality with other key variables such as age and gender is provided. We are careful to emphasise that this article does not advocate the uncritical adoption of any one particular occupation-based socio-economic measure over and above other alternatives. Rather, we are advocating that researchers should choose from the portfolio of existing socio-economic measures in an informed and empirically defensible way, and we strongly advocate undertaking sensitivity analyses. We conclude that researchers should always use existing socio-economic measures that have agreed on and well-documented standards. We strongly advise researchers not to develop their own measures without strong justification nor to use existing measures in an un-prescribed or ad hoc manner.

## Introduction

This article is a review of issues associated with measuring occupations and using occupation-based socioeconomic classifications in sociological research. Theoretical and empirical research on social inequalities or 'social stratification' has been one of the hallmarks of UK sociology since it burgeoned as an academic discipline after the Second World War (Pevalin and Rose, 2002). Central to this field is the recognition that the occupational structure is an important foundation for the main dimension of social stratification (Blau and Duncan, 1967: 6-7). Within sociology, there is a long-standing recognition that in industrialised societies, occupations are the most powerful single indicator of levels of material reward, social standing and life chances (Parkin, 1971). The occupational information that is routinely provided in large-scale social surveys is a key resource for studying contemporary social life, and occupation-based indicators are central to sociological investigations.

Despite the sociological consensus that occupations are central to understanding social stratification, there is no single obvious and agreed on way of measuring occupations. Debates have been exacerbated because of the complex nature of the occupational structure in contemporary labour markets. Within sociology, a wide range of measures have been advocated. These measures are often linked with mainstream sociological theories and concepts, most notably related to 'social class'. This article is not orientated towards an evaluation of social class measures or other measures relating to social stratification. Nor does this article document the history or development of the measures. Rather, it is orientated towards the more prosaic, but usually overlooked, practical aspects of using occupational information collected via social surveys in sociological research.

The theorisation, measurement and operationalisation of occupation-based measures has received great attention in the specialised field of social stratification research but has received far less attention in other areas of social science despite the centrality of occupations for many empirical analyses. It is our conjecture that appropriately measuring occupations and using occupational information in sociological analyses requires thought and in-depth knowledge of these measures. The aim of this article is to document issues associated with utilising occupation-based social classifications in social survey analyses and to provide some clear prescriptions for sociologists who are not experts in this field.

We begin with an outline of how to handle raw occupational information. This is followed by an introduction to the two major approaches to measuring occupations and a third lesser known but intellectually innovative approach. The three approaches are social class schemes, social stratification scales and the microclass approach. In addition, occupation-based measures for international comparisons are briefly described because this area is seldom highlighted. We conclude with a discussion of the intersection of other key variables such as age and gender and discuss a range of issues related to the inclusion of these measures in sociological analyses.


## Rationale for occupation-based social classifications in social surveys

The most common justification for using occupation-based socio-economic measures is that they make reliable, parsimonious indicators of the social positions of individuals (Parkin, 1971;Rose and Pevalin, 2003). To most social stratification researchers, occupation-based socio-economic measures do not simply act as a proxy where income data themselves are unavailable, they are measures designed to help us better understand fundamental forms of social relations and inequalities to which income is merely epiphenomenal (Rose and Pevalin, 2003: 39). Empirical inquiries using repeated contacts data have convincingly shown that there is a high degree of income churning from year to year which makes income data unlikely to consistently represent individuals' positions in industrial economies (Jarvis and Jenkins, 1997;Jenkins and Van Kerm, 2009). By contrast, occupation-based socio-economic measures are more stable and, therefore, better describe lifetime earnings profiles (Goldthorpe and McKnight, 2006;Rose and Pevalin, 2003). Hauser and Warren (1997) contend that the social sciences have been suffering from a preoccupation with measures of income and poverty. This focus possibly stems from the assumed utility of monetary measures for impact or 'realworld' relevance. The focus on income might also reflect the relative disciplinary esteem of the field of economics within the social sciences. Bourguignon (2006) and Goldthorpe (2012) both assert that it is possible that this economic focus may have diverted some social scientists from major and consequential dimensions of social inequality which are not captured by focusing purely on income.

Some contemporary sociologists dispute the continued relevance of occupation-based social classifications. Against the backdrop of a vast quantity of empirical results charting continued class-based inequalities (e.g. Erikson et al., 1979;Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992;Goldthorpe et al., 1980Goldthorpe et al., , 1987Wright, 1997), a parallel stream of literature has claimed that 'class as a concept is ceasing to do any useful work' (Pahl, 1989: 710) or is indeed 'dead ' (e.g. Clark and Seymour, 1991;Holton and Turner, 1989;Joyce, 1995;Kingston, 1994;Lee and Turner, 1996;Pakulski and Waters, 1996). These theories generally argue that the lives and experiences of individuals in modern society are too fluid and transient, and too influenced by the processes of globalisation, to fit neatly within-class categories. Pakulski and Waters' (1996) account of the 'death of class' centres on two main ideas. First, the class-based divisions peaked in industrial society and have been declining ever since. Second, although there are inequalities in modern society, these are not aligned with traditional social classes.

There are, however, a number of weaknesses in the 'end of class' thesis. Goldthorpe and Marshall (1992) note that the concept of class which is being attacked is a concept which is never clearly defined, is most aligned to the Marxist tradition and differs greatly from the more recent sociological concepts of social class that have been developed and deployed in empirical studies. The more nuanced aspects of the concept of social class are largely overlooked by those who argue that class is dead, and social class is often represented in a caricatured and simplistic manner (Goldthorpe and Marshall, 1992). Platt (2011: 15) highlights that central concerns in contemporary class analysis include the notion of changes in the influence of class, the declining importance of class and the intersectionality of other variables such as gender and ethnicity. We would add that a central theme in contemporary class analysis is the study of the extent to which the influence of social class has decreased over time in relation to major economic and social changes (e.g. Breen, 2004b;Erikson and Goldthorpe, 2010;Hochstadt, 1999;Shavit and Blossfeld, 1993;Zijdeman, 2009).

While class analysts have researched these issues in some depth, Goldthorpe and Marshall (1992) assert that sociologists who claim that class is dead have provided little convincing evidence to support their arguments. Furthermore, they have also noted that there has been no attempt to provide longitudinal evidence of change in the nature or influence of class to provide adequate support for the 'death of class' argument. It is also notable that many theoretically oriented sociologists, from very different standpoints, have continued to describe the importance and relevance of class in contemporary society (Giddens, 1981;Sayer, 2005;Skeggs, 1997). Savage et al. (2013) recently proposed a new model of social class influenced by the writings of the French sociologist Bourdieu. 1 From this theoretical standpoint, occupations are not the main indicators of social stratification positions. This work has led to an extensive amount of discussion over the last year. The new models of class developed by Savage et al. (2013) are based on the concepts of economic capital (e.g. income and wealth), cultural capital (e.g. engagement with cultural goods and activities) and social capital (e.g. social contacts and networks; see Bourdieu, 1984). These concepts are measured using indicators such as household income, savings, property value, the number of social contacts held and the occupations of these social contacts, engagement with 'highbrow culture' (e.g. visiting museums or listening to classical music) and engagement with 'emerging cultural capital'. Emerging cultural capital describes activities once considered 'lowbrow culture' but that may now be more ubiquitous. Examples might include using social networking websites, going to a gym or online gaming.

Rather than theorising occupations as the main basis of the opportunity structure, Bourdieu (1984) argues that the three capitals can be used to better explain the processes of social reproduction. Based on this theory, Savage et al. (2013) contend that by measuring individuals' levels of these capitals, a far more informative social class scheme can be developed than the traditional occupation-based measures that are widely used. Payne (2013) has noted that the seven 'new' classes proposed by Savage et al. (2013) are very similar to the established UK National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification (NS-SEC) categories but with the added distinction of an 'elite' category. Therefore, this new scheme does not represent a revolutionary reworking of the established social class categories. The measure proposed by Savage et al. (2013) has been extensively critiqued (Bradley, 2014;Lambert and Griffiths, 2013;Mills, 2013Mills, , 2014Mills, , 2015Payne, 2013;Rose and Harrison, 2013;Rollock, 2014). Despite the critiques offered by the 'end of class' theorists, and the direction proposed by Savage et al. (2013), there is no strong empirical evidence that dissuades us of the extremely high value of using existing occupation-based measures in the secondary analysis of large-scale social surveys.


## Standardised occupational classifications

Modern industrial economies are characterised by a wide range of occupations, each of which contain numerous different jobs. Collecting job-related information (e.g. job titles) is routinely the first step in collecting occupational information within social surveys. The next step is usually marshalling this information into a recognised occupational scheme.

The raw occupational information in large-scale microlevel social surveys is usually coded into a standardised occupational unit group scheme. In the United Kingdom, it is common for social survey data to be coded into the Office for National Statistics (2010) Standardised Occupational Classification, which are known as SOC codes. Some surveys are coded into the International Labour Organisation's International Standard Classification of Occupations, which are known as ISCO codes (see Ganzeboom, 2010). This information is often augmented with additional employment data such as employment status (e.g. self-employed or supervisory). Occupational unit group codes are produced by matching original textual occupational descriptions (e.g. from survey question responses) with a standardised list of occupations. We consider that it is extremely important that data collectors maintain occupational data in the form of an established protocol (e.g. using SOC codes). Coding raw occupational data (e.g. textual descriptions) directly into socio-economic measures is highly unsatisfactory because it will result in the loss of valuable detailed occupational information. As Lambert (2002) demonstrates, without the use of an established protocol for coding raw occupational information (e.g. using SOC codes), it is later impossible to test for comparability between both current and future occupationbased measures.

Translating raw survey data into unit group codes can be a time-consuming exercise, but the burden is greatly reduced through the use of computer-assisted and computerautomated coding procedures (Elias et al., 1993). The Computer-Aided Structured Coding Tool 2 (CASCOT) is an online resource for the quick and reliable coding of occupational descriptions, which was developed by the Institute of Employment Research at the University of Warwick (Jones, 2004). The CASCOT programme compares the text in the description of an occupation with the text in standardised descriptors for occupational classifications. The software then presents a list of recommended matches. CASCOT also provides a score for the matches indicating the degree of certainty that the given occupational code is correct. The Office for National Statistics also publish an open-access online coding tool 3 that operates in a similar manner, and these and other coding software are available as offline packages suitable for bulk-processing large volumes of data.

Schemes of unit group codes are updated periodically, and the current nationally specific UK scheme is SOC2010. 4 Another example of a standardised occupational code is the ISCO 5 (International Labour Organization, 2010). ISCO is also widely used in both cross-national and nationally specific survey datasets (Bergman and Joye, 2005). ISCO represents an important effort to develop internationally comparable occupational codes, which facilitate crossnational comparisons in social surveys (Elias, 1997). In many countries, 'cross-walks' are available that enable values of the national standardised occupational unit group scheme (e.g. SOC2010) to be translated into ISCO. 6 These cross-walks are usually written by researchers and/or national statistics agencies.


## Occupation-based social classifications

Organising occupational information into standardised occupational codes is only the first stage in the process. Secondary data analysts will generally not need to engage with this stage of the process when they are using existing survey resources that are well curated. The British Household Panel Survey is a prime example of a large-scale social survey with well-curated occupational data that are readily available for secondary data analysis (Taylor et al., 2010). The second stage in the process of developing occupationbased social classifications is to convert these data from standardised lists of occupational unit groups (e.g. SOC codes) into the required socio-economic measure.

The means to convert unit group codes and employment status data into occupation-based measures is typically supplied in a listing of occupational unit groups alongside the corresponding levels of an occupation-based measure. This may take the form of a table, textual description, statistical software command file or a matrix of data for matching (see Lambert and Bihagen, 2012, for a more extended description). In order to carry out these operations, the researcher will usually require some skills in the use of statistical software for data management (see Mitchell, 2010;Treiman, 2009). Lambert and Bihagen (2014) report that there has been a great deal of inconsistency in how researchers have organised occupational information into occupation-based social classifications. For instance, they claim that upwards of a thousand different measures based upon occupations have been used in contemporary social science. 7 It is unsurprising that this surfeit of measures may initially seem daunting for researchers, especially those who are not social stratification specialists. It is notable that many social classifications emerge from very different sociological theories, which influence both their conceptual and empirical foundations.

It is well observed that in many secondary analyses of large and complex social surveys, the analysts tend to select a single occupation-based measure. The choice of measure might be made as a result of theoretical fiat, or due to more practical operational issues, or even a mixture of both. Our methodological advice is that researchers should utilise existing measurement options whenever possible and should avoid producing their own measures or using existing measures in an ad hoc manner, unless they have very strong and clearly justified reasons. Social survey methodologists have made this point on several previous occasions (Bechhofer, 1969;Blumer, 1956;Bulmer et al., 2010;Burgess, 1986;Lambert and Bihagen, 2014;Stacey, 1969). Most notably, Bechhofer (1969) states, 'researchers are advised not to add to the already existing plethora of classifications without very good reason' (p. 118).

Our advice is based on the following premises. First, the field of stratification research is highly specialised, and a great deal of theoretical thought and empirical testing has been directed towards the development of occupation-based measures. Therefore, it is probable that a measure suitable for most analyses already exists. Second, the adoption of an existing measure is almost always more time efficient. Third, and most importantly in our view, existing measures have agreed and documented standards and, therefore, facilitate replication. As Lambert and Bihagen (2012) assert, this locates firmly within the culture of cumulative social scientific endeavour.


## Social class schemes

Social class schemes are very widely used in sociological research and can generally be regarded as socio-economic measures that divide the population into unequally rewarded categories (Crompton, 2008: 49). Social class schemes are not necessarily hierarchical, although an ordinal structure is often evident (Carlsson, 1958;Glass, 1954). There are a plethora of social class schemes, and these measures are often informed by different theoretical standpoints (see Crompton, 2008).  distinguished between groups of social class measures which could be classified as being Marxist, 8 Weberian or Durkhiemian in their approach. As we have described above, more recently, the measure proposed by Savage et al. (2013) has its genesis in the theoretical work of Bourdieu. However, Marxist and Bourdieusian socio-economic measures are not usually readily derived from occupational information alone and do not ordinarily feature in social survey datasets.

Many of the earliest published social class schemes focussed on differences in the skill levels of occupations and defined social categories in those terms. Skill categories were sometimes calculated based on typical qualification requirements, but their identification was also often associated with evaluations of the relative prestige or social standing of the occupation. A prominent example is the United Kingdom's long-standing 'Registrar General's Social Classification' 9 (e.g. Szreter, 1984). There is evidence that skill-based measures are empirically very powerful, and they remain a popular choice in social research (see Elias and McKnight, 2001;Tahlin, 2007).

The work of Goldthorpe has arguably generated the most influential occupation-based social classification in sociology and allied disciplines (Evans, 1992) -the Erikson-Goldthorpe-Portocarero (EGP) schema (see Erikson et al., 1979). The theoretical principles of the EGP approach led to the development of subsequent cognate schemes, including CASMIN (Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992), the United Kingdom's NS-SEC Rose and Pevalin, 2003) and the European Socio-Economic Classification (Rose and Harrison, 2007). In this tradition, employment relations in the labour market are held to be of key importance to the allocation of individuals into social class categories (Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992: 36-45). Individuals within a social class are considered to share similar 'market situation' (e.g. levels of income, economic security and chances for economic advancement) and 'work situation' (e.g. authority and control; Goldthorpe, 1980;Lockwood, 1958). Accordingly, those individuals within a social class are thought to hold similar life chances and often lifestyles.

In its least aggregated form, the EGP schema identifies 11 classes, although a 7-class version is widely used in empirical analyses (see Table 1). Erikson and Goldthorpe (1992) recommend that researchers move between the seven-, fiveand three-class versions based on the need to balance explanatory comprehensiveness with explanatory parsimony. They state that the schema could be extended to include more classes if there was good reason to do so (Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992: 46). The use of varied forms of the EGP schema is consistent with the claim that the measure is an instrument du travail rather than a definitive representation of social class groupings in the United Kingdom (Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992: 46).

In 1994, the UK Office for National Statistics commissioned the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) to facilitate a review of social classifications. As a result of this review, the EGP approach was adopted as the basis of a new government measure of social class (Rose, 1995;Rose et al., 2005;Rose and Pevalin, 2003). Consequently, the NS-SEC was developed, and since 2001, this occupationbased measure, described in Table 2, has been used in official statistics and government research in the United Kingdom (Office for National Statistics, 2010). In congruence with the EGP approach, the NS-SEC approach comprises of aggregate groupings of individuals who are considered to share similar life chances and lifestyles as a consequence of their employment relations. Similarly, various reduced versions of the schema are recommended (see Table 2).

In a recent and related exercise, a 'European Socioeconomic Classification' (ESeC) has been developed (Harrison and Rose, 2006;Rose and Harrison, 2010). This is a social class schema, based on the EGP model, which is designed to facilitate cross-nationally comparative research. ESeC 10 comprises a nine-class categorical measure, with recommended reduced versions of five or three classes, which can be readily operationalised from data coded into the threedigit version of the ISCO occupational unit group scheme. The 'ESeC' scheme is specifically designed for international research, although other UK-oriented versions of the EGP scheme have also been exploited in cross-nationally comparative studies (e.g. Blossfeld and Hofmeister, 2005;Breen, 2004a;Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992;Ganzeboom, 1996).

The EGP social class schema and its derivatives are widely used in British sociology, and several studies have provided evidence of acceptable construct 11 and criterion 12 validity for this measure (e.g. Evans, 1992;Evans andMills, 1998, 2000). Nevertheless, these social class schemes have also been evaluated critically. Questions have been asked about the degree of within-class homogeneity in social class categories, and concerns have been raised that individuals placed within the same social class can hold very different positions within social hierarchies (Bergman and Joye, 2005;Blackburn and Prandy, 1997). Penn (1981), Hout and Hauser (1992) and Blackburn and Prandy (1997) have also argued that the EGP schema's categories downplay the key element of hierarchy in social stratification. Finally, measures from the EGP schema have a relatively high number of categories, so it is sometimes suggested that they are not well suited to incorporation in multivariate statistical analyses (e.g. regression models) because having a large number of categories inhibits the estimation of interaction effects. A consequence is that this limitation might encourage researchers, de facto, into the less desirable practice of simplifying the measure into a more coarse-grained format.


## Social stratification scales

Having introduced categorical social class schemes, we now turn our attention to occupation-based scales. The principal difference between categorical social class schemes and stratification scales is that rather than placing individuals into qualitatively distinct categories, social stratification scales place individuals at some point on a continuous or gradational one-dimensional hierarchy (Bergman and Joye, 2005). The dimension captured by occupation-based scales can usually be described as a representation of 'relative social advantage' (Jonsson et al., 2009). In some traditions, all occupation-based scales are referred to as 'status' scales, but this terminology is ambiguous, since in some interpretations, 'status' refers to a very specific form of social inequality (Chan and Goldthorpe, 2007). Scaling approaches also, technically, accommodate measurements that assign scores to occupations in more than one dimension (e.g. Levine and Spadaro, 1988), but in practice, scales are only regularly used in a single dimensional framework in applied research.

A notable example of a social stratification scale is the Cambridge Social Interaction and Stratification Scale (CAMSIS) (Prandy, 1990;Stewart et al., 1980). This in an empirically constructed scale that is based on the theoretical idea that there is a stratification order derived from a hierarchical structure of advantage (and disadvantage) arising from the unequal distribution of social, cultural and economic resources. In the CAMSIS approach, individuals are embedded in social networks of relationships within which they engage in social, cultural, political and economic interactions. These social interactions are circumscribed by the social distance of these social actors. The idea of the centrality of 'social space' is not unique to the CAMSIS approach and has a long history in the sociological literature. 13 Chan (2010) describes a recent, separate project that constructed occupation-based scales by analysing social interaction patterns using a very similar approach to the CAMSIS perspective.

The CAMSIS approach is based on examining patterns of social interaction between occupations that are uncovered by examining the frequency of links between people in different occupations. These links are typically defined either by  (Prandy, 1999). In this approach, country-and time-specific scales are usually calculated, and different CAMSIS scales can also be generated for men and women and could also be generated for other important socio-demographic differences if desired (e.g. ethnic groups or geographical regions). Lambert et al. (2008) conclude that this quality of 'specificity' has attractive properties for a wide range of analyses where more detailed resolution might be illuminating. Two other important stratification scales are the Standard International Occupational Prestige Scale (SIOPS; see Treiman, 1996, 2003) and the International Socio-Economic Index (ISEI; Ganzeboom et al., 1992). SIOPS is devised by taking survey information on prestige ratings given by respondents to samples of jobs and calculating averages within and across societies (Treiman, 1977). Treiman's original analysis compared ratings from over 60 societies and drew the important conclusion that variation from society to society, and across time, in the prestige allocated to occupations was minimal. This axiom is often referred to as the 'Treiman constant' within stratification research (Hout and DiPrete, 2006). Coxon and Jones (1978, 1979a, 1979b have critiqued Treiman's approach at length, based on analyses which focus on the cognitive issues involved when asking individuals to rank occupations. Coxon and Jones (1978, 1979a, 1979b considered the types of distinctions people might draw between occupations. They experimented with tasks such as asking respondents to sort occupations into groups and asking the respondents to describe the criteria by which occupations could be ordered. They argue that these evaluative tasks should have preceded Treiman's protocol to rank the occupations by prestige, in order to ensure the respondents had a clear basis by which to rank the occupations (Coxon and Jones, 1978). Coxon and Jones (1978, 1979a, 1979b also present evidence that the ranking of occupations can vary between individuals and groups which may be overlooked when producing average rankings or scales. For example, individual's exhibit a pattern of 'occupational egoism' whereby they give more favourable ratings to their own occupations and occupations similar to their own (Coxon and Jones, 1978).

The SIOPS provides a hierarchical ranking from the least to the most esteemed occupations according to average ratings, and scores are shown to correlate strongly with the socio-economic circumstances of individuals who hold these occupations. The ISEI by contrast calculates scores for occupations based on their average profiles in terms of the income and educational qualifications held by their incumbents (with some adjustment for age profiles). Further examples of social stratification scales include scales based only on the average income of occupations (e.g. Sobek, 1995), career prospects in terms of average wage growth (e.g. Bihagen and Ohls, 2004) or job quality or desirability (e.g. Jencks et al., 1988;Mills, 2007).

Because they are continuous measures, all of the occupation-based social stratification scales lead to numeric values being attached to occupations, but the relative importance of a specific value is only meaningful in comparison with other occupations on the same scale. For example, the CAMSIS scales are usually standardised to a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 15 in each version, but the SIOPS and ISEI measures are scaled in terms of their original measurement, and they typically have a mean of around 40, and a standard deviation of about 14, in a nationally representative sample. CAMSIS scales tend to be specific to particular societies, whereas ISEI and SIOPS are designed to be 'universal' (i.e. the same scores are applicable to the same occupations across different societies). However, socio-economic index and prestige scales can also be calculated 'specifically' within a society, and a 'universal' version of the CAMSIS scale is also available (De Luca et al., 2010). Semi-routine occupations 5 Semi-routine and routine occupations 7

Routine occupations 8

Never worked and long-term unemployed A major attraction of all scale-based socio-economic measures is their relative parsimony in statistical analyses. Scales typically need only a single parameter (i.e. for a linear effect) or two parameters (e.g. for a curvilinear effect) to summarise their influence in a statistical modelling approach (e.g. a standard regression model). In many circumstances, this parsimony offers a major improvement over the inclusion of a categorical social class schema. In statistical analyses where the socio-economic measure may interact with other explanatory variables included in the analysis, the parsimony that emerges from using a scale is further emphasised.

Another important attraction of using stratification scales as occupation-based measures is that their numerical functional form lends them to arithmetic standardisation strategies that may aid comparative evaluations of social change. For instance, in some analyses in stratification research, it is common practice to apply mean-standardisation to scale scores within the country or year of a particular dataset. Subsequent results such as association statistics are expressed in terms of their relative influence in each context. It is well known in stratification research that similar comparisons are much harder to conduct when categorical occupation-based measures are used. This is because there are often substantial changes in the distribution of cases to occupation-based categories over time or between countries.


## 'Microclass' approaches

Grusky and colleagues have provided a critique of traditional social class schemes which has led to their development of the 'microclass' approach Sørensen, 2001, 1998;Grusky and Weeden, 2006). This novel perspective suggests that the categorical approach of class schemes is desirable but that there are many other important divisions than are conventionally demarked in 'big class' approaches such as the EGP schema. 'Big class' schemas generally feature a modest number of social class categories (e.g. nine in EGP). These 'big classes' contain a large number of occupations, for example, there are 88 occupations measured by SOC90 and 60 occupations measured by SOC2000 in the semi-routine occupations category (NS-SEC 6) of the UK NS-SEC. By contrast, the microclass approach defines a much larger number of classes based on institutionalised occupational divisions. Microclass approaches typically feature around 80-100 different classes. Grusky and Sørensen (1998) contend that traditional social class schemes fail to represent detailed social structures within big classes and that the social structure is not adequately represented by unidimensional hierarchical scales.

Details of the microclass scheme can be found in Grusky and Sørensen (2001). Theoretically, microclasses are defined by the social and/or technical institutionalisation of occupations (e.g. plumber, baker and doctor) rather than agglomerate classes (e.g. skilled manual workers or professionals). In practice, however, the empirical operationalisation of microclasses usually results in some groups being more homogeneous and more clearly institutionalised than others. Nevertheless, a major attraction of the microclass approach is that it facilitates the investigation of potentially important substantive differences at the detailed occupational level that may be hidden within the large categories of 'big' social class schemes.

The microclass approach is still comparatively new, but it has been successfully employed to study both social mobility and educational inequalities (Gayle and Lambert, 2011;Jonsson et al., 2009). Despite the appeal of the microclass approach, it has been subject to theoretical critiques (see Erikson et al., 2012). Erikson et al. (2012) argue that the disaggregation of categories mean that patterns linked to microclasses cannot be clearly interpreted within the theoretical framework that is useful to a 'big class' measure. At a practical level, the inclusion of a large multiple category explanatory variable tends to decrease parsimony in standard statistical models. In addition, to ensure adequate statistical power when working with survey data covering the large number of microclass categories, large sample sizes are required. We have stated above that compared with categorical measures, scales better facilitate analyses that include interaction effects, and we, therefore, note that this issue will be amplified with a categorical variable with a large number of categories.


## Selecting an appropriate socio-economic measure

With so many different socio-economic measures available, selecting an appropriate measure may at first appear to be a daunting task, especially for researchers who are not social stratification specialists. We argue that a sensible and defensible solution is to proceed by selecting several different operationalisations of the measures. We stress that operationalising an occupation-based measure is not necessarily a simple case of selecting one superlative measure. 15 Therefore, a good solution is to construct a number of measures and evaluate them through a 'sensitivity analysis'.

We use the term 'sensitivity analysis' to describe the process of investigating the influence which small alterations to a statistical analysis, for example, the use of different operationalisations of an explanatory variable in a statistical model, have on substantive results. In most circumstances, a new sensitivity analysis is probably required for each new analysis. This is because the particular features of an occupation-based measure are likely to be varied in different analyses and, more importantly, cannot be predicted a priori. The process of conducting a sensitivity analysis can seem burdensome and even uninspiring; however, modern software capabilities mean that at least in principle it is now quite easy to re-run analyses using different candidate measures. We contend that undertaking sensitivity analyses is of considerable benefit to social science more generally as it increases rigour and, therefore, adds confidence to results. In the same way, as good analysts put effort into comparing the results of different forms of statistical analysis, similar effort should be put into comparisons of measures based on alternative key social science variables.


## Socio-economic classifications and relationships with demographic structures

An important consideration when analysing occupationbased socio-economic measures is their relationship with other key social science variables (e.g. age, gender and time period). In many analyses, occupation-based measures will show moderate correlations with other key variables. In some extreme cases, if this is ignored, there is a danger that this may result in misleading interpretations (Lambert et al., 2008;Prandy, 1986). Lambert et al. (2008) explored this issue focussing on time periods, countries and gender. They concluded that while temporal changes in the meaning of occupations are slight, gender differences in occupational distributions are so entrenched that they should be considered fundamental to the evaluation of occupationbased measures (see also Gabriel and Schmitz, 2007;Prandy, 1986).

The role of age differences in occupational classifications has received far less consideration than the effects of gender. However, several recently advocated occupationbased measures are known to have strong associations with age (see Kunst and Roskam, 2010). Multidimensional measures of stratification, for example the approach recently developed using data from the Great British Class Survey (Savage et al., 2013), also appear to be strongly linked to age differences.

A suitable analytical response may be to include measures of age and gender as control variables within analysis, also investigating possible interaction effects between the age and gender measures and the occupational classification. In practice, these controls may reduce the parsimony of the model or introduce further challenges to interpretation, so researchers may have to make a careful judgement on the best way to address correlations between occupation-based classifications and age or gender (or other comparable factors).

An alternative approach to providing increased control for these relationships is to use occupation-based measures that have been derived for specific groups. Examples of such measures include the gender-specific CAMSIS scales or the social class scheme for women's jobs recommended by Martin and Roberts (1984). With regard to age patterns, the concept of occupational maturity is also important. An argument expressed by Goldthorpe et al. (1987) is that most adults reach a point of 'occupational maturity', around about the age of 35, after which it is relatively unlikely they will experience major changes in their occupational position (p. 51). Analyses, particularly in the area of social mobility for example, have often been restricted to samples of adults over this age (see Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992). More recently, Tampubolon and Savage (2012) have suggested that the appropriate age of occupational maturity may have risen slightly over time. Secondary survey data analysts using occupation-based socio-economic classifications should be cognisant of the concept of occupational maturity and consider adjusting their analyses whenever it is required.

A further issue when using occupation-based measures relates to how they can be used to represent households rather than individuals. This has been expressed in stratification research as a debate between 'individual', 'dominance' and 'conventional' approaches to social classification (e.g. Erikson, 1984). The individual approach uses the individual's current or last occupation. The 'dominance' approach measures all jobs in the household and typically assigns a measure based on the economically dominant occupation within the household. This is usually the occupation which contributes the most to household circumstances and is generally the one with the longest hours of work. The 'conventional' approach assigns a position on the basis of the occupation of the 'conventional head of the household'. This is most commonly the oldest employed male living within the household.

Another alternative is simply to incorporate the necessary individual variables that relate to occupational characteristics within the household. For example within a statistical model of a child's educational attainment, information on both their mother's and their father's occupation might be included. In practice, in some analyses, such measures may be highly correlated, and suitable thought must, therefore, be put into the precise interpretation of these effects. We advocate that secondary analysts of survey datasets should explore alternative model formulations, thoughtfully consider their effects and then suitably document alternative results.

Finally, an enduring problem when using occupational measures is the complexity of making comparisons over time when the underlying structure of the labour market has changed. In some secondary analyses of large-scale social surveys where occupation-based measures are included as explanatory variables, this will not be an issue due to the restricted time frame of the analysis. In more specialised analyses, for example, in research on inter-and intra-generational mobility, more thought will be required regarding structural changes in the labour market. We suggest that in such analyses, specialist statistical approaches that are directed towards providing increased control to help to combat this problem should be considered (see especially Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992).


## Conclusion

We began this article by stating that despite occupations being central to a broad portfolio of substantive social science research questions, there is no single agreed on way of measuring occupations. An aim of this article has been to improve the awareness that there are a number of varied occupationbased measures which can be used in social research. We have highlighted that there are a series of issues which require thought when including occupation-based measures in any substantive analysis. Most importantly, we strongly advise researchers not to develop their own measures without strong justification or to use existing measures in an un-prescribed or ad hoc manner. Our clear recommendation is that researchers should always use existing occupation-based measures that have agreed on and well-documented standards.

We are careful to emphasise that we are not advocating the uncritical adoption of any one particular socio-economic measure over and above other alternatives. Rather, we are advocating that researchers chose from the portfolio of existing socio-economic measures in an informed and empirically defensible way. As Lambert and Bihagen (2014) conclude, measures are often selected on theoretical grounds, which rest on the claim that a given measure captures a specific aspect of the occupational structure. Recent empirical endeavours which have attempted to provide sensitivity analyses indicate that the theoretical orientations usually ascribed to specific occupation-based measures do not necessarily exert appreciable influence on substantive results (see Gayle and Lambert, 2011;Lambert and Bihagen, 2014). We conclude that rather than adopting a particular socioeconomic measure on theoretical grounds, the secondary data analyst should focus more attention on the analytical benefits of competing measures. These considerations should include operational issues such as the specific form of the socio-economic measures, how to best maximise model parsimony, how to effectively specify models with suitable additional key variables and where appropriate how best to include relevant interaction effects.

We advocate that secondary data analysts evaluate the widest possible number of socio-economic measures and make the results of these explorations available in the form of a 'sensitivity analysis', for example, in a data appendix. In many well-curated large-scale surveys, a number of alternative measures will be deposited with the data. Therefore, sensitivity analyses can easily be undertaken. In datasets where alternative measures are not readily available, we advocate that secondary data analysts place effort into constructing as many alternative measures as possible using detailed standardised occupational unit group codes. The secondary data analyst must always be cautious not to use occupation-based socio-economic measures in an ad hoc manner. An obvious example of this is combining categories of a social class measure in an unstandardised or unprescribed manner. We hope that this article provides succinct information on the foundations of existing occupation-based measures. In addition, we have attempted to provide practical advice that will make a positive contribution to how existing socio-economic measures can be better incorporated into social science analyses.


## Declaration of conflicting interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.


## Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.


## Notes

14. Detailed guidance for the translation of occupational codes and employment status information into CAMSIS measures can be found on the project's website: http://www.camsis.stir. ac.uk/. 15. It has been argued that occupation-based social classifications measure different aspects of social stratification dependent on their conceptual basis (see Bukodi et al., 2011;Chan and Goldthorpe, 2007;Goldthorpe, 2010;Marshall et al., 2005;Rose and Harrison, 2010). If this is the case, a sensitivity analysis will provide an indication of the robustness of social survey analyses across different occupation-based measures. In recent work, Lambert and Bihagen (2014) have demonstrated that, generally, occupation-based social classifications are highly correlated regardless of their theoretical or conceptual basis.

## Table 1 .
1Goldthorpe class scheme(Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992: 38-39).Full version 

Collapsed versions 
Seven-class version 

Five-class version 

Three-class version 

I 
Higher grade professionals, administrators 
and officials; managers in large industrial 
establishments; large proprietors 

I + II 
Service class: professionals, 
administrators and managers; higher 

grade technicians; supervisors of non-
manual workers 

I-III 

White-collar 

workers 

I-III + IVa + b 

Non-manual 

workers 

II 
Lower grade professionals, administrators 
and officials; higher grade technicians; 
managers in small industrial establishments; 
supervisors of non-manual employees 

IIIa 
Routine non-manual employees, higher 
grade (administration and commerce) 

III 
Routine non-manual workers: routine 
non-manual employees in administration 

and commerce; sales personnel; other 
rank-and-file service workers 

IIIb 
Routine non-manual employees, lower 
grade (sales and services) 

IVa 
Small proprietors, artisans and so on, with 
employees 

IVa + b 
Petty bourgeoisie: small properties and 
artisans and so on, with and without 
employees 

IVa + b 
Petty bourgeoisie 

IVb 
Small proprietors, artisans and so on, 
without employees 

IVc 
Farmers and small holders; other self-
employed workers in primary production 

IVc 
Farmers: farmers and small holders and 
other self-employed workers in primary 
production 

IVc + VIIb 

Farm workers 

IVc + VIIb 

Farm 
workers 

V 
Lower grade technicians; supervisors of 
manual workers 

V + VI 
Skilled workers: lower grade technicians; 
supervisors of manual workers, skilled 

manual workers 

V + VI 

Skilled workers 

V + VI + VIIa 

Manual 
workers 

VI 
Skilled manual workers 

VIIa 
Semi-skilled and unskilled manual workers 

(not in agriculture etc.) 

VIIa 
Non-skilled workers: semi-and unskilled 

manual workers (not in agriculture etc.) 

VIIa 

Non-skilled 
workers 

VIIb 
Agricultural workers and other workers in 

primary production 

VIIb 
Agricultural labourers: agricultural and 

other workers in primary production 


## Table 2 .
2National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification (NS-SEC).Eight-class version 
Five-class version 
Three-class version 

1 
Higher managerial, administrative and 
professional occupations 

1 
Higher managerial, administrative 
and professional occupations 

1 
Higher managerial, administrative 
and professional occupations 
1.1 
Large employers and higher managerial and 
administrative occupations 
1.2 
Higher professional occupations 
2 
Lower managerial, administrative and 
professional occupations 
3 
Intermediate occupations 
2 
Intermediate occupations 
2 
Intermediate occupations 
4 
Small employers and own account workers 
3 
Small employers and own account 
workers 
5 
Lower supervisory and technical occupations 
4 
Lower supervisory and technical 
occupations 

3 
Routine and manual occupations 

6 

Author biographiesRoxanne Connelly is an Assistant Professor of Sociology at the University of Warwick. Her main research interests include social stratification, the sociology of education and the analysis of complex social science datasets.Vernon Gayle is a Professor of Sociology and Social Statistics at the University of Edinburgh. His main research interests include social stratification, the sociology of youth and the sociology of education. He also has research interests in migration, subjective wellbeing, populations, fertility, digital social research and the sociology of sport. His methodological interests include the analysis of large-scale and complex social science datasets, statistical modelling, longitudinal data, administrative social science data, missing data methods and social networks.Paul S. Lambert is a Professor of Sociology at the University of Stirling. He is engaged in research on social stratification, social distance, and statistical methodology, and teaches courses on social inequality and social research methods.
have also recently developed a social class model based on Bourdieusian theory. Rosenlund Atkinson, Atkinson and Rosenlund (2014) have also recently developed a social class model based on Bourdieusian theory.

. CASCOT can be accessed here. CASCOT can be accessed here: http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/ fac/soc/ier/software/cascot/.

. The Office for National Statistics coding tool is available here. The Office for National Statistics coding tool is available here: http://www.neighbourhood.statistics.gov.uk/HTMLDocs/ dev3/ONS_SOC_occupation_coding_tool.html.

Although SOC2010 is the most up-to-date UK scheme, some surveys may use coding guidelines that are based on previous schemes such as SOC2000, SOC90 or CO80. Further details of SOC2010 are available here. Although SOC2010 is the most up-to-date UK scheme, some surveys may use coding guidelines that are based on previ- ous schemes such as SOC2000, SOC90 or CO80. Further details of SOC2010 are available here: http://webarchive. nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons. gov.uk/ons/guide-method/classifications/current-standard- classifications/soc2010/soc2010-volume-1-structure-and- descriptions-of-unit-groups/index.html

Exemplary resources are available on the web pages of Prof. Harry Ganzeboom. Exemplary resources are available on the web pages of Prof. Harry Ganzeboom: http://www.harryganzeboom.nl/ismf/ismf. htm.

For a summary of several occupation-based measures, see Lambert and Bihagen. For a summary of several occupation-based measures, see Lambert and Bihagen (2012: 17-19).

Readers might be interested to know that Marxist class schemes generally consider social relations of economic production as the basis on which class groups can be defined, rather than the 'technical' divisions of labour (i.e. occupations; see Wright. Wright, Wright and ChoReaders might be interested to know that Marxist class schemes generally consider social relations of economic production as the basis on which class groups can be defined, rather than the 'technical' divisions of labour (i.e. occupations; see Wright, 1989, 1997, 2005; Wright and Cho, 1992; Wright et al., 1982;

. Martin Wright, Western and WrightWright and PerroneWright and Martin, 1987; Wright and Perrone, 1977; Western and Wright, 1994).

For more details of the Registrar General's Social Class (RGSC) measure, see Rose (1995) and Bland (1979). A critical discussion of the RGSC measure is available in Rose and Pevalin. For more details of the Registrar General's Social Class (RGSC) measure, see Rose (1995) and Bland (1979). A criti- cal discussion of the RGSC measure is available in Rose and Pevalin (2003).

Construct validity is based on the assessment of whether a measure reflects the underlying construct of interest. Cronbach and MeehlConstruct validity is based on the assessment of whether a measure reflects the underlying construct of interest (Cronbach and Meehl, 1955).

Criterion validity is based on the assessment of whether a measure behaves in the expected fashion, given the theory underlying the measure. Carmines and ZellerCriterion validity is based on the assessment of whether a measure behaves in the expected fashion, given the theory underlying the measure (Carmines and Zeller, 1979).

Sorokin (1927) states that 'man's social position is the totality of his relationships towards all groups of a population, within each of them, towards its members. For example. 6For example, Sorokin (1927) states that 'man's social position is the totality of his relationships towards all groups of a popu- lation, within each of them, towards its members' (p. 6).

Mapping the British social space: Towards a Bourdieusian class scheme (working paper). W Atkinson, L Rosenlund, BristolUniversity of BristolAtkinson W and Rosenlund L (2014) Mapping the British social space: Towards a Bourdieusian class scheme (working paper). Bristol: University of Bristol.

Bechhofer F (1969) Occupations. In: Stacey M. LondonComparability in Social ResearchBechhofer F (1969) Occupations. In: Stacey M (ed.) Comparability in Social Research. London: pp. 94-122.

Comparison social stratification schemata. M M Bergman, Joye D ; Camsis, Csp-Ch Goldthorpe, Treiman Isco-88, Wright , Cambridge Studies in Social Research. 10University of CambridgeBergman MM and Joye D (2005) Comparison social stratification schemata: CAMSIS, CSP-CH, Goldthorpe, ISCO-88, Treiman, and Wright. University of Cambridge, Cambridge Studies in Social Research, no 10. Available at: http://www.sociology. cam.ac.uk/research/srg/cs10

Towards a definition of dead-end jobs: Empirically derived measures of dead-end-jobs using Swedish data. E Bihagen, M Ohls, Work, Employment & Society conference. Available at. Bihagen E and Ohls M (2004) Towards a definition of dead-end jobs: Empirically derived measures of dead-end-jobs using Swedish data. In: Work, Employment & Society conference. Available at: http://staff.stir.ac.uk/paul.lambert/SALSR/ BihagenOhls.pdf

The reproduction of social inequality. R Blackburn, K Prandy, Sociology. 313Blackburn R and Prandy K (1997) The reproduction of social ine- quality. Sociology 31(3): 491-509.

Measuring 'social class': A discussion of the registrar-general's classification. R Bland, Sociology. 13Bland R (1979) Measuring 'social class': A discussion of the regis- trar-general's classification. Sociology 13: 283-291.

P Blau, O Duncan, The American Occupational Structure. LondonJohn Wiley & SonsBlau P and Duncan O (1967) The American Occupational Structure. London: John Wiley & Sons.

Bamberg: Faculty of Social and Economic Science, Otto Friedrich University of Bamberg Blumer H (1956) Sociological analysis and the 'variable. H Blossfeld, H Hofmeister, American Sociological Review. 21GLOBALIFE -Life Courses in the Globalization Process (Final report)Blossfeld H and Hofmeister H (2005) GLOBALIFE -Life Courses in the Globalization Process (Final report). Bamberg: Faculty of Social and Economic Science, Otto Friedrich University of Bamberg Blumer H (1956) Sociological analysis and the 'variable'. American Sociological Review 21: 683-690.

. P Bourdieu, London: RoutledgeBourdieu P (1984) Distinction. London: Routledge.

From income to endowments: The difficult task of expanding the income poverty paradigm. F Bourguignon, Poverty and Inequality. Grusky DB and Kanbur RStanford, CAStanford University PressBourguignon F (2006) From income to endowments: The difficult task of expanding the income poverty paradigm. In: Grusky DB and Kanbur R (eds) Poverty and Inequality. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 76-102.

Class descriptors or class relations? Thoughts towards a critique of Savage et al. H Bradley, Sociology. 48Bradley H (2014) Class descriptors or class relations? Thoughts towards a critique of Savage et al. Sociology 48: 429-436.

Social Mobility in Europe. Breen R (ed.Oxford University PressOxfordBreen R (ed.) (2004a) Social Mobility in Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Social Mobility in Europe. R Breen, Oxford University Press OxfordOxfordBreen R (2004b) Social Mobility in Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press Oxford.

The conceptualisation and measurement of occupational hierarchies: A review, a proposal and some illustrative analyses. E Bukodi, S Dex, J H Goldthorpe, Quality & Quantity. 453Bukodi E, Dex S and Goldthorpe JH (2011) The conceptualisation and measurement of occupational hierarchies: A review, a proposal and some illustrative analyses. Quality & Quantity 45(3): 623-639.

Introduction. M Bulmer, J Gibbs, L Hyman, Social Measurement Through Social Surveys: An Applied Approach. Farnham: Ashgate. Bulmer M, Gibbs J and Hyman LBulmer M, Gibbs J and Hyman L (2010) Introduction. In: Bulmer M, Gibbs J and Hyman L (eds) Social Measurement Through Social Surveys: An Applied Approach. Farnham: Ashgate, pp. 1-9.

Key Variables in Social Investigation. London: Routledge and Kegan PaulBurgess R (ed.) (1986) Key Variables in Social Investigation. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Social Mobility and Class Structure. G Carlsson, GleerupsLundCarlsson G (1958) Social Mobility and Class Structure. Lund: Gleerups.

Reliability and Validity Assessment, Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences. E G Carmines, R A Zeller, SAGEThousand Oaks, CACarmines EG and Zeller RA (1979) Reliability and Validity Assessment, Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

The social status scale: Its construction and properties. T W Chan, Social Status and Cultural Consumption. Chan TWCambridgeCambridge University PressChan TW (2010) The social status scale: Its construction and properties. In: Chan TW (ed.) Social Status and Cultural Consumption. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 28-56.

Class and status: The conceptual distinction and its empirical relevance. Chan Tw, J H Goldthorpe, American Sociological Review. 724Chan TW and Goldthorpe JH (2007) Class and status: The con- ceptual distinction and its empirical relevance. American Sociological Review 72(4): 512-532.

Are social classes dying?. Clark Tn, M L Seymour, International Sociology. 6Clark TN and Seymour ML (1991) Are social classes dying? International Sociology 6: 397-410.

The Images of Occupational Prestige. Apm Coxon, C L Jones, MacmillanLondonCoxon APM and Jones CL (1978) The Images of Occupational Prestige. London: Macmillan.

Class and Hierarchy: The Social Meaning of Occupations. Apm Coxon, C L Jones, MacmillanLondonCoxon APM and Jones CL (1979a) Class and Hierarchy: The Social Meaning of Occupations. London: Macmillan.

Measurement and Meaning: Techniques and Methods of Studying Occupational Cognition. Apm Coxon, C L Jones, MacmillanLondonCoxon APM and Jones CL (1979b) Measurement and Meaning: Techniques and Methods of Studying Occupational Cognition. London: Macmillan.

. R Crompton, Class and Stratification. Polity PressCrompton R (2008) Class and Stratification. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Construct validity in psychological tests. L J Cronbach, P E Meehl, Psychological Bulletin. 52Cronbach LJ and Meehl PE (1955) Construct validity in psycho- logical tests. Psychological Bulletin 52: 281-302.

ICAM: The International CAMSIS Scale. D De Luca, Meraviglia , C Ganzeboom, H , International Research Association. Haifa, IsraelResearch Committee 28 conferenceDe Luca D, Meraviglia C and Ganzeboom H (2010) ICAM: The International CAMSIS Scale. In: International Research Association, Research Committee 28 conference, Haifa, Israel, 14 April 2010.

Occupational classification (ISCO-88): Concepts, methods, reliability, validity and cross-national comparability. OECD Labour Market and Social Policy Occasional papers no. P Elias, OECD PublishingParisElias P (1997) Occupational classification (ISCO-88): Concepts, methods, reliability, validity and cross-national compara- bility. OECD Labour Market and Social Policy Occasional papers no. 20. Paris: OECD Publishing.

Skill measurement in official statistics: Recent developments in the UK and the rest of Europe. P Elias, A Mcknight, Oxford Economic Papers. 533Elias P and McKnight A (2001) Skill measurement in official sta- tistics: Recent developments in the UK and the rest of Europe. Oxford Economic Papers 53(3): 508-540.

Computer Assisted Standard Occupational Classification. P Elias, K Halstead, K Prandy, HMSOLondonElias P, Halstead K and Prandy K (1993) Computer Assisted Standard Occupational Classification. London: HMSO.

Social class of men, women and families. R Erikson, Sociology. 184Erikson R (1984) Social class of men, women and families. Sociology 18(4): 500-514.

The Constant Flux: A Study of Class Mobility in Industrial Societies. R Erikson, J H Goldthorpe, Oxford: ClarendonErikson R and Goldthorpe JH (1992) The Constant Flux: A Study of Class Mobility in Industrial Societies. Oxford: Clarendon.

Has social mobility in Britain decreased? Reconciling divergent findings on income and class mobility. R Erikson, J H Goldthorpe, The British Journal of Sociology. 612Erikson R and Goldthorpe JH (2010) Has social mobility in Britain decreased? Reconciling divergent findings on income and class mobility. The British Journal of Sociology 61(2): 211-230.

No way back up from ratcheting down? A critique of the 'microclass' approach to the analysis of social mobility. R Erikson, J H Goldthorpe, M Hällsten, Acta Sociologica. 553Erikson R, Goldthorpe JH and Hällsten M (2012) No way back up from ratcheting down? A critique of the 'microclass' approach to the analysis of social mobility. Acta Sociologica 55(3): 211-229.

Intergenerational class mobility in three western societies. R Erikson, J H Goldthorpe, L Portocarero, British Journal of Sociology. 304Erikson R, Goldthorpe JH and Portocarero L (1979) Intergenerational class mobility in three western societies: England, France, and Sweden. British Journal of Sociology 30(4): 415-441.

Testing the validity of the Goldthorpe class schema. G Evans, European Sociological Review. 83Evans G (1992) Testing the validity of the Goldthorpe class schema. European Sociological Review 8(3): 211-232.

Identifying class structure: A latent class analysis of the criterion-related and construct validity of the Goldthorpe class schema. G Evans, C Mills, European Sociological Review. 141Evans G and Mills C (1998) Identifying class structure: A latent class analysis of the criterion-related and construct validity of the Goldthorpe class schema. European Sociological Review 14(1): 87-106.

In search of the wage-labour/service contract: New evidence on the validity of the Goldthorpe class schema. G Evans, C Mills, British Journal of Sociology. 514Evans G and Mills C (2000) In search of the wage-labour/service contract: New evidence on the validity of the Goldthorpe class schema. British Journal of Sociology 51(4): 641-661.

Gender differences in occupational distributions among workers. P E Gabriel, S Schmitz, Monthly Labor Review. 130Gabriel PE and Schmitz S (2007) Gender differences in occupa- tional distributions among workers. Monthly Labor Review 130: 19-24.

Internationally comparable measures of occupational status for the 1988 international standard classification of occupations. Hbg Ganzeboom, Social Science Research. 25Ganzeboom HBG (1996) Internationally comparable measures of occupational status for the 1988 international standard classification of occupations. Social Science Research 25: 201-239.

A new international socio-economic index (ISEI) of occupational status for the international standard classification of occupation 2008 (ISCO-08) constructed with data from the ISSP. Hbg Ganzeboom, Annual Conference of International Social Survey Programme. LisbonGanzeboom HBG (2010) A new international socio-economic index (ISEI) of occupational status for the international stand- ard classification of occupation 2008 (ISCO-08) constructed with data from the ISSP 2002-2007. In: Annual Conference of International Social Survey Programme, Lisbon, 1 May.

Internationally comparable measures of occupational status for the 1988 international standard classification of occupations. Hbg Ganzeboom, D J Treiman, Social Science Research. 253Ganzeboom HBG and Treiman DJ (1996) Internationally compa- rable measures of occupational status for the 1988 interna- tional standard classification of occupations. Social Science Research 25(3): 201-235.

Advances in Cross-National Comparison: A European Working Book for Demographic and Socio-Economic Variables. Hbg Ganzeboom, D J Treiman, Hoffmeyer-Zlotnik JHP and Wolf CKluwer AcademicNew YorkThree internationally standardised measures for comparative research on occupational statusGanzeboom HBG and Treiman DJ (2003) Three internationally standardised measures for comparative research on occu- pational status. In: Hoffmeyer-Zlotnik JHP and Wolf C (eds) Advances in Cross-National Comparison: A European Working Book for Demographic and Socio-Economic Variables. New York: Kluwer Academic, pp. 159-193.

A standard international socio-economic index of occupational status. Hbg Ganzeboom, De Graaf, P M Treiman, D J , Social Science Research. 211Ganzeboom HBG, De Graaf PM and Treiman DJ (1992) A stand- ard international socio-economic index of occupational status. Social Science Research 21(1): 1-56.

An analysis of detailed parental occupational differences and their effects on children's school attainment in Britain. V Gayle, P Lambert, ISA research committee 28 Spring meeting. ColchesterGayle V and Lambert P (2011) An analysis of detailed parental occupational differences and their effects on children's school attainment in Britain. In: ISA research committee 28 Spring meeting, Colchester, 13-16 April 2011.

The Class Structure of the Advanced Societies. A Giddens, HutchinsonLondonGiddens A (1981) The Class Structure of the Advanced Societies. London: Hutchinson.

D V Glass, Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain. Oxford: ClarendonGlass DV (1954) Social Mobility in Britain. London: Routledge. Goldthorpe JH (1980) Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain. Oxford: Clarendon.

Analysing social inequality: A critique of two recent contributions from economics and epidemiology. J H Goldthorpe, European Sociological Review. 266Goldthorpe JH (2010) Analysing social inequality: A critique of two recent contributions from economics and epidemiology. European Sociological Review 26(6): 731-744.

Back to class and status: Or why a sociological view of social inequality should be reasserted. J H Goldthorpe, Revista Espanola de Investigaciones Sociologicas. 137Goldthorpe JH (2012) Back to class and status: Or why a socio- logical view of social inequality should be reasserted. Revista Espanola de Investigaciones Sociologicas 137: 201-216.

The economic basis of social class. J H Goldthorpe, A Mcknight, Mobility and Inequality: Frontiers of Research in Sociology and Economics. Morgan SL, Grusky DB and Fields GSStanford, CAStanford University PressGoldthorpe JH and McKnight A (2006) The economic basis of social class. In: Morgan SL, Grusky DB and Fields GS (eds) Mobility and Inequality: Frontiers of Research in Sociology and Economics. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 109-136.

The promising future of class analysis: A response to recent critiques. J H Goldthorpe, G Marshall, Sociology. 263Goldthorpe JH and Marshall G (1992) The promising future of class analysis: A response to recent critiques. Sociology 26(3): 381-400.

Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain. J H Goldthorpe, Llewellyn C Payne, C , Oxford University PressOxfordGoldthorpe JH, Llewellyn C and Payne C (1980) Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain. J H Goldthorpe, Llewellyn C Payne, C , Clarendon PressOxfordGoldthorpe JH, Llewellyn C and Payne C (1987) Social Mobility and Class Structure in Modern Britain. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Can class analysis be salvaged?. Grusky Db, J B Sørensen, American Journal of Sociology. 1035Grusky DB and Sørensen JB (1998) Can class analysis be salvaged? American Journal of Sociology 103(5): 1187-1234.

Social Stratification: Class, Race, and Gender in Sociological Perspective. Grusky Db, J B Sørensen, : Grusky DBWestview PressBoulder, COAre there big social classes?Grusky DB and Sørensen JB (2001) Are there big social classes? In: Grusky DB (ed.) Social Stratification: Class, Race, and Gender in Sociological Perspective. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 183-194.

Does the sociological approach to studying social mobility have a future?. Grusky Db, K A Weeden, Mobility and Inequality. Morgan SL, Grusky DB and Fields GSStanford, CAStanford University PressGrusky DB and Weeden KA (2006) Does the sociological approach to studying social mobility have a future? In: Morgan SL, Grusky DB and Fields GS (eds) Mobility and Inequality. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 85-108.

The European Socio-economic Classification (ESeC) User Guide. Harrison E Rose, D , Colchester: University of EssexHarrison E and Rose D (2006) The European Socio-economic Classification (ESeC) User Guide. Colchester: University of Essex.

Socioeconomic indexes for occupations: A review, update, and critique. R M Hauser, J R Warren, Sociological Methodology. 27Hauser RM and Warren JR (1997) Socioeconomic indexes for occupations: A review, update, and critique. Sociological Methodology 27: 177-298.

Mobility and Modernity: Migration in Germany. S Hochstadt, University of Michigan PressAnn Arbor, MIHochstadt S (1999) Mobility and Modernity: Migration in Germany, 1820-1989. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Has class analysis a future? Max Weber and the challenge of liberalism to Gemeinschaftlich accounts of class. R J Holton, B S Turner, Holton RJ and Turner BSMax Weber on Economics and Society. London: RoutledgeHolton RJ and Turner BS (1989) Has class analysis a future? Max Weber and the challenge of liberalism to Gemeinschaftlich accounts of class. In: Holton RJ and Turner BS (eds) Max Weber on Economics and Society. London: Routledge, pp. 160-196.

What have we learned? RC28's contributions to knowledge about social stratification. M Hout, T A Diprete, Research in Social Stratification and Mobility. 24Hout M and DiPrete TA (2006) What have we learned? RC28's con- tributions to knowledge about social stratification. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 24: 1-20.

Symmetry and hierarchy in social mobility: A methodological analysis of the CASMIN model of class mobility. M Hout, R M Hauser, European Sociological Review. 812International Labour Organization (2010) International Standard Classification of OccupationsHout M and Hauser RM (1992) Symmetry and hierarchy in social mobility: A methodological analysis of the CASMIN model of class mobility. European Sociological Review 8: 239-266. International Labour Organization (2010) International Standard Classification of Occupations. Available at: http://www.ilo. org/public/english/bureau/stat/isco/index.htm (accessed 12 December 2013).

Low income dynamics in 1990s Britain. Jarvis S Jenkins, S P , Fiscal Studies. 18Jarvis S and Jenkins SP (1997) Low income dynamics in 1990s Britain. Fiscal Studies 18: 123-143.

What is a good job? A new measure of labor-market success. C Jencks, L Perman, L Rainwater, American Journal of Sociology. 936Jencks C, Perman L and Rainwater L (1988) What is a good job? A new measure of labor-market success. American Journal of Sociology 93(6): 1322-1357.

The measurement of economic inequality. S Jenkins, P Van Kerm, Economic Inequality. Salverda W, Nolvan B and Smeeding TOxfordOxford University PressJenkins S and Van Kerm P (2009) The measurement of economic inequality. In: Salverda W, Nolvan B and Smeeding T (eds) Economic Inequality. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 40-69.

. R Jones, CASCOT (Computer Aided Structured COding Tool). Warwick: University of WarwickJones R (2004) CASCOT (Computer Aided Structured COding Tool). Warwick: University of Warwick.

Microclass mobility: Social reproduction in four countries. J O Jonsson, D B Grusky, Di Carlo, M , American Journal of Sociology. 1144Jonsson JO, Grusky DB, Di Carlo M, et al. (2009) Microclass mobility: Social reproduction in four countries. American Journal of Sociology 114(4): 977-1036.

. P Joyce, Class. Oxford University PressJoyce P (1995) Class. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Are There Classes in the United States?. P W Kingston, Research in Social Stratification and Mobility. Althauser R and Wallace M13JAI PressKingston PW (1994) Are There Classes in the United States? In: Althauser R and Wallace M (eds) Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, vol. 13. Greenwich: JAI Press, pp. 3-41.

(eds) Social Class in Europe: An Introduction to the European Socio-Economic Classification. A E Kunst, A J Roskam, Rose D and Harrison ERoutledgeLondonUsing the ESeC to describe socio-economic inequalities in health in EuropeKunst AE and Roskam AJ (2010) Using the ESeC to describe socio-economic inequalities in health in Europe. In: Rose D and Harrison E (eds) Social Class in Europe: An Introduction to the European Socio-Economic Classification. London: Routledge.

Handling occupational information. P S Lambert, Building Research Capacity. 4Lambert PS (2002) Handling occupational information. Building Research Capacity 4: 9-12.

Stratification research and occupation-based social classifications. P S Lambert, E Bihagen, Social Stratification: Trends and Processes. Farnham: Ashgate. Lambert P, Connelly R, Blackburn RM, et al.Lambert PS and Bihagen E (2012) Stratification research and occu- pation-based social classifications. In: Lambert P, Connelly R, Blackburn RM, et al. (eds) Social Stratification: Trends and Processes. Farnham: Ashgate, pp. 113-28.

Using occupation-based social classifications. P S Lambert, E Bihagen, Work, Employment & Society. 283Lambert PS and Bihagen E (2014) Using occupation-based social classifications. Work, Employment & Society 28(3): 481-494.

P S Lambert, D Griffiths, Seven new social classes? Available at. 12Lambert PS and Griffiths D (2013) Seven new social classes? Available at: http://pullingapartproject.wordpress.com/2013/04/04/seven- new-social-classes/ (accessed 12 December 2013).

The importance of specificity in occupation-based social classifications. P S Lambert, L Tan, K Prandy, International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy. 285-6Lambert PS, Tan L, Prandy K, et al. (2008) The importance of spec- ificity in occupation-based social classifications. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 28(5-6): 179-192.

Conflicts about Class: Debating Inequality in Late Industrialism. D J Lee, B S Turner, LongmanLondonLee DJ and Turner BS (1996) Conflicts about Class: Debating Inequality in Late Industrialism. London: Longman.

Occupational mobility: A structural model. J H Levine, J Spadaro, Social Structures: A Network Approach. Wellman B and Berkowitz SDCambridgeCambridge University PressLevine JH and Spadaro J (1988) Occupational mobility: A struc- tural model. In: Wellman B and Berkowitz SD (eds) Social Structures: A Network Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 452-476.

The Blackcoated Worker: A Study in Class Consciousness. D Lockwood, Allen & UnwinLondonLockwood D (1958) The Blackcoated Worker: A Study in Class Consciousness. London: Allen & Unwin.

Social Class in Modern Britain. G Marshall, H Newby, D Rose, RoutledgeLondonMarshall G, Newby H, Rose D, et al. (2005) Social Class in Modern Britain. London: Routledge.

Women and Employment: A Lifetime Perspective. J Martin, C Roberts, HMSOLondonMartin J and Roberts C (1984) Women and Employment: A Lifetime Perspective. London: HMSO.

Unequal jobs: Job quality and job satisfaction. C Mills, Market, Class and Employment. McGovern P, Hill S, Mills C, et al.OxfordOxford University PressMills C (2007) Unequal jobs: Job quality and job satisfac- tion. In: McGovern P, Hill S, Mills C, et al. (eds) Market, Class and Employment. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 233-282.

The Great British Class Fiasco. C Mills, 12Mills C (2013) The Great British Class Fiasco. Available at: http:// oxfordsociology.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/the-great-british- class-fiasco.html (accessed 12 December 2013).

The Great British Class Fiasco: A comment on. C Mills, Savage et al. Sociology. 48Mills C (2014) The Great British Class Fiasco: A comment on Savage et al. Sociology 48: 437-444.

The Great British Class Survey: Requiescat in pace. C Mills, The Sociological Review. 632Mills C (2015) The Great British Class Survey: Requiescat in pace. The Sociological Review 63(2): 393-399.

Data Management Using Stata: A Practical Handbook. M Mitchell, Standard Occupational Classification. TX; BasingstokePalgrave MacmillanCollege StationMitchell M (2010) Data Management Using Stata: A Practical Handbook. College Station, TX: Stata Press. Office for National Statistics (2010) Standard Occupational Classification 2010. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Is the emperor naked? Some questions on the adequacy of sociological theory in urban and regional research. R E Pahl, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research. 13Pahl RE (1989) Is the emperor naked? Some questions on the ade- quacy of sociological theory in urban and regional research. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 13: 709-720.

The death of class. J Pakulski, M Waters, Theory and Society. 25Pakulski J and Waters M (1996) The death of class. Theory and Society 25: 667-691.

Class Inequality and Political Order: Social Stratification in Capitalist and Communist Societies. F Parkin, PraegerNew YorkParkin F (1971) Class Inequality and Political Order: Social Stratification in Capitalist and Communist Societies. New York: Praeger.

Models of contemporary social class: The Great British Class Survey. G Payne, Methodological Innovations Online. 81Payne G (2013) Models of contemporary social class: The Great British Class Survey. Methodological Innovations Online 8(1): 3-17.

The Nuffield class categorisation. R D Penn, Sociology. 152Penn RD (1981) The Nuffield class categorisation. Sociology 15(2): 265-271.

The National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification: Unifying Official and Sociological Approaches to the Conceptualisation and Measurement of Social Class in the United Kingdom. D Pevalin, D Rose, Presses de Sciences PoParisPevalin D and Rose D (2002) The National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification: Unifying Official and Sociological Approaches to the Conceptualisation and Measurement of Social Class in the United Kingdom. Paris: Presses de Sciences Po.

Understanding Inequalities: Stratification and Difference. L Platt, Polity. Platt L (2011) Understanding Inequalities: Stratification and Difference. Polity.

Similarities of life-style and the occupations of women. K Prandy, Gender and Stratification. Crompton R and Mann MCambridgePolity PressPrandy K (1986) Similarities of life-style and the occupations of women. In: Crompton R and Mann M (eds) Gender and Stratification. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 137-153.

The revised Cambridge scale of occupations. K Prandy, Sociology. 24Prandy K (1990) The revised Cambridge scale of occupations. Sociology 24: 629-655.

The social interaction approach to the measurement and analysis of social stratification. K Prandy, International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy. 19Prandy K (1999) The social interaction approach to the measure- ment and analysis of social stratification. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 19: 204-236.

Race, class and 'The Harmony of Dispositions. N Rollock, Sociology. 48Rollock N (2014) Race, class and 'The Harmony of Dispositions'. Sociology 48: 445-451.

Social research update: Official social classification in the UK. D Rose, 12Rose D (1995) Social research update: Official social classification in the UK. Available at: http://sru.soc.surrey.ac.uk/SRU9.html (accessed 12 December 2013).

The European socio-economic classification: A new social class scheme for comparative European research. Rose D Harrison, E , European Societies. 93Rose D and Harrison E (2007) The European socio-economic classification: A new social class scheme for comparative European research. European Societies 9(3): 459-490.

Social Class in Europe: An Introduction to the European Socio-economic Classification. Rose D and Harrison ERoutledgeLondonRose D and Harrison E (eds) (2010) Social Class in Europe: An Introduction to the European Socio-economic Classification. London: Routledge.

Letters: Little solidarity over the question of social class. The Guardian. Rose D Harrison, E , Rose D and Harrison E (2013) Letters: Little solidarity over the question of social class. The Guardian. Available at: http:// www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/05/solidarity-ques- tion-social-class

Researcher's Guide to the National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification. D Rose, D J Pevalin, Rose D and Pevalin DJLondon: SAGEThe NS-SEC explainedRose D and Pevalin DJ (2003) The NS-SEC explained. In: Rose D and Pevalin DJ (eds) A Researcher's Guide to the National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification. London: SAGE, pp. 28-43.

The National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification: Origins, Development and Use. D Rose, D J Pevalin, O&apos;reilly , K , Palgrave MacmillanBasingstokeRose D, Pevalin DJ and O'Reilly K (2005) The National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification: Origins, Development and Use. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

A new model of social class: Findings from the BBC's Great British Class Survey experiment. M Savage, F Devine, N Cunningham, Sociology. 472Savage M, Devine F, Cunningham N, et al. (2013) A new model of social class: Findings from the BBC's Great British Class Survey experiment. Sociology 47(2): 219-250.

The Moral Significance of Class. A Sayer, Cambridge University PressCambridgeSayer A (2005) The Moral Significance of Class. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational Attainment in Thirteen Countries (Social Inequality Series). Y Shavit, H-P Blossfeld, Westview PressBoulder, COShavit Y and Blossfeld H-P (1993) Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational Attainment in Thirteen Countries (Social Inequality Series). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Classifying practices: Representations, capitals and recognitions. B Skeggs, Class Matters. Mahony P and Zmroczek CLondonTaylor & FrancisSkeggs B (1997) Classifying practices: Representations, capitals and recognitions. In: Mahony P and Zmroczek C (eds) Class Matters. London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 127-143.

The comparability of occupations and the generation of income scores. M Sobek, Historical Methods. 281Sobek M (1995) The comparability of occupations and the generation of income scores. Historical Methods 28(1): 47-51.

Social and Cultural Mobility. P Sorokin, Free PressNew YorkSorokin P (1927) Social and Cultural Mobility. New York: Free Press.

. M Stacey, Comparability in Social Research. HeinemannStacey M (ed.) (1969) Comparability in Social Research. London: Heinemann.

Social Stratification and Occupations. A Stewart, K Prandy, R M Blackburn, Holmes & Meier PublishersNew YorkStewart A, Prandy K and Blackburn RM (1980) Social Stratification and Occupations. New York: Holmes & Meier Publishers.

The genesis of the registrar-general: Social classification of occupations. Srs Szreter, British Journal of Sociology. 354Szreter SRS (1984) The genesis of the registrar-general: Social classification of occupations. British Journal of Sociology 35(4): 522-546.

Skills and wages in European labour markets. M Tahlin, Employment Regimes and the Quality of Work. Gallie DOxfordOxford University PressTahlin M (2007) Skills and wages in European labour markets. In: Gallie D (ed.) Employment Regimes and the Quality of Work. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 35-76.

Intergenerational and intragenerational social mobility in Britain. G Tampubolon, M Savage, Social Stratification: Trends and Processes. Aldershot: Ashgate. Lambert PS, Connelly R, Blackburn M, et al.Tampubolon G and Savage M (2012) Intergenerational and intragenerational social mobility in Britain. In: Lambert PS, Connelly R, Blackburn M, et al. (eds) Social Stratification: Trends and Processes. Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 115-131.

British Household Panel Survey User Manual Volume A: Introduction. M F Taylor, J Brice, N Buck, and AppendicesColchester: University of EssexTechnical ReportTaylor MF, Brice J, Buck N, et al. (2010) British Household Panel Survey User Manual Volume A: Introduction, Technical Report and Appendices. Colchester: University of Essex.

Occupational Prestige in Comparative Perspective. D J Treiman, Academic PressNew YorkTreiman DJ (1977) Occupational Prestige in Comparative Perspective. New York: Academic Press.

Quantitative Data Analysis: Doing Social Research to Test Ideas. D J Treiman, John Wiley & SonsSan Francisco, CATreiman DJ (2009) Quantitative Data Analysis: Doing Social Research to Test Ideas. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons.

The permeability of class boundaries to intergenerational mobility among men in the United States, Canada, Norway, and Sweden. M Western, E O Wright, American Sociological Review. 59Western M and Wright EO (1994) The permeability of class bound- aries to intergenerational mobility among men in the United States, Canada, Norway, and Sweden. American Sociological Review 59: 606-629.

The Debate on Classes. E O Wright, London: Wright EO (1997) Class Counts. CambridgeCambridge University PressWright EO (1989) The Debate on Classes. Verso, London: Wright EO (1997) Class Counts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Approaches to Class Analysis. E O Wright, Cambridge University PressCambridgeWright EO (2005) Approaches to Class Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

The relative permeability of class boundaries to cross-class friendships: A comparative study of the United States, Canada, Sweden, and Norway. Wright Eo, D Cho, American Sociological Review. 57Wright EO and Cho D (1992) The relative permeability of class boundaries to cross-class friendships: A comparative study of the United States, Canada, Sweden, and Norway. American Sociological Review 57: 85-102.

The transformation of the American Class Structure. Wright Eo, B Martin, American Sociological Review. 93Wright EO and Martin B (1987) The transformation of the American Class Structure, 1960-1980. American Sociological Review 93: 1-29.

Marxist class categories and income inequality. Wright Eo, L Perrone, American Sociological Review. Wright EO and Perrone L (1977) Marxist class categories and income inequality. American Sociological Review 32-55.

The American Class Structure. E O Wright, C Costello, D Hachen, American Sociological Review. 47Wright EO, Costello C, Hachen D, et al. (1982) The American Class Structure. American Sociological Review 47: 709-726.

Like my father before me: Intergenerational occupational status transfer during industrialization (Zeeland. R L Zijdeman, Continuity and Change. 2403Zijdeman RL (2009) Like my father before me: Intergenerational occupational status transfer during industrialization (Zeeland, 1811-1915). Continuity and Change 24(03): 455-486.