# Effect of Proxy Responses on Tobacco Use Surveys in Thailand, 2011

CorpusID: 53093537
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ff0ff694da89489356f7d50bb38c618f9f25d46](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ff0ff694da89489356f7d50bb38c618f9f25d46)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Effect of Proxy Responses on Tobacco Use Surveys in Thailand, 2011
OCTOBER 2018

PhDJason Hsia 
MSHataichanok Puckcharern 
PhDMachell Town 
Effect of Proxy Responses on Tobacco Use Surveys in Thailand, 2011
OCTOBER 201810.5888/pcd15.180158PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY Volume 15, E129 RESEARCH BRIEF Suggested citation for this article: Hsia J, Puckcharern H, Town M. Effect of Proxy Responses on Tobacco Use Surveys in Thailand, 2011. Prev Chronic Dis 2018;15:180158. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.5888/pcd15.180158. PEER REVIEWED The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions. www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2018/18_0158.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 1
Proxy responses are often allowed in household tobacco surveys when all household members are included in a sample. To assess the effect of proxy responses on prevalence estimates, we compared 2 surveys in 2011 that gauged tobacco use in Thailand: the Cigarette Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey (SADS) and the Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS). Both surveys had similar nonsampling errors and design, but SADS allowed proxy responses and GATS did not. When proxy responses were included in SADS, the prevalence estimate was 10% lower in GATS for men (41.69% in GATS vs 46.55% in SADS) and 18% lower in GATS for women (2.14% in GATS vs 2.61% in SADS). Eliminating proxy responses is recommended to increase accuracy of tobacco-use surveillance.

## Objective

Household surveys with equal selection probability design often use selection probability proportional to size in the first few stages and simple random sampling to select a fixed household number in the last stage; then they interview all members of selected households. Although this design may have smaller sampling errors than unequal probability selection designs have, proxy responses introduce nonsampling errors, because of the varying availability of household members for interviews. The objective of this study was to assess the effect of proxy responses on estimating the prevalence of tobacco use in Thailand.


## Methods

We used data from 2 tobacco-use surveys in Thailand that differed in proxy use but had similar sample design and other nonsampling errors (Appendix). The Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey (SADS) has been used for surveillance of tobacco and alcohol use in Thailand since 1991 (1). The Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS) was first used for tobacco surveillance in 2009 (2). SADS and GATS target noninstitutionalized persons (aged ≥11 in SADS and ≥15 in GATS). Both surveys categorize geography into 5 regions (Bangkok, Central, North, Northeast, or South) and 2 levels of urbanicity (urban or rural). All primary sampling units (PSUs) were enumeration areas designated by the National Statistical Office of Thailand (1,2). The number of PSUs was proportionally allocated to each stratum of geography and urbanicity. For firststage SADS, 4,830 PSUs were selected by using selection probability proportional to the number of households. The second stage randomly chose an equal number of households from previously selected PSUs. All eligible people in the randomly selected household were interviewed; 1 present adult household member answered questions for unavailable members. In the first stage of GATS sampling, 1,088 PSUs were selected by using the same sampling method that SADS used. The second stage of sampling in GATS was also the same as in SADS. At the third stage, only 1 randomly selected member from all eligible household members was interviewed. The GATS survey protocol requires that at least 3 attempts are made to visit the selected household member; proxy responses are prohibited. Our comparison was based on 177,350 persons in SADS and 21,488 persons in GATS (all aged ≥15).

Thailand's National Statistical Office conducted the surveys with similar interviewers, supervisors, interview techniques, response rates, and quality of fieldwork. Using the most recent survey data available (2011), we assessed a key survey variable, current smoking, for proxy responses. In Thailand, more than 95% of tobacco users are cigarette smokers; the prevalence of tobacco use is low among women. We calculated and compared current smoking prevalence and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for SADS (with and without proxy responses) and GATS.

The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions.


## Results

The response rate was 97.2% for SADS and 97.7% for GATS at the household level and 98.5% for GATS at the individual level. The proxy rate was 42.6% for SADS. Of proxy responses, 81.7% were provided by participants aged 45 or older and 67.9% were provided by women.

The prevalence of current smoking decreased for both men and women from 1991 to 2004 and then stayed flat thereafter in SADS ( Figure). Estimates in SADS were lower than estimates in GATS in 2009 and 2011. In a comparison of GATS and SADS in 2011, when proxy responses were included in SADS, the prevalence estimate was 10% lower in GATS for men (41.69% vs 46.55%) and 18% lower in GATS for women (2.14% vs 2.61% ) (Table). The percentage-point differences between SADS and GATS were −4.87 (95% CI, −6.60 to −3.13; P < .001) for men and −0.47 (95% CI, −0.93 to −0.02; P = .04) for women. When proxy responses in SADS were excluded, the estimated prevalence in SADS increased to 45.27% for men and 2.86% for women in 2011, not significantly different from the estimates in GATS. We found similar results by age, residence, region, and income for all subgroups of men and most subgroups of women (Table). We found a different pattern for some subgroups of women. For example, among women aged 15 to 24, the prevalence increased when we excluded proxy responses in SADS, but the difference between the estimate in SADS (1.33%) was significantly different from the estimate in GATS (0.43%). With few exceptions, the estimated prevalence was higher in SADS after excluding proxy responses, and these estimates were closer to GATS estimates for men and women overall and among subgroups. 


## Discussion

SADS and GATS in Thailand in 2011 provided a rare opportunity to compare prevalence estimates. Whereas SADS used equal probability sample and proxy responses, GATS used unequal probability sample and no proxy responses. The same authoritative statistical agency conducted both surveys, using similar interviewers, supervisors, and interview techniques and following the same field-operation protocol. Nonsampling errors other than those due to proxy responses, therefore, can be assumed to be similar to each other or at least not a major cause of nonsampling error in the comparison. When proxy responses were removed and prevalence estimates in SADS were recalculated, the estimates increased and were much closer to those in GATS, indicating that proxy reports generate lower estimates of smoking rates than self-reported data. Previous studies reported similar findings (3,4).

This study has several limitations. First, the study was conducted in Thailand, and the extent to which stigma about smoking may affect proxy responses is not known. For example, some family members may wish to hide another family member's smoking behavior. Some proxy validation studies in the United States did not find this effect (5,6); in the United States, family members usually do not hide the smoking behavior of other family members. Second, small numbers of female smokers might have resulted in unstable estimates among subgroups of women in GATS, these unstable estimates might have affected the subgroup analysis among women, such as those aged 15 to 24. Third, older household members possibly acted as proxies for the more-often un-PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE available younger members. In the past decade, Thailand has developed a greater social tolerance for younger female smokers (1), and thus, household proxies may have had less of an effect on the reporting of stigmatized behaviors than they did previously (3).

The China Health Service Survey had similar findings in its multistage cluster sampling design, which permitted household proxies. The prevalence of current smoking among men in the China Health Service Survey was lower (46.5%) than the prevalence in a survey that had a similar design but prohibited household proxies (52.1%) (7,8). In summary, the results of our research in Thailand suggest that proxy responses generally lead to an underestimation of the prevalence of current smokers.     

## Figure .
.Prevalence of current smoking estimated from SADS and GATS in Thailand, 2011. No data were available from GATS from 1991 through 2007. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Abbreviations: GATS, Global Adults Tobacco Survey (2); SADS, Cigarette Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey (1).


expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions.


. Smoking status by proxy and self report: rate of agreement in different ethnic groups. KM, Lynn WR, Giffen CA. Effect of proxy-reported smoking status on population estimates of smoking prevalence. Am J Epidemiol 1997;145expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions.


Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval; GATS, Global Adults Tobacco Survey (2); SADS, Cigarette Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey (1). a z Test used to determine whether estimated proportion from a is the same as from b. b z Test used to determine whether estimated proportion from c is the same as from b.(continued on next page) expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions.

## Table Table .
TableEstimated Prevalence of Current Smoking From 2011 SADS, Including and Excluding Proxy Responses, and 2011 GATS, by Demographic CharacteristicsVariable 
SADS Including Proxy (a) GATS (b) SADS Excluding Proxy (c) 

a − b, Percentage Point (95% CI) 
[P Value 
a ] 
c − b, Percentage Point (95% CI) 
[P Value 
b ] 

Men 

All 
41.69 
46.55 
45.27 
−4.87 (−6.60 to −3.13) [<.001] 
−1.29 (−3.02 to 0.45) [.15] 

Age 

15-24 
31.76 
42.00 
42.76 
−10.24 (−13.66 to −6.82) [<.001] 
0.76 (−2.67 to 4.19) [.66] 

25-44 
47.59 
50.50 
49.74 
−2.90 (−5.69 to −0.11) [.04] 
−0.76 (−3.55 to 2.03) [.59] 

45-59 
45.11 
48.74 
46.73 
−3.63 (−7.10 to −0.16) [.04] 
−2.01 (−5.48 to 1.46) [.26] 

≥60 
32.61 
38.30 
34.43 
−5.68 (−9.05 to −2.31) [.001] 
−3.86 (−7.24 to −0.49) [.02] 

Residence 

Urban 
34.67 
39.63 
37.79 
−4.96 (−7.36 to −2.56) [<.001] 
−1.84 (−4.25 to 0.56) [.13] 

Rural 
45.23 
50.08 
49.36 
−4.85 (−7.30 to −2.39) [<.001] 
−0.72 (−3.17 to 1.74) [.57] 

Region 

Bangkok 
32.06 
36.51 
37.45 
−4.45 (−8.18 to −0.72) [.02] 
0.95 (−2.79 to 4.69) [.62] 

Central 
37.38 
44.54 
41.69 
−7.16 (−11.02 to −3.31) [<.001] 
−2.86 (−6.71 to 1.00) [.15 

North 
37.04 
39.35 
40.66 
−2.32 (−5.34 to 0.71) [.13] 
1.31 (−1.75 to 4.37) [.40] 

Northeast 
46.50 
49.70 
50.22 
−3.20 (−6.33 to −0.07) [.045] 
0.52 (−2.61 to 3.65) [.74] 

South 
50.52 
59.24 
53.66 
−8.72 (−13.81 to −3.63) [.001] 
−5.58 (−10.66 to −0.49) [.03] 

Income 

Lowest third 
39.77 
47.83 
45.56 
−8.06 (−11.06 to −5.06) [<.001] 
−2.27 (−5.28 to 0.73) [.14] 

Middle third 
48.94 
51.54 
50.72 
−2.59 (−5.10 to −0.08) [.04] 
−0.81 (−3.33 to 1.71) [.53] 

Highest third 
34.91 
40.03 
37.30 
−5.12 (−8.07 to −2.18) [.001] 
−2.73 (−5.68 to 0.21) [.07] 

Women 

All 
2.14 
2.61 
2.86 
−0.47 (−0.93 to −0.02) [.04] 
0.25 (−0.22 to 0.72) [.30] 

Age 

15-24 
0.76 
0.43 
1.33 
0.33 (0.04 to 0.62) [.03] 
0.90 (0.58 to 1.22) [<.001] 

25-44 
1.71 
2.34 
2.15 
−0.63 (−1.26 to −0.01) [.05] 
−0.19 (−0.84 to 0.46) [.56] 

45-59 
2.95 
3.71 
3.48 
−0.76 (−1.47 to −0.05) [.06] 
−0.23 (−1.04 to 0.58) [.58] 

≥60 
3.42 
3.90 
4.16 
−0.48 (−0.94 to −0.02) [.25] 
0.26 (−0.58 to 1.10) [.54] 

Residence 

Urban 
1.75 
2.98 
2.30 
−1.22 (−1.88 to −0.57) [<.001] 
−0.67 (−1.34 to 0.01) [.048] 

Rural 
2.35 
2.41 
3.16 
−0.06 (−0.52 to 0.39) [.79] 
0.75 (−0.07 to 1.23) [.002] 

Region 

Bangkok 
1.57 
2.80 
2.25 
−1.23 (−1.99 to −0.48) [.001] 
−0.55 (−1.33 to 0.24) [.17] 

Central 
2.24 
3.69 
3.06 
−1.45 (−2.32 to −0.58) [.001] 
−0.63 (−1.53 to 0.26) [.17] 

North 
4.68 
4.71 
5.90 
−0.03 (−1.03 to 0.95) [.96] 
1.19 (−0.06 to 2.21) [.02] 



## Table .
.Estimated Prevalence of Current Smoking From 2011 SADS, Including and Excluding Proxy Responses, and 2011 GATS, by Demographic Characteristics Appendix. Survey Questions, Sample Design, and Survey Operation of 2011 Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey and 2011 Global Adults Tobacco Survey in Thailand Current smoking Do you currently smoke tobacco on a daily basis, less than daily, or not at all? Do you currently smoke tobacco on a daily basis, less than daily, or not at all? (daily, less than daily, not at all, don't know) Interviewer composition Designated NSO's employees Designated NSO's employees Interviewer training Field interviewers/supervisors were divided into 15 training sessions. NSO provided trainings. Field interviewers/supervisors were divided into 2 training sessions. NSO provided trainings. Inverse of product of selection probability of 3-stage sampling Adjustment for nonresponse Inverse response rate within primary sampling unit Inverse response rate within primary sampling unit × adjustment factor derived from weighting class method by region, urbanicity, age, and sex Poststratification adjustment Weighting class method by region, urbanicity, age, and sex Weighting class method by region, urbanicity, age, and sex The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions.Variable 
SADS Including Proxy (a) GATS (b) SADS Excluding Proxy (c) 

a − b, Percentage Point (95% CI) 
[P Value 
a ] 
c − b, Percentage Point (95% CI) 
[P Value 
b ] 

Northeast 
1.08 
1.04 
1.50 
0.04 (−0.44 to 0.52) [.88] 
0.45 (−0.04 to 0.94) [.07] 

South 
1.54 
1.50 
1.89 
0.04 (−0.53 to 0.62) [.89] 
0.39 (−0.19 to 0.97) [.19] 

Income 

Lowest third 
2.32 
3.10 
3.18 
−0.78 (−1.40 to −0.15) [.01] 
0.07 (−0.57 to 0.72) [.82] 

Middle third 
2.22 
2.65 
2.82 
−0.42 (−0.83 to −0.01) [.04] 
0.17 (−0.42 to 0.76) [.58] 

Highest third 
1.24 
1.75 
1.74 
−0.50 (−0.97 to −0.03) [.04] 
−0.01 (−0.49 to 0.48) [.98] 

Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval; GATS, Global Adults Tobacco Survey (2); SADS, Cigarette Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey (1). 
a z Test used to determine whether estimated proportion from a is the same as from b. 
b z Test used to determine whether estimated proportion from c is the same as from b. 

PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE 

VOLUME 15, E129 

PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY 

OCTOBER 2018 

The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 

the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions. 

www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2018/18_0158.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Survey Questions 
2011 Smoking and Alcohol Drinking Survey 
2011 Global Adults Tobacco Survey 

Questions before current smoking question 
Demographic questions 
Demographic questions 

Question after current smoking question 
Have you smoked tobacco daily in the past? (yes, no, 
don't know, refused) 

Have you smoked tobacco daily in the past?(yes, no, 
don't know, refused) 

Sample Design 
2-Stage stratified cluster sampling 
3-Stage stratified cluster sampling 

Strata 
Bangkok and 4 regions by urbanicity 
Bangkok and 4 regions by urbanicity 

Primary sampling units 
Enumeration areas defined by the National Statistical 
Office (NSO) 

Enumeration areas defined by NSO 

Sampling units at stage 2 
Households 
Households 

Eligible persons 
Persons aged ≥11 years living in primary residence 
Persons aged ≥15 years living in primary residence 

Sampling units at stage 3 
Not applicable 
Randomly selected 1 person from the previously 
selected household 

Survey operation 

Field work dates 
March-May 2011 
September-November 2011 

Response rate at household level 
97.2% 
97.7% 

Response rate at individual level 
Not applicable 
98.5% 

Proxy rate 
42.6% 
Proxy was not allowed 

Weight computation 

Base weight 
Inverse of product of selection probability of 2-stage 
sampling 

Variance Estimation 
Linearization method using SAS 
Linearization method using SAS 

PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE 

VOLUME 15, E129 

PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY 

OCTOBER 2018 


www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2018/18_0158.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
AcknowledgmentsWe did not have financial support for this project, nor do we have any conflicts of interest to disclose. No copyrighted materials or survey/instruments/tools were used. We thank the peer reviewers for their valuable comments.
Thailand tobacco control country profile. Bangkok (TH): Tobacco Control Research and Knowledge Management Center. L Termsirikulchai, S Benjakul, M Kengganpanich, N Theskayan, S Nakju, Mahidol UniversityTermsirikulchai L, Benjakul S, Kengganpanich M, Theskayan N, Nakju S. Thailand tobacco control country profile. Bangkok (TH): Tobacco Control Research and Knowledge Management Center, Mahidol University; 2008. http://service.nso.go.th/nso/ nsopublish/pubs/pubsfiles/sumSmoke54.pdf. Accessed August 2, 2018.

World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia. Global adult tobacco survey: Thailand report. World Health Organization. Global adult tobacco survey: Thailand report, 2011. World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia; 2011. http://www.searo.who.int/ tobacco/surveillance/Global_Adult_Tobacco_Survey_ Thailand_Report_2011.pdf. Accessed July 31, 2018.

The reporting of stigmatizing health conditions: a comparison of proxy and selfreporting. M L Berk, C M Horgan, S M Meyers, J Econ Soc Meas. 143Berk ML, Horgan CM, Meyers SM. The reporting of stigmatizing health conditions: a comparison of proxy and self- reporting. J Econ Soc Meas 1986;14(3):197-205.

Estimates of population smoking prevalence: self-vs proxy reports of smoking status. E A Gilpin, J P Pierce, S W Cavin, C C Berry, N J Evans, M Johnson, Am J Public Health. 8410Gilpin EA, Pierce JP, Cavin SW, Berry CC, Evans NJ, Johnson M, et al. Estimates of population smoking prevalence: self-vs proxy reports of smoking status. Am J Public Health 1994; 84(10):1576-9.