# Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease A Review

CorpusID: 53237207
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b16a052cbc3d7ab6257491519a22b69696436a7c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b16a052cbc3d7ab6257491519a22b69696436a7c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease A Review


MD;Anamarija M Perry 
Department of Pathology
University of Michigan
5230 Medical Sciences Bldg 1, 1301 Catherine St48109 (Ann ArborMI

MDSarah M Choi 
Department of Pathology
University of Michigan
5230 Medical Sciences Bldg 1, 1301 Catherine St48109 (Ann ArborMI

Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease A Review
10.5858/arpa.2018-0219-RA)


K ikuchi-Fujimoto disease (KFD), also known as histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis, is a relatively rare condition characterized by subacute necrotizing regional lymphadenopathy. This is a benign and self-limited disease, frequently associated with mild fever, and occasionally with other systemic symptoms. [1][2][3] The disease was first described in Asia by Kikuchi 4 and Fujimoto et al 5 in 1972, and afterwards in the United States 6,7 and Europe. 8 Despite many studies in the literature, the etiology and pathogenesis of KFD remain unknown. Clinicians, as well as many pathologists, are unfamiliar with this entity, which can pose significant diagnostic challenges as it can easily be mistaken for other benign lymphadenopathies or infec-tious lymphadenitis as well as lymphomas. Herein, we provide a review of clinical and histopathologic aspects of this entity.


## EPIDEMIOLOGY

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease was first described 4,5 in Japanese patients and has a higher prevalence among Asians. [1][2][3] Pileri et al 8 described the first case series outside of Asia, with a predominantly European cohort. Since then, KFD has been reported worldwide in a variety of ethnic backgrounds. 1 It usually affects young adults (younger than 40 years), but it can occur in any age group. [1][2][3] Most reports show female predominance 1 ; however, some studies from Asian countries suggest that the male to female ratio is closer to 1:1. 9,10 CLINICAL FEATURES Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is self-limiting with acute to subacute course, evolving during several weeks. Patients most commonly present with posterior cervical lymphadenopathy (60%-90% of cases), frequently with concomitant involvement of axillary and/or supraclavicular lymph nodes. Affected lymph nodes are tender and painful. Generalized lymphadenopathy is rarely reported (1%-22% of cases). Lymphadenopathy is most commonly associated with fever (35%-77% of cases); other infrequent symptoms include weight loss, nausea and vomiting, weakness, headache, arthralgia, night sweats, upper respiratory symptoms, and sore throat. 3 Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly rarely occur (less than 5% of cases). 11 The disease uncommonly occurs in extranodal locations, most frequently in the skin, and occasionally in bone marrow and liver. 1,[12][13][14] Cutaneous involvement mostly affects the face and upper body, manifesting as rashes, nodules, erythematous papules, indurated erythematous lesions, erythema multiforme, and erythematous maculopapular lesions. [1][2][3]11,15,16 Most commonly patients have normal laboratory findings. In some cases, there is mild anemia, mildly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and elevated C-reactive protein. Other findings include leukopenia (especially granulocytopenia; 20%-58% of cases) and leukocytosis (2%-5% of cases), with atypical lymphocytes in the peripheral blood reported in up to one-third of patients. Other laboratory abnormalities seen in some of these patients include elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase and elevated aminotransferases. 3 


## ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Many studies in the literature have tried to elucidate the cause of KFD, but at present it remains unclear. The 2 most common theories explored in the literature are infectious and autoimmune. The clinical picture of KFD is similar to that of viral infection, and, like viral infection, the disease does not respond to antibiotics. Moreover, histopathologic features (ie, paracortical expansion, immunoblastic proliferation, necrosis in paracortex, predominance of T cells, and circulating atypical/reactive lymphocytes in the peripheral blood) are similar to those seen in viral infections. 1 It has been postulated that KFD represents an exuberant T-cell-mediated immune response to a variety of antigens in genetically susceptible people. 1 Compared with the general population, patients with KFD more frequently have particular human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II alleles, specifically HLA-DPA1 and HLA-DPB1. These alleles are more prevalent in Asians and are extremely rare or absent in whites, which may account for the more common occurrence of this entity among Asian people. 19 Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease has also been described in association with a number of systemic diseases, most commonly autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Wegener granulomatosis, Sjögren syndrome, Graves disease, Still disease, etc. 3,20 The cytoplasm of stimulated lymphocytes and histiocytes of KFD patients contains tubular reticular structures that, by electron microscopy, bear similarity to structures that have been described in the endothelial cells and lymphocytes of patients with SLE and other autoimmune disorders. 21 Imamura et al 21 hypothesized that KFD may represent a self-limited, SLE-like autoimmune disorder triggered by viruses and other infectious agents. However, in contrast to SLE patients, serologic tests (such as rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and anti-double-strand DNA antibodies) have been consistently negative in KFD patients. [1][2][3]7 Despite negative serology in KFD, there is a degree of clinical and morphologic overlap between KFD and SLE that requires particular consideration. In a study by Dumas et al 22 that included 91 KFD patients, 11 patients (12%) had a history of SLE. These cases likely represent lupus lymphadenitis, as the 2 disorders are histologically indistinguishable in some cases.

A number of case reports have described KFD in association with different pathologic conditions (eg, meningitis, 23 status epilepticus, 24 interstitial lung diseases, 25 myocarditis, 26 acute renal failure, 27 hemophagocytic syndrome, 28 and sickle cell anemia 29 ) and malignancies (breast, 30 stomach, 31 and oral cavity 32 ), as well as in patients with pacemakers 3 and breast implants, 33 suggesting that these foreign bodies might represent triggers for the development of disease.


## HISTOPATHOLOGIC FEATURES AND

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY Histologically, lymph nodes usually have partially preserved architecture with follicular hyperplasia. The paracortex is expanded and shows patchy, well-circumscribed areas of necrosis. Necrotic foci show abundant karyorrhectic nuclear debris and a large accumulation of histiocytes at the edge of necrosis. Occasionally, there are only isolated apoptotic cells scattered throughout large sheets of histiocytes, admixed with cellular debris and nuclear dust. In the necrotic foci there are frequent so-called crescentic histiocytes. Among the histiocytes, there are scattered small lymphocytes, activated T cells, and some plasma cells. Neutrophils and eosinophils are conspicuously absent, an important clue in diagnosis of this entity (Figure 1, A through C). At the edge of necrotic areas, there are clusters of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, as well as immunoblasts. Moreover, thrombosed vessels can frequently be seen at the periphery of necrosis. 34,35 Three evolving histologic patterns of KFD have been proposed: proliferative, necrotizing, and xanthomatous. The initial proliferative pattern is characterized by an expanded paracortex with sheets of histiocytes and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, admixed with small lymphocytes and karyorrhectic nuclear debris. The necrotic phase is characterized by the presence of necrosis. In the xanthomatous phase, there is predominance of foamy histiocytes in the lesions, regardless of presence or absence of necrosis 9 (Figure 1, D).

The diagnosis of Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is made predominantly on basis of morphologic evaluation. As in many benign and malignant lymph node disorders, lowpower pattern recognition is critical in this disease. Immunohistochemical staining is sometimes useful, especially in cases with limited tissue (ie, core biopsies or small biopsies), where it is often difficult to appreciate a pattern of lymph node involvement. The histiocytes in KFD are positive for lysozyme, myeloperoxidase, CD68, CD163, and CD4. The lymphocytes in the lesions are mostly CD3positive T cells demonstrating a predominance of CD8  


## DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of KFD includes infectious lymphadenitis of different etiologies, autoimmune lymphadenopathy (primarily SLE lymphadenopathy), and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The histologic differential diagnosis of KFD is given in the Table. Multiple infectious agents can cause necrotizing lymphadenitis, which may mimic KFD. In necrotizing lymphadenitis of tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, leprosy, and cat-scratch disease, there is proliferation of epithelioid histiocytes with granuloma formation, as well as scattered giant cells. In cases of syphilitic necrotizing lymphadenitis, there is usually prominent perivascular plasma cell infiltration. In lymphadenitis caused by Y enterocolitica, there are prominent eosinophils, whereas in bacterial infections there are usually abundant neutrophils. Moreover, neutrophils and viral inclusions are seen in cases of herpes simplex necrotizing lymphadenitis. Special stains and immunohistochemical stains are sometimes helpful in identifying the infectious agents. Correlation with serologic and molecular studies is usually necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Occasionally, infectious mononucleosis lymphadenitis can enter the differential diagnosis of KFD. Infectious mononucleosis usually shows marked follicular hyperplasia and paracortical expansion with an increase in immunoblasts and scattered Hodgkin-and Reed-Sternberg-like cells. Single-cell apoptosis and foci of necrosis are also commonly seen. Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA in situ hybridization is usually strongly and diffusely positive and resolves the diagnostic dilemma. 34 Systemic lupus erythematosus lymphadenopathy is the most difficult differential diagnosis to resolve, and in some cases it is histologically and immunohistochemically indistinguishable from KFD. Systemic lupus erythematosus lymphadenopathy shows focal or confluent paracortical necrosis, surrounded by lipid-laden histiocytes. Within the necrotic foci, there are numerous apoptotic cells. Similarly to KFD, there is an absence of neutrophils and eosinophils. In a subset of cases, hematoxylin bodies are seen, composed of aggregates of nuclear DNA, polysaccharides, and immunoglobulin. Hematoxylin bodies are the most specific histologic feature of SLE lymphadenopathy. Moreover, blood vessels showing Azzopardi phenomenon (hematoxylinstaining nuclear material) can sometimes be seen in the areas of necrosis (Figure 3, A through D). Given the   histologic similarity of SLE lymphadenopathy to KFD, it is prudent to always put SLE in the differential diagnosis to alert clinicians that clinical and laboratory correlation is needed to distinguish between these 2 entities. 1-3, 34 Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease can easily be confused with lymphoma. Proliferation of immunoblasts and plasmacytoid dendritic cells at the edges of necrotic foci, as well as obliteration of sinuses, can mimic involvement by both Tcell and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 36 Immunohistochemical stains are helpful in challenging cases. B-cell lymphomas are easy to eliminate because of very few B cells in the involved areas. T-cell lymphomas can pose a more difficult diagnostic challenge because most lymphoid cells in the lesions are T cells. Positivity of histiocytes for myeloperoxidase is a helpful clue. However, positivity for myeloperoxidase can sometimes be misinterpreted as myeloid sarcoma. In KFD, no immunohistochemical stain is a substitute for a good-sized, well-fixed hematoxylin and eosin-stained section.

Diagnosis of KFD is especially difficult in small or needle-core biopsies, where the pattern of involvement cannot be well appreciated. Figure 4 shows a case of KFD from our practice diagnosed on a needle core biopsy that nicely illustrates challenges and pitfalls of this diagnosis on a small specimen. Several small needle core biopsies of a cervical lymph node were completely effaced by an atypical lymphohistiocytic infiltrate that on high power showed sheets of large atypical cells with irregular nuclei, focally prominent nucleoli, and moderately abundant cytoplasm. In addition, frequent apoptotic bodies as well as a larger area of necrosis were present (Figure 4, A through C). Differential diagnosis in a case like this is certainly large cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, both B and T cell. Immunohistochemical staining was extremely useful in clarifying diagnosis of KFD, as most cells were CD68-positive histiocytes that coexpressed myeloperoxidase. In addition, clusters of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, highlighted by CD123, were seen ( Figure 4, D through F). The majority of small lymphocytes in the background were CD8-positive T cells, whereas B cells were very limited. However, in many instances diagnosis of KFD cannot be made with certainty on a small specimen; when in doubt, a larger biopsy should be requested. A generous incisional or excisional biopsy is an optimal specimen for diagnosis of KFD.


## TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is a self-limited disease that usually resolves within a few months. It has a low recurrence rate of 3% to 4%, 1-3 and only several fatal cases have been reported. 26,37,38 Treatment aims at relieving symptoms (rest, analgesics, and antipyretics), as there is no specific therapy for these patients. Patients with relapsing disease or a more severe clinical course might benefit from corticosteroid therapy 2 .


## CONCLUSIONS

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease poses significant diagnostic challenges to pathologists and clinicians. Pathologists should be familiar with this entity to avoid a misdiagnosis of lymphoma, which could lead to unnecessary and aggressive therapy. Excisional lymph node biopsy is the optimal specimen for diagnosis of KFD; however, immunohistochemical stains can be helpful in cases with limited material. From a clinical standpoint, one of the most important differential diagnoses is SLE, which should be ruled out in all patients diagnosed with KFD.


Lymphomas B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (eg, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (eg, peripheral T-cell lymphoma, anaplastic large cell lymphoma) Classical Hodgkin lymphoma Myeloid sarcoma compared with CD4, with very few CD20-positive B cells. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are highlighted with CD123 (Figure 2, A and B). 2,34

## Figure 1 .
1Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. A, Lymph node with paracortex expanded by circumscribed sheets of histiocytes and areas of necrosis (arrow). B, Well-defined necrotic area. C, Higher magnification of the histiocytic infiltrate with karyorrhectic debris; some histiocytes have crescentic nuclei (arrowheads). Neutrophils are absent. D, In the xanthomatous phase of disease numerous foamy histiocytes are seen without prominent necrosis (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnifications 340 [A and B] and 3400 [C and D]).

## Figure 3 .
3Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). A, Paracortical sheet of histiocytes with karyorrhectic debris in an SLE patient with enlarged cervical lymph node; morphologic findings are indistinguishable from Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. B, Histiocytes stain positive with myeloperoxidase immunohistochemical stain. C, Another case of SLE lymphadenopathy showing extensive necrosis with apoptotic debris and hematoxylin bodies. D, Azzopardi effect (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnifications 3200 [A] and 3400 [C and D]; original magnification 3200 [B]).

## Figure 2 .
2Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. A, CD123 showing increase in plasmacytoid dendritic cells, with prominent clustering on the edges of necrotic foci. B, Histiocytes are positive for myeloperoxidase immunohistochemical stain (original magnifications 3100 [A] and 3200 [B]).

## Figure 4 .
4Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease in a needle core biopsy. A, Several small needle core biopsies of a cervical lymph node show complete effacement by an atypical lymphohistiocytic infiltrate. B, High power shows sheets of large atypical cells with irregular nuclei, focally prominent nucleoli and moderately abundant cytoplasm; there are frequent apoptotic bodies. C, Area of necrosis with karyorrhectic debris is present. D and E, Most cells in the infiltrate are histiocytes, as shown by CD68 immunohistochemistry (D), which coexpress myeloperoxidase (E). F, CD123 highlights clusters of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnifications 310 [A] and 3400 [B and C]; original magnifications 310 [D] and 3100 [E and F]).


Histologic Differential Diagnosis ofKikuchi-Fujimoto  Disease    Infections 

Tuberculosis 
Histoplasmosis 
Leprosy 
Cat-scratch disease 
Syphilis 
Yersinia enterocolitica lymphadenitis 
Bacterial lymphadenitis, not otherwise specified 
Herpes simplex lymphadenitis 
Infectious mononucleosis 

Autoimmune diseases 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 


Arch Pathol Lab Med-Vol 142, November 2018 Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: A Review-Perry & Choi
Arch Pathol Lab Med-Vol 142, November 2018 Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: A Review-Perry & Choi
Arch Pathol Lab Med-Vol 142, November 2018 Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: A Review-Perry & Choi

Enigmatic Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a comprehensive review. X Bosch, A Guilabert, R Miquel, E Campo, Am J Clin Pathol. 1221Bosch X, Guilabert A, Miquel R, Campo E. Enigmatic Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a comprehensive review. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004;122(1):141-152.

. C B Hutchinson, Wang E Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease, Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1342Hutchinson CB, Wang E. Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2010;134(2):289-293.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a clinicopathologic update. F Pepe, S Disma, C Teodoro, P Pepe, G Magro, Pathologica. 1083Pepe F, Disma S, Teodoro C, Pepe P, Magro G. Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a clinicopathologic update. Pathologica. 2016;108(3):120-129.

Lymphadenitis showing focal reticulum cell hyperplasia with nuclear debris and phagocytosis. M Kikuchi, Nippon Ketsueki Gakkai Zasshi. 35Kikuchi M. Lymphadenitis showing focal reticulum cell hyperplasia with nuclear debris and phagocytosis. Nippon Ketsueki Gakkai Zasshi. 1972;35:378- 380.

Cervical necrotizing lymphadenitis: a new clinicopathological agent. Y Fujimoto, Y Kozima, K Hamaguchi, Naika. 20Fujimoto Y, Kozima Y, Hamaguchi K. Cervical necrotizing lymphadenitis: a new clinicopathological agent. Naika. 1972;20:920-927.

Necrotizing lymphadenitis: a study of 30 cases. R R Turner, J Martin, R F Dorfman, Am J Surg Pathol. 72Turner RR, Martin J, Dorfman RF. Necrotizing lymphadenitis: a study of 30 cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 1983;7(2):115-123.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis of Kikuchi and Fujimoto. R F Dorfman, Arch Pathol Lab Med. 11111Dorfman RF. Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis of Kikuchi and Fujimoto. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1987;111(11):1026-1029.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis without granulocytic infiltration. S Pileri, M Kikuchi, D Helbron, K Lennert, Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histol. 3953Pileri S, Kikuchi M, Helbron D, Lennert K. Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis without granulocytic infiltration. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histol. 1982;395(3):257-271.

Kikuchi's disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis): a clinicopathologic study of 79 cases with an analysis of histologic subtypes, immunohistology, and DNA ploidy. T T Kuo, Am J Surg Pathol. 197Kuo TT. Kikuchi's disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis): a clinicopathologic study of 79 cases with an analysis of histologic subtypes, immunohistology, and DNA ploidy. Am J Surg Pathol. 1995;19(7):798-809.

Kikuchi's disease: a review and analysis of 61 cases. H C Lin, C Y Su, C C Huang, C F Hwang, C Y Chien, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1285Lin HC, Su CY, Huang CC, Hwang CF, Chien CY. Kikuchi's disease: a review and analysis of 61 cases. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003;128(5):650-653.

Disease: analysis of 244 cases. Y Kucukardali, E Solmazgul, E Kunter, Clin Rheumatol. 261Kucukardali Y, Solmazgul E, Kunter E, et al. Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: analysis of 244 cases. Clin Rheumatol. 2007;26(1):50-54.

Cutaneous manifestation of Kikuchi's histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. T T Kuo, Am J Surg Pathol. 149Kuo TT. Cutaneous manifestation of Kikuchi's histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. Am J Surg Pathol. 1990;14(9):872-876.

A case of histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis with bone marrow and skin involvement. Y Sumiyoshi, M Kikuchi, K Ohshima, Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 4203Sumiyoshi Y, Kikuchi M, Ohshima K, et al. A case of histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis with bone marrow and skin involvement. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1992;420(3):275-279.

Immunohistological study of skin involvement in Kikuchi's disease. Y Sumiyoshi, M Kikuchi, M Takeshita, Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 624Sumiyoshi Y, Kikuchi M, Takeshita M, et al. Immunohistological study of skin involvement in Kikuchi's disease. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1992;62(4):263-269.

The histopathology of cutaneous lesions of Kikuchi's disease (necrotizing lymphadenitis): a report of five cases. J Spies, K Foucar, C T Thompson, P E Leboit, Am J Surg Pathol. 239Spies J, Foucar K, Thompson CT, LeBoit PE. The histopathology of cutaneous lesions of Kikuchi's disease (necrotizing lymphadenitis): a report of five cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 1999;23(9):1040-1047.

Skin manifestations of. Yen Hr, P Y Lin, W Y Chuang, M L Chang, C H Chiu, Yen HR, Lin PY, Chuang WY, Chang ML, Chiu CH. Skin manifestations of

disease: case report and review. Kikuchi-Fujimoto, Eur J Pediatr. 1634-5Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: case report and review. Eur J Pediatr. 2004;163(4-5): 210-213.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto lymphadenitis: role of parvovirus B-19, Epstein-Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6, and human herpesvirus 8. F G Rosado, Y W Tang, R P Hasserjian, Hum Pathol. 442Rosado FG, Tang YW, Hasserjian RP, et al. Kikuchi-Fujimoto lymphadenitis: role of parvovirus B-19, Epstein-Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6, and human herpesvirus 8. Hum Pathol. 2013;44(2):255-259.

Causative agents of Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis): a meta-analysis. Y Chong, C S Kang, Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 7811Chong Y, Kang CS. Causative agents of Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis): a meta-analysis. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolar- yngol. 2014;78(11):1890-1897.

DNA typing of HLA class II genes (HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP) in Japanese patients with histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease). T Tanaka, M Ohmori, S Yasunaga, Tissue Antigens. 543Tanaka T, Ohmori M, Yasunaga S, et al. DNA typing of HLA class II genes (HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP) in Japanese patients with histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease). Tissue Antigens. 1999;54(3):246-253.

Clinical association between. B Sopeña, A Rivera, A Chamorro, Sopeña B, Rivera A, Chamorro A, et al. Clinical association between

Kikuchi's disease and systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic literature review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 471Kikuchi's disease and systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic literature review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2017;47(1):46-52.

An ultrastructural study of subacute necrotizing lymphadenitis. M Imamura, H Ueno, A Matsuura, Am J Pathol. 1073Imamura M, Ueno H, Matsuura A, et al. An ultrastructural study of subacute necrotizing lymphadenitis. Am J Pathol. 1982;107(3):292-299.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: retrospective study of 91 cases and review of the literature. G Dumas, V Prendki, J Haroche, Medicine (Baltimore). 9324Dumas G, Prendki V, Haroche J, et al. Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: retrospective study of 91 cases and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014;93(24):372-382.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease) with aseptic meningitis. Y Sato, H Kuno, K Oizumi, J Neurol Sci. 1632Sato Y, Kuno H, Oizumi K. Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease) with aseptic meningitis. J Neurol Sci. 1999;163(2):187-191.

Status epilepticus revealing Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a case report and review of the literature. J Oumerzouk, A Jouehari, Y Hssaini, A Bourazza, Rev Neurol (Paris). 16912in FrenchOumerzouk J, Jouehari A, Hssaini Y, Bourazza A. Status epilepticus revealing Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a case report and review of the literature [in French]. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2013;169(12):1010-1012.

Bilateral pleural effusion and interstitial lung disease as unusual manifestations of Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: case report and literature review. A Garcia-Zamalloa, J Taboada-Gomez, P Bernardo-Galán, BMC Pulm Med. 1054Garcia-Zamalloa A, Taboada-Gomez J, Bernardo-Galán P, et al. Bilateral pleural effusion and interstitial lung disease as unusual manifestations of Kikuchi- Fujimoto disease: case report and literature review. BMC Pulm Med. 2010;10:54.

A fatal case of multicentric Kikuchi's histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. J K Chan, K C Wong, C S Ng, Cancer. 639Chan JK, Wong KC, Ng CS. A fatal case of multicentric Kikuchi's histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. Cancer. 1989;63(9):1856-1862.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: an unusual association with acute renal failure. A F Silva, R Focaccia, A C Oliveira, A Sementilli, G F Reis, Braz J Infect Dis. 146Silva AF, Focaccia R, Oliveira AC, Sementilli A, Reis GF. Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: an unusual association with acute renal failure. Braz J Infect Dis. 2010; 14(6):621-627.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis preceded by Kikuchi disease in children. G Y Lim, B Cho, N G Chung, Pediatr Radiol. 387Lim GY, Cho B, Chung NG. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis preceded by Kikuchi disease in children. Pediatr Radiol. 2008;38(7):756-761.

A rare disorder in an orphan disease: Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease in a young-adult patient with sickle cell anemia. E Vencato, R Manfredi, A Zamò, Am J Hematol. 8912Vencato E, Manfredi R, Zamò A, et al. A rare disorder in an orphan disease: Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease in a young-adult patient with sickle cell anemia. Am J Hematol. 2014;89(12):1151-1152.

Kikuchi's disease in axillary lymph nodes draining breast carcinoma. N M Aqel, E E Peters, Histopathology. 363Aqel NM, Peters EE. Kikuchi's disease in axillary lymph nodes draining breast carcinoma. Histopathology. 2000;36(3):280-281.

Kikuchi's lymphadenitis and carcinoma of the stomach. J M Radhi, L Skinnider, A Mcfadden, J Clin Pathol. 506Radhi JM, Skinnider L, McFadden A. Kikuchi's lymphadenitis and carcinoma of the stomach. J Clin Pathol. 1997;50(6):530-531.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a case report and review of the literature. S Ifeacho, T Aung, M Akinsola, Cases J. 11187Ifeacho S, Aung T, Akinsola M. Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: a case report and review of the literature. Cases J. 2008;1(1):187.

Kikuchi's histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis associated with ruptured silicone breast implant. C E Sever, C P Leith, J Appenzeller, K Foucar, Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1204Sever CE, Leith CP, Appenzeller J, Foucar K. Kikuchi's histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis associated with ruptured silicone breast implant. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1996;120(4):380-385.

Ioachim's Lymph Node Pathology. H L Ioachim, L J Medeiros, Lippincott Williams & WilkinsPhiladelphia, PA4th ed.Ioachim HL, Medeiros LJ. Ioachim's Lymph Node Pathology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009.

Atlas of Nontumor Pathology: Benign and Reactive Conditions of Lymph Node and Spleen. D P O&apos;malley, T I Geirge, A Orazi, S L Abbondanzo, Washington, DCAmerican Registry of PathologyO'Malley DP, Geirge TI, Orazi A, Abbondanzo SL. Atlas of Nontumor Pathology: Benign and Reactive Conditions of Lymph Node and Spleen. Washington, DC: American Registry of Pathology; 2009.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease): continuing diagnostic difficulties. L P Menasce, S S Banerjee, D Edmondson, M Harris, Histopathology. 333Menasce LP, Banerjee SS, Edmondson D, Harris M. Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease): continuing diagnostic difficulties. Histopathology. 1998;33(3):248-254.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease): a clinicopathologic study of nine cases. Jkc Chan, D Saw, Pathology. 18Chan JKC, Saw D. Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease): a clinicopathologic study of nine cases. Pathology. 1986;18:22-28.

Fatal Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease in transplant recipients: a case report. M K Tsai, H F Huang, R H Hu, Transplant Proc. 307Tsai MK, Huang HF, Hu RH, et al. Fatal Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease in transplant recipients: a case report. Transplant Proc. 1998;30(7):3137-3138.