# Plastid Genome Engineering and its Potential Applications: A Review

CorpusID: 53614430
 
tags: #Engineering, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2fcd6dd11ec7868802858b860e9c2f7f89aa9f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2fcd6dd11ec7868802858b860e9c2f7f89aa9f8)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Plastid Genome Engineering and its Potential Applications: A Review
August 2018

Neelam Kaushik 
Division of Crop Improvement
Central Potato Research Institute (CPRI)
HP-171, 001ShimlaIndia

Arvind Kumar Bhatt 
Department of Biotechnology
Himachal Pradesh University
Summer HillHP-171 005ShimlaIndia

S K Chakrabarti 
Division of Crop Improvement
Central Potato Research Institute (CPRI)
HP-171, 001ShimlaIndia

Plastid Genome Engineering and its Potential Applications: A Review

International Journal of Agriculture, Environment and Biotechnology Citation: IJAEB
114August 201810.30954/0974-1712.08.2018.2Received: 02-05-2018 Accepted: 21-07-2018BIOTECHNOLOGYPlastid transformationgenetic engineeringtransgenetransplastomic plants
Plastid genome engineering is a credible tool for the basic biotechnological research and various innovative techniques have led to the better understanding of the complex processes involved in the plastid transformation. Plastids in higher plants are the major biosynthetic centers for photosynthesis which is the main source of energy requirement. Plastids have their own genome i.e. plastome which is maternally inherited in most angiospermic plant species. Although production of transgenic plants has traditionally been through expression of transgene in the nucleus, but plastid transformation is considered more attractive and efficient target for genetic engineering due to several advantages over nuclear transformation including high level of foreign protein, eliminating the risk of cross pollination with weeds, absence of silencing mechanism and ability to engineer multiple genes rather than a single gene. The potential utility of plastid genome engineering has been explored in development of crops with various agronomic traits, development of vaccine, biopharmaceuticals, therapeutic proteins, biomaterials and industrial enzymes, which will definitely prove beneficial in near future. Plastid transformation is still to be fully utilized for product commercialization, because of the problems associated with protein purification and expression level control. This review article highlights the various possibilities and potential applications of plastid genome engineering for generation of marker free transplastomic plants, improvement in agronomic traits and role of plastids in the production of cost effective biopharmaceuticals and biomaterials.Highlightsm Plastid genome engineering is the potential emerging biotechnological tool for generation of marker free transgenic plants, agronomic traits improvement and providing affordable biopharmaceuticals and biomaterials.

The plant cell's genetic information is localized in the nucleus along with DNA in chloroplast and mitochondria for DNA replication, transcription and protein synthesis. Plastids are the major biosynthetic centers for photosynthesis in plant cells and eukaryotic algae, which is the primary source of food production (Wang et al. 2009). The plastids genome called as plastome is a circular double-stranded DNA molecule of size 120 to 160 kb, present in 1,000-10,000 copies per cell in different plant species and contains 100-120 highly conserved unique genes which are maternally inherited in most angiosperm plant species. The expression of transgenes in the nucleus led to the production of transgenic plants for basic and applied purposes worldwide, but the possibility that transgenes may escape via pollen, contaminating non-transformed plants has given scope for a new field of genetic engineering i.e. plastid transformation (Ruf et al. 2007;Daniell 2007). These plants with transformed plastid genomes are termed as transplastomic (Maliga 1993). Plastid transformation is a tissue culture dependent Print ISSN : 1974ISSN : -1712 Online ISSN : 2230-732X process which involves integration of transgene that encodes a selectable marker by two homologous recombination events, followed by exposure of plastids to the selective agent and finally elimination of untransformed plastid genome copies in the tissue culture medium containing antibiotics (Bock 2001 Plastid transformation is routinely done in tobacco and the efficiency of transformation is much lower in other plants than in tobacco (Maliga 2004). The possibilities and obstacles to extend this technology to higher crops which regenerate through somatic embryogenesis has been discussed by many authors (Daniell et al. 2002;Lee et al. 2006;Clarke and Daniell 2011). The chloroplast genome of closely related plant species was not found conserved. Due to the lack of conservation of intergenic spacer regions of the chloroplast and the species specificity of this regulatory sequences have put forward the process of development of highly efficient species specific transformation vectors for integration and expression of transgenes in chloroplast (Daniell et al. 2016). First commercial development of an oral drug produced in commercial lettuce cultivar using species specific chloroplast transformation vector was published by Su et al. in 2015. This may open up new era in plastid genome engineering to introduce and express novel genes in the engineered plants for oral delivery of pharmaceuticals and vaccines, which will reduce expensive purification, cold storage, transportation and short shelf life of current protein drugs. In this review, we will discuss advances made so far for generation of marker free transplastomic plants, which is the need of hour for public acceptability of the genetically modified crops, transplastomic plants for expression of agronomically important traits and role of plastids in the production of cost effective biopharmaceuticals and biomaterials in plants.


## Development of marker free transplastomic plants

The marker genes are required for the selection of transplastomic plants. After selection of transplastomic plants, the marker genes are eliminated for the biosafety concern to release antibiotic resistant gene in the field crops and the high level expression of marker gene will increase metabolic burden on the plant . The marker free plants can be obtained by direct repeats or Cre-lox recombination approaches.

In the Cre-loxP site specific recombination, marker gene (flanked by two directly oriented lox sites, 34 bp) and gene of interest are introduced into the plastid genome without Cre activity. When marker elimination is required, a gene encoding nuclear plastid targeting Cre activity is introduced into the nucleus and subsequent import in plastids excises sequences between two lox sites (Corneille et al. 2001). Another site specific recombinase (phiC31 phage integrase) have been used for the excision of aadA marker gene, flanked by directly oriented non identical phage attP (215 bp) and bacterial attB (54 bp) attachment sites. The marker gene thus removed after nuclear transformation of transplastomic plants with integrase gene encoding a plastid targeted integrase enzyme (Kittiwongwattana et al. 2007).

Both the systems (Cre-lox and Int-att) are equally efficient for obtaining marker free plants, but Int-att appears to be better choice as plastid DNA contains pseudo lox sites recognized by Cre (Corneille et al. 2003;Lutz et al. 2004;Kittiwongwattana et al. 2007). Alternatively, the removal of marker gene via directly repeated sequences (Iamtham and Day 2000), transient co-integrative (Klaus et al. 2003;2004) and cotransformation-segregation (Kindle et al. 1991;Ye et al. 2003) approaches may be used to obtain marker free plants, but due to some limitations, these approaches are not commonly used to obtain marker free plants. Recently, removal of aadA marker gene was achieved by using mycobacteriophage Bxb1 recombinase and attP/attBII recognition sites (Shao et al. 2014). Several antibiotic-free selectable markers such as D-amino acid oxidase (Gisby et al. 2012), isopentenyl transferase (IPT) (Dunne et al. 2014) and anthranilate synthase α-subunit (ASA2) 


## Engineering of plastid genome for agronomic traits

The engineering of plastid genome for agronomic traits is important to feed worldwide increasing population (Clarke and Daniell 2011). Hence several agronomic traits for crop improvement, including herbicide resistance, insect resistance, draught tolerance, salt, water and temperature tolerance have already been engineered via plastid transformation (Verma and Daniell 2007;Repkova 2010). The major advances have already been made by expressing heterologous cry genes for delta-endotoxin from Bacillus thuriengiensis via engineering chloroplast genome. Plastid expression of Bt gene in important major crops has not yet reached commercial development, as market is saturated with Bt crops that avoid the use of expensive chemical pesticides . Different cry genes have been expressed in different crops against a range of pests by plastid transformation (Kota et al. 1999;De Cosa et al. 2001;Gatehouse 2008;Chakrabarti et al. 2006;Liu et al. 2008;Kim et al. 2009;Dufouramantel et al. 2005).

The authors suggested that targeting of cry genes to chloroplast confers a high level plant resistance to different insects, thus providing an efficient strategy for crop insect management. The RNA interference (RNAi) concept was also used for engineering chloroplast genome for insect resistance Zhang et al. 2015). The study conducted by  used lepidoptern chitin synthase (Chi), cytochrome P450 monooxigenase and V-ATPase as RNAi targets, which are essential proteins required for insect survival. The transcripts level of targeted genes were reduced to almost undetectable levels in the insect midgut, which resulted in significant reduction in net weight of larvae and population rate. In another study, Zhang et al. (2015) introduced dsRNA via chloroplast genome to target insect β-actin gene to provide resistance against Colorado potato beetle. The expression of dsRNAs via chloroplast genome explore the possibility of use of RNAi approaches to confer desired agronomic traits or to downregulate dysfunctional genes following oral delivery of dsRNA bio-encapsulated within the plant cell .

Plastid transformation has also been used for the development of plant varieties which are resistant to bacterial and fungal diseases. Disease resistant tobacco was developed by expressing MSI-99, an antimicrobial peptide which conferred resistance to fungal pathogen Colletotrichum destructive in tobacco (DeGray et al. 2001). Transplastomic plants inhibited the growth of pregerminated spores of Aspergillus flavus, Fusarium moniliforme and Verticillium dahlia and Pseudomonas syringae pv tabaci bacteria by more than 95% compared with non-transformed control plant, which suggested that MSI-99 expressed in tobacco chloroplasts can provide significant protection from both bacterial and fungal pathogens. The research conducted by Wang et al. (2015) showed that MSI-99 expressed in tobacco chloroplast is capable of providing protection against rice blast, one of the most dangerous fungal rice disease.

The possibility of plastid genome engineering for weed control has been explored in several studies. Plastid expression of bar gene which encode herbicide inactivating phosphinothricin acetyltransferase (PAT) enzyme led to high level enzyme accumulation and conferred field tolerance to glufosinate (Daniell et al. 1998;Lutz et al. 2001). Plastid expression of bacterial 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (HPPD) enzyme in transgenic chloroplast of tobacco and soybean resulted in strong herbicide tolerance (Dufouramantel et al. 2007). In another study, plastid expression of a variant form of the 5-enolpyruvyl shikimate-3-phosphate synthase (EPSPS) gene conferred higher resistance to the broad-spectrum herbicide, glyphosate (Roudsari et al. 2009).

Every plant is exposed to various biotic and abiotic stress factors such as drought, salinity and freezing which affect plant's growth and ultimately crop production. Plastid genetic engineering has successfully been used for the development of abiotic stress tolerance in plants. Trehalose, an osmoprotectant accumulated under stress conditions can play a significant role in protecting plant cells against damage caused by these stresses. The expression of trehalose phosphate synthase 1 (TPS1) gene in chloroplast has no phenotypic variation (Lee et al. 2003) as compared to nuclear transgenic plants. The study conducted by Kumar et al. (2004) clearly showed that transgenic carrot plants expressing badh (betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase) gene accumulated glycine betaine which showed tolerance to high conc. of NaCl up to 400 mmol/l, the highest level of salt tolerance reported among genetically engineered crops. A gene for choline monooxygenase (BvCMO) from beet (Beta vulgaris) was expressed via plastid genetic engineering in tobacco (Zhang et al. 2008). Transplastomic plants accumulated glycine betaine, an osmoprotectant in leaves, roots and seeds and showed tolerance to toxic level of choline and salt/drought stress when compared to wild type plants. Khan et al. (2015) also highlighted that expression of ArDH gene in tobacco chloroplast increases tolerance to high conc. of NaCl up to 350 mM due to expressed ArDH gene encoding enzyme arabitol dehyrogenase, which is responsible for reduction of D-ribulose to D-arabitol.

The chloroplast targeted codA gene from Arthrobacter globiformis for transgenic rice has been developed for water stress tolerance which showed higher photosystemII activity and better physiological performance under water stress conditions (Kathuria et al. 2009). Temperature stress resistance, an important agronomic trait can be successfully achieved by expressing E. coli panD gene which catalyses the decarboxylation of L-aspartate to generate β-alanine and CO 2 . Transplastomic plants expressing panD was able to endure high temperature stress than that of wild type plants (Fouad and Altpeter 2009;Wani et al. 2015). Further, Chen et al. (2014) showed that by using protease inhibitors and chitinase in transgenic tobacco confer resistance against insects, pathogens and abiotic stress.


## Engineering of plastid genome for production of biopharmaceuticals

One of the most fascinating applications of plastid genetic engineering is being used for the production of biopharmaceuticals. Plant cell expressing therapeutic proteins can be lyophilized and stored indefinitely at room temperature without losing their efficacy (Kwon et al. 2013). So, the use of high level expression of particular protein in edible leaves permits oral delivery and hence reduces production cost by eliminating the purification step. Plastid transformation has made enormous advances in the field of molecular farming for the production of high end biopharmaceuticals. More than 40 biopharmaceuticals and vaccine antigens have been expressed in the chloroplast genome by different researchers .

The first therapeutic protein, human somatotropin (hST) was expressed in a soluble, biologically active and disulfide bonded form (Staub et al. 2000), since then many researchers have expressed both bacterial and viral vaccine antigen genes in plastid genome. The vaccines developed have only been experimented on mice and developing effective vaccines for human use is still in the progress (Daniell et al. 2009). Most therapeutic proteins were expressed in tobacco chloroplast for initial evaluation and for the oral delivery of drugs, its usefulness was limited due to high alkaloid content. After extensive optimization of plastid transformation protocols in lettuce, therapeutic proteins were subsequently expressed in lettuce (Ruhlman et al. 2010) which is the only reproducible transplastomic system for oral delivery of biopharmaceuticals and vaccines. Some algae have also been explored for production of vaccine antigens. 


## Engineering of plastid genome for production of biomaterials

Plastid transformation has been used for the production of many industrially valuable biomaterials such as enzymes, amino acids and polyester. The plastid transformation has been used to produce p-hydroxybenzoic acid (pHBA), which is major monomer in liquid crystal polymers. The transplastomic tobacco plants expressing ubiC gene produced highest level of pHBA polymer in normal healthy plant (Vitanen et al. 2004). The chloroplast produced enzymes offer several advantages over traditionally produced enzymes including significantly reduced cost, improved stability and no need for enzyme purification. Genes for thermostable xylanase enzyme used in pulp and paper industry were successfully expressed in tobacco chloroplast (Leelavathi et al. 2003;Kim et al. 2011 Trichoderma reesei in tobacco chloroplast. Chloroplast produced enzyme showed wider pH optima and thermostability than E. coli produced enzyme. Plastid transformation have also been used for the production of amino acid, tryptophan (Tsai et al. 2005) and polyester, polyhydroxybutyrate (Lossl et al. 2003).


## CONCLUSION

The chloroplast genome has become innovative target for plant genetic engineering due to several advantages over nuclear transformation. Although more than 100 transgenes have been stably integrated and expressed in tobacco chloroplast genome till date, however, extension of technology to other crop plants is limited by several factors including non-availability of chloroplast genome sequences and optimization of plastid transformation protocols in different crop species. Plastid transformation is routinely carried out in tobacco, while efficiency of transformation is low in other crop plants. Plastid transformation have been used for engineering of several important agronomic traits such as insect resistance, herbicide resistance, draught, salt, water and temperature tolerance in an eco-friendly manner which will definitely enhance crop productivity. Generation of marker free transplastomic plants, which is the need of hour for public acceptability of the genetically modified crops will facilitate public acceptance in near future. The plastid transformation is being used for the production of valuable vaccines antigens and therapeutic proteins.

This technology has not resulted in product commercialization, because of problem associated with protein purification and in nascent stage as experimented only in animal model. Most of the therapeutic proteins and vaccine antigens are produced in tobacco plastid genome which cannot be used for oral administration because of its toxic alkaloid contents. At present lettuce is the only reproducible system used for production of therapeutic proteins. Therefore, it is necessary to use those plant species that can be used as a system for oral delivery of biopharmaceuticals and vaccines.

Further studies with edible crops will be needed in near future for successful implementation of plastid genetic engineering for oral administration of drugs.


## REFERENCES

Agarwal, P., Verma, D. and Daniell, H. 2011 


Dauvillee et al. (2010) successfully utilized Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to accumulate Apical Membrane Antigen-I (AMA-I) and Meroziote Surface Protein-I (MSP-I) for vaccine against malaria.


Corneille, S., Lutz, K.A., Azhagiri, A.K. andMaliga, P. 2003.   Identification of functional lox sites in the plastid genome.Plant J., 35: 753-762. Daniell, H., Khan, M.S. and Allison, L. 2002. Milestones in chloroplast genetic engineering an environmentally friendly era in biotechnology. Trends Plant Sci., 7: 84-91. Daniell, H., Lin, C.S., Yu, M. and Chang, W.J. 2016. Chloroplast genomes: diversity, evolution, and applications in genetic engineering. Genome Biol., 17: 134. Daniell, H., Vivekananda, J., Nielsen, B.L., Ye, G.N., Tewari, K.K. and Sanford, J.C. 1990. Transient foreign gene expression in chloroplasts of cultured tobacco cells after biolistic delivery of chloroplast vectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87: 88-92. Daniell, H. 2007. Transgene containment by maternal inheritance, Effective or elusive? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 6879-6880. Daniell, H., Datta, R., Varma, S., Gray, S. and Lee, S.B. 1998. Containment of herbicide resistance through genetic engineering of the chloroplast genome. Nat. Biotechnol., 16: 345-348. Daniell, H., Singh, N.D., Mason, H. and Streatfield, V. 2009. Plant-made vaccine antigens and biopharmaceuticals. Trends Plant Sci., 14: 669-679. Dauvillee, D., Delhaye, S., Gruyer, S., Slomianny, C., Moretz, S.E., d'Hulstet, C., Long, A.C., Ball, S.G. and Tomavo, S. 2010. Engineering the chloroplast targeted malarial vaccine antigens in Chlamydomonas starch granules. PLOS One, 5: e15424.


. Expression of Trichoderma reesei β-mannanase in tobacco chloroplast and its utilization in lignocellulosic woody biomass hydrolysis. PLOS One, 6: e29302. Barone, P.,Zhang, X.H. and Widholm, J.M. 2009. Tobacco plastid transformation using the feedback insensitive anthranilate synthase [α]-subunit of tobacco (ASA2) as a new selectable marker. J Exp Bot., 60: 3195-3202. Bock, R. 2001. Transgenic plastids in basic research and plant biotechnology. J Mol Biol., 312: 425-438. Chakrabarti, S.K., Lutz, K.A., Lertwiriyawong, B., Svab, Z. and Maliga, P. 2006. Expression of the cry9Aa2 B.t. gene in tobacco plastids confers resistance to potato tuber moth. Transgenic Res., 15: 481-488. Chen, P.J., Senthilkumar, K., Jane, W.N., He, Y., Tian, Z. and Yeh, K.W. 2014. Transplastomic Nicotiana benthamiania plants expressing multiple defence genes encoding protease inhibitors and chitinase display broad-spectrum resistance agains insects, pathogens and abiotic stresses. Plant Biotechnol. J., 12: 503-515. Clarke, J.L. and Daniell, H. 2011. Plastid biotechnology for crop production: present status and future prospectives. Plant Mol Bio., 76: 211-220. Corneille, S., Lutz, K., Svab, Z. and Maliga, P. 2001. Efficient elimination of selectable marker genes from the plastid genome by the CRE-lox site-specific recombination system. Plant J., 27: 171-178.
Print ISSN : 1974-1712 Online ISSN : 2230-732X

Over expression of the Bt cry2Aa2 operon in plastids leads to formation of insecticidal crystals. B Decosa, W Moar, S B Lee, M Miller, H Daniell, Nat Biotechnol. 19DeCosa, B., Moar, W., Lee, S.B., Miller, M. and Daniell, H. 2001. Over expression of the Bt cry2Aa2 operon in plastids leads to formation of insecticidal crystals. Nat Biotechnol., 19: 71-74.

Expression of an antimicrobial peptide via the chloroplast genome to control phytopathogenic bacteria and fungi. G Degray, K Rajasekaran, F Smith, J Sanford, H Daniell, Plant Physiol. 127DeGray, G., Rajasekaran, K., Smith, F., Sanford, J. and Daniell, H. 2001. Expression of an antimicrobial peptide via the chloroplast genome to control phytopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Plant Physiol., 127: 852-862.

Generation and characterization of soybean and marker free tobacco plastid transformants over-expreesing a bacterial 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase which provides strong herbicide tolerance. N Dufourmantel, M Dubald, M Matringe, H Canard, F Garcxon, C Job, E Kay, J P Wisniewski, J M Ferullo, B Pelissier, A Sailland, G Tissot, Plant Biotechnol. J. 5Dufourmantel, N., Dubald, M., Matringe, M., Canard, H., Garcxon, F., Job, C., Kay, E., Wisniewski, J.P., Ferullo, J.M., Pelissier, B., Sailland, A. and Tissot, G. 2007. Generation and characterization of soybean and marker free tobacco plastid transformants over-expreesing a bacterial 4- hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase which provides strong herbicide tolerance. Plant Biotechnol. J., 5: 118-133.

Generation and analysis of soybean plastid transformants expressing Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Ab protoxin. N Dufourmantel, G Tissot, F Goutorbe, F Garçxon, C Muhr, S Jansens, B Pelissier, G Peltier, M Dubald, Plant Mol. Biol. 58Dufourmantel, N., Tissot, G., Goutorbe, F., Garçxon, F., Muhr, C., Jansens, S., Pelissier, B., Peltier, G. and Dubald, M. 2005. Generation and analysis of soybean plastid transformants expressing Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Ab protoxin. Plant Mol. Biol., 58: 659-668.

Modifying fatty acid profiles through a new cytokininbased plastid transformation system. A Dunne, J Maple-Grodem, D Gargano, R P Haslam, J A Napier, N H Chua, R Russel, S G Moller, Plant J. 80Dunne, A., Maple-Grodem, J., Gargano, D., Haslam, R.P., Napier, J.A., Chua, N.H., Russel, R. and Moller, S.G. 2014. Modifying fatty acid profiles through a new cytokinin- based plastid transformation system. Plant J., 80: 1131- 1138.

Transplastomic expression of bacterial l-aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase enhances photosynthesis and biomass production in response to high temperature stress. W N Fouad, F Altpeter, Transgenic Res. 18Fouad, W.N. and Altpeter, F. 2009. Transplastomic expression of bacterial l-aspartate-alpha-decarboxylase enhances photosynthesis and biomass production in response to high temperature stress. Transgenic Res., 18: 707-718.

Biotechnological prospects for engineering insect-resistant plants. J A Gatehouse, Plant Physiol. 146Gatehouse, J.A. 2008. Biotechnological prospects for engineering insect-resistant plants. Plant Physiol., 146: 881-887.

Growth of transplastomic cells expressing d-amino acid oxidase in chloroplasts is tolerant to d-alanine and inhibited by d-valine. M F Gisby, V Mudd, A Day, Plant Physiol. 160Gisby, M.F., Mudd, V. and Day, A. 2012. Growth of transplastomic cells expressing d-amino acid oxidase in chloroplasts is tolerant to d-alanine and inhibited by d-valine. Plant Physiol., 160: 2219-2226.

Removal of antibiotic resistance genes from transgenic tobacco plastids. S Iamtham, A Day, Nat Biotechnol. 18Iamtham, S. and Day, A. 2000. Removal of antibiotic resistance genes from transgenic tobacco plastids. Nat Biotechnol., 18: 1172−1176.

The engineered chloroplast genome just got smarter. S Jin, H Daniell, Trends Plant Sci. 20Jin, S. and Daniell, H. 2015. The engineered chloroplast genome just got smarter. Trends Plant Sci., 20: 622-640

Engineered chloroplast dsRNA silences cytochrome p450 monooxygenase, V-ATPase and chitin synthase gene in the insect midgut and disrupts Helicoverpa armigera larval development and population. S Jin, N D Singh, L Li, X Zhang, H Daniell, Plant Biotechnol. J. 13Jin, S., Singh, N.D., Li, L., Zhang, X. and Daniell, H. 2015. Engineered chloroplast dsRNA silences cytochrome p450 monooxygenase, V-ATPase and chitin synthase gene in the insect midgut and disrupts Helicoverpa armigera larval development and population. Plant Biotechnol. J., 13: 435-446.

Glycinebetaine induced waterstress tolerance in codA-expressing transgenic indica rice is associated with up-regulation of several stress responsive genes. H Kathuria, J Giri, K N Nataraja, U Murata, M Udayakumar, A K Tyagi, Plant Biotechnol. J. 7Kathuria, H., Giri, J., Nataraja, K.N., Murata, U., Udayakumar, M. and Tyagi, A.K. 2009. Glycinebetaine induced water- stress tolerance in codA-expressing transgenic indica rice is associated with up-regulation of several stress responsive genes. Plant Biotechnol. J., 7: 512-526.

Metabolic engineering of the chloroplast genome reveals that the yeast ArDH gene confers enhanced tolerance to salinity and drought in plants. M S Khan, B Kanwal, S Nazir, Front Plant Sci. 6725Khan, M.S., Kanwal, B. and Nazir, S. 2015. Metabolic engineering of the chloroplast genome reveals that the yeast ArDH gene confers enhanced tolerance to salinity and drought in plants. Front Plant Sci., 6: 725.

Plastidtargeted expression of synthetic cry1Ac in transgenic rice as an alternative strategy for increased pest protection. E H Kim, S C Suh, B S Park, K S Shin, S J Kweon, E J Han, S H Park, Y S Kim, J K Kim, Planta. 230Kim, E.H., Suh, S.C., Park, B.S., Shin, K.S., Kweon, S.J., Han, E.J., Park, S.H., Kim, Y.S. and Kim, J.K. 2009. Plastid- targeted expression of synthetic cry1Ac in transgenic rice as an alternative strategy for increased pest protection. Planta, 230: 397-405.

Production of hyperthermostable GH10 xylanase Xyl10B from Thermotoga maritima in transplastomic plants enables complete hydrolysis of methylglucuronoxylan to fermentable sugars for biofuel production. J Y Kim, M Kavas, W M Fouad, G Nong, J F Preston, J F Altpeter, Plant Mol. Biol. 76Kim, J.Y., Kavas, M., Fouad, W.M., Nong, G., Preston, J.F. and Altpeter, J.F. 2011. Production of hyperthermostable GH10 xylanase Xyl10B from Thermotoga maritima in transplastomic plants enables complete hydrolysis of methylglucuronoxylan to fermentable sugars for biofuel production. Plant Mol. Biol., 76: 357-369.

Engineering the chloroplast genome: techniques and capabilities for chloroplast transformation in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. K L Kindle, K L Richards, D B Stern, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 88Kindle, K.L., Richards, K.L. and Stern, D.B. 1991. Engineering the chloroplast genome: techniques and capabilities for chloroplast transformation in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 1721-1725.

Plastid marker gene excision by the phiC31 phage sitespecific recombinase. C Kittiwongwattana, K Lutz, M Clark, P Maliga, Plant Mol. Biol. 64Kittiwongwattana, C., Lutz, K., Clark, M. and Maliga, P. 2007. Plastid marker gene excision by the phiC31 phage site- specific recombinase. Plant Mol. Biol., 64: 137-143.

Rapid and proven production of transplastomic tobacco plants by restoration of pigmentation and photosynthesis. S M J Klaus, F C Huang, C Eibl, H U Koop, T J Golds, Plant J. 35Klaus, S.M.J., Huang, F.C., Eibl, C., Koop, H.U. and Golds, T.J. 2003. Rapid and proven production of transplastomic tobacco plants by restoration of pigmentation and photosynthesis. Plant J., 35: 811-821.

Generation of marker-free plastid transformants using a transiently cointegrated selection gene. S M J Klaus, F C Huang, T J Golds, H U Koop, Nat Biotechnol. 22Klaus, S.M.J., Huang, F.C., Golds, T.J. and Koop, H.U. 2004. Generation of marker-free plastid transformants using a transiently cointegrated selection gene. Nat Biotechnol., 22: 225-229.

Overexpression of the Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) Cry2Aa2 protein in plastids confers resistance to plants against susceptible and Bt-resistant insects. M Kota, H Daniell, S Verma, S F Garczynski, F Gould, W J Moar, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 96Kota, M., Daniell, H., Verma, S., Garczynski, S.F., Gould, F. and Moar, W.J. 1999. Overexpression of the Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) Cry2Aa2 protein in plastids confers resistance to plants against susceptible and Bt-resistant insects. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 1840-1845.

Plastid-expressed betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase gene in carrot cultured cells, roots, and leavesconfers enhanced salt tolerance. S Kumar, A Dhingra, H Daniell, Plant Physiol. 136Kumar, S., Dhingra, A. and Daniell, H. 2004. Plastid-expressed betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase gene in carrot cultured cells, roots, and leavesconfers enhanced salt tolerance. Plant Physiol., 136: 2843-2854.

Oral delivery of human biopharmaceuticals, autoantigens and vaccine antigens bioencapsulated in plant cells. K C Kwon, D Verma, N D Singh, R Herzog, H Daniell, Adv. Drug Deli. Rev. 65Kwon, K.C., Verma, D., Singh, N.D., Herzog, R. and Daniell, H. 2013. Oral delivery of human biopharmaceuticals, autoantigens and vaccine antigens bioencapsulated in plant cells. Adv. Drug Deli. Rev., 65: 782-799.

Plastid transformation in the monocotyledonous cereal crop, rice (Oryza sativa) and transmission of transgenes to their progeny. S M Lee, K Kang, H Chung, S H Yoo, X M Xu, S B Lee, J J Cheong, H Daniell, M Kim, Mol. 21Lee, S.M., Kang, K., Chung, H., Yoo, S.H., Xu, X.M., Lee, S.B., Cheong, J.J., Daniell, H. and Kim, M. 2006. Plastid transformation in the monocotyledonous cereal crop, rice (Oryza sativa) and transmission of transgenes to their progeny. Mol., 21: 401-410.

Overproduction of an alkali and thermo-stable xylanase in tobacco chloroplasts and efficient recovery of the enzyme. S Leelavathi, N Gupta, S Maiti, A Ghosh, V S Reddy, Mol Breed. 11Leelavathi, S., Gupta, N., Maiti, S., Ghosh, A. and Reddy, V.S. 2003. Overproduction of an alkali and thermo-stable xylanase in tobacco chloroplasts and efficient recovery of the enzyme. Mol Breed, 11: 59-67.

Accumulation of terhalose within transgenic chloroplast confers draught tolerance. S B Lee, H B Kwon, S J Kwon, S C Park, M J Jeong, S E Han, M O Byun, H Daniell, Mol Breed. 11Lee, S.B., Kwon, H.B., Kwon, S.J., Park, S.C., Jeong, M.J., Han, S.E., Byun, M.O. and Daniell, H. 2003. Accumulation of terhalose within transgenic chloroplast confers draught tolerance. Mol Breed, 11: 1-13.

Expression of a Bacillus thuringiensis toxin (cry1Ab) gene in cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. var. capitata L.) chloroplast confers high insecticidal efficacy against Plutella xylostella. C W Liu, C C Lin, J C Yiu, J J W Chen, M J Tseng, Theor Appl Genet. 117Liu, C.W., Lin, C.C., Yiu, J.C., Chen, J.J.W. and Tseng, M.J. 2008. Expression of a Bacillus thuringiensis toxin (cry1Ab) gene in cabbage (Brassica oleracea L. var. capitata L.) chloroplast confers high insecticidal efficacy against Plutella xylostella. Theor Appl Genet., 117: 75-88.

Polyester synthesis in transplastomic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) significant contents of polyhydroxybutyrate are associated with growth reduction. A Lossl, C Eibl, H J Harloff, C Jung, H U Koop, Plant Cell Rep. 21Lossl, A., Eibl, C., Harloff, H.J., Jung, C. and Koop, H.U. 2003. Polyester synthesis in transplastomic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) significant contents of polyhydroxybutyrate are associated with growth reduction. Plant Cell Rep., 21: 891-899.

A novel approach to plastid transformation utilizes the phiC31 phage integrase. K A Lutz, S Corneille, A K Azhagiri, Z Svab, P Maliga, Plant J. 37Lutz, K.A., Corneille, S., Azhagiri, A.K., Svab, Z. and Maliga, P. 2004. A novel approach to plastid transformation utilizes the phiC31 phage integrase. Plant J., 37: 906-913.

Construction of marker-free transplastomic plants. K A Lutz, P Maliga, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 18Lutz, K.A. and Maliga, P. 2007. Construction of marker-free transplastomic plants. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 18: 107-114.

Expression of bar in the plastid genome confers herbicide resistance. K A Lutz, J E Knapp, P Maliga, Plant Physiol. 125Lutz, K.A., Knapp, J.E. and Maliga, P. 2001. Expression of bar in the plastid genome confers herbicide resistance. Plant Physiol., 125: 1585-1590.

Towards plastid transformation in flowering plants. P Maliga, Trends Biotechnol. 11Maliga, P. 1993. Towards plastid transformation in flowering plants. Trends Biotechnol., 11: 101-107.

Plastid transformation in higher plants. P Maliga, Annu Rev Plant Biol. 55Maliga, P. 2004. Plastid transformation in higher plants. Annu Rev Plant Biol 55: 289-313.

High-level expression of a suite of thermostable cell wall-degrading enzymes from the chloroplast genome. K Petersen, R Bock, Plant Mol. Biol. 76Petersen, K. and Bock, R. 2011. High-level expression of a suite of thermostable cell wall-degrading enzymes from the chloroplast genome. Plant Mol. Biol., 76: 311-321.

Potential of chloroplast genome in plant breeding. J Repkova, Czech J. Genet. Plant Breed. 46Repkova, J. 2010. Potential of chloroplast genome in plant breeding. Czech J. Genet. Plant Breed, 46: 103-113.

Regeneration of glyphosate-tolerant Nicotiana tabacum after plastid transformation with a mutated variant of bacterial aroA gene. M F Roudsari, A H Salmanian, A Mousavi, H H Sohi, M Jafari, Iran J Biotechnol. 7Roudsari, M.F., Salmanian, A.H., Mousavi, A., Sohi, H.H. and Jafari, M. 2009. Regeneration of glyphosate-tolerant Nicotiana tabacum after plastid transformation with a mutated variant of bacterial aroA gene. Iran J Biotechnol., 7: 247-253.

Determining the transgene containment level provided by plastid transformation. S Ruf, D Karcher, R Bock, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 104Ruf, S., Karcher, D. and Bock, R. 2007. Determining the transgene containment level provided by plastid transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 6998-7002.

The role of heterolgous chloroplast sequence elements in transgene integration and expression. T Ruhlman, D Verma, N Samson, H Daniell, Plant Physiol. 152Ruhlman, T., Verma, D., Samson, N. and Daniell, H. 2010. The role of heterolgous chloroplast sequence elements in transgene integration and expression. Plant Physiol., 152: 2088-2104.

Precise excision of plastid DNA by the large serine recombinase Bxb1. M Shao, S Kumar, J G Thompson, Plant Biotechnol. J. 12Shao, M., Kumar, S. and Thompson, J.G. 2014. Precise excision of plastid DNA by the large serine recombinase Bxb1. Plant Biotechnol. J., 12: 322-329.

High-yield production of a human therapeutic protein in tobacco plastids. J M Staub, B Garcia, J Graves, V Hajdukiewicz, P Hunter, N Nehra, V Paradkar, M Schlittler, J A Carroll, L Spatola, D Ward, G Ye, D A Russell, Nat Biotechnol. 18Staub, J.M., Garcia, B., Graves, J., Hajdukiewicz, V., Hunter, P., Nehra, N., Paradkar, V., Schlittler, M., Carroll, J.A., Spatola, L., Ward, D., Ye, G. and Russell, D.A. 2000. High-yield production of a human therapeutic protein in tobacco plastids. Nat Biotechnol., 18: 33-338.

Low cost industrial production of coagulation factor IX bioencapsulated in lettuce cells for oral tolerance induction in hemophilia B. J Su, L Zhu, A Sherman, X Wang, S Lin, A Kamesh, J H Norikane, S J Streatfield, R W Herzog, H Daniell, Biomaterials. 70Su, J., Zhu, L., Sherman, A., Wang, X., Lin, S., Kamesh, A., Norikane, J.H., Streatfield, S.J., Herzog, R.W. and Daniell, H. 2015. Low cost industrial production of coagulation factor IX bioencapsulated in lettuce cells for oral tolerance induction in hemophilia B. Biomaterials., 70: 84-93.

Stable transformation of plastids in higher plants. Z Svab, P Hajdukiewicz, P Maliga, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 87Svab, Z., Hajdukiewicz, P. and Maliga, P. 1990. Stable transformation of plastids in higher plants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA., 87: 8526-8530.

Overexpression of the feedback-insensitive anthranilate synthase gene in tobacco causes tryptophan accumulation. F Y Tsai, J E Brotherton, J M Widholm, Plant Cell Rep. 23Tsai, F.Y., Brotherton, J.E. and Widholm, J.M. 2005. Overexpression of the feedback-insensitive anthranilate synthase gene in tobacco causes tryptophan accumulation. Plant Cell Rep., 23: 548-556.

Chloroplast vector system for biotechnology applications. D Verma, H Daniell, Plant Physiol. 145Verma, D. and Daniell, H. 2007. Chloroplast vector system for biotechnology applications. Plant Physiol., 145: 1129-1143.

Metabolic engineering of the chloroplast genome using the Escherichia coli ubiC gene reveals that chorismate is a readily abundant plant precursor for p-hydroxybenzoic acid biosynthesis. P V Viitanen, A L Devine, M S Khan, D L Deuel, Van, D E Dyk, H Daniell, Plant Physiol. 136Viitanen, P.V., Devine, A.L., Khan, M.S., Deuel, D.L., Van, Dyk D.E. and Daniell, H. 2004. Metabolic engineering of the chloroplast genome using the Escherichia coli ubiC gene reveals that chorismate is a readily abundant plant precursor for p-hydroxybenzoic acid biosynthesis. Plant Physiol., 136: 4048-4060

Advances in chloroplast engineering. H H Wang, W B Yin, Z M Hu, J Genet Genomics. 36Wang, H.H., Yin, W.B. and Hu, Z.M. 2009. Advances in chloroplast engineering. J Genet Genomics, 36: 387-398.

Chloroplast expressed MSI-99 in tobacco improves disease resistance and displays inhibitory effect against rice blast fungus. Y P Wang, Z Y Wei, Y Y Zhang, C J Lin, X F Zhang, Y L Wang, J Y Ma, J Ma, S C Xing, Intl. J. Mol. Sci. 16Wang, Y.P., Wei, Z.Y., Zhang, Y.Y., Lin, C.J., Zhang, X.F., Wang, Y.L., Ma, J.Y., Ma, J. and Xing, S.C. 2015. Chloroplast expressed MSI-99 in tobacco improves disease resistance and displays inhibitory effect against rice blast fungus. Intl. J. Mol. Sci., 16: 4628-4641.

Transplastomic plants for innovation in agriculture. A review. S H Wani, S K Sah, L Sagi, K Solymosi, Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35Wani, S.H., Sah, S.K., Sagi, L. and Solymosi, K. 2015. Transplastomic plants for innovation in agriculture. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev., 35: 1391-1430.

Persistence of unselected transgenic DNA during a plastid transformation and segregation approach to herbicide resistance. G N Ye, S M Colburn, C W Xu, P T J Hajdukiewicz, J M Staub, Plant Physiol. 133Ye, G.N., Colburn, S.M., Xu, C.W., Hajdukiewicz, P.T.J. and Staub, J.M. 2003. Persistence of unselected transgenic DNA during a plastid transformation and segregation approach to herbicide resistance. Plant Physiol., 133: 402-410.

Full crop protection from an insect pest by expression of long double-stranded RNAs in plastid. J Zhang, S A Khan, C Hasse, S Ruf, D G Heckel, R Bock, Sci. 347Zhang, J., Khan, S.A., Hasse, C., Ruf, S., Heckel, D.G. and Bock, R. 2015. Full crop protection from an insect pest by expression of long double-stranded RNAs in plastid. Sci., 347: 991-994.

Plastidexpressed choline monooxygenase gene improves salt and drought tolerance through accumulation of glycine betaine in tobacco. J Zhang, W Tan, X H Yang, H X Zhang, Plant Cell Rep. 27Zhang, J., Tan, W., Yang, X.H. and Zhang, H.X. 2008. Plastid- expressed choline monooxygenase gene improves salt and drought tolerance through accumulation of glycine betaine in tobacco. Plant Cell Rep., 27: 1113-1124.