# Ethnopharmacological Survey of Medicinal Plants in Albaha Region, Saudi Arabia

CorpusID: 5374937
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8633f23fa1f4d4973e0ffe7e45964ca9144a1f4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8633f23fa1f4d4973e0ffe7e45964ca9144a1f4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Ethnopharmacological Survey of Medicinal Plants in Albaha Region, Saudi Arabia


Nasser A Awadh Ali 
Saeed Salah 
Al Sokari 
Department of Biology
Faculty of Sciences
Albaha University


Ahmed Gushash 
Department of Arabic Language and 5 Biology
Faculty of Science and Arts
Albaha University
BaljurashiAlbaha, KSA

Sirajudheen Anwar 
Department of Medicinal Chemistry -Pharmacology and Toxicology Unit


Khalid Al-Karani 
Department of Clinical Pharmacy
College of Clinical Pharmacy
KSA
Albaha University


Abdulwali Al-Khulaidi 
Agricultural Research and Extension Authority
TaizYemen


Department of Pharmacognosy


Ethnopharmacological Survey of Medicinal Plants in Albaha Region, Saudi Arabia
10.4103/pr.pr_11_17401Al Bahahethnopharmacologyfolk medicinemedicinal plantsSaudi Arabiasurvey
Background: Local natural medicinal resource knowledge is important to define and elaborate usage of herbs, in systematic and organized manner. Until recently, there has been little scientifically written document regarding the traditional uses of medicinal plants in Al Bahah region. Objective: This pilot study aims to collect the ethnobotanical information from native populations regarding the benefits of medicinal plants of Al Bahah region, and determine if the traditional usage is scientifically established (proved) from literature. Materials and Methods: The survey collected data for 39 plant species recorded by informants for their medicinal benefits. The recorded species were distributed among 28 plant families. Leguminosae and Euphorbiaceae were represented each by 3 species, followed by Asteraceae (2 species), Lamiaceae (2 species), Apocynaceae (2 species), and Solanaceae (2 species). All the medicinal plants were reported in their local names. Analysis of ethnopharmacological data was done to obtain percentage of plant families, species, parts of plants used, mode of administration, and preparation types. Results: Total 43 informants were interviewed, maximum number of species were used to cure skin diseases including burns (3), wounds(7), warts (1), Leishmania (7), topical hemostatic (2), followed by gastrointestinal system, rheumatism, respiratory tract problems, diabetes mellitus, anti-snake venom, malaria, and eye inflammation. Conclusions: The study covered Al Bahah city and its outskirts. Ten new ethnobotanical uses were recorded such as antirheumatic and anti-vitiligo uses for Clematis hirsute, leishmaniasis use of Commiphora gileadensis, antigout of Juniperus procera, removing warts for Ficus palmata.SUMMARY• 39 plant species from 28 plant families are used for treating more than 20 types of diseases. • Maximum number of species ( 23 species ) was used for treating skin diseases (42.6%) including leishmaniasis, wound healing, dermatitis, psoriasis, vitiligo and warts.• Ten ethnobotanical uses of 8 studied plants have not been previously reported. • The most used medicinal plants, according to their Use Index (UI) were Juniperus procera, Rumex nervosus, and Ziziphus spina-christi.

## INTRODUCTION

Not <400,000 flowering plants are found on the earth. [1] About 12% of them are used in the traditional medicine. [2][3][4] About 10,000 of those plants have already been scientifically investigated and described. In Western medicine system, higher plant-derived substances constitute around 25% of prescribed medicines and 74% of the 121 bioactive plant-derived compounds were identified through research based on leads from traditional medicine. [5] The knowledge of medicinal plant uses was acquired by means of trial and error and transmitted from the older to the younger people, but this knowledge and transmission are in danger because transmission between older and younger generation is not always assured. [6,7] Indigenous knowledge of Saudi traditional medicine ancient and still available among the tribal and local people and medicinal healers (Hakim). In KSA, more than 1200 (over 50%) of the total flowering plants (2250) are expected to be of medicinal importance. [8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15] This indigenous knowledge and traditional experiences have been passed verbally devoid of documentation and the traditional healers are dying without passing their knowledge. Besides, the urbanization of the indigenous customs results in more and more loss of the old knowledge of this human heritage. Therefore, there is an urgent necessity for documenting those vast stores of knowledge through ethnobotanical surveys, before their disappearance from the community, especially in Al Bahah. Al Bahah region is located in the Southwest of Saudi Arabia, enjoying with different geographical regions -mountainous, plains, coastal, and high biodiversity. Until recently, there has been little scientifically written documentation regarding the traditional uses of medicinal plants in Al Bahah region. [16,17] Therefore, we focused on our project on collecting and documenting the ethnobotanical knowledge in Al Bahah region.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS


## Study area

Al Bahah region is located in the Southwest of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia between Makkah region and Aseer region [ Figure 1]. The city is located in an area surrounded by natural tree and agricultural plateaus. The province is famous for beautiful forests, wildlife areas, valleys, and mountains. The area contains more than 53 well-known forests dominated by Juniperus procera, among them are Raghdan, Ghomsan, Fayk, Skaran, and Aljabal. Al Bahah region is divided geographically into three different parts: High mountainous Sarah region with temperate weather and rich plant diversity due to relatively high annual rainfall, Eastern Tehama lowland coastal area with very hot and humid weather and very little average rainfall and the Eastern hills with cool winters, hot summers, and sparse vegetation cover. Main cities of Al Bahah region are Baljurashi, Almandaq, Qilwah, and Al-Mikhwah. The main two tribes of this region are Ghamid and Zahran. Al Bahah city experiences mild climate with temperatures ranging between 12°C and 23°C (53.6°F-73.4°F). Due to its location at 2500 m (8200 ft), the climate is moderate in summer and cold in winter above sea level. Humidity ranges from 52% to 67%. The mountainous region, As-Sarah, the weather is cooler in summer and winter. Annual rainfall in the mountainous region ranges between 229 and 581 mm. The average rainfall of the Al Bahah region ranges between 100 and 250 mm.


## Data collection

Information on medicinal plants was collected from Al Bahah and surrounding regions such as Baljurashi, Al Mandaq, and Miqwah from October 2015 to June 2016. Ethnomedicinal information was collected  


## Data analysis

Descriptive statistical methods were applied to analyze and summarize the ethnomedicinal data such as percentage of families, species, administration types, preparation modes, and plant parts used.


## RESULTS

The survey collected ethnomedicinal information of 39 plant species recorded by informants for their medicinal benefits. The recorded species were distributed among 28 plant families. Leguminosae and Euphorbiaceae were represented each by 3 species, followed by Asteraceae (2 species), Lamiaceae (2 species), Apocynaceae (2 species, and Solanaceae (2 species). All the medicinal plants were reported in their local names listed in Table 1, and used in more than 20 types of diseases. Maximum number of species was used to cure skin diseases (23 species; 42.6%) including leishmaniasis (8; 34.8%), wound healing (6; 26.1%), dermatitis (2; 8.7%), local hemostatic (2; 8.7%), inflamed gums (2; 8.7%), psoriasis (1; 4.3%), vitiligo (1; 4.3%), warts (1; 4.3%) [ Figure 2] followed by the gastrointestinal system (10; 18.5%), rheumatism (6; 11.1%), anti-snake venom (3; 5.6%), antimalaria (2; 3.7%), cardiovascular diseases (2; 3.7%), urinary tract infection (2; 3.7%), diabetes mellitus (2; 3.7%),) and respiratory tract problems (4; 7.4%) [ Figure 3]. The principal modes of preparation were paste (27.7%), oral raw consumption (23.4%), infusion (14.9%), decoction (8.5%), powder (6.4%), solutions (8.5%), and others (10.6%) [ Figure 4]. Most preparations were drawn from a single plant, often plant parts (fresh or dried) were ingested orally. Some preparations of plant parts were mixed with honey, water, and milk to improve the palatability of remedies. Among various plant parts used (leaves, fruits, branch lets, roots, rhizomes, flowers, fruits, seeds, and latex), the most frequently used plant part was the leaf, constituting 49 % followed by fruit (11 %), roots (10 %), milky latex (10%), flowers (8 %), aerial parts (4 %), branches (4 %) and others (4 %) [ Figure 5]. Twenty-three plant preparations obtained from   


## DISCUSSION

Traditional herbal medicine has played a significant role currently as a topic for scientific research, particularly when the literature and field work data have been properly assessed. Such evaluation findings can offer several plants that can have the priority to be studied for specific biological activity based on the traditional herbal uses. [18] Ethnomedical uses of the plants can be utilized as an indicator for isolating bioactive compounds using bioactivity-guided fractionation method. This ethnomedicinal route provides positive activity in the order of 2-5 new compounds per 10,000 studied plants in comparison to the random route that gives positive activity in the order of one compound per 10,000 studied plants. [19][20][21] In this study, ethnomedicinal information was collected from 39 medicinal plants belonging to 28 plant families. There is no dominance of any plant family with a higher number of plant species. However, plant families with herbs are represented by Leguminosae,    Asteraceae, Lamiaceae, Solanaceae. Their use may be preferred because of their ready availability. The most used medicinal plants, according to their UI [ Table 1], were J. procera, Rumex nervosus, and Ziziphus spina-christi. Those three medicinal plants are widespread species in Al Bahah and available during the whole year. Different parts of the plants were used for preparing the herbal remedies. However, in the majority of the plants, the herbal preparations were obtained from the leaves (45%) and similar observation has been recorded for other forested communities with green vegetation and abundant leaves. [22] It is known that leaves form a key part of plant identification and are the most easily available part to collect by local people. [23] In addition, the preference toward leaves may be because leaves are the main photosynthetic organ in plants and are responsible mainly for the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites that acts on the body as bioactive compounds. [24] Hence, leaves are the source for photosynthates or exudates [25] that are toxins against environmental hazards and this character provides medicinal value to the human body. Most herbalists give remedies for skin diseases and sometimes for rheumatism in the form of washes and pastes, and for gastrointestinal diseases orally in the form of infusion, decoction, and oral raw consumption. Skin diseases were the most treated ailments by about 43% of herbal preparations mainly pastes and Leishmania and wound healing constitute the main skin diseases treated by 8 and 6 herbal preparations successively. At present, leishmaniasis is common in the human population in different localities, including the Eastern and Southern Province of Saudi Arabia and in particular endemic in the Al-Hassa Oasis. [26] While the antileishmanial activity of Myrtus communis, Achillea biebersteinii, Olea europaea, and Dodonaea viscosa was proved, [27][28][29][30][31] further antileishmanial screening should be done in the future for the following plants Commiphora gileadensis and Dorstenia foetida. Rheumatic diseases, in particular, rheumatic arthritis, affectalmost 1%-2% of the population globally and attack women thrice as commonly as men. The spectrum of rheumatic diseases seen in Saudi Arabia appeared to be broadly similar to that seen in the West. In KSA, the rheumatic diseases affect 19.28/100,000 inhabitants. [32] However, most of the Saudi patients tends to use the conventional medicines for managing such disease, some of them still use the medicinal plants, especially in rural areas and among the old people. In our study, six plants were reported to manage rheumatic diseases, Clematis hirsute, Psiadia punctulata, Moringa peregrine, O. europaea, Withania somnifera, and J. procera. The anti-inflammatory activity of P. punctulata, M. peregrine, O. europaea, Salvadora persica, and W. somnifera was reported, and therefore, their traditional uses in folk medicine are justified scientifically. [33][34][35][36][37][38] C. hirsute and J. procera should be tested for cyclo-and lipo-xygenase inhibitory activity and related bioassays to verify their uses in traditional medicine as anti-inflammatory agents. Reports were found to the hypoglycemic effect of O. europaea leaves, Retama raetam fruits and M. peregrine, [39][40][41] but there has been no report about the hypoglycemic of R. nervosus that has been used traditionally as hypoglycemic agent. When the present study is compared to ethnobotanical contributions done in KSA and neighboring countries, our findings disclosed that ten ethnobotanical uses of eight medicinal plants have been recorded for the first time [ Table 2]. [7,8,10,12,15,[42][43][44][45][46] Little or no reports have been found so far regarding the bioactivity-guided fractionation of C. hirsute, J. procera, C. gileadensis, and D. foetida; therefore, those plants can be a target for further bioactivity-guided isolation. Ethnobotanical use in particular of C. hirsute for managing vitiligo should be proved using melanocytes bioassay, vitiligo, a disease that affects about 0.5%-1% of the world's population that means about 60 million suffering from this disease. The average age of onset is in the mid-twenties, but it can appear at any age. The disorder affects both sexes and all races equally; however, it is more noticeable in people with dark skin. Moreover, traditional antigout use of J. procera should be proved pharmacologically and the plant can be utilized economically for managing gout because the plant occurs as forests. It was reported that hyperuricemia is present in a considerable proportion of the Saudi people. [47] Most of the plants used for treating wound healing showed antimicrobial activity.


## CONCLUSIONS

In summary, this survey demonstrates that the culture of folk medicine is still practiced but on limited scale by the population in Al Bahah region. Pharmacological, toxicological, and phytochemical studies should be done for the promising medicinal plants mentioned in this research project, to assure their biological activity as well as their toxicity and then design therapeutic strategies based on the most effective and least toxic products in particular for J. procera and R. nervosus. J. procera can be utilized economically for medical purposes because it grows wild in vast areas in Al Bahah region.

## Figure 1 :
1Map of Al Bahah region

## Figure 2 :
2Percent of herbal preparations used to cure skin diseases

## Figure 3 :
3Percent of herbal preparations to cure human diseases; GI: Gastrointestinal tract; RD: Rheumatic disease; CVS: Cardiovascular diseases; UTI: Urinary tract infection; DM: Diabetes mellitus; RT: Respiratory infection

## Figure 4 :
4Percent of modes of herbal preparation Pharmacognosy Research, Volume 9, Issue 4, October-December, 2017


by ethnobotanical interviews with informants (43) (local users 18, knowledgeable persons in herbal shops(10), and traditional healers(15); ethnomedicinal properties (local name, parts of plants, ailments, the way of preparation, and administration) of plants were reported through informal, interviews, plants collected were taxonomically identified. Voucher specimens are preserved at the Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Clinical Pharmacy, Al Baha University.

## Table 1 :
1Ethnobotanical plant species used as medicines in Albaha region Cupressaceae, J. procera Hochst. ex. Endel.Contd...Family/scientific name 
Local name 
Parts used 
Folk medicinal uses 
Preparations 
Administration 
Use index, n (%) 
Acanthaceae, B. edulis (Forssk.) Pers. 
Al-saha 
Flowers 
Upper 
respiratory tract 
infection 

Infusion 
Oral 
10 (23) 

Amaranthacea, A. javanica (Burm. 
f.) Juss. ex J.A. Schultes 

Al-R'a 
Leaves, roots 
As hemostatic 
and healing 
wounds 

Powder 
Topical 
18 (42) 

Apocynaceae, C. spinarum L. 
Al-shaden 
Roots 
Cleaning the teeth 
Teeth brush 
Topical 
5 (12) 
Apocynaceae, A. obesum (Forssk) 
Roem. and Schult. 

Algaraz 
Red flowers 
Sight of its red 
flowers excites the 
sexual desire in 
women 

8 (19) 

Apocynaceae, A. obesum (Forssk.) 
Algaraz 
Milky latex 
mixed with cool 
water 

Skin disease 
Solution 
Topical 
11 (26) 

Asteraceae, A. biebersteinii Afan. 
Aldefera 
Aerial parts 
Leishmania 
Paste 
Topical 
6 (14) 
Asteraceae, A. biebersteinii Afan. 
Aldefera 
Flowers 
Insect repellent, 
flowers chewed 
for relieving 
toothache 

Topical 
10 (23) 

Burseraceae, C. gileadensis (L.) C. 
Chr 

Al-bisham 
Tender twigs 
with leaves 

Anti-snake poison 
Maceration 
or decoction 

Oral 
4 (9) 

Burseraceae, C. gileadensis (L.) C. 
Chr 

Al-bisham 
Transparent 
liquid exudated 

Peptic ulcer 
Solution 
Oral 
7 (16.0) 

Burseraceae, C. gileadensis (L.) C. 
Chr 

Al-bisham 
Oleogum resin 
Leishmaniasis 
Paste 
Topical 
10 (23) 

Capparaceae, C. tomentosa L. 
Al-Iillb 
Leaves and 
fruits 

Abortifacient 
Eaten raw 
Oral 
5 (12) 

Celastraceae, G. parviflora (Vahl) 
Chiov. 

Al-athrar 
Tender 
branchlets 

For treating urine 
retention 

Tender 
branch is 
wrapped on 
the patient's 
waist 

Topical 
3 (6) 

Chenopodiaceae, C. murale L. 
A'tra 
Aerial parts 
Leishmaniasis 
Paste 
Topical 
11 (26) 
Ranunculaceae, C. hirsute L. 
Al-dhian 
Leaves 
Antirheumatic 

Antivitiligo 

Paste 
Topical 
9 (21) 

11 (26) 
Combretaceae, C. molle G. Don. 
Althu'ab 
Black bitter 
gum 

Stomach ache 
Eaten by 
some people 

Oral 
4 (9) 

Asteraceae, A. yemenensis Podl. 
Al-ik-hiwan 
Flowers 
Stomach ache 
vomiting 

Infusion 
Oral 
5 (12) 

Asteraceae, P. punctulata (DC.) 
Vatke. 

Al-Tabak 
Leaves 
Antirheumatic 
Paste 
Topical 
8 (19) 
Insect repellent 
Smoke of 
leaves 

13 (30) 

Alar'ar 
Leaves collected 
before sunrise 

Antispasmodic 
Infusion 
Oral 
25 (58) 

Cupressaceae, J. procera Hochst. ex. 
Endel. 

Alar'ar 
Leaves 
Gout 
Infusion 
Oral 
18 (41) 

Cupressaceae, J. procera Hochst. ex. 
Endel. 

Alar'ar 
Leaves 
Cold, pharyngitis 
Smoke of its 
leaves 

12 (28) 

Euphorbiaceae, E. cuneata Vahl 
Al-baka 
Antispasmodic 
Poisonous, small 
branchlet used 
for brushing 
teeth may 
be fatal 

Brush 
Topical 
3 (7) 

Euphorbiaceae, E. fractiflexa S. 
Carter and Wood 

Al-saab 
Latex 
Conjunctivitis 
Wash (diluted 
with water) 

Topical 
2 (5) 

Euphorbiaceae, E. schimperi C. Presl 
Al-dehin 
Milky latex 
For healing 
cavernous stinking 
wounds 

Solution 
Topical 
4 (9) 

Lamiaceae, L. pubescens Decne. 
Al-shiah 
Leaves 
Antispasmodic, 
antiseptic 

Chewing 
leaves 

Oral 
13 (30) 

Lamiaceae, O. fruticosa (Forssk.) 
Schweinf. ex Penzig 

Alsharm 
Leaves 
Eye inflammation in 
livestock 

Decoction 
Topical 
5 (12) 



## Table 1 :
1Contd...Family/scientific name 
Local name 
Parts used 
Folk medicinal uses 
Preparations 
Administration 
Use index, n (%) 
Leguminosae, A. tortilis (Forssk.) 
Hayne, 

Alsomer 
Roots 
Cleaning teeth 
Teeth brush 
Topical 
11 (26) 

Leguminosae, A. tortilis (Forssk.) 
Hayne, 

Alsomer 
Its honey 
Ulcers and deep 
wounds (gangrene) 

Topical 
7 (16) 

Leguminosae, I. articulate L. 
Al-khiter 
Powder of 
leaves roots 

Hemoststic 
Powder 
Topical 
10 (23) 

Leguminosae, R. raetam (Forssk.) 
Webb 

AL-retem 
fruits 
hypoglycemic 
Decoction 
Oral 
5 (12) 

Moraceae, D. foetida Schweinf. 
Om -Lakef 
Milky latex 
leishmaniasis 
Lotion 
Topical 
7 (16) 
Moraceae, F. palmata Forssk. 
Al-hamat 
Milky latex of 
tender branch 

For removing warts 
Topical 
4 (9) 

Moringaceae, M. peregrina (Forssk.) 
Fiori 

Al-ban 
Cooked seeds 
Joints pains 
backache, sciatic pain 

Eaten 
Oral 
13 (30) 

Al-ban 
Powdered gum 
Conjunctivitis 
Wash 
Topical 
9 (21) 
Al-ban 
Powdered 
branches 

Incurable wounds 
Paste 
Topical 
13 (30) 

Moringaceae, M. peregrina (Forssk.) 
Fiori 

Al-ban 
Gums, seeds 
and its oil, small 
tender branches 

Hypoglycemic and 
for treating burns 

Oil of seeds 
14 (33) 

Myrtaceae, M. communis L. 
Al-A's 
Leaves 
Asthma 
Infusion 
Oral 
5 (12) 
Myrtaceae, M. communis L. 
Al-A's 
Bark 
Pharyngitis and 
cough 

Chewing the 
bark of plant 

Oral 
12 (28) 

Myrtaceae, M. communis L. 
Al-A's 
Leaves 
Mouth ulcers, 
leishmaniasis, 
gangrene (deep 
wounds) 

Paste 
Topical 
7 (16) 

Oleaceae, O. europaea L. 
Al-aotem 
Under heating, 
small pieces of 
dried stems give 
different types 
of liquids, first 
liquid called 
semnah used as 
antirheumatic 
and for treating 
leishmaniasis 

Antirheumatic 
Topical 
8 (19) 
Leishmaniasis 

Oleaceae, O. europaea L. 
Al-aotem 
The 2 nd liquid 
named almohel 

Inflamed gums 
Mouth wash 
Topical 
7 (16) 

Oleaceae, O. europaea L. 
Al-aotem 
3 rd liquid named 
katran (Tar) 

Skin diseases of 
animals (camels) 

Liniment 
Topical 
10 (23) 

Oleaceae, O. europaea L. 
Al-aotem 
Leaves 
Diabetes 
mellitus and 
hypertension 

Chewing 
leaves 

Oral 
13 (30) 

Polygonaceae, R. nervosus Vahl 
Al-athrub 
Leaves 
Hypoglycemic 
Oral 
21 (49) 
Asthma 
5 (12) 
Stopping diarrhea 
8 (19) 
Polygonaceae, R. nervosus Vahl 
Al-athrub 
Leaves 
Wounds 
Powder 
Topical 
15 (35) 
Polygonaceae, R. vesicarius L. 
Al-homad 
Tender leaves 
Antiemetic 
Raw 
Oral 
9 (21) 
Rhamnaceae, Z. spina-christi (L.) 
Willd. 

Al-sider 
leaves 
Strengthening hairs 
(women) 

Wash 
Topical 
19 (44) 

Rhamnaceae, Z. spina-christi (L.) 
Willd. 

Al-sider 
Leaves 
Antispasmodic 
Infusion 
Oral 
6 

Rosaceae, R. abyssinica R. Br. 
Al-obal 
Fruits 
Pharyngitis, cough 
Infusion 
Oral 
13 (30) 
Rutaceae, R. chalepensis L. 
alsithab 
Leaves 
Snake bites 
As dressing 
Topical 
4 (9) 
Salvadoraceae, S. persica L. 
Al-Arak 
Fruits 
Antisnake 
painful rheumatism 

Eaten by 
people 

Oral 
14 (32) 

Sapindaceae, D. viscosa Jacq. 
Shath 
Leaves 
Burns 
Paste 
Topical 
3 (7) 
Leaves 
Leishmaniasis 
Paste 
Topical 
8 (19) 
Solanaceae, S. incanum L 
Al-hadak 
Fruits 
Leishmaniasis 
Paste juice 
Topical 
10 (23) 
Solanaceae, S. incanum L 
Al-hadak 
Roots 
Malaria 
Decoction 
Oral 
3 (7) 
Solanaceae, S. incanum L. 
Al-hadak 
Leaves 
As dressing for 
healing wounds 

Paste 
Topical 
5 (12) 

Solanaceae, W. somnifera (L.) Dun. 
Alobeb 
Leaves 
Chronic dermatitis, 
psoriasis 

Paste 
Topical 
7 (16) 

Tiliaceae, Grewia tembensis Fresen. 
Shohaat 
Leaves 
Gum inflammation 
Eaten 
Topical 
3 (7) 

Contd... 


## Table 1 :
1Contd...Family/scientific name 
Local name 
Parts used 
Folk medicinal uses 
Preparations 
Administration 
Use index, n (%) 
Vitaceae, C. rotundifolia (Forsk.) 
Vahl. 

Al-saleh 
leaves 
Antimalarial 
Raw 
Oral 
6 (14) 

Vitaceae, C. digitatum (Forssk.) 
Dessc 

Al-halqa 
Rhizomes 
Nausea 
Eaten 
Oral 
3 (7) 

n: Total number of people interviewed; B. edulis: Blepharis edulis; A. javanica: Aerva javanica; C. edulis: Carissa edulis; A. obesum: Adenium obesum; 
A. biebersteinii: Achillea biebersteinii; C. gileadensis: Commiphora gileadensis; C. tomentosa: Capparis tomentosa; G. parviflora: Gymnosporia parviflora; 
C. murale: Chenopodium murale; C. hirsute: Clematis hirsute: C. molle: Combretum molle; A. yemenensis: Anthemis yemenensis; P. punctulata: Psiadia punctulata; 
J. procera: Juniperus procera; E. cuneata: Euphorbia cuneata; E. fractiflexa: Euphorbia fractiflexa; E. schimperi: Euphorbia schimperi; O. fruticosa: Otostegia fruticosa; 
A. tortilis: Acacia tortilis; L. pubescens: Lavandula pubescens; I. articulate: Indigofera articulate; R. raetam: Retama raetam; D. foetida: Dorstenia foetida; F. palmate: 
Ficus palmata; M. peregrine: Moringa peregrine; M. communis: Myrtus communis; O. europaea: Olea europaea; R. nervosus: Rumex nervosus; R. vesicarius: Rumex 
vesicarius; Z. spina: Ziziphus spina; R. abyssinica: Rosa abyssinica; R. chalepensis: Ruta chalepensis; S. persica: Salvadora persica; D. viscosa: Dodonaea viscosa; 
S. incanum: Solanum incanum; W. somnifera: Withania somnifera; C. rotundifolia: Cissus rotundifolia; C. digitatum: Cyphostemma digitatum 



## Table 2 :
2Plant species with new ethnopharmacological uses Commiphora gileadensis; C. hirsute: Clematis hirsute; C. molle: Combretum molle; J. procera: Juniperus procera; E. fractiflexa: Euphorbia fractiflexa; F. palmate: Ficus palmate; S. incanum: Solanum incanumFamily/scientific 
Parts used 
Folk medicinal uses 
Preparations 
C. gileadensis 
Transparent liquid 
Peptic ulcer and as anti-snake 
Oral 
C. gileadensis 
Oleogum resin 
Leishmaniasis 
Topical 
C. hirsute 
Leaves 
Antirheumatic, anti-vitiligo 
Paste 
C. molle 
Black bitter gum 
Stomach ache 
Raw eaten 
J. procera 
Leaves 
Gout 
Infusion 
E. fractiflexa 
Latex 
Conjunctivitis 
Wash (diluted with water) 
F. palmata 
Milky latex 
Removing warts 
Topical 
S. incanum 
Roots 
Malaria 
Infusion 
C. gileadensis: 
Pharmacognosy Research, Volume 9, Issue 4, October-December, 2017
AcknowledgementThe authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Higher Studies and Scientific Research, Albaha University for funding this work through the project number 55/1436. The authors gratefully acknowledge this financial support.Financial support and sponsorshipConflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.
How many species of seed plant are there?. R Govaerts, Taxon. 50Govaerts R. How many species of seed plant are there? Taxon 2001;50:1085-90.

Impact of cultivation and gathering of medicinal plants on biodiversity: Global trends and issues. In: Biodiversity and the Ecosystem Approach in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Ninth Regular Session of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. U Schippmann, A B Cunningham, D J Leaman, FAORome, ItalySchippmann U, Cunningham AB, Leaman DJ. Impact of cultivation and gathering of medicinal plants on biodiversity: Global trends and issues. In: Biodiversity and the Ecosystem Approach in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Ninth Regular Session of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. Rome, Italy: FAO; 2002. p. 143-67.

A complete profile on blind-your-eye Mangrove Excoecaria agallocha L. (Euphorbiaceae): Ethnobotany, phytochemistry, and pharmacological aspects. S Mondal, D Ghosh, K Ramakrishna, Pharmacogn Rev. 10Mondal S, Ghosh D, Ramakrishna K. A complete profile on blind-your-eye Mangrove Excoecaria agallocha L. (Euphorbiaceae): Ethnobotany, phytochemistry, and pharmacological aspects. Pharmacogn Rev 2016;10:123-38.

Ethnobotanical study of latex plants in the maritime region of Togo. Y P Hoekou, T Tchacondo, S D Karou, K Koudouvo, W Atakpama, P Pissang, Pharmacognosy Res. 8Hoekou YP, Tchacondo T, Karou SD, Koudouvo K, Atakpama W, Pissang P, et al. Ethnobotanical study of latex plants in the maritime region of Togo. Pharmacognosy Res 2016;8:128-34.

Medicinal and aromatic plants in agroforestry systems. M R Rao, M C Palada, B N Becker, Agroforestry Syst. 61Rao MR, Palada MC, Becker BN. Medicinal and aromatic plants in agroforestry systems. Agroforestry Syst 2004;61:107-22.

Ecology and ethnomedicine: Exploring links between current environmental crisis and indigenous medical practices. C Anyinam, Soc Sci Med. 40Anyinam C. Ecology and ethnomedicine: Exploring links between current environmental crisis and indigenous medical practices. Soc Sci Med 1995;40:321-9.

A comparison of traditional anti-inflammation and anti-infection medicinal plants with current evidence from biomedical research: Results from a regional study. A Vieira, Pharmacognosy Res. 2Vieira A. A comparison of traditional anti-inflammation and anti-infection medicinal plants with current evidence from biomedical research: Results from a regional study. Pharmacognosy Res 2010;2:293-5.

Chemical constituents from the leaves of Euphorbia ammak growing in Saudi Arabia. Abdel-Sattar E Abou-Hussein, D Petereit, F , Pharmacognosy Res. 7Abdel-Sattar E, Abou-Hussein D, Petereit F. Chemical constituents from the leaves of Euphorbia ammak growing in Saudi Arabia. Pharmacognosy Res 2015;7:14-7.

Medicinal Plants of Saudi Arabia. J S Mossa, M A Al-Yahya, Al-Meshal Ia, King Saud University PressRiyadhMossa JS, Al-Yahya MA, Al-Meshal IA. Medicinal Plants of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: King Saud University Press; 2000.

Medicinal Plants of Saudi Arabia. J S Mossa, M A Al-Yahya, Al-Meshal Ia, King Saud University PressRiyadhMossa JS, Al-Yahya MA, Al-Meshal IA. Medicinal Plants of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: King Saud University Press; 1987.

Saudi Plants: A Phytochemical and Biological Approach. M A Al-Yahya, Al-Meshal Ia, J S Mossa, A B Al-Badr, M Tariq, King Saud University PressRiyadhAl-Yahya MA, Al-Meshal IA, Mossa JS, Al-Badr AB, Tariq M. Saudi Plants: A Phytochemical and Biological Approach. Riyadh: King Saud University Press; 1990.

Handbook of Arabian Medicinal Plants. Gazanfar Shahina, A Z , CRC PressBoca Raton, Florida, London, TokyoGazanfar Shahina AZ. Handbook of Arabian Medicinal Plants. Boca Raton, Florida, London, Tokyo: CRC Press; 1994.

Flora of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: Ministry of Agriculture and Water. S A Chaudhary, Chaudhary SA. Flora of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: Ministry of Agriculture and Water; 2000.

Flora of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: Ministry of Agriculture and Water. S A Chaudhary, Chaudhary SA. Flora of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: Ministry of Agriculture and Water; 2001.

Antidiabetic and anticancer potential of native medicinal plants from Saudi Arabia. S M Alqahtani, S O Alkholy, M P Ferreira, Polyphenols in Human Health and Disease. Watson RR, Preedy V, Zibadi SLondonElsevierAlqahtani SM, Alkholy SO, Ferreira MP. Antidiabetic and anticancer potential of native medicinal plants from Saudi Arabia. In: Watson RR, Preedy V, Zibadi S, editors. Polyphenols in Human Health and Disease. London: Elsevier; 2013.

Prospects for plant anthelmintics in tropical veterinary medicine. J A Hammond, D Fielding, S C Bishop, Vet Res Commun. 21Hammond JA, Fielding D, Bishop SC. Prospects for plant anthelmintics in tropical veterinary medicine. Vet Res Commun 1997;21:213-28.

Historical review of medicinal plants' usage. B B Petrovska, Pharmacogn Rev. 6Petrovska BB. Historical review of medicinal plants' usage. Pharmacogn Rev 2012;6:1-5.

Some medicinal plants used in Yemeni herbal medicine to treat malaria. N A Ali, K Al-Rahawi, U Lindequist, Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 1Ali NA, Al-Rahawi K, Lindequist U. Some medicinal plants used in Yemeni herbal medicine to treat malaria. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med 2004;1:72-6.

Pharmaceutical prospecting and the potential for pharmaceutical crops -Natural product drug discovery at the United States National Cancer Institute. G M Cragg, M R Boyd, M R Grever, S A Schepartz, Ann Mo Bot Gard. 82Cragg GM, Boyd MR, Grever MR, Schepartz SA. Pharmaceutical prospecting and the potential for pharmaceutical crops -Natural product drug discovery at the United States National Cancer Institute. Ann Mo Bot Gard 1995;82:47-53.

Medicinal plants as sources of new therapeutics. W H Lewis, Elvin-Lewis Mp, Ann Mo Bot Gard. 82Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis MP. Medicinal plants as sources of new therapeutics. Ann Mo Bot Gard 1995;82:16-24.

Antimycobacterial screening of some Turkish plants. F Tosun, C A Kizilay, B Sener, M Vural, P Palittapongarnpim, J Ethnopharmacol. 95Tosun F, Kizilay CA, Sener B, Vural M, Palittapongarnpim P. Antimycobacterial screening of some Turkish plants. J Ethnopharmacol 2004;95:273-5.

Medicinal plants popularly used in the Brazilian Tropical Atlantic Forest. Di Stasi, L C Oliveira, G P Carvalhaes, M A Queiroz, M TienJr, O S Kakinami, S H , Fitoterapia. 73Di Stasi LC, Oliveira GP, Carvalhaes MA, Queiroz M Jr., Tien OS, Kakinami SH, et al. Medicinal plants popularly used in the Brazilian Tropical Atlantic Forest. Fitoterapia 2002;73:69-91.

First comprehensive contribution to medical ethnobotany of Western Pyrenees. S Akerreta, R Y Cavero, M I Calvo, J Ethnobiol Ethnomed. 326Akerreta S, Cavero RY, Calvo MI. First comprehensive contribution to medical ethnobotany of Western Pyrenees. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2007;3:26.

Observation on the traditional phytotherapy among the Malayali tribes in Eastern Ghats of Tamil Nadu, South India. Francis Xavier, T Kannan, M Auxilia, A , J Ethnopharmacol. 165Francis Xavier T, Kannan M, Auxilia A. Observation on the traditional phytotherapy among the Malayali tribes in Eastern Ghats of Tamil Nadu, South India. J Ethnopharmacol 2015;165:198-214.

Isolation of biologically active constituents from Moringa peregrina (Forssk.) Fiori. (Family: Moringaceae) growing in Egypt. T S El-Alfy, S M Ezzat, A K Hegazy, A M Amer, G M Kamel, Pharmacogn Mag. 7El-Alfy TS, Ezzat SM, Hegazy AK, Amer AM, Kamel GM. Isolation of biologically active constituents from Moringa peregrina (Forssk.) Fiori. (Family: Moringaceae) growing in Egypt. Pharmacogn Mag 2011;7:109-15.

Cutaneous leishmaniasis in Al Hassa, Saudi Arabia: Epidemiological trends from 2000 to 2010. T T Amin, Al-Mohammed Hi, F Kaliyadan, B S Mohammed, Asian Pac J Trop Med. 6Amin TT, Al-Mohammed HI, Kaliyadan F, Mohammed BS. Cutaneous leishmaniasis in Al Hassa, Saudi Arabia: Epidemiological trends from 2000 to 2010. Asian Pac J Trop Med 2013;6:667-72.

Antileishmanial and cytotoxic effects of essential oil and methanolic extract of Myrtus communis L. H Mahmoudvand, F Ezzatkhah, F Sharififar, I Sharifi, E S Dezaki, Korean J Parasitol. 53Mahmoudvand H, Ezzatkhah F, Sharififar F, Sharifi I, Dezaki ES. Antileishmanial and cytotoxic effects of essential oil and methanolic extract of Myrtus communis L. Korean J Parasitol 2015;53:21-7.

Evaluation of antileishmanial activity of albaha medicinal plants against Leishmania amazonensis. S S Al-Sokari, N A Ali, L Monzote, Al-Fatimi Ma, Biomed Res Int. 938747Al-Sokari SS, Ali NA, Monzote L, Al-Fatimi MA. Evaluation of antileishmanial activity of albaha medicinal plants against Leishmania amazonensis. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:938747.

The leishmanicidal activity of oleuropein is selectively regulated through inflammation-and oxidative stress-related genes. I D Kyriazis, O S Koutsoni, N Aligiannis, K Karampetsou, A L Skaltsounis, E Dotsika, Parasit Vectors. 9441Kyriazis ID, Koutsoni OS, Aligiannis N, Karampetsou K, Skaltsounis AL, Dotsika E, et al. The leishmanicidal activity of oleuropein is selectively regulated through inflammation-and oxidative stress-related genes. Parasit Vectors 2016;9:441.

In vitro antiprotozoal activity potential of some plant extracts from Albaha region. N A Ali, S S Al-Sokari, R A Mothana, M Kourish, M Wagih, C Paul, World J Pharm Res. 5Ali NA, Al-Sokari SS, Mothana RA, Kourish M, Wagih M, Paul C, et al. In vitro antiprotozoal activity potential of some plant extracts from Albaha region. World J Pharm Res 2016;5:338-46.

Hierarchical cluster analysis and chemical characterisation of Myrtus communis L. essential oil from Yemen region and its antimicrobial, antioxidant and anti-colorectal adenocarcinoma properties. S Anwar, R A Crouch, Awadh Ali, N A , Al-Fatimi , M A Setzer, W N Wessjohann, L , Nat Prod Res. 9Anwar S, Crouch RA, Awadh Ali NA, Al-Fatimi MA, Setzer WN, Wessjohann L. Hierarchical cluster analysis and chemical characterisation of Myrtus communis L. essential oil from Yemen region and its antimicrobial, antioxidant and anti-colorectal adenocarcinoma properties. Nat Prod Res 2017; 9:1-6.

Prevalence of Arthritis and Rheumatic Diseases around the World. A Growing Burden and Implications for Health Care Needs Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research Arthritis Community Research and Evaluation Unit (ACREU). R Wong, A M Davis, E Badley, R Grewal, M Mohammed, Toronto Western Research InstituteWong R, Davis AM, Badley E, Grewal R, Mohammed M. Prevalence of Arthritis and Rheumatic Diseases around the World. A Growing Burden and Implications for Health Care Needs Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research Arthritis Community Research and Evaluation Unit (ACREU) Toronto Western Research Institute; 2010.

Olea europaea leaf (Ph.Eur.) extract as well as several of its isolated phenolics inhibit the gout-related enzyme xanthine oxidase. J Flemmig, K Kuchta, J Arnhold, H W Rauwald, Phytomedicine. 18Flemmig J, Kuchta K, Arnhold J, Rauwald HW. Olea europaea leaf (Ph.Eur.) extract as well as several of its isolated phenolics inhibit the gout-related enzyme xanthine oxidase. Phytomedicine 2011;18:561-6.

Double-blind placebo-controlled trial of hydroxytyrosol of Olea europaea on pain in gonarthrosis. R Takeda, T Koike, I Taniguchi, K Tanaka, Phytomedicine. 20Takeda R, Koike T, Taniguchi I, Tanaka K. Double-blind placebo-controlled trial of hydroxytyrosol of Olea europaea on pain in gonarthrosis. Phytomedicine 2013;20:861-4.

Herbal plants used in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: A review. A Kaur, P Nain, J Nain, Int J Pharm Pharm Sci. 4Kaur A, Nain P, Nain J. Herbal plants used in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: A review. Int J Pharm Pharm Sci 2012;4:44-57.

Phytochemical Investigation of Psiadia punctulata for Analgesic Agents. Doctoral Dissertation. L S Mulwa, Nairobi, KenyaUniversity ofMulwa LS. Phytochemical Investigation of Psiadia punctulata for Analgesic Agents. Doctoral Dissertation. University of Nairobi, Kenya; 2012.

Pharmacological profile of Salvadora persica. M Ahmad, H Imran, Z Yaqeen, Z Rehman, A Rahman, N Fatima, Pak J Pharm Sci. 24Ahmad M, Imran H, Yaqeen Z, Rehman Z, Rahman A, Fatima N, et al. Pharmacological profile of Salvadora persica. Pak J Pharm Sci 2011;24:323-30.

Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities of Moringa peregrina Seeds. M A Koheil, A Mohammed, M A Hussein, S M Othman, A El-Haddad, Free Radic Antioxid. 1Koheil MA, Mohammed A, Hussein MA, Othman SM, El-Haddad A. Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities of Moringa peregrina Seeds. Free Radic Antioxid 2011;1:49-61.

Hypoglycemic and antioxidant effect of oleuropein in alloxan-diabetic rabbits. H F Al-Azzawie, M S Alhamdani, Life Sci. 78Al-Azzawie HF, Alhamdani MS. Hypoglycemic and antioxidant effect of oleuropein in alloxan-diabetic rabbits. Life Sci 2006;78:1371-7.

Antihypertensive, antiatherosclerotic and antioxidant activity of triterpenoids isolated from Olea europaea, subspecies Africana leaves. L I Somova, F O Shode, P Ramnanan, A Nadar, J Ethnopharmacol. 84Somova LI, Shode FO, Ramnanan P, Nadar A. Antihypertensive, antiatherosclerotic and antioxidant activity of triterpenoids isolated from Olea europaea, subspecies Africana leaves. J Ethnopharmacol 2003;84:299-305.

Mechanisms of the antihyperglycemic activity of Retama raetam in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. M M Algandaby, H A Alghamdi, O M Ashour, A B Abdel-Naim, S A Ghareib, Abdel - Sattar, E A , Food Chem Toxicol. 48Algandaby MM, Alghamdi HA, Ashour OM, Abdel-Naim AB, Ghareib SA, Abdel-Sattar EA, et al. Mechanisms of the antihyperglycemic activity of Retama raetam in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Food Chem Toxicol 2010;48:2448-53.

Ethnobotanical magnitude towards sustainable utilization of wild foliage in Arabian Desert. P C Phondani, A Bhatt, E Elsarrag, Y A Horr, J Tradit Complement Med. 6Phondani PC, Bhatt A, Elsarrag E, Horr YA. Ethnobotanical magnitude towards sustainable utilization of wild foliage in Arabian Desert. J Tradit Complement Med 2015;6:209-18.

Medicinal and non-medicinal uses of some plants found in the middle region of Saudi Arabia. R S Youssef, J Med Plants Res. 7Youssef RS. Medicinal and non-medicinal uses of some plants found in the middle region of Saudi Arabia. J Med Plants Res 2013;7:2501-13.

Traditional medicinal plants indigenous to Al-Rass province, Saudi Arabia. G E El-Ghazali, K S Al-Khalifa, G A Saleem, E M Abdallah, J Med Plants Res. 4El-Ghazali GE, Al-Khalifa KS, Saleem GA, Abdallah EM. Traditional medicinal plants indigenous to Al-Rass province, Saudi Arabia. J Med Plants Res 2010;4:2680-3.

Medicinal plant diversity in the flora of Saudi Arabia 1: A report on seven plant families. M A Rahman, J S Mossa, M S Al-Said, Al-Yahya Ma, Fitoterapia. 75Rahman MA, Mossa JS, Al-Said MS, Al-Yahya MA. Medicinal plant diversity in the flora of Saudi Arabia 1: A report on seven plant families. Fitoterapia 2004;75:149-61.

Beduin Ethnobony: Plant Concepts and Plant Use in a Desert Pastoral World. A Dissertation. University of Arizona. J P Mandaville, Mandaville JP. Beduin Ethnobony: Plant Concepts and Plant Use in a Desert Pastoral World. A Dissertation. University of Arizona; 2004.

Hyperuricemia in Saudi Arabia. Al-Arfaj As, Rheumatol Int. 20Al-Arfaj AS. Hyperuricemia in Saudi Arabia. Rheumatol Int 2001;20:61-4.