# 1:4 1 Behavioural Measure in Rat Model of Walker 256 Breast Cancer Cell-induced Bone Pain: An Overview

CorpusID: 53978615
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a68a56c43e81855c3660cb9626dc0ac39efb1e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a68a56c43e81855c3660cb9626dc0ac39efb1e4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

1:4 1 Behavioural Measure in Rat Model of Walker 256 Breast Cancer Cell-induced Bone Pain: An Overview
2018

Priyank A Shenoy priyank.shenoy@monash.edu 
DrA Priyank 
Shenoy 

American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics
Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
Monash University
MelbourneVictoriaAustralia


Monash University
MelbourneVictoriaAustralia

1:4 1 Behavioural Measure in Rat Model of Walker 256 Breast Cancer Cell-induced Bone Pain: An Overview

4. American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics
51201810.21767/2393-8862.100014Received: August 22, 2018; Accepted: September 04, 2018; Published: September 06, 2018 Vol. 5 No. 1:4 2018this article in : http://www.imedpub.com/pharmacology-and-pharmacotherapeutics/ iMedPub Journals Short Communication Corresponding author: Citation: Shenoy PA (2018) Suitability of Stimuli evoked Hypersensitivities in Hind paws as a Clinically Relevant Pain ReferencesWalker 256; Breast cancer-induced bone pain
Metastases of breast cancer cells to the axial skeleton causes excruciating pain. The nature of pain hypersensitivities in metastasized bones is very complex due to the interplay of inflammatory, neuropathic and cancer-specific pain components. The existing drugs typically used to treat breast cancer-induced bone pain are inefficacious and often exhibit severe side effects. Hence, it remains to be an important goal of the ongoing research activities to seek novel analgesic compounds with better efficacy and tolerability. One of the key aspects in the process of understanding the mechanisms of pain progression and drug discovery to mitigate the hypersensitivities is employment of suitable preclinical animal models that mimic the complex human pathophysiology of breast cancer induced bone pain. Walker 256 breast cancer cell-induced bone pain model in rats is one such model that is known to show key resemblances to the clinical pain associated with bony metastases. The commonly used methods to assess pain hypersensitivities in Walker 256 cell-induced bone pain model in rats include stimuli evoked techniques like von Frey assessment and Randall-Selitto test. While other methods like assessment of gait parameters or spontaneous pain can also be used as beneficial complementary tools, this short review majorly sheds light on suitability of the stimuli evoked pain assessment methods in the hind paws of rats as being clinically relevant measures of assessing breast cancer induced bone pain in Walker 256 cell induced bony metastases.

## Introduction

Pain is a significant medical problem that co-exists with several diseases including various types of cancer [1]. Breast cancer cells metastasize from the tissue of origin and establish themselves in distant parts of the axial skeleton [2]. The cancer cells growing in the bone microenvironment cause osteolysis and sensitisation of the peripheral nerve endings innervating the bones, thereby causing excruciating pain [3]. Breast cancer-induced bone pain (BCIBP) causes severe morbidity because of the heterogeneous combination of inflammatory, neuropathic and cancer-specific components [4]. The existing analgesic/adjuvant medications are often insufficiently efficacious to combat this pain condition [5][6][7][8]. Thus it is very important to develop and characterize suitable preclinical models of BCIBP so as to assist in drug discovery programs aimed at identifying novel compounds having potential to mitigate this often intractable pain condition. The rat model of Walker 256 breast cancer cell induced bone pain is a highly useful preclinical tool for assessment of mechanisms of BCIBP and for seeking novel analgesics in the treatments thereof, as it mimics key aspects of the human pathophysiology of this condition [8-11].


## Discussion

Von Frey test using a series of filaments corresponding to different levels of forces, and paw pressure test also called as Randall- However, it is noteworthy that dissociation is observed in between skeletal pain behaviors and skin hypersensitivity in a male C3H mouse model of intra-femoral injection of NCTC 2472 osteosarcoma cells [61]. It is known that different types of cell lines or tumors exhibit distinct pain behavioral patterns [62]. It is the unique interaction between each of the cancers colonising the bone and the nerve innervation that predominantly decides the nature of pain manifestation [63]. On these grounds, a previous study highlighted the fact that neither spontaneous pain nor ambulatory pain is the best measure of cancer induced bone pain for all models triggered by different cancer cell lines in general [62]. It showed that intra-osseous injection of B16-F10 melanoma cell line in the femur did not produce either the spontaneous pain or the ambulatory pain. The bone pain induced by B16-F10 cell line manifested only as hind paw skin hypersensitivity. Similarly, C26 colon cancer cell line did not produce spontaneous pain behavior. Hence, the spontaneous or ambulatory pain are not the universal measures of bone pain at least in some models like B16 cell model and C26 cell model. In alignment to this preclinical animal based study, a clinical study of cancer induced bone pain also reported that in patients with breakthrough pain, which is commonly triggered by a stimulus [64], patients were not more likely to experience pain at the weight-bearing bone sites, compared to patients without pain [65]. Additionally, allodynia and gait behaviours are two independent phenomena. Neuropathic pain is one of the key components of cancer induced bone pain [4], and allodynia (measured by tests like von Frey) is a more reliable measure of the neuropathic pain component, rather than gait behaviours (weight bearing or spontaneous pain during ambulation) [66]. The changes in gait parameters can typically be due to the tendency of animals to avoid allodynia produced by contact of the paw with the floor [67]. The gait changes might not necessarily relate well to pain hypersensitivities [66][67][68][69][70][71][72].

There are several evidences that suggest that changes in gait parameters like guarding the hind paw during ambulation or changes in weight bearing are significantly driven by the adaptive changes and psychological influences (pain-avoidance and fear due to cognition), rather than the current levels of pain intensity [66][67][68][69][70][71][72][73][74][75][76][77][78][79][80][81][82]. Whereas, both the von Frey and Randall-Selitto tests that are also used in humans to assess pain hypersensitivities, detect the current levels of pain and have high clinical relevance [16][17][18][19][20][21]. This is probably one of the most important reasons why large number of published studies used stimuli-evoked methods like the von Frey and Randall-Selitto tests to assess pain hypersensitivities in the hind paws of animals following unilateral tibial inoculation of cancer cells.


## Conclusion

The vast literature on Walker 256 cell induced BCIBP model in rats strongly suggests that stimuli evoked pain behaviours in the hind paws of rats is an appropriate measure of cancer induced bone pain in this particular model. However, a complementary assessment of measures like ambulatory pain, spontaneous pain or pain evoked by weight bearing on the hind paws of rats might add more value to the studies in future as these tests might be considered relatable to pain assessments in humans. 13 Cobianchi S, De Cruz J, Navarro X (2014) Assessment of sensory thresholds and nociceptive fiber growth after sciatic nerve injury reveals the differential contribution of collateral reinnervation and nerve regeneration to neuropathic pain. Exp Neurol 255: 1-11.

14 De Koning P, Brakkee JH, Gispen WH (1986) Methods for producing a reproducible crush in the sciatic and tibial nerve of the rat and rapid and precise testing of return of sensory function.  

## 10
Shenoy PA, Kuo A, Khan N (2018) The somatostatin receptor-4 Agonist J-2156 alleviates mechanical hypersensitivity in a rat model of breast cancer induced bone pain. Front Pharmacol 9. 11 Shenoy PA (2018) Establishment, optimization and characterization of a rat model of breast cancer induced bone pain. Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Australia. 12 Kambiz S, Baas M, Duraku LS (2014) Innervation mapping of the hind paw of the rat using Evans Blue extravasation, Optical Surface Mapping and CASAM. J Neurosci Methods 229: 15-27.

## 24
Fang D, Kong L-Y, Cai J (2015) Interleukin-6-mediated functional upregulation of TRPV1 receptors in dorsal root ganglion neurons through the activation of JAK/PI3K signaling pathway: Roles in the development of bone cancer pain in a rat model. Pain 156: 1124-1144. 25 Liu M, Yang H, Fang D (2013) Upregulation of P2X3 receptors by neuronal calcium sensor protein VILIP-1 in dorsal root ganglions contributes to the bone cancer pain in rats. Pain 154: 1551-1568. 26 Zheng Q, Fang D, Liu M (2013) Suppression of KCNQ/M (Kv7) potassium channels in dorsal root ganglion neurons contributes to the development of bone cancer pain in a rat model. Pain 154: 434-448. 27 Shih MH, Kao SC, Wang W (2012) Spinal Cord NMDA receptormediated activation of mammalian target of rapamycin is required for the development and maintenance of bone cancer-induced pain hypersensitivities in rats. J Pain 13: 338-349. 28 Li TF, Fan H, Wang YX (2016) Aconitum-derived bulleyaconitine A exhibits antihypersensitivity through direct stimulating dynorphin a expression in spinal microglia. J Pain 17: 530-548. 29 Li Y, Cai J, Han Y (2014) Enhanced function of TRPV1 via up-regulation by insulin-like growth factor-1 in a rat model of bone cancer pain. Eur J Pain 18: 774-784. 30 Liu S, Liu YP, Yue DM (2014) Protease-activated receptor 2 in dorsal root ganglion contributes to peripheral sensitization of bone cancer pain. Eur J Pain 18: 326-337. 31 Zhang R-X, Li A, Liu B (2008) Electroacupuncture attenuates bone cancer-induced hyperalgesia and inhibits spinal preprodynorphin expression in a rat model. Eur J Pain 12: 870-878. 32 Muralidharan A, Wyse BD, Smith MT (2014) Analgesic efficacy and mode of action of a selective small molecule angiotensin ii type 2 receptor antagonist in a rat model of prostate cancer-induced bone pain. Pain Med 15: 93-110.


Find this article in : http://www.imedpub.com/pharmacology-and-pharmacotherapeutics/ used the hind paw as a location to test hypersensitivity to evoked pain such as that induced by the von Frey test, rather than spontaneous or movement evoked pain. There are many different studies very recently published, that used Walker 256 cells to induce bone pain in rats that only used stimuli evoked behavioural measures such as von Frey paw withdrawal thresholds in the hind paws, but not spontaneous movement evoked or weight bearing measures to assess pain hypersensitivities[35- 60]. The vast experience of different laboratories conducting preclinical cancer-pain research around the world with the Walker 256 cell induced BCIBP model in rats strongly emphasizes on the suitability of stimuli evoked hypersensitivities in paws as the correct measure of bone pain in this particular model.American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics 
ISSN 2393-8862 

Selitto testing using increasing force delivered via a blunt cone 
shaped pusher, are two of the most common behavioural tests 
employed in assessment of Walker 256 cell induced BCIBP in rats 
[9]. The plantar hind paw of rats, the anatomical region where von 
Frey and Randall-Selitto stimuli are applied, is mainly innervated 
by the tibial nerve and hence tibial bone pain sensations manifest 
as hypersensitivities in the plantar aspect of the hind paws [12-
15]. Hence, the traditional and most commonly used method to 
measure tibial bone pain is assessment in the paws, with hundreds 
of studies prevailing in the literature using this protocol. By using 
intra-tibial injections of complete Freund's adjuvant in the tibiae 
of female Wistar rats, a study has elegantly established that the 
bone pain induced by activation of tibial nerves directly manifests 
as hind paw skin hypersensitivity [15]. Cutaneous tests like the 
von Frey testing and Randall-Selitto testing detect the current 
levels of pain and have high clinical relevance as used in humans 
[16-21]. 

A study involving the Department of Medicine of the University of 
Florida (Gainesville, USA) has validated that mechanically evoked 
pain is a highly relevant measure of the clinical pain intensity in 
patients with deep pain of muco-skeletal origin [22]. Similarly, 
a study conducted in Edinburgh Cancer Centre (Edinburgh, 
UK) also validated that assessing mechanical allodynia using 
von Frey filaments is a direct measure of cancer induced bone 
pain in humans [23]. Hence assessment of the stimuli evoked 
hypersensitivities in the hind paws is physiologically relevant 
assessment of bone pain. As per the previous studies published in 
journals like PAIN [24-26], The Journal of Pain [27,28], European 
Journal of Pain [29-31], Pain Medicine [32], Molecular Pain 
[33,34], Nature Neuroscience [35] and others, it is a traditional 
practice within the pain research fraternity to test the pain 
hypersensitivities in the paw, following inoculation of cancer cells 
in the tibia, without deploying other measures like gait or weight 
bearing parameters. Along these lines, a recent report suggested 
that a vast majority of around ~90% of the cancer induced bone 
pain studies in the literature using MRMT-1 cells in rats used the 
response evoked by the cutaneous stimuli applied to the foot as 
a measure of bone pain [36]. From the vast literature available on 
Walker 256 cell induced bone pain model in rats, inoculation of 
Walker 256 cell in the tibia always manifests as hypersensitivities 
in the hind paws, without any discordance in paw-tibia correlation 
being reported [8]. The majority of studies in the literature that 
used the Walker 256 breast cancer cell-induced bone pain model 
in rats, 


23 Scott AC, McConnell S, Laird B (2012) Quantitative sensory testing to assess the sensory characteristics of cancer-induced bone pain after radiotherapy and potential clinical biomarkers of response. Eur J Pain 16: 123-133.J Neurol Sci 74:237-
246. 

15 Yang CJ, Wang XW, Li X (2011) A rat model of bone inflammation-
induced pain by intra-tibial complete Freund's adjuvant injection. 
Neurosci Lett 490: 175-179. 

16 Tena B, Escobar B, Arguis MJ (2012) Reproducibility of electronic Von 
Frey and Von Frey monofilaments testing. Clin J Pain 28: 318-323. 

17 Reitz MC, Hrncic D, Treede RD (2016) A comparative behavioural 
study of mechanical hypersensitivity in 2 pain models in rats and 
humans. Pain 157: 1248-1258. 

18 Abrams DI, Jay CA, Shade SB (2007) Cannabis in painful HIV-
associated sensory neuropathy: A randomized placebo-controlled 
trial. Neurol 68: 515-521. 

19 Prabhavathi K, Chandra US, Soanker R (2014) A randomized, double 
blind, placebo controlled, cross over study to evaluate the analgesic 

activity of Boswellia serrata in healthy volunteers using mechanical 
pain model. Indian J Pharmacol 46: 475-479. 

20 Levine JD, Gordon NC, Taiwo YO (1988) Potentiation of pentazocine 
analgesia by low-dose naloxone. J Clin Invest 82: 1574-1577. 

21 Neuvonen PJ, Tokola O, Toivonen ML (1985) Methionine in 
paracetamol tablets, a tool to reduce paracetamol toxicity. Int J Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 23: 497-500. 

22 Staud R, Weyl EE, Price DD (2012) Mechanical and heat hyperalgesia 
highly predict clinical pain intensity in patients with chronic 
musculoskeletal pain syndromes. J Pain 13: 725-735. 


© Under License of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License
Wang LN, Yao M, Yang JP (2011) Cancer-induced bone pain sequentially activates the ERK/MAPK pathway in different cell types in the rat spinal cord. Mol Pain 7: 48.34 Pan HL, Zhang YQ, Zhao ZQ (2010) Involvement of lysophosphatidic acid in bone cancer pain by potentiation of TRPV1 via PKCϵ pathway in dorsal root ganglion neurons. Mol Pain 6: 85. 35 Chen G, Kim YH, Li H (2017) PD-L1 inhibits acute and chronic pain by suppressing nociceptive neuron activity via PD-1. Nat Neurosci 20: 917-926.
© Under License of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License Vol. 5 No. 1:4

. 2393-8862American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics. American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics ISSN 2393-8862

Effects of Src-kinase inhibition in cancer-induced bone pain. M De Felice, D Lambert, I Holen, Mol Pain. 12174480691664372De Felice M, Lambert D, Holen I (2016) Effects of Src-kinase inhibition in cancer-induced bone pain. Mol Pain 12: 174480691664372.

Inhibition of spinal UCHL1 attenuates pain facilitation in a cancer-induced bone pain model by inhibiting ubiquitin and glial activation. W Cheng, Y L Chen, L Wu, Am J Transl Res. 8Cheng W, Chen YL, Wu L (2016) Inhibition of spinal UCHL1 attenuates pain facilitation in a cancer-induced bone pain model by inhibiting ubiquitin and glial activation. Am J Transl Res 8: 3041-3048.

Antiallodynic effects of propentofylline Elicited by interrupting spinal glial function in a rat model of bone cancer pain. M Yao, X Y Chang, Y X Chu, J Neurosci Res. 89Yao M, Chang XY, Chu YX (2011) Antiallodynic effects of propentofylline Elicited by interrupting spinal glial function in a rat model of bone cancer pain. J Neurosci Res 89: 1877-1886.

Effects of electroacupuncture treatment on bone cancer pain model with morphine tolerance. L Sima, B Fan, L Yan, Sima L, Fan B, Yan L (2016) Effects of electroacupuncture treatment on bone cancer pain model with morphine tolerance. Evidence- based complementary and alternative medicine 1-5.

Modulation of Nav1.8 by lysophosphatidic acid in the induction of bone cancer pain. H L Pan, B L Liu, W Lin, Neurosci Bull. 32Pan HL, Liu BL, Lin W (2016) Modulation of Nav1.8 by lysophosphatidic acid in the induction of bone cancer pain. Neurosci Bull 32: 445-454.

MHC-I promotes apoptosis of GABAergic interneurons in the spinal dorsal horn and contributes to cancer induced bone pain. Q Fu, D Shi, Y Zhou, Exp Neurol. 286Fu Q, Shi D, Zhou Y (2016) MHC-I promotes apoptosis of GABAergic interneurons in the spinal dorsal horn and contributes to cancer induced bone pain. Exp Neurol 286: 12-20.

GPR30 disrupts the balance of GABAergic and glutamatergic transmission in the spinal cord driving to the development of bone cancer pain. J Luo, X Huang, Y Li, Oncotarget. 7Luo J, Huang X, Li Y (2016) GPR30 disrupts the balance of GABAergic and glutamatergic transmission in the spinal cord driving to the development of bone cancer pain. Oncotarget 7: 73462-73472.

Bullatine A stimulates spinal microglial dynorphin A expression to produce anti-hypersensitivity in a variety of rat pain models. Q Huang, X F Mao, H Y Wu, J Neuroinflammation. 13214Huang Q, Mao XF, Wu HY (2016) Bullatine A stimulates spinal microglial dynorphin A expression to produce anti-hypersensitivity in a variety of rat pain models. J Neuroinflammation 13: 214.

Effect of systemic injection of heterogenous and homogenous opioids on peripheral cellular immune response in rats with bone cancer pain: A comparative study. J Y Du, Y Liang, J F Fang, Exp Ther Med. 12Du JY, Liang Y, Fang JF (2016) Effect of systemic injection of heterogenous and homogenous opioids on peripheral cellular immune response in rats with bone cancer pain: A comparative study. Exp Ther Med 12: 2568-2576.

Upregulation of (C-X-C motif) Ligand 13 (CXCL13) attenuates morphine analgesia in rats with cancer-induced bone pain. S F Wang, C G Dong, X Yang, Med Sci Monit. 22Wang SF, Dong CG, Yang X (2016) Upregulation of (C-X-C motif) Ligand 13 (CXCL13) attenuates morphine analgesia in rats with cancer-induced bone pain. Med Sci Monit 22: 4612-4622.

P2Y12 receptor-mediated activation of spinal microglia and p38MAPK pathway contribute to cancerinduced bone pain. M Liu, M Yao, H Wang, J Pain Res. 10Liu M, Yao M, Wang H (2017) P2Y12 receptor-mediated activation of spinal microglia and p38MAPK pathway contribute to cancer- induced bone pain. J Pain Res 10: 417-426.

Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 contributes to morphine tolerance in rats with cancer-induced bone pain. L Liu, X J Gao, C G Ren, Exp Ther Med. 13Liu L, Gao XJ, Ren CG (2017) Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 contributes to morphine tolerance in rats with cancer-induced bone pain. Exp Ther Med 13: 461-466.

STAT1 as a downstream mediator of ERK signaling contributes to bone cancer pain by regulating MHC II expression in spinal microglia. Z Song, B Xiong, H Zheng, Brain Behav Immun. 60Song Z, Xiong B, Zheng H (2017) STAT1 as a downstream mediator of ERK signaling contributes to bone cancer pain by regulating MHC II expression in spinal microglia. Brain Behav Immun 60: 161-173.

Recombinant protein transduction domain-Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase alleviates bone cancer pain via peroxiredoxin 4 modulation and antioxidation. W Yao, H Zhao, R Shi, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 486Yao W, Zhao H, Shi R (2017) Recombinant protein transduction domain-Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase alleviates bone cancer pain via peroxiredoxin 4 modulation and antioxidation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 486: 1143-1148.

Anti-rheumatic drug iguratimod protects against cancer-induced bone pain and bone destruction in a rat model. Y Sun, Y X Wu, P Zhang, Oncol Lett. 13Sun Y, Wu YX, Zhang P (2017) Anti-rheumatic drug iguratimod protects against cancer-induced bone pain and bone destruction in a rat model. Oncol Lett 13: 4849-4856.

Antinociceptive effect of intrathecal injection of genetically engineered human bone marrow stem cells expressing the human proenkephalin gene in a rat model of bone cancer pain. Y Sun, Y Tian, H Li, Pain Res Manag. 11Sun Y, Tian Y, Li H (2017) Antinociceptive effect of intrathecal injection of genetically engineered human bone marrow stem cells expressing the human proenkephalin gene in a rat model of bone cancer pain. Pain Res Manag 2017: 11.

Involvement of chemokine CXCL11 in the development of morphine tolerance in rats with cancer-induced bone pain. G Guo, Y Peng, B Xiong, J Neurochem. 141Guo G, Peng Y, Xiong B (2017) Involvement of chemokine CXCL11 in the development of morphine tolerance in rats with cancer-induced bone pain. J Neurochem 141: 553-564.

Simultaneous inhibition of NMDA and mGlu1/5 receptors by levo-Corydalmine in rat spinal cord attenuates bone cancer pain. W L Dai, B Yan, N Jiang, Int J Cancer. 141Dai WL, Yan B, Jiang N (2017) Simultaneous inhibition of NMDA and mGlu1/5 receptors by levo-Corydalmine in rat spinal cord attenuates bone cancer pain. Int J Cancer 141: 805-815.

HDAC inhibitor TSA ameliorates mechanical hypersensitivity and potentiates analgesic effect of morphine in a rat model of bone cancer pain by restoring mu-opioid receptor in spinal cord. X Hou, Y Weng, B Ouyang, Brain Res. 1669Hou X, Weng Y, Ouyang B (2017) HDAC inhibitor TSA ameliorates mechanical hypersensitivity and potentiates analgesic effect of morphine in a rat model of bone cancer pain by restoring mu-opioid receptor in spinal cord. Brain Res 1669: 97-105

Involvement of Spinal CCR5/PKCgamma Signaling Pathway in the Maintenance of Cancer-Induced Bone Pain. L H Hang, S N Li, X Dan, Neurochem Res. 42Hang LH, Li SN, Dan X (2017) Involvement of Spinal CCR5/PKCgamma Signaling Pathway in the Maintenance of Cancer-Induced Bone Pain. Neurochem Res 42: 563-571.

Alleviating mechanical allodynia and modulating cellular immunity contribute to electro-acupuncture's dual effect on bone cancer pain. Y Liang, J Y Du, J F Fang, Integr Cancer Ther. 17Liang Y, Du JY, Fang JF (2017) Alleviating mechanical allodynia and modulating cellular immunity contribute to electro-acupuncture's dual effect on bone cancer pain. Integr Cancer Ther 17: 401-410.

Reactive oxygen species scavengers ameliorate mechanical allodynia in a rat model of cancer-induced bone pain. Y Q Zhou, D Q Liu, S P Chen, Redox Biol. 14Zhou YQ, Liu DQ, Chen SP (2018) Reactive oxygen species scavengers ameliorate mechanical allodynia in a rat model of cancer-induced bone pain. Redox Biol 14: 391-397.

The analgesic effects of triptolide in the bone cancer pain rats via inhibiting the upregulation of HDACs in spinal glial cells. X F Hu, X T He, K X Zhou, J Neuroinflammation. 14213Hu XF, He XT, Zhou KX (2017) The analgesic effects of triptolide in the bone cancer pain rats via inhibiting the upregulation of HDACs in spinal glial cells. J Neuroinflammation 14: 213.

Nuclear factor kappa B regulated monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/chemokine CC motif receptor-2 expressing in spinal cord contributes to the maintenance of cancerinduced bone pain in rats. Y Wang, H Ni, H Li, Mol Pain. 141744806918788681Wang Y, Ni H, Li H (2018) Nuclear factor kappa B regulated monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/chemokine CC motif receptor-2 expressing in spinal cord contributes to the maintenance of cancer- induced bone pain in rats. Mol Pain 14: 1744806918788681.

Alleviating mechanical allodynia and modulating cellular immunity contribute to electroacupuncture's dual effect on bone cancer pain. Y Liang, J Y Du, J F Fang, Integr Cancer Ther. 17Liang Y, Du JY, Fang JF (2018) Alleviating mechanical allodynia and modulating cellular immunity contribute to electroacupuncture's dual effect on bone cancer pain. Integr Cancer Ther 17: 401-410.

Dissociation between the relief of skeletal pain behaviors and skin hypersensitivity in a model of bone cancer pain. Jmg Guedon, G Longo, L A Majuta, Pain. 157Guedon JMG, Longo G, Majuta LA (2016) Dissociation between the relief of skeletal pain behaviors and skin hypersensitivity in a model of bone cancer pain. Pain 157: 1239-1247.

Different tumors in bone each give rise to a distinct pattern of skeletal destruction, bone cancer-related pain behaviors and neurochemical changes in the central nervous system. M A Sabino, N M Luger, D B Mach, Int J Cancer. 104Sabino MA, Luger NM, Mach DB (2003) Different tumors in bone each give rise to a distinct pattern of skeletal destruction, bone cancer-related pain behaviors and neurochemical changes in the central nervous system. Int J Cancer 104: 550-558.

Cancer-induced bone pain: Mechanisms and models. A N Lozano Ondoua, A M Symons Liguori, T W Vanderah, Neurosci Lett. 557Lozano Ondoua AN, Symons Liguori AM, Vanderah TW (2013) Cancer-induced bone pain: Mechanisms and models. Neurosci Lett 557: 52-59.

Guidelines for the management of breakthrough pain in patients with cancer. A Caraceni, A Davies, P Poulain, J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 1Caraceni A, Davies A, Poulain P (2013) Guidelines for the management of breakthrough pain in patients with cancer. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 1: S29-S36.

Characterization of cancerinduced bone pain: an exploratory study. B J Laird, J Walley, G D Murray, Support Care Cancer. 19Laird BJ, Walley J, Murray GD (2011) Characterization of cancer- induced bone pain: an exploratory study. Support Care Cancer 19: 1393-1401.

Hypolocomotion, asymmetrically directed behaviors (licking, lifting, flinching, and shaking) and dynamic weight bearing (gait) changes are not measures of neuropathic pain in mice. J S Mogil, A C Graham, J Ritchie, Mol Pain. 634Mogil JS, Graham AC, Ritchie J (2010) Hypolocomotion, asymmetrically directed behaviors (licking, lifting, flinching, and shaking) and dynamic weight bearing (gait) changes are not measures of neuropathic pain in mice. Mol Pain 6: 34.

Gait analysis as a correlate of pain induced by carrageenan intraplantar injection. P Coulthard, S U Simjee, B J Pleuvry, J Neurosci Methods. 128Coulthard P, Simjee SU, Pleuvry BJ (2003) Gait analysis as a correlate of pain induced by carrageenan intraplantar injection. J Neurosci Methods 128: 95-102.

Abnormal gait, due to inflammation but not nerve injury, reflects enhanced nociception in preclinical pain models. M J Piesla, L Leventhal, B W Strassle, Brain Res. 1295Piesla MJ, Leventhal L, Strassle BW (2009) Abnormal gait, due to inflammation but not nerve injury, reflects enhanced nociception in preclinical pain models. Brain Res 1295: 89-98.

The CatWalk method: Assessment of mechanical allodynia in experimental chronic pain. A F Gabriel, Mae Marcus, Ghim Walenkamp, Behav Brain Res. 198Gabriel AF, Marcus MAE, Walenkamp GHIM (2009) The CatWalk method: Assessment of mechanical allodynia in experimental chronic pain. Behav Brain Res 198: 477-480.

Pain related behaviour in two models of osteoarthritis in the rat knee. J Fernihough, C Gentry, M Malcangio, Pain. 112Fernihough J, Gentry C, Malcangio M (2004) Pain related behaviour in two models of osteoarthritis in the rat knee. Pain 112: 83-93.

. M K Boettger, K Weber, M Schmidt, Gait abnormalitiesBoettger MK, Weber K, Schmidt M (2009) Gait abnormalities

. 2393-8862American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics. American Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics ISSN 2393-8862

differentially indicate pain or structural joint damage in monoarticular antigen-induced arthritis. Pain. 145differentially indicate pain or structural joint damage in monoarticular antigen-induced arthritis. Pain 145: 142-150.

A study of the relationships of changes in pain and gait after tourniquet-induced ischemia-reperfusion in rats. K Aihara, T Ono, N Umei, J Phys Ther Sci. 29Aihara K, Ono T, Umei N (2017) A study of the relationships of changes in pain and gait after tourniquet-induced ischemia-reperfusion in rats. J Phys Ther Sci 29: 98-101.

Fear-avoidance and its consequences in chronic musculoskeletal pain: A state of the art. Jws Vlaeyen, S J Linton, Pain. 85Vlaeyen JWS, Linton SJ (2000) Fear-avoidance and its consequences in chronic musculoskeletal pain: A state of the art. Pain 85: 317-332.

The effect of pain catastrophizing on outcomes: A developmental perspective across children, adolescents, and young adults with chronic pain. A B Feinstein, J A Sturgeon, B D Darnall, J Pain. 18Feinstein AB, Sturgeon JA, Darnall BD (2017) The effect of pain catastrophizing on outcomes: A developmental perspective across children, adolescents, and young adults with chronic pain. J Pain 18: 144-154.

Pain sensitization in people with knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. C Fingleton, K Smart, N Moloney, Osteoarthr Cartil. 23Fingleton C, Smart K, Moloney N (2015) Pain sensitization in people with knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Osteoarthr Cartil 23: 1043-1056.

Pain catastrophizing and painrelated fear in osteoarthritis patients: relationships to pain and disability. T J Somers, F J Keefe, J J Pells, J Pain Symptom Manage. 37Somers TJ, Keefe FJ, Pells JJ (2009) Pain catastrophizing and pain- related fear in osteoarthritis patients: relationships to pain and disability. J Pain Symptom Manage 37: 863-872.

The relationship of gender to pain, pain behavior, and disability in osteoarthritis patients: the role of catastrophizing. F J Keefe, J C Lefebvre, J R Egert, Pain. 87Keefe FJ, Lefebvre JC, Egert JR (2000) The relationship of gender to pain, pain behavior, and disability in osteoarthritis patients: the role of catastrophizing. Pain 87: 325-334.

The relationship between pain catastrophizing, kinesiophobia and subjective knee function during rehabilitation following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction and meniscectomy: A pilot study. A Tichonova, I Rimdeikienė, D Petruševičienė, Medicina. 52Tichonova A, Rimdeikienė I, Petruševičienė D (2016) The relationship between pain catastrophizing, kinesiophobia and subjective knee function during rehabilitation following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction and meniscectomy: A pilot study. Medicina 52: 229-237.

Pain catastrophizing and fear of pain predict the experience of pain in body parts not targeted by a delayed-onset muscle soreness procedure. N G Niederstrasser, A Meulders, M Meulders, J Pain. 16Niederstrasser NG, Meulders A, Meulders M (2015) Pain catastrophizing and fear of pain predict the experience of pain in body parts not targeted by a delayed-onset muscle soreness procedure. J Pain 16: 1065-1076.

The relationship between fear-avoidance and objective biomechanical measures of function in patients with adult degenerative scoliosis. R Haddas, I H Lieberman, A Block, Spine. 43Haddas R, Lieberman IH, Block A (2018) The relationship between fear-avoidance and objective biomechanical measures of function in patients with adult degenerative scoliosis. Spine 43: 647-653

The influence of pain and pain-related fear and disability beliefs on walking velocity in chronic low back pain. S M Al-Obaidi, Al-Zoabi , B , Al-Shuwaie , N , Int J Rehabil Res. 26Al-Obaidi SM, Al-Zoabi B, Al-Shuwaie N (2003) The influence of pain and pain-related fear and disability beliefs on walking velocity in chronic low back pain. Int J Rehabil Res 26: 101-108.

Musculoskeletal pain, fear avoidance behaviors, and functional decline in obesity: potential interventions to manage pain and maintain function. H K Vincent, M C Adams, K R Vincent, Reg Anesth Pain Med. 38Vincent HK, Adams MC, Vincent KR (2013) Musculoskeletal pain, fear avoidance behaviors, and functional decline in obesity: potential interventions to manage pain and maintain function. Reg Anesth Pain Med 38: 481-491.