# A survey on relationship between capital structure, free cash flow and diversification and firm performance of listed companies in Tehran Stock Exchange

CorpusID: 54903475
 
tags: #Economics, #Business

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b907a2e52c5634094bd5b0476fc09794729779a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b907a2e52c5634094bd5b0476fc09794729779a)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A survey on relationship between capital structure, free cash flow and diversification and firm performance of listed companies in Tehran Stock Exchange
September 27 2014

Mohammad Khodaei Valahzaghard 
Assist. Prof. & Faculty Member
Department of Accounting
School of Management and Human Sciences
Tehran North Branch
Islamic Azad University (IAU)
TehranIran

Maryam Borzabadi Farahani 
M.Sc. Student
Department of Accounting
School of Management and Human Sciences
Tehran North Branch
Islamic Azad University (IAU)
TehranIran

A survey on relationship between capital structure, free cash flow and diversification and firm performance of listed companies in Tehran Stock Exchange
September 27 2014D32E0FD64184EF069AC9D4903131B43710.5267/j.msl.2014.9.018Received May 4, 2014 Accepted 24 September 2014
This paper presents an empirical investigation to study the effects of free cash flow, share diversification and capital structure on Tobin-Q in selected firms on Tehran Stock Exchange.The population of the survey includes 520 firms listed on this exchange until year 2012 and the survey uses a sample of 105 firms, randomly.The study uses the models originally developed byPalepu (1985)[Palepu, K. (1985).Diversification strategy, profit performance and the entropy measure.Strategic Management Journal, 6(3),[239][240][241][242][243][244][245][246][247][248][249][250][251][252][253][254][255] to measure the effects of different factors on Tobin Q.The study has indicated that while capital structure and free cash flow influence positively on Tobin Q, diversification has maintained a negative and meaningful relationship with Tobin Q.

## Introduction

Capital structure is considered as the most important parameter affecting the valuation of corporates (Booth, et al., 2001;De Jong, 2002;Hasan & Butt, 2009;Fairfield et al., 2003).Changing and changeable environment, the credit rating companies is partly dependent on their capital structure (La Rocca et al., 2009).Fluid variables and factors affecting the capital structure can be described in terms of profitability and efficiency in target coverage, representation theory and the theory of hierarchy affect compliance (Tang & Jang, 2010;Dechow et al., 2008).Variability of stock, a uniform change in stock ownership is essential and influential factor in predicting future cash flows (Doukas & Kan, 2004).According to sources of finance, companies have different return and risk (Campa & Kedia, 2002).However, the name of the area of operations, profitability, growth opportunities, size and type of activity would be detrimental to their diverse financial needs (Gill et al., 2008).Financial performance will be somehow affected by the financial leverage ratio changes (Menéndez-Alonso, 2003).Other factors such as take over (Zhao et al., 2009), corporate governance (Wen et al., 2002, Scott Jr, 1972;Erickson & Wang, 1999), capital investment (Titman et al., 1998(Titman et al., , 2004;;Theis & Casey, 1999), intellectual capital (Tan et al. 2007;Brush et al., 2000), corporate ownership (Kapopoulos & Lazaretou, 2007;DeFond et al., 2012), information asymmetry (Coller & Yohn, 1997;Basu, 1997;Dichev & Tang, 2009) also influence on financial performance.


## The proposed study

This paper presents an empirical investigation to study the relationship between capital structure, free cash flow and diversification and Tobin's Q of listed companies in Tehran Stock Exchange.The population of the survey includes 520 firms listed on this exchange until year 2012 and the survey uses a sample of 105 firms, randomly.The study uses the model originally developed by Palepu (1985)
) _ ( _ ) _ ( ) ( ) , (                    () _ ( _ ) _ ( ) , (                    
(2)
t                    (3)
where TDL, FCF, Cashflow, Sales_GR, Ad_EX represent total degree of leverage, free cash flow, cash flow, sales growth, Capital expenditures, respectively.In addition, RER, PPNE QR, and DR represent ratio of retained earnings to assets, fixed assets to total assets ratio, quick ratio and diversity ratio, respectively.Moreover, dummy_Dividend is a dummy variable, which is one if a firm pays dividend and zero, otherwise and finally, Tobin's Q is considered as dependent variable in all models.Models (1-3) are considered for testing three hypotheses as follows, 1.There is a meaningful relationship between Tobin's Q and total degree of leverage.

2. There is a meaningful relationship between Tobin's Q and free cash flow.

3. There is a meaningful relationship between Tobin's Q and share diversity.

Table 1 demonstrates the summary of some basic statistics.The preliminary results of Table 1 indicate that all data are normally distributed.However, the implementation of Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on Tobin Q yields K-S = 4.073 with Sig.= 0.000, which means the dependent variable is not normally distributed and we need to use Johnson Transformation to normalize the data, which yields K-S = 0.515 with Sig.= 0.954.Therefore, we may now use regression analysis to examine three hypotheses of the survey.Finally, we have investigation correlations among different pairs of independent variables.In our survey, we have not found any significant relationship.


## The results

In this section, we present details of the implementation of regression analysis on Eq. (1) to Eq. (3).


### The relationship between degree of leverage and Tobin Q

The first hypothesis of this survey investigates the relationship between degree of leverage and Tobin Q. Table 2 demonstrates the results of Chaw and Huasman.Based on the results of Table 2 we may use Panel data with fixed effect.Table 3 shows details of other necessary statistics.As we can observe from the results of generalized regression analysis (GLS), there is a meaningful relationship between TDL and Ln(Tobin's Q), (β = 0.0160 t-value = 0.2576, P-value = 0.0168).R-Square is equal to 0.4406, which means the independent variables could approximately describe 44% of the changes on dependent variable.F-value is equal to 3.6221 with p-value = 0.000, which means there is a linear relationship between independent variables and dependent variable.These results lead us to confirm the first hypothesis of the survey.


### The relationship between free cash flow and Tobin Q

The second hypothesis of this survey studies the relationship between cash flow and Tobin Q. Table 4 shows the results of Chaw and Huasman.Based on the results of Table 4 we may use Panel data with fixed effect.Table 5 shows details of other necessary statistics.As we can observe from the results of generalized regression analysis (GLS), there is meaningful relationship between FCF and Ln(Tobin's Q), (β = 0.0909 t-value = 2.1031, P-value = 0.0359).R-Square is equal to 0.5597, which means the independent variables could approximately describe 56% of the changes on dependent variable.F-value is equal to 3.9129 with p-value = 0.000, which means there is a linear relationship between independent variables and dependent variable.These results lead us to confirm the second hypothesis of the survey and conclude that there was a positive and meaningful relationship between free cash flow and Tobin Q.


### The relationship between share diversity and Tobin Q

The third hypothesis of this survey studies the relationship between share diversity and Tobin Q. Table 6 presents the results of Chaw and Huasman.Based on the results of Table 6 we may use Panel data with fixed effect.Table 7 shows details of other necessary statistics.As we can observe from the results of generalized regression analysis (GLS), there is a meaningful relationship between DR and Ln(Tobin's Q), (β = 0.0909 t-value = 2.1031, P-value = 0.0359).R-Square is equal to 0.7204, which means the independent variables could approximately describe 56% of the changes on dependent variable.F-value is equal to 11.8525 with p-value = 0.000, which means there is a linear relationship between independent variables and dependent variable.These results lead us to confirm the last hypothesis of the survey and conclude that there was a negative and meaningful relationship between share diversity and Tobin Q.


## Conclusion

This paper presents an empirical investigation to study the effects of free cash flow, share diversification and capital structure on Tobin-Q in selected firms on Tehran Stock Exchange.The population of the survey includes 520 firms listed on this exchange until year 2012.The study has indicated that capital structure and free cash flow influenced positively on Tobin Q.In addition, diversification maintained a negative and meaningful relationship with Tobin Q. Nawaz et al. (2011) reported a positive and meaningful relationship between capital structure and Tobin Q but the results are not consistent with findings of Arslan and Karan (2007) and Ebaid et al. (2009).In addition, in terms of firm diversification, the results of our study are somewhat consistent with findings of Anderson et al. (1998), Menéndez-Alonso (2003), Rajan et al., 2000, La Rocca et al. (2009) and Chkir and Cosset (2001).



as follows,
LnTobinsqit ,01LnTDLit ,2t Cashflow i ,3LnSalesGRit ,4dummyt Dividend i ,5LnAdEXt6t , RER i7t , PPNE i8i QRt ,it ,

## Table 1
1
The summary of some basic statistics
VariableNMean Standard deviationMinMaxSkewnessKurtosisTobin Q6300.35690.6143-1.89471.5664-0.947-0.023TDL6301.47640.48151.0023.87581.3191.368Free Cash Flow6300.23380.1738-1.01590.4402-1.1773.749DR6300.530.4242-0.79670.8357-2.3943.962Cash Flow6300.33320.8817-3.67943.42540.9353.042Ln(Sales_Growth)6301.11650.04610.98451.2650.3840.283Dummay Dividend6300.93420.246801-3.53510.528Ad-EX6300.4820.8676-4.17773.4028-0.493.544RER6300.11950.5448-2.518511.268514.069282.391PPNE6300.250.1860.00080.87861.0350.679QR6301.35280.48950.24522.99640.7780.799

## Table 2
2
The summary of Chaw and Huasman tests
TestNumberStatisticsStatistics valueDegree of freedomSig.Chaw630F3.6445(104, 515)0.0000Hausman630Chi-Square25.463380.0013

## Table 3
3
The results of some statistics As we can observe from the results of Table3, all statistics are within the acceptable level and we may examine the first hypothesis based on the regression technique as follows,
Jarque-BeraBreusch-PaganDurbin-WatsonRamseyChi-SquareP-valueFP-valueDFP-value1.91370.87212.66040.00712.102.86080.0580
, ,


## Table 4
4
The summary of Chaw and Huasman tests
TestNumberStatisticsStatistics valueDegree of freedomSig.Chaw630F3.5280(104, 515)0.0000Hausman630Chi-Square42.551880.0000

## Table 5
5
The results of some statistics As we can observe from the results of Table5, all statistics are within the acceptable level and we may examine the second hypothesis based on the regression technique as follows,
Jarque-BeraBreusch-PaganDurbin-WatsonRamseyChi-SquareP-valueFP-valueDFP-value1.83310.79652.19860.02602.150.27700.7581

## Table 6
6
The summary of Chaw and Huasman testsAs we can observe from the results of Table7, all statistics are within the acceptable level and we may examine the second hypothesis based on the regression technique as follows,
TestNumberStatisticsStatistics valueDegree of freedomSig.Chaw630F9.3843(104, 515)0.0000Hausman630Chi-Square28.729280.0004Table 7The results of some statisticsJarque-BeraBreusch-PaganDurbin-WatsonRamseyChi-SquareP-valueFP-valueDFP-value1.65650.58982.14890.02971.790.29880.7417
, ,

AcknowledgementThe authors would like to thank the anonymous referees for constructive comments on earlier version of this paper.
R C Anderson, J M Bizjak, M L Lemmon, T W Bates, Corporate governance and firm diversification. Available at SSRN 121013. 1998

Does Free cash flow anomaly exist in an Emerging Market? Evidence from the Istanbul Stock Exchange. Ö Arslan, M B Karan, International Research Journal of Finance and Economics. 112007

The conservatism principle and the asymmetric timeliness of earnings. S Basu, Journal of accounting and economics. 2411997

Capital structures in developing countries. L Booth, V Aivazian, A Demirguc-Kunt, V Maksimovic, The Journal of Finance. 5612001

The free cash flow hypothesis for sales growth and firm performance. T H Brush, P Bromiley, M Hendrickx, Strategic Management Journal. 2142000

Explaining the diversification discount. J M Campa, S Kedia, The Journal of Finance. 5742002

Fair value measurements and auditor versus management conservatism: Evidence from the banking industry. F Chen, K Lam, W Smieliauskas, M Ye, 2010University of TorontoWorking paper

What affects accounting conservatism: A corporate governance perspective. W Chi, C Liu, T Wang, Journal of contemporary accounting & economics. 512009

Diversification strategy and capital structure of multinational corporations. I E Chkir, J C Cosset, Journal of Multinational Financial Management. 1112001

Management forecasts and information asymmetry: An examination of bid-ask spreads. M Coller, T L Yohn, Journal of Accounting Research. 351997

The disciplining role of leverage in Dutch firms. De Jong, A , European Finance Review. 612002

The persistence and pricing of the cash component of earnings. P M Dechow, S A Richardson, R G Sloan, Journal of Accounting Research. 4632008

Do Auditors Value Client Conservatism?. M L Defond, C Y Lim, Y Zang, 2012University of Southern California, Singapore Management University

Earnings volatility and earnings predictability. I D Dichev, V W Tang, Journal of accounting and Economics. 4712009

Excess cash flows and diversification discount. J A Doukas, O B Kan, Financial Management. 332004

The impact of capital-structure choice on firm performance: empirical evidence from Egypt. I E S Ebaid, Journal of Risk Finance. 1052009The

Earnings management by acquiring firms in stock for stock mergers. M Erickson, S W Wang, Journal of Accounting and Economics. 2721999

Accrued earnings and growth: Implications for future profitability and market mispricing. P M Fairfield, J S Whisenant, T L Yohn, The Accounting Review. 7812003

Corporate performance and the chief executive officer's compensation in the service industry. A Gill, N Biger, S Bhutani, Open Business Journal. 12008

Econometric analysis. W H Greene, 2003Pearson Education India

Impact of ownership structure and corporate governance on capital structure of Pakistani listed companies. A Hasan, S A Butt, International Journal of Business and Management. P50. Jang, S. S., & Park, K.422009. 2011International Journal of Hospitality Management

Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. The American economic review. M C Jensen, 198676

Corporate ownership structure and firm performance: evidence from Greek firms. Corporate Governance: An International Review. P Kapopoulos, S Lazaretou, 200715

Effect of diversification on capital structure. La Rocca, M La Rocca, T Gerace, D Smark, C , Accounting & Finance. 4942009

Does diversification strategy matter in explaining capital structure? Some evidence from Spain. E J Menéndez-Alonso, Applied Financial Economics. 1362003

Relationship between Capital Structure and Firms Performance: A Case of Textile Sector in Pakistan. A Nawaz, R Ali, M A Naseem, Global Business and Management Research: An International Journal. 32011

Diversification strategy, profit performance and the entropy measure. K Palepu, Strategic management journal. 631985

The cost of diversity: The diversification discount and inefficient investment. R Rajan, H Servaes, L Zingales, The Journal of Finance. 5512000

Evidence on the importance of financial structure. D F ScottJr, Financial Management. 41972

Intellectual capital and financial returns of companies. H P Tan, D Plowman, P Hancock, Journal of Intellectual capital. 812007

Does international diversification discount exist in the hotel industry?. C H H Tang, S S Jang, Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research. 3242010

An empirical investigation of agency relationships and capital structure of property management firms in the UK. J Theis, M Casey, Journal of Property Investment & Finance. 1711999

The determinants of capital structure choice. S Titman, R Wessels, The Journal of finance. 4311988

Capital investments and stock returns. S Titman, K C Wei, F Xie, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 39042004

Corporate governance and capital structure decisions of the Chinese listed firms. Y Wen, K Rwegasira, J Bilderbeek, Corporate Governance: An International Review. 1022002

Effects of takeover protection on earnings overstatements: evidence from restating firms. Y Zhao, K H Chen, L J Yao, Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting. 3342009