# Case Report Romiplostim: Successful treatment of a pregnant woman with refractory immune thrombocytopenia A case report and literature review

CorpusID: 55746221
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c347ec0c713a026badafc15aaec482d35c88f65f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c347ec0c713a026badafc15aaec482d35c88f65f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Case Report Romiplostim: Successful treatment of a pregnant woman with refractory immune thrombocytopenia A case report and literature review
2018. 2018

Noorodin Karami noorodin.karami@yahoo.com 
Mehrdad Payandeh 
Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences
KermanshahIran

Afshin Karami 
Department of Hematology
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Noorodin Karami 
Department of Genetics
Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences
YazdIran

Jafar Barati Masgareh 
Department of Biology
School of Sciences
Razi University
KermanshahIran

Case Report Romiplostim: Successful treatment of a pregnant woman with refractory immune thrombocytopenia A case report and literature review

Biomedical Research and Therapy
5825652018. 201810.15419/bmrat.v5i8.465Article History: Received: 30 June 2018 Accepted: 28 July 2018Author for correspondence:Immune thrombocytopeniaPrednisolonePrimary ITPRomiplostimSplenectomy
Immune thrombocytopenia is characterized by reduced platelet count. This condition occurs in both adults and children. The most common form of thrombocytopenia is primary ITP and autoantibodies are involved in its development. In this study, our patient was a pregnant woman with ITP who showed refractory to prednisolone and splenectomy as first and second line treatment, respectively, but the response to treatment with Romiplostim and platelet count was favorable, and delivery was reported without fetal complications.Biomed PressAn Open Access PublisherCreative Commons Attribution License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by/4.0/, which permits unrestricted use, provided the original author and source are credited.Abstract

## Background

Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), formerly known as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, is an autoimmune disease described by a severe reduction in peripheral blood platelets [1]. In thrombocytopenia, the platelet count reaches less than 100 x 10 9 /L [2]. Adult ITP has an incidence about 2.0 to 4.0 per 100,000, while in childhood is 1.9 to 6.4 per 100,000 [3,4]. The major complications for patients with ITP are bleeding and intracranial hemorrhage [5]. Types of thrombocytopenia include primary and secondary ITP. Primary ITP is due to the autoimmune destruction of platelets, which include 80% of the patients. Secondary ITP is related to other conditions such as lupus erythematosus, infections such as HCV and HIV, and lymphoma [6]. Also, the acute form is a temporary condition that lasts up to 3 months and mainly affects children, while the chronic form may persist for more than 12 months and affect adults [7]. For patients with chronic ITP, there are several treatments that includes corticosteroids, immunoglobulin, splenectomy, and thrombopoietin receptor agonists (TPO-RAs). TPO-RA is commonly used in patients who do not respond adequately to corticosteroids and splenectomy [5]. The rationale for selecting TPO-RAs in the treatment of refractory ITP is that the level of thrombopoietin (TPO) is abnormal or low in the patients. Also, the response rates of ITP patients to IVIG and corticosteroids have been reported to be less than 40% [8], while for TPO-RAs, the response rate is reported 59-88% [9]. In this study, we have reported a pregnant woman with ITP who was refractory to prednisolone and splenectomy but responded positively to the treatment with Romiplostim. A 22-year-old woman with symptoms such as weight loss, petechial rashes on parts of the body and bleeding from the gums and nose, referred to the Kermanshah Hematology and Oncology Clinic in May 2015. There was no suspicious case in the patient's clinical history. During her examinations, multiple petechial rashes were observed on the organs of the body and spleen was not palpable. Also, laboratory studies showed decreased platelet count and positive anti-dsDNA. The results of complete blood count are as follows: platelet count: 19 x10 9 /L (normal range: 120-450), hemoglobin (Hb): 9 g/dL (normal range: 11.5-18.5), white blood cell (WBC): 10 x 10 9 / L (normal range: 3.5-11). Therefore, initial treatment with Prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) and Hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/day), was performed for several months, and the results of complete blood count (CBC) were as follows:


## Case History

Platelet count: 45 x 10 9 / L, Hb: 11.6 g/dl, WBC: 12.3 x 10 9 / L, anti-dsDNA: positive. After several cycles of treatment, CBC results showed refractory to treatment in the patient, and the physician asked for bone marrow aspiration (BMA). The BMA results showed the normal number of megakaryocytes with less platelet attachment. Therefore, the final diagnosis was ITP. Accordingly, the patient's treatment continued with IVIG (intravenous immunoglobulins) (15 g/day), and also due to the presence of lupus, Hydroxychloroquine and Azathioprine (150 mg/day) were used. After 4 months, due to the results of relatively low platelet count and splenomegaly in the patient, the first line treatment failed, and in the next action, she was subjected to splenectomy.

Shortly after splenectomy, the patient suddenly decided to be pregnancy. Therefore, according to the patient's condition, treatment with steroid regimens was performed in the first trimester of pregnancy. Also, abdominal ultrasound indicated the progression of normal pregnancy; however, the platelet count did not increase significantly. Since the patient was passing pregnancy and approaching delivery time, the decision was taken to use Romiplostim for her. After three cycles of treatment, the response to treatment was good, and her platelet count was about 164 x 10 9 /L. In the parturition, the platelet count was 75 x 10 9 / L, and she gave birth to a healthy baby. After delivery, the patient's platelet count was still good, and now the treatment with romiplostim continues for her and the patient is in favorable condition.


## Payandeh et al.

Biomedical Research and Therapy 2018, 5(8): 2565-2571

Patients with ITP have specific characteristics, including platelet count <100 × 10 9 / L and bleeding. Increased platelet destruction and reduced platelet production are two main mechanisms of ITP pathogenesis [10]. In most patients, it seems that platelet destruction is due to the production of autoantibodies and is considered as the most common cause of ITP development [11]. The glycoprotein IIa / IIIa on platelets is a target for autoantibodies [4]. This mechanism is associated with platelet phagocytosis, and splenic macrophages and neutrophils are involved. Also, there are two factors involved in reducing platelet production: dysfunction of megakaryocytes and the inadequate level of TPO [5]. In pregnant women, the incidence of ITP is 7% and the probability of occurrence of pregnancy-related disorders, such as stillbirth, pregnancy loss, premature delivery, and congenital anomalies, is relatively high [12]. So, treatment options for these patients are very important. There are three lines of therapies for these patients: In the first line treatment, corticosteroids, IVIG, and anti-D immunoglobulins are approved [13]. These factors are used, but due to the limited time of response, they are not considered for long periods. Corticosteroids (such as prednisolone) also decrease the autoantibodies production and inhibit the platelet destruction caused by macrophages [14], while IVIG reduced platelet destruction through binding to Fc receptors in the reticuloendothelial system [15]. Splenectomy and Rituximab are considered as the main options in the second line treatment. For patients who have failed treatment with corticosteroids, splenectomy is usually recommended [16]. Also, Rituximab, as an antibody, results in the inhibition of B cells by binding to CD20 [17].

In patients with chronic ITP who have been refractory to chemotherapy regimens such as corticosteroids, immunoglobulin or splenectomy, the FDA has been approved using TPO-RAs, such as Eltrombopag and Romiplostim (Nplate ® ) [18]. These are considered the third line treatment. Typically, megakaryocytes are as the source of platelets, and a chief regulator for the production of new platelets from megakaryocytes is TPO [19]. The treatment of ITP with TPO-RAs is performed by activating TPO receptors of megakaryocytes in bone marrow. The JAK2/STAT5 and MAPK are the main pathways for the performance of TPO-RAs that enhance platelet count by inducing transcription of the genes involved in platelet proliferation (Figure 1) [20]. Nplate ® is the commercial form of romiplostim and showed an effective response in both splenectomized and nonsplenectomized patients [21]. The safety and effectiveness in increasing and maintaining the platelet count and limited side effects are the benefits of romiplostim [4]. The advantages and adverse effects of using romiplostim are presented in Table 1. In the past years, due to a lack of human studies and adverse effects in animal studies, it was recommended that romiplostim should not be used routinely during pregnancy. However, in a few studies, the treatment of ITP patients with romiplostim has been reported during pregnancy without fetal complications [22,23]. In a case study, ITP was successfully treated in pregnant woman with systemic lupus erythematosus using romiplostim. After delivery, results of CBC  showed a high platelet count (202 × 10 9 /L) [23]. In the similar study, the patient who has failed in first-line treatment showed an effective response to the drug [22]. Similarly, Samuelson and colleagues reported two ITP patients who received romiplostim during pregnancy without severe complications to the mother or the fetus. In the first patient, the use of romiplostim increased the platelet count to 200 × 10 9 /L, and in the second patient, the platelet count reached 184 × 10 9 /L [24]. Also, recombinant human thrombopoietin (rhTPO) is a glycosylated form of TPO that expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells. The rhTPO, as first-line therapy for refractory ITP, was approved by the China State Food and Drug Administration [25]. In the latest study, rhTPO was used for ITP during pregnancy. This study was conducted in the Chinese population, and 74.2% of the patients responded to treatment with rhTPO [26]. Finally, it's important to note that if TPObased treatments are fully confirmed in terms of safety and efficacy, management of ITP will be facilitated in pregnant women. Our patient has the unique characteristics listed below:

-Pregnancy during treatment -Presence of two types of main and accessory spleen -Refractory to first and second line treatment -A positive response to treatment using romiplostim without fetal complications -Successful delivery 


## Conclusion

Regarding the risks of ITP for pregnancy, especially hemorrhage, the type of treatment is very imperative in these patients. Because romiplostim directly affects megakaryocytes in bone marrow, it seems to be a good option for the patients who were refractory to the first and second line treatment.


## Open Access

This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCBY4.0) which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited. 


## List of abbreviations


## Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not to be applied.


## Competing interests


. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

## Figure 1 .
1Cellular mechanism of Thrombopoietin Receptor Agonists (TPO-RAs). Eltrombopag and Romiplostim, as representatives of TPO-RAs, link to Thrombopoietin receptors and activate JAK2/STAT5 and MAPK pathways. These pathways induce transcription of the genes involved in platelet production, which leads to an increase in platelet count.

## Table 1 .
1Advantages and adverse effects of Romiplostim([4,24,27,28])Romiplostim 
Advantages 
Adverse effects 
Response rates ≈ 95% 
Headache 
Approved by the FDA for patients with chronic ITP 
Fatigue 
Increases quality of life 
Diarrhea 
Decreases the need for rescue treatments 
Nasopharyngitis 
Decreases bleeding complications 
Hypoglycemia (in isolated 
cases) 
Discontinue treatment and maintain the platelet counts (in 
isolated cases) 

Bone-marrow fibrosis (in 
isolated cases) 




ITP: Immune thrombocytopenia; CBC: complete blood count; BMA: bone marrow aspiration; TPO: thrombopoietin; IVIGs: intravenous immunoglobulins; TPO-RAs: thrombopoietin receptor agonists; rhTPO: recombinant human thrombopoietin
Biomed. Res. Ther. 2018, 5(8): 2565-2571
Biomed. Res. Ther. 2018, 5(8): 2565-2571 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3. Discussion
The authors declare that they have no financial or other conflicts of interest.FundingNone.Authors' contributions
The pathogenesis of immune thrombocytopaenic purpura. N Cooper, J Bussel, 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06024.xBritish journal of haematology. 133Cooper N, Bussel J. The pathogenesis of immune thrombocytopaenic purpura. British journal of haematology. 2006;133:364-374. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06024.x.

Immune thrombocytopenia: no longer 'idiopathic. K Mccrae, McCRAE K. Immune thrombocytopenia: no longer 'idiopathic'.

. 10.3949/ccjm.78gr.10005Cleveland Clinic journal of medicine. 78358Cleveland Clinic journal of medicine. 2011;78:358. Available from: https://doi.org/10.3949/ccjm.78gr.10005.

Clinical updates in adult immune thrombocytopenia. M P Lambert, T B Gernsheimer, 10.1182/blood-2017-03-754119Blood. 129Lambert MP, Gernsheimer TB. Clinical updates in adult immune thrombocytopenia. Blood. 2017;129:2829-2835. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-03-754119.

Romiplostim as a treatment for immune thrombocytopenia: a review. S Chalmers, M D Tarantino, Journal of blood medicine. 637Chalmers S, Tarantino MD. Romiplostim as a treatment for immune thrombocytopenia: a review. Journal of blood medicine. 2015;6:37.

. Payandeh, Biomedical Research and Therapy. 58Payandeh et al. Biomedical Research and Therapy 2018, 5(8): 2565-2571

Clinical Practice Updates in the Management Of Immune Thrombocytopenia. Pharmacy and Therapeutics. A M Khan, H Mydra, A Nevarez, 42756Khan AM, Mydra H, Nevarez A. Clinical Practice Updates in the Management Of Immune Thrombocytopenia. Pharmacy and Therapeutics. 2017;42:756.

Is Autoimmune Thrombocytopenia Itself the Primary Disease in the Presence of Second Diseases Data from a Long-Term Observation. N Aboud, F Depré, A Salama, 10.1159/000449038Transfusion Medicine and Hemotherapy. 44Aboud N, Depré F, Salama A. Is Autoimmune Thrombocytopenia Itself the Primary Disease in the Presence of Second Diseases Data from a Long-Term Observation. Transfusion Medicine and Hemotherapy. 2017;44:23-28. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1159/000449038.

Chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura: present strategy, guidelines and new insights. W Stevens, H Koene, J J Zwaginga, G Vreugdenhil, Neth J Med. 64Stevens W, Koene H, Zwaginga JJ, Vreugdenhil G. Chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura: present strategy, guidelines and new insights. Neth J Med. 2006;64:356-363.

Corticosteroids compared to intravenous immune globulin for the treatment of immune thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. D Sun, N Shehata, Y Y Xiang, S Gregorovich, B D France, D M Arnold, file:/localhost/opt/grobid/grobid-home/tmp/10.1182/blood-2016-04-710285Blood. 12810Sun D, Shehata N, Xiang YY, Gregorovich S, France BD, Arnold DM, et al. Corticosteroids compared to intravenous immune globulin for the treatment of immune thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Blood. 2016;128(10):1329-1335. Available from: 10.1182/blood-2016-04-710285.

How I treat immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): the choice between splenectomy or a medical therapy as a second-line treatment. W Ghanima, B Godeau, D B Cines, J B Bussel, file:/localhost/opt/grobid/grobid-home/tmp/10.1182/blood-2011-12-309153Blood. 1205Ghanima W, Godeau B, Cines DB, Bussel JB. How I treat immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): the choice between splenectomy or a medical therapy as a second-line treatment. Blood. 2012;120(5):960-969. Available from: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-309153.

Platelet production and platelet destruction: assessing mechanisms of treatment effect in immune thrombocytopenia. S J Barsam, B Psaila, M Forestier, L K Page, P A Sloane, J T Geyer, 10.1182/blood-2010-11-321398Blood. 117Barsam SJ, Psaila B, Forestier M, Page LK, Sloane PA, Geyer JT, et al. Platelet production and platelet destruction: assessing mechanisms of treatment effect in immune thrombocytopenia. Blood. 2011;117:5723-5732. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-11-321398.

Pathogenesis of chronic immune thrombocytopenia: increased platelet destruction and/or decreased platelet production. D Nugent, R Mcmillan, J L Nichol, S J Slichter, 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07717.xBritish journal of haematology. 146Nugent D, McMillan R, Nichol JL, Slichter SJ. Pathogenesis of chronic immune thrombocytopenia: increased platelet destruction and/or decreased platelet production. British journal of haematology. 2009;146:585-596. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07717.x.

Pregnancy and birth outcomes among women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. D F Wyszynski, W J Carman, A B Cantor, J M Graham, L H Kunz, A M Slavotinek, 10.1155/2016/8297407Journal of pregnancy. 8297407Wyszynski DF, Carman WJ, Cantor AB, Graham JM, Kunz LH, Slavotinek AM, et al. Pregnancy and birth outcomes among women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Journal of pregnancy. 2016;2016:8297407. null. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/8297407.

Current management of primary immune thrombocytopenia. D Provan, A C Newland, 10.1007/s12325-015-0251-zAdvances in therapy. 3210Provan D, Newland AC. Current management of primary immune thrombocytopenia. Advances in therapy. 2015;32(10):875-887. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-015-0251-z.

Mechanisms of corticosteroid action in immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP): experimental studies using ITP-prone mice,(NZW x BXSB) F1. H Mizutani, T Furubayashi, Y Imai, H Kashiwagi, S Honda, H Take, Blood. 79Mizutani H, Furubayashi T, Imai Y, Kashiwagi H, Honda S, Take H, et al. Mechanisms of corticosteroid action in immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP): experimental studies using ITP-prone mice,(NZW x BXSB) F1. Blood. 1992;79:942-947.

Fc receptors in immune thrombocytopenias: a target for immunomodulation?. B Psaila, J B Bussel, The Journal of clinical investigation. 118Psaila B, Bussel JB. Fc receptors in immune thrombocytopenias: a target for immunomodulation? The Journal of clinical investigation. 2008;118:2677-2681.

The American Society of Hematology 2011 evidence-based practice guideline for immune thrombocytopenia. C Neunert, W Lim, M Crowther, A Cohen, L Solberg, M A Crowther, 10.1182/blood-2010-08-302984Blood. 11716Neunert C, Lim W, Crowther M, Cohen A, Solberg L, Crowther MA. The American Society of Hematology 2011 evidence-based practice guideline for immune thrombocytopenia. Blood. 2011;117(16):4190-4207. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-08-302984.

Targeted anti-cancer therapy using rituximab, a chimaeric anti-CD20 antibody (IDEC-C2B8) in the treatment of non-Hodgkinś B-cell lymphoma. D R Anderson, A Grillo-Lopez, C Varns, K S Chambers, N Hanna, Anderson DR, Grillo-Lopez A, Varns C, Chambers KS, Hanna N. Targeted anti-cancer therapy using rituximab, a chimaeric anti-CD20 antibody (IDEC-C2B8) in the treatment of non-Hodgkinś B-cell lymphoma. null. 1997;.

Thrombopoietin-receptor agonists for primary immune thrombocytopenia. P Imbach, M Crowther, Imbach P, Crowther M. Thrombopoietin-receptor agonists for primary immune thrombocytopenia.

. Biomed. Res. Ther. 58Biomed. Res. Ther. 2018, 5(8): 2565-2571 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. 10.1056/NEJMct1014202New England Journal of Medicine. 365New England Journal of Medicine. 2011;365:734-741. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMct1014202.

Thrombocytopenia caused by the development of antibodies to thrombopoietin. J Li, C Yang, Y Xia, A Bertino, J Glaspy, M Roberts, 10.1182/blood.V98.12.3241Blood. 9812Li J, Yang C, Xia Y, Bertino A, Glaspy J, Roberts M, et al. Thrombocytopenia caused by the development of antibodies to thrombopoietin. Blood. 2001;98(12):3241-3248. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V98.12.3241.

Thrombopoietin receptor agonists. Y Tomiyama, 10.1007/978-981-10-4142-6_17Autoimmune Thrombocytopenia. SingaporeSpringerTomiyama Y. Thrombopoietin receptor agonists. In: Autoimmune Thrombocytopenia. Singapore: Springer; 2017. p. 171-181. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-4142-6_17.

Role of romiplostim in splenectomized and nonsplenectomized patients with immune thrombocytopenia. J Perdomo, 10.2147/ITT.S80648ImmunoTargets and therapy. 51Perdomo J. Role of romiplostim in splenectomized and nonsplenectomized patients with immune thrombocytopenia. ImmunoTargets and therapy. 2016;5:1. Available from: https://doi.org/10.2147/ITT.S80648.

Rescue therapy with romiplostim for refractory primary immune thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. J Decroocq, L Marcellin, C L Ray, L Willems, 10.1097/AOG.0000000000000371Obstetrics & Gynecology. 124Decroocq J, Marcellin L, Ray CL, Willems L. Rescue therapy with romiplostim for refractory primary immune thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2014;124:481-483. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000000371.

Successful treatment of severe thrombocytopenia with romiplostim in a pregnant patient with systemic lupus erythematosus. J K Alkaabi, S Alkindi, N A Riyami, F Zia, Lma Balla, S M Balla, 10.1177/0961203312463621Lupus. 21Alkaabi JK, Alkindi S, Riyami NA, Zia F, Balla LMA, Balla SM. Successful treatment of severe thrombocytopenia with romiplostim in a pregnant patient with systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus. 2012;21:1571-1574. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203312463621.

Use of romiplostim for refractory primary immune thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. Clinical Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine COGRM. B Samuelson, L B Kreuziger, T Gernsheimer, Samuelson B, Kreuziger LB, Gernsheimer T. Use of romiplostim for refractory primary immune thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. Clinical Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine COGRM. 2017;.

Eltrombopag for use in children with immune thrombocytopenia. T O Kim, J Despotovic, M P Lambert, 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017010660Blood advances. 2Kim TO, Despotovic J, Lambert MP. Eltrombopag for use in children with immune thrombocytopenia. Blood advances. 2018;2:454-461. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2017010660.

A novel recombinant human thrombopoietin therapy for the management of immune thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Z Kong, P Qin, S Xiao, H Zhou, H Li, R Yang, file:/localhost/opt/grobid/grobid-home/tmp/10.1182/blood-2017-01-761262Blood. 1309Kong Z, Qin P, Xiao S, Zhou H, Li H, Yang R, et al. A novel recombinant human thrombopoietin therapy for the management of immune thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Blood. 2017;130(9):1097-1103. Available from: 10.1182/blood-2017-01-761262.

Romiplostim for the treatment of primary immune thrombocytopenia. A Janssens, 10.1586/ehm.12.6Expert review of hematology. 5Janssens A. Romiplostim for the treatment of primary immune thrombocytopenia. Expert review of hematology. 2012;5:133-144. null. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1586/ehm.12.6.

Long-term treatment with romiplostim in patients with chronic immune thrombocytopenia: safety and efficacy. D J Kuter, J B Bussel, A Newland, R I Baker, R M Lyons, J Wasser, 10.1111/bjh.12260British journal of haematology. 161Kuter DJ, Bussel JB, Newland A, Baker RI, Lyons RM, Wasser J, et al. Long-term treatment with romiplostim in patients with chronic immune thrombocytopenia: safety and efficacy. British journal of haematology. 2013;161:411-423. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.12260.