# Abdominal Compartment Syndrome as a Multidisciplinary Challenge. A Literature Review

CorpusID: 56530421
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94dc01e38c952c976054610506b95235404b54bc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94dc01e38c952c976054610506b95235404b54bc)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Abdominal Compartment Syndrome as a Multidisciplinary Challenge. A Literature Review
2018

Gabriel Alexandru Popescu popescugabriel2005123@yahoo.com 
Pharmacy, Sciences and Technology of Târgu Mureş
University of Medicine
Romania

Surgery Clinic No. 2
Târgu MureşRomania

Paul Rad 
Pharmacy, Sciences and Technology of Târgu Mureş
University of Medicine
Romania

Surgery Clinic No. 2
Târgu MureşRomania

Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Clinic No. 1
Surgery Clinic No
2, Gh. Marinescu street, No. 50, Târgu Mureș540139Târgu MureşRomania, Romania

Gabriel Alexandru Popescu 
Pharmacy, Sciences and Technology of Târgu Mureş
University of Medicine
Romania

Abdominal Compartment Syndrome as a Multidisciplinary Challenge. A Literature Review

The Journal of Critical Care Medicine
44201810.2478/jccm-2018-0024Received: 1 September 2018 / Accepted: 30 October 2018REVIEW * Correspondence to:abdominal compartment syndromeintra-abdominal pressuredecompressive laparotomy
Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (ACS), despite recent advances in medical and surgical care, is a significant cause of mortality. The purpose of this review is to present the main diagnostic and therapeutic aspects from the anesthetical and surgical points of view. Intra-abdominal hypertension may be diagnosed by measuring intra-abdominal pressure and indirectly by imaging and radiological means. Early detection of ACS is a key element in the ACS therapy. Without treatment, more than 90% of cases lead to death and according with the last reports, despite all treatment measures, the mortality rate is reported as being between 25 and 75%. There are conflicting reports as to the importance of a conservative therapy approach, although such an approach is the central to treatment guidelines of the World Society of Abdominal Compartment Syndrome, Decompressive laparotomy, although a backup solution in ACS therapy, reduces mortality by 16-37%. The open abdomen management has several variants, but negative pressure wound therapy represents the gold standard of surgical treatment.

## Introduction

Since the early 2000s, Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (ACS) has been accepted as a well-defined clinical entity. Monitoring of intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) represents a necessity, particularly in critically ill patients in intensive care units [1]. Moreover, knowing the risk factors that could lead to an increase in intra-abdominal pressure and progression to ACS, IAP monitoring has made it possible to detect early signs of intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH) in patients being treated in intensive care, surgery, internal medicine and cardiology departments. Besides objective methods of measuring intra-abdominal pressure, detailed anamnesis as well as communication skills with the patients is an important factor in identifying possible risk factors [2]. Early detection of ACS is key to obtaining the best results in treating the syndrome [3]. In addition to IAP measuring, imaging methods such as ultrasound and computer tomography aid in flagging-up characteristic signs that may suggest an increase in IAP [4].

ACS treatment, as recommended by the World Society of Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (WSACS), has undergone several changes over time, and since 2006 both conservative therapy and surgical treatment have been added to their guidelines. This review reports on the multidisciplinary approach to ACS, from intensive care and surgical perspectives.

The reviews aim is to identify gaps in knowledge and suggested guidelines regarding the diagnosis and treatment of ACS analyzing the results of published studies.


## Definitions

In 2006, the WSACS published a series of definitions they are still valid today [5]. Within these definitions, ACS is defined as an elevated IAP of more than 25 mmHg associated with new organ failure. Trigger factors, located inside of the abdominal cavity, induce a primary ACS, whereas trigger factors, out with the abdomino-pelvic cavity, contribute to the development of a secondary ACS. When abdominal scars and adhesions exist, the IAP varies in different parts of peritoneal cavity, resulting in what is described as polyACS.

In addition to well-established definitions, there are a number of recommendations and suggestions that have not been firmly endorsed, and further studies are required to accurately determine the level of implementation. They have been classified according to recommendation or suggestion in grades A to D; Astrongly recommended, D-poorly recommended, with subcategories occurring in each major grouping [5].


## Risk factors

A number of risk factors for the onset of ACS have been identified from studies, mainly performed in intensive care units. Thus, for primary ACS, the predominant predisposing factors are peritonitis, pancreatitis and abdominal trauma, and for secondary ACS, extra-abdominal sepsis is the major contributing factor (Table  I) [5][6][7][8][9][10].


## Pathophysiology

The mechanisms of increased IAP are tissue edema, bowel and mesenteric edema, retroperitoneal space edema, and ascites after capillary leakage. IAH will lead to capillary compression which leads to intestinal ischemia [3,11]. Cardiovascular function is severely affected by the decreased preload due to inferior vena cava compression, which will lead to ischemia and hypoxia in all tissues [11,12]. A high position of the diaphragm and a decreased compliance of the thoracic wall will induce hypoxia, increased pleural pressure and accumulation of intrapleural fluid [13]. Compres-sion on the inferior vena cava and renal veins leads to alterations of the glomerular filtration rate [11,12]. Liver function is also severely affected by ischemia, which will activate the Kupffer cells and release inflammatory mediators acting on hepatocytes and sinusoidal cells [14][15][16][17]. In cases of abdominal trauma and ruptured aortic aneurisms, the high pressure from affected vessels will rapidly lead to the accumulation of blood inside of peritoneal cavity, and a rapid progression to ACS due to the rapid pressure changes of IAP [18,19].


## Diagnosis

Measurement of IAP was recommended after recognition of severe effects of increased IAP and due to a low sensitivity of the whole series of clinical examinations tests [20]. The main variants of IAP measurement are presented in Table II [21].

The direct method is the most sensitive in determining PIA values. It is an invasive one, not without complications [22]. Laparoscopy allows the direct recording of IAP throughout the surgical procedure and allows the pneumoperitoneum pressure to be controlled. Studies related to the negative impact of intra-abdominal hypertension on body systems have been correlated with establishing the standard value of pneumoperitoneum pressure commonly used in laparoscopic interventions at 12 mmHg -capillary perfusion pressure [23].

The gold standard of IAP's indirect measurement is the monitoring of intravesical pressure, which is currently the most commonly used method [24,25]. There are several methods of measuring IAP by a transvesical approach. The first to be used was that described by Kron (1984) [22] in which the bladder wall was considered to be acting as a membrane pressure transducer. After the intravesical injection of 20 ml saline, the IAP is measured by a needle connected to a pressure manometer [26]`. Based on this technique, the continuous monitoring system of the IAP was developed. An easier but not so precise technique is the Harahill method, where the IAP values are read from a scale following the same principles as PVC measurement. The column of fluid elevated in a tube perpendicular to the body above the pubic symphysis and connected to the uretrovesical catheter represents the IAP value. In later studies it was concluded that the urinary bladder wall acts as a pressure transducer only when it contains 25 ml of liquid. Continuous monitoring of IAP using the transvesical approach involves the use of a three-way uretrovesical catheter, irrigating the urinary bladder continuously with a steady flow of 25 ml saline solution. The transducer between the urinary catheter and a monitor, displays real-time intravesical pressure [27].

Although theoretical use of the transurethral approach pathway could lead to urinary tract infections, Cheatman (2006) reported on 3108 critical patients of whom 122 had their IAP measured by a transvesical approach. It was found that the technique itself does not leads to the development of urinary infections in a higher proportion to those resulting from the simple catheterization of the bladder [28].

Early detection of ACS by imaging methods has also been reported as being satisfactory. Cavaliere et al. (2011) simulated intraabdominal hypertension in a group of sixteen healthy volunteers and evaluated ultrasonographically the size of the inferior cava vein, the flow through it and renal circulation. They concluded that IAH simulation was associated with decreased inferior vena cava cross-section area and an increased resistive index in renal arteries [29]. Pereira et al. (2017) reporting on a group of fifty critically ill patients who developed IAH, showed that the point of care ultrasound (POCUS) proved to be extremely useful in evaluation of bowel activity, identification of large intestinal contents, the identification of patients who would benefit from bowel evacuation as an adjuvant to lower IAP and the diagnosis of moderate to large amounts of free intra-abdominal fluid [30]. Echocardiography can detect indirect but non-specific signs of ACS, decreased preload as well as dysfunctions of systolic and diastolic ventricular functions [31]. Ignarra et al. (2011), after having performed a CT contrast scanning in fifty patients with IAH, observed some specific signs of elevated intraabdominal pressure. In eight patients there was elevation of the diaphragm, in five patients there was the "round belly sign", in seven patients there was the presence of free fluid and air in the intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal spaces, in six patients there was collapse ot the inferior vena cava , in four patients there was hyperenhancement and thickening of the intestine bowel wall, an in another twenty, an elevated hepatic artery resistance index Color-Doppler with reversed diastolic flow [4].


## Treatment


## Conservative treatment

ACS conservative therapy should follow the WSACS Guidelines and must be initiated as soon as possible [32]. Reports on the incidence of ACS mortality indicate that without treatment the mortality is higher than 90%, and despite the administration of therapeutic measures, the mortality is between 25 and 75% [33]. The most important therapeutic measures are sedation, 0 or negative balance fluid resuscitation, nasogastric and rectal probe and neuromuscular blockade.


## Surgical treatment

Decompressive laparotomy (DL) is of particular importance in the ACS, reducing the mortality by between 16% and 37% [11] (Table III).

An "open abdomen" is a fraught and difficult solution in the treatment of ACS, both in terms of the temporary and the permanent closure. DL is part of the ACS treatment algorithm established by WSACS. [32] However, DL is rarely performed as conservative treatment shows good results in a proportion of patients developing ACS. In Cheatham's study (2011) on 265 patients with ACS, only sixty-two needed DL, and Tabel II. IAP measurements methods


## Direct IAP measurement methods Indirect IAP measurement methods


## Recording the values transmitted by an intraabdominal catheter

Urinary bladder pressure Intragastric pressure Pressure inside the colon Intrautherine pressure Inferior vena cava pressure thirty-one underwent percutaneous decompressive laparotomy (Table IV) [38].

The solutions preventing complications of open abdomen (OA) surgery are diverse and have developed concomitantly with the evolution of this new therapeutic concept. Among the many surgery variants for Temporary Abdominal Closure (TAC), only a few have been incorporated into standard medical practice and include closing the skin over the bowels and omentum with clamps, use of a Bogota bag and the Whitman technique [41][42][43]. The method of wound aspiration by creating negative pressure has been proven to have the best results, accomplishing several of the goals of TAC management. Based on the technique of Brock and Barker (1995) the development of dedicated vacuum therapy kits was introduced. [44,45] The TAC approach using negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) technique conforms with 1B WSACS recommendation of OA management [32]. The final closure is related to the formerly used TAC. If visceral protection with epiploon can be performed, or if the granulation tissue is sufficiently well developed after NPWT, polypropylene meshes can be applied over granulated tissue. Safe al-ternatives are dual meshes, sutured to the aponeurotic edges and applied over the viscera [46,47]. Biological materials offer a possible solution, but they are laborious and can give rise to postoperative complications due to graft necrosis. Modern cross-linked and noncross-linked meshes, manufactured in the laboratory, are very expensive at present [48][49][50].


## Conclusions

Despite the new therapeutic protocols recently introduced, ACS remains an entity resulting in a high mortality. Primary ACS occurs most often after the contamination of the abdominal cavity. Decompressive laparotomy is a necessary therapeutic solution in the complex treatment of ACS, improving the prognosis. DL aims both to release the intra-abdominal pressure, and to treat the underlying disease. The open abdomen management is based on eliminating secretions, protecting the viscera and avoiding lateral musculoaponeurotic retraction. Vacuum-assisted wound therapy encounters all above requirements (grade 1B) according with WSACS Guidelines of 2013. 

## Table I .
IRisk factors for the occurrence of primary and secondary ACSPrimary ACS 
Secondary ACS 

Severe intra-abdominal infection 
Pancreatitis 
Blunt/penetrating trauma 
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm 
Postoperative bleeding 
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage 
Postoperative closure of the abdomen 
Undertension 
Ascites 
Ileus 
Pregnancy 

Sepsis 
Large-volume fluid replacement 
Burns 
Dialysis 
Obesity 


## Table III .
IIIThe ACS mortality rates quoted by different authors in the specific literature after decompressive laparotomy[11,[34][35][36][37] Table IV. The main indications for open abdomen [33, 39, 40] Trauma Prevention and treatment of IAH/ACS Need for a "second look" operation Post-injury septic abdomen Loss of abdominal wall Abdominal sepsis Peritonitis after perforations Peritonitis after anastomotic fistulas Severe acute pancreatitis Necrotizing pancreatitis Infected necrotizing pancreatitis Hemorrhagic necrotizing pancreatitis Abdominal Compartment Syndrome (ACS) Primary ACS Secondary ACS Recurrent ACS Severe ileus High fixation in frozen abdomen ACS: Abdominal Compartment Syndrome IAP: Intra-Abdominal Pressure IAH: Intra-Abdominal Hypertension WSACS: World Society of Abdominal Compartment Syndrome DL: Decompressive Laparotomy OA: Open AbdomenAuthor 
Year 
No. of patients 
Study type 
Mortality 
J.J De Waale 
2006 
250 
Retrospective 
49.2% 
J.J De Waale 
2010 
18 
Retrospective 
36% 
Davis et al 
2013 
45 
Prospective 
24% 
Divarci et al 
2014 
150 
Prospective 
16% 
Hwabejire et al. 
2015 
122 
Retrospective 
37.7% 
J.J De Waale 
2016 
33 
Prospective 
36% 
Muresan et al 
2016 
66 
Prospective 
27.3% 

General condition 
Open abdomen strong indication 

Abbreviations 


Conflict of interestNone to declare.
You don't have any excuse, just start measuring abdominal pressure and act upon it. M L Malbrain, Minerva Anestesiol. 74Malbrain ML. You don't have any excuse, just start measuring abdominal pressure and act upon it. Minerva Anestesiol. 2008;74:1-2.

Communication skills in pediatrics -the relationship between pediatrician and child. C O Marginean, L E Melit, M Chincesan, Medicine. 96438399Marginean CO, Melit LE, Chincesan M, et al. Communication skills in pediatrics -the relationship between pediatrician and child. Medicine. 2017;96(43):e8399.

Abdominal Compartment Syndrome: Risk factors, diagnosis, and current therapy. G M Luckianow, M Ellis, D Governale, L J Kaplan, Crit Care Res Pract. 908169Luckianow GM, Ellis M, Governale D, Kaplan LJ. Abdominal Compartment Syndrome: Risk factors, diagnosis, and current therapy. Crit Care Res Pract. 2012;2012:908169.

Abdominal compartment syndrome: radiological signs. R Ignarra, C Acampora, C Mazzeo, 10.1594/ecr2011/C-0719European Congress of RadiologyIgnarra R, Acampora C, Mazzeo C, et al. Abdominal compartment syndrome: radiological signs. European Congress of Radiology 2011. http://dx.doi.org/10.1594/ecr2011/C-0719

Results from the International Conference of Experts on Intra-Abdominal hypertension and Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. I. Definitions. M L Malbrain, M L Cheatham, A Kirkpatrick, Intensive Care Med. 32Malbrain ML, Cheatham ML, Kirkpatrick A, et al. Results from the International Conference of Experts on Intra-Abdominal hypertension and Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. I. Definitions , Intensive Care Med. 2006;32:1722 -32.

Djj Muckart, R R Ivatury, A Leppaniemi, R S Smith, Definitions, Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. Ivatury RR, Cheatham ML, Malbrain M, Sugrue MGeorgetown, TX: Landis BioscienceMuckart DJJ, Ivatury RR, Leppaniemi A, Smith RS. Definitions. In: Ivatury RR, Cheatham ML, Malbrain M, Sugrue M, eds. Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. Georgetown, TX: Landis Bioscience; 2006:8-18.

Soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) -a possible biomarker for bacteremia in sepsis. A M Georgescu, J Szederjesi, S Voidazan, Rev Romana Med Lab. 231Georgescu AM, Szederjesi J, Voidazan S, et al. Soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) -a possible biomarker for bacteremia in sepsis. Rev Romana Med Lab. 2015;23(1):59-73.

The intraabdominal pressure: A real indicator of the tension free principle during anterior wall repair procedure after incisional hernias. M Muresan, S Muresan, T Bara, Ann. Ital. Chir. 865Muresan M, Muresan S, Bara T, et al. The intraabdominal pressure: A real indicator of the tension free principle during anterior wall repair procedure after incisional hernias. Ann. Ital. Chir. 2015;86(5):421-6.

Local recurrence after the sfincter-saving operation and abdominal perineal resection in rectal cancer. M Mureşan, S Bancu, T Bara, L Bancu, M Turcu, S Mureşan, Chirurgia. 104Mureşan M, Bancu S, Bara T, Bancu L, Turcu M, Mureşan S. Local recurrence after the sfincter-saving operation and abdominal perineal resection in rectal cancer. Chirurgia. 2009;104:23-5.

Results of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy-5-Year Follow-Up Study in an Eastern European Emerging Bariatric Center. R M Neagoe, M Mureșan, S Bancu, Obes Surg. 274Neagoe RM, Mureșan M, Bancu S, et al. Results of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy-5-Year Follow-Up Study in an Eastern European Emerging Bariatric Center. Obes Surg. 2017;27(4): 983-9.

How much does decompressive laparotomy reduce the mortality rate in primary abdominal compartment syndrome? A single-center prospective study on 66 patients. M Muresan, S Muresan, K Brinzaniuc, Medicine. 9656006Muresan M, Muresan S, Brinzaniuc K, et al. How much does decompressive laparotomy reduce the mortality rate in primary abdominal compartment syndrome? A single-center prospective study on 66 patients. Medicine. 2017;96(5):e6006.

Prompt reduction in intra-abdominal pressure following large-volume mechanical fluid removal improves renal insufficiency in refractory decompensated heart failure. W Mullens, Z Abrahams, G S Francis, D O Taylor, R C Starling, W H Tang, J Card Fail. 14Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, Taylor DO, Starling RC, Tang WH. Prompt reduction in intra-abdominal pressure following large-volume mechanical fluid removal improves renal insufficiency in refractory decompensated heart failure. J Card Fail. 2008;14:508-14.

Respiratory effects of increased intra-abdominal pressure. M L Malbrain, Réanimation. 16Malbrain ML. Respiratory effects of increased intra-abdominal pressure. Réanimation. 2007;16:49-60.

Liver injury in sepsis and abdominal compartment syndrome in rats. M A Muftuoglu, A Aktekin, N C Ozdemir, Surg Today. 36Muftuoglu MA, Aktekin A, Ozdemir NC, et al. Liver injury in sepsis and abdominal compartment syndrome in rats. Surg Today. 2006;36:519-24.

Time-and dosedependent severity of lung injury in a rat model of sepsis. R Ş Fodor, A M Georgescu, A D Cioc, Rom J Morphol Embryol. 564Fodor RŞ, Georgescu AM, Cioc AD et al. Time-and dose- dependent severity of lung injury in a rat model of sepsis. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2015;56(4):1329-37.

Acute liver failure: mechanisms of immune-mediated liver injury. Z Wu, M Han, T Chen, Liver Int. 30Wu Z, Han M, Chen T, et al. Acute liver failure: mechanisms of immune-mediated liver injury. Liver Int. 2010;30:782-94.

Early Liver Dysfunction in Patients with Intra-Abdominal Infections. K Guo, J Ren, G Wang, Medicine October. 94421782Guo K, Ren J, Wang G, et al. Early Liver Dysfunction in Patients with Intra-Abdominal Infections. Medicine October 2015; 94(42):e1782.

Abdominal compartment syndrome. G Betro, L J Kaplan, J A Kellum, C Ronco, R Bellomo, Critical care nephrology. Elsevier2nd editionBetro G, Kaplan LJ. Abdominal compartment syndrome. In: Kellum JA, Ronco C, Bellomo R. Critical care nephrology. 2nd edition. Elsevier. 2009

Factors associated with abdominal compartment syndrome complicating endovascular repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms. M Mehta, R C Darling, S P Roddy, J Vasc Surg. 42Mehta M, Darling RC, Roddy SP, et al. Factors associated with abdominal compartment syndrome complicating endovascular repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42:1047-51.

Results from the International Conference of Experts on Intra-abdominal Hypertension and Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. II. Recommendations. M L Cheatham, M L Malbrain, A Kirkpatrick, Intensive Care Med. 336Cheatham ML, Malbrain ML, Kirkpatrick A, et al. Results from the International Conference of Experts on Intra-abdominal Hypertension and Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. II. Recommendations. Intensive Care Med. 2007;33(6):951-62.

Techniques to measure intra-abdominal pressure (IAP): time for a critical re-appraisal. A Ashraf, J M Conil, B Georges, Intensive Care Med. 30Ashraf A, Conil JM, Georges B et al,.Techniques to measure intra-abdominal pressure (IAP): time for a critical re-appraisal. Intensive Care Med. 2004;30:357-71.

The measurement of intraabdominal pressure as a criterion for abdominal re-exploration. I L Kron, P K Harman, S P Nolan, Ann Surg. 199Kron IL, Harman PK, Nolan SP. The measurement of intra- abdominal pressure as a criterion for abdominal re-exploration. Ann Surg. 1984;199:28-30.

Does splanchnic ischemia occur during laparoscopic cholecystectomy?. M M Ozmen, A Kessaf Alsar, H T Besler, Surg Endosc. 16Ozmen MM, Kessaf Alsar A, Besler HT. Does splanchnic ischemia occur during laparoscopic cholecystectomy? Surg Endosc. 2002;16:468-71.

Influence of semirecumbent position on intra-abdominal pressure as measured by bladder pressure. D G Vasquez, G M Berg-Copas, Wetta-Hall , R , J Surg Res. 139Vasquez DG, Berg-Copas GM, Wetta-Hall R. Influence of semi- recumbent position on intra-abdominal pressure as measured by bladder pressure. J Surg Res. 2007;139:280-5.

Estimation of intra-abdominal pressure by bladder pressure measurement: validity and methodology. M A Fusco, R S Martin, M C Chang, J Trauma. 502Fusco MA, Martin RS, Chang MC. Estimation of intra-abdominal pressure by bladder pressure measurement: validity and methodology. J Trauma. 2001;50(2):297-302.

Model de reconstrucție tension free a peretelui abdominal în defecte parietale gigante prin monitorizarea intraoperatorie a presiunii intraabdominale. M Mureșan, T Bara, Ș Bancu, Jurnalul de Chirurgie. 83Prezentare de cazMureșan M, Bara T, Bancu Ș, et al. Model de reconstrucție tension free a peretelui abdominal în defecte parietale gigante prin monitorizarea intraoperatorie a presiunii intraabdominale. Prezentare de caz. Jurnalul de Chirurgie 2012;8(3):297-302.

Saline volume in transvesical intra-abdominal pressure measurement: enough is enough. J De Waele, P Pletinckx, S Blot, E Hoste, Intensive Care Med. 323De Waele J, Pletinckx P, Blot S, Hoste E. Saline volume in transvesical intra-abdominal pressure measurement: enough is enough. Intensive Care Med. 2006;32(3):455-9.

Abdominal Compartment Syndrome: pathophysiology and definitions. M L Cheatham, Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 1710Cheatham ML. Abdominal Compartment Syndrome: pathophysiology and definitions. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2009;17:10.

Sonographic assessment of abdominal vein dimensional and hemodynamic changes induced in human volunteers by a model of abdominal hypertension. F1 Cavaliere, A Cina, D Biasucci, Crit Care Med. 392Cavaliere F1, Cina A, Biasucci D, et al. Sonographic assessment of abdominal vein dimensional and hemodynamic changes induced in human volunteers by a model of abdominal hypertension. Crit Care Med. 2011;39(2):344-8.

The role of point-ofcare ultrasound in intra-abdominal hypertension management. Bm1 Pereira, R G Pereira, R Wise, Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther. 495Pereira BM1, Pereira RG, Wise R, et al. The role of point-of- care ultrasound in intra-abdominal hypertension management. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther. 2017;49(5):373-81.

Cardiac ultrasound and abdominal compartment syndrome. Y Mahjoub, G Plantefeve, Acta Clin Belg. 621SupplMahjoub Y, Plantefeve G. Cardiac ultrasound and abdominal compartment syndrome. Acta Clin Belg. 2007;62(Suppl 1):183- 9.

Intra-abdominal hypertension and the abdominal compartment syndrome: updated consensus definitions and clinical practice guidelines from the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. A W Kirkpatrick, D J Roberts, J De Waele, Intensive Care Med. 397Kirkpatrick AW, Roberts DJ, De Waele J. Intra-abdominal hypertension and the abdominal compartment syndrome: updated consensus definitions and clinical practice guidelines from the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39(7):1190-206.

Negative Pressure Wound Therapy of Open Abdomen and Definitive Closure Techniques After Decompressive Laparotomy: A Single-center. M Mureșan, S Mureșan, K Brinzaniuc, D Sala, R M Neagoe, Observational Prospective Study. Wounds. 3010Mureșan M, Mureșan S, Brinzaniuc K, Sala D, Neagoe RM. Negative Pressure Wound Therapy of Open Abdomen and Definitive Closure Techniques After Decompressive Laparotomy: A Single-center Observational Prospective Study. Wounds 2018;30(10) Epub August 13.

Decompressive laparotomy for abdominal compartment syndrome. J J De Waele, Kimball E Malbrain, M , Br J Surg. 103De Waele JJ, Kimball E, Malbrain M, et al. Decompressive laparotomy for abdominal compartment syndrome. Br J Surg. 2016;103:709-15.

Effect of obesity and decompressive laparotomy on mortality in acute pancreatitis requiring intensive care unit admission. Pjb Davis, K M Eltawil, B Abu-Wasel, M J Walsh, T Topp, M Molinari, World J Surg. 372Davis PJB, Eltawil KM, Abu-Wasel B, Walsh MJ, Topp T, Molinari M. Effect of obesity and decompressive laparotomy on mortality in acute pancreatitis requiring intensive care unit admission. World J Surg. 2013;37(2):318-32.

Abdominal decompression for abdominal compartment syndrome in critically ill patients: a retrospective study. J De Waele, L Desender, De Laet, I Ceelen, W Pattyn, P Hoste, E , Acta Clin Belg. 656De Waele J, Desender L, De Laet I, Ceelen W, Pattyn P, Hoste E. Abdominal decompression for abdominal compartment syndrome in critically ill patients: a retrospective study. Acta Clin Belg. 2010; 65(6):399-403.

Incidence and prognosis of intraabdominal hypertension and abdominal compartment syndrome in children. E Divarci, B Karapinar, M Yalaz, O Ergun, A Celik, J Pediatr Surg. 513Divarci E, Karapinar B, Yalaz M, Ergun O, Celik A. Incidence and prognosis of intraabdominal hypertension and abdominal compartment syndrome in children. J Pediatr Surg. 2014;51(3):503-7.

Percutaneous catheter decompression in the treatment of elevated intraabdominal pressure. M L Cheatham, K Safcsak, Chest. 140Cheatham ML, Safcsak K. Percutaneous catheter decompression in the treatment of elevated intraabdominal pressure. Chest. 2011;140:1428-35.

The open abdomen, indications, management and definitive closure. F Coccolini, W Biffl, F Catena, World J Emerg Surg. 1032Coccolini F, Biffl W, Catena F, et al. The open abdomen, indications, management and definitive closure. World J Emerg Surg. 2015;10(32).

The open abdomen: practical implications for the practicing surgeon. C C Burlew, Am J Surg. 204Burlew CC. The open abdomen: practical implications for the practicing surgeon. Am J Surg. 2012;204:826-35.

Skin only or silo closure in the critically ill patient with an open abdomen. L N Tremblay, D V Feliciano, J Schmidt, Am J Surg. 1826Tremblay LN, Feliciano DV, Schmidt J, et al. Skin only or silo closure in the critically ill patient with an open abdomen. Am J Surg. 2001;182(6):670-5.

Nonoperative progressive 'Bogota bag' closure after abdominal decompression. J A Myers, B A Latenser, Am Surg. 6811Myers JA, Latenser BA. Nonoperative progressive 'Bogota bag' closure after abdominal decompression. Am Surg. 2002;68(11):1029-30.

A burr-like device to facilitate temporary abdominal closure in planned multiple laparotomies. D H Wittmann, C Aprahamian, J M Bergstein, Eur J Surg. 1592Wittmann DH, Aprahamian C, Bergstein JM, et al. A burr-like device to facilitate temporary abdominal closure in planned multiple laparotomies. Eur J Surg. 1993;159(2):75-9.

Temporary closure of open abdominal wounds: the vacuum pack. W B Brock, D E Barker, R P Burns, Am Surg. 611Brock WB, Barker DE, Burns RP. Temporary closure of open abdominal wounds: the vacuum pack. Am Surg. 1995;61(1):30- 5.

Experience with vacuum-pack temporary abdominal wound closure in 258 trauma and general and vascular surgical patients. D E Barker, J M Green, R A Maxwell, J Am Coll Surg. 2045Barker DE, Green JM, Maxwell RA, et al. Experience with vacuum-pack temporary abdominal wound closure in 258 trauma and general and vascular surgical patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204(5):784-92.

Polypropylene mesh closure of the complicated abdominal wound. R F Fansler, P Taheri, C Cullinane, B Sabates, L M Flint, American J Surg. 1701Fansler RF, Taheri P, Cullinane C, Sabates B, Flint LM. Polypropylene mesh closure of the complicated abdominal wound. American J Surg. 1995;170(1):15-8.

Absorbable mesh and topical negative pressure therapy for closure of abdominal dehiscence with exposed bowel. C B Chuo, S S Thomas, J Plast Reconstr Aesth Surg. 6111Chuo CB, Thomas SS. Absorbable mesh and topical negative pressure therapy for closure of abdominal dehiscence with exposed bowel. J Plast Reconstr Aesth Surg. 2008;61(11):1378- 81.

Early one-stage closure in patients with abdominal compartment syndrome: fascial replacement with human acellular dermis and bipedicle flaps. J S Guy, R Miller, J A Morris, J Diaz, A May, Am Surg. 6912Guy JS, Miller R, Morris JA, Diaz J, May A. Early one-stage closure in patients with abdominal compartment syndrome: fascial replacement with human acellular dermis and bipedicle flaps. Am Surg. 2003;69(12):1025-8.

Biologic grafts for ventral hernia repair: a systematic review. N J Slater, M Van Der Kolk, T Hendriks, H Van Goor, R P Bleichrodt, Am J Surg. 2052Slater NJ, van der Kolk M, Hendriks T, van Goor H, Bleichrodt RP. Biologic grafts for ventral hernia repair: a systematic review. Am J Surg. 2013;205(2):220-30.

Biologic Mesh: Classification and evidence-based critical appraisal. C R Deeken, Hernia Surgery. Deeken CR. Biologic Mesh: Classification and evidence-based critical appraisal. Hernia Surgery 2016;61-69.