# Management Difficulties of Cerebeller Haemangioblastoma: A Case Report and Literature Review

CorpusID: 58453858
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77fc13e4274ca7fb358f709aa82a216e73fcec03](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77fc13e4274ca7fb358f709aa82a216e73fcec03)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Management Difficulties of Cerebeller Haemangioblastoma: A Case Report and Literature Review


Forhad Hossain Chowdhury forhadchowdhury@yahoo.com 
Dept. of Neurosurgery
Dept. of Neurosurgery
Dhaka Medical College Hospital
Dhaka 2. Associate professor

Dhaka. 3. Dept. of Neurosurgery
Dhaka Medical College Hospital
Dhaka Medical College Hospital
Dhaka

MD. RAZIULHaque 
MAINULHaque Sarkar 
Dept. of Neurosurgery
Dhaka Medical college Hospital
Dhaka

SYEDMahbubul Alam 
Dept. of Surgery
Sir Salimullah Medical College and Mitford Hospital
Dhaka

Chowdhury Forhad Hossain 

Department of Neurosurgery
Dhaka Medical College Hospital
DhakaBangladesh

Management Difficulties of Cerebeller Haemangioblastoma: A Case Report and Literature Review
35C9DCFDDEE7AD9CBCAD5BB918D6779CCerebeller haemangioblastomaVon Hippel Lindau disease. RadiosurgeryMicrosurgery
IntroductionCushing and Bailey used the term 'Haemangioblastomas' to describe tumors arising from the endothelial cells of the central nervous system. 1 Haemangioblastomas are solid or cystic benign vascular tumors that may arise anywhere in the body including central nervous system. 2 Though histologically benign, their development is often unfavorable due to high frequency of recurrence and multicentricity especially when occurring in a familial set-up i.e., Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) syndrome.3They account for 1.5-2.5% of all intracranial and 7-12% of posterior fossa tumors.Inspite of some advancement of endovascular and radiosurgical therapy in the treatment of these tumours, they are rarely effective in isolated form; Microsurgical removal CNS haemangioblastomas is the treatment of choice, though it is often complicated and difficult, because of tumor hypervascularity and location.In addition, though surgical mortality ,morbidity rates have been reduced, but still there may be mortality and morbidity, even with the advantages of modern microsurgical techniques.4,5,6,7re, we report on a male patient with recurrent haemangioblastoma in the cerebellum with Von Hippel Lindau disease who underwent partial microsurgical excision

followed by radiosurgery 13 years back.The patient was successfully treated by redo microsurgical excision.


## Case report

A seventy year old office executive presented to us with progressive imbalance of limbs and trunk for which he could not stand and walk for last few days along with altered level of consciousness.There was history of intention tremor and scanning of speech for last 14 years that were worsening for the last months .He had hiccough and vertigo.There was no history of visual or any other cranial nerves dysfunction.His family history was positive for Von Hippel Lindau disease.He underwent microsurgical operation of tumour + ventriculo-peritoneal(V-P) shunt for cerebeller haemangioblastoma in Singapore (1995).There was massive peroperative bleeding(nine units of blood transfused) for which operation could not be proceeded and about eighteen hours was needed for haemostasis followed by one month ICU support .Post operatively patient developed scanning of speech and intention tremor .Later on patient was referred for gamma knife radiosurgery to Japan(1995).After radiosurgery his condition was static with cerebeller dysarthia and intention tremor but he was just able to manage his office with difficulties.Higher psychic function were normal except speech which was scanning cerebeller dysarthic type.Cranial nerves including fundoscopic examination were normal.His cerebeller signs and long tract signs were bilaterally positive.V-P shunt was functioning and abdominal examination revealed no abnormality.Preoperative MRI in 1995 showed highly vascular solid cerebeller haemangioblastoma( Peroperatively tumour was vascular , fibrous and adherent to tentorium & brain(due to radiosurgery).We excised the tumour along with excision of superficial cyst and marsupialization of deep cyst that was adhere to the brain stem.Postoperative period was uneventful .At the end of six months after operation patient can walk without support and write with some difficulties.Dysarthia persisted like that of preoperative state.Post operative(after second operation) contrast MRI showed complete excision of the tumor (Figure -3).


## Discussion and literature review

[10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18] The average age at presentation was ranged from 38-49.5 years. 9-17VHL syndrome is seen in 23-40% cases of cerebeller haemangioblastoma.10Our patient had VHL syndrome and he presented at the age of 41 years.

][11][12][13][14][15][16][17] The incidence of papilloedema has ranged from 39-70% and cerebellar involvement from 40-80%.0][11][12][13][14][15][16][17] This patient initially presented with Features of raised Intra Cranial Pressure(ICP) for which he underwent V-P shunt.There may be polycythemia and is believed to be due to secretion of Erythropoietin-like substance by the neoplastic tissue.The average hemoglobin is 16-18 g% reported in literature. 14,17 efore the last operation patient's Hb was 16g%.

Radiologically, 60-72% are cystic tumors and rest are solid. 9- 15Initially the tumour of our patient was solid but at recurrence it had cystic component (in formation of cystic component radio surgery might get some influence!) Tumors may in the cerebellar hemispheres accounted for 60% cases, vermian tumors in 28%, while brainstem (subpial) tumors is seen 12 % patients.Hydrocephalus is seen in 20% cases. 14s pite of some advancement of endovascular and radiosurgical therapy in the treatment of these tumours, they are rarely effective in isolated form; Microsurgical removal CNS haemangioblastomas is the treatment of choice, though it is often complicated and difficult, because of tumor hypervascularity and location.Complete excision is the goal of the surgery.The cyst wall need not be removed.The solid nodule tumor mass is removed microscopically by dissecting the gliotic margins away from the tiny vascular pedicles that are coagulated.To avoid intraoperative swelling, the large draining veins have to be preserved until the arterial feeders to the mural nodule have been isolated and resected.Piecemeal removal must be avoided to prevent catastrophic bleeding.Some authors have advocated the use of preoperative embolisation as an adjunct to microsurgical removal.Though radiosurgery can help in small, solid and difficult location, it is rarely curative and recurrence is most likely along with radiation change in brain, meninges and tumour itself that make tumour excision difficult that we faced in our case.Pan et al treated 20 haemangioblastomas with Gamma-Knife (GK).19 Niemala et al treated 10 patients with 11 haemangioblastomas with GK.20 They suggested that a solitary small or medium-sized haemangioblastomas usually shrink or stop growing after radiosurgery The mortality rate in available literature has varied from 4-36%. 8-233][14][15][16][17]22,23 The common postoperative morbidity was due to chest infection, lower cranial nerve paresis and meningitis.

Factors predicting a poor outcome are multiple haemangioblastomas, association with retinal haemangioblastomas and/or onset of disease at less than 30 years age.10Predominantly solid and midline tumors had a significantly higher mortality when compared to cystic and hemispheric tumors, which can be partly explained by their proximity to the brainstem. 12,13,17la Monte stated that recurrence was correlated with younger age (< 30 years) and VHL syndrome.24Also, cystic tumors were more frequent, had a longer survival while recurrence was less.11In literature, recurrence has ranged from 16-30%. 8,10,12,22,23,24



Figure-IA &IB).Postoperative and post radiosurgical MRI in 1997/98 persisted reduced size vascular tumour (Figure-1C&1D) .MRI on 2008(before second operation) showed recurrent cerebeller tumour (vascular) with multiple big cyst almost occupying the whole posterior cranial fossa along with post radiosurgical changes and midline suboccipital craniectomy (Figure-2).Other parts of brain were free of tumour.Cerebral angiography showed posterior cranial fossa highly vascular tumour blush with surrounding avascular areas (cystic areas).Spinal MRI and abdominal ultrasonogram were normal.His Hb was 16gm%.


## Fig.- 1 :
1
Fig.-1:A&B;MRI of brain, before first operation, saggital and axial section.C &D;MRI of brain axial and sagittal section after first operation and radiosurgery.


## Fig.- 2 :
2
Fig.-2:A&B;MRI of brain, before second operation, sagittal section.C &D; MRI of brain coronal and axial section just before second operation.


## Fig.- 3 :
3
Fig.-3: MRI of brain sagittal sections (A&B) and axial section (C) after second operation.

J MEDICINE 2010; 11 : 155-158   
Conflict of interest: None
. S S Rengachary, J P Blount, Haemangioblastomas, Wilkins RH, Rengachary SS1996McGraw Hill2nd ed

Clinical analysis of haemangioblastoma. E S Kim, S S Kang, J K Lee, T S Kim, S Jung, J H Kim, J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 271998

Lindau's disease. Review of the literature and study of large kindred. K L Melmon, S W Rosen, Am J Med. 361964

Surgical treatment of vascular lesions in the brain stem. S N Chou, D L Erickson, H J Ortiz-Suazez, J Neurosurg. 421975

Posterior fossa haemangioblastomas. J B Julow, P Gortval, E Pasztor, Acta Neurochir (Wien). 1281994

Solid cerebellar haemangioblastoma. S H Okawara, J Neurosurg. 391973

Olivecrona H : The cerebellar angioreticulomas. J Neurosurg. 91952

Central nervous system haemangioblastomas: A clinical and genetic study of 52 cases. A M Boughey, N A Fletcher, A E Harding, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 541990

Haemangioblastomas of the central nervous system in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and sporadic disease. J E Conway, D Chou, R E Clatterbuck, H Brem, D M Long, D Rigamonti, Neurosurgery. 482001

Infratentorial haemangioblastomas. F Resche, Neurochirurgie. 311985French

. J Julow, K Balint, P Gortvai, E Pasztor, Posterior fossa haemangioblastomas

. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 1281994

Surgical management of haemangioblastoma of the posterior fossa. L Symon, T Murota, M Pell, L Bordi, Acta Neurochir. 1201993

A review of 81 cases. H Palmer, Haemangioblastomas, Acta Neurochir (Wien). 271972

Clinical and surgical aspects of posterior fossa haemangioblastomata. R Jeffreys, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 381975

Central nervous system haemangioblastomas: A clinical and genetic study of 52 cases. A M Boughey, N A Fletcher, A E Harding, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 541990

Biological factors involved in the clinical features and surgical management of cerebellar haemangioblastomas. S Obrador, Martin-Rodriguez Jg, Surg Neurol. 721977

Posterior fossa haemangioblastomas. J P Constans, F Meder, F Maiuri, R Donzelli, R Spaziante, E De Divitiis, Surg Neurol. 251986

Intracranial haemangioblastomas: CT and MR findings. A D Elster, D W Arthur, J Comput Assist Tomogr. 121988

Gamma knife radiosurgery for haemangioblastomas. L Pan, E M Wang, B J Wang, L F Zhou, N Zhang, P W Cai, Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 701998

Gamma knife radiosurgery in 11 haemangioblastomas. M Niemela, Y J Lim, M Soderman, J Jaaskelainen, C Lindquist, J Neurosurg. 851996

Surgical management of brainstem haemangioblastomas in patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease. R J Weil, R R Lonser, H L Devroom, J E Wanebo, E H Oldfield, J Neurosurg. 982003

Cerebellar haemangioblastomas. V P Mondkar, W Mckissock, R W Russell, Br J Surg. 541967

Haemangioblastomas: Clinical characteristics, surgical results and immunohistochemical studies. S Londrini, G Lasio, C Cimino, F Pluchino, J Neurosurg Sci. 351991

Haemangioblastomas: Clinical and histopathological factors correlated with recurrence. S M Monte, S A Horowitz, Neurosurgery. 251989