# A review on making things see: Augmented reality for futuristic virtual educator PUBLIC INTEREST STATEMENT

CorpusID: 64241386
 
tags: #Education, #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/24d7f4c77c997abccdd59226cb3a1ad33f9ac0a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/24d7f4c77c997abccdd59226cb3a1ad33f9ac0a9)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review on making things see: Augmented reality for futuristic virtual educator PUBLIC INTEREST STATEMENT
2017. 2017

&amp; Iqbal 
Sidhu 
A review on making things see: Augmented reality for futuristic virtual educator PUBLIC INTEREST STATEMENT

4: 1287392 INFORMATION & COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN EDUCATION | REVIEW ARTICLE Iqbal & Sidhu, Cogent Education
412873922017. 201710.1080/2331186X.2017.1287392Received: 12 January 2017 Accepted: 18 January 2017*Corresponding author: Javid Iqbal, Department of Graphics and Multimedia, College of IT, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, 43000 Kajang, Malaysia Reviewing editor: Shuyan Wang, The University of Southern Mississippi, USA Additional information is available at the end of the article ABOUT THE AUTHORS Javid Iqbal is a registered PhD candidate at the National Energy University Malaysia. He holds a bachelor's degree in Computer Science and Engineering from Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute and Master's degree in Communication Systems from Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute. His research interest includes Multimedia, Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality. Manjit Singh Sidhu, PhD, is a professor at the College of Computer Science and IT, Dept. of Graphics and Multimedia, National Energy University Malaysia. He is a Chartered IT Professional Fellow with the British Computer Society, Senior IEEE Member USA, and Fellow of the Malaysian Scientific Association. His work has been published extensively in Conference proceedings, Journals, and Scientific Books. He has also won numerous teaching and research awards for his innovative development of interactive Multimedia, Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality Software and User Interfaces. Page 1 of 14 (CC-BY) 4.0 license. Page 2 of 14Subjects: Computer Graphics & VisualizationChoreographyDancers Keywords: dance learningaugmented realityKinect V2
In the past few years many choreographers have focused upon implementation of computer technology to enhance their artistic skills. Computer vision technology presents new methods for learning, instructing, developing, and assessing physical movements as well as provides scope to expand dance resources and rediscover the learning process. This work reviews the study done over AR based learning technologies for the development of inter personal skills. This paper further elaborates the literature done till date within the scope of AR based training for educational aspects. The review focuses on the techniques categorized according to the type of dance learning method which can further be enhanced and addressed by means of novel AR based technology. The authors aim to provide an overview for learning standards based on AR Kinect sensors. In addition the future work is toward exploring the latest version of Kinect V2 for dance training that could become the next futuristic virtual educator.

## PUBLIC INTEREST STATEMENT

Dance learning through television or pre-recorded video leads to improper training. The reason for ineffective dance learning based on existing methods is the inability to provide timely feedback and lack of interactivity, where the dancers have limited options to control the media. However in this modern technology era, technological assisted approaches have been innovated to aid people. In this paper, we reviewed the techniques categorized according to the type of dance learning methods which can further be enhanced by means of modern technologies. A brief background is supported by data showing learning phases, articles according to learning stages, and technology-based learning. As a case study, we selected India as a country that practices various types of dance and have one of the highest populations for motivational dance training skills. The paper then provides the benefits and suggestions of utilizing futuristic technologies to expertise in dance training skills.


## Introduction


### Dance learning technology

Learning dance and mastering in a particular dance style can turn out to be the most challenging task for new learners. Although this will need a choreographer or professional training sessions, technology has replaced such traditional way of learning. People who consider dance as their hobby or who hardly find time to look for a trained teacher or attend any dance classes; will mostly go for self-learning or in-house practice. Technology has made available numerous ways to search for information or video to make self-learning easier. But the major drawback is that the online websites do not provide any interactive feedback and inspiration to the learner by which the learning process becomes less interesting and ineffective.

Recently, there have been many advances in movement training, self-paced dance learning and choreographic demonstrations. The different learning activities can be adopted depending upon the learning method and content (Guyon, Athitsos, Jangyodsuk, & Escalante, 2014;Parrish, 2007). The emergence of dance video games and fitness training with gaming console and tracking technology such as Microsoft Kinect, motion sensors, augmented and virtual reality environments, and visualization methods have made movement skill better but the focus remains mainly on entertainment. For human beings, facial expressions occupy an important position in interpersonal and non-verbal communication. They are influenced by changes of internal emotion states and generated by the movements of facial muscles. Over the last two decades, numerous researches have focused on the analysis of these facial motions and the recognition of related emotions which can be noted from Table 1. Till date, those tasks are still a challenging issue in both psychology and CV. The existing methodologies in dance technology have focused upon just training a single person with the limited number of data-sets.


### AR applications

Augmented reality has numerous applications in the education sector. We can classify application areas as follows: (1) Knowledge acquisition, (2) Social development, (3) Education and training, (4) Navigation and construction. Figure 1 represents the significant transformation and the learning shift from traditional aspects toward multimedia services. AR also has made its impact on the navigation and construction industry. The last decade has seen a significant transformation in learning shift where AR has entered into wide variety of domains. The dance and music learning has also become more interesting with the employment of AR technology and AR handheld devices.

The state of art that has been dealt with the authors in the literature in the past decades, includes many applications such as helping the students to understand the X-ray view of a human body in medical sector as described by authors in Kandikonda (2011) allowing the architect students to not only see the structure of a building but also to get insights into the underlying infrastructure. In the field of navigation, AR has been employed in handheld devices and user interfaces for providing location information, traffic updates, route finding, data about new places of interests, and many varied applications. The entertainment and attractiveness of AR have created a pathway for evolution of AR theme park in South Korea. More information about this AR theme park is provided at http://www.thelivepark.com/blog/en/archives/category/about. The educational perspective has made its major transformation from classroom training toward computer visional augmented world as described in Table 2. This significant shift has made many students to opt for AR enabled learning rather than traditional methods. In this paper, the authors have reviewed the AR based dance learning methods and the impact of CV and AR in educational sector.  


## Motivation


### Advancement in AR technology

Learning is said to be a life-long process. But educating an individual is tailored to the learner's level of understanding, competence, and abilities. Our objectives are to review the AR based learning strategies till date and discuss the existing education and information-seeking processes as described in Table 3. Motivation must be considered as one of the important factor because it is directly linked to learning achievements. Therefore, AR applications, which are interactively and visually understandable, seems more attractive and motivating than traditional tools to the learner's perspective. On the other hand, games for learning are valued for their inspirational power and user-oriented features . Generally, the concreteness of game-based actions tends to involve pragmatism, if not enthusiasm, or trial and error. This learning phenomenon offers enormous directions for training, based on strong personal interest and inspiration.

CV has a major impact on the younger generation due to advancements in technology and the modern era of cyberspace world. The authors till date have presented different theories of enhanced learning through the discoveries made and developed in the last two decades (Hall et al., 2002;Kaufmann & Schmalstieg, 2003;Schall, 2009). Learning through AR helps the students with external amplification, internal rewards, challenge, and increased self-confidence (Chen, 2006). Therefore our survey deals with the reviewing of how the existing learning technology in AR influences the learner's insights and performance. AR based education is deemed to provide constructivism which is considered to be the fundamental theory of motivation and self-inspiration in educational sector as depicted in Figure 2. Eventually the aim of this review is to provide perspectives for AR based education, for specializing in a particular aspect, with interesting features, lower costs, easier understandability and reusability of content, easier integration with existing and future applications.


### Different types of dance in India

India has been selected as our case study since various forms of dance are practiced and learnt by people of all ages varying from young children to adults.

According to Wikipedia, "Dance is the art of movement of the body, usually rhythmically and to music, using prescribed or improvised steps and gestures." Indian classical dance is one of the oldest dance traditions associated with worlds majority of religious culture and heritage. In Indian culture, dance and music play a vital role for religious worship and spirituality. From the historical aspects, it is evident that lord Shiva has his imprint on the importance of dance and music. The presence of dance acts as a way of reacting and reaching out spiritually to the holy power of divinity in Hinduism. People in India also engage in dance and singing very frequently on a variety of occasions such as festivals, cultural programs, social events, and dance reality shows as depicted in Figure 3. In India, Bollywood, Kollywood, and Tollywood films are also deeply rooted with dance and music numbers that makes them unique when compared with Hollywood movies. Dance is vitally essential to Indian identity and plays key role as an inherit part of expression of Indianness.

It would appear that by the time of earliest civilizations in Indian subcontinent, dance had achieved a considerable way of expressing physical gestures. Indian classical dance is a gesture of all body parts each class of dance has its own way of learning and expression. The main drawback of existing solutions is that during dance performance due to obstructions it becomes difficult to capture all the gestures with the help of existing technology (Samanta & Chanda, 2013). In Saha,  Ghosh, Konar, and Janarthanan (2013), authors have introduced an algorithm for identification of dance video by recognizing posture from each frame for the purpose of e-learning by taking Indian classical dance oddisi as the input. The researchers in Majumdar (2012) have illustrated a method to develop a digital bharathanatiyam interaction. The existing solutions have focused only upon specific dance forms and hence cannot be applied to other dance movements. Therefore this study  deals with reviewing various existing dance learning technology for the different types of dances in India. Figure 4 and Table 4 show different types of dances in India according to region.


## Background study


### From traditional learning toward computer vision

The process of educating an individual has emerged from classroom teaching, motor learning, elearning toward CV. During the 1990s the advancements of technology gave way to computer-based training. The following decades eventually have witnessed the proliferation of information sharing, embedded systems, artificial intelligence, neural networks, and cloud computing. The authors in Han, Shao, Xu, and Shotton (2013) have presented a comprehensive resent Kinect based CV algorithms and applications. The reviewed approaches are classified according to vision problems and include topics such as preprocessing, object tracking, object recognition, human activity analysis, hand gesture analysis, and indoor 3D mapping. The preliminary explanation of AR technology adaption for teaching support and learning enhancement have been identified, summarized, and analyzed using interactive marker AR technology based models. The researchers in Wang et al. (2014) have presented an AR navigation system with automatic marker free image registration using 3D image overlay and stereo tracking for dental surgery. Image registration is performed by patient tracking and real-time 3D contour matching without requiring any fiducial and reference markers(fiducial is an object placed in the field of view of an imaging system which appears in the image produced, for use as a point of reference or a measure). Although there are many educational prototypes in the current literatures, the research contribution in Santos et al. (2014) urge that only a few prototypes are developed by interdisciplinary groups and base their work on learning theory. Thus their work enumerates the affordance of AR for leaning and discusses learning theories relevant to future AR educational content. The authors have outlined a comparative study of various AR software development kits (SDk's) to create AR applications. The paper (Amin & Govilkar, 2015) provides a comprehensive description on how AR is different from Virtual reality, working scenarios of AR, and various types of tracking employed in AR technology. Last few decades have shown a significant transformation from traditional learning toward CV in educational sector.


### AR in education and training

Augmented reality as defined earlier is a technology that makes use of CV techniques to collaborate computer generated virtual objects with real-time environment in order to increase or to enhance what can be visualized by the human user (Hall et al., 2002). In educational sector AR can be used in dance education, Chemistry, Biology, Astronomy, Mathematics, Computer graphics, etc. AR in chemistry education is used for the exploration of physical models of amino acids (Fjeld & Voegtli, 2002). In biology AR based learning system is used to get insights into the interior of human organs on a detailed basis with easier understanding (Gillet, Sanner, Stoffler, Goodsell, & Olson, 2004). In astronomy AR technology is applied for better understanding of seasonal changes in light and temperature, rotation/revolution of Sun and Earth (Shelton & Hedley, 2002). AR is also used as a visualization tool in computer graphics laboratories and in computer aided design lectures as described in Kaufmann and Meyer (2008) and Chen (2006). In mathematics AR is used for teaching calculus and algorithms (Kaufmann & Schmalstieg, 2003). This research throws light on various benefits of AR applications in educational environment. The authors have eventually concluded that improved learning curve and increased motivation account for more than 20% of all the advantages of AR in educational aspects mentioned in literature till date (Diegmann, Schmidt-kraepelin, Van Den Eynden, & Basten, 2015). In the field of dance education Kinect sensors are employed to train the students in physical movements as well as master them in their skills.


### Fun filled AR based dance learning using Kinect

Computer vision and motion sensing technologies have enabled the users to actively, physically, and mechanically interact with the digital environment in varied ways. The hybrid combinations of traditional art forms and advanced CV techniques have made the authors in the last decade to drive out to AR based dance leaning systems. The researchers in Guyon et al. (2014) have described Cha learn gesture data-set that is user dependent, small vocabulary, and one-shot learning using Kinect camera. In Silva et al. (2013), the authors have developed a prototype to monitor fall risk while playing a game using smart phone accelerometer. The experimenters in Fan, Xu, and Geng (2012) have introduced a novel method for synthesizing dance motion that follows the emotions and the contents of a piece of music. The research contribution in Yang, Leung, Yue, and Deng (2012) had presented an automatic dance lesson generation system which is suitable in a learning-by-mimicking scenario where the learning objects can be represented as multi-attribute time series data. The authors in Chan, Leung, Tang, and Komura (2011) proposed a new dance training system based on motion capture and virtual reality technologies. The research in Golshani, Vissicaro, and Park (2004) had presented multimedia information repository for cross cultural dance studies such as East Indian dance with the use of two 3D Vicon motion capture systems. The researchers in Eichner and Ferrari (2012) proposed techniques for novel Human Pose Co-estimation for joint pose estimation over multiple persons in a common, but unknown, pose. In Kuramoto, Nishimura, Yamamoto, Shibuya, and Tsujino (2013), a visualization method of velocity and acceleration of teacher's motion for the learner to understand more clearly and easily has been proposed. This research provides an updated interactive performance system for floor and aerial dance that controls visual and sonic aspects of the presentation through Microsoft Kinect camera. Improvised gesture recognition and tracking system called Action Graph (AG) is described in this article, which has the capability of capturing incoming gestures in an unsupervised way & enables mapping between input gestures to desired rendering functionalities (Wang, 2015). The authors of Anderson, Grossman, Matejka, and Fitzmaurice (2013) have discussed a novel system YouMove that allows users to record and learn physical movement sequences. The Kinect-based recording system is designed to be simple, allowing anyone to create and share training content, some of the screen shots are shown in Figure 5. The corresponding training system uses recorded data to train the user using a large-scale AR mirror. The system trains the user through a series of stages that gradually reduce the user's reliance on guidance and feedback. This also discusses the design and implementation of YouMove and its interactive mirror. The authors have presented a user study in which YouMove was shown to improve learning and short-term retention by a factor of 2 compared to a traditional video demonstration. While the presented implementation uses a half-silvered mirror as a display, the software could also run as a traditional videobased AR system. The Kinect has difficulty tracking movements that cause large amounts of occlusions. This would be more accessible to users, but does not provide the real-time feedback that the mirror does. It would be interesting to better understand any learning difference between a mirror and video-based system on various devices (large screen, small screen, etc.). The addition of social features and richer inclusions of gaming technologies could also greatly help YouMove. One can imagine online yoga, dance or martial arts classes, with competition from online peer groups, but more work is needed to achieve this. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2017.1287392


### Feature comparison of Kinect V2 with Kinect V1

The features of Kinect V1 and Kinect V2 are tabulated in    Figure 6 represents cyclic taxonomy view of this review where AR based learning technologies were reviewed for dance education that have employed Kinect sensors. There are numerous advantages of AR in educational sector some of which are interactive, easier to understand, and attractive way for learning and teaching according to past studies.


### Benefits of AR in educational sector

Other benefits include stimulation of conceptual thinking, constructivism, receiving greater sense of 3D space, theoretical understanding, perception enhancement, and fun-based interaction as depicted in Figure 7. The features of AR based learning include robust, cheaper, user friendly, animated, timely, easily understandable, responsive, seamless integration with other media, interesting, reliable, efficient, and portable (Carmigniani et al., 2011;Dong & Kamat, 2013;Jee, Lim, Youn, & Lee, 2014).  


## Conclusion

Augmented reality has made distinctive contributions toward learning experiences. The developments in CV technology have led researchers to enhance and assess AR learning aspects. In the course of this review there are many interesting facts that can be derived cyclic taxonomy of which is illustrated in Figure 6. The evolution of learning paradigm from traditional methods toward CV, relative to the theory of education technology has showed a significant transformation and has eventually led researchers and technologists to adopt AR as one of the promising direction for multimedia learning technology. The insights for AR technology in navigation and construction industries provide an essential need for comprehensive systems, integration of multiple platforms, user friendly interfaces, defect detection, and seamless integration at an affordable cost. The AR technology can be used for group as well as individual learning which motivates the learner in every possible way. The advantage of AR in educational sector includes opportunity to visualize digital information, observe the finer details of subjects and possibilities to examine the virtual information perceptively as many times as needed. Hence AR has made its major contribution toward knowledge acquisition in educational sector during the last few decades. There has also been emergence of AR based dance learning technology with tracking capabilities such as Microsoft Kinect. This technology has been employed for fun-filled dance learning with responsive interactions and self-motivating feedback. It can further be concluded that the traditional dances can be explored and the cultural heritage can be preserved with CV technology. The Kinect V2 sensor is seen as a future direction for AR based motion recognition and gesture detection, for which the work is underway.

## Figure 2 .
2AR in educational sector.

## Figure 3 .
3Dance events and reality shows in India.

## Figure 4 .
4Classification of dance types according to genre.

## Figure 5 .
5Fun filled AR based learning using Kinect.

## Figure 6 .
6Cyclic taxonomy of this review.

## Figure 7 .
7Advantages and features of AR based learning.

## Table 1 .
1Advantages and drawbacks of learning technologyAuthor/Year 
Enabling technologies/Method Advantages 
Drawbacks 

Parrish (2007) 
• Motion capture technology 

• Multimedia 

Capable of capturing difficult actions 
of the body as seen in the layered 
details of holding props, complex 
inversions, and partnering 

Investment in educational 
technology has many issues such as 
professional development, quality 
hardware and software 

Ofli, Erzin, Yemez, and Tekalp (2012) 
• Automatic dance choreography 
creation 

• Multimodal dance modeling 

The proposed music-driven dance 
animation method can also be 
applied to other dance genres such 
as ballroom dances, Latin dances and 
hip hop, as long as the dance 
performance is musical measure-
based 

Proposed framework can be modified 
to be used for other multimodal 
applications such as speech-driven 
facial expression or body gesture 
synthesis and animation 

Fan et al. (2012) 
• Dance motion and music 
mapping relationship 

• Music-driven dance motion 
synthesis 

A novel method for synthesizing 
dance motions which are closely 
synchronized with the input music via 
a learning-based approach 

Only some most popularly adopted 
music and motion features were 
used in the Prototype system for 
proof of principle 

Kohn, Nowakowska, and Belbachir 
(2012) 

• Dynamic stereo vision 
By the use of the dynamic stereo 
vision sensor a recognition rate of 
94% is achieved 

It is difficult to provide a thoroughly 
comparative analysis with state-of-
the-art systems because a single set 
of gestures has to be used for 
comparison 

Sensor 

Majumdar (2012) 
• Mobile-based applet 
Helps the user to systematically 
understand and independently 
practice the dance 

Only bharatanatyam is taken into 
consideration 

This work illustrates an effort to 
develop a digital bharatanatyam 
interaction 

Lee, Lee, and Park (2012) 
• Clustering algorithm 
A novel approach is proposed for 
generating dance performance based 
on music similarity 

Generating better motion connectiv-
ity between motion sequences is one 
factor to be considered 

Yang et al. (2012) 
• Motion capture technology 
The proposed automatic lesson 
generation system identifies the 
compact prerequisite structure, 
determines the knowledge states 
and plans a learning path by 
considering the complexity of the 
learning objects 

This method cannot be applied for 
traditional dances because 
demonstrating the full dance at once 
may be too long for students to 
remember and learn 

Khan and de Byl (2012) 
• Motion detecting technology 
It can facilitate rapid knowledge 
transfer with mechanisms for deeper 
understanding than video installation 
or rare live performances 

Future research must focus on how 
such kinesthetic experiences can be 
designed for children to provide 
meaningful and engaging experi-
ences with ICH (Intangible Cultural 
Heritage) 

Takai (2012) 
• Virtual dance studio 
The proposed method can show how 
the dance trainer moves the body by 
the body model 

Posture, that it is difficult for dance 
students to estimate it what kind of 
posture the dance trainer takes from 
silhouette because there is many 
postures that dancer moves both 
arms, and both legs, to back and 
forth in the general dance 

Clay et al. (2012) 
• Augmented reality 

• Motion capture technology 

Five interactions used in augmenting 
an improvised dance show 

Producing an augmented show 
gathering so many technological 
elements proved difficulty 

Guyon et al. (2014) 
• Computer vision 

• Gesture recognition 

• RGBD cameras 

Easy understanding of Sign language 
recognition 

Group dance is not considered 

(Continued) 


## Table 1 .
1(Continued) http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2017.1287392

## Table 2 .
2Applications of ARNo 
Author/Year 
Application 
Types of learning paradigm 

1. 
de Bruin, Schoene, Pichierri, and Smith (2010) 
• Motor 

• Cognitive 

• Rehabilitation 

Motor learning 

2. 
Ivanova and Ivanov (2011) 
• Web-based applications 

• AR applications utilized in different learn-
ing scenarios 

Learning and teaching computer graphics 

3. 
Han et al. (2013) 
• Video analysis applications 

• Health care applications 

• Indoor video surveillance 

• Activity of a human 

• Kinect in gaming applications 

Understanding Kinect 

4. 
Wang et al. (2014) 
• Dental surgery 
Medical 

5. 
Rankohi and Waugh (2013) 
• Visualization and simulation applications 
for construction 

Architecture, engineering, construction, and 
facility management (AEC/FM) industry 

6. 
Jee et al. (2014) 
• Education applications 

• E-learning application 

E-learning 


## Table 3 .
3Advances in AR learning technologyNo. 
Author/Year 
Subject 
AR employed 

Yes/No 

1 
Fjeld and Voegtli (2002) 
Chemistry 
Yes 

2 
Hall et al. (2002) 
Archeology 
Yes 

3 
Vlahakis, Karigiannis, Tsotros, Ioannidis, and Stricker (2002) 
Archeology 
Yes 

4 
Shelton and Hedley (2002) 
Astronomy 
Yes 

5 
Kaufmann and Schmalstieg (2003) 
Mathematics 
Yes 

6 
Gillet et al. (2004) 
Biology 
Yes 

7 
Poh et al. (2005) 
Mechanical 
Yes 

8 
Chen (2006) 
Chemistry 
Yes 

9 
Kaufmann and Meyer (2008) 
Mechanics 
Yes 

10 
Changhun and Kwanghee (2008) 
Physics 
Yes 

11 
Schall (2009) 
Civil 
Yes 

12 
Behzadan, Iqbal, and Kamat (2011) 
Civil 
Yes 



## Table 4 .
4Different types of dances in IndiaNo. 
Dance genre 
Type of dance 
Place of origin 

1 
Bharathanatiyam 
Classical dance 
South India 

2 
Kathakali 
Classical dance 
Kerala 

3 
Manipuri 
Classical dance 
Manipur 

4 
Kathak 
Classical dance 
North India 

5 
Kuchipudi 
Classical dance 
South India 

6 
Odissi 
Classical dance 
Odisha 

7 
Sattriya 
Classical Dance 
Assam 

8 
Bihu 
Folk and tribal dance 
Assam 

9 
Dhandiya 
Folk and tribal dance 
Gujarat 

10 
Rasiya 
Folk and tribal dance 
Rajasthan 

11 
Bhangra 
Folk and tribal dance 
Punjab 

12 
Cholia 
Folk and tribal dance 
Uttarakhand 


## Table 5 .
5The components of Kinect V2 are color camera, infrared projector, infrared camera, depth camera, microphone array, and a software development kit (SDK). The resolution of Kinect V2 is defined to be 1,920 × 1,080 pixels at the rate of 30 frames per second (fps) whereas kinect V1 has 640 × 480 pixels at rate of 30 fps. The depth camera of Kinect V2 has 512 × 424 resolution compared to 320 × 240 in Kinect V1. The microphone array in Kinect V2 features four microphone capsules with each channel processing 32 bit audio at a sampling rate of 16 KHz in contrary to Kinect V1 with 4 mic, 4 channels, 16 bits and 16 kHz microphone array. Kinect V2 has 70 degrees of horizontal fields of view and 60 degree of vertical field of view whereas Kinect V1 has 51 and 43 degrees, respectively. The total number of body joints that Kinect V2 can capture is 26 which is comparatively higher than Kinect V1 having 20 body joints capturing capabilities. Kinect V2 can track 6 skeletons at a time but Kinect V1 on the other hand can track only 2 skeletons. Kinect V2 supports 3.0 USB versions and is supported by Windows 8 and higher version operating system. The types of applications for Kinect V2 include desktop, ×86, ×84, Win 8 store, Java script, and web. It can be clearly seen here that since the existence of this technology device the Kinect V2 has made remarkable new enhancements and features. The new Kinect V2 features as mentioned here are yet to be tapped for its effectiveness and the authors believe that this device could become the futuristic virtual educator or trainer.

## Table 5 .
5Comparison of Kinect V1 and V2No. Features 
Kinect V1 
Kinect V2 

1 
Color camera 
640 × 480 @30 frames per second 
1,920 × 1,080 @30 frames per second 

2 
Depth camera 
320 × 240 
512 × 424 

3 
Microphone array 
4 mics, 4 channels, 16 bit 16 kHz 
4 mics, 4 channels 32 bit 16 kHz 

4 
Horizontal field of view 
57 degrees 
70 degrees 

5 
Body joints 
20 
26 

6 
Skeletons tracked 
2 
6 

7 
USB version 
2 
3.0 

8 
Supported OS 
Win 7, Win 8 Desktop 
Win 8 

9 
Types of Applications 
Desktop, x86, x64, JavaScript, Web 
Desktop, x86, x64, Win 8 Store, JavaScript, 
Web 


Iqbal & Sidhu, Cogent Education (2017), 4: 1287392  
Iqbal & Sidhu, Cogent Education (2017), 4: 1287392 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2017.1287392
© 2017 The Author(s). This open access article is distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) 4.0 license.

Comparative study of augmented reality Sdk's. D Amin, S Govilkar, 10.5121/ijcsa.2015.5102International Journal on Computational Science & Applications. 5Amin, D., & Govilkar, S. (2015). Comparative study of augmented reality Sdk's. International Journal on Computational Science & Applications, 5, 11-26. doi:10.5121/ijcsa.2015.5102

YouMove: Enhancing movement training with an augmented reality mirror. F Anderson, T Grossman, J Matejka, G Fitzmaurice, 10.1145/2501988.2502045Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. the 26th annual ACM symposium on User Interface Software and TechnologyAnderson, F., Grossman, T., Matejka, J., & Fitzmaurice, G. (2013). YouMove: Enhancing movement training with an augmented reality mirror. Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 311-320). doi:10.1145/2501988.2502045

A collaborative augmented reality based modeling environment for construction engineering and management education. A Behzadan, A Iqbal, V Kamat, Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference (WSC). the Winter Simulation Conference (WSC)Behzadan, A., Iqbal, A., & Kamat, V. (2011). A collaborative augmented reality based modeling environment for construction engineering and management education. Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), 3573-3581. Retrieved from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6148051

J Carmigniani, B Furht, M Anisetti, P Ceravolo, E Damiani, M Ivkovic, 10.1007/s11042-010-0660-6Augmented reality technologies, systems and applications. Multimedia Tools and Applications. 51Carmigniani, J., Furht, B., Anisetti, M., Ceravolo, P., Damiani, E., & Ivkovic, M. (2011). Augmented reality technologies, systems and applications. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 51, 341-377. doi:10.1007/s11042-010-0660-6

A virtual reality dance training system using motion capture technology. J C P Chan, H Leung, J K T Tang, T Komura, 10.1109/TLT.2010.27IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. 4Chan, J. C. P., Leung, H., Tang, J. K. T., & Komura, T. (2011). A virtual reality dance training system using motion capture technology. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 4, 187-195. doi:10.1109/TLT.2010.27

Introduction of physics simulation in augmented reality. C Changhun, K Kwanghee, 10.1109/ISUVR.2008.17Proceeding of the International Symposium on Ubiquitous Virtual Reality. eeding of the International Symposium on Ubiquitous Virtual RealityChanghun, C., & Kwanghee, K. (2008). Introduction of physics simulation in augmented reality. Proceeding of the International Symposium on Ubiquitous Virtual Reality, 2008 (pp. 37-40). doi:10.1109/ISUVR.2008.17.

A study of comparing the use of augmented reality and physical models in chemistry education. Y C Chen, 10.1145/1128923.1128990Proceeding of the 2006 ACM International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications -VRCIA. eeding of the 2006 ACM International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications -VRCIAChen, Y. C. (2006). A study of comparing the use of augmented reality and physical models in chemistry education. In Proceeding of the 2006 ACM International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications -VRCIA, 369-372. doi:10.1145/1128923.1128990

Desirability of a teaching and learning tool for Thai dance body motion. W Choensawat, K Sookhanaphibarn, C Kijkhun, The series lecture notes in computer science. Berlin HeidelbergSpringerChoensawat, W., Sookhanaphibarn, K., & Kijkhun, C. (2013). Desirability of a teaching and learning tool for Thai dance body motion. In The series lecture notes in computer science (pp. 171-179). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Interactions and systems for augmenting a live dance performance. A Clay, N Couture, L Nigay, J B De La Riviere, J C Martin, M Courgeon, G Domengero, 10.1109/ISMAR-AMH.2012.648398611th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality 2012 -Arts, Media, Humanities. Paper ISMAR-AMH 2012. 1Clay, A., Couture, N., Nigay, L., de la Riviere, J. B., Martin, J. C., Courgeon, M., & Domengero, G. (2012). Interactions and systems for augmenting a live dance performance. 11th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality 2012 -Arts, Media, Humanities. Paper ISMAR-AMH 2012, 1, 29-38. doi:10.1109/ISMAR-AMH.2012.6483986

Einsatz der virtuellen Realität für das Training der motorischen Kontrolle bei Älteren. E De Bruin, D Schoene, G Pichierri, S T Smith, 10.1007/s00391-010-0124-7Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie. 43de Bruin, E., Schoene, D., Pichierri, G., & Smith, S. T. (2010). Einsatz der virtuellen Realität für das Training der motorischen Kontrolle bei Älteren. Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie, 43, 229-234. doi:10.1007/s00391-010-0124-7

Benefits of augmented reality in educational environments -A systematic literature review. P Diegmann, M Schmidt-Kraepelin, S Van Den Eynden, D Basten, Benefits. 3Diegmann, P., Schmidt-kraepelin, M., Van Den Eynden, S., & Basten, D. (2015). Benefits of augmented reality in educational environments -A systematic literature review. Benefits, 3, 1542-1556.

SMART: Scalable and modular augmented reality template for rapid development of engineering visualization applications. S Dong, V R Kamat, 10.1186/2213-7459-1-1Visualization in Engineering. 11Dong, S., & Kamat, V. R. (2013). SMART: Scalable and modular augmented reality template for rapid development of engineering visualization applications. Visualization in Engineering, 1, 1. doi:10.1186/2213-7459-1-1

Human pose co-estimation and applications. M Eichner, V Ferrari, 10.1109/TPAMI.2012.85IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 34Eichner, M., & Ferrari, V. (2012). Human pose co-estimation and applications. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 34, 2282-2288. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2012.85

A multi-modal dance corpus for research into interaction between humans in virtual environments. S Essid, X Lin, M Gowing, G Kordelas, A Aksay, P Kelly, R Tournemenne, 10.1007/s12193-012-0109-5Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces. Essid, S., Lin, X., Gowing, M., Kordelas, G., Aksay, A., Kelly, P., … Tournemenne, R. (2012). A multi-modal dance corpus for research into interaction between humans in virtual environments. Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, 157-170. doi:10.1007/s12193-012-0109-5

Example-based automatic music-driven conventional dance motion synthesis. R Fan, S Xu, W Geng, 10.1109/TVCG.2011.73IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. 18Fan, R., Xu, S., & Geng, W. (2012). Example-based automatic music-driven conventional dance motion synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18, 501-515. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2011.73

Augmented Chemistry: An interactive educational workbench. M Fjeld, B M Voegtli, 10.1109/ISMAR.2002.1115100Proceedings. International Symposium Mixed and Augmented Reality. International Symposium Mixed and Augmented RealityFjeld, M., & Voegtli, B. M. (2002). Augmented Chemistry: An interactive educational workbench. In Proceedings. International Symposium Mixed and Augmented Reality, 1-3. doi:10.1109/ISMAR.2002.1115100

Augmented reality with tangible auto-fabricated models for molecular biology applications. A Gillet, M Sanner, D Stoffler, D Goodsell, A Olson, 10.1109/VISUAL.2004.7IEEE Visualization. Gillet, A., Sanner, M., Stoffler, D., Goodsell, D., & Olson, A. (2004). Augmented reality with tangible auto-fabricated models for molecular biology applications. IEEE Visualization, 2004, 235-241. doi:10.1109/VISUAL.2004.7

A multimedia information repository for cross cultural dance studies. F Golshani, P Vissicaro, Y Park, 10.1023/B:MTAP.0000036838.87602.71Multimedia Tools and Applications. 24Golshani, F., Vissicaro, P., & Park, Y. (2004). A multimedia information repository for cross cultural dance studies. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 24, 89-103. doi:10.1023/B:MTAP.0000036838.87602.71

. I Guyon, V Athitsos, P Jangyodsuk, H J Escalante, Guyon, I., Athitsos, V., Jangyodsuk, P., & Escalante, H. J. (2014).

10.1007/s00138-014-0596-3Machine Vision and Applications. The ChaLearn gesture datasetThe ChaLearn gesture dataset (CGD 2011). Machine Vision and Applications, 1-23. doi:10.1007/s00138-014-0596-3

The visitor as virtual archaeologist: Explorations in mixed reality technology to enhance educational and social interaction in the museum. T Hall, L Ciolfi, L Bannon, M Fraser, S Benford, J Bowers, M Flintham, 10.1145/584993.585008Hall, T., Ciolfi, L., Bannon, L., Fraser, M., Benford, S., Bowers, J., … Flintham, M. (2002). The visitor as virtual archaeologist: Explorations in mixed reality technology to enhance educational and social interaction in the museum. Methods, 91-97. doi:10.1145/584993.585008

Enhanced computer vision with Microsoft Kinect sensor: A review. J Han, L Shao, D Xu, J Shotton, 10.1109/TCYB.2013.2265378IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics. 43Han, J., Shao, L., Xu, D., & Shotton, J. (2013). Enhanced computer vision with Microsoft Kinect sensor: A review. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 43, 1318-1334. doi:10.1109/TCYB.2013.2265378

Stochastic regular grammar-based learning for basic dance motion recognition. Y Heryadi, M Fanany, A Arymurthy, 10.1109/ICACSIS.2013.6761612Cloud2.Snappages.Com. 978-979. Heryadi, Y., Fanany, M., & Arymurthy, A. (2013). Stochastic regular grammar-based learning for basic dance motion recognition, Cloud2.Snappages.Com. 978-979. http:// cloud2.snappages.com/b887f6216920e33921eb3600dca 196648e63c23d/767- SRGforDanceBasicDanceMotionRecognition.pdf http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICACSIS.2013.6761612

Enhancement of learning and teaching in computer graphics through marker augmented reality technology. M Ivanova, G Ivanov, International Journal of New Computer Architectures and their Applications. 1Ivanova, M., & Ivanov, G. (2011). Enhancement of learning and teaching in computer graphics through marker augmented reality technology. International Journal of New Computer Architectures and their Applications, 1, 176-184.

An augmented reality-based authoring tool for E-learning applications. H K Jee, S Lim, J Youn, J Lee, 10.1007/s11042-011-0880-4Multimedia Tools and Applications. 68Jee, H. K., Lim, S., Youn, J., & Lee, J. (2014). An augmented reality-based authoring tool for E-learning applications. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 68, 225-235. doi:10.1007/s11042-011-0880-4

Using virtual reality and augmented reality to teach human anatomy. K Kandikonda, Toledo, OHThe University of ToledoKandikonda, K. (2011). Using virtual reality and augmented reality to teach human anatomy. Toledo, OH: The University of Toledo.

Simulating educational physical experiments in augmented reality. H Kaufmann, B Meyer, 10.1145/1507713.1507717ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2008 Educ. Program. SIGGRAPH Asia '08. 1Kaufmann, H., & Meyer, B. (2008). Simulating educational physical experiments in augmented reality, ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2008 Educ. Program. SIGGRAPH Asia '08, 1. doi:10.1145/1507713.1507717

Mathematics and geometry education with collaborative augmented reality. H Kaufmann, D Schmalstieg, 10.1016/S0097-8493(03)00028-1Computers & Graphics. 27Kaufmann, H., & Schmalstieg, D. (2003). Mathematics and geometry education with collaborative augmented reality. Computers & Graphics, 27, 339-345. doi:10.1016/S0097-8493(03)00028-1

Creating tangible cultural learning opportunities for indigenous dance with motion detecting technologies. M Khan, P De Byl, 10.1109/IGIC.2012.6329834IEEE International Games Innovation Conference. Khan, M., & de Byl, P. (2012). Creating tangible cultural learning opportunities for indigenous dance with motion detecting technologies. 2012 IEEE International Games Innovation Conference (pp. 1-3). doi:10.1109/IGIC.2012.6329834

Real-time body motion analysis for dance pattern recognition. EEE Computer Society Conference Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. B Kohn, A Nowakowska, A N Belbachir, 10.1109/CVPRW.2012.6238894Kohn, B., Nowakowska, A., & Belbachir, A. N. (2012). Real-time body motion analysis for dance pattern recognition. EEE Computer Society Conference Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2012, 48-53. doi:10.1109/CVPRW.2012.6238894

Velocity and visualizingacceleration on augmented practice mirror self-learning support system of physical motion. I Kuramoto, Y Nishimura, K Yamamoto, Y Shibuya, Y Tsujino, 10.1109/IIAI-AAI.2013.28Second IIAI International Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics. Kuramoto, I., Nishimura, Y., Yamamoto, K., Shibuya, Y., & Tsujino, Y. (2013). Velocity and visualizingacceleration on augmented practice mirror self-learning support system of physical motion. Second IIAI International Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics, 2013, 365-368. doi:10.1109/IIAI-AAI.2013.28

Study on the synchronous e-learning platforms for dissemination of traditional dance. J Lee, 10.1109/DigitalHeritage.2013.6743784Digital Heritage International Congress. 457Lee, J. (2013). Study on the synchronous e-learning platforms for dissemination of traditional dance. Digital Heritage International Congress, 2013, 457. doi:10.1109/DigitalHeritage.2013.6743784

Music similarity-based approach to generating dance motion sequence. M Lee, K Lee, J Park, 10.1007/s11042-012-1288-5Multimedia Tools and Applications. 62Lee, M., Lee, K., & Park, J. (2012). Music similarity-based approach to generating dance motion sequence. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 62, 895-912. doi:10.1007/s11042-012-1288-5

Design and implementation of an augmented reality system using gaze interaction. J Y Lee, H M Park, S H Lee, S H Shin, T E Kim, J S Choi, 10.1007/s11042-011-0944-5Multimedia Tools and Applications. 68Lee, J. Y., Park, H. M., Lee, S. H., Shin, S. H., Kim, T. E., & Choi, J. S. (2014). Design and implementation of an augmented reality system using gaze interaction. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 68, 265-280. doi:10.1007/s11042-011-0944-5

Framework for teaching Bharatanatyam through digital medium. R Majumdar, 10.1109/T4E.2012.53Majumdar, R. (2012). Framework for teaching Bharatanatyam through digital medium, 241-242. doi:10.1109/T4E.2012.53

Learn2Dance: Learning statistical music-to-dance mappings for choreography synthesis. F Ofli, E Erzin, Y Yemez, A M Tekalp, 10.1109/TMM.2011.2181492IEEE Transactions on Multimedia. 14Ofli, F., Erzin, E., Yemez, Y., & Tekalp, A. M. (2012). Learn2Dance: Learning statistical music-to-dance mappings for choreography synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 14, 747-759. doi:10.1109/TMM.2011.2181492

Technology in dance education. International Handbook of Research in Arts Education. M Parrish, 10.1007/978-1-4020-3052-916Parrish, M. (2007). Technology in dance education. International Handbook of Research in Arts Education, 16, 1381-1397. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-3052-9

. Y Poh, Y Poh, A Y C Nee, A Y C Nee, K Youcef-Toumi, K Youcef-Toumi, Poh, Y., Poh, Y., Nee, A. Y. C., Nee, A. Y. C., Youcef-Toumi, K., Youcef-Toumi, K., ...

Facilitating mechanical design with augmented reality. S K Ong, Ong, S. K. (2005). Facilitating mechanical design with augmented reality. Design, 1-5. Retrieved from http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en &btnG=Search&q=intitle:Facilitating±Mechanical±Design ±with±Augmented±Reality#0

Review and analysis of augmented reality literature for construction industry. S Rankohi, L Waugh, 10.1186/2213-7459-1-9Visualization in Engineering. 19Rankohi, S., & Waugh, L. (2013). Review and analysis of augmented reality literature for construction industry. Visualization in Engineering, 1, 9. doi:10.1186/2213-7459-1-9

Identification of Odissi dance video using Kinect sensor. S Saha, S Ghosh, A Konar, R Janarthanan, 10.1109/ICACCI.2013.6637461Proceeding of the 2013 International Conference Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics, ICACCI 2013. eeding of the 2013 International Conference Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics, ICACCI 2013Saha, S., Ghosh, S., Konar, A., & Janarthanan, R. (2013). Identification of Odissi dance video using Kinect sensor. Proceeding of the 2013 International Conference Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics, ICACCI 2013 (pp. 1837-1842). doi:10.1109/ICACCI.2013.6637461

A novel technique for spacetime-interest point detection and description for dance video classification. S Samanta, B Chanda, International symposium on visual computing, Part I. 8033Samanta, S., & Chanda, B. (2013). A novel technique for space- time-interest point detection and description for dance video classification. In International symposium on visual computing, Part I, LNCS (Vol. 8033, pp 507-516).

M E C Santos, A Chen, T Taketomi, G Yamamoto, J Miyazaki, H Kato, Augmented reality learning experiences: Survey of Prototype Design and Evaluation. 7Santos, M. E. C., Chen, A., Taketomi, T., Yamamoto, G., Miyazaki, J., & Kato, H. (2014). Augmented reality learning experiences: Survey of Prototype Design and Evaluation, 7, 38-56.

Handheld augmented reality in civil engineering. G Schall, 4th Conference on Computer Image Processing and its Application in. Slovenia; MariborSchall, G. (2009) Handheld augmented reality in civil engineering. In 4th Conference on Computer Image Processing and its Application in Slovenia 2009 (ROSUS 2009) (pp. 19-25). Maribor.

Using augmented reality for teaching Earth-Sun relationships to undergraduate geography students. B E Shelton, N R Hedley, 10.1109/ART.2002.1106948The First IEEE International Workshop. Augmented Reality ToolkitShelton, B. E., & Hedley, N. R. (2002). Using augmented reality for teaching Earth-Sun relationships to undergraduate geography students. In Augmented Reality Toolkit, The First IEEE International Workshop. doi:10.1109/ART.2002.1106948

Using the smartphone accelerometer to monitor fall risk while playing a game: The design and usability evaluation of dance ! don't fall. P A Silva, F Nunes, A Vasconcelos, M Kerwin, R Moutinho, P Teixeira, 10.1007/978-3-642-39454-6{_}81Foundations of Augmented Cognition. 8027Silva, P. A., Nunes, F., Vasconcelos, A., Kerwin, M., Moutinho, R., & Teixeira, P. (2013). Using the smartphone accelerometer to monitor fall risk while playing a game: The design and usability evaluation of dance ! don't fall. Foundations of Augmented Cognition, 8027, 754-763. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39454-6-81

Production of body model for education of dance by measurement active quantity. M Takai, 10.1109/GCCE.2012.6379584IEEE 1st Global Conference on Consumer Electronics. Takai, M. (2012). Production of body model for education of dance by measurement active quantity. IEEE 1st Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (pp. 212-216). doi:10.1109/GCCE.2012.6379584

You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use. No additional restrictions You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits. Cogent Education (ISSN: 2331-186X) is published by Cogent OA. Share -copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format Adapt -remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose, even commercially. Taylor & Francis GroupPublishing with Cogent OA ensures: • Immediate, universal access to your article on publication • High visibility and discoverability via the Cogent OA website as well as Taylor & Francis Online • Download and citation statistics for your article •. Rapid online publication • Input from, and dialog withYou are free to: Share -copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format Adapt -remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose, even commercially. The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms. Under the following terms: Attribution -You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use. No additional restrictions You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits. Cogent Education (ISSN: 2331-186X) is published by Cogent OA, part of Taylor & Francis Group. Publishing with Cogent OA ensures: • Immediate, universal access to your article on publication • High visibility and discoverability via the Cogent OA website as well as Taylor & Francis Online • Download and citation statistics for your article • Rapid online publication • Input from, and dialog with, expert editors and editorial boards

Personalized augmented reality touring of archaeological sites with wearable and mobile computers. V Vlahakis, J Karigiannis, M Tsotros, N Ioannidis, D Stricker, 10.1109/ISWC.2002.1167214Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers. the 6th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable ComputersVlahakis, V., Karigiannis, J., Tsotros, M., Ioannidis, N., Stricker, D. (2002). Personalized augmented reality touring of archaeological sites with wearable and mobile computers. Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers (pp. 2-9). doi:10.1109/ISWC.2002.1167214

Free-body gesture tracking and augmented reality improvisation for floor and aerial dance free-body gesture tracking and augmented reality. C Wang, 10.13140/2.1.2863.1845Wang, C. (2015). Free-body gesture tracking and augmented reality improvisation for floor and aerial dance free-body gesture tracking and augmented reality. doi:10.13140/2.1.2863.1845

Augmented reality navigation with automatic marker-free image registration using 3-D image overlay for dental surgery. J Wang, H Suenaga, K Hoshi, L Yang, E Kobayashi, I Sakuma, H Liao, 10.1109/TBME.2014.2301191IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering. 61Wang, J., Suenaga, H., Hoshi, K., Yang, L., Kobayashi, E., Sakuma, I., & Liao, H. (2014). Augmented reality navigation with automatic marker-free image registration using 3-D image overlay for dental surgery. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 61, 1295-1304. doi:10.1109/TBME.2014.2301191

Automatic dance lesson generation. Y Yang, H Leung, L Yue, L Deng, 10.1109/TLT.2011.31IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. 5Yang, Y., Leung, H., Yue, L., & Deng, L. (2012). Automatic dance lesson generation. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 5, 191-198. doi:10.1109/TLT.2011.31