# Dengue disease surveillance: an updated systematic literature review

CorpusID: 6657487
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Political_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78fac8b8426bab0095723c255f65d07197d824f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78fac8b8426bab0095723c255f65d07197d824f8)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Dengue disease surveillance: an updated systematic literature review


S Runge-Ranzinger 
Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases
World Health Organization
GenevaSwitzerland

P J Mccall 
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine
LiverpoolUK

A Kroeger 
Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases
World Health Organization
GenevaSwitzerland

Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine
LiverpoolUK

O Horstick 
Institute of Public Health
University of Heidelberg
HeidelbergGermany

Dengue disease surveillance: an updated systematic literature review
10.1111/tmi.12333denguesurveillancesystematic reviewepidemic preparednessdengue outbreaks
objectives To review the evidence for the application of tools for dengue outbreak prediction/ detection and trend monitoring in passive and active disease surveillance systems in order to develop recommendations for endemic countries and identify important research needs.methods This systematic literature review followed the protocol of a review from 2008, extending the systematic search from January 2007 to February 2013 on PubMed, EMBASE, CDSR, WHOLIS and Lilacs. Data reporting followed the PRISMA statement. The eligibility criteria comprised (i) population at risk of dengue, (ii) dengue disease surveillance, (iii) outcome of surveillance described and (iv) empirical data evaluated. The analysis classified studies based on the purpose of the surveillance programme. The main limitation of the review was expected publication bias.results A total of 1116 papers were identified of which 36 articles were included in the review. Four cohort-based prospective studies calculated expansion factors demonstrating remarkable levels of underreporting in the surveillance systems. Several studies demonstrated that enhancement methods such as laboratory support, sentinel-based reporting and staff motivation contributed to improvements in dengue reporting. Additional improvements for passive surveillance systems are possible by incorporating simple data forms/entry/electronic-based reporting; defining clear system objectives; performing data analysis at the lowest possible level (e.g. district); seeking regular data feedback. Six studies showed that serotype changes were positively correlated with the number of reported cases or with dengue incidence, with lag times of up to 6 months. Three studies found that data on internet searches and event-based surveillance correlated well with the epidemic curve derived from surveillance data.conclusions Passive surveillance providing the baseline for outbreak alert should be strengthened and appropriate threshold levels for outbreak alerts investigated. Additional enhancement tools such as syndromic surveillance, laboratory support and motivation strategies can be added. Appropriate alert signals need to be identified and integrated into a risk assessment tool. Shifts in dengue serotypes/genotype or electronic event-based surveillance have also considerable potential as indicator in dengue surveillance. Further research on evidence-based response strategies and cost-effectiveness is needed.

## Introduction

Dengue remains a major and growing public health threat worldwide. With the most recent study estimating that global infection rates of 390 million infections occur annually (Bhatt et al. 2013), the need for improved dengue surveillance is evident. Dengue surveillance is essential for the detection of outbreaks and, in the longer term, to monitor disease trends. In order to trigger timely interventions, outbreak alerts are particularly important to mobilise vector control and to prime or reorganise healthcare delivery services in preparation for a surge in suspected cases. Although vector control tools can be effective in principle, implementation remains an issue and effective dengue routine prevention is rarely achieved, particularly in high-density urban communities Pilger et al. 2010). Emergency vector control operations in response to dengue outbreaks 1116 are more typically applied, even though the efficacy of the most widespread method used, insecticide fogging or space-spraying, is dubious (Esu et al. 2010). Surveillance for dengue can include different indicators and systems (Harrington et al. 2013;Henning 2004;Stroup et al. 1989) to detect outbreaks and monitor trends. The authors' earlier systematic literature review (Runge Ranzinger et al. 2008) analysed 'the evidence on the structure, purpose and usefulness of dengue disease surveillance in dengue endemic countries' and described a general lack of evidence for the usefulness of dengue disease surveillance for early outbreak detection, especially the lack of indicators/alert signals available to trigger response. A stepwise adaptation of surveillance systems after evaluation in combination with active surveillance was recommended. Since then, new articles in the field of dengue surveillance have been published, and new initiatives towards early detection of dengue outbreaks have been launched (WHO expert meeting on dengue outbreak detection and response, June 2012). Common to all reports and recommendations is an increased recognition of the need for dengue control to focus on surveillance, vector control and adequate case management.

The aims of this review were to strengthen the evidence base and (where required) adjust the recommendations of Runge Ranzinger et al. (2008) by incorporating new trends and tools and to identify and summarise advances or improvements made. As in the earlier review, dengue vector surveillance was not covered here, but has been reviewed independently elsewhere (Bowman et al. 2014, in press).


## Methodology

This review followed the protocol (York 2001) used in a previous systematic literature review on dengue disease surveillance, and the reporting guidelines set out in the PRISMA Statement for systematic reviews and metaanalyses (Liberati et al. 2009). The eligibility criteria of the reviewed literature were as follows: (i) population at risk of dengue, (ii) dengue disease surveillance, (iii) outcome of surveillance described and (iv) empirical data evaluated. After the recent dengue outbreaks in France and Croatia (29 and 30), the population at risk in the search was extended to include the European region. Literature reported in English, German and Spanish was included although the search was conducted in English only. Studies focusing on risk mapping, transmission dynamics, forecasting or prediction methods were excluded (e.g. Buczak et al. 2012; Chen & Chang 2013; Racloz et al. 2012), as they did not directly study surveillance systems.

The literature search and analyses were developed and continued until 15th February 2013, with two persons working as data extractors. Search fields included Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms/subjects and free text, considering population, intervention and outcome. The terms 'dengue' and 'severe dengue' (dengue fever (DF), dengue h(a)emorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS)), 'surveillance' (disease, clinical, active, passive, sentinel, epidemiologic, population), 'communicable disease control', 'effectiveness', 'evaluation', 'disease notification', 'disease outbreaks', 'hospital and clinical laboratory information system' were used. The search strategy was adapted according to the databases, consistent with the process undertaken during the primary review published in 2008.

The search strategy was applied to the following databases to locate peer-reviewed studies: The United States National Library of Medicine and the National Institutes All results were screened for duplication by author, title, journal and publication date, and then screened for relevance, based on the title and abstract only. The full text of all studies considered to be relevant was then reviewed for final assessment by two independent data extractors. Where necessary, consensus was achieved by discussion. Relevant information, including study bibliographic information, study design and objectives, levels of endemicity and population, components of the surveillance system (surveillance subjects, scope and method), resources spent on the system, delivery of the surveillance system (information flow, outbreak and/or case definition, additional relevant information), purpose of the surveillance system and outcome attributes, was extracted and tabulated in evidence tables ( Table 1).

As many studies were descriptive or 'ecological studies' and therefore could not be ranked according to the 'hierarchy of study designs' (York 2001), the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC 2000) evidence hierarchy (Merlin et al. 2009) was used to group the studies according to study design. Only studies at evidence 'level IV or level III-2 and III-3' were included. -Would be a low-cost option -Estimating an indicator near real-time -Dengue-related search queries are generally not as influenced by news coverage (panic-driven searches)

-Despite strong historical correlations, it remains susceptible to false alerts.

-Sufficient search volume is needed.

-Rural areas and developing nations tend to lack or have limited Internet access currently.

-Intercountry comparisons may be difficult, each presented country and model must be considered independently. -In settings, with less developed surveillance systems, an internet search term-based system may yield significant gains in the rapidity of predictions.

-It is conceivable that an internet search term-based model may be a proxy for routine surveillance in specific settings.

-Individual models need to be developed for specific settings using local surveillance data and search terms. 


## Conclusions of study author:

The community-based programme captured twofold more fever and symptomatic dengue infections relative to study population size than the school-based system while monitoring five times as many people using the same number of personnel and the same amount of resources.

-Community-based surveillance allowed to identify symptomatic dengue cases in all age groups and was not solely limited to school-aged children.

-Several factors, including the research objective, sitespecific dengue epidemiology and cultural characteristics of the study population, will help determine the type of active surveillance system to implement. -On the civilian side, more time was necessary to detect the new dengue fever outbreak, in particular because it did not use any statistical tool to identify an increase in cases above a threshold.

-Several weeks were also necessary for the local vector borne disease committee to request a strengthening of existing vector control measures. 


## Conclusions


## Conclusions of study author:

-Specific areas of acceptability to enter data could be significantly improved -The high sensitivity and low specificity of syndromic surveillance is characteristic.

This lack of specificity may lead to costly false alarms.

-Sensitivity of the system means that if utilised correctly by s stakeholders, it is unlikely to miss any disease epidemic where the primary symptom is fever.

-The timeliness and sensitivity were major strong points.

-Logging of patients into the system took too much time 


## Conclusions of study author:

-This was not a classic capture-recapture study, but rather an ecological study comparing incidence rates in a cohort to national surveillance rates in the surrounding urban areas.

-The HCSFV district, which borders Lake Managua, may have higher dengue rates than other health centres, as there was more reported dengue among the non-study population of the HCSFV.

-However, another plausible explanation is that these higher numbers are due to the impact of the PDCS study protocol and increased awareness.

- 


## Conclusions of study author

-This active surveillance found a higher disease incidence than reported to the national surveillance system, particularly in preschool children and that disease incidence was high in both rural and urban areas.

-It also confirmed the previously observed focal nature of dengue virus transmission.

C. Trend monitoring and outbreak detection -Peak season was Sept to Nov.

-Airport fever screening was successful in identifying 45% of imported dengue cases with fever.

-No statistical impact on community transmission comparing presence and absence of airport fever screening.

-Dengue cases appeared to be positively associated with population density ( Conclusions of study author:

-55.0% (298/542) of imported cases were temporary, nonfebrile, that is, latent cases, undetected by airport fever screening.

-50-90% of dengue infection cases are asymptomatic, and therefore, transmission of DENV into Taiwan via incoming travellers may be inevitable.

-The efficacy of screening symptomatic passengers passing through Taiwan airports by NCIT was found to have a PPV = 30.5-62.6% when fever prevalence among passengers was <1%.

-The effect on mitigating community transmission in dengue epidemics was not significantly different between pre-2003 border control methods and post-2003 methods (fever screening). 


## Conclusions of study author:

-Dengue in Taiwan is an adult infectious disease; elderly have high morbidity and mortality rates.

-Secondary infection increases the disease severity, but not mortality, dengue-infected adults are more symptomatic.

-The transmission cycle in Taiwan is unique, beginning with importation in the summer and ending in the winter.

-Most (64%) of the dengueinfected persons showed clinical symptoms after DENV-1 /DENV-3 infection.

-Severe disease can be caused by secondary infection with DENV-2 or primary infection with DENV-1 or DENV-3.

1148 Studies were grouped according to study types: models, time-series, case studies, ecological studies, evaluations, expert consensus, descriptive studies, prospective and retrospective cohorts.

No studies were excluded in the analysis for quality reasons if the eligibility criteria were met, and the limitations and possible biases in such studies are reported in the results section. The analysis grouped studies into four categories based on the purpose of the surveillance approach under investigation: (A) outbreak prediction/ detection; (B) trend monitoring; (C) both outbreak prediction/detection and trend monitoring; and (D) low/nonendemic countries.


## Results

A total of 1116 studies, including duplicates, were identified during the electronic search as potentially relevant to the research question. After screening of titles and abstracts, 90 studies remained eligible. Full assessment of the text eliminated 54 further studies, leaving 36 studies included (Figure 1). Data of the 36 studies were extracted to a table (Table 1), also assigning a unique identifier number for each study.

When grouped according to purpose of the surveillance system studied and compared with the 2008 review, an increase in research interest in early outbreak detection was apparent, particularly in endemic countries: (A) outbreak prediction or detection (14 studies/previously 5); (B) monitoring dengue trends (4 studies/previously 6); (C) outbreak prediction and trend monitoring (9 studies/previously 7); and (D) non-endemic countries (9 studies/ previously 6). Within each of these categories, key components essential for improving surveillance in endemic and non-endemic countries were identified. The detailed findings are summarised and presented in Table 1. 


## 1152


## Surveillance systems for outbreak detection and/or prediction (Groups A and C)

Most of these studies were from highly endemic settings and were intended to predict or detect outbreaks at an early stage.

Using electronic event-/search query-based surveillance for early detection of increased dengue activity. Two studies investigated the value of data quantifying the numbers of internet searches seeking dengue information in a number of countries (Bolivia, Brazil, India, Indonesia and Singapore; studies 1 and 2), by comparing with epidemiological data from the surveillance system using time-series analysis. The curve of the search queries over time was similar to the epidemic curve constructed from surveillance data, underlining the usefulness of this new and relatively simple approach. Study 13 used a real-time electronic approach based on Health Map in order to enhance timeliness and outbreak detection and to provide an added value for monitoring the ongoing spread of dengue.

Using the appearance of a new dengue serotype/genotype as an alert signal for dengue outbreaks. Six studies investigated serotype changes as a dengue outbreak signal (studies 3-8) using virus surveillance information, analysing laboratory data (genotyped or sequenced data) or hospital data (severity of cases) and examining how these correlated with the number of reported cases or dengue incidence. Five of these studies (3-7) also analysed whether a serotype shift or a clade replacement was positively associated with a subsequent epidemic. The sixth study investigated the correlation between population-wide serotype-specific data and an increase in cases (study 8) and showed that outbreaks occurred following the introduction of new serotypes in specific islands. Examining these studies in detail, retrospective studies in Singapore (studies 3,5) found that a serotype switch from DENV-2 to DENV-1 in 2004/2005 was associated with the 2005 epidemic. However, according to Schreiber (study 6), viral genome sequencing would not have been sufficient to predict this outbreak. A switch from DENV-1 back to DENV-2 in early 2007 was used as a warning sign and led to response actions that were believed to have reduced the impact of an outbreak 6 months later. A clade replacement within DENV-2 was also considered a contributing factor to the 2007 Singapore outbreak (study 3) and another outbreak at the end of 2010 (study 4). Similarly, three surveys in Surabaya (Indonesia) investigated prospectively the correlation of DENV type and disease incidence. Here, an increase in case numbers in 2010 was attributed to a genotype shift in DENV-1 from genotype IV to I between April and September 2009 (study 7). Retrospective analysis of serotype-specific surveillance data in the Pacific region (study 8) demonstrated that the rapid replacement of DENV-1 by DENV-4 in the region was associated with dengue outbreaks in 2008 and 2009 in Kiribati, New Caledonia, Samoa, Tonga and other islands.

Using syndromic surveillance to create alert signals for dengue outbreaks. Five studies investigated the value of syndromic surveillance for early outbreak detection. These included a comparison of community-based fever surveillance with surveillance of school absenteeism in Peru (study 9) and two studies in French Guiana (studies 10 and 12) that described the advantages of reporting dengue cases using a syndromic case definition compared with routine reporting. These two French Guiana studies and another in Madagascar (study 14) used sentinel sites and reported higher sensitivity and outbreak early warning capacity compared with the routine reporting systems (which were based on laboratory surveillance and passive case reporting). Studies 10 and 12 highlighted the need for maintaining the traditional surveillance and considering the increased potential for false alerts in syndromic surveillance systems.

The prospective study in Peru indicated that community door-to-door fever surveillance had higher sensitivity than school absenteeism records as an indicator for dengue (study 9); the community-based fever cohort captured twice as many cases as the school-based approach.

In French Guiana (study 10), the syndromic clinical surveillance in a military population and the routine laboratory reporting systems were found to be complementary: the syndromic approach detected an outbreak 3-4 weeks earlier and was six times more sensitive than laboratory-based surveillance, but the specificity was lower in the former. Further analysis (study 11) using CDC criteria (CDC 2001) showed that the ideal reporting time was often not achieved due to barriers at data entry and that an increased risk of false alerts needed to be considered. However, all respondents perceived that this system detected outbreaks adequately and subsequent countrywide introduction of sentinel-based syndromic reporting in French Guiana identified 80 signals for confirmed cases and 64 for clinical cases and predicted three major epidemics (study 12). In Madagascar, a sentinel-based syndromic surveillance system for six diseases was evaluated: it detected ten outbreaks, five were confirmed and two of which were dengue (study 14).

Use of other sentinel site-based approaches to increase capacity for outbreak detection. Three studies analysed sentinels sites for early outbreak warning, either in the form of sentinel-based reporting and virus surveillance (Cambodia, study 20) or for non-endemic countries (studies 22, 23, see group D below). One study described an enhanced routine surveillance system in Puerto Rico by motivating public health staff, which resulted in an increase in reported dengue incidence three times above the incidence during the two most recent epidemics in 1994 and 1998 (study 21). In Cambodia, passive surveillance plus sentinel site surveillance including virus surveillance increased the sensitivity of detecting outbreaks (defined as numbers of cases exceeding two standard deviations [SD] above the mean) although the response was delayed, mainly due to inadequate financial management (study 24).

In Europe, ten new strains of dengue viruses were detected in travellers returning from Africa, and increased observation of dengue in travellers by surveillance networks (TropNetEurop) was correlated with outbreaks documented in national data (study 23).


## Surveillance for describing endemic⁄epidemic trends (Group B and C)

These surveillance systems under investigation were mostly population-based and passive. Some included additional sentinel sites or virus surveillance but they were used only to monitor viral trends and were not applied to early warning.

Four cohort-based studies calculated the level of underreporting, either using capture-recapture approaches comparing two independent surveillance systems or by comparing cohort-based data with the national routine reporting. The expansion factor indicating the level of underreporting was calculated to be: The results demonstrated remarkably high levels of underreporting in the surveillance systems, particularly for non-hospitalised cases. It was a common experience that a large proportion of the affected population was not captured by passive routine reporting (e.g. non-users of health services, users of private/traditional sectors or certain age groups (e.g. adults in Cambodia).
•
Four evaluations of routine dengue surveillance systems (studies 24-27) in 6 countries (Brazil, Bolivia, Cambodia, Indonesia, Maldives and Thailand) were conducted using a similar protocol for evaluations based on CDC Guidelines (CDC 2001). Both trend monitoring and outbreak detection were evaluated. All evaluations found that a clear understanding of the objectives of the surveillance system by all stakeholders was crucial. The routine reporting systemssome of them with laboratory supportwere perceived to be useful for trend monitoring and national planning but, as they did not apply appropriate thresholds/alert signals or include additional surveillance components, they had little capacity for early outbreak detection. In particular, reporting timeliness was perceived to be low, ranging from a few days for notification in the Maldives (study 27) to six to seven weeks until data analysis in Cambodia (study 24). Moreover, the responses were delayed, as shown in the Maldives, where no threshold for taking action was implemented, and in Cambodia, where lack of sufficient financial management and other constraints undermined any response to the alert signal of 'increased transmission (above two SD) in low transmission season'. In Thailand, where the system relied exclusively on clinically confirmed cases, respondents felt that outbreak responses were delayed because decision-makers did not trust the data and feared false alerts (study 24). All evaluations reported that timeliness could have been increased by electronic reporting or simplified reporting forms and that data analysis should have been performed at the lowest possible level (e.g. every district, once per week), given that sufficient capacity was available.


## Dengue surveillance in low⁄non-endemic countries (Group D)

The value or effectiveness of primarily laboratory-supported active dengue surveillance systems in non-endemic settings was described in several studies from Asia and Europe. Timeliness of the system and laboratory support were reported to be crucial elements.

Three European studies described the recent detection of dengue in France (study 30) and in Croatia (study 29) and imported dengue cases in Italy (study 28). In Croatia, the notification of returning travellers led to the detection of autochthonous cases, while survey-based investigations revealed additional cases (29).

An evaluation of routine reporting in Korea (study 31) reported a 2-to 15-day delay from disease onset to reporting, which was shortened when electronic reporting components were introduced.

Four studies from Taiwan (studies 32-36) demonstrated the effectiveness of linking routine reporting with strong laboratory support and active and syndromic reporting elements in monitoring epidemiological, virological and clinical trends. Airport fever screening (studies 32 and 36) detected around 45% of imported dengue cases, but any impact this might have had on subsequent autochthonous transmission could not be determined.


## Discussion


## Key findings

A greater number of the studies included in the present study (19/36) were performed in Asia than in the Americas (8/36; previously 17/24), illustrating a shift in research attention to Asia from the Americas since the 2008 review, when 17 and 6 studies, respectively, of 24 were recorded. In the present study, four studies (4/36) had a global focus, one study was from Africa and three studies were from Europe, most likely reflecting the global spread of, and consequent interest in, dengue disease in these regions in recent years.

Tools for trend monitoring (Group B and C), and as baseline for 'excess reporting' for outbreak detection

The surveillance systems deployed for this purpose were mainly population-based and passive. Some included additional sentinel sites or virus surveillance, but in those cases, the data were used only to monitor viral trends and were not applied to early warning. Four cohort-based prospective studies calculated an expansion factor with a range between 1.1 and 2.6 for inpatients in Cambodia and Thailand, respectively, and between 3.9 and 29 in Cambodian, Nicaraguan and Thai cohorts for non-hospitalised cases.

The results demonstrate remarkable levels of underreporting in the surveillance systems, particularly for nonhospitalised cases. It was a common experience that a large proportion of the affected population was not captured by passive routine reporting (e.g. non-users of health services, users of private/traditional sectors or certain age groups, e.g. adults in Cambodia). However, while less than satisfactory, this does not mean that such a system is entirely inadequate, because as long as it is accurately reflecting the disease trend, it may still be used effectively as a baseline for detecting excess reporting (e.g. more than 2xSD above the mean of the previous lance systemhas potential for dengue outbreak prediction. Studies that evaluate sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive values of such a threshold are likely to be particularly valuable.

Throughout the studies, reporting time was slow, and without any threshold, responses were delayed while poor financial management and lack of trust in the data by decision-makers hindered further the delivery of adequate and timely response measures. Despite that, all evaluations reported that timeliness could have been increased by electronic reporting or the use of simplified reporting forms and that data analysis should have been performed at the lowest possible level (e.g. once per week in every district) if sufficient capacity was available.

In summary, the country evaluations consistently highlighted that immediate improvement is possible using a number of options, many of which are already available and easily implementable: (i) simplified data forms/data entry protocols/electronic-based reporting, (ii) clearly defined and easily understood system objectives, (iii) appropriate and regular/frequent data analysis at the lowest possible level (iv) and regular data feedback from top to bottom levels. As evidence becomes available, two additional components will be required to complete the model: (i) clearly defined and locally appropriate triggers for an outbreak response (no studies were found exploring the optimal sensitivity and specificity of such thresholds) and (ii) implementation of evidence-based response strategies.


## Alert signals 1 (triggers/indicators/thresholds) for epidemic response (Group A, C and D)

Predicting outbreaks through the introduction or shift of a dengue sero-/genotype: six studies (studies 3-8) investigated serotype changes as a dengue outbreak signal demonstrated a positive correlation with the number of reported cases or dengue incidence, although the lag times could extend up to 6 months. However, viral genome sequencing alone would, according to Schreiber (study 6), not have been sufficient to predict an outbreak.

But these events are highly site-specific and are influenced by herd immunity, population size, co-circulation of additional dengue viruses and potentially numerous other factors. Moreover, only those countries with reliable serotype-/genotype-specific surveillance would be able to monitor changes in any patterns. Genotypic shifts were used as an early warning signal in Singapore prior to the 2007 epidemic and initiated an early response (study 3). Taking into consideration the possibility that publication bias (i.e. that only positive results are likely to be published) would have excluded additional studies where serotype shifts were not associated with subsequent outbreaks and that numerous potential confounding factors would have been possible in all studies, it is not yet possible to draw any firm conclusions on the value of this as a measure in surveillance. Nonetheless, the sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value of this parameter merit evaluation in prospective and comparative studies.

Predicting or detecting dengue outbreaks by syndromic surveillance data: Five studies investigated the value of syndromic surveillance for early outbreak detection. These included a comparison of community-based fever surveillance with school absenteeism in Peru (study 9), and two studies in French Guiana (studies 10 and 12) describing the advantages of reporting dengue cases using a syndromic case definition as compared to routine reporting. The prospective study in Peru indicated that community door-to-door fever surveillance had higher sensitivity than school absenteeism records. In French Guiana (study 10), the syndromic approach detected an outbreak 3-4 weeks earlier and was six times more sensitive than laboratory-based surveillance, but specificity was lower. However, in another study in French Guiana (11), the ideal reporting time of 60 min for a real-time syndromic surveillance approach was often not achieved due to barriers at data entry, while a risk of false alerts was expected, given the high sensitivity of the system. In Madagascar (14) and French Guiana (12), syndromic sentinel-based surveillance built on clinical syndromic case definitions showed promising results, increasing the sensitivity of dengue case detection in comparison with routine reporting and allowing the early detection of epidemic events.

Two studies investigated the value of data quantifying internet searches for dengue information carried out in a number of countries (Bolivia, Brazil, India, Indonesia and Singapore; studies 1 and 2). The curve of the search queries over time was similar to the epidemic curve constructed from surveillance data underlining the usefulness of this new and remarkably simple approach. Study 13 used a real-time electronic event-based approach based on Health Map to enhance timeliness, outbreak discovery and provide an added value for monitoring the ongoing spread of dengue.

A number of studies that were included in the earlier 2008 review also dealt with this topic; in summary, the following syndromic surveillance-based indicators were identified:

• Proportion of virologically confirmed cases (study 3,


## Rigau-P erez & Clark 2005)

• Malaria negative rate in fever patients in a malaria endemic areas (Carme et al. 2003, Talarmin et al. 2000 • Fever alerts (Pirard et al. 1997;Kourı et al. 1998) • Clinical syndromic case definitions (study 10, 11, 12 and 14) • School absenteeism (study 9) • Google search queries or event-based surveillance (Study 1, 2 and 13) Fever alert for the purpose of outbreak detection was not found to be useful in Cuba and Bolivia (Pirard et al. 1997;Kourı et al. 1998). None of the studies included in this update analysed syndromic surveillance based on laboratory parameters or the proportion of virologically confirmed cases. One study from Singapore (study 3) mentioned that during the 2007/2008 epidemic, the proportion of DENV-positive samples detected by PCR rose from 57.9% in January 2007 to 91.0% in July 2007 at the peak of transmission. A similar trend has been shown in Puerto Rico previously (Rigau-P erez & Clark 2005).

In summary, detection of increases in proportions of positive tested samples and quantification of electronic search queries are both promising approaches to dengue outbreak detection. They are inexpensive and offer near real-time data and their value for operational use should be considered and investigated. Syndromic surveillance based on a clinical case definition remains a complementary tool to national routine reporting.


## Limitations

The main limitation of this review was its restriction to English, German and Spanish. However, as the bulk of literature accessible on electronic databases today is indexed in English by title and abstract, and no additional articles in other languages were found during the extensive search, the impact of a language bias is likely to be limited. While publication bias is a potential concern, by screening carefully the reference lists of assessed articles and grey literature, the bias has been reduced.

A 'research hot spot' in Singapore and Taiwan was identified: these two countries accounted for 10 of the total of 36 studies, potentially introducing some level of bias in the overall assessment of the published literature. Potential for bias also may have occurred with respect to the evidence demonstrating an association between newly introduced dengue serotypes and subsequent outbreaks (see below), because no studies reporting the absence of any association (i.e. new serotypes not followed by an increase in dengue; a phenomenon that is arguably, less likely to be published) were found.

Two key knowledge gaps were identified: none of the studies investigated whether the thresholds currently in use for triggering an outbreak response were at an appropriate level of sensitivity or geographical scale, and none indicated how outbreaks were distinguished from standard or 'expected' seasonal changes in transmission. Further research in this area remains of the highest priority and is strongly recommended.


## Conclusions

Following the systematic review of the evidence of the value or potential of various tools or approaches for dengue outbreak prediction or trend monitoring, the following conclusions can be drawn:

• Passive surveillance remains the backbone of disease monitoring, also providing the baseline for outbreak alert. All opportunities for improvement should be exploited to ensure that disease trends are accurately reflected. While underreporting could be tolerated to a certain extent, further research will be required to determine how much.

• The usefulness of the new dengue case classification for epidemiological use should be evaluated, as it is currently underway for its clinical use.

• Country evaluations of dengue surveillance systems should be conducted and published following CDC criteria.

• More research is necessary to identify appropriate thresholds of excess reporting that can be used to trigger an outbreak response; such studies must take into account both the geographical scale as well as the level of sensitivity.

• Appropriate additional alert signals need to be identified and tested and integrated risk assessment tools need to be developed.

• Additional well-designed and well-implemented enhancement tools (such as active surveillance components, laboratory support or motivation strategies) would strengthen surveillance.

• Shifts in dengue serotypes or genotype have considerable potential in dengue surveillance, and the value of these data merits evaluation in prospective and comparative studies. It is crucial that both negative and positive results be published to overcome publication bias in favour of positive associations.

• Syndromic surveillance approaches have potential as useful complementary tools offering increased timeliness and sensitivity but with an increased risk of false alerts. Further studies investigating laboratory parameters (e.g. the proportion of confirmed-torequested laboratory tests) are also merited. Internet searches or electronic event-based surveillance strategies also show promise, although their operational usefulness remains to be demonstrated.

• Further research on evidence-based response strategies and cost-effectiveness is still needed.


of Health Medical Database (PubMed) (1966-2013), Excerpta Medica Database (EMBASE) (1983-2013), the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), the World Health Organization (WHO) library database (WHOLIS) and the Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Database (Lilacs) (1967-2013). The references cited by relevant literature, including grey literature, were also screened for further articles. Grey literature and unpublished studies were included if found relevant to the research question and if they fulfilled the inclusion and exclusion criteria.

## Figure 1
1lists of 72 publications were screened for relevant citations, thesis and other grey literature were analysed as available (n = 87): fulltext assessment of 18 additional documents, 2 papers could not be obtained. Potential relevant citations identified by the search of databases. (n = 1116; including duplications and after evaluation of full text and application of inclusion and exclusion criteria from the systematic review (n = 54). The majority of the exclusions were made as not fulfilling criteria b) and c): a) Population at risk b) Dengue disease surveillance c) Outcome of surveillance described d) Empirical data evaluated Relevant studies included in systematic review: (n = 36) Flow chart of articles included and excluded.

## Table 1
1Evidence tablesAuthor 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

A. Surveillance for outbreak prediction and/or early outbreak detection 
1. Chan EH 
et al. (2011) 
Bolivia, Brazil, 
India, 
Indonesia and 
Singapore 
(2003-2010) 
To complement 
traditional 
surveillance by 
potentially facilitating 

earlier detection, 
capturing health-
seeking behaviour, as 
well as capturing the 
population of the ill 

who do not seek 
medical care 
formally. 

To build models 
able to estimate a 
disease activity 
indicator using 

data on Google 
search patterns fit 

to a time series of 
case counts from 
official data 
sources. 

Aggregating historical 
anonymised logs of 

online Google search 
queries submitted 
between 2003 and 2010. 
Time series are computed 
for the most common 
search queries in the 
selected countries, 
irrespective of query 
language. Each time 

series was normalised by 
dividing the count for 

each query on a 
particular day by the 

total number of online 
search queries submitted. 

Spikes in the time series 
indicate an increase in 
interest in dengue. To 
determine whether they 

are 'true spikes' or 
'spurious spikes' (e.g. 

panic driven) can be 
distinguished when the 

rate of growth exceeds 
the normal rate of spread 
as determined by the 
basic reproduction 
number R0 or if p was 
found to exceed five 
standard deviations from 

the mean. 

Model-fitted 'expected' 
epidemic curves generally 
matched 'observed' epidemic 
curves quite well for all five 
countries, with the exception 

of Bolivia in 2007 when the 
model overestimated the 
activity in that season, and 
India in 2005 for which it 
underestimated 

Timeliness: 
Potential to provide earlier 
signals of epidemics without 
delay of official case counts 
Sensitivity: 
Underreporting (e.g. due to 
misdiagnosis or subclinical 

cases) extends to the models 

as well; however, it could be 
a source of information for 
those otherwise not 
demanding health care at all 

or in the reporting sector. 

Conclusions of study author 

-Could supplement traditional 

surveillance. 



## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

2. Althouse BM 
et al. (2011) 
Singapore 
(weekly 
incidence, 
2004-2011) 

and Bangkok 
(monthly 
incidence, 
2004-2011) 
Google search query 

Dengue incidence 
data and Internet 
search data for 
the same period 
were 
downloaded. 

Search terms were 
chosen. Three 
models to predict 
incidence were 
compared. 
Logistic regression and 
support vector machine 
(SVM) models were used 

to predict a binary 
outcome. Incidence 
prediction models were 
assessed using r2 and 
Pearson correlation. 
Logistic regression and 
SVM model performance 
were assessed. Models 
were validated using 
multiple cross-validation 
techniques. 

NA 
-In Bangkok, the model has an 
r2~0:943, and a correlation 

of 0.869 between fitted and 
observed. 

-In Singapore, the model has 
an r2~0:948, and a 
correlation of 0.931. 

-In both Singapore and 
Bangkok, SVM models 
outperformed logistic 

regression in predicting 
periods of high incidence. 

-The AUC for the SVM 
models using the 75th 
percentile cut-off is 0.906 in 
Singapore and 0.960 in 
Bangkok. 

-Our predictions of time 
periods with high dengue 
incidence are very accurate 

with sensitivities and 
specificities of 0.861-1.00 

and 0.765-1.00 for multiple 
thresholds in each location. 

Conclusions of study author 

-Internet search terms predict 
incidence of dengue with 

high accuracy. 
-The methods use freely 
available data and analysis 

tools and can be readily 
adapted to other settings. 



## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

3. Lee KS et al. 
(2010) 
Singapore 
2006-2008 
2005 laboratory-based 
dengue virus 
surveillance was 
established for close 
monitoring and 
investigation of the 
circulating dengue 

virus serotypes. 

To proof a 
serotype switch 

for the 2007/ 
2008 outbreak. 

Phylogenetic analysis of 

DENV sequences was 
conducted using the 
maximum-likelihood 

method as implemented 

and compared with 
sequence data obtained 

from GenBank. 

Warning level 
= 256 cases/ 
epidemiologic week as 

reported by the Ministry 

of Health. 

-The numbers of dengue-
positive samples serotyped 
were 186 in 2006, 889 in 
2007 and 918 in 2008 and 
represent 
10% of the total 

dengue cases 
-During January-September 
2006, 75%-100% of 
samples collected each 
month contained DENV-1. 

-In early January 2007, the 
predominant circulating 

serotype switched from 
DENV-1 to DENV-2. 

-The proportion of DENV-2-
positive samples detected by 
PCR rose from 57.9% in 
January 2007 to a peak of 
91.0% in July 2007. 
-Early detection of this switch 
warned of a possible 
upcoming dengue outbreak. 

Conclusions of study author 

-Dengue surveillance provided 
early warning and 
contributed to early 
activation of enhanced 

vector control. 
-Unable to assess the 
effectiveness of the control 
measures, considering the 
regional situation in 2007, 
without these measures the 
dengue situation in 
Singapore in 2007 would 

have been worse than or 
comparable to that in 2004-

2005. 
-Demonstrates how rapidly 

dengue virus serotypes can 

be replaced within a 
population. 

1120 


## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

10. Meynard 
Jean-Baptiste 

et al. (2008) 
French Guiana 
week 41 of 
2005 to week 
25 of 2006. 

Syndromic and clinical 
surveillance reporting 

on the armed forces 
and laboratory 
surveillance reporting 

on the civilian 
population. 

The objectives 
were to study the 
value of a 
syndromic 
surveillance 

system set-up 
within the armed 
forces, compared 
with the 
traditional 
clinical 
surveillance 

system during this 
outbreak. The 

main studied 
performance was 

the early warning 
capacity. 
a)Until 2006, surveillance 
was based on the 
weekly civilian 
laboratory surveillance 

of confirmed cases 
within the 200 000 
general population. 

b)For the armed forces, the 
surveillance is based on 

the clinical military 
mandatory system 

within the 3000 
soldiers. 

c)To enhance this clinical 
surveillance, a new 
syndromic prototype 

was set up in October 
2004 combined with 
the clinical system. 

a)Threshold= 6 cases per 

week for more than 2 
consecutive weeks. 

b)A weekly statistical non-
automated analysis 

using the Current Past 
Experienced Graph 

(CPEG) to compare 
with historical data. 
c)Data analysis is 
automated and uses 

both the CPEG and the 
Exponential Weighted 

Moving Average. 

-Syndromic surveillance 
detected the dengue fever 
outbreak several weeks 
before clinical surveillance, a 
pre-alarm was activated 
during week 41, this was not 
confirmed for three more 
weeks. The real alarm with 

the armed forces started 
during week 44 of 2005. 



## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

12. Flamand C 
et al. (2011) 
French Guiana 
January 2006-
December 

2010 
In 2006 laboratory, 
sentinel, hospital and 
health centre-based 
surveillance was 
implemented, to 

improve early 
detection of 
outbreaks and to 

allow a better 
provision of 
information. 

37 812 clinical 
cases and 10 724 
confirmed cases 

were analysed to 
validate the 
performances of 

the system. 
a)30 voluntary general 
practitioners (35% of total 

GP's) 
b)Surveillance from 
Emergency Departments 

(EDs) of the three 
hospitals 

c)17 health centres weekly 
report number of cases by 
satellite. 
1 Sporadic transmission 
2 Dengue fever clusters 
3 Pre-alert (exceeding 
threshold for 2 weeks) 

4 Epidemic (exceeding 
threshold for 2 more 
weeks) 

5 End of epidemic (below 

threshold) 

6 Increase of positivity 
rates of biological 
analysis and re-
emergence of a serotype 

is used to confirm the 
entry in the next stage. 
-Three major outbreaks were 
detected 
-During these outbreaks, 80 
signals were triggered for 
confirmed cases and 64 for 
clinical cases, all these 
outbreaks were confirmed 

-Average duration of the 
epidemics varied between 38 

and 41 weeks. 
-Reinforcement vector control 

measures proportionate to 

the severity and magnitude 
of the epidemiological 
situation. 

Conclusions of study author 
-Validity of the surveillance 
system and its performance 

to monitor dengue patterns, 
to detect outbreaks and to 
provide real-time 
information 

-Great variety of data sources 
constitutes a very sound 

basis for the analysis and 
interpretation 

-Time-series methodology and 

taking into account data 
characteristics such as 

secular trends, seasonality 
and abrupt changes should 
be considered in future. 
-Outbreak prediction in future 

will consist in the use of 
other data sources for 
surveillance such as 
environmental factors (i.e. 

climatic, meteorological, 
plant cover and land use) so 
as to help monitor and 
predict the spatial and 
temporal distribution of the 
virus. 

1128 


## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

19. Mark E. 
Beatty et al. 
(2010) 22 
countries 
Multiple approaches as 

in 22 countries 
practised. 

Experts attended 
meetings to 
discuss dengue 
surveillance. 
Literature and 
reports on 
surveillance 
programmes were 
reviewed, and 
expert opinions 
shared. 
-12/22 (55%) of countries 
represented confirmed 
reported cases with 
laboratory testing. 
-Nearly every country 
includes suspected dengue 
cases. 
-Cambodia report children 

less than 15 years of age. 
-Singapore and Brazil 
monitor vector indices not 

so Puerto Rico. 
-All countries are 
dependent on paper forms 

for case reporting before 
any additional 
investigation or action. 

Not applicable 

-Surveillance and laboratory 
methods varied making 
comparisons difficult. 

-In Kolkata, special mapping 
has been used to target 
control activities. 

-In Singapore and Brazil, 
ministries using intranet-

based data entry 
-Time required to receive a 
result of a sample is too 
long and so useless for the 
treating physician. 

-Data are rarely used locally 
missing the opportunity for 

a local response. 
-Under-detection and under-

reporting of dengue cases 

were significant and often 
due to the design of the 
surveillance system. 
-Virological surveillance is 
under-utilised or completely 

lacking. 
-Effective links between the 
various stakeholders exists; 
many of these are dependent 
on personal contacts. 

Conclusions of study author 

-Every dengue-endemic 
country should make 
reporting of dengue cases to 

the government mandatory. 
-Electronic reporting systems 
should be developed and 
used. 

-At minimum dengue 
surveillance data should 

include incidence, 
hospitalisation rates, deaths 

by age group. 
-Additional studies should be 
completed to check the 
sensitivity of the system. 
-Laboratories should share 
expertise and data. 

-Tests that identify dengue 
virus should be used in 
patients with fever for four 
days or less and antibody 
tests should be used after 
day 4 to diagnose dengue; 
-Early detection and prediction 
of dengue outbreaks should 
be goals for national 
surveillance systems. 

1134 


## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

33. Chien-Chou 
Lin et al. 
(2009) 
Taiwan 2002-
2007 
1) hospital-based 
reporting system and 
hospital syndrome 
reporting system for 

viral haemorrhagic 
fever. 

2) Active surveillance 
systems (individual 
self-suspected reports, 

expanded 
epidemiological 

contact surveys, school 

and community 
screening systems, 
airport fever 
screening). 

Unlike sero-
epidemiological 

studies, the data 
presented in this 

study were 
derived from 
routine diagnosis 
and analysed 
anonymously. 
Report completed within 6 
-24 h then online 
available for the local 
health bureau and 
hospital. Once the case is 
confirmed, sheet is 
completed by the local 

health bureau or hospital. 
Staff will visit and 
interview the index case. 
Blood samples will be 
drawn from contacts 
within a radius of 50 
metres, those who may 
have had contact or had 
fever. 
A confirmed dengue case is 
defined as (i) positive for 
dengue virus isolation; or 

(ii) positive for dengue 
virus genome by RT-
PCR; or (iii) positive for 
dengue virus-specific IgM 
and IgG in a single serum 
sample, or (iv) fourfold 
increase of IgG antibody 

in paired samples. 

First indigenous index case 
usually occurs May or June, 
imported from South-East 

Asia. 
-Eventually, the outbreak then 
spreads out gradually and 
peaks around October and 
ending in the winter. 

-3 to~6 dengue virus strains 
imported and locally 
transmitted each year. Only 

one strain of serotype has 
dominated in each year. 

-This pattern has been 
repeated yearly -42 150 
blood samples were drawn 
for serological analysis, of 
which 1.1% (464/42 150) 
were found to be dengue 
virus infected. All 464 
persons did not feel sick 
enough to go to the hospital 

for medical treatment. 
-Ratio of symptomatic to 
asymptomatic cases is 1.78 
(64%/36%) 



## Table 1 (
1Continued)Author 
Publication 

year, Study 
population 

Purpose & type 
(active/passive) of 
surveillance 

Study design & 
objectives 
Development & delivery of 
surveillance system 

Outbreak definition, Case 
definition 
Results and outcome attributes 

Conclusions of study authors 

and risk of bias 

34. Huang Jyh-
Hsiung et al. 
(2007) 2005 
Taiwan 
(i) passive (hospital-
based reporting) and 
(ii) active (fever 
screening at airports, 
self-reporting, 

screening for contacts 

of confirmed cases, 
patients with fever of 
unknown origin, 
school-based 
reporting) 
surveillance systems. 

Presentation of the 

results of a 
laboratory-based 

dengue 
surveillance and 
phylogenetic 

study in Taiwan 
for 2005. Human 
samples used 
were derived 
from confirmed 
dengue cases 
submitted to the 
Taiwan CDC in 
2005. 
Dengue is a category 2 
reportable infectious 
disease in Taiwan. 
Suspected cases must be 
reported within 24 h 
using the old WHO 
classification scheme. 
Surveillance systems are 
established by central and 

local health departments 
in Taiwan. 

Laboratory diagnosis: 
Infection with DENV 

was defined as a febrile 
illness associated with the 
detection of DENV-
specific IgM and IgG 
antibodies, isolation of 

DENV or detection of 
DENV RNA by reverse-
transcription-polymerase 

chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
-A total of 104 laboratory-
confirmed imported dengue 

cases were identified in 
Taiwan during 2005, 46 
(44.2%) cases were 
identified by fever screening 

at airports. 
-Similar to the findings of our 
previous study, Indonesia, 
Vietnam, the Philippines and 
Thailand were the most 
frequent importing countries 

-A total of 202 laboratory-
confirmed indigenous 
dengue cases were recorded 

in Taiwan during 2005. 12 
DENV-1, others DENV-3 

(two strains) and DENV-2. 

Conclusions of study author: 
-Laboratory-based dengue 

surveillance system to 

identify febrile patients at 

the airports by an infrared 
thermal scanner. Most (44 

of 46) of the confirmed cases 
identified by airport fever 
screening were in the 
viraemic stages. These 34 

cases were identified on days 
1-3 after onset of illness. 
-In contrast, the imported 
cases reported from passive 
(hospital) surveillance 
systems were evenly 
distributed 1-20 days after 

the onset of illness. 
-Phylogenetic analyses 
suggested that the three 
epidemic strains, DENV-3, 
genotype I, DENV-3, 
genotype II and DENV-2, 
American/Asian Genotype) 

which cocirculated in 
southern Taiwan in 2005, 

were recently imported from 
the Philippines and Vietnam, 
respectively. 



14-28 times in Nicaragua for a paediatric cohort (study 15) • 8.7 times in Thailand (2.6 times for hospitalised cases) (study 16) • 9.1 times in Cambodia (1.4 for hospitalised cases) (study 16, 18)• 3.9-29 times in Cambodia following a capturerecapture analysis (study 17) • 1.1-2.4 times in Cambodia following a capturerecapture analysis of hospitalised cases (study 17)
© 2014 The Authors. Tropical Medicine and International Health published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
years) and thus outbreak detection. In the context of a public health system, it is not clear how sensitive surveil-
Alert signals for an unexpected increase in dengue case numbers (an 'outbreak') could include signals from within the dengue time series itself, or signals from external indicators associated with changes in dengue transmission. Other indicators (additional to the increase in cases) could be considered as indicators for a dengue outbreak. (Note: 'Alert signals'also called alarm signalsare indicators that, at a defined threshold, are intended to 'trigger' a response).
AcknowledgementThe project was financially supported by a grant from the European Commission (Grant Number m281803) to the IDAMS network (International Research Consortium on Dengue Risk Assessment, Management and Surveillance) within the 7th Framework Programme of the European Commission and by the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases (WHO-TDR).lance data need to be (i.e. what is an acceptable level of under-reporting) in order to fulfil the dual purposes of reflecting disease trends accurately and providing a baseline for outbreak early alert. The studies reviewed here indicated that underreporting to a limited extent can be tolerated in high endemic settings, as long as the data are geographically representative and, ideally, laboratory confirmed as dengue. The calculation of an expansion factor enables a more accurate value for the national burden of disease, which is important for targeting public health measures and advocacy.In the earlier systematic review, the sensitivity of the DF/DHF/DSS case classification was considered to be too low (studies 20, 24-26), especially for DHF cases(However, all evaluations found that a clear understanding of the objectives of the surveillance system by all stakeholders was crucial. All routine reporting systems, with or without laboratory support, were perceived to be useful for trend monitoring and national planning. However, without the use of appropriate thresholds or alert signals or additional surveillance components to increase timeliness or sensitivity (e.g. as sentinel sites or syndromic surveillance components), they had little capacity for early outbreak detection. Improvements indicated by the evaluations were not exploited.An appropriate alert signal with a defined threshold level ('trigger') for initiation of a response is crucial for any system. None of the reviewed studies investigated the specific threshold for excess reporting within a routine surveillance system. However, analysis of the included articles suggested that in general, an excess of reported cases (pattern recognition technique;Buehler et al. 2004) identified through a population-based routine surveil-
Classifying dengue: a review of the difficulties in using the WHO case classification for dengue haemorrhagic fever. S Bandyopadhyay, L C Lum, A Kroeger, Tropical Medicine and International Health. 11Bandyopadhyay S, Lum LC & Kroeger A (2006) Classifying den- gue: a review of the difficulties in using the WHO case classifi- cation for dengue haemorrhagic fever. Tropical Medicine and International Health 11, 1238-1255.

Usefulness and applicability of the revised dengue case classification by disease: multi-centre study in 18 countries. J Barniol, R Gaczkowski, E V Barbato, BMC Infectious Diseases. 11106Barniol J, Gaczkowski R, Barbato EV, et al. (2010) Usefulness and applicability of the revised dengue case classification by disease: multi-centre study in 18 countries. BMC Infectious Diseases 11, 106.

The global distribution and burden of dengue. S Bhatt, P W Gething, O J Brady, Doi:10.1038/nature12060Nature. Bhatt S, Gething PW, Brady OJ et al. (2013) The global distribu- tion and burden of dengue. Nature, Doi:10.1038/nature12060.

Assessing the relationship between vector indices and dengue transmission: a systematic review of the evidence. L R Bowman, S Runge-Ranzinger, P J Mccall, A L Buczak, P T Koshute, S M Babin, Bh &amp; Feighner, S H Lewis, BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 12124PLoS NTDsBowman LR, Runge-Ranzinger S & McCall PJ (2014) Assessing the relationship between vector indices and dengue transmis- sion: a systematic review of the evidence. PLoS NTDs, in press Buczak AL, Koshute PT, Babin SM, Feighner BH & Lewis SH (2012) A data-driven epidemiological prediction method for dengue outbreaks using local and remote sensing data. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 12, 124.

Framework for evaluating public health surveillance systems for early detection of outbreaks. J W Buehler, R S Hopkins, J M Overhage, D M Sosin, V Tong, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 53Buehler JW, Hopkins RS, Overhage JM, Sosin DM & Tong V (2004) Framework for evaluating public health surveillance systems for early detection of outbreaks. Morbidity and Mor- tality Weekly Report 53, 1-11.

Non-specific alert system for dengue epidemic outbreaks in areas of endemic malaria A hospital-based evaluation in Cayenne. B Carme, M Sobesky, M H Biard, P Cotellon, C Aznar, J M Fontanella, Epidemiology and Infection. 130Carme B, Sobesky M, Biard MH, Cotellon P, Aznar C & Fonta- nella JM (2003) Non-specific alert system for dengue epidemic outbreaks in areas of endemic malaria A hospital-based evaluation in Cayenne (French Guiana). Epidemiology and Infection 130, 93-100.

Updated guidelines for evaluating public health surveillance systems. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 50RRCDC (2001). Updated guidelines for evaluating public health surveillance systems. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 50, RR 13, 1-35

Predicting dengue outbreaks using approximate entropy algorithm and pattern recognition. Cc &amp; Chen, H C Chang, Journal of Infection. 67Chen CC & Chang HC (2013) Predicting dengue outbreaks using approximate entropy algorithm and pattern recognition. Journal of Infection 67, 65-71.

Effectiveness of peridomestic space spraying with insecticide on dengue transmission; systematic review. Tropical medicine and international health. E Esu, A Lenhart, L Smith, O Horstick, 15Esu E, Lenhart A, Smith L & Horstick O (2010) Effectiveness of peridomestic space spraying with insecticide on dengue trans- mission; systematic review. Tropical medicine and interna- tional health, 15, 619-631.

Detecting and responding to a dengue outbreak: evaluation of existing strategies in country outbreak response planning. J Harrington, A Kroeger, S &amp; O&apos; Runge-Ranzinger, T Dempsey, ID 756832The Journal of Tropical Medicine. 9Harrington J, Kroeger A, Runge-Ranzinger S & O'Dempsey T (2013) Detecting and responding to a dengue outbreak: evalu- ation of existing strategies in country outbreak response plan- ning. The Journal of Tropical Medicine, 2013, 9 pages, Article ID 756832.

Overview of syndromic surveillance what is syndromic surveillance? MMWR. K J Henning, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 532SupplHenning KJ (2004). Overview of syndromic surveillance what is syndromic surveillance? MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 53(Suppl); 5-11. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ preview/mmwrhtml/su5301a3.htm (accessed 2 May 2014)

Dengue vector-control services: how do they work? A systematic literature review and country case studies. Transactions of the. O Horstick, Runge Ranzinger, S Nathan, M B Kroeger, A , Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 104Horstick O, Runge Ranzinger S, Nathan MB & Kroeger A (2010) Dengue vector-control services: how do they work? A systematic literature review and country case studies. Transac- tions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 104, 379-386.

Reviewing the development, evidence base and application of the revised dengue case classification. Pathogens and Global Health. O Horstick, J Farrar, L Lum, 106Horstick O, Farrar J, Lum L et al. (2012) Reviewing the develop- ment, evidence base and application of the revised dengue case classification. Pathogens and Global Health, 106, 94-101(8).

Comparing the usefulness of the 1997 and 2009 WHO dengue case classification: a systematic literature review. O Horstick, T Jaenisch, E Martinez, Accepted AJTMH. Horstick O, Jaenisch T, Martinez E et al. (2014) Comparing the usefulness of the 1997 and 2009 WHO dengue case classifica- tion: a systematic literature review. Accepted AJTMH 2014

Reemergence of dengue in Cuba: a 1997 epidemic in Santiago de Cuba. G Kourı, M G Guzman, L Valdes, Emerging Infectious Diseases. 4Kourı G, Guzman MG, Valdes L et al. (1998) Reemergence of dengue in Cuba: a 1997 epidemic in Santiago de Cuba. Emerging Infectious Diseases 4, 89-92.

The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. A Liberati, D G Altman, J Tetzlaff, PLoS Med. 6Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. (2009) The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med 6, e1000100.

Extending an evidence hierarchy to include topics other than treatment: revising the Australian 'level of evidence'. BMC Medical Research Methodology. T Merlin, A Weston, R Tooher, Merlin T, Weston A & Tooher R (2009). Extending an evidence hierarchy to include topics other than treatment: revising the Australian 'level of evidence'. BMC Medical Research Method- ology. www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/9/34

National Health and Medical Research Council, How to use the evidence: assessment and application of scientific evidence. NHMRC. NHMRC (2000). National Health and Medical Research Coun- cil, How to use the evidence: assessment and application of scientific evidence, February 2000. http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/ _files_nhmrc/publications/attachments/cp69.pdf

Dengue outbreak response: documented effective interventions and evidence gaps. D Pilger, De Maesschalck, M Horstick, O &amp; San Martin, J L , TropIKA Reviews. 2Pilger D, De Maesschalck M, Horstick O & San Martin JL (2010). Dengue outbreak response: documented effective interventions and evidence gaps. TropIKA Reviews. http://jour nal.tropika.net/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S2078- 86062010000100002&lng=en&nrm=iso (accessed 2 May 2014)

Desarrollo de un Sistema de Vigilancia para dengue en Santa Cruz. M Pirard, J Lora, M Boelaert, A &amp; Gianella, P Van Der Stuyft, Bolivia. Bol. Centif. De CENETROP XVI. Pirard M, Lora J, Boelaert M, Gianella A & Van der Stuyft P (1997) Desarrollo de un Sistema de Vigilancia para dengue en Santa Cruz, Bolivia. Bol. Centif. De CENETROP XVI.

Surveillance of dengue fever virus: a review of epidemiological models and early warning systems. V Racloz, R Ramsey, S Tong, W Hu, Revista Panamericana de Salud P ublica. Rigau-P erez JG & Clark GG6PLoS Neglected Tropical DiseasesRacloz V, Ramsey R, Tong S & Hu W (2012) Surveillance of dengue fever virus: a review of epidemiological models and early warning systems. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 6, e1648. Rigau-P erez JG & Clark GG (2005) Como responder a una epi- demia de dengue: vision global y experiencia en Puerto Rico. Revista Panamericana de Salud P ublica 17, 282-293.

Systematic Review: what does dengue disease surveillance contribute to predicting and detecting outbreaks and describing trends?. Runge Ranzinger, S Horstick, O Marx, M &amp; Kroeger, A , Tropical Medicine and International Health. 13Runge Ranzinger S, Horstick O, Marx M & Kroeger A (2008) Systematic Review: what does dengue disease surveillance con- tribute to predicting and detecting outbreaks and describing trends? Tropical Medicine and International Health, 13, 1022-1041.

Detection of aberrations in the occurrence of notifiable diseases surveillance data. D F Stroup, G D Williamson, J L Hendon, J M Karon, Statistics in Medicine. 8Stroup DF, Williamson GD, Hendon JL & Karon JM (1989) Detection of aberrations in the occurrence of notifiable diseases surveillance data. Statistics in Medicine 8, 323-329.

Surveillance of dengue fever in French Guiana by monitoring the results of negative malaria diagnoses. A Talarmin, C Peneau, P Dussart, Epidemiology and Infection. 125Talarmin A, Peneau C, Dussart P, et al. (2000) Surveillance of dengue fever in French Guiana by monitoring the results of negative malaria diagnoses. Epidemiology and Infection 125, 189-193.

World Health Organization and the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR) (2009) Dengue guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control: new edition. 1479789241547871World Health Organization and the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR) (2009) Dengue guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control: new edition. 147. ISBN: 9789241547871.

Global Strategy for dengue prevention and control. WHO. 2WHO (2012). Global Strategy for dengue prevention and control 2012-2020. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/75303/1/ 9789241504034_eng.pdf (accessed 2 May 2014)

Report for undertaking systematic reviews of research on effectiveness. York Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. 2York Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (2001) Report for undertaking systematic reviews of research on effectiveness. http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/crd/report4.htm (accessed 2 May 2014).

Using web search query data to monitor dengue epidemics: a new model for neglected tropical disease surveillance. E H Chan, V Sahai, C Conrad, J S Brownstein, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 51206Chan EH, Sahai V, Conrad C & Brownstein JS (2011) Using web search query data to monitor dengue epidemics: a new model for neglected tropical disease surveillance. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 5, e1206.

Prediction of dengue incidence using search query surveillance. B M Althouse, Y Y Ng, Dat Cummings, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 5Althouse BM, Ng YY & Cummings DAT (2011) Prediction of dengue incidence using search query surveillance. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 5, e1258.

Dengue virus surveillance for early warning Singapore. Emerging Infectious Diseases 16. K-S Lee, Y-L Lai, S Lo, Lee K-S, Lai Y-L, Lo S et al. (2010). Dengue virus surveil- lance for early warning Singapore. Emerging Infectious Dis- eases 16. www.cdc.gov/eid

Dengue virus surveillance in Singapore reveals high viral diversity through multiple introductions and in situ evolution. K-S Lee, S Lo, Ss-Y Tan, Infection Genetics and Evolution. 12Lee K-S, Lo S, Tan SS-Y et al. (2012) Dengue virus surveil- lance in Singapore reveals high viral diversity through multi- ple introductions and in situ evolution. Infection Genetics and Evolution 12, 77-85.

The 2005 dengue epidemic in Singapore: epidemiology, prevention and control. B K Koh, L C Ng, Y Kita, Annals Academy of Medicine Singapore. 37Koh BK, Ng LC, Kita Y et al. (2008) The 2005 dengue epi- demic in Singapore: epidemiology, prevention and control. Annals Academy of Medicine Singapore 37, 538-545.

Genomic epidemiology of a dengue virus epidemic in urban Singapore. M J Schreiber, E C Holmes, S H Ong, Journal of Virology. 83Schreiber MJ, Holmes EC, Ong SH et al. (2009) Genomic epidemiology of a dengue virus epidemic in urban Singapore. Journal of Virology, 83, 4163-4173.

Displacement of the predominant dengue virus from type 2 to type 1 with a subsequent genotype shift from IV to I in Surabaya. A Yamanaka, K C Mulyatno, H Susilowati, E Hendrianto, A P Ginting, PLoS One. 627322Yamanaka A, Mulyatno KC, Susilowati H, Hendrianto E & Ginting AP (2011) Displacement of the predominant dengue virus from type 2 to type 1 with a subsequent genotype shift from IV to I in Surabaya, Indonesia 2008-2010. PLoS One 6, e27322.

Rapid displacement of dengue virus type 1 by type 4, Pacific region. D-S Li, W Liu, A Guigon, C Mostyn, R Grant, J Aaskov, Emerging Infectious Diseases. 16Li D-s, Liu W, Guigon A, Mostyn C, Grant R & Aaskov J (2010) Rapid displacement of dengue virus type 1 by type 4, Pacific region 2007-2009. Emerging Infectious Diseases 16. www.cdc.gov/eid.

Comparison of two active surveillance programs for the detection of clinical dengue cases in Iquitos. C Rocha, A C Morrison, S B For, Peru. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 80Rocha C, Morrison AC, For SB et al. (2009) Comparison of two active surveillance programs for the detection of clinical dengue cases in Iquitos, Peru. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 80, 656-660.

Value of syndromic surveillance within the Armed Forces for early warning during a dengue fever outbreak in French Guiana in 2006. M Jean-Baptiste, C Herv E, T Gaetan, BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 829Jean-Baptiste M, Herv e C, Gaetan T et al. (2008) Value of syndromic surveillance within the Armed Forces for early warning during a dengue fever outbreak in French Guiana in 2006. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 8, 29.

Evaluation of a syndromic surveillance for the early detection of outbreaks among military personnel in a tropical country. H Jefferson, B Dupuy, H Chaudet, Journal of Public Health. 30Advance Access PublicationJefferson H, Dupuy B, Chaudet H et al. (2008) Evaluation of a syndromic surveillance for the early detection of outbreaks among military personnel in a tropical country. Journal of Public Health, 30, 375-383. Advance Access Publication 15 April 2008.

The epidemiologic surveillance of dengue-fever in French Guiana: when achievements trigger higher goals. C Flamand, P Quenel, V Ardillon, L Carvalho, S Bringay, M Teisseire, DOI:10.3233/ 978-1-60750-806-9-629User Centred Networked Health Care. IOS Press169SeriesStudies in Health Technology and Informatics EbookFlamand C, Quenel P, Ardillon V, Carvalho L, Bringay S & Teisseire M (2011) The epidemiologic surveillance of den- gue-fever in French Guiana: when achievements trigger higher goals. In: User Centred Networked Health Care Vol. 169, 629-633. SeriesStudies in Health Technology and Infor- matics Ebook. IOS Press 2011© 2011 European Federation for Medical Informatics. All rights reserved. DOI:10.3233/ 978-1-60750-806-9-629.

Electronic event-based surveillance for monitoring dengue, Latin America. Emerging Infectious Diseases 18. A G Hoen, M Keller, A D Verma, D L Buckeridge, J S Brownstein, Hoen AG, Keller M, Verma AD, Buckeridge DL & Brown- stein JS (2012) Electronic event-based surveillance for moni- toring dengue, Latin America. Emerging Infectious Diseases 18. www.cdc.gov/eid.

Sentinel surveillance system for early outbreak detection in Madagascar. L Randrianasolo, Y Raoelina, M Ratsitorahina, BMC Public Health. 1031Randrianasolo L, Raoelina Y, Ratsitorahina M et al. (2010) Sentinel surveillance system for early outbreak detection in Madagascar. BMC Public Health 10, 31. http://www.bio- medcentral.com/1471-2458/10/31.

High dengue case capture rate in four years of a cohort study in Nicaragua compared to national surveillance data. K Standish, G Kuan, W Avil Es, A Balmaseda, E Harris, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 4633Standish K, Kuan G, Avil es W, Balmaseda A & Harris E (2010) High dengue case capture rate in four years of a cohort study in Nicaragua compared to national surveillance data. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 4, e633.

Dengue in Thailand and Cambodia: an assessment of the degree of underrecognized disease burden based on reported cases. O Wichmann, I-K Yoon, S Vong, K Limkittikul, R V Gibbons, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 5996Wichmann O, Yoon I-K, Vong S, Limkittikul K & Gibbons RV (2011) Dengue in Thailand and Cambodia: an assessment of the degree of underrecognized disease burden based on reported cases. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 5, e996.

Under-recognition and reporting of dengue in Cambodia: a capture-recapture analysis of the National Dengue Surveillance System. S Vong, S Goyet, C Ngan, Epidemiology and Infection. 140Vong S, Goyet S, Ngan C et al. (2012) Under-recognition and reporting of dengue in Cambodia: a capture-recapture analysis of the National Dengue Surveillance System. Epide- miology and Infection, 140, 491-499.

Dengue Incidence in urban and rural Cambodia: results from population-based active fever surveillance. S Vong, V Khieu, O Glass, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 4903Vong S, Khieu V, Glass O et al. (2010) Dengue Incidence in urban and rural Cambodia: results from population-based active fever surveillance 2006-2008. PLoS Neglected Tropi- cal Diseases 4, e903.

Best practices in dengue surveillance: a report from the Asia-Pacific and Americas Dengue Prevention Boards. M E Beatty, A Stone, D W Fitzsimons, J N Hanna, S K Lam, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 4890Beatty ME, Stone A, Fitzsimons DW, Hanna JN & Lam SK (2010) Best practices in dengue surveillance: a report from the Asia-Pacific and Americas Dengue Prevention Boards. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 4, e890.

National dengue surveillance in Cambodia 1980-2008: epidemiological and virological trends and the impact of vector control. R Huy, P Buchy, Conan A , Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 88Huy R, Buchy P, Conan A et al. (2010) National dengue sur- veillance in Cambodia 1980-2008: epidemiological and viro- logical trends and the impact of vector control. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 88, 650-657.

Epidemiological and clinical observations on patients with dengue in Puerto Rico: results from the first year of enhanced surveillance. M M Ramos, D F Arg€ Uello, C Luxemburger, The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 79Ramos MM, Arg€ uello DF, Luxemburger C et al. (2008) Epi- demiological and clinical observations on patients with den- gue in Puerto Rico: results from the first year of enhanced surveillance-June 2005-May 2006. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 79, 123-127.

Seasonality, annual trends, and characteristics of dengue among Ill returned travelers 1997-2006. Emerging Infectious Diseases 14. E Schwartz, L H Weld, A Wilder-Smith, Schwartz E, Weld LH, Wilder-Smith A et al. (2008) Season- ality, annual trends, and characteristics of dengue among Ill returned travelers 1997-2006. Emerging Infectious Diseases 14. www.cdc.gov/eid.

Molecular surveillance of circulating dengue genotypes through European travelers. C Domingo, M Niedrig, J Gascon, Journal of Travel Medicine. 18Domingo C, Niedrig M, Gascon J et al. (2011) Molecular surveillance of circulating dengue genotypes through European travelers. Journal of Travel Medicine 18, 183- 190.

Is dengue disease surveillance able to predict or detect outbreaks and initiate timely response? Assessment of National Dengue Control Programmes in Thailand and Cambodia. S Runge-Ranzinger, University of HeidelbergDoctorate ThesisRunge-Ranzinger S (2010). Is dengue disease surveillance able to predict or detect outbreaks and initiate timely response? Assessment of National Dengue Control Pro- grammes in Thailand and Cambodia. Doctorate Thesis, Uni- versity of Heidelberg.

Is dengue disease surveillance able to predict or detect outbreaks in Brazil and Bolivia? Thesis: Master of Science in International Health. C F Rediguieri, University of HeidelbergRediguieri CF (2009). Is dengue disease surveillance able to predict or detect outbreaks in Brazil and Bolivia? Thesis: Master of Science in International Health, University of Hei- delberg

Analysis of dengue surveillance system in Indonesia: Is it effective to detect and predict outbreaks? Thesis: Master of Science in International Health. N Y Isma, University of HeidelbergIsma NY(2010). Analysis of dengue surveillance system in Indonesia: Is it effective to detect and predict outbreaks? Thesis: Master of Science in International Health, University of Heidelberg

An Evaluation of the Surveillance System for Dengue virus infections in Maldives. Performed as a major assignment for the course on Infectious Disease Surveillance -EPID6470. A A Aishath, Master of Clinical Epidemiology, University of Newcastle AustraliaAishath AA (2011). An Evaluation of the Surveillance System for Dengue virus infections in Maldives. Performed as a major assignment for the course on Infectious Disease Sur- veillance -EPID6470. Master of Clinical Epidemiology, Uni- versity of Newcastle Australia.

Surveillance for West Nile, dengue, and chikungunya virus infections. F Gobbi, L Barzon, G Capelli, Veneto Region, ItalyEmerging Infectious Diseases 18Gobbi F, Barzon L, Capelli G et al. (2012) Surveillance for West Nile, dengue, and chikungunya virus infections, Veneto Region, Italy 2010. Emerging Infectious Diseases 18. www. cdc.gov/eid.

Bulletin Europ een sur les Maladies Transmissibles =. I Gjenero-Margan, B Aleraj, D Krajcar, European Communicable Disease Bulletin. 1619805Euro SurveillanceGjenero-Margan I, Aleraj B, Krajcar D et al. (2011). Autoch- thonous dengue fever in Croatia, August-September 2010. Euro Surveillance: Bulletin Europ een sur les Maladies Trans- missibles = European Communicable Disease Bulletin;16: pii=19805. http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle. aspx?ArticleId=19805

First two autochthonous dengue virus infections in metropolitan France. L Ruche, Y Souar Es, A Armengaud, Euro Surveillance: Bulletin Europ een sur les Maladies Transmissibles = European Communicable Disease Bulletin. 1519676Ruche L, Souar es Y, Armengaud A et al. (2010). First two autochthonous dengue virus infections in metropolitan France, September 2010. Euro Surveillance: Bulletin Eu- rop een sur les Maladies Transmissibles = European Commu- nicable Disease Bulletin; 15: pii=19676. http://www. eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19676

Timeliness of national notifiable diseases surveillance system in Korea: a cross-sectional study. H-S Yoo, O Park, H-K Park, Yoo H-S, Park O, Park H-K et al. (2009). Timeliness of national notifiable diseases surveillance system in Korea: a cross-sectional study. http://www.biomedcentral.com/ 1471-2458/9/93

Epidemiological trends and the effect of airport fever screening on prevention of domestic dengue fever outbreaks in Taiwan. M-M Kuan, T Lin, J-H &amp; Chuang, H-S Wu, International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 14Kuan M-M, Lin T, Chuang J-H & Wu H-S (2010) Epidemi- ological trends and the effect of airport fever screening on prevention of domestic dengue fever outbreaks in Taiwan 1998-2007. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 14, e693-e697.

Characteristic of dengue disease in Taiwan. C-C Lin, Y-H Huang, P-Y Shu, The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 82Lin C-C, Huang Y-H, Shu P-Y et al. (2010) Characteristic of dengue disease in Taiwan: 2002-2007. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 82, 731-739.

Laboratorybased dengue surveillance in Taiwan 2005: a molecular epidemiologic study. J-H Huang, T-L Liao, Chang S-F , The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 77Huang J-H, Liao T-L, Chang S-F et al. (2007) Laboratory- based dengue surveillance in Taiwan 2005: a molecular epi- demiologic study. The American Journal of Tropical Medi- cine and Hygiene, 77, 903-909.

Molecular characterization of dengue viruses imported into Taiwan during 2003-2007: geographic distribution and genotype shift. P-Y Shu, C-L Su, T-L Liao, The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 80Shu P-Y, Su C-L, Liao T-L et al. (2009) Molecular character- ization of dengue viruses imported into Taiwan during 2003-2007: geographic distribution and genotype shift. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 80, 1039-1046.

Airport sentinel surveillance and entry quarantine for dengue infections following a fever screening program in Taiwan. Mm &amp; Kuan, F-Y Chang, 12182BMC Infectious DiseasesKuan MM & Chang F-Y (2012). Airport sentinel surveil- lance and entry quarantine for dengue infections following a fever screening program in Taiwan. BMC Infectious Dis- eases, 12:182. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/12/ 182

Corresponding Author Silvia Runge-Ranzinger, Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, World Health Organization. deGeneva, SwitzerlandE-mail: s.runge-ranzinger@t-onlineCorresponding Author Silvia Runge-Ranzinger, Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. E-mail: s.runge-ranzinger@t-online.de