# Commentary: Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences A commentary on Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences

CorpusID: 6724986
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/89dff2045489b363543fb54bdc4b55371f716216](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/89dff2045489b363543fb54bdc4b55371f716216)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Commentary: Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences A commentary on Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences
1 March 2017. 2016

R Denaro 
V 

GENERAL COMMENTARY
University of Rostock
Germany


Karolinska University Hospital
Sweden

Commentary: Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences A commentary on Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences

Dean ; BJF (2017) Commentary: Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and Sympathetic Neurotransmitters in the Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy: A Review of the Current Evidences

Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
91861 March 2017. 2016Received: 07 September 2016 Accepted: 28 February 2017 Published: 21 March 2017 Citation:Edited by: Reviewed by:. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9:60.tendinopathyinflammationglutamatespainVEGFNMDARtendons


I read the recent systematic review which asked some interesting questions regarding the pathogenesis of tendinopathy (Vasta et al., 2016). The statement "histologic studies have demonstrated the absence of inflammatory infiltrates" is not supported by the current evidence base. Our recent systematic review on this subject demonstrated that the absence of neutrophils does not equate to the absence of inflammatory cells (Dean et al., 2016), while several recent studies have provided compelling evidence to support the hypothesis that chronic inflammation is a key factor in the pathogenesis of tendinopathy (Dakin et al., 2015;Dean et al., 2015a). In addition the search strategy does not appear to have been comprehensive. We have carried out a number of systematic reviews in this area (Dean et al., 2016;Vasta et al., 2016) which identified numerous studies which have been missed by this review (Gotoh et al., 1998;Forsgren et al., 2005;Andersson et al., 2008;Lakemeier et al., 2010;Shindle et al., 2011;Millar et al., 2012). We have also published several pieces of work related to markers such as VEGF, glutamate, various glutamate receptors, the neurokinin-1 receptor and tyrosine hydroxylase which were also not included (Dean et al., , 2015aFranklin et al., 2014). It is rather problematic that so many relevant studies have not been incorporated into this systematic review. It is important that readers are fully informed of the current evidence base and thus can be made aware of the role of neuro-inflammatory change in the pathogenesis of tendinopathy.


## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and approved it for publication.
 March 2017 | Volume 9 | Article 60

Presence of substance P and the neurokinin-1 receptor in tenocytes of the human Achilles tendon. G Andersson, P Danielson, H Alfredson, S Forsgren, 10.1016/j.regpep.2008.02.005Regul. Pept. 150Andersson, G., Danielson, P., Alfredson, H., and Forsgren, S. (2008). Presence of substance P and the neurokinin-1 receptor in tenocytes of the human Achilles tendon. Regul. Pept. 150, 81-87. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2008.02.005

Inflammation activation and resolution in human tendon disease. S G Dakin, F O Martinez, C Yapp, G Wells, U Oppermann, B J F Dean, 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac4269Sci. Transl. Med. 7Dakin, S. G., Martinez, F. O., Yapp, C., Wells, G., Oppermann, U., Dean, B. J. F., et al. (2015). Inflammation activation and resolution in human tendon disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 311ra173. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac4269

Glucocorticoids induce specific ion-channel-mediated toxicity in human rotator cuff tendon: a mechanism underpinning the ultimately deleterious effect of steroid injection in tendinopathy?. B J Dean, S L Franklin, R J Murphy, M K Javaid, A J Carr, 10.1136/bjsports-2013-093178Br. J. Sports Med. 48Dean, B. J., Franklin, S. L., Murphy, R. J., Javaid, M. K., and Carr, A. J. (2014). Glucocorticoids induce specific ion-channel-mediated toxicity in human rotator cuff tendon: a mechanism underpinning the ultimately deleterious effect of steroid injection in tendinopathy? Br. J. Sports Med. 48, 1620-1626. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2013-093178

Are inflammatory cells increased in painful human tendinopathy? A systematic review. B J Dean, P Gettings, S G Dakin, A J Carr, 10.1136/bjsports-2015-094754Br. J. Sports Med. 50Dean, B. J., Gettings, P., Dakin, S. G., and Carr, A. J. (2016). Are inflammatory cells increased in painful human tendinopathy? A systematic review. Br. J. Sports Med. 50, 216-220. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2015-094754

In vitro effects of glutamate and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonism on human tendon derived cells. B J Dean, S J Snelling, S G Dakin, M K Javaid, A J Carr, J. Orthopaed. Res. 33Dean, B. J., Snelling, S. J., Dakin, S. G., Javaid, M. K., and Carr, A. J. (2015b). In vitro effects of glutamate and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonism on human tendon derived cells. J. Orthopaed. Res. 33, 1515-1522.

Differences in glutamate receptors and inflammatory cell numbers are associated with the resolution of pain in human rotator cuff tendinopathy. B J F Dean, S J B Snelling, S G Dakin, R J Murphy, M K Javaid, A J Carr, 10.1186/s13075-015-0691-5Arthritis Res. Ther. 17176Dean, B. J. F., Snelling, S. J. B., Dakin, S. G., Murphy, R. J., Javaid, M. K., and Carr, A. J. (2015a). Differences in glutamate receptors and inflammatory cell numbers are associated with the resolution of pain in human rotator cuff tendinopathy. Arthritis Res. Ther. 17:176. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015- 0691-5

Vascular NK-1 receptor occurrence in normal and chronic painful Achilles and patellar tendons: studies on chemically unfixed as well as fixed specimens. S Forsgren, P Danielson, Alfredson , H , 10.1016/j.regpep.2004.09.008Regul. Pept. 126Forsgren, S., Danielson, P., and Alfredson, H. (2005). Vascular NK-1 receptor occurrence in normal and chronic painful Achilles and patellar tendons: studies on chemically unfixed as well as fixed specimens. Regul. Pept. 126, 173-181. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2004.09.008

Up-regulation of glutamate in painful human supraspinatus tendon tears. S L Franklin, B J Dean, K Wheway, B Watkins, M K Javaid, A J Carr, 10.1177/0363546514532754Am. J. Sports Med. 42Franklin, S. L., Dean, B. J., Wheway, K., Watkins, B., Javaid, M. K., and Carr, A. J. (2014). Up-regulation of glutamate in painful human supraspinatus tendon tears. Am. J. Sports Med. 42, 1955-1962. doi: 10.1177/0363546514532754

Increased substance P in subacromial bursa and shoulder pain in rotator cuff diseases. M Gotoh, K Hamada, H Yamakawa, A Inoue, H Fukuda, 10.1002/jor.1100160515J. Orthopaed. Res. 16Gotoh, M., Hamada, K., Yamakawa, H., Inoue, A., and Fukuda, H. (1998). Increased substance P in subacromial bursa and shoulder pain in rotator cuff diseases. J. Orthopaed. Res.16, 618-621. doi: 10.1002/jor.1100160515

The association between retraction of the torn rotator cuff and increasing expression of hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha and vascular endothelial growth factor expression: an immunohistological study. S Lakemeier, J J Reichelt, T Patzer, S Fuchs-Winkelmann, J R Paletta, M D Schofer, 10.1186/1471-2474-11-230BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 11230Lakemeier, S., Reichelt, J. J., Patzer, T., Fuchs-Winkelmann, S., Paletta, J. R., and Schofer, M. D. (2010). The association between retraction of the torn rotator cuff and increasing expression of hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha and vascular endothelial growth factor expression: an immunohistological study. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 11:230. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-11-230

Hypoxia: a critical regulator of early human tendinopathy. N L Millar, J H Reilly, S C Kerr, A L Campbell, K J Little, W J Leach, 10.1136/ard.2011.154229Ann. Rheum. Dis. 71Millar, N. L., Reilly, J. H., Kerr, S. C., Campbell, A. L., Little, K. J., Leach, W. J., et al. (2012). Hypoxia: a critical regulator of early human tendinopathy. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 71, 302-310. doi: 10.1136/ard.2011.154229

Full-thickness supraspinatus tears are associated with more synovial inflammation and tissue degeneration than partialthickness tears. M K Shindle, C C T Chen, C Robertson, A E Ditullio, M C Paulus, C M Clinton, 10.1016/j.jse.2011.02.015J. Shoul. Elbow Surg. Am. Shoul. Elbow Surg. 20Shindle, M. K., Chen, C. C. T., Robertson, C., DiTullio, A. E., Paulus, M. C., Clinton, C. M., et al. (2011). Full-thickness supraspinatus tears are associated with more synovial inflammation and tissue degeneration than partial- thickness tears. J. Shoul. Elbow Surg. Am. Shoul. Elbow Surg. 20, 917-927. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2011.02.015

Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and sympathetic neurotransmitters in the pathogenesis of tendinopathy: a review of the current evidences. S Vasta, A Di Martino, B Zampogna, G Torre, R Papalia, V Denaro, 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00186Front. Aging Neurosci. 8186Vasta, S., Di Martino, A., Zampogna, B., Torre, G., Papalia, R., and Denaro, V. (2016). Role of VEGF, Nitric Oxide, and sympathetic neurotransmitters in the pathogenesis of tendinopathy: a review of the current evidences. Front. Aging Neurosci. 8:186. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00186