# A survey of rabies virus antibodies in confined, hunting and roaming dogs in Ogun and Oyo States, Southwestern Nigeria Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease

CorpusID: 71977167
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07bb4100d1dc4a3fe2577483acc56b82bff9ccb9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07bb4100d1dc4a3fe2577483acc56b82bff9ccb9)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A survey of rabies virus antibodies in confined, hunting and roaming dogs in Ogun and Oyo States, Southwestern Nigeria Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease
2015

Daniel Oladimeji Oluwayelu 
Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology
University of Ibadan
IbadanNigeria

Adebowale Idris Adebiyi 
Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology
University of Ibadan
IbadanNigeria

Obokparo Godspower Ohore 
Department of Veterinary Pathology
Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology
University of Ibadan
IbadanNigeria

University of Ibadan
IbadanNigeria

Daniel Oladimeji Oluwayelu 
A survey of rabies virus antibodies in confined, hunting and roaming dogs in Ogun and Oyo States, Southwestern Nigeria Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease

Document heading Asian Pac J Trop Dis
51201510.1016/S2222-1808(14)60620-417 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apjtd *Corresponding author: Foundation Project: Supported by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Grant for Higher Education Initiative in Africa (Grant No. 97944-0-800/406/99).
Objective: To screen for rabies virus (RABV)  antibodies in apparently healthy confined, hunting and roaming dogs by a community-based approach. Methods: Sera from 230 (80 confined, 92 hunting and 58 roaming) dogs in some urban and periurban communities in Ogun and Oyo states, Southwestern Nigeria were screened for RABV antibodies using the indirect ELISA method. Results: Analysis of administered questionnaires showed that of 80 confined dog owners, 37 were aware of anti-rabies vaccination (i.e. they were informed) while 17 were negligent and 26 uninformed. Of the 230 sera tested, only 13 (5.7%) from vaccinated confined dogs in Oyo state were positive (i.e. had optimal RABV antibody titres) (mean 0.54, 95% CI: 0.42-0.67) while all confined dog sera in Ogun state were negative. Eleven (12.0%) and 14 (24.1%) of the hunting and roaming dogs respectively had sub-optimal RABV antibody titres while the rest were negative. Conclusions: Evidently, these groups of dogs are a totally unprotected and susceptible dog population that can serve as potential reservoirs of RABV in the study area. Responsible pet ownership, vaccination of hunting and roaming dogs, and community-based active rabies surveillance are therefore advocated in Nigeria.

## Introduction

Rabies, an endemic neglected zoonosis that is a reemerging global health threat, is caused by the rabies virus (RABV) which is the prototype species of the genus Lyssavirus, family Rhabdoviridae [1] . As one of the most dreaded zoonoses, rabies satisfies all the World Health Organization criteria for diseases that are a priority for control. The disease has traditionally been associated with dogs more than any other animal and, in parts of the world where domestic animal control and vaccination programmes are limited, dogs remain the most important reservoir of the disease [2] . Although safe and effective animal and human vaccines are widely available for its prevention and control, rabies remains a neglected disease that is poorly controlled throughout much of the developing world, particularly Africa and Asia, where most human rabies deaths occur [2] . According to the World Health Organisation [3] , the annual number of human rabies deaths globally is about 61 000 with the vast majority of deaths (84%) occurring in rural areas. In Africa, rabies incidence is reported to be underestimated by more than 100-fold because most deaths occur in communities rather than in hospitals [4,5] . Recent increases in human rabies deaths in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America suggest that rabies is re-emerging as a serious public health issue [3] . With rising urbanization, there is an increase in the presence of traditional pets in households and the licking of humans by dogs that are rabid or suspected to be rabid poses a major risk to human health [6] . The rise in pet ownership is reflected in the amount of pet dogs in developed and developing nations. According to one estimate, the current world population of domestic dogs may be as high as 500 million, of which a substantial proportion is poorly supervised or free-roaming [7] . Freeroaming dogs have long been considered to be a problem in many countries and regions mainly because dogs are likely to form packs and threaten, injure or kill children or adults, apt to chase or prey on livestock and are of primary importance in rabies control in about half the countries in the world [3,8].

Rabies has been reported in owned confined and freeroaming dogs in several countries [9][10][11] . In Nigeria, there have been reports of clinical rabies with the burden of the disease being worsened by atypical cases which present without specific signs or symptoms of rabies [12][13][14][15] . However, most of these reports were based on records of animals that visited private and government-owned veterinary clinics and hospitals with paucity of information on immune status of hunting dogs [16,17] . In view of the recent upsurge in adoption of exotic and local dogs as pets in Nigeria accompanied by increased contact and bonding between the dogs and their owners [18] , and the traditional close association between hunters and their dogs, there is a need for studies to determine the level of protection of these dogs against rabies. In the present study, we have adopted a community-based approach to investigate the presence of RABV antibodies in apparently healthy confined, hunting and roaming dogs in Ogun and Oyo states, Southwestern Nigeria. These two states are noted for influx of people and dogs from all regions in Nigeria since dog trade across the country is common and unregulated [16] .


## Materials and methods


### Study locations

The study was carried out in Abeokuta, Sagamu and Odeda in Ogun state and in Ibadan, the capital of Oyo state. The two states are located in Southwestern Nigeria at 7°00′ N 3°35′ E with estimated population of 4.1 million people and 8°00′ N 4°00′ E with estimated population of 5.6 million people, respectivel [19] .


### Sample population and specimen collection

A total of 230 apparently healthy dogs of both sexes (77 males and 153 females) were used for this study. They comprised 80 confined dogs presented for routine clinical examination or vaccination at some of the major government-owned veterinary clinics in Ogun and Oyo states, 92 hunting dogs from Odeda farm (hunting) settlement in Ogun state and 58 roaming dogs from urban and peri-urban areas of Ibadan (including dogs captured by traders and sold to the public for consumption as delicacies). Questionnaires were administered to collect pertinent demographic data including age, sex and breed of dog, ownership type, purpose for keeping the dog, type of management, anti-rabies vaccination history and educational status of owner.

Using sterile syringes and needles, about 2.5 mL of blood was collected from each dog through the cephalic vein into plain sample bottles without anticoagulant. The blood was allowed to clot at room temperature for about 5 to 6 h and sera obtained were stored at -20 °C until tested.


### Detection of rabies virus antibodies using ELISA procedure

The indirect ELISA technique used was as described by Ohore et al [17] . Optimal working dilutions obtained following chequerboard titration were antigen 1:500, sera 1:100 and rabbit anti-dog horse radish peroxidase IgG (Sigma, USA) 1:1 000. The cut-off sample to positive (SP) ratio was calculated to be 0.25, which corresponded to twice the optical density (OD) value of the negative control serum. Results were read using the Top-Read Microplate ELISA reader (Axiom, Germany) and were considered valid when the difference between the mean OD of the positive and negative control sera was greater than 0.2 and the mean OD of the negative control serum was less than or equal to 0.25. Samples with SP ratio greater than the cut-off value of 0.25 were considered to have optimal RABV antibody levels (positive), those with SP ratio lower than the cut-off had suboptimal antibody levels while serologically negative samples were those with zero SP ratio. Data obtained were subjected to One-way ANOVA to determine statistical significance of the findings.


## Results

The demographic data of the screened dogs in Ogun and Oyo states including breed and vaccination status as well as educational status of the dog owners are shown in Table  1. Interviews conducted among the dog owners showed that 21.3% (17/80) of them were aware of the anti-rabies vaccination programme but refused to vaccinate their dogs (i.e. they were negligent), 36.3% (29/80) were misinformed about the vaccination (i.e. they were made to believe their dogs had been vaccinated when, in reality, they had not been vaccinated), while the remaining 34 (42.5%) were uninformed (i.e. they had no knowledge of anti-rabies vaccination). All the hunting and roaming dogs and some confined dogs were local breeds. The prevalence of RABV antibodies in confined dogs in the two states is shown in Table 2 with none of the vaccinated dogs from Ogun state being positive for RABV antibodies while 54.2% (13/24) from Oyo state were positive. None of the 92 hunting dogs, which were all unvaccinated, was positive for RABV antibodies but 11 (12.0%) had suboptimal antibody levels while 81 (88.0%) were negative. Similarly, none of the 58 unvaccinated roaming dogs was positive for RABV antibodies but 14 (24.1%) and 44 (75.9%) had sub-optimal and no antibody levels respectively. Overall, the prevalence of RABV antibodies in confined, hunting and roaming dogs was 16.3%, 0% and 0% respectively (Table 3).   


## Discussion

Rabies is endemic in settings where large groups of unvaccinated and unconfined domestic dogs are present and the most cost-effective strategy for preventing the disease in people is by eliminating it in dogs through vaccination [20] . Indeed, transmission of rabies has been reported to effectively stop when over 70% of the canine population is immune [10] . In the present study, we provide the rabies antibody profile of confined, hunting and roaming dogs in two states in Southwestern Nigeria. Compared to previous studies which reported higher rabies antibody prevalence rates of 71.4% and 42.6% in confined dogs in Ibadan, Oyo state and Ilorin, Kwara state respectively, the overall low (16.3%) rabies seroprevalence rate obtained for confined, hunting and roaming dogs in this study suggests that only a small proportion of the dog population in the study locations received anti-rabies vaccination. This observation suggests a poor attitude/response of the dog owners to antirabies vaccination and is corroborated by the results of questionnaire analysis which showed that a substantial percentage of dog owners in this study did not vaccinate their dogs against rabies, even when they were educated. Thus, the low rabies seroprevalence rate obtained in this study could be attributed to the fact that the dog owners were negligent, misinformed or totally uninformed about dog rabies vaccination. The non-detection of RABV antibodies in some vaccinated confined dogs suggests poor vaccination responses or decayed rabies antibody levels as at the time of blood sample collection. These poor vaccination responses observed may be due to factors such as antigenic differences between the rabies virus strain used for vaccine production and the circulating wild rabies virus strains [4] , administration of incorrect or sub-optimal doses of vaccine, failure of some dogs to seroconvert even with repeated doses of vaccine [10] , and poor immunogenicity of the vaccine, probably as a result of fluctuation in storage temperature. In such circumstances, although dogs may have been correctly vaccinated, their immune response and the quality of immunity may be inadequate. In tropical countries like Nigeria, vaccine virus titres may rapidly wane if proper cold storage is not maintained. Moreover, the fact that a large proportion (83.8%) of confined dogs studied was unprotected against rabies indicates that they are a highly susceptible dog population which constitutes a threat to public health.

It is noteworthy that all hunting and roaming dogs screened did not possess protective rabies antibody levels. These dogs, which were local breeds, were all unvaccinated. This finding corroborates the reports of Awoyomi et al. who noted that local dogs have a high probability of being unvaccinated and Adeyemi et al. who observed that there is inadequate rabies vaccination coverage in Nigeria, which increases public health risk [21,22] . It is known that behavioural factors such as mating in these hunting and roaming dogs are indiscriminate and uncontrolled, and predisposes them to occasional fights over mating partners. Therefore, this unprotected group stand a great risk of rabies exposure which may occur when saliva of an infected animal gains entry into the host through any skin abrasion or a fresh wound, or through virus splashing into the conjunctiva [2,11] .

The detection of sub-optimal rabies antibody levels in unvaccinated hunting and roaming dogs suggests they may have had field exposure to rabies or rabies-related viruses. These hunting and roaming dogs could therefore serve as canid reservoirs which harbour inapparent infection and shed virus in their saliva in the absence of clinical disease [10] . Thus, they constitute a potential high risk dog population that may serve as exposure points for rabies in the community. Furthermore, there is possibility of exposure of the unprotected hunting dogs to sylvatic rabies during hunting expeditions. For instance, Radostits et al. noted that it is likely that outbreaks occurring naturally amongst carnivores may originate by them eating bats which have died of rabies [23] . Also, Badrane and Tordo reported that all rabies virus variants of terrestrial carnivores are believed to have their origin from variants of rabies virus associated with bats [24] . The occasional cross-species transmission (i.e. spill-over) of rabies virus variants from a reservoir host to a secondary species in which the original variant subsequently becomes adapted could lead to its emergence as a novel or unique subvariant of rabies virus [3] . Therefore, the detection of suboptimal RABV antibody levels in unvaccinated hunting dogs in this study indicates that they might have had subclinical exposure to rabies or rabies-related viruses from wildlife. Consequently, they pose a threat to public health since they may serve as reservoirs of both urban and sylvatic rabies and ultimately, as vectors transmitting rabies to humans and other animals [3] .

In conclusion, this study has revealed considerable indifference to vaccination of confined dogs even among educated dog owners, and shown that hunting and roaming dogs in the study areas are not protected against rabies. These three categories of domestic dogs thus constitute a threat to public health as it has been reported that human exposure is more likely to occur through bites from owned unvaccinated dogs than stray dogs [25] . There is therefore a need for promotion of responsible pet ownership in Nigeria through extensive public education. In addition, the study has not only underscored the fact that hunting and roaming dogs should be included in future rabies vaccination campaigns, it has also highlighted the need for more studies on the epidemiology of rabies and rabies-related viruses in Nigeria. Furthermore, intervention strategies which have been used in successful rabies control programmes elsewhere such as community-based active surveillance and integration of veterinary and public health services in implementing mass dog vaccination programmes, are advocated [9,26] .


## Conflict of interest statement

We declare that we have no conflict of interest. 


## Acknowledgements


## Comments


## Background

Rabies is a dreadful zoonotic disease of high control priority. Dogs being primary reservoir require control by vaccination. Data are however limited in both free roaming and confined dogs. The study was designed to determine rabies protection by measuring antibody level to rabies in dogs in the study area.


## Research frontiers

Rabies virus antibody level in blood was measured by ELISA test in populations of vaccinated, unvaccinated, confined and free roaming dogs. Lack of or sub-optimal levels were observed.


## Related reports

Data presented showed poor serum antibody detection in dogs in contrast to previous studies. This was alluded to lack of active vaccination due to negligence and poor attitude. Failure to seroconvert according to the authors may also be due to antigenic variation, vaccine failure due to poor storage.


## Innovations & breakthroughs

A total of 83.8% of confined or roaming dogs were unprotected against rabies and as such are highly susceptible, thereby constituting public health risk.


## Applications

Community-based rabies surveillance and mass vaccination incorporating veterinary and public health services are advocated.

Peer review Data presented highlight incessant neglect of rabies visa-vis ensuring dogs are immunized to prevent human exposures. Comparative sensitivity of ELISA, fat etc. may be useful. Additional references as indicated above will improve the quality of argument. Overall it is an interesting and well written paper.


This work was partly supported by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Grant for Higher Education Initiative in Africa (Grant No.

## Table 1
1Vaccination status of confined dogs and educational status of their owners in Ogun and Oyo states.State Dog breed Number Educated 
owners 

Uneducated 

owners 

Vaccinated 

dogs 

Unvaccinated 

dogs 

Ogun Alsatian 

19 
14 
5 
10 
9 

Rottweiler 

5 
5 
0 
1 
4 

Local 

8 
4 
4 
2 
6 

Others 

2 
2 
0 
1 
1 

Total 

34 
25 (73.5%) 
9 (26.5%) 
14 (41.2%) 
20 (58.8%) 

Oyo Alsatian 

24 
18 
6 
14 
10 

Rottweiler 

7 
4 
3 
4 
3 

Local 

8 
4 
4 
2 
6 

Others 

7 
7 
0 
4 
3 

Total 

46 
33 (71.7%) 13 (28.3%) 
24 (52.2%) 
22 (47.8%) 



## Table 2
2Prevalence of rabies virus antibodies in confined dogs in Ogun and Oyo states.Confined dog 
No. dogs 
No. positive (%) No. sub-optimal (%) 
No. negative (%) 

Ogun Oyo 
Ogun 
Oyo 
Ogun 
Oyo 
Ogun 
Oyo 

Vaccinated 

13 
24 
0 (0.0) 13 (54.2) 
3 (23.1) 
9 (37.5) 
10 (76.9) 
2 (8.3) 

Unvaccinated 

21 
22 
0 (0.0) 
0 (0.0) 
3 (14.3) 
9 (40.9) 
18 (85.7) 13 (59.1) 

Total 

34 
46 
0 (0.0) 13 (54.2) 
6 (17.6) 
18 (39.1) 
28 (82.4) 15 (32.6) 



## Table 3
3Overall prevalence of rabies virus antibodies in confined, hunting and roaming dogs in the study locations.Dog 
Number 
Positive (optimal) 
Sub-optimal 
Negative 

Confined 

80 
13 (16.3%) 
24 (30.0%) 
43 (53.8%) 

Hunting 

92 
0 (0.0%) 
11 (12.0%) 
81 (88.0%) 

Roaming 

58 
0 (0.0%) 
14 (24.1%) 
44 (75.9%) 

Total 

230 
13 (5.7%) 
49 (21.3%) 
168 (73.0%) 



Taxonomy of Viruses. Virus taxonomy: 2013 release. International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. Virus taxonomy: 2013 release. [Online] Available from: http:// ictvonline.org/virusTaxonomy.asp [Accessed on 20th March, 2014]

World Health Organization. Rabies. Geneva: World Health Organization. Accessed on 15th MarchWorld Health Organization. Rabies. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. [Online] Available from: http://www.who.int/ mediacentre/factsheets/fs099/en/ [Accessed on 15th March, 2014]

World Health Organization. WHO expert consultation on rabies: second report. Geneva: World Health Organization. World Health Organization. WHO expert consultation on rabies: second report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.

Estimating human rabies mortality in the United Republic of Tanzania from dog bite injuries. S Cleaveland, E M Fèvre, M Kaare, P G Coleman, Bull World Health Organ. 804Cleaveland S, Fèvre EM, Kaare M, Coleman PG. Estimating human rabies mortality in the United Republic of Tanzania from dog bite injuries. Bull World Health Organ 2002; 80(4): 304-310.

Rabies exposures, post-exposure prophylaxis and deaths in a region of endemic canine rabies. K Hampson, A Dobson, M Kaare, J Dushoff, M Magoto, E Sindoya, PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 211339Hampson K, Dobson A, Kaare M, Dushoff J, Magoto M, Sindoya E, et al. Rabies exposures, post-exposure prophylaxis and deaths in a region of endemic canine rabies. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2008; 2(11): e339.

Zoonoses in the bedroom. B B Chomel, B Sun, Emerg Infect Dis. 1711Chomel BB, Sun B. Zoonoses in the bedroom. Emerg Infect Dis 2011; 17(11): 167-172.

Dog ecology and population biology. H C Matter, T J Daniels, Macpherson CN, Meslin FX, Wandeler AICABIWellingborough, UKMatter HC, Daniels TJ. Dog ecology and population biology. In: Macpherson CN, Meslin FX, Wandeler AI, editors. Dog zoonoses and public health. Wellingborough, UK: CABI; 2000.

The role of veterinary epidemiology in the study of free-roaming dogs and cats. M R Slater, Prev Vet Med. 484Slater MR. The role of veterinary epidemiology in the study of free-roaming dogs and cats. Prev Vet Med 2001; 48(4): 273-286.

Communitybased active surveillance for rabies in Machakos district. P M Kitala, J J Mcdermott, M N Kyule, J M Gathuma, Prev Vet Med. 441-2Kitala PM, McDermott JJ, Kyule MN, Gathuma JM. Community- based active surveillance for rabies in Machakos district, Kenya. Prev Vet Med 2000; 44(1-2): 73-85.

Potential for rabies control through dog vaccination in wildlife-abundant communities of Tanzania. M C Fitzpatrick, K Hampson, S Cleaveland, L A Meyers, J P Townsend, A P Galvani, Fitzpatrick MC, Hampson K, Cleaveland S, Meyers LA, Townsend JP, Galvani AP. Potential for rabies control through dog vaccination in wildlife-abundant communities of Tanzania.

. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 681796PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2012; 6(8): e1796.

Diagnosis of canine rabies by the direct fluorescent antibody technique in Plateau state. D O Ehizibolo, E A Ogunsan, M J Muhammed, C I Nwosuh, S Olaleye, O O Chukwu, Nigeria. Niger Vet J. 292Ehizibolo DO, Ogunsan EA, Muhammed MJ, Nwosuh CI, Olaleye S, Chukwu OO, et al. Diagnosis of canine rabies by the direct fluorescent antibody technique in Plateau state, Nigeria. Niger Vet J 2008; 29(2): 20-24.

Rabies in 5-week-old puppies in Jos, Plateau state Nigeria: a case report. N N Kujul, S A Banyigyi, A S Abechi, G D Moses, Researcher. 212Kujul NN, Banyigyi SA, Abechi AS, Moses GD. Rabies in 5-week-old puppies in Jos, Plateau state Nigeria: a case report. Researcher 2010; 2(12): 86-88.

Incidence of dog bite injuries and clinical rabies in a tertiary health care institution: a 10-year retrospective study. S A Abubakar, A G Bakari, Ann Afr Med. 112Abubakar SA, Bakari AG. Incidence of dog bite injuries and clinical rabies in a tertiary health care institution: a 10-year retrospective study. Ann Afr Med 2012; 11(2): 108-111.

Rabies in a vaccinated 9-month-old German shepherd dog. A M Qasim, A A Obadua, P A Okewole, I S Tekki, O S Omoleye, 10.1155/2013/280603Case Rep Vet Med. Qasim AM, Obadua AA, Okewole PA, Tekki IS, Omoleye OS. Rabies in a vaccinated 9-month-old German shepherd dog, Akure, 2010: a case report. Case Rep Vet Med 2013; doi: 10.1155/2013/280603.

Prevalence of antibodies against rabies among confined, free-roaming and stray dogs in a transit city of Nigeria. B O Olugasa, J O Aiyedun, B O Emikpe, Vet Ital. 474Olugasa BO, Aiyedun JO, Emikpe BO. Prevalence of antibodies against rabies among confined, free-roaming and stray dogs in a transit city of Nigeria. Vet Ital 2011; 47(4): 453-460.

Retrospective dog rabies vaccination evaluation at the University of Ibadan. I Adeyemi, K Zessin, Vet Arhiv. 705Adeyemi I, Zessin K. Retrospective dog rabies vaccination evaluation at the University of Ibadan, Nigeria (1988-1992). Vet Arhiv 2000; 70(5): 223-230.

The seroprofile of rabies antibodies in companion urban dogs in Ibadan, Nigeria. O G Ohore, B O Emikpe, O O Oke, D O Oluwayelu, J Anim Vet Adv. 61Ohore OG, Emikpe BO, Oke OO, Oluwayelu DO. The seroprofile of rabies antibodies in companion urban dogs in Ibadan, Nigeria. J Anim Vet Adv 2007; 6(1): 53-56.

Prevalence of avian origin H5 and H7 influenza virus antibodies in dogs in Ibadan and Sagamu, Southwestern Nigeria. D O Oluwayelu, Aiki-Raji, Neba Co, Che, O Ahmadu, Afr J Biomed Res. Oluwayelu DO, Aiki-Raji CO, Neba Che, Ahmadu O. Prevalence of avian origin H5 and H7 influenza virus antibodies in dogs in Ibadan and Sagamu, Southwestern Nigeria. Afr J Biomed Res 2011;

National Population Commission. National Population CommissionAbuja, NigeriaPopulation and housing censusNational Population Commission. 2006 Population and housing census. Abuja, Nigeria: National Population Commission;

Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Microbial Threats. The causes and impacts of neglected tropical and zoonotic diseases: opportunities for integrated intervention strategies. National Academies PressWashington; USInstitute of Medicine (US) Forum on Microbial Threats. The causes and impacts of neglected tropical and zoonotic diseases: opportunities for integrated intervention strategies. Washington: National Academies Press (US); 2011.

Socioeconomic factors associated with non-vaccination of dogs against rabies in Ibadan. O J Awoyomi, I G Adeyemi, F S Awoyomi, Nigeria. Niger Vet J. 283Awoyomi OJ, Adeyemi IG, Awoyomi FS. Socioeconomic factors associated with non-vaccination of dogs against rabies in Ibadan, Nigeria. Niger Vet J 2007; 28(3): 59-63.

Ten-year (1993-2002) retrospective evaluation of vaccination of dogs against rabies at the University of Ibadan. I G Adeyemi, Adetunji Vo, James Vo, Alonge Do, Nigeria. Afr J Biol Res. 82Adeyemi IG, Adetunji VO, James VO, Alonge DO. Ten-year (1993- 2002) retrospective evaluation of vaccination of dogs against rabies at the University of Ibadan, Nigeria. Afr J Biol Res 2005; 8(2): 71- 77.

Veterinary medicine: a textbook of the diseases of cattle, sheep, pigs, goats and horses. O M Radostits, D C Blood, C C Gay, Saunders W. B. CompanyPhiladelphiaRadostits OM, Blood DC, Gay CC. Veterinary medicine: a textbook of the diseases of cattle, sheep, pigs, goats and horses. Philadelphia: Saunders W. B. Company; 1994.

Host switching in Lyssavirus history from the Chiroptera to the Carnivora orders. H Badrane, N Tordo, J Virol. 7517Badrane H, Tordo N. Host switching in Lyssavirus history from the Chiroptera to the Carnivora orders. J Virol 2001; 75(17): 8096- 8104.

Recurrence of animal rabies. K E Tasioudi, P Iliadou, E I Agianniotaki, E Robardet, E Liandris, S Doudounakis, Emerg Infect Dis. 202Tasioudi KE, Iliadou P, Agianniotaki EI, Robardet E, Liandris E, Doudounakis S, et al. Recurrence of animal rabies, Greece, 2012. Emerg Infect Dis 2014; 20(2): 326-328.

Implementation of an intersectoral program to eliminate human and canine rabies: the Bohol Rabies Prevention and Elimination Project. S M Lapiz, M E Miranda, R G Garcia, L I Daguro, M D Paman, F P Madrinan, PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 6121891Lapiz SM, Miranda ME, Garcia RG, Daguro LI, Paman MD, Madrinan FP, et al. Implementation of an intersectoral program to eliminate human and canine rabies: the Bohol Rabies Prevention and Elimination Project. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2012; 6(12): e1891.