# A SURVEY OF ALGEBRAIC ACTIONS OF THE DISCRETE HEISENBERG GROUP

CorpusID: 73658100
 
tags: #Mathematics, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5f02e1d0eb6f26e4b175a7960a2420be1ff13921](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5f02e1d0eb6f26e4b175a7960a2420be1ff13921)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A SURVEY OF ALGEBRAIC ACTIONS OF THE DISCRETE HEISENBERG GROUP


Douglas Lind 
Klaus Schmidt 
A SURVEY OF ALGEBRAIC ACTIONS OF THE DISCRETE HEISENBERG GROUP
Dedicated to Anatoly Vershik on the occasion of his 80th birthday
The study of actions of countable groups by automorphisms of compact abelian groups has recently undergone intensive development, revealing deep connections with operator algebras and other areas. The discrete Heisenberg group is the simplest noncommutative example, where dynamical phenomena related to its noncommutativity already illustrate many of these connections. The explicit structure of this group means that these phenomena have concrete descriptions, which are not only instances of the general theory but are also testing grounds for further work. We survey here what is known about such actions of the discrete Heisenberg group, providing numerous examples and emphasizing many of the open problems that remain.

## Introduction

Since Halmos's observation [30] in 1943 that automorphisms of compact groups automatically preserve Haar measure, these maps have provided a rich class of examples in dynamics. In case the group is abelian, its dual group is a module over the Laurent polynomial ring Z[x ± ]. Such modules have a well-developed structure theory, which enables a comprehensive analysis of general automorphisms in terms of basic building blocks that can be completely understood.

The roots of the study of several commuting algebraic maps can be traced back to the seminal 1967 paper of Furstenberg [23], where he considered the joint dynamical properties of multiplication by different integers on the additive torus. In 1978 Ledrappier [38] gave a simple example of a mixing action of Z 2 by automorphisms of a compact abelian group that was not mixing of higher orders. For an action by d commuting automorphisms, the dual group is a module over the Laurent polynomial ring Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ± d ], i.e., the integral group ring ZZ d of Z d . The commutative algebra of such modules provides effective machinery for analyzing such actions. This point of view was initiated in 1989 by Kitchens and the second author [37], and a fairly complete theory of the dynamical properties of such actions is now available [61].

Let ∆ denote an arbitrary countable group, and let α denote an action of ∆ by automorphisms of a compact abelian group, or an algebraic ∆-action. The initial steps in analyzing such actions were taken in [61,Chap. 1], and give general criteria for some basic dynamical properties such as ergodicity and mixing.

In 2001 Einsiedler and Rindler [19] investigated the particular case when ∆ = Γ, the discrete Heisenberg group, as a first step towards algebraic actions of noncommutative groups. Here the concrete nature of Γ suggests that there should be specific answers to the natural dynamical questions, and they give several instances of this together with instructive examples. However, the algebraic complexity of the integral group ring ZΓ prevents the comprehensive analysis available in the commutative case.

A dramatic new development occurred in 2006 with the work of Deninger on entropy for principal ∆-actions. Let f ∈ Z∆, and let Z∆f denote the principal left ideal generated by f . Then ∆ acts on the quotient Z∆/Z∆f , and there is a dual ∆-action α f on the compact dual group, called a principal ∆-action. Deninger showed in [16] that in many cases the entropy of α f equals the logarithm of the Fuglede-Kadison determinant the linear operator corresponding to f on the group von Neumann algebra of ∆. In case ∆ = Z d , this reduces to the calculation in [46] of entropy in terms of the logarithmic Mahler measure of f . Subsequent work by Deninger, Li, Schmidt, Thom, and others shows that this and related results hold in great generality (see for example [17], [39], and [41]). In [41] the authors proved that three different concepts connected with ∆-actions, namely entropy, Fuglede-Kadison determinants, and L 2 -torsion, coincide, revealing deep connections that are only partly understood.

These ideas have some interesting consequences. For example, by computing the entropy of a particular Heisenberg action in two different ways, we can show that for almost every pair (a, b) of real numbers. Despite its simplicity, this fact does not appear to follow from known results on random matrix products.

Our purpose here is to survey what is known for the Heisenberg case ∆ = Γ, and to point out many of the remaining open questions. As Γ is the simplest noncommutative example (other than finite extensions of Z d , which are too close to the abelian case to be interesting), any results will indicate limitations of what a general theory can accomplish. Also, the special structure of Γ should enable explicit answers to many questions, and yield particular examples of various dynamical phenomena. It is also quite instructive to see how a very general machinery, used for algebraic actions of arbitrary countable groups, can be made quite concrete for the case of Γ. We hope to inspire further work by making this special case both accessible and attractive.


## Algebraic actions

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group. The integral group ring Z∆ of ∆ consists of all finite sums of the form g = δ g δ δ with g δ ∈ Z, equipped with the obvious ring operations inherited from multiplication in ∆. The support of g is the subset supp(g) = {δ ∈ ∆ : g δ = 0}.

Suppose that ∆ acts by automorphisms of a compact abelian group X. Such actions are called algebraic ∆-actions. Denote the action of δ ∈ ∆ on t ∈ X by δ · t. Let M be the (discrete) dual group of X, with additive dual pairing denoted by t, m ∈ R for t ∈ X and m ∈ M . Then M becomes a module over Z∆ by defining δ · m to be the unique element of M so that t, δ · m = δ −1 · t, m for all t ∈ X, and extending this to additive integral combinations in Z∆.

Conversely, if M is a Z∆-module, its compact dual group X M = M carries a ∆action α M dual to the ∆-action on M . Thus there is a 1-1 correspondence between algebraic ∆-actions and Z∆-modules.

Let T = R/Z be the additive torus. Then the dual group of M = Z∆ can be identified with T ∆ via the pairing t, g = δ t δ g δ where t = (t δ ) ∈ T ∆ and g = g δ δ ∈ Z∆.

For θ ∈ ∆, the action of θ on t ∈ T ∆ is defined via duality by θ · t, g = t, θ −1 · g for all g ∈ Z∆. By taking g = δ ∈ ∆, we obtain that (θ · t) δ = t θ −1 δ . It is sometimes convenient to think of elements in T ∆ as infinite formal sums t = δ t δ δ, and then θ · t = δ t δ θδ = δ t θ −1 δ δ. This allows a well-defined multiplication of elements in T ∆ by elements from Z∆, both on the left and on the right.

We remark that the shift-action (θ · t) δ = t θ −1 δ is opposite to the traditional shift direction when ∆ is Z or Z d , but is forced when ∆ is noncommutative. This has sometimes caused confusion; for example the last displayed equation in [19, p. 118] is not correct. Now fix f ∈ Z∆. Let Z∆f be the principal left ideal generated by f . The quotient module Z∆/Z∆f has dual group X f ⊂ T ∆ . An element t ∈ T ∆ is in X f iff t, gf = 0 for all g ∈ Z∆. This is equivalent to the condition that t · f * , g = 0 for all g ∈ Z∆, where f * = δ f δ δ −1 . Hence t ∈ X f exactly when t · f * = 0, using the conventions above for right multiplication of elements in T ∆ by members of Z∆. In other words, if we define ρ f (t) = t · f * to be right convolution by f * , then X f is the kernel of ρ f . In terms of coordinates, t is in X f precisely when δ t θδ f δ = 0 for all θ ∈ ∆.

Our focus here is on the discrete Heisenberg group Γ, generated by x, y, and z subject to the relations xz = zx, yz = zy, and yx = xyz. Alternatively, Γ is the subgroup of SL(3, Z) generated by We will sometimes use the notation R for the integral group ring ZΓ of Γ when emphasizing its ring-theoretic properties. The center of Γ is Z = {z k : k ∈ Z}. The center of R is then the Laurent polynomial ring ZZ = Z[z ± ]. Hence every element of R can be written as g = k,l,m g klm x k y l z m = k,l g kl (z)x k y l , where g klm ∈ Z and g kl (z) ∈ ZZ. For g = k,l g kl (z)x k y l ∈ ZΓ, define the Newton polygon N(g) of g to be the convex hull in R 2 of those points (k, l) for which g kl (z) = 0. In particular, N(0) = ∅. Because ZZ is an integral domain, it is easy to verify that N(gh) equals the Minkowski sum N(g) + N(h) for all g, h ∈ ZΓ. This shows that ZΓ has no nontrivial zero-divisors. However, a major difference between the commutative case and ZΓ is that unique factorization into irreducibles fails for ZΓ.

Example 2.1. It is easy to verify that (y − 1)(y − z)(x + 1) = (xyz 2 − xz + y − z)(y − 1).

Each of the linear factors is clearly irreducible by a Newton polygon argument.

We claim that f (x, y, z) = xyz 2 − xz + y − z cannot be factored in ZΓ. Note that N(f ) = [0, 1] 2 . Suppose that f = gh. Adjusting by units and reordering factors if necessary, we may assume that g and h have the form g(x, y, z) = g 0 (z) + g 1 (z)x and h(x, y, z) = h 0 (z) + h 1 (z)y. Expanding gh, we find that g 0 (z)h 0 (z) = −z, g 0 (z)h 1 (z) = 1, g 1 (z)h 0 (z) = −z, and g 1 (z)h 1 (z) = z 2 .

Hence g 0 (z) = h 1 (z) −1 = g 1 (z)z −2 and h 0 (z) = −zg 1 (z) −1 . Then we would have
−z = g 0 (z)h 0 (z) = g 1 (z)z −2 −zg 1 (z) −1 = −z −1 .
This proves that f has no nontrivial factorizations in ZΓ.

Since Γ is nilpotent of rank 2, it is polycyclic, and so R is both left-and rightnoetherian, i.e. R satisfies the ascending chain condition on both left ideals and on right ideals [56].

Suppose now that M is a finitely generated left R-module, say generated by m 1 , . . . , m l . The map R l → M defined by [g 1 , . . . , g l ] → g 1 m 1 + . . . g l m l is surjective. Its kernel K is a left R-submodule of the noetherian module R l , hence also finitely generated, say by [f 11 , . . . , f 1l ], . . . , [f k1 , . . . , f kl ]. Let F = [f ij ] ∈ R k×l be the rectangular matrix whose rows are the generators of K. Then K = R k F , and M ∼ = R l /R k F . We will denote the corresponding algebraic Γ-action for this presentation of M by α F . Notice that when k = l = 1 we are reduced to the case F = [f ], corresponding to the quotient module R/Rf and the principal Γ-action α f .


## Ergodicity

Let X be a compact abelian group and let µ denote Haar measure on X, normalized so that µ(X) = 1. If φ is a continuous automorphism of X, then the measure ν defined by ν(E) = µ φ(E) is also a normalized translation-invariant measure. Hence ν = µ, and µ is φ-invariant.

This shows that if α is an algebraic action of a countable group ∆ on X, then α is µ-measure-preserving. A measurable set E ⊂ X is α-invariant if α δ (E) agrees with E off a null set for every δ ∈ ∆. The action α is ergodic if the only α-invariant sets have measure 0 or 1. The following, which is a special case of a result due to Kaplansky [34], gives an algebraic characterization of ergodicity. . Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and α be an algebraic ∆-action on a compact abelian group X whose dual group is M . Then α is ergodic if and only if the ∆-orbit of every nonzero element of M is infinite.

Roughly speaking, this result follows from the observation that the existence of a bounded measurable α-invariant function on X is equivalent to the existence of a nonzero finite ∆-orbit in M .

For actions of the Heisenberg group Γ, this raises the question of characterizing those F ∈ R k×l for which α F is ergodic. The first result in this direction is due to Ben Hayes. . For every f ∈ ZΓ the principal algebraic Γ-action α f is ergodic.

Proof. We give a brief sketch of the proof. First recall that ZZ is a unique factorization domain. Define the content c(g) of g = i,j g ij (z)x i y j ∈ ZΓ {0} to be the greatest common divisor in ZZ of the nonzero coefficient polynomials g ij (z), and put c(0) = 0. A simple variant of the proof of Gauss's lemma shows that c(gh) = c(g)c(h) for all g, h ∈ ZΓ. Now fix f ∈ ZΓ = R. The case f = 0 is trivial, so assume that f = 0. Suppose that h+Rf has finite Γ-orbit in R/Rf . Then there are m, n 1 such that (x m −1)h = g 1 f and (z n − 1)h = g 2 f for some g 1 , g 2 ∈ R. Then
c (x m − 1)h = c(x m − 1)c(h) = c(h) = c(g 1 )c(f ), so that c(f ) divides c(h) in ZZ. Also, c (z n − 1)h = (z n − 1)c(h) = c(g 2 )c(f ),
so that (z n −1)[c(h)/c(f )] = c(g 2 ), and hence z n −1 divides c(g 2 ). Thus g 2 /(z n −1) ∈ R, and so h = [g 2 /(z n − 1)]f ∈ Rf , showing that h + Rf = 0 in R/Rf .

Hayes called a group ∆ principally ergodic if every principal algebraic ∆-action is ergodic. He extended Theorem 3.2 to show that the following classes of groups are principally ergodic: torsion-free nilpotent groups that are not virtually cyclic (i.e., do not contain a cyclic subgroup of finite index), free groups on more than one generator, and groups that are not finitely generated. Clearly Z is not principally ergodic, since for example the action of x on the module Z[x ± ]/ x k − 1 dualizes to a k × k permutation matrix on T k , which is not ergodic.

Recently Li, Peterson, and the second author used a very different approach to proving principal ergodicity, based on cohomology [40]. These methods greatly increased the collection of countable discrete groups known to be principally ergodic, including all such groups that contain a finitely generated amenable subgroup that is not virtually cyclic.

We will describe now how their ideas work in the case of Γ. We begin by describing two important properties of finite-index subgroups of Γ, namely that they are amenable and have only one end.

For an arbitrary discrete group ∆ let 1 (∆, R) = {w ∈ R ∆ : w 1 := δ |w δ | < ∞} and ∞ (∆, R) = {w ∈ R ∆ : w ∞ := sup δ |w δ | < ∞}, so that ∞ (∆, R) is the dual space to 1 (∆, R).

Fix K, L 1, and put M = KL. Let Λ = Λ KLM = x K , y L , z M , the finite-index subgroup of Γ generated by x K , y L , and z M . Lemma 3.3. Let Λ = Λ KLM and suppose that {T λ : λ ∈ Λ} is an action of Λ by continuous affine operators on ∞ (Γ, R). If C is a weak*-compact, convex subset of ∞ (Γ, R) such that T λ (C) ⊂ C for every λ ∈ Λ, then there is a common fixed point b ∈ C for all the T λ .

Proof. Put F n = {x pK , y qL , z rM : 0 p < n, 0 q < n, 0 r < n 2 }.

The condition of the powers of z is imposed so that any distortion caused by left multiplication of F n by a given element λ ∈ Λ is eventually small. More precisely, for every λ ∈ Λ we have that
|λF n F n | |F n | → 0 as n → ∞,
where denotes symmetric difference and | · | denotes cardinality. Now fix b 0 ∈ C, and let b n = 1 |Fn| λ∈Fn T λ (b 0 ). Then b n ∈ C since C is convex. Since C is weak*-compact, there is a subsequence b n j converging weak* to some b ∈ C. Note that sup c∈C c ∞ < ∞ by compactness of C. Then since each T θ is continuous, we have that T θ (b n j ) → T θ (b) for every θ ∈ Λ. Furthermore,
T θ (b n j ) − b n j ∞ |θF n j F n j | |F n | · sup c∈C c ∞ → 0 as j → ∞. It follows that T θ (b) = b for all θ ∈ Λ.
The essential point in the previous proof is that Λ is amenable, and that {F n } forms a Følner sequence.

We call a set A ⊂ Λ = Λ KLM almost invariant if |Aλ A| is finite for every λ ∈ Λ. Clearly, if A is almost invariant, then so is Aλ for every λ ∈ Λ.
Lemma 3.4. Let A ⊂ Λ = Λ KLM be an infinite almost invariant subset. Then Λ A is finite. Proof. Let S = {x K , x −K , y L , y −L , z M , z −M }
be a set of generators for Λ. The Cayley graph G of Λ with respect to S has as vertices the elements of Λ, and for every vertex λ and s ∈ S there is a directed edge from λ to λs. Let E be the union of As A over s ∈ S, so E is finite. We can therefore enclose E in a box of the form B = {x iK y kL z lM : |i|, |j|, |k| n}. Since A is infinite, choose a ∈ A B. Then for every b ∈ Λ B there is a finite directed path in G from a to b that avoids B, say with vertices a, as 1 , as 1 s 2 , . . ., as 1 s 2 . . . s r = b, and by definition of E each of these is in A. Hence Λ A ⊂ B, and so is finite.

Second proof of Theorem 3.2, adapted from d [40]. Suppose that h ∈ ZΓ with h + ZΓf having finite Γ-orbit in ZΓ/ZΓf . We will prove that h ∈ ZΓ.

There are K, L 1 such that (
x K − 1)h ∈ ZΓf and (y L − 1)h ∈ ZΓf . Then x −K y L x K y −L = z KL also stabilizes h + ZΓf . Let M = KL. Then there are g 1 , g 2 , g 3 ∈ ZΓ such that (x K − 1)h = g 1 f , (y L − 1)h = g 2 f , and (z M − 1)h = g 3 f .
Consider the finite-index subgroup Λ = Λ KLM of Γ as above. For every λ ∈ Λ there is a c(λ) ∈ ZΓ such that (λ − 1)h = c(λ)f , and this is unique since ZΓ has no zero-divisors. Then c : Λ → ZΓ is a cocycle, that is, it obeys c(λλ ) = c(λ) + λc(λ ) for all λ, λ ∈ Λ.

Consider ZΓ as a subset of ∞ (Γ, R). We claim that c is a uniformly bounded cocycle, i.e., that sup λ∈Λ c(λ) ∞ < ∞. The reason for this is that we can calculate the value of c(λ) for arbitrary λ using left shifts of the generators g i that are sufficiently spread out to prevent large accumulations of coefficients. For example, if p, q, r 1, then applying the cocycle equation first for powers of x K , then powers of y L , and then powers of z M , we get that (3.1) c(x pK y qL z rM ) = g 1 + x K g 1 + · · · + x (p−1)K g 1 + x pK g 2 + x pK y L g 2 + · · · + x pK y (q−1)L g 2 + x pK y qL g 3 + x pK y qL z M g 3 + · · · + x pK y qL z (r−1)M g 3 .

Since the supports of the g i are finite, there is a uniform bound P < ∞ so that for every γ ∈ Γ and every λ ∈ Λ, there are at most P summands in the expression (3.1) for c(λ) whose support contains γ. Hence c(λ) ∞ P sup 1 i 3 g i ∞ = B < ∞, establishing our claim. Now let C be the closed, convex hull of {c(λ) : λ ∈ Λ} in ∞ (Γ, R), which is weak*compact since the c(λ) are uniformly bounded. Consider the continuous affine maps
T λ : ∞ (Γ, R) → ∞ (Γ, R) defined by T λ (v) = λ · v + c(λ)
. Then T λ • T λ = T λλ by the cocycle property of c, and T λ (c(λ )) = c(λλ ), so that T λ (C) ⊂ C for all λ ∈ Λ. By Lemma 3.3 there is a common fixed point v = (v γ ) ∈ C for the T λ , so that v − λ · v = c(λ) ∈ ZΓ for all λ ∈ Λ. Write each v γ = w γ + u γ with w γ ∈ Z and u γ ∈ [0, 1). Then
u γ − u λ −1 γ = v γ − v λ −1 γ + w γ − w λ −1 γ ∈ (−1, 1) ∩ Z = {0},
so that w also satisfies that w − λ · w = c(λ), where now w ∈ ∞ (Γ, Z) has integer coordinates. Replacing w with −w, we have found a w ∈ ∞ (Γ, Z) with w ∞ B and λ · w − w = c(λ) for all λ ∈ Λ.

Next, we use Lemma 3.4 to show that we can replace w with an element of ∞ (Γ, Z) having finite support, and so is an element of ZΓ. Fix γ ∈ Γ. For −B k B consider the "level set" for the restriction of w to the right coset Λγ, A γ,k = {λ ∈ Λ : w λ −1 γ = k}. We claim that for each γ there is exactly one k for which A γ,k is infinite. For suppose that A γ,k is infinite. Let θ ∈ Λ. Since θ·w−w = c(θ) has finite support, w θ −1 λ −1 γ = w λ −1 γ for all but finitely many λ ∈ Λ. Hence |A γ,k θ A γ,k | < ∞ for every θ ∈ Λ. By Lemma 3.4, we see that Λ A γ,k is finite. Hence for every γ ∈ Γ we can adjust the value of w on the coset Λγ so that the restriction of w to Λγ has finite support. Doing this for each of the finitely many right cosets Λγ results in a w with finite support on Γ, so that w ∈ ZΓ.

Thus c(λ) = (λ − 1)w for every λ ∈ Λ. Since (λ − 1)h = c(λ)f = (λ − 1)wf , we obtain h = wf ∈ ZΓf , as required.

Theorem 3.2 answers the 1 × 1 case of the following natural question.

Problem 3.5. Describe or characterize those F ∈ R k×l for which α F is ergodic, or, equivalently, those noetherian R-modules M for which α M is ergodic. Is there a finite algorithm that will decide whether or not a given α F is ergodic? Are there easily checked sufficient conditions on F for ergodicity of α F ? Einsiedler and Rindler provided one answer to Problem 3.5, which involves the notion of prime ideals in R. A two-sided ideal p in R is prime if whenever a and b are two-sided ideals in R with ab ⊆ p, then either a ⊆ p or b ⊆ p. If N is an R-submodule of an R-module M , then the annihilator ann R (N ) of N is defined as {f ∈ R : f n = 0 for all n ∈ N }, which is a two-sided ideal in R. A prime ideal p is associated to M if there is a submodule N ⊆ M such that for every nonzero submodule N ⊆ N we have that ann R (N ) = p. Every noetherian R-module has associated prime ideals, and there are only finitely many of them.

Call a prime ideal p of R ergodic if the subgroup {γ ∈ Γ : γ − 1 ∈ p} of Γ has infinite index in Γ. For instance, the ideal p in Example 3.7 is prime (being the kernel of a ring homomorphism onto an commutative integral domain), but is not ergodic. It is easy to verify that a prime ideal is ergodic if and only if α R/p is ergodic, and that the only ideal associated with R/p is p.  
z − 1 = (y − z)(x − 1) + (1 − xz)(y − 1) ∈ p,
and so the map φ : R → Z defined by φ(f ) = f (1, 1, 1) is a well-defined surjective ring homomorphism with kernel p. Thus p is a prime ideal with R/p isomorphic to Z. The dual Γ-action is simply the identity map on T, which is nonergodic. Hence p is a left ideal generated by two elements with α R/p nonergodic, showing that Theorem 3.2 does not extend to nonprincipal actions.

We remark that if we consider Z 3 instead of Γ, then the characterization of ergodic prime ideals in [61,Thm. 6.5] shows that their complex variety is finite, and in particular by elementary dimension theory they must have at least three generators.

A relatively explicit description of all prime ideals in R is given in [49]. An answer to this problem would reduce Problem 3.5 to computing the prime ideals associated to a given noetherian R-module. However, this appears to be difficult, even for modules of the form R/Rf , although it follows from Theorem 3.2 that all prime ideals associated to R/Rf must be ergodic.


## Mixing

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and let M be a left Z∆-module. Denote by µ Haar measure on X M . The associated algebraic ∆-action α M is called mixing if, for every pair of measurable sets E, F ⊂ X M , we have that lim δ→∞ µ(α δ M (E) ∩ F ) = µ(E)µ(F ), where δ → ∞ refers to the one-point compactification of ∆. For m ∈ M , the stabilizer of m is the subgroup {δ ∈ ∆ : δ · m = m}. In the case ∆ = Γ, this is equivalent to requiring that for every nonzero m ∈ M the map γ → γ · m is injective on Γ.

Using this together with some of the ideas from the previous section, we can give a simple criterion for g(z) ∈ ZZ = Z[z ± ] so that α g is mixing.

Proposition 4.2. Let g = g(z) ∈ ZZ. Then the principal Γ-action α g is mixing if and only if g(z) has no roots that are roots of unity.

Proof. Suppose first that g(z) has a root that is a root of unity, so that g(z) has a factor g 0 (z) ∈ ZZ dividing z n − 1 for some n 1. Then h = g/g 0 / ∈ ZΓg, but (z n − 1)h = [(z n − 1)/g 0 ]g ∈ ZΓg, so that α g is not mixing by Prop. 4.1.

Conversely, suppose that g has no root that is a root of unity. Recall that the content c(h) of h = i,j h ij (z)x i y j is the greatest common divisor in ZZ of the h ij (z). Then h ∈ ZΓg if and only if g | c(h).

Suppose that (x p y q z r − 1)h ∈ ZΓg with (p, q) = (0, 0). Then g divides c((x p y q z r − 1)h) = c(h), showing that h ∈ ZΓg. Similarly, if (z r −1)h ∈ ZΓg, then g | (z r −1)c(h), and by assumption g is relatively prime to z r − 1. Hence again g | c(h), and so h ∈ ZΓg. Then Prop. 4.1 shows that α g is mixing.

Using more elaborate algebra, Hayes found several sufficient conditions on f ∈ ZΓ for α f to be mixing. To make the cyclotomic nature of these conditions clear, recall that the n-th cyclotomic polynomial Φ n (u) is given by Φ n (u) = (u − ω), where the product is over all primitive n-th roots of unity. Each Φ n (u) is irreducible in Q[u], and u n − 1 = d|n Φ d (u) is the irreducible factorization of u n − 1 in Q[u].

Let u 1 , . . . , u r be r commuting variables. Then a generalized cyclotomic polynomial in Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ± r ] is one of the form Φ k (u n 1 1 . . . u nr r ) for some k 1 and choice of integers n 1 , . . . , n r , not all 0.

There is a well-defined ring homomorphism π : ZΓ → Z[x ± ,ȳ ± ], wherex andȳ are commuting variables, given by x →x, y →ȳ, and z → 1.  32]). Each of the following conditions on f ∈ ZΓ is sufficient for α f to be mixing:
For f = ij f ij (z)x i y j ∈ ZΓ, its image under π is f (x,ȳ) = ij f ij (1)x iȳj .
(1) f ∈ Z[x ± , z ± ] and f is not divisible by a generalized cyclotomic polynomial in x and z.

(2) f ∈ Z[y ± , z ± ] and f is not divisible by a generalized cyclotomic polynomial in y and z.

(3) f = ij f ij (z)x i y j with the content c(f ) not divisible by a cyclotomic polynomial in z, and f (x,ȳ) not divisible by a cyclotomic polynomial inx andȳ. (c) A generalized cyclotomic polynomial in u 1 and u 2 has a root both of whose coordinates have absolute value 1. It follows that, for example, 4u 1 + 3u 2 + 8u 1 u 2 cannot be divisible by any generalized cyclotomic polynomial. Then part (3) above implies that for every choice of nonzero integers p, q, r, the polynomial f = (z p + 3)x + (z q + 2)y + (z r + 7)xy yields a mixing α f . More generally, if ij b ij u i 1 u j 2 is not divisible by a generalized cyclotomic polynomial, and p ij (z) ∈ ZZ all satisfy p ij (1) = b ij and have no common root that is a root of unity, then f = ij p ij (z)x i y j results in a mixing α f . Problem 4.5. Does there exist a finite algorithm that decides, given f ∈ ZΓ, whether or not α f is mixing? More generally, is there such an algorithm that decides mixing for Γ-actions of the form α F , where F ∈ ZΓ k×l ?

There is another, simply stated, sufficient condition for α f to be mixing. Recall that 1 (Γ, R) is a Banach algebra under convolution, with identity element 1.
Proposition 4.6. If f ∈ ZΓ is invertible in 1 (Γ, R)
, then α f is mixing.

Proof. If α f were not mixing, there would be an h / ∈ ZΓf and an infinite subgroup
Λ ⊂ Γ such that λ · h − h ∈ ZΓf for all λ ∈ Λ, say λ · h − h = c(λ)f . Let w ∈ 1 (Γ, R) be the inverse of f . Then λ · h · w − h · w = c(λ) ∈ ZΓ. Letting λ → ∞ in Λ, we see that g = h · w ∈ ZΓ. Hence h = h · w · f = gf ∈ ZΓf ,
showing that α f is mixing.

We will see in Theorem 5.1 that invertibility of f in 1 (Γ, R) corresponds to an important dynamical property of α f .


## Expansiveness

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group and α be an algebraic ∆-action on a compact abelian group X. Then α is called expansive if there is a neighborhood U of 0 X in X such that δ∈∆ α δ (U ) = {0 X }. All groups X we consider are metrizable, so let d be a metric on X compatible with its topology. By averaging d over X, we may assume that d is translation-invariant. Then α is expansive provided there is a κ > 0 such that if d α δ (t), α δ (u) κ for all δ ∈ ∆, then t = u. Expansiveness is an important and useful property, with many implications. It is therefore crucial to know when algebraic actions are expansive. For principal actions there is a simple criterion. . Let ∆ be a countable discrete group and let f ∈ Z∆. Then the following are equivalent:

(1) The principal algebraic action α f on X f is expansive, (2) The principal algebraic action α f * on X f * is expansive,
(3) f is invertible in 1 (∆, R), (4) ρ f is injective on ∞ (∆, R).
Before sketching the proof, we isolate a crucial property of 1 (∆, R) called direct finiteness: if v, w ∈ 1 (∆, R) with v · w = 1, then w · v = 1, where v · w denotes the usual convolution product in 1 (∆, R). This was originally proved by Kaplansky [35, p. 122] using von Neumann algebra techniques. Later Montgomery [52] gave a short proof using C * -algebra methods. A more self-contained argument using only elementary ideas was given by Passman [57]. All these arguments use a key feature of 1 (∆, R), that it has a faithful trace function tr : 1 (∆, R) → R given by tr(w) = w 1 ∆ . This function has the properties that it is linear, tr(1) = 1, tr(v · w) = tr(w · v), and tr(v · v) 0, with equality iff v = 0. The key argument is that if e · e = e, then 0 tr(e) 1, and tr(e) = 1 implies that e = 1.
If v · w = 1, then e = w · v satisfies that e · e = (w · v) · (w · v) = w · (v · w) · v = w · v = e, and tr(w · v) = tr(v · w) = 1, hence w · v = 1.
Proof of Theorem 5.1. Let d T be the usual metric on T = R/Z defined by d T (t + Z, u + Z) = min n∈Z |t − u + n|. It is straightforward to check that we may use the pseudometric
d 1 on X f defined by d 1 (t, u) = d T (t 1 ∆ , u 1 ∆ ) to determine expansiveness (see [16, Prop. 2.3] for details). First suppose that there is a w ∈ ∞ (∆, R) such that ρ f (w) = w · f * = 0.
Let β : R → T be the usual projection map, and extend β to ∞ (∆, R) coordinatewise. For every > 0 we have that ρ f ( w) = 0, so that β( w) ∈ X f . Since w ∞ = w ∞ can be made arbitrarily small, it follows that α f is not expansive. Conversely, if α f is not expansive, there is a point t ∈ X f with d T (t δ , 0) < (3 f * 1 ) −1 for all δ ∈ ∆. Pickt δ ∈ [0, 1) with β(t δ ) = t δ for all δ ∈ ∆, and lett = (t δ ) ∈ ∞ (∆, R). Then ρ f (t) ∈ ∞ (∆, Z)), and ρ f (t) ∞ < 1, hence ρ f (t) = 0. This shows that (1) ⇔ (4).

Now suppose that ρ f is injective on ∞ (∆, R). Then ρ f * 1 (∆, R) is dense in 1 (∆, R) by the Hahn-Banach Theorem. Since the set of invertible elements in 1 (∆, R) is open, there is a w ∈ 1 (∆, R) with w · f * = 1. By direct finiteness, f * is invertible in 1 (∆, R) with inverse w. Hence f −1 = (w * ) −1 . This shows that (4) ⇒ (3), and the implication (3) ⇒ (4) is obvious. Since f is invertible if and only if f * is invertible, (2) ⇔ (1).

Let us call f ∈ Z∆ expansive if α f is expansive. For the case ∆ = Z, Wiener's theorem on invertibility in the convolution algebra 1 
(Z, C) shows that f (u) ∈ Z[u ± ]
is expansive if and only if f does not vanish on S. The usual proof of Wiener's Theorem via Banach algebras is nonconstructive since it uses Zorn's lemma to create maximal ideals. Paul Cohen [13] has given a constructive treatment of this and similar results. We are grateful to David Boyd for showing us a simple algorithm for deciding expansiveness in this case.

Proposition 5.2. There is a finite algorithm, using only operations in Q[u], that decides, given f (u) ∈ Z[u ± ], whether or not f is expansive.

Proof. We may assume that f (u) ∈ Z[u] with f (0) = 0, say of degree d. We can compute the greatest common divisor g(u) of f (u) and u d f (1/u) using only finitely many operations in Q [u]. Observe that any root of f (u) on S must also be a root of g(u). Let the degree of g be e. Then g(u) = u e g(1/u), so that the coefficients of g(u) are symmetric. If e is odd, then −1 is a root of g since all other possible roots come in distinct pairs. If e is even, it is simple to compute h(u) ∈ Q[u] so that g(u) = u e/2 h(u + 1/u). Any root of g on S corresponds to a root of h on [−2, 2]. We can then apply Sturm's algorithm, which uses a finite sequence of calculations in Q[u] and sign changes of rationals, to compute the number of roots of h in [−2, 2].

Decidability of expansiveness for other groups ∆, even just Γ, is a fascinating open question. Problem 5.3. Is there a finite algorithm that decides, given f ∈ ZΓ, whether or not f is expansive?

There is one type of polynomial in Z∆ that is easily seen to be expansive. Call f ∈ Z∆ lopsided if there is a δ 0 ∈ ∆ such that |f δ 0 | > δ =δ 0 |f δ |. This terminology is due to Purbhoo [58].

If f is lopsided with dominant coefficient f δ 0 , adjust f by multiplying by ±δ −1
0 so that f 1 > δ =1 |f δ |. Then f = f 1 (1 − g), where g 1 < 1.
We can then invert f in 1 (∆, R) by geometric series:
f −1 = 1 f 1 (1 + g + g * g + . . . ) ∈ 1 (∆, R).
Thus lopsided polynomials are expansive. The product of lopsided polynomials need not be lopsided (expand (3+u+u −1 ) 2 ). Surprisingly, if f ∈ Z∆ is expansive, then there is always a g ∈ Z∆ such that f g is lopsided. This was first proved by Purbhoo [58] for ∆ = Z d using a rather complicated induction from the case ∆ = Z, but his methods also provided quantitative information he needed to approximate algorithmically the complex amoeba of a Laurent polynomial in several variables. The following short proof is due to Hanfeng Li.

Proposition 5.4. Let ∆ be a countable discrete group and let f ∈ Z∆ be expansive. Then there is g ∈ Z∆ such that f g is lopsided.

Proof. Since f is expansive, by Theorem 5.1 there is a w ∈ 1 (∆, R) such that f · w = 1. There is an obvious extension of the definition of lopsidedness to 1 (∆, R). Note that lopsidedness is an open condition in 1 (∆, R). First perturb w slightly to w having finite support, and then again slightly to w having finite support and rational coordinates. This results in w ∈ Q∆ such that f w is lopsided. Choose an integer n so that g = nw ∈ Z∆. Then f g is lopsided.

One consequence of the previous result is that if f ∈ Z∆ is expansive, then the coefficients of f −1 must decay exponentially fast. Recall that if ∆ is finitely generated, then a choice of finite symmetric generating set S induces the word norm | · | S , where |δ| S is the length of the shortest word in generators in S whose product is δ. Clearly |δ 1 δ 2 | S |δ 1 | S |δ 2 | S . A different choice S for symmetric generating set gives an equivalent word norm | · | S in the sense that there are two constants c 1 , c 2 > 0 such that c 1 |δ| S |δ| S c 2 |δ| S for all δ ∈ ∆.

Proposition 5.5. Let ∆ be a finitely generated group, and fix a finite symmetric generating set S. Suppose that f ∈ Z∆ is invertible in 1 (∆, R). Then there are constants C > 0 and 0 < r < 1 such that
|(f −1 ) δ | C r |δ| S for all δ ∈ ∆.
Proof. By the previous proposition, there is a g ∈ Z∆ such that h = f g is lopsided.

We may assume that the dominant coefficient of h occurs at 1 ∆ , so that
h = q(1−b), where q ∈ Z and b ∈ Q∆ has b 1 = s < 1. Let F = supp(h) and put τ = max{|δ| S : δ ∈ F }. Now h −1 = q −1 (1 + b + b 2 + . . . ) and b k 1 b k 1 s k for all k 1. Furthermore, if (b n ) δ = 0, then |δ| S nτ . Hence if |δ| S > nτ , then (1 + b + b 2 + · · · + b n ) δ = 0. Thus |(h −1 ) δ | = |q −1 (b n+1 + b n+2 + . . . ) δ | q −1 ∞ k=n+1 b k 1 q −1 1 − r s n+1
whenever |δ| S > nτ . This shows that (h −1 ) δ Cr |δ| S with r = s 1/τ and suitable C > 0. Since f −1 = gh −1 , we obtain the result with the same r and different C.

We remark that a different proof of this proposition, using functional analysis and under stricter hypotheses on ∆, was given in [17,Prop. 4.7]
. If ∆ = Z and f (u) ∈ Z[u ± ] is invertible in 1 (Z, R), then f does not vanish on S.
Then 1/f is holomorphic in an annular region around S in C, and so its Laurent expansion decays exponentially fast, giving a direct proof of the proposition in this case.

Next we focus on the case ∆ = Γ and obstructions of invertibility coming from representations of Γ.

Let H be a complex Hilbert space, and let B(H) be the algebra of bounded linear operators on H. Denote by U(H) the group of unitary operators on H. An irreducible unitary representation of Γ is a homomorphism π : Γ → U(H) for some complex Hilbert space H such that there is no nontrivial closed subspace of H invariant under all the π(γ). Then π extends to an algebraic homomorphism π :
1 (Γ, C) → B(H) by π( γ f γ γ) = γ f γ π(γ). If there is a nonzero v ∈ H with π(f )v = 0, then clearly f cannot be invertible in 1 (Γ, R)
. The converse is also true.
Theorem 5.6. Let f ∈ ZΓ. Then f is not invertible in 1 (Γ, R) if and only if there is an irreducible unitary representation π : Γ → U(H) on some complex Hilbert space H and a nonzero v ∈ H such that π(f )v = 0.
This result is stated in [19,Thm. 8.2], and a detailed proof is given in [26,Thm. 3.2]. A key element of the proof is that 1 (Γ, C) is symmetric, i.e., that 1 + g * g is invertible for every g ∈ 1 (Γ, C), and in particular for every g ∈ ZΓ.

There are examples of countable amenable groups that are not symmetric [33].

We remark that Theorem 5.6 remains valid when Γ is replaced by any nilpotent group, in particular by Z or Z d . In the latter cases all irreducible unitary representations are 1-dimensional, and obtained by evaluation at a point in S d . This is exactly the Wiener criterion for invertibility in 1 (Z d ).

The usefulness of Theorem 5.6 is at best limited since Γ is not of Type I and so its representation theory is murky. However, there is an extension of Gelfand theory, called Allan's local principle, that detects invertibility in the noncommutative Banach algebra 1 (Γ, C). The use of this principle for algebraic actions was initiated in [26]. In the case of Γ-actions this principle has an explicit and easily verified form, which we now describe.

To simplify notation, let B = 1 (Γ, C) be the complex convolution Banach algebra of Γ, and C = 1 (Z, C) be its center. The maximal ideals of C all have the form
m ζ = {v = ∞ i=−∞ v j z j : v(ζ) = 0}, where ζ ∈ S. For v ∈ C the quotient norm of v + m ζ ∈ C/m ζ is easily seen to be v + m ζ C/m ζ = |v(ζ)|. Let b ζ denote the two-sided ideal in B generated by m ζ , so that b ζ = w = i,j w ij (z)x i y j ∈ B : w ij (z) ∈ m ζ for all i, j ∈ Z . Then for w = i,j w ij (z)x i y j ∈ B, the quotient norm of w + b ζ ∈ B/b ζ is w + b ζ B/b ζ = ∞ i,j=−∞ |w ij (ζ)|.
To give a concrete realization of B/b ζ , introduce variables U , V , subject to the skew commutativity relation V U = ζU V . Then the skew convolution Banach algebra
1 ζ (U, V ) consists of all sums ∞ i,j=−∞ c ij U i V j with c ij ∈ C and i,j |c ij | < ∞,
and with multiplication the usual convolution modified by skew commutativity. Then the
map B/b ζ → 1 ζ (U, V ) given by i,j w ij (z)x i y j +b ζ → i,j w ij (ζ)U i V j
is an isometric isomorphism of complex Banach algebras. Identifying these algebras, the quotient map π ζ :
B → B/b ζ ∼ = 1 ζ (U, V ) takes the concrete form π ζ i,j w ij (z)x i y j = i,j w ij (ζ)U i V j .
In [26, Section 3], Allan's local principle was introduced as a convenient device for checking expansiveness of principal actions of Γ and applied to a number of examples.

Theorem 5.7 (Allan's local principle, [2]). An element w = 1 (Γ, C) is invertible if and only if π ζ (w) is invertible in 1 ζ (U, V ) for every ζ ∈ S. Proof. Using the notations introduced above, clearly if w is invertible in B, then its homomorphic images π ζ (w) must all be invertible.
Conversely, suppose w ∈ B is not invertible, but π ζ (w) is invertible in 1 ζ (U, V ) for every ζ ∈ S. The left ideal Bw is proper since w is not invertible, so let b be a maximal left ideal in B containing Bw. It is easy to see that b ∩ C must be a maximal ideal in C, hence b ∩ C = m ζ for some ζ ∈ S. Then b ζ ⊆ b. By assumption, π ζ (w) = w + b ζ is invertible in B/b ζ , and w ∈ b, so that b = B, a contradiction.
We now turn to some concrete examples where expansiveness can be analyzed geometrically. Before doing so, let us introduce a quantity that we will use extensively.
Definition 5.8. Let f (u) ∈ Z[u ± ]. The logarithmic Mahler measure of f is defined as m(f ) = S log |f (ξ)| dξ. The Mahler measure of f is defined as M(f ) = exp(m(f ))
.

Suppose that f (u) = c n u n + · · · + c u + c 0 with c n c 0 = 0. Factor f (u) over C as c n n j=1 (u − λ j ). Then Jensen's formula shows that m(f ) has the alternative expression as
(5.1) m(f ) = log |c n | + |λ j |>1 log |λ j | = log |c n | + n j=0 log + |λ j |,
where log + r = max{log r, 0} for r 0. Mahler's motivation was to derive important inequalities in transcendence theory. Using that
M(f g) = M(f )M(g), he showed that if f, g ∈ C[u], then f g 1 2 − deg f −deg g f 1 g 1 ,
and that the constant is best possible.

Let us consider the case of f ∈ ZΓ that is linear in y, so that f (x, y, z) = h(x, z)y− g(x, z). We will find 1-dimensional α f -invariant subspaces of ∞ (Γ, C) as follows. Let Λ = x, z be the subgroup of Γ generated by x and z. To make calculations in ∞ (Γ, C) and ∞ (Λ, C) more transparent, we will write elements as formal sums
w = γ∈Γ w(γ)γ and v = λ∈Λ v(λ)λ. Fix (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 and define (5.2) v ξ,ζ = ∞ k,m=−∞ ξ k ζ m x k z m ∈ ∞ (Λ, C).
Observe that
ρ x (v ξ,ζ ) = k,m ξ k ζ m x k z m x −1 = ξ k,m ξ k ζ m x k z m = ξ v ξ,ζ ,
and similarly ρ z (v ξ,ζ ) = ζ v ξ,ζ . Hence the 1-dimensional space Cv ξ,ζ is a common eigenspace for ρ x and ρ z . It follows that ρ q (v ξ,ζ ) = v ξ,ζ q * (x, z) = q(ξ, ζ) v ξ,ζ for every q ∈ ZΛ. Let {c n } be a sequence of complex constants to be determined, and consider the point w = ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n . Using the relations y k q(x, z) = q(xz k , z)y k for all k ∈ Z and all q ∈ ZΛ, the condition ρ f (w) = w · f * = 0 becomes
0 = ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n y −1 h * (x, z) − g * (x, z) = ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ,ζ h * (xz n−1 , z)y n−1 − c n v ξ,ζ g * (xz n , z)y n = ∞ n=−∞ c n+1 h(ξζ n , ζ) − c n g(ξζ n , ζ) v ξ,ζ y n .
This calculation shows that ρ f (w) = 0 if and only if the c n satisfy
(5.3) c n+1 h(ξζ n , ζ) = c n g(ξζ n , ζ) for all n ∈ Z.
Since w ∞ = sup n∈Z |c n |, one way to create nonexpansive f 's of this form is to find conditions on g and h that guarantee the existence of a nonzero bounded solution {c n } to (5.3) for some choice of ξ and ζ.

Suppose that both g and h do not vanish on S 2 . Fix a nonzero value of c 0 . Then by (5.3), the other values of c n are determined:
(5.4) c n =        c 0 n−1 j=0 g(ξζ j , ζ) h(ξζ j , ζ) for n 1, c 0 −n j=1 g(ξζ −j , ζ) h(ξζ −j , ζ) −1 for n −1. Let (5.5) φ ζ (ξ) = log |g(ξ, ζ)/h(ξ, ζ)|,
and consider the map ψ ζ (n, ξ) : Z × R → R given by
(5.6) ψ ζ (n, ξ) =      n−1 j=0 φ ζ (ξζ j ) for n 1, 0 for n = 0, − −n j=1 φ ζ (ξζ −j ) for n −1. Then ψ ζ satisfies the cocycle equation ψ ζ (m + n, ξ) = ψ ζ (m, ξ) + ψ ζ (n, ξζ m ) for all m, n ∈ Z and ξ ∈ S. Furthermore, there is a nonzero bounded solution {c n } to (5.3) if and only if {ψ ζ (n, ξ) : −∞ < n < ∞} is bounded above.
Suppose that ζ ∈ S is irrational, and that there is a ξ ∈ S for which (5.3) has a nonzero bounded solution. Observe that φ ζ is continuous on S 2 since neither g nor h vanish there by assumption. By the ergodic theorem,
S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = lim n→∞ 1 n n−1 j=0 φ ζ (ξζ j ) = lim n→∞ 1 n ψ ζ (n, ξ) 0, and − S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = lim n→∞ − 1 n n j=1 φ ζ (ξζ −j ) = lim n→∞ 1 n ψ ζ (−n, ξ) 0. Thus S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = m(g(·, ζ)) − m(h(·, ζ)) = 0.
There is a similar necessary condition when ζ is rational, but here the integral is replaced by a finite sum over a coset of the finite orbit of ζ in S. It turns out that these necessary conditions are also sufficient.
Theorem 5.9. Let f (x, y, z) = h(x, z)y − g(x, z) ∈ ZΓ, and suppose that both g and h do not vanish anywhere on S 2 . Let φ ζ (ξ) = log |g(ξ, ζ)/h(ξ, ζ)|. Then α f is expansive if and only if (1) S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0
for every irrational ζ ∈ S, and (2) for every n-th root of unity ζ ∈ S and ξ ∈ S we have that n−1 j=0 φ ζ (ξζ j ) = 0. Proof. Suppose first that α f is nonexpansive. By Theorem 5.1, the Γ-invariant subspace K = {w ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) : ρ f (w) = 0} is nontrivial. By restricting the Γ-action on K to the commutative subgroup Λ, we can apply the argument in [61, Lemma 6.8] to find a 1-dimensional Λ-invariant subspace W ⊂ K. In other words, there are a nonzero w ∈ K and ξ, ζ ∈ S such that ρ x (w) = ξw and ρ z (w) = ζw. It follows from this and the above discussion that w must have the form w = ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n with the c n ∈ C given by (5.3), and with {c n } a bounded sequence. If ζ is an n-th root of unity, then clearly n−1 j=0 φ ζ (ξζ j ) = 0 by boundedness of the c n , while if ζ is irrational, then the discussion above shows that S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0. For the converse, suppose first that ζ is rational, say ζ k = 1. If there is a ξ ∈ S with ξ ∈ S with k−1 j=0 φ ζ (ξζ −j ) = 0, then (5.4) and (5.5) show that there is a bounded sequence {c n }, in this case even periodic with period k, so that w =
c n v ξ,ζ y n ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) with ρ f (w) = 0, showing that α f is nonexpansive.
Finally, suppose that ζ is irrational and
S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0. If there were a continuous coboundary b on S such that φ ζ (ξ) = b(ξζ) − b(ξ)
, then the cocycle ψ ζ (·, ξ) would be bounded for every value of ξ, and as before this means we can form an nonzero point w ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) with ρ f (w) = 0, so α f is nonexpansive. So suppose no such coboundary exists. Let Y = S × R, and define a skew product transformation S : Y → Y by S(ξ, r) = (ξζ, r + φ ζ (ξ)). Since φ ζ is not a coboundary, but S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0, the homeomorphism S is topologically transitive (see [28] or [4, Thms. 1 and 2]). By [5, p. 38f], there exists a point ξ ∈ S such that the entire S orbit of (ξ, 0) has its second coordinate bounded above. Since S n (ξ, 0) = (ξζ n , ψ ζ (n, ξ)), it follows that for this choice of ξ, the sequence {c n } from (5.4) and (5.5) is also bounded, and therefore
w = ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) with ρ f (w) = 0,
and so α f is nonexpansive.

Remark 5.10. With the assumptions of Theorem 5.9 that neither g nor h vanish on S 2 , the functions m g(·, ζ) and m h(·, ζ) are both continuous functions of ζ. Hence the conditions (1) and (2) in Theorem 5.9 combine to say that the graphs of these functions never cross (for rational ζ use the Mean Value Theorem). In particular, if h(x, z) ≡ 1, then since S m g(·, ζ) dζ = m(g) 0, the condition for expansiveness of f (x, y, z) = y − g(x, z) becomes simply that m g(·, ζ) > 0 for all ζ.

Example 5.11. The polynomial f (x, y, z) = 3+x+y+z, although not lopsided, was shown to be expansive in [19,Example 7.4]. In [26,Example 3.6] four different ways to verify its expansiveness are given: (1) using irreducible unitary representations, (2) direct computation of its inverse in 1 (Γ, R), (3) using Allan's local principle, and (4) using the geometric argument in Theorem 5.9.

Many more examples illustrating various aspects of expansiveness (or its lack) for polynomials in ZΓ are contained in [26].
Example 5.12 ([26, Example 5.11]). Let f (x, y, z) = x+y+z+2 = y−g(x, z) ∈ ZΓ, where g(x, z) = −x − z − 2.
Since g(−1, −1) = 0, it does not quite satisfy the hypothesis of Theorem 5.9. However, we can directly use the violation of (2) there to show that α f is nonexpansive.

Let ζ 0 = −1. We want to find ξ ∈ S such that |g(ξ, −1)g(−ξ, −1)| = 1. This amounts to solving |ξ 2 − 1| = 1, and this has the four solutions ±e ±πi/6 . Let ξ 0 = e πi/6 , and consider the point v ξ 0 ,−1 as defined in (5.2). Then the coefficients c n of the point ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ 0 ,−1 y n ∈ ker ρ f satisfy (5.3), and are hence alternately multiplied by g(ξ 0 , −1) and by g(
−ξ 0 , −1), where |g(ξ 0 , −1)| = 2 − √ 3 ∼ = 0.51764 and |g(−ξ 0 , −1)| = 1/|g(ξ 0 , −1)| ∼ = 1.93185. Thus {c n } ∞ n=−∞ is bounded, and hence α f is nonexpansive.
Note that here m(g(·, ζ)) = log |ζ + 2|, which vanishes only at ζ = −1. Hence for all irrational ζ, condition (1) of Theorem 5.9 is satisfied. It is an easy exercise to show that if ζ = −1 is rational, then condition (2) is also satisfied. So here the only values of (ξ, ζ) leading to a bounded solution {c n } of (5.3) are (±e ±πi/6 , −1). This example appears as [19,Example 10.6], but was claimed there to be expansive.
Example 5.13. Let f (x, y, z) = y 2 − xy − 1 ∈ ZΓ. For (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 let v ξ,ζ be defined by (5.2), and let w = ∞ n=−∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n .
Although f is now quadratic in y, we can still calculate ρ f (w) as before, finding that ρ f (w) = 0 if and only if
(5.7) c n+2 = ξ ζ n c n+1 + c n for all n ∈ Z.
Thus we need conditions on (ξ, ζ) for which (5.7) has a bounded solution.

For n 1 put
(5.8) A n (ξ, ζ) = 0 1 1 ξζ n−1 0 1 1 ξζ n−2 . . . 0 1 1 ξ .
Then the recurrence (5.7) shows that
A n (ξ, ζ) c 0 c 1 = c n c n+1
for all n 1, and there is a similar formula for n −1.

We are therefore reduced to finding (ξ, ζ) such that the matrix-valued cocycle {A n (ξ, ζ)} is bounded. The easiest place to look is at ζ = 1, since A n (ξ, 1) = A 1 (ξ, 1) n . Now A 1 (ξ, 1) has eigenvalues on S provided that the roots of u 2 −ξu−1 = 0 are there. This happens exactly when ξ = ±i. Hence if we define c n by
c n c n+1 = 0 1 1 i n 0 1 for all n ∈ Z, then w = ∞ k,n,m=−∞ c n i k x k y n z m ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) ∩ ker(ρ f ),
and so α f is nonexpansive. For some values of (ξ, ζ) the growth rate of A n (ξ, ζ) can be strictly positive, for example (1,1). However, as we will see later, the growth rate of A n (ξ, ζ) as n → ±∞ is zero for almost every (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 , although this is not at all obvious.

If g or h are allowed to vanish on S 2 , there is a completely different source of nonexpansive behavior.
Example 5.14. Let f (x, y, z) = h(x, z)y − g(x, z) ∈ ZΓ, and suppose that g(x, z) and h(xz −1 , z) have a common zero (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 . Consider v ξ,ζ as a point in ∞ (Γ, C). Then ρ f (v ξ,ζ ) = v ξ,ζ · y −1 h * (x, z) − g * (x, z) = v ξ,ζ · h * (xz −1 , z)y −1 − g * (x, z) = h(ξζ −1 , ζ)v ξ,ζ · y −1 − g(ξ, ζ)v ξ,ζ = 0, so that ρ f is not expansive.
There is a simple geometric method to create examples of this situation. Start with two polynomials g(x, z) and h 0 (x, z) whose unitary varieties in S 2 do not intersect, but which have the property that the unitary variety of the skewed polynomial h 0 (xz m , z) intersects that of g for sufficiently large m. An example of this form are described in [25,Example 8.5], which also contains other results about expansiveness in cases when at least one unitary variety is nonempty. However, this analysis leaves open one very interesting case. The simplest version of this question is the following.
Problem 5.15. Let g(x, z) ∈ Z[x ± , z ± ]
, and suppose there is a ζ ∈ S for which m g(·, ζ) = 0 and such that g(ξ, ζ) vanishes for at least one value of ξ ∈ S. Is there a value of ξ for which the partial sums n j=0 log |g(ξζ j , ζ)| are bounded above for all n?

Fraczek and Lemańczyk showed in [21] that these sums are unbounded for almost every ξ ∈ S. The argument of Besicovitch [5] to prove the existence of bounded sums makes essential use of continuity, and does not apply in this case where there are logarithmic singularities.

Remark 5.16. By invoking some deep results in diophantine approximation theory, we can show that the second alternative in the last paragraph of the proof of Theorem 5.9 never occurs. For we claim that if S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0, then ζ must be an algebraic number in S. Assuming this for the moment, then a result of Gelfond [24] shows that for every > 0 there is a C > 0 such that |ζ n − 1| > Ce −n for every n 1. Since φ ζ (ξ) is smooth, its Fourier coefficients φ ζ (n) decay rapidly as |n| → ∞, and so the formal
solution b(ξ) = ∞ −∞ b n ξ n to φ ζ (ξ) = b(ξζ) − b(ξ)
, with b n = φ ζ (n)/(ζ n − 1) for n = 0, also decays rapidly, giving a continuous solution b.

To justify our claim, write
g(x, ζ) = A(ζ) m j=1 (x − λ j (ζ)) and h(x, ζ) = B(ζ) n k=1 (x − µ k (ζ)),
where A(z) and) B(z) are Laurent polynomials with integer coefficients and the λ j and µ k are algebraic functions. The condition S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0 becomes, via Jensen's formula,
A(ζ) |λ j (ζ)|>1 λ j (ζ) = B(ζ) |µ k (ζ)|>1 µ k (ζ) ,
which is an algebraic equation in ζ, so ζ is algebraic.

From this, and the preceding proof, under our assumptions that neither g nor h vanish anywhere on S 2 , we conclude that if S φ ζ (ξ) dξ = 0 and ζ is irrational, then every choice of ξ will yield a nonzero point w =
c n v ξ,ζ y n ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) with ρ f (w) = 0.
This idea was observed independently by Evgeny Verbitskiy (oral communication).

To illustrate some of the preceding ideas, we provide an informative example. This was chosen so that the diophantine estimates mentioned in Remark 5.16 can be given an elementary and self-contained proof, rather than appealing to difficult general diophantine results. In addition, the constants in our analysis are effective enough to rule out nonexpansive behavior at all rational ζ. One consequence is that for this algebraic Γ-action, nonexpansiveness cannot be detected by looking at only finite-dimensional representations of Γ.
Example 5.17. Let g(x, z) = a(x)c(z), where a(x) = x 2 − x − 1 and c(z) = z 12 + z 2 +1.
It is easy to check that neither a nor c vanishes on S, so that g does not vanish anywhere on S 2 . Also, a(x) has roots τ = (1 + √ 5)/2 and σ = (
1 − √ 5)/2 = −τ −1 . Consider f (x, y, z) = y−g(x, z), so that here h(x, z) ≡ 1. Then φ ζ (ξ) = log |g(ξ, ζ)| = log |a(ξ)| + log |c(ζ)|, and define ψ ζ (n, ξ) as in (5.6). Call (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 nonexpansive for g if the sequence {ψ ζ (n, ξ) : n ∈ Z} is bounded.
We claim there are eight values ζ 1 , . . . , ζ 8 ∈ S, which are algebraically conjugate algebraic integers of degree 48, such that the nonexpansive points for g are exactly those of the form (ξ, ζ k ), where ξ is any element of S and 1 k 8.

We start with two simple results.

Lemma 5.18. Suppose that ζ ∈ S is irrational, and that there are constants C > 0 and 0 < r < 1 such that |ζ n − 1| Cr n for all n 1. If κ ∈ C with |κ| < r, then the function ξ → log |1 − ξκ| on S is a continuous coboundary for ζ, i.e., there is a
continuous b : S → R such that log |1 − ξκ| = b(ξζ) − b(ξ).
Proof. Since |ξκ| < 1, the Taylor series for log(1 − ξκ) converges, so that
log(1 − ξκ) = − ∞ n=1 ξ n κ n n . Let B(ξ) = ∞ n=1 b n ξ n . Then B(ξζ) − B(ξ) = log(1 − ξκ) provided that b n = −κ n /[(ζ n − 1)n] for all n 1.
The assumption on ζ implies that |b n | C −1 (|κ|/r) n , so that the series for B converges uniformly on S. Then b(ξ) = Re{B(ξ)} gives the required coboundary.

Lemma 5.19. Let p(u) ∈ Z[u] be monic and irreducible. Suppose that p has a root ζ ∈ S that is irrational. Then there is a constant C > 0 such that
(5.9) |ζ n − 1| CM(p) −n/2 for all n 1,
where M(p) > 1 is the Mahler measure of p.
Proof. Factor p over C as p(u) = (u − ζ)(u −ζ) r j=1 (u − λ j ), whereζ is the complex conjugate of ζ. The polynomial p (n) (u) = (u − ζ n )(u −ζ n ) r j=1 (u − λ n j )
has integer coefficients, and p (n) (1) = 0, hence |p (n) (1)| 1. Then using the trivial estimates that |λ n − 1| 2 if |λ| 1 and |λ n −
1| (1 − 1/|λ|)|λ n | if |λ| > 1, we obtain that 1 |p (n) (1)| = |ζ n − 1||ζ n − 1| r j=1 |λ n j − 1| |ζ n − 1| 2 2 r |λ j |>1 |λ n j − 1| |ζ n − 1| 2 2 r |λ j |>1 1 − 1 |λ j | M(p) n .
Hence (5.9) is valid with
C = 2 −r/2 |λ j |>1 1 − 1 |λ j | −1/2 .
Recall that a(x) = (x − τ )(x − σ), so that m(a) = log τ . By Theorem 5.9, we need to find just those ζ ∈ S for which 0 = S log |g(ξ, ζ)|d ξ = S (log |a(ξ)| + log |c(ζ)|) dξ = log τ + log |c(ζ)|, that is, we must solve the equation |c(ζ)| = τ −1 . Any such solution ζ ∈ S would also satisfy c(z)c(1/z) = τ −2 , or, equivalently, satisfy
F (z) = z 12 c(z)c(1/z) − τ −2 ∈ Q(τ )[z].
Here F (z) has degree 24, and has eight roots ζ 1 , . . . , ζ 8 ∈ S. To show these are algebraic integers, multiply F (z) by its Galois conjugate over Q(τ ), yielding the following polynomial G(z) = z 48 + 2z 46 + z 44 + 2z 38 + 5z 36 + 5z 34 + 2z 32 + z 28 + 5z 26 + 7z 24 + 5z 22 + z 20 + 2z 16 + 5z 14 + 5z 12 + 2z 10 + z 4 + 2z 2 + 1, whose irreducibility is confirmed by Mathematica. Hence the ζ k are conjugate algebraic integers of degree 48 as claimed. Now G has 10 roots outside the unit circle, whose product is M(G) ∼ = 1.90296. Then M(G) ∼ = 1.37948 < τ , which plays a crucial role in dealing with rational ζ.

By Theorem 5.1, the only irrational ζ we need to consider are the eight ζ k . By Lemma 5.19, there is a constant C > 0 such that |ζ n k − 1| > Cr n , where r = M(G) −1/2 < 1. Since τ −1 = |σ| < r, by Lemma 5.18, we can find continuous coboundaries b 1 and b 2 so that
log |1 − τ −1 ξ| = b 1 (ξζ k ) − b 1 (ξ) and log |ξ − σ| = b 2 (ξζ k ) − b 2 (ξ). Hence ψ ζ k (ξ) = log |(ξ − τ )(ξ − σ)c(ζ k )| = log |1 − τ −1 ξ| + log |ξ − σ|
is also a coboundary. Thus (ξ, ζ k ) is nonexpansive for every ξ ∈ S. This is an example of the algebraic phenomenon discussed in Remark 5.16.

To complete our analysis, we turn to the rational case, say ζ = ω, a primitive n-th root of unity. The idea of the following argument is that is to show that there is a large enough N 0 such that for all n N 0 , the variation of the n-periodic function n−1 j=0 a(ξω j ) is small compared to |c(ω)|. The estimates are sharp enough to obtain the bound N 0 = 143, and the remaining cases n < 143 can be checked by hand.

First observe that
n−1 j=0 a(ξω j )τ −1 = n−1 j=0 ξω j − τ τ (ξω j − σ) = (−1) n n−1 j=0 (1 − τ −1 ξω j )(ξω j − σ) = (−ξ n )(1 − τ −n ξ n )(1 − σ n ξ −n ).
Since log |1 − κ| 2|κ| for all κ ∈ C with |κ| τ −1 , it follows that
(5.10) log | n−1 j=0 a(ξω j )τ −1 | 4τ −n
for all ξ ∈ S and all n 1. Recalling that c(ζ k ) = τ −1 , we obtain that
log n−1 j=0 a(ξω j )c(ω) = log n−1 j=0 a(ξω j )τ −1 + log |[c(ω)/c(ζ k )] n |.
Thus, if (5.11) n log |c(ω)τ | > 5τ −n then we must have n−1 j=0 φ ζ k (ξω j ) = 0 for all ξ ∈ S. To obtain a reasonable bound for N 0 so that (5.11) holds for all n N 0 , we need to make a more careful estimate in the proof of Lemma 5.19 for the polynomial G(z). Here G(z) has ten roots λ 1 , . . . , λ 10 outside the unit circle. Thus besides these and ζ andζ, there are 36 roots of G on or inside the unit circle. The estimate in the proof of Lemma 5.19 can be refined as
1 |ζ n k − 1| 2 · 2 36 10 j=1 |λ n j − 1| = |ζ n k − 1| 2 · 2 36 M(G) n 10 j=1 1 − 1 λ n j .
It is easy to check that 10 j=1 |1 − λ −n j | has a maximum of about 37.94 at n = 6. Hence Since ζ n k − 1 = ζ n k − ω n = (ζ k − ω)(ζ n−1 k + ζ n−2 k ω + · · · + ω n−1 ), it follows that |ζ k − ω| 1 n |ζ n k − 1|. Verifying (5.11) breaks into two cases, depending on whether or not ω is close to some ζ k . Let 0 = 0.01. It is an exercise in calculus to show that if |ω − ζ k | > 0 for every k, then log |c(ω)τ | 0 , while if |e 2πis − ζ k | < 0 for some k, then the derivative of log |c(e 2πis )τ | has absolute value 1. A glance at Figure 1 should make clear the meaning of these statements.

In the first case, the inequality (5.11) is satisfied if n 0 > 5τ −n , which is true for all n 8.

In the second case, using the lower bound on the absolute value of the derivative,
log |c(ω)τ | = log |c(ω)| − log |c(ζ k )| |ω − ζ k | 1 n |ζ n k − 1| 1/n 2 18 √ 40 M(G) −n/2 .
Since M(G) 1/2 < τ , the last term is eventually greater than 5τ −n , and in fact this holds for all n 143. One can then check by hand that that (5.11) holds for all n < 143, completing our analysis of this example. It is sometimes useful to make a change of variables to transform a polynomial into a form that is easier to analyze (see for example [46, (3-6)]). Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and aut(∆) denote the group of automorphisms of ∆. If Φ ∈ aut(∆), then Φ will act on various objects associated with ∆. For example, if
f = δ f δ δ ∈ Z∆, then Φf = δ f δ Φ(δ), and so Φ(f g) = Φ(f )Φ(g) and Φ(f * ) = Φ(f ) * . Analogous formulae hold for T ∆ , 1 (∆, R), and ∞ (∆, R). If α is an action of ∆, there is a new ∆-action α Φ defined by (α Φ ) δ = α Φ(δ) .
Lemma 5.20. Let Φ ∈ aut(∆) and f ∈ Z∆. Then Φ induces a continuous group isomorphism Φ : X f → X Φf intertwining the ∆-actions α f and α Φ f , so that (X f , α f ) and (X Φf , α Φ f ) are topologically conjugate ∆-actions.
Proof. If t ∈ T ∆ , then t ∈ X f iff t · f * = 0 iff 0 = Φ(t · f * ) = Φ(t) · Φ(f ) * iff Φ(t) ∈ X Φf , so that Φ induces the required isomorphism. Since Φ(δ · t) = Φ(δ) · t,
we see that Φ intertwines α f and α Φ f . Remark 5.21. It is important to emphasize what Lemma 5.20 does not say. Although α Φ f and α Φf are both ∆-actions on X Φf , there is no obvious relation between them, even if ∆ is commutative. For example, if ∆ = Z ∼ = u , f (u) = u 2 −u−1, and
Φ(u) = u −1 , then (X Φf , α Φf ) is conjugate to the Z-action of A = 0 1 1 −1 on T 2 , while (X Φf , α Φ f ) is conjugate to the Z action of A −1 on T 2 .
But A and A −1 do not even have the same eigenvalues, so cannot give algebraically conjugate Z-actions.

However, certain dynamical properties are clearly shared between α f and α Φf , for example ergodicity, mixing, and expansiveness.

Automorphisms of Γ have an explicit description. Proof. Clearly Φ induces an automorphism of Γ/Z ∼ = Z 2 , hence ad − bc = ±1. The condition Φ(yx) = Φ(xyz) shows that Φ(z) = z ad−bc . These necessary conditions are easily checked to also be sufficient.

An analysis of expansiveness for nonprincipal actions has been carried out by Chung and Li [12]. Let F ∈ ZΓ k×k be a square matrix over ZΓ. Then ZΓ k /ZΓ k F is a left ZΓ-module, whose dual gives an algebraic action α F on X F . An argument similar to the proof of (3) implies (1) in Theorem 5.1 shows that if F has an inverse in 1 (Γ, R) k×k , then α F is expansive on X F . The converse is also true, and leads to a description of all expansive Γ-actions. 
F −1 = 2(4 − xy) −1 −x(4 − yx) −1 −y(4 − xy) −1 2(4 − yx) −1 ,
where the inverses appearing in the entries are all in 1 (Γ, R) by lopsidedness.

Obviously an algorithm for invertibility of square matrices would immediately answer Problem 5.3. But if the answer to the latter is affirmative, would this provide an algorithm to decide invertibility of square matrices? Problem 5.25. Suppose there is an algorithm which decides whether or not an element in ZΓ has an inverse in 1 (Γ, R). Is there then an algorithm that decides, given F ∈ ZΓ k×k , whether or not F has a inverse with entries in 1 (Γ, R)?

If α is an expansive algebraic ∆-action on X, and Y is a closed α-invariant subgroup, then clearly the restriction of α to Y is also expansive. However, whether the quotient action α X/Y on X/Y is expansive is much more difficult. When ∆ = Z d , expansiveness of the quotient is always true ([60, Thm. 3.11]), but the proof uses commutative algebra and is not dynamical. Chung and Li conjecture [12] that for nilpotent groups ∆, quotients of expansive actions are always expansive. Even for the Heisenberg group this is not known.

Problem 5.26. If α is an expansive action of Γ on a compact abelian group X, and if Y is a closed α-invariant subgroup of X, then must the quotient action of α on X/Y be expansive?


## Homoclinic points

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group and α an algebraic ∆-action on a compact abelian group X. An element t ∈ X is called homoclinic for α, or simply homoclinic, if α δ (t) → 0 X as δ → ∞. The set of homoclinic points forms a subgroup of X called the homoclinic group of α. The established notation in the literature for this group is ∆ α (X). It will always be clear from context (and a slight font change) what ∆ (or ∆) refers to.

Homoclinic points are an important technical device for localizing the behavior of points in the group. For example, they are used to construct periodic points, to prove a strong orbit tracing property called specification, and to estimate entropy. They are also a natural starting point for constructing symbolic covers of algebraic actions.

For ∆ = Z d , many properties of homoclinic groups were studied in detail in [43], especially for principal actions. Let us briefly describe some of the main results there, with a view to extensions to Γ.

For
f ∈ ZZ d = Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ± d ], define the complex variety of f to be V(f ) = {(z 1 , . . . , z d ) ∈ (C × ) d : f (z 1 , . . . , z d ) = 0},
where C × = C {0}, and the unitary variety of f to be
U(f ) = {(z 1 , . . . , z d ) ∈ V(f ) : |z 1 | = · · · = |z d | = 1}.
Then by Theorem 5.1 and Wiener's theorem, α f is expansive if and only if U(f ) = ∅.

In this case, let w = (f * ) −1 ∈ 1 (Z d ). As before, let β : ∞ (∆, R) → T ∆ be given by (βw) δ = w δ (mod 1), which clearly commutes with the left ∆-actions. Put t = β(w ). Since ρ f (t ) = β(ρ f (w )) = β(w·f * ) = β(1) = 0, we see that t ∈ X f , and is also homoclinic. Furthermore, t is fundamental, in the sense that every homoclinic point is a finite integral combination of translates of t (cf. [43,Lemma 4.5]). In this case all homoclinic points decay rapidly enough to have summable coordinates. In order to describe homoclinic points of principal ∆-actions α f , we first "linearize" X f as follows. Put
W f = β −1 (X f ) = {w ∈ ∞ (∆, R) : ρ f (w) ∈ ∞ (∆, Z)}.
Suppose now that f ∈ Z∆ is expansive, and define w = (f * ) −1 ∈ 1 (∆, R). Then ρ f is invertible on ∞ (∆, R), and W f = ρ −1 f ∞ (∆, Z)) , where ρ −1 f (u) = u · w for every u ∈ ∞ (∆, Z). . Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and f ∈ Z∆ be expansive, so that f is invertible in 1 (∆, R). Put w = (f * ) −1 and let π : ∞ (∆, Z) → X f be defined as π(u) = β(u · w ), where β is reduction of coordinates (mod 1). Then:

(1) π : ∞ (∆, Z) → X f is surjective, and in fact the restriction of π to the set of those u with u ∞ f 1 is also surjective; (2) ker π = ρ f ∞ (∆, Z) ; (3) π commutes with the relevant left ∆-actions; and (4) π is continuous in the weak* topology on closed, bounded subsets of ∞ (∆, Z).

Proof. Suppose that t ∈ X f . There is a unique liftt ∈ ∞ (∆, R) with β(t) = t andt δ ∈ [0, 1) for all δ ∈ ∆. Then β ρ f (t) = ρ f β(t) = ρ f (t) = 0 in X f , hence
ρ f (t) ∈ ∞ (∆, Z), and in fact ρ f (t) ∞ f 1 . Furthermore π ρ f (t) = β t · f * · w ) = β t · f * · (f * ) −1 = t.
This proves (1), and the remaining parts are routine verifications.

If f ∈ Z∆ is expansive, let t = β(w ) and call t the fundamental homoclinic point of α f . This name is justified by the following. Proposition 6.2. Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and f ∈ Z∆ be expansive.
Put w = (f * ) −1 ∈ 1 (∆, R) and t = β(w ) ∈ ∆ α f (X f ). Then every element of ∆ α f (X f ) is a finite integral combination of left translates of t .
Proof. Suppose that t ∈ ∆ α f (X f ), and lift t tot ∈ ∞ (∆, R) as in the proof of Proposition 6.1. Then ρ f (t) ∈ ∞ (∆, Z), and sincet δ → 0 as δ → ∞, the coordinates of ρ f (t) must vanish outside of a finite subset of ∆, i.e., ρ f (t) = g ∈ Z∆. Then t = π ρ f (t) = π(g) = β(g · w ) = g · t has the required form.

Next we show that expansive principal actions have a very useful orbit tracing property called specification.


## Proposition 6.3 ([17, Prop. 4.4]).

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and f ∈ Z∆ be expansive. Then for every > 0 there is a finite subset K of ∆ such that if F 1 and F 2 are arbitrary subsets of ∆ with K F 1 ∩ K F 2 = ∅ and if t (1) and t (2) are arbitrary points in X f , then we can find t ∈ X f such that d T (t δ , t (i) δ ) < for every δ ∈ F i , for i = 1, 2.

Sketch of proof. Let > 0. The set K is chosen so that δ / ∈K |w δ | < / f 1 . Lift each t (i) tot (i) , and then truncate each ρ f (t (i) ) to a u (i) having support in K F i . It is then easy to verify that t = π ρ f (u (1) ) + ρ f (u (2) ) as the required properties (see [17,Prop. 4.4] for details).
A point t ∈ X f with δ∈∆ d T (t δ , 0) < ∞ is called summable. Let ∆ 1
α f (X f ) denote the group of all summable homoclinic points for α f . Summability is crucial in using homoclinic points for dynamical purposes.
Example 6.4. Let f (u 1 , u 2 ) = 3 − u 1 − u −1 1 − u 2 − u −1 2 ∈ Z[u ± 1 , u ± 2 ]
. It is shown in [43,Example 7.3] that ∆ α f (X f ) is uncountable (indeed, the Fourier series of every smooth density on U(f ) decays to 0 at infinity, and so gives a homoclinic point), but
∆ 1 α f (X f ) = {0}.
Despite their large number, the nonsummable homoclinic points here are essentially useless.

Summable homoclinic points may still exist for nonexpansive actions. For example, consider f (u 1 , u 2 ) = 2 − u 1 − u 2 . The formal inverse w of f * via geometric series is well-defined and has coordinates decaying to 0 at infinity, so that β(w) is homoclinic, but the decay is so slow that w is not summable (see [43,Example 7.2]). Define a function F : T 2 → C by putting F (s 1 , s 2 ) = f * (e 2πis 1 , e 2πis 2 ). Then 1/F is integrable on T 2 , and w is just the Fourier transform of 1/F . Now 1/F has a singularity at (0, 0), and we can try to cancel this by multiplying it by a sufficiently high power N of another polynomial G(s 1 , s 2 ) = g(e 2πis 1 , e 2πis 2 ) that also vanishes at (0, 0) so that G N /F has absolutely convergent Fourier series, resulting in a summable homoclinic point g N · w = g N /f * . For this example, taking g(u 1 , u 2 ) = u 1 − 1, a detailed analysis in [44, §5] shows that N = 3 is the smallest power such that G N /F has absolutely convergent Fourier series, providing a summable homoclinic point for α f . This "multiplier method" can be generalized to all f ∈ Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ± d ] provided that the dimension of U(f ) ⊂ S d is at most d−2. More precisely, with this condition, there is another polynomial g ∈ Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ± d ], not a multiple of f , such that U(f ) ⊂ U(g). The corresponding quotient G N /F has absolutely convergent Fourier series for sufficiently large N [45], and hence α f has summable homoclinic points. However, if dim U(f ) = d − 1, this method fails, and in fact there are no nonzero summable homoclinic points [45,Thm. 3.2].

Let us turn to considering homoclinic points for principal actions of Γ. If f ∈ ZΓ is expansive, we have already seen how to describe ∆ α f (X f ), and that this agrees
with ∆ 1 α f (X f ). Consider f (x, y, z) = 2 − x − y ∈ ZΓ.
If ω = e 2πi/3 , then f is in the kernel of the algebra homomorphism 1 (Γ, C) → C given by x → ω, y → ω 2 , and z → 1. Hence f is not expansive.

However, it is shown in [27] that the formal inverse of f can be smoothed by using the multiplier (z − 1) 2 to create a summable homoclinic point for α f . The proof uses highly nontrivial combinatorial arguments, starting with the noncommutative expansion
(x + y) n = n k=0 n k z x k y n−k , where n k z = k j=0 z n−j − 1 z j+1 − 1 .
If f (x, y, z) = 4 − x − x −1 − y − y −1 the authors of [26] state that they shown that the multiplier (z − 1) 12 results in a summable homoclinic point, and conjecture that (z − 1) 2 actually suffices. For more complicated nonexpansive polynomials in ZΓ, it is not at all clear what could substitute for the dimension condition on the unitary variety in the commutative case.
Problem 6.5. For f ∈ ZΓ, determine explicitly both ∆ α f (X f ) and ∆ 1 α f (X f ).
Anticipating the entropy material from the next section, we remark that Chung and Li [12, Thm. 1.1], generalizing earlier work for Z d in [43], showed that ∆ α f (X f ) = {0} if and only if α f has positive entropy, and that ∆ α f (X f ) is dense in X f if and only if α f has completely positive entropy.

For expansive ∆-actions α f , Proposition 6.1(1) gives a continuous, equivariant, and surjective map π from the full ∆-shift with symbols {− f 1 , − f 1 +1, . . . , f 1 } to X f , which allows us to view this shift space as a symbolic cover of X f . In 1992 Anatoly Vershik showed [68] that for certain hyperbolic toral automorphisms, this symbolic cover could be pruned to a shift of finite type for which the covering map π is one-to-one almost everywhere. This provided an arithmetic approach to constructing Markov partitions, which were originally found geometrically by Adler and Weiss, and are one of the main motivations for symbolic dynamics. Vershik's arithmetic construction was further investigated in [63], [64], [36], and [62]. Einsiedler and the second author [20] considered the problem of extending this idea to obtain symbolic representations of algebraic Z d -actions, and gave an example of an algebraic Z 2 -action for which the symbolic cover could be pruned to a shift of finite type to obtain a map that is one-to-one almost everywhere, but the proof involved a complicated percolation argument. Even for Heisenberg actions virtually nothing is known about the existence of good symbolic covers. Problem 6.6. Find general sufficient conditions on an expansive f ∈ ZΓ so that the symbolic cover from Proposition 6.1 (1) can be pruned to one that is (a) of finite type or at least sofic, (b) of equal entropy, or (c) one-to-one almost everywhere.


## Entropy of Algebraic Actions

We give here several equivalent definitions of the (topological) entropy of an algebraic action, sketch some background material on von Neumann algebras, and then describe recent results relating entropy to Fuglede-Kadison determinants.

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group. For finite subsets F, K ⊂ ∆, define F K = {δθ : δ ∈ F, θ ∈ K}. For what follows to make sense, we require that ∆ be amenable, namely that there is a sequence {F n : n 1} of finite subsets of ∆ such that for every finite subset K of ∆ we have that |F n F n K| |F n | → 0 as n → ∞.


## Such a sequence is called a right-Følner sequence.

Suppose that α is an algebraic ∆-action on a compact abelian group X. We assume there is a translation-invariant metric d on X, and let µ denote normalized Haar measure on X.

As before, we abbreviate the (left) α-action of ∆ on X by using δ · t for α δ (t). Then ∆ acts on subsets E ⊂ X by δ · E = {δ · t : t ∈ E}. Although this differs from the traditional action of transformations on subsets using inverse images, this seems better suited to our purposes, since all α δ are invertible, and its use is consistent with the action of ∆ on functions on X: if χ E is the indicator function of E, then
δ · χ E = χ E • δ −1 = χ δ·E .
To define topological entropy, we consider open covers U of X. If U 1 , . . . , U n are open covers, define their span as n j=1 U j = {U 1 ∩ · · · ∩ U n : U j ∈ U j for 1 j n}. If U is an open cover and F is a finite subset of ∆, let U F = δ∈F δ · U, where δ · U = {δ · U : U ∈ U}. For an open cover U let N(U) denote the cardinality of the open subcover with fewest elements, which is finite by compactness. It is easy to check that N(U ∨ V) N(U)N(V). We define the open cover entropy of α to be
(7.1) h cov (α) = sup U lim sup n→∞ 1 |F n | log N(U Fn )
where the supremum is taken over all open covers of X.

Recall the elementary fact that if {a n : n 1} is a sequence of nonnegative reals with a m+n a m + a n , then a n /n converges to a limit as n → ∞, and this limit equals inf 1 n<∞ a n /n. Hence for ∆ = Z and F n = {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}, it follows that the lim sup in (7.1) is actually a limit. There is a general version of this argument valid for amenable groups, due to Lindenstrauss and Weiss. (
1) 0 φ(F ) < ∞, (2) if F ⊆ F , then φ(F ) φ(F ), (3) φ(δF ) = φ(F ) for all δ ∈ ∆, and (4) φ(F ∪ F ) φ(F ) + φ(F ) if F ∩ F = ∅.
Then for every right-Følner sequence {F n } the numbers φ(F n )/|F n | converge to a finite limit, and this limit is independent of the choice of right-Følner sequence.

Roughly speaking, this fact is proved by showing that if K is a large finite subset of ∆ and is small, then any F with |F F K|/|F | < can be almost exactly tiled by left translates of F n s of various sizes. Then subadditivity and translation-invariance of φ show that φ(F )/|F | is bounded above, within a small error, by inf n φ(F n )/|F n |.

Fix an open cover U of X, and put φ(F ) = log N(U F ) for every nonempty finite subset F of ∆. Since each α δ is a homeomorphism of X, it follows that
φ(δF ) = log N θ∈F (δθ) · U = log N δ · θ∈F θ · U = log N θ∈F θ · U = φ(F ).
Conditions (1) The open cover definition of topological entropy is due to Adler, Konheim, and McAndrew [1]. Bowen [8] introduced equivalent definitions that are better suited for many purposes, which we now describe.

If F is a finite subset of ∆ and > 0, a subset E ⊂ X is called (F, )-spanning if for every t ∈ X there is a u ∈ E such that d(δ −1 · t, δ −1 · u) < for every δ ∈ F .
Dually, a set E ⊂ X is called (F, )-separated if for distinct elements t, u ∈ E there is a δ ∈ F such that d(δ −1 · t, δ −1 · u)
. Let r F ( ) denote the smallest cardinality of any (F, )-spanning set, and s F (F, ) be largest cardinality of any (F, )-separated set. Put One more variant of the entropy definition, using volume decrease, is also useful. Let B = {t ∈ X : d(t, 0) < }, and for finite F ⊂ ∆ put B F = δ∈F δ · B . Define
h vol (α) = lim →0 lim sup n→∞ − 1 |F n | log µ B Fn .
If E is (F, )-spanning, then X = t∈E (t + B F ), so that 1 |E|µ(B F ), and hence h vol (α) h span (α). If E is (F, )-separated, then the sets {t + B F /2 ) : t ∈ E} are disjoint, so that |E|µ(B F /2 ) 1, proving that h sep (α) h vol (α). Thus all these notions of entropy coincide, and we let h(α) denote their common value. We remark that these are also equal to the measure theoretic entropy of α with respect to Haar measure, but we will not be using this fact. Deninger's paper [16] has complete proofs of these facts, and also that the lim sup's in these definitions can be replaced by lim inf's without affecting the results.

If Φ ∈ aut(∆) and {F n } is a right Følner sequence, then clearly so is {Φ(F n )}. It follows that h(α Φf ) = h(α f ), i.e., entropy is invariant under a change of variables.

Suppose that α is an algebraic ∆-action on X, and that Y is a closed ∆-invariant subgroup of X. Let α Y denote the restriction of α to Y , and α X/Y be the quotient action on X/Y . An important property of entropy is that it adds over the exact sequence 0 → Y → X → X/Y → 0.

Theorem 7.2 (The Addition Formula, [39,Cor. 6.3]). Let ∆ be an amenable group, let α be an algebraic ∆-action on X, and suppose that Y is a closed, ∆-invariant subgroup of X. Then h(α) = h(α Y ) + h(α X/Y ).

The Addition Formula has a long history. The basic approach is to take a Borel cross-section to the quotient map X → X/Y , and regard α as a skew product with base action α X/Y and fiber actions that are affine maps of Y with the same automorphism part α Y but with different translations. The idea is then to show that the translation parts of these affine maps, being isometries, do not affect entropy. The case ∆ = Z was proved by Bowen [8], and the case ∆ = Z d is handled in [46, Appendix B] using arguments due originally to Thomas [67]. Fiber entropy for amenable actions was dealt with in [69]. There is a serious difficulty in generalizing these ideas to noncommutative ∆, namely the lack of a scaling argument used to eliminate a universal constant due to overlaps of open sets in a cover. However, machinery developed by Ollagnier [53] handles this issue, and this was used by Li to give the most general result cited above.

When ∆ = Z d there are explicit formulas for entropy. First consider the case ∆ = Z. Without loss of generality, we can assume that f (u) ∈ Z[u ± ] has the form f (u) = c n u n + · · · c 1 u + c 0 with c n c 0 = 0. Factor f (u) over C as f (u) = c n n j=1 (u − λ j ). Then Yuzvinskii [71,72] showed that (7.2) h(α f ) = log |c n | + n j=1 log + |λ j | = m(f ).

An interpretation of (7.2) from [42] shows that term n j=1 log + |λ j | is due to geometric expansion, while the term log |c n | is due to p-adic expansions for those primes p dividing c n , an adelic viewpoint that has been useful in other contexts as well.

Mahler measure is defined for polynomials f ∈ Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ±1 d ] = R d by the formulas and M(f ) = exp m(f ) [51]. One of the main results in [46] is that for nonzero f ∈ R d we have that h(α f ) = m(f ). With this information, entropy for arbitrary algebraic Z d -actions can be easily found. Let a be an ideal in R d that is not principal. A simple argument [46,Thm. 4.2] shows that h(α R d /a ) = 0. Any finitely generated R d -module M has a prime filtration 0 = M 0 ⊂ M 1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ M r with M j /M j−1 ∼ = R d /p j , where the p j are prime ideals in R d . Then the Addition Formula shows that h(α M ) = h(α R d /p 1 ) + · · · + h(α R d /pr ), and each summand can be computed from our preceding remarks.
m(f ) = S d log |f | = 1 0 . . .
To conclude this discussion of the ∆ = Z d case, we point out that there is a complete characterization for which principal actions have zero entropy. Recall the definition of generalized cyclotomic polynomial from §4.
Proposition 7.3 ([9, 65]). Let f ∈ Z[u ± 1 , . . . , u ±1 d ].
Then h(α f ) = 0 if and only if f is a product of generalized cyclotomic polynomials times a monomial or its negative.

This result was originally proved by Boyd [9] using deep results of Schinzel, but was later given a simpler and more geometric proof by Smyth [65].

Turning now to noncommutative ∆, we sketch some background material on related von Neumann algebras. The functional analysis used can be found, for example, in [14, Chaps. VII, VIII]. Let
2 (∆, C) = w = δ∈∆ w δ δ : w δ ∈ C and w 2 2 := δ∈∆ |w δ | 2 < ∞ ,
which is a complex Hilbert space with the standard inner product δ w δ δ, δ v δ δ = δ w δ v δ . As in the case of 1 (∆, C), there is a left-action of ∆ on 2 (∆, C) given by θ · δ w δ δ = δ w δ θδ. The group von Neumann algebra N∆ of ∆ consists of all those bounded linear operators T ∈ B 2 (∆, C) commuting with the left ∆-action, i.e., T (δ·w) = δ·T (w). There is a natural inclusion of C∆ into N∆ given by f → ρ f , where as before ρ f (w) = w · f * . In addition, there is a faithful normalized trace function tr N∆ : N∆ → C given by tr N∆ (T ) = T (1 ∆ ), 1 ∆ . This means that tr N∆ is linear, tr N∆ (1) = 1, tr N∆ (T T * ) > 0 for every T = 0, and tr N∆ (ST ) = tr N∆ (T S).

Using this trace, Fuglede and Kadison [22] defined a determinant function on N∆ as follows. Let T ∈ N∆. Then T T * 0, so the spectral measure ν of the self-adjoint operator T T * is supported on [0, ∞), in fact on [0, T T * ]. Using the functional calculus for B 2 (∆, C) , we can form the operator log(T T * ) = ∞ 0 + log t dν(t), where the lower limit 0 + indicates that we ignore any point mass at 0 that ν may have.

We then define det N∆ T = exp 1 2 tr N∆ log(T T * ) .

This Fuglede-Kadison determinant has the following very useful properties (see [48, §3.2] for details):

• det N∆ T * = det N∆ T ,
• if T > 0 in N∆, then det N∆ T = exp(tr N∆ log T ), • if 0 S T in N∆, then det N∆ S det N∆ T , • det N∆ ST = (det N∆ S)(det N∆ T ).
We remark that multiplicativity of det N∆ is not obvious, essentially being a consequence of the Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula and vanishing of trace on commutators, although for technical reasons a complex variables approach is more efficient. For f ∈ ZZ d , we observed that ρ f ∈ NZ d , and this corresponds to multiplication by f (e −2πis 1 , . . . , e −2πis d ). Hence in this case det NZ d f = M(f ) and so log det
NZ d f = m(f ) = h(α f ).
Indeed, it was the equality of Mahler measure, entropy, and the Fuglede-Kadison determinant in Lück's book [48,Example 3.13] that originally inspired Deninger to investigate whether this phenomenon extended to more general groups. He was able to show in [16] that with some conditions it did. Further work [17], [39] extended the generality, culminating in the comprehensive results of Li and Thom [41].

To describe their work, recall that ρ f is a bounded linear operator on 2 (∆, C). More generally, if F ∈ Z∆ k×l , then there is a bounded linear operator ρ F : 2 (∆, C) k → 2 (∆, C) l given by right multiplication by F * , where (F * ) i,j = (F i,j ) * . There is an extension of det N∆ to such F (see [ 
(∆, C) → 2 (∆, C) is injective. Then h(α f ) = log det N∆ f . More generally, if F ∈ Z∆ k×l and if ρ F : 2 (∆, C) k → 2 (∆, C) l is injective, then h(α F ) log det N∆ F . If k = l, then h(α F ) = h(α F * ) = log det N∆ F .
In particular, h(α f ) = h(α f * ). This is a highly nontrivial fact, since there is no direct connection between α f and α f * .

The computation, or even estimation, of the values of Fuglede-Kadison determinants is not easy. In the next two sections we will explicitly calculate entropy for certain principal actions of the Heisenberg group.

As pointed out by Deninger [16], there are examples of lopsided polynomials f for which det N∆ f can be computed by a rapidly converging series.
Example 7.6. Let f (x, y, z) = 5−x−x −1 −y −y −1 ∈ ZΓ. Write f = 5(1−g), where g = 1 5 (x + x −1 + y + y −1 )
. It is easy to see [6,Lemma 2.7] that the spectrum of g, considered as an element in NΓ, is contained in [−4/5, 4/5]. Hence we can apply the functional calculus to compute log f via the power series for log (1 − t), yielding
log f = log 5 + log(1 − g) = log 5 − ∞ n=1 g n n .
Now tr NΓ (g n ) is the value of the constant term of g n . If r Γ (n) denotes the number of words over S = {x, x −1 , y, y −1 } of length n whose product is 1, then clearly tr NΓ (g n ) = 5 −n r Γ (n). In any word over S with product 1, the number of x and x −1 must be equal and similarly with y and y −1 , so that r Γ (n) = 0 for n odd. The numbers r Γ (2n) grow rapidly:
r Γ (2n) = 4 2n 1 2n 2 + O 1 n 3 ,
(see [29], although the result stated there is off by a factor of 2). We thank David Wilson for providing us a short Mathematica program that computes r Γ (2n) up to r Γ (60), which is a 33 digit number. Hence
tr NΓ log f = log 5 − 30 n=1 r Γ (2n) (2n)5 2n − ∞ n=31 r Γ (2n) (2n)5 2n .
Using the trivial estimate r Γ (2n) 4 2n , the last sum has value less than 10 −7 . The remaining part therefore gives the value for h(α f ) = tr NΓ log f ∼ = 1.514708, correct to six decimal places. We remark that 5g = x + x −1 + y + y −1 , considered as an operator in NΓ, has been studied intensively, and is closely related to Kac's famous Ten Martini Problem. Indeed, the image of 5g in the rotation algebra factor A θ of NΓ is Harper's operator H θ (cf. [6]). Kac conjectured that for every irrational θ the spectrum of H θ is a Cantor set of zero Lebesgue measure. This conjecture was recently confirmed by deep work of Avila.

Remark 7.7. The calculations in the previous example can be carried out just as well in any group ∆ containing two elements x and y. The only change is that the number r ∆ (n) of words over S = {x, x −1 , y, y −1 } whose product is 1 will be different, depending on ∆. For comparison with the example, we work this out for ∆ = Z 2 with commuting generators x, y, and for ∆ = F 2 , the free group with generators x, y.

Recalling that f = 5(1 − g), let us define
L(f, ∆) := log 5 − ∞ n=1 tr g n n = log 5 − ∞ n=1 r ∆ (n) n · 5 n .
The preceding example shows that L(f, Γ) ∼ = 1.514708. For ∆ = Z 2 , we are computing entropy for f considered as a polynomial in the commuting variables x, y, and this is given by Mahler measure to be L(f, Z 2 ) = Observe that any word in S ⊂ Γ whose product is 1 abelianizes to one in Z 2 , and so r Γ (n) r Z 2 (n), which is reflected in the inequality L(f, Γ) L(f, Z 2 ). The case ∆ = F 2 is more interesting. Here any word in the generators x, y whose product is 1 must also give a word in any group ∆ containing x, y with product 1, so that r F 2 (n) r ∆ (n) for all groups ∆. Hence L(f, F 2 ) L(f, ∆), so that L(f, F 2 ) gives a universal upper bound.

To compute L(f, F 2 ), start with the generating function for r F 2 (2n), which by [15, I.9] is known to be Indeed L(f, F 2 ) > L(f, Γ), but only in the fifth decimal place.
G(t) = ∞ n=1 r F 2 (2n)t n = 3 1 + 2 √ 1 − 12t = 1 + 4t + 28t 2 + 232t 3 + 2092t 4 + . . . .
We remark that Lewis Bowen [7] has extended a notion of entropy to actions of sofic groups, and in particular free groups (although these do not have Følner sequences). In [7, Example 1.1] he shows that in the previous discussion L(f, F 2 ) equals the sofic entropy of the corresponding algebraic F 2 -action.

It is somewhat surprising that here L(f, F 2 ) is the logarithm of an algebraic number, since in the case ∆ = Z d with d > 1 this appears not to generally be the case. For example, when d = 3 and g = 1 + u 1 + u 2 + u 3 , Smyth [66] has computed the logarithmic Mahler measure to be m(g) = h(α g ) = log[7ζ(3)/2π 2 ], where ζ is the Riemann zeta-function.

Next we extend the face entropy inequality described for principal Z d -actions in [46,Remark 5.5] to principal ZΓ-actions. This inequality proves that many such actions have strictly positive entropy.

We start with the basic case.

Proposition 7.8. Let f (x, y, z) = D r=0 g r (x, z)y r ∈ ZΓ with g 0 (x, z) = 0. Then h(α f ) m(g 0 ).

Proof. By definition the map ρ g 0 (x,z) : T Z 2 → T Z 2 has kernel X g 0 , and is surjective since multiplication by g 0 (x, z) is injective on Z[x ± , z ± ]. Define Φ : T Z 2 → T Z 2 by (Φu) i,j = u i+j,j . Then for every k ∈ Z we have that u ∈ ker ρ g 0 (x,z) iff Φ k (u) ∈ ker ρ g 0 (xz −k ,z) .

The algebraic Z 2 -action α g 0 on X g 0 has entropy m(g 0 ). Fix ε > 0 and δ > 0. Then for sufficiently large rectangles Q ⊂ Z 2 there is a (Q, ε)-separated set {u 1 , . . . , u N } ⊂ X g 0 with N e (m(g 0 )−δ)|Q| . Note that since d T is translation invariant, for every u ∈ T Z 2 the translated set {u 1 + u, . . . , u N + u} is also (Q, ε)-separated.

Let
t (n) = i,j t (n)
i,j x i z j ∈ T Z 2 be arbitrary, and put t = ∞ n=−∞ t (n) y n ∈ T Γ . The condition for t to be in X f is that ρ f (t) = 0, which in terms of the t (n) becomes
(7.3) D r=0
ρ gr(xz k ,z) (t (k+r) ) = 0 for all k ∈ Z.

Let L 1. For each (j 0 , j 1 , . . . , j L−1 ) ∈ {1, . . . , N } L we will construct a sequence {t
(0) j 0 , t (−1) j 0 ,j 1 , . . . , t (−L+1)
j 0 ,j 1 ,...,j L−1 } in T Z 2 that will be used to create an ε-separated set in X f .

Put t (n) = 0 for all n 1, so that (7.3) is trivially satisfied for k 1. Define t (0)
j 0 = u j 0 for 1 j 0 N . Then (7.3) is satisfied at k = 0 since ρ g 0 (x,z) (u j 0 ) = 0. Since ρ g 0 (xz −1 ,z) is surjective on T Z 2 , for each j 0 there is a t (−1) j 0 ∈ T Z 2 such that ρ g 0 (xz −1 ,z) (t (−1) j 0 ) = −ρ g 1 (xz −1 ,z) (t (0) j 0 ). Let t (−1) j 0 ,j 1 = t (−1) j 0 + Φ(u j 1 ) for 1 j 1 N .
Since ρ g 0 (xz −1 ,z) Φ(u j 1 ) = 0, it follows that (7.3) is satisfied at k = −1 for all choices of j 0 and j 1 .

Similarly, for each {t
(0) j 0 , t (−1) j 0 ,j 1 } there is a t (−2) j 0 ,j 1 ∈ T Z 2 with ρ g 0 (xz −2 ,z) t (−2) j 0 ,j 1 = −ρ g 1 (xz −2 ,z) t (−1) j 0 ,j 1 − ρ g 2 (xz −2 ,z) t (0) j 0 . Put t (−2) j 0 ,j 1 ,j 2 = t (−2)
j 0 ,j 1 + Φ 2 (u j 2 ) for 1 j 2 N . Then (7.3) holds for k = −2 and all choices of j 0 , j 1 , j 2 .

Continuing in this way, for every L-tuple (j 0 , j 1 , . . . , j L−1 ) ∈ {1, . . . , N } L we have constructed {t
(0) j 0 , t (1) j 0 ,j 1 , . . . , t (−L+1)
j 0 ,...,j L−1 } so that (7.3) is satisfied for k −L + 1. Each choice can be further extended to find t (n) for n −L for which the resulting point is in X f . Identify Z 3 with Γ via (i, j, k) ↔ x i z j y k , and consider Q = L−1 k=0 Φ k (Q) × {−k} ⊂ Γ. We claim that the N L points in X f constructed above are (Q, ε)-separated. For at the first index k for which j k = j k , the points Φ(u j k ) and Φ k (u j k ) differ by at least ε at some coordinate of Φ k (Q).

Finally, if we choose Q be be very long in the x-direction compared with the zdirection, and make L small compared with both, we can make Q as right-invariant as we please. Hence there is a Følner sequence {Q m } in Γ with s(Q m , ε) e m(g 0 )−δ |Q m | , and thus h(α f ) m(g 0 ).

Recall from Section 2 that the Newton polygon N(f ) of f = k,l f kl (z)x k y l ∈ ZΓ is the convex hull in R 2 of those points (k, l) for which f kl (z) = 0. A face of N(f ) is the intersection of N(f ) with a supporting hyperplane, which is either a point or a line segment. For each face F of N(f ) let f F (x, y, z) = (k,l)∈F ∩Z 2 f k,l (z)x k y l . For every face F of N(f ) there is a change of variables followed by multiplication by a monomial transforming f so that F now lies on the x-axis with the rest of N(f ) in the upper half-plane. Since entropy is invariant under such transformations, we can apply Proposition 7.8 to obtain the following face entropy inequality. Recall that the Pinsker σ-algebra of a measure-preserving action α is the largest σ-algebra for which the entropy of α on this σ-algebra is zero. An action has completely positive entropy if its Pinsker σ-algebra is trivial. An old argument of Rohlin shows that the Pinsker σ-algebra of an algebraic action α on X is invariant under translation by every periodic point. Hence if the periodic points are dense, then the Pinsker σ-algebra is invariant under all translations, and so arises from the quotient map X → X/Y , where Y is a compact α-invariant subgroup. Thus the restriction of α to its Pinsker σ-algebra is again an algebraic action (see [46,Prop. 6.2]), providing one reason for the importance of the problem above. For algebraic Z d -actions there is an explicit criterion for completely positive entropy in terms of associated prime ideals (see [46,Thm. 6.5]), but even in the case of Heisenberg actions no similar criterion is known. Problem 7.11. Characterize the algebraic Γ-actions with completely positive entropy.

For algebraic Z d -actions, completely positive entropy is sufficient to imply that they are isomorphic to Bernoulli shifts [59]. Is the same true for algebraic Γ-actions? Problem 7.12. If an algebraic Γ-actions has completely positive entropy, is it necessarily measurably isomorphic to a Bernoulli Γ-action?


## Periodic Points and Entropy

Let ∆ be a countable discrete group, and α be an algebraic ∆-action on X. A point t ∈ X is periodic for α if its ∆-orbit is finite. The stabilizer {δ ∈ ∆ : δ · t = t} of such a point t has finite index in ∆, and we will need a generous supply of such subgroups. Call ∆ residually finite if, for every finite subset K of ∆, there is a finiteindex subgroup Λ of ∆ such that Λ ∩ (K {1}) = ∅. Every finite-index subgroup Λ of ∆ contains a further finite-index subgroup Λ of Λ that is normal in ∆, so that residual finiteness can be defined using finite-index normal subgroups. If {Λ n } is a sequence of finite-index subgroups of ∆, we will say Λ n → ∞ if, for every finite set K ⊂ ∆, there is an n K such that Λ n ∩ (K {1}) = ∅ for all n n K .

For a finite-index subgroup Λ of ∆, let
Fix Λ (α) := {t ∈ X : λ · t = t for all λ ∈ Λ}.
If Λ is normal in ∆, then for λ ∈ Λ and δ ∈ ∆ we have that δλδ −1 = λ ∈ Λ. Hence in this case
Fix Λ (α) is ∆-invariant, since if t ∈ Fix Λ (α) then λ · (δ · t) = (λδ) · t = (δλ ) · t = δ · (λ · t) = δ · t.
We will focus on expansive principal actions. Let ∆ be a countable residually finite discrete group, and let f ∈ Z∆ be expansive. Recall the notations and results from Proposition 6.1. For a finite-index subgroups Λ of ∆, let a superscript of Λ on a space denote the set of those elements in the space fixed by Λ, so for example 
∞ (∆, R) Λ = {w ∈ ∞ (∆, R) : λ · t = t for all λ ∈ Λ}.Fix Λ (α f ) = π ∞ (∆, Z) Λ ∼ = ∞ (∆, Z) Λ /ρ f ∞ (∆, Z) Λ .
Proof. Any point t ∈ Fix Λ (α f ) can be lifted to a pointt ∈ ∞ (∆, R) Λ , and then the proof of Proposition 6.1 yields Λ-invariant points at every step.

Note that ∞ (∆, Z) Λ is a free abelian group of rank [∆ : Λ], the index of Λ in ∆, and that ρ f is an injective endomorphism on this group by expansiveness. 
(8.1) | Fix Λ (α f )| = | det(ρ f | ∞ (∆,R) Λ )|.
Proof. Observe that ρ f is an injective linear map on the real vector space ∞ (∆, R) Λ of dimension n = [∆ : Λ] and maps the lattice ∞ (∆, Z) Λ to itself. If A is any n × n matrix with integer entries and nonzero determinant, then it is easy to see, for example from the Smith normal form, that |Z n /AZ n | = | det(A)|.

Remark 8.3. Since we will need to complexify some spaces in order to use complex eigenvalues, let us say a word about conventions regarding determinants. If A is an n × n real matrix, we could regard A as an n × n complex matrix acting on C n , or as a (2n) × (2n) real matrix acting on R n ⊕ iR n , and these have different determinants. We will always use the first interpretation.

With Corollary 8.2 we begin to see the connections among periodic points, entropy, and Fuglede-Kadison determinants. For expansive actions, periodic points are separated, and so |Λ| −1 log | Fix Λ (α f )| should approximate, or at least provide a lower bound for, the entropy h(α f ). But by (8.1), this is also a finite-dimensional approximation to the logarithm log det N∆ f of the Fuglede-Kadison determinant of ρ f . The main technical issue is then to show both of these approximations converge to the desired limits. For expansive α f is is relatively easy, but for general α f the are numerous difficulties to overcome.

We can now deduce two important properties of expansive principal actions.

Proposition 8.4. Let ∆ be a residually finite countable discrete amenable group, and let f ∈ Z∆ be expansive. Then

(1) the α f -periodic points are dense in X f , and
(2) if |X f | > 1 (i.e., if f is not invertible in Z∆), then h(α f ) > 0.
Sketch of proof. For (1), let t ∈ X f and find u ∈ ∞ (∆, Z) with π(u) = β(u·w ) = t. By Prop. 6.1(4), there is a finite subset K of ∆ such that if u K ∈ ∞ (∆, Z) denotes the restriction of u to K and 0 elsewhere, then π(u K ) is close to t. By enlarging K if necessary, we can assume that δ / ∈K |w δ | is small. Let Λ be a finite-index subgroup of ∆ such that λK ∩ λ K = ∅ for distinct λ, λ ∈ Λ. Let t 0 = λ∈Λ λ · π(u K ). Then t 0 ∈ Fix Λ (α f ) and t 0 is close to t.

For (2), again choose a finite K so that δ / ∈K |w δ | is small, where we may assume that w 1 = 1. Find Λ with λK ∩λ K = ∅ for distinct λ, λ ∈ Λ. If F is any sufficiently invariant Følner set, then |F ∩ Λ| is about |F |/[∆ : Λ]. Then for every choice of b λ = 0 or 1 for λ ∈ F ∩ Λ, the points λ∈F ∩Λ b λ (λ · w ) are (F, 1/2)-separated. Hence if {F n } is any Følner sequence, then for every < 1/2 we have that lim sup For ∆ = Z d , it turns out that the periodic points for α M are always dense in X M for every finitely generated ZZ d -module M [61,Cor. 11.3]. The simple example of multiplication by 3/2 on Q dualizes to an automorphism of a compact group with no nonzero periodic points, since (3/2) n − 1 is invertible in Q (see [61, Example 5.6(1)]). We do not know the answer to the following. Problem 8.5. Let ∆ be a countable discrete residually finite group, and M be a finitely generated Z∆-module. Must the α M -periodic points always be dense in X M ?

We now focus on using periodic points to calculate entropy. It is instructive to see how these calculations work in a simple example.

Example 8.6. Let ∆ = Z, and let f (u) = u 2 − u − 1 ∈ Z∆ = Z[u ± ]. Let Λ n = nZ and F n = {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}. Then {F n } is a Følner sequence in Z that is also a fundamental domain for Λ n . Denote by Ω n the set of all n-th roots of unity in C. For ζ ∈ Ω n let v ζ = k∈Z ζ k u k ∈ ∞ (Z, C) Λn . Then ρ u (v ζ ) = ζv ζ , so the v ζ form an eigenbasis for the shift on ∞ (Z, C) Λn . Hence ρ f (v ζ ) = f (ζ)v ζ for each ζ ∈ Ω n . We can consider the elements of ∞ (Z, C) Λn as elements in the n-dimensional complex vector space ∞ (Z/nZ, C). The matrix of ρ f with respect to the basis {1, u, . . . , u n−1 } is the circulant matrix
(8.2) C n (f ) =        −1 −1 1 0 . . . 0 0 0 −1 −1 1 . . . 0 0 . . . 1 0 . . . −1 −1 −1 1 . . . 0 −1        .
We can compute the determinant of C n (f ) using the eigenbasis {v ζ : ζ ∈ Ω n }. Factor
f (u) = (u − τ )(u − σ), where τ = (1 + √ 5)/2 and σ = −1/τ . Then | Fix Λn (α f )| = | det ρ f | ∞ (Z/nZ,C) | = ζ∈Ωn |f (ζ)| = ζ∈Ωn |τ − ζ| · |σ − ζ| = |τ n − 1| · |σ n − 1|.
Then lim
n→∞ 1 n log | Fix Λn (α f )| = log τ = m(f ).
Since α f is expansive, periodic points are separated, and so log τ is certainly a lower bound for h(α f ). But it is also easy in this case to see that it is an upper bound, using for example approximations from homoclinic points as in the proof of Proposition 8.4.

Note that if f ∈ Z[u ± ] had a root ξ ∈ S, then the factor |ξ n − 1| in the calculation of determinant would occasionally be very small, which could cause the limit not to exist. This is one manifestation of the difficulties with nonexpansive actions.

We turn to the Heisenberg case ∆ = Γ. For q, r, s > 0 put Λ rq,sq,q = x rq , y sq , z q , which is a normal subgroup of Γ of index rsq 3 . Let f ∈ ZΓ be expansive. Recall that κ 0 = κ 0 (f ) = 1/(3 f 1 ) is an expansive constant for α f . In particular, if Λ is a finite-index subgroup of Γ, and if t = u ∈ Fix Λ (α f ), then for any fundamental domain Q of Λ there is a γ ∈ Q such that d T (t γ , u γ ) κ 0 .

A bit of notation about the limits we will be taking is convenient. If ψ(Λ rq,sq,q ) is a quantity that depends on Λ rq,sq,q , we write lim q→∞ ψ(Λ rq,sq,q ) = c to mean that for every > 0 there is a q 0 such that |ψ(Λ rq,sq,q ) − c| < for every q q 0 and all sufficiently large r and s. Theorem 8.7 ([17,Thm. 5.7]). Let f ∈ ZΓ be expansive, and define Λ rq,sq,q as above. Then lim
q→∞ 1 [Γ : Λ rq,sq,q ] log | Fix Λrq,sq,q (α f )| = h(α f ).
Proof. In light of Example 8.6, it is tempting to use a fundamental domain for Λ rq,sq,q of the form Q = {x k y l z m : 0 k < rq, 0 l < sq, 0 m < q}, but such a Q is far from being right-Følner, since right multiplication by x will drastically shear Q in the z-direction.

The method used in [17,Thm. 5.7] is to decompose Q into pieces, each of which is thin in the y-direction, and translate these pieces to different locations in Γ. The union of these translates will still be a fundamental domain, but now it will also be Følner, and so can be used for entropy calculations. This method depends in general on a result of Weiss [70], and ultimately goes back to the -quasi-tiling machinery of Ornstein and Weiss [54]. In our case, we can give a simple description of this decomposition.

Choose integers a(q) such that a(q) → ∞ but a(q)/q → 0 as q → ∞. Consider the set F rq,L,q = {x k y l z m : 0 k < rq, L l < L + a(q), 0 m < q}.

It is easy to verify that since a(q) is small compared with q, right multiplication by a fixed γ ∈ Γ creates only small distortions, and so for every γ ∈ Γ we have that
(8.3) lim q→∞ |F rq,L,q F rq,L,q γ| |F rq,L,q | = 0. Define Q rq,sq,q = [rq/a(q)]−1 j=0 x rqj F rq,a(q)j,q ,
where if a(q) does not evenly divide rq, make the obvious modification in the last set. Then Q rq,sq,q is also a fundamental domain for Λ rq,sq,q , but now it is also a Følner sequence as q → ∞ by (8.3). By the separation property of periodic points, for all < κ 0 we have that | Fix Λrq,sq,q (α f )| s(Q rq,sq,q , ). Since {Q rq,sq,q } is Følner,
lim sup q→∞ 1 |Q rq,sq,q | log | Fix Qrq,sq,q (α)| h(α f ).
For the reverse inequality, let δ > 0 and let < δ/3. Choose a finite set E ⊂ Γ such that γ / ∈E |w γ | < / f 1 . The sets P rq,sq,q = γ∈E Q rq,sq,q γ also form a Følner sequence, and |P rq,sq,q |/|Q rq,sq,q | → 1 as q → ∞.

Fix q, r, and s for the moment, and choose a (P rq,sq,q , δ)-separated set S of maximal cardinality. For every t ∈ S, lett ∈ ∞ (Γ, R) be its lift, with t ∞ 1 and β(t) = t. Write v(t) ∈ ∞ (Γ, Z) Λrq,sq,q for the unique point with v(t) γ = (ρ f (t)) γ for all γ ∈ Q rq,sq,q . Our choice of E implies that the points in {π v(t) : t ∈ S} ⊂ Fix Λrq,sq,q (α f ) are (P rq,sq,q , δ/3)-separated, hence distinct. Hence |S| | Fix Λrq,sq,q (α f )|. Since {P rq,sq,q } is Følner and |P rq,sq,q |/|Q rq,sq,q | → 1 as q → ∞, we see that
h(α f ) = lim inf q→∞ 1 |P rq,sq,q | log s(P rq,sq,q , δ) lim inf q→∞ 1 |Q rq,sq,q | log | Fix Λrq,sq,q (α f )|,
completing the proof.

We apply this result, combined with Corollary 8.2, to compute entropy for expansive principal Γ-actions α f . Using the above notations, let V rq,sq,q = ∞ (Γ, C) Λrq,sq,q , so that (8.4) | Fix Λrq,sq,q (α f )| = | det(ρ f | Vrq,sq,q )| .

We will compute this determinant by decomposing V rq,sq,q into ρ f -invariant subspaces, each having dimension 1 or q. To do this, for each (ξ, η, ζ)
∈ S 3 let v ξ,η,ζ = ∞ k,l,m=−∞ ξ k η l ζ m x k y l z m ∈ ∞ (Γ, C).
Observe that ρ y (v ξ,η,ζ ) = v ξ,η,ζ · y −1 = η v ξ,η,ζ , and similarly ρ z (v ξ,η,ζ ) = ζ v ξ,η,ζ , so that v ξ,η,ζ is a common eigenvector for ρ y and ρ z . However,
ρ x (v ξ,η,ζ ) = k,l,m ξ k η l ζ m x k y l z m · x −1 = k,l,m ξ k η l ζ m x k−1 y l z m−l = k,l,m ξ k+1 (ηζ) l ζ m x k y l z m = ξ v ξ,ηζ,ζ .
Let Ω q = {ζ ∈ S : ζ q = 1}, and Ω q = Ω q {1}. For arbitrary (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 let
W ζ (ξ, η) = q−1 j=0 Cv ξ,ηζ j ,ζ if ζ ∈ Ω q , Cv ξ,η,1 if ζ = 1.
By the above, for every (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 and ζ ∈ Ω q , the subspace W ζ (ξ, η) is invariant under the right action of Γ. Now let f ∈ ZΓ, and assume that f is expansive. Adjusting f by a power of x if necessary, we may assume that f has the form f (x, y, z) = D j=0 x j g j (y, z), where each g j (y, z) ∈ Z[y ± , z ± ] with g 0 (y, z) = 0 and g D (y, z) = 0. The action of ρ f on v ξ,η,ζ is then given by
ρ f (v ξ,η,ζ ) = D j=0 ρ x j g j (y,z) (v ξ,η,ζ ) = D j=0 ξ j g j (η, ζ)v ξ,ηζ j ,ζ .
If ζ = 1, then ρ f (v ξ,η,1) = f (ξ, η, 1)v ξ,η,1 , so is given by the 1 × 1 matrix A 1,f (ξ, η) = [f (ξ, η, 1)]. If ζ ∈ Ω q , then the matrix of ρ f on W ζ (ξ, η) takes the following q × q circulant-like form, where for notational convenience we assume that q > D:
A ζ,f (ξ, η) =        g 0 (η, ζ) g 1 (η, ζ)ξ · · · g D (η, ζ)ξ D · · · 0 0 g 0 (ηζ, ζ) g 1 (ηζ, ζ)ξ g 2 (ηζ, ζ)ξ 2 · · · 0 0 0 g 0 (ηζ 2 , ζ) g 1 (ηζ 2 , ζ)ξ · · · 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . g 1 (ηζ q−1 , ζ)ξ g 2 (ηζ q−1 , ζ)ξ 2 · · · 0 · · · g 0 (ηζ q−1 , ζ)        .
By our expansiveness assumption ρ f is injective, and each W ζ (ξ, η) is ρ f -invariant, hence det A ζ,f (ξ, η) = 0 for all (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 and all ζ ∈ Ω q . Now suppose that r, s 0. For convenience we will assume that both r and s are primes distinct from q. Then {v ξ,η,ζ : (ξ, η, ζ) ∈ Ω rq × Ω sq × Ω q } is a basis for V rq,sq,q . Note that if ζ ∈ Ω q , then W ζ (ξ, η) = W ζ (ξ, ηζ j ) for 0 j < q. Since Ω sq ∼ = Ω s × Ω q by relative primeness of s and q, we can parameterize the spaces W ζ (ξ, η) by η ∈ Ω s . This gives the ρ f -invariant decomposition
(8.5) V rq,sq,q = W 1 (ξ, η) : (ξ, η) ∈ Ω rq × Ω sq ⊕ W ζ (ξ, η) : (ξ, η, ζ) ∈ Ω rq × Ω s × Ω q .
We now evaluate the limit of (8.6) 1 rsq 3 log | det(ρ f | Vrq,sq,q )| as r, s → ∞ using the decomposition (8.5).

On each of the 1-dimensional spaces W 1 (ξ, η) in (8.5) ρ f acts as multiplication by f (ξ, η, 1). Hence the contribution to (8.6) of the first large summand in (8.5) is
(8.7) 1 rsq 3 (ξ,η)∈Ωrq×Ωsq log |f (ξ, η, 1)|.
By expansiveness, f (ξ, η, 1) never vanishes for (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 , so that log |f (ξ, η, 1)| is continuous on S 2 . By convergence of the Riemann sums to the integral, as r, s → ∞ we have that 1 rsq 2
(ξ,η)∈Ωrq×Ωsq log |f (ξ, η, 1)| → S 2 log |f (ξ, η, 1)| dξdη.
The additional factor of q in the denominator of (8.7) shows that it converges to 0 as r, s → ∞.

For the spaces W ζ (ξ, η) with ζ ∈ Ω q , the expansiveness assumption shows that det A ζ,f (ξ, η) never vanishes for (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 , so again log | det A ζ,f (ξ, η)| is continuous on S 2 . Hence for ζ ∈ Ω q , as r, s → ∞ we have that
1 |Ω rq × Ω sq | (ξ,η)∈Ωrq×Ωs log | det A ζ,f (ξ, η)| → S 2 log | det A ζ,f (ξ, η)| dξdη.
Adding these up over ζ ∈ Ω q , and observing that |Ω s | = |Ω qs |/q, we have shown the following.

Theorem 8.8. Let f (x, y, z) = D j=0 x j g j (y, z) ∈ ZΓ be expansive. Then
(8.8) h(α f ) = lim q→∞ q prime 1 q 2 ζ∈Ωq S 2 log | det A ζ,f (ξ, η)| dξdη,
where the matrices A ζ,f (ξ, η) are as given above.

At first glance the denominator q 2 in (8.8) appears puzzling. The explanation is that one q comes from averaging over the q-th roots of unity, while the other q comes from the size of the matrices A ζ,f (ξ, η). From the point of view of von Neumann algebras, we should really be using the "normalized determinant" | det A ζ,f (ξ, η)| 1/q corresponding to the normalized trace on C n , and then the second q would not appear.

For expansive polynomials in ZΓ that are linear in x the entropy formula in the preceding theorem can be simplified considerably. Theorem 8.9. Let f (x, y, z) = g(y, z) + xh(y, z) ∈ ZΓ, where g(y, z) and h(y, z) are Laurent polynomials in Z[y ± , z ± ]. If α f is expansive, then
(8.9) h(α f ) = S max m(g(·, ζ) , m h(·, ζ) dζ,
where m g(·, ζ) = S log |g(η, ζ)| dη and similarly for h. Corollary 8.10. Let f (x, y, z) = g(y, z) + xh(y, z), and assume that neither g nor h vanish anywhere on S 2 . If α f is expansive, then h(α f ) = max{m(g), m(h)}.

Proof of the Corollary. After the change of variables x → y, y → x, and z → z −1 , we can apply Theorem 5.9 to conclude that either m g(·, η) > m h(·, η) for all η ∈ S, or m g(·, η) < m h(·, η) for all η ∈ S. The result then follows from (8.9) by integrating over η ∈ S.

The intuition behind (8.9) is simple to explain. The matrices A ζ,f (ξ, η) for ζ ∈ Ω q take the form
(8.10) A ζ,f (ξ, η) =      g(η, ζ) h(η, ζ)ξ 0 · · · 0 0 g(ηζ, ζ) h(ηζ, ζ)ξ · · · 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . h(ηζ q−1 , ζ)ξ 0 · · · g(ηζ q−1 , ζ)      . Then (8.11) det A ζ,f (ξ, η) = q−1 j=0 g(ηζ j , ζ) + (−1) q−1 ξ q q−1 j=0
h(ηζ j , ζ).

For fixed ζ the first product behaves like M g(·, ζ) q , and similarly for h. Whichever is larger will dominate, suggesting the formula (8.9). To make this intuition precise, we require several lemmas.

Lemma 8.11. For every ξ ∈ C, ζ ∈ S, and n 1, 1 n log |ξ n − ζ n | log + |ξ| + log 2 n .

Proof. If |ξ| 1, then |ξ n − ζ n | 2. If |ξ| > 1, then 1 n log |ξ n − ζ n | 1 n log(|ξ| n + 1) 1 n log |ξ| n + log |ξ| n + 1 |ξ| n = log |ξ| + 1 n log 1 + 1 |ξ| n log |ξ| + log 2 n .

If 0 = φ(u) ∈ C[u], then (5.1) shows that m(φ) > −∞. We will use the convention m(0) = −∞. With the usual conventions about arithmetic and inequalities involving −∞, the results that follow will make sense and are true even if some of the polynomials are 0. log |φ(e 2π2j/n ζ)| m(φ) + D log 2 n .

Proof. Fix n 1 and set ω = e 2πi/n , so that R n (log |φ|)(ζ) = 1 n n−1
j=0 log |φ(ω j ζ)|. Write φ(u) = c d u d +· · ·+c 0 , where d D and c d = 0. Factor φ(u) = c d d k=1 (u−ξ k ).
Then using the previous lemma, Proof. If n > (D log 2)/ , then the previous lemma implies that for every ζ ∈ S we have that R n (log |φ|)(ζ) m(φ) + and R n (log |ψ|)(ζ) m(ψ) + . Hence max{R n log |φ| (ζ), R n log |ψ| (ζ)} max{m(φ), m(ψ)} + , and the second inequality follows by integrating over ζ ∈ S.
R n log |φ| (ζ) = 1 n n−1 j=0 log c d d k=1 (ω j ζ − ξ k ) = log |c d | + 1 n d k=1 n−1 j=0 log |ω j ζ − ξ k | = log |c d | + 1 n d k=1 log n−1 j=0 (ω j ζ − ξ k ) = log |c d | + 1 n d k=1 log |ζ n − ξ n k | |c d | + d k=1 log + |ξ k | + d log 2 n m(φ) + D log 2 n .
For the first inequality, observe that
m(φ) = S R n log |φ| (ζ) dζ S max{R n log |φ|)(ζ), R n (log |ψ|)(ζ) dζ,
and similarly for φ.

We need one more property of Mahler measure, proved by David Boyd [10]. Recall that M(φ) = exp m(φ) , and by convention exp(−∞) = 0. 
+ c 1 u + · · · + c D u D )
is continuous.

Continuity is clear when the coefficients remain bounded away from 0 since the roots are continuous functions of the coefficients, but for example if c D → 0 then continuity is more subtle. Boyd's proof, which also applies the polynomials in several variables with bounded degree, uses Graeffe's root-squaring method, managing to sidestep various delicate issues, leading to a remarkably simple proof.

Proof of Theorem 8.9. If ζ ∈ Ω q , then we have seen in (8.11
) that det A ζ,f (ξ, η) = q−1 j=0 g(ηζ j , ζ) + (−1) q−1 ξ q q−1 j=0
h(ηζ j , ζ).

By (5.1), for any complex numbers a and b, S log |a + ξ q b| dξ = max{log |a|, log |b|}.
Hence S log det A ζ,f (ξ, η) dξ = max log q−1 j=0 g(ηζ j , ζ) , log q−1 j=0 h(ηζ j , ζ) . It follows that 1 q S 2 log det A ζ,f (ξ, η) dξdη = S max R q log |g(·, ζ)| (η), R q log |h(·, ζ)| (η) dη.
Let > 0. Writing g ζ (y) = g(y, ζ) and h ζ (y) = h(y, ζ), note that these are Laurent polynomials of uniformly bounded degree D in C[y ± ], where the degree of a Laurent polynomial is the length of its Newton polygon. Applying 8.13 to g ζ and h ζ , we obtain that for q > (D log 2)/ , max m(g(·, ζ)), m(h(·, ζ)) 1 q S 2 log | det A ζ,f (ξ, η)| dξdη < max m(g(·, ζ)), m(h(·, ζ)) + .

We must now consider the possibility that for some ζ ∈ S both g(y, ζ) and h(y, ζ) vanish as polynomials in C[y ± ], and claim this never happens provided that α f is expansive. Write g(y, z) = j g j (z)y j and h(y, z) = k h k (z)y k , where g j (z), h k (z) ∈ Z[z ± ]. If ζ 0 ∈ S were a common zero for all the g j (z) and h k (z), then its minimal polynomial over Q would divide every g j (z) and h k (z). But then the nonzero point w = i,j,k ζ k 0 x i y j z k ∈ ∞ (Γ, C) would have ρ f (w) = 0, contradicting expansiveness.

Thus the function ζ → max m(g(·, ζ)), m(h(·, ζ)) is continuous on S. Hence the sums 1
q 2 ζ∈Ωq S 2 log det A ζ,f (ξ, η) dξdη
simultaneously approximate h(α f ) by Theorem 8.8, and are also Riemann sums over Ω q of the continuous function max m(g(·, ζ)), m(h(·, ζ)) , and so converge to the integral in (8.9), concluding the proof.

Our proof of Theorem 8.9 made use of the expansiveness hypothesis on α f in order to use periodic points to approximate entropy. But surely the entropy formula (8.9) is valid more generally. Problem 8.15. Is the entropy formula (8.9) for linear polynomials in ZΓ valid for arbitrary g(y, z) and h(y, z) in Z[y ± , z ± ]?

It will follow from results in the next section that (8.9) is valid if either g ≡ 1 or h ≡ 1.

Let us turn to the quadratic case f (x, y, z) = g 0 (y, z) + xg 1 (y, z) + x 2 g 2 (y, z). We start with a simple result about determinants.

Lemma 8.16. Let a j , b j , and c j (0 j q − 1) be arbitrary complex numbers. Then
det        a 0 b 0 c 0 0 . . . 0 0 0 a 1 b 1 c 1 . . . 0 0 . . . c q−2 0 0 0 . . . a q−2 b q−2 b q−1 c q−1 0 0 . . . 0 a q−1        = q−1 j=0 a j − tr q−1 j=0 −b j c j −a j 0 + q−1 j=0 c j .
If c j a j+1 = −b j b j+1 for every j, where subscripts are taken mod q, then the value of this determinant simplifies to
q−1 j=0 a j − (−1) q (τ q + σ q ) q−1 j=0 b j + q−1 j=0 c j ,
where τ = (1 + √ 5)/2 and σ = −1/τ .

Proof. Taking subscripts mod q, a permutation π of {0, 1, . . . , q − 1} contributes a nonzero summand in the expansion of the determinant if and only if it has the form π(j) = j + j , where j = 0, 1, or 2. The sequences { j } ∈ {0, 1, 2} q corresponding to permutations are precisely the closed paths of length q in the labeled shift of finite type depicted below.

The paths 00 . . . 0 and 22 . . . 2 give the terms a 0 a 1 · · · a q−1 and c 0 c 1 · · · c q−1 , respectively, while it is easy to check that the golden mean shift of finite type produces middle term of the result.

If c j a j+1 = −b j b j+1 for all j, then each occurrence of a block 20 in a closed path of length q can be replaced by the block 11, changing the factor c j a j+1 to b j b j+1 together with an appropriate sign change. The result of these substitutions is that every closed path of length q in the golden mean shift gives the same contribution −(−1) q b 0 b 1 · · · b q−1 to the expansion, and there are tr [ 1 1

1 0 ] q = τ q + σ q of them.

We use this to give the quadratic analogues of (8.10) and (8.11).

Corollary 8.17. Let f (x, y, z) = g 0 (y, z)+xg 1 (y, z) +x 2 g 2 (y, z) ∈ ZΓ. Suppose that ζ ∈ Ω q , and for (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 define A ζ,f (ξ, η) as above. Then det A ζ,f (ξ, η) = q−1 j=0 g 0 (ηζ j , ζ) + (−1) q−1 tr q−1 j=0 −g 1 (ηζ j , ζ)ξ g 2 (ηζ j , ζ)ξ 2 −g 0 (ηζ j , ζ) 0 + ξ 2q q−1 j=0 g 2 (ηζ j , ζ).


## (8.13)

If g 1 (y, z)g 1 (yz, z) = −g 2 (y, z)g 0 (yz, z), then det A ζ,f (ξ, η) = q−1 j=0 g 0 (ηζ j , ζ) + (−1) q−1 (τ q + σ q )ξ q q−1 j=0 g 1 (ηζ j , ζ) + ξ 2q q−1 j=0 g 2 (ηζ j , ζ).

(8.14)

Motivated by Theorem 8.8 and the rigorous results from the expansive linear case, we can now formulate a reasonable conjecture about entropy in the quadratic case.

As in the linear case, for fixed irrational ζ, the growth rate of the first and third terms in (8.13) are given my m g 0 (·, ζ) and m g 2 (·, ζ) , respectively. The growth rate for the second term should be the same for almost every choice of (ξ, η) ∈ S 2 , and if so denote this value by b f (ζ). For example, in case g 1 (y, z)g 1 (yz, z) = −g 2 (y, z)g 0 (yz, z), from (8.14) we see that b f (ζ) = log τ + m g 1 (·, ζ) . Problem 8.18. Let f (x, y, z) = g 0 (y, z) + xg 1 (y, z) + x 2 g 2 (y, z) ∈ ZΓ. Is h(α f ) = S max m g 0 (·, ζ) , b f (ζ), m g 2 (·, ζ) dζ ?

In particular, if g 1 (y, z)g 1 (yz, z) = −g 2 (y, z)g 0 (yz, z), is (8.15) h(α f ) = S max m g 0 (·, ζ) , log τ + m g 1 (·, ζ) , m g 2 (·, ζ) dζ ?

Example 8. 19. Fix g(y, z) ∈ ZΓ, and let g 0 (y, z) = −g(yz −1 , z)g(y, z), g 1 (y, z) = g(y, z), and g 2 (y, z) = 1. These satisfy the conditions for (8.15), and this formula becomes (8.16) h(α f ) = S max 2m g(·, ζ) , log τ + m g(·, ζ) , 0 dζ.

For example, letting g(y, z) = (z − 1)y + z 2 − 1, for each of the three functions in (8.16) there is a range of ζ for which it is the maximum.

A similar analysis can be carried out for higher degree polynomials, but the evaluation of the relevant determinants now involves a finite family of more complicated (and interesting) shifts of finite type.


## Lyapunov Exponents and Entropy

The methods of the previous section to compute entropy have some serious limitations because of the expansiveness assumptions. There is a more geometric approach to entropy, using the theory of Lyapunov exponents, which Deninger used in [18] to calculate Fuglede-Kadison determinants, or equivalently by Theorem 7.5, entropy, in much greater generality.

To motivate this approach, first recall the linear example f (x, y, z) = y −g(x, z) ∈ ZΓ. For v ξ,ζ defined in (5.2) and w = ∞ −∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n with ρ f (w) = 0, we have from (5.3) that log |g(ξζ j , ζ)| → m(g(·, ζ)), and the limit is the same for almost every ξ by ergodicity of irrational rotations. For toral automorphisms, entropy is the sum of the growth rates on various eigenspaces that are positive. By analogy, we would expect entropy here to be the integral of the positive growth rates, i.e., that (9.2) h(α f ) = S max{m(g(·, ζ)), 0} dζ.

This is a special case of (8.9), but with no assumptions on g. Indeed, since the eigenspaces here are 1-dimensional, the techniques used in [46] can be adapted to prove the validity of (9.2) for every 0 = g ∈ Z[x ± , z ± ]. However, since this will be subsumed under Deninger's results, there is no need to provide an independent proof here.

To state the main result in [18], we need to give a little background. For each irrational ζ ∈ S there is the rotation algebra A ζ , which is the von Neumann algebra version of the twisted l 1 algebras used in Allan's local principle (see [3] for details). There are also natural maps π ζ : NΓ → A ζ . As explained in [16, §5], there is a faithful normalized trace function tr ζ on each A ζ such that tr NΓ (a) = S tr ζ (a) dζ for every a ∈ NΓ. This implies that for determinants we have (9.3) log det NΓ (a) = S log det π ζ (a) dζ.

Hence we need a way of evaluating the integrands for a = ρ f . Suppose that f ∈ ZΓ is monic in y and of degree D, and so has the form f (x, y, z) = y D − g D−1 (x, z)y D−1 − · · · − g 0 (x, z),

where the g j (x, z) ∈ Z[x ± , z ± ] and g 0 = 0. Calculations similar to Example 5.13 show that if ρ f ( ∞ −∞ c n v ξ,ζ y n ) = 0, then, for every n, c n+D = g D−1 (ξζ n , ζ)c n+D−1 + g D−2 (ξζ n , ζ)c n+D−2 + · · · + g 0 (ξζ n , ζ)c n . g 0 (ξ, ζ) g 1 (ξ, ζ) g 2 (ξ, ζ) · · · g D−1 (ξ, ζ)      , and let A n (ξ, ζ) = A(ξζ n−1 , ζ)A(ξζ n−2 , ζ) . . . A(ξ, ζ)

be the corresponding cocycle. Then the recurrence relation for the {c n } can be written as
A n (ξ, ζ)    c 0 . . . c D−1    =    c n . . . c n+D−1    .
The A n (ξ, ζ) are D × D matrices, and we need to include all directions with positive growth rate. There is a deep and important theorem governing this.

Theorem 9.1 (Oseledec Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem). Let T be an invertible ergodic measure-preserving transformation on a measure space (Ω, ν), and B : Ω → C D×D be a measurable map from Ω to the D × D complex matrices such that Ω log + B(ω) dν(ω) < ∞. Then there is a T -invariant measurable set Ω 0 ⊂ Ω with ν(Ω 0 ) = 1, an M D, real numbers χ 1 < χ 2 < · · · < χ M and multiplicities r 1 , . . . , r M 1 such that r 1 + · · · + r M = D, and measurable maps V j from Ω 0 to the space of r j -dimensional subspaces of C D , such that for all ω ∈ Ω 0 we have that To apply this result to our situation, fix an irrational ζ ∈ S. Let T ζ : S → S be given by T ζ (ξ) = ξζ. Let B(ξ) = A(ξ, ζ). Since the entries of B(ξ) are continuous in ξ, clearly S log + B(ξ) < ∞. Hence there are Lyapunov exponents χ j (ζ) and multiplicities r j (ζ). With these in hand, we can now state Deninger's main result from [18] as it applies to the Heisenberg case.

Theorem 9.2. Let f (x, y, z) = y D − g D−1 (x, z)y D−1 − · · · − g 0 (x, z) ∈ ZΓ, where the g j (x, z) ∈ Z[x ± , z ± ] and g 0 = 0. For every irrational ζ denote the Lyapunov exponents for A(ξ, ζ) and T ζ as above by χ j (ζ) with multiplicities r j (ζ). Then log det ζ (π ζ (ρ f )) = j r j (ζ)χ j (ζ) + , and hence by Theorem 7.5 and (9.3), (9.5) h(α f ) = log det NΓ ρ f = S j r j (ζ)χ j (ζ) + . Example 9.3. Let f (x, y, z) = y 2 − (2x − 1)y + 1. For each (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 there is a nonzero vector v(ξ, ζ) ∈ C 2 and a multiplier κ(ξ, ζ) ∈ C with |κ(ξ, ζ)| 1 such that 0 1 −1 2ξ − 1 v(ξ, ζ) = κ(ξ, ζ)v(ξζ, ζ).

Since the determinants of these matrices all have absolute value 1, there is exactly one nonnegative Lyapunov exponent, of multiplicity one. For each irrational ζ ∈ S its value is given by χ(ζ) = S log |κ(ξ, ζ)| dξ, and hence

h(α f ) = S χ(ζ) dζ = S 2 log |κ(ξ, ζ)| dξdζ.

A numerical calculation of the graph of log |κ(ξ, ζ)| is shown in Figure 2, and indicates the complexity of these phenomena even in the quadratic case. Although Lyapunov exponents are generally difficult to compute, there is a method to obtain rigorous lower bounds on the largest Lyapunov exponent known as "Herman's subharmonic trick." Its use in our context was suggested to us by Michael Bjorklund.

Proposition 9.4. Let f (x, y, z) = y D − g D−1 (x, z)y D−1 − · · · − g 0 (x, z) ∈ ZΓ, where the g j (x, z) ∈ Z[x, z ± ], so that only nonnegative powers of x are allowed, and g 0 (x, z) = 0. For every irrational ζ ∈ S let χ ∞ (ζ) denote the largest Lyapunov exponent resulting from Theorem 9.2. Then χ ∞ (ζ) log spr A(0, ζ), where A(ξ, ζ)

is the matrix given in (9.4), and spr denotes the spectral radius of a complex matrix. In particular, (9.6) h(α f ) S log + spr A(0, ζ) dζ.

Proof. Fix an irrational ζ ∈ S. Put B(x) = A(x, ζ), and let T (x) = ζx. For a complex matrix C = [c ij ] define C = max i,j {|c ij |}. Theorem 9.1 shows that for almost every ξ ∈ S we have that     Observe that since only nonnegative powers of x are allowed, this result is reminiscent of the face entropy inequality in Corollary 7.9. It is stronger since it gives a lower bound for every irrational ζ, but the integrated form (9.6) is weaker since it uses only the top Lyapunov exponent to give a lower bound for the entropy of the face corresponding to x = 0.

Example 9.5. We finish by returning to Example 5.13. Let f (x, y, z) = y 2 −xy−1 ∈ ZΓ. Using the change of variables x → y, y → x and z → z −1 , f becomes monic and linear in y, hence by the previous theorem we can compute that h(α f ) = 0. On the other hand, treating f as monic and quadratic in y, we see that the Lyapunov exponents must all be 0. But the determinant has absolute value 1, and so in fact the Lyapunov exponents must vanish almost everywhere. In other words, By taking transposes to reverse the order of the product, we obtain (1.1) from the Introduction. Although this appears to be a simple result, we have not been able to obtain this as a consequence of any known results in random matrix theory. 


Theorem 3.6 ([19, Thm. 3.3]). Let M be a noetherian R-module. Then α M is ergodic if and only if every prime ideal associated with M is ergodic.

## Example 3 . 7 .
37Let p be the left ideal in R generated by x − 1 and y − 1. Then

## Problem 3 . 8 .
38Characterize the ergodic prime ideals in R.


Proposition 4.1 ([61, Thm. 1.6]). The algebraic ∆-action α M is mixing if and only if the stabilizer of every nonzero m ∈ M is finite.

## Examples 4. 4 .
4(a) If f = 1 + x + y, then α f is mixing by part(3).(b) If f = x+z −2, then α f is mixing by part (1), yet f (x,ȳ) =x−1 is cyclotomic, showing that part(3)is not always necessary.

## Figure 1 .
1Graph of log |c(e 2πis )τ |

## Lemma 5 . 22 .
522Every automorphism of Γ is uniquely determined by integers a, b, c, d, r, and s with ad − bc = ±1, and is given by Φ(x) = x a y b z r , Φ(y) = x c y d z s , and Φ(z) = z ad−bc .

## Theorem 5 .
523 ([12, Thm. 3.1]). Let F ∈ ZΓ k×k and α F be the associated algebraic Γ-action on X F . Then α F is expansive if and only if F is invertible in 1 (Γ, R) k×k . Moreover, every expansive Γ-action is isomorphic to the restriction of such an α F to a closed α F -invariant subgroup of X F . Example 5.24. Let F = 2 x y 2 ∈ ZΓ 2×2 . By simply formally solving the equations for the inverse, one arrives at


Proposition 7.1 ([47, Thm. 6.1]). Suppose that φ(F ) is a real-valued function defined for all nonempty finite subsets F of ∆, satisfying:


,(2), and (4) in Proposition 7.1 are trivially satisfied for this φ. Hence for every open cover U, the lim sup in (7.1) is a limit, and this limit does not depend on the choice of right Følner sequence {F n }.


|F n | log r Fn ( ), and h sep (α) = lim →0 lim sup n→∞ 1 |F n | log s Fn ( ). If U denotes the open cover of X by -balls, the elementary inequalities N(U F ) r F ( ) s F ( ) N(U F /2 ) show that h cov (α) = h span (α) = h sep (α), and so all three are independent of choice of right Følner sequence.


(e 2πis 1 , . . . , e 2πis d )| ds 1 . . . ds d ,

## Example 7. 4 .
4Let ∆ = Z d , and write elements of Z d as n = (n 1 , . . . , n d ). The Fourier transform identifies 2 (Z d , C) with L 2 (T d , C), with n being identified with the function χ n , where χ n (s) = exp 2πi(n · s) for s ∈ T d . Any bounded linear operator T on 2 (Z d , C) commuting with the Z d -action must have the form of convolution with some element v ∈ 2 (Z d , C). Hence the Fourier transform V of v must give a bounded linear operator on L 2 (T d ) via pointwise multiplication, and this forces V ∈ L ∞ (T d , C). Conversely, every V ∈ L ∞ (T d , C) corresponds to an element of NZ d . This identifies NZ d with L ∞ (T d , C). Under this identification,tr NZ d (V ) =T d V (s) ds and det NZ d (V ) = exp T d log |V (s)| ds .


− 2 cos(2πs) − 2 cos(2πt)| ds dt ∼ = 1.507982 .

## Corollary 7 . 9 .
79If f ∈ ZΓ and F is a face of N(f ), then h(α f ) h(α f F ). Face entropies are essentially logarithmic Mahler measures of polynomials in commuting variables, and so easy to compute. Observe that if h(α f ) = 0, then the Corollary shows that h(α f F ) = 0 for every face F of N(f ), and that Proposition 7.3 gives a complete characterization of what f F can be. Indeed, Smyth used the face entropy inequality as the starting point for his proof of Proposition 7.3. However, the algebraic complexity of ZΓ prevents a direct extension of his methods, leaving open a very interesting question.Problem 7.10. Characterize those f ∈ ZΓ for which h(α f ) = 0.

## Corollary 8 . 2 .
82Under the hypotheses in Proposition 8.1,

## Lemma 8 . 12 .
812Suppose that φ(u) ∈ C[u] has degree D. Then for every ζ ∈ S and

## Lemma 8 . 13 .
813Let φ(u), ψ(u) ∈ C[u] each have degree D. Then for every n > (D log 2)/ , max m(φ), m(ψ) S max{R n log |φ|)(ζ), R n (log |ψ|)(ζ) dζ max m(φ), m(ψ) + .

## Theorem 8 .
814 ([10]). The map C D+1 → [0, ∞) given by (c 0 , c 1 , . . . , c D ) → M(c 0

## ( 1 )
1C D = V 1 (ω) ⊕ · · · ⊕ V M (ω), (2) B(ω)V j (ω) = V j (T ω), and(3)1 n log B(T n−1 ω)B(T n−2 ω) . . . B(ω)v v → χ j uniformly for 0 = v ∈ V j (ω).

## Figure 2 .
2Graph of log |κ(ξ, ζ)|.


(x) are polynomials in x with complex coefficients. Now each log |b(n) ij (ξ)| is subharmonic for ξ ∈ C, and hence max i,j {log |b


log B(0) n → log spr B(0) = log spr A(0, ζ)as n → ∞. The entries in A(ξ, ζ) are uniformly bounded above, and hence 1 n log |b


log B(0) n = log spr A(0, ζ).


j = 0 for almost every (ξ, ζ) ∈ S 2 .


41, §2.1]) for details.Theorem 7.5 ([41, Thm. 1.2]). Let ∆ be a countable discrete amenable group, and let f ∈ Z∆. Suppose that ρ f : 2


Douglas Lind: Department of Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA E-mail address: lind@math.washington.edu Klaus Schmidt: Mathematics Institute, University of Vienna, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, A-1090 Vienna, Austria and Erwin Schrödinger Institute for Mathematical Physics, Boltzmanngasse 9, A-1090 Vienna, Austria E-mail address: klaus.schmidt@univie.ac.at

. R L Adler, A G Konhein, M H Mcandrew, Topological entropy, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 114R. L. Adler, A. G. Konhein, and M. H. McAndrew, Topological entropy, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 114 (1965), 309-319. 29

Ideals of vector-valued functions. G R Allan, Proc. London Math. Soc. 182G.R. Allan Ideals of vector-valued functions, Proc. London Math. Soc. 18(2), (1968) 193-216. 14

The rotation algebra. J Anderson, W Paschke, Houston J. Math. 15J. Anderson and W. Paschke, The rotation algebra, Houston J. Math. 15 (1989), 1-26. 48

A class of transitive cylinder transformations. Giles Atkinson, 263-270. 17J. London Math. Soc. 17Giles Atkinson, A class of transitive cylinder transformations, J. London Math. Soc 17 (1978), 263-270. 17

A problem on topological transformations of the plane II. Abram Samoilovitch, Besicovitch , Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 2819Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch, A problem on topological transformations of the plane II, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 28 (1951), 61-65. 17, 19

On the spectrum of a random walk on the discrete Heisenberg group and the norm of Harper's operator. Cédric Béguin, Alain Valette, Andrzej Zuk, J. Geom. and Phys. 21Cédric Béguin, Alain Valette, and Andrzej Zuk, On the spectrum of a random walk on the discrete Heisenberg group and the norm of Harper's operator, J. Geom. and Phys. 21 (1997), 337-356. 33

Entropy for expansive algebraic actions of residually finite groups. Lewis Bowen, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys. 31Lewis Bowen, Entropy for expansive algebraic actions of residually finite groups, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys. 31 (2011), 217-245. 34

Entropy for group endomorphisms and homogeneous spaces. Rufus Bowen, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 15330Rufus Bowen, Entropy for group endomorphisms and homogeneous spaces, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 153 (1971), 401-414. 29, 30

Kronecker's theorem and Lehmer's problem for polynomials in several variables. David Boyd, 116-121. 31J. Number Theory. 13David Boyd, Kronecker's theorem and Lehmer's problem for polynomials in several variables, J. Number Theory 13 (1981), 116-121. 31

Uniform approximation to Mahler's measure in several variables. David Boyd, 125-128. 44Canad. Math. Bull. 41David Boyd, Uniform approximation to Mahler's measure in several variables, Canad. Math. Bull. 41 (1998), 125-128. 44

Injective convolution operators on ∞ (Γ) are surjective. Yemon Choi, Canadian Math. Bull. 53Yemon Choi, Injective convolution operators on ∞ (Γ) are surjective, Canadian Math. Bull. 53 (2010), 447-452.

Homoclinic group, IE group, and expansive algebraic actions, preprint. Phu Nhan, Hanfeng Chung, Li, 2427Nhan-Phu Chung and Hanfeng Li, Homoclinic group, IE group, and expansive algebraic actions, preprint. 24, 27

A note on constructive methods in Banach algebras. Paul J Cohen, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 1211Paul J. Cohen, A note on constructive methods in Banach algebras, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 12 (1961), 159-163. 11

A Course in Functional Analysis. John B Conway, Springer31New York2nd EditionJohn B. Conway, A Course in Functional Analysis, 2nd Edition, Springer, New York, 1990. 31

Pierre De, La Harpe, Topics in Geometric Group Theory. ChicagoUniv. of Chicago Press34Pierre de la Harpe, Topics in Geometric Group Theory, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2000. 34

Fuglede-Kadison determinants and entropy for actions of discrete amenable groups. Christopher Deninger, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 1948Christopher Deninger, Fuglede-Kadison determinants and entropy for actions of discrete amenable groups, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 19 (2006), 737-758. 2, 11, 30, 32, 33, 48

Expansive algebraic actions of discrete residually finite amenable groups and their entropy. Christopher Deninger, Klaus Schmidt, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys. 2740Christopher Deninger and Klaus Schmidt, Expansive algebraic actions of discrete residually finite amenable groups and their entropy, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys. 27 (2007), 769-786. 2, 10, 13, 25, 26, 32, 37, 39, 40

Determinants on von Neumann algebras, Mahler measure and Ljapunov exponents. Christopher Deninger, J. Reine Angew. Math. 65149Christopher Deninger, Determinants on von Neumann algebras, Mahler measure and Ljapunov exponents, J. Reine Angew. Math. 651 (2011), 165-185. 48, 49

Algebraic actions of the discrete Heisenberg group and other non-abelian groups. Manfred Einsiedler, Harald Rindler, Aequationes Math. 6218Manfred Einsiedler and Harald Rindler, Algebraic actions of the discrete Heisenberg group and other non-abelian groups, Aequationes Math. 62 (2001), 117-135. 2, 3, 8, 13, 17, 18

Markov partitions and homoclinic points of algebraic Z d -actions, in: Dynamical Systems and Related Topics. Manfred Einsiedler, Klaus Schmidt, Proc. Steklov Inst. Math. 216Interperiodic PublishingManfred Einsiedler and Klaus Schmidt, Markov partitions and homoclinic points of algebraic Z d -actions, in: Dynamical Systems and Related Topics, Proc. Steklov Inst. Math. 216 (1997), Interperiodic Publishing, Moscow, 259-279. 28

On symmetric logarithm and some old examples in smooth ergodic theory. K Fraczek, M Lemańczyk, Fund. Math. 180K. Fraczek and M. Lemańczyk, On symmetric logarithm and some old examples in smooth ergodic theory, Fund. Math. 180 (2003), 241-255. 19

Determinant theory in finite factors. B Fuglede, R V Kadison, 520-530. 31Ann. Math. 55B. Fuglede and R. V. Kadison, Determinant theory in finite factors, Ann. Math. 55 (1952), 520-530. 31

Disjointness in ergodic theory, minimal sets, and a problem in diophantine approximation. Hillel Furstenberg, Math. Syst. Theory. 11Hillel Furstenberg, Disjointness in ergodic theory, minimal sets, and a problem in diophantine approximation, Math. Syst. Theory 1 (1967), 1-49. 1

Transcendental and Algebraic Numbers. A O Gelfond, 19Dover, New YorkA. O. Gelfond, Transcendental and Algebraic Numbers, Dover, New York, 1960. 19

A Wiener lemma for the discrete Heisenberg group: invertibility criteria and applications to algebraic dynamics. Martin Göll, Klaus Schmidt, Evgeny Verbitskiy, 19preprintMartin Göll, Klaus Schmidt, and Evgeny Verbitskiy, A Wiener lemma for the discrete Heisen- berg group: invertibility criteria and applications to algebraic dynamics, preprint. 19

Algebraic actions of the discrete Heisenberg group: expansiveness and homoclinic points. Martin Göll, Klaus Schmidt, Evgeny Verbitskiy, 1727preprint. 13, 14Martin Göll, Klaus Schmidt, and Evgeny Verbitskiy, Algebraic actions of the discrete Heisen- berg group: expansiveness and homoclinic points, preprint. 13, 14, 17, 27

Homoclinic points of principal algebraic actions. Martin Göll, Evgeny Verbitskiy, 27preprintMartin Göll and Evgeny Verbitskiy, Homoclinic points of principal algebraic actions, preprint. 27

. Walter Gottschalk, Gustav Hedlund, Topological Dynamics, Amer. Math. Soc. Colloq. Publ. 3617Walter Gottschalk and Gustav Hedlund, Topological Dynamics, Amer. Math. Soc. Colloq. Publ. 36, Providence, 1955. 17

Random walk on a discrete Heisenberg group. Driss Gretete, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo. 60Driss Gretete, Random walk on a discrete Heisenberg group, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 60 (2011), 329-335. 33

On automorphisms of compact groups. Paul Halmos, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 491Paul Halmos, On automorphisms of compact groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 49 (1943), 619- 624. 1

Gauss's lemma and the ergodicity and mixing of nilpotent group actions. Benjamin Hayes, SeattleUniversity of WashingtonSenior ThesisBenjamin Hayes, Gauss's lemma and the ergodicity and mixing of nilpotent group actions, Senior Thesis, University of Washington, Seattle, 2009. 5

Mixing principal algebraic actions of torsion-free nilpotent groups. Benjamin Hayes, preprint. 9Benjamin Hayes, Mixing principal algebraic actions of torsion-free nilpotent groups, preprint. 9

An amenable group with a nonsymmetric group algebra. Joe Jenkins, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 7513Joe Jenkins, An amenable group with a nonsymmetric group algebra, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 75 (1969), 357-360. 13

Groups with representations of bounded degree. Irving Kaplansky, Can. Math. J. 1. 4Irving Kaplansky, Groups with representations of bounded degree, Can. Math. J. 1, 1949, 105- 112. 4

. Irving Kaplansky, Fields, Univ Rings, Chicago PressChicagoIrving Kaplansky, Fields and Rings, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1969. 11

Arithmetic constructions of sofic partitions of hyperbolic toral automorphisms. Richard Kenyon, Anatoly Vershik, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Syst. 18Richard Kenyon and Anatoly Vershik, Arithmetic constructions of sofic partitions of hyperbolic toral automorphisms, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Syst. 18 (1998), 357-372. 28

Automorphisms of compact groups. Bruce Kitchens, Klaus Schmidt, Ergodic Th. & Dynam. Syst. 1011Bruce Kitchens and Klaus Schmidt, Automorphisms of compact groups, Ergodic Th. & Dynam. Syst. 101 (1989), 691-735. 1

Un champ markovien peutêtre d'entropie nulle et mélangeant. François Ledrappier, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris Ser. A. 2871François Ledrappier, Un champ markovien peutêtre d'entropie nulle et mélangeant, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris Ser. A 287 (1978), 561-562. 1

Compact group automorphisms, addition formulas and Fuglede-Kadison determinants. Hanfeng Li, Annals of Math. 17632Hanfeng Li, Compact group automorphisms, addition formulas and Fuglede-Kadison determi- nants, Annals of Math. 176 (2012), 303-347. 2, 30, 32

Ergodicity of principal algebraic group actions. Hanfeng Li, Jesse Peterson, Klaus Schmidt, Contemp. Math. 6317Hanfeng Li, Jesse Peterson, and Klaus Schmidt, Ergodicity of principal algebraic group actions, Contemp. Math. 631 (2015), 201-210. 5, 7

Entropy, Determinant, and L 2 -torsion. Hanfeng Li, Andreas Thom, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 2732Hanfeng Li and Andreas Thom, Entropy, Determinant, and L 2 -torsion, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 27 (2014), 239-292. 2, 32

Automorphisms of solenoids and p-adic entropy. Douglas Lind, Tom Ward, Ergod. Theory & Dynam. Syst. 831Douglas Lind and Tom Ward, Automorphisms of solenoids and p-adic entropy, Ergod. Theory & Dynam. Syst. 8 (1988), 411-419. 31

Homoclinic points of algebraic Z d -actions. Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 1227Douglas Lind and Klaus Schmidt, Homoclinic points of algebraic Z d -actions, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 12 (1999), 953-980. 25, 26, 27

Entropy and growth rate of periodic points of algebraic Z d -actions. Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, Evgeny Verbitskiy, Dynamical Numbers: Interplay between Dynamical Systems and Number Theory. S. Kolyada, Yu. Manin, M. Möller, P. Moree and T. WardAmerican Mathematical Society53227Contemp. Math.Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, and Evgeny Verbitskiy, Entropy and growth rate of periodic points of algebraic Z d -actions, in: Dynamical Numbers: Interplay between Dynamical Systems and Number Theory, ed. S. Kolyada, Yu. Manin, M. Möller, P. Moree and T. Ward, Contemp. Math., vol. 532, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 2010. 27

Homoclinic points, atoral polynomials, and periodic points of algebraic Z d -actions. Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, Evgeny Verbitskiy, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Syst. 33Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, and Evgeny Verbitskiy, Homoclinic points, atoral polynomials, and periodic points of algebraic Z d -actions, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Syst. 33 (2013), 1060-1081. 27

Mahler measure and entropy for commuting automorphisms of compact groups. Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, Tom Ward, Invent. Math. 10148Douglas Lind, Klaus Schmidt, and Tom Ward, Mahler measure and entropy for commuting automorphisms of compact groups, Invent. Math. 101 (1990), 593-629. 2, 23, 30, 31, 34, 36, 48

Mean topological dimension. Elon Lindenstrauss, Benjamin Weiss, Israel J. Math. 115Elon Lindenstrauss and Benjamin Weiss, Mean topological dimension, Israel J. Math. 115 (2000), 1-24. 29

L 2 -Invariants: Theory and Applications to Geometry and K-Theory. Wolfgang Lück, Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. 4432Springer-VerlagWolfgang Lück, L 2 -Invariants: Theory and Applications to Geometry and K-Theory, Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. 44, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002. 32

Prime ideals in skew Laurent polynomial rings. Kenneth W Mackenzie, Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. 368Kenneth W. MacKenzie, Prime ideals in skew Laurent polynomial rings, Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. 36 (1993), 299-317. 8

An application of Jensen's formula to polynomials. Kurt Mahler, Mathematika. 7Kurt Mahler, An application of Jensen's formula to polynomials, Mathematika 7 (1960), 98- 100.

On some inequalities for polynomials in several variables. Kurt Mahler, J. London. Math. Soc. 3731Kurt Mahler, On some inequalities for polynomials in several variables, J. London. Math. Soc. 37 (1962), 341-344. 31

Left and right inverses in groups algebras. Susan Montgomery, 539-540. 11Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 75Susan Montgomery, Left and right inverses in groups algebras, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 75 (1969), 539-540. 11

J , Moulin Ollagnier, Ergodic Theory and Statistical Mechanics. New YorkSpringer-Verlag111530J. Moulin Ollagnier, Ergodic Theory and Statistical Mechanics, Lecture Notes in Math. 1115, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985. 30

Entropy and isomorphism theorems for actions of amenable groups. Donald Ornstein, Benjamin Weiss, 1-141. 40J. d'Analyse Math. 48Donald Ornstein and Benjamin Weiss, Entropy and isomorphism theorems for actions of amenable groups, J. d'Analyse Math. 48 (1987), 1-141. 40

A multiplicative ergodic theorem. V Oseledets, Moscow Math. Soc. 19V. Oseledets, A multiplicative ergodic theorem, Moscow Math. Soc. 19 (1968), 197-231.

The Algebraic Structure of Group Rings. Donald Passman, Wiley-Interscience PublicationNew YorkDonald Passman, The Algebraic Structure of Group Rings, A. Wiley-Interscience Publication, New York, 1977. 4

Idempotents in group rings. Donald Passman, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 2811Donald Passman, Idempotents in group rings, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 28 (1971), 371-374. 11

A nullstellensatz for amoebas. Kevin Purbhoo, Duke Math. J. 141Kevin Purbhoo, A nullstellensatz for amoebas, Duke Math. J. 141 (2008), 407-445. 12

Almost block independence and Bernoullicity of Z d -actions by automorphisms of compact abelian groups. Daniel Rudolph, Klaus Schmidt, Invent. Math. 120Daniel Rudolph and Klaus Schmidt, Almost block independence and Bernoullicity of Z d -actions by automorphisms of compact abelian groups, Invent. Math. 120 (1995), 455-488. 36

Automorphisms of compact abelian groups and affine varieties. Klaus Schmidt, Proc. London Math. Soc. 243Klaus Schmidt, Automorphisms of compact abelian groups and affine varieties, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 61 (1990), 480-496. 24

Dynamical Systems of Algebraic Origin. Klaus Schmidt, Birkhäuser Verlag1638Basel-Berlin-BostonKlaus Schmidt, Dynamical Systems of Algebraic Origin, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel-Berlin- Boston, 1995. 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 16, 38

Algebraic coding of expansive group automorphisms and two-sided beta-shifts. K Schmidt, Monatsh. Math. 129K. Schmidt, Algebraic coding of expansive group automorphisms and two-sided beta-shifts, Monatsh. Math. 129 (2000), 37-61. 28

Bijective arithmetic codings of the 2-torus, and binary quadratic forms. Nikita Sidorov, Anatoly Vershik, 365-400. 28J. Dynam. Cont. Sys. 4Nikita Sidorov and Anatoly Vershik, Bijective arithmetic codings of the 2-torus, and binary quadratic forms, J. Dynam. Cont. Sys. 4 (1998), 365-400. 28

Bijective and general arithmetic codings for Pisot toral automorphisms. Nikita Sidorov, J. Dynam. Cont. Sys. 7Nikita Sidorov, Bijective and general arithmetic codings for Pisot toral automorphisms, J. Dynam. Cont. Sys. 7 (2001), 447-472. 28

A Kronecker-type theorem for complex polynomials in several variables. Chris Smyth, Can. Math. Bull. 2431Chris Smyth, A Kronecker-type theorem for complex polynomials in several variables, Can. Math. Bull. 24 (1981), 447-452. 31

On measures of polynomials in several variables. Chris Smyth, Bull. Aust. Math. Soc. 23Chris Smyth, On measures of polynomials in several variables, Bull. Aust. Math. Soc. 23 (1981), 49-63. 34

The addition formula for entropy of transformations of G-spaces. R K Thomas, 119-130. 30Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 160R. K. Thomas, The addition formula for entropy of transformations of G-spaces, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 160 (1971), 119-130. 30

Arithmetic isomorphism of hyperbolic toral automorphisms and sofic systems. Anatoly Vershik, Functional Anal. Appl. 26Anatoly Vershik, Arithmetic isomorphism of hyperbolic toral automorphisms and sofic systems, Functional Anal. Appl. 26 (1992), 170-173. 27

The Abramov-Rokhlin entropy addition formula for amenable group actions. T Ward, Q Zhang, Monatsh. Math. 114T. Ward and Q. Zhang, The Abramov-Rokhlin entropy addition formula for amenable group actions, Monatsh. Math. 114 (1992), 317-329. 30

Monotilable amenable groups. Benjamin Weiss, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 202Benjamin Weiss, Monotilable amenable groups, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 202 (2001), 257-262. 40

Metric properties of the endomorphisms of compact groups. S A Yuzvinskii, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 20Amer. Math. Soc. Transl.S. A. Yuzvinskii, Metric properties of the endomorphisms of compact groups, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 20 (1965), 1295-1328 (Russian); translated in Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 66 (1968), 63-98. 30

Computing the entropy of a group of endomorphisms. S A Yuzvinskii, Siberian Math. J. 8Sibrsk. Math.Ẑ.S. A. Yuzvinskii, Computing the entropy of a group of endomorphisms, Sibrsk. Math.Ẑ. 8 (1967), 230-239; translated in Siberian Math. J. 8 (1967), 172-178. 30