# Clinical pharmacokinetics of Azilsartan medoxomil for the treatment of cardiovascular disease: A review

CorpusID: 80405327
 
tags: #Medicine, #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/688f8d9909152404f2eca18050dbed7073d74d7f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/688f8d9909152404f2eca18050dbed7073d74d7f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Clinical pharmacokinetics of Azilsartan medoxomil for the treatment of cardiovascular disease: A review


D Sangeetha 
Department of Chemistry
School of Advanced Sciences
VIT University
Vellore-632 014

Tamil Nadu
India

M Senthil Kumar 
Department of Chemistry
School of Advanced Sciences
VIT University
Vellore-632 014

Tamil Nadu
India

Syngeneic International Limited
Bangalore-560099India

Clinical pharmacokinetics of Azilsartan medoxomil for the treatment of cardiovascular disease: A review
10.1088/1757-899X/263/2/0220321 Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd 1234567890 14th ICSET-2017 IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 263 (2017) 022032
Hypertension related cardiovascular complications could be amplified by the presence of metabolic co-morbidities. Azilsartan medoxomil is a precise blocker of angiotensin 1 receptor that prevent angiotenin binding, resulting in vasodilation and decrease the effects of aldosterone. Azilsartan is a recently approved angiotensin 1 receptor blocker and appears to be more efficacious in reducing blood pressure than other blockers with a similar safety and tolerability profile. Its very high affinity to and slow dissociation from the angiotensin 1 receptor along with its inverse agonistic properties make it a very good candidate for clinical effects beyond simple blood pressure control, potentially counteracting cardiac hypertrohy and cardiac fibrosis. In drug discovery and the development is to optimize candidate selection for the target therapeutic area and to predict the dose and dosing regime for initial clinical trials with due consern to the requirements for effective treatment in the target therapeutic area these are the main role of preclinical pharmacokinetics. Both the pharmaceutical target and drug disposition like absorption, clearance and distribution of new chemical entities with clear understanding and consideration is required for the type of agent and in sequence for the successful approach.

## Introduction

Over all worldwide, increased blood pressure report is approximately to cause 8.0 million deaths and it is about 13.2% of the total of all deaths. These accounts for 62 million disability adjusted life years or 3.9% of total disability adjusted life years [1]. For treating hypertension eight classes of medications are used now a days. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics,angiotensin II receptor blockers, alphadrenergi c blockers, direct renin inhibitors central adrenergic inhibitor, calcium-channel blockers, and betaadrenergic blockers are included in this. Seven agents of the angiotensin II receptor blockers classcandesartan such as eprosartan, irbesartan, losartan, olmesartan, , telmisartan, and valsartan were used till now . Many of these drugs are available in combination with other antihypertensive agents, such as the direct renin inhibitors aliskiren, the calcium-channel blockers amlodipine, and the thiazide diuretic hydro-chlorothiazide. Azilsartan medoxomil is a new addition to the angiotensin II receptor blockers class of antihypertensive agents [2]. Food and Drug Administratio n approval has been recorded in the year of 2011. Generally looking for this compound is angiotensin II receptor blockers class and the angiotensin II  receptor blockers mechanism of action, selective inhibition of angiotensin  II by competitive  antagonism of the angiotensin II receptors, has been speculated to reduce adverse effects and  possibly  enhance  clinical efficacy. Angiotensin II receptor blockers displace angiotensin II from the angiotensin I receptor and produce their blood pressure lowering eff ects by antagonizing angiotensinII induced vasoconstriction, aldosterone release,catecholamine releas e, arginine vasopressin release, water intake, and hypertrophic response [3][4][5][6].


## Pharmacology of Azilsartan metoximil

Increased activity of the renin angiotensin aldosterone system played a major role in thedevelopme nt of hypertension and related cardiovascular complications. Angiotensin II is the major effectors hormone of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and exhibits a main role in the regulation of blood pressure, fluid-electrolyte balance and pathophysiology of hypertension. Azilsartan is a particular blocker of angiotensin II type-1 receptors that prevent angiotensin II binding, resulting in vasodilation and decrease the effects of aldosterone, because of this type of receptors in the vascular smooth muscle and the adrenal gland. With respect to other angiotensin receptor blockers, Azilsartan is highly selective for the angiotensin II type-1 receptor and not the Angiotensin II type-2 receptor. Azilsartan medoxomil is a prodrug to subject of its active moiety, at the level of the gastrointestinal tract. Approximately 2 to 3 hr this compound reaches peak plasma concentration through oral administration.

Without fasting administration not affect bioavailability approximately 57 %. Mainly excreted by the kidney and clearance of 2.3 mL/min. The elimination halflife is approximately 9 to10 hr, after oral administration with the steady state of plasma concentrati ons was reached within five days .Treatment with Azilsartan is healthy tolerated, with similar overall rate of adverse events as compared to placebo. In particular, it has been reported that treatment withdrawal due to adverse events ranged from 2 to 3% [7][8]. Literature review has been shown the most frequently occurring adverse event in sick persons receiving Azilsartan was diarrheal occurring in approximately 2% of sick person receiving the 80 mg dose in placebocontrolled mono therapy trials, compared with 0.5% of sick persons who received placebo [9][10][11]. Other adverse events potentially related to treatment with Azilsartan included nausea, asthenia, fatigue, muscle spasm, dizziness and cough. In clinical trials, the most common side effects included headache, dizziness, dyslipidemia and urinary tract infection. Dosage forms that are retained in the stomach would increase its oral bioavailability and efficacy. Therefore sustainedrelease (SR) products are needed for Azilsartan to prolong its duration of action and to improve sick person compliance.


## Pharmacokinetic Evaluation:

At present bringing a new drug to introduce in market is approximate to be between $750 million and $1.5 billion. Presently a enormous space among the number of candidate medicine compounds in evaluating ones actually get approved [12][13][14][15]. Due to lack of understanding of the relationship between dose-concentration response and unanticipated safety events drugs fail at late stages, because of these two key reasons. specified this type of scenario, it is very crucial condition to have possible tools that help to forecast how a drug will carry out invivo and help out in the success of a clinical therapeutic candidate. Pharmacokinetics characterizes of the A (absorption), D (distribution), M (metabolism), and E (elimination) properties of a drug. Though, the reason of Pharmacokinetics is to study the time course of amounts and concentration of drug and its metabolite in the variable tissues in the body, and to put up fit to deduce the data. Pharmacokinetics is interconnected with many disciplines, particularly, biop harma-ceutics therapeutics and pharmacology. Although most of the foundation of pharmacokinatic was laid in the late fifties and early sixties, it continues to be comparatively young discipline among the health science. The origin of pharmacokinetics can be traced back to the papers published by late thirties. Two of these papers were kinetics of distribution of substances administrated to the body and the extra vascular modes of administration and kinetics of distribution of substances into the body. The knowledge of pharmacokinetics can be used for variety of purposes. These may be clinical in nature, or may be interest from an industrial or formulation stand point. Examples of importance of pharmacokinetics include the following: i) Estimation of rate of ADME properties of a drug in the body. ii) Estimation of bioavailability of drug from multi-source products marketed by various manufacture containing the same drug. iii) Estimation of bioavailability of drug from different formulation of the same drug. iv) Calculation of appropriate dosage regimen for individuals. v) To describe the time course of drug in the body and calculate the various pK parameters of the drug. vi) Principle of desired rate of release is the basis for research in various drug delivery systems, e.g., prodrug, coated dosage forms, etc.

Unwavering from plasma concentration of formulations of sustained release tablets of ten critical pharmacokinetic parameters such as extent of protein binding, clearance,effective concentration range, fraction of the available dose excreted unchanged, extent of availability, blood or plasma concentration ratio, half-life, toxic concentration, volume of distribution, rate of availability, AUC0-∞, C max , T max , T1/2, AUC0-t and elimination rate constant. In general, elimination rate constant was calculated from the slope of the terminal elimination phase of a semi logarithmic plot of concentration versus time, after subjecting it to linear regression analysis it ought indomitable for each new chemical molecule in both test animals. The statutory definitionof pharmacokinetics parameters maximum peak serum concentration that a drug achieves in an exacting test area of the body after the drug has been administrated and previous to the administration of a second dose. Concentration maximum is the parallel of Concentration minimum, which is the Concentration minimum, concentration that a drug achieves after dosing. The related pharmacokinetic parameter time maximum is the time at which the Concentration maximum is observed. After oral administration, the Same subject are used to different properties of various formulations, they could be concentration maximum and time maximum are dependent on the level of the rate of drug absorption and the disposition profile of the drug. Quick fix drug side effects are most likel y near the Concentration maximum, whereas the therapeutic effect of drug with sustained durati on of action usually occurs at concentrations slightly above the C min . Bioavailability is the rou te of administration and its galenic formulation determine the amount of administered dose abso rbed into the circulation.

After administered the drug bioavailability depends on many elements like Absorption of a lot of drugs does not exactly follow linear kinetics. In few cases, the drug can be absorbed in a constant rate and the same amount of drugs is absorbed during every time interval and mimics constant rate intravenous infusion.

For that reason in each succeeding half-life and very less drugs are eliminated.

Clearance and volume of distribution depends on the half life of a drug .The elimination half life is considered to be free of the amount of drug in the body. The actual body contact to drug after administration of a dose of the drug based on the area under the plasma drug concentration time curve reflects, it is expressed in mg*h/L. The dose administered to reaches the systemic circulation corresponds to total amount the fraction. The Area Under Curve is directly proportional to the dose when the drug follows linear kinetics. The Area under Curve is inversely proportional to the clearance of the drug. These two distinct phases in the plasma concentration versus time plot are described in the figure-1(t 1/2 ) can be estimated from the terminal slope of the plasma concentration time profile [21][22][23][24]. 


## Bioavailability Consideration for time release tablets

Mechanism is used in capsules to dissolve gradually and release a drug over time depend upon the sustained-release, sustained-action, extended-release, time release controlled-release, continuous release. The advantages of slow release tablets are frequently being taken less frequently than immediate release formulations of the parallel drugs and they keep steadier levels of the drug in the bloodstream. Most of the slow release drugs are formulated, so that the active ingredient is surrounded in a surrounding substance of insoluble core. Some drugs are covered in the polymer-coated tablets with a laser type drilled hole on one side and on the other side covered with permeable membrane. The porous membrane hard-pressed by the acids in the stomach, potency the drug to come out from surface to surface the laser drilled hole within the time, whole drug releases into the system while the polymer container remains impaired, later on excreted through normal digestion for slow release formulations, the drug dissolves into the matrix and physically swells to form a gel and allowing the drug to exit on the outside surface. There are certain considerations for the formation of sustained release formulation, if the potent compound has a lengthy half-life; it is stable on its own. Time releasing not related to its blood levels and active compound. If the absorption of the energetic compound involves an active transport, the improvement of releases an active substance gradually, product might be challenging. Finally, if the potent drug was a lesser half-life, it would need a more quantity to preserve a long established efficient dosage. In this particular situation, a huge healing window is required to keep away from toxicity; or else, the risk is needless and dissimilar method of administration would be suggested [25][26][27][28][29].

Bioavailability and bioequivalence studies in new drug approach would be submitted for a not officially accepted, discovered recently drug entity and prodrug derived of a beforehand accepted discovered recently drug entity formulated as a redesigned compound . Also suggested that consequent customized compounds that are pharmaceutically corresponding and bioequivalent to the scheduled drug manufactured goods be submitted as truncated new drug applications. The principle of an in vivo bioavailability investigation for which a controlled-release compounds claim to decide, if all of the subsequent surroundings are met: The active moiety targeted to the slow-release maintain the bioavailability outline well-known for the compound regulations out the incidence of any molecule discarding.

Particular moiety portions and suspension of the active therapeutic moiety depends on the drug product's formulation provides reliable pharmacokinetic performance. A presently marketed, unslow-release moiety, containing therapeutic moiety and administered according to the dosage recommendations in the labelling and slow-release drug product subject to a permitted occupied new drug application containing the same active moiety component and administered suitably to the dosage suggested in the labelling [30][31][32].


### In vivo bioequivalence Studies for pre-approval and post-approval


#### Pre-approval and Post-approval

Pre-approval when compounds is in the similar moiety outward appearance, but in a dissimilar potency, and is relation same in its vital and non vital ingredients to the potency of which bioavilability or bioequvalance testing has been conducted, an in vivo Bioequvalance demonstration of single or many inferior strengths can be rejected based on dissolution tests and an invivo study on the maximum strength.

Post approval information for immediate release drug moiety approved of in vitro and in vivo dissolution by bioequivalence studies, the presence of particular post-approval changes are available in an food and drug administration guidance for industry permitted Scale-Up and Post-Approval Changes-Immediate Release [32].


### Waivers of In vivo bio waivers Studies


#### Beaded Capsules -Lesser potency.

Based on the f2 test could be used compare different strength of the compound by variation dissolution method and can be generated dissolution profile for slow release capsules, where they contain active moiety differs only in the number of pellets. Fast bioequivalence study to be carried out only on the maximum strength and an invivo studies for lower strengths based on dissolution profiles.


#### Tablets -Lesser potency.

Lesser quantatiy of slow-release tablets is on the unique dosage form but in a various strength, and almost parallel in its vital and unvital ingredients and it has the same compound release in the system, an invivo bioeqivalance fortitude of single or many lower strengths can be excluded based on dissolution profile comparisons, with an invivo study only on the more strength.Suggested that the compound exhibit analogous dissolution profiles among the maximum strength and the slight strengths based on the f2 test in at least three different dissolution media : pH 1.2, 4.5 and 6.8. as well as dissolution profile be generated on the test and reference products of all strengths [27] . Pharmacokinetics is a further step toward rational and optimal therapy. The aim is to decrease the amount of drug and increase the half-life and preventing danger of toxicity. pK is based on the potential of fraction of the drug absorbed against fraction of the drugdissolved in different type of formulations. In that slow-release formulations are useful to improve the effectiveness of the compounds strength as well as also improving the cardiovascular disease compatibility, compounds will be got reasonable cost. The dosage form is easy to optimize and very helpful and result in resistance. Azilsartanmedoxomil dose range of 20-320 mg does not require any alteration based on sick person's age, sex, race of hepatic [2].


## CONCLUSION


of the drug in the lumen. ii) Determine the dissolution in the intestinal lumen and it absorption across the intestinal wall depend on Physicochemical properties of the drug and its excipients iii) Surface and time obtainable for absorption. iv) pH and perfusion of the small intestine. v) Hepatic first-pass effect. vi) Complex chemical reaction in the lumen. Under these conditions, absorption is characterized by an absorption rate constant and a corresponding absorption half-life[16][17][18][19][20].

## Fig- 1 .
1Time course of the plasma concentration of a drug applied by a

Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamicmodeling of reversible drug effects in Handbook of Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Correlation. J Venitz, H. Derendorf and G. HochhausCRC Press1NY, USAVenitz J 1995 Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamicmodeling of reversible drug effects in Handbook of Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Correlation H. Derendorf and G. Hochhaus, Eds., vol. 1, CRC Press,NY, USA.

Edarbi (azilsartanmedoxomil), prescribing information. Takeda. Deerfield, IllEdarbi (azilsartanmedoxomil), prescribing information. Takeda; Deerfield, Ill: 2011.

Azilsartanmedoxomil (Edarbi): the eighth angiotensin II receptor blocker. J D Jones, S H Jackson, C Agboton, T S Martin, P T. 36Jones JD, Jackson SH, Agboton C, Martin TS 2011 Azilsartanmedoxomil (Edarbi): the eighth angiotensin II receptor blocker. P T 36:634-40.

Pharmacokinetic Pharmacodynamic relationships in phase I/Phase II of drug development. A Van Peer, E Snoeck, M L Huang, J Heykants, Eur J Drug MetabPharmacokinet. 181Van Peer A, Snoeck E, Huang ML, Heykants J 1993 Pharmacokinetic Pharmacodynamic relationships in phase I/Phase II of drug development. Eur J Drug MetabPharmacokinet. 18(1): 49-59.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data and models clinical trials. J L Steimer, M E Ebelin, J Van Bree, Eur J Drug MetabPharmacokinet. 181Steimer JL, Ebelin ME, Van Bree J 1993 Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data and models clinical trials. Eur J Drug MetabPharmacokinet. 18(1): 61-76.

Role of pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic principles in rational and cost-effective drug development. R Lieberman, J Mcmichael, Ther Drug Monit. 184Lieberman R, McMichael J 1996 Role of pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic principles in rational and cost-effective drug development. Ther Drug Monit. 18(4): 423-8.

Yang RS 1995 physiologically based pharmacokinetic/ pharmacodynamicmodelling of chemical mixtures and possible applications in risk assessment. H A El-Masri, R S Thomas, S A Benjamin, Toxicology. 1052-3El-Masri HA, Thomas RS, Benjamin SA, Yang RS 1995 physiologically based pharmacokinetic/ pharmacodynamicmodelling of chemical mixtures and possible applications in risk assessment. Toxicology 105(2-3): 275-82.

Physiologic indirect response models characterize diverse types of pharmacodynamic effects. W J Jusko, H C Ko, ClinPharmacolTher. 564Jusko WJ, Ko HC 1994 Physiologic indirect response models characterize diverse types of pharmacodynamic effects. ClinPharmacolTher.56(4): 406-19.

Peter Anselm K Gitt1, Peter Baumgart, Felix Bramlage, Mahfoud5, Jochen Sebastian A Potthoff6, Senges1, Steffen Schneider1, Hartmut Buhck7, Roland E Schmieder 2013 EARLY Treatment with azilsartan compared to ACE-inhibitors in anti-hypertensive therapy -rationale and design of the EARLY hypertension registry BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 1346Anselm K Gitt1,Peter Baumgart,Peter Bramlage, Felix Mahfoud5, Sebastian A Potthoff6, Jochen Senges1,Steffen Schneider1, Hartmut Buhck7, Roland E Schmieder 2013 EARLY Treatment with azilsartan compared to ACE-inhibitors in anti-hypertensive therapy -rationale and design of the EARLY hypertension registry BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 13: 46.

Drug-or hormone-induced adaptation: model of adrenergic hypersensitivity. J J Lima, J J Krukemeyer, H Boudoulas, J PharmacokinBiopharm. 173Lima JJ, Krukemeyer JJ, Boudoulas H 1989 Drug-or hormone-induced adaptation: model of adrenergic hypersensitivity. J PharmacokinBiopharm. 17 (3): 347-64.

First-time-in-human dose selection: allometric thoughts and perspectives. H Boxenbaum, C Dilea, J ClinPharmacol. 3510Boxenbaum H, DiLea C 1995 First-time-in-human dose selection: allometric thoughts and perspectives. J ClinPharmacol. 35(10): 957-66.

Application of pharmacodynamicmodeling for designing time-variant dosing regimens to overcome nitroglycerin tolerance in experimental heart failure. J A Bauer, J P Balthasar, H L Fung, 10.1088/1757-899X/263/2/022032IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 149Pharm Res.Bauer JA, Balthasar JP, Fung HL 1997 Application of pharmacodynamicmodeling for designing time-variant dosing regimens to overcome nitroglycerin tolerance in experimental heart failure. Pharm Res. 14 8 1234567890 14th ICSET-2017 IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 263 (2017) 022032 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/263/2/022032 (9): 1140-5.

Methodology for pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data analysis. Weinerdl Gabrielssonjl, Pharm SciTechnoloToday. 26GabrielssonJL,WeinerDL 1999 Methodology for pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data analysis. Pharm SciTechnoloToday 2 (6): 244-52.

Basic concepts of pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (pK/ pD) modelling. B Meibohm, Derendorfh , Int J ClinPharmacolTher. 3510Meibohm B, DerendorfH 1997 Basic concepts of pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (pK/ pD) modelling. Int J ClinPharmacolTher. 35 (10): 401-13.

Mechanism based pharmacodynamicmodeling. Levyg, Clin PharmacolTher. 56LevyG.1994 Mechanism based pharmacodynamicmodeling.Clin PharmacolTher. 56: 356-358

Simultaneous modeling of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics: application to dtubocurarine. L B Sheiner, D R Stanski, S Vozeh, R D Miller, J Ham, ClinPharmacolTher. 253Sheiner LB, Stanski DR, Vozeh S, Miller RD, Ham J 1979 Simultaneous modeling of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics: application to d- tubocurarine. ClinPharmacolTher. 25(3): 358-71.

Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamicmodeling of the central nervous system effects of midazolam and its main metabolite a-hydroxyimidazolam in healthy volunteers. J W Mandema, B Tuk, A L Van Steveninck, D D Breimer, A F Cohen, M Danhof, ClinPharmacolTher. 516Mandema JW, Tuk B, van Steveninck AL, Breimer DD, Cohen AF, Danhof M 1992 Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamicmodeling of the central nervous system effects of midazolam and its main metabolite a-hydroxyimidazolam in healthy volunteers. ClinPharmacolTher. 51(6): 715-28.

Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamicmodeling of risperidone effects on electroencephalography in healthy volunteers. D Y Lee, K U Lee, Kwonjs, Jangij, Chomj, S G Shin, J I Woo, Psychopharmacology. 1443Lee DY, Lee KU, KwonJS, JangIJ,ChoMJ,Shin SG, Woo JI 1999 Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamicmodeling of risperidone effects on electroencephalography in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology 144(3): 272- 8.

Comparison of four basic models of indirect pharmacodynamic responses. N L Dayneka, V Garg, W Jusko, J PharmacokinBiopharm. 214Dayneka NL, Garg V, Jusko W 1993 Comparison of four basic models of indirect pharmacodynamic responses. J PharmacokinBiopharm. 21(4): 457-78.

Jocelyn D Jones, Sylvia H Jackson, Carmen Agboton, Tonya S Martin, The Eighth Angiotensin II Receptor Blocker. 36Jocelyn D. Jones, Sylvia H. Jackson, Carmen Agboton, and Tonya S. Martin, 2011 AzilsartanMedoxomil (Edarbi): The Eighth Angiotensin II Receptor Blocker 36 (10): 634-640.

Physiologically based pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modelling of chemical mixtures and possible applications in risk assessment. H A El-Masri, R S Thomas, S A Benjamin, R S Yang, Toxicology. 1052-3El-Masri HA, Thomas RS, Benjamin SA, Yang RS 1995 Physiologically based pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modelling of chemical mixtures and possible applications in risk assessment. Toxicology 105(2-3): 275-82.

Comparison of four basic models of indirect pharmacodynamic responses. N L Dayneka, V Garg, W Jusko, J PharmacokinBiopharm. 214Dayneka NL, Garg V, Jusko W 1993 Comparison of four basic models of indirect pharmacodynamic responses. J PharmacokinBiopharm. 21(4): 457-78.

Physiological indirect effect modelling of the antilipolytic effects of adenosine A1-receptor agonists. E A Vanschaick, H J De Greef, A P Ijzerman, M Danhof, J PharmacokinetBiopharm. 256vanSchaick EA, de Greef HJ, Ijzerman AP, Danhof M 1997 Physiological indirect effect modelling of the antilipolytic effects of adenosine A1-receptor agonists. J PharmacokinetBiopharm. 25(6): 673-94.

Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). www.wikipedia.org. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER); March 2003.

Azilsartan medoxomil in the management of hypertension: an evidence-based review of its place in therapy. Emiliano Angeloni, Core Evidence. 11Emiliano Angeloni. April 2016 Azilsartan medoxomil in the management of hypertension: an evidence-based review of its place in therapy. Core Evidence ; 11: 1-10.

Mathematical Comparison of curves with an emphasis on in vitro dissolution profiles. Moore J W Flanner, H H , Pharm. Tech. 206Moore J.W, Flanner H.H. 1996. Mathematical Comparison of curves with an emphasis on in vitro dissolution profiles. Pharm. Tech. 20(6), : 64-74,

Biopharmaceutics and pharmacokinetics in drug research. P Ramesh, Sunil Thomas, International Journal of Pharmaceutics. 201Ramesh P, Sunil Thomas N2000 Biopharmaceutics and pharmacokinetics in drug research. International Journal of Pharmaceutics 201: 131-150

Angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers. M Burnier, Circulation. 103Burnier M 2001 Angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers. Circulation 103:904- 912.

. Leon Shargel, Susanna Wu-Pong, Andrew B C Yu, Applied Biopharmaceutics & Pharmacokinetics. 7Michael Weitz and Regina Y. Brown United States of Americath editionLeon Shargel, Susanna Wu-Pong, Andrew B.C.Yu 7 th edition, Applied Biopharmaceutics & Pharmacokinetics, Michael Weitz and Regina Y. Brown United States of America.

10.1088/1757-899X/263/2/02203214th ICSET-2017 IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 2632203214th ICSET-2017 IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 263 (2017) 022032 doi:10.1088/1757-899X/263/2/022032

In vitro dissolution profile comparisonstatistics and analysis of the similarity factor. V P Shah, Song Y T Sathe, P , Pharm. Res. 15Shah V.P, Song Y.T, Sathe, P 1998. In vitro dissolution profile comparison - statistics and analysis of the similarity factor. Pharm. Res. 15: 889-896.

SUPAC-SS Non-sterile semisolid Dosage Forms, Scale-Up and Post Approval Changes: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls; In Vitro Release Testing and In Vivo Bioequivalence Documentation. U.S.Food and Drug Administration (FDABocaRaton, FLCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDERU.S.Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (1997). SUPAC-SS Non-sterile semisolid Dosage Forms, Scale-Up and Post Approval Changes: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls; In Vitro Release Testing and In Vivo Bioequivalence Documentation. BocaRaton, FL; Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER).