# A review of Conocetus Desbrochers des Loges, 1875, subgenus of Polydrusus Germar, 1817 (Coleoptera, Curculionidae, Entiminae)

CorpusID: 89701568
 
tags: #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72bf54288612aaccc4619f6bc776f4ab833d556c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72bf54288612aaccc4619f6bc776f4ab833d556c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review of Conocetus Desbrochers des Loges, 1875, subgenus of Polydrusus Germar, 1817 (Coleoptera, Curculionidae, Entiminae)


Christoph Germann germann.christoph@gmail.com 
Naturmuseum Solothurn
Klosterplatz 2CH-4500Solothurn

Naturhistorisches Museum der Burgergemeinde Bern
Bernastrasse 15CH-3005BernSwitzerland

A review of Conocetus Desbrochers des Loges, 1875, subgenus of Polydrusus Germar, 1817 (Coleoptera, Curculionidae, Entiminae)
2118-97735505537A6EF05821320544F40D77B06210.5852/ejt.2018.392PolydrusiniPolydrususConocetusDenticonocetusnew subgenusnew speciesnew synonymsnew recordstaxonomyEastern Mediterranean region
The species of the subgenus Conocetus Desbrochers des Loges, 1875 are reviewed and Polydrusus (Conocetus) transjordanus sp.nov. is described.Upon examination of the holotype of Polydrusus bardus Gyllenhal, 1834, it was observed that the species hitherto determined sensu auctorum as P. bardus was a misidentification.The specimen in question was therefore unnamed and is thus newly described as Polydrusus (Conocetus) crinipes sp.nov.

## Introduction

Desbrochers des Loges (1875) established the genus Conocetus for three species: Polydrusus bardus Gyllenhal, 1834, P. virens (Kiesenwetter, 1864) and the type species Conocetus grandiceps Desbrochers des Loges, 1875.He later provided a first review of the genus (Desbrochers des Loges 1902), including a determination key, new descriptions and redescriptions of several species.Schilsky (1910) included Conocetus as a subgenus in Polydrusus Germar, 1817 based on the similarity of the head and rostrum with the subgenera Leucodrosus Seidlitz, 1890 (type species P. tibialis Gyllenhal, 1834), Tylodrusus Stierlin, 1884 (type species P. pterygomalis Boheman, 1840) and Eustolus C.G. Thomson, 1859 (at present a senior synonym of Tylodrusus).This proposition was followed by all subsequent authors.

The most recently described new species in the subgenus Conocetus is P. (Conocetus) festae (Solari, 1925), based on specimens from Libya (Solari 1925).

The subgenus Conocetus is characterized as follows: 1) rostrum broad, transverse; 2) antennal scrobes lateral, short and triangular with lower margin protruding downwards and obtusely angled; 3) left mandible stronger, rectangularly protruding; 4) temples always well visible; 5) eyes oval to long-oval, more or less bulged, protruding from the head's outline; 6) antennae very slender and thin; 7) pronotum mostly as long as wide; 8) legs slender, femora without teeth; 9) integument of elytra and pronotum with circular to oval adjacent scales and bare areas where hairs arise.After the present review, Conocetus and Denticonocetus subgen.nov.consist of 12 species, all distributed in the Eastern Mediterranean region, except for P. longus (Stierlin, 1884) from Morocco -reported here as incertae sedis.Collection localities are cited directly from labels with original spelling and punctuation.For type specimens, the different specimen labels are given from the top downward and separated by a double slash (//).Additional information and general remarks are highlighted using square brackets [ ].


## Material and methods


## Abbreviations

Photographs were taken with a 5-megapixel digital camera (Leica DFC 420).Series of images were captured through a binocular microscope (Leica MZ16) and processed with Auto-Montage software (Imagic Image Access, Version 8).All measurements were taken digitally with the measurement-tool of the above mentioned Auto-Montage software.Body length was measured from the anterior margin of sclerite, see Fig. 9D-P, whereas in Eustolus the internal sac consists of several differently shaped, complex sclerites, and in the rather heterogeneous Polydrusus s. str. the internal sacs consist of prevailing tissues with rasp-like teeth.


## Etymology

The subgeneric name Denticonocetus subgen.nov. is of male gender and combines the characteristically dentate femora (in Latin: dentis = tooth) and the morphologically most similar subgenus Conocetus.

Polydrusus (Denticonocetus subgen.nov.) kahri Kirsch


## Comments on new synonymies

Based on all specimens examined and their identical internal sacs (see Fig. 9A-C), P. siculus and P. vodozi are hereby regarded as junior synonyms of P. kahri.Magnano (1964) resurrected P. siculus from synonymy, mainly based on the differences given by Desbrochers des Loges (1872) in the original description.However, upon examination of specimens from various localities for the present study, these characters do not support a species status, therefore Polydrusus siculus = Polydrusus kahri.

In the case of P. vodozi, the synonymy with P. kahri proposed by Hoffmann (1950) and Schott (2014) is formally approved here (Polydrusus vodozi = Polydrusus kahri).The type specimen in the collection of Desbrochers was examined by L. Schott and confirmed as conspecific with P. kahri; furthermore, a male specimen from Corsica was examined (see below).


## Remarks

Polydrusus kahri is a widespread species reported from France (Alpes Maritimes), including Corsica (Vizzavona: Hoffmann 1950; Schott 2014), Austria to Dalmatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, Montenegro (Yunakov 2013; no specimens presently examined and not included in Fig. 10), Greece, and all of Italy including Sicily, but apparently excluding Sardinia (mentioned by Hoffmann 1950 CoLour.Body colour reddish-brown.Head, pronotum and elytra set with oval to roundish, vivid green shimmering scales and long, pointed, light brownish adjacent hairs.head.Rostrum short and wide, almost twice as wide as long.Eyes oval, irregularly bulged, strongest in first third, well protruding from outline of head.Pterygia well developed, visible from above.Pterygial span as wide as frons just behind the eyes.Rostral dorsum and frons between the eyes flat, upper side of head behind eyes slightly bulged.Rostral dorsum irregularly striato-punctuate with carinula in the middle.Epistome well visible, V-shaped, margin glossy.Mandibles strong, left mandible above right one, thus fore margin of epistome assymmetrically protruding leftwards.Antennal scrobes lateral, short and triangular, lower margin buckled downwards, with obtuse angle.Temples visible, ½ the maximal eye length.

antennae.Long and slender, antennal funiculus longer than scape, reddish-brown, scape bowed, clubbed towards apex, reaching backwards into first third of pronotum.Antennal funiculus with 7 antennomeres: 1 st longer than 2 nd and 3 rd ; 5 th to 7 th of same length; 4 th slightly longer than 3 rd and 5 th to 7 th ; club with 3 segments, elongate-oval.

Pronotum.Transverse (L/W: 0.7-0.8),sides slightly rounded, widest just behind the middle, constricted just before fore margin and simply rounded towards hind margin.Hairs and oval to lanceolate greenish scales directing towards an imaginary line in the middle of the disc.Scales at disc of pronotum narrower oval.

eLytra.L/W: males 2.0, females 1.8-1.9.Elongate, widest at shoulders and almost parallel (males) or widest behind the middle (females), round-pointed towards apex, shoulders present, with hind wings.Striae with shorter, adjacent white hairs.Interspaces with long, light brownish, adjacent, pointed hairs standing irregularly.Vestiture consisting of regular-standing broad oval to roundish scales with vivid green shimmer.Scales narrower along suture.

Legs.Strong, reddish-brown coloured to yellowish, all femora edentate, set with whitish hairs with a pearl-like lustre.Tarsi with first tarsomere twice as long as second, third bilobed, about 1.5 times as wide as the second, fourth one minute, claw segment as long as second and third together, claws fused at base.maLe genitaLia.Penis with apophyses shorter than median lobe, this attenuated towards broad triangular apex with blunt tip, in lateral view flattened (Fig. 7E).Internal sac wrench-like, with leaf-like flattened base, two triangular sclerites at apex and a thin, tube-like, bowed sclerite in-between in lateral view (Fig. 9G).

FemaLe genitaLia.Spiculum ventrale with very long and slender apodeme, plate hardly sclerotized.Spermatheca C-shaped with short nodulus and ramus; nodulus twice as long as ramus.


## Remarks, variability and differentiation

The new species corresponds to specimens misidentified by authors as Polydrusus bardus.Examination of the holotype of P. bardus revealed that the description by Gyllenhal (in Schoenherr et al. 1834) referred instead to a species commonly known as P. gracilicornis Kiesenwetter, 1864 (or its junior synonyms, see the overview above for details), and therefore has priority over that name.

The reddish-brown to yellowish legs, with hairs but deprived of scales, are characteristic for both P. crinipes sp.nov.and P. rhodiacus.Polydrusus crinipes sp.nov.further differs from P. rhodiacus by the protruding convex eyes (Fig. 3A-B) (vs elongate drop-shaped in P. rhodiacus; Fig. 2E-F).


## Ecology

The new species was collected from May to July, often along rivers (e.g., Nestos River), from sea level to montane altitudes, on various deciduous trees (e.g., Corylus avellana, Populus, Ulmus, Ziziphus).
Polydrusus (Conocetus) transjordanus sp. nov. urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:CFF6EFCB-C8C1-489E-BBF0-794D18269536 Figs 2C-D, 6E-H, 9O, 11

## Etymology

The name of the new species, transjordanus, is derived from its distribution across the Jordan River.head.Rostrum short and almost twice as wide as long.Eyes oval, regularly and moderately bulged, protruding from outline of head.Pterygia well developed, visible from above.Pterygial span as wide as frons just behind the eyes.Rostral dorsum and frons between the eyes flat, upper side of head behind eyes slightly bulged.Rostral dorsum irregularly striato-punctuate with carinula in the middle.Epistome well visible, V-shaped, margin glossy.Mandibles strong, left mandible above right one, thus fore margin of epistome asymmetrically protruding to the left.Antennal scrobes lateral, short and triangular, lower margin buckled downwards, obtuse angled.Temples visible, ⅔ of the maximal eye length.


## Material examined


## Holotype

antennae.Long and slender, yellowish, scape bowed, clubbed towards apex, just reaching backwards (laterally) to fore margin of pronotum.Antennal funiculus with 7 antennomeres: 1 st longer than 2 nd ; 3 rd to 7 th of same length but slightly broadening; club with 3 visible segments, elongate-oval.

Pronotum.Simply rounded towards hind margin.Hairs and oval to lanceolate greenish scales directing towards imaginary point in middle of fore margin.Scales at margins of pronotum mostly standing more densely.

eLytra.L/W: 1.7-1.8.Elongate, widest at shoulders and parallel (males) or widest behind middle (females), round-pointed towards apex, shoulders present, with hind wings.Striae with short, adjacent white hairs as long as puncture diameter.Interspaces with long, whitish, semi-raised and pointed hairs standing regularly in one row.Vestiture appearing spotty and consisting of oval to elongate-oval scales with greenish pearl-like lustre.Scales narrower and smaller along suture.

Legs.Strong, reddish-brown to yellowish coloured, all femora edentate, set with whitish hairs and oval scales with a greenish pearl-like lustre.Tarsi with first tarsomere twice as long as second, third bilobed, about 1.5 times as wide as second, fourth one minute, claw segment as long as second and third together, claws fused at base.maLe genitaLia.Penis with apophyses shorter than median lobe, this attenuated up to ⅔ of its length, from there broadening towards triangular apex with prolonged blunt tip protruding tongue-like, flattened in lateral view (Fig. 6E-H).Internal sac wrench-like, with leaf-like flattened base, two S-shaped sclerites at apex and a strong, b-shaped sclerite in-between in lateral view (Fig. 9O).

FemaLe genitaLia.Spiculum ventrale with very long and slender apodeme, plate hardly sclerotized.Spermatheca C-shaped with short nodulus and slightly longer, strongly bowed ramus.


## Variability and differentiation

The density of the vestiture varies and the colour of the scales varies from greenish to whitish, but always with a pearl-like lustre.The size also varies considerably: males are generally smaller than females, but the eyes of males are bigger, in relation to head size, than those of females.Polydrusus (Conocetus) transjordanus sp.nov. is morphologically most similar to P. grandiceps, differing in the smaller eyes (in relation to head size; Fig. 5A-B), mostly more greenish and more oval scales, and the more gracile penis (see key; Fig. 6E-H).Polydrusus bardus is at first sight morphologically similar to P. transjordanus sp.nov.and may reach the distribution area of the latter at the north-western border (ancient records from "Syria"; see under bardus).However, the vestiture of P. bardus consists of denser and more regular standing, roundish and more vivid-green scales on the elytra and pronotum (loosely standing, oval and pale greenish ones in P. transjordanus sp.nov.), and shorter, more adjacent hairs on the head, pronotum and elytra (about twice as long and more steeply raised in P. transjordanus sp.nov.).


## Ecology

The new species was found almost year-round (from January to November) and collected mainly in woodland on both evergreen and summer-green oaks (e.g., Quercus ilex, Q. boissieri, Q. calliprinos, Q. ithaburensis) and on Pistacia palaestina, from lowlands up to montane altitudes.


## Polydrusus


## Variability and differentiation

Males are more gracile than females.The colour of legs varies from dark brown and blackish to yellowish.The most similar species is Polydrusus calabricus which shares the body shape (long-oval elytra) and the shape of the penis (Fig. 7F-G).Both are easily separable by the shape of the eyes (see key and Fig. 3C-F).Only P. rhodiacus shows similar eyes (Fig. 2E-F), but differs in legs deprived of scales and the elongate shape of the penis (Fig. 7D).


## Ecology

Collected from April to June (exceptionally also in September) at various altitudes from beach to montane level from different deciduous trees (Amygdalus, Pistacia lentiscus, Prunus, Quercus) and Cupressaceae.


## Polydrusus (Conocetus) bardus Gyllenhal, 1834

Figs 4A-B, 7H, 9K-L, 10


## Material examined

Type material TURKEY: 1 ♀ (holotype of P. bardus Gyllenhal, 1834), "Chersonis" [and a second word, probably the collector "Eindstedt…" illegibly handwritten] // NHRS-JLKB 000023178 // Typus [red printed label].GREECE: 1 ♂ (holotype of P. graecus (Stierlin, 1884)), Holotype Attica // coll.Stierlin // Holotypus // C. graecus Stl.// Holotypus P. graecus Stierlin det.Dieckmann 1989 (SDEI).The synonymy with P. bardus is confirmed.


## Type locality

The type locality of P. bardus is Thracian Chersonese, today Gallipoli in Turkish Thrace.


## Comments on new synonymies

Polydrusus bardus = P. gracilicornis


## Remarks

As already stated by Schilsky (1910), P. (Conocetus) bardus was often confused and misinterpreted (see under P. crinipes sp.nov.), and it was only by examining the type specimen that the true identity of the species could be clearly established.Desbrochers des Loges (1902) confused it with P. marcidus in his redescription, but there are also examples in the revised collections where P. bardus (or P. crinipes sp.nov.) were confused with P. calabricus (e.g., det.Stöcklein NMB).


## Variability

This often misinterpreted species varies considerably in size, vestiture (scale size, colour), vestiture of legs (metallic hairs with or without scales intermixed), length and orientation of hairs on elytra and, to a lesser degree, in the shape of the pronotum, which is mirrored in the different names aiming for the shape of the pronotum (cylindrithorax, quadraticollis).However, careful examination of the shape of the penis as well as the internal sac across a comprehensive body of material (see above) allowed the identification of a single, more widely distributed species.


## Ecology

Desbrochers des Loges (1902) indicated "sur les Pins" [on pine trees] in his description.On Crete Polydrusus bardus was beaten from Quercus ithaburensis (C.Germann, pers.obs.) and Q. pubescens (Thompson, data taken from labels).Furthermore, according to label data from various collectors, the species was also collected from Castanea sativa in Turkey (e.g., N. Lodos), and from Quercus ilex, Q. coccifera and Q. ithaburensis macrolepis in Greece (L.Friedman).Records are from April to August, from sea level to subalpine altitudes.(Faust,


## Polydrusus (Conocetus) baudii


## Type locality

Cyprus.


## Variability

Rather constant in size and vestiture, the colour of the scales varies from greenish to brownish.


## Ecology

Collected from various trees (L.Behne; Pistacia, Pinus, Juniperus, Cistus) in creek valleys and Olive groves at various altitudes in spring and summer (from April to August).


## Polydrusus


## Type locality

Calabria (Italy).


## Variability and similar species

The diagnosis given by Faust (1890) is precise: "...sie kann sehr leicht mit angustus Luc.verwechselt werden, wenn man die breitere Stirn, die kürzeren, mehr gewölbten Augen, den breiten Rüssel und die dünneren Beine von calabricus nicht beachtet."[…it (P.calabricus) can very easily be confused with angustus, if the wider frons, the shorter and more convex eyes, the wider rostrum and the more slender legs of calabricus were not considered].See also the comments above under P. angustus, the most similar species to P. calabricus.


## Ecology

Collected from May to June, from sea level to subalpine altitudes.


## Polydrusus


## Type locality

LIBYA: Cyrenaica.


## Remarks

Solari (1925) provided the following (type) localities (included in Fig. 12): Derna, Zavia (= Az Zawiyah), Mechili, Tecnis (= Taknis) and Tolmetta.The first records of P. festae outside of Libya were already reported by Germann et al. (2015) as specimens of an unknown Conocetus sp. from Samos Island.It is remarkable that this brachypterous and thus supposedly little-mobile species occurs across the Mediterranean Sea.This can be explained by the recent introduction of this species in Greece (Samos Island and Crete), although the first specimens known from Crete (without collecting date, see above) were collected by Gustav Paganetti-Hummler (1871-1949), hence a very recent introduction can be excluded.Polydrusus festae is therefore recorded here for the first time from Greece.


## Variability and similar species

The species was compared with both P. baudii and P. marcidus by Solari (1925), based on the key by Schilsky (1910).The squamulate scutellum, the head shape, pronotum and the oval elytra (Fig. 1C-D) as well as its brachyptery are very characteristic and not shared with other species of the subgenus.


## Ecology

Collected from February (Solari 1925) to June, from the sea shore to colline altitudes.Other material examined EGYPT: 2 ♂♂, 1 ♀, Cairo Aegypt., coll.Frey (NMB).

ISRAEL: 1 ex., Qiryat Tiv'on, on Quercus ithaburensis, 25 Apr. 1954 Kraatz]."However, the chosen lectotype and paralectotype, which were the only specimens pinned under the species' name in the collection of Ernst August Hellmuth von Kiesenwetter (in ZSM), fit perfectly the author's description and it is very likely that the author based his description on them.Kiesenwetter probably bought them from Theobald Krüper, who was known to sell insects from Greece from 1859 (Horn et al. 1990), then labelled them himself.

Four syntypes of Polydrusus gracilis (Stierlin, 1888) where the lectotype and three paralectotypes are selected in accordance with the description by Stierlin (1888b):


## Incertae sedis

Polydrusus longus (Stierlin, 1884) Fig. 11 Type locality MOROCCO: Tangiers.


## Remarks

Unfortunately no specimen of this seemingly very characteristic species, based on its narrow and very elongate elytra (length: 5 mm, width: 1 mm), which are 3 times as long as wide (Stierlin 1884), could be examined in the present review.Stierlin (1884) compared P. longus with P. bardus (whereas with present knowledge, P. crinipes sp.nov.was meant).However, the distribution of P. longus, which seems to be restricted to the westernmost part of the Mediterranean basin, in comparison with the eastern focus of all other species of the subgenus, is at least surprising.One specimen from the BMNH was determined by L. Magnano as "Polydrusus (Conocetus) longus Stl.", but belongs instead to Polydrusus (Chomatocryptus) xanthopus Gyllenhal, 1834.As the placement in Conocetus cannot be verified, and is doubtful based on the deviant distribution and the very elongate habitus, the species is preliminarily treated as incertae sedis.



Yunakov (2013) listed 19 species of Conocetus in the Catalogue of Palaearctic Coleoptera and a further 18 are listed in the Cooperative Catalogue of the Palaearctic Coleoptera Curculionoidea (Alonso-Zarazaga et al. 2017: 354-364), excluding the erroneous repetition of Polydrusus (Conocetus) virens (Kiesenwetter, 1864).




of Natural History, Stockholm SDEI = Senckenberg Deutsches Entomologisches Institut, Müncheberg SMNHTAU = Steinhardt Museum of Natural History, Dept of Zoology, Tel Aviv University, Israel ZSM = Zoologische Staatssammlung München Private collections cCB = collection Carlo Braunert, Mensdorf cCG = collection Christoph Germann, Rubigen (partly in the NMBE) cGM = collection Gerd Müller, Frechen cHW = collection Herbert Winkelmann, Berlin cJF = collection Jan Fremuth, Hradec Králové cJH = collection Julien Haran, Montpellier cLM = collection Luigi Magnano (at the BMNH) cJM = collection Jochen Messutat, Preußisch-Oldendorf cJP = collection Jean Pelletier, Monnaie cKS = collection Karel Schön, Litvínov cPB = collection Piotr Białooki, Sopot cRB = collection Roman Borovec, Sloupno


## FRANCE: 1 ♂
1
Fig. 1.A-B.Habitus of Polydrusus (Denticonocetus) kahri Kirsch, 1865. A. Male from Ancona, Italy.B. Female from Sicily, Italy.-C-D.Polydrusus (Conocetus) festae (F.Solari, 1925) from Samos Island, Greece.C. Male.D. Female.-E-F.Polydrusus stierlini (Schilsky, 1910).E. Male from Chalkidike, Greece.F. Female from Peloponnese, Greece.




ISREAL: 1 ♂, Har Meron, 5 Jun.1974, leg.D. Furth // [red label:] Holotype Polydrusus (Conocetus) transjordanus sp.nov.des.C. Germann 2016 (SMNHTAU).Type locality ISRAEL: Mount Meron.


## Fig. 2 .
2
Fig. 2. A-B.Habitus of Polydrusus (Conocetus) grandiceps (Desbrochers des Loges, 1875).A. Lectotype male from Lebanon.B. Female from Syria.-C-D.Polydrusus transjordanus sp.nov., paratypes from Jordan.C. Male.D. Female.-E-F.Polydrusus rhodiacus (Schilsky, 1912).E. Male from Nicosia, Cyprus.F. Female lectotype from Cyprus.


## Fig. 3 .
3
Fig. 3. A-B.Habitus of Polydrusus (Conocetus) crinipes sp.nov. A. Holotype, male from Corfu, Greece.B. Female from Bulgaria.-C-D.Polydrusus angustus (Lucas, 1854).C. Male from Rhodes, Greece.D. Female from Kalymnos, Greece.-E-F.Polydrusus calabricus (Faust, 1890).E. Male from Peloponnese, Greece.F. Female from Cephalonia, Greece.




Type locality GREECE: Mount Ida, Crete.Other material examined GREECE: 1 ♀, Naxos, coll.Stierlin (SDEI); 4 ex., Graecia coll.Stierlin (SDEI); 1 ♀, Thessalia, Volo, leg.Stussiner (SDEI); 3 ex., Thessal[ia] Pelion, leg.Stussiner (SDEI); 2 ex., Aegina v. Oertzen (SDEI); 1 ♂, Naxos, leg.Schatzmayr (SDEI); 2 ex., Kreta, leg.Paganetti (SDEI); 7 ex., Parnass, leg.Paganetti (SDEI); 1 ex., Attica, leg.Reitter (SDEI); 1 ♂, Athen, coll.V. Heyden (SDEI); 1 ♀, Attica, leg.Reitter, coll.V. Heyden (SDEI); 1 ♂, Graecia leg.Kraatz (SDEI); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Graecia, leg.Faust (SDEI); 2 ♀♀, Parnass, leg.Paganetti, coll.Piesbergen (SDEI); 2 ex., Asiat.Türkei, Rhodes, coll.Stöcklein (NMB); 2 ex., Volo, Thessalien, coll.P. Meyer (NMB); 2 ♂♂, Parnass, Graecia (NMB); 2 ex., Cycla.[Cyclades], coll.Kraatz (SDEI); 1 ex., femoratus Strl.Graecia Zeiller (SDEI); 1 ex., Taygetos, coll.Apfelbeck (NMB); 1 ex., Graecia, coll.Apfelbeck (NMB); 2 ex., Parnass, leg.Paganetti, coll.J. Breit (NMB); 3 ex., Parnass, leg.Paganetti 1903, coll.Stöcklein (NMB); 2 ex., Kreta, leg.Paganetti, coll.Stöcklein (NMB); 1 ex., Parnass, Paganetti, coll.G.A.K. Marshall (BMNH); 1 ♂, Parnass, Paganetti, coll.J.B. Jörger (NMB); 2 ex., Parnass, Paganetti, coll.J. Breit (NMB); 1 ex., Kreta, Paganetti, coll.G.A.K. Marshall (BMNH); 1 ex., Paleohoka, 17 May 1999, Crète, C. Besnard rec.(cJP); 4 ex., Saloniki, coll. A. Rätzer (NMBE); 1 ex., Kreta Ins., Dikti Mts, Lesithi plateau, 800 m, 5 Jun.2001, leg.J. Voříšek (BMNH); 2 ex., Rhodos, 11-30 May 1974, v. Budberg leg.(BMNH); 1 ♂, Peloponesos, S of Tripolis, Karies, 24 Jun.2004, J. Voříšek leg.(BMNH); 1 ♀, Peloponesos or., Astros, 5-20 m, 25 May 2004, J. Voříšek leg.(BMNH); 1 ex., Rhodos, 9 May [19]70, leg.Dr. Engelman, coll O. Voříšek (BMNH); 2 ♂, Attika, Varkiza, 6 May [19]93, leg.Colonnelli (cRB); 21 ex., Rhodes, Lachania, env.50 m, 8 May 1995, leg.R. Borovec (cCG, cRB); 1 ex., Rhodes (FO 13), Afandou beach, 5 May [20]


## Fig. 4 .
4
Fig. 4. A-B.Habitus of Polydrusus (Conocetus) bardus Gyllenhal, 1834. A. Male from Crete, Greece.B. Female from Rhodes, Greece.-C-D.Polydrusus marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864.C. Male from Antalya, Turkey.D. Female from Chalkidike, Greece.-E-F.Polydrusus baudii (Faust, 1889).E. Male from Lemesos, Cyprus.F. Female from Paphos, Cyprus.


## Fig. 6 .
6
Fig. 6.A-D.Penis of Polydrusus (Conocetus) grandiceps (Desbrochers des Loges, 1875), lateral and dorsal views.A. Lectotype: Lebanon.B. Turkey, Erdemli.C. Israel, Nimrod.D. Israel, Panyas.-E-H.Penis of P. transjordanus sp.nov., lateral and dorsal views.E. Jordan, Ajlun.F. Israel, Nahal Oren.G. Israel, Mi'ilya.H. Holotype: Israel, Mt Meron.




Found on flowering Quercus ilex bushes (G & U. Müller and C. Germann; photograph of the habitat in Germann et al. 2015).Polydrusus (Conocetus) grandiceps (Desbrochers des Loges, 1875) Figs 2A-B, 6A-D, 9P, 11 Material examined Lectotype The following syntype specimen is hereby designated as lectotype of Polydrusus (Conocetus) grandiceps: LEBANON: 1 ♂, Conocetus grandiceps Desbr.Libanon cèdres Desbroch.[handwritten] // Syntypus [printed] // Faust vid.teste // Sch.[green paper] // coll.L. v. Heyden [printed] // [red label:] Lectotype Polydrusus.(Conocetus) grandiceps (Desbrochers des Loges, 1875) des.C. Germann 2016 (SDEI).


## Fig. 7 .
7
Fig. 7. A-H.Penis of Polydrusus (Denticonocetus) and P. (Conocetus) spp., dorsal and lateral views.A. P. (D.) kahri Kirsch, 1865, Italy, Sicily.B. P. festae (F.Solari, 1925), Greece, Samos.C. P. stierlini (Schilsky, 1910), Greece, Macedonia.D. P. rhodiacus (Schilsky, 1912), Cyprus, Dionios.E. P. crinipes sp.nov., Greece, Corfu.F. P. angustus (Lucas, 1854), Greece, Crete.G. P. calabricus (Faust, 1890), Greece, Peloponnese.H. P. bardus Gyllenhal, 1834, Greece, Crete.


## GREECE: 2
2
♀♀ [on the same pin, the upper one is selected here as lectotype], gracilis Strl Graecia Zeiller [unknown handwriting] // Db. // gracilis ♀♂ // ♀ [both are females] (collection L. von Heyden, SDEI); 1 ♀, Db. // gracilis // ♀ // Sch.(ditto); 1 ♀, gracilicornis Ksw.Creta Rei…[illegible] // 75 // Db. // gracilis // ♀ Sch.(ditto).// [red label:] Lectotype/Paralectotypes Polydrusus (Conocetus) gracilis (Stierlin, 1888) (= marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864) labelled C. Germann 2016.The lectotype and all syntypes belong to P. marcidus; therefore the synonymy of P. gracilis with P. marcidus can be approved here.Type locality GREECE: Peloponnese, Taygetos.Other material examined ALBANIA: 1 ♀, Tepelenë Pass N Buz, 900 m, 10 Jul.2010, leg.H. Mühle 55 (cCG).


## Fig. 9 .
9
Fig. 9. A-C.Internal sac of Polydrusus (Denticonocetus) kahri Kirsch, 1865. A. Italy, Sicilia.B. Croatia, Istria.C. Italy, Monte Baldo.D-P.Internal sac, dorsal and lateral views of: D. P. (Conocetus) festae (F.Solari, 1925), Greece, Samos.E. P. stierlini (Schilsky, 1910), Greece, Poligiros.F. P. rhodiacus (Schilsky, 1912), Cyprus, Dionios.G. P. crinipes sp.nov., Greece, Corfu.H. P. angustus (Lucas, 1854), Greece, Crete.I. P. calabricus (Faust, 1890), Greece, Patra.J. Ditto, Italy, Capo Leuca.K. P. bardus Gyllenhal, 1834, Greece, Crete.L. Ditto Iran, Lorestan.M. P. marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864, Turkey, Antalya.N. P. baudii (Faust, 1889), Cyprus.O. P. transjordanus sp.nov., Jordania, Ajlun.P. P. grandiceps (Desbrochers des Loges, 1875), lectotype, Lebanon.


## Fig. 10 .
10
Fig. 10.Map showing records of Polydrusus (Denticonocetus) kahri Kirsch, 1865, and two species of P. (Conocetus).Those of P. kahri for France were taken from Hoffmann (1950), whereas literature records from Bosnia-Hercegovina, Macedonia and Montenegro, not verified by specimens examined, were not included (map copyright: Google).


## Fig. 11 .
11
Fig. 11.Map showing records of five species of Polydrusus (Conocetus) and of P. (incertae sedis) longus (Stierlin, 1884) (map copyright: Google).


## Fig. 12 .
12
Fig. 12. Map showing records of four species of Polydrusus (Conocetus); additional records of P. festae (F.Solari, 1925) are taken from Solari (1925) (map copyright: Google).









kahri Kirsch A.la Mt Baldo Tyrol Kahr // 407 // Sch.// coll.L.v.Heyden DEI Müncheberg // [red label:] SYNTYPUS Polydrusus (Denticonocetus) kahri Kirsch, 1865 labelled C. Germann 2015 (SDEI).
, 1865Figs 1A-B, 7A, 9A-C, 10Material examinedSyntypesITALY: 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Type localityITALY: Monte Baldo.
Other material examined AUSTRIA: 3 ex., Teriolis [Zirl, Innsbruck], coll.Koltze (SDEI).CROATIA: 1 ♂, 1 ex., Istria, leg.Reitter (BMNH); 2 ♂♂, Dalmatia, coll.Koltze (SDEI); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Istria, Krk Island, Baska env., leg.E. Strejckova (cRB); 2 ex., Istrien, Vrsar, 17 Jul.1988, leg. W. Suppantschitsch (SDEI); 1 ex., Istrien, Dvigrad, 20 Jul.1988, leg. W. Suppantschitsch (SDEI).




, but not included in Colonnelli 2003, nor in Abbazzi & Maggini 2009).Records by Yunakov (2013) from Cyprus are highly dubious and may refer to misidentifications.Polydrusus kahri shows large variability in size and density of vestiture.
DescriptionPolydrusus (Conocetus) crinipes sp. nov. urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:897EA3D6-350A-4C5A-8E6C-02CF14DCF3E8Figs 3A-B, 7E, 9G, 11 Length. 3.7-4.3 mm, holotype 4.2 mm; females 4.2-5.0 mm.EtymologyThe name 'crinipes' derives from the characteristic hairs 'crinis' on the legs '-pes', shared only withP. rhodiacus within the subgenus.Type materialHolotypeGREECE: ♂, Korfu, Airportlagune, 28 Jul. 1989, leg. W. Suppantschitsch (SDEI) // [red label:] HolotypePolydrusus (Conocetus) crinipes sp. nov. des. C. Germann 2016 (SDEI).Type localityGREECE: Corfu Island.ParatypesBULGARIA: 1 ♂, Pirin, Sugarevo, 700-900 m, 25 Jun. 1983, leg. R. Borovec (cRB); 1 ♀, Sandanski,Struma-Ufer, 4 Jun. 1983, leg. L. Behne (SDEI); 3 ♂♂, 3 ♀♀, Sandanski, Strumatal, 27 Jun. 1983, leg.L. Behne (SDEI, cRB); 2 ♂♂, 6 ♀♀, Sandanski, Strumaufer, 4 Jun. 1983, leg. L. Behne (SDEI); 1 ♂,Pirin, Kasina, 1300-1400 m, 28 Jun. 1983, leg. R. Borovec (cRB); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Sandanski, Jun. 1970, leg.D. Marek (cJF).



Athens // Kiesenwetter (ZSM); 1 ♂, virens Ksw.Grèce Ksw.// Celadonius (Phyll.)Brull.♂ Polydrosus [sic!] (ZSM).[Both with additional red labels:] Syntype Polydrusus (Conocetus) virens (Kiesenwetter, 1864) labelled C. Germann 2016.Two syntypes of Polydrusus (Conocetus) femoratus (Stierlin, 1888): GREECE: 1 ♂, Griechenland [handwritten by L. Dieckmann] // Syntypus [red label] // coll.Stierlin // Polydrusus femoratus Stierl.det.Dieckmann 1989 (SDEI); 1 ♂, Griechenld // P. femoratus Stl.[both Stierlin's handwriting] // Syntypus // Polydrusus femoratus Stierl.det.Dieckmann 1989 (SDEI).
(Conocetus) angustus (Lucas, 1854)Figs 3C-D, 7F, 9H, 11Material examinedSyntypesTwo syntypes of Polydrusus virens (Kiesenwetter, 1864):GREECE: 1 ♀,



14, leg.J. Messutat (cJM); 18 ex., Rhodes, Kalithea env.(FO 1), 24 Apr.-7May 2014, leg.J. Messutat (cJM); 4 ex., Rhodes (FO 2), Kolymbia, beach, 26 Apr.[20]14, leg.J. Messutat (cJM); 8 ex., Rhodes (FO 7), Apollona, N, 400 m, 29 Apr.[20]14, leg.J. Messutat (cJM); 1 ex., Rhodes (FO 3), Archipoli NE, 150 m, 26 Apr.[20]14, leg.J. Messutat (cJM); 1 ex., Rhodes (FO 6), Laerma N, 260 m, 28 Apr.[20]14, leg.J. Messutat 1 ♀.Rhodes, Afantou env., 200 m, 10 May 1996, leg.R. Borovec (cRB); 2 ♀♀, 13 ex., Rhodos, Umgb.Faliraki, E [end of] May [19]83, R. Frieser leg.(SDEI); 1 ♂, Kreta, Aghios, Nikolaos 12 Apr.-3May 1975, leg.R. Köstlin (SDEI); 1 ♀, Peloponnes, Astros, 14 Jun.[19]86, leg.H. Nebauer (SDEI); 1 ♂, Rhodes, 7 May 1995, Koutsoutis env., pr.Emponas, 400 m, leg.Ing.K. Schön (cKS); 12 ex., Crete Isl., Rethymno, Agia Gallini, 0 m, 16 May 2009, leg.C. Germann (cCG, NMBE, NMSO); 1 ♂, Crete Isl., Heraklio, N Demati (E Pirgos), N35°02′28″ N, E25°18′01″ E, 160 m, 19 May 2009, leg.C. Germann (cCG); 11 ex., Kalymnos Island, 1-6 Jun.2012, leg.T. Kissling and M. Albrecht (cCG, NMBE, NMSO); 1 ♂, Peloponnese, Voidokilia-Bucht, Sommer [summer] 2005, leg.K. Germann (NMBE); 7 ex.Samos, 3 km NE of Pythagoreio, 20 m, 10 Jun.2014, leg.Fouque René (cPB); 28 ex., Xanthi, Nestos-Delta, N of Chrysoupoli, Ruderalfläche, 41°00′46″ N, 24°42′39″ E, 40m, 29 May 2016, leg.C. Germann (cCG, NMSO).ITALY (first records for Italy): 13 ex., Sicilia mer.[meridionale], Cassibile, 80 m, 12-13 May 1995, beating of Amygdalus, leg.R. Borovec (cCG, cRB); 4 ex., Calabrica, leg.Baudi (SDEI); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Sicilia mer., Cassibille [sic!], 80 m, 12-13 May 1995, beating of Amygdalus, leg.M. Holecova (SDEI).TURKEY: 1 ex., Asiatic Turkey, 1934, leg.Nihal Shevket (BMNH); 1 ex., Didyma, 21 May 1995, leg.Dr. A. Hamet (cRB); 1 ♂, Smyrna, coll.Apfelbeck (NMB); 8 ex., E Selendi, S Akhisar, 17 May 2010, leg.P. Bialooki (cCG, cPB); 5 ♂♂, 7 ♀♀, N Izmir, 8 km N of Bergama, 22 May 2011, leg.P. Bialooki (cPB, cCG); 2 ♀♀, S Antalya, Gündogmus, 27 Sep.1980, leg.N. Lodos (cCG, cJF); 1 ♀, Menavgat, 5 May 1969, leg.Wewalka (cJF); 1 ♂, Smyrna [Izmir], coll.Apfelbeck (NMB).


## Kiesenwetter, 1864 syn. nov.

Polydrusus gracilicornis was described based on specimens from Crete (Greece), as Kiesenwetter wrote: "Von Zebe auf Creta gesammelt (Ksw.), von Kraatz mir auch, als in Griechenland gesammelt, mitgetheilt."[Collected by Zebe on Crete (Ksw.; thus referring to his own collection)…].Indeed Kraatz only told Kiesenwetter that the (new species) was also found by him in Greece (= mainland Greece, supposedly).There is a single specimen in the Kiesenwetter collection at the ZSM, which is here designated as lectotype of Polydrusus (Conocetus) gracilicornis Kiesenwetter, 1864 with the following label data: Creta // gracilicornis Candie Ksw // Kiesenwetter // [red label:] Lectotype Polydrusus (Conocetus) gracilicornis Kiesenwetter, 1864 des.C. Germann 2016.
Polydrusus

## bardus = P. cylindrithorax Desbrochers des Loges, 1900 syn. nov.

The description of P. cylindrithorax was based on specimens from Rhodes.All examined specimens from Rhodes belong to P. bardus.
Polydrusus bardus = P

## . quadraticollis Desbrochers des Loges, 1902 syn. nov.

Based on examined specimens of P. quadraticollis from Smyrne (= Izmir).All examined specimens from Turkey belong to P. bardus.




: 2 ex., Capo Leuca, 25 May 1948, leg.Giordani-Busulini (cJP); 1 ex., Puglie, S. Menaio, Jun.1965, leg.Abbruzzese (cJP); 1 ex., Aquila, leg.Reitter, coll.Marshall (BMNH); 1 ♀, Puglia, Circ.Mar.Piccolo (TA), 5 Jun.1977, leg.Montemurro (NMB); 1 ♂, Puglia, Francavilla F. (BR), 140 m, 15 May 1976, leg.F. Angelini (cJM).
Figs 3E-F, 7G, 9I-J, 12Material examinedGREECE: 2 ♂♂, Peloponesos b. Clokos Mts, 2 km NE Petsaki, 900-1000 m, 20 May 2004, J. Voříšekleg. (BMNH); 2 ♂♂, 2 ♀♀, Peloponnes, Erimanthos Alepohori, 1800-2000 m, 22 Jun. 1997, leg.Winkelmann (SDEI); 2 ex., Epirus, Umgeb. Konitsa, 9 Jul. 2006, leg. W. Ziegler (cHW); 1 ♂, Corfu N,Mt Pandokratoras, Lafki (3 km SE Acharavi), 39°46′24″ N, 19°50′41″ E, 420 m, 21 May 2012, leg. Bahrand Winkelmann (cHW); 2 ♂♂, 3 ♀♀, Corfu N, Lake Andinioti (4.5 km SE Acharavi), 39°48′54″ N,19°51′42″ E, 22 May 2012, leg. Bahr and Winkelmann (cCG, cHW); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Pelopones, coll. Apfelbeck(NMB); 2 ♂♂, 5 ♀♀, Petroto, SE Patra, NW Peloponnesus, 28 May 2012, leg. P. Bialooki (cCG, cPB);1 ♂, 1 ♀, Kefallonia, Poros env., 29 May-5 Jun. 1997, leg. Ing. K. Schön (cRB); 1 ♂, Peloponnes10 km sü Kalamata über Ano Ve.g., ca. 400 m 1 May 1990, leg. A. Elbert (SDEI); 1 ♀, Peloponnes
(Faust, 1890)alabricus(Faust, 1890)3 km sü Kalamata Schluchteingang [entrance of a gorge], ca 150 m, 1 May 1990, leg. A. Elbert (SDEI); 1 ♂, Epirus Nomos Thesprotia, Tal zw.Margariti und Morti, 24 May 1992, leg. A. Elbert (SDEI); 1 ♂, Kalavrita, 23 May 1990, leg.Svec (cRB); 2 ex., [Peloponnese] Ilias, Panopoulos, Eichenwald NW, 21.39 E, 37.50 N, 30 May 2006, leg.Rieger (cCG, cJM).ITALY


## on new synonymy Polydrusus grandiceps = P. zurcheri (Schilsky, 1912) syn. nov

Kiesenwetter, 1864ht (BMNH); 1 ♂, Har Hermon, 33°18.1′N,34°46.4′E,1760m,20Jul.2009,leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, Panyas, 33°14′55″ N, 35°41′40″ E, 20 Jul.2009, leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, Mezudat Nimrod, 27 May 1999, leg.V. Chikatunov (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, Mezudat Nimrod, 27 May 1999, leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 2 ex., Har Hermon, 1600 m, 5 Aug. 2004, leg.L. Friedman/A.Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 4 ex., Har Hermon, 33°18′ N, 35°46′ E, 1500-1600 m, 6 Jun.2002, leg.L. Friedman/A.Freidberg (SMNHTAU).1 ex., Har Hermon, 1600 m, 12 Jun.2003,leg.L. Friedman/A.Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 9 ex., Har Hermon, 1600 m, 33°18.1′N,35°46.2′E,20Jul.2009,leg.L. Friedman/A.Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Har Dov, 33°16′ N, 35°41′ E, 635 m, 6 Jun.2013, leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, Hermon Field School, 18 May 2009, leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, Har Dov, Mizpe Ramta, 16 Jun.1999,leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ♂, Panyas, 14 Jun.1996, leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 1 ♀, Har Dov, 33°15′ N, 35°40′ E, 300 m, 6 Jun.2013, leg.L. Friedman (SMNHTAU).JORDAN: 1 ♂, 5 km NE of Ajlun, 32.36754 N, 35.77937 E, 1005 m, 10 Jun.2011, leg.C.Monnerat (cCG); 1 ♂, Ajlun, Eichenwäldchen, Gesiebe, 32°18′23″ N, E35°46′4″ E, 1163 m, 1 Jun.2012, leg.M. Borer (cCG); 1 ♂, 3 ex., Amman, 800 m, 27 Jun.1957,leg.J. Klapperich (SDEI); 1 ♀ Dehbeen b.Jerash, 19 Jun.1959, leg.J. Klapperich (SDEI); 3 ex., Umgb.Jerash, 31 Aug. 1968, leg.J. Klapperich (SDEI).Northern gov., Bcharre env., 1 km E of Ariz, Horsh Arz el-Rab, 34°14′33″ N, 36°2′59″ E, 1900 m, ancient Cedrus forest, swept and singled, 20 Jun.2016, leg. A. Kotán, P. Nemes and T. Németh (cPB); 1 ex., Northern gov., Ehden env., Horsh Ehden Natural Reserve, 34°18′33″ N, 35°59′14″ E, 1525 m, swept and singled, 19 Jun.2016, leg. A. Kotán, P. Nemes and T. Németh (cPB); 1 ♂, 1 ♀, Northern gov., Tannourine env., 2 km N of Harissa, Tannourine Cedars Nat.Reserve, 34°12′34″ N, 35°55′45″ E, 1750 m, swept and singled, 18 Jun.2016,leg.A. Kotán, P. Nemes and T. Németh (cPB).SYRIA: 1 ♂, 6 ex., Burqush env., NW Damascus, 25 May 1998, leg.S. Kadlec (cRB); 1 ♂, Syria (Tamaze env.), Jabal al-Ansariyah, E slope, 6 Jun.1999, leg.S. Kadlec (cRB).TURKEY: 2 ♂♂, Anatol.m., Toros Daglari, 900 m, 6 Jun.1991, leg.S. Kadlec, coll.Voříšek (BMNH); 3 ex., Icel (Erdemli NW), Aydinlar SW, 25 Jul.1998, 1000 m, leg.H. Winkelmann (HW); 6 ex., Icel (Erdemli NW), Aydinlar SW, 1000 m, 25 Jul.1998, leg.Messutat (cJM); 1 ex., Aydinlar b.Erdemli, 20 May 1989, leg.Kuff and Szallies (cJM); 2 ♂♂, Anatolia m.Toros Daglari, 900 m, 25 km NW of Erdemli, 6 Jun.1991, S. Kadlec leg.(BMNH).The following syntype specimen, fully in accordance with the locality given in the original description (Hadjin-Dagh [= Saimbeyli in Turkey, Adana]), is hereby designated as lectotype of P. (Conocetus) zurcheri: TURKEY: 1 ♂, Hadjin Dagh As. minor // 6 // Ch.Zurcher // Zurcheri * Schils.//LectotypePolydrusus(Conocetus)zurcheri (Schilsky, 1912) des.C.Germann 2016 (MFN).Specimens vary from dark brownish with scarce and spotty scales to light brown with denser scales.Freshly emerged specimens (where the mandibular scars are still present; these quickly get lost) show denser standing scales.Collected on or nearby Quercus ithaburensis and Quercus sp. in general (sifted from leaf litter; M. Borer oral comm.), but also from Cedrus sp.(Cupressaceae).Lives sympatrically in similar habitats with P. transjordanus sp.nov.Collected from April to July, from sea level up to high montane altitudes.Polydrusus marcidusKiesenwetter, 1864, where the first one is selected as lectotype: GREECE: 1 ♀, Taygetos // [red label:] Lectotype Polydrusus (Conocetus) marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864 labelled C. Germann 2016 (ZSM); 1 ♀, [without label, but mounted in exactly the same way as the other specimen, with new label printed on red paper:] Paralectotype Polydrusus (Conocetus) marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864 labelled C. Germann 2016 (ZSM).The locality is handwritten, supposedly by Kiesenwetter himself.The exact locality was not indicated in the original description; Kiesenwetter (1864: 254) wrote very generally as usual at that time: "Aus Griechenland (Krüper)…" [from Greece (Krüper)].He furthermore mentioned: "…von Kraatz mitgetheilt [reported by
LEBANON: 1 ♂, Mt Liban, coll. D. Sharp (BMNH); 1 ex., Beyrouth (Beirut), coll. J. Pelletier (cJP); 1 ex., Achkout, coll. J. Pelletier (cJP); 1 ♂, Northern gov., 7 km NE of Batroun, Qnat, 34°15.323′ N, 35°53.667′ E, 1195 m, macchia, swept and singled, 18 Jun. 2016, leg. A. Kotán, P. Nemes and T. Németh Ecology Polydrusus (Conocetus) marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864 Figs 4C-D, 8C, 9M, 10 Material examined Type material (cPB); 1 ♂, Comments Variability Two syntypes of
AcknowledgementsMany thanks for considerable support to Martin Albrecht (Bolligen, Switzerland), Friedhelm Bahr (Viersen, Germany), Max Barclay (BMNH), Christoph Bayer (Berlin, Germany), Lutz Behne (SDEI), Johannes Bergsten (NRM), Piotr Białooki (State Plant Health and Seed Inspection, Gdańsk, Poland), Matthias Borer (NMB), Roman Borovec (Smidary, Czech Republic), Carlo Braunert (Mendsorf, Luxembourg), Manfred Egger (Innsbruck, Austria), Laibale Friedman (SMNHTAU), Michael Geiser (BMNH), Julien Haran (Montpellier, France), Thomas Kissling (Zürich, Switzerland), Jochen Messutat (Preußisch-Oldendorf, Germany), Christian Monnerat (Info fauna -CSCF, Neuchâtel), Gerd and Uschi Müller (Frechen, Germany), Hans Mühle (München, Germany), Jean Pelletier (Monnaie, France), Karel Schön (Litvínov, Czech Republic), Laurent Schott (La Chapelle Saint Luc, France), Eva Sprecher (NMB), Joachim Willers (MFN), Herbert Winkelmann (Berlin, Germany) and Wolfgang Ziegler (Rondeshagen, Germany).I am grateful to the referees for their helpful comments on and corrections to the manuscript.Remarks and variabilityPolydrusus marcidus seems to reproduce parthenogenetically in the western part of the distribution area.Male specimens are presently only recorded from Turkey (Antalya).Males differ considerably from females (bigger and more stout pronotum, fore tibiae directed inwards towards apex, generally bigger in size; Fig.4C-D).Some females from the amphigonic populations (Antalya,Kestebek, Myra)are considerably bigger than other populations.EcologyFound on two occasions on dry slopes or meadows, once in Bulgaria (F.Burger) and in Greece (H.Winkelmann).From label data the following trees are mentioned: Quercus coccifera, Q. ilex and Q. ithaburensis macrolepis (by L. Friedman from Greece).Collected from April to August, at hill to (high-) montane altitudes.(Schilsky, 1912)Figs 2E-F, 7D, 9F, 12Polydrusus (Conocetus) rhodiacusMaterial examinedType material One syntype specimen, which is selected here as lectotype:Type locality CYPRUS.Other material examined CYPRUS: 1 ♂, Dionos (Chypre), 28 May 1974, coll.Voříšek (BMNH); 1 ♂, Nicosie (SDEI).TURKEY: 2 ♂, Adana, As m. [= Asia minor], coll.Lokay (cRB); 1 ♂, Antalya distr., Gündogmus,RemarksThe type locality given in the original description "Auf Rhodos" [on Rhodes] is wrong and should not be used in faunistic references, as in DallaTorre et al. (1936).Charles Zürcher himself(Zürcher 1919: 159)corrected the origin of the type specimens from "Rhodes" to "L' île de Chypre".The present record from Gündogmus is the first for mainland Turkey.EcologyOnly the given data; collected late May and in September.VariabilityThe typical robust head (Fig.5C) is more pronounced in females than in males, which are generally more slender (Fig.1E-F).Interestingly, among the few specimens examined, males were much more rarely collected than females.EcologyCollected from April to July, from sea level to montane (exceptionally subalpine) altitudes.DiscussionIn this review, the often-misinterpreted species of the subgenus Conocetus are revised, and the use of synonymous names is clarified through the study of type specimens and topotypical material, resulting in seven new synonymies.Based on its morphology, Polydrusus kahri does not belong in Conocetus, nor in any other established subgenus.To accommodate this species, we herein propose the new subgenus Denticonocetus.The re-evaluation of the morphology of Conocetus revealed that the following characters are important for specific determination: i) body shape, ii) shape of head, iii) shape of eyes, iv) vestiture of body (including length and orientation of hairs), v) vestiture of legs, vi) shape of scales, vii) male genitalia including internal sac.Using these characters, two new species are described: Polydrusus (Conocetus) transjordanus sp.nov.and Polydrusus (Conocetus) crinipes sp.nov.. Body size, shape of pronotum, colour of scales, colour of legs, often body colour, and female genital organs are intraspecifically variable, and thus may be misleading.The most surprising faunistic results are new records from Italy with P. angustus, Greece with the apterous P. festae, extending its distribution across the Mediterranean Sea, and records of P. rhodiacus from mainland Turkey, showing that the species is not endemic to Cyprus.
Florence (cJP); 1 ex. ITALY: 1 ex.San Casciano Val di Pesa (FI). Scala45 May [19]36, leg. F. Vitale (cJP); 1 ex

San Casciano Val di Pesa, Jul. [19]88, leg. Giannini (BMNH); 1 ex., Abruzzo, leg. Fiori (BMNH); 3 ex. Sicilia (PA), 5 km SW of Carini. Ancona, leg. Flach (BMNH); 1 ex. Mt Longa, 38°07′04″ N, 13°08′06″ E, 640 m, Kalk, Quercus-WaldJul. 1963Giannini (BMNH); 1 ex. forest

. leg. C. Germann (cCG. Jul. 2005

3 km N of Bisacquino. ♂ Sicilia, ( Pa), 37°43′44″ N, 13°16′05″ E, 830 m. Kalk, Quercus ilex; Germann (cCG, NMBE; Sicilia (PA)1 Aug. 20051 ex.

. M Bisacquino, N Barraci, 1 Aug. 2005830Kalk, Quercus ilexleg. Germann (cCG

. ♂ , Sizilien Rätzer, 

. ♂ , ♀ Ancona, Mte Conero, 200 m, 15

. R Borovec, leg. R. Borovec (cRB. Jun.1991. 1060 m, 24 Jun. 1991. 250 m, 22 Jun. 1991leg. R. Borovec (cRB

. ♀ , Sicilia , Mte Soro, C. Germann (NMBE. A. Fiori, coll. A. Rätzer19 Oct. 2002. 2 Aug. 18983 ex.

Cantot (cJP); 2 ex. M Sicilia, S Nebrodi, Fratello, 16 May 2008. 14 Jun. 1996Sicile, Castelbuonoleg. Krajcik (cRB

leg. A. Fiori (NMB); 1 ex., Abruzzen, coll. ♂ , ♀ Sicilia Bor, Or, Francavilla Di Sicilia, leg. R. Borovec (cRB. 400-600 m, 7-9 May 1995. 2 Aug. 1898J. Breit (NMB. 1 ex

1888, leg. Stierlin, coll. Apfelbeck (NMB); 1 ex. ♀ , Sicilien , Emilia, coll. J. Breit (NMB; Trento, Scriba, coll2 ex. L.v. Heyden (SDEI

Gran Sasso, Sequens, coll. L.v. Heyden GREECE: 13 ex., same data as holotype (SDEI, NMBE, cCG); 2 ex. Tyrol, Coll L V Kahr, Heyden, Suppantschitsch (SDEI); 6 ex., Corfu, leg. Paganetti (SDEI); 1 ex. Korfu, Ropa Tal; Corfu25 Jul. 19892 ex.. 2 ex. Corfu, leg. Paganetti (BMNH

. ♂ , Corfu Paganetti, 1 ex., Corfu, leg. Paganetti (cRB

. Ex, Roda Corfu, 19 May-2 Jun. 2012Bahr & Winkelmann (cHW

Bahr and Winkelmann (cHW); 2 ex. ♂ , Corfu , Mt Pandokratoras, Lafki, 420 m, 21 May 2012Corfu, Agios Georgios

. leg. Czető Zsolt (cRB. L. Korission and K. SchönJun. 2002. 19-27 Jun. 2003. Jun. 1995. 11-19 Jul. 2006leg. P. Tyrner (cRB. 6 ex., Corfu, leg. Paganetti (NMB

. ♀ , Macedonia Piera, Paralia , F. Bahr, J. Messutat and H. Winkelmann1-15 Jun. 2013

. Macedonia ♂♂, Mt Piera, Olympus, F. Bahr, J. Messutat and H. Winkelmann3 Jun. 2013

. Macedonia ♀♀, Piera, N Katerini, F. Bahr, J. Messutat and H. Winkelmann35 m, 3 Jun. 20133 ex., C-Maced

. Katerini S Piera, F. Bahr, J. Messutat and H.Winkelmann3 Jun. 2013

. ♂ , ♀ Macedonia, Piera, Paralia, Beach, F. Bahr, J. Messutat and H. Winkelmann6-9 Jun. 2013cJM

. ♂ , Nestos- Delta, Chrysoupolis , 29 Jun. 1982Kessler (SDEI)

. ♀ , Nestos- Delta, Chrysoupolis , 30 Jun. 1982Kessler (SDEI)

. ♀ , Macedonia Nestos-Delta, Chrysoupolis , 26 Jun. 1982Kessler (SDEI)

. ♂ , Polikastro , C. Bayer8 km N of Axioupoli, 28 Jun. 1997

. ♂♂, ♀♀, N W Polikastro, 8 km N of Axioupoli, 28 Jun. 1997Messutat (cJM

. ♂ , Graecia Krüper, 

. ♂ , ♀ Macedonia, Mt Piera, Olympus, F. Bahr, J. Messutat and H. Winkelmann600-1050 m, 3 Jun. 2013Olympos, Plaka2 ex

Trikala, n. Kalambaka (Fluss), leg. W. Ziegler. Jul. 198511Suppantschitsch (SDEI); 1 ex

Nestos-Delta, 10 km E of Nea Karia, 40°53′37″ N, 24°50′17″ E. Bayer Bahr, Winkelmann , Jun. 2012. 20 m, 9 Jul. 2003. 6 Jun. 20121 ex. 1 ex

. ♀ , Xanthi Nestos-Delta, N Nestosufer, C. Germann (cCG. 25 m, 29 May 2016

. ♂ , ♀ Xanthi, Nestos-Delta, Chrysoupoli, N Ruderalfläche, C. Germann (cCG. 40 m, 29 May 2016

Paratypes In addition to the colletion data cited below, the paratype specimens all carry the following red label: Paratype Polydrusus (Conocetus) transjordanus sp. nov. des. C. Germann 2016. ISRAEL: 6 ex. ♀♀, Xanthi, 2.5 km NE of Chrysoupoli, Nestos-Delta, Nestosaue und Ufer, 41°00′32″ N, 24°44′04″ E. SMNHTAU, cCG; Meron25 m, 29 May 2016. 1 Jun. 1978same data as holotype. 3 ex.. leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU

Reitter (MFN); 1 ex. ♂ , Kaifa (= Haifa, Qiryat Tiv'on. M. Sternlicht, coll. G.A.K. Marshall25 Apr. 1954BMNH

. ♂ , Kibuz Dahlia, 15 May 1975

. ♂ , Ya'ar Bar'am, 35°25′ E, 674 m, oldgrowth woodland, pitfall [traps

. ♂ , Mt Meron, leg. Levanony (SMNHTAU. 22 Nov. 2007Ziv'on

. ♂ , Nahal , Oren , leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU. 11 May 2003riverbed

. N Hurfeish, A. Timm and T. AssmannMay 20056Hurfeishpitfall [traps. 1 ex. recent woodland, 32°60′ N, 35°22′ E, 706 m, pitfall [traps

. A Timm, T Assmann, A. Timm and T. AssmannJun. 2005. 4 Jul. 2005. 22 Jul. 2005Hurfeish4 ex. recent woodland, 32°60′ N, 35°22′ E, 706 m, pitfall [traps. 3 ex., Ya'ar Bar'am, 33°02′ N, 35°25′ E, 674 m, oldgrowth woodland, pitfall [traps

SMNHTAU); 6 ex., Ziv'on, 33°02′ N, 35°25′ E, recent woodland, 773 m, pitfall [traps. ♂ Ya'ar Bar'am, N , Ya'ar Bar'am, 33°02′ N, 35°25′ E, 674 m, oldgrowth woodland. A Timm, T Assmann, Har Meron, 32°59′44″, 35°24′38″; Drees (SMNHTAU7 Jul. 2005. 4 Jun. 2005. 4 Aug. 2005. 31 Jul. 201021leg. L. Friedman and C. 1 ex., Hurfeish, 32°60′ N, 35°22′ E, recent woodland, pitfall [traps

. E , A. Timm and T. Assmann25 Jun. 2005pitfall [traps

Zi'on. Ex, Mt Meron, Levanony (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. 22 Nov. 2007

N , 35°13′24″ E , leg. L. Friedman and C. Drees (SMNHTAU31 Jul. 2010pitfall [traps

♂ , Mi ' Quercus, Har Meron, 32°60′ N, 35°25′ E. 23 Jun. 1987. 1140 m, 262 ex

L Friedman, Har Addir, 980 m, on Quercus boissieri, Q. calliprinos. Har MeronGalilee Nahal KezivJun. 2014. 20 May 2013. 18 Aug. 2000. Jan. 2010. 20 May 1999leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. 1 ex. leg. Chikatunov (SMNHTAU

SMNHTAU); 1 ex., Ma'alot, on Quercus calliprinos. N Har Meron, E , L Friedman, C Drees, L Friedman, L Friedman, L Friedman, leg. J. Halperin (SMNHTAU. H. TsegaiSMNHTAU31 Jul. 2010. 16 Aug. 1990. 1100 m, 6 Sep. 2007. 2006. 1100 m, 23 Sep. 1997. 1100 m, 26 May 1999. 28 May 2006pitfall [traps. 6 ex. 1 ex. 1 ex. 3 ex.. 1 ex. leg. N. Angel, (SMNHTAU)

. Ex, ; L Har Meron, Friedman, 800 m, 28 May 2003

. ; L Har Meron, L Friedman, Friedman, 800 m, 22 May 1998. 19 May 1998Har Meron1 ex

. ; L Har Meron, Friedman, 1100 m, 26 May 1999. 800 m, 26 May 1999. 5 Oct. 1976Har Meron; Manheim (SMNHTAU; Mt Meron1 ex. 1 ex

SMNHTAU); 1 ex. A Freidberg, leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU. 11200 m, 3 Jul. 19804 ex

Ex, ; F Nahal Amud, Kaplan, Zvik (SMNHTAU); 2 ex., Har Addir, 980 m, on Q. boissieri, Q. calliprinos. Mi'ilya, on Quercus10 Jun. 1987. 18 Apr. 2010. 23 Jun. 1987. 20 May 2013Tur'an Peak, 33°48′ N, 35°28′ E, 555 m. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

Mazzuva, ; L Bezet, Friedman, Hurfeish, 32°60′ N, 35°22′ E, recent woodland, pitfall. A Timm, T Assmann, Meron60 m, 20 May 2013. 12 Oct. 2005. 1140 m, 26 Jun. 2014. 10 Sep. 1973. 2 May 2002. 17 May 2004leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU. 2 ex., 32°43′ N, 35°01′ E, 16 May 2008, leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU

Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 2 ex., Nahal Oren. Oren Nahal, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 2 ex. 14 May 2002. 22 May 2001. 22 May 2001leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

Oren Nahal, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. 4 May 2004. 2 May 2002Nahal Oren. riverbed, 14 May 2003 leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. Oren Nahal, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. 31 May 2002. 2 Jul. 1996. 11 May 2003Nahal Oren. leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU

leg. I. Lopatin (SMNHTAU); 6 ex. ; L Nahal Oren, Friedman, Nahal Oren, 32°43.5′ N, 35°00.5′ E, 224 m. Karmiyya Ridge1 May 2001. Nahal Oren, 16 May 1999. 19 May 2011. 4 May 2010. 2 May 2002Nahal Oren, 32°43′ N, 34°58′ E. 12 ex., Nahal Oren. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

. N Nahal Oren, leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU. 27 May 2012

Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. N Nahal Oren, Nahal Oren, 32°42′53.9″ N, 34°58′35.8″ E. 40 m, 25 May 2009. 2 May 2002301 ex., Nahal Oren

Furth (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. Nahal Keziv. M. FinkelSMNHTAUApr. 1974. 28 May 1999

Ex, Oren Nahal, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. 11 May 2003. 1 May 2001. 21 Apr. 2007Nahal Oren. leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU

Freidberg (SMNHTAU); 2 ex. Ex, Oren Nahal, Furth (SMNHTAU); 1 ex., Tur'an Peak, 33°48′ N, 35°28′ E, 555 m. Mt Tabor24 Apr. 2004. 14 May 1979. 18 Apr. 2010leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU

Hay-Bar, Karmel, Zomet Ha' Amaqim (Jalame). 450 m, 21 May 2010. May 199328leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU. 2 ex

L Friedman, L Friedman, Yizhar, Salman Farsi Nat. Res., 800 m, on Quercus calliprinos. YerushalayimApr. 1975. 15 Apr. 1958. 14 May 2014. 20 May 2013. 20 Feb. 199910Nahal Keziv

. M Finkel, SMNHTAU)

. Keziv, Nahal Keziv. M. FinkelSMNHTAU7 May 1999. 20 May 1999. 21 May 1999Nahal Keziv

. Keziv, Nahal Keziv. 28 May 19991 ex

M. Finkel (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. M Finkel, Sep. 1999. 4 Jun. 1999

. Ex, Keziv, Nahal Keziv. 10 Jun. 1999. 17 Jun. 20003 ex.

. M Finkel, Nahal Keziv. M. FinkelSMNHTAUNahal Keziv, 26 Jun. 1999. 10 Jul. 1999. 13 May 2000Nahal Keziv

SMNHTAU); 2 ex. Keziv, leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU. M. Finkel21 May 1999. 8 May 1979. 1200 m, 3 Jul. 1980Nahal Keziv. 1 ex. leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU

. Mt Meron, 8 Aug. 1972Furth (SMNHTAU)

Furth (SMNHTAU); 12 ex. ; D Meron, Furth, leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. Meron; Meron; Shoresh; Furth (SMNHTAU; Mi'ilya, on Quercus5 Jun. 1974. 1 Jun. 1978. 10 Sep. 1973. 4 Jun. 1974. 20 May 1984. 20 May 1978. 23 Jun. 1987Newe Ativ. 2 ex. 2 ex. leg. Zvik (SMNHTAU

Warburg (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. Ex, Hermon Har, Har Hermon. 1970-1990. 1450 m, 25 Jun. 19973 ex., Nahal Oren, 24 May 1995, leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU

. Ex, Oren Nahal, leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU. 30 May 1995. Nahal Oren, 13 May 20074 ex.. leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU

Oren Nahal, 32°42′53.9″ N, 34°58′35.8″ E. 2 May 2002

SMNHTAU); 1 ex. A Freidberg, leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU); 1 ex., Nahal Oren. Nahal Oren, 9 Jun. 1978. 4 May 1980. Nahal Oren, 9 May 1979leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU); 3 ex.. leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU

; T Nahal Oren, Pavlicek, Furth (SMNHTAU); 1 ex. T Pavlicek, Smnhtau, Bmnh, Mt Carmel; Mt Carmel; Mt Carmel9 Jun. 1978. Nahal Oren, 3 Jul. 1997. 27 May 1997. 13 May 1997. 28 May 1996Nahal Oren

. V Chikatunov, T Pavlicek, Nmbe Smnhtau, Nmso); 1 Ex, Oren Nahal, Nahal Oren. 11 Jun. 1996. 9 Jun. 19976 ex

. V Chikatunov, T Pavlicek, 

. ♂ , Beit Oren, Y. Zvik12 May 1991

. N Ex, ; T Oren, Pavlicek, Nahal Oren. T. PavlicekSMNHTAU10 Jul. 1997. Jun. 1997Nahal Oren

. T Pavlicek, T. Pavlicek (SMNHTAU, BMNH, NMBEJun. 1998. Jun. 1996. 15 Jun. 199832 ex., Nahal Oren. 2 ex., Nahal Oren

. Oren Nahal, T. Pavlicek18 May 1998

. T Pavlicek, 2 Jun. 1998

Chikatunov and T. Pavlicek (SMNHTAU); 1 ex., Nahal Oren, light trap. N Oren, ; T Pavlicek, 19 Jun. 1998. 15 May 1997. 5 Jul. 1999. 26 Jun. 1997. 4 Jun. 1999Carmel [MtSMNHTAU); 1 ex., Nahal Oren1 ex., Nahal Oren. 1 ex., Nahal Oren, light trap

V Chikatunov, T Pavlicek, JORDAN: 1 ♂, Jordanie, 5 km NE of Ajlun, 32.36754 N, 35.77937 E, 1005 m. M Sternlicht, Smnhtau, 18 May 1954. 10 Jun. 20111 ex

. C Monnerat, 

. Jordanien ♂♂, Fuhesh Bei Amman, leg. Klapperich (SDEI. 14 Oct. 1956

. ♂ , Jordanien-O , Dehbeen B Jerash, leg. J. Klapperich (SDEI. 19 Jun. 1959

. ♀ Ost-Jordanien, Wald Bei, Jerash , leg. J. Klapperich (SDEI. 800 m, 24 May 1956

. ♀ , Jordania Ne, Um Qais, N , leg. C. Monnerat (cCG. 9 m, 14 Apr. 2008NMBE

Additional material The following specimens were not included in the type series due to being partly immature or inflexible/ hardly remountable. ISREAL: 2 ex. ♀ Ost-Jordanien, [ Schaubak, Shobak, Yizhar, Salman Farsi Nat. Res., 818 m, on Q. calliprinos. 17 May 1968. 28 Apr. 1975. 11 Jun. 2013on Quercus ithaburensis, leg. 11 ex. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

SMNHTAU); 2 ex., Mazzuva, Nahal Bezet, 60 m, on Q. calliprinos. Ex, N Panyas, E , L Friedman, L Friedman, Har Meron, 32°0′ N, 35°24′ E, 900 m, Field School. 5 Jun. 2002. 1100 m, 26 May 1999. 20 May 2013. 26 May 2009. 7 Apr. 2013leg. A. Freidberg (SMNHTAU. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

Berekhat Ya'ar. L Friedman, 14 May 2003

Qiryat Tiv'on, on Quercus ithaburensis. M Sternlicht, Qiryat Tiv'on, on Quercus ithaburensis. M Sternlicht, Har Meron1 May 1954. 13 May 1954. 19 May 1954. Adullam, 15 May 2006. 1100 m, 26 May 1999Qiryat Tiv'on, on Quercus ithaburensis. 1 ex. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

SMNHTAU); 1 ex. ; L Har Meron, L Friedman, C Friedman, V Drees ; Y Mandelik, Chikatunov, 800 m, 22 May 1999. 31 Jul. 2010. 24 May 2006Har Meron; Har Meronpitfall [traps. 2 ex. 1 imm.. 12 ex., N. Sansan, 17 May [20]02. 1 ex. [imm.], Har Hermon, 1970-1990, leg. M. Warburg (SMNHTAU

. Nahal Galilee, Keziv, leg. Chikatunov (SMNHTAU. 20 May 19995 ex., Matta', 31 May 1974, leg. D. Furth (SMNHTAU

mm; females: 3.8-5.4 mm. Body. Colour reddish-brown. Vestiture of head, pronotum and elytra set with elongate-oval scales with a greenish pearl-like lustre and long, pointed, whitish hairs, adjacent on head and pronotum, semi-raised. holotype: 3.4Description Length. Males: 3.2-4.5 mm. 25° angle) on elytra

Soroni-Fanes, 30 m, 1 May [20]14, leg. Rhodes (FO 9J. Messutat (cJM. 1 ex., Rhodes (FO 12. 3 May [20]14, leg. J. Messutat (cJM

]14, leg. Rhodes, J. Messutat (cJM. 11380 m, 3 May [203 ex., Rhodes (FO 13), Afandou, beach, 5 May [20]14, leg. J. Messutat (cJM

Wittmer (NMB); 1 ex. ♂ , ♀ , Agios Nikolao, Kreta, 24 Apr. 197125Crete, Chania, Potamida

. ♂♂, ♀♀, Attika, ( Sounio, ) Se Athens, N 24°01′40″ E ; Bahr, Bayer, Brunner And Winkelmann ; Peloponnes, Kaliani, Prov, Korinthia, Prov. Korinthia. 50 m, 17 May 2011. 5 May 2010. 20 Jul. 2009. 13 May 2007Prov. Drama. leg. W. Ziegler (cHW

. ♂ , Rhodos , Kallithea , 5-19 May 2005

. Kreta ♀♀, Knossos Umgb, Jun

. ♂ , Peloponnese Argolis, Mt Didymo, 6 Apr. 2010leg. H. Winkelmann (cHWDidyma, doline

. ♀ , Peloponnese Argolis, Palea Epidavros, 1-10 Apr. 2010leg. H. Winkelmann (cHW

. ♀ , Peloponnese Corinthia, Korfos Env, 10 Apr. 2010leg. H. Winkelmann (cHW

. ♂ , Crete Chania, Potamida , H. Winkelmann25 Apr. 2011

. ♀ , Peloponnes Galatas, Jun. [19]76, Köstlin leg. (SDEI)

♀ , Samos , Zimmerman (SDEI); 18 ex. Rhodes, Kalithea envMay [1987

. leg. Messutat (cCG, cJM. Apr.-7 May 2014NMBE

. ♂ , Rhodes , 12Genadi, beach

♀ , Rhodes , Apollona N, 400 m. Rhodes; Rhodes; Kolymbia, beach29 Apr26Emponas, 380 m. 20]14, leg. Messutat (cJM. 4 ex.

Apr, Archipoli NE. Rhodes150 m, 26 Apr20]14, leg. Messutat (cJM. 1 ex. 20]14, leg. Messutat (cJM

Soroni-Fanes, 30 m, 1 May [20]14, leg. Messutat (NMBE); 6 ex. ♀ , Rhodes (fo6) Laerma, N ; N Peloponnesus, Kato Loutro, Xilokastro, 260 m, 28 Apr. 2 Jun. 2012Rhodes20]14, leg. Messutat (cJM. 5 ex.. leg. P. Bialooki (cPB

. ♂♂ Platanos, Ne Parnon Mts, leg. P. Bialooki (cPB. 18 May 2012

♀ , Gerakini , Svilha (cJS). 4 Jun. 1992

. ♂ , Pelop , 24 Jun. 1974Horak & Svihla leg. (cJSMt Taygetos, Asafigion

. ♀♀. 5 km S of Monemvasia, 13-25 May [19]89, leg. Rieger (cCG, cJM

. ♂ , Makedonia-S Lithochoro, C. Bayer30 m, 11 May 2005Plaka-coast, 40°07′32″ N, 22°33′03″ E

. ♀ , Rhodes Stöcklein, 

. Thessalien ♀♀, . P Volo, Meyer, 

. Parnass ♂♂, 

. ♀ , Taygetos Apfelbeck, 3 ex., Parnass, Paganetti [19]03, coll. Stöcklein (NMB

. ♂ , ♀ Kreta, Paganetti, Stöcklein, 

Wittmer (NMB); 12 ex. ♀ , Kreta , Agios Nikolao, Peloponnesus, pass W Astros. 24 Apr. 1971. 18 May 2012

♀ , Attica , Nea Makri, leg. Messutat (cJM). Jun. 2015

♀ , Euboia , Mt Ochi, leg. Messutat (cJM); 4 ex. Rhodes, Kolymbia, beach; Nomos Lakonias, Strand965 m, 4 Jun. 2015. 3 Apr. 2015. May2.5 km NE of Myli. 2 ex. 5 km N of Monemvasia

Paradissi Mts, 100 m. Rhodes5 May 1996Rieger (cJM); 15 ex. Paradisi env., R. Borovec leg. (cRB, BMNH

Filerimos Mts, Lalyssos, 267 m, R. Borovec leg. ♂♂, Rhodes, Attiki, Varkiza; Creta, nom. Iraklion, Matala10 May 1996. 8 May 1993. Jun. 19944 ex. leg. E. Colonnelli (BMNH); 1 ex. Regalin (BMNH

. ♂♂, ♀♀, Attika, Sounio, H. Winkelmann50 m, 17 May 2011. 25 Apr. 2011Crete Chania, Potamida3 ex.

. ♀ , Peloponnes Kaliani, Prov, . W Korinthia, Ziegler, 5 May 2010

. ♂ Drama, . W Prosotsani, Ziegler, 20 Jul. 2009

. ♂ , Korinthia Stimfalia, W. Ziegler13 May 2007

. ♂ , Rhodos , Kallithea , 5-19 May 2005

. Kreta ♀♀, Knossos Umgb, H.-J. GrunwaldJun. 19923 ex., Platistomo, 31 May 2013, leg. Eifler (cHW

. ♂ , Peloponnes Argolis, Mt Didymo, 6 Apr. 2010Didyma dolineleg. Winkelmann (cHW

. ♀ , Peloponnese Argolis, Palea Epidavros, 1-10 Apr. 2010leg. Winkelmann (cHW

. ♀ , Peloponnese Corinthia, Korfos Env, 10 Apr. 2010leg. Winkelmann (cHW

. ♀ , Peloponnes Galatas, leg. Köstlin (SDEI); 1 ex., Ost-Kreta. Jun. 1976. Vai, 6 Jun. 1999

. ♀ Süd-Kreta, Umgb Koutsouras, 1 Jun. 1999

. ♂ , Kreta Umgb, Matala, 

Schulz, leg. Sieber (SDEI); 4 ex. AthenApr. 2001. May [1987Kreta. 1 ex

♂ , Crete Heraklion, Timbaki, Winkelmann (cHW); Other material examined GREECE: 2 ♀♀, Rhodes, Mts Filerimos, Lalyssos, 267 m, R. Borovec leg. 3 Apr. 2013

. Kreta ♂♂, Omalos , 25

. ♀ , Crête , Therisso , P. Berger15 Apr. 1984

. W 1♂, Ö -Kreta, Rethimno, Perama, 26 Apr. 20111 ex., Creta, coll. Koltze (SDEI

. ♂ , Ins Creta, Reitter, Westl. Creta, Elos, v. Oertzen, coll. Kraatz (SDEI. SDEI1 ex. 2 ex. Kraatz (SDEI

. ♂ , Creta Or, Assitaes, Holtz, coll; Breit (NMB)

. ♂ , ♀ , Creta Isl, Rethymno, Armeni, N Kastellos, 430 m, 13 May 2009leg. Germann (cCG

. Georgiuopoli ♂ W-Kreta, May 19892 ex., [Crete] Assitaes, coll. Koltze (SDEI

. ♂ , [ Crete, ] Suda, Bay , coll. Champion (BMNH

. ♂ Brussa, [ Bursa, ] , Merkl , 

. ♂ , Samos , Votsalakia Env, 11-20 Jun. 2007

. Chalkidike ♂♂, Megali, Panajia. 

. N , 23°42′ 45″ E, 150 m, 17 Jul. 2003leg. Bayer (cHW, cCG

. ♂ , Dito Bahr, 

. ♂ , Epirus , Velia Pindos, Grevina, 8

. ♀ , Crete Rethimno, Armeni , 2 May 1998Thompson (BMNH)

Rhodes, Filerimos Mts, Lalyssos. leg. Borovec (cRB, BMNH267 m, 10 May 1996

. ♀ , Crête , Agia Irini, 18 Jun. 1984Berger (cJP

. ♂ , Peloponnes Messinia, Exohori , 5 Jun. 2011

. ♂ , Pella Agrarpidees, Florina , 31 Jul. 20091 ex., Taygetos (ZSM); 1 ex., J. Rhodus [Rhodes], coll. Fremuth (cRB

. ♂ , Kreta Umgb, Alikampos Georgioupoli, 25 Apr. 1989Elbert

. ♂ , Kreta , Georgiuopoli , May

. leg. R. Frieser (SDEI. 89

. ♂ , Griechenland C Gracilicornis, Stierlin's handwriting. SDEI

. ♂ , Graecia Stierlin, 

. ♂ , Parnass , subalpin, 1 Jul. [19]09, leg. Rambousek (SDEI

. ♂ , Morea [= Peloponnese, ] , Coll Kraatz, 

. ♂ , Katerini , Ag Zabransky, Dimitrios, 800 m, 19-21 Jul. 1990

SDEI); 1 ex. Creta ♂♂, . O Leonhard, 3 Jun. 1981Crete; Lefka Ori Mts, OmalosBily leg. (cJF

♂ Rhodes, ; L Friedman, Reitter (BMNH). 7 ex., Kefalonia, Agios Eleftherios, 3 km NW, 38°11.482′ N, 20°35.658′ E, 670 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. 27 Jun. 2016

; L Kefalonia, L Friedman, Friedman, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 9 ex., Kefalonia, Charakti 38°10.310′ N 20°41.359′ E, 530 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. Kefalonia, Tzanata27 Jun. 2016. 28 Jun. 2016. 28 Jun. 2016. 28 Jun. 2016Mycenean Tholos Tomb, 38°08.509′ N, 20°45.646′ E, 70 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

Ex, Kefalonia, Kalos Neochori, Mts, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU); 6 ex., Kefalonia, Komitata, 38°21.149′ N 20°35.863′ E, 550 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. 29 Jun. 2016. 29 Jun. 2016Demotokitos Mt, 38°19.660′ N, 20°36.674′ E, 400-600 m, on Quercus. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

L Friedman, Kefalonia, Agia Dinata Mts, 5km N of Dilinata, 38°16.013′ N, 20°30.712′ E, 700 m, on Quercus ithaburensis macrolepis. 30 Jun. 2016

. ♂ , Epirus Velia, Pindos , Grevena, 8

SYRIA: 2 ♂♂. Ins Kreta, Dikti, Lesithi plateau, 800m, leg. J. Voříšek (BMNH). Syria, Reitter (BMNH)Mts 5 Jun. 2001

TURKEY: 1 ♂. ♀ , Syr , coll. A. Rätzer (NMBE). Adana, Reitter (BMNH)

10 km S of Ilgaz. ♂ , Centr Ankara, N , 18 Jul. 1996

. ♂♂, Hatay, Sungur, 800 m, 29 Jul. 1998leg. Winkelmann (SDEI, cJP

. ♂ , Asia Minor, Smyrna Prov, Mts Bozdagh, Goelchik, 29 Jul. 1931Uvarov (BMNH

. ♀ , Bozdag Nr Izmir, 26

. leg. Lodos (BMNH. Jun. 1971

Prudek and Riha (cHW); 17 ex. Bursa ♂♂, Cagliyan Env, Nur Daglari, Hasanbeyli. 10-14 Jul. 1997. 1150 m, 16 Jul. 1996Tymer and Voříšek leg

Bayer and Winkelmann (SDEI, cHW); 1 ex. ♂ , Icel ( Mersin, Nw ) , Findikpinari , Hop pass, 15 km NE Mardin, 37°23″ N, 40°51″ E. Ankara N, Ilgaz S Korgun, N1000 m, 26 Jul. 1998. 18 Jul. 1996. 16 May 2001Winkelmann (cHW); 11 ex. leg. Kadlec (cRB

. ♂ , Tosya Ene, Ada Dagi, 

. ♂ , ♀ Bingöl, Kadlec, coll. Voříšek20 Jun. 1986BMNH

Zbuzek (cRB); 2 ex. ♂ , Olüdenis , Fethyie Env, 8 May 1991. 16 Jul. 1996Bayer and WinkelmannAnkara N, Tosya N, Karadere

. ♂ , ♀ Van Prov, Alacabük Dagi, Kuskuh Kiran, 28Göründü

. D. Hauck leg. (cHW. Jun.-2 Jul. 1997

♂ , Avsallar , B Incekum, 22 km W of Alanya. May 1995leg. A. Pütz (SDEI

20 km SW of Dogansehir. Malatya ♂♂, 24 Jun. 1989Barries and Cate

. ♂ , Hatay Iskenderun, S , Güzelyayla , 700 m, 27 Jul. 1998Messutat (SDEI

Tyrner and Voříšek (BMNH); 1 ex. Nur ♂♂, Daglari, Husanbeyli, Göynük NNW Kemer. 1150 m, 16 Jul. 19967-14 May [19]09, leg. Sieber (SDEI

. ♂ , Adana Hasanbeyli, Nurdagi Gecidi, N , 800-1100 m, 24 May 2002leg. Skale (SDEI

m, leg. ♂ Tarpus, ; S Lundberg, 1200

♂ , Anatol Centr, Tal zw. Tünceli u. Ovacik, 1200. W Heinz, 20 Jul. 1985

. Ex, N Ankara, Ilgaz, 18 Jul. 1996leg. Bayer (cHW, cCG, NMBE

. ♂ , ♀ , Destigin , 5

. ♂ , Konya , Karaman , 2 Jul. 1980leg. N. Lodos (cJF

. ♂ , ♀ Pozanti, 

. Fig, 

Heads of species of Polydrusus (Conocetus). A. Polydrusus grandiceps Desbrochers des Loges, 1875, male. B. Polydrusus transjordanus sp. nov., male. C. P. stierlini Schilsky. A-D , 1910

BULGARIA: 1 ♀, near Ju Rodopi, Jez Kŭrdzhali. P Lucas, European Journal of Taxonomy. 3922018. 9 Aug. 1986leg. R. Borovec (cRB

♀ , Pirin , Sugarevo env., 700-900 m. 

. ♀ , Delschewo [ Delschevo, ] Pirin, Trockenwiesen, F. Burger24 Jul. 1989on dry meadows

Chalkidike ♀♀, N Ne Megali Panaija, GREECE: 26. 150 m, 17 Jul. 2003leg. Bayer (cCG, cHW, NMBE

♀ , Kreta Mts, Leshiti plateau. J Voříšek, BMNH800 m, 5 Jun. 2001

. Ioanina ♀♀, Elati , C. Cocqempot leg. (cJP. 7 Jul. 2003

. ♀ , Crete Sw, N E Paleochora, N Maza, leg. Ch. Bayer (cHW. 700 m, 21 May 2004

. ♀ , Kreta , Agios Nikolao, 24 Apr. 1971

. ♀ , Katerini , Ag Zabransky, Dimitrios, 800 m, 19-21 Jul. 1990

Bahr (cHW); 2 ♀♀, Agios Grangatiko [Grammatiko], Prov. Pella, SW Edessa, 31 Jul. Makedonia ♀♀, Chalkidike, Megali Of, Panaija, 17 Jul. 2003. 2009leg. W. Ziegler (cHW

. ♀ , Voria Pindos, Morti Trockenhang, 25 Jun. 1997dry slope. leg. Winkelmann (cHW

. ♀ , Pella , W. ZieglerAsrogogia, 29 Jul. 2009

. ♀ , Kreta , Prina Kalamafka, leg. K. Liebenow (SDEI. 27 May 1999. 20 Jun. 2001leg. K. Liebenow (SDEI

. ♀ , Korfu Sidari, 1 Aug.1989Suppantschitsch (SDEI

. ♀ , Korfu , Lipades, 30 Jul. 1989Suppantschitsch (SDEI

. ♀ , Epirus Velia, Pindos Nr Grevina, 8 Aug. 1996Barries and Cate

. ♀ , Samos , May 1987

. ♀ , Parnass Paganetti, 

. ♀ , K R Crete, ] Chania, ; M Kuma-See, Novak, 4 Jun. 1994

. ♀ , Kreta , Omalos , 25

. ♀ , Kreta , Kera Izermiadon, leg. Bernhauer (coll. JM. 8230 Jun

. ♀ Thesprotia, Plataria B Igoumenitsa, leg. J. Frank (cJM. Jun. 1994

♀ Voria, E Pindos, N W Grevena, Morfi, Messutat (cJM); 17 ♀♀, Kefalonia, Agios Eleftherios, 3 km NW, 38°11.482′ N, 20°35.658′ E, 670 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. Kefalonia, Tzanata25 Jun. 1997. 27 Jun. 2016. 28 Jun. 2016Mycenean Tholos Tomb, 38°08.509′ N, 20°45.646′ E, 70 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU

Kefalonia ♀♀, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU). 28 Jun. 2016Tzanata, 1 km E, 38°08.6′ N, 20°45.953′ E, 120 m

Kefalonia ♀♀, ; L Neochori, Friedman, Kalos Mts, Demotokitos Mt, 38°19.660′ N, 20°36.674′ E, 400-600 m, on Quercus. 29 Jun. 2016

Kefalonia ♀♀, Kalos Komitata, Vathoula Mts, Mt, leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU ); 11 ♀♀, Kefalonia, Charakti, 38°10.310′ N, Fig. 8. A-E. Penis of Polydrusus (Conocetus) spp., dorsal and lateral views. A. P. bardus Gyllenhal, 1834, Turkey, Hatay. B. P. bardus. Iran, Lorestan; Turkey, Antalya; Cyprus, Lemesos29 Jun. 2016. 186438°21.484′ N, 20°35.145′ E, 640-730 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. D. P. baudii (Faust, 1889

L Friedman, 20°41.359′ E, 530 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. 2018. 28 Jun. 2016392

Kefalonia ♀♀, Komitata , 38°21.149′ N, 20°35.863′ E, 550 m, on Quercus ilex and Q. coccifera. 29

. L Friedman, Jun. 2016

TURKEY: 2 ♀♀. Kefalonia ♀♀, Dinata Agia, Mts, 5km N Dilinata, 38°16.013′ N, 20°30.712′ E, 700 m, on Quercus ithaburensis macrolepis. 30 Jun. 2016. 10-14 Jul. 1997. 6-9 Jul. 1997leg. L. Friedman (SMNHTAU). Riha leg. (cHW); 2 ♀♀, Eskisehir Sakari Ilica, near Gümele. Prudek and M. Riha (cHW

. ♀ , Myra , B. Zbuzek5 May 1991

. ♀ , Myra , 150 km SW of Antalya, leg. Zd. Jindra (cRB. 5 May 1991

♀ Of Antalya, ; Kumluca, ♀♀, N Ankara, S Ilgaz, N Korgun, Suppantschitsch (SDEI). Antalya22 May 1991. 18 Jul. 1996. Jul. 19892

. ♀ , Kestebek , Kudrna leg. 24 Jun. 1991BMNH

. ♀ , Antalya Kemer, G. Gillerfors (SDEI. 31 May 1991

♂ , Antalya Kemer, Gillerfors (SDEI). 31 May 1991

. ♂ , Prov Antalya, Beldibi, 7 Jul. 1992

. ♂ , Prov , 3 JunAntalya, Kemer

. S Lundberg, 

. ♂ , Antalya Kemer, I. Rydh16 Jun. 1994

. ♂ , Antalya Kemer, 1600 m, 20 May [1991Suppantschitsch (SDEI

Key to the species of Polydrusus (Conocetus) and P. (Denticonocetus) subgen. ♀ , Zonduldak , Karabük , 20 km E, 22-23 Jun. 1996. nov

(Denticonocetus subgen. nov.) kahri Kirsch, 1865 -Femorae untoothed. 2All femora toothed (Fig

festae (F. Solari, 1925) -Elytra long oval or parallel sided (males) or parallel at least at basal half, then widened towards apex (females), shoulders pronounced (hind wings present; not verified in P. longus); scutellum with inconspicuous vestiture; eyes of various shape. Elytra oval, shoulders not pronounced (brachypterous; Fig. 1C-D); scutellum with densely standing scales; eyes. 

(incertae sedis) longus (Stierlin, 1884) -Elytra less than 3 times as long as width of both elytra. Elytra 3 times as long as width of both elytra

Legs with either whitish hairs or hairs with green lustre, no scales. 

Legs with hairs plus oval or lanceolate scales. 

rhodiacus (Schilsky, 1912) -Legs bright reddish-brown to yellowish, with shorter hairs with green lustre. Eyes oval, clearly bulged (Fig. 3A-B). Legs reddish-brown with very long, raised, white hairs with a pearl-like lustre. Eyes less bulged, long oval drop-shaped as in P. angustus (Figs 2E-F, 3C. nov

Head very robust (especially in females); eyes remarkably small, placed laterally, oval and bulging; temples mostly longer than diameter of an eye. Frons and epifrons bulged, therefore head and rostrum appear swollen (Figs 1E-F, 5C). 1910Schilsky

Bigger and long-oval, elongate species with apex of elytra elongately pointed (Fig. 3C-F); scales oval, dense, standing, with blue-greenish sheen; femora robust; body colour dark-brown to blackish; eyes either conspicuously long-oval (Fig. 5D) or circular and bulging. 8 -Smaller species with parallel sided elytra, apex of elytra not elongately pointed; scales brighter golden-greenish or other (coppery, brownish, or whitish to pearl-like); body colour brighter; eyes oval but not long-oval

angustus (Lucas, 1854) -Eyes circular and bulged (Fig. Eyes conspicuously long-oval drop shaped and less bulged (Figs 3C-D, 5D). Faust1890

Body colour mostly well visible through rather scarce, often spotty standing, oval to lanceolate whitish scales with a greenish pearl-like lustre; scales on sides of pronotum mostly denser standing. 10 -Hairs less conspicuous, shorter and more adjacent; scales on elytra and pronotum different

grandiceps (Desbrochers des Loges, 1875) -Eyes small (Fig. 5B), less protruding (note: males have bigger eyes than females); body colour brighter brown; scales generally more rounded-oval, denser and more regular standing with greenish pearl lustre; penis more gracile, tip shorter, slightly rounded (Fig. novbody mostly dark brown; scales generally narrower, lanceolate-oval, sparsely standing (often spotty), with whitish to pearl-like lustre (only exceptionally slightly greenish); penis more robust, tip longer, truncated (Fig

. European Journal of Taxonomy. 3922018

Scales on upper side of body vivid green, circular, dense and regularly standing, hairs in-between short and adjacent (Fig. 1834

Scales on elytra generally circular, but with lanceolate ones intermixed, therefore appearing spotty or cloudy (except males of P. baudii, see below), hairs in-between longer. Colour varying from greenish to brownish, more lanceolate scales around disc of pronotum. 12

Females (the females of the two following species are very similar, and thus difficult to distinguish). 

Penis robust (Fig. 8C), internal sac with long and slender sclerite (Fig 9M); males only known from Turkey, possible parthenogenetic reproduction elsewhere (= geographical parthenogenesis). 1864Elytra broader. Vestiture cloudy, with lanceolate scales intermixed (Fig. 4C-D)

Males more gracile and of about the same size as females; narrower, weakly rounded laterally and hardly bulged dorsally. Elytra long-oval, parallel along middle, pointed towards apex. Vestiture with regular-standing circular scales (Fig. 4E-F). 1889FaustPenis gracile (Fig. 8D), internal sac with short and stout sclerite (Fig. 9N)

marcidus Kiesenwetter, 1864 -Elytral hairs mostly (but not always) darker (Fig. 4F). Elytral hairs brighter, mostly whitish. Faust1889

Elenco sistematico-faunistico dei Curculionoidea italiani. References Abbazzi, P Maggini, L , Scolytidae e Platypodidae esclusi (Insecta, Coleoptera). 20095

Cooperative Catalogue of Palaearctic Coleoptera Curculionoidea. M A Alonso-Zarazaga, H Barrios, R Borovec, P Bouchard, R Caldara, E Colonnelli, L Gültekin, P Hlaváč, B Korotyaev, C H C Lyal, A Machado, M Meregalli, H Pierotti, L Ren, M Sánchez-Ruiz, A Sforzi, H Silfverberg, J Skuhrovec, M Trýzna, Castro A.J. & Yunakov N.N2017ZaragozaMonografías electrónicas S.E.A. 8, Sociedad Entomológica Aragonesa S.E.A.

. S Bertolini, Neue Käferarten des Trentinogebietes. Verhandlungen der Kaiserlich-Königlichen Zoologisch-Botanischen Gesellschaft in Wien. 181868

Description de 14 nouvelles espèces de curculionides d'Europe, d'Algérie, de l'Asie Mineure et d'un nouveau genre de cette famille. L A A Chevrolat, Coleopterologische Hefte. 51869

A revised checklist of Italian Curculionoidea (Coleoptera). E Colonnelli, Zootaxa. 3372003

Coleopterorum Catalogus: auspiciis et auxilio: 132. Dr W. Junk, s'-Gravenhage. Desbrochers des Loges J. 1872. Diagnoses d'espèces nouvelles de Coléoptères appartenant aux genres Polydrusus, Thylacites, Tanymecus, Scythropus, Metallites et Phaenognathus. Dalla Torre, K W Emden, M Van & Emden, F Van, Annales de la Société entomologique de France. Schenkling S.511936. 1871Curculionidae: Brachyderinae. I. Pars 147

Diagnoses de Curculionides inédits. J Desbrochers Des Loges, Desbrochers des Loges J. 1900. Espèces inédites de curculionides de l'Ancien Monde. 18751

Révision des curculionides appartenant aux genres Eudipnus et Conocoetus et genres voisins et au groupe des Scythropidae, suivie de rectifications synonymiques observations diverses. Le Frelon. 851901-1902Le Frelon

Description d'un Polydrosus nouveau de Corse. J Desbrochers Des Loges, Le Frelon. 1181903

Berichte über die von E. v. Oertzen im Jahre 1887 in Griechenland u. Klein-Asien gesammelten Coleopteren. VII. Griechische Curculioniden. Besprechung und Beschreibung einiger Arten. J Faust, Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift. 18891889

Rüsselkäfer aus den Mittelmeer-Ländern. J Faust, Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift. 189021890

An annotated checklist of the weevil fauna of Samos Island with new records for Greece (Coleoptera, Curculionoidea). C Germann, G Müller, U Müller, K Schön, Contributions to Natural History. 272015

Coléoptères Curculionides. Première partie. A Hoffmann, Faune de France. 521950Editions Paul Lechevalier

Collectiones Entomologicae: eine Kompendium über den Verbleib entomologischer Sammlungen der Welt bis 1960. Vols 1-2. Akademie der Landwirtschaftswissenschaften der Deutschen Demokratischen Republik. W Horn, I Kahle, G Friese, R Gaedike, 1990Berlin

Beitrag zur Käferfauna Griechenlands. H Kiesenwetter, Von, Neuntes Stück. Curculionidae. Berliner Entomologische Zeitschrift. 81864

. T F W Kirsch, Kleinere Mittheilungen. Berliner Entomologische Zeitschrift. 91865

Essai sur les animaux articulés qui inhabitent l'île de Crête. P H Lucas, Revue et Magasin de Zoologie pure et appliquée. 18546

Ricerche sulla fauna appenninica. LXXVII. Coleotteri curculionidi dell'Aspromonte. (X contributo alla conoscenza dei curculionidi). L Magnano, Schilsky J. 1910. Die Käfer Europas. NuremburgBauer und Raspe196412Memorie del Museo civico di storia naturale di Verona

Die Käfer Europas. J Schilsky, Nach der Natur beschrieben von Dr. H.C. Küster und Dr. G. Kraatz. Heft. 481912Bauer und Raspe

Genera et species Curculionidum, cum synonymia hujus familiae. Species novae aut hactenus minus cognitae, descriptionibus a Dom. C J Schoenherr, C Boheman, L Gyllenhal, 10.5962/bhl.title.8952Pars prima. Leonardo Gyllenhal, C. H. Boheman; Pariset entomologis aliis illustratae. Tomus secundus

Polydrusini 707-709. L Schott, Catalogue des Coléoptères de France. Association Roussillonnaise d'Entomologie. M Tronquet, Perpignan2014

F Solari, Missione zoologica del Dr. E. Festa in Cirenaica. XIV. Coleotteri. A Dodero, 1925

. 10.5169/seals-400449Stierlin W.G. 1884. Bestimmungs-Tabellen europäischer Rüsselkäfer. II. Brachyderidae. Mittheilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen Gesellschaft. Bolletino dei Musei di zoologia ed anatomia comparata della Università di Torino3923nueva serie

. W G Stierlin, 10.5169/seals-400479Beschreibung einiger neuen Käferarten. Mittheilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen Gesellschaft. 82

Beschreibung einiger neuer europäischen Rüsselkäfer. W G Stierlin, 10.5169/seals-400508Mittheilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen Gesellschaft 8 [1888-1893

. N Yunakov, Catalogue of Palaearctic Coleoptera. Löbl I. & Smetana A.82013Brill

Desk editor: Chloe Chester Printed versions of all papers are also deposited in the libraries of the institutes that are members of the EJT consortium. C Zürcher, La vraie provenance du Polydrosus rhodiacus Schilsky (Coleoptera Curculionidae). Gavin Broad, Section , Max Barclay, Paris, France; Botanic Garden Meise, Belgium1919. 14 September 2016 Manuscript accepted: 16 June 2017. January 20189159Muséum national d'Histoire naturelleObservations diverses

. Natural History Museum of Denmark. Real Jardín Botánico de Madrid CSICRoyal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium; Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom; Royal Belgian Institute of Natural SciencesNaturalis Biodiversity Center