# Human H7N9 avian influenza virus infection: a review and pandemic risk assessment

CorpusID: 8981740
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d273ad7ce2a6f247ec189676772885337b618c9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d273ad7ce2a6f247ec189676772885337b618c9)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Human H7N9 avian influenza virus infection: a review and pandemic risk assessment
2013. e48

Yiu Kang 
Lai 
George Wing 
Yiu Ng 
Kit Fai Wong 
Ivan Fan 
Ngai Hung 
Jeffrey Kam Fai 
Hong 
Fanny Fan Cheng 
John Kwok 
Cheung Chan 
Human H7N9 avian influenza virus infection: a review and pandemic risk assessment

Emerging Microbes and Infections
22013. e4810.1038/emi.2013.48REVIEWH7N9H9N2PB2 proteinpoultry marketsquail
China is undergoing a recent outbreak of a novel H7N9 avian influenza virus (nH7N9) infection that has thus far involved 132 human patients, including 37 deaths. The nH7N9 virus is a reassortant virus originating from the H7N3, H7N9 and H9N2 avian influenza viruses. nH7N9 isolated from humans contains features related to adaptation to humans, including a Q226L mutation in the hemagglutinin cleavage site and E627K and D701N mutations in the PB2 protein. Live poultry markets provide an environment for the emergence, spread and maintenance of nH7N9 as well as for the selection of mutants that facilitate nH7N9 binding to and replication in the human upper respiratory tract. Innate immune suppression conferred by the internal genes of H9N2 may contribute to the virulence of nH7N9. The quail may serve as the intermediate host during the adaptation of avian influenza viruses from domestic waterfowl to gallinaceous poultry, such as chickens and related terrestrial-based species, due to the selection of viral mutants with a short neuraminidase stalk. Infections in chickens, common quails, red-legged partridges and turkeys may select for mutants with human receptor specificity. Infection in Ratitae species may lead to the selection of PB2-E627K and PB2-D701N mutants and the conversion of nH7N9 to a highly pathogenic avian influenza virus.

## INTRODUCTION

China is undergoing a recent outbreak of human nH7N9 infection that has involved 132 patients, including 37 deaths, as of 31st May 2013. 1 Nearly 84% of confirmed human cases of this outbreak are from Eastern China. 2 The median age of these patients was 61 years with a male to female ratio of approximately 2:1. More than 60% of the patients had one or more coexisting medical conditions. 3 More than 80% of these patients required treatment in an intensive care unit. Two-thirds of the patients had adult respiratory distress syndrome secondary to viral pneumonia, 24% had septic shock and 15% had acute renal failure. 4 An N31S mutation in the nH7N9 M2 protein confers resistance to amantadine and rimantadine. 5,6 Although most nH7N9 viruses are sensitive to oseltamivir, a mutation in the neuraminidase (NA) gene that conferred resistant to both oseltamivir and zanamivir was detected in two patients who received steroid therapy. 7 It has been reported that oseltamivir initiated at symptom onset to control disease progress was ineffective in a family cluster. 8 nH7N9 is a novel reassortant avian-origin influenza A virus. The hemagglutinin (HA) gene of this virus might have originated from H7N3 avian influenza viruses of duck origin. The NA gene of this virus might have been transferred from an H7N9 avian influenza virus of migratory birds. The six internal genes (non-structural (NS), nucleoprotein, polymerase acidic (PA), polymerase basic 1 (PB1), PB2 and matrix) most likely originated from H9N2 avian influenza viruses endemic in brambling birds or chickens in China. Phylogenetic analysis has indicated the possibility of an as yet unidentified intermediate host. [9][10][11] nH7N9 viruses isolated from humans contain features related to human adaptation, such as a Q226L mutation in the HA and E627K and D701N mutations in the PB2 protein. 12,13 These mutations enhanced nH7N9 binding to and replication in the human upper respiratory tract. 14-17 nH7N9 can be transmitted efficiently via direct contact among ferrets and can replicate in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts of these infected animals. 18 Live poultry markets were suspected as the source of the recent human nH7N9 outbreak. 19 The absence of multiple basic amino acids at the HA cleavage site of these low pathogenic nH7N9 viruses probably led to subclinical infections among poultry and favored the silent spread of nH7N9 in the live poultry market. 20-23 nH7N9 viruses encode a deletion at position 69-73 of the NA stalk region, a characteristic related to adaptation of an avian influenza virus from aquatic birds to terrestrial domestic poultry, particularly chickens. This deletion is also associated with increased virulence in mammals. 5 Hence, nH7N9 may have been circulating among poultry for some time before the current outbreak. Twenty percent of human nH7N9 infections were associated with farm exposure, especially in rural China. 24 The effectiveness of culling infected poultry and closing the live poultry markets in preventing human outbreaks of nH7N9 was demonstrated in Hangzhou, Shanghai and Zhejiang. The suspension of transport and trading of live birds carrying the virus may limit further geographical spread of nH7N9 to other uninvolved provinces. 25,26 


## THE EMERGENCE, SPREAD AND MAINTENANCE OF nH7N9 IN LIVE POULTRY MARKETS

The mixing of multiple species of poultry along with mammals in live poultry markets provides an ideal environment that favors reassortment among avian influenza viruses of different subtypes and interspecies viral transmission, including transmission from avian species to humans. Duck and geese are natural reservoirs of avian influenza viruses. 27,28 Quail may serve as the intermediate host for the adaptation of novel reassortant avian influenza viruses from domestic waterfowl to gallinaceous poultry and humans. 29,30 Chickens, common quail, red-legged partridges, and turkeys have both human-like sialic acid alpha-2,6-galactose-linked receptors and avian-like sialic acid alpha-2,3-galactose-linked receptors in their trachea and intestine. [31][32][33][34] The ability of some low pathogenic H9 and H7 avian influenza viruses to bind to both avian and human receptors has conferred a survival advantage to these subtypes over other avian influenza viruses in these poultry species, 35 which may explain why endemic H9N2 36 , H7N2 37 and H7N7 38 viruses in poultry have been shown to acquire human receptor specificity and have caused outbreaks in humans. The asymptomatic infection of poultry with these pathogenic influenza viruses that have acquired human receptor specificity in live poultry markets facilitates the transmission of these pathogenic reassortant influenza viruses to humans. 39 There is a link between human highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus (HPH5N1) infection and live poultry markets in China. 40 Influenza infection of ostrich and emu can lead to the selection of PB2-E627K and PB2-D701N mutants, 41 and ratite-origin isolates of low pathogenicity can easily be converted to highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses in chickens. [42][43][44] The mixing of new birds with unsold birds in live poultry markets sustains the circulation of these reassortant viruses. Hence, the live poultry market is important in the emergence, spread and maintenance of these pathogenic reassortant influenza viruses. 45 


## THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE INTERNAL GENES FROM THE H9N2 AVIAN INFLUENZA VIRUS TO THE VIRULENCE OF nH7N9

The interferon-mediated antiviral response and the species specificity of the NS segment are important in determining tissue tropism and virulence of influenza viruses. [46][47][48] Interferon-beta (IFN-b) plays a critical role in the defense against an influenza virus that cannot be compensated by IFN-a. 49 The NS of HPH5N1 is able to inhibit constitutive IFN-b release 50 and inducible IFN-b production at the pretranscriptional 51 and post-transcriptional levels 52 and to induce cytokine dysregulation. 53 The intense innate immune suppression enhances tropism of HPH5N1 for human tissues and allows HPH5N1 to invade and replicate in human tissues without the need for the avian sialic acid alpha-2,6-galactose receptor. [54][55][56][57] Introduction of the HPH5N1 NS into the low pathogenic H7N1 avian influenza virus enabled H7N1 to replicate efficiently in different human cell lines without prior adaptation due to potent suppression of IFN-b production. 58 This observation shows that the NS of HPH5N1 is able to increase the virulence and enhance the adaptation of avian influenza viruses to human hosts. An optimal gene constellation is important for the virulence of NS in HPH5N1 infection. 59,60 The viral polymerase protein PA and the nucleocapsid protein are important for the stabilization of the CPSF30-NS1 complex. 61 The three influenza virus polymerases (PA, PB1 and PB2) and the PB1-F2 protein enhance NS-mediated interferon antagonism. 62,63 The interaction between matrix and NS leads to down-regulation of the inflammasome and produces a delayed apoptosis of respiratory epithelial cells. 64,65 This delayed apoptosis and potent suppression of the innate immune response allows HPH5N1 to proliferate rapidly during the stealth phase of influenza infection 66 and results in a high viral load, 67 cytokine dysregulation 68 and high mortality. 69 The NS of HPH5N1 comes from an ancestor H7N7 avian influenza virus, which has become incorporated into the H9N2 of the quail population in China. The introduction of NS and the other five internal genes (nucleoprotein, PA, PB1, PB2 and matrix) from the H9N2 of the quail population into HPH5N1 was responsible for the outbreak of the HPH5N1 infection in 1997 in chickens and humans in Hong Kong. 70 This NS-associated gene constellation that led to the outbreak of HPH5N1 in 1997 is also present in some of the H9N2 avian influenza viruses endemic in China. 71,72 The outbreak of human nH7N9 infection after reassortment of the six internal genes from H9N2 into nH7N9 has been corroborated by the outbreak of the human HPH5N1 infection in 1997 following the reassortment of these six internal genes from H9N2 that are capable of suppressing the innate immune response into HPH5N1 in Hong Kong. The potent IFN-suppressing capability of this NS-associated gene constellation may have contributed to the virulence of nH7N9 in humans. Because low pathogenic H7 avian influenza virus can cause asymptomatic infections in poultry and has an increased ability to acquire human receptor specificity by selective pressure in poultry species that contain both human and avian binding sites in their trachea and intestine, the reassortment of this NS-associated gene constellation of H9N2 into nH7N9 may be more disastrous than the outbreak of HPH5N1 in 1997 in terms of pandemic risk.

Furthermore, the virulence of the NS of an influenza virus in host cells is species specific. The species specificity of NS was first discovered during testing of the individual gene segments of the 1918 H1N1 Spanish influenza pandemic virus in mice. The NS that is virulent to human cells is less virulent than the corresponding wild-type control virus in mice. 47,73 The 2009 novel H1N1 influenza virus (2009PV), which induced a potent cytokine dysregulation of the human host and produced an enhanced mortality among young adult humans, 74 caused only modest disease in ferrets 75 and asymptomatic infection in pathogen-free miniature swine. 76 The asymptomatic infection of 2009PV in pathogen-free miniature swine explains the absence of a detectable outbreak of 2009PV infection in the swine population before the virus surfaced in humans. HPH5N1 is highly pathogenic to humans but has heterogeneous virulence in mice and ferrets. 77 Despite the outbreak of an HPH5N1 infection that had a mortality rate of 80% in Indonesia, HPH5N1 was detected in asymptomatic infections in an Indonesian swine population. 78 Therefore, tests assessing the pathogenicity of nH7N9 in humans should be conducted in human cell lines.


## THE CONTRIBUTION OF nH7N9 MUTANTS SELECTED IN LIVE POULTRY MARKETS TO HUMAN INFECTION## INTRODUCTION

China is undergoing a recent outbreak of human nH7N9 infection that has involved 132 patients, including 37 deaths, as of 31st May 2013. 1 Nearly 84% of confirmed human cases of this outbreak are from Eastern China. 2 The median age of these patients was 61 years with a male to female ratio of approximately 2:1. More than 60% of the patients had one or more coexisting medical conditions. 3 More than 80% of these patients required treatment in an intensive care unit. Two-thirds of the patients had adult respiratory distress syndrome secondary to viral pneumonia, 24% had septic shock and 15% had acute renal failure. 4 An N31S mutation in the nH7N9 M2 protein confers resistance to amantadine and rimantadine. 5,6 Although most nH7N9 viruses are sensitive to oseltamivir, a mutation in the neuraminidase (NA) gene that conferred resistant to both oseltamivir and zanamivir was detected in two patients who received steroid therapy. 7 It has been reported that oseltamivir initiated at symptom onset to control disease progress was ineffective in a family cluster. 8 nH7N9 is a novel reassortant avian-origin influenza A virus. The hemagglutinin (HA) gene of this virus might have originated from H7N3 avian influenza viruses of duck origin. The NA gene of this virus might have been transferred from an H7N9 avian influenza virus of migratory birds. The six internal genes (non-structural (NS), nucleoprotein, polymerase acidic (PA), polymerase basic 1 (PB1), PB2 and matrix) most likely originated from H9N2 avian influenza viruses endemic in brambling birds or chickens in China. Phylogenetic analysis has indicated the possibility of an as yet unidentified intermediate host. [9][10][11] nH7N9 viruses isolated from humans contain features related to human adaptation, such as a Q226L mutation in the HA and E627K and D701N mutations in the PB2 protein. 12,13 These mutations enhanced nH7N9 binding to and replication in the human upper respiratory tract. 14-17 nH7N9 can be transmitted efficiently via direct contact among ferrets and can replicate in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts of these infected animals. 18 Live poultry markets were suspected as the source of the recent human nH7N9 outbreak. 19 The absence of multiple basic amino acids at the HA cleavage site of these low pathogenic nH7N9 viruses probably led to subclinical infections among poultry and favored the silent spread of nH7N9 in the live poultry market. 20-23 nH7N9 viruses encode a deletion at position 69-73 of the NA stalk region, a characteristic related to adaptation of an avian influenza virus from aquatic birds to terrestrial domestic poultry, particularly chickens. This deletion is also associated with increased virulence in mammals. 5 Hence, nH7N9 may have been circulating among poultry for some time before the current outbreak. Twenty percent of human nH7N9 infections were associated with farm exposure, especially in rural China. 24 The effectiveness of culling infected poultry and closing the live poultry markets in preventing human outbreaks of nH7N9 was demonstrated in Hangzhou, Shanghai and Zhejiang. The suspension of transport and trading of live birds carrying the virus may limit further geographical spread of nH7N9 to other uninvolved provinces. 25,26 


## THE EMERGENCE, SPREAD AND MAINTENANCE OF nH7N9 IN LIVE POULTRY MARKETS

The mixing of multiple species of poultry along with mammals in live poultry markets provides an ideal environment that favors reassortment among avian influenza viruses of different subtypes and interspecies viral transmission, including transmission from avian species to humans. Duck and geese are natural reservoirs of avian influenza viruses. 27,28 Quail may serve as the intermediate host for the adaptation of novel reassortant avian influenza viruses from domestic waterfowl to gallinaceous poultry and humans. 29,30 Chickens, common quail, red-legged partridges, and turkeys have both human-like sialic acid alpha-2,6-galactose-linked receptors and avian-like sialic acid alpha-2,3-galactose-linked receptors in their trachea and intestine. [31][32][33][34] The ability of some low pathogenic H9 and H7 avian influenza viruses to bind to both avian and human receptors has conferred a survival advantage to these subtypes over other avian influenza viruses in these poultry species, 35 which may explain why endemic H9N2 36 , H7N2 37 and H7N7 38 viruses in poultry have been shown to acquire human receptor specificity and have caused outbreaks in humans. The asymptomatic infection of poultry with these pathogenic influenza viruses that have acquired human receptor specificity in live poultry markets facilitates the transmission of these pathogenic reassortant influenza viruses to humans. 39 There is a link between human highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus (HPH5N1) infection and live poultry markets in China. 40 Influenza infection of ostrich and emu can lead to the selection of PB2-E627K and PB2-D701N mutants, 41 and ratite-origin isolates of low pathogenicity can easily be converted to highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses in chickens. [42][43][44] The mixing of new birds with unsold birds in live poultry markets sustains the circulation of these reassortant viruses. Hence, the live poultry market is important in the emergence, spread and maintenance of these pathogenic reassortant influenza viruses. 45 


## THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE INTERNAL GENES FROM THE H9N2 AVIAN INFLUENZA VIRUS TO THE VIRULENCE OF nH7N9

The interferon-mediated antiviral response and the species specificity of the NS segment are important in determining tissue tropism and virulence of influenza viruses. [46][47][48] Interferon-beta (IFN-b) plays a critical role in the defense against an influenza virus that cannot be compensated by IFN-a. 49 The NS of HPH5N1 is able to inhibit constitutive IFN-b release 50 and inducible IFN-b production at the pretranscriptional 51 and post-transcriptional levels 52 and to induce cytokine dysregulation. 53 The intense innate immune suppression enhances tropism of HPH5N1 for human tissues and allows HPH5N1 to invade and replicate in human tissues without the need for the avian sialic acid alpha-2,6-galactose receptor. [54][55][56][57] Introduction of the HPH5N1 NS into the low pathogenic H7N1 avian influenza virus enabled H7N1 to replicate efficiently in different human cell lines without prior adaptation due to potent suppression of IFN-b production. 58 This observation shows that the NS of HPH5N1 is able to increase the virulence and enhance the adaptation of avian influenza viruses to human hosts. An optimal gene constellation is important for the virulence of NS in HPH5N1 infection. 59,60 The viral polymerase protein PA and the nucleocapsid protein are important for the stabilization of the CPSF30-NS1 complex. 61 The three influenza virus polymerases (PA, PB1 and PB2) and the PB1-F2 protein enhance NS-mediated interferon antagonism. 62,63 The interaction between matrix and NS leads to down-regulation of the inflammasome and produces a delayed apoptosis of respiratory epithelial cells. 64,65 This delayed apoptosis and potent suppression of the innate immune response allows HPH5N1 to proliferate rapidly during the stealth phase of influenza infection 66 and results in a high viral load, 67 cytokine dysregulation 68 and high mortality. 69 The NS of HPH5N1 comes from an ancestor H7N7 avian influenza virus, which has become incorporated into the H9N2 of the quail population in China. The introduction of NS and the other five internal genes (nucleoprotein, PA, PB1, PB2 and matrix) from the H9N2 of the quail population into HPH5N1 was responsible for the outbreak of the HPH5N1 infection in 1997 in chickens and humans in Hong Kong. 70 This NS-associated gene constellation that led to the outbreak of HPH5N1 in 1997 is also present in some of the H9N2 avian influenza viruses endemic in China. 71,72 The outbreak of human nH7N9 infection after reassortment of the six internal genes from H9N2 into nH7N9 has been corroborated by the outbreak of the human HPH5N1 infection in 1997 following the reassortment of these six internal genes from H9N2 that are capable of suppressing the innate immune response into HPH5N1 in Hong Kong. The potent IFN-suppressing capability of this NS-associated gene constellation may have contributed to the virulence of nH7N9 in humans. Because low pathogenic H7 avian influenza virus can cause asymptomatic infections in poultry and has an increased ability to acquire human receptor specificity by selective pressure in poultry species that contain both human and avian binding sites in their trachea and intestine, the reassortment of this NS-associated gene constellation of H9N2 into nH7N9 may be more disastrous than the outbreak of HPH5N1 in 1997 in terms of pandemic risk.

Furthermore, the virulence of the NS of an influenza virus in host cells is species specific. The species specificity of NS was first discovered during testing of the individual gene segments of the 1918 H1N1 Spanish influenza pandemic virus in mice. The NS that is virulent to human cells is less virulent than the corresponding wild-type control virus in mice. 47,73 The 2009 novel H1N1 influenza virus (2009PV), which induced a potent cytokine dysregulation of the human host and produced an enhanced mortality among young adult humans, 74 caused only modest disease in ferrets 75 and asymptomatic infection in pathogen-free miniature swine. 76 The asymptomatic infection of 2009PV in pathogen-free miniature swine explains the absence of a detectable outbreak of 2009PV infection in the swine population before the virus surfaced in humans. HPH5N1 is highly pathogenic to humans but has heterogeneous virulence in mice and ferrets. 77 Despite the outbreak of an HPH5N1 infection that had a mortality rate of 80% in Indonesia, HPH5N1 was detected in asymptomatic infections in an Indonesian swine population. 78 Therefore, tests assessing the pathogenicity of nH7N9 in humans should be conducted in human cell lines.


## THE CONTRIBUTION OF nH7N9 MUTANTS SELECTED IN LIVE POULTRY MARKETS TO HUMAN INFECTION

Live poultry markets provide an ideal environment for viral reassortment and interspecies transmission of avian influenza viruses. Ducks and quail can act as mixing vessels to facilitate reassortment of influenza viruses of different subtypes, which may result in the generation of novel reassortant avian influenza viruses and the selection of mutants that may expand their host range to mammals. 79,80 nH7N9 has a five-amino-acid deletion in the NA stalk that may be associated with increased virulence. 5,6 Influenza viruses with a long NA stalk have a selective advantage in aquatic birds. Sustained circulation of subtype Review and risk assessment on H7N9 KY Lai et al 2 H5 and H7 influenza viruses in terrestrial poultry often selects for viruses with a shorter neuraminidase stalk. Those HPH5N1 viruses with a short NA stalk have increased virulence in mice and humans. Among the 162 HPH5N1 viruses isolated from humans, only two viruses contain a long NA stalk. 81 Serial passage of a duck-origin avian influenza virus in quail led to the acquisition of mutations in HA commonly found in human seasonal influenza viruses and stepwise stalk deletions in NA. These quail-adapted duck-origin influenza viruses were able to replicate in human bronchial epithelial cells. 82 Serial passage of H9N2 viruses into quails and chickens can lead to the production of mutants with short NA stalks that can infect mice without prior adaptation and result in the selection of PB2-E627K mutants. 83 These quail-and chicken-adapted mutants with short NA stalks can efficiently replicate in the respiratory tract of chickens and be transmitted via respiratory contact. The susceptibility of quails to multiple subtypes of influenza viruses facilitates reassortment among these viruses. The role of quail as an intermediate host in the adaptation of avian influenza viruses from domestic waterfowl, such as ducks and geese, to gallinaceous poultry, such as chickens and related terrestrial-based species, and the ability of quail to shed these novel reassortant viruses via respiratory aerosols led to their removal from live poultry markets in Hong Kong in 2002. 84,85 nH7N9 isolated from humans contains features related to human adaptation, such as a Q226L mutation in the HA cleavage site and E627K and D701N mutations in the PB2 protein, that facilitate nH7N9 binding to and replication in the human upper respiratory tract. The Q226L mutation in HA facilitated the adhesion of nH7N9 to the human upper respiratory tract, 86,87 a property that enhanced the ability of this avian influenza virus to transmit via aerosols. [14][15][16] The PB2-E627K mutation increased the viral polymerase activity, replication efficiency and pathogenicity of this avian influenza virus in the mammalian host. 88,89 The PB2-E627K mutation also allowed efficient replication of the avian influenza virus at both 33 6 C and 37 6 C. The ability to replicate at 33 6 C facilitates avian influenza virus proliferation in the upper respiratory tract of humans, a property that may allow the virus to be readily spread by sneezing and coughing. Efficient replication at 37 6 C allows this avian influenza virus to replicate in human lungs and to induce acute pulmonary complications. [90][91][92] The only reported fatal case of a low pathogenic H7N7 avian influenza virus was with a virus containing a PB2-E627K mutation, which is absent in those patients presenting with mild conjunctivitis. 93,94 The PB2-D701N mutation allows the avian influenza virus to cross the host species barrier and to infect mammalian cells. 95,96 The asymptomatic spread of nH7N9 among poultry and the rapid selection of nH7N9 mutants capable of human invasion indicates that the pandemic threat of nH7N9 may surpass that of HPH5N1. The live poultry market plays a key role in the recent outbreak of poultry and human infections with nH7N9 by providing an environment for amplification, maintenance and interspecies transmission of the nH7N9 virus. Closing of the live poultry markets and culling of poultry in infected live poultry markets are important events in the prevention of further dissemination of nH7N9 infection. A ban on keeping live poultry overnight in live poultry markets may reduce the circulation of reassortant influenza viruses. 97 Massive poultry vaccination and central poultry slaughtering should be considered if nH7N9 becomes an endemic disease among poultry. 24 However, such a vaccination program may lead to the development of multilineage antigenic drift in these low pathogenic avian influenza viruses. 98 The control of a human nH7N9 outbreak may prevent further adaptation of nH7N9 in humans because PB2-E267K and PB2-D701N mutants can be selected during replication in humans. 99 Proper disposal of infected poultry and animal carcasses is important in preventing the spread of nH7N9 via predatory or scavenger birds. [100][101][102] Because influenza infection of ostrich and emu can lead to the selection of PB2-E267K and PB2-D701N mutants and because ratite-origin influenza isolates of low pathogenicity can easily be converted to a highly pathogenic avian influenza virus in chickens, meticulous care must be taken to prevent the spread of nH7N9 to ostrich and other members of the Ratitae family. China has undergone a boom in ostrich and emu farming due to the market demand for their high-quality feathers, leather, healthy low-cholesterol red meat, eggs, eggshells and oil. China is the largest ostrich producer in Asia. 103 In Inner Mongolia, producers are experimenting with the rearing of emus to replace sheep and goats in grasslands to alleviate the problem of overgrazing and desertification in China. [104][105][106] Outbreaks of avian influenza virus infections have been reported in ostrich and emu farms in China. 107,108 Direct contact between ostrich flocks and migratory birds via the free-range production systems in ostrich farms may play an important role in the mutual dissemination of mutant avian influenza viruses between ostriches and migrating birds. 109 Biosecurity measures should be implemented to minimize possible contact between ostriches or emus and migrating birds on these farms. 110 Regular surveillance programs on ostrich and emu farms are important for the detection and early control of the asymptomatic spread of nH7N9 among these species. 111 Wild birds carrying low-pathogenic nH7N9 may migrate towards Qinghai Lake. 112 The acquisition of the PB2-E627K mutation has been reported in a HPH5N1 virus at Qinghai Lake in 2005. 113,114 Descendants of the Ratitae family around Qinghai Lake have been implicated in the emergence of such mutant viruses as fossils of Struthio asiaticus 115 and ornithomimosaurs (ostrich-mimic dinosaurs) 116 have been detected in the Gansu Province of China. Hence, nH7N9 may undergo further reassortment or mutation at Qinghai Lake before spreading to the southern part of China and to the rest of the world during the coming winter season via migrating birds. 117,118 CONCLUSION Current epidemiological data suggest that an immediate human nH7N9 pandemic is unlikely, 119 although it is impossible to predict whether nH7N9 will become endemic among poultry in China. The world should be vigilant against nH7N9. Continued monitoring and surveillance to obtain additional epidemiological data of nH7N9 is important for the early detection of a potential human nH7N9 pandemic. Seroprevalence studies may delineate the magnitude of asymptomatic or mild nH7N9 cases in the community. 120 Unless long-term measures are taken, such as the enhancement of live poultry market hygiene and poultry farm biosecurity to eliminate the emergence, spread and maintenance of reassortant avian influenza viruses and the selection of mutants capable of human invasion, live poultry markets and poultry farms may serve as incubators for the emergence of highly lethal reassortant avian influenza viruses with pandemic potential. Review and risk assessment on H7N9 KY Lai et al 3


World Health Organization. Cumulative number of confirmed cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) reported to WHO, 2013. Geneva: WHO, 2013. Available at http:// www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/influenza_h7n9/08_ReportWeb H7N9Number.pdf (accessed 31 May 2013). 2 Bai T, Zhou J, Shu Y. Serological study for influenza A (H7N9) among high-risk groups in China. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 2339-2340.1 


Clinical Findings in 111 cases of influenza A (H7N9) virus infection. H Gao, H Lu, B Cao, N Engl J Med. 368Gao H, Lu H, Cao B et al. Clinical Findings in 111 cases of influenza A (H7N9) virus infection. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 2277-2285.

Asian influenza A(H7N9) infections; intensivists as viral hunters in the new century. X Xi, Q Fang, Q Gu, B Du, 10.1016/j.jcrc.2013.05.001J Crit Care. Xi X, Fang Q, Gu Q, Du B. Asian influenza A(H7N9) infections; intensivists as viral hunters in the new century. J Crit Care; e-pub ahead of print 21 May 2013; doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2013.05.001.

Genetic analysis of novel avian A (H7N9) influenza viruses isolated from patients in China. T Kageyama, S Fujisaki, E Takashita, Euro Surveill. 1820453Kageyama T, Fujisaki S, Takashita E et al. Genetic analysis of novel avian A (H7N9) influenza viruses isolated from patients in China, February to April 2013. Euro Surveill 2013; 18: 20453.

Genomic signature and protein sequence analysis of a novel influenza A (H7N9) virus that causes an outbreak in humans in China. Q Liu, L Lu, Z Sun, G W Chen, Y Wen, S Jiang, Microbes Infect. 15Liu Q, Lu L, Sun Z, Chen GW, Wen Y, Jiang S. Genomic signature and protein sequence analysis of a novel influenza A (H7N9) virus that causes an outbreak in humans in China. Microbes Infect 2013; 15: 432-439.

Association between adverse clinical outcome in human disease caused by novel influenza A H7N9 virus and sustained viral shedding and emergence of antiviral resistance. Lancet; e-pub ahead of print 29. Y Hu, S Lu, Z Song, 10.1016/S0140-6736Hu Y, Lu S, Song Z et al. Association between adverse clinical outcome in human disease caused by novel influenza A H7N9 virus and sustained viral shedding and emergence of antiviral resistance. Lancet; e-pub ahead of print 29 May 2013; doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61125-3.

Poor responses to oseltamivir treatment in a patient with influenza A (H7N9) virus infection. X Liu, T Li, Y Zheng, K Wong, S Lu, H Lu, Emerg Microbes Infect. 227Liu X, Li T, Zheng Y, Wong K, Lu S, Lu H. Poor responses to oseltamivir treatment in a patient with influenza A (H7N9) virus infection. Emerg Microbes Infect 2013; 2: e27.

Origin and diversity of novel avian influenza A H7N9 viruses causing human infection: phylogenetic, structural, and coalescent analyses. D Liu, W Shi, Y Shi, Lancet. 381Liu D, Shi W, Shi Y et al. Origin and diversity of novel avian influenza A H7N9 viruses causing human infection: phylogenetic, structural, and coalescent analyses. Lancet 2013; 381: 1926-1932.

The novel H7N9 influenza A virus: its present impact and indeterminate future. R E Kahn, J A Richt, Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 13Kahn RE, Richt JA. The novel H7N9 influenza A virus: its present impact and indeterminate future. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2013; 13: 347-348.

Genesis of avian-origin H7N9 influenza A viruses. M Van Ranst, P Lemey, Lancet. 381van Ranst M, Lemey P. Genesis of avian-origin H7N9 influenza A viruses. Lancet 2013; 381: 1883-1885.

Human infection with a novel avian-origin influenza A (H7N9) virus. R Gao, B Cao, Y Hu, N Engl J Med. 368Gao, R. Cao B, Hu Y et al. Human infection with a novel avian-origin influenza A (H7N9) virus. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 1888-1897.

Human infections with the emerging avian influenza A H7N9 virus from wet market poultry: clinical analysis and characterisation of viral genome. Y Chen, W Liang, S Yang, Lancet. 381Chen Y, Liang W, Yang S et al. Human infections with the emerging avian influenza A H7N9 virus from wet market poultry: clinical analysis and characterisation of viral genome. Lancet 2013; 381: 1916-1925.

An airborne transmissible avian influenza H5 hemagglutinin seen at the atomic level. W Zhang, Y Shi, X Lu, Y Shu, J Qi, G F Gao, Science. 340Zhang W, Shi Y, Lu X, Shu Y, Qi J, Gao GF. An airborne transmissible avian influenza H5 hemagglutinin seen at the atomic level. Science 2013; 340: 1463-1467.

Experimental adaptation of an influenza H5 HA confers respiratory droplet transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 virus in ferrets. M Imai, T Watanabe, M Hatta, Nature. 486Imai M, Watanabe T, Hatta M et al. Experimental adaptation of an influenza H5 HA confers respiratory droplet transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 virus in ferrets. Nature 2012; 486; 420-428.

Identification of amino acids in HA and PB2 critical for the transmission of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in a mammalian host. Y Gao, Y Zhang, K Shinya, PLoS Pathog. 51000709Gao Y, Zhang Y, Shinya K et al. Identification of amino acids in HA and PB2 critical for the transmission of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in a mammalian host. PLoS Pathog 2009; 5: e1000709.

A single amino acid in the PB2 gene of influenza A virus is a determinant of host range. E K Subbarao, W London, B R Murphy, J Virol. 67Subbarao EK, London W, Murphy BR. A single amino acid in the PB2 gene of influenza A virus is a determinant of host range. J Virol 1993; 67: 1761-1764.

Infectivity, transmission, and pathology of human H7N9 influenza in ferrets and pigs. Science; e-pub ahead of print 21. H Zhu, D Wang, D J Kelvin, 10.1126/science.1239844Zhu H, Wang D, Kelvin DJ et al. Infectivity, transmission, and pathology of human H7N9 influenza in ferrets and pigs. Science; e-pub ahead of print 21 June 2013; doi:10.1126/science.1239844.

Avian influenza A H7N9 in Zhejiang, China. M Koopmans, M D De Jong, Lancet. 381Koopmans M, de Jong MD. Avian influenza A H7N9 in Zhejiang, China. Lancet 2013; 381: 1882-1883.

Isolation and characterization of H7N9 viruses from live poultry markets-implication of the source of current H7N9 infection in humans. J Z Shi, G H Deng, P H Liu, 10.1007/s11434-013-5873-4Chin Sci Bull. Shi JZ, Deng GH, Liu PH et al. Isolation and characterization of H7N9 viruses from live poultry markets-implication of the source of current H7N9 infection in humans. Chin Sci Bull 2013; doi:10.1007/s11434-013-5873-4.

Live-Animal Markets and Influenza A (H7N9) Virus Infection. C J Bao, L B Chi, M H Zhou, L Hong, G F Gao, H Wang, N Engl J Med. 368Bao CJ, Chi LB, Zhou MH, Hong L, Gao GF, Wang H. Live-Animal Markets and Influenza A (H7N9) Virus Infection. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 2337-2339.

Environmental connections of novel avian-origin H7N9 influenza virus infection and virus adaptation to the human. J Li, X Yu, X Pu, Sci China Life Sci. 56Li J, Yu X, Pu X et al. Environmental connections of novel avian-origin H7N9 influenza virus infection and virus adaptation to the human. Sci China Life Sci 2013; 56: 485- 492.

Epidemiological link between exposure to poultry and all influenza A(H7N9) confirmed cases in Huzhou city, China. J Han, M Jin, P Zhang, Euro Surveill. 18520481Han J, Jin M, Zhang P et al. Epidemiological link between exposure to poultry and all influenza A(H7N9) confirmed cases in Huzhou city, China, March to May 2013. Euro Surveill 2013; 18: pii520481.

Exposure to avian influenza H7N9 in farms and wet markets. S S Lee, N S Wong, C C Leung, Lancet. 3811815Lee SS, Wong NS, Leung CC. Exposure to avian influenza H7N9 in farms and wet markets. Lancet 2013; 381: 1815.

Reducing exposure to avian influenza H7N9. J Xu, S Lu, H Wang, C Chen, Lancet. 381Xu J, Lu S, Wang H, Chen C. Reducing exposure to avian influenza H7N9. Lancet 2013; 381: 1815-1816.

Avian influenza A(H7N9) and the closure of live bird markets. West Pacif Surveill Response J; e-pub ahead of print. M Murhekar, Y Arima, P Horby, 10.5365/wpsar.2013.4.2.008Murhekar M, Arima Y, Horby P et al. Avian influenza A(H7N9) and the closure of live bird markets. West Pacif Surveill Response J; e-pub ahead of print Apr-Jun 2013; doi:10.5365/wpsar.2013.4.2.008.

Infectious diseases emerging from Chinese wet-markets: zoonotic origins of severe respiratory viral infections. P C Woo, S K Lau, K Y Yuen, Curr Opin Infect Dis. 19Woo PC, Lau SK, Yuen KY. Infectious diseases emerging from Chinese wet-markets: zoonotic origins of severe respiratory viral infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2006; 19: 401-407.

H7N9 Incident, immune status, the elderly and a warning of an influenza pandemic. Y Guan, A Farooqui, H Zhu, W Dong, J Wang, D J Kelvin, J Infect Dev Ctries. 17Guan Y, Farooqui A, Zhu H, Dong W, Wang J, Kelvin DJ. H7N9 Incident, immune status, the elderly and a warning of an influenza pandemic. J Infect Dev Ctries 2013; 17: 302-307.

Role of quail in the interspecies transmission of H9 influenza A viruses: molecular changes on HA that correspond to adaptation from ducks to chickens. D R Perez, W Lim, J P Seiler, J Virol. 77Perez DR, Lim W, Seiler JP et al. Role of quail in the interspecies transmission of H9 influenza A viruses: molecular changes on HA that correspond to adaptation from ducks to chickens. J Virol 2003; 77: 3148-3156.

Pathobiology and transmission of highly and low pathogenic avian influenza viruses in European quail (Coturnix c. coturnix). K Bertran, R Dolz, N Busquets, Vet Res. 4423Bertran K, Dolz R, Busquets N et al. Pathobiology and transmission of highly and low pathogenic avian influenza viruses in European quail (Coturnix c. coturnix). Vet Res 2013; 44: 23.

Differences between influenza virus receptors on target cells of duck and chicken. A Gambaryan, R Webster, M Matrosovich, Arch Virol. 147Gambaryan A, Webster R, Matrosovich M. Differences between influenza virus receptors on target cells of duck and chicken. Arch Virol 2002; 147: 1197-1208.

Quail carry sialic acid receptors compatible with binding of avian and human influenza viruses. H Wan, D R Perez, Virology. 346Wan H, Perez DR. Quail carry sialic acid receptors compatible with binding of avian and human influenza viruses. Virology 2006; 346: 278-286.

The quail and chicken intestine have sialylgalactose sugar chains responsible for the binding of influenza A viruses to human type receptors. C T Guo, N Takashashi, H Yagi, Glycobiology. 17Guo CT, Takashashi N, Yagi H et al. The quail and chicken intestine have sialyl- galactose sugar chains responsible for the binding of influenza A viruses to human type receptors. Glycobiology 2007; 17: 713-724.

Distribution patterns of influenza virus receptors and viral attachment patterns in the respiratory and intestinal tracts of seven avian species. T Costa, A J Chaves, R Valle, Vet Res. 4328Costa T, Chaves AJ, Valle R et al. Distribution patterns of influenza virus receptors and viral attachment patterns in the respiratory and intestinal tracts of seven avian species. Vet Res 2012; 43: 28.

Structures of receptor complexes of a North American H7N2 influenza hemagglutinin with a loop deletion in the receptor binding site. H Yang, L M Chen, P J Carney, R O Donis, J Stevens, PLoS Pathog. 61001081Yang H, Chen LM, Carney PJ, Donis RO, Stevens J. Structures of receptor complexes of a North American H7N2 influenza hemagglutinin with a loop deletion in the receptor binding site. PLoS Pathog 2010; 6: e1001081.

H9N2 influenza A viruses from poultry in Asia have human virus-like receptor specificity. M N Matrosovich, S Krauss, R G Webster, Virology. 281Matrosovich MN, Krauss S, Webster RG. H9N2 influenza A viruses from poultry in Asia have human virus-like receptor specificity. Virology 2001; 281: 156-162.

Contemporary North American influenza H7 viruses possess human receptor specificity: implications for virus transmissibility. J A Belser, O Blixt, L M Chen, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 105Belser JA, Blixt O, Chen LM et al. Contemporary North American influenza H7 viruses possess human receptor specificity: implications for virus transmissibility. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 7558-7563.

Comparative analysis of avian influenza virus diversity in poultry and humans during a highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N7) virus outbreak. M Jonges, A Bataille, R Enserink, J Virol. 85Jonges M, Bataille A, Enserink R et al. Comparative analysis of avian influenza virus diversity in poultry and humans during a highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N7) virus outbreak. J Virol 2011; 85: 10598-10604.

Isolation and characterization of avian influenza viruses, including highly pathogenic H5N1, from poultry in live bird markets in Hanoi. D C Nguyenm, T M Uyeki, S Jadhao, J Virol. 79Nguyenm DC, Uyeki TM, Jadhao S et al. Isolation and characterization of avian influenza viruses, including highly pathogenic H5N1, from poultry in live bird markets in Hanoi, Vietnam, in 2001. J Virol 2005; 79: 4201-4212.

Indications that live poultry markets are a major source of human H5N1 influenza virus infection in China. X F Wan, L Dong, Lan Yu, J Virol. 85Wan XF, Dong L, Lan Yu et al. Indications that live poultry markets are a major source of human H5N1 influenza virus infection in China. J Virol 2011; 85: 13432-13438.

Ostrich involvement in the selection of H5N1 influenza virus possessing mammalian-type amino acids in the PB2 protein. K Shinya, A Makino, M Ozawa, J Virol. 83Shinya K, Makino A, Ozawa M et al. Ostrich involvement in the selection of H5N1 influenza virus possessing mammalian-type amino acids in the PB2 protein. J Virol 2009; 83: 13015-13018.

An Arg-Lys insertion at the hemagglutinin cleavage site of an H5N2 avian influenza isolate. M L Perdue, M Garcia, J Beck, M Brugh, D E Swayne, Virus Genes. 12Perdue ML, Garcia M, Beck J, Brugh M, Swayne DE. An Arg-Lys insertion at the hemagglutinin cleavage site of an H5N2 avian influenza isolate. Virus Genes 1996; 12: 77-84.

Origin and molecular changes associated with emergence of a highly pathogenic H5N2 influenza virus in Mexico. T Horimoto, E Rivera, J Pearson, Virology. 213Horimoto T, Rivera E, Pearson J et al. Origin and molecular changes associated with emergence of a highly pathogenic H5N2 influenza virus in Mexico. Virology 1995; 213: 223-230.

Heterogeneity in the haemagglutinin gene and emergence of the highly pathogenic phenotype among recent H5N2 avian influenza viruses from Mexico. M García, J M Crawford, J W Latimer, E Rivera-Cruz, M L Perdue, J Gen Virol. 77García M, Crawford JM, Latimer JW, Rivera-Cruz E, Perdue ML. Heterogeneity in the haemagglutinin gene and emergence of the highly pathogenic phenotype among recent H5N2 avian influenza viruses from Mexico. J Gen Virol 1996; 77: 1493-1504.

Identifying live bird markets with the potential to act as reservoirs of avian influenza A (H5N1) virus: a survey in northern Viet Nam and Cambodia. G Fournié, J Guitian, S Desvaux, PLoS ONE. 737986Fournié G, Guitian J, Desvaux S et al. Identifying live bird markets with the potential to act as reservoirs of avian influenza A (H5N1) virus: a survey in northern Viet Nam and Cambodia. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e37986.

The role of interferon in influenza virus tissue tropism. A García-Sastre, R K Durbin, H Zheng, J Virol. 72García-Sastre A, Durbin RK, Zheng H et al. The role of interferon in influenza virus tissue tropism. J Virol 1998; 72: 8550-8558.

The makings of a killer. P Palese, C F Basler, A García-Sastre, Nat Med. 8Palese P, Basler CF, García-Sastre A. The makings of a killer. Nat Med 2002; 8: 927- 928.

Genetically determined, interferondependent resistance to influenza virus in mice. O Haller, H Arnheiter, I Gresser, J Lindenmann, J Exp Med. 149Haller, O, Arnheiter H, Gresser I, Lindenmann J. Genetically determined, interferon- dependent resistance to influenza virus in mice. J Exp Med 1979; 149: 601-612.

Protective role of beta interferon in host defense against influenza A virus. I Koerner, G Kochs, U Kalinke, S Weiss, P Staeheli, J Virol. 81Koerner I, Kochs G, Kalinke U, Weiss S, Staeheli P. Protective role of beta interferon in host defense against influenza A virus. J Virol 2007; 81: 2025-2030.

Critical role of constitutive type I interferon response in bronchial epithelial cell to influenza infection. A C Hsu, K Parsons, I Barr, PLoS ONE. 732947Hsu AC, Parsons K, Barr I et al. Critical role of constitutive type I interferon response in bronchial epithelial cell to influenza infection. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e32947.

Influenza A virus strains that circulate in humans differ in the ability of their NS1 proteins to block the activation of IRF3 and interferonb transcription. R L Kuo, C Zhao, M Malur, R M Krug, Virology. 408Kuo RL, Zhao C, Malur M, Krug RM. Influenza A virus strains that circulate in humans differ in the ability of their NS1 proteins to block the activation of IRF3 and interferon- b transcription. Virology 2010; 408: 146-158.

The H5N1 influenza virus NS genes selected after 1998 enhance virus replication in mammalian cells. K Y Twu, R L Kuo, J Marklund, R M Krug, J Virol. 81Twu KY, Kuo RL, Marklund J, Krug RM. The H5N1 influenza virus NS genes selected after 1998 enhance virus replication in mammalian cells. J Virol 2007; 81: 8112- 8121.

Progress in identifying virulence determinants of the 1918 H1N1 and the Southeast Asian H5N1 influenza A viruses. C F Basler, P V Aguilar, Antiviral Res. 79Basler CF, Aguilar PV. Progress in identifying virulence determinants of the 1918 H1N1 and the Southeast Asian H5N1 influenza A viruses. Antiviral Res 2008; 79: 166-178.

Avian influenza receptor expression in H5N1-infected and noninfected human tissues. L Yao, C Korteweg, W Hsueh, J Gu, FASEB J. 22Yao L, Korteweg C, Hsueh W, Gu J. Avian influenza receptor expression in H5N1- infected and noninfected human tissues. FASEB J 2008; 22: 733-740.

Tropism of avian influenza A (H5N1) in the upper and lower respiratory tract. J M Nicholls, M C Chan, W Y Chan, Nat Med. 13Nicholls JM, Chan MC, Chan WY et al. Tropism of avian influenza A (H5N1) in the upper and lower respiratory tract. Nat Med 2007; 13: 147-149.

H5N1 infection of the respiratory tract and beyond: a molecular pathology study. J Gu, Z Xie, Z Gau, Lancet. 370Gu J, Xie Z, Gau Z et al. H5N1 infection of the respiratory tract and beyond: a molecular pathology study. Lancet 2007; 370: 1137-1145.

Effects of receptor binding specificity of avian influenza virus on the human innate immune response. I Ramos, D Bernal-Rubio, N Durham, J Virol. 85Ramos I, Bernal-Rubio D, Durham N et al. Effects of receptor binding specificity of avian influenza virus on the human innate immune response. J Virol 2011; 85: 4421- 4431.

The NS segment of an H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) is sufficient to alter replication efficiency, cell tropism, and host range of an H7N1 HPAIV. W Ma, D Brenner, Z Wang, J Virol. 84Ma W, Brenner D, Wang Z et al. The NS segment of an H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) is sufficient to alter replication efficiency, cell tropism, and host range of an H7N1 HPAIV. J Virol 2010; 84: 2122-2133.

The role of influenza virus gene constellation and viral morphology on cytokine induction, pathogenesis, and viral virulence. J S Peiris, L M Poon, J M Nicholls, Y Guan, Hong Kong Med J. 15Peiris JS, Poon LM, Nicholls JM, Guan Y. The role of influenza virus gene constellation and viral morphology on cytokine induction, pathogenesis, and viral virulence. Hong Kong Med J 2009; 15: 21-23.

Virology: bird flu in mammals. H L Yen, Jsm Peiris, Nature. 486Yen HL, Peiris JSM. Virology: bird flu in mammals. Nature 2012; 486: 332-333.

Influenza a virus polymerase is an integral component of the CPSF30-NS1A protein complex in infected cells. R L Kuo, R M Krug, J Virol. 83Kuo RL, Krug RM. Influenza a virus polymerase is an integral component of the CPSF30-NS1A protein complex in infected cells. J Virol 2009; 83: 1611-1616.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 controls type I IFN induction in chicken macrophage HD-11 cells: a polygenic trait that involves NS1 and the polymerase complex. M Liniger, H R Moulin, Y Sakoda, N Ruggli, Virol J. 97Liniger M, Moulin HR, Sakoda Y, Ruggli N, summerfield A. Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 controls type I IFN induction in chicken macrophage HD-11 cells: a polygenic trait that involves NS1 and the polymerase complex. Virol J 2012; 9: 7.

The influenza virus protein PB1-F2 inhibits the induction of type i interferon by binding to MAVS and decreasing the mitochondrial membrane potential. Z T Varga, A Grant, B Mancassamy, P Palese, J Virol. 86Varga ZT, Grant A, Mancassamy B, Palese P. The influenza virus protein PB1-F2 inhibits the induction of type i interferon by binding to MAVS and decreasing the mitochondrial membrane potential. J Virol 2012; 86: 8359-8366.

Lethal influenza virus infection in macaques is associated with early dysregulation of inflammatory related genes. C Cilló Niz, K Shinya, X Peng, PLoS Pathog. 51000604Cilló niz C, Shinya K, Peng X et al. Lethal influenza virus infection in macaques is associated with early dysregulation of inflammatory related genes. PLoS Pathog 2009; 5: e1000604.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses inhibit effective immune responses of human blood-derived macrophages. J Friesenhagen, Y Boergeling, E Hrincius, S Ludwig, J Roth, D Viemann, J Leukoc Biol. 92Friesenhagen J, Boergeling Y, Hrincius E, Ludwig S, Roth J, Viemann D. Highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses inhibit effective immune responses of human blood-derived macrophages. J Leukoc Biol 2012; 92: 11-20.

Cutting edge: stealth influenza virus replication precedes the initiation of adaptive immunity. B Moltedo, C B Ló Pez, M Pazos, M I Becker, T Hermesh, T M Moran, J Immunol. 183Moltedo B, Ló pez CB, Pazos M, Becker MI, Hermesh T, Moran TM. Cutting edge: stealth influenza virus replication precedes the initiation of adaptive immunity. J Immunol 2009; 183: 3569-3573.

Viral load of the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus in infected human tissues. N Sirinonthanawech, M Uiperasertkul, O Suptawiwat, P Auewarakul, J Med Virol. 83Sirinonthanawech N, Uiperasertkul M, Suptawiwat O, Auewarakul P. Viral load of the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus in infected human tissues. J Med Virol 2011; 83: 1418-1423.

Fatal outcome of human influenza A (H5N1) is associated with high viral load and hypercytokinemia. M D De Jong, C P Simmons, T T Thanh, Nat Med. 12de Jong MD, Simmons CP, Thanh TT et al. Fatal outcome of human influenza A (H5N1) is associated with high viral load and hypercytokinemia. Nat Med 2006; 12: 1203-1207.

Avian influenza A(H5N1)-current situation. A Melidou, Euro Surveill. 1419199Melidou A. Avian influenza A(H5N1)-current situation. Euro Surveill 2009; 14: 19199.

Molecular characterization of H9N2 influenza viruses: were they the donors of the ''internal'' genes of H5N1 viruses in Hong Kong?. Y Guan, K F Shortridge, S Krauss, R G Webster, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 96Guan Y, Shortridge KF, Krauss S, Webster RG. Molecular characterization of H9N2 influenza viruses: were they the donors of the ''internal'' genes of H5N1 viruses in Hong Kong? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96: 9363-9367.

H9N2 influenza viruses possessing H5N1-like internal genomes continue to circulate in poultry in southeastern China. Y Guan, K F Shortridge, S Krauss, J Virol. 74Guan Y, Shortridge KF, Krauss S et al. H9N2 influenza viruses possessing H5N1-like internal genomes continue to circulate in poultry in southeastern China. J Virol 2000; 74: 9372-9380.

A novel genotype H9N2 influenza virus possessing human H5N1 internal genomes has been circulating in poultry in eastern China since 1998. P Zhang, Y Tang, X Liu, J Virol. 83Zhang P, Tang Y, Liu X et al. A novel genotype H9N2 influenza virus possessing human H5N1 internal genomes has been circulating in poultry in eastern China since 1998. J Virol 2009; 83: 8428-8438.

The origin and virulence of the 1918 ''Spanish'' influenza virus. J K Taubenberger, Proc Am Philos Soc. 150Taubenberger JK. The origin and virulence of the 1918 ''Spanish'' influenza virus. Proc Am Philos Soc 2006; 150: 86-112

Estimated global mortality associated with the first 12 months of 2009 pandemic influenza A H1N1 virus circulation: a modelling study. F S Dawood, A D Iuliano, C Reed, Lancet Infect Dis. 12Dawood FS, Iuliano AD, Reed C et al. Estimated global mortality associated with the first 12 months of 2009 pandemic influenza A H1N1 virus circulation: a modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis 2012; 12: 687-695.

Comparative pathology in ferrets infected with H1N1 influenza A viruses isolated from different hosts. J H Smith, T Nagy, E Driskell, P Brooks, S M Tompkins, R A Tripp, J. Virol. 85Smith JH, Nagy T, Driskell E, Brooks P, Tompkins SM, Tripp RA. Comparative pathology in ferrets infected with H1N1 influenza A viruses isolated from different hosts. J. Virol 2011; 85: 7572-7581.

In vitro and in vivo characterization of new swine-origin H1N1 influenza viruses. Y Itoh, K Shinya, M Kiso, Nature. 460Itoh Y, Shinya K, Kiso M et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of new swine-origin H1N1 influenza viruses. Nature 2009; 460: 1021-1025.

Pathogenesis of emerging avian influenza viruses in mammals and the host innate immune response. T R Maines, K J Szretter, L Perrone, Immunol Rev. 225Maines TR, Szretter KJ, Perrone L et al. Pathogenesis of emerging avian influenza viruses in mammals and the host innate immune response. Immunol Rev 2008; 225: 68-84.

Influenza A (H5N1) viruses from pigs. C A Nidom, R Takano, S Yamada, Indonesia. Emerg Infect Dis. 16Nidom CA, Takano R, Yamada S et al. Influenza A (H5N1) viruses from pigs, Indonesia. Emerg Infect Dis 2010; 16: 1515-1523.

Continuing Evolution and interspecies transmission of influenza viruses in live bird markets in Korea. H J Lee, J S Kwon, D H Lee, Avian Dis. 541SupplLee HJ, Kwon JS, Lee DH et al. Continuing Evolution and interspecies transmission of influenza viruses in live bird markets in Korea. Avian Dis 2010; 54(Suppl 1): 738- 748.

Evolution and molecular epidemiology of H9N2 influenza A viruses from quail in southern China. K M Xu, K S Li, G J Smith, J Virol. 81Xu KM, Li KS, Smith GJ et al. Evolution and molecular epidemiology of H9N2 influenza A viruses from quail in southern China, 2000 to 2005. J Virol 2007; 81: 2635-2645.

Neuraminidase stalk length and additional glycosylation of the hemagglutinin influence the virulence of influenza H5N1 viruses for mice. Y Matsuoka, D E Swayne, C Thomas, J Virol. 83Matsuoka Y, Swayne DE, Thomas C et al. Neuraminidase stalk length and additional glycosylation of the hemagglutinin influence the virulence of influenza H5N1 viruses for mice. J Virol 2009; 83: 4704-4708.

Adaptation of a duck influenza A virus in quail. S Yamada, K Shinya, A Takada, J Virol. 86Yamada S, Shinya K, Takada A et al. Adaptation of a duck influenza A virus in quail. J Virol 2012; 86: 1411-1420.

Evidence of expanded host range and mammalianassociated genetic changes in a duck H9N2 influenza virus following adaptation in quail and chickens. M J Hossain, D Hickman, D R Perez, PLoS ONE. 33170Hossain MJ, Hickman D, Perez DR. Evidence of expanded host range and mammalian- associated genetic changes in a duck H9N2 influenza virus following adaptation in quail and chickens. PLoS ONE 2008; 3: e3170.

A 27-amino-acid deletion in the neuraminidase stalk supports replication of an avian H2N2 influenza A virus in the respiratory tract of chickens. E M Sorrell, H Song, L Pena, D R Perez, J Virol. 84Sorrell EM, Song H, Pena L, Perez DR. A 27-amino-acid deletion in the neuraminidase stalk supports replication of an avian H2N2 influenza A virus in the respiratory tract of chickens. J Virol 2010; 84: 11831-11840.

Length variations in the NA stalk of an H7N1 influenza virus have opposite effects on viral excretion in chickens and ducks. T W Hoffmann, S Munier, T Larcher, J Virol. 86Hoffmann TW, Munier S, Larcher T et al. Length variations in the NA stalk of an H7N1 influenza virus have opposite effects on viral excretion in chickens and ducks. J Virol 2012; 86: 584-588.

Amino acid 226 in the hemagglutinin of H9N2 influenza viruses determines cell tropism and replication in human airway epithelial cells. H Wan, D R Perez, J Virol. 81Wan H, Perez DR. Amino acid 226 in the hemagglutinin of H9N2 influenza viruses determines cell tropism and replication in human airway epithelial cells. J Virol 2007; 81: 5181-5191.

Avian Influenza virus glycoproteins restrict virus replication and spread through human airway epithelium at temperatures of the proximal airways. M A Scull, L Gillim-Ross, C Santos, PLoS Pathog. 51000424Scull MA, Gillim-Ross L, Santos C et al. Avian Influenza virus glycoproteins restrict virus replication and spread through human airway epithelium at temperatures of the proximal airways. PLoS Pathog 2009; 5: e1000424.

The viral polymerase mediates adaptation of an avian influenza virus to a mammalian host. G Gabriel, B Dauber, T Wolff, O Planz, H D Klenk, J Stech, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 102Gabriel G, Dauber B, Wolff T, Planz O, Klenk HD, Stech J. The viral polymerase mediates adaptation of an avian influenza virus to a mammalian host. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102: 18590-18595.

Human-like PB2 627K influenza virus polymerase activity is regulated by importin-a1 and -a7. B Hudjetz, G Gabriel, PLoS Pathog. 81002488Hudjetz B, Gabriel G. Human-like PB2 627K influenza virus polymerase activity is regulated by importin-a1 and -a7. PLoS Pathog 2012; 8: e1002488.

Residue 627 of PB2 is a determinant of cold sensitivity in RNA replication of avian influenza viruses. P Massin, S Van Der Werf, N Naffakh, J Virol. 75Massin P, van der Werf S, Naffakh N. Residue 627 of PB2 is a determinant of cold sensitivity in RNA replication of avian influenza viruses. J Virol 2001; 75: 5398- 5404.

Growth of H5N1 influenza A viruses in the upper respiratory tracts of mice. M Hatta, Y Hatta, J H Kim, PLoS Pathog. 3Hatta M, Hatta Y, Kim JH et al. Growth of H5N1 influenza A viruses in the upper respiratory tracts of mice. PLoS Pathog 2007; 3: 1374-1379.

PB2 amino acid at position 627 affects replicative efficiency, but not cell tropism, of Hong Kong H5N1 influenza A viruses in mice. K Shinya, S Hamm, M Hatta, H Ito, T Ito, Y Kawaoka, Virology. 320Shinya K, Hamm S, Hatta M, Ito H, Ito T, Kawaoka Y. PB2 amino acid at position 627 affects replicative efficiency, but not cell tropism, of Hong Kong H5N1 influenza A viruses in mice. Virology 2004; 320: 258-266.

Avian influenza A virus (H7N7) associated with human conjunctivitis and a fatal case of acute respiratory distress syndrome. R A Fouchier, P M Schneeberger, F W Rozendaal, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 101Fouchier RA, Schneeberger PM, Rozendaal FW et al. Avian influenza A virus (H7N7) associated with human conjunctivitis and a fatal case of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101: 1356-1361.

Pathogenesis of avian influenza (H7) virus infection in mice and ferrets: enhanced virulence of Eurasian H7N7 viruses isolated from humans. J A Belser, X Lu, T R Maines, J Virol. 81Belser JA, Lu X, Maines TR et al. Pathogenesis of avian influenza (H7) virus infection in mice and ferrets: enhanced virulence of Eurasian H7N7 viruses isolated from humans. J Virol 2007; 81: 11139-11147.

Molecular basis of replication of duck H5N1 influenza viruses in a mammalian mouse model. Z Li, H Chen, P Jiao, J Virol. 79Li Z, Chen H, Jiao P et al. Molecular basis of replication of duck H5N1 influenza viruses in a mammalian mouse model. J Virol 2005; 79: 12058-12064.

Interaction of polymerase subunit PB2 and NP with importin alpha1 is a determinant of host range of influenza A virus. G Gabriel, A Herwig, H D Klenk, PLoS Pathog. 411Gabriel G, Herwig A, Klenk HD. Interaction of polymerase subunit PB2 and NP with importin alpha1 is a determinant of host range of influenza A virus. PLoS Pathog 2008; 4: e11.

Avian influenza and ban on overnight poultry storage in live poultry markets, Hong Kong. Y H Leung, E H Lau, L J Zhang, Y Guan, B J Cowling, J S Peiris, Emerg Infect Dis. 18Leung YH, Lau EH, Zhang LJ, Guan Y, Cowling BJ, Peiris JS. Avian influenza and ban on overnight poultry storage in live poultry markets, Hong Kong. Emerg Infect Dis 2012; 18: 1339-1341.

Effect of vaccine use in the evolution of Mexican lineage H5N2 avian influenza virus. C W Lee, D A Senne, D L Suarez, J Virol. 78Lee CW, Senne DA, Suarez DL. Effect of vaccine use in the evolution of Mexican lineage H5N2 avian influenza virus. J Virol 2004; 78: 8372-8381.

Selection of H5N1 influenza virus PB2 during replication in humans. Q M Le, Y Sakai-Tagawa, M Ozawa, M Ito, Y Kawaoka, J Virol. 83Le QM, Sakai-Tagawa Y, Ozawa M, Ito M, Kawaoka Y. Selection of H5N1 influenza virus PB2 during replication in humans. J Virol 2009; 83: 5278-5281.

Genetic characterization of HPAI (H5N1) viruses from poultry and wild vultures. M F Ducatez, Z Tarnagda, M C Tahita, Burkina Faso. Emerg Infect Dis. 13Ducatez MF, Tarnagda Z, Tahita MC et al. Genetic characterization of HPAI (H5N1) viruses from poultry and wild vultures, Burkina Faso. Emerg Infect Dis. 2007; 13: 611-613.

Incursion and spread of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses among wild birds in 2010-11 winter in Japan. K Soda, H Ito, T Usui, J Vet Med Sci. 75Soda K, Ito H, Usui T et al. Incursion and spread of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses among wild birds in 2010-11 winter in Japan. J Vet Med Sci 2012; 75: 605-612.

Highly (H5N1) and low (H7N2) pathogenic avian influenza virus infection in falcons via nasochoanal route and ingestion of experimentally infected prey. K Bertran, N Busquets, F X Abad, PLoS ONE. 732107Bertran K, Busquets N, Abad FX et al. Highly (H5N1) and low (H7N2) pathogenic avian influenza virus infection in falcons via nasochoanal route and ingestion of experimentally infected prey. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e32107.

R Wang, M Qi, Z Jingjing, Prevalence of Cryptosporidium baileyi in ostriches. Zhengzhou, China175Struthio camelusWang R, Qi M, Jingjing Z et al. Prevalence of Cryptosporidium baileyi in ostriches (Struthio camelus) in Zhengzhou, China. Vet Parasitol 2011; 175: 151-154.

Climate and overgrazing are decimating Mongolian steppes. Y Y Liu, J P Evans, M F Mccabe, PLoS ONE. 857599Liu YY, Evans JP, McCabe MF et al. Climate and overgrazing are decimating Mongolian steppes. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e57599.

Chicken farming in grassland increases environmental sustainability and economic efficiency. M Liu, B Wang, C P Osborne, G Jiang, PLoS ONE. 853977Liu M, Wang B, Osborne CP, Jiang G. Chicken farming in grassland increases environmental sustainability and economic efficiency. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e53977.

The Organization for Industrial Spiritual and Cultural Advancement (OISCA) International Emu Rearing Project in Alashan Inner Mongolia. Tokyo: OISCA International. 1OISCAOISCA. The Organization for Industrial Spiritual and Cultural Advancement (OISCA) International Emu Rearing Project in Alashan Inner Mongolia. Tokyo: OISCA International, 2013. Available at http://www.oisca-international.org/projects/ default.aspx?cid546&pid58 (accessed 1 June 2013).

Isolation of avian influenza virus (H9N2) from emu in China. W Kang, W Pang, J Hao, D Zhao, Ir Vet J. 59Kang W, Pang W, Hao J, Zhao D. Isolation of avian influenza virus (H9N2) from emu in China. Ir Vet J 2006; 59: 148-152.

Characterization of a highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus isolated from an ostrich. P Yang, Dongmei, C Wang, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 396Yang P, Dongmei , Wang C et al. Characterization of a highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus isolated from an ostrich. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010; 396: 973-977.

Ecology and epidemiology of avian influenza in ostriches. A J Olivier, Dev Biol (Basel). 124Olivier AJ. Ecology and epidemiology of avian influenza in ostriches. Dev Biol (Basel) 2006; 124: 51-57.

Avian influenza in ostriches: epidemiological investigation in the Western Cape Province of South Africa. M Sinclair, G K Brü Ckner, J J Kotze, Vet Ital. 42Sinclair M, Brü ckner GK, Kotze JJ. Avian influenza in ostriches: epidemiological investigation in the Western Cape Province of South Africa. Vet Ital 2006; 42: 69-76.

Avian influenza: the Canadian experience. J Pasick, Y Berhane, K Hooper-Mcgrevy, Rev Sci Tech. 28Pasick J, Berhane Y, Hooper-McGrevy K. Avian influenza: the Canadian experience. Rev Sci Tech 2009; 28: 349-358.

In China's backcountry, tracking lethal bird flu. L Jiao, Zoonoses, Science. 330313Jiao L. Zoonoses. In China's backcountry, tracking lethal bird flu. Science 2010; 330: 313.

Avian flu: H5N1 virus outbreak in migratory waterfowl. H Chen, G J Smith, S Y Zhang, Nature. 436Chen H, Smith GJ, Zhang SY et al. Avian flu: H5N1 virus outbreak in migratory waterfowl. Nature 2005; 436:191-192.

Properties and dissemination of H5N1 viruses isolated during an influenza outbreak in migratory waterfowl in western China. H Chen, Y Li, Z Li, J Virol. 80Chen H, Li Y, Li Z et al. Properties and dissemination of H5N1 viruses isolated during an influenza outbreak in migratory waterfowl in western China. J Virol 2006; 80: 5976-5983.

A Miocene ostrich fossil from Gansu Province, northwest China. L Hou, Z Zhou, F Zhang, Z Wang, Chin Sci Bull. 50Hou L, Zhou Z, Zhang F, Wang Z. A Miocene ostrich fossil from Gansu Province, northwest China. Chin Sci Bull 2005; 50: 1808-1810.

A giant ornithomimosaur from the Early Cretaceous of China. P J Makovicky, D Li, K Q Gao, M Lewin, G M Erickson, M A Norell, Proc Biol Sci. 277Makovicky PJ, Li D, Gao KQ, Lewin M, Erickson GM, Norell MA. A giant ornithomimosaur from the Early Cretaceous of China. Proc Biol Sci 2010; 277: 191-198.

Flying over an infected landscape: distribution of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 risk in South Asia and satellite tracking of wild waterfowl. M Gilbert, S H Newman, J Y Takekawa, Ecohealth. 7Gilbert M, Newman SH, Takekawa JY et al. Flying over an infected landscape: distribution of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 risk in South Asia and satellite tracking of wild waterfowl. Ecohealth 2010; 7: 448-458.

Wild ducks as long-distance vectors of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N1). J Keawcharoen, D Van Riel, G Van Amerongen, Emerg Infect Dis. 14Keawcharoen J, van Riel D, van Amerongen G et al. Wild ducks as long-distance vectors of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N1). Emerg Infect Dis 2008; 14: 600-607.

How to interpret the transmissibility of novel influenza A(H7N9): an analysis of initial epidemiological data of human cases from China. H Nishiura, K Mizumoto, K Ejima, Theor Biol Med Model. 1030Nishiura H, Mizumoto K, Ejima K. How to interpret the transmissibility of novel influenza A(H7N9): an analysis of initial epidemiological data of human cases from China. Theor Biol Med Model 2013; 10: 30.

World Health Organization. Overview of the emergence and characteristics of the avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. Geneva: WHO. World Health Organization. Overview of the emergence and characteristics of the avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. Geneva: WHO, 2013. Available at http://www.who.int/ influenza/human_animal_interface/influenza_h7n9/en/ (accessed 3 June 2013).