# Sulci of the canine brain: a review of terminology 2 3

CorpusID: 91781982
 
tags: #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f40ceddda09a0e1e83ee6856bf0dd79ebbb43c3f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f40ceddda09a0e1e83ee6856bf0dd79ebbb43c3f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Sulci of the canine brain: a review of terminology 2 3


Kálmán Czeibert czeibert.kalman@ttk.elte.hukc 
Department of Ethology
Eötvös Loránd University
BudapestHungary

Patrizia Piotti 
Department of Ethology
Eötvös Loránd University
BudapestHungary

Örs Petneházy 
University of Kaposvar
KaposvarHungary

Medicopus Nonprofit Ltd
KaposvarHungary

Enikő Kubinyi 
Department of Ethology
Eötvös Loránd University
BudapestHungary

Sulci of the canine brain: a review of terminology 2 3
1 1 8 9 *Corresponding author 10 51 veterinary anatomy 52 53dogcraniometrysulcusbrainCanine Brain and Tissue Banknomenclature
27Over the last decades there have been several publications of anatomical and neurological 28 textbooks, which include descriptions about the dogs' brain. However, the terminology used is 29 inconsistent, partly due to individual differences in neocortical gyration and partly due to the 30 common practice of adapting terms from human and murine anatomy. In order to identify such 31 incongruences, in Study 1, we reviewed the existing literature and identified the common terms 32 used as well as any discrepancies between textbooks. Three main forms of inconsistencies were 33 found; a) the use of terms that are not included in the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (NAV), 34 b) the inclusion of structures that are listed as not canine-specific, and c) the use of similar 35 names to identify potentially different anatomical structures. To address these issues, in Study 36 2 we investigated the consistency in appearance of the cerebral sulci, performing a 37 macroscopical examination on 79 canine brains obtained through the Canine Brain and Tissue 38 Bank (CBTB). We then evaluated whether sulci on the frontal regions of brachycephalic breeds 39 differed from those of mesocephalic and dolichocephalic groups, as frontal and olfactory 40 regions are subjected to the most extreme modifications following the shortening of the skull.41The statistical analysis showed no difference across the skull length types regarding the 42 occurrence of these sulci, although furrows on the lateral side of the brain proved to be more 43 stable than those on the medial side. In Study 3, we summarized the findings in accordance 44 with the NAV to produce a definitive index of the terms that we recommend be used for each 45 identified sulci. Such an index is beneficial for educational, clinical use, and research (e.g. 46 neuroscience) purposes. The dog is emerging as a pioneering and exceptional model in 47 comparative neuroscience, and therefore the implications for canine neuroscience research 48 should not be underestimated.49 3 50

Brain atlases are therefore fundamental tools for several clinical and research purposes [1][2][3][4][5]. 61 One essential aspect of such research activities is the need to compare, and thus identify, brain 62 structures and areas across different modalities (from macroscopic modalities to histological 63 studies). For this to be done reliably, there is a need for tools such as universal atlases (i.e. an 64 atlas that allows viewing the same structure as depicted through various indirect imaging (CT, 65 MR) or through a more direct approach (surgical intervention and endoscopy)). Consequently, 66 the comparison of brain structures under different imaging modalities requires several atlases, 67 and those currently available in the literature are rarely standardized in their terminology and 68 present a large variability in terminology [6-9]. Thus, the first step to creating a comparative 69 brain atlas for dogs requires the specification of a common descriptive language and 70 clarification of the present terminology in order to make it comparable for every user. named Gyrus ectomarginalis caudalis [11][12][13][14], or Gyrus ectosagittalis caudalis [11,14], or 85 Gyrus suprasylvius posterior [6,15]). One reason for these incongruences is that in dogs there 86 are no clearly defined borders for individual brain lobes as there are in humans -where, for 87 example, the border between frontal and temporal lobes is defined by a well-recognized 88 anatomical element, the Sulcus centralis [16]. Furthermore, the surface morphology of dogs' 89 brains can vary slightly, even between individuals of the same breed type, due to the different 90 patterns of localization and/or length of their sulci [17,18].


## 91

One of the main issues that arises from such nomenclature incongruences is that it 92 makes it difficult to perform comparisons between research findings that use different terms.


## 93

Furthermore, the assessment of intracranial structures (including anatomical variations and 94 potential abnormalities) requires a common descriptive language between clinicians and 95 researchers. Similar issues have been resolved in the case of another species, the domestic cat, 96 through the production of a tissue probability feline cortical brain map. This map consists of a We aimed to review the current situation in the naming of the basic structures of the 100 canine brain, highlighting the discrepancies found in different literature sources, and then, 101 based on a study where we evaluated canine brains, we summarize the sulci that are highly 102 prevalent in dogs. We then present a summarizing In order to produce a comprehensive summary of the terms used in canine 117 neuroanatomy, we reviewed the literature searching specifically for canine brain cortical 118 features' terminology and investigated their consistency in a sample of unprocessed dog brains, 119 in three studies as follows: in Study 1, we aimed to assess the level of consistency among the 120 terms used in the veterinary clinical, educational, and research nomenclature for dog brains. In   The Sulcus corporis callosi was named Sulcus callosus in three textbooks [8,42,43]. 156 Additionally, in some textbooks, the suffix "lateralis" was used instead of "marginalis": this as Fissura rhinalis [6,44], and the Sulcus suprasplenialis as Sulcus ectosplenialis [39]. Finally, 161 some textbooks used the more human-related nomenclature based on anterior-posterior terms 162 in place of rostralis-caudalis [6,15]. 163 We identified terms that were commonly used in the textbooks and were not present in 164 the NAV; these were the Sulcus ectogenualis [8,13,15 


## 175

A different type of incongruence emerged regarding the identification of certain sulci. 176 We identified inconsistencies in relation to the localization of the Sulcus ansatus [46]. The 177 following alternatives were found: some described it as a medial continuation from the Sulcus 178 coronalis to the Sulcus marginalis [14,15,43], or as a rostro-medial branch derived from the The brains were obtained from dogs after they had been euthanized for medical reasons 224 (that had no effect on the central nervous system gross morphology), and their bodies donated purposes prior to the current study; therefore, information about the sex, exact age, and breed 234 of the dogs could not always be obtained at the time of the brain anatomical assessment. 235 However, the dogs' head morphology group could be extrapolated from craniometrical data.  The sulci were grouped in two ways for further analysis. Initially, we identified the 281 sulci located in the medial area of the brain and those located in the lateral area of the brain.


## 282

Scores of the sulci in the two groups were averaged and compared to assess the consistency in were not normally distributed, therefore the data were analysed using non-parametric tests. All 292 tests were two-tailed and the level of significance was set at 0.05.


# 294


## Results


## 295

The scoring revealed that 31% of the sulci could be identified in more than 90% of the 296 hemispheres and 33% of the sulci were identifiable in less than 10% of the hemispheres (Fig   13   297 2). As expected, the Fissura longitudinalis cerebri was identified in all hemispheres (as it 298 should separate the two hemispheres, and only in pathological conditions disappears, where 299 the two halves of the brain fuses), also the Sulcus rhinalis lateralis pars rostralis could be 300 identified in all dogs, while the Sulcus rostralis was missing in the majority of the dogs. In 301 order to avoid pseudoreplication, for each sulcus of each dog, a mean score was calculated for 302 the sulci from the left and right hemispheric scores, which was then used for further analysis.   in Table 2 we provide the terms that primarily according to the NAV's guidelines but also 345 broadening its spectrum we recommend be used for each identified sulci and compared them  (Fig4/19). For the terms that had more than one alternative name based on the 363 literature, we recommend the use of the following terms (see also  [14].


## 411

In Study 2, we assessed the presence of the main sulci in a large sample of dogs and we furrows on the lateral side of the brain proved to be more stable than those on the medial side.


## 419

One limitation of the evaluation performed in Study 2, is that fixation in formalin ex situ can 420 cause flattening on the surface if the brain is not placed properly in the container, and surface 421 blood vessels can make impression on the cortex that appear similar to the original grooves.


## 422

While knowledge of basic topography may aid in differentiating in these cases, it was not 423 possible to exclude the chance that these types of events occurred. In future studies, the true 424 depth of the sulci would be assessed through T2-weighted MR imaging, where the Liquor 425 cerebrospinalis could clearly highlight the grooves. By making 3-dimensional models from the 426 MR images one could also interactively visualise not only the grooves but the gyri as well. 427 We have provided a thorough review of the current state of the terminology used to 428 describe the canine brain. Our summary and recommendations for appropriate terminology can 429 serve as a base for future canine brain atlases and medical terminology.  


of neuroscience research and clinical activities rely on structural and 55 functional imaging techniques, e.g. magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography 56 (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission tomography (SPECT), 57 which allow for detailed examination of the central nervous System (CNS). The diagnostic and 58 research interpretation of such techniques requires the knowledge and unambiguous 59 identification of areas and regions; one of the most complex CNS structures being the brain.

## 71
In order to facilitate the establishment of universally accepted anatomical descriptions,72 the World Association of Veterinary Anatomists (WAVA, http://www.wava-amav.org) 73 regularly provides an internationally recognized list of terms, which describes the macroscopic 74 anatomy of various non-human animals, including dogs. Since 1968, when the first Nomina 4 75 Anatomica Veterinaria (NAV) was published, the International Committee on Veterinary 76 Gross Anatomical Nomenclature (ICVGAN) has regularly updated its recommendation for the 77 use of various anatomical terms. The latest version of NAV available at the time this manuscript 78 was written was the recently revised 6th edition, which was compiled by the ICVGAN, 79 authorized by the General Assembly of the World Association of Veterinary Anatomists, and 80 published by the Editorial Committee [10]. Despite the existence of such guidelines, when 81 describing the morphology of the basic structures of the canine brain (gyri and sulci, i.e. 82 convolutions and involutions visible on the brain surface), there are still some incongruences 83 in the terminology used in veterinary anatomy textbooks (e.g. Gyrus suprasylvius caudalis is 84


cortical template based on cytoarchitectonic and electrophysiological findings, 98 as well as the use of common descriptions regarding surface morphology and terminology [19]. 5 99


we analysed 79 canine brains looking at the consistency and frequency of occurrence 122 of the sulci that were identified in Study 1. Finally, in Study 3, we summarized a finalised set 123 of terms with color-coded figures congruent with the established official nomenclature, anatomy and neurology textbooks were reviewed, focusing on the 132 terms and definitions used to describe the sulci (grooves or furrows) in the cerebral cortex of 133 the canine brain. For each of these, we described the major analogies and incongruences, and 134 reported and discussed the advantages and limitations that they pose for the field of veterinary 135 medicine and neuroanatomy.


assessment of anatomy textbooks 138 A literature search was conducted for canine and comparative animal neuroanatomy 139 and neurology textbooks with cortical descriptions, from academic publishers (e.g. Elsevier, 140 Parey, Wiley Blackwell, Springer, and Enke). We included the latest editions available of all 141 the veterinary anatomy books that could be obtained through these sources and were published 142 in the English language, from the year 2000 until the time this study was performed (i.e. 143 between November 2016 and September 2017). For some of the textbooks, the original version 144 (German or French) was used, as no English translation was available. Using this criteria, 14 145 textbooks were selected [6,8,11-15,38-45]. For each book, the description of the canine 146 telencephalic cortical features was assessed, with a focus on the terms and definitions used to 147 describe sulci. The terms were then compared to those provided by the NAV produced by the 148 World Association of Veterinary Anatomists [14]. in the names used to identify certain structures. Specifically, 153 different names were used to describe the Fissura pseudosylvia, i.e. Fissura sylvii or Sulcus 154 pseudosylvius [44], Sulcus sylvius [6,40] and both Sulcus sylvii and Sulcus pseudosylvius [15].


157 resulted in systematic incongruences, such as the use of Sulcus ectolateralis instead of Sulcus 158 ectomarginalis [6,15], Sulcus entolateralis instead of Sulcus endomarginalis [15], and Sulcus 159 lateralis instead of Sulcus marginalis [6,15]. Furthermore, the Sulcus rhinalis was referred to 160


179junction of the Sulcus marginalis and the Sulcus coronalis[6,12,38,42,45]. The rostro-medial180    branch was described in one book as Sulcus acominis[15], which marks all the radial grooves 181 from the major sulci as impressions of vessels[46]. Another textbook [11] showed a transverse 182 groove across the Gyrus marginalis, which was then referred to as Sulcus transsecans [15], 183 while the rostro-medial branch was entitled as Sulcus postcruciatus. However, the Sulcus 184 postcruciatus is defined by the NAV as a shallow groove caudal to the Sulcus cruciatus, and it 185should not have any contact with the Sulcus marginalis or the Sulcus coronalis[14]. One book 186 indicated the Sulcus postcruciatus as Sulcus ansatus[8], while another referred to it in the text187 as rostro-medial branch, and in a figure as Sulcus ansatus, localized between the Sulcus 188 coronalis and Sulcus marginalis [44]. of the literature showed various inconsistencies in terminologies. There 193 were three main forms of inconsistencies; a) the use of terms that were not included in the 194 NAV, b) the inclusion of structures that were listed as not canine-specific in the NAV, and c) 195 the use of similar names to identify potentially different anatomical structures. In order to 196 address these issues, we investigated a large number of dog brains to evaluate the occurrence 197 of the anatomical structures described in the various textbooks, as well as the NAV. determined that the anatomy of the canine brain varies between breed 203 types [47,48], as for example, in brachycephalic dogs, the rostral cranial fossa is shorter than 204 in dolichocephalic dogs and the ethmoidal fossa is less deep, thus the position of the frontal 205 lobe and the olfactory bulbs in brachycephalic breeds may differ from breeds with other skull 206 types [49]. There is also a difference between the frequency of occurrence of the known shape 207 variations among the sulci [50]. Therefore, we decided to perform an anatomical examination 208 of the sulci of a large sample of dog brains, with the aim to assess the consistency in the 209 identification of dog brain sulci. We hypothesized that a) the sulci would be more prevalent on 210 the outer (lateral) surface than on the inner (medial) surface (i.e. sulci located in the medial 211 brain areas would be more difficult to identify (as they are shallower)), and b) the sulci of the 212 frontal lobe of brachycephalic breeds would be less developed compared to other (longer 213 headed) breeds (i.e. the sulci in the frontal lobes of brachycephalic dogs would be more difficult 214 to identify compared to mesocephalic and dolichocephalic dogs). 215 All the specimens were obtained from the Canine Brain and Tissue Bank (CBTB) 216 established in the Department of Ethology, Institute of Biology, Eötvös Loránd University, 217 Budapest, Hungary. The CBTB is a collection of biomedical material stored under formalin-218 and/or cryogenic conditions. The aim of the CBTB is to collect tissue samples for research, 219 educational and collaborative purposes. The tissues were obtained from canine bodies, which 220 were donated by dog owners through local veterinary clinics at the time when the animal had 221 to be euthanized for medical reasons.


of 158 brain hemispheres (N = 158) were obtained from 79 adult dogs (Canis 231 familiaris) over one year of age and were examined post-mortem. Only dogs without gross 232 brain deformities were included in the study. The dogs' bodies had been used for other research 233

## 236
The sample consisted of 19 brachycephalic dogs (Skull index ± SD = 0.68 ± 0.07, min = 0.60, 237 max = 0.88), 47 mesocephalic (Skull index ± SD = 0.55 ± 0.03, min = 0.50, max = 0.61), and 238 13 dolichocephalic (Skull index ± SD = 0.47 ± 0.02, min = 0.43, max = 0.49).


procedure and skull measurements242    Dissection began with the removal of the skin and the temporal muscles in order to243    identify the main landmarks for the craniometric analysis (shown inFig 1). The first two 244 landmarks provided the rostro-cranial delimitation of the skull; they were the most rostral point245 of the incisive bone (prosthion, i.e. the most rostral point of the incisive bone) and the most 246 caudal point of the skull, i.e. where the Crista sagittalis externa meets with the Crista nuchae 11 247 (inion / Protuberantia occipitalis externa) [42]. After removing the calvaria, were initially placed into a rinsing 10% formalin solution for one hour, which 255 ensured the removal of the majority of debris and blood. They were then placed into a 4% 256 formalin solution and conserved for a minimum of two weeks at 4 °C. After this period, the 257 brains were removed from the formalin solution and the two hemispheres were separated with 258 a microtome blade along the midline. The median plane was localized along the Fissura 259 longitudinalis cerebri, longitudinally through the Corpus callosum and the vermis of the 260 cerebellum, resulting in the separation of the two hemispheres and the two halves of the were evaluated based on a 4-point scale to assess the presence and ease to 265 recognize each individual sulcus among those identified in Study 1 by one of the authors (KC) 266 who, at the time of assessment, was unaware of the hypothesis of the study. A score of 1 was 267 given if the sulcus was clearly distinguishable (normal), 2 if it was less distinct/shallower than 268 the average or interrupted in multiple sites (less developed), 3 if it was not present (missing), 269and 4 when it could not be identified (unidentifiable, e.g. due to injury of the affected region)analysis, a number of indices were calculated to classify dog types.273Skull length was defined as the distance between the inion and the prosthion, and the skull 274 width was defined as the distance between the widest points of the zygomatic arches (seeFig 275 1). The skull index (SI) was then used to identify the head morphology [42] as:


the identification of sulci based on their location. The sulcus corporis callosi and the sulcus 284 hippocampi were not included in the analysis, because they were not visible without dissecting 285 the brain to seek for hidden deeper structures. We then looked at how certain sulci varied based 286 on the head type. As the rostral part of the brain is likely to vary the most in brachycephalic287 dogs [49], as compared to dolicho-and mesocephalic dogs, we selected the most rostral sulci 288 for further analysis. The selected sulci were: Sulcus proreus, Sulcus intraproreus, Sulcus 289 genualis, Sulcus endogenualis, and Sulcus rostralis. Data were analysed using the statistical 290 software IBM SPSS version 22. Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests indicated that some of the variables 291

## Fig 2 .
2Sulcal frequency of occurrence according to the scoring system. Blue: 305 normal (score 1), red: less developed (score 2), grey: missing (score 3), yellow: 306 unidentifiable (score 4).

## 1 Fig 3 .
13analysis we performed pertained to the relationship between brain areas and 309 appearance of the sulci. Specifically, we compared the scores of the sulci on the medial part of 310 the brain with those on the lateral part. For each dog, a cumulative score was calculated for the 311 medial area ("medial score" = mean score of all the sulci in the medial area) and for the lateral 312 area ("lateral score" = mean score for all the sulci in the lateral area). A Wilcoxon signed-rank 313 test revealed that the lateral score was significantly lower than the medial score (Mdn Lat = Result of the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The box-plot represents the cumulative 318 score for each brain area (lateral, in yellow, and medial, in grey). The boxes represent the 319 upper (75% of the scores fall below the upper quartile) and lower (25% of scores fall 320 below the lower quartile) quartiles and the horizontal thick line represents the median.321 The dots represent the scores of individual dogs (based on the 4-pont scale investigated the differences in the selected sulci, based on head type. Due to 326 shift in the olfactory bulb and the frontal lobe in brachycephalic breeds compared to other 327 (meso-and dolichocephalic) head types [49], we expected that it could have an effect on the 328 appearance of the sulci at this region. Therefore, we compared the score of the most rostral 329 sulci (both individually and as a group) between brachycephalic dogs and other head types.330 Mann-Whitney U tests revealed that there were no significant differences between 331 brachycephalic dogs and other head types in any of the individual sulci or the cumulative score 332 (

## Fig 4 . 359 (
4359to those that have been used in the past, according to the literature reviewed, so that it is possible 347 to identify the term of reference starting from any term used in the literature considered in this Cortical map of the main sulci of the canine brain. A) Lateral view of the right351 hemisphere, B) medial view of the right hemisphere, C) caudal view of the right 352 hemisphere, D) dorsolateral view of the entire brain (3-dimensional model), E) rostral 353 view of the right hemisphere, F) dorsal view of the right hemisphere, and G) ventral view 354 of the right hemisphere. Sulci that were recorded as missing or indistinct in less than 33% 16 355 of the cases in Study 2 are marked with red, and the more prevalent ones (sulci that were 356 distinguishable the most) are marked with blue. 357 358 Terms that were consistently used included across textbooks Fissura longitudinalis cerebri Fig4/1), Sulcus ansatus (Fig4/22), Sulcus coronalis (Fig4/21), Sulcus endorhinalis (Fig4/28), 360 Sulcus genualis (Fig4/42), Sulcus hippocampi, Sulcus presylvius (Fig4/6), Sulcus rhinalis 361 medialis (Fig4/29), Sulcus splenialis (Fig4/37), Sulcus ectogenualis (Fig4/44) and Sulcus 362 precruciatus


evaluated whether an individual structure was present, underdeveloped, missing or 413 unidentifiable. Using craniometric indexes, we compared whether sulci of brachycephalic 414 breeds differed from those of mesocephalic and dolichocephalic groups, based on the presence 415 of certain sulci on the frontal regions, as this part of the brain is supposed to be subjected to the 416 most extreme modifications following the shortening of the skull. The analysis showed no 417 difference across the skull length types regarding the occurrence of these sulci, although 418


grateful for Dr. Judit Benczik for commenting on an earlier version of this 433 manuscript. We also would like to thank Professor Dr. Hagen Gasse for his helpful comments 434 and suggestions and to Dr. Lisa Wallis for the language proofing. has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under 438 the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement 439 No [680040]) and from the János Bolyai Research Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of 440 Sciences and the Hungarian Brain Research Program (2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002). The 441 funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or 442 preparation of the manuscript.


table and guideline for use. Such a tool could be beneficial for educational, clinical use, and research (e.g. neuroscience) purposes. The implications for canine neuroscience research should not be underestimated as dogs are 105 considered a good translational model for the study of human neurological and psychiatric diseases[20] and changes in the brain, including for example age related changes[21-23]. The latest human research [24-26] relies heavily on the use of fMRI methods, and in parallel there 108 has also been an increase in the number of non-invasive canine fMRI studies, due to the fact 109 that pet dogs exhibit cooperativeness and trainability, and thus can be trained to lie still and 110 unrestrained in the MRI scan [27-29]. Recent studies have tested the effects of dietary 111 restriction and immunotherapy on aging and aging-associated diseases, and the results 112 highlight the translation value of the dog model for aging and Alzheimer's disease [30-34]. Different dog brain templates are also developed during the past years to help these fields [35-37]. These examples show how the dog may become a pioneering and exceptional model in 115 comparative neuroscience.103 

104 

106 

107 

113 

114 

116 




,38,42,44] and the Sulcus ectosylvius medius [6,15,38,42]. Furthermore, we observed a category of sulci that seldom occurred in 166 certain textbooks. These are for example the Sulcus rostralis, Sulcus posticus, Sulcus occipitalis inferior, Sulcus lateromedialis superior, Sulcus lateromedialis inferior and Sulcus transsecans [15]. In one textbook, the rostral part of the Sulcus splenialis, just before the Sulcus cruciatus, was named Sulcus cinguli [38]. A groove rostral to the Lamina terminalis was mentioned as Sulcus parolfactorius [42], and another between the Corpus callosum and the Sulcus splenialis was referred to as Sulcus infrasplenialis [11]. Finally, a number of structures identified by the NAV as specific to ungulates was used to describe specific structures in the 173 canine brain in some of the textbooks. Examples of this were the Sulcus calcarinus [13,44], Sulcus diagonalis [15], and the Sulcus proreus [12,15,38,42].165 

167 

168 

169 

170 

171 

172 

8 

174 



## Table 1 ).
1Table 1. Results of the Mann-Whitney U tests comparing brachycephalic dogs and other head types in the individual sulci and cumulative score. Test statistics areFollowing the results of Study 1 and Study 2, we summarized the index of the canine brain's main sulci for further discussion and future terminology guidelines. We based the index on the terms that showed the highest consistency across the two modalities of analysis. Thus333 

334 

335 

336 

indicated as "U", standardized test statistics are indicated as "z" and effect size as 

337 

"r"; statistical significance was set at p = 0.05. 

Median 

(IQR) 
Name of sulcus 

Brachycephalic 

Other 1 

U 
z 
p 
r 

Sulcus proreus 
2 (1.5-2.5) 
2 (1.5-2.5) 
679.00 
1.29 
0.197 
0.14 

Sulcus 

intraproreus 

3 (2.0-3.0) 
3 (2.5-3.0) 
552.00 
-0.24 
0.806 
-0.03 

Sulcus genualis 
2 (1.5-2.5) 
2 (1.5-2.5) 
595.00 
0.29 
0.770 
0.03 


## Table 2 ): Fissura
2We reviewed the commonly used terminology regarding the sulci of the canine brain in order to assess the occurrence of possible inconsistencies. We often found several different anatomical terms that refer to the same cortical structures, which can cause difficulties in interpreting comparative studies.To our knowledge, this is the first publication to compare the anatomical description of canine sulci used in the literature. Although the Illustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature, based on the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (NAV)[14], provides a reliable official collection of recommended terms for the description of veterinary anatomy with figures, the use of such terms, as found in the current study, is not always widespread across brain anatomy textbooks. A review of academic textbooks was performed in Study 1, which compared fourteen major books in the field of comparative anatomy, neuroanatomy and neurology, to reveal differences among the sources in the terminology used to label the different cortical structures. We showed that several terms have been derived from humanterminology, especially the directions (anterior/posterior, superior/inferior), and are used in the 25 406 veterinary literature. We recommend the use of the veterinary-related terms because most of the intracranial structures (vessels, nerves, and pathways) are named according to the NAV, using dorsal/ventral instead of superior/inferior and rostral/caudal instead of anterior/posterior 409 (e.g. Sinus sagittalis dorsalis, Nuclei rostrales thalami, Nucleus cochlearis dorsalis et ventralis, Tractus spinocerebellaris dorsalis et ventralis etc.)364 

pseudosylvia (Fig4/7), Sulcus corporis callosi (Fig4/41), Sulcus cruciatus (Fig4/18), Sulcus 

365 

ectomarginalis (Fig4/25), Sulcus ectosylvius caudalis (Fig4/11), Sulcus ectosylvius rostralis 

366 

(Fig4/8), Sulcus endomarginalis (Fig4/27), Sulcus marginalis (Fig4/23), Sulcus postcruciatus 

367 

(Fig4/20), Sulcus proreus (Fig4/4), Sulcus rhinalis lateralis pars rostralis (Fig4/2), Sulcus 

368 

rhinalis lateralis pars caudalis (Fig4/3), Sulcus suprasplenialis (Fig4/32), Sulcus suprasylvius 

369 

caudalis (Fig4/16), Sulcus suprasylvius medius (Fig4/15), Sulcus suprasylvius rostralis 

370 

(Fig4/14), Sulcus ectosylvius medius (Fig4/10), Sulcus endogenualis (Fig4/43), Sulcus 

371 

intraproreus (Fig4/5), Sulcus retrosplenialis (Fig4/36),and Sulcus marginalis caudalis 

372 

(Fig4/24). 

373 

For those terms that were mentioned in only one source, we recommend: Sulcus lateromedialis 

374 

dorsalis (Fig4/30), Sulcus lateromedialis ventralis (Fig4/31), Sulcus limitans ventralis 

375 

(Fig4/13), Sulcus occipitalis lateralis (Fig4/17), Sulcus occipitotemporalis (Fig4/35), Sulcus 

376 

posticus (Fig4/12), Ramus ascendens sulci splenialis (Fig4/38), Sulcus preectomarginalis 

377 

(Fig4/26), Sulcus presuprasplenialis (Fig4/34), Sulcus rostralis (Fig4/45), Sulcus transsecans 

378 

(Fig4/33), processus acominis (Fig4/9), Sulcus infrasplenialis (Fig4/40), Sulcus parolfactorius 

379 

(Fig4/46). As the Ramus ascendens sulci splenialis (38) and the Sulcus occipitotemporalis 



. W L Nowinski, A Fang, B T Nguyen, J K Raphel, L Jagannathan, R Raghavan, Nowinski WL, Fang A, Nguyen BT, Raphel JK, Jagannathan L, Raghavan R, et al.

Multiple brain atlas database and atlas-based neuroimaging system. Comput Aided Surg. 448Multiple brain atlas database and atlas-based neuroimaging system. Comput Aided Surg 448

. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4490150Off J Int Soc Comput Aided Surg. 21<42::AID-IGS7>3.0.CO;2-NOff J Int Soc Comput Aided Surg. 1997;2: 42-66. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097- 449 0150(1997)2:1<42::AID-IGS7>3.0.CO;2-N

The human brain in 1700 pieces: 451 design and development of a three-dimensional, interactive and reference atlas. W L Nowinski, B C Chua, G Y Qian, N G Nowinska, 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.10.021J 452 Neurosci Methods. 204Nowinski WL, Chua BC, Qian GY, Nowinska NG. The human brain in 1700 pieces: 451 design and development of a three-dimensional, interactive and reference atlas. J 452 Neurosci Methods. 2012;204: 44-60. doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.10.021

Utility of Brain Imaging Methods in Research on Aging. C R Hartel, R L Buckner, National Academies Press454US)InternetHartel CR, Buckner RL. Utility of Brain Imaging Methods in Research on Aging 454 [Internet]. National Academies Press (US); 2006. Available: 455 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK83759/ 456

Comprehensive 457 cellular-resolution atlas of the adult human brain. S-L Ding, J J Royall, S M Sunkin, L Ng, Bac Facer, P Lesnar, 10.1002/cne.24080J Comp Neurol. 524Ding S-L, Royall JJ, Sunkin SM, Ng L, Facer BAC, Lesnar P, et al. Comprehensive 457 cellular-resolution atlas of the adult human brain. J Comp Neurol. 2016;524: 3127- 458 3481. doi:10.1002/cne.24080

Computation of a high-resolution MRI 460 3D stereotaxic atlas of the sheep brain. A Ella, J A Delgadillo, P Chemineau, M Keller, 10.1002/cne.24079J Comp Neurol. 525Ella A, Delgadillo JA, Chemineau P, Keller M. Computation of a high-resolution MRI 460 3D stereotaxic atlas of the sheep brain. J Comp Neurol. 2017;525: 676-692. 461 doi:10.1002/cne.24079

The Beagle Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. X Palazzi, Springer463New York, NY; New York1st edPalazzi X. The Beagle Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. 1st ed. New York, NY: 463 Springer New York; 2011.

. H Gomercic, M Kramer, M Mihaljevic, M Duras-Gomercic, T Gomercic, A Hartmann, 465Gomercic H, Kramer M, Mihaljevic M, Duras-Gomercic M, Gomercic T, Hartmann A, 465

CT-und MRT-Atlas: Transversalanatomie des Hundes. 1st ed. Stuttgart: Enkeet al. CT-und MRT-Atlas: Transversalanatomie des Hundes. 1st ed. Stuttgart: Enke;

Veterinary Neuroanatomy: A Clinical Approach. C E Thomson, C Hahn, Philadelphia: Saunders W.B. 1st ed. 468 EdinburghThomson CE, Hahn C. Veterinary Neuroanatomy: A Clinical Approach. 1st ed. 468 Edinburgh ; Philadelphia: Saunders W.B.; 2012.

A stereotaxic atlas of the dog's brain. Rk-S Lim, C-N Liu, R L Moffitt, W F Windle, 470Springfield: Charles C ThomasLim RK-S, Liu C-N, Moffitt RL, Windle WF. A stereotaxic atlas of the dog's brain. 470 Springfield: Charles C Thomas; 1960.

Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria. World Association of 47210. ICVGAN. Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria, 6th edition. In: World Association of 472

Veterinary Anatomists (WAVA) documents. InternetVeterinary Anatomists (WAVA) documents [Internet]. 2017. Available: 473 http://www.wava-amav.org/wava-documents.html

. R Barone, R Bortolami, Anatomie comparée des mammifères domestiques : Tome. 6475Barone R, Bortolami R. Anatomie comparée des mammifères domestiques : Tome 6, 475

. I Neurologie, Paris: VigotNeurologie I, système nerveux central. Paris: Vigot; 2004.

Anatomy of the 477 Dog: An Illustrated Text. K D Budras, P H Mccarthy, W Fricke, R Richter, A Horowitz, R Berg, 5th ed. SchlueterscheBudras KD, McCarthy PH, Fricke W, Richter R, Horowitz A, Berg R. Anatomy of the 477 Dog: An Illustrated Text. 5th ed. Schluetersche; 2007.

Funktionelle Neuroanatomie für die Tiermedizin. M H Stoffel, 1st ed. Stuttgart: EnkeStoffel MH. Funktionelle Neuroanatomie für die Tiermedizin. 1st ed. Stuttgart: Enke;

Illustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature. 3 481 revised. G Constantinescu, O Schaller, Stuttgart: ThiemeConstantinescu G, Schaller O. Illustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature. 3 481 revised. Stuttgart: Thieme; 2011.

Atlas of the Canine Brain. O S Adrianov, T A Mering, NPP Books. 1st ed. Domino KE, Domino EF, 483 editorsAdrianov OS, Mering TA. Atlas of the Canine Brain. 1st ed. Domino KE, Domino EF, 483 editors. NPP Books; 2010.

M Schuenke, E Schulte, U Schumacher, L M Ross, E D Lamperti, M Voll, THIEME 485 Atlas of Anatomy: Head and Neuroanatomy. New YorkThieme1st ed. StuttgartSchuenke M, Schulte E, Schumacher U, Ross LM, Lamperti ED, Voll M. THIEME 485 Atlas of Anatomy: Head and Neuroanatomy. 1st ed. Stuttgart; New York: Thieme;

Anatomical Variations in the Pseudosylvian Fissure 488 Morphology of Brachy-, Dolicho-, and Mesaticephalic Dogs. L M Carreira, A Ferreira, 10.1002/ar.23171Anat Rec. 298Carreira LM, Ferreira A. Anatomical Variations in the Pseudosylvian Fissure 488 Morphology of Brachy-, Dolicho-, and Mesaticephalic Dogs. Anat Rec. 2015;298: 489 1255-1260. doi:10.1002/ar.23171

Longitudinal Cerebral Fissure Anatomy Variations in Brachy. L M Carreira, A Ferreira, 491Carreira LM, Ferreira A. Longitudinal Cerebral Fissure Anatomy Variations in Brachy-, 491

Mesaticephalic Dogs and Their Importance to Brain Surgery. - Dolicho, 10.1002/ar.23183Anat Rec. 492Dolicho-and Mesaticephalic Dogs and Their Importance to Brain Surgery. Anat Rec. 492 2015;298: 1612-1621. doi:10.1002/ar.23183

Catlas: An magnetic resonance imaging-494 based three-dimensional cortical atlas and tissue probability maps for the domestic cat 495 (Felis catus). D Stolzberg, C Wong, B E Butler, S G Lomber, 10.1002/cne.24271J Comp Neurol. 525Stolzberg D, Wong C, Butler BE, Lomber SG. Catlas: An magnetic resonance imaging- 494 based three-dimensional cortical atlas and tissue probability maps for the domestic cat 495 (Felis catus). J Comp Neurol. 2017;525: 3190-3206. doi:10.1002/cne.24271

Frequency of nonspecific clinical signs in dogs with 497 separation anxiety, thunderstorm phobia, and noise phobia, alone or in combination. K L Overall, A E Dunham, D Frank, J 498 Am Vet Med Assoc. 219Overall KL, Dunham AE, Frank D. Frequency of nonspecific clinical signs in dogs with 497 separation anxiety, thunderstorm phobia, and noise phobia, alone or in combination. J 498 Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;219: 467-473.

Neurobiology of the aging dog. E Head, 10.1007/s11357-500Age. 33Head E. Neurobiology of the aging dog. Age. 2011;33: 485-496. doi:10.1007/s11357- 500

A canine model of human aging and Alzheimer's disease. E Head, Biochim Biophys. 502Head E. A canine model of human aging and Alzheimer's disease. Biochim Biophys 502

. 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.016Acta. 1832Acta. 2013;1832: 1384-1389. doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.016

Cognitive Dysfunction Syndrome: A Disease of 504. G M Landsberg, J Nichol, J A Araujo, Landsberg GM, Nichol J, Araujo JA. Cognitive Dysfunction Syndrome: A Disease of 504

Canine and Feline Brain Aging. 10.1016/j.cvsm.2012.04.003Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 42768Canine and Feline Brain Aging. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2012;42: 749- 505 768. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2012.04.003

Alzheimer Classification Using a Minimum 507. H Guo, L Liu, J Chen, Y Xu, X Jie, Guo H, Liu L, Chen J, Xu Y, Jie X. Alzheimer Classification Using a Minimum 507

Spanning Tree of High-Order Functional Network on fMRI Dataset. 10.3389/fnins.2017.00639Front Neurosci. 508Spanning Tree of High-Order Functional Network on fMRI Dataset. Front Neurosci. 508 2017;11. doi:10.3389/fnins.2017.00639

Subcortical 510 evidence for a contribution of arousal to fMRI studies of brain activity. X Liu, J A De Zwart, M L Schölvinck, C Chang, F Q Ye, D A Leopold, 10.1038/s41467-017-02815-3Nat Commun. 511395Liu X, de Zwart JA, Schölvinck ML, Chang C, Ye FQ, Leopold DA, et al. Subcortical 510 evidence for a contribution of arousal to fMRI studies of brain activity. Nat Commun. 511 2018;9: 395. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-02815-3

Tumor Tissue Detection using 513. H Huang, J Lu, J Wu, Z Ding, S Chen, L Duan, Huang H, Lu J, Wu J, Ding Z, Chen S, Duan L, et al. Tumor Tissue Detection using 513

. Blood-Oxygen-Level-Dependent Functional MRI based on Independent Component. 514Blood-Oxygen-Level-Dependent Functional MRI based on Independent Component 514

. 10.1038/s41598-017-18453-0Analysis. Sci Rep. 81223Analysis. Sci Rep. 2018;8: 1223. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-18453-0

Understanding dog cognition by functional magnetic resonance 516 imaging. L Huber, C Lamm, 10.3758/s13420-017-0261-6Learn Behav. 45Huber L, Lamm C. Understanding dog cognition by functional magnetic resonance 516 imaging. Learn Behav. 2017;45: 101-102. doi:10.3758/s13420-017-0261-6

Voice-sensitive regions in the dog and 518 human brain are revealed by comparative fMRI. A Andics, M Gácsi, T Faragó, A Kis, A Miklósi, 10.1016/j.cub.2014.01.058Curr Biol CB. 24Andics A, Gácsi M, Faragó T, Kis A, Miklósi A. Voice-sensitive regions in the dog and 518 human brain are revealed by comparative fMRI. Curr Biol CB. 2014;24: 574-578. 519 doi:10.1016/j.cub.2014.01.058

Awake canine fMRI predicts dogs' 521 preference for praise vs food. P F Cook, A Prichard, M Spivak, G S Berns, 10.1093/scan/nsw102Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 11Cook PF, Prichard A, Spivak M, Berns GS. Awake canine fMRI predicts dogs' 521 preference for praise vs food. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2016;11: 1853-1862. 522 doi:10.1093/scan/nsw102

. N Alisauskaite, I Spitzbarth, W Baumgärtner, P Dziallas, S Kramer, R Dening, Alisauskaite N, Spitzbarth I, Baumgärtner W, Dziallas P, Kramer S, Dening R, et al.

Chronic post-traumatic intramedullary lesions in dogs, a translational model. 10.1371/journal.pone.0187746PloS One. 525187746Chronic post-traumatic intramedullary lesions in dogs, a translational model. PloS One. 525 2017;12: e0187746. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0187746

Canis familiaris As a Model for Non-527. N Bunford, A Andics, A Kis, Á Miklósi, M Gácsi, Bunford N, Andics A, Kis A, Miklósi Á, Gácsi M. Canis familiaris As a Model for Non- 527

. Invasive Comparative Neuroscience, 10.1016/j.tins.2017.05.003Trends Neurosci. 40Invasive Comparative Neuroscience. Trends Neurosci. 2017;40: 438-452. 528 doi:10.1016/j.tins.2017.05.003

The companion dog as a 530 unique translational model for aging. A Mazzatenta, A Carluccio, D Robbe, C D Giulio, A Cellerino, 10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.08.024Semin Cell Dev Biol. 70Mazzatenta A, Carluccio A, Robbe D, Giulio CD, Cellerino A. The companion dog as a 530 unique translational model for aging. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2017;70: 141-153. 531 doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.08.024

The companion dog 533 as a model for human aging and mortality. J M Hoffman, K E Creevy, A Franks, D G O&apos;neill, Del Promislow, 10.1111/acel.12737Aging Cell. 17Hoffman JM, Creevy KE, Franks A, O'Neill DG, Promislow DEL. The companion dog 533 as a model for human aging and mortality. Aging Cell. 2018;17: e12737. 534 doi:10.1111/acel.12737

Neural processes of vocal social perception: Dog-human 536 comparative fMRI studies. A Andics, Á Miklósi, 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.11.017Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 85Andics A, Miklósi Á. Neural processes of vocal social perception: Dog-human 536 comparative fMRI studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2018;85: 54-64. 537 doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.11.017

A stereotaxic 539 breed-averaged, symmetric T2w canine brain atlas including detailed morphological and 540 volumetrical data sets. B Nitzsche, J Boltze, E Ludewig, T Flegel, M J Schmidt, J Seeger, 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.066NeuroImage. Nitzsche B, Boltze J, Ludewig E, Flegel T, Schmidt MJ, Seeger J, et al. A stereotaxic 539 breed-averaged, symmetric T2w canine brain atlas including detailed morphological and 540 volumetrical data sets. NeuroImage. 2018; doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.066

. R Datta, J Lee, J Duda, B B Avants, C H Vite, B Tseng, A Digital Atlas of the Dog 542Datta R, Lee J, Duda J, Avants BB, Vite CH, Tseng B, et al. A Digital Atlas of the Dog 542

. 10.1371/journal.pone.0052140Brain. PLoS ONE. 752140Brain. PLoS ONE. 2012;7: e52140. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052140

Development 544 of representative magnetic resonance imaging-based atlases of the canine brain and 545 evaluation of three methods for atlas-based segmentation. M E Milne, C Steward, S M Firestone, S N Long, T J O&apos;brien, B A Moffat, 10.2460/ajvr.77.4.395Am J Vet Res. 77Milne ME, Steward C, Firestone SM, Long SN, O'Brien TJ, Moffat BA. Development 544 of representative magnetic resonance imaging-based atlases of the canine brain and 545 evaluation of three methods for atlas-based segmentation. Am J Vet Res. 2016;77: 395- 546 403. doi:10.2460/ajvr.77.4.395

Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haustiere. R Nickel, A Schummer, E Seiferle, 548Band IVNickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E. Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haustiere, Band IV: 548

. Sinnesorgane Nervensystem, Endokrine Drüsen, 4 unveränderte. Berlin u.a.: EnkeNervensystem, Sinnesorgane, Endokrine Drüsen. 4 unveränderte. Berlin u.a.: Enke;

. H E König, H-G Liebich, G M Constantinescu, M Bowen, M Dickomeit, K Shook, König HE, Liebich H-G, Constantinescu GM, Bowen M, Dickomeit M, Shook K, et al.

Veterinary Anatomy of Domestic Mammals: Textbook and Colour Atlas. New YorkSchattauer4th ed. 552 StuttgartVeterinary Anatomy of Domestic Mammals: Textbook and Colour Atlas. 4th ed. 552 Stuttgart; New York: Schattauer; 2009.

Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy. K M Dyce, W O Sack, Cjg Wensing, 4th ed. StDyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG. Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy. 4th ed. St.

. Mo Louis, Louis, Mo: Saunders; 2009.

Atlas and Textbook of Small Animal Neurology: An Illustrated 556 Text. A Jaggy, R Couteur, Le, 1st ed. Hannover: SchlueterscheJaggy A, Couteur R le. Atlas and Textbook of Small Animal Neurology: An Illustrated 556 Text. 1st ed. Hannover: Schluetersche; 2010.

Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. H E Evans, A De Lahunta, 558St. Louis, Missouri4th ed.Evans HE, de Lahunta A. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 4th ed. St. Louis, Missouri: 558 Saunders; 2012.

Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology. A De Lahunta, E N Glass, M Kent, 560St. Louis, MO: Saunders4th edde Lahunta A, Glass EN, Kent M. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology. 560 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2014.

. M J Schmidt, M Kramer, Zns-Befunde Mrt-Atlas, Bei Hund Und Katze, Enke562Stuttgart1st ed.Schmidt MJ, Kramer M. MRT-Atlas ZNS-Befunde bei Hund und Katze. 1st ed. 562 Stuttgart: Enke; 2015.

Fundamentals of Canine Neuroanatomy and Neurophysiology. E E Uemura, 1st edUemura EE. Fundamentals of Canine Neuroanatomy and Neurophysiology. 1st ed.

. Iowa Ames, Wiley-BlackwellAmes, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell; 2015.

External brain anatomy in relation to the phylogeny of 566. G A Lyras, A Van Der Geer, . E , Lyras GA, Van Der Geer A a. E. External brain anatomy in relation to the phylogeny of 566

Caninae (Carnivora: Canidae). A M Pilegaard, M Berendt, P Holst, A Møller, F J Mcevoy, 10.1046/j.1096-3642.2003.00067.x56847Zool J Linn Soc. 138Effect of Skull Type on the 569Caninae (Carnivora: Canidae). Zool J Linn Soc. 2003;138: 505-522. 567 doi:10.1046/j.1096-3642.2003.00067.x 568 47. Pilegaard AM, Berendt M, Holst P, Møller A, McEvoy FJ. Effect of Skull Type on the 569

Relative Size of Cerebral Cortex and Lateral Ventricles in Dogs. 10.3389/fvets.2017.00030Front Vet Sci. 430Relative Size of Cerebral Cortex and Lateral Ventricles in Dogs. Front Vet Sci. 2017;4: 570 30. doi:10.3389/fvets.2017.00030

The dorsal sagittal venous sinus anatomical 572 variations in brachycephalic, dolichocephalic, and mesocephalic dogs and their 30 573 significance for brain surgery. L M Carreira, A Ferreira, F L Burilo, 10.1002/ar.21474Anat Rec Hoboken NJ. 294Carreira LM, Ferreira A, Burilo FL. The dorsal sagittal venous sinus anatomical 572 variations in brachycephalic, dolichocephalic, and mesocephalic dogs and their 30 573 significance for brain surgery. Anat Rec Hoboken NJ 2007. 2011;294: 1920-1929. 574 doi:10.1002/ar.21474

Effect of brachycephalic, mesaticephalic, and 576 dolichocephalic head conformations on olfactory bulb angle and orientation in dogs as 577 determined by use of in vivo magnetic resonance imaging. A K Hussein, M Sullivan, J Penderis, 10.2460/ajvr.73.7.946Am J Vet Res. 73Hussein AK, Sullivan M, Penderis J. Effect of brachycephalic, mesaticephalic, and 576 dolichocephalic head conformations on olfactory bulb angle and orientation in dogs as 577 determined by use of in vivo magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Vet Res. 2012;73: 578 946-951. doi:10.2460/ajvr.73.7.946

Variations of the dog cerebral sulci, compared in particular with 580 those of the cat. K Kawamura, J Naito, J Hirnforsch. 19Kawamura K, Naito J. Variations of the dog cerebral sulci, compared in particular with 580 those of the cat. J Hirnforsch. 1978;19: 457-467.