# Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor: A Review of the Clinical Aspects and Possible Mechanistic Underpinnings

CorpusID: 9451060
 
tags: #Medicine, #Psychology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/215a17fa8fe0b35047843943be6ba4d80ba15f98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/215a17fa8fe0b35047843943be6ba4d80ba15f98)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor: A Review of the Clinical Aspects and Possible Mechanistic Underpinnings


Fé Lix Bermejo-Pareja 
Head of the Neurology Department
University Hospital ''12 de Octubre''
MadridSpain

Biomedical Research Network on Neurodegenerative Disorders (CIBERNED)
Carlos III National Research Institute
MadridSpain

Department of Biomedical Sciences (ANECA)
Complutense University of Madrid
Spain

Veró Nica Puertas-Martín 
Neurology Department
University Hospital ''12 de Octubre''
MadridSpain

Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor: A Review of the Clinical Aspects and Possible Mechanistic Underpinnings
Received: October 18, 2011 Accepted: May 8, 2012 Published: September 14, 2012Review * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Editor: Elan D. Louis, Columbia University, United States of America Funding: None. Financial Disclosures: None. Conflict of Interest: The authors report no conflict of interest.Essential tremorcognitioncognitive disordersdementianeurologic manifestationscerebellar disorders
The classical concept of essential tremor (ET) as a monosymptomatic tremorogenic disorder has been questioned in the last decade as new evidence has been described. Clinical, neuroimaging, and pathological studies have described a probable structural basis (mainly in cerebellum) and evidence that ET is associated with subtle clinical cerebellar deficits and several non-motor clinical manifestations, such as cognitive and mood disorders. We performed literature searches in Medline, ISI Web of Knowledge, and PsycInfo databases. The aim of this review is to describe cognitive deficits associated with ET. First, we present a brief history of ET cognitive disorders presented. Second, we describe several clinical cross-sectional series demonstrating that ET is associated with mild cognitive deficits of attention, executive functions, several types of memory (working memory, immediate, short term, delayed, and possibly others) and, mood disorders (depression). Recent neuroimaging studies favor a cerebellar basis for these cognitive deficits. Population-based surveys confirm that mild cognitive dysfunction is not limited to severe ET cases, the entire ET group, including mild and undiagnosed cases, can be affected. Cohort studies indicated that ET cognitive deficits could be progressive and that ET patients had an increased risk of dementia. The mood and cognitive deficits in ET are in agreement with cognitive affective cerebellar syndrome described in patients with cerebellar disorders. New evidence, mainly from functional (neuroimaging) and prospective clinical studies would further bolster recent descriptions of ET clinical manifestations. Citation: Bermejo-Pareja F, Puertas-Martín V. Cognitive features of essential tremor: a review of the clinical aspects and possible mechanistic underpinnings. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov 2012;2: http://tremorjournal.org/article/view/74

## Introduction

The classical series did not detect cognitive deficits in essential tremor (ET) patients, [1][2][3][4][5][6] although the Mayo Clinic series described a high percentage of ''psychoneurosis'' (16% suffered from this out-ofdate diagnosis), there was no comparison with a control group. 4 A study in 1990 performed controlled comparison of premorbid personality in Parkinson's disease (PD) and ET patients and demonstrated similar premorbid personality with analogous neuropsychiatric symptoms (depressive, introverted, rigid, and ''lonely'' traits) in both disorders and found that the general intelligence of ET patients was similar to controls. 7 An analogous study was recently performed. 8 That is to say, 20th-century clinical series and neurological reports [9][10][11] describe ET as a slowly progressing, monosymptomatic, benign movement disorder that is frequently familial and is infrequently associated with incapacitating tremor, and very rarely with other neurological symptoms, such as gait ataxia. 1,3,6,11,12 Historically, it has not been associated with cognitive symptoms. This classical view was established in the well-known definition of ET by the Movement Disorders Society in the last years of the 20th century. 13 The current history of cognitive disorders in ET began with the precise and extensive psychometric evaluation performed prior to thalamic deep brain stimulation (DBS) as a treatment for medicationrefractory ET. The first documented ET neuropsychology was published by Tröster et al. 14 in 1999 without control cases. Later, several clinical series of psychometric evaluation in ET patients were described 1) in patients to be treated with thalamic DBS; [15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22] 2) in clinic-based ET patients, 23,24 and, more recently, in 3) populationbased ET cases, [25][26][27][28][29] many of them with control cases for comparison.

The present review analyses the cognitive aspects of ET patients. A review of the ET patient cognitive aspects in the new scenario of ET as a possible benign neurodegenerative disorder has been recently described. 30 


## Methods

The review was performed using Medline, ISI Web of Knowledge, and PsycInfo databases with a combination of MESH terms: essential tremor and cognitive disorders, cognition, and dementia. In Medline and the ISI Web of Knowledge, neurologic manifestations and psychiatric and neuropsychiatric symptoms were also entered in the search. Only papers written in English, French, and Spanish were analyzed. Some papers were obtained from the main neurological text and article references were also included in the analysis.


## Main results

In Medline there were nearly 2,250 articles (July 2011) on ET, but only a few were dedicated to descriptions of cognitive symptoms in ET patients ET patients.


## Essential tremor is not a monosymptomatic tremor disorder

In the last few years of the 20th century, the Movement Disorders Society 13 considered ET as a tremorogenic monosymptomatic disorder. It is important to summarize more recent (21st century) clinical and pathological aspects of ET that include cognitive deficit in this new nosological concept of ET.

The most apparent clinical manifestation of ET is limb kinetic tremors (axial tremor is infrequent), although other infrequent neurological motor manifestations indicative of cerebellar deficits have been described (Table 1). The most frequent non-tremor manifestations are subtle (or subclinical) cerebellar motor neurologic deficits, 31-40 mild (or very mild) cognitive impairments, [16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30] and depression. 8,17,22,25,29,[41][42][43][44][45] Nevertheless, there are not enough longterm population-based studies that evaluate the frequency of the symptoms shown in Table 1 in ET patients. Another important issue regarding ET nosology is the increasing evidence of cerebellar pathology, which is concordant with clinical deficits and is based on pathological and neuroimaging data.

Classically, ET had no pathology: it was a functional disorder. In 1991 Rajput et al. 46 reported that only eight cases had been studied pathologically, and they analyzed six additional patients. Although they did not find any specific neuropathological lesions in ET brain, there was no control group. 46 In the last decade, Louis and colleagues 41,47,48 performed controlled studies and demonstrated that the majority of ET cases had identifiable structural brain changes localized in the cerebellum itself (Purkinje cell loss and other neurodegenerative abnormalities, such as an elevated number of axonal torpedoes) or in the brainstem neurons that synapse with Purkinje cells. A smaller group of ET brains had only Lewy bodies limited to the brainstem (locus ceruleus and dorsal vagus nucleus). 47 These data were criticized by several authors. Rajput and Rajput 49 recently reported no cerebellum abnormities in their series, but it should be mentioned that it only included two normal controls, which could lead to a type II error. 50 Other authors considered brainstem Lewy bodies as an incidental finding in old people and cerebellar abnormalities as secondary to ''therapeutic'' alcohol abuse, 51 but ET brain Possibly associated with migraine, restless legs syndrome, Lewy body dementia and Alzheimer's disease cerebellar findings and brain weight 47 are not consistent with chronic alcoholic brain pathology. 52 The neuroimaging and neurophysiologic findings indicate a cerebellar dysfunction origin for ET. Two studies performed in the 1990s 53,54 suggested that the tremors of ET patients were related to activation in the cerebellar hemispheres and its connected brainstem structures. In the next decade, non-routine neuroimaging studies demonstrated a relationship between ET and cerebellar and brain abnormalities [55][56][57][58][59][60][61][62] (with some exceptions). 63,64 In summary, recent clinical, pathological, and neuroimaging findings are consistent with the hypothesis that ET is a disorder of the cerebellum and its brain connections rather than a monosymptomatic tremor disorder. However, current ET nosology has several problems. The absence of clear monogenetic defects in a familial disorder (LINGO1 is only a genetic risk factor 65 ) favors the hypothesis that ET may be a more heterogeneous disorder than was previously thought. 41 Cases of benign tremulous parkinsonism, 66 adult-onset dystonic tremor (AODT), in which the dystonia could appear many years after the tremor, 67,68 and other rare tremors, including fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), could mimic ET cases. 51,69,70 However, the majority of ET cases, mainly in a community setting, may still be traditional ET. The problem is that traditional ET could comprise several families of essential tremors. 41 This issue might explain the absence of clear genetic abnormalities in a frequently familial disorder.


## Cognitive deficits in ET


## Historical data

As stated in the introduction, the classical 20th century series did not detect cognitive deficits in ET patients 1-6 (with the exception of 16% of ''psychoneurosis'' in an uncontrolled study 4 ). Disturbances in the premorbid ET personality described in 1990 7 went unnoticed, perhaps because they were published in a monograph series that was not included in Medline.

The current history of cognitive disorders in ET began with extensive psychometric evaluation performed prior to thalamic DBS for medication-refractory ET; the implanted brain hardware could modulate neurologic function with low morbidity. 71 The first investigation of ET neuropsychology was published in 1999 and comparing 40 patients using a thorough psychometric evaluation pre-DBS and 3 months after the operation. 14 The absence of a control group limited the impact of mild psychometric abnormalities described in ET patients. One year later, an interesting report described improvement 15 in a patient who had been assessed on bilateral thalamic DBS during the ''on'' and ''off'' periods. Without stimulation, the patient suffered from declines . 1 standard deviation (SD) on measures of verbal fluency and recall compared with active stimulation. 15 This report demonstrated that the amelioration of tremor by DBS mildly improved certain cognitive deficits, indicating that these deficits were in some way related to the ET. Both studies provided evidence that ET patients can have cognitive deficits, but the specific type of cognitive abnormalities remained unknown.

Three studies on cognitive dysfunction in ET were published in 2001. [16][17][18] The publication by Gasparini et al. 16 was based on theoretical reasons (''a deregulation of the mechanisms underlying both the cognitive and motor functions can be hypothesized'') and investigated ''frontal lobe dysfunction'' in a series of ET patients treated with thalamic and found evidence of cognitive dysfunction. Lombardi et al. 17 suggested that the cerebellar deficits in ET could be accompanied by psychological disturbances. Since then, several clinical series in patients to be treated with thalamic DBS [16][17][18][19][20][21][22] and clinical series from specialized clinics ( Table 2) have confirmed psychometric abnormalities in ET patients; 23,24 (Table 3). Were these deficits a consequence of the tremor itself 72 as has been maintained by several authors? In 2003, Fields et al. 73 reported psychometric findings of ET patients pre-and 12 months after thalamic DBS. Some psychometric deficits were slightly improved, but the majority persisted. The stability of the majority of psychometric deficits in ET (after the amelioration of patient tremors) militates against an adverse tremor effect. 30 Obviously, clinical series of ET have a selection bias (severe and longstanding ET cases). Are the psychological abnormalities described in the previous ET series an attribute of severe or chronic ET patients? The limitations of the clinical series have been overcome by the findings from a population-based survey, the Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) cohort study in 5,278 elderly people. 74 The survey analyzed the epidemiology of the main neurological disorders in elderly people, 75 including ET. 76,77 In the second (incidence) wave of this cohort, the whole participant population was invited to complete a brief psychometric test. 25,30,78 The result of this study confirmed that mild ET cases (the majority of them did not seek medical attention 76,77 ) suffered from the main psychometric abnormalities described in clinical series. [16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24]30 (Table 4). Also, an increase in mild cognitive impairment cases was detected 29 together with a dementia risk in elderly ET participants in the NEDICES study. 26 This observation was corroborated in another community-based cohort in New York. 27 Other clinical ET patient series evaluated several neuropsychological or neuropsychiatric aspects of ET patients, but the objectives were to discover their role in the social or personal evolution of ET patients, not to analyze cognitive disturbances. [79][80][81][82][83] More recently, a clinical series with neuroimaging selection (ET cases must show integrity of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic terminals, as evidenced by a normal dopamine transporter scan) clarified the relationship between verbal memory executive dysfunction and cerebellar pathology. 61 In summary, several cognitive abnormalities have been described in clinical and population-based series of ET patients in the last decade.


## Cognitive deficits in ET

A summary of the cognitive deficits in ET patients is listed in Table 5.

It is not easy to establish a summary of cognitive deficits in ET for several reasons: the heterogeneity of patient series (age, ET duration, and severity); the variety of neuropsychological batteries; the limited number of ET patients (only 13-55 cases assessed), with the exceptions of the Tröster series (without controls) 14,21 and the NEDICES series 25 (short neuropsychological battery). The cross-sectional designs of the analyzed ET series do not permit the clinical evolutions of the described psychometric characteristics to be obtained. For these reasons, it is difficult to establish firm conclusions, and this summary will change with knowledge gained from future prospective series. Another fact that hinders firm conclusions is the mildness psychometric deficits described in ET series and the fact that these mild deficits do not affect all ET patients. 30 The association of frequent mild depression in clinical and population-based series has been postulated as a possible cause of cognitive ET deficits. 72 In fact, depression, measured by clinical and psychometric scales, is, in general, mild. It is also a constant finding in ET series, 8,17,22,25,29,[41][42][43][44][45] probably has its own characteristics, 43 and could be related to motor dysfunction and social stigma associated with tremor. 45 However, it is likely that, it is also biologically determined; it is independent of the motor intensity and evolution, 30,81,83 and it is described in cerebellar disorders without tremor or mild motor impairment. 90, 91 The most consistent cognitive findings described in the ET series are discussed below.

Deficits of attention-concentration and working memory. The majority of the series demonstrated several deficits of attentionconcentration in ET patients. The subtest of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and Digit Span (forward and backwards) was clearly disturbed in several series. 17,22,24 The Brief Test of Attention (auditory) 21 and selective test of auditory and visual attention (Stroop test) were altered in several series. 16,20,21 The Symbol Search 22 and Trail Making Test (TMT) (series A, attention and time to complete; 16,78 and series B, executive function 16 ) were also disturbed, except in the Sahin et al. series. 23 Complex attention and other related psychological functions were evaluated by the Stroop test, 16,20,21,23 and Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST). 16,17,20,23 The majority of series observed disturbances in both evaluations. 30 Other types of attention, such as visual attention, were evaluated in the Duane and Vermilion 19 series: 56% of ET patients had abnormal scores on the Letter Cancellation Task and 71% had low scores on the Test of Variables of Attention or the Conners' Continuous Performance Test. Others studies also demonstrated alterations in visual attention (Stroop task interference condition), 16,21 and one report described impaired visual attention reaction times. 39 Working memory, the ability to carry out a series of actions or mental operations in which one is required to hold something in memory in order to do the following operation, was assessed specifically in the Lombardi et al. 17 study by means of Digit Span, forward plus backward total span (WAIS); Visual Span, forward plus backward total span (Wechsler Memory Scale [WMS]); and Letter-Number Sequencing (WAIS). All these tests revealed deficits, although the visual span was not affected. 17 In summary, auditory, verbal, and visual attention and working memory are affected in many ET patients, and these deficits are usually mild in the great majority of series, including the populationbased series. There are few studies with computerized attention evaluation (reaction times and others). 19 Deficits in executive functions. Executive function, that is to say, the overall control and sequencing of multiple cognitive operations, is  


## Authors

Lombardi 17 Gasparini 16 Duane 19 Lacritz 20 Troster 21 Sahin 23 Higginson 22 Kim 24 Benito-Leó n 25 Psychological functions  30 Verbal fluency tests such as the Letter-cued Word Fluency (FAS test, number of animals, or fruit during 1 minute), 16,17,[20][21][22][23][24]78 which is DLPF-dependent and the Ruff Figural Test Fluency 20 were also affected. The Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB), specific for detecting frontal deficits, obtained statistically significant alterations in a recent series. 61 The Matrix Reasoning (WAIS) was mildly abnormal in one study, 22 but the Tower of London, 17 Tower of Hanoi, 16 and Clock Drawing 23 Tests, which require executive and visuospatial abilities, were within normal ranges.  In summary, mild executive dysfunction, as detected by tests that mainly require complex attention and set shifting, is a constant finding in ET series.

Explicit verbal memory (immediate or short-term and delayed). Several types of memory (working, short-term, and delayed [verbal learning]), but not implicit memory (unconscious memory of acts), were evaluated in ET patients. The most frequently employed measure is the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT), which is affected in almost all clinical series (to a different degrees in the various subscales). 30 In an analogous test, a Spanish test that includes naming of pictures, immediate and delayed verbal memory, 78 revealed mild memory deficits in a large number of ET patients in a populationbased series. Also, the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT) used in one study demonstrated that memory was impaired in ET versus controls. 24 The complete Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-R) or its subscales were performed in several clinical series, with different results. Logical memory (WMS subscale) was abnormal in one series, 22 but not in the large series by Tröster et al. 21 (only 12-15% of ET patients were 1 SD below the normative group) or in the Lacrtiz et al. 20 investigation. The figural subscale was affected in another series. 22 Visual memory investigated with the Rey-Osterreith Complex Figure (ROF) test did not show statistically significant differences versus controls in two studies. 23,24 In the Kim et al. 24 investigation, only the ROF recognition subscale showed a statistical deficit, but the Faces (WMS) 22 and Visual Reproduction subscales (WMS) 20 were affected.

With the exception of eyeblink conditioning, implicit memory has not been assessed in ET patients 38 ).

To summarize, only verbal memory (recognition, immediate, and delayed) was consistently disturbed in ET patients, and visual memory is possibly affected.

Language. As stated above, several tests of verbal fluency were consistently lower in ET patients. Other tests, such as the Benton Naming Test (BNT), were also affected, 17,21,22,24 but the results were more variable. 20,23


## Other psychological functions

Other psychological functions are not consistently affected or have not been sufficiently investigated to draw firm conclusions (Table 5).

Mental processing speed. Fine motor speed was disturbed in one series, 21 and the timed TMT Part A was affected in the populationbased series, 78 as was Symbol Search 22 (mental processing speed), indicating a possible slowing of mental processing that is also described in PD patients. 17,20,22,84,85 More data are needed to establish definite conclusions.

Visuospatial functions have been evaluated in several studies. The Benton Facial Recognition Test was implemented in three series; two found abnormal results in ET patients, 21,23 whereas the third showed them to be within the normal range. 17 The Hooper Visual Organization Test (HVOT) and Benton Line Orientation (BLO) were statistically abnormal in one study, 23 but the HVOT was in the normal range in two other clinical series. 17,21 This fact, coupled with variable data from block designs (WAIS) (normal in two 17,20 and abnormal in one 23 ) and normal visual memory in two clinical series 23,24 give a picture of possible normality in visuospatial functions, with facial recognition as one exception. 30 General cognitive function was evaluated by intelligence quotient, 21 Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 24,25 and Spanish verbal intelligence test. 25,78 The results showed that IQ was in the normal range (mean 109; but with .13 mean years of education), but MMSE scores were significantly lower than those in controls in the Kim et al. study 24 and in a population-based survey. 25 These findings indicate possible below-average cognitive performance in ET patients (mainly in elderly ET patients). In NEDICES, the increased rate of mild cognitive impairment 29 risk of dementia, and association of dementia in this cohort 26,87 suggested that cognition is affected in some ET patients. 25 This was confirmed in a community-based study in New York. 27 This fact is in agreement with the greater cognitive decline observed in ET patients versus controls in the prospective follow-up of the NEDICES survey. 28 These findings indicate that some ET cases could suffer from a progressive cognitive decline. 30 This point needs further prospective investigations to determine whether general cognitive function is below average in ET patients or if the decrement in general cognitive function is a consequence of a slow, mild degenerative process. 30 Abstract thinking and reasoning are rarely investigated in ET patients. Several WAIS subscales were implemented in clinical series (block designs, 17,20,23 picture completion, 17,22 matrix reasoning, 17,22 similarities, 17,22 and vocabulary 17 ) with contradictory results (abnormal in the Higginson et al. 22 series and normal in Lombardi et al. 17 ). Elementary calculation was evaluated in the Kim et al. 24 series without abnormalities. Obviously, more data are needed.


## Clinical significance of cognitive deficits

There is a unanimous consensus that cognitive deficits in ET patients are mild (in general between 1 and 2 SD below the normative group or controls) and subclinical. 21,30 The abnormalities also seem generalized, affecting approximately 30-60% of ET cases 19,21 (visual attention deficits affect more than 70% of ET cases 19 ). In the Lacritz et al. 20 study, 12 of 13 ET cases had one psychometric abnormality or more. The SDs of the majority of psychometric evaluations were greater in ET cases (232) versus controls (696), indicating greater variability of psychometric performance in ET cases than in controls. 25 The results of the psychometric evaluation are quite similar in ET and PD patients. 17,20,22 ET patients performed, in general, worse in tests of word fluency and attention and better in reasoning and calculation than PD patients. 30 Findings from the NEDICES cohort and other studies demonstrated that the functional incapacity of ET patients is more related to cognitive performance and depression than to tremor (clinical series, [42][43][44][45] population-based surveys, 88 and in nursing home series 89 ).


## Cognitive studies limitations

It was stated at the beginning of the ''Cognitive deficits in ET'' section that these clinical series have several limitations, including a low number of cases, variable psychometric batteries (with different versions and subscales performed), an absence of adequate control cases in several series, only cross-sectional studies, and others. 30 These limitations motivated the criticisms by Deuschl and Elble, 72 who doubted the reality of cognitive deficits in ET patients, explaining that the selection bias (severe and longstanding ET cases) in thalamic DBS series, the presence of depression and sedative medications, and other limitations (type I error) may influence these deficits. Moreover, some limitations in the NEDICES cohort (low number of ET incident cases) may have influenced the psychological results. 72 However, several series adjusted the presence of cognitive deficits for depression and sedative medication, 17,20,22 and the incidence of cognitive deficits remained statistically significant. 30 Despite the limitations of the ET clinical and population-based series, they consistently showed mild cognitive dysfunction, and in the NEDICES survey, in which the great majority of ET cases were mild and did not take medications, cognitive deficits were similar to the clinical series. 25,30 Why these cognitive deficits in essential tremor?

Cognitive evaluation consistently demonstrated that ET patients exhibit several deficits in attention, various executive functions, verbal memory (immediate and delayed), language, depression, and probably a very mild global cognitive impairment. These have been explained by three different physiopathological dysfunctions: 1) a deficit in the DLPF (thalamic-cerebellar loop), 16,30 2) a subclinical or unapparent clinical cerebellar syndrome, 17,30 and 3) the noxious effect on the nervous system of the ''dynamic oscillatory disturbance of the motor system.'' 72 Given the current knowledge, the most credible explanation is that cognitive dysfunctions and mood disorders in ET patients could be the consequence of subclinical cerebellar syndrome associated with ET. The cognitive and mood disturbances are similar to those described in cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome (CCAS), 90,91 which has been described in patients suffering from acute and chronic cerebellar disorders and has been explained by anatomical and neuroimaging findings showing a relationship between the associative cortex (mainly prefrontal) and the cerebellar hemispheres. 90,91 Cognitive dysfunction in CCAS has been termed ''cerebral dysmetria'' because the cerebellum ''is not only a motor control device, but it is also an essential component of the brain mechanisms for personality, mood, and intellect.'' 91 This syndrome would explain the neuropsychological and emotional findings in ET patients. 16,21,25,30,92 In fact, ''frontal lobe syndrome'' in ET patients may be secondary to dysfunction of the loop between the DLPF and parietal cortex-thalamic-cerebellar cortex determined by cognitive posterior cerebellar dysfunction. 93 That is to say, the frontal lobe and the cerebellar hypothesis are in fact analogous.

Functional MRI makes it possible to explore cognitive dysfunctions due to neural network disturbances. With this technique, several studies showed enhanced responses of brain regions implicated in cognitive function (such as working memory) in patients with neurodegenerative disorders compared with healthy controls. 94,95 An Italian team investigated the neurophysiology of verbal working memory in ET patients 61,96 and demonstrated a variety of brain dysfunctions that included: ''i) abnormally enhanced cerebellar response (crus I/lobule VI) during high-load working memory trials; ii) altered functional connectivity between crus I/lobule VI and the executive control circuit, as well as the default mode network.'' 61,96 These findings corroborated, with complex experimental data, that the posterior cerebellar loop dysfunction (and its executive control circuit DLFL, parietal lobule, thalamus) is the origin of some cognitive deficits in ET patients and opens a new avenue in ET cognitive deficit investigation.

The explanation 72 that attributes cognitive and mood derangements of ET to the noxious effect on the nervous system of the ''dynamic oscillatory disturbance of the motor system'' seem speculative given the current data. Although it is possible that tremors may have some deleterious effects on some aspects of cognitive performance or on the mood or social embarrassment and quality of life of ET patients, there are no clear data demonstrating this rational hypothesis in the majority of cognitive deficits associated with ET.


## Need for further cognitive testing in ET" if appropriate

Many aspects of cognitive disorders in ET need further study, including non-verbal aspects of memory (implicit memory), visuospatial abilities (in general and face recognition), and particularly general cognitive capacities and their evolution in clinical and population-based investigations. Also, the physiological basis of cognitive deficits (functional neuroimaging and others) requires more investigation, as the Passamonti et al. 61 series demonstrated.

Prospective surveys would be useful in confirming the risk of progressive cognitive deterioration and dementia that has been described and would allow for medications that could stall or stop such deterioration to be tested.


## Conclusions

A new nosology for ET has emerged in the last decade. Currently, ET is a clinical syndrome rather than a monosymptomatic disorder, 12 in which there is mild cerebellar dysfunction (in general subclinical) and many non-motor manifestations (mainly cognitive [16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25]30,41 ) and mood disorders (depression 17,19,20,22,25,30,41 ) (Table 1). There is also evidence of pathology affected the cerebellum and its connections. 41 Collectively, recent studies suggest that ET is a structural disorder rather than a functional disorder with unknown pathology.

The cognitive ET deficits are diverse, [16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][25]30 but they usually affect attention (verbal, auditory, and visual), working memory (phonological and spatial deficits), executive functions (divided attention, shifting motor plan, generating lists of words, and others), certain language functions, and several types of verbal memory apart from working memory (recognition, immediate, and delayed memory). These deficits are consistent with CCAS described in cerebellar lesions 90,91 and are likely due to cortical-subcortical-cerebellar loop dysfunction. 30,61 Other cognitive deficits such as visuospatial dysfunctions, require more data.

Another interesting point is the increasing cognitive dysfunction in ET patients (mainly in elderly ET patients) shown in populationbased surveys, 25,28 which may be partly responsible for the observed increased risk of mild cognitive cases and dementia.

Studies exploring cognitive disorders with new neurophysiological tests (such as functional neuroimaging), clinical studies, and prospective population-based surveys are needed to corroborate the ET cognitive findings of the last decade.

## Table 1 .
1Associated Disorders in Essential Tremor PatientsPathology of the cerebellum and its brainstem connectionsSubtle Neurological Deficits 

Bradykinesia (mild) 

Cerebellar dysfunction 

abnormal eyeblink reflex conditioning 

deficits in paced finger typing 

dysfunction in hand-eye coordination and ocular 
movements 

mirror movements 

mild dysarthria 

tandem gait ataxia 

Olfactory and hearing deficits 

Non-motor deficits 

Mild cognitive deficits (Table 4) 

Neuropsychiatric symptoms 

anxiety 

depression 

specific personality traits 

Sleep disorders 

Decreased body mass index 

Nervous system pathology 

Association with neurological or 
neurodegenerative disorders 

Parkinson's disease 

Dystonia 

Myoclonus 



## Table 2 .
2ET Patient Series with Cognitive Evaluation (selection) 1 DBS, deep brain stimulation; ET, essential tremor; PD, Parkinson's disease patients to compareAuthors/Year 
ET 
Controls 
Series Origin 

n Cases 
n Cases 

Gasparini et al. 16 
27 
Yes, 15 
Thalamic DBS 

Lombardi et al. 17 
18 
No 2 and 18 PD 
Thalamic DBS 

Duane & Vermilion 19 
55 
No 2,3 
Thalamic DBS 

Lacritz et al. 20 
13 
No 2 and 13 PD 
Thalamic DBS 

Trö ster et al. 21 
101 
No 2 
Thalamic DBS 

Benito-Leó n et al. 25 
232 
Yes, 696 
Population based 

Sahin et al. 23 
16 
Yes, 16 
Specialized clinic 

Higginson et al. 22 
24 
Yes, 21 and 24 PD 
Thalamic DBS 

Kim et al. 24 
34 
Yes, 33 
Specialized clinic 

1 

Passamonti et al. series 61 not included (see text) 

2 

Compared with normative data 

3 

Retrospective study 
Abbreviations: 

## Table 3 .
3Main Cognitive Deficits in ET patients 1


Tremor and Other Hyperkinetic Movements http://www.tremorjournal.org The Center for Digital Research and Scholarship Columbia University Libraries/Information Services thought to be frontal lobe-dependent (mainly dorsolateral prefrontal [DLPF]) or their connections (frontal-thalamic-cerebellar loop). Executive functions can be assessed by motor (go-no-go paradigm, fist-edge-palm, Luria loop test, and others) and psychometric tests. Motor test results are not different in ET patients. 23,24 This makes sense because these tests are usually only positive in patients with severe frontal deficits. The psychometric ''frontal'' tests evaluate many psychological functions, such as complex attention, set shifting, planning, mental flexibility and control, verbal fluency, social behavior, and insight. Its paradigmatic examples are the WCST, the Stroop test, and TMT Part B, all of which were altered in the majority of the series.Global cognitive function 
5 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
++ 
++ 

Attention-concentration 
++ 
++ 
5 
ND 
ND 
5 
++ 
++ 
++ 

Working memory 
++ 
++ 
ND 
++ 
++ 
5 
++ 
++ 
ND 

Motor performance 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
++ 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 

Spatial fluency 
ND 
ND 
ND 
++ 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 

Concept formation 
++ 
++ 
+ 
++ 
5 
++ 
ND 
ND 
ND 

Reasoning 
5 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
+ 
ND 
ND 

Memory 

Verbal memory 
++ 
ND 
+ 
5 
++ 
+ 
ND 
-/++ 2 
ND 

Logical memory 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
5 
ND 
++ 
ND 
ND 

Visual memory 
ND 
ND 
+ 
+ 
ND 
5 
++/5 2 
5 
ND 

Verbal fluency 
++ 
++ 
++ 
+ 
++ 
++ 
+ 
++ 
++/-2 

Naming 
+ 
ND 
ND 
5 
++ 
5 
++ 
++ 
+ 

Visuoperception 
5 
ND 
ND 
ND 
++/5 2 
++ 
ND 
ND 
+ 

Visuoconstruction 
5 
5 
5 
5 
ND 
5 
++ 
ND 
ND 

Mood (depression) 
+ 
ND 
+ 
+ 
ND 
ND 
++ 
ND 
++ 3 

1 

Modified from Bermejo-Pareja 30 (Passamonti et al. 61 is not included, see text) 

2 

Similar tests are discordant 

3 

See Lois et al. 42 
Reviewer's test selection and test gradation: 5, similar or superior to controls or standard measures; +, mild alteration (statistically significant); ++, clear alteration (p,0.01); ND, not done 
Psychological functions and tests (for test abbreviations, see text): 
Global cognitive function: IQ and MMSE 
Attention-concentration: Digit forward Span (WAIS); TMT; Picture Completion (WAIS); Brief test of attention; Symbol digit and others 
Working Memory: Digit backward span (WAIS); Stroop test, and others 
Motor performance: Groove Pegboard 
Concept formation: WMS-R VR: WCST 
Reasoning: Matrix and similarities (WAIS) 
Verbal memory: CVLT, HVLT. Logical memory (WMS-R). Visual memory: Faces and Visual Reproduction (WMS-R), ROF test 
Verbal Fluency: FAS test; listing animals and fruits during 1 minute; and others 
Denomination: BNT and others 
Visuoperception: Benton Recognition Face, BLO; HVOT and others 
Visuoconstruction: Block design (WAIS) and others 
Mood: Geriatric depression scale, Beck depression Inventory, DSM-IV diagnosis and others 

Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor 

Bermejo-Pareja F, Puertas-Martín V. 



## Table 4 .
4Essential Tremor and Cognitive Deficits (population-based series)1 (A) Cognitive deficits clearly demonstrated 

Psychological tests 
ET Subjects 
Controls 
p-Value 

232 2 
696 3 

Global cognitive function 

MMSE-37 (range 0-37) 
27.0 (6.7) 
28.9 (5.9) 
0.001 

Attention/frontal executive function 

Trail Making Test A (errors) 
8.7 (11.0) 
3.8 (7.6) 
0.001 

Trail Making Test A (time to complete) 

.5 minutes 
91 (39.2%) 
148 (21.3%) 
0.001 

0 or ,5 minutes 
141 (60.8%) 
548 (78.7%) 

Verbal fluency 

Verbal fluency (fruits) 
8.9 (3.9) 
10.0 (3.5) 
0.001 

Memory 

Naming test (score 0-6) 
5.4 (1.5) 
5.7 (6) 
0.019 

Immediate free recall (score 0-6) 
3.9 (1.6) 
4.2 (1.4) 
0.012 

Delayed free recall (score 0-6) 
3.5 (1.9) 
3.9 (1.8) 
0.009 

Immediate logical memory (score 0-6) 
3.9 (1.7) 
4.3 (1.6) 
0.003 

Delayed logical memory (score 0-6) 
3.1 (2.2) 
3.6 (2.1) 
0.008 

(B) Cognitive functions; no statistically significant difference 

Verbal fluency 

(animals) 
12.6 (5.0) 
12.9 (4.7) 
0.42 

Premorbid intelligence 

Word accentuation test (score 0-30) 
10.2 (10.3) 
11.4 (10.3) 
0.10 

1 

Modified from Benito-Leó n et al. 25 

2 

Number of ET cases detected 

3 

Number of cognitively normal control cases 
Abbreviations: ET, essential tremor; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination 

Bermejo-Pareja F, Puertas-Martín V. 
Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor 

Tremor and Other Hyperkinetic Movements 
http://www.tremorjournal.org 

The Center for Digital Research and Scholarship 
Columbia University Libraries/Information Services 


## Table 5 .
5Cognitive Deficits in ET: SummaryGeneral conclusion 

Cognitive deficits are mild (subclinical) and multiple. 

Consistent deficits 

(A) Attention-concentration and working memory 

Digit Span, forward and backwards (WAIS) 

Trail Making Test Part A, Symbol Search 

Selective auditory attention (Brief Test of Attention) 

Visual reaction time 

Working memory 

(Visual Span, WMS; Letter-Number Sequencing, WAIS; Stroop test) 

(B) Executive functions 

Set-shifting (Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, Stroop test, Trail Making Test Part B) 

Verbal fluency (Letter-Cued Word Fluency; animals and others) 

FAB battery 

Other tests (Ruff Figural Fluency test; Matrix Reasoning -WAIS) 

(C) Explicit verbal memory (immediate or short-term and delayed) 

Short-term verbal memory (CVLT and other tests) 

Delayed verbal memory (CVLT and other tests) 

Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-R), logical memory not clearly affected 

Visual memory (ROF test) without alterations 

(D) Language 

Verbal fluency (letter-cued word fluency, listing fruit or animals during 1 minute) 

Vocabulary (Benton Naming test) 

Possible deficits 

Mental processing speed (several tests) 

Visuospatial functions (facial recognition) 

General cognitive capacity (elderly ET) 

No deficit (or very dubious) 

Reasoning, abstract thinking, calculation 

Not evaluated 

Implicit memory (exception: eyeblink conditioning) 

Abbreviations: CVLT, California Verbal Learning Test; ET, essential tremor; FAB, Frontal Assessment Battery; ROF, Rey-Osterreith Complex Figure; WAIS, Wechsler 
Adult Intelligence Scale; WMS, Wechsler Memory Scale 

Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor 
Bermejo-Pareja F, Puertas-Martín V. 

Tremor and Other Hyperkinetic Movements 
http://www.tremorjournal.org 

The Center for Digital Research and Scholarship 
Columbia University Libraries/Information Services 

AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Joe Healey, who reviewed the English version of the manuscript.
Essential tremor. A clinical and genetic population study. T Larsson, T Sjogren, Acta Psychiatr Neurol Scand. 36144SupplLarsson T, Sjogren T. Essential tremor. A clinical and genetic population study. Acta Psychiatr Neurol Scand 1960;36(Suppl 144):1-176.

Observations on essential tremor. J Marshall, 10.1136/jnnp.25.2.122J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 65Marshall J. Observations on essential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1962;65:122-125, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.25.2.122.

Clinical manifestations of essential tremor. E Critchley, 10.1136/jnnp.35.3.365J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 35Critchley E. Clinical manifestations of essential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1972;35:365-372, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.35.3.365.

. A H Rajput, K P Offord, C M Beard, L T Kurland, Essential tremor inRajput AH, Offord KP, Beard CM, Kurland LT. Essential tremor in

45-year study. Minnesota Rochester, 10.1136/jnnp.47.5.466J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 47Rochester, Minnesota:a 45-year study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1984;47:466- 470, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.47.5.466.

Essential tremor:Clinical correlates in 350 patients. J S Lou, J Jankovic, 10.1212/WNL.41.2_Part_1.234Neurology. 41Lou JS, Jankovic J. Essential tremor:Clinical correlates in 350 patients. Neurology 1991;41:234-238, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.41.2_Part_1.234.

The relationship of essential tremor to other movement disorders: report on 678 patients. Essential Tremor Study Group. W C Koller, K Busenbark, K Miner, 10.1002/ana.410350613Ann Neurol. 35Koller WC, Busenbark K, Miner K. The relationship of essential tremor to other movement disorders: report on 678 patients. Essential Tremor Study Group. Ann Neurol 1994;35:717-723, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ana. 410350613.

The premorbid personality of patients with Parkinson's disease: a comparative study with healthy controls and patients with essential tremor. W Poewe, E Karamat, G W Kemmler, F Gerstenbrand, Adv Neurol. 53Poewe W, Karamat E, Kemmler GW, Gerstenbrand F. The premorbid personality of patients with Parkinson's disease: a comparative study with healthy controls and patients with essential tremor. Adv Neurol 1990;53:339- 342.

Personality in essential tremor. A Chatterjee, E C Jurewicz, L M Applegate, E D Louis, 10.1136/jnnp.2004.037176J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 75Chatterjee A, Jurewicz EC, Applegate LM, Louis ED. Personality in essential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004;75:958-961, http://dx.doi. org/10.1136/jnnp.2004.037176.

Principles of Neurology. Adams RD, Victor M.New YorkMcGraw-Hill5th ednAdams RD, Victor M., eds. Principles of Neurology, 5th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993;86-87.

Merrit's Textbook of Neurology. R P Rowland, Ninth EditionRowland RP, ed. Merrit's Textbook of Neurology. Ninth Edition.

. &amp; Williams, Wilkins, Baltimore. Williams & Wilkins. Baltimore. 1995;712-713.

In: Parkinson's disease and movement disorders. B Dubois, B Pillon, Jankovic J, Tolosa ELippincott Williams & WilkinsNew YorkDubois B, Pillon B. In: Parkinson's disease and movement disorders. Jankovic J, Tolosa E, eds. New York: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998;837-858.

Gait abnormality in essential tremor. C Singer, J Sanchez-Ramos, W J Weiner, 10.1002/mds.870090212Mov Disord. 9Singer C, Sanchez-Ramos J, Weiner WJ. Gait abnormality in essential tremor. Mov Disord 1994;9:193-196, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds. 870090212.

. G Deuschl, P Bain, M Brin, Consensus Statement of the Movement Disorder Society on Tremor. Mov Disord. 13Suppl. 3Deuschl G, Bain P, Brin M. Consensus Statement of the Movement Disorder Society on Tremor. Mov Disord 1998;13(Suppl. 3):2-23.

Neuropsychological and quality of life outcome after thalamic stimulation for essential tremor. A I Tröster, J A Fields, R Pahwa, 10.1212/WNL.53.8.1774Neurology. 53Tröster AI, Fields JA, Pahwa R, et al. Neuropsychological and quality of life outcome after thalamic stimulation for essential tremor. Neurology 1999;53: 1774-1780, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.53.8.1774.

. J A Lucas, J D Rippeth, R J Uitt, E A Shuster, R E Wharen, Lucas JA, Rippeth JD, Uitt RJ, Shuster EA, Wharen RE.

Neuropsychological functioning in a patient with essential tremor with and without bilateral VIM stimulation. 10.1006/brcg.1999.1103Brain Cogn. 42Neuropsychological functioning in a patient with essential tremor with and without bilateral VIM stimulation. Brain Cogn 2000;42:253-267, http://dx.doi. org/10.1006/brcg.1999.1103.

Frontal lobe dysfunction in essential tremor: a preliminary study. M Gasparini, V Bonifati, E Fabrizio, J Neurol. 248Gasparini M, Bonifati V, Fabrizio E, et al. Frontal lobe dysfunction in essential tremor: a preliminary study. J Neurol 2001;248:399-402.

Cognitive deficits in patients with essential tremor. W J Lombardi, D J Woolston, J W Roberts, R E Gross, 10.1212/WNL.57.5.785Neurology. 57Lombardi WJ, Woolston DJ, Roberts JW, Gross RE. Cognitive deficits in patients with essential tremor. Neurology 2001;57:785-790, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1212/WNL.57.5.785.

Cognition and affect in idiopathic essential tremor. K Vermilion, A Stone, D Duane, Mov Disord. 16130SupplVermilion K, Stone A, Duane D. Cognition and affect in idiopathic essential tremor. Mov Disord 2001;16 (Suppl 1):S30.

Cognitive functioning in individuals with ''benign'' essential tremor. D D Duane, K J Vermilion, L H Lacritz, R DeweyJr, C Giller, C M Cullum, 10.1212/WNL.58.11.1706.20J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 58NeurologyDuane DD, Vermilion KJ. Cognitive deficits in patients with essential tremor. Neurology 2002;58:1706, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.58.11.1706. 20. Lacritz LH, Dewey R Jr, Giller C, Cullum CM. Cognitive functioning in individuals with ''benign'' essential tremor. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 2002;8:125- 129.

Neuropsychological deficits in essential tremor: an expression of cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathophysiology?. A I Tröster, S P Woods, J A Fields, Eur J Neurol. 9Tröster AI, Woods SP, Fields JA. Neuropsychological deficits in essential tremor: an expression of cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathophysiology? Eur J Neurol 2002;9:143-151.

. C I Higginson, V L Wheelock, D Levine, D S King, C T Pappas, Sigvardt, Higginson CI, Wheelock VL, Levine D, King DS, Pappas CT, Sigvardt

Cognitive deficits in essential tremor consistent with frontosubcortical dysfunction. Ka, 10.1080/13803390701754738J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 30KA. Cognitive deficits in essential tremor consistent with frontosubcortical dysfunction. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 2008;30:760-765, http://dx.doi.org/10. 1080/13803390701754738.

Frontal functions in young patients with essential tremor: a case comparison study. H A Sahin, M Terzi, S Uçak, O Yapici, T Basoglu, M Onar, 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18.1.64J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 18Sahin HA, Terzi M, Uçak S, Yapici O, Basoglu T, Onar M. Frontal functions in young patients with essential tremor: a case comparison study. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2006;18:64-72, http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi. neuropsych.18.1.64.

Cognitive impairment in essential tremor without dementia. J S Kim, I U Song, Y S Shim, J Clin Neurol. 5Kim JS, Song IU, Shim YS, et al. Cognitive impairment in essential tremor without dementia. J Clin Neurol 2009;5:81-4.

. J Benito-León, E D Louis, F Bermejo-Pareja, Neurological Disorders inBenito-León J, Louis ED, Bermejo-Pareja F; Neurological Disorders in

Population-based case-control study of cognitive function in essential tremor. doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000192393.05850.ec.26Neurology. Pareja F, Louis ED66Central Spain (NEDICES) Study GroupNeurological Disorders inCentral Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Population-based case-control study of cognitive function in essential tremor. Neurology 2006;66:69-74, http://dx. doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000192393.05850.ec. 26. Bermejo-Pareja F, Louis ED, Benito-León J; Neurological Disorders in

Risk of incident dementia in essential tremor: a population-based study. 10.1002/mds.21553Mov Disord. 22Central Spain (NEDICES) Study GroupCentral Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Risk of incident dementia in essential tremor: a population-based study. Mov Disord 2007;22:1573-1580, http://dx. doi.org/10.1002/mds.21553.

Essential tremor is associated with dementia: prospective population-based study in New York. S P Thawani, N Schupf, E D Louis, 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b389f1Neurology. 73Thawani SP, Schupf N, Louis ED. Essential tremor is associated with dementia: prospective population-based study in New York. Neurology 2009;73: 621-625, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b389f1.

Essential tremor-a neurodegenerative disorder associated with cognitive defects?. F Bermejo-Pareja, 10.1038/nrneurol.2011.44Nat Rev Neurol. 7Bermejo-Pareja F. Essential tremor-a neurodegenerative disorder associated with cognitive defects? Nat Rev Neurol 2011;7:273-382, http://dx. doi.org/10.1038/nrneurol.2011.44.

Motor initiation and execution in essential tremor and Parkinson's disease. E B Montgomery, K B Baker, K Lyons, W C Koller, 10.1002/1531-8257Mov Disord. 15AIDMontgomery EB, Baker KB, Lyons K, Koller WC. Motor initiation and execution in essential tremor and Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord 2000;15:511- 515, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/1531-8257(200005)15:3,511::AID-

Essential tremor and cerebellar dysfunction clinical and kinematic analysis of intention tremor. G Deuschl, R Wenzelburger, K Loffler, J Raethjen, H Stolze, 10.1093/brain/123.8.1568Brain. 123Deuschl G, Wenzelburger R, Loffler K, Raethjen J, Stolze H. Essential tremor and cerebellar dysfunction clinical and kinematic analysis of intention tremor. Brain 2000;123:1568-1580, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/123.8. 1568.

. B Koster, G Deuschl, M Lauk, J Timmer, B Guschlbauer, C H Lucking, Koster B, Deuschl G, Lauk M, Timmer J, Guschlbauer B, Lucking CH.

Essential tremor and cerebellar dysfunction: abnormal ballistic movements. 10.1136/jnnpJ Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 73Essential tremor and cerebellar dysfunction: abnormal ballistic movements. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002;73:400-405, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.

The gait disorder of advanced essential tremor. H Stolze, G Petersen, J Raethjen, R Wenzelburger, G Deuschl, 10.1093/brain/124.11.2278Brain. 124Stolze H, Petersen G, Raethjen J, Wenzelburger R, Deuschl G. The gait disorder of advanced essential tremor. Brain 2001;124:2278-2286, http://dx. doi.org/10.1093/brain/124.11.2278.

Eye movement abnormalities in essential tremor may indicate cerebellar dysfunction. C Helmchen, A Hagenow, J Miesner, 10.1093/brain/awg132Brain. 126Helmchen C, Hagenow A, Miesner J. Eye movement abnormalities in essential tremor may indicate cerebellar dysfunction. Brain 2003;126:1319- 1332, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awg132.

Farkas Z, Szirmai I, Kamondi A. Impaired rhythm generation in essential tremor. C Duval, A F Sadikot, M Panisset, 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.07.066.37Mov Disord. 1115Brain ResDuval C, Sadikot AF, Panisset M. Bradykinesia in patients with essential tremor. Brain Res 2006;1115:213-216, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres. 2006.07.066. 37. Farkas Z, Szirmai I, Kamondi A. Impaired rhythm generation in essential tremor. Mov Disord 2006;21:1196-1199, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ mds.20934.

Impairment of rapid repetitive finger movements and visual reaction time in patients with essential tremor. M Kronenbuerger, M Gerwig, B Brol, F Block, D Timmann, F J Jiménez-Jiménez, L Rubio, H Alonso-Navarro, 10.1093/brain/awm081.39Eur J Neurol. 130BrainKronenbuerger M, Gerwig M, Brol B, Block F, Timmann D. Eyeblink conditioning is impaired in subjects with essential tremor. Brain 2007;130:1538- 1551, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm081. 39. Jiménez-Jiménez FJ, Rubio L, Alonso-Navarro H, et al. Impairment of rapid repetitive finger movements and visual reaction time in patients with essential tremor. Eur J Neurol 2010;17:152-159.

. E D Louis, K Marder, E C Jurewicz, D Watner, G Levy, Mejia-Santana, Louis ED, Marder K, Jurewicz EC, Watner D, Levy G, Mejia-Santana

Body mass index in essential tremor. H , 10.1001/archneur.59.8.1273Arch Neurol. 59H. Body mass index in essential tremor. Arch Neurol 2002;59:1273-1277, http:// dx.doi.org/10.1001/archneur.59.8.1273.

Essential tremor. E D Louis, doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52014-2.00033-1Handb Clin Neurol. 100Louis ED. Essential tremor. Handb Clin Neurol 2011;100:433-448, http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52014-2.00033-1.

Self-reported depression and anti-depressant medication use in essential tremor: cross-sectional and prospective analyses in a population-based study. E D Louis, J Benito-León, F Bermejo-Pareja, Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. 14Eur J NeurolLouis ED, Benito-León J, Bermejo-Pareja F; Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Self-reported depression and anti-depressant medication use in essential tremor: cross-sectional and prospective analyses in a population-based study. Eur J Neurol 2007;14: 1138-1146.

Characteristics of depressive symptoms in essential tremor. Z W Li, M J Xie, D S Tian, 10.1016/j.jocn.2010.05.021J Clin Neurosci. 18Li ZW, Xie MJ, Tian DS, et al. Characteristics of depressive symptoms in essential tremor. J Clin Neurosci 2011;18:52-56, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. jocn.2010.05.021.

. V Chandran, P K Pal, J Y Reddy, K Thennarasu, R Yadav, Shivashankar, Chandran V, Pal PK, Reddy JY, Thennarasu K, Yadav R, Shivashankar

Non-motor features in essential tremor. 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01573.xActa Neurol Scand. 125N. Non-motor features in essential tremor. Acta Neurol Scand 2012;125:332-337, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01573.x.

The psychosocial burden of essential tremor in an outpatient-and a communitybased cohort. D Lorenz, C Poremba, F Papengut, S Schreiber, G Deuschl, Eur J Neurol. 18Lorenz D, Poremba C, Papengut F, Schreiber S, Deuschl G. The psychosocial burden of essential tremor in an outpatient-and a community- based cohort. Eur J Neurol 2011;18:972-979.

Clinicopathologic observations in essential tremor: report of six cases. A H Rajput, B Rozdilsky, L Ang, A Rajput, 10.1212/WNL.41.9.1422Neurology. 41Rajput AH, Rozdilsky B, Ang L, Rajput A. Clinicopathologic observations in essential tremor: report of six cases. Neurology 1991;41:1422- 1424, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.41.9.1422.

Neuropathological changes in essential tremor: 33 cases compared with 21 controls. E D Louis, P L Faust, J P Vonsattel, 10.1093/brain/awm266Brain. 130Louis ED, Faust PL, Vonsattel JP, et al. Neuropathological changes in essential tremor: 33 cases compared with 21 controls. Brain 2007;130:3297- 3307, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm266.

Essential tremor: evolving clinicopathological concepts in an era of intensive post-mortem enquiry. E D Louis, 10.1016/S1474-4422Lancet Neurol. 910Louis ED. Essential tremor: evolving clinicopathological concepts in an era of intensive post-mortem enquiry. Lancet Neurol 2010;9:613-622, http://dx. doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70090-9.

Significance of cerebellar Purkinje cell loss to pathogenesis of essential tremor. A H Rajput, A Rajput, 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.05.008Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 17Rajput AH, Rajput A. Significance of cerebellar Purkinje cell loss to pathogenesis of essential tremor. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2011;17:410-412, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.05.008.

Purkinje cell loss is a characteristic of essential tremor. E D Louis, P L Faust, J P Vonsattel, 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.05.004Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 17Louis ED, Faust PL, Vonsattel JP. Purkinje cell loss is a characteristic of essential tremor. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2011;17:406-409, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.05.004.

Tremorsome controversial aspects. N P Quinn, S A Schneider, P Schwingenschuh, K P Bhatia, 10.1002/mds.23289Mov Disord. 26Quinn NP, Schneider SA, Schwingenschuh P, Bhatia KP. Tremor- some controversial aspects. Mov Disord 2011;26:18-23, http://dx.doi.org/10. 1002/mds.23289.

Neuronal loss in functional zones of the cerebellum of chronic alcoholics with and without. K G Baker, A J Harding, G M Halliday, J J Kril, C G Harper, Baker KG, Harding AJ, Halliday GM, Kril JJ, Harper CG. Neuronal loss in functional zones of the cerebellum of chronic alcoholics with and without

Wernicke's encephalopathy. 10.1016/S0306-4522(98Neuroscience. 91Wernicke's encephalopathy. Neuroscience 1999;91:429-438, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/S0306-4522(98)90664-9.

Functional studies of the human cerebellum with positron emission tomography. I H Jenkins, R S Frackowiak, Rev Neurol. 149Jenkins IH, Frackowiak RS. Functional studies of the human cerebellum with positron emission tomography. Rev Neurol (Paris) 1993;149:647-653.

Involuntary tremor of ET patients was associated with a significantly larger extent of activation in the cerebellar hemispheres. S F Bucher, K C Seelos, R C Dodel, M Reiser, W H Oertel, 10.1002/ana.410410108Ann Neurol. 41Bucher SF, Seelos KC, Dodel RC, Reiser M, Oertel WH. Involuntary tremor of ET patients was associated with a significantly larger extent of activation in the cerebellar hemispheres. Ann Neurol 1997;41:32-40, http://dx. doi.org/10.1002/ana.410410108.

. E D Louis, D C Shungu, S Chan, X Mao, E C Jurewicz, D Watner, Louis ED, Shungu DC, Chan S, Mao X, Jurewicz EC, Watner D.

Metabolic abnormality in the cerebellum in patients with essential tremor: a proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging study. 10.1016/S0304-3940(02Neurosci Lett. 333Metabolic abnormality in the cerebellum in patients with essential tremor: a proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging study. Neurosci Lett 2002;333: 17-20, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3940(02)00966-7.

Diffusion tensor imaging in patients with essential tremor. D H Shin, B S Han, H S Kim, P H Lee, Am J Neuroradiol. 29Shin DH, Han BS, Kim HS, Lee PH. Diffusion tensor imaging in patients with essential tremor. Am J Neuroradiol 2008;29:151-153. 57. Benito-León J, Alvarez-Linera J, Hernández-Tamames JA, Alonso-

Brain structural changes in essential tremor: voxel-based morphometry at 3-Tesla. H Navarro, F J Jiménez-Jiménez, E D Louis, 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.037J Neurol Sci. 87Navarro H, Jiménez-Jiménez FJ, Louis ED. Brain structural changes in essential tremor: voxel-based morphometry at 3-Tesla. J Neurol Sci 2009;87:138-142, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.037.

Cerebellar atrophy in essential tremor using an automated segmentation method. A Cerasa, D Messina, G Nicoletti, Am J Neuroradiol. 30Cerasa A, Messina D, Nicoletti G, et al. Cerebellar atrophy in essential tremor using an automated segmentation method. Am J Neuroradiol 2009;30: 1240-1243.

Diffusion tensor MRI changes in cerebellar structures of patients with familial essential tremor. G Nicoletti, D Manners, F Novellino, 10.1212/WNLNeurology. 74Nicoletti G, Manners D, Novellino F, et al. Diffusion tensor MRI changes in cerebellar structures of patients with familial essential tremor. Neurology 2010; 74: 988-994, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.

Diffusion tensor imaging of white matter involvement in essential tremor. J C Klein, B Lorenz, J S Kang, 10.1002/hbm.21077Hum Brain Mapp. 32Klein JC, Lorenz B, Kang JS, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging of white matter involvement in essential tremor. Hum Brain Mapp 2011;32:896-904, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21077.

Altered cortical-cerebellar circuits during verbal working memory in essential tremor. L Passamonti, F Novellino, A Cerasa, 10.1093/brain/awr164Brain. 134Passamonti L, Novellino F, Cerasa A, et al. Altered cortical-cerebellar circuits during verbal working memory in essential tremor. Brain 2011;134: 2274-2286, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr164.

Decrease in cerebral and cerebellar gray matter in essential tremor: A voxel-based morphometric analysis under 3T MRI. B S Bagepally, M D Bhatt, V Chandran, 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2011.00598.xJ Neuroimaging. 22Bagepally BS, Bhatt MD, Chandran V, et al. Decrease in cerebral and cerebellar gray matter in essential tremor: A voxel-based morphometric analysis under 3T MRI. J Neuroimaging 2012;22:275-278, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j. 1552-6569.2011.00598.x.

Voxel-based morphometry shows no decreases in cerebellar gray matter volume inessential tremor. C Daniels, M Peller, S Wolff, 10.1212/01.wnl.0000240130.94408.99Neurology. 67Daniels C, Peller M, Wolff S, et al. Voxel-based morphometry shows no decreases in cerebellar gray matter volume inessential tremor. Neurology 2006;67: 1452-1456, http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000240130.94408.99.

Diffusion-weighted imaging study of patients with essential tremor. P Martinelli, G Rizzo, D Manners, 10.1002/mds.21287Mov Disord. 22Martinelli P, Rizzo G, Manners D, et al. Diffusion-weighted imaging study of patients with essential tremor. Mov Disord 2007;22:1182-1185, http:// dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.21287.

LINGO1 variants in essential tremor and. H Deng, S Gu, J Jankovic, Deng H, Gu S, Jankovic J. LINGO1 variants in essential tremor and

Parkinson's disease. 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01516.xActa Neurol Scand. 125Parkinson's disease. Acta Neurol Scand, 2012;125:1-7, http://dx.doi.org/10. 1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01516.x.

. K A Josephs, J Y Matsumoto, J E Ahlskog, Benign tremulous parkinsonismJosephs KA, Matsumoto JY, Ahlskog JE. Benign tremulous parkinsonism.

. 10.1001/archneur.63.3.354Arch Neurol. 63Arch Neurol 2006;63:354-357, http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archneur.63.3.354.

Patients with adult-onset dystonic tremor resembling parkinsonian tremor have scans without evidence of dopaminergic deficit (SWEDDs). J Rivest, C D Marsden, S A Schneider, M J Edwards, P Mir, 10.1002/mds.870050115.68Mov Disord. 5Mov DisordRivest J, Marsden CD. Trunk and head tremor as isolated manifestations of dystonia. Mov Disord 1990;5:60-65, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.870050115. 68. Schneider SA, Edwards MJ, Mir P, et al. Patients with adult-onset dystonic tremor resembling parkinsonian tremor have scans without evidence of dopaminergic deficit (SWEDDs). Mov Disord 2007;22:2210-2215, http://dx.doi. org/10.1002/mds.21685.

The fragile X premutation presenting as essential tremor. M A Leehey, R P Munhoz, A E Lang, 10.1001/archneur.60.1.117Arch Neurol. 60Leehey MA, Munhoz RP, Lang AE, et al. The fragile X premutation presenting as essential tremor. Arch Neurol 2003;60:117-121, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1001/archneur.60.1.117.

Milestones in tremor research. R Elble, G Deuschl, F M Skidmore, R L Rodriguez, H H Fernandez, W K Goodman, 10.1002/mds.23579.71Mov Disord. 26Elble R, Deuschl G. Milestones in tremor research. Mov Disord 2011;26: 1096-1105, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.23579. 71. Skidmore FM, Rodriguez RL, Fernandez HH, Goodman WK, Foote

Lessons learned in deep brain stimulation for movement and neuropsychiatric disorders. Kd, M S Okun, CNS Spectr. 11KD, Okun MS. Lessons learned in deep brain stimulation for movement and neuropsychiatric disorders. CNS Spectr 2006;11:521-536.

Essential tremor-neurodegenerative or nondegenerative disease towards a working definition of ET. G Deuschl, R Elble, 10.1002/mds.22755Mov Disord. 24Deuschl G, Elble R. Essential tremor-neurodegenerative or nondegen- erative disease towards a working definition of ET. Mov Disord 2009;24:2033- 2041, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.22755.

Neuropsychological and quality of life outcomes 12 months after unilateral thalamic stimulation for essential tremor. J A Fields, A I Tröster, S P Woods, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 74Fields JA, Tröster AI, Woods SP, et al. Neuropsychological and quality of life outcomes 12 months after unilateral thalamic stimulation for essential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003;74:305-311, http://dx.doi.org/10.

Methods and demographic findings of the baseline survey of the NEDICES cohort: a doorto-door survey of neurological disorders in three communities from Central Spain. J M Morales, F P Bermejo, J Benito-León, 10.1016/j.puhe.2003.10.007Public Health. 118Morales JM, Bermejo FP, Benito-León J, et al. Methods and demographic findings of the baseline survey of the NEDICES cohort: a door- to-door survey of neurological disorders in three communities from Central Spain. Public Health 2004;118:426-433, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe. 2003.10.007.

. F Bermejo, R Gabriel, S Vega, J M Morales, W A Rocca, D W Anderson, Bermejo F, Gabriel R, Vega S, Morales JM, Rocca WA, Anderson DW;

Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Problems and issues with door-to-door, two-phase surveys: an illustration from central. Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Problems and issues with door-to-door, two-phase surveys: an illustration from central

. ; Spain, J Benito-León, F Bermejo-Pareja, J M Morales, S Vega, J A Molina, 10.1159/000054794.76Neuroepidemiology. 20Spain. Neuroepidemiology 2001;20:225-231, http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/ 000054794. 76. Benito-León J, Bermejo-Pareja F, Morales JM, Vega S, Molina JA.

Prevalence of essential tremor in three elderly populations of central Spain. 10.1002/mds.10376.77Mov Disord. 18Neurological Disorders inPrevalence of essential tremor in three elderly populations of central Spain. Mov Disord 2003;18:389-394, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.10376. 77. Benito-León J, Bermejo-Pareja F, Louis ED; Neurological Disorders in

Incidence of essential tremor in three elderly populations of central Spain. doi.org/10.1212/01.WNL.0000161852.70374.01Neurology. 64Central Spain (NEDICES) Study GroupCentral Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Incidence of essential tremor in three elderly populations of central Spain. Neurology 2005;64:1721-1725, http://dx. doi.org/10.1212/01.WNL.0000161852.70374.01.

. F Bermejo-Pareja, J Benito-Leon, S Vega, M J Medrano, G C Roman, on behalf of the Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) StudyBermejo-Pareja F, Benito-Leon J, Vega S, Medrano MJ, Roman GC; on behalf of the Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study

Incidence and subtypes of dementia in three elderly populations of central Spain. Group, 10.1016/j.jns.2007.07.021J Neurol Sci. 264Group. Incidence and subtypes of dementia in three elderly populations of central Spain. J Neurol Sci 2008;264:63-72, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jns. 2007.07.021.

Quality of life in a random sample of community dwelling older patients with essential tremor. H V Nguyen, V Ngian, D Cordato, Q Shen, D K Chan, Nguyen HV, Ngian V, Cordato D, Shen Q, Chan DK. Quality of life in a random sample of community dwelling older patients with essential tremor.

. 10.1111/j.1600-0404Acta Neurol Scand. 116Acta Neurol Scand 2007;116:289-292, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.

Executive dysfunction and neuropsychiatric symptoms predict lower health status in essential tremor. S P Woods, J C Scott, J A Fields, A Poquette, A I Tröster, 10.1097/WNN.0b013e3181684414Cogn Behav Neurol. 21Woods SP, Scott JC, Fields JA, Poquette A, Tröster AI. Executive dysfunction and neuropsychiatric symptoms predict lower health status in essential tremor. Cogn Behav Neurol 2008;21:28-33, http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ WNN.0b013e3181684414.

The pattern of cognitivefunctional decline in elderly essential tremor patients: an exploratory-comparative study with Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease patients. P G Frisina, W Tse, T D Hälbig, L S Libow, 10.1016/j.jamda.2008.10.013J Am Med Dir Assoc. 10Frisina PG, Tse W, Hälbig TD, Libow LS. The pattern of cognitive- functional decline in elderly essential tremor patients: an exploratory-comparative study with Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease patients. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2009; 10:238-242, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2008.10.013.

Functional correlates of lower cognitive test scores in essential tremor. E D Louis, 10.1002/mds.22920Mov Disord. 83. Louis ED, Benito-León J, Vega-Quiroga S., Bermejo-Pareja F. &25Louis ED. Functional correlates of lower cognitive test scores in essential tremor. Mov Disord 2010;25:481-485, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.22920. 83. Louis ED, Benito-León J, Vega-Quiroga S., Bermejo-Pareja F. &

Cognitive and motor functional activity in non-demented community-dwelling essential tremor cases. 10.1136/jnnp.2009.202838J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 81Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study GroupNeurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Cognitive and motor functional activity in non-demented community-dwelling essential tremor cases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2010;81:997-1001, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1136/jnnp.2009.202838.

Slowed central processing in simple and go/no-go reaction time tasks in Parkinson's disease. J A Cooper, H J Sagar, P Tidswell, N Jordan, 10.1093/brain/117.3.517Brain. 117Cooper JA, Sagar HJ, Tidswell P, Jordan N. Slowed central processing in simple and go/no-go reaction time tasks in Parkinson's disease. Brain 1994;117: 517-512, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/117.3.517.

Slowing of reaction time in Parkinson's disease: the involvement of the frontal lobes. E L Berry, R I Nicolson, J K Foster, M Behrmann, H J Sagar, 10.1016/S0028-Neuropsychologia. 37Berry EL, Nicolson RI, Foster JK, Behrmann M, Sagar HJ. Slowing of reaction time in Parkinson's disease: the involvement of the frontal lobes. Neuropsychologia 1999;37:787-795, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0028-

. Del Ser, T Gonzalez-Montalvo, J I Martinez-Espinosa, S Delgado, - , Del Ser T, Gonzalez-Montalvo JI, Martinez-Espinosa S, Delgado-

Estimation of premorbid intelligence in Spanish people with the Word Accentuation Test and its application to the diagnosis of dementia. C Villapalos, F Bermejo, Villapalos C, Bermejo F. Estimation of premorbid intelligence in Spanish people with the Word Accentuation Test and its application to the diagnosis of dementia.

The Neurological Disorders in Central Spain Study Group. Elderly-onset essential tremor is associated with dementia. J Benito-León, E D Louis, F Bermejo-Pareja, 10.1006/brcg.1997.0877Brain Cogn. 33NeurologyBrain Cogn 1997;33:343-356, http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/brcg.1997.0877. 87. Benito-León J., Louis E. D., Bermejo-Pareja, F. The Neurological Disorders in Central Spain Study Group. Elderly-onset essential tremor is associated with dementia. Neurology 2006;66:1500-1505, http://dx.doi.org/10. 1212/01.wnl.0000216134.88617.de.

The Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Cognitive and motor functional activity in non-demented community-dwelling essential tremor cases. E D Louis, J Benito-León, S Vega-Quiroga, F Bermejo-Pareja, 10.1136/jnnp.2009.202838J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 81Louis ED, Benito-León J, Vega-Quiroga S, Bermejo-Pareja F; The Neurological Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group. Cognitive and motor functional activity in non-demented community-dwelling essential tremor cases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2010;81:997-1001, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1136/jnnp.2009.202838.

When a tremor is not just a tremor: cognitive and functional decline in essential tremor, a more complex disorder than we thought. J E Galvin, J D Schmahmann, J C Sherman, 10.1016/j.jamda.2009.02.005.90J Am Med Dir Assoc. 10BrainGalvin JE. When a tremor is not just a tremor: cognitive and functional decline in essential tremor, a more complex disorder than we thought. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2009;10:218-220, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2009.02.005. 90. Schmahmann JD, Sherman JC. The cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome. Brain 1998;121:561-79, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/121.4.561.

Disorders of the cerebellum: Ataxia, dysmetria of thought, and the Cerebellar Cognitive Affective Syndrome. J D Schmahmann, 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.16.3.367J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 16Schmahmann JD. Disorders of the cerebellum: Ataxia, dysmetria of thought, and the Cerebellar Cognitive Affective Syndrome. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2004;16:367-378, http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.16. 3.367.

Expanding clinical dimensions of essential tremor. L J Findley, 10.1136/jnnp.2004.041293Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 75Findley LJ. Expanding clinical dimensions of essential tremor. Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004;75:948-949, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2004. 041293.

Functional topography in the human cerebellum: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. C J Stoodley, J D Schmahmann, 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.08.039Neuroimage. 44Stoodley CJ, Schmahmann JD. Functional topography in the human cerebellum: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Neuroimage 2009;44:489- 501, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.08.039.

. J E Desmond, J D Gabrieli, A D Wagner, B L Ginier, G H Glover, Desmond JE, Gabrieli JD, Wagner AD, Ginier BL, Glover GH.

Lobular patterns of cerebellar activation in verbal working memory and finger tapping tasks as revealed by functional MRI. J Neurosci. 17Lobular patterns of cerebellar activation in verbal working memory and finger tapping tasks as revealed by functional MRI. J Neurosci 1997;17: 675-685.

Patterns of brain activation in people at risk for Alzheimer's disease. S Y Bookheimer, M H Strojwas, M S Cohen, N Engl J Med. 343Bookheimer SY, Strojwas MH, Cohen MS, et al. Patterns of brain activation in people at risk for Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 2000;343: 450-6.

Fronto-parietal overactivation in patients with essential tremor during Stroop task. A Cerasa, L Passamonti, F Novellino, 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328335b42cNeuroreport. 21Cerasa A, Passamonti L, Novellino F, et al. Fronto-parietal over- activation in patients with essential tremor during Stroop task. Neuroreport 2010; 21:148-51, http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0b013e328335b42c.

. Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor Bermejo. Cognitive Features of Essential Tremor Bermejo-Pareja F, Puertas-Martín V.