# A review of the genus Monema Walker in China (Lepidoptera, Limacodidae)

CorpusID: 9538179
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b951d58cad29860fc0f38d18c6c9e7fe98ee0afa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b951d58cad29860fc0f38d18c6c9e7fe98ee0afa)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review of the genus Monema Walker in China (Lepidoptera, Limacodidae)
Published 3 June 2013

Zhaohui Pan 
Institute of Plateau Ecology, Agriculture and Animal
Husbandry College of Tibet University
860000LinzhiP.R. China

Chaodong Zhu 
Institute of Zoology
Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution
Chinese Academy of Sciences
100101BeijingP.R. China

Chunsheng Wu chunshengwuwucs@ioz.ac.cn 
Institute of Zoology
Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution
Chinese Academy of Sciences
100101BeijingP.R. China

A review of the genus Monema Walker in China (Lepidoptera, Limacodidae)
Published 3 June 201310.3897/zookeys.306.5216Academic editor: E. van Nieukerken | Received 27 March 2013 | Accepted 29 May 2013 |A review of the genus Monema Walker in China (Lepidoptera, Limacodidae) 23 urn:lsid:zoobank.org:pub:4FFDB920-7E4A-4F33-9D8E-16CC7189723F Citation: Pan Z, Zhu C, Wu C (2013) A review of the genus Monema Walker in China (Lepidoptera, Limacodidae).LepidopteraLimacodidaeMonemanew speciesChina
Four species and one subspecies of the genus Monema Walker, 1855 are recognized from China, in which M. tanaognatha Wu & Pan sp. n. is described as new, M. coralina Dudgeon, 1895 and M. meyi Solovyev & Witt, 2009 are newly recorded for China. The female of M. meyi is reported for the first time. Monema nigrans de Joannis, 1901 and M. melli Hering, 1931 are synonymized with M. flavescens Walker, 1855. Cnidocampa rubriceps Matsumura, 1931 is regarded here as a subspecies of Monema flavescens Walker, 1855. The photographs of moths and their genitalia are given. A key to the species of the genus is provided. A peer-reviewed open-access journal http://species-id.net/wiki/Monema_meyi Figs 3, 9, 19 Monema meyi Solovyev & Witt, 2009: 108-109. Type locality: Vietnam (ZMHB).Description. Wing expanse 35-38 mm in male, 36-42 mm in female. The species is similar externally to M. flavescens, but well discriminated by male genitalia: saccular process divided apically, juxta with lateral row of elongate spines, very broad saccus, S-shaped aedeagus with long and strong apical spur.Female genitalia: posterior apophysis long, anterior apophysis very short; sclerotized exterior flap at posterior margin of ostium large and elongate, bearing minute hair; ductus bursae very long, basal 1/3 narrow and straight, apical 2/3 wider and spiralled; corpus bursae ovate, large; a pair of signa trigonal, bearing spines. Remarks. This species, newly recorded in China, was described based on two males from Vietnam (Solovyev and Witt 2009). This is the first report and description of the female. The sclerotized exterior flap at posterior margin of ostium is large and elongate compared to that found in M. flavescens and M. tanaognatha.

## Introduction

The genus Monema was erected by Walker in 1855, based on the type species, Monema flavescens Walker, 1855.

Prior to the present study the genus included the following species: M. flavescens Walker, 1855, M. nigrans de Joannis, 1901, M. coralina Dudgeon, 1895 (Matsumura, 1931), M. melli Hering, 1931 andM. meyi Solovyev &Witt, 2009 and it is distributed in Nepal, Bhutan, China, Far East of Russia, Korea, Japan, and northern Vietnam (Hering 1913(Hering , 1933Solovyev 2008;Solovyev and Witt, 2009;Yoshimoto 1993Yoshimoto , 1994. The diagnosis of the genus is given below.

In China three taxa have been recorded (Cai 1981;Inoue 1992;Wu 2005Wu , 2012Wu and Fang 2010) up to now. In this paper, four species are reported for China, including one species described as new to science and two species newly recorded for China. Monema nigrans and M. melli are synonymized with M. flavescens. Cnidocampa rubriceps is regarded here as a subspecies of M. flavescens.


## Materials and methods

Material examined for this study originates from the insect collections of the Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IZCAS), Beijing, P. R. China. All types of new species are deposited in IZCAS Photographs of moths and their genitalia were captured using Canon-EOS-7D with the help of micro-lens. Standard methods of dissection and mounting in Euparal follow Holloway et al. (1987). Description. Moths medium-sized, body yellowish. Male antennae filiform and thicker than in female. Labial palpi extremely long, more than three times eye diameter. Forewings with R 3 + R 4 stalked from R 5 and R 2 stalked with their stem. Hindwings with M 1 and Rs stalked. Forewings with two narrow brown fasciae running from apex to 3/4 and 1/3 of inner margin respectively; basal part of forewing bordered by proximal fascia yellow, rest brown. Hind tibiae with two pairs of spurs. Male genitalia: tegumen narrow; uncus narrow and long, usually with short ventral process at apex; gnathos narrow and long, nearly as long as uncus; juxta with lateral elongate process or spines; valva elongate, with apically saccular process; saccus usually long and large, more than half of valva's width.

Female genitalia: posterior apophysis long, anterior apophysis very short and less than the half length of posterior one; sclerotized exterior flap at posterior margin of ostium bearing minute hair; ductus bursae very long, more than the half length of the abdomen, base narrow and straight, apical part wider and spiraled; corpus bursae ovate, large; a pair of signa trigonal, bearing spines.

The larva belongs to the nettle-type, and is known only for M. flavescens. Its final instar larvae are 19-25mm in length. Head yellowish brown. Thorax yellowish green. Dorsum with a large purple-brown spot shaped as a dumbbell. Subdorsal scoli on T2-A9 and lateral scoli on T2, T3 and A2-8 ( Fig. 22) (Long et al. 2008).

The cocoon of M. flavescens Walker is very hard and shaped as a sparrow-egg. It is white, with longitudinal brown stripes (Fig. 23).

The genus is related to Hyphorma Walker, 1865, but differs from the latter by the shorter terminal segment of the labial palpi and the stalked R 2 and R 3-5 in the forewings. Scopelodes Westwood, 1841 and Phocoderma Butler, 1886 also have very long palpi, but the absence of a tuft of hair in 2nd or 3rd segments distinguish them from Monema (Hering 1931). Description. Wing expanse 30-32 mm in male, 35-39 mm in female. In male genitalia, the juxta is short and ends in 1-3 long spines each side. In female genitalia, the sclerotized base of ductus bursae is diagnostic.  flavescens. Solovyev and Witt (2009) treated M. flavescens var. nigrans as a full species. However, the black form (var. nigrans ) and the normal form (flavescens) are from the same population and the var. nigrans do not show any differences in the male or female genitalia with flavescens. Therefore we treat M. flavescens var. nigrans merely as a dark form. In Guiyang 2.75% of the population of flavescens belonged to the black form; the black individuals can interbreed with the non black individuals and produce fertile offspring (Long et al. 2008). Distribution. Taiwan. Remarks. Cnidocampa rubriceps is treated here as a subspecies of Monema flavescens because the male genitalia have the same structure, except for the aedeagus that is longer in ssp. rubriceps than in ssp. flavescens.


## Key to the species and subspecies


## Monema tanaognatha Wu & Pan, sp. n.

urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:AAF50A42-14EA-45E5-AAD3-0F2E027119A8 http://species-id.net/wiki/ Monema_tanaognatha  Figs 1, 2, 7, 18 Description. Wing expanse 28-33mm. Labial palpus yellowish brown, tip black. Face yellow to pale red. Head and thorax yellow. Abdomen yellowish brown. Ground colour of forewing yellow, with two dark concave fasciae from apex to 1/3 and 2/3 of inner margin, distal part of forewing, bordered by proximal fascia, brown. Hindwing yellow to yellowish brown.

Male genitalia: tegumen narrow; uncus narrow and long, ventrally with short process on apex; gnathos narrow and very long; juxta U-shaped, each lateral bar with distal tuft of long spines; valva elongate, with a strong short apically saccular process; saccus long and relatively narrower than that of flavescens; aedeagus slightly longer than valva, narrow and straight.

Female genitalia: posterior apophysis long, anterior apophysis very short; sclerotized exterior flap at posterior margin of ostium smaller, bearing minute hair; ductus bursae very long, basal half narrow and straight, apical half wider and spiraled; corpus bursae ovate, large; a pair of signa trigonal, bearing spines. Etymology. The name is derived from Greek "Tanaos" (=Long) and "gnathos" (Greek for jaw), corresponding to the long gnathos in the male genitalia. Description. Wing expanse 30-35mm. The mostly reddish wings are diagnostic. In the male genitalia, the uncus lacks the ventrally apical process.  Specimens examined. Yunnan, Xinshuangbanna, 700m, 4-15 Apr. 1993, Yang Longlong (4♂, gen. slide L06051); Xizang, Motuo, 1080m, 22 July 2006, Chen Fuqiang (1♀).


## Monema meyi Solovyev & Witt, 2009, new record to China

Distribution. Yunnan (Xinshuangbanna), Xizang (Motuo); Nepal, Bhutan.

Remarks. The abdomen of the female from Xizang is missing. The species is reported for the first time in China.

## Distribution.
Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, Inner Mongolia, Beijing, Hebei, Shandong, Henan, Shaanxi, Qinghai, Jiangsu, Shanghai, Zhejiang, Hubei, Jiangxi, Fujian, Taiwan, Guangdong, Guangxi; Russia (Far East), Korea, Japan. Remarks. M. melli was described based on a single male from Guangdong, China. It differs from M. flavescens by the smaller size and the shorter labial palpus. According to the male genitalia of the holotype examined and provided by Mr. Solovyev, it matches well with that of M. flavescens. Thus we synonymize M. melli with M.

## Figures 1- 6 .
6Adults. 1 M. tanaognatha Wu & Pan, sp. n. , holotype (Kunming, male) 2 M. tanaognatha sp. n., paratype (Kunming, female) 3 M. meyi Solovyev & Witt (Hunan, male) 4 M. coralina Dudgeon (Yunnan, male) 5 M. flavescens flavescens Walker (Beijing, female) 6 M. flavescens flavescens Walker (Black form, Shanghai, male).

## ( a )
aMonema flavescens flavescens Walker, 1855 http://species-id.net/wiki/Monema_flavescens_flavescensFigs 5, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22, 23    Monema flavescensWalker, 1855Walker,  : 1112 Description. Wing expanse 25-39 mm. The aedeagus is 1.6 times as long as valva, shorter than that in ssp. rubriceps. Frons yellow to yellowish red.Specimens examined. Heilongjiang, Dailing, 390m, 30 June-16 July 1962, Bai Jiuju (25♂), 4-9 July 1957 (5♂, gen. slide WU0180); Heilongjiang,Yichun, 9 July  1956 (2♂), 6 Sept. 1956; Heilongjiang, Wuchang, Shengli Linchang, 10 July 1970 (3♂); Heilongjiang, Harbin, 17 July-17 Aug. 1936 (2♀), 81 Aug. 1940; Heilongjiang, Hulin 852 Farm, 10 July1962, Chen Tailu (1♂); Liaoning, Qingyuan, 29-30 July 1954 (1♀8♂, gen. slide WU0179); Liaoning, XInjin, 1954 (2♂); Jilin, Manjiang, 19 June-27 July 1955 (4♀10♂); Jilin, Changbai Shan, 800m, 2-13 July 1982, Zhang Baolin (2♀3♂, gen. slide WU0178); Inner Mongolia ,Ulanhot 15 July 1987 (1♂), 5 June 1957 (1♂, gen. slide WU0181); Hunan,Yongshun Shanmuhe, 600m, 3 Aug. 1988, Chen Yixin (1♂, gen. slide WU0117); Hunan, Andong, 20 May 1954 (1♂, gen. slide WU0118); Hunan, Guzhang Gaowangjie, 850m, 29 July 1988, Chen Yixin (1♂, gen. slide WU0120); Hunan, Hengshan, 22Aug. 1979 (1♂, gen. slide WU0119); Fujian, Wuyishan, Sangang, 3 Aug. 1979, Song Shimei (1♀, gen. slide WU0121); Fujian, Wuyishan, Tongmu, 26 July 1979, Song Shimei (1♂, gen. slide WU0121a); Fujian, Xiamen, 1♂, 25 June 1973, Zhang Baolin (1♂, gen. slide WU0123); Hubei, Shennongjia, 950-1640m, 18-24 July 1980, Yu Peiyu (8♂, gen. slide WU0124); Hubei, Jingzhou, July 1980 (6♂, gen. slide WU0125); Hubei, Xingshan Longmen River, 1350m, 16 June-17 July 1993, Yao Jian (9♂, gen. slide WU0126); Hubei, Zigui, Jiutouling, 100m, 12-13 June 1993, Yao Jian (3♂, gen. slide WU0127); Hubei, Xuanen, Fengshuiling 1200-1240m , 29 July 1989, Yang Longlong, Li Wei (1♂, gen. slide WU0128); Guangxi, Longsheng, 10-15 June 1980, Wang Linyao (4♂), 26 May 1963, Wang Chunguang (1♀, gen. slide WU0133, 134); Guangxi, Gualin Forestry Institute, 5 July 1981, Liang Xinqiang (1♂, gen. slide WU0145); Guangxi, Qinzhou, 15 Apr. 1980, Cai Rongquan (2♂, gen. slide WU0143); Guangxi, Jinxiu, 1100m, 10 May 1999, LI Wenzhu (1♂) (gen. slide WU0141); Zhejiang, Hangzhou, 1 Aug. 1973, Zhang Baolin (2♂); Zhejiang, Hang-Figures 7-12. Male genitalia. 7 M. tanaognatha Wu & Pan, sp. n. holotype (gen. slide WU0156) 8 M. coralina Dudgeon (gen. slide L06051) 9 M. meyi Solovyev & Witt (gen. slide WU0121) 10 M. flavescens rubriceps (Matsumura) (16058 MWM GS Taiwan) 11 M. melli Hering, holotype (TYPE ZHUB GU2) 12 M. flavescens flavescens (Black form, gen. slide L06052). . slide WU0174, 175) Jiangxi, Lushan, 17-19 June 1974, Zhang Baolin (2♂) (gen. slide WU0146); Jiangxi, Guling, July 1935 (1♀1♂, gen. slide WU01149); Jiangxi, 27-28 May 1957, Yu Peiyu (1♀2♂, gen. slide WU0150); Shanghai, 11-26Aug.1932, O. Piel (16♀4♂, gen. slides L06056, 57), 14 June-20 July 1933, A. Savio (4♂); Shanghai, Botanical Park, June 1974 (1♀); Jiangsu, Yangzhou, 15 May 1926 (1♂), 20 June 1974 (1♂, gen. slide WU0182); Jiangsu, Nanjing, 1-10 June 1957, Yu Peiyu (3♀) (gen. slide WU0183); Guangdong, Guangzhou, July 1931 (5♂); Guangdong, Guangzhou, Shipai, 17 Sept. 1958, Wang Linyao (1♂); Guangdong, Nanling, 21 July 2008, Chen Fuqiang (1♂, gen. slide WU0053a) Beijing, 3-31 May 1957, Yu Peiyu (6♀15♂, gen. slide WU0184); Beijing, Xishan, 1♂, Aug.1955; Beijing, Qinghe, 1♂, 13 Mar.1957 (1♂); Beijing, Tanzhesi, 15 Aug. 1951 (1♂); Beijing, Bada ling, 24 June 1957 (1♂); Beijing, Baihua shan, 4-16 July 1973, Liu Youqiao, Zhang Baolin (5♂, gen. slide WU0185); Beijing, Sanbu, 25 July 1964, (5♂), 21 July 1972, Zhang Baolin (1♀); Hebei, Changli, 15 June-8 July 1972 (1♂6♀), 21 June 1973 (2♀, gen. slide WU0186); Henan, Songxian, Baiyun shan, 1400m, 18-20 July 2003, Qiu Reng (2♂); Henan, Huixian Baligou, 700m, 12-15 July 2002 (1♀); Henan, Neixiang Baotianman, 12 July 1998, Shen Xiaocheng (1♂). Black form: Shanghai Datong Route, 28 July 1980 (1♂, gen. slide L06052); Shanghai Botanical Park, June 1974, Tian Lixin (1♀) (gen. slide L06053); Shanghai, July 1935 (2♂); Jilin, Manjiang, 9-31 July 1955 (1♀2♂, gen. slides L06059, L06060). Distribution. Mainland China; Russia (Far East), Korea, Japan. (b) Monema flavescens rubriceps (Matsumura, 1931) stat. n. http://species-id.net/wiki/Monema_flavescens_rubriceps Fig. 10 Cnidocampa rubriceps Matsumura, 1931: 105. Type locality: Taiwan, China. Monema rubriceps (Matsumura): Hering, 1931: 691. Description. Wing expanse 30-32mm. It differs from Monema flavescens flavescens Walker by the red frons. The aedeagus about twice as long as valva, longer than that of ssp. flavescens. Specimens examined. None. The image of the male genitalia of M. rubriceps (Matsumura) was provided by Dr. Solovyev.

## Figures 18 - 21 .
1821Female genitalia . 18 M. tanaognatha Wu & Pan sp. n. ( gen. slide WU0156) 19 M. meyi Solovyev & Witt (gen. slide WU0147) 20 M. flavescens flavescens Walker (gen. slide WU0121) 21 M. flavescens flavescens Walker (Black form (gen. slide L06053). Monema coralina Dudgeon, 1895, new record to China http://species-id.net/wiki/Monema_coralina Figs 4, 8 Monema coralina Dudgeon, 1895: 290. Type locality: Bhutan.

## Figures 22 - 23 .
2223Larva and cocoon of M. flavescens flavescens Walker. 22 larva 23 cocoon.

## Figure 24 .
24Distribution of Monema in China.  M. tanaognatha Wu & Pan;  M. coralina Dudgeon;  M. meyi Solovyev & Witt;  M. flavescens flavescens Walker;  M. flavescens rubriceps(Matsumura).

## systematics Monema
systematicsWalker, 1855 http://species-id.net/wiki/Monema Monema Walker, 1855: 1102,1112. Type species: Monema flavescens Walker, 1855: 1112, by monotypy. Cnidocampa Dyar, 1905: 952. An unnecessary replacement name for Monema Walker, 1855, [not preoccupied by the plant genus Monema Greville, 1827].


Wings mostly pale reddish .........................................................M. coralina -Wings mostly brown to pale black .... M. flavescens flavescens (Black form) 3 Frons red .................................................................M. flavescens rubriceps -Frons yellow ............................................................................................... 4 4 Saccus long, aedeagus straight ..................................................................... 5 -Saccus short and wide, aedeagus S-shaped........................................M. meyi 5 Gnathos narrow and long; juxta long, ending in a tuft of long spines each side ........................................................................... M. tanaognatha sp. n. -Gnathos short; juxta short, ending in 1-3 long spines each side .................... ............................................................................... M. flavescens flavescens1 
Wings mostly pale black, brown or pale reddish ......................................... 2 
-
Wings mostly yellow or yellowish brown .................................................... 3 
2 
Monema flavescens Walker, 1855 
http://species-id.net/wiki/Monema_flavescens 
Figs 5, 6, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22, 23 

Monema flavescens Walker, 1855: 1112, fig. 1c. Type locality: North China. 
Miresa flavescens (Walker): Seitz, 1913: 344, fig. 50c. 
Cnidocampa flavescens (Walker): Cai, 1981: 99. 
Cnidocampa johanibergmani Bryk, 1948: 219. 
Monema melli Hering, 1931: 691, fig. 87i. Type locality: Guangdong, China. syn. n. 
Monema flavescens var. nigrans de Joannis, 1901: 251. 
Monema nigrans de Joannis: Solovyev and Witt 2009: 108. 




Type material.Holotype: male, Kunming, Yunnan, 16 May 1980, Song Shimei  (gen. slide WU0156). Paratypes: 1♀♂, same data as holotype (gen. slide WU0157); Xuanwei,Yunna , 1890m, 1♂, 25 June 1979. Shaanxi, Fuping, 900-950m, 23-24 July 1998, Yuan Decheng, Yao jian, Zhang Youwei (5♂, gen. slide WU0172); Shaanxi, Liuba Miaotaizi, 1350m, 21 July 1998, Yao jian (1♂); Shaanxi, Taibai Huangbaiyuan, 1350m, 14 July 1980, Zhang Baolin (4♂, gen. slide WU0173); Shaanxi, Ningshan Huoditang,1580-1650m, 27 July 1998, Yao Jian (4♂, gen. slides WU0171, WU0176); Gansu, Wenxian Tielou, 1450m, 1999 July 24, Yao jian, Wang Hongjian, Zhu Chaodong (7♂, gen. slide WU0164); Gansu, Kangxian, Qinghe linchang, 1400-2250m, 15 July 1998, Yao Jian (3♂), 7-9 July 1999, Yao jian (9♂, gen. slide WU0162, 163); Gansu, Kangxian, Baiyun shan, 1250-1750m, 12 July 1998, Yao Jian(3♂) (gen. slide WU0165); Gansu, Diechang, 1800m, 7 July 1998, Yao Jian (4♂, gen. slide WU0166); Gansu, Zhouqu, Shantan Linchang, 2400m, 15 July 1999, Wang Hongjian (4♂, gen. slide WU0167, 168); Sichua, Emei shan, 800-1000m, 21 June-25 July 1957, Huang Keren, Zhu fuxing, Lu Youcai (7♂, gen. slides WU0110, WU0135); Sichua, Dujiang Yan, Qingcheng Shan, 700-1000m, 3-4 June 1979, Gao Ping , Shang Jinwen (2♂) (gen. slides WU0112, WU0113); Hubei, Lichuan, Xingdou Shan, 800m, 21-23 July 1989, Li Wei (2♂, gen. slide WU0130); Guangxi, Miaoer shan, Jiuniuchang, 1150m, 7 July 1985, Fang Chenglai (2♂, gen. slide WU0132).Distribution. Shaanxi, Gansu, Hubei, Guangxi, Sichuan, Yunnan. Remarks. The species is similar externally to M. flavescens, but is well distinguished by male genitalia: gnathos is narrowing and very long; juxta is long and ending in a tuft of long spines at each side. In female genitalia, base of ductus bursae of the new species is narrow and membranous, while that of M. flavescens is sclerotized.Figures 13-17. Male genitalia of Monema flavescens flavescens Walker. 13 Shennongjia, Hubei (gen. slide WU0124) 14 Xiamen, Fujian (gen. slide WU0123) 15 Xingshan, Hubei (gen. slide WU0126) 16 Jingzhou, Hubei (gen. slide WU0125) 17 Wuyishan, Fujian (gen. slide WU0121a).
AcknowledgementsWe are very grateful to Mr. Alexey V. Solovyev (Dept. of Zoology, Ulyanovsk State Pedagogical University, Russia) for providing photos of the adult and male genitalia of the holotype of M. melli Hering and the image of the male genitalia of M. rubriceps (Matsumura). We also extend our great thanks to two anonymous reviewers and Dr. Erik van Nieukerken for their good advice.This work was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation, China (NSFC Grant No. 31172129, J121002), Forest Ecology Station in Linzhi, Tibet, "Western Light" Visiting Scholar Program in Tibet, and Survey of animal resources in Southeast Tibet supported by Ministry of Science and Technology.
Zur Kenntnis der Grossschmetterlinge von Korea. Pars II. Macrofrenatae II. Arkiv för zoologi. F Bryk, 41219Bryk F (1948) Zur Kenntnis der Grossschmetterlinge von Korea. Pars II. Macrofrenatae II. Arkiv för zoologi, 41, A(1): 219.

R-Q Cai, Limacodidae. Iconographia Heterocerorum Sinicorum. BeijingScience Press1In ChineseCai R-Q (1981) Limacodidae. Iconographia Heterocerorum Sinicorum 1. Science Press, Bei- jing, 97-104 [In Chinese].

G C Dudgeon, Hampson GF. Descriptions of new Heterocera from India. Transactions of the Entomological Society of London. 290Dudgeon GC (1895) In: Hampson GF. Descriptions of new Heterocera from India. Transac- tions of the Entomological Society of London: 290.

. H Inoue, Lepidoptera of Taiwan. Heppner JB, H Inoue12Inoue H (1992) Limacodidae. In: Heppner JB, H Inoue (Ed) Lepidoptera of Taiwan 1(2): 101-102.

Limacodidae (Cochliopodidae). M Hering, In: Seitz A. Macrolepidoptera of the World. 2Hering M (1913) Limacodidae (Cochliopodidae). In: Seitz A. Macrolepidoptera of the World, 2: 349-347.

In: Seitz A. Macrolepidoptera of the World, Supplement 2. M Hering, Alfred Kerner, VerlagStuttgartLimacodidae (Cochliopodidae)Hering M (1933) Limacodidae (Cochliopodidae). In: Seitz A. Macrolepidoptera of the World, Supplement 2. Alfred Kerner, Verlag, Stuttgart, 201-209.

Slug and Nettle Caterpillars: The biology, taxonomy and control of the Limacodidae of economic importance on palms in South-East Asia. Cab International. J D Holloway, M Cock, J W Desmier, R Chenon, Cock MJW, Godfray HCJ, Holloway JDSystematic account of South-East Asian pest LimacodidaeHolloway JD, Cock M, Desmier JW, Chenon R (1987) Systematic account of South-East Asian pest Limacodidae. In: Cock MJW, Godfray HCJ, Holloway JD (Eds) Slug and Nettle Caterpillars: The biology, taxonomy and control of the Limacodidae of economic importance on palms in South-East Asia. Cab International. Wallingford 15-117.

Bulletin de la Société entomologique de France. J Joannis De, 251Variation of Monema flavescens WalkerJoannis de J (1901) Variation of Monema flavescens Walker. Bulletin de la Société ento- mologique de France: 251.

Population occurrence and control strategy of Monema flavescens in Guiyang. J-K Long, Q-H Luo, X-Qi Zeng, Y-T Zeng, Chinese Bulletin of Entomology. 456In ChineseLong J-K, Luo Q-H, Zeng X-Qi, Zeng Y-T (2008) Population occurrence and control strat- egy of Monema flavescens in Guiyang. Chinese Bulletin of Entomology 45( 6): 913-918 [In Chinese].

Description of some new genera and species from Japan, with a list of species of the family Cochilidionidae. S Matsumura, Insecta Matsumurana. 5Matsumura S (1931) Description of some new genera and species from Japan, with a list of species of the family Cochilidionidae. Insecta Matsumurana 5: 101-116.

The limacodid moths (Lepidoptera: Limacodidae) of Russia. A V Solovyev, Eversmannia. 15Solovyev AV (2008) The limacodid moths (Lepidoptera: Limacodidae) of Russia. Eversmannia 15-16: 17-43.

The Limacodidae of Vietnam. Entomofauna, Supl. A V Solovyev, T J Witt, 16Solovyev AV, Witt TJ (2009) The Limacodidae of Vietnam. Entomofauna, Supl.16: 33-321.

Walker F (1855) List of the Specimens of Lepidopterous Insects in the Collection of the British Museum. 51112Walker F (1855) List of the Specimens of Lepidopterous Insects in the Collection of the British Museum 5: 1102, 1112.

Lepidoptera: Limacodidae. In: Yang X-K (Ed) Insect Fauna of Middle-West Qinling Range and South Mountains of Gansu Province. C-S Wu, Science PressBeijingIn ChineseWu C-S (2005) Lepidoptera: Limacodidae. In: Yang X-K (Ed) Insect Fauna of Middle-West Qinling Range and South Mountains of Gansu Province. Science Press, Beijing, 558-564 [In Chinese].

Microlepidoptera of Qingling Mountains (Insecta: Lepidoptera). Wu C-S (2012) Limacodidae. In: Li H-HBeijingScience PressIn ChineseWu C-S (2012) Limacodidae. In: Li H-H (Ed) Microlepidoptera of Qingling Mountains (In- secta: Lepidoptera). Science Press, Beijing, 729-795 [In Chinese].

Insect Fauna of Henan, Lepidoptera: Limacodidae, Lasiocampidae, Notodontidae, Arctiidae, Lymantriidae and Amatidae. C-S Wu, C-L Fang, Science PressBeijingIn ChineseWu C-S, Fang C-L (2010) Insect Fauna of Henan, Lepidoptera: Limacodidae, Lasiocampi- dae, Notodontidae, Arctiidae, Lymantriidae and Amatidae. Science Press, Beijing, 1-592. [In Chinese].

H Yoshimoto, Limacodidae. In: Haruta T (Ed) Moths of Nepal, Part 2. Tinea. 13Suppl. 3Yoshimoto H (1993) Limacodidae. In: Haruta T (Ed) Moths of Nepal, Part 2. Tinea, 13 (Suppl. 3): 31-35.

H Yoshimoto, Limacodidae. In: Haruta T (Ed) Moths of Nepal. Part 3. Tinea, 14. Suppl. 1Yoshimoto H (1994) Limacodidae. In: Haruta T (Ed) Moths of Nepal, Part 3. Tinea, 14 (Suppl. 1): 85-89.