# Survey Article Inter-Coder Agreement for Computational Linguistics

## Question

How is the significance of agreement coefficients established beyond testing against chance agreement?

## URLs

1. https://ar5iv.org/html/2303.12502
2. https://ar5iv.org/html/2407.11371
3. https://ar5iv.org/html/1909.10140
4. https://ar5iv.org/html/2404.09053
5. https://ar5iv.org/html/2411.16797
6. https://ar5iv.org/html/2107.11449
7. https://ar5iv.org/html/2401.12990
8. https://ar5iv.org/html/2410.05291
9. https://ar5iv.org/html/2411.08410
10. https://ar5iv.org/html/2101.00433

## Answer

## I don't know?: True

I don't know. The context provided does not include any information regarding the establishment of the significance of agreement coefficients beyond testing against chance agreement. The passages focus on issues related to replicability, the value of interdisciplinary collaboration, methods in NLP, and a specific user study involving Q&A pairs, but they do not address statistical methods or metrics relevant to agreement coefficients. Thus, there's insufficient information to formulate an informed answer to your question.

1. [1]:  https://ar5iv.org/html/2303.16166, No Title
2. [2]:  https://ar5iv.org/html/2411.05503, No Title
3. [3]:  https://ar5iv.org/html/2210.15846, No Title
4. [4]:  https://ar5iv.org/html/2305.12544, No Title
5. [5]:  https://ar5iv.org/html/2211.02483, No Title
---
1. [1]:  Passage ID 1: improving research software quality within the NLP community.††\twemojilight bulbDenotes equal contributions.1 IntroductionIn the field of natural language processing (NLP), as well as in broader contexts, the validity and soundness of research findings are typically upheld by “establishing consistency of results versus existing implementations, standard benchmarks, or sanity checks via statistically significant experimental results” (Rozier and Rozier, 2014). Nevertheless, recent evidence indicates that several of these aspects are absent in many papers (Raff, 2019), questioning the scientific credibility of NLP research.On one hand, many scientists have reported difficulties in replicating the work of others, or even their own, (Prinz et al., 2011; Gundersen and Kjensmo, 2018; Wieling et al., 2018a; Chen et al., 2019; Gundersen, 2019), also in the specific context of NLP (Wieling et al., 2018b; Belz et al., 2021a; Marie et al., 2021; Narang et al., 2021; Gehrmann et al.,
2. [2]:  Passage ID 2: success depends on the collective work of interdisciplinary teams.Textbooks are Frequently Cited. Although we did not conduct a detailed citation analysis, textbooks and educational materials are frequently cited, suggesting their value to the field. The development of relevant textbooks, courses, and workshops is in high demand and could facilitate the adoption of modern NLP methods, accelerating field progress.Since we have published the relevant data online111111Bibliography in JSON format: https://kyrgyznlp.github.io/static/bibliography_joined.json., we encourage those interested in formal collaboration analysis to apply Social Network Analysis (SNA) methods [102, 80] to the collaboration graph, labeled bimodal author-paper graph, citation graph (not yet collected), etc. Although the graph sizes are small in this case, comparing indices such as betweenness centrality with other indicators of researchers’ output impact could provide a more conclusive basis to support or
3. [3]:  Passage ID 3: Post on AskubuntuTo evaluate the performance of our proposed approach, we conducted comprehensive experiments with four datasets, collected from the technical Q&A sites Ask Ubuntu, Super User and Stack Overflow respectively.The large-scale automatic evaluation results suggest that our model outperforms a collection of state-of-the-art baselines by a large margin. For human evaluation, we asked 5 domain experts for their feedback on our generated clarifying questions and answers. Our user study results further demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach in solving unanswered/unresolved questions. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:•Previous studies neglect the value of interactions between the question asker and the potential helper. We argue that a clarifying question between the question and answers is an important aspect of judging the relevance and usefulness of the QA pair.Therefore, we train a sequence-to-sequence model to
4. [4]:  Passage ID 4: can stay focused on the experiment and follow guidelines. Additionally, it is difficult to control confounding variables when you have no control over the subjects of the experiment.Research Directions.1.Sample-efficient language learning. This is an area ripe with opportunities to advance our understanding of language and develop more data efficient NLP tools. There is a great need for fundamental and theoretical research into sample-efficient language learning. Computational theories and algorithms for achieving state-of-the-art on smaller data regimes are an exciting area for researchers interested in core NLP, and the pursuit of the state-of-the-art performance may soon be rerouted to data-efficiency scores.Related to this direction is the goal of establishing baselines for sample-efficient lamnguage learning. Having a lower-bound goal (e.g. X hours of interaction achieving Y score) can enable the NLP community to have a more accurate understanding of progress in terms
5. [5]:  Passage ID 5: on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2153–2162, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.[15] Zhengbao Jiang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. 2021. How Can We Know When Language Models Know? On the Calibration of Language Models for Question Answering. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:962–977.[16] Karen Hambardzumyan, Hrant Khachatrian, and Jonathan May. 2021. WARP: Word-level Adversarial ReProgramming. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 4921–4933, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.[17] Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. 2021. Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts for Generation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting