# Magnetic Catalysis: A Review

CorpusID: 118087122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618)

Fields: Physics

## (s5) Magnetic catalysis in 2+1 dimensions
(p5.0) Now, let us consider a Nambu-Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model in 2 + 1 dimensions, in which the magnetic catalysis of symmetry breaking is realized in its simplest possible form [99,102]. When using the reducible representation of Dirac algebra, given by Eq. (6), one finds that the kinetic part of the massless Dirac theory is invariant under a global U(2) flavor symmetry. The generators of the symmetry transformations are given by
## (s8) Zero magnetic field limit in 2 + 1 dimensions
(p8.0) Before concluding the discussion of the (2 + 1)-dimensional NJL model, it is instructive to consider how the above analysis of flavor symmetry breaking modifies in the zero magnetic field case. By taking the limit B → 0 in Eq. (16), we arrive at the following effective potential:
## (s19) Magnetic Catalysis in QED
(p19.0) Using the same conceptual approach as outlined in Sec. 2.4 for the NJL model, one can show that, in Euclidean space, the equation describing a pion-like Nambu-Goldstone boson in QED in a magnetic field has the form of a two-dimensional Schrödinger equation [101]:
## (s22) Concluding Remarks
(p22.0) We hope that this review of magnetic catalysis is sufficient to convey the main idea of the phenomenon in terms of simple and rather general physics concepts. From the outset, this review was never meant to be comprehensive. Here we concentrated only on the bare minimum needed to understand the phenomenon as a consequence of the underlying dimensional reduction of the fermion-antifermion pairing in a magnetic field [99,102,100,101]. For further reading and for deeper insights into various aspects of the magnetic catalysis, it is suggested that the reader refers to the original literature on the topic. Over nearly 20 years of research, there has been a lot of progress made in our understanding of magnetic catalysis. A rather long list of research papers at the end of this review is a pretty objective proof of that. At present, it is evident that the key features of the underlying physics are well established and understood. At the same time, it is also evident that there are still many theoretical questions about the applications of magnetic catalysis under various conditions, where factors other than the magnetic field may also play a substantial role.
