# Privacy-Preserving Data Aggregation Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey

CorpusID: 12970117 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a86046ef3f26811b0d4e996c9692b36bafec2c76](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a86046ef3f26811b0d4e996c9692b36bafec2c76)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Application Areas
(p1.0) In this section, we briefly explain some major application areas of privacy-preserving data aggregation (PPDA) protocols where the leakage of sensor data is a critical issue for WSN users. People might not agree to allow an application to intrude on their personal domain if the privacy of the collected information is not protected. Some common application areas of the PPDA protocol are health monitoring, military surveillance and private households.

(p1.1) (a) Health Monitoring: There are two main health monitoring applications for WSNs. First, there is athletic performance monitoring such as tracking a person's pulse and respiration rate via wearable sensors. Secondly, using health sensors, we can monitor the health of patients, e.g., personal weight, blood sugar level, blood pressure, etc. These sensor measurements of people's health data should be kept private and hidden from other people during transmission with aggregation to the sink node.

(p1.2) (b) Military Surveillance: In military communications, we can use WSNs to replace guards and sentries around defensive perimeters, keeping soldiers out of harm's way, to locate and identify targets for potential attacks and to support attacks by locating friendly troops and unmanned vehicles. Therefore, the privacy of the sensor data is always critical and it should be preserved during aggregation.

(p1.3) (c) Private Households: As mentioned in PDA [17], wireless sensors could be placed in houses in order to collect statistics about water, gas and electricity consumption within a large neighborhood. The aggregated population statistics may be useful for individuals, businesses and government agencies for resource planning purposes and usage advice. However, the individual sensor readings could reveal the daily activities of a household, such as when all family members are absent or when someone is taking a shower; i.e., different water appliances have distinct signatures of consumption that can reveal their identity. Hence, we need a way to collect the aggregated sensor readings while preserving data privacy.
