# A Review of OpenStreetMap Data

CorpusID: 135382379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf)

Fields: Computer Science, Geography

## (s12) Quality Assurance for OSM
(p12.0) The quality of OSM data is under constant scrutiny by the scientific community. The quality of data in OSM is one of the major concerns that industry and authoritative agencies such as National Mapping Agencies (NMAs), Land and Cadastral Agencies and other types of government agencies have about OSM (Olteanu-Raimond et al., 2017b). In practice, there is no single set of metrics or criteria against which OSM can be measured that will satisfy all users for the myriad of possible end applications. The quality of the OSM data and suitability for a particular application, purpose or use case is very much dependent on the characteristics of the problem being tackled. The OSM community recognises the importance of data quality, and a very wide range of tools and applications have been developed to tackle this issue. In this section, we provide some introduction to a small number of these. A comprehensive list is maintained on the OSM wiki 76 .

(p12.1) BBBike and Geofabrik deliver the OSM Map Compare tool 77 , which allows visual comparison of OSM map layers with other popular mapping systems such as Google, Bing, HERE, ESRI, etc. The web map interface allows users to visually compare any region in OSM with the corresponding mapping in the other popular systems. IGN France (French National Institute of Geographic and Forest Information) provides a very similar system to Map Compare with their Ma Visionneuse 78 application, which allows OSM to be compared with IGN layers, amongst others; this is particularly useful for comparison between French web map layers. The OSM Inspector 79 , also by Geofabrik, provides an overlay of potential errors or data quality problems onto an OSM map. These problems include: very long ways (polylines); self-intersecting ways, polygons or polylines, which are represented by only one node; and polygons or polylines that have duplicate nodes contained within them.

(p12.2) Taginfo 2 is a very popular Web-based application that displays up-to-date statistics about the tags used in the OSM database, e.g. which tags are used, how many times they are used, where a certain tag occurs, etc. Taginfo is particularly useful for finding problems with the keys or values in tags, the popularity of tags, where specific tags are used and which other tags are used in combination with them. The use of taginfo to find problems with tagging relates to its very comprehensive listing of the ranking of popularity/application of values to specific keys in tags. This can quickly allow an OSM expert to identify instances of an incorrect assignment of values in tags that has an overall effect on tag data quality. Taginfo does not provide any information on errors relating to geometry or topology. Osmose 80 , an acronym for OpenStreetMap Oversight Search Engine, is a quality assurance tool available to detect issues in OSM data; it is also useful for integrating third-party datasets. It tries to detect anomalies in the data and then display them on an OSM map, from which contributors can fix or update them. Keep Right 81 is one of the oldest quality assurance tools in OSM. It displays automatically detected errors on the OSM map or in a list format, and it detects a very wide set of error types, including geometry errors, topological errors, attribution errors and other general OSM errors.

(p12.3) MapRoulette 82 is a Web-based application that proposes challenges to fix errors in OSM. Each challenge represents a set of tasks, and OSM contributors can fix the errors by performing edits in OSM in the usual way. The challenges vary in difficulty, allowing contributors to choose the types of errors that they feel confident about fixing. The fixing is very heavily focused on the contributors' interpretation of information from aerial imagery. DeepOSM 83 attempts to detect problems in OSM road networks using neural networks. The system downloads satellite imagery and the corresponding OSM data that show roads/ features for that area. This allows DeepOSM to generate training and evaluation data for the neural networks, which then calculate predictions of misregistered roads in OSM.
