# Clinical Interventions in Aging Dovepress Nonpharmacological interventions to treat physical frailty and sarcopenia in older patients: a systematic overview -the SeNATOR Project ONTOP Series

CorpusID: 1710343 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d04b00b3a7329b3f159392fea4fdbe813ab9af](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d04b00b3a7329b3f159392fea4fdbe813ab9af)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) This paper is part of the ONTOP project, a work package of a European Union-funded FP 7 research named SENATOR (Software ENgine for the Assessment & Optimization of drug and non-drug Therapy in Older persons [www.senatorproject.eu]); detailed methodology of ONTOP has been published previously. 18 Briefly, the ONTOP objective is to develop a literature overview of reviews of nonpharmacological treatments of 10 prevalent medical conditions affecting older people. The present paper reports evidence-based interventions for the treatment of sarcopenia and frailty in older people.
## (s10) Primary studies
(p10.0) Overall, the 10 SRs 22-31 yielded 140 primary studies, of which 7 32-38 satisfied the inclusion criteria, but three of these presented the results of the same study. An additional relevant study was included after manual search 39 (Table 4). The six primary studies finally included are listed in Table 5. Table 6 summarizes the risks of bias in each study, which was mostly low due to the nature of the interventions except for performance bias.
## (s19) Summary of main results
(p19.0) This overview was aimed to identify SRs of nonpharmacological interventions used to treat PF and sarcopenia in older patients from different care settings. From 10 SRs 22-31 meeting the inclusion criteria, data from 5 RCTs (7 articles)  and one additional identified RCT, 39 all published in the last 4 years were examined. In order to provide a summary for decision makers and guideline developers, the risk of bias (RoB) and the GRADE quality of evidence were assessed across outcomes for each individual study. The overall GRADE quality of evidence was judged to be low (Tables 7 and 8). In summary, this evidence points to some efficacy of physical exercise programs (that include resistance and balance training) in improving relevant outcomes. An additional relevant finding is the small number of articles that use standard definitions of frailty and sarcopenia.
