# Dry, aligning, dilute, active matter: A synthetic and self-contained overview

CorpusID: 189762178 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics

## (s5) Specific properties of the polar, Vicsek class
(p5.0) Extensive simulations of the Vicsek model have shown that its phase diagram conforms to the general picture sketched above ( Fig. 0.6a). True long-range polar order is observed in the liquid phase ( Fig. 0.6b). As mentioned above, giant number fluctuations have been found in that phase, with a scaling exponent φ 1.6, i.e. compatible with the Toner and Tu value 8 5 . Superdiffusive behavior in the direction transverse to order, a property also following from the Toner-Tu calculation, is indeed present, with again a scaling exponent compatible with the Toner-Tu calculation (Fig. 0.6c). However, a direct, accurate assessment of the Toner-Tu predictions has not yet been reported.  Large-enough systems simulated long enough in the coexistence phase display many traveling bands such as that of Fig. 0.1b. Not too far from the gas binodal line B gas , the bands are arranged in a smectic way: they form a train of identical, equally-spaced, equal-speed objects ( Fig. 0.7a). Close to the liquid binodal B liq , the bands are more numerous and interact strongly with each other, leading to disordered configurations ( Fig. 0.7b).

(p5.1) The bands are 'quanta' of liquid, uniquely defined at fixed noise strength: bands observed at different densities not too far from the gas binodal are identical objects, while the gas level (vapor density) remains constant ( Fig. 0.7c). Their number increases linearly with the dimension of the system along the polar order and/or with the global density ρ 0 ( Fig. 0.7d). One is thus in presence of a microphase separation scenario, one in which the coexisting liquid is quantized into "microphases" (the bands). The shape of these individual quanta of liquid (i.e. the density and order profiles of the bands) varies with the noise level, from rather sharp at low noise to wider and smoother at high noise ( Fig. 0.7e). It is largely believed, but was never reported clearly, that true long-range polar order is also present in the coexistence phase.

(p5.2) The two binodal lines defining the phase diagram correspond to non-critical transitions. If the liquid binodal B liq (separating the coexistence phase from the liquid) remains hard to estimate numerically (see (Solon et al., 2015b) for a reasonable at-  tempt), the gas binodal B gas can be clearly defined by the density of the residual gas separating bands (which varies only with the noise strength η). At finite system size, the transition appears discontinuous since the system has to jump from zero to one band (or vice-versa). Tn the infinite size limit on the other hand, one has always an infinite number of bands but the distance between bands diverges at the gas binodal, so that the liquid fraction goes continuously to zero and the transition is actually continuous.
## (s7) Hydrodynamic theories for the 3 basic DADAM classes
(p7.0) Numerous works on active matter are performed at the hydrodynamic level of a few partial differential equations (PDEs) governing the evolution of 'slow' fields representing the large-scale dynamics of the system at stake. One can either consider stochastic or deterministic PDEs. Here, we mostly discuss deterministic hydrodynamic equations, from which a lot can be learnt. However, it is clear that even though such deterministic PDEs do include some (mean-field) effects of the noise at play at the microscopic level, they cannot account for all fluctuations. In particular they cannot display the anomalously strong fluctuations shown in the previous section to dominate the ordered liquid phases of DADAM systems.

(p7.1) There exist different ways to arrive at hydrodynamic equations. Here we first discuss this in general, before describing our favorite method, the Boltzmann-Ginzburg-Landau (BGL) approach, pioneered and developed by Eric Bertin and collaborators (Bertin et al., 2006;Bertin et al., 2009;Peshkov et al., 2014). Finally, the rest of this section is devoted to studying the solutions of the hydrodynamic equations derived using the BGL method for the 3 basic classes of DADAM.
## (s11) Properties common to all 3 classes
(p11.0) The sets of hydrodynamic equations obtained above using the BGL approach share many properties, leading to the same overall structure of their phase diagrams. First of all, the equation governing the ordering field (f 1 in the polar class, f 2 in the nematic classes) contains the expected Ginzburg-Landau structure,

(p11.1) In all cases ξ > 0, which ensures that the cubic nonlinearity saturates the growth of order occurring when µ > 0. In all cases µ depends linearly on ρ: µ = aρ + b with a and b depending on the noise coefficients. This "ϕ 4 " or Mexican hat potential leads to the existence of a spatially-homogeneous ordered solution with |f | 2 = µ/ξ as soon as µ > 0. In the (ρ 0 , σ) plane, the line µ = 0 has the expected form, growing like a square root from the origin, saturating at high densities (S gas line in Fig. 0.10). Above it, the homogeneous disordered solution is linearly stable, below it it is unstable 13 . In this region, the homogeneous ordered solution exists. It is found to be linearly unstable near onset, i.e. below the µ = 0 line, down to a similar line (S liq line in Fig. 0.10). This linear stability analysis can be performed semi-numerically for arbitrary perturbations of wavenumber q 14 or analytically in the limit |q| → 0 of small wavenumbers. In the polar class for instance, the real part of the growth rate G(q) of the associated instability reads, in the limit of small longitudinal wavenumbers q (Bertin et al., 2009):

(p11.2) where ∂µ 1 = dµ 1 /dρ (> 0) and λ = κ 1 + κ 2 (> 0). This growth rate will therefore always take positive values close to S gas , where the linear coefficient µ 1 → 0. Thus, one can easily see that the instability arises from the ρ-dependence of the linear coefficient µ 1 and, more precisely, from the fact that µ 1 grows with ρ. A similar argument applies to the classes with nematic alignment, such that it constitutes a characteristic feature of DADAM. The growth of µ with ρ is the translation at hydrodynamic (and kinetic) level of the positive feedback mechanism between local density and local order discussed at the microscopic level, and argued to be at the origin of phase separation. The S gas and S liq lines delimiting the domain of linear instability of the homogeneous ordered solution are, in the language of phase-separation, the spinodal lines. In between them, perturbations around the ordered solution grow immediately. In this region, all our hydrodynamic equations possess no stable homogeneous solutions, they only support inhomogeneous solutions. As we will see below, these closely resemble the traveling wave trains observed in the Vicsek model, and the nematic bands observed in the nematic DADAM classes. They exist beyond the region delimited by the spinodal lines. They are observed to compose the dominating attractor of the dynamics up to a line (B gas line in Fig. 0.10) located above the µ = 0 gas spinodal S gas , and down to a line (B liq line in Fig. 0.10) below the liquid spinodal S liq . The two lines B gas and B liq are nothing but the binodal lines in the phase-separation language. They are the lines corresponding to those delimiting the coexistence region at the microscopic level.

(p11.3) Locating them implies a fine study of the nonlinear, inhomogeneous solutions of the hydrodynamic equations, something possibly delicate (see below). The spinodal lines, on the other hand, are easy to determine, but they have limited physical significance, and they do not correspond to the transitions found at the microscopic fluctuating level.
