# Online Fair Division: A Survey

CorpusID: 208202112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418)

Fields: Computer Science, Economics

## (s5) Formal background
(p5.0) We suppose there are n agents being allocated m items. Allocations may be whole (e.g. in the case of indivisible items), fractional (e.g. in the case of divisible items), or randomized (e.g. in the case of indivisible items, this represents a probability distribution over whole allocations). Often, as in many other areas, we will assume additive utilities. Additive utilities offer a compromise between simplicity and expressivity. However, some work in this area has considered more general utilities (e.g. (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019a) studies the more general class of monotone utilities). We consider a number of classical normative properties such as Pareto efficiency and envy-freeness. An allocation is Pareto efficient iff there is no other allocation where all agents have as much utility, and at least one agent has strictly more. An allocation is envy-free iff no agent has strictly greater utility for the items allocated to another agent than the utility for their own items. Envy-freeness is a desirable but often unachievable fairness property (consider two agents and one indivisible item that they both like). Therefore, we also consider a relaxation that can be always achieved: envy-free up to one item (EF1). An allocation is EF1 iff no agent has envy for another agent's bundle, supposing we can remove one item from this bundle. EF1 can be achieved with a simple roundrobin mechanism that allocates the most desired item left to the next agent in a round-robin fashion. We say that a mechanism is Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1 iff it only returns allocations that are Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1. See (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) for more details.
## (s8) Online properties
(p8.0) Another technique to deal with the challenges of online fair division is to consider relaxed normative properties that are applicable to the online setting. For example, (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) relax the definition of strategy-proofness to suppose past decisions are fixed while future decisions could still be strategic. A mechanism is strategy-proof if, an agent cannot improve their (expected) utility by bidding insincerely, supposing the entire information (i.e. the items, their arriving order and the mechanism) about the allocation process is available to each agent. That is, for each problem and agent a i , u(u i1 , . . . , u im ) ≥ u(v i1 , . . . , v im ) for any (possibly strategic) bids v i1 , . . . , v im of agent a i for the m items. On the other hand, we can relax this definition to a weaker online version of strategy-proofness. We say that a mechanism is online strategy-proof if, for each problem and round j ∈ [1, m], u(u i1 , . . . , u i(j−1) , u ij ) ≥ u(u i1 , . . . , u i(j−1) , v ij ) for any (possibly strategic) bid v ij of agent a i for the final jth item.

(p8.1) Online strategy-proofness is less onerous to achieve than strategy proofness. It supposes all earlier decisions are now fixed and the agent can only be strategic about the current decision. It is not hard to see that a strategy-proof mechanism is further online strategy-proof but the opposite may not hold. Indeed, whilst the only online mechanisms that are strategy-proof are rather unresponsive mechanisms such as the random mechanism which just allocates items randomly irrespective of the bids of agents, the class of mechanisms that are online strategy-proof is far larger and can be responsive to the bids of agents. In fact, Theorem 2 in (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) characterizes the class of online mechanisms that are online strategy-proof as "step" mechanisms that allocate items uniformly between agents that bid over some threshold of utility for an arriving item.

(p8.2) Stronger normative properties can also be useful in the online setting. For instance, (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) introduce shared envy-freeness which requires that each pair of agents are envy-free of each other over only the items that both agents in the pair like in common. If you get an item that I don't like, it does not cause me any envy. Shared envy-freeness implies envy-freeness but not the other way around. Shared envy-freeness is one of the normative properties that distinguishes between the LIKE and BALANCED LIKE mechanisms. Table 1, which is taken from (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b), summarizes many of the differences in normative properties of the different online mechanisms discussed in the previous section.
