# Generate FAIR Literature Surveys with Scholarly Knowledge Graphs

CorpusID: 219179714 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e4de425e4a8db948b94cdc2fe14aed8d0cac6e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e4de425e4a8db948b94cdc2fe14aed8d0cac6e9)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s4) ORKG ontology
(p4.0) In ORKG, each paper is typed as paper class. A paper consists of at least one research contribution, which addresses at least one research problem. Research contributions consist of contribution data that describe the contribution. For instance, a paper in Computer Science might have descriptions for materials, methods, implementation and results as contribution data. These prede ned core concepts can be easily extended with domain speci c research problems, methods, etc. in ORKG curation using crowdsourcing or other curation approaches. The underlying data structure uses the notion of statements. Statements are triples that consist of a subject, a predicate (also called a property) and an object. The granularity of a comparison is at the research contribution, meaning that contributions are compared rather than papers. For simplicity, we use the terms "paper comparison" and "contribution comparison" interchangeably. Because a comparison happens on contribution level, it is possible to compare speci c elements of a paper instead of the complete paper. The bene t of this is that a comparison does not contain data from irrelevant contributions. The ORKG OWL ontology is available online. 4 
## (s9) Align contribution descriptions
(p9.0) As described in the rst step, comparisons are built using shared or similar properties of contributions. In case the same property has been used between contributions, these properties are grouped and form one comparison row. However, often di erent properties are used to describe the same concept. This occurs for various reasons. The most obvious reason is when two di erent ontologies are used to describe the same property. For example, for describing the population of a city, DBpedia uses dbo:populationTotal while WikiData uses WikiData:population (actually the property identi er is P1082; for the purpose here we use the label). When comparing contributions, these properties should be considered as equivalent. Especially for community-created knowledge graphs, di erently identi ed properties likely exist that are, in fact, equivalent.

(p9.1) To overcome this problem, we use pre-trained fastText [4] word embeddings to determine the similarity of properties. If the similarity is higher than a predetermined threshold τ , the properties are considered equivalent and are grouped. This happens when the similarity threshold τ ≥ 0.9 (also empirically determined). In the end, each group of properties will be visualized as one row in the comparison table. The result of this step is a list of statements for each contribution, where similar properties are grouped. Based on this similarity matrix γ is generated
