# INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES A Review on Halodule uninervis -A Potent Seagrass Production and Hosted by

CorpusID: 213215533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/061ffd00d3ae3ff065e56fab609fa1a9e29ee5dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/061ffd00d3ae3ff065e56fab609fa1a9e29ee5dd)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Nature is being stated to treat, protect and prevent many ailments. In the ancient medical system, naturally derived products have been an integral part. In India, there are many medicinal plants habituated are used as a treatment for various infectious diseases as well as to manage and cure the disorders. Not only the terrestrial plants were used as a medicine, the marine angiosperms also used as a remedy to treat fever, cardiac disease, malaria, cough, skin diseases, early stages of leprosy, and as a paste to treat wounds (Namadevan et al., 2017). Marine angiosperms are the hydrophytes that grows completely submerged saline environment. They are called as seagrass as they resemble the family Poaceae. As they grow and complete their life cycle in a stress environment, they were rich in Phyto protectants that are unique and novel. These phytocompounds are secondary metabolites that can act as an antibacterial, antioxidant and can act as ef icient nutraceuticals. There are a totally 14 species that are grown in southeast coastal regions of India in those predominantly seen are Thalasssiahemprichii, Cymodocea serrulata, Cymodocearotundata, Halodule uninervis, Syringodium isoetifolium, Halophila beccarii, Halophila ovalis and Halophila ovata. Each seagrass is unique in their photo components (Newmaster et al., 2011). This study elaborates the botanical features, morphology, phytocompounds and pharmacological aspects of Halodule uninervis. It is the main diet for dugongs and green turtles as it is rich in calorie and also their smaller leaf structure makes them to easily digest.
## (s11) Phytocompounds
(p11.0) Generally, seagrass is rich in phenolic substances as they undergo stress. These secondary metabolites act as photoprotectants responsible for selfdefense against pathogens. Such compounds are lavones, condensed tannins, phenolic acids, sulphated phenolic acid and lignin are prominently seen in seagrass than the terrestrial plants. It has been evaluated that the total phenolic content of Halodule uninervis rhizome is 14.96±0.47mg and its leaf is 13.77±0.79mg GAE/g extract, which is signi icant. Halodule uninerviswas found to be rich in phenol and phenylpropanoid derivatives such as pcoumaric acid, caffeic acid, p-hydroxybenzoic acid and vanillic acids (Subhashini et al., 2013).
