# Drug-induced Acute Angle-closure Glaucoma: A Review

CorpusID: 214099556 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed6c11dc43346a2f98e978aaa75302c9aeab901d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed6c11dc43346a2f98e978aaa75302c9aeab901d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Pathophysiology of AACG
(p0.0) Acute angle-closure glaucoma occurs when there is an obstruction of aqueous outflow through the trabecular meshwork, leading to increased IOP. The mechanism of AACG could be divided into the following four groups: pupillary block, crowded angle, anterior lens subluxation, and PIS. 4 Pupillary block is the most common mechanism of AACG and occurs when the functional obstruction between the anterior and posterior chambers takes place at the pupillary segment of the iris and lens. Pupillary block is typically accompanied by the characteristic iris bombe, during which the iris bows forward due to the increased pressure in the posterior chamber.

(p0.1) Crowded angle occurs in patients with thicker iris tissue at the base, resulting in less space for the trabecular meshwork to drain. With mydriasis, the iris dilator muscles contract and the iris is pulled peripherally and crowded into the iridocorneal angle. This crowding of tissue can result in blockage of the trabecular meshwork; interestingly, pupillary block often occurs as the iris is returning to its undilated state after being dilated.

(p0.2) In anterior lens subluxation, the lens is displaced anteriorly which comes into contact with the iris or enters the anterior chamber. This can occur as a result of intrinsic laxity in the zonules that hold the lens in place. Conditions that contribute to zonular laxity can all contribute to this phenomenon, and these include pseudoexfoliation syndrome, Marfan syndrome, homocystinuria, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and Weill-Marchesani syndrome. Similar to pupillary block, the connection between the anterior and posterior chambers is obstructed, and aqueous humor is unable to drain through the trabecular meshwork.

(p0.3) Plateau iris syndrome is characterized by a flat iris, relatively normal anterior chamber depth, and a crowded angle. Plateau iris syndrome occurs due to an anatomical variation in which the peripheral iris base inserts more anteriorly on the ciliary body. This results in a narrower iridocorneal angle that is susceptible to obstruction during mydriasis. As a result, patients with PIS are still at risk of AACG even with a patent iridotomy.
