# A Survey: Intrusion Detection System for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs)

CorpusID: 226419872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665b394ebe0cc1c161ee84e8ace7dd9d8aa4028d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665b394ebe0cc1c161ee84e8ace7dd9d8aa4028d)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Security Requirements in VANETs
(p1.0) Security in VANET is critical due to vulnerabilities exist during information transmission in VANET, which causing VANET exposed to the attacks. In order to maintain a secure vehicular communication and networks, VANET security system should satisfy with the requirements. Some of the requirements are essential for all networks, but some are definite for VANET only [5]. Those requirements are: 2.1. Authentication: in order to allow the communication between vehicles which sending and receiving information, VANET should authenticate each of them. This process may comprise the identification of the sender identity and the legitimacy of the sender to use the network [5]. Authenticity involves proof of identity. Users should be able to identify each other's identity with which they are interacting. It can be verified through authentication process so the unauthorized entity cannot participate in the communication.
## (s3) Non-repudiation:
(p3.0) it ensures that the origin of the information cannot be denying that it has sending the information [5]. Non-repudiation ensures that the sender and receiver cannot deny having sent and received the message respectively.
## (s19) Existing IDS Approaches Anomaly Based Approaches
(p19.0) In [11], the authors proposed detection and interception of Black Hole Attack using Anomaly based approach. The paper was intended to present an effectual approach to detect and intercept this attack taking into account Dynamic MANET on-demand (DYMO) routing protocol. This work presupposes working in three modulesplanting, detection and ultimately the interception against the black hole attack. An IDS is initiated on the notion of machine leaning using MATLAB software. A relative scrutiny of IDS grounded on classifiers like K-Nearest Neighbor, Support Vector Machine, Decision tree and neural network is also conducted to make it certain that the best feasible classifier is settled on for administering the IDS. The analysis of the put forward work is subsequently accomplished taking miscellaneous metrics covering packet drop rate, average transmission delay, Packet Delivery Ratio along with throughput.
