# A Review on Recent Advances in the Constitutive Modeling of Bone Tissue

CorpusID: 222820671 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64b23a9eeb05f6ddb6172fc4fb193956b8bda8ef](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64b23a9eeb05f6ddb6172fc4fb193956b8bda8ef)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s7) Discussion
(p7.0) The mechanical response of bone depends on factors like the structure or length scale under consideration and the applied loading regime. Constitutive models try to describe this response through mathematical models. Usually, such models are implemented into finite element tools to allow the analysis of complex geometries, material distributions, and loading conditions. The focus here was to evaluate recently published constitutive laws for trabecular or cortical bone with respect to practical usage, e.g., in CT-based bone strength predictions.

(p7.1) In summary, there are advances in the field of constitutive modeling of bone tissue. The main focus of recent studies was on the extension and experimental validation of existing models. There were a few new developments, but no fundamental improvements were found compared with the years before. Most important seems the consideration of physical mechanisms (e.g., microcracking) in the case of combined loading. In this regard, a generalization to 3D and application on bone structures which are subjected to cyclic overloading, e.g., bone implant systems, should be researched. Interestingly, a trend towards fracture-based models is observed over the last years. Such models put less effort into the local constitutive modeling but could lead to more insight into the overall failure mechanisms of bone. This might inspire new sophisticated constitutive model developments.

(p7.2) Some studies showed that a multi-scale validation (tissue to apparent level) is still inaccurate. Obviously, important features are missing or experimental shortcomings influence the results. For this reason, validations should take place on the same length scale on which the model is operating. For investigations at any level, more experimental data are desirable taking into account local strain measurements, multi-axial loading, and cyclic loading at different strain rates.

(p7.3) Model validations were carried out in vitro and showed similar accuracies as previous studies. One difficulty in recognizing the actual improvement through a new constitutive model lies in the fact that poor image quality and calibration or incorrect or oversimplified loading have a strong impact on the quality of the obtained results. This means there will be plenty of scope for further improvement of constitutive bone models, but at the same time, other uncertain model parameters must be reduced.

(p7.4) A general problem with simulation methods in biomechanics is the lack of standardization. Sample preparations, experimental protocols, tissue types, scanning, image processing, FEA modeling, and post-processing are done differently from study to study. It is not possible to compare constitutive models quantitatively making it impossible to separate good from less good models.

(p7.5) In terms of clinical applicability in osteoporosis research, in vivo CT-based FEA simulations based on sophisticated constitutive behavior still have great potential. Although no great achievements regarding constitutive modeling have been achieved, the FEA technology itself has developed accordingly. There is an increased level of automation and computational capabilities and the insights and predictive power of FEA simulations models are far better than estimates based on bone mass [49] or other non-physical image-based measures.
