# Downlink MIMO-NOMA With and Without CSI: A Short Survey and Comparison

CorpusID: 226853942 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881be70f55ae163777c92f599eddcc275e498b4b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881be70f55ae163777c92f599eddcc275e498b4b)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s5) A. System Model
(p5.0) Consider a scenario similar to the previous one, but now with a massive-MIMO BS with M antennas transmitting to users equipped with N antennas. The users are also grouped into L clusters, each of which with K users, all with different channel matrices, however, they all share the same spatial correlation matrix R l . In such cases one can apply the Karhunen-Loève channel decomposition [34,35], according to which the k-th user in the l-th cluster can have its channel matrix written as:

(p5.1) where G l,k ∈ C N ×N denotes a fast fading complex Gaussian matrix, Λ l ∈ C M ×M is a diagonal matrix that contains the eigenvalues of R k and U l ∈ C M ×M is a matrix that contains the eigenvectors of R l , meaning that

(p5.2) since that a correlation matrix is always symmetric. However, R l only has r l non-zero eigenvalues, with r l being the rank of R l . Therefore, Λ l is of the form:

(p5.3) and thus can be reduced to a r l × r l matrix, turning G l,k a N × r l matrix and U l a r l × M matrix. Obtaining CSIT for the fast fading matrix G l,k may often be difficult. Because R l is a slowly-changing channel correlation matrix, its estimation at the BS is easier to obtain. The BS sends a precoded M × 1 NOMA vector with superimposed symbols

(p5.4) where s l,k is the symbol for the k-th user in the l-th cluster, α l,k is the power coefficient for the k-th user in the l-th cluster. The number of effective BS antennas for each cluster isM l = (M − r l (L − 1)) and, P l is the M ×M l precoding matrix of the l-th cluster. w l = [0 · · · 0 1 0 · · · 0] T is theM l × 1 precoding vector that has a 1 in the l-th position. The k-th user in the l-th cluster therefore receives
