# Vehicle Detection: A Review

CorpusID: 229051569 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c74b8d4a4bf310726f8c60bf21dad3703d0a116](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c74b8d4a4bf310726f8c60bf21dad3703d0a116)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics, Engineering

## (s6) Stereo perception
(p6.0) With the emergence of Faster-RCNN, 2D object detection has reached an unprecedented boom, and various new methods are emerging, and hundreds of thoughts are competing. However, in the application scenarios of drones, robots, and augmented reality, ordinary 2D detection cannot provide all the information needed to sense the environment. At present, 3D target detection is in a period of rapid development, and at present, it is mainly using the monocular camera, binocular camera, multi-line LIDAR to carry out 3D target detection. However, with the continued industrialization of LiDAR, the cost is decreasing, and there are now some technical solutions for the combined use of LiDAR with a single-eye camera and a small number of lines.

(p6.1) YOLO 3D [28], an extensive multi-task 3D object detection network applied to the Apollo framework, performs lane line identification and object detection with stereo information. The Encoder Module is Yolo's Darknet, which adds a deeper convolutional layer to the original Darknet and an anti-convolutional layer to capture more valuable image context information. The algorithm uses high-resolution multi-channel feature maps, which capture image detail and provide in-depth, low-resolution multi-channel feature maps that provide the encoder with more image context information. The Decoder is divided into two parts, one is semantic segmentation for lane line detection, and the other is object detection, the vehicle detection part is based on YOLO, and also outputs 3D information such as the direction of the vehicle.
