# Sequence variation, common tissue expression patterns and learning models: a genome-wide survey of vertebrate ribosomal proteins

CorpusID: 228187823 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bbb556a9bf5139809b80d616eda1ed32c105d83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bbb556a9bf5139809b80d616eda1ed32c105d83)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s7) Tissue classification learning models based on GTEx
(p7.0) RP expression values from GTEx (TPM) were used to train multi-classification learning models to predict the type of tissue assigned to each sample. During pre-processing, gender-associated paralogs RPL10L, RPS4X/eS4, RPS4Y1/2, RPL39L and RPL26L1 were removed. Four learning models, that include Logistic Regression (one-versus-rest scheme for multiclassification), Support-vector machine with Linear (LinearSVC) or Gaussian (SVC) kernel and Random Forest, were trained using scaled RP expression values. All multi-classification learning models in the present study were created using scikit-learn (68). To evaluate the ability of learning models for accurate prediction of tissue categories, a nested crossvalidation strategy was adopted: the expression dataset was split three times into training (90%) and testing (10%) datasets (outer loop). For each split, learning models were trained based on the training dataset, following Min-Max scaling for each RP record, using 5-fold cross-validation and optimizing the model's parameters with grid-searching (inner loop). For the final evaluation of model performance, we calculated the arithmetic mean and standard deviation of accuracy, F1-score and Matthew's correlation coefficient (MCC) measurements for all three splits.
## (s13) Variation of RP expression is attributed to species but not tissues in the vertebrate lineage
(p13.0) It has been demonstrated that evolutionary analysis of gene expression patterns across various tissues of different mammals can be predictive of gene functionality and importance in disease. Specifically, genes highly conserved in both expression and sequence were shown to participate mainly in housekeeping functions, whereas those conserved in sequence but with variations in expression are primarily involved in transcriptional regulation and possibly can be From the 89 detected RPs in GTEx data, gender-associated RPL10L, RPS4X/eS4, RPS4Y1/2, RPL39L and RPL26L1 to avoid bias, leaving 83 RPs. All multi-classification learning models were created using scikit-learn (68).

(p13.1) attributed with species-specific differences (74). Here, we sought to investigate and characterize RP expression patterns across different vertebrate species and tissues. Initially, we utilized two combinations in which RNA-seq data of 68 RPs (corrected Reads Per Kilobase Million, cRPKM) from i) six tissues of five species, and ii) three tissues of seven species (see 'Materials and Methods' section), were used after scaling expression values between 0 and 1 (Min-Max scaling) for each organism and each RP (Figure 4). Despite limitations in sample availability and the presence of missing values, we observe few within-tissue differences across different species, for instance the increased levels of human RPs in cerebellum compared to, e.g. kidney, while most tissues are consistently expressed ( Figure 4A). In the case of the widest possible span across species (seven in total), only three tissues present sufficient data for comparison: it is remarkable that most species (with the exception of human, to some extent) show the lowest expression of RPs in the brain, compared, e.g. to kidney ( Figure 4B)--consistently with the above findings for fewer species and more tissues.

(p13.2) Overall, there seems to be a general trend for the available instances of tissue-species combinations for higher expression in kidney and heart compared to brain and cerebellum ( Figure 4). As tissues are far older biological entities than species in evolutionary terms, tissue specificity can be seen as limited, while the restricted variation observed arise from species differences. Furthermore, in an attempt to provide an estimate of within-tissue conservation of RP expression levels across different vertebrate species, multi-classification learning models were trained using only the GTEx dataset of human tissues and evaluated for their ability to independently predict the tissue type of samples from the comparative profiling of gene expression across different species (69) (see 'Materials and Methods' section). Apart from lizard and frog, learning models were able to predict with significance (Pvalue < 0.1; one-tailed binomial test) the tissue type of different sample species, especially for the other three primates analyzed here (Supplementary Table S2). This pivotal result strongly suggests that tissue conservation patterns contain a stronger signal than their corresponding species counterparts, as the models are able to recognize the tissue type of different vertebrates based on human tissues, expectedly with decreasing performance. The learning models provide a quantitative perspective of the patterns reflected in the comparative analysis of tissues versus species (Figure 4), further enhancing the reliability of this key conclusion.

(p13.3) Overall, our data support that RP expression levels fluctuate in a consistent manner across tissues of vertebrate species. Additionally, and in agreement with previous observations of gene expression suggesting strong conservation across different tissues (69), we find evidence that human RP expression patterns enable, to a degree, an accurate prediction of tissues in different vertebrates. At the same time, we observe a limited number of within-species differences for several RPs (Supplementary Figures S11 and 12), that need to be further studied and confirmed at the protein level.
