# Biomass Pretreatment and Characterization: A Review

CorpusID: 224928544 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd1e5b1d34cd0a8b2f88e86b4c75e15e7ee96129](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd1e5b1d34cd0a8b2f88e86b4c75e15e7ee96129)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s8) Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopic analyzer
(p8.0) The Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopic (FTIR) is a sensitive technique for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of organic materials such as biomass. It identifies chemical bonds by generating a range of infrared (IR) retention in the form of spectra that represents sample profile. This analytical tool is particularly useful for tracing and tracking changes in biomass molecular structure caused by pretreatment and can distinguish between functional groups [51]. It is a useful technique for the characterization of biomass materials intended for a whole range of applications including biochemical and thermochemical conversion applications. For example, the FTIR can be used to investigate the possibilities of the removal of hemicellulose and lignin from a chemically pretreated biomass in a pulping process. It can also be used to understand the most reactive components of biomass  Table 3.
## (s16) Future prospects
(p16.0) The large-scale substitution of fossil fuel with biomass resources is a topical issue not just for the production of energy but also for the production of chemicals, bio products and materials. Moreover, due to the large availability of biomass throughout the world, the production of the high value-added products from biomass can be achieved under any geographical conditions and the feasibility and viability of the production of the value-added products depends on biomass characteristics and the pretreatment method employed. However, biomass complexity and the high capital and operation costs associated with biomass pretreatment as well as the mechanisms involved in the conversion process of biomass are some of the challenges associated with the use of biomass for the production of energy, chemicals and fuels. Therefore, efforts should be geared toward the design of more easy-touse and cost effective technologies at all levels so as to encourage the widespread application of biomass and attract investment in this field. In addition, not much is known about the optimal biomass pretreatment conditions because they are seldom reported. Consequently, for the efficient and feasible utilization of biomass in bioconversion processes, information about the optimum conditions of pretreatment is vital and efforts made to report such information. It has been reported [61] that researchers and policy makers are in need of useful information that may lead to the much needed improvements in this field of research. So, efforts made to report optimal pretreatment conditions for biomass will create further awareness on the advantages of the exploitation of biomass resources for the production of renewable energy and other bio products.

(p16.1) On the other hand, characterization of biomass also faces significant challenges ranging from the nature of the biomass and the multiphase bioconversion processes using the biomass as feedstock as well as the lack of experimental validation of the cutting-edge analytical techniques used for biomass characterization. Efforts made to address these barriers through continued research will equally lead to optimization of bioconversion and bio refinery processes. Needless to say that, since a single analytical technique cannot provide all of the needed information simultaneously with optimal resolution and high sensitivity, complementary techniques are often required to achieve full understanding of the physical and chemical underpinnings of the prodigy of biomass recalcitrance as it undergoes bioconversion processing. This may ease the challenges associated with experimental validation. Nevertheless, it is vital to mention that each type of characterization technique has its own merits and demerits under a particular set of circumstances and that the shortcomings of one technique may be compensated for by the merits of the other.
