# Job Demands and Resources among Healthcare Professionals during Virus Pandemics: A Review and Examination of Fluctuations in Mental Health Strain during COVID-19 JOB DEMANDS AND RESOURCES AMONG HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS DURING VIRUS PANDEMICS 121

CorpusID: 229349493 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b66e861c401f261843abb91d701db633bdcda6d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b66e861c401f261843abb91d701db633bdcda6d)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s7) COVID-19 Demands and Resources as Predictors of Fluctuations in Mental Health Strain among Emergency Medicine Professionals
(p7.0) The present study was designed to address these gaps in prior research by examining EMP who were treating potential COVID-19 positive patients over the course of 6 weeks during the pandemic as it began spreading in the United States. EMP are at the forefront of the COVID-19 pandemic and are the initial healthcare professionals confronted with positive cases who are experiencing symptoms severe enough for them to go to the emergency room (Rodriguez et al., 2020). Therefore, this specific group of healthcare professionals provides a unique and important sample for investigating how changes in demands and resources are linked to changes in mental health strain across multiple weeks of the pandemic.
## (s19) DISCUSSION
(p19.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has been challenging in many ways for healthcare professionals, particularly in terms of the mental health strain it has added to a workforce that has been experiencing an increase in burnout and stress in recent years (Rodriguez et al., 2020). Accordingly, it is critical to understand what specific factors play a role in generating increased mental health strain as well as factors that may aid in supporting healthcare professionals and in mitigating the impacts of such strain. The purpose of this article was to address this issue by presenting an integrated review of prior literature examining healthcare professionals' experiences during similar epidemics and pandemics, and by offering an empirical examination of weekly fluctuations in EMP mental health strain during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the following sections, we further synthesize the results of our review and empirical study, highlighting key contributions to theory as well as practice. We also note limitations of the study and offer several recommendations regarding important next steps for future researchers aiming to continue to expand this important area of work.
## (s20) Contributions to Theory and Practice
(p20.0) This research makes several unique theoretical and practical contributions. First, in applying the JD-R model to the healthcare professional context, our review of the literature contributes an overarching theoretical framework that clarifies the novel job and personal demands that healthcare professionals may face during virus epidemics and pandemics, as well as the resources that may be beneficial in addressing these demands. Overall, this review contributes to our understanding of healthcare providers' mental health and wellbeing during virus epidemics and pandemics, namely that they are likely to be impacted by an imbalance of increased unique demands and stagnated or declining resources. In light of our subsequent study, this may be especially critical for emergency departments and other frontline healthcare workers as EMP experience higher levels of stress than other occupations even during regular, non-pandemic work (Schneider & Weigl, 2018). Our empirical study of EMP's demands, resources, and mental health strain serves as an important contribution towards addressing the need for an increased understanding of within-person fluctuations in mental health strain during a virus epidemic or pandemic. Furthermore, the mixed results provide interesting insights regarding what may impact healthcare professionals on the frontline of a virus epidemic or pandemic. Notably, we found support for our hypotheses regarding the negative impacts of COVID-19 job and personal demands on EMP's mental health strain over time, as well as the interactive effects of personal demands and number of hours worked per week. As expected, increases in COVID-19 personal demands, COVID-19 job demands, and number of hours worked were each associated with an increase in EMP's mental health strain. However, while there was not an interaction of COVID-19 job demands and number of hours worked, the relationship between COVID-19 personal demands and mental health strain was amplified as the number of hours worked increased.
