# Research and Applied Perspective to Blockchain Technology: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 237840325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea157b78a395eb4601cfa3cf25e78f3c7e9c2a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea157b78a395eb4601cfa3cf25e78f3c7e9c2a4)

Fields: Computer Science, Business

## (s24) Finance-Payroll and Settlement
(p24.0) Public service transactions involve a sequence of activities to legalize the validity of the transacting party, authentication of the data delivered by the transacting party or parties, performing of the transaction and finally delivery of the compulsory service. The transactions are then recorded from end to end. This process take a long time. The blockchain can reduce this time because of it nature of validity and authenticity. Since a large number of events connected to life built pension such as getting expenses from active customers, beneficiaries obtaining their payments and taxes on pensions are basically contract controlled payments. Sestoft [43] has suggested the use of Ethereum as the algorithm should work on self-regulated contracts. A prerequisite here is the fact that such an autonomous system will need event insurance relates life event triggers from other trusted bodies, so that self-executing contracts can act on them.
## (s77) Proof of Luck (PoL)
(p77.0) Proof of luck aims to increase transaction throughput and reduce the computational power used by PoW. Each block when mined is given a random number between 0 and 1 which is called a "luck value". Higher numbers are considered as luckier and less unlucky.

(p77.1) The highest luck value is calculated by adding all the values of each block starting from genesis block till the last block. The miners prefer to append their block to the blockchain having the highest luck value. A higher luck value produces less delay and optimizes communication within the system. The original miner will not need to broadcast its block to the network as another miner tries to solve the proof on the first block having higher luck value [77].
## (s89) A Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA)
(p89.0) A federated byzantine agreement (FBA) is well known for its low transaction costs, scalability and high throughput. Steller and Ripple cryptocurrencies use this consensus where Steller was the first one to use FBA. It works like a byzantine fault tolerance where a blockchain is a responsibility of each byzantine general which belongs to the same blockchain. Nodes need to be known and verified in advance before the user requests any enactment from the FBA [86]. The notary node selects those nodes who they trust, making quorums of nodes and hence forming the FBA network.
## (s90) Healthcare Based Consensus
(p90.0) Blockchain is helpful in healthcare as it provides security to the medical records and other security breaches which healthcare faces on a daily basis. Figure 6 shows the patient profile over the blockchain which can be used for information by the concerned doctor, hospital, insurance company or it can be used in the supply chain management.

(p90.1) A federated byzantine agreement (FBA) is well known for its low transaction costs, scalability and high throughput. Steller and Ripple cryptocurrencies use this consensus where Steller was the first one to use FBA. It works like a byzantine fault tolerance where a blockchain is a responsibility of each byzantine general which belongs to the same blockchain. Nodes need to be known and verified in advance before the user requests any enactment from the FBA [86]. The notary node selects those nodes who they trust, making quorums of nodes and hence forming the FBA network.
## (s107) Proof of Reputation
(p107.0) The paper discusses in this section a decentralized reputation-based blockchain in vehicular networks. The received messages are rated by the elected vehicle from the crowd and then broadcasts its ratings which are in the form of block. Using a vehicle's local knowledge they validate the block and decide to add the block to the blockchain or not. Thus the rating which are stored on the blockchain are said to be reliable enough as these are validated by most of the vehicles in the network [94]. Proof of reputation can also be used generally for almost any business network. Gochain uses proof of reputation for Dapps (Decentralized Applications) and smart contracts that aims to decrease energy consumption, increase performance, provide network security and decentralization.
## (s110) Weight-Based PoS
(p110.0) As discussed by Leng Kaijun [97], a public blockchain consensus has slow speed. The selective incentive weight should be used in common for the agricultural business resources so that these resources reach the underdeveloped and remote areas. Therefore this paper presents a consensus algorithm for the blockchain of agriculture business re- 
## (s112) Weight-Based PoS
(p112.0) As discussed by Leng Kaijun [97], a public blockchain consensus has slow speed. The selective incentive weight should be used in common for the agricultural business resources so that these resources reach the underdeveloped and remote areas. Therefore this paper presents a consensus algorithm for the blockchain of agriculture business resources. The algorithm considers weight based on PoS.
## (s143) Consensus in Power
(p143.0) Blockchain is going to change the legacy systems of centralized nature by hybrid distributed systems which are made up of solar power micro grids and large power plants. This kind of distributed energy system will be a reliable, efficient and renewable energy delivering system. There is also a possibility that blockchain may change the trading system and businesses would trade off using electricity for example if a factory needs additional power, it can buy unused electricity which another factory is selling for five minutes. These five minutes are actually the unused downtime minutes of a factory. This kind of trade can give efficiency benefits to grid operators.

(p143.1) Each home is installed with a smart meter (SM) in order to achieve better scheduling in the smart grid. These SMs collect real-time data of electricity consumption and utilities use this data to provide smart home services in a better way. The real time data can disclose private data of the user and an adversary can take advantage of this data by reading the usage patterns of the electricity consumption profile of the user. In [108], a privacy-preserving and data efficiency aggregation scheme is proposed via blockchain. Users are divided into groups and a private blockchain is managed by each group for its members. For privacy preservation inside a group each user uses pseudonyms to hide their identity. In addition, proof of work is used to achieve block verification. The said scheme achieves security requirements and better performance than other methods.
## (s145) Consensus in Power
(p145.0) Blockchain is going to change the legacy systems of centralized nature by hybrid distributed systems which are made up of solar power micro grids and large power plants. This kind of distributed energy system will be a reliable, efficient and renewable energy delivering system. There is also a possibility that blockchain may change the trading system and businesses would trade off using electricity for example if a factory needs additional power, it can buy unused electricity which another factory is selling for five minutes. These five minutes are actually the unused downtime minutes of a factory. This kind of trade can give efficiency benefits to grid operators.

(p145.1) Each home is installed with a smart meter (SM) in order to achieve better scheduling in the smart grid. These SMs collect real-time data of electricity consumption and utilities use this data to provide smart home services in a better way. The real time data can disclose private data of the user and an adversary can take advantage of this data by reading the usage patterns of the electricity consumption profile of the user. In [108], a privacypreserving and data efficiency aggregation scheme is proposed via blockchain. Users are divided into groups and a private blockchain is managed by each group for its members. For privacy preservation inside a group each user uses pseudonyms to hide their identity. In addition, proof of work is used to achieve block verification. The said scheme achieves security requirements and better performance than other methods.
## (s154) Proof of Property
(p154.0) This proof allows participants not to have a local copy of the full blockchain [116]. Owner of new transaction should have coins enough in their address to fulfil the transaction. New participants can validate the transactions without the need to download a blockchain initially. The new participants need to access the root hash of the Patricia tree system state of the new block. As members of the network can obtain a state from the header so they can delete the old body of the blocks and save a lot of local space which is not the case in traditional blockchain applications.
## (s166) Denial of Service (DoS) Attacks
(p166.0) The attacker crash a node by flooding a large amount of traffic in a denial of service (DoS) [125]. It prevents authorized users from retrieving the service or resource. Similarly, a distributed denial of service (DDoS) is another type of attack where a node is flooded with malevolent requests. In DDoS multiple attackers attack a single node.
## (s167) Sybil Attacks
(p167.0) Multiple identities attacking a larger portion of network is called a sybil attack. The invaders can launch numerous false nodes that seem to be honest to their peers. These false nodes take part in falsifying the network to authenticate illegal transactions and to modify valid transactions. They can use virtual machines, several devices, or internet protocol (IP) addresses as bogus nodes for the attack. The peer to peer (P2P) network assumes that every participating node contains only one identity. Thus, numerous forged nodes give attackers the ability to repudiate transmitted blocks and to outvote authentic nodes. When an attacker controls a large number of nodes in the network, it increases the chances of double-spending [126].
