# Management of pediatric cardiac surgery wound: a literature review

CorpusID: 237422189 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/747e9cfc0c4f082a07dbf9ea397c114da2d5d5dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/747e9cfc0c4f082a07dbf9ea397c114da2d5d5dd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Materials and Methods
(p3.0) The structured literature systematic review was guided by Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Protocols (PRISMA-P) (16). We consulted the PubMed database between February 20 th 2021 and February 28 th 2021, using the following Mesh terms: "Surgical Wound Infection" and "Cardiac Surgical Procedures". We selected the studies considered in this review according to the following criteria. We selected the categories: full text articles (other categories such as abstract only were considered not enough detailed for the purpose of this study), published within the last 20 years, referring to human species only, written in English, and related to a neonatal and/or pediatric population (Infant: birth to 23 months, Child: birth to 18 years). We included both qualitative and quantitative studies, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), prospective and retrospective comparative cohort studies, regression analysis, casecontrol studies, quality improvement (QI) and survey studies. We excluded articles on patients over 18 years of age, in foreign languages other than English. Out of one hundred-sixteen articles, twenty-two articles were determined by us to be relevant and connected to our research (Image 1, Table 1). From an initial analysis of the twenty-two articles identified according to the criteria introduced above, we extrapolated four main recurring topics: 1) risk factors for developing SSIs; 2) strategies to reduce SSIs; 3) relationship between colonization and clinical infection (SSIs rate); 4) impact of SSIs in terms of costs for the healthcare system. We thus decided to structure our study and show the results around these topics, for a more accurate examination and comparison.
