# Integron and its role in antimicrobial resistance: A literature review on some bacterial pathogens

CorpusID: 233865798 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s7) Class III integron
(p7.0) In 1993, class III integrons were first identified in Japan by Arakawa and colleagues in S. marcescens. These types of integrons rarely present in clinical specimens, they have been found in a small number of bacteria such as Acinetobacter spp., Alcaligenes, Citrobacter freundii, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas putida, Salmonella spp. and S. marcescens (7). The 3′-conserved segment in these integrons is similar to that of class I integrons: it contains four genes, qacEΔ1, sul1, orf5, orf6, and their only difference is the lack of transcription genes. In these integrons, there are several gene cassettes including bla IMP-1 and aacA4 that encode metallo-lactamase enzymes and the aminoglycoside resistance gene (tobramycin), respectively. The aacA4 cassette was originally found in class I integrons but the bla IMP-1 cassette was first recognized in class III integrons, however due to the extensive recombination that occurred between class I and III integrons, this gene is also found in class I integrons and has been widely reported worldwide (22). 
## (s17) Staphylococcus aureus
(p17.0) S. aureus is a Gram-positive microorganism which is now considered one of the most important causes of hospital infections (45). Quantitative studies have been done on integrons in Gram-positive bacteria. Class I integrons is more common in S. aureus and causes resistance to aminoglycosides (aadA1a and aadA2), trimethoprim (dfrA17-aadA5 and dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2) and chloramphenicol (aacA4-cmlA1)( 
