# machines Possible Applications of Additive Manufacturing Technologies in Shipbuilding: A Review

CorpusID: 230572342 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s10) Electron Beam Melting
(p10.0) Electron beam melting (EBM) is a method technologically similar to SLS or MPBF, with the difference that instead of a laser as a heat source, a focused beam of electrons is used. The electron beam comes from the electron gun. The tungsten electron gun emits electrons that are accelerated to half the speed of light. The device is equipped with a system of coils whose task is to align the electron beam, focus it in such a way as to obtain the desired spot and deflect it to scan the working field.

(p10.1) As the EBM technology does not use any moving parts to move the heat source and the heat flux density is very high, the printing speed is one of the highest among other 3D printing techniques. Printing takes place in a vacuum to avoid energy loss through the collision of electrons with air molecules. Thanks to this, the process achieves an energy efficiency of 95%, which makes it 5-10 times more energy-efficient than laser sintering. An additional advantage of using the vacuum is the possibility of using reactive materials such as titanium alloys, but the available materials are very limited-Ti grade 2, Ti6Al4V, Inconel 718, CoCrMo [20].
## (s64) Repeatability of Production
(p64.0) Additive manufacturing is a dynamically developing but still young method of production. There are large discrepancies in the parameters of machines and materials from different manufacturers and operating in different 3D printing technologies. Each manufacturer uses different processes, materials, principles of printer operation, pre-processing and post-processing. This set of variables creates the possibility of errors during production, and the variety of methods makes it difficult to verify them. In addition, 3D printers are sensitive to interference, for example, in the power grid, sudden changes of temperature, humidity, vibration or even ambient light intensity when using photopolymers. They can cause printing errors such as poor layer connection, incorrect layer arrangement, layer thickness faults, surface imperfections and pores and voids inside the model [58]. This is the reason why it is so important to implement monitoring of parameters in 3D printing to optimize the process and avoid any manufacturing flaws. Classification societies such as Bureau Veritas and DNV GL are conducting advanced work in the field of AM normalization, making classification procedures and creating a set of guidelines to help different manufacturers achieve the same repeatable results.
