# R E V I E W An Overview of the Efficacy and Safety of Ozanimod for the Treatment of Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis

CorpusID: 234767136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Clinical Trials Phase I Trials
(p6.0) The safety of ozanimod was first tested in two Phase I, randomized, double-blind trials. The data showed a dosedependent reduction in heart rate after the first ozanimod administration; therefore, a dose-escalation protocol was used in all subsequent clinical trials. 25 These studies also determined that ozanimod did not prolong the QTc interval at therapeutic and supratherapeutic doses and did not raise any new safety concerns. 32 Furthermore, the effect of ozanimod on circulating leukocyte subsets was evaluated using flow cytometry and epigenetic cell counting in an open label pharmacodynamic study in which MS patients were randomized to oral ozanimod (0.5 or 1 mg/d) for 12 weeks. Dose-dependent decreases in circulating B-and T-cell counts and differential impacts on naive and memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD19+ B cells were observed. 34 
## (s13) Ozanimod for the Treatment of Other Immune-Mediated Diseases
(p13.0) Thus far, ozanimod has been approved only for the treatment of relapsing MS; however, other immune-mediated inflammatory diseases may benefit from its use. This is suggested not only by evidence based on similar DovePress pathophysiology underlying these conditions but also by analyses based on the use of computational predictive models of docking; 52 however, hypothetical interactions should be confirmed by conducting experimental studies.

(p13.1) A study on the utility of ozanimod in murine models of systemic lupus erythematosus has reported encouraging results. 53 More advanced research data are available on inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) since two Phase II trials, TOUCHSTONE and STEPSTONE (for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, respectively), have been completed.
