# Clinical Medicine Combination Therapy for Neuropathic Pain: A Review of Recent Evidence

CorpusID: 237331527 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a32844b3348474744027bfb2b2c380729f8bec38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a32844b3348474744027bfb2b2c380729f8bec38)

Fields: Medicine

## (s47) Potential Biases and Limitations
(p47.0) We tried to scope the results of this review in the most objective way possible. However, we had some difficulties finding data. First, some trials were found after the third or even the fourth database search. Therefore, though unlikely, the possibility of missing RCTs still exists. As we could not afford the fee to search EMBASE, we may have missed information. Additionally, as the search was already very large, we did not include other websites (e.g., controlled-trials.com, and clinicalstudyresults.org). Thus, we may have missed some RCTs. This can lead to a publication bias. However, we considered that, as the search was conducted on four major databases with over 2000 different citations and over 1500 duplicated results, the probability of missing a trial was very low and the amount of work and duplicates would increase even further. Another difficulty we found was looking for proper data within the publications. Some data were very accessible, but other data needed to be inferred via tables, figures, or even the discussion. Thus, even after a colleague (see the Acknowledgments) reviewed our work, we may have made mistakes with the discernment of extracted data.

(p47.1) Another serious limitation was complying with all items for a systematic review. We did not register the protocol for this review in a review registry (e.g., PROSPERO). This is a critical flaw according to AMSTAR-2 [89]. Even so, we have tried to reflect, in the material and methods section, the entire search protocol as it was carried out. For conducting a proper systematic review, we missed item 2 (protocol registration), whereas items 4 (literature search) and 7 (justification for excluding individual studies) were partially fulfilled, but it only remains an issue for reviewing those studies conducted only after 2012.
