# APPLICATION OF OSCILLOSCOPE TECHNOLOGY IN THE EARLY 21ST CENTURY: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 236287719 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb4bf07cd48be4cb23ffc6d80d175a7dcaaafe6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb4bf07cd48be4cb23ffc6d80d175a7dcaaafe6a)

Fields: Engineering

## (s5) Detection in Nuclear Physics
(p5.0) In the technology for detection in nuclear physics, the digital oscilloscope acts as a substitute for desktop digitizing devices. Comparisons were made to determine the digitization capabilities of the four devices, namely the CAEN DT5725 and DT 5751 desktop digitizers with the Digilent Analog Discovery 2 (AD2) digital oscilloscope and The Red Pitaya STEMLab 125 -14. The desktop digitizer is a desktop module that requires a computer to control the acquisition. The desktop digitizer requires a +12 V power sources. Specifications are as follows:

(p5.1) -DT5725: has 8 input channels, 14 bit ADC, a sampling rate of 250 MS / s (Mega Samples per second), and a bandwidth of 125 MHz. -DT5751: has 2 to 4 input channels, 10 bit ADC, a sampling rate of 1 to 2 GS / s (Giga Samples per second), and a bandwidth of 500 MHz.

(p5.2) Both have MCX connectors on the input line making this impractical because they don't offer the commonly used coaxial connectors namely BNC or LEMO 00. Both also have an input impedance of 50Ω with a selectable input dynamic range from 0V to 0.5V or 0V to 2V. With CAEN's proprietary DPP-PSD firmware, input channels are independent with trigger standard firmware between all channels.

(p5.3) Meanwhile, the digital oscilloscope has the following specifications: -Digilent Analog Discovery 2 (AD2): USB digital oscilloscope with 2 input channels, 14  Based on these specifications, the advantage of the AD2 oscilloscope is that it is more compact than the CAEN desktop digitizer and does not require an external power supply. Meanwhile, the advantages of Red Pitaya STEMLab 125 -14 are in terms of data acquisition and storage control, as well as remote control capabilities.
## (s8) Data Acquisition System
(p8.0) The new measurement data acquisition system implemented in this article, will allow recording of the entire waveform without (nearly) downtime. The large number of measuring channels allows flexible selection of the configuration and type of detector used in the measurement. The differential input of the electrical signal from the detector allows avoiding interference in signal transmission from the detector to the ADC. Each measuring line has the ability to control two independent external power supplies that can be used to power the detector. The trigger parameters of individual data acquisition channels can be set independently in a very flexible way. Thanks to the programmable gate system (FPGA), easy upgrades of the system are possible. The undoubted advantage is the use of a microprocessor system with its own operating system, thanks to which it is possible to carry out measurements without an additional PC. This is especially important in locations where access to electricity can be very limited (eg in mines). The low electricity demand allows the use of battery powered power sources, which is especially important in mines where the power supply can be very unstable and interfere with measurements [12].
## (s9) Terahertz Oscilloscope
(p9.0) In this article they demonstrate a useful new and practical method for recording relativistic electron beam timing information. In this experiment, a resolution of 24 fs was achieved in the measurement of the temporal profile of the beam and an accuracy of 3 fs in determining the arrival time of the beam with a THz pulse having a field strength of about 150 kV/cm and a dielectric tube with D = 0.87 mm. As the defection mode impedance scales as D 3 and THz pulses with fields exceeding 1 MV/cm have been reached), the resolution of the THz oscilloscope can potentially be extended to sub-femtoseconds with stronger THz pulses and smaller aperture dielectric tubes. It should be noted that the temporal resolution in these measurements is inversely proportional to the square root of the electron energy, so this THz oscilloscope can also be applied directly to characterize the electron beams with higher energies. Furthermore, this THz oscilloscope can be directly used to temporarily increase the resolution of Ultrafast Electron Diffraction.

(p9.1) For example, the diffracted beam downstream of the sample can be swept with a THz oscilloscope, forming a ring pattern for operating Ultrafast Electron Diffraction in film mode. In this configuration, the temporal resolution in Ultrafast Electron Diffraction is no longer limited by the electron bunch length and time jitter, but rather by the temporal resolution of the THz oscilloscope, which allows one to achieve femtosecond temporal resolution with a picosecond electron beam. It is hoped that this THz oscilloscope has wide application in many research fields [13].
## (s10) Quartz Crystal Microbalance
(p10.0) This article describes the use of Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) sensors which have developed rapidly in various fields, especially in the study of chemistry and biology. Since the first introduction of this device in 1959, researchers have developed many basic aspects and applications of QCM. The focus is not only on the structure of the sensor, surface or layer but also through improving its interface to obtain more sophisticated measurements and to explore the possibilities for obtaining more information from measurements. Measurement of the response of the Quartz Crystal microscale can be carried out using frequency measurements, signal dissipation, as well as impedance measurements. Among many methods, electrical impedance is one of the preferred analysis. This method provides rich information. Each method has its own advantages and disadvantages. The impedance of the QCM determines the behavior of the QCM operating under the senses. Impedance measurements can lead us to investigate materials, such as complex shear modulus, viscosity, and loading effects caused by coatings on QCM surfaces. However, the need for relatively expensive measuring instruments may be unavoidable. The complexity in stating is one of the main reasons. In impedance measurement, a sinusoidal signal (input signal) is injected into the circuit containing the element under test. The signal before the circuit is the input signal and the circuit signal is the output signal. Impedance calculation is done by comparing the input signal and output signal by considering the circuit configuration. In this experiment, they used a simple voltage divider circuit with known resistive elements. Impedance and phase values are calculated based on signal measurements using a phase gain integrated circuit detector and digital storage oscilloscope.

(p10.1) Phase gain integrated circuit detectors are widely used for magnitude and phase measurement. In many applications, these tools have been used to obtain useful information for research to explain more phenomena. For example, it can be used for superheterodyne microwave interferometers and for tissue bioimpedance spectra. Based on the device, the magnitude and phase are generated from the analog AC voltage signal. As a result, the device also has the potential to measure the QCM impedance with some modified circuitry before it is detected by the device.

(p10.2) The phase gain integrated circuit detector takes two signals as input and produces two DC output signals that are proportional to the ratio of the magnitude and phase difference of the two signals.

(p10.3) The detector usually detects inputs within a certain frequency range. For example, the AD8302 (Analog Devices, USA) can only detect and process RF/IF input. The device may be made to detect low frequency signals if some modification is made to the input circuit. The resonant frequency of a typical QCM sensor ranges from 5MHz to 20MHz. This range closely matches the detected range of AD8302.

(p10.4) DSO is now widely available. With advances in microelectronic technology, DSOs with sampling rates up to GHz and data storage up to Gigabytes are available. There are two main advantages to using a DSO as an instrument for signal measurement. First, the measured data can be stored automatically on a personal computer which provides an easy way for further processing.

(p10.5) Second, DSOs are usually commercialized with the ability to measure AC input across multiple channels, usually in two or four channels. Therefore, using recorded signals measured at the same time, gain and phase shift can be calculated. In this experiment, we compare two methods of measuring the electrical impedance of the QCM sensor around the series resonant frequency. The AC signal source is a direct digital signal generator, AD-9910. This experiment shows that by using the most suitable processing stage, it can eliminate the instability of the signal generator.

(p10.6) Direct comparisons have been made between a Digital Storage Oscilloscope (DSO) and a phase gain integrated circuit detector have been investigated. Gain phase detectors require averaging data for each measurement to reduce signal source variation. DSO provides more accurate results than phase gain integrated circuit detectors. DSO requires pre-processing signals using the most suitable sinusoidal model to get a clear signal to calculate. However, the DSO requires relatively complex processing to obtain the impedance and phase yield, and the phase gain integrated circuit detector simplifies the measurement process [14].
