# PAIN MANAGEMENT WITH PENTHROX INHALER IN PREHOSPITAL CARE:LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 234029162 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6387b1d7dbfc0b7a5eee7b2eb35475eb1224932f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6387b1d7dbfc0b7a5eee7b2eb35475eb1224932f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Result and Disccusion: -Pain management with Penthrox Inhaler
(p4.0) A common problem in pain management in the emergency department and pre-hospital is the difficulty in injecting patients, especially in intravenous administration or patients who do not want to take oral medications because of nausea and vomiting. Failure to put the infusion in the ambulance can affect the delay in handling trauma pain, as well as the limited authority of ambulance officers to administer pain medication injections, penthrox inhaler is the choice of ambulance officers in handling trauma pain (Dißmann et al., 2018).Penthroxinhaleris an anesthetic drug as a trademark of Methoxyflurane, which has been used for more than 40 years in Australia in the management of traumatic pain, both in the pre-hospital and in the emergency department (Porter et al., 2018). Methoxyflurane is a fluorinated hydrocarbon anesthetic, where Penthtrox inhaler contains 3 ml per unit package or in terms of the low dose drug Methoxyflurane that can be used up to 6 ml in the treatment of trauma pain, when inhaled for 25-30 minutes, can provide analgesic effect (Porter et al., 2018). Penthrox inhaler is an alternative treatment for trauma pain and in minor surgical procedures or other medical procedures for both adults and children to treat pain due to the procedure (Porter et al., 2018).
## (s8) Side effect of Penthrox Inhaler
(p8.0) The side effects of using gas drugs are generally seen, whether it causes neprotoxicity and the level of tolerability by the patient himself. Neprotoxicity occurs, depending on how long the drug is given and at what dose. The safe dose for using Pentrox inhaler is 3 ml, and can be repeated for 0.3 hours, the results show that the fluoride level in the serum is 4.7 micro mol/l, while the blood level is between 0.006-0.026 micro mol/l (Porter et al., 2018). The maximum point for safe use of Penthrox inhaler is a maximum of 2 hours (serum level 50 micro mol/l), if given between 2.5 -3 hours will cause sub-clinical symptoms of toxicity, and toxic levels occur when given more than 5 hours (serum level 90 micro mol/l) (Porter et al., 2018).The level of tolerability of drug use can be expressed by patients in the form of side effects. Side effects occurred when 3 ml of Penthrox inhaler was given with oxygen saturation less than 90%, some patients complained of mild headache and mild somnolence. Some patients complain of the smell of rotten fruit (Porter et al., 2018). 18.1% complained of nausea, euphoria, lightheadedness, hallucinations, dry throat, and paresthesia on the lips. Complaints in children after being given Penthrox inhaler, 25.7% experienced drowsiness and 6.7% experienced mild hallucinations (Porter et al., 2018).It can be concluded that giving Methoxyflurane to patients, must ensure the oxygen saturation level is above 90%, the maximum dose is 6 ml, can be given for 2 hours to reduce side effects.
## (s9) Penthrox Inhaler Exposure Level to the Ambulance Staff
(p9.0) Every use of a drug in the form of gas, can undeniably give negative exposure to the officer who gave it. The results of observations of giving Penthrox inhaler in 8 hours in a room without cold air conditioning showed that methoxyflurane gas exposure was 0.23 PPM while in a closed room, exposure to Methoxyflurane gas showed 1.5 PPM, the median of 0.017 (0.008-0.736) PPM, the maximum exposure limit the Methoxyflurane gas is 15 PPM. It can be concluded that giving Methoxyflurane during working hours,specifically 8 hours a day, is safe for use by ambulance officers in the handling of cases of trauma pain (Frangos et al., 2020).
