# Immunologic Aspect in Diagnosis and Treatment of SARS-COV-2 patients; A Review Article

CorpusID: 233305764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783682392daed5316436ea3720a840010b7ff045](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783682392daed5316436ea3720a840010b7ff045)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Humoral and cellular immunity:
(p5.0) ACE2 is expressed highly on apical side of lung epithelial cells in alveolar space, so this virus can likely enter those cells. It is also evident from the fact that early injury of lung was often seen in distal airway. Main components of innate immunity in airways are epithelial cells, alveolar macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs). DCs are located underneath the epithelium while macrophages are located at the apical side of epithelium. 4 Upon entry of the viruses, humoral and cellular immunity is stimulated when these viral antigens are presented to CD4+ helper T cells or CD8 cytotoxic T cells by macrophages and DCs in association with MHC class-2 and MHC class-1 molecules respectively. 12 Two types of antibodies that have diagnostic significance are produced by the immune system named as IgM and IgG antibodies. IgM antibodies are produced earlier than IgG antibodies. 13 it takes about 03 to 06 days for IgM antibodies to be produced after the viral attack, giving seropositive results in current or recent infection. While IgG antibodies provide long term immunity having high affinity responses and are important for immunological memory. IgG takes longer to produce. It is detected after 8 days of infection. 13 IgG antibodies are specific to Spike and Nucleopsid proteins and play a protective role against infections because they last longer while SARS-specific IgM remain in the blood for about 12 weeks then they degrade. 12 The virus usually escapes the innate immune response and gets entry into the cell. Immune system first recognizes the unique molecular patterns of the pathogens by PRRs (Pattern Recognition Receptors). The PRRs for respiratory viruses are TLRs (Toll-like Receptors) 3, 7, 8 present throughout the airway on different cells for defense mechanism. 4, 12 this recognition is led to signaling and to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Unfortunately, by now, there is a little knowledge about antigen presentation of SARS-CoV-2. Studies described that the virus forms a double membrane vesicles during replicating in the cell that prevents it to be recognized by the host innate immunity. Additionally, activation of IFN (interferon) beta promoter and inhibition of nuclear transport of IFN regulating factor 3 by ORF4a, ORF4b, ORF5, and M-proteins also helps the virus to escape from innate immune system. 12
## (s6) Cytokine storm and viral sepsis:
(p6.0) Infection of SARS-CoV-2 in critical patients with symptoms of severe pneumonia, sometimes leads to overproduction of inflammatory cytokines, also termed as cytokine storm, which is uncontrollable. This leads to progression of disease, and to acute lung damage and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) that is a major contributing factor to mortality due to CoVID-19. The cytokines includes IFN-γ, IL (Interleukin)-1, IL-6, IL-12, and TGFβ (Transforming growth factor beta). 14,15,16 Cytokine storm may also lead to hyper activation of T cells, natural killer cells, macrophages, and different chemical mediators from immune cells in addition to excessive production of many cytokines. This impairs lung microvascular and alveolar barrier and it brings off vascular leakage, edema, and the conditions of hypoxia. Such conditions are potentially fatal. 14 A very little published data has revealed that autopsy samples which included lungs, liver, kidney, and heart of elderly died patients had huge amount of inflammatory cell infiltrate, fibrosis, necrosis, and bleeding. Lymphatic organs and spleen also showed atrophy and other conditions of bacterial sepsis like disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). That's why a term 'viral sepsis' is coined in such condition. This undesired immune response and organ failure contributes to the mortality rate of the disease. 16
## (s9) Sample requirement:
(p9.0) RT-PCR detects the virus using respiratory samples. Broadly recommended samples are upper respiratory samples that include nasopharyngeal swabs (NPS), oropharyngeal swab and nasal aspirates while sputum, Broncho alveolar lavage (BAL) and aspirates of trachea are included in lower respiratory samples that are less likely to be collected. Viral loads detection in upper and lower respiratory samples depend upon the days after onset of illness. Low viral loads in the area sampled may lead to a false negative result. 18 Study showed that in the first week of onset of illness, high viral loads were observed that declined with time. 18
## (s16) Corticosteroids:
(p16.0) Corticosteroid is a most commonly and traditionally used drug for its anti-inflammatory response. But it is also known for its immunosuppressive response. This two sided characteristic makes it controversial in its use. 14, 16 although it has been successfully used during SARS epidemic in resolving fever, and lung infiltrate but recent WHO guidelines do not recommend its use for SARS-CoV-2 patients for not showing significant results in patient's recovery. 14
