# Complex Systems, Emergence, and Multiscale Analysis: A Tutorial and Brief Survey

CorpusID: 237818779 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4042157062331449b86e426785b14f911e6874a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4042157062331449b86e426785b14f911e6874a)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics, Mathematics

## (s5) Reasons Why the Power Law Is Favored in Modeling
(p5.0) Two reasons make the power law extremely important in complexity science. One reason is that it embodies the notion of self-similarity, and thus is the natural mathematical tool for describing fractal phenomena. The other reason is that it often signifies great risk, due to infinite variance or even mean. To understand the first reason, imagine a large room with a lot of balls flying around. See Figure 2. Assume the size of the balls follows a power law distribution,

(p5.1) When we observe the balls with our naked eyes, we normally will only pay more attention to the balls of certain size ranges-large balls will block our vision, and very small balls cannot be seen. Now assume that our eyes are comfortable with the scales r 0 , 2r 0 , r 0 /2, etc. Our perception is determined by the relevant abundance or the ratio of the balls of sizes 2r 0 , r 0 , and r 0 /2:

(p5.2) It is independent of r 0 . Now suppose we view the balls through a microscope with a magnifying power of 100, so now our eyes will be focusing on the balls with scales 2r 0 /100, r 0 /100, r 0 /200, etc. The ratio of the balls on those scales will again be independent of the scale r 0 /100. A perception independent of the scale is the essence of self-similarity.

(p5.3) The second reason that the power law is associated with higher risks is easier to understand, since a power law distribution has infinite variance when 0 < α < 2 and even infinite mean when 0 < α ≤ 1. Here, on one hand, one has to have some awe with the power law, as otherwise the cost could be tremendous. For example, during financial crises or economic downturns, the loss of the listed companies follows a power law distribution that is even heavier than the distribution of the gains of all profitable companies [51,52].
