# Periodontal Inflammation and Systemic Diseases: An Overview

CorpusID: 239890800 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf2ee4b8f3c073ea90ea836694617998f0aabe3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf2ee4b8f3c073ea90ea836694617998f0aabe3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s17) MEDICAL ASPECTS OF PERIODONTAL INFLAMMATION
(p17.0) PD and CP are implicated in a multitude of pathogenic processes (see Figure 3), for this reason their prevention is essential for public health (Fujita et al., 2018). As previously discussed, it has been argued whether specific periodontal pathogens are able to stimulate and trigger for the development of systemic inflammatory disease, or if it is actually systemic disease the one leading to microbiome dysbiosis causing an abnormal abundance of periodontal pathogens. If, as is often the case, these same oral pathogens are able to induce non-oral diseases, they may become targets for therapeutic intervention, perhaps via drug repurposing schemes. In any case, the presence of periodontal pathogens may at least be used as a diagnostic marker to predict susceptibility to non-oral disease (Bui et al., 2019).
## (s28) COVID-19, Inflammation, and Periodontitis
(p28.0) The recent, still ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has significantly altered many of our notions and perceptions of chronic and inflammatory conditions. This is also the case with periodontal inflammation. As we have discussed extensively, the roots of the pathophysiology of CP lie, to a large proportion, on a disproportionate cytokine response. As it is the case, the so-called cytokine storms also contribute to a large extent in COVID-19 related complications and mortality Hu et al., 2021). COVID-19 and CP share similar cytokine storm profiles, characterized by elevated levels of IL-1β, IL-7, IL-10, IL-17, IL-2, IL-8, IL-9, IFN-γ , TGF-β, as well as some metalloproteinases . As previously presented, CP often involves Th17 inflammatory responses that are, indeed, one of the determinant drivers of cytokine storming (Bunte and Beikler, 2019).
