# Management of Dentigerous Cysts -A Review

CorpusID: 237856056 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a6b9e4858f0095f236887a07f3a52d0979c6916](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a6b9e4858f0095f236887a07f3a52d0979c6916)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) M ar s u p i a l i s a t i o n ( P a r t s ch I T e ch n i q u e )
(p5.0) It is therefore advisable to revert to the original modality of treatment -one that had fallen out of over the past few decades in opposition to the complete enucleation approach, only to rise again as the more preferable form of therapy in specific situations, such as amongst patients in the first or second decades of life-decompression.

(p5.1) The classical treatment modality of marsupialization or decompression are primarily the choice of treatment for inflammatory dentigerous cysts. This is recommended in order to preserve the tooth that is associated with the pathology. This also favours their eruption when it is difficult to reliably predict the tooth eruption.

(p5.2) Sometimes after marsupialization / decompression, eruption of the associated impacted teeth assumes an abnormal position. It is therefore highly advisable to use a multifaceted approach to the management of such patients. The oral pathologist, the oral and maxillofacial surgeon, and the orthodontist have a unique opportunity to coordinate their efforts to bring about a form of therapy that addresses each patient's specific problems. The identification of the anomaly, its precise surgical approach and the subsequent focus on preservation of the patient's dentition offers the opportunity to successfully remove the offending tissue, while helping the patient achieve a normal occlusion by employing traction of the impacted tooth into its final desired place. This is only made possible if adequate space exists, which again lends considerable weight to the argument of including the skills of an experienced orthodontist to aid in the initial planning stage of the treatment and also the final orthodontically activated traction. 17 Marsupialization, also known as Decompression or Partsch I technique, is a surgical technique based on the incomplete removal of the lining of the pathological cavity, while focusing on reducing the effect the cyst has on the adjacent structures. The cyst shrinks gradually to become smaller. This procedure permits a break in the cystic wall and paves a way for the cystic wall to drain the contents of the cyst. The cyst wall is sutured to the oral mucosa. This procedure permits the eruption of the cyst associated tooth, with or without orthodontic traction.

(p5.3) The advantages of marsupialisation are: • Smaller duration of surgical intervention • Minimal trauma to the patient • Adjacent anatomic structures such as the teeth, the floor of the nose, the inferior alveolar nerve and the maxillary sinus are left intact

(p5.4) The drawbacks of marsupialization are: • Longer hospital stay • Greater duration of postoperative care and follow up • Requires a high degree of patient and parental compliance • Subpar bony healing in patients older than 20 years of age • The risk of recurrence is categorically stated to be higher than the Partsch II technique • The lining of the dentigerous cyst if not removed in its entirety, can cause any ameloblastomas or carcinomas that may be developing in other parts of the lining and may be missed due to incomplete histological examination • A secondary procedure may be necessary • Repeated packing of the pathological cavity is required 18
