# A Review of Remote Sensing Image Dehazing

CorpusID: 235436700 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7121299bfaac9690b64c48c9a46b71b55d807bb7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7121299bfaac9690b64c48c9a46b71b55d807bb7)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s15) Estimating the Atmospheric Light
(p15.0) To estimate the atmospheric light, He firstly picked the top 0.1% brightest pixels in the dark channel and then recorded the coordinates of these pixels. Finally, the max value of corresponding pixel in the original image is regarded as atmospheric light [48].
## (s42) Quantitative Comparison
(p42.0) To check the recovery performances of different techniques, the above mentioned methods (including HE, Retinex, DCP, Non-Local, DehazeNet, MSCNN, AOD-NET, and GCANet [94]) were tested on eight challenging real-world RS hazy pictures. The selected RS images and the results dehazed by the compared approaches are shown in Figure 8. It can be seen from this figure that RS images dehazed by traditional enhancement methods, i.e., HE and Retinex, have high contrast, while they lose some details, e.g., the brighter area in the upper right corner of E1 and the darker area on the left in E2. Moreover, the results of the physical dehazing, i.e., DCP and Non-Local, may lead to some darker RS outputs than they should be (see the DCP result of E5). In contrast, despite the fact that data-driven dehazing is able to produce a high-quality haze-free scene for most given examples, they may fail to the case with heavy haze.  Figure 8. Comparison of RS image dehazing methods discussed above. Figure 8. Comparison of RS image dehazing methods discussed above.

(p42.1) To accurately rank the performance of above compared techniques, we also tested them on eight simulated RS data consisting of hazy image and ground truth. The corresponding recovery results are shown in Figure 9. As expected, the results on simulated input also confirm that both image enhancement, physical model, and data-driven have a somewhat ability to remove the haze cover in an image, i.e., having a good output on a special example. However, they do not work well on the images with various scenes.

(p42.2) Furthermore, we employ MSE, MAE, PSNR, and SSIM to access the restoration quality of selected dehazing methods, as summarized in Table 1. It can be found that data-driven dehazing has more potential to achieve RS image dehazing since it roughly wins the best score in terms of all used evaluation index. Haze-Free Figure 9. Comparison of RS image dehazing methods discussed above.   Geological disasters, such as landslides, mudslides, and ground fissures, seriously endanger human life and wealth security. A high-quality RS image can help us roughly investigate the overall damage in the disaster area. However, RS data may lose its value when it is obscured by clouds and haze. Therefore, removing the haze from hazy RS images is very significant in geological disaster monitoring and control.
