# Brain entropy, fractal dimensions and predictability: A review of complexity measures for EEG in healthy and neuropsychiatric populations

CorpusID: 239214453 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6b2d68ce7c9b17ebf7a8e294fa9d0fe5d335f1a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6b2d68ce7c9b17ebf7a8e294fa9d0fe5d335f1a3)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s4) | Spatial dimensionality
(p4.0) Complex systems can be mathematically modelled by a set of differential equations, referred to as dynamic variables. These variables can be represented in a coordinate system called the state space where each isolated point in the space (a state vector) represents a system state. As it is beyond the scope of this paper to describe the reconstruction of the state space from the time series, readers can find these details in Deyle and Sugihara (2011). Extending from the concept of state space, the phase space is another coordinate system that captures the evolution of the states over time. Each point of the phase space represents a system state at a given time instant. If the dynamical system being modelled is a real-world signal (e.g., biological signal), after a long enough time, the evolution of the dynamic variables will reach an equilibrium where the dynamical system is bounded by a subset of the states with physical significance called the attractor (see Figure 2). The geometry of the attractor constructed from a biological signal captures the unique information about the dynamic nature of the underlying physiological system, beyond what traditional signal F I G U R E 1 Complexity measures can be structured broadly into indices of predictability and regularity. Measures of predictability capture either spatial or temporal dimensionality of the dynamical system, and measures of regularity reflect the complexity of the system's output either on single scales or multiscales. analysis in time and frequency domains can describe. As such, most of the spatial dimensionality indices described below actually refer to characterizations of the geometric shape of the reconstructed attractor (hence the 'spatial dimensionality' denomination).
