# A review on role of nitrous oxide nanoparticles, potential vaccine targets, drug, health care and artificial intelligence to combat COVID-19

CorpusID: 235442463 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ac01a702c725997a20f206ebab82a4b5e5b01258](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ac01a702c725997a20f206ebab82a4b5e5b01258)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s6) Nafamostat and camostat
(p6.0) Nafamostat and camostat were approved by Japan for use against Pancreatitis. There have been some trials to observe the positive impact of serine protease against COVID-19. After some crucial trials, there was no trace of suppression in viral infection. Besides, nafamostat mesylate and camostat mesylate need to be tested further to understand their effects on SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lungs (Hoffmann et al. 2020). Moreover, another study predicted that Camostat and Nafamostat would inhibit prothrombin. However, the usage of Nafamostat was not safe due to its severe side effects such as cardiac arrest, agranulocytosis and anaphylaxis (Kailas2020).
## (s7) Remdesivir
(p7.0) A nucleotide analogue, Remdesivir drug, is viewed as the most potential treatment for SARS-CoV-2infection. A notable study reported the improvement in patients after remdesivir therapy. Totally, 53 patients were treated with remde remdesivir. The patients were administered single dosage per day (200 mg). Among the treated, 36 reported improvement in the health condition (Grein 2020).
## (s9) Role of nitrous oxide (NO) nanoparticles to combat against COVID-19
(p9.0) Virus usually constitutes variable size ranges from 10 to 850 nm. NO is known to combat various fungi, bacteria, virus and tumor cells. Nitrous oxide combined with nanoparticles can be used for various applications. NO can act as an antimicrobial agent because of its anti fungal and antibacterial properties. In addition to those properties, it can able to modulate foreign agents. NO had considered to be a vital agent to treat corona virus and other lung-related ailments. NO can be administered with some other medicines can be effectively used to cure MERS-CoV affected patients and showed positive impacts with very less side effects (Pieretti et al. 2021;Akaike and Maeda 2000). Inhalation of NO treatment has been assessed for COVID patients in two nations, United States of America and China. Previously, NO was effectively used to treat lung-related ailments caused by certain virus. The studies found that NO compounds have potential to combat SARS-CoV replication. Nitrous oxide donor S-nitroso-N-acetyl penicillamine was effective in inhibition of SRS-CoV replication mechanism. Several researchers tried to assess the effects of NO against SARS-CoV-2 and NO donors were considered to important medical treatment. NO can be used as an alternative to tackle the current pandemic. Ultraviolet radiation promotes the NO generation and it is stored in skin and releases into blood, thereby reducing the blood pressure. 
