# VQE Method: A Short Survey and Recent Developments

CorpusID: 232232828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a)

Fields: Physics, Chemistry

## (s2) Introduction to VQE
(p2.0) The VQE method was introduced to mitigate the significant hardware demands needed by the QPE approach on NISQ devices. VQE is a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm, where the computational workload is shared between the classical and quantum components of the hardware. It starts with a reasonable assumption about the form of the target wave function. The most common choice is to represent a wave function in a basis of atom-centered Gaussian basis functions. However, plane wave basis sets [39] can be used as well as the recently proposed "basis-set free" approach [40]. A trial wave function or ansatz is constructed with adjustable parameters, followed by the design of a quantum circuit capable of realizing this ansatz. The ansatz parameters are then variationally adjusted until the expectation value of the electronic Hamiltonian

(p2.1) is minimized. In equation 1 ψ( θ) is the trial wave function that depends on the vector of variational parameters θ; E is the ground state energy of H el , an electronic Hamiltonian most commonly written in the second quantized form, although the first quantization representation has also been considered [41]. In this work, we focus on the second quantized form of the Hamiltonian
## (s5) Unitary Pair Coupled Cluster with Generalized Singles and Doubles Product Wave Functions
(p5.0) One of the chemistry-inspired ansatzes designed to reduce circuit length is the Unitary Pair CC with Generalized Singles and Doubles (k -UpCCGSD) method proposed by Lee et al. [55] The starting point for k -UpCCGSD is the unitary pair coupled cluster double excitations method (UpCCD), which contains a significantly smaller number of operators compared with UCCSD because it includes only twoelectron excitations from occupied spatial orbital i to unoccupied spatial orbital a:

(p5.1) where excitations are performed from occupied orbitals i to unoccupied orbitals a and α and β represent spin. It suffers less from non-variationality and is able to correctly break single bonds. However, it does not recover the dynamic correlation present in UCCD and loses invariance to rotations in occupied-occupied and virtual-virtual subspaces. To address these problems, in addition to pair double excitations, the full single excitations are included in the UpCCSD. For increased accuracy, generalized single and double excitations are included so that there is no distinction between occupied and virtual orbitals p and q when constructing excitations operators:

(p5.2) We note that UCCGSD always produces more accurate results than UCCSD but at a much higher computational cost. In UpCCGSD the cost is reduced by using only pair double excitations. UpCCGSD is inferior to UCCGSD because of the large number of missing double-excitation operators. For increased flexibility of ansatz, a product of k unitary operators is included in the k -UpCCGSD ansatz, resulting in the final expression:

(p5.3) where |φ is the reference wave function and each operatorT (k) contains an independent set of variational parameters for single and paired doubles CC amplitudes. Because of the sparsity of the UpCCGSD operator, the cost to prepare a k -UpCCGSD state scales linearly with the system size with a prefactor k. This structure also provides a way to systematically improve accuracy by increasing k.

(p5.4) The k -UpCCGSD method has been tested on H 4 , H 2 O, and N 2 molecules. Compared with the UCCSD method, k -UpCCGSD offers higher accuracy for the ground state energy with a smaller number of operators in the ansatz for all studied molecules. k -UpCCGSD can achieve chemical accuracy with k = 2 for H 4 (STO-3G and 6-31G basis sets) and H 2 O (STO-3G basis) molecules. UCCGSD is numerically exact for these systems, but it requires more operators in the ansatz. For N 2 molecule with STO-3G basis, k -UpCCGSD requires k=4 to achieve chemical accuracy, whereas UCCSD with more operators fails to come close to chemical accuracy and UCCGSD is within chemical accuracy but requires double the number of operators compared with k -UpCCGSD.
## (s6) Orbital Optimized UCC (OO-UCC) Ansatz
(p6.0) OO-UCC is another variant of the UCC approach [56] where a single-particle orbital rotation operatorκ = pq κ pq (a † p a q − a † q a p ) is introduced to the UCC energy functional,

(p6.1) (hereτ =T −T † is the UCC cluster operator) to variationally determine the coupled cluster amplitudes and also molecular orbital coefficients. Note that optimizingκ is essentially equivalent to minimizing a wave function with respect to orbital rotation parameters. Whenτ is fixed,κ can be obtained through solving a linear equation, Hκ = −g, where H and g are the electronic Hessian and gradient, respectively. In practice, the OO-UCC ansatz can be easily derived from the UCCSD-alike ansatz (also similar to the DUCC ansatz discussed in the following section), except that only doubles are included,

(p6.2) whereτ 1 andτ 2 don't commute, and the singles part eτ 1 takes the role of carrying out orbital rotations that would be variationally optimized to obtain |φ = eτ 1 |φ by using a classical computer, while the doubles part, eτ 2 , is optimized by the VQE. We note that the variational orbitals obtained from the OO-UCCD approach coincide with the commonly known Brueckner orbitals. The reported numerical testing on small molecules has shown that in comparison with conventional UCCSD ansatzes, the qubitization of the OO-UCCD ansatz allows a slight reduction in the number of VQE parameters and the circuit depth. For example, for the NH 3 molecule with the STO-3G basis set, the number of the VQE parameters and the circuit depth required in the OO-UCCD approach were 120 and 2,720, respectively, while those required by the conventional UCCSD were 135 and 2,780, respectively. Regarding accuracy, OO-UCCD maintains a similar level of accuracy to that of UCCSD for most of the small molecules except for LiH, where OO-UCCD results are closer to the full configuration interaction (FCI) results than to UCCSD.
## (s13) Qubit Coupled Cluster Method
(p13.0) The qubit coupled cluster (QCC) method introduced by Ryabinkin et al. [26] resembles the structure of coupled cluster; but instead of using fermionic excitations, the ansatz is built directly in the qubit space. The QCC wave function is of the form
