# Towards Clean and Safe Water: A Review on the Emerging Role of Imprinted Polymer-Based Electrochemical Sensors

CorpusID: 235351899 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5321928c7cf9207bf2111d01c07bdb790557fc0a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5321928c7cf9207bf2111d01c07bdb790557fc0a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Computer Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p0.1) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly

(p0.2) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p0.3) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly
## (s89) Introduction
(p89.0) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p89.1) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly

(p89.2) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p89.3) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly
