# Ultrasonic Guided-Waves Sensors and Integrated Structural Health Monitoring Systems for Impact Detection and Localization: A Review

CorpusID: 233459036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f7aa6d2f5465699f49f89b79fa35f427b980c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f7aa6d2f5465699f49f89b79fa35f427b980c)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering, Materials Science

## (s12) Comparison of Piezoelectric PVDF and PZT Sensors Sensitivity for Impact Detection
(p12.0) In the previous section, we reported the design and fabrication of a circular sensor that was integrated in the same IDT device with the aim to capture impact generated Lamb wave signals propagating from any direction with respect to the sensor center. Some companies have specialized in providing patch piezoelectric sensors with characteristics that are suitable for acoustic source localization, and off the shelf devices are available from Acellent and Physik Instrumente. Specifically, in our design, the circular PVDF sensor has a diameter of 6.5 mm, similar to Acellent's SML-SP-1/4-PZT sensor (1/4", or 6.35 mm) (see Figure 4).

(p12.1) The sensitivity of the circular piezoelectric element as a receiver was assessed by comparing it to a PZT device of a similar active area (see Figure 4), the Physik Instrumente P-876.SP1. These two sensors were taped side-by-side to an aluminum plate 1.2 mm thick, with a third transducer used as transmitter and placed at distance of 200 mm from both. A Morlet wavelet centered at 250 kHz was transmitted and received using the same pre-amplifier for both sensors: an instrumentation amplifier (INA) providing a voltage gain of 78 dB at 250 kHz. The excitation wavelet and the acquired traces are plotted in Figure 7a,b, respectively.

(p12.2) The plot shows that, as expected from the piezoelectric properties of the materials, the circular element sensitivity is lower than the PZT device. However, such a wide difference may not be a problem in impact detection applications, where the signals tend to be rather large, as reported in [73], for different impact velocities. In some cases, the large input voltage at the preamplifier input exceeds the rail-to-rail input and saturates the output with a consequent loss of information of the impact event. In conclusion, the different sensitivity of the two piezoelectric materials is not a limiting factor for the choice between the two. There are other differences between that must be considered for the choice of the sensor technology as temperature. In the following section, we analyze the operating temperature range of PVDF piezo films, being limited with respect piezoceramic and piezocomposites (see Table 1). The plot shows that, as expected from the piezoelectric properties of the materials, the circular element sensitivity is lower than the PZT device. However, such a wide difference may not be a problem in impact detection applications, where the signals tend to be rather large, as reported in [73], for different impact velocities. In some cases, the large input voltage at the preamplifier input exceeds the rail-to-rail input and saturates the output with a consequent loss of information of the impact event. In conclusion, the different 
