# Natural Killer Cells in Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis -A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 245908215 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/151cb405bced473a637958fa64db64f97d4a4b22](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/151cb405bced473a637958fa64db64f97d4a4b22)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
(p7.0) AAV is a group of complex systemic autoimmune disease involving several target organs. This makes it challenging to firmly conclude about the properties and potential role of NK cells in the disease pathogenesis. NK cells in blood of AAV patients have an altered and activated phenotype, but whether the number and frequency of NK cells are also affected is not conclusively determined. Most published studies suggest that number or percentages of circulating NK cells in AAV patients are unaltered but other studies report an increase or decrease, especially in the active phase of the disease. NK cell numbers and frequency are however difficult to interpret, since there is a vast heterogeneity also in healthy controls. Furthermore, AAV patients' treatments could potentially impact NK cells in AAV, and evidence for this is particularly strong for AZA (23). A potential role for NK cells in the effect of cell-binding therapeutic antibodies, via ADCC can also be envisioned. NK cells are also able to infiltrate into the target organ, but in low numbers and the biological significance of these cells or their role in the pathogenesis of AAV remains to be explored, by for example single cell analysis. Novel techniques for spatial analysis of protein and RNA expression in tissue sections could further advance the field and increase the knowledge about the immunological landscape in AAV organs, including NK cells.
