# Different Respiratory Samples for COVID-19 Detection by Standard and Direct Quantitative RT-PCR: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 244602955 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8e2858d3cae2bb28faa00078e92147696a3baec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8e2858d3cae2bb28faa00078e92147696a3baec)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s2) Comparison between self-collected and clinician-collected swabs
(p2.0) The studies that compared self-collected and clinician-collected swabs for COVID-19 detection using RT-qPCR were reported and described in Table 1. Some studies reported that the results of RT-qPCR using cliniciancollected swabs are comparable to selfcollected swabs, especially in cases with higher viral loads (17). Therchilsen et al. reported the acceptable agreement and almost equivalent sensitivity (84.2% for self-and 89.5% for HCWcollected samples) between mobile-phone Table 1. Comparison between self-collected swabs and clinical-collected swabs for diagnosing SARS-CoV-2 using RT-qPCR.
## (s3) Country
(p3.0) No  video-instructed self-collected oropharyngeal as well as nasal samples and HCW-collected oropharyngeal samples (9). In another study, the sensitivity and specificity of self-collected midnasal swabs and clinician swabs were reported 80.0% and 97.9%, respectively. Furthermore, false-negative results in patients with low primary viral loads were seen (17). However, Abdollahi et al. reported moderate agreement between RT-qPCR results of the NPS and OPS samples obtained by the patients and those collected by the lab technicians (18). Overall, future studies should examine the diagnostic accuracy and cost-effectiveness of self-testing methods in a larger and more heterogeneous cohort of patients (9).
## (s6) Mouth rinse/gargle
(p6.0) The anatomic region in the pharynx gargle is the same as throat swabs. Application of pharynx gargle samples is an accepted method for molecular detection of common respiratory infections. Pharynx gargle samples can be easily self-collected without close contact between patients and HCWs (26). The users are explained to squeeze the contents of the sterile vial containing saline into their open mouth. Next, they are asked to perform a swish/gargle cycle three times and then throw the saline out into a sterile empty container (23). It was reported that detection of viral RNA in saline mouth rinse/gargle is stable after 2 days storage at RT (23).
## (s8) Sputum
(p8.0) A higher level of viral load can be detected in samples from LRT compared to NPS and OPS. Furthermore, positive relation between sputum viral load and severity of COVID-19 as well as the risk of progression was reported (35). However, coughing up is necessary to collect sputum from the lower airways. Therefore, all patients, especially elderly or asymptomatic patients, cannot produce sputum (35). CDC stated that LRT samples, such as sputum, are allowed for patients with a productive cough or under particular situations (e.g., invasive mechanical ventilation). Due to the production of aerosols during sputum acquisition, induced sputum was not suggested by the CDC. However, endotracheal sputum aspirates or self-collected sputum (with proper instructions) can be beneficial. Sputum samples can be suitable for patients with a traumatic fracture or anatomic anomaly in the facial/nasal area and patients with productive cough and negative test results using NPS. The presence of mucus in sputum samples is problematic, which can be overcome by CDC guidelines for sputum preparation (36). CDC has suggested pretreating sputum with DTT for COVID-19 detection. In the study of Peng et al., sputum pretreatment using saline, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NALC), proteinase K (PK), and DTT were compared. A higher COVID-19 detection rate was achieved by pretreatment of sputum samples using PK and DTT compared to their pretreatment with NALC or saline (37). Taken together, PK or DTT pretreated sputum samples can be validated on both manual and automated platforms (36,37).
## (s10) Different methods for COVID-19 detection using direct RT-qPCR
(p10.0) Generally, COVID-19 testing is performed when symptoms are apparent. At that time, viral load is usually high (42). Direct RT-qPCR, which eliminates the viral RNA isolation step, is performed faster and simpler than tests requiring an initial RNA extraction step ( Figure 2). Therefore, direct RT-qPCR can be used in resource-limited regions with moderate access to RNA purification kit. This approach will cause widespread testing in these regions while saving time and cost (11). However, due to the presence of inhibitors of RT-qPCR in biological samples and RNA loss caused by heating and/or RNases, the use of pre-treated samples directly in RT-qPCR is challenging (43). Therefore, many studies focused on developing different direct RT-qPCR methods to obtain equivalent results to the established method that involves RNA extraction (Table 5).

(p10.1) Many kit-free protocols consider physical (heat inactivation) or chemical (PK treatment) methods. Heat inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 can be performed at 60 ºC for 32.5 min, at 80 ºC for 3.7 min, and at 100 ºC for 0.5 min. Application of internal control for real-time RT-qPCR reaction confirmed that these temperatures, which are used during amplification by real-time RT-qPCR, do not affect the quality of genetic materials of the samples. PK prevents contamination from  compared to that at 65 ºC for 30 min. Due to the cleavage of RNA into shorter fragments by heat inactivation, it is very important to consider primer and probe in hid-RT-PCR. It was found that the primer-probe set with the shortest amplicon is the best in hid-RT-PCR. Furthermore, because of possible inhibition from the sample, it is necessary to optimize the amount of sample input in hid-RT-PCR. It was demonstrated that an input of 1-4 μL sample in a 20 μL RT-qPCR reaction is optimal. A strong correlation between Ct values of extracted and heat-inactivated samples was observed. However, higher Ct values for hid-RT-PCR on frozen samples compared to fresh RNA eluates of the same samples were reported (10). In the study of Bruce et al., the best sensitivity for COVID-19 detection using direct RT-qPCR was obtained when 3 μL of Figure 2. Schematic representation of standard and direct RT-qPCR. In standard RT-qPCR, respiratory samples were collected, and in the case of swabs, they were transferred into a transport medium. Then, viral RNA was extracted, and an RT-qPCR reaction was performed. In direct RT-qPCR, the virus was inactivated by different methods, including heating, proteinase K treatment, pH changing, and then these inactivated samples were used for COVID-19 detection by RT-qPCR.
