# Citation: A Review on Flexible Electrochemical Biosensors to Monitor Alcohol in Sweat

CorpusID: 248250920 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6526f3ba7e50bb5674052d6ba934aca8e4270fce](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6526f3ba7e50bb5674052d6ba934aca8e4270fce)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering, Materials Science, Chemistry

## (s11) Electrochemical Techniques
(p11.0) Electrochemical techniques are used in order to analyze the loss (oxidation) or gain of electrons (reduction) that given material undergoes during an electrical stimulus. These oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions provide information such as concentration, kinetics, reaction mechanisms and other behaviors of a specie in solution [68]. That said, from electrochemical measurement it is possible to obtain a wide range of electrical properties such as potential, current, charge and time, allowing to evaluate the performance of a biosensor.
## (s12) Electrochemical Techniques
(p12.0) Electrochemical techniques are used in order to analyze the loss (oxidation) or gain of electrons (reduction) that given material undergoes during an electrical stimulus. These oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions provide information such as concentration, kinetics, reaction mechanisms and other behaviors of a specie in solution [68]. That said, from electrochemical measurement it is possible to obtain a wide range of electrical properties such as potential, current, charge and time, allowing to evaluate the performance of a biosensor.

(p12.1) As stated before, electrochemical biosensors can be classified according to the characteristics of the signal obtained by transduction. Thus, according to the type of signal, which may be potential difference, current intensity or impedance/conductance changes, biosensors can be classified as potentiometric, amparometric and impedimetric, respectively [69].
## (s27) SPEs Process of Formation: Substrates, Inks and Additives
(p27.0) Currently it is possible to acquire different substrates, conductive inks and additives for the production of SPEs focused on research and innovation. According to the literature, the use of nanomaterials for the construction of SPEs has shown excellent results. Depending on the intended use, a wide range of conductive materials can be used in electrochemical transducers such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), gold (Au), zinc (ZnO) and graphene [111].
## (s28) SPEs Process of Formation: Substrates, Inks and Additives
(p28.0) Currently it is possible to acquire different substrates, conductive inks and additives for the production of SPEs focused on research and innovation. According to the literature, the use of nanomaterials for the construction of SPEs has shown excellent results. Depending on the intended use, a wide range of conductive materials can be used in electrochemical transducers such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), gold (Au), zinc (ZnO) and graphene [111].
