# A survey on the parameterized complexity of the independent set and (connected) dominating set reconfiguration problems

CorpusID: 248366406 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b18eea6709354741333862b5a6e2b27b157a9533](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b18eea6709354741333862b5a6e2b27b157a9533)

Fields: Computer Science, Mathematics

## (s8) Independent set reconfiguration under token sliding
(p8.0) Just like the token jumping variant, ISR-TS is W[1]-hard on general graphs. It remains hard even when restricted to bipartite graphs or {C 4 , . . . , C p }-free graphs [2], for any p ≥ 4. We sketch the proof for general graphs, which mimics the reduction for the token jumping model. The reduction is from the Multicolored Independent Set (MIS) problem, known to be W[1]-hard. In the Multicolored Independent Set problem, we are given a graph consisting of k cliques of arbitrary size and extra edges joining vertices from different cliques. The goal is to find an independent set of size k which must intersect with each clique in exactly one vertex (called a multicolored independent set). Given an instance (G = (V 1 ∪. . .∪V k , E), k) of Multicolored Independent Set, we construct an instance (H, k, I s , I t ) of ISR-TS as follows. We first let H = G + K k,k where without loss of generality each set V i can be assumed to be a clique. We let L = {l 1 , . . . , l k } and R = {r 1 , . . . , r l } denote the two parts of the biclique, and we set I s = L and I t = R. Finally, we add edges between {l i , r i } and every vertex in V i , for i ∈ [k]. It is not hard to see that (G, k) is a yes-instance of MIS if and only if (H, k, I s , I t ) is a yes-instance of ISR-TS; before any token can slide to R we must have k tokens in G forming a multicolored independent set.
