# Intelligence & Robotics Open Access Review Rail track condition monitoring: a review on deep learning approaches

CorpusID: 245834997 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c4b3d919e2f2a69424b8f95523ae342bdc8b651](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c4b3d919e2f2a69424b8f95523ae342bdc8b651)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) Common deep learning models
(p2.0) Artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning have developed rapidly in recent years. There are many more deep learning networks than one can practically remember. As the resources to learn a particular deep learning method are abundant, we only list some deep learning methods in this section to provide an overview of the techniques available for practitioners and researchers to select and provide brief introductions about the methods. More detailed guides on implementations can be found from the abundance of references available.

(p2.1) The most commonly heard neural network names are probably CNN and RNN. CNN might be noted as ConvNet. The architecture of a CNN was inspired by the organization of the visual cortex and is analogous to that of the connectivity pattern of neurons in the human brain. Individual neurons respond to stimuli only in a restricted region of the visual field known as the receptive field. A collection of such fields overlaps to cover the entire visual area. CNN takes in an input image, assigns importance (learnable weights and biases) to various aspects/objects in the image, and can differentiate one from the other. In RNN, which was derived from feedforward neural networks, nodes are connected to form a directed graph along a temporal sequence to exhibit temporal dynamic behavior. RNN's internal states (memory) are utilized to process variable-length sequences of inputs. A typical RNN architecture is LSTM which has feedback connections and can process both single data points (such as images) and entire sequences of data (such as speech or video). Applications of CNN and RNN to rail maintenance operations are commonly available, but CNN has been more widely adopted.

(p2.2) There are also some neural network architectures based on CNN with a novel configuration and supporting specific functions and tasks which might give inspirations for the rail maintenance operations. A Siamese neural network, also called a twin neural network, is an artificial neural network that uses the same weights while working in tandem on two different input vectors to calculate similarity scores of output vectors [27] . Figure 2 shows how the CNN layers are positioned to form the architecture of the Siamese neural network. U-Net is a CNN that was developed for biomedical image segmentation. It supplements the usual contracting network by successive layers to increase the output resolutions, where up-sampling operators replace pooling operations [28] . Figure 3 shows how the CNN layers are positioned to form the architecture of the U-Net.

(p2.3) Transfer learning and generative adversarial networks (GANs) are exciting and rapidly changing fields that have been drawing attention from researchers and practitioners in and out of the rail industry. The idea of transfer learning [ Figure 4] is that a model developed for a task can be reused as the starting point for a model on another task [29] . Pre-trained models are used as the starting point as transfer learning on both computer vision and natural language processing tasks so that computing and human resources can be preserved and provide a big jump for new deep learning tasks.
