# Mechanism of action of metformin as an anti-aging agent: a literature review

CorpusID: 246884303 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4441887c051c98e47403bab71f4a6a992138d70a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4441887c051c98e47403bab71f4a6a992138d70a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Antioxidants
(p11.0) Metformin carries out its role as an antioxidant through several mechanisms, namely directly capturing hydroxyl radicals and increasing the endogenous antioxidant system, including antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione reductase, catalase, and superoxide dismutase, or GSH content and by downregulating NADPH oxidase. 40 Metformin has been shown to restore paraoxonase 1 (PON 1) activity, a circulating antioxidant associated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and hydrolyzes lipid peroxides in lipoproteins, predominantly low-density lipoprotein LDL. 41 Metformin's action as an antioxidant can be explained with regard to oxidative stress. Metformin's action in delaying aging can be explained by the Nrf2 -GPx7 pathway. Nrf2 is a major transcription factor for modulating cellular antioxidant responses. By binding to antioxidant response elements (ARE), Nrf2 stimulates the expression of various antioxidant enzymes, including GPx7. 32 In young cells, sufficient Nrf2 transcription induces GPx7 expression to maintain oxidative stress. In old cells, the expression of Nrf2 and GPx7 are reduced and oxidative stress accumulates. The expression level of GPx7 decreases in aging human cells, and GPx7 depletion causes premature cellular aging. 32 The use of low-dose metformin can increase Nrf2 core translocation to increase GPx7 expression to reduce cell aging. Low-dose metformin treatment prolongs the life of human diploid fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells. Metformin regulates the endoplasmic reticulum GPx7. The expression level of GPx7 decreases in aging human cells, and GPx7 depletion causes premature cellular aging. 32
