# "EFFECT OF MEDITATION ON MENTAL HEALTH"-A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 244864324 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2048ccbdd335a66541eb64bf0c643146bc6cd5d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2048ccbdd335a66541eb64bf0c643146bc6cd5d)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s7) Sharma (2015) Sharma
(p7.0) Karimi et al. (2019) examined the impact of meditation on mindfulness, emotional intelligence, job satisfaction and job stress-related presenteeism in Australian worksites. Participants of the study had to try an "Auto Transcending Meditation Technique" (ATMT) at the worksite. Switching replications experimental design was used in the study which was compared to an intervention group with a control group. In order to compare the mean pre-post intervention differences, quantitative data analysis was used. From the training evaluation and qualitative data collected from focus groups, thematic analysis was completed. As a result of ATMT, participants indicated significant improvements in levels of mindfulness and emotional intelligence. It was also reported that themat ic analysis showed that participants felt the meditation training and practice resumed into positive personal changes. Results indicated higher mindfulness lessens the effect of stress in participants' mental and physical health. Results demonstrated that meditation training and practice intensifies mindfulness and emotional intelligence, along with benefits for employees" physical and mental health. The study suggested for workplace meditation to be contemplated in health promoting work settings. Schlosser et al. (2019) in their study aimed to report the prevalence of experiences related to unpleasant meditation in the international population of regular meditators as well as understanding the connection of these experiences with demographic characteristics. A total of 315 participants reported having unpleasant meditation experiences, which they thought of were due to meditation practice. Unpleasant meditation experiences were less likely to occur in female and religious participants as indicated by Logistic regression models. The study also reported that those with higher levels of repetitive negative thinking and those who took part in meditation retreat were more likely to experience unpleasant meditation.
