# Utilization of CRISPR-Mediated Tools for Studying Functional Genomics in Hematological Malignancies: An Overview on the Current Perspectives, Challenges, and Clinical Implications

CorpusID: 246362613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s3) TALENs (TALE Nucleases)
(p3.0) Transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) has rapidly emerged as an alternative to ZFNs for genome editing, and they are bacterial effector proteins. In 2009, the code used by TALE proteins to recognize DNA was uncovered. TALE DNA-binding domains can be constructed using a variety of methods, with the most straightforward approach being the Golden Gate assembly (Maeder et al., 2013). TALENs comprise a non-specific DNA cleavage domain fused to a customizable sequence-specific DNA-binding domain to generate DSBs. This DNA-binding domain consists of a highly conserved repeat sequence from transcription activator-like effector (TALE), which is a protein originally discovered in the phytopathogenic Xanthomonas bacteria that naturally alters the transcription of genes in host plant cells. The binding of TALE to DNA is mediated by a central region that contains an array of 33 to 35 amino acid sequence motifs. The amino acid sequence of each repeat is structurally similar, except for two hypervariable amino acids (the repeat variable di-residues or RVDs) at positions 12 and 13. DNA-binding specificity is determined by RVDs, with ND specifically binding to C nucleotides, HN to A or G nucleotides, NH to G nucleotides, and NP to all nucleotides. There is a one-to-one correspondence between RVDs and contiguous nucleotides in the target site, constituting a strikingly simple TALE-DNA recognition cipher.

(p3.1) Functional endonuclease FokI is factitiously fused to DNAbinding domains to create site-specific DSBs and thereby stimulate DNA recombination to achieve TALEN-induced targeted genomic modification. To cleave the two strands of the targeted DNA, the FokI cleavage domain must be dimerized. Hence, like zinc fingers, such a TALEN module is designed in pairs to bind opposing DNA target loci, with proper spacing (12-30 bp) between the two binding sites. However, compared to zinc-finger proteins, there is no need to redesign the linkage between repeats constituting long arrays of TALEs, whose function is to target individual genomic sites. Following pioneering studies on zinc-finger proteins, multiple effector domains have become accessible to support the fusion of TALE repeats for different genomic modification purposes, including nucleases, transcriptional activators, and site-specific recombinases. Although their simpler cipher codes provide better simplicity in design than triplet-confined zinc-finger proteins, one of the primary technical hurdles for cloning repeat TALE arrays is the design of identical repeat sequences on a large scale. To address this limitation, a few strategies have been established to facilitate the fast assembly of custom TALE arrays, including "Golden Gate" molecular cloning, high-throughput solid phase assembly, and connection-independent cloning techniques. More recent advances in TALEN assembly, though, have focused on the development of methods that can enhance their performance, including specificity profiling to uncover non-conventional RVDs that improve TALEN activity, directed evolution as means to refine TALE specificity, and even fusing TALE domains to homing endonuclease variants to generate chimeric nucleases with extended targeting specificity (Liu et al., 2014). TALENs attach FokI to arrays of DNA-binding modules, originally from plant pathogens, that each targets a single base pair. TALENs are smaller than Cas9 but larger than ZFNs. The modules have high DNA-binding affinity but include repeated sequences that create cloning challenges. According to a study conducted by Bethany K. R. and Randall S. P. in 2015, they have stated that TALENs are not efficient at making biallelic modifications, and it requires further cloning steps or alternative animal breeding step to produce animals with the intended biallelic mutations.
## (s9) Summary on Gene Editing Methods
(p9.0) In summary, the CRISPR system allows for site-specific genomic targeting in virtually any organism (Guilinger et al., 2014). It also offers platform that is an efficient way of making precise genetic changes to the human genome. This can be employed for disruption, addition, and correction of genes. Thus, the remaining parts of this review will focus on the utilization of CRISPR tools for understanding the functional genomics of various hematological malignancies, its challenges, as well as the clinical implications.
## (s10) APPLICATION OF VARIOUS CRISPR SYSTEM IN STUDYING THE FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS OF AML
(p10.0) AML is a multifaceted genetic disease caused by an interwoven process in which numerous collaborating mutations that allow a cell to evade the checkpoints that normally safeguard it against DNA damage and other disruptions of healthy cell growth (Babaei et al., 2013). It is a type of blood cancer which causes excessive proliferation of abnormal immature leukemic cells known as blasts. Uncontrolled growth occurs through mutations in the FLT3, NPM1, CEBPA, RAS, and c-KIT genes among others. A key gene involved in AML pathogenesis is the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3, a receptor-type tyrosine-protein kinase (FLT3), positioned at chromosome 13q12 encoding a class III receptor tyrosine kinase that regulates hematopoiesis. This receptor is activated by the binding of the related tyrosine kinase three ligand (FL) to its extracellular domain which induces homodimer formation in the plasma membrane and autophosphorylation (Rivera-Torres et al., 2020). The activated receptor kinase phosphorylates multiple cytoplasmic effector molecules in cellular pathways involved in apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Protein kinase activation can be induced by somatic mutations, a common mechanism of tumorigenesis led by the constitutive activation of the receptor resulting in acute myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Advancement in the treatment of leukemia over the last 40 years has impacted and transformed a uniformly fatal disease into one that is somewhat manageable. There are, however, several subtypes of pediatric and adult leukemia that evade treatment and continue poor prognosis; many of these involve FLT3 mutations. For example, the FLT3 ITD associated with a single point mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain is known to induce resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) treatment (Rivera-Torres et al., 2020).
## (s17) SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
(p17.0) This review has clearly demonstrated that CRISPR has served well in deciphering and understanding the genetic basis of hematological malignancies and has bloomed to become the new gamechanger in the field of genome editing by overcoming all the limitations that were displayed by other editing techniques earlier. In spite of all the merits posed by this so-called prime technique, CRISPR also come with certain limitations like its earlier predecessors.

(p17.1) Currently, CRISPR systems can be delivered in different modes whereby, gene editing can be achieved through transient or stable delivery system. Viral-based transfection of CRISPR is the most efficient method for producing stablymodified cells (Lino et al., 2018). Nevertheless, there has been a recent paradigm shift where non-viral methods are becoming the main homestay given biosafety and ethical issues when utilizing viral vectors. Non-viral vector systems include systems such as lipid nanoparticles, cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs), DNA "nanoclews," and gold nanoparticles. Having said that, the efficiency of the delivery still remains a challenge in hematological-related malignancies. There has been special technique developed to shuttle the cargo of the CRISPR system into the cell via rapid cell mechanical deformation (Peyravian et al., 2021). This has, to a certain extent, alleviated the limitation posed earlier and has allowed high delivery efficiency in hematological malignancies.

(p17.2) The issue of specificity in the CRISPR system is a major concern since Cas9 binds to unintended genomic sites for cleavage, termed as off-target effects. The target efficiency of the CRISPR system is only determined through 20 nucleotide sequences of guide RNA (gRNA) and PAM sites adjacent to target loci. If there are more than three mismatches between target sequences and 20 nucleotides of gRNA, it can result in off-target effects. Researchers have proposed two types of off-target effects, the first types of off-target effects likely to occur due to the sequence homology of the target loci and the next types of offtarget sites occur in the genome other than the target site (Naeem et al., 2020). The effect causes multiple cellular issues at the genomic level and in turn leads to deletions, alterations in the respective gene, and sometimes could lead to lethal genetic mutations. There are different methods established to validate the off-target effects and the most unique of them all is the Genome-wide Unbiased Identification of DSBs Enabled by Sequencing (GUIDE-seq). This provides an unbiased and genome-wide method for detecting CRISPR RNA-guided DSBs in cells . This groundbreaking study has increased the practical viability of the off-target detection. With standardization of all the methods that has been drawn FIGURE 1 | Timeline describing the research progress of CRISPR applications in hematological malignancies. Key studies contributing to major breakthroughs in the field are highlighted. Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 767298 16 over the years, it makes the gene editing tool known as CRISPR to be a possible therapeutic approach in field of hematological malignancy.

(p17.3) The molecular scissors known as "CRISPR" provides complete silencing, and knockdown of gene can still be a valuable means depending on the type of malignancy. This method of gene silencing usually involves an extended time frame to generate a stable cell line. Taking into consideration on the other gene editing tools available with the likes of ZFN, TALENs, and meganucleases, it can be said that CRISPR is the most efficient, stable, and effective. CRISPR is appropriate for delineating gene functions, and genome-editing technology is the apparent option for creating a true genetic null allele, introducing a point mutation, and correcting a specific mutation.

(p17.4) In conclusion, through current advancement in terms of gene editing, we can say that CRISPR has taken the research world by storm, evidently allowing us to make changes to the once impossible. CRISPR has made its way onto the freezers of labs all around the spectrum, easily accessible for researchers to use it. It is also becoming a mainstream methodology to study cancer biology given its versatility. It has now matured its way from experimental approach toward customized treatment involving cancer patients. CRISPR gene editing tools have also sparked significant advancements in enhancing our knowledge regarding hematological malignancies, which in essence presents us with potential therapeutic applications which holds much promise for alternative treatments for patients with this group of malignancies. Development of CRISPR utilization in studying the functional genomics of haematologic malignancies is depicted in Figure 1 and a general summary for studying functional genomics via CRISPR based tools is presented in Figure 2.  
