# The role of diet in renal cell carcinoma incidence: an umbrella review of meta- analyses of observational studies

CorpusID: 246482043 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de099fcad51723cb4df649130f2740407d1ed30](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de099fcad51723cb4df649130f2740407d1ed30)

Fields: Medicine

## (s16) Associations and level of evidence
(p16.0) The SHR and level of evidence for each dietary factor are summarized in Table 2 and are shown in Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. The SHR and 95% CI excluded the null value for 20 of the 64 exposures, including 4 (67%) for dietary patterns or dietary quality indices; 6 (46%) for foods; 0 for beverages; 3 (42%) for alcoholic beverages; 3 (20%) for macronutrients; and 4 (21%) for micronutrients. The SHR was statistically significant (P<0.05) for 18 (28%) of the 64 exposures, with 4 (67%) exposures for dietary patterns or dietary quality indices, 6 (46%) for foods with 1 (8%) that were unavailable due to missing data, 0 for beverages, 2 (29%) for alcoholic beverages, 2 (13%) for macronutrients with 4 (27%) that were unavailable due to missing data, and 4 (21%) for micronutrients. Sixty (94%) exposures in the included meta-analyses had more than 1000 cases or 20,000 participants. Table 2 and Fig. 2 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence associating dietary patterns or dietary quality indices with the incidence of RCC. No dietary factors showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association with RCC. There was 1 instance of weak evidence (class IV) that long-term adherence to a healthy dietary pattern 0.66 (0.51 to 0.85) was associated with a lower risk of developing RCC compared with nonadherence to a healthy dietary pattern. Similarly, there were 3 weak pieces of evidence (class IV) that chronic exposure to an   Drinking pattern and glycemic load were not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. Table 2 and Fig. 3 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence for the association of foods with the incidence of RCC. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. There was 1 case of suggestive evidence (class III) of an inverse Forest plots and the level of evidence of the association of foods with RCC incidence. SHR summary hazard ratio, NS nonsignificant. *Association was not statistically significant after using the trim-and-fill method. -The level of evidence could not be assessed because data related to 95% PI, I 2 , small study effects, and excess significance bias could not be calculated association between increased vegetable (0.74, 0.63 to 0.86) intake and the incidence of RCC. There were 3 pieces of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of all meats (1.27, 1.08 to 1.49), processed meat (1.13, 1.01 to 1.26), and poultry (1.23, 1.02 to 1.47) were positively associated with the incidence of RCC. There was 1 instance of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of cruciferous vegetables (0.81, 0.71 to 0.92) were negatively associated with the incidence of RCC. Fish, fruits, fruit and non-starchy vegetables, non-starchy vegetables, tomatoes, and citrus fruit intake were not associated with the incidence of RCC. Seafood intake was not associated with RCC incidence. However, the level of evidence could not be assessed because data related to 95% PI, I 2 , small study effects, and excess significance bias could not be calculated. Table 2 and Fig. 4 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence for the association of beverages with the incidence of RCC. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. The intake of sweetened carbonated beverage, sweetened beverages, tea, and coffee was not associated with the incidence of RCC. Table 2 and Fig. 5 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence for the association of alcoholic beverages with the incidence of RCC. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. There were 2 pieces of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of wine (0.70, 0.52 to 0.94) and spirits (0.80, 0.64 to 0.99) was inversely associated with the incidence of RCC. Beer intake was not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. Dose-response meta-analyses showed that light drinking (<12.5 g/d), moderate drinking (12.5-37.5 g/d), and heavy drinking (>37.5 g/d) were not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. A high vs low meta-analysis also showed that any drinking was not significantly associated with the risk of developing RCC. Table 2 and Fig. 6 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence of the association of macronutrients with RCC incidence. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. There was only 2 instance of weak evidence (class IV) showing that  an inverse association between increased dietary fiber (0.82, 0.71 to 0.95) intake and the incidence of RCC and that increased animal protein (1.10, 1.00 to 1.20) intake was associated with the risk of RCC. Fruit fiber, vegetable fiber, cereal fiber, total fat, saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, total protein, and plant protein were not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. The remaining dietary factors (legume fiber, animal fat, plant fat, and cholesterol) could not be assessed for their level of evidence because the data related to 95% PI, I 2 , small study effects, and excess significance bias could not be calculated. Table 2 and Fig. 7 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence of the association of micronutrients with the incidence of RCC. No exposures showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association with RCC. There was 1 instance of suggestive evidence (class III) that increased intake of vitamin C (0.77, 0.66 to 0.90) was associated with a lower risk of RCC. There were 3 pieces of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of vitamin E (0. 81 
