# Value-Based Healthcare From the Perspective of the Healthcare Professional: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 245882693 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0b985b9f9d5e0774ca3d0660919d3884176a02ee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0b985b9f9d5e0774ca3d0660919d3884176a02ee)

Fields: Medicine

## (s43) Limitations
(p43.0) This study has five biases. First, the identified outcomes of VBHC on professionals' experiences and their well-being may not be generalizable to all professionals working in a VBHC context for three reasons. Namely, scholars may use different criteria for judging whether their intervention is part of VBHC, studies report on different combinations of VBHC activities and -as this review concludes -experiences may be partly work environment specific. A second bias is that studies reporting on high-value care and high-value, cost-conscious care are generalized while there may be subtle differences between these care models. Hence, we may expect professionals to pursue slightly different behaviors in each of these care models, which, in turn, may evoke slightly different experiences and outcomes. Third, this review does not distinguish between the type of healthcare professional and her educational status. Clinicians, nurses, and residents, who form the main populations in the included studies, may fulfill different roles in VBHC and hence can be expected to have different experiences and encounter different personal outcomes. Consequently, based on this review, it is not possible to target focused interventions to specific populations. Fourth, the temporality of the findings is uncertain as some experiences and outcomes may be connected to implementation efforts more than being a lasting characteristic of VBHC. However, judging whether VBHC has become part of the normal work is complicated as this perception is suggested to vary from professional to professional (24). Last, assessing whether a job demand or resource is a characteristic of VBHC or a characteristic of the environment is a delicate task and requires certain interpretability as all care activities take place in an environment. This implies that different takes on the resulting overview of job demands and resources are possible.
