# Deep Personality Trait Recognition: A Survey

CorpusID: 248530069 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f704ce3bcf044b06050ea966af67974cd6a41dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f704ce3bcf044b06050ea966af67974cd6a41dc)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Psychology

## (s7) Understanding Dyadic Interactions From Video and Audio Signals
(p7.0) The understanding dyadic interactions from video and audio signals (UDIVA; Palmero et al., 2021) data set, comprises of 90.5 h of non-scripted face-to-face dyadic interactions between 147 participants (81 men and 66 women) from 4 to 84 years old. Participants were distributed into 188 dyadic sessions. This data set was recorded by using multiple audio-visual and physiological sensors. The raw audio frame rate is 44.1 kHz. Video recordings are collected from 6 HD tripod-mounted cameras with a resolution of 1,280 × 720. They adopted questionnaire based assessments, including sociodemographic, self-and peer-reported personality, internal state, and relationship profiling from participants. From Table 1, we can see that the representative personality trait recognition databases are developed from the single modality (audio), bimodality (audio-visual), and multiple modalities. For obtaining the ground-truth scores of personality traits on these databases, personality questionnaires are presented to the users for annotations. Nevertheless, such subjective annotations with personality questionnaires may affect the reliability of trained models on these databases.
## (s21) Bimodal Modalities Based Personality Trait Recognition
(p21.0) For bimodal modalities based personality trait recognition, the widely used one is audio-visual modality. In order to effectively extract audio-visual feature representations of short video sequences, numerical studies have been conducted for audiovisual personality trait recognition. Güçlütürk et al. (2016) developed an end-to-end audio-visual deep residual network for audio-visual apparent personality trait recognition. In detail, the audio data and visual data were firstly extracted from the video clip. Then, the whole audio data were fed into an audio deep residual network for feature learning. Note that the activities of the penultimate layer in the audio deep residual network were temporally pooled. Similarly, the whole visual data were fed into a visual deep residual network with a frame at a time. The activities of the penultimate layer in the visual deep residual network were spatiotemporally pooled. Finally, the pooled activities of the audio and visual stream were concatenated at feature-level as an input of a fully connected layer for personality trait prediction.
