# Citation: Cecil, K.M. Pediatric Exposures to Neurotoxicants: A Review of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy Findings

CorpusID: 247309838 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c1e756074a605251ddf8a455bd65b6fb3cbd40d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c1e756074a605251ddf8a455bd65b6fb3cbd40d)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s2) Lead Exposure and Intelligence
(p2.0) Cognitive and behavioral assessments of individuals exposed to lead have demonstrated adverse changes in brain function. Several cohort studies from around the world individually demonstrated the adverse effect of environmental lead exposure on FSIQ, as it is sensitive for assessing cognitive function and can be reliably measured during childhood. When combining data into a pooled analysis from existing cohort studies for over 1300 children followed from birth until 10 years of age, Lanphear and co-authors found using a covariate-adjusted log-linear model, a 6.7 FSIQ point decrement associated with an increase in concurrent blood lead concentrations from 2.4 to 30 µg/dL, with the steepest slope for FSIQ loss found for the first 10 µg/dL [18]. Effects this large warranted changes in brain structure, organization, and function, however, lead itself cannot be directly or indirectly detected by MRI methods.
## (s10) Italian Adolescents, Manganese, and Resting State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(p10.0) De Water et al. investigated the associations between prenatal, early postnatal, and childhood dentine Mn concentrations and intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) for adolescents enrolled in a longitudinal cohort from northern Italy [29]. The study team estimated prenatal, early postnatal, and childhood Mn concentrations in deciduous teeth using laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. Dentine Mn concentrations (Mn:Calcium ratio) were highest during the prenatal period and significantly diminished throughout childhood. Resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) from 14 adolescents (12-18 years; 6 girls) was post-processed with seed-based correlation analyses featuring six subcortical seeds (pallidum, putamen, left, and right caudate) and one cortical seed (bilateral middle frontal gyrus) from Harvard-Oxford atlases. With linear and quadratic correlations between log-transformed Mn concentrations and seed-based iFC (Bonferronicorrected), controlling for either socio-economic status, sex or age, the study reported postnatal Mn concentrations were associated with increased iFC between the middle frontal gyrus and medial prefrontal cortex, however, decreased iFC between the right putamen and pre-and postcentral gyrus. Summarizing the preliminary work, the study found early postnatal Mn concentrations are associated with increased iFC within cognitive control brain areas, but decreased iFC between motor areas in adolescents [29].
## (s15) Morphological MRI and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Cincinnati Children Exposed to Traffic Related Air Pollution
(p15.0) Beckwith et al. examined whether childhood TRAP exposure is associated with regional differences in brain volume and cortical thickness among children enrolled in a longitudinal cohort study based in Cincinnati, Ohio USA [34]. Anatomical T1-weighted MRI from a nested subset of 12-year-old participants (n = 135) characterized with either higher or lower levels of TRAP exposure during their first year of life was analyzed with voxel-based morphometry to examine group differences in regional brain volume, and with separate analyses, changes in cortical thickness. Smaller regional gray matter volumes were found in the left pre-and post-central gyri, the cerebellum, and inferior parietal lobe of participants in the higher TRAP exposure group relative to participants with lower exposure. Reduced cortical thickness was observed in participants with higher exposure relative to those with lower exposure, primarily in sensorimotor regions of the brain including the pre-and post-central gyri and the paracentral lobule, but also within the frontal and limbic regions [34]. These findings are shown in Figure 6. Age at MRI examination, birth weight, participant FSIQ, census tract deprivation status at birth, and race were selected for inclusion in the final model. Total intracranial volume was also included as a covariate for volumetric analyses. Figure 6. Imaging findings acquired from a 3 Tesla scanner at age 12 years from the Cincinnati Childhood Allergy and Air Pollution Study (CCAAPS) comparing high and low groups based upon estimated element carbon attributable to traffic (ECAT) exposure in the first year of life. Left, regions illustrated in red and yellow on brain renderings oriented with different views demonstrate regional reduced cortical thickness. Right, regional gray matter volume loss illustrated across the brain in a sagittal view (top) and axial view showing cerebellar region (bottom) associated with the high ECAT group compared to the low ECAT group. Clusters were corrected for multiple comparisons using threshold free cluster enhancement with a familywise error rate of p < 0.05. Color bar representslog (p) value from 1.4 to 2.6.
