# Using wearable cameras to investigate health-related daily life experiences: A literature review of precautions and risks in empirical studies

CorpusID: 240317464 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1211f590db7e7fb7650bc6d0593d694fec2a19b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1211f590db7e7fb7650bc6d0593d694fec2a19b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Methods
(p5.0) We performed a literature review to identify studies that included the use of automated wearable cameras to investigate human daily experiences. The search protocol was modified from the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) (Moher et al., 2009). Development of our search, screening, and data extraction procedures occurred in two phases. In April 2018, we performed an initial search of two databases (PubMed and PsycINFO) using the following search terms and strategy: eButton wearable camera OR SenseCam OR Vicon Revue OR Autographer OR GoPro OR "wearable camera." At that time, we developed eligibility and data extraction procedures (described below). The initial search did not capture all relevant papers of which the authors were aware. Thus, in November 2019, we performed a second, more extensive search using expanded search terms and an additional database, in order to conduct the current review. Specifically, three databases were searched (PubMed, PsycINFO, and EMBASE) using the following search terms and strategy: eButton OR SenseCam OR Vicon Revue OR Autographer OR GoPro OR (camera AND phone) OR (camera AND wear*). Searches were limited to publications that were published before April 1, 2018 (the date we initiated the initial search), written in English, and included human participants. Of note, we did not filter for articles with a particular focus (e.g. health-related behaviors), since articles across broad areas of investigation would provide relevant information on camera-related precautions and risks, and our goal was to identify the most comprehensive set of relevant articles. However, our selection of databases-specifically, databases that are commonly searched when conducting health-related reviews-was informed by our backgrounds in health-related research. As a result, almost all relevant articles from our search pertained to health. All references identified in the second search were imported into Covidence, an online, systematic review management software. The second search resulted in a total of 1325 articles, which were screened for eligibility in two phases, described below. Please also refer to Figure 1 for a flowchart of the search and screening process.

(p5.1) First, two authors (LP and KNJ) screened the titles and abstracts to identify potentially eligible articles. Articles were deemed eligible if they met all of the following eligibility criteria: (1) text in English; (2) published online or in print before 04/01/2018; (3) presents findings of original, empirical research (i.e. not a theoretical manuscript or review of studies reported elsewhere); (4) includes human participants; (5) participants wore a camera that took photos automatically; (6) camera worn as part of the study protocol (i.e. not as part of life logging activities engaged in by the participant prior to and independent of the study); (7) camera worn to document daily experiences that are not specific to a profession (e.g. studies using wearable cameras to document surgical procedures, or studies of police body cams, were excluded); (8) camera worn in participants' own everyday environment (i.e. not only in the laboratory, or during prescribed activities such as an outing with the investigator); (9) camera worn in locations where participant could reasonably encounter bystanders who are non-cohabitants and not participating in or aware of the study; (10) wearable camera system did not capture video and/or audio. We established criteria 7-9 to eliminate studies in which wearable cameras were used but did not pose the full range of camera-related risks relevant to this review, such as participants receiving negative reactions from bystanders. Conversely, criterion 10 eliminated studies that posed risks beyond those associated with the use of wearable cameras to capture still photos, due to the capture of audio or video. Additionally, publications were excluded if they were (11a) case studies or (11b) conference proceedings that included only an abstract, since these were unlikely to include information sufficient for analyses. A total of 100 duplicate articles were removed; eighty-five duplicates were identified automatically by Covidence, and 15 duplicates were identified manually by LP and KNJ. These authors marked "no," "maybe," or "yes" to indicate each article's eligibility status Please see the text for the definitions of the eligibility criteria, referred to here by number. Eligibility criteria were ordered starting from general to specific, and reviewers selected the first reason in the list that a given article was not eligible. Thus, articles could have been excluded for more than one reason.

(p5.2) based on the article's title and abstract. All articles with conflicting decisions were flagged by Covidence, and LP and KNJ reviewed each abstract together to reach a consensus. Next, two authors (LP and CJ) scanned the full text of the 103 articles identified as potentially eligible (i.e. marked as "yes" or "maybe.") This resulted in the exclusion of 62 articles for the following reasons, numbered according to the corresponding eligibility criteria (see above): (3) not original, empirical research (12 articles); (5) camera not worn or picture taking not automatic (11 articles); (6) camera not worn as part of the study protocol (2 articles); (7) camera not worn to document common daily experiences (2 articles); (8) camera not worn in everyday environment (8 articles); (9) camera not worn around true bystanders (1 article); (10) camera took video and/or audio (9 articles); (11a) case study(ies) (3 articles); (11b) conference proceedings (14 articles). Eligibility criteria were ordered starting from general to specific, and reviewers selected the first reason in the list that a given article was not eligible; thus, articles could have been excluded for more than one reason. Forty-one papers from the full-text review met all eligibility criteria. Additionally, the authors identified four additional, potentially relevant articles from the results of the initial search. These articles were subjected to the same screening processes described above, resulting in a total of 45 eligible articles.

(p5.3) Review of these articles suggested that, in some instances, multiple articles referred to the same sample of participants (i.e. data came from the same study). In total, the 45 articles were based on 36 independent studies. As described below, data were extracted for each study, using all relevant articles, rather than for each article. This ensured that we did not incorrectly portray a precaution or risk as occurring multiple times (i.e. if it was reported in two or more articles referring to the same study).
