# Multi-label classification for biomedical literature: an overview of the BioCreative VII LitCovid Track for COVID-19 literature topic annotations

CorpusID: 248299908 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2439d350943601be90afb0516b747e4a6caebac](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2439d350943601be90afb0516b747e4a6caebac)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s9) Discussion and conclusions
(p9.0) This overview paper summarizes the BioCreative LitCovid track in terms of data collection and team participation. It provides a manually curated dataset of over 33,000 biomedical scientific articles. This is one of the largest datasets for multi-label classification for biomedical scientific literature, to our knowledge. Overall, 19 teams submitted 80 testing set predictions and ~75% of the submissions had better performance than the baseline approach. Given the scale of the dataset and the level of participation and team results, we conclude that the LitCovid track of BioCreative VII ran successfully and is expected to make significant contributions to innovative biomedical text mining methods.

(p9.1) One possible direction to explore is the efficiency of transformers in real-world applications. As described above, over 80% of the teams used the transformers; the top 5 team submissions also show superior performance using the transformer approach. However, it has a trade-off on the efficiency side. Existing studies show that transformers are significantly slower than other deep learning approaches using word and sentence embeddings, e.g., up to 80 times slower for biomedical sentence retrieval [84]. This is more challenging under the setting of multi-label classification (may require more than one transformer model) on COVID-19 literature (~10,000 articles per month). The Bioformer team showed one candidate approach, which only uses one third of the parameters used by the original transformer architecture and achieves similar performance. We expect more innovative transformer approaches will be developed to improve the efficiency.
