# micromachines An Overview of the Strategies for Tin Selenide Advancement in Thermoelectric Application

CorpusID: 245475343 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75c6e060eaa79aff3e75b40bfc707509ab699356](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75c6e060eaa79aff3e75b40bfc707509ab699356)

Fields: Physics, Medicine, Engineering, Materials Science

## (s8) Synthesis of SnSe
(p8.0) As mentioned earlier, the SnSe monocrystalline structure has fascinating TE properties. However, due to its poor mechanical properties, expensiveness, and rigid crystal growth conditions, the single crystals are restricted in their industrial-scale production [63]. Many researchers have concentrated on fabricating polycrystalline SnSe to avoid the slow process of single crystal growth. Melting and mechanical alloying are the two widely practiced ways to produce the polycrystalline SnSe, particularly in the case of melting routes.

(p8.1) In the following section, some commonly used methods for producing single crystal and polycrystal of SnSe TE materials were reported, i.e., Bridgman method, temperature gradient method, mechanical alloying method, hydrothermal/solvothermal (HT/ST) method, spark plasma sintering technique (SPS), and hot-pressing (HP) technology.
## (s29) Applications
(p29.0) Single-crystal SnSe, allows for efficient heat-to-electricity conversion and vice-versa, suitable for applications such as microgenerators, heaters or coolers. However, it is just too bulky for applications that demand flexible, wearable devices. The manufacture of 2D flexible TEGs is made possible by the design and fabrication of SnSe nanocrystals. Typically, there are two main approaches to achieve this goal [63]: (1) by fabricating SnSe-based thin films using drop-casting processes and assembling them with flexible substrates, and (2) fabricating organic/inorganic composite films containing SnSe nanocrystals as fillers.
