# A Review of Deep Learning-Based Visual Multi-Object Tracking Algorithms for

CorpusID: 253112363 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8bc028b646d23f110198db9203633e3949b099b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8bc028b646d23f110198db9203633e3949b099b)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s28) SORT-Based Object Tracking
(p28.0) The SORT [50] object tracking algorithm is an online, real-time, multi-object tracking algorithm that incorporates correlation filters into a deep learning algorithm. It predicts the current position using a Kalman filter, correlates the detection frames and objects by correlation, and uses the Intersection over Union (IoU) between each detection and all predicted bounding boxes of an existing object as a metric for the object relationship between the preceding and following frames. Although the object tracking method for SORT is quick, it scarcely addresses object occlusion, leading to a large number of ID switches; accuracy is good in the absence of occlusion but low in the presence of occlusion.
## (s32) Fusion Detection and Tracking Module
(p32.0) The front-end object detection network significantly affects how well multi-object tracking functions, as can be shown from the analysis above. In order to further increase algorithm simplicity, weight sharing between the two phases of detection and tracking is realized, and the high-performance object detection network is improved to support multiple objects tracking tasks. Recently, research on object tracking algorithms has turned its attention to fusion of multi-object tracking algorithm modules.

(p32.1) Feichtenhofer et al. [11] initially proposed to include the object detection network in the tracking branch in 2017. They then implemented the main line detection task using an improved R-FCN algorithm, interacted with the multiscale feature maps of the first stage 
