# What's the Situation with Intelligent Mesh Generation: A Survey and Perspectives

CorpusID: 253499424 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04d5891518052f83a7f240b821935ccef1ca051f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04d5891518052f83a7f240b821935ccef1ca051f)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s35) IM-Net [65]
(p35.0) Generate high visual quality mesh Efficient representation with coordinate information Many nonsurface points yield many invalid calculations 17.10 Scan2Mesh [66] Adaptation to incomplete scans Cleaner and more CAD-like meshes from noisy and partial range scans
## (s38) 2.15
(p38.0) BCNet [16] Accuracy of geometric representation Different topology garments can be generated Some details cannot be generated 2.48 PolyGen [70] Generate a wide variety of realistic geometries Is capable of generating coherent and diverse mesh samples It is suitable for the generation of artificial object surfaces but not for the generation of complex surfaces.
## (s44) Summary of open challenges
(p44.0) In this review, we have highlighted the limitations found across the selected articles. These limitations not only represent the challenges within the IMG field, but also help identify potential future research directions. The primary challenges we've recognized are as follows: (1) Generalization: Generalization means the ability for an algorithm to handle objects not observed during training -is a crucial aspect demonstrating the practical utility of the algorithm. The lack of generalization is a prevalent issue with current IMG methods, particularly those using deformationbased mesh generation techniques. These methods often produce meshes specific to a particular object type or topology, limiting their wider applicability.

(p44.1) (2) Interpretability: The interpretability of IMG is critically important, especially within the aerospace industry. It is our suggestion that melding IMG with fundamental mathematical and physical models, as evidenced by studies such as Zheng et al. [188] and Lei et al. [189], can not only effectively govern model optimization but also impart enhanced interpretability to the model. However, thus far, no research has directly addressed this particular issue.
