# BioScientific Review (BSR) Title: Molecular Basis of the Structure and Transmission of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and MERS: A Review Report History: Molecular Basis of the Structure and Transmission of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and MERS: A Review Report

CorpusID: 259592928 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8730ba93f8a6958a2554dce33a23c290a33b72cf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8730ba93f8a6958a2554dce33a23c290a33b72cf)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s6) Structure of SARS
(p6.0) Genome of SARS-CoV includes 29,727 nucleotides (in length) having 11 ORFs. These include 1) specified location and number of small open reading frames, 2) having 1 copy of Polypro, and 3) short anchoring of S protein. Figure 2a gives the systematic representation of genome organization of SARS. Spike glycoprotein of this virus is a membranous protein (type 1) and makes a trimer formation. It usually has a transmembranous segment which helps the trimer to anchor the viral membrane. Further, ectodomain plays a role in decorating its virion surface. On the cell surface of the host, it mostly binds to ACE2 enzyme (receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) which is a receptor present on the host's surface resulting in membrane fusion, while undergoing various rearrangements related to the structure [15]. This glycoprotein is reported to be glycosylated heavily with each promotor having glycosylation sites (22N linked) [30]. Various studies regarding the initial analysis of the strain (Wuhan-Hu-1) which outbreaks confirmed to be amino acid residues (1273), with N-terminus signal peptide, binding receptor fragment S1 as well as S2 (fusion fragment) in it. Moreover, S1 is further divided into a huge number of domains, such as NTD, CTD1, CTD2 and RBD (N-terminal domain, Cterminal domains 1 and 2 and receptor binding domain).
## (s8) Structure and Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2)
(p8.0) The fatality rates of pneumonia of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and MERS-CoV (2.9, 9.6, and ∼36 percentages, respectively) were reported [31]. OC43, NL63, HKU1, and 229E (HCoV-s) also have the capability to cause diseases, although they are self-limited and show mild symptoms [32]. The general structure of SARS-CoV-2 is shown in Figure 2b. 
## (s12) Structure and Transmission of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
(p12.0) Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a respiratory syndrome and dromedary camels are known to be their initial source of origin. As far as its  [75]. During encountering targeted cells or viral biogenesis, the cleavage of MERS coronavirus occurs at junction point found in between subunits (S1 and S2) [76]. Moreover, the 2 nd cleavage site S2 is processed on onseting of fusion of membrane and is found in S2 subunit upstream of fusion peptide. Both of these cleavage sites enhanced chances of viral entry and in modulation of cell tropism and host range [77].
## (s16) Diagnosis.
(p16.0) After diagnosis with COVID-19, the period of recovery differs depending upon their health condition and severity of symptoms. People with mild condition of this virus have chances to recover within a week. However, severe patients have to experience alveoli damage as well as respiratory failure, which may lead to death. The rate of mortality persists more in elder people having symptoms of serious diseases such as heart failure, Parkinson's disease, and brain tumor [105].
## (s17) Mortality Rate.
(p17.0) Death rates caused by coronaviruses, namely MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV reaches upto 37% and 10% -15%, respectively. COVID-19 patient's death rate varied in between 2% to 4% and reached upto 13%, showing that death rate in case of COVID-19 is lesser than SARS and MERS [106]. Further comparisons are show in Table 4.
