# Electron beam powder bed fusion of copper components: a review of mechanical properties and research opportunities

CorpusID: 251558253 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af577ecffd047508580c2f68d570081274fc09a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af577ecffd047508580c2f68d570081274fc09a3)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s1) Principle of EB-PBF
(p1.0) The electron beam can be used for both additive and subtractivebased manufacturing. For instance, this process can be used to formulate channel structures for copper ingots by melting and evaporation [18]. If the electron beam is used in subtractive regions, it is called electron beam machining, which is not within the scope of this research.

(p1.1) Electron beam powder bed fusion (EB-PBF), which is known as selective electron beam melting (SEBM) and electron beam melting (EBM) by Arcam, has become a successful method for PBF. EB-PBF system uses a high-energy electron beam (compared to laser-based powder bed fusion (LB-PBF) to fuse metal powder particles. Researchers at the Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden, first developed this process. EB-PBF was commercialised by Arcam AB, Sweden, in 2001, and is now owned by GE.

(p1.2) Similar to LB-PBF, in the EB-PBF, a focused electron beam scans along a thin layer of spread and settled powder, causing localised fusion/melting and solidification per the slice cross-section. Table 1 summarises the differences between EB-PBF and LB-PBF. Most of the presented differences in this table are due to EB-PBF having an energy/ heat source of electrons. Nevertheless, other differences are associated with engineering trade-offs as practised in EB-PBF and LB-PBF and are not necessarily inherent to the processing.
## (s5) Technical challenges of EB-PBF of pure copper
(p5.0) In EB-PBF of copper, the lack of component-level data can be related to the significant processing challenges. Even though copper has a relatively low melting temperature, several physical properties of this material present significant processing challenges for EB-PBF. The narrow process window for EB-PBF is related to the sensitivity of the copper to thermal boundary conditions and geometric effects within a layer. Thus, while AM produces complex geometries from copper powder, the process parameter and properties data are typically associated with small prismatic specimens [39]. The AM process selection needs many cares and considerations to ensure the good quality and performance of the printed components. The reflectivity of the copper powder in an electron beam is quite lower than a laser; therefore, the efficiency of the EB-PBF is higher than that of laser-based systems. Higher preheat temperature in electron beam systems reduces the effect of periodic cooling and heating as well as the need for thermal processing to solve residual stress issues. This has culminated in the quality of EB-PBF parts in comparison with LB-PBF. Due to using a higher power energy source and larger beam size, the dimensional accuracy of EB-PBF is lower than LB-PBF. Therefore, more post-processing to achieve surface quality and dimensional deviation is needed for the EB-PBF component that can add to the total manufacturing lead time and the cost of the production.

(p5.1) EB-PBF of unalloyed copper generally has fewer challenges compared to LB-PBF. The induced energy between the beam and the powder is significantly higher, the mid-level vacuum environment (~ 2 × 10 −3 to 2 × 10 −6 mBar) minimises oxidation, and the high scan speed and beam power facilitate efficient bed preheating to reduce thermal gradients and residual stresses.
