# R E V I E W Brain targeting based nanocarriers loaded with resveratrol in Alzheimer's disease: A review

CorpusID: 257694895 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e76a9b6ed6f71748d185c4a925dd70398590ed6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e76a9b6ed6f71748d185c4a925dd70398590ed6)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s10) | CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECT
(p10.0) RES shows several biological characteristics and medicinal effects, including anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, anti-tauopathy, Aβ plaques degradation, and anti-oxidant actions. RES has insignificant bioavailability and extremely low oral absorption efficiency, restricting its clinical use. Nevertheless, clinical trials have not yet succeeded to display these actions, maybe due to the low bioavailability of RES, among other pharmacokinetics specifications. Therefore, studies have considered on the development and progress of RES-Derivatives, which would preserve the neuroprotective attributes of RES, but can present higher efficacy. A suitable drug for the treatment of neurological diseases should enter the brain across the BBB. Regarding its low bioavailability and solubility, RES has a limited permeation across the BBB. Therefore, the bioavailability and stability of RES can be boosted by NCs and encapsulation methods. The NP-drug delivery systems can protect the hydrophobic RES against enzymes, light, and pH. Such systems can also ameliorate drugtargeting specificity in the CNS, enhance medicine loading efficiency, and improve the bioavailability. Studies on animal models of AD displayed successful delivery of the RES-loaded NCs, but little information can be found on the mechanism of carrying drugs into or throughout the body.

(p10.1) Drug delivery methods can revolutionise the application of the bioactive compounds, as the development of novel molecules and the method of their transfer across the BBB could greatly affect the world. Furthermore, the investigations should be concentrated on the co-delivery and target delivery of phytobioactive compounds to prohibit ROS that leads to 162 -JALILI ET AL.
