# WHAT ARE THE BARRIERS TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORDS? A REVIEW OF RECENT STUDIES

CorpusID: 254707896 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8a9e5629a645999bf6e3b74d334a9f3b98d58f6f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8a9e5629a645999bf6e3b74d334a9f3b98d58f6f)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s6) Lack of technical supports
(p6.0) Technical support in the of electronic medical records implementation is a very important aspect. Lack of technical supporting team or slow response from the technical team regarding complaints from users will be a big obstacle in implementing electronic medical records (Kruse et al., 2016). Users who find difficulties or are dissatisfied with system performance will increasingly distrust the system's capabilities and consequently will no longer want to use the system if the technical team does not respond quickly. Therefore, preparing a reliable and responsive technical support team is a must before the implementation of electronic medical records begins. Ajami & Arab-Chadegani (2013) Cost and benefits misalignment, privacy and confidentiality concerns, system interoperability, data standardization, lack of expert that lead the process, as well as the number and availability of vendors in the market 2 AlSadrah (2020) Security breaches, loss of access to data in the event of a computer crash or power failure, time required to data entry and check its quality, technological complexity, potential for disruption of doctor-patient communication, lack of support and fast response from hospitals IT staff, and lack of training for health workers in using electronic medical records 3

(p6.1) Fennelly Jung et al. (2020) Lack of communication between government and health facilities, lack of system development environment, lack of infrastructure, poor implementation of standard terminology, user resistance, and poor system functionality 10
## (s8) User resistance
(p8.0) Users who are used to using conventional paper-based systems will likely have resistance when the system is changed to electronic-based. This resistance can come from the reluctance to move from their comfort zone so far. Lack of literacy related to information technology and unclear fears of new systems must be addressed first (Jung et al., 2020). Intensive training and mentoring activities can be a solution to this problem, of course the design of electronic-based medical records must also be made as simple as possible to make it easier for users to use it.
