# Adaptive thermal comfort for energy saving office building design-A literature review

CorpusID: 259480052 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aff3e0a2f76c94c1f6eb76616287c8ce7199480d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aff3e0a2f76c94c1f6eb76616287c8ce7199480d)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) The current study gives a thorough summary of the thermal comfort research that has been done in office buildings all over the globe. As indicated below [30], various studies have distinct features of office.

(p1.1) Naturally ventilated (NV): An office runs continuously freely. Free running (FR): An office has an HVAC system or is naturally ventilated, however throughout the research time, HVAC system is turned off. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC): One of the heating and cooling systems in the office was operational during the research time. Mixed Mode (MM): MM buildings are divided into three categories: concurrent (HVAC and natural ventilation occur at the same time), zoned (natural ventilation and HVAC occur in distinct parts of the building), and change-over (HVAC and natural ventilation occur at different times in the same area)

(p1.2) In this research, the adaptive thermal comfort models and regression equations were studied in a variety of office running modes. Only a few studies have given adaptive thermal comfort models. Apart from thermal comfort, the energy-saving potential of the adaptive model has been studied in numerous research. Natural ventilation is another smart approach for buildings to use less energy. Various studies have been conducted to assess the prospects for energy savings by using natural ventilation. 
## (s13) Overall discussion
(p13.0) As shown in Figure 6, the comfort temperatures indicated by several research for NV or FR buildings are displayed on the ASHRAE 55 comfort standard. The slope of this research is steeper since the coefficient is higher than in ASHRAE 55. This might be due to the larger range of outside climate fluctuation investigated by this study [30]. The majority of the comfort temperature is determined to fall within the ASHRAE band of comfort, and comfort temperature rises as the external temperature rises. Adaptive behaviour is, as we all know, embedded into climate and society.
