# Advances and strategies for capillary electrophoresis in the characterization of traditional Chinese medicine: A review of the past decade (2011-2021)

CorpusID: 257120179 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5fa537093553509d18d65f0d44a3b17330c29d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5fa537093553509d18d65f0d44a3b17330c29d9)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s5) Overview of capillary electromigration techniques for TCM
(p5.0) The microscale CE technique primarily identifies, separates, and quantifies various chemical constituents in complex TCM mixtures. Consequently, CE with UV detection has been considered the most advanced technology for the analysis of herbal raw materials in the past 20 years (Przybylska et al., 2021). The typical separation modes of CE utilized for TCM are CZE, MEKC, and CEC, whereas capillary isotachophoresis (CITP) is used as a preconcentration technique.

(p5.1) The CZE mode is the simplest of the CE techniques. In this mode, the analytes are separated inside an open tubular capillary filled with a buffer or electrolyte solution. Therefore, CZE is also called free solution CE. The separation in CZE is based on the differences in migration velocities due to the analyte's charge, mass, and size, in response to an applied voltage-generating electric field across the capillary. The movement of analyte ions in an electric field is called electrophoretic flow. The electroosmotic flow (EOF) represents a bulk flow of all ions and neutrals in the liquids inside the capillary, even though the migration of buffer cations is the primary driving force for the EOF. The buffer pH is crucial for the charged states of the analytes. Several classes of non-dissociated (uncharged or neutral TCM molecules) are not separated from each other but can migrate through the bulk solution's movement by EOF and elute at the dead time. Because of its simplicity, CZE-UV is the most extensively utilized mode in TCM. CZE has been primarily used to quantify secondary metabolites in plant extracts and active components in herbal medicines, mainly with UV detection. Although the molecular absorption method of detection has been used to determine most TCM analytes, alternative detection methods such as fluorometric, electrochemical methods (conductometry, amperometry, and potentiometry), chemiluminescence, as well MS methods have also been reported. In CE-MS, an ionization source is present at the cathodic end of the capillary to generate gas-phase ions analyzed by a mass analyzer to generate a mass spectrum, providing information about the mass-to-charge ratio of the ionic species.

(p5.2) Tables 2-Tables 3 list types of TCM tested by CZE. To achieve a good separation of TCM by CZE, multiple variables must be optimized, including capillary type, pH, voltage, injection mode, buffer composition, and concentration, as well as the types and concentrations of buffer additives. The MEKC mode of CE allows for the resolution of neutral and charged molecules and can be used to analyze a wide range of active TCM ingredients, such as flavonoids, in herbal raw materials (Table 4). The separation in MEKC mode is more complex than that in CZE mode because surfactant and/or cyclodextrin are often added to the running buffer in the former mode of CE. Therefore, the MEKC running buffer is reinforced with charged or uncharged surfactants present at higher concentrations than their critical micelle concentration (CMC), resulting in micelle formation. Because of the influence of dispersed surfactants, the micelles form a pseudostationary phase (PSP) that allows the differential separation of analyzed compounds based on the chargeto-mass ratio and hydrophobicity.
