# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Gut Microbiota Alterations and Primary Glomerulonephritis in Children: A Review

CorpusID: 255328855 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae275a3dd54d50b4914916c35d4413d10d5a0eff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae275a3dd54d50b4914916c35d4413d10d5a0eff)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s9) Probiotics
(p9.0) Potentially beneficial might be the use of Lactobacillus plantarum in children and adolescents with INS. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial conducted by Fortes et al. suggests that the administration of this probiotic strain might have an immunomodulatory and hypolipidemic effect in pediatric patients with INS and dyslipidemia [43]. Among probiotic-treated children, the tendency to reduce TNF-α levels and increase IL-10 levels was observed. However, the inclusion criteria were met only by four patients; thus, the results should be interpreted with caution.

(p9.1) The possible use of a probiotic containing SCFA-producing bacteria in the reduction of relapses of INS in children was evaluated by Yamaguchi et al. [27]. The study group consisted of 20 children with INS (median age 5.3 years) during remission. The intervention was a daily administration of preparation of Clostriudium butyricum. Two-year follow-up revealed a significantly lower annual frequency of INS relapse in the probiotic treatment group. Additionally, the number of patients who started rituximab therapy because of frequent relapses was significantly higher in the non-probiotic treatment group. In addition, in probiotic-treated patients, a significant increase in the relative abundance of butyrateproducing bacteria and blood Treg cell counts were observed. Further studies are needed to evaluate the possible use of probiotics in the therapy of INS or other primary glomerulonephrites. The questions to answer are the choice of a specific probiotic strain, the optimal dosage, and the duration of the therapy.
