# Input-output modelling for household activity-level environmental footprints: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 257650379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/938619365e813cbc55cc04390a99881fc35588fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/938619365e813cbc55cc04390a99881fc35588fe)

Fields: Physics, Economics, Environmental Science

## (s12) Data sources
(p12.0) The studies on household production activities combine national time-use surveys (usually diary-based) with national household budget survey data to create original input-output tables. Many of the models that also cover consumption activities use the same sources for consumption and time use data but take outset in environmental footprints from existing national input-output tables. To obtain environmental footprints of household expenditure categories,  used the Eora multi-region input-output table and  used the World Input-Output Database for other countries than China. The German study developed an original model . , , , and Agbahey et al (2020) took outset in their previous work creating social accounting matrices for Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Pakistan, and Zambia. Finding suitable time-use data was challenging for some of the developing countries and they relied, among other data sources, on labour force and agricultural practice surveys .

(p12.1) Studies usually aggregated the activities in timeuse surveys into broader categories, but the Japanese study maintained the time-use survey's original 85 categories . Studies differ in what share of the day they cover; the Finnish studies covered 18.7, 19.3, and 23.0 h for the three different years , while the Austrian and Japanese studies covered all 24 h .

(p12.2) A few data challenges became evident from the review. The quality of data currently suffers from household consumption and time use data being collected separately, creating problems with input allocation. Data is mainly collected by national statistical agencies. When separately collected, making these time use, household expenditure, and input-output data compatible requires efforts by agencies to characterize households by a multitude of consistent factors. Further, the separately collected data makes causality difficult to establish, because time-use surveys include some income effect (people with more free time most likely work and earn less), and expenditure surveys include a time-use effect (higher expenditures are often a result of long work time) (Antal et al 2020). Collecting longitudinal time use and expenditure data from the same households is a solution (Antal et al 2020).  suggested the implementation of household output surveys, asking respondents for the volume of household production. This has, to our knowledge, not been done. Finally, time use is usually surveyed during a single period of the year, creating problems when accounts are compared to market accounts that usually cover an entire year (Hoekstra 2020).
