# Innovative pedagogical principles and technological tools capabilities for immersive blended learning: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 251178286 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e55c38a6651fefd5530d104ea73d44f0ae912e59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e55c38a6651fefd5530d104ea73d44f0ae912e59)

Fields: Computer Science, Education, Medicine

## (s23) Mapping of the principles of heutagogy, peeragogy, and cybergogy
(p23.0) with the capabilities of technological learning tools for immersive blended learning implementation Figure 8 shows the basis for mapping elements to indicate the suitable implementation of an immersive blended learning approach. The capabilities of the technological learning tools are mapped with the selected ten innovative pedagogical principles to find the relevance of the two elements in creating an immersive blended learning environment. Initially, there are 12 innovative pedagogical principles discussed in this study; however, the second and fifth principles of peeragogy are not included in the mapping because of their unimportance to being adopted in a blended learning environment. This is because (1) the two principles require no technological learning assistance when learners need to halt/take a step back in order to observe their learning process. Note that technological usage is necessary for the scope of this study, and (2) the independent learning concept that can be found in both second and fifth principles has been covered in the first and fourth principles; therefore, it is appropriate to omit the second and fifth peeragogy principles to avoid duplicated results in the mapping.

(p23.1) Based on Figs. 9, 10, and 11, the obvious pattern that can be seen from the mapping is that each capability of all types of technological tools, i.e., FB, blogs, and LMS, is associated with at least one aspect of the principles of Education 4.0 innovative pedagogies. This could mean that establishing an immersive blended learning environment is possible, as the learning process could be optimised by integrating comprehensive pedagogical elements and technological tools that are directly linked to each other. This is also congruent with Kaufman's (2019) suggestion that in redesigning a transformative instructional model of blended learning, it  has to involve both technology and pedagogy and thus can promote active learning experiences and student-centred pedagogies.

(p23.2) Analysing the technological learning tools individually, FB has the most connections (n = 30 links) between the capabilities and pedagogical principles compared to blogs (n = 24), and LMS (n = 23). This proves that although FB starts off as a social media tool, it is relevant to be categorised as one of the most influential   (Gregory & Bannister-Tyrrell, 2017). This also implies that FB is able to support different kinds of aspects in a learning process, as it holds all six capabilities of technological learning tools and supports all the sub-categories except two sub-capabilities, namely, synchronous (communication time) and critical thinking (self-related) although the latter is still debatable, as Blaschke and Hase (2019) mentioned briefly how social media could help learners to think critically.
