# Medicine ® Treatment of Alzheimer's disease by combination of acupuncture and Chinese medicine based on pathophysiological mechanism A review

CorpusID: 255226022 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Excitotoxicity
(p7.0) Glutamate is another neurotransmitter present in the brain, and excessive glutamate levels can cause excitotoxicity, eventually leading to cell death. Minocycline is the only commercialized drug that targets the glutamate system to treat AD. It is a noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist that controls glutamate overstimulation. It regulates Ca2 + influx and efflux at the cell membrane via NMDA receptors. Minocycline also acts as an antagonist of the nACh and 5-HT3 receptors. Inhibition of NMDA can inhibit the expression of α-secretase, thereby reducing the production of Aβ. [21,24] 
## (s27) Conclusion
(p27.0) Although a purely biological definition of AD has been proposed in the past, with the progress of research, an increasing number of studies have pointed out that amyloid P and Tau biomarkers are not enough to predict the progress of AD with confidence, nor are they enough to be applied to the clinical environment and diagnosis of people without cognitive impairment. The relationship between the coexistence of tau and amyloid P pathology on the one hand and the development of cognitive decline and ATN remains uncertain at the individual level.

(p27.1) In the past 20 years, the number of deaths related to AD has increased significantly, but the treatment of Western medicine remains vague. FDA-allowed treatments for AD have not shown any remedial effects and have not been able to reduce the rate of disease progression. Most of the drugs recommended for use are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and NMDA receptor antagonists. However, none of the potential drugs developed have been successful beyond phase II/III trials, and the challenges remain low bioavailability, prolonged serum half-life, and inability to cross the blood-brain barrier.

(p27.2) TCM therapy AD has unique advantages and is increasingly being widely recognized by the international community, and related studies have emerged endlessly at home and abroad. [100] TCM, acupuncture, and moxibustion, especially the combination of acupuncture and medicine, play vital roles in the treatment of AD. Acupuncture and moxibustion, as ancient treatment methods, can dredge meridians, regulate qi and blood, replenish essence and marrow, dredge the governor vessel, regulate the spirit, and tonify the kidney by needling relevant acupoints. TCM treatment of AD has few side effects and can play a lasting advantage. Based on the theory of visceral manifestation of TCM, syndrome differentiation, and treatment, its mechanism of action is to stimulate the cerebral cortex to synthesize nicotinic ACH, reduce blood lipids, dilate cerebral vessels, increase cerebral blood flow, and improve cerebral inflammatory injury.

(p27.3) The combination of acupuncture and medicine combines the advantages of TCM and acupuncture, exerts a combined therapeutic effect of drugs and acupoint stimulation, and treats both symptoms and root causes. This has been explained in detail before the article and is not repeated here.

(p27.4) TCM therapy for AD mostly involves compound treatment and multi-point acupuncture treatment, and its mechanism of action is not yet clear. Although in recent years, the Chinese medicine community has made more and more gratifying research, it still needs more relevant basic research, animal experiments, and clinical observations to explain and clarify the strategy of TCM therapy for AD.

(p27.5) In addition, the study of AD in TCM is closely followed by modern medicine. After absorbing the frontier achievements of modern medicine, it has been applied to the study of TCM. We really lack research based on the tradition of TCM, based on classical ancient books, mainly on TCM, absorbing the advanced achievements of modern medicine for our use, and the times call for us to regain the characteristics of TCM. 
