# Nanomaterials-Based Sensors for Respiratory Viral Detection: A Review

CorpusID: 250144980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science, Environmental Science

## (s8) VI. MECHANISM OF SENSING OF NANOMATERIALS-BASED SENSORS FOR
(p8.0) RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION During virus detection using nanomaterial-based sensors, three basic steps occur, each linked with explicitly with the previous step. First, the target molecule is recognized by a fixed set(s) of biorecognition components. Interactions between the two occur by either covalent or non-covalent interactions. Second, any chemical change recorded by the transducer of the sensor is transferred to the detector. Finally, the detector displays the results in digital signals on a digital screen [55]. Many transducers are used during the detection, like carbon or gold electrode systems, screen printed electrodes and others. In nanomaterial-based sensors, the transducers use electrodes embedded with nanoparticles or a nanomaterial that increases the specificity with which the bioreceptor interacts with the target biomolecule during the detection process. Also, they enhance the overall sensitivity and reproducibility of the sensor.
## (s9) VII. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
(p9.0) NANOMATERIALS-BASED SENSORS FOR RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION As discussed previously, many studies support the superiority of nanomaterial-based sensors over the others due to their unmatched physicochemical properties like the prominent surface to volume ratio, high adsorption, the changes in their quantum aspects and their capacity to react. Hence, a lower quantity of analytes is more than sufficient for their successful analysis. Furthermore, rapid processing of the analyte within a lower budget is possible using such sensors [121]. Even carbon-based nanomaterials like graphene and its derivatives are an excellent choice to develop sensors that can detect respiratory viruses because of their ability to attach to ligands and other nanoparticles [26]. Other nanomaterials like silica nanoparticles are also advantageous in creating sensors to detect viruses because they are biocompatible with other elements in biological conditions. Moreover, nanoporous materials have an even better surface to volume ratio which is gives them an upper hand over the other nanoparticles that are currently available [26].
## (s11) IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE
(p11.0) Highly sensitive sensors can be successfully developed using nanomaterials, such that they give rapid results which are highly reproducible. In addition to being highly sensitive, nanomaterial-based FET sensors are also highly selective and can detect the analyte in low concentrations. Nanomaterials like graphene and In2O3 have been incorporated in the open gated areas of FET to detect respiratory viruses [124]. Elements like gold nanoparticles and their nanoislands have also been successfully included in immunosensors to detect viruses like MERS and COVID-19 under pico and femto concentration ranges [95], [125]. Furthermore, using nanomaterials in sensor development allows for their miniaturization and reduces their overall production cost. Affinity sensors can be easily created using multiple nanomaterials within the same sensor. Such sensors usually have many electrodes within the same system, which allows for simultaneous detection.
