# Harnessing the Power of LLMs in Practice: A Survey on ChatGPT and Beyond

CorpusID: 258331833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/131c6f328c11706de2c43cd16e0b7c5d5e610b6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/131c6f328c11706de2c43cd16e0b7c5d5e610b6a)

Fields: Computer Science, Linguistics

## (s4) GPT-style Language Models: Decoder-only
(p4.0) Although language models are typically task-agnostic in architecture, these methods require fine-tuning on datasets of the specific downstream task. Researchers found that scaling up language models significantly improves the few-shot, even zero-shot performance [16]. The most successful models for better few-shot and zero-show performance are Autoregressive Language Models, which are trained by generating the next word in a sequence given the preceding words. These models have been widely used for downstream tasks such as text generation and question answering.
## (s8) Finetuning data
(p8.0) When deploying a model for downstream tasks, it is essential to consider three primary scenarios based on the availability of annotated data: zero, few, and abundant. In this section, we provide a succinct overview of the appropriate models to employ for each scenario. Zero annotated data: In scenarios where annotated data is unavailable, utilizing LLMs in a zero-shot setting proves to be the most suitable approach. LLMs have been shown to outperform previous zero-shot methods [120]. Additionally, the absence of a parameter update process ensures that catastrophic forgetting [49] is avoided since the language model parameters remain unaltered.

(p8.1) Few annotated data: In this case, the few-shot examples are directly incorporated in the input prompt of LLMs, which is named as in-context learning, and these examples can effectively guide LLMs to generalize to the task. As reported in [16], one-shot and few-shot performance make significant gains, even matching the performance of the SOTA
## (s22) Use Cases with Emergent Abilities.
(p22.0) Scaling of models also endows the model with some unprecedented, fantastic abilities that go beyond the power-law rule. These abilities are called "emergent ability". As defined in [113], emergent abilities of LLMs are abilities that are not present in smaller-scale models but are present in large-scale models. This means such abilities cannot be predicted by extrapolating the performance improvements on smaller-scale models and the model suddenly gains good performance on some tasks once the scale exceeds a certain range. The emergent ability is typically unpredictable and surprising, leading to tasks that emerge randomly or unexpectedly. We examine concrete examples of the emergent abilities of LLMs and provide them as an important reference for deciding whether to leverage LLMs' emergent abilities.

(p22.1) Handling word manipulation is a typical emergent ability. It refers to the ability to learn symbolic manipulations, such as the reversed words [16], in which the model is given a word spelled backwards, and must output the original word.
