# Transcriptome survey reveals increased complexity of the alternative splicing landscape in Arabidopsis

CorpusID: 26875402 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b10d22644d273020bbf8960a3b982af8fa632d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b10d22644d273020bbf8960a3b982af8fa632d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s11) Splice junction detection
(p11.0) We used TopHat software ) to predict splice junctions. To diminish the number of potential false positives, we performed a prediction of splice junctions without mismatches in addition to the original alignment of two mismatches (Supplemental Fig. S1). The above approach allowed us to discard splice junctions that are predicted by erroneous alignment, especially in regions where several dinucleotides resembling splice sites are found in tandem. We have filtered out those splice junctions that were not predicted in the alignment of no mismatches and that are in proximity with another better supported junction by <10 nt. The remaining splice junctions were used for further analysis if they were supported by at least three alignments in the original list (alignment with two mismatches).

(p11.1) We have defined as genic splice junctions those junctions that are inside the coordinates of annotated genes in TAIR9 and have the same strand as the gene in question. Those splice junctions that are inside gene coordinates but are in the opposite strand were named antisense. Finally, those junctions that are not inside any gene coordinates were called intergenic.

(p11.2) For the genic splice junctions, we took those coming from protein-coding genes and have examined whether the predicted splice junctions are inside the coding sequence, 59 UTR or 39 UTR. If one extreme of the junction was in the coding sequence and the other in the UTR, they were classified as 59UTR-CDS or CDS-39UTR.

(p11.3) To determine the signatures of U2 or U12 introns, we used 10 intronic and three exonic bases for the 59 splice site and 14 intronic bases and three exonic bases for the 39 splice site. We have evaluated the splice sites using the procedure and PWMs described by Sheth et al. (2006). A strong signal of U2 or U12 intron was considered if the splice site in question (59 or 39) score was $65 in the respective PWM. For the U12 branch point, a PWM was built using the branch point sequences deposited in the U12 database (Alioto 2007). The procedure of building the PWM was the same as in Sheth et al. (2006). To identify the branch point, we scanned the first 30 bases upstream of the 39 splice site and evaluated this stretch of sequence with the U12 PWMs. The higher score was retained, and, if this score was $65, then it was considered to be a strong signal for a U12 branch point. To define U2 branch points, we have looked for the motif YURAY in the stretch of 30 nt. As U12 introns have more highly conserved 59 splice site and branch point sequences than U2 introns, they were classified as U12 when they possessed both 59 splice site and branch point with scores $ 65 in the respective U12 PWMs. An intron was considered as U2 if it had a good U2 signal in the 59 splice site (score $ 65 in the respective U2 PWMs) and a good signature in the 39 splice site (score $ 65 in the respective U2 PWMs) or the YURAY U2 branch point.
