# Promising Highly Targeted Therapies for Cholangiocarcinoma: A Review and Future Perspectives

CorpusID: 260035251 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Human Clinical Studies on PIT
(p10.0) In 2020, PIT for unresectable locally advanced/recurrent head and neck cancer was publicly approved and initiated as a clinical modality in Japan ahead of the rest of the world. In the U.S., a phase 3 trial of PIT for the same cancer has been performed. The first in-human PIT for head and neck cancer conducted in the U.S. in 2015 revealed tumor volume reduction with complete remission (13.3%), partial remission (30%), and stable disease (36.7%), which is a promising but somewhat insufficient result [102]. Thereafter, in Japan, a few clinical trials have been performed or initiated for unresectable advanced/recurrent gastric cancer or esophageal cancer (one for gastric cancer or esophageal cancer is completed; another for esophageal cancer is suspended) and advanced or recurrent solid tumors with one or more hepatic metastases (recruitment) (https://jrct.niph.go.jp/search?language=en& page=1, accessed on 1 June 2023). The former used cetuximab-IR700 conjugate targeting cancer cells with anti-PD antibody (nivolumab), while the latter used anti-CD25 antibody-IR700 conjugate targeting regulatory T-cells with anti-CTLA-4 antibody (pembrolizumab). The initial PIT with an APC on a cancer cell alone has some limitations, such as (1) insufficient attainment of an APC to a cancer cell and penetration depth of NIR light into the tissue; (2) lack of a dedicated light device for a deeply located tumor, such as CCA and pancreatic cancer; and (3) non-universality of a single APC for various tumors. Based on these findings, PIT with another anticancer drug, such as an immune check inhibitor (ICI), is ongoing, as described above. Unfortunately, there has been no clinical trial of PIT for CCA. However, recent molecular and immunological investigations and treatments for CCA, including EGFR and FGFR inhibitors (pemigatinib/infigratinib/futibatinib), neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (entrectinib/larotrectinib), and ICIs (durvalumab, a PD-L1 inhibitor), will promote and accelerate the use of PIT in the near future.
## (s11) Conclusions and Future Directions
(p11.0) The basic premises of highly targeted therapies for CCA involve the identification of specific targets on CCA cells and directing therapeutic interventions towards those targets. Although several targets have been identified or investigated as described above, they are not universally applicable and are limited to certain types of CCA. Overcoming the discrepancy between the universality of the target and the localization of the attack in cancer therapy is partially controversial. However, it is not an insurmountable challenge, as we can visually differentiate CCA cells from non-CCA cells and select them in vitro using our own judgment. Currently, artificial intelligence (AI) plays an important role in various fields, including clinical diagnosis of cancer through endoscopy and pathology, as well as preclinical analysis using multi-omics approaches [103]. Therefore, the collabo-ration between human observation and AI has the potential to overcome the obstacles in identifying universal targets in CCA cells, paving the way for the development of highly targeted therapies for CCA, such as in ADC, PDT, and PIT.

(p11.1) Author Contributions: M.K. reviewed previous reports and drafted the manuscript. N.S. supervised and advised on the contents of this paper. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
