# A Review on Automatic Text Summarization Approaches

CorpusID: 33696521 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9638a59852efd53fcc97a5f11d39c007081fab0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9638a59852efd53fcc97a5f11d39c007081fab0)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s21) Graph Based Method
(p21.0) Graph theory is simply used to model the connections or links that exist between objects. Generally, a graph can be denoted in the form of G = (V, E), where V represents the graph's vertex or node and E is the edge between each vertex. In the context of text documents, vertex represents sentences and an edge is the weight between two sentences. Using this approach, documents can therefore be represented as a graph where each sentence becomes the vertex and the weight between each vertex corresponds to the similarity between the two sentences.

(p21.1) As in most literature concerning graph based approach, the most widely used similarity measure is the cosine similarity measure (Erkan and Radev, 2004). An edge then exists if the similarity weight is above some predefined threshold. Figure 5 shows an example graph for multi document. Once the graph is constructed for a set of documents, important sentences will then be identified; it follows the idea that a sentence is considered important if it is strongly connected to many other sentences.
## (s22) Discourse Based Method
(p22.0) In this study, we also investigate studies related to discourse analysis. It involves analysis on the semantic relation that exist between textual units. In the case involving multiple document, some research works study the utility of cross-document relations to determine important sentences which are deemed relevant to the document collection. Radev (2000), initiated the study on cross-document relations and came up with Cross-Document Structure Theory (CST) model. In this model, words, phrases or sentences can be link with each other if they are semantically connected. For example, some of the semantic connections or CST relations between sentences are given in Table 1.
