# Machine Learning in Orthopedics: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 49428358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44b5cfc5223e88977667b07e68ce3371f50033d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44b5cfc5223e88977667b07e68ce3371f50033d)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s5) Decision Trees and Random Forests
(p5.0) In Kotti et al. (2017), Random Forests (RF) were used both for classifying Osteoarthritis (OA) subjects from healthy ones and to attempt to provide a clinical interpretability of the results through the provision of a continuous regression output that, according to the authors, should better mimic the progressive nature of an OA pathology when compared with a crisp classification output. The authors collected kinematic data from patients which comprised ground reaction forces parameters (GRF), and extracted features for each of the three paths axes -X, Y, and Z. The most informative GRF parameters were computed by summing up the prediction error of the observations that were eliminated along the three paths, so that the final outcome of the ensemble could be appropriately averaged by also considering the error-bias. The sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and F1 score were reported for each group of axis features and for the combination of all three. Crossvalidation for the three axes showed a mean accuracy of 72.61 ± 4.24%.
## (s13) Generative Techniques
(p13.0) In orthopedics research, a generative model 6 was applied to the prediction of the progression and shape of idiopathic scoliosis affected spines, beginning from a 3D spine reconstruction of X-Ray images (Kadoury et al., 2017). The authors modeled a probabilistic manifold structure, a geometric space with 6 Generative methods are probabilistic methods able to generate a statistical model from a set of observed variables, in order to infer new inputs and the relative outputs, rather than just find a model for the existing variable values (the inputs). appropriate structures and transform operators, where highdimensional data were reduced in dimension while preserving high-dimensional properties. The manifold structure, in the reduced dimensionality, best discriminated the curves of spines between progressive and non-progressive by maximizing the distance between these two conditions. This was obtained through a discriminant graph-embedding approach able to maintain the similarities between high-dimensional points in the low dimensional space, such that the mapping operation between the two spaces was locally linear and preserved the distance between neighbor points (a result which was feasible owing to the Riemannian manifold properties of the model space). One within-class similarity graph and one between-class similarity graph were modeled to maximally separate features in the manifold space. Another component of the model was a prior probability which was used during the linear mapping between high-res and low-res spaces in order to compute the distribution of each specific mapping. To predict the deformity progression of a 3D spine baseline reconstruction, this reconstruction was projected onto the manifold space to identify the neighborhood samples. A geodesic curve was used to represent the spatiotemporal evolution of the curve by means of regression methods, which aimed at estimating the progressive deformities of the curve. This was obtained by applying the inverse transformation operation, that is, from a given point on the regressed curve to the high-dimensional space, until a predicted 3D representation of the output spine was obtained. The approach outperformed other ML approaches, both discriminative (SVM) and generative-Locally Linear Embedding(LLE) and the Locally Linear Latent Variable Model (LL-LVM)-with 81% accuracy, 87.9% sensitivity, 75% specificity and 0.85 ROC.
## (s15) Visually Supported Discussion of the Results
(p15.0) In order to present the results of our literature survey visually as well, we provide seven data visualizations, which we describe in the following account. Their description is also intended as a means to discuss the results of the survey and wrap up our reflections. Figures 2, 3 have been already commented upon and have a simple interpretation: the number of articles on the impacted orthopedic literature that explicitly mention ML (either conventional or deep) has constantly increased in the last 20 years, and approximately tenfold since 2010. As hinted above, this does not necessarily imply that before 2000 there were no ML techniques that were applied to orthopedic problems; rather, this is a sign that these techniques are now increasingly frequently recognized under this clear-cut umbrella term, and ML is becoming an increasingly common topic among orthopedic practitioners and researchers we well. Figure 4 is a bubble chart that presents an overview of the number of publications (proportional to the bubble areas) divided by application domain and ML technique. This chart outlines how the number of studies that employ some kind of ML technique varies for different application domains. By combining these three dimensions, it becomes evident that the largest number of papers (corresponding to the largest bubbles) falls in the areas of Osteoarthritis Detection and Prediction, Bone and Cartilage Image Segmentation, and Spine Pathologies Detection. Similarly, it is evident that diagnostic and prognostic purposes do not differ significantly in terms of the number of papers that deal with them.

(p15.1) A similar visual overview is depicted in Figure 5, where we represent the number of articles in terms of ML technique and the kind of source data exploited. This bubble chart shows that both SVM and Deep Learning techniques are the techniques that are most frequently used, and that Medical Imaging Data are the kind of data that are exploited more frequently. This is no surprise, as it may reflect the relatively widespread diffusion of advanced PACS platforms in orthopedic facilities in comparison to EMR and other computer support to clinical (orthopedic) practice (Abraham et al., 2011).
