# Clinical Medicine A Literature Review of Proton Beam Therapy for Prostate Cancer in Japan

CorpusID: 58539316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f80badcadff95e865e771a8fdcc53d874399844](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f80badcadff95e865e771a8fdcc53d874399844)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s8) Comparison between IMPT and PSPT
(p8.0) Comparison between IMPT and PSPT delivery system was conducted in a clinical study by Kase et al. The efficiency of the two techniques in terms of proton distribution to the tumor and organ at risk were documented. Sixteen patients participated in a study of treatment planning comparison between the techniques, four of whom were diagnosed with prostate cancer. IMPT has a greater ability in concentrating the dose to the patient target volume (PTV) in comparison to PSPT, while the PTV dose homogeneity were noted to be more desirable in PSPT. Decreased dose homogeneity of IMPT was due to hotspots near the border of the PTV, while increased dose homogeneity in PSPT can be credited to the utilization of static ridge filters designed to administer constant dose in the SOBP region and the placement of beam collimator close to the patient's body surface. This study confirmed that IMPT can reduce large doses to the OAR, yet it was not effective in decreasing the maximum dose irradiation to the skin of prostate cancer patients. Hence, the use of IMPT is not beneficial in reducing the probability of inflammation. However, due to the decreased dosage to the OARs incidence of rectal bleeding and irradiation cystitis is also reduced. The utilization of IMPT can enhance the dose concentration by around 50% of the isodose line. Another significant factor to consider is the beam angle selection in order to produce the optimal treatment outcome when using IMPT [29].
## (s11) Materials and Methods
(p11.0) Published work on Proton Beam Therapy for Prostate Cancer in Japan were gathered using PubMed database in the second-half of 2018. We went through abstracts and manuscripts written in English with the keywords 'proton beam therapy', 'prostate cancer' and 'Japan'. Research details were as follows ("proton therapy"[MeSH Terms] OR ("proton"[All Fields] AND "therapy"[All Fields]) OR "proton therapy"[All Fields] OR ("proton"[All Fields] AND "beam"[All Fields] AND "therapy"[All Fields]) OR "proton beam therapy"[All Fields]) AND ("prostatic neoplasms"[MeSH Terms] OR ("prostate"[All Fields] AND "cancer"[All Fields]) OR "prostate cancer"[All Fields]) AND ("japan"[MeSH Terms] OR "japan"[All Fields]). In this literature review, everything that discussed proton beam therapy for prostate cancer in Japan were included. This identified 23 articles. Analysis of journals included in this study is shown in Figure 1 using a flowchart by PRISMA [72]. 
