# Chapter 10 CHAPTER OVERVIEW SURVEILLANCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES USING SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CLUSTERING METHODS

CorpusID: 61192667 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c97ba82b410e28129ff51fa614f49ce03fd4cfcc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c97ba82b410e28129ff51fa614f49ce03fd4cfcc)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s30) Data Collection and Quality of GIS Data
(p30.0) In data collection, timely data and "modifiable area unit problem" (MAUP)similar to ecological fallacies in epidemiology -are the two major barriers. Available timely data are important to fast-spreading infectious diseases such as most respiratory infections. In addition, the high quality of GIS data is another limitation in many developing countries. By contrast, those pointed address data of cases related to privacy are generally inaccessible in developed countries. Most importantly, for infectious diseases involving higher social stigma or patients' private life such as tuberculosis, sexual transmitted disease (STD) or AIDS, the pointed data for spatial cluster analysis will be very difficult to obtain. Then, the problem of spatial precision or polygon data will make it very hard to investigate the evolution of the outbreak by time and place simultaneously or to search for interesting hypotheses. Since most public health systems are governed by local departments, it is very likely those surveillance data are frequently aggregated into administrative units. Unfortunately, different densities and distribution patterns of disease, such as cholera in Figure 10-8, exhibited from different aggregated administration unclear at the initial stage of disease outbreaks [38]. The subsequent cases after the introduction of prevention and/or control measures can also be carefully evaluated to verify the most effective strategy, using time-based integrated surveillance data. The visualized dynamic distributions of cases in various time periods and places at different levels of the public health system, from local, state/provincial to national and international, can be presented to generate hypotheses and to verify the success of containing the outbreak for decision-makers. Most importantly, evidence of spatial clustering along with other epidemiological findings and laboratory tests may indicate a possible infectious etiology for emerging infectious disease, similar to Epstein Barr virus for Hodgkin's disease [39].
## (s77) Data Collection and Quality of GIS Data
(p77.0) In data collection, timely data and "modifiable area unit problem" (MAUP)similar to ecological fallacies in epidemiology -are the two major barriers. Available timely data are important to fast-spreading infectious diseases such as most respiratory infections. In addition, the high quality of GIS data is another limitation in many developing countries. By contrast, those pointed address data of cases related to privacy are generally inaccessible in developed countries. Most importantly, for infectious diseases involving higher social stigma or patients' private life such as tuberculosis, sexual transmitted disease (STD) or AIDS, the pointed data for spatial cluster analysis will be very difficult to obtain. Then, the problem of spatial precision or polygon data will make it very hard to investigate the evolution of the outbreak by time and place simultaneously or to search for interesting hypotheses. Since most public health systems are governed by local departments, it is very likely those surveillance data are frequently aggregated into administrative units. Unfortunately, different densities and distribution patterns of disease, such as cholera in Figure 10-8, exhibited from different aggregated administration unclear at the initial stage of disease outbreaks [38]. The subsequent cases after the introduction of prevention and/or control measures can also be carefully evaluated to verify the most effective strategy, using time-based integrated surveillance data. The visualized dynamic distributions of cases in various time periods and places at different levels of the public health system, from local, state/provincial to national and international, can be presented to generate hypotheses and to verify the success of containing the outbreak for decision-makers. Most importantly, evidence of spatial clustering along with other epidemiological findings and laboratory tests may indicate a possible infectious etiology for emerging infectious disease, similar to Epstein Barr virus for Hodgkin's disease [39].
