# A review on health benefits of kombucha nutritional compounds and metabolites

CorpusID: 90806994 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd2da06842b31703376ae6f616eaa45115049f7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd2da06842b31703376ae6f616eaa45115049f7b)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Kombucha definition
(p1.0) Kombucha is the name of the beverage obtained from the fermentation of tea, mainly black tea (there are also other varieties that can be used as a base for its preparation, such as green and oolong tea, also known as blue tea); with added sugar as a substrate for fermentation. Although this beverage has originally been prepared using tea, it is possible to find variations made with infusions like mint, lemon balm or jasmine. The taste of the beverage is slightly acidic and slightly carbonated, which provides greater acceptance among consumers. Some metabolic products of Symbiotic Culture of Bacteria and Yeast (SCOBY), like acetic acid and other organic acids, posses antibacterial activity and prevents contamination of the drink by pathogenic bacteria (Watawana, Jayawardena, Gunawardhana, & Waisundara, 2015).
## (s3) Fermentation
(p3.0) Kombucha fermentation period is typically known to require a minimum of 3 days to a maximum of 60 days, depending on cultural practices (Watawana et al., 2015). The fermentation of kombucha is carried out at room temperature, optimizing fermentation time. Sucrose is used as the main carbon source in a concentration of 5-20%, providing the media and nutrients necessary for microorganism development. A SCOBY or the resulting liquid at a 10% concentration from a previous fermentation may be used as starter culture for fermentation .

(p3.1) According to , the variables of the fermentation process, such as time, temperature and sucrose concentration, will determine the final concentration of organic substances such as acids and pH. Organic acids produced during this fermentation process diminished the tea's pH value, which leads to a lack of oxygen induced by the acidity. Due to this, the number of possible pathogenic microbial cells, if any, diminishes, resulting in a safe beverage for consumption, despite having a microbial origin (Watawana et al., 2015).
