# Mineralogy and Geochemistry of Geophagic Soils in Ghana: A Review

CorpusID: 222075430 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3350bbf3961ff8dbac4910dcca28640b0b65607](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3350bbf3961ff8dbac4910dcca28640b0b65607)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geology

## (s2) III. THE REVIEW
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Arhin and Zango [4] highlighted on the fate of geophagia in Ghana by collecting and analysing thirty (30) baked clay balls with an average weight of 70 g from market centres in Kumasi, Navrongo and Anfoega. Trace elements contents were determined for their concentration levels. Out of thirty samples, 10 samples were collected from each region. The field samples were prepared by drying, pounding and sieving. The samples were sieved to <125 µm fraction, weighed to 100 g portion, labelled and bagged. The labelled and bagged samples were sent to the laboratory for trace element analysis using XRF analytical technique. Arhin and Zango analysed the trace element concentrations and also carried out calculation on the probable daily intake (PDI) and health risk indices (HRI), and used country averages in geophagic clays as calculated by Hunter [18] using in vitro extraction method as a reference to compare Potassium (K), Calcium (Ca) and Magnesium (Mg) of major oxides in baked clay-ball samples from the three regions. K concentration recorded in the clay balls in Volta was same as recorded in Upper East, as 2.72 mg/kg, whilst it was 2.19 mg/kg in Ashanti region. Analyses of the results showed enrichment of K in clay balls in the three regions relative to the country average concentration of 0.13 mg/kg. Higher values were obtained for Mg in the clay balls in all the three regions when values were compared to the in vitro extraction average of 0.28 mg/kg. Volta and Upper East regions recorded same values of 1.5 mg/kg whilst Ashanti had higher value of 2.29 mg/kg. On the contrary, the most cherish element such as Ca that is essential for bone building was consistently lower in all clay balls analysed in all the three regions. Equal measurements of Ca concentrations of 0.03 mg/kg were recorded for Volta and Upper East regions whereas 0.23 mg/kg in Ashanti region. Similar analyses performed by Arhin and Zango on the trace elements in the geophagic clays were Arsenic (As), Chromium (Cr), Cobalt (Co), Molybdenum (Mo), Caesium (Cs), Zirconium (Zr) and Lathanium (La).

LLM judge: YES

What did the study by Arhin and Zango reveal about the concentration of trace elements, including Potassium, Magnesium, and Calcium, in geophagic clay balls from different regions in Ghana?

