# IBUPROFEN AND ITS DIFFERENT ANALYTICAL AND MANUFACTURING METHODS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 102629014 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b86e983192cd88d2d13ec58c60111253513b7a61](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b86e983192cd88d2d13ec58c60111253513b7a61)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s9) Studies and specifications
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Many studies have revealed different cases of the ibuprofen effect on various human cells as well as other living microbes and also other components showing similar activity to ibuprofen. Beauchamp et al. found oil from the olive plant showing similar ibuprofen activity due to the presence of oleocanthal [17]. Studies showed that inflammation and plaque pathology is suppressed by ibuprofen in mouse for Alzheimer disease [18]. In 1993, Hasson et al. were able to study the ibuprofen effect on the muscle soreness, damage, and performance where they found that prophylactic damage of ibuprofen does not prevent creatine kinase release from the muscle but decrease the soreness of muscle and help in restoring the muscle function for certain period of time [19]. Similarly, in 2002, Trappe et al. also studied the effect of two analgesics ibuprofen (IBU: 1,200 mg/day) and acetaminophen (ACET: 4,000 mg/day) on muscle protein and soreness. They found an active influence of ibuprofen in the muscle protein [20]. With the advancement in research, in 2004, Schnitzer et al. were able to study and compare lumiracoxib with ibuprofen. They found that lumiracoxib was able to decrease the ulcer complication by two to three folds than the NSAID [21]. Bernard et al. studied the effect of ibuprofen on the physiology and survival of patients with Sepsis where they concluded that ibuprofen helps in reducing levels of prostacyclin and thromboxane with a decrease in consumption, tachycardia, fever, oxygen, and lactic acidosis but does not prevent the development of shock or the acute respiratory Bashyal distress syndrome [22]. Studies also reveal that ibuprofen possess the antifungal activities [23].
