# A Review of Localization and Tracking Algorithms in Wireless Sensor Networks

CorpusID: 10003728 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f02fc32f7e13d6c587769588567187277ff8977](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f02fc32f7e13d6c587769588567187277ff8977)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s18) D. Fingerprinting Based Methods [57]
Number of References: 9

(p18.0) Standard fingerprinting based localization methods available in the literature are Radar [65], PlaceLab [66], and Horus [67]. These methods comprise primarily two phases: training and testing [126]. During training phase, radio map is generated at each of the fingerprint location. Subsequently, a location is chosen corresponding to the minimum error between test RSS data and fingerprint RSS. [68,69]. This method is able to cope with heterogeneous devices during training and testing phases. A method described in [68] utilizes ratio of RSS, whereas, [69] uses relative RSS data for coarse-grained localization due to which performance deteriorates [70]. Notably, these fingerprinting based localization methods provide good location accuracy at the expense of heavy training during radio map construction. Classification of tracking algorithms is described in the ensuing section.
## (s19) IV. BROAD CLASSIfiCATION OF TRACKING METHODS
Number of References: 9

(p19.0) Tracking of mobile node [2] is carried out generally using a Kalman filter [71], an extended Kalman filter [72] or a particle filter [73,74] in current state of-art methods. The mobile sensor node accounts for all possible motion scenarios unlike a static node [127]. Mobile nodes can be localized using range free techniques. Applications in this context include vehicular tracking in a city [75]. Networks which consist of mobile nodes also employ Monte Carlo localization techniques [38,39].
## (s20) A. Cluster-based Tracking Methods
Number of References: 11

(p20.0) There are three types of clustered-based approaches, namely static, dynamic and spatio-temporal. In [92], three cluster based approaches, adaptive head, static head, and selective static head are proposed. The adaptive head [92] is the most energy efficient approach while static and selective static heads algorithms are chosen for rapidly moving target. Cluster management strategies, such as the proactive and the reactive cluster management are presented to handle energy and the longevity constraints of the sensor nodes [93]. A dynamic clustering method that optimizes the information utility of data for a given cost of communication and computation is explored in [94]. However, this energy efficient approach is applicable to single target only. An energy aware target detection and localization strategy for cluster-based wireless sensor network is presented in [95]. This probabilistic localization method is not scalable and limited to a single target. A decentralized, lightweight, dynamic clustering algorithm for target tracking is proposed in [88]. A cluster head is chosen for the received acoustic signal above a set threshold. The cluster head collaborates with the neighboring sensors for the exchange of information. In [96], a tracking approach that uses dynamic mechanism to deal with different ways of missing targets is presented. DELTA [97] tracks a constant moving target dynamically by building groups and electing group leaders using flashlight. An attempt to reduce the number of the number of nodes involved in communication for tracking and consequently decreasing energy consumption is presented in [98]. In [84], a classification algorithm for target tracking is developed. It estimates the velocity to reduce uncertainty in the movement of the target and thus tracking error. However, this method is applicable only for single target. A hybrid static/dynamic clustering method called continuous object detection and tracking algorithm (CODA) is described in [99]. It utilizes cluster head to estimate the boundary profile and communicates this to base-station.
## (s21) a) Prediction-based Tracking Methods
Number of References: 8

(p21.0) The prediction based tracking is one of the subclass of clustered-based tracking. In this context, an energy efficient prediction based mobile node tracking method is discussed in [78,100,87]. This method is energy efficient since sensors are in sleep mode most of the time and avoid long range transmission to the base-station. The architecture of this prediction-based energy saving scheme (PES) comprises of three blocks, namely, prediction, wake up and recovery. Only the sensor node that tracks a mobile target is active, while remaining sensor nodes stay in a low-power mode. Hence the sensing and micro-control unit are deactivated. Sensor nodes monitor and send the information of mobile target to the basestation. The prediction from base-station is sent back to the sensor node, when the target enters its range. The sensor node continues to monitor and track the object, if the prediction is consistent. Otherwise, the target is declared missing and a recovery mechanism is activated. However, the work is limited for the case of moving patterns of the mobile target.

(p21.1) In [101], dual prediction based reporting (DPR) for mobile target tracking is discussed. Both sensor node and base-station predict the future location of target. Multi-hop communication does not take place in case of consistent prediction. The DPR comprises of two subsystem; location and prediction. The location model determines the granularity of the target location state and prediction model estimate targets' future movement. In [91], distributed processing for multiple target tracking is presented. Distributed architecture is preferred over centralized architecture for energy efficiency in a wireless sensor network. A linear predictor (DPT) that utilizes previous two locations to predict the next location is proposed in [89]. The method is distributed and is scalable while minimizing the energy consumption of the network. However, reduction of miss rate, relationship between energy consumption and location accuracy, and extension for mobile sensors are the open problems here. An optimal tracking interval for a given predictive tracking of the target is proposed in [102]. The energy aware tracking system with error handling ability is discussed in [103]. This method considers the case of error avoidance and error correction besides tracking. The method also handles sudden direction change of moving target and transmission failure. However, varying speed of mobile target is not taken into the account.
## (s22) B. Tree-based Tracking Methods
Number of References: 8

(p22.0) A scalable tracking using networked sensors (STUN) [104] tracks a large number of targets using hierarchical organization. In [105], a DCTC method to detect and track a target by pruning and expanding a convoy tree. An initial convoy tree is created, when target is detected. The neighboring sensor nodes send the data to the root node and the tree is reconfigured once the target moves out. In [106,107], an approach for target tracking that ensures reasonable localization accuracy, low energy dissipation, and low complexity is proposed. However, this work is not suitable for multiple intruding objects. Innetwork data processing for object tracking is carried out using update cost and query cost efficiently in [108,109]. A query based efficient target tracking that continuously reports the tracking information to a mobile user is presented in [110]. A voronoi-based target tracking is explored in [83], which establishes non-uniform coverage to detect the target using non-redundant sensor nodes
