# Prevalence, incidence and carrier frequency of 5q-linked spinal muscular atrophy - a literature review

CorpusID: 10787051 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/453972bc9b360226ceb8a5b90414333353943d6b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/453972bc9b360226ceb8a5b90414333353943d6b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Prevalence by SMA subtype
Number of References: 23

(p4.0) Although SMA type I is expected to account for more than half of all new SMA cases [30], the studies that examined a SMA type I only showed a prevalence of 0.04 to 0.28 per 100,000 [24,25,[31][32][33][34], which is much lower than the 1-2 per 100,000 persons noted for all SMA. Due to its severity, patients with SMA type I have a short life expectancy. Therefore often no or only few patients are alive on the date of the study, which could account for this lower prevalence. Nowadays, a median life expectancy of around one year of age is estimated for type I patients [35][36][37], whereas in type II 75-93% of patients survive beyond 20 years of age [37][38][39][40] and life expectancy for type III is thought to be close to the normal population [20,39]. The prevalence of both SMA type II and III together has been estimated around 1.5 per 100,000 [31,32,[41][42][43]. Of three studies that investigated type II and type III separately, two found a higher prevalence of type III compared to type II [24,32]. This may be explained by the longer life expectancy of type III patients compared to type II SMA patients.
## (s8) Carrier frequency in SMA
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Since SMA is a recessive disease, there are also unaffected, heterozygous carriers of the disease. Carriers fall into four main groups of genotypes (Fig. 1). The most common one is the '1 + 0' genotype (one normal, functional allele and a SMN1 deleted, disease allele). A much less common category is the '2 + 0' genotype with two functional genes on one chromosome and none on the other. Furthermore, there are also '1 + 1 D ' and '2 + 1 D ' genotypes, which have one or two functional genes on one chromosome and a non-functional gene due to either a point mutation or a microdeletion on the other. These last two genotypes are very rare [56,57]. Four or even more copies of the SMN1 gene have also been found, indicating a '2 + 2' or possibly a '3 + 1' genotype. This suggests '3 + 0' or '3 + 1 D ' carrier genotypes might also be possible, however these will be even rarer.
## (s10) SMN1 copy number differences between populations
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) In 2014, MacDonald et al. have performed a metaanalysis comparing the SMA carrier frequency among different ethnicities. In their analysis they included 14 studies where ethnicities were described and results were broken down by SMA copy number [47]. They took the different carrier genotypes described above into account and determined the carrier rates in the ethnic groups. Furthermore, they calculated the reduced risk of being a carrier if a 2-or 3-copy result was found. This again showed a substantially higher carrier risk with a 2-copy test result for Black people. In addition a very high carrier risk and 2-copy risk in Iranians was found. However, this is based on one study only [91].
