# A Review on Iron Chelators in Treatment of Iron Overload Syndromes

CorpusID: 10915610 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d45b44e3378bf9a63f0e8b00be2bf85a273b8ab5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d45b44e3378bf9a63f0e8b00be2bf85a273b8ab5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) DEFERASIROX
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) Tridentate iron chelating agent that binds iron in a 2:1 ratio. This combination has high affinity for iron and very low affinity for copper and zinc. 50 The most common side effects of DFX are abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, skin rashes and ophthalmic complication. These reactions frequently occur in older patients with predisposition to myelodysplastic syndrome, renal or hepatic disease and patients with low platelet counts. 51 Serum creatinine level, serum transaminases, bilirubin and CBC should be regularly monitored. One of troublesome factors in Deferasirox therapy is proximal renal tubular dysfunction 52 and other complications including drastic level of metabolic acidosis, hypophosphatemia and hypokalemia. In study from Al-Khabori, et al. 52 Deferasirox withdrawal and replacement therapy in 4 patients with similar conditions rapidly resulted in normal balance of electrolytes. It is worth noting that in order to prevent these complications; the patients should avoid the use of antacid containing aluminum such as Maalox and Mylanta during Deferasirox therapy. 53
## (s6) Formulation of Chelators and their consumption dosage
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Deferiprone is presented as 500 mg tablets and oral solution (100 mg in 0.4 ml). The common dosage is 75-100 mg/kg/day in 3 doses per day. Deferasirox is available in different tablet sizes such as 125 mg, 250 mg and 500 mg. They are completely water or juice soluble and can be taken with an empty stomach. The recommended dosage is 20 mg/kg up to a maximum of 30 mg/kg/day in a single dose. Ferritin level monitoring will prescribe the further dosage. 54 Expenses of Deferiprone and Deferasirox therapy can be compared from different points of view: medication prices, laboratory tests cost and side effects related treatment cost. 4 It is estimated that Deferiprone therapy cost for a child could be twice higher than Deferoxamine therapy. As a result, Deferasirox is the first choice and then both Deferiprone and Deferoxamine surge into second and third place, respectively. However, this comparison can still be various in different countries. Several recent studies indicate that Deferasirox therapy is more affordable than traditional Deferoxamine therapy (Table 1). 54
## (s8) Importance of Chelation therapy in clinical trial
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Various studies have been shown the safety and efficiency of chelation therapy in treatment of iron overload in major beta-thalassemia patients with International Journal of Hematology Oncology and Stem Cell Research ijhoscr.tums.ac.ir chronic transfusion. Since the transfusion volume affects the chelation dosage, monitoring iron intake is necessary, especially in children. 57,58 Using iron chelation therapy in transfusion-dependent anemia such as MDS, aplastic anemia and sickle cell disease has been approved. Recent reviews indicate that therapy response is dependent on chelation dosage and iron overload in body. Although the numbers of chelation therapy studies on patients with anemia due to reduction in red blood cell production such as diamond black fan are not low, there is no assessment of therapy response due to their anemia mechanism. So, there are a lot of questions still remain unanswered. 58 Various studies on the effect of iron overload due to transfusion in patients with different types of rare anemia have shown that dose of DXM and regular monitoring of serum ferritin levels are the factors involved in the control of iron.
## (s9) CONCLUSION
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Several conditions including severity of iron overload, treatment period, final costs of treatment and the results of recent studies must be taken into consideration in order to select the proper chelation therapy for a particular clinical situation. Furthermore, the additional expenses of treatment and cost of medications should be considered. Iron is also an important element in the proliferation of tumor cells. Hence, in the absence of this vital element, the proliferation of malignant cells will be also difficult. 63 Therefore, in the near future, the potential role of chelation therapy in treatment and control of cancers will be considered. Finally, the importance of knowledge and information on complete and perfect iron chelation will be revealed in the future. 64 
