# Clinical effectiveness of baclofen for the treatment of alcohol dependence: a review

CorpusID: 10538516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b0191ea4a4fa638dfca0264ba42185ce4fd55a1c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b0191ea4a4fa638dfca0264ba42185ce4fd55a1c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Discussion
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The evidence supporting the safe and effective use of baclofen for maintenance treatment of alcohol dependence is growing, as evidenced by the number of ongoing or recently completed trials. From the studies reviewed here, it appears that baclofen may prolong the time to first drink, reduce overall drinking days, and facilitate maintenance of abstinence in select populations. Baclofen appears to be well tolerated at the doses that have been evaluated. The available evidence suggests a potentially unique impact of baclofen for the treatment of alcohol dependence, given that it has been safely used in patients with comorbid cirrhosis of the liver, a disease that is not uncommon in alcohol-dependent patients. However, the role of baclofen in patients with other medical and psychiatric comorbidities remains unclear. With the exception of stable antidepressant use, those with a treated comorbid psychiatric illness were excluded from RCTs. As the efficacy of baclofen has not been conclusively confirmed for the maintenance of alcohol abstinence, excluding subjects taking other psychotropic medications may avoid confounding from other psychotropic agents that may have beneficial effects on alcohol intake. However, baclofen may provide clinical benefit in those with underlying anxiety, and expanding future inclusion criteria in clinical trials would be important to test this hypothesis. Addolorato et al 19 found improvements in anxiety but not depression scores in patients treated with baclofen. The anxiolytic effects of submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress baclofen have also been shown to be greater than placebo in alcoholic patients, producing similar results to both low-dose amitriptyline and diazepam, though in that particular study abstinence from alcohol was not measured or reported. 25 One case report describes a patient with schizophrenia and alcohol dependence who experienced decreased alcohol intake and cravings when he was treated with baclofen. 26 Additionally, Dore et al 22 reported a case series of baclofen use in dually diagnosed individuals (n = 13). When doses ranging from 30 mg to 275 mg of baclofen were used daily, eight (61.5%) subjects experienced a significant abstinence period or reduction in drinking quantity. Four subjects also reported beneficial anxiolytic effects. Unfortunately, two subjects overdosed with baclofen, and seven patients experienced mild to moderate adverse events, including drowsiness, nocturnal enuresis, forgetfulness, and dizziness. Additional data supporting the efficacy and safety of baclofen in dually diagnosed patients are warranted and necessary before it can be firmly recommended over other potential options.
