# The diagnostic value of serum creatinine and cystatin c in evaluating glomerular filtration rate in patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis

CorpusID: 11585709 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/363a8492cc1aa9cad26089f6f60900c611a88f71](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/363a8492cc1aa9cad26089f6f60900c611a88f71)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Detection method
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) For SCr and SCysC detection, all clinical methods were included. The testing processes for SCysC were particle-enhanced nephelometric immunoassay (PENIA) and particle-enhanced turbidimetric immunoassay (PETIA) [22,23]. The detection methods for SCr were the enzymatic method and the Jaffé method [24]. www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget Data extraction and literature quality assessment Independent reviews by Chunyong Liu and Huiqun Li highlighted other possible studies in accordance with the above described exploration approach. Both reviews and summaries of every article were studied repeatedly to be sure inclusion criteria were met.
## (s6) Synthesis and analysis of data
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Meta-analysis was carried out by the software RevMan version 5.3, and Meta-Disc version 1.4. Publication bias analysis was performed using Stata 14.0 (Stata Corp, College Station, TX, USA). When a fourfold table contained a cell with a value of 0, the calculations were corrected with the addition of 0.5 in the cell. Studies containing two cells with the value of 0 were not included in the analysis [26]. Each document was summarized by SPE, SEN, ± PVs, ± LRs for diagnostic tests, and also analyzed for heterogeneity with the χ 2 test. This was evaluated using the I 2 method, and significant study heterogeneity was considered when I 2 > 50%. I 2 values between 25 and 50% were deemed to show modest heterogeneity and I 2 values < 25% were thought to indicate low heterogeneity. Clinical utility of SCysC and SCr for estimated GFR (eGFR) was evaluated by a Fagan plot. We drew the SROC curve based on the literature included in this study, and calculated the zone under the receiver operating characteristic curves. All results are presented with 95% confidence intervals (CI) [27].
## (s13) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 17

(p13.0) SCr, SCysC and endogenous creatinine clearance rates were utilized as endogenous indicators to estimate GFR in the clinical setting. In the estimation of GFR, ideal endogenous blood substances incorporate the following CKD = chronic kidney disease; SCr = serum creatinine; SCysC = serum cystatin C; GFR = glomerular filtration rate; mGFR = measured GFR; PETIA = particle-enhanced turbidimetric immunoassay; PENIA = particle-enhanced nephelometric immunoassay; NA or "/"= not applicable.   properties: release into the blood stream at a steady speed, free filtration by the glomerulus, no reabsorption or secretion by the renal tubules, and removal through the kidneys [28]. Most research mentions many factors that effect the generation of SCr, including age, gender, muscle mass, pharmaceutical or other drug use, among others. In addition, until kidney function loss has reached 50%, a typical concentration of SCr may be seen due to tubular secretion and additional clearance through the viscera [29].

(p13.1) SCr, urine creatinine, serum albumin or SCysC are most often used in eGFR assays [30]. GFR may be calculated via many formulas, and all of these assays and equations were found in the included studies. However, as no single method has been validated in a large human population of CKD patients, finding the best method to assess renal function in CKD patients that can be carried out in routine practice is a problem that needs to be addressed. SCr is suggested to be the typical indicator for renal injury assessment, and plays a significant clinical role in the evaluation of GFR in patients with chronic kidney disease. Additionally, about five to ten percent of discharged creatinine comes from distal tubule discharge, which more or less increases in answer to reduced GFR, making it difficult to accurately identify tiny and mild changes in GFR [31]. Drug treatments such as trimethoprim, cimetidine, cefoxitin that block the distal tubule from releasing creatinine can also enhance the SCr level, leading to increased bias in the estimation of GFR [32]. Normally, in kidney, the glomerulus filters creatinine and the tubule secrets creatinine. However, the secretion of the creatinine can be neglected when the GFR is significantly high [42]. A reported disadvantage of using creatinine is that nearly 50% of the total kidney creatinine excretion is due to proximal tubular secretion, thereby affecting its accuracy in estimating kidney function [62].

(p13.2) Unlike SCr, SCysC is filtered and reabsorbed in the proximal tubules freely, is not secreted by the tubules, and does not rely on sex, race, muscle mass or age. The concentration of SCysC is found to be stable within certain inflammatory conditions and in other disorders of      metabolism. And it is possible to SCysC without a well documented limitation to the patients with extreme changes in weight, muscle mass. SCysC rises earlier than SCr when GFR declines, suggesting it could serve as a marker and have further benefits in detecting early renal dysfunction. SCysC has been shown to be better than SCr in GFR assessment, and its usefulness has been demonstrated in patients with almost regular kidney function. In previous studies within the general population and also in older people, SCysC has been shown to be an ideal predictor of death rate and major cardiovascular events, and has been reported to be better than SCr alone. Peralta et al. [31] studied 11,909 participants and found that SCysC levels in those cases may be useful for evaluating CKD individuals with high risk for complications. Including SCysC could enhance death risk forecast by phases of kidney function relative to SCr. The investigators found that comparison of associations using SCysC in estimating GFR can be used to indicate risk of hip fracture in older men. SCysC is produced by nucleated cells in all human beings and its concentration is not influenced by sex, age, dietary habit, swelling, etc. Hence, SCysC has no correlation with pathophysiological states other than GFR. This makes its expression an ideal endogenous marker in estimating GFR changes, and improves the accuracy of early diagnosis for kidney function. Therefore, SCysC provides reliable renal dysfunction risk prediction [33,34].

(p13.3) A previous meta-analysis written by Shlipak et al. [35] demonstrated that it is possible that rearranging assessment of kidney function to include SCysC improved forecasts of the following: cardiovascular disease, renal morbidity, and mortality. Research by Coll et al. [36] showed that levels of SCr were raised in over 92.1% of patients that had reduced renal function in comparison with SCysC levels, which increased in every patient.

(p13.4) CKD patients or transplant patients should be categorized into stages based on their GFR. This has been suggested by the National Kidney Foundation Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (K/DOQI) and by Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) [37][38][39][40]. Risk of Progression in CKD is usually defined as impaired or decreased kidney function, with a GFR of less than 60 ml/min per 1.73 m 2 for 3 months or longer, regardless of cause [37]. The results of our meta-analysis show that by SCysC-based estimates of the GFR, we may identify more latent CKD patients when cut-off values are 60 (ml/min/1.73 m 2 ), which is most important for secondary prevention of CKD progression. Therefore, we recommend that Cystatin C-based estimates of the GFR should universally be introduced into daily clinical practice or used as endpoints in clinical trials.
