# Microbial xylanases and their industrial application in pulp and paper biobleaching: a review

CorpusID: 11718514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02f43ac2a34accb1dd42c271068b63d1b4b5d3f9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02f43ac2a34accb1dd42c271068b63d1b4b5d3f9)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Xylanolytic enzymes
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) The complex structure of xylan has been defined as a linear polymer of repeating xylopyranosyl groups substituted at various carbon positions with different sugars and/or acidic compounds. Hence, complete and efficient enzymatic hydrolysis of the complex polymer requires an array of enzymes with diverse specificity and modes of action. Endo-1,4-b D-xylanase (E.C. 3.2.1.8) randomly cleaves the xylan backbone; b-D-xylosidases (E.C. 3.2.1.37) cleaves xylose monomers, whereas the removal of the side groups is catalysed by a-L-arabinofuranosidases (E.C. 3.2.1.55), a-D glucuronidases (E.C. 3.2.1.139) and acetylxylan esterases (E.C. 3.1.1.72) which remove acetyl and phenolic side branches and act synergistically on the complex polymer (Beg et al. 2001;Collins et al. 2005). All these enzymes perform supportively to change xylan into its constituent sugars. The existence of such a multifunctional xylanolytic enzyme system is relatively common in fungi (Driss et al. 2012a), actinomycetes (Walia et al. 2013a) and bacteria (Azeri et al. 2010). Table 1 summarizes the biochemical properties of acidic, alkaline and thermostable xylanases reported in literature.
## (s3) Xylanase sources
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Xylanase are prevalent in nature, they arise both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes and have been reported from marine and terrestrial bacteria, rumen bacteria, protozoa, fungi, marine algae, snails, crustaceans, insects and seeds of terrestrial plants and germinating seeds (Walia et al. 2013a). Amongst the prokaryotes, bacteria and cyanobacteria from marine environments produce xylanase (Annamalai et al. 2009). There is information about xylanase from plants, which is endoxylanase from Japanese pear fruits during over maturing period and higher animals such as mollusc, are also able to produce xylanase (Yamaura et al. 1997). There are reports related to isolation and purification of xylanase from various other sources such as anaerobic bacterium Clostridium acetobutylicum, immature cucumber seeds and germinating barley (Sizova et al. 2011).
## (s4) Extremophilic xylanases
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Xylanase considered are of fungal or bacterial origin which show optimum activity at, or near, mesophilic temperatures (*40-60°C) (Walia et al. 2014) and neutral (in particular for bacterial xylanase) or slightly acidic (in particular for fungal xylanase) pH. There is also information related to  Liu et al. (2010) xylanase that are active and stable at extreme pH ranging from 2 to 11 and temperature ranging from 5 to 105°C (Collins et al. 2005) as well as at high concentration of NaCl-30% (Waino and Ingvorsen 2003). These are produced by microorganisms which produce enzymes adapted to these extreme habitats.
## (s9) Application of xylanase in pulp and paper biobleaching
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) The regular procedure of papermaking requires high measure of chemicals, which has brought about risky profluent transfer issues (Verma and Satyanarayana 2013). The pulp and paper industry has been scanning for novel biotechnology methods utilized for the replacement for a portion of the chemicals utilized as a part of the paper making process. Biopulping is the pretreatment of wood or nonwood by lignin-degrading fungi prior to routine pulping process. Notwithstanding, the downsides are the time used in the pretreatment (around 2-4 weeks) and yield loss, as the organisms will be at the same time attacked by the polysaccharides and lignin. To defeat these disadvantages, xylanase pretreatment expanded the dissemination of sodium hydroxide in both hardwoods and softwoods and enhanced the traditional pulping process (Woldesenbet et al. 2012).

(p9.1) The enzyme utilized with the end goal of biobleaching should be dynamic at higher temperature, thermostable, alkalophilic and cellulase free xylanase . This is essential for the enzymatic removal of lignin associated with hemicellulosic fraction with a slightest harm to the pulp because of the nonappearance or having poor cellulolytic activity. Other than the utilization of xylanase in bleaching through lignin removal, the utilization of xylanases additionally help in expanding pulp fibrillation, decrease of beating times in unique pulp and expanded freeness in reused fibers (Savitha et al. 2009). It has been demonstrated from a few studies that xylanase prebleaching is an environment friendly, economically cheap innovation and can diminish the amount of bleached chemicals required to achieve a given brightness in the resulting chemical bleaching stage. Pretreatment with xylanases enhances the effectiveness of chemical extraction of lignin from pulp and minimizes the necessity of chlorine dioxide (ClO 2 ) (Khonzue et al. 2011). The innovation likewise enhances paper quality, mass thickness and breaking length and it could lessen the release of volatile organic compounds. In this way, without cellulase activity, xylanases utilized as a part of pulp and paper biobleaching can be a more secure option for the substitution of the dangerous chlorinated compounds (Golugiri et al. 2012;Walia et al. 2015b).
## (s10) Biopulping
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Biopulping is the fungal treatment of wood chips and other lignocellulosic materials with natural wood decay fungi prior to mechanical or chemical pulping. The fungal treatment process is carrying out for the subsequent removal of lignin. Wood is debarked, chipped and screened according to mill operations. Then chips are steamed briefly to reduce the load of natural microorganisms present in wood chips. After steaming process, chips are cooled with forced air and inoculated with the biopulping fungus. Before processing, the inoculated chips are piled and ventilated with filtered and humidified air for 1 to 4 weeks. The biopulping process is technologically feasible and cost-effective. The main advantages of this process are: Reduced electrical energy consumption and increased mill throughput for mechanical pulping. The process also improved strength properties of paper, and reduced environmental impact (Khonzue et al. 2011). The use of biopulping as a pretreatment for the Kraft process is still an open research issue. The uses of this technology for other substrates such as non-woody plants like straw, and corn stalks also need much attention (Woldesenbet et al. 2012).
