# Mg-Based Hydrogen Absorbing Materials for Thermal Energy Storage-A Review

CorpusID: 116544173 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd5ce3615ddd49176f4d7d019585c489aad9ef90](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd5ce3615ddd49176f4d7d019585c489aad9ef90)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Engineering

## (s2) Chemical Fundamentals
Number of References: 9

(p2.0) For the TES system, there are mainly three potential technologies used to store thermal energy: Sensible storage, latent storage, and chemical storage. In the sensible storage system, the energy density is equal to the product of temperature change by the specific heat of this material. The thermal energy is stored when the temperature of the material increases and released when its temperature decreases. In our daily life, hot water storage, underground thermal energy storage, and rock filled storage are typical applications of sensible heat storage [15]. When a solid/liquid state material transforms into a liquid/gas state, it would absorb energy to overcome the intermolecular force. Under this circumstance, it would release thermal energy during the process of gas/liquid state transforming into liquid/solid state. The thermal energy related to the phase change of material is named latent heat. In the time of absorbing or releasing heat, the temperature of the system would not change and equal to the melting or boiling point. In total, there are more than 150 phase change materials listed by Zalba et al. [16]. Compared with sensible heat, latent heat materials are able to store more than 5-14 times heat due to the much higher phase-transition enthalpy [20]. Nevertheless, both sensible heat and latent heat storage are physical thermal energy storage system, in which thermal energy will fade out as time goes by, and they are not reliable for long-term thermal energy storage. There are many publications studying the TES by sensible and latent heat storage [1,15,16,20,21]. Chemical storage is the technology of storing heat by utilizing reversible chemical reactions [22].
## (s7) Mg/MgH 2 System
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) Theoretically, the pure Mg/MgH 2 system could possess a thermal energy density as high as 2814 kJ/kg [41]. Compared with one of the largest solar thermal power plants in Granada, Spain, which contains about 28,000 tons of 60% NaNO 3 + 40% KNO 3 to store concentrated thermal energy, while only 1100 tons of Mg metal will be enough to the same size of heat storage [19]. The particle size of Mg should be controlled in the range of 25-100 µm in order to complete a full conversion to MgH 2 and get a faster reaction kinetics at a minimum temperature of 350 • C under normal pressure [41]. With the temperature increases, the Mg metal particles are going to agglomerate and fuse with each other after a certain cycle time, resulting in bad reaction kinetics and an incomplete reaction between Mg particles and hydrogen. It is noted that the high vapor pressure (0.133 bar at 500 • C) of Mg particles and comparatively low melting point (Tm = 650 • C) lead to the poor cycle stability [41]. Indeed, it is of fundamental significance to know the function of H 2 dissociation equilibrium pressure against operation temperature for the better controlling of the Mg/MgH 2 heat storage system. Figure 2 indicates the clear relationship between hydrogen dissociation pressure and temperature. At a given hydrogen pressure, we could get the lowest temperature for H 2 liberation and the highest temperature for the heat release. In other words, based on Figure 2, the direction of the chemical reaction could be adjusted by altering the H 2 pressure. On the other hand, it is also feasible to adjust the temperature range to regulate the progress of the irreversible chemical reaction under a certain H 2 pressure.
## (s16) Conclusions and Perspective
Number of References: 9

(p16.0) Thermal energy from solar radiation is a potential candidate to serve as an energy reserve. Compared with sensible heat and latent heat storage, chemical heat storage demonstrates to be an advantageous technology for TES due to its high energy density in a wide temperature range and long storage duration without heat loss. In recent decades, a great number of scientists devoted themselves to the research of reversible chemical heat storage [1][2][3]15,19,62,84,85]. There were various materials proposed already and fabricated for TES in theoretical and experimental cases. Mg-based materials are known for hydrogen storage area due to the abundant reserves, low cost, high hydrogen capacity, and light weight, but the related thermodynamic problems (high dehydrogenation enthalpy) limit their further application. In the research of TES, the drawback of high reaction enthalpy becomes the core advantage of those materials for Mg-based materials. In the Ni-doped Mg/MgH 2 system, which even exhibited an energy density as high as 2147 kJ/kg [41]. Different types of Mg-based materials for thermal storage are reviewed and materials like Mg-Fe/Mg 2 FeH 6 and NaMgH 3 with low hydrogen dissociation pressure and good thermal stability are more favorable for TES. Based on the current development of chemical heat storage, the thermodynamic and kinetic properties dominate the heat storage properties of reversible chemical reaction. Different from the thermodynamic problems in hydrogen storage, the high reaction enthalpy and fast reaction kinetics help to improve the efficiency of the TES system and make the reaction release more thermal energy and to do so quickly. Evaluated from energy density, Mg-based materials are suitable for TES. However, the low hydrogen absorption pressure and thermal stability become the limitation. The introduction of different metal hydrides to form a composite might be a good choice. The enhancement of thermal conductivity is necessary to the TES system, how to get a good heat transfer ability on the basis of fast hydrogen absorption kinetics still need further investigation. The additives or catalysts can optimize the kinetics but whether they will maintain stable during numerous cycles at high temperature needs to be confirmed. The design of a proper reactor for the chemical reaction and chemical stability of the reversible reaction also remains challenging.  
