# Resurgence of Polymyxin B for MDR/XDR Gram-Negative Infections: An Overview of Current Evidence

CorpusID: 11101197 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39361c45df5203e87d2f7ab72dabc13dbd237ef3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39361c45df5203e87d2f7ab72dabc13dbd237ef3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Epidemiology of Resistance to Carbapenems
Number of References: 10

(p1.0) Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) has been reported with high mortality rates globally. CRE were unusual prior to 1992 but there has been significant rise worldwide [9]. A recent evaluation of CRE from the Unites States (US) reported incidence of 2.93 per 100,000 population. These bacteria were isolated most frequently from urine and had significant association with prior hospitalization [10]. Besides production of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL), Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC) is an essential component enabling resistance to most antibiotics including quinolones and aminoglycosides [9]. Recent observational reports from India suggest varied CRE prevalence between 12.26% and 71.25% [11][12][13][14][15][16]. Emergence of novel phenotypes like NDM-beta-lactamase has grown into major threats resulting in multidrug resistance. Recently in India, NMD-1 producing isolates majorly from Escherichia coli and K. pneumoniae were found to be resistant to all antibiotics except tigecycline and colistin [17]. Thus, resistance to carbapenems is a significant concern necessitating cautious use of existing antibiotics.
## (s2) Polymyxins
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Polymyxins which include polymyxin B and colistin (polymyxin E) are the "old" antibiotics which are used clinically. There has been a renewed interest in these antibiotics because of widespread resistance to newer antibiotics. Polymyxins are now labelled as "last resort" for MDR and/or XDR Gram-negative infections [20]. First approved for clinical use in 1940s, polymyxins were not favoured considering their toxicities. However, their growing use in critical care settings has helped understand in vitro and in vivo behaviour [21].
## (s3) Chemistry.
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Polymyxins are composed of fatty acid chain (hydrophobic region) and amino acids (D and L) arranged in a cyclical heptapeptide ring. A tripeptide side chain binds cyclical ring to fatty acid chain. Single amino acid chain of D-leucine in polymyxin E is replaced by D-phenylalanine in polymyxin B (Figure 1) [20,22].

(p3.1) Polymyxin B is commercially available as sulphate salt for parenteral administration [20]. Different polypeptides component in polymyxin B have different molecular formula. Polymyxin B component polypeptides include B1, B2, B3, and B1-I and sum of these constitutes minimum 80% for polymyxin B. Because of these components, there is batch to batch variation in commercial preparations [20].
## (s4) Mechanism of Action.
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Antibacterial action of polymyxin can be segregated in two parts. Firstly, being positively charged, these cationic polypeptides interact electrostatically with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) present in outer cell membrane of GNB. These interactions displace positively charged Ca ++ and Mg ++ (stabilizers of lipopolysaccharide in outer cell membrane) leading to instability of cell membrane. A detergent-like effect leads to leakage of cell contents resulting in rapid bacterial death. Secondly, polymyxins are reported to have potent antiendotoxin activity and binding of polymyxins to lipid A component of LPS molecules neutralises it. However, the mechanism of septic shock prevention is unclear. It is believed that plasma endotoxin is immediately bound by LPS-binding protein, and the complex is quickly bound to cell-surface CD14 [7,20].  [20,22].
## (s7) 3.5.
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) Pharmacokinetics. Despite its clinical use, understanding of pharmacokinetics (PK) was limited for polymyxin B. In recent years, PK of polymyxin has been studied with enough details. Kwa et al. studied the PK of polymyxin B in MDR Gram-negative infections in adults ≥ 16 years without renal dysfunction. In a dose of 0.3 to 1 million units administered once or twice daily for mean duration of 7 days, mean volume of distribution (Vd) reported was 42.7 L with a half-life of 13.6 hours. Mean clearance was 2.4 L/h. This first attempt to describe PK of polymyxin B was limited by small number ( = 9) of subjects [25]. For long it is believed that the dosage of polymyxin B should be based on the renal function [7]. A recent investigation by Sandri et al. [26] provides substantial details of population PK of polymyxin B in critically ill patients. Twenty-four patients (above 20 years) who had varying creatinine clearance received polymyxin B in a dose of 0.45-3.38 mg/kg/day. They showed significantly low interindividual variability (coefficient of variation, 32.4%) in total body clearance when the dose was scaled by total body weight and not by total creatinine clearance. Clearance of polymyxin B did not show any correlation with creatinine clearance. Clearance was also unaffected in patients who were on renal replacement therapy suggesting that polymyxin B does not require dose modification in patients on renal replacement therapy. Large amount of filtered polymyxin B is reabsorbed from kidneys, which shows linear relationship with creatinine clearance suggesting higher reabsorption with declining renal function. Major PK findings from this study are summarized in Table 2. Further this study highlighted dosing of polymyxin B. Based on MICs of causative organisms, a high dose regimen (3 mg/kg/d) is necessary for MIC ≤ 2 mg/L wherein a loading dose should be considered. For MIC ≤ 1 mg/L (less severe infection), a usual dose of up to 2.5 mg/kg/d would be appropriate. However, for higher MICs, dose greater than 3 mg/ kg/d cannot be advised because of safety concerns [26].
## (s8) Efficacy of Polymyxin B: Monotherapy
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) As discussed previously, polymyxin B has different polypeptide components. Tam et al. assessed potency of these components in an in vitro study against three standard wildtype bacterial strains and three clinical MDR strains of P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, and K. pneumoniae. Broth dilution method was used for MIC determination. No substantial differences were reported in potency against standard and MDR strains suggesting differences in molecular structure may not have difference in antibacterial activity [30]. In another study, Thamlikitkul et al. [31] studied polymyxin B activity against carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii (CRAB). In 217 strains of CRAB from different patients, MIC 50 and MIC 90 values were 0.5 and 1 mg/L, respectively. With a breakpoint of ≤2 mg/L, 98.2% strains were identified to be susceptible establishing efficacy of polymyxin B in CRAB infections. This finding can further be substantiated with findings from Mexico wherein Rosales-Reyes and colleagues [32] demonstrated 100% susceptibility of highly lethal (28.2% mortality) and biofilm producing clone (92.9% strains)-MDR A. baumannii-to polymyxin B. This clone was resistant to major antibiotics including aminoglycosides, cephems, carbapenems, and fluoroquinolones. These findings suggest superior efficacy of polymyxin B against MDR and biofilm producing A. baumannii isolates.
## (s9) Efficacy of Polymyxin B: Combination Therapy
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Combination therapy may prove beneficial in management of MDR and extremely drug resistant (XDR) organisms including superbugs. In this era of increasing bacterial resistance, combination therapy with polymyxin B holds promise in critical care setting. Being used commonly clinically, combination treatment holds the promise to effectively increase bactericidal activity and may reduce the development of resistance compared to monotherapy [38]. Rahim et al. [39] reported synergistic efficacy of polymyxin B and chloramphenicol in MDR NDM-producing K. pneumoniae. In these strains, chloramphenicol alone was ineffective whereas polymyxin B monotherapy was associated with rapid regrowth and emergence of resistance. With combination, there were no polymyxin resistant isolates. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) features also were consistent with these findings. They found the formation of projections and blebs on the surface of bacterium which is consistent with mechanism of polymyxin B and they were denser with combination treatment. This provides insights that combination treatment may avert development of resistance to polymyxin B. This also adds to the finding that antibiotics considered "old" can be beneficial even in superbug infections when used in combination.
## (s12) Neurotoxicity.
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Reported incidence of neuropathy with use of polymyxins is nearly 7%. Symptoms are like any other neuropathy and include weakness, paraesthesia, ophthalmoplegia, dysphagia, ataxia, and neuromuscular weakness sometimes leading to respiratory failure. Most of the neurotoxicity has been described for colistin/colistimethate sodium [48,57]. However, no severe forms of neurotoxicity necessitating respiratory support have been reported in the last two decades [21]. Holloway et al. [50] reported one case of newonset altered mental status and one with distal paraesthesia. Sobieszczyk et al. [58] reported neuropathy manifesting as seizures and neuromuscular weakness which were possibly related to polymyxin B in two (7%) cases. Weinstein et al. [59] recently reported two cases of polymyxin B induced neuropathy. First case was 60-year-old obese diabetic female with other multiple ailments and was on treatment with multiple medication including varenicline and quetiapine. Polymyxin B (loading dose 20000 U/Kg as two divided doses) was initiated for K. pneumoniae identified in urine culture which was sensitive only to polymyxin B. She developed oral paraesthesia within 1 hour of starting IV infusion. Second patient was 57-year-old male having ascending cholangitis. MDR K. pneumoniae susceptible only to polymyxin B, gentamicin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was found in drain fluid culture. Multiple medications were introduced during hospitalization. For pancreatic abscess, patient was advised with 30-day treatment with polymyxin B and imipenemcilastatin. After 30 days, oral and lower extremity paraesthesia were developed. Symptoms reversed with discontinuation of polymyxin B. There was no rechallenge attempted in either case. Though not commonly reported, caution is advised with increasing use of polymyxin B to monitor neurotoxicity.
## (s13) Congenital Anomalies.
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) Though rare, risk of congenital anomalies exists for polymyxin B. Kazy et al. [60] reported crude OR of 0.8 for first trimester. Anomalies included cardiovascular malformations, neural tube defect, microcephaly, limb reduction defect, and congenital talipes equinovarus. Due to small number of cases, risk appears small though existent. Overall, there is limited data for polymyxin B and evaluation in larger sample is necessary to establish causal effect [21].
## (s15) Dosage and Administration of Polymyxin B.
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) Currently, recommended dose of polymyxin B is 1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg/day administered intravenously in two divided doses as one-hour infusion. This dose is well tolerated in empirical setting [21]. Some reports suggest a dose of up to 3 mg/kg/day being used in clinical setting [26,27]. Evidence suggests that daily dose of 200 mg and above is associated with better mortality outcomes. However, renal injury needs to be cautiously monitored at such higher dose. Doses above 3 mg/kg/day cannot be recommended due to safety concerns [26]. Evaluation of baseline renal function may be necessary but dosing is not affected by renal function as polymyxin B is majorly eliminated by nonrenal mechanisms. Prescribing polymyxin B in adequate dosage is essential to avoid underdosing in lieu of renal dysfunction [61,62].
