# Part Functionality Alterations Induced by Changes of Surface Integrity in Metal Milling Process: A Review

CorpusID: 116022842 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/49cc5500dab07d6f583a605f675b8d50790c4eba](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/49cc5500dab07d6f583a605f675b8d50790c4eba)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s2) Machined Surface Topography Characteristic
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) The surface topography of any manufacturing process is a critical index. It is mainly affected by geometric properties of the machining system for milling process. Choosing suitable cutting parameters for given tools, workpiece materials, and machine tools is an important step to get The definition of surface function differs depending on the operating performance of the surface. For example, when translational surfaces are used as surfaces for the bearing inner and outer rings, tribological functionality will become dominant. However, for the applications of dynamic loading and cyclical stresses, fatigue characteristics may be a prime consideration in determining component failure [11]. Therefore, in order to get the influence mechanism of cutting parameters on parts performance, it is important to study the intrinsic relationship between the factors of surface integrity and parts performance [6].
## (s5) Fatigue Strength and Wear Resistance as Effected by Surface Topography
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Milling process is generally applied to conduct finishing machining of sculptured surfaces, therefore the machined component have very demanding specifications in surface topography for its performance. The smoothest surfaces are desired in most milling processes, especially when the fatigue life of the part being machined is high [38]. However, in some biomedical fields, it is desirable to have rough surface morphology [39]. The surface structure is responsible for the mechanical functionality of the component. Sometimes, even if the surface dimension and surface finish of a component are well within the tolerance, there remains the possibility of lack of surface quality for a milled surface. The reason is surface topography influences not only the mechanical and physical properties of contacting parts, but also optical and coating properties of some no contacting components.
## (s6) Fatigue Strength and Wear Resistance as Effected by Surface Topography
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Milling process is generally applied to conduct finishing machining of sculptured surfaces, therefore the machined component have very demanding specifications in surface topography for its performance. The smoothest surfaces are desired in most milling processes, especially when the fatigue life of the part being machined is high [38]. However, in some biomedical fields, it is desirable to have rough surface morphology [39]. The surface structure is responsible for the mechanical functionality of the component. Sometimes, even if the surface dimension and surface finish of a component are well within the tolerance, there remains the possibility of lack of surface quality for a milled surface. The reason is surface topography influences not only the mechanical and physical properties of contacting parts, but also optical and coating properties of some no contacting components.
## (s8) Machined Surface Metallurgy Characteristic
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) In milling of high hardness material or difficult-to-machine metal material, high stress, strain rate, and temperature will have a severe impact on the machined surface. The microscale and nanometer scale existing on the machined surface will change under the interaction of large strain, high strain rate and high temperature [58,59]. The property changes include microstructure change, plastic deformation. Many research works have been done on process mechanics and surface integrity due to the complex coupling between phase transformations and loading in milling process [60]. Generally, the depth of microstructural alteration has been observed to increase when the cutting speed, feed rate and tool wear are increased.
