# A Review of Laser-Assisted Versus Traditional Phacoemulsification Cataract Surgery

CorpusID: 1149463 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/70c87f3e0ebc1150c11161ed4f32a4b259d8272e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/70c87f3e0ebc1150c11161ed4f32a4b259d8272e)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Visual Acuity
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) A number of studies have evaluated best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) after both methods. Generally speaking, the differences in this outcome following LCS or manual phacoemulsification were minimal to non-existent. Mastropasqua et al. for instance found a UDVA of 0.35 logMAR in the laser group and of 0.28 logMAR in the standard phacoemulsification group 1 month postoperatively. Six months after surgery, the UDVA was 0.13 and 0.08 logMAR in these two respective groups [19]. Kránitz et al., using Snellen visual acuity, found a UDVA of 0.59 (SD 0.23) and 0.51 (SD 0.29) in the LCS and the standard phacoemulsification cohorts, respectively. At 1 month, UDVA values were 0.69 (SD 0.19) and 0.61 (SD 0.28) in laser-operated eyes and eyes after conventional cataract surgery, respectively; after 1 year, the respective values were 0.63 (SD 0.23) and 0.60 (SD 0.25). They found no statistically significant difference between arms at any time point [20].
## (s6) Endothelial Cell Count and Ultrasound Exposure
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) The application of ultrasound energy within the anatomically rather confined structures of the anterior segment is an essential step in phacoemulsification. It is a valuable tool, but not without its risks. High ultrasound power and long ultrasound time (effective phacoemulsification time, EPT) are probably important intraoperative factors leading to endothelial cell loss, sometimes excessive loss, after phacoemulsification in healthy eyes with no previous risk factors, such as a history of intraocular surgery, pseudoexfoliation, or corneal dystrophy [24]. Ultrasound energy has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of cystoid macular edema [25]. With increasing experience with femtosecond laser technology the amount of ultrasound energy usually decreases (Fig. 4).

(p6.1) A study from Australia by Abell et al. compared 150 patients undergoing femtosecond laser treatment and 51 patients undergoing conventional phacoemulsification. The study found a mean EPT reduction in the laser group by 83.6% with 30% of patients in this group achieving zero EPT [26]. After femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery was introduced in our clinic, the necessity for ultrasound application gradually declined with our growing experience with the femtosecond laser treatment. While phacoemulsification was still needed in 59% of patients (from the 200th to the 400th patient) after the introduction of LCS, in the group comprising the 700th to the 900th patient, only 38% required phacoemulsification for lens fragmentation. After further climbing of the learning curve, phacoemulsification was required in only 9% of patients-number 1200 to number 1400. All 18 eyes that required ultrasound energy had a grade 4 (LOCS III) cataract and the median EPT was 0.4 s. More than 90% of our surgeries are performed with ''zero phaco''. In grade 2 cataracts, there is currently no ultrasound application in 100% of cases [27].

(p6.2) A catastrophic cell loss leading to a density of 500 or less cells per mm 2 will result in corneal decompensation which in many cases requires a keratoplasty, either penetrating or lamellar. It is  Fig. 4 Full fragmentation of the advanced cataractous lens using a two main cut pattern (with multiple repetitions herein) in LCS. Cavitation gas bubbles appear at the end of the lasing well established that ultrasound application during phacoemulsification can lead to endothelial cell damage in cataract surgery due to mechanical trauma from sonic waves and from thermal injury [24]. While improvements of phacoemulsification technology have made the application less perilous for the endothelium, Mencucci et al. nevertheless reported a not insignificant endothelial cell loss between 4% and 25% [28].
## (s8) Inflammation
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) The prostaglandin release can trigger an alteration of the blood-aqueous barrier and lead to postoperative inflammation that can clinically manifest as a mild iritis and with increased cells and protein in the anterior chamber. The latter effect causes a flare which can be quantified as an indicator of inflammation by laser flare photometry. Abell et al. demonstrated that postoperative aqueous flare was significantly greater in eyes that had undergone manual cataract surgery at 1 day and at 4 weeks postoperatively than in eyes after LCS [36]. Conrad-Hengerer et al. published similar results: when comparing 104 eyes that underwent laser cataract surgery with 104 fellow eyes which had manual phacoemulsification, laser flare photometry showed higher levels in the standard group at the first postoperative visit 2 h after surgery compared with the laser group. In the same study, retinal thickness was measured by spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. No significant differences could be detected, indicating that LCS did not obviously influence the incidence of postoperative macular edema [29]. A different tendency was reported by a group from Australia, though, with seven cases of macular edema out of 833 eyes (0.8%) operated on with the laser vs. one eye in a group of 458 conventionally operated cases (0.1%) [37].
## (s9) LCS IN CHALLENGING CASES
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) The safety and efficacy of LCS (Fig. 5) has been demonstrated in a number of special cases. The accuracy and reproducibility of the laser capsulotomy are particularly valuable in pediatric patients. A posterior capsulotomy of the right size is crucial up to the age of 6 years to prevent posterior capsule opacification (PCO) and for the implantation of an IOL that is fixated in the capsular bag. Because of the infant lens capsule's high elasticity, manual anterior and posterior capsulorhexes are challenging to perform and frequently lead to an oversized capsule opening. Capsulotomy performed by the laser has been proven safe and effective, with tissue bridges remaining in 6 eyes out of 22 successful capsulotomies [38]. The age-dependent deviation from the capsulotomy's target diameter which was observed in the initial operations of children with congenital cataract can be overcome by the Bochum formula. Applying this formula has become crucial in achieving a precalculated diameter and allowing precise adjustment of the posterior capsulotomy to the anterior capsulotomy [39].
