# Molecular Signatures of Natural Selection for Polymorphic Genes of the Human Dopaminergic and Serotonergic Systems: A Review. Molecular Signatures of Natural Selection for Polymorphic Genes of the Human Dopaminergic and Serotonergic Systems: A Review

CorpusID: 11989608 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/366642d57032ebe4bc77bd48b4f93859373238f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/366642d57032ebe4bc77bd48b4f93859373238f8)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Ancestral Susceptibility
Number of References: 10

(p3.0) Major changes in human behavior, diet, etc. have led to changes in selective regimes. Ancestral alleles that were formerly favored are associated in the new selective regimes with dysfunction, and are now being selected against Ding et al., 2002;Arcos-Burgos and Acosta, 2007;Guo et al., 2007;Carrera et al., 2009;Crespi, 2009 The authors cited proposed the hypothesis in question for a specific neurotransmitter polymorphism or polymorphisms, but may not have specifically endorsed that hypothesis vs. alternative hypotheses.

(p3.1) space (Charlesworth, 2006;Hedrick, 2012;Connallon and Clark, 2013). A few studies have found suggestions of advantageous phenotypes for heterozygotes for neurotransmitter polymorphisms. For example, Costas et al. (2011) found a small protective effect against schizophrenia for heterozygotes of the COMT val158met polymorphism (rs4680) in a European and West Asian sample. Gosso et al. (2008) found for this same polymorphism that Val/Met heterozygotes had superior performance in working memory tasks than either Val/Val or Met/Met homozygotes.
## (s7) Footprints of Positive and Balancing Selection
Number of References: 13

(p7.0) Episodes of natural selection acting on a genetic variant leave characteristic footprints in the DNA sequences within the population in which selection has occurred. Positive selection increases not only the frequency of the particular genetic variant under selection (for example a nucleotide substitution that causes a favorable change in the amino acid sequence of a protein) but also the frequency of whatever nearby, genetically-linked variants happen to be present on the individual chromosome in which the favorable new mutation first appeared (Vitti et al., 2013). This effect of a selective event on the genomic neighborhood of the favored variant is manifested by discernable signatures, including, for positive selection, patterns of strong linkage disequilibrium among variants in the selected region, and by effects on the spectrum of frequencies of the various genetic variants present in a population. A wide variety of statistical procedures has been developed to detect these signals of selection (Oleksyk et al., 2010;Vitti et al., 2013). Conversely, balancing selection leads to a population retaining multiple genetic variants for longer periods of time than would be expected under strictly neutral processes. This leaves footprints of balancing selection that can be distinct both from positive selection and from neutral processes: deep coalescence times for gene genealogies, characteristic allele frequency spectra, with alleles maintained at intermediate frequencies, or even polymorphisms shared among species that predate their speciation (Key et al., 2014;Fijarczyk and Babik, 2015;Gao et al., 2015). These characteristic signatures of balancing selection are not expected to be evident until a gene has been undergoing balancing selection for a considerable period of time, at least 2N e generations, with N e the effective population size. Effective population sizes may be considerably less than the current census population, particularly in species that have undergone severe bottlenecks in their history (Charlesworth, 2006;Connallon and Clark, 2013). For the human species as a whole, N e is typically estimated at a bit in excess of 10,000 (Tishkoff and Verrelli, 2003;Wall, 2003;Charlesworth, 2009). Assuming an average generation time of 25 years, this suggests for humans that the distinctive footprints of balancing selection will only be expected for polymorphisms that have been balanced for more than 500,000 years.

(p7.1) The footprints of more recently-initiated balancing selection may instead closely resemble those of positive selection (Andrés et al., 2009;Hedrick, 2012). Initially, a novel mutant allele that is subject to balancing selection will be below its balanced equilibrium frequency, and will increase in frequency due to selection, at the expense of the established allele, just as with positive selection.
## (s10) Balancing Selection
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) Several genome scans studies have focused on detecting signals of balancing selection in human evolution (e.g., Andrés et al., 2009;Leffler et al., 2013;DeGiorgio et al., 2014). Leffler et al. (2013) looked for evidence of very long-term balancing selection through polymorphisms shared in both humans and common chimpanzees. Only two of the polymorphic SNPs they identified were associated with human neurotransmitter genes, both with the upstream (promoter) region of the serotonin receptor HTR2A. However, both of these polymorphisms (rs6311 and rs36213156) are C/T polymorphisms associated with CpG dinucleotides, that is sites with a C and a G nucleotide adjacent in a DNA strand. Such sites are associated with a particularly high rate of mutation, particularly transitions such as a change of the cytosine residue to a thymine (Nachman and Crowell, 2000). This increases the likelihood that the observed polymorphisms are shared between humans and chimpanzees due to recurrent mutation, rather than by balancing selection that has been maintained since prior to speciation (Leffler et al., 2013).
## (s11) Positive Selection
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) The strongest evidence for positive selection in a human neurotransmitter gene is for the serotonin transporter SLC6A4. Claw et al. (2010) found that the population genetics of one haplotype of this gene, which they termed "S/12/G, " had a set of distinctive features. For a common haplotype (36% in their global sample), there was a significantly low degree of SNP variation compared to other haplotypes of the SLC6A4 gene. The 36% global frequency also appears quite high (in absence of positive selection) for a haplotype with an estimated most recent common ancestor at 19 kya (Claw et al., 2010). Coalescent simulations further suggest that the patterns of SNP diversity, haplotype frequency and geographic variation in haplotype frequencies across populations could not be explained by a combination of neutral and demographic processes (Claw et al., 2010). Crespi et al. (2007) examined 76 genes putatively associated with schizophrenia risk for evidence of positive selection. They queried the Haplotter database, representing analyses using an extended-haplotype based test (iHS) in one sample each representing African, Asian and European populations (Voight et al., 2006). Genes examined included COMT, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, MAOA, SLC6A4, and TPH1. SLC6A4 was in a region with a signal of positive selection for both the European and Asian samples. In all, 14 of the 76 genes examined showed signals of positive selection, but SLC6A4 was the only one of our genes of interest to do so. Murdoch et al. (2013) also identified a signal of selection in the region of SLC6A4 in the Haplotter data, although they argued that selection may have actual been for a nearby, linked gene.
