# Review Article Black Stain and Dental Caries: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 11679612 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa24db49eba03a4488fb6d2c6c3ba18528b6831d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa24db49eba03a4488fb6d2c6c3ba18528b6831d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 25

(p0.0) The causes of tooth discoloration are classified according to the location of the stain and are divided into extrinsic, intrinsic, or internalized. Extrinsic discoloration is deposited on the tooth surface or in the acquired pellicle. The compounds that are incorporated into the pellicle produce a stain due to either their basic color or chemical interaction at the tooth surface. Intrinsic stains occur when the tooth structure is penetrated by pigmented materials, usually during tooth development. Internalized discoloration is the incorporation of extrinsic stain within the tooth substance following dental development [1,2].

(p0.1) A specific type of external discoloration is called black stain (BS). It is characterized as a dark line or an incomplete coalescence of dark dots formed on the cervical third of the tooth and following the contour of the gingival margin, firmly attached to the tooth surface. BS is a common finding in children; however it can be also seen in adults [3]. Studies have shown equal prevalence in both sexes [4,5]. The characterization of factors contributing to the formation of BS and its nature has become of interest since association between the presence of BS and lower caries experience in children was noted.

(p0.2) BS is considered to be a special form of dental plaque with a tendency for calcification [3,6]. The ultrastructural examination of this deposit revealed microorganisms embedded in matrix. Almost all of bacteria were Gram-positive rods [7]. The microbiological composition of the BS is thought to be dominated by Actinomycetes [8]. Recent PCR analysis of plaque samples of children with BS showed significantly higher number of Actinomyces naeslundii and lower number of Lactobacillus spp. than in nondiscolored plaque samples [9]. The pigment is suggested to be a black insoluble ferric compound, probably ferric sulfide formed by the interaction between hydrogen sulfide produced by bacteria and iron [3]. The studies on the composition of BS disclosed higher content of calcium and phosphate than in nondiscolored plaque. Spatial chemical analysis using wavelength dispersive spectrometry showed corresponding areas of high concentration of sulfur and copper/iron. This may suggest that sulfur and metal ions form intensely colored compounds [6,10]. Little data is available on chemical composition of saliva in subjects with BS. However, higher levels of salivary buffering capacity, higher pH, and increased concentrations of calcium and phosphate were reported [11][12][13].

(p0.3) The prevalence of BS varies between 2.4% and 18% because of unspecified criteria used for diagnosis and different populations included in the studies. Most of the authors showed that the presence of BS is associated with lower caries experience. The causative factors of BS are not fully understood. Certain types of bacteria seem to be involved in the etiology. It is not clear how the presence of BS on the tooth surface reduces susceptibility to caries. The dominant occurrence on smooth surfaces was not associated with lower caries experience on these surfaces which implies that caries resistance in children with BS is a result of a general lower caries activity rather than a localized effect [4,5,9,[14][15][16][17][18][19]].
## (s3) Factors Contributing to the Formation of Black Stain
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Unclear etiology of BS makes it difficult to distinguish factors associated with its formation. Few authors attempted to find correlations between sex, age, diet, oral hygiene, socioeconomic status, medications, and BS prevalence. In all reviewed papers there was no association between sex and BS prevalence [4,5,15,17]. Chen et al. showed that the occurrence of BS increases with age; however the correlation is not statistically significant. The authors also found that the number of stained teeth increases with age ( < 0.007) [4]. In one report, more stained teeth were observed in permanent dentition compared to primary dentition [24].
## (s4) Chemical Composition of Black Stain
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) Biochemical studies on BS composition confirmed higher calcium content in BS patients. This difference was statistically significant when a plastic instrument was used for sample collection but not a metal one. This substantiates the impression that the use of a metal instrument may increase the calcium and metallic ions levels. Phosphate concentrations were also higher in BS group [6]. Further research focused on the identification of the compound responsible for the black color of the stain. Scraped samples were subjected to qualitative chemical analysis. The results suggested that the black compound is probably ferric sulfide, formed by the reaction between hydrogen sulfide produced by bacteria and iron in saliva or gingival fluid [3]. Parnas et al. hypothesized that metallic ions found in BS come from the samples collection process. Therefore, the authors used both metal (study group B) and graphite (study group A) curettes to obtain the material. The chemical composition was assessed by the use of energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS). Group A compared to control group (without BS) had higher calcium and phosphorus levels. No differences were found in the amounts of the carbon, oxygen, sodium, magnesium, silicon, sulfur, chloride, and potassium. No traces of metallic ions were found in group A, whereas iron, copper, titanium, aluminum, and zirconium were detected in samples scraped with a metal instrument. This may suggest that the use of metallic instruments influences the sample composition [26]. However, Tantbirojn et al. performed a study in which they used extracted teeth with naturally formed black deposit, so sample collection bias could not have been introduced. Authors found traces of iron and copper. The spatial chemistry analysis showed that areas with high iron and copper concentrations corresponded with areas of high concentration of sulfur. This finding is in accordance with Reid et al. studies [3], suggesting that possibly metallic ions and sulfur complex are responsible for the black color of stains [10].
## (s5) Salivary Parameters
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Saliva plays an important role in maintaining oral health and protecting from dental caries. Salivary parameters such as pH, buffering capacity, and calcium and phosphate ion concentrations are well-known caries-protective factors [11][12][13]. There is little data describing the saliva composition in subjects with BS. Surdacka obtained saliva using paraffin wax chewing stimulation. Significantly higher levels of calcium, inorganic phosphates, copper, sodium, and total protein were found in patients with BS compared to controls. Glucose levels were significantly lower in BS group. No differences were found in iron, zinc, and magnesium concentrations. Authors also showed that pH was higher in children with stains; however salivary flow rate did not differ between the groups [11,12]. Aysun et al. also studied salivary parameters in children with BS. Only few results were in accordance with the previous paper. Calcium levels and saliva buffering capacity were significantly higher in BS group. There were no significant differences in phosphorus levels and salivary pH. Salivary flow rate was lower in children with BS compared to children without BS [13].
## (s6) Microbiology of Black Stain
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) Theliade et al. demonstrated that BS is a deposit consisting of microorganisms embedded in an intermicrobial substance with a tendency to calcification. Therefore, it can be classified as a type of dental plaque, although it is composed of different types of bacteria. Most of the microorganisms are Grampositive rods [7]. Further studies aimed to isolate and identify the predominant cultivable microorganisms of the BS. As suspected Gram-positive rods were the largest morphological group. The majority of these were facultatively anaerobic and anaerobic rods, typical of Actinomyces israelii and Actinomyces naeslundii [8]. A PCR study designed to determine the presence of periodontal bacteria in BS showed that Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella melaninogenica were absent in black deposit; however, Actinomyces spp. and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans were more prevalent in BS patients than in controls. This may suggest that these bacteria are involved in the formation of BS [27]. Another PCR analysis investigated BS samples for Prevotella nigrescens, Prevotella intermedia, Actinomyces spp., and Streptococcus mutans. Four analyzed bacteria had similar prevalence in both BS patients and controls. These findings are in contrast with other studies, in which Actinomyces spp. were the most prevalent species [28]. The most recent PCR study confirmed that Actinomyces naeslundii is more prevalent in BS patients. On the contrary, Lactobacillus spp. and Fusobacterium nucleatum can be found in higher numbers in subjects without BS. The authors also demonstrated that S. mutans tends to be more prevalent in BS-free samples. Additionally, no significant differences were observed between the prevalence of A. actinomycetemcomitans in BS and BS-free patients [9].
