# Terahertz imaging using quantum cascade lasers-a review of systems and applications

CorpusID: 122148275 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce6dfa3f3e7d537d2c910f681b00c5c73f892bd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce6dfa3f3e7d537d2c910f681b00c5c73f892bd)

Fields: Engineering, Physics

## (s3) Imaging with high spatial resolution
Number of References: 18

(p3.0) The higher operating frequencies of THz QCLs compared to TPI sources and electronic frequency-domain sources enable high transverse resolutions with minimum feature sizes smaller than 250 µm [46,47,49,50]. For context, the diffractionlimited beam waist expected for a TEM 00 (Gaussian) mode focused by a lens with f -number f/1, at a wavelength λ = 100 µm (∼3 THz), is calculated to be w 0 = 2λf /π = 64 µm. It is perhaps not surprising, though, that diffraction-limited resolution is seldom realized in experimental systems due to the irregular beam profiles exhibited by THz QCLs. Metal-metal (MM) waveguides offer high modal confinement, enabling the realization of devices with high operating temperatures and low threshold current densities [51]. However, as a result of the sub-wavelength aperture in this waveguide design (typically ∼10 µm thick), the output beam becomes strongly diffracted. The associated beam patterns [52] are extremely poor, limiting the usefulness of this type of waveguide for many potential applications of THz QCLs. The alternative and more common approach is to employ a semi-insulating surface plasmon (SP) waveguide [28]. SP waveguides typically provide lower waveguide losses than MM waveguides as a result of the waveguide mode partially overlapping with the undoped substrate. More significant, though, is the superior beam quality and reduced beam divergence [53,54] that results from this approach. QCL-based imaging systems reported to date have therefore exclusively employed SP waveguides. Nevertheless, the beam profile of such devices is still not ideal. Far-field profiles have been shown to comprise dual emission lobes originating from beam diffraction from both the substrate and waveguide ridge [41,42,55]. The emission profile is also typically characterized by extensive ring-like interference fringes [54,56] that can be understood using a wire laser model that treats the device as a longitudinally distributed source [57].

(p3.1) In order to address these considerations and realize better optimized image resolution, hollow dielectric waveguides have been employed to efficiently couple the QCL emission to the free-space TEM 00 (Gaussian) mode [58,59]. An alternative approach is through spatial filtering of the QCL beam, which has been successfully employed for the development of a transmission-mode THz confocal microscope based on a QCL source emitting at 2.9 THz [50]. In this scheme the QCL beam was first spatially filtered using a 200 µm (∼2λ) aperture placed in the common focal plane of a pair of matched (NA∼0.45) lenses. Figures 1(a) and (b) demonstrate the resulting improvement in beam quality, measured in a plane close to the cryostat window and also close to the aperture. For the purpose of rejecting out-of-focus radiation, this spatially filtered beam was then focused through the sample under test, followed by a 300 µm confocal aperture. This aperture was found to enhance image contrast whilst also reducing the depth of field, and the complete system yielded an impressive transverse resolution better than 70 µm with an axial resolution of ∼400 µm. Figures 1(c)-(e) show THz images of a fresh green leaf containing minute veins, which amply demonstrate the high resolution attainable through this spatially filtered confocal arrangement.
## (s13) Swept-frequency interferometric imaging for materials analysis
Number of References: 12

(p13.0) In all the demonstrations of coherent imaging using a THz QCL reported to date [38,39,59], the phase information encoded in the imaging data has been related to the geometry of the target under investigation. This approach is equivalent to timedomain techniques whereby the temporal delay of the THz wave, measured after reflection from a target, is interpreted in terms of the path lengths corresponding to reflective interfaces within the target. The characterization of coating thickness and uniformity in coated pharmaceutical tablets has been reported based on this technique [9,11]. Alternatively, however, the phase change upon reflection from a target can be related to the complex permittivity of the target material. This is the basis of THz time-domain reflection spectroscopy [117], which enables THz frequency spectroscopic measurements on thick and/or highly absorbing samples including liquids [118]. The coherent nature of the SM approach has recently led to the development of an equivalent swept-frequency technique for both THz imaging and materials analysis in a reflective geometry [95]. Such application of a narrowband QCL source offers the advantage of high output power spectral density, spectral resolution exceeding that offered by TDS by several orders of magnitude, and the capability for high-speed measurements in a compact system.

(p13.1) In an SM imaging system the total phase shift incurred in one round trip of the beam comprises a contribution from the propagation phase shift corresponding to twice the optical path length of the external cavity, which we view as the optical length from the QCL source to the target and back to the QCL source, in addition to the phase shift occurring on reflection at the target. The former of these can be varied, resulting in a series of cavity resonances ('fringes') observable on the SM signal, by either varying the external cavity length or alternatively by applying a chirp to the laser frequency through ramp modulation of the driving current. For this latter frequency modulation approach the temporal separation between the SM fringes, as well as their shape and phase, depend on the external cavity length but also the complex permittivity of the target. Thus, through analysis of the SM waveform, the complex reflectivity of the target may be deduced. Using calibration standards, such an approach has recently been applied to the determination of the complex refractive indices of exemplar plastic materials with high accuracy [95].  In this demonstration the laser was driven in cw just above the lasing threshold, with a sawtooth current modulation superimposed on the dc driving current; this 50 mA peakto-peak modulation corresponded to a 600 MHz chirp of the emission frequency. For image acquisition, the time-domain SM waveform was recorded at each pixel using a digital acquisition card. From these waveforms, both amplitude and phase information could be determined on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Figure 18(a) shows an amplitude-like image of a custom-designed composite target consisting of a 1 inch aluminum cylinder equipped with three cylindrical bores (5 mm diameter) containing different plastics. In this image, the copper colour represents stronger feedback, which arises from the aluminum part of the target, whereas darker regions indicate weak feedback from the plastic bores. Due to the colour scale adopted here and the strong feedback from the aluminum relative to the three plastics, the contrast between the different plastic regions is not immediately apparent from this image. Nevertheless, this amplitude contrast is preserved in the time-domain signals acquired for each plastic, as can be seen in figure 18(c). Also evident in these waveforms is the differing temporal shift of the SM signal relative to the rising edge of the modulation waveform. This phase-like representation of the SM waveforms is shown in figure 18(b). In combination, these amplitude and phase images reveal spatial changes in the magnitude and phase of the complex reflectivity of the target. In particular, through fitting the acquired SM waveforms to a model based on the steadystate solution of the Lang-Kobayashi equations [105], both the refractive index and the extinction coefficient of the target can be obtained on a pixel-by-pixel basis, following appropriate calibration of the model using materials of known complex index. This approach has been shown to enable measurement of material properties with high accuracy [95]. Among the attractive qualities of this SM approach is its compact form and its ability to enable coherent sensing via the laser terminal voltage without the need for an external detector. This technique could therefore be readily extended to arrays of THz QCLs operating at multiple frequencies, or single electrically switchable QCLs, thereby enabling spectroscopic material characterization and identification within a fast and sensitive high-resolution imaging system 6.5. High-resolution ISAR imaging by SM As described previously, the majority of THz QCL-based imaging approaches acquire images by raster-scanning the sample through the focused THz beam (although notable exceptions have been discussed in section 2.3). The resolution of images formed in this manner is determined by the laser beam spot size, which depends on the operating frequency of the laser and the diffraction limits of the optical system. To overcome this limit, however, the coherent nature of SM in THz QCLs has recently been exploited for ISAR imaging, leading to spatial resolution exceeding the diffraction limit [119].
