# A Review of Visual Descriptors and Classification Techniques Used in Leaf Species Identification

CorpusID: 126265733 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88e6b71ff56059fa966d1ed35d91e16441a0b6b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88e6b71ff56059fa966d1ed35d91e16441a0b6b1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Computer Science

## (s7) Edges and Corner Points
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Edges are significant features of leaf images in terms of measuring sharp variations in images. The Sobel edge detection operators were used to extract edge features from images in [45]. From the edges, feature points were found which intersect the edges and achieved 100% accuracy with 13 different plants. The model ascertains damages to veins. Corner features [46] are useful to find the similarity of leaf images because corners are intersections of two different edges or interest points under various different directions and lighting conditions. They are stable across different sequences, useful when there is damage to the corners, and are the same for all leaves. Harris Corner detectors are used to find the different directions of contours directly. The angles are arranged in ascending order, stored in an array and compared to find out the least angle of the unmatched image. Tekkesinoglu et al. [193] used morphological transformation and edge detection techniques to identify the leaf boundary of overlapped (Hevea leaves) rubber tree leaves.
## (s10) Entropy and Pulse Coupled Neural Networks
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) The pulse-coupled neural network, an artificial neural network model, is used to extract features from leaf images. The image size and neural network size are same. Pulse Coupled Neural Network was used by Wang et al. in [73] to classify leaves using the entropy sequence with Hu and Zernike moment invariants. Liu et al. [74] used an adaptive unit-linking PCNN to extract the centre of the time matrix from images. Different from the PCNN an Intersecting cortical Model (ICM) used by Wang et al. [75] acts as an anti-agent for noise and anti-geometric properties of images. Table 4 summarizes the feature extraction techniques, the features extracted from leaves using those techniques and, the advantages and disadvantages of those techniques.
## (s12) Texture Features Based on Fractals
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) The topological structure is used to measure how close two objects are to each other. In [80], the authors used a Lie group of region structures to measure the texture of weeds and provide information about pixel intensity and spatial features of broadleaf weeds. The smooth manifolds of local symmetries were derived at by applying the Riemannian Manifold on the leaf surface. The dimension of a region covariance of the leaf surface is lower than that of the original image. It extracts multiple features such as information on edges and directions. Fractals measure the self-similar texture of leaves as well as the roughness of the leaf surface. A multi-scale Minkowsi fractal dimension method was used to analyse and recognize leaf images in [81,82]. This method extracts outline and vein features as curves. Usually, objects and patterns have distinct geometric natures in fractals and, in order to overcome this difficulty, they used the multi-scale Minkowsi fractal dimension technique for classifying Passiflora leaf morphometry. In [83], the researchers used new fractal refinement technique for classifying species based on contour, contour nerves, nervure fractals of three different levels. Mutchar and Fatichah [84] used lacunarity feature for leaf classification as the fractal dimension cannot discriminate between two objects with different patterns/texture. It measures the spatial distribution of gaps with certain image textures. Casanova et al. [85] used Gabor filter to extract texture features from images. It collects various image features and extracts energy signature from leaves. He evaluated 20 different classes of Brazilian flora using Linear Discriminant Analysis and achieved 86.00% of classification accuracy.
## (s13) Local Binary Patterns Based on Texture
Number of References: 10

(p13.0) The Local binary pattern (LBP) is an image feature, which transforms image into an array of values. It describes about the changes in the neighbouring pixels. Qi et al. [92] introduced a pair-wise rotation invariant co-occurrence local binary pattern (PRICoLBP) and applied to colour images. It represents the local curvature as well as edge contour information. This technique was applied to various databases comprising flower and leaves. An LBP histogram Fourier feature (LBP-HF) [93] identifies uniform patterns using Fourier descriptors. It stores all uniform patterns in a single bin and the authors used all the information on pixels, leaf interiors and exteriors separately. A modified local binary pattern was proposed in [94], where LBP binary values are calculated based on thresholding. It lends same LBP code for two different patterns. To overcome this problem the mean and standard deviation of the neighbouring pixels were taken into account. It captures the structural relationship between the gray values of the pixels in the neighbourhood. The LBP was combined with the gray-level co-occurrence matrix in [95] for tea leaf classification. In the basic LBP, every pixel needs to be calculated for obtaining LBP values, and computing the LBP is a time-consuming process. To circumvent the problem, the authors introduced a non-overlap window that includes a centre pixel and its neighbour pixels in a single gray-level image. There is no overlap between the windows in this technique. Since the GLCM is used to calculate the relationship between two windows, it produces multiscale texture features.

(p13.1) A multiscale local binary pattern was applied on the path integral (pi-LBP) in [96]. In all multiscale LBPs, local information is encoded individually in each scale, but the pi-LBP can effectively encode the cross-scale correlation and provides better texture description. A pixel-based LBP was introduced in [97] instead of computing global information built on a block-based LBP the authors computed LBP based on center pixel of a half-size window which determines how much local and global information is included in the texture descriptor. It produces powerful relations for the intra-class variability of textures. Sumathi et al. [98] used Gabor filter for textural, statistical and spatial frequency domain relationships in leaf classification. The LBP variance [40] was applied to classify Costa Rican plant species. It detects micro texture veins as well as areas between veins and reflections. It returns a histogram of features and counts the position in which it corresponds to the particular leaf texture which has an LBP code. The gray-level co-occurrence matrix was used for herb detection in [99].  [101]. introduced a local n-ary pattern for texture classification which is rotation invariant and produces uniform patterns. However, it produces naturally high dimensional features. Wang et al. [102] used Local binary pattern in decomposed leaf images for extracting the characteristics of texture features of images on ICL and Swedish leaf databases. It is robust to noise, occlusion and clutter.
## (s14) Textons
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Textons are used to construct texton dictionaries created based on filter responses in spatial and frequency domains. For rotation invariant databases, the authors of [103] constructed a continuous maximum response descriptor to distinguish between and intra-class variations and a principal curvature descriptor for strong intra-class grouping ability. These techniques are useful for leaf databases with both interclass and intra-class variations. Minu and Thyagarajan [104] used texton with MPEG 7 visual features to recognize flower images. They also presented an ontology-based image retrieval system for asteroideae flower domain in their paper [105].
## (s23) Random Forest
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) An ensemble classifier, the random forest is used to construct a large set of trees at random. It runs efficiently on large databases, handles a large number of input variables without variable deletion, effectively estimates missing data, and maintains the accuracy of a classifier. It gives proximities between pairs of classes and, further, estimates crucial features automatically. During multiclass classification, if some data are missed, it leads to an imbalance in the data concerned. To resolve this problem, a direct ensemble classifier [142,143] is used for an imbalanced multiclass learning classifier. It is a combination of the 1-nearest neighbor and Naive Bayes or the K-nearest neighbor and Naive Bayes classifiers.
