# Health sector responses to intimate partner violence: A literature review

CorpusID: 12268766 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/332093999f8489b5ef6f7efe0eebe9bc4c389057](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/332093999f8489b5ef6f7efe0eebe9bc4c389057)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s4) The response of the health sector to intimate partner violence
Number of References: 8

(p4.0) Despite growing recognition that IPV is an important public health issue, there has been a relative lack of evidence regarding the most effective health system responses. 26,27,28 A Cochrane review of IPV interventions concluded that there is insufficient evidence to show whether current health sector-based approaches are effective in reducing violence or improving psychological well-being. 28 This points to a need for the development of new health sector responses, 29 as well as more rigorous evaluations of interventions and their integration into health services and systems, particularly in primary care, which is relatively under-represented in the literature. 27,30 There is, however, sufficient evidence that intervening for IPV in a primary care setting can be beneficial. A recent systematic review of interventions based in primary care found that 76% of 17 included studies showed an improvement in at least one measured outcome, including reductions in IPV, improvement in health-related quality of life and increased safety-promoting behaviours. 31 Included studies were largely of United States origin, with only one study originating in South Africa, one in Peru and one in Hong Kong.
## (s6) System-level interventions
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Reviews of IPV interventions have emphasised that comprehensive, system-wide approaches have been the most effective. 26,40,41 IPV interventions are complex, requiring more than health care provider training to enable effective programme functioning within a health system. For example, a realist review (focusing on programme mechanisms to understand how and why programmes work) found that providers can be supported by four elements of an IPV programme: institutional support at high levels; effective protocols; ongoing training; and immediate access to support services. 40 The evidence base informing the scale-up of IPV interventions and their integration into health systems is lacking. 42 However, examples of published investigations that do exist provide lessons of interest to those wishing to institute an appropriate response to IPV. In Malaysia, the national scaleup of One Stop Crisis Centres, an integrated health sector response to IPV, was investigated. Factors relating to health system structure and organisation, as well as external policy constraints, were found to be barriers to implementation. 42 Several system-level factors arising from this case study could be applicable in other contexts. Commitment at policy level was found to be necessary, which could be communicated to service delivery level by incorporating appropriate indicators into routine reporting. Adequate training, as well as adjustments to service delivery, in order to ensure that providers have the necessary time and privacy available to them, were required. Finally, flexibility of the model was important so as to allow for its implementation at different levels of care.
