# Privacy-Preserving Data Aggregation Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey

CorpusID: 12970117 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a86046ef3f26811b0d4e996c9692b36bafec2c76](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a86046ef3f26811b0d4e996c9692b36bafec2c76)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s10) SMART:
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The Slice-Mix-AggRegaTe (SMART) by He et al. [17] achieves privacy-preserving data aggregation by hiding original data before the data transmissions. For this, each sensor node first customizes its private data by slicing it into a fixed number of pieces. Then, it sends data slices to a particular number of neighboring sensor nodes. After the data pieces are received from the neighboring sensor nodes, all sensor nodes calculate the aggregate value of the data slices so that the privacy of the sensor data can be preserved. In the SMART, each sensor node randomly selects a set of sensor nodes, say J, within h hops. When each sensor node slices its private data randomly into J pieces, J -1 pieces are encrypted and sent to the randomly selected sensor nodes, keeping one data piece at the same sensor node. All the sensor nodes decrypt the data by using their shared keys and sum all the received slices. Each sensor node sends the sum to its parent. Finally, the root of the network is the ultimate aggregation point of all sensor data. Figure 6 shows an example of the SMART with seven nodes where J = 3 and hop h = 1. The notation d ij represents a slice of private data sent from node i to node j and r i represents the sum of sliced data. Although the SMART preserves the privacy of sensor data during their aggregation with low computation overhead, it generates a large number of messages in the network. In addition, like the CPDA, the SMART can tolerate only the collusion to a certain threshold, i.e., the sum of out-degree and in-degree minus one.  iPDA: To address both privacy-preservation and integrity-protection for WSNs, He et al. [32] proposed a data aggregation protocol called integrity-Protecting Private Data Aggregation (iPDA). The iPDA resorts to a redundancy check by constructing two disjoint aggregation trees to achieve integrity. Each sensor node needs to send its reading to both aggregation trees and the inputs to both trees are equal. The disjoint aggregation trees perform data aggregation individually. Therefore, data pollution attacks can be detected at the base station by comparing aggregation results along the disjoint aggregation trees. If the aggregation results agree with each other, then the base station will accept the result. Otherwise, it will treat the data to have pollution attacks or node failures, or both and reject it. The iPDA achieves data privacy by using the slicing and assembling technique of the SMART. In this protocol, each participating sensor node first hides its individual data by slicing the data and sending encrypted data slices to different neighboring aggregators. Then, the aggregators collect and route aggregated results back to the base station. Figure 7 illustrates disjoint aggregation trees composed of sky-blue and grey nodes that are separately rooted at the base station (yellow node). However, the iPDA has a high communication overhead due to the slicing technique and each sensor node has to send its reading to both aggregation trees. In addition, it can tolerate the collusion of up to a certain threshold number of sensor nodes. Although the threshold can be raised by increasing the number of slices, it will further increase communication overhead. Moreover, the accuracy of the aggregated result is decreased because of the high data collision rate due to the large number of messages in the network. 
## (s14) Sheng and Li's scheme:
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Sheng et al. [36] proposed a privacy-preserving storage scheme which associates a tag with each encrypted data in order to process a range query, by adopting the concept of bucketing [37] and indexing [38]. Their two-tiered network model consists of a powerful sink, regular sensor nodes, and storage nodes equipped with a large storage capacity, as shown in Figure 9. In this scheme, every sensor generates environmental data values at a fixed rate and periodically submits the collected data in the form of coarse information to the closest storage node. The storage nodes first bucketize the mixture of original data into a few bins before storing them. Both the sensor node and the sink node have agreed on the same bucket partition. Before transmitting the data to the storage nodes, the data source first encrypts the data by using the key shared with the sink and then attaches a tag to the encrypted data indicating the bucket into which the data falls. When the sink node needs to process a range query over the data stored in the storage nodes, it obtains an approximate result based on the tags corresponding to the query range, instead of having storage nodes decrypting every data point and returning them. Then, through decryption at the base station, the real data set can be derived. However, the main problem of this scheme is the transmission delay, i.e., sending data from sensors to the sink, which is critical for many tracking and event detection applications. In addition, this scheme does not consider the scenario of malicious modifications of sensor data.
## (s16) PIA:
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) To address Privacy-preserving Integrity-assured data Aggregation (PIA) for WSNs, recently, Taban et al. [39] proposed four distinct symmetric-key solutions. In their single aggregator model, an aggregator node is used as an intermediary between the user (i.e., a third party) and the sensor nodes that aggregates the sensor data and forwards the query response to the user, as shown in Figure 10. The problem is that the user wants to verify the integrity of the received aggregate value whereas the network owner does not want the user to access the original data. The proposed four solutions to the problem are as follows. The first scheme uses homomorphic encryption to hide the data. In this scheme, homomorphism and Message Authentication Code (MAC) [40] are combined to construct an authenticated encryption scheme for the aggregator model. However, it is limited to additive homomorphism and only supports aggregation functions such as add, average and standard deviation. The second scheme adopts an Order Preserving Encryption Scheme (OPES) [41] to preserve the privacy of the distribution of the data. For example, OPES preserves the order of the data such that any pair of plaintexts y 1 and y 2 , where y 1 < y 2 , encrypt to ciphertexts c 1 and c 2 , where c 1 < c 2 . However, this framework is useful for any aggregation function which can be approximated by uniform sampling [24,42] and which relies only on the comparison operation. The third scheme directly uses the Secure Hierarchical In-networking Aggregation (SHIA) scheme [22] for adapting distributed integrity verification to the single aggregated model. Because the sensor nodes have access to all of the raw data, this scheme can support any aggregation function. However, the scheme has the communication overhead of O(N) messages per sensor node, where N is the total number of sensor nodes in a network. To achieve data privacy and integrity assurance the third scheme is improved by introducing a logical aggregation tree within the aggregator node. This is the fourth scheme know the improved scheme and each sensor node has the communication overhead of O(log N). However, the scheme only supports decomposable functions, such as Mean, Standard Deviation, Count and Min/Max. Figure 10. Data aggregation from sensors A, B and C with two aggregators X and Y.
