# A Review on Platensimycin: A Selective FabF Inhibitor

CorpusID: 1341326 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7134b887dc03cbfb4d91ae6fe8a67986475fe37](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7134b887dc03cbfb4d91ae6fe8a67986475fe37)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s1) Isolation of Platensimycin
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Platensimycin was isolated by Wang et al. in 2006 at concentration of 2 to 4 mg/L from fermentation broth of S. platensis (MA7327 and MA7331) using SephadexLH20 liquid chromatography medium by reversed-phase HPLC chromatography [3]. In a subsequent study, three-step isolation was modified by Singh et al. and they established two-step method eliminating the SephadexLH20 step [11]. It was also isolated from Streptomyces platensis (MA7327), recovered from soil samples collected in Eastern Cape, South Africa [12].
## (s5) Synthesis of Tetracyclic
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Cage. The simplified enone generated from 3-ethoxycyclohex-2-enone which was used as a starting material (Scheme 2). Allylic bromide 9 [27] (LDA, 92%) and propargyl bromide (LDA, 97%) were used as reagents of choice to generate the bis-alkylated enone 10 from 8. Reduction followed by acidic hydrolysis and reintroduction of the TBS ether produced enone 11 from enone 10 (yield 84%). Spirocycle 12 was generated by cycloisomerization of 11 [28,29]. Oxidation of 12 produced bis-enone 13 [30] which upon acid hydrolysis gave desired aldehyde 6. Secondary alcohol 14 was prepared by addition of samarium(II) iodide in a dilute solution of aldehyde 6 HFIP in THF/HMPA followed by NH 4 Cl solution. Esterification of 14 with TEA resulted in the formation of cage-like structure 4 which on treatment with KHMDS and MeI followed by KHMDS and allyl iodide produced olefin 16. Vinyl pinacol boronate and 16 reacted in presence of the Grubbs second generation catalyst to produce vinyl boronate 19 which on reacting with trimethylamine Noxide gave 20. Following Pinnick protocol 20 was converted to desired carboxylic acid 3.
## (s12) Synthesis of Tetracyclic Cage. O-TBS and O-benzoyl-
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) protected enones 47a and 47b were prepared from 1,3cyclohexadiene 49 through allylboration, selective oxidation, and utilizing the Dess-Martin oxidation, with the yield of (97%). Diels-Alder reaction in between 47a and 47b and siloxydienes produced two stereogenic mixtures 46a, 46b and 46c, 46d. The mixture of two inseparable diastereomers (46b and 46d) was employed in the next step. Following Noyori's procedure [26] followed by hydrolysis of the benzoyl group and separation of diastereomers 53 was given which upon catalytic oxidation using palladium(II) chloride and copper(II) acetate produced 54a and 54b in 10 : 1 ratio. Vinyl triflate 55 was produced from 54 and reduced to 56 which was transformed to 57. Transannular radical cyclization of monothioacetal 57 gave desired 4 (Scheme 7).  aldehyde 68 containing oxoethylene group was synthesized from alcohols 66 by Mandai protocol [39]. Using Ohira-Bestmann reagent 74 [40,41], enyne 69 was formed which was treated with AIBN in tert-BuOH and PPTS to initiate the radical cyclization resulting formation of tetracyclic cage 72. L-Selectride, THF, and TFA/CH 2 Cl 2 were consecutively added with 72 to produce the desired enone 58 (Scheme 9).  [47] used an intramolecular Robinson annulation approach [48] in the retrosynthetic analysis presented in (Scheme 11). The bicyclic compound 84 to give the tetracyclic core structure 4 is key step in the retrosynthesis by Robinson annulation event.
## (s16) Pharmacology of Platensimycin
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) Bacterial cell wall synthesis, protein synthesis, and DNA replication are the predominant targets for widely used antibiotics. But the emergence of resistance to antibiotics   demands new antibacterial targets. Fatty acid synthase (FAS) pathway is now an attractive target for antibacterial agents because, as a new target, FAS inhibition will not suffer from bacterial resistance immediately and biosynthesis pathway of bacteria, plants, and parasites (FAS II in which component proteins are dissociated) is different from mammals (FAS I in which component proteins are generally single-chain, multidomain homodimers or two-chain heterodimers carrying all proteins of the pathway) in subcellular organization of components which demonstrate a target specificity for the FAS II inhibitors. A general scheme for type II fatty acid biosynthesis is shown in Figure 2 [9]. A recent development in finding inhibitors of fatty acid biosynthesis is the discovery of platensimycin which shows broad-spectrum Grampositive antibacterial activity (Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Enterococci (VRE), MIC < 1.0 g mL −1 ) by selectively inhibiting cellular lipid biosynthesis [58]. The mechanism of action is the selective inhibition of elongation of FabF    bacteria incorporates exogenous fatty acids into their cell [61,62]. Platensimycin exhibited antibacterial activity against efflux-negative Escherichia coli (tolC), but not against wildtype E. coli, specifying that efflux mechanisms, and not compound specificity, limit the effectiveness of platensimycin in E. coli and possibly other Gram-negative bacteria [3].
