# Survey on Automated Machine Learning

CorpusID: 139106022 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e7e6684e5e73eae210c6d7adfc57e245f0fa0fdf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e7e6684e5e73eae210c6d7adfc57e245f0fa0fdf)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s11) Sequential Model-Based Optimization
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) The CASH problem can be treated as a regression problem: the loss function can be approximated using standard regression methods based on the tested hyperparameter configurations. This concept is captured by sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) (Bergstra et al., 2011;Hutter et al., 2011; displayed in Algorithm 1. The loss function f (λ) is complemented by a probabilistic regression model M that acts as a sur- rogate for f . The surrogate model M allows predicting the performance of an arbitrary configuration λ without evaluating the demanding objective function f . M is built using all so-far observed performances D 1:n = {(λ 1 , f (λ 1 )) , . . . , (λ n , f (λ n ))} (line 3) and is used to sequentially create new configurations (line 4). These new configurations are obtained using a cheap acquisition function. Each suggested configuration is evaluated on the objective function f (line 5) and the result added to D 1:n (line 6). These steps are repeated until a fixed budget T -usually either a fixed number of iterations or a time limit-is exhausted. The initialization (line 1) is often implemented by selecting a small number of random configurations that are evaluated. Figure 8 shows the complete SMBO procedure.
## (s42) BOHB
Number of References: 2

(p42.0) BOHB  is a composed solver for the CASH problem. It is a combination of Bayesian optimization and hyperband (Li et al., 2018). A limitation of hyperband is the random generation of the tested configurations. BOHB replaces this random selection by a SMBO procedure. All function evaluations are stored in and modeled by a TPE. New configurations are drawn from l(λ) in Equation (8)   candidate configurations is sampled at random to comply with the theoretical guarantees of hyperband (Li et al., 2018). For each function evaluation, BOHB passes the current budget and a configuration instance to the objective function. The interpretation of the budget is conferred to the user, meaning it can represent basically anything, e.g., the fraction of training data to use, available runtime or number of iterations.
