# Managed Aquifer Recharge: An Overview of Issues and Options 16

CorpusID: 133526589 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ede130015c735e7ef94ccd3f08d7b2f8fa9ebdd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ede130015c735e7ef94ccd3f08d7b2f8fa9ebdd)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) As covered in Chap. 2, many of the world's aquifers are rapidly being depleted. Nearly one quarter of the world's population -1.7 billion people -live in regions where more water is being consumed than nature can renew (Gleeson et al. 2012). Over-exploitation occurs when groundwater abstraction is too intensive, for example for irrigation or for direct industrial water-supply like extracting fossil fuels Foster et al. 2013). When groundwater is continuously overpumped, year after year, the volume withdrawn from the aquifer cannot be replaced by recharge. Eventually, the groundwater level is much lower than its initial level and even when pumping stops, the aquifer has trouble rising once again to its original level. In continental zones, over-exploitation can lead to groundwater drawdown and, ultimately, to subsidence through development of sinkholes when underground caverns or channels collapse. In coastal areas, the decrease in groundwater recharge results in saltwater intrusion into the aquifer formation (Petalas and Lambrakis 2006;De Montety et al. 2008). Preserving local groundwater resources is an environmental and economic issue in coastal zones and is vital in an island context. The increasing demand for water caused by a growing population can lead to the salinization of groundwater resources if these are systematically overexploited. Limiting the salinization of coastal aquifers is consistent with the groundwater objective of the European Union Water Framework Directive, which is to achieve a good qualitative and quantitative status by 2015. The economic advantage of preserving these threatened water resources is that, when there is a growing demand, a local water resource is sustained and there is no need to import water. Transporting water can cost 2-10 times more than limiting the intrusion of saltwater into a coastal aquifer.
## (s13) Biogeochemical Processes Evaluation
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) In the case of artificial recharge systems that involve infiltration techniques, geochemical and microbiological processes might occur in the unsaturated zone that enables the purification of the recharge water. Furthermore, the unsaturated zone must allow the water to infiltrate to the aquifer, the aquifer must be able to store the infiltrated water, and then release it without excessive "dissipation", which would cancel the storage effect. It is, however, possible to identify the main criteria that can affect the geochemical and microbiological processes that enhance the purification of the recharge water as it moves through the unsaturated zone: (i) pH, (ii) redox potential, (iii) organic matter content, and (iv) mineralogy (Johnson et al. 1999;Rinck-Pfeiffer et al. 2000;Pettenati et al. 2012):
