# metals Corrosion, Erosion and Wear Behavior of Complex Concentrated Alloys: A Review

CorpusID: 139438036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a46757cea4259eaac45a12ae1ede0ad021896b8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a46757cea4259eaac45a12ae1ede0ad021896b8)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s7) Corrosion Behavior of Complex Concentrated Alloys
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Majority of the complex concentrated alloys studied so far for their corrosion behavior are based on the CoCrFeNi equimolar system. The observed corrosion behavior in these alloys may be broadly classified based on their composition and the resulting surface passivation layers, microstructural heterogeneity, phase segregation and associated galvanic corrosion, and finally, the test environment. CoCrFeNi-Cux (where "x" indicates varying proportions) was one of the earliest developed alloys, where the effect of increasing copper content on the microstructure and corrosion properties was reported [29]. Immersion and potentiodynamic polarization tests were conducted in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution. The as-cast CoCrFeNi-Cux alloys showed face centered cubic (FCC) phase mixture having distinct dendritic (copper lean) and inter-dendritic (copper rich) phases. In this alloy, the bright inter-dendritic regions were Cu rich as shown in Figure 2a. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results show a single set of FCC peaks for several of these compositions, although the microstructure shows segregation between dendrites. This may be due to the very close d-spacing of the two phases that could not be resolved in XRD. The corrosion behavior of these alloys was comparable to SS304 stainless steel, with the copper free composition showing highest resistance to pitting (Figure 2b). The x = 0.5 alloy showed higher corrosion current density and pitting density, as shown in Figure 2c. This was attributed to higher galvanic action prompted from the Cu segregated in the inter-dendritic regions. Galvanic coupling results in initiation and propagation of localized corrosion pits causing rapid dissolution of the more anodic phase (in this case the bright Cu rich phase).  The copper rich interdendritic regions appear white, while the dendrites are darker; and, (b) Potentiodynamic polarization plots of the alloys in 3.5% NaCl. The Cu free CoCrFeNi alloy showed highest resistance compared to other two complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) and SS304L; (c) Microstructure after corrosion tests showing that Cu rich inter-dendritic regions corroded faster as compared to the dendritic regions lean in Cu. This may be due to the galvanic effect arising from the difference in composition [29] (reprinted with permission from Elsevier).
## (s11) Wear Behavior of CCAs
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) All of the complex concentrated (high entropy) alloy systems that have been studied so far for their wear behavior are summarized in Figure 24. They are broadly classified based on the alloy chemistry and processing. In addition to wear behavior, the hardening response, phase stability, and hot hardness was reported for some alloys. The copper containing alloys were typically single phase or mixture of two simple phases. The copper free alloys were based on AlCoCrFeNi system and modified with Ti or Mo. The copper free alloys showed higher wear resistance when compared to the copper containing alloys. In addition, wear behavior of alloys that are composed of purely refractory elements have also been reported. Surface modification was done for some conventional steels and Ti alloys by LASER cladding, tungsten inert gas (TIG), and sputtering to enhance the wear properties.   Figure 23. Comparison of high entropy alloys with conventional structural materials for erosion and erosion-corrosion resistance. "Conventional materials" in the figure refers to a broad range of materials developed for erosion/corrosion applications such as SS304 [28,50], SS304L, mild steel, Bainitic Steel [86] and Copper Alloys [87]. "Coatings" refer to coatings on AA6061 [88] for erosion mitigation.
## (s12) Wear Behavior of CCAs
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) All of the complex concentrated (high entropy) alloy systems that have been studied so far for their wear behavior are summarized in Figure 24. They are broadly classified based on the alloy chemistry and processing. In addition to wear behavior, the hardening response, phase stability, and hot hardness was reported for some alloys. The copper containing alloys were typically single phase or mixture of two simple phases. The copper free alloys were based on AlCoCrFeNi system and modified with Ti or Mo. The copper free alloys showed higher wear resistance when compared to the copper containing alloys. In addition, wear behavior of alloys that are composed of purely refractory elements have also been reported. Surface modification was done for some conventional steels and Ti alloys by LASER cladding, tungsten inert gas (TIG), and sputtering to enhance the wear properties. Comparison of high entropy alloys with conventional structural materials for erosion and erosion-corrosion resistance. "Conventional materials" in the figure refers to a broad range of materials developed for erosion/corrosion applications such as SS304 [28,50], SS304L, mild steel, Bainitic Steel [86] and Copper Alloys [87]. "Coatings" refer to coatings on AA6061 [88] for erosion mitigation.
