# Reconstruction of the alveolar cleft: can growth factor-aided tissue engineering replace autologous bone grafting? A literature review and systematic review of results obtained with bone morphogenetic protein-2

CorpusID: 137196 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9c4f1ba2abd42fb81c1096dbbe3707833d27686](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9c4f1ba2abd42fb81c1096dbbe3707833d27686)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Tissue engineering
Number of References: 20

(p1.0) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p1.1) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].

(p1.2) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p1.3) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].
## (s2) Growth factors
Number of References: 80

(p2.0) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p2.1) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p2.2) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].

(p2.3) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p2.4) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p2.5) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].
## (s3) Clinical application of growth factors
Number of References: 36

(p3.0) PRP has been applied for reconstruction of the maxillofacial skeleton with contradictory results [14,15].

(p3.1) Recombinant human PDGF (rhPDGF) has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the repair of periodontal defects. RhPDGF has been studied in combination with β-tricalcium phosphate and in combination with IGF in a gel delivery system for the repair of periodontal defects [16][17][18].

(p3.2) Recombinant human BMP-2 (rhBMP-2) in combination with a collagen sponge carrier made out of type 1 bovine collagen has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and is used for specific clinical situations, i.e. interbody spinal fusion, open tibial fractures, sinus augmentation and alveolar ridge augmentation after dental extraction [19,20].

(p3.3) Recombinant human BMP-7 (rhBMP-7) is used in nonunion of long bone fractures and spinal fusion and has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for these indications. A study has been performed with rhBMP-7 for sinus floor elevation [20,21].

(p3.4) PRP has been applied for reconstruction of the maxillofacial skeleton with contradictory results [14,15].

(p3.5) Recombinant human PDGF (rhPDGF) has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the repair of periodontal defects. RhPDGF has been studied in combination with β-tricalcium phosphate and in combination with IGF in a gel delivery system for the repair of periodontal defects [16][17][18].

(p3.6) Recombinant human BMP-2 (rhBMP-2) in combination with a collagen sponge carrier made out of type 1 bovine collagen has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and is used for specific clinical situations, i.e. interbody spinal fusion, open tibial fractures, sinus augmentation and alveolar ridge augmentation after dental extraction [19,20].

(p3.7) Recombinant human BMP-7 (rhBMP-7) is used in nonunion of long bone fractures and spinal fusion and has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for these indications. A study has been performed with rhBMP-7 for sinus floor elevation [20,21].
## (s9) Full text analysis
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) Three articles were excluded on basis of the full text screening. The article by Chin et al. [22] on BMP-2 was excluded because besides CLAP, facial clefts were reconstructed and because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Fallucco et al. [23] on BMP-2 was excluded because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Hibi et al. [24] on PRP was excluded because bone marrow aspirate was used.
## (s11) Bone quantity
Number of References: 22

(p11.0) Dickinson et al. [26] reported more bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group (95%) compared to the control group (63%). Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reported slightly less bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group compared to the control group, although the differences (5.8% and 7%) seem not significant. Alonso et al. [25] further measured more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months. In the study by Herford et al. [27], two patients in the rhBMP-2 group showed significantly less bone formation in the cleft than the other patients; the authors explain this by possible wound breakdown of the nasal mucosal layer.

(p11.1) Bone height was measured by Alonso et al. [25] and by Dickinson et al. [26]. Alonso et al. [25] reported lower bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (10.2 mm) than in the control group (13.9 mm), whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reported   [26] higher bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (85%) than in the control group (70%). The position of the bone in the cleft was described by Alonso et al. [25]; in the rhBMP-2 group, most bone was deposited in the supra-apical area of the cleft, whereas in the control group, most bone was seen in the alveolar area.
## (s12) Bone quality
Number of References: 8

(p12.0) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.

(p12.1) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.
## (s13) Complications and adverse events
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).

(p13.1) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).
## (s24) Tissue engineering
Number of References: 20

(p24.0) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p24.1) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].

(p24.2) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p24.3) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].
## (s25) Growth factors
Number of References: 80

(p25.0) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p25.1) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p25.2) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].

(p25.3) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p25.4) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p25.5) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].
## (s26) Clinical application of growth factors
Number of References: 36

(p26.0) PRP has been applied for reconstruction of the maxillofacial skeleton with contradictory results [14,15].

(p26.1) Recombinant human PDGF (rhPDGF) has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the repair of periodontal defects. RhPDGF has been studied in combination with β-tricalcium phosphate and in combination with IGF in a gel delivery system for the repair of periodontal defects [16][17][18].

(p26.2) Recombinant human BMP-2 (rhBMP-2) in combination with a collagen sponge carrier made out of type 1 bovine collagen has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and is used for specific clinical situations, i.e. interbody spinal fusion, open tibial fractures, sinus augmentation and alveolar ridge augmentation after dental extraction [19,20].

(p26.3) Recombinant human BMP-7 (rhBMP-7) is used in nonunion of long bone fractures and spinal fusion and has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for these indications. A study has been performed with rhBMP-7 for sinus floor elevation [20,21].

(p26.4) PRP has been applied for reconstruction of the maxillofacial skeleton with contradictory results [14,15].

(p26.5) Recombinant human PDGF (rhPDGF) has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the repair of periodontal defects. RhPDGF has been studied in combination with β-tricalcium phosphate and in combination with IGF in a gel delivery system for the repair of periodontal defects [16][17][18].

(p26.6) Recombinant human BMP-2 (rhBMP-2) in combination with a collagen sponge carrier made out of type 1 bovine collagen has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and is used for specific clinical situations, i.e. interbody spinal fusion, open tibial fractures, sinus augmentation and alveolar ridge augmentation after dental extraction [19,20].

(p26.7) Recombinant human BMP-7 (rhBMP-7) is used in nonunion of long bone fractures and spinal fusion and has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for these indications. A study has been performed with rhBMP-7 for sinus floor elevation [20,21].
## (s32) Full text analysis
Number of References: 6

(p32.0) Three articles were excluded on basis of the full text screening. The article by Chin et al. [22] on BMP-2 was excluded because besides CLAP, facial clefts were reconstructed and because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Fallucco et al. [23] on BMP-2 was excluded because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Hibi et al. [24] on PRP was excluded because bone marrow aspirate was used.
## (s34) Bone quantity
Number of References: 22

(p34.0) Dickinson et al. [26] reported more bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group (95%) compared to the control group (63%). Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reported slightly less bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group compared to the control group, although the differences (5.8% and 7%) seem not significant. Alonso et al. [25] further measured more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months. In the study by Herford et al. [27], two patients in the rhBMP-2 group showed significantly less bone formation in the cleft than the other patients; the authors explain this by possible wound breakdown of the nasal mucosal layer.

(p34.1) Bone height was measured by Alonso et al. [25] and by Dickinson et al. [26]. Alonso et al. [25] reported lower bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (10.2 mm) than in the control group (13.9 mm), whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reported   [26] higher bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (85%) than in the control group (70%). The position of the bone in the cleft was described by Alonso et al. [25]; in the rhBMP-2 group, most bone was deposited in the supra-apical area of the cleft, whereas in the control group, most bone was seen in the alveolar area.
## (s35) Bone quality
Number of References: 8

(p35.0) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.

(p35.1) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.
## (s36) Complications and adverse events
Number of References: 8

(p36.0) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).

(p36.1) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).
