# Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology Odontogenic Sinusitis: A Review of the Current Literature

CorpusID: 13743852 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52291192a2ba97d45903774b065b220fc31ad66c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52291192a2ba97d45903774b065b220fc31ad66c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Epidemiology
Number of References: 6

(p1.0) The etiology of acute sinonasal inflammation or sinusitis may be the result of environmental allergens, irritants, bacterial infections, fungus, or dental issues including inflammation, infection, or foreign bodies. Odontogenic sinusitis is most common among 40-60 year olds with a slight female predominance. 7,12,13 Approximately 50% of patients will report previous dental surgery or This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. infection, however only one-third will report associated dental pain. 14 It is estimated that 10% of cases of chronic maxillary sinusitis are odontogenic in origin, though this has been reported to be as high as 75% among patients with unilateral maxillary disease. 5,15 Although the overall incidence of odontogenic sinusitis remains relatively low, several studies have demonstrated that the incidence of odontogenic sinusitis appears to be increasing over the last decade. 16 
## (s3) Clinical Evaluation and Diagnosis
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) The clinical presentation of odontogenic sinusitis varies, but most commonly includes symptoms of facial pain or pressure, postnasal drip, nasal congestion, purulent anterior rhinorrhea that may be unilateral, foul smell or taste, and fatigue. Obtaining a thorough history particularly as it relates to dentoalveolar surgery is critical. Of particular note is the finding that dental pain is often absent in odontogenic sinusitis, and when dental pain is present in the absence of other nasal symptoms, it is not specific for sinusitis. 18 Of additional note, less than half of patients report a recent dental procedure. This is likely due to the latency period of up to a year for augmentative dental surgery-associated maxillary sinusitis and a latency of almost four years in implant-associated maxillary sinusitis. 15 Careful evaluation of dentition for root fractures, status of the dental pulp, periodontal tissues, presence of an oral-antral fistula and condition of existing dental restorations are important components of the initial physical examination. Additionally, intranasal examination with anterior rhinoscopy or nasal endoscopy may demonstrate findings of unilateral purulent rhinorrhea or edema but remains less sensitive in the detection of odontogenic sinusitis as compared to imaging modalities (Fig. 1).
## (s4) Surgical Management
Number of References: 9

(p4.0) Odontogenic sinus disease refractory to medical management traditionally involves definitive treatment of the underlying dental pathology. This may involve further endodontic treatment with root canal, apicoectomy, or dental extraction. Endoscopic sinus surgery may be required for patients who fail initial medical management and dental treatment. [31][32][33] A recent retrospective review of 43 patients with odontogenic sinusitis demonstrated that 52% of patients improved with medical and dental treatment, while 48% ultimately required functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Among this cohort of patients, 14% patients required both dental intervention and endoscopic sinus surgery. Mattos et al. 32 further identified factors predictive of the need for endoscopic sinus surgery. These predictive factors included the presence of ostiomeatal unit involvement and prior dental procedures (odds ratio 37.3 and 7.4, respectively). Additionally, all patients with oral-antral fistula or retained dental foreign bodies ultimately required functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Kim et al. 11 reviewed 19 patients treated for odontogenic sinusitis specifically as the result of a dental implant. Only 21% of patients in this cohort were successfully managed medically, while 79% required endoscopic sinus surgery. The maxillary second molar was the most commonly implanted tooth, with a mean symptom duration of 4.31 months. There were significantly higher rates of ostiomeatal unit involvement among patients in this study undergoing endoscopic sinus surgery, further supporting the conclusion that ostiomeatal unit involvement may change the clinical course of the disease and its potential for response to conservative treatment.

(p4.1) Successful management of odontogenic sinusitis involves a combination of medical treatment, dental surgery and/or endoscopic sinus surgery. Although several studies have emphasized dental surgery as the primary treatment modality for odontogenic sinusitis, there is recent evidence to suggest that endoscopic sinus surgery alone may be an effective treatment approach. 26,34 A recent study examining odontogenic sinusitis in patients with dental implants who had undergone prior "sinus lift" procedures demonstrated that endoscopic sinus surgery with culture directed antibiotic therapy can be an effective treatment strategy for achieving disease resolution. 34 Among this small cohort of patients with intact dental implants, all were able to be successfully managed without removal of the involved implant at an average of 18 months follow-up. Wang et al. 26 described a cohort of patients undergoing treatment for odontogenic sinusitis. Among the patients with complete disease resolution, 33% required sinus surgery alone and 33% required concurrent sinus surgery and dental surgery. Although a large portion of patients were successfully managed with endoscopic sinus surgery alone, the authors acknowledged that dental surgery should remain the first-line surgical treatment as it appropriately targets the source of infection.
