# A Review of OpenStreetMap Data

CorpusID: 135382379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf)

Fields: Geography, Computer Science

## (s1) How Does One Contribute to OSM?
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) The OSM data model is very straightforward to understand. There are three primitive data types or objects: nodes, ways (polygons and polylines) and relations (logical collections of ways and nodes). A way is made up of at least two nodes (for polylines) or three nodes (for closed polygons). A node represents a geographic point feature and its coordinate is usually expressed as latitude and longitude. Within OSM, every object must have at least one attribute or tag (a key/value pair) assigned to it to describe its characteristics. There are many guides and tutorial documents on how one begins to map with OSM; recently the company Mapbox provided an updated set of documentation for this 1 . The OSM Map Features pages on the OSM wiki (OpenStreetMap, 2016) represent the reference document describing the officially adopted OSM tags. These tags have been agreed upon over the years and there are wiki pages written to describe the likely usage and use case scenarios of each tag. OSM follows a folksonomy approach to tagging, and, in theory, any tag can be associated with any object (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015). Contributors are free to create their own tags. As several authors have shown (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015;Ballatore and Zipf, 2015), this can lead to disagreements amongst contributors or confusion on how to use specific tags in certain geographic scenarios (for example tagging an object representing an unpaved pedestrian footpath). Services such as taginfo 2 allow exploration and visualisation of the most frequently used tags and their keys for the entire OSM database. The taginfo service is particularly useful for understanding the style or structure of tags used on specific object types, conceptualising the very wide range of values some keys are assigned in tags and the spatial distribution of tags. Taginfo is constantly updated in near real-time and stores the tags from every object in the global OSM database. There is no theoretical limit on the number of tags that can be assigned to any object. Nodes that have a tag with a key name are usually called Points of Interest (POI) and usually represent the position of some object or structure of general interest. Keys in OSM can be internationalised to accommodate languages other than English, which, due to OSM's origins, has established itself as the lingua franca of the project (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015).
