# A Concise Network-Centric Survey of IP Traceback Schemes based on Probabilistic Packet Marking

CorpusID: 14895300 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ffb1145a51bda49a4b74a7338e3630c5c3ace0c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ffb1145a51bda49a4b74a7338e3630c5c3ace0c)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 13

(p0.0) Internet Protocol (IP) traceback is a method to deal with Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks [1], [2]. Using IP traceback, sources of attack traffic can be identified from the network traffic they generate. A prominent IP traceback technique for identification of flooding style DDoS attacks is Probabilistic Packet Marking (PPM). In PPM-based IP traceback, network routers embed their own identities in packets randomly selected from all the network traffic that the routers process [3]. In the event of an attack, the routers' identity markings present in the attack packets can be used to reconstruct the attack graph -the paths taken by attack traffic -and establish its sources [4], [5]. The technique of probabilistically marking packets for IP traceback is the basis of many schemes hereafter referred to as PPM-based schemes [4], [6], [7], [8]. Multiple additional schemes have been proposed with the purpose to increase the efficiency of PPM-based schemes [6], [8], [9], [10].
## (s6) C. Categories of PPM schemes
Number of References: 13

(p6.0) Despite their large number, PPM-based schemes have similar underlying algorithms in their marking schemes. The underlying algorithm is responsible for how the packets in which the router identities are embedded are selected. For example, the majority of the considered schemes exhibit underlying algorithms in which all routers randomly select packets with equal probability p [3], [4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. The schemes in this category are prone to re-marking. We refer to this category as the re-marking category of PPM-based schemes. In the other category of schemes, the routers' packet selection process is only partially random. The underlying algorithms in this category prohibit the overwriting of previous router information and as a result exhibit performances that are notably different from the re-marking category [12], [13], [11].

(p6.1) We select three representative marking schemes: PPM [3] to represent the re-marking category, and TMS [12] and PBS [13] to represent the non-re-marking category. The analytical models for these three schemes are markedly different from each other, even for equal marking probability, because of the differences in the schemes' underlying marking algorithms. The performance of any PPM-based scheme can therefore be compared to either one of these schemes, or a combination of them.
