# Molecular Sciences Nutrigenomics and Beef Quality: A Review about Lipogenesis

CorpusID: 14919998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783bdeaf3ab3820a4f3c6c222e710bdcfd62b301](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783bdeaf3ab3820a4f3c6c222e710bdcfd62b301)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Commitment
Number of References: 14

(p2.0) Currently, the mechanisms controlling adipogenesis in fetal and postnatal skeletal muscle in vivo remain poorly defined, although numerous in vitro cell culture studies suggest that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARγ) and CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) are crucial factors controlling adipogenesis from commitment of multipotent stem cells to differentiation into adipocytes [12][13][14]. The current thought is that MSC at the initial stage of determination give rise to myogenic factor five expressing (myf5(+)) and non-expressing (myf5(´)) cells [15]. Myf5 is a crucial early myogenic transcription factor, expression of which is highly specific to committed skeletal myoblastic cells [16]. Muscle and brown adipocytes develop from myf5(+) cells, whereas chondrocytes, osteoblasts, fibroblasts and white adipoblasts develop from myf5(´) cells [4,17]. The further commitment of myf5(+) and myf5(´) cells to myogenic, adipogenic, or osteogenic cells is controlled by different groups of protein such as the zinc finger protein (ZFP) family, the wingless (Wnt) protein family, the hedgehog protein family, the bone morphogenic protein (BMP) family, and the nuclear hormone superfamily [18][19][20]. The outcomes of different transcription factors depend on relative concentration, stage of differentiation, cell to cell interactions, and the nature of the extracellular matrix. The exact stage at which they act is not well defined in the literature and needs further research to elucidate the precise role of these signals.

(p2.1) Zinc finger proteins are the largest transcription factor family in mammals [21] and contain one or more zinc finger motif(s) that regulate diverse growth and developmental processes, including adipogenesis, through DNA/RNA binding, protein-protein interactions, transcription activation, and regulation of apoptosis [22]. Zinc finger proteins, notably Zfp423, Zfp467, and Zfp521 control BMPs are the members of transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) super family and play critical role in the commitment of MSCs into cell lineages. There are 14 members in the BMP family (BMP-2 to BMP-15). BMP4 stimulates the differentiation of MSC to adipocyte lineage, BMP2 promotes the osteogenic lineage, and BMP7 plays a crucial role in brown adipocyte differentiation [28]. The primary function of many proadipogenic factors (i.e., b-catenin and preadipocyte factor-1) is repression of genes inhibiting adipogenesis. BMP4 dissociates a complex of Wnt proteins that suppress PPARG expression and adipogenesis [29] (Figure 1).
## (s6) Lipogenesis
Number of References: 12

(p6.0) Lipogenesis is a physiological process of endogenous fatty acid synthesis that increases inversely to muscle tissue development. Therefore, after puberty and sexual maturity, as muscle growth decreases, adipose tissue increases [65]. According to Pethick et al. [66], fat deposition is not homogeneous throughout the animal body; the first observed depot to form is internal fat (abdominal, renal-inguinal and pelvic), followed by intermuscular, subcutaneous and intramuscular fat or marbling.

(p6.1) For fat synthesis to occur, triglycerides must be incorporated into the animal adipose tissue, after the absorption of dietary fatty acids or de novo synthesis of other fatty acids [67]. The main factor in the control of fat deposition rate is the animal's nutritional status, as acetate, a volatile fatty acid produced in ruminal fermentation, is the main precursor for the synthesis of fatty acids among ruminants [68]. Following its absorption across the ruminal epithelium and distribution to the peripheral tissues, acetate is converted in adipose cells into acetyl-CoA through the action of the enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase [69]. The gene that encodes this enzyme is known as acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 2 (ACSS2). This step also occurs with dietary long-chain fatty acids. (abdominal, renal-inguinal and pelvic), followed by intermuscular, subcutaneous and intramuscular fat or marbling. For fat synthesis to occur, triglycerides must be incorporated into the animal adipose tissue, after the absorption of dietary fatty acids or de novo synthesis of other fatty acids [67]. The main factor in the control of fat deposition rate is the animal's nutritional status, as acetate, a volatile fatty acid produced in ruminal fermentation, is the main precursor for the synthesis of fatty acids among ruminants [68]. Following its absorption across the ruminal epithelium and distribution to the peripheral tissues, acetate is converted in adipose cells into acetyl-CoA through the action of the enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase [69]. The gene that encodes this enzyme is known as acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 2 (ACSS2). This step also occurs with dietary long-chain fatty acids.

(p6.2) The presence of acetyl-CoA and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is essential for de novo fatty acid synthesis. In addition to acetate, another source of acetyl-CoA is the pyruvate produced through glycolysis, following decarboxylation in the mitochondria. However, as lipogenesis takes place in the cytosol, acetyl-CoA, which is not permeable through the mitochondrial membrane, is transported as citrate to the extracellular compartment, where it is cleaved by the enzyme citrate lyase into oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA ( Figure 2). NADPH, in turn, is synthesized in the pentose phosphate pathway, and, in the case of ruminants, also through the transformation of citrate into α-ketoglutarate in the cytosol, which then re-enters the mitochondria [70]. In non-ruminant animals, citrate lyase, malate dehydrogenase and malic enzyme are responsible for the production of more NADPH molecules from cytosolic citrate [68].  The presence of acetyl-CoA and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is essential for de novo fatty acid synthesis. In addition to acetate, another source of acetyl-CoA is the pyruvate produced through glycolysis, following decarboxylation in the mitochondria. However, as lipogenesis takes place in the cytosol, acetyl-CoA, which is not permeable through the mitochondrial membrane, is transported as citrate to the extracellular compartment, where it is cleaved by the enzyme citrate lyase into oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA ( Figure 2). NADPH, in turn, is synthesized in the pentose phosphate pathway, and, in the case of ruminants, also through the transformation of citrate into α-ketoglutarate in the cytosol, which then re-enters the mitochondria [70]. In non-ruminant animals, citrate lyase, malate dehydrogenase and malic enzyme are responsible for the production of more NADPH molecules from cytosolic citrate [68].
## (s9) Transcription Factors and Lipid Metabolism in Beef Cattle
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Several key events involved in the synthesis of fat in the animal tissues take place at the molecular level. The association of nutritional factors with the modulation of fat metabolism is one of the recent targets of nutrigenomic studies conducted with beef cattle. Within this context, special attention has been given to the study of nuclear receptors related to fatty acid metabolism [108][109][110][111][112][113]. Those receptors form an intracellular protein receptor superfamily included within the transcription factors class. Upon binding to the DNA, those factors allow RNA polymerase binding and transcription initiation. Such factors participate in several physiological functions, including homeostasis, reproduction, growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, apoptosis and metabolism [114].
## (s10) Transcription Factors and Lipid Metabolism in Beef Cattle
Number of References: 7

(p10.0) Several key events involved in the synthesis of fat in the animal tissues take place at the molecular level. The association of nutritional factors with the modulation of fat metabolism is one of the recent targets of nutrigenomic studies conducted with beef cattle. Within this context, special attention has been given to the study of nuclear receptors related to fatty acid metabolism [108][109][110][111][112][113]. Those receptors form an intracellular protein receptor superfamily included within the transcription factors class. Upon binding to the DNA, those factors allow RNA polymerase binding and transcription initiation. Such factors participate in several physiological functions, including homeostasis, reproduction, growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, apoptosis and metabolism [114].
