# 02+ MILLION TOP 1% MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12.2% AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES A Review of Interventions for Treatment- Resistant Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

CorpusID: 141609969 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff109aaa2ccd8de9cfebc775ea2e439c55ab5d54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff109aaa2ccd8de9cfebc775ea2e439c55ab5d54)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s4) Atypical antipsychotics
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Psychotic symptoms can be quite prevalent in those with PTSD, especially in veterans with combat exposure (Stein, Kline, & Matloff, 2002). The prevalence of psychosis in veterans with PTSD is estimated to range from 30-40% (M. B. Hamner, 1997). Psychotic symptoms are often associated with more severe symptoms that are not affected by the standard treatment with SSRIs or other antidepressants (Pae et al., 2008;Sareen, Cox, Goodwin, & Asmundson, 2005). It is suggested that PTSD affects serotonergic and dopaminergic pathways, both of which can be acted on by atypical antipsychotics (M. B. Hamner, Faldowski et al., 2003). There is also some indication that PTSD can affect alphaadrenergic receptors as well, which can also be acted on by some atypical antipsychotics. Some activities of these drugs include, D 2 , 5-HT 2 and alpha 1 adrenergic receptor antagonism. Certain drugs also have an antihistaminic role, helping with some of the sleep-disturbances accompanying PTSD (Ravindran & Stein, 2009). As such, atypical antipsychotics have been utilized as a monotherapy and as adjunctive treatment for PTSD, with or without psychotic symptoms, with most evidence supporting the use of them as an adjunctive therapy. Three RCTs (see Table 1), eight open-label trials and multiple case series were identified for the use of atypical antipsychotics in the treatment of TR-PTSD. The following is a summary of the studies on atypical antipsychotics: 
## (s6) Risperidone
Number of References: 15

(p6.0) Risperidone has affinity for 5-HT 2A , 5-HT 7 , D 2 , and alpha-1 and 2 receptors. As such, risperidone has the capacity to reduce positive and negative symptoms of PTSD, such as, delusions, hallucinations, thought disorder, hostility, social and emotional withdrawal and aggression, among others (Kozaric-Kovacic, Pivac, Muck-Seler, & Rothbaum, 2005). Two RCTs (Hamner, Faldowski et al., 2003;Bartzokis et al., 2004) and two open-label trials (David, De Faria, & Mellman, 2006;Kozaric-Kovacic et al., 2005) demonstrate the positive effect of risperidone in the treatment of refractory PTSD. However, Rothbaum et al (2005) failed to find any benefit of risperidone on the primary CAPS outcome. Treatment resistance includes criteria such as, unresponsive to SSRIs over the past year (Bartzokis et al., 2004;Kozaric-Kovacic et al., 2005;Rothbaum et al., 2008) and as only partially responsive to current medications (David et al., 2006;M. B. Hamner, Faldowski et al., 2003). Risperidone is evaluated in conjunction with participants' regular doses of either SSRIs (Rothbaum et al., 2008) or all antidepressants (M. B. Hamner, Faldowski et al., 2003). Average daily doses of risperidone ranged between 1.9-2.5mg/day for 5-16 weeks. The percentage of responders to risperidone compared to the placebo was not recorded. Modest results were found for the combination of antidepressants and risperidone in treatment of the psychotic and reexperiencing symptoms of PTSD. (Hamner, Faldowski et al., 2003). The open label trials were consistent in showing the benefit of adjunctive treatment and monotherapy treatment with risperidone. One study in particular (David et al., 2006) specifically showed risperidone to be effective in treating the sleep symptoms accompanying PTSD. In summary, risperidone has shown some promise for TR-PTSD, but larger, more rigorous RCTs are needed for confirmation.
## (s10) Aripiprazole
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Aripiprazole is a 5-HT 2A antagonist with partial agonist effects on the 5-HT 1A and D 2 receptors contributing to a reduction in anxiety. Two open-label trials demonstrate the potential effectiveness of aripiprazole in treating refractory-PTSD. In a 12-week trial, www.intechopen.com participants were given a mean dose of 12.95 mg/day of the drug as a monotherapy treatment (Villarreal et al., 2007). Of the 22 participants, 15 of them (68%) had previously been unresponsive to two or more antidepressants. By the end of the trial, 14 people (64%) responded to treatment, defined as a minimum of 20% improvement on the CAPS scale, and two participants remitted. Of the 14 responders, twelve participants had a CGI-I score of very much, or much improved. In a second 12-week trial, a flexible dose (15-30 mg/day) of the drug was given adjunctively to the 20 participants (Robert, Hamner, Durkalski, Brown, & Ulmer, 2009). Of these 20 participants, 85% of them had previously been treated with an average of 1.5 antidepressants trials, but were still experiencing significant PTSD symptoms. Based on the response criteria of a minimal decrease in CAPS score by 20%, 53% of the sample responded to treatment. In addition, a recent chart review of veterans with both PTSD and comorbid depression that received this drug in an open-label fashion for 12 weeks experienced a reduction in both PTSD and depression severity. Treatment resistance was defined as being minimally or partially responsive to previous medication (Richardson, Fikretoglu, Liu, & McIntosh, 2011). These findings suggest that aripiprazole may be effective in treating PTSD in those who are considered treatment resistant; however, further and more rigorous evaluation of the drug is required. Based on the evidence, it appears that olanzapine and risperidone are the most effective atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of refractory PTSD. The study of atypical antipsychotics in treatment of refractory PTSD is promising, however more research is needed, including larger sample sizes and more double blind randomized controlled trials.
## (s13) Guanfacine
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) Guanfacine acts as an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist (Ravindran & Stein, 2009), and as such is proposed as a mechanism for reducing hyper-arousal symptoms associated with PTSD. In an eight-week double blind, randomized controlled trial, 63 veterans with TR-PTSD received either an average dose of 2.4mg/day of guanfacine or of placebo (Neylan et al., 2006). Included participants were either taking no medication, or continued to meet the criteria for PTSD even though they were on a stable dose of medication. Guanfacine showed a small but statistically significant effect in reducing CAPS scores, as compared to the placebo group, as well as a decrease in the average total IES-R score. After eight weeks, the drug was no more effective than the placebo in reducing PTSD symptoms. In addition, those who were given guanfacine experienced high rates of adverse effects, such as dry mouth, light-headedness and a drop in blood pressure. Based on the results of this trial, guanfacine is not suggested to benefit individuals with PTSD.
## (s14) Clonidine
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Similar to the effect of guanfacine, clonidine, an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist, blocks the alpha-2 receptors in areas with high concentrations of norepinephrine, thus reducing symphathetic tone. As such, it is hypothesized that the drug can have beneficial effects on the hyper-arousal symptoms exhibited in PTSD (Ravindran & Stein, 2009). In an openclinical trial (Harmon & Riggs, 1996), pre-school children with PTSD were treated with clonidine (average dose, once stabilized, 0.1-0.105mg/day). Children were only included in this study if they had been unresponsive to at least one, but often several months of behavioral treatment. Based on teacher and physician opinion, all children experienced a decrease in aggressive behavior, and 71% of the children exhibited decreased impulsivity, www.intechopen.com hypervigilance, anxiety, temper-tantrums, oppositional behavior and sleep disturbances. After trying out many different drugs, Kinzie and Leung (1989) found TCAs most effective in relieving PTSD symptoms. Cambodian refugees (N=12) with PTSD were treated with a combination of imipramine (maximum dose 150mg/day) and clonidine (0.1-0.6mg/day).
## (s16) Topiramate
Number of References: 3

(p16.0) Topiramate has several different mechanisms of operation. Topiramate blocks calcium and sodium channels, increasing the activity of GABA, inhibiting the activity of carbonic anhydrase enzyme and blocking the AMPA receptor. Topiramate's anti-kindling properties may block certain pathways involved in PTSD (Andrus & Gilbert, 2010). One RCT testing the efficacy of topiramate in treating PTSD shows potential benefit. In a 12-week adjunctive therapy, double blind, randomized control trial, 67 patients who were being treated with psychotropic medications, but experiencing no response were included. There was a significant improvement between those combat veterans receiving the drug (50-500mg/day) and those receiving the placebo (Akuchekian & Amanat, 2004). PTSD symptoms of re-experiencing, sleep disturbances, irritability, anger, difficulty recalling, and startle reaction were reduced in the experimental group. In a case series (Berlant, 2001), when previous medications were ineffective, topiramate was reported to help with reexperiencing symptoms, such as nightmares and intrusive flashbacks. There is suggestion that topiramate, as an anticonvulsant agent, may be effective in treatment-resistant individuals with PTSD; however, the findings of the RCT need to be replicated and additional investigation is required.
## (s19) Levetiracetam
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Levetiracetam reduces signal transmission through high voltage calcium channels. This drug might also effect the functioning of the SV2A synaptic vesicle protein. Animal models show that levetiracetam may reduce the anxiety induced by withdrawal from benzodiazepines (Kinrys, Wygant, Pardo, & Melo, 2006). In a retrospective study, Kinrys et al (2006) treated non-responding PTSD patients with levetiracetam in an adjunctive therapy fashion. A mean dose of 1967 ± 650 mg/day was given to patients for an average of 9.7 ± 3.7 weeks. Significant improvements were seen in PCL-C, CGI-S and HAM-A scores. Thirteen patients (56%) were characterized as www.intechopen.com responders, and 6 patients (26%) were characterized as remitters. No patients discontinued treatment due to adverse effects. These findings are inconclusive pending further research that must include RCTs. Based on the literature to date, there is not enough evidence to recommend the use of anticonvulsants for treating TR-PTSD.
## (s20) Mood stabilizers 4.5.1 Lithium carbonate
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) Lithium stimulates serotonin synthesis and increases the sensitivity of pre-and postsynaptic receptors to serotonin. These mechanisms may be responsible for the ability of lithium to reduce aggression (Forster, Schoenfeld, Marmar, & Lang, 1995). In a case series Kitchner and Greenstein (1985) reported on the effect of low dose lithium carbonate (300-600 mg/day) in treating the PTSD-related anger, irritability, anxiety and sleep disturbance symptoms in individuals who were resistant to other treatment (tranquilizers, antidepressants, hypnotics and psychotherapy). Over three to 12 months, adjunctive treatment with lithium was effective in treating these treatment-resistant symptoms. No further and more up-to-date studies on lithium treatment of refractory PTSD patients were found in the literature. As a result, lithium may be an effective treatment for specific symptoms of TR-PTSD, but more rigorous evaluation is necessary.
## (s23) Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
Number of References: 5

(p23.0) Several studies have found cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to be effective for treatmentresistant refugees. Otto et al (2003) randomly assigned ten women to either receive sertraline (mean dose 125mg/day) or sertraline (mean dose 100mg/day) plus CBT. All women had previously failed to respond to a combination of clonazepam (0.5-1mg/day) plus an SSRI other than sertraline. CBT focused on information, exposure and cognitive modification. The combination of sertraline and CBT was more effective than sertraline alone. Hinton et al (2004) randomly assigned Vietnamese refugees with PTSD and concurrent panic attacks to two different cohorts, one to receive treatment immediately, and the other to be on the waitwww.intechopen.com list. All included participants still met criteria for PTSD diagnosis despite treatment with a stable dose of SSRIs and supportive counseling. CBT was adapted to be culturally appropriate. Significant improvements were seen on all outcome measures, demonstrating the efficacy of culturally adapted CBT. A trial with Cambodian refugees with TR-PTSD and comorbid panic attacks (Hinton et al., 2005) likewise found benefit of a culturally adapted CBT program. In the randomized controlled trial, Hinton et al (2009) studied the mechanism behind the efficacy for CBT in Cambodian refugees. Patients receiving the treatment showed much greater improvement on one physiological measure and on all psychometric measures. In addition, those in the waitlist group significantly improved once they too received treatment. The study found the severity of PTSD to be mediated by orthostatic panic and emotion regulation. The vagal tone and emotional regulation ability is improved by CBT, suggesting a decrease in vagal tone to be associated with PTSD and orthostatic panic among refugees, as well as with emotional regulation ability. In a culturally adapted, 14-week, CBT trial of Latino women with TR-PTSD (Hinton et al., 2011), significant reduction in PTSD symptoms was again demonstrated. Treatment resistance was defined as still meeting PTSD criteria despite receiving supportive therapy and a maximally tolerated dose of SSRIs for at least six months. These few studies demonstrate the ability of culturally adapted CBT to be an effective treatment for refuges with PTSD who are not responding to first line treatment.
## (s24) Alternative treatments
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) Multiple alternative treatments have been evaluated for their uses in treating refractory PTSD. Two RCTs have been performed looking at different methods for treatment. Kaplan et al (1996) evaluated the use of inositol in a double-blind randomized, controlled cross-over trial. Inositol is a second messenger that exerts its effect over neurotransmitters such as serotonin. It has been shown to have antidepressant and anti-panic properties, and is therefore proposed to also help alleviate PTSD symptoms. Included participants were those who had no response or only partial response to a trial of antidepressants or other treatment, or had refused treatment with medication. Participants were treated with either 12g/day of inositol or of placebo only. Response to treatment was based on the IES, and its two subscales for avoidance and intrusion. Overall, no significant differences were found between treatment and placebo groups in overall IES score, either subscale or on the Hamilton depression and anxiety scales. This study shows inositol to have no effect on TR-PTSD. A second RCT evaluated the use of ±3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) for TR-PTSD (Mithoefer, Wagner, Mithoefer, Jerome, & Doblin, 2010). In the past, MDMA has been shown to reduce fear, while maintaining a state of alertness and is therefore proposed to be helpful in conjunction with psychotherapy. Individuals who were resistant to both psychotherapy and psychopharmacology were randomized to receive either MDMA or placebo in two 8-hour experimental psychotherapy sessions. The CAPS was used to indicate response to treatment. In the treatment-group, 83% (N= 10/12) individuals responded, whereas, only 25% (N=2/8) in the placebo-group responded. No serious adverse effects were seen. This is an interesting proof-of-concept and the role of this drug in the treatment of PTSD remains to be determined. Abramowitz and Lichtenberg (2010) conducted a prospective open study on the efficacy of a new hypnotic technique for TR-PTSD. The new technique, hypnotherapeutic olfactory conditioning (HOC), consists of six 1.5 hour sessions per week where the patient is taught to use a pleasant-smelling scent to help them re-enter and remain calm in situations that trigger anxiety and panic. All participants in this study had continual PTSD symptoms and olfactory trigger components despite prior treatment. The IES-R, BDI and Dissociative Experiences Scale were used to assess the treatment. At the end of the six weeks, a significant reduction was seen in PTSD symptoms, depression and dissociative experiences. Response to treatment was indicated by a 50% decrease in in IES-R scores. Of the participants, 58% responded. In those who have olfactory trigger components to their PTSD, HOC may be an effective treatment. Nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid substance was also evaluated as a potential treatment for individuals whose PTSD-related nightmares were resistant to treatment for at least two years (Fraser, 2009). In this open label clinical trial, nabilone (mean dose 0.5mg/day) was added to the medication regiment of 47 patients. Thirty-four of the patients (72%) experienced complete or significant reductions in their nightmares. Nabilone may be effective for treatment-resistant nightmares, but its role in treatment of TR-PTSD is cautioned as it is still inconclusive.
