# Evidence for Clinical Use of Honey in Wound Healing as an Anti-bacterial, Anti-inflammatory Anti-oxidant and Anti-viral Agent: A Review

CorpusID: 14509629 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67358acd65b2e8619ea30c89db848fbbaa2fa0eb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67358acd65b2e8619ea30c89db848fbbaa2fa0eb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Anti-viral Properties
Number of References: 12

(p6.0) There is only one published crossover trial by Al-Waili et al concerning the use of honey in adult patients with recurrent attacks of herpetic lesions (labial and genital) (38). Topical treatment with honey was compared with acyclovir treatment. Honey showed better results with no side effects, over patients using acyclovir who reported itchiness (38). The trial showed that topical honey application was effective in the management of pain and other signs and symptoms of recurrent lesions from genital and labial herpes (38). However, there is a paucity of research regarding the antiviral properties of honey. There have been reports of using medicinal honey in addition to systemic acyclovir in zoster patients with impaired im-mune systems. This was done with the hope of preventing secondary bacterial infection of the skin as well as speeding up the healing of the herpetic lesions (10). There is enough evidence for clinical use of honey for wound healing. However there is a lack of data in the literature regarding classification of honey's wound healing properties mechanisms . To make a more informative decision towards using topical honey on different wounds it is important to classify precise mechanisms of action for this effect. Although it is mentioned that honey works on wide spectrum of bacteria, the limitation of this article is that it does not illustrate which species of bacteria are more affected by this treatment. Among the articles reviewed, thirteen published trials lack proper binding, have poor validity and are not free from personal bias. Another eight articles are published by a single researcher. This means that conclusions have to be reviewed with caution. The degree of consistency is considerable in those trials published by the same author; hence, they may have been influenced by personal bias. The size of many trials is questionable (39). More detailed, double blinded randomized controlled studies with sufficient statistical power and minimal personal bias are warranted to investigate the pain relieving, anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative effects of honey. However, double-blinded studies might not be a possible method for testing wound dressing as honey and its aroma is well recognized (40,41). Pediatric use cannot be recommended at this stage due to lack of sufficient evidence (41). Similarly, the effects of honey on viruses cannot be advocated due to a paucity of evidence. Although the number of participants treated was small, studies done so far have shown promising results. One positive aspect is the absence of adverse effects in honey treated patients. There are only two adverse effects related to medical honey. One was stinging pain reported by some of the patients (less than 5%), which was resolved by using anaesthetic cream or postponing the treatment to another phase of healing. Secondly, a small number of patients experienced local atopic reactions to medihoney. These patients had an underlying atopic disposition. Therefore, there are no severe systemic reactions to medical honey (10,42). Factors such as the species of bee, botanical origin and geographical location, as well as processing and storage conditions should be part of the ongoing research (2). A comparison of different types of honey may be an important issue in future research (22).
