# Role of androgens, progestins and tibolone in the treatment of menopausal symptoms: a review of the clinical evidence

CorpusID: 14234658 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65d6ea8cf4bf340ba7fdb4b8ebb5f6bd1e220f4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65d6ea8cf4bf340ba7fdb4b8ebb5f6bd1e220f4a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) DHEA
Number of References: 8

(p11.0) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).

(p11.1) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).
## (s13) Mood and cognitive disturbances
Number of References: 14

(p13.0) A range of other symptoms, including depression, nervousness, agitation, insomnia, arthralgia, and poor concentration are associated with the menopause (Bachmann 1998), but the relationship between these symptoms and low estrogen is more diffi cult to determine. Such psychological and mood changes around the time of menopause may be the result of a complex interplay between environmental stimuli and other factors such as sleep disturbance and fatigue. Sleep disturbance is a pervasive and distressing menopausal symptom and may occur independently of hot fl ushes and night sweats (Cardozo et al 1998). A community-based longitudinal study gave no support for mood symptoms being part of the menopausal syndrome (Avis et al 1994;Baker 1994;Khan et al 1994;Dennerstein et al 2004).

(p13.1) Any improvements in these symptoms or in general wellbeing noted while taking ET/EPT may be due to improvements in vasomotor symptoms, urogenital symptoms, sexual function, and quality of sleep (Brown et al 2001).
## (s26) DHEA
Number of References: 8

(p26.0) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).

(p26.1) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).
## (s28) Mood and cognitive disturbances
Number of References: 14

(p28.0) A range of other symptoms, including depression, nervousness, agitation, insomnia, arthralgia, and poor concentration are associated with the menopause (Bachmann 1998), but the relationship between these symptoms and low estrogen is more diffi cult to determine. Such psychological and mood changes around the time of menopause may be the result of a complex interplay between environmental stimuli and other factors such as sleep disturbance and fatigue. Sleep disturbance is a pervasive and distressing menopausal symptom and may occur independently of hot fl ushes and night sweats (Cardozo et al 1998). A community-based longitudinal study gave no support for mood symptoms being part of the menopausal syndrome (Avis et al 1994;Baker 1994;Khan et al 1994;Dennerstein et al 2004).

(p28.1) Any improvements in these symptoms or in general wellbeing noted while taking ET/EPT may be due to improvements in vasomotor symptoms, urogenital symptoms, sexual function, and quality of sleep (Brown et al 2001).
