# Overview of Wireless Sensor Network

CorpusID: 15880829 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0eee677f2a2105d98a170ed4a549e0efd1325a67](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0eee677f2a2105d98a170ed4a549e0efd1325a67)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s14) Protocols for Information via Negotiation (SPIN):
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Sensor protocols for information via negotiation (SPIN), is a data-centric negotiation-based family of information dissemination protocols for WSNs (Kulik et al., 2002). The main objective of these protocols is to efficiently disseminate observations gathered by individual sensor nodes to all the sensor nodes in the network. Simple protocols such as flooding and gossiping are commonly proposed to achieve information dissemination in WSNs. Flooding requires that each node sends a copy of the data packet to all its neighbors until the information reaches all nodes in the network. Gossiping, on the other hand, uses randomization to reduce the number of duplicate packets and requires only that a node receiving a data packet forward it to a randomly selected neighbor. Low-energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH) is a routing algorithm designed to collect and deliver data to the data sink, typically a base station (Heinzelman et. al. 2000).
## (s24) Data link layer
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) Data link layer does the error detection and correction, and encoding of data. Link layer is vulnerable to jamming and DoS attacks. TinySec (Karlof et al., 2004) has introduced link layer encryption which depends on a key management scheme. However, an attacker having better energy efficiency can still rage an attack. Protocols like LMAC (Hoesel et al., 2004) have better anti-jamming properties which are viable countermeasure at this layer.
