# Epigenetic treatment of solid tumours: a review of clinical trials

CorpusID: 15757866 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f3273c0df09c42f3bbade5c1be3801888fd6b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f3273c0df09c42f3bbade5c1be3801888fd6b)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s8) Pharmacokinetics
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) To obtain an authentic effect on epigenetic mechanisms, the choice of the dose and schedule of administration is crucial since, especially for demethylating agents, if the drug concentration is too high this may result in cell toxicity or in a "traditional" antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, when a combination is used, the epigenetic effect must persist during chemotherapy (and possibly also later) in order to obtain an adequate synergism. This concept is guiding recent studies on new schedules of drug administration, as is the case for romidepsin [54]. Detailed data on pharmacokinetics have been published for several drugs (see Tables 1 and 2 for a complete list). The pharmacology of demethylating agents has been originally described in the past, and recent analyses mostly concern their interaction with other agents used in combination, such as temozolomide [55].
## (s11) Toxicity of demethylating agents
Number of References: 8

(p11.0) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.

(p11.1) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.
## (s12) Toxicity of HDAC inhibitors
Number of References: 40

(p12.0) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p12.1) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].

(p12.2) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p12.3) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].
## (s33) Pharmacokinetics
Number of References: 4

(p33.0) To obtain an authentic effect on epigenetic mechanisms, the choice of the dose and schedule of administration is crucial since, especially for demethylating agents, if the drug concentration is too high this may result in cell toxicity or in a "traditional" antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, when a combination is used, the epigenetic effect must persist during chemotherapy (and possibly also later) in order to obtain an adequate synergism. This concept is guiding recent studies on new schedules of drug administration, as is the case for romidepsin [54]. Detailed data on pharmacokinetics have been published for several drugs (see Tables 1 and 2 for a complete list). The pharmacology of demethylating agents has been originally described in the past, and recent analyses mostly concern their interaction with other agents used in combination, such as temozolomide [55].
## (s36) Toxicity of demethylating agents
Number of References: 8

(p36.0) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.

(p36.1) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.
## (s37) Toxicity of HDAC inhibitors
Number of References: 40

(p37.0) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p37.1) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].

(p37.2) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p37.3) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].
