# A review of communication-oriented optical wireless systems

CorpusID: 16050825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddd83478ac477d4b9e5d81d628ecda8938a54e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddd83478ac477d4b9e5d81d628ecda8938a54e6)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s7) Multispot diffusing links
Number of References: 9

(p7.0) Spatial diversity techniques have been successfully applied to indoor OW links in a topology that is termed multispot diffusing (MSD) and shown in Figure 5c [108]. The MSD architecture aims to combine the advantages of point-to-point links with the mobility of diffuse links [108][109][110][111][112][113][114][115]. To this end, the MSD transmitter modulates data onto a series of beams that are projected onto the ceiling above the communications floor. The MSD receiver ideally images one or perhaps several spots and decodes data from the diffusely reflected energy. The same data is modulated for all spots and the arrangement and number of spots is optimized so that at least one spot is in the imager for every receiver position.
## (s15) Hybrid OW/RF channel model
Number of References: 3

(p15.0) In a hybrid OW/RF system, it is necessary to include both the OW and RF channel impairments in the overall system performance. In general, OW and RF links, depending on the frequency of operation, can be modeled independently to include the weather effects. As a result, separate channel models for the OW and RF links are mostly adequate to predict the hybrid system performance. Most practical OW systems employ intensity modulation with direct detection (IM/DD). The OW channel propagation results in a multiplicative effect on the transmitted optical intensity of the laser source with a channel gain factor. The channel gain includes atmospheric attenuation, pointing error effects and atmospheric turbulence. A detailed discussion of the channel impact on OW only systems has been presented in Section 4. Since the OW link operates with direct line-of-sight (LOS), the RF link too has LOS, and therefore the RF link can be modeled as a Ricean channel and often as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel for good channel conditions. However, for longer and high altitude links severe fading in the RF link can occur. One example is [222], where the link operates over a distance of 150 km at a height of 10,000 ft. Both frequency-flat and frequency-selective fading were observed for a system operating in the Xand Ku-band at a data rate of 274 Mb/s. When higher RF frequencies are considered (such as at millimeter wavelengths) the OW and RF channels may not be truly independent. Higher RF frequency bands support higher data rates, but they are also more affected by atmospheric effects and pointing errors. Consequently, higher RF frequencies are affected by scintillations, and moderate to heavy rain events were reported to affect both OW laser link at 850 nm and millimeter wave RF [227]. Pointing errors can also affect scintillation statistics for both channels [228]. In such a case, pointing error correlations between the two links cannot be ignored.
