# Percutaneous image-guided ablation of bone and soft tissue tumours: a review of available techniques and protective measures

CorpusID: 16128068 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb4eda189ae50e0629d39941269f35d7344ebbe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb4eda189ae50e0629d39941269f35d7344ebbe)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 24

(p0.0) During the last decades, technological evolution in the fields of both imaging and instrumentation has led to the development of minimally invasive percutaneous ablative techniques for the treatment of benign and malignant bone tumours. Nowadays, percutaneous ablation techniques in the musculoskeletal system include chemical ablation (i.e. injection of ethanol, acetic acid), irreversible electroporation (IRE) and thermal ablation [radiofrequency ablation (RFA), microwave ablation (MWA), cryoablation] [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11]. In the latter techniques, one should also include coblation (radiofrequency ionisation used mainly for tumour decompression), irreversible electroporation (IRE) and MR-guided HIFU (high intensity focus ultrasound, which is totally noninvasive). These techniques may act as first-line therapies in certain pathological entities or as attractive adjuncts to conservative therapy, radiotherapy or surgery in other cases.

(p0.1) Prior to performing any ablation, the interventional radiologist should be aware of the tumour histology (benign or malignant), the patient's general condition and the degree of bone destruction (will consolidation be needed?) [2]. The final decision for malignant cases is made by multidisciplinary oncologic boards. The aim of the ablation (curative versus palliative) should be precisely defined from the beginning of the strategy planning. According to the standards of practice for bone ablation, indications for curative treatments include benign (osteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma <3 cm in diameter, chondroblastoma) and malignant (slow-growing cancers with <3 lesions of <3 cm in diameter each) lesions [2]. Indications for palliative therapies include pain reduction, tumour debulking, decompression and reduction and/or prevention of impeding pathological fractures (where stabilisation will be necessary in combination with the ablation technique) [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11].
## (s2) General principles
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) Ablation in the musculoskeletal system can be quite painful and should be performed under some kind of anaesthesia, ranging from conscious sedation to general anaesthesia. All procedures are performed under extensive local sterility measures and prophylactic antibiotics. Whenever an intact bone cortex is noted the coaxial approach is required; the trocar is either drilled or hammered through the cortex depending on the type of cortical reaction (lytic vs. blastic). Once in position, the needle is removed from the trocar and the ablation instrument is inserted coaxially. It is recommended to pass through the lesion before placing the probe, as the sensitive tip of the ablation probe could be damaged by trying to force it through the lesion. Always remember to move the trocar away from the expected ablation zone in order to avoid having a conductor that will transmit heat from the lesion to the surface, with resultant skin and soft tissues burns. In addition, extreme care should be taken concerning the surrounding structures, especially those sensitive to heat or cold (e.g. nerves). Heating at 45˚C has been shown to be neurotoxic to spinal cord and peripheral nerves [12][13][14]. Cryoablation can also cause neural damage with temporary neuropraxia occurring at −20˚C and permanent neurological damage at ≤−40˚C [2]. Protective measures include passive thermal protection techniques (thermocouples for temperature monitoring, intraoperative neurological monitoring systems such as neurodiagnostic EEG, EMG and evoked potential electrodes and accessories) or active thermal protection techniques (skin protection, hydrodissection, CO 2 or air insulation) [2,15].
## (s3) Benign tumours
Number of References: 41

(p3.0) Osteoid osteoma is a relatively common benign tumour (2-3 % of all bone tumours, 10 % of benign bone tumours) usually seen in children and young adults [17]. Although these small tumours (usually of <1.5 cm diameter) have no or a minimum growth rate, they seem larger in imaging studies because of the surrounding oedema and tissue reaction [17]. Due to the extreme appearance of the surrounding tissues, MRI usually leads to overestimation and occasionally is misleading for the diagnosis; CT seems to be the method of choice for the diagnosis of osteoid osteoma [18]. This benign tumour is quite painful and patients complain of localised pain that is worse in the night and characteristically relieved by NSAIDs (nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs) [6]. In the literature there are few studies with limited patient numbers reporting disappearance of the pain after conservative therapy even if the imaging findings stay the same with no changes [19][20][21]. Before deciding to try to treat an osteoid osteoma conservatively, the physician should weigh the potential complications, including not only those from long-term use of NSAIDs but also the chance of muscular atrophy and bone deformity in patients aged <5 years [6,22].

(p3.1) Radiofrequency ablation was first performed in osteoid osteoma [23,24]. Ever since, for the therapy of this benign tumour, thermal ablation constitutes a first-line therapy. Concerning osteoid osteoma ablation, throughout the literature there are numerous studies, some with smaller and others with higher numbers of patients, but all of them have quite high pain reduction rates (up to 96 %) and low recurrence rates (∼7 % at 2 years) in common [6,[25][26][27][28][29][30][31]. Described thermal ablation techniques for the treatment of osteoid osteoma include the use of monopolar or bipolar RF electrodes, plasmamediated RF electrodes and laser [32][33][34][35][36]. Recent studies on the use of microwaves and MR-guided HIFU report similar success rates and minimal complications [37][38][39].

(p3.2) Percutaneous ablation of osteoid osteoma is performed under CT guidance, extended local sterility measures and antibiotic prophylaxis. Access to the nidus is achieved with a trocar that is either hammered or drilled through the intact bone. Once inside the nidus, a bone biopsy needle can be inserted coaxially and a sample obtained to verify the osteoma diagnosis. Then the electrode is inserted coaxially through the trocar, and ablation is performed with a specific protocol resulting in an ablation zone of ∼1 cm diameter (Fig. 1). Potential complications are rare and include iatrogenic damage to the surrounding nerve root or tissues due to the electrode placement, heat effect and size of the bone necrosis [6]. Follow-up of successful ablation is performed clinically and there is no need for imaging follow-up in asymptomatic patients [6].

(p3.3) Traditional surgical techniques for osteoid osteoma treatment include wide excision removing a bone block, marginal resection of the entire nidus, curettage or high-speed burr techniques [40]. Comparison of these techniques to percutaneous, minimally invasive, imaging-guided ablation favours the latter in terms of minimum trauma, minimum functional restriction and significantly lower cost [40].

(p3.4) Thermal ablation can be used as a treatment in a variety of benign tumours including osteoblastoma (<3 cm in diameter) (Fig. 2) and chondroblastoma, whilst throughout the literature there are reports of ablation in cases of chondromyxoid fibroma, intracortical chondroma, aneurysmal bone cyst, eosinophilic granuloma and cystic hydroma [2,6,[41][42][43]. State-of-the-art reviews report that "essentially any small well defined lesion at imaging can be treated with RF ablation" [6].

(p3.5) Recent studies upon cryoablation report promising preliminary results whenever the technique is applied as the treatment in extrabdominal desmoids tumours [44,45]. This kind of treatment for soft tissue tumours seems to be governed by Fig. 1 Osteoid osteoma in the tibia: a CT axial scan: metallic markers were placed on the patient's skin. b CT axial scan: Once the trocar reaches the lesion, the needle is removed and a bone biopsy needle is inserted coaxially for sampling to verify the diagnosis. c CT axial scan: Then, the radiofrequency electrode is inserted into the lesion coaxially and an ablation protocol specific for osteoid osteoma is performed. d CT axial scan: Follow-up post trocar removal. Notice the trocar tract, which ends up in the lesion Fig. 2 Osteoblastoma in the L2-L3 facet joint: a CT axial scan: A 22G spinal needle is inserted inside the epidural space and air is injected through the antimicrobial filter. b Axial CT scan: A trocar is drilled till the lesion. c Axial CT scan: Coaxially, a bipolar radiofrequency electrode is introduced inside the lesion and the ablation protocol is performed. d During the ablation protocol, evoked potentials are used for nerve monitoring high efficacy concerning local tumour control and pain reduction and at the same time by the reduced complication rate and convalescence rate post-therapeutically [44,45].
## (s4) Malignant tumours
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The most common malignant bone tumours are metastatic lesions; any malignant neoplasm possesses the capacity to metastasise in the musculoskeletal system [46]. In the general population carcinomas of the breast, prostate, lung and kidney constitute, in decreasing order, ∼75 % of skeletal metastasis cases whilst carcinomas of the prostate, lung and bladder are more common in males and carcinomas of the breast and uterus more common in females [46]. Osseous metastatic disease especially when lytic lesions are involved can result in significant pain and mobility impairment. In most cases the therapeutic goal is palliation with resultant pain reduction and mobility improvement. Alternative therapeutic goals in palliative treatments include tumour reduction/decompression and bone consolidation. Potential therapies include surgery, embolisation, chemotherapy, osteoplasty, ablation, radiotherapy and palliative analgesics. External beam radiotherapy seems to provide at least partial pain relief in 50 % and 80 % of patients with only 30 % reporting complete pain relief [47]. In addition, radiotherapy may result in osteonecrosis or neural damage [48].
