# Gastric cancer: Overview

CorpusID: 16275797 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06a03445f8ba07257899657108640c19217a0761](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06a03445f8ba07257899657108640c19217a0761)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Classification Systems
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) Gastric adenocarcinomas are classified into two main groups: early and advanced, which are associated with prognosis. The 5-year survival rate in patients with early gastric cancer is between 85 and 100%, while it is only 5-20% for advanced gastric cancer. Early gastric carcinoma is defined as limited to the mucosa or submucosa, regardless of lymph node invasion 39 . Advanced gastric cancer is classified based on the gross appearance into four types: I) polypoid, II) ulcerated with well-defined borders, III) ulcerated with irregular and infiltrative borders, and IV) diffuse infiltrative, with no evidence of mass or ulcer 39 . The last type is usually observed in diffuse type adenocarcinomas and it is known as linitis plastica.

(p4.1) According to their anatomical location, gastric adenocarcinomas are classified as proximal (originating in the cardia) and distal (originating distal to the cardia). The gastric cardia is an ill-defined region, 0.1 to 1.0 cm in length, located immediately distal to the squamocolumnar junction. Tumors involving the squamocolumnar junction are frequently discovered in advanced stages when the size of the tumor makes it difficult to properly assess the site of origin as the esophagus or stomach. Previously, it was left to the judgment of the physicians involved to classify the tumors located at the esophagogastric junction as esophageal or gastric. Currently, a new approach is followed due to the recognition of proximal and distal adenocarcinomas as two distinct biological entities with different clinical features and epidemiological characteristics. Unlike distal adenocarcinomas, cardia adenocarcinomas have shown increased rates in the last several decades, especially in industrialized countries, affect predominantly Caucasian populations, and are associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease but not with H. pylori infection. In addition, cardia adenocarcinomas seem to have a more aggressive natural history with deeper gastric wall invasion, greater lymph node involvement, and a worse prognosis than distal adenocarcinomas 5,40 . In the United States, the five-year survival rate for proximal and distal carcinomas is 14% and 26%, respectively. 5 Based on these observations and due to the similar characteristics shared by esophageal and esophagogastric adenocarcinomas, the 7th edition (2009) of the American Joint Classification of Cancer (AJCC) Tumor Staging Manual, uses the esophageal cancer staging system for all cancers arising in the esophagogastric junction and any cancer arising in the proximal 5 cm of the stomach with involvement of the esophagogastric junction 41 .
## (s6) Prevention and early detection
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) General measures for gastric cancer prevention are the adequate consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, the avoidance of excessive salt intake and the avoidance of exposure to tobacco smoke. Treatment and eradication of H. pylori infection is recommended in patients with gastritis, and there are a number of studies showing the benefit of anti-H. pylori treatment in reducing both the progression of precancerous lesions and the risk of gastric cancer [50][51][52] . Large-scale H. pylori eradication as a preventive measure for gastric cancer has been the object of controversy. This measure is not recommended due to the risk of the appearance of antimicrobial-resistant strains, not only for H. pylori but for other infectious agents as well. Furthermore, although the efficacy of treatment regimens have shown recent improvements, virtually all schemes present some margin of failure in eradicating the bacteria and the rates of re-infection are often high. Moreover, since H. pylori has accompanied human beings from ancient times, strong arguments exist that consider this bacterium as part of the human gastric microbiome and its elimination as the cause of the increase in prevalence of diseases such as gastroesophageal reflux, Barrett's esophagus, and esophageal and cardia adenocarcinoma 10 .
