# A Review on Automated Brain Tumor Detection and Segmentation from MRI of Brain

CorpusID: 16988556 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e888535c5b8ce61f50fa7ecc1979403c18d2bafb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e888535c5b8ce61f50fa7ecc1979403c18d2bafb)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s12) Bayesian approach:
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) This is a supervised and parametric approach, where the data are assumed to follow a multivariate normal distribution, where mean and covariance are estimated from the training data set [57]. This method combines a graph-based algorithm and Bayesian model and segments the edema in addition. Also it can be extended to vectorial variables to operate on multi-modality images. A Bayesian network is a model of compound probability distribution function of a set of variable like directed acyclic graph with a probability table for each node. The nodes in a Bayesian network depends upon different variables in a domain, and the arcs between nodes represent the dependency relationships among the variables with probability [57]. First introduce some terms are very shortly written. Prior probability is the probability determined by the historic materials or the judgment of somebody. Since this kind of probability is not validated by experiment, it is called prior probability. Posterior probability is the probability which revised according to Bayesian equation and new features achieved by analysis thus the total probability theorem if A can be only influenced by factors B i . B j = Ø (i≠j), P(B i ) > 0, i = 1, 2,…then it have: P(A) = ∑ P(B i )P(A/B i ) Bayesian Equation is also called posterior probability equation because in this probability distribution some other investigations are needs. If the prior probability is P(B i ) and the additional information obtained by investigation is P(A|B i ), where i = 1,2,…, n, then the probability is:
## (s17) Fuzzy c-means algorithms:
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) The goal of a clustering analysis is to divide a given set of data or objects into a cluster, which represents subsets or a group. The partition should have two properties one of them is the homogeneity inside clusters data, which belongs to one cluster, should be as similar as possible and another one is heterogeneity between the clusters data, which belongs to different clusters, should be as different as possible [73]. The membership functions do not replicate the actual data distribution in the input and the output. They may not be suitable for fuzzy pattern recognition. To build membership functions from the data available, a clustering technique may be used to partition the data, and then produce membership functions from the resulting clustering [74]. The FCM algorithm is an improvement of earlier clustering methods. The objective function of FCM algorithm is defined as the sum of distances between the patterns and the cluster centers.
## (s23) Fusion-based:
Number of References: 3

(p23.0) Fusion techniques are based on various theories such as probabilistic and Bayesian fusion, fuzzy set theory, possibility and belief functions theory. Since a tumor consists of different biological tissues, one type of MRI cannot give complete information about abnormal tissues. Therefore, different MRI modalities information of a patient is combined to take a decision on the location, extension, prognosis and diagnosis of the tumors discussed by  [132]. Data fusion is a growing research field, and the goal of data fusion is to obtain an information synthesis by combining different data [133]. Data coming from different sources and techniques are usually redundant but also complementary. A fuzzy fusion Dou et al. [134] using operators such as t-norm or average operators was performed to fuse the membership functions. Finally a fuzzy region growing is used to refine the final result. This method uses the fused information of several MRI types to segment the tumor automatically and is very fast to detect and segment the tumors.
## (s30) a) b)
Number of References: 4

(p30.0) Self-organizing maps (SOM) is an unsupervised clustering network that maps inputs which can be high dimensional to one or two dimensional discrete lattice of neuron units [169]. The input data is organized into several patterns according to a similarity factor like Euclidean distance and each pattern assigns to a neuron. Each neuron has a weight that depends on the pattern assigned to that neuron [169]. Input data is classified according to their grouping in input space and neighbouring neuron and moreover learns distribution and topology of input data [174,175]. For calculating that black and white similarity map, the more neighbors it use to calculate the distance the better similarity map we will get, but the number of distances the algorithm needs to compute increases exponentially.
## (s33) Fractal-based:
Number of References: 4

(p33.0) A fractal is an irregular geometric object with an infinite nesting of structures at all scales. Some of the most important properties of fractals are self-similarity, chaos, and non-integer fractal dimension (FD) [186,187,188]. Mathematically, a fractal structure is defined as a set that has a fractal dimension exceeding its topological one. FD serves as an index of the morph metric complexity and variability of the object being studied. The disadvantage is that the size of sub images is a problem, because different sub image sizes result in different FD. The second problem is the selection of reference images, because the MR images have different sizes and different parameters [189] and for tumor detection it is required to have a reference image similar to the patient image.
