# The TNBS-induced colitis animal model: An overview

CorpusID: 16208822 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43de143a22b9a9b738a29bece0b2fd89ae45c94](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43de143a22b9a9b738a29bece0b2fd89ae45c94)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Pathophysiology of TNBS-induced colitis
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) Based on the original report by Morris et al. [8] ethanol and TNBS (Trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid) at a dose of 100 mg/kg are coadministered intra-rectally to rats. Ethanol is used as a means to effectively disrupt intestinal barrier and enable the interaction of TNBS with colon tissue proteins [9,10]. Trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid, a classical skin contactant serves as a hapten and as Little et al. suggested as early as 1966 [11], when coupled with proteins with high molecular weight can elicit significant immunologic responses by rendering those proteins immunogenic to the host immune system. A single administration of the combined substances leads to the development of an excessive cell mediated immune response reflected by acute Th1 inflammation [12].
## (s5) Pathological characteristics of TNBS colitis
Number of References: 11

(p5.0) TNBS colitis invokes certain lesions in a histopathological level [21]. Those lesions can be assessed either macroscopically or microscopically. Multiple scores and assessment tools have been developed in an effort to quantify the impact of inflammation on colonic tissue and furthermore evaluate the effect of various compounds in preventing or treating those lesions. Macroscopically, inflammation is spreading in a transverse fashion and ends up to the development of transmural colitis [22]. That is a shared feature with the hallmark of human Crohn's disease. Moreover, mucosal edema, distortion of crypts and the formation of abscesses occur during the course of the disease [23,24]. Macroscopic evaluation of the colon and rectum up to 24 h after TNBS treatment revealed the presence of mucosal edema and hemorrhagic ulcerations. Conglutination was obvious later.

(p5.1) Histologic examination has showed predominant infiltration of leukocytes and erythrocytes in mucosa and submucosa in the first week. Neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes infiltrated in mucosa, submucosa and muscularis propria 14 d later. Fibroblasts and granuloma-like structures were also obviously seen. No damage  [29] Wistar rats (180e220 g) 7.5 mg 40% 1 e TRPV1 and TRPA1 may be promising targets in pain modulation. Abad et al. [30] BALB/c mice 6e8 weeks 3-mg 50% 2 3e10 d VIP has beneficial prophylactic and therapeutic effects in TNBS-induced colitis Petrella et al. [31] Wistar rats (200e250 g) 60 mg/kg 1 4 d Low doses of N/OFQ significantly decrease the colonic inflammatory profile Chen et al. [32] Rats; 0.6 mL 50% 1 1e21 d NF-kB also regulates ICAM-1 expression during colonic inflammation. Pretreatment of PDTC may attenuate the inflammation development. Fitzpatrick et al. [33] Wistar rats Neonatal rats-3w. 8  The use of the model as described above allows the construction of long-term databases which can serve as a reference for future strain comparisons Natah et al. [37] SpragueeDawley rats (250e300 g) 30 mg 50% 1 1, 2, 3, 7 and 21 d colitis transiently increased permeability to sodium fluorescein and led to a mild disruption of BBB Motavallian et al.
