# Molecular Sciences Effects of Probiotics and Synbiotics on Obesity, Insulin Resistance Syndrome, Type 2 Diabetes and Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: A Review of Human Clinical Trials

CorpusID: 17334122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d5fc5cbb8ae8ac986b3ecbba59c669808d98327](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d5fc5cbb8ae8ac986b3ecbba59c669808d98327)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Probiotics
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) Lactobacillus salivarius Ls-33 was tested in obese adolescents to investigate its impact on fecal microbiota and anthropometric measures, biomarkers related to inflammation, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. The ratios of Bacteroides, Prevotellae, and Porphyromonas group bacteria to Firmicutes-belonging bacteria, including Clostridium cluster XIV, Blautia coccoides, Eubacterium rectale group and Roseburia intestinalis, were significantly increased after the administration of L. salivarius Ls-33. However, the overall cell numbers of fecal bacteria, including the groups above as well as Clostridium cluster I and cluster IV, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus group and Bifidobacterium spp., were not significantly altered by intervention. Similarly, the short chain fatty acids (SCFA) remained unaffected [31]. Moreover, Gobel et al., (2012) [32] carried out an intervention to study the Lactobacillus salivarius Ls-33 effects on some inflammation biomarkers and several parameters of metabolic syndrome in adolescents with obesity. However, they did not find changes in those parameters.

(p3.1) The effect of L. gasseri SBT2055 was examined in two studies using a cohort of Japanese adults with large visceral fat areas (VFA). The participants were randomly assigned to three groups receiving increasing colony-forming units (CFUs) of L. gasseri SBT2055 for 12 weeks. The results showed a reduction in body mass index (BMI), waist, abdominal VFA and hip circumferences [33,34]. Additionally, a hypocaloric diet supplemented with a probiotic-enriched cheese containing Lactobacillus plantarum reduced the BMI, the putrescine content and the intestinal lactobacilli in Russian adults with obesity and hypertension. Similarly, there was a reduction in the blood pressure (BP), namely a lower diastolic BP and a tendency toward lower systolic BP at the end of the intervention in the obese hypertensive patients that received the hypocaloric diet supplemented with the probiotic cheese [35].

(p3.2) The administration of L. acidophilus La5, B. lactis Bb12, and L. casei DN001 was evaluated in individuals with high BMI who were randomly assigned to three groups depending on particular intervention diets: one group was established with a regular yogurt with low calorie diet (RLCD), the second one received a probiotic yogurt with low calorie diet (PLCD) and, the third one received probiotic yogurt without low calorie diet (PWLCD) for about two months. A reduction in BMI, fat percentage, and leptin level was observed that was more obvious in groups who received the weight-loss diet including probiotic yogurt. Additionally, a reduction in the serum levels of CRP was more evident in the PWLCD group than in the PLCD and RLCD groups after the 8-week intervention. The expression of the FOXP3, T-bet, GATA3, TNF-α, IFN-γ, TGF-β, and ROR-γt genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMCs) were assessed before and after intervention. In the three groups, ROR-γt expression was reduced and FOXP3 was increased. The expression of the TNF-α, TGF-β, and GATA3 genes did not change. Interestingly, T-bet gene expression was down-regulated in the PLCD and PWLCD groups. However, the IFN-γ expression was down-regulated in all groups. The authors suggested that weight loss diet and probiotics yogurt had effects on gene expression in PBMCs among overweight and obese individuals [36][37][38].

(p3.3) An 8-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-and compliance-controlled parallel study in overweight and obese subjects was conducted to evaluated the effects of one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophilus [39]. The patients were randomly divided into five groups: (1) a yogurt fermented with two strains of S. thermophilus and two strains of L. acidophilus; (2) a placebo yogurt fermented with delta-acid-lactone; (3) a yogurt fermented with two strains of S. thermophilus and one strain of L. rhamnosus; (4) a yogurt fermented with one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophiles; and finally (5) two placebo pills daily [39]. After adjustment for small changes in body weight, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) decreased and fibrinogen increased significantly after 8 weeks in the group that received the yogurt fermented with one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophilus compared to the group consuming chemically fermented yogurt and the placebo pill group. Additionally, after 8 weeks, the systolic BP was significantly more reduced in group 1 and the group that received the yogurt fermented with one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophilus than in group 3 [39].
