# Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia: A review

CorpusID: 17201391 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc4d1f20814292b0c3a441d6a2442cd6309eca33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc4d1f20814292b0c3a441d6a2442cd6309eca33)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s5) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) The present review describes the efficacy of CBT in patients with AHs. In summary, the two RCTs included showed a greater efficacy of CBT compared to standard care on AHs. However, in Shawyer et al [24] , TORCH participants subjectively reporting greater improvement in command hallucinations compared to Befriending but no significant group differences on primary outcome measure that was level of compliance with harmful command hallucination. In Birchwood et al [21] instead, CTCH participants showed an improvement in this measure.

(p5.1) One possible explanation of the discrepancy between the two RCTs in term of efficacy on reducing level of compliance with harmful command hallucinations is that, within the general framework of CBT, different theoretical approach can play a different role on the efficacy of the intervention. Indeed, the two RCTs were built on different theoretical frameworks. The TORCH framework is based on the "acceptance" of voices by "cultivating the capacity to just notice voices and associated thoughts rather than believing and acting on them". The CTCH focuses on targeting individuals' appraisals, behavior and affect, and not necessarily symptoms. It is based on the nature of the relationship with the personified voice. Therefore, if the voice hearer believes the voice to have malevolent intent, and crucially to have the power to deliver the threat, this can motivate compliance or appeasement behavior. In addition, in Shawyer et al [24] the intervention "befriending" was used as the control condition and it has a similar amount of therapist engagement and expectancy as CBT. This is likely to have resulted in smaller between-group effect sizes respect to Birchwood et al [21] . As regards non RCT-studies, all papers included showed reduction on frequency and severity of AHs and distress related to them. However, the lack of content details and on rationales within non-RCTs studies decreases their comparability and therefore the chance to draw final conclusions.
## (s6) 6-mo
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Thomas et al [16]  Hutton et al [18]   sidered in our review. Firstly, the role and the possible interference of antipsychotic medications with psychotherapy should be further assessed in the primary studies. Secondly, there is a discrepancy of study design and outcome measures between studies, which did not allow a quantitative analysis of the results. Thirdly, most studies are only preliminary and underpowered. Among strenghts, we have two RCTs with 241 individuals randomized in total and both of them conclude that CBT may be an alternative for individuals with schizophrenia who experience AHs despite antipsychotic treatment.
