# Chitosan Composites for Bone Tissue Engineering-An Overview

CorpusID: 17307201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8135b4b176dacad020c1618d3c04e91d7ee511fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8135b4b176dacad020c1618d3c04e91d7ee511fd)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s2) Preparation of chitosan by chemical methods
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Chitin (Figure 1) is the second most abundant natural polymer after cellulose. CTS is produced from chitin, which is a natural polysaccharide found in crab, shrimp, lobster, coral, jellyfish, butterfly, ladybug, mushroom and fungi. However, marine crustacean shells are widely used as primary sources for the production of CTS [8,9]. Crab and shrimp are important marine species of great commercial importance in the tropical and subtropical waters of the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans. The waste from crab and shrimp processing has recently become a serious issue in coastal areas. Selective isolation of bioactive material from these wastes is the simplest way to decrease the pollution. It not only reduces the environmental pollution because of the disposal of this under utilized by products of crabs and shrimps, but also increases the potential applications of CTS. Moreover, the chemical hydrolysis and enzymatic methods, widely used for the isolation for CTS from marine crustaceans shell, are quite inexpensive.  In chemical hydrolysis method, four main steps are involved in order to produce CTS from marine crustacean shell as depicted in Figure 2. They are (i) demineralization; (ii) deproteinization; (iii) discoloration and (iv) deacetylation. To produce 1 kg of 70% deacetylated CTS from shrimp shells, 6.3 kg of HCl and 1.8 kg of NaOH are required [8,9].
## (s3) Enzymatic hydrolysis method
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Chitosan can be isolated directly from the cell walls of certain fungi, but commercially available CTS are usually prepared from chitin. CTS can be produced via traditional chemical method, however, problems exist related to poor quality and environmental chemical pollution [10]. The enzymatic method could provide an alternative to the current chemical production method. The degree of deacetylation and molecular weight of the CTS depends on the source and preparation method (molecular weight ranges from 300 to over 1,000 kDa, degree of deacetylation from 30% to 95%). CTS can be degraded by enzyme and form various small molecular weight fragments. Chitosanase has been used for the preparation of small molecular weight CTS with various methods such as batch reactor, column reactor and ultrafiltration membrane reactor [11]. The CTS has been extracted with various enzymes like lysozyme, snailase, neutral protease and novel chitin deacetylase from Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The average molecular weight of CTS obtained using the enzymatic method (267.97 kDa) has been reported to be far greater than that obtained by chemical method (84.04 kDa) [10,12].
## (s4) Properties and application of chitosan
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) CTS is a copolymer consisting of β-(1→4)-2-acetamido-d-glucose and β-(1→4)-2-amino-D-glucose unit linkages ( Figure 3) [13,14]. Over the past two decades, CTS has been developed considerably in biomedical applications due to its high biocompatibility, biodegradability, porous structure, suitability for cell ingrowth, osteoconduction and intrinsic antibacterial nature [15], CTS offers a wide range of applications, including cartilage tissue engineering [16], wound healing [17] and orthopedic applications [15]. Degradable polymeric implants eliminate the need for a second surgical operation and can prevent some of the problems associated with stress shielding during post-healing, and can also be used simultaneously to deliver therapeutic drugs to treat infections or growth factors to accelerate new bone growth [18]. There is a growing interest in exploiting the field of bone tissue engineering for composite preparation. This has created a wide range of application in the preparation of artificial organs.
## (s8) In vitro study of CTS/HAp composites
Number of References: 20

(p8.0) CTS have been widely used in orthopedic treatment since it was shown to promote osteoblastic cell growth. When CTS is incorporated with HAp, it remarkably increases the osteoblastic cell growth on the scaffolds [15,21,24,25,27]. The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) method has been frequently used to determine the cytotoxicity of CTS composite materials. All the scaffolds' results showed that the CTS/HAp composite had no cytotoxicity with positive cell attachment and proliferation growth of the osteoblast cells [15,[23][24][25]50,51]. The composite scaffolds possess a pore size of 100-200 µm, providing a spatial arrangement of cells (10-30 µm) and thus cells are able to migrate towards the composite [55]. It was observed that when the osteoblast cells were cultured in the medium of phosphorylated CTS/HAp, the cell morphology changed within 30 min of seeding and later became triangular at 24 h, polygonal at 48 h, and finally, aggregated to be indistinct at 5 days [56]. Apart from HAp, other calcium phosphate minerals also provide adhesion and cell proliferation when combined with CTS. The cell proliferation and adhesion has been found with osteoblast mouse cells MC3T3-E1 and L929 cells in CTS/calcium phosphate specimens [28,57].

(p8.1) The alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) is considered to be an important marker of the differentiation of osteoblast cells at a relatively early bone forming stage and has been widely used to evaluate ALP for scaffold materials. The CTS/HAp composite scaffolds possess higher ALP activity compared to the CTS scaffold whereas the highest ALP activity has been achieved in the composite containing 30-40% of HAp with good cell proliferation; however, cell proliferation decreases with an increase in the HAp concentration [21,51,58]. The modified CTS and its composites are found to have good cell proliferation and higher ALP activity then compared to non modified CTS. CTS glutamate and HAp containing cultured osteoblasts were found to be promising biomaterials for repair bone defects in vivo [56,59].
## (s10) Carbon Nano Tubes for Bone Tissue Engineering
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are allotropes of carbon with a cylindrical nanostructure and constructed with length-to-diameter ratio of up to 28,000,000:1. These cylindrical carbon molecules have novel properties, which make them potentially useful in many applications in nanotechnology, electronics, optics and materials sciences. CNTs have a high Young's modulus (1.0-1.8 TPa), high tensile strength  and high elongation at break (10-30%). In addition, they have extremely small size (about 1-10 nm in diameter), high aspect ratio (>1,000), high structural and chemical stability, and stiffness, as well as remarkable electrical, thermal, optical and bioactive properties [61,62]. All these properties make CNTs especially promising candidates as reinforcement fillers in the development of nano composites. It has been observed that the combination of CNT with CTS leads to an enormous increase in the mechanical strength of the composite [63].
## (s12) Mechanical properties of CTS/CNT composite
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Wang et al. reported that CNT is homogeneously dispersed throughout the CTS matrix. When 0.8% of CNT was introduced in the CTS matrix, the mechanical properties, including the tensile modulus and strength of the nanocomposite were greatly improved by about 93% and 99% [63]. A small addition of CNTs significantly improves the tensile properties of CTS matrix, and the mechanical properties increase with the increase of CNTs' loading (0.4 wt% of CNTs filler) whereas the tensile modulus and strength of the nanocomposite increases dramatically by about 78% and 94%. Due to the aggregation of CNTs within the CTS matrix at higher concentrations, with further increases of the loading level of CNTs, the tensile modulus only increases slightly, while the tensile strength remains stable. For instance, with 2.0 wt% of MWNTs filler, the tensile modulus of the CTS matrix is 2.15 GPa, only 0.07 GPa higher than that of 0.8 wt% of MWNTs. The tensile test results indicate the mechanical properties of the CTS/CNTs [63].
## (s15) Remaining Challenges and Future Directions for Bone Biomaterials
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) The organic portion plays a major role in bone implants, therefore their matrices are often hybrid in composition. Apart from CTS, HAp and CNT, large numbers of synthetic polymers have been used for the preparation of composite materials for artificial bone. It was observed that they showed better results in the case of cell viability, cell proliferation, alkaline phosphate activity and mineralization assays [75]. Several synthetic polymers have been used to prepare artificial scaffolding materials but have a number of disadvantages. One of the major drawbacks of synthetic polymers are their degradation times which are half than that of a natural polymer. Nowadays, synthetic polymers like poly lactic acid, poly-L-lactide acid, polyethylene glycol, polyhydroxyl ethyl methacrylate with carbon nano tubes [76], poly caprolactone and polylactic-co-glycolic acid are widely used for scaffold materials. The synthetic polymer not only increases the scaffold strength, but also acts as a drug delivery device to induce bioactivity. Whether synthetic polymers would be able to reinforce the mechanical properties of HAp, is still a burning question.
