# WAVELET BASED IMAGE CODING SCHEMES: A RECENT SURVEY

CorpusID: 17019038 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcf48ef38e425755c31c4cf1cecfeea22c1ead6e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcf48ef38e425755c31c4cf1cecfeea22c1ead6e)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s10) The SPIHT (Set Partitioning in Hierarchical Trees) Coding
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The SPIHT coding [11] is an improved version of the EZW algorithm that achieves higher compression and better performance than EZW. It was introduced by Said and Pearlman [25] in 1996. SPIHT is expanded as Set Partitioning in Hierarchical Trees. The term Hierarchical Trees refers to the quadtrees that is defined in the discussion of EZW. Set Partitioning refers to the way these quadtrees divide up and partition the wavelet transform values at a given threshold. By a careful analysis of this partitioning of transform values, Said and Pearlman were able to develop the EZW algorithm, considerably increasing its compressive power. SPIHT algorithm produces an embedded bit stream from which the best reconstructed images with minimal mean square error can be extracted at various bit rates. Some of the best results like highest PSNR values for given compression ratios for a wide range of images, have been obtained with SPIHT algorithm.
## (s20) The GW (Geometric Wavelet) Coding
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) Geometric wavelet is a recent advancement in the field of multivariate nonlinear piecewise polynomials approximation proposed by Deckel et.al [21]. It is a new and efficient method best suited for low bit-rate image coding. It combines the binary space partition tree approximation [23] with geometric wavelet (GW) coding so as to efficiently capture curve singularities and thus providing a sparse representation of the image. The GW method successfully competes with advanced wavelet methods such as the EZW, SPIHT, and EBCOT algorithms. A gain of about 0.4 dB over the SPIHT and EBCOT algorithms at the bit-rate 0.0625 bits-per-pixels (bpp) is achieved. The GW technique also outperforms other recent segmentation methods that are based on "sparse geometric representation". Table 5 shows the PSNR values for Lena test image using the GW approach. An improvement over the geometric wavelet (GW) image coding method by using the slope intercept representation of the straight line in the binary space partition scheme is proposed by Chopra and Pal [22]. The performance of this algorithm is compared with other classical wavelet transform-based compression methods such as EZW, the SPIHT and the EBCOT algorithms. The proposed image compression algorithm outperforms the EZW and SPIHT algorithm, as shown in Table 6. The PSNR results for Lena image using the improved GW method for compression ratios of 64, 128 and 256 are given in Table 6. These results are also compared with other algorithms. Table 6. PSNR values for Lena image of size 512x512 using improved GW, compared with other state-of-the art-methods
