# Deep Learning for Spatio-Temporal Data Mining: A Survey

CorpusID: 186206569 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a54c647f6db73621ec496ea86355726161c0898d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a54c647f6db73621ec496ea86355726161c0898d)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s11) C. Classification
Number of References: 20

(p11.0) The classification task is mostly studied in analyzing fMRI data. Recently, brain imaging technology has become a hot topic within the field of neuroscience, including functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), and Magnetoencephalography (MEG) [120]. Particularly, fMRI combined with deep learning methods, has been widely used in the study of neuroscience for various classification tasks such as disease classification, brain function network classification and brain activation classification when watching words or images [158]. Various types of ST data can be extracted from the raw fMRI data depending on different classification tasks. [34] proposed the use of recurrent neural networks with long short-term memory (LSTMs) for classification of individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and typical controls directly from the resting-state fMRI time-series data generated from different brain regions. [48], [52], [54], [71], [113], [132] modeled the fMRI data as spatial maps, and then used them as the input of the classification models. Instead of using each individual restingstate fMRI time-series data directly, [48] and [52] calculated the whole-brain functional connectivity matrix based on the Pearson correlation coefficient between each pair of restingstate fMRI time-series data. Then the correlation matrix can be considered as a spatial map, and is input to a DNN model for ASD classification. [113] proposed a more general convolutional neural network architecture for functional connectome classification called connectome-convolutional neural network (CCNN). CCNN is able to combine information from diverse functional connectivity metrics, and thus can be easily adapted to a wide range of connectome based classification or regression tasks, by varying which connectivity descriptor combinations are used to train the network.

(p11.1) Some works also directly use the 3D structural MRI brain scanned images as the ST raster data, and then 3D-CNN model is usually applied to learn features from the ST raster for classification [63], [66], [78], [116], [128], [194]. [78] proposed two 3D convolutional network architectures for brain MRI classification, which are the modifications of a plain and residual convolutional neural networks. Their models can be applied to 3D MRI images without intermediate handcrafted feature extraction. [194] also designed a deep 3D-CNN framework for automatic, effective, and accurate classification and recognition of large number of functional brain networks reconstructed by sparse 3D representation of whole-brain fMRI signals.
## (s24) G. Neuroscience
Number of References: 10

(p24.0) In recent years, brain imaging technology has become a hot topic within the field of neuroscience. Such technology includes functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), Magnetoencephalography (MEG), and functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS). The spatial and temporal resolutions of neural activity measured by these technologies is quite different from another. fMRI measures the neural activity from millions of locations, while it is only measured from tens of locations for EEG data. fMRI typically measures activity for every two seconds, while the temporal resolution of EEG data is is typically 1 millisecond. Because of its space resolving power, fMRI and EEG combined with deep learning methods, has been widely used in the study of neuroscience [34], [63], [113], [128]. As we discussed before, deep learning models are mostly used for the classification task in neuroscience by using the fMRI data or EEG data such as disease classification [34], brain function network classification [113] and brain activation classification [63]. For example, Long-Short Term Memory network (LSTM) was used to identify Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) [34], Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) were used to diagnose amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) [113] and Feedforward Neural Networks (FNN) were used to classify Schizophrenia [119].
