# An Overview of Self-Administered Health Literacy Instruments

CorpusID: 18227205 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e1aaffed6d3860ef03f1670ad89d7f322892553](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e1aaffed6d3860ef03f1670ad89d7f322892553)

Fields: Medicine, Education

## (s9) Setting
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Most included studies reported the setting from which participants were recruited for validation. About a third of the instruments were validated in populations recruited from secondary and specialty care settings (12/35; 34.2%), while a quarter of studies recruited in primary care settings (8/35; 22.9%). The remainder of validation studies recruited from diverse non-clinical settings (17/35; 48.6%), such as schools and community centres, and shopping malls. Two studies [39,47] reported validating general health literacy measures through online surveys and did not provide information about the characteristics of the subjects recruited. Three studies [41,46,52] recruited participants from more than one setting (Appendix S2).
## (s15) majority of included indices have been developed and validated in the United
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) States. There is a clear trend towards the development of more measures in recent years. The instruments identified in this review are mostly intended for adults (with only six available for pediatric populations) and have been primarily tested in non-clinical settings. Several instruments take less than 5 minutes to complete, and there are many with adequate validity. Low health literacy is strongly associated with worse health outcomes [54]. In order to improve the provision of healthcare for patients with low health literacy, it has been suggested that we need to have appropriate measurement tools to identify these individuals at clinical and population levels. Several authors have proposed that new health literacy assessment measures are required [11,12,55,56] yet we have identified 35 indices, validated for use in a wide variety of populations. While it is understandable that no single assessment measure has been able to represent a complex construct such as health literacy in its entirety, there are additional aspects to the construct itself that are inherent to the way in which it is assessed. Our review is the first to use systematic overview methodology to review the administration, development, and grouping of generic and condition-or context-specific self-report measures. We used a sensitive search strategy to report the breadth of health-related literacy assessment, building upon an earlier review of the psychometric properties of 19 health literacy instruments [11].
## (s18) Relevance to an ongoing research agenda for health literacy measurement
Number of References: 9

(p18.0) Researchers and clinicians alike need to consider practicalities of administration, including how long a measure takes to complete, whether it is suitable for selfcompletion (either online or with paper and pencil), and in what other circumstances and populations it has been used. Our review draws attention to the fact that several health literacy assessments require a great deal of time, potentially exceeding the average length of a primary care consultation. In a large European study, for example, Deveugele et al [67] found that the average length of a primary care consultation was 10.7 (6.7) minutes. In the present study, the average time required to administer a clinical or clinical/research health literacy assessment in this review was 20.7 (23.6) minutes. Since primary care was a common location in which these indices were developed and validated, it is critical that future research in this area is attentive to the reality of busy clinical practice. Our review demonstrates that currently, health literacy assessment using most available tools is impractical in clinical practice due to the time required, despite authors' suggestions that some of these measures should be incorporated into consultations. Despite the association between low health literacy and poorer outcomes, there is no evidence that health literacy screening has an effect on health outcomes [68]. It seems unlikely that health literacy assessment will become a fixture of clinical practice. Resources might be better allocated to developing interventions to mitigate the effect of low health literacy on health outcomes, for which there is already a strong evidence-base.

(p18.1) Almost three quarters of available health literacy indices included in this review have been developed and validated in populations in the United States. Indices from the United States may not be fully transferable to another health system, although it should be noted that this review only included English language papers. Again, in contrast to proposed research agendas for health literacy [55,56] it is unclear whether this is best dealt with by undertaking validation of existing indices in other countries and health systems, as opposed to developing new indices to address these issues.

(p18.2) Many successful interventions intended to mitigate the effects of low health literacy on outcomes have resulted in mixed effects [60,61,62]. Some have improved health outcomes, such as end-of-life care preferences [69] whereas others have had no effect on other outcomes such as hemoglobin A1c in patients with type II diabetes [70]. Although it is somewhat unclear what benefit the development of additional health literacy assessment measures could provide, one key deficiency is that in order to move forward in 'improving' people's health literacy, either new indices must either be developed or existing indices tested to determine if they are sensitive to change over time. It will not be possible to ascertain if it is even possible to 'improve' people's health literacy until there are measures which have been shown to be sensitive to change in this regard.
