# A survey of the small RNA population during far-red light-induced apical hook opening

CorpusID: 18603468 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a07406b9309bc059d7a6ef974c77c776c06ead60](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a07406b9309bc059d7a6ef974c77c776c06ead60)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s4) SMALL RNA BLOCK BUILDING AND COUNTS CALCULATION
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) The proximity-based small RNA block was generated as previously described (Lu et al., 2005;Li et al., 2012b). Perfectly matching reads from the eight libraries were combined to build blocks on the 20 chromosomes. The small RNA expression level of each block in a library was calculated as the sum of the abundances of small RNAs belonging to the block. A weighing method was used for calculating block counts from repetitively mapped small RNA as described in Li et al. (2012b) to prevent overcounting of the expression level of repeat-mapping small RNAs.
## (s10) OVERVIEW OF THE SMALL RNA PROFILE OF SOYBEAN SEEDLINGS
Number of References: 7

(p10.0) Total RNA samples extracted from cotyledons, the apical hook concave region, apical hook convex region and hypocotyl of 7day-old dark-grown seedlings and seedlings treated with 1 h FRc were submitted for small RNA sequencing using the Illumina GAIIx (Keck center, University of Illinois). Eight to fifteen million reads were generated from each library (Figure 2A; Table  S1). The raw reads were preprocessed and first aligned to the soybean tRNA and rDNA databases using Novoalign (www. novocraft.com). Twenty five to Fifty five percent of total small RNA reads from these libraries mapped to tRNA or rDNA databases (Figure 2A; Table S1). The two cotyledon libraries have a relatively higher percentage (approximately 55% of the total reads) of small RNA reads mapped to rDNA (Figure 2A). This higher proportion might be a result of the cotyledon samples including actively dividing young tissues, which were previously reported to produce more rDNA-mapped small RNA compared to mature tissue (Lu et al., 2005). These rDNA and tRNA mapped reads were considered unlikely to be relevant to light-responsive small RNA regulation and were hence removed from further analysis. The remaining reads were aligned to the JGI soybean genome assembly (v5.0) using Novoalign, allowing only perfect matches (t = 0). From 68 to 91% of the reads mapped to the soybean genome perfectly (Figure 2B). Allowing two mismatches in each read increased the percentage of mapped reads by 2.3-3.6% (Figure 2B). This is likely caused by sequencing errors, or by polymorphisms within the Williams 82 population (Varala et al., 2011). A small portion of the remaining non-mapped reads aligned to the soybean chloroplast and mitochondrial sequences ( Figure 2B). Finally, 6.0-25.4% of reads remained unmapped to either the nuclear genome or the plastid genome even with relaxed stringency (Figure 2B). In summary, most reads mapped to the soybean nuclear genome assembly perfectly, resulting in 1.7-9 million nuclear genome-mapped reads representing 0.5-2.5 million unique sequences for each library. Those reads were used for further analysis (Table S1).

(p10.1) Different functional categories of small RNA are known to have specific sizes (Chen, 2009(Chen, , 2010Axtell, 2013), thus we analyzed the size distribution of the genome-mapped small RNAs. The 21 and 24 nt small RNAs are the two most abundant classes in all libraries (Figure 3). Interestingly, a distinctive 21:24 nt ratio was observed across different tissue types. The 21 nt small RNAs represent the most abundant class in the cotyledons, with a 21:24 nt ratio close to 2:1 in both libraries, the highest of the tissues examined. In contrast, the 24 nt class is the most abundant in both hypocotyl libraries, with 21:24 nt ratios of 0.81:1 and 0.67:1, respectively. Among the four hook libraries, the dark treated plants resembled the hypocotyl libraries, with the 24 nt class as the most abundant class (21:24 nt ratio of 0.71:1 and 0.75:1 for hook concave and hook convex, respectively), however, surprisingly, the FR libraries had almost equal amounts of 21 and 24 nt small RNA (21:24 nt ratio as 0.98:1 and 1.07:1). This may indicate either an induction of 21 nt class or a repression of 24 nt sRNA in response to FR. Most miRNAs belong to the 21 nt class, while the 24 nt class mainly consists of heterochromatic siRNA (Chen, 2010). Therefore, the change in ratio of 21:24 nt may indicate that miRNAs are relatively more abundant in response to FR treatment in the hook within 1 h. The proportion of 22 nt small RNA, reported to be ta-siRNA triggers (Chen, 2010), is relatively constant across the eight libraries (Figure 3).
## (s11) IDENTIFICATION OF NOVEL miRNAs IN DE-ETIOLATING SOYBEAN SEEDLINGS
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) To test whether there are novel miRNAs in our dataset, a pipeline was developed to identify putative novel miRNAs based on the secondary structure of the putative pri-miRNA as well as all other standards considered necessary for description of a new miRNA (Meyers et al., 2008). We included small RNA data from a global profile of small RNAs in soybean to broaden the scope of this analysis to cover a wide range of organs and developmental stages. Specifically, data from our experiment was combined with data from Zabala et al. (2012) to create a broad profile of endogenous small RNA populations in soybean. Appropriate parameters for maximizing the sensitivity of the prediction process were determined using a training set of known miRNA generating loci in Glycine max in miRBase (mirbase.org; Kozomara and Griffiths-Jones, 2011). Combinations of parameters, including folding temperature, threshold dG, and the length of flanking sequence were tested using UNAfold (Markham and Zuker, 2008). The learned set of parameters was then used to select small RNA producing loci, from the combined dataset, that show a favorable secondary structure.
## (s16) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) The ability to respond to environmental light allows plants to adapt rapidly to environmental changes. It has been known for a long time that the plant light responses involve induction and repression of protein-coding gene expression at the mRNA level. Recently, small RNA has been implicated in plant development and abiotic stress responses (Lewis et al., 2009;Chen et al., 2010). However, the role of small RNA in light-related plant development has not been investigated to our knowledge. In our study, we showed that a mutant with defective miRNA function displayed impaired de-etiolation. We further performed a survey sequencing of the small RNAs in the cotyledons, hook convex region, hook concave region, and hypocotyl, both from etiolated seedlings and seedlings treated with 1-h FRc light. We showed that potentially novel miRNAs may exist in these little-characterized tissues, and that the level of some small RNAs met our statistical criteria for differential expression after a 1-h light treatment in the specific regions of the seedling investigated. Together these results expand our knowledge of the role of small RNA in plant development, as well as add to our current understanding of light signaling.
