# S S Energy Harvesting Techniques for Wireless Sensor Networks/Radio-Frequency Identification: A Review

CorpusID: 198452299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7990a5bf1cfe4a01ebff342bb3e1fb8654f32144](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7990a5bf1cfe4a01ebff342bb3e1fb8654f32144)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s4) •
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The joint rate and power control problem is amended in a single-variable problem of the ratio of uplink transmission rate to the uplink transmission power [54]. However, this approach is limited in realistic cases and can only be applied in specific studies where simplified forms of utility functions are assumed (i.e., where the ratio of uplink transmission rate to power appears). As a result, the use of this approach strongly depends on problem formulation. The single variable problem is solved with respect to the substituted ratio. To determine users' optimal pair of uplink transmission rate and power, the maximum value of one resource is assumed and the other one is determined, so the ratio is equal to the optimal one. Although users update their uplink transmission rate and power in the same step, the obtained solution remains inferior compared with the corresponding solution of the actual joint two-variable optimisation problem discussed in [53].
## (s5) Sleep/Wake Up Techniques
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Switching off (sleep mode) the non-active transceivers have become the ultimate approach towards the realization of EE in Information and communications technology, due to the fact that it can save large amount of energy. The philosophy behind the proposed approach is to exploit dense and redundant deployment of sensor nodes, leading to a small coverage area. The sensor nodes' off/on switching approach is more desirable for improving WSN EE and prolonging the battery lifetime of the wireless sensors. However, the coverage issue should be considered, and it should be guaranteed by the remaining active nodes. Misra et al. [27] proposed a subset solution in which nodes with minimum overlap areas are activated and must be capable of reducing network energy. Meanwhile, Karasabun et al. [28] modelled the EE issue as a subset selection problem of active connected sensors for correlated data payload gathering. Using spatial correlation, the sensor information of non-active sensor nodes can be obtained from those of active nodes, which makes it a good strategy. Equation (1) gives the average power consumption as the sleep power multiplied by the percentage of duration the system is in sleep mode plus the active power multiplied by the percentage of duration the system is in active mode all divided by 100. In a situation in which the system is designed to have bigger sleep energy comparable to the active energy, it is then feasible to engage power reduction strategy by tuning the sensor node to its lowest power mode. There are two scenarios in which the active power term can be larger than the sleep power term either (i) the power ratio per event is large or (ii) active power events have higher frequency.

(p5.1) On the other hand, one can exploit the duty cycling schemes to make a sensor node switched on/off based on network activity (traffic conditions). Duty cycling schemes can be classified into three categories: on-demand, asynchronous, and scheduled rendezvous. Meanwhile, duty cycle-based protocols are certainly the most EE [29,30]. However, it should be taken into account that the low duty cycle has the capability to conserve a large big volume of energy but can lead to high communication delays. To reduce the delay, the protocol parameters can be tuned before deployment for ease, although it may result in inflexibility, or dynamical settings can be deployed to reflect the instantaneous traffic conditions. Moreover, the active period of nodes in order to optimise power consumption is a function of the traffic load, buffer overflows, delay requirements or harvested energy are discussed in [31].
## (s8) Aggregation and Reduction of the Data
Number of References: 7

(p8.0) Obviously, data transmission and processing are not cheap with reference to energy consumption. Therefore, efficiency in handling data delivered to the sink nodes leads to energy saving. Reducing and aggregating the data quantity being delivered to the sink nodes are considered efficient solutions to increase EE during the transmission process [17]. In data aggregation schemes [45], nodes are permitted to only re-transmit the average or the lesser of the received information. However, information aggregation may lead to latency reduction since traffic is reduced, thereby reducing network delays. The drawback of this approach is that it may impact negatively on the accuracy of the data collected. If an optimal aggregation function is not deployed, it may become difficult to recover the original data sent to the sink [46]. Therefore, it is not recommended to use this technique with applications that need high accuracy; but adaptive sampling techniques are used when the criteria are formed in terms of coverage or information precision. In adaptive sampling approaches, the sampling rate are adjusted at each sensor and at the same time, making sure that the application requirements are achieved referenced to range or data precision. For instance, in a supervision task, low-power acoustic sensors can be deployed to notice an imposition. In a scenario where an event is stated, power-hungry cameras can be instructed to gather better-grained information [29]. Three-dimensional correlation is a good candidate for reducing the sampling rate in areas experiencing low variation in sensed data. In human activity recognition applications, Yan et al. [93] suggested that that sampling acquisition be based on core user activity, rather than taking samples in all unnecessary instances such as sitting, jumping, biking or running. Conversely, network coding can be deployed to reduce the overall data traffic in broadcast environment by transmitting a linear aggregation of several packets rather than a copy of each packet. Between computation and communications, communications utilize lesser energy because computations are generally regarded as power hungry application as a result, network coding exploits this gain. Wang et al. [47] fuse network coding and connected dominating sets to additionally decrease energy utilization in broadcast events. AdapCode [94] is an information broadcasting protocol designed by allowing a node to broadcast N messages received at several other nodes, resulting in energy conservation. The resultant energy savings from the bandwidth is (N − 1)/N compared to naive flooding. The receiver node can recover the original packets by Gaussian elimination after receiving N coded packets successfully. Moreover, AdapCode enhances reliability by adjusting N to the sensor node numbers, because when N rises and the number declines, the packets recovery rate for data decoding decreases. Reliability can be further improved by permitting more sensor nodes to acquire less than N packets and send a negative acknowledgement to recover loss information.
