# A Review on Bacteriorhodopsin-Based Bioelectronic Devices

CorpusID: 19094542 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d042475e8309c0cfe985b6a92178d9f5d0e39db](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d042475e8309c0cfe985b6a92178d9f5d0e39db)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Biology, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) General Structure and Operation Principles of bR
Number of References: 14

(p2.0) Extracted from H. salinarum, bR molecule is made up of 248 amino acid residues in a polypeptide chain, which consists of seven transmembrane α-helices (shown in Figure 3) [41][42][43][44][45]. Each bR molecule contains a chromophore named retinal, which is covalently linked to the amino group of lysine-216 in the G helix via a protonated Schiff base [46][47][48]. The Schiff base is located in the center of a cavity enclosed by seven transmembrane helices, which effectively divides the proton channel into two partitions: the extracellular and cytoplasmic half-channels [42,44,49]. The extracellular region and cytoplasmic region mostly contains charged residues (e.g., Asp 85) or hydrophobic residues, which serves as the proton acceptor or proton donor to Schiff base, respectively [50,51]. . Schematic structure of bR molecule which contains seven α-helices. The red arrows and the corresponding numbers (in yellow) indicate the path of the transport of a proton from the cytoplasmic to extracellular side of the membrane. The insert on the top right corner is the molecular formula of lysine-216. Reproduced from [51].
## (s6) Holographic Associative Processors
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Bacteriorhodopsin has been serving as an archetypal biomaterial for studies involving optical processors. For example, from the view of computer science, Jordan A. Greco et al. explored the use of bacteriorhodopsin in optical associative processors recently. [23] They not only investigated complex Fourier association using computer simulations but also associated the results with the holographic properties of bR-based thin films and explored their uses in algorithms of processors. Owing to ability of bR-based thin film in combining dynamic photochromism with high quantum efficiency of the blue-shifted intermediates during the bR photocycle and structural stability, this work can provide a method for both real-time computing and long-term data storage. The light path diagram of the experimental set up applied in writing and reading a volume transmission hologram is shown in Figure 10. Besides, from a biomolecule directed evolution standpoint, Jason. R Hillebrecht et al. investigated methods to optimize the photoactive protein bR for optical holographic memories recently [24]. They proposed optimization strategy of main and branched photocycle, key photochemical intermediates such as M-state, O-state, and Q-state using site-directed mutagenesis to improve efficacy of bR-based holographic memories. There have been over 800 semi-random mutants being studied for seeking the lengthened M-state and O-state lifetimes at 412 and 650 nm, respectively, through genetic modification. The length of lifetime M-state mutants can improve the holographic sensitive property of bR compared to the native bR for real-time holographic processors permanent. Another more permanent intermediate state, Q-state, is required for application of long-term holographic data storage. Amazingly, that device has the ability of regenerating the entire image by selecting from thousands of stored holograms only requiring a partial input one.
## (s9) X-ray Sensor
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) The technique of X-ray detection has still been under further development to improve its low sensitivity, complex processing requirements and so on. Therefore, some new materials have been used in the fabrication to achieve real-time and reusable radiation sensing recently. Bacteriorhodopsin, as a light driven proton pump protein molecule, has been used to fabricate photodetectors with sensing range from UV to infrared of the photospectrum since 2006 [100]. More importantly, in 2011, Ahmadi's group proposed that bR could also be used in a sensor to detect the X-ray region for the first time and the flexible X-ray sensor based on bacteriorhodopsin they fabricated was able to achieve real-time monitoring of radiation dosage, energies and dose rates [35]. This flexible X-ray sensor is comprised of the following structure like a sandwich: PET-ITO-(bacteriorhodopsin, Kapton film)-ITO-PET. bR thin film is coated and dried on ITO electrodes which are connected to voltage supply. The Kapton Polyimide film is used to form an electrical insulation between two conductive ITO sheets. The sensing area is in the shape of a circular with radius of 3 mm.
