# A Review of the Role of Natural Clay Minerals as Effective Adsorbents and an Alternative Source of Minerals Provisional chapter A Review of the Role of Natural Clay Minerals as Effective Adsorbents and an Alternative Source of Minerals

CorpusID: 199647576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2647f0bc6c94ccd30aeb0ee087e97f26b8603886](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2647f0bc6c94ccd30aeb0ee087e97f26b8603886)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Chemistry

## (s8) Adsorption of rare earth elements (REE)
Number of References: 24

(p8.0) REE group consists of 17 elements and is divided into two categories namely the light rare earths (L-REE) and the heavy rare earths (H-REE). REE have been used widely in metallurgy, chemical engineering, electronics and electrooptics, medicine, biomedicine, for manufacturing of magnetostriction materials and lasers [45][46][47]. Its applications in advanced technologies are increasing [48]. In modern societies, the rare earth elements (REE) are considered because of their unique physical and chemical properties. REE will be of substantial attention for the foreseeable future, with demand likely to grow.

(p8.1) Therefore, due to the increasing use of REE in industries, determination of REE has been of a recent increasing concern. Several analytical techniques were used to determine REE in samples such as inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) [49], neutron activation (INAA) [50]. Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) [51] and inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) [52]. Research should continue to play an important role in the search for rare earth ore deposits and their extraction, ensuring that as little damage is done to the environment as conceivable.

(p8.2) Various techniques have been used for removal of REE ions from aqueous systems such as solid-phase extraction, solvent extraction, ion exchange, ion-selective electrodes [53][54][55][56][57][58][59] and adsorption [60][61][62]. Adsorption method is the best technique because of low cost, simplicity of design and operation. The ion-adsorption type rare earths ore, is mainly located in China and REE in these deposits were released by weathering of REE-rich granites and subsequently adsorbed by NCMs.

(p8.3) Recently, there has been a significant interest in adsorption of rare earth elements with NCMs [1, [63][64][65]. Piasecki and Sverjensky [66] also had studied REE speciation/distribution on wide ranges of pH and ionic strength. They concluded that most of the surface-adsorbed lanthanides occur as simple "clay-REE" or as hydrolyzed "clay-O-REE 2+ " species.

(p8.4) NCMs are electronegative, saturated with cations such as Na + , K + , Ca 2+ , and Mg 2+ are capable of exchanging cations such as REE to the surface. Previous researches have shown that REE contained in NCMs are mainly present as physisorbed ions, which can be easily recovered by a simple ion-exchange procedure [66,67]. It is evident that the adsorption of REE ions on NCMs would have great influence on the mineralization process and the leaching process of the ionadsorption type rare earths ore.
## (s10) Investigations of adsorption/extraction behavior for REE onto natural clay minerals
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Four natural clay minerals namely kaolinite, montmorillonite, muscovite and illite were systematically investigated and compared for their adsorption/extraction behavior for REE [77]. The study reported that the montmorillonite exhibits highest adsorption and regeneration efficiencies for REE while kaolinite has highest extractions efficiencies for both REE light and heavy in the order of kaolinite > illite > montmorillonite > muscovite. Also study found that the lack extractions of REE from muscovite than other NCMs are believed to presence of iron oxide and biotite mineral (produce iron oxide as a result of its alteration) associated with muscovite. The leaching process of the REE is a kind of the reversibility of the ion-exchange process, it was evident that the cation exchange and negatively charged surfaces are the mechanism for REE adsorption. It was concluded that NH 4 + is lacking as a lixiviant from NCMs since NCMs are associated with iron oxide, particularly, either with NCMs containing iron (i.e., biotite) or minerals which always associate with biotite such as muscovite. The important role of the pH in extraction of REE from NCMs was evidenced, when REE-NCMs come into contact with the NH 4 + solution, the pH is rapidly increased from the initial pH solution for both montmorillonite and muscovite, leading to the decrease of the availability of ion-exchangeable REE with NH 4 + ions. That is one of the factors that influence the reduction in the REE extraction from montmorillonite and muscovite when compared with those of kaolinite and illite. The results illustrated that the structure and surface properties of NCMs are also the key factors that affect the rare earth leaching, consequently identifying the types of NCMs and associated impurities in clay materials is important for getting the best leaching system [77].
