# Systematic Literature Review of Food-Intake Monitoring in an Aging Population †

CorpusID: 198912172 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2b9d8149b5e848e5e2bc72166a48a742ce759b5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2b9d8149b5e848e5e2bc72166a48a742ce759b5)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Psychology, Medicine, Environmental Science, Computer Science

## (s9) e) Data Extraction and Synthesis
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) For an SLR, Kitchenham et al. [30] and Petersen et al. [31] defined guides suggesting that other parts of the analyzed papers should only be evaluated in those cases in which they are not well-structured or are imprecise. For this research, we decided to completely analyze each full paper in order to better answer all the raised questions. Some important proposals could be left aside by only analyzing titles, abstracts and keywords.
## (s19) IoT
Number of References: 6

(p19.0) From an IoT perspective, projects are being developed for measuring food-nutrition facts through a pocket-sized nonintrusive near-infrared (NIR) scanner [73]. This device records NIR spectra reflected from foods and uses them as features to predict nutrients, for example, energy and carbohydrates. The researchers used partial least-squares (PLS) regression and support-vector regression (SVR) for prediction. This device can only infer percentages of food-nutrient contents. Therefore, to better monitor food-intake, it is crucial to provide food weight in order to calculate the exact nutritional content [74].

(p19.1) Making use of other technologies, there are cutlery IoT devices with different integrated sensors for food-intake monitoring, such as References [75,76]. In the specific case of Reference [75], the presented work is a spoon that can recognize meal composition during the intake process without user intervention or on-body instruments. This utensil makes use of the fact that light spectra reflected by foods are dependent on the food ingredients. By analyzing the reflected light spectra, the spoon can recognize which type of food is on top of the utensil. The proposal describes the prototype design and the food-recognition algorithm for 20 types of foods. On the other hand, Reference [76] presented another utensil, in this case, a knife device that can identify food. In this case, a small microphone is attached to the knife that records the cutting sound of the food. The system extracts spectrograms from cutting sounds and uses them as feature vectors to train a classifier, making use of the k-Nearest Neighbor method (k-NN), a support vector machine (SVM) and a convolutional neural network (CNN) to verify differences of the classification methods. Neither case specifies how to identify the specific person and the cost of these projects is unknown.
## (s20) Single Board Computers
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) Systems based on Single Board Computers have existed for a long time. They have the general operating features and nutrient databases needed for food-intake analysis. Eight of these single board computers were exhaustively analyzed in [78]. The different systems vary in cost, the number of foods, nutrients in the database and ease of food entry. The main difference with the projects analyzed above, however, is the low speed of analyzing food-intake and the complexity in learning and using single board computers for elderly people. They also require the supervision and management of an assistant for the elderly. Other examples of this type of single board computers are References [79] or [80].
## (s32) •
Number of References: 3

(p32.0) The best options are found in the Smartphone category. The works of Reference [47] or Reference [48] developed a mobile application that send photos taken with smartphones to external web services and receives the extracted data from such photos. These solutions detect intake and food without supervision but they cannot identify the person who is eating. On the other hand, a project [46] presented another app, but on this occasion, online processing was not used. Instead, data insertion was carried out by remote dieticians and other healthcare professionals (supervised manner and with intermediaries).
