# Pulmonary Hypertension Associated with Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: A Review

CorpusID: 209284473 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/127b75b8b039c10f097ca1b16cc2eac7a1f9bb98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/127b75b8b039c10f097ca1b16cc2eac7a1f9bb98)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Pathophysiology and Symptoms
Number of References: 6

(p1.0) Lung development occurs in 5 stages: embryonic, pseudoglandular, canalicular, saccular, and alveolar. 23 Alveolar capillary development is largely immature until later stages of lung development, around 26 weeks' gestation. Perturbations to development in utero, such as maternal hypertensive diseases of pregnancy, poor fetal growth, and genetic abnormalities, can have negative consequences on prenatal lung development. Premature birth, coupled with acquired injury to the developing lung, contributes to markedly abnormal alveologenesis and associated vasculogenesis. 20 Injury may result from the effects of hyperoxia, mechanical ventilation (volutrauma, barotrauma, atelectotrauma), hypercarbia, infection, tissue hypoxia, heart dysfunction, and intracardiac shunts.

(p1.1) The ''old'' BPD first described by Northway et al. 24 in 1967 was characterized by diffuse fibroproliferative changes, reflecting effects of mechanical ventilation on the premature lung. However, in this era of extremely low-gestational-age premature infants, the ''new'' BPD is marked by alveolar and vascular simplification and remodeling. Abnormal gas exchange, a hallmark feature of BPD, results from abnormally thickened and fewer alveolar septae and a reduction in alveolar capillary surface area. The capillaries of the pulmonary vascular bed are found within these septae. Increased diffusion distance negatively impacts gaseous exchange, resulting in hypercapnia and hypoxemia. Mechanical ventilation and oxygen supplementation are utilized to mitigate abnormal gas exchange. However, these interventions often further contribute to lung injury. Hyperoxia creates reactive oxygen species, which can inhibit the innate factors necessary for proper angiogenesis [vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and hypoxia-induced factor]. 25 The end result of these pathologic changes is PH: a pulmonary vascular system with marked increase in PVR. Arteries are muscularized, hypertonic, and reactive. The elevated resistance impedes forward flow of blood through the lungs, which manifests as worsening hypoxemia and right ventricular adaptation by dilation and hypertrophy. The inability of the RV to sustain this response, in addition to impaired ventriculo-ventricular interaction may result in left ventricular dysfunction, contributing to the clinical picture of right heart failure.

(p1.2) The PH-BPD infant presents with nonspecific symptoms, which can often be ascribed to the underlying prematurity or BPD. It is well recognized that BPD with chronic respiratory failure and PH-BPD share similar risk factors and overlapping symptoms, making differentiation challenging. 6,26 The PH-BPD infant may require chronic oxygen supplementation, but nevertheless may experience frequent episodes of hypoxemia and bradycardic events. Despite periods of clinical improvement, respiratory deterioration leading to escalation of respiratory support is common. In addition, the PH-BPD infant may tolerate handling poorly, requiring heavy sedation and comfort interventions. With continued exposure to elevated PVR, the RV may also fail leading to uncoupling from its afterload. RV dysfunction may manifest as hepatomegaly, edema, or poor growth, often with inability to successfully feed orally.
## (s5) Echocardiography
Number of References: 10

(p5.0) Echocardiography is the usual screening test for PH in adults and children and it is recommended in infants with established BPD. 18 It may be prudent to screen all infants born at <29 weeks' gestation who require oxygen for >28 days of life. 6,16 The echocardiogram may give direct signs of PH, such as increased tricuspid regurgitant jet (TRJ) and indirect signs, such as changes in the RV shape/size/function, changes in interventricular septal position, changes in right ventricular ejection time to pulmonary artery acceleration time ratio, and/or changes in direction of shunt flow (Table 1). TRJ velocity for pulmonary artery pressure estimation may be unmeasurable because of inability to obtain a good envelope on echocardiography or it may not correlate well with catheterization data. Unmeasurable TRJ velocity may be especially pronounced in the presence of right ventricular failure. Therefore, it has been suggested to use a ratio of RV estimated pressure to systemic pressure for PH diagnosis instead of elevated TRJ velocity. This also takes the infant's systemic vascular resistance into account, when assessing right heart pressures. Using this schema, significant pressure elevation in the PH-BPD infant would be considered for RV:systemic ratio >1:2, regardless of the calculated absolute numbers. 15 Another approach is to use a higher TRJ velocity cutoff, such as 3 m/s, to be more sensitive for PH-BPD. 29 Measurements of pulmonary regurgitation can be taken at peak velocity and at end velocity to calculate mean pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, respectively. 30 Other echocardiographic parameters, including tissue Doppler imaging, RV strain, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, pulmonary artery acceleration time, and RV fractional area change, are increasingly utilized to establish and monitor the diagnosis of PH. [31][32][33][34] Echocardiography should also be used to evaluate for ''benign'' shunts that may be contributing to the clinical picture or to assess for reversal of flow pattern in known shunts, indicating changes in pulmonary pressures (discussed below).
## (s7) VARGHESE AND RIOS
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) hemodynamics, and perform procedures if needed (stent placement, device closure of intracardiac shunt, angioplasty). Assessment of the left ventricle (LV) is important to assess for any prematurity-related LV complications and to assess for clinical improvement or worsening after initiation of pharmacotherapy. Cardiac catheterization is, however, an invasive procedure typically requiring general anesthesia. Performance of cardiac catheterization in these patients is recommended in centers proficient with the care of the PH-BPD infant to minimize complications. Serious complication rates are low in experienced settings, cited as 1%-3%. 13,15 Clinical stability for transport, intubation, anesthesia, along with size limitations may affect candidacy and complication rates. Cardiac catheterization should be considered if/when there are 16 : persistent signs of severe cardiorespiratory disease or clinical deterioration not directly related to airway disease or acute infection significant PH despite optimal management of lung disease and associated morbidities long-term chronic PH therapy is anticipated there is the presence of unexplained, recurrent pulmonary edema shunt lesions, such as ASD, VSD, PDA concerns for pulmonary vein stenoses
## (s9) Left-to-Right Cardiac Shunts
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Left-to-right intracardiac shunts, such as an ASD, have traditionally been considered benign conditions in pediatric populations. However, this dogma derives from populations normal lung development. There is emerging evidence that for populations with chronic lung disease, such as BPD, any increase in pulmonary circulation can be significantly detrimental. Pulmonary overcirculation, which is difficult to measure by echocardiography, can decrease lung compliance, increase the work of breathing, and promote further vascular remodeling. 2,15,36 Due to the cardiorespiratory impacts associated with large ASDs, these infants may exhibit poor somatic growth, an inability to tolerate weaning of oxygen supplementation, and have the need for an extended duration of respiratory support.
## (s10) Pulmonary Vein Stenosis
Number of References: 7

(p10.0) PVS is a rare condition; however, it has been recognized as an increasingly prevalent complication for the premature population with BPD. 40 PVS is marked by intimal and medial fibromuscular or fibromyxoid proliferation causing narrowing of the intra-and/or extrapulmonary pulmonary veins up to the venoatrial junction (Fig. 2). 41 This will result in some degree of pulmonary venous congestion, interstitial edema, and upstream elevation of pulmonary artery pressure. The arterial involvement makes PVS a significantly difficult condition to treat and assess because of the pre-and postcapillary PH. Pulmonary vasodilation may result in capillary flooding and pulmonary edema. PVS may be congenital or acquired. Observational studies in infants with BPD with serial echocardiograms show the first detection of PVS in late infancy/toddler stage, indicating that this condition is likely acquired and develops over the course of several months. The etiology of PVS in the BPD population is unclear and generally thought to be idiopathic. However, causes related to the prematurity itself have been implicated. These factors include stressors within the underdeveloped premature heart, such as increased left ventricular loading conditions, which could adversely affect postnatal pulmonary vein development. Prolonged mechanical ventilation has also been evoked as a risk factor for PVS development in BPD, perhaps through stimulation of inflammation and VEGF pathways. 11,40 An association with necrotizing enterocolitis has also been suggested. 41 The natural history of PVS is extremely unpredictable. 40 PVS is often progressive and may ''spread,'' with unaffected veins becoming affected over time. The degree of involvement may also vary, from mild stenosis to complete atresia of the vein. Echocardiography will diagnose the majority of PVS cases, however, the condition may also be diagnosed by contrast CT scan with angiography, angiography during cardiac catheterization, and cardiac MRI. 42 PVS should be considered in the preterm infant with increasing oxygen requirement and worsening uni-or multilobar haziness on chest radiography. Echocardiography typically suggests worsening PH. Specific attention should be paid to the pulmonary veins during echocardiography in this patient population as they may not be interrogated on routine studies. Turbulent flow with increasing gradient >5 mmHg is concerning for PVS. 43 In cases of complete pulmonary vein atresia, there will be no flow noted by Doppler on echocardiogram and CT scan of the chest with angiography should be pursued for confirmation of the diagnosis.
## (s11) Management
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Treatment of the PH-BPD infant focuses on preserving right ventricular function by preventing progression of pulmonary vascular remodeling, minimizing further insult to the pulmonary vasculature, and optimizing respiratory status. General neonatology principles of care form the basis for much of the recommendations for PH-BPD management. In general, as infants grow and mature, new alveolar growth with attendant capillaries leads most survivors to improve with respect to both lung disease and PH. However, some children may require use of targeted PH therapies to manage the disease process more long term. It should be noted though that there are no randomized controlled studies of targeted PH pharmacotherapy in BPD. Echocardiography should be repeated at regular intervals to monitor disease status, response to therapy, and for left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. 18,45 Management of chronic respiratory failure 
## (s12) VARGHESE AND RIOS
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) PH. Patients should be assessed for structural airway abnormalities when suspected; this may require flexible and/or rigid bronchoscopy and/or dynamic assessment of airway caliber by CT scan. Both tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia have been reported commonly in this patient population. Acute and/or chronic respiratory failure must be addressed in a timely fashion to minimize further injury to an abnormal pulmonary vascular bed. Experts recommend using ventilator techniques which minimize hyperinflation because of the negative effects on PVR associated with high lung volumes, but which will also minimize alveolar derecruitment. Ventilatory strategies for PH-BPD build on BPD expert consensus recommendations, to minimize air trapping and avoid acidosis: respiratory rates 12-15 breaths per minute, tidal volumes 10-12 mm/kg of body weight, and positive end-expiratory pressures <10 cm of water. 16 In some instances, long-term mechanical ventilation may be necessary. 20 The use of corticosteroids for prevention of BPD has been studied extensively, yet the exact regimen remains controversial. Their role in PH-BPD has not been evaluated. 46 Additional morbidities, such as chronic dysphagia with aspiration, also require management to prevent further injury to fragile BPD lungs. 16,47 Measures to minimize respiratory exacerbations due to respiratory viral illnesses are crucial to preserving prognosis. Local infection control policies should be enforced, along with good hand washing. Vaccinations should be routinely administered for the patient and recommended for parents, family members, the health care team, and visitors. If eligible, prophylaxis for respiratory syncytial virus should be given.
## (s13) Nutrition
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) Optimized nutrition may be difficult in the infant with PH-BPD due to fluid restriction. However, strategies, such as caloric fortification and volume condensation, may be reasonable options to continue delivery of high-quality nutrition. 47 Specific nutritional strategies that focus on somatic and lung growth are beyond the scope of this review, but there is a recognized need for targeted nutritional support with supervised titration to promote optimal nutritional success. 47 Oxygen Oxygen in high concentrations may serve as a vasodilator and oxygen supplementation is typically used in BPD and PH-BPD. The goal of oxygen supplementation is to reduce or eliminate hypoxemic episodes. Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ) is generally measured by oximetry and is used in PH patients as a surrogate for alveolar oxygenation. Target SaO 2 varies based on the etiology of the PH and coexistence of additional morbidities, such as congenital heart disease and ophthalmologic disease. In severe PVS, a slightly lower oxygen target may be desirable to control oxygen-mediated precapillary vasodilation. Hyperoxia should be minimized to reduce additional oxygen toxicity and pulmonary inflammation. Recently released guidelines recommend a target SaO 2 of 92%-94% as sufficient to prevent hypoxemia, while not incurring additional inflammation from hyperoxia and oxygen toxicity. 16 In some cases, there may be poor or absent clinical response to oxygen supplementation. An intracardiac shunt lesion or pulmonary arteriovenous malformation should be considered. Intrapulmonary bronchopulmonary anastomoses in severe BPD may also contribute to recorded hypoxemia. However, these lesions are presently undetectable by standard investigation, therefore making them a difficult clinical target. In older infants or toddlers with persistent PH by echocardiography, a formal polysomnogram may be required to evaluate for sleep disordered breathing. 16 Diuretics may be clinically effective in the setting of right ventricular dilation and congestion. 25 Therapy is titrated to effect, which may be especially important in the setting of shunt lesions. Care must be taken to maintain cardiac preload. 13 Inhaled nitric oxide is generally used only in selected patients in a dose range of 1-20 parts per million; methemoglobin levels should be monitored. Inhaled nitric oxide is indicated if the partial pressure of oxygen in an arterial sample is <100 mmHg (while receiving 100% oxygen) or if oxygenation index is >25. 16,45 Targeted Specific PH Pharmacotherapy
