# A Survey on Access Control in Semi-Trusted Cloud Environment

CorpusID: 202777977 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06cc877c05fb5fcfea1577cf4c47e74134bdea97](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06cc877c05fb5fcfea1577cf4c47e74134bdea97)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) CP-ABE
Number of References: 7

(p1.0) Fountain (RLF) codes. This proposed scheme provides adaptive and privacy against a significant number of colluding servers. To retrieve any requested content the servers within RG is collaborated with each other. The proposed solution is that the robust against a significant number of servers in the network. In this paper [9], the authors have proposed a new scheme that has four entities: the client, the cloud server, the auditor, and the key generation center (KGC) and six phases: Setup, Store, ChalGen, ProGen, VerPro, and CheckLog. In PDP model, when the client has updated their information to the cloud, he/she can delete the information in the local storage. If a client outsources a file with m blocks data and tags, the cloud server only store one block of them and passing the integrity auditing of the auditor. In this paper [10], the authors have proposed a two-factor data security protection mechanism with factor revocability for cloud storage system. Some naive approaches are used for enhancement of security protection for Double encryption (with an additional public key or serial number) and Split the secret key into two parts (The first part is stored in the computer while the second part is embedded into a security device).This scheme achieves two factors protection and security device revocability without requiring a great amount of additional complexity. In this paper [11], the authors have proposed ECSED, a novel semantic search scheme based concept hierarchy (the concepts at lower levels contain related meanings than those at higher levels) and the semantic relationship of encrypted datasets. ECSED uses two cloud servers (store the outsourced datasets and return results and compute the similarity scores. To improve this tree-based index structure is used. In this paper [12], the authors have proposed a scheme to deduplicate encrypted data stored in cloud based on data owner challenge and proxy re-encryption. This scheme can adjustably support on data update and sharing with deduplication even when the data owners are offline. It provides greater efficiency on big data deduplication in cloud storage. In this paper [13], the authors have proposed an identity-based (IDbased) RDIC protocol by making use of key-homomorphic cryptographic to lesser the complexity and the cost for publishing and managing the public key authentication framework in PKI-based RDIC schemes. It provides security against infected cloud server and third party verifier. In this paper [14], the authors have proposed a new system of novel server-side deduplication for encrypted data and allows cloud server to access to control the outsourced data encryption and this prevents the data leakage and guarantees data integrity against any tag inconsistency attack. This scheme has reduced computational overhead. In this paper [15], the authors have proposed an innovative and parallel trust computing scheme based on big data analysis for the trustworthy cloud service environment. It is used first to block and parallel computing mechanism, the speed of trust calculation is greatly which makes this trust computing scheme very suitable for a large-scale cloud computing environment.
