# Posterior corneal astigmatism: a review article

CorpusID: 201843812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae90cf4b7d5f1da9eb4541da1b63ea100b8ac300](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae90cf4b7d5f1da9eb4541da1b63ea100b8ac300)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Effect of increasing age on the anterior and posterior corneal astigmatism
Number of References: 24

(p3.0) Increasing age mostly affects astigmatism of the anterior corneal surface and posterior corneal surface is less affected by the age. By increasing age, the steep meridian of the anterior corneal surface tends to change its direction from vertical to horizontal, while these changes did not reported in the steep meridian of the posterior corneal surface. 8,14,17 Since the prevalence of with-the-rule astigmatism is higher in the youth and by increasing age it tends to change to against-the-rule astigmatism, the posterior corneal astigmatism acts relatively as a compensating factor for anterior corneal astigmatism in the young people (the steep meridian is vertical). However, in the older population, the posterior corneal astigmatism has a boosting effect and increases the anterior corneal astigmatism (the steep meridian is horizontal). Actually, the posterior corneal astigmatism will compensate the anterior corneal astigmatism in the younger population and increases the total astigmatism in the older population. 35,48,108,113,110 Finally, knowing about the changes of the corneal shape with increasing age is very important because these changes can affect the stability of the corneal shape after refractive surgery. 111,116,113 The effect of posterior corneal astigmatism on eye surgeries

(p3.1) Accurate screening before surgery is one of the key factors in the success of the refractive surgery that would reduce the unpleasant results and patient dissatisfactions.  In the past, the classical screening method was used for the patients who were candidate for refractive surgery; it included corneal topography based on placido disk (evaluation of the anterior corneal surface) and measuring the corneal thickness. 116,117 Due to the fact that corneal topography plays a prominent role and has been a great revolution in diagnosing and managing corneal diseases, it has a leading role by surveying the results of the corneal refractive surgery and treating its complications after that. 91,117,118 There are two important points that should be taken into consideration about posterior corneal astigmatism; firstly, we cannot definitely determine an amount of posterior astigmatism based on the information of the anterior corneal surface and secondly, posterior corneal astigmatism can affect the results of refractive surgeries for correcting astigmatism, if they are only based on the information of the anterior corneal surface. 91,119,120,[123][124][125][126][127] For instance, failure in calculating an amount of posterior corneal astigmatism with a steep meridian (that can cause against the rule astigmatism at the posterior corneal surface) can cause more correction for the eyes that have with-the-rule astigmatism or less correction for the eyes that have against-the-rule astigmatism.
## (s4) Posterior corneal astigmatism and cataract surgery
Number of References: 8

(p4.0) Significant corneal astigmatism is observed in 14% of the society. Using spectacles in high astigmatism has some limitations because of inducing meridional magnification; therefore, these days, for those who have cataract surgeries, there is a tendency for correcting the astigmatism and reducing distortions at the time of surgery. These methods are very useful in patients who have an astigmatism 2 or more diopters. 126 In the latest methods of cataract surgery, despite the recent developments, lens extraction without any possible harm and reducing the need for using spectacles after surgery is still challenging. In order to achieve this goal, it is very important to consider all of the refractive errors especially astigmatism at the time of the surgery. Due to the fact that there are new technologies for this surgery and new formulas are used to measure intra ocular lens power, spherical errors after surgery have greatly reduced. In spite of this, 20% of these people who have cataract have a corneal astigmatism that is more than 1.50 diopter before surgery. 127,128 In the people who have cataract surgery, failure to estimate an exact amount of astigmatism by neglecting the posterior astigmatism can cause some errors in correcting an astigmatism and due to the point that most of the eyes have a posterior astigmatism, which is ATR, if this negligence occurs in toric intra ocular lens use, it overcorrects WTR astigmatism and undercorrects ATR astigmatism. Controlling this astigmatism is vital for the best outcome.

(p4.1) During recent years, correction of the astigmatism is one of the main goals in the cataract surgery and this strong tendency is increasing during phacoemulsification by having small incision and using foldable lenses in order to correct both spherical and cylindrical refractive errors. 128 For correcting an astigmatism in these cases, many different techniques are used; for instance, changing the size and the location of the incision, 129 using a loose incision in the cornea or limbus, 130 using clear corneal incisions anteriorly at steeper meridians, 131 using toric intra ocular lenses, 132,133 and Excimer laser. 134 The main purpose of using these methods is correcting the astigmatism as much as possible, in order to make an appropriate and a satisfactory uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA).
