# Online Fair Division: A Survey

CorpusID: 208202112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418)

Fields: Economics, Computer Science

## (s5) Formal background
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) We suppose there are n agents being allocated m items. Allocations may be whole (e.g. in the case of indivisible items), fractional (e.g. in the case of divisible items), or randomized (e.g. in the case of indivisible items, this represents a probability distribution over whole allocations). Often, as in many other areas, we will assume additive utilities. Additive utilities offer a compromise between simplicity and expressivity. However, some work in this area has considered more general utilities (e.g. (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019a) studies the more general class of monotone utilities). We consider a number of classical normative properties such as Pareto efficiency and envy-freeness. An allocation is Pareto efficient iff there is no other allocation where all agents have as much utility, and at least one agent has strictly more. An allocation is envy-free iff no agent has strictly greater utility for the items allocated to another agent than the utility for their own items. Envy-freeness is a desirable but often unachievable fairness property (consider two agents and one indivisible item that they both like). Therefore, we also consider a relaxation that can be always achieved: envy-free up to one item (EF1). An allocation is EF1 iff no agent has envy for another agent's bundle, supposing we can remove one item from this bundle. EF1 can be achieved with a simple roundrobin mechanism that allocates the most desired item left to the next agent in a round-robin fashion. We say that a mechanism is Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1 iff it only returns allocations that are Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1. See (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) for more details.
## (s9) Impossibility results
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Another approach to understand the challenges of online fair division is to identify normative properties which are impossible to achieve in the online setting which can be achieved in the offline setting. For example, in offline fair division, Pareto efficiency and envy-freeness ex ante are possible to achieve simultaneously, e.g. the allocations returned by the probabilistic serial mechanism are Pareto efficient and envyfree ex ante (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001). In online fair division, these two normative properties are also possible to achieve simultaneously with 0/1 utilities, For instance, the LIKE mechanism, allocating each next item uniformly at random to any agent who declares strictly positive utility, is Pareto efficient and envy-free ex ante. But, with general (i.e. non-0/1) utilities, there is no online mechanism that can be both Pareto efficient and envy-free ex ante (proved first in (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b)).
## (s13) Reallocating items
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) A final technique to deal with the online nature of fair division is to consider allocations that can be adjusted once subsequent items are revealed. By re-allocating items allocated in the past when new items arrive, we can perhaps restore desirable normative properties. For example, with two agents, additive valuations and m online items, (He et al. 2019) prove that any uninformed algorithm requires Θ(m) items to be re-allocated to ensure an EF1 allocation. Unsurprisingly, an informed algorithm requires no re-allocations to ensure EF1. For the case of three or more agents, (He et al. 2019) prove that even informed algorithms require Ω(m) items to be reallocated to ensure an EF1 allocation, and design an uninformed algorithm that makes do with O(m 3/2 ).
## (s14) Conclusions
Number of References: 10

(p14.0) Online fair division is a promising and active research area that looks to take account of the online nature of many resource allocation problems. Whilst recent work has identi- Figure 1: Summary of results about online mechanisms satisfying (combinations of) properties such as strategy proofness (SP), envy-freeness ex ante (EFA), Pareto efficiency ex ante (PEA) and Pareto efficiency ex post (PEP). Any part of the Venn diagram marked "∅" is impossible (e.g. no mechanism is envy-free ex ante and Pareto efficient ex post). Any part of the Venn diagram marked "∞" represents a combination of properties which an infinite number of different mechanisms can satisfy (e.g. any probabilistic combination of the LIKE and ORP mechanisms returns a probability distribution of allocations that is envy-free ex ante). OSD* represents any probability distribution of online serial dictator (OSD) mechanisms. MEM STEP is any "memoryless step" mechanism where the current item is allocated irrespective of the past (i.e. memoryless), and whether an agent is feasible is simply a step function of their bid. This figure is taken from (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b). fied many important features of such problems, there are many research directions still to be considered. For example, how do we extend recent results such as (Aziz et al. 2015b;2015a;Aziz, Schlotter, and Walsh 2016;Aziz et al. 2017;Gerding et al. 2019;Aziz et al. 2019;Aleksandrov and Walsh 2018) about the (offline) fair division of goods and bads to the online setting? As a second example, the preferences of agents are often highly correlated. How can we exploit this fact in an online setting? As a third example, we can apply online mechanisms like those discussed here to an offline setting by imposing an "artificial" arrival order to the agents or items. Can this help achieve desirable normative properties? And, as a fourth example, can we extend these ideas to the online versions of other problems in social choice such as capacitated facility location (Aziz et al. 2020) or peer assessment (Walsh 2014b).
