# Burnout of residents: Overview from various medical institutions -A suggested model for improvement

CorpusID: 209234748 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce2e47c671ccab5315d99f94f0b8811e64d36e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce2e47c671ccab5315d99f94f0b8811e64d36e7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Suggestions
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) Before introducing wellness programs, it is important to take into account several elements. The process is multidimensional and requires commitment from different levels ranging from the institution as a whole, down to the level of the residents. Burnout symptoms are associated with depression; thus, any program should tackle the stigma surrounding this mental health issue. Moreover, the characteristics of residents should be captured along with the nature of their training institutions. [6] Lebanon is a developing country, and our institution is a tertiary care center located in the capital. [17] Residents in developing countries are subject to different challenges such as suboptimal working conditions, lower income, political instability, exposure to war, and inadequate health-care infrastructure. [17] Any program should acknowledge that some medical students might already suffer from mental health issues prior to starting residency. The importance of burnout may be addressed in the resident agreement document and/or distribute educational pamphlets regarding burnout, wherein they can find any needed information.
## (s8) CONCLUSION
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Burnout among residents is a crucial issue that has gained attention in the last decade. It is important to acknowledge that the health of residents' is a profession by itself [18] and that special and dedicated care should be given to their well-being in addition to teaching. Providing professional support in the form of wellness programs addressed to residents may attenuate the consequences of burnout through emotional control, time management, and team building. [7] Although there is no clear definition of wellness in the literature, [7] it is essential to generate such interventions, and this represents an important area for future research. [6] Research should determine the prevalence of burnout and identify the elements associated with it before introducing any academic program.
