# Techniques for Abdominal Wall Closure after Damage Control Laparotomy: From Temporary Abdominal Closure to Early/Delayed Fascial Closure-A Review

CorpusID: 206325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b06ebeefb72dff4099b11461ae06691ae9122bde](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b06ebeefb72dff4099b11461ae06691ae9122bde)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Direct pressure has long been used until World War II for hemostasis, especially in patients with coagulopathy. It was abandoned because of recurrent bleeding at pack removal and late infection. In a prospective study carried out from 1968 to 1973, Lucas and Ledgerwood [1] reintroduced the technique and used it on 3 patients in a series of 637 patients with liver injuries. The authors emphasized "open-mindedness and flexibility" in the use of packing. Subsequently, other authors reported on packing for severe liver injuries [2,3]. As the number of patients in these series was small (4 and 17 patients), the idea of packing was still not considered as a desirable and standard practice then [2,3].

(p0.1) In 1983, Stone et al. [4] reported their experience on 31 patients who were diagnosed to have major coagulopathy soon after the onset of surgery. In the first 14 patients, the procedure was continued with hemostatic replacement and completion of the operation. The mortality was 93% [1]. In the subsequent 17 patients, the operation was aborted and abdominal tamponade was achieved with sponges. The mortality was 35%. Unfortunately, the operation was considered as a surgical failure as leaving the abdomen "open" was thought to result in intra-abdominal abscess and intestinal fistulas. In 1993, pioneered by Rotondo et al. [5], surgeons began to recognize that patients with major injuries were more likely to die from intraoperative metabolic failure (the vicious triad of coagulopathy, acidosis, and hypothermia) than from failure to complete operative repairs. The need for abbreviated surgery and rapid return to intensive care units (ICU) for aggressive resuscitation were emphasized. Now codified as "damage-control" laparotomy, patients are left with open abdomen (OA) with a planned return to the operating room for definitive surgery. Thus the concept of damage-control surgery (DCS), used more than 100 years ago, has finally been accepted by mainstream surgeons recently.
## (s3) Temporary Abdominal Closure Techniques
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) From the mid 1980S, surgeons considered "laparotomy" or open packing to be a valuable technique in the management of severe, intra-abdominal sepsis [16][17][18]. The indications included gastrointestinal perforation, anastomotic dehiscence, abscess, and acute necrotizing pancreatitis. Bailey et al. [18] evaluated laparotomy in patients with severe intraabdominal infection from colorectal diseases. The mortality was 28.6%. However, the wounds of these patients were left to heal by contraction and granulation and required reconstructive surgery later. Problems with evisceration, fluid and protein loss, and fistula were reported. Although open packing was not an ideal technique, it made surgeons accept that laparotomy was effective in patients with severe intraabdominal infection.
## (s5) Bogota Bag.
Number of References: 7

(p5.0) When skin-only closure is impossible, as is often the case, a temporary plastic Bogota bag sutured to the skin provides an excellent solution for containment. The Bogota bag [22][23][24][25], so named by Mattox while observing in Bogota, Colombia, uses a large intravenous (IV) bag to cover the abdominal viscera. After the initial operation, a presterilized, soft 3-L IV bag is cut to an oval shape and stapled with a standard skin stapling device or sutured with monofilament suture to the skin edges of the wound ( Figure 4). Sterile, antibiotic soaked towels are placed over the silo, which is then covered with an iodine-impregnated adhesive plastic drape. The wound is inspected and the dressing is changed every 24 hours. IV bag silos may be replaced in the intensive care unit setting using standard sterile surgical techniques and equipment. This is a variation of the silo closure used for repair of gastroschisis and omphalocele. Other alternatives include bowel bag, Steri-Drape, or Silastic cloth.

(p5.1) These materials hold sutures or staples well, help to retain body heat, minimize fluid loss, are quick and easy to apply, and are nonirritating to the underlying viscera. A silo closure may decrease respiratory and renal compromise associated with decrease in intra-abdominal pressure. The Bogota bag closure is much less expensive than any other techniques which are currently available. The flexibility to apply the silo at the bedside also decreases the inherent risks with transferring a critically ill patient from the intensive care unit to the operating room. The technique may be particularly useful for surgeons who encounter severe abdominal trauma in small rural hospitals because life-saving interventions, such as control of bleeding, need to be performed immediately and rapidly before the patients are transferred to a major hospital for definitive treatment. The rates of primary closure range from 12 to 82%, and enterocutaneous fistula rates are generally low, and range from 0 to 14.4% [26][27][28].
## (s6) 4.4.
Number of References: 34

(p6.0) Mesh. The use of absorbable and permanent synthetic repair materials for patients who underwent TAC in open abdomen has been reported [31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45]. Permanent synthetic prostheses, when sutured to the fascial edges, can be used to protect abdominal wall tissues from damages which result from repetitive surgical procedures through the incision, prevent lateral retraction of the fascia, and facilitated reoperation. However, wrinkling secondary to wound contracture, infection, hernia, mesh extrusion, and enterocutaneous fistula are some complications that may be seen. Several permanent synthetic repair materials are available, including the broad classes of macroporous, microporous, and composite materials. When implanting a prosthetic mesh, the surgeon must carefully take into consideration the potential interactions between the host and the prosthetic material. As a result of fibroblast response produced by the rough texture of the mesh, the mesh material becomes incorporated into the host's granulation tissues. In this way, intestinal loops become adherent to the biomaterial to form the first stage in the development of biomaterial-related intestinal fistula. Polypropylene mesh, with its porous structure which is appropriate for growth of microvascular vessels and convenient for topical application of growth factors, was popularly used ( Figure 5). Yuan et al. [43] reported that when compared with polyethylene sheet (always Bogota Bag in emergency situations), the microvascular densities, thickness of granulation tissue, and fibroblast counts were higher in the polypropylene mesh group. Although meshes improved the primary closure rates which ranged from 33 to 89%, macroporous repair materials such as polypropylene were associated with a high incidence of 6.6% to 14.7% of fistulas when placed in contact with bowel [31,32,[35][36][37]39]. Some series reported fistula formation in as many as 75% of patients [33]. Recently, Scholtes et al. [44] reported that implantation of nonabsorbable meshes in open abdomen, even for a patient with a contaminated or dirty abdomen, resulted in a reduced incidence of incisional abdominal wall hernia. The overall mortality rate and enterocutaneous fistula formation rate were 8% and 22%, respectively, which were not influenced by the use of mesh. However, the limitations of this study were that it was retrospective in design, and the authors could not exclude selection bias in the indication for mesh implantation. Thus, nonadherent materials should be placed between the intra-abdominal contents and fascia to prevent formation of fistulas and to facilitate future manipulation of the wound. Microporous repair materials such as polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) which resists adherence to tissues may be used over the bowel ( Figure 6). The main disadvantage of microporous repair materials is the increased risk of infection. The pore size allows for the colonizing bacteria to evade the host immune cells. The prosthetic then acts as a source of contamination in the wound. Thus, both ePTFE and polypropylene materials should not be placed in a contaminated environment, because of unsuitability and the high complication risk. However, this risk should not be an issue if the material is being used as a temporary closure which will be removed at the time of definitive closure [41].

(p6.1) Absorbable meshes include polyglactin 910 (Vicryl; Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) and polyglycolic acid (Dexon; Davis & Geck, Danbury, CT) [34,38,40,42]. Vicryl comes in a larger size (12 * 12 inches) but has smaller interstices, which tends to impair drainage. Vicryl also tends to tear at the suture site even with a tapered needle. Dexon, although smaller in size (the largest size is 7 × 9 inches), has large interstices which  allow easy passage of a needle. It does not tear and allows for egress of intra-abdominal fluid [35]. The advantages of an absorbable mesh are as follows: it is resistant to infection, pliable, and easier to work with than the currently available permanent meshes. The mesh does not unravel when cut and can be opened repeatedly to provide less traumatic access to the abdominal cavity for repeated drainage procedures. When wound contraction occurs, the mesh can be trimmed to remove any excess material. Both types of absorbable meshes result in less tension on the fascia, thus minimizing the occurrence of necrotizing fasciitis. However, the use of absorbable meshes for TAC has resulted in fistula formation rates which ranged from 5% to 11% and intra-abdominal abscesses [41]. Prichayudh et al. reported enteroatmospheric fistula formation in 15% of patients [42]. For this reason, consideration should be given to place a barrier between an absorbable synthetic material and viscera for temporary closure. Recently, Sutton et al. [45] reported the use of Gore Bio-A mesh in the management of open abdomen. Gore Bio-A mesh has a web of biocompatible synthetic polymers which are gradually absorbed in 6 months. The use of Gore Bio-A is safe, feasible, and cost-effective even within a contaminated field. Unlike the permanent meshes, it facilitates ingrowth of granulation tissues causing the covering to adhere to the wound. When this occurs, reoperation becomes a challenge, and the patient must be treated with split-thickness skin graft and then to undergo a planned ventral hernia repair about a year after the initial operation. Therefore, if an absorbable mesh is used for TAC, care should be taken to remove the material before any rapid overgrowth of granulation tissues. Absorbable mesh is not designed to be used to approximate the fascial edges serially but it is designed to form a granulation tissue bed for future skin grafting. On the other hand, nonabsorbable meshes can be initially sutured to the abdominal fascia loosely, allowing visceral swelling and thus preventing the development of ACS. As visceral edema resolves, the mesh can then be excised in the medial portion and the two edges resutured to sequentially result in fascial approximation. The use of nonabsorbable meshes improves the primary closure rates, which range from 33 to 89% [46].
## (s9) Vacuum-Assisted Wound Closure and Mesh-Mediated
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) The principle using VAWCM as a technique for temporary abdominal closure after laparotomy has been described [73][74][75][76][77]. In brief, in a patient whose abdomen was left open, a sterile perforated plastic sheet was placed intraabdominally to cover the viscera and then an oval-shaped polypropylene mesh is sutured to the fascial edges using a running 0 monofilament suture. The plastic sheet is covered with moist laparotomy pads, to protect the fascia and the subcutaneous tissues. A sterile gauze is placed over the pads and two silicone drainage tubes are brought in caudally through the skin over the gauze. The drains are covered with a layer of dry laparotomy pads and the wound is sealed with adhesive plastic dressings. The drains are linked to a suction device under continuous topical negative pressure (100-150 mmHg) (Figures 9 and 10). After 2-3 days the possibility to close the abdomen is evaluated. If possible, the abdominal wall is closed. Otherwise, the mesh is cut in the midline, the inner plastic sheet and gauze are changed, and the mesh is tightened by suturing it in the midline using a running 0 monofilament suture, while the viscera is kept from protruding by putting some tension on the abdominal wall. This temporary abdominal closure system is changed every 2-3 days. Abdominal closure is considered when a separation of the fascial edges remains from 3 to 5 cm, with only weak tension assessed by pulling the fascial edges towards the midline. The mesh is then removed, and the fascia is closed. This is followed by skin closure.
## (s11) Fascial Bridge Using Prosthetic Mesh.
Number of References: 10

(p11.0) Under the situation that the abdominal fascia does not gather together, the first choice of primary fascial closure is fascial bridge with a prosthetic mesh or a biological mesh, or the other option is a planned ventral hernia. The ideal permanent prosthetic mesh for abdominal fascial bridge should have the following properties: chemical inertness, no allergic or inflammatory reaction, ability to resist mechanical stress, ability to be sterilized, lack of physical modification by body tissues, lack of carcinogenicity, convenience for clinical use, and inexpensiveness [25]. In the early periods, nonabsorbable meshes, such as polypropylene, polytetrafluoroethylene, and polyester products which have some but not all these properties, were commonly used for delayed abdominal fascial closure (DAFC) in the management of patients with OA. However, the risk of wound infection, enterocutaneous fistula, and recurrent herniation, which may even develop years after the original procedure, hindered the use of nonabsorbable mesh. Voyles et al. [81] used polypropylene mesh in a large series of patients to bridge repair in acute replacement of fullthickness abdominal wall. It was noted that polypropylene mesh was highly effective in the early restoration of abdominal wall continuity. However, significant long-term problems such as mesh extrusion and/or enteric fistulae developed. The causes of enterocutaneous fistulae include prior bowel desiccation, adherence of bowel to mesh, and adherence of bowel to exposed fascial edges. Once bacterial colonization or infection happened, the prosthetic mesh may act as a chronic source of contamination [82]. Fansler et al. [83] reported similar experience. In 26 critically ill or injured patients requiring celiotomy, polypropylene mesh was used to bridge the fascial defect. Even though the mesh protected the abdominal viscera from damage resulting from repetitive surgical procedures through the same incision, they found the mesh created a 50% enterocutaneous fistula rate. Other long-term complications such as wrinkling secondary to wound contracture, infection, hernia, and mesh extrusion were also seen. The use of permanent prosthetic mesh has been abandoned because of the high rates of complications. Nowadays, prosthetic mesh was mostly used in elective cases but not after trauma or abdominal catastrophes. Tensionfree repair of large ventral hernias with prosthetic mesh was associated with hernia recurrence rates which ranged from 2% to 18% and complication rates which ranged from 10% to 17% [84][85][86]. The association of prosthetic mesh with bacterial colonization is well known, which has been reported to be up to 6.8% [87,88], even in the absence of contamination. Recently, Dietz et al. [89] presented a four-stage procedure to bridge repair the fascial defect of patients with OA through application of a two-component mesh of polypropylene in combination with polyglycolic acid (PGA, absorbable mesh). 17/19 (89.5%) patients succeeded in abdominal wall closure, except in two patients (9.5%) who died during hospitalization. This indicated that synthetic meshes still represent an important alternative to achieve fascial closure in patients with OA. However, long-term follow-up is still lacking.
## (s12) Biologic Mesh.
Number of References: 12

(p12.0) Prosthetic mesh allows for a tensionfree repair of the fascial defect. Unfortunately, it is associated with a completely different set of problems. In addition, it does not bring any of the basic wound healing units (e.g., glycosaminoglycans, fibronectin) into the wound field. The mesh becomes only minimally integrated in the final wound and it is never truly an integrated implant. Several approaches have been developed in an attempt to address these problems. Mathes et al. reported that reimplantation of a prosthetic into an already contaminated field or skin at risk for breakdown had a very high rate of reinfection [90]. Other methods have been attempted to repair the defects without using a mesh. Local flaps, pedicle or free flaps, have been utilized to provide additional soft tissue coverage and the necessary ingredients for wound healing. However, it cannot be applied universally even if successful in some patients. The fascial defect may be too large for these tissue flaps to cover. Autologous tissue is neither always available nor is it free of donor morbidity. Postoperative complications and reherniation still are troublesome problems with rates ranging from 0% to 43% and 8% to 32%, respectively [91,92]. Therefore, an ideal prosthesis is one that augments the body's natural efforts to heal, provides structural support, allows for ingrowth, and is eventually replaced or fully integrated. Many of these characteristics are found in acellular dermal matrix (ADM).

(p12.1) ADM is a biologic material derived from a donor source-which in most cases is human cadaveric, porcine, or bovine in origin. Chemical and physical processing removes all cellular components of the dermis while preserving the extracellular matrix and basement membrane components. This results in a sheet consisting of extracellular material that acts as a signal for fibroblast incorporation, collagen deposition, and collagen maturation. The extracellular matrix stays intact and is gradually revascularized and remodeled into autologous tissue while maintaining its structural integrity. Early revascularization of the graft is thought to enhance resistance to infection and contamination. This unique ability also carries ADM to become integrated into the native tissue, which aids in wound strength and offers a more biocompatible solution. In addition, with absence of a permanent prosthetic mesh at the repair site, ADM also shows excellent mechanical properties, such as tensile strength, plasticity, and flexibility [93]. Since 2003, ADM has been introduced for abdominal wall reconstruction, with suggestions that it has improved capacity to integrate with surrounding tissues, with less inclination towards infection, erosion, extrusion, adhesion formation, and rejection when compared with synthetic materials. In addition, there have been reports of successful reconstructions of large, complex abdominal wall defects even when placed directly over viscera and when the operative field had been irradiated and/or contaminated with bacteria [94]. However, the disadvantages of ADMs have surfaced with increasing use. Specifically, one of the most prominent concern with ADM is that it stretches over time, leading to abdominal wall laxity and recurrent hernia which ranged widely from 0% to 80% [95]. The laxity and/or recurrence, however, are likely a function of both the high content of elastin in the dermal matrix and improvement in the underlying bowel edema over time. The recurrence rate is also associated with the ADM location (underlay/inlay, overlay/onlay), type of fascial repair (reinforced/bridged repair), and surgical indication (open abdomen/tumour/recurrent hernia).

(p12.2) Although ADM has been used extensively as an option to repair hernia defects, even in wounds with complex and contaminated abdominal defects, it is important to recognize that this material is still in the early stages of use in the management of open abdomen (Figures 11-12). Several studies have described the use of ADM as a fascial bridge after open abdomen which may represent a definitive repair for Figure 12: ADM mesh sutured in place over the exposed bowel. patients with OA. Guy et al. [96] first described a definitive closure technique with a single operation using commercially available ADM as a fascial substitute. ADM materials were used in 9 patients with abdominal compartment syndrome in that trauma center. The fascial defects of the patients were closed on the ninth postoperative day (range 3 to 30 days) and the patients were discharged home on average 8 days (range 5 to 29 days) after the abdominal closure. Complications were few and developed in 3 (33%) patients which included flap hematoma, wound infection, and recurrent hernia. No fistulas developed. A retrospective review of 37 patients with OA reported excellent outcomes. The placement of ADM to bridge repairs the defects that could not be closed primarily after application of negative pressure therapy closed for an average of 21.8 days. No hernia, fistulas, or other complications were reported with a complete follow-up at 30 days and a longest follow-up of 3 years [97]. Conversely, de Moya et al. [98] reported their experience in the use of ADM in trauma patients with large open abdominal wounds and assessed the long-term outcomes. In 10 patients enrolled during a 1-year period, the 30-day follow-up showed no recurrence in 100% of patients. However, follow-up at the end of 1 year demonstrated significant laxity or recurrent hernia or both in 100% of patients. This is the limitation which needs to be addressed surgically. Singh et al. [99] reported in a retrospective review 10 liver transplant recipients with open abdomen treated with ADM. The median follow-up was 10 months with no incidence of evisceration or hernia. Shinall Jr. et al. [100] examined the benefits in children of early fascial closure of open abdomen using ADM. In 5 consecutive children sustaining intra-abdominal catastrophe and managed with damage control celiotomy, ADM was sewn in place as a fascial substitute. After definitive closure, particularly, closure of the skin and subcutaneous tissue over ADM, no patient developed a ventral hernia. Chuo and Thomas [101] described similar results in one aged female with OA using a Permacol mesh (a porcine dermis-derived biomaterial) combined with topical negative pressure therapy. The abdominal dehiscence and exposed bowel of the patient who was admitted with a large bowel perforation were extremely well managed by the technique of mesh application. Permacol mesh appeared to lose its superficial surface at about 4 weeks with the deeper layer incorporating into the underlying wound bed. When she was reviewed later at a 12-month follow-up, examination of the anterior abdominal wall did not reveal any herniation. These available literatures supported the use of ADM as a fascial bridge in the setting of the unclosable abdomen. Yet there is still lack of prospective randomized controlled trials demonstrating the superiority of this technique.
