# cancers Involvement of the Anterior Commissure in Early Glottic Cancer (Tis-T2): A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 201756375 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ac730c34e313c20820f9e3c7db322e35e926d01](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ac730c34e313c20820f9e3c7db322e35e926d01)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Study Characteristics
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) All 58 studies included in this review were published in peer-reviewed journals. Only one prospective randomized study, which was on radiation therapy, was identified [5]. All other publications had a level of evidence classified as B [6]. Most of the studies reported outcomes for early glottic cancer, grouping Tis-T2 tumors together, with only a few studies focusing on T1 or T2 tumors separately. The 34 radiotherapy studies included 9656 patients, of which 3930 patients (40.7%) had involvement of the AC. The 24 TLM studies included 3958 patients, of which 1169 patients (29.5%) had involvement of the AC.
## (s11) Study Characteristics
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) All 58 studies included in this review were published in peer-reviewed journals. Only one prospective randomized study, which was on radiation therapy, was identified [5]. All other publications had a level of evidence classified as B [6]. Most of the studies reported outcomes for early glottic cancer, grouping Tis-T2 tumors together, with only a few studies focusing on T1 or T2 tumors separately. The 34 radiotherapy studies included 9656 patients, of which 3930 patients (40.7%) had involvement of the AC. The 24 TLM studies included 3958 patients, of which 1169 patients (29.5%) had involvement of the AC.
## (s17) Overall Survival, Disease Specific Survival, and Larynx Preservation
Number of References: 49

(p17.0) Four of the radiotherapy studies (11.8%) presented the 5-year OS [8,20,42,43]. The involvement of the AC did not have a statistically significant impact on any of these studies. Seven studies (20.6%) presented the 5-year DSS [8][9][10]16,20,35,38]. In two of these, the involvement of the AC had a statistically significant impact [10,38]. None of the radiotherapy studies presented the 5-year LP rates.

(p17.1) Ten of the TLM studies (41.7%) presented the 5-year OS [23,24,26,28,32,54,58,59,61,65]. The involvement of the AC had a statistically significant impact for one of these for patients with T1b and T2 tumors, but not for T1a tumors [23]. In seven studies, no significant impact was found [24,26,28,32,58,59,61], and in two studies, the impact on OS was not reported [23,54]. Six studies (25.0%) presented the 5-year DSS. Two of these studies showed a statistically significant impact of AC involvement on DSS [53,58], and three studies did not [3,26,59]. In one study, the impact of the AC was not reported [54]. Ten studies (41.7%) presented the 5-year LP rate. Six studies did not show a statistically significant impact of AC involvement on laryngeal preservation [3,26,53,56,59,64], whereas one study did [58]. In two studies, the impact of AC involvement on LP was not reported [23,28]. One study presented a binary approach (yes/no) as well as a more detailed classification. The first showed no significant impact on the AC, whereas the latest identified a significant impact on the involvement of the AC related to the amount of involvement of the AC [54].
