# Continuous Glucose Monitoring Sensors for Diabetes Management: A Review of Technologies and Applications

CorpusID: 201185249 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e00b3af5e06ddadf639028d6a4450c6afcdbeb0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e00b3af5e06ddadf639028d6a4450c6afcdbeb0)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s7) THE IMPACT OF CGM ON DAILY MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) Nowadays, the beneficial impact brought by the integration of a CGM system in diabetes management has been proven [49]. Indeed, initial reluctance from both clinicians and patients has diminished through years thanks to the constant accumulation of clinical evidence from research over adult and pediatric populations with T1DM [29]. Just to mention a few, recent research proved CGM sensors to be effective for patients with frequent hypoglycemic events [7], sensor augmented pumps [50], and gestational diabetes [47], treated with either continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) or a multiple daily injection (MDI) insulin regimen. Published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been devoted to study the impact of CGM sensor systems on (1) improving glycemic control, (2) mitigating hypoglycemic episodes, (3) reducing glycemic variability. In the following, some significant literature results proving the beneficial impact of CGM are reported.
## (s10) Reduction of glycemic variability
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Several studies appear to confirm that glycemic variability can play a key-role in the appearance of vascular damages [29] and in the set-up of hypoglycemic events [55]. CGM sensors are important also in reducing glycemic variability in individuals affected by diabetes. In Jamiolkowska et al. [56], 40 subjects aged 14.6 years have been recruited to evaluate whether the use of CGM could improve glycemic variability in terms of glucose standard deviation (SD) and area under the curve (AUC). Results showed a reduction of SD from 60.7 to 51.7 mg/dL as well as a decreasing of AUC with threshold fixed at 140 mg/dL from 41.2% of the control group to 21.2% of the group that accepted the adoption of CGM use. Another study from Tumminia et al. [57] compared 10 individuals with T1DM undergoing MDI therapy. Participants were monitored for 6 months while being randomized into two groups to compare SMBG versus CGM in terms of SD of the glucose profile and range of glycemic excursions (RGEs). Results showed a reduction of both SD and RGE when using CGM compared to SMBG (62.3 mg/dL vs. 75.5 mg/dL and 132.3 mg/dL vs. 175.3 mg/dL, respectively).
## (s12) Decision support systems
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) The increased amount of available information brought by wearable devices, such as CGM systems and physical activity monitoring bands, has led to the development of decisionmaking tools and applications that can enhance the management of the disease [58]. A decision support system (DSS) gives the possibility to support users with proactive and personalized decisions in any scenario of their daily living and allows to react at shorter time scales. Over the past few years, DSSs for diabetes have been an emerging concept in health care. By means of this new technology, data can be automatically collected, transmitted, aggregated with other physiological data, analyzed, stored, and presented to the patient. By integrating e-health and tele-monitoring systems, DSSs for T1DM have the potential to improve glycemic outcomes thanks to prevention of hypo-or hyperglycemic events, reducing uncertainty when making critical self-management decisions [59]. A DSS for diabetes treatment provides an alternative to the closed-loop system, the so-called artificial pancreas (AP). Indeed, a wide range of users do not feel confident with the use of AP systems, being concerned about errors occurring in the insulin pump, and they prefer an open-loop therapy, which can be assisted by DSSs. Most of DSSs already available in the literature are composed by a predictive glucose module (which alerts the user whenever its BG is predicted to fall outside the safe range in the next future), an insulin suspension module (which temporarily suspends basal insulin delivery to avoid hypoglycemia when BG is critically low in patient using insulin pumps), and an adaptive insulin bolus calculator (which provides users with a suggestion of the correct insulin dosage to compensate the BG fluctuation due to a meal).
