# A survey of parameterized algorithms and the complexity of edge modification *

CorpusID: 210839434 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s7) Open problem 2.2 ([78]). Does Line Graph Deletion admit a polynomial kernel?
Number of References: 10

(p7.0) Similar questions are open for Line Graph Completion and Line Graph Editing. There has also been some attempt to generalize the approach of Cai and Cai [49] to families of hereditary graphs characterized by not only a single obstruction but a finite number of them. This gave the very nice result contained in the work of Aravind, Sandeep, and Sivadasan [8], but which is valid only for restricted input graphs: if the input graphs have bounded degree and if the graphs in F are connected, then the F-free edge Deletion problem admits a polynomial kernel.

(p7.1) Among the classes of graphs listed in Table 1, one received a particular attention: cluster graphs (see the survey by Böcker and Baumbach [22] for more on the topic). The reason is that cluster graph modification problems, more precisely deletion and editing, are closely related to the question of community detection, which is central in the domain of complex networks. It is striking to see that despite the simplicity of the structure of cluster graphs (they are disjoint union of cliques), both the editing and deletion problems remain NP-complete. Completion is trivially polynomial: simply turn each connected component into a clique. From a kernelization perspective, Gramm et al. [144] first showed the existence of a k 3 kernel both for Cluster Deletion and Cluster Editing. The editing kernel was improved to linear size, namely 6k, by Fellows et al. [108] and there were several works putting efforts to further reduce the size of the kernel to 4k, by Guo [153], and then to 2k by Chen and Meng [67] and by Cao and Chen [55] independently. The same efforts were put in trying to obtain the best possible complexity for FPT algorithms solving these modification problems. Gramm et al. [144] first obtained a 2.27 k complexity for editing and 1.77 k for deletion, which was improved by Böcker and Damaschke [25] to 1.76 k and 1.41 k respectively.
## (s19) Related results
Number of References: 10

(p19.0) In some cases, the input graph is naturally a bipartite graph. The Chain Completion problem is the problem of making a bipartite graph a bipartite chain graph, that is, a bipartite graph with no induced 2K 2 . The problem was first shown to admit a polynomial kernel by Guo [152] when the bipartition is fixed. Fomin and Villanger showed that this version of the problem admits a subexponential time algorithm [122] and Bliznets et al. [17] showed that it cannot be solved in time O(2 k 1/4 ) unless ETH fails. Drange et al. [98] relaxed the input requirements, showing that the problem still admits a quadratic kernel even when the bipartition is not fixed.

(p19.1) In the Minimum Flip Consensus Tree problem, we are asked to turn an input bipartite graph into a bipartite graph with same partition that contains no P 5 starting from any top vertex, called a consensus tree. This kind of graph, a consensus tree, arises in computational phylogenetics, with the bottom vertices being characters and the top vertices being the taxa. The problem is solvable in time c k n O(1) by Cai's theorem. Chen [65] proved that it is NP-complete and gave an O(6 k n 2 ) FPT algorithm, which was later improved to O(4.42 k n) by Böcker, Bui and Truss [24]. Finally, Komusiewicz and Uhlmann [182] gave a O(3.68 k n 3 ) algorithm and a O(k 3 ) kernel for Minimum Flip Consensus Tree.

(p19.2) Several variants of cluster editing were introduced for the special case of bipartite graphs. The main one, called Bicluster Editing, aims at obtaining a union of complete bipartite graphs. It admits a 4k linear kernel and a FPT algorithm running in O(3.24 k + |E|) [155]. Drange et al. [101] considered the extension of p-Cluster Editing to Bicluster Editing and the more general t-Partite Cluster Editing, yielding the problems p-Bicluster Editing and t-Partite p-Cluster Editing. None of the classical parameterized versions are solvable in subexponential time, but fixing the number p of connected components in the solution, the problems become solvable in subexponential time. In [101], it is shown that a problem called p-Starforest Editing is solvable in time O(2 3 √ pk + m + n), whereas an algorithm of running time 2 O(p √ k log(pk)) + O(m + n) is given for p-Bicluster Editing, as well as t-Partite p-Cluster Editing.
## (s37) Open problem 4.1. Is it possible to give efficient FPT algorithms for DCE(S) and/or WDCE(S) parameterized by k + r for general degree list functions?
Number of References: 4

(p37.0) For the case vertex deletion ∈ S ⊆ {vertex deletion, edge deletion} and single-element degree lists, Mathieson and Szeider [219] showed that WDCE(S) admits a kernel with O(kr(k + r)) vertices. For general degree lists, they demonstrated a kernel with O(k 2 r k+1 + kr k+2 ) vertices. These results were complemented by Froese, Nichterlein and Niedermeier [127], who proved that if only edge additions are allowed (i.e, for the completion problem), then DCE(S) has kernels with O(kr 2 ) and O(r 5 ) vertices, that is, it admits a polynomial kernel whose size depends only on r. To obtain the latter result, they prove that the problem can be solved in polynomial time if k is sufficiently large (greater that some polynomial of r). The latter result is based on a clever application of combinatorial results about existence of f -factors. Hence, the following win-win approach can be used: if k is large, then the problem is solved in polynomial time, and if k is bounded by a polynomial of r, then the kernelization algorithm for the case where the parameter is k + r is applied. Froese, Nichterlein and Niedermeier [127] also give lower bounds by proving that DCE(S) parameterized by k + r has no polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly if S = {vertex deletion} or S = {edge addition}. Another lower bound for this parameterization was given by Golovach [133] who proved that DCE(S) with degree lists of size one has no polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly if {vertex deletion, edge addition} ⊆ S.
## (s44) Open problem 4.4. Investigate the parameterized complexity of variants of DCF(S) and EECG for directed graphs.
Number of References: 2

(p44.0) Besides vertex degree constraints, it could be interesting to consider edge degree constraints or combined vertex and edge degree constraints. In particular, Mathieson [218] considered a number of problems of this type. For a edge weighted graph, the weighted degree of a vertex is defined as the sum of weights of incident edges. Respectively, the weighted sum of an edge is the sum of the vertex degrees of its end-points. Mathieson [218] considered the following problems for edge weighted graphs:
## (s63) Π-Degree Sequence Completion (Π-DSC)
Number of References: 3

(p63.0) Notice that Π is a tuple property. In particular, DCE({edge addition)} is not a special case of Π-DSC, but Anonymization({edge addition}) is. They introduced the auxiliary Π-Decision problem that asks whether an n-tuple T = (d 1 , . . . , d n ) of non-negative integers satisfies Π and proved, using the previous results about Anonymization({edge addition}) [162], that if Π-Decision is FPT when parameterized by ∆ = max{d i | 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, then Π-DSC is FPT when parameterized by ∆ + k. Recall now that Bredereck et al. [39] proved that Anonymization({edge addition}) is FPT when parameterized by ∆ and has a kernel with O(∆ 7 ) vertices. Generalizing this result, Froese et al. [127] defined the Π-Number Sequence Completion (Π-NSC) problem that asks for a sequence d 1 , . . . , d n of non-negative integers and two non-negative integers k and ∆ , whether there are non-negative integers x 1 , . . . , x n such that the n-tuple T = (d 1 + x 1 , . . . , d n + x n ) satisfies Π,
## (s69) Diameter Augmentation
Number of References: 3

(p69.0) The problem is known to be NP-hard even if d = 2 [193] as it was shown by Li, McCormick and Simchi-Levi, and it was proved by Gao, Hare and Nastos that the problem is W[1]-hard when parameterized by k even if d = 2. Frati et al. [125] studied a more general weighted optimization version of Diameter Augmentation, where we have a weighted graph with a weight function w : V (G) × V (G) → N and a cost function c : V (G) × V (G) → N and an integer bound B. The goal is to add a set of edges F such that c(F ) = e∈F c(e) ≤ B, and the diameter of G + F is minimum. Frati et al. [125] gave an FPT 4-approximation algorithm running in time 3 B poly(n, B). They also established some inapproximability results.
