# Imaging spectrum of meningiomas: a review of uncommon imaging appearances and their histopathological and prognostic significance

CorpusID: 211212834 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83758f0b33e48fb230a813284800c12c91666979](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83758f0b33e48fb230a813284800c12c91666979)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Clear cell variant
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) This subtype is histologically comprised of polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm. It shows a predilection for younger patients and cerebellopontine (CP) angle location (Figure 11). Usually these tumours show a heterogeneous enhancement pattern. Peritumoral oedema and cyst formation in the underlying brain parenchyma is common. Being a WHO grade II tumour, osteolysis of the underlying bones is more common than hyperostosis [20], and hence this feature cannot be used to differentiate CP angle clear cell meningioma from the more common CP angle tumour, acoustic schwannoma. However, certain imaging clues do exist, which can be used to differentiate them (Table 1) [21].
## (s16) Atypical variant and WHO grade III meningiomas
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Atypical subtype of grade II and all three subtypes of grade III meningiomas can essentially be differentiated only based on histopathology and cannot be definitively differentiated from each other on imaging. However, on the basis of imaging findings, a prediction of high-grade meningioma can be made by the radiologist [22]. They occur in relatively old patients and show a male predominance. Imaging features predicting a high-grade meningioma include an extra-axial mass showing irregular tumour margins with indistinct tumour-brain interfaces, lack of sharply defined enhancement margins, heterogeneous signal intensity and enhancement pattern, eccentric intratumoural necrosis, extensive peritumoral oedema, definite invasion of underlying brain parenchyma, and destruction of the overlying bone ( Figure 12).   In contrast to grade I and other grade II meningiomas, these show diffusion restriction [23]. On dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, the volume transfer constant K trans shows higher values as compared to other meningiomas. MRS may be necessary for confirmation if conventional imaging findings are not sufficiently diagnostic of meningioma and it shows an alanine peak (specific) and glutamine/glutamate peak in the tumour. Important differentials of high-grade meningiomas include haemangiopericytoma (differentiated from meningioma by the presence of myoinositol peak on MRS) and metastases (usually differentiated from meningioma by the presence of multiple lesions). The main differentiating features on imaging of the various histopathological subtypes of meningiomas are shown in Table 2. 
