# Molecular Sciences Somatostatin Analogs in Clinical Practice: A Review

CorpusID: 211831309 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8068b7fc4e4f2eb8b7291a1f8dd6910b55fe4d6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8068b7fc4e4f2eb8b7291a1f8dd6910b55fe4d6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) Somastostatin (SST) is a cyclic polypeptide derived from an SST precursor protein that is processed into several peptide hormones, including SST-14, SST-28, and neuronostatin. SST-14 is the isoform that was originally characterized [1]. STT is one of the main inhibitors of endocrine and exocrine hormone secretion in humans [2]. Native SST is not useful in clinical practice because it has an extremely short half life of 1-3 min, rapidly degradated by ubiquitously distributed peptidases in plasma and tissues [3]. After the characterization of SST, several SST synthetic analogs (SSAs) with longer half-life were developed. To date, three of them have been approved in clinical practice: lanreotide and octretide are considered first-generation SSAs, and pasireotide is considered a second-generation SSA. Their main clinical use has been evaluated in Phase III clinical Trials, and some other uses have been evaluated in prospective studies.
## (s6) Thyrotropinomas
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Thyrotropinoma is a very infrequent pituitary tumor, which represents 1% of pituitary adenomas, mostly macroadenomas, with locally aggressive behavior and clinical hyperthyroidism. The first therapeutic approach is transsphenoidal surgery or debulking, previous normalization of thyroid function, although it is curative in only 44% of cases [51,52]. Radiotherapy is used when remission is not achieved, but its effect is unpredictable and late, and the rate of remission is low [53].

(p6.1) SSAs constitute a treatment option for thyrotropinomas. In the presurgical stage, SSAs are effective in controlling hyperthyroidism and they improve surgery outcomes by reducing tumor size. As an adjuvant therapy to surgery, SSAs achieve euthyroidism in 75-95% of cases and a reduction in tumor size between 30-50% in the first 3 months of treatment [54][55][56]. For efficacy and safety, it should be noted that long-term treatment with SSAs should be maintained, at the lowest possible dose, to achieve biochemical and tumor control.
## (s7) Corticotropinomas
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) Cushing's disease appears when a corticotropin (ACTH) secreting pituitary adenoma is present. It represents 10% of pituitary adenomas. The treatment of choice is transsphenoidal surgery, which is curative in 50-90% of cases [57][58][59]. Radiation therapy and adrenolytic agents can be used as adjuvant treatment in case of incomplete surgical resections.

(p7.1) Corticotropinomas express mostly SSTR5, followed by SSTR2. SSTR2 activation inhibits Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) synthesis, while SSTR5 activation inhibits cell proliferation. Corticotropinomas express almost exclusively high levels of POMC [60]. In an in vitro study, it was observed that octreotide exerted, in a shorter period of time, a greater degree of inhibition in a greater percentage of cells and managed to inhibit ACTH more than pasireotide [60]. However, another in vitro study in mice showed a more potent inhibition of ACTH with pasireotide compared to octreotide [19].
## (s10) Gastroenteropancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (GEP-NETs)
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are a heterogeneous group of tumors that originate in neuroendocrine cells from endocrine glands, endocrine islets, and endocrine cells dispersed throughout the digestive and respiratory tract. The gastrointestinal tract (62-67%) and the lungs (22-27%) are the most common primary tumor sites and the majority are sporadic [88]. GEP-NETs commonly express SSTR [88]. Approximately 80% of NETs of the gastrointestinal tract express SSTR2 [89]. In fact, in patients with GEP-NETs treated with SSAs, expression of SSTR2 is associated with longer progression-free survival (PFS) [90].
## (s18) Graves' Orbitopathy
Number of References: 8

(p18.0) Graves' orbitopathy is an extrathyroid manifestation of autoimmune hyperthyroidism. SSTR is present in extraocular muscles, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts (Graves' disease target cells), as well as immunoreactivity for IGF-1 in extraocular muscles and adipocytes [142]. Thus, SSAs act on the triggers and perpetuators of the disease by inhibiting cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-1, TGF-3) and growth factors (mainly IGF-1) [143].

(p18.1) In vivo studies have demonstrated a relationship between the presence of SSTR and the activity of thyroid orbitopathy, determined by OctreoScan ® [144,145]. However, it remains to be determined whether OctreoScan ® is a parameter of disease activity and a predictor of immunosuppressive therapy outcome better than clinical parameters, MRI, or measurement of glycosaminoglycan in plasma and/or urine.

(p18.2) Several studies in small cohorts and without a control group have shown that octreotide and lanreotide improve symptoms (Soft tissue inflammation, palpebral aperture, intraocular pressure, exophthalmos, diplopia, cornea, and visual acuity), inactivate the disease at 3 months, and reduce the use of systemic corticosteroids. Therefore, SSAs are a diagnostic, therapeutic, and predictive option of the therapeutic response to immunosuppressants of Graves' orbitopathy in active phase [146][147][148][149].
## (s20) Digestive and Lymphatic Fistulas
Number of References: 5

(p20.0) Fistulas are a major complication of surgery and are associated with high morbidity and mortality (10-35%) [159]. The most proximal in the intestine (esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and jejunum) and those that have a high debit (hydroelectrolytic losses) are fistulas of difficult management. SSAs are useful in the treatment of fistulas due to their ability to inhibit digestive secretions (salivary, gastric, intestinal, pancreatic, and biliary) and decrease digestive peristalsis. It is also useful in lymphatic fistulas by reducing thoracic duct lymph flow rate. Several studies have shown the benefit of octreotide and lanreotide, achieving a higher fistula closure rate. With respect to the mortality rate, the results of the studies are contradictory. Most of these studies agree that the greatest benefit occurs in the first 10 days of treatment. Therefore, SSAs are an effective adjuvant treatment in the management of fistulas that do not respond to conventional treatment with intestinal rest and total parenteral nutrition. It is also used prophylactically in pancreatic surgery [160][161][162][163].
## (s25) Adverse Events
Number of References: 5

(p25.0) SSAs are generally well tolerated. Adverse events may begin shortly after the first administration of the drug and may decrease progressively over the subsequent weeks as the treatment continues [188]. The most reported adverse events include injection site discomfort and erythema, gastrointestinal disturbances such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, biliary sludge or gallstones, and modest and transient negative impact on glucose homeostasis. Cholelithiasis represents the most serious complication of SSAs, but is generally asymptomatic, and has been reported in 3-56% of patients. Pasireotide has shown a safety profile as expected for an SSA, except for the degree of hyperglycemia [189]. Uncommon side effects include sinus bradycardia, asthenia, headache, pruritus, decreased libido, increased serum bilirubin, and constipation [190]. Alopecia has also been reported [191]. High doses of SSAs have not shown differences in common adverse events when compared to standard doses [192].
