# future internet Modeling and Simulation Tools for Fog Computing-A Comprehensive Survey from a Cost Perspective

CorpusID: 219441455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b045522376072d4f1071dd09bcecba0f540a764f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b045522376072d4f1071dd09bcecba0f540a764f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Basic Concepts
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Since 2009, Satyanarayanan et al. [21] have supported that cloud computing suffers from large scale and increasing latency, and have pointed out the need for new technologies. Among the newer developments, fog computing is a groundbreaking technology that bolsters and extends the cloud. The term "fog computing" was initially introduced by Cisco, in 2012, as a "cloud-to-thing continuum" [1]. It is defined in different ways, which encompass the cooperation of a huge number of distributed devices and the placement of storage, computational and networking services at the edges, the network or the cloud [2]. Fog computing is not a standalone paradigm, it is located between the cloud and the network edges, supporting virtualization and the cooperation of end devices. It arose as a result of the efforts of academia and industry in order to provide low latency, high scalability while reducing costs and energy. It is considered as a promising technology, capable of handling extraordinary amounts of data that are generated by IoT devices. The features of fog computing include heterogeneity support, geographical distribution, location awareness, ultra-low latency, support of real time and large-scale applications, and virtualization [4].
## (s6) Modeling and Simulation Challenges
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Fog computing emerges as a modern and competitive environment in a number of different areas: smart cities, intelligent transportation systems, smart healthcare, public safety, smart grid, industry 4.0, smart home and smart building are only some of the domains where applications have been developed and supported by a variety of fog computing technologies [10]. Often, these technologies and applications have a significant impact on daily peoples lives. However, not all of them have reached a satisfactory level of maturity and require more consideration. Existing approaches try to answer emerging questions, to solve a problem or make a decision in a specific field [17] mainly using modeling and simulation. Today, there are several simulation tools for fog computing environments with different mechanisms and characteristics. Before we investigate how they fulfill their purpose, we discuss the current challenges in fog computing that lead to new specialized and novel techniques. These innovations can be evaluated, tested and have their cost estimated by employing proper simulation tools.
## (s8) Storage
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) One of the main functions of fog computing is the provision of storage resources which are closer to the end devices than cloud storage. The storage requirements come from a large number of end devices, which may be distributed in a vast geographical area, used by different users while running their applications. Many types of storage can be used in fog nodes in order to provide the reliability and data integrity required by the fog system [26]. The user needs, the application requirements or restrictions and the cost determine the type and capacity of storage, while a key issue is the placement of storage resources. In 5G wireless networks, proactive caching and distributed storage based on the integration of each user's personal storage space [6] have been proposed as storage technologies which can expand the service capabilities. Sharma et al. [27] propose a fog architecture that supports blockchain storage; blockchain technology introduces an efficient, scalable and secure way to manage resources.
## (s13) Cost Considerations
Number of References: 6

(p13.0) Fog computing is a complex environment, where services are provided to users, and users execute their applications. The acquisition of services or resources depends on the participating nodes and their roles as providers or users and always involves the notion of cost. Various aspects of fog computing costs have been considered and cost-aware schemes have been proposed for resource allocation [33], simulations tools [34,35], or modeling tools [36,37]. Battula et al. [33] propose a cost model for fog computing environments which concerns both devices and applications. It is calculated per device or application and summarizes different types of cost and various cost parameters. It is expressed as a function of:
