# The impacts of faculty caring on nursing students' intent to graduate: A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 211473611 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81a364c24955f5b3f3a3a58165baeb618fcdb1b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81a364c24955f5b3f3a3a58165baeb618fcdb1b1)

Fields: Medicine, Education, Psychology

## (s11) Building students' confidence
Number of References: 10

(p11.0) Based on the findings of this review, students' confidence was defined as the ability to be self-reliant in new situations. Instilling confidence and being respectful were the most personal caring behaviors. Differences occurred based on students' social demographics, such as different countries and ethnicities. In the studies which examined students in Greece, India, the Philippines, and Nigeria, the most important caring attribute for an instructor was "instills confidence through caring" [11,15]. In contrast, a research study in Iran found that the most important attribute among nursing students was that the instructors were respectful to students and had positive sharing behaviors [16]. Instilling confidence in students through caring ranked as the second most important attribute, according to the study [16].

(p11.1) Nursing students in the united states had similar perceptions of their instructors, with the highest-ranking attribute being "instills confidence through caring" [17]. This article [17] also found a correlation between increased age of students and increased perceptions of their professors caring. This could be due to students' life experiences and generational similarities between older students and their professors [17]. Fifer [17] also connected an increase in working hours of students to a decrease in the perception of their instructor caring, which could be attributed to the increased levels of stress on students both financially and mentally. In regard to race, Fifer [17] and Torregosa et al. [18] found that non-white students had an increased perception of their instructors caring overall. When students perceived caring in their faculties, who showed a personal level of care and helped students build their confidence, students were better apt to listen and learn.
## (s12) Creating a compassionate learning environment
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) A compassionate classroom environment was referred to as an environment in which students felt understood, challenged, and encouraged. Students least reported attribute in all studies was that instructors exhibited "control versus flexibility [11,15]. Control was defined as not allowing students to problem-solve and forcing students to follow instructions exactly as what faculties said. Flexibility, in contrast, allowed students to learn in a way that fit students the best while faculties provided support and guidance on safe practice [17]. Students reporting a lack of flexibility perceived  12 nursing students Structured interviews Empathy from instructors promoted a constructive learning experience and a caring learning environment while a lack of empathy obstructed students' learning.
## (s25) Respecting students
Number of References: 5

(p25.0) Respecting students was defined as approaching students in the same respectful way a colleague should be treated. A study which interviewed six ADN/BSN nursing students in the mid-western United States found that all of the students interviewed had at least one faculty "bully" [5]. Mott [5] also found that 83% of the students interviewed experienced "fear/intimidation," 67% felt "frustration/anger/sadness/depression," 67% were made to feel "demeaned or belittled," and 50% experienced "decreased selfconfidence." Though it was found in Mott's study that students became more resilient after experiencing a faculty bully, a negative impact was still made on their learning environment and experience.

(p25.1) Concerning the intimidation and fear, some instructors were also perceived as prejudice. A study on the perception of instructors on male nursing students found discriminatory behaviors that consistently favored female students [20]. The male students in the study reported the following experiences: gender bias, being singled out, doing manly stuff, limitations in clinical settings, and no male role models [20]. Thus, when students felt being biased, they did not feel that they belonged, and their learning environment was compromised. For male students to feel comfortable, Powers et al. [20] suggested faculties implementing gender-neutral terminology into nursing examples and lectures and treating all students as equals.
## (s29) Providing continuing education and mentoring programs for instructors
Number of References: 4

(p29.0) Finding new ways to educate instructors on appropriate caring behaviors is beneficial to students. Mikkonen et al. [4] suggest providing continuing education for instructors, in which instructors can develop and increase their empathic skills and understand the importance of showing empathy on students' learning and professionalism. Other suggestions for continuing education of instructors come from Labrague et al. [11] who suggest nurse educators become certified, which can benefit both instructors and students. Continuing education on instructing faculty empathy skills may promote students' perceptions of what nursing means to them and keep students on the path to finish their nursing education.

(p29.1) Faculty mentoring programs are also valuable to develop junior faculties. Swanson, Larson, and Malone [28] find that successful mentoring programs foster junior faculties' academic success as scholars and educators. Effective mentoring programs help mentors and mentees build a productive relationship that is consisted of mutual respect, trust, and open communication. Effective mentoring programs can provide a win-win situation for both nursing schools and junior faculties [28]. Faculties can build their reputations and careers, and universities can benefit from the increasing contributions of the junior faculties.
