# Machine Learning for Intelligent Optical Networks: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 212657759 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5ff9ba22e1e500abb5b7ad3c84f7c2df9114920](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5ff9ba22e1e500abb5b7ad3c84f7c2df9114920)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s27) RWA and RSA in Optical Networks
Number of References: 4

(p27.0) Besides routing resources assignment, allocation of other resources is also an important issue. Especially for the optical networks, there are multiple types of resources to be assigned, such as wavelength, spectrum, and modulation format, which makes the resource allocation more complicated. In WDM networks, several wavelengths are transmitted in a single link. RWA problems refer to assign a route and an optical wavelength for each IP service flow [72], while RSA aims to setup a lightpath with multiple spectrum slots for a flow transmission. Spectrum assignment refers to allocate suitable spectrum slots to the requested lightpath. RSA in EON is the equivalent problem to the RWA in WDM networks. The difference of RSA and RWA is due to the capability of the EON architecture to offer flexible spectrum allocation to meet the requested data rates [73].

(p27.1) Both of RWA and RSA are NP-complete [74]. The problems are usually formulated as constrained optimization problems, such as Integer Linear Programming (ILP). Heuristics approaches, such as genetic algorithm and simulated annealing, are used to solve the problems [75] [76]. Recently, many researches leverage ML techniques to solve RWA and RSA problems. These works are introduced in this subsection.
## (s28) Supervised Learning-based RWA
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) In [77], the RWA problem is modeled as a multi-class classification problem and solved with logistic regression and DNN. The optimal RWA configurations are computed in advance through ILP, and Net2Plan network optimization tool [66] is used to obtain training samples. When training the logistic regression and DNN models, network states include topology, capacity, available wavelengths and the set of traffic demands, are input to the model, and the target output is the optimal RWA configuration to these states. The supervised learning model learns the relationships between network states and optimal optical RWA. With these learned relationships, computing the optimal solution with ILP is not necessary, which avoids high computational complexity. The computing of optimal RWA configuration by the above approach is time efficient and thus enable real-time network configuration.
## (s38) Failure Management
Number of References: 3

(p38.0) Failures in optical networks may cause network performance degradation and even huge data loss. There are mainly two kinds of failure management methods: reactive methods and proactive methods. In reactive methods, the network operators take actions when alarms occur. However, the data loss has already happened and the manual operation may not cope with massive alarms and invisible failures in aspects of flexibility and timeliness. Thus, the system should be designed in a proactive way, which can detect the potential failures and provide enough time for restoration actions [101]. Machine learning is a powerful tool for proactive failure detection, which learns the relationship between current network status and future network failures. In addition to failure prediction, it is also nontrivial to identify and localize the root-causes of failures for efficient and precise service maintenance and restoration [102]. In this subsection, the applications of ML techniques used in failures prediction, identification and localization will be reviewed. Vela et al. propose a data visualization method for failure localization with the aid of K-means [109]. To support human operation with monitored path BER data, the BER performance of paths and their change trends are visualized. Paths are clustered according to the max BER and BER trend with K-means approach, and different centroids are plotted in a 2D place. Different colors are assigned according to different BER performance for better representation to human operators.
