# Solid-State Transformers in Locomotives Fed through AC Lines: A Review and Future Developments

CorpusID: 211105412 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/17905555dceac6bb23495d3af9a80b9d385ec8f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/17905555dceac6bb23495d3af9a80b9d385ec8f3)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s7) Review of Main Conversion Architectures
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) With the availability of 3.3 kV high-power IGBTs (Insular Gate Bipolar Transistor), many studies were carried out on railway traction at the end of the '90s [10,11], proposing innovative architectures, modular and based on the use of high performance IGBTs. These studies consisted of a four quadrant multilevel converter in a cascade connection of H-bridges, as 1st stage to interface with the 15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz overhead line voltage. As 2nd and 3rd stage, a reversible DC/DC converter composed of a DC/AC with H-bridge, a medium frequency transformer and a AC/DC with H-bridge was proposed. It was hypothesized the use of a series-resonant circuit in the AC-link, in order to reach sufficiently high frequency for transformer operation. Further studies were carried out by the same researchers regarding an architecture which could work both at 15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz and 3 kV DC [69].
## (s9) Bombardier Transportation "Medium Frequency Topology"
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) In 2007 Bombardier Transportation presented a laboratory prototype called "Medium Frequency Topology" [14], which exploits the principle shown in [10,11] and which is designed for 15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz. PET main features are reported in Table 3, whereas PET scheme is shown in Figure  6. Analogously to the eTransformer, it is a 3SC and it is made of eight identical modules cascade connected. Differently from eTransformer, where only one medium frequency transformer is used, in Medium Frequency Topology a transformer is used for each module and the outputs of the modules (LV DC-link) are parallel connected. The 1st stage is a AC/DC full H-bridge, the 2nd stage a full H-bridge DC/AC s.w. (differently from eTransformer that has an half-bridge) and the 3rd stage is again a full H-bridge AC s.w./DC. If one of the modules fails, the Medium Frequency Topology can work with a reduction of power of 1/8; indeed it uses 6.5 kV IGBTs for the 1st stage and therefore 7 modules are sufficient for 15 kV line voltage. The transformers are just 18 kg each and they have 1:1 winding ratio. The main disadvantage of this PET is that a great number of IGBTs, and of course of auxiliary devices, is needed. A reduction of number of components can be performed using half Hbridges, as shown in next solutions.  
## (s34) Soft-Switching MMC: Description and Waveform Simulation
Number of References: 4

(p34.0) One of the main limitations in the use of MMC for railway application is connected to its switching frequency. In order to reduce transformer volume and weight, it should be necessary to have at least a frequency of 7-8 kHz and significant advantages will be obtained with a frequency of 10-20 kHz. Even if the MMC is quite refined and exploit optimally the switching frequency, the features of high power switches (some kV and hundreds of A) limits the MMC frequency at 1-2 kHz. In the first studies [13,76] the switching frequency was 4 kHz for the two-voltage version (18 submodules per arm), with a submodule medium frequency of 350 Hz and an output voltage switching at 2 kHz; 4 kHz switching frequency for the one-voltage version (12 submodules per arm), with an output voltage switching at 1 kHz.

(p34.1) The MMC is intrinsically hard-switching but, being composed by identical submodules, there could be the possibility of increasing the switching frequency using a soft-switching topology [42,54] in the H-bridge; the aim of the study is to investigate this aspect. One has to note that if the switching frequency of the single submodule increases, once the desired output frequency is fixed, the number of submodules can decrease, and therefore the number of devices.
