# Trends and applications of resilience analytics in supply chain modeling: systematic literature review in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic

CorpusID: 218988656 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57350288f90b899a5ce11a0c4815b6fb2efba610](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57350288f90b899a5ce11a0c4815b6fb2efba610)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s19) Geo-economic analysis
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) This literature review further analyzes the geographic differentiation among the publications reviewed that were published between 2017 and 2019. Supply chains, industry types, and disruption threat levels are subject to the location from which they originate and with which they operate. Certain countries or regions are hubs for certain industries, political threats, or climatic threats, and could affect the supply chain resilience models, especially during pandemics. For example, Tukamuhabwa et al. (2017) utilizes a single case study on 20 manufacturing firms in Uganda to identify critical challenges to supply chain resilience in developing, or emerging, economies. Some of these challenges include counterfeiting, dishonest employees, and corruption (Tukamuhabwa et al. 2017). To differentiate between possible geographic specificities, each of the 94 publications was categorized in terms of its geographic location (country/ region), type of economy (developed or emerging), industry, sub-industry, and supply chain scope (domestic or international). Table SI3 includes each of these categories, in addition to the type of data (quantitative, qualitative, or both) and whether or not the publication presents a metric, or proxy metric, for resilience.
