# molecules An Overview of the Potential Antineoplastic Effects of Casticin

CorpusID: 212738428 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0303a9699d1626f45ccd2fedf3745417cd883691](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0303a9699d1626f45ccd2fedf3745417cd883691)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Casticin and Breast Cancer
Number of References: 10

(p7.0) Breast cancer is the most prevalent type of cancer in women and is a major cause of mortality worldwide due to its poor prognosis and diagnostic procedures [49][50][51][52]. Pretreatment of casticin on MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells resulted in downregulation of MMP-9 mRNA protein expression but has no significant effect on MMP-2, suggesting that casticin can suppress both migration and invasion abilities in breast cancer cells. Although both proteins have similar properties, MMP-9 is directly involved in response to invasion, whereas MMP-2 is found only in malignant tumors, so it is not involved in initial invasive events. Within the AP-1 pathway, casticin suppressed c-Jun and c-Fos expression, leading to an increase in proliferative properties. Casticin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated Akt in the Akt signaling pathway. The reduction in MMP-9 protein levels reserved the invasion abilities of the breast cancer cell lines. The findings in this particular research paper suggest that casticin has properties to inhibit the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, preventing cell invasion and migration in various tumor cells, including breast cancer [48]. The Akt signaling pathway is crucial for regulating both tumorigenesis (the formation of a tumor) and the cell cycle. The pathway is activated by a large number of receptor tyrosine kinases-for example, epidermal cell growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulin-like growth factors (IFGRs)-with protein kinase B (PKB) being the central node that can be stimulated [48,53,54]. Casticin significantly inhibits cell viability by suppressing Akt activation in a concentration-dependent manner and also inhibits selfrenewal and invasionary behaviors of cancer cells. Besides opioid receptors, casticin may also directly bind to several proteins, including estrogen receptors, threonine-protein kinase Pim-1 and reticuline oxidase, as revealed by docking studies [48,53]. As a result, casticin could be utilized as an antineoplastic drug for human breast cancers.
## (s9) Casticin and Breast Cancer
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Breast cancer is the most prevalent type of cancer in women and is a major cause of mortality worldwide due to its poor prognosis and diagnostic procedures [49][50][51][52]. Pretreatment of casticin on MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells resulted in downregulation of MMP-9 mRNA protein expression but has no significant effect on MMP-2, suggesting that casticin can suppress both migration and invasion abilities in breast cancer cells. Although both proteins have similar properties, MMP-9 is directly involved in response to invasion, whereas MMP-2 is found only in malignant tumors, so it is not involved in initial invasive events. Within the AP-1 pathway, casticin suppressed c-Jun and c-Fos expression, leading to an increase in proliferative properties. Casticin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated Akt in the Akt signaling pathway. The reduction in MMP-9 protein levels reserved the invasion abilities of the breast cancer cell lines. The findings in this particular research paper suggest that casticin has properties to inhibit the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, preventing cell invasion and migration in various tumor cells, including breast cancer [48]. The Akt signaling pathway is crucial for regulating both tumorigenesis (the formation of a tumor) and the cell cycle. The pathway is activated by a large number of receptor tyrosine kinases-for example, epidermal cell growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulin-like growth factors (IFGRs)-with protein kinase B (PKB) being the central node that can be stimulated [48,53,54]. Casticin significantly inhibits cell viability by suppressing Akt activation in a concentration-dependent manner and also inhibits self-renewal and invasionary behaviors of cancer cells. Besides opioid receptors, casticin may also directly bind to several proteins, including estrogen receptors, threonine-protein kinase Pim-1 and reticuline oxidase, as revealed by docking studies [48,53]. As a result, casticin could be utilized as an antineoplastic drug for human breast cancers.
## (s11) Casticin and Cervical Cancer
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) Following breast cancer, cervical cancer is the second deadliest deadly cancer among women [57,58]. Consequently, two studies have been conducted on the HeLa, CasKi and SiHa cervical cancer lines. Casticin induced cell cycle arrest in the sub-G1 phase and increased the reactive oxygen species (ROS) concentration within all three cell lines. Additionally, casticin induced mitochondrial apoptosis by the upregulation of Cytochrome c, the downregulation of MMP and an increase in caspase-3 and -9 activities. Bax was upregulated, while Bcl-xL and XIAP were both downregulated. Both mitochondrial signaling pathways and ROS production mediated the apoptosis. Mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis is a dissipation of the mitochondrial membrane potential and is modulated by the Bel-2 family of proteins. Contrastingly, ROS-mediated apoptosis is the result of the excess production of ROS, which induced oxidative damage and depolarized MMP. Doses of casticin between 0.5-4.0 µM were tested, with an IC50 value of 1.268 µM [59]. Another similar study also found that casticin increased levels of ROS production and increased the expression of phosphorylated JNK and c-Jun protein [60].
## (s12) Casticin and Colon Cancer
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) After lung and breast cancer, colorectal, or colon cancer, is the third-leading cause of cancer deaths in Western countries [61]. Casticin induced cell morphological changes and induced apoptosis via the activation of the caspase-and mitochondrial-dependent signaling cascade. Caspases are cysteine-aspartic protease enzymes which play a crucial role in inflammation, apoptosis, necrosis and other programmed cell death strategies. In caspase-mediated apoptosis, caspases catalyze the specific cleave factors of several regulatory proteins. Casticin upregulated ROS production but decreased Ca2+ ion levels, as well as the mitochondria membrane potential (∆Ψm). Casticin also downregulated intracellular protein targets such as cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), p21 and Cip1 proteins, whereas cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB1), CDKN1B, p27 and Kip1 protein levels were increased. MMP-2 genes were inhibited by casticin in colon cancer cells. G2/M cell cycle arrest was also induced in Colo 205 cells when cells were incubated with 40 µM of casticin between 12-24 h. The results obtained are in agreement with other papers, which suggests that G2/M cell cycle arrest is induced by the increase of p27 expression. Additionally, casticin also increased levels of caspase-3, -8 and -9-however, only at a 12-h incubation period [62].
## (s13) Casticin and Esophageal Cancer
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) Although esophageal cancer does not have a high incidence rate relative to other cancers, it has an extremely high recurrence rate [12]. Most people diagnosed with esophageal cancer are simultaneously diagnosed with terminal cancer due to the aggressive metastatic ability of the neoplasm. Human esophageal cancer cell lines TE-11 and ECA-109 were tested in a dose-dependent fashion in vitro. Results indicated that casticin reduced levels of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 and increased levels of proapoptotic Bax proteins. Similar to colon cancer, casticin also upregulated levels of caspase-3 and -9, as well as PARP. This was mediated by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway. It is important to note that the casticin samples used in this study were pretreated with a JNK pathway inhibitor, SP600125, which may have minimized the effect of the compound itself on the cell line. The levels of MMP were downregulated, while the levels of mitochondrial cytochrome c were increased. Cytochrome c acts as an electron carrier in the electron transport chain. In apoptosis, cytochrome c binds to cardiolipin, stimulating ROS-mediated apoptosis. In esophageal cancer cell lines, casticin inhibited the proliferative abilities and the clonogenicity (the ability of a cell to clone itself). Cell cycle arrest in sub-G1/G2 was also induced. Moreover, the same study discovered the antitumor properties of casticin in mouse xenograft models [63].
## (s17) Casticin and Lung Cancer
Number of References: 8

(p17.0) Lung cancer is the most commonly occurring cancer and causes more deaths worldwide than any other cancer. For metastasized lung cancers, the survival rate is only 5% [84][85][86][87]. Subsequently, there are numerous studies on the effectiveness of casticin on human lung cancer cell lines. Casticin downregulated uPAR and CD33, upregulated AMPK and ACC and silenced FOXO3 expression through the AMPK/FOXO3 signaling pathway in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) H446 cells [88]. Another study isolated A549 cells from lung cancer stem-like cells (LCSLCs) from non-SCLC A549 cells, in which casticin reduced expression of CD133, CD44 and ALDH1 proteins and also suppressed MMP-9 activity. The compound inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, with an IC50 value of 14.3 µM and 0.4 µM on A549 and parental cells, respectively. Additionally, casticin has the ability to attenuate self-renewal and invasion in A549 cells, and there was downregulation of the Akt phosphorylation pathway [89]. Additionally, casticin downregulated IL-6 tumor necrosis factor α and suppressed cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and prostaglandin E2 production. There was reduced mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), inflammatory cytokine levels and chemokine gene expression. The PI3K/Akt and MAPK both blocked the transcription of the NF-κB p65 protein in interleukin-1B (IL-1B) pulmonary epithelial cells [90]. Casticin blocked proinflammatory pathways and reduced existing inflammation in A549 lung cancer cells. Results showed an increase in MMP, cytochrome C protein and activated caspase-9 and -3. Proapoptotic Bax was upregulated, and the antiapoptotic X-linked inhibitor of apoptotic protein (XIAP) and B cell lymphoma-extra-large (Bcl-xL) were downregulated. Casticin-induced apoptosis was mediated through mitochondrial pathways and the upregulation of DR5; however, there was no significant effect on the death receptor (DR) 4 [91]. The compound targets various pathways in combating lung cancer; clinical tests are required to assess the effectiveness in patients.
## (s18) Casticin and Melanoma
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Melanoma is a type of cancer that develops from melanocytes-a type of cell that contains melanin pigment. Melanomas typically prevail in the skin, but some rare forms of melanoma can occur in the mouth, eyes and even intestines [92]. An in vitro study conducted on mouse melanoma B16F10 cells examined gene expression levels of cell migration and invasion. It was detected that there were decreased MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the mitochondria, as well as downregulation of the NF-κB pathway, AKt pathway, FAK, p-EGFR, p-JNK and Rho A. Casticin increased the expression of certain genes, including cell adhesion molecule 1 (SCN1B), and decreased the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), which are associated with cell invasion and migration in mouse melanoma cell lines. Cell viability in melanoma cells decreased in a dose-dependent manner [93]. In another study, it was found that, in human melanoma A365.S2 cells, casticin induced morphological changes and mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis, damaged and condensed DNA and decreased the total number of viable cells. Casticin also induced G2/M cell cycle arrest by increasing the expression of p35, p31 and CHK-1 proteins, while downregulating Cdc25c, CDK1, cyclin A and cyclin B to control the cell cycle. Moreover, casticin inhibited the activation of tumorigenic NF-κB pathway [94] and increased ROS generation and caspase-3. A decrease in ∆Ψm aided in mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis [95]. Consequently, casticin suits the purpose of being a potential chemo-preventive agent in melanoma skin cancer treatment in the future.
## (s19) Casticin and Oral Cancer
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) In 2018, around 350,000 cases of oral cancer were diagnosed worldwide, resulting in an estimated 170,000 deaths. It is a serious cancer and the most commonly occurring malignancy in the head and neck regions [96][97][98]. Casticin downregulated β-catenin, an essential component of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, in human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) UM1 and HSC-3 cells. The overexpression of β-catenin induces proliferation, invasion and migratory activities in tumor cells, while its downmodulation can negatively regulate these tumorigenic processes. Additionally, casticin reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in a dose-dependent manner [99]. In a second study, casticin inhibited cell viability by upregulating ROS and Ca2+ ions, decreasing ∆Ψm; activating caspase-3, -8 and -9 and upregulating AIF and cytochrome c. Casticin also has the ability to inhibit EMT transitioning, where epithelial cells become more migratory by losing their polarity and junctions. Treatment with casticin induced cell morphological changes, condensed and damaged DNA and enabled G2/M cell cycle arrest in SCC-4 cells [100]. Casticin can therefore be tested as a potential antineoplastic agent towards OSCC cells in humans.
## (s22) In vivo Studies: Mouse Models
Number of References: 5

(p22.0) The effects of casticin have been tested in a great number of in vitro studies; nevertheless, even with a small number of studies conducted in vivo (performed on a live organism), the drug still showcased significant antineoplastic effects. The majority of in vivo experiments are performed on a xenograft model, which is a tissue/organ transplant that is derived from a different species and injected into the recipient-usually, a mouse. Casticin inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis in a mouse xenograft model against esophageal cancer [63]. Casticin also prevented cadherin switching from taking place and aided cells in maintaining their normal migratory behavior in a mouse CD133+ cell line against hepatocellular carcinoma by upregulating E-cadherin and decreasing N-cadherin levels [79]. In a leukemia WEHI-3 mouse neoplasm, casticin increased macrophage phagocytosis from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (any peripheral blood cell containing a round nucleus-for example, T cells, B cells, NK cells and monocytes), causing cell endocytosis and eventual death [107]. Additionally, casticin induced mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis in response to myriad stimuli in a mouse melanoma model and also induced early G2/M cell cycle arrest [95]. Cancer cells undergo a "mitosis out-of-control" process to divide, adhering to their undifferentiated and proliferating nature. This means that cancer cells continue to divide without the regulation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). The increase of CDKs and the induction of cell cycle arrest at any stage can be analyzed using the cell cycle arrest apoptosis assay [41]. Table 2 summarizes the reported anticancer actions of casticin in preclinical models. 
## (s24) Effect of Casticin on Metastasis
Number of References: 12

(p24.0) Metastasis is the process by which cancer cells migrate throughout the body. The invasion of cancer cells into surrounding tissues and vessels is an early stage of tumor metastasis. As more than 90% of cancer patients die due to persistent recurrence, metastasis and chemotherapy resistance, there is a need for studies to prevent or target metastasis [116][117][118][119][120][121][122]. Casticin significantly reduced the cell migration rate by 77.41% after 48 h of 5 µM compared to the control of DU145 cells [99] and inhibited cell migration by 93% after 24 h of 200 nM in human melanoma A375.S2 cancer cells [123]. In addition, MMP-2/-9 activities were inhibited in a concentration-and time-dependent manner in DU145 cells [124]. Moreover, casticin significantly inhibited the motility ability of MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells [51]. The cDNA microarray analysis showed that casticin affected gene expression associated with cell migration and invasion, and DNA-damage-inducible transcript 3 (DDIT3) decreased four-fold in the group treated with casticin compared to the control group in B16F10 cells [93]. The role of the compound in regulating EMT is depicted in Figure 4.
## (s25) Other Important Pharmacological Actions
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) For years, casticin has been used in Chinese folk medicine to alleviate premenstrual symptoms in women. A study conducted by Webster et al. investigated compounds extracted from V. agnuscastus, such as casticin, and their opioidergic mechanisms for premenstrual syndrome treatment. Casticin can bind to and activate µ-and δ-opioid receptor subtypes in a dose-dependent manner, reducing premenstrual syndrome effects. Casticin was reported to have therapeutic effects through the upregulation of these receptors [125]. Additionally, it is established that casticin displays antiinflammatory properties. In an in vivo study conducted on female BALB/c mice, casticin reduced oxidative stress in the lungs of mice with asthma, alongside reduced activity by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and goblet cell hyperplasia. Moreover, casticin downregulated the levels of proinflammatory Th2 cytokine and eotaxin, resulting in reduced lung inflammation. It was reported that casticin is also a powerful immunomodulatory therapeutic drug and could be used in asthma treatment [126].
## (s26) Cytotoxicity Data
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) The cytotoxicity data of casticin has been analyzed for in vitro and in vivo studies. Casticin reduced tumor growth rate and volume in all the in vivo studies discussed in this review article. In nude mice injected with esophageal cancer cells, casticin treatment was most effective at a dose of 10 mg/kg, causing a significant reduction in tumor weight. The control mice had a larger tumor volume and weight of 510.83 ± 94.95 mg, while both these factors significantly decreased with casticin dosages of 2 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg, where the mean weight of the mice was 369.83 ±70.04 mg and 193.50 ± 33.73 mg, respectively. There was no visible effect of apoptosis or necrosis on normal cells, whereas casticin induced apoptosis in the xenograft mouse model [63]. In leukemia WEHI-3 mice, pretreatment of casticin for a two-week period resulted in decreased weights of the liver and spleen at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg casticin. There was no significant difference in the appearances or body weights of the mice upon administration of casticin. T cell proliferation at 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 mg/kg and B cell proliferation at 0.1 mg/kg were promoted, along with an increase in phagocytic activity from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). The highest dose of casticin, at 0.4 mg/kg, had a higher survival rate than ATRA, a preexisting leukemic drug. Additionally, all mice treated with 0.1 and 0.4 mg/kg of casticin survived [107]. In a concentration-dependent fashion, casticin had the ability to reduce the viability of A549 lung cancer cells at all concentrations of casticin tested, i.e., 1 µM, 5 µM and 10 µM [90]. Finally, casticin significantly reduced tumor volume and weight in an in vivo melanoma experiment. 
## (s27) Other Important Pharmacological Actions
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) For years, casticin has been used in Chinese folk medicine to alleviate premenstrual symptoms in women. A study conducted by Webster et al. investigated compounds extracted from V. agnus-castus, such as casticin, and their opioidergic mechanisms for premenstrual syndrome treatment. Casticin can bind to and activate µand δ-opioid receptor subtypes in a dose-dependent manner, reducing premenstrual syndrome effects. Casticin was reported to have therapeutic effects through the upregulation of these receptors [125]. Additionally, it is established that casticin displays anti-inflammatory properties. In an in vivo study conducted on female BALB/c mice, casticin reduced oxidative stress in the lungs of mice with asthma, alongside reduced activity by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and goblet cell hyperplasia. Moreover, casticin downregulated the levels of proinflammatory Th2 cytokine and eotaxin, resulting in reduced lung inflammation. It was reported that casticin is also a powerful immunomodulatory therapeutic drug and could be used in asthma treatment [126].
## (s28) Cytotoxicity Data
Number of References: 4

(p28.0) The cytotoxicity data of casticin has been analyzed for in vitro and in vivo studies. Casticin reduced tumor growth rate and volume in all the in vivo studies discussed in this review article. In nude mice injected with esophageal cancer cells, casticin treatment was most effective at a dose of 10 mg/kg, causing a significant reduction in tumor weight. The control mice had a larger tumor volume and weight of 510.83 ± 94.95 mg, while both these factors significantly decreased with casticin dosages of 2 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg, where the mean weight of the mice was 369.83 ±70.04 mg and 193.50 ± 33.73 mg, respectively. There was no visible effect of apoptosis or necrosis on normal cells, whereas casticin induced apoptosis in the xenograft mouse model [63]. In leukemia WEHI-3 mice, pretreatment of casticin for a two-week period resulted in decreased weights of the liver and spleen at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg casticin. There was no significant difference in the appearances or body weights of the mice upon administration of casticin. T cell proliferation at 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 mg/kg and B cell proliferation at 0.1 mg/kg were promoted, along with an increase in phagocytic activity from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). The highest dose of casticin, at 0.4 mg/kg, had a higher survival rate than ATRA, a preexisting leukemic drug. Additionally, all mice treated with 0.1 and 0.4 mg/kg of casticin survived [107]. In a concentration-dependent fashion, casticin had the ability to reduce the viability of A549 lung cancer cells at all concentrations of casticin tested, i.e., 1 µM, 5 µM and 10 µM [90]. Finally, casticin significantly reduced tumor volume and weight in an in vivo melanoma experiment. The mean weight of the tumors in control mice were three times greater than those treated with casticin at 2 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg. There was negligible difference in the overall body weights of the mice in both the casticin-treated and control groups [95]. In the case of all these models, casticin has the ability to suppress tumor growth without significantly affecting the weight of mice, suggesting the compound to be a viable anticancer treatment in preclinical studies.
## (s30) Conclusions
Number of References: 2

(p30.0) Cancer continues to persist as one of the deadliest diseases worldwide, responsible for the deaths of millions each year. Despite advancements in cancer research, the treatments may not always be effective, and they often occur alongside severe side effects. It is therefore essential to devise a safe and effective means to treat cancer. A suitable approach would be through the use of natural compounds, such as casticin. This review summarizes the antineoplastic effects of casticin, a flavonoid isolated from the Vitex species. Casticin has the ability to induce mitochondrial-dependent and ROS-mediated apoptosis, induce cell cycle arrest and inhibit the proliferation of invasive and migratory properties in breast, bladder, colon, lung, oral and ovarian cancers and others. Furthermore, casticin affects diverse oncogenic pathways, such as the MAPK, NF-κB and PI3K/Akt pathways, through the modulation of various proteins; increases ROS generation through the enhancement of Bax proteins and the decrease of Bcl proteins and inhibits cell division cycles (cdc25c and cdc2) and cyclins (B1) to induce cell cycle arrest. Moreover, in in-vivo studies, casticin was used to examine tumor growth and metastatic suppression in mouse models. Although casticin has displayed strong cytotoxic activities towards cancerous cells in preclinical studies, interestingly, pretreatment with casticin did not result in apoptosis or necroptosis of normal cells [62]. In fact, casticin aided in maintaining normal migratory behaviors of noncancerous cells in mice with hepatocellular carcinoma through the process of cadherin switching, thus serving as an effective anticancer agent [78]. Although many preclinical studies have been conducted in cell lines as well as mouse models to assess the anticancer effects of casticin, clinical trials are essential to report the therapeutic uses of casticin. More preclinical studies can be conducted to assess the pharmacokinetic properties of novel anticancer drugs, especially casticin. This may open new perspectives for the development of natural compounds as therapeutic drugs towards cancer treatments.  
