# A Review of Concepts, Benefits, and Challenges for Future Electrical Propulsion-Based Aircraft

CorpusID: 216322299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07ee16665802aa90c23ee5ad7bd2b48de5c303f2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07ee16665802aa90c23ee5ad7bd2b48de5c303f2)

Fields: Engineering

## (s13) Sizing Tool
Number of References: 12

(p13.0) As an initial development, a sizing methodology for fully electric aircraft is proposed for general aviation applications [130][131][132][133][134], where the Breguet-range equation is modified for a battery sourced propulsion system. In further developments, Nam et al. [135] and Cinar et al. [136][137][138] proposed power-based sizing methods featuring multiple but generalized energy source paths. These are considered as very elementary design environments, with mere modifications in the existing propulsion system, and with added features of electrical energy source. Isikveren et al. [139] methodology considered a simplified graphical based method for sizing the electric aircraft with dual energy sources in the propulsion system, however, the energy sources do not feature the unique characteristics particular to the electrical energy storage. Riboldi et al. [134,140] presented a generalized sizing methodology based on predicting weight fractions using statistical regression methods, albeit applicable to smaller aircraft. The proposed method utilizes the sizing matrix plot which is a function of wing loading and power load, and imposed certification and regulation constraints on top of it for finding the viable design space. These methodologies do not include the sizing and operational impact from inclusion of the newly added propulsion system components and, thus, lack the design versatility stemming from a hybrid electric system.
## (s14) Multidisciplinary Optimization Framework
Number of References: 16

(p14.0) Besides the introduced design variable for optimizing the energy schedule in a hybrid electric configuration, the attributed aerodynamic benefits of the propulsion concepts like BLI or DEP have to be established based on strong coupled interactions between the propulsion and aerodynamic performance tools. The analysis needs to be done for change in the operational behavior and physical design characteristics of the aircraft. This concept introduces a significantly higher number of operational variables to be considered for the optimization study. Furthermore, the electrical system performance features the coupled interaction with the thermal management system. Other aspects include re-orientation of the propulsion system lay-out for the radial aircraft design associated structural implication. The possible interactions between the different subsystems were considered when estimating the benefits at the global level. A fully-coupled propulsion-aerodynamic model in a multidisciplinary optimization environment is necessary to assess the benefits with more accuracy. In the study presented by Schnell et al. [149], a coupled integration was established between streamline curvature method based BLI aft-fan design and the gas turbine performance tool EVA [150] for a partially turboelectric configuration. Though physics-based models are used, the study lacks an optimization study for the design.

(p14.1) Perullo et al. [151] defined the electric aircraft sizing process with three distinct steps: determining the fidelity level in the system-modeling, selecting the energy management approach, and the optimization technique. A low-fidelity linearized modeling and simulation tool is necessary for the weight and size estimation for the components for the design space exploration, whereas high-fidelity models are necessary for the assessment of the closed coupled interaction between different disciplines such as aerodynamics and propulsion. Martin et al. [152] divided the optimization technique in to two broad categories: monolithic and distributed architecture based. The monolithic architecture considers a single optimization problem. Monolithic architectures become computationally expensive in an environment when the coupling variables between the disciplines grow larger. Most of the optimization studies performed to date are made for single objective monolithic architecture. The distributed approach breaks the optimization problem into a set of sub-problems with subsets of variables and constraints and generally proves to be computationally efficient [153]. The monolithic approach becomes computationally expensive when it involves many disciplines with higher fidelity tools and multiple design variables. Perullo et al. [151] proposed a pre-sizing methodology using the elements from model predictive control (MPC) and concurrent optimization to formulate a new structure for the aircraft sizing. In this, the design problem is classified to two sub-level problems; the high-level optimization problem uses design parameters for the coupled propulsion system-airframe and the low-level optimizer uses the MPC algorithm to optimize the mission adaptive design variables such as the power split. The optimization architecture reduces the number of coupling variables between different disciplines, and thus makes the sizing and optimization procedure efficient and less computationally expensive.

(p14.2) The PEGASUS design analysis uses a low-order multidisciplinary optimization environment created by extending the features of the NPSS and FLOPS tools. The performance of the gas turbine and propeller and the electrical system were built with use of NPSS, whereas the aircraft aerodynamics, sizing, weight, and performance were developed utilizing the FLOPS tool. The split between the electric and mechanical shaft power is discretized and the vehicle performance model outputs the battery sizing. The performance of the propulsion system was imported to the ModelCentre based optimization framework to minimize the MTOW. The optimization environment uses wing area and maximum take-off thrust as the two design variables; however, it lacks the coupled interaction between the aerodynamics and structural disciplines [42,43]. Applicable to thin-haul aircraft, a sizing method with an optimization study for the fuel consumption/take-off thrust is proposed by authors Silva et al. [154] The sizing methodology duly accounts for the aero-propulsive interaction and the impact of power scheduling on the sizing of the energy source.

(p14.3) Trajectory analysis is an important part of the aircraft optimization study, traditionally made for fuel burn or range, but could be utilized for noise prediction and propulsion system sizing and mission performance. The time-varying operational behavior of a hybrid electric aircraft and the imparted impact on the physical design of the aircraft motivates a tighter integration of the trajectory analysis with other disciplines such aerodynamics, propulsion system performance, and weight. This transforms the aircraft optimization problem into an even more complex problem, dealing with significantly larger numbers of design variables along multiple disciplines. The optimization environment tools developed in the past lack any methodology for full mission energy optimization with physics-based models in different disciplines. While many studies claimed the benefits of using BLI on the cruise performance, they are subjected to many simplifications. They largely focus on estimating the BLI profile and its imposed impact on the inlet of the propulsion system [26,74,155]. A fully coupled aero-propulsive analysis enables such study. The work simplified the assumption for electrical system components for the performance assessment study and does not include the optimization study.

(p14.4) OpenMDAO is an open-source multidisciplinary optimization framework developed by NASA GRC which has been explored by many researchers due to its versatile application. This platform enables coupled integration of different discipline models coded in several programming languages with various levels of fidelity into a single analysis tool. The framework uses a gradient based approach with analytic derivatives and uses in-house solvers and optimization methods to address the optimization problem [83,156]. Gray et al. [83] used this platform for coupled aero-propulsive interactions to examine an optimized split ratio in the shaft power for different powertrain drive transmission efficiency values. The platform uses ADFlow computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solver to solve the Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) equations and the PyCycle-1-D propulsion analysis tool for generating the adjoint analytic derivative. The framework enables multidisciplinary optimization based on the Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) gradient-based optimization method. Falck et al. [157] used the OpenMDAO with moderate fidelity propulsion and aerodynamic discipline tools to conduct the mission analysis for observing the thermal state in the electrical components.
## (s22) Electrical Power System
Number of References: 4

(p22.0) Superconducting materials or normal conductors operated in liquid hydrogen temperature offer zero resistance (electrical resistance for pure aluminum or copper can be 1/100th or less of that at the room temperature) to the conduction of electricity and hence stand out in terms of conductivity and ampacity. Use of the superconducting wires in DC transmission systems exhibits very low loss. For machine applications, the superconductors can produce higher magnetic field strengths and can be enabled for higher power density and torque density machines [170]. Power generation is also a big issue for the turboelectric/hybrid or even fully electric configurations. These utilize either fuel onboard or a battery charged from the grid, and do not give emission saving benefits as desired [96]. A possible and promising alternative is to fuel the aircraft with liquid hydrogen (LH 2 ) and possible use of a cryogenic enabled electrical system. The current underlying technology level for the machine power electronics lags substantially from the desired level in the aircraft application. The development and future technology prediction in the non-cryogenic system is equally compelling and competitive [107]. Suitability of the high temperature superconducting (HTS) material for use in airborne applications is large, as they can carry huge amounts of current with negligible loss. These features enable high power density and high torque density machines. However, there is need for a cryo-cooler to cool this machine and a possible candidate in this regard is liquid hydrogen (LH 2 ) superconductivity, an obvious choice for higher power density and torque requirements. A cryogenic cooled propulsion system is highly efficient but there is unlikeliness of reaching sufficient maturity over the next 20 to 25 year [171].
## (s23) High Voltage Architecture and Protection
Number of References: 5

(p23.0) Propulsion power sized electrical system necessitates lightweight components and a flexible architecture design with components as per the reliability and fail-safe operation standards. That entails boosting the system voltage level and defining appropriate voltage regulation standards for it. Historically, the commercial adoption of electrical system for aircraft application was initiated with the advent of the 'Fly by Wire' concept. The operating voltage was chosen for 115 V AC with a constant frequency at 400 Hz in high power applications and 28 V DC in low power applications [172,173]. The increased demand under more electric aircraft (MEA) applications drove the initial evolution in the electrical power system architecture, transiting to a variable frequency (360-800 Hz) 230 V AC or ±270 V DC system [153,174,175]. Further boost in the voltage level from the current standard of 540 V would potentially lower the cable weight in a propulsion power sized transmission system.
## (s31) Thermal Management System Challenges & Developments
Number of References: 10

(p31.0) Thermal management systems (TMS) are necessary to pull away the heat in the propulsion system components due to the system inefficiencies. Maintaining the right operating temperature in the electrical components (battery, converter, motor/generator, etc.) ensures optimized performance of it and negates the runaway heat problems. On the downside, the inclusion of TMS components impacts the aircraft weight and causes parasitic drag, affecting the aircraft overall performance for the worse. A study performed on designing the TMS for electric propulsion system application indicates that the TMS weight could be even 5% of the weight of the total electrical system weight even for a low electric power level and could impose an efficiency penalty in the range of 3% thrust loss [28,176]. TMS designs for a conventional aircraft exhausts the waste-heat to the free stream air or to the fan by-pass duct air through a liquid coolant loop [237]. Given a higher order of magnitude of the heat load emanating from the electrification of the propulsion system, it is envisioned that both the conventional approach and existing onboard heat sinks would not be adequate for exhausting the heat load of an electric aircraft. Some novel approaches for dissipating the heat should be worked through [237,238].

(p31.1) Typical components desired in TMS are the heat exchanger, coolant pump, a coolant reservoir, and the piping system. The heat sinks appropriate for the TMS are fuel, fan bypass/ ram air, and coolants, and heat exchanger designs vary as a fuel oil cooler and air oil cooler. The architectural lay out can be made as centralized/decentralized [180], parallel/serial [31] systems, etc., optimized based on the placement and sizing of the head load components. Coolants are typically single phase or two-phase; some of the suitable coolants are listed in the literature [180]. Advanced heat exchanger designs are microchannel based multi-pass tube-fin designs [239] and surface coolers [240].
