# remote sensing Remote Sensing of River Discharge: A Review and a Framing for the Discipline

CorpusID: 216210358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/84c4a6cf4f45eb56d6ada9cf88d12f0de3fde5ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/84c4a6cf4f45eb56d6ada9cf88d12f0de3fde5ea)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Remote sensing (RS) provides value to the earth science community as a source of primary data (electromagnetic radiation recorded directly by the satellite/aircraft) obtained from a unique frame of reference. Although raw electromagnetic radiation received by sensors needs to be carefully calibrated to transform these observations into useable science signals, remote sensing platforms provide high quality primary data at a variety of spatial, temporal, and spectral scales. Hydrology in particular has been traditionally open to the use of RS (e.g., ( [1][2][3][4]); Calmant et al., 2008;Lettenmaier et al. 2015; RSQ. At the other end of the spectrum, gravity recovery and climate experiment (GRACE) observations of relative satellite positions are first turned into a model of the geoid and then processed into mass anomalies via the application of a hydrologic model: the remote sensing signal has indeed driven the data, but many other sources of information and model physics have been invoked to produce the desired output. Thus, many users are confused about remotely sensed data products, and it can be difficult for the non-specialist to determine which products rely on ancillary data and which do not. In the case of RSQ, all methodologies must transform observations to discharge, as we cannot instantaneously and simultaneously measure river depth, cross sectional area, and depth-averaged velocity from space. Accordingly, hundreds of manuscripts have been written on this subject, all fundamentally seeking to use remotely sensed data to estimate river discharge.
## (s9) Calibration of Local Channel Hydraulic Relationships
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Remotely Sensed Rating Curves Perhaps the most logical transition from traditional hydrology to RSQ is the realization that empirical relationships might be built from RS signals and calibrated directly to observed discharge for a specific channel. In its simplest form, this paradigm takes shape as a space-based rating curve. Among the earliest examples of the space rating curve uses altimetry estimates of river stage directly in a rating curve together with in situ measured flows ( [69]; Koblinsky et al., 1993). This is an analog to the gauging station, and forms a powerful discharge monitoring approach provided sufficient in situ data are available to populate the rating curve. Other early work included SAR studies of floodplains, rivers, and lakes interested in deriving levels and/or widths in service of these rating goals ( . The field has matured to the point where detailed considerations of RS signal quality are becoming important (e.g., [85]; Normandin et al., 2018), rather than repeated proof of concept of the viability of space-based rating. We note also that altimetry signals often used in space based rating curves are generally only applicable over large rivers; most altimeters have been designed for ocean applications and reprocessing these signals over smaller rivers is often challenging. Width measurements can also drive rating curves. These are straightforward to derive for RSQ purposes on rivers as narrow as 12 m with the advent of CubeSats, but these signals are often of less radiometric quality than those available from conventional satellites ( ). These small-area applications highlight how not all RSQ work is driven by either global or ungauged basin interests, and provide innovative solutions to practical fieldwork issues via RSQ. In sum, this section represents the most straightforward and non-controversial application of RSQ reviewed here, as RS has simply replaced a ground measurement in a traditional discharge estimation paradigm.
## (s13) Calibration/Assimilation of an RS Signal into a Hydrologic Model
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) We first consider RSQ as seen again from a hydrologic perspective, yet this time we focus on RS as the sole source of calibration data, as opposed to use of RS data in conjunction with an in situ calibrated model as in Section 2.1. The balance of these fluxes is water excess, and so a valid RSQ approach is to emulate a hydrologic model solely from outer space. Various authors have investigated RS of each of these specific components in an effort to better constrain each one. Parr et al. ( [112]; 2015) used RS ET and leaf area index products in conjunction with the VIC model, while Lopez-Lopez et al. ( [113]; 2018) explored downscaling and in 2017 calibrated the PCR GLOBWB model for a basin in Morocco with RS ET and soil moisture, and both concluded that their approach is viable and improves discharge accuracy [114]. However, Mendiguren et al. ( [115]; 2017) and Bowman et al. ( [116]; 2016) explicitly compared RS ET energy balance models against traditionally calibrated hydrological models and found low correlation between the two products. These authors further argued that the spatial component of errors in ET are important and well-suited to remote sensing. Remote sensing of precipitation is a huge field given the importance of precipitation to flood forecasting, and thus this literature is not covered here despite providing important grounding and uncertainty analysis to RSQ; see Lettenmaier et al. ( [2]; 2015) for a recent review. While this precipitation literature is certainly germane, any satisfactory review would render this manuscript overlong. The GRACE signals covered in Section 2.1.1 can provide the final storage term, and thus a simple water balance may be made at very large spatial footprints for totally and politically ungauged basins from RS estimates of precipitation, ET, and storage.

(p13.1) Moving beyond a simple water balance, Sun et al. ( [117]; 2015) provide a basin-scale approach that seeks to use no in situ data to calibrate their hydrologic model, instead using river width observations as a calibration target. This decision required a reconfiguration of traditional model physics to represent width as the state variable (i.e., rearranging the discharge equation so width is on the left hand side). Sun et al. then attempt to force their hydrology model with only globally available data, using the dynamic river width signal to calibrate.  [14]; 2019) paper discussed earlier: that study used over 10,000 in situ gauges to produce the best possible global discharge estimates at almost 3 million river reaches. These Lin et al. data are globally available and consistent, and offer a starting point for any model assimilation/calibration study, be it hydrologic, hydraulic, or both. However, using these outputs necessarily invokes the gauges used to produce them: even discharge information in gauge-sparse locations like Siberia implicitly relies on gauge knowledge via coupling with well-gauged basins. Thus, we expect future work to struggle with what it means for a basin to be ungauged when all global basins have been modelled in a fully coupled land surface framework. We leave further discussion for Section 3.
