# Deep Learning on Knowledge Graph for Recommender System: A Survey

CorpusID: 214743520 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d44050abf76b2d1a2cb6d127093cfb83ab2d96c8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d44050abf76b2d1a2cb6d127093cfb83ab2d96c8)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s26) Meta-path Defined
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) Receptive Field. MEIRec [4] and RecoGCN [41] propose to leverage the semantic-aware meta paths to carve out concise and relevant receptive fields for each node, which is referred as meta-path defined receptive field. Definition 4.1. Meta-path [41]. A meta-path ρ is defined as a path in a knowledge graph in the form of t 1
## (s27) Vector-wise Aggregator and Updater.
Number of References: 4

(p27.0) To remove the limitation of training on clustered mini-graphs for large-scale graphs, IntentGC [46] introduces a special graph neural network, which replaces the normal aggregator and updater in GNNs with a vector-wise aggregator and a vector-wise updater. The key idea is to avoid unnecessary feature interactions by replacing the expensive matrix multiplication between a huge weight matrix and a giant feature vector (formed by concatenation of many vectors) with a summation of multiple small matrix products. The detailed formulation is shown in Table 3. [30] performs personalized recommendation by converting the knowledge graph into a user-specific weighted graph, on which a graph neural network is applied Social Network Epinions 175,000 508,000 - [6], [36] to compute personalized item embeddings. The weights of edges on this new graph are computed by a trainable function f (z e ) that identifies important knowledge graph relationships for a given user. We refer this technique as graph translation.
## (s32) Datasets
Number of References: 28

(p32.0) We summarize the state-of-the-art papers and list their publicly available datasets in Table 4 alphabetically. Generally speaking, we fit those datasets into 6 major scenarios: book, citation, movie, music, point of interest (POI) and social network. Here the general goal in each dataset is to let the recommender system infer users' preferred items based on users' past history, for example, watched movies or read books. The size and complexity of the datasets are upon the problem settings in different papers.  [17], [25], [36], [40] Recall T P T P +F N [15], [23], [30], [31], [33], [40] F1 Score 2 · Precision·Recall Precision+Recall [29], [31] [41], [42], [46] NDCG NDCG = DCG iDCG [15], [23], [33], [40], [41] 

(p32.1) , [36], [45], [5], [29], [30], [31], [36], [46] 
## (s36) Explainability of Recommendation
Number of References: 11

(p36.0) Compared to traditional content or collaborate-filtering based recommender systems, explainability is particular important for GNN-KADR systems, because non-expert humans cannot intuitively determine the relevant context within a knowledge graph, for example, when identifying influential users in social network that are good candidates for selling agents in social e-commerce. In addition, Making explainable predictions to users allow them to understand the factors behind the network's recommendations (i.e., why was this item/services recommended? [19,39]), and is helpful to earn user's trust on the system. It also helps the practitioner prob weights and activations to understand more about the model [26].

(p36.1) There are several existing works focusing on the explainability of GNNs. GNNEXPLAINER [43] proposed by Ying et al. is a model agnostic approach that provides interpretable explanations for predictions of any GNN-based model. Given an instance, it identifies a compact subgraph structure and a small subset of node features that have a crucial role in GNNâȂŹs prediction. Pope et al. [18] extend three common explainability methods, i.e., gradient-based saliency maps [21], Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [44], and Excitation Backpropagation (EB) [44], from CNNs to GNNs to identify important aspects of the computation. However, these methods are designed for homogeneous graphs and do not take the heterogeneity of knowledge graph into account.

(p36.2) On the other hand, some other methods, e.g., KPRN [35], EIUM [10], RuleRec [16], attempt to utilize the knowledge graph as an information source to make explainable recommendations. However, these methods usually sample paths from the knowledge graph and extract information from them via non-GNN algorithms such as RNN. Thus, compared to GNNs, the topological and semantic structure of knowledge graphs is corrupted in these cases, leading to unsatisfied performance.
