# Threats to Online Advertising and Countermeasures: A Technical Survey

CorpusID: 218518023 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42ce230075cee1a21cf0df8770068d4f97863175](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42ce230075cee1a21cf0df8770068d4f97863175)

Fields: Law, Business, Computer Science

## (s9) Other Frauds.
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Cookie stuffing or cookie dropping is an activity in which illegitimate actors receive credit for purchases made by web users by defrauding affiliate marketing programs, even if the affiliate marketer did not actively perform any marketing for the affiliate program [76]. The defrauding is carried out by the illegitimate actor depositing a cookie (hence the term "cookie stuffing") on the user's computer for a target website that is unrelated to the one the user is visiting. The illegitimate actor then receives credit when the user later visits the target website. The user is usually unaware of the cookie stuffing. By mining the HTTP logs in a university web server, Snyder et al. [76] found that over one-third of publishers in affiliate marketing programs use cookiestuffing to claim credit from online retailers for illicit referrals. In addition to cookie stuffing, a new ad fraud mechanism enables publishers to increase their ad revenue by deceiving the ad exchange and advertisers. This new scheme (described in Reference [54]) targets users visiting the publisher's site using higher-paying ads. By issuing requests to content not explicitly requested by the user, the user's online interest profile is corrupted and the ad selection process is influenced.
## (s15) In the Network. As shown in
Number of References: 3

(p15.0) With Transport Layer Security (TLS), MiTM is not as easy as before. However, it is still doable. In fact, the usage of TLS proxies is not negligible. In Reference [60], 1 out 250 TLS connections are TLS-proxied during a study of 2.9M tests. A TLS proxy acts as an endpoint of TLS connections. In particular, A TLS proxy can issue a substitute certificate for any web server the user visits; as a result, the user establishes an encrypted connection to the proxy rather than the desired web server. This means the proxy can decrypt and modify the HTTP payload including ads [60]. Besides HTTPS proxies, other attacks are possible. For instance, a Man-In-The-Middle-Script-In-The-Browser (MITM-SITB) attack is presented in Reference [43]. In the attack, malicious JavaScript is sent to the user's browser within a TLS connection with the attacker, and this JavaScript is used in direct connections. In such cases, the boundary between MiTM and MiTB/MiTMo is blurred.
## (s16) What Malicious Parties Can Use
Number of References: 4

(p16.0) Another important aspect of understanding attacks concerns the tools and infrastructure that attackers have to achieve their goals. For advertising attacks, hackers have utilized malware, botnets, and click farms. 3.6.1 Malware and Botnets. Malware gains access to a computer system (personal computer, smartphones, IoT devices, and so on) for purposes such as stealing data, damaging the device, or simply annoying the user [30]. Hence, malware is a popular means to create attacks against online advertising. These threats include ad fraud, ad injection, and stealing web cookies. A botnet refers to a network of computers that have been infected by malware and turned into bots. Figure 6 illustrates a typical botnet architecture. A botmaster can remotely control a large network of bots (i.e., infected computers) to execute attacks. Bots receive commands from the attacker's Command and Control (C&C) server [78] and can be turned into machines creating click fraud (which are then known as clickbots [24]). Through the C&C, bots can also be turned into machines that fetch ads from the Internet unknown to the user. Botnets take advantage of vulnerabilities in web browsers and spread malware in the form of browser extensions [65].
## (s25) Client-centric Proposals for Web Browser Environments. Tripwire
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) Similarly, a solution for publishers and ad servers to build a secure ad serving system based on authenticated hash-chains is proposed in Reference [88]. A basic operation of the proposal is to compute hash values of web pages. However, as websites become more dynamic, computation of web pages is not as relevant as when the research was done. In contemporary websites or web applications, the only way to measure integrity is to compute the hash value of the DOM (Document Object Model) tree that is rendered by the browser. A series of tests on web browsers to detect bot use (replacing humans) is developed in Reference [93]. JavaScript snippets are developed for testing the browser with mouse event tests, functionality tests, and behavior tests. The advertiser's server will challenge the client using this series of tests. If the client fails during the testing, the request from the client is considered as invalid.
## (s27) Client-centric Proposal to Improve Online Behavioral Advertising.
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) Reference [46] describes the online advertising industry's proposal to mitigate the loss of privacy in OBA. The proposal is for the use of OBA disclosures: icons, accompanying taglines, and landing pages intended to inform users about OBA and provide opt-out options. The authors of Reference [46] conducted a 1,505-participant online study to investigate Internet users' perceptions of OBA disclosures. They found that the disclosures failed to clearly notify participants about OBA and inform them about their choices. The authors discuss the challenges in crafting disclosures and provide suggestions for improvement.
## (s31) Private-by-Design Proposal for Online Behavioral Targeting
Number of References: 3

(p31.0) Designs do exist for online advertising systems that allow for online behavioral targeting without revealing the user's online behavior, and thus protecting his privacy. For instance, a framework called Adnostic is proposed in Reference [86], which is a browser-assisted approach. The scheme consists of two modules building user profile with privacy and rendering ads into publisher pages when the participated publishers' websites are visited. However, according to Reference [69], none of these designs have been implemented and deployed in the real world. The authors of Reference [69] attempt to remedy this situation by building and evaluating a fully functional prototype of a practical privacy-preserving ad system at a reasonably large scale and deploying it. The authors claim to have more than 13K opted-in users. Their system had been in operation for over two months at the time of writing their paper, serving an average of 4.8K active users daily. These authors found that their system obtained click-through rates that are comparable with Google display ads. Their paper is an account of their experience and lessons learned with this system, the first "privacy-by-design" behavioral advertising and analytics system.
