# A Review on the efficiency and accuracy of localization of moisture distributions sensing in agricultural silos

CorpusID: 212850780 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b3c120e33b79793ec8b178d209a89af57ad9664](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b3c120e33b79793ec8b178d209a89af57ad9664)

Fields: Materials Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Moisture determination has been a major problem in many branches of store grain for many years particularly in the agricultural silos. Accurate moisture determination testing in silos is very important in managing and selling paddy and grain. This is because each grain has a completely different ideal moisture determination. Inaccurate Moisture determination measurements will lead to lower head grain. Once milled at wrong moisture content, it will endure additional drying cost and loss of quality especially when the paddy is dried too much. Furthermore, if the grain is just too wet in storage, harvested paddy will become wetter than necessary and this can contribute to the loss in profit when the paddy is sold. Therefore, it is important to develop moisture measurement systems to determine exact moisture content (MC).  2 Radio Frequency (RF) based volume tomography is considerably a quite new and challenging area, especially for non-invasive 3D imaging technologies which the primarily concept idea is adopted from Electrical Capacitance Volume Tomography [1]. In conventional electrical capacitance tomography, the measured capacitance will be placed between plates combinations. Then, it is used to reconstruct 2D images of moisture distribution. Similarly, RF based volume tomography are also constructed to have multiple layers of antenna measuring different attenuation of the transmitted signal. To reconstruct 2D images, the multi-path or diffraction of the signal from the silo walls is considered as a source of distortion to the final reconstructed images. Time of Arrival approaches may be able to mitigate the effect of distortion. However, it may not be true for all conditions. When grain samples have different layers of moisture, 2D image reconstruction can be quite complicated.
