# Nature-inspired optimization algorithms in knapsack problem: A review

CorpusID: 214198082 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f68fa8466960e4bd0699906c7894fb5a98c00ec7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f68fa8466960e4bd0699906c7894fb5a98c00ec7)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s5) Algorithm 2: The pseudo code of the particle swarm optimization algorithm
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Particle swarm optimization has been firstly "proposed for continuous optimization problems where velocity and position are real values. Therefore, it is not able to tackle a binary optimization problem such as knapsack problem. Kennedy and Eberhart [1997] developed a new version of particle swarm optimization, called binary particle swarm optimization (BPSO) to deal with problems with binary search space. In BPSO the position of particles takes the values 0 or 1. The velocity updating remains as defined in Eq. (4), then sigmoid function is used to transform the real values to the binary values according to the following equations [Haddar et al. 2016]:
## (s13) max
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) St   (27) where max S is the max walk step that a monarch butterfly individual can move in one step and t is the current generation. The butterfly adjusting operator" can be described in Algorithm 6 , Wang et al. 2016]. The standard monarch butterfly optimization algorithm was proposed to "handle a continuous optimization problem. In discrete optimization problems the standard method cannot be applied directly to deal with such a problem. Therefore, the sigmoid function is used to convert the continuous values into binary:
