# Smart design engineering: a literature review of the impact of the 4th industrial revolution on product design and development

CorpusID: 213749832 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb7d21dd783488296c3a0f54c719db625007d26](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb7d21dd783488296c3a0f54c719db625007d26)

Fields: Engineering

## (s7) Design for empowered users
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Through open innovation, customers can be empowered to become involved in the front end of the design process using digital design and product development tools and become active members of the product design team, which exceed mass customisation and the possibility of choosing from possible pre-defined alternatives (Würtz et al. 2015). In Würtz et al. (2015), for instance, the customer generates the geometrical dimensions of the product himself/ herself, which are produced by a assembling a combination of additive manufactured parts and pre-manufactured parts. For example, 247TailorSteel is a company that manufactures customised stainless-steel blanks for several industrial equipment manufacturers in the Netherlands. In this case, an industrial IoT drives a network of manufacturing technologies-or CPSs-that automatically translate customer orders from the upstream online product configurator, through manufacturing planning and control and down to the delivery to the customer (www.247ta ilors teel.com).
## (s8) Design for product-in-use feedback
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Learning from product use is of paramount importance for designing successful products; a well-executed user-centred design decreases overall development time and improves product quality (Buurman 1997). The convergence of embedded systems, global networks and business web and interactive CPS service creation by users is bringing a new wave of innovations and changes in human-system cooperation, usability and safety (Broy et al. 2012). It facilitates the access to endusers and improves communication among the members of the multi-disciplinary design team, particularly during the early process of idea generation. Recent technical developments, such as 3D printing, computer simulation, cyber-physical systems, augmented reality and online mass customisation toolkits have increased the possibilities of assessing consumer response to experiential product attributes in concept optimisation (Luchs et al. 2016). Living labs are one example of the application of these technologies (Mulder et al. 2015), prototypes of which send information through sensors with user consent but without user awareness.
## (s12) Design for emotional interaction
Number of References: 8

(p12.0) As observed by Dawid et al. (2017), although most smart products are currently isolated solutions, the fragmentation that can occur when a larger number of products co-exist in an environment without truly cooperating indicates missed opportunities and challenges for exploiting synergies. This, however, demands that smart products become aware of which other smart products are available in their vicinity and that they have a common language and established standards for interacting. The largest challenge for smart products is, however, to bridge the interface gap between, on the one hand, the technology that becomes ever more invisible and, on the other hand, the user who is less and less aware of what smart appliances they might be using, what information these appliances collect (and with whom they share this information) and how they can be controlled, configured, taught, and used (Dawid et al. 2017). An interesting phenomenon is the emergence of emotional bounds between user and product, which are potentially stronger the more interactive and 'intelligent' the device is. Chang et al. (2014) study the influence of different product characteristics on consumer purchase intention, and they find that connectivity, interactivity, telepresence, intelligence, convenience and security all positively influenced purchase intention via functional experience. This requires a deeper understanding of user, task and emotional requirements. Ng et al. (2014) explore how human behaviour can change the design of smart products and services and how interactions between consumers and their self-generated data can be analysed and fed back to support more informed and self-aware consumption decisions. Dawid et al. (2017) analyse some psychological aspects related to the interaction between humans and smart products and identify two possible scenarios: (1) having humans directly interface with smart products that communicate and cooperate among themselves, and (2) cognitive humanoid robots will evolve as flexible assistants in our houses and cities instead of distributing the smartness into installed components. The argue that the latter alternative is more natural and is easier for users control, thus reducing the need for embedding smartness into several devices, facilitating the designer to deal with questions of privacy, reducing the device's interaction complexity, and serving as a gateway to control and report the status of smart home products. Ghosh et al. (2017) propose a cyber-emphatic design framework that considers data feedback from productembedded sensors, which is processed through a network of psychological constructs. As a result, they identify the potential to manipulate product features and then measure the changes in perception using sensors and psychological construct models.

(p12.1) Solving these social challenges implies new engineering strategies, which call for the participatory analysis and design of systems and services that are (1) manageable, tailorable, trustworthy, fault-tolerant and accountable; (2) capable of learning from users' behaviours; (3) self-determined and controllable by the users and (4) compatible with non-networked systems and services as well as dropouts (Broy et al. 2012). For this vision to become reality, significant steps still need to be taken in terms of cognitive interaction technology, which is the research field that investigates how technical systems can deeply understand what they perceive, how to robustly manipulate physical objects and how to communicate with human users to provide assistance (Dawid et al. 2017).
## (s15) Increased stakeholder quantity and complexity
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) According to Dawid et al. (2017), consumers' perceptions of various smart features, such as autonomy, human-like interaction, the ability to cooperate, reactivity, adaptability and multi-functionality, may play a role in stakeholder quantity and complexity. Consumers' attitudes, consumption values and intended behavioural usage regarding smart products need to be investigated more closely to determine whether smart(er) products are really better. This requires reshaping the product concept using all involved processes and considering the product's lifecycle (Eigner et al. 2013).

(p15.1) Modelling smart products requires interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary collaboration among several intermediary stakeholders in addition to producers and customers, including empowered ones (Blanco et al. 2017;Wellsandt and Thoben 2016), such as (1) managers responsible for introducing smart products to the market to consider the market perspective, (2) experts from the underlying technical fields to learn about the specifics of the alternative systems and to understand their potential pros and cons, (3) sociologists and psychologists to help overcome mental or other barriers during the adoption process, (4) lawyers (in some cases) to address any legal concerns, since smart products often raise data protection issues and/or liability issues, (5) representatives from each group of prospective users of these products, (6) policy makers and their specific interests (e.g., concerning the limitation of energy and/or resource consumption, which may be actuated by subsidies and/or enforced by regulations) (Dawid et al. 2017). Rymaszewska et al. (2017) demonstrate three cases of business-to-business (B2B) IoT powered servitisation, in which the implementation of strategic issues relates to several different areas and different stakeholders outside the technical field. Failing to take into account these scenarios would jeopardise the developed solution.
