# COLOR FEATURE WITH SPATIAL INFORMATION EXTRACTION METHODS FOR CBIR: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 216621194 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d033dd8f3a463745ef2dd163b17d39199659b46d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d033dd8f3a463745ef2dd163b17d39199659b46d)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) In the last years, the development of the multimedia applications led to widespread off digital images. Also, the developing of then images' sharing unlimited number of images via social media every day. However, managing and organizing these digital images present a problem. Thus, the concepts of indexing and retrieval were introduced to overcome this issue. Indexing relates to "how images are store in database to retrieve them (through querying) more efficient", whereas Retrieval relates to "how to retrieve images that are most relevant to the query image from images in database" [1,2,3]. At the First, Texts-Based Images Retrieval (TBISR) are used to achieve the image retrieval task. It's depend one metadata that related to each image and the retrieving of image task done by using traditional query techniques "using keyword". This method works well with small digital images databases but, it has low efficiency with huge database. The most important problem in TBIR is different users use different words to describe the same image (subjectivity of the human). This problem negatively affects the efficiency of the text-based image search, so, a need for more efficient image retrieval system is appeared. The needed system must perform an automatic indexing and retrieving. Therefore, the second method depending on image content for indexing and retrieving. Therefore, this method is generally known as Contents-Based Images Retrieval (CBIIR) [4]"."
