# Galectins for Diagnosis and Prognostic Assessment of Human Diseases: An Overview of Meta-Analyses e923901-1

CorpusID: 220944385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/113619d10986b835367e60131d7852907804ebbf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/113619d10986b835367e60131d7852907804ebbf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Thyroid cancer
Number of References: 8

(p5.0) Four different study groups performed similar meta-analyses to evaluate the role of galectin-3 in diagnosis of thyroid cancer [17][18][19][20]. According to the effect sizes, meta-analyses by de Matos L et al. [17], Xin Y et al. [18], and Trimboli P et al. [19] calculated the sensitivity and specificity to evaluate the diagnostic performance of galectin-3, but the meta-analysis by Tang W et al. calculated the OR to compare the difference in positive galectin-3 expression rate between patients with and without thyroid cancer [20]. Regardless, all of them supported the diagnostic value of galectin-3. Notably, Xin Y et al. also explored the role of Hector Battifora mesothelial antigen-1 in the diagnosis of thyroid cancer and suggested that the AUC of Hector Battifora mesothelial antigen-1 should be larger than that of galectin-3.
## (s16) e923901-6
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) In terms of prognostic assessment, three different study groups performed similar meta-analyses to evaluate the role of galectin-3 for assessing outcomes of heart failure [25][26][27]. But they employed different statistical methods and calculated different effect sizes. In 2015, Chen A et al. included 11 studies and found a positive association of galectin-3 with all-cause mortality by using combining categorical (HR=1.30) and continuous (HR=1.28) data [25]. They also found a statistically significant association of galectin-3 with cardiovascular mortality (HR=1.59). In 2016, Chen Y et al. conducted meta-analyses in chronic heart failure (9 studies) and acute heart failure (4 studies) [26]. The pooled AUC, DOR, sensitivity, and specificity of galectin-3 for predicting all-cause death were 0.64, 2.36, 60%, and 61% in chronic heart failure and 0.64, 2.30, 64%, and 57% in acute heart failure, respectively. In 2017, Imran T et al. found a statistically significant association of elevated plasma galectin-3 level with higher risk of all-cause death (HR=1.09) in nine studies and CVD (HR=1.44) in five studies [27]. Taken together, all three meta-analyses indicated that galectin-3 negatively influenced outcomes of heart failure, but its ability might be relatively weak.
## (s21) Pregnancy
Number of References: 7

(p21.0) Three meta-analyses evaluated the diagnostic value of galectins alone or in combination with pulsatility index for preeclampsia (Table 3) [34][35][36].

(p21.1) Two different study groups published similar meta-analyses in 2015 to explore the diagnostic accuracy of galectin-13 alone for preeclampsia [34,35]. Wu P et al. identified nine studies exploring the role of galectin-13, also known as placental protein 13, for diagnosis of preeclampsia [34]. The AUC was 0.882, sensitivity 37%, and specificity 88%. In another meta-analysis by Zhong Y et al., the sensitivity and specificity of galectin-13 were 47% and 89% for early preeclampsia, 60% and 78% for early preeclampsia, 36% and 90% for small for gestational age, and 51% and 88% for preterm delivery, respectively [35]. LGALS2 -C3279T gene polymorphism and ischemic stroke * Studies included heart failure patients and general population.
