# Survey of Spinal Cord Stimulation Hardware Currently Available for the Treatment of Chronic Pain in the United States

CorpusID: 227121538 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0e024c36ff79bda8b90280fbadcf18b58a0ba60](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0e024c36ff79bda8b90280fbadcf18b58a0ba60)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) The point prevalence of chronic low back pain (cLBP) among all adults in the United States (US) is 13.1% (1). Several factors have been identified to confer a more than doubling of the adjusted odds ratio (aOR) of cLBP including being between 50 and 69 years old (aOR 2.03-2.07), having less than a high school education (aOR 2.27), having an annual household income <$20,000 (aOR 2.29), income derived primarily from disability (aOR 2.62), depression (aOR 3.30-10.62 depending on severity), sleep disturbances (aOR 3.90), and other medical comorbidities (aOR 2.49-6.09) (1). The lifetime prevalence of acute LBP is nearly 80% in the United States (2). There is concern that as the US population ages and attains increasing risk factors for the development of cLBP, there will be a need for increased treatments (3).

(p0.1) The treatment of cLBP pain represents a major financial burden on the US health-care system. The 12 month healthcare expenditures of adult patients with LBP in the US was found to be $25,613 (95% confidence interval $25,569-$25,657) among patients who underwent spine surgery compared to $795 ($790-800) among patients who chose non-surgical treatments (4). The two major considerations when choosing a spinal cord stimulation (SCS) system are efficacy, which is often equivalent to spine surgery, and cost, which is substantially less than spine surgery. SCS represents a continuously evolving technology with evidence for cost-effective management of cLBP. The use of older, non-rechargeable implanted pulse generators (IPGs) was associated with similar incremental cost utilization ratio (ICUR) compared to surgical reoperation for the treatment of LBP (0.59 vs. 0.83) (5). The use of SCS for the treatment of neuropathic leg and LBP was associated with higher upfront costs compared to conventional medical therapy ($19,486 vs. $3,994) but increases in health-care-related quality of life and EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D) scores at 6 months (6).
