# The use of chemometrics in combination with molecular spectroscopic and chromatographic methods for authentication of Curcuma species: a review

CorpusID: 224413441 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62b5f7645d541920948bd26151af3e8aee28153e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62b5f7645d541920948bd26151af3e8aee28153e)

Fields: Chemistry

## (s7) Authentication of Curcuma species using chromatography
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) Due to its capability to separate components of interest present in Curcuma species, chromatographicbased techniques such as thin layer, liquid, and gas chromatography in combination with chemometrics evolved as emerging techniques for authentication studies (Esteki et al., 2018). Chromatographic methods equipped with numerous detectors have been used for identification of adulteration practices by quantification of specipic markers (compouds) present in genuine and adulterated samples (Esteki et al., 2017) Most chromatographic methods intended to Curcuma species authentication are developed for analysis of curcuminoid in C. longa and C. xanthorriza. Rafi et al. (2011) have developed TLC fingerprints for differentiation of three herbs, namely Turmeric (Curcuma longa), java turmeric (Curcuma xanthorrhiza) and cassumunar ginger (Zingiber cassumunar). The visualization of separated zones was performed using visible and UV lights at 254 and 366 nm, respectively. The pattern of TLC fingerprint was different among three herbs evaluated exhibiting specific marker zones respectively. For example, turmeric was characterized by 7 zones at Rf of 0.05-0.97 under UV 254. This result indicated that TLC fingerprint can be used for discrimination and authentication of three herbs tested.

(p7.1) HPLC is a common method used for quantitative analysis of curcuminoid either for authentication or quality control purposes (Siregar et al., 2017). HPLC using fingerprint profiles combined with supervised pattern recognition of DA has been exploited for authentication and discrimination of C. xanthorrhiza from C. longa by determining the contents of curcuminoids. The results showed that curcuminoid contents in C. longa were higher than those in C. xanthorrhiza, as a consequence both species could be  (Windarsih et al., 2018b) discriminated and authenticated based on curcuminoid levels. In addition, the discrimination and authentication of both species were also achieved based on HPLC fingerprint chromatograms using curcuminoid components as marker peaks. Combined with DA, HPLC fingerprint offered excellent result allowing two species to be separated and correctly classified .
