# High Temperature Corrosion Protection of Heating Surface Metals of Waste Incineration Power Generation Boilers: A Review

CorpusID: 229048452 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca6b63061cc8a278875a39c11f990744eedbae0f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca6b63061cc8a278875a39c11f990744eedbae0f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Engineering, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) As an efficient, clean and resource-based waste treatment method, waste incineration power generation is favored by all countries in the world. As of 2018, the daily processing capacity of global waste incineration plants has reached 700,000 t d -1 [1]. However, the problem of corrosion has always been an important reason hindering the development of waste incineration power generation. Since metal parts such as water wall, superheater, heat exchanger, induced draft fan are eroded by medium and high temperature flue gas during the operation of the boiler, the material will continue to peel and thin. This not only increases the high costs for the enterprises concerned, but also makes it impossible to guarantee the safety of the boiler operation. The high-temperature corrosion of these heated surfaces CBMES 2020 Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1649 (2020) 012031 IOP Publishing doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1649/1/012031 2 usually includes oxidative corrosion, thermal corrosion, chloride corrosion, etc. Among them, chloride corrosion is the main one. This paper reviews the anti-corrosion technologies commonly used in the heating surface of waste incineration boilers, such as hardfacing, thermal spraying, and remelting, analyzes the advantages and disadvantages of these technologies, and prospects their application prospects.
## (s10) High Frequency Induction Remelting
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) High-frequency induction remelting refers to the use of high-frequency induction to heat and melt the coating using the induced current (eddy current) generated in the workpiece and coating. Compared with laser remelting, high-frequency induction remelting technology requires less equipment, simple process, and low cost. It is more suitable for the mass production of more regularly shaped products such as water-cooled wall pipe rows. In recent years, many scholars have done a lot of research on the bonding mechanism, the influencing factors of cladding parameters and the remelting mode in the process of induction cladding. In recent years, the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and other countries have applied more and more self-fluxing alloy (NiCrSiB) coatings on the water-cooled walls of waste incineration boilers using high-frequency induction heating [13]. As shown in Figure 4, Valean [14] et al. sprayed a NiCrBSi coating on the surface of the substrate through an oxygen-acetylene flame, and then applied the high-frequency induction remelting technique to melt the coating again. After remelting, the porosity of the coating decreased from an initial value of approximately 15% to a final value of less than 3%, and both the wear rate and corrosion behavior were improved. In addition, as shown in Figure 5, induction remelting has a higher microhardness than flame remelting. 
