# FLAVONOIDS IN THE SPECIES OF THE FAMILY ARACEAE: A REVIEW Sebuah tinjauan: Senyawa-senyawa flavonoid pada suku Araceae

CorpusID: 225922320 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b10938a92fcb38dd326ee047c060d75ed5e7de5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b10938a92fcb38dd326ee047c060d75ed5e7de5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s1) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY GYMNOSTACHYDOIDEAE
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Gymnostachys anceps alone belongs to this subfamily and was surveyed for flavonoids (Table  1). A flavonol glycoside, kaempferol 3-sophoroside-7-rhamnoside ( Figure 8) was isolated from the leaves of this species (Williams et al. 1971). Other flavonoids were not reported. Williams et al. (1971) surveyed the C-glycosylflavones which were common flavonoids in the Araceae including Lemnaceae, however they were not present in this species.   
## (s6) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY LASIOIDEAE
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) About 60 species of 10 genera belong to the Lasioideae. Two species, Dracontium asperum and Lasia spinosa, were surveyed for flavonoids (Table  6). Common anthocyanins, cyanidin and pelargonidin 3-rutinosides, were found in Dracontium asperum (Williams et al. 1981). C-Glycosylflavones were detected in D. asperum and L. spinosa, and characterized as isovitexin xyloside and vitexin glucoside (D. asperum) (Williams et al. 1981), and vitexin and its 2"-glucoside (L. spinosa) (Hong Van et al. 2006). Table 6. Reports on the flavonoids from the species of subfamily Lasioideae Dracontium asperum K.Koch Anthocyanin: cyanidin 3-rutinoside, pelargonidin 3-rutinoside (pt), C-Glycosylflavone: isovitexin xyloside, vitexin glucoside (lf) (Williams et al. 1981) Dracontium asperum (as Dracontium foecundum Hook.f.) (Williams et al. 1981) Anthocyanin: cyanidin 3-rutinoside, pelargonidin 3-rutinoside (sp, sx) (Williams et al. 1981) Lasia spinosa (L.) Thwaites Flavonol: quercetin 3-rutinoside (wp), C-Glycosylflavone: vitexin, vitexin 2´´-glucoside (wp) (Hong Van et al. 2006)
