# molecules A Review on Graphene-Based Light Emitting Functional Devices

CorpusID: 221770997 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08aa02d2c0f5552b2de3dfdd5192a31b11987770](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08aa02d2c0f5552b2de3dfdd5192a31b11987770)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s6) Electroluminescence (El) from Graphene
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) Only a few studies have been explored EL emissions from graphene, where the EL measurement was either limited to the few-layered graphene or nano-scale photonic crystals [142]. In related research, Ryan Beam et al. reported STM (scanning tunneling microscope) induced hot electroluminescence from single-layer graphene at ambient conditions. Explicitly, the emission radiations depend on the number of graphene layers and the relative energy of the injected carriers. In the case of pristine graphene, the electron-hole pair can be excited by the incident photons [143], where the non-radiative combination of electron-holes occurs in the valence band due to the unavailability of energy states [144]. However, in the case of the doped graphene layer, the incident photon can produce a radiative effect due to the presence of the energy states [145]. Therefore, the EL effect requires a doping level within a limit range of ω L > 2|E F ≥ ω E |, where ω L and ω E are the relative photon energy of laser emissions [146]. Moreover, EL emissions from graphene can be transformed into the STM vision by replacing incident photons with electron injection, as demonstrated in Figure 10a. Moreover, the energy of injected charge carriers can be controlled by applying base voltage V B ; the experiment setup is illustrated in Figure 10b. Besides, in the experimental setup, initially, the glass substrates were cleaned with plasma oxygen and then coated with ITO, where the P-type graphene layer with a maximum bandgap of~0.5 eV was obtained through the doping effect of contact leads. with ITO, where the P-type graphene layer with a maximum bandgap of ~0.5 eV was obtained through the doping effect of contact leads. In addition, the change in the Fermi energy of the graphene layer can be due to two possible reasons: first, the high work function of the AU tip material, which raises the P-doping level, and secondly, the bias voltage VB, which can also induce the capacitive effect. These two possible doping effects can induce a bandgap from ~0.5 to 0.65 eV [147]. The induced bandgap in graphene is enough for an electroluminescent effect at near IR and visible emissions. Likewise, the electroluminescence effect was experimented in the graphene layer for energies level ≤ 2EF, as shown in Figure 10c with the grey shaded area. Besides, if the injected carrier has energy less than 2EF, then electrons lose their energy before the process of radiative decaying. The output radiation spectrum for single-layer graphene is shown in Figure 10d.

(p6.1) The established LEDs-based technology is the key component of today's solid-state semiconductor industry [148], where the existing LEDs technology has enabled plenty of applications, such as low cost, high-efficiency performance, smart display, and high-performance communication. However, the tuning of light-emitting spectra in LEDs' design is quite challenging; the emission spectrum of LEDs is predefined in the fabrication process [149]. In related research, Wang et al. reported a spectrally tunable and visible light emission from the graphene-based heterostructure structure device, as shown in Figure 4(a). The light scribe surface of the semi-reduced GO nanoclusters is interfaced between the GO and reduced GO. The zero-bandgap nature of rGO and the extremely large bandgap between ( and *) bandgap of GO implies that the luminescence in rGO and GO is not possible, though, the experimentally observed broad PL feature is a strong signature of the presence of localized states in the semi-reduced GO layer, similar to those in rGO In addition, the change in the Fermi energy of the graphene layer can be due to two possible reasons: first, the high work function of the A U tip material, which raises the P-doping level, and secondly, the bias voltage V B , which can also induce the capacitive effect. These two possible doping effects can induce a bandgap from~0.5 to 0.65 eV [147]. The induced bandgap in graphene is enough for an electroluminescent effect at near IR and visible emissions. Likewise, the electroluminescence effect was experimented in the graphene layer for energies level ≤ 2E F , as shown in Figure 10c with the grey shaded area. Besides, if the injected carrier has energy less than 2E F , then electrons lose their energy before the process of radiative decaying. The output radiation spectrum for single-layer graphene is shown in Figure 10d.

(p6.2) The established LEDs-based technology is the key component of today's solid-state semiconductor industry [148], where the existing LEDs technology has enabled plenty of applications, such as low cost, high-efficiency performance, smart display, and high-performance communication. However, the tuning of light-emitting spectra in LEDs' design is quite challenging; the emission spectrum of LEDs is predefined in the fabrication process [149]. In related research, Wang et al. reported a spectrally tunable and visible light emission from the graphene-based heterostructure structure device, as shown in Figure 4a. The light scribe surface of the semi-reduced GO nanoclusters is interfaced between the GO and reduced GO. The zero-bandgap nature of rGO and the extremely large bandgap between (π and π*) bandgap of GO implies that the luminescence in rGO and GO is not possible, though, the experimentally observed broad PL feature is a strong signature of the presence of localized states in the semi-reduced GO layer, similar to those in rGO quantum dots [150]. The charge carrier mobility in the semi-reduced GO network approaches 10 cm 2 V -1 S 1 that supports the carrier injection. Moreover, the emission spectrum can be controlled by the doping level or by the gating level from blue to red (∆ 750 nm). Significantly, the devices fabricated with the light scribe method shows visible light emission with a high brightness up to 6,000 cdm −2 , but short lifetime and low efficiency~1% [63].

(p6.3) Moreover, the light emission intensity as a function of the drain to source bias is shown in Figure 11b. Particularly, EL intensity can be controlled by the driving current; a relatively uniform device operation was reported at fixed current bias 0.1 A (I max /I min < 2). The EL spectral can be tuned from light blue to dark red emission spectrum by the adjustment of the Fermi level, where the implication of side gate voltage was used to tune the Fermi level. Besides, the ambient doping can also be utilized for the tuning EL spectra. The variation in EL spectral under different gate voltage values is demonstrated in Figure 11c, where wavelength shifts from 690 nm (V G = 0) to 470 nm (V G = 50 V) were observed. The temperature-dependent charge transportation was also analyzed by plotting drain-source current versus gate voltage (I-V), as shown in Figure 11d. The I-V relationship found to be fit with measured conductivity in the Arrhenius Plot shows the electrons injection in system charge emission manners. More specifically, the linearity feature in log(I) plot versus V 1/2 indicates an agreement with Poole Frankel's current law [151]. The Pool Frankel effect is defined as the movement of trapped electrons from the coulomb binding state to the conduction band [152]. Figure 11e illustrates the Pool Frankel emission of the graphene-based FELED, where the high density of states in the oxygen-rich light-emitting layer work as charge traps states. Besides, in a high electric field, the low energy states' occupied charges at discrete energy levels are excited to perform thermally generated electron-hole combination, which results in EL. The zero bandgap nature of graphene limits its use as an active material for optoelectronic applications [153]. However, outstanding properties of graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) combined with tunable bandgap make it a promising candidate for the development of future light-emitting sources.

(p6.4) Molecules 2020, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 31 cm 2 V -1 S 1 that supports the carrier injection. Moreover, the emission spectrum can be controlled by the doping level or by the gating level from blue to red (ʎ ≅ 750 ). Significantly, the devices fabricated with the light scribe method shows visible light emission with a high brightness up to 6,000 cdm −2 , but short lifetime and low efficiency ~1% [63]. Moreover, the light emission intensity as a function of the drain to source bias is shown in Figure  11b. Particularly, EL intensity can be controlled by the driving current; a relatively uniform device operation was reported at fixed current bias 0.1 A (Imax/Imin < 2). The EL spectral can be tuned from light blue to dark red emission spectrum by the adjustment of the Fermi level, where the implication of side gate voltage was used to tune the Fermi level. Besides, the ambient doping can also be utilized for the tuning EL spectra. The variation in EL spectral under different gate voltage values is demonstrated in Figure 11c, where wavelength shifts from 690 nm (VG = 0) to 470 nm (VG = 50 V) were observed. The temperature-dependent charge transportation was also analyzed by plotting drainsource current versus gate voltage (I-V), as shown in Figure 11d. The I-V relationship found to be fit with measured conductivity in the Arrhenius Plot shows the electrons injection in system charge emission manners. More specifically, the linearity feature in log(I) plot versus V1/2 indicates an agreement with Poole Frankel's current law [151]. The Pool Frankel effect is defined as the movement of trapped electrons from the coulomb binding state to the conduction band [152]. Figure 11(e) illustrates the Pool Frankel emission of the graphene-based FELED, where the high density of states in the oxygen-rich light-emitting layer work as charge traps states. Besides, in a high electric field, the low energy states' occupied charges at discrete energy levels are excited to perform thermally generated electron-hole combination, which results in EL. The zero bandgap nature of graphene limits its use as an active material for optoelectronic applications [153]. However, outstanding properties of graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) combined with tunable bandgap make it a promising candidate for the development of future light-emitting sources. 
