# Sequence variation, common tissue expression patterns and learning models: a genome-wide survey of vertebrate ribosomal proteins

CorpusID: 228187823 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bbb556a9bf5139809b80d616eda1ed32c105d83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bbb556a9bf5139809b80d616eda1ed32c105d83)

Fields: Computer Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Harvesting and curation of vertebrate RP sequences
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) RP gene symbols of both the previous and the new nomenclature (9) were used to perform manual queries to the NCBI RefSeq Database in order to retrieve the respective RP reference sequences for each of the eleven vertebrate species, namely Homo sapiens (human), Pan troglodytes (chimpanzee), Pongo abelii (Sumatran orangutan), Macaca mulatta (rhesus macaque), Mus musculus (house mouse), Monodelphis domestica (gray short-tailed opossum), Ornithorhynchus anatinus (platypus), Gallus gallus (chicken), Anolis carolinensis (arboreal anole lizard), Xenopus tropicalis (western clawed frog) and Danio rerio (zebrafish) (51). For one or more vertebrate species, 23 RPs failed to return ortholog sequences by either annotation queries or alignments using BLASTP and the respective 90 RP H. sapiens protein sequence, as queries (52). For these missing RPs, H. sapiens orthologs were used again to perform queries using TBLASTN to identify DNA sequences with statistically significant similarity (e-value < 0.05), subsequently translated and added to complete our RP protein sequence collection. The RP collection was manually curated and annotated by setting unique IDs specifying gene name, NCBI RefSeq ID and vertebrate species. The RP protein sequence of the largest size was marked by the term 'ref ' (as reference) and in case of additional sequences, they were marked and enumerated using the term 'iso ' (isoforms). In total, 1083 RP sequences were assimilated into our sequence data collection. Confirming the validity of our approach, we noted that several O. anatinus translated RPs we had marked, were also incorporated into a more recent release (NCBI Ornithorhynchus anatinus Annotation Release 104). Heatmaps for phylogenetic profiling (also expression, see below) were created with ComplexHeatmap (53).
## (s3) Sequence comparison and clustering
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Automatic all-versus-all sequence comparison was performed for the entire RP protein sequence collection. Lowcomplexity masking was applied to the RP sequences using CAST (55) and comparisons were performed using BLASTP (e-value < 0.05) (52). Pairwise lists of significant hits, with a minimum threshold of 50% for identity score, were used to form sequence similarity networks and Markov-chain clustering (MCL) (inflation = 1.8, minimum three nodes per cluster) (56) was applied using Biolayout 3D Express (57). This e-value threshold is justified by the fact that the searches are not blind but supervised, i.e. the query set is known (RPs) and we go for high sensitivity (no false negatives), and 'low precision' (i.e. potentially some false positives, for which we have none). Therefore, it is not problematic to run searches when the query as well as the target sets are well-defined, as in this case.
## (s8) Analysis of expression profiles in vertebrates
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) For the analysis of RP expression patterns across vertebrate species and tissues, we utilized RNA-Seq data of 68 RPs (corrected Reads Per Kilobase Million; cRPKM) (69) in two combinations to maximize coverage, respectively: i) six common tissues for five species, i.e. maximum number of common tissues, and ii) three common tissues for seven species, i.e. maximum number of common species. Expression values were scaled between 0 and 1 using Min-Max for i) each organism and ii) each RP, before being reordered per tissue for comparisons. Note that the choice of the eleven vertebrate species was partly imposed by the availability of genome-wide tissue expression data, generated for splicing variants (69).
## (s11) Vertebrate RPs are >80% identical between zebrafish and human, with six exceptions
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) To provide an accurate estimation of protein sequence conservation across vertebrate species and map it to the three-dimensional structure of the ribosome, H. sapiens (human) and D. rerio (zebrafish) RP protein sequences from each cluster were selected and compared (Figure 2). Human and zebrafish represent the most distant vertebrate species in our set and both have a record of curated protein sequences (51,71). For each cluster, the pair of human and zebrafish RPs with the highest identity score was selected and was used as metric of estimation of sequence conservation within the vertebrate lineage. We observed distinct differences between the estimated RP sequence conservation levels, range from ∼60 to 100% identity score ( Figure 2A). As expected, most RPs exhibit high sequence identity scores (>80%), except for RPL7L1, RPL14/eL14, RPL6/eL6, RPL36/eL36, FAU/RPS30-precursor/eS30 and RPL7/uL30. Also, comparison of within-cluster identity score ranks between SSU and LSU RPs, after removing the cluster of RPS27a/eS31 and UBA52/RPL40-precursor/eL40, that contains RPs from both ribosomal subunits, shows a small (∼4%) but significant increase in identity score for SSU RPs (P-value < 0.05; non-parametric, two-sided Wilcoxon test). This observation could be related to the slightly higher proportion of universal RPs in SSU both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, due to the higher conservation of the SSU rRNA (7) ( Figure  2B).
## (s12) Sequence variability does not affect a correlated mode of expression for most human RP genes
Number of References: 15

(p12.0) To investigate possible tissue-specific expression patterns of RPs, we utilized RNA-seq data from the GTEx database v8 (65). Inspection of RP expression profiles in GTEx non-disease human tissues confirmed the known tissue-enrichments (Supplementary Figure S5) displayed by RPL3L (38)(39)(40)(41) in skeletal and cardiac muscle as well as RPL10L (40,(42)(43), RPL39L (39,(44)(45) and RPS4Y2 (46) in testis (not shown). Interestingly, RPL26L1, a RP paralog of RPL26/uL24, was also found enriched in testis but the functional significance of its overexpression has yet to be described. For RPL7L1 and RPS27L, despite lack of information regarding tissue enrichment, there is over-expression in samples of cultured fibroblasts comparted to RPL7/uL30 and RPS27/eS27, respectively--of unknown significance. Dimension reduction (t-SNE) of samples based on RP expression, separated them into distinct clusters according to their tissue (Supplementary Figures S6 and 7), as was previously reported (72). This led us to assign samples into 33 different categories, notably separating samples of similar tissue origin (Supplementary Figures S8-10). This includes cerebellum samples, which display higher average RP expression than the rest of the samples with brain origin, and tumorigenic in vitro cell cultures (EBV-transformed lymphocytes and cultured fibroblasts), which were ranked among ovary, cervix uteri and uterus as the tissues with the highest average expression levels of RPs (Figure 3). Regarding global RP expression in non-disease samples, liver and brain display the lowest RP expression levels, while ovary and cervix uteri the highest (Figure 3). Curiously, the detection of liver and blood as tissues with low RP expression levels might be due to the usage of different expression datasets and processing (50), compared to previous individual studies. Nevertheless, proliferation potential appears to account for most of the RP expression variability displayed across different tissues (50), as clearly shown by the high ranking of in vitro cultured EBV-lymphoblasts and fibrob- lasts, that differ considerably from their relative tissues of origin, blood and skin, respectively (Figure 3).
