# Vitamin C: A Review on its Role in the Management of Metabolic Syndrome

CorpusID: 220302678 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bd60858e833af3fca1a74627200ecde9d1d0a5e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bd60858e833af3fca1a74627200ecde9d1d0a5e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 15

(p0.0) The harmonised criteria according to Joint Interim Statement define metabolic syndrome (MetS) in the presence of at least three out of these five metabolic abnormalities: elevated waist circumference, blood pressure (BP), fasting blood glucose (FBG), triglycerides (TG) and reduced high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) [1]. The unhealthy dietary pattern, such as high consumption of refined carbohydrate and saturated fat, is directly correlated with MetS development [2][3][4][5]. The lack of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity is also one of the important risk factors for MetS [6]. MetS patients are advised to adopt lifestyle-based interventions as the initial management, such as avoiding food and beverage containing high sugar and fat content along with maintaining aerobic exercise. Drug therapies (medications for obesity, hyperglycaemia, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia) and bariatric surgery are recommended if lifestyle modifications are not successful in improving MetS conditions.

(p0.1) Recently, there is a growing interest in employing anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory agents as prophylactic or therapeutic agents against MetS [7][8][9][10], in line with the speculation that oxidative stress and inflammation play a significant role in the pathophysiology of MetS. Under this hypothesis, oxidative damage and inflammation are triggered by exogenous factors, like an overabundance of dietary carbohydrate and lipid. Dietary fat mainly consists of a combination of saturated fatty acid (SFA), trans-unsaturated fatty acid (TFA), monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) with different health effects [11]. The degree of saturation in dietary fat has been proposed to differentially influence the several key factors of MetS. Both SFA and TFA are highly atherogenic by Ivyspring International Publisher increasing the levels of total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C), apolipoprotein A-1 (apoA1) and decreasing the level of HDL-C. In contrast, MUFA and PUFA have favourable effects on atherogenicity by reducing TC, LDL-C and elevating HDL-C [11]. Excessive macronutrients ingestion generates a large amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS) as by-product causing lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress that eventually lead to inflammation via activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) signalling pathway [12,13]. Likewise, the increase in adipocyte size and number arise from abdominal obesity and dyslipidaemia elevate the endogenous pool of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which act as potent stimulators for ROS production by macrophages and monocytes [14]. Therefore, the interdependence of oxidative stress and inflammation suggests the potential use of agents exhibiting anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory activities simultaneously to mitigate MetS.
## (s5) The relationship between circulating vitamin C concentration and MetS
Number of References: 14

(p5.0) Four cross-sectional studies involving adolescents and adults participating in National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) demonstrated that serum vitamin C concentration was inversely correlated with MetS outcomes [39][40][41][42]. Using data from NHANES between 1988 until 1994, the serum vitamin C concentration was compared among 8,808 adults (aged 20 years and above) with and without MetS. Findings from this study indicated that the age-adjusted concentration of vitamin C was lower in participants with MetS (36.41 ± 1.11 mmol/L) than those without MetS (42.94 ± 0.83 mmol/L). The concentration of vitamin C was inversely correlated with waist circumference (β = -4.090 ± 0.860) and hyperglycaemia (β = -3.066 ± 1.017). Besides, individuals with the highest number of MetS criteria had the lowest serum vitamin C concentration [39].

(p5.1) From the year 2001 to 2006, Beydoun and colleagues performed two cross-sectional studies recruiting 4,285 adolescents (aged 12 -19 years) and 1,574 adults (aged 20 -85 years), respectively. In adolescents, lower concentration of vitamin C in serum was noted in participants with MetS than those without MetS. Inverse relationships were constantly found between vitamin C and MetS using different models, i.e. after controlling for socio-demographic and dietary factors (OR = 0.26; 95% CI 0.11 to 0.62) as well as after inclusion of serum cholesterol and TG (OR = 0.16; 95% CI 0.05 to 0.52) [40]. A similar trend was detected in adults whereby MetS subjects displayed lower vitamin C concentration compared to non-MetS subjects. Vitamin C was inversely related to MetS count and binary outcomes. Every increase of ~28.5 μmol/L in vitamin C concentration was associated with 24% lower prevalence odds of MetS (OR = 0.76; 95% CI 0.58 to 0.98) [41]. More recently, a cross-sectional study was published consisting of data from NHANES between 2005 until 2006. A total of 2,049 MetS subjects were identified using the harmonized criteria from the Joint Interim Statement in this study. The authors unveiled that vitamin C concentration decreased with increasing BMI and number of MetS components. In addition, having lower than the clinical reference range for vitamin C was significantly associated with a greater likelihood of MetS (OR = 1.39; 95% CI 1.01 to 1.90) [42].

(p5.2) Another cross-sectional study by Chielle et al. Comparative results were obtained from case-control studies assessing the relationship between plasma vitamin C status and MetS components. Odum and co-researchers recruited 200 Nigerians consisting of 100 MetS subjects as well as 100 age-and sex-matched controls. The mean plasma vitamin C concentration of the study population was measured and a significantly lower concentration of vitamin C was observed in MetS individuals as compared to the healthy subjects [44,45]. Two case-control studies by Godala and co-researchers estimated the plasma vitamin C concentration in MetS patients (aged 30 -65 years) and healthy subjects (aged 41 -65 years). MetS subjects were found to have a lower plasma vitamin C concentration relative to healthy controls. Deficiency of circulating vitamin C concentration was significantly more common in MetS subjects than healthy individuals. The concentration of vitamin C in MetS patients was found to inversely correlate with systolic BP (Pearson's coefficient: -0.31, p<0.0001), diastolic BP (Pearson's coefficient: -0.1689, p=0.042) and HDL-C (Pearson's coefficient: -0.19, p=0.018) [38,46].

(p5.3) On the contrary, two cross-sectional studies reported paradoxical results. A total of 118 healthy participants working at B.P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, Nepal were included in a cross-sectional study. They reported that 39% subjects (n=46) were diagnosed with MetS and no significant difference was observed in the plasma vitamin C concentration among individuals with and without MetS. Furthermore, other oxidative stress parameter and antioxidant levels including malondialdehyde (MDA), reduced glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and vitamin E were not significantly different among the subjects with and without MetS. The authors suggested that oxidative stress did not contribute in the pathogenesis of MetS in this population [47]. . Findings from this study demonstrated no difference in serum vitamin C concentration among the three groups of subjects. The discrepancy observed in the findings of this study compared to other studies might be due to the presence of other antioxidants in counteracting the oxidative stress during MetS. The levels of SOD and total antioxidant activity were lower in PCOS women with MetS as compared to healthy control [48].
## (s6) The effects of vitamin C supplementation on MetS
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) The earliest clinical trial investigating the effects of vitamin C on MetS was conducted by Czernichow et al. (2009). They designed a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled, primary prevention trial, known as the French SUpplementation en VItamines et Mineraux AntioXydants (SU.VI.MAX) study. A total of 5,220 men and women were included and randomly assigned to receive either a supplement containing a combination of antioxidants (120 mg vitamin C, 30 mg vitamin E, 6 mg β-carotene, 20 mg zinc and 100 μg selenium) or a placebo. The participants were free of MetS during the onset of the study and were followed for 7.5 years. Results from this study pinpointed that antioxidant supplementation for 7.5 years did not affect the incident risk of MetS, as shown by an approximately equal number of MetS events in the placebo and intervention groups. However, higher baseline serum vitamin C concentration was associated with lower odds for MetS incident risk (OR = 0.53; 95% CI 0.35 to 0.80) [49].

(p6.1) The effects of vitamin C supplementation alone or in combination with endurance physical activity were investigated by Farag and co-authors in two randomised controlled trials. In the first study, participants of both sexes with MetS (n=141; aged 30 -50 years old) were randomly divided into six groups receiving placebo, 2000 IU/day vitamin D or 500 mg/day vitamin C with or without 30 minutes/day physical activities for three months. Their data concluded that subjects taking vitamin C alone had a lowered TG level compared to placebo. The level of HDL-C was increased, but TG and waist circumference were decreased in MetS patients subjected to vitamin C supplementation with exercise in relative to the placebo [50]. Another randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled trial by the same group of researchers involved 96 MetS patients aged between 30 to 60 years old. It was worthy to note that vitamin C supplementation alone decreased BMI and LDL-C compared to the placebo group. The MetS patients had lower systolic BP after taking vitamin C supplements and undergoing physical activity for three months than the placebo controls [51].

(p6.2) Recently, Mahmoodi et al. (2019) designed a double-blind controlled trial to elucidate the influence of zinc (5 mg) and vitamin C (300 mg) in combination on MetS parameters in postmenopausal women with T2DM (n=69; aged 50 -65 years). The supplementation of zinc plus vitamin C for 12 weeks resulted in higher FBG and HDL-C as well as lower systolic and diastolic BP [52]. In the same year, Ponce et al. (2019) tested whether adopting a balanced diet alone or adopting a balanced diet plus daily intake of orange juice attenuated risk factors in individuals with MetS (n=72; aged 48 ± 9 years). Subjects who were consuming a balanced diet and orange juice daily (328 ± 35 mg) obtained a significantly higher concentration of vitamin C in their nutritional composition of the meal as compared to those who only took a balanced diet (145 ± 42 mg). Both interventions improved MetS features, indicated by decreased body weight, BMI, waist circumference, fat mass, visceral fat area, blood glucose, TC, HDL-C and BP. Only the combination of a balanced diet together with the intake of orange juice lowered insulin and insulin resistance [53]. Shenoy et al. (2010) also evaluated the impact of a ready serve vegetable juice on MetS-associated parameters among men and women (n=81; aged 35 -65 years) who met the criteria for MetS set by National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) Panel III. The participants were randomised into three groups receiving no vegetable juice, 8 or 16 ounces of low sodium vegetable juice per day for 12 weeks. The authors pointed out that the groups provided with vegetable juice had a higher intake of vitamin C and lost more weight as compared to the group who did not drink the juice [54].
## (s7) The potential mechanism of action for vitamin C in the management of MetS
Number of References: 19

(p7.0) The anti-oxidative property of vitamin C Oxidative stress, an imbalance between the production and inactivation of ROS, is the hallmark of MetS [55]. Several biochemical mechanisms of ROS formation during MetS have been postulated. Unhealthy eating habits (such as consuming a diet rich in fat and carbohydrate), as well as low physical activity, are the contributing factors of MetS [6,56]. In the state of overnutrition, the large flux of macronutrients exacerbates oxidation process resulting in higher ROS generation and postprandial oxidative stress response [57]. The increase in adipose tissues stimulates excessive production of pro-inflammatory mediators, which in turn stimulate macrophages and monocytes to generate ROS [14]. Hypertrophied adipocytes also secrete angiotensin II to enhance ROS production from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase [58]. Under physiological condition, the synthesis of ROS is often counteracted by the natural antioxidant system in the body consisting of a series of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants. The examples of enzymatic antioxidants are SOD, GPx and catalase (CAT) whereas the non-enzymatic antioxidants include GSH, vitamin C, vitamin E, beta (β)-carotene and other phytochemicals. The perturbation of ROS and antioxidant balance is often due to an increase in ROS production or/and a depression of the antioxidant system. High level of ROS reacts with cellular macromolecules and causes lipid peroxidation [59]. Thus, the products of lipid peroxidations are often the biomarkers for oxidative stress.

(p7.1) The protective effects of vitamin C against oxidative stress have been presented in MetS animal models (Table 1). Using Wistar rats fed with a high-salt diet, the orally supplemented 100 mg/kg vitamin C for 4 weeks increased vitamin C concentration, total antioxidant status and decreased MDA content in animals as compared to non-treated negative controls [22]. Another study showed that the mutant Wrn ∆hel/∆hel mice treated with drinking water enriched with 0.4% sodium ascorbate decreased oxidative stress in liver and heart tissues [the levels of ROS and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage decreased] along with the reversal of metabolic phenotypes [24]. In the rabbit model, results from comet assay showed that the DNA damage in lymphocytes of the diabetic group without supplementation of vitamin C was higher (indicated by longer tail length) and a reduction was seen in the vitamin C-treated group. Simultaneously, serum MDA was also higher in diabetic group and decreased after vitamin C supplementation. The serum paraoxonase-1 (PON-1) activity and time required for small dense low-density lipoprotein (sdLDL) oxidation were low in the diabetic group. These parameters increased after vitamin C supplementation [25]. The investigation using animal model of MetS induced by high-fat diet displayed MetS features and high degree of oxidation (MDA level) in the body. Feeding the animals with a fixed-dose combination of vitamin C, green tea polyphenols and grape seed extract proanthocyanidin successfully ameliorated the oxidative stress [28].

(p7.2) In a cross-sectional study, Li et al. (2013) found that MDA content was significantly higher, whereas the SOD activity and β-carotene level were significantly lower in the MetS patients. Serum SOD and GPx activity were decreased as the number of MetS components increased. Higher SOD activity (OR = 0.506; 95% CI 0.303 to 0.844) and β-carotene level (OR = 0.097; 95% CI 0.026 to 0.374) were associated with lower odds of MetS after adjusted for age and gender. The analysis of correlation found a positive association between vitamin C intake and serum antioxidant level [32]. MetS parameters and total antioxidant capacity adjusted by daily energy intake were measured by Puchau et al. (2010) in a study involving 153 Caucasian healthy young subjects (aged 20.8 ± 2.7 years). The results showed that dietary total antioxidant capacity was positively associated with vitamin C (r = 0.29, p < 0.001) but negatively associated with body weight (r = -0.18, p = 0.025), waist circumference (r = -0.18, p = 0.029), waist-to-hip ratio (r = -0.16, p = 0.048), systolic BP (r = -0.19, p = 0.018) and serum glucose (r = -0.26, p = 0.001). Serum free fatty acid was also appeared to be negatively associated with dietary total antioxidant capacity in multiple linear regression analysis (OR = -0.09; 95% CI -0.16 to -0.03) [60]. In line with these studies, it was observed that the level of γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) was increased as the number of MetS indicators increased among the population in the United States indicating damage to the liver and bile ducts [42]. Several oxidative markers were evaluated in Brazilian adult with and without MetS. The MetS subjects presented the increases in GGT, glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (GPT), glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT), total ferric antioxidant power (FRAP), sulfhydryl groups (SH) and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) [43]. By contrasting the oxidative stress indicators and anti-oxidative capacity in healthy controls, the MDA level was higher whereas the levels of SOD and total antioxidant activity were lower in PCOS subjects with MetS [48]. In a randomised controlled trial, MetS patients assigned with a balanced diet and 500 mL/day orange juice over 12 weeks had higher vitamin C intake with a concomitant increase in antioxidant capacity [53].
