# A Review on Oxidative Stress, Diabetic Complications, and the Roles of Honey Polyphenols

CorpusID: 227754696 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f8191620462b04f418319440b24326e24db0e4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f8191620462b04f418319440b24326e24db0e4e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s1) The Role of Insulin Resistance in Diabetic Complications
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) 2.1. Insulin. Insulin is a pancreatic β-cell anabolic peptide hormone, where its mature forms occur in two stages [14]. Pre-pro-insulin is processed first, resulting in the formation of proinsulin [15] from the signal fragment. Following this, the centre fragment (C-chain-35aa) is cut off, forming dipeptides via two chains of disulphides (A-21aa, B-30aa) [15]. Insulin is an important protein, playing several roles in regulating carbohydrate and lipid metabolisms, where the postprandial rise in blood glucose levels is the most significant stimulus for its production. By enhancing insulin output as well as its effects on the effector cells (myocytes, adipocytes, and hepatocytes), glucose transport into the cells is enhanced, thus decreasing the blood glucose. The event is accomplished by enhanced translocation of insulin-dependent glucose carriers (GLUT), with GLUT4 found in skeletal muscle, hepatocytes, and adipocytes [16]. When the glucose level in the small intestine exceeds 30 mM, glucose transport to the inside of the pancreatic β cells will be initiated in an insulin-independent manner via GLUT2. GLUT2 promotes transportation of glucose based on a concentration gradient. In the cell, glucose is converted into glucose-6-phosphate, which minimises equalization of glucose concentrations and prolonged transport of glucose into the cells. Further, glycolysis of glucose-6 phosphate leads to the formation of ATP, the level of which increases slowly due to a constant glucose supply. ATP inhibits the potassium channel because it blocks the outflow of potassium (K+ ions) from cells. Therefore, the level of K+ ions increases in the cell, which becomes more and more electropositive until the membrane charges are aligned, and the membrane is depolarized. The voltage-dependent calcium channel activates due to depolarisation, thus encouraging cell ion influx of calcium ions (Ca 2+ ). Ca 2+ activates the ryanodine channel in the membrane of insulin-accumulating vesicles, causing migration and the release of insulin molecules into the cell membrane [17].
## (s4) In Vitro
Number of References: 16

(p4.0) Mechanism of Insulin Resistance Initiated by ROS. There are various mechanisms by which mitochondrial ROS may contribute to insulin resistance, with differing processes based on tissue type. ROS activates MAPKs such as JNK and p38. For example, ROS activates JNK by oxidizing and inactivating MAPK phosphatases (MKPs) (Figure 1), which dephosphorylate and inactivate JNK [26]. Additionally, ROS may oxidize thioredoxin (TRX), resulting in TRX dissociation and apoptotic signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1; kinase MAPK) complexes and a consequent JNK signalling activation [27]. Finally, the JNK inhibitor glutathione S-transferase Pi is oxidized by ROS and promotes JNK dissociation [28].

(p4.1) Although ROS activates IKKβ via some mechanisms that remain unknown, in some cases, some mechanisms dependent on tyrosine phosphorylation may play a role. Specifically, Src protein tyrosine kinase ROS-mediated activation leads to activation of tyrosine phosphorylation and protein kinase D, which in turn phosphorylates and activates IKKβ [29]. Regardless of the exact mechanisms by which JNK and IKKβ are activated by ROS, several studies have revealed that the protein kinases contribute significantly to the development of insulin resistance in diabetes [30]. In the case 3 Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity of JNK deficiency, specific muscles prevent high-fat diet-(HFD-) induced muscle insulin resistance [31], while cellpermeable JNK inhibitory peptide administration improves glucose tolerance and causes increased insulin sensitivity as seen in obese db/db C57BLKS/J diabetes mice [32]. In the same way, the overexpression of hepatocyte-specific IKKβ creates resistance to hepatic insulin [33], while IKKβ hepatic impairment protects the mice against resistance to facilitate hepatic insulin as induced by HFD. [34]. Subsequently, JNK and IKK enter the insulin pathway during the IRS-1 phase [30]. IKK and JNK phosphorylate IRS-1 on serines 302, 307, and 612 to prevent the attachment of IRS-1 to the insulin receptor, thus promoting IRS-1 degradation and reducing the binding of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) as well as the activation of important metabolic pathways, including activation of AKT. A study has shown that non-IRS-1-dependent tyrosine kinases receptors are also defective in AKT signalling when the cells become insulin resistant [35] indicating that while oxidative stress and increase of insulin resistance via IRS-1 Ser phosphorylation can happen in obese and diabetic states, it is possible that ROS and downstream IRS-1 serine phosphorylation will promote insulin resistance. Among the various proinflammatory cytokines, TNF-α is one of the most important proinflammatory cytokines, which promotes the development of insulin resistance and T2DM. In adipocytes and peripheral tissue, the high level of TNF-α from the macrophages of tissues [36] induces insulin resistance by altering insulin signalling via serine phosphorylation, again, leading to the development of T2DM [37].

(p4.2) Diacylglycerol-(DAG-) PKC signalling alterations in the muscle, liver, and adipose tissues are correlated with insulin resistance contributed by aging, high fructose, and fat feeding as well as obesity. Additionally, glucose-induced formation of DAG, which (1) improves phosphorylation, (2) decreases IR regulation, and (3) enhances glucose flux during hyperglycaemia occurring via the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway, can block glucose transport by activating PKC [38]. PKC has also been directly involved in lipolysis and metabolism of adipose tissue [39] where transfected hepatocytes that overexpress PKC tend to become resistant to insulin [40].
## (s8) Mitochondria-Targeted Antioxidants.
Number of References: 7

(p8.0) Mitochondria are undoubtedly one of the primary sources of ROS in human infections, and efforts have been made in the search of mitochondrial antioxidants. One of these studies is the synthesis of compounds linked with triphenyl phosphonium compounds by ubiquinol, ubiquinone, or vitamin E. The lipophilic cations are placed in the mitochondrial matrix where triphenyl methyl phosphonium cations [63] have also been used. The most commonly used compounds are MitoQ (ubiquinone) and mitovitamin E [49] which can accumulate a hundred times in the mitochondria [64] due to the membrane potential. Although the mechanism of action remains unclear, MitoQ has been used in humans as a pharmacolog-ical agent in Parkinson's disease and other diseases such as diabetes. In an animal study, MitoQ can be administered in drinking water to (1) protect against myocardial cell death, (2) enhance endothelial function, and (3) enhance mitochondrial respiration in rat models of ischemia reperfusion [65]. MitoQ decreases the amount of lipid peroxidation in rats by acting as a chain-breaking antioxidant [66]. It has sometimes been noted that MitoQ can act as a prooxidant agent [67] and confer some metabolic effects at elevated levels, possibly as a result of decoupling impact in mitochondrial complex I [68]. MitoQ may also act well on significant key enzymes including AMP kinase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, and phosphofructokinase.
## (s11) Implications of Nrf2 Transcription Factor in Diabetic
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) Complications. Nrf2 gene, which is also known as NFE2L2, encodes for a transcription factor that controls for ARE genes in the promoter regions. These genes encode for proteins produced in response to environmental stress, metabolic enzymes, injury, and inflammation as well as detoxifying enzymes, including free radical production. Nrf2 in the cytoplasm is linked to Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) in unstressed circumstances, avoiding its translocation to the nucleus as illustrated in Figure 3 [72]. During stressed conditions (either electrophilic or oxidative stress), the Keap1/Nrf2 complex receives a signal involving phosphorylation and/or redox modification resulting in translocation of Nrf2 into the nucleus. Keap1, however, mediates the rapid ubiquitination and subsequent Nrf2 degradation by the proteasome 26S under basal circumstances. Cullin 3-based ubiquitin E3 (Cul-E3) ligase complex ubiquitinates Nrf2 while Keap1 acts as a substrate adapter which promotes the ubiquitination of Nrf2 by cullin 3. Consequently, Nrf2 has a short half-life (only 20 minutes) under normal circumstances. Oxidative stress is responsible for destroying critical cysteine residues in Keap1, disrupting the Keap1-Cul3 ubiquitination mechanism. However, if Nrf2 is not ubiquitinated, it builds up in the cytoplasm and is translocated to the nucleus (illustrated in Figure 3) [74,75].

(p11.1) Nrf2 associates with the small protein called Maf present in its nucleus to create a heterodimer and initiate transcription in the upstream promoter region of several cytoprotective genes. The cytoprotective genes include the encoding antioxidant and phase-II detoxifying enzymes like superoxide dismutases (SODs), catalase (CAT), NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, γ-glutamyl cysteine synthase (γ-GCS), NQO-1, hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1), glutathione peroxidase-1 (GPx-1), and glutathione S-transferase (GST). The response shown by the antioxidants to the signalling pathways NFE2L2 and NFE1-NFE2L2/ARE is considered a promising target against diabetic complications affecting the pulmonary, hepatic,   Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity digestive, neural, and cardiovascular systems as well as diabetic nephropathy [76,77].
