# Highlights Neural Networks based approaches for Major Depressive Disorder and Bipolar Disorder Diagnosis using EEG signals: A review Neural Networks based approaches for Major Depressive Disorder and Bipolar Disorder Diagnosis using EEG signals: A review

CorpusID: 221969961 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9710707dcbc71a0f12e0964785cd1d123f8f9cfb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9710707dcbc71a0f12e0964785cd1d123f8f9cfb)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine, Biology, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s4) Search Strategy and Eligibility Criteria
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) We have searched IEEEXplore, PubMed, Embase, Springer, ScienceDirect and Web of Science, for articles published between January 2010, and May 2020 by using the following keywords: (âĂĲDepressionâĂİ OR âĂĲshallow neural networkâĂİ OR âĂĲDeep learningâĂİ OR âĂĲElectroen-cephalogramâĂİ OR âĂĲCross-validationâĂİ OR âĂĲBipolar depressionâĂİ OR âĂĲArtificial neural networkâĂİ OR We also explored the articles that cite the ones that we found by the key-words mentioned above. There were no language restrictions. We performed this systematic review by conforming to the PRISMA statement [42] that helps to improve the reporting of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Eligibility criteria of this review includes the suitable depictions of different shallow and deep neural network techniques for the automatic assessment of depression by using EEG and representation of scientifically acquired data and generation of real-time results. Different technical reports and procedures [43], [44] of systematic reviews are followed to complete this survey. Publication dates of the EEG based depression studies meeting the criteria of ten years is considered. Only  Table 2. These keywords were used interchangeably, in combinations of two or more, with either âĂĲORâĂİ or âĂĲANDâĂİ operands.
## (s9) Clinical Background of Depression
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Depression is a leading source of disability worldwide and significantly contributes to the global burden of disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) 4 , depression is a common psychiatric disorder characterized by a persistent undesirable effect like sadness, lack of attention, or pleasure in formerly satisfying or enjoyable activities. While the symptoms of the depression can be psychological (e.g., feeling hopeless, having continuous sadness, feelings of guilt and low self-esteem, loss of interest, having suicidal thoughts, and so on), the link between the depression and physical symptoms (e.g., headache, constipation, limb pain, stomach problems, pain at joints, back pain, tiredness, appetite and weight changes, sleep changes, and so on) has also been reported in the literature [62,63]. The causes of depression comprise complex relations among psychosomatic, social, and biotic factors. Life moments such as childhood and teenage adversity, death, major events like losing a job, genetics, and substance abuse may increase the chance of depression. Pharmacological and psychosomatic treatments are available for moderate and severe depressive disorder. However, in low-and middle-income states, treatment and care facilities for depression are frequently absent or undersized [64]. WHO 3 reports that approximately 76âĂŞ85% of people in such countries have a lack of access to the depressive treatment they need.
## (s15) Public EEG Datasets for Depression Diagnosis
Number of References: 40

(p15.0) Due to the sensitive nature of depression data and for privacy and confidentiality reasons, very few public datasets are available for EEG based depression diagnosis, therefore, data that is launched by the child mind institute. The major goal of HBN is to produce a dataset that captures a wide range of heterogeneity and impairment that occurs in evolving psychopathology. The HBN contains information about depressive disorder, behavioral, intellectual, eye tracking, and phenotype data, by using multi-modal EEG and brain imag-  [53] No psychotic disease DSM-IV BDI,HADS (BDI-II,HADS)score>14 [111] No medication Psychiatrists interview --

(p15.1) Watch pictures BDI(II)score 14-28 [54] No medication Psychiatrists interview -- [112] -Psychiatrists interview -- [113] No mental disorder interview Working on ladder - [114] No mental disorder BDI-II -BDI(II)score 14-28 [55] Free of neurological disease MINI interview, -(DSM-IV) Score [56] No medication -Watch 5sec film of pictures BDI(II), Hamilton score [57] No mental disorder -Watch pictures BDI(II)score 14-28 [115] No mental disorder BDI-II -BDI(II)score 14-28 [116] No drug addiction BDI(II) Sit in rest position BDI(II)score 14-28 [72] No medication (PHQ-9), Mini-Mental State Exam(MMSE)

(p15.2) Sound stimulation MMSE score [117] No epileptic BDI(II) -score>14 [118] Free of drugs --- [119] No psychopathology BDI-II Watch picture BDI-score>14 [60] No psychopathology (PHQ)-9, DASS-21 DASS-21 DASS-score>14 [77] No mood stabilizer (DSM)IV,(HAM-D) Resting position HAM-D score>14 [73] Free of psychopathology (PHQ)-9 -(PHQ)-score>5 [120] No psychopathic history BDI-II -BDI-score>14 [121] Free of any medicine BDI(II) -BDI(II)>13 [116] No neurological history --- [122] Hospital inpatient PSQI,PHQ-9,GAD-7,MINI Play sound track PHQ-9>5 [78] No drug history DSM-IV,(BDI)II -(BDI)II-score>14 [123] No psychiatric drug --- [124] No mental disorder Written consent -- [125] No mental disease (DSM)-IV,HUSM -(DSM)-score [126] Free of any medications (BDI)II -(BDI)II-score>14 [127] Free of any medications Written consent -- [128] Free of drugs (BDI)II -(BDI)II-score>14 [138] No psychopathology.

(p15.3) (BDI)II Watch images (BDI)II-score>14 [129] No psychopathology BDI-II Watch pictures (BDI)II-score>14 [130] No mental disease DSM-IV -DSM-IV score [131] No medication -Play the VR game - [116] No mental disease Hospital patient -- [132] No psychiatric disease Hospital patient -- [133] No mental disease Hospital patient -- [134] No mental disease Hospital patient -- [135] No psychiatric disease PHQ-9,DASS-21 PHQ-9,DASS-21 PHQ-9>5 [136] No psychotic DSM-IV BDI,HADS (BDI-II,HADS) score>14 [137] No psychotic MOCA MMSE MOCA score ing MRI. In the HBN, a clinical assessment of mental health and learning disorders is performed. The HBN protocols include the behavioral and physical measures, family structure, stress, trauma, cognition, and language tasks. About 10,000 subjects of New York with ages between 5 and 21years participated in data collection. The clinical team consisted of a mixture of psychologists and social workers. The safety and eligibility of the participants was confirmed by prescreening interview. The screening interview collected information about the subjectâĂŹs psychiatric and medicinal history.
## (s18) Pre-processing
Number of References: 21

(p18.0) The EEG signal recording is a time-consuming procedure in which depressed patients perform some tasks. During recording, EEG signals are contaminated by undesired or polluted signals called artifacts. The artifacts that occur due to the patient body movement, heartbeat, eye blinks, muscle movement are called physiological artifacts. The artifacts that occur due to the electrodes placement, environmental noise, and device error are known as non-physiological artifacts [147]. These artifacts affect the quality of the actual EEG signals; hence it is important to sanitize useful data from contaminated EEG signals through preprocessing of the EEG data. In this phase, different undesired artifacts are filtered by using different noise removal and artifact elimination algorithms to prepare data for the next stage. Table 11 shows the shows the different artifact removal techniques. Mumtaz et al. [53], claim that raw EEG signals have poor resolution due to the low Signal-to-Noise ratio (SNR). Therefore, to enhance the performance of EEG signals, multiple source eye correction (MSEC) technique is used to remove the undesired signals. The authors of references [111,54,117,116,123,124,131,135] used a Notch filter with 50Hz to remove power line intervention and to sanitize EEG signals from artifacts. While, articles [75,113,114,121,123,129,130,134,135] used a low pass and high-pass-filter with 40Hz and 1Hz cutoff frequency to filter the noise. Adaptive noise canceller and fast ICA is used in [55,137] to remove inaccurate information from the false EEG recordings. As per our findings, the low pass, high pass, and Notch filter are frequently used to remove the artifacts in EEG based depression detection.
## (s19) Neural networks-based approaches for depression recognition
Number of References: 9

(p19.0) Neural Networks (NNs) [148] are non-parametric, flexible, and parallel computing systems that consist of neurons layers and weighted links in which information is transferred from the input neurons to the output neurons in a forward or backward way. In recent years, ANN-based approaches are used in EEG studies for classification and diagnosis of major depressive disorder. ANN can classify nonlinear relations and incorporates high-order dealings between predictive variables to produce accurate results. Most of the articles [57,77] use it for the classification of the unipolar and bipolar depression and have achieved good accuracy of 89.09% by implementing the pre-treatment cordance of frontal QEEG.

(p19.1) Multi-layer FFNN, Back Propagation Neural Network (BPNN), and Enhanced probabilistic neural network (EPNN) have been used in [60,121,78] for discriminating MDD and non-MDD patients. In the test, EEG recording of depressed and age control subjects were collected under the 10 crossvalidation technique. EEG electrodes were placed at the prefrontal (Fp1 and Fp2), frontal (F3, F4, F7, and F8), cerebral (C3 and C4), and temporal (T3, T4, T5 and T6) regions of the brain. The results indicate that the signals collected from the cerebral (C3 and C4) region gives slightly higher accuracy as compared to the other brain regions. Multi-layer In [56,115,116], a comparative study of FFNN, neurofuzzy networks, relative wavelet energy (RWE), and probabilistic neural networks (PNN) has been performed for differentiating the depressed and normal patients through EEG signals. Classification abilities of neural, neuro-fuzzy network, and relative wavelet energy (RWE) networks are authenticated by the EEG recordings. The FFNN leads the PNN, neuro-fuzzy networks, and relative wavelet energy (RWE) achieving 100% classification accuracy with time and wavelet energy as the input features.
## (s21) Clinical background of Bipolar Disorder
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) Bipolar Disorder(BD) or manic-depressive illness (MDI) is a dangerous neural disorder that is predicted by mood uncertainty and may start from early ages (i.e., in infants and teenagers). Individuals with BD face recurrently swings between depressive and manic episodes [15]. According to the American Psychiatric Association [16], there are four major categories of bipolar disorder: bipolar I disorder, that has one atleast one full episode of mania or diverse episodes of mania and depression. Bipolar II disorder has no manic episode, minimum one hypomanic episode and many depressive episodes. Patients with cyclothymic disorderhas many hypomanic and depressive episodes. Bipolar disorder includes both depressive and hypomanic episodes alternatively.
## (s23) Bio markers based assessment of Bipolar disorder (Assessment by Nonverbal Signs)
Number of References: 7

(p23.0) The pathophysiology of bipolar disorder is complex, multi factorial, and not fully understandable. To overcome this complexity, the biomarkers based assessment not only facilitates the diagnosis and monitoring of complex bipolar disorder, yet also provide biological effects of treatment. These assessments devise a new hypotheses about the causes and pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. The peripheral biomarkers like neurotrophins, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation are used in [165] to measure the illness activity of bipolar disorder. The neurotrophins [166] is a family of proteins that induce the survival, development, and function of neurons. It shows distinct patterns in the different stages of bipolar disorder; therefore, [167] use it as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) bipolar disorder biomarker. The oxidative stress is an imbalance of antioxidants and free radicals in the human body. Its ratio increased during the bipolar disorder episodes; therefore, in [168] oxidative stress is used to diagnose the bipolar disorder. The neuroinflammation is a localized physical condition of the body that becomes reddened or swollen during bipolar disorder. The authors of [169] use it for bipolar disorder study. The spectral entropy modulation that quantifies the EEG signal degree of uncertainty gets deficit during manic episodes of bipolar disorder, so in [9] it is used as a bipolar disorder and schizophrenia biomarker for altered function. The brain oscillations and lithium response variate during bipolar disorder condition and used as bipolar disorder biomarker in [170] .
## (s26) Types of EEG Electrodes:
Number of References: 7

(p26.0) The electrode placement and types of electrodes play a major role in EEG based bipolar disorder data acquisition. Minor mistakes in electrode placement pollute the overall EEG results that further affect the classification of the EEG signals. The two major international electrode placement standards at the scalp are 10-10 and 10-20 [176]. According to the literature presented in Table 15 most of the studies used international placement standards [171,172,115] but few create their own electrode placement strategy [57,116]. Wet and dry types of electrodes are used in EEG based studies to diagnose bipolar disorder. Wet electrodes are usually made of silver and silver chloride material and applied on a scalp by using the electrolytic gel material that works as a conductor between the skin and the wet electrodes. Dry electrodes consist of a single metal and can be directly placed on the scalp without the need to apply the conductive gel. Dry electrodes are the most efficient and easy to use as compared to wet electrodes. As patients feel comfortable with dry electrodes therefore latest technologies prefer to use them [177].
## (s28) Automatic assessment of Bipolar disorder
Number of References: 6

(p28.0) Automation of bipolar disorder assessment is a major challenge for the research community. The automatic methods make the investigation procedure quick and easy. In these methods, features are automatically extracted from the EEG signals and then based on these features a mental disorder is diagnosed. In this article, artificial neural network and deep learning-based approaches are considered for automated bipolar disorders diagnosis.  Bandpass, notch filter and visual inspection [172] Bandpass filter at 0.15 to 70 Hz [57] Bandpass filter 40HZ [115] Total variation Filtering(TVP) [116] Notch filter at 50HZ [175] Independent component analysis [174] -
## (s29) Pre-processing
Number of References: 6

(p29.0) The pre-processing or artifact removal is a major part of EEG data acquisition, except this activity no analysis can be performed directly on the EEG data. It is necessary to filter the EEG signals from the different physiological and non-physiological artifacts and interference before using it. The researchers used different techniques and tools to manually or automatically remove the artifacts from the EEG signals as shown in Table: 16. The band pass, notch and ICA (Independent Component Analysis) are the important filters that are used in most of the bipolar disorder studies [171,172,57,116,175] to remove the noise, interference and physiological and non-physiological artifacts with 40 Hz to 70Hz frequency range. These filters remove the artifacts from EEG signals based on the frequency and amplitude level of the EEG signals (upper and lower level of the signals). The Total Variation Filtering (TVP) and visual inspection are signal filtering techniques that are used in some studies [115] and remove noise manually from the signals.
