# Imaging Deep Learning-Based Crowd Scene Analysis Survey

CorpusID: 225200350 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34424e701824a70d7be5d668f3de06b809b3fe99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34424e701824a70d7be5d668f3de06b809b3fe99)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s3) Detection-Based Approaches
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) Early approaches used detectors to detect peoples' heads or shoulders in the crowd scene to count them, such as in [16,17]. Counting by detection is usually performed either in monolithic detection or parts-based detection. In monolithic detection, the detection is usually preformed based on pedestrian detection methods such as optical flow [18], histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) [19], Haar wavelets [20], edgelet [21], Particle flow [22], and shapelets [23]. Subsequently, the extracted features from the former detectors are fed into nonlinear classifiers such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) [24]; however, the speed is slow. A linear classifier such as linear SVM, hough forests [25], or boosting [26] usually provides a trade-off between speed and accuracy. Then, the classifier is slid over the whole image to detect candidates and to discard the less confident candidates. The results of sliding give the number of people in the scene.
## (s11) Deep Learning Approaches
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) In [77], the authors provided the model in Figure 7 for capturing and learning dynamic representations of different objects in an image. The structure consists of four bunches of convolutional layers on xy-slices. Dimensions are then swapped using semantic feature cuboid so that xy becomes xt, followed by a bunch of xt convolutional layers. The last part of the network is a temporal layer to fuse cues learned from different xt-slices followed by fully connected layers. Another big problem in crowd action recognition is recognizing semantic pedestrian attributes in surveillance images [78]. The authors proposed a Joint Recurrent Learning (JRL) model [78] for learning attribute context and correlation. The network utilizes Long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network for encoding and decoding. The intra-person attribute context of each person is modelled by the LSTM encoder. To make up for the poor image quality, the network uses auxiliary information from similar training images to provide inter-person similarity context. Lastly, LSTM decoder is constructed to model a sequential recurrent attribute correlation within the intra-person attribute context and the inter-person similarity context.

(p11.1) Detection of abnormal behavior in a crowded scene is a very promising research area that aims to prevent crimes before they happen. In [79], the authors proposed a model for abnormal event detection in a crowded scene. As Figure 8 shows, the model utilizes density heat maps and optical flow of the image frame. The network has two streams: one for density heat maps and one for optical flows of the frames. Both streams go through the same number of convolutional layers followed by fully connected layers, and then, the output of both streams are concatenated to output a classification of the frame sequence, thus detecting any abnormality. One of the state-of-the-art methods for action recognition was proposed in [80]. The authors of the paper proposed a 4D model that recognizes actions using volumes of persons in the image. First, a people classification CNN was used to classify and detect every person in the image. Then, using the cropped image frame of each person, the volume of the person was used as input to the network Action4DNet shown in Figure 9. The input was convoluted multiple times in a 3D CNN; then, an attention model was used to learn the most relevant local sub-volume features, while max pooling was used to learn the global features. Both features were used as input to an LSTM network for action classification. Action 4D achieved very high accuracy compared to other evaluated models. However, in a scene with 10+ people, the accuracy went down because the network is dependent on having each person's body clearly visible in the image. This shows that accurate action recognition in a crowd scene is still far from an achievable task in the current year. Table 2 compares crowd action recognition methods.  
## (s14) Discussion
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) In this survey, we compared both traditional and deep learning methods for crowd counting and crowd action recognition. It turned out that deep learning-based approaches have high MAE and MSE compared to traditional-based approaches. One of the most important challenges is the lack of training dataset for different categories. One way to tackle this problem is (1) using data augmentation and applying scale changes augmentation and color changes and (2) using transfer learning to transfer the knowledge from a pretrained network to another (e.g., from the IMAGNET dataset [90] to the ShanghaiTec dataset [66]). A very important observation in crowd scene analysis is that CNN-based approach works very well; however, GAN networks such as in [62] have the highest performance in terms of MAE and MSE. Generative adversarial network (GAN) is a promising framework for crowd scene analysis, as shown in Table 4. Following GAN, the next context-aware method such as that in [91] achieves high performance. 
