# APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND MECHANICS (ENGLISH EDITION) A review of computational modeling and deep brain stimulation: applications to Parkinson's disease *

CorpusID: 227015687 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69ea9fc6cd9f150282b977c5c699ab59489b4d16](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69ea9fc6cd9f150282b977c5c699ab59489b4d16)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common chronic neurodegenerative disorder, which involves several neural pathways of motors and non-motors. The core pathology underlying PD is degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) in midbrain, leading to the decrease in the dopamine (DA) level in striatum. PD is characterized by motor impairments including rigidity, slowness of movement, and tremor. It can also cause a wide range of non-motor symptoms that appear normally in the course of the disease both early and late-loss of smell, sleep disorders, autonomic dysfunction, cognitive decline, and depression [1] . The severity of these symptoms increases as the PD progresses [2] .
## (s2) Neural network models
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) The biological Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) and derivative models have confirmed their availability for recognizing and signifying the electrical activities in single neurons [16][17][18][19] . Studies have shown that the CTBG network model for central nervous systems has always been the physiological basis for studying PD. In the past modeling process, the conductivity-based HH model is used to describe the dynamic behavior of different neurons from a mathematical perspective. The HH model is based on the electrical equivalent circuit model which is a useful method to describe the behavior of membrane potential. It mainly includes three parts, i.e., ion channel, power supply, and capacitor. Figure 2(a) shows an equivalent circuit representation of neurons with sodium (Na), calcium (Ca), and potassium (K) ion-channels and leakage current (L). The membrane capacitance current can be expressed as
## (s4) DBS therapy
Number of References: 10

(p4.0) DBS is an effective strategy used in the treatment and control of PD [42] . It inserts electrodes into the deep nucleus of the brain and then connects the electrodes to the square wave generator placed in the human subcutaneous tissue with wires to complete the stimulation of parkinsonian patients [43] . The doctor can adjust the frequency, pulse width, or amplitude of the stimulation signal to get the best treatment effect [44][45] .

(p4.1) Although DBS is considered to be an effective treatment for PD, its side effects are more obvious. From the system perspective, DBS is an external local control input into the network, which causes several problems. (i) DBS generally uses a single nucleus as the target, and prolonged stimulation will cause specific physical damage [46] . (ii) The battery needs to be replaced by clinical surgery [47][48] . At present, the stimulation frequency required for STN-DBS or GPi-DBS is about 130 Hz-185 Hz [5] , and the high energy consumption leads to battery replacement, which will increase the risk of infection in patients. (iii) Due to the lack of adaptation to the needs of patients and the effects of symptoms, doctors need to adjust parameters for a long time to achieve the optimal stimulation effect [44][45] . Therefore, how to improve this inherent treatment strategy and choose a safer and more effective stimulation method is the main problem of the current studies.
## (s5) Optimization of DBS: waveform, target, and electrode
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) In recent years, many studies have proposed that using neuron models improves DBS from different perspectives to reduce stimulation side effects. Improvements to DBS can be divided into three categories (see Fig. 4). The first one is about waveforms. The most commonly used DBS waveform is dominated by rectangular pulse stimulation [22][23][49][50] . Terman et al. [21] modeled this rectangular pulse stimulation as
## (s7) Summary and outlook
Number of References: 7

(p7.0) We systematically summarize the dynamic modeling analysis and control strategies related to PD in recent decades. According to the records and analysis of clinical experiments, the nucleus within the BG in the parkinsonian network exhibits bursting a discharge behavior, and the synchronization level increases. Through the power spectral density analysis, it is found that the energy of STN and GPi nucleus increases significantly in the beta-band. Using the neuron model and the field model, these dynamic characteristics are well reflected. Models are generally based on CTBG circuits. Except for the striatum, we generally consider other nuclei as a whole in modeling. Recently, optogenetics has been used to specifically stimulate the neuron population in GPe [84] , where targeted interventions reliably induce long-term exercise rescue in PD mouse models. Studies have developed molecular and genetic strategies to subdivide GPe neurons into subgroups, which have different physiological and anatomical projections [85][86] . In the prototype population, neurons can be further subdivided according to the expression of parvalbumin (PV)-GPe and Lim homeobox 6 (Lhx6)-GPe [85][86] . The long-lasting recovery of the movement of PD mice can be achieved by selective excitatory stimulation of PV-GPe or inhibitory stimulation of Lhx6-GPe [84] . Therefore, the identification of different cell types in the BG is essential for us to understand the function of the BG and treat neurological disorders, especially PD. At present, in terms of modeling study, the specific modeling of the nucleus within the BG is blank, which will be an important node for subsequent study. Because certain dynamic effects are only achieved by limiting the operation of specific neuron subgroups, rather than by regulating all neurons at the same time. The specific modeling of neurons helps us to further understand the dynamic mechanism of PD [5] .
