# A Review of Proton Conductivity in Cellulosic Materials

CorpusID: 227128136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3aef32e088f5fbbe10d38fc25de88e4cb43e106f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3aef32e088f5fbbe10d38fc25de88e4cb43e106f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Chemistry

## (s3) Pristine Cellulosic Materials
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) Fundamental investigations into the electrical conductivity of natural polysaccharides were first reported by Murphy in the 1960s, specifically on natural cellulose (i.e. cotton) in both dry (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b, and humid conditions (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. The conductivity of bulk compressed samples was measured, and the significant influence of even trace amounts of absorbed water was realized. Dry cellulose was reported to have very low conductivity in the range from 10 −16 to 10 −9 mS·cm −1 between 25 and 180°C, respectively. Meanwhile, at 100% RH, the conductivity increased by up to 12 orders of magnitude (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. It is not entirely clear from their description if these measurements were performed in-or through-plane. To explain this strong dependence on water content, theoretical models were built and it was assumed that cellulose possesses periodically distributed "ion-generating sites" where lower energy is required for water dissociation to H 3 O + and OH − , increasing the conductivity. It wasn't until 1963 that it was suggested that ionic rather than electronic conduction was responsible for the observed results, after the products of electrolysis were detected during measurements (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. It was postulated that "conduction in dry cellulose involves tunneling of the proton between equivalent sites, the one in the ion, the other in an adjacent neutral molecule" (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. Following studies investigated the ionic conductivity of cellulose derivatives, e.g. cellulose acetate, showing that the conductivity decreases by ∼1 order of magnitude in dry samples doped with various ion salts (e.g. LiCl) (Barker et al., 1964a(Barker et al., , 1964b.
## (s5) Chemical Modification of Cellulose
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) From a sustainability point of view, completely avoiding the utilization of fluorinated polymers or other toxic and/or expensive ionomers is preferred. However, as discussed above, pure nanocellulose membranes don't have sufficient intrinsic proton conductivity to satisfy the targets set for PEMFC applications by the US Department of Energy 3 or Fuel Cell Commercialization Conference of Japan (Ohma et al., 2011). A promising alternative to using additives is to directly modify the chemical structure of the cellulose polymer to improve the desired properties. Due to the presence of reactive hydroxyl groups in the structure of cellulose (especially the primary alcohol group -CH 2 OH) such modification can be performed in a variety of different ways, as has been demonstrated historically. For example, surface modification of cellulosic materials improves the efficiency of the defibrillation process, or can be used to make them compatible with specific solvents (Thomas et al., 2018). The most common approaches towards modifying the primary alcohol group of cellulose are carboxymethylation, 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxylmediated (TEMPO-mediated) oxidation, phosphorylation and sulfonation. In the field of PEM development, various forms of sulfonation have been used to improve the proton conductivity.
