# Job Demands and Resources among Healthcare Professionals during Virus Pandemics: A Review and Examination of Fluctuations in Mental Health Strain during COVID-19 JOB DEMANDS AND RESOURCES AMONG HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS DURING VIRUS PANDEMICS 121

CorpusID: 229349493 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b66e861c401f261843abb91d701db633bdcda6d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b66e861c401f261843abb91d701db633bdcda6d)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s2) Brief Overview of the Job Demands-Resources Model
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) The Job Demands-Resources (JD-R) model is one of the most commonly applied models of work stress in occupational health psychology and is a useful framework for conceptualizing burnout and well-being at multiple levels of analysis (Bakker & Demerouti, 2017). The JD-R model posits that burnout and other adverse mental health outcomes are a function of both the job demands facing employees and the personal and job resources available to help employees meet those demands (Demerouti, Bakker, Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001). The job demands component of the model addresses those factors of work that require continuous amounts of physical, mental, or emotional effort. Sources of these demands can be found in physical aspects of the work environment (e.g., high levels of noise or crowding), social aspects of the work environment (e.g., interpersonal conflict, abusive supervision), or organizational aspects of the work environment (e.g., organizational constraints, time pressure). Chronic exposure to job demands creates a strain on employees through the continuous effort required to address the demands present in the work environment. One advantage of the JD-R model over other models is the focus on broad categories of job demands that have the potential to apply to diverse organizational settings .
## (s9) Measures
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) The weekly survey required brief measures that were easy to complete from a computer or mobile device. Therefore, checklists were primarily used to assess the constructs of interest, as has been done in similar studies of healthcare professionals during prior virus epidemics and the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., Schecter, Pham, Hua, Spinazzola, Sonnenklar, Li, & Milanaik, 2020;Wu et al., 2009). Total scores on the checklists are best considered formative constructs that assess the total amount of strain, demands, and resources present on a given week.

(p9.1) Mental Health Strain. The survey designed and administered for the present research included an adapted 7-item version of the Mayo Clinic Physician Well-Being Index (PWBI), for which prior research has established construct and criterion validity and reliability (Dyrbye et al., 2013). Specifically, in the current survey the first item in the 7-item PWBI, "Have you felt burned out from your work?" was omitted and instead included the single item burnout measure from the Mini Z burnout measure (Dolan, Mohr, Lempa, Joos, Fihn, Nelson, & Helfrich, 2015). Given that all items in the measure assess strain-related mental health issues (e.g., depression, anxiety, fatigue), for the present article we use the term mental health strain to describe scores on this measure. Therefore, the sum of the items resulted in a mental health strain score ranging from 0 (low mental health strain) to 7 (high mental health strain).
## (s17) Interactions between COVID-19 Demands and Workload.
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) Results for the multilevel models examining the interactions between hours worked and the two COVID-19 demands are provided in the first two sections of Table 4. All predictors were group mean centered (i.e. centered within person) before interaction terms were created (Aguinis, Gottfredson, & Culpepper, 2013;Enders & Tofighi, 2007). Hours worked the prior week interacted with COVID-19 personal demands to predict mental health strain. The interaction is plotted in Figure 2 and indicates that the relationship between COVID-19 personal demands and mental health strain was magnified when participants had worked more hours the week prior to the assessment. That is, as COVID-19 personal demands increased, mental health strain increased. However, this relationship became stronger as hours worked the prior week increased. Thus, Hypothesis 2(b) was supported. However, hours worked the prior week did not interact with COVID-19 job demands to predict participants' mental health strain; thus, Hypothesis 2(a) was not supported.  Note. The mental health strain control variable controlled for participants' mental health strain from the prior week. The marginal pseudo-R 2 values for the three models testing Hypothesis 1(a), 1(b), and 1(c), respectively, were .57, .57, and .50. Abbreviations: B, slope; CI, confidence interval; LL, lower level of the 95% CI; MHS, mental health strain; p, significance value; SE, standard error; t, t approximation; UL, upper level of the 95% CI. *p < .05 (two-tailed); **p < .01 (two-tailed); ***p < .001 (two-tailed).  Note. The marginal pseudo-R 2 values for the models testing Hypothesis 2(a) and 2(b), respectively, were .52 and .53. The marginal pseudo-R 2 values for the models testing
## (s21) Limitations and Future Directions
Number of References: 4

(p21.0) As with any study, there are limitations that must be considered when interpreting the results of our study. There are also future research directions that can address these limitations and enhance theory and practice in this context. First, in order to keep the survey to a manageable length so that EMP would respond on a weekly basis, we were not able to include previously validated, complete scales for variables such as meaningful work, which may have reduced our ability to capture meaningful variations over time. Regarding the measurement of demands and resources, we did rely upon similar measurement approaches implemented in studies of healthcare professionals during virus epidemics and pandemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic (Rodriguez et al., 2020;Tam et al., 2004). We also utilized objective metrics for capturing the demand of work hours, which helped to reduce the survey length while also providing reliable and accurate data. However, the checklists were formative measures that were summed from dichotomous items, which again may have reduced the ability to capture finer grained, significant fluctuations over time.

(p21.1) From a future research perspective, continued refinement and testing of appropriate measures is a critical future step for this area of research, and may benefit from increased inclusion of less obtrusive, more objective measures. For example, researchers have examined the potential use of psychophysiological responses as a measure of physicians' cognitive demands while on the job (Johannessen, Szulewski, Radulovic, White, Braund, Howes, Rodenburg, & Davies, 2020), while others are developing methods for objectively capturing physician stress using wearable sensors (Kaczor, Carreiro, Stapp, Chapman, & Indic, 2020). These types of metrics may be very useful for dynamically monitoring healthcare professionals' physical demands and workload during virus epidemics and pandemics. However, a mixed methods approach will most likely be the optimal approach for effectively capturing and analyzing all elements of the JD-R framework over time.
