# A Review of Spiritual Development and Transformation among College Students from Jesuit Higher Education

CorpusID: 225528969 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/46ad9da94ce85576aeec51af3d87cd58c8d173d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/46ad9da94ce85576aeec51af3d87cd58c8d173d9)

Fields: Education, Psychology

## (s2) The Unique Opportunities within Faith-Based Colleges and Universities for Spiritual Transformation
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Faith-based educational institutions generally take the spiritual development of their students, as well as their faculty and staff, seriously by offering a variety of strategic and intentional programs and opportunities to nurture spiritual development and transformation for all segments of the campus community, but most especially for their college students. These programs include on-campus religious services, opportunities for pastoral care and spiritual direction, courses in religion and spirituality, extracurricular spiritually-based activities such as retreats, social justice volunteer programs, immersion trips, and meditation sessions and instruction. Faith-based institutions often take mission and identity, steeped within the cultural and traditions of spirituality and religion, very seriously, and suggest that higher education sits within a particular informed way of thinking, being, and viewing the world. This is not to say that faith-based institutions, as a rule, insist on common beliefs and practices among their faculty, staff, and students. This may be true at certain very conservative religious schools who offer statements of faith and behavior that all students, faculty, and staff must agree to and sign (Daniels and Gustafson 2016;Wagner 2006). Most faith-based colleges and universities admit students and hire faculty and staff from all or no faith traditions, but typically expect that students and employees acknowledge and support the mission and identity of their institutions.
## (s8) Faith That Seeks Justice
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) A phrase often heard on Jesuit campuses is something along the lines of "integrating faith, justice, and the intellectual life." This phrase, or variations on the theme (e.g., ''faith that does justice"), illustrates well the guiding principle of Jesuit higher education and the curricular and extracurricular programs and activities that enliven and enrich it. At Jesuit colleges and universities, faith may be centered in the Roman Catholicism of the Jesuit tradition but faith-related issues that are addressed are certainly relevant and applicable to most, if not all, other faith traditions as well. Faith is thus very broadly defined and applied, and is welcoming to both Christian and non-Christian traditions. Justice refers to the Jesuit mission of social justice, i.e., being especially attentive to and mindful of those who struggle with oppression, poverty, discrimination, and marginalization within society in an effort to be in solidarity and kinship with them and their struggles (Kolvenbach 2008;Nicolás 2011;Potter 2011). This emphasis includes "preferential option for the poor and marginalized" (Kolvenbach 2008), and seeks to develop a more just and humane world for everyone but especially for those on the margins of society. Finally, the intellectual and academic life is the primary mission of the university and is what they are designed to do at their very best. Colleges and universities are vortexes or gathering places to nurture engaged communities for intellectual growth and development that invite faculty, staff, and students as well as the local and larger community to come together in learning. This focus on "integrating faith, justice, and the intellectual life" is highlighted throughout many of the activities of the university and permeates planning, programing, and staffing for spiritual formation, development, and nurturance.
## (s13) Immersion Trips
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Domestic and international immersion trips are offered typically for a week during the academic year breaks such as Thanksgiving, Christmas, and Spring break, and occasionally during long weekends. Students meet with trip leaders and local residents to learn about their experiences, and they may also work for a short time engaged in community activities such as building homes, water, or electrical systems; serving in soup kitchens; or tutoring at-risk children. Reflection and group processing help students to integrate their experience with both academic material and highlight spiritual faith formation issues too, with positive expected spiritual development outcomes expected (Mills et al. 2007;Plante 2018;Plante et al. 2009).
