# Pharmacological and pharmacognostical aspect of Prosopis juliflora: A review

CorpusID: 228973335 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/101ec8428beac2b6d09fc3e91803cffb3fd9464b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/101ec8428beac2b6d09fc3e91803cffb3fd9464b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s21) Antimicrobial activity
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) P. juliflora crude extracts, alkaloid-enriched fraction and isolated alkaloid was explained by dos santos et al. that was evaluated for antimicrobial potential by in-vitro methods. In 1999, Satish et al. described the potential use to combat microorganisms in crop plants and Caceres et al., studied the treatment of gonorrhea by using tincture of P. juliflora. For that plant material was macerated in 50% alcohol and the tincture tested for in-vitro activity by measuring the inhibition zone. The leaf extract or tincture showed 9.6 mm of inhibition which was maximum and most active against Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Isolated from symptomatic patient) [61]. Besides the studies on microorganisms that affect humans, Satish et al. found that antibacterial property was only found in the aqueous extracts of P. juliflora, Lawsonia inermis and Oxalis corniculata. P. juliflora leaves have antibacterial activity against various Xanthomonas sp. (inhibition zone of 18-23 mm) comparable to bacterimycin and streptocycline and manage diseases in several crops [62]. In 2013, dos santos et al. described in-vitro antimicrobial activity to evaluate pods of P. juliflora as feed additives for ruminants which contain alkaloid enriched fraction for study. Chloroform extract of P. juliflora pods contains alkaloids which have invitro antimicrobial activity against Micrococcus luteus (MIC = 25 µg/ml), Staphylococcus aureus (MIC = 50 µg/ml) and Streptococcus mutans (MIC = 50 µg/ ml) and gas production have been evaluated with monensin as the positive control.
## (s28) Toxicity studies
Number of References: 6

(p28.0) Toxicity refers to the harmful interaction between chemicals and biological systems. A toxicant is any substance that has harmful effects on a living system. P. juliflora or mesquite or algarroba parts are used by both animals as well as by human beings due to their beneficial effects. But sometimes due to consumption, intoxication is seen in animals, mainly in ruminant animals (in USA, Peru, Brazil). Mesquite is a very common plant in dry areas and easily available but the reports showed that it also causes animal poisoning due to the consumption of pods [71]. A disease known as "Caratorta" is most common in the ruminant animals specially in goats and cattle. In this the lateral deviation of the head occurs due to cranial nerve dysfunction, degeneration and disappearance of neurons in the trigeminal motor nucleus which perform to keep food in the mouth during mastication. This disease occurs only in those animals which eat P. juliflora pods for 8 months or more [29,71]. Also, other clinical signs during rumination are seen like dysphagia, incoordination of chewing movements, atrophy, dysphagia and profuse salivation of the masseter muscle in animals, ruminal atony, anemia, submandibular edema and progressive weight loss [72]. All the symptoms result in degradation of brain flora like neuromuscular alteration, histologic lesions like spongiosis, gliosis, the loss of Nissl granules, fine vacuolation of the perikaryon of neurons from trigeminal motor nuclei and finally which results in the degeneration and disappearance of neuronal cells in the trigeminal motor nucleus [72,73].
