# Individual-and Household-Level Interventions to Reduce Air Pollution Exposures and Health Risks: a Review of the Recent Literature

CorpusID: 227176581 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4158a81039e2282e8e736666dad18138299c56a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4158a81039e2282e8e736666dad18138299c56a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s6) Vehicle Ventilation and Filtration
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) By 2017, there was substantial evidence that in-vehicle concentrations of UFP and other traffic-related particles are influenced by opening windows, recirculating cabin air, and/or the use of enhanced filtration [111][112][113][114][115]. These findings have been reinforced by recent studies, some of which documented considerable variation in particle concentrations under different ventilation conditions [115][116][117]. For example, Kumar and colleagues [117] drove pre-planned routes in 10 cities and measured in-vehicle PM 2.5 concentrations with windows open and fan off (windows open), windows closed with fan on (fan on), and windows closed with recirculation mode on (recirculation). Relative to recirculation mode, PM 2.5 concentrations were up to 385% higher with fan on and up to 1020% higher with windows open.

(p6.1) In contrast, the evidence that vehicle ventilation or filtration influence health is much more limited. Prior to 2017, we are aware of one study that directly addressed this issue. In that non-randomized study, the use of a vehicle's air conditioning system improved air quality and modified the effects of PM 2.5 on HRV [118]. More recently, in a non-randomized study, Yu and colleagues [119,120] found that using high-efficiency cabin air filters in taxis with windows closed reduced mean PM 2.5 and ultrafine concentrations by 37% and 47%, respectively, but did not alter oxidative stress indicators.

(p6.2) That study and several others published recently also emphasized the trade-offs between closing windows and recirculating cabin air to reduce particle concentrations and avoiding high levels of CO 2 , which can cause drowsiness and cognitive impairment [115,[120][121][122][123][124][125]. Hudda and Fruin [125] conducted a modeling study to identify vehicle and trip characteristics associated with elevated CO 2 concentrations in passenger vehicles. They concluded that most one-or twooccupant trips of average duration would not exceed 2500 ppm (ppm) of CO 2, a threshold that has consistently been found to impair mental performance. However, for multiple passenger or long-distance trips, the authors suggested that recirculation mode should be periodically interrupted to avoid having CO 2 concentrations exceed 2500 ppm.
