# Deep Learning in Computer-Aided Diagnosis and Treatment of Tumors: A Survey

CorpusID: 226227182 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed0c052a5e9d24042ed5d420d296d50c84394ff1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed0c052a5e9d24042ed5d420d296d50c84394ff1)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Cancer is a leading cause of death and a notable public health problem worldwide. According to Global Cancer Statistics [1], by 2018, there will be an estimation of 18.1 million new cancer cases and 9.6 million deaths caused by cancer. Thus to diagnose early and treat compatibly becomes one of the most important research topics in medicine. Previously, people devote to the simple medical method to approach the above goal, which depends on the information obtained by the doctor's perception and the experiences gained by years. While the perception can be influenced by objective factors (e.g., sensory threshold, fatigue, and prior knowledge.) and the acquisition of experience often costs more time, and such experience is often subjective. With the tremendous development of artificial intelligence, considerable attention has been paid to plentiful applications based on artificial intelligence that was used for Computer-Aided Diagnosis and Treatment of Tumors because this technique could assist solve the above two issues. Since Hinton et al. [2] prove that traditional statistical methods are not necessary to extract features as long as computing resources are sufficient, deep neural networks have been asked to learn useful latent features from big data. After that, deep learning has become a new force in Computer-Aided Diagnosis and Treatment of Tumors.
## (s31) Inception v3
Number of References: 3

(p31.0) Improved model for CNN Figure 19: The pipeline of work from Coudray et al. [96] which mainly including data preprocessing and model training by CNN. the structure of this work. Also, the author validated their work on independent datasets of frozen tissues, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues, and biopsies obtained at the New York University (NYU) Langone Medical Center. Furthermore, the trained network in this work could predict gene mutations using images as the only input in LUAD, which is meant to assist pathologists in the detection of cancer subtype or gene mutations. The Average area Under the Curve (AUC) of classification is 0.97, and AUCs of prediction is from 0.733 to 0.856. In prediction, Bychkov et al. [53] combines CNN and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM [10]) to predict colorectal cancer outcome based on images of Haematoxylin and Eosin (H & E) stained Tumour Tissue Microarray (TMA), which was shown in Figure 20. Also, this work can directly predict five-year disease-specific survival without any intermediate tissue classification. This work shows that extract more prognostic information from the tissue morphology of colorectal cancer than an experienced human observer.
