# Technologies Trend towards 5G Network for Smart Health-Care Using IoT: A Review

CorpusID: 220836721 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88c0b6e4569ba02a7a296825024a90608bc0b283](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88c0b6e4569ba02a7a296825024a90608bc0b283)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s15) Characteristics of Smart Health-Care
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) The critical requirements for successful deployment of the smart health-care system are presented in Figure 4. Those major requirements are classified as Things-oriented, App-oriented, and Semantics-oriented. The establishment of a personalised network in the sensors and the user's computing device, and information security are the sole responsibilities of App-oriented architectures in order to guarantee the authenticity of data transmissions among applications in smart-phones and sensors. The duties of architectures that are things-oriented are immediate supervision, flexible application, responsiveness at the higher level, consumption of low power, higher efficiency, and switching on the intelligent procedure. Systems that are Semantic-oriented should be capable of handling natural language execution methods for improving user experience, growing detectable specimens that are based on the earlier obtained information, and having exceptional computing abilities [59,60]. 
## (s25) Millimetre-Wave Communications
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) From Equation (1), it is clear that the channel with high bandwidth results in an enhanced data rate. However, for increasing the bandwidth of the channel, the higher operating frequency is required. It will solve the second trend for the next generation network (i.e., 5G) by using higher frequencies in the millimetre wave band. However, there are many disadvantages of millimetre wave communications. Firstly, having free-space propagation in the millimetre wave leads to higher signal attenuation [69]. Secondly, rain, atmospheric gases, and buildings are reasonable observers of this band [70]. For the problem, as mentioned above, different solutions are possible: using tiny cells will lead to minimising the attenuations; for higher attenuations, the directive antennas to be used or indoor base stations to avoid the building absorption issue.
## (s27) Device-To-Device (D2D) Communications
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) D2D communication is another trend for the next-generation network that is 5G [73]. The said technique is usable in two different methods. The first way is where one terminal collaborates with others in a manner that enhances the communication features between the base station and terminals. The second method is where one terminal communicates with another terminal directly without including the base station. Device-to-device communication can improve channel reliability, system throughput, operation cost reduction, and energy efficiency. Figure 8 shows both of the approaches. Direct communication in D2D allows for numerous D2D links concurrently to share the same bandwidth, which leads to increasing the cell traffic capacity. Furthermore, the SNR can be improved with direct communication approach (as compared to the communication through the base station), due to which transmission power is minimised to save energy or maximise the link capacity. At last, the radio link latency is reduced by D2D direct communication [74]. 
