# electronics A Review on MIMO Wireless Signals over Fibre for Next Generation Fibre Wireless (FiWi) Broadband Networks

CorpusID: 229439476 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10c9045f0acc25539d0e78b7c13232b1f0c2f89c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10c9045f0acc25539d0e78b7c13232b1f0c2f89c)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) With the increasing number of smartphones and their broadband demanded applications [1], there is a huge need for high bandwidth broadband infrastructure. Moreover, the rapidly growing demands on bandwidth and end users' new data rates consuming applications such as YouTube, Netflix, peer-to-peer downloading and cloud computing, call for the combination of the fibre and wireless domains in a unified infrastructure. FiWi networks merge wireless networks with optical networks. The wireless networks have the availability, flexibility and coverage, while optical networks support transmission speeds and overcome distance limitations [2]. FiWi systems have started to draw in broad research enthusiasm as they offer great potential for tackling the issues of high-speed Internet access "over the last mile". Specifically, FiWi systems with a passive optical network (PON) as the optical system have been seriously concentrated in the previous years as a PON can give high transmission bit rates for today's bandwidth killing applications [2].
## (s1) Introduction to PONs
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Different types of multiplexing techniques are used when many users share a point-to-multipoint PON-based topology. There are four types of PONs, which can be classified based on the used multiplexing technique: time division multiplexing (TDM), optical code division multiplexing (OCDM), wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), and orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM). Of these various approaches, two of them are highly recommended to see broad future use, which are TDM-PON and WDM-PON techniques [10,11]. Moreover, Pure WDM-PON, OCDM-PON, or OFDM-PON techniques are not as standardised and studied as TDM-PON today [12]. In addition, other WDM schemes (based on OFDM or OCDM) do not offer advantages over the WDM/TDM hybrid PON [13]. Here, a brief overview is provided for these two types of multiplexing techniques (TDM and WDM) and then the hybrid techniques between them, because they are related to this paper.
## (s6) BBoF
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The BBoF technique is implemented to deliver RF wireless signals as a baseband signal over fibre. After the baseband signal is transmitted over fibre, at the access point (AP) the baseband signal is modulated and decoded to the desired wireless signal, as depicted in Figure 4. In this technique, the sent DS signal is upconverted by direct modulation using an optical modulator and then propagated as a baseband signal over optical fibre. The AP receives the transmitted signal and performs direct detection using photodiode (PD), a low pass filter (LPF), and decoder. Therefore, the output of the PD is then modulated using the RF modem at the required carrier frequency f RF . In the other direction (upstream), the received wireless signal from the AP is converted to BB signal and sent back to the Central Office (CO). This technique has many advantages, such as chromatic dispersion effects reduction, and using well-known methods for signal processing at the AP. Further, there is no need for high bandwidth photodiode detectors at the AP [24,25]. However, this technique can be considered a complicated scheme compared to the RoF technique where no BB to radio signal conversion is required at the AP [25]. 
## (s17) 5G MIMO Signals over Fibre
Number of References: 8

(p17.0) It is observed that 5G network technology would enable 20 Gb/s peak rate per cell and 1000 times data traffic compared to the existing 4G LTE [94]. 5G systems can support MIMO technology, enhancing the spectral efficiency and satisfying the high data rate requirements for today's mobile devices [67]. Moreover, the RoF is the qualifying technology for the future 5G cellular networks [95,96], which can be used in combination with the MIMO technology.

(p17.1) A unique 5G architecture for the backhaul of 5G MIMO signals over an optical network that is based on UDWDM is proposed in [67]. A big number of OLTs is unified through a ring architecture permitting them to communicate, exchange information and deliver access to ultra-dense mm-wave networks, as shown in Figure 15. One of the main advantages of this system is the use of a comb generator to generate multiple wavelengths from a single laser source. However, multiple LDs and PDs are still needed in the ONU. In addition, the wireless transmission in only over 2.2 m. The extreme bit rate is equal to 4.8 Gbit/s over a bandwidth of 1.96 GHz. An analogue indoor dispersed antenna system (DAS) for 5G mobile communications, which supports 4 × 4 MIMO, is demonstrated in [94]. The maximum bit rate is identical to 5.3 Gbit/s. CWDM is utilised in order to multiplex the different 5G MIMO signals, which means each MIMO stream needs a separate wavelength widely separated from the adjacent wavelength. This will limit the number of users especially if the system is used in a PON environment as in [42,97].
## (s18) DRoF MIMO Signals over Fibre
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) Both ARoF and DRoF solutions have been studied to provide the last-mile wireless coverage [98]. ARoF based systems also suffer from chromatic dispersion, nonlinearity, and losses in the optical sources, detectors, links, and other passive or active components [99]. On the other hand, DRoF system can completely remove these effects on the analogue carrier for long-distance transmission by conveying digital bits, which present the radio frequency (RF) carriers over optical fibre with an error-free transmission till bit error rate (BER) is intolerable. However, for short distances, the traditional ARoF will be more practical, since no digital to analogue is required and the fibre dispersion effect is not high. In [100], both ARoF and DRoF are compared as fronthaul for 5G 8 × 8 MIMO signals. The ARoF reduces the cost of the infrastructure. However, it is not as future proof as to the DRoF system. The study concludes that there is a trade-off between Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) and Operational Expenditure (OPEX) for a given deployment. For example, if there is no plan for future expenditure or other types of traffic to be introduced to the network in the future, then ARoF is the right choice in this case.
## (s20) MIMO Wireless Signals over TWDM-PON
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) In [6], a bidirectional RoF-PON capable of manging MIMO streams at slight cost, high spectral efficiency and backward compatibility with currently installed PON is proposed. The major advantage of this work is the compatibility with currently deployed PON. Reusing the existing deployed ODNs is extremely beneficial and cost-effective for providing the original high data rate wireless demands, as shown in Figure 16 This architecture is a bidirectional asymmetric RoF-PON with whole 40/10Gb/s DS/US transmission for 32 RAUs at a distance of 20 km. Figure 17 illustrates the RoF-PON architecture that is able to handle multiple MIMO streams. The OLT has eight LDs and, using the comb technique (Figure 8b, twenty-four wavelengths are produced from these. Sixteen of them (upper and lower sidebands) are used to transmit the DS traffic and the other eight wavelengths are used to transmit the US traffic. Each two MIMO wireless signals in the DS transmission are optically merged using PDM, as shown in Figure 17.  Figure 18 illustrates the constellation diagrams of the US wavelengths, which are still clearly separated even after a transmission of 20 km SMF. Hence, there is still a possibility for improvement in this system since NG-PON requires a reach higher than 40 km [101]. Also, the number of ONUs/RAUs is required to be 64 RAUs or above [102].
## (s26) •
Number of References: 4

(p26.0) Low-cost solutions for integrated transport of diverse MIMO wireless technologies, for example, multiband OFDM-UWB and WiFi IEEE 802.11ax, are particularly important for infrastructure consolidation through long-reach PONs [77]. • Also, from an economical point of view, it is very desirable for operators to upgrade current PONs to deliver wireless services by the least changes in the deployed infrastructure [12,108]. Therefore, reusing the existing ODNs is highly valuable and cost-effective for providing the new high data rates demands. More research studies are needed for seamless integration and compatibility of underlying MIMO wireless transmission over deployed ODNs (as proposed in [6]). Moreover, backhauling of 5G/6G signals has not yet been studied enough as RoF signals over PONs. • 5G and beyond will implement small cells; therefore, it is highly desirable to lower the cost of the RAU/AP, since multiple RAUs/APs will be used in a relatively small area.
