# animals Use of Different Cooling Methods in Pig Facilities to Alleviate the Effects of Heat Stress-A Review

CorpusID: 221239498 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d148e5eaf3b782da83c510232a40747ac898b1a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d148e5eaf3b782da83c510232a40747ac898b1a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s6) Cooling Methods Based on Water Evaporation
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) Fogging, misting or showers as well as evaporative pads have been used in pig housing [6,11,53]. These methods may significantly improve heat loss of nonsweating animals [54]. Water droplets sprayed (depending on their size) either fall on a small pen area (showers) or cause wetting of a larger surface (misting). In both these cases the animal skin is wetted. Drop cooling is another method to directly cool the animal surface. The nozzles of this system are often applied to individual pens above the animal's neck. Drop cooling causes the release of water droplets with fairly large intervals over time (e.g., 2 L/h) [9]. All the aforementioned methods causes vapourisation of water from the animal body surface, and thus improve evaporative heat loss in pigs.
## (s8) Floor Cooling
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) Taking into consideration the large amount of time pigs spend lying, especially individually kept sows, contact with a cool surface may lead to improved comfort of an animal during hot periods. The developing of a floor cooling system using underground water was used both in open-type and closed pig facilities [74,75]. In the study of Shi et al. [73], the pigs were kept in an open house with a floor cooling system (pump-powered water pipelines under a thick layer of concrete) or without this technology. The authors analysed changes in the behaviour of individuals of both groups. Independently of the rise in ambient temperature (23 to 34 • C), 60% of the pigs with access to the cooling area spent their time lying. This was the opposite to the animals of the other group; when the air temperature increased to 30 • C, only 57% of the pigs were lying comfortably and at 30-33 • C, only 10-20% of pigs were found to lie in the sleeping area. No pigs were observed in this area when the ambient temperature increased up to 33 • C; instead the animals were lying or standing in the play area where access to water was provided.

(p8.1) Based on a preferential test, it was found that gilts most often chose the conductive cool-pads to rid themselves of heat load compared to the drip-cooling or snout-cooling methods [76]. In the other study not only behaviour but also production performance and physiological parameters were evaluated [77]. In this experiment one group of lactating sows was kept in individual pens equipped with plates with circulating water (17 • C). In comparison to the females maintained in the typical pens, the cooled sows were characterised with higher feed intake (6.47 vs. 5.60 kg/day, respectively), milk production (10.20 vs. 8.05 kg/sow/day, respectively) and consequently higher weight of piglets at weaning (6.42 vs. 5.30 kg, respectively). With regard to behaviour, it may be stated that the cooled females spent less time sleeping and more time nursing. Moreover, they were eating and drinking more and there was less frequency to urinate compared to the individuals kept uncooled. Taking into consideration indicators such as respiratory rate, skin surface and rectal temperature, the values were generally significantly lower in sows kept with the cooled floor system.
