# Image Enhancement Techniques: A Review

CorpusID: 225210630 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62b2eda13fda66b45ff50b36690a404e35fea124](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62b2eda13fda66b45ff50b36690a404e35fea124)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) B. Histogram-Based Locality-Preserving Contrast Enhancement [2]
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) In this method is proposed by Jeyong Shin,et al. [2] a. Locality condition is defined in image histogram by using the intensity level. The purpose of the locality condition is to re-alize a local Contrast Enhancement [2] b. Optimization Problem Formulation

(p3.1) To calculate x, an optimization problem is formed in the context of locality conditions over the entire intensity range [2]. 

(p3.2) In this method is proposed by Jeyong Shin,et al. [2] a. Locality condition is defined in image histogram by using the intensity level. The purpose of the locality condition is to re-alize a local Contrast Enhancement [2] b. Optimization Problem Formulation

(p3.3) To calculate x, an optimization problem is formed in the context of locality conditions over the entire intensity range [2]. 
## (s31) B. Histogram-Based Locality-Preserving Contrast Enhancement [2]
Number of References: 12

(p31.0) In this method is proposed by Jeyong Shin,et al. [2] a. Locality condition is defined in image histogram by using the intensity level. The purpose of the locality condition is to re-alize a local Contrast Enhancement [2] b. Optimization Problem Formulation

(p31.1) To calculate x, an optimization problem is formed in the context of locality conditions over the entire intensity range [2]. 

(p31.2) In this method is proposed by Jeyong Shin,et al. [2] a. Locality condition is defined in image histogram by using the intensity level. The purpose of the locality condition is to re-alize a local Contrast Enhancement [2] b. Optimization Problem Formulation

(p31.3) To calculate x, an optimization problem is formed in the context of locality conditions over the entire intensity range [2]. 
