# foods The Toxic Impact of Honey Adulteration: A Review

CorpusID: 226031227 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4143b1c3468337e25cabe242e9fc4a737126198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4143b1c3468337e25cabe242e9fc4a737126198)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) Stingless Bee Honey
Number of References: 7

(p3.0) Among all five genera of the stingless bee, there are the only two types of stingless bees that produce honey, namely, Melipona and Trigona [36]. As a result of the previous study, stingless bee honey, in comparison to sting bee honey, has been shown to be higher in moisture content, acidity, and lower in diastase activity [37]. Furthermore [5], stingless bees can be differentiated from sting bee in terms of morphology (absence of sting) (Figure 1a), collection of nectar, their short harvest distance, and their honeycomb-less hives. These species of bees are not dangerous to humans and are very active as compared to other bees. Among all these species, only two types, named Heterotrigona itama (H.itama) and Geniotrigona thoracica, are kept by beekeepers, as they produce a higher volume of honey as compared to the others. In this regard, Se et al. [16] stated that H. itama honey has significantly higher physicochemical values when it comes to moisture content, water activity, free acidity and color intensity, and better These species of bees are not dangerous to humans and are very active as compared to other bees. Among all these species, only two types, named Heterotrigona itama (H. itama) and Geniotrigona thoracica, are kept by beekeepers, as they produce a higher volume of honey as compared to the others. In this regard, Se et al. [16] stated that H. itama honey has significantly higher physicochemical values when it comes to moisture content, water activity, free acidity and color intensity, and better antioxidant properties in comparison with other types of honey. Furthermore, Bakar et al. [38] mentioned that H. itama honey is less concentrated, with a more sour taste and aroma in comparison with other types of honey. Moreover, stingless bee store honey in a honey pot as opposed to a honeycomb. Among all recognized Apis species, there are only two commercially used by mankind, namely A. mellifera and A. cerana. This is due to the behavioral limitation of other species, such as dwarf and giant honeybees, which practice open-air nesting and cannot be kept in manmade hives. A comparison between these two species, A. mellifera generally is more productive in producing honey compared to A. cerana [3]. Furthermore, honeybees ( Figure 1b) store honey in a honeycomb.
## (s13) Palm Sugar
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Palm sugar is extracted from the flower buds of the palm. It is a natural sweetener undergoing minimum steps during the chemical-free procedure. One study [62] reported that the major carbohydrates in palm sugar were sucrose, followed by glucose and fructose. The significant advantage of palm sugar is the lack of a blood sugar spiking effect, owing to its low glycemic index (~35). The most popular honey adulterant in India is jaggery syrup, which is prepared by the evaporation of palm tree extraction the evaporation of the sap of palm trees [63]. While sucrose and glucose are the main sugar components of palm sugar, the LD 50 for sucrose is 29,700 mg/kg BW and for glucose 25,800 mg/kg BW for a rat [64].
