# A Review of Environmental Context Detection for Navigation Based on Multiple Sensors

CorpusID: 221237778 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/715727543701132420e565b29891cc87b272e99e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/715727543701132420e565b29891cc87b272e99e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) In the past decade, much work has been done to make navigation more precise and more reliable: sensor fusion, improvement of signal quality, receiver hardware enhancement (antennas arrays for instance), mitigation of errors, robust filtering, and so on. Fusing data from different sensors is a good way to make a navigation system more accurate, but it could also degrade the navigation accuracy when some of those data are erroneous. For instance, fusing Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) data with vision-based data in an indoor situation or in a harsh environment would create positioning errors since GNSS data might be unreliable in such a context. That is why context information is interesting and useful for navigation purposes, as mentioned in [1,2]. There are two very different concepts of "context" for navigation: behavioural and environmental contexts. The behavioural context represents the activity of either a vehicle in the case of robotic applications such as Unmanned Ground/Aerial Vehicles (UGVs or UAVs) (for example, accelerating/slowing down) or a user in the case of a smartphone (climbing stairs, running, taking a lift, etc.). The environmental context defines the surroundings, like indoor/outdoor, close to a building, under a tree, and so on. Reference [1] is an interesting introduction to environmental contexts since it gives an exhausting list including even the space or submarine environment.
## (s6) C/N0
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The Carrier to Noise ratio (C/N0) is probably the most well-known indicator of the GNSS signal. It is a signal-to-noise ratio that is not quantified in dB, but in dB.Hz. It gives information on the signal quality and on how badly (or not) the signal has been attenuated. According to [34], a standard C/N0 is around 45 dB.Hz in an open sky area. They also showed that different ranges of C/N0 values can be representative of a specific context (Table 2). When looking at this table, it seems very easy to distinguish indoor environments from outdoor ones: a simple threshold seems more than enough. However, the reality is much more complex. Firstly, C/N0 is not that stable and reliable. This was showcased in [1], where they acquired 100 s of C/N0 values (at a frequency of 1Hz) in different contexts such as indoors, outdoors in urban/residential areas, and open field. For each of those recordings, the authors computed histograms of C/N0. Those histograms showed that C/N0 values vary greatly during the period of acquisition (due to temporal losses of satellite visibility for a short time period). As a conclusion, we can fairly say that it is not possible to implement a simple threshold, as given in Table 2, to detect a context. However, the authors of [1] made two observations based on those data:
## (s8) Satellite Elevations
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) Satellite elevation is not an indicator that gives directly any information on the context. However, it can be used as supplementary information to help the context detection, like the pseudo-range. Indeed, the lower the satellite is, the higher the risk is to have its signal occluded by a building. Elevation can be used for detecting multipaths or for NLOS/LOS classification. To do so, it is mandatory to have a height map of the environment to compare buildings height with satellites elevations (azimuths are also used in this process). Formerly, such height maps needed to be created by various methods [50], but currently, 3D city models are widely available [51][52][53][54]. All those techniques do work, they require a 3D environment model and an accurate estimation of the receiver position, which are far from being available everywhere. It was also stated in [55] that those techniques require much computational resource, which cannot be supported by every navigation setup.
## (s14) Scene Analysis/Classification
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Now that we have seen the importance of what is above the vehicle (sky extraction and NLOS detection), we will take a look at what it is facing. Most of the autonomous vehicles have a frontal camera for navigation and/or mission purposes. The art of recognizing what contains a scene is called scene analysis. This is interesting for context detection, as it could help to distinguish indoors or outdoors for instance. Such decision making is referred to as scene classification. Filtering indoor scenes from outdoor ones seems like a simplification of scene classification, but in fact, it is not so simple. Indeed, the type of objects can vary greatly in both situations (plants can be found inside for instance), and external parameters such as illumination or weather can greatly influence the rendering of a picture. Different solutions exist, but there are two main families: the methods based on an analysis of the picture as a whole, which are called holistic methods, and approaches based on local descriptors, which are indicators computed on a sub-part of the image. Most of the time, the sub-parts are created by a segmentation algorithm. There are also a few methods that cannot be applied in our case. One such method is based on the labelling of the different objects of a scene to then classify it depending on the found objects (for example, if a desk, a bed, and a chair are detected in the picture, it can be classified as a bedroom). Such solutions are useful when it is necessary to precisely classify scenes to perform a mission task at a specific place. However, in our navigation application, where we only need to distinguish indoors from outdoors, the level is too high [82]. Lastly, methods based on the metadata of the picture also exist [83,84]. Indeed, with the exif (exchangeable image file) format, it is possible to have access to various parameters, which are referred as metadata. There is a wide range of possible parameters, like GPS position, time, camera manufacturer, or even information, in the picture. Those last parameters are the most interesting for image classification. Here is a non-exhaustive list of them: aperture, autofocus distance, exposure time, f-number, use of the flash, and so on. In our case, we do not have access to all the required data (for instance, it is not possible to use flash since there is no flash on a UGV setup), and therefore, we cannot use this technique.
## (s19) Context Detection Based on Other Sensors
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) The two previous sections covered GNSS-and vision-based indicators that can be used for context detection. We are still missing indicators on the IMU, our last sensor available in the classical navigation setup. Actually, the IMU does not give interesting information on the context, as it functions in the same manner regardless of the environment. Using the IMU measurement enables detecting pedestrian steps [117], road vibrations (to check if the car is moving) [118], or how straight a vehicle is going thanks to its gyro [119]. Measurements from accelerometers and gyroscopes are also used in more complex systems to identify the behavioural context and the activity of smartphone users (for example, running, climbing stairs, inside a lift [120]), to create an activity map for example [121]. Such information will not directly help our environmental context detection. Nonetheless, using IMU data is still the best and simplest way to know if the vehicle is in motion or not. This information could be interesting for managing context detection because if the drone is idle, we have no reason to look for a new context (it is however still important to follow the evolution of the satellite constellation).
