# Techniques for In Vivo Measurement of Ligament and Tendon Strain: A Review

CorpusID: 222184086 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab8e05a239fe73415d9d0a898473641c447986a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab8e05a239fe73415d9d0a898473641c447986a5)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s5) Measurement Technology and Experimental Methods
Number of References: 16

(p5.0) To detect displacement, HEST sensors measure the change in voltage resulting from relative movement between a magnet and a Hall-effect magnetic sensor, whereas DVRTs measure the movement of a magnetic core within two coil windings by measuring the resulting change in magnetic reluctance. 17 The parameters of these two sensors are displayed in Fig. 1a. 17,44 Beynnon and co-workers arthroscopically implanted a HEST sensor onto the ACL of subjects under local anaesthesia, 21 mounting the sensor by pressing on two fixation barbs (Fig. 1b). ACL strains were then quantified during limited functional movements before removal of the sensor. The measurement procedures of DVRT sensors are similar to the HEST sensors (Fig. 1c). 46 

(p5.1) To detect displacement, HEST sensors measure the change in voltage resulting from relative movement between a magnet and a Hall-effect magnetic sensor, whereas DVRTs measure the movement of a magnetic core within two coil windings by measuring the resulting change in magnetic reluctance. 17 The parameters of these two sensors are displayed in Fig. 1a. 17,44 Beynnon and co-workers arthroscopically implanted a HEST sensor onto the ACL of subjects under local anaesthesia, 21 mounting the sensor by pressing on two fixation barbs (Fig. 1b). ACL strains were then quantified during limited functional movements before removal of the sensor. The measurement procedures of DVRT sensors are similar to the HEST sensors (Fig. 1c). 46 
## (s6) Slack Length
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) To assess in vivo ACL slack length, Beynnon and coworkers recorded the displacement of a HEST sensor fixed on the ACL while applying antero-posterior shear loads to the tibia. 19,45 They found an ''inflection point'' on the plot of the sensor length against shear load (Fig. 1d), corresponding to the length where the ACL engages. The corresponding sensor length at this point was considered to be the reference length used to calculate strain. Hence, any subsequent relative change of the sensor displacement from this length was considered to directly reflect loading within the ACL. 19,72 This method was later validated by Fleming and coworkers through concurrently implementing a force probe to measure ACL load on cadaveric knees. 47 

(p6.1) To assess in vivo ACL slack length, Beynnon and coworkers recorded the displacement of a HEST sensor fixed on the ACL while applying antero-posterior shear loads to the tibia. 19,45 They found an ''inflection point'' on the plot of the sensor length against shear load (Fig. 1d), corresponding to the length where the ACL engages. The corresponding sensor length at this point was considered to be the reference length used to calculate strain. Hence, any subsequent relative change of the sensor displacement from this length was considered to directly reflect loading within the ACL. 19,72 This method was later validated by Fleming and coworkers through concurrently implementing a force probe to measure ACL load on cadaveric knees. 47 
## (s7) Key findings
Number of References: 40

(p7.0) In vivo strain sensor measurements have provided critical insights into rehabilitation protocols for ACL  by providing direct evidence for activity selection that ensure tissue strains are under damaging magnitudes, 62 but high enough to facilitate healing. 136 Specifically, squatting was long thought to be a safe activity for early rehabilitation of ACL reconstruction. However, in vivo ACL strain measurements using DVRT sensors have revealed that peak strains induced by squatting (3.6%) 20 are higher than lunges (1.8-2.0%), sit-to-stand (2.8%), step-up/down (2.5-2.6%), 62 and cycling activities (1.7%). 46 These findings indicate that squatting exposes the ACL to greater loads than open-chain movements 17 and should therefore be used cautiously during rehabilitation. In vivo sensor measurements have also revealed key insights into the role of muscle activation in both loading and protecting the ACL. The measurements indicate that isometric quadriceps contractions increase ACL strain at flexion angles of less than 50°, 18,19,72 isometric gastrocnemius contractions increase ACL strain over all tested flexion angles, and that hamstrings contraction reduce ACL strain at flexion angles greater than 5°. 17,48 These measurements have provided fundamental knowledge that can inform targeted muscle strengthening and neuromuscular coordination training to protect the ACL.

(p7.1) In vivo strain sensor measurements have provided critical insights into rehabilitation protocols for ACL  by providing direct evidence for activity selection that ensure tissue strains are under damaging magnitudes, 62 but high enough to facilitate healing. 136 Specifically, squatting was long thought to be a safe activity for early rehabilitation of ACL reconstruction. However, in vivo ACL strain measurements using DVRT sensors have revealed that peak strains induced by squatting (3.6%) 20 are higher than lunges (1.8-2.0%), sit-to-stand (2.8%), step-up/down (2.5-2.6%), 62 and cycling activities (1.7%). 46 These findings indicate that squatting exposes the ACL to greater loads than open-chain movements 17 and should therefore be used cautiously during rehabilitation. In vivo sensor measurements have also revealed key insights into the role of muscle activation in both loading and protecting the ACL. The measurements indicate that isometric quadriceps contractions increase ACL strain at flexion angles of less than 50°, 18,19,72 isometric gastrocnemius contractions increase ACL strain over all tested flexion angles, and that hamstrings contraction reduce ACL strain at flexion angles greater than 5°. 17,48 These measurements have provided fundamental knowledge that can inform targeted muscle strengthening and neuromuscular coordination training to protect the ACL.
## (s10) VIRTUAL FIBRE ELONGATION
Number of References: 32

(p10.0) Initial imaging assessments of ligament strain were achieved using open-MRI 9,64 and CT scans 55,85,138,188 to measure ligament length on the 2D slice images that best displayed the structure. However, substantial inaccuracies were clearly present in such 2D measurements due to out-of-plane errors. The virtual fibre elongation method overcomes this limitation by leveraging imaging data to reconstruct the relative 3D poses of the bones to determine the relative displacements of soft tissue attachment sites to non-invasively quantify tendon and ligament length change patterns. 82,83,183 For investigating dynamic activities, fluoroscopy is the state-of-art imaging modality, as CT and MRI are limited by their long-capture times and small field of view (FOV). Thus the following discussion will primarily review fluoroscopic imaging studies. 67 

(p10.1) Initial imaging assessments of ligament strain were achieved using open-MRI 9,64 and CT scans 55,85,138,188 to measure ligament length on the 2D slice images that best displayed the structure. However, substantial inaccuracies were clearly present in such 2D measurements due to out-of-plane errors. The virtual fibre elongation method overcomes this limitation by leveraging imaging data to reconstruct the relative 3D poses of the bones to determine the relative displacements of soft tissue attachment sites to non-invasively quantify tendon and ligament length change patterns. 82,83,183 For investigating dynamic activities, fluoroscopy is the state-of-art imaging modality, as CT and MRI are limited by their long-capture times and small field of view (FOV). Thus the following discussion will primarily review fluoroscopic imaging studies. 67 
## (s13) Advantages and Limitations
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) The virtual fibre elongation method leverages stateof-the-art dynamic imaging technologies to non-invasively evaluate soft tissue strains throughout functional activities at high frequencies (> 200 Hz). It can quantify regional tissue strains by using multiple fibres to represent the same ligament (Fig. 4). Furthermore, as the fibre attachment locations are manually selected, uncertainty quantification and sensitivity studies can be readily performed. 68 Additionally, the measurement accuracy is not affected by whether the tissue is deep or superficial. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the method allows comparisons of injured or reconstructed tissue function against the healthy contralateral limb.
## (s14) ULTRASOUND
Number of References: 44

(p14.0) Ultrasound is a non-invasive, radiation-free, and cost-effective technique to visualise the internal architecture of musculoskeletal soft tissues. Clinically, ultrasound is commonly used to identify pathological tendon abnormalities. 114 In research settings, ultrasound has been leveraged to quantify muscle, tendon, and ligament deformation during dynamic activities. Numerous ultrasound studies quantified strains of large flat tendons such as the AT during walking 50,88 and running, 39,102 however, very few ultrasound studies focused on ligaments. 155 Ultrasound also enables muscle fibre lengths and pennation angle to be dynamically assessed. 33,97 Typical ultrasound systems consist of a hand-held transducer connected by flexible wire to a cart that houses the electronics for signal generation and processing, as well as a screen for visualization. The working principle behind ultrasound imaging relies on propagating ultrasonic waves (sound waves with fre-quencies > 20,000 Hz) into the tissue of interest and recording their reflection. 139,146 The ultrasonic waves reflect off the tissue according to the local properties, and the echoes are recorded and used to generate an image. Traditional ultrasound systems generate planar 2D images and can reach tissues up to 17 cm beneath the skin. 38 Two primary techniques have been developed to measure soft tissue strain during dynamic movements using ultrasound, myotendinous junction (MJ) tracking (Fig. 5) and speckle tracking (Fig. 5). Freehand 3D ultrasound has also been applied to measure Achilles tendon strain, but only by imaging multiple static postures, and thus this review focuses on MJ and speckle tracking techniques.

(p14.1) Ultrasound is a non-invasive, radiation-free, and cost-effective technique to visualise the internal architecture of musculoskeletal soft tissues. Clinically, ultrasound is commonly used to identify pathological tendon abnormalities. 114 In research settings, ultrasound has been leveraged to quantify muscle, tendon, and ligament deformation during dynamic activities. Numerous ultrasound studies quantified strains of large flat tendons such as the AT during walking 50,88 and running, 39,102 however, very few ultrasound studies focused on ligaments. 155 Ultrasound also enables muscle fibre lengths and pennation angle to be dynamically assessed. 33,97 Typical ultrasound systems consist of a hand-held transducer connected by flexible wire to a cart that houses the electronics for signal generation and processing, as well as a screen for visualization. The working principle behind ultrasound imaging relies on propagating ultrasonic waves (sound waves with fre-quencies > 20,000 Hz) into the tissue of interest and recording their reflection. 139,146 The ultrasonic waves reflect off the tissue according to the local properties, and the echoes are recorded and used to generate an image. Traditional ultrasound systems generate planar 2D images and can reach tissues up to 17 cm beneath the skin. 38 Two primary techniques have been developed to measure soft tissue strain during dynamic movements using ultrasound, myotendinous junction (MJ) tracking (Fig. 5) and speckle tracking (Fig. 5). Freehand 3D ultrasound has also been applied to measure Achilles tendon strain, but only by imaging multiple static postures, and thus this review focuses on MJ and speckle tracking techniques.
## (s15) Measurement Technology and Experimental Methods
Number of References: 64

(p15.0) For both strain measurement techniques, the ultrasound transducers must be fixed to the body during dynamic movement to image a tissue. Typically, the ultrasound transducer is housed in a foam orthotic and strapped to the body using athletic tape. 50 In many experiments, a treadmill is used so that the ultrasound cart can remain stationary. Commonly, markers are attached to the transducer and the ultrasound system is synchronized with a motion analysis system so that the transformation between the image field of view and other anatomic landmarks can be calculated (Fig. 5).

(p15.1) The MJ tracking technique enables muscle and tendon lengths to be quantified by tracking anatomical landmarks in each ultrasound image of a series collected throughout an activity. For example, the elongation of the free AT can be measured by tracking the displacement between the calcaneus attachment and the soleus-AT myotendinous junction (sATMJ). 94 An ultrasound transducer with a wide FOV (100 mm) can image the entire free AT from the calcaneus to sATMJ 94 (Fig. 5). For many applications and ultrasound systems, however, the tissue length exceeds the transducer's FOV and thus only one attachment site can be tracked. Synchronizing the ultrasound system with an optic tracking system provides another means to track the length change of a long tendon during movement. 40,104,135 To measure the AT, a reflective marker is placed on the calcaneus attachment to track its position. An ultrasound transducer equipped with reflective markers is fixed on the shank to image the position of the sATMJ, and then transform it into the global coordinate system. The free AT length is then defined as the distance between the positions of the calcaneus and the sATMJ.

(p15.2) Speckle tracking provides an alternative method to quantify regional tissue strain using ultrasound. A speckle is an interference pattern with bright and dark spots in B-mode or radiofrequency (RF) ultrasound images. 156 The speckle pattern remains constant when the tissue structure is static and thus is thought to be representative of the tissue structure rather than measurement noise. Therefore, when the tissue microstructure is deformed, the speckle pattern changes accordingly. 22 After the B-mode or RF ultrasound images of the tendon are obtained throughout an activity, a region of interest (ROI) containing the tendon structure is manually selected on one image. 95 Then, automated speckle tracking algorithms are used to calculate the frame-to-frame speckle displacement within the ROI, which is then converted into tendon elongations. 50,134 Slack Length Ultrasound provides two opportunities to assess the slack length of a tissue. Firstly, a tissue can be imaged at multiple joint postures until buckling can be identified in the B-mode images. This has been demonstrated on the patellar tendon. 151,154 Secondly, a novel ultrasound imaging technique called shear wave elastography, which quantifies the speed of shear wave propagation in a tissue, has been applied to assess tissue slack length. Shear wave speed has been shown to be related to tissue stress, 23,111 and thus can be applied to establish when the tissue goes slack if a corresponding joint is manipulated through its range of motion. This technique has been applied to assess the slack length of the AT 75 and the ankle angle when the individual triceps surae muscles are slack. 65 

(p15.3) For both strain measurement techniques, the ultrasound transducers must be fixed to the body during dynamic movement to image a tissue. Typically, the ultrasound transducer is housed in a foam orthotic and strapped to the body using athletic tape. 50 In many experiments, a treadmill is used so that the ultrasound cart can remain stationary. Commonly, markers are attached to the transducer and the ultrasound system is synchronized with a motion analysis system so that the transformation between the image field of view and other anatomic landmarks can be calculated (Fig. 5).

(p15.4) The MJ tracking technique enables muscle and tendon lengths to be quantified by tracking anatomical landmarks in each ultrasound image of a series collected throughout an activity. For example, the elongation of the free AT can be measured by tracking the displacement between the calcaneus attachment and the soleus-AT myotendinous junction (sATMJ). 94 An ultrasound transducer with a wide FOV (100 mm) can image the entire free AT from the calcaneus to sATMJ 94 (Fig. 5). For many applications and ultrasound systems, however, the tissue length exceeds the transducer's FOV and thus only one attachment site can be tracked. Synchronizing the ultrasound system with an optic tracking system provides another means to track the length change of a long tendon during movement. 40,104,135 To measure the AT, a reflective marker is placed on the calcaneus attachment to track its position. An ultrasound transducer equipped with reflective markers is fixed on the shank to image the position of the sATMJ, and then transform it into the global coordinate system. The free AT length is then defined as the distance between the positions of the calcaneus and the sATMJ.

(p15.5) Speckle tracking provides an alternative method to quantify regional tissue strain using ultrasound. A speckle is an interference pattern with bright and dark spots in B-mode or radiofrequency (RF) ultrasound images. 156 The speckle pattern remains constant when the tissue structure is static and thus is thought to be representative of the tissue structure rather than measurement noise. Therefore, when the tissue microstructure is deformed, the speckle pattern changes accordingly. 22 After the B-mode or RF ultrasound images of the tendon are obtained throughout an activity, a region of interest (ROI) containing the tendon structure is manually selected on one image. 95 Then, automated speckle tracking algorithms are used to calculate the frame-to-frame speckle displacement within the ROI, which is then converted into tendon elongations. 50,134 Slack Length Ultrasound provides two opportunities to assess the slack length of a tissue. Firstly, a tissue can be imaged at multiple joint postures until buckling can be identified in the B-mode images. This has been demonstrated on the patellar tendon. 151,154 Secondly, a novel ultrasound imaging technique called shear wave elastography, which quantifies the speed of shear wave propagation in a tissue, has been applied to assess tissue slack length. Shear wave speed has been shown to be related to tissue stress, 23,111 and thus can be applied to establish when the tissue goes slack if a corresponding joint is manipulated through its range of motion. This technique has been applied to assess the slack length of the AT 75 and the ankle angle when the individual triceps surae muscles are slack. 65 
## (s16) Key Findings
Number of References: 124

(p16.0) Ultrasound based strain measurements have provided many important insights into the dynamic function of the AT. For example, ultrasound was used to quantify in vivo AT strains during dynamic activities such as running (3.5-5.8%), walking (4.6%), and onelegged hopping (8-8.3%). 40,41,104,105 These functional AT strain data provide some important implications for AT injury. Firstly, the in vivo AT strains during one-legged hopping are surprisingly close to the AT failure strains found in in vitro tendon tensile tests. 15,104 As the AT remained healthy after hopping tests, this finding demonstrates the difficulty of comparing in vivo and in vitro strain measurements and perhaps inconsistency among the methods. Secondly, the in vivo strain data from ultrasound measurements can serve as a variable to assess other parameters associated with AT injury, such as the mechanical ''safe factor'' 0 and ''core temperature'' 9 of the AT. Franz and co-workers measured the regional deformations of AT during walking, 50 and showed that the aggregate AT exhibited nearly twice as much elongation as the free AT. Moreover, the superficial AT exhibited larger elongations than the deep AT and only the superficial AT elongation was found to increase at higher walking speeds, indicating non-uniform regional strain patterns in the AT. Cronin and coworkers compared the length changes of Achilles tendons during walking between healthy and diabetic subjects. 34 The length changes of Achilles tendons were smaller in diabetic subjects than healthy patients but the length changes of muscle-tendon units were similar. These findings indicate that diabetes may decrease the elastic energy storage of Achilles tendons and increase muscle work, resulting in decreased walking efficiency. Finally, ultrasound has provided insights to AT healing and protection. For example, AT strain during running with a 18 mm heel lift was significantly smaller than barefoot, suggesting that such a heel lift could help to reduce the AT strains during AT rehabilitation training. 39 Ultrasound evaluations have also contributed towards understanding the function of human triceps surae muscles during walking and running. [29][30][31][32][33]101 In these studies, either a single ultrasound transducer was positioned over the medial gastrocnemius (MG) so that the soleus was also visible, 32 or two transducers were placed over the MG and soleus. 80 The MG and soleus fascicle lengths and pennation angles were then measured using an automated tracking algorithm, and motion-capture derived knee and ankle joint kinematics were further used to estimate MG and soleus muscle-tendon unit lengths. 32,102,116 These studies found different length change patterns and magnitudes between the MG and soleus fascicles during the stance phase of gait, indicating the different functional roles of the two muscles. 80 Relevant studies have also determined the differences in triceps surae length changes and behavior between walking and running, 81,102 between forefoot and rearfoot running, 160 and at different running speeds. 79 Investigating the length change patterns in both muscle fascicle and muscle-tendon unit also showed a decreased energy storing role of the AT in race-walking compared to running. 32 The effect of age on gastrocnemius muscletendon behavior during walking has also been studied by ultrasound, 116 and it was found that tendon lengthening is greater and muscle fascicle lengthening is smaller in older subjects compared to young subjects. In addition, ultrasound has been used to characterize the effect body mass on gastrocnemius medialis fascicle behavior during stair ascent. 157 By calculating the difference between the muscle tendon unit length change and the fascicle length change, it was found that additional body mass could cause substantially greater stretching on the tendon. This finding may be meaningful in evaluating effect of obesity on pathological loading in triceps surae muscle tendon unit.

(p16.1) The application of ultrasound to quantify ligament strain is limited to a few studies investigating superficial ligaments during static movements, such as the dorsal lisfranc ligament, 56,110,145 pisohamate ligament and pisometacarpal ligament. 119 Using speckle-tracking, 5-7% strains were observed in the coracoacromial ligament during dynamic shoulder rotations such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction. 134 The strain patterns and displacements of the coracoacromial ligament indicated contact with the rotator cuff in these frequently used shoulder movements. This indicates a possible mechanism for rotator cuff pathologies, and provides guidelines for rehabilitation protocols as certain movements such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction were found to induce excessive tissue strains.

(p16.2) Ultrasound based strain measurements have provided many important insights into the dynamic function of the AT. For example, ultrasound was used to quantify in vivo AT strains during dynamic activities such as running (3.5-5.8%), walking (4.6%), and onelegged hopping (8-8.3%). 40,41,104,105 These functional AT strain data provide some important implications for AT injury. Firstly, the in vivo AT strains during one-legged hopping are surprisingly close to the AT failure strains found in in vitro tendon tensile tests. 15,104 As the AT remained healthy after hopping tests, this finding demonstrates the difficulty of comparing in vivo and in vitro strain measurements and perhaps inconsistency among the methods. Secondly, the in vivo strain data from ultrasound measurements can serve as a variable to assess other parameters associated with AT injury, such as the mechanical ''safe factor'' 0 and ''core temperature'' 9 of the AT. Franz and co-workers measured the regional deformations of AT during walking, 50 and showed that the aggregate AT exhibited nearly twice as much elongation as the free AT. Moreover, the superficial AT exhibited larger elongations than the deep AT and only the superficial AT elongation was found to increase at higher walking speeds, indicating non-uniform regional strain patterns in the AT. Cronin and coworkers compared the length changes of Achilles tendons during walking between healthy and diabetic subjects. 34 The length changes of Achilles tendons were smaller in diabetic subjects than healthy patients but the length changes of muscle-tendon units were similar. These findings indicate that diabetes may decrease the elastic energy storage of Achilles tendons and increase muscle work, resulting in decreased walking efficiency. Finally, ultrasound has provided insights to AT healing and protection. For example, AT strain during running with a 18 mm heel lift was significantly smaller than barefoot, suggesting that such a heel lift could help to reduce the AT strains during AT rehabilitation training. 39 Ultrasound evaluations have also contributed towards understanding the function of human triceps surae muscles during walking and running. [29][30][31][32][33]101 In these studies, either a single ultrasound transducer was positioned over the medial gastrocnemius (MG) so that the soleus was also visible, 32 or two transducers were placed over the MG and soleus. 80 The MG and soleus fascicle lengths and pennation angles were then measured using an automated tracking algorithm, and motion-capture derived knee and ankle joint kinematics were further used to estimate MG and soleus muscle-tendon unit lengths. 32,102,116 These studies found different length change patterns and magnitudes between the MG and soleus fascicles during the stance phase of gait, indicating the different functional roles of the two muscles. 80 Relevant studies have also determined the differences in triceps surae length changes and behavior between walking and running, 81,102 between forefoot and rearfoot running, 160 and at different running speeds. 79 Investigating the length change patterns in both muscle fascicle and muscle-tendon unit also showed a decreased energy storing role of the AT in race-walking compared to running. 32 The effect of age on gastrocnemius muscletendon behavior during walking has also been studied by ultrasound, 116 and it was found that tendon lengthening is greater and muscle fascicle lengthening is smaller in older subjects compared to young subjects. In addition, ultrasound has been used to characterize the effect body mass on gastrocnemius medialis fascicle behavior during stair ascent. 157 By calculating the difference between the muscle tendon unit length change and the fascicle length change, it was found that additional body mass could cause substantially greater stretching on the tendon. This finding may be meaningful in evaluating effect of obesity on pathological loading in triceps surae muscle tendon unit.

(p16.3) The application of ultrasound to quantify ligament strain is limited to a few studies investigating superficial ligaments during static movements, such as the dorsal lisfranc ligament, 56,110,145 pisohamate ligament and pisometacarpal ligament. 119 Using speckle-tracking, 5-7% strains were observed in the coracoacromial ligament during dynamic shoulder rotations such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction. 134 The strain patterns and displacements of the coracoacromial ligament indicated contact with the rotator cuff in these frequently used shoulder movements. This indicates a possible mechanism for rotator cuff pathologies, and provides guidelines for rehabilitation protocols as certain movements such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction were found to induce excessive tissue strains.
## (s18) Future work
Number of References: 40

(p18.0) Ultrasound methods are currently the most clinically viable for assessing musculoskeletal soft tissue strains due to their non-invasive, non-radiative, and relatively low-cost nature. However, their 2D nature limits the accuracy and repeatability of this method. Freehand 3D ultrasound scanning has been developed to quantify the 3D AT deformation in vivo, 42,125 including changes in AT length, AT width, thickness, cross-sectional area, and volume. 125,127 This technique relies on a conventional ultrasound machine coupled with a transducer instrumented with reflective markers and an optical tracking system. The operator performs transverse ultrasound scans from the calcaneus along the AT to the gastrocnemius muscle, 103,128 during which the spatial position and orientation of the ultrasound transducer are recorded. Then, the 2D ultrasound images (between-frame interval of 0.1-0.5 mm) are transformed into the global coordinate system to create a 3D AT reconstruction. 129 Highly precise 2D-to-3D transformation of the image (error under 1 mm) can be achieved after temporal and spatial calibration of the ultrasound transducer. 128,129 Measurements of 3D AT deformations then require a series of digital processing procedures such as segmenting and rendering AT cross-sections, reconstructing 3D AT volumes, and defining measurement sites. 128 The applicability of 3D freehand ultrasound to dynamic movements, however, remains to be established (Fig. 5).

(p18.1) Ultrasound methods are currently the most clinically viable for assessing musculoskeletal soft tissue strains due to their non-invasive, non-radiative, and relatively low-cost nature. However, their 2D nature limits the accuracy and repeatability of this method. Freehand 3D ultrasound scanning has been developed to quantify the 3D AT deformation in vivo, 42,125 including changes in AT length, AT width, thickness, cross-sectional area, and volume. 125,127 This technique relies on a conventional ultrasound machine coupled with a transducer instrumented with reflective markers and an optical tracking system. The operator performs transverse ultrasound scans from the calcaneus along the AT to the gastrocnemius muscle, 103,128 during which the spatial position and orientation of the ultrasound transducer are recorded. Then, the 2D ultrasound images (between-frame interval of 0.1-0.5 mm) are transformed into the global coordinate system to create a 3D AT reconstruction. 129 Highly precise 2D-to-3D transformation of the image (error under 1 mm) can be achieved after temporal and spatial calibration of the ultrasound transducer. 128,129 Measurements of 3D AT deformations then require a series of digital processing procedures such as segmenting and rendering AT cross-sections, reconstructing 3D AT volumes, and defining measurement sites. 128 The applicability of 3D freehand ultrasound to dynamic movements, however, remains to be established (Fig. 5).
## (s35) Measurement Technology and Experimental Methods
Number of References: 16

(p35.0) To detect displacement, HEST sensors measure the change in voltage resulting from relative movement between a magnet and a Hall-effect magnetic sensor, whereas DVRTs measure the movement of a magnetic core within two coil windings by measuring the resulting change in magnetic reluctance. 17 The parameters of these two sensors are displayed in Fig. 1a. 17,44 Beynnon and co-workers arthroscopically implanted a HEST sensor onto the ACL of subjects under local anaesthesia, 21 mounting the sensor by pressing on two fixation barbs (Fig. 1b). ACL strains were then quantified during limited functional movements before removal of the sensor. The measurement procedures of DVRT sensors are similar to the HEST sensors (Fig. 1c). 46 

(p35.1) To detect displacement, HEST sensors measure the change in voltage resulting from relative movement between a magnet and a Hall-effect magnetic sensor, whereas DVRTs measure the movement of a magnetic core within two coil windings by measuring the resulting change in magnetic reluctance. 17 The parameters of these two sensors are displayed in Fig. 1a. 17,44 Beynnon and co-workers arthroscopically implanted a HEST sensor onto the ACL of subjects under local anaesthesia, 21 mounting the sensor by pressing on two fixation barbs (Fig. 1b). ACL strains were then quantified during limited functional movements before removal of the sensor. The measurement procedures of DVRT sensors are similar to the HEST sensors (Fig. 1c). 46 
## (s36) Slack Length
Number of References: 20

(p36.0) To assess in vivo ACL slack length, Beynnon and coworkers recorded the displacement of a HEST sensor fixed on the ACL while applying antero-posterior shear loads to the tibia. 19,45 They found an ''inflection point'' on the plot of the sensor length against shear load (Fig. 1d), corresponding to the length where the ACL engages. The corresponding sensor length at this point was considered to be the reference length used to calculate strain. Hence, any subsequent relative change of the sensor displacement from this length was considered to directly reflect loading within the ACL. 19,72 This method was later validated by Fleming and coworkers through concurrently implementing a force probe to measure ACL load on cadaveric knees. 47 

(p36.1) To assess in vivo ACL slack length, Beynnon and coworkers recorded the displacement of a HEST sensor fixed on the ACL while applying antero-posterior shear loads to the tibia. 19,45 They found an ''inflection point'' on the plot of the sensor length against shear load (Fig. 1d), corresponding to the length where the ACL engages. The corresponding sensor length at this point was considered to be the reference length used to calculate strain. Hence, any subsequent relative change of the sensor displacement from this length was considered to directly reflect loading within the ACL. 19,72 This method was later validated by Fleming and coworkers through concurrently implementing a force probe to measure ACL load on cadaveric knees. 47 
## (s37) Key findings
Number of References: 40

(p37.0) In vivo strain sensor measurements have provided critical insights into rehabilitation protocols for ACL  by providing direct evidence for activity selection that ensure tissue strains are under damaging magnitudes, 62 but high enough to facilitate healing. 136 Specifically, squatting was long thought to be a safe activity for early rehabilitation of ACL reconstruction. However, in vivo ACL strain measurements using DVRT sensors have revealed that peak strains induced by squatting (3.6%) 20 are higher than lunges (1.8-2.0%), sit-to-stand (2.8%), step-up/down (2.5-2.6%), 62 and cycling activities (1.7%). 46 These findings indicate that squatting exposes the ACL to greater loads than open-chain movements 17 and should therefore be used cautiously during rehabilitation. In vivo sensor measurements have also revealed key insights into the role of muscle activation in both loading and protecting the ACL. The measurements indicate that isometric quadriceps contractions increase ACL strain at flexion angles of less than 50°, 18,19,72 isometric gastrocnemius contractions increase ACL strain over all tested flexion angles, and that hamstrings contraction reduce ACL strain at flexion angles greater than 5°. 17,48 These measurements have provided fundamental knowledge that can inform targeted muscle strengthening and neuromuscular coordination training to protect the ACL.

(p37.1) In vivo strain sensor measurements have provided critical insights into rehabilitation protocols for ACL  by providing direct evidence for activity selection that ensure tissue strains are under damaging magnitudes, 62 but high enough to facilitate healing. 136 Specifically, squatting was long thought to be a safe activity for early rehabilitation of ACL reconstruction. However, in vivo ACL strain measurements using DVRT sensors have revealed that peak strains induced by squatting (3.6%) 20 are higher than lunges (1.8-2.0%), sit-to-stand (2.8%), step-up/down (2.5-2.6%), 62 and cycling activities (1.7%). 46 These findings indicate that squatting exposes the ACL to greater loads than open-chain movements 17 and should therefore be used cautiously during rehabilitation. In vivo sensor measurements have also revealed key insights into the role of muscle activation in both loading and protecting the ACL. The measurements indicate that isometric quadriceps contractions increase ACL strain at flexion angles of less than 50°, 18,19,72 isometric gastrocnemius contractions increase ACL strain over all tested flexion angles, and that hamstrings contraction reduce ACL strain at flexion angles greater than 5°. 17,48 These measurements have provided fundamental knowledge that can inform targeted muscle strengthening and neuromuscular coordination training to protect the ACL.
## (s40) VIRTUAL FIBRE ELONGATION
Number of References: 32

(p40.0) Initial imaging assessments of ligament strain were achieved using open-MRI 9,64 and CT scans 55,85,138,188 to measure ligament length on the 2D slice images that best displayed the structure. However, substantial inaccuracies were clearly present in such 2D measurements due to out-of-plane errors. The virtual fibre elongation method overcomes this limitation by leveraging imaging data to reconstruct the relative 3D poses of the bones to determine the relative displacements of soft tissue attachment sites to non-invasively quantify tendon and ligament length change patterns. 82,83,183 For investigating dynamic activities, fluoroscopy is the state-of-art imaging modality, as CT and MRI are limited by their long-capture times and small field of view (FOV). Thus the following discussion will primarily review fluoroscopic imaging studies. 67 

(p40.1) Initial imaging assessments of ligament strain were achieved using open-MRI 9,64 and CT scans 55,85,138,188 to measure ligament length on the 2D slice images that best displayed the structure. However, substantial inaccuracies were clearly present in such 2D measurements due to out-of-plane errors. The virtual fibre elongation method overcomes this limitation by leveraging imaging data to reconstruct the relative 3D poses of the bones to determine the relative displacements of soft tissue attachment sites to non-invasively quantify tendon and ligament length change patterns. 82,83,183 For investigating dynamic activities, fluoroscopy is the state-of-art imaging modality, as CT and MRI are limited by their long-capture times and small field of view (FOV). Thus the following discussion will primarily review fluoroscopic imaging studies. 67 
## (s43) Advantages and Limitations
Number of References: 2

(p43.0) The virtual fibre elongation method leverages stateof-the-art dynamic imaging technologies to non-invasively evaluate soft tissue strains throughout functional activities at high frequencies (> 200 Hz). It can quantify regional tissue strains by using multiple fibres to represent the same ligament (Fig. 4). Furthermore, as the fibre attachment locations are manually selected, uncertainty quantification and sensitivity studies can be readily performed. 68 Additionally, the measurement accuracy is not affected by whether the tissue is deep or superficial. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the method allows comparisons of injured or reconstructed tissue function against the healthy contralateral limb.
## (s44) ULTRASOUND
Number of References: 44

(p44.0) Ultrasound is a non-invasive, radiation-free, and cost-effective technique to visualise the internal architecture of musculoskeletal soft tissues. Clinically, ultrasound is commonly used to identify pathological tendon abnormalities. 114 In research settings, ultrasound has been leveraged to quantify muscle, tendon, and ligament deformation during dynamic activities. Numerous ultrasound studies quantified strains of large flat tendons such as the AT during walking 50,88 and running, 39,102 however, very few ultrasound studies focused on ligaments. 155 Ultrasound also enables muscle fibre lengths and pennation angle to be dynamically assessed. 33,97 Typical ultrasound systems consist of a hand-held transducer connected by flexible wire to a cart that houses the electronics for signal generation and processing, as well as a screen for visualization. The working principle behind ultrasound imaging relies on propagating ultrasonic waves (sound waves with fre-quencies > 20,000 Hz) into the tissue of interest and recording their reflection. 139,146 The ultrasonic waves reflect off the tissue according to the local properties, and the echoes are recorded and used to generate an image. Traditional ultrasound systems generate planar 2D images and can reach tissues up to 17 cm beneath the skin. 38 Two primary techniques have been developed to measure soft tissue strain during dynamic movements using ultrasound, myotendinous junction (MJ) tracking (Fig. 5) and speckle tracking (Fig. 5). Freehand 3D ultrasound has also been applied to measure Achilles tendon strain, but only by imaging multiple static postures, and thus this review focuses on MJ and speckle tracking techniques.

(p44.1) Ultrasound is a non-invasive, radiation-free, and cost-effective technique to visualise the internal architecture of musculoskeletal soft tissues. Clinically, ultrasound is commonly used to identify pathological tendon abnormalities. 114 In research settings, ultrasound has been leveraged to quantify muscle, tendon, and ligament deformation during dynamic activities. Numerous ultrasound studies quantified strains of large flat tendons such as the AT during walking 50,88 and running, 39,102 however, very few ultrasound studies focused on ligaments. 155 Ultrasound also enables muscle fibre lengths and pennation angle to be dynamically assessed. 33,97 Typical ultrasound systems consist of a hand-held transducer connected by flexible wire to a cart that houses the electronics for signal generation and processing, as well as a screen for visualization. The working principle behind ultrasound imaging relies on propagating ultrasonic waves (sound waves with fre-quencies > 20,000 Hz) into the tissue of interest and recording their reflection. 139,146 The ultrasonic waves reflect off the tissue according to the local properties, and the echoes are recorded and used to generate an image. Traditional ultrasound systems generate planar 2D images and can reach tissues up to 17 cm beneath the skin. 38 Two primary techniques have been developed to measure soft tissue strain during dynamic movements using ultrasound, myotendinous junction (MJ) tracking (Fig. 5) and speckle tracking (Fig. 5). Freehand 3D ultrasound has also been applied to measure Achilles tendon strain, but only by imaging multiple static postures, and thus this review focuses on MJ and speckle tracking techniques.
## (s45) Measurement Technology and Experimental Methods
Number of References: 64

(p45.0) For both strain measurement techniques, the ultrasound transducers must be fixed to the body during dynamic movement to image a tissue. Typically, the ultrasound transducer is housed in a foam orthotic and strapped to the body using athletic tape. 50 In many experiments, a treadmill is used so that the ultrasound cart can remain stationary. Commonly, markers are attached to the transducer and the ultrasound system is synchronized with a motion analysis system so that the transformation between the image field of view and other anatomic landmarks can be calculated (Fig. 5).

(p45.1) The MJ tracking technique enables muscle and tendon lengths to be quantified by tracking anatomical landmarks in each ultrasound image of a series collected throughout an activity. For example, the elongation of the free AT can be measured by tracking the displacement between the calcaneus attachment and the soleus-AT myotendinous junction (sATMJ). 94 An ultrasound transducer with a wide FOV (100 mm) can image the entire free AT from the calcaneus to sATMJ 94 (Fig. 5). For many applications and ultrasound systems, however, the tissue length exceeds the transducer's FOV and thus only one attachment site can be tracked. Synchronizing the ultrasound system with an optic tracking system provides another means to track the length change of a long tendon during movement. 40,104,135 To measure the AT, a reflective marker is placed on the calcaneus attachment to track its position. An ultrasound transducer equipped with reflective markers is fixed on the shank to image the position of the sATMJ, and then transform it into the global coordinate system. The free AT length is then defined as the distance between the positions of the calcaneus and the sATMJ.

(p45.2) Speckle tracking provides an alternative method to quantify regional tissue strain using ultrasound. A speckle is an interference pattern with bright and dark spots in B-mode or radiofrequency (RF) ultrasound images. 156 The speckle pattern remains constant when the tissue structure is static and thus is thought to be representative of the tissue structure rather than measurement noise. Therefore, when the tissue microstructure is deformed, the speckle pattern changes accordingly. 22 After the B-mode or RF ultrasound images of the tendon are obtained throughout an activity, a region of interest (ROI) containing the tendon structure is manually selected on one image. 95 Then, automated speckle tracking algorithms are used to calculate the frame-to-frame speckle displacement within the ROI, which is then converted into tendon elongations. 50,134 Slack Length Ultrasound provides two opportunities to assess the slack length of a tissue. Firstly, a tissue can be imaged at multiple joint postures until buckling can be identified in the B-mode images. This has been demonstrated on the patellar tendon. 151,154 Secondly, a novel ultrasound imaging technique called shear wave elastography, which quantifies the speed of shear wave propagation in a tissue, has been applied to assess tissue slack length. Shear wave speed has been shown to be related to tissue stress, 23,111 and thus can be applied to establish when the tissue goes slack if a corresponding joint is manipulated through its range of motion. This technique has been applied to assess the slack length of the AT 75 and the ankle angle when the individual triceps surae muscles are slack. 65 

(p45.3) For both strain measurement techniques, the ultrasound transducers must be fixed to the body during dynamic movement to image a tissue. Typically, the ultrasound transducer is housed in a foam orthotic and strapped to the body using athletic tape. 50 In many experiments, a treadmill is used so that the ultrasound cart can remain stationary. Commonly, markers are attached to the transducer and the ultrasound system is synchronized with a motion analysis system so that the transformation between the image field of view and other anatomic landmarks can be calculated (Fig. 5).

(p45.4) The MJ tracking technique enables muscle and tendon lengths to be quantified by tracking anatomical landmarks in each ultrasound image of a series collected throughout an activity. For example, the elongation of the free AT can be measured by tracking the displacement between the calcaneus attachment and the soleus-AT myotendinous junction (sATMJ). 94 An ultrasound transducer with a wide FOV (100 mm) can image the entire free AT from the calcaneus to sATMJ 94 (Fig. 5). For many applications and ultrasound systems, however, the tissue length exceeds the transducer's FOV and thus only one attachment site can be tracked. Synchronizing the ultrasound system with an optic tracking system provides another means to track the length change of a long tendon during movement. 40,104,135 To measure the AT, a reflective marker is placed on the calcaneus attachment to track its position. An ultrasound transducer equipped with reflective markers is fixed on the shank to image the position of the sATMJ, and then transform it into the global coordinate system. The free AT length is then defined as the distance between the positions of the calcaneus and the sATMJ.

(p45.5) Speckle tracking provides an alternative method to quantify regional tissue strain using ultrasound. A speckle is an interference pattern with bright and dark spots in B-mode or radiofrequency (RF) ultrasound images. 156 The speckle pattern remains constant when the tissue structure is static and thus is thought to be representative of the tissue structure rather than measurement noise. Therefore, when the tissue microstructure is deformed, the speckle pattern changes accordingly. 22 After the B-mode or RF ultrasound images of the tendon are obtained throughout an activity, a region of interest (ROI) containing the tendon structure is manually selected on one image. 95 Then, automated speckle tracking algorithms are used to calculate the frame-to-frame speckle displacement within the ROI, which is then converted into tendon elongations. 50,134 Slack Length Ultrasound provides two opportunities to assess the slack length of a tissue. Firstly, a tissue can be imaged at multiple joint postures until buckling can be identified in the B-mode images. This has been demonstrated on the patellar tendon. 151,154 Secondly, a novel ultrasound imaging technique called shear wave elastography, which quantifies the speed of shear wave propagation in a tissue, has been applied to assess tissue slack length. Shear wave speed has been shown to be related to tissue stress, 23,111 and thus can be applied to establish when the tissue goes slack if a corresponding joint is manipulated through its range of motion. This technique has been applied to assess the slack length of the AT 75 and the ankle angle when the individual triceps surae muscles are slack. 65 
## (s46) Key Findings
Number of References: 124

(p46.0) Ultrasound based strain measurements have provided many important insights into the dynamic function of the AT. For example, ultrasound was used to quantify in vivo AT strains during dynamic activities such as running (3.5-5.8%), walking (4.6%), and onelegged hopping (8-8.3%). 40,41,104,105 These functional AT strain data provide some important implications for AT injury. Firstly, the in vivo AT strains during one-legged hopping are surprisingly close to the AT failure strains found in in vitro tendon tensile tests. 15,104 As the AT remained healthy after hopping tests, this finding demonstrates the difficulty of comparing in vivo and in vitro strain measurements and perhaps inconsistency among the methods. Secondly, the in vivo strain data from ultrasound measurements can serve as a variable to assess other parameters associated with AT injury, such as the mechanical ''safe factor'' 0 and ''core temperature'' 9 of the AT. Franz and co-workers measured the regional deformations of AT during walking, 50 and showed that the aggregate AT exhibited nearly twice as much elongation as the free AT. Moreover, the superficial AT exhibited larger elongations than the deep AT and only the superficial AT elongation was found to increase at higher walking speeds, indicating non-uniform regional strain patterns in the AT. Cronin and coworkers compared the length changes of Achilles tendons during walking between healthy and diabetic subjects. 34 The length changes of Achilles tendons were smaller in diabetic subjects than healthy patients but the length changes of muscle-tendon units were similar. These findings indicate that diabetes may decrease the elastic energy storage of Achilles tendons and increase muscle work, resulting in decreased walking efficiency. Finally, ultrasound has provided insights to AT healing and protection. For example, AT strain during running with a 18 mm heel lift was significantly smaller than barefoot, suggesting that such a heel lift could help to reduce the AT strains during AT rehabilitation training. 39 Ultrasound evaluations have also contributed towards understanding the function of human triceps surae muscles during walking and running. [29][30][31][32][33]101 In these studies, either a single ultrasound transducer was positioned over the medial gastrocnemius (MG) so that the soleus was also visible, 32 or two transducers were placed over the MG and soleus. 80 The MG and soleus fascicle lengths and pennation angles were then measured using an automated tracking algorithm, and motion-capture derived knee and ankle joint kinematics were further used to estimate MG and soleus muscle-tendon unit lengths. 32,102,116 These studies found different length change patterns and magnitudes between the MG and soleus fascicles during the stance phase of gait, indicating the different functional roles of the two muscles. 80 Relevant studies have also determined the differences in triceps surae length changes and behavior between walking and running, 81,102 between forefoot and rearfoot running, 160 and at different running speeds. 79 Investigating the length change patterns in both muscle fascicle and muscle-tendon unit also showed a decreased energy storing role of the AT in race-walking compared to running. 32 The effect of age on gastrocnemius muscletendon behavior during walking has also been studied by ultrasound, 116 and it was found that tendon lengthening is greater and muscle fascicle lengthening is smaller in older subjects compared to young subjects. In addition, ultrasound has been used to characterize the effect body mass on gastrocnemius medialis fascicle behavior during stair ascent. 157 By calculating the difference between the muscle tendon unit length change and the fascicle length change, it was found that additional body mass could cause substantially greater stretching on the tendon. This finding may be meaningful in evaluating effect of obesity on pathological loading in triceps surae muscle tendon unit.

(p46.1) The application of ultrasound to quantify ligament strain is limited to a few studies investigating superficial ligaments during static movements, such as the dorsal lisfranc ligament, 56,110,145 pisohamate ligament and pisometacarpal ligament. 119 Using speckle-tracking, 5-7% strains were observed in the coracoacromial ligament during dynamic shoulder rotations such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction. 134 The strain patterns and displacements of the coracoacromial ligament indicated contact with the rotator cuff in these frequently used shoulder movements. This indicates a possible mechanism for rotator cuff pathologies, and provides guidelines for rehabilitation protocols as certain movements such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction were found to induce excessive tissue strains.

(p46.2) Ultrasound based strain measurements have provided many important insights into the dynamic function of the AT. For example, ultrasound was used to quantify in vivo AT strains during dynamic activities such as running (3.5-5.8%), walking (4.6%), and onelegged hopping (8-8.3%). 40,41,104,105 These functional AT strain data provide some important implications for AT injury. Firstly, the in vivo AT strains during one-legged hopping are surprisingly close to the AT failure strains found in in vitro tendon tensile tests. 15,104 As the AT remained healthy after hopping tests, this finding demonstrates the difficulty of comparing in vivo and in vitro strain measurements and perhaps inconsistency among the methods. Secondly, the in vivo strain data from ultrasound measurements can serve as a variable to assess other parameters associated with AT injury, such as the mechanical ''safe factor'' 0 and ''core temperature'' 9 of the AT. Franz and co-workers measured the regional deformations of AT during walking, 50 and showed that the aggregate AT exhibited nearly twice as much elongation as the free AT. Moreover, the superficial AT exhibited larger elongations than the deep AT and only the superficial AT elongation was found to increase at higher walking speeds, indicating non-uniform regional strain patterns in the AT. Cronin and coworkers compared the length changes of Achilles tendons during walking between healthy and diabetic subjects. 34 The length changes of Achilles tendons were smaller in diabetic subjects than healthy patients but the length changes of muscle-tendon units were similar. These findings indicate that diabetes may decrease the elastic energy storage of Achilles tendons and increase muscle work, resulting in decreased walking efficiency. Finally, ultrasound has provided insights to AT healing and protection. For example, AT strain during running with a 18 mm heel lift was significantly smaller than barefoot, suggesting that such a heel lift could help to reduce the AT strains during AT rehabilitation training. 39 Ultrasound evaluations have also contributed towards understanding the function of human triceps surae muscles during walking and running. [29][30][31][32][33]101 In these studies, either a single ultrasound transducer was positioned over the medial gastrocnemius (MG) so that the soleus was also visible, 32 or two transducers were placed over the MG and soleus. 80 The MG and soleus fascicle lengths and pennation angles were then measured using an automated tracking algorithm, and motion-capture derived knee and ankle joint kinematics were further used to estimate MG and soleus muscle-tendon unit lengths. 32,102,116 These studies found different length change patterns and magnitudes between the MG and soleus fascicles during the stance phase of gait, indicating the different functional roles of the two muscles. 80 Relevant studies have also determined the differences in triceps surae length changes and behavior between walking and running, 81,102 between forefoot and rearfoot running, 160 and at different running speeds. 79 Investigating the length change patterns in both muscle fascicle and muscle-tendon unit also showed a decreased energy storing role of the AT in race-walking compared to running. 32 The effect of age on gastrocnemius muscletendon behavior during walking has also been studied by ultrasound, 116 and it was found that tendon lengthening is greater and muscle fascicle lengthening is smaller in older subjects compared to young subjects. In addition, ultrasound has been used to characterize the effect body mass on gastrocnemius medialis fascicle behavior during stair ascent. 157 By calculating the difference between the muscle tendon unit length change and the fascicle length change, it was found that additional body mass could cause substantially greater stretching on the tendon. This finding may be meaningful in evaluating effect of obesity on pathological loading in triceps surae muscle tendon unit.

(p46.3) The application of ultrasound to quantify ligament strain is limited to a few studies investigating superficial ligaments during static movements, such as the dorsal lisfranc ligament, 56,110,145 pisohamate ligament and pisometacarpal ligament. 119 Using speckle-tracking, 5-7% strains were observed in the coracoacromial ligament during dynamic shoulder rotations such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction. 134 The strain patterns and displacements of the coracoacromial ligament indicated contact with the rotator cuff in these frequently used shoulder movements. This indicates a possible mechanism for rotator cuff pathologies, and provides guidelines for rehabilitation protocols as certain movements such as forward flexion, horizontal abduction, and internal rotation at 90°abduction were found to induce excessive tissue strains.
## (s48) Future work
Number of References: 40

(p48.0) Ultrasound methods are currently the most clinically viable for assessing musculoskeletal soft tissue strains due to their non-invasive, non-radiative, and relatively low-cost nature. However, their 2D nature limits the accuracy and repeatability of this method. Freehand 3D ultrasound scanning has been developed to quantify the 3D AT deformation in vivo, 42,125 including changes in AT length, AT width, thickness, cross-sectional area, and volume. 125,127 This technique relies on a conventional ultrasound machine coupled with a transducer instrumented with reflective markers and an optical tracking system. The operator performs transverse ultrasound scans from the calcaneus along the AT to the gastrocnemius muscle, 103,128 during which the spatial position and orientation of the ultrasound transducer are recorded. Then, the 2D ultrasound images (between-frame interval of 0.1-0.5 mm) are transformed into the global coordinate system to create a 3D AT reconstruction. 129 Highly precise 2D-to-3D transformation of the image (error under 1 mm) can be achieved after temporal and spatial calibration of the ultrasound transducer. 128,129 Measurements of 3D AT deformations then require a series of digital processing procedures such as segmenting and rendering AT cross-sections, reconstructing 3D AT volumes, and defining measurement sites. 128 The applicability of 3D freehand ultrasound to dynamic movements, however, remains to be established (Fig. 5).

(p48.1) Ultrasound methods are currently the most clinically viable for assessing musculoskeletal soft tissue strains due to their non-invasive, non-radiative, and relatively low-cost nature. However, their 2D nature limits the accuracy and repeatability of this method. Freehand 3D ultrasound scanning has been developed to quantify the 3D AT deformation in vivo, 42,125 including changes in AT length, AT width, thickness, cross-sectional area, and volume. 125,127 This technique relies on a conventional ultrasound machine coupled with a transducer instrumented with reflective markers and an optical tracking system. The operator performs transverse ultrasound scans from the calcaneus along the AT to the gastrocnemius muscle, 103,128 during which the spatial position and orientation of the ultrasound transducer are recorded. Then, the 2D ultrasound images (between-frame interval of 0.1-0.5 mm) are transformed into the global coordinate system to create a 3D AT reconstruction. 129 Highly precise 2D-to-3D transformation of the image (error under 1 mm) can be achieved after temporal and spatial calibration of the ultrasound transducer. 128,129 Measurements of 3D AT deformations then require a series of digital processing procedures such as segmenting and rendering AT cross-sections, reconstructing 3D AT volumes, and defining measurement sites. 128 The applicability of 3D freehand ultrasound to dynamic movements, however, remains to be established (Fig. 5).
