# Linking microdosimetric measurements to biological effectiveness: a review of theoretical aspects of MKM and other models

CorpusID: 220525925 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dfb8159543b32d799b612356f19296181ad35aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dfb8159543b32d799b612356f19296181ad35aa)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s13) The stochastic microdosimetic kinetic model
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) The analytical computation method proposed by Sato and Furusawa in [Sato and Furusawa, 2012] introduces a correction to the original formulation of MK model, taking into account the stochastic nature of specific energy deposition in both the domain z and the cell nucleus z n , to improve the adherence of the model to the measured survival fractions for high-LET and high-dose irradiation. The new model is named double-stochastic micro-dosimetric kinetic (DSMK) model. In the same study [Sato and Furusawa, 2012], a second model, termed stochastic microdosimetric kinetic (SMK) Figure 12: Linear quadratic α (panel a) and β (panel b) parameters as a function of LET for the irradiation of of V79 cells with different ions. Points represent experimental data taken from PIDE [Friedrich et al., 2013b], different colors/gray levels and shapes refer to H, He, C and Ne ions respectively (the colour/gray level and shape legend refers both to panel a and b). In panel a, solid and dashed lines represent respectively the extrapolation with the MCt-MKM and the original MKM models, while in panel b a comparison between different model is reported (namely MKM, MCt-MKM, LEM-II and RMF). In the case of the MCt-MKM, overlapped to the α and β curves the MC statistical confidence bands (68%) are reported. These bands are small due to the high statistics and they blends with the curves thickness. A saturation effect is observed for both α and β parameters. Plot taken from [Manganaro et al., 2017]. model, is derived to represents the stochastic nature of domain specific energy z by its approximated mean value and variance in order to reduce the computational time.
## (s18) The Repair-Misrepair-Fixation (RMF) model
Number of References: 5

(p18.0) The Repair-Misrepair-Fixation (RMF) model combines the RMR and LPL models adding the consideration of intra-and intertrack † binary misrepair to predict the biological effect of LET [Carlson et al., 2008, Frese et al., 2012, Stewart et al., 2018]. The RMF model considers the entire cell nucleus as the volume for pairwise DSB interactions. In the RMF model a coupled system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations is used to model the time-dependent kinetics of DSB induction, rejoining, and pairwise DSB interaction to form lethal (and nonlethal) chromosome damage. The model treats initial DSB formation as a compound Poisson process and postulates a first-order repair term that gives rise to exponential rejoining kinetics for most DSB (> 98%) and a second-order (quadratic) term to account for the small subset of the initial DSB (< 2%) that undergo pairwise DSB interactions to form an exchange.

(p18.1) A LQ approximation of the solution of the RMF system of differential equations can be expressed as follows [Carlson et al., 2008, Frese et al., 2012:
