# minerals Applications of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Mining from Exploration to Reclamation: A Review

CorpusID: 225462413 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65a9f2b4d413d8c02763720aa4b2f637a1666aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65a9f2b4d413d8c02763720aa4b2f637a1666aa)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s24) Conclusions
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) This review provided an analysis of studies conducted in the past 10 years by academics, for using UAV technology in the mining process that proceeds through the exploration, exploitation, and reclamation phases. A total of 65 research papers published in academic journals and MSC/PHD theses were identified, and their detailed contents on the use of UAVs were analyzed for systematic reviews. These reviews found that current applications of UAVs in mining can be categorized into (1) geological and structural analysis via remote sensing, (2) aerial geophysical survey at the exploration phase, (3) topographic surveying in open-pit mines, (4) rock slope analysis, (5) working environment analysis, (6) surveying in underground mines at the exploitation phase, (7) soil and water pollution monitoring, (8) ecological restoration monitoring, and (9) ground subsidence monitoring at the reclamation phase. Among the current applications, topographic surveying in open-pit mines has been applied the most. The most common types of UAVs and data acquired by sensors for UAV applications in mining were the rotary wing and images or video captured by digital cameras, respectively. Regarding the scales of the target area for UAV applications, regional-scale studies were usually conducted at the exploration phase. However, mine and zonal scale studies were more prevalent at the exploitation phase. An autonomous style of flying control was commonly used for UAV applications at all phases of the mining process.
