# GAMIFICATION IN COMPUTER SCIENCE COURSES: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 239636412 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/200f25c0f2722d12377b20dc5b31d4de184783ab](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/200f25c0f2722d12377b20dc5b31d4de184783ab)

Fields: Computer Science, Education

## (s7) Most Used Gamification Elements in Computer Science Education
Number of References: 9

(p7.0) Gamification is often characterized as utilization throughout the non-game background of gamification components, which increases the learners' encouragement and motivation, as it does in computer science education, there are many gamification elements used (Rahman, 2018). Depending on the primary research findings, a most popular feature of gamification used during computer science classes were badges, leaderboards, score, level as well as feedbacks, and they were the most commonly known feature of the game throughout learning at computer science (Rojas-López and Rincón-Flores, 2018; Koivisto and Hamari, 2014). Badges and Leader boards have become the critical ability to improve training performance (Falkner and Falkner, 2014). Gamification elements that are most commonly seen in computer science training is as follows:

(p7.1) Points: Some researches explored the effect from points showed the good effects throughout computer science education since the point offered immediate feedback and made the participant engaged or inspired with computer science teaching (Sprint and Cook, 2015;Oktaviati and Jaharadak, 2018;.

(p7.2) Badges: According to Smiderle et al. (2019); Oktaviati and Jaharadak (2018) and Rahman, (2018), badges highlighted good effects that could inspire or include learners during computer science learning; it will inspire learners to provide enjoyable learning experiences and therefore can assess the skill of the individual, learners feel encouraged to complete the assignment and enjoy the extra acknowledgment will gain as they receive the badges. Badges may improve the learner's interest or involvement in studying computer science, but perhaps the main crucial thing has become an effective structure; it will be more straightforward or more challenging for the learner to obtain (Baxter et al., 2016). There will be variations of learning trends among learners with the information stage; learners of poor performance may be most motivated for engaging, whereas learners of higher motivation become provided hon abilities badges (Falkner and Falkner, 2014).
## (s8) Effects of Gamification Elements on Student's Motivations in Computer Science Courses
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Motivation is the step to continue the action and even to direct it. Learning motivation may be described as the willingness of the student to encountering (Lister, 2015). Gamification's main goal was to improve motivation and success by structured elements targeting various activities and ability creation. It gives rise to numerous theoretical frameworks, often using motivational templates (Frącz, 2015). The philosophy of selfdetermination speaks of two main types: internal and external motivation.
