# Mobile keystroke dynamics for biometric recognition: An overview

CorpusID: 234303055 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d7dffdf31c581017bb1bc6c9e751fdd02c73f800](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d7dffdf31c581017bb1bc6c9e751fdd02c73f800)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s16) | Sensor information
Number of References: 3

(p16.0) Modern mobile devices embed several sensors which may provide data to be used for KD-based biometric recognition [21], in addition to timing information. For instance, since the emergence of smartphones with touch screens, finger pressure (P) and area (A) are two of the most-commonly exploited characteristics that are used within the KD framework [22]. Similarly, the way a user holds the phone, the amount of acceleration observed while moving, the number of fingers used during typing, are all relevant information that can be used to complement and support KD-based biometric recognition in the framework of continuous authentication [23]. The Android platform categorizes the aforementioned sensors according to three classes, that is, motion sensors, position sensors, and environment sensors 2 . Additionally, the touchscreen itself has its own set of managed events. The signals which can be recorded by a mobile device through sensors belonging to such groups, and used for biometric recognition purposes analysing the users' typing behaviour, are detailed hereafter. Environment sensors are not described here since they do not collect data regarding the users' interaction with the device.
## (s29) | Features employed for free text representation
Number of References: 9

(p29.0) While all approaches dealing with KD derived from fixed text employ similar methods for generating the used biometric representations, either collecting signals at specific and expected time events, or computing statistical features summarizing the observed behaviour, more heterogeneous MAIORANA ET AL. approaches have been proposed to process free text inputs. In fact, in this latter case the signals collected during enrolment and recognition stages can be considerable different, in term of content and length. In principle, it is not even guaranteed that a subject types the same keys during the two phases. Therefore, specific strategies have to be defined to generate templates which could be compared to determine their similarity. Some approaches have been defined to select, from the collected data, a subset of events which are most likely to occur several times while typing free texts. For instance, only the most recurrent characters have been employed in [61] to perform recognition regardless the actual words or sentence composed by users. For such characters, which have been identified as the set {E,T,A,O,N,I}, the hold time KHT has been computed and used as discriminative feature. An analogous approach has been followed in [52], where the 40 most frequently used combinations of consecutive keys have been chosen according to the statistical distributions of English words. The RP D di-graph latencies associated to such pairs have been used to create the desired templates, together with KHT and pressure information associated to each of the 41 keys available in the employed keyboard. A dynamic feature space has been considered in [11], where hold times, di-graph latencies, and instantaneous gyroscope, orientation, and position, for which at least a minimum number of four different instances are available, have been used at the early stage of the data collection process, with the feature space growing as more data is being collected. Only the first two pressed keys of each typed word have been instead considered in [54] to define the employed template, together with statistical metrics of all the collected di-graphs, coordinates, distance, velocity, and finger area.

(p29.1) Conversely, the entire amount of collected data is employed in [53], without performing any selection, by directly storing the time series associated to the duration of a keystroke, the time since last keystroke, and the distance from last keystroke. The recorded sequences are divided into different 'views', depending on whether the performed keystroke is associated to an alphabet letter or to a special character. A third view consisting of the time series recorded by the accelerometer sensor has been then added. Statistical features associated to all pressed keys and related to the corresponding TC, drag distance and velocity, and KHT, have been instead considered in [56]. Distributions of data have been also estimated as in [55,57]. In the former case, the layout of the employed virtual keyboard has been considered to categorize consecutive keys into pairs having similar distances in either left or right directions. The flight times corresponding to each occurrence of the so-defined pairs are then averaged to assign representative features to each data point, thus creating graphical representations of the collected data having travel distances on the xaxis, and corresponding flight times on the y-axis. Missing points which could not be evaluated on the basis of the collected data are instead estimated resorting to a polynomial curve fitting algorithm. As for [57], data recorded during a typing activity are represented through distributions of KHT, di-graph latencies, TC, and drag characteristics. Gaussian distributions are used to model the distribution of the collected samples. In order to exclude breaks in the typing process, a maximum typing gap time of four seconds is set, after which the related keystrokes are not considered for computing the considered statistics.
## (s34) | OPEN ISSUES AND FURTHER RESEARCHES
Number of References: 4

(p34.0) Although biometric recognition on mobile devices based on KD has been investigated for more than a decade, it can be still considered a biometric modality at the early stages of its exploitation. Actually, the analysis of the typing patterns performed on mobile devices has attracted far less interest than its counterpart on physical keyboards, for which more in-depth evaluations have been conducted [64], and commercial applications have been proposed 15 . Nonetheless, given the pervasiveness of mobile devices, the rapid technology advancements which have led to the embedding of several miniaturized sensors, and the widespread of available applications, the design of systems exploiting KD to recognize the legitimate users of mobile devices would be an extremely interesting and profitable field of research. In fact, it would allow performing non-invasive and transparent access control to many services in our everyday life. However, before KD-based recognition can be considered a practical and feasible recognition modality for mobile devices, significant efforts have to be made and relevant aspects have to be still properly investigated.

(p34.1) One of the major issues affecting the current state of the art is the lack of public databases on which perform research. As evident from the information reported in Table 2 and in Section 6, most of the works proposed in literature have been tested on in-house databases, thus preventing the possibility of conducting proper comparison among different approaches, with only few exceptions [34,36]. In order to foster the research on this topic, it is therefore of primary importance to collect, and make publicly available, datasets comprising KD recordings collected on mobile devices. In doing so, several aspects representing issues of currently available datasets have to be considered.
