# Methodologies and evaluation of electronic travel aids for the visually impaired people: a review

CorpusID: 235245899 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c135339ec45c4e337fde8d506a66d04ba73d7622](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c135339ec45c4e337fde8d506a66d04ba73d7622)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Psychology

## (s5) Geographic information system
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Geographic information system (GIS) with visual landmarks for GIS/vision based localization is discussed in [18]. A camera with a small portable computer such as a netbook is used as its hardware. Incorporation of GPS and GIS for determination of position and orientation for navigation of the visually impaired have also been done. Other implementations of GIS in wayfinding systems include [19], [20]. GIS system may face some difficulties as nature environmental conditions are extremely difficult to measure [21].
## (s9) Gyroscope/IMU
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Zheng et al. [25] have estimated the orientation by making use of the gyroscope featured in a smartphone. By solely using a gyroscope, an accurate angle is achieved; with average error of 2.73 within 6% error rate. Correct altitude is tracked within a short period of 10s. Another sample of navigation assisted by IMU can be seen in [26], [27]. Other than wayfinding, gyroscope sensor is also associated with the ability of balancing and angle determination.
## (s13) RFID
Number of References: 24

(p13.0) Another method to accomplish position tracking is by using radio-frequency identification (RFID). Costa et al. [32] suggest RFID and computer vision for detection of landmarks placed on the ground. The hardware is equipped with a RFID reader connected via Bluetooth. Table 2 shows summarizes the navigation techniques of ETAs development with criteria and references. Most commonly devices to achieve navigation purposes are GPS, off-the-shelf smartphone sensors and camerabased system. GPS can be used to attain both wayfinding and path tracking information [33]- [35]. IMU, gyroscope, compass and magnetometer are commonly found in smartphone devices [25], [24]. Camera based wayfinding techniques include SLAM [36], Microsoft Kinect [37]- [39], novel liquid sound navigation [40] and FL2-0352 camera [41]. Machine learning methods which are getting numerous attention for researchers nowadays [42], [43] such as particle swarm optimization (PSO) [44] have also been implemented for navigation purposes.  [15], [16], [27], [36], [40], [45] [24], [ 25], [27], [46] [30], [32], [33] 
## (s16) Simulation
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Initially, experiments to evaluate ETAs are done by simulation. One of the early simulation tests for visually impaired technology with stereo vision-based aid is presented in [47]. They tested the ground plane  [49] tested an algorithm for path planning within a supermarket environment with C++ simulation. A supermarket layout with numbered corners and section as point of interest (PoI) is mapped out on the system. Desired destination and current situation are given as the input from the user.
