# Impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on scientific research and implications for clinical academic training -A review

CorpusID: 231610946 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/304317e56f223185bccb2d841bc8e1f3d6d3758f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/304317e56f223185bccb2d841bc8e1f3d6d3758f)

Fields: Medicine, Education

## (s3) Impact on clinical science
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s4) Impact on researchers
Number of References: 20

(p4.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p4.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:
## (s17) Impact on clinical science
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s18) Impact on researchers
Number of References: 20

(p18.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p18.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:
## (s31) Impact on clinical science
Number of References: 4

(p31.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s32) Impact on researchers
Number of References: 20

(p32.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p32.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:
## (s45) Impact on clinical science
Number of References: 4

(p45.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s46) Impact on researchers
Number of References: 20

(p46.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p46.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:
