# Influential Factors and Evaluation Methods of the Performance of Grouted Semi-Flexible Pavement (GSP)-A Review

CorpusID: 237694325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d9c88be55ea4f54d051d8541a32336922d4dfa0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d9c88be55ea4f54d051d8541a32336922d4dfa0)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s11) Complex Admixtures
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].

(p11.1) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].
## (s20) Fatigue Life Performance
Number of References: 4

(p20.0) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 

(p20.1) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 
## (s26) 2S2P1D Model
Number of References: 8

(p26.0) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p26.1) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.

(p26.2) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p26.3) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.
## (s60) Complex Admixtures
Number of References: 4

(p60.0) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].

(p60.1) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].
## (s69) Fatigue Life Performance
Number of References: 4

(p69.0) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 

(p69.1) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 
## (s75) 2S2P1D Model
Number of References: 8

(p75.0) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p75.1) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.

(p75.2) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p75.3) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.
