# Systematic literature review of trials assessing recommended systemic treatments in hepatocellular carcinoma

CorpusID: 239649246 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2ecb3eaa6eebce6e789592b50edc2d4bf13ef63](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2ecb3eaa6eebce6e789592b50edc2d4bf13ef63)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Performance status & disease stage
Number of References: 23

(p4.0) The ECOG performance status, BCLC stage, and Child-Pugh class of patients from each trial arm were also examined for similarity. The ranges of enrolled patients who were ECOG 0 (i.e., fully active), ECOG 1 (i.e., able to perform light/sedentary activity) and ECOG 2 (i.e., unable to perform work activities but capable of self-care) were 25-100%, 17-75% and 0-8%, respectively, in the 1L setting ( Figure 2). Notably, two of the early RCTs assessing sorafenib [37,38] enrolled a much lower proportion of patients who were ECOG 0 compared with other 1L single arm trials and RCTs; these two trials also enrolled patients who were ECOG 2. Aside from these two trials [37,38], the ECOG performance status of patients in 1L trials was largely similar. In the 2L setting, the ranges of enrolled patients who were ECOG 0 and 1 were 52-91% and 9-48%, respectively, and appeared broadly similar.

(p4.1) Seventeen of the 24 trials in the similarity assessment reported patients' BCLC stage at baseline. Patients staged BCLC C (i.e., advanced disease) ranged 43-96% in the 1L setting (Supplementary Figure 4). Two trials in the 1L single-arm setting had a lower proportion of BCLC C patients than most other 1L trials, while the Sorafenib AP trial enrolled BCLC C patients almost exclusively [33,35,37]. Aside from these three trials, the BCLC staging appeared broadly similar in the 1L setting. In the 2L setting, BCLC C patients composed 76%-94% of patients; in this regard, 2L trials appeared broadly similar. Patients with a Child-Pugh score of 5-6 (i.e., Child-Pugh A, considered well-compensated) varied throughout the trial arms, ranging 43-100% in the 1L setting (Supplementary Figure 5)  enrolled >20% Child-Pugh B patients [30][31][32]35]. One 1L RCT [38] enrolled only Child-Pugh B or C patients; other 1L RCTs enrolled <10% Child-Pugh B patients and were therefore considered similar in Child-Pugh class. In the 2L setting, one trial enrolled 55% Child-Pugh B patients [71]; all other 2L trials enrolled >90% Child-Pugh A patients and were considered similar.

(p4.2) In summary, some trials in the 1L setting included patients who had more advanced disease based on ECOG performance status [30,37,38], BCLC stage [37], and Child-Pugh class [30][31][32]35,38]. All these trials assessed sorafenib as single arm or placebo-controlled RCTs. Patients in 2L trials were more similar in terms of these characteristics, aside from one single-arm trial for lenvatinib [71].
## (s10) NMA feasibility
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) In addition to similar patient characteristics, the feasibility of performing an NMA relies on a network of treatments connected by common comparators assessed in RCTs and common outcomes reported within each network [16]. We examined the outcomes that could be indirectly compared through an NMA for all the treatments recommended by the NCCN Guidelines, based on the available RCT data and network structure (Supplementary Figure 12). Notably, FOLFOX could not be compared with other 1L treatments in an NMA because the in-trial comparator was doxorubicin [61]; since no other recommended treatments have been compared with doxorubicin in a trial setting, FOLFOX could not integrate into the treatment network. Similarly, nivolumab ± ipilimumab could not be compared with other 2L treatments in an NMA because its existing trials were single-arm studies. Based on the currently available RCT data, key efficacy outcomes (i.e., OS, PFS, ORR and DCR) could be indirectly compared via NMA for the majority of recommended treatments in both 1L and 2L RCT settings. Less commonly reported efficacy outcomes such as TTP and DOT could also be indirectly compared via NMA for most treatments. DOR could be indirectly compared in 2L RCTs only. Serious and discontinuation-related TEAEs could be indirectly compared via NMA in both 1L and 2L settings, but grade ≥3 TEAEs could be indirectly compared in the 1L setting only.
## (s11) Discussion
Number of References: 15

(p11.0) The objective of this study was to determine the similarity of trials assessing recommended systemic treatments for advanced HCC. In general, we found that trials were largely similar based on design and inclusion criteria within respective 1L and 2L categories, aside from some older single-arm trials and placebo-controlled RCTs assessing sorafenib [30][31][32]35,37,38]. The design and patients' disease stage in 2L RCTs were also considered broadly similar and suitable for quantitative comparison.

(p11.1) Trials differed in some key patient characteristics. While age, sex, and prevalence of vascular invasion and extrahepatic spread were relatively similar across trials, the proportion of patients infected with hepatitis B and levels of AFP varied widely. Hepatitis B infection and AFP level may represent treatment effect modifiers and should be evaluated closely in any potential meta-analyses. For example, a review of over 11,000 patients with HCC in USA found that hepatitis B-related cases were associated with a significantly lower risk of mortality compared with cases related to alcohol, metabolic disorder and multiple etiologies [96]. Similarly, AFP is a biomarker often elevated in patients with HCC who are more likely to have viral etiology, cirrhosis, larger or multiple tumors and vascular invasion [97]. Ultimately, the best approach may be to perform quantitative studies using analyses of patient subgroups with underlying disease characteristics or comorbidities as reported by individual study authors to control for specific patient characteristics [13]. This method enables more nuanced information for healthcare decision makers to make targeted recommendations for patients based on the presence or absence of specific disease characteristics, such as bleeding risk, hepatitis B infection or AFP levels.

(p11.2) We also found generally robust reporting of key clinical efficacy outcomes, including mPFS, mOS and tumor response. There is broad consensus that mOS is the primary efficacy outcome of interest in determining a preferred treatment. Other efficacy outcomes, such as mPFS, mTTP and ORR, could be analyzed using NMA with relatively robust networks. However, there is some disagreement within the field on the usefulness of surrogate end points such as mTTP, mPFS and ORR [98][99][100][101], particularly for IO agents, which demonstrate different relationships between tumor response and disease progression than TKI and VEGFRI drugs [102,103]. In other words, although analyses of several efficacy outcomes may be possible in an NMA, the interpretation of analyses on surrogate end points must be performed with a deep understanding of the treatments involved and clinical implications of the findings. Indirect comparisons of serious TEAEs or TEAEs leading to discontinuation are also possible via NMA; however, we did not assess the practicality of indirectly comparing individual adverse events, and these analyses are typically less reliable due to heterogenous reporting and relative rarity.
