# energies The Hydration and Volume Expansion Mechanisms of Modified Expansive Cements for Sustainable In-Situ Rock Fragmentation: A Review

CorpusID: 239241152 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45238c6b780f4dd5e5edc933d735f42c7be0910a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45238c6b780f4dd5e5edc933d735f42c7be0910a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Engineering

## (s9) Time-Dependent Hydration Mechanisms of Alite
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Although the previously discussed molecular scale mechanism supports the overall reaction suggested by Taylor, it has been proposed considering a completely pure form with uniform surfaces dissolving stoichiometrically. However, when considering the lattice structures, as shown in Figure 1, it can be clearly seen that the surfaces do not always obey the stoichiometric ratios. Furthermore, the electrical nature of the ions, even of similar chemical nature, may be different, resulting in uneven adsorption, nucleation and finally product formation. Therefore, the variations observed from Taylor's equation of the tricalcium silicate hydration discussed in the previous section, can be attributed to these assumptions. Considering the thermodynamics of the reaction between alite and water, a high heat of hydration is observed within the first few seconds. The reaction would then reduce during about 30 min and remain at a constant low rate of less than 1 mW/g. This steady state would last for about 1-2 h and would be consequently led to slow expansion. By the end of this period, the rate of hydrolysis would again increase at about 2 h into the hydration, reaching a secondary maximum at around 9 h, before gradually decreasing again [47]. Thus, five distinct stages can be seen in the hydration of alite, as shown in Figure 2.  The rapid dissolution of the alite in water is a highly exothermic reaction, releasing a heat of about 138 kJ/mol immediately after wetting [47]. This would result in the initially observed high rate of Stage 0.

(p9.1) As the Ca 2+ concentration increases with time, further dissolution would be inhibited by the Le' Chaterlier's principle, leading to the next stage of the hydration. However, by the end of Stage 0, the expected Si and Ca concentrations would be much lower when compared to the theoretical K sp ≈ 3 and the deceleration of the rate would occur in undersaturated conditions [48]. In addition, the molar ratio of Ca:Si observed during the steady state is much larger than the expected 3:1 ratio [49]. Thus, the rapid decrease in rate (Stage 1) in undersaturated conditions and the steady state (stage 2), which can be assumed to be an equilibrated period showing larger Ca:Si ratios, is an enigma. There are several hypotheses on this regard, but we shall review two of the most plausible mechanisms.
## (s10) Protective Barrier Hypothesis
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) The protective barrier hypothesis states that there is a rapid formation of a thin metastable layer of the less soluble CSH, of a lower stoichiometric ratio when compared with alite [50], which acts as a barrier for water to diffuse and hydrate the alite, and to control the diffusion of particles from the unhydrated surfaces as well [51]. However, a considerable rate of hydration can be seen during this period (Stage 1), indicating that the reaction continues beneath the formed protective barrier suggested by this hypothesis, until an equilibrium is reached. To explain this, Gartner et al. [52] suggested the formation of two layers, one by the hydration of alite and the other by the precipitation from the surrounding solution. It has also been suggested that these layers would eventually turn into a stable form. The end of the steady state where an acceleration in rate is observed is predicted to occur as the stable barrier breaks due to the arising osmotic pressure. The origin of this pressure is explained by the difference between the ion concentration of the solution, which is in contact with the cement grains, and that of outside the barrier [53]. However, this theory has not gained much evidence to be proven correct.
## (s11) Slow Dissolution Hypothesis
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) Another hypothesis that has been developed is the controlled dissolution hypothesis. Here the dissolution mechanism would depend on the degree of saturation. At very high levels of undersaturation of Ca 2+ (aq) , prior to equilibration, which is at about (10-20) mmol/L [49], the dissolution rate would be very high, which enables an etch pit activation on the surface, and thus defects the surface. As the undersaturation decreases and reaches equilibrium, the etch pit openings occur in a negligibly small scale. After this point, the rate of dissolution would depend on the previously activated etch pit density, thus ensuring slow release of the ions from the activated etch pits. This will lead to a decelerating dissolution rate and then a steady state [57]. An additional reason for the decreasing rate, which leads to a constant low stage, is the poisoning of the etch pits by the free silicate ions in the solution [58].
## (s16) Effect of Sulfate Concentration
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) In a system with sufficient amounts of sulfates, with over 2.4% by mass of SREMA [77], the reaction was observed to accelerate greatly during the nucleation and the crystal growth processes. This would lead the main alite peak about 7-8 h into the hydration. Soon after, a sharp peak, corresponding to the formation of monosulfate from tricalcium aluminate at the point of sulfate depletion, will be seen. Figure 6 depicts the overall rate of hydration of a properly sulfated system. Under low sulfate percentages with less than 1.3% by mass [47], the hydration of alite would be delayed while the monosulfate peak is seen much earlier. Thus, a clear relationship between alite hydration and sulfates can be observed and it is said to be due to the modifications to the growth of CSH by the adsorption of sulfate ions. That being said, EDS analysis indicates no such unique modification. However, the hydration of alite would retard in the presence of aluminates by the formation of the byproduct CASH. In the absence of active etch pits, aluminates tend to attack polar groups such as water, to form more a stable state Al(OH) 3 with a gel-like consistency. This has a solubility product K sp in the range of ∼10 −34 , explaining its stability.
## (s17) Effect of Alite to Tricalcium Aluminate Ratio
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) Studies have been carried out to understand the influence of the ratio of alite to tricalcium aluminate for the overall rate of hydration [78]. It has been found that the peaks corresponding to the alite hydration are barely influenced by small changes to the ratio. However, it has been observed that larger ratios would lead to an earlier monosulfate peak. While a 90:10 ratio of alite to tricalcium aluminate showed the monosulfate peak at around 43 h into the hydration, the sample with the ratio of 94:6 showed the same peak about 23 h earlier. As the ratio increases, the amount of corresponding tricalcium aluminate would be reduced and thereby the amount of sulfates incorporated into the system would also be reduced. The large amounts of alite would give an efficient CSH production, which then would adsorb a larger portion of the sulfates. This would ultimately lead to a sulfate deficiency and initiate the monosulfate formation [78].
## (s20) Effect of Welan Gum
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) Considering SREMA shows its activity in the presence of water, welan gum should not disrupt the main reactions of concern, resulting in the volume expansion. Although welan gum has been studied extensively due to its commercial importance in many areas, the exact mechanism of it in water is poorly studied. Gellan gum, having the same tetrasaccharide backbone as welan gum [80], would act as a gelling agent forming a gel-like consistency with water and would disintegrate in the presence of excess of water. However, welan gum, having either L-rhamnose or L-mannose as a side group in glucose (*), is a non-gelling agent [33] which leads to a viscous aqueous solution rather than undergoing complete hydration. Therefore, it is safe to say that welan gum would not intervene with the hydration reactions of the main components, causing changes in the optimum amount of water incorporated.
