# Person Retrieval in Surveillance Using Textual Query: A Review

CorpusID: 233864858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b900a89058ff4051b9b78ff725b206fb573005e5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b900a89058ff4051b9b78ff725b206fb573005e5)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s17) Soft biometric attribute selection
Number of References: 3

(p17.0) Soft biometric attributes are not unique; for example, there may be multiple people with a blue torso colour. Thus, it produces numerous matches for the given textual query. Therefore, it is advantageous to use the most discriminative attributes for person retrieval. Different soft biometrics have certain advantages, and they are discussed below. For example, a surveillance video may contain different view angles and distance. The person's height is invariant to such concerns [68,69,78]. Clothing colour is also one of the most discriminative attributes. It has the following advantages:
## (s19) Vision based person retrieval system
Number of References: 40

(p19.0) This section discusses a person retrieval system that uses a natural languagebased textual query. Researchers propose methods using handcrafted featurebased retrieval [61,62,63,64,65,66,67,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77], deep learning feature-based linear filtering [68,69,78], parallel classification of attributes [79,80,81] utilization of Natural Language Processing (NLP) algorithms to process textual queries [82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89]. Such a plethora of methods consists of person detection, segmentation, soft biometric attributes classification, and person identification as crucial steps in the person retrieval process. These key steps are given in Fig. 10 and discussed as follows:

(p19.1) Step-I (Person detection): Person retrieval in surveillance is a challenging task because such scenarios are usually in the wild, containing various objects (e.g., chair, table, car, and train) apart from the person. Hence, person detection is the critical initial step before textual query-based person retrieval. Person detection is the task of locating all persons in the surveillance frame. It was a foreground-background separation problem before the era of deep learning. A person is a foreground object, which is different from the rest of the background. Early research detected the person by different methodologies like background subtraction [70,90], adaptive background segmentation [91], Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) [92], and Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HoG) [93]. Deep learning-based methodologies are becoming popular in recent years due to their robust feature extraction and learning ability. The computer vision community considers person detection as an object detection problem. Some of the popular object detection frameworks are "You Only Look Once (YOLO)" [94], Single-Shot Multibox Detector (SSD) [126], Region-based Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN) [95], Fast R-CNN [96], Faster R-CNN [97] and Mask R-CNN [98]. Person detection provides a bounding box for each person in the frame.
## (s28) Discrete attribute-based person retrieval
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) Soft biometric attributes like clothing colour and clothing type do not stay consistent for a given individual for a length of time. Such soft attributes keep on changing over a short period. Thus, soft biometric attribute-based person retrieval methods are short-term retrieval methods [71,119]. Such methods are well suited for applications like criminal investigation and searching for missing persons for a limited period. Discrete attribute-based person retrieval methods are further divisible into two categories based on how the features are extracted, i.e., 1. Handcrafted feature-based person retrieval. 2. Deep feature-based person retrieval.
## (s30) Deep feature-based methodologies
Number of References: 3

(p30.0) Deep learning-based methodologies are becoming popular in the past few years due to their efficient feature learning ability. The deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) based approach has gained more attention in the computer vision community. Table 4 shows an overview of the deep feature-based person retrieval methodologies. The performance column shows the highest value reported in the relevant literature in the case of multiple scenario-based analyses. Semantic Retrieval Convolutional Neural Network (SRCNN) developed by Martinho et al. in [124] shows the evaluation of a similar setup of [106]. Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss functions quantify binary classification and regression. SRCNN achieves 35.7% and 46.4% at rank-1 accuracy for one-shot and multi-shot identification, respectively. Thus, a deep feature based SRCNN approach demonstrates a rank-1 accuracy improvement of 23.2% and 26.3% over a handcrafted feature-based system of [106].
## (s33) Deep features
Number of References: 8

(p33.0) AlexNet [69] It is small network and 61M parameters to learn, but the classification accuracy is low. MobileNet [80] It's a light weight network and 4.2M parameters to learn, but it is having little high error rate. ResNet-50 [80,81,83] It is having advantage of residual block which is having skip connection from input for better learning ability. Over 25M parameters to learn. DenseNet [78,79,80] It is having connection from each layer to every other layer and hence leveraging information from other layers which learns much better compare to other networks.
