# Comorbid Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Bipolar Disorder: A Review

CorpusID: 237283585 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7127817ad06a80104789aad1e7738d7ed3c1a938](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7127817ad06a80104789aad1e7738d7ed3c1a938)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s5) BD with Premenstrual Symptom Comorbidity Compared to BD Only
Number of References: 16

(p5.0) Mood episodes BD-PME Increased number of depressive episodes (24) BD-Severe PMS Not linked to number of episodes or episode duration (25) BD-PMDD More [hypo]manic or depressive episodes in past year, more lifetime depressive episodes (26) Symptom severity: depression and mania BD-PME Higher symptom severity for manic and depressive symptoms (24) BD-PMDD Follicular: worsened depressive symptoms, no differences in manic symptoms.

(p5.1) Late luteal: similar depressive symptoms, worse manic symptoms (27) Symptom severity: anxiety BD-PMDD Late luteal: higher state anxiety. No differences in trait anxiety (27) Biological rhythms disruption and sleep quality BD-PMDD Follicular and late luteal: worsened subjective biological rhythms disruptions, similar sleep quality (27) Rapid cycling BD-PMDD Mixed findings-higher risk of rapid cycling (26), no link to rapid cycling (28) Relapse BD-PME Linked to shorter time to relapse of syndromal/subsyndromal mood episode (24) Cyclothymia BD-PMDD Associated with cyclothymia (28).

(p5.2) Bipolar disorder type BD-PMDD Mixed findings: associated with BD type II (28,29), not associated with BD type I or II (26) First episode polarity BD-PMDD Not linked to first episode polarity (26) Age of onset BD-Severe PMS Linked to earlier age of onset (25).

(p5.3) BD-PMDD Mixed findings. Linked to earlier onset of depressive and manic episodes (26), not linked to age of onset (28).
## (s6) CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF COMORBID BIPOLAR DISORDER AND PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) There have been a number of studies investigating the course of illness and clinical presentation in females with premenstrual exacerbation of mood symptoms or PMDD comorbid with BD, showing worsened clinical presentation of BD in these comorbid disorders, including a higher number of episodes, shorter time to relapse, earlier age of onset, risk of rapid cycling, and higher number of comorbidities (24,26).

(p6.1) In a prospective study of 293 females with BD from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for BD (STEP-BD), Dias and colleagues found that females with premenstrual exacerbation of mood symptoms had a higher number of depressive episodes, had a shorter time to relapse to a subsyndromal or syndromal episode of BD (4.5 months compared to 8.5 months). Additionally, symptom severity among these females was higher for both depressive and manic symptoms (24). In a cross-sectional study of the STEP-BD data, Slyepchenko et al. defined a provisional PMDD diagnosis in females enrolled in STEP-BD based on DSM-5 criteria. Having PMDD was linked to a higher risk of rapid cycling, as well as [hypo]manic and depressive episodes in the past year, and lifetime depressive episodes. Findings from this study also showed that in females with BD, having PMDD was not associated with BDI or BDII, or first episode polarity (26). However, in a smaller study by Fornaro and Perugi (n = 92 females with BD, 25 of whom had PMDD), having PMDD was linked to cyclothymia and BD-II, though not rapid cycling, any association with age of onset, a seasonal pattern, or psychotic features/ past hospitalization (28). Another small study did not find an association of number of depressive or manic episode, or length of depressive episodes to be linked to severe premenstrual mood symptoms (25). Additionally, several smaller studies have suggested the association of severe PMS and PMDD with BD-II, though this finding was not confirmed in a larger sample (26,28,29). Earlier age of onset of BD in females with both BD and PMDD/ premenstrual mood symptoms has been reported by two studies, one of which reported earlier onset of both [hypo]manic and depressive episodes (25,26).

(p6.2) Females with comorbid PMDD and BD are affected by a higher rate of comorbid conditions (see Figure 1), including having a history of anxiety disorders, such as generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder with and without agoraphobia. Additionally, they are more likely to have a lifetime history of substance / alcohol abuse or dependence, and a lifetime history of bulimia nervosa. As well, individuals with the comorbid disorders are more likely to have a history of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and adult attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (26). In another study, PMDD was linked to obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and Body Dysmorphic Disorders as well (28), though the link to OCD was not replicated by a larger study (26).

(p6.3) Individuals with comorbid BD and PMDD also have an earlier age of menarche, as well as a shorter span of time between the onset of menarche and the onset of BD. Additionally, they were found to be more likely to have severe mood symptoms during oral contraceptive use. These findings indicate that hormonal changes may play a role in these comorbid conditions (26). To further support this, several reports indicate that individuals with both BD and PMDD are more likely to have mood symptoms during other reproductive life events, such as pregnancy and the postpartum period (26,28), with one study reporting mood worsening in 77% of women during the perimenstrual, postnatal or menopausal periods, which were linked to a worsened course of BD, including earlier age of onset (30). However, these findings have not been consistent: Payne and colleagues reported no association between mood symptoms during different reproductive life events (i.e., premenstrual period, postpartum, perimenopausal) in women with BD type I (31).

(p6.4) In a study from our group where all participants completed at least 2 months of prospective daily symptom charting, we found that individuals diagnosed with both BD and PMDD had worse depressive symptom severity during the follicular phase compared to females with BD, females with PMDD, a female control group, and individuals with both BD and PMDD. Additionally, females with BD and PMDD had worsened depressive symptoms during the late luteal phase compared to controls, but not the other groups-individuals with a PMDD diagnosis were equally symptomatic. In terms of manic symptoms, females in the BD-PMDD group had worsened manic symptoms during the late luteal phase compared to all other groups, though these differences were not present during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. Additionally, females with BD-PMDD had higher state anxiety during the follicular phase compared to the control group during the follicular phase, and higher state anxiety compared to both the BD and control groups by the late luteal phase. They also had higher trait anxiety compared to the PMDD group and the control group during the follicular phase, though trait anxiety scores worsened for females with PMDD only by the luteal phase (27). Additionally, females with both BD and PMDD had worsened subjective biological rhythms disruptions than those with BD, PMDD, and healthy controls during the follicular phase. However, by the luteal phase, females in the PMDD group had no statistical differences in subjective biological rhythms disruption compared to females with both BD and PMDD. Notably, females with both BD and PMDD had worse subjective sleep quality during the luteal phase than both the PMDD group and control groups, though not the BD-only group. Overall, these findings indicate that symptomatic burden is worsened in individuals euthymic for BD, with comorbid PMDD, in terms of depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, sleep and biological rhythms disruption, with some differential effects based on menstrual phase. It is possible that increased symptoms during euthymia may be a contributing factor to the increased frequency of depressive and manic episodes seen in comorbid BD/ PMDD (27).
