# LITERATURE REVIEW Association between apolipoprotein B and dietary fibers

CorpusID: 237633856 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e8b50be33f30e6166d082c132dc10ed78f2cdd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e8b50be33f30e6166d082c132dc10ed78f2cdd9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Structure of the apolipoproteins
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) The complete amino acid sequence of the ApoB100 consists of 4536 amino acids with a molecular weight of 550 kDa. 26 The mature ApoB100 is the 27 amino acids N-terminal truncated version of the premature ApoB100 with the molecular mass of 513 kDa. 27 ApoB100 has a globular amino terminal domain, which reacts with microsomal triglyceride transfer proteins. The apoB gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 2. Study have identified one hundred twenty-three genetic variants in the apoB gene. The apoB100-3,500Arg-Gln affects its receptor binding and causes a disorder known as familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB). 28 ApoB100 is synthesized in hepatocytes and it could be degraded under certain conditions. 29 ApoB is an atherogenic component found in VLDL, IDL, and Lpa. Therefore, apoB represents the circulating atherogenic lipoprotein particles.

(p7.1) ApoB48 consists of 2152 amino acids with a molecular mass of 264 kDa. ApoB100 and apoB48 are produced from a single gene. ApoB48 is generated by cell-specific RNA editing of a CAA codon to a premature UAA termination codon and is identical to the N-terminal 48% of apoB100. 30 ApoB48 is synthesized by enterocytes, secreted in chylomicrons and stored in chylomicron remnant. Since one molecule of apoB48 is present in each chylomicron particle, it can be used as a marker for the chylomicrons. 31 Particles smaller than 70-80 nm can penetrate blood vessel walls. Therefore, chylomicron remains, but not nascent chylomicrons, are considered to be atherogenic. Chylomicron waste is enriched with ester cholesterol by exchange with HDL. 32
## (s14) Physical activity
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Study revealed that months of aerobic exercise decreased apoB concentration in hypercholesterolemic men. 48 In contrast, another study by reported that aerobic exercise for 20 weeks did not affect the concentration of apoB. Others found no change in apoB concentrations during either long or short aerobic exercise. Some factors must result in these various outcomes such as age. 49 
