# Clinical Medicine A Review on Various Topics on the Thermal Grill Illusion

CorpusID: 237324970 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a16c367d446ad9ce0117b302d8c0f3a4f46ef6a6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a16c367d446ad9ce0117b302d8c0f3a4f46ef6a6)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s6) The Response to the TGI in Patients with Chronic Pain
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Two studies evaluated whether chronic pain affected the response to the TGI, with conflicting results. Sumracki et al. evaluated the difference in the response to the TGI between patients with chronic pain (n = 18) and pain-free participants (n = 16) [16]. They compared the responses to the TGI in patients with chronic pain with those in pain-free participants. Although there was a minimal difference, the intensity of TGI-related pain and degree of discomfort were significantly lower in patients with chronic pain than in pain-free participants. Sumracki et al. suggested that patients with chronic pain have an altered central integration of ascending pain signals. This proposal is correlated with long-term functional and structural changes in the central nervous system. In contrast to the results of this study, the case report by Heavner et al. showed the opposite response [17]. They reported that a patient with chronic pain due to complex regional pain syndrome experienced an intolerable burning sensation on the thermal grill; however, this result might be unreliable because this study involved only one patient with chronic pain. More studies are needed to clarify whether chronic pain increases the intensity of the pain response to the thermal grill or decreases it. Furthermore, the response to the TGI following pain duration would be an interesting topic for future studies.
## (s8) The Response to the TGI in Patients with Psychological Disorders
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) Bekrater-Bodmann et al. reported alterations in the TGI due to borderline personality disorder (BPD) [25]. They recruited 29 patients with current BPD, 19 patients with BPD in remission, and 22 healthy participants. They found that the intensities of TGI-induced pain and unpleasantness were lower in patients with current BPD than in those with BPD in remission and healthy participants. However, the general ability to perceive TGI in patients with current BPD was not affected. The intensity of the TGI was negatively correlated with dissociation and traumatization in patients with current BPD. In addition, Boettger et al. compared the TGI response between 18 patients with acute paranoid schizophrenia and 18 matched controls [26]. Compared with controls, temperature differentials for the perception of the TGI and cold and heat pain thresholds were increased in patients with schizophrenia. In another study, Boettger et al. recruited 18 patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 18 matched controls and evaluated the pain threshold and intensity of TGI-induced pain [27]. In patients with MDD, cold and heat pain thresholds were significantly increased compared to those in controls. In addition, patients with MDD experienced less TGI pain despite increased stimulus intensity. In contrast to these results, in another study by Boettger et al. and Pinerua-Shuhaibar et al., transiently mildly depressed people or people in a sad mood state showed an increase in TGI-induced pain [28,29].
