# Brain entropy, fractal dimensions and predictability: A review of complexity measures for EEG in healthy and neuropsychiatric populations

CorpusID: 239214453 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6b2d68ce7c9b17ebf7a8e294fa9d0fe5d335f1a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6b2d68ce7c9b17ebf7a8e294fa9d0fe5d335f1a3)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s9) | Mood and anxiety disorders
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Relatedly, several researchers have long underscored the association between enhanced cortical dynamics, healthy cognitive functioning and emotional regulation (Aftanas, Lotova, Koshkarov, Pokrovskaja, et al., 1997;Carlino et al., 2012;Gregson et al., 1993;Lamberts et al., 2000;Martinez-Rodrigo et al., 2019;McIntosh et al., 2008). As cognitive and emotional dysregulation are transdiagnostic markers of mood and anxiety disorders (Holtzheimer & Mayberg, 2011), one might expect lower neural complexity in these patient populations as compared with their healthy counterparts. However, as with the literature on schizophrenia, conflicting trends in mood and anxiety disorders also appear to challenge the unidirectional notion of complexity as being adaptive.

(p9.1) Depression is a disorder characterized by dysthymia and anhedonia, reinforced by inflexible cognitive patterns manifesting primarily as negative ruminations (Holtzheimer & Mayberg, 2011). Studies have reported overall lower values of complexity in the EEG signals of individuals with depression as compared with healthy controls (see Table 2). This may be explained by maladaptive emotion regulation (ER) styles (e.g., selfblaming and rumination, Bornas et al., 2013) and a tendency to fixate on negative emotional states (Holtzheimer & Mayberg, 2011), both of which have been associated with lower EEG complexity.
## (s16) | Practical considerations
Number of References: 9

(p16.0) Other crucial considerations when choosing a complexity metric include the length of the time series and the signal-to-noise ratio (Bravi et al., 2011). For instance, it may be difficult to achieve reliable complexity estimates with CD and L1 due to their underlying assumptions of noise-free and lengthy data (for reconstructing the phase space), as these assumptions are not realistic in clinical applications. On the other hand, LZC may be more robust for short and noisy data (Fernandez et al., 2013). As for HFD, while it has been said to be more accurate for measuring FD as compared with other algorithms and is computationally simpler and faster, its values may be positively skewed by the amount of noise in data (Fernandez et al., 2013). In fact, LZC and HFD have been frequently used as measures of anaesthesia and sedation depth due to their reliability in assessing short data segments, thus making it appropriate for real-time monitoring of patient outcomes (Ferenets et al., 2006;Zhang et al., 2001). In general, it is recommended that researchers report the length of the recordings, as well as the sampling rate (both of which determine the number of data points) to facilitate reproducibility and comparisons of complexity analyses.

(p16.1) Regarding entropy measures, it is important to note that ApEn and SampEn (which are essentially irregularity statistics) have been criticized to be unreflective of a system's complexity. Although MSE was proposed to address this specific limitation (Costa et al., 2002), it requires a substantially longer time series to be accurate. Instead, other versions of MSE (e.g., MMSE) have been proposed to work better with short-term signals (Karmakar et al., 2020), but their performances have not yet been established with physiological signals. Additionally, while entropy-based indices such as ApEn and SampEn are among the most common indices, their sensitivity to the selection of computational parameters have prompted development of more robust approaches, such as FuzzyEn, which uses a fuzzy function instead of a single value of parameter, as well as entropy profiling where variations of parameter values are used to capture the complete profile of entropy (Karmakar et al., 2020;Udhayakumar et al., 2017). Note, however, that entropy profiling has not yet been investigated in the context of EEG signals.
## (s17) | Conclusions
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) With the constant introduction of new complexity estimators (Tripathy et al., 2017) and modified versions of existing ones (Bai et al., 2015), it has become increasingly difficult for researchers to choose an optimal measure specific to the psychological state of interest. It may seem convenient to use a wide range of them, but this is a practice fraught with issues such as results fishing, cherrypicking and biased interpretations. By enhancing the ease for researchers in navigating the plethora of complexity measures and clarifying their underlying theoretical meanings and their differences, we hope to facilitate new developments in the field. Apart from the inexplicit boundaries between measures of randomness and meaningful complexity, rigorous investigations that consider key factors such as experimental task demands and symptom trajectories are important for well-grounded conclusions to be made about neural complexity. Future meta-analyses of EEG complexity data could be useful in understanding the source of the discrepancies in existing literature and determine the reliability of change in neural complexity with pathology, healthy aging or consciousness states. We may also gain some clarity by investigating complexity-based approaches in relationship with other EEG analysis approaches, such as time/ frequency or connectivity analysis. In summary, as witnessed by the recent rise in related publications, the complexity analysis of EEG signals offers encouraging prospects for both research and clinical endeavours to further our understanding of normal and abnormal neurophysiological functioning.
