# metals New Developments and Future Trends in Low-Temperature Hot Stamping Technologies: A Review

CorpusID: 230584628 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06ce19fe03f328b00c949740f795e96e8ba02f17](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06ce19fe03f328b00c949740f795e96e8ba02f17)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s5) Tailored Microstructures and the Quenching and Partitioning Process
Number of References: 16

(p5.0) Additionally, in order to improve the final performance of hot-stamped components and widen their application, two novel techniques have been developed, one in which hot stamping is combined with a tailored microstructure [11] and the other in which it is combined with a quenching and partitioning (Q&P) process [41][42][43][44]. A typical example of a B-pillar with a tailored microstructure after hot stamping is shown in Figure 4a. Here, the upper region has a higher tensile strength with a fully martensitic microstructure to support the vehicle structure. The lower region has a higher ductility with only a partially martensitic microstructure, the remainder consisting of ferrite and pearlite, to absorb more energy during a possible car crash [11]. Several methods are available to obtain tailored microstructures, such as partial heating, differential cooling, tailor-welded and rolled blanks and partial annealing after hot stamping. [45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52]. For example, Oldenburg [45] used a material combination approach to develop dies comprising materials of different thermal conductivities to achieve different cooling rates as a function of location during the forming stage. This enabled the boron steel microstructure after hot stamping to be tailored. Yun et al. [50] further developed the material combination approach, using lithium nitrate undergoing a phase transformation as the part with low thermal conductivity. This effectively avoided the problem of heat conduction between different materials, and high-quality tailored blanks could be obtained. However, the processes involved in all these approaches are rather complicated and involve extra cost, and the feasibility has so far only been demonstrated on a laboratory scale.
## (s6) Tailored Microstructures and the Quenching and Partitioning Process
Number of References: 37

(p6.0) Additionally, in order to improve the final performance of hot-stamped components and widen their application, two novel techniques have been developed, one in which hot stamping is combined with a tailored microstructure [11] and the other in which it is combined with a quenching and partitioning (Q&P) process [41][42][43][44]. A typical example of a B-pillar with a tailored microstructure after hot stamping is shown in Figure 4a. Here, the upper region has a higher tensile strength with a fully martensitic microstructure to support the vehicle structure. The lower region has a higher ductility with only a partially martensitic microstructure, the remainder consisting of ferrite and pearlite, to absorb more energy during a possible car crash [11]. Several methods are available to obtain tailored microstructures, such as partial heating, differential cooling, tailor-welded and rolled blanks and partial annealing after hot stamping. [45][46][47][48][49][50][51][52]. For example, Oldenburg [45] used a material combination approach to develop dies comprising materials of different thermal conductivities to achieve different cooling rates as a function of location during the forming stage. This enabled the boron steel microstructure after hot stamping to be tailored. Yun et al. [50] further developed the material combination approach, using lithium nitrate undergoing a phase transformation as the part with low thermal conductivity. This effectively avoided the problem of heat conduction between different materials, and high-quality tailored blanks could be obtained. However, the processes involved in all these approaches are rather complicated and involve extra cost, and the feasibility has so far only been demonstrated on a laboratory scale.  . Advanced forming and quenching methods in hot stamping: two novel hot stamping processes for improving the final performance of hot-stamped parts: (a) Tailored microstructure (Adapted with permission from Elsevier [11]); (b) Quenching and partitioning process (reproduced with permission from Elsevier [42]) (Ci, Cγ, Cm represent the carbon contents of the initial alloy, austenite and martensite, respectively).

(p6.1) The Q&P heat treatment process was first proposed by Speer et al. [41][42][43][44]. As shown in Figure  4b [42], the treatment starts with a full or partial austenitisation followed by rapid cooling to a quenching temperature (QT) between the martensite start temperature (Ms) and martensite finish temperature (Mf) to obtain a predesignated fraction of martensite. In the subsequent partitioning treatment, the material is held at a partitioning temperature (PT), which can be equal to QT (one-step treatment) or somewhat higher than QT (two-step treatment) [53,54]. The aim of this novel process is . Advanced forming and quenching methods in hot stamping: two novel hot stamping processes for improving the final performance of hot-stamped parts: (a) Tailored microstructure (Adapted with permission from Elsevier [11]); (b) Quenching and partitioning process (reproduced with permission from Elsevier [42]) (C i , C γ , C m represent the carbon contents of the initial alloy, austenite and martensite, respectively).

(p6.2) The Q&P heat treatment process was first proposed by Speer et al. [41][42][43][44]. As shown in Figure 4b [42], the treatment starts with a full or partial austenitisation followed by rapid cooling to a quenching temperature (QT) between the martensite start temperature (M s ) and martensite finish temperature (M f ) to obtain a predesignated fraction of martensite. In the subsequent partitioning treatment, the material is held at a partitioning temperature (PT), which can be equal to QT (one-step treatment) or somewhat higher than QT (two-step treatment) [53,54]. The aim of this novel process is to partition carbon into the austenite and increase the stability of this phase at room temperature, thereby improving the final ductility and toughness through the transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) effect in the retained austenite. Based on this, Liu et al. [55,56] integrated a Q&P treatment into a hot stamping process and examined its efficacy in improving the final performance of conventional hot-stamping boron steel. The ductility was increased from 6.6% to 14.8% after a Q&P treatment at 320 • C for 30 s. Zhu et al. [57] further developed a new hot air system for partitioning; this replaced the conventional furnace to easily and rapidly control the temperature of the blank after quenching with a uniform temperature distribution. However, it is still difficult to achieve isothermal partitioning process in an industrial environment. For the industrial application of Q&P in hot stamping, it is necessary to further investigate the possibility of non-isothermal partitioning and the effect of the Q&P treatment on the impact properties and resistance to hydrogen embrittlement of the steel rather than its ductility only.
## (s23) Application of Low-Temperature Hot Stamping Process in Medium-Mn Steel
Number of References: 28

(p23.0) As a result of the advanced features of medium-Mn steels, the research direction has gradually shifted in recent years from cold forming to low-temperature hot stamping. A general schematic diagram of the process is shown in Figure 13. The soaking (austenitisation) temperature depends on the A 3 temperature, which is in turn related to the chemical composition of the material. It has usually been set at 30-80 • C above A 3 in most of the research conducted so far, e.g., [103,122,126,143]. The average austenitisation temperature is thus around 100-200 • C lower than that in the traditional hot stamping process for boron steel. After soaking, the heated material is rapidly transferred to the die and stamped and quenched as in the conventional procedure. Some retained austenite may be present at room temperature, but most of the microstructure is martensitic [144][145][146]. However, microstructural evolution during the LTHS process has not yet been studied in depth, nor has its effect on forming behaviour and final mechanical behaviour been investigated. and 6.5Mn steels, respectively. The cost of the additional baking process need not be included in cost calculations because baking can be combined with paint tempering in real production lines. There is the possibility of not only an improvement in mechanical properties, but also a reduction in cost if the ART annealing process can be omitted. However, more research is required to understand the evolution of microstructure and its effect on final performance after hot stamping before this experimental ART-free process can be used in real applications.  Oxidation and decarburisation are unavoidable when uncoated steels are exposed to air at elevated temperature during the hot stamping process. The oxide layer formed by reaction between the outer surface of the sheet and atmospheric oxygen must be removed after hot stamping and has a deleterious effect on the dimensional accuracy of the product [147]. The inner decarburisation layer is caused by the loss of carbon and not only reduces the strength, but also increases the shear rate, which promotes crack growth and reduces the fatigue resistance of the hot-stamped material [148,149]. In addition, both the oxidation and the decarburisation layer affect the heat transfer during die quenching, deceasing productivity. It can be seen in Figure 14 that decarburisation layers of over 100 µm in depth are formed in the surface microstructure of a hot stamped 22MnB5 steel austenitised  Table 2. Chang et al. [126] investigated the application of LTHS to ART-annealed MMn steels. They determined the optimal process windows by which the best formability and final mechanical properties could be obtained. These were 780-840 • C for 4-7 min for austenitisation, and 450-500 • C for stamping; the optimal cooling rate was 10-60 • C s −1 . These conditions can be achieved with a traditional hot stamping production line. After stamping, the ultimate tensile strength was around 1400 MPa with a total elongation of 11.8%. Wang et al. [143] suggested that an austenitising temperature of 800 • C was sufficient for the complete austenitisation of 5Mn steel and reduced oxidation and decarburisation. This low-temperature hot stamped material had fine microstructure and attained an ultimate tensile strength of 1500 MPa with an elongation of 10%. Based on this, Li et al. [103] further investigated 5Mn steel after LTHS. They found that unlike in hot-stamped 22MnB5 steel, the M s temperature was not sensitive to the forming temperature and pressure, resulting in even distributions of microstructure and mechanical properties. Pan et al. [145] investigated the tensile behaviour of low-temperature hot stamped 5.6Mn steel after warm rolling without ART annealing. An excellent UTS × TE product of around 27.5 GPa·% was obtained in this material. The reason for such good mechanical properties is not yet well understood, but it may be related to a higher degree of M3 features in the microstructure, which was observed to be of an ultrafine and multiphase character. Lu et al. [146] examined the effect of post-processing on the microstructure and mechanical properties of low-temperature hot stamped 7.0Mn steel. A process of baking at 170 • C for 20 min was introduced after the whole stamping process to re-partition the carbon into the retained austenite. This was found to improve the ductility significantly by enabling continuous occurrence of the TRIP or TWIP effects during deformation. As a result of this baking, the total elongation was increased from around 3% to 11.7%. Hou et al. [144] and Li et al. [122] have also examined the effect of post-processing on the mechanical behaviour of cold-rolled MMn steel after LTHS. After subsequent baking at 170 • C for 20 min, very high tensile strengths of 1805 MPa and 1700 MPa and total elongations of 16% and 11.8% were obtained in 7.5Mn and 6.5Mn steels, respectively. The cost of the additional baking process need not be included in cost calculations because baking can be combined with paint tempering in real production lines. There is the possibility of not only an improvement in mechanical properties, but also a reduction in cost if the ART annealing process can be omitted. However, more research is required to understand the evolution of microstructure and its effect on final performance after hot stamping before this experimental ART-free process can be used in real applications. Oxidation and decarburisation are unavoidable when uncoated steels are exposed to air at elevated temperature during the hot stamping process. The oxide layer formed by reaction between the outer surface of the sheet and atmospheric oxygen must be removed after hot stamping and has a deleterious effect on the dimensional accuracy of the product [147]. The inner decarburisation layer is caused by the loss of carbon and not only reduces the strength, but also increases the shear rate, which promotes crack growth and reduces the fatigue resistance of the hot-stamped material [148,149]. In addition, both the oxidation and the decarburisation layer affect the heat transfer during die quenching, deceasing productivity. It can be seen in Figure 14 that decarburisation layers of over 100 µm in depth are formed in the surface microstructure of a hot stamped 22MnB5 steel austenitised for 5 min at 920 • C (Figure 14a [103]) and around 40-50 µm heated at 950 • C for 5 min even under a protective nitrogen atmosphere (Figure 14c [143]). In contrast, only an extremely thin decarburisation layer was observed in an MMn steel after austenitisation at 800 • C for 5 min both without (Figure 14b [103]) and with (Figure 14d [143]) a protective nitrogen atmosphere. If the formation of this layer can be avoided, this will provide a considerable saving in both tooling and coating costs.  It has been shown experimentally in a real stamped automotive part that uniform tensile properties can be obtained through LTHS [126]. Measurements of tensile strength, yield strength and total elongation from various positions in the part are given in Figure 15. These results showed that the variation in each tensile property over all measurement locations did not exceed 5%, demonstrating an even distribution of mechanical properties across the part [126]. Zheng et al. [150] studied the effect of various hot forming parameters on the formability of MMn steel (5 wt. % Mn) and 22MnB5 steel based on square-cup deep drawing, both numerically and experimentally. Their results demonstrated that the strain rate (0.01-1.0 s −1 ) had a strong influence in the 22MnB5, but only It has been shown experimentally in a real stamped automotive part that uniform tensile properties can be obtained through LTHS [126]. Measurements of tensile strength, yield strength and total elongation from various positions in the part are given in Figure 15. These results showed that the variation in each tensile property over all measurement locations did not exceed 5%, demonstrating an even distribution of mechanical properties across the part [126]. Zheng et al. [150] studied the effect of various hot forming parameters on the formability of MMn steel (5 wt. % Mn) and 22MnB5 steel based on square-cup deep drawing, both numerically and experimentally. Their results demonstrated that the strain rate (0.01-1.0 s −1 ) had a strong influence in the 22MnB5, but only a weak influence in the MMn steel. The mechanical behaviour during hot forming in the MMn steel was also less sensitive to deformation temperature than in the 22MnB5 steel. The MMn steel had, overall, a better formability in deep drawing during the hot stamping process with a more uniform thickness and distribution of martensitic microstructure. The reason for this improved uniformity of distribution has not yet been clarified, but it was shown that MMn steels give favourable results when they are used to produce complex-shaped automobile structure components by LTHS.  [126]. Adapted from [126], with permission from Elsevier, 2020.
