# Cancer and occupational exposure to pesticides: an umbrella review

CorpusID: 231706498 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56c6ffdfd8c6a1bb1151eef3454252c3063d2aa2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56c6ffdfd8c6a1bb1151eef3454252c3063d2aa2)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) A review of qualitative and quantitative reviews was undertaken following the recommendations of Aromataris et al. (2015) and with consideration for systematic review evaluation in general (Shea et al. 2017;Moher et al. 2009). Each step of the process was performed independently by both authors, with stepwise discussion to clarify and resolve any disagreements.
## (s10) Conclusion
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Just as cancer is not a unique disease, the exposures to "pesticides" and "farming" are similarly diverse. Interpretations are most informative when assessed by specific cancer type and active ingredients. However, it is a well-known challenge to collect these data reliably and validly with an adequate sample size, oftentimes retrospectively, all of which limits the ability to compare and contrast those exposures used in toxicology studies. For the last decade, there has been attention on the consideration, if not integration, of both animal and epidemiologic data for both risk assessment and regulatory decision-making [e.g. (Adami et al. 2011;Christensen et al. 2015)] and this remains a priority going forward. This review sought to compare the human and animal data relative to specific cancer outcomes reported in epidemiologic studies. While several pesticidal active ingredients were associated with specific cancer, overall, there was neither strong nor consistent epidemiologic data supportive of a positive association between pesticide exposure in occupational settings and cancer. In recent years, there have been progressive, science-based approaches for determining the oncogenic potential from chemicals, including pesticides, which include identification of genotoxic potential, toxicological mode of action, relevance to humans, and assessment of human exposure relative to doses used in animal experimentation. In addition, epidemiologic studies offer critical information and insight on exposure and disease, including cancer in humans. The challenge and opportunity at hand are for enhanced multidisciplinary collaboration to understand the contributions and limitations of both toxicologic and epidemiologic research so that underpinning scientific questions and informed study design will increase the ability and confidence to inform and protect human health.
