# Ultrasonic Guided-Waves Sensors and Integrated Structural Health Monitoring Systems for Impact Detection and Localization: A Review

CorpusID: 233459036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f7aa6d2f5465699f49f89b79fa35f427b980c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f7aa6d2f5465699f49f89b79fa35f427b980c)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s19) Sensors Embedding
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Another issue for sensors is the embedding in the structure to ensure durability for service in harsh environmental conditions. Bellan et al. carried out an example of the embedding PVDF IDTs for composite CRFP materials [78], but no easy solution for connections and wiring of the piezoelectric film was provided. Following these early works, an innovative approach that was based on bioinspired sensors was proposed by Ghoshal et al. [79] with a ribbon of PZT element array. Recently, the concept of "smartskin" (SS) of bioinspired embedded sensors was developed with several advantages in the installation and the simplified task for signal acquisition and processing [80]. Another interesting approach for "aircraft smart composite skin" (ASCS) was proposed in [81], with the investigation of efficient ways to connect in series and/or parallel a large number of PZT sensors with front end electronics; a signal processing strategy for converting analog information to digital sequences was also a main result towards simplifying the embedded signal processing.
## (s26) Hardware Developments of Wired and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) for SHM and Validation Tests
Number of References: 9

(p26.0) From the previous sections, it turns out that, in recent years, the combination of several progresses in sensors and mixed signals low power electronics have introduced a new paradigm for the SHM systems that is the network of sensors nodes, as reported by Farrar et al. [130]. Figure 10 shows a conceptual description of the migration from single distributed sensors on a structure to the sensor network, where, for example, the authors represented a sensor network for monitoring a COPV system. In the same picture are shown the main electronic blocks that are needed to realize a sensor node with active and passive mode operation. The transducer driver (for broadband or narrow band ultrasonic transducers) and the signal conditioning are both controlled by a mixed signal System on Chip (SoC). The connections between nodes and the central unit (see architecture in Figure 10) can be implemented with wired solutions where the power lines for the nodes can sustain a sufficient data rate by using power line communication (PLC) protocols and related chipset. Simplified connection schemes and a low power digital electronic front end has been recently proposed and validated on an aircraft wing by Qiu et al. [81]. The SoC development of a node with passive and active mode operation poses several design issues that are related to the electronic design. The main issues are the power consumption and design of an efficient ultrasonic pulser to gain transduction efficiency in active mode [131]. Local high voltage power amplifiers or pulsers are needed to excite transducers with 10 V to 100 V amplitude excitation signals; the local availability of high voltages is generally obtained with boost DC/DC converters. This type of converter can be realized with SoC solutions, but the integration of passive components (inductors and capacitors) still needs to find a compromise between the size and switching frequency. The dimensions also become critical for the integration into the structure and protection of electronics is needed to guarantee a life-time same as the monitored structure. The cost of wiring is generally high, and the replacement of defective hardware and sensors should be avoided for a time that is comparable to the service life of the facility.

(p26.1) Schubert et al. published one of the first implementation of this paradigm [102] with the Match-X project of the Fraunhofer Institute. The node design and electronic integration with a stack of miniaturized PCBs with embedded PZT transducers that were mounted on a glass-fiber-reinforced-polymer (GFRP) plate is reported. The paper also addressed the requirement of power supply overvoltage protection and detection of failure events that is one important consideration for self-diagnostic of nodes. Lehmann et al. [53] presented, in the same year, the results of validation of the embedded PZT MFC transducers in an aircraft wing. Local processing of the acoustic signatures was demonstrated by the integration of the AFE in the node architecture: the ADC, algorithms for data reduction, and digital communication by a Digital Signal Processor (DSP). Although the adopted solution for data transfer was based on a two wires industrial Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, the authors introduced an expandable feature to open the wireless connection with a Bluetooth module, a key feature for the evolution to a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Figure 11 shows the main electronic blocks of a sensor node for a WSN.   Schubert et al. published one of the first implementation of this paradigm [102] with the Match-X project of the Fraunhofer Institute. The node design and electronic integration with a stack of miniaturized PCBs with embedded PZT transducers that were mounted on a glass-fiber-reinforced-polymer (GFRP) plate is reported. The paper also addressed the requirement of power supply overvoltage protection and detection of failure events that is one important consideration for self-diagnostic of nodes. Lehmann et al. [53] presented, in the same year, the results of validation of the embedded PZT MFC transducers in an aircraft wing. Local processing of the acoustic signatures was demonstrated by the integration of the AFE in the node architecture: the ADC, algorithms for data reduction, and digital communication by a Digital Signal Processor (DSP). Although the adopted solution for data transfer was based on a two wires industrial Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, the authors introduced an expandable feature to open the wireless connection with a Bluetooth module, a key feature for the evolution to a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Figure 11 shows the main electronic blocks of a sensor node for a WSN.  [102] with the Match-X project of the Fraunhofer Institute. The node design and electronic integration with a stack of miniaturized PCBs with embedded PZT transducers that were mounted on a glass-fiber-reinforced-polymer (GFRP) plate is reported. The paper also addressed the requirement of power supply overvoltage protection and detection of failure events that is one important consideration for self-diagnostic of nodes. Lehmann et al. [53] presented, in the same year, the results of validation of the embedded PZT MFC transducers in an aircraft wing. Local processing of the acoustic signatures was demonstrated by the integration of the AFE in the node architecture: the ADC, algorithms for data reduction, and digital communication by a Digital Signal Processor (DSP). Although the adopted solution for data transfer was based on a two wires industrial Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, the authors introduced an expandable feature to open the wireless connection with a Bluetooth module, a key feature for the evolution to a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Figure 11 shows the main electronic blocks of a sensor node for a WSN.   
