# A Review of Remote Sensing Image Dehazing

CorpusID: 235436700 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7121299bfaac9690b64c48c9a46b71b55d807bb7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7121299bfaac9690b64c48c9a46b71b55d807bb7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s20) Other Physical Dehazing Methods
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) TAN [57] observed that haze-free images have higher contrast compared with the hazy images, and maximized the contrast per patch, while maintaining a global coherent image. This algorithm enhances the contrast of the image and improves its visibility. Unfortunately, color oversaturation and halo effect are visible in the images after dehazing. Fattal [58] firstly assumed that the albedo of the local image regions is a constant, and the transmission and surface shading are locally uncorrelated. Then, the independent component analysis (LCA) is used to estimate the albedo. As expected, the performance of this method mainly depends on the statistical characteristics of the input data to a certain extent, thus insufficient color information is bound to lead to unreliable statistical estimates.
## (s23) DehazeNet
Number of References: 3

(p23.0) DehazeNet [71,72] was proposed by Cai et al. [73] in 2016. It uses a multi-level architecture based on a CNN, which takes a hazy image as an input and outputs its transmission map. Then, according to this estimated output, they restored the haze-free image based on the ASM. The structure of DehazeNet is shown in Figure 3. 
## (s26) DehazeNet
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) DehazeNet [71,72] was proposed by Cai et al. [73] in 2016. It uses a multi-level architecture based on a CNN, which takes a hazy image as an input and outputs its transmission map. Then, according to this estimated output, they restored the haze-free image based on the ASM. The structure of DehazeNet is shown in Figure 3.  DehazeNet employs feature extraction, multi-scale mapping, local extremum, and nonlinear regression to calculate the transmission map of a hazy image.
## (s46) Drawback of ASM
Number of References: 2

(p46.0) The image dehazed by ASM will have a dim effect since ASM fails to consider the light trapping phenomenon related to the texture density and scene depth. In other words, ASM considers that all scenes in the image are directly illuminated by the atmospheric light, while ignoring the influence of uneven illumination. To address the above problems, many useful methods [18,23] which optimize the robustness of the ASM are proposed. Although the dim effect is solved to a certain extent, uneven haze remains a challenge. Therefore, it is a challenging problem to use a more robust physical model to describe complex scenes.
