# Survey and Performance Analysis of Deep Learning Based Object Detection in Challenging Environments

CorpusID: 236950954 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50400b478dda3eebb966f71e8d8f90718a0e2854](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50400b478dda3eebb966f71e8d8f90718a0e2854)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s5) YOLO
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) You Only Look Once (YOLO) [24] has been widely applied to develop real-time object detection systems in various domains [45][46][47]. Unlike region-based convolutional neural networks, YOLO only takes a single look and divides the image into S × S grid of cells. For each object that exists on the image, one grid cell is supposed to be responsible for having that object at its center. Figure 9 illustrates the main idea of YOLO. This section covers the techniques that have exploited YOLO to detect objects in a complex environment.
## (s6) RFB-Net
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Currently, existing state-of-the-art detection algorithms use pre-trained backbones based on Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) to extract low-level and high-level features. Instead of relying on a pre-trained backbone, RFB-Net is inspired by the Receptive Fields (RFs) structure in the human visual system. RFB-Net considers the relationship between size and eccentricity of RFs to enhance features. Figure 10 illustrates the main building block of RFB-Net. Figure 10. The explained architecture of RFB [56]. RFB is inspired by Receptive Fields (RFs) in human visual system. RFB considers the relationship between the size and eccentricity of receptive fields into account to enhance the features. (a) RFB is identical to Inception, responsible for simulating the RFs of multiple sizes, and (b) part reproduces the relation between the RF size and eccentricity in the human visual system by using smaller kernels. Reprinted from [56].
## (s18) Deep Saliency Networks
Number of References: 7

(p18.0) In 2019, Ghose et al. [65] proposed the combination of saliency maps with thermal images to detect pedestrians in poor lighting conditions. This work suggested that instead of relying on thermal and RGB images, the addition of saliency map information to thermal images facilitates the network to identify the objects. At first, the method augments the thermal images by replacing one duplicate channel with a corresponding saliency map. This combination helps illuminate salient parts of the image while preserving textural information. To extract saliency maps, the authors experimented with two state-of-the-art deep saliency networks (PiCA-Net [85] and R3Net [86]).

(p18.1) PiCA-Net generates an attention map for each pixel in an image and employs Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [87] to scan the image and obtain global context. U-Net [88] is then applied to detect salient objects from the generated attention maps. R3Net [86] uses residual refinement block to learn residuals between the ground truth and saliency maps. To assess the performance of the proposed method, the authors exploited KAIST multispectral pedestrian dataset [59].
## (s19) ShuffleSeg
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) Following the concept of applying image segmentation [65], Rashed et al. [66] proposed an FCN-based architecture for moving object detection by concatenating spatial information with LiDAR sensors. The presented work employed three encoders to handle RGB, rgbFlow, and lidarFlow information separately. The whole network follows encoderdecoder architecture. The encoder extracts the latent features while the decoder up-samples them to generate the final image. To analyze the capabilities of the proposed approach, the authors used KITTI dataset [89] and a custom-made Dark-KITTI dataset to simulate a low-light environment. The proposed method achieved a 4.25% improvement on standard KITTI and 10.1% relative improvement on the Dark-KITTI dataset.
## (s28) UNIRI-TID
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) UNIRI-TID [55] (https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/thermal-image-dataset-persondetection-uniri-tid accessed on 22 June 2021) is a novel dataset published in [54] for the task of detecting human/non-human objects in difficult weather. The dataset contains thermal images collected manually using the thermal camera in different weather conditions. The dataset was created to provide a balanced ratio of images for each kind of difficult weather such as rainy, fog, clear, and hazy. Furthermore, the creators of this dataset applied custom augmentation such as grayscale to increase the number of images. The dataset has a total of 35,974 images with 2663 images for clear weather, 2313 for rainy weather, 1135 for foggy weather, 18,333 are grayscale images, and the remaining 6111 images contain a mix of all possible weather conditions. Figure 15f illustrates a few samples of this dataset. Table 2. Important statistics of challenging object detection datasets. OD denotes object detection, SOD represents salient object detection, and COD is for category specific object detection.    
## (s48) Evaluations for Object Detection in a Challenging Environment
Number of References: 6

(p48.0) Object detection in a challenging environment is used to distinguish objects from the background and regress their boundaries. Tables 3 and 4 summarize the performance comparison of various methodologies that are explained in Section 3. Different approaches have reported results on specific evaluation metrics. Therefore, we have placed a "-" on the unused metric. By looking at Table 2, apart from [54,65], all the methods have reported results on separate datasets and utilized distinctive evaluation metrics. Therefore, the results summarized in these tables are not directly comparable to each other. Nonetheless, it is evident that there is still much room for improvement in all employed datasets. For instance, the method presented in [63] achieves the AP of 0.49 on SKU-110K dataset. Owing to the challenges present in the dataset (see Section 4.4), the method could only detect objects present in front of the camera or classify multiple objects with a single class. The approach introduced in [57] obtain the AP of 0.34 on the ExDark dataset, which contains dark indoor scenes make object detection even more challenging. Similarly, methods in [54,65] report mAPs of 0.35 and 0.68 on the KAIST dataset, which includes pair of thermal and RGB images taken at night-time or in harsh weather conditions (See Section 4.6). Table 3. Object detection performance analysis in challenging environments. IOU represents intersection over union threshold, whereas mAP and AP denote mean average precision and average precision, respectively. FPS represents frames per second calculated at inference time.
## (s49) Literature
Number of References: 14

(p49.0) Year that converts night-time images to day time prior to object detection reaches a mAP of 0.82, and the approach from Kamal et al. [67] accomplish AP of 0.94 on the CURE-TSD dataset, which is explained in Section 4.2. For the sake of readability, we have presented the results of [61,72] in a separate table (Table 4) because they reported results on their own introduced evaluation metrics. It is critical to emphasize that, apart from the five methods [62][63][64]66,68], all other approaches have not discussed their computational performances. Along with the quantitative analysis, we examined a few of the discussed approaches by paying attention to their failure cases. In Figure 17, we observed that from the bird's-eye view, the method proposed by [54] fails to detect people. Similarly, the work of [58] gets confused with non-living human-like objects in images as exhibited in Figure 18.

(p49.1) The system of Kamal et al. [67] is vulnerable to detect traffic signs that are not close to the camera. A visual illustration is visible in Figure 19. Another approach presented by Wang et al. [68] is unable to detect objects in motion blur images. On top of that, the work tends to produce false positives on the images where no object is present. Figure 20 exhibits an example of such cases.  [54]. Fails at detecting persons from the bird's-eye view. Reprinted from [54].   
## (s52) Conclusions
Number of References: 3

(p52.0) With the rapid computational advances, noticeable improvements have been observed by employing deep learning-based object detection algorithms in challenging environments. This paper comprehensively reviews the relevant approaches that have attempted to identify objects under challenging scenarios through deep neural networks and provides an empirical performance analysis of currently employed object detection algorithms. Moreover, the advantages and limitations of all explained techniques are provided. Furthermore, this work describes all the relevant datasets currently exploited to resolve the problem of object detection under challenging environments. This work discusses the well-known evaluation criteria and presents a performance analysis of explained methodologies and object detection algorithms by benchmarking recent object detection algorithms on challenging datasets of ExDark [97], CURE-TSD [92], and Reside [98]. In the end, we highlight the current open issues and present future direction that can enhance the research of object detection under challenging environments. 
