# Hyperprogression under immunotherapy: a new form of immunotherapy response?-a narrative literature review

CorpusID: 237291144 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1a828643f160826aea1f3a7bc769de37551da0dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1a828643f160826aea1f3a7bc769de37551da0dc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) The treatment of especially metastatic cancer patients has been dramatically improved by the introduction of immunotherapy. There are already 3 immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) that target cytotoxic T lymphocyteassociated molecule-4 (CTLA-4), programmed cell death receptor-1 (PD-1), and programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) are the most widely studied and recognized. It has been proven that ICIs can increase the overall survival (OS) in variety of malignancies, such as melanoma, nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), renal cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), urothelial bladder cancer, and endometrial stromal sarcoma (1)(2)(3). However, a small subset of patients on immunotherapy may not benefit at all from immunotherapy, instead, they experience a faster and more aggressive progression of the tumor than expected, with a dramatic acceleration of the disease, which is referred to as hyperprogression (HP) or hyperprogressive disease (HPD). Patients with HPD could suffer a deleterious survival effect and significantly shorter OS, suggesting that HP should be managed as fulminant toxicity and needs to be considered before immunotherapy is initiated. Existing literature has reviewed and summarized the definition, diagnostic criteria, reported risk factors and possible mechanisms of HP. However, with the gradual deepening of the exploration of HPD, researchers have made significant breakthroughs in elucidating the mechanism and mechanism of HPD and exploring biomarkers. On this basis, we reviewed and summarized the definition, incidence, diagnostic criteria, reported risk factor and possible mechanisms of HPD in recent years, and briefly introduced a novel perspective that few people mentioned: the potential biomarkers of HPD. We present the following article in accordance with the Narrative Review reporting checklist (available at https://dx.doi. org/10.21037/tlcr-21-575).
## (s3) Appearance, definitions, and diagnosis of HPD
Number of References: 22

(p3.0) HPD is considered to be an acceleration of tumor growth after ICI treatment that is not only due to immune infiltration but also due to real disease progression (4,5). It was first reported in a retrospective study published by Lahmar et al. in 2016. They performed a retrospective study of 89 NSCLC patients treated by ICIs, calculated the tumor growth rate [TGR: the log-scale calibrated change in the sum of the volumes of the target lesions according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 criteria per month] before and after ICIs treatment, and found that ΔTGR (difference between TGR during ICIs and TGR at baseline) was <0 in 79 patients and >0 in 20 patients; and among these 20 patients, 9 had a ΔTGR >50%, meaning that tumor volume increased at least 50% during immunotherapy (6). In the same year, Chubachi et al. also reported a case of rapid lung cancer progression after 3 cycles of nivolumab treatment and described it as a "disease flare" (7). Later, in 2017, Champiat and his colleagues defined HPD as patients who have been assessed with disease progression by the RECIST for the first evaluation with at least a 2-fold increase in TGR before and after receiving immunotherapy. Subsequently, an increasing number of studies have confirmed the existence of the HPD phenomenon in many types of tumors, like NSCLC, esophageal squamous carcinoma, melanoma, soft tissue sarcoma, etc. (8)(9)(10)(11). HP has become an increasingly recognized phenomenon.

(p3.1) Despite its growing incidence, the diagnostic criteria for HPD have not yet been standardized. Clinicians have previously evaluated the activity and efficacy of new cancer therapeutics in solid tumors by immune-related response criteria (irRC), RECIST, immune RECIST (iRECIST), immune-related RECIST (irRECIST), or immune-modified RECIST (imRECIST) (12)(13)(14). We have compiled these criteria in Table 1, all of these criteria divide efficacy into 4 levels ( Figure 1) Table 1 Overview of radiological criteria in immuno-oncology Variables RECIST1.1 (15) irRC (13) irRECIST (16) iRECIST (12) imRECIST (17) Lesion measurement  HPD was considered to be RECIST-defined PD at first assessment and a more than 2-time TGR increase after the initiation of immunotherapy (18). Meanwhile, Saâda-Bouzid et al. defined HP as TGK ratio (TGK R : TGK post-immunotherapy/TGK pre-immunotherapy) ≥2, and these authors reported a 29% incidence of HPD (19). The common requirement of TGR and TGK measurement is a comparison of the variation of target lesions before and after immunotherapy is initiated, which mainly depends on computed tomography (CT) scan. As Ferrara et al., they defined HPD as disease progression at the first evaluation with ΔTGR exceeding 50% (20). However, the exclusive use of a radiological definition of HPD could easily misdiagnose pseudoprogression as HP (21), which could lead to an overestimate. Moreover, in some cases of rapid clinical decline, performing a confirmatory CT scan may not be feasible. Therefore, some authors propose adding other clinical criteria to the diagnostic criteria for HPD. For instance, Kato et al. suggest 3 criteria to define HPD: time to treatment failure (TTF) <2 months; and a tumor burden increase of 50% with a progression rate increase of at least 2 times (22). In addition to these, Lo Russo et al. also proposed the following diagnostic criteria: ≥2 new lesions appearing in 1 already-involved organ or new involved organs appearing at the first radiological evaluation after the initiation of immunotherapy, and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score decrease of 2 points or more within the first 2 months of treatment (23). However, too great a consideration for clinical factors can confer disadvantages, as progressive PD may be mistaken for HPD; this contradiction may be part of the reason why there is still no consensus on the diagnostic criteria for HPD.
## (s7) Liquid biopsy
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) As a branch of in vitro diagnosis, liquid biopsy is a noninvasive blood test to monitor circulating tumor cells (CTCs), circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and cellfree DNA (cfDNA) fragments released into the blood by tumors or metastatic lesions. ctDNA and cfDNA can reflect blood-based tumor mutational burden (bTMB) and chromosomal instability of cancer cells, which has been linked to poor prognosis and resistance to treatment in several malignancies. By analyzing the mutations detected in ctDNA, bTMB can be calculated to evaluate tumor response to immunotherapy, and increased TMB has been associated with a higher likelihood of immunotherapy response (37)(38)(39). More importantly, the dynamics of ctDNA may be more sensitive than radiological tests. In a study involving 125 melanoma patients, the researchers found that none of the patients (n=9) who were finally diagnosed with pseudoprogression did not observe a significant increase in ctDNA (even it is detectable at baseline, subsequent ctDNA levels will be reduced by >10 times due to treatment), despite the significant increase in tumor size on imaging (40). And Weiss et al. used chromosomal number instability (CNI) score to evaluate 56 patients treated with immunotherapy across multiple tumor types, six of whom had HP, and in 5 of these 6 cases, the CNI score also predicted progression at an earlier time (∼6-9 weeks) compared with routine imaging (41). This shows that cfDNA is expected to become a potential biomarker for predicting HPD.
## (s8) Radiomics
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Radiomics is an emerging field that translates medical images into quantitative data and enables these data to be extracted and applied in clinical decision-making, thereby improving diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive accuracy. In cancer research, radiomics has also shown promise in tumor diagnosis, clinical staging, response evaluation, recurrence, distant metastasis, and prognosis prediction (42,43). The image information extracted by Radiomic includes but is not limited to size/shape, heterogeneity/texture, relationship with surrounding tissues, which also provides a basis for evaluating the efficacy of immunotherapy, because tumor size changes caused by tumor cell necrosis may not necessarily occur in the course of immunotherapy. Besides, Sun et al. observed a significant correlation between the genomic and radiomic characteristics (P<0.0001) and the abundance of CD8 cells as well as tumor-associated neutrophils (P=0.0079), which are associated with poor response to immunotherapy (44). The study published by Ji et al. also validated that radiomics could separate patients who did and did not benefit from immunotherapy, they constructed 4 radiomics models to explore that whether radiomics can use in predicting the effectiveness of immunotherapy. And the sensitivity, specificity, and area under the curve (AUC) of the best model can reach 83.3%, 88.9%, and 0.806 respectively (42). From this point of view, radiomics may be used as one of the promising markers, through which, it may be possible to stratify people undergoing immunotherapy and screen out potential populations that may develop HPD. While more research is still needed to support this.
## (s10) Potential mechanisms
Number of References: 17

(p10.0) Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to participate in the development of HP. We here summarize the most commonly discussed mechanisms in the recent literature ( Figure 3). (49). ICIs such as CTLA-4 and PD-1, along with stimulating receptors like tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 4 (OX40) and glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related protein (GITR), are also expressed by T-reg cells. PD-1 works by blocking TCR and CD28 signals to inhibit the excessive activation of effector T cells (49). PD-L1 can increase the possibility of mutual PD-1 and PD-L1 signaling, allowing delicate control of immune cell homeostasis (50,51). Meanwhile, the survival and function of T-reg cells in TME are dependent on T cell receptor (TCR) and CD28 signals (49), and the blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 may activate the immune-suppressive function of T-reg cells, promoting the proliferation of T-reg cells, resulting in further suppression of immunity and rapid tumor progression (49). In line with this hypothesis, Kamada et al. found that non-HPD patients exhibited a drastically reduced ratio of effector regulatory T (eT-reg) cells to CD8 + T cells and the ratio of Ki67 + eT-reg cells to Ki67 + CD8 + T cells (mainly with Ki67 + eT-reg cells decreases) in tumor Infiltrating lymphocytes; meanwhile, HPD patients showed no significant change or just a slight increase. This clinical result was validated through in vitro and in vivo mouse models, providing strong support for the role of T reg cells in HP (27). TME Research shows that in HPD tumors, an immunosuppressive environment forms after ICI treatment. The presence of inflammatory cells in TME can lead to tumor escape by triggering local inflammation, remodeling matrix tissue, modifying metabolism, or promoting angiogenesis (46,52).      immune cell populations were significantly decreased while other immune cell populations that attenuate immune responses in the TME were upregulated in the HPD tumors after anti-PD-1 treatment (52). Another study by Lo Russo et al. retrospectively analyzed 152 patients with NSCLC who received immunotherapy and found an enrichment of tumor-associated macrophages in patients with HP. By using immunofluorescence staining, immunophenotypic macrophages were observed in patients with HP; CD163, CD33, and PD-L1 were all positive and co-expressed, and statistically showed different expression compared with non-HPD patients (P<0.0001) (23). In addition, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and high LDH concentration in serum may also play a part in affecting the TME. VEGF can influence the immune regulatory environment of tumors by inhibiting the maturation of myeloid and dendritic precursors and the recruiting immunosuppressive M2 macrophages which may be involved in HPD (30). Finally, elevated levels of LDH promote hypoxia in the tumor and acidification of the extracellular environment, which may reduce ICI efficacy, leading to tumor cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and antiapoptosis (53).  (33), JAK-STAT signaling activated by ICIs can also increase interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-8, which can bind to MDM2 promoter and induce MDM2 expression (54). Moreover, MDM2 expression can regulate VEGF expression in some cancers, and this may contribute to a variety of MDM2 functions in promoting cancer growth and metastasis (55). EGFR activation has also been associated with the upregulation of the checkpoints CTLA-1, PD-1, and PD-L1, which can drive immune escape (56). Epidermal growth factor (EGF) signal transduction has also been shown to induce posttranslational modification of PD-L1, which might be associated with poor prognosis and metastasis (29).
