# A Review on Feed Additives used in Fish Diet

CorpusID: 235850944 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f03ce20bad61d4f75270e7bbba4412f0257a713](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f03ce20bad61d4f75270e7bbba4412f0257a713)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s19) IV. AN OVERVIEW ON THE RECENT STUDY RELATING THE INCORPORATION OF FEED ADDITIVES IN FISH DIET
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) Authors [23] suggested that the new aspects of using some safe feed additives on alleviated imidacloprid toxicity in farmed fish: a review. Investigators was [24] reviewed that the fish and shellfish are precious and cheap sources of Omega fatty acids and several other important nutrients for human consumption. There is critical need to study further on novel feed additives similar to inclusion of herbs on fish feeds which decrease feed expenditure, highest digestibility and prevention of remaining effects of hormones and antibiotics on fish muscles which in returns have effects on human that consumes them. The fishing have also been connected with a fast increase in fish consumption, as well as the presence of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, which are essential for humans other than high quality and feed additives. According to [25] the feed contain useful feed additives encourage the growth and physical condition of tilapia, get better their immune systems, and encourage physiological benefits away from traditional feeds. The feed additives such as probiotics, prebiotics, phytogenic substances, immune-stimulants, enzymes, hormones, mycotoxin binders, organic acids etc. are best functional feed additives.
