# minerals Advances in Blast-Induced Impact Prediction-A Review of Machine Learning Applications

CorpusID: 236226442 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb6c6622339c0e4455da96a169aafe3d0e69e198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb6c6622339c0e4455da96a169aafe3d0e69e198)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s6) Empirical Models
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Empirical blast impact prediction models are established following rigorous and extensive field studies; data collection; and site observations of several blast parameters, including blast geometry, the geology of the area, rock type, blast direction, wind direction, the location of building structures relative to a blast zone, etc. The empirical models are based on two main factors: (1) the maximum charge per delay and (2) the distance from the blast face to the monitoring point. The models are generally mine-specific due to the heterogeneity of geological formations and variations in site conditions from one location to another. To apply empirical models for site-specific predictions of blast impacts, the models are calibrated using field measurements and established site constants. Tables 3-5 are summaries of some empirical models for predicting blast-induced ground vibrations, airblast/air overpressure, and flyrock, respectively. The models presented in these tables are not exhaustive, and references can be made to Murmu et al. [12] and Kumar et al. [43] for a more comprehensive list, particularly for blast-induced ground vibrations. Table 3. Empirical models for predicting blast-induced ground vibrations.
## (s8) Empirical Models
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Empirical blast impact prediction models are established following rigorous and extensive field studies; data collection; and site observations of several blast parameters, including blast geometry, the geology of the area, rock type, blast direction, wind direction, the location of building structures relative to a blast zone, etc. The empirical models are based on two main factors: (1) the maximum charge per delay and (2) the distance from the blast face to the monitoring point. The models are generally mine-specific due to the heterogeneity of geological formations and variations in site conditions from one location to another. To apply empirical models for site-specific predictions of blast impacts, the models are calibrated using field measurements and established site constants. Tables 3-5 are summaries of some empirical models for predicting blast-induced ground vibrations, airblast/air overpressure, and flyrock, respectively. The models presented in these tables are not exhaustive, and references can be made to Murmu et al. [12] and Kumar et al. [43] for a more comprehensive list, particularly for blast-induced ground vibrations. Table 3. Empirical models for predicting blast-induced ground vibrations.
## (s13) Ground Vibration
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Several ML models, including the ANN, RF, SVM, and logistic regression, have been employed in predicting and modeling blast-induced ground vibrations. Currently, ground vibrations are, by far, the most studied blast impact for many ML applications. The prediction procedure involves the selection of input parameters, a training model, and predicting the outcome. The input parameters can vary from two to as many as possible, depending on the strength of the algorithm and the computing resources available. Different studies have considered different sets of influential factors in predicting the ground vibrations and designed varying ANN architectures to ensure the accuracy of these predictions. Some of these studies only considered as few as two parameters, while others considered as many as 13 parameters to predict the blast-induced ground vibrations [80]. In fact, due to the complexity of the blast phenomenon and the many factors involved, it has been a challenge to identify the specific influential factors. Nevertheless, studies have considered explosive characteristics, blast design parameters, geological conditions, and rock mass properties as the major factors influencing blast-induced ground vibrations. Among the main factors, the distances between the blast zone and monitoring point, maximum charge per delay, velocity of detonation, blasthole depth, burden, spacing, stemming height, powder factor, rock-quality designation (RQD) and p-wave velocity were the most common factors in estimating blast-induced ground vibrations. Due to the limitations of the parameters and datasets, studies have tried to change the number of hidden layers and the hidden neurons to ensure the accuracy of their predictions [81]. For instance, Amnieh et al. [82] designed an ANN model with four hidden layers (hidden neurons in each layer: 20-17-15-10) and four influential parameters that showed better performances in predicting the PPV for a problem with 25 datasets.
