# coatings Current Challenges and Innovative Developments in Hydroxyapatite-Based Coatings on Metallic Materials for Bone Implantation: A Review

CorpusID: 230628166 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12452707df11fc2137929fa1a7d92f992146ba7c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12452707df11fc2137929fa1a7d92f992146ba7c)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Metals
Number of References: 12

(p1.0) Density (g/cm 3  HAp can be coated on metallic implants using various coating techniques [19]. The non-bioactivity factor of metals can be easily compensated by using HAp. The metallic implant with HAp coating supports new bone development due to strong interface between the coating and host tissue [20]. Additionally, HAp coating also acts as a corrosion control film against aggressive body fluids. This HAp film also retards the dissolution rate of metallic ions thus minimizing chances of leaching [21]. Several coating methods are available for the deposition of HAp on metallic implants. These methods include sol-gel, dip coating, electrochemical deposition, chemical vapor deposition, thermal spraying, radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering, micro-arc oxidation (MAO), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), plasma spraying, and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) [22]. Thermal spray coating is the most efficient and commonly applied nowadays on metallic implants due to its uniform coating layer on the metal surfaces [23].
## (s2) Theory of Adhesive Bond
Number of References: 16

(p2.0) The functionality and strength of coating layers on metallic substrate depend upon two fundamental characteristics i.e., cohesion and adhesion [76]. Adhesion is attractive force between various layers that hold the two surfaces. This force resists the applied stress to separate the two surfaces. Cohesion is the internal attractive force between molecules of a coating film. This force is responsible for holding the coating film bonded together as shown in Figure 1 below. The adhesion and cohesion forces between adhesive and metallic substrate are seen in Figure 1A,B respectively. The adhesive force between metallic substrate and adhesive is classified into three types (i) specific adhesion, (ii) mechanical force, and (iii) efficient adhesion [78,79]. The specific adhesion arises due to the presence of attractive forces between dissimilar molecules whereas mechanical adhesion is associated with forces present due to penetration of adhesive inside the microstructures of a substrate. At the same time, specific adhesion and mechanical adhesion combine to yield adhesion that holds the substrate and coating layer. The efficiency of this adhesion is dependent upon adhesive and cohesive forces. The adhesive layer failure results due to the breakage of the bond between the adhesive layer and substrate [80].

(p2.1) The functionality and strength of coating layers on metallic substrate depend upon two fundamental characteristics i.e., cohesion and adhesion [76]. Adhesion is attractive force between various layers that hold the two surfaces. This force resists the applied stress to separate the two surfaces. Cohesion is the internal attractive force between molecules of a coating film. This force is responsible for holding the coating film bonded together as shown in Figure 1 below. The adhesion and cohesion forces between adhesive and metallic substrate are seen in Figure 1A,B respectively. The adhesive force between metallic substrate and adhesive is classified into three types (i) specific adhesion, (ii) mechanical force, and (iii) efficient adhesion [78,79]. The specific adhesion arises due to the presence of attractive forces between dissimilar molecules whereas mechanical adhesion is associated with forces present due to penetration of adhesive inside the microstructures of a substrate. At the same time, specific adhesion and mechanical adhesion combine to yield adhesion that holds the substrate and coating layer. The efficiency of this adhesion is dependent upon adhesive and cohesive forces. The adhesive layer failure results due to the breakage of the bond between the adhesive layer and substrate [80].
## (s3) Theory behind Adhesion
Number of References: 16

(p3.0) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].

(p3.1) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].
## (s5) Theory behind Adhesion
Number of References: 16

(p5.0) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].

(p5.1) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].
## (s9) Biomimetic Deposition
Number of References: 12

(p9.0) The biomimetic method constitutes of mimicking natural building processes of bone. In this way, HAp can be used to enhance the osseointegration of natural bone and coated artificial implant [121,122]. The biomimetic coating process promotes the adhesion and proliferation of osteoblast cells, as it mimics the properties of natural bone tissues. A biomimetic method like other chemical coating processes needs the presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the implant. This functional group can easily attach with the pre-treatment step using acid or alkali. These functional groups on the substrate surface facilitated the CaP nucleation process with succeeding crystallization to promote apatite formation. The biomimetic coating processes occurred at normal conditions of pH and temperature [123][124][125][126]. Figure 3 below shows a biomimetic coating in SBF. Table 4 shows different raw materials and operating parameters used during the biomimetic coating.
## (s10) Biomimetic Deposition
Number of References: 24

(p10.0) The biomimetic method constitutes of mimicking natural building processes of bone. In this way, HAp can be used to enhance the osseointegration of natural bone and coated artificial implant [121,122]. The biomimetic coating process promotes the adhesion and proliferation of osteoblast cells, as it mimics the properties of natural bone tissues. A biomimetic method like other chemical coating processes needs the presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the implant. This functional group can easily attach with the pre-treatment step using acid or alkali. These functional groups on the substrate surface facilitated the CaP nucleation process with succeeding crystallization to promote apatite formation. The biomimetic coating processes occurred at normal conditions of pH and temperature [123][124][125][126]. Figure 3 below shows a biomimetic coating in SBF. Table 4 shows different raw materials and operating parameters used during the biomimetic coating.    

(p10.1) The biomimetic method constitutes of mimicking natural building processes of bone. In this way, HAp can be used to enhance the osseointegration of natural bone and coated artificial implant [121,122]. The biomimetic coating process promotes the adhesion and proliferation of osteoblast cells, as it mimics the properties of natural bone tissues. A biomimetic method like other chemical coating processes needs the presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the implant. This functional group can easily attach with the pre-treatment step using acid or alkali. These functional groups on the substrate surface facilitated the CaP nucleation process with succeeding crystallization to promote apatite formation. The biomimetic coating processes occurred at normal conditions of pH and temperature [123][124][125][126]. Figure 3 below shows a biomimetic coating in SBF. Table 4 shows different raw materials and operating parameters used during the biomimetic coating.    
## (s11) Chemical Vapor Deposition
Number of References: 16

(p11.0) Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a coating technique that uses volatile precursors to coat pre-heated substrates via reaction or decomposition on the surface as shown in the Figure 4 [130,131]. CVD is widely used to coat metal implants with HAp and calcium phosphate-based coating [132]. The most promising feature of CVD is that it can control the crystal phases and micro-structures formation during coating. Additionally, it can able to coat complex metallic shapes with uniform coating [131]. Table 5 below shows different raw materials and operating parameters applied during CVD.  

(p11.1) Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a coating technique that uses volatile precursors to coat pre-heated substrates via reaction or decomposition on the surface as shown in the Figure 4 [130,131]. CVD is widely used to coat metal implants with HAp and calcium phosphate-based coating [132]. The most promising feature of CVD is that it can control the crystal phases and micro-structures formation during coating. Additionally, it can able to coat complex metallic shapes with uniform coating [131]. Table 5 below shows different raw materials and operating parameters applied during CVD.  
## (s14) Thermal Spraying
Number of References: 24

(p14.0) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].

(p14.1) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].
## (s15) Plasma Spraying
Number of References: 32

(p15.0) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7.Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bioactive coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 °C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating 

(p15.1) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7.Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bioactive coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 °C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating 
## (s16) Thermal Spraying
Number of References: 24

(p16.0) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].

(p16.1) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].
## (s17) Plasma Spraying
Number of References: 72

(p17.0) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7. Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bio-active coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 • C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 • C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.

(p17.1) Coatings 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32 thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 °C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.  

(p17.2) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7. Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bio-active coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 • C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 • C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.

(p17.3) Coatings 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32 thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 °C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.  
## (s18) High-Velocity Suspension Flame Spraying (HVSFS)
Number of References: 16

(p18.0) A high-velocity oxygen-fuel flame spray technique has been used to obtain uniformity by coating suspensions using a spray mechanism as shown in Figure 8 [177,178]. Few difficulties may encounter due to the handling of suspensions. This problem can be resolved by using axial powder injection. In this process, high-velocity suspension flame spray (HVSFS) covers the injection complications [68,179]. The  

(p18.1) A high-velocity oxygen-fuel flame spray technique has been used to obtain uniformity by coating suspensions using a spray mechanism as shown in Figure 8 [177,178]. Few difficulties may encounter due to the handling of suspensions. This problem can be resolved by using axial powder injection. In this process, high-velocity suspension flame spray (HVSFS) covers the injection complications [68,179]. The  
## (s20) Pulsed Laser Deposition
Number of References: 72

(p20.0) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a coating technology used to coat different substrates with the help of a highly accelerated beam of laser in the presence of a vacuum as shown in Figure 9. This laser beam strikes the targeted substrate with the material which we want to coat. The coating material starts to vaporize and form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1 µm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].

(p20.1) form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1μm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].   

(p20.2) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a coating technology used to coat different substrates with the help of a highly accelerated beam of laser in the presence of a vacuum as shown in Figure 9. This laser beam strikes the targeted substrate with the material which we want to coat. The coating material starts to vaporize and form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1 µm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].

(p20.3) form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1μm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].   
## (s68) Metals
Number of References: 12

(p68.0) Density (g/cm 3  HAp can be coated on metallic implants using various coating techniques [19]. The non-bioactivity factor of metals can be easily compensated by using HAp. The metallic implant with HAp coating supports new bone development due to strong interface between the coating and host tissue [20]. Additionally, HAp coating also acts as a corrosion control film against aggressive body fluids. This HAp film also retards the dissolution rate of metallic ions thus minimizing chances of leaching [21]. Several coating methods are available for the deposition of HAp on metallic implants. These methods include sol-gel, dip coating, electrochemical deposition, chemical vapor deposition, thermal spraying, radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering, micro-arc oxidation (MAO), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), plasma spraying, and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) [22]. Thermal spray coating is the most efficient and commonly applied nowadays on metallic implants due to its uniform coating layer on the metal surfaces [23].
## (s69) Theory of Adhesive Bond
Number of References: 16

(p69.0) The functionality and strength of coating layers on metallic substrate depend upon two fundamental characteristics i.e., cohesion and adhesion [76]. Adhesion is attractive force between various layers that hold the two surfaces. This force resists the applied stress to separate the two surfaces. Cohesion is the internal attractive force between molecules of a coating film. This force is responsible for holding the coating film bonded together as shown in Figure 1 below. The adhesion and cohesion forces between adhesive and metallic substrate are seen in Figure 1A,B respectively. The adhesive force between metallic substrate and adhesive is classified into three types (i) specific adhesion, (ii) mechanical force, and (iii) efficient adhesion [78,79]. The specific adhesion arises due to the presence of attractive forces between dissimilar molecules whereas mechanical adhesion is associated with forces present due to penetration of adhesive inside the microstructures of a substrate. At the same time, specific adhesion and mechanical adhesion combine to yield adhesion that holds the substrate and coating layer. The efficiency of this adhesion is dependent upon adhesive and cohesive forces. The adhesive layer failure results due to the breakage of the bond between the adhesive layer and substrate [80].

(p69.1) The functionality and strength of coating layers on metallic substrate depend upon two fundamental characteristics i.e., cohesion and adhesion [76]. Adhesion is attractive force between various layers that hold the two surfaces. This force resists the applied stress to separate the two surfaces. Cohesion is the internal attractive force between molecules of a coating film. This force is responsible for holding the coating film bonded together as shown in Figure 1 below. The adhesion and cohesion forces between adhesive and metallic substrate are seen in Figure 1A,B respectively. The adhesive force between metallic substrate and adhesive is classified into three types (i) specific adhesion, (ii) mechanical force, and (iii) efficient adhesion [78,79]. The specific adhesion arises due to the presence of attractive forces between dissimilar molecules whereas mechanical adhesion is associated with forces present due to penetration of adhesive inside the microstructures of a substrate. At the same time, specific adhesion and mechanical adhesion combine to yield adhesion that holds the substrate and coating layer. The efficiency of this adhesion is dependent upon adhesive and cohesive forces. The adhesive layer failure results due to the breakage of the bond between the adhesive layer and substrate [80].
## (s70) Theory behind Adhesion
Number of References: 16

(p70.0) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].

(p70.1) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].
## (s72) Theory behind Adhesion
Number of References: 16

(p72.0) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].

(p72.1) Adhesives are non-metallic compounds used to bind two surfaces that hold them together and counter their separation. The application of adhesive offers several advantages, including stress distributions, ease in processing, aesthetic, and low processing costs. This adhesive penetrates down through micro-channels of a substrate and joins the two surfaces with strong binding force [81]. When different surfaces are bind with the help of adhesives, many other forces also act on these layers. These forces include physical adsorption, mechanical interlocking, and chemical forces. Adhesives are classified into two major classes named reactive and non-reactive adhesives. In the reactive class, the adhesive reacts with the surface molecules and forms a hard layer. The adhesive layer sticks to the surface of the substrate due to hydrogen bonding between substrate and adhesive. This transfer of hydrogen gives rise to electrostatic forces of attraction which are associated with the progression of Van der Waals forces between the molecules. The coating material and substrate are chemically interlinked with each other. The strength of these chemical bonds is very high, which resists the deterioration of coating against the external environment. The rough surface enhances the interfacial area for better contact between adhesive and substrate. To obtain maximum results from adhesive, the adhesive must possess wetting properties so that it can completely wet the surface. After application, it completely dries out and boosts its strength so that it shares and transmits the load between the adjacent layers [81][82][83].
## (s76) Biomimetic Deposition
Number of References: 12

(p76.0) The biomimetic method constitutes of mimicking natural building processes of bone. In this way, HAp can be used to enhance the osseointegration of natural bone and coated artificial implant [121,122]. The biomimetic coating process promotes the adhesion and proliferation of osteoblast cells, as it mimics the properties of natural bone tissues. A biomimetic method like other chemical coating processes needs the presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the implant. This functional group can easily attach with the pre-treatment step using acid or alkali. These functional groups on the substrate surface facilitated the CaP nucleation process with succeeding crystallization to promote apatite formation. The biomimetic coating processes occurred at normal conditions of pH and temperature [123][124][125][126]. Figure 3 below shows a biomimetic coating in SBF. Table 4 shows different raw materials and operating parameters used during the biomimetic coating.
## (s77) Biomimetic Deposition
Number of References: 24

(p77.0) The biomimetic method constitutes of mimicking natural building processes of bone. In this way, HAp can be used to enhance the osseointegration of natural bone and coated artificial implant [121,122]. The biomimetic coating process promotes the adhesion and proliferation of osteoblast cells, as it mimics the properties of natural bone tissues. A biomimetic method like other chemical coating processes needs the presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the implant. This functional group can easily attach with the pre-treatment step using acid or alkali. These functional groups on the substrate surface facilitated the CaP nucleation process with succeeding crystallization to promote apatite formation. The biomimetic coating processes occurred at normal conditions of pH and temperature [123][124][125][126]. Figure 3 below shows a biomimetic coating in SBF. Table 4 shows different raw materials and operating parameters used during the biomimetic coating.    

(p77.1) The biomimetic method constitutes of mimicking natural building processes of bone. In this way, HAp can be used to enhance the osseointegration of natural bone and coated artificial implant [121,122]. The biomimetic coating process promotes the adhesion and proliferation of osteoblast cells, as it mimics the properties of natural bone tissues. A biomimetic method like other chemical coating processes needs the presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the implant. This functional group can easily attach with the pre-treatment step using acid or alkali. These functional groups on the substrate surface facilitated the CaP nucleation process with succeeding crystallization to promote apatite formation. The biomimetic coating processes occurred at normal conditions of pH and temperature [123][124][125][126]. Figure 3 below shows a biomimetic coating in SBF. Table 4 shows different raw materials and operating parameters used during the biomimetic coating.    
## (s78) Chemical Vapor Deposition
Number of References: 16

(p78.0) Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a coating technique that uses volatile precursors to coat pre-heated substrates via reaction or decomposition on the surface as shown in the Figure 4 [130,131]. CVD is widely used to coat metal implants with HAp and calcium phosphate-based coating [132]. The most promising feature of CVD is that it can control the crystal phases and micro-structures formation during coating. Additionally, it can able to coat complex metallic shapes with uniform coating [131]. Table 5 below shows different raw materials and operating parameters applied during CVD.  

(p78.1) Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a coating technique that uses volatile precursors to coat pre-heated substrates via reaction or decomposition on the surface as shown in the Figure 4 [130,131]. CVD is widely used to coat metal implants with HAp and calcium phosphate-based coating [132]. The most promising feature of CVD is that it can control the crystal phases and micro-structures formation during coating. Additionally, it can able to coat complex metallic shapes with uniform coating [131]. Table 5 below shows different raw materials and operating parameters applied during CVD.  
## (s81) Thermal Spraying
Number of References: 24

(p81.0) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].

(p81.1) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].
## (s82) Plasma Spraying
Number of References: 32

(p82.0) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7.Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bioactive coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 °C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating 

(p82.1) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7.Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bioactive coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 °C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating 
## (s83) Thermal Spraying
Number of References: 24

(p83.0) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].

(p83.1) The thermal spray technique is gaining a lot of attention and adopted as a latest method of coating which gives excellent properties to bio-medical metallic implants. In thermal spray, precursors in the form of solution or suspension are used for coating the desired substrate to impart desired properties. Thermal spraying is classified into three sub-groups, namely flame, plasma arc, and electrical arc sprays. There are different operational approaches to carry out thermal spraying on substrates. These approaches include atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying (VPS), liquid plasma spraying (LPS), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), high-velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), high-velocity suspension flame spraying (HVSFS), detonation gun spraying, and gas tunnel type plasma spraying (GTPS). All these techniques were used to coat metallic implants with HAp [158][159][160][161][162][163].
## (s84) Plasma Spraying
Number of References: 72

(p84.0) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7. Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bio-active coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 • C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 • C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.

(p84.1) Coatings 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32 thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 °C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.  

(p84.2) Plasma spray is a commonly used technique nowadays to coat bio-active HAp on bio-medical implants [164][165][166]. This technique used an electric arc of high temperature and pressure for melting and showering of HAp on the metallic implants. The starting material of coating is dried HAp which is converted into plasma with the help of thermal plasma jet. After that the generated high temperature plasma contacts the surface of substrate and adheres on it as shown in Figure 7. Another type of plasma deposition includes air or vacuum spray, which is a more established technique. The HAp coating on a substrate by using this technique is stronger with superior properties. The temperature of jets varies from 10,000 K-30,000 K which decreases with a decrease in distance from the jet nozzle [167,168]. This particular technique is used for bio-active coatings on different bio-medical implant materials. The only limitation of the plasma spray process is the deformation of HAp structure due to high temperature coating operation. Sometimes high temperature operation causes reduced adhesive strength of HAp layer and metal surface [169]. The structural properties of coated HAp can be altered by using post heat treatment. The coated HAp annealed at 400 • C for 90 h. This results in the transformation of HAp structure and increased its crystallinity [170]. Higher crystalline structure favors good adhesive strength between implant and damaged tissues [171]. On the other hand, high temperature heat treatment also reduces the fatigue stresses on the surface as coating thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 • C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.

(p84.3) Coatings 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32 thickness decreases along with the color of coating. This post coating heat treatment at 700 °C for 1 h also enhances the purity of coating by removal of any excess water and impurities [172,173]. The metallic implants coated with HAp using plasma spray enhance the osteoconductivity due to the strong bonding of HAp with the metal surface [174][175][176]. The research studies using the plasma spray technique are displayed in Table 7 below.  
## (s85) High-Velocity Suspension Flame Spraying (HVSFS)
Number of References: 16

(p85.0) A high-velocity oxygen-fuel flame spray technique has been used to obtain uniformity by coating suspensions using a spray mechanism as shown in Figure 8 [177,178]. Few difficulties may encounter due to the handling of suspensions. This problem can be resolved by using axial powder injection. In this process, high-velocity suspension flame spray (HVSFS) covers the injection complications [68,179]. The  

(p85.1) A high-velocity oxygen-fuel flame spray technique has been used to obtain uniformity by coating suspensions using a spray mechanism as shown in Figure 8 [177,178]. Few difficulties may encounter due to the handling of suspensions. This problem can be resolved by using axial powder injection. In this process, high-velocity suspension flame spray (HVSFS) covers the injection complications [68,179]. The  
## (s87) Pulsed Laser Deposition
Number of References: 72

(p87.0) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a coating technology used to coat different substrates with the help of a highly accelerated beam of laser in the presence of a vacuum as shown in Figure 9. This laser beam strikes the targeted substrate with the material which we want to coat. The coating material starts to vaporize and form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1 µm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].

(p87.1) form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1μm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].   

(p87.2) Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is a coating technology used to coat different substrates with the help of a highly accelerated beam of laser in the presence of a vacuum as shown in Figure 9. This laser beam strikes the targeted substrate with the material which we want to coat. The coating material starts to vaporize and form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1 µm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].

(p87.3) form high-temperature plasma. This plasma strikes the target material and forms a thin layer of coating. For better coating and thin film without any defects, high vacuum atmosphere is favored. Heating of the substrate is also favored for achieving uniformity in coating [185]. PLD process has gained much attraction due to versatile coating characteristics along with a wide range of operational parameters as shown in Table 9. These parameters include uniformity, thickness, strength, crystallinity etc. [186]. The drawback of this process includes residual stresses which are associated with the failure of the coating. These residual stresses arise due to high temperature operation [187]. Another reason behind residual stresses is difference in crystal structure of HAp coating and metallic substrate. These residual stresses create defects on coating films which are unable to detect on a very thick layer (1μm thickness). Surface roughness also plays an important role during bone healing. The coating formed during PLD is more uniform which affects the response of nearby bone tissues for tissue regeneration. The coatings formed by PLD are mostly uniform with slight micro porous structure with surface roughness ranges up to a few nanometers [188]. For minimizing the stresses, post heat treatment operation is usually carried out. For the bio-implant, the existence of surface irregularities and porosity promote cell adhesion and proliferation due to larger surface area [189]. The response of the body towards HAp coating is affected by the particle size, texture, morphologies and surface area provided [190]. The rough surfaces of coating enhance the wetability which is required during growth and interaction with body fluids [190]. Coating surface chemistry and topography are also vital for good osseointegration [191]. The healing of damaged bone in the presence of a biomedical implant is similar to primary bone healing. At starting, blood is present which gradually transformed in to clot in between the implant and bone. This transformation is completed in the presence of phagocytic cells. If the implant is already coated with the bioactive coatings the response generated by them is fast. This response facilitated in quick bone regeneration in comparison with metallic implants without coatings. The bioactive coatings promote biological responses from the body e.g., bonding with tissues and tissue growth. Normally, there are two types of materials available. One possesses the property of osteoconductivity whereas the other offers osteoproductivity. Once these coating layers interacted with the body fluid they started to generate stimulus which facilitates in the bone growth process along the surface or away from the biomedical implant [192].   
