# Knowledge Representation in Learning Classifier Systems: A Survey

CorpusID: 2356998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd68a38678140ff8f544d026786422ea616366b5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd68a38678140ff8f544d026786422ea616366b5)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) The first framework of Learning Classifier System (LCS) labeled "cognitive system" was introduced more than 30 years ago by John H. Holland (Holand, 1976). LCSs were originally inspired by the general principles of Darwinian evolution and cognitive learning. The LCS framework was reformed to use reinforcement learning techniques such as Q-learning (Sutton and Barto, 1998) in order to ensure appropriate reward estimation and propagation. LCS is also known as rule-based evolutionary online learning system. It is a heuristic method in which a population of production systems are consisted and adapted by using genetic algorithm and reinforcement learning techniques. Each production system can cover small region of environment and represent some portions of the overall solution. Therefore, a LCS system is able to solve a problem by using the best evolved production systems in its population.
## (s7) Fuzzy Logic Based Representation
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) In the rule based classifier systems, the comprehensibility and interpretability are two must considerable features (Hayes-Roth, 1985). Besides, fuzzy logic is one of the best known mechanisms providing such properties. There are number of approaches to use fuzzy logic and fuzzy set theory (Zadeh, 1965;Zadeh, 1973 2008a). The main goal behind such efforts is combining the generalization capabilities of LCS with the fine interpretability of fuzzy rules to achieve an online learning system with more accurate, general and well understandable rule set. In the following, first, we briefly describe important works in this area. Second, a comprehensive description of notable approaches which try to embed fuzzy logic in knowledge representation component of LCS is provided. He addressed the classic "Competition versus Cooperation" problem in genetic fuzzy systems, (Bonarini, 1996;Bonarini and Trianni, 2001). He proposed a Michigan style LCS named ELF where the rule set is divided into subpopulations. To produce the correct action, the classifiers of these subpopulations cooperated whilst the classifiers in each subpopulation competed with each other. The behavior of ELF in overcoming some of issues of strength-based LCSs was verified by applying it to several reinforcement learning problems such as the coordination of autonomous agents. In (Bonarini, 2000;, a general framework of learning classifier systems were introduced and later this framework was extended particularly for XCS called FIXCS in . In (Bonarini, 2000), the different components of this framework have been analyzed to be consistent with fuzzy models. In addition, some features are introduced for the sake of classifying LFCS proposals presented in the literature. , named Fuzzy-UCS, extended this approach to be applied in supervised learning classifier system, i.e. UCS which is a derivation of XCS introduced in 2003 (Bernadó-Mansilla and Garrell, 2003) for classification task in data mining. In following, a comprehensive description of well known fuzzy representation which is successfully used in LCS realms to produce accuracy based fuzzy rule based system such as Fuzzy-XCS and Fuzzy-UCS.
## (s14) Tile Coding Based Representation
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Lanzi et al. had extended XCSF with tile coding prediction . Tile coding is one of the most common and successful methods to tackle complex environment in reinforcement learning realm (Sutton and Barto, 1998). In tile coding, the problem space is mapped into a set of overlapping tilings; each tiling partitions the input space into a set of nonoverlapping hyper-rectangles named tiles. Classifiers in XCSF with tile coding prediction have two additional parameters; the number of tilings and their resolution. The extended system can adapt these parameters through GA. Also the usual linear prediction function in XCSF is replaced with a tile coding approximator. So, the weight vector of each classifier contains the parameters related to each tile. Figure 11 shows how a classifier with two tilings partitions the input space and which tiles (states) could match the specified input. The new extended XCSF was tested on three multistep problems taken from the reinforcement learning literature: the 2D Gridworld (Boyan and Moore, 1995), the puddle world (Boyan and Moore, 1995), and the mountain car (Sutton, 1996). Indeed, such XCSF evolves an ensemble of tile coding approximators, each one on the problem subspace, instead of the typical monolithic approximator. The reported results showed that XCSF with tile coding can always reach an optimal solution and converge faster than XCSF with linear approximation.
