# Survey Summary on Salts Hydrates and Composites Used in Thermochemical Sorption Heat Storage: A Review

CorpusID: 236359453 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53de4c76dd6bede749fb9ed6e5ea0f23c971e984](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53de4c76dd6bede749fb9ed6e5ea0f23c971e984)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s29) Composites Based Binary Salts
Number of References: 5

(p29.0) Any material has its advantages and drawbacks. The combination of two suitable materials to form a binary salt can therefore enhance the efficiency and stability of the TCES material. In order to achieve favorable performance, for instance, a hydrothermal stable salt with a high deliquescence relative humidity (DRH) and a small amount of deliquescence salt were combined. Mixing sulfate and chloride was the most remarkable example of this. Chloride has a high hygroscopicity and is easy to overhydrate to form a solution in the hydration reaction; this drastically decreases the hydration reaction stability. In comparison, sulfate, due to weak reaction kinetics and insufficient transfer water vapor, experiences an incomplete reaction [57]. By combining these two salts (sulfate and chloride), the dehydrated sulfate was partly dissolved in a solution of chloride hydrated salt to form a higher hydrate state. This prevents the instability of excessive chloride hydration and increases the hydration kinetics of the sulfate salt. To avoid the reactor corrosion by chlorides, a mixture with a high sulfate ratio and low desorption temperature need to be combined [57]. In order to prepare various binary salts, Rammelberg et al. [192] mixed MgCl 2 , MgSO 4 , MgBr 2 , FeSO 4 , and CaCl 2 , examined the properties and circulation stability of each binary salt via a continuous process of hydration/dehydration. Surprisingly, the mixture of calcium chloride and magnesium chloride showed good cycle stability without reaction control to prevent overhydration and showed superior kinetic properties. Similarly, Rammelberg et al. [193] mixed MgSO 4 , MgCl 2 , and CaCl 2 salt hydrates in pairs in order to obtain three binary salt hydrates. At a constant vapor pressure of 21 mbar, the results of the hydration and dehydration reactions showed that the cycling capability of all three mixed materials was enhanced. The mixture of CaCl 2 and MgCl 2 showed an optimal cycling stability and, after 55 cycles, showed almost no diminution. Ejeian et al. [194] prepared MgSO 4 -based composites on activated carbon fiber ((ACF)-LiCl-MgSO 4 ). MgSO 4 was selected as salt in order to avoid solution leakage due to the excessive hydration and increase the composites' mass transfer capability and density of adsorption.
