# Control Strategies and Performance Assessment of Upper-Limb TMR Prostheses: A Review

CorpusID: 232382088 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97fe4693f29156a5c8af27a4f7b7500f8a9baf43](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97fe4693f29156a5c8af27a4f7b7500f8a9baf43)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Targeted Muscle Reinnervation
Number of References: 13

(p1.0) After an upper-extremity amputation, the employment of TMR allows for improving the functionality of myoelectric prostheses: the reinnervation of residual muscles creates additional myoelectric control sites available for obtaining the multi-DoF prosthetic control, without the need of switching between modalities available on the device [20]. In 1995, Kuiken examined muscle recovery and related changes in the motor unit population of "hyper-reinnervated" rats [18]. Only in 2004, the first TMR surgery was performed on one human subject with bilateral shoulder disarticulation amputation [21] Figure 2. In 2006, Kuiken introduced the following requirements to make TMR surgery successful: (i) separate regions of muscles and skin must be reinnervated by multiple donor nerves; (ii) EMG signals must be acquired from each target area; and, (iii) the prosthesis must be able to receive numerous EMG input signals and control several motors [22]. TMR can be performed for three different levels of amputation: shoulder disarticulation, transhumeral, and transradial amputation. The innervation strategies depend on the type of amputation [23]. For the shoulder disarticulated patients Figure 3B, pectoralis muscles are usually denervated and then reinnervated with residual arm peripheral nerves [22]. Afterward, back muscles (if possible) are also reinnervated to have more active sites. For the transhumeral amputees Figure 3A, the median nerve is transferred to the short head of the biceps motor branch to restore the function of hand closing or pronation; the ulnar nerve is transferred to a residual brachialis motor branch to have additional control sites for hand closing; finally, the radial nerve is reinnervated to the lateral head of the triceps motor branch in order to control hand opening or supination [24]. For transradial amputees, the control of multifunctional prosthetic hands can be reached by using additional Targeted Muscle Reinnervation signals for improving the function of intrinsic finger and thumb muscles: the distal median nerve is transferred to the flexor digitorum superficialis, while the ulnar nerve is reinnervated to the flexor carpi ulnaris [25]. When the muscles usually chosen cannot be reinnervated, as in [26], three bundles of the anterior tight muscle are used to obtain three active sites for the prosthetic control. The TMR is also an emerging technique for the treatment and reduction of the phantom limb pain (PLP) and neuroma pain [27], for the osseointegrated prostheses [28], and for the targeted sensory Reinnervation [29] of bidirectional neuroprosthetic devices. Finally, another important outcome is the use of TMR in the oncologic population, due to the potential to reduce pain without the use of opioids [30]. , and radial (red) nerves transfer on biceps brachii (orange), brachialis (violet), and triceps brachii (green) muscles of transhumeral (TH) amputees; (B) Musculocutaneous (black), median (light green), radial (blue), and ulnar (yellow) nerves transfer on pectoralis major (clavicular and sternal head, in red), and pectoralis minor muscles (dark green) of shoulder disarticulation (SD) amputees.
## (s13) Direct Control
Number of References: 37

(p13.0) Regarding systems with DC strategies, the following performance evaluation methods were taken into account: in the Box and Block Test (BBT) [60], the patient had to move the higher number of standard size cubes from one side of the box to the other in a maximum time of one minute; however, Kuiken modified the test extending the time limit up to 2 min., to use it with amputee patients who had undergone the TMR procedure. In the Clothespin Relocation Test (CRT) [21], the patient is prompted to move three clips from the horizontal bar to the vertical bar; the execution time that is required to complete the task was measured. The test was repeated three times. Instead, the Cubbies test [32] is a cubicle reach and retrieve test (Cubbies) composed of 15 cubicles, containing 15 one-inch (2.5 cm) cubes placed on an adjustable height table; in this test, the subject, without moving his feet, has to reach, grasp, and place the 1-inch cubes on the table from as many cubicles as he is able to reach successfully; the total time to grasp a 1-inch cube, place it on the table, and activate a buzzer is recorded. The score consists of the average time per successful reach and retrieval of all blocks in the work-space. In the Cups test [32], 11 plastic cups must be individually retrieved from an inverted stack and positioned in a prescribed pyramid arrangement; four upside-down cups on the bottom row, until one on the top. The final eleventh cup has to be placed upright on top of the top upside-down cup of the pyramid. The time that is needed to stack and unstack the cups is recorded. Finally, the Miscellaneous ADL consisted of a series of the following activities: cutting meat with a knife and fork; place three objects onto a tray and then transport the tray; place 3 1-lb cans into a bag with handles; open and close a jar of peanut butter; stir a spatula in a big bowl; open an envelope with a tool; wrap a package; pull on both socks; and, remove and put on a long-sleeved shirt.

(p13.1) The following six papers used the BBT (modified up to 2 min.) [21,24,[31][32][33][34] to evaluate the performance of the proposed control strategy. In detail, in Kuiken et al. [21], the comparison of the prosthetic control before and after the TMR surgery has shown an improvement of the new procedure. An increase in performance was present: +8.3 blocks, on average, over three tests. In Kuiken et al. [31], for the patient with TH amputation, the results were: +322% blocks moved with the experimental prosthesis. In Kuiken et al. [24], there was the evidence of an increase in the performance between pre-surgery and postsurgery: the average score over three trials changed from 4.0 ± 1.0 to 15.6 ± 1.5 blocks. In Miller et al. [32,34] and O'Shaughnessy et al. [33] the BBT (modified up to 2 min) was employed. In Miller et al. [32], the patient achieved better performance with the three DoFs arm: he moved, on average, 15.0 ± 0.1 blocks, while wearing the six DoFs prosthesis he only moved 13.7 ± 2.5 blocks. In Miller et al. [34], the improvements ranged from 95% to 271% (with an average of 198%) of the number of blocks moved. In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], both of the patients demonstrated an increase in the number of blocks (on average, over three tests) of 611% and 150% for patient 1 and patient 2, respectively.

(p13.2) The CRT was also employed in the following six studies [21,22,[31][32][33][34]. The task execution time of CRT equals -36 seconds in Kuiken et al. [21,22] and −54.24% in Kuiken et al. [31]. In Miller et al. [32], the subject was required to flex the shoulder forward once, and then sequentially activate terminal device, elbow and wrist rotations. This test showed that the subject was faster with the six DoF arm (58.0 ± 9.2 s of task execution time) than the three DoF arm (79.2 ± 14.3 s of task execution time). In Miller et al. [34], the improvement ranged from 31% to 55% (with an average of 45%) reduction in the time to complete the task. In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], there was a decrease of the time (in seconds) that is required to move three clothespins from one beam to another: 55% and 41% for patient 1 and for patient 2, respectively.

(p13.3) The AMPS test was employed in the following four papers [24,31,33,34]. In Kuiken et al. [24], it went from the score of 0.30 and 0.90 for motor and process, respectively, to the score of 1.98 in both cases. In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], a computer-tabulated score was reported, reflecting motor and processing function concerning activities of daily living. For patient 1, there was an increase in the score from 0.5 to 1 regarding the motor function and from 0.3 to 1.1 in the processing function. For patient 2, there was an increase in the score from 0.9 to 1.56 in the motor function and from 1.09 to 1.43 in the processing function.
## (s16) Results and Discussion
Number of References: 21

(p16.0) A comprehensive literature analysis on the most used prosthetic control strategies for TMR patients was carried out, when considering the amputation level of the enrolled patients, the number of signals of reinnervated sites, the number of controlled DoFs and, when available, the methods for validating the control of a prosthetic device, and the obtained performance. When the prosthesis is controlled with DC strategies (proportional strategy, usually), it is possible to use the simultaneous method for the selection of the joint to be controlled. The number of joints that can be controlled simultaneously depends on the number of input signals available. The reinnervated sites used to acquire EMG signals are usually three [21] or four [31,32,34,44,47] for SD patient, while it can be two [31,33,34,47] or four [24,44,45] for TH amputees. Especially when there are less then two reinnervated sites, additional signals from the residual muscles [21,31,33] can be used to actuate the prosthesis with the myoelectric control. However, patients simultaneously control, at most, two DoFs with the only use of EMG signals, whether from reinnervated sites or residual muscle. Almost all patients have demonstrated that they can control a three DoF prosthesis with F/E elbow, P/S wrist, and O/C hand movements, by switching with the co-contraction joint selection strategy from one of the two DoFs simultaneously controlled (usually elbow or hand) to the third one (wrist) and vice-versa. For patients with more than four reinnervated sites, as one of the TH amputees in [44], the P/S of the wrist can also be controlled simultaneously. In some studies, additional inputs were added to EMG signals, such as those from FSR sensors [32,34] or from switches [24]; these additional inputs allow for simultaneously controlling more than two DoFs, with a hybrid control. However, prostheses with more than three DoFs, as in [32], resulted in being difficult and less intuitive to control.
