# Contrast-Induced Nephropathy: A Review of Mechanisms and Risks

CorpusID: 235378070 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/888254f5d79834ee8ef5a61bbf7b4eaae3f51f45](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/888254f5d79834ee8ef5a61bbf7b4eaae3f51f45)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Diagnosis of renal failure
Number of References: 15

(p2.0) The diagnosis of CIN is typically based on an absolute (≥0.5 mg/dL) or relative (≥25%) increase in Scr from baseline [29]. According to some studies [30,31], Scr is not a precise marker of renal function due to at least three reasons. First, creatinine undergoes secretion by renal tubular epithelium normally. Second, there may be a discrepancy in its production from muscles, and it may vary with weight, race, age, and sex. Therefore, daily changes in Scr do not necessarily reflect changes in kidney function in patients with renal disease. Third, there is a dilution of creatinine during volume overload that may occur in patients with renal disease [31].

(p2.1) Because of these possible limitations of using only creatinine, numerous biomarkers of tubular injury have been considered. One such marker is plasma cystatin-C (Cys-C) which is an endogenous low-molecularweight protease inhibitor that is easily filtered across the glomerular membrane and is neither secreted nor reabsorbed along the nephron. Cys-C is distributed in the extracellular fluid volume [32], while Scr is circulated in the total body water [33], a volume which is three times greater. Therefore, serum Cys-C increases more quickly than Scr when glomerular filtration rate (GFR) drops. During renal injury, a decrease in GFR leads to an increase in serum Cys-C, which occurs much earlier than the increase in Scr [34]. Due to its short half-life, Cys-C shows earlier changes in serum levels in comparison to Scr. Thus, making it a better marker than Scr as an indicator of GFR [34].

(p2.2) Another potential early marker of renal dysfunction is plasma neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL). NGAL is a protein related to human neutrophil gelatinase that belongs to the superfamily of lipocalins, which are small extracellular proteins serving to transport small hydrophobic molecules, such as lipids, pheromones, and retinoids [35]. Subsequent to renal tubular cell damage, NGAL is released into the plasma and urine; and is therefore increased in both urine and plasma much sooner (within two hours) than Scr [36]. In a prospective study by Wagener et al. [37] involving 81 adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery at Columbia University Medical Center of New York, 16 (20%) developed postoperative ARD. It was revealed that patients developing postoperative ARD had considerably higher urinary NGAL concentrations soon after cardiac surgery. These findings may improve the early detection of CIN and prevent progression to renal failure.

(p2.3) An additional marker of renal dysfunction is urinary liver-type fatty acid-binding protein (L-FABP) which is expressed in renal proximal tubules, secreted into urine, and is caused by decreased peritubular capillary blood flow and associated cellular hypoxia. The main role of FABP is to facilitate lipid transport in the renal tubules to the mitochondria or peroxisomes where they are metabolized by β-oxidation [38]. Experimental studies have revealed that urinary L-FABP has been elevated a few hours after cardiopulmonary bypass surgery, appearing as an independent risk indicator of ARD post-cardiac surgery, suggesting it may be a predictive early biomarker of ARD after cardiac surgery [39]. In an additional experiment, Bachorzewska-Gajewska et al. [36] studied 25 patients who had normal Scr and underwent percutaneous coronary intervention for unstable angina. It was shown that there was a significant increase in urinary L-FABP just after four hours and remained elevated for up to 48 hours [36].
## (s3) Prevention strategies
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) Intravenous fluid hydration with normal saline is a low cost and low-risk fluid therapy found to be one of the main prevention strategies for CIN. Hydration increases intravascular volume, dilutes overall intravascular contrast load, and promotes diuresis [40]. Most importantly, hydration decreases the activity of reninangiotensin system causing a reduction in vasoconstrictive substances, such as endothelin mitigating blood flow reduction and reducing cellular hypoxia [41]. It has been reported that the most effective method for reducing CIN risk is via hydration with intravenous isotonic saline prior to the administration of contrast [42]. In a randomized control study, it was shown that diabetic patients, patients receiving more than 250 mL of CM, female patients, and those underdoing emergent interventions were most likely to benefit from intravenous saline [43]. In this study, patients scheduled for elective or emergency coronary angioplasty benefited more from isotonic (0.9% saline) than half-isotonic (0.45% sodium chloride plus 5% glucose) beginning the morning of the procedure for elective interventions and immediately before emergency interventions.

(p3.1) Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is a well-tolerated and readily available water-soluble antioxidant, which has been shown to diminish renal damage in a CIN rat model [44]. Aside from scavenging oxygen free radicals that arbitrate cell necrosis following myocardial infarction and angioplasty, ascorbic acid can likewise act as an antioxidant to prevent ischemic cell death in the renal tubule [45]. A randomized, double-blind study reported that prophylactic oral administration of the antioxidant ascorbic acid (3 g at least two hours before the procedure and 2 g in the night and the morning after the procedure) appears to reduce the incidence of CIN in patients with preexisting renal dysfunction undergoing coronary procedures [46].

(p3.2) An alternative potential preventative measure is the use of N-acetyl cysteine (NAC). NAC is a stable form of the non-essential amino acid cysteine that acts as a protective agent of the renal tubules. It is fairly inexpensive, readily available, has an ease of administration by both oral and intravenous injection, and is well tolerated in patients [47]. One of the contributing factors often associated with CIN is vasoconstriction. By stabilizing NO, NAC may have a vasodilatory effect in certain situations [48]. For example, it was shown in an animal study that pretreatment with NAC enhances renal blood flow by direct renal vasodilation and by releasing renal prostaglandin E2 and renal cortical NO [49]. In a double-blind study [50], 83 patients with an Scr concentration of >1.2 mg/dL or creatinine clearance of <50 mL/min undergoing CT scanning were studied. Patients received NAC (600 mg orally twice daily) and 0.45% saline intravenously (before and after CM administration), or a placebo and saline. In patients receiving NAC, Scr assessed 48 hours after CM administration decreased from its baseline value of 2.5 ± 1.3 to 2.1 ± 1.3 mg/dL (P < 0.001). In the placebo group, baseline Scr values (2.4 ± 1.3 mg/dL) did not decrease at 48 hours (2.6 ± 1.5 mg/dL). This suggests that prophylactic oral administration of NAC prior to contrast exposure may help prevent renal damage.
