# Molecular Sciences Melatonin and Phytomelatonin: Chemistry, Biosynthesis, Metabolism, Distribution and Bioactivity in Plants and Animals-An Overview

CorpusID: 237937534 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e60bc845830d254ae1ef82173ff96a4d790e43b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e60bc845830d254ae1ef82173ff96a4d790e43b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s4) N1-Acetyl-N2-Formyl-5-Methoxykynuramine (AFMK)
Number of References: 16

(p4.0) Kynuramine compounds, such as AFMK and its de-formylated form (AMK), are molecules produced during tryptamine degradation. The redox activity and antioxidative properties of AFMK have been evaluated in several experimental models. Unlike antioxidants, such as vitamin C and vitamin E, AMFK can donate more than one electron [41]. In particular, Rosen and colleagues showed that AFMK can donate four electrons leading to the production of indolinone derivatives, such as Z-, E-isomers of N-(1-formyl-5-methoxy-3oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indol-2-ylidenemethyl)-acetamide and N-(1-formyl-2-hydroxy-5-methoxy-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indol-2-ylmethyl)-acetamide [42]. However, AFMK was reported to be a less effective free radical scavenger than AMK and melatonin [43][44][45][46]. The antioxidant properties of AFMK were demonstrated also in biological models. In particular, Tan and colleagues showed that the addition of AFMK to calf thymus DNA in presence of a mixture of prooxidant agents strongly reduced in a dose-dependent way the levels of 8-OH-dG (an indicator of DNA damage) [41]. Moreover, in rat liver homogenates incubated with H2O2 and Fe 2+ , 100 µM AFMK inhibited lipid peroxidation (LPO) and improved cell viability, although Fe 2+ chelation was not observed [41]. Kynuramine compounds, such as AFMK and its de-formylated form (AMK), are molecules produced during tryptamine degradation. The redox activity and antioxidative properties of AFMK have been evaluated in several experimental models. Unlike antioxidants, such as vitamin C and vitamin E, AMFK can donate more than one electron [41]. In particular, Rosen and colleagues showed that AFMK can donate four electrons leading to the production of indolinone derivatives, such as Z-, E-isomers of N-(1-formyl-5-methoxy-3oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indol-2-ylidenemethyl)-acetamide and N-(1-formyl-2-hydroxy-5-methoxy-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indol-2-ylmethyl)-acetamide [42]. However, AFMK was reported to be a less effective free radical scavenger than AMK and melatonin [43][44][45][46]. The antioxidant properties of AFMK were demonstrated also in biological models. In particular, Tan and colleagues showed that the addition of AFMK to calf thymus DNA in presence of a mixture of prooxidant agents strongly reduced in a dose-dependent way the levels of 8-OH-dG (an indicator of DNA damage) [41]. Moreover, in rat liver homogenates incubated with H 2 O 2 and Fe 2+ , 100 µM AFMK inhibited lipid peroxidation (LPO) and improved cell viability, although Fe 2+ chelation was not observed [41].
## (s7) Biosynthetic Route in Animals
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) A clear difference in melatonin synthesis between animals and plants concerns the availability of the precursor tryptophan. Unlike plants, animals cannot synthetize tryptophan de novo ( Figure 3), but it must be taken in through the diet. Similarly to plants, also animal mitochondria are the main biosynthetic sites and the compartments with the highest concentration of melatonin [89]. The melatonin biosynthetic pathway in mammals was first discovered by Axelrod's group in 1960, and now it is well defined [90]. However, the classic melatonin biosynthetic pathway has been expanded in all vertebrates and can be applied also to other animals, including insects [91].
## (s9) Focus on the Enzymes Involved in the Biosynthetic Routes
Number of References: 28

(p9.0) As previously described, the biosynthetic pathways involved in the synthesis of melatonin in both plants and animals have some similarities and differences, mainly related to the enzymes, their substrate affinity and cellular localization. Moreover, differently to animals, plants have an additional melatonin biosynthetic pathway that proceeds from serotonin to 5-MT with the consequent acetylation of this intermediate to melatonin (Figure 8). This evidence is based on some recent studies in which it was reported how the two melatonin-generating sites can crosstalk to maintain a stable supply of melatonin in plants when the chloroplast pathway is blocked. In this particular context, plants can switch the chloroplast-based production into mitochondria, using a biosynthetic pathway similar to that found in animals. However, some differences related to the origin and activity of enzymes have been found. In this section, the main differences in the activity observed for plant and animal enzymes involved in melatonin biosynthesis will be investigated and discussed. TDC is the enzyme catalyzing the conversion of 5-hidroxytryptophan into serotonin [73]. It was originally identified in Catharanthus roseus as a soluble cytosolic and homodimeric protein, composed by monomers having molecular weight equal to 54,000 u.m.a. TDC of C. roseus showed higher substrate affinity to tryptophan (K m = 0.075 mmol/L) compared to 5-hydroxytryptophan (K m = 1.3 mmol/L). On the contrary, TDC could not accept L-DOPA (dioxyphenylalanine) or phenylalanine as substrates [101]. TDC proteins purified from Ophiorrhiza pumila, Oryza sativa and Rauvolfia verticillata showed K m values for tryptophan (0.72, 0.69 and 2.89 mmol/L, respectively), 10-fold higher than the values showed for TDC purified from C. roseus. However, it is also known that other species, including Oryza sativa, expressed multiple TDC proteins in contrast to C. roseus that has only one isoform [102,103]. TDC is the enzyme catalyzing the conversion of 5-hidroxytryptophan into serotonin [73]. It was originally identified in Catharanthus roseus as a soluble cytosolic and homodimeric protein, composed by monomers having molecular weight equal to 54,000 u.m.a. TDC of C. roseus showed higher substrate affinity to tryptophan (Km = 0.075 mmol/L) compared to 5-hydroxytryptophan (Km = 1.3 mmol/L). On the contrary, TDC could not accept L-DOPA (dioxyphenylalanine) or phenylalanine as substrates [101]. TDC proteins purified from Ophiorrhiza pumila, Oryza sativa and Rauvolfia verticillata showed Km values for tryptophan (0.72, 0.69 and 2.89 mmol/L, respectively), 10-fold higher than the values showed for TDC purified from C. roseus. However, it is also known that other species, including Oryza sativa, expressed multiple TDC proteins in contrast to C. roseus that has only one isoform [102,103] Regarding the hydroxylation reaction occurring during melatonin biosynthesis, it is predominantly mediated in plants by two cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenases (T5H and the putative TPH). Likely aromatic amino acid hydroxylase, both require tetrahydrobiopterin as a co-substrate [104]. Tryptamine 5-hydroxylase (T5H) belongs to the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase family [105], and it is responsible for the addition of one hydroxyl group to the 5 position of tryptamine. This reaction leads to the formation of 5-hydroxytryptamine [67]. T5H displays not only a high substrate affinity for tryptamine (Km = 0.0073 mmol/L), but also a high turnover number (Kcat = 45/min) [105]. However, T5H enzyme does not catalyze the conversion of tryptophan into 5-hydroxytryptophan [105]. The catalytic efficiency (Kcat/Km) measured for rice T5H was 6164/min. This value was 25-fold higher than the value measured for rice TDC (Kcat/Km = 247/min) suggesting a rapid conversion of tryptamine produced by TDC to serotonin ( Figure 9). This data could explain the high content of melatonin in close-related species [106,107]. A suggestion of the existence of one or more enzymes involved in the synthesis of melatonin Regarding the hydroxylation reaction occurring during melatonin biosynthesis, it is predominantly mediated in plants by two cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenases (T5H and the putative TPH). Likely aromatic amino acid hydroxylase, both require tetrahydrobiopterin as a co-substrate [104]. Tryptamine 5-hydroxylase (T5H) belongs to the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase family [105], and it is responsible for the addition of one hydroxyl group to the 5 position of tryptamine. This reaction leads to the formation of 5-hydroxytryptamine [67]. T5H displays not only a high substrate affinity for tryptamine (K m = 0.0073 mmol/L), but also a high turnover number (K cat = 45/min) [105]. However, T5H enzyme does not catalyze the conversion of tryptophan into 5-hydroxytryptophan [105]. The catalytic efficiency (K cat /K m ) measured for rice T5H was 6164/min. This value was 25-fold higher than the value measured for rice TDC (K cat /K m = 247/min) suggesting a rapid conversion of tryptamine produced by TDC to serotonin ( Figure 9). This data could explain the high content of melatonin in close-related species [106,107]. A suggestion of the existence of one or more enzymes involved in the synthesis of melatonin comes from Sekiguchi mutant rice, which completely lacks in T5H activity, but nevertheless it is able to synthetize melatonin at lower levels compared to the wild type [86]. Further analysis showed that Sekiguchi rice switched the melatonin synthetic pathway from the classic plant type using a route similar to that used by animals, in which tryptophan is hydroxylated to 5-hydroxytryptophan by a tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH). On the other hand, although no animal TPH homologs were detected in plant genome [85], other scientific evidences support the presence of TPH-like enzymes in plants. However, this route exhibits a very low serotonin biosynthetic flux rate if compared to the main melatonin biosynthetic plant pathway. For example, (i) Griffonia simplicifolia seeds are notoriously rich in 5-hydroxytryptophan, with amounts justifiable by assuming the presence of TPHlike enzymes [67]; (ii) in in vitro cultures of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) was observed that the synthesis of serotonin mainly occurs via 5-hydroxytryptophan when 14C-tryptophan was added in culture medium, suggesting that it was produced from tryptophan by a TPH-like enzyme [108]; (iii) the soluble fraction of rice root extracts exhibited a tetrahydropterin-dependent amino acid hydroxylase activity, similar to TPH [109]; (iv) Park and colleagues observed a concomitant increase of the content of melatonin, tryptamine, tryptophan and 5-HT in transgenic rice plants (cv. Dongjin) with transcriptionally suppression of T5H with respect to the wild type [85].
## (s10) Caffeic Acid 3-O-Methyltransferase (COMT) (EC 2.1.1.68)
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) It is well known that COMT plays a pivotal role in the lignin biosynthetic pathway [123] and in the methylation of several substrates, including caffeic acid, 5-hydroxy coniferaldehyde, and quercetin [124]. However, it also covers an important role in melatonin synthesis by methylating N-acetylserotonin [125]. Like ASMTs, also COMT can O-methylate both N-acetylserotonin and serotonin [72]. Concerning kinetic parameters, it was recorded that in Arabidopsis COMT showed higher affinity (K m 0.233 mmol/L) and V max (30 pkat/mg protein) towards N-acetylserotonin than ASMT (K m = 0.456 mmol/L; V max = 0.11 pkat/mg protein), resulting in a 636-fold higher catalytic efficiency of COMT compared to ASMT. Arabidopsis COMT also converts serotonin into 5-methoxytryptamine, with much lower affinity (3.396 mmol/Land) and V max (8.8 pkat/mg protein) than that associated with conversion of N-acetylserotonin into melatonin [84]. Similar values were also measured for rice COMT [79]. Finally, in comt knockout mutants of Arabidopsis [72] and COMT suppressed rice lines [79], a marked reduction in the synthesis of melatonin was observed, assuming an essential role of this enzyme in melatonin biosynthetic pathway.
## (s11) Distribution of Melatonin in Plants
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) Several plant species are able to produce large amount of melatonin, which is consequently stored in specialized tissues or organs. Melatonin levels in plants vary from undetectable to very high concentrations [126]. Indeed, in some cases the levels of melatonin are comparable to that of animals, with values ranging from few pg to ng per g of fresh weight (FW). However, it has previously reported that some plants can produce higher amounts of melatonin in comparison to animals. Several authors assumed that plants grown under unfavourable conditions, including heat or cold stress, exposure to soil pollutants, or bacterial infection, have the capacity to up-regulate phytomelatonin production [127]. Furthermore, since phototrophic organisms need an higher antioxidant environment to protect the appropriate functioning of photosystems, the very high concentration of phytomelatonin in chloroplasts should not be surprising [128]. The stress promoting melatonin production was also observed in animals, suggesting the key role of melatonin to make organisms more resistant to stress conditions.

(p11.1) In this work, a database consisting of published articles in which the phytochemical composition of different plant raw materials containing melatonin was built. The database originally contained 2485 entries, which were individually analyzed to select papers that provided an accurate melatonin content via HPLC methodology (n = 47) [38,115,. Furthermore, information regarding the species binomial name, plant family, common name, and plant part used for the extraction was extrapolated along with the melatonin content. Data reported using different measurement units were homogeneous and fixed for the water content when necessary. Consequently, all data were expressed as ng melatonin per gram of FW. The total number of selected species was 131, and the estimated 493 average melatonin content was 579.38 ± 1513.28 ng per g of FW.
## (s13) Phytomelatonin Content within Plant Families
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) After a systematic grouping of the identified plants according to their family, cluster analysis revealed that the 131 analyzed species belonged to 35 different families ( Figure 11). The highest phytomelatonin content was reported for the Rubiaceae family, with an average phytomelatonin content of 5885 ng/g. Rubiaceae family includes the Coffea species, whose seeds notoriously have the highest phytomelatonin content. The Rubiaceae phytomelatonin content was twofold higher compared to species belonging to Violaceae, Pentaphylacaceae and Juglandaceae families. Other families noteworthy for their high phytomelatonin content were Lamiaceae, Rutaceae, Hypericaceae, Berberidaceae, Piperaceae, Ranunculaceae and Asteraceae.  [38,115,. Data are expressed as ng melatonin per g of FW Euclidean distances, calculated with centroid method. Statistical analysis and graphical representation were made using SPSS v. 24 software. Figure 10. Cluster distribution of melatonin within plant species, according to previously published data [38,115,. Data are expressed as ng melatonin per g of FW Euclidean distances, calculated with centroid method. Statistical analysis and graphical representation were made using SPSS v. 24 software. an outlier value. The cluster I was composed by nine families with a melatonin content ranging between 2 and 20 ng/g. The clusters II and III contained four and three families respectively, with a melatonin content lower than 1 ng/g. Among them the most representative were Basellaceae, Amaryllidaceae, Bromeliaceae, Musaceae, Actinidiaceae, Asparagaceae and Araceae; the families that included species with the highest melatonin content were included in the cluster V. Finally, the cluster IV contained fifteen families with a melatonin content ranging from 43 to 450 ng/g and a punctual outlier (Amaranthaceae family) that had a very low melatonin content. Figure 11. Cluster distribution of melatonin within plant families, according to previously published data [38,115,. Euclidean distances were calculated with centroid method. Data were expressed as ng melatonin per g of FW. Statistical analysis and graphical representation were made using SPSS v. 24 software. Figure 11. Cluster distribution of melatonin within plant families, according to previously published data [38,115,. Euclidean distances were calculated with centroid method. Data were expressed as ng melatonin per g of FW. Statistical analysis and graphical representation were made using SPSS v. 24 software.
## (s14) Phytomelatonin Content in Plant Tissues
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) In order to understand which plant organ was designated to preferentially accumulate phytomelatonin, a further cluster analysis was performed after grouping the plant raw materials into seven categories: (i) flowers; (ii) leaves; (iii) seeds; (iv) sprouts; (v) bulbs; (vi) fruits; (vii) roots ( Figure 12). erties of this compound that normally helps the more exposed organs to counteract potential stressful conditions. These data could be explained by the constitutive presence of other antioxidants in the fruits that effectively protect pigments from oxidative menaces. On the other hand, the low value recorded for phytomelatonin content in fruits may be due to influence of harvesting time and post-harvest condition, in addition to ripeness stage of fruits, along with the variability of the different cultivation conditions and environmental factors that normally may affect fruit maturation [127]. Figure 12. Cluster distribution of melatonin in plant organs, according to previously published data [38,115,. Euclidean distances were calculated with centroid method. Statistical analysis and graphical representation were made using SPSS v. 24 software.
## (s15) Role of Phytomelatonin in Plants
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) Melatonin is a plant endogenous compound with a wide variety of functions, ranging from hormonal to antioxidant. Recently, part of the functions and action mechanisms of this indolamine has been clarified, and this compound is now considered a plant master regulator and a valuable response marker to different kind of stresses. For example, in lupin and tomato, it was observed that melatonin content may simply increase by cultivating plants in field or chambers [127,174]. A similar trend has been also observed in Figure 12. Cluster distribution of melatonin in plant organs, according to previously published data [38,115,. Euclidean distances were calculated with centroid method. Statistical analysis and graphical representation were made using SPSS v. 24 software.
## (s17) Melatonin as a Promoter or Inhibitor of Plant Growth
Number of References: 35

(p17.0) The treatment of plants or seeds with exogenous melatonin revealed both a promoting and inhibiting effect on shoot, leaf, root growth and yield of several species in a concentration-dependent manner. Studies on Lupinus albus showed that the application of melatonin may act as a vegetative growth promoter in cotyledons [183] and etiolated lupin [184], by inducing growth of hypocotyls after the treatment at micromolar concentrations. On the other hand, this molecule seems to have an inhibitory effect at higher concentrations, displaying an auxin-like effect [185]. In particular, the growth-promoting effect of melatonin turned out to be 63% similar to that of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) [184]. This auxin-like effect was observed by several authors on different plant species. For example, the growth promoting activity of melatonin at nanomolar concentrations was evaluated on oat (Avena sativa), wheat (Triticum aestivum), barley (Hordeum vulgare), and canary grass (Phalaris canariensis). In these studies, it was calculated that melatonin activity ranged from 10% (oat coleoptiles) to 55% (barley coleoptiles) with respect to IAA [132]. In the same study, a concentration-dependent growth-inhibitory effect at micromolar concentration was also observed, especially on roots (56%-86% with respect to IAA) in canary grass and to 86% in wheat roots [132]. Similar effects were also described in red cabbage (Brassica oleracea rubrum) and in mustard (Brassica juncea) roots, where the treatment with 0.1 µM melatonin showed a stimulatory effect on root growth, whereas an inhibitory response was observed after treatment with 100 µM [185,186].

(p17.1) The role of melatonin in the induction of rhizogenesis was initially demonstrated in 2007 by Marino and colleagues, who observed a root primordia generation from lupin pericycle cells after melatonin treatment. This rhizogenic effect was confirmed in the following years by different authors and in a number of plants, including cucumber (Cucumis sativus) [187], in four cherry rootstocks (Prunus cerasus; P. cerasus × P. canescens; P. avium × P. mahaleb; P. avium × P. cerasus) [26], in pomegranate (Punica granatum) [188], in Arabidopsis thaliana [189,190], and in rice (Oryza sativa) [191]. Moreover, studies conducted on transgenic rice seedlings overexpressing sheep serotonin N-acetyltransferase, showed that the melatonin levels were 10-fold higher with respect to the wild type seedlings, and had a twofold enhancement of the root growth, demonstrating a direct relationship between the endogenous melatonin level and the root growth rate [191]. Consequently, due to some similarities between melatonin and IAA, such as the apparent auxin-mimetic action exerted by melatonin, the common precursor and the structural analogy, several authors mistakenly identified the melatonin as an auxin-mimetic molecule able to promote vegetative growth [25]. However, nowadays it is known that melatonin does not stimulate IAA biosynthesis or mimic its actions, but it affects the root growth in an auxinindependent manner [189,190]. This evidence comes from a study in which the expression of an auxin-inducible marker (DR5::GUS) was evaluated in roots of Arabidopsis thaliana after the treatment with melatonin or two auxins (IAA and NAA). In this work, the authors observed that GUS was exclusively expressed after IAA and NAA treatments [190]. Another observation comes from Zhang and colleagues, who not only compared the morphological root architecture of plants treated with melatonin to untreated ones, but also performed a whole-transcriptome sequencing analysis (RNA-Seq) [192]. In their experimental conditions, the authors observed that 121 genes were up-regulated and 196 genes were significantly down-regulated in melatonin-treated roots [192]. They also observed an increased number of lateral roots in treated plants compared to untreated. Moreover, because the auxin-related genes exhibited minimal expression differences, they confirmed the hypothesis that melatonin affects the root pattern in an auxin-independent manner [189,190].

(p17.2) However, melatonin treatment seems to affect endogenous auxin levels in many plants [193,194]. For example, exogenous melatonin pre-treatment increased IAA and Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) of tomato plants and mustard seedlings [185,195], whereas 600 µM melatonin decreased endogenous IAA level in Arabidopsis, repressing auxin synthesis related genes (YUC1, YUC2, YUC5, YUC6, TAA1, TAR2) and IAA efflux components (PIN1, PIN3, PIN7), then remarkably suppressed primary root growth [196]. Moreover, melatonin pre-treatment at relatively low dosage (50 µM) activated the expression of auxin efflux genes (PIN1, PIN3 and PIN7) and signalling transduction genes (IAA19 and IAA24) to promote adventitious root formation in Arabidopsis, tomato, and rice plants [195,197,198]. Further transcriptome analysis on Arabidopsis showed that sixteen IAA pathway-related genes were modulated upon melatonin treatment [197], and an improved root growth by low (10 and 50 µM) concentration of melatonin [199] was observed, however these positive effects were absent in several mutants of auxin transporters [197]. In rice, 10-20 µM melatonin pre-treatment increased the expression levels of OsIAA1, OsIAA9, OsIAA10, OsIAA20, and OsIAA27 [198]. These results suggested that melatonin might partially function as an IAA mimic molecule at low concentration, but the question remains still open.
## (s19) Melatonin Affects Photosynthetic Efficiency
Number of References: 9

(p19.0) Melatonin is involved also in the reduction of chlorophyll degradation and in the enhancement of photosynthetic efficiency under abiotic stress by regulating the accumulation and function of key biomolecules, including RuBisCO enzyme, proteins, chlorophylls, and nitrogen-related compounds [212]. Indeed, maize (Zea mays) plants treated with exogenous melatonin increased total soluble proteins, nitrogen, and RuBisCO content [213]. In rice, the treatment with melatonin caused a significant reduction in chlorophyll degradation, along with suppression in the transcript levels of senescence-related genes [214]. In apple tree leaves whose photosynthetic capacity was partially inhibited because of drought stress, melatonin was able to improve the efficiency of photosystem II under dark and light conditions, also allowing leaves to maintain a higher capacity for CO 2 assimilation and stomatal conductance [215]. Similar data were obtained in a study related to water-stressed cucumber seedlings, in which melatonin treatment was observed to reduce chlorophyll degradation, increase photosynthetic rate and activities of ROS-scavenging enzymes, basically reducing the effects of drought [187]. Other positive effects of melatonin application were observed on photosynthetic pigments and machinery of the macroalga Ulva spp. and Chara australis, which reported an increase in the efficiency of the photosystem II reaction centres [216]. Positive effects were also observed in shoot-tip explants of cherry rootstock, in which in addition to its rhizogenic effects, melatonin slightly enhanced the content of photosynthetic pigments [26].

(p19.1) Studies conducted on grafted Carya cathayensis showed that plants grown under severe drought stress displayed a drastic reduction of photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance, and transpiration rate compared to unstressed plants. Moreover, pre-treated plants with 100 µM melatonin showed less drought negative effects with an average enhancement of 24% in gas exchange parameters [34]. In the same plants, drought stress also negatively affects the maximum quantum efficiency (Fv/Fm) and the electron transport rate (ETR) of photosystem II (PSII), but melatonin pre-treatment was able to significantly improves the performance of PSII by enhancing Fv/Fm and Electron Transport Rate (ETR) [34].
## (s20) Melatonin Affects Antioxidant Defence System
Number of References: 13

(p20.0) All the positive effects that melatonin has on plants are basically related to its antioxidant and ROS scavenger activity, resulting in an anti-stress effect that is also expressed by its ability to up-regulate a wide number of stress response genes including heat stress transcription factor A-3 (HSFA3), ABA-induced Wheat Plasma Membrane Polypeptide (AWPM), cytochrome c-2 (CYTC2), stearoyl-acyl carrier protein desaturase (SAD), catalase (CAT), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), basic Leucine Zipper Domain 60 (bZIP60), luminal binding protein 2 (BIP2), luminal binding protein 3 (BIP3), and calnexin 1 (CNX1), and to down-regulate the stress-related genes calcium dependent protein kinase 1 (CDPK1), mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MAPK1), thermospermine synthase (TSPMS), ethylene-responsive transcription factor 4 (ERF4), heath shock protein 80 (HSP80), and protein early responsive to dehydration 15 (ERD15) [231][232][233][234].

(p20.1) Several studies have proven that the endogenous production of melatonin is a consequence of abiotic stress, suggesting that this molecule protects plant cells from oxidative damage. For example, barley [235] and lupin [174] plants treated with different chemical stressors such as zinc, hydrogen peroxide, or sodium chloride, showed an increase of the endogenous melatonin levels. Furthermore, the same plants treated with exogenous melatonin before being subjected to chemical stress, showed an improved vegetative development and survival compared to the untreated control. Similar results were obtained with pea (Pisum sativum) plants [236] and red cabbage seedlings [186] grown in presence of toxic copper concentrations, that showed an improved vegetative development and survival following melatonin application. In this context, the authors hypothesized that melatonin may stabilize biological membranes by triggering the activity of antioxidative enzymes and enhancing the scavenging of harmful ROS and RNS that normally degrade the polyunsaturated fats causing the formation of malondialdehyde (MDA) [219,237,238]. A more specific action mechanism involving the antioxidant machinery was described by Sharma and colleagues, who observed an increase of the antioxidant enzyme activity, including superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), peroxidase (POD), and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) [34]. In particular, they reported a 26.1% increase of the enzymatic activity for CAT, 21.42% for POD, and 8.9% for APX in grafted Carya cathayensis plants in comparison to untreated plants. Moreover, they also detected an increase of the gene expression of SOD (+56%), CAT (+85%), APX (+81%), and PAL (+200%) in treated plants [34].
## (s21) Melatonin Interactions with Plant Hormones
Number of References: 15

(p21.0) In line with the definition of plant growth regulator and biostimulant, melatonin may influence and promote plant growth in various ways, also through the modulation of the biosynthesis of hormones, including abscisic acid (ABA), brassinosteroids (BRs), cytokinins (CKs), gibberellins (GAs), jasmonic acid (JA), auxins (AUXs) and strigolactones (SLs). For example, it has been reported that the treatment of plants with melatonin negatively regulates ABA production by down-regulating the key biosynthetic gene, NCED3 (9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase 3) and up-regulating the genes related to ABA-catabolism [239,240]. Since ABA is actively involved in the response to water stress, melatonin treatment may help plants to counteract this type of abiotic stress. The drought resistance conferred by melatonin to plants is also due to the up-regulation of the cytokinin gene expression, such as histidine kinases (HKs), histidine phosphotransferases (HPs), and the response regulators (Type-A RRs, Type-B RRs). At the same time, melatonin is able to down-regulate the production of zeatin (ZT), a cytokinin derived from adenine that is mainly produced during biotic stress conditions [34].

(p21.1) On the other hand, melatonin also positively affects the biosynthesis of brassinosteroids (24-EBL) and jasmonic acid (JA) via the induction of various biosynthetic genes [34,241]. These processes result in an improved protection against different typology of abiotic stress in which 24-EBL and JA play a key role [242][243][244][245][246][247][248][249]. Finally, melatonin seems also able to induce ethylene biosynthesis through the up-regulation of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) synthase [229]. However, this up-regulation occurs in a different way from that carried out by IAA, as observed in a recent study in which RNA-Seq analysis were performed on Arabidopsis thaliana plants treated with melatonin [229].
## (s22) Melatonin Affects Primary and Secondary Metabolism
Number of References: 11

(p22.0) A metabolomic analysis conducted on grafted Carya cathayensis plants showed that severe drought stress mostly down-regulated the metabolite production, in fact 1661 metabolites were up-regulated and 2298 were down-regulated compared to control plants. The same analysis conducted on melatonin pre-treated plants grown under severe drought stress compared to untreated water-stressed plants, showed 1203 up-regulated metabolites and only 271 down-regulated metabolites [34]. Moreover, it was observed as a general trend that the severe drought stress condition down-regulated the primary and secondary metabolism, whereas melatonin treatment resulted in their up-regulation [34]. For example, the carotenoid pathway, that is normally down-regulated under severe drought conditions, is instead up-regulated after plant pre-treatment with melatonin [34]. This result can be related to the ability of melatonin in mediating the up-regulation of the genes involved in the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway, PSY1 (phytoene synthase1) and CRTISO (carotenoid isomerase) [210,222,250,251]. Additionally, the carbon fixation seems to be affected in a similar manner. Indeed, this process is down-regulated in drought-stressed plants, whereas is up-regulated in plants pre-treated with melatonin, due to the ability of this molecule to modulate the expression of key genes encoding for RuBisCO, FBA, FBP, SEBP, and RPI [222]. On the other hand, the sugar metabolism and the phenylpropanoid pathways seem not to be affected [34]. Indeed, in both conditions they are up-regulated. However, some experimental results suggest that melatonin can selectively up-regulate the expression of transcription factors involved in anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway (e.g., MYB, bHLH, and WD40) [252]. In this way, melatonin regulates the polyphenol biosynthesis via ethylene cell signalling, by up-regulating the expression of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), the key enzyme of the phenylpropanoid pathway [253].
## (s27) Melatonin in Other Pathological Conditions
Number of References: 13

(p27.0) Beneficial effects of melatonin intake from plant foods have been proven against a variety of diseases. Hepatoprotection by antioxidant constituents of coffee, including melatonin, have been observed in several animal model liver diseases, including hepatic fibrosis, steatohepatitis, and carbon tetrachloride induced liver cirrhosis [328][329][330]. The hepatoprotective role of coffee seems to be related to the antioxidant properties of its constituent, in particular to the high melatonin content [146,331,332]. On the other hand, an hepatoprotective role has been also demonstrated for melatonin alone [263,[333][334][335][336][337]. Finally, a recent study suggested that a general dietary supplementation with melatonin should be considered for preserving the liver physiology [338].
