# R E V I E W An Overview of the Efficacy and Safety of Ozanimod for the Treatment of Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis

CorpusID: 234767136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 11

(p0.0) Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common inflammatory immune-mediated demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS), affecting approximately 2.3 million people worldwide. 1 It is one of the most common causes of disability in young adults. 2 Although MS remains a chronic condition, early diagnosis and treatment are the keys to achieving satisfactory control of the disease. Currently, many disease-modifying drugs (DMDs) with different immunomodulatory mechanisms have become available and can radically change the natural progression of MS. Most of them have a significant effect on inflammation and are approved to treat relapsing-remitting forms of MS (RRMS); however, the longterm neuroprotective effects remain unproven. migration, rearrangement of cytoskeleton, adhesion, and inflammation. 3 By interacting with S1PR, the S1P analogue evokes several effects in different tissues and organs. S1PR is a G protein-coupled receptor with five subtypes (S1PR1-5) that are expressed in multiple organs and systems. 4 The primary therapeutic action of S1PR modulators is due to the inhibition of S1PR subtype 1 located on lymphocytes, neural cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, atrial myocytes, and atrioventricular (AV) nodes.- 5 Its inhibition blocks lymphocyte egress from lymph nodes and the thymus, resulting in a reduction of circulating lymphocytes and thus inflammatory cell infiltration in the CNS. Fingolimod (also called FTY720 and Gilenya TM ), a novel immunosuppressant, induces the sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by accelerating lymphocyte homing in rats. An increase in the frequency of CD62L-positive T cells in Peyer's patches by fingolimod-induced lymphocyte homing was observed by Yanagawa. 6 S1PR modulators can readily cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB), thereby allowing the establishment of a direct interaction with CNS receptors; this interaction may be partly responsible for the therapeutic benefit demonstrated by this class of drugs. 7 The modulation of S1PR in the neurons, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes has been hypothesized to promote myelin regeneration and to prevent the occurrence of synaptic defects, ultimately preventing neuronal damage. 8 These effects are thought to be attributable not only to the interaction with the subtype 1 receptor, but also with the subtype 5 receptor that is mainly expressed on oligodendrocytes in white matter tracts and on brain endothelial cells. 9,10 Interactions with S1PR5 may mediate oligodendrocyte survival that is essential for neuronal remyelination. 9 It is also thought that S1PR5 expressed on CNS endothelial cells plays an important role in BBB formation and permeability maintenance. 11
## (s1) Fingolimod
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) The first oral drug developed and approved for the treatment of relapsing-remitting MS in 2010 was fingolimod, a small lipophilic agent that is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase to become an S1P analogue. It binds to S1PR and induces its internalization; after fingolimod phosphate dissociation, the receptor returns to the surface. 12 Fingolimod is a non-selective modulator of all S1PR subtypes, except for subtype 2. Clinical trials showed a 60% decrease in the annualized relapse rate (ARR) in fingolimod 1.25 mg/d-treated patients versus placebo and a reduction in new T2 lesions and gadolinium-enhancing (GdE) lesions on MRI scans over 24 months of treatment. 8 The good efficacy, tolerability, and convenient route of administration have been key to the success of fingolimod. Nevertheless, its non-selectivity leads to interactions with S1PR 3-4-5, which are likely responsible for several of fingolimod's adverse events, including QT interval prolongation, hypertension, macular oedema, pulmonary toxicity, and possibly hepatotoxicity. 13 Moreover, the effects of fingolimod are reversible but are affected by its prolonged half-life of 7 d.
## (s6) Clinical Trials Phase I Trials
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The safety of ozanimod was first tested in two Phase I, randomized, double-blind trials. The data showed a dosedependent reduction in heart rate after the first ozanimod administration; therefore, a dose-escalation protocol was used in all subsequent clinical trials. 25 These studies also determined that ozanimod did not prolong the QTc interval at therapeutic and supratherapeutic doses and did not raise any new safety concerns. 32 Furthermore, the effect of ozanimod on circulating leukocyte subsets was evaluated using flow cytometry and epigenetic cell counting in an open label pharmacodynamic study in which MS patients were randomized to oral ozanimod (0.5 or 1 mg/d) for 12 weeks. Dose-dependent decreases in circulating B-and T-cell counts and differential impacts on naive and memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD19+ B cells were observed. 34 
