# Clinical Medicine Combination Therapy for Neuropathic Pain: A Review of Recent Evidence

CorpusID: 237331527 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a32844b3348474744027bfb2b2c380729f8bec38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a32844b3348474744027bfb2b2c380729f8bec38)

Fields: Medicine

## (s24) Outcomes
Number of References: 9

(p24.0) Five studies reported the number of patients with a ≥50% pain reduction [38,[42][43][44][45], and in other studies, this number was deduced from the figures [32]. Most of these studies also reported the number of patients with ≥30% pain reduction, except for two studies [38,43]. One study described the proportion of patients reporting ≥50% pain reductions and ≥30% pain reductions, but these proportions were assessed using a secondary analysis producing the overall percentage from all treatment groups on a three-branch crossover study. The number of participants could not be calculated from this percentage or from the diagram of participants included and withdrawn from the study [37]. Other outcomes such as adverse effects and the patient's overall impression of the change in pain relief are shown in a table in the Supplementary Materials (Table S1).
## (s38) Cannabinoids in Combination
Number of References: 4

(p38.0) One of the results of this review is that adding THC/CBD to a pre-existing treatment for NP did not show any benefits for these patients [43]. On the other hand, a recent review on only nabiximol (THC/CBD) for NP found that it was superior to the placebo but with a small effect size [49]. This small effect size alone may be the reason why it is not useful in combination. Moreover, there may be a difference between whether the CT is used with THC alone. Nabilone, a synthetic THC analogue, added to gabapentin (GBP) could be beneficial [39], but again, the results were produced from a very small number of participants, and the study was performed only for nine weeks. Findings indicating that GBP synergistically enhances THC have also been reported [50]. Thus, THC, but not a combination of THC/CBD, may represent a potential adjuvant for NP medications.
## (s39) Topical Treatments in Combination
Number of References: 9

(p39.0) Evidence for other topical treatments in CT is also controversial. Apart from the RCTs selected in this review, where CP8 was demonstrated to reduce NP as an add-on therapy [44], we also found three other non-selected studies on a lidocaine 5% plaster [51][52][53], one retrospective analysis on transdermal buprenorphine [54], and a very recent study protocol of a study combining clonidine and pentoxifylline [55]. One of the lidocaine 5% plaster studies [51] and the transdermal buprenorphine study not only were retrospective but also had a low number of participants, with different pain conditions and several concomitant therapies. Therefore, they were not suited for drawing any conclusions. Another retrospective study using a lidocaine 5% plaster as an off-label add-on therapy for different localized NP syndromes and conducted with 130 patients found that only 79 were still on the plaster after 3 months (44 after a year) [52]. Nevertheless, out of the 130, 66 reported >30% pain relief, from which 39 reported >50%. Despite being retrospective, this study suggests that lidocaine 5% plaster as an add-on therapy could have the same effect as CP8. Furthermore, an RCT for lidocaine 5% plaster against the placebo did pinpoint some findings about its use [53]. Randomization was stratified by concomitant treatment status, and no significant differences were found among the study groups, even though the treatment arm experienced better pain relief. A subgroup analysis showed that the add-on therapy group behaved almost the same as the placebo group. Hence, the results from the available literature on lidocaine 5% plaster are heterogeneous and inconsistent and should be clarified in a proper RCT for CT.
## (s41) Antidepressant and Opioid Combinations
Number of References: 5

(p41.0) The literature on antidepressants and opioids is limited too, but the results are more consistent towards a benefit for CT. In fact, combining antidepressants, be they tricyclic or otherwise, with opioids is a more frequent combination than combining antiepileptics with opioids [61]. Whilst DXT and methadone reduce cancer-related pain when compared with each drug alone (monotherapy) [62], adding DXT to an opioid-PGB therapy might have clinical benefits in alleviating refractory N-CP [32], and a superior efficacy of a nortriptyline-morphine combination has also been reported over each of these drugs in monotherapy [37]. Another RCT with a DXT-methadone combination could not be completed due to recruitment and retention issues [41]. Even though little evidence exists, the quality seems better for CT with antidepressants plus opioids than for gabapentinoids plus opioids.
## (s42) Gabapentinoids and Antidepressants in Combination
Number of References: 14

(p42.0) Another very frequently found combination is the one between gabapentinoids and antidepressants [61,63]. In fact, combinations of PGB/GBP and DXT/TCAs have been previously recommended for consideration as an alternative to increasing dosages in monotherapy for patients unresponsive to monotherapy with moderate dosages [8]. The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) guidelines have recommended adding venlafaxine to GBP in patients with inadequate pain relief on GBP monotherapy [64]. Recent evidence is contradictory, and recommendations may need to be reconsidered. An RCT selected in this review demonstrated the superiority for CT with PGB and imipramine. [38]. This RCT, though, had a low number of patients per arm, and the test lasted only for 5 weeks. The period was too short to show a persistence of the effect. Even so, PGB and imipramine in moderate doses was significantly superior to either drug in moderate-dose monotherapy. In another cohort study, PGB superadded to a pre-existing amitriptyline regimen helped to reduce pain [65]. However, though the authors claimed that the study was a randomized placebo-controlled study, the blinding and randomization procedures were not described properly. In addition, other recent contradictory results have been presented. In a post hoc analysis of another previous non-inferiority trial for DXT against PGB, patients treated with DXT plus GBP showed greater pain reduction than PGB monotherapy but not to DXT monotherapy, which was even more effective in patients who previously did not take any type of antidepressant [66]. Additionally, one of the other selected RCTs, the COMBO-DN study, did not find any statistically significant difference between the combination of DXT with PGB and high-dose monotherapy of either of them [42]. This RCT had some biases that made the results difficult to interpret. The result only lasted 8 weeks within the comparison period, no comparison for CT against low doses monotherapy was made, and the drop-out rate was high for several reasons: 109 out of 804 (13.5%) of the initial participants were drop-outs due to adverse effects, 10 dropped out due to a lack of efficacy, 42 dropped out due to patient decision, 64 dropped out for other reasons (noteworthily, 12 of them were withdrawn despite presenting a "satisfactory response" just before completion of the trial, and this issue, far from being odd, also appears in another selected study [44]), whereas only 290 completed the study out of 804 initially randomized. Additionally, in another cohort study, a combination of anticonvulsants and antidepressants was not associated with improved pain control at 6 months compared with individual therapy [67]. After considering these heterogeneous results, we are not sure recent evidence is strong enough to support recommendations on combining antidepressants with gabapentinoids. If a need for such combinations exists, the evidence shows it may be better to combine gabapentinoids with tricyclics.

(p42.1) Nevertheless, whether PGB should be added to the treatment of refractory uncontrolled pain, with an already broad treatment profile, remains to be answered. This was reported, with a relevant improvement in pain and treatment satisfaction, in two large observational studies [58,68], and neither TCAs nor opioids were found to be predictive factors for adverse events associated with PGB [69]. However, a re-analysis with pooled data from several RCTs showed that the therapeutic response to PGB was unaffected by concurrent NP medications and that the appearance of adverse events was unaffected too [70].
