# Pediatric Stroke: Overview and Recent Updates

CorpusID: 235721636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Prothrombotic States
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Although prothrombotic states are more commonly associated with venous clots, it is an important cause of stroke. This accounts for both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes. Up to 20 to 50% of children with strokes have an underlying thrombotic disorder; either hereditary or acquired [17]. Antiphospholipid antibodies, deficiency of protein C, MTHFR C677T polymorphism, factor V Leiden mutations, deficiency of antithrombin III, factor II G20210A, and elevated levels of lipoprotein(a), are examples of traits found to be significantly implicated in first occurrences of pediatric arterial ischemic strokes [18]. This also holds true for combined thrombophilias. Obtaining a family history regarding history of venous clots and strokes is essential. Also, a thorough review of medication list can aid in determining the underlying etiology. For example, valproic acid, an antiepileptic, has been linked to acquired protein C deficiency [17].
## (s8) Vascular
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Hemorrhagic strokes in childhood often occur in the setting of vascular malformations. Such malformations are typically due to genetic disorders or are congenital in nature like arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). AVMS are the most commonly encountered and are seen in setting of neurocutaneous syndromes like Struge-Weber disease, Wyburn-Mason Syndrome, PHACE syndrome, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and incontinentia pigmenti [17,19]. Arteriopathies are also a common cause of stroke. Arteriopathies can occur in the setting of infections and also with noninflammatory conditions like dissections and fibromuscular dysplasia as well as with moyamoya disease [19].
## (s11) Infections
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) A causal relationship exists between infectious processes and stroke; this includes bacterial, parasitic, viral, and fungal infections. Focal arteriopathy, vasculitis and or in situ thrombosis are common mechanisms for ischemia. These are often seen in cases of meningitis, encephalitis as well as with HIV and herpesviruses. Other common mechanisms occur either through direct invasion, prothrombotic state, accelerated atherogenesis, enhanced platelet aggregation, or secondary to an inflammatory response. Also, cardioembolic strokes can arise from endocarditis or with heart failure, for example, with Trypanosoma cruzi [21]. Subcortical strokes, in particular those involving the basal ganglia are associated with the Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV) [17]. In addition to HIV and VZV other organisms associated with strokes are: mycoplasma tuberculosis, influenza A, treponema pallidum, Parvovirus B19, and enterovirus, chlamydia pneumoniae, and aspergillus [21].
## (s12) Oncologic
Number of References: 10

(p12.0) Strokes can occur in the setting of cancer itself, or as a consequence of treatment, either through radiation or via chemotherapy. Patients with leukemia, and those with radiation therapy, have been cited as the most at risk [22,23]. Most strokes occur early during cancer treatment with a median time of 5 months after cancer diagnosis [24]. Children with cancer have the highest lifetime risk of fatal strokes and the risk is partially due to the exposure of radiation which causes strokes even decades after treatment [24,25]. The risk has been shown to be dose dependent [25]. In a study conducted by Haddy et al., radiation dose to the brain was significantly associated with long-term cerebrovascular mortality among 5-year survivors [26]. Sun et al. evaluated the relationship between cancer and childhood ischemic strokes from children enrolled in the International Pediatric Stroke Study between January 2003 and June 2019 and found that cancer was present in 3.3% of children with AIS and in 10.7% with cerebral sinovenous thrombosis [27]. These findings are consistent with the findings of other published studies, with hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke occurring at similar frequencies [22,28].
## (s19) Intravenous Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA)
Number of References: 7

(p19.0) The most comprehensive study to date regarding stroke and tPA uses in pediatrics is the TIPS study which was published in 2010. The TIPS study was an international multicenter, dose-adaptive, phase 1 study [42]. Children aged 2 through 17 years who presented with AIS were eligible for enrollment to receive IV tPA if initiated within 4.5 hours of stroke onset [42]. Three dosing tiers were planned (0.75, 0.9, and 1.0 mg/kg of IV tPA), given over the period of one hour [42]. The purpose of the TIPS study was to define safety criteria to guide the use of tPA in pediatric patients. However, the study was terminated due poor recruitment.

(p19.1) In a retrospective multicentric study in France conducted between 2012 and 2015, 11 pediatric patients (median age 11.8 years) with arterial ischemic stroke received intravenous recombinant-tPA [44]. The median time from onset to treatment was 240 minutes and the median time from onset to magnetic resonance imaging was 165 minutes [43]. Predominant clinical presentations consisted of acute hemiplegia/hemiparesis and dysphagia, and the median NIHSS score was 10 [43]. Most strokes involved the middle cerebral artery territory. No intracranial or peripheral bleeding was reported after treatment and most had a favorable outcome [45].
