# Purpose in the For-Profit Firm: A Review and Framework for Management Research

CorpusID: 234808799 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bbebac0dabd555a74e90f0b1ce66ef657b97b4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bbebac0dabd555a74e90f0b1ce66ef657b97b4a)

Fields: Business

## (s13) Generating Impact
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Why and when does purpose matter? Ultimately, the purpose of the for-profit firm should matter for all of its stakeholders. At the macro level, entire economies, societies, and communities are likely to be deeply affected by how firms frame, formalize, and realize their purpose. As noted earlier, firms may have to make difficult tradeoffs in order to create public as well as private value, including giving up opportunities for value appropriation that may undermine their purpose. The implications of such tradeoffs are not well understood and require further research. Critical questions concern not only whom the firm ultimately decides to serve but how its decisions are viewed by its stakeholders, an area that might be informed by theories of procedural and distributive justice as well as by research on social movements and stakeholder mobilization (Akemu, Whiteman, & Kennedy, 2016;Folger & Konovsky, 1989;Quattrone, 2015). Also potentially important is the firm's time frame for realizing its purpose. How do firms weigh short-term costs against longer term potential gains or vice versa, and how do these choices affect the economies, societies, and communities in which they operate, especially in the face of major economic or social crises such as those induced by the Covid-19 pandemic (Craighead, Ketchen, & Darby, 2020)? Additional questions relate to the macro-level trends created by the prevalence and priorities of purposedriven businesses in a given economy, society, or community. These include, for example, how value creation and capture may be affected by diversity of purpose among for-profit firms versus by convergence of purpose on shared priorities, such as climate change or reducing inequality. The answers to such questions will fundamentally affect the outcomes and impact of purpose-driven firms.
