# Flying Free: A Research Overview of Deep Learning in Drone Navigation Autonomy

CorpusID: 236298796 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1e33066557b26f24113450c9a852f7821aea874](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1e33066557b26f24113450c9a852f7821aea874)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s18) Areas of Concentrated Research Effort
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) The most common project archetype seen throughout the research pool follows DNNbased autonomous movement with a quad rotor drone trained from bespoke data [7] or transfer-learned from a pretrained network [25]. The most frequent focus of research work within the research pool was for basic autonomous movements. Though the quality of various implementations and methods of acquiring results differ, solutions trended towards the same structure of approximately 75-95% navigational accuracy inside the project's use case. Whilst this is a wide range of navigational accuracy achievement and exact tasks will differ across individual research works, the high levels of accuracy for DNN-based navigation policies indicate that they are effective in the environments that they are trained for. Most projects took the approach of reducing complexity either by not relying on subsystems such as GPS or network access, and/or by partially or fully focusing on optimising network efficiency for on-board operation. Most projects also avoided the use of any additional sensors, instead relying on a single camera system. No papers in the research pool considered the use of dual cameras for spatial awareness, which defied author expectations.
## (s20) Issues
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) Most research works explain their approach to model training and testing, explaining the chosen ground truth, labels and descriptions of how the navigation system interfaces with the CNN model. One issue to highlight, however, is a lack of uniformity of metrics in the domain. Some papers evaluate their approach using environment-specific metrics, such as the number of successful laps [46] and performance at different speeds [23]. In the DNN research space, the inclusion of visual descriptions of architectures and evaluation results comparing similar architectural or function-level approaches is crucial to the explainability of the project. The use of research work-specific metrics, when displayed without connection to a more common metric such as accuracy, makes it difficult to compare the performance of autonomous navigation approaches across the domain.
