# R E V I E W Depression and Anxiety Among Medical Students: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 233424642 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f391beced070aaac3044da3a8484fb184bfd68d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f391beced070aaac3044da3a8484fb184bfd68d)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s5) Difference Between Medical and Non-Medical Students
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Several studies evaluated the depression rate and compared medical and non-medical students. A British study compared the degree of depression in medical students with their non-medical peers and discovered that medical college students had a lower prevalence of depression generally than non-medical students. 21 In contrast, a meta-analysis indicated that the depression rate among medical students was not significantly different from non-medical students. 5 A Swedish study investigated the factors linked to depression and explored the frequency of depressive disorders at various academic levels among medical students. 12 The study demonstrated that medical students had a higher prevalence of depressive disorders compared to the general population. The Variation Across the Academic Years

(p5.1) The incidence of depression was found to be varied across the academic years in medical school. First-year students had the highest prevalence of depression (33.5%), and the rates gradually decreased until year 5 (20.5%). 5 According to another study, the highest rate of depression was diagnosed in medical students of the second year. 8 A Pakistani study stated a high prevalence of depression among newly entered students (1st and 2nd year students) compared to senior students. 20 In contrast, in another study, the risk of depression was significantly higher in third-year students (39%) compared to first-year students (28.4%), besides an increased level of perceived stress among the same group. 22 A study evaluated depression, anxiety, and stress disorders among medical students and revealed that the depression levels among students at the entry of medical school were similar to the general public, then progressively worsened over the academic period. 23
## (s8) Difference in Gender
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) A study carried out among medical students showed a significant gender difference with twice the rate of anxiety among females compared to males (40% versus 20%). 30 Another study in Brazil assessed and compared the frequency and severity of symptoms of anxiety among firstand sixth-year medical students. They found that females were more likely to suffer from anxiety than males. 31 In Saudi Arabia, a cross-sectional study showed a significantly higher rate of psychological morbidities, including anxiety, among premedical, 1st, 2nd and 3rd year female medical students (89.7%) than males (60%); however, no significant differences were found between gender in all other years. 32
## (s9) Factors Associated with Anxiety
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Several risk factors that predispose undergraduate medical students to psychological disorders, like anxiety, have been reported. A study in Pakistan described that drugs addicted students, students with a positive family history of depression and anxiety, and individuals who had lost a close relative in the past year were more prone to suffer from psychological disorders and being anxious than other individuals. 20 Another study demonstrated that students with economic difficulties were at a higher risk for such disorders. 33 In Egypt, a study estimated the frequency of depression, anxiety and stress symptoms among undergraduates in a medical college and demonstrated the relationship of such conditions with sociodemographic data. They showed that the female gender, university campus residents, pre-clinical years students, and students with lower academic accomplishment had higher scores of anxiety than other groups. 25 Other issues may cause a significant effect on medical students' mental and emotional well-being and induce anxiety such as long working and study hours, mastering medical knowledge, competition, and inadequate time for non-academic activities. 34,35 Additionally, anxiety was found to be positively predicted by a family history of mental disorders. 30 A study highlighted students' three top concerns: academic performance, the pressure to succeed, and post-graduation plans. 36 Further studies are required to determine the factors linked with mental problems such as anxiety that influence medical undergraduates' academic achievements. 
