# A Review of Data Analysis Techniques Used in Near-Infrared Spectroscopy

CorpusID: 236517634 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aacaf653a2d4e34d7d2f2881b0d7796df0a884c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aacaf653a2d4e34d7d2f2881b0d7796df0a884c3)

Fields: Mathematics, Physics

## (s5) Savitzky-Golay Filter
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Savitzky and Golay [36] have developed a type of digital smoothing filter known by their name in 1964. In this type of filter, the data set is fitted to a polynomial degree using the leastsquares method with the help of convolution. Convolution coefficients to be used in the Savitsky-Golay (SG) filter are predetermined according to the differentiation order and polynomial degree. Luo et al. [37] improved the SG filter to be used for even-numbered data.
## (s8) Another version of MLR modeling is
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Step-Wise Multiple Linear Regression (SMLR). In SMLR, MLR is applied to the data set multiple times. The least correlated input variable is removed each time. In this way, it continues until the highest R 2 value is achieved [51]. In Shen et al., SMLR method was employed to establish aflatoxin quantification models [56].
## (s10) Principal Component Regression
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Although PLSR is a suitable modeling method for many spectral data, especially if the independent variables have a high correlation with each other, this negatively affects the regression coefficients [67]. This situation is called the collinearity problem. One method that gives more successful results in such datasets is Principal Component Regression (PCR) [68]. The PCR method is formed by the application of PCA and LSR methods together. First of all, the principal components of the spectral data are extracted with the PCA method. The ones that show the most variance in data are selected among these principal components, and the regression model is created using these principal components.
