# coatings A Review on the Electrodeposition of Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys in Ionic Liquids

CorpusID: 234287361 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83514adc9b16c6fcc7421a9882f9d67e528c024f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83514adc9b16c6fcc7421a9882f9d67e528c024f)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s2) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Ionic liquids for Al deposition can be categorized into first-generation and secondgeneration, depending on their nature. First-generation ILs are also known as chloroaluminate ILs and generally halide-based, while second-generation ILs are generally stable against moisture and air. First-generation ILs are generally produced by mixing AlCl 3 (anhydrous) and an IL containing halides such as Cl − , F − , Br − , I − [27]. Chloroaluminate ILs are the simplest ones composed of mostly inorganic halide anions and organic cations, and display high conductivity, wide electrochemical potential window and considered to be the potential system that can be used as an electrolyte media for electrodepositing Al, Al alloys. By changing the molar ratio of IL to AlCl 3 , it is possible to tune the Lewis acidity and can be classified into acidic, neutral, and basic [45]. Neutral mixtures are usually obtained when the molar ratio is 1:1 and contains Al(III) species in the form of [(AlCl 4 )] − , whereas acidic mixtures obtained by changing the molar ratio to 1:2 contains Al(III) species in the form of [(Al 2 Cl 7 )] − . The basic mixture with molar ratio between 1:1 and 1:2 contains both [(Al 2 Cl 7 )] − and [(AlCl 4 )] − . Based on the literature, it is reported that chloroaluminate ILs are widely used for Al deposition since they have rich Al(III) reducible species; [Al 2 Cl 7 ] − , which is considered to be the electro-active species and will be reduced as per the following Equation
## (s5) Anodic Effect
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Anodes in electrodeposition shall not influence the electrochemical process but also controls the physical characteristics of the Al cathodic deposit such as surface morphology, crystal orientation and the anodic reactions occurring in ILs are significantly different owing to their increased ohmic resistance. Anodes can be either inert or soluble and are dependent on the metal to be deposited, electrolyte media. Anodic reactions during deposition from aqueous electrolyte media generally involve either electrolyte break down or anodic dissolution, and anodic oxidation process occurs at a relatively faster rate than the cathodic reduction process. On the contrary, the anodic reactions and the anode material play a significant role during metal deposition in ILs, especially when similar electrode areas and geometries are employed. Under such circumstances, the mass transportation of oxidizable species controls the anodic dissolution, which, in turn, governs the overall deposition process. Employing inert anodes during Al deposition from different ILs pose certain challenges such as (i) understanding of the nature of the anodic breakdown products, (ii) its influence on the deposition process, deposit characteristics, (iii) cost [68,69]. In such cases, soluble anodes are preferred and considered to beneficial owing to the fact that they decrease the overpotential and minimize the breakdown of the ILs. However, anodic dissolution in ILs takes place with the use of soluble metals, which limits the passivation of many metals during the deposition. Al slabs/rods are generally employed as a potential soluble anode material during the Al deposition in ILs and maintain the reducible cationic Al species constantly, favoring a good deposition. Abbott et al. [70] systematically investigated the anodic dissolution of a soluble Al anode during the Al deposition with similar electrode geometry from [BMIm][Cl]-AlCl 3 containing lithium chloride (LiCl 3 ) and toluene, studied the effect of the anodic process in relation to the morphology of Al deposit. It was shown that anodic process influenced the morphological features of Al deposited at cathode. Pitting was observed on the Al anode and was attributed to the uneven dissolution rates at the bottom of the surface indicative of incomplete removal of the surface oxide layer. Further, in a different study conducted by the same group [71], it was demonstrated that the electrolytic oxidation of anodes in an IL environment is complicated and majorly dependent on (i) metal speciation, (ii) transport properties and, (iii) metal solubility. Incomplete removal of an oxide layer blocks the electrode surface and leads to a decrease in anodic current and affects the even dissolution of metal. Studies on the anodic dissolution in ionic media would provide an in-depth analysis of the anodic and cathodic process and the mechanism of Al growth (and metal speciation). While new strategies to develop the use of soluble anodes for the Al deposition in ILs are still in the research phase; studies on employing inert electrode materials and knowledge about the anodic processes that occur in ionic liquids need further investigation.
