# Advances in coatings on magnesium alloys for cardiovascular stents - A review

CorpusID: 235447244 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1d78ac8cb2bb34a4e1026833476f27c8e33f58db](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1d78ac8cb2bb34a4e1026833476f27c8e33f58db)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Clinical trials of Mg-based stents
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) In terms of clinical trials of Mg-based stents, Biotronik Company implanted 123 "DREAMS 2G ′′ stents into 123 patients with coronary heart disease to assess the availability and safety of the stents. The clinical results demonstrated that complete degradation of "DREAMS 2G ′′ stents occurred 9 months after implantation. The 12-month followup results showed that "DREAMS 2G ′′ stent had good safety and that the late lumen loss (LLL) of the lesion was about 0.39 ± 0.27 mm, implying that "DREAMS 2G ′′ stent owned many advantages such as better radial support, higher vascular compliance, lower acute rebound rate, and no cardiac death or stent thrombosis after implantation [79]. "DREAMS 2G ′′ stents obtained the certification of CE and, in June 2016, became the first biodegradable Mg alloy stent marketed in Europe under the trade name Magmaris [79]. Moreover, Biotronik Company carried out a clinical trial (code-named "BIOSOLVE-III") to further evaluate the efficacy of Magmaris. The follow-up results confirmed that Magmaris was safe and effective [84]. Although the studies mentioned above have fully demonstrated the safety of Mg alloy stents, the problems of excessive degradation rate and insufficient endothelialization need to be further resolved to meet the radial support required for the gradual reconstruction of blood vessels. 
## (s13) Fluoride conversion coatings
Number of References: 10

(p13.0) Fluorination treatment is a technology to prepare a fluoride conversion film on Mg substrates [122,123], and the corresponding formation mechanism of MgF 2 film is shown in reaction (7) [124]:

(p13.1) Fluoride modification has been proverbially reported to reform the corrosion resistance of Mg alloys in industrial [125] and biomedical [126][127][128] fields. Mao et al. [129] applied hydrofluoric acid (HF) to obtain an MgF 2 conversion coating on the JDBM Mg alloy and studied its degradation and biocompatibility in vitro. Electrochemical tests unveiled that the degradation behavior of the Mg substrate was substantially improved by the formed MgF 2 protective layer. Also, the HR of the MgF 2 coating was lower (10.1%), and the cytotoxicity was decreased tremendously. Moreover, the MgF 2 coating exhibited a good anti-platelet adhesion ability. However, HF treatment is not an environmentally friendly method and may seriously affect the life and health of laboratory personnel. Yuan et al. [124] developed an environmentally friendly and simple technique to fabricate MgF 2 films with nanoscale on JDBM alloy in 5.8 g/L of potassium fluoride solution (KF). Compared with the Mg substrate, the corrosion rate of the MgF 2 sample was decreased by about 20% (0.269 mm/y vs. 0.337 mm/y) in artificial plasma. The team further attested that the prepared MgF 2 coating could facilitate the adhesion, proliferation, and spreading of ECs because the nanoscale structures (200-300 nm) offered a much more favorable surface (Fig. 5). Furthermore, the JDBM stent exhibited excellent radial strength and compliance performance. The angiography images showed absence of thrombosis or serious in-stent restenosis in the MgF 2 -coated JDBM stent, implying that the modified stent was safe and efficient in vivo. A follow-up intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) indicated that the coated stent was well-apposed to the vessel wall with no evidence of strut fracture, in-stent restenosis, or thrombosis. Furthermore, histological observation revealed that the MgF 2 coating aided in the re-endothelialization process of the JDBM stent into the denuded artery, demonstrating the acceptable mechanical durability and excellent tissue compatibility of the biodegradable stents. Nevertheless, the MgF 2 film is thin and can be destroyed easily; therefore, it is often used as a pretreatment technique followed by organic coatings [130].
## (s18) Poly(lactide-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) coatings
Number of References: 8

(p18.0) PLGA, as an encouraging candidate, is one of the functional coatings that enhance the corrosion resistance and biocompatibility of Mg-based stents because its hydrolysates (lactic acid and glycolic acid) are endogenous and easily metabolized by the body via the Krebs cycle [157][158][159]. PLGA has been approved by the European Medicine Agency (EMA) and US FDA for application in various drug delivery systems in humans [160,161]. Zhang et al. [162] reported a compact and uniform PLGA coating on a medical Mg-Zn alloy via the dip-coating method. The PLGA coating showed good corrosion resistance and a long degradation cycle, which effectively protected the Mg alloy from corrosion and achieved good medical application. Guo et al. [163] designed a drug-release coating composed of MAO coating, PLLA coating, and PLGA coating containing paclitaxel (PTX, an antineoplastic agent, that can inhibit intimal proliferation [164]). SEM images demonstrated that the PLLA coating completely sealed the micro-cracks/holes on the MAO layer. Also, the MAO/PLLA/PLGA (PTX) coating exhibited less platelet adhesion, aggregation, and activation. The drug release rate emphasized that the composite coating kept the PTX in a nearly linear sustained-release state, with no significant burst releases, and prolonged the release time of PTX. Furthermore, the prepared coating had acceptable blood compatibility.
## (s20) Polydopamine (PDA) coatings
Number of References: 14

(p20.0) Compared with synthetic polymers (e.g. PCL, PLA, and PLGA), natural polymers exhibit enhanced biocompatibility, largely because of the absence of highly acidic degradation products [175]. Dopamine (DA), a high-adhesion protein inspired by mussel foot, can be used as a polymeric coating in a variety of materials because mussel foot protein-5 can firmly adhere to various substrate surfaces, including anti-adhesion polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) materials [176]. Poly-dopamine (PDA) synthesized via molecular self-polymerization can combine with many biological molecules because of its various functional groups (amine and catechol) [177]. Many studies have proved that the PDA layer can effectively enhance the attachment, proliferation, and migration of ECs [178,179]. Virtanen et al. [180] polymerized a PDA layer with a thickness of ~1 μm on pure Mg via a one-step immersion process in Tris buffer and studied the effects of pH value, immersion time, immersion angle, and dopamine concentration. The results of Tafel curves suggested that an immersion angle of 0 • and a coating time of 2 h provided the best corrosion protection in a 0.1 M NaCl solution. Moreover, optimum corrosion resistance was achieved at both pH 10 and 1 mg/mL of DA and pH of 8 and 2 mg/mL of DA. A coating on Mg alloy for vascular stents needs to have both good anti-corrosion performance and other functional properties, including outstanding bioactivity, biocompatibility, and suitability. Pan et al. [181] applied the self-assembly strategy to prepare a PDA coating on the Mg alloy AZ31B treated by alkali (NaOH) heating treatment. Electrochemical tests revealed that the i corr of the PDA sample was reduced by three orders and that the E corr increased from − 1.174 to − 0.178 V, suggesting the good corrosion resistance of the PDA coating. Moreover, ECs exhibited an improved proliferative profile compared with those grown on the unmodified Mg alloy, implying that the PDA film-coated Mg alloy had good cytocompatibility with ECs. These results might be attributed to the fact that the different chemical groups (e.g. amine) introduced by the self-assembly technology can further react with other biomolecules with different functions, to improve biocompatibility. Unfortunately, the preparation of self-polymerizing PDA coatings on Mg alloys using the traditional method is time consuming and yields a large amount of PDA agglomeration. Moreover, Mg alloys can be corroded seriously, causing the cracking and high roughness of PDA coating [182,183]. To address this problem, Guan et al. [184] developed an electropolymerized dopamine (ePDA) coating on the ZE21B alloy through the galvanostatic method in sodium salicylate (SS) aqueous solutions. SEM images revealed that the ePDA coatings were more uniform than were dip-polydopamine (dPDA) coatings. However, as the corrosion resistance of ePDA coatings was slightly lower than that of dPDA coatings, it is necessary to further investigate the underlying mechanism and optimize the process of ePDA coating on Mg alloys. Recently, many studies stated that PDA can be used as an intermediate layer for additional surface functionalization (to improve adhesion and biocompatibility) [185]; however, the blood compatibility of PDA coatings is very poor because the imino and quinine groups will rapidly adsorb proteins, thus leading to the occurrence of adverse reactions, such as platelet adhesion, aggregation, and coagulation [186,187]. Hence, researchers have attempted to conjugate functional biomolecules (heparin, etc.) to PDA coatings for improved blood compatibility [188].
## (s21) Hyaluronic acid (HA) coatings
Number of References: 8

(p21.0) HA, a bio-derived polymer, is one of the major components of the ECM that has the key functions of anti-thrombosis and antiinflammation [189,190]. HA can hinder bacterial cell adhesion because of its anionic and hydrophilic properties [191]. Also, HA provides a suitable environment for cell growth and can play a role in lubricating implant materials, and HA can promote the transition of SMCs from a synthetic to a contractile phenotype [192]. Lee et al. [193] manufactured a biosynthesized HA coating on absorbable pure Mg, for restraining the corrosion behavior of this material. The outcomes of the electrochemical test revealed that the early corrosion rate was markedly enhanced because of the synthetic HA coating. Nevertheless, the HA-coated pure Mg was peeled off during implantation in rats, which led to local and persistent corrosion, implying that the adhesion of the coating might be weak. To improve this shortcoming of HA coatings on Mg-based materials, Li et al. [194] prepared HA coatings with different molecular weights (MWs; 4 × 10 3 , 1 × 10 5 , 5 × 10 5 , and 1 × 10 6 Da) on the ZE21B alloy using PDA coating as the intermediate layer (Fig. 7). The results showed that the PDA/HA coating (1 × 10 5 Da) improved better corrosion resistance and pro-endothelialization ability. In addition, the PDA/HA coating enhanced blood compatibility and the anti-hyperplasia and anti-inflammation functions of the ZE21B alloy. However, the poor mechanical property, rapid degradation and clearance in vivo of HA limit many of its direct clinical applications [195]. These deficiencies of HA can be addressed by chemical modifying or crosslinking [189].
## (s25) Inorganic layer/inorganic layer
Number of References: 5

(p25.0) Li et al. [226] reported a nanosheet-structured Mg-Al LDH coating with a thickness of 3.8 μm on the MAO-coated Mg alloy AZ31, which was obtained using a water bath with a higher pH (13.76) at a lower temperature (60 • C). The results demonstrated that the i corr of the MAO-LDH coating was decreased by four orders of magnitude compared with the Mg substrate, implying that the hybrid coating possessed excellent corrosion resistance. Furthermore, the MAO-LDH coating possessed a certain degree of self-healing ability because of the appearance of a wide passivation region in the anodic polarization branch. Unfortunately, that   (continued on next page) paper used bone-implant cells alone to evaluate the cytocompatibility of Mg alloys; therefore, further evaluation of the blood compatibility and ECs compatibility is necessary. Chen et al. [227] developed MAO coating sealed by Ag 2 O and Ag 2 CO 3 phases on the Mg-3Zn-0.5Sr alloy via the addition of different concentrations of silver acetate (CH 3 COOAg; 0, 1, 2, and 3 g/L) in the electrolyte. The results of these experiments revealed that the MAO-Ag coating evidently ameliorated the corrosion resistance ability of the Mg alloy because of the decrease in the rate of micro-pores/cracks on its surface. The MAO-Ag coating afforded an evident antibacterial property because Ag 2 O nanoparticles possessed the strongest bactericidal effect, and the Ag + released by the phase containing Ag also killed bacteria by attaching to and penetrating their cell membrane [228,229]. An MAO/MgF 2 coating was synthesized on the Mg alloy ZK60 by combining MAO and fluorination treatment technology for the first time [230]. The experimental results demonstrated that post-treatment with HF sealed the porous MAO coating, and that MgF 2 became the dominant component of the coating. A hemolytic test illustrated that the HRs of MAO (0.34% ± 0.22%) and the MAO/MgF 2 coating (0.20% ± 0.08%) were substantially reduced according to the ISO 10993-4 standard, showing that the MAO/MgF 2 coating had no hemolytic potential. Although inorganic composite coatings have good performance corrosion resistance, the elastic deformation required for Mg alloy stents needs to be improved.
## (s26) Inorganic layer/organic layer
Number of References: 6

(p26.0) To resolve the problem that the degradation rate of Mg-based stents treated with an inorganic coating (i.e. MgF 2 coating) is accelerated by small fragments and cracks on the surface caused by balloon catheter expansion, Niidome et al. [231] proposed a method that uses PLLA to coat MgF 2 coating on AZ31-based stents. As a result, the high corrosion resistance of the MgF 2 /PLLA coating was maintained after its expansion, and the MgF 2 coated with a PLLA coating exhibited better cell adhesion  on the surface, signifying that the MgF 2 /PLLA hybrid coating was preferable for HUVECs adhesion. Furthermore, Wang et al. [232] prepared a composite coating composed of an inner inorganic coating and an outer organic coating on the ZE21B alloy, namely magnesium fluoride/tannic acid (MgF 2 /TA) coating. TA, which is a natural polyphenol, contains five catechol and five pyrogallol groups. And TA has a variety of biological effects, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antibacterial properties [233][234][235]. The outcomes of this experiment suggested that the MgF 2 /TA coating endowed the Mg alloy substrate with excellent antioxidant and platelet-repellent capabilities. Besides, the composite coating supported the growth and proliferation of ECs. The rat subcutaneous implantation tests revealed that no obvious inflammatory response was observed for the MgF 2 /TA coating (Fig. 12). The regulation of the degradation behavior and moderate pH microenvironment of biodegradable Mg alloys will be confronted with a huge challenge. Yu et al. [236] developed a self-degradable MAO/CS composite coating on an Mg-4Li-1Ca alloy using dip-coating and MAO technology. The results of the electrochemical test demonstrated a distinct amelioration in the anti-corrosive ability of the MAO/CS coating in Hank's solution. In addition, the MAO/CS coating exhibited good effectiveness in inhibiting bacterial growth via the contact-killing strategy. Moreover, with the prolongation of soaking time, the degradation of the MAO/CS coating gave rise to a decrease in pH, and kept the solution pH at a moderate level (≤8.25). Interestingly, the hydrogen evolution rates of the MAO/CS coated Mg substrate increased rapidly after immersion in Hank's solution after 100 h, which was attributed to the fact that the MAO/CS coating was cathodic relative to the Mg substrate.
## (s27) Organic layer/organic layer
Number of References: 5

(p27.0) Choi et al. [185] reported a PDA/PCL composite coating obtained by a simple dip-coating method, to study whether the adhesive force between the Mg substrate and the created coating affected corrosion resistance. The results of the Tafel curve showed that the PDA/PCL coating effectively enhanced the corrosion resistance of the Mg substrate. Moreover, the PDA pretreatment substantially improved the adhesion of the outer PCL layer, thereby revealing the possibility of preventing the corrosion of the Mg substrate. Zhang et al. [237] further adopted a facile and highly efficient strategy of alkali treatment to obtain a bottom hydroxyl (-OH) layer with a negative charge, and combined this approach with the LbL method to successively immobilize PDA and HA (1 or 2 g/L) on the Mg alloy AZ31B. Electrochemical results revealed that the Mg-OH/PDA/HA coating endowed the Mg substrate with good corrosion resistance. Utilizing the anti-thrombosis ability of HA and the biocompatibility of PDA, a balance between anti-thrombogenicity and biocompatibility could be achieved by regulating the content of HA molecules on the PDA surface. Moreover, a multifunctional Mg-OH-PDA-HA (1 g/L) coating markedly boosted HUVECs proliferation because of the exposure of more active sites on the PDA layer; interestingly, the intrinsic anti-thrombotic function of the HA layer was also retained. For providing the degradation rate required to match the vascular reform speed, Yeh et al. [238] designed a layer of sandwich-like coating with a gallic acid layer (GA, which is a type of phenolic acid with biological activity that has anti-inflammatory effects, promotes the proliferation of ECs and inhibits the growth of SMCs [239,240]) enclosed between the PLGA layers on the ZK60 alloy. An electrochemical analysis attested that the corrosion rate of the PLGA/-GA/PLGA coating with a close-packed sandwiched layer was ~2000 times lower than that of the bare Mg substrate, demonstrating a better corrosion resistance. Moreover, PLGA/GA/PLGA coating could selectively inhibit SMCs growth and advance the proliferation of ECs, which was attributed to the GA released from the sandwich coating. The sandwich-layer structure may be a promising treatment strategy for curing atherosclerosis and preventing late-stent restenosis.
