# Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders: A Literature Review Male sexual health and dysfunction Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders

CorpusID: 233190941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c2d159c992045300e3969a45294b2676474ebcfc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c2d159c992045300e3969a45294b2676474ebcfc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) DIABETES MELLITUS
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) As a result of the short and long-term effects caused by hyperglycemia, many medical, psychological, and SD complications can develop in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) [35]. These complications can be prevented or delayed with effective treatment and blood sugar control. SD in men is one of the lesser-known complications of DM. SD in diabetic men may present as ED, ejaculation problems, and libido disorders. All three of these types of SD can significantly affect the quality of life of diabetic patients [36]. It has been reported that the prevalence of SD is gradually increasing in diabetic patients [37]. However, the prevalence of PE has not been fully determined, due to the lack of a clear evidence-based definition of PE [7]. Studies investigating the relationship between PE and DM have been conducted separately on type 1 DM (T1DM), type 2 DM (T2DM), and preDM (Table 1).

(p3.1) In the study by El Sakka [38] including 676 male T2DM patients, the prevalence of PE was 32.4% in patients younger than 50 years old and 67.6% in patients over 50 years old. That study reported that patients who had diabetes for more than 10 years were 2.7 times more likely to have PE than men who had diabetes less than 5 years (p<0.05). In addition, the authors observed that diabetic patients with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) >7% were 10 times more likely to have PE than patients with HbA1c <7%. As a result of their study, El-Sakka concluded that long diabetes duration, the presence of cardiovascular disease, poor glycemic control, and the presence of ED are associated with an increased risk of PE in diabetic men [38]. In another study including 300 diabetic men, Owiredu et al [36] reported a prevalence of PE of 56.6%. In addition, testosterone levels were negatively correlated with fasting blood glucose (FBS), HbA1c, short IELT, weight, and waist circumference (WC). Majzoub et al [39] reported that of 488 patients with T2DM, 115 (23.6%) had ED and 294 (60.2%) had PE. The authors of that study observed that patients with T2DM had a significantly higher prevalence of PE and ED than the control group (p<0.001). In addition, the authors found that all PE types were higher in patients with T2DM, and that mean IELT was significantly lower in patients with T2DM (3.6±2.7) than controls (4.3±2.8) (p=0.014) [39]. In a study conducted to evaluate the prevalence of PE in Italy, 569 of 2,658 men with PE had LPE, 1,855 had APE, and 234 were not identified. In that same study, it was determined that diabetes treatment led to a decrease in PE prevalence [40]. Differences in PE rates in patients with T2DM may be due to variations in the studied populations or to the way PE was defined in each study [39]. The link between PE and T2DM is still unclear. However, psychogenic factors and organic causes, especially diabetic autonomic neuropathy, play a role in the proportionality of the incidence of PE with the duration and severity of DM [41].
