# Automating Laboratory Processes by Connecting Biotech and Robotic Devices-An Overview of the Current Challenges, Existing Solutions and Ongoing Developments

CorpusID: 236425030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b0418d05b0cc868fe7a59cf6a28d81de19eff5c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b0418d05b0cc868fe7a59cf6a28d81de19eff5c)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Biotechnological products play an ever-increasing role for several sectors of the producing industry. In the medical sector, some of such processes are already established (e.g., insulin production), and also the pharma industry takes more and more advantage of biotechnology (e.g., CAR-T therapies). In food production, gene-modified plants promise higher yield using less pesticides. In a few years, meat grown in the laboratory may be found in grocery stores [1]. Another novel sector is that of synthetic biology, where biological products and their gene codes are fully engineered to create food, medicine or even replacements for technical parts [2].
## (s2) Basic Requirements for Automation
Number of References: 9

(p2.0) In this section, the basic requirements for automating a laboratory process that is so far performed manually are presented. These prerequisites address the equipment used during the execution of the protocol, the physical and software interfaces that depend on it, material transport, and the need for control software [4,14,17]. If automation was not considered during the early stages of the development cycle, these requirements represent major challenges for the operator [4].

(p2.1) Many factors need to be considered when automating a standard operating procedure (SOP). On the one hand, the overall process must be separable into modular steps that can be applicable to technical devices [10]. On the other hand, the SOP has to be automatable regarding handling of materials and containers. Therefore, a key aspect is the amount of product that will be produced by the process. The suitability of all equipment and containers depends on the desired output quantity. To avoid bottlenecks and reduce the variance in container sizes, all process steps should be dimensioned to process input materials in a similar range of quantity [17]. Furthermore, all operations must be determined with quantitative values. Information such as "shake carefully" or "add a little fluid" cannot be handled by machines and needs to be specified. In addition, many process steps depend on qualitative measurement values such as the evaluation of optical observations such as cell shape, medium color, confluence or transparency. Due to the error-proneness of manual measurements and human-induced variability, these evaluations should be performed automatically. This can be accomplished by artificial-intelligence-based algorithms for image recognition, as has been shown in several studies [11,13,18].
