# information A Comprehensive Survey of Knowledge Graph-Based Recommender Systems: Technologies, Development, and Contributions

CorpusID: 235826036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s7) Hybrid Filtering
Number of References: 44

(p7.0) These systems commonly combine collaborative filtering with content-based filtering or collaborative filtering with any other recommendation approach. The goal of combination is to leverage each approach's advantages and to improve the overall system performance [38].

(p7.1) Currently, some works on hybrid approaches are based on deep learning methods [52,53], Bayesian networks [54,55], clustering [56,57], latent features [58,59], and graphs [60,61].

(p7.2) These systems commonly combine collaborative filtering with content-based filtering or collaborative filtering with any other recommendation approach. The goal of combination is to leverage each approach's advantages and to improve the overall system performance [38].

(p7.3) Currently, some works on hybrid approaches are based on deep learning methods [52,53], Bayesian networks [54,55], clustering [56,57], latent features [58,59], and graphs [60,61].
## (s10) Linked Open Data (LOD)-Based Recommendation
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].

(p10.1) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].
## (s12) Path-Based Recommendation
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p12.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s26) Education
Number of References: 16

(p26.0) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p26.1) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p26.2) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.

(p26.3) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p26.4) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p26.5) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.
## (s28) Lodging and Tourism
Number of References: 22

(p28.0) Building KGs for lodging and tourism generally describe users and items (such as hotels, events, tourist attractions, and points of interest) as well as user-user or user-item interactions. Specifically, the KG proposed by [13] captures the logical associations between customer records (historical data on their movements and social communications). Furthermore, Reference [11] showed that, by applying appropriate methods, the graphs can learn personalized weights of each user and the item to recommend, depending on the factors that most influence the customer's decision process. Another feature is that the graph can incorporate and connect heterogeneous information from location-based social networks (LBSN) into a unified representation space.

(p28.1) Another graph that can be highlighted is the Event-centric Tourism Knowledge Graph (ETKG), presented in [15]; the graph models the temporal and spatial dynamics of tourist trips. A relevant feature of ETKG is that it allows for representing dynamic data as activities that tourists can perform during a trip. The graph interconnects events using temporal relations in chronological order. Moreover, some additional features such as spatial information and attributes of journeys are incorporated into ETKG.

(p28.2) Regarding the recommendation, the proposed systems attempt to leverage networks of entities built from several sources. Concretely, the recommendation system proposed by [11] integrates relevant factors and features that influence user check-in behavior. In this study, the authors demonstrate that KG technologies allow for embedding heterogeneous information in unified representation space.

(p28.3) Moreover, KG-based recommendation can leverage weighted users' or items' properties according to their influence on the users' preferences. The method proposed by [16] can distinguish relevant customer's information to recommend hotels using a recurrent neural network and an attention-like mechanism.

(p28.4) In the tourism domain, we found that some works focus on addressing the sparsity of information and cold-start issues. Zhang, Wang, and Luo in [50] proposed the KGE-based collaborative filtering method that uses a deep neural network (DNN) to predict links that represent user-item interactions. Likewise, Reference [16] addresses a similar data completion task to predict user-item interactions. In [14], the authors tried to alleviate the cold-start problem by using the fine-grained restaurant services' features to identify similar users when a new user is coming.

(p28.5) Concerning the performance of the analyzed works, in general, an improvement is observed compared to other recommendation methods taken as a baseline. The RNN-based recommendation model of [16] predicts the interaction between users and hotels better (according to MAP and ROC-AUC) than the other three recommendation models. Likewise, the proposal of [11] is better in accuracy, recall, and MAP against eight different models, considering three evaluation datasets. Another method that improves the recommendation performance is ETKGCN [15], which recommends POIs related to tourist attractions. According to the authors, its performance is better because it integrates information from user reviews, a feature little exploited in other tourism networks.
## (s30) E-Commerce, Business, and Financial Sector
Number of References: 10

(p30.0) In e-commerce, certain items do not receive user feedback or do not have reviews, or there are users without historical data. To solve the lack of data, Reference [70] proposed an ontology as the driver to build users' profiles using multiple dimensions such as user's feedback, reviews, and user's ratings. In this way, the ontological model facilitates understanding the user-specific preferences by modelled from numerous perspectives.

(p30.1) Other works evidencing the use of multiple entities and data dimensions such as (1) Reference [68] present DCDIR, which utilizes a cross-domain mechanism to give personalized recommendations for new users in the insurance domain; (2) the KG built-in [20] incorporates data from supply-demand networks between business services and users, community network structures between users and between services, POIs, and detailed service content; (3) in [20], the KGE method called TransH is used to create dense representations of a KG; TransH facilitated the prediction of underlying relationships between users, POIs, and business services accurately.

(p30.2) On the other hand, for recommending business services, the experimental results of [20] demonstrate that the POIKG RS algorithm performs better than other collaborative filtering methods (Popularity, UserCF, ItemCF, and SPrank), especially when the data is sparse, which corresponds with a practical online scenario. Additionally, the approach can utilize the characteristics of different user groups and their POIs, resulting in better recommendation accuracy. Finally, POIKG RS presented significant online performance, i.e., when a user posts a comment on a service, they receive recommendation services immediately.
## (s33) Interpretability of Recommendations
Number of References: 20

(p33.0) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p33.1) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p33.2) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.

(p33.3) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p33.4) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p33.5) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.
## (s58) Hybrid Filtering
Number of References: 44

(p58.0) These systems commonly combine collaborative filtering with content-based filtering or collaborative filtering with any other recommendation approach. The goal of combination is to leverage each approach's advantages and to improve the overall system performance [38].

(p58.1) Currently, some works on hybrid approaches are based on deep learning methods [52,53], Bayesian networks [54,55], clustering [56,57], latent features [58,59], and graphs [60,61].

(p58.2) These systems commonly combine collaborative filtering with content-based filtering or collaborative filtering with any other recommendation approach. The goal of combination is to leverage each approach's advantages and to improve the overall system performance [38].

(p58.3) Currently, some works on hybrid approaches are based on deep learning methods [52,53], Bayesian networks [54,55], clustering [56,57], latent features [58,59], and graphs [60,61].
## (s61) Linked Open Data (LOD)-Based Recommendation
Number of References: 4

(p61.0) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].

(p61.1) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].
## (s63) Path-Based Recommendation
Number of References: 4

(p63.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p63.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s77) Education
Number of References: 16

(p77.0) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p77.1) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p77.2) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.

(p77.3) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p77.4) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p77.5) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.
## (s79) Lodging and Tourism
Number of References: 22

(p79.0) Building KGs for lodging and tourism generally describe users and items (such as hotels, events, tourist attractions, and points of interest) as well as user-user or user-item interactions. Specifically, the KG proposed by [13] captures the logical associations between customer records (historical data on their movements and social communications). Furthermore, Reference [11] showed that, by applying appropriate methods, the graphs can learn personalized weights of each user and the item to recommend, depending on the factors that most influence the customer's decision process. Another feature is that the graph can incorporate and connect heterogeneous information from location-based social networks (LBSN) into a unified representation space.

(p79.1) Another graph that can be highlighted is the Event-centric Tourism Knowledge Graph (ETKG), presented in [15]; the graph models the temporal and spatial dynamics of tourist trips. A relevant feature of ETKG is that it allows for representing dynamic data as activities that tourists can perform during a trip. The graph interconnects events using temporal relations in chronological order. Moreover, some additional features such as spatial information and attributes of journeys are incorporated into ETKG.

(p79.2) Regarding the recommendation, the proposed systems attempt to leverage networks of entities built from several sources. Concretely, the recommendation system proposed by [11] integrates relevant factors and features that influence user check-in behavior. In this study, the authors demonstrate that KG technologies allow for embedding heterogeneous information in unified representation space.

(p79.3) Moreover, KG-based recommendation can leverage weighted users' or items' properties according to their influence on the users' preferences. The method proposed by [16] can distinguish relevant customer's information to recommend hotels using a recurrent neural network and an attention-like mechanism.

(p79.4) In the tourism domain, we found that some works focus on addressing the sparsity of information and cold-start issues. Zhang, Wang, and Luo in [50] proposed the KGE-based collaborative filtering method that uses a deep neural network (DNN) to predict links that represent user-item interactions. Likewise, Reference [16] addresses a similar data completion task to predict user-item interactions. In [14], the authors tried to alleviate the cold-start problem by using the fine-grained restaurant services' features to identify similar users when a new user is coming.

(p79.5) Concerning the performance of the analyzed works, in general, an improvement is observed compared to other recommendation methods taken as a baseline. The RNN-based recommendation model of [16] predicts the interaction between users and hotels better (according to MAP and ROC-AUC) than the other three recommendation models. Likewise, the proposal of [11] is better in accuracy, recall, and MAP against eight different models, considering three evaluation datasets. Another method that improves the recommendation performance is ETKGCN [15], which recommends POIs related to tourist attractions. According to the authors, its performance is better because it integrates information from user reviews, a feature little exploited in other tourism networks.
## (s81) E-Commerce, Business, and Financial Sector
Number of References: 10

(p81.0) In e-commerce, certain items do not receive user feedback or do not have reviews, or there are users without historical data. To solve the lack of data, Reference [70] proposed an ontology as the driver to build users' profiles using multiple dimensions such as user's feedback, reviews, and user's ratings. In this way, the ontological model facilitates understanding the user-specific preferences by modelled from numerous perspectives.

(p81.1) Other works evidencing the use of multiple entities and data dimensions such as (1) Reference [68] present DCDIR, which utilizes a cross-domain mechanism to give personalized recommendations for new users in the insurance domain; (2) the KG built-in [20] incorporates data from supply-demand networks between business services and users, community network structures between users and between services, POIs, and detailed service content; (3) in [20], the KGE method called TransH is used to create dense representations of a KG; TransH facilitated the prediction of underlying relationships between users, POIs, and business services accurately.

(p81.2) On the other hand, for recommending business services, the experimental results of [20] demonstrate that the POIKG RS algorithm performs better than other collaborative filtering methods (Popularity, UserCF, ItemCF, and SPrank), especially when the data is sparse, which corresponds with a practical online scenario. Additionally, the approach can utilize the characteristics of different user groups and their POIs, resulting in better recommendation accuracy. Finally, POIKG RS presented significant online performance, i.e., when a user posts a comment on a service, they receive recommendation services immediately.
## (s84) Interpretability of Recommendations
Number of References: 20

(p84.0) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p84.1) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p84.2) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.

(p84.3) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p84.4) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p84.5) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.
