# molecules Beneficial Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Female Reproductive Disorders: A Review

CorpusID: 234743401 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e9aa525adcf46c2a6eab849e4cb803811c0b876](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e9aa525adcf46c2a6eab849e4cb803811c0b876)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) Tea is originated from East Asia and has become the most widely consumed beverage worldwide after water [1]. Green tea, black tea and oolong tea are harvested from the same Camellia sinensis plant but possess different properties (Table 1). Green tea accounts for 20% of the total tea consumption worldwide and is the primary beverage consumed daily in Asian countries [2], including Japan [3], China [4] and Korea [5]. Green tea is consumed in an average of three cups and as high as 10 cups per day [6]. According to a human adverse event data, the observed safe level for green tea is 704 mg of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (ECGC)/day, which is approximately 880 mL of brewed green tea daily [7]. Table 1. Different properties of green tea, oolong tea and black tea.
## (s6) Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Endometriosis
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) Endometriosis is a chronic disorder characterised by the implantation of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity [33]. It affects adolescents and reproductive-aged women and is commonly associated with chronic pelvic pain and infertility [34]. EGCG, the most abundant component found in green tea, has a beneficial effect against endometriosis.

(p6.1) In this review, we found seven studies exploring the effect of EGCG against endometriosis (Table 2: in vivo studies, and Table 3: in vitro studies). These studies utilised animal models of endometriosis, which involved an endometrium transplanted into an animal; the endometrium tissues were derived either from an endometriosis patient or from an animal endometrium. The studies reported the positive effects of EGCG on the endometrium, mainly those exerted by anti-angiogenic, anti-fibrotic, anti-proliferative and proapoptotic mechanisms. The anti-proliferative effect of EGCG against endometriosis was reported in most of the studies. EGCG causes regression in the development of endometriosis lesions assessed by size, number, volume, weight and cell proliferation [33,[35][36][37][38]. Figure 2 illustrates a simplified version of the mechanism related to the beneficial effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis.

(p6.2) The anti-angiogenic properties of EGCG were reported in five studies [33,[35][36][37]39]. Xu et al. [33] transplanted eutopic endometria from stage III endometriosis patients into severely compromised immunodeficient (SCID) mice. In this study, the mice are treated either with 20 mg/kg/day vitamin E as antioxidant control, 50 mg/kg EGCG or saline intraperitoneally for 3 weeks. Treatment with EGCG but not vitamin E reduced the level of angiogenesis in endometriotic lesions and its adjacent tissues, as indicated by the weak staining of CD34 and cytokeratin; they also reported decreases in microvessel size and density and down-regulation of mRNA for angiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), further demonstrating the anti-angiogenic effect of EGCG. However, no changes were observed in hypoxia-inducible factor 1, alpha subunit (HIF1A) expression, suggesting that green tea EGCG has an anti-angiogenic effect in endometriosis, specifically through VEGF suppression [33]. Another study utilised both tissues from human with stage III endometriosis and mouse endometrial tissues transplanted into SCID mice. In this study, treatment with EGCG at 50 mg/kg through the intraperitoneal route again showing inhibition of angiogenesis mainly through the reduction of microvessel formation and down-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor C (VEGF-C) and tyrosine kinase receptor VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) expression [39]. In the in vitro part of this study, 10-50 µM EGCG inhibited VEGF-C/VEGFR-2 signalling through c-JUN, interferong, matrix metalloproteinase-9 and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand, which are the three pathways for endothelial proliferation, inflammatory response and mobility [39].

(p6.3) The anti-angiogenic properties of EGCG were demonstrated in another study utilising in vivo and in vitro methods [37]. In this study, endometrium and ovarian follicles transplanted into dorsal skinfold chamber models of Syrian golden hamsters. Treatment with 65 mg/kg EGCG selectively inhibited angiogenesis and the blood perfusion of endometriotic lesions without affecting blood vessel development in the ovarian follicles. These are indicated by a significantly reduced number and density of microvessels development and decreased centerline red blood cell velocity and volumetric blood flow within the endometriotic lesions but not in ovarian follicles. In the in vitro part of this study, 40 µM EGCG suppressed estrogen-stimulated activation, proliferation and VEGF expression of endometrial cells in isolated hamster endometrial cells [37]. Green tea EGCG has poor bioavailability [40]. Hence, a study utilised the prodrug of EGCG (EGCG octaacetate) to enhance the stability and bioavailability of EGCG. In this study, EGCG octaacetate resulted in a significantly lower degree of staining of CD31 and αSMA (angiogenic marker) compared with the EGCG group [36]. Hetero-transplants of eutopic endometrium from patients with stage III endometriosis into severely compromised immunodeficient (SCID) mice
## (s8) Effects of Green Tea Catechins on PCOS
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) PCOS is a combination of complex reproductive, endocrine and metabolic syndrome [42]. Approximately 6-10% (defined by 1990 NIH criteria) of reproductive women have been affected by PCOS, and the incidence rates doubled according to Rotterdam or Androgen Excess-PCOS Society criteria [43]. Currently, PCOS has no definite treatment, symptomatic treatment alone is being implemented [44]. Green tea and its derivatives, catechins, have beneficial health effects against PCOS. We found three clinical trials and one animal study exploring the effect of green tea or its derivative catechin against PCOS ( Table 4). Most of these studies showed the positive health effects against PCOS, suggesting that green tea is a supplement for currently available drugs for PCOS.
