# A Review on Development of Liquid Cooling System for Central Processing Unit (CPU)

CorpusID: 230590098 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4749052dbd1080d904fad51628152b33ac75864d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4749052dbd1080d904fad51628152b33ac75864d)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s1) Working Fluid
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) The development of working fluid had been actively studied to increase the thermal performance of the cooling system in electronic devices. Air-and water-cooling system are favorably used today for CPU cooling. However, the heat dissipation capacity of conventional air-cooled heatsinks is limited because of non-uniform temperature distribution in the base of heatsinks [5]. The most common working fluid used for liquid cooling is deionized water. It is cheap and better heat capacity than the air-cooling system. Moreover, ethylene glycol is one of the base fluids can be used. Ethylene glycol has a structure similar to water but has a lower freezing point and higher boiling point. Azmi et al., [6] had done a review about heat transfer augmentation of ethylene glycol. During the late 90s, the application of nanoparticle provides effective ways to increase heat transfer characteristic of fluid [7]. Further development of working fluid has come out with the nanoparticle in the based fluid which is called nanofluid. Further development of enhancing heat transfer working fluid is important to decrease the high portion of energy for cooling and could increase the efficiency of heat removal [8]. Different nanoparticles have been developed and had been applied for many applications in heat transfer.
## (s7) Thermoelectric Coolers (TECs)
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Thermoelectric consists of two categories which are thermoelectric generators (TEGs) and thermoelectric coolers (TECs) [51]. TEGs transform heat energy into electrical energy. Seebeck effect is a phenomenon that occurs where voltage is generated which a temperature difference between two different electrical conductors or semiconductors. Meanwhile, TECs dissipated heat by using electric through the Peltier effect. The Peltier effect is described as a phenomenon whereby heat is dissipated or absorbed when electric current flows across a junction between two materials. There are many commercialize thermoelectric Peltier available on the market. Usually, TEC is used for cooling electronic devices. Figure 1 shows the mechanism of the Pielter effect in TEC. Among conventional TEC that are usually being used, there are three types of TEC modeling available which are single-stage thermoelectric coolers, multi-stage thermoelectric coolers, trapezoid, and annular thermoelectric coolers. TEC is widely being used for cooling CPU to increase the CPU cooling performance while decreasing the noise of the cooling system. The application of TEC could reduce the noise to less than 40dB with a power consumption of 130 W to cool the CPU in Kumar et al., [45]. As the TEC is a very simple yet high cooling performance device, researchers are interested to combine with different cooling applications. This will increase the cooling performance and more heat can be absorbed from the electronic device.
## (s8) Heat Pipe
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) The Heat pipe work by transferring energy from one point to another using working fluid or coolant. The heat pipe is a device with highly effective thermal conductors due to their high heat transfer for condensation and boiling. The heat pipe is considered one of the best cooling devices due to its high thermal conductivity, reliability and cost-effectiveness [52]. There are many types of heat pipes which are pulsating heat pipe, rotating heat pipe, oscillating heat pipe, wick heat pipe and thermosyphon and many more [53]. Usually, the heat pipe is divided into three parts which are the evaporator section, adiabatic (transport) section and condenser section. Heat dissipated at the external heat pipe parts will transfer to working fluid in evaporator parts. The heated working fluid will flow through the adiabatic section to the condenser. Vaporize working fluid will condense in condenser part where latent heat of vaporization is released to the heat sink. The capillary pressure/action is responsible to transport working fluid to the evaporator. Not enough capillary pressure to supply working fluid to evaporator could disrupt the heat pipe system. The wicked heat pipe is defined as a heat pipe with working fluid flow by using a capillary wick. The capillary-driven heat pipe, loop heat pipe (LHP) and capillary pumped loop heat pipe (CPLHP). Heat pipe for electronic cooling is usually in mini/micro size. Therefore, this type of heat pipe is very suitable to apply in a laptop and notebook which has limited space.
## (s9) Jet Impingement
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Jet impingement cooling method is one of the promising developments in the heat transfer application. As its name, this method involves high velocity forced convection by ejecting coolant directly onto a heated surface through a convergent nozzle [55]. Due to its high heat transfer rate, this method could benefit from the electronic cooling application. To the current development, several parameters that had been studied by researchers that affect the cooling performance which is jet to target distance, flow region (Reynold's number), surrounding (confined, semi-confined), surface shape (rough or smooth, incline or flat, etc.) and fluid type. To support this, Singh [56] had comprehensively studied the heat transfer of jet impingement with novel surface roughness. Variable involve in the research are jet to jet spacing, jet to target distance and Reynold's number. The results show that concentric surface roughness has higher heat transfer and fin effectiveness compared to traditional cubic and cylindrical roughness. Furthermore, as the jet to jet spacing, jet to target distance and Reynold's number increase, the Nusselt's number also increases. Therefore, heat transfer is increased.
