# Organoids as host models for infection biology -a review of methods

CorpusID: 239025417 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9027ac32be7bfa611f75f8cd333f732f13a4b1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9027ac32be7bfa611f75f8cd333f732f13a4b1f)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Methods for using organoids to study infection
Number of References: 12

(p2.0) Organoids Organoids fill the gap between monotypic cells and complex organisms. The term "organoid" has been used in the past to describe the histological characteristics of tumors or other tissues and generally meant "resembling an organ". The stem cell field has, however, redefined this term to describe 3D cell cultures derived from stem cells, in which the cells self-organize and exhibit at least some of the functions that they would have in vivo 8 . The technology originated from parallel developments in the two major fields of stem cell research: adult stem cells 9 and pluripotent stem cells 10 . Today, the two technologies cover an impressive range of organs that can be mimicked 1,[5][6][7] . In organoid cultures, isolated stem cells are placed in a dome of ECM and provided with a specific cocktail of growth factors. To generate organoids from pluripotent stem cells, growth factors mimic embryonic development. As a result, these organoids harbor very different cell types, such as mesenchymal and epithelial cells, in the same organoid, and the organoids have a rather limited expansion potential. In contrast, to generate organoids from adult tissuespecific stem cells, the growth factors provided mimic tissue regeneration. The resulting organoids consist of pure epithelial cells, and many types of these organoids have been shown to have tremendous expansion potential with very high genetic stability 11,12 . In prototypes of adult stem cell-derived cultures for gastrointestinal organoids, cells grow to generate a single epithelial layer surrounding a central lumen. Cells show specific polarization, with the apical side facing the organoid lumen. The organoid can present invaginations, or buddings, of the cell layer that resemble the intestinal crypts or gastric glands. In addition, the growth factor cocktail can be modified to induce the differentiation of specific cell types of interest, for example, intestinal adsorptive cells versus secretory cells or gastric pit cells versus gland cells 9,13,14 . Importantly, because organoids are a source of expandable primary cells, their cells can also be used to establish other in vitro models, such as 2D monolayers or more advanced tissue engineering (TE) models (Fig. 2). Complexity of current models available for the study of human infectious diseases. Cell lines are widely accessible and practical but lack epithelial complexity. Organoids and organoidderived primary cell monolayers consist of primary nontransformed cells that can differentiate into different cell types. Animal models allow the study of host-pathogen interactions in whole organisms; however, pathogens are often highly adapted to their natural host, and thus animal studies have limitations in the study of human infectious diseases.
## (s3) Starting questions
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) To study infection in organoids, three central questions should be considered: What is the natural site of the host-pathogen interaction; what is the natural target cell for infection; and which host factors could be crucial for determining the outcome of the infection? For example, in the gastrointestinal tract, an ingested pathogen reaches the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract and then interacts with the apical side of epithelial cells. In contrast, pathogens that disrupt the epithelial barrier or that are spread via immune cells can also reach the basolateral side of host cells. Regarding the target cells, some pathogens are known to exhibit very narrow cell-type tropisms, while others infect a range of cell types. For many pathogens, it is not yet known which cells can be infected. Last, organoids are generated from specific individuals and retain patient-specific characteristics 1,15 , such as expression profiles or treatment responses [16][17][18] . Therefore, it seems likely that infection studies in organoids could mirror observed patient specificity regarding susceptibility to infection or variation in the infectious disease outcome. While this enables questions regarding patient specificity in infection to be asked, it should also be kept in mind regarding the experimental setup, and experiments should be performed using organoid lines from at least three different patients. We suggest using these considerations as a starting point for selecting the appropriate method.
## (s4) Microinjection of organoids
Number of References: 15

(p4.0) One of the first techniques used to infect organoids was microinjection of pathogens into the lumen, which allows them to interact with the apical side of host cells (Fig. 3a). Microinjection with bacteria, such as Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) 13,[19][20][21][22] , Clostridioides difficile (C. difficile) 23,24 , Escherichia coli (E. coli) 25,26 , and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) 27,28 , as well as parasites, such as Cryptosporidium parvum (C. parvum) 29,30 , viruses [31][32][33] , and toxins/drugs 32,34,35 has proven instrumental for understanding the initial steps of pathogenesis and establishing organoids as an advanced model for studying host-pathogen interactions. Microinjection was also used to experimentally test the hypothesis that pks-positive E. coli contribute to colon carcinogenesis; for this, long-term exposure to the bacteria was necessary. However, the primary cells constantly regenerate and thus need biweekly splitting. Therefore, Fig. 2 Organoids and organoid-derived models. Organoids are derived from tissue-specific adult stem cells (ASCs) or pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The cells differentiate into different cell types, which self-organize into domains and thus resemble the native tissue architecture, yielding reductionist models of organs. ASCs can easily be maintained in culture for long-term expansion, seeded in 2D monolayers, and seeded in tissue engineering models, including scaffolds, providing more structural complexity to resemble the physiological microenvironment for cell growth and distribution.
## (s5) Infection during splitting
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) One of the simplest methods to infect organoids is to do so during passaging. After release from the ECM, organoids are disrupted mechanically or enzymatically, shredded into fragments, incubated with the pathogen, and re-embedded in the ECM until the end of the infection time point (Fig. 3a). As with normal passaging, the individual organoid fragments will generate new organoids. This method has been used to infect fallopian tube organoids with Chlamydia trachomatis (C. trachomatis), an intracellular pathogen. Interestingly, the bacteria did not infect all cells within the organoids but instead established a chronic infection of only a few cells per organoid. The infection could be maintained in vitro for up to 2 months, sustained only by repeated pathogen life cycles within the organoids themselves. This mimics the natural process very closely and enabled the observation that epithelial cells organized into an intact layer can maintain the integrity of this layer by expelling infected cells into the lumen before they are lysed. These observations highlight the advantages of organoids compared to cancer cell lines, in which C. trachomatis infection leads to the death of all cells by the end of the first C. trachomatis life cycle. Such long-term infections may also be instrumental to study the contribution of this pathogen to cancer development 54 . The same approach was also applied to analyze the correlation between S. Typhimurium infection and gallbladder cancer. Infected single cells derived from gallbladder organoids displayed a higher level of organoid formation and cell transformation, which correlates with the known carcinogenic potential of this pathogen 55 .
## (s6) Organoid-derived monolayers
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) Organoid-derived monolayers are established by the enzymatic dissociation of 3D organoids into organoid fragments or single cells that are then seeded on a flat plastic surface or transwells (Fig. 3b). Cell attachment to the surface often requires coating with ECM-like proteins, such as complex matrices (e.g., Matrigel or Basement Membrane Extract), gelatin, collagen, or fibronectin. Complex matrices provide a suitable coating surface but have several disadvantages, such as xenogeneic origin, the presence of growth factors and other components such as gentamicin, and batch-to-batch variability. Collagen is often a good alternative to support the attachment and growth of several types of organoids (e.g., stomach and intestinal organoids) 35,[56][57][58] . To obtain a confluent, stable monolayer of cells attached to the well surface, several experimental aspects must be considered. For example, the number of cells seeded will determine the time required to reach confluence. The medium composition can also be modified to induce or inhibit cell differentiation, depending on the experimental approach. 2D monolayers have been used to model a range of infections, including H. pylori 56,59,60 , pathogenic E. coli 61 , norovirus 57,62 and, recently, Epstein Barr virus (EBV) infections 33 . In the case of EBV, infected B cells, the primary target cell of the virus, were added to the epithelial culture and transferred the virus to cells 33 , an infection method termed "transfer infection" that has been previously described for cell lines 63 .
## (s8) Cells seeded on scaffolds
Number of References: 7

(p8.0) A wide range of biomaterial scaffolds has been used as support for cell cultures, which include decellularized matrices, hydrogels, and natural-based or synthetic biopolymers with tunable mechanical and chemical properties (Fig. 3c). The use of biological decellularized scaffolds can help to mimic the 3D structure of tissue by providing the natural architecture for cells 73 , e.g., the widely used small intestinal submucosa (SISmuc) scaffold 74 . This model consists of a piece of decellularized porcine SISmuc. Seeding this scaffold with Caco-2 colorectal cells under dynamic conditions (on an orbital shaker) yields a polarized mucosal epithelial barrier with a 3D microarchitecture resembling that of the small intestine 75 . Infection of this 3D model compared to a standard 2D monolayer of Caco-2 cells with a range of Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) mutants revealed bacterial factors that play a role in the infection in 3D but not in 2D. For example, C. jejuni strains lacking the capsule surrounding the bacteria can adhere and internalize better into host cells, but this effect is only observed in the 3D model 75 . It will be interesting to analyze which molecular mechanisms underlie such effects. By seeding primary organoidderived cells onto SISmuc, an even more relevant infection model has been generated 64 . In another version, Caco-2 cells were again used to build an epithelial layer on SISmuc to generate a trilayered model (endothelium, scaffold, and epithelium), in which a layer of endothelial cells was seeded onto the other side of the scaffold. When this model was cocultured with monocytes on the endothelial compartment and infected with S. Typhimurium on the side seeded with Caco-2 cells, the bacteria mainly infected the epithelial cells, while the endothelial cells were largely protected 76 . A similar decellularized intestinal matrix, but of human origin, has also been used as a scaffold for seeding primary human jejunal organoids derived from pediatric patients. This yielded jejunal grafts that showed not only cell differentiation but also digestion and absorption functions in vitro and could further survive and form intestinal lumens in vivo when grafted under the kidney capsule in mice 77 .
## (s10) Bioprinting with cells
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Hydrogels are highly tunable, and their biofunctionality can be improved through modification of their polymeric network. Moreover, their versatility allows combination with several TE techniques for scaffold production, such as micropatterning, 3D printing, and microfluidic techniques. By micropatterning, it is possible to stamp ECM proteins (e.g., fibronectin and collagen) onto culture substrates (e.g., polystyrene), creating small cell adhesion sites that can mimic the natural scaffold of the tissue. Using cells from organoids in this way has allowed the generation of an in vitro self-renewing human intestinal epithelium with crypt-villus structures and proper cell lineage compartmentalization 81 . Another recent work has described a human intestinal model created using 3D printing and a cell-laden collagen bioink 82 . Similar approaches have also been implemented for other organs, such as the liver 83 . Although conventional cell lines were used in these models, similar tissue-like structures are likely to develop using organoid-derived cells.
## (s11) Organs-on-a-chip and microdevices
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) In this approach, cells are seeded into a chamber and subjected to continuous flow, with additional mechanical forces that mimic physiological organ conditions (Fig. 3c). These forces provide further complexity to the cultures and mimic the hydrostatic forces to which tissues are normally subjected. Some of these devices include multiple chambers separated by a porous membrane, which can be seeded with different cell types on each side. The chambers can also be seeded with cells from different organs (multiorgan devices) in an attempt to mimic an entire or partial body system (body-on-a-chip) 84,85 . A broad range of organ-on-a-chip models have been developed over recent years, including those models of the skin, lung, gastrointestinal tract, kidney, and liver 86 . Prime examples of organ-on-a-chip models for infection research are those of the lung and intestine.
