# Parkinson's Disease and the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Review Article on the Association between SARS-CoV-2 and α-Synucleinopathy

CorpusID: 236471472 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0390eade53e2916420b2ca303ed6f1aaa2f2a53d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0390eade53e2916420b2ca303ed6f1aaa2f2a53d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) NEUROTROPISM OF SARS-COV-2
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) The first reported neurological manifestation of COVID-19 was in a PD patient. Animal studies have also indicated the particularly high vulnerability of glial and oligodendroglial cells to coronaviruses. 15 Moriguchi et al. 16 even detected SARS-CoV-2 RNA in CSF, suggesting its neurotropism. More than 1/3 of hospitalized COVID-19 patients exhibited neuronal involvement. 17 Brief explanations of how the SARS-CoV-2 likely gains access to the brain and the pathogenesis of the virus are provided below.
## (s4) Routes of entry
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) While there is little evidence that SARS-CoV-2 enters the brain parenchyma, there are multiple means by which the virus might be able to do so. 24 SARS-CoV-2-mediated direct neuroinvasion is achieved by transsynaptic transfer across infected neurons, including via the olfactory nerve, via the ocular epithelium, and via the neurovascular endothelium, or by the migration of infected leucocytes across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) along with blood-borne transport to highly vascularized brain tissues (Figure 1). 8,25,26 Mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 brain infection  Figure 1. Different mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the brain. BBB: blood-brain barrier, SARS-CoV-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
## (s5) JMD
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) Transcribial route SARS-CoV-2 first infects the olfactory bulb, which is the only area of the CNS not protected by dura, through the olfactory epithelium and olfactory nerve. Furthermore, it is most abundant in and around the region with primary or secondary connections with the olfactory bulb, including the cortex, basal ganglia, and midbrain. 27 This pattern explains the fact that anosmia and ageusia are prodromal symptoms of COVID-19 in approximately 50% of patients. 4 Since axons projecting from the olfactory system to the brain are not protected by the BBB, the virus is able to spread in a rather short span of three days. 8 However, a recent study revealed that ACE-2 and transmembrane serine protease 2, another SARS-CoV-2 receptor, are not expressed in olfactory sensory or bulb neurons but rather in olfactory epithelial cells, suggesting the involvement of other dissemination mechanisms. 28
## (s10) IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON THE CNS
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) Even after the presence of a high viral load and severe inflammation, SARS-CoV-2 appears unlikely to exhibit direct neurotropism, and the clinical changes appear to be caused by an inflammatory-mediated brain response rather than viral invasion. 32 Widespread neuronal infection, which causes the production of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, upregulates ACE-2 expression and further activates a cytokine storm in the brain. 11,27 TNF-α and IL-1β concurrently mediate the breakdown of the BBB, further permitting infiltration of immune cells and viral particles into the CNS. 11 In addition to inducing direct neuroinflammation, SARS-CoV-2 has an indirect impact related hypoxia, as acute respiratory disease predisposes the brain to edema, disturbed metabolism and subsequent structural and functional damage within the basal ganglia. 11,28 Autopsy reports for 18 consecutive patients that died of SARS-CoV-2 infection showed hypoxic changes but did not reveal any signs of encephalitis. 8 Additionally, ACE-2 present in the vasculature of the brain harbors five hypoxia-responsive elements, the expression of which is upregulated via hypoxia inducible factor-1A independent mechanisms (Figure 2). 11
## (s12) Direct viral invasion
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Inflammatory mediated response leading to cytokine storm and BBB breakdowm SARS-CoV-2 related hypoxia promotes brain edema and damage to basal ganglia systemic inflammatory response along with a cytokine storm seems to be easily triggered in patients with conditions associated with chronic inflammation such as diabetes, obesity, and cardiac diseases. 11,33 COVID-19 may also worsen PD through interacting with the dopaminergic system in the brain, and it is also worth noting that PD is worsened when patients acquire other infections, suggesting a vicious cycle between PD and COV-ID-19. 34 PD is common in elderly patients and causes respiratory and cardiac symptoms, which places these patients at a higherrisk for SARS-CoV-2 infection. 35 Table 1 shows the results of various studies on the effect of COVID-19 on patients with PD. However, other studies have revealed that PD patients are not at a higher risk of COVID-19. Moreover, being older (mean 78.3 years) and having a longer disease duration (mean 12.7 years) puts these patients in a higher risk category with a substantially high mortality rate of 40%, while those receiving deep brain stimulation and levodopa infusion are especially vulnerable, with a mortality rate of 50%. 35
## (s14) α-Synuclein and SARS-CoV-2
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) Braak' s dual hit hypothesis (Figure 3) proposes that α-synuclein associated pathology, a hallmark of PD, originates in the nasal and intestinal mucosa. As the digestive and respiratory systems are exposed to the external environment (e.g., SARS-CoV-2), the olfactory bulb and enteric cell plexus are specifically involved in the response to inflammation. 18,45,46 Following pathogen infection, the first hit of PD, i.e., increased α-synuclein expression in peripheral neurons, occurs, leading to the accumulation of misfolded proteins that form high-molecular-weight aggregates. Under normal conditions, these proteins do not propagate and are cleared by normal cellular homeostatic mechanisms. However, in the context of genetic predisposition, metabolic perturbation, cellular aging and chronic inflammation, which act as a second hit, the cellular milieu facilitates the accumulation of α-synuclein. The infectious agent is escorted by α-synuclein along the vagus or olfactory nerve to either the olfactory bulb or dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and then spreads retrogradely to neighboring neurons through the brain connectome, finally reaching the SNpc; this process represents the geographical evolution of disease. 45,46 37 Out of 781 PD patients, 69% complained of a lack of hands-on care, 43% reported a lack of intimacy and 37%
## (s21) JMD
Number of References: 6

(p21.0) This neuroinflammation triggers central PD pathology, which manifests as microglial activation and increased cytokine levels in the SNpc following viral infection. α-Synuclein, in addition to being responsible for the pathological hallmark of PD, also functions as a native antiviral factor within neurons, as indicated by its increased neuronal expression following acute West Nile virus infection. The literature suggests that West Nile and SARS are similar; therefore, analogous α-synuclein expression upregulation might occur during SARS-CoV-2 infection, leading to widespread neurodegeneration. 18,47 It is postulated that antiviral α-synuclein accumulation following SARS-CoV-2 infection might also compound preexisting cell-autonomous vulnerability. 18 Studies have reported that H1N1 influenza infection obstructs protein clearance to maintain optimal viral protein load, rendering infected host cells unable to counterbalance its accumulation. 48 SARS-CoV-2 infection might also interfere with α-synuclein clearance by binding the human protein trafficking molecule open reading frame, which is involved in endoplasmic regulation, leading to the uncontrollably aggregation of α-synuclein (Figure 4). 49 The loss of normal α-synuclein function alters endolysosomal autophagy, leading to the accumulation of dysmorphic organelles identified as a major component of Lewy bodies. 46 As SARS-CoV-2 proteins interact with host proteins involved in pathways that are altered during aging, inducing changes such as mitochondrial dysfunction, autophagy deficiency, endoplasmic reticulum stress, loss of proteostasis and inflammation, it is likely that SARS-CoV-2 infection may exacerbate protein misfolding and aggregation. 11 α-Synuclein also activates Toll-like receptor-4, which binds to SARS-CoV-2, on microglia and astroglia, leading to proinflammatory activation and chronic neuroinflammation, contributing to further degen-   eration of dopaminergic neurons in PD. 50
## (s23) Dopamine and SARS-CoV-2
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) Rodent experiments have demonstrated that dopamine may play a role in shaping lung immunity via dopamine receptors expressed by alveolar epithelial cells, lung macrophages and pulmonary terminal nerves, but the potential protective role of dopamine in the context of viral infections has been poorly investigated. 55 The changes that occur in the dopaminergic system following viral infections were summarized by Oliver et al. 56 ACE-2 receptors are highly expressed in dopaminergic neurons, which are already compromised in PD due to degeneration; therefore, SARSrelated brain penetration may cause additional harm and worsen symptoms. 57,58 ACE-2 and aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) are coregulated and are coexpressed in nonneuronal cell types; thus, a SARS-CoV-2-induced downregulation of ACE-2 expression might be paralleled by an alteration of the dopamine synthetic pathway. Since ACE-2 and AADC are both highly expressed in intestinal epithelial cells and are important sources of circulating dopamine in the blood, ACE-2 expression downregulation leads to a further reduction in blood dopamine levels in COVID-19-infected PD patients and increases the need for dopamine replacement therapy. 55 Neuromelanin in the SNpc is an immune stimulator, 59 and the number of pigmented neuromelanin-expressing neurons is significantly decreased in the HIV-1-infected brain, 60 leading to dopaminergic pathology.
## (s26) DRUG INTERACTIONS
Number of References: 2

(p26.0) Patients with mild COVID-19 have been advised to manage their symptoms at home. This is difficult for PD patients, as selfmedication with over-the-counter (OTC) drugs can interfere with PD symptoms and treatments. 66 The anticholinergic properties of OTC medications that include antihistamines can worsen constipation, confusion, and urinary symptoms in PD patients. If a patient is on anticholinergics for Parkinson' s symptoms and OTC antihistamines or anticholinergics are taken, the side effects can be enhanced, and close monitoring is required. For PD patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), serious drug interactions can occur if they take cough suppressants such as dextromethorphan, as MAOIs can enhance the serotonergic effect of dextromethorphan, leading to serotonin syndrome. If MAOIs and nasal decongestants are taken together, the alpha agonist effect of the decongestant can be enhanced, leading to severe hypertensive syndrome. 66 
