# Mesenchymal Stem Cell Secretome for Dermatology Application: A Review

CorpusID: 239048624 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36b11b980fbbb02c78f350fac7ea16e1b05175a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36b11b980fbbb02c78f350fac7ea16e1b05175a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 16

(p0.0) The skin is the largest organ of the body and serves as the first defense against various disorders and external stimuli causing susceptibility to infection and inflammation. 1 Various skin problems are often found, ranging from acute to chronic skin disorders that can impair the structure and function of the skin to triggering various reactions on the skin. In chronic skin conditions, such as infection, inflammation, ultraviolet (UV) exposure and others, general therapy is not able to restore the function and structure of injured skin tissue under normal circumstances. Thus, triggering the development of more effective therapies. 2 The development of stem cell-based therapies continues to today, especially in skin disease therapy. Stem cells, in particular mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), can secrete trophic factors responsible for regenerating tissue and repairing tissue damage. [3][4][5] However, this therapy using MSCs shows low cell survival and engraftment rates after the transplant process, cell retention, and, in case of mutations from stem cells, can lead to cancer. 1,2,6,7 The main mechanism of action of MSCs is associated with the paracrine effect of important factors secreted by secretome. Because of awareness related to the work of MSCs based on the secretion of its secretome, it can be used as an alternative to overcome problems related to the use of living cells. 8 Secretome is a bioactive molecule secreted by MSCs in conditioned media. It contains a large number of growth factors, cytokines, and various macromolecules and extracellular vesicles including microvesicles and exosomes that can stimulate various biological reactions, especially in modulation of various new tissue formations. [8][9][10][11][12] These factors play an important role in communication between cells and are involved in a variety of physiological processes, including signal transduction to provide a biological response. 13 Therapy using secretome can answer challenges related to the problem of living cell use. The secretome's ability to regenerate and repair damaged tissues makes it one of the alternatives related to the handling of various skin problems that have been widely reported in various studies. So, in this article, we will review the use of secretome for skin application is described in Table 1.
## (s3) Isolation and Secretome Culture
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) Isolation is the first step in obtaining a secretome. Secretome of MSCs can be isolated from various adult tissues, including the spinal cord, 38 adipose tissue, 39 skin tissue, 16 peripheral blood, 21 and neonatal tissue, such as Wharton jelly, 40 umbilical cord, 17 amniotic membrane, 41 and placenta. 42 The isolation process is done to obtain the network that is being used. After the isolation process, cell culture is carried out. Based on Park et al, cell cultures were carried out by incubating isolated cells for 5 hours at a temperature of 37°C in the growth medium using Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), which contains 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), to provide cell nutrition needs and 250 U/mL collagenase type 1. It was then filtered with 40 μm strainer cells and then planted in a growth medium (ie, basal growth of medium EBM-2 endothelial cells and equipped with EGM-2 supplements at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 ). 2,38,43 Preparation of Secretome Secretome preparation was performed when the cell reached 80-90% confluence, and it was then washed  [14] Human immortalised keratinocytes (HaCaTs) In vitro [4,5] Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs)
## (s9) 1407
Number of References: 19

(p9.0) activity, cellular aging and cellular apoptosis, intracellular ROS levels, and pyrimidine cyclobutane dimer assay (CPD). 26,27,29,58,78 Wang et al reported that there was an increase in cell proliferation from adipose-derived stem cells (ADSC-CM) use, as well as a decrease in the number of cells undergoing apoptosis and a decrease in cellular aging in HDFs. 58 Kim et al also found ADSC-CM can decrease the number of cell deaths from apoptosis (characterized by a decrease in the sub-G1 phase) and increase collagen I synthesis, as well as inhibit the production of MMP1 in HDFs. 60 Using the same method of sub-GI assay, Dewi et al also reported a reduction in the percentage of apoptosis after treatment with the human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal stem cell (hUCB-MSC-CM) conformation 5%, 10% and 20% from 94.2% to 46.8%, 31.8% and 31.5%, respectively. 29 The use of secretome was able to reduce intracellular ROS levels using the DCFDA fluorescent assay, 26 as well as able to increase cell migration and reduce the level of formation of CPD in vitro. 27 The secretome of ADSCs had the effect of providing photoprotection. This is related to the content of biological factors that play a role in particular platelet-derived growth factor AA (PDGF-AA), which can promote deposition and remodeling of the extracellular matrix. 25 This effect is also associated with the content of TGF-β1 in the secretome, which can stimulate mRNA expression and increase collagen production. 59 This mechanism is also related to the upregulated expression of wnt3a and catenin in the Wnt/βcatenin signaling pathway, which is associated with increased expression of TGF-β2 (which is important for the synthesis of procollagen type I). 79 Other tests performed on the test animals, which were generally nude mice, pertained to UVB exposure. The results revealed a reduction in wrinkles and skin distress by improving skin hydration after macroscopic use of secretome and increased collagen synthesis based on Masson trichrome analysis. 24,27,28 In some studies, it has been reported that secretome can be used as an active ingredient in cosmetics, reminding us of its benefits in regenerating the skin. Generally, research utilizes secretome as a skin care therapy to prevent various aging factors, including photoaging. Amirthalingam et al formulated secretome as an antiaging cosmetic product in the form of semi-solid serum preparations, with the following doses used 0.25%, 0.5% and 1%. 27 Similar research by Kim et al utilized secretome as raw material in the manufacture of cosmetics applied using an air brush, with secretome concentration as high as 5%. The results showed a reduction in test parameters, such as wrinkles, and increased skin moisture. 80 Similarly, Kim et al also used secretome as a raw material cosmetic material in the form of cream preparations. The secretome concentration used was 1%, which was contoured in 3D culture. The use of secretome can increase collagen synthesis greater than control and reduced aging by improving skin elasticity. 30 
## (s11) Other Application
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Secretome is reported to have antimicrobial activity. Antimicrobial is a compound that can inhibit or suppress the growth of microbes. Various drugs that are resistant to microbes continue to increase. The use of secretome can be one of the alternatives to prevent drug resistance. In some studies, secretome is known to release antimicrobial peptides such as cathelicidin LL-37, calprotectin, hepcidin, RNase3, lipocalin-2 and human β-defensins. 37 Yagi et al reported secretome of adipose tissue is able to suppress the growth of S. aureus through increased activity of cathelicidin. 65 Harman et al investigated the antibacterial effects of secretome on bacteria found in skin wounds, tested using S. aureus and E. coli. The results showed that the use of secretome can inhibit the growth of gram-positive bacteria S. aureus and gram negative E. coli from the production of secreted factors that can affect bacterial membranes. 90
