# Environmental Factors Problems and use of cyanobacteria for environmental improvement -A Review

CorpusID: 233283435 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f81eb74c25345401a6a7ef2b97cdfae1e839b03](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f81eb74c25345401a6a7ef2b97cdfae1e839b03)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 10

(p0.0) Cyanobacterial harmful algae blooms have been recognized as a problem worldwide, resulting from the inherent detrimental effects, although the presence in the ecosystem is not widely recognized. Cyanobacteria, also known as blue-green algae (N. A. Herrera et al., 2015) are a group of bacteria characterized by numerous structural features (El Gamal, 2010). These microorganisms are autotrophic, which are primary producers in aquatic systems, hence categorized as algae (Picardo et al., 2019). Also, due to the chlorophyll a content and the presence of related compounds (El Gamal, 2010), cyanobacteria are able to perform photosynthesis, which is a process that provides the primary source of energy for most forms of life on Earth (Axmann et al., 2014;Bortoli et al., 2014;Kimambo et al., 2019). Furthermore, they are also highly adaptive, with the capacity to grow autotrophically (Picardo et al., 2019), heterotrophically (Atteia et al., 2013), or mixotrophically (Subashchandrabose et al., 2013).
## (s6) Sources and Pathways
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) Microcystin-RR identified in most soils (Xiang et al., 2019), which is introduced through contacts with land plants by agriculture activities, especially along with contaminated irrigation water sources (Cao et al., 2018). This has led to high land invasion (Gibble & Kudela, 2014), characterized by the occurrence of microalgae on buildings, trees or roofs (Wiśniewska et al., 2019).

(p6.1) Furthermore, microcystin also can spread into the surrounding environment (Takahashi et al., 2014), especially for the aerosolized cyanobacteria, which is passively transported through the air. The vitality of these organisms depends on adaptation and the ability to react actively to the changing environmental conditions (resilience) (Fröhlich-Nowoisky et al., 2016). Also, cyanobacteria are mainly emitted into the atmosphere from water surfaces, and soil (Wiśniewska et al., 2019).
## (s7) Bioaccumulation
Number of References: 11

(p7.0) This process is possibly affected by various factors, including the exposure route, duration, and concentration of Microcystin in their food resources (Dong et al., 2012), as well as bioaccumulation capacity and incomplete depuration after contact (Paldavičiene et al., 2015). The toxin accumulates on the seafloor (Takahashi et al., 2014), in snail (J. Zhang et al., 2012), in fish tissues (Dong et al., 2012), in various mammal organs, including muscle, liver, kidney, heart, lung, spleen, gastrointestinal tract and gonads, consequently leading to potential damage. Microcystin also affects vegetables and soils (Xiang et al., 2019), rice (Cao et al., 2018), cereals, corn, peanuts, soybeans, and spices, among others during maturation, storage, and transportation (Picardo et al., 2019). This toxin biomagnifies and persists in the medium of co-occurrence, and poses a large potential ecological risk within the food chains (Gibble & Kudela, 2014;Z. Wang et al., 2017). Furthermore, cyanotoxin persistence after agricultural land applications require urgent attention (Quilliam et al., 2015).
