# Research and Applied Perspective to Blockchain Technology: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 237840325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea157b78a395eb4601cfa3cf25e78f3c7e9c2a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea157b78a395eb4601cfa3cf25e78f3c7e9c2a4)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s11) Public/Permissionless Blockchains
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Blockchain that has no restriction on accommodating anonymous participants is known as permissionless blockchain [26]. The term public blockchain is used interchangeably. Lottery based consensus algorithms are used to publish a block. A single node is responsible for publishing a block. Lottery-based mechanisms elect the validator to decide the next block to be added into the blockchain ledger. Election is based on a lottery draw and the one who wins is the validator. Each new block is appended using a new draw. The lottery-based mechanism avoids the malicious node having forged block to append it into the ledger. Such mechanisms do not follow a rule of thumb for electing the validator hence each lottery has its own trust model for electing the validator. If voting based consensus is allowed to be used in permissionless blockchain, multiple accounts can be made by the participants to do a Sybil attack to make the decisions in their favour. A sybil attack is one of the issue in peer to peer network where a malicious node creates many identities and tries to manipulate the network by controlling it. Public blockchains need security and for this purpose the block creation mechanism needs to be difficult and expensive so that the resources of one node are not enough to bias the decisions in its favor. The disadvantage of public blockchain is in terms of PoW where heavy computation power is needed. All the nodes need to solve a cryptographic puzzle by brute force. The node which wins the puzzle is rewarded and all the other nodes computations are wasted. The consensus is achieved as 51% of power. Proof of stake uses the wealth of miners to win a ticket rather than computational power [27]. There are other various consensus algorithms for private and public blockchains which are discussed in Section 5.
## (s113) Consensus in Internet of Things (IoT)
Number of References: 2

(p113.0) IoT relies on a centralized system where many devices are attached to each other via the cloud or any other central system [98]. The data are sent back from the cloud to the device. This makes the scalability issue as sending and receiving of data from many devices can slow up the central system and security issues may arise. Blockchain has made the IoT more reliable, secure and efficient. IoT produces a massive transaction so a decentralized solution would provide a cost effective solution and a peer to peer communication can provide a standardized management for the massive transactions. Although a peer-to-peer communication model suffers a security challenge but the blockchain technology achieves transparent interactions among different parties. The use of a Proof of work consensus algorithm makes the blockchain distributed ledger more trusted and secure [99]. Figure 9 shows the scenario of blockchain retrieving data from various IoT devices. In different scenarios of IoT and blockchain different or already discussed consensus of the blockchain are discussed below.
