# A survey on active noise control techniques-Part I: Linear systems

CorpusID: 238253433 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/412a340b461d719f280a78c53af6c5ab0fa95da8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/412a340b461d719f280a78c53af6c5ab0fa95da8)

Fields: Physics, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) 3) FxLMS-based algorithms for impulsive noise
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) The impulsive noise is often due to the occurrence of noise disturbance with low probability but large amplitude, which has become a great challenge for ANC systems [177]. The α-stable noise can effectively model the impulsive noise encountered in ANC systems, which explains why such noise is widely used for active impulsive noise control (AINC) [177,178,179].

(p3.1) To combat α-stable noise, a clipped FxLMS algorithm was proposed by Sun et al., which puts limitations on the input signal [119]. In 2009, the improved version of Sun's algorithm was proposed and termed as Akhtar's algorithm [177]. The Akhtar's algorithm has a restriction in both input signal and error signal, which can be expressed as:
## (s5) Filtered-x RLS-based algorithms 1) FxRLS-based algorithms for broadband noise
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) The standard FxRLS algorithm can converge faster than the FxLMS algorithm, at the price of increased complexity [200]. As such, the RLS algorithm has been extended to ANC systems in recent years. In [200], a hybrid algorithm, which can switch between the filtered-x NLMS (FxNLMS) and FxRLS algorithms, was proposed for functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) acoustic noise control. The FxRLS algorithm is adopted at the initial convergence stage for obtaining fast convergence. Once detected it stops converging, the hybrid algorithm switches to the FxNLMS algorithm for low residual error. By doing this, the overall attenuation performance can be better than that of the individual FxRLS and FxNLMS components.
## (s7) 3) FxRLS-based algorithms for impulsive noise
Number of References: 8

(p7.0) In [202], to suppress the effect of the impulsive noise, a logarithmic cost function has been employed with the consideration of communication error in the error signal. Following this work, several FxRLS variants have been developed for AINC [203,204]. In [203], a modified FxRLS algorithm was proposed by addition of state-space for AINC. The filtered-x recursive maximum correntropy (FxRMC) algorithm [204] presented an information theoretic learning (ITL) approach for AINC. Moreover, an adaptive kernel size scheme was introduced. Note that such maximum correntropy criterion (MCC) can also be utilized in NLANC systems, see Part II of this work.

(p7.1) Another FxRLS-based algorithm for AINC was proposed in [205], where Akhtar's scheme [177] was incorporated with the modified gain method. To deal with the long channel responses and colored inputs in ANC systems, the subband adaptive filter (SAF) was developed for fast convergence and low computational complexity [206].
## (s8) 2) Subband ANC algorithms for narrowband noise
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) For most ANC systems, it is necessary to estimate the secondary path offline or online, which undoubtedly increases the computational complexity. Therefore, some subband ANC algorithms consider avoiding the secondary path estimation to reduce complexity. However, when the secondary path phase is close to ±90 o , the convergence rate of the algorithm is slow. To overcome this limitation, a frequency-domain delayless subband algorithm was proposed, where 4 update directions, 180 o , 0 o , and ±90 o are adopted to single-tone and narrowband noise control [210]. The disadvantage of this method is that the filter update process must be performed in the frequency-domain, resulting in high computational complexity. To overcome this limitation, in [211], a simplified attempt was developed to cope with the implementation problem when the secondary path phase is close to ±90 o . Two reference signals are generated in each subband, and two update directions are utilized. Only one subband reference signal and one update direction are employed to approximate the phase response of the residual secondary path. Then, the coefficients of the full-band adaptive controller are directly adapted in time-domain.
## (s10) Lattice ANC algorithms
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) The lattice filter is also an important architecture in ANC systems. Such structure can attenuate multiple sinusoidal interferences in ANC systems and its corresponding algorithm, i.e., the gradient adaptive lattice (GAL) algorithm, can provide a reliable performance as compared with the known algorithm [213,214]. In the past decade, two VSS strategies have been suggested for the GAL algorithm, resulting in two VSS filtered-x GAL (VSS-FxGAL) algorithms [214,215]. These algorithms exhibit good attenuation performance for hybrid narrowband and broadband noise. Very recently, a recursive least-squares lattice (RLSL) algorithm grouping the secondary path innovation (SPI) and lattice-order decision (LOD) was developed [216]. The SPI algorithm whitens the error signal into a virtual error signal just before the secondary path to generate virtual undesired signals corresponding to the output of the lattice filter. The LOD algorithm determines the order of the lattice filter, while considering the noise reduction performance. As a consequence, a faster convergence rate and lower computational complexity is achieved as compared to the FxRLS algorithm.  The key contributions of the filtered-e ANC algorithms before the last decade are listed in Table   5. Note that the basic filtered-e LMS (FeLMS) and filtered-x FeLMS (FxFeLMS) algorithms have been developed in 1996 and 1999, respectively.
## (s12) 2) FeLMS-based algorithms for narrowband noise
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The performance of the FxLMS-based algorithms for NANC systems is subjected to the number of targeted frequencies and the estimated secondary path. Therefore, it is natural to consider using FeLMS-based algorithms for NANC. In [223], the FeLMS algorithm was intentionally introduced to deal with the noise in NANC systems. Moreover, the convergence behavior of the algorithm was analyzed. This work has proven that FeLMS-type algorithms are feasible in dealing with narrowband noise. The existing works of NANC are outlined in Table 6. For band-limited white noises and tonal signals white noise) signals) [21,167,168] 2.3. Filtered-u ANC family Several fundamental filtered-u ANC algorithms have been proposed before the past decade. We summarize these efforts in Table 7. In the following, the development of filtered-u ANC algorithms in the past decade is reviewed in detail.
## (s25) Active structural acoustic control (ASAC)
Number of References: 11

(p25.0) In the past decade, the ASAC techniques have been extensively used in diverse fields (helicopters [322,323], vehicles [324], etc [325,326,327]). In [328], an ASAC approach was proposed for repetitive impact noises. The efficiency of the suggested optimal control configuration and the iterative learning control (ILC) algorithm was verified. In [329], an implementation of multi-channel global ANC systems was presented, which utilizes an active casing. Moreover, a distributed version of the switched-error FxLMS algorithm was developed as the control algorithm. The fuzzy control is one of the most appealing methods where it is impossible to sufficiently well model the inference system and the FxLMS algorithm might be failed. The early work of fuzzy control in ANC systems can be found in [330,331], which employ the fuzzy-logic system for broadband noise control. In [332], the cross correlation between reference and error microphones signals and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) estimate of the cross-correlation function were used as the input of a fuzzy-logic system to adjust the coefficients of the FIR filter.
