# polymers Development of Graphene-Based Polymeric Nanocomposites: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 237468825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s2) Properties and Synthesis Methods of Graphene
Number of References: 10

(p2.0) G is a 2D flat single-atom-thick sheet composed of sp 2 carbon structure arranged in a honeycomb structure (Scheme 1a). G exhibits exceptional electronic, thermal, and mechanical properties [13]. It presents high gas impermeability, a high specific area (2600 m 2 /g), larger than that of carbon nanotubes (about 1000 m 2 /g), and a delocalized movement of electrons, which implies an outstanding electronic behavior and very high electron mobility (i.e., 15,000 cm 2 /V s) [14]. It displays very high electrical conductivity (6000 S/cm) and thermal conductivity (between 4800 and 5300 W/m K at room temperature) [15], significantly higher than that of Cu (400 W/m K). Besides, it is believed to be the thinnest material on earth and the strongest in terms of stiffness and strength, with a breaking strength 200 times greater than steel, a tensile strength of 130 GPa, and a Young's modulus close to 1 TPa [16]. On the other hand, it shows high optical transparency [17], it is chemically inert, and electrochemically stable. Due to these properties, G is regarded as an excellent candidate for a variety of applications: (1) sensing and biosensing devices; (2) ultracapacitors that could store more renewable energy from sun, wind, and waves than current technologies; (3) transparent conducting electrodes required in applications such as touch screens, liquid crystal displays, organic photovoltaic cells; (4) light emitting diodes (LEDs); and (5) transistors and microchips or nanochips with high operating speed. The synthesis of G can be carried out following two different approaches: (1) bottomup method; and (2) top-down method. The former approach is based on the synthesis of G from small units of carbon to obtain graphene layers. The most common techniques The synthesis of G can be carried out following two different approaches: (1) bottomup method; and (2) top-down method. The former approach is based on the synthesis of G from small units of carbon to obtain graphene layers. The most common techniques based on this methodology are chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and epitaxial growth (Scheme 2). based on this methodology are chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and epitaxial growth (Scheme 2).

(p2.1) A brief description of these methods along with their advantages and limitations are shown below. CVD produces high-quality G using a transition metal substrate such as Cu, Ni, Pd, Au, or Ru [18]. The deposition consists of the flow of a hydrocarbon precursor at high temperature (i.e., 750-1200 °C) (Scheme 2). As the surface of the metal cools, a deposition phenomenon takes place due to the reduction in the solubility of carbon atoms, which precipitate forming a monolayer. Thus, CVD graphene is synthesized via two stages: (1) the pyrolytic decomposition of precursors, which is performed at very high temperatures with the aid of a metal catalyst and onto a substrate to prevent the precipitation of carbon clusters; and (2) the formation of G monolayer out of the disassociated carbon atoms, which also requires very high temperatures, hence catalysts are employed. This method is scalable and enables the synthesis of large graphene flakes. The main disadvantage is that the catalysts can incorporate impurities into G monolayer.

(p2.2) Epitaxial growth is usually carried out using a silicon carbide (SiC) substrate [19]. The substrate is graphitized under thermal treatment at ~1300 °C and vacuum conditions, which leads to the sublimation of the Si atoms at the same time as the carbon-enriched surface experiences reorganization and graphitization. This technique allows controlling of the G layer thickness via modifying either the time, the temperature, or in combination, and enables obtaining high-quality G. One of its advantages is that it enables electric devices to be fabricated directly on semi-insulating SiC [20]. Though, it is one of the most expensive synthesis methods given that SiC has to be heated at very high temperatures; thus, it is not reasonably priced on a large-scale. A brief description of these methods along with their advantages and limitations are shown below.
## (s6) Functionalization Procedures for the Development of Graphene/ Polymer Nanocomposites
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) The combination of G with a polymeric matrix typically improves the polymer mechanical properties, charge dissociation, and charge transport. However, G and its derivatives require a functionalization process in order to be properly mixed with the polymer chains. A wide range of functionalization options to improve the G-polymer interaction have been reported [3,11]. These methods can be classified into two main categories: noncovalent and covalent strategies (covalent linking of polymer chains to G materials). A representative scheme of these approaches, which are described in detail in the following subsections, is shown in Scheme 5 [38].

(p6.1) Polymers 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 25 proach possibly being appropriate for industrial production, the high toxicity of hydrazine make it unsuitable for large-scale synthesis. Consequently, other reducing agents have been suggested, such as NaBH4, which is very helpful at reducing C=O groups while it is less useful in the reduction of epoxy and carboxylic acid moieties [37], and cannot reduce alcohol groups. Other green reducing agents such as ascorbic acid, hydroiodic acid, and urea have been employed for GO synthesis [32].
## (s7) Functionalization Procedures for the Development of Graphene/Polymer Nanocomposites
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) The combination of G with a polymeric matrix typically improves the polymer mechanical properties, charge dissociation, and charge transport. However, G and its derivatives require a functionalization process in order to be properly mixed with the polymer chains. A wide range of functionalization options to improve the G-polymer interaction have been reported [3,11]. These methods can be classified into two main categories: noncovalent and covalent strategies (covalent linking of polymer chains to G materials). A representative scheme of these approaches, which are described in detail in the following subsections, is shown in Scheme 5 [38]. Scheme 5. Schematic illustration of graphene-based nanomaterials, and covalent and non-covalent functionalization approaches. Taken from reference [38].
## (s11) Grafting-from Methods
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) These are based on the anchoring of polymer-growth initiator molecules to the Gbased material surface; then, the polymerization can start in these anchored initiators [39]. This technique avoids the possible steric hindrance since the polymer grows directly onto the G-based material surface, allowing the grafting of polymers with a high molecular weight, hence nanocompounds with an elevated grafting extent can be synthesized. Though, it requires a fine control of the reaction conditions as well as the amounts of initiator and substrate. Given that the initiator requires a functional group to be grafted, GO and rGO are more frequently used than G [40]. However, it is also feasible to use G if a pre-functionalization step is carried out to introduce functional groups within the structure. Several grafting-from techniques have been described in the literature, the most important being atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), polycondensation, ring opening polymerization (ROP) and Ziegler-Natta polymerization.

(p11.1) The ATRP is a radical reaction that creates a carbon-carbon bond with a transition metal catalyst (a copper halide and an amine-based ligand). It comprises a fast initiation process and the development of a dynamic equilibrium between dormant and growing radicals [41]. It is suitable for the polymerization of many monomers with diverse chemical functionalities and provides good control of molecular weight, polymer composition, and structure with a low polydispersity. Though, it has some disadvantages, such as the elevated catalyst concentration needed and its removal that can be difficult and expensive, hence limiting its use on a large scale. Besides, it is an air-sensitive reaction, difficult to perform in aqueous media. For instance, it has been used for synthesizing a polystyrene (PS)/G nanocomposite [42]. rGO sheets were initially prepared via reduction of GO in the presence of a surfactant. Then, aryl diazonium salt as an ATRP initiator was covalently linked to the rGO sheets. Methyl 2-bromopropionate was used as a grafting initiator to Scheme 6. Schematic representation of the grafting-from and grafting-to approaches to functionalize graphene with polymers.
## (s12) Grafting-from Methods
Number of References: 12

(p12.0) These are based on the anchoring of polymer-growth initiator molecules to the G-based material surface; then, the polymerization can start in these anchored initiators [39]. This technique avoids the possible steric hindrance since the polymer grows directly onto the G-based material surface, allowing the grafting of polymers with a high molecular weight, hence nanocompounds with an elevated grafting extent can be synthesized. Though, it requires a fine control of the reaction conditions as well as the amounts of initiator and substrate. Given that the initiator requires a functional group to be grafted, GO and rGO are more frequently used than G [40]. However, it is also feasible to use G if a prefunctionalization step is carried out to introduce functional groups within the structure. Several grafting-from techniques have been described in the literature, the most important being atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), polycondensation, ring opening polymerization (ROP) and Ziegler-Natta polymerization.

(p12.1) The ATRP is a radical reaction that creates a carbon-carbon bond with a transition metal catalyst (a copper halide and an amine-based ligand). It comprises a fast initiation process and the development of a dynamic equilibrium between dormant and growing radicals [41]. It is suitable for the polymerization of many monomers with diverse chemical functionalities and provides good control of molecular weight, polymer composition, and structure with a low polydispersity. Though, it has some disadvantages, such as the elevated catalyst concentration needed and its removal that can be difficult and expensive, hence limiting its use on a large scale. Besides, it is an air-sensitive reaction, difficult to perform in aqueous media. For instance, it has been used for synthesizing a polystyrene (PS)/G nanocomposite [42]. rGO sheets were initially prepared via reduction of GO in the presence of a surfactant. Then, aryl diazonium salt as an ATRP initiator was covalently linked to the rGO sheets. Methyl 2-bromopropionate was used as a grafting initiator to control the chain propagation on the surfaces of graphene sheets (Scheme 7). The length and grafting density of polymer chains were tailored by changing the amount of the grafting initiator and its molar ratio with styrene monomer. Significant increases in thermal conductivity were observed for the nanocomposite with only 2.0 wt% rGO. Furthermore, Polymers 2021, 13, 2978 9 of 25 the resulting PS nanocomposites with 0.9 wt% rGO showed about 70% and 57% increases in tensile strength and Young's modulus, respectively. Additionally, it has been applied for the preparation of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) grafted from GO [43]. The initiators were immobilized by esterification reaction with the carboxylic groups of GO. In this work, the polydispersity of the grafted PMMA was approximately one, demonstrating a wellcontrolled process. This PMMA-g-GO displayed good solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform and methanol, and could be used as nanoreinforcement in a PMMA matrix. Due to the strong interfacial interactions between the PMMA-g-GO and PMMA, an efficient load transfer was attained, thus improving the mechanical and thermal properties of the nanocomposites. For instance, the addition of 1 wt% PMMA-g-GO led to a noteworthy improvement in the elongation at break, resulting in a more ductile and tougher material, and also increased the initial degradation temperature of the matrix by around 50 • C. control the chain propagation on the surfaces of graphene sheets (Scheme 7). The length and grafting density of polymer chains were tailored by changing the amount of the grafting initiator and its molar ratio with styrene monomer. Significant increases in thermal conductivity were observed for the nanocomposite with only 2.0 wt% rGO. Furthermore, the resulting PS nanocomposites with 0.9 wt% rGO showed about 70% and 57% increases in tensile strength and Young's modulus, respectively. Additionally, it has been applied for the preparation of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) grafted from GO [43]. The initiators were immobilized by esterification reaction with the carboxylic groups of GO. In this work, the polydispersity of the grafted PMMA was approximately one, demonstrating a well-controlled process. This PMMA-g-GO displayed good solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform and methanol, and could be used as nanoreinforcement in a PMMA matrix. Due to the strong interfacial interactions between the PMMA-g-GO and PMMA, an efficient load transfer was attained, thus improving the mechanical and thermal properties of the nanocomposites. For instance, the addition of 1 wt% PMMA-g-GO led to a noteworthy improvement in the elongation at break, resulting in a more ductile and tougher material, and also increased the initial degradation temperature of the matrix by around 50 °C. RAFT is a controlled radical polymerization reaction based on chain transfer agents, such as thiocarbonylthio (C=S) or vinyl (C=CH2) compounds [44], to produce low polydispersity index polymers. It works under mild conditions; polymerization can be attained by several approaches including emulsion, bulk, or suspension polymerization, and the structures are well-defined. The key benefits are that it is appropriate to varied types of Scheme 7. Synthetic routes for achieving controllable functionalization of polystyrene (PS)/G nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [42]. Copyright 1991 Royal Society of Chemistry.

(p12.2) RAFT is a controlled radical polymerization reaction based on chain transfer agents, such as thiocarbonylthio (C=S) or vinyl (C=CH 2 ) compounds [44], to produce low polydispersity index polymers. It works under mild conditions; polymerization can be attained by several approaches including emulsion, bulk, or suspension polymerization, and the structures are well-defined. The key benefits are that it is appropriate to varied types of monomers and that it allows controlling the polymerization of monomers soluble in water. The drawbacks are the need to select a RAFT agent for the specific polymerization and processing conditions. In this regard, PS/GO nanocomposites have been prepared via RAFT mediated mini-emulsion polymerization [45]. In this work, dodecyl isobutyric acid trithiocarbonate (DIBTC) RAFT agent was anchored to the hydroxyl groups of GO through an esterification reaction (Scheme 8). Then, stable mini-emulsions were obtained by sonicating RAFT-g-GO in styrene monomer in the presence of a surfactant, followed by polymerizing using 2,2-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) as initiator to yield encapsulated PS/GO nanocomposites. The molecular weight and polydispersity of PS in the nanocomposites changed with the amount of RAFT-g-GO. The thermal stability and mechanical properties were also improved due to the intercalation of PS within the GO flakes. The storage and loss modulus of the nanocomposites with 3 and 6 wt% GO were higher than those of raw PS, while the glass transition T g value decreased due to the change in the molecular weight of PS. monomers and that it allows controlling the polymerization of monomers soluble in water. The drawbacks are the need to select a RAFT agent for the specific polymerization and processing conditions. In this regard, PS/GO nanocomposites have been prepared via RAFT mediated mini-emulsion polymerization [45]. In this work, dodecyl isobutyric acid trithiocarbonate (DIBTC) RAFT agent was anchored to the hydroxyl groups of GO through an esterification reaction (Scheme 8). Then, stable mini-emulsions were obtained by sonicating RAFT-g-GO in styrene monomer in the presence of a surfactant, followed by polymerizing using 2,2-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) as initiator to yield encapsulated PS/GO nanocomposites. The molecular weight and polydispersity of PS in the nanocomposites changed with the amount of RAFT-g-GO. The thermal stability and mechanical properties were also improved due to the intercalation of PS within the GO flakes. The storage and loss modulus of the nanocomposites with 3 and 6 wt% GO were higher than those of raw PS, while the glass transition Tg value decreased due to the change in the molecular weight of PS. Scheme 8. Synthesis route for the preparation of RAFT immobilized GO nanosheets. Taken from reference [45].
## (s18) Scheme 12.
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Schematic representation of the different interactions between PEDOT:PSS and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [74]. Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydrophobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emeraldine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the two nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71].

(p18.1) Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydro phobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emerald ine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the tw nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71]. Scheme 13. Schematic representation of the different interactions between PANI and hexameth ylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [71].
