# Panax japonicus and chikusetsusaponins: A review of diverse biological activities and pharmacology mechanism

CorpusID: 230569744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ada41802f375cc0bad85c062146c9fb3f5fa06e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ada41802f375cc0bad85c062146c9fb3f5fa06e)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s4) Liver cancer
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Chikusetsusaponin IVa are reported against SK-Hep-1 cells with IC 50 value of 18.9 mg/mL and it was comparable to that of cisplatin (IC 50 = 12.7 mg/mL) (Yoo, Kwon, & Park, 2006). Deglucose chikusetsusaponin IVa (DCIVa) inhibited cell growth of HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell line and viability in a dose-and time-dependent manner using an MTT assay. DCIVa lead to chromatin condensation and margination at the nuclear periphery, and apoptotic body for-mation. Moreover, Hoechst 33,258 staining showed nuclear condensation and fragmentation. Furthermore, DCIVa increased cell apoptosis and G2/M cell cycle arrest, in addition enhanced the expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, and deceased the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (Song et al., 2015).
## (s8) Anti-inflammatory activity
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Inflammation is a well-orchestrated biological reaction that consists of multiple reactions. After the germ-line encoded receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and leucine-rich-repeatcontaining receptors (NLRs), recognized external stimuli receptors detect pathogen-or damage-associated molecular patterns. Receptors are activated to stimulate a series of signaling cascades. Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-jB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) are very important pathway of inflammation. These transcriptional factors induce the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-6, iNOS, and COX-2. Consequently, cytokines can lead highly reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitrogen species in effector cells (Kim, Yi, Kim, & Cho, 2017;Tasneem, Liu, Li, Choudhary, & Wang, 2018). Both inhibiting cytokines and ROS or improving the expression of eNOS and SOD can alleviate inflammation.

(p8.1) Chikusetsusaponins from P. japonicus can inhibit inflammation in different cells with different inducer through inhibiting cytokines and ROS generation. By using colonic aging rats model, Dun et al. investigated the modulating intestinal tight junction of total saponins of P. japonicus (SPJ). The study proved that SPJ increased the expression of the tight junction proteins claudin-1 and occludin. Treatment with SPJ decreased the levels of interleukin-1b and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), reduced the phosphorylation of three MAPK isoforms, and inhibited the expression of NF-jB. Consequently, SPJ modulates the damage of intestinal epithelial tight junction and inhibits inflammation in colonic aging rats model (Dun et al., 2018). Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CSIVa) could significantly inhibit HFDinduced lipid homeostasis, and inhibited inflammation in adipose tissue through inhibiting both NLRP3 inflammasome activation and NF-jB signaling (Yuan et al., 2017). Meanwhile, Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CSIVa) suppresses the production of iNOS, COX-2, IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-a in LPS-stimulated THP-1 cells through inhibiting NF-jB activation and ERK, JNK, and p38 signal pathway phosphorylation (Wang, Qi, Li, Wu, & Wang, 2015). In addition, Chikusetsusaponin IVa methyl ester might inhibit iNOS, COX-2, TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b expression through downregulation of NF-jB and AP-1 in macrophages (Lee et al., 2016). Moreover, Chikusetsusaponin IV showed significant anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anticoagulant effects through significantly inhibit levels of TXA2, ET, MDA, and COX-2 and improve the activities of eNOS and SOD in vitro (Cao et al., 2017). Moreover, Hsiu-Hui Chan (Chan et al., 2011) reported some chikusetsusaponins (including chikusetsusaponin IVa) exhibited strong inhibition of superoxide anion generation and elastase release by human neutrophils induced by formyl-L-methionyl-L-leucyl-lphenylalanine/cytochala sin B (fMLP/CB), with IC 50 values ranging from 0.78 to 43.6 lmol/ L ( Table 2).
## (s15) Commercial formulation in clinical trial
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) There are some commercial formulations in clinical trial. More and more clinical trial are being conducted recently, and metabolomics are used not only in plant but also the formulation (Xie et al., 2008;Yu, Mwesige, Yi, & Yoo, 2019).

(p15.1) ShenMai Injection (SMI), is an intravenous injection used as an add-on therapy for coronary artery disease and cancer; saponins are its bioactive constituents. Ginsenosides Rb, Rb, Rc, Rd, Ro, Ra, Re, and Rg likely contribute the major part of OATP1B3-mediated ShenMai-drug interaction potential. Ginsenoside Ro (chikusetsusaponin V) inhibited OATP1B3 more potently than the other ginsenosides detected in ShenMai plasma (Olaleye et al., 2019). Another research showed 14 saponins of 21 compounds were quantified in SMI by HPLC-MS. The highest content of ginsenosides Ro and chikusetsusaponin IVa are137 lg/mL, 4.96 lg/mL in ten batches, respectively, indicating these compounds may play an important role in pharmacodynamics of SMI (Li, Cheng, Dong, Li, & Yang, 2016).

(p15.2) The fermented Chinese formula Shuan-Tong-Ling (STL) is composed of Puerariae Lobatae Radix (Gegen in Chinese), Salvia miltiorrhiza (Danshen in Chinese), Curcumae Radix (Jianghuang in Chinese), Hawthorn (Shanzha in Chinese), Salvia chinensis (Shijianchuan in Chinese), Sinapis alba (Baijiezi in Chinese), Astragali Radix (Huangqi in Chinese), Panax japonicus (Zhujieshen in Chinese), Atractylodes macrocephala (Baizhu in Chinese), Paeoniae Radix Alba (Baishao in Chinese), Bupleurum chinense (Chaihu in Chinese), Chrysanthemum indicum (Juhua in Chinese), Cyperi Rhizoma (Xiangfu in Chinese) and Gastrodiae Rhizoma (Tianma in Chinese). The aqueous extract was fermented with Lactobacillus, Bacillus aceticus and Saccharomycetes. ShuanTong-Ling is a formula used to treat brain diseases including ischemic stroke, migraine, and vascular dementia. Shuan-Tong-Ling attenuated H 2 O 2 -induced oxidative stress in rat microvascular endothelial cells. Meanwhile, Shuan-Tong-Ling also decreased tumor necrosis factor-a and interleukin-1b levels in the hippocampus on the ischemic side. In addition, Shuan-Tong-Ling upregulated the expression of SIRT1 and Bcl-2 and downregulated the expression of acetylatedprotein 53 and Bax. The reduced ROS level was accompanied by increasing SOD and GSH activities. Further assays showed upregulation of SIRT1 and PGC-1aand downregulation of p21 after STL treatment. The results revealed that STL could protect BMECs against oxidative stress injury at least partially through the SIRT1 pathway (Mei et al., 2017;Tan et al., 2016).
