# Innovative Coatings of Metallic Alloys Used as Bioactive Surfaces in Implantology: A Review

CorpusID: 236417044 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305ad65c7f7b495ce7ed3604c7d418117b5edde9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305ad65c7f7b495ce7ed3604c7d418117b5edde9)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 14

(p0.0) Inserting implants into living organisms must be carried out in accordance with the natural conditions of living systems; considering that the functionality of the human body is achieved through the normal activity of each physiological system, any organ dysfunction thus is transmitted to the whole living system [1]. Implants can partially or totally replace a damaged element of the body under the conditions of their acceptance by the host environment [2,3]. Among the metallic materials approved for use in medical practice (orthopedics and dentistry), the most frequently used are: stainless steels with small amounts of carbon (316L), Co-Cr alloys, such as Co-Cr-Ni-Mo, precious metal alloys, Ti and its alloys (TiAlV, TiAlVMoFe, and TiAlZr), and biodegradable alloys [4]. Improvement in the long-term utilization of implantable materials is achieved by modifying its surface exposed to physiological and biological environments [5]. In numerous studies, it has been observed that metallic biomaterials undergo a series of corrosion reactions in human body fluids. These reactions result in release of metallic ions, which are toxic at high concentrations. Metal implants have different compositions and various structures than human bone, thus, the healing process takes longer as the bone/implant interface forms more slowly [6]. Along with heat treatments, laser treatments are also employed for covering the surfaces of metal implants with thin layers; these are sometimes structured at micro-and nanolevel obtained by more sophisticated or simpler chemical and electrochemical techniques that are overall more efficient than the bare metal surface. The criteria for the inclusion of biocompatible materials in international standards for the selection of implantable materials for prostheses are based on their biocompatibility [7] and are as follows:
## (s4) Coatings with TiO2
Number of References: 10

(p4.0) Ti oxides are used to promote osteointegration [56] and are classified into rutile, anatase, and brookite if their crystalline structure is considered. At low temperatures, the brookite turns into rutile. For this reason, only anatase and rutile are of interest. Ti and its alloys oxidize easily in air and form a layer of TiO2 on the surface of the metal. This layer is called native, has thicknesses between 3 and 7 nm, and contains the amorphous phase. Native oxide provides very good chemical stability manifested by increased corrosion resistance [57]. The concentration ratio between Ti and O gradually varies from 1 to 2 [58]. Ti and its alloys are stable and resistant to corrosion; however, the literature has considered the amount of Ti ions that can be released in the tissues adjacent to the metal implant used [59]. The release of Ti ions into tissues indicates that its corrosion has occurred in vivo. Native TiO2 is bioinert and cannot promote a direct link with living bone, which implies that TiO2 does not show osteoconductivity and osseointegration. To increase biocompatibility, the TiO2 layer needs to be thick and dense.

(p4.1) TiO2 has a molecule composed of a positive Ti + ion and two O 2-negative ions. When Ti is in contact with electrolyte solutions (body fluids, saliva, and plasma), OHcan easily bind to the Ti cation in the TiO2 and Ti-OH groups. Acidic or basic Ti-OH groups can form on the surface of Ti [60]. 
## (s18) Introduction
Number of References: 14

(p18.0) Inserting implants into living organisms must be carried out in accordance with the natural conditions of living systems; considering that the functionality of the human body is achieved through the normal activity of each physiological system, any organ dysfunction thus is transmitted to the whole living system [1]. Implants can partially or totally replace a damaged element of the body under the conditions of their acceptance by the host environment [2,3]. Among the metallic materials approved for use in medical practice (orthopedics and dentistry), the most frequently used are: stainless steels with small amounts of carbon (316L), Co-Cr alloys, such as Co-Cr-Ni-Mo, precious metal alloys, Ti and its alloys (TiAlV, TiAlVMoFe, and TiAlZr), and biodegradable alloys [4]. Improvement in the long-term utilization of implantable materials is achieved by modifying its surface exposed to physiological and biological environments [5]. In numerous studies, it has been observed that metallic biomaterials undergo a series of corrosion reactions in human body fluids. These reactions result in release of metallic ions, which are toxic at high concentrations. Metal implants have different compositions and various structures than human bone, thus, the healing process takes longer as the bone/implant interface forms more slowly [6]. Along with heat treatments, laser treatments are also employed for covering the surfaces of metal implants with thin layers; these are sometimes structured at micro-and nanolevel obtained by more sophisticated or simpler chemical and electrochemical techniques that are overall more efficient than the bare metal surface. The criteria for the inclusion of biocompatible materials in international standards for the selection of implantable materials for prostheses are based on their biocompatibility [7] and are as follows:
## (s22) Coatings with TiO2
Number of References: 10

(p22.0) Ti oxides are used to promote osteointegration [56] and are classified into rutile, anatase, and brookite if their crystalline structure is considered. At low temperatures, the brookite turns into rutile. For this reason, only anatase and rutile are of interest. Ti and its alloys oxidize easily in air and form a layer of TiO2 on the surface of the metal. This layer is called native, has thicknesses between 3 and 7 nm, and contains the amorphous phase. Native oxide provides very good chemical stability manifested by increased corrosion resistance [57]. The concentration ratio between Ti and O gradually varies from 1 to 2 [58]. Ti and its alloys are stable and resistant to corrosion; however, the literature has considered the amount of Ti ions that can be released in the tissues adjacent to the metal implant used [59]. The release of Ti ions into tissues indicates that its corrosion has occurred in vivo. Native TiO2 is bioinert and cannot promote a direct link with living bone, which implies that TiO2 does not show osteoconductivity and osseointegration. To increase biocompatibility, the TiO2 layer needs to be thick and dense.

(p22.1) TiO2 has a molecule composed of a positive Ti + ion and two O 2-negative ions. When Ti is in contact with electrolyte solutions (body fluids, saliva, and plasma), OHcan easily bind to the Ti cation in the TiO2 and Ti-OH groups. Acidic or basic Ti-OH groups can form on the surface of Ti [60]. 
