# A global comparison of implementation and effectiveness of materiovigilance program: overview of regulations

CorpusID: 237495336 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8acb409281d45d724f8f79d76599a61d0e06ddf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8acb409281d45d724f8f79d76599a61d0e06ddf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s29) Reporting of adverse events from medical devices
Number of References: 3

(p29.0) Reporting of adverse events associated with medical devices is done by various mediums. Any serious, non-serious, frequent, rare, known, or unknown events can be reported, although it should have relevance with the ADR. Currently, India's materiovigilance system has 26 dedicated monitoring centers for adverse outcome related to medical device that report incidents on a voluntary basis (Shukla et al. 2020). Additionally, around 270 adverse reaction monitoring centers created under the pharmacovigilance program in India have requested to submit the adverse events related to medical devices. Therefore, once any commission enrolls a hospital or a medical institute as a monitoring center, the available research associate will start collecting and sending the adverse events related to medical devices to the commission. The research associate's responsibility will be to liaise between the patient and consumer, record, validate the reported incident/s and report the case to commission, and inform the manufacturer of the medical device. There is a MDAE (Medical Device Adverse Event) reporting form in which reporting of any medical device associated adverse events may be reported (Kalaiselvan et al. 2015). This form consists of initial description, details of the adverse event occurred, and associated risks to the patient. It can be downloaded from the website of the IPC. Adverse events can also be reported by PvPI (Pharmacovigilance Program of India) helpline number (Kalaiselvan et al. 2014). The healthcare professionals, patients can duly report the MDAE form to either NCC or SCTIMST. Any suspected serious adverse events must be reported to CDSCO and commission within 15 calendar days from the occurring of an event. After filling the MDAE form, it can be directly submitted to either the SCTIMST or the NCC. At the commission, each report that is being received is first segregated into initial, final, and a follow-up report. The reports are allotted with a unique reference number. Until a conclusion is made, the commission seeks additional information from the patient or reporter. These reports are evaluated by professionally trained staff members present at the panel to ensure that the data is comprehensive, valid, and of high quality. They are further evaluated by external subject expert group, and then it is forwarded to the core technical committee to prepare any necessary recommendations. The recommendations being made are then forwarded to the CDSCO for any regulatory action. After forwarding it to CDSCO, it is then forwarded to WHO-UMC (Uppsala Monitoring Center), where its entry is done in "vigiflow." If the data is determined to be missing, the report is forwarded to the reporter or monitoring center, along with any relevant comments, so it can be completed and amended accordingly. The confidentiality of patients is strictly safeguarded while examining and evaluating case reports. Table 5 shows the comparison of medical device regulations and the assigned timelines for various countries across the world.
