# Meselu Eskezia Ayalew. The Role of Nanotechnology for Energy Storage, Conservation and Post Combustion CO 2 Capture in Industry: A Review

CorpusID: 237854390 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/224a902e1c080f9f10fac708c89f0ac954920b91](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/224a902e1c080f9f10fac708c89f0ac954920b91)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Engineering

## (s3) Nanomaterials for Energy Storage
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) A sustainable power provides requires a stepped-up alternate to renewable sources of power [12]. Energy storage performs necessary roles in conserving the over demand of strength for utilization all through the demand. On the other hand, many sorts of energy sources are intermittent in nature like photo voltaic power which is affected through cloudy and dusty weather, as nicely as the non availability in the course of the night [7]. Energy storage consists of a wide vary of applied sciences and functions and is categorized in accordance to the way in which the electricity is stored. 1) Chemical energy: accumulator, battery, redox flow battery, hydrogen, methane 2) Mechanical energy: flywheel, spring, pumped-storage power plant 3) Electrical energy: capacitor (electrical engineering), superconducting magnetic energy storage. 4) Thermal energy: warmness accumulator The storage of electrical energy is rather complex. It must first be transformed into every other shape of energy, which is associated with loss. Nanotechnology innovations are already contributing to expanded energy conversion, storage and transmission [12].
## (s7) Nanotechnology in Agricultural and Food
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Production A range of nanomaterials, usually metal-based nanomaterials and carbon-based nanomaterials, have been exploited for their absorption, translocation, accumulation and consequences on growth and improvement of crop plants. The nice morphological consequences blanketed more desirable germination share and rate, length of root and shoot, their ratio and vegetative biomass of seedlings in many crop plants [5]. Nanotechnology is becoming popular in several fields like electronics, robotics, medicine, etc. However, it has been much less famous inside the food area as compared to different fields. Most vital applications in this zone are meals processing, meals packaging, food preservation, and food best monitoring [3].
