# Progress in Emerging Contaminants Removal by Adsorption/Membrane Filtration-Based Technologies: A Review

CorpusID: 238995840 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s5) Emerging Contaminants Analysis
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) The data on the ECs presence in water bodies are still scarce and limited. It is partly due to the unavailability of instruments for analysis. Hence, improvement of ECs analysis methods is significant in ECs' detection. Generally, ECs analysis can be classified based on the targeted compound, nontargeted compound, and unknown compound. The LC-MS/MS is commonly used to analyze ECs . Nonetheless, research is still needed, especially for detecting non-target/unknown ECs. New methods are required to allow a more efficient, low-cost, and time-saving analysis (Rodriguez-Narvaez et al., 2017). Figure 3 shows targeted compounds and non-targeted compounds analysis using LC-MS. The LC-QTOF-MS/MS method showed high-confidence results. In the targeted compound analysis, the high sensitivity of TOF-MS offered intelligent screening and quantitative analysis. In the study of nontargeted compounds, the data were obtained through processing data based on some parameters (i.e., full scan mode mass accuracy; MS/MS library data of spectral purity score grade; structure description and mass error of fragment ion). Although the commercial MS/MS library can accurately and simultaneously confirm the non-target compounds, it is recommended to use the library that contains 20,000-30,000 compounds to achieve higher accuracy (Bueno et al., 2012). A pharmaceutical product is the standard category of ECs. The general steps for analyzing the ECs include sample collection, filtration, extraction, derivatization (if necessary), and LC-MS or GC-MS analysis (Fatta et al., 2007).  ECs treatment technologies typically consist of physical, biological, and chemical treatments (Figure 4). Physical treatment does not employ a biological or chemical agent and does not change the biochemical properties of the ECs. Biological treatment is a process that involves living organisms or enzymatic degradation. Lastly, chemical treatment is a process that involves chemical reactions (Ahmed et al., 2021).
## (s8) Adsorption Mechanism
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Adsorbent and adsorbate interact in two ways: chemi-and physisorption. In the former, the adsorbate forms a monolayer. The adsorbate interacts with the external surface of the adsorbent, enters the internal pores through pore diffusion, and interacts with the active sites (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). The adsorbent and the adsorbate form a new electronic configuration through electron sharing or electron transfer, and chemical interaction occurs. In the latter, adsorbent and adsorbate interact through the Van der Waals force in solid-liquid or solid-gas systems (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). Electrostatic forces or Van der Waals forces occur without the transfer or sharing of electrons. The adsorbate retains its identity, although a surface force field may deform it.
## (s15) Factor Affecting Performance
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) The main parameter to judge membrane performance is permeability that is affected by membrane pore size, surface chemistry, morphology, porosity, thickness, etc. The increase in membrane thickness causes a decrease in permeation flux because of longer flow path across the membrane matric (Kárászová et al., 2020). Membrane permeability is also influenced by hydrophilic/ hydrophobic characteristics and morphology of membrane surface. Higher porosity leads to lower intrinsic membrane resistance (Shamsuddin et al., 2016).  Transport through a membrane is affected by both the feed solution characteristics and the membrane properties (Hammami et al., 2017). In NF, ECs rejection is influenced by several factors. They are EC properties (i.e., molecular size, charge, hydrophobicity, polarity, diffusivity, solubility), membrane properties (i.e., surface charge, hydrophobicity, permeability, pore size), and membrane operating conditions (i.e., rejections/recovery, transmembrane pressure, flux, water feed quality) (Bolong et al., 2009). The efficiency of ECs removal is influenced by both the physicochemical characteristics of ECs and the membrane properties.
## (s16) Membrane Fouling
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) One of the main challenges of membranebased filtration is membrane fouling (Van der Bruggen et al., 2008). It is caused by substance deposition on the membrane surface and/or in the membrane pores (Madhura et al., 2018). It lowers the membrane flux and could alter the membrane surface hydrophobicity through the formation of the cake layer, the surface charge, traces contaminant adsorption, and the overall surface roughness (Kárászová et al., 2020). Membrane fouling is affected by the foulant material characteristics, such as the functional groups, overall structure, size, etc. It dictates its physical/chemical interaction with the membrane material. (Shamsuddin et al., 2016).

(p16.1) Based on the nature of the foulant materials, foulant materials can be classified into living cells (biological), organics, particulates, and inorganics (Bokhary et al., 2018). Several parameters also influence membrane fouling, namely membrane properties, feed characteristics, and operational parameters. These parameters must be considered when designing a membrane process (Bokhary et al., 2018).
## (s18) HYBRID SYSTEMS
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) Various treatment technologies (i.e., biological, physical, chemical treatments) have been investigated for ECs removal and showed good performance. However, hybrid systems have been developed due to challenges and limitations of each technology (e.g., contaminant sludge disposal, high retention time, high cost, limited removals of a wide range of ECs) (Dhangar & Kumar, 2020). Recently, studies of various hybrid systems for ECs removal have increased significantly (Ahmed et al., 2017). One of the hybrid systems is adsorption/membrane filtration-based technologies. This hybrid system has some advantages: rapid kinetic, low pressure-drop, better separation efficiency, easier control and handling, lower discharge volume, higher reusability, lower fouling rate (in some cases), and low-energy footprint, lower process cost, and potential use as biosorbents. In this section, an overview of the hybrid system involving adsorption or/and membrane is provided.
## (s20) Membrane Filtration-Based Hybrid System
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) The applications of membrane filtrationbased hybrid systems for ECs removal are shown in Table 8. Pathak et al., (2018) assessed a combination of osmotic membrane bioreactor (OMBR) with MF to remove atenolol, caffeine, and atrazine. MF was required to solve the salt accumulation problems due to rejection by the FO, acting as the purging system. The process worked under oxic-anoxic conditions, and the performance was quite diverse for each targeted ECs. The highest removal was obtained for caffeine (94-100%), followed by atenolol (89-96%) and atrazine (16-40%). Atrazine removal was related to redox and microbial condition on the system. Martínez et al., (2013) removed ECs (i.e., nicotine, hydrochlorothiazide 4-acetamido antipyrine, sulfamethoxazole, ranitidine hydrochloride, nicotine) by a combination of photocatalytic oxidation and membrane filtration. The photocatalytic oxidation process was facilitated by the TiO2 photocatalysis and Fe2O3/SBA-15 in H2O2 photo-Fenton. The membrane types were RO and NF. NF membrane showed a better choice for the hybrid system than the RO due to its lower energy footprint and higher flux while still offering good EC rejection. TiO2 photocatalysis and Fe2O3/SBA-15 with H2O2 photo-Fenton showed ECs removal of 80-100%. Among all targeted ECs, nicotine has the lowest removal efficiency. However, Fe2O3/SBA-15 in H2O2 photo-Fenton showed better performance on nicotine removal than the TiO2 photocatalysis system. Chen et al., (2019) assessed the hybrid process between UF and magnetic ion exchange resin (MIEX) for carbamazepine removal. This hybrid system exploited the UF advantage of turbidity treatment and MIEX advantage in EC removal. MIEX was used as pre-treatment. The system could reduce the secondary contaminant of resin and increase the membrane lifespan.
