# A survey of various intelligent home applications using IoT and intelligent controllers

CorpusID: 237761764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc4e3cd886a21ecf1eed0d0cf6b83ae6876594f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc4e3cd886a21ecf1eed0d0cf6b83ae6876594f8)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Intelligent home description
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p3.1) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 

(p3.2) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p3.3) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 
## (s4) What does the intelligence meam?
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).

(p4.1) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).
## (s11) CHALLENGES
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 

(p11.1) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 
## (s23) Intelligent home description
Number of References: 12

(p23.0) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p23.1) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 

(p23.2) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p23.3) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 
## (s24) What does the intelligence meam?
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).

(p24.1) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).
## (s31) CHALLENGES
Number of References: 4

(p31.0) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 

(p31.1) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 
