# Electrocardiogram-Based Emotion Recognition Systems and Their Applications in Healthcare-A Review

CorpusID: 236950952 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4a628c73fcc7c5fb6953d6ea35055b4ac2e0c68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4a628c73fcc7c5fb6953d6ea35055b4ac2e0c68)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s1) •
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Firstly, monitoring human emotions during certain tasks and assessing the behavioral response in critical situations. For example, in [6], the emotion recognition system focuses on studying a driver's performance during a race. • Next, clinical application in monitoring patients' psychological condition for relevant drug prescriptions or treatment. In [7], emotion recognition is implemented in healthcare settings to promote relaxation and reduce stress. Three emotional services are provided in the design framework, which are relaxation, amusement, and excitement services. • Finally, emotion recognition can be used for marketing. Emotion recognition can be utilized for website optimization [8], where the system can be designed to collect information on which adverts attract the most attention, which can allow catering appropriate contents according to audience demography.
## (s8) Affective Dimensional Model (ADM)
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) The ADM, which is also known as the continuous dimension model, is a range of two-dimensional planes of valence and arousal. One researcher preferred to add another plane of dominance into the model [42]. The ADM was developed by Russell [43] and has been adopted widely by researchers from different backgrounds. Figure 5 shows the illustration of valence, arousal, and dominance on a positive and negative scale. Valence is the feeling of pleasantness, either being appetitive or aversive, while arousal is the intensity of the feeling being experienced [44]. The dominance scale represents the authority to be in control, ranging from submissive to feeling empowered. Figure 5. The graphical scheme provided to subjects to understand the ADM scales [45].
## (s9) Binary Emotional Model
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) The binary emotional model consists of positive and negative emotional states (Pos/Neg) [47]. The purpose of this model is to simply generalize between which emotions are bad and which emotions are good. Negative emotions may cause mental stress to the bearer and the people around them. It is unhealthy to be exposed to prolonged negative emotions as it affects the physiological state of a person. Depression, anxiety, and bipolar disorder are known effects of emotional and mental stress [48,49]. Moreover, by simplifying the emotional model to two classes, a targeted application of an emotion recognition system can be built with less complexity. A higher accuracy of training and testing models can also be expected. Figure 7 shows the emotional stress model proposed by [39]. Instead of valence, the author used a pleasantness scale to describe the region of potential mental stressors. Any emotions categorized under negative valence such as sadness, anger, fear, and disgust are potential stress factors that may lead to complications. Thus, the binary emotional model is another important classification model for affective computing studies. 
## (s11) Emotion Evaluation
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Emotion evaluation is an annotation perspective for emotion labeling on the data collected. The most common approach is through a first-person perspective or self-assessment. In this way, the subject personally labels their emotions on a Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) [65]. The questionnaire varies depending on which emotional models are used. Usually, there will be a pictorial description of emotions and the intensity scale to ease the labeling process, as shown in Figure 5. The problem with internal annotation is that the subject might feel discomfort and insecure in sharing their true conscious and unconscious experiences towards the stimuli [15]. This indirectly reduces the reliability of the reported emotional experience.
## (s22) PQRST Detection and Statistical Features
Number of References: 12

(p22.0) The most basic features to be extracted from ECG signals are the PQRST points' allocations. Between the P wave, QRS complex and T wave, the QRS complex was considered important in defining the HR and HRV through IBI calculation [55,80]. The Pan-Tompkins QRS detection algorithm [81] is considered as the most common technique to find the R peak location [58,67,69]. In [39,40], the QRS complex was derived by applying a nonlinear transformation on the first derivative (Gaussian first-order differentiator) of the filtered ECG signal [82,83]. Continuous wavelet transforms (CWT) are applied to detect a precise R location and then the QS, P, and T waves [84]. Finally, in [83], a built-in R peak detection was embedded in Acknowkedge3.8.2 application software, and there is no need for the researcher to manually extract the features.
## (s24) HRV and IBI Features
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) HRV measures specific changes between heart beats in the time domain. The time between beats is measured in milliseconds (ms) and is called an RR interval or IBI. The variation in IBI values contributes to the readings of HRV. HRV features are claimed to be one of the most used methods in ECG-based emotion recognition systems [69,90]. HRV is also known to have distinct changes in emotion variations [87] and used as an indication of stress and mental effort in healthy adults [69]. Moreover, HRV is the most precise non-invasive physiological technique in measuring the activity of the ANS throughout the body. The widely available and affordable consumer-grade ECG devices that can record a significantly good signal are sufficient for HRV feature extraction.
## (s25) Empirical Mode Decomposition, Wavelet Transform, and Fourier Transform
Number of References: 8

(p25.0) Empirical mode decomposition (EMD), also known as the Hilbert-Huang transform (HHT), is a technique to transform signals into parts called intrinsic mode functions (IMF) [98]. This technique is suitable for nonlinear and nonstationary signals such as those from an ECG. With the IMF characteristic, the instantaneous frequency and amplitude of the signal can be defined. Moreover, the HHT also preserves the characteristic of frequency changes as the lengths of original signal and IMF are the same. The application of EMD for ECG feature extraction techniques to emotion recognition systems is seen in a few papers such as [21,26,54,76,99,100]. In [54], 35 features were extracted from IMF1 and IMF2. The features consist of statistical features such as mean, max, standard deviation, variance, skewness, kurtosis, and others.
## (s27) Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction
Number of References: 10

(p27.0) Extracted features do not promise fully relevant correlations with physiological changes in emotion regulation. Feature selection is a method to optimize the classification architecture by only picking the best feature combinations and eliminating noninformative features. This can also reduce the computational cost of the classification in the later step. In [26], recursive feature elimination, the chi-square test, the P test, random forest feature selection (RF FS), extra tree feature selection, and random support vector machine feature selection were used. Moreover, swarm intelligence is also common in the feature selection process. The author of [74] applied the genetic algorithm, while ant colony optimization was used in [104]. Binary particle swarm optimization (BPSO) and hybrid particle swarm optimization (HPSO) have also been applied for feature selection [84]. The wrapper method and the Tabu search algorithm are found in [77] and [103]. In [109], the author used Kullback-Leibler divergence as a feature selection. Other common techniques are sequential forward selection (SFS) and sequential backward selection (SBS), which have been applied in [86,87,110].
## (s32) Emotion Recognition Application in Healthcare Utilizing ECG
Number of References: 8

(p32.0) The authors of [7,18] proposed a new healthcare system that focuses on emotional wellbeing. The system consists of physiological sensors (ECG and EEG) to measure and detect emotions. Based on that, the system provides necessary services such as relaxation, amusement, and excitement. These three emotional services are selected to balance out negative emotions detected from the subject with strong positive states. The relaxation service consists of a guided deep breathing exercise proven to benefit stress management. The exercise came with virtual objects in augmented reality and musical assistance for a calming effect. The system utilizes augmented reality as an output service channel, thus providing amusement and excitement services to the user interaction with the virtual objects. The interaction is enabled by Kinect's gesture detection.

(p32.1) A healthy workplace environment using a novel mood recognition solution that is able to identify eight different DEM emotions in every two-hour interval was proposed in [105]. The employees were provided with a wearable physiological device (ECG, PPG, and TEMP) along with a complimentary smartphone application called "HealthyOffice". The configuration setup was conducted to facilitate a periodical self-reporting towards the current emotional state in a structured manner. The objective of constantly monitoring employees' emotions in the workplace is to optimize the overall mental health of the organisation by eliminating anxiety, stress, and depression in the working environment. Thus, higher productivity is expected, and the output revenue can be significantly measured. A similar study of emotion healthcare application in the workplace environment was also conducted in [77], with a slightly different approach. This study used ECG, EDA, and TEMP as the physiological models. Rather than identifying the spectrum of basic emotions, the work only focused on stress and non-stress binary emotional classification.

(p32.2) A clinical application of emotion recognition systems was presented by [117]. The study utilized ECG and respiration sensors to detect stress symptoms in the patients. The targeted application of the work was towards patients who suffer migraine, addiction (substance or smoking), and stress-related disorders. The benefit of monitoring the patients' emotional stress condition is to ensure that a negative tendency is not triggered. Daily stress management can reduce severe addictive behavior and refrain from triggering migraine. The work also proposed a combination of physiological signals and other data such as visual exposure, social interactions, geoexposures, light and sound exposures, and digital trails to determine which parameters influence stress triggers. In [119], a home healthcare system using wearable physiological sensors that have an emotion recognition function was designed. The targeted groups for the application of the system were elderly and sub-healthy people. HR, TEMP, and SC were monitored at the wrist of the wearer in real time. The data were broadcast wirelessly to the family doctor or health practitioner who is responsible for the subject. An alert system was also embedded in the design to send a text message and notify the doctor, in case of a risky situation. The healthcare system can detect the states of joy, anger, and sadness.

(p32.3) The cardiac defense response (CDR) is a specific field of study that is closely related to psychophysiological reactivity towards an intense stimulation. CDR serves as a protective function of the fight or flight response in case of dangerous situations [120]. However, when exposed to it for a long period of time, anxiety, stress, depression, and other mental disorders might arise. The author of [121] proposed a novel integrated system using ECG signals to detect fear in real time. Since fear is the emotional response when a person is in danger, the system was designed to detect a prolonged CDR. In healthcare, this system is important for monitoring stress and early prevention of mental disorders.
