# Multimodal Technologies and Interaction A Systematic Literature Review on the User Experience Design for Game-Based Interventions via 3D Virtual Worlds in K-12 Education A Systematic Literature Review on the User Experience Design for Game-Based Interventions via 3D Virtual Worlds in K-12 Education. Multimodal Technol

CorpusID: 235679897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de8b7e0bfd74f178abd1ae83dc476e670e64ea7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de8b7e0bfd74f178abd1ae83dc476e670e64ea7)

Fields: Computer Science, Education, Psychology

## (s7) Rationale and Research Questions
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) This systematic review presents evidence provided exclusively by experimental studies (empirical, case, and pilot studies), which analyzed the game development process to assist game designers and UX and interaction designers concerning some of the most important key aspects and perspectives of using 3DVWs for the development of games in different K-12 learning subjects. It also considers the challenges provided by Read and Markopoulos [44]. The first challenge is associated with the lack of explicit design models and guidelines that can be suggested for the design of interactive artefacts with a focus on Child-Computer Interaction (CCI) and more broadly, the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) field of research. The second is related to K-12 students' participation, specifically as users, on how to pave a pathway to understand better the demands and support of interactive technology on UX design issues that are still underexplored. The same authors claimed, additionally, that there is a lively interest to understand factors affecting theory, design and practices pertaining to children's participation. Particularly, the concepts are related to the "Theory to Design" process which is associated with theoretical works and interaction design practices that can facilitate students' cognitive and emotional participation. Such processes reflect a shift in the general UX/ID community, not only to fully understand instructional practices' effectiveness, but also what motivates children to become engaged and learn actively within specific contexts [45]. Within GBL contexts developed in 3DVWs, students can learn by doing, and therefore practice their knowledge gained from the theoretical parts of courses to avoid becoming passive recipients of the instructor's guidance. Thus, the research questions (RQs) formulated to fulfill the main purpose of this review are as follows:
## (s21) Limitations and Future Work
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) There are some limitations worth noting in this review. First, due to the often-sparse definitions of 3DVWs, we searched specific databases that include peer-reviewed international journals without considering other articles, which have been published in conference proceedings or book chapters. Second, many articles had a small sample size of participants with limited aspects, and thus, their results could not be easily generalized. Based on this review's results, a limited number of studies (e.g., [5,32]) investigated factors affecting students' behavior and engagement in 3DVWs-supported instruction, such as the age distinction and the socio-cognitive background, to understand better any potential association between their performance and willingness to learn actively. There was no information gathered regarding the roles that instructors/educators and researchers had within the educational 3DVWs, how they obtained information during the experimentation process, or how they mitigated the impact of their presence during the teaching and learning process.
