# Local Anesthesia in Pediatric Dentistry: A Literature Review on Current Alternative Techniques and Approaches

CorpusID: 239686567 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ba8ee94881b17485793b216b1d3d511725d212e8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ba8ee94881b17485793b216b1d3d511725d212e8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Nasal Route of Anesthesia
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) It is a novel method to accomplish local anesthesia for maxillary teeth by deposition of an anesthetic agent from a metered device's nostrils. 18 The hypothesis is that the anesthetic solution disperses through the nose's mucous walls and affects the maxillary innervating teeth structures. 19 It constitutes a mixture of 3% tetracaine hydrochloride and 0.05% oxymetazoline. In addition to its anesthetic properties, it furthermore deteriorates bleeding risk, which occurs due to vasoconstriction of local blood vessels' without a significant cardiovascular disturbance. This method enables dental clinicians to manipulate in a conservative way necessitating pulpal anesthesia for maxillary incisors, canines, premolars with >40 kg weight. 20 Further research considering the efficiency and safety in administering this method for pediatric patients is necessary. Hersh et al. suggested that K 3 0 5 (3% tetracaine plus 0.05% oxymetazoline) was competent and well-tolerated during restorative procedures in adults. 21 In contrast, Capetillo et al. reported that nasal spray afforded less pulpal anesthesia than infiltration with lidocaine, and undesirable effects are elicited like nasal drainage, burning, pressure, severe respiratory depression, seizures, convulsion, and disorientation. 19,22 According to Ciancio et al., a more significant amount of nasal discomfort is seen in the combination of 3% tetracaine plus 0.05% oxymetazoline group (25 vs 11%) than the tetracaine alone group when it is administrated for restorative procedures for vital maxillary teeth in adults. In contrast, the tetracaine alone group displayed toothache, procedural pain, and congestion. These outcomes supported that oxymetazoline's addition to tetracaine can enhance the local anesthetic effect than administering tetracaine alone. 23
## (s7) Buffering the Local Anesthesia
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Malamed described an approach where sodium bicarbonate's addition immediately before anesthetic administration enhanced the solution's pH value. 24 Local anesthetics are weak bases to create a stable injectable anesthetic solution. Therefore, blending with acid produces hydrochloride salt. Consequently, all local anesthetic solutions are acidic before injection, which may provoke a stinging or burning sensation during administration and postinjection tissue injury. Hence, to bypass these, alkalinization of dental anesthetic cartridges is beneficial before injection, which hastens analgesia and lowers injection pain. 25 For buffering the local anesthesia, 8.4% sterile solution of sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO 3 ) is added to lidocaine with epinephrine as a neutralizing agent immediately before administration of local anesthetic injection. 25 
## (s9) Phentolamine Mesylate (Local Anesthesia Reversal Agent)
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) The long span of soft-tissue anesthesia is often an unwanted outcome of local anesthesia in children. Self-inflicted soft-tissue trauma, altered facial appearance perception, impaired speech, and difficulty in chewing are some of the postoperative consequences of local analgesia. Phentolamine mesylate is an alpha-adrenergic antagonist, which enhances the clearance of local anesthetic solution from the site of injection, diminishing the duration of action. 30 It is a vasodilator and an adversary to the vasoconstrictor, but not an anesthetic agent. 31 It produces faster diffusion of the anesthetic agent into the vascular system away from the injection site. It is available as a cartridge with a concentration of 0.4 mg/1.7 mL. Dosage of this drug depends upon the number of cartridges of local anesthetic with vasoconstrictor administered. Usually, it requires one cartridge of a reversal agent for every cartridge of the local anesthetic administered. 32 Phentolamine appears to be safe in 3-to 5-year-old children with significantly enhanced lip sensation reversal than sham injections. 33 Disadvantage of this agent is that it requires the second prick to deliver the drug to the respected site, which will hurt the child.

(p9.1) Grover et al. suggested that phentolamine mesylate administration improves patient care by offering significant advantages like the accelerated safe return of normal functioning of oral soft tissues from 460 to 230 minutes and shortened the post-treatment duration. 34 In a recent systematic review and metaanalysis performed by Vinnakota and Kamatham, the occurrence of adverse events like facial swelling, increased blood pressure, and reactions at the site of administration and paresthesia were more significant. Phentolamine mesylate was administered as a reversing agent compared to controls. On segregating age-based studies, there was a lower incidence of adverse events in children and adolescents than in adults (odds ratio for children 0.68 and adults 1.58). 35 Al-Khafaji et al. stated that phentolamine mesylate usage is safe and efficient in reversing soft tissue anesthesia, with 1.8 mL of 3% mepivacaine hydrochloride (without any vasoconstrictor). 36
## (s10) Centbucridine
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) It is a quinolone derivative with a local anesthetic effect. The 0.5% concentration of centbucridine can be used for adequate infiltration anesthesia and also for nerve blocks. 37 However, the clinical trial results are not statistically significant, but descriptively, they are superior over lignocaine, having excellent anti-allergic properties and antihistaminic properties. 37 Gune and Katre stated that centbucridine was in line with lignocaine which is the gold standard and can be considered as a substitute for 12-to 14-year-old hypersensitivity patients to lignocaine or with another amide based anesthetics and for individuals with cardiac and thyroid disorders where these vasoconstrictors are contraindicated. 37 locAl AnesthesIA delIvery devIces
## (s11) Jet-injection (Medjet-III)
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) The jet technology is a needleless injection that utilizes a mechanical energy source to deliver pressure, enabling a thin flow of anesthesia to infiltrate the soft tissues. It is presumed to have benefits over traditional infiltration methods by displaying a quick onset of soft tissue anesthesia, controlled distribution of the anesthetic dose, and high acceptance in instances of needlephobia patients. The lack of a needle for administration advocates a positive psychological outcome. 38 This device can direct the anesthetic solution with a small orifice seven times less than the world's smallest available needle. It can administer intradermal, subcutaneous, and intramuscular volumes of 0.01-1 cm 3 at 2,000 psi with this device. It can contribute to painless anesthesia and is ideal for nasopalatine and greater palatine injections. Furthermore, mechanical adjustments can be possible for the depth of penetration. 39 Even though it has several advantages, Arapostathis et al. stated that children preferred traditional infiltration over the jet-injector due to difficulty placing the device on gingival tissue area children experienced inadequate anesthesia. 40
## (s12) Single Tooth Anesthesia
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) This system employs an extra-short 30-G needle placed in the gingival sulcus parallel to the tooth's long axis. The number of points for administering anesthesia differs for single-and multirooted teeth, i.e., one point (distal) and two (distal and mesial)/three points, respectively. The needle has to be placed into the tissue till it approaches the periodontal ligament to achieve adequate anesthesia. Advantages of single tooth anesthesia (STA) include lack of anticipatory anxiety (due to its pen-like design), lack of pain, no perioral tissue anesthetic effects (lips, tongue, and cheeks), and no damages to the crown of permanent teeth. 41 Garret-Bernardin et al. stated that STA is an effective alternative to traditional techniques due to less significant pain and discomfort in children. 42 Al-Obaida et al. stated that STA increases the patients' satisfaction and compliance due to its profound anesthetic effect in restorative procedures among adolescence. 43
## (s13) QuickSleeper [Computer-controlled Intraosseous Anesthesia System]
Number of References: 7

(p13.0) In this technique, anesthesia is delivered with constant velocity and pressure to reduce the anesthetic effect's injection pain. 18,44 It comprises a handpiece and a control box; signals are sent to the main control box through Bluetooth by pressing the pedal. Once the circuit is completed, the handpiece drills and administers an anesthetic solution into the intra-bony space or cancellous bone to produce maximized anesthesia efficiency. 45 Smaïl-Faugeron et al. stated that the QuickSleeper® system eases dental practitioners while dealing with children and adolescent patients as it is associated with less pain and anxiety. 46 Smaïl-Faugeron et al. stated that QuickSleeper reduces pain compared to conventional infiltration in children as it is delivered near the teeth in the cancellous bone; thereby, it has a limited softtissue anesthetic effect. The authors also stated that QuickSleeper is useful in the treatment of MIH or severe pulpal inflammation. 47 Sixou et al. summarized that 58.9% of children with past dental anesthesia experience reported that this technique was more pleasant than the infiltration method as it delivers the drop by drop anesthetic solution in the first 30 seconds. 48 Carugo et al., in a systematic review, stated that computerized devices had been demonstrated to reduce pain during anesthesia compared to conventional techniques in children. 49 
## (s14) Vibrotactile Devices
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Vibratory stimulation is the prospective technique used in pain reduction. Many devices have been designed based on the "Gatecontrol" theory, which states that the neural gate can be closed while applying pressure and vibration, reducing itch and pain perception. The brain can only recognize one sensation from one area at a given time; thus, vibrating the cheek has been followed to distract the brain from the discomfort of the anesthetic shot. 50 Ungor et al. stated that vibrations were useful in reducing the pain without causing anxiety upon injection. 51 
## (s20) Intra-osseous Anesthesia
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) The first modern intra-osseous (IO) anesthesia technique requires a motor-driven perforator to penetrate the bone and buccal gingiva. It allows the delivery of a local anesthetic agent directly into the cancellous bone next to the anesthetized tooth. 60 Idris et al. concluded that supplemental IO injection significantly influences pulpal anesthesia in irreversible pulpitis conditions. 61 Numerous systems are developed to attain IO anesthesia; commonly used devices are X tip and IntraFlow.
## (s21) X-tip
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) The X-tip anesthesia delivery system consists of an X-tip that separates the device into two parts: the drill (a special hollow needle) and the guide sleeve component. The drill leads the guide sleeve over the cortical plate, then separated and withdrawn. The remaining guide sleeve is designed to admit a 27-G needle to inject the anesthetic solution. The guide sleeve is detached after the IO injection is complete. 52 The minimum onset time duration for anesthesia was 5 minutes, the maximum time was 9 minutes. The primary modifications in the application of the X-tip device are: 62 • The penetration need not be done through the attached gingiva. • Care should be taken to detach the guide sleeve with a hemostatic agent after administering the injection.
## (s23) IontophoresIs
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) It has a broad range of dentistry applications; one of its applications is a non-invasive procedure of anesthesia. This method can be used for delivering local anesthesia to deeper oral tissues following topical application. This procedure assists in penetrating positively charged lignocaine and adrenaline agents to deeper tissues with an electrical influence. 65 Due to the lack of needles, this technique can enhance the dentist-patient relationship. Thongkukiatkun et al. elicited that topical application of 20% lignocaine and 0.1% epinephrine, through an iontophoretic current of 120 mA for the 90 seconds, is required to anesthetize exposed, normal dentine. 66 Cubayachi et al. stated that a combination of the drugs prilocaine hydrochloride and lidocaine hydrochloride appeared to increase the mucosal accumulation after iontophoresis by 86-and 12-fold, respectively (pH 7.0). Hence, applying iontophoresis to a combination of drugs at pH 7.0 can assist in a needle-free approach to promote the onset and extends buccal anesthesia duration. 67
## (s26) Virtual Anesthesia
Number of References: 4

(p26.0) The distraction techniques are the most extensively practiced behavioral techniques for alleviating dental anxiety. Currently, virtual reality (VR) devices are more engaging forms of distraction. Although it has certain limitations, several authors have stated that it decreases pain and increases patient satisfaction during medical procedures. 73 Clinical trials on VR reported both subjective and objective reduction of pain and anxiety during dental procedures in children. 74 These observations recommend that VR can be used as an adjunctive tool in non-pharmacologic analgesia. Due to this analgesic potential in VR, this is termed "virtual anesthesia". Atzori et al. and Nunna et al. suggested that VR is a useful technique that helps children cope with dental fillings and extractions in a nonstressful manner with higher fun levels than its counterpart. 75,76 
