# atmosphere Statistical Approaches for Forecasting Primary Air Pollutants: A Review

CorpusID: 236343312 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00d1cfbe3eaea0a83f5db73ff247ba5d0200e435](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00d1cfbe3eaea0a83f5db73ff247ba5d0200e435)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s17) Particulate Matter (PM)
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) PM2.5 and PM10 are the pollutants of greatest concern. In recent years, the number of studies on PM1 or finer PM has increased [28,29]. For these pollutants, when conducting statistical prediction, ANNs are the most widely applied method. The ANN interpolation method has significant advantages in most cases, especially under the condition of limited air quality network density [30]. However, for solving the problem of air pollution source allocation, the BP-ANN method requires as many emission sources as possible to complete training [31].
## (s20) Multiple Pollutants and AQI
Number of References: 4

(p20.0) The focus of mixed pollutants is not on the accuracy of prediction methods but is mainly on obtaining more information on pollutant concentrations and distribution. With the development of science and technology, researchers are no longer satisfied to predict only single pollutants but also attempt to predict multiple pollutants. The research object of multiple pollutants is to holistically study common and wide-ranging pollutants such as PM2.5, NO 2 , BC, O 3 , and SO 2 to comprehensively reflect the overall level of air pollution and provide a basis for environmental management. Therefore, the application of the AQI is urgently needed for the overall evaluation of air quality. Common air quality prediction models usually predict multiple pollutants first and then calculate the air quality index [72,73]. The prediction effect of multiple pollutants is an important premise of the AQI prediction model.

(p20.1) The study of multiple pollutants is often complicated by the difference in the prediction effect of different pollutants. For example, the prediction results of a composite pollution LUR model developed by Huang et al. [64] can explain 87%, 83%, 72%, and 65% of NO 2 , SO 2 , PM2.5, and O 3 , respectively. The correlation between the types of pollutants, seasons, and meteorological variables at different altitudes is also different. The sensitivity of pollutants to meteorological variables is higher in winter than in other seasons, and the sensitivity of ozone to meteorological variables is also different from the other two pollutants [74]. Therefore, improving the overall prediction accuracy of composite pollution models is very difficult.
