# Technology and jobs: A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 247939494 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ee85abdb363a533ff11ec4d3e395a133508c8a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ee85abdb363a533ff11ec4d3e395a133508c8a0)

Fields: Economics, Computer Science

## (s14) Studies not supporting the replacement effect
Number of References: 14

(p14.0) The number of studies that provide evidence against any significant impact of technology on employment is somewhat smaller (n=17). Nine of them are on ICT, two on robots, two on innovation, one on TFP-style study, and three studies use other/indirect technology measures. Fung (2006) proxied ICT by expenses on IT and computer data processing and examined whether ICT had a labor-saving impact on firms in the US banking industry between 1992-2002. The author rejected the presence of labor-saving effects for the technologies considered, observing that the more technology-intensive firms increased their employment. Similarly, Aubert-Tarby et al. (2018) analyzed whether digitilization in the French newspaper and magazine press industry creates or destroys jobs. Overall, they found digitalization to be associated with higher wages and a reduced probability to be laid off. Atasoy et al. (2016), Gaggl and Wright (2017), and Pantea et al. (2017) made similar observations for EU countries and Turkey looking at different firm-level ICT usage indicators. They estimated either insignificant or positive effects of these technologies on employment in SMEs. Gaggl and Wright (2017) showed that the introduction of these technologies is associated with changes in the composition of tasks performed by workers. In line with that, Biagi and Falk (2017) and Ivus and Boland (2015) did not find any significant effect of ICT on employment in European industries and Canadian regions, respectively. Behaghel and Moschion (2016) did not observe that ICT-diffusion increases the probability of dismissals in French cities. If anything, they provided only weak support of increased job instability for high-school dropouts. Borland and Coelli (2017) provided a descriptive historical analysis documenting a decrease in routine labor which does not deviate from historical patterns. They could not identify any noteworthy relationship between ICT-diffusion and employment changes. Dekle (2020) and Fu et al. (2021) evaluated the impact of robots on employment (n=2). Fu et al. (2021) studied a sample of seventy-four countries, including the EU-27 and twenty-nine developing countries. They found insignificant effects in developing countries and positive employment effects accompanied with productivity increases in developed countries. The authors also reported heterogeneity by gender, but they did not find evidence for robot-induced replacement. Dekle (2020) analyzed the impact of robot-diffusion during 1979-2012 in twenty Japanese industries, but could not identify any significant negative effects on employment.

(p14.1) Among innovation studies (n=2), Calvino and Virgillito (2018) concluded in a literature review that the relationship between product innovation and employment is rather positive if statistically significant at all. The impact of process innovation remains controversial and the authors emphasized that the existing evidence is insufficient to support the existence of a replacement effect. Fung (2006) studied -in addition to ICT -the impact of in-house process innovation in the banking sector. But again, they could not find any support that these innovations reduce employment.
## (s19) Studies not supporting the reinstatement effect
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) The two non-supporting studies are the studies by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020) and Goaied and Sassi (2019). While they do not support the reinstatement effect, they offer support for the replacement and real income effect. Both studies rely on regression analyses and report an overall negative impact of technology on net employment. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019) studied the impact of robots on the regional employment to population ratio in 1990-2007 in the US. The authors found that robot-diffusion is associated with an increase in unemployment driven by employment losses in manufacturing and routine manual, blue collar occupations. The effects are larger for men than women. Additionaly, they reported positive productivity effects and increases in capital income. Goaied and Sassi (2019) studied the long term impact of ICT-diffusion in 167 countries grouped into five regions using the number of mobile phone and internet users as a technology indicator. Distinguishing between long and short term effects, the authors reported negative short and long term employment effects. They reported a positive relationship between GDP and employment, but cannot attribute this to technology.
## (s22) Studies supporting the effect
Number of References: 19

(p22.0) Among the real income supporting studies, ten investigated the impact of ICT (Autor, 2015;Autor et al., 2002;Baddeley, 2008;Berman et al., 1994;Blanas et al., 2019;Chun et al., 2015;Goaied and Sassi, 2019;Oulton, 2002;Strohmaier and Rainer, 2016;Vu, 2013). Seven of them reported a positive impact of ICT on productivity, three found positive income effects, and two provide evidence of a positive relationship between output growth and labor demand. The three studies by Autor (2015), Autor et al. (2002), and Oulton (2002) rely on descriptive analyses using industry-level case studies, macro-level growth accounting methods, and macroeconomic history. The other seven are regressions are macro-or meso-level, as well as one firm-level study by Chun et al. (2015). Another six studies examined the impact of robots using Meso or regional-level regressions (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2019;Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020;Blanas et al., 2019;Dekle, 2020;Graetz and Michaels, 2018;Jung and Lim, 2020). They all provide evidence of the productivity increasing effect of robots. Blanas et al. (2019) also found a positive effect of robots on the wage bill of high-skill, old and middle aged men which may indicate an increase in the demand for certain types of jobs like engineers and managers.
## (s30) Net employment effects of TFP-style technology
Number of References: 2

(p30.0) Among the TFP-style studies, we found strong support for the simultaneous destruction of production labor, mostly in manufacturing, and creation of new non-production labor, mostly in services. We identified thirteen studies (76%, Table 3) that support the replacement effect. Many of them showed labor demand shifts, particularly from production to non-production labor within and across industries, and from low-to high-skill workers. For the reinstatement effect, we found ten studies (91%, Table 5) supporting it by documenting employment shifts from manufacturing to services and employment increases for skilled non-production labor. Moreover, one reinstatement study showed that TFP shocks in upstream industries are associated with employment increases in downstream industries. These observations support the idea that technological change leads to structural change with a reallocation of economic activity down the value chain, i.e. from more primary and secondary industries towards increasingly processed sectors and services (Krüger, 2008;Syrquin, 1988).
