# Optical Fiber Sensors for Ultrasonic Structural Health Monitoring: A Review

CorpusID: 243815441 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a84141c6a7058a531a70252d77cd1cf8df6ce1d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a84141c6a7058a531a70252d77cd1cf8df6ce1d8)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Physics, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) Structural health monitoring (SHM) systems are necessary in structures in order to detect any deterioration in the structure and avoid catastrophic failures. In addition, SHM systems can minimize maintenance costs and the down-times of critical structures, thus allowing a very high return on investment [1]. As a result, SHM systems are receiving great interest from the scientific community [2,3]. SHM can be loosely defined as the assessment of the condition of the structure through the monitoring if its in-service performance. Typically sensors used to detect vibration, strain, corrosion, etc., are placed on the structure and through monitoring damage sensitive features the condition of the structure can be determined. A wide range of SHM techniques have been developed over the last few decades, which make use of several different technologies and damage sensitive features [4][5][6][7].
## (s3) Polarization-Based Sensors
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) When a light-wave propagates along the optical fiber, its polarization state can change due to the difference in the phase velocity of the two polarization components in a birefringent fiber. The polarization properties of light propagating through an optical fiber are sensitive to external conditions such as stress, strain, pressure, and temperature. This sensitivity is harnessed in a fiber polarimetric sensor to retrieve the sensing parameter based on the change in the polarization [27]. Cross sensitivity between different external parameters is a major challenge to these types of sensors. The capability of polarimetric fiber sensors to measure strain, temperature, and pressure is demonstrated in a variety of applications including for SHM [28]. This sensor is popularly used as a hydrophone for acoustic measurements. However, the sensitivity of the polarization state to low amplitude ultrasonic structural waves is low [29]. This is primarily due to the fact that a large amount of birefringence in the optical fiber must be induced to produce measurable changes in the polarization state. For a surface mounted sensor, the loading is only applied along one side of the optical fiber and the transverse pressure is not near that induced by a loading state such as hydrostatic loading. Additionally, methods based on birefringence do not make use of any systematic amplification (such as the high slope of the FBG sensor in edge filtering).
## (s4) Intensity-Based Sensors
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) Microbend sensors are the most popular example of intensity-based sensors. Any perturbation in the structure introduces small microbends in the optical fiber [30]. These microbends result in a change in the intensity of the transmitted light, which may be monitored for detecting the perturbations [31]. This phenomenon can be used for detecting a propagating wave or acoustic event. However, the amplitude of guided waves are extremely small and are again only applied to one side of the optical fiber for surface mounted sensors. The resulting bending and therefore bending loss in the optical fiber is extremely low. Therefore, microbend sensors are unsuitable for GW monitoring.

(p4.1) These challenges with microbend sensors have been overcome through the use of fused tapered couplers. In this sensor (Figure 3), two tapered optical fibers are fused together using a high temperature flame [32]. This process brings the core region of the two optical fibers in contact, which in turn allows the light transfer across the tapered region [33]. For the input energy P 0 , the output energy in the two output ports is given by Equation (2) [34].
## (s12) Optical Fiber-Based Ultrasonic SHM
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) A recent review by Wu et al. [16] covers much of the literature on FBG sensors for GW detection prior to 2018. So, the primary focus of this paper is on fiber optic sensors other than FBG sensors for GW detection, and more recent advances in FBGs for GW detection. Similar to Wu et al. [16] we classify SHM processes into impact detection, acousto-ultrasonic (using actuators and sensors) or acoustic emission. The distinction is made typically on the source of the ultrasonic signal, the amount of energy in the system, and the dominant frequency range.
## (s13) SHM Using Sensors Other Than FBG Sensors
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) As mentioned in earlier sections, there are several different types of transduction techniques. The earliest work in acoustic emission detection was using the intensity based microbend sensor for composites [121,122]. A laminated composite was subjected to tensile tests, and when cracking occurs, the micro-bend sensor detects the acoustic event. The setup needed for the acquisition is simple, but the signal processing requirements were deemed high according to the state-of-the-art in algorithms 20 years ago. The main drawback is the high noise content, which makes the signal processing and extraction of damage sensitive features a challenge.
## (s16) Acoustic Emission
Number of References: 3

(p16.0) Acoustic emission signals are typically low energy and high frequency broadband signals that are generated during crack formation or damage propagation. Several passive systems for their detection have been proposed, making use of FBG sensors. Some of the key publications have been reviewed by Willberry et al. [33]. More recently, Jinachandran et al. [151] performed a variety of experiments for AE-based detection in weld structures. They first proposed a novel packaged FBG sensor that is robust and applied it in conditions simulating in-service conditions due to hydrogen induced cold crack monitoring. Xu et al. [152] employed FBG sensors for debond monitoring of T-joints using cantilevered FBG sensors. The T-joint is a very important structural component of aerospace structures and the FBG sensors offer an inexpensive method for the assessment of the debond.
