# SAFETY AND RELIABILITY OF CARBON-PEEK PLATE FOR THE TREATMENT OF DISTAL RADIUS FRACTURES: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

CorpusID: 241735785 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e161048caf0a5375818cff8cceca303c9569580a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e161048caf0a5375818cff8cceca303c9569580a)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s6) CLINICAL OUTCOMES AND STUDIES ANALYSIS
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) All patients were clinically evaluated by ROM, DASH, VAS, Grip Strength with a mean follow-up of 15.7 months (min: 12 months; max: 19 months). None of the 15 patients had postoperative complications. 21 Allemann et al., in 2019, reported 10 patients all affected by type B fracture, treated with CFR-PEEK plate (Inc. Icotec, Altstätten, Switzerland). These patients were 53.3 ± 16.6 years old and the male/female ratio was 60:40. Patients were radiographically evaluated by X-ray and CT, and only ROM was clinically evaluated. The intraoperative rupture of the screw head in two screws has been documented, but this did not lead to any complication. No other peri-or postoperative complications were described. 29 Guzzini  Return to sporting activity was conceded after 3 months without any complication. 27 Lastly, Tarallo et al. published a retrospective study including 110 patients treated for distal radius fracture using a volar fixed-angle plate DiPHOS-RM (Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy). All CFR-PEEK plates were implanted between May 2012 and December 2017. 33 males and 77 females were enrolled. The mean age was 58 years old (min: 23 years; max:86 years) and the mean follow-up was 48 months (min: 14 months; max: 21 months). Among these, there were 14 cases of A3 fracture according to the AO Classifications system, 33 cases of B3, 18 cases of C1, 30 cases of C2, and 15 cases of C3. All patients, except 10, were evaluated with a mean follow-up of four years (range 14-81 months). Patients were radiographically and clinically evaluated at 1, 2, 3, and 12 months and then re-evaluated until complete healing. Finally, the authors reported one case of flexor pollicis longus (FPL) rupture one year after surgery, one case of infection, two cases of extensor tendonitis, and 5 cases of plate failure. 26 
