# Female dietary patterns and outcomes of in vitro fertilization (IVF): a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 246002062 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Selection criteria
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) Inclusion criteria were based on the PICO framework (Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome) [39]. P: women undergoing IVF or IVF with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Weight loss potentially improves outcomes during IVF treatment among women who are overweight (body mass index > = 25 kg/m2) or diagnosed with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) [40]; thus, we excluded studies restricted to women who are overweight or diagnosed with PCOS. I: dietary pattern with clearly delineated component food items. C: comparison group that differed in adherence to the dietary pattern. Early outcomes, such as embryo quality and yield, may not predict overall IVF treatment success [41][42][43]. Thus O: biochemical pregnancy (pregnancy diagnosed only by the detection of beta human chorionic gonadotrophin (βhCG) in serum or urine), clinical pregnancy (pregnancy diagnosed by ultrasonographic visualization of one or more gestational sacs or definitive clinical signs of pregnancy), or live birth (the birth of a live fetus after 22 completed weeks of gestational age) [44].
## (s10) 'Profertility' diet
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) The 'profertility' diet was examined alongside the Med-Diet in Gaskins 2019. The 'profertility' diet is based on findings from the EARTH study and comprises higher intake of supplemental folic acid, vitamin B12, vitamin D, low-pesticide fruits and vegetables, whole grains, seafood, dairy, and soy foods; and lower intake of high pesticide fruits and vegetables [32,48] (Table 2). Higher adherence to the 'profertility' diet was positively associated with biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and probability of live birth (probability of live birth as an adjusted proportion Q1 vs Q4 (95% CI) = 0.33 (0.26-0.40), 0.56 (0.47-0.64) (Gaskins, 2019) ( Table 4). Findings were largely attributed to intake of micronutrients and pesticide residues on fruits and vegetables, however an indirect approximated measure of pesticide intake was used to assess exposure [48]. The sample included 357 women participating in the EARTH study and the 
## (s16) Dietary patterns and components
Number of References: 10

(p16.0) Across studies, the exposure under investigation (dietary pattern) was selected using two different methods (Supplemental Table 2). In two studies, an α-posteriori approach was utilized [51,54]. Results from participant questionnaires or FFQ were examined and the exposure was derived based on which dietary pattern best fit the data. In the remaining studies, investigators used a hypothesis driven α-priori approach. An exposure was chosen before dietary intake information was obtained and a FFQ or questionnaire appropriate for the respective pattern administered.

(p16.1) No two studies included the same dietary components in their definitions of the MedDiet ( Table 2). All MedDiet definitions included higher intake of seafood, legumes, fruits, and vegetables. Most included low consumption of meat [48][49][50]52] and low to moderate (versus no or high) intake of alcohol [48][49][50]54]. Definitions inconsistently included; whole grains, type of fats and oils, dairy, nuts, poultry, and potatoes ( Table 2).
## (s20) Study characteristics likely leading to methodological challenges Exposure assessment
Number of References: 6

(p20.0) All studies utilized questionnaires to assess exposure, with most utilizing a validated self-administered semiquantitative FFQ (number of items ranging from 6 to 131) [48,49,51,54] (Supplemental Table 2). No questionnaire was validated prospectively in a population of women experiencing infertility and/or undergoing IVF treatment. In all studies, for exposure classification, participants were grouped into categories of adherence (e.g., low, intermediate, high) to the dietary pattern under investigation in relation to other participants' adherence based on questionnaire responses. In all studies, exposure used for analyses and covariates were assessed once at baseline and not reassessed during the follow up period for changes. Studies including participants who utilized cryopreserved embryos or oocytes did not assess exposure at both the time of cryopreservation and the time of attempted use/transfer into a uterus [48,50].
## (s21) Timing of recruitment and exposure data collection
Number of References: 17

(p21.0) It is unclear if studies included baseline data on the duration of the current pregnancy attempt. A portion of participants in three studies had undergone at least one prior IVF treatment cycle during the current pregnancy attempt at the time of recruitment [48,50,54] while no participant had a previous IVF treatment in two studies [49,51] (Supplemental Table 2). Four studies collected information on participants' 'duration of infertility' at the time of baseline data collection [49,[52][53][54]. In the two studies in which a range of data was provided, participants had a mean duration of 3 years [49,52]. Six studies collected exposure data subsequent to initial consultation for infertility; three at treatment initiation [48,51,52], two at the time of oocyte retrieval [49,50] and one at the time of embryo transfer [54].
## (s24) Associations between dietary patterns and IVF outcomes
Number of References: 5

(p24.0) Nine different dietary patterns from seven observational studies were examined among participants. Higher adherence to the MedDiet, a Dutch 'preconception' diet, and a 'profertility' diet were associated with improvements in biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, or live birth in at least one study. Amongst studies of the MedDiet, findings were inconsistent and dose-response associations were only found in one study. Within the study, associations were modified by age and present only among women age < 35 and only for the outcomes of clinical pregnancy and live birth. Although examined in one relatively small population, increased adherence to a 'profertility' diet was associated with improvements in biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and live birth. Likewise, higher adherence to a Dutch 'preconception diet' was associated with improvements in clinical pregnancy in a single small study. The aHEI-2010 diet, 'Fertility Diet' , 'health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern, 'vegetable and seafood' dietary pattern, 'Western' dietary pattern, and 'rice and miso soup' dietary pattern were not materially associated with improved IVF outcomes. Explanations for differences in findings across and within studies on the MedDiet put forth by study authors include the escalating and overshadowing influence of age on fertility [49], lack of accounting for dietary supplements [50], and insufficient statistical power [51]. Likewise, authors of studies investigating remaining dietary patterns hypothesize that differences may be attributed to intake of substances such as pesticides [48] and linoleic acid [54]. However, causative conclusions are difficult to draw due to the high degree of heterogeneity across studies and potential bias resulting from methodological issues which may mask true associations.
