# Internet of Intelligence: A Survey on the Enabling Technologies, Applications, and Challenges

CorpusID: 248851666 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f90e4db93456237d70da5b48121cb480c1255992](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f90e4db93456237d70da5b48121cb480c1255992)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s16) C. Information Layer
Number of References: 4

(p16.0) The information layer aims to process the massive raw data in the Internet of intelligence, analyze the valuable information, and transfer it to the intelligence layer. In this layer, the information itself is more valuable than its source since it describes intelligent events. ICN can build an information/content-centric information layer architecture based on the requirements of the Internet of intelligence. ICN mainly includes two types of packets: information packets and data packets [121]. Information packets are used to record the path of the user's request to facilitate the content publisher to return response data, and data packets are the content that the publisher responds to the user's request. Both the information packet and the data packet contain three tables: content store (CS), pending interest table (PIT), and forwarding information base (FIB) [122], [123]. CS is used as a temporary cache of content to meet future requests for stored content. PIT tracks unmet interests (more precisely, interests that have been reposted but have not yet received data). Finally, FIB maintains a record of each suitable interface that can access the name prefix. Fig. 11 shows the ICN model. Unlike the IP architecture, the main focus of ICN is to disseminate, find, and deliver information, instead of concentrating on the accessibility of end hosts and maintaining the conversation between them. Users in ICN can request content without knowing where the content is located. The communication follows the receiverdriven principle, and the data follows the reverse path [124]. Therefore, the connection establishment in ICN is determined by matching the requested content rather than the endpoint providing the content.
## (s19) Smart Contact
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Fig. 14. An example of implementing blockchain in the Internet of intelligence system. data sensing, etc.) among the Internet of intelligence devices. Every transaction on the blockchain is verified according to one-way encrypted hash functions and stored in a distributed ledger [151]. Any Internet of intelligence participants cannot arbitrarily change this ledger, and they must reach an agreement on the current state and changes of the blockchain ledger [152]. Without the general agreement of blockchain peers, unauthorized changes to the blockchain ledger will be detected and blocked. In order to reach such an agreement, consensus mechanisms are adopted by the blockchain peers. Commonly used consensus mechanisms include proof of stake (PoS), proof of work (PoW), and directed acyclic graph (DAG), and so forth [153]- [155]. Relying on the consensus mechanism and the chain structure of the blockchain, the Internet of intelligence system can use the blockchain to store, access and protect historical transactions to exploit these data further. Fig. 14 presents the significant steps of operating a blockchain-enabled Internet of intelligence system: i) Intelligent devices generate transactions (or records of important information) and broadcast them to the network; ii) Intelligent devices verify the information and transactions received, and the network uses hash algorithms to reach an agreement of new block creator; iii) All intelligent devices insert the identical copy of the new block into their local ledgers; vi) Transactions stored in the blockchain ledger trigger smart contracts in intelligent devices; v) Intelligent devices execute the corresponding tasks.
## (s21) Applications of the Internet of intelligence
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) Digital twin technology has three main characteristics: i) Full life cycle: the digital twin should run through the entire life cycle of the physical object, and can even go beyond its life cycle and persist in the digital space; ii) Real-time/quasireal-time: the physical object and the twin are not completely independent, and a completely real-time or quasi-real-time mapping relationship should be established; iii) Bidirectional: the data flow between entity object and twin is bidirectional. Based on the idea of digital twin, a series of successful applications in the Internet of intelligence have been demonstrated in areas such as smart cities, manufacturing, and electric power. It has implemented various services, including 3D visualization, intelligent manufacturing, life cycle management, state prediction, and so forth [168]- [170]. In general, through the digital twin technology, the Internet of intelligence can obtain massive data and build a powerful digital twin, thereby simulating the operation rules of entity objects and helping to put them into practice in the real world. Furthermore, the digital twin can also be integrated with other application layer technologies to better serve human beings.
## (s24) A. Smart Computer/Communication Network
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) As already introduced in Section V, computing and communication are key enabling technologies for the physical resources layer of the Internet of intelligence. As the Internet of intelligence flourishes, it will in turn support the development of 5G/6G and the future Internet, promoting intelligence in computer/communication networks. By distributing intelligence and federated learning at the edge of smart computer/communication networks, the Internet of intelligence can break through the limitations of users and data in a single network node or a single domain to improve the versatility and scalability of intelligence models [178]. Meanwhile, the paradigm of intelligence networking can also enable intelligence to be effectively stored, delivered, and shared, thus effectively alleviating information redundancy within the smart computer/communication network. In addition, the security and privacy issues of smart computer/communication networks can also be effectively enhanced through the application of blockchain technology, thus facilitating intelligence sharing, decentralized intelligence, and trust in decision-making [5]. The smart computer/communication network with the Internet of intelligence has the following characteristics.
## (s25) B. Smart Transportation/Autonomous Driving
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) Smart transportation integrates people, vehicles and road infrastructure into a large and rigorous system that manages urban traffic by collecting real-time vehicle and road information and controls vehicle driving mode through end-to-end  Fig. 17. Comparison of single-vehicle intelligence, centralized approach, distributed approach and BCL approach of autonomous driving. joint decision-making. The Internet of intelligence can accelerate the transition of smart transportation from connected vehicles to fully automated driving [194]. Autonomous driving is a technology that integrates AI, visual computing, radar, monitoring equipment, and positioning systems [195]. It not only relies on efficient and real-time data computing but also requires real-time access to road infrastructure and Internet data. Consequently, autonomous driving relies on the entire network to coordinate all vehicles and road infrastructure, rather than being limited by the computing and sensing capabilities of any single vehicle. In autonomous driving, simple information processing and forwarding mechanisms are no longer sufficient. The decision model is based on the environment and is constructed from a larger set of vehicular information. In such cases, the model may reduce the load and delay of autonomous driving since the key content is extracted from a larger set of input information. Therefore, the Internet of intelligence plays a vital role in autonomous driving to obtain intelligence by processing, analyzing and understanding the collected information. Moreover, intelligence sharing between vehicles can provide more accurate location awareness and higher communication efficiency. Following we provide several fields of autonomous driving systems that can be benefited from the Internet of intelligence.
## (s28) D. Smart Cities
Number of References: 4

(p28.0) Smart cities have become a new paradigm, which can dynamically exploit resources in cities from ubiquitous devices to provide citizens with a wide range of services [224]. Smart cities involve various components, including ubiquitous intelligent devices, a variety of heterogeneous networks, and data centers with large-scale storage and powerful computing capabilities. Despite the potential vision of smart cities, how to provide intelligent, secure and efficient services for smart cities is still a challenging issue [225]. In such cases, by using attractive technologies such as AI, blockchain, digital twin and so forth, the Internet of intelligence can become a promising candidate for empowering smart city services. The Internet of intelligence allows intelligence transmission rather than information transmission in smart cities, thereby providing safer and more effective services and making smart cities smarter. Compared with traditional smart cities, smart cities with the Internet of intelligence has the following characteristics: 1) Efficient Data Analytics: Hundreds of millions of intelligent devices and sensors in every corner of cities can automatically collect and monitor various data in real-time, including traffic, weather, energy, water consumption, shopping information, air quality, and so on [226]. Through data aggregation, transmission, storage, organization, and analysis, what is happening and what may happen in the future can be understood. However, to cope with such a huge amount of data, the current data processing of smart cities is of poor efficiency. In such a city-scale deployment of smart services, data is generated at a high rate, and only a small part of this massive data is typically used to improve the lives of urban residents [227]. Compared with the traditional information networking smart cities, the data processing efficiency can be greatly improved in intelligence networking smart cities through intelligence sharing. Here, we take the way of dressing as an example. When people migrate from one city to another, new ways of dressing need to be established according to the local weather. For traditional smart cities, ML may be used to learn the new environment. Based on the collected weather and dressing data, a new way of dressing can be established through a lot of learning and training. Humans are different from machines. When migrating to a new city, they will quickly obtain the correct way of dressing through the experience shared by others rather than random attempts. Therefore, as illustrated in Fig. 19, in a smart city driven by the Internet of intelligence, it is no longer to spend a lot of time, material and financial resources to re-training, but to refer to the way of human intelligence and establish the correct way of dressing through the intelligence sharing between intelligent agents.
## (s29) E. Smart Healthcare
Number of References: 6

(p29.0) Healthcare is another field that benefits from the Internet of intelligence. In terms of medical services, the Internet of intelligence can effectively integrate doctors, patients, hospitals and regulatory agencies to provide reliable customized and precise health management services. Medical and health services can continue to provide high-quality services throughout their life cycle. Under the premise of satisfying privacy protection, the Internet of intelligence can store, protect, retrieve, analyze and share intelligence from patients, doctors, medical equipment, etc. Medical resources can also be shared between doctors and hospitals. Doctors or medical equipment can check patients remotely, and all shared intelligence can be retrieved from local or remote servers. As a result, the boundaries between hospitals and hospitals, and between regions and regions can be effectively eliminated, realizing the sharing of medical resources. To sum up, in medical and health services enabled by the Internet of intelligence, the physical boundaries of hospitals and the geographic boundaries of cities can be eliminated, and the work efficiency of doctors and hospitals can be significantly improved, thereby helping to change health management, treatment and hospital management. Some application domains in smart healthcare that can benefit from the Internet of intelligence technologies are summarized as follows. 1) Doctor Recommendation: Adopting medical appointment platforms in hospitals may pose challenges for patients in choosing the right doctor online. Specifically, people may not be able to understand who is the right doctor to solve their health problems without professional knowledge and experience [230], [231]. A smarter doctor recommendation system can be constructed based on the Internet of intelligence to cope with such issues. Patients can share the evaluations of the doctors they make appointments on the doctor recommendation system. Driven by the Internet of intelligence, the smart doctor recommendation system converts information collected from patients, doctor appointment platforms, patient comments, etc. into intelligence, and presents it to patients to achieve efficient doctor recommendations.

(p29.1) 2) Personalized Diagnosis: Based on the collected medical data and personalized physiological indicators, the Internet of intelligence can use various ML and cognitive computing algorithms to establish personalized diagnosis plans, so as to provide patients with personalized treatments to prevent and treat diseases [232]. Taking diabetes as an example, through the collection, storage and analysis of personal diabetes information, the Internet of intelligence can extract the intelligence from the information and adjust treatment strategies in time according to changes in the patient's condition, as shown in Fig. 20. In addition, effective intelligence sharing among patients, relatives, friends, personal health consultants, and doctors is established through the Internet of intelligence to maintain sustainability in diagnosing and treating intelligencedriven diabetes [233]. Particularly, the Internet of intelligence mainly provides personalized diagnosis to patients in two ways. On the one hand, the Internet of intelligence enables patients to maintain a healthy lifestyle to prevent them from suffering from the disease at an early stage. On the other hand, the Internet of intelligence promotes out-of-hospital treatment, which can effectively reduce the cost of long-term hospitalization for patients.

(p29.2) 3) Epidemic Prediction: A significant challenge for the current epidemic monitoring and control system is the need for a large amount of pathological, radiographic, genetic and other types of epidemic-related information to be absorbed, stored and processed. In the event of a sudden outbreak of an epidemic, such as COVID-19, it is challenging to conduct many tests manually on each test object due to time constraints [234]. The Internet of intelligence will play an important role in such crises. In the Internet of intelligence, the hospital data center acts as an intelligent agent to train and establish a smart prediction system according to different types of physiological signals and hospital test signals, including chest X-ray images, computed tomography (CT) scanning images, protease sequences, eye surface images, cough sounds, body temperature, blood pressure, etc [235]. Then, hospital data centers can extract intelligence about COVID-19 from the trained model, preserve the intelligence and share it with other hospital data centers. In this way, the Internet of intelligence can effectively process massive epidemic data and predict realtime epidemic crises. Fig. 21 illustrates the process of the Internet of intelligence to combat COVID-19-like pandemics. Furthermore, the Internet of intelligence can help healthcare providers manage patients remotely. By allowing professionals outside the shock center to diagnose patients remotely, the tremendous pressure on front-line nursing staff can be reduced.
## (s31) G. Smart Grid/Energy
Number of References: 6

(p31.0) Smart grids are replacing traditional grids to provide consumers with reliable and efficient energy services. Smart grids introduced distributed energy generators to improve the utilization of distributed energy, introduced smart meters and two-way communication networks to realize customers and utility providers, and introduced electric vehicles to improve energy storage capacity and reduce carbon dioxide emissions. In this way, smart grids have demonstrated outstanding reliability, efficiency, security and interactivity [241], [242]. The Internet of intelligence can effectively help smart grids achieve better performance in predictive dispatch, fault diagnosis, and network attack detection. Load forecasting is an important achievement of smart grid system. It forecasts the shortterm, medium-term and long-term demand for electricity. By identifying better power distribution among consumers or customers (homes, industries, and corporate offices), power distribution companies will particularly benefit from smart grids. Currently, different power utilization data is gathered together. Deep learning can use these data for load forecasting so that that power distributors can predict the power demand of users for power distribution. However, the vast amount of data poses a challenge to the calculation time of deep learning. Through distributed intelligent sharing, the Internet of intelligence can effectively reduce ML training and computing time and improve feature selection. For example, in [243], the authors proposed a distributed intelligent learning model for smart grid, which uses Hilbert Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC) bottleneck technology to provide higher precision learning, thus reducing the calculation time and cost in the case of limited data. In addition, the Internet of intelligence can effectively manage its load scheduling while protecting the privacy of residents. Inspired by FL, the authors in [244] proposed a distributed deep reinforcement learning approach, in which the action network is located in the distributed household, and the critic network is located in the aggregator from the trusted third party. The security of smart grids under network attacks has aroused widespread concern. In order to improve the security of smart grids, the Internet of intelligence can detect DDoS attacks by analyzing the patterns of network data. Through the automatic analysis and detection method, it can respond in time, take preventive measures, greatly reduce the damage, and improve prediction accuracy.

(p31.1) In the energy field, the Internet of intelligence energy services can effectively complete the integration of power grids, thermal power grids and fuel grids, and realize the integration and complementarity of wind, solar and other energy sources. Energy Internet (also referred to as Smart grid 2.0) aims to become a smart grid with ultra-high voltage (UHV) grid as the backbone, variable clean energy transmission as the leader, and interconnection as the main feature [245]. Through the integration of the energy industry and intelligent technologies, comprehensive management of energy production, storage, transmission and consumption can be effectively realized [246]. The Internet of intelligence can transform the traditional centralized AI into large-scale distributed intelligence networking systems, realizing self-organization, selfevolution and real-time intelligence. Distributed AI provides more accurate online real-time data training models to achieve smarter scheduling and control. Deterministic low latency and flexible network resource configuration guarantee a more realtime system response. Meanwhile, the Internet of intelligence can effectively deal with energy inefficiency or energy failures in the energy Internet. For instance, by connecting the energy market and consumers, the Internet of intelligence can realize smart management of hybrid power energy consumption and production. When consumers have their own production capacity, the Internet of intelligence realizes two-way power transactions based on real-time electricity prices. That is, consumers sell their surplus electricity to the energy market at a satisfactory price during the peak period of electricity consumption, and they can buy the electricity in the market at a lower price during the low period of electricity consumption. This will not only reduce energy waste and promote the prosperity of the free energy trading market but also help promote clean energy to replace traditional energy.
## (s34) J. Lessons Learned: Summary and Insights
Number of References: 4

(p34.0) This section is dedicated to providing a vision of the Internet of intelligence and discusses in detail the huge market potential of the Internet of intelligence in various applications, thus laying the foundation for its application in a wide range of fields. systems. First, on-board collective learning will effectively improve the efficiency, accuracy, and security of ML. Second, human characteristics and motivation are taken into account in the Internet of intelligence-driven CAVs to achieve the ultimate consumer-centric experience. Third, the Internet of intelligence has the potential to help build a secure, trustworthy and decentralized CAV ecosystem, thereby enhancing the security of vehicular communication and the QoS of vehicular services. • The Internet of intelligence greatly enhances the intelligence and connectivity of industrial production, and can be widely used in many fields of the smart industry. First, Enhanced security [16], [75], [188]- [193] Smart transportation /autonomous driving
