# micromachines A Review of Sharp-Switching Band-Modulation Devices

CorpusID: 245165941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3848635de2b67177c2d9b27b320aeefbffb23c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3848635de2b67177c2d9b27b320aeefbffb23c1)

Fields: Physics, Medicine, Engineering

## (s5) Principle of Band-Modulation
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) Although the lateral PNPN structure looks like a floating-body thyristor, its operating principle is different, as it relies on band-modulation effects, rather than impact ionization (Section 3). The device is biased in forward mode with V A > 0. The electrostatic doping builds up three P-N junctions along the body; their energy barriers prevent the injection of holes from the anode and of electrons from the cathode into the body. The device stays in blocked mode, until the gate or anode voltage becomes large enough to collapse the barriers and let a large cathode-anode current flow. Corresponding band diagrams and a detailed description are given in Section 3.1. The switching characteristics are extremely sharp and inspired the name Z 2 -FET, for Zerosubthreshold swing and Zero impact ionization [13]. The earlier variant with two top gates, as in Figure 2b, was named a field-effect diode (FED) [15,16].
## (s6) Device Variants
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) The architecture of the Z 2 -FET can be further enriched in several ways. Dual ground-planes ( Figure 3a): The ground-plane (GP-P) located underneath the ungated portion of the body is negatively biased and generates the necessary P* electrostatic doping. The sister ground-plane, located beneath the gated region, is positively biased and assists the front gate in forming a strong energy barrier [17]. This architecture eliminates the inconvenience of a single ground plane, which tends to counteract the front-gate action (Figure 2a). collapse the barriers and let a large cathode-anode current flow. Corresponding band diagrams and a detailed description are given in Section 3.1. The switching characteristics are extremely sharp and inspired the name Z 2 -FET, for Zero subthreshold swing and Zero impact ionization [13]. The earlier variant with two top gates, as in Figure 2b, was named a field-effect diode (FED) [15,16].
## (s7) Device Variants
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) The architecture of the Z 2 -FET can be further enriched in several ways. Dual ground-planes ( Figure 3a): The ground-plane (GP-P) located underneath the ungated portion of the body is negatively biased and generates the necessary P* electrostatic doping. The sister ground-plane, located beneath the gated region, is positively biased and assists the front gate in forming a strong energy barrier [17]. This architecture eliminates the inconvenience of a single ground plane, which tends to counteract the front-gate action (Figure 2a).  Physically-doped ungated section (Figure 3b): The idea here is to eliminate the back-gate action. Boron implantation replaces the P* electrostatic doping, without affecting the sharpness of the device characteristics [18]. This solution is well suited to FinFETs and nanowires, although it does sacrifice some of the reconfigurability. Z 3 -FET ( Figure 3c): This Zero top-gate variant has the partitioning of the body doping controlled by the twin ground-planes [19]. The omission of the gate stack enables operation at higher voltage, without dielectric reliability issues. Furthermore, the free surface can be used for superior detection of light, biochemical species, or radiation.
## (s8) Implementation in FD-SOI Technology
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Band modulation devices have been designed and fabricated in 14 nm [20] and 28 nm [21] FD-SOI technologies. Both advanced nodes feature promising characteristics, with a slightly different process flow. For instance, in 28 nm FDSOI, the fabrication of a Z 2 -FET structure (Figure 4a) starts by delimiting the device surface using STI isolation. A 25-nm-thick BOX separates the undoped ultrathin silicon film (t Si = 7 nm with~10 16 cm −3 doping concentration) from a highly P-type doped ground plane (~10 18 cm −3 ), which prevents the deep depletion of the substrate and acts as a back-gate. In order to access the GP and control the well potential, the BOX is locally etched. The undoped Si film of the Z 2 -FET is partially covered by a single high-k/metal front-gate with a capacitance equivalent thickness (CET) of 3.7 nm, whereas the rest of the channel is ungated. Thinner dielectrics, down to CET = 1.1 nm, have been successfully tested at lower gate voltages. The gate stack formation starts with a thermally grown oxide interface (SiO 2 ), ensuring a good interface quality, clean of fixed charges. The interface SiO 2 layer (IL) is covered by a high-k hafnium dioxide layer (HfO 2 , 18 < k < 20), improving the current drive and reducing the gate leakage. It is connected via a mid-gap metal layer (TiN or AlTiN) to a low-resistance poly-Si electrode followed by gate patterning and offset spacer formation.
## (s28) Static Memory Cell: Operation as Capacitorless SRAM
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) The DC hysteresis observed when sweeping the Z 2 -FET anode voltage back and forth while monitoring the current suggests the possibility of using the Z 2 -FET as a single-transistor static RAM cell [26]. The static memory window, i.e., the valid anode voltages to operate the cell as an SRAM, is defined as the range between the DC current switching points VON and VOFF, see Figure 16. The high-current '1'-state is set by applying VA > VON, to overcome the injection barriers and forward-bias the cell. In contrast, the low-current '0'-state is programmed with a low anode voltage VA < VOFF; the barriers are rebuilt and block the current flow. In either case, after setting the '1'-or '0'-state, the anode bias must be maintained within the limits of the memory window, VOFF < VA < VON, to avoid flipping the memory state. The fine-tuning of the ground-plane voltage offers yet another solution for the suppression of the leakage current. However, a too negative V BG counteracts the effort of the front-gate to set a strong hole-injection barrier at the anode, whereas a too positive V BG hampers the creation of an electron barrier at the cathode. Once again, the dual groundplane variant (Figure 3a) shows improved performance [32]. It is the ground-plane located beneath the gated region that makes the difference. When V BG = 0 the leakage is high, but it decreases by orders of magnitude for V BG = +2 V (Figure 15b). This ground-plane can guarantee a strong barrier at the anode, even though the front-gate voltage is kept small (V FG = 0.5 V), suitable for low-voltage applications. Note that the ground-plane biasing does not impact the I ON current. The I ON /I OFF current ratio can exceed six orders of magnitude. The proper selection of anode, gate, and ground-plane voltages is even more crucial in short-body devices, where the energy barriers are narrower and, thus, more transparent. While I ON current is improved, the I OFF leakage current tends to increase more quickly unless the gate voltages are increased.
## (s43) TFET
Number of References: 6

(p43.0) A band-modulation device can also be operated in the TFET mode, without any structural changes; the device anatomy and gate voltage polarity are preserved, but the anode is reverse biased. Figure 24 again shows a hocus-pocus diode with a positive V FG > 0, a floating V BG (no back-gate voltage), and a variable anode voltage V A . The I A -V A characteristics are highly asymmetric, denoting fundamentally different operation mechanisms. When V A is positive, we obtain the sharp-switching feedback-based Z 2 -FET characteristic described earlier, with a nearly vertical transition from I ON to I OFF . On the other hand, the negative V A produces a TFET mode, where the I A is generated via band-to-band tunneling (BTBT) at the anode junction and flows between the heavily P + anode and the electrostatically doped electron-rich region under the front gate. The TFET mode of the band modulation device in Figure 24 has the merit of emphasizing the extreme reconfigurability of the band-modulation device, but the SS obtained experimentally is disappointing, as is the low ION. These drawbacks are common to all experimentally realized Si-based TFETs. While numerical simulations relying on ideally abrupt junctions (and favorable adjustable parameters in the interband tunneling transmission coefficients) have led to predictions of SS below the 60 mV/decade limit over a wide range of current densities, including practically relevant ION [60], the reality is rather different. Due to the large Si bandgap and relatively heavy tunneling masses, no all-silicon TFET has delivered an ION exceeding 1 μA/μm, while maintaining sharp SS over several decades of ID. Attempts to improve ION by moving to lower EG channel materials or by employing heterostructures, where the BTBT process would occur in a lower bandgap material (like Ge), while retaining CMOS compatibility have met with limited success [61,62]. The TFET mode of the band modulation device in Figure 24 has the merit of emphasizing the extreme reconfigurability of the band-modulation device, but the SS obtained experimentally is disappointing, as is the low I ON . These drawbacks are common to all experimentally realized Si-based TFETs. While numerical simulations relying on ideally abrupt junctions (and favorable adjustable parameters in the interband tunneling transmission coefficients) have led to predictions of SS below the 60 mV/decade limit over a wide range of current densities, including practically relevant I ON [60], the reality is rather different. Due to the large Si bandgap and relatively heavy tunneling masses, no all-silicon TFET has delivered an I ON exceeding 1 µA/µm, while maintaining sharp SS over several decades of I D . Attempts to improve I ON by moving to lower E G channel materials or by employing heterostructures, where the BTBT process would occur in a lower bandgap material (like Ge), while retaining CMOS compatibility have met with limited success [61,62].
