# Parasitology General overview of the current status of human foodborne trematodiasis

CorpusID: 248918633 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bde150d0549564b038702335ebb63ddd61c7c471](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bde150d0549564b038702335ebb63ddd61c7c471)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s1) Liver flukes
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) At least 15 species of liver flukes are known to cause human infections. They include C. sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, O. felineus, Metorchis conjunctus, M. bilis, M. orientalis, Amphimerus sp., Amphimerus noverca, A. pseudofelineus, Pseudamphistomum truncatum, P. aethiopicum, Dicrocoelium dendriticum, D. hospes, Fasciola hepatica and F. gigantica (Table 1)  . They can be divided into small liver flukes (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp., Pseudamphistomum spp. and Dicrocoelium spp.) and large liver flukes (F. hepatica and F. gigantica) according to the size of the adult worms. The first intermediate host is freshwater or brackish water snails, and the second intermediate host is freshwater fish (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp. and Pseudamphistomum spp.), ants (Dicrocoelium spp.) or aquatic vegetation (Fasciola spp.) ( Table 1). The morphological similarity of opisthorchiid eggs to heterophyid as well as lecithodendriid-like fluke eggs frequently poses diagnostic problems in human fecal examinations. Molecular techniques using internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 1 (cox1) have been used to differentiate the eggs as well as larvae and adults of opisthorchiid and heterophyid flukes (Duflot et al., 2021).

(p1.1) At least 15 species of liver flukes are known to cause human infections. They include C. sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, O. felineus, Metorchis conjunctus, M. bilis, M. orientalis, Amphimerus sp., Amphimerus noverca, A. pseudofelineus, Pseudamphistomum truncatum, P. aethiopicum, Dicrocoelium dendriticum, D. hospes, Fasciola hepatica and F. gigantica (Table 1)  . They can be divided into small liver flukes (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp., Pseudamphistomum spp. and Dicrocoelium spp.) and large liver flukes (F. hepatica and F. gigantica) according to the size of the adult worms. The first intermediate host is freshwater or brackish water snails, and the second intermediate host is freshwater fish (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp. and Pseudamphistomum spp.), ants (Dicrocoelium spp.) or aquatic vegetation (Fasciola spp.) ( Table 1). The morphological similarity of opisthorchiid eggs to heterophyid as well as lecithodendriid-like fluke eggs frequently poses diagnostic problems in human fecal examinations. Molecular techniques using internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 1 (cox1) have been used to differentiate the eggs as well as larvae and adults of opisthorchiid and heterophyid flukes (Duflot et al., 2021).
## (s5) Metorchis spp.
Number of References: 10

(p5.0) Metorchis conjunctus (Cobbold, 1860) Looss, 1899 (the North American liver fluke) is a common parasite of carnivorous mammals, including sledge dogs (causing fatality), in northern Canada (MacLean et al., 1996). Asymptomatic sporadic human infections were reported in Canada since 1945, particularly in aboriginal populations from Quebec to Saskatchewan and the eastern coast of Greenland (Babbott et al., 1961;MacLean et al., 1996). In 1993, an outbreak of a common-source infection with this fluke, with acute clinical symptoms of fatigue, upper abdominal tenderness and pain, low-grade fever, headache, weight loss and anorexia, occurred among 19 Korean immigrants in a river north of Montreal, Canada; the patients consumed wild-caught fish (Catostomus commersoni) that had been undercooked (MacLean et al., 1996). Laboratory findings included high blood eosinophilia and raised liver enzymes (MacLean et al., 1996). However, serious liver diseases have not been reported in human infections.
## (s26) Isthmiophora hortensis
Number of References: 10

(p26.0) Isthmiophora hortensis (Asada, 1926) Kostadinova and Gibson, 2002 (syn. Echinostoma hortense) was first found from rats in Japan, and then also from rats in South Korea and China . Human infections were first documented in Japan in 1976 and then also found in South Korea and China (Chai and Lee, 2002;Chai et al., 2009). In South Korea, clinical cases with significant abdominal symptoms were diagnosed by extracting living worms by gastroduodenal endoscopy . Loaches, Misgurnus anguillicaudatus and M. mizolepis, and other freshwater fish, including Odontobutis obscura interrupta and Moroco oxycephalus, are the second intermediate hosts .

(p26.1) Echinochasmus spp. Echinochasmus japonicus Tanabe, 1926 was originally reported in Japan from dogs, cats, rats, mice and birds experimentally fed the metacercariae encysted in freshwater fish . This fluke is now known to occur mainly in Far Eastern countries (Chai and Lee, 2002;Chai and Jung, 2019). In Japan, an experimental human infection was reported to be successful, and in China and South Korea natural human infections were discovered . Freshwater fish, including P. parva, Hypomesus olidus and Gnathopogon strigatus, are the second intermediate hosts Choi et al., 2006).
## (s30) Caprimolgorchis molenkampi
Number of References: 16

(p30.0) Caprimolgorchis molenkampi (Lie, 1951) Baugh, 1957 (syn. Prosthodendrium molenkampi) was originally reported from 2 human autopsies in Indonesia (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Later, this fluke was found again in 14 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970;Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Currently, this fluke shows a considerable prevalence in northeast Thailand and Laos . Naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).

(p30.1) Caprimolgorchis molenkampi (Lie, 1951) Baugh, 1957 (syn. Prosthodendrium molenkampi) was originally reported from 2 human autopsies in Indonesia (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Later, this fluke was found again in 14 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970;Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Currently, this fluke shows a considerable prevalence in northeast Thailand and Laos . Naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).
## (s33) Gymnophallloides seoi
Number of References: 4

(p33.0) Gymnophalloides seoi  was originally reported from a woman suffering from acute pancreatitis and gastrointestinal discomfort in South Korea Chai et al., 2003). Subsequently, a southwestern coastal island was found to be a highly endemic area with 49% prevalence and heavy worm loads . This fluke is now known to be distributed in 25 seashore villages of western and southern coastal islands and 3 coastal inlands of South Korea . Oysters, Crassostrea gigas were verified to be the second intermediate hosts . Consumption of raw oysters is the main mode of human infection.

(p33.1) Gymnophalloides seoi  was originally reported from a woman suffering from acute pancreatitis and gastrointestinal discomfort in South Korea Chai et al., 2003). Subsequently, a southwestern coastal island was found to be a highly endemic area with 49% prevalence and heavy worm loads . This fluke is now known to be distributed in 25 seashore villages of western and southern coastal islands and 3 coastal inlands of South Korea . Oysters, Crassostrea gigas were verified to be the second intermediate hosts . Consumption of raw oysters is the main mode of human infection.
## (s36) Phaneropsolus bonnei
Number of References: 12

(p36.0) Phaneropsolus bonnei Lie, 1951 was originally reported based on adult flukes recovered from a human autopsy in Indonesia, and subsequently this fluke was found in monkeys in Malaysia and India (Manning et al., 1970). Human infections with this fluke were first reported in 15 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970). Thailand and Laos are currently important countries where this fluke infection is considerably high among the people . Insects, particularly naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies, serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).

(p36.1) Phaneropsolus bonnei Lie, 1951 was originally reported based on adult flukes recovered from a human autopsy in Indonesia, and subsequently this fluke was found in monkeys in Malaysia and India (Manning et al., 1970). Human infections with this fluke were first reported in 15 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970). Thailand and Laos are currently important countries where this fluke infection is considerably high among the people . Insects, particularly naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies, serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).
## (s46) Liver flukes
Number of References: 4

(p46.0) At least 15 species of liver flukes are known to cause human infections. They include C. sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, O. felineus, Metorchis conjunctus, M. bilis, M. orientalis, Amphimerus sp., Amphimerus noverca, A. pseudofelineus, Pseudamphistomum truncatum, P. aethiopicum, Dicrocoelium dendriticum, D. hospes, Fasciola hepatica and F. gigantica (Table 1)  . They can be divided into small liver flukes (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp., Pseudamphistomum spp. and Dicrocoelium spp.) and large liver flukes (F. hepatica and F. gigantica) according to the size of the adult worms. The first intermediate host is freshwater or brackish water snails, and the second intermediate host is freshwater fish (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp. and Pseudamphistomum spp.), ants (Dicrocoelium spp.) or aquatic vegetation (Fasciola spp.) ( Table 1). The morphological similarity of opisthorchiid eggs to heterophyid as well as lecithodendriid-like fluke eggs frequently poses diagnostic problems in human fecal examinations. Molecular techniques using internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 1 (cox1) have been used to differentiate the eggs as well as larvae and adults of opisthorchiid and heterophyid flukes (Duflot et al., 2021).

(p46.1) At least 15 species of liver flukes are known to cause human infections. They include C. sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, O. felineus, Metorchis conjunctus, M. bilis, M. orientalis, Amphimerus sp., Amphimerus noverca, A. pseudofelineus, Pseudamphistomum truncatum, P. aethiopicum, Dicrocoelium dendriticum, D. hospes, Fasciola hepatica and F. gigantica (Table 1)  . They can be divided into small liver flukes (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp., Pseudamphistomum spp. and Dicrocoelium spp.) and large liver flukes (F. hepatica and F. gigantica) according to the size of the adult worms. The first intermediate host is freshwater or brackish water snails, and the second intermediate host is freshwater fish (C. sinensis, Opisthorchis spp., Metorchis spp., Amphimerus spp. and Pseudamphistomum spp.), ants (Dicrocoelium spp.) or aquatic vegetation (Fasciola spp.) ( Table 1). The morphological similarity of opisthorchiid eggs to heterophyid as well as lecithodendriid-like fluke eggs frequently poses diagnostic problems in human fecal examinations. Molecular techniques using internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 1 (cox1) have been used to differentiate the eggs as well as larvae and adults of opisthorchiid and heterophyid flukes (Duflot et al., 2021).
## (s50) Metorchis spp.
Number of References: 10

(p50.0) Metorchis conjunctus (Cobbold, 1860) Looss, 1899 (the North American liver fluke) is a common parasite of carnivorous mammals, including sledge dogs (causing fatality), in northern Canada (MacLean et al., 1996). Asymptomatic sporadic human infections were reported in Canada since 1945, particularly in aboriginal populations from Quebec to Saskatchewan and the eastern coast of Greenland (Babbott et al., 1961;MacLean et al., 1996). In 1993, an outbreak of a common-source infection with this fluke, with acute clinical symptoms of fatigue, upper abdominal tenderness and pain, low-grade fever, headache, weight loss and anorexia, occurred among 19 Korean immigrants in a river north of Montreal, Canada; the patients consumed wild-caught fish (Catostomus commersoni) that had been undercooked (MacLean et al., 1996). Laboratory findings included high blood eosinophilia and raised liver enzymes (MacLean et al., 1996). However, serious liver diseases have not been reported in human infections.
## (s71) Isthmiophora hortensis
Number of References: 10

(p71.0) Isthmiophora hortensis (Asada, 1926) Kostadinova and Gibson, 2002 (syn. Echinostoma hortense) was first found from rats in Japan, and then also from rats in South Korea and China . Human infections were first documented in Japan in 1976 and then also found in South Korea and China (Chai and Lee, 2002;Chai et al., 2009). In South Korea, clinical cases with significant abdominal symptoms were diagnosed by extracting living worms by gastroduodenal endoscopy . Loaches, Misgurnus anguillicaudatus and M. mizolepis, and other freshwater fish, including Odontobutis obscura interrupta and Moroco oxycephalus, are the second intermediate hosts .

(p71.1) Echinochasmus spp. Echinochasmus japonicus Tanabe, 1926 was originally reported in Japan from dogs, cats, rats, mice and birds experimentally fed the metacercariae encysted in freshwater fish . This fluke is now known to occur mainly in Far Eastern countries (Chai and Lee, 2002;Chai and Jung, 2019). In Japan, an experimental human infection was reported to be successful, and in China and South Korea natural human infections were discovered . Freshwater fish, including P. parva, Hypomesus olidus and Gnathopogon strigatus, are the second intermediate hosts Choi et al., 2006).
## (s75) Caprimolgorchis molenkampi
Number of References: 16

(p75.0) Caprimolgorchis molenkampi (Lie, 1951) Baugh, 1957 (syn. Prosthodendrium molenkampi) was originally reported from 2 human autopsies in Indonesia (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Later, this fluke was found again in 14 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970;Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Currently, this fluke shows a considerable prevalence in northeast Thailand and Laos . Naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).

(p75.1) Caprimolgorchis molenkampi (Lie, 1951) Baugh, 1957 (syn. Prosthodendrium molenkampi) was originally reported from 2 human autopsies in Indonesia (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Later, this fluke was found again in 14 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970;Manning and Lertprasert, 1973). Currently, this fluke shows a considerable prevalence in northeast Thailand and Laos . Naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).
## (s78) Gymnophallloides seoi
Number of References: 4

(p78.0) Gymnophalloides seoi  was originally reported from a woman suffering from acute pancreatitis and gastrointestinal discomfort in South Korea Chai et al., 2003). Subsequently, a southwestern coastal island was found to be a highly endemic area with 49% prevalence and heavy worm loads . This fluke is now known to be distributed in 25 seashore villages of western and southern coastal islands and 3 coastal inlands of South Korea . Oysters, Crassostrea gigas were verified to be the second intermediate hosts . Consumption of raw oysters is the main mode of human infection.

(p78.1) Gymnophalloides seoi  was originally reported from a woman suffering from acute pancreatitis and gastrointestinal discomfort in South Korea Chai et al., 2003). Subsequently, a southwestern coastal island was found to be a highly endemic area with 49% prevalence and heavy worm loads . This fluke is now known to be distributed in 25 seashore villages of western and southern coastal islands and 3 coastal inlands of South Korea . Oysters, Crassostrea gigas were verified to be the second intermediate hosts . Consumption of raw oysters is the main mode of human infection.
## (s81) Phaneropsolus bonnei
Number of References: 12

(p81.0) Phaneropsolus bonnei Lie, 1951 was originally reported based on adult flukes recovered from a human autopsy in Indonesia, and subsequently this fluke was found in monkeys in Malaysia and India (Manning et al., 1970). Human infections with this fluke were first reported in 15 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970). Thailand and Laos are currently important countries where this fluke infection is considerably high among the people . Insects, particularly naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies, serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).

(p81.1) Phaneropsolus bonnei Lie, 1951 was originally reported based on adult flukes recovered from a human autopsy in Indonesia, and subsequently this fluke was found in monkeys in Malaysia and India (Manning et al., 1970). Human infections with this fluke were first reported in 15 human autopsies in northeastern Thailand (Manning et al., 1970). Thailand and Laos are currently important countries where this fluke infection is considerably high among the people . Insects, particularly naiads and adults of dragon-and damselflies, serve as the second intermediate hosts (Manning and Lertprasert, 1973).
