# Postoperative Bleeding Complications in Patients on Novel Oral Anticoagulants and Vitamin K Antagonist Following an Invasive Dental Procedure -A Review of Literature

CorpusID: 240621679 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aa94c5b4a4cf6ed36fc76c85d028c47c907b801e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aa94c5b4a4cf6ed36fc76c85d028c47c907b801e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) N O V E L A N T I C O A GU L A N T S
Number of References: 11

(p2.0) To overcome the limitations of heparin and warfarin, new anticoagulant drugs were introduced in 2008. 17,18 They specifically target the selective steps in the coagulation cascade. They include apixaban, rivaroxaban and edoxaban, which are direct factor Xa inhibitors and dabigatran, which is a direct thrombin inhibitor. 19 These drugs are indicated in cases of deep vein thrombosis, stroke, for the prevention of thromboembolic events and in the management of acute coronary syndromes. Rivaroxaban and edoxaban are usually taken once daily, whereas apixaban and dabigatran are taken twice daily. These drugs have a wide therapeutic range, no food interactions, compared to warfarin, lesser risk of intracranial bleeding, rapid onset of action, stability at a fixed dose and no need for regular monitoring. Only the renal function has to be tested before the initiation of the drugs. It is contraindicated in cases of renal impairment, history of gastric bleeding or ulcer, hepatic disorders and in pregnancy, breastfeeding individuals. 20 There is no specific evidence-based guideline for the management of dental patients under NOAC. A recent evidence-based review reports that there is a lack of good quality studies pertaining to dental procedures in patients under NOACs. 21 Based on the currently available evidence, simple surgical interventions that have low bleeding risk can be done without interruption of DOACs in patients with normal renal function. The procedures should be done 12 or 24 hours after the last intake.

(p2.1) Interventions at peak plasma concentration should be avoided. 22 In case of a high risk of bleeding, it is advisable to delay the morning dose on the day of dental treatment. NOACs can be continued again after 6 to 8 hours after the dental intervention. 22,23 Due to the short time to peak plasma concentration of DOACs, resuming the drug at the same dose once haemostasis has been established provides rapid restoration of anticoagulation after the intervention. 24 The disadvantages of NOACs include the lack of an antidote to resolve major bleeding complications possibly associated with their ubiquitous use. 25 The periprocedural management of patients on NOACs is a complex clinical problem and may pose a patient-specific concern. The cost of these drugs was comparatively higher than VKA. Since most of the NOAC agents are renally eliminated, the patients with a renal impairment will be benefited. 26 D a b i g a t r a n Approved by the EU in 2008 and FDA in 2010. It was the first NOAC of its class 27 It is a direct thrombin inhibitor that prevents the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin, which leads to the prevention of clot formation. It has poor absorption through the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, it is given as the prodrug dabigatran, edoxaban. Its bioavailability is 3 -7 %. It takes 1 -3 hours to achieve the peak concentration. It's halflife is 12 -17 hours.
