# Brazilian Journal of OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY Osteolipoma of head and neck ---a review

CorpusID: 249396112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c475dca523c7a6f544bf0db26d02ecf065ec7e00](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c475dca523c7a6f544bf0db26d02ecf065ec7e00)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Presentation
Number of References: 8

(p5.0) Classically, osteolipoma and majority of the head and neck osteolipoma presents as a painless swelling or mass located in the submucosa or soft tissue (Fig. 2). The texture or consistency of the mass itself is variable ranging from soft and fluctuant to firm and hard. 33,38 The surface of the mass can be smooth or nodular with no overlying skin or mucosal changes. 2 Additionally, when arising from the head and neck region, the signs and symptoms can be variable depending on the site of origin and size of the tumor. Lesions arising from the nasopharynx and paranasal sinuses tend to present with nasal obstruction. 5,19 Large tumor located in pharynx or parapharyngeal space can present with pressure symptoms on the surrounding structures, resulting in dysphagia,   Fig. 2 showing a hypodense mass (fat attenuation centrally) with peripheral hyperattenuation (calcification). paraesthesia in the trigeminal nerve distribution and middle ear effusion. 14,15,30 The child with the congenital osteolipoma of the palate presented with a cleft palate, nasal regurgitation and recurrent middle ear infections. 23
## (s7) Pathogenesis
Number of References: 9

(p7.0) The pathogenesis of osteolipoma is still unclear. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain its' pathogenesis. It is thought that osteolipomas may arise from the proliferation of mesenchymal stem cells (characterizing a ''mesenchymoma''), either directly from multipotent stem cells, or cells from a different lineage which subsequently differentiates into lipoblasts, chondroblasts or osteoblasts, and fibroblasts. 8,17,20,27 This adipo-osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells is finely balanced by a variety of external factors including chemical, physical, and biological factors. 44 Another hypothesis is that osteolipoma forms from fibroblast metaplasia within a pre-existing lipoma, which is usually large and long-standing. 16,31 The metaplasia occurs due to repetitive trauma which leads to subsequent metabolic changes, ischemia and calcium deposition. 2,37 Fritchie et al. was in support of this theory as cytogenetic analyses from their case series showed chromosomal translocations which are consistent with the karyotypic features of simple lipoma. 43 Arantes et al. also indicated that the presence of osseous of trabeculae along the fibrous septi further supported this hypothesis. 10 Other alternative hypothesis includes the transformation of fibroblasts into osteoblasts induced by growth factors released from monocytes or due to the ossification of an inadequately nutritional supplied tissue within the core the lipoma. 13,27,31
