# AI-Enabled Opportunities and Transformation Challenges for SMEs in the Post-pandemic Era: A Review and Research Agenda

CorpusID: 248424867 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Business, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the main driving force of employment and economic growth (1). The outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 and resultant (regional) pandemic control and lockdown policies have made SMEs vulnerable (2). Compared with large corporations, SMEs are facing greater challenges and uncertainties (3,4), which will likely continue to the postpandemic era (5,6). Despite the rapid response of governments to curb business closures by providing mitigation measures such as loans, wage support and subsides, the financial difficulties of SMEs have not been significantly improved. Some mitigation measures to reduce this burden are not as effective as expected, therefore its vital to find urgent measures to properly resolve the difficulties of SMEs and subsequently promote their continuous development.
## (s1) METHODOLOGY
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) This study adopts the realist systematic approach to reviewing the relevant literature (20,21). The detailed search process is shown in Figure 1. We first determined the most basic search terms through informal search and applied them to the core collection of Web of Science, and then expanded the collection scope according to the citation of the literature. Specifically, under the TS column of Web of Science, we first use small and mediumsized enterprises (e.g., "SMEs, " "small enterprise, " "micro enterprise, " and "medium enterprise"), artificial intelligence or digitization (e.g., "artistic intelligence, " "Ai, " and "digital * ") and sustainable development (e.g., "sustaina * ") as keywords. The timeframe is limited to "2019-2022", The literature type is limited to "articles, Early access or review", and 62 articles are obtained through preliminary search. Next, we exported the detailed information of these studies [i.e., journal, author, title, year, abstract, and PDF (if any)] to an Excel spreadsheet.
## (s3) The Difficult Situation Brought by the Pandemic
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The COVID-19 pandemic and the lockdown and other control measures have made SMEs' operating environment the most fragile and unpredictable ever in recent history (2,4). First, the destroyed global production and business practices have increased the uncertainty of the production and operation of SMEs (23). Second, the global or regional logistics is blocked and the supply chain is interrupted (4). Many raw materials urgently needed for production are difficult to be in place in time. In addition, due to the shortage of labor, the decline of demand, and the cancellation of orders, a large number of manufacturing SMEs have ceased to operate (24). Third, interaction or working time restrictions and the decline of customers' purchasing power reduced or suspended business activities, and the business revenue shrank sharply. The cash flow shortage of SMEs (especially tourism, catering, and other service industries) with small capital reserves was even more obvious. This change in the business environment occurred during the pandemic but will last for a long time after the pandemic (5, 6).
## (s5) Process Improvement and Optimization
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Solutions based on AI can help manufacturing SMEs realize automation, which leads to process improvement and optimization (11). AI can help to solve the problem of labor shortage and enable SMEs to achieve world-class production standards and promotion activities with the least manpower (26). It can automate customer management, collect and process advanced data to improve trend analysis, logistics planning and inventory management, reduce costs, increase sales and increase profits. It can save time and limit defects, avoid risks and improve performance (12), so that suppliers can create value closer to customer operations (10). During the pandemic, AI technology provided new service modes for SMEs and realized asymptotic process improvement with the help of image recognition and speech recognition.
## (s6) Real-Time Customer Insights
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) AI are not only able to identify, verify and monitor customers in real time, but also determine purchasing power and interest in purchased goods, according to use traces, and then market segment products according to customers' specific needs. The pandemic control policy enables most consumers to switch to online consumption, and every customer must leave traces when using online services. Popular online sales provide AI with a large database to understand the actual needs and preferences of customers, and to advise manufacturers or retailers to target specific audiences for advertising, promotion, and sales optimization (27). AI can analyze all activities performed by consumers online, study their behavior and computing possibilities through algorithms, manage demand-supply and perform all back-end operations. AI can also assist in social media marketing and identify new market opportunities. Big data analysis in AI technology can be used to develop customers' personalized files and predict their purchase habits (11), which helps to increase the customer base and overall profitability of SMEs (28).
## (s9) Demand Forecasting
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Due to the difficulty of demand forecasting caused by the pandemic, it is more important than ever to understand and predict consumer demand through an integrated supply chain, and AI technology may become a key component (11). In retail SMEs can use AI technology in demand forecasting and supply chain implementation, thereby informing the ability to trigger response demand when customers choose the last item and then track the store's rapid replenishment of products (11). SME manufacturing firms can fight against tacit knowledge by using AI to promote technologies, such as decision support systems (DSS) (12,30). The Internet of things combined with AI can also be used for predictive analysis in maintenance to reduce machine downtime and increase part-production (12).

(p9.1) The COVID-19 pandemic has driven SMEs to open the upstream and downstream ecology of the industry, fully meet the broad market demand of AI applications, and realize a complete industrial closed loop. For example, under the lockdown policy during the pandemic, some SMEs in the food supply chain, such as restaurants, cafés and retail organizations, could quickly carry out remote operations and allow online ordering, delivery and distribution (3). Furthermore, by enabling the traditional QR code with AI, the data of various activities (such as cinemas, scenic spots, retail stores, etc.), other than inventory management, can be recorded or executed (27). It can record high-quality data while reducing personnel contact, to understand customer preferences, predict future needs, and provide high-quality data for organizations to improve production efficiency.
## (s16) Material Resources
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) There is little doubt that digital technology has improved quality and efficiency, according to Sjödin et al. (36) it is important to recognize the digitization of SMEs and the need to expand AI in digital services (56). The construction of new infrastructure such as the industrial internet is the key to the digital upgrading transformation of SMEs.

(p16.1) Organizations need a lot of data to adopt or deploy AI (42), which depends on the type of infrastructure provided by enterprises (27), and the data available to them. However, a considerable number of SMEs currently lack the high-quality infrastructure to support the adoption of AI (3). Furthermore, SMEs may hinder the improvement of AI solutions because they are unable to obtain a large amount of data or obtain low-quality data (11).
## (s18) Technology Complexity
Number of References: 6

(p18.0) The concept of technical complexity is conceptualized through ease of use (40). Therefore, Technology Acceptance Theory (TAM) should be considered by SMEs when adopting AI for its practicability (27) and ease of use (40). The adaptation of cloud computing solutions are high in SMEs as its simple and easy to understand, easy to use and practical (47), or ease of use of social media platforms that have been widely used in the development of new products for SMEs (1). Therefore, continuous improvement of one's own processes and systems, further supported by investment in technologies, are the key areas for SMEs to maintain competitiveness (12). Nonetheless, the complexity of AI technologies (such as deep learning) is not acceptable and far too complex for most SMEs.
## (s19) Technology Compatibility
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) Compatibility is the degree to which technology is assimilated and integrated within an organization's existing processes and available infrastructure (40). Currently, there is a lack of unified standards amongst products, equipment, software, and systems related to AI. The implementation of AI is down to the quality of data; however, AI applications face a variety of challenges in this area. These challenges include an insufficient size of data availability, data collection standards, format, integration, continuity, transparency, repeatability, quantity, quality of data input, and dimensional obstacles (11). The data challenges are more obvious to SMEs, especially standards and data structures. Generally, SMEs lack data, or the standardized formats required to verify limited data to gain a real benefit from AI solutions. Simply AI requires the need to create a consistent format that is able to share data among different organizations or industries (11). However, it is questionable whether different algorithms for an SME can solve problems based on different organizations or industries.
## (s22) Ethical and Trust Risks
Number of References: 6

(p22.0) The collection of large data sets, its storage and sharing of that data derived from AI technology and raises ethical issues related to governance, quality, security, standards, privacy, and data ownership (60). Therefore, SMEs need to take certain measures to reduce these risks when using AI. For example, trust is an important factor in the diffusion of AI technology (11,41). Individuals and organizations may lack trust and worry about the moral dimension of the AI systems and the use of shared data (43). This is prevalent when there are analyses before decisionmaking based on the AI system. However, it is not clear how to solve moral and legal problems (11,33). Developing solutions based on AI requires a large amount of data, creating an element of risk due to user privacy, especially when the government issues user privacy laws that propose data collection cannot be at the expense of user privacy. The data collection based on protecting user privacy may limit the development of AI within SMEs, particularly "specialized and new" organizations who would worry about potential risks such as core technology leakage caused by data sharing.
## (s26) Future Research on Environmental Threats
Number of References: 6

(p26.0) The pandemic may stimulate or accelerate the technological advancements of SMEs, including issues related to data protection and the decision-making process, which may directly affect the activities of the manufacturing sector. At this present moment, SMEs lack resources and knowledge to formulate special transformation strategies (12), and governments or relevant industrial organizations need to provide various support such as awareness enhancement, capacity training, platform construction and scheme simplification (45). Governments enhancing policy measures in helping SMEs obtain big data (64) for example. Furthermore, enabling normal operations to resume and attract new organizations, investors, and talent to the region to build a good AI industrial ecosystem.

(p26.1) Future research can focus on the scope, strength, and type of support the government and relevant organizations can provide. For example developing an AI education strategy that can be embedded in government departments, higher education, and employers (26), whilst developing policies, regulations and ethical guidance and framework (33). This can be formulated and implemented by government regulators in terms of intervention and supervision (7). This will prevent the abuse of AI in the future.
