# Rate constants of chlorine atom reactions with organic molecules in aqueous solutions, an overview

CorpusID: 249551296 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eae487b62bb6e22be6a08f10c322afcd88c515c7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eae487b62bb6e22be6a08f10c322afcd88c515c7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s3) Simple oxidized molecules
Number of References: 22

(p3.0) A large number of rate constants are available on Cl • reactions with simple oxidized molecules (Scheme 1) (Gilbert et al. 1988;Mertens and von Sonntag 1995;Buxton et al. 2000;Wicktor et al. 2003): all values are in the 10 8 -10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 range ( Table 2). In the experiments of Gilbert et al. (1988), Cl • was generated in the reaction (24) Cl • + H 2 O ⇌ ClOH • + H + k 24 H 2 O = 2.5 × 10 5 s −1 (-24) k −24 = 2.6 × 0.6 × 10 10 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 (25) ClOH •− ⇌ • OH + Cl − k 25 = 6.1 ± 0.8 × 10 9 s −1

(p3.1) •and H 2 PO 4 •obtained by metal-catalyzed decomposition of the appropriate peroxides. Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) used the laser flash photolysis (LFP) technique for Cl • production in chloroacetone photodecomposition and they calculated the rate constants using the decay of Cl • absorbance. Mertens and von Sonntag (1995) determined the k Cl• values in competitive reactions. Minakata et al. (2017) conducted detailed quantum mechanical calculations on the mechanisms. In the case of several molecules, e.g., methanol, ethanol, similar rate constants were measured in two or three laboratories. Generally, the values agreed with each other within one order of magnitude. The authors suggested H-abstraction and Cl-adduct formation as the main mechanisms. Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) published k Cl• =1 × 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 for methanol (Scheme 1). For alcohols with a higher C-atom number, the values seem to be somewhat bigger. The average of the k Cl• values published by Gilbert et al. (1988), Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) for the reaction of ethanol is 2 × 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 . The values published by Mertens and von Sonntag (1995), Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) for 2-propanol are highly different, they are 6 × 10 9 , 1.5 ± 0.1 × 10 9 and 3.2 ± 0.7 × 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively. The same is true for tert-butanol: the values of Mertens and von Sonntag (1995) and Buxton et al. (2000) are 3 × 10 8 and 6.2 ± 0.3 × 10 8 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively, whereas the values of Gilbert et al. (1988) and Wicktor et al. (2003) are 2.2 ± 0.3 × 10 9 and 1.1 ± 0.1 × 10 8 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively. 1-Propanol and 2-butanol react with k Cl• values of 2.2 ± 0.4 × 10 9 and 5.0 ± 0.6× 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively (Wicktor et al. 2003).
## (s8) Simple aromatic molecules
Number of References: 14

(p8.0) Most of the pharmaceutical, pesticide, personal care, etc., compounds contain benzene ring in their structures. Here, in this chapter we discuss the reactions of Cl • with relatively simple aromatic molecules (Scheme 4). Mártire et al. (2001) reported the same k •Cl values for toluene, chlorobenzene and benzoic acid: 1.8 ± 0.3×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 (Table 4). In their former publication, these authors for benzene gave a value of 6.0×10 9 ≤ k Cl• ≤ 1.2×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 (Alegre et al. 2000). Watts and Linden (2007) analyzing the reactions in complex aqueous systems containing organic molecules assumed that nitrobenzene reacts with negligible rate with Cl • , at the same time it is highly reactive toward • OH. According to the recent experiments of Lei et al. (2021), the rate constant of the Cl • + nitrobenzene reaction is not negligible, but rather high, 1.01×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 .

(p8.1) Three mechanisms are considered in Cl • reactions with these simple aromatic molecules: single-electron-transfer (SET) from the ring to Cl • , H-abstraction from the aromatic ring or from the alkyl side chain, and radical addition to the aromatic ring. The SET reaction pathway was disregarded in the cases of benzene, toluene and benzoic acid, since the expected final products in this mechanism, phenol derivatives were not observed (Mártire et al. 2001). Based on the theoretical calculations of Minakata et al. (2017), H-abstraction from the benzene ring is a minor reaction. In the reaction of toluene, the transient absorption spectrum shows sharp bands around 300 nm characteristic to the benzyl type radical. However, as Mártire et al. (2001) mention benzyl type radical may not necessarily form in H-abstraction from the methyl group, but it can also be produced by HCl elimination from an intermediate radical. In the • OH + toluene system, only 6% of • OH produces benzyl radical (Sehested et al. 1975).

(p8.2) Absorption spectra of the transients in laser and conventional flash photolysis experiments (Alegre et al. 2000;Mártire et al. 2001) reveal that Cl • addition to the aromatic rings forming chlorocyclohexadienyl radicals is the predominant mechanism in agreement with the results of theoretical calculations. • OH reacts with aromatic molecules also in radical addition (Homlok et al. 2020). The reaction may occur in one or two steps. In the two-step process, first a π-complex forms: the radical is not stabilized to a single bond, in the second step the radical may stabilize at one of the double bonds giving the σ-complex. In the one-step process, the σ-complex forms directly. In the experiments of Alegre et al. (2000) and Mártire et al. (2001), with the applied time resolution (50 ns) no π-complex was observed. The addition (localization) may take place to any of the carbon atoms in the ring. Some of these radicals are expected to transform to chlorinated stable products in disproportionation reaction. In air saturated solution of benzene chlorobenzene represented less than 10% of the consumed benzene (Alegre et al. 2000).
## (s9) Pesticides
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Fluconazole and climbazole are used as fungicides (Scheme 5, Table 5). In fluconazole the two electron withdrawing F-atoms decrease the reactivity with the aromatic ring, and the published rate constant, 5.5×10 9 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 (Cai et al. 2020) is smaller than the values of Mártire et al. (2001) published for simple aromatic molecules. The value for climbazole (6.3±1.5×10 10 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 , Cai et al. 2019) is unrealistically high. The rate constant was determined in the UV/free chlorine system, in which both Cl • and • OH were reacting radicals and nitrobenzene was used as scavenger of OH. Atrazine reacts with a much smaller rate constant of 6.87×10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 (Kong et al. 2020). Cl • is expected to abstract H-atom from the alkyl side chains.
