# Ramp Metering Strategies: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 249078269 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d93ca6ae37ad2e32036ce559f02a536325ef680](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d93ca6ae37ad2e32036ce559f02a536325ef680)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s9) Local
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Kerner (2006) introduces an approach to congestion control labelled ANCONA, which is based on the fundamentals of three-phase traffic flow theory (free flow, synchronized flow, and wide moving jam). Considering that the spillback effect of queues could block not only the upstream off-ramp but also the upstream on-ramp, ANCONA applies spatial confinement of congestion and uses the relatively high speed and larger discharge rate of synchronized flow to prevent the upstream propagation of congestion and reduce the waiting time at the traffic light in the on-ramp lane. Thus, the principle of ANCONA is to locate congestion arising at the bottleneck. The author tested the strategy on a two-lane highway section with a downstream bottleneck created by an off-ramp and an upstream bottleneck created by an on-ramp. The on-ramp and off-ramp merging sections are 0,5 and 0,6 km long, respectively. Traffic data were collected via two sets of detectors on the main highway control road. Yasar et al. (2006) present the problem of the critical occupancy value, pointing out that if this value is lower than its actual value, the control law becomes overly conservative and leads to excessive waiting times at the on-ramps. On the other hand, if the value is set higher than the actual value, congestion on the freeway increases. To solve this problem, the authors developed C-MIXCROS and D-MIXCROS. These are two local feedback ramp metering strategies based on online estimates of critical occupancy. In the article, the authors use two methods proposed by Ozbay et al. (2006)  To avoid this, and given the location of the actual bottleneck downstream, PI-ALINEA uses an extended structure that allows the downstream occupancy measured in the merge area to be used. It is shown in Equation (2):
