# Polarimetric Imaging Through Scattering Media: A Review

CorpusID: 247500575 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/70941d1654add0d8c873b9d73f97cacc2b778505](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/70941d1654add0d8c873b9d73f97cacc2b778505)

Fields: Physics

## (s7) Representative Methods
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) As the first attempt, Tyo et al. [41,76] designed a special sample, an aluminum target containing two abraded patches with orthogonal directions, to verify the effectiveness of PD imaging systems. This sample is placed in a tank with inside dimensions of 30 × 30 × 15 cm 3 . This tank is filled with water and milk to simulate the scattering environments. PS and PD images after being transformed for optimal display are shown in   Figure 4A. We can see that the abraded patches are clearly visible in the transformed PD image but practically invisible in the transformed PS image. The key factor contributing to the enhanced visibility of the two patches in the PD image is the common-mode rejection feature intrinsic to PD. Based on a series of validation, Tyo et al. [76] found that the PD imaging model is quite sensitive to intrinsically small signals and possesses valuable qualities of being passive, simple, and potentially fast.

(p7.1) This method does not employ polarized illumination, which makes it constantly suffer from a reduced signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) because light reflected from the target and diffusive light backscattered from the turbid medium are superposed. Guan et al. [42] developed the traditional model and added a linear polarizer behind the light source to generate a polarized illumination. By measuring the co-polarization (parallel to the incident light's polarization state) and cross-polarization (perpendicular to the incident light's polarization state) images, they obtain an improved PD image, expressed as I PDI I − I ⊥ . Figure 4B presents the comparison between PS and PD images. The result shows that the proposed method significantly suppresses the background noise, and the image contrast is improved approximately 1.7 times [42].
## (s10) Representative Methods
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) To enhance the contrast, the two orthogonal polarized images in the traditional PD imaging model must be strictly selected to make the projections of the veiling light onto the two orthogonal axis directions equal [41]. However, this selection is time-consuming and inconvenient by rotating the polarizer mechanically, which is unsuitable for rapid imaging applications. Tian et al. optimized the traditional PD model to deal with this  limitation. They proposed a modified PD imaging method (M-PDI) based on the Stokes vector analysis of the veiling light [90]. The output image after removing the veiling light is expressed by

(p10.1) where α is the polarization orientation angle of the veiling light. The optimal value of α corresponds to the highest image contrast. A linear Stokes vector is calculated by capturing three images in polarizer's directions of 0, 45, and 90°and searching the optimal α. The significant advantage of this method is that the recovery performance can be updated automatically by the computation program when obtaining the Stokes parameters, which makes the implementation of PD imaging ideal for rapid imaging. Figures 8A-D show the recovery results of this method. The result shows the background noise is significantly suppressed, and the contrast of the target "Z" is significantly improved. In 2018, Guan et al. [91] modified the above method and proposed another M-PDI method via the Stokes vector-based interpolation method. Figure 8E compares the traditional and the modified polarization filtering methods in PD imaging. The principle of this method is shown in Figure 8F [91]. From the image results, the object's contrast is significantly enhanced, and the background noise is significantly decreased. More details of this method and the comparison with the traditional PD method can be found in [91].

(p10.2) Although the M-PDI method has partially addressed certain inherent drawbacks of the traditional model based on Stokes analysis, the determination of crucial parameters, based on the computational searching, makes the model performance unstable and sensitive to noise [38]. To overcome this issue, Liang et al. [38] further explored the relationship between the Stokes vector and veiling light and estimated the backscattering/air-light using the AoP analysis. Based on the three captured images on different polarizer directions (i.e., 0, 45, and 90°), the Stokes vector is calculated by the expressions in [38] S 0 I(0) + I(90)
## (s13) Representative Methods
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) The MM-based polarimetric suppression method for the imaging in scattering media is mainly based on modulating the polarization state of the active illumination. The earliest attempts focused on imaging linear MM and required nine intensity images [44,45,103]. In the related configurations, the WPs in PSG and PSA in Figure 2B2 are removed, and the polarizers in PSG and PSA are rotated to three different positions to capture nine images, respectively.

(p13.1) In 2019, Guan et al. [44] found that the illumination polarization angle and the MM difference between the medium and the object could affect the SNR of recovered results obtained by the rotation orthogonal polarization imaging method. They designed a linear MM-based polarimetric method to precisely control the illumination polarization angle and achieve a rapid imaging process. In 2021, Wang et al. [45] plotted backscattered light and target reflected light in the point cloud diagram in Figure 11A by establishing a differential imaging model. According to Figure 11A, on the premise that the angle between the polarizer's direction and the backscattering light's polarization direction is 45°, the backscattering light can be removed by the PD method to achieve scattering suppression. By analyzing the principle of polarization difference, the output result under ideal conditions is given by I out x, y I PB x, y − I PB⊥ x, y + I PT x, y − I PT⊥ x, y
## (s17) Polarimetric Imaging Through Scattering Tissues
Number of References: 9

(p17.0) In the above sections, we have reviewed the polarimetric imaging through such scattering media as fog, haze, and turbid water. Meanwhile, biological tissues as another important scattering media and the related polarimetric imaging techniques have gained great attention in the biomedical field. To be more specific, the biological tissues contain fiber-like macromolecules (e.g., the collagen fibers in the skin and tendons, muscle fibers, and myofibrils in skeletal muscles), which exhibit a certain degree of structural anisotropy and anisotropy in dielectric response. These properties manifest themselves via birefringence [125,126], which can be observed using polarization measurement or polarimetric imaging [127]. For example, many works have shown that the depolarization, retardance, and diattenuation induced by the birefringent tissues can be considered indicators to assess macromolecules' microstructure, thus being conducive to diagnosis and the study of pathological alterations [128,129]. However, the scattering (especially the multiple scattering) in thick tissues often results in the depolarization of light, which makes detection of the remaining information-carrying polarization signals challenging. Therefore, various polarimetry or polarimetric imaging techniques have been developed to maximize measurement sensitivity to assist in analyzing useful tissue information [97,127,130,131].
