# Natural Killer Cells in Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis -A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 245908215 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/151cb405bced473a637958fa64db64f97d4a4b22](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/151cb405bced473a637958fa64db64f97d4a4b22)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) PERIPHERAL NK CELLS IN AAV
Number of References: 30

(p4.0) Several publications describe unaltered NK cell numbers and percentages in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of AAV patients compared to control ( Table 1) (52,54,58,59). The literature focusing on NK cell numbers or percentage in AAV is however inconclusive, and some studies instead report a decrease or increase of NK cell numbers or percentage in these patients (23,53,(55)(56)(57), in line with what has been reported for some other autoimmune diseases (60). Also in healthy persons there is however great variations in percentage and absolute numbers of NK cells and high age is generally an important contributing factor that may vary between studies (23). Hypothetically, this incongruence of data might also be explained by differences in the study population but also by the fact that the amount of NK cells in circulation can vary between AAV disease phenotype, different phases of the disease and in relation to treatment.

(p4.1) In most studies of peripheral NK cells in AAV the ratio between CD56 bright and CD56 dim cells was unaltered in AAV compared to controls (52,54,55,59). However, ANCA-negative AAV patients had a lower proportion of CD56 dim cells compared to healthy controls whereas the frequency of CD56 bright cells and CD56 dim cells expressing high levels of CD57 were not influenced by occurrence of ANCA (59). Decreased NK cell numbers, and also specifically CD56 dim cells, were further found in the active phase of disease (57) and levels returned to normal in disease remission (56,57), but these differences were not confirmed in all studies (58). One interesting possibility is that the decrease of NK cells in the circulation in active phase of AAV compared to healthy controls reflects recruitment to the site of inflammation, thus lowering the number in circulation. Since the numbers of circulating NK cells negatively correlate with disease activity in GPA patients (55,57), one possibility to further explore is if NK cells can act as a marker for disease activity in all AAV patients. The decrease in NK cell numbers during the active phase of disease was also confirmed in an analysis of GPA and MPA patient groups separately, but this study was not able to confirm an increase in remission (56).

(p4.2) Phenotype analyses of NK cells have shown more activated NK cells in AAV compared to controls, as indicated by a higher expression of the early activation marker CD69 (54,55). The frequency of NK cells expressing the activating killer immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) KIR2DS3 was decreased in AAV patients compared to controls (51), but other activating and inhibitory NK cell receptors were unaltered. This included activating NKp46, NKp44, NKp30, NKG2D and DNAM-1 receptors and their co-receptors NTB-A and 2B4 (53)(54)(55), as well as activating KIRs, except KIR2D3, and inhibitory CD94/ NKG2A and CD161 receptors (50,54). The recruitment of distinct sets of NK cells to sites of infection, malignant transformation or autoimmune inflammation is guided by n/a n/a AAV patients without any treatment in active and remission phase.
## (s5) NK CELLS IN AAV TISSUE
Number of References: 13

(p5.0) Most studies on NK cells in AAV have focused on findings in peripheral blood, however the local immune response can differ from what is observed in the circulation, making the analysis of NK cells in tissue inflammation important. A complicating factor is the lack of specific markers to identify NK cells and hence the need for more complex immunofluorescence co-staining when assessing tissue samples. There are a few studies where NK cells were detected by their expression of CD56, a marker for NK cells, but also for a subset of T cells ( Table 2). Such basic studies detected no or rare presence of CD56 + cells in lung and kidney specimens of patients with GPA and pauci-immune necrotizing glomerulonephritis (55,59,66,69). Using CD16 as NK cell defining marker, CD16 + cells were also identified in nasal tissue samples from few MPA patients with vasculitic neuropathies, however, CD16 is also expressed on neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages making the findings difficult to interpret (65). A possible direct role for NK cells in local cytotoxicity within the target organ was further suggested by the detection of NK cell activating ligands MICA/B and the NK cell activating cytokine IL-15 in active GPA nasal biopsies (67,68). The low numbers of NK cells and/or their absence in AAV tissue could lead to the speculation that NK cells might not contribute to local inflammation or to granuloma formation (55,59). However, in a GPA-like syndrome characterized by chronic granulomatous lesions in the upper respiratory tract and skin vasculitis, a strong infiltration of CD3 -CD56 + NK cells into skin was observed (70). This raises the question whether NK cells could be recruited differently to different organs. In line with this possibility, microvascular endothelial cells (MECs) were used to study their response to inflammatory stimuli and transmigration of immune cells into the inflamed tissue. MECs from lung and renal specimens were stimulated with PR3 which lead to a stronger degranulation of NK cells as compared to dermal MEC´s (54). Further, renal MECs seem to be more susceptible to the proinflammatory stimuli IFNg and TNFa leading to ICAM1, VCAM1 and CCL2 upregulation, which could result in stronger renal recruitment of NK cells. GPA-derived NK cells were also able to directly kill renal MEC´s, indicating a potential role of NK cells in GPA pathogenesis (54). No studies have so far been performed on tissue infiltrating NK cells in EGPA. Further in-  depth analysis of NK cells in AAV affected tissue using for example state of the art single cell RNA sequencing or laser capture microdissection of NK cells from tissue followed by RNA or proteomic profiling would be of interest. Single cell analysis of kidney tissue of ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis exists, however, NK cells were not addressed here (71). In summary, studies on NK cells at the site of inflammation are so far few and there is a need to analyze NK cells in tissue of AAV patients to advance the field.
## (s6) THE IMPACT OF AAV THERAPIES ON NK CELLS
Number of References: 16

(p6.0) AAV patients are treated with glucocorticoids in combination with other immunosuppressing therapies at active flares, then followed by long-term remission maintenance therapy. To induce remission, cyclophosphamide (CYC) or RTX, an anti-CD20 chimeric antibody are commonly used (72)(73)(74)(75). Despite intense immunosuppressive treatment, AAV patients have a high relapse rate. Studies on how NK cells are affected by immunosuppressive treatment are scarce and there is no data if they can be used to predict relapses. Recently, low peripheral NK cell numbers and percentages in GPA and EGPA, but not MPA patients, were associated with azathioprine (AZA) treatment in a dose-dependent manner, but with no other investigated immunosuppressive treatments, including mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, RTX and CYC (23). The lack of effect of AZA treatment on the NK cells in the MPA group could be explained by the fact that MPA patients included in this study were older than the other AAV groups and age positively correlate with NK cell number. Recently the effect of AZA treatment was analyzed in an SLE cohort and showed that these patients had an increased infection rate which was associated with AZA (76). Also, in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), AZA treatment was associated with lower NK cell counts in blood and an increased risk of herpes simplex infections, but the possible role of NK cells in that remains to be determined. In a previous study, CYC was also not shown to affect the frequency of circulating NK cells in AAV patients compared to non-CYC treated patients (23,58). Similarly, RTX treatment or other disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) did not alter the frequencies of NK cells in GPA patients as evaluated during different stages of the disease (55,77). However, an analysis of the activation maker CD69 on PBMC NK cells from GPA patients prior and directly after RTX infusion showed increased activation. Furthermore, when healthy donor PBMCs were incubated overnight with RTX in vitro, phenotypical and functional changes of NK cells were observed (78). NK cells that were exposed to RTX showed a higher CD107a expression indicating degranulation and an enhanced activation as measured by CD69 expression on CD56 dim cells (79). In addition, RTX induced a down regulation of Fc-g-receptor CD16 which is a sign of NK cell activation and enhanced the expression of the costimulatory receptor CD137 on NK cells (80) and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity (81). Experience from using RTX as cancer treatment suggests that NK cell counts could potentially be used as a prognostic marker for the long-term effect of the treatment. The next generation antibody against CD20, a fully humanized antibody, Obinutzumab (OBZ), showed a higher ADCC and direct B cell killing (82). A study comparing OBZ to RTX showed that OBZ activates NK cells from GPA patients more efficiently and increases the depletion of non-malignant B cells in in vitro setting overnight (79). In conclusion, the effect of treatment on NK cells must be consideration as an important factor when assessing NK cell numbers, phenotype and function in AAV. Conversely, NK cells can potentially also participate in the effects of therapies, including cell-binding antibodies.
