# Formation, antimicrobial activity, and biomedical performance of plant-based nanoparticles: a review

CorpusID: 247682784 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783d8520004c75d6890b2e92c20b2818584838d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783d8520004c75d6890b2e92c20b2818584838d9)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) General strategy
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) The unique properties of nanoparticles have fueled the research activities, yielding a wide range of practical utilizations including chemical sensing, heterogeneous catalysis, environmental remediation, nanotechnology, biomedical engineering, and agriculture. There is an increasing demand for tailoring and developing nanoparticles in the simplest pathway. At present, nanoparticles are synthesized by two different routes: "top-down" and "bottom-up" (Fig. 2). The former process is to reduce the size of the original bulk materials to new nano-sized ones through some common methods such as sputtering, chemical etching, and so forth (Jadoun et al. 2021). The latter process is the use of atoms, molecules to assemble or splice small particles together into a nano-sized material through some common methods such as the sol-gel process, green synthesis, and so forth (Rath et al. 2014). Synthesizing nanoparticles can be mainly conducted using chemical, physical and biological approaches. The following sections will vigorously articulate the strengths and weaknesses of each approach.
## (s3) Physical methods
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) To synthesize nanoparticles, there are some widely used physical methods such as high-energy ball milling, electrospraying, laser ablation, physical vapor deposition, melt mixing, inert gas condensation, laser pyrolysis, and flash spray pyrolysis (Dhand et al. 2015;Vishnukumar et al. 2017). These methods mostly belong to the topdown approach by using mechanical energy or electrical energy to grind materials into small-size nanoparticles (Dhand et al. 2015). Two of the most noteworthy methods are evaporation and condensation, carried out in a tube furnace to produce metallic nanoparticles at atmospheric pressure (Abbasi et al. 2014). Although the physical methods are eco-friendly because they do not use toxic chemical substances, the grinding of materials is considerably energy-consuming and requires elaborate equipment, leading to high production cost, and difficulty of systematical scalability (Iravani et al. 2014). 
## (s4) Chemical methods
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) The chemical methods are widely used to synthesize nanoparticles, involving sol-gel, hydrothermal, microemulsion, chemical reduction, and precipitation (Jamkhande et al. 2019). Among them, sol-gel is the most commonly used technique due to tunable implementation and high-yield production. Metal precursors and chemical reducing agents are used for the synthesis (Abinaya et al. 2021). However, chemical techniques not only increase the cost of production but also impose the burden of hazardous waste on the environment and human health (Bandeira et al. 2020). To solve this drawback, the green synthesis of nanoparticles from biological methods has paid great attention during the past decades.
## (s5) Biological methods
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Biological methods adopt bioreducing agents from microbes, e.g., bacteria, fungus, algae and protozoa, biomolecules or macromolecules, e.g., proteins, enzymes, nucleic acids and carbohydrates, and plant extracts to synthesize nanoparticles (Fig. 3). The use of these biological substrates is intended to replace toxic chemical reductants and chemical stabilizers (Abinaya et al. 2021). Biological methods have also many advantages over chemical methods since they are more benign and highly biocompatible. Indeed, microorganisms can secrete enzymes that play a role in reducing and stabilizing metal nanoparticles. However, the microbial synthesis of nanoparticles presents more obstacles than other biological methods because it exhibits a range of difficulties in culturing and maintaining microbial growth (Srikar et al. 2016). In terms of biomolecules for synthesizing nanoparticles, enzymes are the representatives which can bind with metal ions and reduce them to form nanoparticles. They can bind with metal ions and reduce them to form nanoparticles. The main limitation of the biomolecules-mediated synthesis is, however, the poor stability of nanoparticles and prolonged duration (Palomo 2019).

(p5.1) Meanwhile, plant extract-mediated synthesis discloses some large advantages because various phytochemicals presenting in the plant extracts (e.g., polyphenols, alkaloids, flavonoids, and alcoholic) possibly act as biocapping and bioreducing agents in the fabrication process, enhancing the stability of the nanoparticles (Lee et al. 2014;Ikram 2015). For example, Rafique et al. (2017) showed that plant extracts to synthesize nanoparticles bring higher efficiency, easy handling, safer and rapid than other biological methods.
## (s7) Chemical composition of plants
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) As mentioned, plant extracts bring many benefits and effectiveness to the synthesis of nanoparticles, which could be thanks to the intrinsic presence of phytochemicals such as polyphenols, flavonoids, sugars, terpenes, and so forth originated from the plant species. Phytochemicals can exist in different tissues of the plant such as leaves, flowers, roots, stems, seeds, pods, resins, and bark (Vishnukumar et al. 2018). Table 1 shows the types of phytochemicals presenting in different plant parts. In general, flavonoids, phenolics, quercetin, and terpenoids are main phytochemicals in most plants. They contribute essentially to the reduction, capping and stabilization of nanoparticles during synthesis. For example, Pansambal et al. (2017) confirmed that polyphenols, saponins, flavonoids, coumarins, volatile oils, tannins, and sterols from A. hispidum act as capping and chelating agents for the synthesis of CuO nanoparticles. Sundararajan and Ranjitha Kumari (2017) proved the major role of polyphenols and flavonoids in A. vulgaris leaf as a bio-capping agent for Au nanoparticles synthesis. In another study, Khan et al. (2020) discovered that the presence of kaempferol, quercetin, caffeic acid, dihydrokaempferol in P. undulata extract showed as effective metal reducing agents during the formation of Au and Ag nanoparticles. Chandraker et al. (2019) published that the leaves of A. conyzoides contain alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids, saponins, tannins, which are all capable of reducing, capping and stabilizing Ag nanoparticles. Among them, tannin and tannic acid are prominent phytochemicals for the efficient reduction process. These studies showed the importance of phytochemicals in plant extracts for the synthesis of nanoparticles.
## (s8) Role of phytochemicals for nanoparticles biosynthesis
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) The presence of the phytochemicals from plant extract can benefit the adsorptive, catalytic, biomedical, and biocompatible properties of nanoparticles. For the adsorptive activity, the phytochemicals enrich the surface of nanoparticles by providing new functional groups (Abdullah et al. 2021). Thus, they enhance the surface functionalization and create more physicochemical interactions (e.g., electrostatic interaction, π-π interaction, hydrogen bonding, and so forth) (Wu et al. 2020). For example, Hammad and Asaad (2021) recently compared the methylene blue dye sorption affinity between biologically and chemically synthesized FeO nanoparticles. In this study, iron nanoparticles material produced from C. vulgaris extract exhibited a higher surface area (85.7 m 2 /g) than the one (71.6 m 2 /g) produced by the chemical precipitation method. The authors implicated that the phytochemicals from C. vulgaris significantly reduced the particle size (4.47 nm) of FeO nanoparticles in comparison with the chemical synthesis case (9.07 nm). More importantly, the maximum dye adsorption capacity obtained by biologically synthesized FeO nanoparticles (29.14 mg/g) was significantly higher than that of chemically synthesized ones (19.08 mg/g). This confirmed the main role of phytochemicals in enhancing the surface functionalization and improving the adsorption performance.

(p8.1) For the catalytic activity, the presence of phytochemicals aids in lowering the band gap energy of the nanomaterials (Muthuvel et al. 2020a). This results in decreasing the electron-splitting activation energy, promoting the rapid and efficient separation of electrons, and facilitating the formation of reactive oxygen species ( • OH, • O 2 -, H 2 O 2 ) (Khan et al. 2019). In addition, the phytochemicals on the surface of the 1 3 nanoparticles also hinder the electron recombination process (Ganesan et al. 2020). For example, S. nigrum-derived ZnO nanoparticles yielded high efficiency of 98.89%, compared with 81.94% of chemically produced ZnO nanoparticles for the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (Muthuvel et al. 2020b). In another study, Abdullah et al. (2021) indicated the excellent photocatalytic ability of ZnO nanoparticles biofabricated from M. acuminata peel for degrading basic blue 100%, while that of chemically synthesized ZnO nanoparticles obtained only 87.71%.
## (s10) Ag, Au, and Pt nanoparticles
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) The general mechanism of synthesizing the Ag, Au, and Pt nanoparticles from plant extracts is the bioreduction by biomolecules originating from plants (Fig. 4). Plant extracts often contain functional groups (e.g., carbonyl, hydroxyl, and amine) to react with metal ions and reduce these to nanoparticles with different shapes and sizes. For example, some compounds involving flavonoids, protein, sugars and terpenoids or other bioactive substances possibly participated in the reduction in Ag + to Ag 0 (Borase et al. 2014). This was demonstrated by evaluating the significant change in the content of sugars and flavonoids before and after the reduction reaction. Ghotekar et al. (2018) determined the components of L. leucocephala leaf extract including tannins, saponins, carbohydrates, coumarins, steroids, flavonoids, phenols, and amino acids. Thanks to the antioxidant groups of polyphenols in L. leucocephala extract, Ag nanoparticles could be formed through the reduction in Ag + . In addition, the authors demonstrated that various substances such as gallic acid, β-sitosterol, mimosine, caffeic acid, and chrysoenol also play a key role in stabilizing the of Ag nanoparticles. In addition, Zheng et al. (2013) revealed that the reduction in Pt(II) into Pt(0) nanoparticles was dependent on many factors such as temperature, reducing sugars, flavonoid contents. Another research also showed that plant extracts exhibited a possible mechanism for the reduction and stabilization of the chloroaurate ions (AuCl 4 -) to Au nanoparticles (Huang et al. 2011).
## (s12) ZnO nanoparticles
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) The mechanism of forming other green oxide metal nanoparticles such as ZnO nanoparticles is also significantly dependent on phytochemicals in plant extracts. Król et al. (2019) studied ZnO nanoparticle fusion with the aid of biomolecules from M. sativa extract. Zinc aqua complex can exchange with their water molecules when binding to protein ligands due to the coordination chemistry of zinc. On the other hand, flavonoids (e.g., quercetin, rutin and galangin) can chelate with Zn 2+ ions through specific metal ion binding sites (Fig. 5). The Zn-flavonoid complex was formed and calcined at high temperature to form ZnO nanoparticles. In another study, Kumar et al. (2014) demonstrated that phytochemicals such as flavonoids, limonoids, and carotenoids containing free -OH and -COOH can react with ZnSO 4 to form the Zn-(flavonoid, limonoids, carotenoid) complex. This complex is then transferred into a furnace at 150 °C to produce ZnO nanoparticles.
## (s13) MgO nanoparticles
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) The synthesis mechanism of MgO nanoparticles is also based on the biocapping and chelating mechanism of biomolecules in plant extracts. Specifically, Mg 2+ ions in the precursor can be chelated with biomolecules to form complexes with metals (Singh et al. 2019a). Isoleucine acid is a phytochemical originating from L. acidissima fruit extract and accounts for forming MgO nanoparticles with high stability (Nijalingappa et al. 2019). In this study, the isoleucine-MgO complex was formed after the binding of magnesium nitrate to isoleucine acid. Next, the complex was calcined at high temperature (500-800 °C) so that MgO nanoparticles could be formed with good dispersion and high stability. Suresh et al. (2018) described the possible mechanism of MgO nanoparticles synthesis from insulin plant extracts as follows: (i) diosgenin in the extract reacts with magnesium nitrate salt solution to form complexes with weak hydrogen bonds; (ii) treat this complex at a temperature of about 80 °C to form the precipitation in the form of hydroxide; (iii) the product MgO nanoparticles was created by calcination at 450 °C.
## (s17) N 2 adsorption-desorption isotherm
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) The nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherm is used to measure the amount of N 2 that adsorbs onto the nanoparticles surface. This reflects the plot of relative pressure versus volume of nitrogen at the temperature 77 K (Fig. 8b). Based on N 2 adsorption-desorption isotherm, the surface area can be determined by Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) or density functional theory (DFT) method. The surface area of nanoparticles can be well beneficial for explaining the catalytic, adsorption and different properties. Many studies reported that nanoparticles produced from plant extract exhibited the large surface area (52.6-137.4 m 2 /g) (Stan et al. 2017;Singh et al. 2019c;Sethy et al. 2020;Lakshminarayanan et al. 2021). It can be understood that phytochemicals in plant extracts reduce the aggregation of newborn nanoparticles, thereby increasing their surface area, which contributes to the excellent properties and applications of nanoparticles.
## (s18) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy is used to learn about the surface chemistry of nanoparticles. Specifically, this technique can detect functional groups derived from biomolecules, which contribute to the synthesis of nanoparticles. The resulting spectrum exhibits absorption and transmission by generating a sample molecular fingerprint, which changes the identity of the sample (Rajeshkumar and Bharath 2017). Yazdi et al. (2019) detected many functional groups existing in the surface of Ag nanoparticles produced from H. trichophylla flower extract, involving O-H (3397-3410 cm -1 ), C-H (2921 and 2847 cm -1 ), C-N (1626 cm -1 ), N-O (1385 cm -1 ), and so forth. Sundararajan and Ranjitha Kumari (2017) reported the presence of a wide range of chemical bonds belonging to alcohols, alkanes, aldehydes, and amines on the surface of Au nanoparticles synthesized from A. vulgaris extract. These evidences may provide the main hypothesis for the existence of phytochemicals that take part in the formation of nanoparticles.
## (s19) Scanning electron microscopy
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) The morphology of nanoparticles is very diverse and important to better understand the structure of nanoparticles. While the atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique produces three-dimensional images with many visualizations (Falsafi et al. 2020), scanning electron microscopy (SEM)    T. procumbens is a powerful tool to explore their two-dimensional surface morphology. SEM investigation is applied to characterize the shape, size, morphology, and size distribution of the biosynthesized nanoparticles. For example, Yousaf et al. (2020) showed Ag nanoparticles from A. millefolium extract owning diverse shapes such as spherical, rectangular, and cubical. Vasantharaj et al. (2019) reported CuO nanoparticles from R. tuberosa extract with spherical, cylindrical, and cubical morphologies. Meanwhile, MgO and ZnO nanoparticles from plant extracts can exhibit both spherical shapes (Dobrucka 2018;Rajapriya et al. 2020). However, this technique may be less significant to discovery the structure of nanoparticles, particularly their particle sizes.
## (s21) X-ray diffraction
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) X-Ray diffraction (XRD) pattern is the characteristic technique to analyze the crystal structure, crystal plane and calculate the crystal size of a nanomaterial (Thamaphat et al. 2008). X-rays can penetrate deeply through materials and provide information about their crystal structure (Huang et al. 2007). If the material has a crystalline structure, diffraction peaks at different angles will be observed by the XRD. The Debye-Scherrer equation measures the particle size from the XRD data by determining the width of the (111) Bragg reflection according to the following equation (Eq. 1).
## (s24) Anticancer activity
Number of References: 12

(p24.0) Cancer diseases are increasingly detected in many recent years, affecting the physical and mental health of patients. They can cause many anxiety, distress, and depression behaviors. According to the International Cancer Research Organization, there are about 18.1 million new cases of cancer and 9.6 million cases of death each year around the world (Bray et al. 2018). It is forecasted that by 2025, this number will increase to 19.3 million, of which patients are mainly from developing countries. Therefore, the treatments and therapies against cancer diseases have paid special attention from scientists. Some cancer treatments involve hormone therapy and immunotherapy, but these often result in some abnormalities in the patient body. Specifically, they possibly damage normal cells and vital organs, exacerbating the patient health, and causing the reduction in life quality (Han et al. 2019). Metallic nanoparticles have a huge potential in the detection, diagnosis and treatment of cancer diseases . Their high selectivity between diseased and normal cells minimizes the risks of side effects and limits the damage to normal cells (Saravanan et al. 2020). The reason may be owing to different electrostatic interactions between nanoparticles and these cells . The anticancer mechanism of metallic nanoparticles is quite complex and still under investigation. Lee et al. (2019) suggested that the plausible anticancer mechanism of metallic nanoparticles could be due to the reactive oxygen species-dependent apoptosis and caspase-mediated apoptosis in cancer cell lines (Fig. 10). When metallic nanoparticles come into contact with cancer cell membranes, cell surface provokes the invagination of nanoparticles by endocytosis to generate the intracellular membrane-bounded vesicles (Doherty and McMahon 2009). This allows endocytosed nanoparticles to enter the intracellular space without elimination. They are then released to produce reactive oxygen species which can perform the tasks of malfunctioning a variety of mitochondria and enzymes, protein oxidation, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage, nuclear destruction, and decreasing major non-protein free-radical scavengers (Bethu et al. 2018). In particular, reactive oxygen agents are likely to induce cell cycle arrest in the growth and preparation for mitosis phase as well as meiosis phase (Patil and Kim 2017). They are ascribed to increasing the ratio between B-cell lymphoma protein 2-associated X and B-cell lymphoma protein, which determines cell susceptibility to apoptosis. This process is finalized through the stimulation of caspase -3, -8, -9 (proteins related to apoptosis). Many works also indicated that reactive oxygen species increase the level of tumor protein P53 as known to inhibit cancer cells (Kordezangeneh et al. 2015;Patil and Kim 2017;Kim et al. 2019). Based on the mentioned mechanisms, nanoparticles through reactive oxygen agents can contribute greatly to killing cancer cells. Table 4 summaries the anticancer activity of nanoparticles synthesized from various plant extracts. For example, Lee et al. (2019) reported that T. farfara flower bud extracts could be used to synthesize Ag nanoparticles and Au nanoparticles. Through the structural characterization by the atomic force microscopy images, the average particle sizes of Ag nanoparticles and Au nanoparticles were determined, at 56.24, and 41.96 nm, respectively. Both Au nanoparticles and Ag nanoparticles presented good anticancer abilities to cells including human gastric adenocarcinoma (AGS), human colorectal adenocarcinoma (HT-29), and human pancreas ductal adenocarcinoma (PANC-1). However, the minimum inhibitory concentration values of Au nanoparticles were between 2 and 4 times lower than Ag nanoparticles for all cells, indicating that Au nanoparticles were more likely to be resistant against cancer line cells than Ag nanoparticles. It could be explained due to the smaller particle size of Au nanoparticles, leading to better penetration into the cell membrane. Agreeing with this finding, Patil and Kim (2017) confirmed that the higher surface area of the gold nanoparticles allows the presence of more surface atoms, hence more exposure of nanoparticles in cancer cells.
## (s26) Antioxidant activity
Number of References: 23

(p26.0) For a long time, researchers have concluded that free radicals are one of the causes of human disease and aging processes (Chen et al. 2012). Cells that perform functional activities such as immunity and respiration in the body can produce free radicals. When free radicals are, however, overproduced, they will pair with other biomolecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, lipids and carbohydrates in the body. This phenomenon can cause a wide range of negative effects on humans such as atherosclerosis, aging, cardiovascular disease, inflammation. More seriously, free radicals are responsible for cancer diseases ). In addition, the chemical compounds in foods exposed under air are likely to react with oxygen, which loses nutritional value, and increases rancidity as well as discoloration (Das et al. 2013). Free radicals in foods can be harmful to human health. Although butylated hydroxytoluene, n-propyl gallate, and butylated hydroxyanisole are effective antioxidants, they are highly carcinogenic agents, hence not widely used (Das et al. 2013). Some nanoparticles (ZnO, Ag) incorporated into food packaging membranes have played the potentials for antimicrobial activities and applications against free radicals (Al-Naamani et al. 2016;Yu et al. 2019).

(p26.1) Biogenic nanoparticles have recently been known for their high antioxidant capacity, biocompatibility, and Fig. 11 Antifungal mechanism of metallic nanoparticles producing from the plants. The reactive oxygen species are responsible for protein damage, DNA replication inhibition, enzyme inhibition, and so forth, causing fungal cell death. Abbreviations: ROS, reactive oxygen species; DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid stability (Mohanraj and Chen 2007;Naahidi et al. 2013). These properties may be derived from plant extracts, which contain various bioactive compounds known as phytochemicals including isoflavones, alkaloids, and polyphenols. They not only supply a good platform to produce nanoparticles but also improve their properties in terms of surface area, particle size, and surface functionality. As a result, they are used to serve as promising antioxidants against free radicals which are beneficial in the medical fields and food preservation (Fig. 12). The green synthesis of nanoparticles from plant extract is recognized as one of the most economical and environment-friendly methods. Table 6 summarizes the results of antioxidant activities of biosynthesized nanoparticles from recent works.

(p26.2) The methods of determining the antioxidant activities of nanoparticles have been studied. 2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) is a free radical scavenging trap for other radicals, allowing to monitor antioxidant properties. This is owing to its ability in inhibiting free radicals (Zhaleh et al. 2019). The DPPH-based method presents as one of the most widely used  (Khatami et al. 2015) ones because it provides a simple protocol, screening results rapidly and high reliability . Nelson et al. (2016) suggested a possible mechanism how metallic nanoparticles worked out antioxidant activity of metallic nanoparticles. The nanoparticles firstly eliminate • O 2 to O 2 , H 2 O 2 reduced to H 2 O and O 2 , and followed by the formation of O 2 from OH • or H 2 O 2 . Specific for CeO 2 nanoparticles, the chain initiates a series of reactions to remove free radicals, i.e., (1) and (2)  (2)   Kharat and Mendhulkar (2016) have reported that Ag nanoparticles synthesized from Elephantopus scaber leaf extracts. In this literature, the IC50 values of Ag nanoparticles from E. scaber extract were between 41.86 and 126.6 μg/mL. By using the same leaf extract, Francis et al. (2018) successfully produced Ag nanoparticles with a small average particle size of ~ 37.86 nm. In addition, IC50 value of Ag nanoparticles from E. scaber extract was found at 6.629 μg/mL which was considerably lower than that of Ag nanoparticles reported by Kharat and Mendhulkar (2016). This indicated the antioxidant activity of Ag nanoparticles has been improved. The underlying reason might be the microwave-assisted synthesis procedure, enhancing the better stability of Ag nanoparticles (Francis et al. 2018). Ag nanoparticles from E. scaber extract also showed a comparative antioxidant activity better than crude extract. As a result, the use of microwaves may contribute to the enhancement of the antioxidant activity of Ag nanoparticles.

(p26.3) Other plant extracts were reportedly used to synthesize and test antioxidant activity of Ag nanoparticles. Indeed, Ahn et al. (2019) investigated the potential of C. cernuum extract for such purposes. Accordingly, IC50 value against DPPH radical scavenging of Ag Nanoparticles was obtained at 121 μg/mL. Park et al. (2020) explained that several biocompounds such as sesquicineole, α-bisabolol, and myrtenal compounds in C. cernuum extract supported the superior antioxidant activity. Yousaf et al. (2020) pointed out Ag nanoparticles synthesized from A. millefolium extract had an excellent antioxidant performance. Accordingly, the IC50 value of Ag nanoparticles against DPPH (7.03 μg/mL) was higher than that of ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 4.29 μg/mL), a popular natural antioxidant. In other words, as-mentioned results demonstrated that Ag nanoparticles produced from A. millefolium extract exhibited even more antioxidant effectiveness than vitamin C. This finding suggests a prospective future for the researches on bio-based Ag nanometallic antioxidants.

(p26.4) Apart from the synthesis of Ag nanoparticles, many studies also carried out the synthesis of other metallic nanoparticles (e.g. Au, ZnO, CuO) from different plant species and measure their antioxidant activities (Rajeshkumar et al. 2018(Rajeshkumar et al. , 2019Zhaleh et al. 2019). Indeed, Zhaleh et al. (2019) synthesized Au nanoparticles from G. tournefortii leaf extract, and the IC50 value against DPPH was about 194 μg/mL. Likewise, Rajeshkumar et al. (2018) implicated that ZnO nanoparticles from leaf mango extract acquired outstanding antioxidant activity. As evidenced by the percentage of inhibition toward DPPH, the value for ZnO Nanoparticles was in range from 22 to 93%. Rajeshkumar et al. (2019) performed another study on the antioxidant ability of CuO nanoparticles from C. arnotiana extract. Accordingly, Fig. 12 Nanoparticles in the medical field and food preservation the percentage of radical scavenging activity of CuO nanoparticles was about 21%. It can be concluded that diverse metallic nanoparticles (Ag, Au, CuO, ZnO) from various plant extracts have great potentials for antioxidant activities. Also, the common antioxidants can be replaced by such biogenic nanoparticles in health therapies, and medical technologies.
## (s27) Drug delivery
Number of References: 16

(p27.0) Treatments for diseases in biomedical fields are being investigated to address a wide range of restraints of normal drug delivery systems including nonspecific biological delivery and targeting, poor oral bioavailability, and insufficient water solubility (Rahman et al. 2020). Nanotechnology has long been attractive to researchers due to its affordable applications in delivering drugs to target organs, tissues or cells in cancer treatment or biocarriers by crossing the blood-brain barrier (Lockman et al. 2002;Haley and Frenkel 2008). Nanoparticles represent the surface functionalization and exhibited large surface area to facilitate the drug loading (Faraji and Wipf 2009). In addition, nanoparticles show high biocompatibility and lessen drug resistance because they can accumulate in the body without being detected by the resistance protein P-glycoprotein (Cho et al. 2008). Specifically, the biosynthesis of nanoparticles using plant extract can be the optimal resolution due to the presence of phytochemicals that contribute to their stability and benignity (Yew et al. 2020).

(p27.1) The blood-brain barrier known as the "tough guardian" is the barrier that covers the inner nerve cells (Fig. 13). They play an important role in protecting the brain and regulating homeostasis, minimizing the penetration of foreign substances (Chen and Gao 2017). Therefore, it is difficult to transform drugs inside and support early treatment of nerve cell damage. Nanoparticles can bypass the blood-brain barrier without altering their integrity thanks to the small size and the process of endocytosis. As a result, neuroleptic drugs can be transported into neuron cells to support treatment by pathways such as through endocytosis or transport through the tight junction (Nair et al. 2012). In recent researches on cancer treatment, nanoparticles from plant extracts exhibit the potential to act as the distribution system of anticancer drugs to tumors of patients (Table 7). Because conventional chemotherapeutic agents may not deliver specifically to target organs, potentially causing damage to other healthy cells, a reduction in their dose may result in ineffective treatment (Cho et al. 2008). Therefore, nanoparticles have solved the above problems, especially magnetic nanoparticles (Fig. 14). First, the drug will be loaded on nanoparticles and injected into the blood capillaries, then locate the sites of cancer cells and tumors using external magnetism. This access can pinpoint the exact site of drug delivery without affecting other non-target organs (Yew et al. 2020). Then, the nanoparticles will approach cancer cells through the endocytosis pathway and release the drug, and thus, kill the cancer cells (Haley and Frenkel 2008). For example, Taghavi et al. (2016) synthesized Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles to deliver the drug deferasirox, resulting in a cell death percentage of about 69.3% human leukemia cell lines. In another study, Pham et al. (2016) produced Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles coated with curcumin to inhibit lung cancer cells, acquiring an IC50 value of 73.03 μg/mL. Sriramulu et al. (2018) carried out the synthesis ZnFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles from A. marmelos leaf extract to carfilzomib drug delivery. Accordingly, 95% of carfilzomib was released by nanoparticles in 360 min.

(p27.2) In addition to magnetic nanoparticles, other nanoparticles (e.g. Ag, Au nanoparticles) are also capable of delivering drugs for cancer treatment effectively. Specifically, Ganeshkumar et al. (2013) reported that Au nanoparticles from P. granatum peel extract could load fluorouracil drug (78%) for breast cancer treatment. This study also indicated that 22.92% of the drug was released after 48 h. More interestingly, IC50 value of fluorouracil-Au nanoparticles against breast cancer cells was 4 times lower than that of the free fluorouracil. Similarly, Pooja et al. (2015) showed that Au nanoparticles from gum of Sterculia genus extract could deliver gemcitabine hydrochloride to human lung cancer cells. According to the results, IC50 value of drug-Au nanoparticles was about twofold lower than the free drug. Fig. 13 Transport mechanism of nanoparticles across the blood-brain barrier for drug delivery application 
## (s28) Medical diagnostics
Number of References: 4

(p28.0) Recent advances in medical nanotechnology are expanding in the early diagnosis of dangerous diseases such as cancer and stroke. Typically, some methods such as computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are prevalently used. These diagnostic methods are, however, limited because they can only detect tumors and diseased tissues with a size of more than a few millimeters or equivalent to 10 million cells ). The nanoparticles exhibit unique optical and surface plasmon resonance properties, whereas their scattering ability is five times greater than that of conventional dyes used in diagnostic techniques (Radwan and Azzazy 2009). Moreover, their small size and high biocompatibility bring them an easy approach to the tissues or organs to perform probe functions. Therefore, nanoparticles are used in diagnostic methods such as photoimaging, signal, fluorescence, and surface-enhanced Raman scattering (Boisselier and Astruc 2009). Cancer is a dangerous disease, the second leading cause of human death in the world . The normal diagnostic methods can only detect the tumors at the grown periods, causing difficulty in cancer treatment. Therefore, early diagnosis is necessary to prevent these diseases. Mukherjee et al. (2013) noticed the synthesis of Au nanoparticles from O. scandens leaf extract for the diagnosis of lung and breast cancers. The results were observed by the olympus fluorescence microscope that nanoparticles can spontaneously emit red fluorescence toward both cancer cells. The authors also suggested the red emission phenomenon was ascribed to the encapsulating phytochemicals and the light scattering of nanoparticles. As an example, Fig. 15 describes the fluorescent diagnostic technique using nanoparticles for photo-imaging and computed tomography scans. In another study, Chanda et al. (2011) reported the cancer diagnostic ability of Au nanoparticles from cinnamon extract. Accordingly, the photoacoustic signal for prostate cancer cell lines was stronger in the presence of Au nanoparticles than the other.
## (s29) Antiaging
Number of References: 5

(p29.0) Skin aging can affect aesthetics and raise the risks for skin cancers. Skin aging is caused by many factors, i.e., internal factors by age or genetic and external factors by constant exposure under ultraviolet irradiation or pollutants in daily life (Puizina-Ivic 2008). The free radicals are underlying to activate collagenase, elastase, and tyrosinase enzymes to digest collagen in the triple helix region, breaking down the elastin, and synthesizing toxic melanin (Eun Lee et al. 2019). Mostafa et al. (2019) showed that Ag nanoparticles from C. pumilio plant extract may be against enzymes that cause skin aging. The interaction between the hydroxyl groups of phenol in plant extract with the enzymes functional groups or the hydrophobic interaction between the benzene ring of phenol and enzyme may change the structure, reducing the enzyme activity. The inhibition percentages of antielastase, anti-collagenase and anti-tyrosinase enzymes in the keratinocyte cell line were 91, 76, and 79%, respectively. Likewise, nanoparticles can also be used as a shield against ultraviolet rays. Khatami et al. (2019) discovered Ni-doped CeO 2 nanoparticles synthesized from S. rebaudiana extract were a promising filter against ultraviolet agents. Sunscreen's ability to absorb ultraviolet rays is measured based on sun protection factor. If this factor is above 30, the filter can prevent 98% of ultraviolet rays from skin surface (Jose and Netto 2019). The results of sun protection factor from three samples are acceptable: CeO 2 (38.98) < Ni 1%-doped CeO 2 (40.15) < Ni 3%-doped CeO 2 (42.54). The authors explained that the smaller the nanoparticle size is, the narrower the band-gap, the better the ultraviolet-absorbing material. It can be seen that nanoparticles from plant extracts support potential anti-aging products for human health and the environment.
## (s31) Challenges
Number of References: 8

(p31.0) Nanotechnology is evolving and has bright future prospects. In particular, the use of plant extracts for nanofabrication is increasingly being developed and gradually replacing chemical or physical production technologies with the economic, ecological, and safety benefits. In the near future, nanoparticles biofabricated from plant extracts can be incorporated into large-scale production from locally available plant species. These strengths can open new commercialized opportunities for biogenic nanoparticles; and hence, lowering the production cost. This possibly leads to boosting the density of bionanomaterials in the material sciences. In addition to their outstanding biomedical and environmental applications, nanoparticles can also have great prospects in many other technologies. For example, the bio-based nanoparticles can act as green catalysts for the synthesis of novel bioactive compounds (Balwe et al. 2017). They have many potentials for antioxidant and free radical scavenging activities (Yousaf et al. 2020). These antioxidants can firmly link to food preservation, antiaging, and other biomedical applications. In particular, some of the outstanding applications of nanoparticles are to produce biopesticides, biofertilizers, and even bionanosensors applying for smart agricultural fields (Shang et al. 2019).

(p31.1) However, paralleling with the advanced technologies of nanoparticles, there can have many challenges and potential drawbacks. Firstly, these nanomaterials can have potentially affected human health. While many studies have performed in vitro and reported on antibacterial, anti-cancer as well as the treatment of many diseases, the effects of administering nanoparticles directly into the body still need a satisfactory answer (Zhang et al. 2014;Bethu et al. 2018;Youssif et al. 2019). Secondly, their special physicochemical properties need to be monitored for better understanding of underlying influential mechanisms because the nano-scaled materials exhibit more significantly variable behaviors than the macroscopic ones (Ojha 2020). Thirdly, for environmental and agricultural applications, the aspects of negative effects on living organisms are also of great concern. Animals, and aquatic organisms may be exposed directly or indirectly from residues of post-use nanomaterials discharged in soil and water environments (Marambio-Jones and Hoek 2010). Fourthly, the actual efficiency of biomedical and environmental applications of bio-based nanoparticles needs to be addressed as many studies are carried out in the simulated or theoretical mode. Fifthly, the adoption of plants to synthesize nanoparticles on a large scale will lead to worrying concerns about caring for well-grown plants to accommodate conditions containing the necessary biological compounds. These undesirable effects require further insights and advancements with many specified researches. Sixthly, the biggest obstacle limiting the applications of nanoparticles is the lack of a standardized set of regulations necessary for their utilization. Their uncontrolled use without unified regulations will cause many inevitable effects. Ultimately, the field of nanotoxicology is still in its infancy to ensure the safety of nanoparticles (Baruah et al. 2016). These challenges need to be addressed before large-scale commercialization and development of nanoparticles from plant extracts can be made.
