# Online hemodiafiltration (HDF) versus high-flux hemodialysis (hf-HD): A review

CorpusID: 247569626 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb8b775f00a5c1545fa2f25551c8a09f04f1281f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb8b775f00a5c1545fa2f25551c8a09f04f1281f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) The main function of the kidney is to eliminate toxins generated by the metabolic processes of the body (Clark et al., 2019). Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) or who are in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) have this function affected, which leads to accumulation of the aforementioned toxins in the circulatory system, a condition called "uremia" (Clark & Gao, 2002;Franco et al., 2019). An accumulation of these so-called uremic toxins (UTs) in the body generates several deleterious effects in the organism, including malnutrition, anemia, dermal atrophies, dyslipidemia, metabolic acidosis, inflammation, pericarditis, hypertension, heart failure, coagulation disorders, and cardiovascular disease (CVD). CVDs are the leading cause of death in these patients (Go et al., 2004;Vanholder et al., 2005, Vanholder et al., 2008.

(p0.1) Patients in ESRD require renal replacement therapy (RRT) such as dialysis in order to prevent symptoms and to sustain their life . Despite technological and management advances to improve the quality of life (QoL) of patients in ESRD, it is notable that there is a high incidence of adverse complications such as hospitalization and death in this population, where the mortality rates of patients in ESRD are higher than patients with diabetes, CVD or cancer Saran et al., 2017). However, new hemodialysis techniques are being developed, improved and studied in order to improve this scenario. Conventional low-flux hemodialysis (HD) is not highly effective, and patient morbidity and mortality rates are still high (Locatelli et al., 2015). As an alternative, recent controlled trials demonstrate that dialysis techniques which make use of high-flux membranes or that associate diffusion with convection show superiority over conventional hemodialysis in clinical endpoints (Canaud et al., 2020).
## (s10) Biocompatibility of Hemodialysis Membranes
Number of References: 18

(p10.0) Hemodialysis is a procedure performed in extracorporeal circulation, and the lack of biocompatibility may induce significant clinical and biochemical responses. Due to blood contacting with the components of the hemodialysis circuit, such as dialysis membranes, drains and intravenous fluids administered during the procedure, activation of inflammatory and immune pathways may occur, leading to dialysis-induced oxidative stress and membrane-induced inflammation, which are related to cardiovascular problems (Chang et al., 2014;Gomółka et al., 2020;Ojeda et al., 2020;Claudio Ronco et al., 2018;Claudio Ronco & Clark, 2018). This activation occurs via the alternative pathway of the complementary system, leading to anaphylatoxins being released into the bloodstream, activation of the coagulation cascade and of different cell types (monocytes, neutrophils, basophils, and platelets), and elevating plasma pro-inflammatory cytokine levels such as interleukin-1β (IL-1), IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and stimulating the production of proteolytic enzymes by granulocytes Due to the exposure time of the blood to the dialysis membrane surface, the biocompatibility of this HD component is crucial. Membranes have the function of removing water and solutes through various mass separation processes such as diffusion, convection and adsorption (Ojeda et al., 2020;Claudio Ronco & Clark, 2018). These membranes can be traditionally classified according to their composition and permeability, being made of cellulose (modified or unmodified) or synthetic.

(p10.1) Unmodified cellulose membranes were the most common in the past, but they were eradicated from the market, and the same has been observed for modified cellulose membranes which have good performance and functionality when compared to synthetic ones; however, their biocompatibility and permeability are limited, preventing their application in convective therapies (Clark et al., 1999;Gomółka et al., 2020;Kalantar-zadeh et al., 2018;Ojeda et al., 2020;Claudio Ronco & Clark, 2018).

(p10.2) These limitations have been surpassed with the advance of biomaterials and with the improvement in the production of fibers that have resulted in new membranes with specific characteristics and refined properties, which have begun to present greater biocompatibility and permeability, in addition to expanding their categorization. Factors such as permeability index, hydrophilic index, adsorption capacity, and electric potential are now considered to define the membrane category Ronco & Clark, 2018). Studies show that the use of synthetic high-flux membranes have greater biocompatibility by reducing chronic inflammation and oxidative stress, as in the case of membranes used in hf-HD and HDF (Clark et al., 1999;Gomółka et al., 2020;Ojeda et al., 2020;Pieroni et al., 2015;Tomo, 2016).
## (s12) Cardiovascular Stability
Number of References: 17

(p12.0) The most frequent clinical problem in patients during HD is cardiovascular (CV) instability, which occurs due to a decreasing blood volume during filtration, leading to vasoconstriction and reduced perfusion in some body regions, triggering systemic circulatory stress (Locatelli et al., 2018;Penny et al., 2018;Ronco et al., 2000). A patient may experience stunting of the myocardium and of other vital organs or precipitated ischemia as a consequence of this instability (Locatelli et al., 2018;Ok et al., 2013;Penny et al., 2018). Studies point out that it is necessary to accurately monitor possible causes of cardiovascular injuries during HD in order to prevent these cardiovascular events, and provide effective preventive intervention for such injuries (Penny et al., 2018).

(p12.1) Despite studies pointing towards HDF and hf-HD as alternatives to HD to minimize the occurrences of these cardiovascular events, the clinical benefits of HDF compared to hf-HD continue to be debated. Articles highlight both the similarity of the techniques and the superiority of HDF over hf-HD (Table 1) (La Milia et al., 2019;Locatelli et al., 2015Locatelli et al., , 2018Shroff et al., 2018). La Milia et al. (2019) stated that the removal of Na + balance and plasma tonicity did not differ between hf-HD and HDF and this was not a factor which could explain the superiority of HDF. Studies have evidenced that HDF can improve cardiovascular stability when compared to hf-HD (Locatelli et al., 2018) in patients receiving higher convection volumes, however this limits the reach of this technique, since patients who have suboptimal vascular access or time limitations associated with dialysis may not reach these convection volumes (Grooteman et al., 2012;Ok et al., 2013;J. R. Smith et al., 2017). Compared to HF-HD, MCO-HD induces a higher myoglobin reduction ratio, but also reduces the pre-dialysis levels of other medium molecules, including beta2-microglobulin, and kappa and lambda free light chain. Thus, MCO-HD appears as a strategy in the removal of medium-molecular-weight toxins, and can be considered an alternative to HDF. (van Gelder et al., 2020) Netherlands
