# materials Dynamic Behavior of Sandwich Structures with Magnetorheological Elastomer: A Review

CorpusID: 244506574 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/29439acd7a379efb538bad7c74525ad563fc3443](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/29439acd7a379efb538bad7c74525ad563fc3443)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics, Engineering

## (s16) Effect of The Applied Field on MRE Sandwich Structures Loss Factors and Deflection
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) In terms of loss factor, the damping properties of adaptable sandwich structures hav received a lot of attention. The ratio of imaginary-to-real components of complex eigen values is defined as the loss factor. The viscoelastic behavior of MRE composed of RT silicone rubber and carbonyl iron powder (CIP) was studied by Bellan and Bossis [96]. Th applied magnetic field conditions were discovered to have an effect on the shear storag and shear loss modulus. Gong et al. [97] examined the rheological characteristics and m crostructures of several isotropic MRE sample assemblies. MRE samples are made up CIP, silicon rubber, and silicone oil in varying weight percentages. Experiments indicate that mixtures comprising 60% CIP, 20% silicone oil, and 100% silicone rubber have th Figure 11. Variation of the natural frequency for different modes considering the magnetic field applied on sandwich structure with MRE honeycomb core of ABS and PLA honeycomb.
## (s17) Effect of The Applied Field on MRE Sandwich Structures Loss Factors and Deflection
Number of References: 3

(p17.0) In terms of loss factor, the damping properties of adaptable sandwich structures have received a lot of attention. The ratio of imaginary-to-real components of complex eigenvalues is defined as the loss factor. The viscoelastic behavior of MRE composed of RTV silicone rubber and carbonyl iron powder (CIP) was studied by Bellan and Bossis [96]. The applied magnetic field conditions were discovered to have an effect on the shear storage and shear loss modulus. Gong et al. [97] examined the rheological characteristics and microstructures of several isotropic MRE sample assemblies. MRE samples are made up of CIP, silicon rubber, and silicone oil in varying weight percentages. Experiments indicated that mixtures comprising 60% CIP, 20% silicone oil, and 100% silicone rubber have the best MR effect. Chen et al. [98] investigated the shear characteristics of anisotropic MREs and observed that the shear modulus of MREs increases as magnetic fields increase.
## (s19) Non-Linear Behavior of MRE Sandwich Structures
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Nonlinear behaviors in MRE sandwich structures have been observed, despite the fact that previous research indicated that MRE sandwich structures had a core operating in the pre-yield zone. The first-order natural frequency of a geometrically flawed MRE sandwich rose in response to an increasing external magnetic field [125]. Aguib observed the nonlinear static behavior of MRE sandwich beams made of composite materials. When the magnetic field was altered, the beam s stiffness and damping properties changed. The strains and stresses rose in direct proportion to the magnetic field strength. As the magnetic field rose, beam bending reduced, as illustrated in Figure 20 [126].
## (s20) Non-Linear Behavior of MRE Sandwich Structures.
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) Nonlinear behaviors in MRE sandwich structures have been observed, despite the fact that previous research indicated that MRE sandwich structures had a core operating in the pre-yield zone. The first-order natural frequency of a geometrically flawed MRE sandwich rose in response to an increasing external magnetic field [125]. Aguib observed the nonlinear static behavior of MRE sandwich beams made of composite materials. When the magnetic field was altered, the beam's stiffness and damping properties changed. The strains and stresses rose in direct proportion to the magnetic field strength. As the mag- in the pre-yield zone. The first-order natural frequency of a geometrically flawed MRE sandwich rose in response to an increasing external magnetic field [125]. Aguib observed the nonlinear static behavior of MRE sandwich beams made of composite materials. When the magnetic field was altered, the beam's stiffness and damping properties changed. The strains and stresses rose in direct proportion to the magnetic field strength. As the magnetic field rose, beam bending reduced, as illustrated in Figure 20 
