# healthcare Does Artificial Intelligence Make Clinical Decision Better? A Review of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Acute Kidney Injury Prediction

CorpusID: 244812316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1896930a162464cb8f802aaab22ca475f632dccc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1896930a162464cb8f802aaab22ca475f632dccc)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) AKI Risk Factors and Risk Scores
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) Some studies that have focused on identifying significant risk factors for AKI have determined that both patient susceptibilities and exposure are crucial in AKI development. Patient susceptibilities include age, gender, race, and comorbidities. Among all comorbidities, CKD has been identified as a major risk factor for AKI due to its associated loss of autoregulation, loss of renal reserve, and susceptibility to nephrotoxic agents. Moreover, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, hyperuricemia, obesity, and liver disease have all been reported as risk factors for AKI [19,36,37]. Exposure to sepsis, nephrotoxic agents, surgical intervention, and shock have been identified as contributors to AKI [16,17]. A multicenter international cross-sectional AKI-EPI study reported that sepsis, hypovolemia, and nephrotoxic drug exposure were the three most frequently reported etiologies of AKI in patients with a critical illness [16]. The incidence of AKI may be higher among patients with poor physical condition after certain exposure; for example, an aging patient may have a higher risk of AKI after cardiac surgery. However, AKI risk differs by the physical condition and nephrotoxic exposure; this renders accurate risk assessment challenging.
## (s3) From Automated Electronic Alerts to AI
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) As MISs become more popular, systems that provide automated electronic alerts (e-alerts) have become increasingly feasible; in such a system, the electronic records and clinical information of patients are analyzed using an algorithm that predicts whether early or subclinical AKI is present [52]. These systems are expected to aid patient care by making clinical evaluation and treatment timelier. Park and his colleagues had investigated an AKI alert system with automated nephrologist consultation in which clinicians could generate automated consultations to the nephrology division while patient's serum creatinine concentration elevation of at least 1.5-fold or 0.3 mg/dL from baseline. This study reported that the early consultation with a nephrologist was greater (adjusted OR, 6.13; 95% CI, 4.80-7.82) and odds of a severe AKI event were reduced (adjusted OR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.64-0.89) after introducing the e-alert system. However, mortality was not affected (adjusted HR, 1.07; 95% CI, 0.68-1.68) [53]. Another study used an e-alert system in ICU patients, clinician received a "pop-up" message while the e-alert system screened the serum creatinine data and detected possible AKI events following the KDIGO criteria definition. Although the sensitivity, specificity, Youden Index and accuracy of the AKI e-alert system were 99.8, 97.7, 97.5 and 98.1%, respectively, in this study, and the prevalence of diagnosis AKI and the prevalence of nephrology consultation in the e-alert group was higher than that in the non-e-alert group. There was no significant difference in the prevalence of dialysis, rehabilitation of renal function, or death in the two groups [54]. In 2017, a systemic review concluded that an e-alerts system neither reduced mortality (odds ratio [OR], 1.05; 95% CI, 0.84-1.31) nor reduced the incidence of dialysis treatment (OR, 1.20; 95% CI, 0.91-1.57) [55,56]. All six studies included in this meta-analysis used only serum creatinine change as the trigger for e-alerts, and serum creatinine change is neither a sensitive nor specific marker of kidney injury, as mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Beyond the limitation of serum creatinine as an AKI marker, e-alerts systems face challenges when used in patients without baseline renal function and those with CKD who have higher baseline creatinine levels and more significant changes in renal function following small changes in creatinine level; a wide variety of further care is provided by clinicians to patients after the receipt of e-alerts. To prescribe standardized and evidence-based clinical care after the receipt of e-alerts, a care bundle was built. The most recent guidelines prescribe no specific management options for AKI, and the treatment strategy is mainly supportive. In critically ill patients, the occurrence and severity of AKI were reduced following adherence to KDIGO guidelines detailing the management of fluids, avoidance of nephrotoxins, monitoring of serum creatinine levels and hemodynamics, and referral to a specialist. Several studies have reported a decrease in hospital-acquired AKI and AKI-associated mortality and hospitalization days when the e-alert system was combined with a care bundle, the patient's history was analyzed, the patient's urine samples were tested, a clinical diagnosis of AKI was established, the course of treatment and testing was planned, and advice was sought from a nephrologist [57][58][59]. Machine-learning algorithms are in high demand and require large volumes of data. With large EMR databases and powerful computing hardware, scholars have extended the application of machine learning.
