# A review on extreme weather events and livelihood in Odisha, India

CorpusID: 244052790 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eebcb59ff35be38184ece450a9cbd36feabd7b80](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eebcb59ff35be38184ece450a9cbd36feabd7b80)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Economics

## (s10) Conclusion and policy implications
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The study concluded that people have reduced abilities to deal with climate change owing to recurrent and severe nature of extreme events in Odisha. Considering the impact climate change and extreme events have had on livelihoods of people, stronger and sustainable measures need to be taken to enable the community to adapt. The vulnerability analysis by Paltasingha and Goyarib (2015) reveals that the household income of the farmers and thus their financial security was directly linked to their ability to cope with the extreme events. Whereas others have argued that lack of financial assets and poor institutional support are the major constraints on overcoming the negative effects these disasters have on livelihood (Chhotray and Few, 2012). In this regard there is an urgent need to ensure that farming communities are able to diversify their income sources which enhances their financial condition and also acts as a hedge against extreme events. Diversification of crops, growing drought and flood resistant varieties of crops and water harvesting are some of the measures that can be undertaken. Interventions in agriculture need to be such that they are able to benefit all sections of society. This can be achieved by collaborating with village level volunteers for distribution of drought/flood resistant seeds and dissemination of early warnings on natural disasters. In drought prone areas another effective measure could be afforestation by using drought-resistant vegetation like Jackfruit trees. Employment generation measures need to be taken with a focus towards youth in these communities by providing training towards skill development. Monitoring mechanisms are required to ensure that government programmes such as the MGNREGA are implemented in a more effective manner to ensure basic income security. SHGs also need to be supported in order to provide alternate livelihoods that are not directly dependent on natural resources. Any measure undertaken for livelihood regeneration needs to ensure that discussions are held with the community to ensure that their interests are taken into account. People belonging to communities that are the most disadvantaged such as poor and the landless need to be engaged in a deeper manner in this regard. Further research is required on efficacy of adaptation mechanisms for livelihood security in this region.
