# Partial orchiectomy and testis intratubular germ cell neoplasia: World literature review

CorpusID: 24656005 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c1aa90c4072833c8e3d8b5b415a9f5bbcb5a0497](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c1aa90c4072833c8e3d8b5b415a9f5bbcb5a0497)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) CONTRALATERAL INTRAEPITHELIAL GERM CELL NEOPLASIA
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The Dieckmann and colleagues review of 1954 patients with a unilateral GCT who underwent a contralateral testicular biopsy concurrently showed a prevalence of 4.9%, with testicular atrophy having a 4.3-fold increased risk of having contralateral ITGCN. [26] Patients with ITGCN were significantly younger, and only three patients with negative ITGCN on biopsying went on to develop frank carcinoma. Because of similar incidence rates, their data suggest that ITGCN can be a precursor for testicular carcinoma.

(p3.1) The Dieckmann and colleagues review of 1954 patients with a unilateral GCT who underwent a contralateral testicular biopsy concurrently showed a prevalence of 4.9%, with testicular atrophy having a 4.3-fold increased risk of having contralateral ITGCN. [26] Patients with ITGCN were significantly younger, and only three patients with negative ITGCN on biopsying went on to develop frank carcinoma. Because of similar incidence rates, their data suggest that ITGCN can be a precursor for testicular carcinoma.
## (s5) BILATERAL TESTICULAR CANCER
Number of References: 20

(p5.0) The reviewed literature shows that most bilateral testicular GCTs are seminomas and occur metachronously on an average after 4 years. [32,33] In the Klatte and colleagues review, [32] bilateral tumors are of similar histologies in more than 50% of the cases, and 74% were seminomas. More important is the observation that having a history of testicular GCT increases the risk of having a contralateral tumor by 26-fold.

(p5.1) The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) reported an overall incidence of bilateral testicular cancer of 1.5% in a review of patients spanning 50 years and a decrease in the incidence of contralateral cancer with time. This is consistent with the hypothesis that treatment with cisplatin chemotherapy decreased the risk of developing a contralateral testicular tumor. [33] Similar findings in the Sonneveld and colleagues review [16] showed that the overall prevalence of bilateral testicular cancer in stage I patients was 3.6%, and has slightly decreased over the past three decades, attributed to intensive follow-up, improvement of radiodiagnostic techniques, serum tumor markers and patient education, which have resulted in earlier lower-stage diagnosis of contralateral tumors and hence improved prognosis.

(p5.2) The reviewed literature shows that most bilateral testicular GCTs are seminomas and occur metachronously on an average after 4 years. [32,33] In the Klatte and colleagues review, [32] bilateral tumors are of similar histologies in more than 50% of the cases, and 74% were seminomas. More important is the observation that having a history of testicular GCT increases the risk of having a contralateral tumor by 26-fold.

(p5.3) The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) reported an overall incidence of bilateral testicular cancer of 1.5% in a review of patients spanning 50 years and a decrease in the incidence of contralateral cancer with time. This is consistent with the hypothesis that treatment with cisplatin chemotherapy decreased the risk of developing a contralateral testicular tumor. [33] Similar findings in the Sonneveld and colleagues review [16] showed that the overall prevalence of bilateral testicular cancer in stage I patients was 3.6%, and has slightly decreased over the past three decades, attributed to intensive follow-up, improvement of radiodiagnostic techniques, serum tumor markers and patient education, which have resulted in earlier lower-stage diagnosis of contralateral tumors and hence improved prognosis.
## (s6) CHEMOTHERAPY
Number of References: 24

(p6.0) Whether cisplatin-based chemotherapy may eradicate testicular ITGCN is a matter of debate in the reviewed literature. Kleinschmidt and colleagues recently investigated the eradication of ITGCN after receiving carboplatin or a combination of platinum, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB). [34] Overall, seven of 11 patients failed either of these chemotherapeutic regimens after undergoing biopsying at a mean of 8.8 months post-treatment. Reasons that may keep platinum-based chemotherapies from completely eradicating ITGCN include the blood-testes barrier and the possibility that ITGCN is resistant to chemotherapies, with increasing success for the treatment of initial testicular carcinoma and all reports recommending close follow-up for contralateral tumor occurrence. [33] On the other hand, some reports have attributed the decreased incidence of contralateral testicular tumors to platinum-based chemotherapy. [29,33] Van Basten and colleagues, in their review of testicular cancer in Dutch men, noted that a three-times lower incidence rate of a contralateral testicular tumor was found in the chemotherapy subgroup compared with those on surveillance. [35] Fossa and colleagues [29] in their review of the surveillance, epidemiology and end results database (SEER) showed a decreased incidence of contralateral testicular cancer that they hypothesized could be related to platinum-based chemotherapy.

(p6.1) Whether cisplatin-based chemotherapy may eradicate testicular ITGCN is a matter of debate in the reviewed literature. Kleinschmidt and colleagues recently investigated the eradication of ITGCN after receiving carboplatin or a combination of platinum, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB). [34] Overall, seven of 11 patients failed either of these chemotherapeutic regimens after undergoing biopsying at a mean of 8.8 months post-treatment. Reasons that may keep platinum-based chemotherapies from completely eradicating ITGCN include the blood-testes barrier and the possibility that ITGCN is resistant to chemotherapies, with increasing success for the treatment of initial testicular carcinoma and all reports recommending close follow-up for contralateral tumor occurrence. [33] On the other hand, some reports have attributed the decreased incidence of contralateral testicular tumors to platinum-based chemotherapy. [29,33] Van Basten and colleagues, in their review of testicular cancer in Dutch men, noted that a three-times lower incidence rate of a contralateral testicular tumor was found in the chemotherapy subgroup compared with those on surveillance. [35] Fossa and colleagues [29] in their review of the surveillance, epidemiology and end results database (SEER) showed a decreased incidence of contralateral testicular cancer that they hypothesized could be related to platinum-based chemotherapy.
## (s12) CONTRALATERAL INTRAEPITHELIAL GERM CELL NEOPLASIA
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The Dieckmann and colleagues review of 1954 patients with a unilateral GCT who underwent a contralateral testicular biopsy concurrently showed a prevalence of 4.9%, with testicular atrophy having a 4.3-fold increased risk of having contralateral ITGCN. [26] Patients with ITGCN were significantly younger, and only three patients with negative ITGCN on biopsying went on to develop frank carcinoma. Because of similar incidence rates, their data suggest that ITGCN can be a precursor for testicular carcinoma.

(p12.1) The Dieckmann and colleagues review of 1954 patients with a unilateral GCT who underwent a contralateral testicular biopsy concurrently showed a prevalence of 4.9%, with testicular atrophy having a 4.3-fold increased risk of having contralateral ITGCN. [26] Patients with ITGCN were significantly younger, and only three patients with negative ITGCN on biopsying went on to develop frank carcinoma. Because of similar incidence rates, their data suggest that ITGCN can be a precursor for testicular carcinoma.
## (s14) BILATERAL TESTICULAR CANCER
Number of References: 20

(p14.0) The reviewed literature shows that most bilateral testicular GCTs are seminomas and occur metachronously on an average after 4 years. [32,33] In the Klatte and colleagues review, [32] bilateral tumors are of similar histologies in more than 50% of the cases, and 74% were seminomas. More important is the observation that having a history of testicular GCT increases the risk of having a contralateral tumor by 26-fold.

(p14.1) The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) reported an overall incidence of bilateral testicular cancer of 1.5% in a review of patients spanning 50 years and a decrease in the incidence of contralateral cancer with time. This is consistent with the hypothesis that treatment with cisplatin chemotherapy decreased the risk of developing a contralateral testicular tumor. [33] Similar findings in the Sonneveld and colleagues review [16] showed that the overall prevalence of bilateral testicular cancer in stage I patients was 3.6%, and has slightly decreased over the past three decades, attributed to intensive follow-up, improvement of radiodiagnostic techniques, serum tumor markers and patient education, which have resulted in earlier lower-stage diagnosis of contralateral tumors and hence improved prognosis.

(p14.2) The reviewed literature shows that most bilateral testicular GCTs are seminomas and occur metachronously on an average after 4 years. [32,33] In the Klatte and colleagues review, [32] bilateral tumors are of similar histologies in more than 50% of the cases, and 74% were seminomas. More important is the observation that having a history of testicular GCT increases the risk of having a contralateral tumor by 26-fold.

(p14.3) The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) reported an overall incidence of bilateral testicular cancer of 1.5% in a review of patients spanning 50 years and a decrease in the incidence of contralateral cancer with time. This is consistent with the hypothesis that treatment with cisplatin chemotherapy decreased the risk of developing a contralateral testicular tumor. [33] Similar findings in the Sonneveld and colleagues review [16] showed that the overall prevalence of bilateral testicular cancer in stage I patients was 3.6%, and has slightly decreased over the past three decades, attributed to intensive follow-up, improvement of radiodiagnostic techniques, serum tumor markers and patient education, which have resulted in earlier lower-stage diagnosis of contralateral tumors and hence improved prognosis.
## (s15) CHEMOTHERAPY
Number of References: 24

(p15.0) Whether cisplatin-based chemotherapy may eradicate testicular ITGCN is a matter of debate in the reviewed literature. Kleinschmidt and colleagues recently investigated the eradication of ITGCN after receiving carboplatin or a combination of platinum, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB). [34] Overall, seven of 11 patients failed either of these chemotherapeutic regimens after undergoing biopsying at a mean of 8.8 months post-treatment. Reasons that may keep platinum-based chemotherapies from completely eradicating ITGCN include the blood-testes barrier and the possibility that ITGCN is resistant to chemotherapies, with increasing success for the treatment of initial testicular carcinoma and all reports recommending close follow-up for contralateral tumor occurrence. [33] On the other hand, some reports have attributed the decreased incidence of contralateral testicular tumors to platinum-based chemotherapy. [29,33] Van Basten and colleagues, in their review of testicular cancer in Dutch men, noted that a three-times lower incidence rate of a contralateral testicular tumor was found in the chemotherapy subgroup compared with those on surveillance. [35] Fossa and colleagues [29] in their review of the surveillance, epidemiology and end results database (SEER) showed a decreased incidence of contralateral testicular cancer that they hypothesized could be related to platinum-based chemotherapy.

(p15.1) Whether cisplatin-based chemotherapy may eradicate testicular ITGCN is a matter of debate in the reviewed literature. Kleinschmidt and colleagues recently investigated the eradication of ITGCN after receiving carboplatin or a combination of platinum, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB). [34] Overall, seven of 11 patients failed either of these chemotherapeutic regimens after undergoing biopsying at a mean of 8.8 months post-treatment. Reasons that may keep platinum-based chemotherapies from completely eradicating ITGCN include the blood-testes barrier and the possibility that ITGCN is resistant to chemotherapies, with increasing success for the treatment of initial testicular carcinoma and all reports recommending close follow-up for contralateral tumor occurrence. [33] On the other hand, some reports have attributed the decreased incidence of contralateral testicular tumors to platinum-based chemotherapy. [29,33] Van Basten and colleagues, in their review of testicular cancer in Dutch men, noted that a three-times lower incidence rate of a contralateral testicular tumor was found in the chemotherapy subgroup compared with those on surveillance. [35] Fossa and colleagues [29] in their review of the surveillance, epidemiology and end results database (SEER) showed a decreased incidence of contralateral testicular cancer that they hypothesized could be related to platinum-based chemotherapy.
