# Domain-Specific Languages for Workflows. A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 244504689 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95dce95f0a9078efa578b29dee946d9e50e00469](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95dce95f0a9078efa578b29dee946d9e50e00469)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s9) C. Limitations of DSLs for Workflows
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Tharido et al., 2018 [53] developed a DSL called "Work-flowDSL" for Data Analysis applications. WorkflowDSL language does not have a support for cyclic operations. Moreover, it is ennforced via Xtext validation rules. In addition to that, since this very language was designed to focus on dataintensive workflows, it cannot convey flows of a workflow. Other limitations include, grammar expression capabilities and high dependency on language constructs. Exedra [20], a domain-specific language for large graph analytics workflows has the following limitations.

(p9.1) • The current version of Exedra grammar is limited to graph reading, and graph analysis algorithms such as degree distribution calculation, clustering etc. • This version of Exedra grammar does not have the capability to do graph traversal operations. • There is only implementation of compartments for Scale-Graph and KDT libraries, hence restricting the other mediums. • The communication between different compartments introduces an additional overhead of data format conversion. • Lastly, the Dipper framework is not able to accommodate the changes made to the libraries or the middle ware using which the compartments run. Apart from the development, evaluation of a DSL is also an integral and challenging task. Hence, the question of evaluating DSL solutions is gaining more and more attention in the scientific community [54]. Khalaoui et al. have investigated the success factors for Domain-Specific modeling activities and prepared a list of qualitative criteria with positive and negative impacts [55]. To evaluate a DSM solution, Mohagheghi et al. [56] suggested using both quantitative and qualitative criteria, while taking into account the stakeholder's interests.
