# State of art bio-materials as scale inhibitors in recirculating cooling water system: a review article Uncorrected Proof

CorpusID: 246408105 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/264ae659adc11cbe9ccbc86ead7e8697b099e41a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/264ae659adc11cbe9ccbc86ead7e8697b099e41a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s5) vapor diffusion method
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Scale crystallization occurs in the millisecond range in the process of vapor diffusion method, which shows significant attractivity in the research of CaCO 3 crystallization (Addadi et al. 1987;Gehrke et al. 2005;Tourney & Ngwenya 2009). Generally, its key distinction with other methods is that CaCO 3 crystals are precipitated from experimental solution which gradually supersaturates under the continuously decomposing ammonium carbonate in a closed container, according to the following  

(p5.1) The vapor diffusion method is appropriate for slow CaCO 3 crystallization benefits from the relatively stable gas-liquid phase contributes to eliminate the interference of other factors, this promotes well-facetted calcite crystals' formation for further microscopic observations (Gehrke et al. 2005;Liu et al. 2016a).
## (s11) Dynamic tube blocking test
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Dynamic tube blocking test is one of the main testing methodologies to evaluate the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) required to prevent the formation of scale under dynamic flow condition. In principle, it involves measurements of the increasing pressure caused by scale deposition on the test tube wall. Scale inhibition efficiency is represented by the ratio of the time needs to obstruct the tube flow in the presence and the absence of the inhibitors (Macedo et al. 2019;Sanni et al. 2019).
## (s12) Pilot plant test
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) The pilot plant tests are conducted in a recirculating cooling water system or in a simulating device to test the field application performance of a scale inhibitor (Neveux et al. 2016;Chen et al. 2019). Comparing to other methods, pilot plant test can not only offer a flexible operation as the system can be directly controlled by computer, but also directly obtain the feasibility of the tested agent. However, such experiment condition of pilot plant tests is difficult to achieve in general laboratories.
## (s15) Polycarboxylates scale inhibitors
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) Polycarboxylates scale inhibitors possess functional carboxyl groups (-COOH) in its molecular structure, making them have strong chelating and dispersing abilities on Ca 2þ . During CaCO 3 crystallization process, polycarboxylates can significantly inhibit CaCO 3 crystal growth by adsorption on crystal surface, modify the regular CaCO 3 crystal morphology (Wada et al. 2001). Widely known polycarboxylates scale inhibitors are poly-maleic acid, polyacrylic acid and poly (methacrylic acid) due to their high performance-price ratio. Moreover, polycarboxylates scale inhibitors are also reported to copolymerized with other functional groups for better performance (-NH 2 , -OH, -COOH, -SO 3 H and so on.) (Shakkthivel & Vasudevan 2006;Yang et al. 2017;Dong et al. 2018), in the cases of monomers embedded to polymer molecules, multiple functional groups acted synergistically to enhance both dispersion and adsorption capacity when polymer preventing scale nucleation and growth.
## (s16) Organic Green scale inhibitors
Number of References: 8

(p16.0) With the severe restriction of waste water discharge to the environment, green chemistry demands scale inhibitors to move towards the direction of environmentally friendly, which is readily biodegradability, no-bioaccumulation, and non-toxic. Broadly speaking, polyaspartic acid (PASP), polyepoxysuccinic acid (PESA) andcarboxymethylinulin (CMI) are three typical representatives of green inhibitors, their antiscaling performances have been well documented as well as toxicity, solubility, biodegradability, and synthetic routes, their non-nitrogenous, non-phosphorus and environmental acceptability together with excellent antiscaling properties allow them to be the most promising alternatives to conventional scale inhibitors (Hasson et al. 2011;Chaussemier et al. 2015;Kumar et al. 2018;Mpelwa & Tang 2019).

(p16.1) Among the above-mentioned scale inhibitors, several recent studies modified PASP with B-cyclodextrin (Fu et al. 2020), urea (Zhang et al. 2016a(Zhang et al. , 2016b, glycine (Migahed et al. 2016), tyrosine (Tyr) and tryptophan (Trp)  by grafting copolymerization, such modifications improved its scale inhibition efficiency in different degrees, giving PASPbased copolymer inhibitors a superior performance in against CaCO 3 , CaSO 4 and Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 . Moreover, molecular dynamics simulations indicated that scale inhibition ability by sulfamic/amino modified PASP came from preventing the growth of CaSO 4 crystal planes ( (040), (041) and (113)) , this provided an in-depth study on its scale inhibition mechanism at atomistic level.
## (s17) Blending scale inhibitors
Number of References: 3

(p17.0) Specifically, a blending scale inhibitor usually functions more efficiently than any single inhibitor. For an enhanced synergistic inhibition, blended scale inhibitors should be adopted according to a certain proportion and guarantee the concentration of each component not below the minimum inhibitor concentration. It's worth noting that the synergistic action of blending scale inhibitors usually occurs under the circumstances when each component possesses different scale inhibition mechanisms. Synergistic effect between some scale inhibitors have been found in some literatures, for example ATMP and DTPMPA (Zeino et al. 2018), PBTCA, HEDP and ATMP (Li et al. 2014), sodium gluconate (SG) and PBTC (Ou & Chiang Hsieh 2016).
## (s19) Proteins and amino acids molecules as scale inhibitors
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) Except polyaspartic acid, various proteins and amino acids have proven excellent anti-scaling capacity. In a previous study (Kumar et al. 2010), a type of water-soluble vitamin M, Pteroyl-L-glutamic acid (PGLU), was conducted as scale inhibitor, 120 mg/L of PGLU showed 100% CaCO 3 scale inhibition efficiency according to static jar tests at 70°C. Dynamic tube blocking tests also showed the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) required for scale inhibition at 110°C is 160 mg/L, it is therefore concluded that PGLU could be a favorable green scale inhibitor. Besides PGLU, a mixture of another two vitamins, RS1066 (Thiamine and Pyridoxine), was applied as scale inhibitor by (Menzri et al. 2017), they conducted CO 2 degasification method and chronoamperometry experiments to test its anti-scaling performance. As a result of CO 2 degassing by stirring, 160 mg/L RS1600 inhibited calcite scale via delaying the nucleation time from 30 to 72 min in tested Hamma hard water. The chronoamperometry showed the scaling time increased 2 times under the presence of 40 mg/L of RS1600, corresponded a 66.78% inhibition efficiency. The FTIR, XRD and Raman spectroscopy demonstrated the vitamins blending scale inhibitor, RS1600, modified the crystalline structure and made the calcite crystalline to form a metastable phase to inhibit the calcite crystal formation. In a previous study, a 48-amino-acid-long peptide, cysteine-rich Mdm2 peptide, was tested as a scale inhibitor (Dalas et al. 2006) by constant composition method to investigated the calcite inhibition by cysteine-rich Mdm2 peptide. For a total calcium concentration range of 80-120 mg/L, Mdm2 peptide reached a maximum inhibition of 58% on calcite crystal growth. Side terminal carboxyl groups of Mdm2 peptide fragment were regarded as binding sites which interact with calcite surface through hydrogen bonding, making the crystal surface grow sites blocked.
## (s21) Chitosan
Number of References: 4

(p21.0) Chitosan (CTS), a widely distributed biopolymer in nature, has been chemically modified and shown the potential of green scale inhibitor due to its nontoxic, CTS and its derivatives with broad areas of application had been reported in many studies as scale inhibitor. Previously (Guo et al. 2012), chitosan was copolymerized with maleic anhydride (MA), styrene sulfonic sodium (SSS), and acrylic amide (AM) to prepare CTS-MA-SSS-AM, which was highly effective as a CaCO 3 scale inhibitor, according to static jar tests (GB/T 16632-2008) at 70°, with an advanced CaCO 3 inhibition efficiency of 95.62%, 0.2 g/L CTS-MA-SSS-AM was capable in against Ca 2þ 0.006 mol/L and HCO 3 À 0.0045 mol/L precipitated into calcite scale. Recent research reported chitosan biguanidine hydrochloride (CG), obtained by modified chitosan with guanidine group, showed a good performance in retarding scale formation during real membrane desalinating application (with cross-flow unit for 6 h) (Maher et al. 2020), with only flux declines of 2.6 and 5% for CaSO 4 and CaCO 3 in feed water under concentrations of 10 and 15 mg/L respectively. Moreover, SEM analysis showed that CG strongly changed the precipitated scale crystals morphology, the initial needle-like CaSO 4 crystal structure was modified and transformed into an irregular structure while cubic CaCO 3 crystals were regulated to be cracked and distorted. The authors explained the antiscaling mechanism of CG that introducing chitosan backbone with guanidinium group increased its cationic charges, made CG can strongly combine with scalants along with anionic charges on its surfaces and consequently inhibited scale growth.

(p21.1) Another derivate of chitosan, carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS) was also found to mediate the crystal growth of calcium carbonate previously (Liang et al. 2004), SEM and XRD demonstrated that high CMCS dosage of 1,000 mg/L significantly changed the crystal morphology of precipitated CaCO 3 crystals and facilitated them transfer to calcite form. In a dynamic tube block tests according to (NACE International 2005) NACE TM3110, carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS) was functioned as a scale inhibitor of CaCO 3 under synthetic brine solution (Macedo et al. 2019). It was found that CMCS significantly reduced the scaling tendency of tested water, the precipitation time was obviously extended from 18 to 50 min under 50 mg/L of CMC, the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) of CMCS was 170 ppm for preventing scale formation at T ¼ 70°C and 1,000 psi. SEM along with infrared spectroscopy analysis showed CMCS effectively interacted with calcium ions through its carboxylate ions and lone pair of electrons on -OH and -NH 2 groups, which resulted in deforming the CaCO 3 crystal morphology and made the scaling ions hard to organize and preventing the scale formation.
## (s24) Plant extracts as scale inhibitors
Number of References: 9

(p24.0) In this direction, there have been many studies on applying plant extracts as scale inhibitors, although some were reviewed before (Chaussemier et al. 2015;Kumar et al. 2018), recent years, novel antiscalants derived from several different plant extracts have emerged, we have followed up with the latest research on applying plant extracts as antiscalants, their antiscaling performances along with the mechanisms are described in detail.

(p24.1) In a few studies, FCP (fast controlled precipitation) method along with CA were conducted to assess the scale inhibition performance of several plant extracts, including Herniaria glabra (Horner et al. 2017), Spergularia rubra, Parietaria officinalis (Cheap-Charpentier et al. 2016) and Hylocereus undatus (Lourteau et al. 2019). The FCP method was conducted at 30°C in synthetic water (Ca 2þ ¼ 100 mg/L) with 850 rpm stirring rate. The results showed that among the four plant extracts, Hylocereus undatus was the most efficient scale inhibitor with the lowest dosage of 24 mg/L to completely inhibit CaCO 3 formation (reached an efficiency of 100% as determined by FCP resistivity response), followed by 30 mg/L for Spergularia rubra and 50 mg/L for Herniaria glabra, the least effective was P. officinalis, for which a dosage up to 100 mg/L was required for complete scale inhibition. However, in CA experiments, a higher dosage of plant extracts was generally required for preventing extra CaCO 3 deposition on the electrode surface. Among the four plant extracts, the n-butanolic extract of H. glabra with a minimum dose of 75 mg/L was able to totally inhibit the precipitation of CaCO 3 , however, to achieve the same effect using Hylocereus.undatus extract, a slightly higher concentration of 180 mg/L was required while large doses of 300 and 700 mg/L were needed by S. rubra and P. officinalis respectively. SEM and XRD characterization indicated the crystal morphology became irregular and the vaterite polymorph was preferentially favored to form. The authors suggested surface complexation between the carboxylate groups of these plant extract molecules and calcium atoms on the CaCO 3 surface led an adsorption effect on the calcite crystal surface, reduced the crystal growth, and modified its geometry.

(p24.2) In two recent reports, the scale inhibition performance of Mazuj gall and Bistorta Officinalis extract were both evaluated by static beaker tests (Mohammadi & Rahsepar 2018;Mohammadi & Rahsepar 2019). The CaCO 3 crystallization process was kept in a 50°water bath for 18 h at pH ¼ 8.5 after the extracts was incubated, residual Ca 2þ concentration within the filtrate was determined by EDTA titration. Consequently, 1,000 ppm of Mazuj gall extract provided a high inhibition efficiency of 97.2% in against 592 ppm total hardness while Bistorta Officinalis extract provided a slightly enhanced scale inhibition efficiency of 99.5% under the same experimental condition, it was thus concluded that both Mazuj gall and Bistorta Officinalis extracts could be used as effective antiscaling additives in cooling water solution.

(p24.3) Previously, Gambier extract from Uncaria gambier Roxb leaves was reported as a green inhibitor for CaCO 3 formation (Suharso et al. 2011), by bottle-roller batch method, they found 200 ppm Gambier extract brought 70-80% CaCO 3 inhibition efficiency at 80°C. Subsequently, the authors modified Gambier extract with benzoic and citric acid at a ratio of (Gambier extract: benzoic acid: citric acid/2:1:2) to strengthen its antiscaing capability (Suharsoa 2017). Consequently, modified Gambier extract showed an inhibition efficiency of 12-92% under the concentration range of 50-300 ppm, such antiscaling effect was slightly diminished compared with original Gambier extract, which showed an inhibition efficiency of 60-100% under the concentration range of 50-250 ppm. SEM and particle size distribution analyses indicated both Gambier extract and its modified product could not only induce irregular changes on CaCO 3 morphology but also reduce particle sizes, it was suggested that inhibitor molecules like tannic acid, catechin and quercetin from the Gambier extract could interfere with Ca 2þ at the active growth sites of the CaCO 3 micro-crystals to block calcite crystal growth. Nayunigari et al. (2016) reported using curcumin, which is naturally abundant in Turmeric plant (Curcuma longa), copolymerized with malic acid in order to control scaling problems in cooling water treatment. Static jar tests were conducted to evaluate the antiscaling capacity of synthetic poly (curcumin-malic acid) with 7,500 mg/L of Ca 2þ and 10,200 mg/L of SO 4 2À for 16
