# Auricular avulsion injuries: Literature review and management algorithm

CorpusID: 248116357 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad9b5c5a4c026ca5875c92d0e4379c7eef752d33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad9b5c5a4c026ca5875c92d0e4379c7eef752d33)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Classification of ear avulsion injuries
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) The wording and the meaning related to ear amputation vary in the literature and can be very ambiguous. Complete or total amputations are reserved solely for a complete separation of the ear. [6,7] A complete avulsion of a smaller part of the pinna is described as partial avulsion. [3,7] Cases of amputated auricles with narrow pedicle bridges were inconsistently expressed in the literature as incomplete, near-complete, subtotal avulsion, and extended or deep laceration. [3,6,10,11] For the purpose of this review, we are going to describe ear injuries as complete and incomplete avulsion.
## (s5) Microsurgical repair
Number of References: 19

(p5.0) Although it yields the best cosmetic outcome, microvascular replantation of an amputated ear segment may not be an available or appropriate option for all patients. [5,6] This approach should be attempted when the facility can handle microsurgical repair, suitable vessels are identified on initial examination, and the amputated segment is repairable. Furthermore, the patient should be adequately counseled about the possible complications and expected postoperative care. Preferably, venous anastomosis is achieved, but this will not be possible in most cases because of a lack of appropriately sized veins. [4,34,38] The first successful clinical microvascular replantation of a completely amputated ear was reported in 1980 by Pennington et al. using the vein grafts from the superficial temporal vessels. [39] Ever since, many authors have replicated the approach and a variety of technological advancements have been suggested. [4,5,28,40] The most common complication associated with microvascular replantation of the auricle is venous congestion which, in many cases, can lead to complete loss of the ear segment. [4,5] Venous congestion can be dealt with using leach therapy, skin puncture of the replanted segment, and anticoagulation. [4,40] Microsurgical replantation has some disadvantages; it requires longer operative time and hospital stay, multiple blood transfusions, and has a significant failure rate. [4] The average operative time reported by Kind was 6 h, with an average hospital stay of 11.4 days. [16] Nevertheless, the technique offers the best cosmetic outcome when successful revascularization is achieved. [6,16,40] 
## (s6) Other techniques
Number of References: 11

(p6.0) Various other nonmicrosurgical techniques have been described in the literature, including the pocket method, local flap reconstruction, and temporoparietal fascia (TPF) flap reconstruction. Studies showed that techniques utilizing periauricular skin or fascia flaps would result in auricular shrinkage and distortion due to cartilage resorption. [6,9] The principle of the retroauricular pocket was first proposed in 1971 by Mladick et al. [41] The method is a two-step technique that involves removing the skin of the amputated segment followed by re-attachment to the stump and then burial in a retroauricular pocket. In this way, a greater contact surface with the vascular bed is created to enhance the probability of graft "take." A second procedure is required after 28 days to remove the ear from the pocket. [41] The TPF flap is another nonmicrosurgical technique that provides a vascularized flap, based on STA and vein, to an amputated auricle. The skin of the amputated part is first removed, preserving an intact perichondrium, suturing the cartilage to the stump, applying a TPF flap, followed by covering the area with a skin graft. [42,43] Steffen et al. supported renouncing methods using pocket technique and periauricular tissue flaps because of the inevitable cartilaginous distortion. [6,40] In addition, these methods cause additional trauma to the ear remnant and the surrounding tissue, jeopardizing their use for future secondary reconstruction. [6,7,9] 
