# Design of Fieldable Cross-Layer Optimized Network using Embedded Software Defined Radios: Survey and Novel Architecture with Field Trials

CorpusID: 246240861 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fef09969a3bbb45fd9a38cae3f5a6588f8472fa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fef09969a3bbb45fd9a38cae3f5a6588f8472fa)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) In recent years, we have seen explosive growth in the number of wireless devices that have become an inevitable component of our daily lives. This includes everything such as the connected devices in our smart homes, cellular network, the entire concept of Internet-of-Thing (IoT) networks controlling manufacturing, monitoring smart grids, space communications, underwater networks, tactical networks, among others. As we move from 5G (5th Generation) to 6G (6th Generation), the need to optimize the scarce resources is becoming evident and inevitable [1]- [7]. We have also seen a drive towards the software virtualization of these devices and networks to provide much-required flexibility and adaptability to the growing needs of each application. The inability to adapt the network operations depending on varying requirements and dynamic deployed scenarios due to black-box style wireless stack leads to inefficient resource usage and suboptimal performance. Dynamic network control and agile management (user scheduling, radio resources, mobility management) are the envisioned benefits of the next-generation wireless network paradigms such as software-defined networking (SDN), network function virtualization (NFV), and multi-access edge computing (MEC) [8]. Therefore, a reconfigurable radio stack that can be transformed based on diverse applications as well as to adapt to the dynamic wireless conditions is favored.

(p0.1) Traditionally, the strictly layered architecture proposed by the open systems interconnection (OSI) reference model has been the prevalent design for a majority if not all modern networking architectures. This is strict in the sense that they are designed to maintain only a limited interface between the neighboring layers [9]. Realizing the deficiencies in this layered architecture, the cross-layer optimized approach has been proposed over the past decade to maximize the utilization of scarce resources by "erasing" the strict boundaries between various layers of the protocol stack. In other words, any attempt to violate the OSI reference model is considered a cross-layer design [10]. While there are abundant solutions proposed in literature [9], [11]- [14], the majority of it is limited to simulations that may have strong assumptions and/or do not consider all the hardware constraints and rigidness that may be encountered during a real-life deployment. During the next phase of advancement, the advent of software defined radios (SDR) provided the much-needed impetus to this concept providing the flexibility to implement novel crosslayer architectures. This enabled some of these efforts to be extended to hardware-based testbed evaluations. In most cases, these efforts still used one or more dedicated (non-embedded) host computers to implement the solutions which were then connected to SDRs.
