# A Review of Per-and Polyfluorinated Alkyl Substance Impairment of Reproduction

CorpusID: 244501492 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb5f17da269bf657e31703af0e422b6486bb6b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb5f17da269bf657e31703af0e422b6486bb6b1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s1) Long-Chain PFAS
Number of References: 6

(p1.0) Per-and Polyfluorinated Alkyl Substances (PFAS) are synthetic chemicals that contain at least one perfluoroalkyl group (Birru et al., 2021). Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) are the most common PFAS detected in the environment due to their widespread use in manufacturing and chemical stability (Huang and Jaffé, 2019). Both PFOS and PFOA are considered long-chain PFAS because they possess an eightcarbon backbone; their functional groups are sulfonate and carboxylate, respectively (Tsuda, 2016). They possess both hydrophobic and oleophobic properties, along with other chemical characteristics making them useful in many consumer goods (Birru et al., 2021). Their carbon-fluorine bonds, make them resistant to degradation and allow them to persist in the environment and bioaccumulate within living organisms (Zeng et al., 2019;Neagu et al., 2021).
## (s2) Short-Chain PFAS Replacements
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) With the phasing out of long-chain PFAS in the early 2000s, short-chain alternatives (i.e., those with carbon backbones of <7 carbons) began to take their place in industry and the environment (Brendel et al., 2018). These alternatives share similar structures to long-chain PFAS (i.e., heavily fluorinated carbon chains), however, one or more alkylether group is inserted into a shorter fluoroalkyl chain. Short-chain PFAS are also products of long-chain degradation (Li et al., 2020). Shortchain replacements GenX, ADONA, and F53B are widely used. GenX is a trade name for a short-chain PFAS processing technology, of which the hexafluoropropylene oxide (HFPO) dimer acid and its ammonium salt are the major constituents. ADONA (dodecafluoro-3H-4,8-dioxanonanoate) is generally used as a substitute for PFOA in fluoropolymer production (Fromme et al., 2017;Munoz et al., 2019). Chlorinated polyfluoroalkyl ether sulfonate, or F53B, has been produced as an alternative to PFOS and has been adopted as a mist suppressant by several electroplating companies (Du et al., 2016;Munoz et al., 2019;Shi et al., 2019).
## (s10) Short-Chain Reproductive Effects in Animal Models
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) Three recent studies examined reproductive effects of GenX in mice (Blake et al., 2020) and rats (Conley et al., 2019;Conley et al., 2021). Mice treated with GenX had a greater incidence of placental abnormalities while rats showed a greater incidence of reduced maternal thyroid hormone levels and elevated levels of PPAR-regulated gene expression in both maternal and fetal livers (as with PFOA described above). GenX is a developmental toxicant in the rat; those dosed from gestational day 8 through post-natal day 2 (from 1 to 125 mg/kg/day), had increased neonatal mortality and reduced birth weight (Conley et al., 2021).

(p10.1) In zebra fish, F53B was associated with an increase in birth defects, delayed hatchings, and decreased survival rates in embryos (Shi et al., 2017). Conversely, Gaballah et al. (2020) concluded that GenX (and ADONA) was not associated with developmental toxicity in zebrafish.
