# Citation: Dominic, D.; Baidurah, S. Recent Developments in Biological Processing Technology for Palm Oil Mill Effluent Treatment-A Review

CorpusID: 247861731 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52d25e4c5affac33d153d877f24ec09aee179808](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52d25e4c5affac33d153d877f24ec09aee179808)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Factors Affecting Microorganism Activity during the Biological Processing Treatment
Number of References: 22

(p3.0) Figure 1 delineates five bioenvironmental factors affecting microorganism activity during biological processing treatments, namely, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, concentration of nutrients, and toxicity. Temperature is one of the main factors that affects microorganism activity during a biological processing treatment. The regulation of ambient temperature is important because it influences the outcome of a study in terms of treatment stability and performance in biological wastewater [29]. If the temperature is regulated at the optimum level, the growth and metabolism of bacteria at an excellent level can be achieved. Consequently, a high yield of the bioprocess can be obtained as the environment provided to the microorganisms during the biological treatment is fulfilling the demand of the normal biological reaction. Consequently, the temperature will affect the enzymatic reaction of the bacteria. This is because the growth of each species is dominantly determined by the specific temperature of its enzyme. If the temperature is high, the enzymatic reaction of the bacteria will increase. Conversely, the enzymatic reaction of the microbes will reduce when exposed beyond the maximum temperature limit due to the denaturing of the enzyme. Moreover, the enzymatic reaction of the microbes will decrease if the temperature is lowered; however, some microorganisms have the ability to adapt to new living conditions rapidly after the temperature is lifted from the mesophilic range to the thermophilic range while some would just vanish from the system due to their low tolerance to high temperatures [29]. Microorganisms that possess high-temperature tolerance would be able to grow, but significantly, when there is no microbial growth, there will be no soluble COD removal either [30]. Thus, an optimum temperature needs to be regulated to ensure the effective biological treatment of wastewater.

(p3.1) The growth and distributions of microorganisms are influenced by pH during biological degradation. A study conducted by Nwuche et al. (2014) evinced the pH of the medium was found to affect the efficiency of COD removal from the POME [31]. The biological macromolecules activities of the microorganisms depend on the pH value [32] and bacteria have a narrower pH range for growth as compared to fungi [33]. The pH may affect the bacteria's thermodynamic force of chemical reactions involving protons as metabolites and the energetic metabolism, provided that the proton motive force is used to be the main source of electrochemical potential for ATP synthesis [32]. The pH below the normal physiological range tolerated by the bacterial cells leads to bacterial growth inhibition [33]. Similarly, a pH above the normal physiological range tolerated by the bacterial cells will deter the bacterial growth. Moreover, increasing or decreasing the environmental pH by one unit in natural environments will lower the metabolic activity of microbial communities by up to 50% [34]. Withal, the biodegradation of POME using a consortium of microorganisms in unfavourable pH conditions will obstruct the growth of bacteria. This is because the bacteria will be outcompeted by other bacterial species that are more adapted to the pH conditions [34]. The optimum pH is upmost required to maintain the microorganisms' metabolism, physiological mechanisms, and structural integrity during the biological degradation of the POME. Bioenvironmental factors affecting microorganisms' activities during biological processing treatment.

(p3.2) A study conducted by Tajuddin et al. (2004) [35] evinced the growth of the bacteria can be accelerated and the aerobic digestion process period can be shortened, with the increase of oxygen concentration. Liao et al. (2011) [36] also reported that a higher degradation efficiency can be achieved with a higher dissolved oxygen (DO) level. This observation pinpoints that the oxygen supplied to the microorganisms through aeration will allow them to respirate and satisfy the BOD [35]. The aeration would also increase the oxygen concentration and at the same time enhance the microorganisms' growth, thus, reducing the COD concentration [35]. Moreover, the oxygen acts as an agent in the oxidation of undesirable contaminants [35]. As the DO concentration increases, the pollutant removals and biomass production increases [37]. If the concentration of DO is low during the biological treatment, the microbes are unable to degrade the organic matter. A sufficient concentration of DO is required by the microorganisms to degrade the copious organic matter present in the POME.

(p3.3) The ability of microorganisms to grow also depends on the concentration of toxicity and exposure. The toxicity for all compounds is enhanced when the acid concentration increases [38]. The high toxicity will inflict undesirable low microorganisms' growth rates and a reduction in cell concentrations, while the severe growth inhibition of the microorganisms will disrupt the biodegradation of organic matter present in the POME. Most importantly, the target action of the toxicity is dependent on the concentration of the toxic chemical [39]. A surfeit of toxic chemicals will alter the molecular structure of the microorganisms and subsequently revise the mode of action during the biodegradation of organic matter. In lieu, at a minute concentration, the toxic chemical can be utilized as nutrients [39].
## (s6) Ultrasonic Membrane Anaerobic System (UMAS)
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) The ultrasonic membrane anaerobic system (UMAS) is one of the anaerobic digestion treatments applied for the biological treatment of industrial effluent. This system offers a cost-effective method for POME treatment. In this system, an ultrasonic device is applied to reduce the fouling of the membrane and to simultaneously increase the COD removal efficiency [85]. UMAS is one of the alternative methods of treating POME. Based on a study conducted by Abdurahman et al. (2013), a COD removal efficiency of 98.5% with the working volume of 200 L was achieved for 480.3 days of POME treatment by utilizing an UMAS at 30 • C [42]. The study also recorded 98.0% of COD removal efficiency within 20.3 days. There was no significant difference of the COD removal efficiency when both HRTs were compared. This was because the increased biomass concentration in the system subsequently led to the washout phase of the reactor [42]. The 98.6% reduction of COD removal was equivalent to 3000 mg/L of COD content.

(p6.1) The introduction of an ultrasonic device eliminates the presence of membrane fouling in the system and a high COD removal percentage can be achieved in a shorter treatment time [85]. The accumulation of particles at the membrane surface of the UMAS is reduced as the fouling effect is overcome by the presence of ultrasonic waves [85]. For that reason, the COD removal efficiency can be observed to increase gradually throughout the biodegradation of POME. In the case without the application of an ultrasonic device, fouling could build up over time while the COD removal efficiency would decrease. This is because the resistance of the POME flowing over the surface would increase, due to the reduced cross-sectional area of the flow channels. Nonetheless, the COD removal efficiency from the POME by the UMAS is lower compared to the COD removal efficiency from the POME by an UASBR. This is because the longer the HRTs, the greater the fouling effects and along with the biological treatment of POME using a UMAS, huge deposits of solids would form on the membrane surface. Concomitantly, the membrane pores will become blocked and the performance of the UMAS system will be reduced as compared to the UASBR.
## (s10) Biological Treatment of POME Using Bacteria
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) This subtopic highlights the effective biological processing technologies in the presence of bacteria applicable to POME treatment, as delineated in Table 4. Karim et al. (2019) successfully treated POME biologically using Bacillus cereus MF 661,883 with the highest COD removal efficiency at 79.35%, BOD removal efficiency at 72.65%, 0.2 L working volume at 35 • C, and HRTs of six days [117]. The highest COD removal efficiency was recorded for the 50% diluted POME prior to biological treatment by B. cereus MF 661883. The remaining COD and BOD in the treated POME were equivalent to 4859 ± 605 mg/L and 4054 ± 368 mg/L. The POME contained an enormous amount of organic compounds that were primarily composed of cellulolytic material originating from cellulose fruit debris. Cellulase-producing bacteria are needed to degrade cellulose, such as B. cereus; a sporeforming bacteria that has the capability to produce cellulase and perform the degradation of cellulose-based agro-industry waste. Bala et al. (2015) has also reported that cellulolytic activity in a liquid medium could be facilitated by B. cereus due to the ability of B. cereus to excrete enzymes [113]. The COD and BOD in POME reduced significantly after being biologically treated with B. cereus MF 661883. This observation indicated that the bacteria had degraded the cellulolytic material using cellulase by reducing it into sugar. The B. cereus MF 661,883 also utilized carbon from the POME for growth, therefore the abundance of organic compounds in POME that is responsible for the BOD and COD makes POME itself a suitable substrate for the cultivation of the various growth of microorganisms [93]. • C = degree Celsius; HRT = hydraulic retention time; COD = chemical oxygen demand; BOD = biochemical oxygen demand; TSS = total suspended solids; OLR = organic loading rate; L = litre; SVI = sludge volume index; NH 3 -N = ammoniacal nitrogen; ND = no data.
