# A Review of Three-Dimensional Medical Image Visualization

CorpusID: 247983782 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f79ed86667be3d8d6d97955cddbea13ffd8ddca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f79ed86667be3d8d6d97955cddbea13ffd8ddca)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s7) Geometry Methods.
Number of References: 7

(p7.0) Extracting and visualizing representative geometry in the vector field, e.g., streamlines, pathlines, or streaklines, are effective and well-received methods. Geometry methods extract global path features from seeded points in the image [47]. Streamlines are visualized as 3D lines or tubes colored by the desired property, for example, the electrical potentials of electric fields of a torso in Figure 4(v) or a brain with the volume rendering as context in Figure 4(d). The analysis of flow patterns is aided with image slices [48] similar to the case of volume rendering, where a cutting plane is often used. The extraction of global path features is sensitive to seed points; a probing tool facilitates seeding in images [49]. However, automatic seeding remains as a challenging and open question.

(p7.1) Alternative to visualizing 3D geometry as lines, tubes, or surfaces, global path features can be shown with textures. Line integral convolution (LIC) [50] visualizes the vector field by convolving a noise image with a low-pass filter along streamlines extracted from the data image. The LIC method can be extended to curved surfaces [41,51], for example, on the surface of a heart [41] as shown in Figure 4(a) or a torso as shown in Figure 4(b).
## (s8) Feature Methods.
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Feature methods extract features of interests, e.g., sinks, sources, saddle points, vortices, and regions of abnormal flow velocity, in vector fields. We cover specialized methods for medical fluid flows; for other vector field data, we refer the readers to a general overview of texture-based vector field visualization [43]. Extracting vor-tex regions is a vital process in a number of vector medical image visualization techniques [52,53]. Vortex cores in blood vessels are related to blood transportation mechanisms in the aorta and the left ventricle [53]. Vortex regions are extracted for analysis of potential malfunctions [52].

(p8.1) Line predicates [54] are functions used for querying integral lines (streamlines or pathlines) that meet certain properties of interest. These functions are flexible and especially suitable for vector medical images as flow features such as velocity, shapes of lines, and distances to the vessel wall can be encoded. Blood with high residence times [55] and impingement zones of cerebral aneurysms [56] can be extracted with line predicates.
## (s9) 3.2.4.
Number of References: 8

(p9.0) Techniques for Improved Spatial Perception. Spatial perception of path geometry, lines or tubes, is difficult in 3D due to many factors, e.g., cluttering, inaccurate depth perception, occlusion, and inaccurate perception of orientation. Methods that improve spatial perception are available to complement aforementioned visualization techniques (Sections 3.2.1-3.2.3). Particles in the flow field can be drawn as different shaped glyphs [52] or cartoon-styled stretched ellipsoids or short pathlines (pathlets) [49]. Drawing whole extracted lines as illuminated streamlines [57] or with halos [58,59] is another strategy for visualization with enhanced spatial perception.

(p9.1) Global illumination is superior to local illumination in user performance for locating and comparing features with tube/line renderings as shown in a comparative study [60]. Shadows are especially important for depth perception of vector field visualization as they provide depth cues. Directional ambient occlusion [61] or ray tracing for tubes [62] is able to create shadow effects for vector field data or field lines extracted from tensor fields (Figures 5(c) and 5(d)).
## (s10) Tensor Image Visualization.
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) Tensor image visualization techniques concern medical images with the attribute(s) s of equation (1) as tensors-here, we consider only secondorder tensors [65], i.e., matrices, and most applications in medicine assume symmetric matrices. DTI captures the Figure 4: Vector field visualization of medical images. The LIC method is used to visualize (a) a simulation of the bioelectric field of the heart [41]. ©2008 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from Li et al. [41]. Streamlines are visualized as colored lines in bioelectric field simulations in (b) a torso (reprinted, with permission, from the SCI Institute). The visualization of a brain in (c) applies LIC with isosurfacing for an MRI scan along with volume rendering of a functional MRI (fMRI) [42]. ©2007 SPIE. Reprinted, with permission, from Schafhitzel et al. [42]. 6 Health Data Science diffusion information of water molecules in tissues as symmetric matrices at each point. In medicine, clinical experts often use the term diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) to refer to the isotropic diffusion map-a scalar measurement of DTI.
## (s20) 12
Number of References: 8

(p20.0) Health Data Science methods for bioelectric fields problems can be found in a review, where related visualization techniques are also discussed [44]. Comparative visualization is important for understanding an ensemble of simulation runs and comparing between patients or different measures of medical images. Scalar image ensembles, for example, brain MR atlas data (https://www.oasis-brains.org/), are a common form of ensemble medical image data. Direct visualization of image members in 2D and 3D is not effective due to occlusion, and quantitative comparison is not feasible in this way either. One possible solution is to reduce the dimensionality of image data to one (1D) with space-filing curves [135,137,138]. Data-driven space-filling curves [135] better preserve spatial coherency in the resulting 1D representation than static curves [137,138], which potentially break spatially coherent features into distant 1D fragments. The method is applied for visualizing brain MRI atlas and an ensemble of 3D myocardial ischemia simulations and could potentially be used for diagnosis or research by finding anomalies of subjects through comparison to the main trends. Comparative visualization of stress tensors is available for analyzing rupture risks of cerebral aneurysms based on computational fluid dynamic simulations [134]. With several glyph designs, the method supports the comparison of local stress tensors on the inner and outer vessel walls. Medical experts consider that this method introduces the often overlooked wall structure information for rupture assessment and could contribute to the development of a comprehensive risk factor of aneurysms in the future.
