# Citation: Epple A Review on the Possibilities and Challenges of Today's Soil and Soil Surface Assessment Techniques in the

CorpusID: 248971567 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e4cdc0da91708d7ec3670c964d1ebf9e282b0ae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e4cdc0da91708d7ec3670c964d1ebf9e282b0ae)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) Process-Based Soil Erosion Models
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) Models are simplifications of reality and can, by definition, never fully represent the processes of the real world. Because these models can only come close to reality, researchers are looking for a balance between modelling and reality. Depending on their area of spe-Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 2468 4 of 23 ciality, models feature different advantages and limitations. With improving knowledge, computing power and observational technologies, these limitations are constantly shifting towards models that are more realistic while also showing limits regarding reality. Where to exactly draw this line poses an almost philosophical question, answerable only by each individual model. In comparison to empirical models, process-based soil erosion models are more demanding regarding their input data, computing requirement and calibration necessity, and in general are less user-friendly. However, due to physically-based descriptions of soil erosion and sediment transport, the models offer an understanding and reproducibility of the occurring processes [23]. Such models allow for an isolated consideration of individual components of soil erosion processes as well as a better understanding of the relationship between cause and impact within soil erosion research [19]. While these models are process-oriented, they still contain empirical parts based on laboratory and site-specific field experiments. Even though they can be extrapolated to other scales, this aspect must still be treated with care [27].
## (s8) Parameterization Due to Developments in Resolution
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Improved resolutions on ever larger areas and on temporal scales offer new information and fields of application. Such developments make satellite data more and more attractive. Using digital soil mapping data from, e.g., Sentinel 1, Sentinel 2 and Landsat 8, can serve as covariates to predict soil properties. They offer a great spectrum of information on, e.g., soil organic carbon, soil total nitrogen, clay content of the soil and the "Normalized Difference Vegetation Index", with spatial resolutions up to 10 m [80][81][82]. Such information, which has been constantly improving over the last few decades, offer us input data today, with resolutions that are especially interesting to model applications covering medium to large areas. While they are able to generate information on large scales with revisiting times of a few days, the resolutions available in the scope of metres only enable information on erosional processes on larger scales.
