# materials A Review of Irradiation Damage and Effects in α-Uranium

CorpusID: 249633229 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65bf7ccf4955dacc038f6714a932487bc9ac01c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65bf7ccf4955dacc038f6714a932487bc9ac01c3)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics, Medicine, Engineering

## (s2) Crystallography and Fundamental Defect Kinetics
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) The α phase of uranium consists of corrugated sheets of atoms in a highly asymmetrical face-centered orthorhombic structure [6]. Beeler et al. calculated the lattice constants of α-U with a = 2.793 Å, b = 5.849 Å, c = 4.894 Å, as seen in Figure 1a [7]. The structure of α-U is made up of close-packed corrugated planes of atoms, including planes parallel to the densely packed flat (010) plane and planes parallel to the [100] axis. The interatomic distances of corrugated planes (e.g., line segments ab = 2.70 and ad = 2.80 Å in Figure 1b) are smaller than interatomic distances between the corrugated planes (e.g., line segment ak = 3.25 and dk = 3.34 Å in Figure 1b) [8]. This corrugated structure is responsible for the anisotropy of physical properties of α-U. There is only one type of lattice site, tetrahedral interstitial site, pentahedron site, and single vacancy site. However, there exist several types of self-interstitial configurations (eight tetrahedral, eight pentahedral pyramidal and four octahedral interstitial sites). The most stable configuration is schematically shown in Figure 1b, where atom X is in the interstice of a pentahedron.  [7], 2022, Elsevier). (b) schematic structure of α-U and the most stable self-interstitial configuration (reprinted and adapted with permission from [8], 2022, IOP publishing, Ltd).
## (s3) Electronic Properties
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) The electronic structure of uranium is dominated by 5f electron states that form narrow bands that tend to bond the atoms in complex and distorted ways. DFT results reveal that 5f orbitals are active in the chemical bonding for uranium [11]. The behavior of 5f electrons of uranium is observed to be similar to that of the d orbital electrons in the transition elements [12]. Compared with the bulk atoms, the deficit of atoms near the uranium surface breaks the balance between the delocalization and localization of 5f electrons, leading to the electrons changing from delocalized to localized. As the electrons change from delocalized to localized, the arrangement of the surface atoms is interrupted and the total energy of the surface increases. This principally leads to a high surface energy, in turn leading to a high affinity for hydrogen, oxygen and carbon [11,13].

(p3.1) The research on the electronic properties of α-U was mainly motivated by the anomalous electronic configuration of α-U [5] and the discovery of superconductivity in α-U [14]. A long-standing debate on the description of the 5f elements involved whether they should be called actinides, in which the 5f shell was progressively filled, or thorides, in which the 6d shell progressively filled. From the chemical point of view, this question was effectively settled by the production of the heavier elements Np and Pu and the early study of their spectroscopic properties, revealing the actinide nature of α-U. Superconductivity was discovered in α-U in 1942 by Aschermann and Justin and was first reported by Mott [14]. However, the existence of intrinsic superconductivity in α-U (i.e., superconductivity of α-U in the pure undoped state) is a topic of discussion even today. Multiple investigations in the 1950s found a range of superconductivity transition temperatures [5] 
## (s4) Electronic Properties
Number of References: 13

(p4.0) The electronic structure of uranium is dominated by 5f electron states that form narrow bands that tend to bond the atoms in complex and distorted ways. DFT results reveal that 5f orbitals are active in the chemical bonding for uranium [11]. The behavior of 5f electrons of uranium is observed to be similar to that of the d orbital electrons in the transition elements [12]. Compared with the bulk atoms, the deficit of atoms near the uranium surface breaks the balance between the delocalization and localization of 5f electrons, leading to the electrons changing from delocalized to localized. As the electrons change from delocalized to localized, the arrangement of the surface atoms is interrupted and the total energy of the surface increases. This principally leads to a high surface energy, in turn leading to a high affinity for hydrogen, oxygen and carbon [11,13].

(p4.1) The research on the electronic properties of α-U was mainly motivated by the anomalous electronic configuration of α-U [5] and the discovery of superconductivity in α-U [14]. A long-standing debate on the description of the 5f elements involved whether they should be called actinides, in which the 5f shell was progressively filled, or thorides, in which the 6d shell progressively filled. From the chemical point of view, this question was effectively settled by the production of the heavier elements Np and Pu and the early study of their spectroscopic properties, revealing the actinide nature of α-U. Superconductivity was discovered in α-U in 1942 by Aschermann and Justin and was first reported by Mott [14]. However, the existence of intrinsic superconductivity in α-U (i.e., superconductivity of α-U in the pure undoped state) is a topic of discussion even today. Multiple investigations in the 1950s found a range of superconductivity transition temperatures [5] depending on the purity of the samples. Conversely, several late 1960s studies indicated the possibility of superconductivity being the result of grain-boundary filamentary sheathes rather than bulk superconductivity, indicating that superconductivity is not intrinsic to α-U [15]. In fact, Geballe et al. [16] suggested that the variations in superconductive properties were correlated to the intergranular strains resulting from anisotropic expansion in α-U.

(p4.2) Three phase transitions occur in α-U below 43 K due to the presence of charge density waves and were postulated to affect the intrinsic superconductivity of α-U [17]. Charge density waves (CDW) occur when there is a spatial modulation of the electron density [18]. This CDW is typically associated with a mass density wave of the positively charged ions which make up the crystal lattice. The possibility of CDW formation is enhanced in lowerdimensional systems (1D and 2D materials) because the simple structures involved lead to a high probability of favorable Fermi surface nesting (i.e., the shifting and coincidence of two Fermi surfaces that are required for CDW formation). In bulk materials, CDW phenomena are rather rare because of the unlikelihood of Fermi surface nesting. Uranium is the only element in the periodic table to exhibit a phase transition to CDW states at ambient pressure. The three phase transitions can be seen as a drastic change in the derivative of the electric resistivity vs. temperature [18].
