# R E V I E W Is Nigella sativa an Effective Bodyweight Lowering Agent and a Mitigator of Obesity Risk? A Literature Review

CorpusID: 250463039 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/353404610fdc3309cf4933fe81c3dc80f1878d97](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/353404610fdc3309cf4933fe81c3dc80f1878d97)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) 501
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Most of the analysed studies in this review reported the statistical significance and the safety of the weight-lowering effect of NS. However, one might argue the clinical significance of NS weight-lowering effect, but we can further illustrate that NS-weight lowering effect is also clinically significant based on the relatively large effect size of 0.6 for NS bodyweight-lowering and 0.4 for waist circumference reduction as reported by Safi et al 18 as well as the frequently and repeatedly demonstrated metabolic effect of NS on lowering blood lipids including triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL, blood glucose and HbA1C and the positive influence on HDL and insulin resistance. 23,29 In the study performed by Mostafa et al, 19 NS administration for 12 weeks was superior to metformin or diet restriction in modifying total cholesterol, LDL, and triglycerides. Moreover, the clinical significance of NS-weight lowering effect can also be augmented by lifestyle modifications such as caloric restriction and exercise training because evidence has been shown that the combined NS administration and lifestyle changes yielded better effect than each of these interventions separately. 27,42 
## (s6) Mechanisms of NS-Induced Bodyweight Reduction
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) Most of the retrieved literature reflecting the weight reduction effect of NS lacks the explanation and the evidence of the exact mechanism of this effect. Some studies proposed an anorexic effect of NS and aimed to estimate the food intake or appetite modifications. Mahdavi et al, 26 Farhangi et al, 25 and Safi et al 18 failed to demonstrate any difference in the total caloric intake of their NS-treated subjects compared to the control group, albeit Safi et al showed a reduction in appetite sensation using a visual scale of appetite before and after meals. On the other hand, Le et al 36 showed a significant reduction in food intake by rats fed with NS compared to control rats. Despite these efforts to estimate the caloric intake or the changes in the appetite, there is a lack of exploration of the appetite regulation pathways and the influence of multiple peptides on the satiety and hunger centers of the hypothalamus. 43 Few studies only, such as Moustafa et al 23 
