# A review of fish diversity, decline drivers, and management of the Tanguar Haor ecosystem: A globally recognized Ramsar site in Bangladesh

CorpusID: 253987061 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2111567e5cc427d9d5806060da0ab5017996aa2c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2111567e5cc427d9d5806060da0ab5017996aa2c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s4) Temperature
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The water temperature of the TH varied from 22.4 C to 31.0 C with an annual mean around 26.0 C (Bhuiyan et al., 2019(Bhuiyan et al., , 2020. Solayman et al. (2018) determined the temperature ranged from 27.2 C to 29.4 C with a mean value of 28.28 C from Rupaboi beel, Muinsakhali beel, Chatrar beel, Boddof beel, and Kolma beel of the haor. Similarly, Mamun et al. (2013) found 27.98 C as the mean value of water temperature and recorded the minimum value 27.8 C and the maximum value 28.1 C.
## (s5) pH variation
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) The water pH value of the haor normally fluctuates between 8.1 and 9.7 from December to March and 7.5-7.7 from April to September (Bhuiyan et al., 2020). However, the study of Bhuiyan et al. (2019) recorded the pH values range between 7.2 and 9.7 in the Rauar area of TH throughout the year. Solayman et al. (2018) found the average pH value ranges from 7.3 to 8.7, while Mamun et al. (2013) reported that the average value spans from 6.9 to 7.6. However, the average water pH value in TH is suitable for survival of fish as the pH value 6.5 to 8.5 is considered normal for fisheries (ECR, 1997). Solayman et al. (2018) recorded the average DO content ranged from 4.27 mg/l to 8.56 mg/l. Mamun et al. (2013) discovered 5.5 mg/l as the peak DO value, 4.5 mg/l as the lowest DO value, and 5.02 mg/l as the mean DO value. Surface water with a DO value of 5 mg/l or higher is favorable for fisheries (ECR, 1997) which supports the diversified fisheries of TH.
## (s7) Total dissolved solid (TDS)
Number of References: 11

(p7.0) Compared to other waterbodies in Bangladesh, TH has a relatively low TDS (mean ¼ 63.5 mg/l). The TDS value ranges from 51 to 85 mg/l in Rauar area and from 58 to 77 mg/l in watch tower area of TH throughout the year (Bhuiyan et al., 2019(Bhuiyan et al., , 2020. However, Mamun et al. (2013) and Solayman et al. (2018) found the ranges from 731 to 1020 mg/l and 670-1036 mg/l, respectively. The authors of both pieces of research opined that the higher TDS value of water may be ascribed to the high dissolved ion content of upstream water and domestic contaminants (Mamun et al., 2013;Solayman et al., 2018). Bhuiyan et al. (2020) measured and recorded the mean electrical conductivity of TH water at 80.75 μS/cm. However, the conductivity value  fluctuates from 60 to 110 μS/cm throughout the year (Bhuiyan et al., 2019). On the other hand, the study from Mamun et al. (2013) Mamun et al. (2013) and Solayman et al. (2018) with the values found in other waterbodies.
## (s10) Nutrient content
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) The nutrient profile analysis is an important part to think about the productivity of any waterbody, although the TH was found to be deficient in nutrients. Different studies have found that the soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP) levels, soluble reactive silicate (SRS) levels, NO 3 -N levels and NH 4 þ levels were ranges from 9.76 to 30.05 μg/l, 4.45-16.14 mg/l, 0.25-0.48 mg/l and 270-1380 μg/l, respectively, at the watch tower area of the haor (Bhuiyan et al., 2020). However, the highest concentrations of SRP (30.05 μg/l) SRS (16.14 mg/l), and NH4þ (1380 μg/l) were observed in September, March, and April, respectively (Bhuiyan et al., 2020). In the Rauar area of TH, SRP, SRS, NO 3 -N, and NH 4 þ concentrations ranged from 5.43 to 36.43 μg/l, 4-14.58 mg/l, 0.06-0.31 mg/l, and 238-1230 μg/l, respectively (Bhuiyan et al., 2019).

(p10.1) Highest amounts of NH 4 þ (905 and 1230 μg/l) was found during winter season. According to Bhuiyan et al. (2019), the highest concentration of NH 4 þ in winter season could be due to a presence of higher population of migratory birds during that time. The Watch Tower area has a higher concentration of vital nutrients, such as SRP, NO 3 -N, SRS, and NH 4 þ , than the Rauar area (Bhuiyan et al., 2020).
## (s24) Income determinants of the fishermen in haor region
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) The income of the fishermen can be affected by several factors, such as the fish catch, age of fishermen, and training program provided in the area (Ahmed et al., 2021). To analyze these factors, Tikadar et al. (2022) carried out a multiple linear regression model in haor area and a summary of that finding is presented in Table 9. The results show that age of the fishermen, education rate, training program and NGO membership of the fishermen influence their income positively and significantly. Older fishermen tend to have greater experience than the younger. They catch more fish because they are well-versed in the ecology of the floodplains. Additionally, they have better market knowledge, which helps them negotiate a higher price for the fish.
