# The versatile role of Serpina3c in physiological and pathological processes: a review of recent studies

CorpusID: 258835180 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67404ec482e00617561a65cf3d2d08f8766b9ff7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67404ec482e00617561a65cf3d2d08f8766b9ff7)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s9) Atherosclerosis of arteries
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Atherosclerosis is characterized by chronic inflammation, the accumulation of lipids in plaques, and eventually leads to myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke (92). Abnormal proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is an important part of the pathological process of atherosclerosis. With the accumulation of inflammatory factors, growth factors, cytokines and vasoactive substances to the pathological level, the expression of cell proliferation-related proteins in VSMCs increased, resulting in excessive proliferation of VSMCs, then neointima and plaques are formed (92). Many studies have shown that thrombin plays an important role in atherosclerosis caused by abnormal proliferation and migration of VSMCs (93). It has been reported that some serpins can be used as thrombin inhibitors to inhibit blood coagulation (94). For example, both SerpinD1, SerpinC1 and SerpinE2 can participate in physiological processes such as blood coagulation, fibrinolysis and inflammation by inhibiting thrombin (13). Recently, researchers have The beneficial roles of Serpina3c in NAFLD. In normal liver, Serpina3c can inhibit Wnt/b-catenin signal pathway, promotes ubiquitination-mediated degradation of b-catenin, inhibits JNK/NF-kB signal pathway, reduces the expression of inflammatory cytokines interleukin 18 (IL-18), MCP-1, TNFa, and decreases the expression level of intercellular adhesion molecule 1(ICAM-1) and TGF-b. These will reduce liver inflammation and fibrosis. However, in the NAFLD livers of Apoe and Serpina3c double knockout mice fed with HFD, due to the lack of Serpina3c, Wnt/b-catenin signal pathway could not be inhibited, making the entry of b-catenin into the nuclei, which interacts with Foxo-1 to activate TLR4 transcription. Increased expression of TLR4, and activation of downstream receptor interaction protein 3 (RIP3) and phosphorylation mixed lineage kinase domain-like pseudokinase (MLKL) will then induce hepatocyte necroptosis. The deletion of Serpina3c leads to the activation of JNK/NF-kB signal pathway and the increase of the expression of ICAM-1 and TGF-b. The content of extracellular matrix (ECM) will be increased. Together, these lead to more severe inflammation and fibrosis in the liver. (Created with BioRender.com).
