# Academic Editors: Codrina Ancuta medicina Review Depression in Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Narrative Review-Diagnostic Challenges, Pathogenic Mechanisms and Effects

CorpusID: 253538941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02698c0526d927c8289e4ccabd81d3a98418e4df](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02698c0526d927c8289e4ccabd81d3a98418e4df)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s10) Effect of Inflammation on Neurotransmission
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) It is a well-known fact that low serotonin levels are correlated with depressive symptoms [31]. Inflammation has been shown to decrease serotonin availability within the CNS or the brainstem through either lack of its precursor, tryptophan, or increased serotonin transporter activity. In inflammatory diseases, TNFα expression is increased, leading to high levels of the serotonin transporter, which lowers serotonin levels in the brainstem. As mentioned above, TNFα levels are increased in RA patients [17].

(p10.1) Moreover, in immune-mediated inflammation, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) is upregulated and is an enzyme that leads to the breakdown of tryptophan. The breakdown products of tryptophan can have both neuroprotective and neurotoxic effects. The ratio of breakdown products is skewed in inflammatory conditions towards neurotoxic effects. This pattern correlates with mood disorders [17]. In inflammation, the IDO pathway is also upregulated in mature dendritic cells, leading to reverse signaling to regulatory T-cells contributing to autoimmunity [32].

(p10.2) Another important molecule for neurotransmission and neuroprotection is brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Inflammation has been shown to decrease its levels and its effects on neurogenesis. RA animal models showed that these changes are associated with depression [33]. Furthermore, in rat models, anti-TNF medication DMARDs like etanercept have been shown to increase hippocampal BDNF [34].
## (s12) Effects of Depression in RA Patients
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Depression in patients with RA is associated with poor long-term outcomes. Multiple studies have shown that depression in RA is associated with increased pain, fatigue, and physical disability. This alters treatment compliance, causes more comorbidities, and leads to higher mortality, partly through increased suicide risk. Depression in RA increases health service utilization and healthcare costs directly through hospitalization, but also indirectly through loss of work productivity. It also considerably decreases quality of life (QoL) for RA patients, a fact that is reflected in all domains of QoL questionnaires [41]. Additionally, psychological distress may impact health outcomes by influencing other health behaviors alongside medication adherence, such as smoking and physical activity. Reduced levels of physical activity can result in deconditioning, loss of natural endorphins, and increased pain [13].
