# Exploring mHealth applications for self-management of chronic low back pain: A survey of features and benefits

CorpusID: 258931224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63642d5da06142eeb9709088329e23e0095a2ae1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63642d5da06142eeb9709088329e23e0095a2ae1)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s7) Health professionals' viewpoint
Number of References: 12

(p7.0) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p7.1) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.

(p7.2) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p7.3) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.
## (s9) Self-management, Rehabilitation
Number of References: 18

(p9.0) Agnew et al. [69] Different mHealth applications (review paper)

(p9.1) Patient-physician partnership Adherence, Self-management Itoh et al. [70] "Secaide" application Physical activity, Education/advice Pain reduction Lewkowicz et al. [71] Different mHealth applications (review paper)

(p9.2) Personalization and customization, Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural change Pain reduction, Adherence, Self-management Hogan et al. [72] "The Veterans Health Administration Pain Coach" application Activity tracking, Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural change, Diary/self-assessment Pain reduction, Self-assessment "ACBSC" application Physical activity, Education/advice Self-management, Feeling good/positive/in control Browne et al. [80] "PainNavigator" application Education/advice, Goal setting, Diary/self-assessment Self-management, Rehabilitation management support as part of the regular treatment programs provided by physiotherapists, postural exercise therapists, and other healthcare providers. It should also include developing tools to assist healthcare providers in assessing patients' self-management skills and facilitating the patient-physician partnership. Fu et al. [84] undertook a systematic review and realized that a partnership between patients and health professionals might support patients to self-manage their CLBP. They identified seven factors that affect patient-professional partnerships: communication, mutual understanding, roles of health professionals, information delivery, patients' involvement, individualized care, and healthcare service. Chala et al. [85] investigated the perception and conceptualizing of health professionals (medical doctors and physiotherapists) toward self-management for people with CLBP in Ethiopia. They found that self-management is a new concept for many of them, and they lack the competencies to provide self-management support for people with CLBP. Many of the support methods they proposed mainly focused on improving impairments rather than helping patients make self-efficacy skills. Therefore, there is a need to improve health professionals' self-management support competencies through training.

(p9.3) Guardado et al. [14] conducted qualitative research by interviewing 23 healthcare professionals from three countries with good healthcare quality indicators such as Finland, Spain, and Switzerland. They showed that more than half of healthcare professionals considered self-management mHealth solutions, and the data derived from them could benefit patients and healthcare professionals. They believed that the advantages of using patient-generated health data through activity tracking include knowing more about patient behaviours and activities, which could help healthcare professionals better understand factors affecting patients' health and how treatment could be adapted and thereby facilitate the patient-physician partnership. Kong et al. [86] investigated the perception and current use of 186 physicians in the USA toward mHealth solutions. More than half of them were willing to discuss mHealth solutions with patients. They showed that proof of accuracy and precision of collected biometrics through tracking and sensors is the most crucial metric that increases the likelihood of implementing information gathered by the mHealth solutions in their practice, e.g., to employ patients to better follow through in behavioural change and medication adherence.
## (s13) Application search strategy
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.

(p13.1) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.
## (s22) Neutral features
Number of References: 46

(p22.0) Slade et al. [102] conducted a review to identify and synthesize qualitative empirical studies investigating beliefs about exercise therapy for people with CLBP. They found that participants are likely to prefer and participate in exercise or training programs and activities designed to consider their preferences, circumstances, fitness levels, and exercise experiences. However, they would prefer supervised exercise over advice to exercise. People feel encouraged to exercise when they have regular contact with a healthcare professional and feel understood. In line with [32,102], our analysis also shows that researchers, medical experts, and patients with CLBP expect patients to interact with their physicians using mHealth solutions. At the same time, users do not usually find such interaction available. Other studies have also found that users expect to interact with their physicians using mHealth applications, though few applications offer the "patient-physician partnership" feature [69,72]. The reason could be inadequate knowledge and skills from application creators and a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators.

(p22.1) To make this happen, developers need to work with health professionals and ensure that mHealth applications are integrated into clinical practice. However, many challenges lead to a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators and also a lack of interaction between health professionals and patients. The reasons include healthcare professionals' lack of knowledge and confidence in using mHealth solutions [69,103], a lack of existing technology [57], difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to switching troubles [100], and lack of interest [46]. There are other reasons beyond the interest and knowledge of health professionals, like concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concerns, compatibility with the workflow [100], lack of trustworthy sources of informative mHealth applications [56], legal barriers, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and standards [100].

(p22.2) Educating health professionals makes them familiar with mHealth solutions. It assists them in the treatment process, like using patients' data for treatment, prescribing, and having partnerships through applications to help patients to be treated easier by self-managing their pain. It could benefit health professionals' businesses as well. A solution to familiarise health professionals with mHealth technologies, especially more advanced features of mHealth like artificial intelligence [104] is teaching mHealth technologies in medical education [105]. However, including mHealth courses in the medical curriculum might take time to become widespread worldwide.

(p22.3) Regular self-monitoring using mHealth applications can provide physicians with patients' data and leads to a better understanding of patients with chronic pain and improve treatment adherence [74]. Younger physicians at a lower professional rank, who tend to be more open to new technologies, are more likely to recommend mHealth solutions [72]. In countries where mHealth solutions are still in their infancy, it may be more effective to focus on the benefits of mHealth solutions for physicians themselves rather than the benefits for patients to increase adoption [106]. Future research and development of mHealth applications for CLBP should consider a scientific evidence base and engage in a multidisciplinary approach between application developers, healthcare professionals, and patients [16]. The future mHealth should also focus more on prevention and early disease detection rather than on remote assessment and treatment of patients [46].

(p22.4) Privacy concerns are also a significant barrier to the adoption of mHealth solutions, especially among individuals who have not used them before [32,107]. To address this issue, independent authorities should certify applications to assure healthcare professionals of their ethical and data security practices. In addition, technical problems such as interoperability between data collection and medical records need to be addressed to limit the disruption to clinical work [108]. Clinical validation of mHealth solutions on a larger scale, rather than just pilot studies, is also needed to gain acceptance from patients and healthcare professionals.
## (s23) The least significant features
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) Few applications provide the "Artificial intelligence" feature, and its benefit score is also low. According to Esmaeilzadeh et al. [110], who studied how patients perceive the benefits, risks, and use of AI clinical applications for their healthcare, incompatibility with instrumental, technical, ethical, or regulatory values can be a reason for rejecting AI applications in healthcare. Thus, various risks are still associated with implementing AI applications in diagnostics and treatment recommendations for patients with both acute and chronic illnesses. Before the widespread roll-out of AI, more research is needed to identify the challenges that may raise concerns about implementing and using AI applications. Regulatory agencies should establish normative standards and evaluation guidelines for implementing AI in healthcare in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
## (s47) Health professionals' viewpoint
Number of References: 12

(p47.0) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p47.1) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.

(p47.2) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p47.3) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.
## (s49) Self-management, Rehabilitation
Number of References: 18

(p49.0) Agnew et al. [69] Different mHealth applications (review paper)

(p49.1) Patient-physician partnership Adherence, Self-management Itoh et al. [70] "Secaide" application Physical activity, Education/advice Pain reduction Lewkowicz et al. [71] Different mHealth applications (review paper)

(p49.2) Personalization and customization, Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural change Pain reduction, Adherence, Self-management Hogan et al. [72] "The Veterans Health Administration Pain Coach" application Activity tracking, Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural change, Diary/self-assessment Pain reduction, Self-assessment "ACBSC" application Physical activity, Education/advice Self-management, Feeling good/positive/in control Browne et al. [80] "PainNavigator" application Education/advice, Goal setting, Diary/self-assessment Self-management, Rehabilitation management support as part of the regular treatment programs provided by physiotherapists, postural exercise therapists, and other healthcare providers. It should also include developing tools to assist healthcare providers in assessing patients' self-management skills and facilitating the patient-physician partnership. Fu et al. [84] undertook a systematic review and realized that a partnership between patients and health professionals might support patients to self-manage their CLBP. They identified seven factors that affect patient-professional partnerships: communication, mutual understanding, roles of health professionals, information delivery, patients' involvement, individualized care, and healthcare service. Chala et al. [85] investigated the perception and conceptualizing of health professionals (medical doctors and physiotherapists) toward self-management for people with CLBP in Ethiopia. They found that self-management is a new concept for many of them, and they lack the competencies to provide self-management support for people with CLBP. Many of the support methods they proposed mainly focused on improving impairments rather than helping patients make self-efficacy skills. Therefore, there is a need to improve health professionals' self-management support competencies through training.

(p49.3) Guardado et al. [14] conducted qualitative research by interviewing 23 healthcare professionals from three countries with good healthcare quality indicators such as Finland, Spain, and Switzerland. They showed that more than half of healthcare professionals considered self-management mHealth solutions, and the data derived from them could benefit patients and healthcare professionals. They believed that the advantages of using patient-generated health data through activity tracking include knowing more about patient behaviours and activities, which could help healthcare professionals better understand factors affecting patients' health and how treatment could be adapted and thereby facilitate the patient-physician partnership. Kong et al. [86] investigated the perception and current use of 186 physicians in the USA toward mHealth solutions. More than half of them were willing to discuss mHealth solutions with patients. They showed that proof of accuracy and precision of collected biometrics through tracking and sensors is the most crucial metric that increases the likelihood of implementing information gathered by the mHealth solutions in their practice, e.g., to employ patients to better follow through in behavioural change and medication adherence.
## (s53) Application search strategy
Number of References: 4

(p53.0) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.

(p53.1) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.
## (s62) Neutral features
Number of References: 46

(p62.0) Slade et al. [102] conducted a review to identify and synthesize qualitative empirical studies investigating beliefs about exercise therapy for people with CLBP. They found that participants are likely to prefer and participate in exercise or training programs and activities designed to consider their preferences, circumstances, fitness levels, and exercise experiences. However, they would prefer supervised exercise over advice to exercise. People feel encouraged to exercise when they have regular contact with a healthcare professional and feel understood. In line with [32,102], our analysis also shows that researchers, medical experts, and patients with CLBP expect patients to interact with their physicians using mHealth solutions. At the same time, users do not usually find such interaction available. Other studies have also found that users expect to interact with their physicians using mHealth applications, though few applications offer the "patient-physician partnership" feature [69,72]. The reason could be inadequate knowledge and skills from application creators and a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators.

(p62.1) To make this happen, developers need to work with health professionals and ensure that mHealth applications are integrated into clinical practice. However, many challenges lead to a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators and also a lack of interaction between health professionals and patients. The reasons include healthcare professionals' lack of knowledge and confidence in using mHealth solutions [69,103], a lack of existing technology [57], difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to switching troubles [100], and lack of interest [46]. There are other reasons beyond the interest and knowledge of health professionals, like concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concerns, compatibility with the workflow [100], lack of trustworthy sources of informative mHealth applications [56], legal barriers, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and standards [100].

(p62.2) Educating health professionals makes them familiar with mHealth solutions. It assists them in the treatment process, like using patients' data for treatment, prescribing, and having partnerships through applications to help patients to be treated easier by self-managing their pain. It could benefit health professionals' businesses as well. A solution to familiarise health professionals with mHealth technologies, especially more advanced features of mHealth like artificial intelligence [104] is teaching mHealth technologies in medical education [105]. However, including mHealth courses in the medical curriculum might take time to become widespread worldwide.

(p62.3) Regular self-monitoring using mHealth applications can provide physicians with patients' data and leads to a better understanding of patients with chronic pain and improve treatment adherence [74]. Younger physicians at a lower professional rank, who tend to be more open to new technologies, are more likely to recommend mHealth solutions [72]. In countries where mHealth solutions are still in their infancy, it may be more effective to focus on the benefits of mHealth solutions for physicians themselves rather than the benefits for patients to increase adoption [106]. Future research and development of mHealth applications for CLBP should consider a scientific evidence base and engage in a multidisciplinary approach between application developers, healthcare professionals, and patients [16]. The future mHealth should also focus more on prevention and early disease detection rather than on remote assessment and treatment of patients [46].

(p62.4) Privacy concerns are also a significant barrier to the adoption of mHealth solutions, especially among individuals who have not used them before [32,107]. To address this issue, independent authorities should certify applications to assure healthcare professionals of their ethical and data security practices. In addition, technical problems such as interoperability between data collection and medical records need to be addressed to limit the disruption to clinical work [108]. Clinical validation of mHealth solutions on a larger scale, rather than just pilot studies, is also needed to gain acceptance from patients and healthcare professionals.
## (s63) The least significant features
Number of References: 2

(p63.0) Few applications provide the "Artificial intelligence" feature, and its benefit score is also low. According to Esmaeilzadeh et al. [110], who studied how patients perceive the benefits, risks, and use of AI clinical applications for their healthcare, incompatibility with instrumental, technical, ethical, or regulatory values can be a reason for rejecting AI applications in healthcare. Thus, various risks are still associated with implementing AI applications in diagnostics and treatment recommendations for patients with both acute and chronic illnesses. Before the widespread roll-out of AI, more research is needed to identify the challenges that may raise concerns about implementing and using AI applications. Regulatory agencies should establish normative standards and evaluation guidelines for implementing AI in healthcare in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
