# Assessing the impact of caregiving on informal caregivers of adults with a mental disorder in OECD countries: A systematic literature review of concepts and their respective questionnaires

CorpusID: 250357218 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bcc377261e8560dc9e04015a522e3f6aa6924fc7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bcc377261e8560dc9e04015a522e3f6aa6924fc7)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s19) Methodological limitations
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) There are some limitations that should be explored. Firstly, the paper should be scrutinized for categorical bias. Categorical bias could have occurred during the generation of the concept clusters because the process required a degree of personal interpretation. Secondly, the transferability of our findings to other cultural settings is limited, due to the exclusion of non-English publications and non-OECD research. The cultural norms and perceptions concerning informal caregiving has been found to vary greatly across countries and could have impacted our identification of concepts [19]. Thirdly, studies and questionnaires could not be identified for some mental disorders. These factors may have affected the selection of concepts and their respective operationalization. Lastly, the generalizability of our study was limited to adult caregivers and care recipients. The age of the care recipient and caregiver is a factor that not only alters the caregiving experience, but also plays a role in the impact of caregiving. For example, concepts such as parentification are not relevant for adults and was not included in our concept list but should be considered for minors [218].
