# Hormonal and environmental signals guiding stomatal development Stomatal development-a brief overview

CorpusID: 255829484 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1d3f3c2dda5647fca6f6bc5eaeb85f520c06f0a1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1d3f3c2dda5647fca6f6bc5eaeb85f520c06f0a1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Stomatal development-a brief overview
Number of References: 44

(p0.0) Stomata are micropores on the epidermis of above ground plant tissues, which serve as the passage for oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water between the external environment and internal plant tissues. Thus, stomata play a critical role for efficient photosynthesis, and in global carbon and water cycles [1,2]. Upon opening, stomata facilitate the uptake of CO 2 necessary for photosynthesis, but this process simultaneously enhances the evaporation of water through stomatal pores. To solve this dilemma, plants evolved sophisticated mechanisms to regulate stomata in coordination with various stimuli. In the short term, stomatal aperture is adjusted to optimize the balance between photosynthesis and transpiration [1]. In the long term, plants regulate stomatal development, responding to internal and external signals by changing the number of stomata [3]. Current understanding of stomatal movement upon diverse signaling can be sourced from a recent review [4]. Here, we will focus on the regulation of stomatal development.

(p0.1) Studies on stomatal development have advanced greatly during the past decade. In the model plant Arabidopsis, stomata are produced through a stereotypical cell division and differentiation process, starting from a subset of protodermal cells called meristemoid mother cells (MMCs). MMCs initiate the stomata lineage by dividing asymmetrically to generate a small meristemoid and a large stomatal lineage ground cell (SLGC; Fig. 1a). The meristemoid, a precursor stem cell, can renew itself by one to three rounds of asymmetric division in an inward-spiral manner, producing a late meristemoid surrounded by SLGCs. The late meristemoid then differentiates into a guard mother cell (GMC), which will divide symmetrically once to generate a pair of guard cells surrounding a pore (Fig. 1a). The latest SLGC could also gain MMC cell fate and divide asymmetrically to generate a satellite stoma (Fig. 1a). The cell-state transitions above are controlled by the consecutive activities of several basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, namely SPEECHLESS (SPCH), MUTE, and FAMA in coordination with their partner bHLH proteins SCREAM (SCRM, also known as ICE1) and SCRM2 [5][6][7][8]. SPCH is crucial for the entry asymmetric division of a meristemoid [6]. A careful analysis of the weak loss-of-function allele of SPCH also revealed its role of subsequently amplifying asymmetric divisions [7]. In contrast, the close relative of SPCH, MUTE, is required to terminate asymmetric division and promote differentiation, including symmetric division [7]. The last step of stomatal development is mediated by FAMA, which inhibits extra symmetric divisions in GMCs and promotes the GC identity [5]. Even though the developmental programs of stomatal formation differ among species, the bHLH transcription factors mentioned above represent the core module throughout land plants [9].

(p0.2) Stomatal patterning and density are two critical features for optimized stomatal function. During stomatal development, the one-cell spacing rule is tightly followed [3]. That means stomata are not formed in direct contact with each other, but with at least one non-stoma cell present between two stomata to enforce the proper opening and closure of the pore. Cell-cell communication is therefore essential in stomatal patterning [10]. Multiple signals, including secreted peptides that belong to the EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTORS (EPFs) family, plant hormones, and environmental stimuli, play important roles in concert with each other in both stomatal patterning and density (Fig. 1b) [3,11,12]. A well-known mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade consisting of YODA (YDA), MKK4/5/7/9, and MPK3/6 mediates these upstream signals by regulating Fig. 1. Summary of the effects that diverse range of signals have on stomatal development. a A cartoon showing stomatal cell-lineage transitions from a protodermal cell, a meristemoid mother cell (MMC), meristemoids undergoing asymmetric amplifying divisions and producing stomatallineage ground cells (SLGCs), and a guard mother cell (GMC) to a stoma with paired guard cells (GCs). A protodermal cell could differentiate into a pavement cell, and SLGCs could become pavement cells. Cartoons are modified from Han and Torii [11]. b An Arabidopsis seedling with stomata highlighted in green is in the center. Signals that negatively regulate stomatal development are shown on the left, indicated with red arrows. Signals that promote stomatal formation are shown on the right, indicated with green arrows. The black and yellow boxes indicate darkness (or signals that inhibit stomatal development) and light (or signals that promote stomatal development), respectively. When a signal is deficient, a minus sign is put in front of it. Top left: cotyledon epidermis with pavement cell only. Middle left: cotyledon epidermis with arrested meristemoids. Bottom left: hypocotyl epidermis with pavement cell only. Top right: cotyledon epidermis with clustered stomata. Middle right: cotyledon epidermis with high stomatal density. Bottom right: hypocotyl epidermis with clustered stomata. Confocal microscopy images of the cotyledon and hypocotyl epidermis of wild-type and various mutant seedlings were taken using a Leica SP5 WLL and false colored using Adobe Photoshop CS6 the stability of the stomatal bHLH proteins in Arabidopsis [13,14]. In this review, we will summarize recent findings on the signals that control stomatal development and discuss how their intricate signaling webs are integrated to bring about the differentiation of stomata in the model plant Arabidopsis.
## (s3) Abscisic acid
Number of References: 18

(p3.0) The role of ABA in stomatal physiology is well-known [66]. In addition to stomatal movement, ABA also affects stomatal development (Fig. 1b). Application of ABA reduces the number of stomata per leaf in wheat [67]. On the other hand, ABA promoted stomatal formation on the water-submerged leaves in Potamogeton perfoliatus [68], implying the complex ABA effect could be species dependent. In Arabidopsis, mutants defective in ABA metabolism or in ABA signaling display high stomatal density [69,70], whereas defects in ABA catabolic enzymes result in fewer stomata [69], suggesting that ABA represses stomatal development. Indeed, the ABA biosynthesis mutant aba2 displays prolonged expression of SPCH and MUTE. Double mutant analysis of aba2 with spch and mute further revealed that ABA restricts stomatal-lineage divisions at the point of SPCH, upstream of MUTE [69]. In addition, HOMEODOMAIN GLABROUS11 (HDG11), which promotes ABA production, also activates the ER gene (Fig. 2) [71,72], implying that ABA affects stomatal development at multiple levels.
## (s4) Stomatal development is controlled by environmental factors
Number of References: 44

(p4.0) As stomata are the windows through which plants exchange gas and water with the environment, it is not surprising that environmental factors, especially light, CO 2 , and water, would influence stomatal development as feedback (Fig. 1b). An interesting mechanism revealed by a clever leaf-cuvette experiment is that light and CO 2 levels perceived by mature leaves, which have more access to these environmental signals but less plasticity in stomatal development, could affect the stomatal density in young leaves [76]. A long-distance signal transmitted from mature leaves is predicted to control stomatal formation in expanding leaves. The photoreceptor Phytochrom B (phyB) could be one component in this process, as inducing phyB only in mature leaves resulted in an increase in stomatal index for non-induced young leaves under high light, whereas phyB mutant lost this systemic regulation on stomatal development [77]. Other than the systemic control, an increasing number of studies demonstrate that external signals could influence stomatal formation by integrating into the intrinsic stomatal developmental pathway at various steps [33,65,[77][78][79][80][81][82][83].

(p4.1) As stomata are the windows through which plants exchange gas and water with the environment, it is not surprising that environmental factors, especially light, CO 2 , and water, would influence stomatal development as feedback (Fig. 1b). An interesting mechanism revealed by a clever leaf-cuvette experiment is that light and CO 2 levels perceived by mature leaves, which have more access to these environmental signals but less plasticity in stomatal development, could affect the stomatal density in young leaves [76]. A long-distance signal transmitted from mature leaves is predicted to control stomatal formation in expanding leaves. The photoreceptor Phytochrom B (phyB) could be one component in this process, as inducing phyB only in mature leaves resulted in an increase in stomatal index for non-induced young leaves under high light, whereas phyB mutant lost this systemic regulation on stomatal development [77]. Other than the systemic control, an increasing number of studies demonstrate that external signals could influence stomatal formation by integrating into the intrinsic stomatal developmental pathway at various steps [33,65,[77][78][79][80][81][82][83].
## (s6) Water
Number of References: 32

(p6.0) Water condition, like other environmental factors, is known to affect stomatal development (Fig. 1b), but very little is known about the detailed mechanism. Low water potential can be generated by either less water or high osmotic pressure. It has been reported that water stress from soil (drought) reduces stomatal number in grasses [67,79]. Arabidopsis under osmotic stress also exhibits reduced stomatal density [99]. High osmotic pressure destabilizes SPCH protein via the MAPK cascade and therefore results in fewer stomata on the Arabidopsis epidermis [99]. The negative regulation of water deficiency on stomatal development suggests an attractive idea of enhancing plant drought tolerance by manipulating stomatal density. Indeed, overexpression of EPF2 and EPF1 reduced stomatal density and improved drought tolerance in Arabidopsis and barley, respectively [100][101][102]. On the other hand, it is reported that moderate water deficits from soil have positive effects on stomatal number in grasses [79], indicating that plants precisely regulate water-use-efficiency via controlling stomatal development to optimize growth. Further investigations are required to understand how plants fine-tune stomatal formation in response to various water conditions.

(p6.1) Water condition, like other environmental factors, is known to affect stomatal development (Fig. 1b), but very little is known about the detailed mechanism. Low water potential can be generated by either less water or high osmotic pressure. It has been reported that water stress from soil (drought) reduces stomatal number in grasses [67,79]. Arabidopsis under osmotic stress also exhibits reduced stomatal density [99]. High osmotic pressure destabilizes SPCH protein via the MAPK cascade and therefore results in fewer stomata on the Arabidopsis epidermis [99]. The negative regulation of water deficiency on stomatal development suggests an attractive idea of enhancing plant drought tolerance by manipulating stomatal density. Indeed, overexpression of EPF2 and EPF1 reduced stomatal density and improved drought tolerance in Arabidopsis and barley, respectively [100][101][102]. On the other hand, it is reported that moderate water deficits from soil have positive effects on stomatal number in grasses [79], indicating that plants precisely regulate water-use-efficiency via controlling stomatal development to optimize growth. Further investigations are required to understand how plants fine-tune stomatal formation in response to various water conditions.
## (s7) Unraveling signal integration
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) Stomatal development is influenced by multiple environmental and internal (hormonal) cues. Since the discoveries of the core stomatal signaling pathways and master regulators of stomatal differentiation [11], increasing efforts have been taken to delineate how these multiple inputs feed into the core stomatal pathways as we summarized in this review. Many questions remain open, however. For instance, environmental signals are perceived differently in specific tissue and cell types [103]. Expanding the cell state-specific profiling [104] under different environmental conditions may help decipher the molecular intersections in regional-and cellstate-specific contexts.
## (s9) Stomatal development-a brief overview
Number of References: 44

(p9.0) Stomata are micropores on the epidermis of above ground plant tissues, which serve as the passage for oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water between the external environment and internal plant tissues. Thus, stomata play a critical role for efficient photosynthesis, and in global carbon and water cycles [1,2]. Upon opening, stomata facilitate the uptake of CO 2 necessary for photosynthesis, but this process simultaneously enhances the evaporation of water through stomatal pores. To solve this dilemma, plants evolved sophisticated mechanisms to regulate stomata in coordination with various stimuli. In the short term, stomatal aperture is adjusted to optimize the balance between photosynthesis and transpiration [1]. In the long term, plants regulate stomatal development, responding to internal and external signals by changing the number of stomata [3]. Current understanding of stomatal movement upon diverse signaling can be sourced from a recent review [4]. Here, we will focus on the regulation of stomatal development.

(p9.1) Studies on stomatal development have advanced greatly during the past decade. In the model plant Arabidopsis, stomata are produced through a stereotypical cell division and differentiation process, starting from a subset of protodermal cells called meristemoid mother cells (MMCs). MMCs initiate the stomata lineage by dividing asymmetrically to generate a small meristemoid and a large stomatal lineage ground cell (SLGC; Fig. 1a). The meristemoid, a precursor stem cell, can renew itself by one to three rounds of asymmetric division in an inward-spiral manner, producing a late meristemoid surrounded by SLGCs. The late meristemoid then differentiates into a guard mother cell (GMC), which will divide symmetrically once to generate a pair of guard cells surrounding a pore (Fig. 1a). The latest SLGC could also gain MMC cell fate and divide asymmetrically to generate a satellite stoma (Fig. 1a). The cell-state transitions above are controlled by the consecutive activities of several basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, namely SPEECHLESS (SPCH), MUTE, and FAMA in coordination with their partner bHLH proteins SCREAM (SCRM, also known as ICE1) and SCRM2 [5][6][7][8]. SPCH is crucial for the entry asymmetric division of a meristemoid [6]. A careful analysis of the weak loss-of-function allele of SPCH also revealed its role of subsequently amplifying asymmetric divisions [7]. In contrast, the close relative of SPCH, MUTE, is required to terminate asymmetric division and promote differentiation, including symmetric division [7]. The last step of stomatal development is mediated by FAMA, which inhibits extra symmetric divisions in GMCs and promotes the GC identity [5]. Even though the developmental programs of stomatal formation differ among species, the bHLH transcription factors mentioned above represent the core module throughout land plants [9].

(p9.2) Stomatal patterning and density are two critical features for optimized stomatal function. During stomatal development, the one-cell spacing rule is tightly followed [3]. That means stomata are not formed in direct contact with each other, but with at least one non-stoma cell present between two stomata to enforce the proper opening and closure of the pore. Cell-cell communication is therefore essential in stomatal patterning [10]. Multiple signals, including secreted peptides that belong to the EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTORS (EPFs) family, plant hormones, and environmental stimuli, play important roles in concert with each other in both stomatal patterning and density (Fig. 1b) [3,11,12]. A well-known mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade consisting of YODA (YDA), MKK4/5/7/9, and MPK3/6 mediates these upstream signals by regulating Fig. 1. Summary of the effects that diverse range of signals have on stomatal development. a A cartoon showing stomatal cell-lineage transitions from a protodermal cell, a meristemoid mother cell (MMC), meristemoids undergoing asymmetric amplifying divisions and producing stomatallineage ground cells (SLGCs), and a guard mother cell (GMC) to a stoma with paired guard cells (GCs). A protodermal cell could differentiate into a pavement cell, and SLGCs could become pavement cells. Cartoons are modified from Han and Torii [11]. b An Arabidopsis seedling with stomata highlighted in green is in the center. Signals that negatively regulate stomatal development are shown on the left, indicated with red arrows. Signals that promote stomatal formation are shown on the right, indicated with green arrows. The black and yellow boxes indicate darkness (or signals that inhibit stomatal development) and light (or signals that promote stomatal development), respectively. When a signal is deficient, a minus sign is put in front of it. Top left: cotyledon epidermis with pavement cell only. Middle left: cotyledon epidermis with arrested meristemoids. Bottom left: hypocotyl epidermis with pavement cell only. Top right: cotyledon epidermis with clustered stomata. Middle right: cotyledon epidermis with high stomatal density. Bottom right: hypocotyl epidermis with clustered stomata. Confocal microscopy images of the cotyledon and hypocotyl epidermis of wild-type and various mutant seedlings were taken using a Leica SP5 WLL and false colored using Adobe Photoshop CS6 the stability of the stomatal bHLH proteins in Arabidopsis [13,14]. In this review, we will summarize recent findings on the signals that control stomatal development and discuss how their intricate signaling webs are integrated to bring about the differentiation of stomata in the model plant Arabidopsis.
## (s12) Abscisic acid
Number of References: 18

(p12.0) The role of ABA in stomatal physiology is well-known [66]. In addition to stomatal movement, ABA also affects stomatal development (Fig. 1b). Application of ABA reduces the number of stomata per leaf in wheat [67]. On the other hand, ABA promoted stomatal formation on the water-submerged leaves in Potamogeton perfoliatus [68], implying the complex ABA effect could be species dependent. In Arabidopsis, mutants defective in ABA metabolism or in ABA signaling display high stomatal density [69,70], whereas defects in ABA catabolic enzymes result in fewer stomata [69], suggesting that ABA represses stomatal development. Indeed, the ABA biosynthesis mutant aba2 displays prolonged expression of SPCH and MUTE. Double mutant analysis of aba2 with spch and mute further revealed that ABA restricts stomatal-lineage divisions at the point of SPCH, upstream of MUTE [69]. In addition, HOMEODOMAIN GLABROUS11 (HDG11), which promotes ABA production, also activates the ER gene (Fig. 2) [71,72], implying that ABA affects stomatal development at multiple levels.
## (s13) Stomatal development is controlled by environmental factors
Number of References: 44

(p13.0) As stomata are the windows through which plants exchange gas and water with the environment, it is not surprising that environmental factors, especially light, CO 2 , and water, would influence stomatal development as feedback (Fig. 1b). An interesting mechanism revealed by a clever leaf-cuvette experiment is that light and CO 2 levels perceived by mature leaves, which have more access to these environmental signals but less plasticity in stomatal development, could affect the stomatal density in young leaves [76]. A long-distance signal transmitted from mature leaves is predicted to control stomatal formation in expanding leaves. The photoreceptor Phytochrom B (phyB) could be one component in this process, as inducing phyB only in mature leaves resulted in an increase in stomatal index for non-induced young leaves under high light, whereas phyB mutant lost this systemic regulation on stomatal development [77]. Other than the systemic control, an increasing number of studies demonstrate that external signals could influence stomatal formation by integrating into the intrinsic stomatal developmental pathway at various steps [33,65,[77][78][79][80][81][82][83].

(p13.1) As stomata are the windows through which plants exchange gas and water with the environment, it is not surprising that environmental factors, especially light, CO 2 , and water, would influence stomatal development as feedback (Fig. 1b). An interesting mechanism revealed by a clever leaf-cuvette experiment is that light and CO 2 levels perceived by mature leaves, which have more access to these environmental signals but less plasticity in stomatal development, could affect the stomatal density in young leaves [76]. A long-distance signal transmitted from mature leaves is predicted to control stomatal formation in expanding leaves. The photoreceptor Phytochrom B (phyB) could be one component in this process, as inducing phyB only in mature leaves resulted in an increase in stomatal index for non-induced young leaves under high light, whereas phyB mutant lost this systemic regulation on stomatal development [77]. Other than the systemic control, an increasing number of studies demonstrate that external signals could influence stomatal formation by integrating into the intrinsic stomatal developmental pathway at various steps [33,65,[77][78][79][80][81][82][83].
## (s15) Water
Number of References: 32

(p15.0) Water condition, like other environmental factors, is known to affect stomatal development (Fig. 1b), but very little is known about the detailed mechanism. Low water potential can be generated by either less water or high osmotic pressure. It has been reported that water stress from soil (drought) reduces stomatal number in grasses [67,79]. Arabidopsis under osmotic stress also exhibits reduced stomatal density [99]. High osmotic pressure destabilizes SPCH protein via the MAPK cascade and therefore results in fewer stomata on the Arabidopsis epidermis [99]. The negative regulation of water deficiency on stomatal development suggests an attractive idea of enhancing plant drought tolerance by manipulating stomatal density. Indeed, overexpression of EPF2 and EPF1 reduced stomatal density and improved drought tolerance in Arabidopsis and barley, respectively [100][101][102]. On the other hand, it is reported that moderate water deficits from soil have positive effects on stomatal number in grasses [79], indicating that plants precisely regulate water-use-efficiency via controlling stomatal development to optimize growth. Further investigations are required to understand how plants fine-tune stomatal formation in response to various water conditions.

(p15.1) Water condition, like other environmental factors, is known to affect stomatal development (Fig. 1b), but very little is known about the detailed mechanism. Low water potential can be generated by either less water or high osmotic pressure. It has been reported that water stress from soil (drought) reduces stomatal number in grasses [67,79]. Arabidopsis under osmotic stress also exhibits reduced stomatal density [99]. High osmotic pressure destabilizes SPCH protein via the MAPK cascade and therefore results in fewer stomata on the Arabidopsis epidermis [99]. The negative regulation of water deficiency on stomatal development suggests an attractive idea of enhancing plant drought tolerance by manipulating stomatal density. Indeed, overexpression of EPF2 and EPF1 reduced stomatal density and improved drought tolerance in Arabidopsis and barley, respectively [100][101][102]. On the other hand, it is reported that moderate water deficits from soil have positive effects on stomatal number in grasses [79], indicating that plants precisely regulate water-use-efficiency via controlling stomatal development to optimize growth. Further investigations are required to understand how plants fine-tune stomatal formation in response to various water conditions.
## (s16) Unraveling signal integration
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) Stomatal development is influenced by multiple environmental and internal (hormonal) cues. Since the discoveries of the core stomatal signaling pathways and master regulators of stomatal differentiation [11], increasing efforts have been taken to delineate how these multiple inputs feed into the core stomatal pathways as we summarized in this review. Many questions remain open, however. For instance, environmental signals are perceived differently in specific tissue and cell types [103]. Expanding the cell state-specific profiling [104] under different environmental conditions may help decipher the molecular intersections in regional-and cellstate-specific contexts.
