# A systematic literature review of indicators measuring food security

CorpusID: 258488770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ded17a28c4e9618285110516ca2a827e1fbabeb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ded17a28c4e9618285110516ca2a827e1fbabeb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s3) Literature searching and screening processes
Number of References: 7

(p3.0) We applied the SLR methodology to systematically search, filter, and analyse scientific articles on food security measurement. The SLR is a commonly applied and accepted research methodology in the literature [39]. Although the SLR methodology is widely applied in different disciplines such as the health and life sciences, its application in economics is limited. However, it has recently been applied in agricultural economics (e.g. [40][41][42][43]. In this study, we closely followed the six steps of a systematic review process [39], namely, (a) defining research questions, (b) formulating search strings, (c) filtering studies based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, (d) conducting quality assessment of the filtered studies, (e) collecting data from the studies that passed quality assessment, and (f ) analysing the data. The literature screening process that we followed is also in line with the guidelines in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Statement (PRISMA) [44].
## (s13) Conclusion
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) We critically reviewed numerous food security indicators and methodologies published in scientific articles since the last decade using the SLR methodology. We reviewed, analysed, and summarised the results of 78 articles on food security measurement. We found that the household-level calorie adequacy measure was the most frequently used indicator in the literature as a sole measure of food security. Dietary diversity indicators (HDDS, WDDS, IDDS, and FCS) and experience-based indicators (HFSSM, FIES, HFIAS, HHS, ELCSA) were almost equally in use and popular. In terms of the food security dimensions, food utilisation (13%) and stability (18%) were seldom captured. Caccavale and Giuffrida [12], Izraelov and Silber [7], and Upton et al. [96] are the only studies that measured food security by considering all four dimensions. We also found that the majority of the studies that applied calorie adequacy and dietary diversity-based indicators employed secondary data whereas most of the studies that applied experience-based indicators employed primary data, suggesting the convenience/ simplicity of collecting data for experience-based indicators than dietary-based indicators. The use of experiencebased indicators allows conducting rapid food security
