# A comprehensive overview of metaplastic breast cancer: clinical features and molecular aberrations

CorpusID: 255986670 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce33462b7025e7927a692311729520c7f13666b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce33462b7025e7927a692311729520c7f13666b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Cell origin of MpBC
Number of References: 12

(p2.0) The clonality and origin of MpBC have been debated for years, and there are at least three hypotheses to explain why MpBC are biphasic tumors, meaning the presence of sarcomatous and carcinomatous components within the same tumor. The collision theory suggests that carcinomatous and sarcomatous tissues are derived from separate progenitor cells [9], while the combination theory of monoclonal origin suggests that a common multipotent progenitor cell is responsible for giving rise to both sarcomatous and carcinomatous cells. The conversion/metaplastic theory suggests that the sarcomatous components derive from the carcinomatous component via a metaplastic process. Evidence to support the metaplastic theory comes from data that showed both epithelial and mesenchymal components of the tumor display a positive expression of cytokeratin, S-100, and vimentin [18]. Furthermore, it has also been suggested that MpBC may derive from myoepithelial cells, as the tumors are frequently positive for myoepithelial markers including CD10, p63, and smooth muscle actin [19].

(p2.1) The clonality and origin of MpBC have been debated for years, and there are at least three hypotheses to explain why MpBC are biphasic tumors, meaning the presence of sarcomatous and carcinomatous components within the same tumor. The collision theory suggests that carcinomatous and sarcomatous tissues are derived from separate progenitor cells [9], while the combination theory of monoclonal origin suggests that a common multipotent progenitor cell is responsible for giving rise to both sarcomatous and carcinomatous cells. The conversion/metaplastic theory suggests that the sarcomatous components derive from the carcinomatous component via a metaplastic process. Evidence to support the metaplastic theory comes from data that showed both epithelial and mesenchymal components of the tumor display a positive expression of cytokeratin, S-100, and vimentin [18]. Furthermore, it has also been suggested that MpBC may derive from myoepithelial cells, as the tumors are frequently positive for myoepithelial markers including CD10, p63, and smooth muscle actin [19].
## (s5) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
Number of References: 28

(p5.0) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p5.1) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p5.2) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].

(p5.3) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p5.4) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p5.5) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].
## (s6) Taube et al. [20] 244
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p6.1) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p6.2) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p6.3) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.

(p6.4) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p6.5) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p6.6) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p6.7) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.
## (s7) Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
Number of References: 28

(p7.0) The PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway controls cellular growth, proliferation, metabolism, cellular survival, and angiogenesis and is one of the most frequently dysregulated pathways in cancer [43]. The pathway can be hyperactivated in cells through diverse genomic alterations, such as mutations in PIK3CA, PIK3R1, AKT1, MTOR, TSC2, and LKB1, as well as various other tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes [44].  [28]. The study also showed that recurrence-free survival (RFS) and OS were significantly worse for MpBC patients with PIK3CA mutations. We analyzed a publicly available cancer cohort (n = 9052) from cBio-Portal to identify alteration frequencies for EGFR, PIK3CA, and PTEN genes across all breast cancer subtypes (Fig. 2). Across all cancer types, MpBC showed the highest frequency of alterations in EGFR and PTEN, and a modest percentage of PIK3CA mutations. While it is difficult to conclude whether PIK3CA mutations are more commonly seen in MpBC vs. TNBC, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, we suggest that targeting this pathway with isoform-specific inhibitors in combination with other novel therapeutics may be the future for MpBC treatment. From the same database, we also compared the OS of 33 MpBC patients to 7515 non-metaplastic breast cancer patients (including HR+, HER2+, and TNBC) and found MpBC had a poorer OS (HR 11.5, 95% CI 3.64-36.35) than non-metaplastic breast cancer (Fig. 3) Nitric oxide signaling pathway TNBC expresses higher levels of nitric oxide (NO), which is estimated by nitrate levels, than HER2+ or luminal breast cancers [47]. Furthermore, previous in vitro studies have shown that TNBC tumors expressing inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) produce moderate to high levels of NO, and the increased iNOS activity may confer resistance to chemotherapy [48]. A preclinical study demonstrated that combining docetaxel with pan-NOS inhibitor NG-monomethyl-L-arginine acetate (L-NMMA) in a xenograft model of MDA-MB-231 decreased Ki67 proliferating cells, enhanced tumor apoptosis, and reduced tumor-initiating capacity of residual tumor cells after chemotherapy to a larger degree than docetaxel alone [29]. Another preclinical study assessed the potential of L-NMMA to sensitize metaplastic breast cancer to docetaxel [30]. In this study, L-NMMA significantly reduced cell migration and proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in MpBC cell lines, Hs578T, and BT549. L-NMMA also significantly enhanced docetaxel-mediated apoptosis in MpBC cell lines, as evidenced by a greater number of Annexin Vpositive cells found in cell lines treated with L-NMMA + docetaxel combination therapy, versus vehicle control or monotherapy. This study also examined tumor samples from patients with histologically confirmed MpBC and found that out of 40 MpBC samples, 39 samples had a RPL39 A14V mutation. The RPL39 A14V mutation is associated with enhanced NO activity and cancer cell stemness. MpBC tumors that harbored a RPL39 mutation and were resistant to docetaxel became sensitized to the taxane by L-NMMA through inhibition of STAT3 signaling. Taking this into consideration, a phase 1b/2 clinical trial is being conducted to assess the maximum-tolerated dose, dose-limited toxicities, recommended phase 2 dose, and efficacy of L-NMMA in combination with docetaxel for refractory locally advanced and metastatic triple-negative breast cancer patients (NCT02834403). This clinical trial is also recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC. 

(p7.1) The PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway controls cellular growth, proliferation, metabolism, cellular survival, and angiogenesis and is one of the most frequently dysregulated pathways in cancer [43]. The pathway can be hyperactivated in cells through diverse genomic alterations, such as mutations in PIK3CA, PIK3R1, AKT1, MTOR, TSC2, and LKB1, as well as various other tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes [44].  [28]. The study also showed that recurrence-free survival (RFS) and OS were significantly worse for MpBC patients with PIK3CA mutations. We analyzed a publicly available cancer cohort (n = 9052) from cBio-Portal to identify alteration frequencies for EGFR, PIK3CA, and PTEN genes across all breast cancer subtypes (Fig. 2). Across all cancer types, MpBC showed the highest frequency of alterations in EGFR and PTEN, and a modest percentage of PIK3CA mutations. While it is difficult to conclude whether PIK3CA mutations are more commonly seen in MpBC vs. TNBC, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, we suggest that targeting this pathway with isoform-specific inhibitors in combination with other novel therapeutics may be the future for MpBC treatment. From the same database, we also compared the OS of 33 MpBC patients to 7515 non-metaplastic breast cancer patients (including HR+, HER2+, and TNBC) and found MpBC had a poorer OS (HR 11.5, 95% CI 3.64-36.35) than non-metaplastic breast cancer (Fig. 3) Nitric oxide signaling pathway TNBC expresses higher levels of nitric oxide (NO), which is estimated by nitrate levels, than HER2+ or luminal breast cancers [47]. Furthermore, previous in vitro studies have shown that TNBC tumors expressing inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) produce moderate to high levels of NO, and the increased iNOS activity may confer resistance to chemotherapy [48]. A preclinical study demonstrated that combining docetaxel with pan-NOS inhibitor NG-monomethyl-L-arginine acetate (L-NMMA) in a xenograft model of MDA-MB-231 decreased Ki67 proliferating cells, enhanced tumor apoptosis, and reduced tumor-initiating capacity of residual tumor cells after chemotherapy to a larger degree than docetaxel alone [29]. Another preclinical study assessed the potential of L-NMMA to sensitize metaplastic breast cancer to docetaxel [30]. In this study, L-NMMA significantly reduced cell migration and proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in MpBC cell lines, Hs578T, and BT549. L-NMMA also significantly enhanced docetaxel-mediated apoptosis in MpBC cell lines, as evidenced by a greater number of Annexin Vpositive cells found in cell lines treated with L-NMMA + docetaxel combination therapy, versus vehicle control or monotherapy. This study also examined tumor samples from patients with histologically confirmed MpBC and found that out of 40 MpBC samples, 39 samples had a RPL39 A14V mutation. The RPL39 A14V mutation is associated with enhanced NO activity and cancer cell stemness. MpBC tumors that harbored a RPL39 mutation and were resistant to docetaxel became sensitized to the taxane by L-NMMA through inhibition of STAT3 signaling. Taking this into consideration, a phase 1b/2 clinical trial is being conducted to assess the maximum-tolerated dose, dose-limited toxicities, recommended phase 2 dose, and efficacy of L-NMMA in combination with docetaxel for refractory locally advanced and metastatic triple-negative breast cancer patients (NCT02834403). This clinical trial is also recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC. 
## (s8) Wnt/β-catenin pathway
Number of References: 24

(p8.0) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.

(p8.1) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.
## (s9) Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
Number of References: 12

(p9.0) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).

(p9.1) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).
## (s10) Cell cycle regulating proteins
Number of References: 16

(p10.0) Krings and Chen conducted a study in which they sequenced 408 cancer-related genes in 28 MpBC samples, and they found that MpBC harbored a high frequency of TP53 (64%) and TERT (catalytic subunit of telomerase) promoter mutations (25%), but the latter frequency varied among MpBC subtypes [36]. TERT promoter mutations were enriched in the spindle cell and squamous cell carcinoma variants (47%). Furthermore, the percentage of TP53 mutations in this study was comparable to another study, which found MpBC to harbor 69% TP53 mutations [27]. A study examined myoepithelial MpBC and found that most cases (28 out of 34, 82.4%) showed a distinct chromosomal loss in 9p21.3, including loss of CDK2NA and CDK2NB [37]. CDKN2A and CDKN2B code for the proteins p16 INK4a and p15 INK4b , respectively, which function as inhibitors of Cdk4 and Cdk6 and can induce G1 cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein [49]. Another finding was that loss of 9p21.3 in 64.3% of all MpBC tumor samples was accompanied by a concurrent PIK3CA mutation.

(p10.1) Krings and Chen conducted a study in which they sequenced 408 cancer-related genes in 28 MpBC samples, and they found that MpBC harbored a high frequency of TP53 (64%) and TERT (catalytic subunit of telomerase) promoter mutations (25%), but the latter frequency varied among MpBC subtypes [36]. TERT promoter mutations were enriched in the spindle cell and squamous cell carcinoma variants (47%). Furthermore, the percentage of TP53 mutations in this study was comparable to another study, which found MpBC to harbor 69% TP53 mutations [27]. A study examined myoepithelial MpBC and found that most cases (28 out of 34, 82.4%) showed a distinct chromosomal loss in 9p21.3, including loss of CDK2NA and CDK2NB [37]. CDKN2A and CDKN2B code for the proteins p16 INK4a and p15 INK4b , respectively, which function as inhibitors of Cdk4 and Cdk6 and can induce G1 cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein [49]. Another finding was that loss of 9p21.3 in 64.3% of all MpBC tumor samples was accompanied by a concurrent PIK3CA mutation.
## (s12) Radiation therapy
Number of References: 12

(p12.0) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.

(p12.1) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.
## (s13) Potential therapies in clinical trials
Number of References: 12

(p13.0) Despite the current treatment status for MpBC, which follows a one-size-fits-all scheme in which MpBC patients are provided the same therapeutic options to TNBC patients, there have been completed and ongoing clinical trials specifically on targeted therapeutics against MpBC. For example, a phase 1 clinical trial was conducted to assess the safety and efficacy of mTOR inhibition with temsirolimus or everolimus in combination with VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab and liposomal doxorubicin in 52 patients with advanced MpBC [57]. The objective response rate (ORR) was 21% (complete Though a limitation of this study is the sample size, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, another point to note is that the PIK3CA mutational analysis was specific to hotspot mutations. There is a chance that the tumor samples of the patient cohort may also harbor other PI3K/Akt pathway alterations that could not be detected via molecular testing. A case report was published in 2019 about a patient diagnosed with MpBC (H1047R PIK3CA mutation +), who enrolled in the BELLE-4 clinical trial, and achieved a durable response and overall survival of 42 months to combination therapy of paclitaxel and buparlisib, a pan-PI3K inhibitor [58]. In addition, immune checkpoint blockade, specifically a combination of nivolumab (anti-PD1) and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA4), has shown efficacy in a small cohort of MpBC patients (The DART trial) [59]. In this prospective, single-arm, phase 2 trial, 17 MpBC patients received combination therapy. The ORR% in the study was 12% (RECIST 1.1) and 18% (iRECIST), with three patients showing ongoing responses at 27, 25, and 23 months, respectively. These smaller studies are first to shed light on the potential of targeting the PI3K pathway and utilizing immunotherapy as treatment options for MpBC. Table 2 provides a list of ongoing clinical trials recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC.

(p13.1) Despite the current treatment status for MpBC, which follows a one-size-fits-all scheme in which MpBC patients are provided the same therapeutic options to TNBC patients, there have been completed and ongoing clinical trials specifically on targeted therapeutics against MpBC. For example, a phase 1 clinical trial was conducted to assess the safety and efficacy of mTOR inhibition with temsirolimus or everolimus in combination with VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab and liposomal doxorubicin in 52 patients with advanced MpBC [57]. The objective response rate (ORR) was 21% (complete Though a limitation of this study is the sample size, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, another point to note is that the PIK3CA mutational analysis was specific to hotspot mutations. There is a chance that the tumor samples of the patient cohort may also harbor other PI3K/Akt pathway alterations that could not be detected via molecular testing. A case report was published in 2019 about a patient diagnosed with MpBC (H1047R PIK3CA mutation +), who enrolled in the BELLE-4 clinical trial, and achieved a durable response and overall survival of 42 months to combination therapy of paclitaxel and buparlisib, a pan-PI3K inhibitor [58]. In addition, immune checkpoint blockade, specifically a combination of nivolumab (anti-PD1) and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA4), has shown efficacy in a small cohort of MpBC patients (The DART trial) [59]. In this prospective, single-arm, phase 2 trial, 17 MpBC patients received combination therapy. The ORR% in the study was 12% (RECIST 1.1) and 18% (iRECIST), with three patients showing ongoing responses at 27, 25, and 23 months, respectively. These smaller studies are first to shed light on the potential of targeting the PI3K pathway and utilizing immunotherapy as treatment options for MpBC. Table 2 provides a list of ongoing clinical trials recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC.
## (s22) Cell origin of MpBC
Number of References: 12

(p22.0) The clonality and origin of MpBC have been debated for years, and there are at least three hypotheses to explain why MpBC are biphasic tumors, meaning the presence of sarcomatous and carcinomatous components within the same tumor. The collision theory suggests that carcinomatous and sarcomatous tissues are derived from separate progenitor cells [9], while the combination theory of monoclonal origin suggests that a common multipotent progenitor cell is responsible for giving rise to both sarcomatous and carcinomatous cells. The conversion/metaplastic theory suggests that the sarcomatous components derive from the carcinomatous component via a metaplastic process. Evidence to support the metaplastic theory comes from data that showed both epithelial and mesenchymal components of the tumor display a positive expression of cytokeratin, S-100, and vimentin [18]. Furthermore, it has also been suggested that MpBC may derive from myoepithelial cells, as the tumors are frequently positive for myoepithelial markers including CD10, p63, and smooth muscle actin [19].

(p22.1) The clonality and origin of MpBC have been debated for years, and there are at least three hypotheses to explain why MpBC are biphasic tumors, meaning the presence of sarcomatous and carcinomatous components within the same tumor. The collision theory suggests that carcinomatous and sarcomatous tissues are derived from separate progenitor cells [9], while the combination theory of monoclonal origin suggests that a common multipotent progenitor cell is responsible for giving rise to both sarcomatous and carcinomatous cells. The conversion/metaplastic theory suggests that the sarcomatous components derive from the carcinomatous component via a metaplastic process. Evidence to support the metaplastic theory comes from data that showed both epithelial and mesenchymal components of the tumor display a positive expression of cytokeratin, S-100, and vimentin [18]. Furthermore, it has also been suggested that MpBC may derive from myoepithelial cells, as the tumors are frequently positive for myoepithelial markers including CD10, p63, and smooth muscle actin [19].
## (s25) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
Number of References: 28

(p25.0) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p25.1) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p25.2) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].

(p25.3) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p25.4) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p25.5) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].
## (s26) Taube et al. [20] 244
Number of References: 20

(p26.0) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p26.1) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p26.2) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p26.3) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.

(p26.4) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p26.5) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p26.6) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p26.7) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.
## (s27) Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
Number of References: 28

(p27.0) The PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway controls cellular growth, proliferation, metabolism, cellular survival, and angiogenesis and is one of the most frequently dysregulated pathways in cancer [43]. The pathway can be hyperactivated in cells through diverse genomic alterations, such as mutations in PIK3CA, PIK3R1, AKT1, MTOR, TSC2, and LKB1, as well as various other tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes [44].  [28]. The study also showed that recurrence-free survival (RFS) and OS were significantly worse for MpBC patients with PIK3CA mutations. We analyzed a publicly available cancer cohort (n = 9052) from cBio-Portal to identify alteration frequencies for EGFR, PIK3CA, and PTEN genes across all breast cancer subtypes (Fig. 2). Across all cancer types, MpBC showed the highest frequency of alterations in EGFR and PTEN, and a modest percentage of PIK3CA mutations. While it is difficult to conclude whether PIK3CA mutations are more commonly seen in MpBC vs. TNBC, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, we suggest that targeting this pathway with isoform-specific inhibitors in combination with other novel therapeutics may be the future for MpBC treatment. From the same database, we also compared the OS of 33 MpBC patients to 7515 non-metaplastic breast cancer patients (including HR+, HER2+, and TNBC) and found MpBC had a poorer OS (HR 11.5, 95% CI 3.64-36.35) than non-metaplastic breast cancer (Fig. 3) Nitric oxide signaling pathway TNBC expresses higher levels of nitric oxide (NO), which is estimated by nitrate levels, than HER2+ or luminal breast cancers [47]. Furthermore, previous in vitro studies have shown that TNBC tumors expressing inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) produce moderate to high levels of NO, and the increased iNOS activity may confer resistance to chemotherapy [48]. A preclinical study demonstrated that combining docetaxel with pan-NOS inhibitor NG-monomethyl-L-arginine acetate (L-NMMA) in a xenograft model of MDA-MB-231 decreased Ki67 proliferating cells, enhanced tumor apoptosis, and reduced tumor-initiating capacity of residual tumor cells after chemotherapy to a larger degree than docetaxel alone [29]. Another preclinical study assessed the potential of L-NMMA to sensitize metaplastic breast cancer to docetaxel [30]. In this study, L-NMMA significantly reduced cell migration and proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in MpBC cell lines, Hs578T, and BT549. L-NMMA also significantly enhanced docetaxel-mediated apoptosis in MpBC cell lines, as evidenced by a greater number of Annexin Vpositive cells found in cell lines treated with L-NMMA + docetaxel combination therapy, versus vehicle control or monotherapy. This study also examined tumor samples from patients with histologically confirmed MpBC and found that out of 40 MpBC samples, 39 samples had a RPL39 A14V mutation. The RPL39 A14V mutation is associated with enhanced NO activity and cancer cell stemness. MpBC tumors that harbored a RPL39 mutation and were resistant to docetaxel became sensitized to the taxane by L-NMMA through inhibition of STAT3 signaling. Taking this into consideration, a phase 1b/2 clinical trial is being conducted to assess the maximum-tolerated dose, dose-limited toxicities, recommended phase 2 dose, and efficacy of L-NMMA in combination with docetaxel for refractory locally advanced and metastatic triple-negative breast cancer patients (NCT02834403). This clinical trial is also recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC. 

(p27.1) The PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway controls cellular growth, proliferation, metabolism, cellular survival, and angiogenesis and is one of the most frequently dysregulated pathways in cancer [43]. The pathway can be hyperactivated in cells through diverse genomic alterations, such as mutations in PIK3CA, PIK3R1, AKT1, MTOR, TSC2, and LKB1, as well as various other tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes [44].  [28]. The study also showed that recurrence-free survival (RFS) and OS were significantly worse for MpBC patients with PIK3CA mutations. We analyzed a publicly available cancer cohort (n = 9052) from cBio-Portal to identify alteration frequencies for EGFR, PIK3CA, and PTEN genes across all breast cancer subtypes (Fig. 2). Across all cancer types, MpBC showed the highest frequency of alterations in EGFR and PTEN, and a modest percentage of PIK3CA mutations. While it is difficult to conclude whether PIK3CA mutations are more commonly seen in MpBC vs. TNBC, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, we suggest that targeting this pathway with isoform-specific inhibitors in combination with other novel therapeutics may be the future for MpBC treatment. From the same database, we also compared the OS of 33 MpBC patients to 7515 non-metaplastic breast cancer patients (including HR+, HER2+, and TNBC) and found MpBC had a poorer OS (HR 11.5, 95% CI 3.64-36.35) than non-metaplastic breast cancer (Fig. 3) Nitric oxide signaling pathway TNBC expresses higher levels of nitric oxide (NO), which is estimated by nitrate levels, than HER2+ or luminal breast cancers [47]. Furthermore, previous in vitro studies have shown that TNBC tumors expressing inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) produce moderate to high levels of NO, and the increased iNOS activity may confer resistance to chemotherapy [48]. A preclinical study demonstrated that combining docetaxel with pan-NOS inhibitor NG-monomethyl-L-arginine acetate (L-NMMA) in a xenograft model of MDA-MB-231 decreased Ki67 proliferating cells, enhanced tumor apoptosis, and reduced tumor-initiating capacity of residual tumor cells after chemotherapy to a larger degree than docetaxel alone [29]. Another preclinical study assessed the potential of L-NMMA to sensitize metaplastic breast cancer to docetaxel [30]. In this study, L-NMMA significantly reduced cell migration and proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in MpBC cell lines, Hs578T, and BT549. L-NMMA also significantly enhanced docetaxel-mediated apoptosis in MpBC cell lines, as evidenced by a greater number of Annexin Vpositive cells found in cell lines treated with L-NMMA + docetaxel combination therapy, versus vehicle control or monotherapy. This study also examined tumor samples from patients with histologically confirmed MpBC and found that out of 40 MpBC samples, 39 samples had a RPL39 A14V mutation. The RPL39 A14V mutation is associated with enhanced NO activity and cancer cell stemness. MpBC tumors that harbored a RPL39 mutation and were resistant to docetaxel became sensitized to the taxane by L-NMMA through inhibition of STAT3 signaling. Taking this into consideration, a phase 1b/2 clinical trial is being conducted to assess the maximum-tolerated dose, dose-limited toxicities, recommended phase 2 dose, and efficacy of L-NMMA in combination with docetaxel for refractory locally advanced and metastatic triple-negative breast cancer patients (NCT02834403). This clinical trial is also recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC. 
## (s28) Wnt/β-catenin pathway
Number of References: 24

(p28.0) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.

(p28.1) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.
## (s29) Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
Number of References: 12

(p29.0) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).

(p29.1) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).
## (s30) Cell cycle regulating proteins
Number of References: 16

(p30.0) Krings and Chen conducted a study in which they sequenced 408 cancer-related genes in 28 MpBC samples, and they found that MpBC harbored a high frequency of TP53 (64%) and TERT (catalytic subunit of telomerase) promoter mutations (25%), but the latter frequency varied among MpBC subtypes [36]. TERT promoter mutations were enriched in the spindle cell and squamous cell carcinoma variants (47%). Furthermore, the percentage of TP53 mutations in this study was comparable to another study, which found MpBC to harbor 69% TP53 mutations [27]. A study examined myoepithelial MpBC and found that most cases (28 out of 34, 82.4%) showed a distinct chromosomal loss in 9p21.3, including loss of CDK2NA and CDK2NB [37]. CDKN2A and CDKN2B code for the proteins p16 INK4a and p15 INK4b , respectively, which function as inhibitors of Cdk4 and Cdk6 and can induce G1 cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein [49]. Another finding was that loss of 9p21.3 in 64.3% of all MpBC tumor samples was accompanied by a concurrent PIK3CA mutation.

(p30.1) Krings and Chen conducted a study in which they sequenced 408 cancer-related genes in 28 MpBC samples, and they found that MpBC harbored a high frequency of TP53 (64%) and TERT (catalytic subunit of telomerase) promoter mutations (25%), but the latter frequency varied among MpBC subtypes [36]. TERT promoter mutations were enriched in the spindle cell and squamous cell carcinoma variants (47%). Furthermore, the percentage of TP53 mutations in this study was comparable to another study, which found MpBC to harbor 69% TP53 mutations [27]. A study examined myoepithelial MpBC and found that most cases (28 out of 34, 82.4%) showed a distinct chromosomal loss in 9p21.3, including loss of CDK2NA and CDK2NB [37]. CDKN2A and CDKN2B code for the proteins p16 INK4a and p15 INK4b , respectively, which function as inhibitors of Cdk4 and Cdk6 and can induce G1 cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein [49]. Another finding was that loss of 9p21.3 in 64.3% of all MpBC tumor samples was accompanied by a concurrent PIK3CA mutation.
## (s32) Radiation therapy
Number of References: 12

(p32.0) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.

(p32.1) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.
## (s33) Potential therapies in clinical trials
Number of References: 12

(p33.0) Despite the current treatment status for MpBC, which follows a one-size-fits-all scheme in which MpBC patients are provided the same therapeutic options to TNBC patients, there have been completed and ongoing clinical trials specifically on targeted therapeutics against MpBC. For example, a phase 1 clinical trial was conducted to assess the safety and efficacy of mTOR inhibition with temsirolimus or everolimus in combination with VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab and liposomal doxorubicin in 52 patients with advanced MpBC [57]. The objective response rate (ORR) was 21% (complete Though a limitation of this study is the sample size, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, another point to note is that the PIK3CA mutational analysis was specific to hotspot mutations. There is a chance that the tumor samples of the patient cohort may also harbor other PI3K/Akt pathway alterations that could not be detected via molecular testing. A case report was published in 2019 about a patient diagnosed with MpBC (H1047R PIK3CA mutation +), who enrolled in the BELLE-4 clinical trial, and achieved a durable response and overall survival of 42 months to combination therapy of paclitaxel and buparlisib, a pan-PI3K inhibitor [58]. In addition, immune checkpoint blockade, specifically a combination of nivolumab (anti-PD1) and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA4), has shown efficacy in a small cohort of MpBC patients (The DART trial) [59]. In this prospective, single-arm, phase 2 trial, 17 MpBC patients received combination therapy. The ORR% in the study was 12% (RECIST 1.1) and 18% (iRECIST), with three patients showing ongoing responses at 27, 25, and 23 months, respectively. These smaller studies are first to shed light on the potential of targeting the PI3K pathway and utilizing immunotherapy as treatment options for MpBC. Table 2 provides a list of ongoing clinical trials recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC.

(p33.1) Despite the current treatment status for MpBC, which follows a one-size-fits-all scheme in which MpBC patients are provided the same therapeutic options to TNBC patients, there have been completed and ongoing clinical trials specifically on targeted therapeutics against MpBC. For example, a phase 1 clinical trial was conducted to assess the safety and efficacy of mTOR inhibition with temsirolimus or everolimus in combination with VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab and liposomal doxorubicin in 52 patients with advanced MpBC [57]. The objective response rate (ORR) was 21% (complete Though a limitation of this study is the sample size, largely due to the rare nature of MpBC, another point to note is that the PIK3CA mutational analysis was specific to hotspot mutations. There is a chance that the tumor samples of the patient cohort may also harbor other PI3K/Akt pathway alterations that could not be detected via molecular testing. A case report was published in 2019 about a patient diagnosed with MpBC (H1047R PIK3CA mutation +), who enrolled in the BELLE-4 clinical trial, and achieved a durable response and overall survival of 42 months to combination therapy of paclitaxel and buparlisib, a pan-PI3K inhibitor [58]. In addition, immune checkpoint blockade, specifically a combination of nivolumab (anti-PD1) and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA4), has shown efficacy in a small cohort of MpBC patients (The DART trial) [59]. In this prospective, single-arm, phase 2 trial, 17 MpBC patients received combination therapy. The ORR% in the study was 12% (RECIST 1.1) and 18% (iRECIST), with three patients showing ongoing responses at 27, 25, and 23 months, respectively. These smaller studies are first to shed light on the potential of targeting the PI3K pathway and utilizing immunotherapy as treatment options for MpBC. Table 2 provides a list of ongoing clinical trials recruiting patients diagnosed with MpBC.
