# A review on the potential effects of environmental and economic factors on sheep genetic diversity: Consequences of climate change

CorpusID: 253649345 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6591b526077c33314f68a18d956cf4c37e55ec52](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6591b526077c33314f68a18d956cf4c37e55ec52)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Economics, Medicine

## (s4) Inadequate feed availability, digestibility, and absorption
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Feed availability in this context refers to both feed quantity and quality. Animal nutrition is positively correlated with growth, reproduction, and production. Poor and/or inadequate nutrition negatively affects the performance of the aforementioned. With the projected increase in atmospheric CO 2 and air temperatures coupled with changed soil quality because of climate change, the quality and quantity of forage are expected to be affected. Further, intensive rainfall and longer dry periods are also projected leading to varied inter-annual precipitation variability (Grant et al., 2014). Persistent inter-annual rainfall variability leads to a continuous variation of soil moisture leading to crops subjected to moisture stress (Fay, 2009).
## (s6) Sheep genetic diversity and potential selection signatures for adaptation traits
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) In the recent past, scientists have developed interest in studying the genetic diversity of different animal species globally using different genetic markers. These studies aimed at elucidating either the origin, migratory paths, genetic diversity status within the breed and among populations resulting in classifying breeds according to extinction risk status and recommending conservation measures if need be. Little attention has been placed on the effects of genotype -environment (GxE) interaction on the loss of diversity in different species. Since domestication, sheep have been subjected to forces of natural and artificial selection leading to several mutations, allele realignment and frequencies in several generations in response to changing environmental conditions resulting from climate change (Gauly & Erhardt, 2001). These genetic changes were meant to align animals to meet the production needs of the environment as well as the farmer. However, due to the increased demand for animal products in the recent past, pressure for improved production has ensued, leading to enhanced selection intensity, especially in exotic sheep breeds. An intensive selection coupled with reduced population size leads to a loss of diversity (Eusebi et al., 2020). Previously, the emphasis was put on breeding strategies that ensured the maintenance of heterozygosity disregarding ''allelic diversity". Allelic diversity in this context refers to a full range of potentially adaptive alleles in the species (Notter, 1999), but this was less useful since heterozygosity did not effectively address genetic diversity corresponding with the changing environmental conditions. Intensive selection for additive traits of economic importance alongside inbreeding are the possible causes of declining allele diversity (Caballero et al., 2020;Simm et al., 1996). Another cause of declining genetic diversity is reduced effective population size (Zhao et al., 2014). The loss of genetic variability has also been greatly impacted by the transfer of breeds to new environments without taking GxE interaction into account. According to the fundamental theory of the GxE interaction, phenotypes of one breed may vary between two different environmental situations (Gavojdian et al., 2014). Hence, introducing breeds in new production environments may lead to decreased fitness traits, putting the breed at risk of extinction. Diversity loss reduces the breed and species' ability to withstand the extreme environments caused by climate change.
