# Networking Architecture and Key Supporting Technologies for Human Digital Twin in Personalized Healthcare: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 259252458 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/334f7825967278d3b357c46497f6c1708021571c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/334f7825967278d3b357c46497f6c1708021571c)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s13) C. The Universal Framework of HDT
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) HDT is capable of revolutionizing the current healthcare sector. As shown in Fig. 3, we summarize the universal framework of HDT from [13], [40]- [42], which consists of six fundamental components, i.e., data acquisition; digital modelling and virtualization; communication; computation; data management; and data analysis and decision making. 1) Data Acquisition: Since HDT is a data-driven model, a reliable data acquisition process is vital for HDT. HDT requires both physiological and psychological data of each physical twin (PT), possibly acquired through multiple sources, to establish high-fidelity digital representation of virtual twin (VT). Specifically, it includes medical data from medical institutions, such as electronic health records (EHR) including biomedical examinations and medical images, physiological data (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure and the concentration of biomarkers) obtained through smart personal medical devices, and data from users' social media, such as posts, comments or messages on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, which can be used to estimate emotions and psychologies.
## (s21) A. On-Body Communication
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) The HDT on-body communication is generally realized through an essential component, called the wireless body area network (WBAN) [105]- [107], where on or in-body sensors are connected and are responsible for the transmission of collected data to the gateway through WBAN. The structure of on-body communication can be divided into two types. In the first type, sensors directly communicate with the gateway, forming a star topology, as shown in Fig. 9 (a). In the second type, sensors are connected to a body's central processor in the first level for preprocessing to reduce the amount of raw data while saving energy, and then the preprocessed data are forwarded to a gateway in the second level, and thus forming a two-level communication topology, as shown in Fig. 9 (b).
## (s22) B. Beyond-Body Communication
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) HDT should be supported by the bidirectional real-time synchronization between any PT-VT pair to ensure high fidelity of VT [115]. This synchronization is, however, data-driven and delay-sensitive. Furthermore, data captured through sensing devices in the physical world are often complex, massive, heterogeneous, multiscale, and with high noise. In addition to real-time synchronization, interacting with VTs involves more complex information that needs to be transmitted between the PT and users in the physical world. Multimodal information, such as 3D virtual items, text, images, haptic feedback, smells, among others, needs to be transmitted in HDT under various applications to enhance the immersive experience. These specific characteristics place a significant burden on current communication networks. For instance, a massive number of PTs simultaneously interact with their respective VTs in the same area, which poses great challenges to bandwidth-limited communication to support the delivery of high-resolution contents [116]. To address these issues, we provide a review of cutting-edge communication solutions that can enable beyond-body communication for HDT.
## (s49) C. Surgery
Number of References: 8

(p49.0) According to WHO, more than 2.5% of patients die during surgery or after surgery. This high mortality rate can be attributed to in-surgery and post-surgery reactions, low precision of the used technologies as well as lack of suitable experience of surgeons [247]. Fortunately, AI-enabled HDT can be applied in preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative management for improve surgical accuracy and precision [52].

(p49.1) AI-assisted preoperative planning can be an essential method to guarantee surgical success. By the traditional way, surgeons prepare themselves for a surgical procedure by looking at medical records and images, such as CT and ultrasound of the concerned patient. This medical imaging-based preoperative planning routine includes anatomical classification, detection, segmentation and registration [248]. To ensure more accurate identification and classification of colon lesions and anatomical landmarks in colonoscopy images, Jheng et al. in [249] developed a CNN-based algorithm to classify benign or malignant lesions of thyroid cancer in ultrasound images. Rubinstein et al. in [250] applied an unsupervised learning approach to detect and localize prostate cancer foci in dynamic positron emission tomography (PET) images. To achieve this, they trained a deeply stacked convolutional autoencoder to extract statistical, kinetic biological and deep features from 4D PET images. Torosdagli et al. in [251] developed a fully convolutional DenseNet-based automated image analysis software for mandible segmentation of cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) images. A UDS-Net-based method was proposed in [252] to segment teeth from dental CBCT images. The proposed method consists of a U-Net with a dense block, comprising multiple densely connected convolutional layers and spatial dropout. Furthermore, a novel 3D deep supervised densely network (3D-DSD Net) was proposed in [253]. The proposed 3D-DSD Net consists of a U-Net with a dense block and additional skip connections, to execute CT data segmentation tasks of the small organs in the temporal bone.
## (s60) H. Generalized AI for HDT
Number of References: 2

(p60.0) HDT-enabled PH systems may integrate a variety of AI algorithms such as KNN and SVM that need to be trained by labelled data. However, most health-related data in HDT are unlabelled. To improve performance, new AI algorithms that can efficiently perform training using unlabeled data are required to facilitate real-time and reliable decisions in HDT. Furthermore, the development of training-specific AI models for each task is time-consuming. The development of general artificial intelligence (GAI) through transfer learning [266] and meta-learning [267] opens several opportunities of alleviating the need for redundant computation.
