# R E V I E W Dispersal of aquatic and terrestrial organisms by waterbirds: A review of current knowledge and future priorities

CorpusID: 256495808 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ba154b4a3a6252d3ab4874dd2fc8265a0b4ecc2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ba154b4a3a6252d3ab4874dd2fc8265a0b4ecc2)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s11) | Invertebrate traits
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) There have been no systematic attempts to assign dispersal syndromes to invertebrate propagules based on their morphology, and experimental studies testing their ability to disperse via waterbirds are much scarcer than for plants ( van Leeuwen, van der Velde, van Groenendael, et al., 2012;van Leeuwen et al., 2020). However, they are sufficient to suggest that propagule size and hardness are key traits. The survival rate after gut passage is higher for hard, resistant structures such as Artemia cysts than for softer propagules such as Corixidae eggs (Carbonell et al., 2021;Sánchez et al., 2012). Studies on snails indicate greater survival for smaller operculated species and those with greatest resistance to external stressors such as desiccation (Simonova et al., 2016; van Leeuwen, van der Velde, van Lith, et al., 2012). In general, retention times of invertebrate propagules are shorter than those of plant seeds (Viana et al., 2013), as expected from their smaller size, which facilitates passage through the gizzard.
## (s18) | G ENE TI C ANALYS E S A S TOOL S TO UNDER S TAND WATERB IRD ZOOCHORY
Number of References: 5

(p18.0) Genetic analyses have revolutionised our capability to study effective dispersal through waterbird vectors, by detecting colonisation routes and quantifying gene flow. In many genetic studies of aquatic plants and invertebrates, high levels of gene flow are detected which support an influence of bird movements. For example, van Leeuwen et al. (2013) demonstrated high rates of genetic interchange for Spanish populations of the alien aquatic snail Physella acuta, for which waterbird endozoochory has since been confirmed (Martín-Vélez et al., 2022). Martin et al. (2020) found that the population structure of the gastropod Planorbella trivolvis suggested LDD along a migratory flyway. Likewise, variation in mitochondrial clades of brine shrimp Artemia franciscana across the Americas is related to shorebird flyways (Muñoz et al., 2013). For cladocerans and the bryozoan Cristatella mucedo, Figuerola et al. (2005) found that waterfowl movements explained a significant amount of gene flow across North America.
## (s19) | UNDER S TANDING WATERB IRD MOVEMENTS AND MODELLING ZOOCHORY
Number of References: 7

(p19.0) It is vital to be able to predict the spatial distribution of propagules dispersed by waterbirds in order to understand the likely consequences for the spatial structure and population dynamics of the vectored organisms, as well as resulting changes in their distribution (Jeltsch et al., 2008;Russo et al., 2006).

(p19.1) Dispersal kernels (Nathan et al., 2012), demonstrate the scale(s) at which propagules are dispersed, as well as the frequency and extent of LDD events. Mechanistic models predict the spatial patterns of propagule dispersal and typically require data on two interacting subcomponents: (1) the retention time of the propagule in the digestive tract and (2) the displacement of the vector over that time (Côrtes & Uriarte, 2013). Sensitivity analysis for wintering waterbirds suggests that maximum gut retention times have less influence on seed dispersal kernels than the nature of bird movements per se, reinforcing the need to include quality tracking data to obtain valid predictions (Martín-Vélez, Leeuwen, et al., 2021). Some studies of endozoochory have made unrealistic estimates of the scale of dispersal, as they fail to accurately account for waterbird movement, and make simple extrapolations from a retention time curve by assuming propagule ingestion is followed by non-stop flights (e.g., Manning et al., 2021;Raulings et al., 2011). However, ringing recoveries have been used to make general predictions for kernels during seasonal migration, and have shown that migrating ducks can facilitate dispersal on a very large scale, predicting dispersal of over 3.5% of seeds to be over 100 km and up to 1,600 km, although maximum dispersal distances
