# D R A F T Where the Minor Things Are: A Pan-Eukaryotic Survey Suggests Neutral Processes May Dominate Minor Spliceosomal Intron Evolution

CorpusID: 254247979 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88926803eeb69f68a8cf414bc6b9132503bd5333](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88926803eeb69f68a8cf414bc6b9132503bd5333)

Fields: Biology

## (s18) Minor intron enrichment
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) A number of cases of minor-intron-rich lineages are worth highlighting. As shown in Fig. 3, the highest known minor intron density is found within the Amoebozoa; our recentlyreported data in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum [41] dwarfs all other known instances of local minor intron enrichment and appears to be an extremely rare example of significant minor intron gain. In the present study, we also find relatively high numbers of minor introns (compared to other amoebozoan species) in both the flagellar amoeba Pelomyxa schiedti (n=90) and the variosean amoeba Protostelium aurantium (labeled Planoprotostelium fungivorum 1 in Fig. 1) (n=265). Although the numbers of minor introns in these species conserved with minor introns in other lineages (e.g., human) are very low, in all cases we find at least some degree of conservation. For example, in alignments between human and P. aurantium orthologs, 11% of human minor introns are conserved as minor introns in P. aurantium, comparable to proportions shared between human and many plant species [56]; in alignments with P. schiedti the proportion of conserved human minor introns is closer to 2.5%, although this appears to largely be due to massive minor-to-major conversion of ancestral minor introns in P. schiedti, as 69% of the human minor introns in those alignments are paired with major introns in P. schiedti.
## (s19) Minor intron depletion
Number of References: 8

(p19.0) Punctuated and dramatic loss of minor introns is a hallmark feature of the minor splicing landscape, and it remains an outstanding question why certain lineages undergo either partial or complete loss of their ancestral minor intron complements [90]. Previous work has delineated many groups that appear to lack either minor introns, minor splicing components or both [3,73,48], but the diversity and scope of more recentlyavailable data motivated us to revisit this topic. In addition to the underlying data presented in Fig. 1, there are a number of cases of severe and/or complete minor intron loss that we highlight here. First, the amoebozoan Acanthamoeba castellanii has been found to contain both minor splicing apparatus as well as a limited number of minor-like intron sequences [73]. While it remains likely that this species contains a small number of minor introns based upon previous evidence, we do not find conservation of any of the twelve Acanthamoeba introns our pipeline classified as minor in either human or the more closely-related amoeobozoan Protostelium aurantium. This may not be particularly surprising, given the low absolute number of minor introns under consideration-between Protostelium aurantium and human, for example, ∼23% of Protostelium minor introns are conserved, and there are only two minor introns from Acanthamoeba in regions of good alignment with human orthologs. Furthermore, we do find a single shared minor intron position between Acanthamoeba and human when we disregard the local alignment quality and simply consider all introns in identical positions within aligned regions, which amounts to 20% of Acanthamoeba minor introns in such alignments.

(p19.1) Among clades with extreme but incomplete loss (a classic case in animals being Diptera), notable examples include the Acari (ticks and mites), bdelloid rotifers, and the springtail (Collembola) subclass of hexapods, We find no evidence at all for minor introns in the following taxa, many of which have not been reported before (those with citations corroborate earlier studies): tardigrades (e.g., Hypsibius exemplaris), Discoba (e.g., Trypanosoma, Leishmania) [48], Orchrophyta (stramenopiles), Alveolata (protists) [3,48]. The Acari, in addition to an overall extreme reduction in minor introns within the clade generally, also contains a number of cases of apparent (by comparative genomic analysis) complete loss in the parasitic mite Tropilaelaps mercedesae (though minor introns are present in sister taxa) and the earth mite Halotydeus destructor. We also report two other novel cases of apparent complete minor intron loss outside of Acari. First, in the Dipteran clade Chironomidae, we find scant evidence of minor introns in Clunio marinus, Polypedilum vanderplanki and Belgica antarctica, all of which also appear to be missing between half and three-quarters of their minor snRNAs. Second, the copepod species of crustaceans Tigriopus californicus and Eurytemora affinis each lack both conserved minor introns and 75% of the minor snRNA set.
## (s20) Minor introns have lower average conservation than major introns
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) A persistent result in the minor intron literature is that minor introns are more highly conserved than major introns (specifically, between animals and plants and even more specifically, between human and Arabidopsis thaliana) [4], although this assertion has been contradicted by at least one more recent analysis [56]. The claim that minor intron conservation exceeds major intron conservation largely rests upon the numbers of introns of both types found in identical positions within 133 alignments of orthologous human-Arabidopsis sequences, as reported in Table 1 of Basu et al. [4]. For major (U2-type) introns, they report 115 conserved as major in aligned ortholog pairs, and 1391 as either not present in one of the two orthologs or present as a minor intron; for minor (U12-type) introns, they find 20 conserved and 135 missing/converted. For each intron type, taking the number conserved and dividing by the total number of introns of that type present in the alignments results in conservation percentages of 7.6% ( 115 115+1391 ) for major introns and 12.9% ( 20 20+135 ) for minor introns (although the aforementioned values are not explicitly stated in the text), leading to the conclusion that minor introns are more highly conserved between human and Arabidopsis than are major introns. To the extent that we correctly understand their approach, however, we believe there may be a complication with this analysis.
## (s23) Minor intron loss vs. conversion
Number of References: 13

(p23.0) When an ancestral minor intron ceases to be a minor intron, it is thought to happen primarily in one of two ways: the entire intron sequence could be lost via, for example, reverse transcriptase-mediated reinsertion of spliced mRNA [44,17,90,33], or the intron could undergo sequence changes sufficient to allow it to be recognized instead by the major spliceosome [11,21,20,26]. From first-principles arguments based on the greater information content of the minor intron motifs [11,10,21] along with empirical analyses [44], it is assumed that intron conversion proceeds almost universally unidirectionally from minor to major. Previous work has also shown that the paradigm of full intron loss (sequence deletion) appears to dominate over conversion in minor introns [44]; we wondered whether any exceptions to this general pattern might exist. First, we assembled a manually-curated sample of species with significant/complete minor intron loss, along with a number of species with much higher minor intron conservation for comparison. For each selected species, we chose an additional species to compare against as well as a species to serve as an outgroup, and then identified orthologs between all members of the group to allow us to identify ancestral major/minor introns (see Methods for details) and estimate fractions of each intron type retained. Considering loss to include both sequence deletion as well as type conversion (which we assume to be unidirectional from minor to major, as discussed above), Fig. 5b shows that minor intron loss is more pronounced than major intron loss in the species we examined (also shown more generally in Fig. 5a).
## (s27) Minor intron-containing genes are longer and more intron-rich than genes with major introns only
Number of References: 8

(p27.0) Across the eukaryotic tree, genomes can vary widely in the number of introns contained in an average gene [72]. Some vertebrate genes have dozens or even hundreds of introns (e.g., the gene titin in human), whereas most genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae lack introns entirely. Given the fact that minor introns appear to be arranged nonrandomly throughout genomes where they are found [56,43,80,1] a natural question to ask is to what extent and in what ways are minor intron-containing genes (MIGs) different than those without minor introns? As far as we are aware, while various aspects of this question have been addressed by different groups [4,11,35], relatively little attention has been paid to possible differences in a number of basic gene attributes, namely gene length (excluding introns) and number of introns per unit coding sequence or "genic intron density" (a coinage we will use here to distinguish from our more frequent usage in this paper of "intron density" to describe some number of introns in terms of their relative share of the total introns in the genome). Strikingly, when we compare the genic intron density of MIGs to all other genes in species with minor introns, we find that MIGs are universally more intron-dense on average than non-MIGs (Fig. 9a). Furthermore, it appears that average MIG lengths (excluding intron sequences) are longer than other genes in the vast majority of species with minor introns (Fig. 9b)   gene length, none of those differences are statistically significant (Mann-Whitney U test, p ≥ 0.05). An in-depth analysis of this qualitative finding is beyond the scope of the current paper, but it seems an underappreciated difference between the two intron types and would benefit from further investigation.
## (s28) Comparison of minor and major intron lengths
Number of References: 3

(p28.0) While a number of studies have compared the length distributions of the different intron types in a limited assortment of genomes [43,91,56], without a large set of minor intron containing species to compare within it has been difficult to gauge the extent to which minor intron lengths might differ from major intron lengths. With the comprehensive minor intron data we have collected, we were able to ask a very basic question: what is the general relationship between average major and minor intron lengths? At a high level, the answer appears to be that major and minor intron lengths are roughly linearly correlated (Fig. 9c)-species with longer average major intron length tend to also have longer average minor intron length (Spearman's ρ = 0.625 for median values, p = 5.08 × 10 −16 ). One interesting aspect of the data in Fig. 9c is shown more clearly in the inset plot (which is simply the subset of the data in the main plot with length ≤ 1000 bp): certain species have significant minor intron loss 3.9 Reconstruction of ancestral minor intron densities (small markers) and large differences between average minor and major intron lengths. It should be noted that the set of species in that region is enriched for Drosophila (a taxonomically over-represented genus in the sequence databases), but includes many additional insect species as well.
## (s31) 3.11
Number of References: 3

(p31.0) No evidence for increased minor splicing in proliferating cells of R. irregularis spliceosome-specific non-coding RNAs (U11, U12, U4atac, and U6atac) (Fig. 11e,f). As found previously in animals and plants, we found a distinctive distribution of intron phase (position at which introns interrupt the coding codon series, whether between codons (phase 0) or after the first or second nucleotide of a codon (phase 1 and 2, respectively): whereas major introns typically show the pattern (ph0 > ph1 > ph2), minor introns in R. irregularis followed the minor pattern in animals and plants (ph1 > ph2 > ph0; [43,56]) (Fig. 11g). In total, we predict that 199 introns in R. irregularis are minortype (0.275% of 72,285 annotated introns), orders of magnitude higher than for other fungal species previously reported to contain minor introns (∼4 in Rhizopus oryzae and ∼20 in Phycomyces blakesleeanus) [3].
