# Summer Reading Program: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 255048877 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6575cdc78ee19e641a6e80a852002f8890ff94c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6575cdc78ee19e641a6e80a852002f8890ff94c1)

Fields: Education

## (s9) Long-term effect of summer reading programs in longitudinal studies
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  

(p9.1) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  
## (s25) Long-term effect of summer reading programs in longitudinal studies
Number of References: 4

(p25.0) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  

(p25.1) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  
