# Drivers of and barriers to routine adult vaccination: A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 252714337 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9eba66b4b2bab5b139963bad5de9ce96d78e8a2c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9eba66b4b2bab5b139963bad5de9ce96d78e8a2c)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) The review was conducted in accordance with the principles of narrative synthesis in systematic reviews 30 and is presented in accordance with the extension of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines on scoping reviews. 31 We conducted an electronic search on 1 February 2021, going back to 1 January 2016, using PubMed and Embase. The search algorithms are shown in Supplementary Table S1. We compiled all identified articles into a screening file, removed duplicates, and screened the remaining articles for eligibility using the inclusion and exclusion criteria outlined in Table 1. The primary inclusion criterion was the reporting of determinants (either drivers or barriers) of routine adult vaccination uptake. Article selection is illustrated in Figure 1. We selected articles based on their titles and abstracts during the first phase of screening; we then read each selected publication in a second phase of screening, and articles were included or excluded based on the full text. All selections and rejections were confirmed by two different reviewers. Items extracted from each selected article were as follows: title, authors, country/countries of origin, study design, study setting, number of subjects, and analysis type. Additional items of particular interest for this review were the vaccine(s) type being studied and the outcomes reported, including quantitative data on vaccination uptake and qualitative data on patient attitudes and experiences. Data were extracted into an Excel spreadsheet by one reviewer and checked for accuracy by a second reviewer.
