# A Review of the Research on the Evaluation Metrics for Automatic Grammatical Error Correction System

CorpusID: 252724722 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4241a0cb51c3780c57cae8b4f4d28341ccba2176](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4241a0cb51c3780c57cae8b4f4d28341ccba2176)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s3) Max Match.
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) Max match, also known as M 2 [12], mainly evaluates the error correction effect of GEC system based on the phrase level edit lattice. e metric first calculates the editing lattice between the source sentence and the hypothetical sentence. e Levenshtein distance [13], , which is based on many inserts, deletions, and replacements needed to change one string into another, is used as the basis for the calculation process. For example, to convert kitten into sitting, the conversion steps are as follows: kitten (k ⟶ s), sittin (e ⟶ i), sitting (⟶ g), and the editing distance is 3. e above example is the calculation method of editing distance at the character level, while M 2 is mainly based on the calculation at the phrase level, that is, the minimum editing operation required to replace one phrase with another. M 2 matches the editing result of the error correction system with the editing between the source sentence and the reference sentence. e higher the coincidence degree, the better the result and the better the system performance. e method of evaluating edit distance includes three measurement dimensions: P (precision), R (recall), and F. P is used to calculate the precision rate of error correction results, and R is used to calculate the recall rate, as shown in formulas (1) and (2).
