# Microgripper design and evaluation for automated l-wire assembly: a survey

CorpusID: 254050894 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e757420918c9d0be9d4410e9b4ef032a358c2167](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e757420918c9d0be9d4410e9b4ef032a358c2167)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) In recent decades, demands for micromanipulation have increased in industrial assembly fields due to the nature of technology progressing to micro scales components assembly. Micromanipulation is the study of positioning micro-objects ranging from 1 to 100 lm in size. These micro-sizes can be a challenge task to manoeuvre without the use of micromanipulator tools due to additional attractive forces, viewing difficulties, high precision, and accuracy requirements (Adriaens et al. 2000;Yuan et al. 2015;Duc et al. 2006). To improve product quality and lead times, the use of robotic automation is being investigated to support micromanipulation equipment. There are two major techniques used for micromanipulation known as contact and non-contact methods, examples of these technologies are the electromagnetic fields, piezoelectric materials, electrostatic forces, electro thermal effect, shape memory alloys, magnetic guiding systems, and optical technologies (Nikoobin and Niaki 2012). These technologies can be utilised in the form of probes, needles, grippers and contactless devices. These methods have various advantages and disadvantages and are all at different stages of continuous development within research domain. The following section will discuss and review these methods.
## (s1) Microgrippers
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Microgrippers are commonly developed in order to manipulate micro-objects, such as microwires and microspheres. It has been stated that microgrippers are often the most suggested technology in use for micromanipulation, often due to their reliable accuracy, low cost, wide jaw aperture, and variable applied force (Nikoobin and Niaki 2012). All microgrippers are developed with different structure designs and different actuator types to control the gripper. A standard microgripper normally consists of a pair of gripping jaws, an actuator mechanism, and an amplification method (Long et al. 2017). Microgrippers have two major classifications based on their structure; cantilever and flexible hinge, these will be evaluated initially below.
## (s3) Actuator types of microgrippers
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) When developing a microgripper, the choice of actuator remains an important part of the process. The actuator is the component of the microgripper which applies force to the structure to enable the jaws to open and close. Throughout the development of microgrippers, various technologies have been trialled to find the most suitable type of actuator, such technologies include; piezoelectric ( Fig. 1) electromagnetic (Fig. 2), electrostatic (Fig. 3), electro-thermal (Fig. 4), and shape memory alloys (SMA) (Fig. 5). A literature report published an algorithm which described the design process of a microgripper (Nikoobin and Niaki 2012). Within this report, the variables that were capable of affecting the design requirements of a microgripper were highlighted, such as jaw aperture, shape of jaw, and actuator type (Nikoobin and Niaki 2012). A state of the art review was published afterwards, which describes the use of different actuator types used within microgrippers (Jia and Xu 2013). Discoveries from the paper and other research are explained in the next five sections of this review. The types of actuators will be evaluated by comparing the advantages and disadvantages for each (Table 2).  
## (s4) Electromagnetic microgrippers
Number of References: 10

(p4.0) Electromagnetic actuated microgrippers utilize electromagnets to open and close the jaw of the gripper. This type of microgripper is often utilized in the form of a cantilever style gripper as presented in Kim et al. (2005). The most common assembly of this actuator type is to place the electromagnet in the centre of two magnetic arms and jaws. Electrical current is conducted through the electromagnet and as it is increased, the magnetic arms are attracted towards it and the aperture size of the gripper tips decreases. Development and experimental trials have been carried out on this type of gripper. An electromagnetically actuated microgripper was developed that is capable of producing a maximum jaw gap of 250 lm (Liaw et al. 2008). Trials of the gripper consisted of testing the grasping technique on a 50 lm metal wire and a 125 lm glass fibre. Manipulation of both objects were successfully gripped without errors in release or accuracy. The gripping force of the system was adjustable with an alteration of the electromagnet current, producing a maximum gripping force of 130 lN (Liaw et al. 2008). However, concerns were noted about this system regarding to heating problems. While the microgripper was in operation its metallic components, manufactured using cold laser cutting, were noticed to increase in temperature from 27 to 38째C over the course of a half hour where the length of the gripper arm increased by approximately 0.1 lm/째C (Liaw et al. 2008). This causes problems over time as the position and accuracy of the gripper may become unknown and will produce errors during the manipulation process. A similar  gripper was developed with the intention of becoming an automated system for the purpose of manipulating a microwire (Ruiz et al. 2018). The gripper jaw had a cantilever structure using electromagnetic actuator. The gripper system was developed in order to manipulate a 50-70 lm diameter copper wire and move it to a desired position (Ruiz et al. 2018). The research trialled various arm lengths and jaw angles of microgripper and recognised the disadvantages of using a long tip as it reduces the clamping force available to grip the wire (Ruiz et al. 2018).

(p4.1) Further experiments were carried out using different weight of objects at different orientations. The results concluded the microgripper's capability of manipulating the copper wire as required. Despite these successes, one report claims that producing a microgripper with an electromagnetic actuator is not preferable due to the complexity of the structure and the negative interference from external electromagnetic fields (Haddab et al. 2000). An additional disadvantage was that these types of microgrippers are often heavier than others due to the components required and may slow down the manoeuvring process and reduce the systems precision (Haddab et al. 2000). These actuator types are agreed to be able to produce a large jaw movement and gripper force which is ideal for larger object. However, due to the structure and components required it is difficult to scale down and hence a limitation for micromanipulation (Kolahdoozan et al. 2017).
## (s6) Electrostatic microgripper
Number of References: 19

(p6.0) Electrostatically actuated microgrippers are utilised by applying a positive and negative voltage to two elements of the microgripper which then attract or repel each other due to the electrostatic force created. The structure of these microgrippers are frequently found in literature to be in a comb formation, which consists of two interlocking combs (Kalaiarasi and Thilagar 2012). As a voltage is applied to the combs, an electrostatic charge is produced, and the combs either attract or repel. This structure is integrated with a set of jaw, which enables them to open or close. The structure is easy to fabricate, requires a low voltage, can produce a large tip deflection (e.g. 70 lm, Table 3) and has a faster response to a change of voltage in comparison to other methods, such as electro-thermal (Yang and Xu 2017). In the 2013 review by Jai and Xu, it was described that the benefits of using an electrostatically actuated microgripper are that it can obtain a large jaw aperture change whilst producing no hysteresis effects which produces a predictable response (Jia and Xu 2013). Another report researched electrostatically controlled microgrippers with the capability of manipulating a micro-object from 0 to 100 lm between the voltages of 0 and 33 V respectively (Yuan et al. 2015). This report developed a novel mechanism for the gripper to self-lock whilst operating, which enabled the gripper to hold an object for a long time without the need to apply voltage during these periods (Yuan et al. 2015). The benefit of this is to ensure that the gripper does not caused unnecessary stress or damage on the object and further reduces the amount of energy used by the microgrippers (Yuan et al. 2015). The system was trialled by successfully holding a metal wire with a diameter of 40.6 lm (Yuan et al. 2015). Electrostatically actuated grippers have been integrated with jaws where the applied force can be precisely controlled (Chen et al. 2009). This gripper was additionally developed to have three tweezers within the gripper to enable the system to grasp a wide range of object (Chen et al. 2009). The grippers themselves were controlled using electrostatic forces, the force sensors utilize piezoelectric materials to detect the force that is being applied to the object (Chen et al. 2009). Each arm tip is capable of a 25 lm deflection although the system as a whole can manipulate objects between 30 and 130 lm (Chen et al. 2009). The gripper was trialled on a variety of sized polystyrene microspheres of sizes between 30 and 80 lm (Chen et al. 2009). It was measured that a force of 350 lN and 100 lN were applied to the object, with the driving voltage of 75 V and 58 V respectively (Chen et al. 2009). In the medical industry, different types of piezoelectric actuated microgrippers have been developed and utilised. It was suggested that microtechnological devices such as microgrippers can be used to assist in minimally invasive surgery and other challenging scenarios regarding to technicality and small-scale sizes (Gaafar and Zarog 2017). One type of gripper developed in 2017 contained a comb structure described above and different types of materials were studied for use in the conducting and insulating components of the gripper (Gaafar and Zarog 2017). The applied voltage was of 100 V with the displacement of the two material types of 19.66 lm and 32.5 lm, this highlights that the choice of material is an important factor to consider (Gaafar and Zarog 2017). Another form of electrostatically actuated comb driven microgripper was developed in 2012 where the researchers simulated the grippers with various shapes of combs (Kalaiarasi and Thilagar 2012). The trialled shapes included a square notch, a 2 stepped notch, small v-shaped notch and large v-notch. From the shapes suggested, the large v-shaped notch produced the greatest jaw tip displacement of 6.66 lm and 21.25 lm with voltages of 14 V and 25 V respectively (Kalaiarasi and Thilagar 2012). However, the jaw displacement of this microgripper was significantly less than other structures, therefore it should be noted that the applied voltage in this design is furthermore less compared to others, resulting in a decrease in energy consumption. Another survey stated that the electrostatic actuated microgrippers reviewed, showed various jaw displacement ranges between 2.5 and 275 lm, with an applied voltage range between 0 and 185 V, a force from the jaws of 4 nN to 2.5 mN and an amplification factor between 4 and 5.9 ). The jaw displacement ranges of these electrostatically actuated microgrippers are able to achieve smaller jaw displacements compared to the piezoelectric actuated grippers as above. This suggests that electrostatic actuators are better suited to manipulate micro-objects within the range of 1-100 lm in compared to other microgripper actuator types. However, there are operational limitations such as requiring a high operating voltage to produce a high jaw displacement, unable to achieve high gripper forces and large structure sizes (Jia and Xu 2013).
## (s12) Transmission systems
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Different forms of transmission systems have been studied for use in surgical robotic systems between controller and gripper, such transmission systems use include cable, fluid, smart material and magnetic. Each of these types have been stated to have multiple advantages and disadvantages with continuing research being conducted for each. Cable-actuated systems are capable of producing high gripping force however they often involve complicated and expensive fabrication processes, hysteresis issues and a short lifespan of ten surgical procedures due to the repetitive bending of the system (Le et al. 2016). Fluid-actuated transmission systems are able to supply a high force particularly at microscale and also achieve large bending angles, on the other hand they also involve a complicated system, require a high power supply and have hysteresis issues (Le et al. 2016). Another form of actuator uses shape memory alloys which are capable of applying a large force and displacement, but also can apply the force along three axis (Le et al. 2016). This form of transmission however has a low frequency response to controls and is stated to have issues with accurate control (Le et al. 2016). The final actuator type reviewed uses a magnetic system which is capable of transferring motion wirelessly, however hysteresis and linearity issues do occur (Le et al. 2016). Therefore, it is not clear what the most recommended system to utilize is when producing a tele-operated surgical robotic system as each transmission method has various advantages and disadvantages associated to them. It is recommended that further research should be conducted to overcome or alleviate the disadvantages of the selected system (Le et al. 2016). Despite the amount of research studied in this area, it is important to note that these types of grippers are designed to handle biological material that are relatively large compared to microscale objects as discussed in previous chapters. For example, the smallest diameter of a human arteries is around 100 lm, which is stated as the maximum limit of microscale objects.
## (s13) Magnetic guiding systems
Number of References: 22

(p13.0) Another method of object manipulation involves the use of a magnetic field to guide non-magnetic flexible wire by attaching a magnetic tip to the wire's end. This method has been recently studied for use in the medical industry where minimally invasive surgery is become ever more researched. The method is used to accurately position a wire whilst inside of a patient. One paper studied into externally manipulating a wire whilst inside of a patient's veins (Yeow et al. 2016). The system developed can adjust the angle of the flexible wire by using a robotically controlled magnetic field. As the flexible wire itself was nonmagnetic, the tip of the wire was coated in a ferro-magnetic material and hence could be controlled by the magnetic field (Yeow et al. 2016). The magnetic field itself was produced by applying a current to several electromagnetic coils distributed around the manipulation zone (Yeow et al. 2016). The magnetic tip of the wire was able to be adjusted by altering the voltage applied to the coils (Yeow et al. 2016). The system was tested by measuring the deflection of the wire tip and comparing it to the input movement expected (Yeow et al. 2016). The measured deflection angle was found to be 20째, resulting in a deflection displacement of around 7 mm. One of the limitations with the system was that the size of the manipulation zone and the deflection angle were both limited by the applied magnetic field. It was stated that the flux density of their system was 20 mT, whereas other researchers used values around 100 mT (Yeow et al. 2016). By increasing the magnetic flux density, they would be able to increase the size of the work zone and the deflection of the wire (Yeow et al. 2016). This method is capable of adjusting the position of a wire on a fine scale. This type of system has the potential to be utilized in order to manipulate certain micro-objects e.g. wires. However, this research paper does not state the precision of the system and therefore may not be accurate enough to be able to manipulate micro-objects to a desired location as indicated. Another area of the medical industry where this form of technology has been researched for is related to the internal delivery of drugs to a specific location inside of a patients' body (Shen et al. 2015). The research developed an electromagnetic field which was used to alter the position and alignment of microcapsules which contained both the drug required, but also iron particles which enabled the capsule to be positioned by the magnetic field (Shen et al. 2015). The electromagnetic field was created by using a system containing Helmoholz and Maxwell coil pairs which produce a uniform and gradient magnetic field respectively. This system successfully enabled to position the magnetic particles (Shen et al. 2015). The design of the drug delivery system had approximately a 21 mm 3 manipulation zone due to the size of the coils, this system design could become unsuitable if larger components are required to be manipulated (Shen et al. 2015). The use of permanent magnets as a guiding system has also been researched for the medical industry (Schiemann et al. 2004). A guiding zone was reported by placing two magnets parallel to each other and on either side of the patient and were capable of producing a 0.1 T magnetic field (Schiemann et al. 2004). The magnets were able to be rotated and re-positioned to orientate the magnetic tip of the flexible wire. The tip of the wire comprised of a neodymium iron boron magnet due to its highly magnetic properties (Schiemann et al. 2004). The magnetic system was successfully able to rotate the tip of the wire in any direction. Although the angle of the tip was controlled using non-contact external magnetic fields, the progression of the wire into the patient is carried out manually. The magnetic field rotated the tip of the wire by an angle of 90째a nd it was calculated that a force of 0.56 g would be applied by the tip onto the internal walls of the patient (Schiemann et al. 2004). The paper concluded that the developed system was capable of accurate positioning of the magnetic tip of the wire whilst inside of an artificial test chambers, however the accuracy of the positioning of the tip was not specified. A complex system comprised of a series of eight electromagnets has also been developed (Kummer et al. 2010). The configuration of the system was capable of producing a non-uniform magnetic field throughout the manipulation zone (Kummer et al. 2010). The system, named OctoMag, was designed to control microrobots inside of a patient, whilst also to be used to manipulate a magnetic tipped wire, similar to the systems presented previously in this section. It is capable of manipulating an isolated microrobot by five degrees of freedom, not only its orientation, but also its position within the manipulation zone (Kummer et al. 2010). It utilizes a vision system as a form of feedback, to monitor the accurate location and orientation of the magnetic object. It was stated in the report that the Octomag system had the potential to be reduced in size and could be used for micromanipulation under a microscope (Kummer et al. 2010). During experimentation conducted with the microrobots it was said stated that a variation of 29.77 lm was present. Another successful magnetic navigation system has been described in Chun et al. (2007). The system includes two permanent magnets situated on either side of the patient. The magnets were able to create a 0.08 T uniform field across the patient and steer a tethered wire with a magnetised tip through the body (Chun et al. 2007). In the paper, it stated that different tip structures were trialled which included various number of magnets along the tip. It was concluded that the constructed tip which comprised of four magnets was the most controllable tether and therefore the most successful during tests (Chun et al. 2007).
## (s14) Probe technology
Number of References: 32

(p14.0) The use of probe structures has also been studied to manipulation micro-objects. Many different technologies have been studied such as optical, mechanical, magnetic and electrostatic (Kawamoto 2009). The method of using an electrostatic force for manipulation has been successfully achieved by many researchers and is often intended for the manipulation of micro-particles such as biological cells and micro-mechanical and micro-electronic objects. One report concluded that tools for micromanipulation such as probes are preferred due to their simple design, whilst microgrippers involve a more complex design and are often delicate and expensive (Power and Yang 2015). Electrostatic probes are often capable of adhering to particles between the sizes of 10 lm to 1 mm (Kawamoto 2009;Takahashi et al. 2001). It has been stated that use of the probes are often limited to the manipulation of small spheres within this size as the adhesion forces, including van der Waals, electrostatic and liquid bridge forces are often larger than the gravitational forces that oppose them (Konno et al. 2005;Masuda et al. 2006;Saito et al. 2003). It is less common to be able to attract larger metallic micro objects as the electrostatic attraction is often weaker than the gravitational forces applied to it (Konno et al. 2005). It is stated that these adhesion forces occur between, the substrate and the particle and also the probe and the particle (Konno et al. 2005;Masuda et al. 2006). To ensure that the probe is capable of picking up the particle, the adhesion force between particle and probe must be larger than the sum of adhesion forces between substrate and particle and the gravitational force applied to the particle (Konno et al. 2005). These forces are affected by the materials and shape of the probe, particle and substrate (Konno et al. 2005). The force between the probe and the particle is enhanced by applying a voltage to the probe which increases the electrostatic force available (Konno et al. 2005). It is this force that ensures that the particle can be manipulated by the probe. The fabrication of the probes is typically manufactured from tungsten wire with a diameter of approximately 100 lm. The wire is often polished and coated in an insulating material to avoid the probe from short circuiting. Researchers have stated that the fabrication and operation of the probe is simple (Kawamoto and Tsuji 2011). Many configurations of probes have been developed and often consist of one, two or three metallic cores where a voltage is applied to. From this, a non-uniform electrostatic field is formed around the probe and generates a Coulomb force that is capable of attracting both non-conductive and conductive micro-particles towards it (Kawamoto 2009). It was established that for conductive micro-particles, the resistivity of the microparticle material must be between 10 7 and 10 9 X cm while the voltage of the probe was 10 V (Kawamoto 2009). The probe is capable of releasing non-conductive particles by setting the voltage to zero (Kawamoto 2009). The same cannot be done for conductive particles as even after the voltage has reached zero the Coulomb adhesion force will still be present and will continue to attract the particle to the probe tip (Kawamoto 2009). The researchers investigated different elements of the probe and the particle to study what would influence the attraction forces of both. Such elements were the dimensions and voltage of the probe and dimensions and material of the micro-object. Even though that increasing the voltage increased the attraction forces, the voltage limit must be noted due to the insulated breakdown properties of the probe (Kawamoto 2009). The research results demonstrated that the duel-core probe, was capable of picking up non-conductive microparticles with diameters of 150-2000 lm and a weight of about 1-1000 lg (Kawamoto 2009). Another configuration of probe, with a duel-core and a staggered tip, was capable of manipulating similar sized particles, with diameters of 100-1000 lm and a weight of 0.6-800 lg (Kawamoto 2009). The single tip probe configuration, which was coated in a gold layer was able to move much smaller particles, with diameters of 30-500 lm and a weight of 0.01-50 lg (Kawamoto 2009). The same researcher later demonstrated that the developed probe was able to pick up slightly conductive, non-spherical, lunar dust particles (Kawamoto and Tsuji 2011). The system was similar, if not identical to the probe developed in Kawamoto (2009). Another researcher carried out a similar electrostatic tip fabrication, but instead of using a tungsten wire they simply used a cantilever from an atomic force microscope due to it being an appropriate and repeatable shape and size (Denisyuk et al. 2014). This ensures that the experiment will be repeatable in the future. The experimentation of the cantilever probe was carried out on three different types of particles (Denisyuk et al. 2014). The particles were a mixture of spherical and octahedron in shape. During experimentation, it was noticed that the octahedron shaped particles could only be picked up while the probe was in contact with one of its vertices (Denisyuk et al. 2014). The researchers also produced a theoretical model of the manipulation of one of the particles. Using the model, they calculated that the probe was capable of attracting a particle while the distance between the probe tip and the particle was smaller than the diameter of the particle (Denisyuk et al. 2014). Another research that was conducted by previously was capable of manipulating 40-80 lm diameter gold spheres using a fine probe (Konno et al. 2005). This was accomplished by applying a 20-50 DC voltage to the probe (Konno et al. 2005). The spheres were then released by changing the voltage to zero. The researchers proved that their probe and system was capable of picking up the particle and also welding it to an additional particle by significantly increasing the voltage (Konno et al. 2005). As stated before, it was demonstrated that their developed probes were capable of manipulating micro-particles with a mass between 0.01 and 1000 lg (Kawamoto 2009). The mass of the wire is within the stated values which implies that this method would be capable of manipulating a variety of wire materials and sizes.
## (s16) Conclusion
Number of References: 3

(p16.0) From the previously stated various microgripper actuator types, shape memory alloys actuated microgrippers previously developed have displayed large jaw displacement and high gripping force compared to other types (Kyung et al. 2008). The presented disadvantages such as high hysteresis error, large energy usage and a slow response time were agreed to not greatly impact the manipulation process of the given task . It seemed that this technology was the most suitable to manipulate l-wire. The reviewed literature failed to include a suitable microgripper design that would be capable of grasping and positioning a micro-sized object such as l-wire and larger sized objects. It is deemed that a solution to this problem must be addressed. Additionally, many microgrippers are found to be inaccurate, often due to the fabrication process which cause an undesired asymmetrical structure of microgripper (Liang et al. 2018). A solution to this issue has been previously presented while utilizing piezoelectric materials as a form of actuator (Liang et al. 2018), however, alternative actuation methods are being researched and there is potential for these to achieve a higher increase in grasp accuracy when used with specific microgripper designs. The microgripper design will need to ensure that a large range of objects can be grasped ranging from sizes of the l-wire to different components such as PCBs. The developed microgripper must be versatile enough to assist with the manipulation of other micro-objects including those in other alternative industrial sectors.
