# Activated flux induced Tungsten inert gas welding of Ferrous alloys -A Review

CorpusID: 250672916 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59695494b94e46a76aad6363613f88f3a290d2a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59695494b94e46a76aad6363613f88f3a290d2a3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) Ferrous alloys have a diverse range of applications in the area of aerospace, automotive, construction, chemical processing industries. A number of welding processes such as shielded metal arc welding, friction stir welding, metal inert gas welding, submerged arc welding are employed to weld thin sections of of ferrous alloys. Electron beam welding, laser beam welding and plasma arc welding are used for welding thick plates [38][39][40][41]. However, all these processes has their own limitations which prevent the frequent use of these processes [27]. One of the most used welding processes for joining ferrous metals is gas tungsten arc (GTA) welding. Tungsten Inert Gas (TIG) welding is another name for GTA welding. In this procedure, a tungsten electrode is utilized to create an arc. Gases such as argon or helium that shield are used to protect the oxidation of the weld zone and other ambient contaminants during welding. TIG welding has a number of benefits over other welding techniques, including the ability to weld various materials, no production of spatter or slag, no sparks, and no smoke, and the ability to weld in all positions. The procedure has several significant limitations, including the need for operators with high levels of competence, an increased UV radiation level, c) ICDMME-2021 Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2272 (2022) 012020 IOP Publishing doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/2272/1/012020 2 Excellent coordination between the eyes and the hands, and d) the difficulty to achieve a larger penetration weld volume in a single pass [22]. Since TIG welding delivers a lower weld depth in a single pass, it is becoming less common in various industrial applications, which is one of these restrictions. As a result, the number of passes required to complete the welding will rise, as will the time it takes to complete the weldment.
## (s2) Effect of fluxes during TIG welding of ferrous alloys
Number of References: 9

(p2.0) Vidyarthy et al., [2] studied single pass, A-TIG welding of the 8 mm thick P91 steel, Weld bead shape, heat input, and angular deformation were examined using CeO2 and MoO3 fluxes. A 200% and 300% increase in penetration of a joint were achieved with fluxes, CeO2 and MoO3, respectively. Due to Marangoni convection and narrowing of arc, this was deduced. Wu et al., [3] The effects of ZrO and CaF were investigated on the weld pool's temperature history and the thermo physical characteristics of the weld bead. When compared to TIG welding, the average temperature at the measuring point rose by 70 C. Because of the narrowing of the arc and turnaround of Marangoni convection, a maximum penetration of 6.4 mm was attained for 3 percent zirconium oxide and 1 percent calcium fluoride concentrations. Vora et al., [4] conducted studies on A-TIG welding of 6 mm thick martensitic/ferritic steel utilizing TiO2 as flux. The microstructures, micro hardness, tensile strength, and impact strength of these welded joints were compared after single and double heat treatment after the weld. Because of the presence of M23C6 and MX carbide precipitates with a high content of Cr, W, and Ta, the double PWHT joint showed a ductility and yield strength improvements. Vasudevan [5], TIG welding of 10-12 mm thick type 304LN and 316LN stainless steels in a single pass, a multi-component activated flux was created. The use of activated flux in TIG welding of stainless steels 316LN and 304LN resulted in a considerable penetration increase of 10-12 mm. A-Flux Coating (over the weld's surface)  [6] the effect of heat treatment after weld on microstructure of zone of fusion and mechanical qualities of Inconel X750 A-TIG weldments utilizing a compound flux of 50 percent SiO2 + 50 percent MoO3 was investigated. Using the compound flux at 190 A current, complete penetrations was obtained in a single pass. The strength of Inconel X750 weldments that have been heat-treated after welding improved, reaching 1142 MPa, it is more similar to the parent metal strength. Cai et al., [7] Cerium oxide's influence on BS700MC super steel weld penetration, microstructure, and mechanical properties were looked into. It was discovered that utilizing Cerium oxide as a flux, enhanced the penetration of super steel welds. The main cause of increased weld penetration is thought to be a change in Marangoni convection. It was also discovered that a cerium oxide level of 15% resulted in the greatest penetration. Ramkumar et al., [8] the mechanical characteristics of weldments produced by TIG welding 5 mm thick Inconel 718 plates were compared. Fluxes of SiO2 and TiO2 are used to prepare the weldment. With a current of 140 A, complete depth was achieved. Both weldments cracked at the parent metal during the tensile test. When compared to the parent metal, weldments aided by SiO2 and TiO2 flux had improved tensile strength characteristics. Due to the presence of oxide flux inclusions, both weldments had low impact toughness.

(p2.1) Ramkumar et al., [9] ferritic stainless steel AISI 430 weldability was investigated using TIG welding with active fluxes and without. SiO2 and Fe2O3 were employed as fluxes. Both fluxes improved weld penetration as welding current increased. The arc constriction effect and Marangoni flow reversal were the reason. Tensile failure occurred at the parent metal with SiO2 flux due to the occurrence of martensite with a low carbon content, whereas For Fe2O3 weldment, because of the existence of more oxygen, failure occurred at the fusion zone. Vasantharaja et al., [10] during multipass TIG and A-TIG welding of 10 mm thick 316LN stainless steel plates, the residual stress distribution and contortion values were investigated. A-TIG weld joints demonstrated less residual stress and deformation due to the lack of filler metal, single pass straight sided edge preparation welding, and a more intense heat source.
## (s3) Influence of welding parameters on weld geometry
Number of References: 7

(p3.0) Various researchers investigated the characteristics of weld current, arc length, shielding gas composition, welding speed and arc voltage on weld geometry. Due to the supremacy of Marangoni convection over aerodynamic drag force, high current was shown to increase the depth of penetration in the A-TIG welding process [26]. Due to the high heat input, reduced welding pace results in a deep and narrow fusion zone, causing inward Marangoni convection [27]. The type of fluxes employed had an effect on the arc voltage. When compared to metallic fluxes like Al2O3, nonmetallic fluxes like SiO2 increased arc voltage due to their higher resistivity [28]. The initial rise in arc length raises the arc voltage, which improves penetration depth. As the arc length further increases, the arc voltage decreases, resulting in a shallow weld [29]. The shielding gas's ionization potential determines the heat input and hence the fusion area of the weld zone. The most common shielding gases are argon and helium. On SS304, Austenitic stainless steel, and SS316, many investigations have been conducted on mixing argon and helium with other gases such as oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen [30,31,32]. The addition of these gases enhanced the d/w ratio.
