# Why vaccines fail against Piscirickettsiosis in farmed salmon and trout and how to avoid it: A review OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY

CorpusID: 253598833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0cb12cd42ce0b19d41f9493f31bea0eb405868ae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0cb12cd42ce0b19d41f9493f31bea0eb405868ae)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s4) Farm-management factors
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) At least two management practices have been strongly associated with increased outbreaks of P. salmonis: the number of bath treatments used to combat sea lice and overcrowding. As previously mentioned, sea lice have been associated with increased mortality in vaccinated fish. If the load of sea lice is high, the number of antiparasite dip treatments carried out by the farming centers increases (52), and higher rates of bathing treatments are associated with a higher risk of mortality attributed to SRS (7,58), due to the acute stress generated by the bathing process. Another factor of farm management is the high number of fish per cage. Salmon overcrowding intensifies friction and fish aggressiveness which causes skin damage (7).
## (s6) Fish-related factors
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) Even under optimal conditions, some fish may not be protected after vaccination, which may be a direct consequence of the host's genetic variability (20). Natural variation in the resistance against P. salmonis in unvaccinated fish has been demonstrated between species (61), as well as within species, including Atlantic salmon, rainbow trout, and Coho salmon (62, 63). Recently, it has been described that vaccine efficacy is also influenced by heritable genetic variation among the hosts, and, as above, differences both between and within species have been observed (20). Results have shown that there are fish families in which the vaccine does not protect against P. salmonis and other family groups in which the vaccine-mediated protection is high (20). In Figure 6, we represent this phenomenon, while in some fish, the protection added by vaccination increased the survival and reduce the bacterial load (right fish) in other, there is no added protection by vaccination (left fish). Currently, the genes that control this genetic variation in vaccinated fish are unknown. Moreover, it is hypothesized that the genes involved in natural resistance in unvaccinated fish may not be the same genes involved in resistance in vaccinated fish (20).
