# Phenotypic techniques and applications in fruit trees: a review

CorpusID: 255946744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fa9a42c0901713fecf87423f0dcc69e1aa40759](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fa9a42c0901713fecf87423f0dcc69e1aa40759)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Background
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Plant phenotype describes the expression of plant traits. Phenotypes are studied at multiple levels, including cells, tissues, organs, individual plants and the whole orchard [1]. Plant phenotypic traits include but are not limited to plant height, biomass content, water state, and yield [2]. The expression of phenotypic traits is controlled by a large number of genetic factors. Therefore, accurate analysis of phenotypic traits is of great significance for the selection of dominant genes and marker-assisted selection [3,4].
## (s2) VIS-NIR spectroscopy
Number of References: 20

(p2.0) VIS-NIR spectroscopy is a new non-destructive measurement technique. Based on the different reflection and radiation information of different substances in the same spectral band, VIS-NIR spectroscopy is widely used to detect chemical substances [20,21], soil [22], minerals [23] and food [24]. The following articles in this section describe the principle of VIS-NIR spectroscopy and its application in the study of fruit tree phenotypes.

(p2.1) VIS-NIR spectroscopy is a new non-destructive measurement technique. Based on the different reflection and radiation information of different substances in the same spectral band, VIS-NIR spectroscopy is widely used to detect chemical substances [20,21], soil [22], minerals [23] and food [24]. The following articles in this section describe the principle of VIS-NIR spectroscopy and its application in the study of fruit tree phenotypes.
## (s3) The principle of VIS-NIR spectroscopy
Number of References: 16

(p3.0) Electromagnetic waves in a range of 400-2500 nm are often used in VIS-NIR spectroscopy [25]. Some of the groups in a substance, especially those containing hydrogen (C-H, O-H, N-H), absorb energy in VIS-NIR spectroscopy, resulting in changes in the reflected or transmitted spectrum [26]. When the substance content of the sample to be measured is different, various spectral curves will be generated. The spectral comprises broad bands arising from overlapping absorptions [27,28]. Therefore, the corresponding relationship between spectra and the parameters to be measured can be established based on spectral features, to carry out quantitative analysis of parameters.

(p3.1) Electromagnetic waves in a range of 400-2500 nm are often used in VIS-NIR spectroscopy [25]. Some of the groups in a substance, especially those containing hydrogen (C-H, O-H, N-H), absorb energy in VIS-NIR spectroscopy, resulting in changes in the reflected or transmitted spectrum [26]. When the substance content of the sample to be measured is different, various spectral curves will be generated. The spectral comprises broad bands arising from overlapping absorptions [27,28]. Therefore, the corresponding relationship between spectra and the parameters to be measured can be established based on spectral features, to carry out quantitative analysis of parameters.
## (s4) The application of VIS-NIR spectroscopy
Number of References: 8

(p4.0) Portable spectrometer is a frequently used instrument in VIS-NIR spectroscopy studies, which can be applied for non-destructive detection. The sample can be measured directly with a light probe [27]. Moving the spectrometer to the sample location, rather than moving the sample to the laboratory, is the most convenient feature of portable spectrometers [28]. Different spectrometers have different spectral band ranges, and it is critical to select the suitable one for detection. Table 1 summarizes the application of VIS-NIR spectroscopy in fruit tree phenotypic studies in the field, and the details are described in the following sections.

(p4.1) Portable spectrometer is a frequently used instrument in VIS-NIR spectroscopy studies, which can be applied for non-destructive detection. The sample can be measured directly with a light probe [27]. Moving the spectrometer to the sample location, rather than moving the sample to the laboratory, is the most convenient feature of portable spectrometers [28]. Different spectrometers have different spectral band ranges, and it is critical to select the suitable one for detection. Table 1 summarizes the application of VIS-NIR spectroscopy in fruit tree phenotypic studies in the field, and the details are described in the following sections.
## (s6) Applications
Number of References: 24

(p6.0) The vegetation index (VI) is the integration of spectral data from two or more bands after a certain mathematical transformation [32]. Researchers usually establish mathematical prediction models by calculating the spectral value of the sensitive wavelength or by calculating and optimizing vegetation indices defined in botany.

(p6.1) Zarco-Tejada et al. used an optical USB2000 spectrometer to detect the chlorophyll and carotenoid contents in grape leaves [33]. The spectrometer has a sampling interval of 0.5 nm which is beneficial for calculating narrowband spectral indices. Several indices calculated within the range of 700-750 nm yielded good results with R 2 value of 0.8-0.9 for chlorophyll estimation. The Structure Insensitive Pigment Index (SIPI) calculated by R 430 / R 680 was used to estimate carotenoids with R 2 = 0.49. The Photochemical Reflectance Index (PRI), calculated by (R 570 − R 539 )/(R 570 + R 539 ), had a clear correlation with chlorophyll-carotenoid ratios. The results of the experiments above indicate that some spectral bands within the spectral ranges of green light (490-560 nm) and red light (620-780 nm) are significantly correlated with pigment contents.

(p6.2) For the estimation of nutrient contents, Ordonez et al. used FieldSpec 3 to characterize the components of vine leaves [34]. They applied functional nonparametric methods to establish prediction models. A curve was fitted to the discrete spectral data of different wavelength by the smoothing process. Moisture and nitrogen were predicted with high R 2 values (R 2 = 0.96 and R 2 = 0.95, respectively). The relationship between the amount of Ca in leaves and reflectance is not sensitive, which may be due to the lack of comparative experiments on different fertilizers. The functional model use all the spectral features detected by the spectrometer instead of using characteristic wavelength values so that the utilization rate of hyperspectral information is improved [35].

(p6.3) The accuracy of portable spectrometers is lower than that of laboratory spectrometers, but portable spectrometers are affordable, small in size, and easy to use, which are useful for non-scientists [28]. VIS-NIR spectroscopy could be an effective diagnostic tool for predicting nutrient deficiencies in fruit leaves [34], and implementing reasonable fertilization management.

(p6.4) The vegetation index (VI) is the integration of spectral data from two or more bands after a certain mathematical transformation [32]. Researchers usually establish mathematical prediction models by calculating the spectral value of the sensitive wavelength or by calculating and optimizing vegetation indices defined in botany.

(p6.5) Zarco-Tejada et al. used an optical USB2000 spectrometer to detect the chlorophyll and carotenoid contents in grape leaves [33]. The spectrometer has a sampling interval of 0.5 nm which is beneficial for calculating narrowband spectral indices. Several indices calculated within the range of 700-750 nm yielded good results with R 2 value of 0.8-0.9 for chlorophyll estimation. The Structure Insensitive Pigment Index (SIPI) calculated by R 430 / R 680 was used to estimate carotenoids with R 2 = 0.49. The Photochemical Reflectance Index (PRI), calculated by (R 570 − R 539 )/(R 570 + R 539 ), had a clear correlation with chlorophyll-carotenoid ratios. The results of the experiments above indicate that some spectral bands within the spectral ranges of green light (490-560 nm) and red light (620-780 nm) are significantly correlated with pigment contents.

(p6.6) For the estimation of nutrient contents, Ordonez et al. used FieldSpec 3 to characterize the components of vine leaves [34]. They applied functional nonparametric methods to establish prediction models. A curve was fitted to the discrete spectral data of different wavelength by the smoothing process. Moisture and nitrogen were predicted with high R 2 values (R 2 = 0.96 and R 2 = 0.95, respectively). The relationship between the amount of Ca in leaves and reflectance is not sensitive, which may be due to the lack of comparative experiments on different fertilizers. The functional model use all the spectral features detected by the spectrometer instead of using characteristic wavelength values so that the utilization rate of hyperspectral information is improved [35].

(p6.7) The accuracy of portable spectrometers is lower than that of laboratory spectrometers, but portable spectrometers are affordable, small in size, and easy to use, which are useful for non-scientists [28]. VIS-NIR spectroscopy could be an effective diagnostic tool for predicting nutrient deficiencies in fruit leaves [34], and implementing reasonable fertilization management.
## (s8) Detection of biochemical parameters of fruits
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) Chlorophyll, carotenoids, total soluble solids (TSS) content and titratable acidity (TA) are biochemical parameters of fruit, and they will change gradually with the fruit growth [44]. Accurate prediction of biochemical parameters will contribute to judging the maturity of fruit and determining whether it is suitable for harvest. This section mainly focuses on the detection of the fruit in living conditions. Elsayed et al. used a handheld spectrometer with wavelengths of 302-1148 nm to test the biochemical parameters of mangoes [45]. The optical fiber probe was placed at a zenith angle of 30 degrees and 0.15 m above the mango fruit for non-contact detection. A contour map was made for the coefficients of determination of all biochemical parameters of mango fruits with all possible wavelength (302-1048 nm) combinations. Twelve wavelengths (810, 780, 760, 750, 730, 720, 710, 686, 620, 570, 550 and 540 nm) were selected to estimate TSS (R 2 = 0.72) and TA (R 2 = 0.64). The results of partial least square regression (PLSR) models revealed that the newly developed index (NDVI − VARI)/(NDVI + VARI) (NDVI: Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) showed a close association with chlorophyll meter readings (R 2 = 0.78).

(p8.1) In addition to the detection of specific points, on-thego spectroscopy has successfully realized continuous spatial detection. A PSS 1050 spectrometer operating in the 570-990 nm spectral range was installed on an all-terrain vehicle [46]. To align the detection probe to the position of the grape cluster, the height of the spectrometer sensor was adjusted to 0.8 m above the ground, the angle was adjusted to level, and the sensor had a distance of 0.3 m from the canopy. According to the spectral characteristics of the grape clusters obtained artificially, the threshold was constantly adjusted to separate out the true berry spectrum from the raw data. TSS was estimated with R 2 value of 0.95.
## (s11) The application of digital photography
Number of References: 8

(p11.0) In the study of fruit tree phenotypes, digital photography is mainly used for the determination of canopy structural and biochemical parameters. Fisheye photography and digital cover photography are two techniques with different lenses, both cameras are useful in plant phenotypic analysis, especially in the determination of leaf area index (LAI) [52,53]. A summary of applications of digital photography in fruit tree phenotypic studies is given in Table 2.

(p11.1) In the study of fruit tree phenotypes, digital photography is mainly used for the determination of canopy structural and biochemical parameters. Fisheye photography and digital cover photography are two techniques with different lenses, both cameras are useful in plant phenotypic analysis, especially in the determination of leaf area index (LAI) [52,53]. A summary of applications of digital photography in fruit tree phenotypic studies is given in Table 2.
## (s12) Detection of architecture parameters
Number of References: 24

(p12.0) Digital image has high image resolution, which is valuable for the calculation of canopy architecture parameters. The architecture parameters include tree height, crown diameter, crown volume (C v ), leaf area (LA) and LAI. LAI is the total one-sided area of leaf tissue per unit ground surface area [54], it can be regarded as a reliable basis for pruning branches and leaves, to improve light transmittance and promote the growth of branches and leaves.

(p12.1) Digital hemispherical photography (DHP) is a type of digital imaging with fisheye lenses. Pictures are usually acquired from beneath the canopy towards the zenith, or from above the canopy looking downward in phenotypic research. Jonckheere et al. reviewed the methods for indirect measurement of LAI by using DHP technology [47]. The advantage of using DHP is that several available commercial integrated instruments have been invented for LAI estimation for the image processing to reduce the intervention of operators. Each system contains a specific imaging device and a free analysis software [54,55].

(p12.2) Illumination condition and shooting distance are intuitive factors affecting image quality. To improve the accuracy of LAI estimation, Knerl et al. conducted multiple experiments to determine the optimal shooting environment [56]. Two kinds of coloured anti-hail nets (blue and pearl nets) were artificially created over the apple trees to mimic uniform overcast and ideal clear sky conditions. The images were taken at distances of 10, 20 and 40 cm respectively, above the ground under the canopy. The OTSU algorithm was selected for threshold prediction. The processing result showed that when the images were taken for a tree group from approximately 10 cm away from the ground in a net-free environment, the predicted LAI had the smallest deviation from the destructive LAI. In the threshold selection, Zarate-Valdez et al. [57] discovered that the contrast threshold for distinguishing leaves from the sky needed to be verified many times to generate reliable LAI.

(p12.3) Digital cover photography (DCP) has become a substitute for DHP with the advantage of high resolution. DCP uses a narrow field-of-view lens aimed at the zenith for imaging [58]. Compared with hemispherical photography, DCP is not sensitive to image exposure; however, there is a lack of software for digital cover image processing automatically [53,59].

(p12.4) To improve the automation of the analysis methods for cover images, Fuentes et al. used a script written in MATLAB 7.4 to replace the manual technique for LAI estimation of eucalyptus woodland [60]. The developed script can directly connect the laptop to the digital camera to obtain cover photographs and LAI analysis in real time. In subsequent research, the script was also applied to determine the LAI of fruit trees in apple orchards and vineyards [61]. In addition, Fuentes et al. added an automated module to the original code, and frames (images) were extracted from videos by commands from the Image Analysis Toolbox [62]. The new script could be successfully applied to analyse the LAI of grape trees from videos.
## (s16) The application of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging
Number of References: 28

(p16.0) As computer technology and new optical equipment have evolved, many kinds of multispectral and hyperspectral imager devices have been developed. The spectral imager needs to be stable during image acquisition. Darkroom and halogen lamps are usually designed for spectral image acquisition in the laboratory [16,70]. Ground-based spectral imaging system is suitable for experiments in the field. The tripods and vehicles are used as the bearing device for the camera [36,71]. To quickly obtain spectral data of the whole orchard, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was applied for imaging [72]. As the UAV flies along the route path, the spectral camera takes continuous images at regular intervals [19]. In addition, spectral cameras mounted on manned spacecrafts and satellites can capture spectral images on a large scale. The acquisition and processing methods of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging in the study of fruit tree phenotypes are shown in Fig. 2. The application of spectroscopy in phenotypic studies has a long history [16], and this review mainly focused on the research over the last 5 years. A summary is listed in Table 3, and some details are described in the following section.

(p16.1) As computer technology and new optical equipment have evolved, many kinds of multispectral and hyperspectral imager devices have been developed. The spectral imager needs to be stable during image acquisition. Darkroom and halogen lamps are usually designed for spectral image acquisition in the laboratory [16,70]. Ground-based spectral imaging system is suitable for experiments in the field. The tripods and vehicles are used as the bearing device for the camera [36,71]. To quickly obtain spectral data of the whole orchard, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was applied for imaging [72]. As the UAV flies along the route path, the spectral camera takes continuous images at regular intervals [19]. In addition, spectral cameras mounted on manned spacecrafts and satellites can capture spectral images on a large scale. The acquisition and processing methods of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging in the study of fruit tree phenotypes are shown in Fig. 2. The application of spectroscopy in phenotypic studies has a long history [16], and this review mainly focused on the research over the last 5 years. A summary is listed in Table 3, and some details are described in the following section.
## (s17) Detection of architecture parameters
Number of References: 10

(p17.0) It is a useful method to establish digital terrain models (DTMs) of orchards by using low-altitude images and global positioning system (GPS) for the identification of canopy architectural features. DTM is an ordered numerical array that describes the spatial distribution of various information on the Earth's surface. DTM without ground objects is referred to as digital elevation model (DEM), and DTM with ground objects is known as digital surface model (DSM). Agisoft PhotoScan is a special computer vision software that can automatically identify and match features of multiple images and build a DTM of the research area by combining ground control point parameters, GPS positioning and internal parameters of the camera. Matese et al. measured the canopy height of vine rows by constructing DSMs and DTMs [73]. Images of the vineyard in the R, G and NIR bands were obtained by a multispectral camera. The canopy height model, representing the relief of the vine row surface, was obtained by subtracting DTM from DSM. The estimated canopy height is approximately 0.5 m lower than the actual canopy height. They also built a NDVI map of the vineyard and found a good correlation between NDVI values and canopy heights in the aera with high canopy height. This finding provided an idea for estimating canopy architecture parameters using VIs.

(p17.1) Pixel-based segmentation results are prone to produce salt and pepper noise because that the size of a single pixel is much smaller than the detected object. Therefore, object-based image segmentation techniques are increasingly used in phenotypic studies [74]. Díaz-Varela used multi-resolution segmentation and supervised classification algorithms to segment the olive canopy and background from UAV images captured by a modified RGB camera [75]. The segmentation of single crowns is performed by the watershed algorithm. The canopy was isolated by a segmented contour line, and tree height was retrieved from DSM based on the identification of local maxima. As a result, crown diameter was predicted with R 2 = 0.58 and R 2 = 0.22 in discontinuous and continuous canopies, respectively, and tree height was estimated with R 2 = 0.07 and R 2 = 0.58. Koc-San et al. proposed circular Hough transform algorithm to extract citrus trees from DSM [76]. Combined with the specific canopy size and spacing, the images were processed by threshold analysis, median filtering and edge detection to obtain the edge of the tree shadow. Then, according to the azimuth of the sun, the circular shadow was moved to obtain the exact boundary of tree crowns. This method is of great value for distinguishing tree crowns from other plants which have similar radiation conditions. A conclusion can be drawn from this result that circular Hough transform algorithm is available for the identification and feature extraction of fruit trees with green, round and compact features. Torres-Sánchez et al. classified vegetation and bare land area based on vegetation index values. The DSM layer was applied to separate trees with the surrounding soil according to the difference in height [77]. This method provides a good estimation of tree height (R 2 = 0.90) and canopy area (R 2 = 0.94). Considering the spatial characteristics and contextual features, the objectoriented classification method takes spatial pixel cluster as the classification feature instead of a single pixel, that is suitable for high resolution image processing.
## (s19) Detection of biochemical parameters of fruits
Number of References: 32

(p19.0) The experiments of fruit detection using spectral imaging are mainly carried out in the laboratory under controlled conditions including illumination, temperature, and distance [84][85][86]. Fruits were tested separately, which would take a long time when there are a large number of samples. Recently, on-the-go spectral imaging devices have been successfully applied in fruit detection [87].

(p19.1) Gutiérrez et al. installed a hyperspectral camera (400-1000 nm) on an all-terrain vehicle, to obtain dynamic hyperspectral images of a vineyard [87]. A relation matrix was established between all the pixels in the spectral image and the characteristic spectrum of the grape, the pixels with correlation coefficients that reached a predetermined value were selected as grape pixels. Epsilon-SVM algorithm was applied for the prediction of TSS (R 2 = 0.91) and anthocyanin concentration (R 2 = 0.72). The application of on-the-go hyperspectral imaging accomplished the detection of fruit components in the field, and the results could be compared with those under laboratory conditions. Replacing all-terrain vehicles with field robotics, Wendel et al. implemented a driverless, automatic spectral scanner to predict the dry matter (DM) content of mangoes [71]. They developed an analytical method that unified the classification and regression analysis of hyperspectral images based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) and the PLS algorithm. The DM content prediction was not for individual fruit, but for the average over each tree. The prediction results revealed that the CNN model had a higher prediction accuracy (R 2 = 0.64) than the PLS model (R 2 = 0.58). To make a more accurate estimation of the mango yield, the research team counted the number of mangoes for each tree [88]. RGB images and hyperspectral images of mango trees were obtained simultaneously. After classifying the mango and nonmango pixels, the width and height of the local area of the mango pixels were parameterized to determine the local maximum. The number of mangoes was determined by the number of local maxima. The estimation of the mango counts showed that the accuracy of hyperspectral counting was lower than that of RGB imaging.

(p19.2) Although the resolution of RGB imaging is higher than that of spectral imaging, which is more conducive to image segmentation, spectral imaging can be applied in many aspects of phenotypic research, bringing much more information to researchers than RGB imaging. The estimation of the ripeness and the number of fruits by spectral imaging is beneficial for farmers to make a detailed harvest plan and maximize the benefits [88].

(p19.3) The experiments of fruit detection using spectral imaging are mainly carried out in the laboratory under controlled conditions including illumination, temperature, and distance [84][85][86]. Fruits were tested separately, which would take a long time when there are a large number of samples. Recently, on-the-go spectral imaging devices have been successfully applied in fruit detection [87].

(p19.4) Gutiérrez et al. installed a hyperspectral camera (400-1000 nm) on an all-terrain vehicle, to obtain dynamic hyperspectral images of a vineyard [87]. A relation matrix was established between all the pixels in the spectral image and the characteristic spectrum of the grape, the pixels with correlation coefficients that reached a predetermined value were selected as grape pixels. Epsilon-SVM algorithm was applied for the prediction of TSS (R 2 = 0.91) and anthocyanin concentration (R 2 = 0.72). The application of on-the-go hyperspectral imaging accomplished the detection of fruit components in the field, and the results could be compared with those under laboratory conditions. Replacing all-terrain vehicles with field robotics, Wendel et al. implemented a driverless, automatic spectral scanner to predict the dry matter (DM) content of mangoes [71]. They developed an analytical method that unified the classification and regression analysis of hyperspectral images based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) and the PLS algorithm. The DM content prediction was not for individual fruit, but for the average over each tree. The prediction results revealed that the CNN model had a higher prediction accuracy (R 2 = 0.64) than the PLS model (R 2 = 0.58). To make a more accurate estimation of the mango yield, the research team counted the number of mangoes for each tree [88]. RGB images and hyperspectral images of mango trees were obtained simultaneously. After classifying the mango and nonmango pixels, the width and height of the local area of the mango pixels were parameterized to determine the local maximum. The number of mangoes was determined by the number of local maxima. The estimation of the mango counts showed that the accuracy of hyperspectral counting was lower than that of RGB imaging.

(p19.5) Although the resolution of RGB imaging is higher than that of spectral imaging, which is more conducive to image segmentation, spectral imaging can be applied in many aspects of phenotypic research, bringing much more information to researchers than RGB imaging. The estimation of the ripeness and the number of fruits by spectral imaging is beneficial for farmers to make a detailed harvest plan and maximize the benefits [88].
## (s20) Detection of diseases
Number of References: 20

(p20.0) Plant diseases can cause considerable losses of plant quality and yield. Hence, effective identification methods should be adopted to prevent disease aggravation and infection [7]. Traditional detection methods are visual feature analysis and microbiological methods by laboratory experiments [89,90]. However, these methods require specialized pathological knowledge and a long time to complete the detection process, resulting in the missing of the best opportunity for treatment. Noninvasive spectral imaging technology provides a rapid non-destructive testing method for plant disease detection. This section mainly focuses on the applications of hyperspectral and multispectral imaging for the disease detection of fruit trees in the field.

(p20.1) Verticillium wilt (VW) caused by the soil-borne fungus Verticillium dahliae Kleb is the most limiting disease in all traditional olive-growing regions worldwide. To detect VW, Calderón et al. captured airborne thermal, multispectral and hyperspectral images of a 7-ha commercial orchard. Through general linear model analysis, visible ratios (B/BG/BR) and fluorescence index (FLD3) were found to be effective in detecting VW at early stages of disease development [91]. To verify the applicability of spectral imaging methods in large-scale orchards, the research team carried out VW detection experiments in a 3000-ha commercial olive area. A manned aircraft replaced the UAV for image acquisition, since the UAV cannot be used in flight for a long time. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and SVM algorithms were used to classify healthy and diseased trees. For the whole data set, SVM expressed a high classification accuracy of 79.2%, while LDA achieved a classification accuracy of 59.0%. FLD3 was a good indicator that could identify olive trees at the early stages of disease development over as much at the orchard scale and even larger scales [92]. López-López et al. used the same analytical algorithms to detect red leaf blotch disease in an almond orchard [93]. Pigment indices (chlorophyll and carotenoid) and chlorophyll fluorescence can identify infected trees effectively in the early stage.

(p20.2) Laurel wilt (LW) is a lethal disease that spreads throughout the southeastern United States and has severely affected avocado industry. A digital colour camera was modified by adding a 37-mm filter ring to the front nose to capture images in the blue band (390-520 nm), green band (470-570 nm) and red-edge band (670-750 nm) [94]. The M-statistic was applied to evaluate the separability of healthy and diseased trees. According to the analysis of variance for the spectral images of the avocado canopy, B/G was found to be capable of separating the healthy trees from the laurel wilt-affected trees with M = 1.53. However, the researchers suggested using a high-spectral-resolution camera to improve the classification accuracy. A Tetracam mini-MCA-6 multispectral camera with six individual digital sensors (green: 580-10 nm; red: 650-10 nm, red-edge, Redge740: 740-10 nm, red-edge, Redge750: 750-10 nm, NIR760: 760-10 nm, and NIR850: 850-40 nm) was applied to obtain spectral images of an avocado orchard [95]. To make the tests more accurate, the researchers divided the degree of infection into four stages. The VIs TCARI 760-650 , NIR/G and redge/G, were able to discriminate LW at each developmental stage, and the value of M was up to 2.1. Although the modified digital camera had a significant reduction in cost, the multispectral camera had a higher number of bands and narrower bandwidth, so more spectral information could be applied for the classification of diseased trees to achieve an improved accuracy. Perez-Bueno et al. mounted a multispectral camera limiting the radiation to the bands at 560, 660 and 830 nm on a UAV [96]. ANN, logistic regression analysis (LRA), LDA and SVM were trained on NDVI to identify white root rot disease in avocado orchards. All four algorithms had the same resolution capability. The sensitivity of the LDA model was 55.5%, which is lower than that of the ANN and SVM models (78.6%). LRA had higher universality and a lower rate of false negatives than SVM in terms of classification. These conclusions can provide a reference for the selection of classification models.

(p20.3) When infected fruit trees show different response characteristics from healthy trees, spectral imaging technology can provide reliable information for the identification of infected fruit trees. Various forms of VIs can be indicators for identification. Effective identification of disease facilitates the implementation of healthy control and yield optimization measures, rather than relying on the chemical action of pesticides [90].
## (s21) Thermal imaging
Number of References: 8

(p21.0) Thermal imaging can produce digital images and draw a thermal map of the scene in false colour [98]. Traditionally, temperature is measured with thermometers, thermocouples, thermistors, and temperature detectors. These techniques are limited to the determination of specific points while thermal imaging enables continuous monitoring in space [99].

(p21.1) Thermal imaging can produce digital images and draw a thermal map of the scene in false colour [98]. Traditionally, temperature is measured with thermometers, thermocouples, thermistors, and temperature detectors. These techniques are limited to the determination of specific points while thermal imaging enables continuous monitoring in space [99].
## (s22) The principle of thermal imaging
Number of References: 32

(p22.0) Everything in nature whose temperature is above absolute zero can emit infrared radiation, and this infrared radiation carries information about the characteristics of the object. Thermal motion of molecules or atoms will be more intense with increasing temperature, and the infrared radiation will also be enhanced [99]. The core of a thermal imaging camera is the infrared detector, which absorbs the infrared energy emitted by the object and converts it into voltage or current [100]. Thermal imaging technology can visualize the temperature information of the detected object, which has played an important role in the analysis of meteorological disaster management [101,102], animal behaviour recognition [103,104], and medical research [105,106].

(p22.1) Everything in nature whose temperature is above absolute zero can emit infrared radiation, and this infrared radiation carries information about the characteristics of the object. Thermal motion of molecules or atoms will be more intense with increasing temperature, and the infrared radiation will also be enhanced [99]. The core of a thermal imaging camera is the infrared detector, which absorbs the infrared energy emitted by the object and converts it into voltage or current [100]. Thermal imaging technology can visualize the temperature information of the detected object, which has played an important role in the analysis of meteorological disaster management [101,102], animal behaviour recognition [103,104], and medical research [105,106].
## (s24) Detection of water stress
Number of References: 8

(p24.0) The lack of sufficient moisture in fruit trees can be considered water stress. Water stress is the most harmful environmental stress to the development and production of fruit trees and can affect cell division and vegetative growth. Water decreasing in plants leads to the photosynthetic rate subtracting and stomatal closure increasing, which result in a reduction of CO 2 uptake and transpiration and thus a rise of plant temperature [107]. Although g s cannot be directly measured by thermal imaging, it is feasible to measure canopy temperature (T c ) to reflect stomatal status [108].

(p24.1) The lack of sufficient moisture in fruit trees can be considered water stress. Water stress is the most harmful environmental stress to the development and production of fruit trees and can affect cell division and vegetative growth. Water decreasing in plants leads to the photosynthetic rate subtracting and stomatal closure increasing, which result in a reduction of CO 2 uptake and transpiration and thus a rise of plant temperature [107]. Although g s cannot be directly measured by thermal imaging, it is feasible to measure canopy temperature (T c ) to reflect stomatal status [108].
## (s27) Detection of diseases
Number of References: 32

(p27.0) Plant disease pathogens may damage the cuticular cell structure of plant tissues, affect stomatal conductance and transpiration, and cause changes in leaf temperature [120]. The ability of thermal imaging to evaluate canopy temperature makes it possible to detect plant diseases.

(p27.1) Apple scab pathogen grows under the epidermis of apple leaves and absorbs nutrients from the subcuticular space and destroys the cuticle, causing water loss and temperature changes. Oerke et al. found significant differences in the thermal images corresponding to different stages of disease severity [121]. The maximum temperature difference (MTD) between the infected area and healthy area increased with the increase in the degree of infection. It was correlated with the infection area (R 2 = 0.85) and overall infection severity (R 2 = 0.71). Polystigma amygdalinum PF Cannon is also a fungus that lives on the surface of the leaf, causing almond trees to be infected with red leaf blotch disease. López-López et al. [93] collected thermal images in an almond orchard and found that the T c − T a increased with the severity of the disease, especially in the stages of moderate or severe infection.

(p27.2) When a plant is affected by VW, the vascular system will be damaged, which impedes the flow of water, resulting in water stress [122,123]. Calderón et al. identified the VW severity levels in olive orchards with airborne thermal imagery [91]. The g s was measured in the leaf and near-canopy fields at the tree level, T c and T a were estimated from the thermal images. Measurement results showed that the T c − T a would become higher and g s would become lower as the severity level increased, which proved that crown temperature estimated with thermal imaging was effective in detecting VW in the early stage of disease development. The team then expanded the olive garden experiment by selecting nine areas in a larger commercial olive garden [92]. The nine areas covered different tree species, tree ages, planting densities and soil management techniques. The results showed that T c − T a was still an effective indicator for VW detection in large-scale orchards.

(p27.3) The studies mentioned above suggested that the changes in T c caused by disease can be monitored by thermal imaging techniques. Thermal imaging can help to separate healthy trees from infected trees, but it lacks diagnostic capability. It is difficult to determine whether the temperature change is caused by disease [121]. Combined with other imaging techniques to solve this problem is the focus of detecting fruit tree diseases at present.

(p27.4) Plant disease pathogens may damage the cuticular cell structure of plant tissues, affect stomatal conductance and transpiration, and cause changes in leaf temperature [120]. The ability of thermal imaging to evaluate canopy temperature makes it possible to detect plant diseases.

(p27.5) Apple scab pathogen grows under the epidermis of apple leaves and absorbs nutrients from the subcuticular space and destroys the cuticle, causing water loss and temperature changes. Oerke et al. found significant differences in the thermal images corresponding to different stages of disease severity [121]. The maximum temperature difference (MTD) between the infected area and healthy area increased with the increase in the degree of infection. It was correlated with the infection area (R 2 = 0.85) and overall infection severity (R 2 = 0.71). Polystigma amygdalinum PF Cannon is also a fungus that lives on the surface of the leaf, causing almond trees to be infected with red leaf blotch disease. López-López et al. [93] collected thermal images in an almond orchard and found that the T c − T a increased with the severity of the disease, especially in the stages of moderate or severe infection.

(p27.6) When a plant is affected by VW, the vascular system will be damaged, which impedes the flow of water, resulting in water stress [122,123]. Calderón et al. identified the VW severity levels in olive orchards with airborne thermal imagery [91]. The g s was measured in the leaf and near-canopy fields at the tree level, T c and T a were estimated from the thermal images. Measurement results showed that the T c − T a would become higher and g s would become lower as the severity level increased, which proved that crown temperature estimated with thermal imaging was effective in detecting VW in the early stage of disease development. The team then expanded the olive garden experiment by selecting nine areas in a larger commercial olive garden [92]. The nine areas covered different tree species, tree ages, planting densities and soil management techniques. The results showed that T c − T a was still an effective indicator for VW detection in large-scale orchards.

(p27.7) The studies mentioned above suggested that the changes in T c caused by disease can be monitored by thermal imaging techniques. Thermal imaging can help to separate healthy trees from infected trees, but it lacks diagnostic capability. It is difficult to determine whether the temperature change is caused by disease [121]. Combined with other imaging techniques to solve this problem is the focus of detecting fruit tree diseases at present.
## (s29) The principle of LiDAR
Number of References: 8

(p29.0) A LiDAR system consists of a single narrowband laser and a receiving system [126]. The laser fires a pulse of light at the target, and the reflected wave is picked up by the receiver. The receiver can accurately measure the propagation time of the light pulse from transmission to reflection. Light pulses travel at the speed of light, and the distance from the laser point to the target can be calculated based on the speed of light and the time of propagation. The position of the target can be determined according to the height and scanning angle of the laser [127].

(p29.1) A LiDAR system consists of a single narrowband laser and a receiving system [126]. The laser fires a pulse of light at the target, and the reflected wave is picked up by the receiver. The receiver can accurately measure the propagation time of the light pulse from transmission to reflection. Light pulses travel at the speed of light, and the distance from the laser point to the target can be calculated based on the speed of light and the time of propagation. The position of the target can be determined according to the height and scanning angle of the laser [127].
## (s38) Background
Number of References: 8

(p38.0) Plant phenotype describes the expression of plant traits. Phenotypes are studied at multiple levels, including cells, tissues, organs, individual plants and the whole orchard [1]. Plant phenotypic traits include but are not limited to plant height, biomass content, water state, and yield [2]. The expression of phenotypic traits is controlled by a large number of genetic factors. Therefore, accurate analysis of phenotypic traits is of great significance for the selection of dominant genes and marker-assisted selection [3,4].
## (s40) VIS-NIR spectroscopy
Number of References: 20

(p40.0) VIS-NIR spectroscopy is a new non-destructive measurement technique. Based on the different reflection and radiation information of different substances in the same spectral band, VIS-NIR spectroscopy is widely used to detect chemical substances [20,21], soil [22], minerals [23] and food [24]. The following articles in this section describe the principle of VIS-NIR spectroscopy and its application in the study of fruit tree phenotypes.

(p40.1) VIS-NIR spectroscopy is a new non-destructive measurement technique. Based on the different reflection and radiation information of different substances in the same spectral band, VIS-NIR spectroscopy is widely used to detect chemical substances [20,21], soil [22], minerals [23] and food [24]. The following articles in this section describe the principle of VIS-NIR spectroscopy and its application in the study of fruit tree phenotypes.
## (s41) The principle of VIS-NIR spectroscopy
Number of References: 16

(p41.0) Electromagnetic waves in a range of 400-2500 nm are often used in VIS-NIR spectroscopy [25]. Some of the groups in a substance, especially those containing hydrogen (C-H, O-H, N-H), absorb energy in VIS-NIR spectroscopy, resulting in changes in the reflected or transmitted spectrum [26]. When the substance content of the sample to be measured is different, various spectral curves will be generated. The spectral comprises broad bands arising from overlapping absorptions [27,28]. Therefore, the corresponding relationship between spectra and the parameters to be measured can be established based on spectral features, to carry out quantitative analysis of parameters.

(p41.1) Electromagnetic waves in a range of 400-2500 nm are often used in VIS-NIR spectroscopy [25]. Some of the groups in a substance, especially those containing hydrogen (C-H, O-H, N-H), absorb energy in VIS-NIR spectroscopy, resulting in changes in the reflected or transmitted spectrum [26]. When the substance content of the sample to be measured is different, various spectral curves will be generated. The spectral comprises broad bands arising from overlapping absorptions [27,28]. Therefore, the corresponding relationship between spectra and the parameters to be measured can be established based on spectral features, to carry out quantitative analysis of parameters.
## (s42) The application of VIS-NIR spectroscopy
Number of References: 8

(p42.0) Portable spectrometer is a frequently used instrument in VIS-NIR spectroscopy studies, which can be applied for non-destructive detection. The sample can be measured directly with a light probe [27]. Moving the spectrometer to the sample location, rather than moving the sample to the laboratory, is the most convenient feature of portable spectrometers [28]. Different spectrometers have different spectral band ranges, and it is critical to select the suitable one for detection. Table 1 summarizes the application of VIS-NIR spectroscopy in fruit tree phenotypic studies in the field, and the details are described in the following sections.

(p42.1) Portable spectrometer is a frequently used instrument in VIS-NIR spectroscopy studies, which can be applied for non-destructive detection. The sample can be measured directly with a light probe [27]. Moving the spectrometer to the sample location, rather than moving the sample to the laboratory, is the most convenient feature of portable spectrometers [28]. Different spectrometers have different spectral band ranges, and it is critical to select the suitable one for detection. Table 1 summarizes the application of VIS-NIR spectroscopy in fruit tree phenotypic studies in the field, and the details are described in the following sections.
## (s44) Applications
Number of References: 24

(p44.0) The vegetation index (VI) is the integration of spectral data from two or more bands after a certain mathematical transformation [32]. Researchers usually establish mathematical prediction models by calculating the spectral value of the sensitive wavelength or by calculating and optimizing vegetation indices defined in botany.

(p44.1) Zarco-Tejada et al. used an optical USB2000 spectrometer to detect the chlorophyll and carotenoid contents in grape leaves [33]. The spectrometer has a sampling interval of 0.5 nm which is beneficial for calculating narrowband spectral indices. Several indices calculated within the range of 700-750 nm yielded good results with R 2 value of 0.8-0.9 for chlorophyll estimation. The Structure Insensitive Pigment Index (SIPI) calculated by R 430 / R 680 was used to estimate carotenoids with R 2 = 0.49. The Photochemical Reflectance Index (PRI), calculated by (R 570 − R 539 )/(R 570 + R 539 ), had a clear correlation with chlorophyll-carotenoid ratios. The results of the experiments above indicate that some spectral bands within the spectral ranges of green light (490-560 nm) and red light (620-780 nm) are significantly correlated with pigment contents.

(p44.2) For the estimation of nutrient contents, Ordonez et al. used FieldSpec 3 to characterize the components of vine leaves [34]. They applied functional nonparametric methods to establish prediction models. A curve was fitted to the discrete spectral data of different wavelength by the smoothing process. Moisture and nitrogen were predicted with high R 2 values (R 2 = 0.96 and R 2 = 0.95, respectively). The relationship between the amount of Ca in leaves and reflectance is not sensitive, which may be due to the lack of comparative experiments on different fertilizers. The functional model use all the spectral features detected by the spectrometer instead of using characteristic wavelength values so that the utilization rate of hyperspectral information is improved [35].

(p44.3) The accuracy of portable spectrometers is lower than that of laboratory spectrometers, but portable spectrometers are affordable, small in size, and easy to use, which are useful for non-scientists [28]. VIS-NIR spectroscopy could be an effective diagnostic tool for predicting nutrient deficiencies in fruit leaves [34], and implementing reasonable fertilization management.

(p44.4) The vegetation index (VI) is the integration of spectral data from two or more bands after a certain mathematical transformation [32]. Researchers usually establish mathematical prediction models by calculating the spectral value of the sensitive wavelength or by calculating and optimizing vegetation indices defined in botany.

(p44.5) Zarco-Tejada et al. used an optical USB2000 spectrometer to detect the chlorophyll and carotenoid contents in grape leaves [33]. The spectrometer has a sampling interval of 0.5 nm which is beneficial for calculating narrowband spectral indices. Several indices calculated within the range of 700-750 nm yielded good results with R 2 value of 0.8-0.9 for chlorophyll estimation. The Structure Insensitive Pigment Index (SIPI) calculated by R 430 / R 680 was used to estimate carotenoids with R 2 = 0.49. The Photochemical Reflectance Index (PRI), calculated by (R 570 − R 539 )/(R 570 + R 539 ), had a clear correlation with chlorophyll-carotenoid ratios. The results of the experiments above indicate that some spectral bands within the spectral ranges of green light (490-560 nm) and red light (620-780 nm) are significantly correlated with pigment contents.

(p44.6) For the estimation of nutrient contents, Ordonez et al. used FieldSpec 3 to characterize the components of vine leaves [34]. They applied functional nonparametric methods to establish prediction models. A curve was fitted to the discrete spectral data of different wavelength by the smoothing process. Moisture and nitrogen were predicted with high R 2 values (R 2 = 0.96 and R 2 = 0.95, respectively). The relationship between the amount of Ca in leaves and reflectance is not sensitive, which may be due to the lack of comparative experiments on different fertilizers. The functional model use all the spectral features detected by the spectrometer instead of using characteristic wavelength values so that the utilization rate of hyperspectral information is improved [35].

(p44.7) The accuracy of portable spectrometers is lower than that of laboratory spectrometers, but portable spectrometers are affordable, small in size, and easy to use, which are useful for non-scientists [28]. VIS-NIR spectroscopy could be an effective diagnostic tool for predicting nutrient deficiencies in fruit leaves [34], and implementing reasonable fertilization management.
## (s46) Detection of biochemical parameters of fruits
Number of References: 6

(p46.0) Chlorophyll, carotenoids, total soluble solids (TSS) content and titratable acidity (TA) are biochemical parameters of fruit, and they will change gradually with the fruit growth [44]. Accurate prediction of biochemical parameters will contribute to judging the maturity of fruit and determining whether it is suitable for harvest. This section mainly focuses on the detection of the fruit in living conditions. Elsayed et al. used a handheld spectrometer with wavelengths of 302-1148 nm to test the biochemical parameters of mangoes [45]. The optical fiber probe was placed at a zenith angle of 30 degrees and 0.15 m above the mango fruit for non-contact detection. A contour map was made for the coefficients of determination of all biochemical parameters of mango fruits with all possible wavelength (302-1048 nm) combinations. Twelve wavelengths (810, 780, 760, 750, 730, 720, 710, 686, 620, 570, 550 and 540 nm) were selected to estimate TSS (R 2 = 0.72) and TA (R 2 = 0.64). The results of partial least square regression (PLSR) models revealed that the newly developed index (NDVI − VARI)/(NDVI + VARI) (NDVI: Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) showed a close association with chlorophyll meter readings (R 2 = 0.78).

(p46.1) In addition to the detection of specific points, on-thego spectroscopy has successfully realized continuous spatial detection. A PSS 1050 spectrometer operating in the 570-990 nm spectral range was installed on an all-terrain vehicle [46]. To align the detection probe to the position of the grape cluster, the height of the spectrometer sensor was adjusted to 0.8 m above the ground, the angle was adjusted to level, and the sensor had a distance of 0.3 m from the canopy. According to the spectral characteristics of the grape clusters obtained artificially, the threshold was constantly adjusted to separate out the true berry spectrum from the raw data. TSS was estimated with R 2 value of 0.95.
## (s49) The application of digital photography
Number of References: 8

(p49.0) In the study of fruit tree phenotypes, digital photography is mainly used for the determination of canopy structural and biochemical parameters. Fisheye photography and digital cover photography are two techniques with different lenses, both cameras are useful in plant phenotypic analysis, especially in the determination of leaf area index (LAI) [52,53]. A summary of applications of digital photography in fruit tree phenotypic studies is given in Table 2.

(p49.1) In the study of fruit tree phenotypes, digital photography is mainly used for the determination of canopy structural and biochemical parameters. Fisheye photography and digital cover photography are two techniques with different lenses, both cameras are useful in plant phenotypic analysis, especially in the determination of leaf area index (LAI) [52,53]. A summary of applications of digital photography in fruit tree phenotypic studies is given in Table 2.
## (s50) Detection of architecture parameters
Number of References: 24

(p50.0) Digital image has high image resolution, which is valuable for the calculation of canopy architecture parameters. The architecture parameters include tree height, crown diameter, crown volume (C v ), leaf area (LA) and LAI. LAI is the total one-sided area of leaf tissue per unit ground surface area [54], it can be regarded as a reliable basis for pruning branches and leaves, to improve light transmittance and promote the growth of branches and leaves.

(p50.1) Digital hemispherical photography (DHP) is a type of digital imaging with fisheye lenses. Pictures are usually acquired from beneath the canopy towards the zenith, or from above the canopy looking downward in phenotypic research. Jonckheere et al. reviewed the methods for indirect measurement of LAI by using DHP technology [47]. The advantage of using DHP is that several available commercial integrated instruments have been invented for LAI estimation for the image processing to reduce the intervention of operators. Each system contains a specific imaging device and a free analysis software [54,55].

(p50.2) Illumination condition and shooting distance are intuitive factors affecting image quality. To improve the accuracy of LAI estimation, Knerl et al. conducted multiple experiments to determine the optimal shooting environment [56]. Two kinds of coloured anti-hail nets (blue and pearl nets) were artificially created over the apple trees to mimic uniform overcast and ideal clear sky conditions. The images were taken at distances of 10, 20 and 40 cm respectively, above the ground under the canopy. The OTSU algorithm was selected for threshold prediction. The processing result showed that when the images were taken for a tree group from approximately 10 cm away from the ground in a net-free environment, the predicted LAI had the smallest deviation from the destructive LAI. In the threshold selection, Zarate-Valdez et al. [57] discovered that the contrast threshold for distinguishing leaves from the sky needed to be verified many times to generate reliable LAI.

(p50.3) Digital cover photography (DCP) has become a substitute for DHP with the advantage of high resolution. DCP uses a narrow field-of-view lens aimed at the zenith for imaging [58]. Compared with hemispherical photography, DCP is not sensitive to image exposure; however, there is a lack of software for digital cover image processing automatically [53,59].

(p50.4) To improve the automation of the analysis methods for cover images, Fuentes et al. used a script written in MATLAB 7.4 to replace the manual technique for LAI estimation of eucalyptus woodland [60]. The developed script can directly connect the laptop to the digital camera to obtain cover photographs and LAI analysis in real time. In subsequent research, the script was also applied to determine the LAI of fruit trees in apple orchards and vineyards [61]. In addition, Fuentes et al. added an automated module to the original code, and frames (images) were extracted from videos by commands from the Image Analysis Toolbox [62]. The new script could be successfully applied to analyse the LAI of grape trees from videos.
## (s54) The application of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging
Number of References: 28

(p54.0) As computer technology and new optical equipment have evolved, many kinds of multispectral and hyperspectral imager devices have been developed. The spectral imager needs to be stable during image acquisition. Darkroom and halogen lamps are usually designed for spectral image acquisition in the laboratory [16,70]. Ground-based spectral imaging system is suitable for experiments in the field. The tripods and vehicles are used as the bearing device for the camera [36,71]. To quickly obtain spectral data of the whole orchard, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was applied for imaging [72]. As the UAV flies along the route path, the spectral camera takes continuous images at regular intervals [19]. In addition, spectral cameras mounted on manned spacecrafts and satellites can capture spectral images on a large scale. The acquisition and processing methods of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging in the study of fruit tree phenotypes are shown in Fig. 2. The application of spectroscopy in phenotypic studies has a long history [16], and this review mainly focused on the research over the last 5 years. A summary is listed in Table 3, and some details are described in the following section.

(p54.1) As computer technology and new optical equipment have evolved, many kinds of multispectral and hyperspectral imager devices have been developed. The spectral imager needs to be stable during image acquisition. Darkroom and halogen lamps are usually designed for spectral image acquisition in the laboratory [16,70]. Ground-based spectral imaging system is suitable for experiments in the field. The tripods and vehicles are used as the bearing device for the camera [36,71]. To quickly obtain spectral data of the whole orchard, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was applied for imaging [72]. As the UAV flies along the route path, the spectral camera takes continuous images at regular intervals [19]. In addition, spectral cameras mounted on manned spacecrafts and satellites can capture spectral images on a large scale. The acquisition and processing methods of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging in the study of fruit tree phenotypes are shown in Fig. 2. The application of spectroscopy in phenotypic studies has a long history [16], and this review mainly focused on the research over the last 5 years. A summary is listed in Table 3, and some details are described in the following section.
## (s55) Detection of architecture parameters
Number of References: 10

(p55.0) It is a useful method to establish digital terrain models (DTMs) of orchards by using low-altitude images and global positioning system (GPS) for the identification of canopy architectural features. DTM is an ordered numerical array that describes the spatial distribution of various information on the Earth's surface. DTM without ground objects is referred to as digital elevation model (DEM), and DTM with ground objects is known as digital surface model (DSM). Agisoft PhotoScan is a special computer vision software that can automatically identify and match features of multiple images and build a DTM of the research area by combining ground control point parameters, GPS positioning and internal parameters of the camera. Matese et al. measured the canopy height of vine rows by constructing DSMs and DTMs [73]. Images of the vineyard in the R, G and NIR bands were obtained by a multispectral camera. The canopy height model, representing the relief of the vine row surface, was obtained by subtracting DTM from DSM. The estimated canopy height is approximately 0.5 m lower than the actual canopy height. They also built a NDVI map of the vineyard and found a good correlation between NDVI values and canopy heights in the aera with high canopy height. This finding provided an idea for estimating canopy architecture parameters using VIs.

(p55.1) Pixel-based segmentation results are prone to produce salt and pepper noise because that the size of a single pixel is much smaller than the detected object. Therefore, object-based image segmentation techniques are increasingly used in phenotypic studies [74]. Díaz-Varela used multi-resolution segmentation and supervised classification algorithms to segment the olive canopy and background from UAV images captured by a modified RGB camera [75]. The segmentation of single crowns is performed by the watershed algorithm. The canopy was isolated by a segmented contour line, and tree height was retrieved from DSM based on the identification of local maxima. As a result, crown diameter was predicted with R 2 = 0.58 and R 2 = 0.22 in discontinuous and continuous canopies, respectively, and tree height was estimated with R 2 = 0.07 and R 2 = 0.58. Koc-San et al. proposed circular Hough transform algorithm to extract citrus trees from DSM [76]. Combined with the specific canopy size and spacing, the images were processed by threshold analysis, median filtering and edge detection to obtain the edge of the tree shadow. Then, according to the azimuth of the sun, the circular shadow was moved to obtain the exact boundary of tree crowns. This method is of great value for distinguishing tree crowns from other plants which have similar radiation conditions. A conclusion can be drawn from this result that circular Hough transform algorithm is available for the identification and feature extraction of fruit trees with green, round and compact features. Torres-Sánchez et al. classified vegetation and bare land area based on vegetation index values. The DSM layer was applied to separate trees with the surrounding soil according to the difference in height [77]. This method provides a good estimation of tree height (R 2 = 0.90) and canopy area (R 2 = 0.94). Considering the spatial characteristics and contextual features, the objectoriented classification method takes spatial pixel cluster as the classification feature instead of a single pixel, that is suitable for high resolution image processing.
## (s57) Detection of biochemical parameters of fruits
Number of References: 32

(p57.0) The experiments of fruit detection using spectral imaging are mainly carried out in the laboratory under controlled conditions including illumination, temperature, and distance [84][85][86]. Fruits were tested separately, which would take a long time when there are a large number of samples. Recently, on-the-go spectral imaging devices have been successfully applied in fruit detection [87].

(p57.1) Gutiérrez et al. installed a hyperspectral camera (400-1000 nm) on an all-terrain vehicle, to obtain dynamic hyperspectral images of a vineyard [87]. A relation matrix was established between all the pixels in the spectral image and the characteristic spectrum of the grape, the pixels with correlation coefficients that reached a predetermined value were selected as grape pixels. Epsilon-SVM algorithm was applied for the prediction of TSS (R 2 = 0.91) and anthocyanin concentration (R 2 = 0.72). The application of on-the-go hyperspectral imaging accomplished the detection of fruit components in the field, and the results could be compared with those under laboratory conditions. Replacing all-terrain vehicles with field robotics, Wendel et al. implemented a driverless, automatic spectral scanner to predict the dry matter (DM) content of mangoes [71]. They developed an analytical method that unified the classification and regression analysis of hyperspectral images based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) and the PLS algorithm. The DM content prediction was not for individual fruit, but for the average over each tree. The prediction results revealed that the CNN model had a higher prediction accuracy (R 2 = 0.64) than the PLS model (R 2 = 0.58). To make a more accurate estimation of the mango yield, the research team counted the number of mangoes for each tree [88]. RGB images and hyperspectral images of mango trees were obtained simultaneously. After classifying the mango and nonmango pixels, the width and height of the local area of the mango pixels were parameterized to determine the local maximum. The number of mangoes was determined by the number of local maxima. The estimation of the mango counts showed that the accuracy of hyperspectral counting was lower than that of RGB imaging.

(p57.2) Although the resolution of RGB imaging is higher than that of spectral imaging, which is more conducive to image segmentation, spectral imaging can be applied in many aspects of phenotypic research, bringing much more information to researchers than RGB imaging. The estimation of the ripeness and the number of fruits by spectral imaging is beneficial for farmers to make a detailed harvest plan and maximize the benefits [88].

(p57.3) The experiments of fruit detection using spectral imaging are mainly carried out in the laboratory under controlled conditions including illumination, temperature, and distance [84][85][86]. Fruits were tested separately, which would take a long time when there are a large number of samples. Recently, on-the-go spectral imaging devices have been successfully applied in fruit detection [87].

(p57.4) Gutiérrez et al. installed a hyperspectral camera (400-1000 nm) on an all-terrain vehicle, to obtain dynamic hyperspectral images of a vineyard [87]. A relation matrix was established between all the pixels in the spectral image and the characteristic spectrum of the grape, the pixels with correlation coefficients that reached a predetermined value were selected as grape pixels. Epsilon-SVM algorithm was applied for the prediction of TSS (R 2 = 0.91) and anthocyanin concentration (R 2 = 0.72). The application of on-the-go hyperspectral imaging accomplished the detection of fruit components in the field, and the results could be compared with those under laboratory conditions. Replacing all-terrain vehicles with field robotics, Wendel et al. implemented a driverless, automatic spectral scanner to predict the dry matter (DM) content of mangoes [71]. They developed an analytical method that unified the classification and regression analysis of hyperspectral images based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) and the PLS algorithm. The DM content prediction was not for individual fruit, but for the average over each tree. The prediction results revealed that the CNN model had a higher prediction accuracy (R 2 = 0.64) than the PLS model (R 2 = 0.58). To make a more accurate estimation of the mango yield, the research team counted the number of mangoes for each tree [88]. RGB images and hyperspectral images of mango trees were obtained simultaneously. After classifying the mango and nonmango pixels, the width and height of the local area of the mango pixels were parameterized to determine the local maximum. The number of mangoes was determined by the number of local maxima. The estimation of the mango counts showed that the accuracy of hyperspectral counting was lower than that of RGB imaging.

(p57.5) Although the resolution of RGB imaging is higher than that of spectral imaging, which is more conducive to image segmentation, spectral imaging can be applied in many aspects of phenotypic research, bringing much more information to researchers than RGB imaging. The estimation of the ripeness and the number of fruits by spectral imaging is beneficial for farmers to make a detailed harvest plan and maximize the benefits [88].
## (s58) Detection of diseases
Number of References: 20

(p58.0) Plant diseases can cause considerable losses of plant quality and yield. Hence, effective identification methods should be adopted to prevent disease aggravation and infection [7]. Traditional detection methods are visual feature analysis and microbiological methods by laboratory experiments [89,90]. However, these methods require specialized pathological knowledge and a long time to complete the detection process, resulting in the missing of the best opportunity for treatment. Noninvasive spectral imaging technology provides a rapid non-destructive testing method for plant disease detection. This section mainly focuses on the applications of hyperspectral and multispectral imaging for the disease detection of fruit trees in the field.

(p58.1) Verticillium wilt (VW) caused by the soil-borne fungus Verticillium dahliae Kleb is the most limiting disease in all traditional olive-growing regions worldwide. To detect VW, Calderón et al. captured airborne thermal, multispectral and hyperspectral images of a 7-ha commercial orchard. Through general linear model analysis, visible ratios (B/BG/BR) and fluorescence index (FLD3) were found to be effective in detecting VW at early stages of disease development [91]. To verify the applicability of spectral imaging methods in large-scale orchards, the research team carried out VW detection experiments in a 3000-ha commercial olive area. A manned aircraft replaced the UAV for image acquisition, since the UAV cannot be used in flight for a long time. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and SVM algorithms were used to classify healthy and diseased trees. For the whole data set, SVM expressed a high classification accuracy of 79.2%, while LDA achieved a classification accuracy of 59.0%. FLD3 was a good indicator that could identify olive trees at the early stages of disease development over as much at the orchard scale and even larger scales [92]. López-López et al. used the same analytical algorithms to detect red leaf blotch disease in an almond orchard [93]. Pigment indices (chlorophyll and carotenoid) and chlorophyll fluorescence can identify infected trees effectively in the early stage.

(p58.2) Laurel wilt (LW) is a lethal disease that spreads throughout the southeastern United States and has severely affected avocado industry. A digital colour camera was modified by adding a 37-mm filter ring to the front nose to capture images in the blue band (390-520 nm), green band (470-570 nm) and red-edge band (670-750 nm) [94]. The M-statistic was applied to evaluate the separability of healthy and diseased trees. According to the analysis of variance for the spectral images of the avocado canopy, B/G was found to be capable of separating the healthy trees from the laurel wilt-affected trees with M = 1.53. However, the researchers suggested using a high-spectral-resolution camera to improve the classification accuracy. A Tetracam mini-MCA-6 multispectral camera with six individual digital sensors (green: 580-10 nm; red: 650-10 nm, red-edge, Redge740: 740-10 nm, red-edge, Redge750: 750-10 nm, NIR760: 760-10 nm, and NIR850: 850-40 nm) was applied to obtain spectral images of an avocado orchard [95]. To make the tests more accurate, the researchers divided the degree of infection into four stages. The VIs TCARI 760-650 , NIR/G and redge/G, were able to discriminate LW at each developmental stage, and the value of M was up to 2.1. Although the modified digital camera had a significant reduction in cost, the multispectral camera had a higher number of bands and narrower bandwidth, so more spectral information could be applied for the classification of diseased trees to achieve an improved accuracy. Perez-Bueno et al. mounted a multispectral camera limiting the radiation to the bands at 560, 660 and 830 nm on a UAV [96]. ANN, logistic regression analysis (LRA), LDA and SVM were trained on NDVI to identify white root rot disease in avocado orchards. All four algorithms had the same resolution capability. The sensitivity of the LDA model was 55.5%, which is lower than that of the ANN and SVM models (78.6%). LRA had higher universality and a lower rate of false negatives than SVM in terms of classification. These conclusions can provide a reference for the selection of classification models.

(p58.3) When infected fruit trees show different response characteristics from healthy trees, spectral imaging technology can provide reliable information for the identification of infected fruit trees. Various forms of VIs can be indicators for identification. Effective identification of disease facilitates the implementation of healthy control and yield optimization measures, rather than relying on the chemical action of pesticides [90].
## (s59) Thermal imaging
Number of References: 8

(p59.0) Thermal imaging can produce digital images and draw a thermal map of the scene in false colour [98]. Traditionally, temperature is measured with thermometers, thermocouples, thermistors, and temperature detectors. These techniques are limited to the determination of specific points while thermal imaging enables continuous monitoring in space [99].

(p59.1) Thermal imaging can produce digital images and draw a thermal map of the scene in false colour [98]. Traditionally, temperature is measured with thermometers, thermocouples, thermistors, and temperature detectors. These techniques are limited to the determination of specific points while thermal imaging enables continuous monitoring in space [99].
## (s60) The principle of thermal imaging
Number of References: 32

(p60.0) Everything in nature whose temperature is above absolute zero can emit infrared radiation, and this infrared radiation carries information about the characteristics of the object. Thermal motion of molecules or atoms will be more intense with increasing temperature, and the infrared radiation will also be enhanced [99]. The core of a thermal imaging camera is the infrared detector, which absorbs the infrared energy emitted by the object and converts it into voltage or current [100]. Thermal imaging technology can visualize the temperature information of the detected object, which has played an important role in the analysis of meteorological disaster management [101,102], animal behaviour recognition [103,104], and medical research [105,106].

(p60.1) Everything in nature whose temperature is above absolute zero can emit infrared radiation, and this infrared radiation carries information about the characteristics of the object. Thermal motion of molecules or atoms will be more intense with increasing temperature, and the infrared radiation will also be enhanced [99]. The core of a thermal imaging camera is the infrared detector, which absorbs the infrared energy emitted by the object and converts it into voltage or current [100]. Thermal imaging technology can visualize the temperature information of the detected object, which has played an important role in the analysis of meteorological disaster management [101,102], animal behaviour recognition [103,104], and medical research [105,106].
## (s62) Detection of water stress
Number of References: 8

(p62.0) The lack of sufficient moisture in fruit trees can be considered water stress. Water stress is the most harmful environmental stress to the development and production of fruit trees and can affect cell division and vegetative growth. Water decreasing in plants leads to the photosynthetic rate subtracting and stomatal closure increasing, which result in a reduction of CO 2 uptake and transpiration and thus a rise of plant temperature [107]. Although g s cannot be directly measured by thermal imaging, it is feasible to measure canopy temperature (T c ) to reflect stomatal status [108].

(p62.1) The lack of sufficient moisture in fruit trees can be considered water stress. Water stress is the most harmful environmental stress to the development and production of fruit trees and can affect cell division and vegetative growth. Water decreasing in plants leads to the photosynthetic rate subtracting and stomatal closure increasing, which result in a reduction of CO 2 uptake and transpiration and thus a rise of plant temperature [107]. Although g s cannot be directly measured by thermal imaging, it is feasible to measure canopy temperature (T c ) to reflect stomatal status [108].
## (s65) Detection of diseases
Number of References: 32

(p65.0) Plant disease pathogens may damage the cuticular cell structure of plant tissues, affect stomatal conductance and transpiration, and cause changes in leaf temperature [120]. The ability of thermal imaging to evaluate canopy temperature makes it possible to detect plant diseases.

(p65.1) Apple scab pathogen grows under the epidermis of apple leaves and absorbs nutrients from the subcuticular space and destroys the cuticle, causing water loss and temperature changes. Oerke et al. found significant differences in the thermal images corresponding to different stages of disease severity [121]. The maximum temperature difference (MTD) between the infected area and healthy area increased with the increase in the degree of infection. It was correlated with the infection area (R 2 = 0.85) and overall infection severity (R 2 = 0.71). Polystigma amygdalinum PF Cannon is also a fungus that lives on the surface of the leaf, causing almond trees to be infected with red leaf blotch disease. López-López et al. [93] collected thermal images in an almond orchard and found that the T c − T a increased with the severity of the disease, especially in the stages of moderate or severe infection.

(p65.2) When a plant is affected by VW, the vascular system will be damaged, which impedes the flow of water, resulting in water stress [122,123]. Calderón et al. identified the VW severity levels in olive orchards with airborne thermal imagery [91]. The g s was measured in the leaf and near-canopy fields at the tree level, T c and T a were estimated from the thermal images. Measurement results showed that the T c − T a would become higher and g s would become lower as the severity level increased, which proved that crown temperature estimated with thermal imaging was effective in detecting VW in the early stage of disease development. The team then expanded the olive garden experiment by selecting nine areas in a larger commercial olive garden [92]. The nine areas covered different tree species, tree ages, planting densities and soil management techniques. The results showed that T c − T a was still an effective indicator for VW detection in large-scale orchards.

(p65.3) The studies mentioned above suggested that the changes in T c caused by disease can be monitored by thermal imaging techniques. Thermal imaging can help to separate healthy trees from infected trees, but it lacks diagnostic capability. It is difficult to determine whether the temperature change is caused by disease [121]. Combined with other imaging techniques to solve this problem is the focus of detecting fruit tree diseases at present.

(p65.4) Plant disease pathogens may damage the cuticular cell structure of plant tissues, affect stomatal conductance and transpiration, and cause changes in leaf temperature [120]. The ability of thermal imaging to evaluate canopy temperature makes it possible to detect plant diseases.

(p65.5) Apple scab pathogen grows under the epidermis of apple leaves and absorbs nutrients from the subcuticular space and destroys the cuticle, causing water loss and temperature changes. Oerke et al. found significant differences in the thermal images corresponding to different stages of disease severity [121]. The maximum temperature difference (MTD) between the infected area and healthy area increased with the increase in the degree of infection. It was correlated with the infection area (R 2 = 0.85) and overall infection severity (R 2 = 0.71). Polystigma amygdalinum PF Cannon is also a fungus that lives on the surface of the leaf, causing almond trees to be infected with red leaf blotch disease. López-López et al. [93] collected thermal images in an almond orchard and found that the T c − T a increased with the severity of the disease, especially in the stages of moderate or severe infection.

(p65.6) When a plant is affected by VW, the vascular system will be damaged, which impedes the flow of water, resulting in water stress [122,123]. Calderón et al. identified the VW severity levels in olive orchards with airborne thermal imagery [91]. The g s was measured in the leaf and near-canopy fields at the tree level, T c and T a were estimated from the thermal images. Measurement results showed that the T c − T a would become higher and g s would become lower as the severity level increased, which proved that crown temperature estimated with thermal imaging was effective in detecting VW in the early stage of disease development. The team then expanded the olive garden experiment by selecting nine areas in a larger commercial olive garden [92]. The nine areas covered different tree species, tree ages, planting densities and soil management techniques. The results showed that T c − T a was still an effective indicator for VW detection in large-scale orchards.

(p65.7) The studies mentioned above suggested that the changes in T c caused by disease can be monitored by thermal imaging techniques. Thermal imaging can help to separate healthy trees from infected trees, but it lacks diagnostic capability. It is difficult to determine whether the temperature change is caused by disease [121]. Combined with other imaging techniques to solve this problem is the focus of detecting fruit tree diseases at present.
## (s67) The principle of LiDAR
Number of References: 8

(p67.0) A LiDAR system consists of a single narrowband laser and a receiving system [126]. The laser fires a pulse of light at the target, and the reflected wave is picked up by the receiver. The receiver can accurately measure the propagation time of the light pulse from transmission to reflection. Light pulses travel at the speed of light, and the distance from the laser point to the target can be calculated based on the speed of light and the time of propagation. The position of the target can be determined according to the height and scanning angle of the laser [127].

(p67.1) A LiDAR system consists of a single narrowband laser and a receiving system [126]. The laser fires a pulse of light at the target, and the reflected wave is picked up by the receiver. The receiver can accurately measure the propagation time of the light pulse from transmission to reflection. Light pulses travel at the speed of light, and the distance from the laser point to the target can be calculated based on the speed of light and the time of propagation. The position of the target can be determined according to the height and scanning angle of the laser [127].
