# materials A Review of Pectin-Based Material for Applications in Water Treatment

CorpusID: 257475506 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bff7d48c03e0627b5224d3630db727351e62635c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bff7d48c03e0627b5224d3630db727351e62635c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Water is at the basis of social and economic development; it is vital to every human being; it is essential for growing food, health, and safety. Moreover, water is related to the economic vitality of our society, and, at present, there is no substitute for water on the earth's crust. Water has a Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) that is dedicated exclusively to its promotion (Goal 6, "Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all"), and it has a crucial role in a good number of the SDGs while forming an essential factor in others. Nevertheless, due to the effects of climate change, which are being felt right now [1], water is becoming a more scarce and less predictably available resource in many world regions [2]. Water scarcity is among the principal problems that many societies and the entire world will face during the XXI century, and it is already affecting every continent.
## (s3) Pectin-Chemical Structure
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Pectin is an anionic heteropolysaccharide that is present in vegetable cell walls. Pectin is particularly predominant in fruit peels, especially in citrus peel and apple pomace, but also in passion fruit rind, pomelo, and banana peel [90]. The pectin backbone chain comprises α-(1,4)-linked D-galacturonic acid (GalA) residues [91] (mainly homogalacturonan (HG), rhamnogalacturonan I (RG-I), rhamnogalacturonan (RG-II)) linked by α 1-4 glycosidic bond. The homogalacturonan domain (HG) is the most abundant and linear domain (around 60%). Additionally, as shown in Figure 3a, pectin has different branch domains, such as xylogalacturonan with sugars (xylose, apiose, rhamnose, galactose, arabinose, fructose, among others).
## (s4) Insoluble Pectin-Cross-Linking Agents That Generate Gelation
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) As mentioned above, pectin is a water-soluble material. Therefore, it must be insolubilized to be used as an adsorbent to remove pollutants from water. Different ionic crosslinking agents were used for pectin, with the cations that were monovalent (Na + , K + ), divalent (Ca 2+ , Cu 2+ , Sr 2+ Ni 2+ Zn 2+ Cd 2+ Pb 2+ or Mg 2+ ), or trivalent (Al 3+ , La 3+ , and Fe 3+ ) being most used. Pectin can also be cross-linked using non-ionic cross-linkers such as glutaraldehyde [111] or laccase [112]. However, ionic crosslinking is the most widely used and suitable method because it has the principal advantage of releasing contaminants (in some cases, recovering a priceless pollutant) and recovering the absorbent that can be reused.
## (s6) Historical Perspective of Structural Models Induced by Calcium
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) In 1973, Grant and coworkers [125] first proposed the interaction between a polysaccharide chain (such as alginate or pectin) and divalent cations in terms of the egg-box model. Initially, this model introduced alginates: a non-branched polysaccharide composed of two monosaccharides, α-L guluronic and β-D mannuronic acids [146]. Using circular dichroism, the authors suggested a cooperative inter-chain mechanism of ion binding involving two chains associated with the coulomb interaction between the active sites and the metal ion. More specifically, two opposite α-L-guluronate sequences paired together to form a structure with cavities, within which Ca 2+ ions were accommodated through specific coordination interactions between two free carboxyl groups.

(p6.1) Five years later, Morris et al. [147] studied alginate chain gelation by X-ray diffraction coupled with circular dichroism using different calcium concentrations. Their results showed that the primary inter-chain association mechanism was regularly dimerizing alginate or poly (guluronate) chain segments. This structure results in cross-linked dimers with a geometric design that resembles an egg box (see Figure 4). Compared with the first proposal of the "egg-box" model, the dimers can further aggregate laterally into multimers, as revealed by small-angle X-ray scattering. In addition, the sugar ring belonging to guluronic acid and the polymer chain adopts a characteristic zigzag shape. Studying the lateral aggregation of dimers is essential to understanding the properties of these biomaterials in terms of their structure to explain what happens during a water remediation process. On the other hand, knowing the correct features and operating principle of the "egg-box" model helps to understand the possible pollutants of adsorption models from wastewater. aterials 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW Five years later, Morris et al. [147] studied alginate chain gelation by coupled with circular dichroism using different calcium concentratio showed that the primary inter-chain association mechanism was regula ginate or poly (guluronate) chain segments. This structure results in cro with a geometric design that resembles an egg box (see Figure 4). Compa proposal of the "egg-box" model, the dimers can further aggregate lat mers, as revealed by small-angle X-ray scattering. In addition, the sugar guluronic acid and the polymer chain adopts a characteristic zigzag sha lateral aggregation of dimers is essential to understanding the proper materials in terms of their structure to explain what happens during a w process. On the other hand, knowing the correct features and operatin "egg-box" model helps to understand the possible pollutants of adsorp wastewater. In 1981, Walkinshaw and Arnott [148] added, for the first time, th junction zone for the "egg-box" model for poly(galacturonic) acid and a tion degree of calcium pectate (i.e., pectin cross-linked with metal ions). I for poly(galacturonic) acid, chain-chain interactions were stabilized by in drogen bonds formed between several adjacent D-galacturonic acid uni bic bonding between methyl esters. Similarly, hydrophobic binding from thyl groups and specific intermolecular hydrogen bonds stabilized calc main interactions between pairs of chains could be the bridges formed which incorporate into their coordination shells two-polyanion oxygen chain and three from the other. In addition, in 1982, Powell et al. [149] in nose distribution for the formation of stable poly(galacturonic) acid inte for high and low degrees of methyl(esterification). Their results confirm and Arnott hypothesis [148]. They also indicate that the length of the p acid sequences between rhamnose interruptions (i.e., hairy regions) is ap stant (i.e., they prove the existence of the junction zone). In 1981, Walkinshaw and Arnott [148] added, for the first time, the concept of the junction zone for the "egg-box" model for poly(galacturonic) acid and a high methoxylation degree of calcium pectate (i.e., pectin cross-linked with metal ions). In this new model, for poly(galacturonic) acid, chain-chain interactions were stabilized by intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed between several adjacent D-galacturonic acid units and hydrophobic bonding between methyl esters. Similarly, hydrophobic binding from segments of methyl groups and specific intermolecular hydrogen bonds stabilized calcium pectate. The main interactions between pairs of chains could be the bridges formed by calcium ions, which incorporate into their coordination shells two-polyanion oxygen atoms from one chain and three from the other. In addition, in 1982, Powell et al. [149] investigated rhamnose distribution for the formation of stable poly(galacturonic) acid inter-chain junctions for high and low degrees of methyl(esterification). Their results confirm the Walkinshaw and Arnott hypothesis [148]. They also indicate that the length of the poly(galacturonic) acid sequences between rhamnose interruptions (i.e., hairy regions) is approximately constant (i.e., they prove the existence of the junction zone).
## (s23) Recent Evolution of Structural Models for Pectin Is Cross-Linked with Other Metals
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) As mentioned above, pectin is susceptible to cross-links with other cations apart from calcium. Specifically, in 2015, Assifaoui et al. [160] published the structural differences found in LM pectin when cross-linked with Ca 2+ and Zn 2+ . These results show that Ca 2+ cations onl interact with carboxyl groups and form more homogeneous pectin network fibers (i.e., th well-known "egg-box" dimers). In contrast, Zn 2+ also interacts with hydroxyl groups, result ing in a less homogeneous cross-linked pectin network (see Figure 7). In 2016, Huynh et al. [161] investigated the binding mechanism using different cati onic metals (Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , Ba 2+ , Mg 2+ ) by isothermal titration calorimetry, viscosity measure ments, and molecular dynamics simulations in poly (galacturonic) acid. In this frame work, a monodentate interaction meant the interaction between a carboxyl group of galac turonic acid and a cation. In contrast, a bidentate interaction means the binding of tw oxygen atoms of the galacturonic acid (from two different pectin chains) and a cation They reported that the interaction between divalent cations and poly (galacturonic) acid is monodentate for Mg 2+ and Zn 2+ and bidentate for Ba 2+ and Ca 2+ . Moreover, the bindin mechanism for the divalent cations, Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , and Ba 2+ , can be associated with mono complexation and point-like cross-links or related to the appearance of the dimmers for mation, depending on the molar ratio between the divalent cation and galacturonic acid (R = Metal 2+ /Gal). This conclusion was based on the number of water molecules coordi nated with the different cations. In the case of Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , and Ba 2+ , the coordination with water was weaker in strength than those of Mg 2+ . During the cross-link, the metal ions los one water molecule for the Zn 2+ and two for Ca 2+ and Ba 2+ , respectively. However, Mg 2 strongly interacts with water and remains weakly bound to poly(galacturonic) acid b sharing water molecules from its coordination shell with the carboxylate groups. Finally two years later, Huynh et al. [162] studied the gelation kinetics of pectin induced from divalent cations (Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , Ba 2+ , Mg 2+ ) by viscoelastic and turbidity measurements. Thei results confirmed that the cations' diffusion kinetics was lower for Zn 2+ than for Ca 2+ and Ba 2+ . However, for the Mg 2+ , the gel was not formed, supporting a previous study [161].
